601556	TITLE *601556 ATAXIN 1; ATXN1
ATXN1, ALTERNATIVE READING FRAME, INCLUDED;;
ALT-ATXN1, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ATXN1 binds RNA, associates with large protein complexes, and interacts
with a vast network of proteins. ATXN1 is thought to be involved in
transcriptional repression and to regulate Notch (see 190198)- and
Capicua (CIC; 612082)-controlled developmental processes (summary by
Bergeron et al., 2013).

CLONING

Using DNA fragments from a cosmid clone shown to contain the CAG
trinucleotide repeat identified as the cause of spinocerebellar ataxia-1
(SCA1; 164400) by Orr et al. (1993), Banfi et al. (1994) screened 2
human fetal brain and 1 human adult cerebellar cDNA libraries to isolate
the ATXN1 transcript. Banfi et al. (1994) demonstrated that the ATXN1
gene encodes an 816-amino acid protein with a molecular mass of 87 kD.
The (CAG)n repeat, coding for a polyglutamine tract, lies within the
coding region, and the protein is transcribed from both the wildtype and
the CAG-expanded ATXN1 allele.

Mizutani et al. (2005) stated that the deduced 816-amino acid ATXN1
protein has an N-terminal BOAT (ATXN1L; 614301) and ataxin-1 (NBA)
domain, followed by the polyglutamine tract, a self-association region
(SAR), and a C-terminal ATXN1 and HBP1 (AXH) domain.

By immunoblot analysis, Servadio et al. (1995) demonstrated that the
ATXN1 protein was present in various brain regions and in nonneuronal
tissues, such as heart, skeletal muscle, and liver. Whereas it was
located predominantly in cytoplasm in nonneuronal tissue, it was found
in nuclei in neurons of the basal ganglia, pons, and cortex, and in both
cytoplasm and nuclei of Purkinje cells of the cerebellum. Servadio et
al. (1995) found that the protein varied in its size and electrophoretic
migration properties according to the size of the (CAG)n repeat.

- Alternative ATXN1

Bergeron et al. (2013) identified an alternative translation initiation
codon in the +3 reading frame of ATXN1. Translation of alternative ATXN1
(ALT-ATXN1) begins 30 nucleotides downstream of the initiation codon of
full-length ATXN1 and ends at nucleotide 587, just prior to the CAG
repeat region. The deduced 185-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 21 kD. ALT-ATXN1 contains 26 proline residues
distributed throughout the molecule, and it has a putative N-terminal
proline-lysine (PY)-type nuclear localization signal. ALT-ATXN1 shares
no sequence similarity with ATXN1. Bergeron et al. (2013) also
identified a second putative 151-amino acid ALT-ATXN1 protein that is
N-terminally truncated compared with the longer ALT-ATXN1 protein.
Database analysis revealed orthologs of ALT-ATXN1 in several mammalian
species and in chicken. Western blot analysis detected both ATXN1 and
ALT-ATXN1 in normal human cerebellum and in primary cells cultured from
a glioblastoma patient. Epitope-tagged ALT-ATXN1 colocalized with ATXN1
in nuclear inclusions and in the nucleoplasm of transfected cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Banfi et al. (1994) determined that ATXN1 gene spans 450 kb of genomic
DNA and is organized into 9 exons. The first 7 fall in the 5-prime
untranslated region, whereas the last 2 contain the coding region and a
7,277 bp 3-prime untranslated region. The first 4 noncoding exons
undergo alternative splicing in several tissues. These features suggest
that the transcriptional and translational regulation of ataxin-1 may be
complex.

MAPPING

Detailed linkage studies of families with SCA1 established the disease
locus on chromosome 6 (see 164400), and Volz et al. (1994) reported that
the ATXN1 gene had been mapped to 6p23 by in situ hybridization.

Servadio et al. (1995) mapped the mouse homolog of the ATXN1 gene to
mouse chromosome 13.

GENE FUNCTION

Servadio et al. (1995) found that ATXN1 protein exhibited a normal
nuclear/cytoplasmic localization in cultured cells and tissues from
individuals with SCA1. Thus, the data showed that the mutant expanded
ATXN1 alleles are faithfully translated into proteins of apparently
normal stability and distribution.

Cummings et al. (1999) found that wildtype ataxin-1 and mutant ataxin-1
with an expanded polyglutamine tract were polyubiquitinated equally well
in transfected HeLa cells in vitro, but the mutant form was 3 times more
resistant to degradation. Inhibiting proteasomal degradation promoted
aggregation of mutant ataxin-1. Mouse Purkinje cells expressing mutant
ataxin-1 but not the ubiquitin-protein ligase Ube3a (601623) showed
fewer ubiquitin-positive nuclear inclusions than Sca1 mice, but the
Purkinje cell pathology was markedly worse. Cummings et al. (1999)
concluded that nuclear inclusions are not necessary to induce
neurodegeneration, but impaired proteasomal degradation of mutant
ataxin-1 may contribute to SCA1 pathogenesis.

Davidson et al. (2000) identified an ataxin-1-interacting protein, A1U
(605440), that localized to the nucleus and cytoplasm of transfected
COS-1 cells. A1U contains an N-terminal ubiquitin-like region and has
substantial homology to human UBQLN2 (300264), a protein that binds the
ATPase domain of the HSP70-like Stch protein (601100). The authors
suggested that A1U may link ataxin-1 with the chaperone and
ubiquitin/proteasome pathways, and that ataxin-1 may function in the
formation and regulation of multimeric protein complexes within the
nucleus.

Using an in vitro RNA-binding assay, Yue et al. (2001) demonstrated that
ataxin-1 binds RNA, and that this binding diminishes as the length of
its polyglutamine tract increases. The authors suggested that ataxin-1
plays a role in RNA metabolism and that the expansion of the
polyglutamine tract may alter this function.

Okazawa et al. (2002) proposed that modified transcription may underlie
polyglutamine-mediated pathology and that polyglutamine-binding
protein-1 (PQBP1; 300463) may be involved in the pathology of SCA1.
Using in vitro and in vivo assays, they showed that interaction between
ataxin-1 and PQBP1 was positively influenced by expanded polyglutamine
sequences. In immunoprecipitation experiments, mutant ataxin-1 enhanced
interaction between PQBP1 and the RNA polymerase II (pol II) large
subunit (180660), and the authors proposed that a ternary complex is
formed by PQBP1 in the presence of mutant ataxin-1. PQBP1 and mutant
ataxin-1 acted cooperatively in cell lines to repress transcription and
induce cell death. Okazawa et al. (2002) hypothesized that high
expression of PQBP1 in the cerebellum promotes mutant ataxin-1-induced
cell death, contributing to the region-specific neurodegeneration seen
in SCA1 patient tissues.

To investigate the effect of expanded poly(Q) repeats on
ubiquitin/proteasome-dependent proteolysis, Verhoef et al. (2002)
targeted these proteins for proteasomal degradation by the introduction
of an N-end rule degradation signal (i.e., N-terminal arginine residue).
While soluble poly(Q) proteins were degraded, they resisted proteasomal
degradation once present in the aggregates. Stabilization was also
observed for proteins that are co-aggregated via interaction with the
expanded poly(Q) domain. Introduction of a degradation signal in
ataxin-1/Q92 reduced the incidence of nuclear inclusions and the
cellular toxicity, conceivably by accelerating the clearance of the
soluble substrate.

Chen et al. (2003) discovered that the 14-3-3 protein (see 113508), a
multifunctional regulatory molecule, mediates the neurotoxicity of
ataxin-1 by binding and stabilizing it, thereby slowing its normal
degradation. The association of ataxin-1 with 14-3-3 was found to be
regulated by AKT (164730) phosphorylation, and in a Drosophila model of
SCA1, both 14-3-3 and Akt modulated neurodegeneration. The authors
concluded that their finding that phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt
signaling and 14-3-3 cooperate to modulate the neurotoxicity of ataxin-1
provides insight into SCA1 pathogenesis and identifies potential targets
for therapeutic intervention.

The pathologic hallmark of neurodegenerative disorders associated with
expanded polyglutamine repeats (polyQ) is the cytoplasmic or
intranuclear accumulation of polyglutamine inclusions. Emamian et al.
(2003) noted that the expanded tract may influence the behavior of the
host protein and that elements of the protein outside of the
polyglutamine tract may influence the course of disease. In vitro,
Emamian et al. (2003) found that ataxin-1 is phosphorylated at ser776
and that most cells expressing ataxin-1(82Q)-ser776 contained large
nuclear inclusions (60%), compared to cells expressing a mutant
ataxin-1(82Q)-ala776 (less than 0.1%). Ataxin-1(82Q)-ala776 transgenic
mice expressed the protein in Purkinje cell nuclei, but progression and
manifestations of disease were substantially reduced. The authors
concluded that polyglutamine tract expansion and intranuclear
localization are not sufficient to induce disease, and that the ser776
phosphorylation site has a critical role in SCA1 pathogenesis.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Hong et al. (2003) found that ataxin-1
interacted with coilin (COIL; 600272). Mutation analysis indicated that
the C-terminal regions of both proteins mediated the interaction. HeLa
cells cotransfected with ataxin-1 and coilin showed colocalization of
the 2 proteins in aggregates in the nucleoplasm. A mutant form of
ataxin-1 containing a polyglutamine expansion also interacted with
coilin and localized with some coiled bodies, but it had no effect on
their normal nuclear distribution.

Skinner et al. (1997) and Matilla et al. (1997) showed that, in
transfected cells, both wildtype (30 glutamines) and mutant (82
glutamines) Atx1 localized to small dense nuclear bodies. Tsai et al.
(2004) demonstrated that Atx1 interacts with the transcriptional
corepressor SMRT (silencing mediator for retinoid and thyroid hormone
receptors; 600848) and with histone deacetylase-3 (HDAC3; 605166). Atx1
binds chromosomes and mediates transcriptional repression when tethered
to DNA. Interaction with SMRT-related factors is a conserved feature of
Atx1, because Atx1 also binds SMRTER, a Drosophila cognate of SMRT.
Significantly, mutant Atx1 forms aggregates in Drosophila, and such
mutant Atx1-mediated aggregates sequester SMRTER. Consistently, the
neurodegenerative eye phenotype in Drosophila caused by mutant Atx1 was
enhanced by a Smrter mutation and, conversely, was suppressed by a
chromosomal duplication that contained the wildtype Smrter gene. Tsai et
al. (2004) interpreted their results as suggesting that Atx1 is a
transcriptional factor whose mutant form exerts its deleterious effects
in part by perturbing corepressor-dependent transcriptional pathways.

By yeast 2-hybrid and mutation analysis, Mizutani et al. (2005) showed
that AXH domain of ATXN1 was required for its interaction with SMRT.
Yeast 2-hybrid analysis also showed that ATXN1 interacted with BOAT
(ATXN1L), and Mizutani et al. (2005) confirmed the interaction between
BOAT and ATXN1 in human cell culture and Drosophila. Truncation analysis
showed that the NBA domain of BOAT mediated its self-association and
interaction with ATXN1, whereas the SAR and NBA domains of ATXN1
mediated its self-association and interaction with BOAT. Mutation
analysis and reporter gene assays revealed that the AXH domain of ATXN1
was required for transcriptional repression, likely due to its
interaction with SMRT. Truncation analysis and reporter gene assays
revealed that ATXN1 contains a C-terminal transcriptional repressive
domain, whereas BOAT contains independent N- and C-terminal
transcriptional repressive domains. Immunoprecipitation analysis showed
that endogenous BOAT, SMRT, and ATXN1 interacted in a complex in HeLa
cells. Expression of ATXN1 with a polyglutamine expansion (82Q) caused
an abnormal eye phenotype in Drosophila, and this phenotype was reversed
by coexpression of BOAT. Expression of ATXN1 without the polyglutamine
tract (0Q) also caused an abnormal eye phenotype in Drosophila, although
it was less severe than that caused by ATXN1(82Q). SCA1 mice, which
express human mutant ATXN1 in Purkinje cells, showed reduced expression
of both Boat and Smrt compared with wildtype mice. Mizutani et al.
(2005) hypothesized that BOAT inhibits mutant ATXN1 toxicity by
dimerizing with ATXN1 and reducing mutant ATXN1 self-association.

Lam et al. (2006) examined soluble protein complexes from mouse
cerebellum and found that the majority of wildtype and expanded Atxn1
assembles into large stable complexes containing the transcriptional
repressor Capicua (Cic; 612082). Atxn1 directly bound Cic and modulated
Cic repressor activity in Drosophila and mammalian cells, and its loss
decreased the steady state level of Cic. Interestingly, the S776A
mutation, which abrogates the neurotoxicity of expanded Atxn1,
substantially reduced the association of mutant Atxn1 with Cic in vivo.
Lam et al. (2006) concluded that their data provided insight into the
function of Atxn1 and suggested that the neuropathology of SCA1
(164400), caused by expansion of the ATXN1 polyglutamine tract, depends
on native, not novel, protein interactions. Lam et al. (2006) found that
the majority of CIC associates with ATXN1 in vivo and that ATXN1 binds
CIC through an 8-amino-acid sequence conserved across species.

Using yeast 2-hybrid screens, coaffinity purification analysis of
transfected HEK293 cells, and bioinformatic analysis, Lim et al. (2006)
developed an interaction network for 54 human proteins involved in 23
inherited ataxias. By database analysis, they expanded the core network
to include more distantly related interacting proteins that could
function as genetic modifiers. A majority (18 of 23) of ataxia-causing
proteins interacted either directly or indirectly. ATXN1 showed strong
direct interactions with ATXN2 (601517) and RBPMS (601558), and the
N-terminal portion of ATXN1 was required for interaction with RBPMS.
RBPMS was a main hub in the network and interacted with many proteins,
including 2 cerebellar ataxia-associated proteins, ATN1 (607462) and QK1
(609590). The ATXN1 interactor COIL also interacted with the
ataxia-associated protein puratrophin-1 (PLEKHG4; 609526).

Lim et al. (2008) demonstrated that the expanded polyglutamine tract of
ATXN1 differentially affects the function of the host protein in the
context of different endogenous protein complexes. Polyglutamine
expansion in ATXN1 favors the formation of a particular protein complex
containing RBM17 (606935), contributing to SCA1 neuropathology by means
of a gain-of-function mechanism. Concomitantly, polyglutamine expansion
attenuates the formation and function of another protein complex
containing ATXN1 and capicua, contributing to SCA1 through a partial
loss-of-function mechanism. Lim et al. (2008) concluded that their model
provides mechanistic insight into the molecular pathogenesis of SCA1 as
well as other polyglutamine diseases.

Notch signaling involves proteolytic release of the Notch intracellular
domain (NICD), followed by NICD-dependent gene activation. Tong et al.
(2011) found that expression of human BOAT1 in Drosophila wing disrupted
Notch signaling, leading to wing defects. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis
of HEK293 cells revealed that both BOAT1 and ATXN1 precipitated CBF1
(RBPJ; 147183), which functions as a transcriptional activator when
associated with NICD. Protein pull-down and yeast 2-hybrid analyses
confirmed the interactions and showed that BOAT1 and ATXN1 competed for
CBF1 binding. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed that NICD
disrupted CBF1-BOAT/ATXN1 interactions. Reporter gene assays revealed
that both BOAT1 and ATXN1 inhibited CBF1 activity at the HEY1 (602953)
promoter. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that Boat1 and
Atxn1, in addition to Smrt, occupied the Hey1 promoter in
differentiating mouse C2C12 myoblasts. Atxn1 bound the Hey1 promoter
transiently, whereas Boat1 and Smrt remained bound to the Hey1 promoter
under the same conditions. Tong et al. (2011) concluded that BOAT1 and
ATXN1 are chromatin-binding factors that repress Notch signaling in the
absence of NCID by acting as CBF1 corepressors.

- Alternative ATXN1

Using coimmunoprecipitation and protein pull-down assays, Bergeron et
al. (2013) found that ALT-ATXN1 interacted directly with ATXN1. Deletion
analysis revealed that ALT-ATXN1 interacted with an N-terminal domain of
ATXN1 and not with the polyglutamine track. Neither ATXN1 nor ALT-ATXN1
directly affected expression or solubility of the other protein, and
ALT-ATXN1 translation was independent of the number of CAG repeats in
the transcript. ATXN1 spontaneously formed intranuclear inclusion in the
absence of ALT-ATXN1 and recruited ALT-ATXN1 to these inclusions.
ALT-ATXN1 also bound to poly(A) RNA.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- ATXN1 Polyglutamine Expansion in SCA1

Orr et al. (1993) demonstrated that the basic defect in spinocerebellar
ataxia-1 (164400) consists of expansion of a trinucleotide CAG repeat
(601556.0001) and Banfi et al. (1994) identified the gene as ataxin-1.
Both groups showed that the repeat is present not only in genomic DNA
but also in a 10-kb mRNA transcript.

Sisodia (1998) reviewed the significance of nuclear inclusions in
glutamine repeat disorders.

Orr and Zoghbi (2001) reviewed the history of unraveling the molecular
pathogenesis of SCA1.

- Genetic Anticipation

Chung et al. (1993) found that 63% of paternal transmissions of the
mutant allele show an increase in repeat number, whereas 69% of maternal
transmissions show no change or a decrease in repeat number. Sequence
analysis showed that 98% of unexpanded alleles had an interrupted repeat
configuration, whereas a contiguous repeat (CAG)n was found in expanded
alleles. This indicated that the repeat instability in ATXN1 is more
complex than a simple variation in repeat number and that the loss of an
interruption predisposes the ATXN1 (CAG)n to expansion. Matilla et al.
(1993) studied the expansion of the ATXN1 gene CAG repeat in a large
family in which spinocerebellar ataxia showed the phenomenon of
anticipation. There were 41 affected members with no juvenile cases of
SCA1, the mean age of onset being 36 years. The family also showed the
phenomenon of parental male bias; i.e., the age of onset was younger and
the duration of illness before death was shorter in the members of the
family who inherited the disorder from the father. In this large Spanish
kindred, Matilla et al. (1993) found 9 clinically unaffected persons
between ages 18 and 40 years who had expansions of the CAG repeat within
the pathogenetic range. In 22 other genetically 'at risk' individuals,
they found that the number of (CAG)n repeats in the ATXN1 gene was
within the normal range.

Jodice et al. (1994) found trinucleotide repeat expansion in 64 subjects
from 19 families: 57 patients with SCA1 and 7 subjects predicted, by
haplotype analysis, to carry the mutation. Comparison with a large set
of normal chromosomes showed 2 distinct distributions with a much wider
variation among expanded chromosomes. The sex of the transmitting parent
played a major role in the size distribution of expanded alleles, those
with more than 54 repeats being transmitted by affected fathers
exclusively. Alleles with 46 to 54 repeats were transmitted by affected
fathers and mothers in equal proportions. On the other hand, the sex
ratio of offspring receiving either more than 54 or less than 54 repeats
approached the expected 50:50. If a steady-state distribution of repeat
numbers is assumed to persist through the generations, this raises the
question as to why affected females transmitting alleles with more than
54 repeats are lacking, while females receiving more than 54 repeats
exist. This may be explained, at least in part, by reduced biologic
fitness. Detailed clinical follow-up of a subset of patients by Jodice
et al. (1994) demonstrated significant relationships between increasing
repeat number on expanded chromosomes and earlier age at onset, faster
progression of the disease, and earlier age at death.

- Association with Schizophrenia

Wang et al. (1996) reported evidence for linkage disequilibrium between
schizophrenia and the ATXN1 CAG repeat. The study was undertaken because
of the report by several groups of linkage between a
schizophrenia-susceptibility gene and markers on 6p (see 600511). The
authors suggested that, if the evidence of linkage disequilibrium with
the ATXN1 gene is valid, this narrows substantially the region
containing the gene, since linkage disequilibrium may be detectable over
regions much smaller than those implicated by linkage analyses. In the
second place, given the known biologic function of the ATXN1 gene in the
brain and the possible relevance of anticipation and CAG repeat
expansion in some rare cases of schizophrenia, ATXN1 may become a
promising candidate for schizophrenia.

EVOLUTION

In order to determine how the human ATXN1 gene acquired the CAG repeat
structure with interruptions, Kurosaki et al. (2006) analyzed the Atxn1
gene in many primate species, rat, and mouse. They found no repeats in
the corresponding region of rodent, prosimian, and New World monkey
Atxn1 genes. They found perfect uninterrupted CAG repeats in Old World
monkeys and interrupted CAG repeats in hominoids. Kurosaki et al. (2006)
concluded that there was no repetitive CAG structure in the common
ancestor of primates and that the interrupted repetitive structure of
the human ATXN1 gene was gradually acquired during evolution of the
simian lineage.

ANIMAL MODEL

Banfi et al. (1996) found that murine Sca1 and human ataxin-1 are highly
homologous but the CAG repeat is virtually absent in the mouse sequence,
suggesting that the polyglutamine stretch is not essential for the
normal function of ataxin-1 in mice. Cellular and developmental
expression of the murine homolog was examined using RNA in situ
hybridization. During cerebellar development, there is a transient burst
of Sca1 expression at postnatal day 14, when the murine cerebellar
cortex becomes physiologically functional. There was also marked
expression of Sca1 in mesenchymal cells of the intervertebral discs
during development of the spinal column. The results suggested to the
authors that the normal Sca1 gene has a role at specific stages of both
cerebellar and vertebral column development.

PQBP1 (300463) is a polyglutamine-binding nuclear protein which has been
shown to interact with ataxin-1. Okuda et al. (2003) generated
transgenic mice overexpressing human PQBP1. The mice showed a late-onset
and gradually progressive motor neuron disease-like phenotype suggestive
of the neurogenic muscular atrophy observed in SCA1 patients. Ataxia
could not be discriminated from predominant progressive weakness.
Pathologic examinations of the transgenic mice revealed loss of Purkinje
and granular cells in the cerebellum as well as loss of motor neurons in
the spinal anterior horn, corresponding to the pathology of human SCA1.
Okuda et al. (2003) concluded that excessive action of PQBP1 causes
neuronal dysfunction and that PQBP1 may be involved in the pathology of
SCA1.

Watase et al. (2003) investigated the pattern of CAG repeat instability
in a knockin mouse model of SCA1. Small pool (SP)-PCR analysis on DNA
from various neuronal and nonneuronal tissues revealed that somatic
repeat instability was highest in the striatum. In the 2 SCA1-vulnerable
tissues, cerebellum and spinal cord, there were substantial differences
in the profile of mosaicism. Watase et al. (2003) suggested that in SCA1
there is no clear causal relationship between the degree of somatic
instability and selective neuronal vulnerability. The finding that
somatic instability is most pronounced in the striatum of various
knockin models of polyglutamine diseases may suggest a role of
trans-acting tissue- or cell-specific factors in mediating the
instability.

Serra et al. (2004) used DNA microarrays to determine the pattern of
gene expression in SCA1 transgenic mice at 5 weeks (prior to onset of
pathology) and at 12 weeks (midpoint of disease progression). By
comparing the pattern of gene expression in the SCA1 ataxic
B05-ataxin-1(82Q) transgenic mouse line with those seen in 2 nonataxic
lines, A02-ataxin-1(30Q) and K772T(82Q), 9 genes were identified whose
expression was consistently altered in the cerebellum of B05(82Q) mice
at 5 and 12 weeks of age. Five of the genes formed a biologic cohort
centered on glutamate signaling pathways in Purkinje cells.

Using a conditional transgenic mouse model of SCA1, Serra et al. (2006)
showed that delaying postnatal expression of mutant human ATXN1 until
completion of cerebellar maturation led to a substantial reduction in
disease severity in adults compared with early postnatal expression of
mutant ATXN1. Microarray analysis revealed that genes regulated by Rora
(600825), a transcription factor critical for cerebellar development,
were downregulated at an early stage of disease in Purkinje cells of
SCA1 transgenic mice. Rora mRNA and protein levels were reduced in
Purkinje cells of SCA1 transgenic mice, and the effect of mutant ATXN1
on Rora protein levels appeared to be independent of its effect on Rora
mRNA levels. Partial loss of Rora enhanced the pathogenicity of mutant
ATXN1 in transgenic mice. Coimmunoprecipitation and pull-down analyses
suggested the existence of a complex containing Atxn1, Rora, and the
Rora coactivator Tip60 (HTATIP; 601409), with Atxn1 and Tip60
interacting directly. Serra et al. (2006) concluded that RORA and TIP60
have a role in SCA1 and proposed that their findings provide a mechanism
by which compromised cerebellar development contributes to the severity
of neurodegeneration in an adult.

Lam et al. (2006) determined that wildtype and polyglutamine-expanded
Atxn1 associate into a group of large protein complexes containing the
transcriptional repressor Capicua (CIC; 612082) in mouse cerebellum and
differentially modify CIC activity. However, although specific
interactions had been clearly implicated in neurotoxicity, it was
unclear whether the neurotoxicity of the mutant protein occurred in its
native state by association into normal endogenous protein complexes or
by the aberrant interactions and new complexes formed by the misfolding
or aggregating Atxn1.

Studies of the pathogenesis of SCA1 supported a model in which the
expanded glutamine tract in the ATXN1 gene causes toxicity by modulating
the normal activities of that gene. To explore native interactions that
modify the toxicity of ATXN1, Bowman et al. (2007) generated a targeted
duplication of mouse Ataxn1l and tested the role of this protein in SCA1
pathology. Using a knockin mouse model of SCA1 that recapitulates the
selective neurodegeneration seen in affected individuals, Bowman et al.
(2007) found that elevated Atxn1l levels suppress neuropathology by
displacing mutant Atxn1 from its native complex with Capicua. The
results provided genetic evidence that the selective neuropathology of
SCA1 arises from modulation of a core functional activity of ATXN1, and
they underscored the importance of studying the paralogs of genes
mutated in neurodegenerative diseases to gain insight into mechanisms of
pathogenesis.

Duvick et al. (2010) observed that transgenic Atxn1 mice with a wildtype
glutamine tract (30Q) and expression of a ser776-to-asp (S776D)
phosphogenic substitution developed pathologic changes in cerebellar
Purkinje cells, such as dendritic atrophy and decreased arborization of
climbing fibers, that resembled those of mice carrying only an expanded
polyglutamine tract (82Q). D776/30Q mice also showed progressive motor
dysfunction, similar to S776/82Q mice. However, the D776/30Q genotype
did not induce cell death. The study showed that a single amino acid
substitution outside of the polyQ tract converted wildtype Atxn1 into a
toxic protein with the pathogenic capabilities of the protein with an
expanded polyQ tract. Moreover, the D776 substitution enhanced the
pathogenicity of Atxn1(82Q). The results supported a model in which
disease pathogenesis involves changes in regions of the protein in
addition to the polyglutamine tract. Alteration at ser776 was critical
for neuronal dysfunction, but an expanded polyglutamine tract was
necessary for neuronal death. Duvick et al. (2010) concluded that
disease initiation and late-stage induction of neuronal death are
distinct disease phases, and suggested that inhibiting phosphorylation
may be a therapeutic strategy.

To determine the long-term effects of exercise, Fryer et al. (2011)
implemented a mild exercise regimen in a mouse model of SCA1 and found a
considerable improvement in survival accompanied by upregulation of
epidermal growth factor and consequential downregulation of Capicua,
which is an ATXN1 interactor. Offspring of Capicua mutant mice bred to
Sca1 mice showed significant improvement of all disease phenotypes.
Although polyglutamine-expanded Atxn1 caused some loss of Capicua
function, further reduction of Capicua levels--either genetically or by
exercise--mitigated the disease phenotypes by dampening the toxic gain
of function. Fryer et al. (2011) concluded that exercise might have
long-term beneficial effects in other ataxias and neurodegenerative
diseases.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 1
ATXN1, (CAG)n EXPANSION

The cause of spinocerebellar ataxia-1 (SCA1; 164400) is an expansion of
a (CAG)n repeat in the gene encoding ataxin-1 located on 6p (Orr et al.,
1993; Banfi et al., 1994). Most unexpanded alleles have an interrupted
repeat configuration, whereas a contiguous repeat (CAG)n is found in
expanded alleles. The repeat instability in ATXN1 is probably more
complex than a simple variation in repeat number; the loss of an
interruption predisposes the ATXN1 (CAG)n repeat to expansion.

Zuhlke et al. (2002) analyzed the CAG repeat length and composition in
the ATXN1 gene in 16 individuals with alleles ranging from 36 to 43
triplets. Alleles with 36 to 38 triplets were present in individuals
with ataxia but without additional characteristic features of SCA1. SCA1
phenotypes were found for patients with 41 and 43 triplets. The 39
triplet allele missing CAT interruptions was associated with symptoms
characteristic for SCA1 in 4 patients, whereas the interrupted allele
with 39 triplets did not cause characteristic SCA1 features in 1
individual. These findings suggested a change from normal to pathologic
alleles at 39 triplets depending on the presence of CAT interruptions in
the CAG repeat. Stable inheritance of the uninterrupted 39 triplet
allele was observed in 1 familial case of SCA1.

REFERENCE 1. Banfi, S.; Servadio, A.; Chung, M.; Kwiatkowski, T. J., Jr.; McCall,
A. E.; Duvick, L. A.; Shen, Y.; Roth, E. J.; Orr, H. T.; Zoghbi, H.
Y.: Identification and characterization of the gene causing type
1 spinocerebellar ataxia. Nature Genet. 7: 513-520, 1994.

2. Banfi, S.; Servadio, A.; Chung, M.-y.; Capozzoli, F.; Duvick, L.
A.; Elde, R.; Zoghbi, H. Y.; Orr, H. T.: Cloning and developmental
expression analysis of the murine homolog of the spinocerebellar ataxia
type 1 gene (Sca1). Hum. Molec. Genet. 5: 33-40, 1996.

3. Bergeron, D.; Lapointe, C.; Bissonnette, C.; Tremblay, G.; Motard,
J.; Roucou, X.: An out-of-frame overlapping reading frame in the
ataxin-1 coding sequence encodes a novel ataxin-1 interacting protein. J.
Biol. Chem. 288: 21824-21835, 2013.

4. Bowman, A. B.; Lam, Y. C.; Jafar-Nejad, P.; Chen, H.-K.; Richman,
R.; Samaco, R. C.; Fryer, J. D.; Kahle, J. J.; Orr, H. T.; Zoghbi,
H. Y.: Duplication of Atxn1l suppresses SCA1 neuropathology by decreasing
incorporation of polyglutamine-expanded ataxin-1 into native complexes. Nature
Genet. 39: 373-379, 2007.

5. Chen, H.-K.; Fernandez-Funez, P.; Acevedo, S. F.; Lam, Y. C.; Kaytor,
M. D.; Fernandez, M. H.; Aitken, A.; Skoulakis, E. M. C.; Orr, H.
T.; Botas, J.; Zoghbi, H. Y.: Interaction of Akt-phosphorylated ataxin-1
with 14-3-3 mediates neurodegeneration in spinocerebellar ataxia type
1. Cell 113: 457-468, 2003.

6. Chung, M.; Ranum, L. P. W.; Duvick, L. A.; Servadio, A.; Zoghbi,
H. Y.; Orr, H. T.: Evidence for a mechanism predisposing to intergenerational
CAG repeat instability in spinocerebellar ataxia type 1. Nature Genet. 5:
254-258, 1993.

7. Cummings, C. J.; Reinstein, E.; Sun, Y.; Antalffy, B.; Jiang, Y.;
Ciechanover, A.; Orr, H. T.; Beaudet, A. L.; Zoghbi, H. Y.: Mutation
of the E6-AP ubiquitin ligase reduces nuclear inclusion frequency
while accelerating polyglutamine-induced pathology in SCA1 mice. Neuron 24:
879-892, 1999.

8. Davidson, J. D.; Riley, B.; Burright, E. N.; Duvick, L. A.; Zoghbi,
H. Y.; Orr, H. T.: Identification and characterization of an ataxin-1-interactin
g protein: A1Up, a ubiquitin-like nuclear protein. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9:
2305-2312, 2000.

9. Duvick, L.; Barnes, J.; Ebner, B.; Agrawal, S.; Andresen, M.; Lim,
J.; Giesler, G. J.; Zoghbi, H. Y.; Orr, H. T.: SCA1-like disease
in mice expressing wild-type ataxin-1 with a serine to aspartic acid
replacement at residue 776. Neuron 67: 929-935, 2010.

10. Emamian, E. S.; Kaytor, M. D.; Duvick, L. A.; Zu, T.; Tousey,
S. K.; Zoghbi, H. Y.; Clark, H. B.; Orr, H. T.: Serine 776 of ataxin-1
is critical for polyglutamine-induced disease in SCA1 transgenic mice. Neuron 38:
375-387, 2003.

11. Fryer, J. D.; Yu, P.; Kang, H.; Mandel-Brehm, C.; Carter, A. N.;
Crespo-Barreto, J.; Gao, V.; Flora, A.; Shaw, C.; Orr, H. T.; Zoghbi,
H. Y.: Exercise and genetic rescue of SCA1 via the transcriptional
repressor Capicua. Science 334: 690-693, 2011.

12. Hong, S.; Ka, S.; Kim, S.; Park, Y.; Kang, S.: p80 coilin, a
coiled body-specific protein, interacts with ataxin-1, the SCA1 gene
product. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1638: 35-42, 2003.

13. Jodice, C.; Malaspina, P.; Persichetti, F.; Novelletto, A.; Spadaro,
M.; Giunti, P.; Morocutti, C.; Terrenato, L.; Harding, A. E.; Frontali,
M.: Effect of trinucleotide repeat length and parental sex on phenotypic
variation in spinocerebellar ataxia 1. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 54: 959-965,
1994.

14. Kurosaki, T.; Ninokata, A.; Wang, L.; Ueda, S.: Evolutionary
scenario for acquisition of CAG repeats in human SCA1 gene. Gene 373:
23-27, 2006.

15. Lam, Y. C.; Bowman, A. B.; Jafar-Nejad, P.; Lim, J.; Richman,
R.; Fryer, J. D.; Hyun, E. D.; Duvick, L. A.; Orr, H. T.; Botas, J.;
Zoghbi, H. Y.: ATAXIN-1 interacts with the repressor Capicua in its
native complex to cause SCA1 neuropathology. Cell 127: 1335-1347,
2006.

16. Lim, J.; Crespo-Barreto, J.; Jafar-Nejad, P.; Bowman, A. B.; Richman,
R.; Hill, D. E.; Orr, H. T.; Zoghbi, H. Y.: Opposing effects of polyglutamine
expansion on native protein complexes contribute to SCA1. Nature 452:
713-718, 2008.

17. Lim, J.; Hao, T.; Shaw, C.; Patel, A. J.; Szabo, G.; Rual, J.-F.;
Fisk, C. J.; Li, N.; Smolyar, A.; Hill, D. E.; Barabasi, A.-L.; Vidal,
M.; Zoghbi, H. Y.: A protein-protein interaction network for human
inherited ataxias and disorders of Purkinje cell degeneration. Cell 125:
801-814, 2006.

18. Matilla, A.; Koshy, B. T.; Cummings, C. J.; Isobe, T.; Orr, H.
T.; Zoghbi, H. Y.: The cerebellar leucine-rich acidic nuclear protein
interacts with ataxin-1. Nature 389: 974-978, 1997. Note: Erratum:
Nature 391: 818 only, 1998.

19. Matilla, T.; Volpini, V.; Genis, D.; Rosell, J.; Corral, J.; Davalos,
A.; Molins, A.; Estivill, X.: Presymptomatic analysis of spinocerebellar
ataxia type 1 (SCA1) via the expansion of the SCA1 CAG-repeat in a
large pedigree displaying anticipation and parental male bias. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 2: 2123-2128, 1993.

20. Mizutani, A.; Wang, L.; Rajan, H.; Vig, P. J. S.; Alaynick, W.
A.; Thaler, J. P.; Tsai, C.-C.: Boat, an AXH domain protein, suppresses
the cytotoxicity of mutant ataxin-1. EMBO J. 24: 3339-3351, 2005.

21. Okazawa, H.; Rich, T.; Chang, A.; Lin, X.; Waragai, M.; Kajikawa,
M.; Enokido, Y.; Komuro, A.; Kato, S.; Shibata, M.; Hatanaka, H.;
Mouradian, M. M.; Sudol, M.; Kanazawa, I.: Interaction between mutant
ataxin-1 and PQBP-1 affects transcription and cell death. Neuron 34:
701-713, 2002.

22. Okuda, T.; Hattori, H.; Takeuchi, S.; Shimizu, J.; Ueda, H.; Palvimo,
J. J.; Kanazawa, I.; Kawano, H.; Nakagawa, M.; Okazawa, H.: PQBP-1
transgenic mice show a late-onset motor neuron disease-like phenotype. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12: 711-725, 2003.

23. Orr, H. T.; Chung, M.; Banfi, S.; Kwiatkowski, T. J., Jr.; Servadio,
A.; Beaudet, A. L.; McCall, A. E.; Duvick, L. A.; Ranum, L. P. W.;
Zoghbi, H. Y.: Expansion of an unstable trinucleotide CAG repeat
in spinocerebellar ataxia type 1. Nature Genet. 4: 221-226, 1993.

24. Orr, H. T.; Zoghbi, H. Y.: SCA1 molecular genetics: a history
of a 13 year collaboration against glutamines. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10:
2307-2311, 2001.

25. Serra, H. G.; Byam, C. E.; Lande, J. D.; Tousey, S. K.; Zoghbi,
H. Y.; Orr, H. T.: Gene profiling links SCA1 pathophysiology to glutamate
signaling in Purkinje cells of transgenic mice. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13:
2535-2543, 2004.

26. Serra, H. G.; Duvick, L.; Zu, T.; Carlson, K.; Stevens, S.; Jorgensen,
N.; Lysholm, A.; Burright, E.; Zoghbi, H. Y.; Clark, H. B.; Andresen,
J. M.; Orr, H. T.: ROR-alpha-mediated Purkinje cell development determines
disease severity in adult SCA1 mice. Cell 127: 697-708, 2006.

27. Servadio, A.; Koshy, B.; Armstrong, D.; Antalffy, B.; Orr, H.
T.; Zoghbi, H. Y.: Expression analysis of the ataxin-1 protein in
tissues from normal and spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 individuals. Nature
Genet. 10: 94-98, 1995.

28. Sisodia, S. S.: Nuclear inclusions in glutamine repeat disorders:
are they pernicious, coincidental, or beneficial? Cell 95: 1-4,
1998.

29. Skinner, P. J.; Koshy, B. T.; Cummings, C. J.; Klement, I. A.;
Helin, K.; Servadio, A.; Zoghbi, H. Y.; Orr, H. T.: Ataxin-1 with
an expanded glutamine tract alters nuclear matrix-associated structures. Nature 389:
971-974, 1997. Note: Erratum: Nature 39: 307 only, 1998.

30. Tong, X.; Gui, H.; Jin, F.; Heck, B. W.; Lin, P.; Ma, J.; Fondell,
J. D.; Tsai, C.-C.: Ataxin-1 and brother of ataxin-1 are components
of the Notch signalling pathway. EMBO Rep. 12: 428-435, 2011.

31. Tsai, C.-C.; Kao, H.-Y.; Mitzutani, A.; Banayo, E.; Rajan, H.;
McKeown, M.; Evans, R. M.: Ataxin 1, a SCA1 neurodegenerative disorder
protein, is functionally linked to the silencing mediator of retinoid
and thyroid hormone receptors. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 4047-4052,
2004.

32. Verhoef, L. G. G. C.; Lindsten, K.; Masucci, M. G.; Dantuma, N.
P.: Aggregate formation inhibits proteasomal degradation of polyglutamine
proteins. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 2689-2700, 2002.

33. Volz, A.; Boyle, J. M.; Cann, H. M.; Cottingham, R. W.; Orr, H.
T.; Ziegler, A.: Report of the second international workshop on human
chromosome 6. Genomics 21: 464, 1994.

34. Wang, S.; Detera-Wadleigh, S. D.; Coon, H.; Sun, C.; Goldin, L.
R.; Duffy, D. L.; Byerley, W. F.; Gershon, E. S.; Diehl, S. R.: Evidence
of linkage disequilibrium between schizophrenia and the SCA1 CAG repeat
on chromosome 6p23. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 59: 731-736, 1996.

35. Watase, K.; Venken, K. J. T.; Sun, Y.; Orr, H. T.; Zoghbi, H.
Y.: Regional differences of somatic CAG repeat instability do not
account for selective neuronal vulnerability in a knock-in mouse model
of SCA1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 2789-2795, 2003.

36. Yue, S.; Serra, H. G.; Zoghbi, H. Y.; Orr, H. T.: The spinocerebellar
ataxia type 1 protein, ataxin-1, has RNA-binding activity that is
inversely affected by the length of its polyglutamine tract. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 10: 25-30, 2001.

37. Zuhlke, C.; Dalski, A.; Hellenbroich, Y.; Bubel, S.; Schwinger,
E.; Burk, K.: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1): Phenotype-genotype
correlation studies in intermediate alleles. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 10:
204-209, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/01/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/20/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/29/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/21/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/7/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/14/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/21/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/21/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/4/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/9/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/31/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/20/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/23/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/17/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/13/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/12/2004
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 12/2/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/22/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/3/2003
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 11/1/2002
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 8/14/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/13/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/15/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/12/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/8/1998
Ethylin Wang Jabs - updated: 7/21/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/5/1996

EDITED mgross: 11/01/2013
carol: 5/28/2013
ckniffin: 5/20/2013
terry: 12/20/2012
alopez: 11/30/2011
terry: 11/29/2011
mgross: 10/26/2011
mgross: 10/21/2011
terry: 10/21/2011
terry: 11/3/2010
wwang: 5/11/2009
mgross: 5/7/2009
mgross: 1/14/2009
alopez: 5/27/2008
terry: 5/21/2008
terry: 9/20/2007
wwang: 6/25/2007
terry: 6/21/2007
alopez: 4/10/2007
terry: 4/4/2007
wwang: 8/17/2006
wwang: 8/10/2006
terry: 8/9/2006
wwang: 2/6/2006
terry: 1/31/2006
mgross: 10/26/2005
terry: 10/20/2005
mgross: 8/23/2005
wwang: 2/22/2005
terry: 2/17/2005
tkritzer: 11/9/2004
terry: 11/2/2004
alopez: 5/13/2004
terry: 5/13/2004
cwells: 2/12/2004
mgross: 12/2/2003
carol: 11/14/2003
carol: 9/25/2003
ckniffin: 9/22/2003
carol: 7/7/2003
mgross: 7/3/2003
cwells: 11/1/2002
carol: 8/14/2002
ckniffin: 8/13/2002
cwells: 2/18/2002
cwells: 2/13/2002
cwells: 3/20/2001
cwells: 3/15/2001
cwells: 3/13/2001
carol: 12/13/2000
terry: 12/12/2000
carol: 10/8/1998
terry: 9/9/1998
mark: 8/1/1997
terry: 12/5/1996
mark: 12/5/1996

612904	TITLE *612904 LIPOCALIN 10; LCN10
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the lipocalin family, such as LCN10, have a common structure
consisting of an 8-stranded antiparallel beta-barrel that forms a
cup-shaped ligand-binding pocket or calyx. Lipocalins generally bind
small hydrophobic ligands and transport them to specific cells (Suzuki
et al., 2004).

CLONING

Suzuki et al. (2004) cloned mouse Lcn10, which encodes a deduced
182-amino acid protein. They identified human LCN10 by database
analysis. Northern blot analysis detected Lcn10 expression in mouse
epididymis only, and epididymal expression began at 3 weeks of age. In
situ hybridization detected Lcn10 in the epithelium lining the initial
segment and segment 2 of mouse epididymis.

GENE FUNCTION

Suzuki et al. (2004) found that expression of Lcn10 in mouse epididymis
disappeared after castration and was only partially restored by
testosterone administration.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Suzuki et al. (2004) mapped the LCN10 gene
to an LCN gene cluster on chromosome 9q34. They mapped the mouse Lcn10
gene to a syntenic region of mouse chromosome 2A3.

REFERENCE 1. Suzuki, K.; Lareyre, J.-J.; Sanchez, D.; Gutierrez, G.; Araki,
Y.; Matusik, R. J.; Orgebin-Crist, M.-C.: Molecular evolution of
epididymal lipocalin genes localized on mouse chromosome 2. Gene 339:
49-59, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/9/2009

EDITED mgross: 07/09/2009

430000	TITLE *430000 INTERLEUKIN 3 RECEPTOR, Y-CHROMOSOMAL; IL3RA
;;IL3RY;;
IL3RAY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The receptor for interleukin-3 (IL3; 147740) is a heterodimer that
shares a beta chain (CSF2RB; 138981) in common with the receptors for
IL5 (IL5R; 147851) and GMCSF (CSF2R; 306250), and, like these other
cytokine receptors, has a ligand-specific alpha chain (IL3RA).

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Kremer et al. (1993) demonstrated
that the IL3RY gene is located in the pseudoautosomal region of the X
and Y chromosomes. See 308385.

REFERENCE 1. Kremer, E.; Baker, E.; D'Andrea, R. J.; Slim, R.; Phillips, H.;
Moretti, P. A. B.; Lopez, A. F.; Petit, C.; Vadas, M. A.; Sutherland,
G. R.; Goodall, G. J.: A cytokine receptor gene cluster in the X-Y
pseudoautosomal region? Blood 82: 22-28, 1993.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/1/1993

EDITED terry: 08/26/2008
mgross: 9/6/2006
dkim: 7/2/1998
mark: 7/26/1995
mimadm: 3/11/1994
carol: 10/1/1993

168450	TITLE *168450 PARATHYROID HORMONE; PTH
;;PARATHYRIN;;
PARATHORMONE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The sequences of parathyrin and of proparathyrin have been determined,
as well as the nucleotide sequence of the PTH gene (Baxter et al., 1977;
Reis et al., 1990).

GENE STRUCTURE

The human PTH gene consists of 3 exons (Goswami et al., 2004). Exon 1 is
untranslated, exon 2 encodes a 25-amino acid signal peptide and part of
the prohormone, and exon 3 encodes the remaining part of the prohormone
(6 amino acids) and the whole PTH molecule (84 amino acids). In humans,
the terminal region of exon 3 consisting of 351 nucleotides remains
untranslated (Vasicek et al., 1983; Reis et al., 1990).

MAPPING

Using a cDNA probe of the parathyroid hormone gene, Antonarakis et al.
(1983) found a common PstI RFLP 3-prime to the PTH gene in all ethnic
groups studied. Family linkage studies were then performed with this
RFLP and with RFLPs related to the hemoglobin-beta (HBB; 141900) and
insulin (INS; 176730) loci. They found that PTH and HBB are closely
linked (recombination fraction, 0.07; confidence limits, 0.05-0.10; lod
score, 4.63). Furthermore, HBB lies between PTH and INS. They estimated
the interval between HBB and INS as 11 cM and the length of 11p as about
50 cM.

By in situ hybridization of meiotic pachytene bivalents, Chaganti et al.
(1985) arrived at the following localizations: PTH (not previously
assigned regionally), 11p11.21; HBB, 11p11.22; HRAS (190020), 11p14.1
and INS, 11p14.1.

By use of RFLPs that map to 11p, Raizis et al. (1985) detected mitotic
recombination as the mechanism of homozygosity in a Wilms tumor. Their
findings showed that insulin and beta-globin had come to homozygosity in
the tumor but PTH remained heterozygous. Thus, PTH must be proximal to
11p13, the cytologically determined site of the Wilms tumor 'gene.'
Using RFLP markers, Holm et al. (1985) concluded that PTH and CALC1
(114130) are very closely linked. No recombination was found in a large
number of opportunities. A lod score of 27.3 was obtained with a maximum
likelihood recombination fraction of 0.002.

By in situ hybridization Zabel et al. (1985) assigned PTH to 11p15 along
with INS, HRAS, and HBB. Their result was inconsistent with earlier
localizations. In most parts of 11p, male recombination is greater than
female recombination, contrary to the usual finding.

Tonoki et al. (1991) concluded from studies using RFLPs and gene dosage
in a patient with the Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (130650) accompanied
with a chromosome abnormality that PTH is located proximal to 11p15.4 in
the region 11p15.3-p15.1, most likely near the border of bands 11p15.4
and 11p15.3.

Lalley et al. (1987) mapped the gene for parathyroid hormone to mouse
chromosome 7.

GENE FUNCTION

By transfection of C-terminal deletion mutant preproPTH in COS-7 cells,
Lim et al. (1992) showed that the C terminus of PTH was necessary for
transport, efficient prosequence cleavage, and secretion.

Hendy et al. (1995) stated that the mRNA for PTH, in addition to
encoding the 84 amino acids of the mature peptide, encodes a 'pre'
sequence of 25 amino acids and a basic 'pro' hexapeptide. They reported
experiments indicating that furin (PACE; 136950) is the most effective
convertase in processing proPTH to PTH. Northern blot analysis and in
situ hybridization showed that furin and preproPTH mRNA are coexpressed
in the parathyroid gland, whereas other prohormone convertases PC1
(162150), PC2 (162151), and PC5 (600488) are not and PACE4 (167405) is
expressed only at very low levels. Hendy et al. (1995) concluded that
furin is the enzyme responsible for the physiologic processing of proPTH
to PTH.

Adams et al. (1998) used a photoaffinity crosslinking approach to
elucidate the nature of the bimolecular interaction of PTH with human
PTHR1. They found arg186 to be of critical importance to the interaction
of PTHR1 with the PTH 125I-K13 contact domain (Zhou et al., 1997):
modification of arg186 to either lysine or alanine does not modify
receptor avidity or signal transduction by the receptor, but eliminates
crosslinking to 125I-K13.

PTH stimulates bone formation to increase bone mass and strength in rats
and humans. Brommage et al. (1999) studied the skeletal effects of
recombinant human PTH-(1-34)(rhPTH-(1-34)) in monkeys, as monkey bone
remodeling and structure are similar to those in human bone. Recombinant
human PTH-(1-34) treatment did not influence serum ionized Ca levels or
urinary Ca excretion, but depressed endogenous PTH while increasing
serum calcitriol levels. Compared to that in the ovariectomized group,
the higher dose of rhPTH-(1-34) increased spine bone mineral density by
14.3%, whole body bone mineral content by 8.6%, and proximal tibia bone
mineral density by 10.8%. Subregion analyses suggested that the anabolic
effect of rhPTH-(1-34) on the proximal tibia was primarily in cancellous
bone. Similar but less dramatic effects on bone mineral density were
observed with the lower dose of rhPTH-(1-34). Daily subcutaneous
rhPTH-(1-34) treatment for 1 year increased bone mineral density in
ovariectomized monkeys without inducing sustained hypercalcemia or
hypercalciuria.

Purroy and Spurr (2002) reviewed the cell biology and molecular genetics
of calcium sensing in bone cells.

CYTOGENETICS

Parathyroid adenomas are benign clonal neoplastic growths, some of which
have been shown to have tumor-specific restriction fragment
abnormalities involving the PTH locus (Arnold et al., 1988). In a case
of parathyroid adenoma bearing restriction fragment abnormalities,
Arnold et al. (1989) showed that a DNA rearrangement had occurred in the
PTH locus; that the rearrangement separated the 5-prime flanking region
of the PTH gene from its coding exons, conceivably placing a newly
adjacent gene under the influence of PTH regulatory elements; that the
DNA that recombined with PTH normally maps to 11q13, the chromosomal
location of several oncogenes and the gene for MEN I (131100); and that
the rearrangement was a reciprocal, conservative recombination of the
locus on 11q13 (designated D11S287) with PTH (on 11p15). Nussbaum et al.
(1990) demonstrated that the ovarian carcinoma in a patient with
hypercalcemia and ectopic secretion of PTH had both DNA amplification
and rearrangement in the upstream regulatory region of the PTH gene.

Cui et al. (1989) estimated the frequency of recombination between the
PTH locus and the G-gamma-globin locus (HBG2; 142250) by typing more
than 700 single-sperm samples from 2 males. The typing technique
involved PCR and allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization. They
arrived at a maximum likelihood recombination frequency of 0.16 (95%
confidence interval, 0.13-0.19). They suggested that with current
technology and a sample size of 1,000 sperm, recombination fractions
down to about 0.009 can be estimated with statistical reliability; with
a sample size of 5,000 sperm, this value dropped to about 0.004.
Reasonable technologic improvements could be expected to result in
detection of recombination frequencies less than 0.001.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a patient from a family with autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism
(146200), Arnold et al. (1990) identified heterozygosity for a missense
mutation in the PTH gene (168450.0001). Functional studied demonstrated
inefficient processing of the mutant protein.

In 3 sibs from a consanguineous family with isolated hypoparathyroidism,
Parkinson and Thakker (1992) identified homozygosity for a splice site
mutation in the PTH gene (168450.0002).

Mullersman et al. (1992) described 2 new RFLPs within the PTH locus.
Both were detectable by a PCR-based assay.

In affected members of a consanguineous kindred who presented with
neonatal hypocalcemic seizures and were found to have isolated
hypoparathyroidism, Sunthornthepvarakul et al. (1999) identified
homozygosity for a missense mutation (168450.0003) in the PTH gene.

Goswami et al. (2004) sought PTH mutations in 51 patients with sporadic
idiopathic hypoparathyroidism. No mutations were observed in the segment
of the PTH gene coding for the signal peptide, prohormone, or the
3-prime untranslated region region. However, 3 previously described
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were observed. There was no
significant difference in the frequency of occurrence of these SNPs
between the patient and the control groups. The authors concluded that
in patients with sporadic idiopathic hypoparathyroidism, neither the
clinical manifestations nor the biochemical indexes of the disease are
related to the occurrence of mutations or SNPs in the PTH gene.

Au et al. (2008) reported the case of a parathyroid adenoma in which
there was loss of heterozygosity for the normal allele and secretion of
a biologically active N-terminal PTH fragment, which was truncated due
to a nonsense mutation in the PTH gene (168450.0004).

ANIMAL MODEL

Miao et al. (2002) compared the skeletal development of newborn mice
lacking either Pth, Pth-related peptide (PTHLH; 168470), or both
peptides. Pth-deficient mice were dysmorphic but viable. They
demonstrated diminished cartilage matrix mineralization, decreased
neovascularization with reduced expression of angiopoietin-1 (601667),
and reduced metaphyseal osteoblasts and trabecular bone. Mice lacking
Pthlh died at birth with dyschondroplasia. Compound mutants displayed
the combined cartilaginous and osseous defects of both single mutants,
indicating that both hormones are required to achieve normal fetal
skeletal morphogenesis, and they demonstrated an essential function of
Pth at the cartilage-bone interface.

Healy et al. (2005) administered human PTH over 48 hours to wildtype
mice and observed a 15% reduction in renal vitamin D receptor (VDR;
601769) levels (p less than 0.03). When the authors similarly
administered PTH to Cyp27b1 (609506)-null mice, which are incapable of
endogenously producing vitamin D hormone, they observed a 29% reduction
in VDR levels (p less than 0.001). Healy et al. (2005) concluded that
PTH is a potent downregulator of VDR expression in vivo.

Xue et al. (2005) compared mice with targeted disruption of the Pth or
25-hydroxyvitamin D3-1-alpha-hydroxylase (CYP27B1; 609506) genes to the
double-null mutants. Although Pth-null and Cyp27b1-null mice displayed
only moderate hypocalcemia, Pth/Cyp27b1 double-null mice died of tetany
with severe hypocalcemia by 3 weeks of age. At 2 weeks, Pth-null mice
exhibited only minimal dysmorphic changes, whereas Cyp27b1-null mice
showed epiphyseal dysgenesis, and Pth/Cyp27b1 double-mutants showed
severe epiphyseal dysgenesis. Although reduced osteoblastic bone
formation was seen in both mutants, Pth deficiency caused only a slight
reduction in long bone length but a marked reduction in trabecular bone
volume, whereas Cyp27b1 ablation caused a smaller reduction in
trabecular bone volume but a significant decrease in bone length. The
authors concluded that PTH plays a predominant role in appositional bone
growth, whereas 1,25(OH)2D3 acts predominantly on endochondral bone
formation. Although PTH and 1,25(OH)2D3 independently, but not
additively, regulate osteoclastic bone resorption, they do affect the
renal calcium transport pathway cooperatively. Consequently, PTH and
1,25(OH)2D3 exhibited discrete and collaborative roles in modulating
skeletal and calcium homeostasis, and Xue et al. (2005) hypothesized
that loss of the renal component of calcium conservation may be the
major factor contributing to the lethal hypocalcemia in double mutants.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPOPARATHYROIDISM, FAMILIAL ISOLATED
PTH, CYS18ARG

In a patient from a family (family D) with autosomal dominant
hypoparathyroidism (146200), earlier reported by Ahn et al. (1986),
Arnold et al. (1990) identified heterozygosity for a T-to-C transition
in exon 2 of the PTH gene, resulting in a cys18-to-arg (C18R)
substitution in the 31-amino acid prepro-sequence of parathyroid
hormone, disrupting the hydrophobic core of the signal sequence. The
patient's father, who was clinically unaffected but had a subnormal PTH
and urinary cAMP responses upon induction of hypocalcemia, was also
heterozygous for the mutation, which was not found in unaffected family
members. Because the hydrophobic core is required by secreted proteins
for efficient translocation across the endoplasmic reticulum, the mutant
protein would be expected to show inefficient processing, which indeed
Arnold et al. (1990) demonstrated.

In HEK293 cells transfected with C18R-mutant preproPTH cDNA, Datta et
al. (2007) demonstrated that the expressed mutant hormone was trapped
intracellularly, predominantly in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER),
resulting in apoptosis. The C18R-expressing cells also showed marked
upregulation of the ER stress-responsive hormones BIP (HSPA5; 138120)
and PERK (EIF2AK3; 604032) and the proapoptotic transcription factor
CHOP (DDIT3; 126337). When C18R-mutant PTH was expressed in the presence
of the pharmacologic chaperone 4-phenylbutyric acid, intracellular
accumulation was reduced and normal secretion was restored. Datta et al.
(2007) suggested that ER stress-induced cell death is the underlying
mechanism for autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism.

.0002
HYPOPARATHYROIDISM, FAMILIAL ISOLATED
PTH, IVS2DS, G-C, +1, EX2DEL

In 2 sisters and a brother with isolated hypoparathyroidism (146200),
the offspring of a first-cousin marriage, Parkinson and Thakker (1992)
identified homozygosity for a G-to-C transversion at the first
nucleotide of intron 2 of the parathyroid hormone gene. The mutation was
detected by restriction enzyme cleavage with DdeI. Both parents were
heterozygous and unrelated normal individuals were homozygous for the
wildtype allele. Defects in mRNA splicing were investigated by the
detection of illegitimate transcription of the PTH gene in
lymphoblastoid cells. The mutation resulted in exon skipping with loss
of exon 2, which encodes the initiation codon and the signal peptide,
thereby causing parathyroid hormone deficiency.

.0003
HYPOPARATHYROIDISM, FAMILIAL ISOLATED
PTH, SER23PRO

In a patient with neonatal hypocalcemic seizures (see 146200), whose
parents were consanguineous, Sunthornthepvarakul et al. (1999)
identified a T-to-C transition in exon 2 of the PTH gene, resulting in a
ser23-to-pro (S23P) substitution in the 25-amino acid prepro-PTH signal
peptide. Serum calcium was 1.5 mmol/L (normal, 2.0-2.5); phosphate was
3.6 mmol/L (normal, 0.9-1.5). A few years later, 2 younger sisters and
her niece presented with neonatal hypocalcemic seizures. Their intact
PTH levels were undetectable during severe hypocalcemia. Genomic DNA
from the proposita was sequenced in all exons of the prepro-PTH gene.
Genotyping of family members was carried out by identification of a new
MspI site created by the mutation. Only affected family members were
homozygous for the mutant allele, whereas the parents were heterozygous,
supporting autosomal recessive inheritance. As this mutation is at the
-3 position in the signal peptide of the prepro-PTH gene, the authors
hypothesized that the prepro-PTH mutant might not be cleaved by signal
peptidase at the normal position, and it might be degraded in rough
endoplasmic reticulum.

.0004
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM, PRIMARY
PTH, ARG83TER

In the parathyroid adenoma (see 145000) of a 59-year-old woman with
hypercalcemia but undetectable serum PTH levels, in which microarray
analysis showed upregulated PTH expression despite negative
immunohistochemistry for PTH, Au et al. (2008) identified a 247C-T
transition in the PTH gene, resulting in an arg83-to-ter (R83X)
substitution and predicting premature termination after 52 amino acids
in the secreted PTH peptide. No wildtype sequence was detected in tumor
DNA, although analysis of peripheral blood leukocyte DNA revealed
heterozygosity for the mutation; loss of heterozygosity analysis showed
that the wildtype PTH allele had been deleted in the tumor. The authors
confirmed that an N-terminal PTH fragment was produced by tumor cells
cultured ex vivo. Noting that Lim et al. (1992) had previously studied
the R83X mutation in vitro and demonstrated impairment of translocation
across the ER, cleavage of pro-PTH, and secretion of PTH, Au et al.
(2008) stated that this case provides evidence that an endogenously
produced N-terminal PTH fragment can be biologically active.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Habener et al. (1978); Kronenberg et al. (1979); Lebo et al. (1985);
Mayer et al. (1983); Schmidtke et al. (1984)
REFERENCE 1. Adams, A. E.; Bisello, A.; Chorev, M.; Rosenblatt, M.; Suva, L.
J.: Arginine 186 in the extracellular N-terminal region of the human
parathyroid hormone 1 receptor is essential for contact with position
13 of the hormone. Molec. Endocr. 12: 1673-1683, 1998.

2. Ahn, T. G.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Kronenberg, H. M.; Igarashi, T.;
Levine, M. A.: Familial isolated hypoparathyroidism: a molecular
genetic analysis of 8 families with 23 affected persons. Medicine 65:
73-81, 1986.

3. Antonarakis, S. E.; Phillips, J. A., III; Mallonee, R. L.; Kazazian,
H. H., Jr.; Fearon, E. R.; Waber, P. G.; Kronenberg, H. M.; Ullrich,
A.; Meyers, D. A.: Beta-globin locus is linked to the parathyroid
hormone (PTH) locus and lies between the insulin and PTH loci in man. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 6615-6619, 1983.

4. Arnold, A.; Horst, S. A.; Gardella, T. J.; Baba, H.; Levine, M.
A.; Kronenberg, H. M.: Mutation of the signal peptide-encoding region
of the preproparathyroid hormone gene in familial isolated hypoparathyroidism. J.
Clin. Invest. 86: 1084-1087, 1990.

5. Arnold, A.; Kim, H. G.; Gaz, R. D.; Eddy, R. L.; Fukushima, Y.;
Byers, M. G.; Shows, T. B.; Kronenberg, H. M.: Molecular cloning
and chromosomal mapping of DNA rearranged with the parathyroid hormone
gene in a parathyroid adenoma. J. Clin. Invest. 83: 2034-2040, 1989.

6. Arnold, A.; Staunton, C. E.; Kim, H. G.; Gaz, R. D.; Kronenberg,
H. M.: Monoclonality and abnormal parathyroid hormone genes in parathyroid
adenomas. New Eng. J. Med. 318: 658-662, 1988.

7. Au, A. Y. M.; McDonald, K.; Gill, A.; Sywak, M.; Diamond, T.; Conigrave,
A. D.; Clifton-Bligh, R. J.: PTH mutation with primary hyperparathyroidism
and undetectable intact PTH. New Eng. J. Med. 359: 1184-1186, 2008.

8. Baxter, J. D.; Seeburg, P. H.; Shine, J.; Martial, J. A.; Goodman,
H. M.: DNA sequence of a human gene coding for a polypeptide hormone.
(Abstract) Clin. Res. 25: 514A only, 1977.

9. Brommage, R.; Hotchkiss, C. E.; Lees, C. J.; Stancill, M. W.; Hock,
J. M.; Jerome, C. P.: Daily treatment with human recombinant parathyroid
hormone-(1-34), LY333334, for 1 year increases bone mass in ovariectomized
monkeys. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 3757-3763, 1999.

10. Chaganti, R. S. K.; Jhanwar, S. C.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Hayward,
W. S.: Germ-line chromosomal localization of genes in chromosome
11p linkage: parathyroid hormone, beta-globin, c-Ha-ras-1, and insulin. Somat.
Cell Molec. Genet. 11: 197-202, 1985.

11. Cui, X. F.; Li, H. H.; Goradia, T. M.; Lange, K.; Kazazian, H.
H., Jr.; Galas, D.; Arnheim, N.: Single-sperm typing: determination
of genetic distance between the G-gamma-globin and parathyroid hormone
loci by using the polymerase chain reaction and allele-specific oligomers. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 86: 9389-9393, 1989.

12. Datta, R.; Waheed, A.; Shah, G. N.; Sly, W. S.: Signal sequence
mutation in autosomal dominant form of hypoparathyroidism induces
apoptosis that is corrected by a chemical chaperone. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 104: 19989-19994, 2007.

13. Goswami, R.; Mohapatra, T.; Gupta, N.; Rani, R.; Tomar, N.; Dikshit,
A.; Sharma, R. K.: Parathyroid hormone gene polymorphism and sporadic
idiopathic hypoparathyroidism. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 4840-4845,
2004.

14. Habener, J. F.; Rosenblatt, M.; Kemper, B.; Kronenberg, H. M.;
Rich, A.; Potts, J. T., Jr.: Pre-proparathyroid hormone: amino acid
sequence, chemical synthesis, and some biological studies of the precursor
region. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 75: 2616-2620, 1978.

15. Healy, K. D.; Vanhooke, J. L.; Prahl, J. M.; DeLuca, H. F.: Parathyroid
hormone decreases renal vitamin D receptor expression in vivo. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 4724-4728, 2005.

16. Hendy, G. N.; Bennett, H. P. J.; Gibbs, B. F.; Lazure, C.; Day,
R.; Seidah, N. G.: Proparathyroid hormone is preferentially cleaved
to parathyroid hormone by the prohormone convertase furin: a mass
spectrometric study. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 9517-9525, 1995.

17. Holm, T.; O'Connell, P.; Leppert, M.; Callahan, P.; White, R.
: Parathyroid hormone and calcitonin are tightly linked and have been
placed on the genetic map of chromosome 11p. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 37: A156 only, 1985.

18. Kronenberg, H. M.; McDevitt, B. E.; Majzoub, J. A.; Nathans, J.;
Sharp, P. A.; Potts, J. T., Jr.; Rich, A.: Cloning and nucleotide
sequence of DNA coding for bovine preproparathyroid hormone. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 76: 4981-4985, 1979.

19. Lalley, P. A.; Sakaguchi, A. Y.; Eddy, R. L.; Honey, N. H.; Bell,
G. I.; Shen, L.-P.; Rutter, W. J.; Jacobs, J. W.; Heinrich, G.; Chin,
W. W.; Naylor, S. L.: Mapping polypeptide hormone genes in the mouse:
somatostatin, glucagon, calcitonin, and parathyroid hormone. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 44: 92-97, 1987.

20. Lebo, R. V.; Cheung, M.-C.; Bruce, B. D.; Riccardi, V. M.; Kao,
F.-T.; Kan, Y. W.: Mapping parathyroid hormone, beta-globin, insulin,
and LDH-A genes within the human chromosome 11 short arm by spot blotting
sorted chromosomes. Hum. Genet. 69: 316-320, 1985.

21. Lim, S. K.; Gardella, T. J.; Baba, H.; Nussbaum, S. R.; Kronenberg,
H. M.: The carboxy-terminus of parathyroid hormone is essential for
hormone processing and secretion. Endocrinology 131: 2325-2330,
1992.

22. Mayer, H.; Breyel, E.; Bostock, C.; Schmidtke, J.: Assignment
of the human parathyroid hormone gene to chromosome 11. Hum. Genet. 64:
283-285, 1983.

23. Miao, D.; He, B.; Karaplis, A. C.; Goltzman, D.: Parathyroid
hormone is essential for normal fetal bone formation. J. Clin. Invest. 109:
1173-1182, 2002.

24. Mullersman, J. E.; Shields, J. J.; Saha, B. K.: Characterization
of two novel polymorphisms at the human parathyroid hormone gene locus. Hum.
Genet. 88: 589-592, 1992.

25. Nussbaum, S. R.; Gaz, R. D.; Arnold, A.: Hypercalcemia and ectopic
secretion of parathyroid hormone by an ovarian carcinoma with rearrangement
of the gene for parathyroid hormone. New Eng. J. Med. 323: 1324-1328,
1990.

26. Parkinson, D. B.; Thakker, R. V.: A donor splice site mutation
in the parathyroid hormone gene is associated with autosomal recessive
hypoparathyroidism. Nature Genet. 1: 149-152, 1992.

27. Purroy, J.; Spurr, N. K.: Molecular genetics of calcium sensing
in bone cells. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 2377-2384, 2002.

28. Raizis, A. M.; Becroft, D. M.; Shaw, R. L.; Reeve, A. E.: A mitotic
recombination in Wilms tumor occurs between the parathyroid hormone
locus and 11p13. Hum. Genet. 70: 344-346, 1985.

29. Reis, A.; Hecht, W.; Groger, R.; Bohm, I.; Cooper, D. N.; Lindenmaier,
W.; Mayer, H.; Schmidtke, J.: Cloning and sequence analysis of the
human parathyroid hormone gene region. Hum. Genet. 84: 119-124,
1990.

30. Schmidtke, J.; Pape, B.; Krengel, U.; Langenbeck, U.; Cooper,
D. N.; Breyel, E.; Mayer, H.: Restriction fragment length polymorphisms
at the human parathyroid hormone gene locus. Hum. Genet. 67: 428-431,
1984.

31. Sunthornthepvarakul, T.; Churesigaew, S.; Ngowngarmratana, S.
: A novel mutation of the signal peptide of the preproparathyroid
hormone gene associated with autosomal recessive familial isolated
hypoparathyroidism. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 3792-3796, 1999.

32. Tonoki, H.; Narahara, K.; Matsumoto, T.; Niikawa, N.: Regional
mapping of the parathyroid hormone gene (PTH) by cytogenetic and molecular
studies. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 56: 103-104, 1991.

33. Vasicek, T. J.; McDevitt, B. E.; Freeman, M. W.; Fennick, B. J.;
Hendy, G. N.; Potts, J. T., Jr.; Rich, A.; Kronenberg, H. M.: Nucleotide
sequence of the human parathyroid hormone gene. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 80: 2127-2131, 1983.

34. Xue, Y.; Karaplis, A. C.; Hendy, G. N.; Goltzman, D.; Miao, D.
: Genetic models show that parathyroid hormone and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D(3) play distinct and synergistic roles in postnatal mineral ion
homeostasis and skeletal development. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 1515-1528,
2005.

35. Zabel, B. U.; Kronenberg, H. M.; Bell, G. I.; Shows, T. B.: Chromosome
mapping of genes on the short arm of human chromosome 11: parathyroid
hormone gene is at 11p15 together with the genes for insulin, c-Harvey-ras
1, and beta-hemoglobin. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 39: 200-205, 1985.

36. Zhou, A. T.; Bessalle, R.; Bisello, A.; Nakamoto, C.; Rosenblatt,
M.; Suva, L. J.; Chorev, M.: Direct mapping of an agonist-binding
domain within the parathyroid hormone/parathyroid hormone-related
protein receptor by photoaffinity crosslinking. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 94: 3644-3649, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/17/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/5/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/29/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/17/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/3/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/10/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/11/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/2/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/7/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/2/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/3/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED carol: 09/17/2013
carol: 2/9/2011
terry: 11/19/2008
wwang: 9/17/2008
wwang: 6/11/2008
terry: 6/5/2008
wwang: 2/11/2008
terry: 1/29/2008
wwang: 10/18/2006
terry: 10/17/2006
carol: 6/1/2006
alopez: 4/3/2006
wwang: 1/11/2005
wwang: 1/10/2005
carol: 11/11/2004
mgross: 12/2/2003
mgross: 10/7/2002
cwells: 7/3/2001
cwells: 7/2/2001
alopez: 6/5/2000
terry: 4/3/2000
dkim: 9/11/1998
mark: 9/18/1997
mark: 9/11/1997
mark: 6/13/1995
mimadm: 1/14/1995
jason: 7/20/1994
warfield: 4/12/1994
carol: 6/3/1992
carol: 5/22/1992

185861	TITLE *185861 SYNAPTIC VESICLE GLYCOPROTEIN 2B; SV2B
;;KIAA0735
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using the SV2 (SV2A; 185860) clone to screen for cDNAs in rat brain,
Bajjalieh et al. (1993) characterized a cDNA that encoded a protein,
which they termed SV2B, that was 65% identical to SV2. The SV2B protein
was recognized by the anti-SV2 antibody. Expression of SV2B was limited
to neural tissue. While both forms of SV2 were expressed in all brain
regions, SV2B was expressed at highest levels in the cortex and
hippocampus, whereas the highest level of expression of SV2A was in
subcortical regions.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1998) cloned SV2B, which they designated
KIAA0735. The deduced protein contains 683 amino acids and shares 94.9%
identity with rat Sv2b. RT-PCR ELISA detected highest expression of SV2B
in brain, and low levels in heart, pancreas, and testis, but not in
other tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Heese et al. (2001) identified a variant of Sv2b from a rat
neuroblastoma cell line which was induced by exposure to an amyloid beta
peptide isoform that contains 42 residues (104760). This variant encodes
the same Sv2b protein but has an elongated 3-prime untranslated region
that is AU-rich and contains several AUUUA elements. Heese et al. (2001)
hypothesized that these sequences may be cis-elements that inhibit
protein translation.

Iezzi et al. (2005) characterized the 3 SV2 isoforms SV2A, SV2B, and
SV2C (610291) and defined their involvement in regulated insulin
secretion. They observed that SV2A and SV2C are associated with
insulin-containing granules and synaptic-like microvesicles in INS-1E
insulinoma and primary beta cells, whereas SV2B is present only on
synaptic-like microvesicles. Neither overexpression nor isoform-specific
silencing of SV2A or SV2C by RNA interference modified
depolarization-triggered cytosolic calcium ion rises or secretory
granule calcium ion concentrations. Iezzi et al. (2005) suggested that
these data strongly argue against any calcium ion transport function of
SV2. Moreover, up- or downregulation of these isoforms had no influence
on potassium ion-induced insulin release, suggesting that SV2 does not
affect the calcium ion-dependent step(s) of exocytosis. By contrast,
Iezzi et al. (2005) found that glucose-elicited secretion was inhibited
during the sustained rather than the early phase, placing the action of
SV2 on the recruitment of granules from the reserve pool to the plasma
membrane. This conclusion was reinforced by capacitance measurements in
glucose-stimulated SV2C-deficient cells. Like capacitance, evoked and
basal hormone release were attenuated more by silencing of SV2C compared
with SV2A. Iezzi et al. (2005) concluded that their data indicate only
partial redundancy and highlight a key role for SV2C in the secretory
process.

Dong et al. (2006) found that botulinum neurotoxin A enters neurons by
binding to the synaptic vesicle protein SV2. Fragments of SV2 that
harbored the toxin interaction domain inhibited botulinum neurotoxin A
from binding to neurons. Botulinum neurotoxin A binding to SV2A and SV2B
knockout hippocampal neurons was abolished and was restored by
expressing SV2A, SV2B, or SV2C. Reduction of SV2 expression in rat
neuronal cell lines also inhibited entry of botulinum neurotoxin A,
which could be restored by expressing SV2 isoforms. Finally, mice that
lacked SV2B displayed reduced sensitivity to botulinum neurotoxin A.
Thus, Dong et al. (2006) concluded that SV2 acts as the protein receptor
for botulinum neurotoxin A.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the SV2B gene
to chromosome 15.

REFERENCE 1. Bajjalieh, S. M.; Peterson, K.; Linial, M.; Scheller, R. H.: Brain
contains two forms of synaptic vesicle protein 2. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 90: 2150-2154, 1993.

2. Dong, M.; Yeh, F.; Tepp, W. H.; Dean, C.; Johnson, E. A.; Janz,
R.; Chapman, E. R.: SV2 is the protein receptor for botulinum neurotoxin
A. Science 312: 592-596, 2006.

3. Heese, K.; Nagai, Y; Sawada, T.: Identification of a new synaptic
vesicle protein 2B mRNA transcript which is up-regulated in neurons
by amyloid beta peptide fragment (1-42). Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 289:
924-928, 2001.

4. Iezzi, M.; Theander, S.; Janz, R.; Loze, C.; Wollheim, C. B.:
SV2A and SV2C are not vesicular Ca(2+) transporters but control glucose-evoked
granule recruitment. J. Cell Sci. 118: 5647-5660, 2005.

5. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Miyajima, N.;
Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the
coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XI. The complete sequences
of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in
vitro. DNA Res. 5: 277-286, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/31/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/7/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/27/1993

EDITED alopez: 08/02/2006
terry: 7/31/2006
joanna: 5/3/2006
carol: 10/2/2003
cwells: 5/7/2003
alopez: 1/13/2000
carol: 5/27/1993

173460	TITLE *173460 PLATELET FACTOR 4; PF4
;;SMALL INDUCIBLE CYTOKINE SUBFAMILY B, MEMBER 4; SCYB4;;
CHEMOKINE, CXC MOTIF, LIGAND 4; CXCL4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Platelet factor-4 is a 70-amino acid protein that is released from the
alpha-granules of activated platelets and binds with high affinity to
heparin. Its major physiologic role appears to be neutralization of
heparin-like molecules on the endothelial surface of blood vessels,
thereby inhibiting local antithrombin III activity and promoting
coagulation. As a strong chemoattractant for neutrophils and
fibroblasts, PF4 probably has a role in inflammation and wound repair
(Eisman et al., 1990).

CLONING

The full-length PF4 cDNA was prepared by Poncz et al. (1987). Eisman et
al. (1990) cloned and sequenced the PF4 gene. Like beta-thromboglobulin
(PPBP; 121010), PF4 is encoded by a small inducible gene (SIG), so
called because of its small size and its stimulation with platelet
activation.

The NOA mouse, an animal model of allergic or atopic dermatitis,
exhibits ulcerative skin lesions associated with accumulation of mast
cells and eosinophils, a significantly increased level of serum IgE, and
scratching behavior. Watanabe et al. (1999) used the differential
display technique to screen genes that might be differentially expressed
in the spleen of NOA mice as compared to that of controls. They isolated
a gene encoding a 105-amino acid protein that has 89% and 64% sequence
identity to rat PF4 and human PF4, respectively. Both PF4 and eotaxin
(601156), a specific chemoattractant for eosinophils, were expressed
more strongly in spleens of adult NOA mice than in younger mice,
parallel to the increase in ulcerative skin lesions in older mice. This
suggested that PF4 and eotaxin may play important roles in the etiology
of atopic dermatitis.

GENE FAMILY

PF4, or CXCL4, belongs to the CXC chemokine family. Chemokines are a
group of small (approximately 8 to 14 kD), mostly basic, structurally
related molecules that regulate cell trafficking of various types of
leukocytes through interactions with a subset of 7-transmembrane, G
protein-coupled receptors. Chemokines also play fundamental roles in the
development, homeostasis, and function of the immune system, and they
have effects on cells of the central nervous system as well as on
endothelial cells involved in angiogenesis or angiostasis. Chemokines
are divided into 2 major subfamilies, CXC and CC, based on the
arrangement of the first 2 of the 4 conserved cysteine residues; the 2
cysteines are separated by a single amino acid in CXC chemokines and are
adjacent in CC chemokines. CXC chemokines are further subdivided into
ELR and non-ELR types based on the presence or absence of a glu-leu-arg
sequence adjacent and N terminal to the CXC motif (summary by Zlotnik
and Yoshie, 2000).

GENE FUNCTION

Lasagni et al. (2003) identified an isoform of CXCR3 (300574), CXCR3B,
as a functional receptor for CXCL4. The found that both CXCR3A and
CXCR3B bound CXCL9 (601704), CXCL10 (147310), and CXCL11 (604852), but
only CXCR3B bound CXCL4, following expression in a microvascular
endothelial cell line. Overexpression of CXCR3A induced an increase in
endothelial cell survival, whereas overexpression of CXCR3B upregulated
apoptotic pathways. Immunohistochemical analysis of primary
microvascular endothelial cells, whose growth in inhibited by CXCL4,
CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11, demonstrated expression of CXCR3B, but not
CXCR3A. CXCR3B-specific monoclonal antibodies reacted with neoplastic
tissue endothelial cells, providing evidence that CXCR3B is expressed in
vivo and may account for the angiostatic effects of CXC chemokines, such
as CXCL4.

Using mass spectrometry, Aivado et al. (2007) generated serum proteome
profiles from 122 patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), 72
non-MDS patients with cytopenia, and 24 controls, and identified a
profile that distinguished MDS from non-MDS cytopenias. Peptide mass
fingerprinting and quadrupole SELDI-TOF mass spectrometry identified 2
differential proteins, CXCL4 and CXCL7 (PPBP; 121010), both of which had
significantly decreased serum levels in MDS. The decrease was confirmed
with independent antibody assays, and subtype analyses revealed
decreased serum levels of these 2 proteins in advanced MDS. Aivado et
al. (2007) suggested that there may be a concerted disturbance of
transcription or translation of these chemokines in advanced MDS.

GENE STRUCTURE

Eisman et al. (1990) demonstrated that the PF4 gene contains 3 exons
spanning approximately 1 kb. The gene is encoded on a 10-kb EcoRI
fragment of genomic DNA.

By in situ hybridization, Griffin et al. (1987) mapped the PF4 gene to
chromosome 4q12-q21. Using PCR of a radiation hybrid panel, Modi and
Chen (1998) mapped the PF4 gene to a 1.8-cR interval on 4q. This tight
cluster contains many members of the CXC chemokine subfamily, and 2
additional genes, IL8 (146930) and MIG (CXCL9), are located about 6 cR
distal to this group. Modi and Chen (1998) suggested that these
chemokine genes are all derived through tandem gene duplication from an
ancestral gene located on chromosome 4, and that the position of SDF1
(600835) on chromosome 10 represents a translocation event.

By PCR analysis and mapping of YAC clones, O'Donovan et al. (1999)
localized a number of CXC chemokine genes to 4q12-q21. They proposed
that the order in this region is centromere--IL8--GRO1
(155730)/PPBP/PF4--SCYB5 (600324)/SCYB6 (138965)--GRO2 (139110)/GRO3
(139111)--SCYB11 (CXCL11)--SCYB10 (CXCL10)--MIG--telomere. The PF4 gene
was localized to 4q12-q13.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Lambert et al. (2007) found that approximately 8% of 250 healthy
individuals had 2-fold increased platelet PF4 content, indicating
variable expression in the general population.

ANIMAL MODEL

In Pf4-null mice and transgenic mice that overexpressed human PF4,
Lambert et al. (2007) found an inverse correlation between peripheral
blood platelet count and platelet PF4 content. The differences in
platelet count appeared to be due to platelet production rather than
platelet survival, but the findings were independent of thrombopoietin
(THPO; 600044) levels. In vitro studies showed that PF4 inhibited
formation of megakaryocyte-containing colonies, and that developing
megakaryocytes released PF4 in culture. Anti-PF4 antibodies reduced the
duration of thrombocytopenia in mice after chemotherapy.

REFERENCE 1. Aivado, M.; Spentzos, D.; Germing, U.; Alterovitz, G.; Meng, X.-Y.;
Grall, F.; Giagounidis, A. A. N.; Klement, G.; Steidl, U.; Otu, H.
H.; Czibere, A.; Prall, W. C.; Iking-Konert, C.; Shayne, M.; Ramoni,
M. F.; Gattermann, N.; Haas, R.; Mitsiades, C. S.; Fung, E. T.; Libermann,
T. A.: Serum proteome profiling detects myelodysplastic syndromes
and identifies CXC chemokine ligands 4 and 7 as markers for advanced
disease. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 1307-1312, 2007.

2. Eisman, R.; Surrey, S.; Ramachandran, B.; Schwartz, E.; Poncz,
M.: Structural and functional comparison of the genes for human platelet
factor 4 and PF4-alt. Blood 76: 336-344, 1990.

3. Griffin, C. A.; Emanuel, B. S.; LaRocco, P.; Schwartz, E.; Poncz,
M.: Human platelet factor 4 gene is mapped to 4q12-q21. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 45: 67-69, 1987.

4. Lambert, M. P.; Rauova, L.; Bailey, M.; Sola-Visner, M. C.; Kowalska,
M. A.; Poncz, M.: Platelet factor 4 is a negative autocrine in vivo
regulator of megakaryopoiesis: clinical and therapeutic implications. Blood 110:
1153-1160, 2007.

5. Lasagni, L.; Francalanci, M.; Annunziato, F.; Lazzeri, E.; Giannini,
S.; Cosmi, L.; Sagrinati, C.; Mazzinghi, B.; Orlando, C.; Maggi, E.;
Marra, F.; Romagnani, S.; Serio, M.; Romagnani, P.: A alternatively
spliced variant of CXCR3 mediates the inhibition of endothelial cell
growth induced by IP-10, Mig, and I-TAC, and acts as a functional
receptor for platelet factor 4. J. Exp. Med. 197: 1537-1549, 2003.

6. Modi, W. S.; Chen, Z.-Q.: Localization of the human CXC chemokine
subfamily on the long arm of chromosome 4 using radiation hybrids. Genomics 47:
136-139, 1998.

7. O'Donovan, N.; Galvin, M.; Morgan, J. G.: Physical mapping of
the CXC chemokine locus on human chromosome 4. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 84:
39-42, 1999.

8. Poncz, M.; Surrey, S.; LaRocco, P.; Weiss, M. J.; Rappaport, E.
F.; Conway, T. M.; Schwartz, E.: Cloning and characterization of
platelet factor 4 cDNA derived from a human erythroleukemic cell line. Blood 69:
219-223, 1987.

9. Watanabe, O.; Natori, K.; Tamari, M.; Shiomoto, Y.; Kubo, S.; Nakamura,
Y.: Significantly elevated expression of PF4 (platelet factor 4)
and eotaxin in the NOA mouse, a model for atopic dermatitis. J. Hum.
Genet. 44: 173-176, 1999.

10. Zlotnik, A.; Yoshie, O.: Chemokines: a new classification system
and their role in immunity. Immunity 12: 121-127, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/25/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/22/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/14/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/19/2000
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 7/12/1999
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 3/4/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/5/1987

EDITED terry: 08/22/2012
wwang: 3/31/2008
ckniffin: 3/25/2008
wwang: 6/22/2007
mgross: 3/14/2006
mgross: 4/19/2000
carol: 7/13/1999
kayiaros: 7/12/1999
carol: 6/16/1998
alopez: 3/4/1998
carol: 10/7/1992
carol: 9/14/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/24/1992
carol: 11/8/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990

176873	TITLE *176873 CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASE 11B; CDK11B
;;CELL DIVISION CYCLE 2-LIKE 1; CDC2L1;;
PROTEIN KINASE p58; PK58; p58;;
CDC-RELATED PROTEIN KINASE p58;;
PITSLRE B;;
CDK11
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Bunnell et al. (1990) identified a human cell division control
(CDC)-related protein kinase, p58, that is structurally and functionally
related to p34(cdc2) (CDC2; 116940). Abnormal expression of the p58
protein kinase in eukaryotic cells had effects suggesting that it is a
negative regulator of normal cell cycle progression. The gene is well
conserved evolutionarily. Its expression is regulated during murine
embryogenesis, and its activity is coordinately regulated with that of
p34(cdc2) during the cell cycle.

Lahti et al. (1994) characterized the genomic region surrounding CDC2L1
and found that a related gene, CDC2L2 (116951), was located within 100
kb. They referred to CDC2L1 as PITSLRE B, based on the amino acid
sequence of the region corresponding to the conserved CDC2 PSTAIRE box.

Xiang et al. (1994) isolated multiple, alternatively spliced CDC2L1 and
CDC2L2 mRNAs. The CDC2L1 transcripts encode protein isoforms ranging in
size from 58 to 110 kD. The isoforms vary in the length and sequence of
their N-terminal regions; the protein kinase catalytic and C-terminal
domains are identical. All contain a 30-residue acid blob domain
comprised primarily of glutamic acid. The larger protein species
contained a putative bipartite nuclear localization signal. Western blot
analysis revealed that the 58-kD isoform was present only in cells
undergoing apoptosis. Xiang et al. (1994) analyzed the expression
pattern of the CDC2L1 mRNAs.

The CDC2L1 and CDC2L2 genes encode almost identical protein kinases of
110 kD that contain at their C termini the open reading frame of a
smaller isoform of 58 kD. Cornelis et al. (2000) found that 2 PITSLRE
protein kinase isoforms, p110 and p58, are translated from a single
transcript by initiation at alternative in-frame AUG codons. p110 is
produced by classic cap-dependent translation, whereas p58 results from
internal initiation of translation controlled by an internal ribosome
entry site (IRES) with unique properties. The IRES element is localized
to the mRNA coding region, and its activity is cell cycle regulated,
permitting translation of p58 in G2/M.

Loyer et al. (2008) stated that both CDC2L2 and CDC2L1 can produce a
third isoform, p46, by caspase-dependent proteolysis of either the p110
or p58 isoforms. By immunofluorescence analysis of several human cell
lines, they detected p110 in both nucleoplasm and nuclear speckles.
Western blot analysis showed robust expression of p110 in several human
cell lines and in activated human peripheral blood cells. Only activated
blood cells expressed p58 and p46. Size exclusion chromatography of HeLa
cells revealed that p110 fractionated with protein complexes of about
170 kD to over 1 MDa.

GENE FUNCTION

Lahti et al. (1994) demonstrated that 1 allele of the entire gene CDC2L
complex was either deleted or translocated in 18 of 20 neuroblastoma
(256700) cell lines investigated. They suggested that the CDC2L gene
complex may harbor 1 or more tumor suppressor genes affected by
chromosome 1p36 modifications in neuroblastoma.

By immunoprecipitation analysis and protein pull-down assays with human
cell lines, Loyer et al. (2008) found that p110 CDK11 associated with
the alpha and beta isoforms of cyclin L1 (CCNL1; 613384) and L2 (CCNL2;
613482) in a high molecular mass complex that showed splicing activity.
The p58 and p46 CDK11 isoforms interacted more weakly with the cyclin L
alpha isoforms. In vivo splicing assays showed that expression of cyclin
L1-alpha, L1-beta, L2-alpha, or L2-beta and/or p110 CDK11 increased
intron-splicing activity and altered alternative splice-site selection
in a cyclin L1 and L2 isoform- and cell type-specific manner. In
contrast with p110 CDK11, p58 and p46 CDK11 reduced splicing activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Eipers et al. (1992) detailed the complete structure of the CDC2L1 gene
including its putative promoter region, transcriptional start sites,
exonic sequences, and intron/exon boundary sequences. The gene is 10 kb
and contains 12 exons and 11 introns.

Gururajan et al. (1998) determined the structure of the 140-kb CDC2L
genomic region. This region consists of 2 identical genomic segments
arranged in a tail-to-tail configuration. Each segment contains a CDC2L
gene linked to an MMP gene. See MMP21 (603320). In each case, the most
widely expressed products of the CDC2L gene are derived from a genomic
region that is composed of 20 exons and spans approximately 20 kb. The
authors reported that only 15 amino acids of the 773-786 residues that
encode the multiple CDC2L isoforms are unique to either CDC2L1 or
CDC2L2.

MAPPING

Eipers et al. (1991) assigned the expressed p58 gene to 1p36 by somatic
cell hybrid analysis, in situ hybridization, and nested PCR
amplification of microdissected chromosomes. The authors stated that
this gene, tentatively symbolized PK58, may be implicated in the
pathogenesis of tumors that have deletion in the region of 1p36.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Lahti et al. (1994) mapped the
CDC2L1 gene to 1p36.3.

White et al. (1995) showed that CDC2L1 is located outside the consensus
region of allelic loss of heterozygosity (LOH) associated with
neuroblastomas, namely, 1p36.3-p36.2, and is therefore not the
neuroblastoma suppressor gene.

REFERENCE 1. Bunnell, B.; Heath, L. S.; Adams, D. E.; Lahti, J. M.; Kidd, V.
J.: Elevated expression of a p58 protein kinase leads to changes
in the CHO cell cycle. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 7467-7471, 1990.
Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 2612 only, 1991.

2. Cornelis, S.; Bruynooghe, Y.; Denecker, G.; Van Huffel, S.; Tinton,
S.; Beyaert, R.: Identification and characterization of a novel cell
cycle-regulated internal ribosome entry site. Molec. Cell 5: 597-605,
2000.

3. Eipers, P. G.; Barnoski, B. L.; Han, J.; Carroll, A. J.; Kidd,
V. J.: Localization of the expressed human p58 protein kinase chromosomal
gene to chromosome 1p36 and a highly related sequence to chromosome
15. Genomics 11: 621-629, 1991.

4. Eipers, P. G.; Lahti, J. M.; Kidd, V. J.: Structure and expression
of the human p58(clk-1) protein kinase chromosomal gene. Genomics 13:
613-621, 1992.

5. Gururajan, R.; Lahti, J. M.; Grenet, J.; Easton, J.; Gruber, I.;
Ambros, P. F.; Kidd, V. J.: Duplication of a genomic region containing
the Cdc2L1-2 and MMP21-22 genes on human chromosome 1p36.3 and their
linkage to D1Z2. Genome Res. 8: 929-939, 1998.

6. Lahti, J. M.; Valentine, M.; Xiang, J.; Jones, B.; Amann, J.; Grenet,
J.; Richmond, G.; Look, A. T.; Kidd, V. J.: Alterations in the PITSLRE
protein kinase gene complex on chromosome 1p36 in childhood neuroblastoma. Nature
Genet. 7: 370-375, 1994.

7. Loyer, P.; Trembley, J. H.; Grenet, J. A.; Busson, A.; Corlu, A.;
Zhao, W.; Kocak, M.; Kidd, V. J.; Lahti, J. M.: Characterization
of cyclin L1 and L2 interactions with CDK11 and splicing factors:
influence of cyclin L isoforms on splice site selection. J. Biol.
Chem. 283: 7721-7732, 2008.

8. White, P. S.; Maris, J. M.; Beltinger, C.; Sulman, E.; Marshall,
H. N.; Fujimori, M.; Kaufman, B. A.; Biegel, J. A.; Allen, C.; Hilliard,
C.; Valentine, M. B.; Look, A. T.; Enomoto, H.; Sakiyama, S.; Brodeur,
G. M.: A region of consistent deletion in neuroblastoma maps within
human chromosome 1p36.2-36.3. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 5520-5524,
1995.

9. Xiang, J.; Lahti, J. M.; Grenet, J.; Easton, J.; Kidd, V. J.:
Molecular cloning and expression of alternatively spliced PITSLRE
protein kinase isoforms. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 15786-15794, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/3/2012
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 6/20/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 11/30/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/24/1991

EDITED mgross: 08/07/2012
terry: 8/3/2012
alopez: 11/19/2010
terry: 11/15/2010
alopez: 5/7/2007
mgross: 6/20/2000
alopez: 1/27/1999
alopez: 11/30/1998
alopez: 7/30/1997
jenny: 7/9/1997
mark: 6/29/1995
mimadm: 2/25/1995
carol: 7/20/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/2/1992
carol: 11/11/1991

603960	TITLE *603960 CALICIN; CCIN
DESCRIPTION In mammalian sperm, the dense cytoplasmic webs surrounding the nuclei
contain a complex structure called the perinuclear theca. In bovine
sperm heads, the perinuclear theca is subdivided into the anterior
subacrosomal layer and the posterior calyx, a funnel-shaped, dense, and
stable structure tightly surrounding the posterior part of the nucleus
on its inner side and apposed to the plasma membrane on the outer side.
Longo et al. (1987) determined that 2 kinds of basic proteins are the
major constituents of the thecal structure: calicin, a 60-kD protein
localized almost exclusively to the calyx, and a group of multiple-band
polypeptides (MBPs or cylicins; see 300768) that are found both in the
calyx and the subacrosomal layer. They speculated that during
spermiogenesis, these insoluble basic proteins contribute to the
formation of the perinuclear theca as an architectural element involved
in the shape changes and the intimate association of the nucleus with
the acrosome and the plasma membrane.

Von Bulow et al. (1995) purified calicin from bull sperm and determined
a partial protein sequence. By PCR analysis of testis cDNA with
oligonucleotide primers based on the calicin protein sequence, they
isolated bovine and human cDNAs encoding calicin. The predicted bovine
protein contains 588 amino acids and has a calculated pI of 8.1. The
partial human cDNA encodes a protein that starts at a position
corresponding to the fourth amino acid of bovine calicin. Overall, the 2
calicins are 91% identical. There are 3 consecutive repeats in the
middle of the calicin protein. Sequence comparisons revealed that
calicin shares homology with the Drosophila kelch protein, which is
associated with the actin-rich intercellular bridges (ring canals) in
the egg chamber that connect the oocyte and the nurse cells. Von Bulow
et al. (1995) noted that calicin is missing or is arranged in a
dramatically different pattern in the heads of malformed human
spermatozoa such as teratozoospermias with 'round-headed' sperm or with
other 'postacrosomal sheath defects.'

REFERENCE 1. Longo, F. J.; Krohne, G.; Franke, W. W.: Basic proteins of the
perinuclear theca of mammalian spermatozoa and spermatids: a novel
class of cytoskeletal elements. J. Cell Biol. 105: 1105-1120, 1987.

2. von Bulow, M.; Heid, H.; Hess, H.; Franke, W. W.: Molecular nature
of calicin, a major basic protein of the mammalian sperm head cytoskeleton. Exp.
Cell Res. 219: 407-413, 1995.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/1/1999

EDITED joanna: 03/24/2009
mgross: 7/1/1999

605284	TITLE *605284 TSC1 GENE; TSC1
;;HAMARTIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The TSC1 gene encodes hamartin, a protein that interacts with tuberin
(TSC2; 191092) to form a protein complex that inhibits signal
transduction to the downstream effectors of the mammalian target of
rapamycin (MTOR, or FRAP1; 601231) (Inoki et al., 2002).

CLONING

As part of a comprehensive strategy to identify the gene mutant in
tuberous sclerosis-1 (191100), van Slegtenhorst et al. (1997) developed
an overlapping contig of clones from the 1.4-Mb TSC1 region on
chromosome 9. Several techniques showed the region to be gene-rich, with
at least 30 genes in a 900-kb segment. They identified 142 exons and 13
genes between D9S1199 and D9S114. The authors PCR-amplified putative and
confirmed exons in a set of 60 DNA samples from 40 sporadic tuberous
sclerosis cases and 20 unrelated familial tuberous sclerosis patients
showing linkage to 9q34. Van Slegtenhorst et al. (1997) identified
mutations in an exon that was part of a transcriptional unit identified
by earlier gene discovery efforts (Nagase et al., 1996). The predicted
TSC1 protein, which was called 'hamartin' by van Slegtenhorst et al.
(1997), consists of 1,164 amino acids and has a calculated mass of 130
kD.

GENE STRUCTURE

The TSC1 gene consists of 23 exons, of which the last 21 contain coding
sequence and the second is alternatively spliced (van Slegtenhorst et
al., 1997).

Cheadle et al. (2000) described the genomic organization of the mouse
Tsc1 locus.

GENE FUNCTION

Hamartin (TSC1), the protein that is defective in tuberous sclerosis-1,
has no significant homology to tuberin (TSC2; 191092), the protein
defective in tuberous sclerosis-2, which is a putative GTPase-activating
protein for RAP1 (see 600278) and RAB5 (179512). Van Slegtenhorst et al.
(1998) showed that hamartin and tuberin associate physically in vivo,
however, and that the interaction is mediated by predicted coiled-coil
domains. The data suggested to the authors that hamartin and tuberin
function in the same complex rather than in separate pathways.

Benvenuto et al. (2000) showed that overexpression of the TSC1 gene in
rat fibroblasts inhibits growth and causes changes in cell morphology.
Growth inhibition was associated with an increase in the endogenous
level of tuberin. As overexpression of tuberin inhibits cell growth, and
hamartin is known to bind tuberin, these results suggested that hamartin
stabilizes tuberin and that this contributes to the inhibition of cell
growth. The stabilization was explained by the finding that tuberin is
highly ubiquitinated in cells, while the fraction of tuberin that is
bound to hamartin is not ubiquitinated. Coexpression of tuberin
stabilized hamartin, which is weakly ubiquitinated, in transiently
transfected cells. The amino-terminal two-thirds of tuberin was
responsible for its ubiquitination and for stabilization of hamartin. A
mutant of tuberin from a patient with a missense mutation of the TSC2
gene, N1658K, was also highly ubiquitinated, and was unable to stabilize
hamartin. Benvenuto et al. (2000) concluded that hamartin is a growth
inhibitory protein whose biologic effect is probably dependent on its
interaction with tuberin.

Hodges et al. (2001) used a series of hamartin and tuberin constructs to
assay for interaction in the yeast 2-hybrid system. Hamartin (amino
acids 302-430) and tuberin (amino acids 1-418) interacted strongly with
one another. A region of tuberin encoding a putative coiled-coil (amino
acids 346-371) was necessary but not sufficient to mediate the
interaction with hamartin, as more N-terminal residues were also
required. A region of hamartin (amino acids 719-998) predicted to encode
coiled-coils was capable of oligomerization but was not important for
the interaction with tuberin. Subtle, non-truncating mutations
identified in patients with tuberous sclerosis and located within the
putative binding regions of hamartin or tuberin abolished or
dramatically reduced interaction of the proteins.

Miloloza et al. (2000) showed that expression of hamartin, assayed by
immunoblot analyses, is high in G0-arrested cells, although it is
expressed throughout the entire ongoing cell cycle. In addition, ectopic
expression of high levels of hamartin attenuated cellular proliferation.
The authors proposed that hamartin affects cell proliferation via
deregulation of G1 phase.

Activated ezrin (123900), radixin (179410), and moesin (309845) (ERM)
family proteins promote linkages between integral membrane proteins and
cytoskeleton proteins, such as F-actin (see ACTA1; 102610). In the
inactive form, the N and C termini of the ERM protein interact, masking
their membrane- and actin-interacting activities, respectively.
Activation of ERM proteins requires RHO (see ARHA; 165390), which
induces a cascade that results in the phosphorylation of threonine in
the C terminus of the ERM protein and causes the intramolecular bond
between the N and C termini to dissociate (Fukuhara and Gutkind, 2000).
Lamb et al. (2000) used yeast 2-hybrid analysis to screen a mouse
fibroblast cDNA library with ezrin as bait. Slot blot analysis,
immunoprecipitation, immunofluorescence microscopy, and mutation
analysis indicated that the N terminus of ezrin interacts with the C
terminus of hamartin, whereas it interacts only weakly with merlin
(607379) and not at all with giantin (602500). Hamartin also interacted
with the N termini of radixin and moesin. Immunofluorescence microscopy
showed that hamartin interacts with F-actin, suggesting that hamartin
may be a direct binding partner for ERM proteins. Inactivation of
hamartin by microscale chromophore-assisted laser inactivation
(micro-CALI) or by antisense hamartin caused a marked retraction of the
affected area of endothelial cell membranes, loss of adhesion, and cell
rounding. Cell adhesion could be restored by injection of active RHO.
Expression of hamartin in cells without organized actin filaments
promoted the assembly of focal adhesions and the assembly of actin
stress fibers. This activity required RHO and residues 145 to 510 of
hamartin. Introduction of a C-terminal fragment of hamartin inhibited
the assembly of actin stress fibers by lysophosphatidic acid, a serum
factor that activates RHO, suggesting that the interaction of hamartin
with ERM proteins is required upstream of RHO. Lamb et al. (2000)
proposed that loss or perturbation of hamartin function leads to loss of
adhesion to the cellular matrix and initiates the development of TSC
hamartomas

Tapon et al. (2001) characterized mutations in the Drosophila Tsc1 and
Tsc2 (gigas) genes. Inactivating mutations in either gene caused an
identical phenotype characterized by enhanced growth and increased cell
size with no change in ploidy. Overall, mutant cells spent less time in
G1. Coexpression of both Tsc1 and Tsc2 restricted tissue growth and
reduced cell size and cell proliferation. This phenotype was modulated
by manipulations in cyclin levels. In postmitotic mutant cells, levels
of cyclin E (123837) and cyclin A (123835) were elevated. This
correlated with a tendency for these cells to reenter the cell cycle
inappropriately, as is observed in the human lesions.

Potter et al. (2001) isolated a mutation in the Drosophila Tsc1 gene.
Cells mutant for Tsc1 were dramatically increased in size yet
differentiated normally. Organ size was also increased in tissues that
contained a majority of mutant cells. Clones of Tsc1 mutant cells in the
imaginal discs underwent additional divisions but retained normal
ploidy. Potter et al. (2001) also showed that the Tsc1 protein binds to
Drosophila Tsc2 in vitro. Overexpression of Tsc1 or Tsc2 alone in the
wing and eye had no effect, but co-overexpression led to a decrease in
cell size, cell number, and organ size. Genetic epistasis data were
consistent with a model in which Tsc1 and Tsc2 function together in the
insulin (INS; 176730) signaling pathway.

Inoki et al. (2002) showed that the Tsc1-Tsc2 complex inhibits the
mammalian target of rapamycin (MTOR) (FRAP1; 601231), leading to
inhibition of p70 ribosomal S6 kinase-1 (608938) and activation of
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E-binding protein-1 (EIF4EBP1;
602223).

Astrinidis et al. (2006) found that endogenous polo-like kinase-1 (PLK1;
602098) associated with the hamartin-tuberin complex in several human
and nonhuman cell lines and that the complex localized to centrosomes.
Phosphorylated hamartin interacted with PLK1 independent of tuberin, and
the interaction required thr310 of hamartin. Hamartin negatively
regulated the protein levels of PLK1 and regulated centrosome number in
an MTOR-dependent manner. Hamartin-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts
had an increased number of centrosomes and a mitotic defect leading to
increased DNA content, and these defects were reversed by rapamycin.

Loss of the TSC genes leads to constitutive activation of MTOR and
downstream signaling elements, resulting in tumor development,
neurologic disorders, and severe insulin/IGF1 (147440) resistance. Ozcan
et al. (2008) found that loss of TSC1 or TSC2 in cell lines and mouse or
human tumors caused endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and activated the
unfolded protein response. The resulting ER stress played a significant
role in the MTOR-mediated negative feedback inhibition of insulin action
and increased the vulnerability to apoptosis.

Choi et al. (2008) showed that Tsc1 and Tsc2 had critical functions in
axon formation and growth in mouse. Overexpression of Tsc1/Tsc2
suppressed axon formation, whereas lack of Tsc1 or Tsc2 induced ectopic
axons in vitro and in mouse brain. Tsc2 was phosphorylated and inhibited
in axons, but not dendrites. Inactivation of Tsc1/Tsc2 promoted axonal
growth, at least in part, via upregulation of neuronal polarity Sad
kinase (see BRSK2; 609236), which was also elevated in cortical tubers
of a TSC patient. Choi et al. (2008) concluded that TSC1 and TSC2 have
critical roles in neuronal polarity, and that a common pathway regulates
polarization and growth in neurons and cell size in other tissues.

To test for the role of intrinsic impediments to axon regrowth, Park et
al. (2008) analyzed cell growth control genes using a virus-assisted in
vivo conditional knockout approach. In wildtype adult mice, mTOR
activity was suppressed and new protein synthesis was impaired in
axotomized retinal ganglion cells, which may have contributed to the
regeneration failure. Reactivating this pathway by conditional knockout
of TSC1, a negative regulator of the mTOR pathway, led to axon
regeneration.

DiBella et al. (2009) showed that morpholino knockdown of zebrafish
Tsc1a led to a ciliary phenotype including kidney cyst formation and
left-right asymmetry defects. Tsc1a localized to the Golgi, but
morpholinos against it, nonetheless, acted synthetically with ciliary
genes in producing kidney cysts. Consistent with a role of the cilium in
the same pathway as Tsc genes, the TOR (FRAP1; 601231) pathway was found
to be aberrantly activated in ciliary mutants, resembling the effect of
Tsc1a knockdown. Kidney cyst formation in ciliary mutants was blocked by
the Tor inhibitor rapamycin. DiBella et al. (2009) suggested a signaling
network between the cilium and the TOR pathway wherein ciliary signals
can feed into the TOR pathway and where Tsc1a may regulate the length of
the cilium itself.

Hartman et al. (2009) reported that hamartin (TSC1) localized to the
basal body of the primary cilium, and that Tsc1-null and Tsc2-null mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) were significantly more likely to contain a
primary cilium than wildtype controls. In addition, the cilia of Tsc1-
and Tsc2-null MEFs were 17 to 27% longer than cilia from wildtype MEFs.
Enhanced ciliary formation in the Tsc1- and Tsc2-null MEFs was not
abrogated by rapamycin, which suggests an mTOR-independent mechanism.
Polycystin-1 (PC1; see 601313) has been found to interact with TSC2, but
Pkd1-null MEFs did not have enhanced ciliary formation. While activation
of mTOR has been observed in renal cysts from ADPKD patients, Pkd1-null
MEFs did not have evidence of constitutive mTOR activation, thereby
underscoring the independent functions of the TSC proteins and PC1 in
regulation of primary cilia and mTOR.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Tuberous Sclerosis

Van Slegtenhorst et al. (1997) screened exons in the 1.4-Mb TSC1 region
on chromosome 9 for mutations in tuberous sclerosis patients. One of the
exons of the TSC1 gene screened for mutations demonstrated mobility
shifts in heteroduplex analysis of samples from 10 of the 60 patient
samples. Sequence analysis revealed 7 small frameshifting mutations
(e.g., 605284.0001), 1 nonsense mutation (605284.0002), 1 missense
mutation (605284.0003), and 1 polymorphism that did not change the
encoded amino acid. It was exon 15 in which the high frequency of
mutations was found on the initial screen. Exon 15 is 559 bp long and
represents 16% of the coding region. Mutation was found in exon 15 in 8
of 55 tuberous sclerosis families (15%) showing linkage to 9q34 and in
only 15 of 607 (2.5%) of sporadic patients or families uninformative for
linkage. A screen for mutations in all coding exons in 20 familial cases
and 152 sporadic patients yielded 8 mutations in each group (40% and 5%,
respectively). Of 32 distinct mutations found in TSC1, 30 were
truncating, and 1 mutation (2105delAAAG; 605284.0001) was seen in 6
apparently unrelated patients. In one of these 6, a somatic mutation in
the wildtype allele was found in a tuberous sclerosis-associated renal
carcinoma, which suggested that hamartin acts as a tumor suppressor.

Jones et al. (1997) comprehensively defined the TSC1 mutation spectrum
in 171 sequentially ascertained, unrelated TSC patients by SSCP and
heteroduplex analysis of all 21 coding exons, and by assaying a
restriction fragment spanning the whole locus. Mutations were identified
in 9 of 24 familial cases, but in only 13 of 147 sporadic cases. In
contrast, a limited screen revealed mutations in the TSC2 gene in 2 of
the 24 familial cases and in 45 of the 147 sporadic cases. Thus, TSC1
mutations were significantly underrepresented among sporadic cases. Both
large deletions and missense mutations were common at the TSC2 locus,
whereas most TSC1 mutations were small truncated lesions. Mental
retardation was significantly less frequent among carriers of TSC1
mutations than TSC2 mutations (odds ratio, 5.54 for sporadic cases only;
6.78 +/- 1.54 when a single randomly selected patient per
multigeneration family was also included). No correlation between mental
retardation and the type of mutation was found. Jones et al. (1997)
concluded that there is a reduced risk of mental retardation in tuberous
sclerosis-1 as opposed to tuberous sclerosis-2 and that consequent
ascertainment bias, at least in part, explains the relative paucity of
TSC1 mutations in sporadic TSC.

Kwiatkowska et al. (1998) performed a comprehensive analysis for
mutations in the TSC1 gene using Southern blot analysis, and SSCP and
heteroduplex analysis of amplified exons in 13 families with genetic
linkage to the TSC1 region, 22 small families without linkage
information, and 126 sporadic patients. Seventeen unique mutations were
identified in 21 patients. Mutations were found in 7 of 13 (54%)
tuberous sclerosis-1-linked families, in 1 of 22 (5%) small families
without linkage, and in 13 of 126 (10%) sporadic cases. The mutations
were all chain-terminating, with 14 small deletions, 1 small insertion,
and 6 nonsense mutations. Twelve of the 21 mutations were previously
reported by van Slegtenhorst et al. (1997), and 9 were new. In families
with mutations, all individuals carrying a mutation met formal
diagnostic criteria for tuberous sclerosis, apart from a 3-year-old girl
who had inherited a deletion mutation and who had no seizures, normal
intelligence, normal abdominal ultrasound, and hypomelanotic macules
only on physical examination. Her 7-year-old sister with the same TSC1
mutation had severe mental retardation. They found no significant
difference in the incidence and severity of mental retardation in the 13
sporadic patients with TSC1 mutations versus the entire sporadic cohort.
The observation indicated that TSC1 mutations are all inactivating,
suggested that tuberous sclerosis-1 occurs in only 15 to 20% of the
sporadic tuberous sclerosis population, and demonstrated that
presymptomatic tuberous sclerosis occurs.

Jones et al. (1999) reported a comprehensive mutation analysis of the
TSC1 and TSC2 genes in a cohort of 150 unrelated tuberous sclerosis
patients and their families, using heteroduplex and SSCP analysis of all
coding exons, and pulsed field gel electrophoresis, Southern blot
analysis, and long PCR to screen for large rearrangements. Mutations
were detected in 120 (80%) of the 150 cases, affecting the TSC1 gene in
22 cases and the TSC2 gene in 98 cases. TSC1 mutations were
significantly underrepresented in sporadic cases. All TSC1 mutations
were predicted to be truncating, consistent with a structural or adaptor
role for the encoded protein. In contrast, 22 patients had TSC2 missense
mutations that were found predominantly in the GAP-related domain (8
cases) and in a small region encoded in exons 16 and 17, between
nucleotides 1849 and 1859 (8 cases), consistent with the presence of
residues performing key functions at these sites. Intellectual
disability was significantly more frequent in tuberous sclerosis-2
sporadic cases than in tuberous sclerosis-1 sporadic cases.

Young et al. (1998) performed a mutation screen of the TSC1 gene in a
panel of 79 tuberous sclerosis patients. Twelve of the patients were
from families showing linkage to 9q34 markers. Causative mutations in
the TSC1 gene were found in 27 of these patients, and 5 other variations
in the gene were identified. Twenty-six of the mutations were predicted
to cause premature termination of the protein product of the gene and
one mutation was in a splice site. The mutation screen showed that TSC1
mutations are rarer in sporadic tuberous sclerosis patients than in
familial cases. This is consistent with the expectation that a larger
proportion of the tuberous sclerosis-2 patients will be sporadic because
of the more severe nature of TSC2 as compared to TSC1. Young et al.
(1998) found that in family 214 of Povey et al. (1994) a presumably
nonpenetrant mother of a severely affected boy in one branch of the
family did not carry the nonsense mutation leu250-to-ter present in
affected individuals in other branches of the family. Furthermore, the
grandmother of the severely affected boy was the 'connecting link' to
the rest of the family not carrying the mutation, thus leading to the
conclusion that the single ungual fibroma that had been thought to mean
that she was affected was not in fact diagnostic of tuberous sclerosis.

Ali et al. (1998) screened 83 unrelated individuals with tuberous
sclerosis for mutations in TSC1. Mutations were found in 16 of the 83
cases (19%). The mutations comprised base substitutions, small
insertions, or small deletions giving rise to 6 nonsense mutations, 8
frameshifts, and 2 splice site mutations, all of which would be expected
to result in a truncated or absent protein. In 8 of 10 cases showing
linkage to the TSC1 locus, mutations were found. In the remaining 73
unassigned cases, only 8 mutations were found (11%). From these data,
Ali et al. (1998) estimated that TSC1 mutations account for 22% of
tuberous sclerosis cases.

Mayer et al. (1999) pointed out that all known TSC1 mutations, as well
as most TSC2 mutations, truncate the proteins hamartin and tuberin,
respectively. Mayer et al. (1999) described an RNA-based screening of
the entire coding regions of both TSC genes for truncating mutations,
applying the protein truncation test (PTT). Simultaneous investigation
of both TSC genes in a group of 48 unassigned TSC patients, which were
previously tested to exclude large intragenic TSC2 rearrangements,
revealed aberrant migrating polypeptides resulting from truncating
mutations in 9 TSC1 cases and in 16 TSC2 cases, while 3 TSC2 cases
showed enlarged proteins. TSC1 mutations included 2 nonsense mutations,
4 insertions, and 3 splice mutations. Nineteen mutations identified in
TSC2 comprised 4 different nonsense mutations in 5 patients, 1 deletion,
1 insertion, and 7 different splicing aberrations due to at least 8
different mutations found in 12 patients. Additional predicted
truncating mutations according to PTT without possible identification of
the causative alteration allowed assignment to TSC1 in 1 and TSC2 in 7
cases. Twelve patients without abnormalities in the PTT were assumed to
harbor missense mutations, probably in TSC2. The high proportion of TSC2
splicing aberrations strengthens the importance of intronic
disease-causing mutations and the application of RNA-based screening
methods to confirm their consequences. Benit et al. (1999) likewise
devised a protein truncation test to analyze the full-length coding
sequence of TSC1. In a study of 15 cases (12 sporadic and 3 familial) by
a combination of PTT and SSCP, they found 5 of 15 mutations, whereas PTT
alone detected 4 of 15 truncating mutations, 2 of which escaped SSCP
analysis.

Niida et al. (1999) reported mutation analysis of the entire coding
region of the TSC1 and TSC2 genes in 126 unrelated TSC patients,
including 40 familial and 86 sporadic cases, by SSCP followed by direct
sequencing. Mutations were identified in a total of 74 (59%) cases,
including 16 TSC1 mutations (5 sporadic and 11 familial) and 58 TSC2
mutations (42 sporadic and 16 familial). Overall, significantly more
TSC2 mutations were found in this population, with a relatively equal
distribution of mutations between TSC1 and TSC2 among the familial
cases, but a marked underrepresentation of TSC1 mutations among the
sporadic cases (P = 0.0035, Fisher's exact test). All TSC1 mutations
were predicted to be protein truncating; however, in TSC2 13 missense
mutations were found, 5 clustering in the GAP-related domain and 3
others occurring in exon 16. Upon comparison of clinical manifestations,
including the incidence of intellectual disability, they could not find
any observable differences between TSC1 and TSC2 patients.

Carbonara et al. (1996) studied LOH in both the TSC1 and TSC2 loci and 7
tumor suppressor gene-containing regions, p53 (191170), NF1 (613113),
NF2 (607379), BRCA1 (113705), APC (611731), VHL (608537), and MLM
(155600), in 20 hamartomas from 18 tuberous sclerosis patients. Overall,
8 angiomyolipomas, 8 giant cell astrocytomas, 1 cortical tuber, and 3
rhabdomyomas were analyzed. LOH at either TSC locus was found in a large
fraction of the informative patients, both sporadic (7/14) and familial
(1/4). A statistically significant preponderance of LOH of TSC2 was
observed in the sporadic group (P less than 0.01). Carbonara et al.
(1996) suspected that bias in the selection for TSC patients with the
most severe organ impairment was responsible for the finding. According
to this suggestion, a TSC2 defect may confer a greater risk for early
kidney failure or possibly a more rapid growth of a giant cell
astrocytoma. None of the 7 antioncogenes tested showed LOH, indicating
that the loss of either TSC gene product may be sufficient to promote
hamartomatous cell growth. The observation of LOH at different markers
in an astrocytoma and in an angiomyolipoma from the same patients
suggested to the authors the multifocal origin of a second-hit mutation.

Van Slegtenhorst et al. (1999) reported mutation analysis of the TSC1
gene in a cohort of 225 unrelated patients. Of 29 mutations detected,
all were small changes leading to a truncated protein except for a
splice site mutation and 2 in-frame deletions in exons 7 and 15. No
clear difference was observed in the clinical phenotype of patients with
an in-frame deletion or a frameshift or nonsense mutation. Van
Slegtenhorst et al. (1999) found no obvious underrepresentation of
mutations among sporadic cases, in contrast to the findings of Jones et
al. (1999). Van Slegtenhorst et al. (1999) found no genotype-phenotype
correlation for patients with TSC1 mutations compared to the overall
population of tuberous sclerosis patients.

Yamashita et al. (2000) examined 27 unrelated Japanese patients with
tuberous sclerosis for mutations in the TSC1 and TSC2 genes, using SSCP
analysis of genomic DNA. They identified 4 mutations in TSC1 that they
considered to be pathogenic, including 3 frameshifts and 1 nonsense
mutation. All were expected to result in a truncated hamartin gene
product. The authors found no difference in the risk for mental
retardation between their series of tuberous sclerosis-1 and tuberous
sclerosis-2 patients. In addition, the extent of protein truncation
expected from the mutations did not correlate with the severity of
clinical symptoms.

Carbonara et al. (1994) presented evidence of loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) at the tuberous sclerosis-1 critical region in a giant cell
astrocytoma occurring in a patient with familial tuberous sclerosis.
Segregation analysis showed that the 9q34 haplotype lost in the tumor
carried the putative normal TSC1 gene. These data supported the
hypothesis of both a germline and somatic loss-of-function mutation
necessary for the development of tuberous sclerosis hamartomas and
suggested a tumor-suppressor activity for the TSC1 gene product. (In the
same astrocytoma, a second small region of LOH was found at 9p21.) Green
et al. (1994) likewise found allele loss consistent with a
tumor-suppressor role of the TSC1 gene. They studied 6 hamartomas from 4
sporadic and 2 familial cases of tuberous sclerosis, none of which
showed allele loss for markers on 16p13.3. The hamartomas were
paraffin-embedded sections of 3 renal angiomyolipomas, 2 giant cell
astrocytomas, and a cardiac rhabdomyoma. One angiomyolipoma showed
allele loss for the markers ABO, DBH, and D9S66. The family structure
did not permit determination of the phase of the disease and marker
alleles. Findings supported the assignment of tuberous sclerosis-1 to
9q34 and placed the gene between D9S149 and D9S67. Similar evidence had
supported a growth suppressor role for the TSC2 gene.

Green et al. (1996) used nonrandom X chromosome inactivation studies to
demonstrate the clonality of tuberous sclerosis hamartomas. Previously,
LOH for DNA markers in the region of either the TSC1 gene on 9q34 or the
TSC2 gene on 16p13.3 had supported the conclusion that these lesions are
indeed clonal. In the studies of X-chromosome inactivation, Green et al.
(1996) examined clonality in 13 TSC hamartomas from female cases by
analyzing X-chromosome inactivation in DNA extracted from archival
paraffin-embedded tumors compared with normal tissue from the same
patient. Seven of the cases were sporadic; 2 were from families linked
to 9q34, 1 was from a family linked to 16p13.3 and 3 were from families
too small to assign by linkage. Only 4 of the 13 hamartomas had
previously shown LOH, 1 in the region of the TSC1 gene and 3 in the
region of the TSC2 gene. A PCR assay was used to analyze differential
methylation of the HpaII restriction site adjacent to the
androgen-receptor triplet-repeat polymorphism on Xq11-q12. In 12 of the
lesions, there was a skewed inactivation pattern, one X-chromosome being
fully methylated and the other unmethylated. Normal tissue showed a
random pattern of inactivation. The finding was considered particularly
intriguing by the authors since the lesions were composed of more than 1
cell type.

Henske et al. (1996) analyzed 87 lesions from 47 TSC patients for LOH in
the TSC1 and TSC2 regions. Of the 28 patients with angiomyolipomas or
rhabdomyomas, LOH for 16p13 was detected in lesions from 12 (57%). LOH
for 9q34 was detected in only 1 patient. The authors noted that LOH
occurred in only 4% of TSC brain lesions and suggested that TSC brain
lesions may result from a different pathogenetic mechanism than TSC
kidney or rhabdomyoma lesions.

Niida et al. (2001) analyzed 24 hamartomas from 10 patients for
second-hit mutations by multiple methods including LOH analysis, SSCP
screening of TSC1 and TSC2, promoter methylation studies of TSC2, and
clonality analysis. The results provided evidence that complete
inactivation of the TSC genes is characteristic of renal angiomyolipomas
but not of other TSC lesions.

Sepp et al. (1996) described the spectrum of LOH in 51 hamartomas from
34 cases of tuberous sclerosis. Of 51 hamartomas analyzed, 21 (41%)
showed LOH; 16 hamartomas showed LOH around TSC2 and 5 showed LOH in the
vicinity of TSC1. No hamartomas showed LOH for markers around both loci.
Sepp et al. (1996) reported that there did not appear to be any major
differences in the frequency of LOH between the different types of
hamartoma. LOH was observed in 7 of 17 angiomyolipomas, 5 of 9 giant
cell astrocytomas, 3 of 8 fibromas, 3 of 5 cortical tubers, and in a
shagreen patch, a cardiac rhabdomyoma, and a renal carcinoma. Sepp et
al. (1996) noted that the excess of LOH for the TSC2 region on
chromosome 16p13.3 may simply reflect that the TSC1 locus is less well
defined and that LOH for 9q34 is therefore harder to find.

Bjornsson et al. (1996) studied 6 TSC-associated RCCs. Their findings
suggested that some TSC-associated RCCs have clinical, pathologic, and
genetic features which distinguish them from sporadic RCC. Clinically
the TSC-associated RCC occurred at a younger age (36 years) than
sporadic tumors and occurred primarily in women (5 of 6 cases).
Bjornsson et al. (1996) reported that 5 tumors displayed clear cell
morphology and 2 of those 5 had high-grade spindle cell areas in
addition to granular cell histology. Of the 6 patients studied, 4 died
from their carcinoma and 3 had pulmonary metastases in addition to
retroperitoneal spread. The 2 surviving patients had tumors that were
detected incidentally (one at surgery for angiomyolipoma and renal
hemorrhage, the other at surgery for renal cysts). Immunostaining for a
melanocyte-associated marker, HMB-45, was positive in 4 of the 6 cases.
LOH was observed on 9q34, 16p13.3, and in 2 cases on chromosome 3p.
Bjornsson et al. (1996) noted that the tumor with LOH of 9q34 alone was
incidentally detected and lacked anaplastic features. In contrast, the
tumors with LOH on 9q34 and 3p had anaplastic features and metastasized.

Cheadle et al. (2000) reviewed the molecular genetic advances in
tuberous sclerosis. They found reports of 154 cases with mutations in
the TSC1 gene and 292 cases with mutations in the TSC2 gene. Forty-seven
percent (73/154) of TSC1 mutations were single-base substitutions, 82%
of which were nonsense mutations.

In a study of 224 index patients with tuberous sclerosis, Dabora et al.
(2001) found mutations in 186 (83%), comprising 138 small TSC2
mutations, 20 large TSC2 mutations, and 28 small TSC1 mutations.
Clinical assessment indicated that sporadic patients with TSC1 mutations
had, on average, milder disease than did patients with TSC2 mutations,
despite being of similar age. They had a lower frequency of seizures and
moderate to severe mental retardation, fewer subependymal nodules and
cortical tubers, less severe kidney involvement, no retinal hamartomas,
and less severe facial angiofibroma. Patients in whom no mutation was
found also had disease that was milder, on average, than that in
patients with TSC2 mutations. Although there was overlap in the spectrum
of many clinical features of patients with TSC1 versus TSC2 mutations,
some features (grade 2-4 kidney cysts or angiomyolipomas, forehead
plaques, retinal hamartomas, and liver angiomyolipomas) were very rare
or not seen at all in TSC1 patients. Thus, both germline and somatic
mutations appear to be less common in TSC1 than in TSC2. The reduced
severity of disease in patients without defined mutations suggests that
many of these patients are mosaic for a TSC2 mutation and/or have TSC
because of mutations in an as yet undefined locus with a relatively mild
clinical phenotype.

Langkau et al. (2002) genotyped 68 unrelated and nonselected patients
(59 sporadic and 9 familial) with clinically confirmed TSC and
identified 29 mutations in the TSC2 gene and 2 mutations in the TSC1
gene. They noted that the TSC1-TSC2 mutation ratio in this group of
patients differed significantly from the 1:1 ratio previously predicted
on the basis of linkage studies. They suggested that milder phenotypes
are more often associated with TSC1 mutations and are likely to escape
ascertainment.

Many mRNAs carrying mutations that encode a truncated protein are
subject to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), which results in reduced
levels of mutant transcript. Virtually all TSC1 mutations truncate the
protein product. Jeganathan et al. (2002) used coding and 3-prime
untranslated region polymorphisms in TSC1 to develop a transcript
imbalance assay to investigate TSC1 transcript levels in patients. This
approach allowed the correct identification of 6 of 7 TSC1 patients
tested blind from a panel of TSC1 and TSC2 patients, with no false
positives. The extent of NMD in TSC1 correlated with each individual
mutation regardless of intrafamilial variation in clinical features and
with no strong evidence for positional bias.

Au et al. (2007) performed mutational analyses on 325 individuals with
definite tuberous sclerosis complex diagnostic status. The authors
identified mutations in 72% (199 of 257) of de novo and 77% (53 of 68)
of familial cases, with 17% of mutations in the TSC1 gene and 50% in the
TSC2 gene. There were 4% unclassified variants and 29% with no mutation
identified. Genotype/phenotype analyses of all observed tuberous
sclerosis complex findings in probands were performed, including several
clinical features not analyzed in 2 previous large studies (see, e.g.,
Sancak et al., 2005). Au et al. (2007) showed that patients with TSC2
mutations have significantly more hypomelanotic macules and learning
disability in contrast to those with TSC1 mutations, findings not noted
in previous studies. The authors also observed results consistent with 2
similar studies suggesting that individuals with mutations in TSC2 have
more severe symptoms.

Nellist et al. (2009) identified 8 different missense mutations in the
TSC1 gene (see, e.g., M224R; 605284.0008 and L180P; 605284.0009) that
segregated with tuberous sclerosis. In vitro functional expression
studies demonstrated that these changes resulted in reduced levels of
TSC1 and a reduction in TSC1-dependent inhibition of mTOR activity, as
detected by immunoblotting. In each case, the functional
characterization was consistent with the genetic and phenotypic
findings, indicating that the missense changes were pathogenic. Nellist
et al. (2009) concluded that mutations close to the N terminus of TSC1
(amino acids 117 to 224) reduce the steady-state levels of TSC1.

- Pulmonary Lymphangioleiomyomatosis

Pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM; 606690) is a destructive lung
disease characterized by a diffuse hamartomatous proliferation of smooth
muscle cells in the lungs. Pulmonary LAM can occur as an isolated form
(sporadic LAM) or in association with tuberous sclerosis complex
(TSC-LAM). Sato et al. (2002) studied the TSC1 and TSC2 genes in 6
Japanese patients with TSC-LAM and 22 patients with sporadic LAM and
identified 6 novel mutations. TSC2 germline mutations were detected in 2
(33.3%) of the 6 patients with TSC-LAM, and a TSC1 germline mutation was
detected in 1 (4.5%) of the 22 sporadic LAM patients. In accordance with
the tumor suppressor model, LOH was detected in LAM cells from 3 of 4
patients with TSC-LAM and from 4 of 8 patients with sporadic LAM.
Furthermore, an identical LOH or 2 identical somatic mutations were
demonstrated in LAM cells microdissected from several tissues,
suggesting that LAM cells can spread from one lesion to another. These
results confirmed the prevailing concept of pathogenesis of LAM: TSC-LAM
has a germline mutation, but sporadic LAM does not; sporadic LAM is a
TSC2 disease with 2 somatic mutations; and a variety of TSC mutations
can cause LAM. However, this study indicated that a fraction of sporadic
LAM can be a TSC1 disease; therefore, both TSC genes should be examined,
even in patients with sporadic LAM.

- Focal Cortical Dysplasia of Taylor

Focal cortical dysplasia of Taylor (FCDT; 607341) is characterized by a
localized malformation of the neocortex and underlying white matter.
Balloon cells, similar to those observed in TSC, are present in many
cases, referred to by Becker et al. (2002) as FCD(bc). Becker et al.
(2002) studied alterations of the TSC1 and TSC2 genes in a cohort of 48
patients with chronic, focal epilepsy and histologically documented
FCD(bc). DNA was obtained after microdissection and laser-assisted
isolation of balloon cells, dysplastic neurons, and nonlesional cells
from adjacent normal brain tissue. Sequence alterations resulting in
amino acid exchange of the TSC1 gene product affecting exons 5 and 17
and silent base exchanges in exons 14 and 22 were increased in patients
with FCD(bc) compared with 200 controls. Sequence alterations were
detected in FCD(bc) and adjacent normal cells. In 24 patients, DNA was
suitable to study LOH at the TSC1 gene locus in microdissected FCD(bc)
samples compared with control tissues. LOH was found in 11 FCD(bc)
cases. In the TSC2 gene, only silent polymorphisms were detected at
similar frequencies as in controls. Becker et al. (2002) concluded that
FCD(bc) constitutes a clinicopathologic entity with distinct
neuroradiologic, neuropathologic, and molecular genetic features, and
suggested the TSC1 gene has a role in its development, with a pathogenic
relationship between it and the TSC complex.

Becker et al. (2002) noted that LOH for alleles at 16p13.3 (where the
TSC2 gene is located) have been observed in brain lesions of TSC, and at
9q34 (where the TSC1 gene is located) in extracerebral lesions of TSC.
Their findings of LOH related to the TSC1 gene in focal cortical
dysplasia are possibly relevant to the 2-hit hypothesis for the
inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. The observed combination of LOH
within the TSC1 locus and sequence polymorphism in the other alleles
suggests that the latter functions as a predisposing germline variant
with low penetrance and a severely restricted manifestation pattern.
Given that TSC1 and TSC2 may act as a cell cycle-regulating complex
(Potter et al., 2001; Tapon et al., 2001), such variant alleles may
induce proliferation activity for a limited time during brain
development.

- Everolimus Sensitivity

Iyer et al. (2012) studied the tumor genome of a patient with metastatic
bladder cancer who achieved a durable (greater than 2 years) and ongoing
complete response to everolimus, a drug targeting the mTORC1 complex
(see 601231). Iyer et al. (2012) identified a 2-bp deletion in the TSC1
gene resulting in a frameshift truncation, and a nonsense mutation in
the NF2 (607379) gene. Iyer et al. (2012) sequenced both genes in the
second cohort of 96 high-grade bladder cancers and identified 5
additional somatic TSC1 mutations, whereas no additional NF2 mutations
were detected. Subsequently, Iyer et al. (2012) explored whether TSC1
mutations is a biomarker of clinical benefit from everolimus therapy in
bladder cancer, and studied 13 additional bladder cancer patients
treated with everolimus. Three additional tumors harbored nonsense
mutations in TSC1, including 2 patients who had minor responses to
everolimus (17 and 24% tumor regression, respectively). Tumors from 8 of
the 9 patients who showed disease progression were TSC1 wildtype.
Patients with TSC1-mutant tumors remained on everolimus longer than
those with wildtype tumors (7.7 vs 2.0 months, p = 0.004) with a
significant improvement in time to recurrence (4.1 vs 1.8 months; hazard
ratio = 18.5, 95% confidence interval 2.1 to 162, p = 0.001). Iyer et
al. (2012) concluded that mTORC1-directed therapies may be most
effective in cancer patients whose tumors harbor TSC1 somatic mutations.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kobayashi et al. (2001) established a line of Tsc1 knockout mice by gene
targeting. Heterozygous mutant mice (Tsc1 +/-) developed renal and
extrarenal tumors such as hepatic hemangiomas. In these tumors, loss of
the wildtype Tsc1 allele was observed. Homozygous Tsc1 mutants died
around embryonic days 10.5 to 11.5, frequently associated with neural
tube unclosure. As a whole, phenotypes of Tsc1-KO mice resembled those
of Tsc2-KO mice previously reported, suggesting that the presumptive
common pathway for the Tsc1 and Tsc2 products may exist in mice as is
thought to be the case in humans. Notably, however, development of renal
tumors in Tsc1 +/- mice was apparently slower than that in Tsc2 +/-
mice.

Kwiatkowski et al. (2002) developed a murine model of TSC1 disease
wherein the mutant allele lacked exons 17 and 18, which leads to
premature termination. Tsc1-null embryos died at midgestation from a
failure of liver development. Tsc1 heterozygotes developed kidney
cystadenomas and liver hemangiomas at high frequency, but the incidence
of kidney tumors was somewhat lower than in Tsc2 heterozygous mice.
Liver hemangiomas were more common, more severe, and caused higher
mortality in female than in male Tsc1 heterozygotes. Tsc1-null embryo
fibroblast lines exhibited persistent phosphorylation of the p70-S6K and
its substrate S6, which was sensitive to treatment with rapamycin,
indicating constitutive activation of the MTOR (FRAP1; 601231)-S6K
pathway due to loss of the Tsc1 protein, hamartin. Hyperphosphorylation
of S6 was also seen in kidney tumors in the heterozygous mice,
suggesting that inhibition of this pathway may aid in control of TSC
hamartomas.

Uhlmann et al. (2002) demonstrated that heterozygous Tsc1 and Tsc2 mice
exhibit increased numbers of astrocytes, suggesting that hamartin and
tuberin are important growth regulators for astrocytes. To study the
consequence of hamartin loss on astrocyte function, Uhlmann et al.
(2002) generated mice in which the Tsc1 gene was specifically
inactivated in astrocytes. The mice demonstrated an age-dependent
progression of increased astrocyte proliferation, abnormal neuronal
organization in the hippocampus, seizures, and death. The findings
suggested that the increase in astrocyte proliferation preceded the
neuronal abnormalities, causing mass effect changes or disturbance of
complex astrocyte-neuron interactions. In culture, the Tsc1-null
astrocytes grew in association with reduced expression of the cell cycle
regulator p27(KIP1) (600778), suggesting disruption of a TSC-mediated
growth regulation complex involving p27(KIP1).

Meikle et al. (2005) developed a conditional mouse mutant of Tsc1. Mice
with ventricular loss of Tsc1 had a median survival of 6 months and
developed a dilated cardiomyopathy with the occurrence of scattered foci
of enlarged ventricular myocytes. The enlarged cells were PAS-positive,
indicating the presence of excess glycogen, and expressed elevated
levels of phospho-S6 (RPS6; 180460), similar to findings in patient
rhabdomyoma cells. The observations were consistent with a 2-hit
mechanism for rhabdomyoma formation. However, the mice showed no
evidence of fetal/neonatal demise, and there was no evidence of
proliferation in the lesions. Meikle et al. (2005) proposed that these
differences may be due to the timing of loss of Tsc1 in the ventricular
myocytes and/or the truncated gestational period in the mouse compared
with humans.

Wilson et al. (2005) showed that approximately 27% of Tsc1 +/- mice on a
C57BL/6 background died at 1 to 2 days from unknown causes. Forty-four
percent of Tsc1 +/- mice on a C3H background developed macroscopically
visible renal lesions as early as 3 to 6 months, increasing to 95% by 15
to 18 months. Renal lesions progressed from cysts through cystadenomas
to solid carcinomas. Eighty percent of Tsc1 +/- mice on a Balb/c
background exhibited solid renal cell carcinomas by 15 to 18 months, and
lesions showed loss of the wildtype Tsc1 allele and elevated protein
levels of MTOR and RPS6.

Goorden et al. (2007) found that Tsc1 +/- mice had no spontaneous
seizures or cerebral lesions but showed impaired learning in
hippocampus-sensitive versions of learning tasks and impaired social
behavior. The findings indicated that haploinsufficiency for Tsc1
resulted in a functional neuronal deficit in the absence of overt
cerebral pathology.

Zeng et al. (2008) observed that mice with conditional Tsc1 inactivation
primarily in glia developed glial proliferation, enlarged brain size,
progressive epilepsy, and premature death. Treatment with rapamycin at
postnatal day 14 before the onset of neurologic symptoms prevented the
development of epilepsy and premature death. Treatment at 6 weeks, after
the onset of symptoms, suppressed seizures and prolonged survival. Brain
histology showed that treatment with rapamycin resulted in decreased
abnormal astrocyte proliferation and increased neuronal organization
compared to untreated mice, even at later treatment. Rapamycin caused a
dose-dependent decrease in S6 phosphorylation, indicating inhibition of
the MTOR pathway. Cessation of rapamycin treatment resulted in
reappearance of seizures, progressive brain enlargement, and premature
death, similar to untreated mice. Zeng et al. (2008) concluded that
rapamycin has strong efficacy for preventing seizures and prolonging
survival in these transgenic mice.

Patients with tuberous sclerosis often develop renal cysts and those
with inherited codeletions of PKD1 gene (601313) develop severe,
early-onset polycystic kidneys. Using mouse models, Bonnet et al. (2009)
showed that many of the earliest lesions from Tsc1 +/-, Tsc2 +/-, and
Pkd1 +/- mice did not exhibit activation of mTOR (601231), confirming an
mTOR-independent pathway of renal cystogenesis. Using Tsc1/Pkd1 and
Tsc2/Pkd1 heterozygous double-mutants, the authors showed functional
cooperation and an effect on renal primary cilium length between
hamartin and tuberin with polycystin-1. The Tsc1, Tsc2, and Pkd1 gene
products helped regulate primary cilia length in renal tubules, renal
epithelial cells, and precystic hepatic cholangiocytes. Consistent with
the function of cilia in modulating cell polarity, Bonnet et al. (2009)
found that many dividing precystic renal tubule and hepatic bile duct
cells from Tsc1, Tsc2, and Pkd1 heterozygous mice were highly
misoriented. Bonnet et al. (2009) proposed that defects in cell polarity
may underlie cystic disease associated with TSC1, TSC2, and PKD1, and
that targeting of this pathway may be of key therapeutic benefit.

Zhou et al. (2009) developed a polycystic kidney disease (PKD) mouse
model by knocking out Tsc1 in a subset of renal tubular cells. Extensive
renal cyst formation in these mice was accompanied by broadly elevated
mammalian target of rapamycin complex-1 (mTORC1; 607536) activity in
both cell-autonomous and non-cell-autonomous compartments. Cyst
development required mTORC1 activation, as low dosage of rapamycin
administration effectively blocked cyst formation. Disruption of Pten
(601728), an upstream regulator of Tsc1/Tsc2, in the same cells did not
lead to PKD, seemingly due to limited activation of mTORC1, suggesting
to the authors that PTEN may not be a major upstream regulator of
TSC/mTORC1 during early postnatal kidney development.

In mutant mice lacking the Tsc1 gene in oocytes, Adhikari et al. (2010)
showed that the entire pool of primordial follicles was activated
prematurely due to elevated mTORC1 activity in the oocyte, resulting in
follicular depletion in early adulthood and premature ovarian failure
(POF). Maintenance of the quiescence of primordial follicles required
synergistic, collaborative functioning of both Tsc1 and Pten, and these
2 molecules suppressed follicular activation through distinct ways.
Adhikari et al. (2010) concluded that Tsc/mTORC1 signaling and PTEN/PI3K
(see 171834) signaling synergistically regulate the dormancy and
activation of primordial follicles, and together ensure the proper
length of female reproductive life.

Tsai et al. (2012) showed that both heterozygous and homozygous loss of
Tsc1 in mouse cerebellar Purkinje cells results in autistic-like
behaviors, including abnormal social interaction, repetitive behavior,
and vocalizations, in addition to decreased Purkinje cell excitability.
Treatment of mutant mice with the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin prevented the
pathologic and behavioral deficits. Tsai et al. (2012) concluded that
their findings demonstrated new roles for Tsc1 in Purkinje cell function
and defined a molecular basis for a cerebellar contribution to cognitive
disorders such as autism.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS 1
TSC1, 4-BP DEL, 2105AAAG

Van Slegtenhorst et al. (1997) found a 4-bp deletion in exon 15 of the
TSC1 gene (2105delAAAG) in 6 apparently unrelated individuals with
tuberous sclerosis (191100). Four were familial and 2 were sporadic. In
2 familial cases with the deletion and a sporadic case, haplotype
analysis using flanking markers confirmed an independent origin of the 3
mutations.

.0002
TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS 1
TSC1, LEU250TER

In a patient with tuberous sclerosis-1 (191100), van Slegtenhorst et al.
(1997) identified a nonsense mutation in the TSC1 gene, a T-to-G
transversion of nucleotide 970 leading to termination at amino acid 250.

.0003
TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS 1
TSC1, LYS585ARG

In patients with tuberous sclerosis-1 (191100), the only missense
mutation among the 32 mutations found by van Slegtenhorst et al. (1997)
in the TSC1 gene was an A-to-G transition of nucleotide 1981, leading to
a lys585-to-arg (K585R) amino acid change.

.0004
TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS 1
TSC1, 2-BP DEL, 2122AC

Kwiatkowska et al. (1999) described a patient with severe tuberous
sclerosis (191100) in whom a mutated TSC1 allele was present in only
one-third of leukocytes and in different proportions in other tissues.
The case illustrated the importance of considering mosaicism and the
limitation of molecular diagnostic methods. The infant girl was born to
young healthy parents. Her development was normal until the age of 18
months, when myoclonic seizures occurred. Although the seizures stopped
with corticotropin therapy, the child subsequently learned few
additional words and withdrew from interaction with her parents and
others. At the age of 12 years, she began to have absence seizures.
Evaluation revealed a normal body habitus but limited activity and
diminished social interaction. Formal testing showed an IQ score of less
than 40. Several angiofibromas were present in the malar regions of the
face. MRI and CT of the brain showed several calcified subependymal
nodules, 2 large cortical tubers (one of which was calcified), and many
smaller cortical tubers. Results of renal ultrasonography,
echocardiography, and retinal examination were all normal. In exon 15 of
the TSC1 gene, a 2-bp deletion, 2122delAC, was found. This deletion
changed the TSC1 protein sequence after amino acid residue 634 and
truncated it at residue 685; in contrast, the normal TSC1 protein has
1164 residues. DNA from urine and hair roots formed heteroduplexes,
indicating that they contained the mutant allele. However, a sample of
buccal-mucosa DNA had no heteroduplex product, suggesting that the
mutant allele was absent in that sample.

.0005
TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS 1
TSC1, 23-BP DUP

Smith and Sperling (1999) reported the results of mutation analysis in a
sporadic case of tuberous sclerosis (191100) first identified in
intrauterine life on the basis of the presence of cardiac rhabdomyomas.
Postnatally, this infant was also found to have subependymal nodules on
brain computed tomographic scan. Hypomelanotic macules were not detected
neonatally or at 12 months of age. The specific mutation identified in
this patient was duplication of a 23-bp segment of DNA between two 9-bp
repeated sequence elements within exon 15 of the TSC1 gene. These repeat
elements were located between nucleotides 1892 and 1900 and between
nucleotides 1915 and 1923. Smith and Sperling (1999) considered it
likely that the presence of these 2 repeated elements predisposed to
misalignment of DNA strands and unequal crossing-over. The mechanism of
origin of rhabdomyomas in tuberous sclerosis was reviewed. Loss of
heterozygosity in the tuberous sclerosis gene regions had been reported
in cardiac rhabdomyomas; however, these lesions are self limiting in
their growth. The basis for this self-limiting proliferation was not
clear. One interesting postulation was that cardiac rhabdomyomas may be
due to delay or failure of apoptosis which occurs as part of the normal
remodeling process in the heart.

.0006
LYMPHANGIOLEIOMYOMATOSIS
TSC1, CYS165TER

In a Japanese patient with isolated pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis
(LAM; 606690), Sato et al. (2002) identified a C-to-A transversion at
nucleotide 716 in exon 6 of the TSC1 gene, resulting in a cys165-to-ter
mutation. Complete inactivation of the TSC1 gene concordant with the
Knudson tumor suppressor model (Knudson, 1971) was observed in this
patient, who had a TSC1 germline mutation and TSC1 LOH for 2 chromosome
9 markers, D9S149 and D9S1198. Since there was a germline mutation in
this case, the isolated pulmonary LAM could be considered
monosymptomatic TSC; however, the patient had no clinical features
characteristic of TSC.

.0007
FOCAL CORTICAL DYSPLASIA OF TAYLOR, TYPE IIB
TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS 1, INCLUDED
TSC1, HIS732TYR

Becker et al. (2002) showed that an amino acid change in residue 732 of
hamartin from histidine to tyrosine (H732Y) was present in 14 of 40
(35%) cases of focal cortical dysplasia of the Taylor balloon cell type
(see 607341) as compared with 2 of 200 (1%) controls. The change was
produced by a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 2415 in exon 17 of the
TSC1 gene. Exon 17 was the site of a number of other polymorphisms
associated with focal cortical dysplasia, as were exons 14 and 22. The
H732Y mutation had been previously observed at low frequencies in
tuberous sclerosis (191100) and in unaffected individuals (Jones et al.,
1997; van Slegtenhorst et al., 1999). Becker et al. (2002) interpreted
the change and others as germline polymorphisms that predispose toward
the cerebral lesion when combined with LOH in the other allele. The
H732T substitution is located in a region of the hamartin protein
involved in the interaction domain with tuberin, the product of the TSC2
gene (191092).

.0008
TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS 1
TSC1, MET224ARG

In 4 affected individuals from a family with tuberous sclerosis
(191100), Nellist et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous 671T-G
transversion in the TSC1 gene, resulting in a met224-to-arg (M224R)
substitution. The proband had definite TSC with multiple shagreen
patches, hypomelanotic macules, ungual fibromas, dental pits, epilepsy
and severe mental disability. One parent and both siblings also
fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for definite TSC, including seizures,
cortical tubers, and below-average intelligence. All affected
individuals also carried a neutral 3103G-A polymorphism (gly1035 to ser;
G1035S) in cis with the M224R mutation. In vitro functional expression
studies showed that M224R-mutant protein did not decrease
phosphorylation of p70-S6K (608938), indicating constitutive activation
of the MTOR (FRAP1; 601231)-S6K pathway, whereas the G1035S variant and
wildtype protein reduced S6K phosphorylation. These findings indicated
that M224R mutation was responsible for the phenotype in this family.

.0009
TUBEROUS SCLEROSIS 1
TSC1, LEU180PRO

In 5 affected individuals from a 3-generation family with tuberous
sclerosis (191100), Nellist et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous
539T-C transition in the TSC1 gene, resulting in a leu180-to-pro (L180P)
substitution. In vitro functional expression studies detected the mutant
protein at low levels and showed that the mutant protein did not inhibit
S6K (608938) phosphorylation.

REFERENCE 1. Adhikari, D.; Zheng, W.; Shen, Y.; Gorre, N.; Hamalainen, T.; Cooney,
A. J.; Huhtaniemi, I.; Lan, Z.-J.; Liu, K.: Tsc/mTORC1 signaling
in oocytes governs the quiescence and activation of primordial follicles. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 19: 397-410, 2010.

2. Ali, J. B. M.; Sepp, T.; Ward, S.; Green, A. J.; Yates, J. R. W.
: Mutations in the TSC1 gene account for a minority of patients with
tuberous sclerosis. J. Med. Genet. 35: 969-972, 1998.

3. Astrinidis, A.; Senapedis, W.; Henske, E. P.: Hamartin, the tuberous
sclerosis complex 1 gene product, interacts with polo-like kinase
1 in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Hum. Molec. Genet. 15:
287-297, 2006.

4. Au, K. S.; Williams, A. T.; Roach, E. S.; Batchelor, L.; Sparagana,
S. P.; Delgado, M. R.; Wheless, J. W.; Baumgartner, J. E.; Roa, B.
B.; Wilson, C. M.; Smith-Knuppel, T. K.; Cheung, M.-Y. C.; Whittemore,
V. H.; King, T. M.; Northrup, H.: Genotype/phenotype correlation
in 325 individuals referred for a diagnosis of tuberous sclerosis
complex in the United States. Genet. Med. 9: 88-100, 2007.

5. Becker, A. J.; Urbach, H.; Scheffler, B.; Baden, T.; Normann, S.;
Lahl, R.; Pannek, H. W.; Tuxhorn, I.; Elger, C. E.; Schramm, J.; Wiestler,
O. D.; Blumcke, I.: Focal cortical dysplasia of Taylor's balloon
cell type: mutational analysis of the TSC1 gene indicates a pathogenic
relationship to tuberous sclerosis. Ann. Neurol. 52: 29-37, 2002.

6. Benit, P.; Kara-Mostefa, A.; Hadj-Rabia, S.; Munnich, A.; Bonnefont,
J.-P.: Protein truncation test for screening hamartin gene mutations
and report of new disease-causing mutations. Hum. Mutat. 14: 428-432,
1999.

7. Benvenuto, G.; Li, S.; Brown, S. J.; Braverman, R.; Vass, W. C.;
Cheadle, J. P.; Halley, D. J. J.; Sampson, J. R.; Wienecke, R.; DeClue,
J. E.: The tuberous sclerosis-1 (TSC1) gene product hamartin suppresses
cell growth and augments the expression of the TSC2 product tuberin
by inhibiting its ubiquitination. Oncogene 19: 6306-6316, 2000.

8. Bjornsson, J.; Short, M. P.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.; Henske, E. P.
: Tuberous sclerosis-associated renal cell carcinoma. Am. J. Path. 149:
1201-1208, 1996.

9. Bonnet, C. S.; Aldred, M.; von Ruhland, C.; Harris, R.; Sandford,
R.; Cheadle, J. P.: Defects in cell polarity underlie TSC and ADPKD-associated
cystogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 2166-2176, 2009.

10. Carbonara, C.; Longa, L.; Grosso, E.; Borrone, C.; Garre, M. G.;
Brisigotti, M.; Migone, N.: 9q34 loss of heterozygosity in a tuberous
sclerosis astrocytoma suggests a growth suppressor-like activity also
for the TSC1 gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 1829-1832, 1994.

11. Carbonara, C.; Longa, L.; Grosso, E.; Mazzucco, G.; Borrone, C.;
Garre, M. L.; Brisigotti, M.; Filippi, G.; Scabar, A.; Giannotti,
A.; Falzoni, P.; Monga, G.; Garini, G.; Gabrielli, M.; Riegler, P.;
Danesino, C.; Ruggieri, M.; Magro, G.; Migone, N.: Apparent preferential
loss of heterozygosity at TSC2 over TSC1 chromosomal region in tuberous
sclerosis hamartomas. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 15: 18-25, 1996.

12. Cheadle, J. P.; Dobbie, L.; Idziaszczyk, S.; Hodges, A. K.; Smith,
A. J. H.; Sampson, J. R.; Young, J.: Genomic organization and comparative
analysis of the mouse tuberous sclerosis 1 (Tsc1) locus. Mammalian
Genome 11: 1135-1138, 2000.

13. Cheadle, J. P.; Reeve, M. P.; Sampson, J. R.; Kwiatkowski, D.
J.: Molecular genetic advances in tuberous sclerosis. Hum. Genet. 107:
97-114, 2000.

14. Choi, Y.-J.; Di Nardo, A.; Kramvis, I.; Meikle, L.; Kwiatkowski,
D. J.; Sahin, M.; He, X.: Tuberous sclerosis complex proteins control
axon formation. Genes Dev. 22: 2485-2495, 2008.

15. Dabora, S. L.; Jozwiak, S.; Franz, D. N.; Roberts, P. S.; Nieto,
A.; Chung, J.; Choy, Y.-S.; Reeve, M. P.; Thiele, E.; Egelhoff, J.
C.; Kasprzyk-Obara, J.; Domanska-Pakiela, D.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.:
Mutational analysis in a cohort of 224 tuberous sclerosis patients
indicates increased severity of TSC2, compared with TSC1, disease
in multiple organs. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68: 64-80, 2001.

16. DiBella, L. M.; Park, A.; Sun, Z.: Zebrafish Tsc1 reveals functional
interactions between the cilium and the TOR pathway. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 18: 595-606, 2009.

17. Fukuhara, S.; Gutkind, J. S.: A new twist for the tumour suppressor
hamartin. Nature Cell Biol. 2: E76-E78, 2000.

18. Goorden, S. M. I.; van Woerden, G. M.; van der Weerd, L.; Cheadle,
J. P.; Elgersma, Y.: Cognitive deficits in Tsc1(+/-) mice in the
absence of cerebral lesions and seizures. Ann. Neurol. 62: 648-655,
2007.

19. Green, A. J.; Johnson, P. H.; Yates, J. R. W.: The tuberous sclerosis
gene on chromosome 9q34 acts as a growth suppressor. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 3: 1833-1834, 1994.

20. Green, A. J.; Sepp, T.; Yates, J. R. W.: Clonality of tuberous
sclerosis hamartomas shown by non-random X-chromosome inactivation. Hum.
Genet. 97: 240-243, 1996.

21. Hartman, T. R.; Liu, D.; Zilfou, J. T.; Robb, V.; Morrison, T.;
Watnick, T.; Henske, E. P.: The tuberous sclerosis proteins regulate
formation of the primary cilium via a rapamycin-insensitive and polycystin
1-independent pathway. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 151-163, 2009.

22. Henske, E. P.; Scheithauer, B. W.; Short, M. P.; Wollmann, R.;
Nahmias, J.; Hornigold, N.; van Slegtenhorst, M.; Welsh, C. T.; Kwiatkowski,
D. J.: Allelic loss is frequent in tuberous sclerosis kidney lesions
but rare in brain lesions. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 59: 400-406, 1996.

23. Hodges, A. K.; Li, S.; Maynard, J.; Parry, L.; Braverman, R.;
Cheadle, J. P.; DeClue, J. E.; Sampson, J. R.: Pathological mutations
in TSC1 and TSC2 disrupt the interaction between hamartin and tuberin. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 10: 2899-2905, 2001.

24. Inoki, K.; Li, Y.; Zhu, T.; Wu, J.; Guan, K.-L.: TSC2 is phosphorylated
and inhibited by Akt and suppresses mTOR signalling. Nature Cell
Biol. 4: 648-657, 2002.

25. Iyer, G. Hanrahan, A. J.; Milowsky, M. I.; Al-Ahmadie, H.; Scott,
S. N.; Janakiraman, M.; Pirun, M.; Sander, C.; Socci, N. D.; Ostrovnaya,
I.; Viale, A.; Heguy, A.; Peng, L.; Chan, T. A.; Bochner, B.; Bajorin,
D. F.; Berger, M. F.; Taylor, B. S.; Solit, D. B.: Genome sequencing
identifies a basis for everolimus sensitivity. Science 338: 221
only, 2012.

26. Jeganathan, D.; Fox, M. F.; Young, J. M.; Yates, J. R. W.; Osborne,
J. P.; Povey, S.: Nonsense-mediated RNA decay in the TSC1 gene suggests
a useful tool pre- and post-positional cloning. Hum. Genet. 111:
555-565, 2002.

27. Jones, A. C.; Daniells, C. E.; Snell, R. G.; Tachataki, M.; Idziaszczyk,
S. A.; Krawczak, M.; Sampson, J. R.; Cheadle, J. P.: Molecular genetic
and phenotypic analysis reveals differences between TSC1 and TSC2
associated familial and sporadic tuberous sclerosis. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 6: 2155-2161, 1997.

28. Jones, A. C.; Shyamsundar, M. M.; Thomas, M. W.; Maynard, J.;
Idziaszczyk, S.; Tomkins, S.; Sampson, J. R.; Cheadle, J. P.: Comprehensive
mutation analysis of TSC1 and TSC2--and phenotypic correlations in
150 families with tuberous sclerosis. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64: 1305-1315,
1999.

29. Knudson, A. G., Jr.: Mutation and cancer: statistical study of
retinoblastoma. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 68: 820-823, 1971.

30. Kobayashi, T.; Minowa, O.; Sugitani, Y.; Takai, S.; Mitani, H.;
Kobayashi, E.; Noda, T.; Hino, O.: A germ-line Tsc1 mutation causes
tumor development and embryonic lethality that are similar, but not
identical to, those caused by Tsc2 mutation in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 98: 8762-8767, 2001.

31. Kwiatkowska, J.; Jozwiak, S.; Hall, F.; Henske, E. P.; Haines,
J. L.; McNamara, P.; Braiser, J.; Wigowska-Sowinska, J.; Kasprzyk-Obara,
J.; Short, M. P.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.: Comprehensive mutational analysis
of the TSC1 gene: observations on frequency of mutation, associated
features, and nonpenetrance. Ann. Hum. Genet. 62: 277-285, 1998.

32. Kwiatkowska, J.; Wigowska-Sowinska, J.; Napierala, D.; Slomski,
R.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.: Mosaicism in tuberous sclerosis as a potential
cause of the failure of molecular diagnosis. New Eng. J. Med. 340:
703-707, 1999.

33. Kwiatkowski, D. J.; Zhang, H.; Bandura, J. L.; Heiberger, K. M.;
Glogauer, M.; el-Hashemite, N.; Onda, H.: A mouse model of TSC1 reveals
sex-dependent lethality from liver hemangiomas, and up-regulation
of p70S6 kinase activity in Tsc1 null cells. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11:
525-534, 2002.

34. Lamb, R. F.; Roy, C.; Diefenbach, T. J.; Vinters, H. V.; Johnson,
M. W.; Jay, D. G.; Hall, A.: The TSC1 tumour suppressor hamartin
regulates cell adhesion through ERM proteins and the GTPase Rho. Nature
Cell Biol. 2: 281-286, 2000.

35. Langkau, N.; Martin, N.; Brandt, R.; Zugge, K.; Quast, S.; Wiegele,
G.; Jauch, A.; Rehm, M.; Kuhl, A.; Mack-Vetter, M.; Zimmerhackl, L.
B.; Janssen, B.: TSC1 and TSC2 mutations in tuberous sclerosis, the
associated phenotypes and a model to explain observed TSC1/TSC2 frequency
ratios. Europ. J. Pediat. 161: 393-402, 2002.

36. Mayer, K.; Ballhausen, W.; Rott, H.-D.: Mutation screening of
the entire coding regions of the TSC1 and the TSC2 gene with the protein
truncation test (PTT) identifies frequent splicing defects. Hum.
Mutat. 14: 401-411, 1999.

37. Meikle, L.; McMullen, J. R.; Sherwood, M. C.; Lader, A. S.; Walker,
V.; Chan, J. A.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.: A mouse model of cardiac rhabdomyoma
generated by loss of Tsc1 in ventricular myocytes. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14:
429-435, 2005.

38. Miloloza, A.; Rosner, M.; Nellist, M.; Halley, D.; Bernaschek,
G.; Hengstschlager, M.: The TSC1 gene product, hamartin, negatively
regulates cell proliferation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1721-1727, 2000.

39. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Ohira, M.; Kawarabayasi, Y.;
Ohara, O.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Miyajima, N.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VI. The coding
sequences of 80 new genes (KIAA0201-KIAA0280) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from cell line KG-1 and brain. DNA Res. 3: 321-329,
1996.

40. Nellist, M.; van den Heuvel, D.; Schluep, D.; Exalto, C.; Goedbloed,
M.; Maat-Kievit, A.; van Essen, T.; van Spaendonck-Zwarts, K.; Jansen,
F.; Helderman, P.; Bartalini, G.; Vierimaa, O.; Penttinen, M.; van
den Ende, J.; van den Ouweland, A.; Halley, D.: Missense mutations
to the TSC1 gene cause tuberous sclerosis complex. Europ. J. Hum.
Genet. 17: 319-328, 2009.

41. Niida, Y.; Lawrence-Smith, N.; Banwell, A.; Hammer, E.; Lewis,
J.; Beauchamp, R. L.; Sims, K.; Ramesh, V.; Ozelius, L.: Analysis
of both TSC1 and TSC2 for germline mutations in 126 unrelated patients
with tuberous sclerosis. Hum. Mutat. 14: 412-422, 1999.

42. Niida, Y.; Stemmer-Rachamimov, A. O.; Logrip, M.; Tapon, D.; Perez,
R.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.; Sims, K.; MacCollin, M.; Louis, D. N.; Ramesh,
V.: Survey of somatic mutations in tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC)
hamartomas suggests different genetic mechanisms for pathogenesis
of TSC lesions. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 69: 493-503, 2001.

43. Ozcan, U.; Ozcan, L.; Yilmaz, E.; Duvel, K.; Sahin, M.; Manning,
B. D.; Hotamisligil, G. S.: Loss of the tuberous sclerosis complex
tumor suppressors triggers the unfolded protein response to regulate
insulin signaling and apoptosis. Molec. Cell 29: 541-551, 2008.

44. Park, K. K.; Liu, K.; Hu, Y.; Smith, P. D.; Wang, C.; Cai. B.;
Xu, B.; Connolly, L.; Kramvis, I.; Sahin, M.; He, Z.: Promoting axon
regeneration in the adult CNS by modulation of the PTEN/mTOR pathway. Science 322:
963-966, 2008.

45. Potter, C. J.; Huang, H.; Xu, T.: Drosophila Tsc1 functions with
Tsc2 to antagonize insulin signaling in regulating cell growth, cell
proliferation, and organ size. Cell 105: 357-368, 2001.

46. Povey, S.; Burley, M. W.; Attwood, J.; Benham, F.; Hunt, D.; Jeremiah,
S. J.; Franklin, D.; Gillett, G.; Malas, S.; Robson, E. B.; Tippett,
P.; Edwards, J. H.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.; Super, M.; Mueller, R.; Fryer,
A.; Clarke, A.; Webb, D.; Osborne, J.: Two loci for tuberous sclerosis:
one on 9q34 and one on 16p13. Ann. Hum. Genet. 58: 107-127, 1994.

47. Sancak, O.; Nellist, M.; Goedbloed, M.; Elfferich, P.; Wouters,
C.; Maat-Kievit, A.; Zonnenberg, B.; Verhoef, S.; Halley, D.; van
den Ouweland, A.: Mutational analysis of the TSC1 and TSC2 genes
in a diagnostic setting: genotype-phenotype correlations and comparison
of diagnostic DNA techniques in tuberous sclerosis complex. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 13: 731-741, 2005.

48. Sato, T.; Seyama, K.; Fujii, H.; Maruyama, H.; Setoguchi, Y.;
Iwakami, S.; Fukuchi, Y.; Hino, O.: Mutation analysis of the TSC1
and TSC2 genes in Japanese patients with pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis. J.
Hum. Genet. 47: 20-28, 2002.

49. Sepp, T.; Yates, J. R. W.; Green, A. J.: Loss of heterozygosity
in tuberous sclerosis hamartomas. J. Med. Genet. 33: 962-964, 1996.

50. Smith, M.; Sperling, D.: Novel 23-base-pair duplication mutation
in TSC1 exon 15 in an infant presenting with cardiac rhabdomyomas. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 84: 346-349, 1999.

51. Tapon, N.; Ito, N.; Dickson, B. J.; Treisman, J. E.; Hariharan,
I. K.: The Drosophila tuberous sclerosis complex gene homologs restrict
cell growth and cell proliferation. Cell 105: 345-355, 2001.

52. Tsai, P. T.; Hull, C.; Chu, Y.; Greene-Colozzi, E.; Sadowski,
A. R.; Leech, J. M.; Steinberg, J.; Crawley, J. N.; Regehr, W. G.;
Sahin, M.: Autistic-like behaviour and cerebellar dysfunction in
Purkinje cell Tsc1 mutant mice. Nature 488: 647-651, 2012.

53. Uhlmann, E. J.; Apicelli, A. J.; Baldwin, R. L.; Burke, S. P.;
Bajenaru, M. L.; Onda, H.; Kwiatkowski, D.; Gutmann, D. H.: Heterozygosity
for the tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) gene products results in
increased astrocyte numbers and decreased p27-Kip1 expression in TSC2
+/- cells. Oncogene 21: 4050-4059, 2002.

54. Uhlmann, E. J.; Wong, M.; Baldwin, R. L.; Bajenaru, M. L.; Onda,
H.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.; Yamada, K.; Gutmann, D. H.: Astrocyte-specific
TSC1 conditional knockout mice exhibit abnormal neuronal organization
and seizures. Ann. Neurol. 52: 285-296, 2002.

55. van Slegtenhorst, M.; de Hoogt, R.; Hermans, C.; Nellist, M.;
Janssen, B.; Verhoef, S.; Lindhout, D.; van den Ouweland, A.; Halley,
D.; Young, J.; Burley, M.; Jeremiah, S.; and 29 others: Identification
of the tuberous sclerosis gene TSC1 on chromosome 9q34. Science 277:
805-808, 1997.

56. van Slegtenhorst, M.; Nellist, M.; Nagelkerken, B.; Cheadle, J.;
Snell, R.; van den Ouweland, A.; Reuser, A.; Sampson, J.; Halley,
D.; van der Sluijs, P.: Interaction between hamartin and tuberin,
the TSC1 and TSC2 gene products. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7: 1053-1057,
1998.

57. van Slegtenhorst, M.; Verhoef, S.; Tempelaars, A.; Bakker, L.;
Wang, Q.; Wessels, M.; Bakker, R.; Nellist, M.; Lindhout, D.; Halley,
D.; van den Ouweland, A.: Mutational spectrum of the TSC1 gene in
a cohort of 225 tuberous sclerosis complex patients: no evidence for
genotype-phenotype correlation. J. Med. Genet. 36: 285-289, 1999.

58. Wilson, C.; Idziaszczyk, S.; Parry, L.; Guy, C.; Griffiths, D.
F. R.; Lazda, E.; Bayne, R. A. L.; Smith, A. J. H.; Sampson, J. R.;
Cheadle, J. P.: A mouse model of tuberous sclerosis 1 showing background
specific early post-natal mortality and metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 1839-1850, 2005.

59. Yamashita, Y.; Ono, J.; Okada, S.; Wataya-Kaneda, M.; Yoshikawa,
K.; Nishizawa, M.; Hirayama, Y.; Kobayashi, E.; Seyama, K.; Hino,
O.: Analysis of all exons of TSC1 and TSC2 genes for germline mutations
in Japanese patients with tuberous sclerosis: report of 10 mutations. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 90: 123-126, 2000.

60. Young, J. M.; Burley, M. W.; Jeremiah, S. J.; Jeganathan, D.;
Ekong, R.; Osborne, J. P.; Povey, S.: A mutation screen of the TSC1
gene reveals 26 protein truncating mutations and 1 splice site mutation
in a panel of 79 tuberous sclerosis patients. Ann. Hum. Genet. 62:
203-213, 1998.

61. Zeng, L.-H.; Xu, L.; Gutmann, D. H.; Wong, M.: Rapamycin prevents
epilepsy in a mouse model of tuberous sclerosis complex. Ann. Neurol. 63:
444-453, 2008.

62. Zhou, J.; Brugarolas, J.; Parada, L. F.: Loss of Tsc1, but not
Pten, in renal tubular cells causes polycystic kidney disease by activating
mTORC1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 4428-4441, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/2/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/18/2012
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/14/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/4/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/3/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/11/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/23/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/24/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/10/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/6/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/30/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/7/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/28/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/28/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/4/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/11/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/25/2007
Natalie E. Krasikov - updated: 7/29/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/6/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/3/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/18/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/14/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/11/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/14/2001
Deborah L. Stone - updated: 9/12/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/13/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 5/7/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/23/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/15/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/25/2000

EDITED carol: 09/16/2013
alopez: 11/5/2012
terry: 11/2/2012
alopez: 9/19/2012
terry: 9/18/2012
wwang: 1/14/2011
alopez: 10/22/2010
terry: 10/4/2010
wwang: 3/12/2010
terry: 3/3/2010
joanna: 11/23/2009
mgross: 11/13/2009
terry: 11/11/2009
wwang: 11/3/2009
terry: 10/23/2009
wwang: 10/21/2009
ckniffin: 9/24/2009
wwang: 8/13/2009
terry: 8/10/2009
carol: 6/19/2009
wwang: 4/15/2009
ckniffin: 4/6/2009
alopez: 1/5/2009
terry: 12/30/2008
mgross: 11/10/2008
terry: 11/7/2008
wwang: 10/28/2008
mgross: 4/28/2008
wwang: 4/14/2008
ckniffin: 4/4/2008
ckniffin: 2/5/2008
wwang: 12/28/2007
terry: 12/11/2007
terry: 8/9/2007
alopez: 8/2/2007
alopez: 8/1/2007
terry: 7/25/2007
carol: 8/29/2005
mgross: 9/23/2004
tkritzer: 8/27/2004
carol: 7/29/2004
ckniffin: 3/23/2004
joanna: 3/19/2004
carol: 1/28/2003
tkritzer: 12/10/2002
tkritzer: 12/6/2002
tkritzer: 12/4/2002
terry: 11/27/2002
tkritzer: 11/14/2002
alopez: 11/12/2002
carol: 11/12/2002
ckniffin: 11/6/2002
cwells: 10/3/2002
tkritzer: 9/23/2002
tkritzer: 9/19/2002
tkritzer: 9/18/2002
cwells: 8/14/2002
mgross: 2/14/2002
terry: 2/11/2002
mcapotos: 9/18/2001
mcapotos: 9/14/2001
carol: 9/12/2001
mgross: 8/13/2001
mgross: 5/7/2001
carol: 1/23/2001
terry: 1/23/2001
carol: 12/19/2000
terry: 12/15/2000
alopez: 10/19/2000
alopez: 10/9/2000
alopez: 9/25/2000

603002	TITLE *603002 TRANSPORTIN 2; TNPO2
;;TRN2;;
KARYOPHERIN BETA-2B; KPNB2B
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Transportin-1 (KPNB2; 602901) interacts directly and specifically with
M9, the bidirectional transport signal of the nuclear shuttling protein
hnRNPA1 (164017) and mediates hnRNPA1 nuclear import. In the course of
isolating additional transportin-1 cDNAs, Siomi et al. (1997) isolated
cDNAs encoding a related protein that they designated 'transportin-2.'
The sequence of the predicted 894-amino acid protein shares 84% identity
with that of transportin-1. One notable difference is that transportin-2
contains a short extra sequence within the region corresponding to the
M9-interacting domain of transportin-1. Far Western blotting showed that
transportin-2 and transportin-1 have different substrate specificities.
Siomi et al. (1997) suggested that the insert in transportin-2 modifies
its interaction with import substrates.

GENE FUNCTION

Transport of macromolecules between the cell nucleus and cytoplasm
occurs through the nuclear pores and is mediated by soluble carriers
known as karyopherins, transportins, importins, or exportins. Shamsher
et al. (2002) found that transportin-2 forms complexes with the mRNA
export factor TAP (NXF1; 602647) that strictly depend on the presence of
RanGTP. The data supported the conclusion that transportin-2
participates directly in the export of a large proportion of cellular
mRNAs, and that TAP connects transportin-2 to mRNAs to be exported.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the TRN2
gene to chromosome 19 (TMAP WI-30101).

REFERENCE 1. Shamsher, M. K.; Ploski, J.; Radu, A.: Karyopherin beta-2B participates
in mRNA export from the nucleus. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 14195-14199,
2002.

2. Siomi, M. C.; Eder, P. S.; Kataoka, N.; Wan, L.; Liu, Q.; Dreyfuss,
G.: Transportin-mediated nuclear import of heterogeneous nuclear
RNP proteins. J. Cell Biol. 138: 1181-1192, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/13/2002
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 10/12/2001

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 8/26/1998

EDITED wwang: 06/11/2008
mgross: 4/7/2006
tkritzer: 12/17/2002
terry: 12/13/2002
carol: 10/12/2001
alopez: 8/27/1998

300110	TITLE *300110 CALCIUM CHANNEL, VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT, ALPHA-1F SUBUNIT; CACNA1F
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The human Xp11.23-p11.22 interval is involved in several hereditary
diseases. Fisher et al. (1997) noted that in constructing YAC contigs
spanning this region, it was found that the region of Xp surrounding the
synaptophysin gene (SYP; 313475) was refractory to cloning in YACs, but
highly stable in cosmids. Preliminary analysis of the cosmid suggested a
high density of coding sequences and prompted complete sequencing of an
SYP-containing cosmid. Fisher et al. (1997) identified 29 putative exons
organized into 3 genes, in addition to the 7 exons of the complete SYP
coding region, all mapping within a 44-kb interval. Two genes were
novel: one (CACNA1F) shows high homology to alpha-1 subunits of calcium
channels (see CACNA2; 114204), whereas the other (LMO6; 300111) encodes
a product with significant similarity to LIM-domain proteins. RT-PCR and
Northern blot studies confirmed that these loci were indeed transcribed.
The third locus (A4; 300112) had been previously described but not
localized to a specific chromosomal site. The region has an elevated GC
content (more than 53%), and Fisher et al. (1997) identified CpG islands
associated with the 5-prime ends of SYP, A4, and LMO6.

Naylor et al. (2000) cloned the mouse Cacna1f gene. The deduced
1,985-amino acid channel protein shares 90% identity with the
1,977-amino acid human protein, with almost perfect conservation between
the functional domains and only a single amino acid substitution within
the transmembrane segments. RT-PCR of several mouse tissues detected
Cacna1f expression only in eye. In situ hybridization detected Cacna1f
in the outer nuclear layer, the inner nuclear layer, and the ganglion
cell layer of mouse retina.

GENE FUNCTION

To study the electrophysiologic and pharmacologic properties of the
L-type calcium channel CACNA1F, Baumann et al. (2004) cloned and
functionally expressed the complete Cacna1f cDNA from the mouse retina.
The data indicated that CACNA1F constitutes the major molecular
correlate of the retinal L-type calcium current. Its intrinsic
biophysical properties, in particular its unique inactivation
properties, enable it to provide a sustained calcium current over the
voltage range required for tonic glutamate release at the photoreceptor
synapse.

Liu et al. (2010) combined electrophysiology to characterize channel
regulation with optical fluorescence resonance energy transfer sensor
determination of free-apocalmodulin (CALM1; 114180) concentration in
live cells. This approach translates quantitative calmodulin
biochemistry from the traditional test-tube context into the realm of
functioning holochannels within intact cells. From this perspective, Liu
et al. (2010) found that long splice forms of Ca(V)1.3 (CACNA1D; 114206)
and Ca(V)1.4 (CACNA1F) channels include a distal carboxy tail that
resembles an enzyme competitive inhibitor that retunes channel affinity
for apocalmodulin such that natural calmodulin variations affect the
strength of Ca(2+) feedback modulation. Given the ubiquity of these
channels, the connection between ambient calmodulin levels and Ca(2+)
entry through channels is broadly significant for Ca(2+) homeostasis.

MAPPING

Fisher et al. (1997) determined that the order of loci in the
Xp11.23-p11.22 interval is Xpter-A4-LMO6-SYP-CACNA1F-Xcen, with
intergenic distances ranging from approximately 300 bp to approximately
5 kb. The density of transcribed sequences in this area (more than 80%)
is comparable to that found in the highly gene-rich band Xq28.

Naylor et al. (2000) mapped the mouse Cacna1f gene to a region of the X
chromosome that shows homology of synteny to human chromosome Xp11.23.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Incomplete Congenital Stationary Night Blindness, Type 2A

Conducting mutation analysis in 13 families with the incomplete form of
X-linked congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB2A; 300071), Strom
et al. (1998) identified 9 different mutations in 10 families, including
3 nonsense and 1 frameshift mutation. Similarly, by mutation analysis of
the CACNA1F gene in 20 families with incomplete CSNB, Bech-Hansen et al.
(1998) found 6 different mutations, all of which predicted premature
protein truncation.

Boycott et al. (2001) summarized 20 CACNA1F mutations that had been
identified in 36 families with incomplete X-linked congenital stationary
night blindness. Three of the mutations accounted for incomplete CSNB in
2 or more families, and a founder effect was demonstrable for one of
these mutations. Of the 20 mutations identified, 14 (70%) were predicted
to cause premature protein truncation and 6 (30%) to cause amino acid
substitutions or deletions at conserved positions in the alpha-1F
protein.

Wutz et al. (2002) reported comprehensive mutation analysis of the 48
exons of the CACNA1F gene in 34 unrelated cases (33 families and 1
sporadic case) diagnosed with the incomplete form of X-linked congenital
stationary night blindness, based on ERG data and dark adaptation tests.
Ten of the families had been partially characterized previously (Strom
et al., 1998). The patients were of German (32), Belgian (1), and French
(1) origin. Mutation analysis was also performed in 2 patients with an
Aland Island disease (300600)-related phenotype. A total of 30 different
mutations (20 of which were novel) were identified in 33 patients, 31
CSNB2 familial cases, and the 2 patients with an AIED-like phenotype.
Reevaluation of the AIED-like phenotype indicated full compatibility of
the patients' ophthalmologic findings with CSNB2. The mutations were
equally distributed over the entire gene sequence and included 13
missense, 8 nonsense, 5 splice site, 3 deletion, and 1 insertion
mutations. RT-PCR experiments in mouse strains with photoreceptor
degeneration showed that the Cacna1f gene is not exclusively expressed
in photoreceptors but in the outer nuclear, the inner nuclear, and the
ganglion cell layer as well.

Nakamura et al. (2003) described 2 Japanese brothers with retinal and
optic disc atrophy and progressive decrease of visual function with
increasing age. Although these clinical features are atypical of
patients with incomplete CSNB, both patients had an in-frame mutation
with deletion and insertion in exon 4 of the CACNA1F gene. In both
patients, the bright flash, mixed rod-cone ERG had a negative
configuration, characteristic of incomplete CSNB. However, the
full-field scotopic and photopic ERGs were nonrecordable, indicating
severe, diffuse retinal malfunction, not typical of incomplete CSNB.
These findings underscored the phenotypic variability of incomplete
CSNB.

Hemara-Wahanui et al. (2005) identified an ile745-to-thr mutation
(I745T; 300110.0006) in the CACNA1F gene in a New Zealand family with a
visual disorder more severe than typical CSNB2.

- Cone-Rod Dystrophy 3

In a large Finnish family with X-linked cone-rod dystrophy-3 (CORDX3;
300476), previously reported by Jalkanen et al. (2003), Jalkanen et al.
(2006) identified a splice site mutation in the CACNA1F gene
(300110.0007).

- Aland Island Eye Disease

In affected members of the original family with Aland Island eye disease
(300600) described by Forsius and Eriksson (1964), Jalkanen et al.
(2007) identified homozygosity for a 425-bp deletion mutation
encompassing exon 30 and portions of adjacent introns of the CACN1F gene
(300110.0008). The mutation was found in heterozygous state in carrier
females of this family and was not found in samples from 121 Finnish
male control subjects.

ANIMAL MODEL

Mansergh et al. (2005) generated a mouse with a loss-of-function
mutation in exon 7 of the mouse Cacna1f gene. Electroretinography of the
mutant mouse revealed a scotopic a-wave of marginally reduced amplitude
compared with the wildtype mouse and absence of the postreceptoral
b-wave and oscillatory potentials. Cone ERG responses together with
visual evoked potentials and multi-unit activity in the superior
colliculus were also absent. Calcium imaging of retinal slices
depolarized with KCl showed 90% less peak signal in the photoreceptor
synapses of the Cacna1f mutant than in wildtype mice. The absence of
postreceptoral ERG responses and the diminished photoreceptor calcium
signals were consistent with a loss of Ca(2+) channel function in
photoreceptors. Immunocytochemistry showed no detectable Cav1.4 protein
in the outer plexiform layer of Cacna1f-mutant mice, profound loss of
photoreceptor synapses, and abnormal dendritic sprouting of second-order
neurons in the photoreceptor layer. Mansergh et al. (2005) concluded
that the Cav1.4 calcium channel is vital for the functional assembly
and/or maintenance and synaptic functions of photoreceptor ribbon
synapses.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NIGHT BLINDNESS, CONGENITAL STATIONARY, TYPE 2A
CACNA1F, GLY369ASP

One of the missense mutations identified by Strom et al. (1998) in cases
of incomplete X-linked congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB2A;
300071) was a gly369-to-asp (G369D) amino acid substitution resulting
from a transition of nucleotide 1106 in exon 8.

.0002
NIGHT BLINDNESS, CONGENITAL STATIONARY, TYPE 2A
CACNA1F, ARG958TER

One of the nonsense mutations identified in families with incomplete
X-linked congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB2A; 300071) by Strom
et al. (1998) was an arg958-to-ter (R958X) mutation due to a C-to-T
transition of nucleotide 2172 in exon 24.

.0003
NIGHT BLINDNESS, CONGENITAL STATIONARY, TYPE 2A
CACNA1F, 1-BP INS, 991C

In 15 CSNB2A (300071) families with the common Mennonite haplotype,
suggesting that these families share a founder mutation (Boycott et al.
(1998)), Bech-Hansen et al. (1998) found insertion of a single C
nucleotide at codon 991 for leucine (L991insC). The insertion caused a
frameshift with stop codon 1001.

.0004
NIGHT BLINDNESS, CONGENITAL STATIONARY, TYPE 2A
CACNA1F, ARG830TER

Among families with CSNB2A (300071), one of the truncating mutations
found by Bech-Hansen et al. (1998) was a C-to-T transition in exon 21 of
the CACNA1F gene, resulting in an arg830-to-ter (R830X) nonsense amino
acid change.

.0005
NIGHT BLINDNESS, CONGENITAL STATIONARY, TYPE 2A
CACNA1F, 1-BP DEL, 4548C

In 2 affected members of a French family segregating X-linked congenital
stationary night blindness type 2, Jacobi et al. (2003) identified a
1-bp deletion (C) at nucleotide 4548 in the CACNA1F gene, resulting in a
frameshift with a predicted premature termination at codon 1524.

.0006
NIGHT BLINDNESS, CONGENITAL STATIONARY, TYPE 2A, SEVERE
CACNA1F, ILE745THR

Hemara-Wahanui et al. (2005) identified a C-to-T transition at
nucleotide 2234 in exon 17 of the CACNA1F gene in a New Zealand family
with a retinal disorder similar to, but more severe than, X-linked
congenital stationary night blindness-2 (CSNB2A; 300071). The transition
resulted in the substitution of a conserved isoleucine with threonine at
residue 745 (I745T) within transmembrane segment IIS6. Affected males
had congenital nystagmus, decreased visual acuity, frequent
hypermetropia, and normal fundi. Female family members had congenital
nystagmus, decreased visual acuity, and frequent high myopia, in
contrast to typical CSNB2A families, in which female heterozygotes are
unaffected. Electroretinography showed CSNB2A-like features in males and
similar, but less severe, features in females. In addition, some
visually impaired males had intellectual impairment and were autistic.
Hemara-Wahanui et al. (2005) found that the I745T mutation caused
altered channel activity following expression in human embryonic kidney
cells. The channel showed a dramatic shift of about -30 mV in the
voltage dependence of activation and significantly slower inactivation
kinetics. Hemara-Wahanui et al. (2005) concluded that the I745T mutation
increases the number of mutant channels open at physiologic membrane
potential and allows for persistent Ca(2+) entry due to reduced channel
inactivation, resulting in a gain-of-function defect.

.0007
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY, X-LINKED, 3
CACNA1F, 5-BP DEL/3-BP INS

In a large Finnish family with X-linked cone-rod dystrophy-3 (CORDX3;
300476), previously reported by Jalkanen et al. (2003), Jalkanen et al.
(2006) identified a deletion/insertion (IVS28-1 GCGTC-TGG) at -1
position in the splice acceptor site of intron 28 of the CACNA1F gene.
The mutation cosegregated completely with the disease phenotype in the
family, which included 7 affected males, 10 carrier females, and 33
unaffected family members; it was not found in 200 control chromosomes.
RNA studies revealed that the mutation caused altered splicing of the
CACNA1F transcript, resulting in 5 variants with predicted premature
termination and exonic deletions of the encoded protein.

.0008
ALAND ISLAND EYE DISEASE
CACNA1F, 425-BP DEL

In affected members of the original family with Aland Island eye disease
(300600) described by Forsius and Eriksson (1964), Jalkanen et al.
(2007) identified homozygosity for a 425-bp deletion mutation
encompassing exon 30 and portions of adjacent introns of the CACN1F
gene. The mutation was found in heterozygous state in carrier females of
this family and was not found in samples from 121 Finnish male control
subjects. The mutation is predicted to cause a deletion of the
transmembrane domain IVS2 and the preceding extracellular loop and
consequently an altered membrane topology for the C-terminal part of the
protein.

REFERENCE 1. Baumann, L.; Gerstner, A.; Zong, X.; Biel, M.; Wahl-Schott, C.
: Functional characterization of the L-type Ca(2+) channel Cav1.4-alpha-1
from the mouse retina. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 45: 708-713, 2004.

2. Bech-Hansen, N. T.; Naylor, M. J.; Maybaum, T. A.; Pearce, W. G.;
Koop, B.; Fishman, G. A.; Mets, M.; Musarella, M. A.; Boycott, K.
M.: Loss-of-function mutations in a calcium-channel alpha-1-subunit
gene in Xp11.23 cause incomplete X-linked congenital stationary night
blindness. Nature Genet. 19: 264-267, 1998.

3. Boycott, K. M.; Maybaum, T. A.; Naylor, M. J.; Weleber, R. G.;
Robitaille, J.; Miyake, Y.; Bergen, A. A. B.; Pierpont, M. E.; Pearce,
W. G.; Bech-Hansen, N. T.: A summary of 20 CACNA1F mutations identified
in 36 families with incomplete X-linked congenital stationary night
blindness, and characterization of splice variants. Hum. Genet. 108:
91-97, 2001.

4. Boycott, K. M.; Pearce, W. G.; Musarella, M. A.; Weleber, R. G.;
Maybaum, T. A.; Birch, D. G.; Miyake, Y.; Young, R. S. L.; Bech-Hansen,
N. T.: Evidence for genetic heterogeneity in X-linked congenital
stationary night blindness. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62: 865-875, 1998.

5. Fisher, S. E.; Ciccodicola, A.; Tanaka, K.; Curci, A.; Desicato,
S.; D'Urso, M.; Craig, I. W.: Sequence-based exon prediction around
the synaptophysin locus reveals a gene-rich area containing novel
genes in human proximal Xp. Genomics 45: 340-347, 1997.

6. Forsius, H.; Eriksson, A. W.: Ein neues Augensyndrom mit X-chromosomaler
Transmission: eine Sippe mit Fundusalbinismus, Foveahypoplasie, Nystagmus,
Myopie, Astigmatismus und Dyschromatopsie. Klin. Monatsbl. Augenheilkd. 144:
447-457, 1964.

7. Hemara-Wahanui, A.; Berjukow, S.; Hope, C. I.; Dearden, P. K.;
Wu, S.-B.; Wilson-Wheeler, J.; Sharp, D. M.; Lundon-Treweek, P.; Clover,
G. M.; Hoda, J.-C.; Striessnig, J.; Marksteiner, R.; Hering, S.; Maw,
M. A.: A CACNA1F mutation identified in an X-linked retinal disorder
shifts the voltage dependence of Ca(v)1.4 channel activation. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 7553-7558, 2005.

8. Jacobi, F. K.; Hamel, C. P.; Arnaud, B.; Blin, N.; Broghammer,
M.; Jacobi, P. C.; Apfelstedt-Sylla, E.; Pusch, C. M.: A novel CACNA1F
mutation in a French family with the incomplete type of X-linked congenital
stationary night blindness. Am. J. Ophthal. 135: 733-736, 2003.

9. Jalkanen, R.; Bech-Hansen, N. T.; Tobias, R.; Sankila, E.-M.; Mantyjarvi,
M.; Forsius, H.; de la Chapelle, A.; Alitalo, T.: A novel CACNA1F
gene mutation causes Aland Island eye disease. Invest. Ophthal. Vis.
Sci. 48: 2498-2502, 2007.

10. Jalkanen, R.; Demirci, F. Y.; Tyynismaa, H.; Bech-Hansen, T.;
Meindl, A.; Peippo, M.; Mantyjarvi, M.; Gorin, M. B.; Alitalo, T.
: A new genetic locus for X linked progressive cone-rod dystrophy. J.
Med. Genet. 40: 418-423, 2003.

11. Jalkanen, R.; Mantyjarvi, M.; Tobias, R.; Isosomppi, J.; Sankila,
E.-M.; Alitalo, T.; Bech-Hansen, N. T.: X linked cone-rod dystrophy,
CORDX3, is caused by a mutation in the CACNA1F gene. (Letter) J.
Med. Genet. 43: 699-704, 2006.

12. Liu, X.; Yang, P. S.; Yang, W.; Yue, D. T.: Enzyme-inhibitor-like
tuning of Ca(2+) channel connectivity with calmodulin. Nature 463:
968-972, 2010. Note: Erratum: Nature 464: 1390 only, 2010.

13. Mansergh, F.; Orton, N. C.; Vessey, J. P.; Lalonde, M. R.; Stell,
W. K.; Tremblay, F.; Barnes, S.; Rancourt, D. E.; Bech-Hansen, N.
T.: Mutation of the calcium channel gene Cacna1f disrupts calcium
signaling, synaptic transmission and cellular organization in mouse
retina. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 3035-3046, 2005.

14. Nakamura, M.; Ito, S.; Piao, C-H.; Terasaki, H.; Miyake, Y.:
Retinal and optic disc atrophy associated with a CACNA1F mutation
in a Japanese family. Arch. Ophthal. 121: 1028-1033, 2003.

15. Naylor, M. J.; Rancourt, D. E.; Bech-Hansen, N. T.: Isolation
and characterization of a calcium channel gene, Cacna1f, the murine
orthologue of the gene for incomplete X-linked congenital stationary
night blindness. Genomics 66: 324-327, 2000.

16. Strom, T. M.; Nyakatura, G.; Apfelstedt-Sylla, E.; Hellebrand,
H.; Lorenz, B.; Weber, B. H. F.; Wutz, K.; Gutwillinger, N.; Ruther,
K.; Drescher, B.; Sauer, C.; Zrenner, E.; Meitinger, T.; Rosenthal,
A.; Meindl, A.: An L-type calcium-channel gene mutated in incomplete
X-linked congenital stationary night blindness. Nature Genet. 19:
260-263, 1998.

17. Wutz, K.; Sauer, C.; Zrenner, E.; Lorenz, B.; Alitalo, T.; Broghammer,
M.; Hergersberg, M.; de la Chapelle, A.; Weber, B. H. F.; Wissinger,
B.; Meindl, A.; Pusch, C. M.: Thirty distinct CACNA1F mutations in
33 families with incomplete type of XLCSNB and Cacna1f expression
profiling in mouse retina. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 10: 449-456, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/22/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/13/2009
Jane Kelly - updated: 10/31/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/31/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/23/2005
Jane Kelly - updated: 2/23/2004
Jane Kelly - updated: 8/19/2003
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 6/13/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/13/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/23/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/11/1997

EDITED terry: 11/16/2010
alopez: 6/17/2010
alopez: 4/26/2010
terry: 4/22/2010
wwang: 6/25/2009
terry: 5/13/2009
terry: 9/10/2008
carol: 10/31/2007
wwang: 9/1/2006
terry: 8/31/2006
mgross: 7/14/2005
terry: 6/23/2005
tkritzer: 8/12/2004
tkritzer: 2/23/2004
carol: 11/5/2003
carol: 8/19/2003
cwells: 6/13/2003
cwells: 3/23/2001
terry: 3/13/2001
alopez: 11/15/1999
alopez: 6/29/1998
terry: 6/23/1998
mark: 12/11/1997

604627	TITLE *604627 INTERLEUKIN 17B; IL17B
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Interleukin-17 (IL17; 603149) is a T cell-derived cytokine that may play
an important role in the initiation or maintenance of the
proinflammatory response. Whereas expression of IL17 is restricted to
activated T cells, IL17 receptor (IL17R; 605461) has been shown to be
widely expressed, a finding consistent with the pleiotropic activities
of IL17. Li et al. (2000) cloned and expressed 2 novel human cytokines,
IL17B and IL17C (604628), that are related to IL17 (approximately 27%
amino acid identity). Northern blot analysis detected an 800-bp IL17B
mRNA in adult pancreas, small intestine, and stomach, whereas IL17C mRNA
was not detected in several adult tissues. No expression of IL17B or
IL17C mRNA was found in activated T cells. The authors found that IL17B
and IL17C differ from IL17 in their patterns of expression and biologic
activities. These findings, coupled with the lack of interaction with
the known IL17 receptor, suggested an expanded role for the IL17 family
in the proinflammatory immune response.

Shi et al. (2000) cloned a cDNA encoding IL17B, which they initially
designated IL20. The deduced 184-amino acid protein, 88% identical to
the mouse sequence, has a 20-amino acid leader sequence, 1 potential
N-glycosylation site, and 8 cysteine residues. Northern blot analysis
detected a 1.0-kb transcript in spinal cord, testis, and small
intestine, with less pronounced expression in prostate, colon mucosal
lining, and ovary. SDS-PAGE analysis determined that IL17B is expressed
as 23-, 22-, and 18-kD proteins under reducing conditions.
Size-exclusion analysis suggested that IL17B is a nondisulfide-linked
dimer.

GENE FUNCTION

Using BIAcore, flow cytometric, and Western blot analyses, Shi et al.
(2000) showed that IL17B bound with high affinity to IL17RB (605458),
but only poorly to IL17R. Analysis of cultured cells showed that IL17B,
in contrast to IL17, did not activate nuclear factor kappa-B (NFKB; see
164011) or induce production of cytokine message or protein.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Li et al. (2000) mapped the IL17B gene to
chromosome 5q32-q34. However, Shi et al. (2000) mapped the IL17B gene to
chromosome 6p21.2 using somatic cell hybrid and radiation hybrid
analysis

ANIMAL MODEL

Yamaguchi et al. (2007) used a mouse collagen-induced arthritis (CIA)
model to study the expression and effects of IL17 family members in
arthritis. They detected increased mRNA expression of Il17a, Il17b,
Il17c, Il17d (607587), Il17e (605658), and Il17f (606496) and of their
receptors, Il17ra and Il17rb, in the arthritic paws of CIA mice.
However, Il17a and Il17f were expressed in Cd4 (186940)-positive T
cells, whereas Il17b and Il17c were expressed in cartilage and other
cell populations. Mouse peritoneal cells stimulated with Il17a, Il17b,
Il17c, and Il17f produced Tnf (191160). Adoptive transfer of Il17b- and
Il17c-transduced Cd4-positive T cells exacerbated arthritis after CIA
induction. Treating CIA mice with antibody to IL17b suppressed arthritis
progression and bone destruction. Yamaguchi et al. (2007) concluded
that, in addition to IL17A, IL17B and IL17C also play an important role
in the pathogenesis of inflammatory arthritis.

REFERENCE 1. Li, H.; Chen, J.; Huang, A.; Stinson, J.; Heldens, S.; Foster,
J.; Dowd, P.; Gurney, A. L.; Wood, W. I.: Cloning and characterization
of IL-17B and IL-17C, two new members of the IL-17 cytokine family. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 773-778, 2000.

2. Shi, Y.; Ullrich, S. J.; Zhang, J.; Connolly, K.; Grzegorzewski,
K. J.; Barber, M. C.; Wang, W.; Wathen, K.; Hodge, V.; Fisher, C.
L.; Olsen, H.; Ruben, S. M.; Knyazev, I.; Cho, Y. H.; Kao, V.; Wilkinson,
K. A.; Carrell, J. A.; Ebner, R.: A novel cytokine receptor-ligand
pair: identification, molecular characterization, and in vivo immunomodulatory
activity. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 19167-19176, 2000.

3. Yamaguchi, Y.; Fujio, K.; Shoda, H.; Okamoto, A.; Tsuno, N. H.;
Takahashi, K.; Yamamoto, K.: IL-17B and IL-17C are associated with
TNF-alpha production and contribute to the exacerbation of inflammatory
arthritis. J. Immun. 179: 7128-7136, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/11/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/7/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/28/2000

EDITED mgross: 09/15/2008
terry: 9/11/2008
mgross: 12/7/2000
mgross: 2/28/2000

604895	TITLE *604895 T-BOX 21; TBX21
;;T-BOX EXPRESSED IN T CELLS; TBET
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Naive T helper (Th) cells differentiate into 2 subsets, Th1 and Th2,
each with distinct functions and cytokine profiles. TBX21 is a
Th1-specific T-box transcription factor that controls the expression of
the hallmark Th1 cytokine, interferon-gamma (IFNG; 147570) (Szabo et
al., 2000).

CLONING

Using a yeast 1-hybrid approach, Szabo et al. (2000) isolated clones
encoding murine Tbx21, which they called 'T-box expressed in T cells,'
or Tbet. The murine Tbx21 gene encodes a deduced 530-amino acid protein
containing a 189-amino acid T-box DNA-binding domain that shows homology
to murine Tbr1 (604616) and Xenopus eomesodermin (EOMES; 604615). The
authors subsequently cloned human TBX21, which encodes a 535-amino acid
protein that shares 88% amino acid identity with murine Tbx21. Northern
blot analysis detected TBX21 expression in lung, thymus, and spleen.

Zhang and Yang (2000) also cloned and characterized TBX21. Northern blot
analysis revealed expression of a 2.7-kb transcript in peripheral blood
leukocytes, spleen, and lung, as well as in NK cell lines. No expression
was detected in mouse embryonic tissue.

GENE FUNCTION

Szabo et al. (2000) showed that TBX21 expression correlates with IFNG
expression in Th1 and natural killer (NK) cells. Ectopic expression of
TBX21 both transactivated the IFNG gene and induced endogenous IFNG
production. Retroviral gene transduction of TBX21 into polarized Th2 and
Tc2 primary T cells redirected them into Th1 and Tc1 cells,
respectively, as evidenced by the simultaneous induction of IFNG and
repression of interleukin-4 (IL4; 147780) and interleukin-5 (IL5;
147850). Szabo et al. (2000) concluded that TBX21 initiates Th1 lineage
development from naive Th precursor cells both by activating Th1 genetic
programs and by repressing the opposing Th2 programs.

Differentiation of T helper cells into mature Th2 cells is associated
with chromatin remodeling of the IL4 and IL13 (147683) genes, whereas
differentiation into Th1 cells evokes chromatin remodeling of the IFNG
gene (Agarwal and Rao, 1998). Also, polarized Th2 cells do not express
IL12RB2 (601642) and therefore do not signal in response to IL12
(161560). However, Smits et al. (2001) found that anti-CD3/anti-CD28
stimulation of Th2 cells from either normal individuals or atopic
patients in the presence of IL12 restored IL12RB2 expression and
signaling. The change to a stable Th0/Th1 phenotype was accompanied by a
loss of GATA3 (131320) expression, a hallmark of the Th2 phenotype, and
the induction of TBX21 expression. Smits et al. (2001) proposed that the
human Th2 phenotype is less stable than that observed in the mouse and
that an IL12-promoting therapeutic approach might be beneficial for
Th2-mediated immune disorders.

Using real-time fluorogenic RT-PCR, Grogan et al. (2001) showed that
Tbet expression is optimal after stimulation with IL12 in wildtype but
not Stat4 (600558)-deficient mice.

Using RT-PCR, Mullen et al. (2001) showed that Tbet expression is
suppressed in the presence of IL4 and anti-IL12, but that Tbet is
expressed in the absence of IL12 and in the presence of anti-IL4.
Ectopic expression of Tbet restored Ifng expression in Stat4-deficient
cells, targeted the remodeling of the Ifng locus, and induced expression
of Il12rb2. Flow cytometric analysis showed that IL12 enhances and
prolongs Ifng expression in Tbet-differentiated Th1 cells through an
interaction with CREB-binding protein (see CREBBP; 600140). Mullen et
al. (2001) suggested that TBET is upstream of the STAT4 pathway. They
also proposed that cytokines may not induce differentiation of T helper
cells but may instead act as essential secondary stimuli that mediate
selective survival of a lineage.

Finotto et al. (2002) observed reduced expression of the T(H)1
transcription factor Tbet in T cells from airways of patients with
asthma compared with that in T cells from airways of nonasthmatic
patients, suggesting that loss of Tbet might be associated with asthma.

Tbet is a member of the T-box family of transcription factors that
appears to regulate lineage commitment in CD4 T helper cells in part by
activating the hallmark T(H)1 cytokine, IFN-gamma (147570). IFN-gamma is
also produced by NK cells and most prominently by CD8 cytotoxic T cells,
and is vital for the control of microbial pathogens. Although Tbet is
expressed in all these cell types, Szabo et al. (2002) demonstrated that
it is required for control of IFN-gamma production in CD4 and NK cells,
but not in CD8 cells. This difference is also apparent in the function
of these cell subsets. Thus, Szabo et al. (2002) concluded that the
regulation of a single cytokine, IFN-gamma, is controlled by distinct
transcriptional mechanisms within the T cell lineage. Szabo et al.
(2002) studied mice deficient in Tbet and established that Tbet is a
transcription factor required for T(H)1 lineage commitment.

Liu et al. (2003) noted that CpG dinucleotides have prophylactic and
therapeutic effects in allergies that have been associated with the
selective downregulation of IgE (147180 )and Th2 cytokine production in
mouse models and in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells from atopic
patients. CpG acts through TLR9 (605474), which is not expressed by T
cells. Liu et al. (2003) found that treatment of mouse splenocytes or
human B lymphocytes with CpG (ODN 2006) upregulated expression of TBET
in these cells by a mechanism dependent on TLR9 and independent of IFNG
and STAT1 (600555). CpG did not upregulate TBET in T cells. Using
specific inhibitors, the authors showed that TBET mRNA expression
required NFKB (see 164011), p38 (MAPK14; 600289), and IL12. Functional
analysis indicated that CpG completely inhibited IgE secretion induced
by IL4 and CD40 (109535) ligation and that IgG1 (147100) was severely
reduced. Liu et al. (2003) proposed that the K type of CpG (e.g., ODN
2006), which has a phosphorothioate backbone, may be a preferable
therapeutic CpG drug compared with the D type, which preferentially
stimulates IFNG and produces low levels of TNFA (191160), results
associated with inflammatory side effects.

Fields et al. (2002) noted that high levels of histone acetylation at
particular loci correlate with transcriptional activity, whereas reduced
levels correlate with silencing. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP), PCR, and green fluorescent protein analysis, they demonstrated
that histones in the cytokine loci (IFNG and IL4) of naive T cells are
unacetylated, but upon TCR stimulation, the loci are rapidly and
progressively acetylated on histones H3 and H4. The acetylation at the
IL4 locus occurs early, regardless of Th1/Th2 polarizing conditions,
correlating with early transcription. The maintenance of acetylation
depends on cytokine and STAT4 and STAT6 (601512) signaling and also on
the transactivator activity of TBET and GATA3, the putative 'master
regulators' of Th lineage determination.

Hwang et al. (2005) reported that TBET represses Th2 lineage commitment
through tyrosine kinase-mediated interaction between itself and GATA3
that interferes with the binding of GATA3 to its target DNA. Hwang et
al. (2005) concluded that their results provide a novel function for
tyrosine phosphorylation of a transcription factor in specifying
alternate fates of a common progenitor cell. Hwang et al. (2005) showed
that TBET phosphorylation is restricted to the TEC kinases ITK (186973)
and RLK (600058). Coexpression studies demonstrated that this was most
efficiently performed by ITK. In primary CD4 T cells isolated from ITK-,
RLK-, or double ITK/RLK-deficient mice, the greatest diminution of TBET
tyrosine phosphorylation was seen in the absence of ITK. Furthermore,
mutation of TBET at tyrosine residue 525, but not control tyrosine
residue 437, resulted in greatly reduced phosphorylation by ITK,
revealing that ITK phosphorylates TBET at residue Y525 after T cell
receptor stimulation.

Hohler et al. (2005) examined monozygotic (MZ) and dizygotic (DZ) twins
for cytokine production and transcription factors controlling Th1/Th2
differentiation and observed low intrapair variability in MZ compared
with DZ twins in expression of IFNG, TNF, and TBET. In contrast, MZ and
DZ twins were equally similar in terms of IL4 production and GATA3
expression. Hohler et al. (2005) proposed that Th1, but not Th2,
responses are genetically determined and that Th2-associated diseases in
humans may be due to genetic variations in Th1 cytokine regulation via
TBET.

Chen et al. (2006) noted that activated T cells, particularly Th1 cells,
express sialyl Lewis x, but resting T cells do not. Using reporter
analysis, they showed that TBET promoted and GATA3 repressed
transcription of FUT7 (602030), the rate-limiting enzyme for sialyl
Lewis x synthesis. TBET interfered with GATA3 binding to its target DNA,
but GATA3 also interfered with TBET binding to the FUT7 promoter. GATA3
regulated FUT7 transcription by recruiting, in a
phosphorylation-dependent manner, histone deacetylase-3 (HDAC3; 605166)
and HDAC5 (605315) and by competing with CBP/p300 (EP300; 602700) in
binding to the N terminus of TBET. Maximal expression of FUT7 and sialyl
Lewis x in T cells was obtained by ROG (ZBTB32; 605859)-mediated
suppression of GATA3. Chen et al. (2006) concluded that the GATA3/TBET
transcription factor complex regulates cell lineage-specific expression
of lymphocyte homing receptors and that glycoconjugates are regulated by
this complex to attain cell lineage-specific expression in Th1 and Th2
lymphocyte subsets.

Intlekofer et al. (2008) demonstrated that CD8+ T cells deficient in the
transcription factors Tbet and eomesodermin (Eomes) (604615) fail to
differentiate into functional killers required for defense against
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus. Instead, virus-specific CD8+ T cells
lacking both Tbet and Eomes differentiated into an interleukin-17 (IL17;
603149)-secreting lineage, reminiscent of the helper T cell fate that
has been implicated in autoimmunity and extracellular microbial defense.
Upon viral infection, mice with T cells lacking both Tbet and Eomes
develop a CD8+ T cell-dependent, progressive inflammatory and wasting
syndrome characterized by multiorgan infiltration of neutrophils.
Intlekofer et al. (2008) concluded that Tbet and Eomes ensure that CD8+
T cells adopt an appropriate course of intracellular rather than
extracellular destruction.

CD4+ T helper cells that selectively produce interleukin-17 (Th17) are
critical for host defense and immunity. Ghoreschi et al. (2010) showed
that Th17 differentiation can occur in the absence of TGF-beta (190180)
signaling. Neither IL6 (147620) nor IL23 (see 605580) alone efficiently
generated Th17 cells; however, these cytokines in combination with
IL1-beta (147720) effectively induced IL17 production in naive
precursors, independently of TGF-beta. Epigenetic modification of the
IL17A (603149), IL17F (606496), and RORC (602943) promoters proceeded
without TGF-beta-1, allowing the generation of cells that coexpressed
ROR-gamma-t (encoded by RORC) and Tbet. Tbet+ROR-gamma-t+Th17 cells are
generated in vivo during experimental allergic encephalomyelitis, and
adoptively transferred Th17 cells generated with IL23 without TGF-beta-1
were pathogenic in this disease model. Ghoreschi et al. (2010) concluded
that their data indicated an alternative mode for Th17 differentiation,
and that, consistent with genetic data linking IL23R (607562) with
autoimmunity, their findings reemphasized the importance of IL23 and
therefore may have therapeutic implications.

Paley et al. (2012) found that 2 distinct states of virus-specific CD8+
T cells exist in chronically infected mice and humans. Differential
expression of the T-box transcription factors Tbet and Eomesodermin
(Eomes) facilitated the cooperative maintenance of the pool of antiviral
CD8+ T cells during chronic viral infection. Tbet(hi) cells displayed
low intrinsic turnover but proliferated in response to persisting
antigen, giving rise to Eomes(hi) terminal progeny. Genetic elimination
of either subset resulted in failure to control chronic infection, which
suggested that an imbalance in differentiation and renewal could
underlie the collapse of immunity in humans with chronic infections.

Klose et al. (2013) provided evidence that the transcription factor Tbet
determines the fate of a distinct lineage of CCR6 (601835)-negative
ROR-gamma-t (602943)-positive innate lymphoid cells (ILCs). Postnatally
emerging CCR6-ROR-gamma-t+ ILCs upregulated Tbet, and this was
controlled by cues from the commensal microbiota and IL23 (605580). In
contrast, CCR6+ROR-gamma-t+ ILCs, which arise earlier during ontogeny,
did not express Tbet. Tbet instructed the expression of Tbet target
genes such as interferon-gamma (147570) and of the natural cytotoxicity
receptor NKp46 (604530). Mice genetically lacking Tbet showed normal
development of CCR6-ROR-gamma-t innate lymphoid cells, but these cells
could not differentiate into NKp46-expressing ROR-gamma-t+ ILCs (i.e.,
IL22 (605330)-producing natural killer cells) and failed to produce
interferon-gamma. The production of interferon-gamma by Tbet-expressing
CCR6-ROR-gamma-t+ ILCs was essential for the release of mucus-forming
glycoproteins required to protect the epithelial barrier against
Salmonella enterica infection. Klose et al. (2013) concluded that
coexpression of Tbet and ROR-gamma-t, which is also found in subsets of
IL17-producing T-helper cells, may be an evolutionarily conserved
transcriptional program that originally developed as part of the innate
defense against infections but that also confers an increased risk of
immune-mediated pathology.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhang and Yang (2000) determined by genomic sequence analysis that the
mouse and human TBX21 genes contain 6 exons.

MAPPING

Zhang and Yang (2000) mapped the mouse Tbx21 gene to chromosome 11D in
an area showing homology of synteny with human chromosome 17.

ANIMAL MODEL

Finotto et al. (2002) generated mice lacking the Tbet gene by targeted
disruption. Heterozygous or homozygous knockout mice exhibited airway
hyperresponsiveness in response to methacholine. Tbet homozygous
knockout mice showed peribronchial and perivenular infiltration with
eosinophils and lymphocytes compared with wildtype littermates. Tbet
heterozygotes, which display only 50% reduction of Tbet protein
expression, displayed a phenotype very similar to that of mice with a
complete absence of Tbet. Tbet heterozygotes and homozygote knockout
mice also demonstrated thickening of the airway subbasement membrane
collagen layer as well as increased expression of some cytokines.
However, the asthma-like phenotype in these mice was independent of
allergen exposure and was not altered by allergen exposure. Finotto et
al. (2002) concluded that mice with a targeted deletion of the Tbet gene
and severe combined immunodeficient mice receiving CD4(+) cells from
Tbet knockout mice spontaneously demonstrated multiple physiologic and
inflammatory features characteristic of asthma.

By replacing the C terminus of Tbet, which contains the trans-activation
domain, with the repression domain of the Drosophila 'engrailed' protein
(see 131290), Mullen et al. (2002) generated a dominant-negative (DN)
Tbet cDNA. Introduction of DN Tbet into cells developing under
Th1-inducing conditions, but not into mature Th1 cells, substantially
inhibited their capacity to express Ifng and resulted in defective
persistence of hypersensitivity site I chromatin within Ifng. Levels of
Il12rb2, however, were reduced in both developing and mature Th1 cells
by DN Tbet. Screening for homeobox factors expressed in Th1 cells by
oligonucleotide array and RT-PCR analysis determined that only Hlx
(142995) is expressed at higher levels in Th1 lymphocytes than in Th2
lymphocytes. Hlx appeared at a slower rate than Tbet and could be
induced by Tbet. Ectopic expression in Stat4 -/- Th2-like cells of both
Tbet and Hlx allowed maximal and synergistic expression of Ifng in these
cells. Introduction of DN Tbet into mature Th1 cells inhibited the
expression of Hlx.

Svensson et al. (2005) noted that both Il15 (600554) -/- mice, which
lack NK and NKT cells, and Ifng -/- mice are highly susceptible to
genital herpes simplex virus (HSV)-2 infection. CD4-positive T cells and
IFNG are the most important components of acquired immunity to genital
HSV-2 infection, and impaired HSV-2-specific IFNG responses in humans
correlate with recurrent clinical disease. Svensson et al. (2005)
vaginally infected Tbet -/- mice with HSV-2. Tbet -/- mice had increased
vaginal and spinal cord viral titers, more severe disease, shorter time
to death, reduced NK-cell activity, impaired Ifng production, lower
specific antibody production, and fewer splenic B cells compared with
wildtype mice. These differences were even more marked in mice first
vaccinated with an attenuated HSV-2 strain and then challenged with
virulent HSV-2. However, CD8-positive T cell-mediated cytotoxicity was
actually stronger in Tbet -/- mice compared with wildtype mice. Svensson
et al. (2005) concluded that TBET is important in both innate defense
and for generation of protective Th1 immunity against genital HSV-2
infection, primarily through its control of NK and CD4-positive T-cell
function.

Ravindran et al. (2005) noted that Tbet-deficient mice resolve infection
with the intracellular pathogen Listeria monocytogenes despite having
only small numbers of Cd4-positive Ifng-producing T cells. In contrast,
they found that challenge of Tbet -/- mice with an attenuated Salmonella
strain resulted in death of most mice in less than a month. Tbet -/-
mice failed to produce Ifng and to switch immunoglobulin isotypes.
Spleen cells of infected Tbet -/- mice did not produce Ifng, but they
did secrete increased levels of Il10 (124092), but not Il4. Ravindran et
al. (2005) concluded that CD4-positive T cells expressing TBET are
required for development of Salmonella-specific Th1 cells, regulation of
IL10 production, and resistance to Salmonella infection.

Using immunohistochemical analysis, Wang et al. (2006) found expression
of TBET in inflammatory infiltrates of human synovial tissue from
patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA; 180300). Tbet -/- mice with the
collagen antibody-induced arthritis model of RA had markedly reduced
joint inflammation at both early and late time points. Mice lacking both
Rag2 (179616) and Tbet were resistant to disease. However, adoptive
transfer of dendritic cells expressing Tbet reconstituted inflammation
in both Tbet -/- and Tbet -/- Rag2 -/- mice. Wang et al. (2006)
concluded that TBET has a vital role in DCs that links innate and
adaptive immunity to regulate inflammatory responses.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ASTHMA, ASPIRIN-INDUCED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
ASTHMA AND NASAL POLYPS, INCLUDED
TBX21, -1993T-C

Akahoshi et al. (2005) identified a -1993T-C SNP in the promoter region
of the TBX21 gene and found that the substitution increases the affinity
of an unknown nuclear protein for the binding site in that region,
resulting in increased transcriptional activity of the TBX21 gene. There
was a significant association between the promoter SNP and
aspirin-induced asthma (see 208550) in a Japanese cohort (p = 0.004),
with increased risk associated with a C allele (OR = 1.93; 95% CI,
1.22-3.06). The association was confirmed in additional independent
samples from patients with asthma and nasal polyposis (see 208550)
regardless of aspirin hypersensitivity (p = 0.008).

REFERENCE 1. Agarwal, S.; Rao, A.: Modulation of chromatin structure regulates
cytokine gene expression during T cell differentiation. Immunity 9:
765-775, 1998.

2. Akahoshi, M.; Obara, K.; Hirota, T.; Matsuda, A.; Hasegawa, K.;
Takahashi, N.; Shimizu, M.; Nakashima, K.; Cheng, L.; Doi, S.; Fujiwara,
H.; Miyatake, A.; and 10 others: Functional promoter polymorphism
in the TBX21 gene associated with aspirin-induced asthma. Hum. Genet. 117:
16-26, 2005.

3. Chen, G.-Y.; Osada, H.; Santamaria-Babi, L. F.; Kannagi, R.: Interaction
of GATA-3/T-bet transcription factors regulates expression of sialyl
Lewis X homing receptors on Th1/Th2 lymphocytes. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 103: 16894-16899, 2006.

4. Fields, P. E.; Kim, S. T.; Flavell, R. A.: Cutting edge: changes
in histone acetylation at the IL-4 and IFN-gamma loci accompany Th1/Th2
differentiation. J. Immun. 169: 647-650, 2002.

5. Finotto, S.; Neurath, M. F.; Glickman, J. N.; Qin, S.; Lehr, H.
A.; Green, F. H. Y.; Ackerman, K.; Haley, K.; Galle, P. R.; Szabo,
S. J.; Drazen, J. M.; De Sanctis, G. T.; Glimcher, L. H.: Development
of spontaneous airway changes consistent with human asthma in mice
lacking T-bet. Science 295: 336-338, 2002.

6. Ghoreschi, K.; Laurence, A.; Yang, X.-P.; Tato, C. M.; McGeachy,
M. J.; Konkel, J. E.; Ramos, H. L.; Wei, L.; Davidson, T. S.; Bouladoux,
N.; Grainger, J. R.; Chen, Q.; and 9 others: Generation of pathogenic
T(H)17 cells in the absence of TGF-beta signalling. Nature 467:
967-971, 2010.

7. Grogan, J. L.; Mohrs, M.; Harmon, B.; Lacy, D. A.; Sedat, J. W.;
Locksley, R. M.: Early transcription and silencing of cytokine genes
underlie polarization of T helper cell subsets. Immunity 14: 205-215,
2001.

8. Hohler, T.; Reuss, E.; Adams, P.; Bartsch, B.; Weigmann, B.; Worns,
M.; Galle, P. R.; Victor, A.; Neurath, M. F.: A genetic basis for
IFN-gamma production and T-bet expression in humans. J. Immun. 175:
5457-5462, 2005.

9. Hwang, E. S.; Szabo, S. J.; Schwartzberg, P. L.; Glimcher, L. H.
: T helper cell fate specified by kinase-mediated interaction of T-bet
with GATA-3. Science 307: 430-433, 2005.

10. Intlekofer, A. M.; Banerjee, A.; Takemoto, N.; Gordon, S. M.;
DeJong, C. S.; Shin, H.; Hunter, C. A.; Wherry, E. J.; Lindsten, T.;
Reiner, S. L.: Anomalous type 17 response to viral infection by CD8+
T cells lacking T-bet and eomesodermin. Science 321: 408-411, 2008.

11. Klose, C. S. N.; Kiss, E. A.; Schwierzeck, V.; Ebert, K.; Hoyler,
T.; d'Hargues, Y.; Goppert, N.; Croxford, A. L.; Waisman, A.; Tanriver,
Y.; Diefenbach, A.: A T-bet gradient controls the fate and function
of CCR6(-)ROR-gamma-t(+) innate lymphoid cells. Nature 494: 261-265,
2013.

12. Liu, N.; Ohnishi, N.; Ni, L.; Akira, S.; Bacon, K. B.: CpG directly
induces T-bet expression and inhibits Ig-gamma-1 and Ig-epsilon switching
in B cells. Nature Immun. 4: 687-693, 2003.

13. Mullen, A. C.; High, F. A.; Hutchins, A. S.; Lee, H. W.; Villarino,
A. V.; Livingston, D. M.; Kung, A. L.; Cereb, N.; Yao, T.-P.; Yang,
S. Y.; Reiner, S. L.: Role of T-bet in commitment of T(H)1 cells
before IL-12-dependent selection. Science 292: 1907-1910, 2001.

14. Mullen, A. C.; Hutchins, A. S.; High, F. A.; Lee, H. W.; Sykes,
K. J.; Chodosh, L. A.; Reiner, S. L.: Hlx is induced by and genetically
interacts with T-bet to promote heritable T(H)1 gene induction. Nature
Immun. 3: 652-658, 2002.

15. Paley, M. A.; Kroy, D. C.; Odorizzi, P. M.; Johnnidis, J. B.;
Dolfi, D. V.; Barnett, B. E.; Bikoff, E. K.; Robertson, E. J.; Lauer,
G. M.; Reiner, S. L.; Wherry, E. J.: Progenitor and terminal subsets
of CD8+ T cells cooperate to contain chronic viral infection. Science 338:
1220-1225, 2012.

16. Ravindran, R.; Foley, J.; Stoklasek, T.; Glimcher, L. H.; McSorley,
S. J.: Expression of T-bet by CD4 T cells is essential for resistance
to Salmonella infection. J. Immun. 174: 4603-4610, 2005.

17. Smits, H. H.; van Rietschoten, J. G. I.; Hilkens, C. M. U.; Sayilir,
R.; Stiekema, F.; Kapsenberg, M. L.; Wierenga, E. A.: IL-12-induced
reversal of human Th2 cells is accompanied by full restoration of
IL-12 responsiveness and loss of GATA-3 expression. Europ. J. Immun. 31:
1055-1065, 2001.

18. Svensson, A.; Nordstrom, I.; Sun, J.-B.; Eriksson, K.: Protective
immunity to genital herpes simpex (sic) virus type 2 infection is
mediated by T-bet. J. Immun. 174: 6266-6273, 2005.

19. Szabo, S. J.; Kim, S. T.; Costa, G. L.; Zhang, X.; Fathman, C.
G.; Glimcher, L. H.: A novel transcription factor, T-bet, directs
Th1 lineage commitment. Cell 100: 655-669, 2000.

20. Szabo, S. J.; Sullivan, B. M.; Stemmann, C.; Satoskar, A. R.;
Sleckman, B. P.; Glimcher, L. H.: Distinct effects of T-bet in T(H)1
lineage commitment and IFN-gamma production in CD4 and CD8 T cells. Science 295:
338-342, 2002.

21. Wang, J.; Fathman, J. W.; Lugo-Villarino, G.; Scimone, L.; von
Andrian, U.; Dorfman, D. M.; Glimcher, L. H.: Transcription factor
T-bet regulates inflammatory arthritis through its function in dendritic
cells. J. Clin. Invest. 116: 414-421, 2006.

22. Zhang, W.; Yang, S. Y.: Cloning and characterization of a new
member of the T-box gene family. Genomics 70: 41-48, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/26/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/14/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/4/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/13/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/16/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/2/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/1/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/2/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/8/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/2/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/5/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/5/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/11/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/17/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/13/2001

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 4/28/2000

EDITED alopez: 03/05/2013
alopez: 3/5/2013
terry: 2/26/2013
alopez: 1/16/2013
terry: 1/14/2013
alopez: 1/4/2011
alopez: 8/18/2008
terry: 8/13/2008
mgross: 1/16/2007
mgross: 10/2/2006
mgross: 9/28/2006
terry: 9/1/2006
mgross: 8/29/2006
mgross: 8/28/2006
terry: 8/2/2006
wwang: 10/27/2005
wwang: 7/8/2005
alopez: 2/22/2005
terry: 2/2/2005
cwells: 8/5/2003
alopez: 7/29/2003
mgross: 6/5/2003
alopez: 7/26/2002
mgross: 6/11/2002
carol: 2/22/2002
alopez: 1/22/2002
terry: 1/17/2002
mgross: 6/13/2001
mgross: 4/28/2000

604386	TITLE *604386 ZINC FINGER TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR TRPS1; TRPS1
;;TRPS1 GENE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TRPS1 is a zinc finger transcriptional repressor involved in the
regulation of chondrocyte and perichondrium development (Napierala et
al., 2008).

CLONING

Momeni et al. (2000) positionally cloned a gene that spanned the
chromosomal breakpoint in 2 patients with trichorhinophalangeal syndrome
type I (TRPS I; 190350) and was deleted in 5 patients with TRPS I
associated with an interstitial deletion. Northern blot analyses
revealed transcripts of 7 and 10.5 kb. The gene, designated TRPS1,
encodes a polypeptide of 1,281 amino acids. The predicted protein
sequence has 2 potential nuclear localization signals (LRRRRG and
RRRTRKR) and an unusual combination of different zinc finger motifs,
including IKAROS-like (see 603023) and GATA-binding (see 600576)
sequences. Kaiser et al. (2004) presented evidence that only one of the
basic amino acid sequences, the RRRTRKR motif (amino acids 946-952),
acts as a nuclear localization signal.

GENE STRUCTURE

Momeni et al. (2000) determined that the TRPS1 gene contains 7 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Momeni et al. (2000) mapped the TRPS1 gene
to chromosome 8q24.

GENE FUNCTION

Kaiser et al. (2003) found that 2 distinct regions of the nuclear
transcription factor TRPS1 can physically interact with the dynein light
chain protein DNCL1 (601562). Region A covers 89 amino acids (635-723),
spanning 3 potential C2H2 zinc finger structures, and region B covers
the 100 most C-terminal amino acids (1182-1281) containing the
IKAROS-like motif. DNCL1 colocalized with TRPS1 in dot-like structures
in the cell nucleus. An electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that
the interaction of DNCL1 and TRPS1 lowered the binding of TRPS1 to the
GATA consensus sequence. In addition, a GATA-regulated reporter gene
assay indicated that DNCL1 could suppress the transcriptional repression
activity of TRPS1.

Radvanyi et al. (2005) performed a comprehensive differential gene
expression screen on a panel of 54 breast tumors and more than 200
normal tissue samples and identified 15 genes specifically overexpressed
in breast cancer, of which one of the most prevalent was TRPS1. The
microarray findings were confirmed by in situ hybridization as well as
immunoblot and immunofluorescence analysis of breast tumor cell lines.
Immunohistochemistry analysis found TRPS1 protein expressed in greater
than 90% of early- and late-stage breast cancer, including ductal
carcinoma in situ and invasive ductal, lobular, and papillary
carcinomas.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Momeni et al. (2000) identified 6 different nonsense mutations in the
TRPS1 gene (604386.0001-604386.0006) in 10 unrelated patients with
trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type I (TRPS1; 190350). The findings
suggested that haploinsufficiency for this putative transcription factor
causes TRPS I.

To investigate whether trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type III (190351)
is caused by TRPS1 mutations and to establish a genotype-phenotype
correlation in TRPS, Ludecke et al. (2001) performed extensive mutation
analysis and evaluated height and degree of brachydactyly in patients
with TRPS I or TRPS III. They found 35 different mutations in 44 of 51
unrelated patients. The detection rate (86%) indicated that TRPS1 is the
major locus for TRPS I and TRPS III. They found no mutation in the
parents of sporadic patients or in apparently healthy relatives of
familial patients, indicating complete penetrance of TRPS1 mutations.
Evaluation of skeletal abnormalities of patients with TRPS1 mutations
revealed a wide clinical spectrum. The phenotype was variable in
unrelated, age- and sex-matched patients with identical mutations, as
well as in families. Four of the 5 missense mutations altered the GATA
DNA-binding zinc finger, and 6 of the 7 unrelated patients with these
mutations could be classified as having TRPS III, because they had
severe brachydactyly, due to short metacarpals, and severe short
stature. The data indicated that TRPS III is at the severe end of the
TRPS spectrum and that it is most often caused by a specific class of
mutations in exon 6 the TRPS1 gene. In the study of Ludecke et al.
(2001), 5 mutations were recurrent, and 4 of these were identified in
patients of different ethnicities: 1 in patients of Norwegian, Turkish,
and Belgian extraction, and another in patients of Belgian, Turkish, and
Japanese extraction, for example.

Kobayashi et al. (2002) identified a missense mutation in exon 6 of the
TRPS1 gene (604386.0009) in type III TRPS, reinforcing the conclusion of
Ludecke et al. (2001).

In cases of type III TRPS, Hilton et al. (2002) found 2 missense
mutations in the GATA DNA-binding zinc finger: R908Q (now R921Q;
604386.0009), a recurrent mutation, and A919V (now A932V; 604386.0010),
a de novo mutation.

In cases of type I TRPS, Kaiser et al. (2004) identified the first 2
missense mutations that do not affect the GATA zinc finger
(604386.0011-604386.0012).

Ludecke et al. (1995) presented evidence that the trichorhinophalangeal
syndrome type II, or Langer-Giedion syndrome (150230), is a contiguous
gene syndrome due to loss of functional copies of both the TRPS1 and
EXT1 (608177) genes.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Investigations have demonstrated that most patients with nonsense
mutations in the TRPS1 gene have the less severe TRPS type I phenotype
(Momeni et al., 2000; Hatamura et al., 2001), while patients with
missense mutations in the GATA-type zinc-finger region of the TRPS1 gene
have the more severe TRPS type III phenotype (Ludecke et al., 2001;
Hilton et al., 2002). Piccione et al. (2009) presented evidence
supporting this hypothesis. They reported 2 unrelated patients with TRPS
types I and III who had heterozygous nonsense and missense mutations,
respectively, in the TRPS1 gene. The patient with type I TRPS had
haploinsufficiency of TRPS1, whereas the patient with type III TRPS had
an allele causing functional modification of the GATA-type motif,
possibly inducing a dominant-negative effect on DNA transcription
regulation and leading to a more severe phenotype.

CYTOGENETICS

Fantauzzo et al. (2008) analyzed the cytogenetic breakpoints of 3
patients with hypertrichosis universalis congenita, Ambras type (HTC1;
145701), including patients ME-1 and SS-1, originally reported by
Baumeister et al. (1993) and Balducci et al. (1998), respectively. They
identified a pericentric inversion in chromosome 8q23.1 that lies 7.3 Mb
downstream of the TRPS1 gene in patient ME-1, a 6.7-Mb deletion that
encompasses the TRPS1 gene in patient SS-1, and a 1.5-Mb deletion in
chromosome 8q24.1 that lies 2.1 Mb upstream of the TRPS1 gene in patient
BN-1. There was no overlap between the breakpoints in the 3 patients, so
the authors defined the entire 11.5-Mb interval between markers RH62506
and D8S269 containing 20 genes, including the TRPS1 gene, as the
candidate interval. Southern blot analysis was suggestive of deletion of
TRPS1 in patient SS-1, and no RNA was available for patient BN-1.
Quantitative RT-PCR demonstrated significant downregulation of TRPS1 in
patient ME-1, suggesting that the inversion breakpoint 7.3 Mb downstream
from the TRPS1 gene reduced expression, consistent with a position
effect. Fantauzzo et al. (2008) suggested that position effect causing
downregulation of TRPS1 expression is the probable cause of
hypertrichosis in Ambras syndrome.

ANIMAL MODEL

Malik et al. (2002) reported that mice heterozygous for deletion of the
DNA-binding GATA domain of Trps1 (delta-GT mutation) displayed facial
anomalies that overlapped with findings for TRPS, whereas mice
homozygous for the delta-GT mutation additionally showed a complete
absence of vibrissae. Unexpectedly, homozygous delta-GT mice died of
neonatal respiratory failure resulting from abnormalities of the
thoracic spine and ribs. Delta-GT heterozygotes also developed thoracic
kyphoscoliosis with age and had structural deficits in cortical and
trabecular bones. The findings directly implicated the GATA-type zinc
finger of TRPS1 in regulation of bone and hair development and suggested
that skeletal abnormalities emphasized in descriptions of TRPS are only
the extreme manifestations of a generalized bone dysplasia.

Napierala et al. (2008) found that mice homozygous for the Trps1
delta-GT mutation showed elongation of the growth plate due to delayed
chondrocyte differentiation and abnormal mineralization of
perichondrium. These abnormalities were accompanied by increased Runx2
(600211) and Ihh (600726) expression and increased Ihh signaling.
Cotransfection experiments showed that wildtype Trps1 bound Runx2 and
repressed Runx2-mediated activation of a reporter plasmid. Double
heterozygosity for Trps1 delta-GT and a Runx2-null mutation rescued the
opposite growth plate phenotypes found in single mutants. Napierala et
al. (2008) concluded that TRPS1 and RUNX2 interact to regulate
chondrocyte and perichondrium development.

Fantauzzo et al. (2008) analyzed koala ('Koa') mice, which represent a
mouse model of hypertrichosis and have a semidominant, radiation-induced
chromosomal inversion near the mouse ortholog of Trps1, and found that
the proximal breakpoint of the Koa inversion is located 791 kb upstream
of the Trps1 gene. Quantitative RT-PCR, in situ hybridization, and
immunofluorescence analysis revealed that Trps1 expression levels are
reduced in Koa mutant mice at the sites of pathology for the phenotype,
including muzzle and dorsal skin and cells surrounding the developing
vibrissae follicles. Fantauzzo et al. (2008) determined that the Koa
inversion created a new Sp1 binding site and translocated additional Sp1
binding sites within a highly conserved stretch spanning the proximal
breakpoint, providing a potential mechanism for a position effect.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
TRICHORHINOPHALANGEAL SYNDROME, TYPE I
TRPS1, CYS351TER

Based on a renumbering of the TRPS1 gene sequence, the mutation
originally referred to as CYS338TER (C338X) has been changed to
CYS351TER (C351X).

In a familial case of type I TRPS (190350), Momeni et al. (2000)
described a 1014C-A transversion in exon 4 of the TRPS1 gene, causing a
nonsense mutation, cys338 to ter.

.0002
TRICHORHINOPHALANGEAL SYNDROME, TYPE I
TRPS1, ARG624TER

Based on a renumbering of the TRPS1 gene sequence, the mutation
originally referred to as ARG611TER (R611X) has been changed to
ARG624TER (R624X).

In a familial case of type I TRPS (190350), Momeni et al. (2000) found
an 1831C-T transition in exon 4 of the TRPS1 gene, causing a nonsense
mutation, arg611 to ter.

.0003
TRICHORHINOPHALANGEAL SYNDROME, TYPE I
TRPS1, 1-BP INS, 2406G

In a familial case of type I TRPS (190350), Momeni et al. (2000) found
insertion of a single guanine between nucleotides 2406 and 2407 in exon
5 of the TRPS1 gene, causing frameshift from codon 803.

.0004
TRICHORHINOPHALANGEAL SYNDROME, TYPE I
TRPS1, 1-BP INS, 2441T

In a sporadic case of type I TRPS (190350), Momeni et al. (2000) found
insertion of a T between nucleotides 2441 and 2442 in exon 5 of the
TRPS1 gene, causing frameshift from codon 814.

.0005
TRICHORHINOPHALANGEAL SYNDROME, TYPE I
TRPS1, ARG853TER

Based on a renumbering of the TRPS1 gene sequence, the mutation
originally referred to as ARG840TER (R840X) has been changed to
ARG853TER (R853X).

In a sporadic case of type I TRPS (190350), Momeni et al. (2000) found a
2518C-T transition in exon 5 of the TRPS1 gene, causing a nonsense
mutation, arg840 to ter.

.0006
TRICHORHINOPHALANGEAL SYNDROME, TYPE I
TRPS1, 4-BP INS, 3360GGAG

In a sporadic case of type I TRPS (190350), Momeni et al. (2000) found
an insertion of 4 bases (GGAG) between nucleotides 3360 and 3361 in exon
7 of the TRPS1 gene, causing frameshift from codon 1121.

.0007
TRICHORHINOPHALANGEAL SYNDROME, TYPE III
TRPS1, THR914PRO

Based on a renumbering of the TRPS1 gene sequence, the mutation
originally referred to as THR901PRO (T901P) has been changed to
THR914PRO (T914P).

In a patient with TRPS III (190351), who was the most severely affected
patient in their study, Ludecke et al. (2001) found a thr901-to-pro
missense mutation in the TRPS1 gene, which was expected to disrupt the
beta-sheet structure of the GATA DNA-binding zinc finger domain and to
alter the shape of the entire zinc finger.

.0008
TRICHORHINOPHALANGEAL SYNDROME, TYPE I
TRPS1, TYR1105TER

Based on a renumbering of the TRPS1 gene sequence, the mutation
originally referred to as TYR1092TER (Y1092X) has been changed to
TYR1105TER (Y1105X).

Hatamura et al. (2001) described a tyr1092-to-ter (Y1092X) nonsense
mutation due to a heterozygous C-to-G transversion in the TRPS1 gene in
a Japanese family with type I trichorhinophalangeal syndrome (190350).
The 40-year-old mother and all 3 of her children had thin sparse hair
with recessed frontotemporo-occipital hairlines. Short stature, short
arm span, facial deformity with bulbous nose and flat broad philtrum,
and clinobrachydactyly of the fingers and toes were noted in all cases.
Radiographs of the children showed brachymesophalangy associated with
cone-shaped epiphyses in hands and feet.

.0009
TRICHORHINOPHALANGEAL SYNDROME, TYPE III
TRPS1, ARG921GLN

Based on a renumbering of the TRPS1 gene sequence, the mutation
originally referred to as ARG908GLN (R908Q) has been changed to
ARG921GLN (R921Q).

Kobayashi et al. (2002) reported a Japanese family in which
trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type III (190351) segregated with a
2723G-A substitution in exon 6 of the TRPS1 gene, resulting in an
arg908-to-gln (R908Q) missense mutation. The proposita was a 59-year-old
woman with short stature, thin and slow-growing hair, and brachydactyly.
Her father and 2 elder sisters likewise had this disorder. She was 138
cm tall, and one of her affected sisters, aged 66 years, was 130 cm
tall. Both were of normal intelligence.

.0010
TRICHORHINOPHALANGEAL SYNDROME, TYPE III
TRPS1, ALA932VAL

Based on a renumbering of the TRPS1 gene sequence, the mutation
originally referred to as ALA919VAL (A919V) has been changed to
ALA932VAL (A932V).

In a case of type III trichorhinophalangeal syndrome (190351), Hilton et
al. (2002) found a C-to-T transition at position 2756 in exon 6, causing
an ala919-to-val (A919V) amino acid substitution in the GATA DNA-binding
zinc finger.

.0011
TRICHORHINOPHALANGEAL SYNDROME, TYPE I
TRPS1, ARG965CYS

Based on a renumbering of the TRPS1 gene sequence, the mutation
originally referred to as ARG952CYS (R952C) has been changed to
ARG965CYS (R965C).

In a father and daughter from Portugal with TRPS I (190350), Kaiser et
al. (2004) identified heterozygosity for a 2854C-T transition in the
TRPS1 gene, resulting in an arg952-to-cys (R952C) substitution. The
mutation prevents the transport of the TRPS1 protein into the nucleus
and thus reduces the nuclear TRPS1 concentration, consistent with
haploinsufficiency.

.0012
TRICHORHINOPHALANGEAL SYNDROME, TYPE I
TRPS1, ARG952HIS

Based on a renumbering of the TRPS1 gene sequence, the mutation
originally referred to as ARG952HIS (R952H) has been changed to
ARG965HIS (R965H).

In a woman from Switzerland and in affected members of 4 generations of
a U.S. family with TRPS I (190350), Kaiser et al. (2004) identified
heterozygosity for a 2855G-A transition in the TRPS1 gene, resulting in
an arg952-to-his (R952H) substitution. The mutation prevents the
transport of the TRPS1 protein into the nucleus and thus reduces the
nuclear TRPS1 concentration, consistent with haploinsufficiency.

REFERENCE 1. Balducci, R.; Toscano, V.; Tedeschi, B.; Mangiantini, A.; Toscano,
R.; Galasso, C.; Cianfarani, S.; Boscherini, B.: A new case of Ambras
syndrome associated with a paracentric inversion(8)(q12;q22). Clin.
Genet. 53: 466-468, 1998.

2. Baumeister, F. A. M.; Egger, J.; Schildhauer, M. T.; Stengel-Rutkowski,
S.: Ambras syndrome: delineation of a unique hypertrichosis universalis
congenita and association with a balanced pericentric inversion (8)(p11.2;q22). Clin.
Genet. 44: 121-128, 1993.

3. Fantauzzo, K. A.; Tadin-Strapps, M.; You, Y.; Mentzer, S. E.; Baumeister,
F. A. M.; Cianfarani, S.; Van Maldergem, L.; Warburton, D.; Sundberg,
J. P.; Christiano, A. M.: A position effect on TRPS1 is associated
with Ambras syndrome in humans and the Koala phenotype in mice. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 17: 3539-3551, 2008.

4. Hatamura, I.; Kanauchi, Y.; Takahara, M.; Fujiwara, M.; Muragaki,
Y.; Ooshima, A.; Ogino, T.: A nonsense mutation in TRPS1 in a Japanese
family with tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome type I. (Letter) Clin.
Genet. 59: 366-367, 2001.

5. Hilton, M. J.; Sawyer, J. M.; Gutierrez, L.; Hogart, A.; Kung,
T. C.; Wells, D. E.: Analysis of novel and recurrent mutations responsible
for the tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndromes. J. Hum. Genet. 47: 103-106,
2002.

6. Kaiser, F. J.; Brega, P.; Raff, M. L.; Byers, P. H.; Gallati, S.;
Kay, T. T.; de Almeida, S.; Horsthemke, B.; Ludecke, H.-J.: Novel
missense mutations in the TRPS1 transcription factor define the nuclear
localization signal. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 12: 121-126, 2004.

7. Kaiser, F. J.; Tavassoli, K.; Van den Bemd, G.-J.; Chang, G. T.
G.; Horsthemke, B.; Moroy, T.; Ludecke, H.-J.: Nuclear interaction
of the dynein light chain LC8a with the TRPS1 transcription factor
suppresses the transcriptional repression activity of TRPS1. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12: 1349-1358, 2003.

8. Kobayashi, H.; Hino, M.; Shimodahira, M.; Iwakura, T.; Ishihara,
T.; Ikekubo, K.; Ogawa, Y.; Nakao, K.; Kurahachi, H.: Missense mutation
of TRPS1 in a family of tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome type III. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 107: 26-29, 2002.

9. Ludecke, H.-J.; Schaper, J.; Meinecke, P.; Momeni, P.; Gross, S.;
von Holtum, D.; Hirche, H.; Abramowicz, M. J.; Albrecht, B.; Apacik,
C.; Christen, H.-J.; Claussen, U.; and 28 others: Genotypic and
phenotypic spectrum in tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome types I and
III. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68: 81-91, 2001.

10. Ludecke, H.-J.; Wagner, M. J.; Nardmann, J.; La Pillo, B.; Parrish,
J. E.; Willems, P. J.; Haan, E. A.; Frydman, M.; Hamers, G. J. H.;
Wells, D. E.; Horsthemke, B.: Molecular dissection of a contiguous
gene syndrome: localization of the genes involved in the Langer-Giedion
syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 31-36, 1995.

11. Malik, T. H.; von Stechow, D.; Bronson, R. T.; Shivdasani, R.
A.: Deletion of the GATA domain of TRPS1 causes an absence of facial
hair and provides new insights into the bone disorder in inherited
tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndromes. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22: 8592-8600,
2002.

12. Momeni, P.; Glockner, G.; Schmidt, O.; von Holtum, D.; Albrecht,
B.; Gillessen-Kaesbach, G.; Hennekam, R.; Meinecke, P.; Zabel, B.;
Rosenthal, A.; Horsthemke, B.; Ludecke, H.-J.: Mutations in a new
gene, encoding a zinc-finger protein, cause tricho-rhino-phalangeal
syndrome type I. Nature Genet. 24: 71-74, 2000.

13. Napierala, D.; Sam, K.; Morello, R.; Zheng, Q.; Munivez, E.; Shivdasani,
R. A.; Lee, B.: Uncoupling of chondrocyte differentiation and perichondrial
mineralization underlies the skeletal dysplasia in tricho-rhino-phalangeal
syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17: 2244-2254, 2008.

14. Piccione, M.; Niceta, M.; Antona, V.; Di Fiore, A.; Cariola, F.;
Gentile, M.; Corsello, G.: Identification of two new mutations in
TRPS 1 gene leading to the tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome type I
and III. (Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A: 1837-1841, 2009.

15. Radvanyi, L.; Singh-Sandhu, D.; Gallichan, S.; Lovitt, C.; Pedyczak,
A.; Mallo, G.; Gish, K.; Kwok, K.; Hanna, W.; Zubovits, J.; Armes,
J.; Venter, D.; Hakimi, J.; Shortreed, J.; Donovan, M.; Parrington,
M.; Dunn, P.; Oomen, R.; Tartaglia, J.; Berinstein, N. L.: The gene
associated with trichorhinophalangeal syndrome in humans is overexpressed
in breast cancer. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 11005-11010, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/18/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/3/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/5/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/17/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/18/2005
Natalie E. Krasikov - updated: 6/16/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/24/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/12/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/17/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/2/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/23/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/29/1999

EDITED wwang: 07/22/2011
ckniffin: 7/18/2011
carol: 1/11/2011
wwang: 11/9/2009
terry: 11/3/2009
mgross: 10/5/2009
terry: 10/5/2009
wwang: 10/17/2006
terry: 10/17/2006
carol: 8/1/2006
alopez: 3/18/2005
carol: 6/16/2004
carol: 6/3/2004
ckniffin: 10/30/2003
carol: 10/30/2003
carol: 3/3/2003
tkritzer: 2/25/2003
terry: 2/24/2003
carol: 10/18/2002
cwells: 4/22/2002
terry: 4/12/2002
carol: 1/31/2002
mcapotos: 1/18/2002
terry: 1/17/2002
mcapotos: 8/15/2001
mcapotos: 8/14/2001
terry: 8/2/2001
joanna: 6/22/2001
carol: 1/23/2001
terry: 1/23/2001
alopez: 12/29/1999

603125	TITLE *603125 TYROSYLPROTEIN SULFOTRANSFERASE 1; TPST1
DESCRIPTION For general information regarding tyrosylprotein sulfotransferases, see
TPST2 (603126).

CLONING

The importance of tyrosine O-sulfation in protein-protein interactions
is illustrated by the sulfation of tyrosine residues in the leukocyte
adhesion molecule P-selectin glycoprotein ligand-1 (PSGL1; 600738);
sulfation is required for its binding to P-selectin on activated
endothelium. Based on the affinity of TPST for the N-terminal 15 amino
acids of PSGL1, Ouyang et al. (1998) purified TPST from rat liver
microsomes. They isolated human and mouse TPST cDNAs that predicted type
II transmembrane proteins of 370 amino acids with almost identical
primary structure. The human cDNA encoded a fully functional
N-glycosylated enzyme with an apparent molecular mass of approximately
54 kD when expressed in mammalian cells. This enzyme defined a new class
of Golgi sulfotransferases that catalyze tyrosine O-sulfation of many
protein substrates involved in diverse physiologic functions including
inflammation and hemostasis.

MAPPING

Beisswanger et al. (1998) stated that TPST1 (GenBank GENBANK AF038009)
maps to human chromosome 7.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Popovic et al. (2002) positioned the TPST1 gene on the physical map of
chromosome 7q11 and established its genomic structure. TPST1 consists of
5 exons (with exon 5 being noncoding), varying in size from 47 to 926
bp, and with introns varying in length from 3.0 to 75.8 kb. By mutation
analysis, the authors excluded TPST1 as the causative gene for
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (260400), which maps to the 7q11 region.

ANIMAL MODEL

Ouyang et al. (2002) found that Tpst1 +/- mice appeared normal and, when
interbred, yielded litters of normal size with a mendelian genetic
distribution and equal sex distribution. Tpst1 -/- mice appeared
healthy, but they had about 5% lower average body weight than wildtype
animals. Although fertility of Tpst1 -/- males and females was normal,
females had significantly smaller litters due to fetal death between 8.5
and 15.5 days postcoitum. Ouyang et al. (2002) concluded that there are
proteins involved in regulating body weight and reproductive physiology
that require tyrosine sulfation for optimal function.

REFERENCE 1. Beisswanger, R.; Corbeil, D.; Vannier, C.; Thiele, C.; Dohrmann,
U.; Kellner, R.; Ashman, K.; Niehrs, C.; Huttner, W. B.: Existence
of distinct tyrosylprotein sulfotransferase genes: molecular characterization
of tyrosylprotein sulfotransferase-2. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95:
11134-11139, 1998.

2. Ouyang, Y.-B.; Crawley, J. T. B.; Aston, C. E.; Moore, K. L.:
Reduced body weight and increased postimplantation fetal death in
tyrosylprotein sulfotransferase-1-deficient mice. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
23781-23787, 2002.

3. Ouyang, Y.-B.; Lane, W. S.; Moore, K. L.: Tyrosylprotein sulfotransferase:
purification and molecular cloning of an enzyme that catalyzes tyrosine
O-sulfation, a common posttranslational modification of eukaryotic
proteins Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 2896-2901, 1998.

4. Popovic, M.; Goobie, S.; Morrison, J.; Ellis, L.; Ehtesham, N.;
Richards, N.; Boocock, G.; Durie, P. R.; Rommens, J. M.: Fine mapping
of the locus for Shwachman-Diamond syndrome at 7q11, identification
of shared disease haplotypes, and exclusion of TPST1 as a candidate
gene. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 10: 250-258, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/5/2005
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 11/4/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/13/1998

EDITED mgross: 08/08/2005
terry: 8/5/2005
cwells: 11/4/2002
carol: 10/14/1998
carol: 10/13/1998

186591	TITLE *186591 SYNTAXIN 4; STX4
;;STX4A;;
SYNTAXIN, PLACENTAL;;
p35-2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Li et al. (1994) described the nucleotide sequence of STX4A, a syntaxin
gene isolated from a placenta library. (The gene was previously
symbolized STX2.) It encodes a predicted 297-amino acid protein that is
89% identical to the amino acid sequence of rat Stx4a.

By immunohistochemical analysis of rat brain sections, Kennedy et al.
(2010) showed that Stx4 was expressed throughout brain. In rat
hippocampal neurons, Stx4 showed a punctate distribution in the
somatodendritic compartment, and Stx4 clusters often localized to
dendritic spines. Immunogold electron microscopy of CA1 rat hippocampus
revealed frequent Stx4 labeling near spine membranes at sites lateral to
postsynaptic densities, with occasional labeling of presynaptic
membranes. Biochemical fractionation of mouse brain revealed Stx4 in
synaptosome fractions, but not in synaptic vesicle fractions.

GENE FUNCTION

Mandon et al. (1996) stated that vesicle-associated membrane proteins
(VAMPs) or synaptobrevins (see 185880) are proposed to bind to cognate
vesicle-targeting receptors in target membranes, which include several
members of the syntaxin family. The molecular mechanisms responsible for
targeting of vesicles containing aquaporin-2 (AQP2; 107777) to the
apical plasma membrane of renal collecting duct cells may involve the
vesicle-targeting protein STX4. Among the known syntaxin isoforms, only
STX1 (STX1A; 186590) and STX4 bind VAMP2 (185881) with high affinity.
Thus, STX1 and STX4 could be considered candidates for a role in
targeting of the AQP2/VAMP2-containing vesicles to the apical plasma
membrane in collecting duct cells. In contrast to STX1, which is
expressed predominantly in the central nervous system, STX4 is expressed
in a variety of tissues including the kidney. Mandon et al. (1996) used
sequence data for rat Stx1a, Stx1b (601485), and Stx4 from Bennett et
al. (1993) to design PCR primers for RT-PCR analysis of rat tissues.
They detected Stx4 mRNA in the apical plasma membrane of collecting duct
principal cells. They also demonstrated in the rat kidney the presence
of a protein with the characteristics of Stx4 in the apical plasma
membrane of inner medullary-collecting duct cells.

To clarify the physiologic function of STXBP3 (608339) in
insulin-stimulated GLUT4 (SLC2A4; 138190) exocytosis, Kanda et al.
(2005) generated mouse embryos deficient in the Stx4-binding protein
Stxbp3 and developed Stxbp3 -/- adipocytes from their mesenchymal
fibroblasts. The insulin-induced appearance of Glut4 at the cell surface
was enhanced in Stxbp3 -/- adipocytes compared to +/+ cells. Wortmannin,
an inhibitor of PI3K, inhibited insulin-stimulated Glut4 externalization
in +/+ but not -/- adipocytes. Kanda et al. (2005) suggested that
disruption of the interaction between STX4 and STXBP3 in adipocytes
might result in enhancement of insulin-stimulated GLUT4 externalization.

Using RT-PCR, immunoblot analysis, and immunofluorescence microscopy,
Sander et al. (2008) demonstrated that human intestinal mast cells (MCs)
expressed SNAP23 (602534), STX1B, STX2 (132350), STX3 (STX3A; 600876),
STX4, and STX6 (603944), but not SNAP25 (600322). MCs also expressed
VAMP3 (603657), VAMP7 (300053), and VAMP8 (603177), but, in contrast
with rodent MCs, they expressed only low levels of VAMP2 (185881). VAMP7
and VAMP8 translocated to the plasma membrane and interacted with SNAP23
and STX4 upon activation. Inhibition of STX4, SNAP23, VAMP7, or VAMP8,
but not VAMP2 or VAMP3, resulted in markedly reduced high-affinity IgE
receptor-mediated histamine release. Sander et al. (2008) concluded that
human MCs express a specific pattern of SNAREs and that VAMP7 and VAMP8,
but not VAMP2, are required for rapid degranulation.

Using rat hippocampal neurons, Kennedy et al. (2010) showed that
exocytosis of recycling endosomes at dendritic spines occurred at
Stx4-enriched sites immediately lateral to postsynaptic densities.
Disruption of Stx4 either acutely or chronically blocked membrane fusion
and cargo delivery triggered by synaptic activation, and acute
inhibition of Stx4 abolished long-term potentiation. Kennedy et al.
(2010) concluded that STX4 is a central component of the SNARE machinery
that mediates rapid, activity-dependent fusion of recycling endosomes in
dendritic spines.

REFERENCE 1. Bennett, M. K.; Garcia-Arraras, J. E.; Elferink, L. A.; Peterson,
K.; Fleming, A. M.; Hazuka, C. D.; Scheller, R. H.: The syntaxin
family of vesicular transport receptors. Cell 74: 863-873, 1993.

2. Kanda, H.; Tamori, Y.; Shinoda, H.; Yoshikawa, M.; Sakaue, M.;
Udagawa, J.; Otani, H.; Tashiro, F.; Miyazaki, J.; Kasuga, M.: Adipocytes
from Munc18c-null mice show increased sensitivity to insulin-stimulated
GLUT4 externalization. J. Clin. Invest. 115: 291-301, 2005.

3. Kennedy, M. J.; Davison, I. G.; Robinson, C. G.; Ehlers, M. D.
: Syntaxin-4 defines a domain for activity-dependent exocytosis in
dendritic spines. Cell 141: 524-535, 2010.

4. Li, H.; Hodge, D. R.; Pei, G. K.; Seth, A.: Isolation and sequence
analysis of the human syntaxin-encoding gene. Gene 143: 303-304,
1994.

5. Mandon, B.; Chou, C.-L.; Nielsen, S.; Knepper, M. A.: Syntaxin-4
is localized to the apical plasma membrane of rat renal collecting
duct cells: possible role in aquaporin-2 trafficking. J. Clin. Invest. 98:
906-913, 1996.

6. Sander, L. E.; Frank, S. P. C.; Bolat, S.; Blank, U.; Galli, T.;
Bigalke, H.; Bischoff, S. C.; Lorentz, A.: Vesicle associated membrane
protein (VAMP)-7 and VAMP-8, but not VAMP-2 or VAMP-3, are required
for activation-induced degranulation of mature human mast cells. Europ.
J. Immun. 38: 855-863, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/20/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/9/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/12/2005
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 10/25/1996
Alan F. Scott - updated: 9/20/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/10/1992

EDITED mgross: 01/03/2011
terry: 12/20/2010
mgross: 10/12/2009
mgross: 10/9/2009
tkritzer: 4/12/2005
psherman: 10/27/1998
mark: 10/25/1996
carol: 9/10/1992

607389	TITLE *607389 SINGLE-STRANDED DNA-BINDING PROTEIN 2; SSBP2
;;SENSOR OF SINGLE-STRANDED DNA COMPLEX, SUBUNIT B2; SOSSB2;;
SOSS COMPLEX, SUBUNIT B2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SSBP2 is a subunit of a single-stranded DNA (ssDNA)-binding complex
involved in the maintenance of genome stability (Huang et al., 2009).

CLONING

By positional cloning, Castro et al. (2002) identified a novel gene,
which they designated SSBP2, that is disrupted at the 5q13 breakpoint in
the acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell line ML3. EST database searching
revealed that the transcript is similar to the chicken gene CSDP, which
encodes a protein that binds single-stranded pyrimidine-rich
mirror-repeat elements with high specificity. By further database
searching, they identified 2 additional cDNAs encoding single-stranded
DNA-binding proteins, SSBP3 (607390) and SSBP4 (607391). The deduced
362-amino acid SSBP2 protein shares 83% and 73% sequence identity with
SSBP3 and SSBP4, respectively, and 100% identity with the mouse Ssbp2
homolog. SSBP family members share a highly conserved N terminus
followed by a glycine- and proline-rich domain. Northern blot analysis
detected ubiquitous expression of a 1.9-kb SSBP2 transcript. Expression
was high in all hematopoietic tissues, including spleen, lymph node,
peripheral blood, bone marrow, thymus, and fetal liver, with highest
expression in thymus and fetal liver. Expression was also high in heart,
brain, kidney, and skeletal muscle. Of 5 leukemia cell lines tested,
expression was highest in pre-T lymphoblastic leukemia cell line CEM. No
gross inactivating mutations were found in leukemia cell lines or in
primary leukemic blasts from 4 patients.

GENE FUNCTION

Using HEK293 cells for tandem affinity purification, Huang et al. (2009)
identified SOSSA (INTS3; 611347) and SOSSC (613273) as common components
of 2 distinct and complementary ssDNA-binding heterotrimeric complexes
defined by their inclusion of either SOSSB1 (SSBP1; 600439) or SOSSB2
(SSBP2), but not both. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis confirmed that
SOSS complexes formed in HeLa cells independent of DNA damage.
Recombinant heterotrimeric SOSS complexes specifically bound ssDNA, but
not double-stranded DNA. SOSSA served as the central assembly factor,
and SOSSB and SOSSC bound overlapping regions on SOSSA, but they did not
interact directly with each other. Depletion of SOSSA by small
interfering RNA led to dramatic decreases in SOSSB1 and SOSSB2 protein
levels, abrogated targeting of SOSSB1 and SOSSB2 to chromatin, increased
ionizing radiation sensitivity, caused defective G2/M checkpoint, and
impaired homologous recombination repair. Huang et al. (2009)
demonstrated that both SOSS complexes and the CTIP (RBBP8; 604124)/RPA
(see RPA1; 179835) complex acted downstream of the MRE11 (600814)-RAD50
(604040)-NBS1 (NBN; 602667) complex and functioned in DNA damage repair.

GENE STRUCTURE

Castro et al. (2002) determined that the SSBP2, SSBP3, and SSBP4 genes
all contain 17 exons and have identical intron/exon boundaries,
suggesting duplication from a common ancestral gene. They also
identified alternative splicing and additional internal exons for all 3
genes, suggesting the existence of multiple isoforms for each protein.
The SSBP2 gene spans more than 200 kb.

MAPPING

Castro et al. (2002) mapped the SSBP2 gene to chromosome 5q13.3, within
the critical breakpoint region in the AML cell line ML3.

REFERENCE 1. Castro, P.; Liang, H.; Liang, J. C.; Nagarajan, L.: A novel, evolutionarily
conserved gene family with putative sequence-specific single-stranded
DNA-binding activity. Genomics 80: 78-85, 2002.

2. Huang, J.; Gong, Z.; Ghosal, G.; Chen, J.: SOSS complexes participate
in the maintenance of genomic stability. Molec. Cell 35: 384-393,
2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/19/2010

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 11/26/2002

EDITED mgross: 02/22/2010
terry: 2/19/2010
mgross: 12/3/2002
carol: 12/2/2002

611213	TITLE *611213 RELT-LIKE 2; RELL2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By EST database analysis to search for sequences with similarity to RELT
(611211), Cusick et al. (2006) cloned full-length RELL1 (611212) and
RELL2. The predicted RELL2 sequence contains a transmembrane domain but
lacks extracellular cysteine-rich domains. RELL2 shares 27% and 40%
amino acid identity with RELT and RELL1, respectively. Northern blot
analysis detected an approximately 3-kb transcript primarily in human
immune-related tissues such as spleen, thymus, testis, peripheral blood
leukocytes, and placenta. RELL2 mRNA was not detected in prostate,
ovary, small intestine, colon, heart, lung, liver, skeletal muscle,
kidney, or pancreas. Immunofluorescent confocal microscopy localized
RELL2 to the plasma membrane in COS-7 cells and colocalized RELL2 with
RELL1 and RELT.

GENE FUNCTION

Using coimmunoprecipitation studies, Cusick et al. (2006) showed that
showed that RELL2 bound RELL1, RELT, and serine-threonine kinase OSR1
(OXSR1; 604046). By in vitro kinase assay, Cusick et al. (2006) showed
that RELL1, RELL2, and RELT were phosphorylated by OSR1.

REFERENCE 1. Cusick, J. K.; Xu, L.-G.; Bin, L.-H.; Han, K.-J.; Shu, H.-B.:
Identification of RELT homologues that associate with RELT and are
phosphorylated by OSR1. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 340: 535-543,
2006.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 7/17/2007

EDITED wwang: 07/17/2007
wwang: 7/17/2007

600505	TITLE *600505 CASEIN KINASE I, ALPHA-1; CSNK1A1
;;CK1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Tapia et al. (1994) isolated a cDNA encoding human casein kinase I from
a fetal brain library using PCR primers based on the bovine sequence.
The cDNA was sequenced and shown to have a predicted amino acid sequence
identical to the bovine protein except that it contains 12 additional
amino acids at the carboxyl end.

GENE FUNCTION

Jia et al. (2004) showed that protein kinase A (PKA; see 188830) and
casein kinase I (CKI) regulate Smo (601500) cell surface accumulation
and activity in response to hedgehog (Hh; see 600725). Blocking PKA or
CKI activity in the Drosophila wing disc prevented Hh-induced Smo
accumulation and attenuated pathway activity, whereas increasing PKA
activity promoted Smo accumulation and pathway activation. Jia et al.
(2004) showed that PKA and CKI phosphorylate Smo at several sites, and
that phosphorylation-deficient forms of Smo fail to accumulate on the
cell surface and are unable to transduce the Hh signal. Conversely,
phosphorylation-mimicking Smo variants showed constitutive cell surface
expression and signaling activity. Furthermore, Jia et al. (2004) found
that the levels of Smo cell surface expression and activity correlated
with its levels of phosphorylation. Jia et al. (2004) concluded that Hh
induces progressive Smo phosphorylation by PKA and CKI, leading to
elevation of Smo cell surface levels and signaling activity.

Bidere et al. (2009) conducted parallel screens involving a mass
spectrometry analysis of CARMA1 (607210) binding partners and an RNA
interference screen for growth inhibition of the CBM-dependent
'activated B cell-like' (ABC) subtype of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL; see 605027). Bidere et al. (2009) reported that both screens
identified CK1-alpha as a bifunctional regulator of NF-kappa-B (164011).
CK1-alpha dynamically associates with the CBM complex on T cell receptor
engagement to participate in cytokine production and lymphocyte
proliferation. However, CK1-alpha kinase activity has a contrasting role
by subsequently promoting the phosphorylation and inactivation of
CARMA1. CK1-alpha has thus a dual 'gating' function which first promotes
and then terminates receptor-induced NF-kappa-B. ABC DLBCL cells
required CK1-alpha for constitutive NF-kappa-B activity, indicating that
CK1-alpha functions as a conditionally essential malignancy gene.

Elyada et al. (2011) showed that casein kinase I-alpha, a component of
the beta-catenin (116806) destruction complex, is a critical regulator
of the Wnt signaling (see 164820) pathway. Inducing the ablation of
Csnk1a1 in the gut triggers massive Wnt activation, surprisingly without
causing tumorigenesis. CKI-alpha-deficient epithelium shows many of the
features of human colorectal tumors in addition to Wnt activation, in
particular the induction of the DNA damage response and cellular
senescence, both of which are thought to provide a barrier against
malignant transformation. The epithelial DNA damage response in mice is
accompanied by substantial activation of p53 (191170), suggesting that
the p53 pathway may counteract the protumorigenic effects of Wnt
hyperactivation. Notably, the transition from benign adenomas to
invasive colorectal cancer in humans is typically linked to p53
inactivation, underscoring the importance of p53 as a safeguard against
malignant progression; however, the mechanism of p53-mediated tumor
suppression is unknown. Elyada et al. (2011) showed that the maintenance
of intestinal homeostasis in CKI-alpha-deficient gut requires
p53-mediated growth control, because the combined ablation of Csnk1a1
and either p53 or its target gene p21 (116899) triggered high-grade
dysplasia with extensive proliferation. Unexpectedly, these ablations
also induced nonproliferating cells to invade the villous lamina propria
rapidly, producing invasive carcinomas throughout the small bowel.
Furthermore, in p53-deficient gut, loss of heterozygosity of the gene
encoding CKI-alpha caused a highly invasive carcinoma, indicating that
CKI-alpha caused a highly invasive carcinoma, indicating that CKI-alpha
functions as a tumor suppressor when p53 is inactivated. Elyada et al.
(2011) identified a set of genes (the p53-suppressed invasiveness
signature, PSIS) that is activated by the loss of both p53 and CKI-alpha
and which probably accounts for the brisk induction of invasiveness.
PSIS transcription and tumor invasion were suppressed by p21,
independently of cell cycle control. Restraining tissue invasion through
suppressing PSIS expression is thus a novel tumor suppressor function of
wildtype p53. PROX1 (601546), IFITM2 (605578), and IFITM3 (605579) are
all PSIS genes.

MAPPING

Tapia et al. (1994) identified YAC genomic clones containing the human
gene and used them to map CKI to chromosome 13q13. Fish et al. (1995)
mapped the CSNK1A1 gene to chromosome 13q13.1-q14.1 by FISH. However,
Gross (2011) mapped the CSNK1A1 gene to chromosome 5q32 based on an
alignment of the CSNK1A1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC008717) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Bidere, N.; Ngo, V. N.; Lee, J.; Collins, C.; Zheng, L.; Wan, F.;
Davis, R. E.; Lenz, G.; Anderson, D. E.; Arnoult, D.; Vazquez, A.;
Sakai, K.; Zhang, J.; Meng, Z.; Veenstra, T. D.; Staudt, L. M.; Lenardo,
M. J.: Casein kinase 1-alpha governs antigen-receptor-induced NF-kappa-B
activation and human lymphoma cell survival. Nature 458: 92-96,
2009.

2. Elyada, E.; Pribluda, A.; Goldstein, R. E.; Morgenstern, Y.; Brachya,
G.; Cojocaru, G.; Snir-Alkalay, I.; Burstain, I.; Haffner-Krausz,
R.; Jung, S.; Wiener, Z.; Alitalo, K.; Oren, M.; Pikarsky, E.; Ben-Neriah,
Y.: CKI-alpha ablation highlights a critical role for p53 in invasiveness
control. Nature 470: 409-413, 2011.

3. Fish, K. J.; Cegielska, A.; Getman, M. E.; Landes, G. M.; Virshup,
D. M.: Isolation and characterization of human casein kinase I-epsilon
(CKI), a novel member of the CKI gene family. J. Biol. Chem. 270:
14875-14883, 1995.

4. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/9/2011.

5. Jia, J.; Tong, C.; Wang, B.; Luo, L.; Jiang, J.: Hedgehog signalling
activity of Smoothened requires phosphorylation by protein kinase
A and casein kinase I. Nature 432: 1045-1050, 2004.

6. Tapia, C.; Featherstone, T.; Gomez, C.; Taillon-Miller, P.; Allende,
C. C.; Allende, J. E.: Cloning and chromosomal localization of the
gene coding for human protein kinase CK1. FEBS Lett. 349: 307-312,
1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/29/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 2/9/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/2/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/3/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/9/2004

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 4/24/1995

EDITED carol: 07/06/2011
alopez: 7/5/2011
terry: 6/29/2011
mgross: 2/9/2011
alopez: 4/3/2009
terry: 4/2/2009
alopez: 3/4/2005
terry: 3/3/2005
mgross: 9/9/2004
psherman: 10/22/1999
dkim: 6/30/1998
mark: 5/13/1996
joanna: 12/6/1995
mark: 4/25/1995
mark: 4/24/1995

605590	TITLE *605590 SPLICING FACTOR 3B, SUBUNIT 1; SF3B1
;;SF3B, 155-KD SUBUNIT; SF3B155;;
SPLICEOSOME-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN, 155-KD; SAP155
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Introns are removed from nuclear pre-mRNA in 2 transesterification
reactions. Splicing takes place in a large ribonucleoprotein particle,
the spliceosome. Spliceosomal intermediate complexes form on pre-mRNA in
the order E, A, B, and C, with the catalytic reactions occurring in
complex C. U2 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs; see 180690) are
among the proteins essential for spliceosome assembly and mRNA splicing.
Functional U2 snRNP is composed of a 12S unit and 2 splicing factors,
SF3A, which is composed of 3 proteins (see SF3A1; 605595), and SF3B,
which is composed of 4 proteins, including SF3B1 (summary by Kramer et
al. (1995), Wang et al. (1998), and Isono et al. (2001)).

CLONING

By SDS-PAGE fractionation of spliceosomal complex A, micropeptide
sequence analysis, database searching, and cDNA library screening, Wang
et al. (1998) isolated a cDNA encoding SF3B1, which they called SAP155.
Sequence analysis predicted that the 1,304-amino acid protein is 50%
identical to the yeast sequence. The C-terminal two-thirds of SF3B1 can
align into 22 PP2A (PPP2R1B; 603113)-like repeats, and the nonconserved
N terminus contains multiple TPGH and RWDETP motifs but lacks SR
domains. Western blot analysis detected the 155-kD protein in the
spliceosomal A/B complex and a larger phosphorylated protein in the C
complex. The authors showed that the phosphorylation occurs concomitant
with the catalytic steps of splicing.

Isono et al. (2001) isolated a cDNA encoding the 146-kD mouse homolog.
The amino acid sequence of Sf3b1 was very highly conserved among
homologs from Schizosaccharomyces pombe (52.4% identity) to human
(99.6%), and the C-terminal 825 residues of these homologs showed even
higher identities.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Golas et al. (2003) determined the 3-dimensional structure of the human
SF3B complex by single-particle electron cryomicroscopy at a resolution
of less than 10 angstroms, allowing identification of protein domains
with known structural folds. The best fit of a modeled RNA recognition
motif indicates that the protein p14 (607835) is located in the central
cavity of the complex. The 22 tandem helical repeats of the protein
SF3B155 are located in the outer shell of the complex enclosing p14.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis and pull-down assays of mouse nuclear
extracts, Isono et al. (2005) found that Sf3b1 interacted directly with
the Polycomb group proteins Pcgf2 (600346) and Rnf2 (608985).
Furthermore, Sf3b1 colocalized with Polycomb proteins on the 5-prime
regions of individual Hox genes.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SF3B1
gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP stSG34935).

Isono et al. (2001) mapped the mouse homolog of human SF3B1 to the
central part of chromosome 1 by interspecific backcross analysis. This
location was also consistent with the mapping data obtained by using a
radiation hybrid panel.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Somatic Mutations

Using whole-exome sequencing of bone marrow cells, Papaemmanuil et al.
(2011) found that 6 of 9 patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS;
614286) carried 1 of 2 somatic heterozygous mutations in the SF3B1 gene:
a lys700-to-glu (K700E) substitution or a his662-to-gln (H662Q)
substitution, in addition to somatic mutations in several other genes.
Targeted resequencing of this gene found that 72 (20%) of 354 patients
with MDS had mutations in the SF3B1 gene. The majority of the patients
(68%) with mutations had refractory anemia with ringed sideroblasts,
although 6% had refractory anemia with excess blasts. Mutations in the
SF3B1 gene were also found less frequently in bone marrow from patients
with other chronic myeloid disorders, such as primary myelofibrosis
(254450), essential thrombocythemia (187950), and chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia (CMML; see 607785), as well as in acute myeloid leukemia (AML;
601626). Somatic mutations were also found in about 1% of primary solid
tumors. The mutations occurred throughout the gene, but were clustered
in exons 12 to 15; K700E was the most common mutation, accounting for 59
(55%) of the 108 variants observed. Alignment and in silico studies
indicated that the mutations were not severely deleterious, suggesting
that the mutant proteins retain structural integrity and some function.
Gene expression profiling studies suggested a disturbance of
mitochondrial gene networks in stem cells from MDS patients with SF3B1
mutations. Clinically, MDS patients with SF3B1 mutations had higher
median white cell count, higher platelet count, higher erythroid
hyperplasia, lower proportion of bone marrow blasts, and overall longer
survival compared to those without SF3B1 mutations, suggesting a more
benign phenotype.

Using whole-exome sequencing of matched tumor and normal samples from
105 individuals with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL; 151400) followed
by expansion studies in an additional 174 CLL patients, Quesada et al.
(2012) found that 27 (9.7%) of the 279 patients had somatic mutations in
the SF3B1 gene. All SF3B1 mutations occurred in the nonidentical HEAT
domains, and SF3B1-mutant cases showed enhanced expression of truncated
mRNAs of various genes. Clinically, patients with SF3B1 mutations had
faster disease progression and poorer overall survival compared to those
with other mutations. No SF3B1 mutations were found in 156 cases of
non-Hodgkin lymphoma (605027).

Harbour et al. (2013) described mutations occurring exclusively at codon
625 of the SF3B1 gene in low-grade uveal melanoma (155720) with good
prognosis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Isono et al. (2005) found that homozygous Sf3b1-null mouse embryos died
during preimplantation development around the 16- to 32-cell stage.
Heterozygous animals appeared normal and healthy; however, they
exhibited various skeletal alterations along the anterior-posterior
axis. Consistent with the axial changes, expression of several Hox genes
was anteriorly extended in the paraxial mesoderm and second branchial
arch. Isono et al. (2005) concluded that Sf3b1 regulates Hox gene
expression in association with Polycomb group proteins.

REFERENCE 1. Golas, M. M.; Sander, B.; Will, C. L.; Luhrmann, R.; Stark, H.
: Molecular architecture of the multiprotein splicing factor SF3b. Science 300:
980-984, 2003.

2. Harbour, J. W.; Roberson, E. D. O.; Anbunathan, H.; Onken, M. D.;
Worley, L. A.; Bowcock, A. M.: Recurrent mutations at codon 625 of
the splicing factor SF3B1 in uveal melanoma. Nature Genet. 45: 133-135,
2013.

3. Isono, K.; Abe, K.; Tomaru, Y.; Okazaki, Y.; Hayashizaki, Y.; Koseki,
H.: Molecular cloning, genetic mapping, and expression of the mouse
Sf3b1 (SAP155) gene for the U2 snRNP component of spliceosome. Mammalian
Genome 12: 192-198, 2001.

4. Isono, K.; Mizutani-Koseki, Y.; Komori, T.; Schmidt-Zachmann, M.
S.; Koseki, H.: Mammalian Polycomb-mediated repression of Hox genes
requires the essential spliceosomal protein Sf3b1. Genes Dev. 19:
536-541, 2005.

5. Kramer, A.; Mulhauser, F.; Wersig, C.; Groning, K.; Bilbe, G.:
Mammalian splicing factor SF3a120 represents a new member of the SURP
family of proteins and is homologous to the essential splicing factor
PRP21p of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. RNA 1: 260-272, 1995.

6. Papaemmanuil, E.; Cazzola, M.; Boultwood, J.; Malcovati, L.; Vyas,
P.; Bowen, D.; Pellagatti, A.; Wainscoat, J. S.; Hellstrom-Lindberg,
E.; Gambacorti-Passerini, C.; Godfrey, A. L.; Rapado, I.; and 36
others: Somatic SF3B1 mutation in myelodysplasia with ring sideroblasts. New
Eng. J. Med. 365: 1384-1395, 2011.

7. Quesada, V.; Conde, L.; Villamor, N.; Ordonez, G. R.; Jares, P.;
Bassaganyas, L.; Ramsay, A. J.; Bea, S.; Pinyol, M.; Martinez-Trillos,
A.; Lopez-Guerra, M.; Colomer, D.; and 29 others: Exome sequencing
identifies recurrent mutations of the splicing factor SF3B1 gene in
chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Nature Genet. 44: 47-51, 2012.

8. Wang, C.; Chua, K.; Seghezzi, W.; Lees, E.; Gozani, O.; Reed, R.
: Phosphorylation of spliceosomal protein SAP 155 coupled with splicing
catalysis. Genes Dev. 12: 1409-1414, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 04/11/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/25/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/24/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/19/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/29/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/4/2001

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/26/2001

EDITED alopez: 04/11/2013
mgross: 2/16/2012
carol: 2/1/2012
ckniffin: 1/25/2012
carol: 10/25/2011
terry: 10/25/2011
ckniffin: 10/24/2011
mgross: 4/21/2005
terry: 4/19/2005
alopez: 5/29/2003
terry: 5/29/2003
mcapotos: 6/6/2001
mcapotos: 6/5/2001
terry: 6/4/2001
mgross: 1/26/2001

607293	TITLE *607293 CHLORIDE INTRACELLULAR CHANNEL 5; CLIC5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Chloride intracellular channels are involved in chloride ion transport
within various subcellular compartments. CLIC5 specifically associates
with the cytoskeleton of placenta microvilli (Berryman and Bretscher,
2000).

CLONING

By biochemical analysis of F-actin (see 102610)- and ezrin (VIL2;
123900)-interacting proteins isolated from placenta microvillus
extracts, followed by searching an EST database and high-stringency
screening of a placenta cDNA library, Berryman and Bretscher (2000)
obtained a cDNA encoding a 32-kD protein, CLIC5. The deduced 251-amino
acid protein is 76%, 52%, 66%, and 63% identical to CLIC4 (606536),
CLIC3 (606533), CLIC2 (300138), and CLIC1 (602872), respectively. It
contains 2 highly conserved hydrophobic domains as well as 3 conserved
tyrosines involved in internalization signal motifs. Northern blot
analysis revealed high expression of a major 6.4-kb transcript, as well
as minor 3.8- and 2.3-kb transcripts, in heart and skeletal muscle, with
moderate levels in kidney, lung, and placenta. Expression of CLIC5 was
enriched in microvillus extracts compared with whole placenta tissue.
Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated highest expression on the
apical surface of trophoblast epithelium.

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunoblot analysis, Berryman and Bretscher (2000) observed strong
binding of CLIC5 to ezrin residues 475 to 586, whereas binding of CLIC4
was low and binding of CLIC1 was undetectable.

By reconstituting recombinant human CLIC5 on a planar lipid bilayer,
Singh et al. (2007) showed that CLIC5 formed a complex multiconductance
channel that was almost equally permeable to Na+, K+, and Cl-. Currents
produced by CLIC1 and by CLIC5 were strongly and reversibly inactivated
by addition of purified platelet F-actin (see 102560) to the cytosolic
face of the bilayer. Inhibition by F-actin was reversed by disruption of
F-actin.

MAPPING

Scott (2002) mapped the CLIC5 gene to chromosome 6p21.1-p12.1 based on
sequence similarity between the CLIC5 sequence (GenBank GENBANK
AF216941) and the chromosome 6 clone RP3-447E21 (GenBank GENBANK
AL050336).

REFERENCE 1. Berryman, M.; Bretscher, A.: Identification of a novel member
of the chloride intracellular channel gene family (CLIC5) that associates
with the actin cytoskeleton of placental microvilli. Molec. Biol.
Cell 11: 1509-1521, 2000.

2. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/9/2002.

3. Singh, H.; Cousin, M. A.; Ashley, R. H.: Functional reconstitution
of mammalian 'chloride intracellular channels' CLIC1, CLIC4 and CLIC5
reveals differential regulation by cytoskeletal actin. FEBS J. 274:
6306-6316, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/28/2010

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/11/2002

EDITED mgross: 11/19/2010
terry: 10/28/2010
mgross: 10/11/2002

604652	TITLE *604652 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 7-LIKE 1; TCF7L1
;;TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 3, FORMERLY; TCF3, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TCF/LEF transcription factors, such as TCF7L1, are mediators of the Wnt
(see 164820) signaling pathway and are antagonized by the TGF-beta
(TGFB1; 190180) signaling pathway (Sagara and Katoh, 2000).

CLONING

The high mobility group (HMG) box is a DNA-binding domain. TCF7
(189908), also called TCF1, and LEF1 (153245), also called TCF1-alpha,
are human lymphoid transcription factors that contain a virtually
identical HMG box. By PCR of human genomic DNA using degenerate
oligonucleotides based on the HMG boxes of TCF7 and LEF1, Castrop et al.
(1992) identified the TCF7L1 and TCF7L2 (602228) genes, which they
called TCF3 and TCF4, respectively. TCF7L1 and TCF7L2 were not expressed
in cells of lymphoid lineage. The deduced amino acid sequences of the
HMG boxes of TCF7L1, TCF7L2, and TCF7 show striking homology. The
authors suggested the existence of a subfamily of TCF7-like HMG
box-containing transcription factors.

By searching databases for homologs of mouse Tcf3, followed by PCR of a
small intestine cDNA library and screening of a fetal lung cDNA library,
Sagara and Katoh (2000) cloned human TCF7L1, which they called TCF3. The
deduced 588-amino acid protein contains a beta-catenin (CTNNB1;
116806)-binding domain at its N terminus, followed by an HMG box, a
nuclear translocation signal, and 2 putative CTBP (see 602618)-binding
sites at its C terminus. TCF7L1 shares 58% amino acid identity with
TCF7L2, its closest homolog among human TCF proteins. Northern blot
analysis detected a 3.0-kb TCF7L1 transcript in human stomach and in
some human gastric cancer cell lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Using Northern blot analysis, Sagara and Katoh (2000) found that TCF7L1
was occasionally upregulated in primary gastric cancer compared with
normal gastric mucosa. Overexpression of TCF7L1 in MKN28 human gastric
cancer cell lines resulted in 8-fold resistance to mitomycin C compared
with controls. DTD (NQO1; 125860) mRNA was downregulated in MKN28 cell
lines overexpressing TCF7L1 and in primary gastric cancer with TCF7L1
upregulation. The DTD protein, which is implicated in mitomycin C
activation, was also downregulated in MKN28 cell lines overexpressing
TCF7L1. Sagara and Katoh (2000) concluded that mitomycin C resistance
induced by TCF7L1 overexpression in gastric cancer is likely due to DTD
downregulation.

Merrill et al. (2001) showed that Lef1 and Tcf3 controlled
differentiation of multipotent stem cells in mouse skin. Lef1 required
Wnt signaling and stabilized beta-catenin to express hair-specific
keratins and control hair differentiation. In contrast, Tcf3 acted
independently of its beta-catenin-interacting domain to suppress
features of epidermal differentiation, in which Tcf3 was normally shut
off, and promote features of the follicle outer root sheath and
multipotent stem cells.

By immunofluorescence analysis, Nguyen et al. (2006) found that
embryonic mouse skin progenitors expressed Tcf3. Using an inducible Tcf3
expression system in mice, they showed that postnatal Tcf3 reactivation
caused committed epidermal cells to induce genes associated with an
undifferentiated, Wnt-inhibited state, and that Tcf3 promoted a
transcriptional program shared by embryonic and postnatal stem cells.
Genes repressed by Tcf3 included transcriptional regulators of the
epidermal, sebaceous gland, and hair follicle differentiation programs,
and all 3 terminal differentiation pathways were suppressed by postnatal
Tcf3 induction. Nguyen et al. (2006) concluded that, in the absence of
Wnt signals, Tcf3 functions in skin stem cells to maintain an
undifferentiated state, and that through Wnt signaling, Tcf3 directs
these cells along the hair lineage.

To balance self-renewal and differentiation, embryonic stem (ES) cells
must control the levels of several transcription factors, including
NANOG (607937). Pereira et al. (2006) showed that Tcf3 limited the
steady-state levels of Nanog mRNA, protein, and promoter activity in
self-renewing mouse ES cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and promoter
reporter assays showed that Tcf3 bound to a promoter regulatory region
of the Nanog gene and repressed its transcriptional activity. Repression
of Nanog required the groucho (see 600189) interaction domain of Tcf3.
Absence of Tcf3 delayed differentiation of ES cells in vitro by allowing
elevated Nanog levels to persist through 5 days of embryoid body
formation. Pereira et al. (2006) concluded that TCF3-mediated control of
NANOG expression allows ES cells to balance the creation of
lineage-committed and undifferentiated cells.

ANIMAL MODEL

Nguyen et al. (2009) found that knockout of Tcf3 or Tcf4 individually
had no overt effect on hair phenotype in mice, but Tcf3/Tcf4 double
knockout resulted in a severe skin and hair defects. Newborn
Tcf3/Tcf4-null skin was thinner than normal and often lacked whiskers.
Tcf3/Tcf4-null skin showed signs of apoptosis and, when grafted onto
nude mice, became shrunken, was unable to repair wounds, and was
progressively lost, showing an inability to maintain long-term
self-renewing populations of skin epithelia. Tcf3/Tcf4-null skin cells
grew poorly in culture and did not survive passaging. Microarray
analysis of mRNAs expressed by normal and Tcf3/Tcf4-null skin suggested
that Tcf3 and Tcf4 maintain skin epithelial stem cells through
Wnt-dependent and Wnt-independent signaling.

NOMENCLATURE

The TCF7L1 gene, although initially designated TCF3, should not be
confused with the TCF3 gene (147141), also known as E2A. TCF7L1 encodes
a TCF/LEF transcription factor involved in Wnt signaling, whereas TCF3
encodes the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors E12 and
E47.

REFERENCE 1. Castrop, J.; van Norren, K.; Clevers, H.: A gene family of HMG-box
transcription factors with homology to TCF-1. Nucleic Acids Res. 20:
611 only, 1992.

2. Merrill, B. J.; Gat, U.; DasGupta, R.; Fuchs, E.: Tcf3 and Lef1
regulate lineage differentiation of multipotent stem cells in skin. Genes
Dev. 15: 1688-1705, 2001.

3. Nguyen, H.; Merrill, B. J.; Polak, L.; Nikolova, M.; Rendl, M.;
Shaver, T. M.; Pasolli, H. A.; Fuchs, E.: Tcf3 and Tcf4 are essential
for long-term homeostasis of skin epithelia. Nature Genet. 41: 1068-1075,
2009.

4. Nguyen, H.; Rendl, M.; Fuchs, E.: Tcf3 governs stem cell features
and represses cell fate determination in skin. Cell 127: 171-183,
2006.

5. Pereira, L.; Yi, F.; Merrill, B. J.: Repression of Nanog gene
transcription by Tcf3 limits embryonic stem cell self-renewal. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 26: 7479-7491, 2006.

6. Sagara, N.; Katoh, M.: Mitomycin C resistance induced by TCF-3
overexpression in gastric cancer cell line MKN28 is associated with
DT-diaphorase down-regulation. Cancer Res. 60: 5959-5962, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/22/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 9/14/2009

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 3/6/2000

EDITED mgross: 01/25/2010
terry: 1/22/2010
mgross: 9/14/2009
mgross: 3/10/2000
psherman: 3/6/2000

606091	TITLE *606091 SIALIC ACID-BINDING IMMUNOGLOBULIN-LIKE LECTIN 10; SIGLEC10
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SIGLECs are members of the immunoglobulin superfamily that are expressed
on the cell surface. Most SIGLECs have 1 or more cytoplasmic immune
receptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs, or ITIMs. SIGLECs are
typically expressed on cells of the innate immune system, with the
exception of the B-cell expressed SIGLEC6 (604405).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences resembling CD33 (SIGLEC3;
159590) and screening a spleen cDNA library, Munday et al. (2001)
isolated a cDNA encoding SIGLEC10. Sequence analysis predicted that the
697-amino acid SIGLEC10 protein contains a signal peptide, an N-terminal
V-set Ig-like domain and 4 C2-set Ig-like domains, 5 potential N-linked
glycosylation sites, a transmembrane region, and a 126-residue
cytoplasmic tail with 3 putative ITIMs. Northern blot analysis detected
a major 3.0-kb SIGLEC10 transcript, with highest levels in spleen, lymph
node, blood leukocytes, and appendix. Little or no expression was
observed in pancreas, thyroid, and testis. Flow cytometric analysis
demonstrated eosinophil-specific expression of SIGLEC10, but at a lower
level than that of SIGLEC8 (605639). Expression was also detected on
monocytes and a CD16 (146740)-positive/CD56-negative natural killer-like
lymphocyte population. After sialidase treatment, which is necessary for
unmasking the sialic acid-binding site on SIGLECs interacting with cell
surface sialic acids, cells expressing SIGLEC10 bound to red blood
cells. Immunoprecipitation analysis indicated expression of a 100- to
120-kD monomeric protein, higher than the predicted molecular mass,
suggesting that SIGLEC10 is glycosylated.

By random sequencing and by comparison with known SIGLEC sequences, Li
et al. (2001) independently cloned SIGLEC10 from a dendritic cell cDNA
library. The cDNA predicted a deduced 607-amino acid protein containing
3 C2-set domains and 3 putative N-glycosylation sites. Northern blot
analysis of multiple human tissues revealed a transcript of about 3.3 kb
in peripheral blood lymphocytes, ovary, and spleen, and a transcript of
about 1.8 kb in liver, spleen, thymus, and lung.

Using the positional candidate cloning approach, Yousef et al. (2001)
identified SIGLEC10 and found that it encodes 3 variants: a deduced
protein of 697 amino acids, a shorter variant missing exon 8, and a
variant with multiple combined exons including intronic sequences.
RT-PCR detected expression of SIGLEC10 primarily in bone marrow, spleen,
brain, small intestine, colon, and spinal cord.

GENE FUNCTION

With use of SIGLEC10-transfected COS-7 cells, Li et al. (2001) found
moderate red blood cell binding and rosette formation that was augmented
by sialidase pretreatment to eliminate sialylated (cis ligands) on the
COS-7 cell surface. With use of polyacrylamide glycoconjugates, they
determined that SIGLEC10 preferentially bound glycoconjugates carrying
sialic acid in either alpha-2,3 or alpha-2,6 linkages, similar to the
binding observed for SIGLEC5 (604200).

Pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and danger (cell
injury)-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) both trigger activation of
the innate immune system. Chen et al. (2009) reported that Cd24
(600074)-deficient mice exhibit increased susceptibility to DAMPs but
not PAMPs. CD24 associates with high mobility group box-1 (HMGB1;
163905), heat shock protein-70 (HSP70; 140550), and heat shock
protein-90 (HSP90; 140571). CD24 negatively regulates their stimulatory
activity and inhibits nuclear factor kappa-B (see 164011) activation.
Chen et al. (2009) reported that this occurs at least in part through
CD24 association with SIGLEC10 in humans or SiglecG in mice. Chen et al.
(2009) concluded that the CD24-SiglecG pathway protects the host against
a lethal response to pathologic cell death and discriminates danger-
versus pathogen-associated molecular patterns.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yousef et al. (2001) determined that the SIGLEC10 gene contains 11 exons
and spans about 6.5 kb.

MAPPING

Using FISH, Munday et al. (2001) mapped the SIGLEC10 gene to 19q13.3,
where it is closely linked to other CD33-related SIGLECs. Yousef et al.
(2001) identified the SIGLEC10 gene on overlapping BAC clones localized
to chromosome 19q13.4. SIGLEC10 lies 278 kb telomeric to SIGLEC9
(605640) and 35 kb centromeric to SIGLEC8.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, G.-Y.; Tang, J.; Zheng, P.; Liu, Y.: CD24 and Siglec-10
selectively repress tissue damage-induced immune responses. Science 323:
1722-1725, 2009.

2. Li, N.; Zhang, W.; Wan, T.; Zhang, J.; Chen, T.; Yu, Y.; Wang,
J.; Cao, X.: Cloning and characterization of Siglec-10, a novel sialic
acid binding member of the Ig superfamily, from human dendritic cells. J.
Biol. Chem. 276: 28106-28112, 2001.

3. Munday, J.; Kerr, S.; Ni, J.; Cornish, A. L.; Zhang, J. Q.; Nicoll,
G.; Floyd, H.; Mattei, M.-G.; Moore, P.; Liu, D.; Crocker, P. R.:
Identification, characterization and leucocyte expression of Siglec-10,
a novel human sialic acid-binding receptor. Biochem. J. 355: 489-497,
2001.

4. Yousef, G. M.; Ordon, M. H.; Foussias, G.; Diamandis, E. P.: Molecular
characterization, tissue expression, and mapping of a novel Siglec-like
gene (SLG2) with three splice variants. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 284:
900-910, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/18/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/11/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/9/2001

EDITED alopez: 06/23/2009
terry: 6/18/2009
carol: 6/12/2002
carol: 6/11/2002
mgross: 7/9/2001

194536	TITLE *194536 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 12; ZNF12
;;KOX3
DESCRIPTION 
MAPPING

Seite et al. (1991) localized 1 member of the human zinc finger Kruppel
family, ZNF12 (KOX3), to chromosome 7p22-p21 by a combination of
analysis of mouse-human somatic cell hybrids and in situ hybridization.
Rousseau-Merck et al. (1993) described pulsed field gel electrophoresis
experiments indicating that ZNF12 and ZNF26 (194537) are within the same
DNA fragment less than 300 kb long.

HISTORY

The control of gene expression in prokaryotes and eukaryotes is
mediated, at least in part, by the binding of regulatory proteins to
specific DNA sequences. Many of these proteins share evolutionarily
conserved DNA binding domains, e.g. homeodomains (Gehring, 1987) or zinc
finger structures (Schuh et al., 1986). These homologies have been used
to clone individual genes of these multigene families from higher
eukaryotic organisms.

REFERENCE 1. Gehring, W. J.: Homeo boxes in the study of development. Science 236:
1245-1252, 1987.

2. Rousseau-Merck, M.-F.; Hillion, J.; Jonveaux, P.; Couillin, P.;
Seite, P.; Thiesen, H.-J.; Berger, R.: Chromosomal localization of
9 KOX zinc finger genes: physical linkages suggest clustering of KOX
genes on chromosomes 12, 16, and 19. Hum. Genet. 92: 583-587, 1993.

3. Schuh, R.; Aicher, W.; Gaul, U.; Cote, S.; Preiss, A.; Maier, D.;
Seifert, E.; Nauber, U.; Schroder, C.; Kemler, R.; Jackle, H.: A
conserved family of nuclear proteins containing structural elements
of the finger protein encoded by Kruppel, a Drosophila segmentation
gene. Cell 47: 1025-1032, 1986.

4. Seite, P.; Huebner, K.; Rousseau-Merck, M. F.; Berger, R.; Thiesen,
H. J.: Two human genes encoding zinc finger proteins, ZNF12 (KOX3)
and ZNF26 (KOX20), map to chromosomes 7p22-p21 and 12q24.33, respectively. Hum.
Genet. 86: 585-590, 1991.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/28/1991

EDITED alopez: 07/07/2010
terry: 3/19/2004
dkim: 6/25/1998
mark: 5/14/1996
carol: 2/24/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 5/28/1991

613939	TITLE *613939 SPERMATOGENESIS-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 20; SPATA20
;;SPERM-SPECIFIC PROTEIN 411; SSP411
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Shi et al. (2004) cloned rat Spata20, which they called Ssp411, and they
identified human SSP411 by database analysis. The deduced 787-amino acid
human protein shares 87% identity with rat Ssp411. SSP411 contains an
N-terminal CxxC thioredoxin (TXN; 187700)-like motif (CHWC) that is
conserved in human, mouse, and rat. Rat Ssp411 also has putative sites
for N- and O-glycosylation and phosphorylation. The N-terminal region of
rat Ssp411 was predicted to assume a thioredoxin fold with a potential
active-site disulfide bond between the cysteines of the CHWC motif.
Northern blot and semiquantitative RT-PCR analyses of rat tissues
detected Ssp411 in testis only, where it was expressed in spermatids,
but not in spermatocytes or spermatogonia. In situ hybridization of
adult rat testis detected Ssp411 in round spermatids and early elongated
spermatids. Immunohistochemical analysis detected Ssp411 protein
predominantly in elongated spermatids.

GENE STRUCTURE

Shi et al. (2004) determined that the SPATA20 gene contains 16 exons and
spans 8.6 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Shi et al. (2004) mapped the SPATA20 gene
to chromosome 17. They mapped the mouse Spata20 gene to chromosome 11.

Hartz (2011) mapped the SPATA20 gene to chromosome 17q21.33 based on an
alignment of the SPATA20 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK025000) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  4/19/2011.

2. Shi, H.-J.; Wu, A. Z.; Santos, M.; Feng, Z.-M.; Huang, L.; Chen,
Y.-M.; Zhu, K.; Chen, C.-L. C.: Cloning and characterization of rat
spermatid protein SSP411: a thioredoxin-like protein. J. Androl. 25:
479-493, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/27/2011

EDITED mgross: 04/27/2011

603533	TITLE *603533 ADAPTOR-RELATED PROTEIN COMPLEX 1, GAMMA-1 SUBUNIT; AP1G1
;;ADAPTIN, GAMMA; ADTG;;
CLATHRIN-ASSOCIATED/ASSEMBLY/ADAPTOR PROTEIN, LARGE, GAMMA-1; CLAPG1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Adaptins are important components of heterotetrameric adaptor complexes
(APs) whose role is to promote the formation of clathrin-coated pits and
vesicles. The AP1 adaptor complex, localized at the trans-Golgi network,
is composed of 2 approximately 100-kD subunits, beta-prime-adaptin
(600157) and gamma-adaptin; 1 medium subunit, AP47 (603535); and 1 small
subunit, AP19 (603531). By screening a human fetal brain library with a
mouse gamma-adaptin cDNA, Peyrard et al. (1998) isolated cDNAs encoding
human gamma-adaptin. The predicted 825-amino acid protein shares 99%
identity with mouse gamma-adaptin. Northern blot analysis revealed that
gamma-adaptin was expressed as a 7.5-kb transcript in all human tissues
tested. An additional 4.4-kb mRNA was present in most tissues, and an
8.5-kb mRNA was detected in pancreas and peripheral blood leukocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

Doray et al. (2002) demonstrated that the Golgi-localized,
gamma-ear-containing adenosine diphosphate ribosylation factor-binding
proteins (GGA1, 606004 and GGA3, 606006) and the AP1 complex colocalize
in clathrin-coated buds of the trans-Golgi networks of mouse L cells and
human HeLa cells. Binding studies revealed a direct interaction between
the hinge domains of the GGAs and the gamma-ear domain of AP1. Further,
AP1 contained bound casein kinase-2 (see CSNK2A1, 115440) that
phosphorylated GGA1 and GGA3, thereby causing autoinhibition. Doray et
al. (2002) demonstrated that this autoinhibition could induce the
directed transfer of mannose 6-phosphate receptors (see 154540) from the
GGAs to AP1. Mannose 6-phosphate receptors that were defective in
binding to GGAs were poorly incorporated into adaptor protein complex
containing clathrin coated vesicles. Thus, Doray et al. (2002) concluded
that GGAs and the AP1 complex interact to package mannose 6-phosphate
receptors into AP1-containing coated vesicles.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids and by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Peyrard et al. (1998) mapped the gamma-adaptin gene to
16q23.

REFERENCE 1. Doray, B.; Ghosh, P.; Griffith, J.; Geuze, H. J.; Kornfeld, S.
: Cooperation of GGAs and AP-1 in packaging MPRs at the trans-Golgi
network. Science 297: 1700-1703, 2002.

2. Peyrard, M.; Parveneh, S.; Lagercrantz, S.; Ekman, M.; Fransson,
I.; Sahlen, S.; Dumanski, J. P.: Cloning, expression pattern, and
chromosomal assignment to 16q23 of the human gamma-adaptin gene (ADTG). Genomics 50:
275-280, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/22/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/15/1999

EDITED carol: 01/27/2012
alopez: 10/23/2002
alopez: 10/22/2002
carol: 9/19/2000
carol: 3/22/1999
alopez: 2/15/1999

123695	TITLE *123695 PHOSPHATE CYTIDYLYLTRANSFERASE 1, CHOLINE, ALPHA ISOFORM; PCYT1A
;;PHOSPHATE CYTIDYLYLTRANSFERASE 1, CHOLINE; PCYT1;;
CYTIDYLYLTRANSFERASE, CTP-PHOSPHOCHOLINE; CTPCT;;
CHOLINE-PHOSPHATE CYTIDYLYLTRANSFERASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The rate-controlling enzyme in the phosphatidylcholine biosynthetic
pathway is CTP-phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase (EC 2.7.7.15). In
cultured eukaryotic cells, this enzyme is essential for survival. The
alpha isoform is located in the nucleus and is regulated by reversible
phosphorylation and membrane association (summary by Rutherford et al.,
1993). See 604926 for a discussion of the beta isoform.

CLONING

Rutherford et al. (1993) cloned and sequenced the murine cDNA for
CTP-phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase. Using PCR with degenerate
oligonucleotide primers based on rodent Ctpct sequences, Kalmar et al.
(1994) isolated a cDNA encoding human CTPCT from an erythroleukemic K562
cell cDNA library. The human nucleotide sequence, encoding a 367-amino
acid polypeptide, is 89% identical to the rat nucleotide sequence. The
catalytic domain of human CTPCT has homology to regions of Bacillus
subtilis glycerol phosphate cytidylyltransferase and yeast MUQ1. Kalmar
et al. (1994) observed significant identity between the alpha-helical
membrane-binding domains of CTPCT and soybean oleosin. Expressed CTPCT
had lipid-dependent cytidylyltransferase activity.

MAPPING

By Southern blot hybridization of DNAs from a panel of interspecific
backcross progeny, Rutherford et al. (1993) mapped the mouse Ctpct gene
to chromosome 16 between the murine homologs of the STF1 (184600) and
SST (182450) genes. Since both of these genes are on 3q in the human,
the PCYT1A gene is predicted by homology to map to the same location.
The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PCYT1A
gene to chromosome 3q (TMAP sts-L28957).

REFERENCE 1. Kalmar, G. B.; Kay, R. J.; LaChance, A. C.; Cornell, R. B.: Primary
structure and expression of a human CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1219: 328-334, 1994.

2. Rutherford, M. S.; Rock, C. O.; Jenkins, N. A.; Gilbert, D. J.;
Tessner, T. G.; Copeland, N. G.; Jackowski, S.: The gene for murine
CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase (Ctpct) is located on mouse
chromosome 16. Genomics 18: 698-701, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 5/8/2000
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 7/12/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/17/1994

EDITED alopez: 09/18/2012
carol: 2/2/2009
carol: 5/8/2000
alopez: 7/12/1999
psherman: 5/6/1999
psherman: 6/9/1998
carol: 6/21/1994
jason: 6/17/1994

608760	TITLE *608760 AUTOPHAGY 7, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; ATG7
;;APG7, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF, APG7;;
APG7-LIKE; APG7L;;
GSA7
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Autophagy is a process of bulk degradation of cytoplasmic components by
the lysosomal/vacuolar system. ATG7 is a ubiquitin-activating enzyme E1
(see 314370)-like protein essential for the Apg12 (ATG12; 609608)
conjugation system that mediates membrane fusion in autophagy (Tanida et
al., 2001).

CLONING

Yuan et al. (1999) identified several APG7L ESTs by searching a database
for sequences similar to P. pastoris Apg7, and they sequenced an APG7L
cDNA from an infant brain cDNA library. The deduced 703-amino acid
protein contains a central putative E1-like ATP-binding site (GxGxxG),
conserved charged amino acids flanking the GxGxxG motif, and a putative
E1 active site with a conserved catalytic cysteine. APG7L shares
similarity with the E1 enzymes UBA2 and UBA3 (UBE1C; 603172), and it
shares 38% identity with yeast Apg7. EST database analysis indicated
that APG7L is expressed by many diverse tissues.

Tanida et al. (2001) found that APG7L expressed by transfected human
embryonic kidney cells had an apparent molecular mass of about 80 kD.

MAPPING

Gross (2012) mapped the ATG7 gene to chromosome 3p25.3 based on an
alignment of the ATG7 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC000091) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Tanida et al. (2001) found that APG7L
interacts with APG12L. Site-directed mutagenesis revealed that cys572 of
APG7L is an active site cysteine essential for formation of the
APG7L-APG12L intermediate. Overexpression of APG7L enhanced the
formation of the APG5L (ATG5; 604261)-APG12L conjugate, indicating that
APG7L is an E1-like enzyme essential for the APG12 conjugation system.
Cross-linking experiments and glycerol-gradient centrifugation analysis
showed that APG7L forms homodimers. Coimmunoprecipitation studies
indicated that 3 human Apg8 counterparts, GATE16 (GABARAPL2; 607452),
GABARAP (605125), and MAP1ALC3 (601242), also form conjugates with
APG7L. Like E1 enzymes, APG7L carrying a mutation of the active site
cysteine (cys572 to ser) formed a stable intermediate via an O-ester
bond instead of a thioester bond.

Tanida et al. (2002) found that ATG7 coimmunoprecipitated with ATG3
(609606), indicating that ATG3 forms an E1-E2 complex with ATG7, similar
to the yeast Apg3-Apg7 complex.

Yu et al. (2004) defined a novel molecular pathway in which activation
of the receptor-interacting protein (RIP; 603453), a serine-threonine
kinase, and Jun amino-terminal kinase (601158) induced cell death with
the morphology of autophagy. Autophagic death required the genes ATG7
(GSA7) and beclin-1 (604378) and was induced by caspase-8 (601763)
inhibition. Yu et al. (2004) cautioned that clinical therapies involving
caspase inhibitors may arrest apoptosis but also have the unanticipated
effect of promoting autophagic cell death.

Sanjuan et al. (2007) demonstrated that a particle that engages
Toll-like receptors on a murine macrophage while it is phagocytosed
triggers the autophagosome marker LC3 (601242) to be rapidly recruited
to the phagosome in a manner that depends on the autophagy pathway
proteins ATG5 and ATG7; this process is preceded by recruitment of
beclin-1 and phosphoinositide-3-OH kinase activity. Translocation of
beclin-1 and LC3 to the phagosome was not associated with observable
double-membrane structures characteristic of conventional
autophagosomes, but was associated with phagosome fusion with lysosomes,
leading to rapid acidification and enhanced killing of the ingested
organism.

Nishida et al. (2009) showed that mouse cells lacking Atg5 or Atg7 can
still form autophagosomes/autolysosomes and perform autophagy-mediated
protein degradation when subjected to certain stressors. Lipidation of
LC3 to form LC3-II, generally considered to be a good indicator of
macroautophagy, did not occur during the Atg5/Atg7-independent
alternative process of macroautophagy. Nishida et al. (2009) also found
that this alternative process of macroautophagy was regulated by several
autophagic proteins, including Unc51-like kinase-1 (ULK1; 603168) and
beclin-1. Unlike conventional macroautophagy, autophagosomes seemed to
be generated in a Rab9 (300284)-dependent manner by the fusion of
isolation membranes with vesicles derived from the trans-Golgi and late
endosomes. In vivo, Atg5-independent alternative macroautophagy was
detected in several embryonic tissues. It also had a function in
clearing mitochondria during erythroid maturation. Nishida et al. (2009)
concluded that their results indicate that mammalian macroautophagy can
occur through at least 2 different pathways: an Atg5/Atg7-dependent
conventional pathway and an Atg5/Atg7-independent alternative pathway.

Lee et al. (2012) found that starved mouse embryonic fibroblasts lacking
the essential autophagy gene product Atg7 failed to undergo cell cycle
arrest. Independent of its E1-like enzymatic activity, Atg7 could bind
to the tumor suppressor p53 (191170) to regulate the transcription of
the gene encoding the cell cycle inhibitor p21(CDKN1A) (116899). With
prolonged metabolic stress, the absence of Atg7 resulted in augmented
DNA damage with increased p53-dependent apoptosis. Inhibition of the DNA
damage response by deletion of the protein kinase Chk2 (604373)
partially rescued postnatal lethality in Atg7 -/- mice. Thus, Lee et al.
(2012) concluded that when nutrients are limited, Atg7 regulates
p53-dependent cell cycle and cell death pathways.

ANIMAL MODEL

Komatsu et al. (2006) reported that loss of ATG7, a gene essential for
autophagy, leads to neurodegeneration. They found that mice lacking Atg7
specifically in the central nervous system showed behavioral defects,
including abnormal limb clasping reflexes and a reduction in coordinated
movement, and died with 28 weeks of birth. Atg7 deficiency caused
massive neuronal loss in the cerebral and cerebellar cortices. Notably,
polyubiquitinated proteins accumulated in autophagy-deficient neurons as
inclusion bodies, which increased in size and number with aging. Komatsu
et al. (2006) commented that there was no obvious alteration in
proteasome function. The authors concluded that autophagy is essential
for the survival of neural cells, and that impairment of autophagy is
implicated in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders involving
ubiquitin-containing inclusion bodies.

Komatsu et al. (2007) found that conditional knockout mice with Purkinje
cell-specific deletion of Atg7 developed abnormal axonal swellings and
dystrophy of Purkinje cell axon terminals in the deep cerebellar nuclei.
The distal axons of Purkinje cells in the knockout mice accumulated
aberrant membranous structures that were different from double-membrane
vacuole-like structures found in the distal axons of Purkinje cells from
wildtype animals. The findings indicated impaired autophagic activity in
the axons of mutant cells, which resulted in cell-autonomous axonopathy
and Purkinje cell death. Dendritic spines were comparatively much less
affected. Mutant mice subsequently developed deficits in locomotion and
motor coordination. Komatsu et al. (2007) concluded that autophagy is
required for normal axon terminal membrane trafficking and turnover and
plays an essential role in the maintenance of axonal homeostasis and
prevention of axonal degeneration.

Cadwell et al. (2009) generated mice with a conditional deletion of Atg7
in the intestinal epithelium and observed that the ileal pathology was
indistinguishable from that of mice with disruption of Atg16l1 (610767)
or Atg5: the Paneth cells displayed a reduced number of granules,
dramatically increased cytoplasmic vesicles, abnormal mitochondria, and
lysozyme (153450) with striking defects in distribution including
diffuse cytoplasmic expression. Cadwell et al. (2009) concluded that a
defect in the autophagy pathway in the intestinal epithelium is
responsible for the observed Paneth cell pathology.

REFERENCE 1. Cadwell, K.; Patel, K. K.; Komatsu, M.; Virgin, H. W., IV; Stappenbeck,
T. S.: A common role for Atg16l1, Atg5 and Atg7 in small intestinal
Paneth cells and Crohn disease. Autophagy 5: 250-252, 2009.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/9/2012.

3. Komatsu, M.; Waguri, S.; Chiba, T.; Murata, S.; Iwata, J.; Tanida,
I.; Ueno, T.; Koike, M.; Uchiyama, Y.; Kominami, E.; Tanaka, K.:
Loss of autophagy in the central nervous system causes neurodegeneration
in mice. Nature 441: 880-884, 2006.

4. Komatsu, M.; Wang, Q. J.; Holstein, G. R.; Friedrich, V. L., Jr.;
Iwata, J.; Kominami, E.; Chait, B. T.; Tanaka, K.; Yue, Z: Essential
role for autophagy protein Atg7 in the maintenance of axonal homeostasis
and the prevention of axonal degeneration. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104:
14489-14494, 2007.

5. Lee, I. H.; Kawai, Y.; Fergusson, M. M.; Rovira, I. I.; Bishop,
A. J. R.; Motoyama, N.; Cao, L.; Finkel, T.: Atg7 modulates p53 activity
to regulate cell cycle and survival during metabolic stress. Science 336:
225-228, 2012. Note: Erratum: Science 337: 910 only, 2012. Note: Erratum:
Science 341: 457 only, 2013.

6. Nishida, Y.; Arakawa, S.; Fujitani, K.; Yamaguchi, H.; Mizuta,
T.; Kanaseki, T.; Komatsu, M.; Otsu, K.; Tsujimoto, Y.; Shimizu, S.
: Discovery of Atg5/Atg7-independent alternative macroautophagy. Nature 461:
654-658, 2009.

7. Sanjuan, M. A.; Dillon, C. P.; Tait, S. W. G.; Moshiach, S.; Dorsey,
F.; Connell, S.; Komatsu, M.; Tanaka, K.; Cleveland, J. L.; Withoff,
S.; Green, D. R.: Toll-like receptor signalling in macrophages links
the autophagy pathway to phagocytosis. Nature 450: 1253-1257, 2007.

8. Tanida, I.; Tanida-Miyake, E.; Komatsu, M.; Ueno, T.; Kominami,
E.: Human Apg3p/Aut1p homologue is an authentic E2 enzyme for multiple
substrates, GATE-16, GABARAP, and MAP-LC3, and facilitates the conjugation
of hApg12p to hApg5p. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 13739-13744, 2002.

9. Tanida, I.; Tanida-Miyake, T.; Ueno, T.; Kominami, E.: The human
homolog of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Apg7p is a protein-activating
enzyme for multiple substrates including human Apg12p, GATE-16, GABARAP,
and MAP-LC3. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 1701-1706, 2001.

10. Yu, L.; Alva, A.; Su, H.; Dutt, P.; Freundt, E.; Welsh, S.; Baehrecke,
E. H.; Lenardo, M. J.: Regulation of an ATG7-beclin 1 program of
autophagic cell death by caspase-8. Science 304: 1500-1502, 2004.

11. Yuan, W.; Stromhaug, P. E.; Dunn, W. A., Jr.: Glucose-induced
autophagy of peroxisomes in Pichia pastoris requires a unique E1-like
protein. Molec. Biol. Cell 10: 1353-1366, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/9/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/8/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/16/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/29/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/11/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/24/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/21/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/26/2005

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/22/2004

EDITED mgross: 10/14/2013
tpirozzi: 10/1/2013
mgross: 5/9/2012
alopez: 5/8/2012
terry: 5/8/2012
alopez: 11/18/2009
terry: 11/16/2009
wwang: 6/8/2009
terry: 5/29/2009
wwang: 3/19/2008
ckniffin: 2/11/2008
alopez: 2/5/2008
terry: 1/24/2008
alopez: 7/26/2006
terry: 7/21/2006
mgross: 9/26/2005
alopez: 6/22/2004
mgross: 6/22/2004

602667	TITLE *602667 NIBRIN; NBN
;;p95 PROTEIN OF THE MRE11/RAD50 COMPLEX;;
NBS1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Varon et al. (1998) described the positional cloning of a gene encoding
a novel protein, termed nibrin, that mapped within a 300-kb critical
region for Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS; 251260) on chromosome 8q21.
Northern blot analysis revealed mRNA transcripts of 2.4 and 4.4 kb in
all tissues examined. The predicted 754-amino acid protein contains 2
domains found in cell cycle checkpoint proteins, a forkhead-associated
domain and an adjacent breast cancer carboxy-terminal domain.

Carney et al. (1998) independently isolated the gene for NBS. They
characterized the gene encoding p95, a member of the MRE11/RAD50
double-strand break (DSB) repair complex. Comparison of the p95 cDNA to
the NBS1 cDNA of Varon et al. (1998) indicated that the p95 and NBS1
genes are identical.

Matsuura et al. (1998) reported the positional cloning of the gene
responsible for the Nijmegen breakage syndrome, NBS1, from an 800-kb
candidate region. They found that the gene is expressed at high levels
in testis, suggesting that it may be involved in meiotic recombination.

GENE FUNCTION

The MRE11/RAD50 DSB repair complex consists of 5 proteins: p95 (NBS1),
p200, p400, MRE11, and RAD50 (604040). Carney et al. (1998) found that
p95 was absent from NBS cells established from NBS patients and that p95
deficiency in these cells completely abrogated the formation of
MRE11/RAD50 ionizing radiation-induced foci. The implication of the
MRE11/RAD50/p95 protein complex in NBS reveals a direct molecular link
between DSB repair and cell cycle checkpoint functions.

Zhong et al. (1999) demonstrated association of BRCA1 (113705) with the
RAD50/MRE11/p95 complex. Upon irradiation, BRCA1 was detected in the
nucleus, in discrete foci which colocalize with RAD50. Formation of
irradiation-induced foci positive for BRCA1, RAD50, MRE11, or p95 was
dramatically reduced in HCC/1937 breast cancer cells carrying a
homozygous mutation in BRCA1 but was restored by transfection of
wildtype BRCA1. Ectopic expression of wildtype, but not mutated, BRCA1
in these cells rendered them less sensitive to the DNA damage agent
methyl methanesulfonate. These data suggested to the authors that BRCA1
is important for the cellular responses to DNA damage that are mediated
by the RAD50-MRE11-p95 complex.

Wang et al. (2000) used immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry
analyses to identify BRCA1-associated proteins. They found that BRCA1 is
part of a large multisubunit protein complex of tumor suppressors, DNA
damage sensors, and signal transducers. They named this complex BASC,
for 'BRCA1-associated genome surveillance complex.' Among the DNA repair
proteins identified in the complex were ATM (607585), BLM (604610), MSH2
(609309), MSH6 (600678), MLH1 (120436), the RAD50-MRE11-NBS1 complex,
and the RFC1 (102579)-RFC2 (600404)-RFC4 (102577) complex. Confocal
microscopy demonstrated that BRCA1, BLM, and the RAD50-MRE11-NBS1
complex colocalize to large nuclear foci. Wang et al. (2000) suggested
that BASC may serve as a sensor of abnormal DNA structures and/or as a
regulator of the postreplication repair process.

Because of the similarities between ataxia-telangiectasia (AT; 208900)
and Nijmegen breakage syndrome, Lim et al. (2000) evaluated the
functional interactions between the ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM;
607585) and NBS1 genes. Activation of the ATM kinase by ionizing
radiation and induction of ATM-dependent responses in NBS cells
indicated that NBS1 may not be required for signaling to ATM after
ionizing radiation. However, NBS1 was phosphorylated on serine-343 in an
ATM-dependent manner in vitro and in vivo after ionizing radiation. An
NBS1 construct mutated at the ATM phosphorylation site abrogated an
S-phase checkpoint induced by ionizing radiation in normal cells and
failed to compensate for this functional deficiency in NBS cells. These
observations linked ATM and NBS1 in a common signaling pathway and
provided an explanation for the phenotypic similarities between the 2
disorders.

Gatei et al. (2000) demonstrated that nibrin is phosphorylated within 1
hour of treatment of cells with ionizing radiation. This response was
abrogated in AT cells that either do not express ATM protein or express
near full-length mutant protein. Gatei et al. (2000) also showed that
ATM physically interacts with and phosphorylates nibrin on serine-343
both in vivo and in vitro. Phosphorylation of this site appears to be
functionally important because mutated nibrin (S343A) does not
completely complement radiosensitivity in NBS cells. ATM phosphorylation
of nibrin does not affect nibrin-MRE11-RAD50 association, as revealed by
radiation-induced foci formation. Gatei et al. (2000) concluded that
their data provide a biochemical explanation for the similarity in
phenotype between AT and NBS.

Zhao et al. (2000) demonstrated that phosphorylation of NBS1, induced by
ionizing radiation, requires catalytically active ATM. Complexes
containing ATM and NBS1 exist in vivo in both untreated cells and cells
treated with ionizing radiation. Zhao et al. (2000) identified 2
residues of NBS1, serine-278 and serine-343, that are phosphorylated in
vitro by ATM and whose modification in vivo is essential for the
cellular response to DNA damage. This response includes S-phase
checkpoint activation, formation of the NBS1/Mre11/Rad50 nuclear foci,
and rescue of hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation. Zhao et al. (2000)
concluded that together, these results demonstrated a biochemical link
between cell cycle checkpoints activated by DNA damage and DNA repair in
2 genetic diseases with overlapping phenotypes.

Zhu et al. (2000) showed by coimmunoprecipitation that a small fraction
of RAD50, MRE11, and NBS1 is associated with the telomeric
repeat-binding factor TRF2 (602027). Indirect immunofluorescence
demonstrated the presence of RAD50 and MRE11 at interphase telomeres.
NBS1 was associated with TRF2 and telomeres in S phase, but not in G1 or
G2. Although the MRE11 complex accumulated in irradiation-induced foci
(IRIFs) in response to gamma-irradiation, TRF2 did not relocate to IRIFs
and irradiation did not affect the association of TRF2 with the MRE11
complex, arguing against a role for TRF2 in double-strand break repair.
Zhu et al. (2000) proposed that the MRE11 complex functions at
telomeres, possibly by modulating t-loop formation.

Lombard and Guarente (2000) showed that p95 and MRE11 are specifically
present on telomeres during meiosis. They suggested that p95 and MRE11
may have a role in telomere maintenance in mammals, analogous to the
role their homologs play in yeast.

Wu et al. (2000) reported that NBS is specifically phosphorylated in
response to gamma-radiation, ultraviolet light, and exposure to
hydroxyurea. Phosphorylation of NBS mediated by gamma-radiation, but not
that induced by hydroxyurea or ultraviolet light, was markedly reduced
in ATM cells. In vivo, NBS was phosphorylated on many serine residues,
of which serine-343, serine-397, and serine-615 were phosphorylated by
ATM in vitro. At least 2 of these sites were underphosphorylated in ATM
cells. Inactivation of these serines by mutation partially abrogated
ATM-dependent phosphorylation. Reconstituting NBS cells with a mutant
form of NBS that cannot be phosphorylated at selected ATM-dependent
serine residues led to a specific reduction in clonogenic survival after
gamma-radiation. Wu et al. (2000) concluded that phosphorylation of NBS
by ATM is critical for certain responses of human cells to DNA damage.

Wilda et al. (2000) studied the expression of Nbs1 in mouse embryos at
different developmental stages as well as in adult mice. Although a low
level of expression was observed in all tissues, highly specific
expression was observed in organs with physiologic DNA double-strand
breakage (DSB), such as testis, thymus, and spleen. Enhanced expression
was also found at sites of high proliferative activity: the
subventricular layer of the telencephalon and diencephalon, the liver,
lung, kidney, and gut, as well as striated and smooth muscle cells in
various organs. In the adult cerebellum, the postmitotic Purkinje cells
were marked specifically. The authors hypothesized that in addition to
the role of the Nbs1 gene product as part of a DNA DSB repair complex,
the Nbs1 gene product may serve further functions during development.

Chen et al. (2000) reported that the NBS1 protein and histone gamma-H2AX
(601772), which associate with irradiation-induced DNA DSBs, are also
found at sites of V(D)J (variable, diversity, joining)
recombination-induced DSBs. In developing thymocytes, NBS1 and
gamma-H2AX form nuclear foci that colocalize with the T-cell
receptor-alpha (TCRA; see 186880) locus in response to
recombination-activating gene-1 (RAG1; 179615) protein-mediated V(D)J
cleavage. Chen et al. (2000) concluded that their results suggest that
surveillance of T-cell receptor recombination intermediates by NBS1 and
gamma-H2AX may be important for preventing oncogenic translocations.

Class switch recombination (CSR) is a region-specific DNA recombination
reaction that replaces one immunoglobulin heavy-chain constant region
gene with another. This enables a single variable region gene to be used
in conjunction with different downstream heavy-chain genes, each having
a unique biologic activity. Activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID;
605257), a putative RNA editing enzyme, is required for this action.
Petersen et al. (2001) reported that the Nijmegen breakage syndrome
protein and gamma-H2AX, which facilitate DNA double-strand break repair,
form nuclear foci at the heavy-chain constant region in the G1 phase of
the cell cycle in cells undergoing class switch recombination. Class
switch recombination is impaired in H2AX -/- mice. Localization of NBS1
and gamma-H2AX to the immunoglobulin heavy-chain locus during class
switch recombination is dependent on AID. In addition, AID is required
for induction of switch region-specific DNA lesions that precede class
switch recombination. Petersen et al. (2001) concluded that AID
functions upstream of the DNA modifications that initiate class switch
recombination.

Falck et al. (2002) demonstrated that experimental blockade of either
the NBS1-MRE11 function or the CHK2 (604373)-triggered events leads to a
partial radioresistant DNA synthesis phenotype in human cells. In
contrast, concomitant interference with NBS1-MRE11 and the CHK2-CDC25A
(116947)-CDK2 (116953) pathways entirely abolishes inhibition of DNA
synthesis induced by ionizing radiation, resulting in complete
radioresistant DNA synthesis analogous to that caused by defective ATM.
In addition, CDK2-dependent loading of CDC45 (603465) onto replication
origins, a prerequisite for recruitment of DNA polymerase, was prevented
upon irradiation of normal or NBS1/MRE11-defective cells but not cells
with defective ATM. Falck et al. (2002) concluded that in response to
ionizing radiation, phosphorylation of NBS1 and CHK2 by ATM triggers 2
parallel branches of the DNA damage-dependent S-phase checkpoint that
cooperate by inhibiting distinct steps of DNA replication.

In mammalian cells, a conserved multiprotein complex of MRE11, RAD50,
and NBS1 (MRN) is important for double-strand break repair, meiotic
recombination, and telomere maintenance. In the absence of the early
region E4, the double-stranded genome of adenoviruses is joined into
concatemers too large to be packaged. Stracker et al. (2002)
investigated the cellular proteins involved in the concatamer formation
and how they are inactivated by E4 products during a wildtype infection.
They demonstrated that concatamerization requires functional MRE11 and
NBS1, and that these proteins are found at foci adjacent to viral
replication centers. Infection with wildtype virus results in both
reorganization and degradation of members of the MRN complex. These
activities are mediated by 3 viral oncoproteins that prevent
concatamerization. This targeting of cellular proteins involved in the
genomic stability suggested a mechanism for 'hit-and-run' transformation
observed for these viral oncoproteins.

Franchitto and Pichierri (2002) reviewed the roles of RECQL2 (604611)
and RECQL3 (604610) in resolution of a stall in DNA replication, as well
as their possible interaction with the MRN complex.

Tauchi et al. (2002) established an Nbs1 knockout cell line by using the
hyperrecombinogenic chick B-cell line DT40. Exon 4 of the 3 Nbs1 alleles
in DT40 cells was targeted. The Nbs1 -/-/- cells were still viable,
although they exhibited slow growth owing to a prolonged cell cycle
time. The disruption of Nbs1 reduced gene conversion and sister
chromatid exchanges, similar to other homologous recombination-deficient
mutants. In fact, a site-specific double-strand break repair assay
showed a notable reduction of homologous recombination events following
generation of such breaks in Nbs1-disrupted cells. The rare
recombinations observed in the Nbs1-disrupted cells were frequently
found to have aberrant structures, which possibly arose from unusual
crossover events, suggesting that the NBS1 complex might be required to
process recombination intermediates. Thus, Tauchi et al. (2002)
demonstrated that NBS1 is essential for homologous
recombination-mediated repair in higher vertebrate cells.

Zhong et al. (2005) tested whether the MRN complex has a global
controlling role over ATR (601215) through the study of MRN deficiencies
generated by RNA interference. The MRN complex was required for
ATR-dependent phosphorylation of SMC1A (300040), which acts within
chromatin to ensure sister chromatid cohesion and to effect several DNA
damage responses. Novel phenotypes caused by MRN deficiency that support
a functional link between this complex, ATR, and SMC1A, included
hypersensitivity to UV exposure, a defective UV responsive intra-S phase
checkpoint, and a specific pattern of genomic instability. Zhong et al.
(2005) concluded that there is a controlling role for the MRN complex
over the ATR kinase, and that downstream events under this control are
broad, including both chromatin-associated and diffuse signaling
factors.

Yuan et al. (2007) found that NBS1, the regulatory subunit of MRN, was
acetylated, and that its acetylation level was tightly regulated by
SIRT1 (604479). SIRT1 associated with the MRN complex in human cells via
binding to NBS1, and SIRT1 maintained NBS1 in a hypoacetylated state, a
requirement for ionizing radiation-induced phosphorylation of NBS1 on
ser343. Yuan et al. (2007) concluded that deacetylation of NBS1 by SIRT1
plays a key role in regulation of the DNA damage response and
maintenance of genomic stability.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

The human RAD50/MRE11)/NBS1 complex (R/M/N) has a dynamic molecular
architecture consisting of a globular DNA binding domain from which two
50-nanometer coiled coils protrude. The coiled coils are flexible and
their apices can self-associate. The flexibility of the coiled coils
allows their apices to adopt an orientation favorable for interaction.
However, this also allows interaction between the tips of the 2 coiled
coils within the same complex, which competes with and frustrates the
intercomplex interaction required for DNA tethering. Moreno-Herrero et
al. (2005) showed that the dynamic architecture of the R/M/N complex is
markedly affected by DNA binding. DNA binding by the R/M/N globular
domain leads to parallel orientation of the coiled coils; this prevents
intracomplex interactions and favors intercomplex associations needed
for DNA tethering. The R/M/N complex thus is an example of a biologic
nanomachine in which binding to its ligand, in this case DNA, affects
the functional conformation of a domain located 50 nanometers distant.

GENE STRUCTURE

Varon et al. (1998) determined that the NBS1 gene spans more than 50 kb
and contains 16 exons.

MAPPING

Varon et al. (1998) mapped the NBS1 gene to chromosome 8q21. Carney et
al. (1998) mapped the gene to chromosome 8q21.3.

By computer-assisted analysis of 5 BAC clones and an EST sequence,
Tauchi et al. (1999) defined the genomic organization of an 800-kb
region on chromosome 8q21 as 5-prime C8ORF1 (604598), 3-prime NBS1,
5-prime DECR1 (222745), and 3-prime CALB1 (114050).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Varon et al. (1998) identified a truncating 5-bp deletion (602667.0001)
in the NBS1 gene in the majority of NBS patients studied, all of whom
carried a conserved marker haplotype. Five additional truncating
mutations were identified in patients with other distinct haplotypes.
The domains found in nibrin and the NBS phenotype suggest that this
disorder is caused by defective responses to DNA double-strand breaks
(DSB).

Matsuura et al. (1998) detected the 5-bp deletion (602667.0001) in NBS1
in 13 individuals of Slavic or German origin and concluded that it is
likely to be a founder mutation.

The findings that the ataxia-telangiectasia gene is involved in the
pathogenesis of T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia and other forms of
leukemia, that there is a high predisposition of NBS patients to
lymphoid malignancy, and the fact that NBS and ATM are indistinguishable
at the cellular level, prompted Varon et al. (2001) to investigate
whether the NBS1 gene is involved in the pathogenesis of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and whether it influences the course of the
disease and so has its place among the tumor suppressor genes. They
analyzed samples from 47 children with first relapse of ALL for
mutations in all 16 exons of the NBS1 gene and identified 4 novel amino
acid substitutions in 7 children. Germline origin of an I171V
(602667.0007) mutation was confirmed in 3 patients, whereas another
change, D95N, was present only in leukemic cells. No additional
mutations were found on the second allele in any of these 7 patients.

Tanzarella et al. (2003) found that heterozygous individuals from 3
unrelated NBS families with distinct gene deletion mutations had
spontaneous chromosome instability (chromatid and chromosomal breaks as
well as rearrangements) in blood lymphocytes, but their lymphoblastoid
cell lines were not different from controls in x-ray G2 sensitivity.
Immunoprecipitation of nibrin detected the normal and variant proteins
in carriers from all 3 families.

Nakanishi et al. (2002) reported a patient diagnosed with Fanconi anemia
(FA; 227650) on the basis of chromosome breakage induced by mitomycin C.
The individual showed atypical FA features, including features of NBS.
The clinical syndrome was severe, and the child died at 3 years of age,
similar to an affected cousin. Immunoblot analysis of primary
lymphocytes indicated expression of both unubiquitinated and
monoubiquitinated isoforms of FANCD2 (227646); however, no NBS1 protein
was expressed. Sequence analysis indicated that the patient cells
contained a tyr363-to-ter mutation in NBS1 (602667.0008), which resulted
in a truncated protein. Genomic sequence analysis showed that the
mutation was homozygous. By coimmunoprecipitation, Nakanishi et al.
(2002) found constitutive interaction between FANCD2 and NBS1, and they
presented evidence that these proteins interact in 2 distinct assemblies
to mediate S-phase checkpoint and resistance to mitomycin C-induced
chromosome damage. NBS1, ATM, and MRE11 were required for FANCD2
phosphorylation in response to radiation-induced S-phase checkpoint. The
assembly of NBS1, MRE11, RAD50, and FANCD2 within nuclear foci was
required for mitomycin C resistance.

Plisiecka-Halasa et al. (2002) looked for NBS1 gene alterations and
changes in nibrin expression in 162 human gynecologic tumors, mostly
ovarian. They identified the so-called Slavic mutation, 657del5
(602667.0001), in 2 of 117 carcinomas studied (1.7%). In both cases it
was present in the germline, and in 1 of these tumors there was loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) for the 657del5 mutation and loss of nibrin
expression.

In monozygotic twin brothers with a severe form of NBS, Seemanova et al.
(2006) identified compound heterozygosity for the 657del5 mutation and a
missense mutation (602667.0009) in the NBS1 gene.

ANIMAL MODEL

Zhu et al. (2001) generated mice deficient in NBS1 by targeted
disruption. Nbs1 -/- mice suffered early embryonic lethality and had
poorly developed embryonic and extraembryonic tissues. Blastocysts
showed greatly diminished expansion of the inner cell mass in culture,
suggesting that NBS1 mediates essential functions during proliferation
in the absence of externally induced damage. Zhu et al. (2001) concluded
that the complex phenotypes observed in NBS patients and cell lines may
not result from a complete inactivation of NBS1 but may instead result
from hypomorphic truncation mutations compatible with cell viability.

Demuth et al. (2004) used the Cre/loxP system to generate mice with an
inducible Nbs1-null mutation, allowing examination of DNA repair and
cell cycle checkpoints in the complete absence of nibrin. Induction of
the null mutation led to loss of the G2/M checkpoint, increased
chromosome damage, radiomimetic sensitivity, and cell death. In vivo,
lymphatic tissues, bone marrow, thymus, and spleen showed a dramatic
decrease in cell survival, whereas liver, kidney, and muscle showed no
effect on cell survival. In vitro, Nbs1-null murine fibroblasts could be
rescued from cell death by transfer of human NBS1 cDNA and, more
significantly, by a cDNA carrying the 5-bp deletion. Demuth et al.
(2004) concluded that the common human 5-bp deletion is hypomorphic and
that expression of a truncated protein may be sufficient to restore
nibrin's vital cellular functions.

Frappart et al. (2005) developed mice with Nbs1 inactivation targeted to
the central nervous system. Nbs1-deleted mice were viable and appeared
normal at birth, but growth retardation was evident by postnatal day 7,
and mutants were half the weight of control mice at weaning. All
Nbs1-deleted mice showed balance disorders, tremors, altered gait,
repetitive movements, and akinesis after postnatal day 7. Macroscopic
examination of brains from mutant mice showed reduced cerebella lacking
foliation. Histologic analysis indicated that Nbs1 loss caused
proliferation arrest of granule cell progenitors and apoptosis of
postmitotic cerebellar neurons. Nbs1-deficient neuroprogenitors showed
proliferation defects in culture, but no increase in apoptosis. They
also contained more chromosomal breaks, which were accompanied by Atm
(607585)-mediated p53 (TP53; 191170) activation. Depletion of p53
substantially rescued the neurologic defects of Nbs1 mutant mice.

Stracker et al. (2007) derived Nbs1 delta-C/delta-C mice in which the
C-terminal ATM interaction domain was deleted. Nbs1 delta-C/delta-C
cells exhibited intra-S-phase checkpoint defects, but were otherwise
indistinguishable from wildtype cells with respect to other checkpoint
functions, ionizing radiation sensitivity, and chromosome stability.
However, multiple tissues of Nbs1 delta-C/delta-C mice showed a severe
apoptotic defect, comparable to that of Atm- or Chk2 (604373)-deficient
animals. Analysis of p53 transcriptional targets and Atm substrates
showed that, in contrast to the phenotype of Chk2 -/- mice, Nbs1-deltaC
does not impair the induction of proapoptotic genes. Stracker et al.
(2007) concluded that instead, the defects observed in Nbs1
delta-C/delta-C mice resulted from impaired phosphorylation at ATM
targets including SMC1 (see 300040) and the proapoptotic factor BID
(601997).

Saidi et al. (2010) found that deletion of Nbs1 in T-cell precursors in
mice resulted in severe lymphopenia and hindered the transition of
double-negative-3 (DN3) thymocytes to DN4 due to abnormal Tcrb (see
186930) coding and signal joints, as well as the functions of Nbs1 in
T-cell expansion. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of TCR loci
revealed that Nbs1 depletion compromised the loading of Mre11/Rad50 to
V(D)J-generated DNA DSBs and thereby affected resection of DNA termini
and chromatin conformation of the postcleavage complex. The DN3-to-DN4
transition in the mutant mice, but not T-cell loss, could be relieved by
p53 deficiency. Ectopic Tcra/Tcrb expression also failed to rescue
T-cell lymphopenia in the mutant mice. Saidi et al. (2010) concluded
that NBS1 functions in both repair of V(D)J-generated DSBs and in
proliferation and that both functions are essential for T-cell
development.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NIJMEGEN BREAKAGE SYNDROME
OVARIAN CANCER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
NBN, 5-BP DEL, NT657

In patients of Slavic origin with Nijmegen breakage syndrome (251260),
Varon et al. (1998) identified a common deletion of 5 nucleotides in
exon 6 of the NBS1 gene (657del5), resulting in a frameshift and a
truncated protein. A total of 46 patients homozygous for this mutation
were identified. The mutation was found exclusively on a specific
'Slavic' haplotype of linked polymorphic markers.

Matsuura et al. (1998) found the same 5-bp deletion in the NBS1 gene in
13 NBS patients of Slavic or German origin. Twelve patients were
homozygous for the deletion and 1 was heterozygous. The deletion
introduced a premature termination signal at codon 218, which was
predicted to result in a severely truncated polypeptide. Matsuura et al.
(1998) concluded that they had identified the gene involved in NBS
because complementation was effected by a YAC that contained the gene
and because no (or extremely reduced) expression of the gene was found
in a patient without the deletion but with the NBS phenotype. The
presence of a founder mutation in 13 of 14 cases, with no demonstration
of the deletion in 50 normal individuals of the same ethnic origin or in
7 normal chromosomes from NBS parents, supported this conclusion.

The truncating 657del5 had been identified in 90% of NBS patients. NBS
shares a number of features with ataxia-telangiectasia (208900), the
most notable being high sensitivity to ionizing radiation and
predisposition to cancer. Patients who are heterozygous for the ATM
mutation are predisposed to breast cancer. Since the NBS phenotype at
the cellular level is very similar to that of ataxia-telangiectasia,
Carlomagno et al. (1999) screened 477 German breast cancer patients,
aged under 51 years, and 866 matched controls for the common NBS
mutation. They identified 1 carrier among the cases and 1 among the
controls, indicating that the population frequency of this NBS mutation
is 1 in 866 persons (95% CI = 1 in 34,376 to 1 in 156) and the estimated
prevalence of NBS is thus 1 in 3 million persons. The proportion of
breast cancer attributable to this mutation is less than 1%.

Kleier et al. (2000) reported a 5-year-old Bosnian boy with severe
microcephaly. Because of multiple structural aberrations involving
chromosomes 7 and 14 typical for ataxia-telangiectasia, that disorder
was diagnosed. However, the diagnosis of NBS was suggested by the boy's
remarkable microcephaly, his facial appearance, and the absence of
ataxia and telangiectasia. DNA analysis demonstrated homozygosity for
the major mutation in the NBS1 gene, 657del5.

Maser et al. (2001) tested the hypothesis that the NBS1 657del5 mutation
was a hypomorphic defect. They showed that NBS cells harboring the
657del5 mutation contained a predicted 26-kD N-terminal protein,
NBS1(p26), and a 70-kD NBS1 protein, NBS1(p70), lacking the native N
terminus. The 26-kD protein is not physically associated with the MRE11
complex (600814), whereas the 70-kD species is physically associated
with it. NBS1(p70) is produced by internal translation initiation within
the NBS mRNA using an open reading frame generated by the 657del5
frameshift. Maser et al. (2001) proposed that the common NBS1 allele
encodes a partially functional protein that diminishes the severity of
the NBS phenotype.

Tekin et al. (2002) reported a consanguineous Turkish family whose first
son died of anal atresia and whose second son, the proband, presented
with severe pre- and postnatal growth retardation as well as striking
microcephaly, immunodeficiency, congenital heart disease, chromosomal
instability, and rhabdomyosarcoma in the anal region. The patient was
homozygous for the 657del5 mutation in the NBS1 gene, which is
responsible for NBS in most Slav populations. The family was the first
diagnosed with NBS in the Turkish population and was one of the most
severely affected examples of the syndrome.

Drabek et al. (2002) presented PCR with sequence specific primers as a
method for detection of the 657del5 mutation. They confirmed a high
carrier frequency in the Czech population (1 in 106 persons; 95% CI = 1
in 331 to 1 in 46).

In Russian children, Resnick et al. (2003) screened for the 657del5 NBS1
mutation in 548 controls and 68 patients with lymphoid malignancies. No
carrier of the mutation was found in the control group. The mutation was
found in heterozygous form in 2 of the 68 patients from the group of
lymphoid malignancies, 1 with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (see 159555)
and 1 with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (605027). Several relatives of the
patient with non-Hodgkin lymphoma who carried the same mutation had
cancer (acute lymphoblastic leukemia, breast cancer, gastrointestinal
cancers), suggesting that heterozygosity may predispose to malignant
disorders.

In monozygotic twin brothers with a severe form of NBS (251260) without
chromosomal instability, Seemanova et al. (2006) identified compound
heterozygosity for the 657del5 mutation and a 643C-T transition in exon
6 of the NBS1 gene, resulting in an arg215-to-trp (R215W) substitution
(602667.0009). Both infants showed reduced expression of full-length
nibrin, and radiation response processes were strongly reduced in their
cells. Their mother and father were heterozygous for the 657del5
mutation and the R215W mutation, respectively, as were their respective
grandfathers.

In a 3-month-old boy with NBS, Varon et al. (2007) identified
homozygosity for the 657del5 mutation; the patient's mother carried the
mutation, whereas his father was homozygous for the wildtype allele.
Analysis of 27 microsatellite markers covering all of chromosome 8
revealed that the patient had a homozygous haplotype for all of the
markers, whereas the mother carried the same haplotype in heterozygous
state. The authors stated that this was the first patient with NBS due
to maternal isodisomy of chromosome 8.

Porhanova et al. (2008) reported a 52-year-old Russian woman with
ovarian cancer (see 604370) who was found to be compound heterozygous
for a mutation in the BRCA1 gene (113705.0018) and the common Slavic
657del5 mutation in the NBN gene. Investigation of the ovarian cancer
tissue showed somatic loss of heterozygosity for NBN, but retention of
heterozygosity for BRCA1. The patient did not have a particularly severe
cancer-prone phenotype, and her parents did not have cancer, although 3
sibs developed cancer as adults. Porhanova et al. (2008) commented that
haploinsufficiency of the BRCA1 gene may contribute to cancer
progression without somatic changes.

.0002
NIJMEGEN BREAKAGE SYNDROME
NBN, 4-BP DEL, NT698

In a patient of English origin with Nijmegen breakage syndrome (251260),
Varon et al. (1998) identified a deletion of 4 nucleotides in exon 6 of
the NBS1 gene, resulting in a frameshift and a truncated protein.

.0003
NIJMEGEN BREAKAGE SYNDROME
NBN, 4-BP DEL, NT835

In a patient of Italian origin with Nijmegen breakage syndrome (251260),
Varon et al. (1998) identified a deletion of 4 nucleotides in exon 7 of
the NBS1 gene, resulting in a frameshift and a truncated protein.

.0004
NIJMEGEN BREAKAGE SYNDROME
NBN, 1-BP INS

In a patient of Mexican origin with Nijmegen breakage syndrome (251260),
Varon et al. (1998) identified an insertion of 1 nucleotide in exon 7 of
the NBS1 gene, resulting in a frameshift and a truncated protein.

.0005
NIJMEGEN BREAKAGE SYNDROME
NBN, 1-BP DEL, 1142C

In a patient of Canadian origin with Nijmegen breakage syndrome
(251260), Varon et al. (1998) identified a deletion of 1 nucleotide in
exon 10 of the NBS1 gene, resulting in a frameshift and a truncated
protein.

.0006
NIJMEGEN BREAKAGE SYNDROME
NBN, GLN326TER

In a patient of Dutch origin with Nijmegen breakage syndrome (251260),
Varon et al. (1998) identified a nonsense mutation, gln326 to ter, in
exon 10 of the NBS1 gene, resulting in a truncated protein.

.0007
APLASTIC ANEMIA
LYMPHOBLASTIC LEUKEMIA, ACUTE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
NBN, ILE171VAL

In 3 patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia, Varon et al. (2001)
found germline heterozygosity for an A-to-G change at nucleotide 511,
resulting in an ile171-to-val (I171V) mutation occurring in a domain of
nibrin that is probably involved in protein-protein interactions.

In an 11-year-old Japanese girl with aplastic anemia (609135) and no
features of Nijmegen breakage syndrome (251260), Shimada et al. (2004)
identified homozygosity for the I171V mutation in the NBS1 gene. Genetic
analysis of the patient and her healthy parents indicated that she
inherited the germline I171V mutation from her father and the wildtype
allele from her mother, and that the second I171V hit occurred on the
wildtype allele early in embryonic development. Cytogenetic analysis of
lymphoblastic cell lines from the patient showed a marked increase in
numerical and structural chromosomal aberrations in the absence of
clastogens, suggesting genomic instability. Shimada et al. (2004) also
screened 413 normal controls and found heterozygosity for I171V in 5
individuals, corresponding to 1.2% of the Japanese population.

.0008
NIJMEGEN BREAKAGE SYNDROME
NBN, TYR363TER

Nakanishi et al. (2002) reported a patient diagnosed with Fanconi anemia
(FA; 227650) on the basis of chromosome breakage induced by mitomycin C.
The individual showed atypical FA features, including features of NBS
(251260). The clinical syndrome was severe, and the child died at 3
years of age, similar to an affected cousin. In this patient, Nakanishi
et al. (2002) identified a homozygous C-to-A mutation at nucleotide 1089
of the NBS1 gene, resulting in a tyr363-to-ter mutation and a truncated
protein.

.0009
NIJMEGEN BREAKAGE SYNDROME
NBN, ARG215TRP

See 602667.0001 and Seemanova et al. (2006).

.0010
NIJMEGEN BREAKAGE SYNDROME
NBN, 2-BP INS, 742GG

In a 53-year-old woman with a mild form of Nijmegen breakage syndrome
(251260) originally reported by Maraschio et al. (1986), Varon et al.
(2006) identified a homozygous 2-bp insertion (742insGG) in exon 7 of
the NBN gene, predicted to result in premature termination. RT-PCR
analysis identified 2 transcripts in both the patient and her parents:
the expected transcript carrying the 2-bp insertion and a second
transcript with in-frame deletion of exons 6 and 7. The skipping of
exons 6 and 7 results in a 650-amino acid protein with a molecular mass
of 73 kD; it also eliminates the 742insGG mutation in exon 7. The 73-kD
(del6-del7) transcript was observed at levels 100-fold lower in controls
than in the patient and her parents, and the del6-del7 transcript was
detected as minor product in RNA from patients with the 657del5 mutation
(602667.0001). The open reading frame of the del6-del7 transcript
predicts a partially functional protein, which was confirmed by studies
in mouse cells. ESE prediction analysis suggested that 742insGG may
affect an ESE sequence, possibly resulting in decreased splicing
enhancer activity. Because the NBN transcript can only remain in-frame
if both exons 6 and 7 are deleted, the authors hypothesized that the
presence of the del6-del7 transcript results from an active mechanism in
which reestablishment of the reading frame requires elimination of the 2
exons. The patient had no immunodeficiency and had not had frequent
infections. Varon et al. (2006) concluded that the unusually mild
phenotype in this patient resulted from residual nibrin activity.

REFERENCE 1. Carlomagno, F.; Chang-Claude, J.; Dunning, A. M.; Ponder, B. A.
J.: Determination of the frequency of the common 675del5 Nijmegen
breakage syndrome mutation in the German population: no association
with risk of breast cancer. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 25: 393-395,
1999.

2. Carney, J. P.; Maser, R. S.; Olivares, H.; Davis, E. M.; Le Beau,
M.; Yates, J. R., III; Hays, L.; Morgan, W. F.; Petrini, J. H. J.
: The hMre11/hRad50 protein complex and Nijmegen breakage syndrome:
linkage of double-strand break repair to the cellular DNA damage response. Cell 93:
477-486, 1998.

3. Chen, H. T.; Bhandoola, A.; Difilippantonio, M. J.; Zhu, J.; Brown,
M. J.; Tai, X.; Rogakou, E. P.; Brotz, T. M.; Bonner, W. M.; Ried,
T.; Nussenzweig, A.: Response to RAG-mediated V(D)J cleavage by NBS1
and gamma-H2AX. Science 290: 1962-1964, 2000.

4. Demuth, I.; Frappart, P.-O.; Hildebrand, G.; Melchers, A.; Lobitz,
S.; Stockl, L.; Varon, R.; Herceg, Z.; Sperling, K.; Wang, Z.-Q.;
Digweed, M.: An inducible null mutant murine model of Nijmegen breakage
syndrome proves the essential function of NBS1 in chromosomal stability
and cell viability. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 2385-2397, 2004.

5. Drabek, J.; Hajduch, M.; Gojova, L.; Weigl, E.; Mihal, V.: Frequency
of 657del(5) mutation of the NBS1 gene in the Czech population by
polymerase chain reaction with sequence specific primers. Cancer
Genet. Cytogenet. 138: 157-159, 2002.

6. Falck, J.; Petrini, J. H. J.; Williams, B. R.; Lukas, J.; Bartek,
J.: The DNA damage-dependent intra-S phase checkpoint is regulated
by parallel pathways. Nature Genet. 30: 290-294, 2002.

7. Franchitto, A.; Pichierri, P.: Protecting genomic integrity during
DNA replication: correlation between Werner's and Bloom's syndrome
gene products and the MRE11 complex. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 2447-2453,
2002.

8. Frappart, P.-O.; Tong, W.-M.; Demuth, I.; Radovanovic, I.; Herceg,
Z.; Aguzzi, A.; Digweed, M.; Wang, Z.-Q.: An essential function for
NBS1 in the prevention of ataxia and cerebellar defects. Nature Med. 11:
538-544, 2005.

9. Gatei, M.; Young, D.; Cerosaletti, K. M.; Desai-Mehta, A.; Spring,
K.; Kozlov, S.; Lavin, M. F.; Gatti, R. A.; Concannon, P.; Khanna,
K.: ATM-dependent phosphorylation of nibrin in response to radiation
exposure. Nature Genet. 25: 115-119, 2000.

10. Kleier, S.; Herrmann, M.; Wittwer, B.; Varon, R.; Reis, A.; Horst,
J.: Clinical presentation and mutation identification in the NBS1
gene in a boy with Nijmegen breakage syndrome. Clin. Genet. 57:
384-387, 2000.

11. Lim, D.-S.; Kim, S.-T.; Xu, B.; Maser, R. S.; Lin, J.; Petrini,
J. H. J.; Kastan, M. B.: ATM phosphorylates p95/nbs1 in an S-phase
checkpoint pathway. Nature 404: 613-617, 2000.

12. Lombard, D. B.; Guarente, L.: Nijmegen breakage syndrome disease
protein and MRE11 at PML nuclear bodies and meiotic telomeres. Cancer
Res. 60: 2331-2334, 2000.

13. Maraschio, P.; Peretti, D.; Lambiase, S.; Lo Curto, F.; Caufin,
D.; Gargantini, L.; Minoli, L.; Zuffardi, O.: A new chromosome instability
disorder. Clin. Genet. 30: 353-365, 1986.

14. Maser, R. S.; Zinkel, R.; Petrini, J. H. J.: An alternative mode
of translation permits production of a variant NBS1 protein from the
common Nijmegen breakage syndrome allele. Nature Genet. 27: 417-421,
2001.

15. Matsuura, S.; Tauchi, H.; Nakamura, A.; Kondo, N.; Sakamoto, S.;
Endo, S.; Smeets, D.; Solder, B.; Belohradsky, B. H.; Der Kaloustian,
V. M.; Oshimura, M.; Isomura, M.; Nakamura, Y.; Komatsu, K.: Positional
cloning of the gene for Nijmegen breakage syndrome. Nature Genet. 19:
179-181, 1998.

16. Moreno-Herrero, F.; de Jager, M.; Dekker, N. H.; Kanaar, R.; Wyman,
C.; Dekker, C.: Mesoscale conformational changes in the DNA-repair
complex Rad50/Mre11/Nbs1 upon binding DNA. Nature 437: 440-443,
2005.

17. Nakanishi, K.; Taniguchi, T.; Ranganathan, V.; New, H. V.; Moreau,
L. A.; Stotsky, M.; Mathew, C. G.; Kastan, M. B.; Weaver, D. T.; D'Andrea,
A. D.: Interaction of FANCD2 and NBS1 in the DNA damage response. Nature
Cell Biol. 4: 913-920, 2002.

18. Petersen, S.; Casellas, R.; Reina-San-Martin, B.; Chen, H. T.;
Difilippantonio, M. J.; Wilson, P. C.; Hanitsch, L.; Celeste, A.;
Muramatsu, M.; Pilch, D. R.; Redon, C.; Ried, T.; Bonner, W. M.; Honjo,
T.; Nussenzweig, M. C.; Nussenzweig, A.: AID is required to initiate
Nbs1/gamma-H2AX focus formation and mutations at sites of class switching. Nature 414:
660-665, 2001.

19. Plisiecka-Halasa, J.; Dansonka-Mieszkowska, A.; Rembiszewska,
A.; Bidzinski, M.; Steffen, J.; Kupryjanczyk, J.: Nijmegen breakage
syndrome gene (NBS1) alterations and its protein (nibrin) expression
in human ovarian tumours. Ann. Hum. Genet. 66: 353-359, 2002.

20. Porhanova, N. V.; Sokolenko, A. P.; Sherina, N. Y.; Ponomariova,
D. N.; Tkachenko, N. N.; Matsko, D. E.; Imyanitov, E. N.: Ovarian
cancer patient with germline mutations in both BRCA1 and NBN genes.
(Letter) Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 186: 122-124, 2008.

21. Resnick, I. B.; Kondratenko, I.; Pashanov, E.; Maschan, A. A.;
Karachunsky, A.; Togoev, O.; Timakov, A.; Polyakov, A.; Tverskaya,
S.; Evgrafov, O.; Roumiantsev, A. G.: 657del5 mutation in the gene
for Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS1) in a cohort of Russian children
with lymphoid tissue malignancies and controls. Am. J. Med. Genet. 120A:
174-179, 2003.

22. Saidi, A.; Li, T.; Weih, F.; Concannon, P.; Wang, Z.-Q.: Dual
functions of Nbs1 in the repair of DNA breaks and proliferation ensure
proper V(D)J recombination and T-cell development. Molec. Cell. Biol. 30:
5572-5581, 2010.

23. Seemanova, E.; Sperling, K.; Neitzel, H.; Varon, R.; Hadac, J.;
Butova, O.; Schrock, E.; Seeman, P.; Digweed, M.: Nijmegen breakage
syndrome (NBS) with neurological abnormalities and without chromosomal
instability. J. Med. Genet. 43: 218-224, 2006.

24. Shimada, H.; Shimizu, K; Mimaki, S.; Sakiyama, T.; Mori, T.; Shimasaki,
N.; Yokota, J.; Nakachi, K.; Ohta, T.; Ohki, M.: First case of aplastic
anemia in a Japanese child with a homozygous missense mutation in
the NBS1 gene (I171V) associated with genomic instability. Hum. Genet. 115:
372-376, 2004.

25. Stracker, T. H.; Carson, C. T.; Weitzman, M. D.: Adenovirus oncoproteins
inactivate the Mre11-Rad50-NBS1 DNA repair complex. Nature 418:
348-352, 2002.

26. Stracker, T. H.; Morales, M.; Couto, S. S.; Hussein, H.; Petrini,
J. H. J.: The carboxy terminus of NBS1 is required for induction
of apoptosis by the MRE11 complex. Nature 447: 218-221, 2007.

27. Tanzarella, C.; Antoccia, A.; Spadoni, E.; di Masi, A.; Pecile,
V.; Demori, E.; Varon, R.; Marseglia, G. L.; Tiepolo, L.; Maraschio,
P.: Chromosome instability and nibrin protein variants in NBS heterozygotes. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 11: 297-303, 2003.

28. Tauchi, H.; Kobayashi, J.; Morishima, K.; van Gent, D. C.; Shiraishi,
T.; Verkaik, N. S.; vanHeems, D.; Ito, E.; Nakamura, A.; Sonoda, E.;
Takata, M.; Takeda, S.; Matsuura, S.; Komatsu, K.: Nbs1 is essential
for DNA repair by homologous recombination in higher vertebrate cells. Nature 420:
93-98, 2002.

29. Tauchi, H.; Matsuura, S.; Isomura, M.; Kinjo, T.; Nakamura, A.;
Sakamoto, S.; Kondo, N.; Endo, S.; Komatsu, K.; Nakamura, Y.: Sequence
analysis of an 800-kb genomic DNA region on chromosome 8q21 that contains
the Nijmegen breakage syndrome gene, NBS1. Genomics 55: 242-247,
1999.

30. Tekin, M.; Dogu, F.; Tacyildiz, N.; Akar, E.; Ikinciogullari,
A.; Ogur, G.; Yavuz, G.; Babacan, E.; Akar, N.: 657del5 mutation
in the NBS1 gene is associated with Nijmegen breakage syndrome in
a Turkish family. Clin. Genet. 62: 84-88, 2002.

31. Varon, R.; Dutrannoy, V.; Weikert, G.; Tanzarella, C.; Antoccia,
A.; Stockl, L.; Spadoni, E.; Kruger, L.-A.; di Masi, A.; Sperling,
K.; Digweed, M.; Maraschio, P.: Mild Nijmegen breakage syndrome phenotype
due to alternative splicing. Hum. Molec. Genet. 15: 679-689, 2006.

32. Varon, R.; Muer, A.; Wagner, K.; Zierler, H.; Sodia, S.; Rauter,
L.; Petek, E.; Tonnies, H.; Neitzel, H.; Sperling, K.; Kroisel, P.
M.: Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) due to maternal isodisomy of
chromosome 8. (Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 143A: 92-94, 2007.

33. Varon, R.; Reis, A.; Henze, G.; Einsiedel, H. G.; Sperling, K.;
Seeger, K.: Mutations in the Nijmegen breakage syndrome gene (NBS1)
in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Cancer Res. 61:
3570-3572, 2001.

34. Varon, R.; Vissinga, C.; Platzer, M.; Cerosaletti, K. M.; Chrzanowska,
K. H.; Saar, K.; Beckmann, G.; Seemanova, E.; Cooper, P. R.; Nowak,
N. J.; Stumm, M.; Weemaes, C. M. R.; Gatti, R. A.; Wilson, R. K.;
Digweed, M.; Rosenthal, A.; Sperling, K.; Concannon, P.; Reis, A.
: Nibrin, a novel DNA double-strand break repair protein, is mutated
in Nijmegen breakage syndrome. Cell 93: 467-476, 1998.

35. Wang, Y.; Cortez, D.; Yazdi, P.; Neff, N.; Elledge, S. J.; Qin,
J.: BASC, a super complex of BRCA1-associated proteins involved in
the recognition and repair of aberrant DNA structures. Genes Dev. 14:
927-939, 2000.

36. Wilda, M.; Demuth, I.; Concannon, P.; Sperling, K.; Hameister,
H.: Expression pattern of the Nijmegen breakage syndrome gene, Nbs1,
during murine development. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1739-1744, 2000.

37. Wu, X.; Ranganathan, V.; Weisman, D. S.; Heine, W. F.; Ciccone,
D. N.; O'Neill, T. B.; Crick, K. E.; Pierce, K. A.; Lane, W. S.; Rathbun,
G.; Livingston, D. M.; Weaver, D. T.: ATM phosphorylation of Nijmegen
breakage syndrome protein is required in a DNA damage response. Nature 405:
477-482, 2000.

38. Yuan, Z.; Zhang, X.; Sengupta, N.; Lane, W. S.; Seto, E.: SIRT1
regulates the function of the Nijmegen breakage syndrome protein. Molec.
Cell 27: 149-162, 2007.

39. Zhao, S.; Weng, Y.-C.; Yuan, S.-S. F.; Lin, Y.-T.; Hsu, H.-C.;
Lin, S.-C. J.; Gerbino, E.; Song, M.; Zdzienicka, M. Z.; Gatti, R.
A.; Shay, J. W.; Ziv, Y.; Shiloh, Y.; Lee, E. Y.-H. P.: Functional
link between ataxia-telangiectasia and Nijmegen breakage syndrome
gene products. Nature 405: 473-477, 2000.

40. Zhong, H.; Bryson, A.; Eckersdorff, M.; Ferguson, D. O.: Rad50
depletion impacts upon ATR-dependent DNA damage responses. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 14: 2685-2693, 2005.

41. Zhong, Q.; Chen, C.-F.; Li, S.; Chen, Y.; Wang, C.-C.; Xiao, J.;
Chen, P.-L.; Sharp, Z. D.; Lee, W.-H.: Association of BRCA1 with
the hRad50-hMre11-p95 complex and the DNA damage response. Science 285:
747-750, 1999.

42. Zhu, J.; Petersen, S.; Tessarollo, L.; Nussenzweig, A.: Targeted
disruption of the Nijmegen breakage syndrome gene NBS1 leads to early
embryonic lethality in mice. Curr. Biol. 11: 105-109, 2001.

43. Zhu, X.-D.; Kuster, B.; Mann, M.; Petrini, J. H. J.; de Lange,
T.: Cell-cycle-regulated association of RAD50/MRE11/NBS1 with TRF2
and human telomeres. Nature Genet. 25: 347-352, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/27/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/2/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/5/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/10/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/6/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/21/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/21/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/19/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/3/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/16/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/25/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/12/2005
Natalie E. Krasikov - updated: 6/1/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/4/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/12/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/10/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/3/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/13/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/21/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/28/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/2/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/21/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/29/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/18/2000
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/16/2000
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/21/2000
Victor A. McKusick -updated: 8/31/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/27/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/2/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/24/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/27/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/18/2000
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/24/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/24/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/30/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/1/1998

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 5/28/1998

EDITED mgross: 10/07/2013
mgross: 10/4/2013
carol: 9/16/2013
carol: 10/8/2012
mgross: 10/5/2011
terry: 9/27/2011
wwang: 10/13/2010
wwang: 11/5/2009
ckniffin: 11/2/2009
ckniffin: 10/29/2009
wwang: 6/25/2009
wwang: 6/23/2009
ckniffin: 6/5/2009
wwang: 12/10/2008
mgross: 8/10/2007
terry: 8/6/2007
wwang: 6/26/2007
wwang: 6/22/2007
terry: 6/21/2007
alopez: 6/21/2007
carol: 8/31/2006
terry: 8/30/2006
wwang: 4/20/2006
terry: 4/19/2006
alopez: 11/7/2005
terry: 11/3/2005
mgross: 5/17/2005
terry: 5/16/2005
wwang: 4/29/2005
wwang: 4/27/2005
terry: 4/25/2005
mgross: 4/14/2005
wwang: 1/19/2005
wwang: 1/13/2005
terry: 1/12/2005
carol: 6/1/2004
mgross: 12/4/2003
cwells: 11/10/2003
carol: 10/27/2003
carol: 5/15/2003
ckniffin: 3/13/2003
mgross: 3/12/2003
terry: 3/12/2003
terry: 3/10/2003
carol: 3/10/2003
tkritzer: 3/7/2003
terry: 3/3/2003
alopez: 11/14/2002
terry: 11/13/2002
tkritzer: 8/27/2002
tkritzer: 8/26/2002
terry: 8/21/2002
cwells: 7/26/2002
terry: 7/24/2002
cwells: 3/29/2002
terry: 3/28/2002
alopez: 1/9/2002
terry: 1/2/2002
mcapotos: 7/5/2001
mcapotos: 6/27/2001
terry: 6/21/2001
alopez: 3/29/2001
terry: 3/29/2001
carol: 3/28/2001
joanna: 1/17/2001
mgross: 12/18/2000
mgross: 11/16/2000
alopez: 9/21/2000
mcapotos: 9/5/2000
mcapotos: 8/31/2000
alopez: 6/27/2000
mcapotos: 6/14/2000
terry: 6/2/2000
alopez: 5/24/2000
alopez: 4/29/2000
terry: 4/27/2000
alopez: 4/18/2000
carol: 2/24/2000
alopez: 10/26/1999
terry: 9/24/1999
alopez: 7/30/1999
alopez: 7/28/1999
terry: 7/16/1999
carol: 8/24/1998
carol: 6/10/1998
carol: 6/1/1998
carol: 5/29/1998

