606910	TITLE *606910 BCL2-LIKE 10; BCL2L10
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

BCL2 (151430) is a prototypic mammalian regulator of cell death. Certain
members of the BCL2 family inhibit apoptosis, while other members
facilitate this physiologic process of cell death.

Using the amino acid sequence of mouse Boo/Diva as query, Ke et al.
(2001) identified BCL2L10 in human EST and genomic databases and cloned
a BCL2L10 cDNA from a human liver cDNA library. The deduced 204-amino
acid protein contains regions resembling the BH1, BH2, BH3, and BH4
domains typical of antiapoptotic members of the BCL2 family, as well as
a putative C-terminal transmembrane domain. BCL2L10 and the mouse
homolog share 47% sequence identity. RT-PCR of multiple human tissues
revealed highest expression in liver, intermediate expression in brain,
lung, pancreas and ovary, and lowest expression in heart, spleen,
thymus, colon, leukocytes, intestine, testis, and prostate.

By database searching and use of PCR, Zhang et al. (2001) identified
BCL2L10 and found that it contains conserved BH4, BH1, and BH2 domains
but lacks a BH3 domain.

Lee et al. (2001) cloned BCL2L10 from a human fetal liver and spleen
cDNA library. Northern blot analysis detected a 1.2-kb message in liver
and kidney. Immunolocalization studies showed that BCL2L10 is diffusely
expressed in the cytosol of hepatocytes and in epithelial cells of
ovarian follicles.

GENE FUNCTION

By coimmunoprecipitation experiments, Ke et al. (2001) found interaction
between BCL2L10 and BAX (600040), BCL2, and BCLXL (600039), but not with
BAK (600516). By transient transfection performed in 4 different human
tumor cell lines, Ke et al. (2001) determined that BCL2L10 has
antiapoptotic action. Stable overexpression in HeLa cells also resulted
in increased resistance to diverse apoptotic stimuli. The authors noted,
however, that because BCL2L10 is capable of associating either with the
antiapoptotic proteins BCL2 and BCLXL or with the proapoptotic protein
BAX, it is possible that BCL2L10 could display different phenotypes
depending on the cellular context.

By transfection experiments, Zhang et al. (2001) demonstrated that
BCL2L10 can block apoptosis induced by interleukin-3 (147740) withdrawal
and Bax (600040) expression, by prevention of cytochrome C (123970)
release, caspase-3 (600636) activation, and mitochondrial membrane
potential collapse. BCL2L10 did not block TNF-alpha (191160)-induced
apoptosis. Furthermore, both the BH4 domain and the transmembrane domain
of BCL2L10 were necessary for its suppressive action on cell death.
Zhang et al. (2001) concluded that BCL2L10 is an antiapoptotic member of
the BCL2 family and that it blocks apoptosis in the mitochondrial death
pathway, but not in the death receptor pathway.

By immunoprecipitation studies of BCL2L10-transfected cells, Lee et al.
(2001) confirmed interaction between BCL2L10 and BCLXL. By transient
transfection of fluorescence-tagged BCL2L10, Lee et al (2001) found
that, upon induction of apoptosis, the well-dispersed intracellular
granular localization pattern shifted to the perinuclear compartment,
with staining overlapping that of a mitochondrial marker. In contrast to
the results of Ke et al. (2001), Lee et al. (2001) found that
overexpression of BCL2L10 promoted cell death in HeLa and human kidney
cells.

Naumann et al. (2001) investigated the effect of BCL2L10 on induction of
apoptosis with the CD95 (134637) ligand and with chemotherapeutic drugs
in human malignant glioma cell lines. BCL2L10-transfected cells were
more sensitive to serum deprivation and became growth arrested in G0/1
in contrast to parental cells or mock-transfected cells.
BCL2L10-transfected glioma cells were also more resistant to induction
of apoptosis. BCL2L10 reduced caspase activation, including caspases 8
and 3, but did not prevent release of cytochrome c. The authors noted,
however, that others have found BCL2L10 to induce apoptosis in other
cell systems.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ke et al. (2001) determined that the BCL2L10 gene contains 2 exons.

MAPPING

Ke et al. (2001) mapped the BCL2L10 gene to chromosome 15q21 based on
sequence similarity between the BCL2L10 sequence and a genomic clone
(GenBank GENBANK CTD-2184D3) localized to 15q21. Lee et al. (2001)
mapped BCL2L10 to chromosome 15q21 by radiation hybrid analysis. The
corresponding mouse gene maps to a region of syntenic homology on
chromosome 9D9.

REFERENCE 1. Ke, N.; Godzik, A.; Reed, J. C.: Bcl-B, a novel Bcl-2 family member
that differentially binds and regulates Bax and Bak. J. Biol. Chem. 276:
12481-12484, 2001.

2. Lee, R.; Chen, J.; Matthews, C. P.; McDougall, J. K.; Neiman, P.
E.: Characterization of NR13-related human cell death regulator,
Boo/Diva, in normal and cancer tissues. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1520:
187-194, 2001.

3. Naumann, U.; Weit, S.; Wischhusen, J.; Weller, M.: Diva/Boo is
a negative regulator of cell death in human glioma cells. FEBS Lett. 505:
23-26, 2001.

4. Zhang, H.; Holzgreve, W.; De Geyter, C.: Bcl2-L-10, a novel anti-apoptotic
member of the Bcl-2 family, blocks apoptosis in the mitochondria death
pathway but not in the death receptor pathway. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10:
2329-2339, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/7/2002

CREATED George E. Tiller: 5/7/2002

EDITED terry: 09/09/2010
carol: 6/7/2002
cwells: 5/7/2002

