604071	TITLE *604071 DIACYLGLYCEROL KINASE, ETA, 130-KD; DGKH
;;DGK-ETA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Diacylglycerol kinase (DGK) plays a key role in cellular processes by
regulating the intracellular concentration of the second messenger
diacylglycerol (Klauck et al., 1996).

For background information on the DGKs, see 125855.

CLONING

Klauck et al. (1996) isolated hamster glucocorticoid-inducible cDNAs
encoding a novel 130-kD DGK that they designated DGK-eta. Sequence
analysis revealed that the predicted protein is closely related to
DGK-delta (DGKD; 601826). Both enzymes contain an N-terminal pleckstrin
homology domain and a putative catalytic domain that is separated into 2
subdomains. Northern blot and immunoblot analyses indicated that DGK-eta
was expressed in most hamster tissues. When expressed in insect cells,
DGK-eta exhibited DGK activity.

By searching genomic databases for sequences similar to that encoding
the SAM domain of DGKD, Murakami et al. (2003) identified a splice
variant of DGKH, which they called DGKH2. DGKH2 utilizes all 30 DGKH
exons and encodes a deduced 1,220-amino acid protein with a calculated
molecular mass of 135 kD. DGKH1, which lacks exon 29, encodes a deduced
1,164-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 128 kD. The
2 proteins differ at their C-terminal ends, and DGKH2 contains a SAM
domain and a C-terminal PDZ-binding domain not found in DGKH1. RT-PCR
detected DGKH1 in most normal and tumor tissues examined, with lowest
expression in lung and skeletal muscle. DGKH2 was detected in testis,
kidney, and colon with lower expression in tumor cells compared to
DGKH1. Western blot analysis of transfected COS-7 cells detected DGKH1
and DGKH2 at apparent molecular masses of 128 and 135 kD, respectively.

GENE FUNCTION

Murakami et al. (2003) reported that both the DGKH1 and DGKH2 isoforms
of DGKH showed diacylglycerol kinase activity; however, the 2 isoforms
differed in several other characteristics. Expression of DGKH2 in
transfected cells was suppressed by glucocorticoid in contrast to the
marked induction of DGKH1. In response to stress stimuli, DGKH1 and
DGKH2 were both rapidly translocated from the cytoplasm to endosomes,
but only DGKH1 relocated back to the cytoplasm upon removal of stress
stimuli. Mutation analysis indicated that oligomerization of DGKH2,
mediated by its SAM domain, was largely responsible for its sustained
endosomal localization. Oligomerization of DGKH2 appeared to negatively
regulate its catalytic activity. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis
indicated that DGKH2 was able to form higher-order oligomers with DGKD
isoforms 1 and 2 through its SAM domain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Murakami et al. (2003) determined that the DGKH gene contains 30 exons.

REFERENCE 1. Klauck, T. M.; Xu, X.; Mousseau, B.; Jaken, S.: Cloning and characterization
of a glucocorticoid-induced diacylglycerol kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 271:
19781-19788, 1996.

2. Murakami, T.; Sakane, F.; Imai, S.; Houkin, K.; Kanoh, H.: Identification
and characterization of two splice variants of human diacylglycerol
kinase eta. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 34364-34372, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/3/2007

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/27/1999

EDITED wwang: 04/06/2007
terry: 4/3/2007
mgross: 7/28/1999
mgross: 7/27/1999

604596	TITLE *604596 CMT1A DUPLICATED REGION TRANSCRIPT 1; CDRT1
;;CHROMOSOME 17 OPEN READING FRAME 1A; C17ORF1A;;
C17ORF1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Misalignment of CMT1A-REP elements on chromosome 17p11.2 causes 2
peripheral neuropathies, Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1a (118220)
and hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (162500).
Using a sequence detected within the proximal CMT1A-REP repeat element,
Kennerson et al. (1997) isolated a fetal brain cDNA for C17ORF1A.
Kennerson et al. (1998) found that C17ORF1A encodes a 252-amino acid
protein with no transmembrane domains and only 1 potential
N-glycosylation site. Northern blot analysis revealed expression of a
3.2-kb transcript in skeletal muscle and heart (Kennerson et al., 1997).

GENE STRUCTURE

Kennerson et al. (1998) determined that the C17ORF1A gene contains at
least 6 exons and spans about 17 kb.

MAPPING

Kennerson et al. (1997) mapped the C17ORF1A gene centromeric to and
partially within proximal CMT1A-REP on chromosome 17p11.2. C17ORF1A and
COX10 (602125) are oriented in opposite directions and transcribed from
opposite strands, with exon 6 of C17ORF1A and a duplicated exon 6
('pseudo-exon') of COX10 juxtaposed on the strands. The authors stated
that the presence of these expressed genes may explain the maintenance
of a disease-causing binary repeat within the human genome.

REFERENCE 1. Kennerson, M. L.; Nassif, N. T.; Dawkins, J. L.; DeKroon, R. M.;
Yang, J. G.; Nicholson, G. A.: The Charcot-Marie-Tooth binary repeat
contains a gene transcribed from the opposite strand of a partially
duplicated region of the COX10 gene. Genomics 46: 61-69, 1997.

2. Kennerson, M. L.; Nassif, N. T.; Nicholson, G. A.: Genomic structure
and physical mapping of C17orf1: a gene associated with the proximal
element of the CMT1A REP binary repeat. Genomics 53: 110-112, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/10/2004

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/23/2000

EDITED carol: 11/30/2007
mgross: 12/10/2004
carol: 2/24/2000

611141	TITLE *611141 MINDBOMB, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 2; MIB2
;;SKELETROPHIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using differential display to identify genes upregulated by truncated
SWI1 (ARID1A; 603024) in a neuroblastoma cell line, followed by
screening a brain cDNA library, Takeuchi et al. (2003) cloned MIB2,
which they called skeletrophin. The deduced 1,013-amino acid protein
contains a dystrophin (DMD; 300377)-like cysteine-rich zinc-binding
domain in its N-terminal half and 5 ankyrin (see 600465) repeats in its
C-terminal half. Northern blot analysis detected a 3.2-kb transcript
that was highly expressed in skeletal muscle and more weakly expressed
in brain, heart, and kidney. Western blot analysis detected a 70-kD
protein in skeletal muscle, heart, and brain, but not in liver, thymus,
or lung. Immunohistochemical analysis of skeletal muscle detected
cytoplasmic foci of skeletrophin expression near the cell surface.

Takeuchi et al. (2005) stated that skeletrophin contains 2 C-terminal
RING-HC domains, the second of which is atypical. By database analysis,
they identified 6 skeletrophin splice variants. RT-PCR analysis showed
tissue-specific expression of 3 of the variants. Dot blot analysis using
a cDNA encoding the N-terminal half of skeletrophin as probe revealed
widespread expression, with highest levels in skeletal muscle.

Koo et al. (2005) identified mouse and human MIB2 as paralogs of
zebrafish Mib (MIB1; 608677). MIB2 has a HERC2 (605837)/Mib domain on
each side of the zinc finger domain, as well as a Mib repeat prior to
the ankyrin repeats. Mouse tissues expressed 2 major Mib2 variants, and
overall expression was higher in neonates and adults than in embryos.

GENE FUNCTION

By yeast 2-hybrid and coimmunoprecipitation analyses, Takeuchi et al.
(2003) showed that skeletrophin interacted with alpha-actin (ACTA1;
102610). Skeletrophin was expressed in 23 of 25 benign nevi, but not in
18 of 38 cases of primary skin melanoma. Treatment with a demethylating
agent restored skeletrophin expression in a human melanoma cell line.

Takeuchi et al. (2005) showed that a recombinant protein containing only
the RING domains of skeletrophin promoted autoubiquitination in a UBCH5B
(UBE2D2; 602962)-dependent manner. Mutation of cys969 in the second RING
motif eliminated the activity, whereas mutation of cys891 in the first
RING motif had no effect. Protein pull-down assays showed that
full-length skeletrophin bound Jagged-2 (JAG2; 602570), but it did not
bind other Notch (see NOTCH1; 190198) ligands tested. Skeletrophin
ubiquitinated the intracellular domain of JAG2, and immunohistochemical
analysis indicated that skeletrophin expression altered the
intracellular localization of JAG2. Overexpression of skeletrophin in a
mouse myeloma cell line induced expression of the Notch effector Hes1
(139605) in cocultured mouse stromal cells by direct cell-cell contact.
RING finger-mutated skeletrophin did not enhance Hes1 expression.
Takeuchi et al. (2005) found elevated skeletrophin expression in 23 of
40 multiple myeloma specimens, especially from patients with osteolytic
bone lesions.

Koo et al. (2005) showed that the RING domains of mouse Mib2 had E3
ubiquitin ligase activity. Mutation of the second RING domain, but not
the first, reduced the activity. Full-length Mib2 underwent
autoubiquitination in transfected cells, an effect that was dramatically
increased in the presence of a proteasome inhibitor. Mib2 interacted
with Xenopus Delta (XD; see 606582) in transfected cells, and mutation
analysis showed that the intracellular domain of XD interacted with the
N-terminal region of Mib2. In transfected HeLa cells, mouse Mib2
colocalized with an early endosomal marker, and coexpression of Mib2
with XD caused ubiquitination of XD and relocalization of XD from the
cell surface into cytoplasmic vesicular structures. Mib2 rescued both
the neuronal and vascular defects in the zebrafish Mib mutant,
confirming that Mib2 acts along the Notch signaling pathway.

Takeuchi et al. (2006) found aberrant methylation of the skeletrophin
promoter in 6 of 31 invasive melanomas, but in none of 25 benign nevi or
5 noninvasive superficial spreading melanomas. The zinc finger
transcription factor SNAIL (see SNAI1; 604238), which is overexpressed
in many melanoma cells, repressed the skeletrophin promoter via an E
box-related element and was involved in downregulation of skeletrophin.
AP2 (TFAP2A; 107580) increased skeletrophin expression. Exogenous
expression of skeletrophin reduced melanoma cell invasion in vitro and
in vivo, and colony formation in soft agar was reduced in a RING
motif-dependent manner, without affecting cell growth. Skeletrophin
downregulated transcription of MET (164860) and increased expression of
HES1.

GENE STRUCTURE

Takeuchi et al. (2005) determined that the MIB2 gene contains 18 exons
and spans 14 kb.

Takeuchi et al. (2006) found that the MIB2 promoter region is GC rich
and lacks typical TATA and CAAT boxes.

MAPPING

Using FISH, Takeuchi et al. (2003) mapped the MIB2 gene to chromosome
1p36.3-p36.2. Takeuchi et al. (2005) mapped the MIB2 gene to chromosome
1p36.32 by genomic sequence analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Koo, B.-K.; Yoon, K.-J.; Yoo, K.-W.; Lim, H.-S.; Song, R.; So,
J.-H.; Kim, C.-H.; Kong, Y.-Y.: Mind bomb-2 is an E3 ligase for Notch
ligand. J. Biol. Chem. 280: 22335-22342, 2005.

2. Takeuchi, T.; Adachi, Y.; Ohtsuki, Y.: Skeletrophin, a novel ubiquitin
ligase to the intracellular region of Jagged-2, is aberrantly expressed
in multiple myeloma. Am. J. Path. 166: 1817-1826, 2005.

3. Takeuchi, T.; Adachi, Y.; Ohtsuki, Y.: Skeletrophin, a novel RING
molecule controlled by the chromatin remodeling complex, is downregulated
in malignant melanoma. DNA Cell Biol. 24: 339-344, 2005.

4. Takeuchi, T.; Adachi, Y.; Sonobe, H.; Furihata, M.; Ohtsuki, Y.
: A ubiquitin ligase, skeletrophin, is a negative regulator of melanoma
invasion. Oncogene 25: 7059-7069, 2006.

5. Takeuchi, T.; Heng, H. H. Q.; Ye, C. J.; Liang, S.-B.; Iwata, J.;
Sonobe, H.; Ohtsuki, Y.: Down-regulation of a novel actin-binding
molecule, skeletrophin, in malignant melanoma. Am. J. Path. 163:
1395-1404, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/26/2007

EDITED carol: 12/26/2007
mgross: 6/26/2007

604941	TITLE *604941 PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 2, REGULATORY SUBUNIT B, ALPHA; PPP2R2A
;;PR55-ALPHA;;
B55-ALPHA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Protein phosphorylation on serine and threonine residues by protein
kinases is responsible for the communication of many intracellular
signals. Equally important is the dephosphorylation of proteins by
serine/threonine phosphatases. Protein phosphatase-2A (PP2A; see
176915), a heterotrimeric serine/threonine phosphatase, has a
particularly complex set of regulatory subunits controlling its function
and localization. By screening lung fibroblast and fetal brain cDNA
libraries using 2 overlapping oligonucleotides corresponding to a
tryptic peptide derived from the 55-kD subunit of rabbit PP2A (PR55),
Mayer et al. (1991) isolated human cDNAs encoding PPP2R2A and PPP2R2B
(604325), which they termed PR55-alpha and PR55-beta, respectively. The
deduced 447-amino acid PPP2R2A protein has a calculated molecular mass
of approximately 52 kD. SDS-PAGE analysis, however, showed that PPP2R2A
was expressed as a 55-kD protein. The nucleotide sequence of PPP2R2A is
75% identical to PPP2R2B in the coding region. Northern blot analysis
detected PPP2R2A transcripts of 2.3 and 2.5 kb, as well as a less
abundant one of 4.4 kb, in all cell lines examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Hyperphosphorylation of Tau (MAPT; 157140) contributes to Alzheimer
disease (104300), and PP2A dephosphorylates Tau, reducing its
deleterious effect. Using an in vitro assay with recombinant human
proteins, Xu et al. (2008) showed that the B-alpha subunit specifically
and markedly facilitated dephosphorylation of phosphorylated Tau by
heterotrimeric PP2A.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PPP2R2A
gene to chromosome 8 (TMAP WI-18898).

REFERENCE 1. Mayer, R. E.; Hendrix, P.; Cron, P.; Matthies, R.; Stone, S. R.;
Goris, J.; Merlevede, W.; Hofsteenge, J.; Hemmings, B. A.: Structure
of the 55-kDa regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 2A: evidence
for a neuronal-specific isoform. Biochemistry 30: 3589-3597, 1991.

2. Xu, Y.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, P.; Jeffrey, P. D.; Shi, Y.: Structure
of a protein phosphatase 2A holoenzyme: insights into B55-mediated
Tau dephosphorylation. Molec. Cell 31: 873-885, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/29/2009

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/9/2000

EDITED mgross: 06/02/2009
terry: 5/29/2009
mgross: 12/1/2006
mgross: 5/10/2000
mgross: 5/9/2000

605950	TITLE *605950 RAS-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN RAB33B; RAB33B
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Small GTP-binding proteins of the RAB family, such as RAB33B, play
important roles at defined steps of vesicular transport in protein
secretion and the endocytosis pathway (Zheng et al., 1998).

CLONING

Zheng et al. (1998) cloned and characterized mouse Rab33b, a small
GTP-binding protein closely related to RAB33A (300333), especially in
the GTP-binding domain. The Rab33b gene encodes a 229-amino acid
protein. Unlike mouse and human RAB33A, which have tissue-specific
expression, Northern blot analysis indicated that mouse Rab33b is
ubiquitously expressed. Using immunofluorescence studies, Zheng et al.
(1998) showed that Rab33b is localized to the medial Golgi cisternae,
suggesting that it may play a role in intra-Golgi transport.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zheng et al. (1998) determined that the mouse Rab33b gene contains 2
exons.

MAPPING

Gross (2013) mapped the RAB33B gene to chromosome 4q31.1 based on an
alignment of the RAB33B sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF350420) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By exome sequencing of the proband in a consanguineous Saudi family
segregating Smith-McCort syndrome linked to chromosome 4 (SMC2; 615222),
Alshammari et al. (2012) identified a homozygous missense mutation in
the RAB33B gene (K46Q; 605950.0001). Immunoblot analysis showed severe
deficiency of RAB33B in patient cells compared with control cells, and
patient fibroblasts also displayed a marked reduction in the
immunofluorescence signal corresponding to RAB33B but comparable signal
intensity to the Golgi marker giantin (602500).

In a 22-year-old Turkish man with Smith-McCort syndrome-2, who had
previously been reported by Neumann et al. (2006), Dupuis et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous missense mutation in the RAB33B gene (N148K;
605950.0002). By Western blot analysis and immunofluorescence studies,
Dupuis et al. (2013) found marked reduction of the RAB33B protein.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SMITH-MCCORT DYSPLASIA 2
RAB33B, LYS46GLN

By exome sequencing of the proband in a consanguineous Saudi family
segregating Smith-McCort syndrome linked to chromosome 4 (SMC2; 615222),
Alshammari et al. (2012) identified homozygosity for a c.136A-C
transversion in the RAB33B gene, resulting in a lys46-to-gln (K46Q)
substitution in the GxxxxGK [S/T] guanine nucleotide-binding domain of
the encoded GTPase. Immunoblot analysis showed severe deficiency of
RAB33B in patient cells compared with control cells, and patient
fibroblasts also displayed a marked reduction in the immunofluorescence
signal corresponding to RAB33B but comparable signal intensity to the
Golgi marker giantin (602500). The mutation fully segregated with the
disease phenotype and was absent on Sanger sequencing of 185 Saudi
controls and absent from 160 Saudi exomes.

.0002
SMITH-MCCORT DYSPLASIA 2
RAB33B, ASN148LYS

In a 22-year old Turkish man with Smith-McCort dysplasia-2 (615222), who
had previously been reported by Neumann et al. (2006), Dupuis et al.
(2013) identified a homozygous c.444T-A transversion in exon 2 of the
RAB33B gene, predicting an asn148-to-lys (N148K) substitution at a
highly conserved residue in the G-4 GTPase domain. By Western blot
analysis and immunofluorescence studies, Dupuis et al. (2013) found
marked reduction of the RAB33B protein. Both parents were heterozygous
for the mutation, which was absent in his unaffected brother and from
publicly available databases of known polymorphic variants.

REFERENCE 1. Alshammari, M. J.; Al-Otaibi, L.; Alkuraya, F. S.: Mutation in
RAB33B, which encodes a regulator of retrograde Golgi transport, defines
a second Dyggve-Melchior-Clausen locus. J. Med. Genet. 49: 455-461,
2012.

2. Dupuis, N.; Lebon, S.; Kumar, M.; Drunat, S.; Graul-Neumann, L.
M.; Gressens, P.; El Ghouzzi, V.: A novel RAB33B mutation in Smith-McCort
dysplasia. Hum. Mutat. 34: 283-286, 2013.

3. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/3/2013.

4. Neumann, L. M.; El Ghouzzi, V.; Paupe, V.; Weber, H.-P.; Fastnacht,
E.; Leenen, A.; Lyding, S.; Klusmann, A.; Mayatepek, E.; Pelz, J.;
Cormier-Daire, V.: Dyggve-Melchior-Clausen syndrome and Smith-McCort
dysplasia: clinical and molecular findings in three families supporting
genetic heterogeneity in Smith-McCort dysplasia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A:
421-426, 2006.

5. Zheng, J. Y.; Koda, T.; Fujiwara, T.; Kishi, M.; Ikehara, Y.; Kakinuma,
M.: A novel Rab GTPase, Rab33B, is ubiquitously expressed and localized
to the medial Golgi cisternae. J. Cell Sci. 111: 1061-1069, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 05/03/2013
Nara Sobreira - updated: 5/3/2013

CREATED Yen-Pei C. Chang: 5/21/2001

EDITED mgross: 05/03/2013
carol: 5/3/2013
wwang: 2/4/2010
alopez: 10/18/2002
mgross: 5/21/2001

602943	TITLE *602943 RAR-RELATED ORPHAN RECEPTOR C; RORC
;;RAR-RELATED ORPHAN RECEPTOR GAMMA; RORG;;
RZR-GAMMA; RZRG;;
RETINOIC ACID-BINDING RECEPTOR GAMMA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The nuclear receptor gene superfamily encodes transcriptional regulators
that play critical roles during homeostasis and specific stages of
development. Members of this gene family include the steroid hormone,
thyroid hormone and retinoid receptors, and orphan receptors for which a
ligand has not yet been identified. Most nuclear receptors contain 5
major domains: an N-terminal A/B domain, a highly conserved DNA-binding
(C) domain containing 2 zinc fingers, a hinge (D) region, a
ligand-binding (E) domain, and an F domain at the C terminus. Using
RT-PCR with degenerate primers based on the 2 most conserved regions of
the C domain, Hirose et al. (1994) isolated a partial cDNA from human
pancreas encoding a novel nuclear receptor. They then recovered skeletal
muscle cDNAs containing the remainder of the coding region. By sequence
analysis, Hirose et al. (1994) found that the predicted 560-amino acid
protein, which they called ROR-gamma, belonged to the ROR/RZR nuclear
receptor subfamily. ROR-gamma shares 50 to 51% sequence identity with
RORA (600825) and RORB (601972). Northern blot analysis revealed that
the 3.2-kb ROR-gamma transcript was expressed at the highest levels in
skeletal muscle and at lower levels in various other tissues. Additional
5.2- and 7.2-kb transcripts were observed in thymus. Medvedev et al.
(1997) stated that the amino acid sequences of mouse and human ROR-gamma
are 88% identical.

GENE FUNCTION

Eberl and Littman (2004) showed that intestinal intraepithelial T
lymphocytes (IELs) expressing the alpha-beta T-cell receptor (see
186880) are derived from precursors that express ROR-gamma-t, an orphan
nuclear hormone receptor detected only in immature CD4(+)CD8(+)
thymocytes, fetal lymphoid tissue-inducer (LTi) cells, and LTi-like
cells in cryptopatches within the adult intestinal lamina propria. Using
cell fate mapping, the authors found that all intestinal alpha-beta T
cells are progeny of CD4(+)CD8(+) thymocytes, indicating that the adult
intestine is not a significant site for alpha-beta T cell development.
Eberl and Littman (2004) concluded that intestinal ROR-gamma-t(+) cells
are local organizers of mucosal lymphoid tissue. Rocha (2005) commented
on the paper by Eberl and Littman (2004), finding their experiments
inconclusive and their interpretations inconsistent with previously
published data. Eberl and Littman (2005) responded that while their
findings did not exclude an extrathymic origin for some IELs, in
particular, TCR-gamma-delta T cells, their contribution to the
generation of the intestinal T cell pool is minimal in healthy mice.

Toward a system-level understanding of the transcriptional circuitry
regulating circadian clocks, Ueda et al. (2005) identified
clock-controlled elements on 16 clock and clock-controlled genes in a
comprehensive surveillance of evolutionarily conserved cis elements and
measurement of the transcriptional dynamics. Ueda et al. (2005) found
that E boxes (CACGTG) and E-prime boxes (CACGTT) controlled the
expression of Per1 (602260), Nr1d2 (602304), Per2 (603426), Nr1d1
(602408), Dbp (124097), Bhlhb2 (604256), and Bhlhb3 (606200)
transcription following a repressor-precedes-activator pattern,
resulting in delayed transcriptional activity. RevErbA/ROR-binding
elements regulated the transcriptional activity of Arntl (602550), Npas2
(603347), Nfil3 (605327), Clock (601851), Cry1 (601933), and Rorc
(602943) through a repressor-precedes-activator pattern as well.
DBP/E4BP4-binding elements controlled the expression of Per1, Per2, Per3
(603427), Nr1d1, Nr1d2, Rora, and Rorb through a
repressor-antiphasic-to-activator mechanism, which generates
high-amplitude transcriptional activity. Ueda et al. (2005) suggested
that regulation of E/E-prime boxes is a topologic vulnerability in
mammalian circadian clocks, a concept that had been functionally
verified using in vitro phenotype assay systems.

Silva-Santos et al. (2005) reported that double-positive T cells
regulate the differentiation of early thymocyte progenitors and
gamma-delta cells by a mechanism dependent on the transcription factor
ROR-gamma-t and the lymphotoxin-beta receptor (LTBR; 600979).
Silva-Santos et al. (2005) suggested the finding provokes a revised view
of the thymus, in which lymphoid tissue induction-type processes
coordinate the developmental and functional integration of the two T
cell lineages.

Differentiation of both T(H)17 and T regulatory (Treg) cell types
requires transforming growth factor-beta (TGFB; 190180), but depends on
distinct transcription factors: ROR-gamma-t for T(H)17 cells and FOXP3
(300292) for Treg cells. Zhou et al. (2008) demonstrated that, together
with proinflammatory cytokines, TGFB orchestrates T(H)17 cell
differentiation in a concentration-dependent manner. At low
concentrations, TGFB synergizes with IL6 (147620) and IL21 (605384) to
promote IL23 receptor (IL23R; 607562) expression, favoring T(H)17 cell
differentiation. High concentrations of TGFB repressed IL23R expression
and favored FOXP3-positive Treg cells. ROR-gamma-t and Foxp3 are
coexpressed in naive CD4(+) T cells exposed to TGFB and in a subset of T
cells in the small intestinal lamina propria of the mouse. In vitro,
Tgfb-induced Foxp3 inhibited ROR-gamma-t function, at least in part
through their interaction. Accordingly, lamina propria T cells that
coexpressed both transcription factors produced less interleukin-17
(Il17a; 603149) than those that express ROR-gamma-t alone. Il6, Il21,
and Il23 relieved Foxp3-mediated inhibition of ROR-gamma-t, thereby
promoting T(H)17 cell differentiation. Therefore, Zhou et al. (2008)
concluded that the decision of antigen-stimulated cells to differentiate
into either T(H)17 or Treg cells depends on the cytokine-regulated
balance of ROR-gamma-t and FOXP3.

Ghoreschi et al. (2010) showed that T(H)17 differentiation can occur in
the absence of TGF-beta (190180) signaling. Neither IL6 nor IL23 (see
605580) alone efficiently generated T(H)17 cells; however, these
cytokines in combination with IL1-beta (147720) effectively induced IL17
production in naive precursors, independently of TGF-beta. Epigenetic
modification of the IL17A (603149), IL17F (606496), and RORC promoters
proceeded without TGF-beta-1, allowing the generation of cells that
coexpressed ROR-gamma-t and Tbet (TBX21; 604895).
Tbet+ROR-gamma-t+T(H)17 cells are generated in vivo during experimental
allergic encephalomyelitis, and adoptively transferred T(H)17 cells
generated with IL23 without TGF-beta-1 were pathogenic in this disease
model. Ghoreschi et al. (2010) concluded that their data indicated an
alternative mode for T(H)17 differentiation, and that, consistent with
genetic data linking IL23R with autoimmunity, their findings
reemphasized the importance of IL23 and therefore may have therapeutic
implications.

Lymphoid tissue-inducer (LTi) cells initiate the development of lymphoid
tissues through the activation of local stromal cells in a process
similar to inflammation. LTi cells express the nuclear hormone receptor
ROR-gamma-t, which also directs the expression of the proinflammatory
cytokine interleukin-17 in T cells. Sawa et al. (2010) demonstrated that
LTi cells are part of a larger family of proinflammatory
ROR-gamma-t-positive innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) that differentiate
from distinct fetal liver ROR-gamma-t-positive precursors. The fate of
ROR-gamma-t-positive ILCs is determined by mouse age, and after birth
favors the generation of cells involved in intestinal homeostasis and
defense. Contrary to ROR-gamma-t-positive T cells, however,
ROR-gamma-t-positive ILCs develop in the absence of microbiota. Sawa et
al. (2010) concluded that ROR-gamma-t-positive ILCs evolve to preempt
intestinal colonization by microbial symbionts.

By performing a chemical screen with an insect cell-based reporter
system, Huh et al. (2011) identified the cardiac glycoside digoxin as a
specific inhibitor of ROR-gamma-t transcriptional activity. Digoxin
inhibited murine TH17 cell differentiation without affecting
differentiation of other T cell lineages and was effective in delaying
the onset and reducing the severity of autoimmune disease in mice. At
high concentrations, digoxin is toxic for human cells, but nontoxic
synthetic derivatives 20,22-dihydrodigoxin-21,23-diol and
digoxin-21-salicylidene specifically inhibited induction of IL17 in
human CD4+ T cells. Using these small-molecule compounds, Huh et al.
(2011) demonstrated that ROR-gamma-t is important for the maintenance of
IL17 expression in mouse and human effector T cells, and suggested that
derivatives of digoxin can be used as chemical templates for the
development of ROR-gamma-t-targeted therapeutic agents that attenuate
inflammatory lymphocyte function and autoimmune disease.

Solt et al. (2011) presented SR1001, a high-affinity synthetic
ligand--the first in a new class of compound--that is specific to both
ROR-alpha (600825) and ROR-gamma-t and which inhibits TH17 cell
differentiation and function. SR1001 binds specifically to the
ligand-binding domains of ROR-alpha and ROR-gamma-t, inducing a
conformational change within the ligand-binding domain that encompasses
the repositioning of helix-12 and leads to diminished affinity for
coactivators and increased affinity for corepressors, resulting in
suppression of the receptors' transcriptional activity. SR1001 inhibited
the development of murine TH17 cells, as demonstrated by inhibition of
interleukin-17A gene expression and protein production. Furthermore,
SR1001 inhibited the expression of cytokines when added to
differentiated murine or human TH17 cells. Finally, SR1001 effectively
suppressed the clinical severity of autoimmune disease in mice. Solt et
al. (2011) concluded that their data demonstrated the feasibility of
targeting the orphan receptors ROR-alpha and ROR-gamma-t to inhibit
specifically TH17 cell differentiation and function, and indicated that
this novel class of compound has potential utility in the treatment of
autoimmune diseases.

ILCs expressing the transcription factor ROR-gamma-t induce the
postnatal formation of intestinal lymphoid follicles and regulate
intestinal homeostasis. ROR-gamma-t-positive ILC express the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR; 600253), a highly conserved, ligand-inducible
transcription factor believed to control adaptation of multicellular
organisms to environmental challenges. In mice, Kiss et al. (2011)
showed that Ahr is required for the postnatal expansion of intestinal
ROR-gamma-t-positive ILC and the formation of intestinal lymphoid
follicles. Ahr activity within ROR-gamma-t-positive ILC could be induced
by dietary ligands such as those contained in vegetables of the family
Brassicaceae. Ahr-deficient mice were highly susceptible to infection
with Citrobacter rodentium, a mouse model for attaching and effacing
infections. Kiss et al. (2011) concluded that their results established
a molecular link between nutrients and the formation of immune system
components required to maintain intestinal homeostasis and resistance to
infections.

Using predominantly wildtype and Hif1a (603348)-/- mouse T cells, Dang
et al. (2011) showed that Hif1a was specifically required for
differentiation of naive T cells into Th17 cells. Hif1a interacted
directly with Ror-gamma-t and acetyltransferase p300 (EP300; 602700) at
the Il17 promoter, and all 3 factors were required for optimum Il17
expression. Simultaneously, Hif1a downregulated differentiation of naive
T cells into Treg cells by directing proteasomal degradation of the
Treg-dependent transcription factor Foxp3 by a mechanism that was
independent of Hif1a transcriptional activity. Differentiation of Th17
cells and loss of Treg cells was enhanced in cultures subjected to
hypoxic conditions. Knockout of Hif1a in mouse T cells rendered mice
highly resistant to Mog (159465)-induced experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis, a mouse model of multiple sclerosis (see 126200).
Dang et al. (2011) concluded that HIF1A has a role in immune responses
by controlling the balance between Th17 and Treg cells.

Santarlasci et al. (2012) noted that Th17 cells have a critical
pathogenic role in chronic inflammatory disorders, but they are rarely
found in inflammatory sites. Santarlasci et al. (2012) found that,
unlike Th1 cells, human CD161 (KLRB1; 602890)-positive Th17 precursor
cells did not proliferate and produce IL2 (147680) in response to
anti-CD3 (see CD3E; 186830)/anti-CD28 (186760) stimulation. Th17 cells
also proliferated poorly in response to IL2, in part due to lower
expression of the transcription factors JUN (165160), FOS (164810), and
NFATC1 (600489) and reduced surface expression of CD3E and CD3Z (CD247;
186780). Microarray and small interfering RNA analyses revealed high
expression of IL4I1 (609742) in Th17 precursor cells and showed that
IL4I1 upregulation was strictly dependent on RORC, the Th17 master
regulatory gene. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that Th17 cells also
exhibited high CD28 expression that was RORC dependent, and stimulation
of CD28 alone induced IL17 production and IL4I1 mRNA upregulation. Th17
cells from synovial fluid of patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis
(see 604302) also expressed higher levels of IL4I1 and CD28 than did Th1
cells. Santarlasci et al. (2012) concluded that the rarity of human Th17
cells in inflamed tissues results from RORC-dependent mechanisms that
limit their expansion and, therefore, reduce their potential to cause
damage.

Klose et al. (2013) provided evidence that the transcription factor Tbet
(604895) determines the fate of a distinct lineage of CCR6
(601835)-negative ROR-gamma-t-positive ILCs. Postnatally emerging
CCR6-ROR-gamma-t+ ILCs upregulated Tbet, and this was controlled by cues
from the commensal microbiota and IL23 (605580). In contrast,
CCR6+ROR-gamma-t+ ILCs, which arise earlier during ontogeny, did not
express Tbet. Tbet instructed the expression of Tbet target genes such
as interferon-gamma (147570) and of the natural cytotoxicity receptor
NKp46 (604530). Mice genetically lacking Tbet showed normal development
of CCR6-ROR-gamma-t innate lymphoid cells, but these cells could not
differentiate into NKp46-expressing ROR-gamma-t+ ILCs (i.e., IL22
(605330)-producing natural killer cells) and failed to produce
interferon-gamma. The production of interferon-gamma by Tbet-expressing
CCR6-ROR-gamma-t+ ILCs was essential for the release of mucus-forming
glycoproteins required to protect the epithelial barrier against
Salmonella enterica infection. Klose et al. (2013) concluded that
coexpression of Tbet and ROR-gamma-t, which is also found in subsets of
IL17-producing T-helper cells, may be an evolutionarily conserved
transcriptional program that originally developed as part of the innate
defense against infections but that also confers an increased risk of
immune-mediated pathology.

GENE STRUCTURE

Medvedev et al. (1997) found that the mouse Rorc gene contains 11 exons
and spans more than 21 kb.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids, Hirose et al. (1994) mapped the
ROR-gamma gene to human chromosome 1. Using fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Medvedev et al. (1997) refined the map position to 1q21.
These authors mapped the ROR-gamma gene in mouse to band 3F2.1-2.2.

ANIMAL MODEL

Most developing thymocytes undergo apoptosis because they do not
interact productively with major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecules. A thymus-specific isoform of RORC, termed ROR-gamma-t
(RORGT), inhibits the expression of Fas ligand (TNFSF6; 134638) and IL2
(147680). Sun et al. (2000) generated Rorc-deficient mice and found that
although they were fertile and phenotypically normal, they had reduced
overall as well as double-positive (DP) CD4 (186940)-positive/CD8 (see
186910)-positive and single-positive CD4-positive thymic cell numbers
and did not express Bclxl (see BCL2L1; 600039). The DP cells underwent
spontaneous apoptosis at a more rapid rate than those in wildtype mice.
The Rorc-null mice had reduced amounts of CDKN1B (600778) and
correspondingly greater CDK2 (116953) activity. Expression of Bclxl
restored most aspects of thymocyte development and increased survival.
Although Rorc-deficient mice had normal export of T lymphocytes to the
periphery and normal splenic architecture, they completely lacked lymph
nodes and Peyer patches, possibly due to the absence of Rorc-expressing
CD4-positive/CD45 (151460)-positive progenitor cells.

To identify the physiologic functions of the retinoid-related orphan
receptor gamma, Kurebayashi et al. (2000) generated mice deficient in
ROR-gamma function by targeted disruption. Homozygous-null mice lacked
peripheral and mesenteric lymph nodes and Peyer patches, indicating that
RORC gene expression is indispensable for lymph node organogenesis.
Although the spleen was enlarged, its architecture was normal. The
thymus of Rorc -/- mice contained 74.4% fewer thymocytes than that of
wildtype mice. Rorc -/- thymocytes placed in culture exhibited dramatic
increase in the rate of 'spontaneous' apoptosis. The observations
indicated that ROR-gamma is essential for lymphoid organogenesis and
plays an important regulatory role in thymopoiesis.

Using FACS analysis, Zhang et al. (2003) showed that splenomegaly in
Rorg -/- mice was due to increased numbers of resting B lymphocytes,
with only marginal increases in T cells and macrophages. In contrast,
peripheral blood lymphocyte levels were comparable to those in wildtype
mice. B-lymphocyte development was normal in both bone marrow and
spleens of Rorg -/- mice. Experiments with bone marrow chimeras using
Rorg -/- or Rag2 (179616) -/- mice as recipients and wildtype or Rorg
-/- mice as donors, respectively, showed that there was no defect in
lymphocyte homeostasis in Rorg -/- mice, but they appeared to have a
defect in the exit of lymphocytes from the spleen.

Eberl et al. (2004) generated mice expressing green fluorescent protein
in exon 1 of the gene encoding Rorgt. During fetal life, Rorgt was
expressed exclusively in CD4-positive and CD4-negative lymphoid tissue
inducer (LTi) cells, which are associated with the development of lymph
nodes and Peyer patches. LTi cells provide essential factors, including
lymphotoxin alpha-1 (153440)/beta-2 (600978), for activation of the
mesenchyma in the lymph node and Peyer patch anlagen. Rorgt-deficient
mice lacked all lymph nodes and Peyer patches, as well as LTi cells, a
phenotype similar to that observed in Id2 (600386) -/- mice. However,
unlike Id2 -/- mice, Rorgt -/- mice retained CD45-positive cells, CD11b
(120980)-positive cells, and MHC class II-positive cells.

RORG, which is broadly expressed, and RORGT, which is expressed
exclusively in immune system cells, are both encoded by the RORC gene
through the use of different promoters and differ only in their N
termini. Ivanov et al. (2006) found that a subset of mouse lamina
propria T cells expressed Rorgt and, using mice lacking Rorgt, they
showed that Rorgt was required for expression of Il17 (IL17A; 603149).
Mice lacking Rorgt had 10-fold fewer Il17-positive cells in intestinal
lamina propria compared with wildtype mice. Forced expression of Rorgt
in naive T cells induced expression of Il17 and Il17f (606496). FACS and
RT-PCR analyses of mice lacking Il6 (147620), which have normal T-cell
numbers, defective induction of autoimmunity, and increased
susceptibility to a variety of pathogens, showed that Il6 was required
for expression of both Rorgt and Il17. Rorc -/- mice were less
susceptible to experimental allergic encephalomyelitis, as were
Rag2-deficient mice that received adoptively transferred cells from Rorc
-/- mice. Ivanov et al. (2006) concluded that RORGT is the transcription
factor that directs differentiation of inflammatory Th17 cells.

REFERENCE 1. Dang, E. V.; Barbi, J.; Yang, H.-Y.; Jinasena, D.; Yu, H.; Zheng,
Y.; Bordman, Z.; Fu, J.; Kim, Y.; Yen, H.-R.; Luo, W.; Zeller, K.;
Shimoda, L.; Topalian, S. L.; Semenza, G. L.; Dang, C. V.; Pardoll,
D. M.; Pan, F.: Control of TH17/T-reg balance by hypoxia-inducible
factor 1. Cell 146: 772-784, 2011.

2. Eberl, G.; Littman, D. R.: Thymic origin of intestinal alpha-beta
T cells revealed by fate mapping of ROR-gamma-t(+) cells. Science 305:
248-251, 2004.

3. Eberl, G.; Littman, D. R.: Response to comment on 'Thymic Origin
of Intestinal alpha-beta T Cells Revealed by Fate Mapping of ROR-gamma-delta+
Cells.' (Commentary) Science 308: 1553 only, 2005.

4. Eberl, G.; Marmon, S.; Sunshine, M.-J.; Rennert, P. D.; Choi, Y.;
Littman, D. R.: An essential function for the nuclear receptor ROR-gamma-t
in the generation of fetal lymphoid tissue inducer cells. Nature
Immun. 5: 64-73, 2004.

5. Ghoreschi, K.; Laurence, A.; Yang, X.-P.; Tato, C. M.; McGeachy,
M. J.; Konkel, J. E.; Ramos, H. L.; Wei, L.; Davidson, T. S.; Bouladoux,
N.; Grainger, J. R.; Chen, Q.; and 9 others: Generation of pathogenic
T(H)17 cells in the absence of TGF-beta signalling. Nature 467:
967-971, 2010.

6. Hirose, T.; Smith, R. J.; Jetten, A. M.: ROR-gamma: the third
member of ROR/RZR orphan receptor subfamily that is highly expressed
in skeletal muscle. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 205: 1976-1983,
1994.

7. Huh, J. R.; Leung, M. W. L.; Huang, P.; Ryan, D. A.; Krout, M.
R.; Malapaka, R. R. V.; Chow, J.; Manel, N.; Ciofani, M.; Kim, S.
V.; Cuesta, A.; Santori, F. R.; Lafaille, J. J.; Xu, H. E.; Gin, D.
Y.; Rastinejad, F.; Littman, D. R.: Digoxin and its derivatives suppress
TH17 cell differentiation by antagonizing ROR-gamma-t activity. Nature 472:
486-490, 2011.

8. Ivanov, I. I.; McKenzie, B. S.; Zhou, L.; Tadokoro, C. E.; Lepelley,
A.; Lafaille, J. J.; Cua, D. J.; Littman, D. R.: The orphan nuclear
receptor ROR-gamma-t directs the differentiation program of proinflammatory
IL-17+ T helper cells. Cell 126: 1121-1133, 2006.

9. Kiss, E. A.; Vonarbourg, C.; Kopfmann, S.; Hobeika, E.; Finke,
D.; Esser, C.; Diefenbach, A.: Natural aryl hydrocarbon receptor
ligands control organogenesis of intestinal lymphoid follicles. Science 334:
1561-1565, 2011.

10. Klose, C. S. N.; Kiss, E. A.; Schwierzeck, V.; Ebert, K.; Hoyler,
T.; d'Hargues, Y.; Goppert, N.; Croxford, A. L.; Waisman, A.; Tanriver,
Y.; Diefenbach, A.: A T-bet gradient controls the fate and function
of CCR6(-)ROR-gamma-t(+) innate lymphoid cells. Nature 494: 261-265,
2013.

11. Kurebayashi, S.; Ueda, E.; Sakaue, M.; Patel, D. D.; Medvedev,
A.; Zhang, F.; Jetten, A. M.: Retinoid-related orphan receptor gamma
(ROR-gamma) is essential for lymphoid organogenesis and controls apoptosis
during thymopoiesis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 10132-10137, 2000.

12. Medvedev, A.; Chistokhina, A.; Hirose, T.; Jetten, A. M.: Genomic
structure and chromosomal mapping of the nuclear orphan receptor ROR-gamma
(RORC) gene. Genomics 46: 93-102, 1997.

13. Rocha, B.: Comment on 'Thymic Origin of Intestinal alpha-beta
T Cells Revealed by Fate Mapping of ROR-gamma-delta+ Cells.' (Commentary) Science 308:
1553 only, 2005.

14. Santarlasci, V.; Maggi, L.; Capone, M.; Querci, V.; Beltrame,
L.; Cavalieri, D.; D'Aiuto, E.; Cimaz, R.; Nebbioso, A.; Liotta, F.;
De Palma, R.; Maggi, E.; Cosmi, L.; Romagnani, S.; Annunziato, F.
: Rarity of human T helper 17 cells is due to retinoic acid orphan
receptor-dependent mechanisms that limit their expression. Immunity 36:
201-214, 2012.

15. Sawa, S.; Cherrier, M.; Lochner, M.; Satoh-Takayama, N.; Fehling,
H. J.; Langa, F.; Di Santo, J. P.; Eberl, G.: Lineage relationship
analysis of ROR-gamma-t+ innate lymphoid cells. Science 330: 665-669,
2010.

16. Silva-Santos, B.; Pennington, D. J.; Hayday, A. C.: Lymphotoxin-mediated
regulation of gamma-delta cell differentiation by alpha-beta T cell
progenitors. Science 307: 925-928, 2005.

17. Solt, L. A.; Kumar, N.; Nuhant, P.; Wang, Y.; Lauer, J. L.; Liu,
J.; Istrate, M. A.; Kamenecka, T. M.; Roush, W. R.; Vidovic, D.; Schurer,
S. C.; Xu, J.; Wagoner, G.; Drew, P. D.; Griffin, P. R.; Burris, T.
P.: Suppression of TH17 differentiation and autoimmunity by a synthetic
ROR ligand. Nature 472: 491-494, 2011.

18. Sun, Z.; Unutmaz, D.; Zou, Y.-R.; Sunshine, M. J.; Pierani, A.;
Brenner-Morton, S.; Mebius, R. E.; Littman, D. R.: Requirement for
ROR-gamma in thymocyte survival and lymphoid organ development. Science 288:
2369-2373, 2000.

19. Ueda, H. R.; Hayashi, S.; Chen, W.; Sano, M.; Machida, M.; Shigeyoshi,
Y.; Iino, M.; Hashimoto, S.: System-level identification of transcriptional
circuits underlying mammalian circadian clocks. Nature Genet. 37:
187-192, 2005.

20. Zhang, N.; Guo, J.; He, Y.-W.: Lymphocyte accumulation in the
spleen of retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor gamma-deficient
mice. J. Immun. 171: 1667-1675, 2003.

21. Zhou, L.; Lopes, J. E.; Chong, M. M. W.; Ivanov, I. I.; Min, R.;
Victora, G. D.; Shen, Y.; Du, J.; Rubtsov, Y. P.; Rudensky, A. Y.;
Ziegler, S. F.; Littman, D. R.: TGF-beta-induced Foxp3 inhibits T(H)17
cell differentiation by antagonizing ROR-gamma-t function. Nature 453:
236-240, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/12/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/26/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/21/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/27/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/10/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/4/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/23/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/12/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/22/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/15/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/10/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/3/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/29/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/25/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/2/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/11/2000
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/29/2000

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 8/6/1998

EDITED mgross: 03/19/2013
terry: 3/12/2013
alopez: 3/5/2013
terry: 2/26/2013
mgross: 9/26/2012
terry: 9/21/2012
alopez: 2/29/2012
terry: 2/27/2012
alopez: 6/21/2011
terry: 6/10/2011
alopez: 1/4/2011
alopez: 11/29/2010
terry: 11/23/2010
alopez: 6/17/2008
terry: 6/12/2008
mgross: 1/2/2007
terry: 12/22/2006
mgross: 6/1/2006
terry: 5/15/2006
alopez: 2/17/2006
terry: 2/10/2006
alopez: 2/3/2006
terry: 2/3/2006
terry: 7/29/2005
terry: 4/5/2005
tkritzer: 8/26/2004
terry: 8/25/2004
mgross: 6/2/2004
terry: 10/11/2000
carol: 6/29/2000
dkim: 10/16/1998
alopez: 8/6/1998

604174	TITLE *604174 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L15; RPL15
DESCRIPTION The mammalian ribosome is composed of 4 RNA species (see 180450) and
approximately 80 different proteins (see 180466).

Adams et al. (1992) isolated an RPL15 cDNA as a human brain EST that
shows sequence similarity to the yeast ribosomal protein YL10 gene.

The complete coding sequence of the human RPL15 gene has been deposited
in GenBank (GENBANK L25899). The deduced RPL15 protein has 205 amino
acids.

By somatic cell hybrid and radiation hybrid mapping analyses, Kenmochi
et al. (1998) mapped the human RPL15 gene to 3p.

REFERENCE 1. Adams, M. D.; Dubnick, M.; Kerlavage, A. R.; Moreno, R.; Kelley,
J. M.; Utterback, T. R.; Nagle, J. W.; Fields, C.; Venter, J. C.:
Sequence identification of 2,375 human brain genes. Nature 355:
632-634, 1992. Note: Comment: Nature 357: 367-368, 1992.

2. Kenmochi, N.; Kawaguchi, T.; Rozen, S.; Davis, E.; Goodman, N.;
Hudson, T. J.; Tanaka, T.; Page, D. C.: A map of 75 human ribosomal
protein genes. Genome Res. 8: 509-523, 1998.

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 9/17/1999

EDITED psherman: 12/07/1999
mgross: 9/20/1999
psherman: 9/17/1999

602661	TITLE *602661 TUBULIN, BETA-3; TUBB3
;;TUBB4;;
TUBULIN, BETA, CLASS III
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Microtubules are dynamic polymeric structures consisting of heterodimers
of alpha-tubulins (see 602529) and beta-tubulins, such as TUBB3, that
are continuously incorporated and released. Microtubules function in
mitosis, intracellular transport, neuron morphology, and ciliary and
flagellar motility (Leandro-Garcia et al., 2010).

CLONING

Sullivan and Cleveland (1986) isolated a partial TUBB3 cDNA, which they
designated beta-4, from a human placenta cDNA library. Ranganathan et
al. (1998) cloned cDNAs encoding human TUBB3 from a prostate carcinoma
cell line.

Wang et al. (1986) cloned mouse Tubb3, which they called M-beta-3, from
testis and bone marrow cDNA libraries. Northern blot analysis detected
abundant Tubb3 expression in testis, where expression began around
postnatal day 32. Much lower Tubb3 levels were detected in all other
adult mouse tissues examined except brain, where expression was even
lower.

Burgoyne et al. (1988) stated that the mouse homolog of human TUBB3,
M-beta-6, is expressed primarily in neural tissue.

By RT-PCR analysis of a human brain cDNA library, Poirier et al. (2010)
cloned TUBB3, which encodes a 450-amino acid protein. RT-PCR,
immunocytochemical, and Western blot analyses showed that TUBB3 was
significantly expressed in fibroblasts.

Using database analysis, Leandro-Garcia et al. (2010) identified 8 major
beta-tubulins, including TUBB3. Quantitative RT-PCR of 21 normal human
tissues detected highest TUBB3 expression in brain, much lower
expression in small intestine, testis, and placenta, and little to no
expression in other tissues.

MAPPING

Tischfield et al. (2010) noted that the TUBB3 gene maps to chromosome
16q24.3.

GENE FUNCTION

Antimicrotubule drugs are used in cancer chemotherapy. By RT-PCR and
Western blot analyses, Ranganathan et al. (1998) found that drug
treatment of prostate carcinoma cells selectively increased TUBB3 mRNA
and protein levels. In brain tumor cell lines, the amount of TUBB3
protein was positively correlated with resistance to an antimicrotubule
agent. Ranganathan et al. (1998) suggested that the selective increase
in TUBB3, an isotype that imparts more dynamicity to microtubules, may
provide a way for cells to overcome the effect of antimicrotubule
agents.

Hari et al. (2003) transfected beta III tubulin into Chinese hamster
ovary cells and demonstrated that beta III tubulin diminished
microtubule assembly in a dose-dependent manner and was toxic when
present at high levels. Cells expressing beta III tubulin at moderate
levels were weakly resistant to paclitaxel, a commonly used
chemotherapeutic agent.

Raspaglio et al. (2008) found that hypoxia induced TUBB3 expression in
several human cell lines, but not in a paclitaxel-resistant cell line.
RNA interference revealed that HIF1A (603348) mediated hypoxia-induced
TUBB3 expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that
HIF1A bound an HIF1A-binding site in the 5-prime flanking region of the
TUBB3 gene. Methylation of an enhancer in the 3-prime flanking region
abolished hypoxia-induced TUBB3 expression.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Congenital Fibrosis of Extraocular Muscles 3A

Tischfield et al. (2010) identified 8 different heterozygous mutations
in the TUBB3 gene (see, e.g., 602661.0001-602661.0005) in affected
individuals with autosomal dominant or sporadic congenital fibrosis of
extraocular muscles type 3A with or without extraocular involvement
(CFEOM3A; 600638). In vitro functional expression studies, mutant mouse
studies, and yeast studies showed that all of the mutations resulted in
altered microtubule dynamics and stability, and some showed various loss
of kinesin microtubule interactions. Most affected individuals had
congenital fibrosis of extraocular muscles, but some showed additional
defects, including developmental delay or learning disabilities
associated with dysgenesis of the corpus callosum. Other variable
features included facial weakness and peripheral axonal neuropathy,
sometimes associated with wrist and finger contractures. There were some
genotype/phenotype correlations: those with the E410K (602661.0005) and
D417H (602661.0003) mutations had a severe phenotype with additional
features, including facial weakness and learning disabilities, whereas
those with the D417N (602661.0004) mutation had peripheral neuropathy
and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, and those with the common R262C
mutation (602661.0001) had the mildest phenotype. Overall, the findings
were consistent with defects in axonal guidance, suggesting that the
TUBB3 gene is critical for normal microtubule dynamics, axonal guidance,
and brain development.

- Complex Cortical Dysplasia With Other Brain Malformations
1

In affected members of 7 unrelated families with complex cortical
dysplasia with other brain malformations-1 (CDCBM1; 614039), Poirier et
al. (2010) identified 6 different heterozygous missense mutations in the
TUBB3 gene (see, e.g., 602661.0006-602661.0009). In vitro functional
expression studies showed that most of the mutations resulted in
impairment of the tubulin heterodimerization process or caused impaired
microtubule stability. Affected individuals had mild to severe mental
retardation, strabismus, axial hypotonia, and spasticity. Brain imaging
showed variable malformations of cortical development, including
polymicrogyria, gyral disorganization, and fusion of the basal ganglia,
as well as thin corpus callosum, hypoplastic brainstem, and dysplastic
cerebellar vermis. Extraocular muscles were not involved.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Three of the TUBB3 mutations identified by Poirier et al. (2010) in
patients with complex cortical dysplasia and other brain malformations
(G82R, T178M; 602661.0008, and M323V; 602661.0009) were localized to the
surface of the tubulin molecule, on the opposite side of TUBB3 mutations
reported by Tischfield et al. (2010) (R262C; 602661.0001, E410K;
602661.0005, and D417N; 602661.0004), suggesting that these 2 groups of
mutations could impair microtubules and/or their interactions with
proteins critical for microtubule function in different ways. Mutations
associated with different phenotypes might reside in different
functional areas of the protein. However, in the specific case of the
ala302 residue, the nature of the variation seemed to influence the
resulting phenotype, since the A302T (602661.0002) and A302V
(602661.0008) mutations resulted in CFEOM3A and CDCBM syndromes,
respectively.

ANIMAL MODEL

Tischfield et al. (2010) showed that heterozygous mice carrying the
R262C mutation (602661.0001) appeared healthy and had no external eye
phenotypes. Homozygous mice failed to breathe normally and died within
hours of birth. Homozygous mice showed defects in the guidance of
commissural axons and cranial nerves, and some had agenesis of the
corpus callosum; heterozygous mice had thin anterior commissures. Both
homo- and heterozygous R262C mice had decreased levels of Tubb3 protein,
but the Tubb3 protein resulted in increased microtubule stability with
decreased Kif21a (608283) microtubule interactions.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
FIBROSIS OF EXTRAOCULAR MUSCLES, CONGENITAL, 3A, WITH OR WITHOUT EXTRAOCULAR
INVOLVEMENT
TUBB3, ARG262CYS

In affected members of 11 unrelated pedigrees with congenital fibrosis
of extraocular muscles-3A (600638), Tischfield et al. (2010) identified
a heterozygous 784C-T transition in exon 4 of the TUBB3 gene, resulting
in an arg262-to-cys (R262C) substitution. Several of the pedigrees had
previously been reported by Doherty et al. (1999), Gillies et al.
(1995), Mackey et al. (2002), and Yamada et al. (2004). The ocular
motility defects ranged from severe to mild. Brain MRI of affected
members in 4 pedigrees showed hypoplasia of the oculomotor nerve and the
muscles innervated by its superior division, the levator palpebrae
superioris and superior rectus, as well as the medial rectus muscle
innervated by its inferior division. The oculomotor nerve also
aberrantly innervated the lateral rectus muscle, normally innervated by
the abducens nerve. The findings were consistent with axon guidance
defects. In addition, affected individuals in some of the families
showed developmental delay or learning disabilities, and some had mild
dysgenesis of the corpus callosum. In vitro studies showed patchy mutant
heterodimer incorporation into microtubules. Further studies showed
decreased polymerization rates and increased depolymerization rates, as
well as altered interaction with kinesins. The mutation was not found in
over 1,700 control chromosomes.

.0002
FIBROSIS OF EXTRAOCULAR MUSCLES, CONGENITAL, 3A, WITH OR WITHOUT EXTRAOCULAR
INVOLVEMENT
TUBB3, ALA302THR

In affected members of 3 unrelated pedigrees with congenital fibrosis of
extraocular muscles-3A (600638), Tischfield et al. (2010) identified a
heterozygous 904G-A transition in exon 4 of the TUBB3 gene, resulting in
an ala302-to-thr (A302T) substitution in a region proposed to mediate
lateral interactions between tubulin heterodimers, which assemble to
form microtubules. Two affected individuals in 1 of the families showed
learning disabilities and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum. In vitro
functional expression studies showed that the A302T mutant incorporated
into microtubules, increased the stability of microtubules, and
diminished overall microtubule dynamics. The mutation was not found in
over 1,700 control chromosomes.

Notably, a mutation affecting the same residue, A302V (602661.0008), was
identified as causative of complex cortical dysplasia and other brain
malformations (614039) (Poirier et al., 2010).

.0003
FIBROSIS OF EXTRAOCULAR MUSCLES, CONGENITAL, 3A, WITH OR WITHOUT EXTRAOCULAR
INVOLVEMENT
TUBB3, ASP417HIS

In a mother and 2 sons with CFEOM3A (600638), Tischfield et al. (2010)
identified a heterozygous 1249G-C transversion in the TUBB3 gene,
resulting in an asp417-to-his (D417H) substitution in a region on the
external surface of microtubules that mediate interactions with motor
proteins and other proteins. Other clinical features included facial
weakness, wrist and finger contractures, peripheral axonal neuropathy in
2, and developmental delay in 1. Brain imaging was not performed. In
vitro functional expression studies in yeast showed that the mutation
resulted in altered kinesin microtubule interactions. The mutation was
not found in over 1,700 control chromosomes. Another mutation in this
residue was also identified (D417N; 602661.0004).

.0004
FIBROSIS OF EXTRAOCULAR MUSCLES, CONGENITAL, 3A, WITH OR WITHOUT EXTRAOCULAR
INVOLVEMENT
TUBB3, ASP417ASN

In affected members of 4 unrelated pedigrees with CFEOM3A (600638),
Tischfield et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 1249G-A transition in
exon 4 of the TUBB3 gene, resulting in an asp417-to-asn (D417N)
substitution in a region on the external surface of microtubules that
mediate interactions with motor proteins and other proteins. Affected
members of 2 families had isolated CFEOM, but affected members in the
other 2 families also developed axonal peripheral neuropathy in the
second to third decade. One Belgian family, previously reported by
Abeloos et al. (1990), had 9 affected individuals, 4 of whom also had
developmental delay or learning disabilities. Five mutation carriers in
this family had peripheral neuropathy in the absence of CFEOM. In vitro
functional expression studies in yeast showed that the mutation resulted
in altered kinesin microtubule interactions. The mutation was not found
in over 1,700 control chromosomes. Another mutation in this residue was
also identified (D417H; 602661.0003).

.0005
FIBROSIS OF EXTRAOCULAR MUSCLES, CONGENITAL, 3A, WITH OR WITHOUT EXTRAOCULAR
INVOLVEMENT
TUBB3, GLU410LYS

In 6 unrelated individuals with sporadic CFEOM3A (600638), Tischfield et
al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 1228G-A transition in exon 4 of the
TUBB3 gene, resulting in a glu410-to-lys (E410K) substitution in a
region on the external surface of microtubules that mediate interactions
with motor proteins and other proteins. All of the mutations appeared to
be de novo. In addition to CFEOM, all individuals had developmental
delay and facial weakness. Some had agenesis of the corpus callosum on
brain MRI. One also had peripheral neuropathy with wrist and finger
contractures. In vitro functional expression studies and yeast studies
showed that the mutation resulted in decreased polymerization rates and
increased depolymerization rates, as well as altered kinesin microtubule
interactions. The mutation was not found in over 1,700 control
chromosomes.

.0006
CORTICAL DYSPLASIA, COMPLEX, WITH OTHER BRAIN MALFORMATIONS 1
TUBB3, THR178MET

In a patient with complex cortical dysplasia and other brain
malformations-1 (CDCBM1; 614039), Poirier et al. (2010) identified a de
novo heterozygous c.533C-T transition in exon 4 of the TUBB3 gene,
resulting in a thr178-to-met (T178M) substitution in the N-terminal
domain. The mutation was not detected in 360 Caucasian controls. Protein
modeling showed that the mutation localized to the surface of the
alpha-beta tubulin heterodimer. Structural data suggested that the
mutation may influence GTP binding. In vitro functional expression
assays showed that the mutant protein was translated and could form
tubulin heterodimers that were properly incorporated into microtubules,
although the microtubules were less stable than wildtype. The patient
had microcephaly, virtually no psychomotor development, axial hypotonia,
spastic tetraplegia, refractory epilepsy, cortical gyral
disorganization, hypoplasia of the cerebellum and brainstem, agenesis of
the corpus callosum, and fusion of the caudate and putamen.

.0007
CORTICAL DYSPLASIA, COMPLEX, WITH OTHER BRAIN MALFORMATIONS 1
TUBB3, GLU205LYS

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with complex cortical
dysplasia and other brain malformations-1 (614039), Poirier et al.
(2010) identified a heterozygous c.613G-A transition in exon 4 of the
TUBB3 gene, resulting in a glu205-to-lys (E205K) substitution in the
intermediate domain. The mutation occurred de novo in 1 family and was
inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern in the other family. The
mutation was not detected in 360 Caucasian controls. In vitro functional
expression studies showed that the mutant protein did not form tubulin
heterodimers and had a subtle impairment in its ability to incorporate
into the cytoskeleton. Studies of patient fibroblasts showed no major
alterations in the microtubule network, but the microtubules were less
stable than wildtype. The patients had moderate to severe mental
retardation, polymicrogyria, dysplastic cerebellum, hypoplasia of the
brainstem, and fusion of the caudate and putamen.

.0008
CORTICAL DYSPLASIA, COMPLEX, WITH OTHER BRAIN MALFORMATIONS 1
TUBB3, ALA302VAL

In 4 affected members of a family with complex cortical dysplasia and
other brain malformations-1 (614039), Poirier et al. (2010) identified a
heterozygous c.905C-T transition in exon 4 of the TUBB3 gene, resulting
in an ala302-to-val (A302V) substitution in the intermediate domain. The
mutation was not detected in 360 Caucasian controls. In vitro functional
expression studies showed that the mutant protein did not form tubulin
heterodimers. The mother had mild mental retardation, gyral
disorganization, and dysplasia of the cerebellar vermis. One of her
daughters was homozygous for the mutation and had a more severe
phenotype with axial hypotonia, gyral disorganization, dysplastic
cerebellar vermis, hypoplastic brainstem, thin corpus callosum, and
fusion of the caudate and putamen.

Notably, a mutation affecting the same residue, A302T (602661.0002), had
been identified as causative of CFEOM3A (600638) (Tischfield et al.,
2010).

.0009
CORTICAL DYSPLASIA, COMPLEX, WITH OTHER BRAIN MALFORMATIONS 1
TUBB3, MET323VAL

In a father and son with complex cortical dysplasia and other brain
malformations-1 (614039), Poirier et al. (2010) identified a
heterozygous c.967A-G transition in exon 4 of the TUBB3 gene, resulting
in a met323-to-val (M323V) substitution in intermediate domain. Protein
modeling showed that the mutation localized to the surface of the
alpha-beta tubulin heterodimer. In vitro functional expression assays
showed that the mutant protein was translated, but generated diminished
levels of tubulin heterodimers. The patients had mental retardation,
gyral disorganization, dysplastic cerebellum, hypoplastic brainstem,
thin corpus callosum, and mild fusion of the basal ganglia.

REFERENCE 1. Abeloos, M.-C.; Cordonnier, M.; van Nechel, C.; van Bogaert, P.;
Gerard, J.-M.; van Regemoorter, N.: Fibrose congenitale des muscles
oculaires: un diagnostic pour plusieurs tableaux cliniques. Bull.
Soc. Belge Ophtalmol. 239: 61-74, 1990.

2. Burgoyne, R. D.; Cambray-Deakin, M. A.; Lewis, S. A.; Sarkar, S.;
Cowan, N. J.: Differential distribution of beta-tubulin isotypes
in cerebellum. EMBO J. 7: 2311-2319, 1988.

3. Doherty, E. J.; Macy, M. E.; Wang, S. M.; Dykeman, C. P.; Melanson,
M. T.; Engle, E. C.: CFEOM3: a new extraocular congenital fibrosis
syndrome that maps to 16q24.2-q24.3. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 40:
1687-1694, 1999.

4. Gillies, W. E.; Harris, A. J.; Brooks, A. M. V.; Rivers, M. R.;
Wolfe, R. J. B.: Congenital fibrosis of the vertically acting extraocular
muscles: a new group of dominantly inherited ocular fibrosis with
radiologic findings. Ophthalmology 102: 607-612, 1995.

5. Hari, M.; Yang, H.; Zeng, C.; Canizales, M.; Cabral, F.: Expression
of class III beta-tubulin reduces microtubule assembly and confers
resistance to paclitaxel. Cell Motil. Cytoskeleton 56: 45-56, 2003.

6. Leandro-Garcia, L. J.; Leskela, S.; Landa, I.; Montero-Conde, C.;
Lopez-Jimenez, E.; Leton, R.; Cascon, A.; Robledo, M.; Rodriguez-Antona,
C.: Tumoral and tissue-specific expression of the major human beta-tubulin
isotypes. Cytoskeleton 67: 214-223, 2010.

7. Mackey, D. A.; Chan, W.-M.; Chan, C.; Gillies, W. E.; Brooks, A.
M. V.; O'Day, J.; Engle, E. C.: Congenital fibrosis of the vertically
acting extraocular muscles maps to the FEOM3 locus. Hum. Genet. 110:
510-512, 2002.

8. Poirier, K.; Saillour, Y.; Bahi-Buisson, N.; Jaglin, X. H.; Fallet-Bianco,
C.; Nabbout, R.; Castelnau-Ptakhine, L.; Roubertie, A.; Attie-Bitach,
T.; Desguerre, I.; Genevieve, D.; Barnerias, C.; Keren, B.; Lebrun,
N.; Boddaert, N.; Encha-Razavi, F.; Chelly, J.: Mutations in the
neuronal beta-tubulin subunit TUBB3 result in malformation of cortical
development and neuronal migration defects. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19:
4462-4473, 2010.

9. Ranganathan, S; Dexter, D. W.; Benetatos, C. A.; Hudes, G. R.:
Cloning and sequencing of human beta-III-tubulin cDNA: induction of
beta-III isotype in human prostate carcinoma cells by acute exposure
to antimicrotubule agents. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1395: 237-245,
1998.

10. Raspaglio, G.; Filippetti, F.; Prislei, S.; Penci, R.; De Maria,
I.; Cicchillitti, L.; Mozzetti, S.; Scambia, G.; Ferlini, C.: Hypoxia
induces class III beta-tubulin gene expression by HIF-1-alpha binding
to its 3-prime flanking region. Gene 409: 100-108, 2008.

11. Sullivan, K. F.; Cleveland, D. W.: Identification of conserved
isotype-defining variable region sequences for four vertebrate beta
tubulin polypeptide classes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 4327-4331,
1986.

12. Tischfield, M. A.; Baris, H. N.; Wu, C.; Rudolph, G.; Van Maldergem,
L.; He, W.; Chan, W.-M.; Andrews, C.; Demer, J. L.; Robertson, R.
L.; Mackey, D. A.; Ruddle, J. B.; and 37 others: Human TUBB3 mutations
perturb microtubule dynamics, kinesin interactions, and axon guidance. Cell 140:
74-87, 2010.

13. Wang, D.; Villasante, A.; Lewis, S. A.; Cowan, N. J.: The mammalian
beta-tubulin repertoire: hematopoietic expression of a novel, heterologous
beta-tubulin isotype. J. Cell Biol. 103: 1903-1910, 1986.

14. Yamada, K.; Chan, W.-M.; Andrews, C.; Bosley, T. M.; Sener, E.
C.; Zwaan, J. T.; Mullaney, P. B.; Ozturk, B. T.; Akarsu, A. N.; Sabol,
L. J.; Demer, J. L.; Sullivan, T. J.; and 14 others: Identification
of KIF21A mutations as a rare cause of congenital fibrosis of the
extraocular muscles type 3 (CFEOM3). Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 45:
2218-2223, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/28/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/14/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/4/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/2/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/7/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/21/2004
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 6/17/1998

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/27/1998

EDITED carol: 09/17/2013
ckniffin: 9/16/2013
mgross: 2/28/2013
wwang: 6/28/2011
ckniffin: 6/14/2011
carol: 3/12/2010
carol: 2/4/2010
terry: 2/4/2010
carol: 2/3/2010
ckniffin: 2/2/2010
mgross: 7/9/2009
terry: 7/7/2009
carol: 12/21/2004
joanna: 12/14/2004
joanna: 12/4/2003
psherman: 6/15/1999
alopez: 6/17/1998
alopez: 5/27/1998

610704	TITLE *610704 PROHIBITIN 2; PHB2
;;REPRESSOR OF ESTROGEN RECEPTOR ACTIVITY; REA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using the C-terminal EF domains of a dominant-negative estrogen receptor
(ER)-alpha (ESR1; 133430) mutant as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a
breast cancer cell line cDNA library, followed by EST database analysis,
Montano et al. (1999) cloned PHB2, which the called REA. The deduced
299-amino acid protein contains 4 potential phosphorylation sites, a
nuclear receptor interaction box, and a nuclear localization motif.

GENE FUNCTION

Montano et al. (1999) showed that REA enhanced the potency of a
dominant-negative ER-alpha mutant and antiestrogens as suppressors of
ER-alpha activity in Chinese hamster ovary cells. When coexpressed with
wildtype ER-alpha or ER-beta (ESR2; 601663), REA suppressed activation
of a reporter gene in a dose-dependent manner. REA had no effect on
reporter activity in the absence of liganded ER, and it had no effect on
the transcriptional activities of other hormone receptors. Mutation
analysis showed that an N-terminal domain and a central domain of REA
were required for its repressor activity. REA interacted directly with
ER-alpha in an in vitro pull-down assay. REA did not interfere with the
ability of ER-alpha to bind to estrogen response element DNA, but it
competed with the coactivator SRC1 (NCOA1; 602691) for modulation of
ER-alpha transcriptional activity.

By gel filtration, mass spectrometry, coimmunoprecipitation, and Western
blot analysis of HeLa cells, Da Cruz et al. (2008) showed that
prohibitin-1 (PHB; 176705) and prohibitin-2 interacted in a 250-kD
complex with SLP2 (STOML2; 608292). Knockdown of SLP2 in HeLa cells or
mouse embryonic fibroblasts via RNA interference led to increased
proteolysis of the prohibitins and other mitochondrial proteins.

Using coimmunoprecipitation analysis, Christie et al. (2011) confirmed
that SLP2 interacted with PHB1 and PHB2. Elevated SLP2 content increased
the association of PHB1 with mitochondrial membranes.

MAPPING

Hartz (2013) mapped the PHB2 gene to chromosome 12p13.31 based on an
alignment of the PHB2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF150962) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

ANIMAL MODEL

Mussi et al. (2006) reported that Rea deletion in mice was embryonic
lethal. They found that, compared with wildtype mice, virgin Rea +/-
mice exhibited faster mammary ductal elongation, and Rea +/- mice showed
increased lobuloalveolar development during pregnancy and delayed
mammary gland involution after weaning. These phenotypes of Rea +/- mice
were associated with significantly increased cell proliferation and ER
transcriptional activities. Rea repressed ER transcriptional activity in
mouse mammary gland under natural conditions, as well as following
ovariectomy and after estrogen replacement.

Using conditional gene targeting, Merkwirth et al. (2008) restricted
expression of mouse Phb2 to mitochondria and identified processing of
the dynamin (see 602377)-like GTPase Opa1 (605290), an essential
component of the mitochondrial fusion machinery, as the central cellular
process controlled by prohibitins. Deletion of Phb2 led to selective
loss of long isoforms of Opa1, resulting in aberrant cristae
morphogenesis, impaired cellular proliferation, and resistance to
apoptosis. Expression of a long Opa1 isoform in Phb2-deficient cells
suppressed these defects, identifying impaired Opa1 processing as the
primary cellular defect in the absence of prohibitins. Merkwirth et al.
(2008) concluded that prohibitins are essential for formation of
mitochondrial cristae and suggested that cell proliferation is coupled
with mitochondrial morphogenesis.

REFERENCE 1. Christie, D. A.; Lemke, C. D.; Elias, I. M.; Chau, L. A.; Kirchhof,
M. G.; Li, B.; Ball, E. H.; Dunn, S. D.; Hatch, G. M.; Madrenas, J.
: Stomatin-like protein 2 binds cardiolipin and regulates mitochondrial
biogenesis and function. Molec. Cell. Biol. 31: 3845-3856, 2011.

2. Da Cruz, S.; Parone, P. A.; Gonzalo, P.; Bienvenut, W. V.; Tondera,
D.; Jourdain, A.; Quadroni, M.; Martinou, J.-C.: SLP-2 interacts
with prohibitins in the mitochondrial inner membrane and contributes
to their stability. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1783: 904-911, 2008.

3. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/20/2013.

4. Merkwirth, C.; Dargazanli, S.; Tatsuta, T.; Geimer, S.; Lower,
B.; Wunderlich, F. T.; von Kleist-Retzow, J.-C.; Waisman, A.; Westermann,
B.; Langer, T.: Prohibitins control cell proliferation and apoptosis
by regulating OPA1-dependent cristae morphogenesis in mitochondria. Genes
Dev. 22: 476-488, 2008.

5. Montano, M. M.; Ekena, K.; Delage-Mourroux, R.; Chang, W.; Martini,
P.; Katzenellenbogen, B. S.: An estrogen receptor-selective coregulator
that potentiates the effectiveness of antiestrogens and represses
the activity of estrogens. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 6947-6952,
1999.

6. Mussi, P.; Liao, L.; Park, S.-E.; Ciana, P.; Maggi, A.; Katzenellenbogen,
B. S.; Xu, J.; O'Malley, B. W.: Haploinsufficiency of the corepressor
of estrogen receptor activity (REA) enhances estrogen receptor function
in the mammary gland. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 16716-16721, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 02/20/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/21/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/16/2007

EDITED mgross: 02/20/2013
mgross: 3/24/2008
terry: 3/21/2008
mgross: 1/16/2007

612747	TITLE *612747 TUFTELIN-INTERACTING PROTEIN 11; TFIP11
;;TUFTELIN-INTERACTING PROTEIN, 39-KD; TIP39;;
NTR1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TFIP11 is a nuclear speckle-localized protein that may play a role in
spliceosome disassembly in Cajal bodies (Stanek et al., 2008).

CLONING

Paine et al. (2000) used yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a mouse tooth
expression library to identify mouse Tfip11, which they called TIP39, as
a tuftelin (TUFT1; 600087)-interacting protein. By database analysis,
they identified human TFIP11, which encodes a deduced 837-amino acid
protein with a calculated molecular mass of 96.8 kD. The deduced
678-amino acid mouse protein shares 92% amino acid identity with human
TFIP11. Both human and mouse proteins contain a myc-type HLH domain, at
least 2 coiled-coil domains, and a C-terminal clathrin-binding motif. In
situ hybridization of 1-day-old mouse mandible detected Tfip11
transcripts in secretory ameloblasts and odontoblasts. In vitro and in
vivo analysis showed that Tfip11 and Tuft1 colocalized.

GENE FUNCTION

By immunofluorescence assay, Wen et al. (2005) localized mouse Tfip11 to
nuclear speckles that are excluded from the nucleoli. Tfip11 colocalized
with splicing factor SC35 (SFRS2; 600813), a marker for nuclear
speckles, and was distinct and excluded from paraspeckles. Using
alpha-amanitin, the authors determined that TFIP11 distribution was
sensitive to RNA polymerase II transcription and independent of
translation. TFIP11 localization was sensitive to RNAse treatment, and
Wen et al. (2005) suggested that TFIP11 may be associated with RNA and
may play a role in splicing.

Stanek et al. (2008) stated that in yeast a complex formed by PRP43
(DDX15; 603403), TFIP11, and Ntr2 have been showed to be essential for
release of individual snRNPs from the excised intron lariat. Stanek et
al. (2008) used small interfering RNAs to deplete TFIP11 expression.
They showed that depletion of TFIP11 led to the accumulation of U4/U6
snRNPs in Cajal bodies, suggesting that reassembly of the U4/U6/U5
tri-snRNP was delayed. Stanek et al. (2008) concluded that individual
snRNPs cycle repeatedly through Cajal bodies

MAPPING

Paine et al. (2000) noted that the TFIP11 gene maps to chromosome
22q12.1 and the corresponding mouse Tfip11 gene maps to chromosome 5F.

REFERENCE 1. Paine, C. T.; Paine, M. L.; Luo, W.; Okamoto, C. T.; Lyngstadaas,
S. P.; Snead, M. L.: A tuftelin-interacting protein (TIP39) localizes
to the apical secretory pole of mouse ameloblasts. J. Biol. Chem. 275:
22284-22292, 2000.

2. Stanek, D.; Pridalova-Hnilicova, J.; Novotny, I.; Huranova, M.;
Blazikova, M.; Wen, X.; Sapra, A. K.; Neugebauer, K. M.: Spliceosomal
small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles repeatedly cycle through
Cajal bodies. Molec. Biol. Cell 19: 2534-2543, 2008.

3. Wen, X.; Lei, Y.-P.; Zhou, Y. L.; Okamoto, C. T.; Snead, M. L.;
Paine, M. L.: Structural organization and cellular localization of
tuftelin-interacting protein 11 (TFIP11). Cell. Molec. Life Sci. 62:
1038-1046, 2005.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 4/22/2009

EDITED wwang: 04/22/2009

612730	TITLE *612730 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 9 (SODIUM/HYDROGEN EXCHANGER), MEMBER 8; SLC9A8
;;SODIUM/HYDROGEN EXCHANGER 8; NHE8;;
KIAA0939
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Sodium-hydrogen exchangers (NHEs), such as SLC9A8, are integral
transmembrane proteins that exchange extracellular Na+ for intracellular
H+. NHEs have multiple functions, including intracellular pH
homeostasis, cell volume regulation, and electroneutral NaCl absorption
in epithelia (Xu et al., 2008).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) obtained a partial SLC9A8 clone, which
they designated KIAA0939. RT-PCR ELISA detected low expression in most
adult tissues and specific brain regions examined. Little to no
expression was detected in adult lung and spleen and in fetal liver and
brain.

By searching databases using rabbit Nhe3 (SLC9A3; 182307) as query,
Goyal et al. (2003) identified human SLC9A8, which they called NHE8. The
full-length protein contains 581 amino acids and shares 96% identity
with mouse Nhe8. NHE8 has an N-terminal hydrophobic domain with 10 to 12
transmembrane segments and a short C-terminal hydrophilic tail. It also
has 4 potential N-glycosylation sites, a PKC-epsilon (PRKCE; 176975)
phosphorylation site, and putative SH2-, SH3-, ERK (see MAPK3; 601795)-,
and type III PDZ-binding domains. Northern blot analysis of mouse
tissues revealed ubiquitous expression, with highest levels in kidney,
testis, skeletal muscle, and liver. Western blot analysis detected Nhe8
in apical membranes purified from rat renal cortex. In situ
hybridization of rat kidney revealed high expression of Nhe8 in proximal
tubules in the outer stripe of the outer medulla, with lower expression
in cortical proximal tubules. No message was detected in glomeruli.

Using Northern blot analysis, Xu et al. (2008) detected 7- and 4-kb NHE8
transcripts in all sections of the human gastrointestinal tract, with
highest expression in stomach, duodenum, and ascending colon. Adult
mouse gastrointestinal tract showed a slightly different distribution of
Nhe8, and Nhe8 expression was much higher in stomach and jejunum of
young mice compared with adult mice.

By immunofluorescence analysis and immunogold electron microscopy of
HeLa cells, Lawrence et al. (2010) found that the majority of NHE8
localized to the trans-Golgi network, with a smaller proportion
localized with multivesicular bodies.

GENE FUNCTION

Xu et al. (2008) found that rat Nhe8 was a functional NHE with kinetics
and an inhibitor profile that differed from other apically expressed
NHEs.

Lawrence et al. (2010) found that knockdown of NHE8 in HeLa cells, but
not knockdown of any other NHE tested, resulted in endosomal clustering,
increased proportion of dense multivesicular bodies, and elevated EGF
(131530) degradation. Overexpression of an inactive NHE8 mutant resulted
in a similar endosomal phenotype. Depletion of NHE8 had no effect on
perinuclear localization of the trans-Golgi network, rate of protein
secretion, or endosomal pH.

MAPPING

Hartz (2009) mapped the SLC9A8 gene to chromosome 20q13.13 based on an
alignment of the SLC9A8 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB023156) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Goyal, S.; Vanden Heuvel, G.; Aronson, P. S.: Renal expression
of novel Na+/H+ exchanger isoform NHE8. Am. J. Physiol. Renal Physiol. 284:
F467-F473, 2003.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  4/14/2009.

3. Lawrence, S. P.; Bright, N. A.; Luzio, J. P.; Bowers, K.: The
sodium/proton exchanger NHE8 regulates late endosomal morphology and
function. Molec. Biol. Cell 21: 3540-3551, 2010.

4. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

5. Xu, H.; Chen, H.; Dong, J.; Lynch, R.; Ghishan, F. K.: Gastrointestinal
distribution and kinetic characterization of the sodium-hydrogen exchanger
isoform 8 (NHE8). Cell Physiol. Biochem. 21: 109-116, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/19/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/14/2009

EDITED mgross: 12/19/2011
terry: 12/19/2011
mgross: 4/14/2009

602034	TITLE *602034 CORTICOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE RECEPTOR 2; CRHR2
;;CORTICOTROPIN-RELEASING FACTOR RECEPTOR 2; CRFR2;;
CRF2 RECEPTOR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Liaw et al. (1996) stated that there are 2 G protein-coupled
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH; 122560) receptors, CRHR1 (122561)
and CRHR2, which they termed the CRF2 receptor. CRH is a 41-amino acid
peptide synthesized in the hypothalamus that is the principal
neuroregulator of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis and
plays an important role in coordinating the endocrine, autonomic, and
behavioral responses to stress and immune challenge.

CLONING

Liaw et al. (1996) used clones of the rat CRF2 receptor to isolate the
human gene from brain and kidney genomic DNA libraries. The predicted
protein, which is 411 amino acids in length and 70% identical to the
CRF1 receptor, contains a putative N-terminal secretory signal sequence
and 7 putative transmembrane domains. Liaw et al. (1996) expressed the
CRF2 receptor and found that transfected cells responded to the binding
of CRH with an increase in intracellular cAMP. Although the rat receptor
has 2 alternatively spliced variants, termed CRF2-alpha and CRF2-beta,
Liaw et al. (1996) found no evidence for alternative splicing of the
human receptor. Liaw et al. (1996) reported that the pharmacologic
profile of this protein was similar to that of the rat CRF2-alpha
protein but distinct from the human CRF1 receptor.

Kostich et al. (1998) reported a novel CRHR2 splice isoform, which they
referred to as 'CRF2-gamma,' found in human brain. CRF2-gamma cDNA
encodes a 397-amino acid receptor containing an amino terminus with no
significant homology to the already reported alpha- and beta-termini.
PCR and Southern blot analysis of CRF2-gamma RNA expression in human
brain detected expression in the septum and hippocampus, with weaker but
detectable expression in the amygdala, nucleus accumbens, midbrain, and
frontal cortex.

GENE FUNCTION

While CRFR1 shares 70% sequence identity with CRFR2, it has much higher
affinity for rat/human CRF. Liaw et al. (1997) determined the regions
involved in receptor-ligand binding and/or receptor activation using
chimeric receptor constructs of human CRFR1 and CRFR2 and generated
point mutations of both receptors. The EC(50) values in stimulation of
intracellular cAMP by the receptors for the peptide ligand were
determined using a cAMP-dependent reporter system. Three regions of the
receptor were found to be important for optimal binding of CRF and/or
receptor activation. The first region was mapped to the junction of the
third extracellular domain and the fifth transmembrane domain.
Substitutions of 3 amino acids of CRFR1 in this region (val266, tyr267,
and thr268) by the corresponding CRFR2 amino acids (asp266, leu267, and
val268) increased the EC(50) value by approximately 10-fold. The other 2
regions were in the second extracellular domain of the CRFR1 (amino
acids 175-178 and his189). Substitutions in each of these 2 regions
increased the EC(50) value for CRF by approximately 7- to 8-fold, but
only in the presence of the amino acid 266-268 mutation involving the
first region, suggesting that the latter 2 regions may play a secondary
role in peptide ligand binding.

Hsu and Hsueh (2001) identified stresscopin (SCP; 605901) and
stresscopin-related peptide (SRP; 605902) as specific ligands for CRHR2.

Lemos et al. (2012) reported that corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF;
122560), a neuropeptide released in response to acute stressors and
other arousing environmental stimuli, acts in the nucleus accumbens of
naive mice to increase dopamine release through coactivation of the
receptors CRFR1 (122561) and CRFR2. Remarkably, severe-stress exposure
completely abolished this effect without recovery for at least 90 days.
This loss of CRF's capacity to regulate dopamine release in the nucleus
accumbens is accompanied by a switch in the reaction to CRF from
appetitive to aversive, indicating a diametric change in the emotional
response to acute stressors. Lemos et al. (2012) concluded that their
results offer a biologic substrate for the switch in affect which is
central to stress-induced depressive disorders.

GENE STRUCTURE

The CRHR2 gene consists of 12 exons spanning approximately 30 kb (Liaw
et al., 1996).

MAPPING

Meyer et al. (1997) used radiation hybrids and fluorescence in situ
hybridization to map CRHR2 to human chromosome 7p21-p15 between the STS
markers D7S632 and D7S690.

Lesh et al. (1997) mapped the mouse Crhr2 gene to chromosome 6.

ANIMAL MODEL

Coste et al. (2000) generated Crhr2 -/- mice through targeted disruption
and demonstrated that CRHR2 supplies regulatory features of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis stress response. Although initiation
of the stress response appeared to be normal, Crhr2 -/- mice showed
early termination of adrenocorticotropic hormone (Acth) release,
suggesting that CRHR2 is involved in maintaining
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis drive. CRHR2 also appears to modify
the recovery phase of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis response,
as corticosterone levels remained elevated after stress in Crhr2 -/-
mice. In addition, stress coping behaviors associated with dearousal
were reduced in Crhr2 -/- mice. Coste et al. (2000) also demonstrated
that CRHR2 is essential for sustained feeding suppression induced by
urocortin (600945). Feeding was initially suppressed in Crhr2 -/- mice
following urocortin administration, but Crhr2 -/- mice recovered more
rapidly and completely than did wildtype mice. In addition to central
nervous system effects, Coste et al. (2000) found that, in contrast to
wildtype mice, Crhr2 -/- mice failed to show the enhanced cardiac
performance or reduced blood pressure associated with systemic
urocortin, suggesting that CRHR2 mediates these peripheral human dynamic
effects. Moreover, Crhr2 -/- mice have elevated basal blood pressure,
demonstrating that CRHR2 participates in cardiovascular homeostasis.

Bale et al. (2000) generated Crhr2 -/- mice by targeted disruption. They
found that Crhr2 -/- mice were hypersensitive to stress and displayed
increased anxiety-like behavior. Mutant mice had normal basal feeding
and weight gain but decreased food intake following food deprivation.
Intravenously injected urocortin produced no effect on mean arterial
pressure in the mutant mice.

Kishimoto et al. (2000) generated mice deficient for Crhr2 by targeted
disruption. They reported that male but not female Crhr2-deficient mice
exhibited enhanced anxious behavior in several tests of anxiety in
contrast to mice lacking Crhr1. The enhanced anxiety of Crhr2-deficient
mice was not due to changes in hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
activity, but rather reflected impaired responses in specific brain
regions involved in emotional and autonomic functions, as monitored by a
reduction in Creb phosphorylation in male, but not female, Crhr2 -/-
mice. Kishimoto et al. (2000) proposed that CRHR1 predominantly mediates
a central anxiolytic response, opposing the general anxiogenic effect of
CRH mediated by CRHR1. Kishimoto et al. (2000) found that neither male
nor female Crhr2-deficient mice showed alterations of baseline feeding
behavior. Both responded with increased edema formation in response to
thermal exposure, however, indicating that in contrast to its central
role in anxiety, the peripheral role of CRHR2 in vascular permeability
is independent of gender.

REFERENCE 1. Bale, T. L.; Contarino, A.; Smith, G. W.; Chan, R.; Gold, L. H.;
Sawchenko, P. E.; Koob, G. F.; Vale, W. W.; Lee, K.-F.: Mice deficient
for corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor-2 display anxiety-like
behaviour and are hypersensitive to stress. Nature Genet. 24: 410-414,
2000.

2. Coste, S. C.; Kesterson, R. A.; Heldwein, K. A.; Stevens, S. L.;
Heard, A. D.; Hollis, J. H.; Murray, S. E.; Hill, J. K.; Pantely,
G. A.; Hohimer, A. R.; Hatton, D. C.; Phillips, T. J.; Finn, D. A.;
Low, M. J.; Rittenberg, M. B.; Stenzel, P.; Stenzel-Poore, M. P.:
Abnormal adaptations to stress and impaired cardiovascular function
in mice lacking corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor-2. Nature
Genet. 24: 403-409, 2000.

3. Hsu, S. Y.; Hsueh, A. J. W.: Human stresscopin and stresscopin-related
peptide are selective ligands for the type 2 corticotropin-releasing
hormone receptor. Nature Med. 7: 605-611, 2001.

4. Kishimoto, T.; Radulovic, J.; Radulovic, M.; Lin, C. R.; Schrick,
C.; Hooshmand, F.; Hermanson, O.; Rosenfeld, M. G.; Spiess, J.: Deletion
of Crhr2 reveals an anxiolytic role for corticotropin-releasing hormone
receptor-2. Nature Genet. 24: 415-419, 2000.

5. Kostich, W. A.; Chen, A.; Sperle, K.; Largent, B. L.: Molecular
identification and analysis of a novel human corticotropin-releasing
factor (CRF) receptor: the CRF2-gamma receptor. Molec. Endocr. 12:
1077-1085, 1998.

6. Lemos, J. C.; Wanat, M. J.; Smith, J. S.; Reyes, B. A. S.; Hollon,
N. G.; Van Bockstaele, E. J.; Chavkin, C.; Phillips, P. E. M.: Severe
stress switches CRF action in the nucleus accumbens from appetitive
to aversive. Nature 490: 402-406, 2012.

7. Lesh, J. S.; Burrows, H. L.; Seasholtz, A. F.; Camper, S. A.:
Mapping of the mouse corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor 2 gene
(Crhr2) to chromosome 6. Mammalian Genome 8: 944-945, 1997.

8. Liaw, C. W.; Grigoriadis, D. E.; Lovenberg, T. W.; De Souza, E.
B.; Maki, R. A.: Localization of ligand-binding domains of human
corticotropin-releasing factor receptor: a chimeric receptor approach. Molec.
Endocr. 11: 980-985, 1997.

9. Liaw, C. W.; Lovenberg, T. W.; Barry, G.; Oltersdorf, T.; Grigoriadis,
D. E.; De Souza, E. B.: Cloning and characterization of the human
corticotropin-releasing factor-2 receptor complementary deoxyribonucleic
acid. Endocrinology 137: 72-77, 1996.

10. Meyer, A. H.; Ullmer, C.; Schmuck, K.; Morel, C.; Wishart, W.;
Lubbert, H.; Engels, P.: Localization of the human CRF2 receptor
to 7p21-p15 by radiation hybrid mapping and FISH analysis. Genomics 40:
189-190, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/1/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/2/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/30/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/15/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/27/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/8/1997

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 10/8/1997

EDITED alopez: 11/01/2012
terry: 11/1/2012
carol: 2/22/2012
alopez: 3/15/2010
alopez: 5/3/2001
terry: 5/2/2001
alopez: 3/31/2000
terry: 3/30/2000
carol: 7/23/1999
mgross: 4/16/1999
mgross: 4/15/1999
mark: 2/2/1998
alopez: 1/29/1998
terry: 1/27/1998
dholmes: 11/26/1997
alopez: 10/10/1997
alopez: 10/8/1997

601046	TITLE *601046 MATRIX METALLOPROTEINASE 12; MMP12
;;MACROPHAGE METALLOELASTASE; MME
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) are a family of related
matrix-degrading enzymes that are important in tissue remodeling and
repair during development and inflammation. Abnormal expression is
associated with various diseases such as tumor invasiveness, arthritis,
and atherosclerosis. MMP activity may also be related to
cigarette-induced pulmonary emphysema. Shapiro et al. (1993) cloned a
cDNA for a metalloproteinase produced by human alveolar macrophages,
which are known to have the capacity to degrade elastin (130160), by
screening an alveolar macrophage cDNA library and a genomic library with
the previously cloned mouse gene (Shapiro et al., 1992). The human gene,
which they designated HME (human macrophage metalloelastase), produces a
1.8-kb transcript encoding a 470-amino acid protein that is 64%
identical to the mouse protein. Both the mRNA and protein were detected
in alveolar macrophages. As in the mouse, the predicted human 54-kD
protein is processed by loss of both N- and C-terminal residues to a
22-kD mature form. The authors showed that recombinantly expressed HME
was able to degrade insoluble elastin.

GENE STRUCTURE

Belaaouaj et al. (1995) described the genomic organization of the HME
gene (also symbolized MMP12). The 13-kb gene is composed of 10 exons and
shares the highly conserved intron-exon borders of other MMPs. The
authors also demonstrated tissue-specific expression in macrophages and
stromal cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Curci et al. (1998) reported that the total MMP12 recoverable from
abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA; 100070) tissue was 7-fold greater than
that from normal aorta. They demonstrated its distinct localization to
residual elastic fiber fragments, indicating that the enzyme
participates in aortic elastin degradation. They suggested that MMP12
has a more central role in aneurysm disease than do other elastolytic
MMPs.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Hunninghake et al. (2009) tested for an association between SNPs in
MMP12 and a measure of lung function, prebronchodilator forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), in more than 8,300 subjects in 7
cohorts that included children and adults. They also examined the
association between these SNPs and development of COPD in the adult
cohorts. Hunninghake et al. (2009) found that the minor allele (G) of a
functional variant in the promoter region of MMP12 (dbSNP rs2276109,
-82A-G) was positively associated with FEV1 in a combined analysis of
children with asthma and adult former and current smokers in all cohorts
(P = 2 x 10(-6)). This allele was also associated with a reduced risk of
onset of COPD (see 606963) in the Normative Aging Study cohort (hazard
ratio, 0.65; 95% CI, 0.46-0.92; P = 0.02) and with a reduced risk of
COPD in a cohort of smokers (OR = 0.63; 95% CI, 0.45-0.88; P = 0.005)
and among participants in a family-based study of early-onset COPD (P =
0.006). Hunninghake et al. (2009) concluded that the minor allele of
dbSNP rs2276109 is associated with a positive effect on lung function in
children with asthma and in adults who smoke. This allele is also
associated with a reduced risk of COPD in adult smokers. Hunninghake et
al. (2009) noted that this minor allele has been associated with
decreased promoter activity through less efficient binding of AP1
(165160) in both murine and human monocytic cell lines (Jormsjo et al.,
2000), and that deletion of the AP1 binding site abolishes both basal
and stimulated expression of MMP12 (Wu et al., 2003).

MAPPING

Belaaouaj et al. (1995) localized the gene to 11q22.2-q22.3 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Pendas et al. (1996) isolated a
1.5-Mb YAC clone mapping to 11q22.3. Detailed analysis of this
nonchimeric YAC clone ordered 7 MMP genes as follows: cen--MMP8
(120355)--MMP10 (185260)--MMP1 (120353)--MMP3 (185250)--MMP12--MMP7
(178990)--MMP13 (600108)--tel.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hautamaki et al. (1997) demonstrated that macrophage elastase must be
present for chronic cigarette smoke exposure to induce emphysema in
mice. Mice homozygous for a knockout of the macrophage elastase gene
(Mme -/-) (Shipley et al., 1996), in contrast to wildtype mice, did not
show increased numbers of macrophages in their lungs and did not develop
emphysema in response to long-term exposure to cigarette smoke.
Smoke-exposed Mme -/- mice that received monthly intratracheal
instillations of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (158105) showed
accumulation of alveolar macrophages but did not develop air space
enlargement. Thus, Hautamaki et al. (1997) concluded that macrophage
elastase is probably sufficient for the development of emphysema that
results from chronic inhalation of cigarette smoke.

Through a global analysis of pulmonary gene expression in the lungs of
mice lacking integrin beta-6 (147558), Kaminski et al. (2000) identified
a marked induction of macrophage metalloelastase, a metalloproteinase
that preferentially degrades elastin and has been implicated in the
chronic lung disease emphysema. Morris et al. (2003) demonstrated that
Itgb6-null mice develop age-related emphysema that is completely
abrogated either by transgenic expression of versions of the beta-6
integrin subunit that support TGFB activation, or by the loss of MMP12.
Furthermore, Morris et al. (2003) showed that the effects of ITGB6
deletion are overcome by simultaneous transgenic expression of active
TGFB1. Morris et al. (2003) concluded that they had uncovered a pathway
in which the loss of integrin-mediated activation of latent TGFB causes
age-dependent pulmonary emphysema through alterations of macrophage
MMP12 expression. Furthermore, they showed that a functional alteration
in the TGFB activation pathway affects susceptibility to this disease.

By examining the effects of an Il13 (147683) transgene on wildtype mice
and mice lacking Mmp9 (120361) or Mmp12, Lanone et al. (2002) determined
that the IL13-mediated eosinophilic and lymphocytic inflammation and
alveolar remodeling in the lung that occurs in asthma (600807), COPD
(606963), and interstitial lung disease is dependent on both MMP9 and
MMP12 mechanisms. The results indicated that MMP9 inhibits neutrophil
accumulation, but, unlike MMP12, has no effect on eosinophil,
macrophage, or lymphocyte accumulation. Furthermore, IL13-induced
production of MMP2 (120360), MMP9, MMP13, and MMP14 (600754) was found
to be dependent on MMP12.

Houghton et al. (2009) showed that Mmp12-null mice exhibited impaired
bacterial clearance and increased mortality when challenged with both
gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria at macrophage-rich portals of
entry, such as the peritoneum and lung. Intracellular stores of MMP12
are mobilized to macrophage phagolysosomes after the ingestion of
bacterial pathogens. Once inside phagolysosomes, MMP12 adheres to
bacterial cell walls where it disrupts cellular membranes resulting in
bacterial death. The antimicrobial properties of MMP12 do not reside
within its catalytic domain, but rather within the carboxyl-terminal
domain. This domain contains a unique 4-amino acid sequence on an
exposed beta-loop of the protein that is required for the observed
antimicrobial activity. Houghton et al. (2009) concluded that their
study represented the first report of direct antimicrobial activity by a
matrix metallopeptidase, and described a new antimicrobial peptide that
is sequentially and structurally unique in nature.

GENETIC VARIABILITY

Joos et al. (2002) investigated the role of MMP polymorphisms (including
G-1607GG in MMP1 and asn357ser in MMP12) in the development of chronic
obstructive lung disease. The authors determined the prevalence of these
polymorphisms in 590 continuing smokers chosen from the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute Lung Health Study for having the fastest (n =
284) and slowest (n = 306) 5 year rate of decline of lung function. Of 5
polymorphisms among 3 MMP loci, only G-1607GG was associated with a rate
of decline in lung function. This allele was associated with a fast rate
of decline (p = 0.02). However, haplotypes consisting of alleles from
the G-1607GG and asn357ser polymorphisms were associated with rate of
decline of lung function (p = 0.0007). The authors concluded that
polymorphisms in the MMP1 and MMP12 genes, but not MMP9, are either
causative factors in smoking-related lung injury or are in linkage
disequilibrium with causative polymorphisms.

HISTORY

The elastase secreted by leukocytes (ELA2; 130130) is a serine protease
inhibitable by alpha-1-protease inhibitor (107400), whereas the elastase
secreted by macrophages is a metalloprotease not inhibitable by
alpha-1-protease inhibitor (Rosenbloom, 1984).

REFERENCE 1. Belaaouaj, A.; Shipley, J. M.; Kobayashi, D. K.; Zimonjic, D. B.;
Popescu, N.; Silverman, G. A.; Shapiro, S. D.: Human macrophage metalloelastase:
genomic organization, chromosomal location, gene linkage, and tissue-specific
expression. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 14568-14575, 1995.

2. Curci, J. A.; Liao, S.; Huffman, M. D.; Shapiro, S. D.; Thompson,
R. W.: Expression and localization of macrophage elastase (matrix
metalloproteinase-12) in abdominal aortic aneurysms. J. Clin. Invest. 102:
1900-1910, 1998.

3. Hautamaki, R. D.; Kobayashi, D. K.; Senior, R. M.; Shapiro, S.
D.: Requirement for macrophage elastase for cigarette smoke-induced
emphysema in mice. Science 277: 2002-2004, 1997.

4. Houghton, A. M.; Hartzell, W. O.; Robbins, C. S.; Gomis-Ruth, F.
X.; Shapiro, S. D.: Macrophage elastase kills bacteria within murine
macrophages. Nature 460: 637-641, 2009.

5. Hunninghake, G. M.; Cho, M. H.; Tesfaigzi, Y.; Soto-Quiros, M.
E.; Avila, L.; Lasky-Su, J.; Stidley, C.; Melen, E.; Soderhall, C.;
Hallberg, J.; Kull, I.; Kere, J.; and 14 others: MMP12, lung function,
and COPD in high-risk populations. New Eng. J. Med. 361: 2599-2608,
2009.

6. Joos, L.; He, J.-Q.; Shepherdson, M. B.; Connett, J. E.; Anthonisen,
N.  R.; Pare, P. D.; Sandford, A. J.: The role of matrix metalloproteinase
polymorphisms in the rate of decline in lung function. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 11: 569-576, 2002. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 803-804,
2003.

7. Jormsjo, S.; Ye, S.; Moritz, J.; Walter, D. H.; Dimmeler, S.; Zeiher,
A. M.; Henney, A.; Hamsten, A.; Eriksson, P.: Allele-specific regulation
of matrix metalloproteinase-12 gene activity is associated with coronary
artery luminal dimensions in diabetic patients with manifest coronary
artery disease. Circ. Res. 86: 998-1003, 2000.

8. Kaminski, N.; Allard, J. D.; Pittet, J. F.; Zuo, F.; Griffiths,
M. J.; Morris, D.; Huang, X.; Sheppard, D.; Heller, R. A.: Global
analysis of gene expression in pulmonary fibrosis reveals distinct
programs regulating lung inflammation and fibrosis. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 97: 1778-1783, 2000.

9. Lanone, S.; Zheng, T.; Zhu, Z.; Liu, W.; Lee, C. G.; Ma, B.; Chen,
Q.; Homer, R. J.; Wang, J.; Rabach, L. A.; Rabach, M. E.; Shipley,
J. M.; Shapiro, S. D.; Senior, R. M.; Elias, J. A.: Overlapping and
enzyme-specific contributions of matrix metalloproteinases-9 and -12
in IL-13-induced inflammation and remodeling. J. Clin. Invest. 110:
463-474, 2002.

10. Morris, D. G.; Huang, X.; Kaminski, N.; Wang, Y.; Shapiro, S.
D.; Dolganov, G.; Glick, A.; Sheppard, D.: Loss of integrin alpha-v-beta-6-mediated
TGF-beta activation causes Mmp12-dependent emphysema. Nature 422:
169-173, 2003.

11. Pendas, A. M.; Santamaria, I.; Alvarez, M. V.; Pritchard, M.;
Lopez-Otin, C.: Fine physical mapping of the human matrix metalloproteinase
genes clustered on chromosome 11q22.3. Genomics 37: 266-269, 1996.

12. Rosenbloom, J.: Elastin: relation of protein and gene structure
to disease. Lab. Invest. 51: 605-623, 1984.

13. Shapiro, S. D.; Griffin, G. L.; Gilbert, D. J.; Jenkins, N. A.;
Copeland, N. G.; Welgus, H. G.; Senior, R. M.; Ley, T. J.: Molecular
cloning, chromosomal localization, and bacterial expression of a murine
macrophage metalloelastase. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 4664-4671, 1992.

14. Shapiro, S. D.; Kobayashi, D. K.; Ley, T. J.: Cloning and characterization
of a unique elastolytic metalloproteinase produced by human alveolar
macrophages. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 23824-23829, 1993.

15. Shipley, J. M.; Wesselschmidt, R. L.; Kobayashi, D. K.; Ley, T.
J.; Shapiro, S. D.: Metalloelastase is required for macrophage-mediated
proteolysis and matrix invasion in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93:
3942-3946, 1996.

16. Wu, L.; Tanimoto, A.; Murata, Y.; Sasaguri, T.; Fan, J.; Sasaguri,
Y.; Watanabe, T.: Matrix metalloproteinase-12 gene expression in
human vascular smooth muscle cells. Genes Cells 8: 225-234, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/26/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/27/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/13/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/24/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/9/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/21/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/25/1997
Ethylin Wang Jabs - updated: 8/21/1997
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 4/21/1997

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 2/7/1996

EDITED alopez: 08/09/2012
carol: 8/8/2012
terry: 4/8/2010
alopez: 2/2/2010
terry: 1/26/2010
alopez: 9/4/2009
terry: 8/27/2009
mgross: 2/13/2006
alopez: 3/24/2003
terry: 3/24/2003
cwells: 10/9/2002
carol: 12/28/1998
terry: 12/23/1998
terry: 12/21/1998
dkim: 7/24/1998
psherman: 5/15/1998
alopez: 9/26/1997
alopez: 9/25/1997
terry: 9/25/1997
mark: 9/4/1997
mark: 5/1/1997
jenny: 5/1/1997
jenny: 4/21/1997
mark: 2/7/1996

601442	TITLE *601442 COFILIN 1; CFL1
;;COFILIN, NONMUSCLE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cofilin is a widely distributed intracellular actin-modulating protein
that binds and depolymerizes filamentous F-actin and inhibits the
polymerization of monomeric G-actin in a pH-dependent manner. It is
involved in the translocation of actin-cofilin complex from cytoplasm to
nucleus (summary by Gillett et al., 1996).

CLONING

Two cofilin isoforms have been identified in mouse: muscle, or M-type
(601443) and nonmuscle, or NM-type (Ono et al., 1994). The mouse M-type
cofilin is expressed in heart, skeletal muscle, and testis, whereas the
NM-type is found in a wide variety of tissues, including heart and
testis. NM-type cofilin expression is minimal in mature mammalian
skeletal muscle. Ogawa et al. (1990) isolated a cDNA encoding a
placentally expressed cofilin. Gillett et al. (1996) cloned CFL1, a
nonmuscle-type cofilin, from a human promyelocytic cDNA library. The
cDNA encodes a 166-amino acid polypeptide with a molecular mass of
approximately 18.5 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Cofilin exhibits actin-depolymerizing activity that is inhibited as a
result of its phosphorylation by LIM kinase (see 601329). Maekawa et al.
(1999) demonstrated that cofilin was phosphorylated during
lysophosphatidic acid-induced, Rho-mediated neurite retraction. This
phosphorylation was sensitive to Y-27632, a specific inhibitor of the
Rho-associated kinase ROCK (601702). ROCK, which is a downstream
effector of Rho, did not phosphorylate cofilin directly but
phosphorylated LIM kinase, which in turn was activated to phosphorylate
cofilin. Maekawa et al. (1999) concluded that phosphorylation of LIM
kinase by ROCK and, consequently, increased phosphorylation of cofilin
by LIM kinase, contribute to Rho-induced reorganization of the actin
cytoskeleton.

Kuhn et al. (2000) reviewed evidence from studies of several avian and
mammalian primary neural cultures and neuronal cell lines that showed a
role for ADF and cofilin in neurite outgrowth.

To study the in vivo biochemical action of cofilin and the subsequent
cellular response, Ghosh et al. (2004) used a general caging method for
proteins that are regulated by phosphorylation. By acute and local
activation of a chemically engineered, light-sensitive phosphocofilin
mimic, they demonstrated that cofilin polymerizes actin, generates
protrusions, and determines the direction of cell migration. Ghosh et
al. (2004) proposed a role for cofilin that is distinct from its role as
an actin-depolymerizing factor.

MAPPING

Gillett et al. (1996) mapped CFL1 to 11q12-q13.3 by analysis of somatic
cell hybrids and to 11q13 by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).
Fernandes et al. (1998) used FISH and mouse/hamster somatic cell hybrid
analysis to map the Cfl1 gene to mouse chromosome 19.

Courseaux et al. (1996) used a combination of methods to refine maps of
the approximately 5-Mb region of 11q13 that includes the MEN1 locus
(131100). They proposed the following gene order:
cen--PTA--FTH1--UGB--AHNAK--ROM1--MDU1--CHRM1--COX8--EMK1--FKBP2--PLCB3--[PYGM,
ZFM1]--FAU--CAPN1-- [MLK3, RELA]--FOSL1--SEA--CFL1--tel.

ANIMAL MODEL

Because deletion of n-cofilin results in embryonic lethality in mice,
Bellenchi et al. (2007) used a conditional knockout approach to examine
the role of n-cofilin in brain development. Homozygous mutant pups were
obtained at the expected mendelian frequency, but more than 90% died
within the first 3 postnatal days. The few that survived up to 30 days
showed growth retardation, ataxia, and signs of epileptic seizures.
Gross analysis of mutant brains revealed an overall normal organization,
but the cerebral cortex had a translucent appearance and enlarged
ventricles. Golgi staining of coronal sections showed that cortical
layers II to IV and parts of layer V were missing in mutant brains.
Studies performed on cultured cortical neuronal progenitors revealed
that loss of n-cofilin impaired their radial migration. Neuronal
progenitors in the ventricular zone showed increased cell cycle exit and
exaggerated neuronal differentiation, leading to depletion of the
neuronal progenitor pool.

REFERENCE 1. Bellenchi, G. C.; Gurniak, C. B.; Perlas, E.; Middei, S.; Ammassari-Teule,
M.; Witke, W.: N-cofilin is associated with neuronal migration disorders
and cell cycle control in the cerebral cortex. Genes Dev. 21: 2347-2357,
2007.

2. Courseaux, A.; Grosgeorge, J.; Gaudray, P.; Pannett, A. A. J.;
Forbes, S. A.; Williamson, C.; Bassett, D.; Thakker, R. V.; Teh, B.
T.; Farnebo, F.; Shepherd, J.; Skogseid, B.; Larsson, C.; Giraud,
S.; Zhang, C. X.; Salandre, J.; Calender, A.: Definition of the minimal
MEN1 candidate area based on a 5-Mb integrated map of proximal 11q13. Genomics 37:
354-365, 1996.

3. Fernandes, M.; Poirier, C.; Lespinasse, F.; Carle, G. F.: The
mouse homologs of human GIF, DDB1, and CFL1 genes are located on chromosome
19. Mammalian Genome 9: 339-342, 1998.

4. Ghosh, M.; Song, X.; Mouneimne, G.; Sidani, M.; Lawrence, D. S.;
Condeelis, J. S.: Cofilin promotes actin polymerization and defines
the direction of cell motility. Science 304: 743-746, 2004.

5. Gillett, G. T.; Fox, M. F.; Rowe, P. S. N.; Casimir, C. M.; Povey,
S.: Mapping of human non-muscle type cofilin (CFL1) to chromosome
11q13 and muscle-type cofilin (CFL2) to chromosome 14. Ann. Hum.
Genet. 60: 201-211, 1996.

6. Kuhn, T. B.; Meberg, P. J.; Brown, M. D.; Bernstein, B. W.; Minamide,
L. S.; Jensen, J. R.; Okada, K.; Soda, E. A.; Bamburg, J. R.: Regulating
actin dynamics in neuronal growth cones by ADF/cofilin and Rho family
GTPases. J. Neurobiol. 44: 126-144, 2000.

7. Maekawa, M.; Ishizaki, T.; Boku, S.; Watanabe, N.; Fujita, A.;
Iwamatsu, A.; Obinata, T.; Ohashi, K.; Mizuno, K.; Narumiya, S.:
Signaling from Rho to the actin cytoskeleton through protein kinases
ROCK and LIM-kinase. Science 285: 895-898, 1999.

8. Ogawa, K.; Tashima, M.; Yumoto, Y.; Okuda, T.; Sawada, H.; Okuma,
M.; Maruyama, Y.: Coding sequence of human placenta cofilin cDNA. Nucleic
Acids Res. 18: 7169 only, 1990.

9. Ono, S.; Minami, N.; Abe, H.; Obinata, T.: Characterization of
a novel cofilin isoform that is predominantly expressed in mammalian
skeletal muscle. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 15280-15286, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/17/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/16/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/7/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/22/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/5/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/3/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/10/1997
Alan F. Scott - updated: 12/2/1996

CREATED Lori M. Kelman: 9/23/1996

EDITED carol: 04/22/2011
terry: 4/20/2011
carol: 2/9/2011
wwang: 4/30/2008
terry: 4/25/2008
mgross: 10/17/2007
terry: 10/16/2007
alopez: 5/7/2004
terry: 5/7/2004
mgross: 10/22/2003
alopez: 8/5/1999
carol: 9/3/1998
terry: 8/5/1997
terry: 7/29/1997
alopez: 6/27/1997
mark: 4/10/1997
joanna: 4/9/1997
joanna: 12/2/1996
mark: 9/23/1996

603731	TITLE *603731 CCR4-NOT TRANSCRIPTION COMPLEX, SUBUNIT 8; CNOT8
;;CAF1-LIKE FACTOR; CALIF;;
PKG PROMOTER-DIRECTED OVERPRODUCTION 2, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;
POP2
DESCRIPTION The yeast CCR4-NOT protein complex is a global regulator of RNA
polymerase II transcription. It is comprised, in part, of CCR4 (see
608951), NOT1 to NOT5, and CAF1 (also referred to as POP2). By searching
sequence databases, Albert et al. (2000) identified human ESTs encoding
homologs of yeast NOT1, NOT2, NOT3, NOT4, and CAF1. The deduced
293-amino acid human homolog of yeast CAF1 shares 75% amino acid
sequence identity with human CAF1 (604913). Thus, the authors stated
that they had identified a second human homolog of yeast CAF1 and called
this novel homolog CALIF for CAF1-like factor. Comparative analysis of
the protein sequences of human CALIF, human CAF1, and yeast CAF1
revealed 34% overall identity between CALIF and yeast CAF1 and 35%
identity between human CAF1 and yeast CAF1. Albert et al. (2000)
concluded that it cannot be determined from these numbers alone whether
CALIF or human CAF1 is the true human ortholog of yeast CAF1. Both CALIF
and human CAF1 are shorter than yeast CAF1, which contains an N-terminal
extension of approximately 140 amino acids. Using the yeast 2-hybrid
assay, Albert et al. (2000) demonstrated that recombinant CALIF can
interact with yeast NOT1, an N-terminally truncated human NOT1 protein
(604917), human NOT3 (604910), and yeast CCR4. Immunoprecipitation
studies indicated that CALIF and NOT3 physically associate in vivo.
Northern blot analysis detected a major 2.5-kb CALIF transcript in all
human tissues tested, namely brain, heart, lung, liver, kidney, small
intestine, colon, spleen, thymus, peripheral blood leukocytes, skeletal
muscle, and placenta. Like the expression of human NOT1, NOT2 (604909),
and NOT3, CALIF expression was high in brain, kidney, and placenta and
very low in skeletal muscle and colon. The authors suggested that CALIF
is a bona fide component of the human CCR4-NOT complex. They found that
recombinant CALIF could not complement the caffeine-sensitive phenotype
conferred by the yeast caf1 null mutation.

The 5q- syndrome (153550) is a myelodysplastic syndrome associated with
an interstitial deletion of the 5q31-q33 region. Fidler et al. (1999)
found that the human POP2 gene is located within this region. The
predicted 292-amino acid human protein shares 75%, 44%, and 38% sequence
identity with mouse Caf1, C. elegans CAF1, and yeast POP2, respectively.
Northern blot analysis revealed that human POP2 was expressed as an
approximately 2.5-kb mRNA in all tissues tested. The authors concluded
that POP2 is a candidate for the tumor suppressor gene associated with
the development of 5q- syndrome.

REFERENCE 1. Albert, T. K.; Lemaire, M.; van Berkum, N. L.; Gentz, R.; Collart,
M. A.; Timmers, H. T. M.: Isolation and characterization of human
orthologs of yeast CCR4-NOT complex subunits. Nucleic Acids Res. 28:
809-817, 2000.

2. Fidler, C.; Wainscoat, J. S.; Boultwood, J.: The human POP2 gene:
identification, sequencing, and mapping to the critical region of
the 5q- syndrome. Genomics 56: 134-136, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patti M. Sherman - updated: 5/4/2000

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 4/13/1999

EDITED mgross: 09/28/2004
carol: 11/6/2000
mcapotos: 5/11/2000
psherman: 5/4/2000
alopez: 4/13/1999

608459	TITLE *608459 CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASE-LIKE 3; CDKL3
;;NKIAMRE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The NKIAMRE protein has features of both mitogen-activated protein
kinases (MAPKs), which are key components of intracellular signaling
cascades, and cyclin-dependent kinases, which are critical in modulating
cell cycle progression and cellular proliferation.

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to rat Nkiatre,
followed by screening a fetal heart cDNA library, Midmer et al. (1999)
cloned CDKL3, which they named NKIAMRE after the protein's putative
cyclin-binding motif. The deduced 455-amino acid protein contains the
MAPK-like TDY motif for threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation, as well
as the putative cyclin-binding motif. NKIAMRE shares 84% amino acid
identity with rat Nkiatre and 41% and 42% identity with human KKIAMRE
(CDKL2; 603442) and KKIALRE (CDKL1; 603441), respectively.

By library screening and RT-PCR of several tissue and cell line cDNA
libraries, Yee et al. (2003) obtained a full-length NKIAMRE cDNA. The
deduced 455-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 52 kD.
They also cloned alternatively spliced NKIAMRE variants from fetal heart
and adult brain cDNA libraries. One variant from brain lacks 2 critical
motifs in the kinase catalytic domain as well as the TDY activation
motif. Expression of NKIAMRE was below the level of detection for
Northern blot analysis, but RT-PCR detected expression in all cell lines
and normal human tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Midmer et al. (1999) found that NKIAMRE was deleted at both alleles in
34 to 70% of cells in 9 of 18 leukemia samples characterized by
chromosome 5q31 abnormalities.

Yee et al. (2003) found that NKIAMRE was activated by treatment of
transfected COS-7 cells with phorbol ester. Mutation of lys33 in the
ATP-binding site and mutations in the TDY motif within the MAPK
activation loop domain abolished the ability of NKIAMRE to phosphorylate
a test protein in vitro.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yee et al. (2003) determined that the NKIAMRE gene contains 11 exons.

MAPPING

By FISH, Midmer et al. (1999) mapped the NKIAMRE gene to chromosome
5q31.

REFERENCE 1. Midmer, M.; Haq, R.; Squire, J. A.; Zanke, B. W.: Identification
of NKIAMRE, the human homologue to the mitogen-activated protein kinase-/cyclin-dependent
kinase-related protein kinase NKIATRE, and its loss in leukemic blasts
with chromosome arm 5q deletion. Cancer Res. 59: 4069-4074, 1999.

2. Yee, K. W. L.; Moore, S. J.; Midmer, M.; Zanke, B. W.; Tong, F.;
Hedley, D.; Minden, M. D.: NKIAMRE, a novel CDC2-related kinase with
features of both mitogen-activated protein kinases and cyclin-dependent
kinases. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 308: 784-792, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/10/2004

EDITED mgross: 02/10/2004

246530	TITLE *246530 LEUKOTRIENE C4 SYNTHASE; LTC4S
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Leukotriene C4 synthetase (LTC4S) catalyzes the synthesis of leukotriene
C4 (LTC4) through conjugation of LTA4 with reduced glutathione (GSH),
which is synthesized by glutathione synthetase (GSS; 601002).
Leukotriene C4 and its receptor-binding metabolites LTD4 and LTE4 are
cysteinyl leukotrienes that are potent lipid mediators of tissue
inflammation. In general, leukotrienes are potent proinflammatory
mediators synthesized from membrane-derived arachidonic acid after
activation of certain granulocytes (Kanaoka et al., 2001).

The cysteinyl leukotrienes have been implicated in bronchial asthma.
CYSLTR1 (300201) and CYSLTR2 (605666) are receptors for LTC4 and its
metabolites. CYSLTR-selective pharmacologic antagonists are important in
the treatment of asthma (Martinez Molina et al., 2007).

CLONING

Penrose et al. (1992) purified LTC4 synthase and characterized it as an
18-kD protein. Lam et al. (1994) cloned the LTC4S gene and showed that
its open reading frame encodes a 150-residue protein with a molecular
mass of 16.5-kD and a pI of 11.05. The deduced sequence contains 2
consensus protein kinase C phosphorylation sites and a potential
N-linked glycosylation site as well as 3 putative membrane-spanning
regions. The deduced amino acid sequence of LTC4S showed no significant
homology to GSH S-transferases but shared 31% overall sequence identity
with 5-lipoxygenase activating protein (FLAP; 603700). Peptide
structural analysis of the deduced LTC4 synthase predicted the presence
of 3 transmembrane domains nearly superimposable on those of FLAP. LTC4
synthase was inhibitable by a FLAP inhibitor, MK-886.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic cloning from a P1 library, Penrose et al. (1996) found that
the LTC4S gene is 2.52 kb long and contains 5 exons. The investigators
noted that although the intron-exon junctions of LTC4S and the human
FLAP gene are identical, the size of FLAP reported by Kennedy et al.
(1991) is over 31 kb. Penrose et al. (1996) found multiple transcription
initiation sites in the 5-prime flanking region of the LTC4S gene.

MAPPING

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, Penrose et al. (1996) mapped
the LTC4S gene to chromosome 5q35.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Ago et al. (2007) showed the atomic structure of human LTC4S in complex
with glutathione at 3.3 angstrom resolution by x-ray crystallography and
provided insights into the high substrate specificity for a glutathione
and LTA4 that distinguishes LTC4S from other microsomal glutathione
S-transferases. The LTC4S monomer has 4 transmembrane alpha-helices and
forms a 3-fold symmetric trimer as a unit with functional domains across
each interface. Glutathione resides in a U-shaped conformation within an
interface between adjacent monomers, and this binding is stabilized by a
loop structure at the top of the interface. LTA4 would fit into the
interface so that arg104 of one monomer activates glutathione to provide
the thiolate anion that attacks C6 of LTA4 to form a thioether bond, and
arg31 in the neighboring monomer donates a proton to form a hydroxyl
group at C5, resulting in
5(S)-hydroxy-6(R)-S-glutathionyl-7,9-trans-11,14-cis-eicosatetranoic
acid (LTC4).

Martinez Molina et al. (2007) independently presented the crystal
structure of human LTC4S in its apo and glutathione-complexed forms to
2.0 and 2.15 angstrom resolution, respectively. The structure revealed a
homotrimer, where each monomer is comprised of 4 transmembrane segments.
The structure of the enzyme in complex with substrate revealed that the
active site enforces a horseshoe-shaped conformation on glutathione and
effectively positions the thiol group for activation by a nearby
arginine at the membrane-enzyme interface. In addition, the structure
provides a model for how the omega end of the lipophilic cosubstrate is
pinned at one end of a hydrophobic cleft, providing a molecular 'ruler'
to align the reactive epoxide at the thiol of glutathione.

GENE FUNCTION

Pace-Asciak et al. (1986) demonstrated that the leukotriene precursor,
LTA4, is transformed by human platelets into LTC4 by a
glutathione-dependent pathway.

Pace-Asciak et al. (1986) found that LTC4 synthesis was severely
impaired in 2 sibs with glutathione synthetase deficiency (266130).
Platelets from the patients had approximately 30% of normal glutathione
levels, reflecting a decrease of glutathione synthetase activity. The
findings in these patients suggested that cellular glutathione levels
may regulate the production of LTC4 synthetase.

The formation of leukotriene C4 from membrane-derived arachidonic acid
is catalyzed by 3 successive enzymatic steps after transmembrane
activation of eosinophils, basophils, mast cells, and
monocytes/macrophages. Arachidonic acid is released from cell membranes
by the action of phospholipase A2 (see 600522). 5-Lipoxygenase is
activated independently via a 5-lipoxygenase-associated protein and
Ca(2+) and catalyzes 2 sequential enzymatic reactions to form LTA4.
Leukotriene C4 synthase catalyzes the conjugation of LTA4 with reduced
glutathione to form LTC4 (Penrose et al., 1992).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Asthma and Aspirin-Intolerant Asthma

Aspirin-intolerant asthma (AIA; 208550) is a distinct clinical syndrome
characterized by adverse respiratory reactions to aspirin and other
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Aspirin causes
bronchoconstriction in AIA patients by triggering cysteinyl-leukotriene
production, probably by removing PGE(2)-dependent inhibition. Sampson et
al. (1997) and Cowburn et al. (1998) found increased LTC4S expression in
bronchial biopsies from patients with AIA. The study by Cowburn et al.
(1998) reported that LTC4S expression in AIA patients was increased
5-fold and 18-fold compared to aspirin-tolerant asthmatics and
nonasthmatic controls, respectively. The authors postulated that AIA
patients may have a polymorphism involved in the regulation of LTC4S
expression that results in overproduction of cysteinyl-leukotrienes
leading to bronchoconstriction.

Sanak et al. (1997) identified a promoter polymorphism in the LTC4S
gene, -444A-C, that was overrepresented among patients with
aspirin-intolerant asthma. Six of 11 AIA patients were homozygous for
the -444C allele, compared to only 1 individual in the aspirin-tolerant
asthmatic and control groups. The frequency of the -444C allele was
nearly doubled in AIA (0.436) compared to aspirin-tolerant asthmatics
(0.227) and nonasthmatic controls (0.226), yielding a relative risk of
3.89 for the -444C allele.

Sanak et al. (2000) found that peripheral blood eosinophils from
patients with AIA had increased LTC4S mRNA. An inhaled aspirin
provocation test led to increased urinary output of LTC4, which reached
significance only in carriers of the -444C allele. Nuclear-protein
interaction studies on HeLa cells showed that the -444C allele created
an additional binding site for the transcriptional signal of histone H4
transcription factor-2 (H4FN; 142750), and in vitro studies demonstrated
that the -444C allele resulted in increased reporter gene expression.
Sanak et al. (2000) concluded that overexpression of LTC4S may
predispose to AIA.

Using in vitro transfection of promoter-reporter constructs, Sayers et
al. (2003) showed that dexamethasone increased transcription of LTC4S by
more than 50% for the -1072G/-444A, A-C, and G-C haplotype constructs (p
less than 0.02), but had no effect on the A-A haplotype (p = 0.27).
Sayers et al. (2003) concluded that the 9% of the Caucasian asthmatic
population with the A-A haplotype may have genetically predetermined
lower cysteinyl-leukotriene levels in the presence of corticosteroids
compared to other patients, which has potential implications in the
evaluation of combined corticosteroid and antileukotriene therapy in
asthma.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kanaoka et al. (2001) found that Ltc4s-null mice developed normally and
were fertile. Bone marrow-derived cells from these mice provided no Ltc4
in response to IgE-dependent activation. In addition, zymosan-induced
peritoneal vascular permeability and IgE-mediated passive cutaneous
anaphylaxis were significantly diminished in these mice. The findings
indicated that Ltc4s is the major Ltc4-producing enzyme in tissues, and
that Ltc4 plays a role in vascular permeability in innate and adaptive
immune host inflammatory responses.

REFERENCE 1. Ago, H.; Kanaoka, Y.; Irikura, D.; Lam, B. K.; Shimamura, T.; Austen,
K. F.; Miyano, M.: Crystal structure of a human membrane protein
involved in cysteinyl leukotriene biosynthesis. Nature 448: 609-612,
2007.

2. Cowburn, A. S.; Sladek, K.; Soja, J.; Adamek, L.; Nizankowska,
E.; Szczeklik, A.; Lam, B. K.; Penrose, J. F.; Austen, K. F.; Holgate,
S. T.; Sampson, A. P.: Overexpression of leukotriene C(4) synthase
in bronchial biopsies from patients with aspirin-intolerant asthma. J.
Clin. Invest. 101: 834-846, 1998.

3. Kanaoka, Y.; Maekawa, A.; Penrose, J. F.; Austen, K. F.; Lam, B.
K.: Attenuated zymosan-induced peritoneal vascular permeability and
IgE-dependent passive cutaneous anaphylaxis in mice lacking leukotriene
C4 synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 22608-22613, 2001.

4. Kennedy, B. P.; Diehl, R. E.; Boie, Y.; Adam, M.; Dixon, R. A.
: Gene characterization and promoter analysis of the human 5-lipoxygenase-activating
protein (FLAP). J. Biol. Chem. 266: 8511-8516, 1991.

5. Lam, B. K.; Penrose, J. F.; Freeman, G. J.; Austen, K. F.: Expression
cloning of a cDNA for human leukotriene C4 synthase, an integral membrane
protein conjugating reduced glutathione to leukotriene A4. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 7663-7667, 1994.

6. Martinez Molina, D.; Wetterholm, A.; Kohl, A.; McCarthy, A. A.;
Niegowski, D.; Ohlson, E.; Hammarberg, T.; Eshaghi, S.; Haeggstrom,
J. Z.; Nordlund, P.: Structural basis for synthesis of inflammatory
mediators by human leukotriene C4 synthase. Nature 448: 613-616,
2007.

7. Pace-Asciak, C. R.; Klein, J.; Spielberg, S. P.: Human genetic
defect in leukotriene C(4) synthesis. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 140:
857-860, 1986.

8. Pace-Asciak, C. R.; Klein, J.; Spielberg, S. P.: Metabolism of
leukotriene A4 into C4 by human platelets. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 877:
68-74, 1986.

9. Penrose, J. F.; Gagnon, L.; Goppelt-Struebe, M.; Myers, P.; Lam,
B. K.; Jack, R. M.; Austen, K. F.; Soberman, R. J.: Purification
of human leukotriene C(4) synthase: organization, nucleotide sequence,
and chromosomal localization to 5q35. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89:
11603-11606, 1992.

10. Penrose, J. F.; Spector, J.; Baldasaro, M.; Xu, K.; Boyce, J.;
Arm, J. P.; Austen, K. F.; Lam, B. K.: Molecular cloning of the gene
for human leukotriene C(4) synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 11356-11361,
1996.

11. Sampson, A. P.; Cowburn, A. S.; Sladek, K.; Adamek, L.; Nizankowska,
E.; Szczeklik, A.; Lam, B. K.; Penrose, J. F.; Austen, K. F.; Holgate,
S. T.: Profound overexpression of leukotriene C4 synthase in bronchial
biopsies from aspirin-intolerant asthmatic patients. Int. Arch. Allergy
Immun. 113: 355-357, 1997.

12. Sanak, M.; Pierzchalska, M.; Bazan-Socha, S.; Szczeklik, A.:
Enhanced expression of the leukotriene C4 synthase due to overactive
transcription of an allelic variant associated with aspirin-intolerant
asthma. Am. J. Resp. Cell Molec. Biol. 23: 290-296, 2000.

13. Sanak, M.; Simon, H.-U.; Szczeklik, A.: Leukotriene C4 synthase
promoter polymorphism and risk of aspirin-induced asthma. Lancet 350:
1599-1600, 1997.

14. Sayers, I.; Sampson, A. P.; Ye, S.; Holgate, S. T.: Promoter
polymorphism influences the effect of dexamethasone on transcriptional
activation of the LTC4 synthase gene. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 11:
619-622, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 10/4/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/3/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/13/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/12/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/17/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/26/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/6/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/26/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/25/1998
Perseveranda M. Cagas - updated: 9/23/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/7/1987

EDITED carol: 06/09/2011
wwang: 6/9/2009
terry: 11/15/2007
carol: 10/4/2007
ckniffin: 10/3/2007
carol: 8/15/2007
terry: 8/13/2007
carol: 5/12/2004
terry: 5/12/2004
alopez: 3/17/2004
alopez: 7/20/2000
terry: 7/17/2000
carol: 7/26/1999
terry: 7/6/1999
alopez: 4/6/1999
carol: 1/26/1999
alopez: 3/25/1998
terry: 3/20/1998
joanna: 6/20/1997
mark: 9/24/1996
mark: 9/23/1996
terry: 5/22/1996
carol: 1/13/1995
mimadm: 2/19/1994
carol: 1/28/1993
carol: 1/8/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/29/1992

612040	TITLE *612040 LYSOPHOSPHATIDYLCHOLINE ACYLTRANSFERASE 2; LPCAT2
;;ACYLTRANSFERASE-LIKE 1; AYTL1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis and PCR, Shindou et al. (2007) cloned mouse and
human LPCAT2. The mouse and human LPCAT2 proteins contain 544 amino
acids and share 88.4% identity. Both have 3 putative transmembrane
domains, several motifs conserved in members of the lysophospholipid
acyltransferase family, and a C-terminal endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
targeting motif (KKxx). PCR analysis of mouse tissues found highest
Lpcat2 expression in resident macrophages and activated neutrophils,
followed by skin, colon, spleen, and activated macrophages.
Epitope-tagged Lpcat2 was expressed mainly in the ER and Golgi of
transfected Chinese hamster ovary cells.

Soupene et al. (2008) identified 3 splice variants of mouse Lpcat2,
which they called Aytl1. The deduced full-length protein contains an
N-terminal catalytic domain and 2 cation-binding EF-hand motifs in its
C-terminal region.

GENE FUNCTION

Shindou et al. (2007) found that lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induced
expression of Lpcat2 in mouse macrophages, and that this induction was
blocked by dexamethasone. In vitro assays of Lpcat2-expressing
microsomes showed that Lpcat2 catalyzed the biosynthesis of
platelet-activating factor (PAF; see 173393) from lyso-PAF. Lpcat2 also
used arachidonoyl-CoA to produce glycerophospholipid PAF precursors from
lysophosphatidylcholine. Under resting conditions, Lpcat2 preferred
arachidonoyl-CoA and contributed to membrane biogenesis. Upon acute
inflammatory stimulation with LPS, the activated enzyme used acetyl-CoA
more efficiently and produced PAF. Shindou et al. (2007) concluded that
LPCAT2 catalyzes membrane biogenesis in inflammatory cells and produces
a prophlogistic mediator in response to external stimuli.

Soupene et al. (2008) expressed mouse Aytl1 in E. coli membranes and
found that it acylated lysophosphatidylcholine, but not other
lysophospholipids tested, in the presence of various acyl-CoA donors.
Calcium and magnesium inhibited Aytl1 activity.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the LPCAT2
gene to chromosome 16 (TMAP RH94125).

REFERENCE 1. Shindou, H.; Hishikawa, D.; Nakanishi, H.; Harayama, T.; Ishii,
S.; Taguchi, R.; Shimizu, T.: A single enzyme catalyzes both platelet-activating
factor production and membrane biogenesis of inflammatory cells: cloning
and characterization of acetyl-CoA:lyso-PAF acetyltransferase. J.
Biol. Chem. 282: 6532-6539, 2007.

2. Soupene, E.; Fyrst, H.; Kuypers, F. A.: Mammalian acyl-CoA:lysophosphatidylcholine
acyltransferase enzymes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 88-93, 2008.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/9/2008

EDITED mgross: 05/09/2008

601778	TITLE *601778 POLYMERASE, RNA, MITOCHONDRIAL; POLRMT
;;MTRNAP
POLYMERASE, RNA, NUCLEAR, SINGLE-POLYPEPTIDE, IV, INCLUDED; SPRNAPIV,
INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION Mitochondria of all organisms contain a genome that is distinct from
that of the nucleus. The circular mitochondrial chromosome contains 37
genes that encode the RNA components of the mitochondrial translational
apparatus, i.e., 22 transfer RNAs and 2 ribosomal RNA genes, as well as
13 polypeptide-encoding genes. All 13 polypeptides are essential
components of 4 of the 5 complexes that form the mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS) pathway (complexes I, III, IV, and V). However,
gene expression in mitochondria relies upon numerous nuclear genes that
encode protein components required for transcription and translation of
the mtDNA-encoded genes, as well as protein and RNA components required
for replication of mtDNA. In addition, nuclear genes encode factors
controlling the import, assembly, and turnover of OXPHOS complexes, and
proteins acting as general regulators of mitochondrial function.
Nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins are synthesized by cytoplasmic
ribosomes, usually as precursors containing an N-terminal extension.
Import into mitochondria is carried out by a complex, ATP-dependent
transport system, followed by cleavage of the leader peptide, which
eventually produces a mature, functional protein. Tiranti et al. (1997)
noted that abnormalities in the nuclear genome repertoire controlling
mitochondrial biogenesis were proposed as the cause of some human
disorders characterized by the presence of mtDNA abnormalities and
mendelian transmission. Both autosomal dominant (157640) and autosomal
recessive (258450) forms of chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia
are associated with the accumulation of multiple deletions of mtDNA in
stable tissues. Another example is tissue-specific mtDNA depletion
(251880), an autosomal recessive disorder causing severe organ-specific
syndromes in early infancy. Mendelian inheritance indicates the presence
of transmissible mutations in nuclear genes that can ultimately damage
the structural integrity of the mtDNA molecule or its copy number. Genes
involved in the control of mtDNA replication and expression are
considered attractive candidates for these disorders. The
characterization of the collection of human proteins related to
mitochondria, the so-called human mitochondrial proteome, is important
in the elucidation of fundamental mechanisms of nucleo-mitochondrial
intergenomic signaling, as well as to clinical researchers interested in
mitochondrial disorders.

Tiranti et al. (1997) used a gene cloning strategy based on the
screening of the expressed sequence tags database (dbEST), using
sequences of mitochondrial housekeeping proteins of yeast, to identify
the cDNA encoding the precursor of the human mitochondrial RNA
polymerase. They identified a 3,831-bp human cDNA predicted to encode a
protein of 1,230 amino acid residues. The protein sequence showed
significant homology with sequences corresponding to mitochondrial RNA
polymerases from lower eukaryotes and to RNA polymerases from several
bacteriophages. Mitochondrial RNA polymerase carries out the central
activity of mitochondrial gene expression and, by providing the RNA
primers for initiation of replication, is also implicated in the
maintenance and propagation of the mitochondrial genome. Thus, it is an
attractive candidate for disorders of nucleo-mitochondrial intergenomic
signaling.

Tiranti et al. (1997) assigned the gene (symbolized mt-RPOL by them) to
chromosome 19 by PCR-based screening of a panel of human/rodent somatic
cell hybrids; regionalization to 19p13.3 was performed with a second
panel containing different portions of chromosome 19.

Tiranti et al. (1997) referred to 'cyberscreening' of sequence
databases, based on yeast-human cross-species comparison, as a powerful,
simple, rapid, and inexpensive method for the molecular dissection of
the human mitochondrial proteome. Cyberscreening might also be referred
to as 'cloning in silico.'

The term proteome appears first to have been used by Humphery-Smith et
al. (1994) and his colleagues (Wasinger et al., 1995) to refer to the
total protein complement of a genome. (They described methods that
allowed proteins to be identified prior to detection of their respective
genes.)

Fish et al. (2004) reported the discovery of a mitochondrial DNA heavy
strand replication origin at nucleotide position 57 in the
strand-displacement loop (D-loop) of several human cell lines (HeLa,
A549, and 143B.TK-) and immortalized lymphocytes. The nascent chains
starting at this origin, in contrast to those initiated at the
previously described origins (Anderson et al., 1981), did not terminate
prematurely at the 3-prime end of the D-loop but proceeded well beyond
this control point, behaving as 'true' replicating strands. This origin
is mainly responsible for mtDNA maintenance under steady-state
conditions, whereas mtDNA synthesis from the formerly identified D-loop
origins may be more important for recovery after mtDNA depletion and for
accelerating mtDNA replication in response to physiologic demands.

Kravchenko et al. (2005) demonstrated that transcription of some mRNAs
in human and rodents is mediated by a single-polypeptide nuclear RNA
polymerase, which they designated spRNAP-IV. spRNAP-IV is expressed from
an alternative transcript of the mitochondrial RNA polymerase gene
POLRMT. The spRNAP-IV lacks 262 N-terminal amino acids of mitochondrial
RNA polymerase, including the mitochondrial-targeting signal, and
localizes to the nucleus. Transcription by spRNAP-IV is resistant to the
RNA polymerase II (PolII; see 180660) inhibitor alpha-amanitin but is
sensitive to short interfering RNA specific for the POLRMT gene. The
promoters for spRNAP-IV differ substantially from those used by RNA
PolII, do not respond to transcriptional enhancers, and contain a common
functional sequence motif.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Ringel et al. (2011) reported the crystal structure of mtRNAP at
2.5-angstrom resolution, which revealed a T7-like catalytic C-terminal
domain, an N-terminal domain that remotely resembles the T7
promoter-binding domain, a novel pentatricopeptide repeat domain, and a
flexible N-terminal extension. The pentatricopeptide repeat domain
sequesters an AT-rich recognition loop, which binds promoter DNA in T7
RNAP, probably explaining the need for TFAM (600438) during promoter
binding. Consistent with this, substitution of a conserved arginine
residue in the AT-rich recognition loop, or release of this loop by
deletion of the N-terminal part of mtRNAP, had no effect on
transcription. The fingers domain and the intercalating hairpin, which
melts DNA in phage RNAPs, are repositioned, explaining the need for
TFB2M (607055) during promoter melting. Ringel et al. (2011) concluded
that their results provided a new venue for the mechanistic analysis of
mitochondrial transcription, and also indicated how an early phage-like
mtRNAP lost functions in promoter binding and melting, which were
provided by initiation factors in trans during evolution, to enable
mitochondrial gene regulation and the adaptation of mitochondrial
function to changes in the environment.

REFERENCE 1. Anderson, S.; Bankier, A. T.; Barrell, B. G.; de Bruijn, M. H.
L.; Coulson, A. R.; Drouin, J.; Eperon, I. C.; Nierlich, D. P.; Roe,
B. A.; Sanger, F.; Schreier, P. H.; Smith, A. J. H.; Staden, R.; Young,
I. G.: Sequence and organization of the human mitochondrial genome. Nature 290:
457-465, 1981.

2. Fish, J.; Raule, N.; Attardi, G.: Discovery of a major D-loop
replication origin reveals two modes of human mtDNA synthesis. Science 306:
2098-2101, 2004.

3. Humphery-Smith, I.; Guyonnet, F.; Chastel, C.: Polypeptide cartography
of Spiroplasma taiwanense. Electrophoresis 15: 1212-1217, 1994.
Note; Erratum: Electrophoresis 16: 1324 only, 1995.

4. Kravchenko, J. E.; Rogozin, I. B.; Koonin, E. V.; Chumakov, P.
M.: Transcription of mammalian messenger RNAs by a nuclear RNA polymerase
of mitochondrial origin. (Letter) Nature 436: 735-739, 2005.

5. Ringel, R.; Sologub, M.; Morozov, Y. I.; Litonin, D.; Cramer, P.;
Temiakov, D.: Structure of human mitochondrial RNA polymerase. Nature 478:
269-273, 2011.

6. Tiranti, V.; Savoia, A.; Forti, F.; D'Apolito, M.-F.; Centra, M.;
Rocchi, M.; Zeviani, M.: Identification of the gene encoding the
human mitochondrial RNA polymerase (h-mtRPOL) by cyberscreening of
the Expressed Sequence Tags database. Hum. Molec. Genet. 6: 615-625,
1997.

7. Wasinger, V. C.; Cordwell, S. J.; Cerpa-Poljak, A.; Yan, J. X.;
Gooley, A. A.; Wilkins, M. R.; Duncan, M. W.; Harris, R.; Williams,
K. L.; Humphery-Smith, I.: Progress with gene-product mapping of
the Mollicutes: Mycoplasma genitalium. Electrophoresis 16: 1090-1094,
1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/21/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/7/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/27/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/15/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/25/1997

EDITED terry: 09/14/2012
alopez: 11/28/2011
terry: 11/21/2011
terry: 5/27/2010
alopez: 9/14/2005
terry: 9/7/2005
wwang: 2/7/2005
wwang: 2/3/2005
terry: 1/27/2005
alopez: 11/22/1999
mgross: 9/22/1999
terry: 9/15/1999
alopez: 7/11/1997
alopez: 4/30/1997
alopez: 4/29/1997
alopez: 4/25/1997

606945	TITLE *606945 LOW DENSITY LIPOPROTEIN RECEPTOR; LDLR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The low density lipoprotein receptor is a cell surface receptor that
plays an important role in cholesterol homeostasis.

CLONING

The low density lipoprotein receptor is synthesized as a 120-kD
glycoprotein precursor that undergoes change to a 160-kD mature
glycoprotein through the covalent addition of a 40-kD protein
(Tolleshaug et al., 1982).

Yamamoto et al. (1984) reported that the human LDL receptor is an
839-amino acid protein rich in cysteine, with multiple copies of the Alu
family of repetitive DNAs. Russell et al. (1984) demonstrated DNA
sequence homology of the LDL receptor with the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGF; 131530).

Sudhof et al. (1985) found that 13 of the 18 exons of the gene encode
protein sequences that are homologous to sequences in other proteins: 5
encode a sequence similar to one in C9 component of complement (120940);
3 encode a sequence similar to a repeat sequence in the precursor for
EGF and in 3 proteins of the blood clotting system--factor IX (300746),
factor X (613872), and protein C (612283), and 5 other exons encode
nonrepeated sequences that are shared only with the EGF precursor. Since
the LDL receptor is a mosaic protein built up of exons shared with
different proteins, it is a member of several supergene families.
Gilbert (1985) commented on the relevance of these findings to
understanding the significance of 'split genes' and 'exon shuffling'
during evolution.

MAPPING

Francke et al. (1984) assigned the LDL receptor to chromosome 19 on the
basis of expression studies in hamster-human somatic cell hybrids. The
LDLR gene was regionalized to 19p13.1-p13.3 by in situ hybridization
(Lindgren et al., 1985).

Frank et al. (1989) identified RFLPs of the mouse LDL receptor gene and
used them to map the gene, designated Ldlr, to the proximal region of
chromosome 9. Using interspecific backcrosses, they established the
order and interval distances for this and several other loci on mouse
chromosome 9, namely, Apoa4 (107690), which is on chromosome 11 in man,
and mannosephosphate isomerase (154550), which is on chromosome 15 in
man.

GENE FUNCTION

Brown and Goldstein (1974) described LDL binding to cultured fibroblasts
in a manner consistent with a receptor, and found that this binding
resulted in suppression of cholesterol synthesis by the cell via
repression of HMG CoA reductase. In a review article, Brown and
Goldstein (1979) described the mechanism of receptor-mediated
endocytosis using the LDL receptor as the prototypic example, thus
further describing its role in cholesterol metabolism. Normally, LDL is
bound at the cell membrane and taken into the cell ending up in
lysosomes where the protein is degraded and the cholesterol is made
available for repression of microsomal enzyme 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl
coenzyme A (HMG CoA) reductase, the rate-limiting step in cholesterol
synthesis.

Lo et al. (2007) observed that inhibition of lymphotoxin (see 153440)
and LIGHT (TNFSF14; 604520) signaling with a soluble lymphotoxin B
receptor (LTBR; 600979) decoy protein attenuated the dyslipidemia in LDL
receptor-deficient mice, which lack the ability to control lipid levels
in the blood. The authors concluded that the immune system directly
influences lipid metabolism and that lymphotoxin modulating agents may
represent a novel therapeutic route for the treatment of dyslipidemia.

- LDL Receptor as a Viral Receptor

Hepatitis C virus (HCV), the principal viral cause of chronic hepatitis,
is not readily replicated in cell culture systems, making it difficult
to ascertain information on cell receptors for the virus. However,
several observations from studies on the role of HCV in mixed
cryoglobulinemia provided some insight into HCV entry into cells.
Evidence indicated that HCV and other viruses enter cells through the
mediation of LDL receptors: by the demonstration that endocytosis of
these viruses correlates with LDL receptor activity, by complete
inhibition of detectable endocytosis by anti-LDL receptor antibody, by
inhibition with anti-apolipoprotein E and anti-apolipoprotein B
antibodies, by chemical methods abrogating lipoprotein/LDL receptor
interactions, and by inhibition with the endocytosis inhibitor
phenylarsine oxide. Agnello et al. (1999) provided confirmatory evidence
by the lack of detectable LDL receptor on cells known to be resistant to
infection by one of these viruses, bovine viral diarrheal virus (BVDV).
Endocytosis via the LDL receptor was shown to be mediated by complexing
of the virus to very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) or LDL, but not high
density lipoprotein (HDL). Studies using LDL receptor-deficient cells or
a cytolytic BVDV system indicated that the LDL receptor may be the main
but not exclusive means of cell entry of these viruses.

Atherogenic lipoprotein phenotype (108725) shows close linkage to the
LDLR locus; indeed, the mutation(s) responsible for this phenotype may
reside in the LDLR gene rather than in a separate, closely situated
gene.

Zelcer et al. (2009) demonstrated that the sterol-responsive nuclear
liver X receptor (LXR) (see 600380) helps maintain cholesterol
homeostasis, not only through promotion of cholesterol efflux but also
through suppression of LDL uptake. LXR inhibits the LDLR pathway through
the transcriptional induction of IDOL (MYLIP; 610082), an E3 ubiquitin
ligase that triggers ubiquitination of the LDLR on its cytoplasmic
domain, thereby targeting it for degradation. LXR ligand reduced,
whereas LXR knockout increased, LDLR protein levels in vivo in a
tissue-selective manner. IDOL knockdown in hepatocytes increased LDLR
protein levels and promoted LDL uptake. Conversely, Zelcer et al. (2009)
found that adenovirus-mediated expression of IDOL in mouse liver
promoted LDLR degradation and elevated plasma LDL levels. Zelcer et al.
(2009) concluded that the LXR-IDOL-LDLR axis defines a complementary
pathway to sterol response element-binding proteins for sterol
regulation of cholesterol uptake.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Rudenko et al. (2002) described the crystal structure of the LDL
receptor extracellular domain at endosomal pH. The ligand-binding domain
(modules R2 to R7) folds back as an arc over the epidermal growth factor
precursor homology domain (the modules A, B, beta propeller, and C). The
modules R4 and R5, which are critical for lipoprotein binding, associate
with the beta propeller via their calcium-binding loop. Rudenko et al.
(2002) proposed a mechanism for lipoprotein release in the endosome
whereby the beta propeller functions as an alternate substrate for the
ligand-binding domain, binding in a calcium-dependent way and promoting
lipoprotein release.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Davis et al. (1986) found that substitution of cysteine for tyrosine in
the cytoplasmic domain of LDL receptors impedes their internalization.
Lehrman et al. (1985) found that genes with nonsense and frameshift
mutations that truncated the cytoplasmic domain resulted in
internalization-defective LDL receptors.

In a patient with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (FH; 143890),
Hobbs et al. (1986) described an LDL receptor mutant in which 1 of the 7
repeating units constituting the ligand binding domain had been deleted.
The deletion arose by homologous recombination by repetitive Alu
sequences in intron 4 and intron 5 of the gene. The deletion removed
exon 5, which normally encodes the sixth repeat of the ligand binding
domain. In the resultant mRNA, exon 4 was found to be spliced to exon 6,
preserving the reading frame. The resulting shortened protein reaches
the cell surface and reacts with antireceptor antibodies but does not
bind LDL. It does, however, bind VLDL, a lipoprotein that contains
apoprotein E as well as apoprotein B-100. The findings in this
instructive case support the hypothesis that the 7 repeated sequences in
the receptor constitute the LDL binding domain, that the sixth repeat is
required for binding of LDL but not of VLDL, and that deletion of a
single repeat can alter the binding specificity of the LDL receptor.

Horsthemke et al. (1987) analyzed DNA from 70 patients in the UK with
heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. In most, the restriction
fragment pattern of the LDLR gene was indistinguishable from the normal;
however, 3 patients were found to have a deletion of about 1 kb in the
central portion of the gene. In 2 patients, the deletion included all or
part of exon 5 (606945.0027); in the third, the deletion included exon 7
(606945.0033). Including a previously described patient with a deletion
in the 3-prime part of the gene, these results indicated that 4 out of
70 patients, or 6%, have deletions.

Langlois et al. (1988) screened 234 unrelated heterozygotes for FH to
detect major rearrangements in the LDLR gene. Total genomic DNA was
analyzed by Southern blot hybridization to probes encompassing exons 1
to 18 of the LDLR gene. Six different mutations were detected and
characterized by use of exon-specific probes and detailed restriction
mapping. The frequency of deletions in the Langlois et al. (1988) study
was 2.5% (6 out of 234 patients). An illustration of previously mapped
deletions and the deletions identified in this study (a total of 16)
suggested that particular areas in the LDLR gene are susceptible to
deletion.

In a Japanese subject with homozygous hypercholesterolemia, Lehrman et
al. (1987) found a 7.8-kb deletion in LDLR (606945.0029). The deletion
joined intron 15 to the middle of exon 18, which encodes the 3-prime
untranslated region, thereby removing all 3-prime splice acceptor sites
distal to intron 15. The mRNA should produce a truncated receptor that
lacks the normal membrane-COOH terminus. The truncated protein was such
that more than 90% of the receptor was secreted from the cell, and the
receptors remaining on the surface showed defective internalization. The
deletion resulted from recombination between 2 repetitive sequences of
the Alu family, one in intron 15 and the other in exon 18. Lehrman et
al. (1987) stated that Alu sequences had been found at the deletion
joints of all 4 gross deletions that had been characterized in LDLR.
Because of these and similar findings in connection with deletions in
the gamma-delta-beta-globin cluster, recombination between Alu sequences
appears to be a frequent cause of deletions in the human genome (see
EVOLUTION).

Horsthemke et al. (1987) suggested that unequal crossing-over between 2
Alu-repetitive DNA sequences was responsible for an intragenic deletion
of the LDLR gene leading to familial hypercholesterolemia. A 4-kb
deletion had occurred between an Alu-repetitive sequence in intron 12
and a sequence in intron 14. The deletion eliminated exons 13 and 14 and
changed the reading frame of the resulting spliced mRNA such that a stop
codon was created in the following exon (606945.0032). The truncated
receptor protein appeared to be rapidly degraded. The deletion was
presumably caused by an unequal crossover event between 2 homologous
chromosomes at meiosis.

Hobbs et al. (1988) found that 16 of 132 cell strains (12%) from persons
with the clinical syndrome of homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia
synthesized no immunodetectable LDL receptor protein, indicating the
presence of 2 mutant genes that failed to produce crossreacting material
(CRM-negative mutants). DNA and mRNA from all but one of these
CRM-negative patients were available for study. Haplotype analysis based
on 10 RFLPs suggested that the 30 CRM-negative genes represented by
these 15 individuals had included 13 different mutant alleles. Four of
the alleles produced no mRNA; 3 of these 4 had large deletions ranging
from 6 to 20 kb that eliminated the promoter region of the gene. The
reason for the lack of mRNA in the fourth allele was not apparent. Three
alleles encoded mRNAs of abnormal size. One of the abnormal mRNAs was
produced by a gene harboring a deletion, and another was produced by a
gene with a complex rearrangement. The third abnormal-sized mRNA (3.1 kb
larger than normal) was produced by an allele that had no detectable
alteration as judged by Southern blotting. The other 6 mRNA-positive
alleles appeared normal by Southern blotting and produced normal-sized
mRNA but no receptor protein.

Among 20 mutant LDL receptor genes, Yamakawa et al. (1989) found 4
different deletion mutations (20%). None of these had been reported
previously in Caucasians. Three of them were novel and one was similar
to a previously described Japanese mutation. In 3 of the 4 deletions,
the rearrangements were related to intron 15 in which there are many Alu
sequences.

Rudiger et al. (1991) reviewed previously described deletions in the
LDLR gene in cases of familial hypercholesterolemia and reported the
finding of a deletion in 3 of 25 unrelated patients with FH. Two of
these were equivalent to previously described LDLR alterations, thus
supporting a notion of recombination hotspots which involve Alu
sequences. In at least 4 cases (FH626, PO, JA, and FH-DK3), a deletion
of exon 5 of the LDLR gene has been found as the defect responsible for
FH. The FH626 mutation was characterized by Hobbs et al. (1986) and
found to involve Alu repeat sequences in introns 4 and 5. Rudiger et al.
(1991) characterized FH-DK3 and likewise found involvement of 2 Alu
repeated sequences present in introns 4 and 5. The crossover breakpoints
involve sequences similar to those reported for FH626 but not at
identical positions in the 5-prime end. By use of denaturing gradient
gel electrophoresis (DGGE) in combination with PCR, Top et al. (1992)
found no evidence of a promoter mutation in the LDLR gene in 350
heterozygotes for FH. Hobbs et al. (1992) reviewed 71 mutations in the
LDL receptor gene that had been characterized at the molecular level and
added 79 additional mutations. Furthermore, they reviewed the insight
that all 150 mutations provided into the structure/function relationship
of the receptor protein and the clinical manifestations of FH.

Feussner et al. (1996) described a 20-year-old man with a combination of
heterozygous FH caused by splice mutation (606945.0054) and type III
hyperlipoproteinemia (107741).

Lee et al. (1998) studied 80 unrelated individuals with FH from the West
of Scotland. Microsatellite analysis using D19S394 was informative in 20
of 23 families studied. In these families, there was no inconsistency
with segregation of the FH phenotype with the LDLR locus. Using SSCP,
Lee et al. (1998) also detected mutations in exon 4 of the LDLR gene in
15 of 80 of these individuals; 7 of 15 had the same cys163-to-tyr
mutation (606945.0058). Lee et al. (1998) concluded that microsatellite
analysis using D19S394 is useful in tracking the LDLR gene in families
and could be used in conjunction with LDL cholesterol levels to diagnose
FH, especially in children and young adults, in whom phenotypic
diagnosis can be difficult.

Jensen et al. (1999) studied 17 families with mutations in the LDLR gene
as a model in which to test formally for linkage directly between an
atherogenic genotype and ischemic heart disease or aortocoronary
calcified atherosclerosis. The aortocoronary calcification was
significantly associated with age and plasma cholesterol. Sex,
hypertension, body mass index, and smoking were not associated with the
aortocoronary calcification. Nonparametric analysis indicated
significant linkage of the LDLR locus to aortic (p less than 0.00005)
and to aortocoronary calcified atherosclerosis (p less than 0.00001).
Assuming a dominant mode of inheritance, significant linkage was
detected for aortic (lod = 3.89) and aortocoronary calcified
atherosclerosis (lod = 4.10). Jensen et al. (1999) suggested that the
atherogenicity of variations in other genes could be assessed by a
similar approach.

Yamakawa et al. (1988) described a TaqI polymorphism in the LDLR gene
which should be useful in the study of FH. Leitersdorf et al. (1989)
used 10 different RFLPs to construct 123 differing haplotypes from 20
pedigrees. The 5 most common haplotypes accounted for 67.5% of the
sample. Heterozygosity and polymorphism information content (PIC) for
each site were determined.

Varret et al. (1997) described a database of LDLR genes and provided a
listing of the 210 mutations it contained as of the fall of 1996. Wilson
et al. (1998) described an online database of LDLR mutations.

Kathiresan et al. (2008) studied SNPs in 9 genes in 5,414 subjects from
the cardiovascular cohort of the Malmo Diet and Cancer Study. All 9 SNPs
had been associated with elevated LDL or lowered HDL. One of the SNPs,
dbSNP rs1529729 in the SMARCA4 gene, was highly correlated with variants
in LDLR. Kathiresan et al. (2008) replicated the associations with the 9
SNPs and created a genotype score on the basis of the number of
unfavorable alleles. With increasing genotype scores, the level of LDL
cholesterol increased, whereas the level of HDL cholesterol decreased.
At 10-year follow-up, the genotype score was found to be an independent
risk factor for incident cardiovascular disease (myocardial infarction,
ischemic stroke, or death from coronary heart disease); the score did
not improve risk discrimination but modestly improved clinical risk
reclassification for individual subjects beyond standard clinical
factors.

Aulchenko et al. (2009) reported a genomewide association (GWA) study of
loci affecting total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and
triglycerides sampled randomly from 16 population-based cohorts and
genotyped using mainly the Illumina HumanHap300-Duo platform. This study
included a total of 17,797 to 22,562 individuals aged 18 to 104 years
from geographic regions spanning from the Nordic countries to Southern
Europe. Aulchenko et al. (2009) established 22 loci associated with
serum lipid levels at a genomewide significance level (P less than 5 x
10(-8)), including 16 loci that were identified by previous GWA studies.
Association of the LDLR gene region identified by dbSNP rs2228671 was
found with total cholesterol levels (P = 9.3 x 10(-24)).

In a patient diagnosed with probable heterozygous FH, Bourbon et al.
(2007) analyzed the LDLR gene and identified a novel variant initially
assumed to be a silent polymorphism (R385R; 606945.0065); however,
analysis of mRNA from the patient's cells showed that the mutation
introduces a new 5-prime acceptor splice site that causes a 31-bp
deletion predicted to result in premature termination. The variant was
subsequently also found in a Chinese homozygous FH patient.

Defesche et al. (2008) analyzed the LDLR gene in 1,350 patients
clinically diagnosed with familial hypercholesterolemia who were
negative for functional DNA variation in the LDLR, APOB (107730), and
PCSK9 (607786) genes. The authors examined the effects of 128 seemingly
neutral exonic and intronic DNA variants and identified the R385R
variant in 2 Chinese families and a G186G (606945.0066) variant that
clearly affected a donor splice site and segregated with
hypercholesterolemia in 35 unrelated Dutch families.

In a metaanalysis of plasma lipid concentrations in greater than 100,000
individuals of European descent, Teslovich et al. (2010) identified SNP
dbSNP rs6511720 near the LDLR gene as having an effect on LDL
cholesterol concentrations with an effect size of -6.99 mg per deciliter
and a P value of 4 x 10(-117). This variant was also found to affect
coronary artery disease risk.

Kulseth et al. (2010) performed RNA analysis in 30 unrelated patients
with clinically defined hypercholesterolemia but without any LDLR
mutations detected by standard DNA analysis; sequencing of RT-PCR
products from an index patient revealed that the major product contained
an insertion of 81 bp from the 5-prime end of intron 14 of LDLR. DNA
sequencing of exons 13 and 14 detected an intronic mutation
(606945.0067) that segregated in heterozygosity with elevated
cholesterol in the proband's family. Kulseth et al. (2010) analyzed an
additional 550 index patients and identified the same splice site
mutation in 3 more probands.

Noting that large-scale genetic cascade screening for familial
hypercholesterolemia showed that 15% of LDLR or APOB mutation carriers
had LDLC levels below the 75th percentile, Huijgen et al. (2010)
proposed 3 criteria for determining pathogenicity of such mutations:
mean LDLC greater than the 75th percentile, higher mean LDLC level in
untreated than in treated carriers, and higher percentage of medication
users in carriers than in noncarriers at screening. Applying these
criteria to 46 mutations found in more than 50 untreated adults, 3 of
the mutations were determined to be nonpathogenic: 1 in LDLR and 2 in
APOB. Nonpathogenicity of the 3 variants was confirmed by segregation
analysis. Huijgen et al. (2010) emphasized that novel sequence changes
in LDLR and APOB should be interpreted with caution before being
incorporated into a cascade screening program.

- Modifiers

Vergopoulos et al. (1997) presented findings suggesting the existence of
a xanthomatosis susceptibility gene in a consanguineous Syrian kindred
containing 6 individuals with homozygous FH (see 602247). Half of the
homozygotes had giant xanthomas, while half did not, even though their
LDL cholesterol concentrations were elevated to similar degrees (more
than 14 mmol/l). Heterozygous FH individuals in this family were also
clearly distinguishable with respect to xanthoma size. By DNA analysis
they identified a hitherto undescribed mutation in the LDLR gene in this
family: a T-to-C transition at nucleotide 1999 in codon 646 of exon 14,
resulting in an arginine for cysteine substitution. Segregation analysis
suggested that a separate susceptibility gene may explain the formation
of giant xanthomas.

In a 13-year-old girl with severe hypercholesterolemia, Ekstrom et al.
(1999) demonstrated compound heterozygosity for a cys240-to-phe mutation
(606945.0059) and a tyr167-to-ter mutation (606945.0045) in the LDLR
gene. Her 2 heterozygous sibs also carried the C240F mutation, but only
one of them was hypercholesterolemic. The authors concluded that there
may be cholesterol-lowering mechanisms that are activated by mutations
in other genes (see 143890).

Knoblauch et al. (2000) studied an Arab family that carried the
tyr807-to-cys substitution (606945.0019). In this family, some
heterozygous persons had normal LDL levels, while some homozygous
individuals had LDL levels similar to those persons with heterozygous
FH. The authors presented evidence for the existence of a
cholesterol-lowering gene on 13q (604595).

Based on the finding from bioinformatic analysis that Alu repeats
represent 85% of LDLR intronic sequences outside exon-intron junctions,
Amsellem et al. (2002) designed a strategy to improve the exploration of
genomic regions in the vicinity of exons in 110 FH subjects from an
admixed population. In the first group of 42 patients found negative for
mutations by former screening strategies, approximately half (22) were
carriers of at least 1 heterozygous mutation. Among a second group of 68
patients recruited to correct for ascertainment bias toward exonic
mutations, 37 (27%) mutation carriers had a splicing regulatory
mutation. Of the 54 mutations identified, 13 were intronic and 18 were
novel, nearly half of which were intronic. Amsellem et al. (2002) stated
that their strategy of detecting the most likely disease-causing LDLR
mutations outside of Alu-rich genomic regions revealed that intronic
mutations may have a greater impact on the molecular basis of FH than
previously reported.

POPULATION GENETICS

Seftel et al. (1980) pointed to a high frequency of hypercholesterolemic
homozygotes in South Africa. In a 7-year period, 34 homozygotes were
seen in one clinic in Johannesburg. All were Afrikaners and most lived
in Transvaal Province. The authors calculated the frequency of
heterozygotes and homozygotes to be 1 in 100 and 1 in 30,000,
respectively. The oldest of their patients was a 46-year-old woman. Of
the 34, six were age 30 or older. The authors concluded that the high
frequency of the gene is attributable to founder effect, as in the case
of porphyria variegata (176200), lipoid proteinosis (247100), and
sclerosteosis (269500). Torrington and Botha (1981) found that 20 of 26
families with FHC (77%) belonged to the Gereformeerde Kerk, whereas
according to the 1970 census only 5% of the Afrikaans-speaking white
population of South Africa belonged to this religious group. Again, the
data were consistent with a founder effect. Using the LDLR activity of
lymphocytes, Steyn et al. (1989) calculated the prevalence of
heterozygous FHC in the permanent residents of a predominantly
Afrikaans-speaking community in South Africa to be 1 in 71--the highest
prevalence reported to date.

Hobbs et al. (1987) found a large deletion (more than 10 kb) in the LDLR
gene in 63% of French Canadians with heterozygous FH. The deletion also
occurred in homozygous form in 4 of 7 French-Canadian homozygotes. The
deletion removed the promoter and first exon of the gene and abolished
the production of mRNA for LDL receptor. The high frequency of the
mutation was interpreted as representing founder effect; 8,000 ancestors
account for present-day French Canadians and there has been relatively
little outbreeding. The deletion has not been observed in any other
ethnic group. It can be detected by analysis of genomic DNA from blood
leukocytes, thus allowing direct diagnosis of FH in most affected French
Canadians. Ma et al. (1989) identified a second 'French Canadian' LDLR
gene deletion which was found in 4 of 80 heterozygotes (5%). The
mutation consisted of a 5-kb deletion removing exons 2 and 3 of the LDLR
gene, which corresponded to the first 2 repeats of the LDLR-binding
domain (606945.0026).

Leitersdorf et al. (1990) analyzed the LDL receptor genes of 11 French
Canadian FH homozygotes. Only 3 different LDLR haplotypes were
identified, and the coding region of the allele associated with each was
sequenced. Three different missense mutations were found. Assays
developed to detect each of these directly were applied to 130 FH
heterozygotes from the greater Montreal area. The common deletion
(606945.0025) responsible for about 60% of cases (Hobbs et al., 1987)
and the smaller deletion (606945.0026) identified by Ma et al. (1989)
and found in about 5% of French Canadians were also sought. They were
able to detect LDL receptor mutations in 76% of the subjects and 14% had
1 of the 3 missense mutations. In the Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean region of
Quebec province, De Braekeleer (1991) estimated the prevalence of
familial hypercholesterolemia as 1/122, compared to the usually
estimated frequency of 1/500 for European populations.

Like the French Canadians, the South Afrikaners appear to have a unique
form of mutation in the LDLR gene consistent with founder effect (Brink
et al., 1987). Because of the presumed role of founder effect on the
high frequency of familial hypercholesterolemia in South Africa, it is
not surprising that Kotze et al. (1987) found a predominance of 2
haplotypes in 27 informative families with FH. In a study of homozygotes
from the Afrikaner population in South Africa, Leitersdorf et al. (1989)
found that 2 mutations account for more than 95% of the mutant LDL
receptor genes. Both mutations were basepair substitutions that resulted
in a single amino acid change and both could be detected readily with
PCR and restriction analysis. The findings were considered consistent
with the high frequency of FH being due to founder effect. Graadt van
Roggen et al. (1991) studied the prevalence and distribution of the 3
common mutations in South Africa in 27 unrelated homozygous and 79
unrelated heterozygous FH Afrikaner patients from 2 regions of South
Africa, the Transvaal and Cape Provinces. The 3 mutations were FH
Afrikaner-1 (606945.0006), FH Afrikaner-2 (606945.0009), and FH
Afrikaner-3 (606945.0044). The relative distribution of each of the 3
mutations was similar in the 2 regions, with frequencies of 66, 27, and
7%, respectively. Defects other than the 3 common mutations were more
frequent in the Cape than in the Transvaal; thus, the 3 known mutations
accounted for 98% of FH alleles in the Transvaal and only 74% in the
Cape Province. None of the patients carried the familial apolipoprotein
B-100 mutation.

Schuster et al. (1995) identified yet another homozygote for the
val408-to-met mutation (606945.0009), a 12-year-old Greek boy living in
Germany. The mutation was present in both his parents, his brother,
grandmother, uncle, and cousin. The haplotype, using 6 RFLPs of the LDL
receptor gene, was different from the one reported earlier in Afrikaner
and Dutch FH patients. Schuster et al. (1995) concluded that the
mutation in the Greek boy probably occurred independently. Furthermore,
they speculated that, because the parents were from different areas in
Greece, the mutation may be common in Greeks.

Deletion of gly197 (606945.0005) is the most prevalent LDL receptor
mutation causing familial hypercholesterolemia in Ashkenazi Jewish
individuals. Studying index cases from Israel, South Africa, Russia, the
Netherlands, and the United States, Durst et al. (2001) found that all
traced their ancestry to Lithuania. A highly conserved haplotype was
identified in chromosomes carrying this deletion, suggesting a common
founder. When 2 methods were used for analysis of linkage disequilibrium
between flanking polymorphic markers and the disease locus and for the
study of the decay of LD over time, the estimated age of the deletion
was found to be 20 +/- 7 generations, so that the most recent common
ancestor of the mutation-bearing chromosomes would date to the 14th
century. This corresponds with the founding of the Jewish community of
Lithuania (1338 A.D.), as well as with the great demographic expansion
of Ashkenazi Jewish individuals in eastern Europe, which followed this
settlement. Durst et al. (2001) could find no evidence supporting a
selective evolutionary metabolic advantage. Therefore, the founder
effect in a rapidly expanding population from a limited number of
families remains a simple, parsimonious hypothesis explaining the spread
of this mutation in Ashkenazi Jewish individuals.

Defesche and Kastelein (1998) stated that more than 350 different
mutations had been found in patients with familial hypercholesterolemia.
They tabulated the preferential geographic distribution that has been
demonstrated for some of the LDL receptor mutations. For example, in the
West of Scotland about half of the index cases of FH were found to have
the cys163-to-tyr mutation (606945.0058). Defesche and Kastelein (1998)
commented on the geographic associations of LDL receptor mutations
within the Netherlands.

EVOLUTION

Alu sequences are widely scattered in the genome, being present in
300,000 to 500,000 copies. They have been described, for example, in the
genes for alpha-globin (see 141800), gastrin (137250), gamma crystallin
(123660), insulin-like growth factor II (147470), and soluble thymidine
kinase. Each is about 300 bp long; thus Alu sequences represent about 3%
of the total DNA. On the basis of structural similarity, the origin of
Alu elements can be traced to the gene for 7SL RNA (Ullu and Tschudi,
1984). The abundant cytoplasmic 7SL RNA functions in protein secretion
as a component of the signal-recognition particle. This particle,
consisting of 6 different polypeptides and 1 molecule of 7SL RNA,
mediates the translocation of secretory proteins across the cytoplasmic
reticulum. Although the 7SL RNA has a well-defined biologic function,
that of the related Alu repeat remains unknown. Thus, the 7SL RNA gene
may be a progenitor of a processed pseudogene, the Alu element, that has
'recently' spread to different locations in the human genome. The
average Alu family member probably integrated into its present genomic
location about 15-30 Myr ago. The Alu family is specific to primates,
suggesting that these repeats were not present as little as 65 Myr ago.

According to the Alu family copy number, one would, on the average,
expect to find 1 such repeat every 3 to 5 kb in the human genome if they
are randomly distributed. However, studies of the
albumin/alpha-fetoprotein family by Ruffner et al. (1987) and of the
thymidine kinase (188300) and beta-tubulin (191130) genes by Slagel et
al. (1987) indicate clustering of Alu repeats in some parts of the
genome. For example, the beta-tubulin gene has 10 of these repeats in
less than 5 kb of a single intron and the thymidine kinase has 13
members within its introns in a region of about 10 kb.

HISTORY

Some early studies of somatic hybrid cells suggested that the gene(s)
for low density lipoprotein receptor may be on chromosome 5 or 21 or
both (Maartmann-Moe et al., 1982).

Li et al. (1988) worked out a PCR method for analyzing DNA sequences in
individual diploid cells and human sperm. They showed that 2 genetic
loci could be coamplified from a single sperm, and proposed its use for
genetic linkage studies. They analyzed the genotype of single sperm
derived from an individual heterozygous at the LDLR locus and the
HLA-DQ(alpha) locus and could show independent assortment. Individual
sperm were drawn into a fine plastic needle under microscopic
observation and delivered to a tube for lysis and amplification. Eighty
individual sperm were analyzed for the study of independent assortment
of LDLR and DQA. The method has great promise for fine mapping. Boehnke
et al. (1989) described the experimental design and issues of sample
size to be considered in the application of the method to the generation
of fine-structure human genetic maps.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using Ldlr -/- mice expressing the lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
(LCMV) glycoprotein (GP) transgene under control of the insulin
promoter, which functions as a mouse model in which type 1 diabetes
(125853) can be induced at will, Johansson et al. (2008) administered a
high-fat diet for 16 weeks to induce the development of advanced
atherosclerotic lesions before inducing diabetes. After the onset of
diabetes, there was increased intraplaque hemorrhage and plaque
disruption, regardless of lesion size, in mice fed low- or high-fat
diets for an additional 14 weeks. Furthermore, diabetes resulted in
increased accumulation of monocytic cells positive for S100A9 (123886),
a proinflammatory biomarker for cardiovascular events, and for a
macrophage marker protein, without increasing lesion macrophage content,
and S100A9 immunoreactivity correlated with intraplaque hemorrhage.
Hyperglycemia was not sufficient to induce plaque disruption: aggressive
lipid lowering, primarily of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, prevented
both plaque disruption and the increased S100A9 in diabetic
atherosclerotic lesions. Conversely, oleate promoted macrophage
differentiation into an S100A9-positive population in vitro, thereby
mimicking the effects of diabetes. Johansson et al. (2008) concluded
that diabetes increases plaque disruption independently of effects on
plaque initiation, through a mechanism that requires triglyceride-rich
lipoproteins and is associated with an increased accumulation of
S100A9-positive monocytic cells, and that this represents an important
link between diabetes, plaque disruption, and the innate immune system.

Lewis et al. (2009) generated mice lacking C1qa (120550) and/or serum
IgM (147020) as well as Ldlr and studied them on both low- and high-fat
semisynthetic diets. On both diets, serum IgM/Ldlr -/- mice developed
substantially larger and more complex en face and aortic root
atherosclerotic lesions, with accelerated cholesterol crystal formation
and increased smooth muscle content in aortic root lesions. TUNEL
analysis revealed increased apoptosis in both C1qa/Ldlr -/- and serum
IgM/Ldlr -/- mice. Overall lesions were larger in mice lacking IgM
rather than C1q, suggesting that IgM protective mechanisms are partially
independent of classic complement pathway activation and apoptotic cell
clearance. Lewis et al. (2009) concluded that IgM antibodies play a
central role in protection against atherosclerosis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
FH TURKEY
LDLR, GLN12TER

In a homozygote with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH; 143890) of
Turkish ancestry, Leitersdorf and Hobbs (1990) identified a CAG-to-TAG
change in codon 12 converting glutamine to a stop codon.

.0002
FH CAPE TOWN 1
LDLR, ASP26/GLY27DEL

In a South African black with FH (143890), Leitersdorf et al. (1988)
demonstrated deletion of aspartic acid-26 and glycine-27 due to deletion
of the 6 nucleotides of codons 26 and 27: GCGATG.

Thiart et al. (2000) found this mutation in 28% of mutant alleles in 56
South African black patients.

.0003
FH FRENCH CANADIAN 4
LDLR, TRP66GLY

This change in exon 3 is a class 3 binding-defective mutation
(Leitersdorf et al., 1990). In the French-Canadian population of a
province in Quebec, Moorjani et al. (1993) compared the clinical
features of homozygous FH (143890) because of the relatively high
frequency of a small number of mutations. In a comparison of 10 subjects
who had the trp66-to-gly (W66G) mutation in exon 3 with 11 subjects who
were homozygous for the 'greater than 10 kb' deletion of the promoter
region in exon 1 (606945.0025), they found the following: mean plasma
cholesterol concentration was higher in the subjects with the deletion
and there was no overlap in values in the 2 groups. Although the
frequency of coronary heart disease was similar in the 2 groups, age of
onset was earlier in subjects with the deletion; in addition, coronary
deaths were more frequent and occurred at an earlier age in the deletion
subjects.

Grossman et al. (1994) reported a 29-year-old woman with FH and a
homozygous W66G mutation who underwent hepatocyte-directed ex vivo gene
therapy with LDLR-expressing retroviruses. She tolerated the procedures
well, liver biopsy after 4 months showed engraftment of the transgene,
and there was no clinical or pathologic evidence for autoimmune
hepatitis. The patient showed an improvement in serum lipids up to 18
months after the treatment.

.0004
FH PUERTO RICO
LDLR, SER156LEU

Hobbs et al. (1989) found this missense mutation in a Puerto Rican
kindred that appeared to have an independently segregating mutation that
suppressed the hypercholesterolemia phenotype in some heterozygotes (see
144020). The same mutation was identified in a German family by Schuster
et al. (1993).

.0005
FH PISCATAWAY
FH LITHUANIA
LDLR, GLY197DEL

Meiner et al. (1991) found that the mutation was responsible for 35% of
71 Ashkenazi-Jewish FH (143890) families in Israel. Of the 25 Ashkenazi
patients who carried the mutant allele, 16 were of Lithuanian origin.
The mutation was not found in 47 non-Ashkenazi FH families. The mutation
was found in 8 of 10 FH cases in the Jewish community in South Africa,
which originated mainly from Lithuania. PCR amplification of a DNA
fragment that includes the mutation in heterozygous individuals results
in the formation of a heteroduplex that can be demonstrated by PAGE and
used for molecular diagnosis.

Mandelshtam et al. (1998) found this mutation in one-third (7 of 23) of
familial hypercholesterolemia cases in St. Petersburg (Russia) Jews and
in no patients of Russian descent.

.0006
FH AFRIKANER 1
FH MAINE
LDLR, ASP206GLU

Kotze et al. (1990) demonstrated a cytosine-to-guanine base substitution
at nucleotide 681 resulting in an amino acid change from aspartic acid
to glutamic acid at residue 206 (D206E) in the cysteine-rich
ligand-binding domain of the LDL receptor. The mutation gives rise to an
additional DdeI restriction site; segregation of the mutation with the
disease was confirmed in 5 large Afrikaner FH (143890) families. Kotze
et al. (1990) predicted that 65% of affected South African Afrikaners
carry this particular base substitution which can be diagnosed by PCR
amplification of genomic DNA followed by restriction enzyme analysis.
Indeed, from analysis of 138 chromosomes of Afrikaner FH (143890)
patients, Kotze et al. (1991) found this mutation in 91 (68.4%). Komuro
et al. (1987) described a homozygote for defective internalization of
the LDL receptor who survived to age 57. Leitersdorf and Hobbs (1990)
found the same mutation in an English-American living in Maine.

Vergotine et al. (2001) demonstrated the feasibility of prenatal
diagnosis of homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia in an Afrikaner
family with the D206E mutation.

.0007
FH MEXICO
FH FRENCH CANADIAN 3
LDLR, GLU207LYS

Codon 207 (GAG) is changed to AAG (Leitersdorf and Hobbs, 1990). The
same mutation was found in French Canadians with FH (143890)
(Leitersdorf et al., 1990).

.0008
FH DENVER 2
LDLR, ASP283ASN

In an African American patient with FH (143890), Leitersdorf and Hobbs
(1990) found a change of aspartic acid-283 (GAC) to asparagine (AAC).

.0009
FH AFRIKANER 2
LDLR, VAL408MET

This and the asp206-to-glu mutation (see 606945.0006) are frequent among
Afrikaners with FH (143890). A GTG-to-ATG mutation is responsible
(Leitersdorf et al., 1989). In a study of 138 chromosomes of Afrikaner
FH patients, Kotze et al. (1991) found that 31 (23.3%) had this
mutation. Schuster et al. (1993) found the same mutation in a German
family and showed that it existed on the same 7-RFLP haplotype as did
the mutation described in South Africa and in the Netherlands,
suggesting a common European origin. Similarly, Defesche et al. (1993)
found the val408-to-met mutation in 19 (1.5%) of 1,268 FH patients of
Dutch descent. In 9 of the patients carrying this mutation on one
allele, the LDLR DNA haplotype was that observed in a South African FH
patient homozygous for the same mutation. The remaining 10 Dutch FH
patients all shared a common haplotype, partly identical to the
Afrikaner haplotype, which could have arisen from a single
recombinational event. With the exception of the family reported by
Schuster et al. (1993), this mutation has been described only in persons
of Dutch ancestry.

.0010
FH ALGERIA
LDLR, ALA410THR

A GCT-to-ACT change is responsible for this variant (Zuliani and Hobbs,
1990).

.0011
FH KUWAIT
LDLR, VAL502MET

A GTG-to-ATG mutation is responsible for this variant (Zuliani and
Hobbs, 1990).

.0012
FH SAINT OMER
LDLR, GLY525ASP

A GGC-to-GAC mutation is responsible for this variant (Leitersdorf and
Hobbs, 1990).

.0013
FH GENOA
LDLR, GLY528ASP

A GGT-to-GAT mutation is responsible for this variant (Leitersdorf and
Hobbs, 1990).

.0014
FH NAPLES
LDLR, GLY544VAL

Esser and Russell (1988) found a GGC-to-GTC mutation as the basis of
this variant.

.0015
FH FRENCH CANADIAN 2
LDLR, CYS646TYR

Leitersdorf et al. (1990) found a TGT-to-TAT mutation in exon 14 as the
basis of this variant. See 606945.0003, 606945.0007, 606945.0025, and
606945.0026 for other French Canadian mutations.

.0016
FH LEBANESE
LDLR, CYS660TER

Lehrman et al. (1987) analyzed the nature of the LDLR mutation present
in high frequency in Lebanon; the frequency of homozygotes is more than
10 times higher than in other parts of the world. It was on the basis of
studies in Lebanon that Khachadurian (1964) first established the
existence of homozygous FHC (143890). Lehrman et al. (1987) demonstrated
that the mutation involves a shortened receptor protein containing 3
domains: the region of clustered O-linked carbohydrates, the
membrane-spanning region, and the cytoplasmic tail. The defect was
attributable to a single nucleotide substitution that creates a
premature termination codon at amino acid 660, eliminating 180 residues
from the mature protein. The termination codon occurred in the middle of
a cysteine-rich sequence that is part of the domain homologous to
epidermal growth factor precursor. The truncated protein retains only 2
domains: a complete ligand-binding region (residues 1-292) and a partial
epidermal growth factor precursor homology region (residues 293-659).
The mutant gene lacks the portions that code for the membrane-spanning
region and the cytoplasmic tail. After synthesis, most of the mutant
receptor remains within the cell. The mutation creates a new restriction
site for the enzyme HinfI, thus permitting diagnosis by Southern
blotting of genomic DNA. Lehrman et al. (1987) studied 4 unrelated Arab
patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, 3 from Lebanon
and 1 from Syria. They referred to this mutation as the Lebanese allele.
In 5 Christian-Arab kindreds in Israel, Oppenheim et al. (1991) found
the 'Lebanese' allele in correlation with hypercholesterolemia. In
addition, their results suggested the possible existence of an
independent factor contributing to elevated LDL cholesterol levels.

.0017
FH ZAMBIA
LDLR, PRO664LEU

In an Asiatic Indian with FH (143890), Knight et al. (1989) and Soutar
et al. (1989) found a CCG-to-CTG mutation changing proline-664 to
leucine. Knight et al. (1989) found that the precursor form of the
mutant receptor is converted more slowly than normal, and the mature
form on the cell surface binds LDL less well than normal. Soutar et al.
(1991) identified this mutation in a large Asian-Indian kindred
containing 22 heterozygotes and 3 homozygotes. All the heterozygotes had
a raised level of plasma total cholesterol and low density lipoprotein
cholesterol, but were remarkably free from premature coronary disease.
No correlation could be found between the apo(a) phenotype (152200) and
the presence or absence of the LDLR mutation. There was, however,
evidence for an inherited trait that markedly increased Lp(a)
concentration, which did not segregate with either apo(a) or the
defective LDLR allele. FH Zambia was found in a patient with familial
hypercholesterolemia who was of Indian origin residing in Zambia.
Rubinsztein et al. (1992) found the same mutation in 4 South African
families of Muslim religion who traced their origin to the vicinity of
Surat in the Gujerat province of India. Functional studies suggested
that the FH in these subjects was due to low steady-state levels of
receptor molecules that are functionally normal but exhibit accelerated
turnover.

Among 915 consecutive patients with FH and of Dutch descent, Defesche et
al. (1992) found 7 persons with the C-to-T transition at nucleotide 2054
in exon 14. All the patients shared the same haplotype. Contrary to
previous reports, no difference was found in plasma levels of Lp(a)
between family members with the mutation in exon 14 and unaffected
persons.

.0018
FH BAHRAIN
LDLR, TRP792TER

In a Bahraini patient with FH (143890), Lehrman et al. (1985) found a
change in the tryptophan-792 codon to a stop codon as the basis of this
variant. Truncation of the cytoplasmic domain of the LDLR protein
results in defective internalization. Recurrence of this mutation was
observed by Loux et al. (1991) in the course of a survey of 139
unrelated French FH subjects.

.0019
FH BARI
FH SYRIA
LDLR, TYR807CYS

In an Italian patient with FH (143890), Davis et al. (1986) found a
TAT-to-TGT mutation in this internalization-defective allele.

.0020
FH NASHVILLE
LDLR, 4-BP INS, EX8

In an American patient with FH (143890), Leitersdorf and Hobbs (1990)
found insertion of 4 nucleotides in exon 8 causing frameshift and
premature termination as the basis of this null allele.

.0021
FH PARIS 3
LDLR, 4-BP INS, EX17

In a French patient with FH (143890), Lehrman et al. (1985) found
insertion of 4 nucleotides in exon 17 causing frameshift and premature
termination as the basis of this internalization-defective allele.
Benlian et al. (1990) found the same duplication of 4 bases in exon 17
as the basis of familial hypercholesterolemia in a homozygous offspring
of consanguineous French parents and in heterozygous relatives. The same
mutation was not found in any normal individuals or in 158 other
individuals with hypercholesterolemia type IIa. The duplication involved
the third nucleotide of codon 796 and the 3 nucleotides of codon 797,
resulting in a frameshift and a stop codon 20 basepairs downstream.

.0022
FH PORTUGAL
LDLR, ASP203ASN

In Portuguese patients with FH (143890), Hobbs et al. (1992) identified
a G-A transition in exon 4 of the LDLR gene, resulting in an
asp203-to-asn (D203N) substitution. The mutation was not found in over
200 non-FH alleles.

.0023
FH ST. LOUIS
LDLR, EX2-8DUP

In an American child homozygous for FH (143890), Lehrman et al. (1987)
found that the LDL receptor precursor was unusually long due to a
duplication of 7 exons. Unequal crossing-over between homologous
repetitive elements (Alu sequences) in intron 1 and intron 8 was the
basis of the duplication.

.0024
FH PARIS 2
LDLR, EX2-5DUP

In a French patient with FH (143890), Leitersdorf and Hobbs (1990) found
this mutation.

.0025
FH FRENCH CANADIAN 1
FH DENVER
LDLR, PROMOTER/EX1 DEL

Deletion of the promoter and exon 1 of the LDLR gene resulting in a null
allele is the mutation found in about 60% of French Canadian cases of FH
(143890) in Quebec (Hobbs et al., 1987; Leitersdorf et al., 1990).
Leitersdorf et al. (1990) quoted work indicating that all persons with
the 'French-Canadian deletion' trace their ancestry to a small town
northeast of Montreal called Kamouraska, thus illustrating founder
effect. Founder effect was suggested as well by the fact that the
mutation was also found in France where it was, however, rare (Fumeron
et al., 1992). The same mutation was found in a non-French Canadian
Caucasian in Denver, Colorado (Hobbs et al., 1988). Betard et al. (1992)
found that the 10-kb deletion had the same haplotype, called the B
haplotype. They identified 15 different haplotypes for the normal allele
in heterozygotes. Thus, founder effect is again supported.

(It is more accurate to state that Kamouraska is northeast of Quebec
City on the south side of the St. Lawrence River. See 609313 for a
unique form of erythrokeratodermia variabilis, designated the Kamouraska
type and symbolized EKV3, that has been identified in families living in
the same region of Quebec.)

Simard et al. (2004) identified the breakpoint of the more than 15-kb
deletion involving the promoter and exon 1 of the LDLR gene, as well as
the breakpoint of the 5-kb deletion of exons 2 and 3 (606945.0026),
which accounts for 5% of French-Canadian FH cases. Both deletions
appeared to be the result of homologous recombination by unequal
crossing over between the left arms of Alu repeats. Simard et al. (2004)
determined that 55% of the LDLR gene is composed of Alu elements; thus,
it is not surprising that most LDLR rearrangements involve at least 1
Alu. They developed a rapid PCR-based assay for these 2
'French-Canadian' deletions. Screening of a representative population
sample of 943 French-Canadian youths whose LDL cholesterol levels were
above the 50th percentile allowed Simard et al. (2004) to estimate the
prevalence of the more than 15-kb allele as 0.11% (95% confidence
interval, 0.03 to 0.38).

.0026
FH FRENCH CANADIAN 5
FH TONAMI 2;;
FH TSUKUBA 1
LDLR, EX2-3DEL

Ma et al. (1989) found deletion of exons 2 and 3 in a French Canadian
patient with FH (143890). The same mutation was found in 2 Japanese
patients with homozygous FH and called FH Tonami-2 (Kajinami et al.,
1989) and FH Tsukuba-1 (Yamakawa et al., 1989).

.0027
FH PARIS 1
LDLR, EX5DEL

In a French patient with FH (143890), Hobbs et al. (1986) found deletion
of exon 5 of the LDLR gene. Horsthemke et al. (1987) found the same
mutation in 2 English patients.

.0028
FH CAPE TOWN 2
FH LEUVEN
LDLR, EX7-8DEL

In South African patients with FH (143890), Henderson et al. (1988)
detected a hitherto undescribed 2.5-kb deletion in the central region of
the LDLR gene, most likely including all of exons 7 and 8. The same
mutation was present in a Dutch patient in Leuven (Russell et al.,
1986).

.0029
FH ROCHESTER
FH OSAKA 1;;
FH HELSINKI
LDLR, EX16-18DEL

In an American patient with FH (143890), Lehrman et al. (1985) found
deletion of exons 16, 17, and part of 18, due apparently to Alu-Alu
recombination. The same mutation was found in Japanese by Lehrman et al.
(1987) and in many Finns by Aalto-Setala et al. (1989). A 9.5-kb
deletion extended from intron 15 to exon 18. Because of loss of the
domains encoded by exons 16, 17, and 18, the carboxy-terminal portion of
the normal receptor, comprising amino acids 750-839, has been replaced
by an unrelated stretch of 55 amino acids. This particular mutation was
found in 23 of 46 unrelated Finnish FH patients with an established
functional defect of LDLR. In cultured fibroblasts, both
receptor-mediated binding and internalization of LDL were reduced on the
average by 25 and 50%, respectively. Aalto-Setala et al. (1989) referred
to the mutation as FH-Helsinki. Rodningen et al. (1992) found the same
mutation in 3 out of 181 (1.7%) unrelated Norwegian FH subjects. All 3
showed the same haplotype. Aalto-Setala et al. (1992) found that the
FH-Helsinki mutation was present in 75 (38%) of 199 unrelated Finnish
patients with hypercholesterolemia. The prevalence ranged from 26 to 58%
in different areas of Finland, with the striking exception of the North
Karelia region where only 1 of 26 (4%) FH patients carried the
FH-Helsinki allele.

.0030
FH VANCOUVER 4
FH VANCOUVER 5
LDLR, EX2-6DEL

Langlois et al. (1988) found 2 instances of deletion of exons 2-6.

.0031
FH VANCOUVER 3
LDLR, EX3-8DEL

Langlois et al. (1988) found an instance of deletion of exons 3-8.

.0032
FH LONDON 1
FH ITALY 1;;
FH VANCOUVER 1
LDLR, EX13-14DEL

In an English patient with FH (143890), Horsthemke et al. (1987) found
deletion of exons 13 and 14. Hobbs et al. (1988) found the same mutation
in an Italian patient and Langlois et al. (1988) found it in Vancouver.

.0033
FH LONDON 2
LDLR, EX7DEL

In an English patient with FH (143890), Horsthemke et al. (1987) found
deletion of exon 7.

.0034
FH OSAKA 2
LDLR, EX7-14DEL

In a Japanese patient with FH (143890), Miyake et al. (1989) found
deletion of exons 7 to 14.

.0035
FH VANCOUVER 2
LDLR, EX17DEL

Langlois (1989) found deletion of exon 17 in a patient in Vancouver,
B.C.

.0036
FH VANCOUVER 6
LDLR, EX4-6DEL

Langlois et al. (1988) found deletion of exons 4 to 6.

.0037
FH REYKJAVIK
LDLR, EX9-10DEL

In the Icelandic population, Taylor et al. (1989) found this deletion.
However, in 17 unrelated families from Iceland, Taylor et al. (1989)
identified at least 4 different haplotypes, indicating that FH (143890)
is a heterogeneous disease even in this small, geographically isolated
population.

.0038
FH TONAMI 1
LDLR, EX15DEL

Kajinami et al. (1988) found deletion of exon 15 in a Japanese patient.

.0039
FH TSUKUBA 2
LDLR, EX16-17DEL

Yamakawa et al. (1989) found deletion of exons 16 and 17 in a Japanese
patient with FH (143890).

.0040
FH BALTIMORE-1
LDLR, EX17-18DEL

In an American Caucasian with FH (143890), Hobbs et al. (1990) found a
deletion from intron 16 to the 3-prime flanking region of the LDLR gene,
resulting in the deletion of exons 17 and 18.

.0041
FH LEIDEN 3
LDLR, EX16DEL

In Dutch patients with FH (143890), Top et al. (1990) found that
deletion of the 5-prime part of exon 16 was a frequent mutation.

.0042
FH POTENZA
LDLR, EX13-15DEL

In an Italian patient with FH (143890), Lehrman et al. (1986) found
deletion of exons 14 and 15 and part of 13.

.0043
FH BOLOGNA 2
LDLR, EX13-15DUP

In a survey of Italian patients with FH (143890), Lelli et al. (1991)
identified a heterozygous patient with an insertion in the LDLR gene
that represented a duplication of exons 13, 14, and 15.

.0044
FH AFRIKANER 3
LDLR, ASP154ASN

Graadt van Roggen et al. (1991) found a G-to-A transition in codon 154
resulting in substitution of asparagine for aspartic acid.

.0045
FH DRUZE
LDLR, TYR167TER

In FH (143890) families from 2 distinct Druze villages from the Golan
Heights in northern Israel, Landsberger et al. (1992) found a TAC-to-TAG
substitution in codon 167, changing the sense from tyrosine to stop. The
mutation was in exon 4, which encodes the fourth repeat of the binding
domain of the mature receptor. Landsberger et al. (1992) presented
demographic data concerning the Druze.

.0046
FH PAVIA
LDLR, EX2-12DEL

Bertolini et al. (1992) found a large rearrangement of the LDLR gene in
3 apparently unrelated families segregating for FH (143890) living in
northern Italy. Southern blot analysis demonstrated heterozygosity for a
25-kb deletion eliminating exons 2-12. The affected subjects possessed 2
LDL receptor mRNA species: one of normal size (5.3 kb) and one of
smaller size (3.5 kb). In the latter mRNA, the coding sequence of exon 1
was joined to the coding sequence of exon 13, causing a change in the
reading frame and thereby giving rise to a premature stop codon. The
predicted receptor protein, a short polypeptide of 29 amino acids, would
be expected to be devoid of any function. Bertolini et al. (1992) found
a common ancestor for the 3 families who had lived in the 17th century
in a region called Lomellina in southwest Lombardy, near Pavia.

.0047
FH NORTH KARELIA
LDLR, 7-BP DEL, EX6

Koivisto et al. (1992) identified a mutation found in many Finnish
patients with heterozygous FH (143890). The mutation, designated FH
North Karelia (FH-NK) , deleted 7 nucleotides from exon 6 of the LDLR
gene, caused a translational frameshift, and was predicted to result in
a truncated receptor protein. The mutation was found in 69 (34%) of 201
unrelated Finnish FH patients and was especially frequent (prevalence
79%) in patients from eastern Finland. FH Helsinki (606945.0029) and FH
North Karelia together account for about two-thirds of FH mutations in
Finland.

In Finnish North Karelia, with a population of about 180,000, Vuorio et
al. (1997) found that the FH-NK mutation accounts for 84% (340 of 407)
of FH cases, while the FH-Helsinki allele was found in 4% (18 cases).
The minimum prevalence of FH in North Karelia was estimated to be 1 in
441 inhabitants; in 1 commune, a frequency of 1 in 143 was found. By use
of parish and tax records, they identified a common ancestor for most of
the North Karelian FH-NK persons in the village of Puso, located within
an area where the FH prevalence is the highest. DNA analysis indicated
that 2% of subjects aged 1 to 25 years would have been diagnosed as
false-negative and 7% as false-positive FH patients on the basis of LDL
cholesterol determinations alone. Coronary heart disease (CHD) was
present in 65 (30%) of the 179 FH gene carriers aged 25 years or more,
and 19 individuals had a previous history of acute myocardial
infarction. The average age at onset of CHD was 42 years for males and
48 years for females.

.0048
FH LONDON 3
LDLR, CYS210TER

In an Irish subject with familial hypercholesterolemia (143890), 1 of
200 patients attending lipid clinics in the London area, Gudnason et al.
(1993) found a GCG-to-GAG transversion changing cys210 to a stop codon.

.0049
FH LONDON 4
LDLR, 2-BP DEL, 694AC

In 5 patients of British extraction with familial hypercholesterolemia
(143890), Gudnason et al. (1993) found deletion of the last 2 bases (694
and 695) of codon 206 (GAC).

.0050
FH OSAKA 3
LDLR, ASP412HIS

In a Japanese patient with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia
(143890), Miyake et al. (1992) identified a G-to-C transversion in exon
9 which was predicted to change asp412 to his. The amino acid change
occurred in the epidermal growth-factor-precursor homology domain of the
LDL receptor. Both in the fibroblasts of the patient and in transfected
COS-1 cells, the mutant protein showed impaired processing and rapid
degradation. Members of the family carrying the mutant gene in
heterozygous state showed higher serum cholesterol levels than the
others; however, cholesterol levels were also influenced by the
apolipoprotein E phenotype. The mutant LDLR reported by Miyake et al.
(1992) is designated here FH Osaka-3.

.0051
FH AFRIKANER 4
LDLR, 18-BP DUP

Kotze et al. (1995) identified a de novo duplication in the LDLR gene in
the course of screening hypercholesterolemics who did not have 1 of the
3 known mutations responsible for the high frequency of FH (143890)
(more than 1/100) in South African Afrikaners. The de novo duplication
of 18 basepairs in exon 4 occurred after nucleotide 678 (or 681) of
their sequence. The authors suggested that the resultant change is
severe, because the corresponding duplicated amino acids 200-205 (or
201-206) are highly conserved in E/apo B binding repeat 5 of LDLC. One
of the daughters of the index patient inherited the defective LDLR gene,
which was absent in both grandparents. Kotze et al. (1995) suggested
that this was the first report of a molecularly characterized de novo
mutation associated with FH.

.0052
FH TURKU
LDLR, GLY823ASP

Two deletions, designated FH-Helsinki (143890.0029) and FH-North Karelia
(143890.0047), account for the mutations present in approximately 60 to
70% of all heterozygous FH (143890) probands in Finland. Koivisto et al.
(1995) screened the DNA samples from a cohort representing the remaining
30% of heterozygous patients by amplifying all 18 exons of the LDLR gene
by PCR and searching for DNA variations with the SSCP technique. Ten
novel mutations were identified, comprising 2 nonsense and 7 missense
mutations, as well as 1 frameshift mutation caused by a 13-bp deletion.
Koivisto et al. (1995) found a single nucleotide change, substituting
adenine for guanine at position 2533 of their sequence and resulting in
a gly823-to-asp amino acid change, in DNA samples from 14 unrelated FH
probands. The mutation, designated FH-Turku, affected the sequence
encoding the putative basolateral sorting signal of the LDL receptor
protein. The FH-Turku gene and another point mutation, FH-Pori (leu380
to his; 606945.0053), accounted for approximately 8% of the FH-causing
gene alterations in Finland and were found to be particularly common
among FH patients from the southwestern part of the country. The
FH-Turku missense mutation was the one closest to the C terminus of LDLR
identified to date.

Koivisto et al. (2001) showed that the FH-Turku mutant receptor is
mistargeted to the apical surface in both Madin-Darby canine kidney
(MDCK) cells and hepatic epithelial cells, resulting in reduced
endocytosis of LDL from the basolateral/sinusoidal surface.
Consequently, virally encoded mutant receptor fails to mediate
cholesterol clearance in LDL receptor-deficient mice, suggesting that a
defect in polarized LDL receptor expression in hepatocytes underlies the
hypercholesterolemia in patients harboring this allele. This evidence
directly links the pathogenesis of a human disease to defects in
basolateral targeting signals, providing a genetic confirmation of these
signals in maintaining epithelial cell polarity.

.0053
FH PORI
LDLR, LEU380HIS

See 606945.0052 and Koivisto et al. (1995).

.0054
FH ELVERUM
LDLR, IVS3, G-A, +1

In Norway, Leren et al. (1994) identified a splice mutation, a G-to-A
change of the first base of intron 3 destroying the conserved GT splice
donor site of intron 3 of the LDLR gene. The same mutation was reported
in patients with FH (143890) in England (Sun et al., 1995) and Germany
(Feussner et al., 1996).

.0055
FH AARHUS
LDLR, ASN543HIS AND 9-BP DEL

During a survey of mutations of the LDL receptor gene in Danish patients
with familial hypercholesterolemia (143890), using SSCP analysis, Jensen
et al. (1997) observed different patterns in exons 11 and 17 from 2
apparently unrelated FH index cases indicating the presence of 2
different mutations. No other mutations were identified by analysis of
the remaining 16 exons and the promoter region. The mutation in exon 11
was found to be a 1690A-C transversion, causing an N543H amino acid
substitution. In exon 17, they identified a 9-bp deletion of nucleotides
2393-2405 (2393del9). This sequence contains a 4-bp repeat of the
nucleotides TCCT at the end. It was therefore likely that the 9-bp
deletion had occurred due to 'slipped mispairing mutagenesis,' involving
mispairing of the 4-bp repeat during replication. The deletion did not
cause a frameshift, and the mutant allele coded, therefore, for an LDL
receptor protein lacking 3 amino acids in the membrane-spanning domain:
leu778, val779, and phe780. The 2 mutations were in the same allele of
the LDLR gene. Each of these mutations alone had little or no effect on
receptor function in transfected COS cells, but when both mutations were
present simultaneously, receptor function, as assessed by flow
cytometric measurement of fluorescent LDL uptake in cells, was reduced
by 75%. Immunostainable receptors on the cell surface were decreased by
80% as measured by flow cytometry. The 2 mutations therefore acted in
synergy to affect receptor function, possibly during intracellular
receptor transport, since Northern blot analysis suggested that mRNA
levels were unaffected. Jensen et al. (1997) noted that double mutations
had been reported in several clinically relevant genes, such as the HEXA
gene (606869.0036) and the CFTR gene (602421) (Savov et al., 1995). In
most of these disorders, one mutation was found to be causative, and the
other modified the onset or severity of the disease. The common
methionine-valine polymorphism in the PRNP gene (176640.0005) modifies
both qualitatively and quantitatively the phenotypic expression of the
pathogenic D178N mutation (176640.0010) resulting in 2 different
disorders: fatal familial insomnia and familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease (Goldfarb et al., 1992). Jensen et al. (1997) stated that in the
case of the LDLR double mutant, there appeared to be a true synergistic
action.

.0056
FH ICELAND
LDLR, IVS4, T-C, +2

Gudnason et al. (1997) stated that haplotype analysis in 18 apparently
unrelated families with FH (143890) in Iceland has identified at least 5
different chromosomes cosegregating with hypercholesterolemia. The most
common haplotype was identified in 11 of the 18 families, indicating a
founder mutation. By using SSCP analysis and direct sequencing of
amplified DNA, Gudnason et al. (1997) identified a T-to-C transition in
the second nucleotide in the 5-prime part of intron 4 of the LDLR gene.
This mutation was present in 10 of the 18 families. In half of the
cases, these families could be traced to a common ancestor by going back
no further than the 18th century. The mutation was predicted to affect
correct splicing of exon 4, and analysis at the cellular level
demonstrated an abnormal mRNA containing intron 4 sequence in
lymphoblastoid cells from a patient carrying the mutation. Translation
of the mRNA would lead to a premature stop codon and a truncated
nonfunctional protein of 285 amino acids.

.0058
FH GLASCO
LDLR, CYS163TYR

Lee et al. (1998) reported that in the West of Scotland, in the Glasco
area, about half of the index cases of familial hypercholesterolemia
(143890) were found to have the cys163-to-tyr mutation of the LDLR gene.

.0059
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA, FAMILIAL
LDLR, CYS240PHE

In a 13-year-old girl with severe hypercholesterolemia (143890), Ekstrom
et al. (1999) demonstrated compound heterozygosity for a cys240-to-phe
mutation and a tyr167-to-ter mutation (606945.0045) in the LDLR gene.
Fibroblasts from the patient showed very low cholesterol esterification
rate, LDL uptake, and degradation as compared to normal fibroblasts. Her
2 heterozygous sibs also carried the C240F mutation, but only one of
them was hypercholesterolemic. Ekstrom et al. (1999) expressed the C240F
mutant in LDLR-deficient CHOldlA7 cells. The transfected cells produced
a detectable protein but were unable to mediate uptake or degradation of
LDL. The authors concluded that there may be cholesterol-lowering
mechanisms that can be activated, perhaps by mutations in known or
hitherto unknown genes.

.0060
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA, FAMILIAL
LDLR, TRP23TER

In patients with familial hypercholesterolemia (143890), Hobbs et al.
(1992) identified a trp23-to-ter mutation in the LDLR gene.

.0061
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA, FAMILIAL
LDLR, CYS25SER

In a Japanese patient with familial hypercholesterolemia (143890),
Takahashi et al. (2001) identified a G-to-C transversion at nucleotide
137 of the LDLR gene, resulting in a cys25-to-ser (C25S) amino acid
substitution in the ligand-binding site (mutation class 2B: slow
transport and processing). The patient first noticed xanthomas on both
elbows at the age of 5 years. These continued to increase in number and
size. At age 40 years, xanthomas were present on elbows, palms, knees,
and feet. Clinical manifestations of myocardial ischemia developed at
age 41. Selective LDL filtration was initiated after plasma apheresis
through a macromolecular exclusion filter. With bimonthly treatments,
her LDL cholesterol decreased by approximately 50% and the xanthomas
regressed markedly, almost disappearing with 5 years of treatment.

.0062
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA, FAMILIAL
LDLR, CYS88SER

Pisciotta et al. (2002) identified a de novo LDLR mutation in a
47-year-old white male who at the age of 43 had suffered a myocardial
infarction. He was heterozygous for a G-to-C transversion in exon 4,
which resulted in a serine for cysteine substitution at position 88
(C88S) of the receptor protein. The mutation was not found in his
parents (nonpaternity was excluded), but it was present in his
9-year-old son, who had familial hypercholesterolemia (143890).
Haplotype analysis indicated that this de novo mutation occurred in the
paternal germline.

.0063
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA, FAMILIAL
LDLR, IVS14, G-A, +1

Takada et al. (2002) described a novel splice site mutation in the LDLR
gene, IVS14+1G-A, which genealogic research confirmed was shared by 14
of 1,135 members of an American Caucasian pedigree descended from a
common ancestor and affected with familial hypercholesterolemia
(143890). The mutation resulted in an abruptly truncated LDLR protein,
reducing functional LDLR activity by half in heterozygous carriers of
the mutant allele. Takada et al. (2002) stated this was the largest
familial hypercholesterolemia kindred described, and of 208 members
screened for this LDLR mutation, 94 carriers and 114 noncarriers were
identified. Strikingly lower total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol
values were observed among most of the LDLR mutation carriers who were
simultaneously homozygous for the -265C allele of the -265C-T
polymorphism of the APOA2 gene (107670.0002). In vitro transfection
assays showed that transcriptional activity of the APOA2 promoter was
reduced by 30% in the -265C allele as compared with the -265T allele.
The variant of the APOA2 gene was associated with reduced plasma LDL
cholesterol only in familial hypercholesterolemia patients.

In the same large family reported by Takada et al. (2002), Takada et al.
(2003) found that a SNP in the growth hormone receptor gene (GHR),
resulting in a L526I (600946.0028) substitution, influenced plasma
levels of high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol in affected family
members with the LDLR mutation. The lowest levels of plasma HDL were
observed among leu/leu homozygotes, highest levels among ile/ile
homozygotes, and intermediate levels among leu/ile heterozygotes. No
such effect was observed among noncarriers of the LDLR mutation.

In the pedigree reported by Takada et al. (2002), Sato et al. (2004)
demonstrated a significant modification of the phenotype of familial
hypercholesterolemia resulting from the IVS14+1G-A mutation by the
arg287 variation in the EPHX2 gene (132811.0001).

.0064
FH PYRGOS
LDLR, -45T DEL

In a patient with familial hypercholesterolemia (143890), Dedoussis et
al. (2003) identified a novel mutation in repeat 3 of the LDLR gene
promoter, -45delT. Analysis of a neutral polymorphism in LDLR mRNA from
the patient's white blood cells showed that the expression of 1 allele
was significantly reduced, and cells had only 24% of LDLR activity by
binding and uptake of iodine-labeled LDL. Transient transfection studies
using a luciferase gene reporter revealed that the -45delT mutation
considerably reduced the transcriptional activity of the LDLR promoter
and strongly suggested that the mutation was the cause of the familial
hypercholesterolemia phenotype. The proband was a female in her late
thirties; her father was reported to have elevated cholesterol levels
and had undergone bypass surgery at the age of 70.

.0065
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA, FAMILIAL
LDLR, ARG385ARG

In a patient diagnosed with probable heterozygous familial
hypercholesterolemia (143890), who had tendinous xanthomas and angina
since the age of 29 years, Bourbon et al. (2007) identified
heterozygosity for a 1216C-A transversion in exon 9 of the LDLR gene,
resulting in a synonymous arg385-to-arg (R385R) change. However,
analysis of mRNA from the patient's cells showed that the mutation
introduces a new 5-prime acceptor splice site that is used to the
exclusion of the natural splice site and causes a 31-bp deletion
predicted to result in premature termination 4 codons beyond the change.
Review of previous LDLR gene sequencing data revealed that the same base
substitution was present in a Chinese homozygous FH patient in whom no
other mutation in LDLR had been found. The authors stated that the
difference in origins of the 2 patients suggested that the mutation was
very unlikely to have been inherited from a common ancestor and that it
might be present in other populations as well.

Defesche et al. (2008) analyzed the LDLR gene in 1,350 patients
clinically diagnosed with familial hypercholesterolemia who were
negative for functional DNA variation in known hypercholesterolemia
genes and identified the R385R variant in 2 probands, both of Chinese
origin, and their family members. In view of the faint band representing
the aberrantly spliced mRNA on gel electrophoresis, the authors
suggested that this DNA variant likely leads to nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay.

.0066
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA, FAMILIAL
LDLR, GLY186GLY

In 35 unrelated Dutch patients clinically diagnosed with familial
hypercholesterolemia who were negative for functional DNA variation in
known hypercholesterolemia genes, Defesche et al. (2008) identified a
621C-T transition in exon 4 of the LDLR gene, resulting in a synonymous
gly186-to-gly (G186G) change, that introduces a 3-prime splice donor
site with a higher 'probability score' than the naturally occurring
3-prime splice site 75 bp downstream. Analysis of cDNA synthesized from
total RNA revealed that the aberrant splicing results in a 75-bp
in-frame deletion and a stable mRNA, predicted to produce an LDLR
protein lacking a 25-amino acid fragment (gly186 to cys210). The variant
was found in homozygosity in 2 of the probands, who had LDL cholesterol
levels of 14.8 and 10.5 mmol/L, respectively, and who both suffered
myocardial infarctions before the age of 20 years. The variant was also
identified in 62 first-degree relatives of the index cases.

.0067
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA, FAMILIAL
LDLR, IVS14, C-G, +86

In a proband with clinically defined hypercholesterolemia (143890),
Kulseth et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for a splice site
mutation (2140+86C-G) in intron 14 of the LDLR gene, activating a
cryptic splice site that results in aberrantly spliced mRNA containing
an 81-bp insertion. Twelve of 23 family members tested were heterozygous
for the mutation, and carriers had significantly increased total
cholesterol levels compared to noncarriers. The 2140+86C-G mutation was
found in 3 additional probands with hypercholesterolemia, and in 1
proband's family the mutation was found in 6 of 7 tested family members,
who all had LDL cholesterol levels above the 97th percentile. RT-PCR
analysis in 1 affected individual from that family showed that the
mutant allele mainly gave rise to aberrantly spliced mRNA, but
contributed 21% normal transcripts. Transfection studies in CHO cells
demonstrated retention of mutant LDLR in the endoplasmic reticulum,
presumably due to protein misfolding.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Allen et al. (1980); Brown and Goldstein (1976); Elston et al. (1976);
Goldstein et al. (1977); Goldstein et al. (1975); Hobbs et al. (1985);
Horsthemke et al. (1987); Horsthemke et al. (1985); Kingsley and Krieger
(1984); Lehrman et al. (1987); Lehrman et al. (1985); Sudhof et al.
(1985)
REFERENCE 1. Aalto-Setala, K.; Helve, E.; Kovanen, P. T.; Kontula, K.: Finnish
type of low density lipoprotein receptor gene mutation (FH-Helsinki)
deletes exons encoding the carboxy-terminal part of the receptor and
creates an internalization-defective phenotype. J. Clin. Invest. 84:
499-505, 1989.

2. Aalto-Setala, K.; Koivisto, U.-M.; Miettinen, T. A.; Gylling, H.;
Kesaniemi, Y. A.; Savolainen, M.; Pyorala, K.; Ebeling, T.; Mononen,
I.; Turtola, H.; Viikari, J.; Kontula, K.: Prevalence and geographical
distribution of major LDL receptor gene rearrangements in Finland. J.
Intern. Med. 231: 227-234, 1992.

3. Agnello, V.; Abel, G.; Elfahal, M.; Knight, G. B.; Zhang, Q.-X.
: Hepatitis C virus and other flaviviridae viruses enter cells via
low density lipoprotein receptor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 12766-12771,
1999.

4. Allen, J. M.; Thompson, G. R.; Myant, N. B.; Steiner, R.; Oakley,
C. M.: Cardiovascular complications of homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia. Brit.
Heart J. 44: 361-368, 1980.

5. Amsellem, S.; Briffaut, D.; Carrie, A.; Rabes, J. P.; Girardet,
J. P.; Fredenrich, A.; Moulin, P.; Krempf, M.; Reznik, Y.; Vialettes,
B.; de Gennes, J. L.; Brukert, E.; Benlian, P.: Intronic mutations
outside of Alu-repeat-rich domains of the LDL receptor gene are a
cause of familial hypercholesterolemia. Hum. Genet. 111: 501-510,
2002.

6. Aulchenko, Y. S.; Ripatti, S.; Lindqvist, I.; Boomsma, D.; Heid,
I. M.; Pramstaller, P. P.; Penninx, B. W. J. H.; Janssens, A. C. J.
W.; Wilson, W. F.; Spector, T.; Martin, N. G.; Pedersen, N. L.: and
45 others: Loci influencing lipid levels and coronary heart disease
risk in 16 European population cohorts. Nature Genet. 41: 47-55,
2009.

7. Benlian, P.; Amselem, S.; Loux, N.; Pastier, D.; Giraud, G.; de
Gennes, J. L.; Turpin, G.; Monnier, L.; Rieu, D.; Douste-Blazy, P.;
Dastugue, B.; Goossens, M.; Junien, C.: A LDL receptor gene homozygous
mutation: PCR amplification, direct genomic sequencing, associated
haplotype, rapid screening for frequency. Ann. Genet. 33: 65-69,
1990.

8. Bertolini, S.; Lelli, N.; Coviello, D. A.; Ghisellini, M.; Masturzo,
P.; Tiozzo, R.; Elicio, N.; Gaddi, A.; Calandra, S.: A large deletion
in the LDL receptor gene--the cause of familial hypercholesterolemia
in three Italian families: a study that dates back to the 17th century
(FH-Pavia). Am. J. Hum. Genet. 51: 123-134, 1992.

9. Betard, C.; Kessling, A. M.; Roy, M.; Chamberland, A.; Lussier-Cacan,
S.; Davignon, J.: Molecular genetic evidence for a founder effect
in familial hypercholesterolemia among French Canadians. Hum. Genet. 88:
529-536, 1992.

10. Boehnke, M.; Arnheim, N.; Li, H.; Collins, F. S.: Fine-structure
genetic mapping of human chromosomes using the polymerase chain reaction
on single sperm: experimental design considerations. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 45: 21-32, 1989.

11. Bourbon, M.; Sun, X.-M.; Soutar, A. K.: A rare polymorphism in
the low density lipoprotein (LDL) gene that affects mRNA splicing. Atherosclerosis 195:
e17, 2007. Note: Electronic Article.

12. Brink, P. A.; Steyn, L. T.; Coetzee, G. A.; van der Westhuyzen,
D. R.: Familial hypercholesterolemia in South African Afrikaners:
PvuII and StuI DNA polymorphisms in the LDL-receptor gene consistent
with a predominating founder gene effect. Hum. Genet. 77: 32-35,
1987.

13. Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.: Familial hypercholesterolemia:
defective binding of lipoproteins to cultured fibroblasts associated
with impaired regulation of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme at
reductase activity. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 71: 788-792, 1974.

14. Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.: Receptor-mediated endocytosis:
insights from the lipoprotein receptor system. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 76:
3330-3337, 1979.

15. Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.: Analysis of a mutant strain of
human fibroblasts with a defect in the internalization of receptor-bound
low density lipoproteins. Cell 9: 663-674, 1976.

16. Davis, C. G.; Lehrman, M. A.; Russell, D. W.; Anderson, R. G.
W.; Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.: The J.D. mutation in familial
hypercholesterolemia: amino acid substitution in cytoplasmic domain
impedes internalization of LDL receptors. Cell 45: 15-24, 1986.

17. De Braekeleer, M.: Hereditary disorders in Saguenay-Lac-St-Jean
(Quebec, Canada). Hum. Hered. 41: 141-146, 1991.

18. Dedoussis, G. V. Z.; Pitsavos, C.; Kelberman, D.; Skoumas, J.;
Prassa, M. E.; Choumerianou, D. M.; Stefanadis, C.; Humphries, S.
E.; Toutouzas, P.: FH-Pyrgos: a novel mutation in the promoter (-45delT)
of the low-density lipoprotein receptor gene associated with familial
hypercholesterolemia. Clin. Genet. 64: 414-419, 2003.

19. Defesche, J. C.; Kastelein, J. J. P.: Molecular epidemiology
of familial hypercholesterolaemia. (Letter) Lancet 352: 1643-1644,
1998.

20. Defesche, J. C.; Schuurman, E. J. M.; Klaaijsen, L. N.; Khoo,
K. L.; Wiegman, A.; Stalenhoef, A. F. H.: Silent exonic mutations
in the low-density lipoprotein receptor gene that cause familial hypercholesterolemia
by affecting mRNA splicing. Clin. Genet. 73: 573-578, 2008.

21. Defesche, J. C.; van de Ree, M. A.; Kastelein, J. J. P.; van Diermen,
D. E.; Janssens, N. W. E.; van Doormaal, J. J.; Hayden, M. R.: Detection
of the pro664-to-leu mutation in the low-density lipoprotein receptor
and its relation to lipoprotein(a) levels in patients with familial
hypercholesterolemia of Dutch ancestry from The Netherlands and Canada. Clin.
Genet. 42: 273-280, 1992.

22. Defesche, J. C.; van Diermen, D. E.; Lansberg, P. J.; Lamping,
R. J.; Reymer, P. W. A.; Hayden, M. R.; Kastelein, J. J. P.: South
African founder mutations in the low-density lipoprotein receptor
gene causing familial hypercholesterolemia in the Dutch population. Hum.
Genet. 92: 567-570, 1993.

23. Durst, R.; Colombo, R.; Shpitzen, S.; Ben Avi, L.; Friedlander,
Y.; Wexler, R.; Raal, F. J.; Marais, D. A.; Defesche, J. C.; Mandelshtam,
M. Y.; Kotze, M. J.; Leitersdorf, E.; Meiner, V.: Recent origin and
spread of a common Lithuanian mutation, G197del LDLR, causing familial
hypercholesterolemia: positive selection is not always necessary to
account for disease incidence among Ashkenazi Jews. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68:
1172-1188, 2001.

24. Ekstrom, U.; Abrahamson, M.; Floren, C.-H.; Tollig, H.; Wettrell,
G.; Nilsson, G.; Sun, X.-M.; Soutar, A. K.; Nilsson-Ehle, P.: An
individual with a healthy phenotype in spite of a pathogenic LDL receptor
mutation (C240F). Clin. Genet. 55: 332-339, 1999.

25. Elston, R. C.; Namboodiri, K. K.; Go, R. C. P.; Siervogel, R.
M.; Glueck, C. J.: Probable linkage between essential familial hypercholesterolemia
and third complement component (C3). Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 16:
294-297, 1976.

26. Esser, V.; Russell, D. W.: Transport-deficient mutations in the
low density lipoprotein receptor: alterations in the cysteine-rich
and cysteine-poor regions of the protein block intracellular transport. J.
Biol. Chem. 263: 13276-13281, 1988.

27. Feussner, G.; Dobmeyer, J.; Nissen, H.; Hansen, T. S.: Unusual
Xanthomas in a young patient with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia
and type III hyperlipoproteinemia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 65: 149-154,
1996.

28. Francke, U.; Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.: Assignment of the
human gene for the low density lipoprotein receptor to chromosome
19: synteny of a receptor, a ligand, and a genetic disease. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 81: 2826-2830, 1984.

29. Frank, S. L.; Taylor, B. A.; Lusis, A. J.: Linkage of the mouse
LDL receptor gene on chromosome 9. Genomics 5: 646-648, 1989.

30. Fumeron, F.; Grandchamp, B.; Fricker, J.; Krempf, M.; Wolf, L.-M.;
Khayat, M.-C.; Boiffard, O.; Apfelbaum, M.: Presence of the French
Canadian deletion in a French patient with familial hypercholesterolemia.
(Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 326: 69 only, 1992.

31. Gilbert, W.: Genes-in-pieces revisited. Science 228: 823-824,
1985.

32. Goldfarb, L. G.; Petersen, R. B.; Tabaton, M.; Brown, P.; LeBlanc,
A. C.; Montagna, P.; Cortelli, P.; Julien, J.; Vital, C.; Pendelbury,
W. W.; Haltia, M.; Wills, P. R.; and 9 others: Fatal familial insomnia
and familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease: disease phenotype determined
by a DNA polymorphism. Science 258: 806-808, 1992.

33. Goldstein, J. L.; Brown, M. S.; Stone, N. J.: Genetics of the
LDL receptor: evidence that the mutations affecting binding and internalization
are allelic. Cell 12: 629-641, 1977.

34. Goldstein, J. L.; Dana, S. E.; Brunschede, G. Y.; Brown, M. S.
: Genetic heterogeneity in familial hypercholesterolemia: evidence
for two different mutations affecting functions of low-density lipoprotein
receptor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 72: 1092-1096, 1975.

35. Graadt van Roggen, F.; van der Westhuyzen, D. R.; Marais, A. D.;
Gevers, W.; Coetzee, G. A.: Low density lipoprotein receptor founder
mutations in Afrikaner familial hypercholesterolaemic patients: a
comparison of two geographical areas. Hum. Genet. 88: 204-208, 1991.

36. Grossman, M.; Raper, S. E.; Kozarsky, K.; Stein, E. A.; Engelhardt,
J. F.; Muller, D.; Lupien, P. J.; Wilson, J. M.: Successful ex vivo
gene therapy directed to liver in a patient with familial hypercholesterolaemia. Nature
Genet. 6: 335-341, 1994.

37. Gudnason, V.; King-Underwood, L.; Seed, M.; Sun, X.-M.; Soutar,
A. K.; Humphries, S. E.: Identification of recurrent and novel mutations
in exon 4 of the LDL receptor gene in patients with familial hypercholesterolemia
in the United Kingdom. Arteriosclerosis Thromb. 13: 56-63, 1993.

38. Gudnason, V.; Sigurdsson, G.; Nissen, H.; Humphries, S. E.: Common
founder mutation in the LDL receptor gene causing familial hypercholesterolemia
in the Icelandic population. Hum. Mutat. 10: 36-44, 1997.

39. Henderson, H. E.; Berger, G. M. B.; Marais, A. D.: A new LDL
receptor gene deletion mutation in the South African population. Hum.
Genet. 80: 371-374, 1988.

40. Hobbs, H. H.; Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.: Molecular genetics
of the LDL receptor gene in familial hypercholesterolemia. Hum. Mutat. 1:
445-466, 1992.

41. Hobbs, H. H.; Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.; Russell, D. W.:
Deletion of exon encoding cysteine-rich repeat of low density lipoprotein
receptor alters its binding specificity in a subject with familial
hypercholesterolemia. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 13114-13120, 1986.

42. Hobbs, H. H.; Brown, M. S.; Russell, D. W.; Davignon, J.; Goldstein,
J. L.: Deletion in the gene for the low-density-lipoprotein receptor
in a majority of French Canadians with familial hypercholesterolemia. New
Eng. J. Med. 317: 734-737, 1987.

43. Hobbs, H. H.; Lehrman, M. A.; Yamamoto, T.; Russell, D. W.: Polymorphism
and evolution of Alu sequences in the human low density lipoprotein
receptor gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 7651-7655, 1985. Note:
Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 1964 only, 1986.

44. Hobbs, H. H.; Leitersdorf, E.; Goldstein, J. L.; Brown, M. S.;
Russell, D. W.: Multiple CRM- mutations in familial hypercholesterolemia:
evidence for 13 alleles, including four deletions. J. Clin. Invest. 81:
909-917, 1988.

45. Hobbs, H. H.; Leitersdorf, E.; Leffert, C. C.; Cryer, D. R.; Brown,
M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.: Evidence for a dominant gene that suppresses
hypercholesterolemia in a family with defective low density lipoprotein
receptors. J. Clin. Invest. 84: 656-664, 1989.

46. Hobbs, H. H.; Russell, D. W.; Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.:
The LDL receptor locus in familial hypercholesterolemia: mutational
analysis of a membrane protein. Annu. Rev. Genet. 24: 133-170, 1990.

47. Horsthemke, B.; Beisiegel, U.; Dunning, A.; Havinga, J. R.; Williamson,
R.; Humphries, S.: Unequal crossing-over between two Alu-repetitive
DNA sequences in the low-density-lipoprotein-receptor gene: a possible
mechanism for the defect in a patient with familial hypercholesterolaemia. Europ.
J. Biochem. 164: 77-81, 1987.

48. Horsthemke, B.; Dunning, A.; Humphries, S.: Identification of
deletions in the human low density lipoprotein receptor gene. J.
Med. Genet. 24: 144-147, 1987.

49. Horsthemke, B.; Kessling, A. M.; Seed, M.; Wynn, V.; Williamson,
R.; Humphries, S. E.: Identification of a deletion in the low density
lipoprotein (LDL) receptor gene in a patient with familial hypercholesterolaemia. Hum.
Genet. 71: 75-78, 1985.

50. Huijgen, R.; Kindt, I.; Fouchier, S. W.; Defesche, J. C.; Hutten,
B. A.; Kastelein, J. J. P.; Vissers, M. N.: Functionality of sequence
variants in the genes coding for the low-density lipoprotein receptor
and apolipoprotein B in individuals with inherited hypercholesterolemia. Hum.
Mutat. 31: 752-760, 2010.

51. Jensen, H. K.; Jensen, T. G.; Faergeman, O.; Jensen, L. G.; Andresen,
B. S.; Corydon, M. J.; Andreasen, P. H.; Hansen, P. S.; Heath, F.;
Bolund, L.; Gregersen, N.: Two mutations in the same low-density
lipoprotein receptor allele act in synergy to reduce receptor function
in heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. Hum. Mutat. 9: 437-444,
1997.

52. Jensen, J. M.; Kruse, T. A.; Brorholt-Petersen, J. U.; Christiansen,
T. M.; Jensen, H. K.; Kolvraa, S.; Faergeman, O.: Linking genotype
to aorto-coronary atherosclerosis: a model using familial hypercholesterolemia
and aorto-coronary calcification. Ann. Hum. Genet. 63: 511-520,
1999.

53. Johansson, F.; Kramer, F.; Barnhart, S.; Kanter, J. E.; Vaisar,
T.; Merrill, R. D.; Geng, L.; Oka, K.; Chan, L.; Chait, A.; Heinecke,
J. W.; Bornfeldt, K. E.: Type 1 diabetes promotes disruption of advanced
atherosclerotic lesions in LDL receptor-deficient mice. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 105: 2082-2087, 2008.

54. Kajinami, K.; Fujita, H.; Koizumi, J.; Mabuchi, H.; Takeda, R.;
Ohta, M.: Genetically determined mild type of familial hypercholesterolemia
including normocholesterolemic patients: FH-Tonami-2. Circulation 80
(suppl. 2): 278 only, 1989.

55. Kajinami, K.; Mabuchi, H.; Itoh, H.; Michishita, I.; Takeda, M.;
Wakasugi, T.; Koizumi, J.; Takeda, R.: New variant of low density
lipoprotein receptor gene FH-Tonami. Arteriosclerosis 8: 187-192,
1988.

56. Kathiresan, S.; Melander, O.; Anevski, D.; Guiducci, C.; Burtt,
N. P.; Roos, C.; Hirschhorn, J. N.; Berglund, G.; Hedblad, B.; Groop,
L.; Altshuler, D. M.; Newton-Cheh, C.; Orho-Melander, M.: Polymorphisms
associated with cholesterol and risk of cardiovascular events. New
Eng. J. Med. 358: 1240-1249, 2008.

57. Khachadurian, A. K.: The inheritance of essential familial hypercholesterolemia. Am.
J. Med. 37: 402-407, 1964.

58. Kingsley, D. M.; Krieger, M.: Receptor-mediated endocytosis of
low density lipoprotein: somatic cell mutants define multiple genes
required for expression of surface-receptor activity. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 81: 5454-5458, 1984.

59. Knight, B. L.; Gavigan, S. J. P.; Soutar, A. K.; Patel, D. D.
: Defective processing and binding of low-density lipoprotein receptors
in fibroblasts from a familial hypercholesterolaemic subject. Europ.
J. Biochem. 179: 693-698, 1989.

60. Knoblauch, H.; Muller-Myhsok, B.; Busjahn, A.; Ben Avi, L.; Bahring,
S.; Baron, H.; Heath, S. C.; Uhlmann, R.; Faulhaber, H.-D.; Shpitzen,
S.; Aydin, A.; Reshef, A.; and 11 others: A cholesterol-lowering
gene maps to chromosome 13q. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 66: 157-166, 2000.

61. Koivisto, U.-M.; Hubbard, A. L.; Mellman, I.: A novel cellular
phenotype for familial hypercholesterolemia due to a defect in polarized
targeting of LDL receptor. Cell 105: 575-585, 2001.

62. Koivisto, U.-M.; Turtola, H.; Aalto-Setala, K.; Top, B.; Frants,
R. R.; Kovanen, P. T.; Syvanen, A.-C.; Kontula, K.: The familial
hypercholesterolemia (FH)-North Karelia mutation of the low density
lipoprotein receptor gene deletes seven nucleotides of exon 6 and
is a common cause of FH in Finland. J. Clin. Invest. 90: 219-228,
1992.

63. Koivisto, U.-M.; Viikari, J. S.; Kontula, K.: Molecular characterization
of minor gene rearrangements in Finnish patients with heterozygous
familial hypercholesterolemia: identification of two common missense
mutations (Gly823-to-Asp and Leu380-to-His) and eight rare mutations
of the LDL receptor gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 57: 789-797, 1995.

64. Komuro, I.; Kato, H.; Nakagawa, T.; Takahashi, K.; Mimori, A.;
Takeuchi, F.; Nishida, Y.; Miyamoto, T.: Case report: the longest-lived
patient with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia secondary to
a defect in internalization of the LDL receptor. Am. J. Med. Sci. 294:
341-345, 1987.

65. Kotze, M. J.; Langenhoven, E.; Retief, A. E.; Steyn, K.; Marais,
M. P.; Grobbelaar, J. J.; Oosthuizen, C. J. J.; Weich, H. F. H.; Benade,
A. J. S.: Haplotype associations of three DNA polymorphisms at the
human low density lipoprotein receptor gene locus in familial hypercholesterolemia. J.
Med. Genet. 24: 750-755, 1987.

66. Kotze, M. J.; Langenhoven, E.; Warnich, L.; du Plessis, L.; Retief,
A. E.: The molecular basis and diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolaemia
in South African Afrikaners. Ann. Hum. Genet. 55: 115-121, 1991.

67. Kotze, M. J.; Theart, L.; Peeters, A.; Langenhoven, E.: A de
novo duplication in the low density lipoprotein receptor gene. Hum.
Mutat. 6: 181-183, 1995.

68. Kotze, M. J.; Warnich, L.; Langenhoven, E.; du Plessis, L.; Retief,
A. E.: An exon 4 mutation identified in the majority of South African
familial hypercholesterolaemics. J. Med. Genet. 27: 298-302, 1990.

69. Kulseth, M. A.; Berge, K. E.; Bogsrud, M. P.; Leren, T. P.: Analysis
of LDLR mRNA in patients with familial hypercholesterolemia revealed
a normal mutation in intron 14, which activates a cryptic splice site. J.
Hum. Genet. 55: 676-680, 2010.

70. Landsberger, D.; Meiner, V.; Reshef, A.; Levy, Y.; van der Westhuyzen,
D. R.; Coetzee, G. A.; Leitersdorf, E.: A nonsense mutation in the
LDL receptor gene leads to familial hypercholesterolemia in the Druze
sect. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 50: 427-433, 1992.

71. Langlois, S.: Personal Communication. Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada  1989.

72. Langlois, S.; Kastelein, J. J. P.; Hayden, M. R.: Characterization
of six partial deletions in the low-density-lipoprotein (LDL) receptor
gene causing familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). Am. J. Hum. Genet. 43:
60-68, 1988.

73. Lee, W. K.; Haddad, L.; Macleod, M. J.; Dorrance, A. M.; Wilson,
D. J.; Gaffney, D.; Dominiczak, M. H.; Packard, C. J.; Day, I. N.;
Humphries, S. E.; Dominiczak, A. F.: Identification of a common low
density lipoprotein receptor mutation (C163Y) in the West of Scotland. J.
Med. Genet. 35: 573-578, 1998.

74. Lehrman, M. A.; Goldstein, J. L.; Brown, M. S.; Russell, D. W.;
Schneider, W. J.: Internalization-defective LDL receptors produced
by genes with nonsense and frameshift mutations that truncate the
cytoplasmic domain. Cell 41: 735-743, 1985.

75. Lehrman, M. A.; Goldstein, J. L.; Russell, D. W.; Brown, M. S.
: Duplication of seven exons in LDL receptor gene caused by Alu-Alu
recombination in a subject with familial hypercholesterolemia. Cell 48:
827-835, 1987.

76. Lehrman, M. A.; Russell, D. W.; Goldstein, J. L.; Brown, M. S.
: Alu-Alu recombination deletes splice acceptor sites and produces
secreted low density lipoprotein receptor in a subject with familial
hypercholesterolemia. J. Biol. Chem. 262: 3354-3361, 1987.

77. Lehrman, M. A.; Russell, D. W.; Goldstein, J. L.; Brown, M. S.
: Exon-Alu recombination deletes 5 kilobases from the low density
lipoprotein receptor gene, producing a null phenotype in familial
hypercholesterolemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 3679-3683, 1986.

78. Lehrman, M. A.; Schneider, W. J.; Sudhof, T. C.; Brown, M. S.;
Goldstein, J. L.; Russell, D. W.: Mutation in LDL receptor: Alu-Alu
recombination deletes exons encoding transmembrane and cytoplasmic
domains. Science 227: 140-146, 1985.

79. Leitersdorf, E.; Hobbs, H. H.: Personal Communication. Dallas,
Tex.  12/1990.

80. Leitersdorf, E.; Hobbs, H. H.; Fourie, A. M.; Jacobs, M.; van
der Westhuyzen, D. R.; Coetzee, G. A.: Deletion in the first cysteine-rich
repeat of low-density lipoprotein receptor impairs its transport but
not lipoprotein binding in fibroblasts from a subject with familial
hypercholesterolemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 7912-7916, 1988.

81. Leitersdorf, E.; Tobin, E. J.; Davignon, J.; Hobbs, H. H.: Common
low-density lipoprotein receptor mutations in the French Canadian
population. J. Clin. Invest. 85: 1014-1023, 1990.

82. Leitersdorf, E.; van der Westhuyzen, D. R.; Coetzee, G. A.; Hobbs,
H. H.: Two common low density lipoprotein receptor gene mutations
cause familial hypercholesterolemia in Afrikaners. J. Clin. Invest. 84:
954-961, 1989.

83. Lelli, N.; Ghisellini, M.; Calandra, S.; Gaddi, A.; Ciarrocchi,
A.; Coviello, D. A.; Bertolini, S.: Duplication of exons 13, 14 and
15 of the LDL-receptor gene in a patient with heterozygous familial
hypercholesterolemia. Hum. Genet. 86: 359-362, 1991.

84. Leren, T. P.; Solberg, K.; Rodningen, O. K.; Tonstad, S.; Ose,
L.: Two founder mutations in the LDL receptor gene in Norwegian familial
hypercholesterolemia subjects. Atherosclerosis 111: 175-182, 1994.

85. Lewis, M. J.; Malik, T. H.; Ehrenstein, M. R.; Boyle, J. J.; Botto,
M.; Haskard, D. O.: Immunoglobulin M is required for protection against
atherosclerosis in low-density lipoprotein receptor-deficient mice. Circulation 120:
417-426, 2009.

86. Li, H.; Gyllensten, U. B.; Cui, X.; Saiki, R. K.; Erlich, H. A.;
Arnheim, N.: Amplification and analysis of DNA sequences in single
human sperm and diploid cells. Nature 335: 414-417, 1988.

87. Lindgren, V.; Luskey, K. L.; Russell, D. W.; Francke, U.: Human
genes involved in cholesterol metabolism: chromosomal mapping of the
loci for the low density lipoprotein receptor and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme
A reductase with cDNA probes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 8567-8571,
1985.

88. Lo, J. C.; Wang, Y.; Tumanov, A. V.; Bamji, M.; Yao, Z.; Reardon,
C. A.; Getz, G. S.; Fu, Y.-X.: Lymphotoxin beta receptor-dependent
control of lipid homeostasis. Science 316: 285-288, 2007.

89. Loux, N.; Benlian, P.; Pastier, D.; Boileau, C.; Cambou, J. P.;
Monnier, L.; Percheron, C.; Junien, C.: Recurrent mutation at aa
792 in the LDL receptor gene in a French patient. Hum. Genet. 87:
373-375, 1991.

90. Ma, Y. H.; Betard, C.; Roy, M.; Davignon, J.; Kessling, A. M.
: Identification of a second 'French Canadian' LDL receptor gene deletion
and development of a rapid method to detect both deletions. Clin.
Genet. 36: 219-228, 1989.

91. Maartmann-Moe, K.; Wang, H. S.; Donald, L. J.; Hamerton, J. L.;
Berg, K.: Data from hybrid cell lines raise the possibility that
factors controlling the low density lipoprotein receptor activity
may reside on human chromosome 21, 5 or both. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 32: 295-296, 1982.

92. Mandelshtam, M.; Chakir, K.; Shevtsov, S.; Golubkov, V.; Skobeleva,
N.; Lipovetsky, B.; Konstantinov, V.; Denisenko, A.; Gaitskhoki, V.;
Schwartz, E.: Prevalence of Lithuanian mutation among St. Petersburg
Jews with familial hypercholesterolemia. Hum. Mutat. 12: 255-258,
1998.

93. Meiner, V.; Landsberger, D.; Berkman, N.; Reshef, A.; Segal, P.;
Seftel, H. C.; van der Westhuyzen, D. R.; Jeenah, M. S.; Coetzee,
G. A.; Leitersdorf, E.: A common Lithuanian mutation causing familial
hypercholesterolemia in Ashkenazi Jews. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 49: 443-449,
1991.

94. Miyake, Y.; Tajima, S.; Funahashi, T.; Yamamoto, A.: Analysis
of a recycling-impaired mutant of low density lipoprotein receptor
in familial hypercholesterolemia. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 16584-16590,
1989.

95. Miyake, Y.; Tajima, S.; Funahashi, T.; Yamamura, T.; Yamamoto,
A.: A point mutation of low-density-lipoprotein receptor causing
rapid degradation of the receptor. Europ. J. Biochem. 210: 1-7,
1992.

96. Moorjani, S.; Roy, M.; Torres, A.; Betard, C.; Gagne, C.; Lambert,
M.; Brun, D.; Davignon, J.; Lupien, P.: Mutations of low-density-lipoprotein-receptor
gene, variation in plasma cholesterol, and expression of coronary
heart disease in homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia. Lancet 341:
1303-1306, 1993.

97. Oppenheim, A.; Friedlander, Y.; Dann, E. J.; Berkman, N.; Schwartz,
S. P.; Leitersdorf, E.: Hypercholesterolemia in five Israeli Christian-Arab
kindreds is caused by the 'Lebanese' allele at the low density lipoprotein
receptor gene locus and by an additional independent major factor. Hum.
Genet. 88: 75-84, 1991.

98. Pisciotta, L.; Cantafora, A.; De Stefano, F.; Langheim, S.; Calandra,
S.; Bertolini, S.: A 'de novo' mutation of the LDL-receptor gene
as the cause of familial hypercholesterolemia. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1587: 7-11, 2002.

99. Rodningen, O. K.; Rosby, O.; Tonstad, S.; Ose, L.; Berg, K.; Leren,
T. P.: A 9.6 kilobase deletion in the low density lipoprotein receptor
gene in Norwegian familial hypercholesterolemia subjects. Clin. Genet. 42:
288-295, 1992.

100. Rubinsztein, D. C.; Coetzee, G. A.; Marais, A. D.; Leitersdorf,
E.; Seftel, H. C.; van der Westhuyzen, D. R.: Identification and
properties of the proline-644-to-leucine mutant LDL receptor in South
Africans of Indian origin. J. Lipid Res. 33: 1647-1655, 1992.

101. Rudenko, G.; Henry, L.; Henderson, K.; Ichtchenko, K.; Brown,
M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.; Deisenhofer, J.: Structure of the LDL receptor
extracellular domain at endosomal pH. Science 298: 2353-2358, 2002.

102. Rudiger, N. S.; Heinsvig, E. M.; Hansen, F. A.; Faergeman, O.;
Bolund, L.; Gregersen, N.: DNA deletions in the low density lipoprotein
(LDL) receptor gene in Danish families with familial hypercholesterolemia. Clin.
Genet. 39: 451-462, 1991.

103. Ruffner, D. E.; Sprung, C. N.; Minghetti, P. P.; Gibbs, P. E.
M.; Dugaiczyk, A.: Invasion of the human albumin-alpha-fetoprotein
gene family by Alu, Kpn, and two novel repetitive DNA elements. Molec.
Biol. Evol. 4: 1-9, 1987.

104. Russell, D. W.; Lehrman, M. A.; Sudhof, T. C.; Yamamoto, T.;
Davis, C. G.; Hobbs, H. H.; Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.: The LDL
receptor in familial hypercholesterolemia: use of human mutations
to dissect a membrane protein. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 51:
811-819, 1986.

105. Russell, D. W.; Schneider, W. J.; Yamamoto, T.; Luskey, K. L.;
Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.: Domain map of the LDL receptor: sequence
homology with the epidermal growth factor precursor. Cell 37: 577-585,
1984.

106. Sato, K.; Emi, M.; Ezura, Y.; Fujita, Y.; Takada, D.; Ishigami,
T.; Umemura, S.; Xin, Y.; Wu, L. L.; Larrinaga-Shum, S.; Stephenson,
S. H.; Hunt, S. C.; Hopkins, P. N.: Soluble epoxide hydrolase variant
(glu287arg) modifies plasma total cholesterol and triglyceride phenotype
in familial hypercholesterolemia: intrafamilial association study
in an eight-generation hyperlipidemic kindred. J. Hum. Genet. 49:
29-34, 2004.

107. Savov, A.; Angelicheva, D.; Balassopoulou, A.; Jordanova, A.;
Noussia-Arvanitakis, S.; Kalaydjieva, L.: Double mutant alleles:
are they rare? Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 1169-1171, 1995.

108. Schuster, H.; Manke, C.; Fischer, J.; Keller, C.; Wolfram, G.;
Zollner, N.: Identification of the valine 408 to methionine mutation
in the LDL receptor in a Greek patient with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. Clin.
Genet. 48: 90-92, 1995.

109. Schuster, H.; Ostwald, P.; Keller, P.; Wolfram, G.; Keller, C.
: Identification of the serine-156 to leucine mutation in the low-density
lipoprotein receptor in a German family with familial hypercholesterolemia. Clin.
Investig. 71: 172-175, 1993.

110. Seftel, H. C.; Baker, S. G.; Sandler, M. P.; Forman, M. B.; Joffe,
B. I.; Mendelsohn, D.; Jenkins, T.; Mieny, C. J.: A host of hypercholesterolaemic
homozygotes in South Africa. Brit. Med. J. 281: 633-636, 1980.

111. Simard, L. R.; Viel, J.; Lambert, M.; Paradis, G.; Levy, E.;
Delvin, E. E.; Mitchell, G. A.: The delta > 15 kb deletion French
Canadian founder mutation in familial hypercholesterolemia: rapid
polymerase chain reaction-based diagnostic assay and prevalence in
Quebec. Clin. Genet. 65: 202-208, 2004.

112. Slagel, V.; Flemington, E.; Traina-Dorge, V.; Bradshaw, H.; Deininger,
P.: Clustering and subfamily relationships of the Alu family in the
human genome. Molec. Biol. Evol. 4: 19-29, 1987.

113. Soutar, A. K.; Knight, B. L.; Patel, D. D.: Identification of
a point mutation in growth repeat C of the low density lipoprotein-receptor
gene in a patient with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia that
affects ligand binding and intracellular movement of receptors. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 86: 4166-4170, 1989.

114. Soutar, A. K.; McCarthy, S. N.; Seed, M.; Knight, B. L.: Relationship
between apolipoprotein(a) phenotype, lipoprotein(a) concentration
in plasma, and low density lipoprotein receptor function in a large
kindred with familial hypercholesterolemia due to the pro664-to-leu
mutation in the LDL receptor gene. J. Clin. Invest. 88: 483-492,
1991.

115. Steyn, K.; Weight, M. J.; Dando, B. R.; Christopher, K. J.; Rossouw,
J. E.: The use of low density lipoprotein receptor activity of lymphocytes
to determine the prevalence of familial hypercholesterolaemia in a
rural South African community. J. Med. Genet. 26: 32-36, 1989.

116. Sudhof, T. C.; Goldstein, J. L.; Brown, M. S.; Russell, D. W.
: The LDL receptor gene: a mosaic of exons shared with different proteins. Science 228:
815-822, 1985.

117. Sudhof, T. C.; Russell, D. W.; Goldstein, J. L.; Brown, M. S.;
Sanchez-Pescador, R.; Bell, G. I.: Cassette of eight exons shared
by genes for LDL receptor and EGF precursor. Science 228: 893-895,
1985.

118. Sun, X.-M.; Patel, D. D.; Bhatnager, D.; Knight, B. L.; Soutar,
A. K.: Characterization of a splice-site mutation in the gene for
the LDL receptor associated with an unpredictably severe clinical
phenotype in English patients with heterozygous FH. Arteroscler.
Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 15: 219-227, 1995.

119. Takada, D.; Emi, M.; Ezura, Y.; Nobe, Y.; Kawamura, K.; Iino,
Y.; Katayama, Y.; Xin, Y.; Wu, L. L.; Larringa-Shum, S.; Stephenson,
S. H.; Hunt, S. C.; Hopkins, P. N.: Interaction between the LDL-receptor
gene bearing a novel mutation and a variant in the apolipoprotein
A-II promoter: molecular study in a 1135-member familial hypercholesterolemia
kindred. J. Hum. Genet. 47: 656-664, 2002.

120. Takada, D.; Ezura, Y.; Ono, S.; Iino, Y.; Katayama, Y.; Xin,
Y.; Wu, L. L.; Larringa-Shum, S.; Stephenson, S. H.; Hunt, S. C.;
Hopkins, P. M.; Emi, M.: Growth hormone receptor variant (L526I)
modifies plasma HDL cholesterol phenotype in familial hypercholesterolemia:
intra-familial association study in an eight-generation hyperlipidemic
kindred. Am. J. Med. Genet. 121A: 136-140, 2003.

121. Takahashi, M.; Ikeda, U.; Takahashi, S.; Hattori, H.; Iwasaki,
T.; Ishihara, M.; Egashira, T.; Honma, S.; Asano, Y.; Shimada, K.
: A novel mutation in exon 2 of the low-density lipoprotein-receptor
gene in a patient with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. (Letter) Clin.
Genet. 59: 290-292, 2001.

122. Taylor, R.; Bryant, J.; Gudnason, V.; Sigurdsson, G.; Humphries,
S.: A study of familial hypercholesterolaemia in Iceland using RFLPs. J.
Med. Genet. 26: 494-498, 1989.

123. Teslovich, T. M.; Musunuru, K.; Smith, A. V.; Edmondson, A. C.;
Stylianou, I. M.; Koseki, M.; Pirruccello, J. P.; Ripatti, S.; Chasman,
D. I.; Willer, C. J.; Johansen, C. T.; Fouchier, S. W.; and 197 others
: Biological, clinical and population relevance of 95 loci for blood
lipids. Nature 466: 707-713, 2010.

124. Thiart, R.; Scholtz, C. L.; Vergotine, J.; Hoogendijk, C. F.;
de Villiers, J. N. P.; Nissen, H.; Brusgaard, K.; Gaffney, D.; Hoffs,
M. S.; Vermaak, W. J. H.; Kotze, M. J.: Predominance of a 6 bp deletion
in exon 2 of the LDL receptor gene in Africans with familial hypercholesterolaemia. J.
Med. Genet. 37: 514-519, 2000.

125. Tolleshaug, H.; Goldstein, J. L.; Schneider, W. J.; Brown, M.
S.: Posttranslational processing of the LDL receptor and its genetic
disruption in familial hypercholesterolemia. Cell 30: 715-724, 1982.

126. Top, B.; Koeleman, B. P. C.; Gevers Leuven, J. A.; Havekes, L.
M.; Frants, R. R.: Rearrangements in the LDL receptor gene in Dutch
familial hypercholesterolemic patients and the presence of a common
4 kb deletion. Atherosclerosis 83: 127-136, 1990.

127. Top, B.; Uitterlinden, A. G.; van der Zee, A.; Kastelein, J.
J. P.; Gevers Leuven, J. A.; Havekes, L. M.; Frants, R. R.: Absence
of mutations in the promoter region of the low density lipoprotein
receptor gene in a large number of familial hypercholesterolaemia
patients as revealed by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Hum.
Genet. 89: 561-565, 1992.

128. Torrington, M.; Botha, J. L.: Familial hypercholesterolaemia
and church affiliation. (Letter) Lancet 318: 1120 only, 1981. Note:
Originally Volume II.

129. Ullu, E.; Tschudi, C.: Alu sequences are processed 7SL RNA genes. Nature 312:
171-172, 1984.

130. Varret, M.; Rabes, J.-P.; Collod-Beroud, G.; Junien, C.; Boileau,
C.; Beroud, C.: Software and database for the analysis of mutations
in the human LDL receptor gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 25: 172-180,
1997.

131. Vergopoulos, A.; Bajari, T.; Jouma, M.; Knoblauch, H.; Aydin,
A.; Bahring, S.; Mueller-Myhsok, B.; Dresel, A.; Joubran, R.; Luft,
F. C.; Schuster, H.: A xanthomatosis-susceptibility gene may exist
in a Syrian family with familial hypercholesterolemia. Europ. J.
Hum. Genet. 5: 315-323, 1997.

132. Vergotine, J.; Thiart, R.; Langenhoven, E.; Hillermann, R.; De
Jong, G.; Kotze, M. J.: Prenatal diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolemia:
importance of DNA analysis in the high-risk South African population. Genet.
Counsel. 12: 121-127, 2001.

133. Vuorio, A. F.; Turtola, H.; Piilahti, K.-M.; Repo, P.; Kanninen,
T.; Kontula, K.: Familial hypercholesterolemia in the Finnish North
Karelia: a molecular, clinical, and genealogical study. Arterioscler.
Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 17: 3127-3138, 1997.

134. Wilson, D. J.; Gahan, M.; Haddad, L.; Heath, K.; Whittall, R.
A.; Williams, R. R.; Humphries, S. E.; Day, I. N. M.: A World Wide
Web site for low-density lipoprotein receptor gene mutations in familial
hypercholesterolemia: sequence-based, tabular, and direct submission
data handling. Am. J. Cardiol. 81: 1509-1511, 1998.

135. Yamakawa, K.; Okafuji, T.; Iwamura, Y.; Yuzawa, K.; Satoh, J.;
Hattori, N.; Yamanouchi, Y.; Yanagi, H.; Kawai, K.; Tsuchiya, S.;
Russell, D. W.; Hamaguchi, H.: TaqI polymorphism in the LDL receptor
gene and a TaqI 1.5-kb band associated with familial hypercholesterolemia. Hum.
Genet. 80: 1-5, 1988.

136. Yamakawa, K.; Takada, K.; Yanagi, H.; Tsuchiya, S.; Kawai, K.;
Nakagawa, S.; Kajiyama, G.; Hamaguchi, H.: Three novel partial deletions
of the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor gene in familial hypercholesterolemia. Hum.
Genet. 82: 317-321, 1989.

137. Yamamoto, T.; Davis, C. G.; Brown, M. S.; Schneider, W. J.; Casey,
M. L.; Goldstein, J. L.; Russell, D. W.: The human LDL receptor:
a cysteine-rich protein with multiple Alu sequences in its mRNA. Cell 39:
27-38, 1984.

138. Zelcer, N.; Hong, C.; Boyadjian, R.; Tontonoz, P.: LXR regulates
cholesterol uptake through Idol-dependent ubiquitination of the LDL
receptor. Science 325: 100-104, 2009.

139. Zuliani, G.; Hobbs, H. H.: Personal Communication. Dallas,
Tex.  1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/14/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/9/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/12/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/5/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/21/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/9/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/14/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/7/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/1/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/18/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/5/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/15/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/1/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/25/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/4/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/3/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/10/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/27/2002

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 5/15/2002

EDITED carol: 10/14/2013
carol: 6/7/2013
joanna: 5/4/2012
carol: 2/15/2012
carol: 2/13/2012
terry: 2/9/2012
terry: 10/26/2011
carol: 5/23/2011
carol: 4/8/2011
alopez: 10/12/2010
wwang: 9/27/2010
alopez: 8/6/2010
terry: 8/5/2010
joanna: 4/27/2010
carol: 4/5/2010
alopez: 1/21/2010
wwang: 12/11/2009
terry: 12/9/2009
alopez: 8/17/2009
terry: 8/14/2009
wwang: 7/20/2009
wwang: 5/18/2009
terry: 5/7/2009
terry: 4/3/2009
carol: 10/21/2008
carol: 10/9/2008
wwang: 4/23/2008
carol: 4/16/2008
carol: 4/2/2008
carol: 4/1/2008
alopez: 6/18/2007
wwang: 10/18/2005
wwang: 10/12/2005
ckniffin: 10/5/2005
tkritzer: 4/15/2005
terry: 4/15/2005
tkritzer: 3/9/2005
ckniffin: 3/1/2005
tkritzer: 3/1/2004
terry: 2/25/2004
alopez: 12/10/2003
terry: 12/4/2003
alopez: 4/3/2003
terry: 4/3/2003
carol: 2/19/2003
tkritzer: 2/14/2003
terry: 2/10/2003
tkritzer: 12/10/2002
tkritzer: 12/3/2002
terry: 11/27/2002
carol: 11/13/2002
tkritzer: 8/30/2002
terry: 8/27/2002
carol: 6/5/2002
ckniffin: 6/5/2002
ckniffin: 6/3/2002
ckniffin: 5/17/2002

600505	TITLE *600505 CASEIN KINASE I, ALPHA-1; CSNK1A1
;;CK1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Tapia et al. (1994) isolated a cDNA encoding human casein kinase I from
a fetal brain library using PCR primers based on the bovine sequence.
The cDNA was sequenced and shown to have a predicted amino acid sequence
identical to the bovine protein except that it contains 12 additional
amino acids at the carboxyl end.

GENE FUNCTION

Jia et al. (2004) showed that protein kinase A (PKA; see 188830) and
casein kinase I (CKI) regulate Smo (601500) cell surface accumulation
and activity in response to hedgehog (Hh; see 600725). Blocking PKA or
CKI activity in the Drosophila wing disc prevented Hh-induced Smo
accumulation and attenuated pathway activity, whereas increasing PKA
activity promoted Smo accumulation and pathway activation. Jia et al.
(2004) showed that PKA and CKI phosphorylate Smo at several sites, and
that phosphorylation-deficient forms of Smo fail to accumulate on the
cell surface and are unable to transduce the Hh signal. Conversely,
phosphorylation-mimicking Smo variants showed constitutive cell surface
expression and signaling activity. Furthermore, Jia et al. (2004) found
that the levels of Smo cell surface expression and activity correlated
with its levels of phosphorylation. Jia et al. (2004) concluded that Hh
induces progressive Smo phosphorylation by PKA and CKI, leading to
elevation of Smo cell surface levels and signaling activity.

Bidere et al. (2009) conducted parallel screens involving a mass
spectrometry analysis of CARMA1 (607210) binding partners and an RNA
interference screen for growth inhibition of the CBM-dependent
'activated B cell-like' (ABC) subtype of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL; see 605027). Bidere et al. (2009) reported that both screens
identified CK1-alpha as a bifunctional regulator of NF-kappa-B (164011).
CK1-alpha dynamically associates with the CBM complex on T cell receptor
engagement to participate in cytokine production and lymphocyte
proliferation. However, CK1-alpha kinase activity has a contrasting role
by subsequently promoting the phosphorylation and inactivation of
CARMA1. CK1-alpha has thus a dual 'gating' function which first promotes
and then terminates receptor-induced NF-kappa-B. ABC DLBCL cells
required CK1-alpha for constitutive NF-kappa-B activity, indicating that
CK1-alpha functions as a conditionally essential malignancy gene.

Elyada et al. (2011) showed that casein kinase I-alpha, a component of
the beta-catenin (116806) destruction complex, is a critical regulator
of the Wnt signaling (see 164820) pathway. Inducing the ablation of
Csnk1a1 in the gut triggers massive Wnt activation, surprisingly without
causing tumorigenesis. CKI-alpha-deficient epithelium shows many of the
features of human colorectal tumors in addition to Wnt activation, in
particular the induction of the DNA damage response and cellular
senescence, both of which are thought to provide a barrier against
malignant transformation. The epithelial DNA damage response in mice is
accompanied by substantial activation of p53 (191170), suggesting that
the p53 pathway may counteract the protumorigenic effects of Wnt
hyperactivation. Notably, the transition from benign adenomas to
invasive colorectal cancer in humans is typically linked to p53
inactivation, underscoring the importance of p53 as a safeguard against
malignant progression; however, the mechanism of p53-mediated tumor
suppression is unknown. Elyada et al. (2011) showed that the maintenance
of intestinal homeostasis in CKI-alpha-deficient gut requires
p53-mediated growth control, because the combined ablation of Csnk1a1
and either p53 or its target gene p21 (116899) triggered high-grade
dysplasia with extensive proliferation. Unexpectedly, these ablations
also induced nonproliferating cells to invade the villous lamina propria
rapidly, producing invasive carcinomas throughout the small bowel.
Furthermore, in p53-deficient gut, loss of heterozygosity of the gene
encoding CKI-alpha caused a highly invasive carcinoma, indicating that
CKI-alpha caused a highly invasive carcinoma, indicating that CKI-alpha
functions as a tumor suppressor when p53 is inactivated. Elyada et al.
(2011) identified a set of genes (the p53-suppressed invasiveness
signature, PSIS) that is activated by the loss of both p53 and CKI-alpha
and which probably accounts for the brisk induction of invasiveness.
PSIS transcription and tumor invasion were suppressed by p21,
independently of cell cycle control. Restraining tissue invasion through
suppressing PSIS expression is thus a novel tumor suppressor function of
wildtype p53. PROX1 (601546), IFITM2 (605578), and IFITM3 (605579) are
all PSIS genes.

MAPPING

Tapia et al. (1994) identified YAC genomic clones containing the human
gene and used them to map CKI to chromosome 13q13. Fish et al. (1995)
mapped the CSNK1A1 gene to chromosome 13q13.1-q14.1 by FISH. However,
Gross (2011) mapped the CSNK1A1 gene to chromosome 5q32 based on an
alignment of the CSNK1A1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC008717) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Bidere, N.; Ngo, V. N.; Lee, J.; Collins, C.; Zheng, L.; Wan, F.;
Davis, R. E.; Lenz, G.; Anderson, D. E.; Arnoult, D.; Vazquez, A.;
Sakai, K.; Zhang, J.; Meng, Z.; Veenstra, T. D.; Staudt, L. M.; Lenardo,
M. J.: Casein kinase 1-alpha governs antigen-receptor-induced NF-kappa-B
activation and human lymphoma cell survival. Nature 458: 92-96,
2009.

2. Elyada, E.; Pribluda, A.; Goldstein, R. E.; Morgenstern, Y.; Brachya,
G.; Cojocaru, G.; Snir-Alkalay, I.; Burstain, I.; Haffner-Krausz,
R.; Jung, S.; Wiener, Z.; Alitalo, K.; Oren, M.; Pikarsky, E.; Ben-Neriah,
Y.: CKI-alpha ablation highlights a critical role for p53 in invasiveness
control. Nature 470: 409-413, 2011.

3. Fish, K. J.; Cegielska, A.; Getman, M. E.; Landes, G. M.; Virshup,
D. M.: Isolation and characterization of human casein kinase I-epsilon
(CKI), a novel member of the CKI gene family. J. Biol. Chem. 270:
14875-14883, 1995.

4. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/9/2011.

5. Jia, J.; Tong, C.; Wang, B.; Luo, L.; Jiang, J.: Hedgehog signalling
activity of Smoothened requires phosphorylation by protein kinase
A and casein kinase I. Nature 432: 1045-1050, 2004.

6. Tapia, C.; Featherstone, T.; Gomez, C.; Taillon-Miller, P.; Allende,
C. C.; Allende, J. E.: Cloning and chromosomal localization of the
gene coding for human protein kinase CK1. FEBS Lett. 349: 307-312,
1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/29/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 2/9/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/2/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/3/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/9/2004

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 4/24/1995

EDITED carol: 07/06/2011
alopez: 7/5/2011
terry: 6/29/2011
mgross: 2/9/2011
alopez: 4/3/2009
terry: 4/2/2009
alopez: 3/4/2005
terry: 3/3/2005
mgross: 9/9/2004
psherman: 10/22/1999
dkim: 6/30/1998
mark: 5/13/1996
joanna: 12/6/1995
mark: 4/25/1995
mark: 4/24/1995

609554	TITLE *609554 INTEGRAL MEMBRANE PROTEIN 2C; ITM2C
;;BRI3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The integral membrane protein family (ITMs, e.g., ITM2B, 603904)
consists of integral type II membrane glycoproteins with an
extracellular C terminus. Using sequence analysis and 5-prime and
3-prime RACE, Vidal et al. (2001) isolated a cDNA corresponding to
integral membrane protein 2C (ITM2C, which the authors referred to as
BRI3), and showed that it encodes a 267-amino acid protein with a
calculated molecular mass of 30.2 kD. ITM2C shares several conserved
features with other human and murine ITM family members, including 1
N-glycosylation and 2 phosphorylation sites and a single transmembrane
domain. Mouse Itm2c shares 92.9% amino acid identity with human ITM2C.
ITM2C shares 43.7% amino acid identity with ITM2B, with greatest
identity in the C-terminal portion. EST homology searches identified
clones encoding a 219-amino acid ITM2C splice variant. The promoter
region of ITM2C is GC-rich and contains 3 SP1 and 5 AP-1 binding sites.
Northern blot analysis showed strong expression of a 2.1-kb ITM2C
transcript in brain and very weak expression in several other tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a human brain library with the
C-terminus of the beta-amyloid protein-converting enzyme BACE (604252)
as bait, Wickham et al. (2005) identified ITM2C as an interacting
protein. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments confirmed the interaction of
ITM2C and BACE. By in situ hybridization, Wickham et al. (2005) showed
that ITM2C is widely expressed in mouse brain, especially in the
hippocampus, cortex, cerebellum, olfactory lobe, and striatum. In situ
hybridization analysis showed that ITM2C and BACE were expressed in
overlapping patterns in the brains of an Alzheimer disease patient,
normal mouse, and a mouse model of Alzheimer disease. A series of
pulse-chase experiments showed that ITM2C is cleaved to an approximately
4-kD C-terminal secreted product, and that the convertases furin
(136950), PC7 (604872), and to a lesser extent PC5A (600488) are
responsible for this cleavage.

GENE STRUCTURE

Using genomic sequence alignment, Vidal et al. (2001) showed that the
ITM2C gene contains 6 exons and spans more than 20 kb.

MAPPING

Vidal et al. (2001) identified the ITM2C gene within a genomic clone
mapping to chromosome 2.

REFERENCE 1. Vidal, R.; Calero, M.; Revesz, T.; Plant, G.; Ghiso, J.; Frangione,
B.: Sequence, genomic structure and tissue expression of human BRI(3),
a member of the BRI gene family. Gene 266: 95-102, 2001.

2. Wickham, L.; Benjannet, S.; Marcinkiewicz, E.; Chretien, M.; Seidah,
N. G.: Beta-amyloid protein converting enzyme 1 and brain-specific
type II membrane protein BRI(3): binding partners processed by furin. J.
Neurochem. 92: 93-102, 2005.

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 8/25/2005

EDITED alopez: 08/25/2005
alopez: 8/25/2005

605100	TITLE *605100 PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE, MAGNESIUM-DEPENDENT, 1D; PPM1D
;;PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE, MAGNESIUM-DEPENDENT, 1, DELTA ISOFORM;;
WILDTYPE p53-INDUCED PHOSPHATASE 1; WIP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Exposure of mammalian cells to ionizing radiation (IR) induces a complex
array of cellular responses, including cell cycle arrest and/or
apoptosis. IR-induced G1 arrest has been shown to depend on the presence
of the tumor suppressor p53 (TP53; 191170), which acts as a
transcriptional activator of several genes. p53 also plays a role in the
induction of apoptosis in response to DNA damage, and this pathway can
be activated by both transcription-dependent and -independent
mechanisms. To search for genes induced in response to IR, Fiscella et
al. (1997) used mRNA differential display with WMN Burkitt lymphoma
cells carrying a wildtype p53 gene, which undergo G1 arrest and
apoptosis following IR, and identified a novel gene, PPM1D, which they
called WIP1. The predicted 605-amino acid PPM1D protein contains 2
putative nuclear localization signals and 3 regions conserved in
serine/threonine PP2C phosphatases. PPM1D protein localized to the
nucleus.

GENE FUNCTION

Fiscella et al. (1997) found that recombinant PPM1D showed phosphatase
activity in vitro. It displayed characteristics of a type 2C
phosphatase, including magnesium dependence and relative insensitivity
to okadaic acid. PPM1D was induced in response to IR in a p53-dependent
manner in WMN Burkitt lymphoma cells. Studies performed in several cell
lines revealed that PPM1D mRNA accumulation following IR correlated with
the presence of wildtype p53. Accumulation of PPM1D mRNA following IR
was rapid and transient. Similar to WAF1 (CDKN1A; 116899), ectopic
expression of WIP1 in human cells suppressed colony formation. Fiscella
et al. (1997) suggested that WIP1 may contribute to growth inhibitory
pathways activated in response to DNA damage in a p53-dependent manner.

ATM (607585) and ATR (601215) kinases maintain genomic integrity and
respond to DNA damage by phosphorylating cellular target proteins that
activate DNA repair pathways and cell cycle checkpoints. Lu et al.
(2005) showed that PPM1D dephosphorylated 2 ATM/ATR targets, CHK1
(603078) and p53, in a human osteosarcoma cell line. PPM1D
dephosphorylation correlated with reduced cellular intra-S and G2/M
checkpoint activity in response to DNA damage induced by ultraviolet and
ionizing radiation. Lu et al. (2005) concluded that a primary function
of PPM1D may be to reverse DNA damage and cell cycle checkpoint
responses and return the cell to homeostasis following DNA repair.

Li et al. (2002) showed that overexpression of the PPM1D gene confers 2
oncogenic phenotypes on cells in culture: attenuation of apoptosis
induced by serum starvation and transformation of primary cells in
cooperation with RAS (see 190020). The APPBP2 gene (605324), which
encodes a microtubule-binding protein that mediates intracellular
protein targeting, is amplified also in breast cancer probably as a
secondary consequence of its nearness to PPM1D on 17q, as it did not
induce any oncogenic phenotype when overexpressed.

Expression of oncogenic RAS in primary human cells activates p53,
thereby protecting cells from transformation. Bulavin et al. (2002)
showed that in a RAS-expressing cell line, p53 is phosphorylated at
ser33 and ser46 by the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK,
the product of the MAPK14 gene; 600289). Activity of p38 MAPK is
regulated by the p53-inducible phosphatase PPM1D, creating a potential
feedback loop. Expression of oncogenic RAS suppresses PPM1D mRNA
induction, leaving p53 phosphorylated at ser33 and ser46 and in an
active state. Bulavin et al. (2002) found that retrovirus-mediated
overexpression of PPM1D reduced p53 phosphorylation at these sites,
abrogated RAS-induced apoptosis, and partially rescued cells from
cell-cycle arrest. Inactivation of p38 MAPK in vivo by gene targeting or
by PPM1D overexpression expedited tumor formation after injection of
mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) expressing E1A+RAS into nude mice.
The gene encoding PPM1D, located at 17q22-q23, is amplified in human
breast tumor cell lines and in approximately 11% of primary breast
tumors, most of which harbor wildtype p53. These findings suggested that
inactivation of the p38 MAPK through PPM1D overexpression resulting from
PPM1D amplification contributes to the development of human cancers by
suppressing p53 activation.

Bulavin et al. (2004) found that Ppm1d-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts
were resistant to transformation by several oncogenes. They determined
that disruption of Ppm1d suppressed transformation through activation of
p38 MAPK, followed by activation of p53 and p16 (CDKN2A; 600160).
Disruption of the Cdkn2a gene, but not of the p53 gene, restored MEF
sensitivity to oncogenes. Ppm1d-disrupted mice also resisted development
of mammary cancer. These findings and others led Bulavin et al. (2004)
to conclude that, through p38 MAPK, PPM1D modulates the CDKN2A
tumor-suppressor locus.

Bernards (2004) commented that Wip1 has potential as a drug target,
since the work of Bulavin et al. (2004) indicates that inhibition of
Wip1 phosphatase can suppress the proliferation of certain types of
cancer, most notably breast cancer. Phosphatases are, in principal,
susceptible to targeting by drugs, as potent inhibitors of other
phosphatases have been developed. The side effects of inhibition of Wip1
might be acceptable, as Wip1-null mice developed normally, even though
defects in immune function have been noted (Choi et al., 2002).

Shreeram et al. (2006) found that deficiency of mammalian Wip1 resulted
in activation of ATM, and that overexpression of Wip1 reduced activation
of the ATM-dependent signaling cascade after DNA damage. Wip1
dephosphorylated ATM at a site critical for ATM monomerization and
activation, and was critical for resetting ATM phosphorylation as cells
repaired damaged DNA. Shreeram et al. (2006) concluded that WIP1 is an
integral component of an ATM-dependent signaling pathway.

Using a genomewide screen with small interfering RNAs, Chew et al.
(2009) identified WIP1 as a negative regulator of the NF-kappa-B p65
subunit (RELA; 164014) reporter gene in transfected human cell lines.
WIP1-mediated regulation of NF-kappa-B occurred in both a p38-dependent
and -independent manner. WIP1 directly dephosphorylated ser536 in 1
isoform of the NF-kappa-B p65 subunit in vitro and reduced the
interaction of p65 with the transcriptional coactivator p300 (EP300;
602700) and transcription of target genes in cultured cells.
Overexpression of WIP1 repressed NF-kappa-B activity and reduced p65
phosphorylation. Conversely, WIP1 deficiency in human and mouse cells
resulted in p65 hyperphosphorylation and increased NF-kappa-B
transcriptional activity.

MAPPING

Li et al. (2002) found that the PPM1D gene, encoding a serine/threonine
protein phosphatase, lies within 17q23, one of the regions most commonly
amplified in breast cancer.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using pooled next-generation sequencing of 507 genes implicated in the
repair of DNA in 1,150 samples, an analytical strategy focused on
protein-truncating variants (PTVs), and a large-scale sequencing
case-control replication experiment in 13,642 individuals, Ruark et al.
(2013) showed that rare PTVs in the p53 (191170)-inducible protein
phosphatase PPM1D are associated with predisposition to breast cancer
and ovarian cancer. PPM1D PTV mutations were present in 25 of 7,781
cases versus 1 of 5,861 controls (P = 1.12 x 10(-5)), including 18
mutations in 6,912 individuals with breast cancer (p = 2.42 x 10(-4))
and 12 mutations in 1,121 individuals with ovarian cancer (p = 3.10 x
10(-9)). Notably, all of the identified PPM1D PTVs were mosaic in
lymphocyte DNA and clustered within a 370-basepair region in the final
exon of the gene, carboxy-terminal to the phosphatase catalytic domain.
Functional studies demonstrated that the mutations result in enhanced
suppression of p53 in response to ionizing radiation exposure,
suggesting that the mutant alleles encode hyperactive PPM1D isoforms.
Thus, although the mutations cause premature protein truncation, they do
not result in the simple loss-of-function effect typically associated
with this class of variant, but instead probably have a gain-of-function
effect.

ANIMAL MODEL

Schito et al. (2006) found that Wip1 -/- mice had reduced numbers of
peripheral T cells. Flow cytometric analysis and microscopy showed that
young Wip1 -/- mice had smaller thymi and reduced numbers of all T
cells, except for double-negative thymocytes, compared with controls.
Crossing Wip1 -/- mice with p53 -/- mice restored normal thymic
development and T-cell development from the double-negative to
double-positive stage. Schito et al. (2006) proposed that WIP1
downregulates p53 activation in thymus and is required for normal
alpha-beta T-cell development.

Chew et al. (2009) showed that fibroblasts from Wip1 -/- mice had
p38-independent elevation in Tnf-alpha (191160) mRNA and protein,
heightened p65 phosphorylation, and elevated NF-kappa-B-dependent
cytokines in Wip1 -/- splenocytes. Lungs and kidneys from Wip1 -/- mice
showed increased ser536 phosphorylation of p65 compared to wildtype
mouse organs. Since TNF-alpha is an NF-kappa-B target gene, the authors
concluded that WIP1 regulates TNF-alpha expression via its role in
NF-kappa-B regulation.

REFERENCE 1. Bernards, R.: Wip-ing out cancer. Nature Genet. 36: 319-320,
2004.

2. Bulavin, D. V.; Demidov, O. N.; Saito, S.; Kauraniemi, P.; Phillips,
C.; Amundson, S. A.; Ambrosino, C.; Sauter, G.; Nebreda, A. R.; Anderson,
C. W.; Kallioniemi, A.; Fornace, A. J., Jr.; Appella, E.: Amplification
of PPM1D in human tumors abrogates p53 tumor-suppressor activity. Nature
Genet. 31: 210-215, 2002.

3. Bulavin, D. V.; Phillips, C.; Nannenga, B.; Timofeev, O.; Donehower,
L. A.; Anderson, C. W.; Appella, E.; Fornace, A. J., Jr.: Inactivation
of the Wip1 phosphatase inhibits mammary tumorigenesis through p38
MAPK-mediated activation of the p16(Ink4a)-p19(Arf) pathway. Nature
Genet. 36: 343-350, 2004.

4. Chew, J.; Biswas, S.; Shreeram, S.; Humaidi, M.; Wong, E. T.; Dhillion,
M. K.; Teo, H.; Hazra, A.; Fang, C. C.; Lopez-Collazo, E.; Bulavin,
D. V.; Tergaonkar, V.: WIP1 phosphatase is a negative regulator of
NF-kappa-B signalling. Nature Cell Biol. 11: 659-666, 2009.

5. Choi, J.; Nannenga, B.; Demidov, O. N.; Bulavin, D. V.; Cooney,
A.; Brayton, C.; Zhang, Y.; Mbawuike, I. N.; Bradley, A.; Appella,
E.; Donehower, L. A.: Mice deficient for the wild-type p53-induced
phosphatase gene (Wip1) exhibit defects in reproductive organs, immune
function, and cell cycle control. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22: 1094-1105,
2002.

6. Fiscella, M.; Zhang, H.; Fan, S.; Sakaguchi, K.; Shen, S.; Mercer,
W. E.; Vande Woude, G. F.; O'Connor, P. M.; Appella, E.: Wip1, a
novel human protein phosphatase that is induced in response to ionizing
radiation in a p53-dependent manner. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 6048-6053,
1997.

7. Li, J.; Yang, Y.; Peng, Y.; Austin, R. J.; van Eyndhoven, W. G.;
Nguyen, K. C. Q.; Gabriele, T.; McCurrach, M. E.; Marks, J. R.; Hoey,
T.; Lowe, S. W.; Powers, S.: Oncogenic properties of PPM1D located
within a breast cancer amplification epicenter at 17q23. Nature Genet. 31:
133-134, 2002.

8. Lu, X.; Nannenga, B.; Donehower, L. A.: PPM1D dephosphorylates
Chk1 and p53 and abrogates cell cycle checkpoints. Genes Dev. 19:
1162-1174, 2005.

9. Ruark, E.; Snape, K.; Humburg, P.; Loveday, C.; Bajrami, I.; Brough,
R.; Rodrigues, D. N.; Renwick, A.; Seal, S.; Ramsay, E.; Del Vecchio
Duarte, S.; Rivas, M. A.; and 52 others: Mosaic PPM1D mutations
are associated with predisposition to breast and ovarian cancer. Nature 493:
406-410, 2013.

10. Schito, M. L.; Demidov, O. N.; Saito, S.; Ashwell, J. D.; Appella,
E.: Wip1 phosphatase-deficient mice exhibit defective T cell maturation
due to sustained p53 activation. J. Immun. 176: 4818-4825, 2006.

11. Shreeram, S.; Demidov, O. N.; Hee, W. K.; Yamaguchi, H.; Onishi,
N.; Kek, C.; Timofeev, O. N.; Dudgeon, C.; Fornace, A. J.; Anderson,
C. W.; Minami, Y.; Appella, E.; Bulavin, D. V.: Wip1 phosphatase
modulates ATM-dependent signaling pathways. Molec. Cell 23: 757-764,
2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/20/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/20/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/4/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/20/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/13/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/5/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/12/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/30/2002

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 6/29/2000

EDITED alopez: 02/21/2013
terry: 2/20/2013
wwang: 9/16/2010
wwang: 9/15/2010
terry: 8/20/2010
mgross: 4/10/2007
terry: 4/4/2007
carol: 11/1/2006
terry: 10/20/2006
mgross: 3/15/2006
wwang: 6/30/2005
wwang: 6/23/2005
terry: 6/13/2005
terry: 6/18/2004
alopez: 4/7/2004
terry: 4/5/2004
alopez: 4/2/2004
alopez: 3/12/2004
carol: 11/12/2003
carol: 11/3/2003
alopez: 6/4/2002
terry: 5/30/2002
mcapotos: 7/14/2000
psherman: 6/30/2000

614584	TITLE *614584 PROLYL 4-HYDROXYLASE, TRANSMEMBRANE; P4HTM
;;PROLINE HYDROXYLASE 4; PH4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

P4HTM belongs to a family of enzymes that downregulate expression of
hypoxia-induced transcription factors (HIFs; see 603348) under normoxic
conditions. These enzymes hydroxylate specific proline residues within
HIF oxygen-dependent degradation domains, inducing their
proteasome-dependent degradation (Oehme et al., 2002).

CLONING

By searching EST databases for sequences similar to the collagen prolyl
4-hydroxylase P4HA1 (176710), followed by RT-PCR of human brain mRNA,
Oehme et al. (2002) cloned P4HTM, which they called PH4. The deduced
502-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 56.7 kD. The
N-terminal half of PH4 has a transmembrane domain and an EF-hand motif,
and the C-terminal half has a putative catalytic domain containing iron-
and oxoglutarate-binding motifs. Quantitative RT-PCR detected variable
PH4 expression in the 17 human tissues examined, with highest expression
in brain, followed by adrenal gland and kidney. Lowest expression was
detected in prostate. Epitope-tagged PH4 colocalized with an endoplasmic
reticulum tracer in transfected COS-7 cells.

Koivunen et al. (2007) found that the full-length 502-amino acid P4HTM
protein contains a putative endoplasmic reticulum (ER) retention signal
and 2 potential N-glycosylation sites. Northern blot analysis detected
P4HTM transcripts of 2.7, 2.3, and 1.8 kb in several human tissues. The
1.8-kb transcript was the main form in all tissues except brain. PCR
analysis detected P4HTM in human epiphyseal cartilage and fibroblasts
and in all tumor samples tested. N-end sequencing revealed that
endogenous and recombinant P4HTM proteins were expressed as full-length
forms and N-terminally truncated forms that began with asp88. Gel
filtration and Western blot analysis detected both full-length and
N-terminally truncated P4HTM in fractions corresponding to molecular
masses of about 105 to 120 kD and 85 to 90 kD, respectively.
Immunoelectron microscopy revealed that the catalytic domain of P4HTM
was expressed on the luminal face of ER membranes. Database analysis
revealed orthologs of P4HTM in vertebrates only.

GENE FUNCTION

Using transfected COS-7 cells, Oehme et al. (2002) showed that human
PH4, like EGLN3 (606426), reduced the transactivation activities of
mouse Hif1-alpha (HIF1A; 603348) and Hif2-alpha (EPAS1; 603349) on a
reporter construct containing tandem hypoxia-responsive elements. Loss
of Hif2-alpha activity correlated with loss of Hif2-alpha protein. Oehme
et al. (2002) hypothesized that PH4 has a role in cellular oxygen
sensing.

By Western blot analysis, Koivunen et al. (2007) found that hypoxia
induced expression of P4HTM in several human cell lines and in adult
human fibroblasts. Overexpression of P4HTM reduced the cellular content
of the isolated transfected HIF1-alpha and HIF2-alpha oxygen-dependent
degradation domains. In contrast, small interfering RNA-mediated
silencing of P4HTM increased full-length HIF1-alpha content. Purified
recombinant P4HTM hydroxylated prolines in HIF1-alpha at 2 sites, with
preference for the more C-terminal site. P4HTM also catalyzed an
uncoupled decarboxylation of 2-oxoglutarate, but it did not hydroxylate
procollagen polypeptides in vitro.

MAPPING

Hartz (2012) mapped the P4HTM gene to chromosome 3p21.31 based on an
alignment of the P4HTM sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK000269) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  4/19/2012.

2. Koivunen, P.; Tiainen, P.; Hyvarinen, J.; Williams, K. E.; Sormunen,
R.; Klaus, S. J.; Kivirikko, K. I.; Myllyharju, J.: An endoplasmic
reticulum transmembrane prolyl 4-hydroxylase is induced by hypoxia
and acts on hypoxia-inducible factor alpha. J. Biol. Chem. 282:
30544-30552, 2007.

3. Oehme, F.; Ellinghaus, P.; Kolkhof, P.; Smith, T. J.; Ramakrishnan,
S.; Hutter, J.; Schramm, M.; Flamme, I.: Overexpression of PH-4,
a novel putative proline 4-hydroxylase, modulates activity of hypoxia-inducible
transcription factors. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 296: 343-349,
2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/19/2012

EDITED mgross: 04/19/2012

607559	TITLE *607559 MAHOGUNIN, RING FINGER 1; MGRN1
;;MAHOGANOID, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF;;
KIAA0544
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mahogunin (MGRN1) is a C3HC4 RING-containing protein with E3 ubiquitin
ligase activity in vitro.

CLONING

'Mahoganoid' is a mouse coat color mutation whose pigmentary phenotype
and genetic interactions resemble those of 'mahogany,' which results
from mutation in attractin (ATRN; 603130). He et al. (2003) and Phan et
al. (2002) cloned the mouse mahogunin gene, mutant in mahoganoid mice.
Both groups identified the human homolog as KIAA0544 (Nagase et al.,
1998).

GENE STRUCTURE

The human MGRN1 gene contains 17 exons (Phan et al., 2002; He et al.,
2003).

MAPPING

Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the KIAA0544 cDNA, corresponding to the
MGRN1 gene, to chromosome 16 by radiation hybrid analysis. Phan et al.
(2002) and He et al. (2003) mapped the MGRN1 gene to 16p13.3; the mouse
homolog maps to chromosome 16.

GENE FUNCTION

Human and mouse mahogunin share 95% amino acid sequence identity and
exhibit a similar expression pattern across multiple tissues with
particularly high levels in brain (He et al., 2003). The RING domain
functions as an E3 ubiquitin ligase, and autoubiquitination is dependent
on ATP, E1, E2, and an intact mahogunin RING domain, with ladder
formation proportional to the amounts. In addition, mahogunin-induced
autoubiquitination exhibited specificity for E2; it occurred with UBC5,
used frequently in the stress response to unfolded proteins, but not
with UBC3, used frequently in cell cycle transitions.

He et al. (2003) determined that the MGRN1 gene encodes 4 mRNA isoforms
that contain a central C3HC4 RING domain as the only recognizable
protein motif; however, regions flanking the RING domain and the
N-terminal region of the protein are also conserved between vertebrate
and invertebrate genomes.

ANIMAL MODEL

Mahogunin is the protein mutant in 'mahoganoid,' a coat-color mutation
of mice in which pigmentation is very similar to that of 'mahogany.' The
mahogany phenotype is caused by mutation in attractin (ATRN; 603130). He
et al. (2003) found that animals carrying the original allele, md,
synthesize small amounts of yellow pigment on the flank and ventrum and
do not develop spongy degeneration up to 5 months of age. However,
animals carrying the md(nc) allele (originally known as 'nonagouti
curly') develop progressive spongiform changes, first apparent in the
hippocampus CA3 region at 2 months of age and later extending to
multiple regions of the brain. Vacuolation predominates in the gray
matter and is associated with neuronal loss but preservation of tissue
architecture; the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, thalamus, brainstem,
caudate-putamen, and cerebellum granule layer are the most consistently
affected regions. In md(nc)/md(nc) mice at 10 months of age, some
regions of the deep cortex and lateral thalamus exhibit mild
astrocytosis before the formation of microscopically visible vacuoles.
Northern hybridization to mouse brain mRNA revealed that md/md mice
expressed reduced levels of a normal-sized transcript and transcripts of
aberrant size, consistent with an intracisternal A particle insertion
into intron 11A. For the md(nc) allele, no transcript was detected by
Northern hybridization, and a thymidine-to-adenine mutation was
identified at position 2 of intron 9 of the Mgrn1 gene. Thus, partial
loss of function for this gene causes a reduction of yellow pigment in
the md allele and complete loss of function causes absence of yellow
pigment and neurodegeneration in the md(nc) allele. The brain
degeneration in md(nc) resembles prion-induced spongiform
encephalopathy. However, no accumulation of the protease-resistant PrP
isoform (PrP-Sc) was seen in these animals.

REFERENCE 1. He, L.; Lu, X.-Y.; Jolly, A. F.; Eldridge, A. G.; Watson, S. J.;
Jackson, P. K.; Barsh, G. S.; Gunn, T. M.: Spongiform degeneration
in mahoganoid mutant mice. Science 299: 710-712, 2003.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.;
Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified
human genes. IX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from
brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 31-39,
1998.

3. Phan, L. K.; Lin, F.; LeDuc, C. A.; Chung, W. K.; Leibel, R. L.
: The mouse mahoganoid coat color mutation disrupts a novel C3HC4
RING domain protein. J. Clin. Invest. 110: 1449-1459, 2002.

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 2/12/2003

EDITED terry: 03/03/2005
tkritzer: 9/9/2003
carol: 5/28/2003
alopez: 2/12/2003

608159	TITLE *608159 PROTEASE, SERINE, 21; PRSS21
;;EOSINOPHIL SERINE PROTEASE 1; ESP1;;
TESTISIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PRSS21 is a membrane-type serine protease that shows highest expression
in premeiotic testicular germ cells.

CLONING

By PCR of an eosinophil cDNA library using degenerate primers based on
the active site of serine proteases, followed by 5-prime and 3-prime
RACE, Inoue et al. (1998) cloned PRSS21, which they called ESP1. The
deduced 314-amino acid ESP1 precursor protein has a calculated molecular
mass of 33.1 kD, and the 273-amino acid active form has a calculated
molecular mass of 30.6 kD. ESP1 contains an N-terminal signal peptide, a
propeptide, an active site catalytic triad of conserved his, asp, and
ser residues, and a hydrophobic C terminus, which suggests that ESP1 is
a membrane-type serine protease. ESP1 shares about 41% amino acid
identity with prostasin (PRSS8; 600823). Northern blot analysis detected
a 1.2- to 1.4-kb transcript in HeLa cells. RT-PCR detected high
expression of ESP1 in testis and prostate, moderate expression in lung,
pancreas, and spleen, and low expression in thymus, colon, and
peripheral blood leukocytes. No expression was detected in kidney and
skeletal muscle. Western blot analysis of transfected human embryonic
kidney cells showed that ESP1 has an apparent molecular mass of 35 kD.

Using PCR, Hooper et al. (1999) cloned PRSS21, which they designated
testisin, from a HeLa cell cDNA library. They identified 3 putative
N-glycosylation sites and 10 conserved cysteine residues in the PRSS21
protein. By analogy to other serine proteases, Hooper et al. (1999)
concluded that 8 of these cysteines likely form disulfide bridges within
the catalytic region, while the remaining 2 probably link the propeptide
and catalytic regions. PRSS21 shares 26 to 38% amino acid identity with
hepsin (142440), acrosin (102480), chymotrypsin (see 118890), and PSA
(176820). Hooper et al. (1999) identified a PRSS21 splice variant that
encodes a 312-amino acid precursor lacking 2 residues near the catalytic
histidine. Northern blot analysis of several human tissues detected a
1.4-kb transcript only in testis. RNA dot blot analysis detected
abundant expression in testis and weak expression in salivary gland,
bone marrow, lung, and trachea. Immunostaining of normal testicular
tissue showed PRSS21 expression in the cytoplasm and on the plasma
membrane of premeiotic germ cells. No staining was detected in 8 germ
cell-derived testicular tumors.

GENE STRUCTURE

Inoue et al. (1999) and Hooper et al. (2000) determined that the PRSS21
gene contains 6 exons and spans 4.5 to 4.6 kb. Using a reporter plasmid,
Inoue et al. (1999) identified a GC-rich 5-prime flanking region
containing an AP1 (see 165160)/SP1 (189906)-binding site as the minimum
promoter for expression in HeLa cells. Hooper et al. (2000) determined
that the promoter region lacks a TATA consensus sequence but contains a
CCAAT box and a CpG island, as well as binding sites for several
testis-specific elements. They noted that the PRSS21 gene has a
structure similar to that of the PRSS8 gene, which maps to chromosome
16p11.2, near PRSS21, suggesting that the 2 genes may have evolved
through gene duplication.

MAPPING

By FISH, Hooper et al. (1999) mapped the PRSS21 gene to chromosome
16p13.3, a region associated with allelic imbalance and loss of
heterozygosity in sporadic testicular tumors. Inoue et al. (1999) mapped
the PRSS21 gene to chromosome 16p13.3 by radiation hybrid analysis and
FISH.

REFERENCE 1. Hooper, J. D.; Bowen, N.; Marshall, H.; Cullen, L. M.; Sood, R.;
Daniels, R.; Stuttgen, M. A.; Normyle, J. F.; Higgs, D. R.; Kastner,
D. L.; Ogbourne, S. M.; Pera, M. F.; Jazwinska, E. C.; Antalis, T.
M.: Localization, expression and genomic structure of the gene encoding
the human serine protease testisin. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1492:
63-71, 2000.

2. Hooper, J. D.; Nicol, D. L.; Dickinson, J. L.; Eyre, H. J.; Scarman,
A. L.; Normyle, J. F.; Stuttgen, M. A.; Douglas, M. L.; Loveland,
K. A. L.; Sutherland, G. R.; Antalis, T. M.: Testisin, a new human
serine proteinase expressed by premeiotic testicular germ cells and
lost in testicular germ cell tumors. Cancer Res. 59: 3199-3205,
1999.

3. Inoue, M.; Isobe, M.; Itoyama, T.; Kido, H.: Structural analysis
of esp-1 gene (PRSS 21). Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 266: 564-568,
1999.

4. Inoue, M.; Kanbe, N.; Kurosawa, M.; Kido, H.: Cloning and tissue
distribution of a novel serine protease esp-1 from human eosinophils. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 252: 307-312, 1998.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/9/2003

EDITED mgross: 10/09/2003

607177	TITLE *607177 IMMEDIATE-EARLY RESPONSE GENE 5; IER5
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Williams et al. (1999) cloned a novel member of the slow-kinetics
immediate-early response gene family, designated Ier5, from a mouse
brain cDNA library. Mouse Ier5 encodes a deduced 308-amino acid protein
with a predicted molecular mass of 31.9 kD. The N-terminal 49 amino
acids show 57% sequence identity with those of the Ier2 protein. Ier5
contains 3 potential nuclear targeting signals, a possible PEST
sequence, which suggests rapid protein degradation, and several
potential phosphorylation sites. Northern blot analysis of total
cellular RNA from serum-starved NIH 3T3 cells showed no detectable
transcription in quiescent cells, but detected a single transcript
within 30 minutes after exposure to serum. Transcription was also
stimulated by the growth factors TPA (173370), FGF (see 131220), and
PDGF (see 173430), and did not appear to be dependent on protein kinase
C (see 176960) activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Williams et al. (1999) identified 2 possible Ets-1 sites, a number of
potential Sp1 sites, and 3 potential AP1-binding sites in the promoter
region of the mouse Ier5 gene. The IER5 genes in humans and mice are
highly homologous to their counterpart in zebrafish. In all of these
organisms, IER5 is an intronless gene (Gottgens et al., 2002).

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the IER5
gene to chromosome 1 (TMAP stSG23644).

REFERENCE 1. Gottgens, B.; Barton, L. M.; Chapman, M. A.; Sinclair, A. M.; Knudsen,
B.; Grafham, D.; Gilbert, J. G. R.; Rogers, J.; Bentley, D. R.; Green,
A. R.: Transcriptional regulation of the stem cell leukemia gene
(SCL)--comparative analysis of five vertebrate SCL loci. Genome Res. 12:
749-759, 2002.

2. Williams, M.; Lyu, M.-S.; Yang, Y.-L.; Lin, E. P.; Dunbrack, R.;
Birren, B.; Cunningham, J.; Hunter, K.: Ier5, a novel member of the
slow-kinetics immediate-early genes. Genomics 55: 327-334, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 8/28/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/28/2002

EDITED tkritzer: 08/28/2002
carol: 8/28/2002
tkritzer: 8/28/2002

607231	TITLE *607231 MAS-RELATED G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR FAMILY, MEMBER D; MRGPRD
;;MRGD
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Dong et al. (2001) identified, in the mouse and human genomes, a family
of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) related to the MAS1 oncogene
(165180), including MRGD. Several pseudogenes were also identified. The
predicted MRG proteins contain transmembrane, extracellular, and
cytoplasmic domains. A subset of MRGs was expressed in specific
subpopulations of sensory neurons that detect painful stimuli. The
expression patterns of these genes thus revealed an unexpected degree of
molecular diversity among nociceptive neurons. Some MRGs could be
specifically activated in heterologous cells by RFamide neuropeptides
such as NPFF and NPAF (see 604643), which are analgesic in vivo. The
authors concluded that MRGs may regulate nociceptor function and/or
development, including the sensation or modulation of pain.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Dong et al. (2001) mapped the MRGD gene to
chromosome 11.

REFERENCE 1. Dong, X.; Han, S.; Zylka, M. J.; Simon, M. I.; Anderson, D. J.
: A diverse family of GPCRs expressed in specific subsets of nociceptive
sensory neurons. Cell 106: 619-632, 2001.

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 9/17/2002

EDITED mgross: 03/24/2009
mgross: 9/17/2002

609884	TITLE *609884 TRANSMEMBRANE PROTEIN 67; TMEM67
;;MKS3 GENE;;
MECKELIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Smith et al. (2006) refined mapping of a Meckel syndrome locus (MKS3;
607361) to a 12.67-Mb interval on chromosome 8q21.13-q22.1, which is
syntenic to the Wpk locus in rat. Positional cloning of the Wpk gene
suggested an MKS3 candidate gene, TMEM67 (transmembrane protein-67). The
human TMEM67 gene encodes a deduced 995-amino acid protein, which the
authors called meckelin, with a calculated unglycosylated mass of 108
kD. Human and rat meckelin share 84% identity. Meckelin was predicted to
contain a signal peptide, at least 2 cysteine-rich repeats, and a
490-residue extracellular region with 4 N-linked glycosylated sites,
followed by 7 transmembrane domains and a 30-residue cytoplasmic tail.
RNA blotting identified a primary transcript of 4.0 kb and a weaker
product of 4.5 kb expressed in all adult and fetal human tissues tested.
Real-time quantitative PCR analysis of human embryonic tissues detected
highest expression in spinal cord and moderate levels in adrenal tissue,
brain, and kidney.

Using in situ hybridization with human embryos, Dawe et al. (2007) found
that meckelin was expressed in kidney, liver, retina, hindbrain,
developing sphenoid bone, and the brain midline. Intense expression was
also detected in cartilage of developing limbs, particularly in the
digits. Immunohistochemical analysis of 18- to 20-week-old human fetal
kidneys detected moderate to high expression of meckelin and MKS1
(609883) at the proximal renal tubule epithelia, but not at glomeruli.
In liver, these proteins were also expressed at the biliary epithelium
of larger bile ducts, but not in hepatocytes. In HEK293 cells, meckelin
was expressed at the cell border and colocalized with alpha-tubulin (see
602529) at primary cilia. Western blot analysis detected meckelin at an
apparent molecular mass of 120 kD.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Smith et al. (2006) mapped the TMEM67 gene to
chromosome 8q21.13-q22.1.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RNA interference, Dawe et al. (2007) found that knockdown of
either Mks1 or Mks3 in mouse inner medullary IMCD-3 cells blocked
centriole migration to the apical membrane and formation of the primary
cilium. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed that wildtype Mks1 and
Mks3 interacted, and knockdown of either Mks1 or Mks3 in IMCD-3 cells
decreased the formation of highly branched structures and tubules in
3-dimensional cultures. Dawe et al. (2007) concluded that MKS1 and MKS3
have roles in ciliogenesis and renal tubulogenesis.

Tammachote et al. (2009) showed that kidney tissue and cells from MKS1
(249000) and MKS3 patients showed defects in centrosome and cilia
number, including multiciliated respiratory-like epithelia, and longer
cilia. Stable shRNA knockdown of Mks1 and Mks3 in IMCD-3 cells induced
multiciliated and multicentrosomal phenotypes. MKS1 and MKS3 functions
are required for ciliary structure and function, including a role in
regulating length and appropriate number through modulating centrosome
duplication. Tammachote et al. (2009) concluded that MKS1 and MKS3 are
ciliopathies, with new cilia-related eye and sperm phenotypes defined.

Williams et al. (2011) showed that the conserved proteins Mks1, Mksr1
(B9D1; 614144), Mksr2 (B9D2; 611951), Tmem67, Rpgrip1l (610937), Cc2d2a
(612013), Nphp1 (607100), and Nphp4 (607215) functioned at an early
stage of ciliogenesis in C. elegans. These 8 proteins localized to the
ciliary transition zone and established attachments between the basal
body and transition zone membrane. They also provided a docking site
that restricted vesicle fusion to vesicles containing ciliary proteins.

By yeast 2-hybrid and immunoprecipitation analyses, Adams et al. (2012)
found that the C-terminal cytoplasmic tail of meckelin interacted with
filamin A (FLNA; 300017). Loss of filamin A or meckelin in immortalized
fibroblasts from patients with null mutations in the genes or by small
interfering RNA in mouse IMCD3 cells resulted in similar cellular
phenotypes, including abnormal basal body positioning and ciliogenesis,
aberrant remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton, deregulation of RHOA
(165390) activity, and hyperactivation of canonical Wnt (see 606359)
signaling. Adams et al. (2012) concluded that the meckelin-filamin A
signaling axis is a key regulator of ciliogenesis and normal Wnt
signaling.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Meckel Syndrome 3

In 5 consanguineous families with Meckel syndrome linked to chromosome
8q21.13-q22.1 (MKS3; 607361), Smith et al. (2006) detected 5 different
homozygous mutations in the TMEM67 gene (609884.0001-609884.0005). The
mutations consisted of 2 frameshift deletions, 2 splicing mutations, and
a nonconservative missense change. The mutations were not found in over
120 ethnically matched normal control chromosomes.

Consugar et al. (2007) identified 7 novel pathogenic mutations in the
TMEM67 gene (see, e.g., 609884.0011) in 5 of 17 families with a clinical
diagnosis of Meckel syndrome.

- Joubert Syndrome 6

Joubert syndrome (JBTS; see 213300) is an autosomal recessive disorder
characterized by cerebellar vermis hypoplasia associated with hypotonia,
developmental delay, abnormal respiratory patterns, and abnormal eye
movements. The association of retinal dystrophy and renal anomalies
defines a subtype of JBTS. Occipital encephalocele and polydactyly have
occasionally been reported in patients with JBTS. These features are
also found in Meckel-Gruber syndrome. The phenotypic overlap between
JBTS and Meckel-Gruber syndrome is supported by the central nervous
system malformations seen in the Wpk rat model of Meckel-Gruber
syndrome, which includes agenesis of the corpus callosum and
hydrocephalus but not exencephaly. The missense mutation, P394L, seen in
the rat Mks3 gene is presumably a hypomorphic allele because of the mild
phenotype and viability of the Wpk rat (Smith et al., 2006). While
sequencing MKS1 (609883) and MKS3 genes in 31 unrelated fetuses
presenting a cerebrorenodigital syndrome, which was designated
'Meckel-like' because of the absence of at least 1 of the MKS diagnostic
criteria, Baala et al. (2007) identified MKS3 mutations in a family with
2 sibs. The pregnancies were terminated at 30 weeks' and 28 weeks'
gestation, respectively, because of abnormal posterior fossae and
hyperechogenic, enlarged kidneys detected by ultrasound. Kidney
pathology in both fetuses showed liver bile duct proliferation and
microcysts mainly in the medulla. Abnormalities in the brainstem
resembling those of JS were described. The 2 sibs were found to be
compound heterozygous for 2 mutations in the MKS3 gene: a missense
mutation, Y513C, inherited from the father (609884.0006) and an
insertion/deletion mutation inherited from the mother (609884.0007).
Despite the absence of neurologic symptoms required for postnatal
diagnosis in these sibs, Baala et al. (2007) questioned what MKS gene
mutations could be found in patients with typical JBTS and sequenced 22
patients who had no deletion of the NPHP1 gene (607100). Sequence
analysis revealed mutations in 3 patients. Studies identified the MKS3
gene as mutant in a sixth form of Joubert syndrome (JBTS6; 610688).

Otto et al. (2009) identified TMEM67 mutations (609884.0011;
609884.0013; 609884.0019; 609884.0021-609884.0023) in 4 (3.3%) of 120
unrelated probands with Joubert syndrome. All patients had ataxia,
hypotonia or psychomotor retardation or showed cerebellar vermis hypo-
or aplasia. All developed end-stage renal disease between 8 and 15
years, and 4 had hepatic fibrosis. Four also had ocular involvement,
including blindness, retinal degeneration, or retinal coloboma.

- Bardet-Biedl Syndrome

The identification of mutations in the MKS1 gene (609883) in patients
with clinical diagnoses of Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS; 209900) led
Leitch et al. (2008) to investigate other Meckel syndrome genes as
contributors to the BBS phenotype. While they did not find families with
2 pathogenic alleles in the MKS3 gene, they did find 2 families
harboring potentially pathogenic heterozygous alleles. In one of these
families a splice-site mutation in MKS3 was found with homozygosity for
a BBS9 mutation (607968). An individual from the second family carried a
complex allele encoding a protein with 2 in cis changes. One of the
changes was predicted to be benign; the second, S320C (609884.0012), was
predicted to be pathogenic. This patient also carried a homozygous
truncating mutation in CEP290 (610142.0013).

- COACH Syndrome

COACH syndrome (216360) is an autosomal recessive disorder originally
described as including cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, oligophrenia
(mental retardation), ataxia, ocular coloboma, and congenital hepatic
fibrosis (Verloes and Lambotte, 1989). The clinical features overlap
with those observed in Joubert and Meckel syndrome. In 8 (57%) of 14
families diagnosed with COACH syndrome, defined as Joubert syndrome with
congenital liver fibrosis, Brancati et al. (2008) identified compound
heterozygous mutations in the TMEM67 gene (see, e.g.,
609884.0013-609885.0016). One of the families included the original
family reported by Verloes and Lambotte (1989) (609884.0013 and
609884.0014). The phenotype in all patients was consistent with Joubert
syndrome with congenital hepatic fibrosis, indicating that COACH
syndrome can be considered a subtype of Joubert syndrome. The clinical
variability of the disorder, relating to the extent and severity of
liver and neurologic dysfunction as well as to the presence or absence
of ocular and renal findings, was hypothesized to be due to genetic
modifiers, similar to other ciliopathies, including Bardet-Biedl
syndrome (BBS; 209900).

Doherty et al. (2010) identified mutations in the TMEM67 gene in 19
(83%) of 23 families with COACH syndrome, defined as Joubert syndrome
with liver disease. In contrast, TMEM67 mutations were only found in 2
(1%) of 209 families with Joubert syndrome without liver involvement.
The findings further supported the concept that COACH syndrome is a form
of Joubert syndrome with hepatic fibrosis. The proposed ciliary function
for TMEM67 supported a unifying underlying pathophysiology for liver
disease in these disorders.

- Nephronophthisis 11

In patients with nephronophthisis and hepatic fibrosis (NPHP11; 613550),
Otto et al. (2009) identified homozygous or compound heterozygous
missense mutations in the TMEM67 gene (see, e.g.,
609884.0018-609884.0021). Mutations in the TMEM67 gene were not found in
105 NPHP patients without liver fibrosis, suggesting that liver fibrosis
is a specific feature of TMEM67 mutations. Otto et al. (2009) concluded
that mutations in TMEM67 can cause NPHP in patients with additional
liver fibrosis but without neurologic involvement and with normal brain
imaging, and that NPHP11, MKS3, and JBTS6 represent a spectrum of
allelic disorders.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Otto et al. (2009) found homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for
missense mutations in the TMEM67 gene (609884.0018-609884.0021) in
patients with NPHP11 and hepatic fibrosis. All patients with NPHP and
hepatic fibrosis and no brain anomaly carried a missense mutation
affecting either amino acid C615 or G821. Thus, Otto et al. (2009)
suggested that some hypomorphic mutations of TMEM67 do not lead to any
neurologic impairment. Four additional patients with a more severe
phenotype of Joubert syndrome-6 also had homozygous or compound
heterozygous mutations (see, e.g., 609884.0011; 609884.0013;
609884.0019; 609884.0021-609884.0023). None of the patients with JBTS6
had truncating mutations on both alleles; all had at least 1 missense
allele. Finally, the liver seems to be affected in most of the patients
with TMEM67 mutations independently of the neurologic involvement,
suggesting that liver disease is a specific feature resulting from
TMEM67 mutations.

ANIMAL MODEL

In the Wistar polycystic kidneys (Wpk) rat, which is a model with
polycystic kidney disease, agenesis of the corpus callosum, and
hydrocephalus, Smith et al. (2006) refined the mapping of the Wpk locus
and identified a missense mutation in the rat Tmem67 gene that was not
present in the parental Wistar strain.

In the Wpk rat model of MKS3, Tammachote et al. (2009) reported
functional defects of the connecting cilium in the eye that resulted in
lack of formation of the outer segment, whereas infertile Wpk males
developed spermatids with very short flagella that did not extend beyond
the cell body. In Wpk renal collecting duct cysts, cilia were generally
longer than normal, with additional evidence of cells with multiple
primary cilia and centrosome overduplication.

Garcia-Gonzalo et al. (2011) found that Tmem67-null mice survived to
birth without overt morphologic abnormalities, but died soon after. By
embryonic day 18.5, Tmem67-null embryonic kidneys had developed cysts,
and kidney tubules had fewer cilia than controls. Tmem67-null embryonic
fibroblasts did not have ciliary defects, suggesting that Tmem67 has
tissue-specific roles in ciliogenesis. Garcia-Gonzalo et al. (2011) also
demonstrated that Tmem67 interacts with Tctn1 (609863) and Tctn2
(613846) and other proteins in a large complex localized to the
transition zone between the ciliary axoneme and the basal body.

Adams et al. (2012) found that knockdown of Mks3 or the Flna ortholog in
zebrafish resulted in similar phenotypes, including brain and body axis
defects, cardiac edema, and otic placode and eye defects. Combined low
doses of both Mks3 and Flna morpholinos increased both the incidence and
severity of developmental defects. An Flna-null mouse strain showed
similar defects. At embryonic day 13.5, male Flna hemizygous embryos
were highly dysmorphic, with extensive disruption of ventricular zone of
the neocortex and severe periventricular heterotopia. Basal body
position was disrupted and neuroepithelial layer showed impaired
ciliogenesis.

Abdelhamed et al. (2013) found that knockdown of Tmem67 in mice
recapitulated the phenotypic variability of neurologic features seen in
human ciliopathies. Two main phenotypic groups were recognized.
Incipient congenic mice (F6 to F10) showed MKS-like features with
variable neurologic abnormalities, including exencephaly and
frontal/occipital encephalocele associated with the loss of primary
cilia, diminished Shh signaling, and dorsalization of the caudal neural
tube. These mutant mice also showed highly deregulated canonical
Wnt/beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806) signaling associated with hyperactive
DVL1 (601365) localized to the basal body: DVL1 is the downstream
signaling modulator of Wnt pathways. Conversely, fully congenic mice (F
greater than 10) had less variable neurodevelopmental features that were
characteristic of JBTS, including cerebellar hypoplasia consistent with
the molar tooth sign on imaging, and retention of abnormal bulbous cilia
associated with neural tube ventralization. These mutant mice had low
levels of deregulated canonical Wnt signaling associated with the loss
of DVL1 localization to the basal body. Abdelhamed et al. (2013)
suggested that modifier alleles likely determine the variation between
MKS and JBTS caused by TMEM67 mutations.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 3
TMEM67, 2-BP DEL, 383AC

In an individual with MKS3 (607361) from Oman, Smith et al. (2006) found
a homozygous 2-bp deletion in exon 3 of the MKS3 gene, 383-384delAC,
causing a frameshift beginning at his128 with premature stop at residue
140 (H128fsX140). Each of the first-cousin parents was heterozygous for
the mutation. The affected individual had occipital encephalocele,
Dandy-Walker cysts, renal cystic dysplasia, hepatic developmental
defects, and left-hand postaxial polydactyly.

.0002
MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 3
TMEM67, 1-BP DEL, 647A

In a Pakistani family with MKS3 (607361), Smith et al. (2006) found that
2 affected sibs carried a homozygous 1-bp deletion (647delA) in exon 6
of the MKS3 gene. The deletion caused a frameshift beginning at glu216
of the protein, with premature termination at residue 221. The sibs had
occipital encephalocele, renal cystic dysplasia, hepatic developmental
defects, and midline cleft palate.

By immunohistochemical analysis, Dawe et al. (2007) found complete lack
of meckelin expression in kidney from a patient with the 647delA
mutation.

.0003
MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 3
TMEM67, IVS8, A-G, -2

In a Pakistani family with MKS3 (607361), Smith et al. (2006) found that
a child with Meckel syndrome carried a homozygous splice site mutation,
IVS8-2A-G, in the MKS3 gene. The child had occipital encephalocele,
renal cystic dysplasia, and hepatic developmental defects.

.0004
MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 3
TMEM67, GLN376PRO

In a Pakistani patient with Meckel syndrome type 3 (607361), Smith et
al. (2006) found a homozygous 1127A-C transversion in exon 11 of the
MKS3 gene causing a missense protein change, Q376P. The patient had
occipital encephalocele, renal cystic dysplasia, hepatic developmental
defects, midline cleft palate, and epididymal cysts.

By immunohistochemical analysis, Dawe et al. (2007) found that the Q376P
substitution in the N-terminal extracellular domain of meckelin resulted
in lack of meckelin at the cell surface due to accumulation of the
mutant protein in the endoplasmic reticulum.

.0005
MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 3
TMEM67, IVS15, G-A, +1

In 2 Pakistani cases of Meckel syndrome type 3 (607361) in individuals
related as double first cousins, Smith et al. (2006) found that the
disorder was related to a homozygous splice site mutation in intron 15
of the MKS3 gene: IVS15+1G-A. One patient had occipital encephalocele,
renal cystic dysplasia, and hepatic developmental defects; the other had
the same 3 features as well as bilateral postaxial polydactyly.

.0006
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6
COACH SYNDROME, INCLUDED
TMEM67, TYR513CYS

In 2 sibs derived from pregnancies terminated at 30 weeks' and 28 weeks'
gestation, respectively, because of abnormal posterior fossae and
hyperechogenic, enlarged kidneys detected by ultrasound, Baala et al.
(2007) found compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the MKS3 gene. A
missense mutation in exon 15, tyr513 to cys (Y513C), was inherited from
the father; a complex in/del mutation (13-bp deletion encompassing the
exon 22/intron 22 boundary replaced by 2 bp) was inherited from the
mother. This 2315_2323+4del13insGG mutation (609884.0007) removed the
donor splice site. Strong suspicion of Joubert syndrome (JS) in this
family prompted a search for MKS3 mutations in patients with a typical
form of the disorder and led to the establishment of a sixth locus for
Joubert syndrome (JBTS6; 610688).

Doherty et al. (2010) identified the Y513C mutation in compound
heterozygosity with another pathogenic TMEM67 mutation (see, e.g.,
I833T; 609884.0013) in 2 families with COACH syndrome (216360), defined
as Joubert syndrome with hepatic involvement.

.0007
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6
TMEM67, 13-BP DEL, 2-BP INS

See 609884.0006 and Baala et al. (2007).

.0008
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6
TMEM67, IVS23+5G-C

In a 14-year-old Algerian girl, the child of consanguineous parents,
with the molar tooth sign and superior vermian dysplasia (JBTS6;
610688), Baala et al. (2007) found homozygous MKS3 mutation near the
donor splice site of intron 23 (IVS23+5G-C). Both parents and a healthy
sister were heterozygous for the mutation. Sequencing of RNA transcript
confirmed exon skipping from exons 22 to 24. This in-frame deletion
predicted a protein lacking amino acids 775 to 813, which compose most
of the putative coiled-coil domain of the protein. This patient had been
reported by Romano et al. (2006).

.0009
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6
TMEM67, IVS6+2T-G

Baala et al. (2007) demonstrated compound heterozygosity for mutations
in the MKS3 gene in a 7-year-old girl with a mild form of Joubert
syndrome (JBTS6; 610688). The patient had been reported by Romano et al.
(2006). Three MKS3 variations were found: on the maternal allele, a
donor splice site mutation in intron 6 (IVS6+2T-G), and on the paternal
allele, a missense mutation located in exon 16 (G545E) and a mutation
located at the last base of exon 21 (2341G-A). Either of the mutations
from the father could be deleterious.

.0010
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6
TMEM67, GLY545GLU, 2341G-A

See 609884.0009 and Baala et al. (2007).

.0011
MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 3
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6, INCLUDED
TMEM67, ARG208TER

In affected fetuses from 3 unrelated families with Meckel syndrome type
3 (607361), Consugar et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous 622A-T
transversion in exon 6 of the TMEM67 gene, resulting in an arg208-to-ter
(R208X) substitution. All fetuses were compound heterozygous for R208X
and another pathogenic mutation in the TMEM67 gene.

In a German patient with Joubert syndrome-6 (610688), Otto et al. (2009)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the TMEM67 gene:
R208X and I833T (609884.0013). The patient had end-stage renal failure
at age 15, hepatic fibrosis, mental retardation, and cerebellar vermis
atrophy. No ocular involvement was observed.

.0012
BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 14, MODIFIER OF
TMEM67, SER320CYS

In an 11-year-old female patient with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (209900)
Leitch et al. (2008) found heterozygosity for a complex mutation in the
TMEM67 gene coding for a protein with 2 in cis changes, and homozygosity
for a truncating mutation of the CEP290 gene (610142.0013). One of the
substitutions in the TMEM67 gene was predicted computationally to be
benign, while the other, ser320 to cys (S320C), occurred at a highly
conserved residue and was predicted to be pathogenic. The S320C mutation
resulted in severe gastrulation movement defects in zebrafish embryos.

.0013
COACH SYNDROME
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6, INCLUDED
TMEM67, ILE833THR

In 2 sibs originally reported by Verloes and Lambotte (1989) as having
COACH syndrome (216360), Brancati et al. (2008) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the TMEM67 gene: a 2498T-C transition
in exon 24, resulting in an ile833-to-thr (I833T) substitution, and a
splice site mutation in intron 24 (2556+1G-T; 609884.0014). An unrelated
patient from Croatia was compound heterozygous for I833T and another
splice site mutation in intron 2 (312+5G-A; 609884.0015). The phenotype
in all patients was consistent with Joubert syndrome (610688) with
congenital hepatic fibrosis, indicating that COACH syndrome is a subtype
of Joubert syndrome.

In a patient with Joubert syndrome-6 (610688)/COACH syndrome, Otto et
al. (2009) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the
TMEM67 gene: I833T and R208X (609884.0011). The patient had end-stage
renal failure at age 16, liver fibrosis, mental retardation, and
cerebellar vermis aplasia. Ocular involvement was not observed.

Doherty et al. (2010) identified the I833T mutation in compound
heterozygosity with another pathogenic TMEM67 mutation (see, e.g.,
Y513C; 609884.0006) in 4 unrelated patients with COACH syndrome, which
the authors defined as Joubert syndrome with liver involvement.

In a German girl with Joubert syndrome, Dafinger et al. (2011)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the TMEM67 gene:
I833T and pro358 to leu (P358L; 609884.0024). She also had a
heterozygous 12-bp deletion in the KIF7 gene (3986del12; 611254.0008).
The patient had mental retardation, molar tooth sign on brain MRI,
ataxia, hypertelorism, low-set ears, coloboma, and elevated liver
enzymes.

.0014
COACH SYNDROME
TMEM67, IVS24DS, G-T, +1

See 609884.0013 and Brancati et al. (2008).

.0015
COACH SYNDROME
TMEM67, IVS2DS, G-A, +5

See 609884.0013 and Brancati et al. (2008).

.0016
COACH SYNDROME
TMEM67, PHE590SER

In 2 Italian brothers with COACH syndrome (216360) reported by Gentile
et al. (1996), Brancati et al. (2008) identified compound heterozygosity
for 2 mutations in the TMEM67 gene: a 1769T-C transition in exon 17,
resulting in a phe590-to-ser (F590S) substitution, and a splice site
mutation in intron 19 (1961-2A-C; 609884.0017).

.0017
COACH SYNDROME
TMEM67, IVS19AS, A-C, -2

See 609884.0016 and Brancati et al. (2008).

.0018
NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 11
TMEM67, GLY821SER

In 3 sibs, born of consanguineous Turkish parents, with nephronophthisis
and hepatic fibrosis (NPHP11; 613550), Otto et al. (2009) identified a
homozygous 2461G-A transition in exon 24 of the TMEM67 gene, resulting
in a gly821-to-ser (G821S) substitution in a highly conserved residue.
The mutation was not found in 188 controls or in 147 ethnically matched
controls. The patients developed end-stage renal disease between ages 9
and 14 years and had no neurologic abnormalities.

.0019
NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 11
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6, INCLUDED
TMEM67, CYS615ARG

In a Turkish patient, born of consanguineous parents, with NPHP11 and
hepatic fibrosis (613550), Otto et al. (2009) identified a homozygous
1843T-C transition in exon 18 of the TMEM67 gene, resulting in a
cys615-to-arg (C615R) substitution in a highly conserved residue. A
German patient was also found to be homozygous for the mutation, and
haplotype analysis indicated a common founder. The Turkish patient had
end-stage renal failure at age 6, liver fibrosis, retinal degeneration,
and mild cortical atrophy. The German patient had end-stage renal
failure at age 6, liver fibrosis, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, and no ocular
or neurologic involvement. Another German patient with NPHP, liver
fibrosis, strabismus, nystagmus, and mild 'statomotoric' retardation was
found to be compound heterozygous for C615R and an 869G-T transversion
in exon 8, resulting in a trp290-to-leu (W290L; 609884.0020)
substitution.

Otto et al. (2009) reported a patient with Joubert syndrome-6 (610688)
who was compound heterozygous for C615R and a 755T-C transition in exon
8 of the TMEM67 gene, resulting in a met252-to-thr (M252T; 609884.0023)
substitution. The patient had end-stage renal failure at age 14, hepatic
fibrosis, nystagmus, oculomotor apraxia, chorioretinal coloboma, ataxia,
and psychomotor retardation.

.0020
NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 11
TMEM67, TRP290LEU

See 609884.0019 and Otto et al. (2009).

.0021
NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 11
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6, INCLUDED
TMEM67, GLY821ARG

In a German patient with NPHP11 and hepatic fibrosis (613550), Otto et
al. (2009) identified a homozygous 2461G-C transversion in exon 24 of
the TMEM67 gene, resulting in a gly821-to-arg (G821R) substitution. The
patient developed end-stage renal failure at age 10 years, and also had
anisocoria and psychomotor retardation, but normal brain MRI findings.
An unrelated German patient with a more severe phenotype, consistent
with Joubert syndrome-6 (610688), was compound heterozygous for G821R
and a 130C-T transition in exon 1, resulting in a gln44-to-ter (Q44X;
609884.0022) substitution. The patient with Joubert syndrome had
end-stage renal failure at age 12, retinal degeneration, chorioretinal
coloboma, ataxia, and cerebellar vermis aplasia. Liver involvement was
not reported. Haplotype analysis of both patients indicated a common
origin for the G821R mutation.

.0022
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6
TMEM67, GLN44TER

See 609884.0021 and Otto et al. (2009).

.0023
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6
TMEM67, MET252THR

See 609884.0019 and Otto et al. (2009).

.0024
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6
TMEM67, PRO358LEU

See 609884.0013 and Dafinger et al. (2011).

.0025
MECKEL SYNDROME 3
TMEM67, 3-BP DEL, 2754CTT

In a patient from a consanguineous family who presented with MKS3
(607361) and cerebellar heterotopia, Adams et al. (2012) identified a
homozygous 3-bp deletion, c.2754_2756delCTT, resulting in an in-frame
deletion of phe919 (919delF) in the C-terminal cytoplasmic region of
meckelin. The deletion abrogated the interaction of meckelin with
filamin A (FLNA; 300017), resulting in aberrant hyperactivation of
canonical Wnt signaling in patient fibroblasts compared with controls.

REFERENCE 1. Abdelhamed, Z. A.; Wheway, G.; Szymanska, K.; Natarajan, S.; Toomes,
C.; Inglehearn, C.; Johnson, C. A.: Variable expressivity of ciliopathy
neurological phenotypes that encompass Meckel-Gruber syndrome and
Joubert syndrome is caused by complex de-regulated ciliogenesis, Shh
and Wnt signalling defects. Hum. Molec. Genet. 22: 1358-1372, 2013.

2. Adams, M.; Simms, R. J.; Abdelhamed, Z.; Dawe, H. R.; Szymanska,
K.; Logan, C. V.; Wheway, G.; Pitt, E.; Gull, K.; Knowles, M. A.;
Blair, E.; Cross, S. H.; Sayer, J. A.; Johnson, C. A.: A meckelin-filamin
A interaction mediates ciliogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 21: 1272-1286,
2012.

3. Baala, L.; Romano, S.; Khaddour, R.; Saunier, S.; Smith, U. M.;
Audollent, S.; Ozilou, C.; Faivre, L.; Laurent, N.; Foliguet, B.;
Munnich, A.; Lyonnet, S.; and 9 others: The Meckel-Gruber syndrome
gene, MKS3, is mutated in Joubert syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 80:
186-194, 2007.

4. Brancati, F.; Iannicelli, M.; Travaglini, L.; Mazzotta, A.; Bertini,
E.; Boltshauser, E.; D'Arrigo, S.; Emma, F.; Fazzi, E.; Gallizzi,
R.; Gentile, M.; Loncarevic, D.; and 12 others: MKS3/TMEM67 mutations
are a major cause of COACH Syndrome, a Joubert Syndrome related disorder
with liver involvement. Hum. Mutat. 30: E432-E442, 2008. Note: Electronic
Article.

5. Consugar, M. B.; Kubly, V. J.; Lager, D. J.; Hommerding, C. J.;
Wong, W. C.; Bakker, E.; Gattone, V. H., II; Torres, V. E.; Breuning,
M. H.; Harris, P. C.: Molecular diagnostics of Meckel-Gruber syndrome
highlights phenotypic differences between MKS1 and MKS3. Hum. Genet. 121:
591-599, 2007.

6. Dafinger, C.; Liebau, M. C.; Elsayed, S. M.; Hellenbroich, Y.;
Boltshauser, E.; Korenke, G. C.; Fabretti, F.; Janecke, A. R.; Ebermann,
I.; Nurnberg, G.; Nurnberg, P.; Zentgraf, H.; Koerber, F.; Addicks,
K.; Elsobky, E.; Benzing, T.; Schermer, B.; Bolz, H. J.: Mutations
in KIF7 link Joubert syndrome with Sonic Hedgehog signaling and microtubule
dynamics. J. Clin. Invest. 121: 2662-2667, 2011.

7. Dawe, H. R.; Smith, U. M.; Cullinane, A. R.; Gerrelli, D.; Cox,
P.; Badano, J. L.; Blair-Reid, S.; Sriram, N.; Katsanis, N.; Attie-Bitach,
T.; Afford, S. C.; Copp, A. J.; Kelly, D. A.; Gull, K.; Johnson, C.
A.: The Meckel-Gruber syndrome proteins MKS1 and meckelin interact
and are required for primary cilium formation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 16:
173-186, 2007.

8. Doherty, D.; Parisi, M. A.; Finn, L. S.; Gunay-Aygun, M.; Al-Mateen,
M.; Bates, D.; Clericuzio, C.; Demir, H.; Dorschner, M.; van Essen,
A. J.; Gahl, W. A.; Gentile, M.; and 11 others: Mutations in 3
genes (MKS3, CC2D2A and RPGRIP1L) cause COACH syndrome (Joubert syndrome
with congenital hepatic fibrosis). J. Med. Genet. 47: 8-21, 2010.

9. Garcia-Gonzalo, F. R.; Corbit, K. C.; Sirerol-Piquer, M. S.; Ramaswami,
G.; Otto, E. A.; Noriega, T. R.; Seol, A. D.; Robinson, J. F.; Bennett,
C. L.; Josifova, D. J.; Garcia-Verdugo, J. M.; Katsanis, N.; Hildebrandt,
F.; Reiter, J. F.: A transition zone complex regulates mammalian
ciliogenesis and ciliary membrane composition. Nature Genet. 43:
776-784, 2011.

10. Gentile, M.; Di Carlo, A.; Susca, F.; Gambotto, A.; Caruso, M.
L.; Panella, C.; Vajro, P.; Guanti, G.: COACH syndrome: report of
two brothers with congenital hepatic fibrosis, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia,
oligophrenia, ataxia, and mental retardation. Am. J. Med. Genet. 64:
514-520, 1996.

11. Leitch, C. C.; Zaghloul, N. A.; Davis, E. E.; Stoetzel, C.; Diaz-Font,
A.; Rix, S.; Al-Fadhel, M.; Lewis, R. A.; Eyaid, W.; Banin, E.; Dollfus,
H.; Beales, P. L.; Badano, J. L.; Katsanis, N.: Hypomorphic mutations
in syndromic encephalocele genes are associated with Bardet-Biedl
syndrome. Nature Genet. 40: 443-448, 2008. Note: Erratum: Nature
Genet. 40: 927 only, 2008.

12. Otto, E. A.; Tory, K.; Attanasio, M.; Zhou, W.; Chaki, M.; Paruchuri,
Y.; Wise, E. L.; Wolf, M. T. F.; Utsch, B.; Becker, C.; Nurnberg,
G.; Nurnberg, P.; Nayir, A.; Saunier, S.; Antignac, C.; Hildebrandt,
F.: Hypomorphic mutations in meckelin (MKS3/TMEM67) cause nephronophthisis
with liver fibrosis (NPHP11). J. Med. Genet. 46: 663-670, 2009.

13. Romano, S.; Boddaert, N.; Desguerre, I.; Hubert, L.; Salomon,
R.; Seidenwurm, D.; Bahi-Buisson, N.; Nabbout, R.; Sonigo, P.; Lyonnet,
S.; Brunelle, F.; Munnich, A.; de Lonlay, P.: Molar tooth sign and
superior vermian dysplasia: a radiological, clinical, and genetic
study. Neuropediatrics 37: 42-45, 2006.

14. Smith, U. R.; Consugar, M.; Tee, L. J.; McKee, B. M.; Maina, E.
N.; Whelan, S.; Morgan, N. V.; Goranson, E.; Gissen, P.; Lilliquist,
S.; Aligianis, I. A.; Ward, C. J.; and 19 others: The transmembrane
protein meckelin (MKS3) is mutated in Meckel-Gruber syndrome and wpk
rat. Nature Genet. 38: 191-196, 2006.

15. Tammachote, R.; Hommerding, C. J.; Sinders, R. M.; Miller, C.
A.; Czarnecki, P. G.; Leightner, A. C.; Salisbury, J. L.; Ward, C.
J.; Torres, V. E.; Gattone, V. H., II; Harris, P. C.: Ciliary and
centrosomal defects associated with mutation and depletion of the
Meckel syndrome genes MKS1 and MKS3. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 3311-3323,
2009.

16. Verloes, A.; Lambotte, C.: Further delineation of a syndrome
of cerebellar vermis hypo/aplasia, oligophrenia, congenital ataxia,
coloboma, and hepatic fibrosis. Am. J. Med. Genet. 32: 227-232,
1989.

17. Williams, C. L.; Li, C.; Kida, K.; Inglis, P. N.; Mohan, S.; Semenec,
L.; Bialas, N. J.; Stupay, R. M.; Chen, N.; Blacque, O. E.; Yoder,
B. K.; Leroux, M. R.: MKS and NPHP modules cooperate to establish
basal body/transition zone membrane associations and ciliary gate
function during ciliogenesis. J. Cell. Biol. 192: 1023-1041, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/8/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/19/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/16/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/18/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/29/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/3/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/7/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/25/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/7/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/6/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/3/2007

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/9/2006

EDITED carol: 10/09/2013
carol: 8/14/2013
ckniffin: 8/8/2013
joanna: 8/5/2013
carol: 7/19/2013
mgross: 7/16/2013
carol: 2/7/2012
alopez: 8/23/2011
ckniffin: 8/18/2011
joanna: 6/6/2011
mgross: 5/19/2011
terry: 4/29/2011
carol: 9/7/2010
ckniffin: 9/3/2010
wwang: 7/21/2010
terry: 7/7/2010
mgross: 6/30/2010
terry: 6/25/2010
wwang: 6/24/2010
ckniffin: 6/16/2010
joanna: 4/1/2009
alopez: 7/14/2008
alopez: 5/23/2008
terry: 5/7/2008
wwang: 6/14/2007
ckniffin: 6/6/2007
alopez: 1/8/2007
terry: 1/3/2007
alopez: 2/9/2006

114760	TITLE *114760 CARBONIC ANHYDRASE IV; CA4
;;CA IV
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Carbonic anhydrases (CAs) are a family of zinc metalloenzymes. For
background information on the CA family, see 114800.

CA IV is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored membrane isozyme
expressed on the luminal surfaces of pulmonary (and certain other)
capillaries and on the luminal surface of proximal renal tubules. CA IV
has ancient evolutionary status among CA isozymes. It is functionally
important in CO2 and bicarbonate transport and has a possible role in
inherited renal abnormalities of bicarbonate transport (review by
Okuyama et al., 1993). CA IV is responsible for the taste of
carbonation.

CLONING

CA IV was originally purified from bovine lung as a 52-kD protein by
Whitney and Briggle (1982). The human enzyme is smaller (35 kD) and
contains no detectable N-linked or O-linked glycosylation (Zhu and Sly,
1990).

Okuyama et al. (1992) isolated a full-length cDNA for human CA IV from a
kidney cDNA library. The deduced CA IV protein contains an 18-amino acid
signal sequence, a 260-amino acid region that shows 30 to 36% similarity
with the 29-kD cytoplasmic CAs (e.g., CA1, 114800), and an additional
27-amino acid C-terminal sequence that ends in a 21-amino acid
hydrophobic domain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Okuyama et al. (1993) isolated a full-length CA IV genomic clone. They
found that the 9.5-kb gene contains 8 exons and 7 introns. The first
exon (exon 1a) encodes the signal sequence. Exon 7 encodes the C
terminus of the enzyme precursor, the C terminus of the mature protein,
and the 120-bp sequence corresponding to the 3-prime untranslated region
of the cDNA.

GENE FUNCTION

CA IV is expressed on the apical surfaces of some segments of the
nephron (Brown et al., 1990), the apical plasma membrane of the colon,
and the plasma membrane of specialized capillary beds, including the
cortical capillaries in brain (Ghandour et al., 1992), the
choriocapillaris of the eye (Hageman et al., 1991), the pulmonary
microvasculature (Fleming et al., 1993), and microcapillaries of
skeletal and cardiac muscle (Sender et al., 1994).

Fleming et al. (1995) presented Northern blot data that characterized
the regional distribution of CA IV in rat gastrointestinal tract in
comparison with other CA isozymes known to be expressed in the gut. They
demonstrated that CA IV is an abundant brush border enzyme in the lower
gastrointestinal tract of both rat and human. They stated that the
findings are consistent with participation of CA IV in the extensive
iron and fluid transport in the distal small and large intestine.

In mammals, carbonation elicits both somatosensory and chemosensory
responses, including activation of taste neurons. Chandrashekar et al.
(2009) identified the cellular and molecular substrates for the taste of
carbonation. By targeted genetic ablation and the silencing of synapses
in defined populations of taste receptor cells, they demonstrated that
the sour-sensing cells (expressing PKD2L1, 604532) act as the taste
sensors for carbonation, and showed that carbonic anhydrase-4, a
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored enzyme, functions as the principal
CO(2) taste sensor. Chandrashekar et al. (2009) concluded that, taken
together, their studies revealed the basis of the taste of carbonation
as well as the contribution of taste cells in the orosensory response to
CO(2).

MAPPING

By the use of PCR on DNA from human/rodent somatic cell hybrids, Okuyama
et al. (1993) assigned the CA4 gene to chromosome 17. They confirmed and
regionalized the assignment to 17q23 by in situ hybridization. (A
different gene called CA4 that was earlier assigned to chromosome 16 was
in fact CA7 (114770).)

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 2 unrelated South African families with retinitis
pigmentosa-17 (RP17; 600852), Rebello et al. (2004) identified a
mutation in the CA4 gene (R14W; 114760.0001).

Yang et al. (2005) identified another family with RP17 that segregated
with the R14W mutation. Genealogic records indicated that this family
was an offshoot of the South African family reported by Bardien et al.
(1995). In 1 of 178 families with autosomal dominant RP, the authors
identified a heterozygous R219S mutation (114760.0002).

ANIMAL MODEL

Shah et al. (2005) produced Ca4-, Ca14 (604832)-, and Ca4/Ca14-null
mice. Although Ca4 or Ca14 knockout resulted in viable mice, Ca4-null
mice, particularly females, were produced in smaller numbers than
predicted. Ca4/Ca14-null mice were also produced in smaller numbers than
predicted, were smaller in size than wildtype mice, and many females
died before 10 months of age. Electrophysiologic studies on hippocampal
slices of the knockout mice showed that either CA could mediate
buffering after synaptic transmission in hippocampal slices in the
absence of the other, but eliminating both significantly reduced
hippocampal pH regulation. Shah et al. (2005) concluded that both CA4
and CA14 contribute to extracellular buffering in the CNS, although CA4
appeared to be more important in the hippocampus.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 17
CA4, ARG14TRP

In 24 affected members of 2 large unrelated South African families with
retinitis pigmentosa-17 (600852) previously reported by Bardien et al.
(1995) and Bardien et al. (1997), Rebello et al. (2004) identified a
40C-T transition in exon 1a of the CA4 gene, resulting in an
arg14-to-trp (R14W) substitution. The mutation occurs in the signal
sequence of the gene at position -5 relative to the signal sequence
cleavage site. The mutation was found to cosegregate with the disease
phenotype and was not found in 36 unaffected family members or 100
controls. Expression of the R14W mutant cDNA in COS-7 cells showed that
the mutation (1) reduced the steady-state level of carbonic anhydrase IV
activity by 28% due to a combination of decreased synthesis and
accelerated turnover; (2) led to upregulation of immunoglobulin heavy
chain-binding protein (BiP; 138120), double-stranded RNA-regulated
protein kinase-like ER kinase (PERK; 604032), and CCAAT-enhancer-binding
protein homologous protein (CHOP; 126337), markers of the unfolded
protein response and endoplasmic reticulum stress; and (3) induced
apoptosis, as evidenced by annexin V (131230) binding and terminal
deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling staining, in
most cells expressing the mutant, but not the wildtype, protein. Rebello
et al. (2004) suggested that a high level of expression of the mutant
allele in the endothelial cells of the choriocapillaris leads to
apoptosis, leading in turn to ischemia in the overlying retina and
producing autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa.

In 13 affected members of a large Caucasian family with RP17, Yang et
al. (2005) identified heterozygosity for the R14W mutation. Genealogic
records indicated that this family was an offshoot of the South African
family reported by Bardien et al. (1995). In affected individuals,
reduction in night and peripheral vision manifested at around age 15,
followed by rod photoreceptor atrophy, bone spicule pigmentation, and
concomitant cone photoreceptor dysfunction manifested by photophobia,
color vision changes, and decreased central vision. ERG demonstrated
reduction of both rod and cone responses.

The mechanism of efficient removal of acid load from retina and retinal
pigment epithelium (RPE) by the choriocapillaris is obscure. Yang et al.
(2005) showed that a functional complex of CA4 and NBC1 (SLC4A4; 603345)
was specifically expressed in the choriocapillaris and that the R14W and
R219S (114760.0002) mutations disrupted NBC1-mediated HCO3- transport.
The authors noted that the importance of functional CA4 for survival of
photoreceptors implies that CA inhibitors, which are widely used as
medications, particularly in the treatment of glaucoma, may have
long-term adverse effects on vision.

.0002
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 17
CA4, ARG219SER

In a European family with RP17 (600852), Yang et al. (2005) identified
heterozygosity for a C-A transversion in exon 7 of the CA4 gene,
resulting in an arg219-to-ser (R219S) substitution in a conserved
residue. The mutation was not found in 1,000 control chromosomes.
Biochemical analysis showed that the mutant protein was enzymatically
inactive.

.0003
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 17
CA4, ARG69HIS

In a Chinese patient with retinitis pigmentosa-17 (600842), Alvarez et
al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for a 206G-A transition in exon 3
of the CA4 gene, resulting in an arg69-to-his (R69H) substitution. The
mutation impaired NBC1 (603345)-mediated pH recovery after acid load.
The mutation was not found in 432 normal chromosomes.

REFERENCE 1. Alvarez, B. V.; Vithana, E. N.; Yang, Z.; Koh, A. H.; Yeung, K.;
Yong, V.; Shandro, H. J.; Chen, Y.; Kolatkar, P.; Palasingam, P.;
Zhang, K.; Aung, T.; Casey, J. R.: Identification and characterization
of a novel mutation in the carbonic anhydrase IV gene that causes
retinitis pigmentosa. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 48: 3459-3468,
2007.

2. Bardien, S.; Ebenezer, N.; Greenberg, J.; Inglehearn, C. F.; Bartmann,
L.; Goliath, R.; Beighton, P.; Ramesar, R.; Bhattacharya, S. S.:
An eighth locus for autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa is linked
to chromosome 17q. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 1459-1462, 1995.

3. Bardien, S.; Ramesar, R.; Bhattacharya, S.; Greenberg, J.: Retinitis
pigmentosa locus on 17q (RP17): fine localization to 17q22 and exclusion
of the PDEG and TIMP2 genes. Hum. Genet. 101: 13-17, 1997.

4. Brown, D.; Zhu, X. L.; Sly, W. S.: Localization of membrane-associated
carbonic anhydrase type IV in kidney epithelial cells. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 87: 7457-7461, 1990.

5. Chandrashekar, J.; Yarmolinsky, D.; von Buchholtz, L.; Oka, Y.;
Sly, W.; Ryba, N. J. P.; Zuker, C. S.: The taste of carbonation. Science 326:
443-445, 2009.

6. Fleming, R. E.; Crouch, E. C.; Ruzicka, C. A.; Sly, W. S.: Pulmonary
carbonic anhydrase IV: developmental regulation and cell-specific
expression in the capillary endothelium. Am. J. Physiol. 265: L627-L635,
1993.

7. Fleming, R. E.; Parkkila, S.; Parkkila, A.-K.; Rajaniemi, H.; Waheed,
A.; Sly, W. S.: Carbonic anhydrase IV expression in rat and human
gastrointestinal tract regional, cellular, and subcellular localization. J.
Clin. Invest. 96: 2907-2913, 1995.

8. Ghandour, M. S.; Langley, O. K.; Zhu, X. L.; Waheed, A.; Sly, W.
S.: Carbonic anhydrase IV on brain capillary endothelial cells: a
marker associated with the blood-brain barrier. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 89: 6823-6827, 1992.

9. Hageman, G. S.; Zhu, X. L.; Waheed, A.; Sly, W. S.: Localization
of carbonic anhydrase IV in a specific capillary bed of the human
eye. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 2716-2720, 1991.

10. Okuyama, T.; Batanian, J. R.; Sly, W. S.: Genomic organization
and localization of gene for human carbonic anhydrase IV to chromosome
17q. Genomics 16: 678-684, 1993.

11. Okuyama, T.; Sato, S.; Zhu, X. L.; Waheed, A.; Sly, W. S.: Human
carbonic anhydrase IV: cDNA cloning, sequence comparison, and expression
in COS cell membranes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 1315-1319, 1992.

12. Rebello, G.; Ramesar, R.; Vorster, A.; Roberts, L.; Ehrenreich,
L.; Oppon, E.; Gama, D.; Bardien, S.; Greenberg, J.; Bonapace, G.;
Waheed, A.; Shah, G. N.; Sly, W. S.: Apoptosis-inducing signal sequence
mutation in carbonic anhydrase IV identified in patients with the
RP17 form of retinitis pigmentosa. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 6617-6622,
2004.

13. Sender, S.; Gros, G.; Wahleed, A.; Hageman, G. S.; Sly, W. S.
: Immunohistochemical localization of carbonic anhydrase IV in capillaries
of rat and human skeletal muscle. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 42: 1229-1236,
1994.

14. Shah, G. N.; Ulmasov, B.; Waheed, A.; Becker, T.; Makani, S.;
Svichar, N.; Chesler, M.; Sly, W. S.: Carbonic anhydrase IV and XIV
knockout mice: Roles of the respective carbonic anhydrases in buffering
the extracellular space in brain. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 16771-16776,
2005.

15. Whitney, P. L.; Briggle, T. V.: Membrane-associated carbonic
anhydrase purified from bovine lung. J. Biol. Chem. 257: 12056-12059,
1982.

16. Yang, Z.; Alvarez, B. V.; Chakarova, C.; Jiang, L.; Karan, G.;
Frederick, J. M.; Zhao, Y.; Sauve, Y.; Li, X.; Zrenner, E.; Wissinger,
B.; Den Hollander, A. I.; Katz, B.; Baehr, W.; Cremers, F. P.; Casey,
J. R.; Bhattacharya, S. S.; Zhang, K.: Mutant carbonic anhydrase
4 impairs pH regulation and causes retinal photoreceptor degeneration. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 255-265, 2005.

17. Zhu, X. L.; Sly, W. S.: Carbonic anhydrase IV from human lung:
purification, characterization, and comparison with membrane carbonic
anhydrase from human kidney. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 8795-8801, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/10/2009
Jane Kelly - updated: 4/16/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/8/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/21/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/8/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/23/1987

EDITED alopez: 11/11/2009
terry: 11/10/2009
wwang: 5/27/2009
carol: 1/29/2009
carol: 4/16/2008
wwang: 11/30/2007
terry: 11/8/2007
wwang: 1/24/2006
wwang: 12/21/2005
tkritzer: 7/20/2004
tkritzer: 7/12/2004
terry: 7/8/2004
carol: 3/1/2000
carol: 9/28/1998
mark: 1/27/1996
terry: 1/19/1996
mark: 11/16/1995
carol: 6/18/1993
carol: 4/29/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
carol: 3/6/1990

601292	TITLE *601292 SULFOTRANSFERASE FAMILY 1A, PHENOL-PREFERRING, MEMBER 2; SULT1A2
;;SULFOTRANSFERASE, PHENOL-PREFERRING 2; STP2;;
PHENOL SULFOTRANSFERASE 2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Her et al. (1996) and Dooley and Huang (1996) reported the sequence of
the SULT1A2 gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sulfonation is an important pathway in the biotransformation of many
drugs, xenobiotics, neurotransmitters, and steroid hormones. The
thermostable form of phenol sulfotransferase preferentially catalyzes
the sulfonation of 'simple' planar phenols. The phenol sulfotransferase
STP1 (171150) maps to chromosome 16. Her et al. (1996) determined the
structure and chromosomal localization of the gene encoding a second
phenol sulfotransferase, STP2. The gene spans approximately 5.1 kb and
contains 9 exons that range in length from 74 to 347 bp. Exons 1A and 1B
as well as the 5-prime portion of exon 2 and the 3-prime portion of exon
8 are noncoding. The locations of most STP2 exon/intron splice junctions
are identical to those of a gene for the thermolabile form of PST in
humans, STM (600641), which maps to 16p close to the location of the
thermostable STP1.

Dooley and Huang (1996) determined that 7 coding exons are conserved
among the human STP1, STP2, and STM (600641) genes. The initiator
methionine is found on exon 2. All 3 genes colocalized on a single
cosmid from chromosome 16p12.1-p11.2 and have a high degree of sequence
homology, suggesting that these 3 genes arose by gene duplication.
Dooley and Huang (1996) stated that the previously identified PST gene
sequences HAST4, HAST4v, and ST1A2 are isolates of the STP2 gene.

MAPPING

Her et al. (1996) mapped STP2 to human chromosome 16 by PCR with DNA
from human/rodent somatic cell hybrids.

REFERENCE 1. Dooley, T. P.; Huang, Z.: Genomic organization and DNA sequences
of two human phenol sulfotransferase genes (STP1 and STP2) on the
short arm of chromosome 16. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 228:
134-140, 1996.

2. Her, C.; Raftogianis, R.; Weinshilboum, R. M.: Human phenol sulfotransferase
STP2 gene: molecular cloning, structural characterization, and chromosomal
localization. Genomics 33: 409-420, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 5/20/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1996

EDITED alopez: 04/13/2009
alopez: 6/11/1999
alopez: 7/24/1997
mark: 6/4/1996

164015	TITLE *164015 MATRIN 3; MATR3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Stuurman et al. (1990) showed that nuclear matrins, a group of proteins
in the nuclear matrix, are present in cultured cells from a variety of
tissues and are probably common to mammalian cells. Stuurman et al.
(1990) differentiated 2 nuclear matrix fractions: the peripheral nuclear
matrix (matrix proteins that remain insoluble after reduction), and the
internal nuclear matrix (matrix proteins released by reduction).

Nakayasu and Berezney (1991) identified several novel nuclear matrins
from a rat liver nuclear matrix and characterized them by peptide maps,
polyclonal antibodies generated against the individual matrins, and
indirect immunofluorescence microscopy. They designated the proteins
matrins 3, 4, D-G, 12, and 13.

Belgrader et al. (1991) cloned a full-length rat insulinoma cDNA that
encodes an acidic internal matrix protein designated matrin-3. The
deduced 845-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of
approximately 95 kD. Its primary structure consists of 33% charged
residues and is generally hydrophilic. Like the lamins (see 150330),
matrin-3 has a positively charged N terminus that contains a large
number of amino acids with free hydroxyl groups. A highly acidic domain
near the C terminus, in which 32% of the amino acids are acidic, is a
characteristic found in other nuclear proteins.

Nagase et al. (1998) cloned and sequenced matrin-3, which they called
KIAA0723, from human brain cDNA libraries. The deduced protein contains
847 amino acids.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the MATR3
gene to chromosome 5 (TMAP WI-15469).

Using genomic sequence analysis, Senderek et al. (2009) mapped the MATR3
gene to chromosome 5q31.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 2 unrelated families with a form of distal myopathy that included
vocal cord and pharyngeal weakness (MPD2; 606070), Senderek et al.
(2009) identified the same missense mutation in the MATR3 gene (S85C;
164015.0001).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MYOPATHY, DISTAL, 2
MATR3, SER85CYS

In affected members of a North American family originally reported by
Feit et al. (1998) and in an unrelated Bulgarian family with distal
myopathy with vocal cord and pharyngeal weakness (MPD2; 606070),
Senderek et al. (2009) identified heterozygosity for a C-to-G
transversion at nucleotide 254 in exon 2 of the MATR3 gene that resulted
in a change from serine to cysteine at codon 85 (S85C).

REFERENCE 1. Belgrader, P.; Dey, R.; Berezney, R.: Molecular cloning of matrin
3: a 125-kilodalton protein of the nuclear matrix contains an extensive
acidic domain. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 9893-9899, 1991.

2. Feit, H.; Silbergleit, A.; Schneider, L. B.; Gutierrez, J. A.;
Fitoussi, R.-P.; Reyes, C.; Rouleau, G. A.; Brais, B.; Jackson, C.
E.; Beckmann, J. S.; Seboun, E.: Vocal cord and pharyngeal weakness
with autosomal dominant distal myopathy: clinical description and
gene localization to 5q31. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63: 1732-1742, 1998.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Miyajima, N.;
Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the
coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XI. The complete sequences
of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in
vitro. DNA Res. 5: 277-286, 1998.

4. Nakayasu, H.; Berezney, R.: Nuclear matrins: identification of
the major nuclear matrix proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 10312-10316,
1991.

5. Senderek, J.; Garvey, S. M.; Krieger, M.; Guergueltcheva, V.; Urtizberea,
A.; Roos, A.; Elbracht, M.; Stendel, C.; Tournev, I.; Mihailova, V.;
Feit, H.; Tramonte, J.; and 11 others: Autosomal-dominant distal
myopathy associated with a recurrent missense mutation in the gene
encoding the nuclear matrix protein, matrin 3. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 84:
511-518, 2009.

6. Stuurman, N.; Meijne, A. M. L.; van der Pol, A. J.; de Jong, L.;
van Driel, R.; van Renswoude, J.: The nuclear matrix from cells of
different origin: evidence for a common set of matrix proteins. J.
Biol. Chem. 265: 5460-5465, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 10/20/2009

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/27/1991

EDITED wwang: 07/01/2011
alopez: 10/20/2009
carol: 5/4/2007
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 11/27/1991

615189	TITLE *615189 ANKYRIN REPEAT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 55; ANKRD55
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ankyrin (see 612641)-like repeats, such as those found in ANKRD55, are
33-residue motifs involved in protein-protein interaction (Alloza et
al., 2012).

CLONING

By database analysis, Alloza et al. (2012) found ANKRD55 expression in
ovary, testis, endometrium, and resting CD4 (186940)-positive T cells.

MAPPING

Alloza et al. (2012) stated that the ANKRD55 gene maps to chromosome
5q11.

REFERENCE 1. Alloza, I.; Otaegui, D.; Lopez de Lapuente, A.; Antiguedad, A.;
Varade, J.; Nunez, C.; Arroyo, R.; Urcelay, E.; Fernandez, O.; Leyva,
L.; Fedetz, M.; Izquierdo, G.; and 10 others: ANKRD55 and DHCR7
are novel multiple sclerosis risk loci. Genes Immunity 13: 253-257,
2012.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/19/2013

EDITED mgross: 04/19/2013

