606344	TITLE *606344 POLYMERASE, DNA, MU; POLM
DESCRIPTION DNA polymerases can participate in both replication of the genome and
DNA repair processes. The human genome contains multiple DNA polymerase
genes.

CLONING

By searching sequence databases to identify new members of the polX
family, Aoufouchi et al. (2000) identified EST clones representing 2 DNA
polymerases, POLM and POLL (606343), which they called pol mu and pol
lambda, respectively. They cloned a full-length POLM cDNA by screening
bone marrow and lymph node cDNA libraries and using 5-prime RACE. POLM
encodes a deduced 494-amino acid protein containing a polX domain, a
BRCA-1 C-terminal (BRCT) domain, and 2 helix-hairpin-helix (HHH)
DNA-binding motifs. POLM shares 40% amino acid identity with terminal
deoxynucleotidyltransferase (TDT; 187410) and 76% identity with mouse
Polm. Aoufouchi et al. (2000) found that POLM has template-dependent DNA
polymerase activity in vitro. Northern blot analysis detected a 2.5-kb
POLM transcript in a variety of tissues with highest levels in lymphoid
tissues, including thymus and tonsillar B cells. Aoufouchi et al. (2000)
hypothesized that POLM may have a preferential expression in
proliferating lymphoid cells. Using RT-PCR to amplify POLM cDNA
sequences, they identified several POLM splice variants which do not
encode functional proteins. The mRNA encoding the complete protein is a
minor species, representing approximately 10% of the mRNAs present in a
cell. Using semiquantitative RT-PCR amplification, Aoufouchi et al.
(2000) found that POLM mRNA expression is downregulated in a dose- and
time-dependent manner upon cell exposure to DNA damaging agents.

Using Northern blot analysis, Bertocci et al. (2003) found that mouse
Polm was highly expressed in a variety of tissues, including skin and
brain, in addition to lymphoid tissues. It showed low expression in
testis, a tissue in which many repair or translesional DNA polymerases
are strongly expressed.

Aoufouchi et al. (2000) provided a phylogenetic comparison of yeast and
human proteins of the polX family.

GENE STRUCTURE

Aoufouchi et al. (2000) determined that POLM is encoded by 11 exons and
spans approximately 10 kb of genomic DNA. It shares identical
exon/intron organization and structurally resembles TDT.

ANIMAL MODEL

Bertocci et al. (2002) generated viable and fertile mice lacking Polm.
Polm -/- mice displayed a normal hypermutation pattern, but histologic
analysis showed that half of Polm -/- mice had a marked depletion of B
cells in peripheral lymphoid organs, with a 50% reduction in splenic B
cells.

Using FACS analysis, Bertocci et al. (2003) demonstrated a reduction in
Ig kappa light chain (IGKC; 147200)-positive, but not Ig lambda light
chain (IGLC; 147220)-positive, splenic B cells in Polm -/- mice.
Immunohistochemical analysis showed that Peyer patch B-cell numbers were
reduced and that germinal center compartmentalization was lacking. Polm
-/- mice had altered IgM-negative to IgM-positive transition of B cells
in bone marrow. Ig light chain gene arrangement was impaired at the
level of the V-kappa-J-kappa and V-lambda-J-lambda junctions, with a
reduction in the number of nucleotides in complementarity-determining
region-3 (CDR3) of B cells, but not T cells. Bertocci et al. (2003)
concluded that POLM is a key element contributing to the relative
homogeneity in size of light chain CDR3 and that it takes part in Ig
gene rearrangement at a stage when TDT is no longer expressed.

REFERENCE 1. Aoufouchi, S.; Flatter, E.; Dahan, A.; Faili, A.; Bertocci, B.;
Storck, S.; Delbos, F.; Cocea, L.; Gupta, N.; Weill, J.-C.; Reynaud,
C.-A.: Two novel human and mouse DNA polymerases of the polX family. Nucleic
Acids Res. 28: 3684-3693, 2000.

2. Bertocci, B.; De Smet, A.; Berek, C.; Weill, J.-C.; Reynaud, C.-A.
: Immunoglobulin kappa light chain gene rearrangement is impaired
in mice deficient for DNA polymerase mu. Immunity 19: 203-211, 2003.

3. Bertocci, B.; De Smet, A.; Flatter, E.; Dahan, A.; Bories, J.-C.;
Landreau, C.; Weill, J.-C.; Reynaud, C.-A.: Cutting edge: DNA polymerase
mu and lambda are dispensable for Ig gene hypermutation. J. Immun. 168:
3702-3706, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/16/2006

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 10/1/2001

EDITED mgross: 06/01/2006
terry: 5/16/2006
carol: 10/2/2001

612792	TITLE *612792 PHOSPHATIDYLSERINE SYNTHASE 1; PTDSS1
;;PSS1;;
KIAA0024
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Phosphatidylserine (PS) accounts for 5 to 10% of cell membrane
phospholipids. In addition to its role as a structural component, PS is
involved in cell signaling, blood coagulation, and apoptosis. PS is
synthesized by a calcium-dependent base-exchange reaction catalyzed by
PS synthases (EC 2.7.8.8), like PTDSS1, that exchange L-serine for the
polar head group of phosphatidylcholine (PC) or phosphatidylethanolamine
(PE) (Sturbois-Balcerzak et al., 2001).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated cDNA library
developed from the human immature myeloid cell line KG-1, Nomura et al.
(1994) cloned PTDSS1, which they designated KIAA0024. The deduced
473-amino acid protein has transmembrane domains and a putative tyrosine
phosphorylation site, and it shares 97.3% identity with Chinese hamster
PS synthase. Northern blot analysis detected PTDSS1 expression in all
human tissues and cell lines examined, with highest levels in heart,
lung, liver, and kidney.

Using RT-PCR, Sturbois-Balcerzak et al. (2001) detected Pss1 expression
in all mouse tissues examined, with highest expression in kidney, liver,
brain, heart, lung, and testis.

By database analysis and PCR of a HeLa cell cDNA library, Tomohiro et
al. (2009) cloned PTDSS1 and PTDSS2 (612793), which they called PSS1 and
PSS2, respectively. SDS-PAGE showed that epitope-tagged PSS1 and PSS2
localized to membrane fractions of transfected HeLa cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Stone and Vance (2000) found that Pss1 and Pss2 localized exclusively to
the mitochondrial-associated membrane (MAM) subcompartment of the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in rodent cell lines and in mouse liver.
Mouse liver MAM used PC and PE as substrates for PS biosynthesis,
whereas ER membranes used only PE.

Using in vitro enzyme assays, Sturbois-Balcerzak et al. (2001) showed
that mouse Pss1 used choline, ethanolamine, and serine for base
exchange, whereas Pss2 used ethanolamine and serine, but not choline.

PS is normally localized on the cell membrane inner leaflet, but it
flips to the cell surface during apoptosis. Grandmaison et al. (2004)
showed that Chinese hamster ovary cells deficient in Pss1 and/or Pss2,
which resulted in reduction of in vitro serine-exchange activity by as
much as 97%, externalized normal amounts of PS during apoptosis. They
concluded that normal levels of PSS1 and/or PSS2 are not required to
generate the pool of PS externalized during apoptosis.

By assaying solubilized membranes prepared from transfected HeLa cells,
Tomohiro et al. (2009) showed that full-length human PSS1 and PSS2
increased serine base-exchange activity 2.9- and 3.5-fold, respectively.
Purified PSS1 catalyzed the conversion of both PC and PE into PS, but
PSS2 only catalyzed the conversion of PE into PS. In vitro, PSS1 also
catalyzed choline and ethanolamine base exchange for the formation of PC
and PE, respectively, but PSS2 only catalyzed ethanolamine and serine
base exchange. Serine base exchange by both enzymes occurred at a
neutral pH optimum and was dependent on Ca(2+). Furthermore, exogenous
PS inhibited serine base exchange by PSS1 and PSS2 in membrane fractions
of transfected HeLa cells in a dose-dependent manner. However, purified
epitope-tagged PSS1, but not PSS2, was activated by PS in the presence
of the detergent sucrose monolaurate, suggesting that the mechanism of
PS-mediated inhibition differs between PSS1 and PSS2.

MAPPING

By PCR of a panel of human-rodent hybrid cell lines, Nomura et al.
(1994) mapped the PTDSS1 gene to chromosome 8.

Sturbois-Balcerzak et al. (2001) mapped the mouse Pss1 gene to
chromosome 13B-C1.

ANIMAL MODEL

Arikketh et al. (2008) found that Pss1 -/- mice were viable and fertile
and had normal life spans. Total serine exchange activity in microsomal
fractions isolated from Pss1 -/- brain, liver, and heart was reduced up
to 85%, but the PS content and Pss2 mRNA levels were unchanged except in
Pss1 -/- liver. The rate of axonal extension of Pss1 -/- neurons was
normal. Intercrosses of Pss1 -/- and Pss2 -/- mice yielded viable mice
with 3 disrupted Pss alleles, but no double-knockout mice were born. In
Pss1 +/- Pss2 -/- and Pss1 -/- Pss2 +/- mice, serine exchange activity
was reduced by 65 to 91%, and the tissue content of PS and PE was
decreased.

REFERENCE 1. Arikketh, D.; Nelson, R.; Vance, J. E.: Defining the importance
of phosphatidylserine synthase-1 (PSS1): unexpected viability of PSS1-deficient
mice. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 12888-12897, 2008.

2. Grandmaison, P. A.; Nanowski, T. S.; Vance, J. E.: Externalization
of phosphatidylserine during apoptosis does not specifically require
either isoform of phosphatidylserine synthase. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1636: 1-11, 2004.

3. Nomura, N.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Kawarabayasi,
Y.; Sato, S.; Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. I. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0001-KIAA0040) deduced by analysis
of randomly samples cDNA clones from human immature myeloid cell line
KG-1. DNA Res. 1: 27-35, 1994. Note: Erratum: DNA Res. 2: 210 only,
1995.

4. Stone, S. J.; Vance, J. E.: Phosphatidylserine synthase-1 and
-2 are localized to mitochondria-associated membranes. J. Biol. Chem. 275:
34534-34540, 2000.

5. Sturbois-Balcerzak, B.; Stone, S. J.; Sreenivas, A.; Vance, J.
E.: Structure and expression of the murine phosphatidylserine synthase-1
gene. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 8205-8212, 2001.

6. Tomohiro, S.; Kawaguti, A.; Kawabe, Y.; Kitada, S.; Kuge, O.:
Purification and characterization of human phosphatidylserine synthases
1 and 2. Biochem. J. 418: 421-429, 2009.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/19/2009

EDITED alopez: 04/30/2013
mgross: 5/19/2009

603974	TITLE *603974 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 92; ZNF92
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Zinc finger proteins (ZNFs), such as ZNF92, bind nucleic acids and
perform many key functions, the most important of which is regulating
transcription (Bellefroid et al., 1991). See ZNF91 (603971) for general
information on ZNFs.

CLONING

By screening a cDNA library derived from a human undifferentiated
embryonal carcinoma cell line with the coding sequence of the ZNF85
(603899) N-terminal nonfinger region, which spans the KRAB domain,
Bellefroid et al. (1991) isolated cDNAs encoding 11 distinct KRAB zinc
finger proteins, including ZNF92, which they called HTF12.

Bellefroid et al. (1993) reported the characterization of a subgroup of
KRAB zinc finger proteins, named the ZNF91 family, of which ZNF92 is a
member. These proteins contain a conserved linker region, called the
ZNF91-related spacer region, between their N-terminal KRAB domain and
their first finger unit. The authors found that members of the ZNF91
family are widely expressed in human tissues, with the highest
expression in T-lymphoid cells.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and FISH, Bellefroid et al. (1993)
mapped the ZNF92 gene to chromosome 19p13.1-p12. However, Gross (2011)
mapped the ZNF92 gene to chromosome 7q11.21 based on an alignment of the
ZNF92 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC036439) with the genomic sequence
(GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Bellefroid, E. J.; Marine, J. C.; Ried, T.; Lecocq, P. J.; Riviere,
M.; Amemiya, C.; Poncelet, D. A.; Coulie, P. G.; de Jong, P.; Szpirer,
C.; Ward, D. C.; Martial, J. A.: Clustered organization of homologous
KRAB zinc-finger genes with enhanced expression in human T lymphoid
cells. EMBO J. 12: 1363-1374, 1993.

2. Bellefroid, E. J.; Poncelet, D. A.; Lecocq, P. J.; Revelant, O.;
Martial, J. A.: The evolutionarily conserved Kruppel-associated box
domain defines a subfamily of eukaryotic multifingered proteins. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 3608-3612, 1991.

3. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/25/2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 02/25/2011

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 7/9/1999

EDITED mgross: 02/25/2011
mgross: 7/20/1999
mgross: 7/12/1999
psherman: 7/9/1999

609982	TITLE *609982 VACUOLAR PROTEIN SORTING 4, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF, A; VPS4A
;;VPS4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

VPS4A belongs to the AAA (ATPases associated with diverse cellular
activities) protein family and is involved in lysosomal/endosomal
membrane trafficking (Beyer et al., 2003).

CLONING

By searching databases for proteins similar to yeast Vps4, Bishop and
Woodman (2000) identified an EST for VPS4A, which they called VPS4, that
had been isolated from a human brain cDNA library. The deduced 432-amino
acid protein contains an N-terminal coiled-coil domain and a central AAA
domain. Fluorescence-tagged VPS4 was expressed in the cytosol of
transfected rat kidney cells.

By searching for ESTs similar to yeast Vps4, followed by screening a
human keratinocyte cell line cDNA library, Scheuring et al. (2001)
cloned VPS4A. The deduced 437-amino acid protein has 5 additional
N-terminal amino acids compared with the VPS4A protein reported by
Bishop and Woodman (2000). VPS4A shares 80% amino acid identity with
VPS4B (609983) and 59% identity with yeast Vps4. Northern blot analysis
detected a ubiquitously expressed 2.3-kb transcript.

Using Northern blot analysis, Beyer et al. (2003) found that mouse Vps4a
and Vps4b were variably expressed in all tissues examined. Most tissues
showed a strong bias for one or the other Vps4, but some expressed both
equally.

GENE FUNCTION

By transient expression in rodent kidney cells, Bishop and Woodman
(2000) found that ATPase-defective mutants of human VPS4 localized to
membranes, including those of endocytic vacuoles, and induced endosomal
vacuolation. Many endosomal vacuoles induced by VPS4 mutants were
substantially enriched in cholesterol relative to the endosomal
compartments of untransfected cells. Mutant VPS4 did not associate with
Golgi or endoplasmic reticulum membranes or with cell surface membranes
recycling to the trans-Golgi, nor did it alter their function. Bishop
and Woodman (2000) concluded that VPS4 is involved in postendosomal
cholesterol sorting.

Scheuring et al. (2001) found that heterologous expression of human
VPS4A in Vps4-null yeast partially suppressed the temperature-sensitive
growth defect and partly complemented the vacuolar protein sorting
defect. VPS4A distributed throughout the cytosol of transfected wildtype
yeast and occasionally concentrated in small dots close to vacuoles.
VPS4A with a glu228-to-gln (E228Q) mutation within the AAA domain
induced dominant-negative vacuolar protein sorting defects in wildtype
yeast cells. Two-hybrid experiments suggested that VPS4A and VPS4B could
form heteromeric complexes, and the interaction was stronger if
dominant-negative mutants were involved. Neither protein formed
homomeric complexes.

Lata et al. (2008) found that the ESCRT-III proteins CHMP2A (610893) and
CHMP3 (610052) (charged multivesicular body proteins 2A and 3) could
assemble in vitro into helical tubular structures that expose their
membrane-interaction sites on the outside of the tubule, whereas the
AAA-type adenosine triphosphatase VPS4 could bind on the inside of the
tubule and disassemble the tubes upon adenosine triphosphate hydrolysis.
CHMP2A and CHMP3 copolymerized in solution, and their membrane targeting
was cooperatively enhanced on planar lipid bilayers. Lata et al. (2008)
concluded that such helical CHMP structures could thus assemble within
the neck of an inwardly budding vesicle, catalyzing late steps in
budding under the control of VPS4.

GENE STRUCTURE

Beyer et al. (2003) determined that the VPS4A gene contains 11 exons and
spans 13.64 kb. The promoter region lacks TATA or CAAT boxes, but it
contains CpG islands.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

The N-terminal coiled-coil region of VPS4A is a microtubule-interacting
and transport (MIT) domain involved in substrate recognition. Scott et
al. (2005) reported the solution structure of the VPS4A MIT domain and
identified CHMP1B (606486), an endosomal sorting complex protein, as a
binding partner. They found that VPS4A MIT forms an antiparallel 3-helix
bundle and that a conserved leucine (L64) on the third helix binds the
C-terminal half of CHMP1B.

The AAA ATPase Vps4 is central to endosomal traffic to lysosomes,
retroviral budding, and cytokinesis, and dissociates ESCRT complexes
from membranes. Obita et al. (2007) showed that of the 6
ESCRT-III-related subunits in yeast, only Vps2 (CHMP2A; 610893) and Did2
bind the MIT (microtubule interacting and transport) domain of Vps4, and
that the C-terminal 30 residues of the subunits are both necessary and
sufficient for interaction. Obita et al. (2007) determined the crystal
structure of the Vps2 C terminus in a complex with the Vps4 MIT domain,
explaining the basis for selective ESCRT-III recognition. MIT helices
alpha-2 and alpha-3 recognize a (D/E)xxLxxRLxxL(K/R) motif, and
mutations within this motif cause sorting defects in yeast. Obita et al.
(2007) concluded that the crystal structure of the N-terminal domain of
an archaeal AAA ATPase shows that is closely related to the MIT domain
of Vps4. The archaeal ATPase interacts with an archaeal ESCRT-III-like
protein even though these organisms have no endomembrane system,
suggesting that the Vps4/ESCRT-III partnership is a relic of a function
that predates the divergence of eukaryotes and archaea.

Stuchell-Brereton et al. (2007) independently showed that the MIT
domains of human VPS4A and VPS4B (609983) bind conserved sequence motifs
located at the C termini of the CHMP1-3 class of ESCRT-III proteins.
Structures of VPS4A MIT-CHMP1A (164010) and VPS4B MIT-CHMP2B (609512)
complexes revealed that the C-terminal CHMP motif forms an amphipathic
helix that binds in a groove between the last 2 helices of the
tetratricopeptide-like repeat (TPR) of the VPS4 MIT domain, but in the
opposite orientation to that of a canonic TPR interaction. Distinct
pockets in the MIT domain bound 3 conserved leucine residues of the CHMP
motif, and mutations that inhibited these interactions blocked VPS4
recruitment, impaired endosomal protein sorting, and relieved
dominant-negative VPS4 inhibition of HIV budding. Thus,
Stuchell-Brereton et al. (2007) concluded that their studies revealed
how the VPS4 ATPases recognize their CHMP substrates to facilitate the
membrane fission events required for the release of viruses, endosomal
vesicles, and daughter cells.

MAPPING

By FISH and genomic sequence analysis, Beyer et al. (2003) mapped the
VPS4A gene to chromosome 16q22. They mapped the mouse Vps4a gene to a
region of chromosome 8D that shares homology of synteny with human
chromosome 16q22.

REFERENCE 1. Beyer, A.; Scheuring, S.; Muller, S.; Mincheva, A.; Lichter, P.;
Kohrer, K.: Comparative sequence and expression analyses of four
mammalian VPS4 genes. Gene 305: 47-59, 2003.

2. Bishop, N.; Woodman, P.: ATPase-defective mammalian VPS4 localizes
to aberrant endosomes and impairs cholesterol trafficking. Molec.
Biol. Cell 11: 227-239, 2000.

3. Lata, S.; Schoehn, G.; Jain, A.; Pires, R.; Piehler, J.; Gottlinger,
H. G.; Weissenhorn, W.: Helical structures of ESCRT-III are disassembled
by VPS4. Science 321: 1354-1357, 2008.

4. Obita, T.; Saksena, S.; Ghazi-Tabatabai, S.; Gill, D. J.; Perisic,
O.; Emr, S. D.; Williams, R. L.: Structural basis for selective recognition
of ESCRT-III by the AAA ATPase Vps4. Nature 449: 735-739, 2007.

5. Scheuring, S.; Rohricht, R. A.; Schoning-Burkhardt, B.; Beyer,
A.; Muller, S.; Abts, H. F.; Kohrer, K.: Mammalian cells express
two VPS4 proteins both of which are involved in intracellular protein
trafficking. J. Molec. Biol. 312: 469-480, 2001.

6. Scott, A.; Gaspar, J.; Stuchell-Brereton, M. D.; Alam, S. L.; Skalicky,
J. J.; Sundquist, W. I.: Structure and ESCRT-III protein interactions
of the MIT domain of human VPS4A. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 13813-13818,
2005.

7. Stuchell-Brereton, M. D.; Skalicky, J. J.; Kieffer, C.; Karren,
M. A.; Ghaffarian, S.; Sundquist, W. I.: ESCRT-III recognition by
VPS4 ATPases. Nature 449: 740-744, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/1/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/26/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/20/2006

EDITED alopez: 10/03/2008
terry: 10/1/2008
alopez: 11/2/2007
terry: 10/26/2007
mgross: 3/21/2006
mgross: 3/20/2006

614244	TITLE *614244 PYRIDOXAL-DEPENDENT DECARBOXYLASE DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; PDXDC1
;;KIAA0251
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated KG-1 human
immature myeloid cell line cDNA library, Nagase et al. (1996) cloned
PDXDC1, which they designated KIAA0251. The deduced protein contains 820
amino acids. Northern blot analysis detected PDXDC1 expression in all
human tissues and cell lines examined.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1996) mapped the PDXDC1
gene to chromosome 16.

Hartz (2011) mapped the PDXDC1 gene to chromosome 16p13.11 based on an
alignment of the PDXDC1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK D87438) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/22/2011.

2. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Ohira, M.; Kawarabayasi, Y.;
Ohara, O.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Miyajima, N.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VI. The coding
sequences of 80 new genes (KIAA0201-KIAA0280) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from cell line KG-1 and brain. DNA Res. 3: 321-329,
1996.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/22/2011

EDITED mgross: 09/22/2011

606196	TITLE *606196 IROQUOIS HOMEOBOX PROTEIN 6; IRX6
;;IRXB3;;
IROQUOIS HOMEOBOX PROTEIN 7, FORMERLY; IRX7, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the Iroquois homeobox gene family appear to play multiple
roles during pattern formation of vertebrate embryos.

CLONING

Members of the Iroquois complex in Drosophila, including the highly
homologous homeobox genes caupolican, araucan, and mirror, act as
prepattern molecules in neurogenesis. Bosse et al. (1997) identified 3
members of the Iroquois homeobox gene family in mouse and showed that
they are involved in several embryonic developmental processes including
anterior/posterior and dorsal/ventral patterning of specific regions of
the central nervous system, and regionalization of the otic vesicle,
branchial epithelium, and limbs.

By EST database searching, Lewis et al. (1999) identified a human
breast-derived partial cDNA clone containing a novel homeobox,
designated IRX5 (606195). Using oligonucleotide primers designed to this
clone for RACE/PCR, they obtained the full-length IRX5 cDNA as well as
fragments of transcripts derived from 4 additional IRX genes, including
IRX7 (which they called IRX3). The human IRX homeodomains are about 90%
identical to the homeodomains of the Drosophila Iroquois complex
proteins and about 93% identical to each other. Each of the IRX proteins
contains a hexapeptide-like motif.

MAPPING

By screening of a human genomic library with chicken IRX2 cDNA and EST
database searching, Ogura et al. (2001) cloned 4 human IRX genes. By
fluorescence in situ hybridization, they mapped the IRX5 and IRX7 genes
to chromosome 16q11.2-q13 and the IRX1 (606197) and IRX2 (606198) genes
to chromosome 5p15.3.

REFERENCE 1. Bosse, A.; Zulch, A.; Becker, M.-B.; Torres, M.; Gomez-Skarmeta,
J. L.; Modolell, J.; Gruss, P.: Identification of the vertebrate
Iroquois homeobox gene family with overlapping expression during early
development of the nervous system. Mech. Dev. 69: 169-181, 1997.

2. Lewis, M. T.; Ross, S.; Strickland, P. A.; Snyder, C. J.; Daniel,
C. W.: Regulated expression patterns of IRX-2, an Iroquois-class
homeobox gene, in the human breast. Cell Tissue Res. 296: 549-554,
1999.

3. Ogura, K.; Matsumoto, K.; Kuroiwa, A.; Isobe, T.; Otoguro, T.;
Jurecic, V.; Baldini, A.; Matsuda, Y.; Ogura, T.: Cloning and chromosome
mapping of human and chicken Iroquois (IRX) genes. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 92: 320-325, 2001.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 8/14/2001

EDITED mgross: 10/25/2006
terry: 3/19/2004
terry: 3/18/2004
carol: 1/8/2003
mcapotos: 8/15/2001
mcapotos: 8/14/2001
carol: 8/14/2001

602204	TITLE *602204 BICAUDAL D, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 1; BICD1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

From the early part of the 20th century, embryologists recognized that
the cytoplasmic asymmetry established in the egg during oogenesis
directs the proper spatial development of the embryo. Development of
this polarity in the Drosophila oocyte depends also on the correct
sorting of maternal RNAs. Bicaudal D is a Drosophila protein that is
involved in establishing the asymmetric cytoplasm in the developing
oocyte. The gene encodes a cytoskeleton-like coiled-coil polypeptide,
with a leucine zipper and 5 alpha-helix domains or heptad repeats
showing sequence similarity to the tail domains of myosin heavy chains
(e.g., 160730), the microtubule motor kinesin (see 600025), and
intermediate filament proteins. Baens et al. (1995) isolated a cDNA
fragment homologous to bicaudal D using a hybridization selection
procedure with cosmids derived from 12p. A PCR-mediated cDNA cloning
strategy was applied by Baens and Marynen (1997) to obtain the coding
sequence of the human homolog (BICD1) and to generate a partial mouse
gene cDNA. They found that predicted amino acid sequence similarity of
the BICD1 cDNA was limited essentially to the amphipatic helices and the
leucine zipper, but the conserved order of these domains suggested a
function of the protein in mammals similar to that in Drosophila. A
database search further indicated the existence of a second human
homolog on 9q and a Caenorhabditis elegans homolog. Northern blot
analysis indicated that both the human and the murine homologs produce
an mRNA species of approximately 9.5 kb expressed in brain, heart, and
skeletal muscle, as well as during mouse embryonic development. The
conserved structural characteristics of BICD1 protein and its expression
in muscle and especially brain suggested to Baens and Marynen (1997)
that BICD1 is a component of a cytoskeleton-based mRNA sorting mechanism
conserved during evolution.

GENE FUNCTION

Bullock and Ish-Horowicz (2001) demonstrated in Drosophila that the same
machinery and RNA signals drive specific accumulation of maternal RNAs
in the early oocyte and apical transcript localization in blastoderm
embryos. They demonstrated in vivo that Egalitarian (Egl) and bicaudal D
(BicD), maternal proteins required for oocyte determination, are
selectively recruited by, and cotransported with, localizing transcripts
in blastoderm embryos, and that interfering with the activities of Egl
and BICD blocks apical localization.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For a discussion of a possible association between genetic variation in
the BICD1 gene and leukocyte telomere length in humans, see 609113.

REFERENCE 1. Baens, M.; Aerssens, J.; van Zand, K.; Van den Berghe, H.; Marynen,
P.: Isolation and regional assignment of human chromosome 12p cDNAs. Genomics 29:
44-52, 1995.

2. Baens, M.; Marynen, P.: A human homologue (BICD1) of the Drosophila
bicaudal-D gene. Genomics 45: 601-606, 1997.

3. Bullock, S. L.; Ish-Horowicz, D.: Conserved signals and machinery
for RNA transport in Drosophila oogenesis and embryogenesis. Nature 414:
611-616, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/9/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/18/1997

EDITED wwang: 10/30/2009
ckniffin: 8/27/2009
wwang: 7/29/2009
mgross: 12/15/2005
alopez: 1/10/2002
terry: 1/9/2002
dholmes: 1/12/1998
terry: 12/29/1997
mark: 12/18/1997

611290	TITLE *611290 NONHOMOLOGOUS END-JOINING FACTOR 1; NHEJ1
;;XRCC4-LIKE FACTOR; XLF;;
CERNUNNOS;;
NEJ1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Double-strand breaks (DSBs) result from genotoxic stresses and are among
the most toxic DNA lesions. NHEJ1 is a DNA repair factor essential for
the nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) pathway, which preferentially
mediates repair of DSBs. Failure to repair DSBs results in genetic
instability, developmental delay, and immunodeficiency (Buck et al.,
2006).

CLONING

Buck et al. (2006) sought to identify the gene mutated in 5 patients
with severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) associated with
microcephaly, growth retardation, and sensitivity to ionizing radiation
(IR) (611291). Using a functional complementation cloning strategy in
which patient fibroblasts were transduced with a thymus cDNA library,
they obtained a cDNA encoding NHEJ1, which they called Cernunnos. The
name Cernunnos comes from a Celtic deity associated with fertility,
reflecting the authors' prior naming of the DNA repair gene Artemis
(DCLRE1C; 605988) after a Greek deity (de Villartay, 2007). The
predicted 299-amino acid Cernunnos protein shares 74% identity with its
mouse homolog. RT-PCR analysis detected ubiquitous expression.
Immunofluorescence microscopy showed a predominantly nuclear
localization in transfected fibroblasts.

By yeast 2-hybrid screening of a brain cDNA library with XRCC4 (194363)
as bait, Ahnesorg et al. (2006) isolated a cDNA encoding NHEJ1, which
they termed XLF. The XLF protein is highly conserved in vertebrates and
contains a C-terminal nuclear localization signal. Fold recognition
analysis predicted a structural organization similar to XRCC4, with an
N-terminal 'head' domain and a coiled-coil structure for the remainder
of the protein. Immunoblot analysis showed that XRCC4 was widely
expressed in human cell lines, and immunofluorescence microscopy
revealed a predominantly nuclear localization.

GENE STRUCTURE

Buck et al. (2006) determined that the NHEJ1 gene contains 8 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Buck et al. (2006) mapped the NHEJ1 gene
to chromosome 2q35.

GENE FUNCTION

Using GST pull-down and coimmunoprecipitation experiments, Ahnesorg et
al. (2006) found that XL4 interacted with both XRCC4 and LIG4 (601837)
in vitro and in vivo. Small interfering RNA-mediated downregulation of
XLF caused marked radiosensitivity and sensitivity to drugs causing
DSBs. Downregulation of either XRCC4 or XLF resulted in defective DNA
DSB repair, and downregulation of XLF led to prolonged phosphorylation
of H2AX (H2AFX; 601772) following irradiation. Ahnesorg et al. (2006)
concluded that XLF is a novel core component of the NHEJ apparatus.

Using immunoprecipitation analysis, Callebaut et al. (2006) showed that
Cernunnos interacted with XRCC4 and LIG4. Sequence analysis revealed
that Cernunnos is the homolog of yeast Nej1 and that both proteins
belong to an extended XRCC4 family.

Cantagrel et al. (2007) found expression of NHEJ1 in the telencephalic
ventricular and subventricular zones of human embryo brains. In human
adult brain, NHEJ1 was mainly expressed in the cerebral cortex and
cerebellum. In a fetus with a malformation of cortical development,
including polymicrogyria, disorganized cellular layers, and neuronal
heterotopia, Cantagrel et al. (2007) identified a balanced de novo
translocation t(2;7)(q35;p22) that disrupted the coding region of NHEJ1.
Further studies showed that a 196-residue truncated protein was
expressed in patient cells. Although sequence analysis did not detect
any mutations in 72 patients with perisylvian polymicrogyria or 13 with
polymicrogyria and heterotopia, Cantagrel et al. (2007) suggested that
NHEJ1 may play a role in the development of the human cerebral cortex.

Zha et al. (2011) showed that XLF, ATM (607585), and H2AX (601772) all
have fundamental roles in processing and joining DNA ends during V(D)J
recombination, but that these roles have been masked by unanticipated
functional redundancies. Thus, combined deficiency of ATM and XLF nearly
blocks mouse lymphocyte development due to an inability to process and
join chromosomal V(D)J recombination DSB intermediates. Combined XLF and
ATM deficiency also severely impairs classical NHEJ, but not alternative
end-joining, during IgH class switch recombination. Redundant ATM and
XLF functions in classical NHEJ are mediated by ATM kinase activity and
are not required for extrachromosomal V(D)J recombination, indicating a
role for chromatin-associated ATM substrates. Correspondingly,
conditional H2AX inactivation in XLF-deficient pro-B lines leads to
V(D)J recombination defects associated with marked degradation of
unjoined V(D)J ends, revealing that H2AX has a role in this process.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Severe Combined Immunodeficiency with Microcephaly, Growth
Retardation, and Sensitivity to Irradiation

Buck et al. (2006) identified mutations in the NHEJ1 gene (611290.0001
to 611290.0004) in all 5 patients they reported with SCID, microcephaly,
growth retardation, and sensitivity to IR (611291). Patient fibroblasts
showed normal sensitivity to IR and normal V(D)J recombination following
complementation with wildtype NHEJ1.

- Severe Combined Immunodeficiency with Sensitivity to Irradiation

Using immunoblot and immunofluorescence analyses, Ahnesorg et al. (2006)
found that the 2BN cell line derived from a patient with SCID and
sensitivity to IR (see 611291), previously reported by Dai et al.
(2003), contained little or no XLF. Although RT-PCR analysis detected a
faint, approximately 900-bp XLF product, immunoblot analysis showed no
protein. Ahnesorg et al. (2006) identified a thymine insertion in codon
4 of the XLF gene (611290.0005) in 2BN cells, resulting in a frameshift
and a truncated protein. Introduction of wildtype XLF into 2BN cells
eliminated their radiosensitivity and rendered them proficient in DNA
DSB repair.

-  Chromosome 2q35 Duplication Syndrome

In a large 8-generation family with syndactyly type I (185900) and 2
families with craniosynostosis and syndactyly (see 185900), Klopocki et
al. (2011) analyzed copy number variation using array CGH and detected 3
duplications of varying sizes on chromosome 2q35 at the IHH locus
(600726). The 3 duplications, which all cosegregated with disease in the
respective families, overlapped in a 9.1-kb region located 40 kb 5-prime
of the IHH gene, within a large intron of the neighboring NHEJ1 gene,
which contains 1 highly conserved noncoding element (CNE). The smallest
region of overlap between the 2 families with craniosynostosis and
syndactyly extended 14.6 kb and encompassed 3 CNEs. Studies in
transgenic mouse embryos demonstrated that the CNEs drive reporter gene
expression in a pattern highly similar to wildtype Ihh expression,
suggesting that the critical duplicated region within the NHEJ1 gene
serves as a long-range enhancer of IHH, specifically regulating IHH
expression during endochondral bone formation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Collie eye anomaly (cea) is a complex disorder in dogs in which the
pattern of chorioretinal and scleral development is disturbed. The
primary aspect, choroidal hypoplasia, presents as a localized defect in
the temporal quadrant of the ocular fundus and is similar to human
macular coloboma. Parker et al. (2007) identified a homozygous 7.8-kb
deletion within intron 4 of the Njeh1 gene in all cea-affected dogs, but
not in unaffected dogs, of multiple breeds. Comparative analysis of this
region among dog, human, mouse, and rat genomes revealed islands of high
sequence conservation, including a core element with conserved binding
sites for several DNA-binding proteins.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY WITH MICROCEPHALY, GROWTH RETARDATION,
AND SENSITIVITY TO IONIZING RADIATION
NHEJ1, ARG57GLY

In a French patient with SCID, microcephaly, growth retardation, and
sensitivity to ionizing radiation (611291), Buck et al. (2006)
identified compound heterozygosity for a C-to-G transversion at
nucleotide 259 in exon 2 of the NHEJ1 gene, leading to an arg57-to-gly
(A57G) substitution, and a T-to-C transition at nucleotide 457 in exon
3, leading to a cys123-to-arg (C123R; 611290.0002) substitution. An
Italian patient with the same phenotype and consanguineous parents was
homozygous for the A57G mutation.

.0002
SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY WITH MICROCEPHALY, GROWTH RETARDATION,
AND SENSITIVITY TO IONIZING RADIATION
NHEJ1, CYS123ARG

See 611290.0001 and Buck et al. (2006).

.0003
SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY WITH MICROCEPHALY, GROWTH RETARDATION,
AND SENSITIVITY TO IONIZING RADIATION
NHEJ1, ARG178TER

In a Turkish patient with SCID, microcephaly, growth retardation, and
sensitivity to ionizing radiation (611291), Buck et al. (2006)
identified homozygosity for a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 622 in
exon 5 of the NHEJ1 gene, resulting in truncation of the NHEJ1 protein
at arg178 (R178X). The parents of the patient were consanguineous.

.0004
SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY WITH MICROCEPHALY, GROWTH RETARDATION,
AND SENSITIVITY TO IONIZING RADIATION
NHEJ1, 1-BP DEL, 267G AND IVS2DS, A-T, +3

In 2 Turkish sibs with SCID, microcephaly, growth retardation, and
sensitivity to ionizing radiation (611291), Buck et al. (2006)
identified a homozygous deletion of G267, the last nucleotide of exon 2
in the NHEJ1 gene, as well as a homozygous A-to-T change 3 nucleotides
downstream in intron 2. These associated mutations resulted in a mixed
RNA population in which normally spliced RNAs carried the G267 deletion,
which led to a frameshift and premature termination, and numerous
aberrant splicing events led to severely truncated proteins. The parents
of the patients were consanguineous.

.0005
SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY WITH SENSITIVITY TO IONIZING RADIATION
DUE TO NHEJ1 DEFICIENCY
NHEJ1, 1-BP INS, 12T

Ahnesorg et al. (2006) identified an insertion of thymine at nucleotide
12 of the first coding exon of the NHEJ1 gene in the 2BN cell line
derived from a patient with SCID and sensitivity to ionizing radiation
(see 611291) but without microcephaly and only mild developmental delay
(Dai et al., 2003). The mutation resulted in a frameshift and a
truncated 46-amino acid protein. Ahnesorg et al. (2006) could not rule
out the possibility that the mutation did not totally inactivate NHEJ1
activity and that some NHEJ1 protein with residual function was made
from alternative downstream translational initiation codons. Callebaut
et al. (2006) also suggested that 2BN cells harbor a hypomorphic
mutation through translation reinitiation at a downstream methionine.

REFERENCE 1. Ahnesorg, P.; Smith, P.; Jackson, S. P.: XLF interacts with the
XRCC4-DNA ligase IV complex to promote DNA nonhomologous end-joining. Cell 124:
301-313, 2006.

2. Buck, D.; Malivert, L.; de Chasseval, R.; Barraud, A.; Fondaneche,
M.-C.; Sanal, O.; Plebani, A.; Stephan, J.-L.; Hufnagel, M.; le Deist,
F.; Fischer, A.; Durandy, A.; de Villartay, J.-P.; Revy, P.: Cernunnos,
a novel nonhomologous end-joining factor, is mutated in human immunodeficiency
with microcephaly. Cell 124: 287-299, 2006.

3. Callebaut, I.; Malivert, L.; Fischer, A.; Mornon, J.-P.; Revy,
P.; de Villartay, J.-P.: Cernunnos interacts with the XRCC4-DNA-ligase
IV complex and is homologous to the yeast nonhomologous end-joining
factor Nej1. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 13857-13860, 2006.

4. Cantagrel, V.; Lossi, A.-M.; Lisgo, S.; Missirian, C.; Borges,
A.; Philip, N.; Fernandez, C.; Cardoso, C.; Figarella-Branger, D.;
Moncla, A.; Lindsay, S.; Dobyns, W. B.; Villard, L.: Truncation of
NHEJ1 in a patient with polymicrogyria. Hum. Mutat. 28: 356-364,
2007.

5. Dai, Y.; Kysela, B.; Hanakahi, L. A.; Manolis, K.; Riballo, E.;
Stumm, M.; Harville, T. O.; West, S. C.; Oettinger, M. A.; Jeggo,
P. A.: Nonhomologous end joining and V(D)J recombination require
an additional factor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 2462-2467, 2003.

6. de Villartay, J.-P.: Personal Communication. Paris, France
6/27/2007.

7. Klopocki, E.; Lohan, S.; Brancati, F.; Koll, R.; Brehm, A.; Seemann,
P.; Dathe, K.; Stricker, S.; Hecht, J.; Bosse, K.; Betz, R. C.; Garaci,
F. G.; Dallapiccola, B.; Jain, M.; Muenke, M.; Ng, V. C. W.; Chan,
W.; Chan, D.; Mundlos, S.: Copy-number variations involving the IHH
locus are associated with syndactyly and craniosynostosis. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 88: 70-75, 2011.

8. Parker, H. G.; Kukekova, A. V.; Akey, D. T.; Goldstein, O.; Kirkness,
E. F.; Baysac, K. C.; Mosher, D. S.; Aguirre, G. D.; Acland, G. M.;
Ostrander, E. A.: Breed relationships facilitate fine-mapping studies:
a 7.8-kb deletion cosegregates with Collie eye anomaly across multiple
dog breeds. Genome Res. 17: 1562-1571, 2007.

9. Zha, S.; Guo, C.; Boboila, C.; Oksenych, V.; Cheng, H.-L.; Zhang,
Y.; Wesemann, D. R.; Yuen, G.; Patel, H.; Goff, P. H.; Dubois, R.
L.; Alt, F. W.: ATM damage response and XLF repair factor are functionally
redundant in joining DNA breaks. Nature 469: 250-254, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 09/19/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/28/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/3/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/16/2007

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 8/2/2007

EDITED carol: 09/19/2013
carol: 9/12/2013
joanna: 8/5/2013
alopez: 2/3/2011
terry: 1/28/2011
mgross: 12/4/2007
terry: 12/3/2007
wwang: 8/23/2007
ckniffin: 8/16/2007
mgross: 8/3/2007

607491	TITLE *607491 PROTEIN O-FUCOSYLTRANSFERASE 1; POFUT1
;;OFUT1; OFUCT1;;
KIAA0180
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The O-fucose modification is found on epidermal growth factor (EGF;
131530)-like repeats of a number of cell surface and secreted proteins.
O-fucose glycans play important roles in ligand-induced receptor
signaling. For example, elongation of O-fucose on Notch (190198) by the
beta-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase fringe (602577) modulates the
ability of Notch to respond to its ligands. The enzyme that adds
O-fucose to EGF-like repeats is GDP-fucose protein O-fucosyltransferase,
or POFUT1 (Wang et al., 2001).

CLONING

By screening sequence databases using a probe deduced from N-terminal
sequence analysis of Pofut1 purified from CHO cells, Wang et al. (2001)
identified a partial cDNA, KIAA0180, that had been cloned by Nagase et
al. (1996). Wang et al. (2001) obtained a full-length cDNA encoding
POFUT1, which they called OFUCT1, by screening a human heart cDNA
library. The full-length cDNA encodes a 388-amino acid protein with a
predicted N-terminal transmembrane sequence typical of a type II
membrane orientation. Wang et al. (2001) identified POFUT1 homologs in
mouse, Drosophila, and C. elegans that share 90.4%, 41.2%, and 29.4%
amino acid identity with human POFUT1, respectively. Northern blot
analysis detected major POFUT1 transcripts of approximately 5 kb in all
tissues examined, consistent with the widespread localization of the
O-fucose modification. Several other weaker bands were also detected,
suggesting that other transcripts may be expressed in some tissues.

Li et al. (2013) demonstrated that Pofut1 is expressed in the skin and
other organs of zebrafish, with highest expression in the testis, fin,
and ovary.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Wang et al. (2001) mapped the POFUT1 gene
to chromosome 20q11, near the centromere. It is located between the
PLAGL2 (604866) and KIF3B (603754) genes. They mapped the mouse gene to
a homologous region of mouse chromosome 2.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (2001) showed that expression of a soluble form of human
POFUT1 in insect cells yielded a protein of the predicted molecular mass
with kinetic and enzymatic properties similar to those of Pofut1
purified from CHO cells.

Using RNA interference to decrease Pofut1 expression in Drosophila,
Okajima and Irvine (2002) demonstrated that O-linked fucose is
positively required for Notch signaling, including both fringe-dependent
and fringe-independent processes. The requirement for Pofut1 was found
to be cell autonomous, in the signal-receiving cell, and upstream of
Notch activation. The transcription of Pofut1 was developmentally
regulated, and overexpression of Pofut1 inhibited Notch signaling. The
authors concluded that POFUT1 is a core component of the Notch pathway
that is required for the activation of Notch by its ligands and whose
regulation may contribute to the pattern of Notch activation during
development.

Notch receptor signaling regulates cell growth and differentiation, and
core components of Notch signaling pathways are conserved from
Drosophila to humans. Shi and Stanley (2003) showed that mouse embryos
lacking protein O-fucosyltransferase-1 die at midgestation with severe
defects in somitogenesis, vasculogenesis, cardiogenesis, and
neurogenesis. The phenotype is similar to that of embryos lacking
downstream effectors of all Notch signaling pathways such as
presenilins, and is different from null phenotypes of Cripto (187395),
Notch receptor, Notch ligand, or Fringe. Protein O-fucosyltransferase-1
is, therefore, an essential core member of Notch signaling pathways in
mammals.

Okajima et al. (2005) found that Drosophila Pofut1 has a distinct Notch
chaperone activity. They localized Ofut1 to the endoplasmic reticulum
and showed that this localization was essential for function in vivo.
Ofut1 could bind to Notch, was required for the trafficking of wildtype
Notch out of the endoplasmic reticulum, and could partially rescue
defects in secretion and ligand binding associated with Notch point
mutations. This ability of Ofut1 to facilitate folding of Notch did not
require its fucosyltransferase activity. Okajima et al. (2005) concluded
that a glycosyltransferase can bind its substrate in the endoplasmic
reticulum to facilitate normal folding.

In HaCaT cells, Li et al. (2013) demonstrated that knockdown of POFUT1
reduces the expression of NOTCH1 (190198), NOTCH2 (600275), HES1
(139605), and KRT5 (148040).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 2 unrelated Chinese families with Dowling-Degos
disease (DDD2; 615327), Li et al. (2013) identified heterozygous
truncating mutations in the POFUT1 gene (607491.0001 and 607491.0002,
respectively); the mutations cosegregated with disease in each family
and neither was found in 600 Chinese controls.

ANIMAL MODEL

Li et al. (2013) observed that morpholino knockdown of POFUT1 in
zebrafish produced a hypopigmentation phenotype at 48 hours
postfertilization (hpf) and abnormal melanin distribution at 72 hpf,
replicating the clinical phenotype seen in patients with Dowling-Degos
disease (see 615327).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DOWLING-DEGOS DISEASE 2
POFUT1, GLU144TER

In affected members of a 4-generation Chinese family with Dowling-Degos
disease (DDD2; 615327), Li et al. (2013) identified heterozygosity for a
c.430G-T transversion in exon 4 of the POFUT1 gene, resulting in a
glu144-to-ter (E144X) substitution. Analysis of RNA from immortalized
lymphocytes from 2 affected individuals showed normal POFUT1 transcripts
but no truncated transcripts, presumably due to nonsense-mediated decay.

.0002
DOWLING-DEGOS DISEASE 2
POFUT1, 1-BP DEL, 482A

In a 53-year-old Chinese woman with Dowling-Degos disease (DDD2;
615327), Li et al. (2013) identified heterozygosity for a 1-bp deletion
(c.482delA) in exon 4 of the POFUT1 gene, causing a frameshift predicted
to result in premature termination (Lys161SerfsTer42).

REFERENCE 1. Li, M.; Cheng, R.; Liang, J.; Yan, H.; Zhang, H.; Yang, L.; Li,
C.; Jiao, Q.; Lu, Z.; He, J.; Ji, J.; Shen, Z.; Li, C.; Hao, F.; Yu,
H.; Yao, Z.: Mutations in POFUT1, encoding protein O-fucosyltransferase
1, cause generalized Dowling-Degos disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 92:
895-903, 2013. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 92: 1014 only, 2013.

2. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Tanaka, A.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. V. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0161-KIAA0200) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 3: 17-24, 1996.

3. Okajima, T.; Irvine, K. D.: Regulation of Notch signaling by O-linked
fucose. Cell 111: 893-904, 2002.

4. Okajima, T.; Xu, A.; Lei, L.; Irvine, K. D.: Chaperone activity
of protein O-fucosyltransferase 1 promotes Notch receptor folding. Science 307:
1599-1603, 2005.

5. Shi, S.; Stanley, P.: Protein O-fucosyltransferase 1 is an essential
component of Notch signaling pathways. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100:
5234-5239, 2003.

6. Wang, Y.; Shao, L.; Shi, S.; Harris, R. J.; Spellman, M. W.; Stanley,
P.; Haltiwanger, R. S.: Modification of epidermal growth factor-like
repeats with O-fucose: molecular cloning and expression of a novel
GDP-fucose protein O-fucosyltransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 40338-40345,
2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/23/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/1/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/13/2003

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 1/17/2003

EDITED carol: 09/17/2013
carol: 7/23/2013
wwang: 6/2/2005
wwang: 6/1/2005
terry: 6/1/2005
alopez: 6/23/2003
terry: 6/13/2003
mgross: 1/17/2003

138760	TITLE *138760 HYDROXYACYL GLUTATHIONE HYDROLASE; HAGH
;;GLYOXALASE II; GLO2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Glyoxalase II (EC 3.1.2.6), otherwise known as hydroxyacyl-glutathione
hydrolase, converts the intermediate substrate S-lactoyl-glutathione to
reduced glutathione and D-lactate (summary by Honey and Shows, 1981).

CLONING

Ridderstrom et al. (1996) cloned a cDNA coding for glyoxalase II from
human liver. The 1,011-bp sequence contains a full-length coding region
of 780 basepairs, corresponding to a 260-amino acid polypeptide. The
calculated molecular mass of the protein is 28,861 Da. They expressed
the gene in bacteria and the recombinant enzyme showed a kinetic
behavior indistinguishable from that of the native enzyme.

MAPPING

By study of somatic cell hybrids, Honey and Shows (1981) concluded that
the gene for glyoxalase II is on chromosome 16. Mulley and Callen (1986)
confirmed the assignment of HAGH to chromosome 16 by studies of a
human-mouse hybrid panel. They found that both HAGH and phosphoglycolate
phosphatase (PGP; 172280) were present only in those cell lines
containing 16p13.

Mulley et al. (1990) assigned the HAGH locus to 16p13.3 by
electrophoretic detection of enzymes from a mouse/human somatic cell
panel, the members of which carried portions of human chromosome 16 with
precisely defined breakpoints.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Board (1980) described rare polymorphism of glyoxalase II, observed only
in a Micronesian population, in which a new variant allele had a
frequency of 0.016. In the heterozygotes, the electrophoretic pattern
was a double band, suggesting that the structure of glyoxalase II is
monomeric. The enzyme shows a high degree of polymorphism in anthropoid
primates (Board et al., 1981).

Data on gene frequencies of allelic variants were tabulated by
Roychoudhury and Nei (1988).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Ball and Vander Jagt (1979)
REFERENCE 1. Ball, J. C.; Vander Jagt, D. L.: Purification of S-2-hydroxyacylglutathione
hydrolase (glyoxalase II) from rat erythrocytes. Anal. Biochem. 98:
472-477, 1979.

2. Board, P. G.: Genetic polymorphism of human erythrocyte glyoxalase
II. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 32: 690-694, 1980.

3. Board, P. G.; Gibbs, C. J., Jr.; Gajdusek, D. C.: Polymorphism
of erythrocyte glyoxalase II in anthropoid primates. Folia Primatol. 36:
138-143, 1981.

4. Honey, N. K.; Shows, T. B.: Assignment of the glyoxalase II gene
(HAGH) to human chromosome 16. Hum. Genet. 58: 358-361, 1981.

5. Mulley, J. C.; Barton, N.; Callen, D. F.: Localisation of human
PGP and HAGH genes to 16p13.3. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 53: 175-176,
1990.

6. Mulley, J. C.; Callen, D. F.: New regional localisations for HAGH
and PGP on human chromosome 16. Hum. Genet. 74: 423-424, 1986.

7. Ridderstrom, M.; Saccucci, F.; Hellman, U.; Bergman, T.; Principato,
G.; Mannervik, B.: Molecular cloning, heterologous expression, and
characterization of human glyoxalase II. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 319-323,
1996.

8. Roychoudhury, A. K.; Nei, M.: Human Polymorphic Genes: World Distribution.
New York: Oxford Univ. Press (pub.)  1988.

CONTRIBUTORS Lori M. Kelman - updated: 8/22/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 06/13/2011
carol: 6/9/2011
mgross: 3/17/2004
mark: 8/22/1996
terry: 8/22/1996
mark: 8/21/1996
mimadm: 9/24/1994
pfoster: 2/18/1994
carol: 3/26/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/26/1991
carol: 2/8/1991

600982	TITLE *600982 MITOGEN-ACTIVATED KINASE KINASE KINASE 1; MAP3K1
;;MAP/ERK KINASE KINASE 1; MEKK1;;
MAPKKK1;;
MEK KINASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MAP3K1, or MEKK1, is a mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase
kinase that regulates the ERK (see 601795) and JNK (see 601158) MAPK
pathways, as well as the transcription factor NF-kappa-B (see 164011)
and the transcriptional coactivator p300 (EP300; 602700). MAP3K1
generates antiapoptotic signaling as a full-length protein, but it
induces apoptosis following cleavage by caspases (see 147678) (summary
by Schlesinger et al., 2002).

CLONING

Xia et al. (1998) cloned human MEKK1 from HeLa, B-cell, and Jurkat cDNA
libraries. The deduced 1,495-amino acid protein has a C-terminal
catalytic domain and shares 83% identity with rat Mekk1. Western blot
analysis detected MEKK1 at an apparent molecular mass of 200 kD in
transfected COS-1 cells.

Xu et al. (1996) cloned rat Mekk1. The deduced 1,493-amino acid rat
Mekk1 protein contains 2 N-terminal proline-rich domains, followed by a
cysteine-rich region, 2 pleckstrin (PLEK; 173570) homology (PH) domains,
and a C-terminal kinase domain. Western blot analysis detected
endogenous MEKK1 at an apparent molecular mass of about 195 kD in human
293 cells. Mekk1 proteins with similar molecular masses were detected in
mouse, rat, and Chinese hamster cell lines. Fractionation of cells
expressing rat Mekk1 revealed that the full-length protein associated
with membranes. A Mekk1 C-terminal catalytic domain fragment associated
with both the soluble fraction and with membranes.

Pearlman et al. (2010) demonstrated high levels of expression of Map3k1
in mouse gonads within 13.5 days postcoitum (dpc), with approximately
equal expression in male and female gonads. Map3k1 expression was also
observed throughout the mouse embryonic gonad at 11.5 dpc, the
sex-determining stage of gonad development. Staining occurred within the
testis cords at 13.5 dpc in a pattern indicative of Sertoli cell
expression.

GENE STRUCTURE

Pearlman et al. (2010) noted that the MAP3K1 gene contains 20 exons.

MAPPING

Vinik et al. (1995) identified DNA sequence and size polymorphisms in
intronic and 3-prime untranslated regions of the mouse Map3k1 gene and
the human MAP3K1 homolog. Using these allele-specific polymorphisms,
they mapped the Map3k1 gene in an intersubspecific backcross to mouse
chromosome 13. They mapped the human MAP3K1 gene to chromosome 5 by
somatic cell hybrid analysis.

GENE FUNCTION

By assaying transfected COS-1 cells, Xia et al. (1998) showed that human
MEKK1 activated JNK1 (MAPK8; 601158) robustly and p38-alpha (MAPK14;
600289) less efficiently, but it had only a marginal effect on ERK2
(MAPK1; 176948). MEKK1 directly and specifically interacted with JNKK1
(MAP2K4; 601335) and activated JNKK1 in cells and in vitro.
Phosphorylation of JNKK1 by MEKK1 disrupted their interaction. MEKK1 and
JNK1 competed for binding to JNKK1. Xia et al. (1998) concluded that
JNKK1 is the preferred MEKK1 substrate.

Gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570) induces a number of genes, including
MEKK1, to upregulate cellular responses by using specific transcription
factors and the cognate elements (Roy et al., 2002).

Lu et al. (2002) found that the PHD domain of MEKK1, a RING finger-like
structure, exhibited E3 ubiquitin ligase activity toward ERK2 in vitro
and in vivo. Moreover, both MEKK1 kinase activity and the docking motif
on ERK1 (601795)/ERK2 were involved in ERK1/ERK2 ubiquitination.
Significantly, cells expressing ERK2 with the docking motif mutation
were resistant to sorbitol-induced apoptosis. Therefore, MEKK1 functions
not only as an upstream activator of ERK and JNK through its kinase
domain, but also as an E3 ligase through its PHD domain, providing a
negative regulatory mechanism for decreasing ERK1/ERK2 activity.

Schlesinger et al. (2002) stated that full-length mouse Mekk1 generates
antiapoptotic signals, while a 91-kD C-terminal Mekk1 fragment induces
apoptosis. They found that caspase-dependent cleavage of Mekk1
relocalized the 91-kD fragment from the particulate fraction to a
soluble cytoplasmic fraction. Schlesinger et al. (2002) concluded that
MEKK1 functions as a molecular switch to regulate apoptosis in a
caspase-dependent manner.

Cytokine signaling is thought to require assembly of multicomponent
signaling complexes at cytoplasmic segments of membrane-embedded
receptors, in which receptor-proximal protein kinases are activated.
Matsuzawa et al. (2008) reported that, upon ligation, CD40 (109535)
formed a complex containing adaptor molecules TRAF2 (601895) and TRAF3
(601896), ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UBC13 (UBE2N; 603679), cellular
inhibitor of apoptosis protein-1 (CIAP1, or BIRC2; 601712) and -2
(CIAP2, or BIRC3; 601721), IKK-gamma (IKBKG; 300248), and MEKK1. TRAF2,
UBC13, and IKK-gamma were required for complex assembly and activation
of MEKK1 and MAP kinase cascades. However, the kinases were not
activated unless the complex was translocated from the membrane to the
cytosol upon CIAP1/CIAP2-induced degradation of TRAF3. Matsuzawa et al.
(2008) proposed that this 2-stage signaling mechanism may apply to other
innate immune receptors and may account for spatial and temporal
separation of MAPK and IKK signaling.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Association with Breast Cancer

Easton et al. (2007) identified an A/C SNP (dbSNP rs889312) in the
MAP3K1 gene that was significantly (p = 7 x 10(-20)) associated with
familial breast cancer (114480) in a 3-stage genomewide association
study of 22,848 cases from 22 studies. Easton et al. (2007) found that
the allele was common in the U.K. population and thus unlikely to confer
increased disease risk individually. However, in combination with other
susceptibility alleles, the SNP may become clinically significant.

In a sample of 10,358 carriers of BRCA1 (113705) or BRCA2 (600185) gene
mutations from 23 studies, Antoniou et al. (2008) did not observe an
overall association between dbSNP rs889312 and increased risk of breast
cancer. However, when the group was stratified, BRCA2 mutation carriers
who also carried the minor allele of the SNP were at slightly increased
risk (hazard ratio of 1.12; p(trend) = 0.02). The authors concluded that
this locus interacts multiplicatively on breast cancer risk in BRCA2
mutation carriers.

- 46,XY Sex Reversal 6

In a French family with 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis mapping to chromosome
5q (SRXY6; 613762), Pearlman et al. (2010) analyzed the MAP3K1 gene and
identified a heterozygous splice site mutation that segregated with
disease in the family (600982.0001). Sequence analysis of MAP3K1 in a
New Zealand family with 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis identified a missense
mutation (600982.0002). Screening of MAP3K1 in 11 sporadic cases
revealed 2 more missense mutations in 2 patients (600982.0003 and
600982.0004, respectively). In cultured primary lymphoblastoid cells
from the French family and 2 sporadic patients, the mutations were found
to alter phosphorylation of the downstream targets p38 (MAPK14; 600289)
and ERK1 (MAPK3; 601795)/ERK2 (MAPK1; 176948) and to enhance binding of
RHOA (165390) to the MAP3K1 complex.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yujiri et al. (1998) targeted disruption of the gene encoding Mekk1 to
define its function in the regulation of MAP kinase pathways and cell
survival. Mekk1 -/- embryonic stem cells from mice had lost or altered
responses of Jnk to microtubule disruption and cold stress but activated
Jnk normally in response to heat shock, anisomycin, and ultraviolet
irradiation. Activation of Jnk was lost and that of Erk was diminished
in response to hyperosmolarity and serum factors in Mekk1 -/- cells.
Loss of Mekk1 expression resulted in a greater apoptotic response of
cells to hyperosmolarity and microtubule disruption. When activated by
specific stresses that alter cell shape and the cytoskeleton, Mekk1
signals to protect cells from apoptosis.

Minamino et al. (1999) found that Mekk1 -/- mouse embryonic stem
cell-derived cardiac myocytes were extremely sensitive to hydrogen
peroxide-induced apoptosis. Elevated sensitivity was due to enhanced
Tnf-alpha (TNF; 191160) production, which was negatively regulated by
the Mekk1-Jnk pathway in wildtype mice.

The BALB/cGa mouse strain and its descendants produced 2 waves of high
frequency of spontaneous heritable mutations. Juriloff et al. (2005)
determined that one of these mutations, referred to as ophthalmatrophy
(oa) or lidgap-Gates (lg-Ga), is a 27.5-kb deletion of exons 2 to 9 of
the Map3k1 gene. The mutation causes a failure of fetal eyelid
development, resulting in the defect 'open eyelids at birth.' Affected
eyes develop corneal opacity by adulthood.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
46,XY SEX REVERSAL 6
MAP3K1, IVS2AS, T-A, -8

In 5 affected individuals from a large multigenerational French family
with 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis, complete or partial (SRXY6; 613762),
originally reported by Le Caignec et al. (2003), Pearlman et al. (2010)
identified heterozygosity for a splice acceptor site mutation (634-8T-A)
in intron 2 of MAP3K1, resulting in the insertion of 2 amino acids
in-frame at this site. Two mutation-positive individuals were phenotypic
females who on laparotomy had right-sided streak gonads and left-sided
dysgenetic testes, with a dysgerminoma of the right streak gonad in one
patient and a dysgerminoma and gonadoblastoma of the left dysgenetic
testis in the other patient. The other 3 mutation-positive family
members were phenotypic males, 1 with penile hypospadias and chordee,
and the 2 other with perineal hypospadias, 1 of whom also had chordee.
The ratio of mutant to wildtype transcript was greater than 1 in
lymphoblastoid cells from affected individuals. The mutation was not
found in 100 unrelated French controls of European descent or in the
1000 Genomes Project. In cultured primary lymphoblastoid cells, the
mutation was found to increase phosphorylation of the downstream targets
p38 (MAPK14; 600289) and ERK1 (MAPK3; 601795)/ERK2 (MAPK1; 176948)
compared to wildtype; coimmunoprecipitation studies demonstrated
enhanced binding of RHOA (165390) to the mutant MAP3K1 complex.

.0002
46,XY SEX REVERSAL 6
MAP3K1, GLY616ARG

In affected individuals from a 3-generation New Zealand family of
European descent with 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis, complete or partial
(SRXY6; 613762), originally reported by Espiner et al. (1970), Pearlman
et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for a 1846G-A transition in exon
10 of the MAP3K1 gene, resulting in a gly616-to-arg (G616R)
substitution. The mutation was not found in 100 unrelated ethnically
matched controls or in the 1000 Genomes Project. A patient cell line
from this family was not available for analysis.

.0003
46,XY SEX REVERSAL 6
MAP3K1, LEU189PRO

In a sporadic patient with 46,XY complete gonadal dysgenesis (SRXY6;
613762), Pearlman et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for a 566T-C
transition in exon 2 of the MAP3K1 gene, resulting in a leu189-to-pro
(L189P) substitution within the phylogenetically conserved focal
adhesion kinase (FAK) binding site. The mutation was not found in 100
unrelated ethnically matched controls or in the 1000 Genomes Project. In
cultured primary lymphoblastoid cells, the mutation was found to
increase phosphorylation of the downstream target ERK1 (MAPK3;
601795)/ERK2 (MAPK1; 176948) compared to wildtype, and
coimmunoprecipitation studies demonstrated enhanced binding of RHOA
(165390) to the mutant MAP3K1 complex.

.0004
46,XY SEX REVERSAL 6
MAP3K1, LEU189ARG

In a sporadic patient with 46,XY complete gonadal dysgenesis (613762),
Pearlman et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for a 566T-G
transversion in exon 2 of the MAP3K1 gene, resulting in a leu189-to-arg
(L189R) substitution within the phylogenetically conserved focal
adhesion kinase (FAK) binding site. The mutation was not found in 100
unrelated ethnically matched controls or in the 1000 Genomes Project. In
cultured primary lymphoblastoid cells, the mutation was found to
increase phosphorylation of the downstream targets p38 (MAPK14; 600289)
and ERK1 (MAPK3; 601795)/ERK2 (MAPK1; 176948) compared to wildtype, and
coimmunoprecipitation studies demonstrated enhanced binding of RHOA
(165390) to the mutant MAP3K1 complex.

REFERENCE 1. Antoniou, A. C.; Spurdle, A. B.; Sinilnikova, O. M.; Healey, S.;
Pooley, K. A.; Schmutzler, R. K.; Versmold, B.; Engel, C.; Meindl,
A.; Arnold, N.; Hofmann, W.; Sutter, C.; and 80 others: Common
breast cancer-predisposition alleles are associated with breast cancer
risk in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 82:
937-948, 2008.

2. Easton, D. F.; Pooley, K. A.; Dunning, A. M.; Pharoah, P. D. P.;
Thompson, D.; Ballinger, D. G.; Struewing, J. P.; Morrison, J.; Field,
H.; Luben, R.; Wareham, N.; Ahmed, S.; and 93 others: Genome-wide
association study identifies novel breast cancer susceptibility loci. Nature 447:
1087-1093, 2007.

3. Espiner, E. A.; Veale, A. M.; Sands, V. E.; Fitzgerald, P. H.:
Familial syndrome of streak gonads and normal male karyotype in five
phenotypic females. New Eng. J. Med. 283: 6-11, 1970.

4. Juriloff, D. M.; Harris, M. J.; Mah, D. G.: The open-eyelid mutation,
lidgap-Gates, is an eight-exon deletion in the mouse Map3k1 gene. Genomics 85:
139-142, 2005.

5. Le Caignec, C.; Baron, S.; McElreavey, K.; Joubert, M.; Rival,
J.-M.; Mechinaud, F.; David, A.: 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis: evidence
for autosomal dominant transmission in a large kindred. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 116A: 37-43, 2003.

6. Lu, Z.; Xu, S.; Joazeiro, C.; Cobb, M. H.; Hunter, T.: The PHD
domain of MEKK1 acts as an E3 ubiquitin ligase and mediates ubiquitination
and degradation of ERK1/2. Molec. Cell 9: 945-956, 2002.

7. Matsuzawa, A.; Tseng, P.-H.; Vallabhapurapu, S.; Luo, J.-L.; Zhang,
W.; Wang, H.; Vignali, D. A. A.; Gallagher, E.; Karin, M.: Essential
cytoplasmic translocation of a cytokine receptor-assembled signaling
complex. Science 321: 663-668, 2008. Note: Erratum: Science 322:
375 only, 2008.

8. Minamino, T.; Yujiri, T.; Papst, P. J.; Chan, E. D.; Johnson, G.
L.; Terada, N.: MEKK1 suppresses oxidative stress-induced apoptosis
of embryonic stem cell-derived cardiac myocytes. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 96: 15127-15132, 1999.

9. Pearlman, A.; Loke, J.; Le Caignec, C.; White, S.; Chin, L.; Friedman,
A.; Warr, N.; Willan, J.; Brauer, D.; Farmer, C.; Brooks, E.; Oddoux,
C.; and 10 others: Mutations in MAP3K1 cause 46,XY disorders of
sex development and implicate a common signal transduction pathway
in human testis determination. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 87: 898-904, 2010.

10. Roy, S. K.; Hu, J.; Meng, Q.; Xia, Y.; Shapiro, P. S.; Reddy,
S. P. M.; Platanias, L. C.; Lindner, D. J.; Johnson, P. F.; Pritchard,
C.; Pages, G.; Pouyssegur, J.; Kalvakolanu, D. V.: MEKK1 plays a
critical role in activating the transcription factor C/EBP-beta-dependent
gene expression in response to IFN-gamma. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99:
7945-7950, 2002.

11. Schlesinger, T. K.; Bonvin, C.; Jarpe, M. B.; Fanger, G. R.; Cardinaux,
J.-R.; Johnson, G. L.; Widmann, C.: Apoptosis stimulated by the 91-kDa
caspase cleavage MEKK1 fragment requires translocation to soluble
cellular compartments. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 10283-10291, 2002.

12. Vinik, B. S.; Kay, E. S.; Fiedorek, F. T., Jr.: Mapping of the
MEK kinase gene (Mekk) to mouse chromosome 13 and human chromosome
5. Mammalian Genome 6: 782-783, 1995.

13. Xia, Y.; Wu, Z.; Su, B.; Murray, B.; Karin, M.: JNKK1 organizes
a MAP kinase module through specific and sequential interactions with
upstream and downstream components mediated by its amino-terminal
extension. Genes Dev. 12: 3369-3381, 1998.

14. Xu, S.; Robbins, D. J.; Christerson, L. B.; English, J. M.; Vanderbilt,
C. A.; Cobb, M. H.: Cloning of rat MEK kinase 1 cDNA reveals an endogenous
membrane-associated 195-kDa protein with a large regulatory domain. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 5291-5295, 1996.

15. Yujiri, T.; Sather, S.; Fanger, G. R.; Johnson, G. L.: Role of
MEKK1 in cell survival and activation of JNK and ERK pathways defined
by targeted gene disruption. Science 282: 1911-1914, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 4/13/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/30/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/16/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/28/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/28/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/17/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/2/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/18/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/3/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/20/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/15/1996

EDITED carol: 08/29/2011
wwang: 4/25/2011
mgross: 4/13/2011
terry: 3/30/2011
terry: 3/18/2011
wwang: 2/23/2011
terry: 2/16/2011
terry: 11/25/2009
alopez: 11/18/2008
mgross: 8/28/2008
wwang: 5/1/2008
ckniffin: 4/28/2008
carol: 8/17/2007
ckniffin: 7/17/2007
mgross: 2/2/2005
mgross: 9/18/2002
cwells: 7/17/2002
terry: 7/3/2002
carol: 9/21/1999
terry: 9/20/1999
mgross: 9/15/1999
dholmes: 3/24/1998
psherman: 3/17/1998
psherman: 3/16/1998
terry: 3/4/1998
terry: 1/17/1997
mark: 5/13/1996
mark: 1/15/1996

615367	TITLE *615367 N-TERMINAL ASPARAGINE AMIDASE; NTAN1
;;N-TERMINAL ASPARAGINE AMIDOHYDROLASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The N-end rule relates the in vivo half-life of a protein to the
identity of its N-terminal residue. By enzymatic deamidation, NTAN1
converts the tertiary destabilizing N-terminal residue asparagine to the
secondary destabilizing residue aspartate (Grigoryev et al., 1996).

CLONING

Grigoryev et al. (1996) cloned mouse Ntan1, which encodes a deduced
310-amino acid protein. By database analysis, they identified 2 splice
variants of human NTAN1. Full-length mouse and human NTAN1 share 92%
amino acid identity. Northern blot analysis detected variable expression
of an approximately 1.4-kb transcript in all 8 mouse tissues examined,
with lowest expression in testis. A transcript of about 1.1 kb was
prominently expressed in testis only.

GENE FUNCTION

By assaying yeast expressing mouse Ntan1, Grigoryev et al. (1996) found
that Ntan1 showed amidase activity toward N-terminal asparagine, but not
N-terminal glutamine, and reduced the half-life of the deamidated test
protein. Northern blot analysis showed that Ntan1 expression decreased
following differentiation in C2C12 mouse myoblasts, but not in MEL mouse
leukemia cells.

MAPPING

Hartz (2013) mapped the NTAN1 gene to chromosome 16p13.11 based on an
alignment of the NTAN1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF092440) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

By interspecific backcross analysis, Grigoryev et al. (1996) mapped the
mouse Ntan1 gene to a proximal region of mouse chromosome 16 that shares
homology of synteny with human chromosome 16p.

REFERENCE 1. Grigoryev, S.; Stewart, A. E.; Kwon, Y. T.; Arfin, S. M.; Bradshaw,
R. A.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland, N. G.; Varshavsky, A.: A mouse amidase
specific for N-terminal asparagine: the gene, the enzyme, and their
function in the N-end rule pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 28521-28532,
1996.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/13/2013.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/12/2013

EDITED tpirozzi: 08/12/2013
tpirozzi: 8/12/2013

602410	TITLE *602410 BROMODOMAIN AND PHD FINGER-CONTAINING PROTEIN; BRPF1
;;BROMODOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN, 140-KD; BR140;;
PEREGRIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Thompson et al. (1994) cloned a cDNA encoding a predicted 1,214-amino
acid protein that they designated BR140. The BR140 protein, known also
as peregrin, has 6 zinc finger motifs and a bromodomain. Thompson et al.
(1994) found that BR140 migrates as a 150-kD protein on SDS-PAGE.
Northern blots showed that BR140 is expressed ubiquitously. Western
blots and immunohistochemistry revealed that BR140 is expressed at the
highest level in testes and spermatogonia, and is localized within
nuclei.

Gregorini et al. (1996) noted that BR140 is very similar in structure to
2 other zinc finger genes, AF10 (602409) and AF17 (MLLT6; 600328), and
suggested that they form a family of regulatory proteins.

MAPPING

Gregorini et al. (1996) mapped the BR140 gene to 3p25-p26 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Gregorini, A.; Sahin, F. I.; Lillington, D. M.; Meerabux, J.; Saha,
V.; McCullagh, P.; Bocci, M.; Menevse, S.; Papa, S.; Young, B. D.
: Gene BR140, which is related to AF10 and AF17, maps to chromosome
band 3p25. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 17: 269-272, 1996.

2. Thompson, K. A.; Wang, B.; Argraves, W. S.; Giancotti, F. G.; Schranck,
D. P.; Ruoslahti, E.: BR140, a novel zinc-finger protein with homology
to the TAF250 subunit of TFIID. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 198:
1143-1152, 1994.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 3/2/1998

EDITED carol: 09/17/2003
carol: 12/14/2000
alopez: 3/2/1998

607994	TITLE *607994 5-PRIME,3-PRIME-@EXORIBONUCLEASE 1; XRN1
;;STRAND EXCHANGE PROTEIN 1; SEP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By PCR using primers based on conserved yeast Sep1 sequences, followed
by library screening and 3-prime RACE, Sato et al. (1998) cloned SEP1
from a peripheral blood leukocyte cDNA library. The deduced 1,694-amino
acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 190 kD. It shares 92%
homology with mouse Sep1, which the authors called Dhm1, over the
N-terminal and central portions of the molecule, but only 74% homology
at the C terminus. Northern blot analysis detected a predominant 10-kb
transcript in all cells and organs tested except lung, liver, and
kidney. Minor bands of about 5.5 kb were detected in testis and
placenta. Epitope-tagged SEP1 was recovered in the cytoplasmic fraction
of transfected 293 cells and showed an apparent molecular mass of about
208 kD. Fluorescence-tagged SEP1 localized to the cytoplasm,
particularly the nuclear periphery, of transfected HeLa cells.

Bashkirov et al. (1997) cloned 2 variants of mouse Sep1, which they
called Xrn1. The longer protein contains 1,719 amino acids and has a
calculated molecular mass of about 194 kD. The smaller variant contains
a 13-amino acid deletion due to skipping of an optional exon.

GENE FUNCTION

Bashkirov et al. (1997) characterized mouse Sep1. Both Sep1 variants
were active in yeast complementation assays. The longer variant
exhibited 5-prime-to-3-prime exoribonuclease activity. Sep1 showed
substrate preference for RNA G4 tetraplex-containing substrates over a
monomeric RNA substrate with the same sequence. It also preferred RNA
substrates over DNA substrates, either G4 or monomeric. Immunostaining
revealed endogenous SEP1 expressed in several human and murine cells as
diffuse cytoplasmic staining and an enrichment in cytoplasmic foci.
Microtubule depolymerizing agents abolished the diffuse cytoplasmic
localization but not the localization in foci. Ingelfinger et al. (2002)
determined that, in addition to SEP1, these foci contain RNA-decapping
enzyme (DCP1/2) and several LSM proteins (see 607281).

Zhang et al. (2002) determined that SEP1 was downregulated in 3 of 4
osteogenic sarcoma cell lines and in 8 of 9 osteogenic sarcoma biopsy
specimens.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Sato et al. (1998) mapped the XRN1 gene to
chromosome 3q25-q26.1.

ANIMAL MODEL

Gatfield and Izaurralde (2004) showed that, contrary to expectation,
degradation of premature termination codon (PTC)-containing messages in
Drosophila is initiated by endonucleolytic cleavage(s) in the vicinity
of the nonsense codon. The resulting 5-prime fragment is rapidly
degraded by exonucleolytic digestion by the exosome, whereas the 3-prime
fragment is degraded by Xrn1. This decay route is shown for several
PTC-containing reporters, as well as an endogenous mRNA that is
naturally regulated by nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). Gatfield and
Izaurralde (2004) concluded that despite conservation in the NMD
machinery, PTC-containing transcripts are degraded in Drosophila by a
mechanism that differs considerably from those described in yeast and
mammals.

REFERENCE 1. Bashkirov, V. I.; Scherthan, H.; Solinger, J. A.; Buerstedde, J.-M.;
Heyer, W.-D.: A mouse cytoplasmic exoribonuclease (mXRN1p) with preference
for G4 tetraplex substrates. J. Cell Biol. 136: 761-773, 1997.

2. Gatfield, D.; Izaurralde, E.: Nonsense-mediated messenger RNA
decay is initiated by endonucleolytic cleavage in Drosophila. Nature 429:
575-578, 2004.

3. Ingelfinger, D.; Arndt-Jovin, D. J.; Luhrmann, R.; Achsel, T.:
The human LSm1-7 proteins colocalize with the mRNA-degrading enzymes
Dcp1/2 and Xrn1 in distinct cytoplasmic foci. RNA 8: 1489-1501,
2002.

4. Sato, Y.; Shimamoto, A.; Shobuike, T.; Sugimoto, M.; Ikeda, H.;
Kuroda, S.; Furuichi, Y.: Cloning and characterization of human Sep1
(hSEP1) gene and cytoplasmic localization of its product. DNA Res. 5:
241-246, 1998.

5. Zhang, K.; Dion, N.; Fuchs, B.; Damron, T.; Gitelis, S.; Irwin,
R.; O'Connor, M.; Schwartz, H.; Scully, S. P.; Rock, M. G.; Bolander,
M. E.; Sarkar, G.: The human homolog of yeast SEP1 is a novel candidate
tumor suppressor gene in osteogenic sarcoma. Gene 298: 121-127,
2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/29/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/29/2003

EDITED alopez: 09/14/2011
mgross: 8/19/2004
carol: 8/18/2004
tkritzer: 7/29/2004
terry: 7/29/2004
mgross: 7/29/2003

142860	TITLE *142860 MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX, CLASS II, DR ALPHA; HLA-DRA
;;HLA-DRA1;;
HLA-DR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY TYPE;;
HLA-D HISTOCOMPATIBILITY TYPE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules present
antigens to CD4 (186940)-positive cells. Human class II MHC molecules
are of 3 major isotypes, HLA-DR, HLA-DP (see 142880), and HLA-DQ (see
146880), each of which consists of an alpha and a beta chain. Both the
alpha and beta chains of HLA-DP and HLA-DQ are polymorphic, whereas
HLA-DR alpha (HLA-DRA) is invariant and HLA-DR beta (HLA-DRB; see
142857) is polymorphic. Thus, differences in the HLA-DR beta chain
account for different peptide-binding motifs of HLA-DR molecules (Dai et
al., 2008).

Lee et al. (1982) described 2 cDNA clones containing sequences
corresponding to HLA-DR antigens, specifically the 34,000 MW
glycoprotein chain. The authors stated that the heavy chain is largely
invariant and that the light chain (MW about 28,000) carries the major
polymorphic determinants. Other HLA-D/DR-associated antigens with
different heavy and light chains (also called alpha and beta,
respectively) have been identified on B cells (Accolla et al., 1981;
Shackelford et al., 1981).

Korman et al. (1982) provided information on the primary structure of
the heavy and light chains of DR. The HLA-DR antigen heterodimer
consists of 4 extracellular domains, 2 of which are Ig-like (1 in the
heavy chain, alpha-2, and 1 in the light chain, beta-2). The third is
the amino-terminal polymorphic domain of the light chain (beta-1), and
the fourth is an invariant domain in the heavy chain (alpha-1). Both the
light and the heavy chains have a large glycosylated amino-terminal
extracellular region, a small hydrophobic membranous region, and a small
hydrophilic carboxy-terminal region; in this they resemble class I MHC
antigens. Kaufman and Strominger (1982) applied limited proteolysis to
demonstrate further that the extracellular region of the light chain
consists of 2 domains, each with a disulfide loop. The amino-terminal
domain bears the carbohydrate and is polymorphic, while the
carboxy-terminal domain is relatively conserved and has significant
amino acid homology with immunoglobulins. In DR, it is the light chain
that is polymorphic; in class I antigens, beta-2-microglobulin is
invariant or highly conserved. Larhammar et al. (1982) likewise
commented on similarities to both the immunoglobulins and the class I
MHC antigens. They referred to the 2 chains of the class II molecules as
alpha and beta. They provided the complete nucleotide sequence of a
beta-chain gene and deduced the corresponding amino acid sequence.
Kratzin et al. (1981) published the sequence of another beta chain which
shows about 70% homology with the one reported by Larhammar et al.
(1982). This is consistent with the conclusion that the HLA-D region
contains at least 2 (Accolla et al., 1981) and probably more
(Shackelford et al., 1981) genes for class II antigens.

The DR, DP (146880), and DQ (142880) gene products resemble each other
fairly closely and also resemble Ia of the mouse. They are heterodimers
of 1 alpha, or heavy, chain (MW 33,000) and 1 beta, or light, chain (MW
28,000). The serologic specificity resides mainly in the beta chain
(Erlich et al., 1983).

Walker et al. (1983) determined the N-terminal amino acid sequences of
the alpha and beta chains of HLA-DR1 and HLA-DR2 antigens. No
differences were found in the alpha chains. However, in the first 35
N-terminal residues of the beta chains, 2 regions of variability were
apparent, each comprising about 6 amino acids. The authors suggested
that these variable regions may be responsible for the serologically
defined polymorphism of HLA-DR antigens.

MAPPING

Location of at least one HLA-DR heavy chain gene on chromosome 6 was
confirmed by analysis of DNA from man-mouse somatic cell hybrids by
Southern transfer of restriction endonuclease transfers. The sequences
coding for HLA-DR heavy chain appear to be present in only one or a few
copies in the genome and to be relatively simple in structure (Lee et
al., 1982).

By studies of a cell line with a small visible deletion of 6p, Erlich et
al. (1983) mapped the alpha chain of HLA-DR to 6p2105-6p23. The genes
for all the class I antigens map in the same region. Under conditions of
high stringency and considering the most intensely hybridizing bands, 1
gene locus each was recognized by HLA-DR alpha and HLA-DR beta probes
and 2 by the HLA-DC beta probe (Levine et al., 1984). By study of
variants with various breakpoints, they defined 3 subregions in the
following order from centromere distally: subregion I, HLA-DC beta-1;
subregion II, HLA-DC beta-2 and HLA-DR alpha; subregion III, HLA-DR
beta. Both the alpha and the beta chains map to the HLA region. (In the
case of the class I antigens, only the alpha chain maps to the HLA
region; the beta chain, beta-2-microglobulin, maps to chromosome 15.)
There are about 25 copies of HLA class I genes and 15, in all, of alpha
and beta class II genes. The class III genes, C2, BF, C4A, C4B, are
present in single copy. The beta chain is responsible for DR
polymorphism. Class II molecules, located predominantly on B cells and
macrophages, play a key role in immune response, functioning in the
presentation of antigen to regulatory T lymphocytes.

Strominger (1986) indicated that the findings with DNA probes 'suggest
that the multiple HLA-DR light chains and the multiple HLA-DR heavy
chains are encoded in a 5 centimorgan region of human 6p'--specifically,
6p21.1.

Hardy et al. (1986) reported mapping studies of the class II region by
means of pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). Their findings,
together with linkage studies and data on linkage disequilibrium,
indicate that the order of the class II genes is
centromere--DP--DZ-alpha--DO-beta--DX (HLA-DQA2;
613503)--DQ--DR-beta--DR-alpha. The map order indicates that DQ
molecules are analogous to the I-A molecules in the mouse and that DR
molecules are analogous to the products of the murine I-E locus. No
recombination between DQ and DR genes had been reported and alleles of
these genes are in very strong linkage disequilibrium. In contrast, a
high recombination frequency of about 1 to 3% is found between DP genes
and DQ-DR genes. Furthermore, there is very little linkage
disequilibrium between DP and DR alleles. These observations suggest
that either the DP subregion is located some distance centromeric to the
DQ-DR subregions or that a recombination 'hotspot' exists between DP and
DQ-DR. The results of Hardy et al. (1986) excluded the first possibility
as the distance between DP and DQ is similar to the distance separating
DQ and DR. See also HLA-DQB1 (604305).

- Reviews

Strominger (1986) and Auffray and Strominger (1986) gave superb
discussions of the molecular structure of the HLA system, particularly
the class II region and also presented a useful map of the region and a
hypothesis for the generation of autoimmunity that depends on somatic
mutation in the immune system.

Trowsdale (1987) provided a useful review of the molecular genetics of
the class II antigens, including his latest version of the working map
of the human HLA-D region.

EVOLUTION

Mayer et al. (1993) showed that a retrovirus related to the mouse
mammary tumor viruses was inserted into intron 1 of DRB6 more than 23
million years ago. The insertion was either accompanied or followed by
the deletion of exon 1 in the promoter region of DRB6. In the 3-prime
long terminal repeat (LTR) of the retrovirus, however, an open reading
frame for a new exon arose, which codes for a sequence that could
function as a leader for the truncated DRB6 gene. The new exon has a
functional donor splice site at its 3-prime end which enables it to be
spliced in register with DRB6 exon 2. Upstream from the new exon is a
promoter enabling transcription of the DRB6 gene. Besides providing an
example of a de novo generation of an exon, the study suggested a
potential mechanism for generating new genes through the replacement of
old exons with newly generated ones.

GENE FUNCTION

By pulsed field gel electrophoresis, Dunham et al. (1989) found
differences in the amount of DNA present in the DQ and DR subregions of
the class II region dependent on the DR type. Specifically, cell lines
that carry DR2 had about 30 kb more DNA within the DR subregion than
those that carry DR3, DR5, or DR6. The DR4 haplotype had an additional
110 kb of DNA within the DQ or DR subregion compared to DR3, DR5, and
DR6. These haplotype-specific differences may be of significance for the
maintenance of linkage disequilibrium within the DR and DQ subregions
and the low frequency of recombination between DQ and DR.

Moen et al. (1980) concluded that HLA-DR matching of cadaveric kidneys
improves survival of the transplanted organ.

Tiercy et al. (1988) demonstrated micropolymorphism undetectable by
serologic typing procedures which should permit more accurate HLA
matching for transplantation and for more precise correlations between
HLA and disease susceptibility. Micropolymorphism was detected by
hybridization with allele-specific oligonucleotides, a method they
referred to as HLA oligotyping.

Chelladurai et al. (1991) demonstrated that HLA-DR has procoagulant
activity and suggested that it is responsible for thromboembolic
complications in cancer patients and in recipients of mismatched organ
transplants.

Olerup et al. (1991) investigated DRB-DQA-DQB gene polymorphism by TaqI
restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis in West Africans and
found polymorphism to be almost twice as extensive in this population as
in North European Caucasians. They interpreted this finding as
indicating that Africans comprise the oldest and genetically most
diverse human population and supporting the hypothesis of a population
bottleneck in the emergence of the white race. They could find little
evidence for parasite-driven overdominant selection and proposed instead
that one of the forces maintaining a low frequency of HLA homozygotes
might be a decreased likelihood of potentially autoreactive T-cell
clones escaping thymic selection in HLA heterozygotes. This would be
consistent with the central role of HLA molecules as self/nonself
discriminators.

Terasaki et al. (1976) described a high frequency of a B-lymphocyte
antigen (group 4) in multiple sclerosis (MS; see 126200). Association
with HLA-A3, HLA-B7, and HLA-Dw2 has been demonstrated also.

In a multistage genomewide association study involving a total of 1,540
multiple sclerosis family trios, 2,322 case subjects, and 5,418 control
subjects, the International Multiple Sclerosis Genetics Consortium
(2007) used the HLA-DRA A/G SNP dbSNP rs3135388 as a proxy for the
DRB1*1501 allele (complete concordance between the dbSNP rs3135388 A
allele and DRB1*1501 was found in 2730 of 2757 subjects in whom data
were available) and confirmed unequivocally that the HLA-DRA locus was
associated with MS (p = 8.94 X 10(-81); OR, 1.99).

Ferber et al. (1999) evaluated the association of HLA class II alleles
DR and DQ with gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) and the postpartum
development of IDDM (222100). DR3 allele frequency was significantly
increased in 43 women with islet autoantibodies, in particular in those
with glutamic acid decarboxylase autoantibodies (GADA), or in the 24
women who developed IDDM postpartum. In women with GADA, DR4 and
DQB1*0302 were significantly elevated. Twenty-five (59.5%) islet
antibody-positive women and 17 (74%) women who developed IDDM postpartum
had a DR3- or DR4-containing genotype. The cumulative risk to develop
IDDM within 2 years postpartum in GDM women with either DR3 or DR4 was
22%, compared to 7% in women without those alleles and rose to 50% in
the DR3- or DR4-positive women who had required insulin during
pregnancy. Combining the determination of the susceptible HLA alleles
DR3 and DR4 with islet autoantibody measurement increased the
sensitivity of identifying GDM women developing postpartum IDDM to 92%,
but did not improve risk assessment above that achieved using GADA
measurement alone, which was the strongest predictor of IDDM.

Kent et al. (2005) examined T cells from pancreatic draining lymph
nodes, the site of islet cell-specific self-antigen presentation. They
cloned single T cells in a nonbiased manner from pancreatic draining
lymph nodes of patients with type I diabetes and from nondiabetic
controls. A high degree of T-cell clonal expansion was observed in
pancreatic lymph nodes from long-term diabetic patients but not from
controls. The oligoclonally expanded T cells from diabetic patients with
DR4, a susceptibility allele for type I diabetes, recognized the insulin
A 1-15 epitope restricted by DR4. Kent et al. (2005) concluded that
their results identified insulin-reactive, clonally expanded T cells
from the site of autoinflammatory drainage in long-term type I
diabetics, indicating that insulin may indeed be the target antigen
causing autoimmune diabetes.

Expression of HLA-DR antigen and ICAM1 in human conjunctival epithelium
is upregulated in patients with dry eyes associated with Sjogren
syndrome (270150). Tsubota et al. (1999) reported that this upregulation
in Sjogren syndrome patients may be controlled by interferon-gamma
(147570) through the activation of transcription factor NFKB (nuclear
factor kappa-B; see 164011).

Pisella et al. (2000) reported that a significant increase of HLA-DR and
ICAM1 expression by epithelial cells was consistently found in patients
with keratoconjunctivitis sicca (Sjogren syndrome) compared with
expression in normal eyes. These 2 markers were well correlated with
each other and correlated inversely with tear break-up time and tear
production as measured by the Schirmer test. The percentage of
conjunctival goblet cells was significantly decreased in dry eye
patients with a significant negative correlation with both HLA-DR and
ICAM1 markers.

By adulthood, 90% of the population in West Africa have been infected
with hepatitis B virus (HBV). Thursz et al. (1997) noted that in most
people this is manifest as an asymptomatic self-limiting infection
during childhood, but approximately 15% of patients develop a persistent
infection, and this often results in chronic liver disease and
hepatocellular carcinoma. Because HBV-induced hepatocellular carcinoma
is commonly a disease of working-age males in West Africa, resistance to
HBV persistence probably confers some reproductive advantage. Almarri
and Batchelor (1994) found that particular HLA class II region
haplotypes affect the probability that an HBV infection will become
persistent. Thursz et al. (1997) presented evidence supporting models of
overdominant selection in which MHC homozygotes are less likely to clear
an HBV infection and thus more likely to become persistently infected.
In tests of 632 Gambian subjects of whom 223 had evidence of persistent
infection and 409 had successfully cleared the virus, they found no
differences in the class I loci; however, significantly fewer subjects
with persistent infection were heterozygous for haplotypes of the HLA
class II region genes, HLA-DR and HLA-DQ.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the
HLA-DRA gene and susceptibility to the development of Parkinson disease,
see 168600.

NOMENCLATURE

Bodmer et al. (1990) presented a consensus on nomenclature for factors
in the HLA system. The HLA-DR molecule has a single species of alpha
chain encoded by the HLA-DRA gene. In the case of the beta chain, there
are DRB1, DRB3 (612735), DRB4, and DRB5 genes. (DRB2 is a pseudogene
with DR-beta-like sequences.) HLA-DRB6 is a truncated gene in both
humans and chimpanzees, lacking exon 1, which normally codes for the
leader and the first 4 amino acid residues of the mature protein.
However, a human DRB6 exon 2 sequence has been obtained by PCR
amplification of cDNA reversely transcribed from RNA of a B-cell line,
implying that the DRB6 gene is, in fact, transcribed.

HISTORY

Dupont et al. (1974) suggested that the genetic control of stimulation
in the mixed lymphocyte culture (MLC) reaction in man is determined by a
separate gene, which they called MLR-S (HLA-D), closely linked to the
FOUR locus of the HLA-A (142800) chromosomal region. They reported 3
children with recombination between the FOUR and MLR-S locus in 2
families and confirmed that the MLR-S locus is located outside the HLA-A
chromosomal region.

In addition to HLA-D, genes controlling secondary mixed lymphocyte
response were assigned to the HLA-A region (Eijsvoogel et al., 1972) and
to SB (142880), a region at least 2 cM proximal to HLA-D. Mempel et al.
(1973) came to the same conclusion.

The focus of the 7th International Workshop on Histocompatibility
Testing held in Oxford in August 1977 was the definition of determinants
present only in B lymphocytes. By analogy to the H-2 nomenclature in the
mouse, these antigens have been called Ia (immune-associated). The
Oxford workshop identified 7 specificities as defined by homozygous
typing cells (HTC) in mixed lymphocyte culture (MLC) tests. These were
designated DRw, for D-related and workshop, i.e., tentative. It was not
certain whether the Dw and DRw specificities were determined by the same
gene or by genes at 2 separate but closely linked loci. It was concluded
that the 7 DRw specificities are determined by codominant alleles. In
the mouse, and presumably in man, there are lymphocyte alloantigens,
designated Ia (immune response-associated) antigens, found mainly on B
lymphocytes. The existence of immune response-associated antigens in man
is highly probable because of the close homology of the H-2 and HLA
regions in mouse and man. See McDevitt and Bodmer (1974) for discussion
and references.

Mann et al. (1975, 1976) demonstrated 2 separate genetic loci for
B-lymphocyte alloantigens in the HLA region. These were demonstrated
using sera derived from multiparous Amish women and testing large Amish
families. HLA-A (142800), HLA-B (142830), and HLA-C (142840) are
serologically defined antigens found on both T and B lymphocytes.
Antigens tested for by mixed lymphocyte reactions appear to be expressed
only in B lymphocytes. The relation of the serologically demonstrated
B-lymphocyte alloantigens to those demonstrated by MLC was not
established. Mann et al. (1975) suggested identity to the Ia antigens of
the mouse. There may be more than 2 loci for B alloantigens in the HLA
area. The Histocompatibility Workshop 1977 was unable to distinguish
with certainty between Ia and HLA-D, i.e., that separate loci are
represented was not established.

Markert and Cresswell (1980) concluded that HLA-DR specificity is
carried on the alpha subunit. A second type of specificity, called MB,
is thought to be determined by a locus closely linked to HLA-DR and,
from studies of Markert and Cresswell (1980), may reside on the beta
subunit. They found that a third closely linked gene locus, MT,
determines Ia antigen-like molecules distinct from those carrying MB and
HLA-DR determinants. HLA-DR in man and Ia in the mouse are termed class
II histocompatibility antigens. One hypothesis to account for the
relationship between MT and DR is that the DR locus is a complex one
that has 3 (or more) 'tightly linked loci, similar to the Rh locus. As
in the Gm system, the product of this complex gene could be located on
separate domains of the gene products. Thus, MT1, DR1, and MT5 could be
on 3 different sites of the Ia molecule, while being determined by a
single complex locus' (Park et al., 1980).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Bell et al. (1985); Bodmer et al. (1997); Bodmer et al. (1994); Bodmer
et al. (1978); Boss and Strominger (1984); Charron and McDevitt (1979);
Corte et al. (1981); Das et al. (1983); Delovitch and Falk (1979);
Dupont et al. (1976); Dupont et al. (1975); Fuller et al. (1978);
Hui et al. (1985); Korman et al. (1982); Lamm  (1978); Lamm et al.
(1977); McMichael and Makgoba (1981); Park et al. (1978); Rollini
et al. (1985); Sachs et al. (1981); Suciu-Foca et al. (1978)
REFERENCE 1. Accolla, R. S.; Gross, N.; Carrel, S.; Corte, G.: Distinct forms
of both alpha and beta subunits are present in the human Ia molecular
pool. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 78: 4549-4551, 1981.

2. Almarri, A.; Batchelor, J. R.: HLA and hepatitis B infection. Lancet 344:
1194-1195, 1994.

3. Auffray, C.; Strominger, J. L.: Molecular genetics of the human
major histocompatibility complex. Adv. Hum. Genet. 15: 197-247,
1986.

4. Bell, J. I.; Estess, P.; St. John, T.; Saiki, R.; Watling, D. L.;
Erlich, H. A.; McDevitt, H. O.: DNA sequence and characterization
of human class II major histocompatibility complex beta chains from
the DR1 haplotype. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 3405-3409, 1985.

5. Bodmer, J. G.; Marsh, S. G. E.; Albert, E.: Nomenclature for factors
of the HLA system, 1989. Immun. Today 11: 3-10, 1990.

6. Bodmer, J. G.; Marsh, S. G. E.; Albert, E. D.; Bodmer, W. F.; Bontrop,
R. E.; Charron, D.; Dupont, B.; Erlich, H. A.; Fauchet, R.; Mach,
B.; Mayr, W. R.; Parham, P.; Sasazuki, T.; Schreuder, G. M. T.; Strominger,
J. L.; Svejgaard, A.; Terasaki, P. I.: Nomenclature for factors of
the HLA system, 1996. Europ. J. Immunogenet. 24: 105-151, 1997.

7. Bodmer, J. G.; Marsh, S. G. E.; Albert, E. D.; Bodmer, W. F.; Dupont,
B.; Erlich, H. A.; Mach, B.; Mayr, W. R.; Parham, P.; Sasazuki, T.;
Schreuder, G. M. T.; Strominger, J. L.; Svejgaard, A.; Terasaki, P.
I.: Nomenclature for factors of the HLA system, 1994. Tissue Antigens 44:
1-18, 1994.

8. Bodmer, W. F.; Bodmer, J. G.; Batchelor, J. R.; Festenstein, H.;
Morris, P. J.: Histocompatibility Testing 1977.  Copenhagen: Munksgaard
(pub.)  1978.

9. Boss, J. M.; Strominger, J. L.: Cloning and sequence analysis
of the human major histocompatibility complex gene DC-3-beta. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 81: 5199-5203, 1984.

10. Charron, D. J.; McDevitt, H. O.: Analysis of HLA-D region-associated
molecules with monoclonal antibody. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 76: 6567-6571,
1979.

11. Chelladurai, M.; Honn, K. V.; Walz, D. A.: HLA-DR is a procoagulant. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 178: 467-473, 1991.

12. Corte, G.; Damiani, G.; Calabi, F.; Fabbi, M.; Bargellesi, A.
: Analysis of HLA-DR polymorphism by two-dimensional peptide mapping. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 78: 534-538, 1981.

13. Dai, S.; Crawford, F.; Marrack, P.; Kappler, J. W.: The structure
of HLA-DR52c: comparison to other HLA-DRB3 alleles. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 105: 11893-11897, 2008.

14. Das, H. K.; Lawrance, S. K.; Weissman, S. M.: Structure and nucleotide
sequence of the heavy chain gene of HLA-DR. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80:
3543-3547, 1983.

15. Delovitch, T. L.; Falk, J. A.: Evidence for structural homology
between murine and human Ia antigens. Immunogenetics 8: 405-418,
1979.

16. Dunham, I.; Sargent, C. A.; Dawkins, R. L.; Campbell, R. D.:
An analysis of variation in the long-range genomic organization of
the human major histocompatibility complex class II region by pulsed-field
gel electrophoresis. Genomics 5: 787-796, 1989.

17. Dupont, B.; Good, R. A.; Hansen, G. S.; Jersild, C.; Nielsen,
L. S.; Park, B. H.; Svejgaard, A.; Thomsen, M.; Yunis, E. J.: Two
separate genes controlling stimulation in mixed lymphocyte reaction
in man. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 71: 52-56, 1974.

18. Dupont, B.; Hansen, J. A.; Yunis, E. J.: Human mixed-lymphocyte
culture reaction: genetics, specificity, and biological implications. Adv.
Immun. 23: 107-202, 1976.

19. Dupont, B.; Yunis, E. J.; Hansen, J. A.; Reinsmoen, N.; Suciu-Foca,
N.; Mickelson, E. M.; Amos, D. B.: Evidence for three genes involved
in the expression of the mixed lymphocyte culture reaction.In: Kissmeyer-Nielse
n, F.: Histocompatibility Testing.  Copenhagen: Munksgaard (pub.)
1975. Pp. 547-551.

20. Eijsvoogel, V. P.; van Rood, J. J.; du Toit, E. D.; Schellekens,
P. T. A.: Position of a locus determining mixed lymphocyte reaction
distinct from the known HL-A loci. Europ. J. Immun. 2: 413-418,
1972.

21. Erlich, H. A.; Stetler, D.; Saiki, R.; Gladstone, P.; Pious, D.
: Mapping of the genes encoding the HLA-DR alpha chain and the HLA-related
antigens to a chromosome 6 deletion by using genomic blotting. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 2300-2304, 1983.

22. Ferber, K. M.; Keller, E.; Albert, E. D.; Ziegler, A.-G.: Predictive
value of human leukocyte antigen class II typing for the development
of islet autoantibodies and insulin-dependent diabetes postpartum
in women with gestational diabetes. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84:
2342-2348, 1999.

23. Fuller, T. C.; Einarson, M.; Pinto, C.; Ahern, A.; Yunis, E. J.
: Genetic evidence that HLA-DR (Ia) specifications include multiple
HLA-D determinants on a single haplotype. Transplant. Proc. 10:
781-784, 1978.

24. Hardy, D. A.; Bell, J. I.; Long, E. O.; Lindsten, T.; McDevitt,
H. O.: Mapping of the class II region of the human major histocompatibility
complex by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Nature 323: 453-455,
1986.

25. Hui, K.; Festenstein, H.; de Klein, A.; Grosveld, G.; Grosveld,
F.: HLA-DR genotyping by restriction fragment length polymorphism
analyses. Immunogenetics 22: 231-239, 1985.

26. International Multiple Sclerosis Genetics Consortium: Risk
alleles for multiple sclerosis identified by a genomewide study. New
Eng. J. Med. 357: 851-862, 2007.

27. Kaufman, J. F.; Strominger, J. L.: HLA-DR light chain has a polymorphic
N-terminal region and a conserved immunoglobulin-like C-terminal region. Nature 297:
694-697, 1982.

28. Kent, S. C.; Chen, Y.; Bregoli, L.; Clemmings, S. M.; Kenyon,
N. S.; Ricordi, C.; Hering, B. J.; Hafler, D. A.: Expanded T cells
from pancreatic lymph nodes of type 1 diabetic subjects recognize
an insulin epitope. Nature 435: 224-228, 2005.

29. Korman, A. J.; Auffray, C.; Schamboeck, A.; Strominger, J. L.
: The amino acid sequence and gene organization of the heavy chain
of the HLA-DR antigen: homology to immunoglobulins. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 79: 6013-6017, 1982.

30. Korman, A. J.; Knudsen, P. J.; Kaufman, J. F.; Strominger, J.
L.: cDNA clones for the heavy chain of HLA-DR antigens obtained after
immunopurification of polysomes by monoclonal antibody. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 79: 1844-1848, 1982.

31. Kratzin, H.; Yang, C.; Gotz, H.; Pauly, E.; Kolbel, S.; Egert,
G.; Thinnes, F. P.; Wernet, P.; Altevogt, P.; Hilschmann, N.: Primarstruktur
menschlicher Histokompatibilitatsantigene der Klasse II. 1. Mitteilung:
aminosauresequenz der N-terminalen 198 Reste der beta-Kette des HLA-Dw2,2;DR2,2-Alloantigens. Hoppe
Seylers Z. Physiol. Chem. 362: 1665-1669, 1981.

32. Lamm, L. U.: Another segregant series, DR, in HLA. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 22: 309-312, 1978.

33. Lamm, L. U.; Kristensen, T.; Kissmeyer-Nielsen, F.; Jorgensen,
F.: On the HLA-B, -D map distance. Tissue Antigens 10: 394-398,
1977.

34. Larhammar, D.; Schenning, L.; Gustafsson, K.; Wiman, K.; Claesson,
L.; Rask, L.; Peterson, P. A.: Complete amino acid sequence of an
HLA-DR antigen-like beta chain as predicted from the nucleotide sequence:
similarities with immunoglobulins and HLA-A, -B, and -C antigens. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 79: 3687-3691, 1982.

35. Lee, J. S.; Trowsdale, J.; Bodmer, W. F.: cDNA clones coding
for the heavy chain of human HLA-DR antigen. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 79:
545-549, 1982.

36. Levine, F.; Mach, B.; Long, E.; Erlich, H.; Pious, D.: Mapping
in the HLA-D region with deletion variants and cloned genes. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 37: 523 only, 1984.

37. Mann, D. L.; Abelson, L.; Harris, S. D.; Amos, D. B.: Second
genetic locus in the HLA region for human B-cell alloantigens. Nature 259:
145-146, 1976.

38. Mann, D. L.; Abelson, L.; Henkart, P.; Harris, S. D.; Amos, D.
B.: Specific B-lymphocyte alloantigens linked to HLA. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 72: 5103-5106, 1975.

39. Markert, M. L.; Cresswell, P.: Polymorphism of human B-cell alloantigens:
evidence for three loci within the HLA system. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 77:
6101-6104, 1980.

40. Mayer, W. E.; O'hUigin, C.; Klein, J.: Resolution of the HLA-DRB6
puzzle: a case of grafting a de novo-generated exon on an existing
gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 10720-10724, 1993.

41. McDevitt, H. O.; Bodmer, W. F.: HLA, immune-response genes, and
disease. Lancet 303: 1269-1275, 1974. Note: Originally Volume I.

42. McMichael, A.; Makgoba, W.: Complexity in human histocompatibility
loci. Nature 293: 701-702, 1981.

43. Mempel, W.; Grosse-Wilde, H.; Albert, E.; Thierfelder, S.: A
typical MLC reaction in HLA typed related and unrelated pairs. Transplant.
Proc. 5: 401-408, 1973.

44. Moen, T.; Albrechtsen, D.; Flatmark, A.; Jakobsen, A.; Jervell,
J.; Halvorsen, S.; Solheim, B. G.; Thorsby, E.: Importance of HLA-DR
matching in cadaveric renal transplantation: a prospective one-center
study of 170 transplants. New Eng. J. Med. 303: 850-854, 1980.

45. Olerup, O.; Troye-Blomberg, M.; Schreuder, G. M. T.; Riley, E.
M.: HLA-DR and -DQ gene polymorphism in West Africans is twice as
extensive as in North European Caucasians: evolutionary implications. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 8480-8484, 1991.

46. Park, M. S.; Terasaki, P. I.; Bernoco, D.: Relationship between
MT and DR antigens.In: Terasaki, P. I.: Histocompatibility Testing
1980.  Los Angeles: UCLA Press (pub.)  1980.

47. Park, M. S.; Terasaki, P. I.; Bernoco, D.; Iwaki, Y.: Evidence
for a second B-cell locus separate from the DR locus. Transplant.
Proc. 10: 823-828, 1978.

48. Pisella, P.-J.; Brignole, F.; Debbasch, C.; Lozato, P.-A.; Creuzot-Garcher,
C.; Bara, J.; Saiag, P.; Warnet, J.-M.; Baudouin, C.: Flow cytometric
analysis of conjunctival epithelium in ocular rosacea and keratoconjunctivitis
sicca. Ophthalmology 107: 1841-1849, 2000.

49. Rollini, P.; Mach, B.; Gorski, J.: Linkage map of three HLA-DR
beta-chain genes: evidence for a recent duplication event. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 7197-7201, 1985.

50. Sachs, J. A.; Jaraquemada, D.; Festenstein, H.: Intra HLA-D region
recombinant maps HLA-DR between HLA-B and HLA-D. Tissue Antigens 17:
43-56, 1981.

51. Shackelford, D. A.; Mann, D. L.; van Rood, J. J.; Ferrara, G.
B.; Strominger, J. L.: Human B-cell alloantigens DC1, MT1, and LB12
are identical to each other but distinct from the HLA-DR antigen. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 78: 4566-4570, 1981.

52. Strominger, J. L.: Biology of the human histocompatibility leukocyte
antigen (HLA) system and a hypothesis regarding the generation of
autoimmune diseases. J. Clin. Invest. 77: 1411-1415, 1986.

53. Suciu-Foca, N.; Weiner, J.; Rohowsky, C.; McKiernan, P.; Susinno,
E.; Rubinstein, P.: Indications that Dw determinants are controlled
by distinct (but closely linked) genes. Transplant. Proc. 10: 799-804,
1978.

54. Terasaki, P. I.; Park, M. S.; Opelz, G.; Ting, A.: Multiple sclerosis
and high incidence of a B-lymphocyte antigen. Science 193: 1245-1247,
1976.

55. Thursz, M. R.; Thomas, H. C.; Greenwood, B. M.; Hill, A. V. S.
: Heterozygote advantage for HLA class-II type in hepatitis B virus
infection. (Letter) Nature Genet. 17: 11-12, 1997. Note: Erratum:
Nature Genet. 18: 88 only, 1998.

56. Tiercy, J.-M.; Gorski, J.; Jeannet, M.; Mach, B.: Identification
and distribution of three serologically undetected alleles of HLA-DR
by oligonucleotide-DNA typing analysis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85:
198-202, 1988.

57. Trowsdale, J.: Genetics and polymorphism: class II antigens. Brit.
Med. Bull. 43: 15-36, 1987.

58. Tsubota, K.; Fukagawa, K.; Fujihara, T.; Shimmura, S.; Saito,
I.; Saito, K.; Takeuchi, T.: Regulation of human leukocyte antigen
expression in human conjunctival epithelium. Invest. Ophthal. Vis.
Sci. 40: 28-34, 1999.

59. Walker, L. E.; Hewick, R.; Hunkapiller, M. W.; Hood, L. E.; Dreyer,
W. J.; Reisfeld, R. A.: N-terminal amino acid sequences of the alpha
and beta chains of HLA-DR1 and HLA-DR2 antigens. Biochemistry 23:
185-188, 1983.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 5/28/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/11/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/25/2005
Jane Kelly - updated: 1/19/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/20/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/12/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/2/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED terry: 12/20/2012
alopez: 11/2/2011
wwang: 9/23/2010
ckniffin: 9/17/2010
mgross: 7/26/2010
terry: 6/1/2009
carol: 5/28/2009
mgross: 4/17/2009
terry: 1/15/2009
carol: 12/11/2008
alopez: 6/8/2005
tkritzer: 5/25/2005
terry: 5/25/2005
alopez: 10/18/2002
carol: 1/10/2002
cwells: 1/25/2001
terry: 1/19/2001
alopez: 6/19/2000
terry: 3/20/2000
alopez: 12/6/1999
alopez: 12/3/1999
carol: 8/26/1999
alopez: 5/14/1998
dholmes: 1/29/1998
dholmes: 1/28/1998
jenny: 9/19/1997
terry: 9/12/1997
jenny: 9/3/1997
terry: 9/2/1997
terry: 7/10/1997
carol: 10/10/1994
terry: 5/9/1994
pfoster: 4/22/1994
warfield: 4/8/1994
mimadm: 2/21/1994
carol: 12/9/1993

608851	TITLE *608851 5-PRIME,3-PRIME-@EXORIBONUCLEASE 2; XRN2
DHM1-LIKE PROTEIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Dhm1 is the mouse homolog of S. pombe dhp1+, which is involved in
homologous recombination and RNA metabolism (Shobuike et al., 1995). By
EST database searching with the sequence of mouse Dhm1 as query, Zhang
et al. (1999) identified the human homolog, which they designated XRN2.
XRN2 encodes a predicted 950-amino acid protein with 93% identity to
Dhm1 and 54% and 42% homology to S. pombe Dhp1+ within putative
functional N- and C-terminal regions, respectively. Northern blot
analysis detected ubiquitous expression of a 3.6-kb XRN2 transcript,
with most abundant expression in testis.

GENE FUNCTION

XRN2 promotes transcription termination at cotranscriptional cleavage
sites. A 'torpedo' model postulated that poly(A) site cleavage provides
an unprotected RNA 5-prime end that is degraded by 5-prime to 3-prime
exonuclease activities (torpedoes) and so induces dissociation of RNA
polymerase II (pol II; see 180660) from the DNA template. Nascent
transcripts located 1 kb downstream of the human beta-globin gene
(141900) poly(A) signal are associated with a cotranscriptional cleavage
(CoTC) activity that acts with the poly(A) signal to elicit efficient
transcriptional termination. The CoTC sequence is an autocatalytic RNA
structure that undergoes rapid self-cleavage. West et al. (2004) showed
that CoTC acts as a precursor to termination by presenting a free RNA
5-prime end that is recognized by XRN2. Degradation of the downstream
cleavage product by XRN2 results in transcriptional termination, as
envisaged in the torpedo model.

Chatterjee and Grosshans (2009) reported that degradation of mature
miRNAs in the nematode C. elegans, mediated by the 5- to 3-prime
exoribonuclease XRN2, affects functional miRNA homeostasis in vivo.
Chatterjee and Grosshans (2009) recapitulated XRN2-dependent miRNA
turnover in larval lysates, where processing of precursor miRNA
(pre-miRNA) by Dicer (606241), unannealing of the miRNA duplex, and
loading of the mature miRNA into the Argonaute (see 606228) protein of
the miRNA-induced silencing complex (miRISC) are coupled processes that
precede degradation of the mature miRNA. Although Argonaute:miRNA
complexes are highly resistant to salt, larval lysate promotes efficient
release of the miRNA, exposing it to degradation by XRN2. Release and
degradation can both be blocked by the addition of miRNA target RNA.
Chatterjee and Grosshans (2009) concluded that their results suggested
the presence of an additional layer of regulation of animal miRNA
activity that might be important for rapid changes of miRNA expression
profiles during developmental transitions and for the maintenance of
steady-state concentrations of miRNAs.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Xiang et al. (2009) reported the crystal structure at 2.2-angstrom
resolution of S. pombe Rat1 (dhp1+) in complex with Rai1 (see DOM3Z;
605996), as well as the structure of Rai1 and its murine homolog Dom3Z
alone at 2.0-angstrom resolution. The structures revealed the molecular
mechanism for the activation of Rat1 by Rai1 and for the exclusive
exoribonuclease activity of Rat1. Biochemical studies confirmed these
observations, and they showed that Rai1 allows Rat1 to degrade RNAs with
stable secondary structure more effectively. There are large differences
in the active site landscape of Rat1 compared to related and PIN (PilT N
terminus) domain-containing nucleases.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Zhang et al. (1999) mapped the XRN2 gene
to chromosome 20p11.2-p11.1, between D20S180 and D20S871.

REFERENCE 1. Chatterjee, S.; Grosshans, H.: Active turnover modulates mature
microRNA activity in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature 461: 546-549,
2009.

2. Shobuike, T.; Sugano, S.; Yamashita, T.; Ikeda, H.: Characterization
of cDNA encoding mouse homolog of fission yeast dhp1+ gene: structural
and functional conservation. Nucleic Acids Res. 23: 357-361, 1995.

3. West, S.; Gromak, N.; Proudfoot, N. J.: Human 5-prime to 3-prime
exonuclease Xrn2 promotes transcription termination at co-transcriptional
cleavage sites. Nature 432: 522-525, 2004.

4. Xiang, S.; Cooper-Morgan, A.; Jiao, X.; Kiledjian, M.; Manley,
J. L.; Tong, L.: Structure and function of the 5-prime to 3-prime
exoribonucleases Rat1 and its activating partner Rai1. Nature 458:
784-788, 2009.

5. Zhang, M.; Yu, L.; Xin, Y.; Hu, P.; Fu, Q.; Yu, C.; Zhao, S.:
Cloning and mapping of the XRN2 gene to human chromosome 20p11.1-p11.2. Genomics 59:
252-254, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/19/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/28/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/28/2004

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 8/18/2004

EDITED alopez: 09/14/2011
alopez: 10/26/2009
terry: 10/19/2009
alopez: 5/7/2009
terry: 4/28/2009
tkritzer: 1/4/2005
terry: 12/28/2004
carol: 8/18/2004

607817	TITLE *607817 VACUOLAR PROTEIN SORTING 13, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF, B; VPS13B
;;COH1 GENE; COH1;;
KIAA0532
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1998) cloned COH1 (VPS13B), which they
designated KIAA0532. The 3-prime UTR contains 2 Alu repeat sequences.
RT-PCR detected COH1 expression in all tissues examined, with highest
expression in kidney.

Kolehmainen et al. (2003) identified the COH1 gene within the Cohen
syndrome (216550) critical region on chromosome 8q22. By in silico
analysis, exon prediction, and RT-PCR methods they obtained a
full-length COH1 cDNA. The longest COH1 transcript encodes a deduced
4,022-amino acid protein with a complex domain structure, including 10
predicted transmembrane domains, a potential vacuolar targeting motif,
endoplasmic reticulum retention signal in the C terminus, and 2
peroxisomal matrix protein targeting signal-2 (PTS2) consensus
sequences, one close to the N terminus and the other close to the C
terminus. COH1 shows strong homology to the Saccharomyces cerevisiae
VPS13 protein, suggesting a role for COH1 in vesicle-mediated sorting
and transport of proteins within the cell. Northern blot analysis
revealed that COH1 is widely expressed, with differential expression of
different transcripts. Transcripts of approximately 2.0 and 5.0 kb were
expressed in fetal brain, lung, liver, and kidney, and in all adult
tissues analyzed. A transcript of approximately 12 to 14 kb was
expressed in prostate, testis, ovary, and colon in the adult. Expression
was very low in adult brain tissue.

By searching databases for sequences similar to VPS13A (605978),
followed by RT-PCR of lymphoid cell line and brain RNA, Velayos-Baeza et
al. (2004) cloned COH1, which they called VPS13B. They identified 2 main
variants, variant 1A and variant 2A, and several other variants
generated by exon skipping or the use of alternative exons. Variants 1A
and 2A both contain exons 1 to 27 and 29 to 62, but variant 1A uses exon
28, while variant 2A uses an alternative exon, exon 28b. EST database
analysis indicated that there are at least 6 different 3-prime end
splice variants, 3 of which involve alternate exons 17b and 17c. Variant
1A encodes the deduced 4,022-amino acid protein, and variant 2A encodes
a deduced 3,997-amino acid protein. VPS13B shares significant similarity
with yeast Vps13 and other human VPS13 proteins only in the N and C
termini. Northern blot analysis and RT-PCR detected VPS13B expression at
variable levels in all tissues examined. Variant 2A was the predominant
transcript in all tissues examined except brain and skeletal muscle, in
which variant 1A predominated.

GENE STRUCTURE

By sequence analysis, Kolehmainen et al. (2003) determined that the COH1
gene contains 62 exons and spans a genomic region of approximately 864
kb. The COH1 gene has a complicated pattern of alternative splicing
which potentially leads to the use of 4 different termination codons and
to 3 additional in-frame, alternatively spliced forms.

Velayos-Baeza et al. (2004) determined that the COH1 gene contains 66
exons, including 4 alternative exons. The translation start codon is in
exon 2.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the COH1 gene
to chromosome 8. Kolehmainen et al. (2003) mapped the COH1 gene to
chromosome 8q22. Velayos-Baeza et al. (2004) mapped the mouse Vps13b
gene to chromosome 15B3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Kolehmainen et al. (2003) identified mutations in the COH1 gene in
patients with Cohen syndrome. Haplotype analysis of Finnish patients
with Cohen syndrome suggested the existence of several different
mutations. One haplotype, present in 30 of 40 (75%) disease chromosomes,
was always found to be associated with a 2-bp (CT) deletion affecting
codons 1116 and 1117 that leads to protein truncation at codon 1124
(607817.0001). Patients in 11 families were homozygous for this
mutation. It was also found in heterozygous form in 8 families, in which
the patients' other COH1 chromosome carried a different haplotype. In
only 1 of these families was a further putative mutation identified, a
leu2193-to-arg (607817.0002) missense substitution. Only 1 Finnish
family did not carry the most common haplotype and is likely to be
homozygous for an as yet unidentified COH1 mutation. The 7 mutations in
the COH1 gene identified in 5 non-Finnish patients with Cohen syndrome
by Kolehmainen et al. (2003) were predicted to result in premature
protein truncation (see, e.g., 607817.0003).

Kolehmainen et al. (2004) reported an extensive genotype-phenotype
screen in a total of 76 patients from 59 families with a provisional
diagnosis of Cohen syndrome. They found 22 different COH1 mutations, of
which 19 were novel, in probands identified by fulfilling 6 or more of
the following criteria: developmental delay, microcephaly, typical Cohen
syndrome facial gestalt, truncal obesity with slender extremities,
overly sociable behavior, joint hypermobility, high myopia and/or
retinal dystrophy, and neutropenia. By contrast, no COH1 mutations were
found in patients with a provisional diagnosis of Cohen syndrome who
were labeled 'Cohen-like.' These patients fulfilled only 5 or fewer of
the 8 criteria.

Hennies et al. (2004) described clinical and molecular findings in 20
patients with Cohen syndrome from 12 families, originating from Brazil,
Germany, Lebanon, Oman, Poland, and Turkey. All patients were homozygous
or compound heterozygous for mutations in COH1. They identified 17 novel
mutations, mostly resulting in premature termination codons. The
clinical presentation was highly variable. Developmental delay of
varying degree, early-onset myopia, joint laxity, and facial dysmorphism
were the only features present in all patients; however, retinopathy at
school age, microcephaly, and neutropenia, they concluded, are not
requisite manifestations of Cohen syndrome.

Falk et al. (2004) described 8 members from 2 large Amish kindreds with
features of Cohen syndrome but an atypical facial gestalt. Homozygosity
mapping detected linkage to the COH1 gene; sequencing of the gene
revealed that all 8 affected individuals were compound homozygous for a
1-bp insertion (9258insT; 607817.0009) and an ile2820-to-thr
substitution (I2820T; 607817.0010).

Seifert et al. (2006) studied 24 patients with Cohen syndrome from 16
families of varying ethnic backgrounds and identified 25 different
mutations in the COH1 gene, including 9 nonsense mutations, 8 frameshift
mutations, 4 verified splice site mutations, 3 larger in-frame
deletions, and 1 missense mutation. The authors noted that the vast
majority of COH1 mutations found in Cohen syndrome result in premature
termination codons.

Katzaki et al. (2007) identified pathogenic mutations in the COH1 gene
in 10 Italian patients with Cohen syndrome from 9 families. All patients
had characteristic features of the disorder, although with greater
variability than reported for Finnish patients. Heterozygous partial
COH1 gene deletions were identified in 2 different families.

Parri et al. (2010) used multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA) to analyze the COH1 gene in 14 patients with Cohen
syndrome from 11 families, including 4 patients from 3 families
previously studied by Katzaki et al. (2007). Parri et al. (2010)
detected 12 different mutations, including 6 frameshift, 3 splice site,
and 2 nonsense mutations, as well as 1 complex rearrangement. Four
patients from 3 Italian families carried the same large deletion
(607817.0011) previously identified in Greek patients by Bugiani et al.
(2008). Combining these results with those from their previous study,
(Katzaki et al., 2007) yielded a total of 21 alleles with point
mutations (58%) and 15 alleles with copy number variation (42%); Parri
et al. (2010) concluded that deletions and duplications account for a
significant percentage of COH1 mutations.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COHEN SYNDROME
VPS13B, 2-BP DEL

In 26 of 32 patients with Cohen syndrome (216550), Kolehmainen et al.
(2003) identified homozygosity or heterozygosity for a 2-bp deletion
(CT) in the COH1 gene, changing codon 1117 from cysteine to
phenylalanine and resulting in a premature termination (I1124X).

.0002
COHEN SYNDROME
VPS13B, LEU2193ARG

In a Finnish family, Kolehmainen et al. (2003) found that Cohen syndrome
(216550) was associated with compound heterozygosity for the common 2-bp
deletion (607817.0001) and a nonsense substitution, leu2193 to arg
(L2193R), in the COH1 gene.

.0003
COHEN SYNDROME
VPS13B, ARG2351TER

In a Belgian patient with Cohen syndrome (216550), Kolehmainen et al.
(2003) identified homozygosity for an arg2351-to-ter (R2351X) mutation
in exon 39 of the COH1 gene.

.0004
COHEN SYNDROME
VPS13B, ASN2993SER

In a Belgian family with Cohen syndrome (216550), Kolehmainen et al.
(2004) found homozygosity for an 8978A-G transition in exon 49 of the
COH1 gene, resulting in an asn2993-to-ser amino acid change (N2993S).

.0005
COHEN SYNDROME
VPS13B, GLU1491TER

In a British family with Cohen syndrome (216550), Kolehmainen et al.
(2004) found homozygosity for a 4471G-T transversion in exon 29 of the
COH1 gene, predicted to result in a stop mutation, glu1491 to ter
(E1491X).

.0006
COHEN SYNDROME
VPS13B, ARG971TER

In a Turkish family with Cohen syndrome (216550), Hennies et al. (2004)
identified an arg971-to-ter (R971X) mutation resulting from a 2911C-T
transition in exon 20 of the COH1 gene.

.0007
COHEN SYNDROME
VPS13B, GLY2645ASP

In an Omani family with Cohen syndrome (216550), Hennies et al. (2004)
found homozygosity for a 7934G-A transition in exon 43 of the COH1 gene
resulting in a gly2645-to-asp (G2645D) amino acid change.

.0008
COHEN SYNDROME
VPS13B, GLN3630TER

In a Turkish family with Cohen syndrome (216550), Hennies et al. (2004)
found homozygosity for a 10888C-T transition in exon 56 of the COH1 gene
resulting in a gln3630-to-ter (Q3630X) mutation.

.0009
COHEN SYNDROME
VPS13B, 1-BP INS, 9258T

In 8 members of 2 large Amish kindreds with features of Cohen syndrome
(216550) but an atypical facial gestalt, Falk et al. (2004) identified a
homozygous 1-bp insertion in exon 51 of the COH1 gene, 9258insT,
resulting in a frameshift with a premature stop codon 19 amino acids
downstream. All unaffected parents were heterozygous for this change.
Patients were also homozygous for an 8459T-C transition in exon 46 of
the COH1 gene, resulting in an ile2820-to-thr mutation (I2820T;
607817.0010).

.0010
COHEN SYNDROME
VPS13B, ILE2820THR

See 607817.0009 and Falk et al. (2004).

.0011
COHEN SYNDROME
VPS13B, EX6-16DEL

In 14 individuals with Cohen syndrome (216550) from an isolated
population on 2 small adjacent islands in the eastern part of the Greek
archipelago, Bugiani et al. (2008) identified a homozygous deletion of
exons 6 through 16 of the COH1 gene, resulting in severe truncation of
the predicted protein. Twelve of the patients belonged to a large
consanguineous kindred. The phenotype was relatively homogeneous, with
common features including moderate to severe mental retardation, slender
extremities with narrow hands and feet, joint hypermobility, and the
typical facial gestalt. Microcephaly was not as profound as reported in
Finnish patients.

In 4 patients with Cohen syndrome from 3 Italian families, including 3
patients from 2 families previously studied by Katzaki et al. (2007),
Parri et al. (2010) identified homozygosity or compound heterozygosity
(see 607817.0012 and 607817.0013) for the large deletion involving exons
6 through 16 of the VPS13B gene. Haplotype analysis of the 4 Italian
patients and 1 of the Greek patients reported by Bugiani et al. (2008)
suggested that the recurrent deletion is due to an ancestral founder
effect in the Mediterranean area.

.0012
COHEN SYNDROME
VPS13B, 1-BP DEL, 11564A

In a 6-year-old Italian boy with Cohen syndrome (216550), born of
consanguineous parents, who was originally reported by Katzaki et al.
(2007), Parri et al. (2010) identified compound heterozygosity for a
large deletion involving exons 6 through 16 of the VPS13B gene
(607817.0011) and a 1-bp deletion (11564delA), predicted to cause a
frameshift and a premature termination codon.

.0013
COHEN SYNDROME
VPS13B, EX46-50DEL

In 2 Italian sisters with Cohen syndrome (216550), originally reported
by Katzaki et al. (2007), Parri et al. (2010) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 large deletions in the VPS13B gene: the exon 6
through 16 deletion (607817.0011) and a deletion involving exons 46
through 50. Analysis of DNA from 2 healthy sibs showed that each
unaffected sib was heterozygous for a respective deletion.

REFERENCE 1. Bugiani, M.; Gyftodimou, Y.; Tsimpouka, P.; Lamantea, E.; Katzaki,
E.; d'Adamo, P.; Nakou, S.; Georgoudi, N.; Grigoriadou, M.; Tsina,
E.; Kabolis, N.; Milani, D.; Pandelia, E.; Kokotas, H.; Gasparini,
P.; Giannoulia-Karantana, A.; Renieri, A.; Zeviani, M.; Petersen,
M. B.: Cohen syndrome resulting from a novel large intragenic COH1
deletion segregating in an isolated Greek island population. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 146A: 2221-2226, 2008.

2. Falk, M. J.; Feiler, H. S.; Neilson, D. E.; Maxwell, K.; Lee, J.
V.; Segall, S. K.; Robin, N. H.; Wilhelmsen, K. C.; Traskelin, A.-L.;
Kolehmainen, J.; Lehesjoki, A.-E.; Wiznitzer, M.; Warman, M. L.:
Cohen syndrome in the Ohio Amish. Am. J. Med. Genet. 128A: 23-28,
2004.

3. Hennies, H. C.; Rauch, A.; Seifert, W.; Schumi, C.; Moser, E.;
Al-Taji, E.; Tariverdian, G.; Chrzanowska, K. H.; Krajewska-Walasek,
M.; Rajab, A.; Giugliani, R.; Neumann, T. E.; Eckl, K. M.; Karbasiyan,
M.; Reis, A.; Horn, D.: Allelic heterogeneity in the COH1 gene explains
clinical variability in Cohen syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 75: 138-145,
2004.

4. Katzaki, E.; Pescucci, C.; Uliana, V.; Papa, F. T.; Ariani, F.;
Meloni, I.; Priolo, M.; Selicorni, A.; Milani, D.; Fischetto, R.;
Celle, M. E.; Grasso, R.; Dallapiccola, B.; Brancati, F.; Bordignon,
M.; Tenconi, R.; Federico, A.; Mari, F.; Renieri, A.; Longo, I.:
Clinical and molecular characterization of Italian patients affected
by Cohen syndrome. J. Hum. Genet. 52: 1011-1017, 2007. Note: Erratum:
J. Hum. Genet. 53: 285 only, 2008.

5. Kolehmainen, J.; Black, G. C. M.; Saarinen, A.; Chandler, K.; Clayton-Smith,
J.; Traskelin, A.-L.; Perveen, R.; Kivitie-Kallio, S.; Norio, R.;
Warburg, M.; Fryns, J.-P.; de la Chapelle, A.; Lehesjoki, A.-E.:
Cohen syndrome is caused by mutations in a novel gene, COH1, encoding
a transmembrane protein with a presumed role in vesicle-mediated sorting
and intracellular protein transport. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 72: 1359-1369,
2003.

6. Kolehmainen, J.; Wilkinson, R.; Lehesjoki, A.-E.; Chandler, K.;
Kivitie-Kallio, S.; Clayton-Smith, J.; Traskelin, A.-L.; Waris, L.;
Saarinen, A.; Khan, J.; Gross-Tsur, V.; Traboulsi, E. I.; Warburg,
M.; Fryns, J.-P.; Norio, R.; Black, G. C. M.; Manson, F. D. C.: Delineation
of Cohen syndrome following a large-scale genotype-phenotype screen. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 75: 122-127, 2004.

7. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.;
Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified
human genes. IX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from
brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 31-39,
1998.

8. Parri, V.; Katzaki, E.; Uliana, V.; Scionti, F.; Tita, R.; Artuso,
R.; Longo, I.; Boschloo, R.; Vijzelaar, R.; Selecorni, A.; Brancati,
F.; Dallapiccola, B.; and 15 others: High frequency of COH1 intragenic
deletions and duplications detected by MLPA in patients with Cohen
syndrome. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 18: 1133-1140, 2010.

9. Seifert, W.; Holder-Espinasse, M.; Spranger, S.; Hoeltzenbein,
M.; Rossier, E.; Dollfus, H.; Lacombe, D.; Verloes, A.; Chrzanowska,
K. H.; Maegawa, G. H. B.; Chitayat, D.; Kotzot, D.; Huhle, D.; Meinecke,
P.; Albrecht, B.; Mathijssen, I.; Leheup, B.; Raile, K.; Hennies,
H. C.; Horn, D.: Mutational spectrum of COH1 and clinical heterogeneity
in Cohen syndrome. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 43: e22, 2006. Note:
Electronic Article.

10. Velayos-Baeza, A.; Vettori, A.; Copley, R. R.; Dobson-Stone, C.;
Monaco, A. P.: Analysis of the human VPS13 gene family. Genomics 84:
536-549, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/9/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/8/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/5/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/14/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/26/2004
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/21/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/30/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/22/2003

EDITED terry: 12/20/2012
wwang: 11/16/2010
terry: 11/9/2010
carol: 8/30/2010
wwang: 1/7/2009
ckniffin: 12/8/2008
wwang: 5/14/2008
ckniffin: 5/5/2008
terry: 8/6/2007
carol: 7/26/2007
wwang: 9/15/2006
terry: 9/14/2006
mgross: 8/27/2004
terry: 8/26/2004
tkritzer: 7/23/2004
terry: 7/21/2004
alopez: 7/19/2004
terry: 6/30/2004
carol: 5/22/2003

106410	TITLE *106410 ANKYRIN 2; ANK2
;;ANKYRIN, NONERYTHROID;;
ANKYRIN, BRAIN;;
ANKYRIN, NEURONAL;;
ANKYRIN-B
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Tse et al. (1991) studied immunoreactive isoforms of erythrocyte ankyrin
found in nonerythroid tissues. Using an erythrocyte ankyrin cDNA clone
as a hybridization probe, they isolated a clone from a human genomic
library that hybridized at low but not at high stringency. Further
studies suggested that the clone represented part of a gene for
nonerythroid ankyrin, which they designated ANK2.

Otto et al. (1991) isolated and sequenced cDNAs related to 2 brain
ankyrin isoforms and showed that they are produced through alternative
splicing of the mRNA from a single gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

The ANK2 gene contains 46 exons (Mohler et al., 2007). Exon 38 is
brain-specific.

GENE FUNCTION

The axon initial segment (AIS) is the site at which neural signals
arise, and should be the most efficient site to regulate neural
activity. Kuba et al. (2010) reported that deprivation of auditory input
in an avian brainstem auditory neuron leads to an increase in AIS
length, thus augmenting the excitability of the neuron. The length of
the AIS, defined by the distribution of voltage-gated sodium channels
and the AIS anchoring protein, ankyrin G, increased by 1.7 times in 7
days after auditory input deprivation. This was accompanied by an
increase in the whole-cell sodium current, membrane excitability, and
spontaneous firing. Kuba et al. (2010) concluded that their work
demonstrated homeostatic regulations of the AIS, which may contribute to
the maintenance of the auditory pathway after hearing loss. Furthermore,
plasticity at the spike initiation site suggests a powerful pathway for
refining neuronal computation in the face of strong sensory deprivation.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids and by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Tse et al. (1991) assigned the ANK2 gene to 4q25-q27.

By analysis of human/rodent cell hybrids, Otto et al. (1991) assigned
the brain ankyrin gene to chromosome 4.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Schott et al. (1995) characterized a large French kindred with long QT
syndrome associated with sinus node dysfunction and episodes of atrial
fibrillation segregating as an autosomal dominant trait. They mapped the
disorder to an 18-cM interval on 4q25-q27 (LQT4; 600919). Mohler et al.
(2003) sequenced the ANK2 gene, which maps to the same region, and
identified a glu1425-to-gly (E1425G) missense mutation (106410.0001).
Ankyrin-B appears to be the first identified protein to be implicated in
a congenital long QT syndrome that is not an ion channel or channel
subunit.

Mohler et al. (2004) identified 8 unrelated probands harboring 5
different ankyrin-B loss-of-function mutations
(106410.0001-106410.0005), 4 of which were previously undescribed, and
expanded the phenotype previously described by Schott et al. (1995).
Mohler et al. (2004) found that humans with ankyrin-B mutations display
varying degrees of cardiac dysfunction, including bradycardia, sinus
arrhythmia, idiopathic ventricular fibrillation, catecholaminergic
polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, and risk of sudden death. However,
a prolonged rate-corrected QT interval was not a consistent feature,
indicating that ankyrin-B dysfunction represents a clinical entity
distinct from classic long QT syndromes. The mutations were localized in
the ankyrin-B regulatory domain, which distinguishes function of
ankyrin-B from ankyrin-G (ANK3; 600465) in cardiomyocytes. All mutations
abolished ability of ankyrin-B to restore abnormal Ca(2+) dynamics and
abnormal localization and expression of Na/Ca exchanger, Na/K ATPase,
and InsP3 receptor in ankyrin-B +/- cardiomyocytes. This study,
considered together with the first description of ankyrin-B mutations
associated with cardiac dysfunction (Mohler et al., 2003), supported a
previously undescribed paradigm for human disease due to abnormal
coordination of multiple functionally related ion channels and
transporters, in this case the Na/K ATPase, Na/Ca exchanger, and InsP3
receptor.

Mohler et al. (2007) identified 4 previously undescribed ANK2 variants
resulting in cardiac dysfunction. They presented the first description
of differences in cellular phenotypes conferred by specific ANK2
variants, and proposed that the various degrees of ankyrin-B loss of
function contribute to the range of severity of cardiac dysfunction.
They concluded that their data identified ANK2 variants as modulators of
human arrhythmias, provided the first insight into the clinical spectrum
of 'ankyrin-B syndrome,' and reinforced the role of ankyrin-B-dependent
protein interactions in regulating cardiac electrogenesis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Mohler et al. (2003) reported that mice heterozygous for a null mutation
in ankyrin-B were haploinsufficient and displayed arrhythmia similar to
humans. The mutation in ankyrin-B resulted in disruption in the cellular
organization of the sodium pump, the sodium/calcium exchanger, and
inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate receptors (all ankyrin-B-binding proteins),
which reduced the targeting of these proteins to the transverse tubules
as well as reducing overall protein level. Ankyrin-B mutation also led
to altered calcium ion signaling in adult cardiomyocytes that resulted
in extrasystoles, and provided a rationale for the arrhythmia. Thus,
Mohler et al. (2003) identified a novel mechanism for cardiac arrhythmia
due to abnormal coordination of multiple functionally related ion
channels and transporters.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LONG QT SYNDROME 4
CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIA, ANKYRIN-B-RELATED, INCLUDED
ANK2, GLU1425GLY

In a large French kindred with autosomal dominant type 4 long QT
syndrome (600919), Mohler et al. (2003) demonstrated that the underlying
defect is a glu1425-to-gly (E1425G) missense mutation in ankyrin-B. The
amino acid substitution was the result of an A-to-G transition at
nucleotide position 4274 in exon 36 of the ANK2 gene.

Further studies reported by Mohler et al. (2004) expanded the phenotype
associated with this mutation (see 600919). In a screening of 664
patients for mutations in the ANK2 gene, a Caucasian female was found to
carry the E1425G mutation. She was clinically unaffected and, in
contrast to previously identified E1425G patients (Mohler et al., 2003),
had a normal QTc of 410 msec with a heart rate of 60 beats per minute.
The proband's 67-year-old mother was a carrier of the E1425G variant
with slightly elevated QTc (430-450 msec) and moderately low heart rate
(63 beats per minute). Three sibs of the proband died young of sudden
death at 25, 17, and 15 years of age. The 25-year-old died while winning
a prize. The 17-year-old died in the shower and had previously
experienced syncopal episodes associated with athletics. The 15-year-old
died getting out of the pool after swimming. The E1425G mutation was not
observed in 550 control individuals. It was the only SSCP variant
identified within the ankyrin-B spectrin-binding domain (exons 24-36).

.0002
CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIA, ANKYRIN-B-RELATED
ANK2, THR1626ASN

In 2 unrelated Caucasian probands from the United States with marginally
elevated QTc and arrhythmia (600919), Mohler et al. (2004) identified a
4877C-A transversion in exon 42 of the ANK2 gene, resulting in a
thr1626-to-asn (T1626N) substitution. One proband was a 46-year-old
female who had a QTc of 450 msec and had experienced syncope, but had a
normal resting heart rate of 72 beats per minute. Her daughter was also
heterozygous for the T1626N mutation and died of sudden death at age 19
years with no previous cardiac symptoms; QTc and heart rate data were
not available. Two sibs, 2 sons, and the mother of the proband were also
carriers of the mutation and had resting QTc in the normal range. At the
time of report, these carriers were asymptomatic. The second proband was
a 51-year-old male who displayed mildly elevated QTc (450 msec) with
sinus arrhythmia (heart rate varying from 50 to 110 beats per minute).
Two of his sibs with normal QTc were heterozygous for the T1626N
mutation but asymptomatic at the time of report. The T1626N mutation was
not observed in 550 control individuals.

.0003
CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIA, ANKYRIN-B-RELATED
ANK2, LEU1622ILE

In a European Caucasian female with ventricular tachycardia and
ventricular fibrillation (600919), Mohler et al. (2004) identified a
4864C-A transversion in exon 42 of the ANK2 gene, resulting in a
leu1622-to-ile (L1622I) substitution. The proband had a normal QTc and a
resting heart rate of 63 beats per minute. The proband's mother, sister,
and brother were carriers of the mutation, but at the time of report all
had been asymptomatic with normal resting QTc and normal heart rates.
The L1622I mutation was not observed in control individuals.

.0004
LONG QT SYNDROME 4
ANK2, ARG1788TRP

In 2 unrelated probands with long QT syndrome (LQT4; 600919), Mohler et
al. (2004) identified a 5336C-T transition in exon 45 of the ANK2 gene,
resulting in an arg1788-to-trp (R1788W) substitution. One proband was a
37-year-old Caucasian female from the United States. She presented with
syncope (originally treated as a seizure) at age 12 years. This woman
subsequently had multiple episodes of syncope associated with sleep, and
torsades de pointes ventricular tachycardia was documented. Beta-blocker
therapy failed to eliminate symptoms and she was treated with an
implantable cardiac defibrillator. ECGs revealed a heart rate of 60
beats per minute, prominent T-U waves, and prolongation of the QT
interval with a QTc of 530 msec. The proband's son had also been
diagnosed with long QT syndrome. The second proband, heterozygous for
the R1788W mutation, was a Caucasian female from Europe with multiple
episodes of exercise-associated syncope. She presented with
supraventricular and ventricular tachycardias that were reproducibly
elicited by exercise tests. The patient had normal QTc at rest (430
msec), but prolongation of 470 msec was observed after a syncopal
episode. The woman was successfully treated with beta blockers; however,
exercise-induced nonsustained supraventricular and ventricular
arrhythmias persisted. The father of the proband carried the mutation
with QTc of 430 msec and a heart rate of 67 beats per minute. The R1788W
mutation was not identified in 280 DNA samples obtained from individuals
with normal ECG.

.0005
CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIA, ANKYRIN-B-RELATED
ANK2, GLU1813LYS

In 2 unrelated probands with cardiac arrhythmia and ventricular
fibrillation, respectively (600919), Mohler et al. (2004) identified a
5437G-A transition in exon 45 of the ANK2 gene, resulting in a
glu1813-to-lys (E1813K) substitution. One proband was a 24-year-old
Caucasian female from Europe diagnosed with recurring arrhythmia and
documented torsades de pointes ventricular tachycardia. She presented
with an elevated resting QTc of 490 msec and mild brachycardia (62 beats
per minute). The second proband was a 60-year-old Caucasian male from
the United States who displayed idiopathic ventricular fibrillation
(Priori et al., 2001) with a normal QTc (395 msec), a normal resting
ECG, and a heart rate of 64 beats per minute. The E1813K mutation was
found in 5 DNA samples obtained from individuals with normal ECGs.

REFERENCE 1. Kuba, H.; Oichi, Y.; Ohmori, H.: Presynaptic activity regulates
Na+ channel distribution at the axon initial segment. Nature 465:
1075-1078, 2010.

2. Mohler, P. J.; Le Scouarnec, S.; Denjoy, I.; Loew, J. S.; Guicheney,
P.; Caron, L.; Driskell, I. M.; Schott, J.-J.; Norris, K.; Leenhardt,
A.; Kim, R. B.; Escande, D.; Roden, D. M.: Defining the cellular
phenotype of 'ankyrin-B syndrome' variants. Circulation 115: 432-441,
2007.

3. Mohler, P. J.; Schott, J.-J.; Gramolini, A. O.; Dilly, K. W.; Guatimosim,
S.; duBell, W. H.; Song, L.-S.; Haurogne, K.; Kyndt, F.; Ali, M. E.;
Rogers, T. B.; Lederer, W. J.; Escande, D.; Le Marec, H.; Bennett,
V.: Ankyrin-B mutation causes type 4 long-QT cardiac arrhythmia and
sudden cardiac death. Nature 421: 634-639, 2003.

4. Mohler, P. J.; Splawski, I.; Napolitano, C.; Bottelli, G.; Sharpe,
L.; Timothy, K.; Priori, S. G.; Keating, M. T.; Bennett, V.: A cardiac
arrhythmia syndrome caused by loss of ankyrin-B function. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 101: 9137-9142, 2004.

5. Otto, E.; Kunimoto, M.; McLaughlin, T.; Bennett, V.: Isolation
and characterization of cDNAs encoding human brain ankyrins reveal
a family of alternatively spliced genes. J. Cell Biol. 114: 241-253,
1991.

6. Priori, S. G.; Napolitano, C.; Grillo, M.: Concealed arrhythmogenic
syndromes: the hidden substrate of idiopathic ventricular fibrillation? Cardiovasc.
Res. 50: 218-223, 2001.

7. Schott, J.-J.; Charpentier, F.; Peltier, S.; Foley, P.; Drouin,
E.; Bouhour, J.-B.; Donnelly, P.; Vergnaud, G.; Bachner, L.; Moisan,
J.-P.; Le Marec, H.; Pascal, O.: Mapping of a gene for long QT syndrome
to chromosome 4q25-27. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 57: 1114-1122, 1995.

8. Tse, W. T.; Menninger, J. C.; Yang-Feng, T. L.; Francke, U.; Sahr,
K. E.; Lux, S. E.; Ward, D. C.; Forget, B. G.: Isolation and chromosomal
localization of a novel non-erythroid ankyrin gene. Genomics 10:
858-866, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/17/2010
Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 10/4/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/12/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/13/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/5/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/15/1991

EDITED alopez: 08/20/2010
terry: 8/17/2010
alopez: 10/4/2007
carol: 9/3/2004
terry: 8/12/2004
carol: 7/21/2004
carol: 7/15/2004
tkritzer: 7/15/2004
terry: 7/13/2004
alopez: 2/26/2003
alopez: 2/5/2003
terry: 2/5/2003
psherman: 4/3/2000
dkim: 7/17/1998
mark: 3/20/1995
carol: 4/7/1993
carol: 10/23/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 8/8/1991
carol: 5/15/1991

608294	TITLE *608294 NONMETASTATIC CELLS 6, PROTEIN EXPRESSED IN; NME6
;;NM23H6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Nucleoside diphosphate (NDP) kinases (EC 2.7.4.6), such as NME6, are
ubiquitous enzymes that catalyze transfer of gamma-phosphates, via a
phosphohistidine intermediate, between nucleoside and dioxynucleoside
tri- and diphosphates (Mehus et al., 1999).

CLONING

Using RT-PCR techniques and primers based on ESTs with sequence identity
to previously identified NMEs, Mehus et al. (1999) identified human
NME6, which encodes a deduced 186-amino acid protein with a calculated
molecular mass of 21.1 kD. NME6 shows 34 to 41% amino acid sequence
identity to other members of the NME family. It contains the conserved
NDP kinase active site motif involved in phosphoryl transfer as well as
other residues previously identified as crucial for nucleotide binding
and catalysis. Compared to NME1 (156490) and NME2 (156491), NME6 has 3
additional residues located in the Kpn loop and a 22-residue extension
at the C terminus. Northern blot analysis detected wide expression of a
1.3-kb transcript in human tissues, with highest expression in kidney,
prostate, ovary, intestine, and spleen.

Tsuiki et al. (1999) obtained a NM23H6 clone from the SAOS2 human
osteosarcoma cell line. The deduced 194-amino acid protein shares a high
degree of similarity with nucleoside diphosphate kinases of various
species and with sea urchin dynein intermediate chain-1 (see 603772).
NM23H6 contains the NDP kinase consensus motif NxxHGSD and a probable
histidine phosphorylation site at his137, which is required to form the
high-energy kinase intermediate. Northern blot analysis detected
widespread expression of an approximately 2-kb NM23H6 transcript, with
highest levels in heart, placenta, and skeletal muscle. Western blot
analysis detected variable NM23H6 expression in all human cell lines
examined. The apparent molecular mass of NM23H6 was 22 kD.
Immunohistochemical analysis of the U2OS osteosarcoma cell line revealed
colocalization of NM23H6 with a mitochondrial marker.

GENE FUNCTION

Tsuiki et al. (1999) demonstrated that purified epitope-tagged NM23H6
could undergo autophosphorylation to form the histidine-phosphorylated
high-energy intermediate. Autophosphorylated NM23H6 showed
phosphotransferase activity, with the transfer of radiolabeled
gamma-phosphate from ATP to CDP, producing radiolabeled CTP.
Overexpression of NM23H6 in SAOS2 cells suppressed cell growth and
interfered with mitosis, resulting in multinucleated cells with many
centrosomes and over 4N DNA content.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Mehus et al. (1999) and Tsuiki et al.
(1999) independently mapped the NME6 gene to chromosome 3p21.3.

REFERENCE 1. Mehus, J. G.; Deloukas, P.; Lambeth, D. O.: NME6: a new member
of the nm23/nucleoside diphosphate kinase gene family located on human
chromosome 3p21.3. Hum. Genet. 104: 454-459, 1999.

2. Tsuiki, H.; Nitta, M.; Furuya, A.; Hanai, N.; Fujiwara, T.; Inagaki,
M.; Kochi, M.; Ushio, Y.; Saya, H.; Nakamura, H.: A novel human nucleoside
diphosphate (NDP) kinase, Nm23-H6, localizes in mitochondria and affects
cytokinesis. J. Cell. Biochem. 76: 254-269, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/1/2010

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 11/26/2003

EDITED mgross: 07/12/2010
terry: 7/1/2010
carol: 11/29/2003
terry: 11/26/2003
carol: 11/26/2003

606899	TITLE *606899 CALCIUM CHANNEL, VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT, GAMMA-7 SUBUNIT; CACNG7
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Voltage-dependent calcium channels couple membrane depolarization in a
number of cellular processes. These activities are regulated by distinct
channels composed of the pore-forming alpha-1 subunit (e.g., CACNA1D;
114206) and the modulatory beta (e.g., CACNB1; 114207), alpha-2/delta
(e.g., CACNA2D1; 114204), and gamma (e.g., CACNG1; 114209) subunits.

CLONING

By database searching and analysis of BAC clones from chromosome 19 near
the PRKCG gene (176980), Burgess et al. (2001) identified cDNAs encoding
CACNG6 (606898), CACNG7, and CACNG8 (606900). The deduced 248-amino acid
CACNG7 protein contains 4 transmembrane segments and a highly conserved
N-glycosylation site in the first extracellular loop. RT-PCR analysis of
24 adult and fetal tissues detected CACNG7 expression in all tissues
tested except heart, uterus, placenta, pancreas, and salivary gland.

Chu et al. (2001) cloned cDNAs for rat, mouse, and human CACNG7.
Phylogenetic analysis indicated that CACNG7 is most related to CACNG5
(606405).

GENE STRUCTURE

By RT-PCR and genomic sequence analysis, Burgess et al. (2001)
determined that the CACNG7 gene, like CACNG6 and CACNG8, contains 4
exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Burgess et al. (2001) mapped the CACNG6,
CACNG7, and CACNG8 genes to chromosome 19q13.4, in the arrangement
telomere--PRKCG--CACNG7--CACNG8--CACNG6--centromere.

REFERENCE 1. Burgess, D. L.; Gefrides, L. A.; Foreman, P. J.; Noebels, J. L.
: A cluster of three novel Ca(2+) channel gamma subunit genes on chromosome
19q13.4: evolution and expression profile of the gamma subunit gene
family. Genomics 71: 339-350, 2001.

2. Chu, P.-J.; Robertson, H. M.; Best, P. M.: Calcium channel gamma
subunits provide insights into the evolution of this gene family. Gene 280:
37-48, 2001.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/1/2002

EDITED mgross: 05/01/2002

602427	TITLE *602427 T-BOX 6; TBX6
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Somites, the segmented mesodermal units of the vertebrate embryo, are
the precursors of adult skeletal muscle, bone, and cartilage. During
embryogenesis, somite progenitor cells ingress through the primitive
streak, move laterally to a paraxial position (alongside the body axis),
and segment into epithelial somites. Chapman et al. (1996) described a
mouse T-box gene, Tbx6, which codes for a putative DNA-binding protein.
The embryonic pattern of expression of Tbx6 in somite precursor cells
suggested that this gene may be involved in the specification of
paraxial mesoderm.

GENE FUNCTION

Yasuhiko et al. (2006) found that Tbx6 was essential for Mesp2 (605195)
expression during somitogenesis in mouse. Tbx6 directly bound to the
Mesp2 gene upstream region and mediated Notch (see 190198) signaling and
subsequent Mesp2 transcription in the anterior presomitic mesoderm.

Takemoto et al. (2011) demonstrated that TBX6-dependent regulation of
SOX2 (184429) determines the fate of axial stem cells. In wildtype mouse
embryos, enhancer N1 of the neural primordial gene Sox2 is activated in
the caudal lateral epiblast, and the cells staying in the superficial
layer sustain N1 activity and activate Sox2 expression in the neural
plate. In contrast, the cells destined to become mesoderm activate Tbx6
and turn off enhancer N1 before migrating into the paraxial mesoderm
compartment. In Tbx6 mutant embryos, however, enhancer N1 activity
persists in the paraxial mesoderm compartment, eliciting ectopic Sox2
activation and transforming the paraxial mesoderm into neural tubes. An
enhancer-N1-specific deletion mutation introduced into Tbx6 mutant
embryos prevented this Sox2 activation into the mesodermal compartment
and subsequent development of ectopic neural tubes, indicating that Tbx6
regulates Sox2 via enhancer N1. Tbx6-dependent repression of Wnt3a
(606359) in the paraxial mesodermal compartment is implicated in this
regulatory process. Paraxial mesoderm-specific misexpression of a Sox2
transgene in wildtype embryos resulted in ectopic neural tube
development. Thus, Takemoto et al. (2011) concluded that Tbx6 represses
Sox2 by inactivating enhancer N1 to inhibit neural development, and this
is an essential step for the specification of paraxial mesoderm from the
axial stem cells.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Papapetrou et al. (1999) mapped
the human TBX6 gene to 16p11.2. This region of chromosome 16 shows
homology of synteny with mouse chromosome 7, cM position 61, the
localization reported for the mouse Tbx6 gene (Chapman et al., 1996).

ANIMAL MODEL

Chapman and Papaioannou (1998) created a mutation in mouse Tbx6 that
profoundly affected the differentiation of paraxial mesoderm. Irregular
somites formed in the neck region of mutant embryos, whereas more
posterior paraxial tissue did not form somites but instead
differentiated along a neural pathway, forming neural-tube-like
structures that flanked the axial neural tube. These paraxial tubes
showed dorsal/ventral patterning that is characteristic of the neural
tube and had differentiated motor neurons. These results indicated that
Tbx6 is needed for cells to choose between a mesodermal and a neuronal
differentiation pathway during gastrulation; Tbx6 is essential for the
specification of posterior paraxial mesoderm, and in its absence cells
destined to form posterior somites differentiate along a neuronal
pathway.

REFERENCE 1. Chapman, D. L.; Agulnik, I.; Hancock, S.; Silver, L. M.; Papaioannou,
V. E.: Tbx6, a mouse T-box gene implicated in paraxial mesoderm formation
at gastrulation. Dev. Biol. 180: 534-542, 1996.

2. Chapman, D. L.; Papaioannou, V. E.: Three neural tubes in mouse
embryos with mutations in the T-box gene Tbx6. Nature 391: 695-697,
1998.

3. Papapetrou, C.; Putt, W.; Fox, M.; Edwards, Y. H.: The human TBX6
gene: cloning and assignment to chromosome 16p11.2. Genomics 55:
238-241, 1999.

4. Takemoto, T.; Uchikawa, M.; Yoshida, M.; Bell, D. M.; Lovell-Badge,
R.; Papaioannou, V. E.; Kondoh, H.: Tbx6-dependent Sox2 regulation
determines neural or mesodermal fate in axial stem cells. Nature 470:
394-398, 2011.

5. Yasuhiko, Y.; Haraguchi, S.; Kitajima, S.; Takahashi, Y.; Kanno,
J.; Saga, Y.: Tbx6-mediated Notch signaling controls somite-specific
Mesp2 expression. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 3651-3656, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/29/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/30/2007
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 3/7/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/9/1998

EDITED alopez: 07/05/2011
terry: 6/29/2011
mgross: 7/30/2007
terry: 7/30/2007
carol: 2/25/2000
terry: 3/9/1999
carol: 3/7/1999
alopez: 2/25/1999
alopez: 3/9/1998

602275	TITLE *602275 GUANYLATE CYCLASE ACTIVATOR 1B; GUCA1B
;;GUANYLATE CYCLASE-ACTIVATING PROTEIN, PHOTORECEPTOR 2; GCAP2;;
GUANYLIN 2, RETINA; GUCA2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Guanylate cyclase activating proteins are related Ca(2+)-binding
proteins that activate photoreceptor guanylate cyclase(s). Surguchov et
al. (1997) showed by PCR analysis that the GUCA1B gene, termed GCAP2 by
the authors, is arranged in a tail-to-tail array with the GUCA1A gene
(600364). Northern blot analysis revealed a 2.2-kb GUCA1B mRNA species
that is detectable only in the retina. Surguchov et al. (1997) concluded
that the closely related gene structures and locations of GUCA1A and
GUCA1B are consistent with a gene duplication event.

MAPPING

Using somatic human-hamster hybrid analysis and fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Surguchov et al. (1997) mapped the GUCA1A gene to
chromosome 6p21.1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Payne et al. (1999) reported mutation analysis of the GUCA1B gene in 400
unrelated British individuals with autosomal dominant central and
peripheral retinal dystrophies. A number of sequence changes and
polymorphisms, but no disease-causing mutations, were found.

Sato et al. (2005) screened 96 unrelated Japanese patients with
retinitis pigmentosa for mutations in the GUCA1B gene and identified
heterozygosity for a G157R mutation (602275.0001) in 3.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 48
GUCA1B, GLY157ARG

In 7 patients from 3 unrelated Japanese families with retinitis
pigmentosa, with or without macular involvement (RP48; 613827), Sato et
al. (2005) demonstrated a novel 156G-A transition in the GUCA1B gene,
resulting in a gly157-to-arg (G157R) substitution. These families
demonstrated variable phenotypic expression and incomplete penetrance of
the retinitis pigmentosa phenotype.

REFERENCE 1. Payne, A. M.; Downes, S. M.; Bessant, D. A. R.; Plant, C.; Moore,
T.; Bird, A. C.; Bhattacharya, S. S.: Genetic analysis of the guanylate
cyclase activator 1B (GUCA1B) gene in patients with autosomal dominant
retinal dystrophies. J. Med. Genet. 36: 691-693, 1999.

2. Sato, M.; Nakazawa, M.; Usui, N.; Tanimoto, N.; Abe, H.; Ohguro,
H.: Mutations in the gene coding for guanylate cyclase-activating
protein 2 (GUCA1B gene) in patients with autosomal dominant retinal
dystrophies. Graefes Arch. Clin. Exp. Ophthalmol. 243: 235-242,
2005.

3. Surguchov, A.; Bronson, J. D.; Banerjee, P.; Knowles, J. A.; Ruiz,
C.; Subbaraya, I.; Palczewski, K.; Baehr, W.: The human GCAP1 and
GCAP2 genes are arranged in a tail-to-tail array on the short arm
of chromosome 6 (p21.1). Genomics 39: 312-322, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Jane Kelly - updated: 6/18/2009
Michael J. Wright - updated: 12/16/1999

CREATED Lori M. Kelman: 1/26/1998

EDITED terry: 04/25/2011
alopez: 3/24/2011
carol: 7/10/2009
carol: 6/30/2009
terry: 6/18/2009
alopez: 2/3/2009
alopez: 12/16/1999
dholmes: 2/9/1998
dholmes: 1/29/1998

