113705	TITLE *113705 BREAST CANCER 1 GENE; BRCA1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

BRCA1 plays critical roles in DNA repair, cell cycle checkpoint control,
and maintenance of genomic stability. BRCA1 forms several distinct
complexes through association with different adaptor proteins, and each
complex forms in a mutually exclusive manner (Wang et al., 2009).

CLONING

Miki et al. (1994) identified cDNA sequences corresponding to the BRCA1
gene by positional cloning of the region on 17q21 implicated in familial
breast-ovarian cancer syndrome (604370). The deduced 1,863-residue
protein with zinc-finger domains near the N terminus. A 7.8-kb mRNA
transcript was identified in testes, thymus, breast and ovary. There
appeared to be a complex pattern of alternative splicing.

Bennett et al. (1995) found that the mouse Brca1 gene shares 75%
identity of the coding region with the human sequence at the nucleotide
level, whereas the predicted amino acid identity was only 58%.

Jensen et al. (1996) demonstrated that BRCA1 encodes a 190-kD protein
with sequence homology and biochemical analogy to members of the granin
protein family, including chromogranin A (118910), chromogranin B
(118920), and secretogranin II, also known as chromogranin C (118930).
They noted that BRCA2 also includes a motif similar to the granin
consensus at the C terminus of the protein. Both BRCA1 and the granins
localize to secretory vesicles, are secreted by a regulated pathway, are
posttranslationally glycosylated, and are responsive to hormones. The
authors stated that as a regulated secretory protein, BRCA1 appears to
function by a mechanism not previously described for tumor suppressor
products. As reviewed by Steeg (1996), granins are a family of acidic
proteins that bind calcium and aggregate in its presence. Known members
of the granin family have been solely neuroendocrine or endocrine in
origin; if BRCA1 is a granin it will necessarily expand the protein
family boundaries.

ElShamy and Livingston (2004) identified a splice variant of BRCA1 that
incorporates a unique 40-nucleotide first exon, exon 1c, that is located
24 Mb upstream of BRCA1 exons 1a and 1b. The 3-prime end of this cDNA
extends 335 nucleotides into intron 11, prompting ElShamy and Livingston
(2004) to designate it IRIS for 'in-frame reading of BRCA1 intron 11
splice variant.' The deduced BRCA1-IRIS protein contains 1,399 amino
acids. In vitro transcription-translation resulted in a protein with an
apparent molecular mass of about 150 kD. Northern blot analysis of
fibroblast mRNA detected BRCA1-IRIS at about 4.5 kb. Semiquantitative
PCR detected variable and developmentally regulated expression of
BRCA1-IRIS and full-length BRCA1 in several adult and fetal human
tissues. Unlike full-length BRCA1, BRCA1-IRIS was exclusively chromatin
associated, failed to interact with BARD1 in vivo or in vitro, exhibited
unique nuclear immunostaining, and coimmunoprecipitated with core DNA
replication initiation sites and with replication initiation proteins.
Suppression of BRCA1-IRIS hindered DNA replication, whereas
overexpression stimulated DNA replication. ElShamy and Livingston (2004)
concluded that endogenous BRCA1-IRIS positively influences the DNA
replication initiation machinery.

GENE STRUCTURE

Miki et al. (1994) determined that the BRCA1 gene contains 22 exons
spanning about 110 kb of DNA.

Brown et al. (1996) determined the detailed structure of the BRCA1
genomic region. They showed that this region of chromosome 17 contains a
tandem duplication of approximately 30 kb which results in 2 copies of
BRCA1 exons 1 and 2, of exons 1 and 3 of the adjacent gene that Brown et
al. (1994) designated 1A1-3B (M17S2; 166945), and of a previously
reported 295-bp intergenic region. Sequence analysis of the duplicated
exons of BRCA1, 1A1-3B, and flanking genomic DNA revealed to Brown et
al. (1996) that there was maintenance of exon/intron structure and a
high degree of nucleotide sequence identity, which suggested that these
duplicated exons are nonprocessed pseudogenes. They noted that these
findings could not only confound BRCA1 mutation analysis but have
implications for the normal and abnormal regulation of BRCA1
transcription, translation, and function.

Smith et al. (1996) sequenced 117,143 bp from human chromosome 17
encompassing BRCA1. The 24 exons of BRCA1 spanned an 81-kb region that
had an unusually high density of Alu repetitive DNA (41.5%), but a
relatively low density (4.8%) of other repetitive sequences. BRCA1
intron lengths ranged in size from 403 bp to 9.2 kb and contained 3
intragenic microsatellite markers located in introns 12, 19, and 20. In
addition to BRCA1, the contig contained 2 complete genes which they
called RHO7 (601555) and VAT1. RHO7 is a member of the RHO family of GTP
binding proteins and VAT1 is an abundant membrane protein of cholinergic
synaptic vesicles. The order of genes on the chromosome was found to be:
centromere-IFP35 (600735)-VAT1-RHO7-BRCA1-M17S2-telomere. Smith et al.
(1996) suggested that these features may contribute to chromosomal
instability or changes in transcription.

MAPPING

The BRCA1 gene maps to human chromosome 17q21 (Miki et al., 1994).
Albertsen et al. (1994) used simple sequence repeat (SSR) markers to
construct a high-resolution genetic map of a 40-cM region around 17q21.
For 5 of the markers, genotypes were 'captured' by using an ABI
sequencing instrument and stored in a locally developed database as a
step toward automated genotyping. In a second report, Albertsen et al.
(1994) described construction of a physical map of a 4-cM region
containing the BRCA1 gene. The map comprised a contig of 137 overlapping
YACs and P1 clones, onto which they had placed 112 PCR markers. They
localized more than 20 genes on the map, 10 of which had not been mapped
to the region previously, and isolated 30 cDNA clones representing
partial sequences of as yet unidentified genes. They failed to find any
deleterious mutations on sequencing of 2 genes that lie within a narrow
region defined by meiotic breakpoints in BRCA1 patients. O'Connell et
al. (1994) developed a radiation hybrid map of the BRCA1 region as the
basis of YAC cloning and pulsed field gel electrophoretic mapping of the
candidate region for the BRCA1 gene.

By an intersubspecific backcross using a DNA sequence variant in the
Brca1 locus, Bennett et al. (1995) mapped the Brca1 gene to distal mouse
chromosome 11 in a region of extensive homology of synteny to human
chromosome 17.

Schrock et al. (1996) mapped the Brca1 gene to mouse chromosome 11,
specifically 11D. De Gregorio et al. (1996) mapped the gene to mouse
chromosome 11.

- Pseudogene

The 5-prime end of the BRCA1 gene lies within a duplicated region on
chromosome 17q21. This region contains BRCA1 exons 1A, 1B, and 2 and
their surrounding introns; as a result, a BRCA1 pseudogene lies upstream
of BRCA1. Puget et al. (2002) found extensive homology between the
tandemly situated BRCA1 and its pseudogene. Exon 1A of BRCA1 and of the
pseudogene were 44.5 kb apart. Distinct homologous recombination events
had occurred between intron 2 of BRCA1 and intron 2 of the BRCA1
pseudogene, leading to 37-kb deletions. These breakpoint junctions were
found to be located at close but distinct sites within segments that are
98% identical. The mutant alleles lack the BRCA1 promoter and harbor a
chimeric gene consisting of pseudogene exons 1A, 1B, and 2, which lacks
the initiation codon, fused to BRCA1 exons 3-24. This represented a new
mutational mechanism for the BRCA1 gene. The presence of a large region
homologous to BRCA1 on the same chromosome appeared to constitute a
hotspot for recombination. Brown et al. (2002) likewise identified a
deletion consistent with recombination between BRCA1 and the BRCA1
pseudogene. In germline BRCA1, a promoter deletion was found in 1 of 60
familial breast cancer patients from the Australian population.

GENE FUNCTION

Thompson et al. (1995) found that BRCA1 mRNA levels were markedly
decreased during the transition from carcinoma in situ to invasive
cancer in sporadic breast cancer. Experimental inhibition of BRCA1
expression with antisense oligonucleotides produced accelerated growth
of normal and malignant mammary cells but had no effect on nonmammary
epithelial cells. The results suggested that BRCA1 may normally serve as
a negative regulator of mammary epithelial cell growth and that this
function is compromised in breast cancer either by direct mutation or by
alterations in gene expression.

Chen et al. (1995) identified the BRCA1 gene product as a 220-kD nuclear
phosphoprotein in normal cells, including breast ductal epithelial
cells, and in 18 of 20 tumor cell lines derived from tissues other than
breast and ovary. However, in 16 of 17 breast and ovarian cancer lines
and in 17 of 17 samples of cells obtained from malignant effusions,
BRCA1 localized mainly in the cytoplasm. Absence of BRCA1 or aberrant
subcellular location was also observed to a variable extent in
histologic sections of many breast cancer biopsies. The findings
suggested to the authors that BRCA1 abnormalities may be involved in the
pathogenesis of many breast cancers, sporadic as well as familial.
Scully et al. (1996), however, reported results that did not support the
hypothesis that wildtype BRCA1 is specifically excluded from the nucleus
in sporadic breast and ovarian cancer.

Coene et al. (1997) reported a well-defined localization of BRCA1 in the
perinuclear compartment of the endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi complex and
in tubes invaginating the nucleus. The nuclear detection was fixation
dependent, which helped to explain the controversial findings previously
reported. The nuclear tubes were not seen in every cell, and therefore
the authors suggested that an involvement in the cell cycle was
possible. These tubes probably enhance nuclear-cytoplasmic interactions
by increasing the surface area.

Chen et al. (1996) raised mouse polyclonal antibodies to 3 regions of
the human BRCA1 protein and confirmed their earlier finding of a 220-kD
nuclear phosphoprotein. They reported that expression and
phosphorylation of the BRCA1 gene and protein are cell cycle dependent
in a synchronized population of bladder carcinoma cells. The greatest
levels of both expression and phosphorylation occurred in S and M
phases.

Chen et al. (1998) used mammalian expression vectors to transfect cells
with BRCA1 and BRCA2 as well as with several antibodies to recognize
these proteins in order to study their subcellular localizations. They
showed that BRCA1 and BRCA2 coexist in a biochemical complex and
colocalize in subnuclear foci in somatic cells and on the axial elements
of developing synaptonemal complexes. Like BRCA1 and RAD51 (179617),
BRCA2 relocates to replication sites following exposure of S phase cells
to hydroxyurea or UV irradiation. Thus, BRCA1 and BRCA2 participate
together in a pathway (or pathways) associated with the activation of
double-strand break repair and/or homologous recombination. Dysfunction
of this pathway may be a general phenomenon in the majority of cases of
hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer.

Zhong et al. (1999) showed that BRCA1 interacts in vitro and in vivo
with RAD50 (604040), which forms a complex with MRE11 (600814) and
p95/nibrin (NBS1; 602667). Upon irradiation, BRCA1 was detected in the
nucleus, in discrete foci which colocalize with RAD50. Formation of
irradiation-induced foci positive for BRCA1, RAD50, MRE11, or p95 was
dramatically reduced in HCC/1937 breast cancer cells carrying a
homozygous mutation in BRCA1 but was restored by transfection of
wildtype BRCA1. Ectopic expression of wildtype, but not mutated, BRCA1
in these cells rendered them less sensitive to the DNA damage agent
methyl methanesulfonate. These data suggested to the authors that BRCA1
is important for the cellular responses to DNA damage that are mediated
by the RAD50-MRE11-p95 complex.

Holt et al. (1996) demonstrated that retroviral transfer of the wildtype
BRCA1 gene inhibits growth in vitro of all breast cancer and ovarian
cancer cell lines tested, but not colon or lung cancer cells or
fibroblasts. Mutant BRCA1, however, had no effect on growth of breast
cancer cells; ovarian cancer cell growth was not affected by BRCA1
mutations in the 5-prime portion of the gene but was inhibited by
3-prime BRCA1 mutations. Development of MCF-7 tumors in nude mice was
inhibited when MCF-7 cells were transfected with wildtype, but not
mutant, BRCA1. Among mice with established MCF-7 tumors, peritoneal
treatment with a retroviral vector expressing wildtype BRCA1
significantly inhibited tumor growth and increased survival. The results
of Holt et al. (1996) were consistent with the previous observation that
the site of BRCA1 mutation is associated with relative susceptibility to
ovarian versus breast cancer.

To identify downstream target genes of BRCA1, Harkin et al. (1999)
established cell lines with tightly regulated inducible expression of
the BRCA1 gene. High-density oligonucleotide arrays were used to analyze
gene expression profiles at various times following BRCA1 induction. A
major target of BRCA1 is the DNA damage-inducible gene GADD45 (126335).
Induction of BRCA1 triggers apoptosis through activation of c-Jun
N-terminal kinase/stress-activated protein kinase (JNK/SAPK; see
601158), a signaling pathway potentially linked to GADD45 gene family
members.

Lorick et al. (1999) showed that like other RING finger proteins, the
N-terminal 788 amino acids of BRCA1 expressed as a GST fusion protein
facilitated E2-dependent ubiquitination. The authors noted that RING
mutations in BRCA1 are associated with familial carcinomas.

In an effort to understand the function of BRCA1, Wu et al. (1996) used
a yeast 2-hybrid system to identify proteins that associate with BRCA1
in vivo. This analysis led to the identification of BARD1 (601593), a
novel protein that interacts with the N-terminal region of BRCA1.

By Western and immunofluorescence analyses in synchronized T24 bladder
cancer cells, Jin et al. (1997) studied the expression patterns of the
BARD1 and BRCA1 proteins. They found that the steady state levels of
BARD1, unlike those of BRCA1, remain relatively constant during cell
cycle progression. However, immunostaining revealed that BARD1 resides
within BRCA1 nuclear dots during S phase of the cell cycle, but not
during the G1 phase. Nevertheless, BARD1 polypeptides are found
exclusively in the nuclear fractions of both G1- and S-phase cells.
Therefore, progression to S phase is accompanied by the aggregation of
nuclear BARD1 polypeptides into BRCA1 nuclear dots. This cell
cycle-dependent colocalization of BARD1 and BRCA1 indicates a role for
BARD1 in BRCA1-mediated tumor suppression.

Scully et al. (1997) found that the BRCA1 gene product is a component of
the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme (polII) by several criteria. BRCA1 was
found to copurify with the holoenzyme over multiple chromatographic
steps. Other tested transcription activators that could potentially
contact the holoenzyme were not stably associated with the holoenzyme as
determined by copurification. Antibody specific for the holoenzyme
component SRB7 specifically purified BRCA1. (SRB proteins are a key
component of the holoenzyme and were discovered in a yeast genetic
screen as suppressors of RNA polymerase B mutations; hence, the
designation SRB. A benign difference is that SRB proteins bind to the
C-terminal domain of yeast polII and are found only in the polII
holoenzyme.) Immunopurification of BRCA1 complexes also specifically
purified transcriptionally active RNA polII and transcription factors
TFIIF (see 189968), TFIIE (see 189962), and TFIIH (see 189972), which
are known components of the holoenzyme. Moreover, a BRCA1 domain, which
is deleted in about 90% of clinically relevant mutations, participated
in binding to the holoenzyme complex in cells. These data were
considered consistent with other data identifying transcription
activation domains in the BRCA1 protein, and link the BRCA1 tumor
suppressor protein with the transcription process as a holoenzyme-bound
protein.

RNA helicase A, or RHA (140 kD), was identified by Lee and Hurwitz
(1993) and Zhang and Grosse (1997) as a helicase of unknown function
with homology to the Drosophila 'maleless' gene, which functions to
increase expression of genes from the male X chromosome. Anderson et al.
(1998) showed that RHA protein links BRCA1 to the holoenzyme complex.
These results were the first to identify specific protein interaction
with the BRCA1 C-terminal domain and were consistent with the model that
BRCA1 functions as a transcriptional coactivator.

Association of the BRCA1 protein with the DNA repair gene RAD51 (179617)
and changes in the phosphorylation and cellular localization of the
protein after exposure to DNA-damaging agents are consistent with a role
for BRCA1 in DNA repair. Although Gowen et al. (1998) reported that
mouse embryonic stem cells deficient in BRCA1 are defective in the
ability to carry out transcription-coupled repair of oxidative DNA
damage and are hypersensitive to ionizing radiation and hydrogen
peroxide, this article was later retracted because of the possibility of
'fabricated and falsified research findings' by one of the authors
(Gowen et al., 2003).

Using transient transfection assays, Fan et al. (1999) demonstrated that
BRCA1 inhibits signaling by the ligand-activated estrogen receptor
ER-alpha (133430) through the estrogen-responsive enhancer element and
blocks the C-terminal transcriptional activation function AF2 of
ER-alpha. These results suggested that wildtype BRCA1 protein may
function, in part, to suppress estrogen-dependent mammary epithelial
proliferation by inhibiting ER-alpha mediated transcriptional pathways
related to cell proliferation, and that loss of this ability may
contribute to tumorigenesis.

Scully et al. (1999) found that retrovirally expressed wildtype BRCA1
decreased the gamma irradiation (IR) sensitivity and increased the
efficiency of double-strand DNA break repair of the BRCA1 -/- human
breast cancer line, HCC1937. It also reduced the susceptibility of the
cells to double-strand DNA break generation by IR. In contrast, multiple
clinically validated BRCA1 products with missense mutations were
nonfunctional in these assays. These data constituted the basis for a
BRCA1 functional assay and suggested that efficient repair of
double-strand DNA breaks is linked to BRCA1 tumor suppression.

BRCA1 contains a C-terminal domain (BRCT) that is shared with several
other proteins involved in maintaining genome integrity. In an effort to
understand the function of BRCA1, Yarden and Brody (1999) sought to
isolate proteins that interact with the BRCT domain. Purified BRCT
polypeptide was used as a probe to screen a human placenta cDNA
expression library by Far Western analysis. The authors reported that
BRCA1 interacts in vivo and in vitro with the Rb-binding proteins RbAp46
(RBBP7; 300825) and RbAp48 (RBBP4; 602923), as well as with Rb (RB1;
614041). Moreover, the BRCT domain associated with the histone
deacetylases HDAC1 (601241) and HDAC2 (605164). These results
demonstrated that BRCA1 interacts with components of the histone
deacetylase complex, and therefore may explain the involvement of BRCA1
in multiple processes such as transcription, DNA repair, and
recombination.

Lee et al. (2000) reported that CHK2 (604373) regulates BRCA1 function
after DNA damage by phosphorylating serine-988 of BRCA1. Lee et al.
(2000) demonstrated that CHK2 and BRCA1 interact and colocalize within
discrete nuclear foci but separate after gamma irradiation.
Phosphorylation of BRCA1 at serine-988 is required for the release of
BRCA1 from CHK2. This phosphorylation is also important for the ability
of BRCA1 to restore survival after DNA damage in the BRCA1-mutated cell
line HCC1937. However, BRCA1 phosphorylation may be complicated. For
example, Cortez et al. (1999) demonstrated that ATM (607585) can
phosphorylate serines at positions 1423 and 1524 of BRCA1 after a high
dose of gamma radiation. In addition, Ruffner et al. (1999) demonstrated
that CDK2 (116953) phosphorylated serine-1497 during the G1/S phase of
cell cycle. Phosphorylation of the different serine residues is likely
to have different effects on BRCA1 function.

Maor et al. (2000) cotransfected a luciferase reporter gene under the
control of the insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF1R; 147370)
promoter with a wildtype BRCA1-encoding expression vector into multiple
cell lines. They observed a significant reduction in luciferase activity
in all 3 cell lines tested, demonstrating suppression of promoter
activity by BRCA1 in a dose-dependent manner. Functional interaction
between BRCA1 and SP1 (189906) in the regulation of the IGF1R gene was
studied in Schneider cells, a Drosophila cell line which lacks
endogenous SP1. In these cells, BRCA1 suppressed 45% of the SP1-induced
trans-activation of the IGF1R promoter. Maor et al. (2000) concluded
that BRCA1 is capable of suppressing the IGF1R promoter in a number of
cell lines, resulting in low levels of receptor mRNA protein. Maor et
al. (2000) hypothesized that mutant versions of BRCA1 lacking
trans-activational activity can potentially derepress the IGF1R
promoter. Activation of the overexpressed receptor by locally produced
or circulating IGFs may elicit a myogenic event which may be a key
mechanism in the etiology of breast and ovarian cancer.

Li et al. (2000) demonstrated that the BRCA1-associated protein CTIP
(604124) becomes hyperphosphorylated and dissociated from BRCA1 upon
ionizing radiation. This phosphorylation event requires the protein
kinase ATM (see 607585). ATM phosphorylates CTIP at serine residues 664
and 745, and mutation of these sites to alanine abrogates the
dissociation of BRCA1 from CTIP, resulting in persistent repression of
BRCA1-dependent induction of GADD45 upon ionizing radiation. Li et al.
(2000) concluded that ATM, by phosphorylating CTIP upon ionizing
radiation, may modulate BRCA1-mediated regulation of the DNA
damage-response GADD45 gene, thus providing a potential link between ATM
deficiency and breast cancer.

Using human and mouse expression plasmids in several protein interaction
assays, Sum et al. (2002) identified CTIP and BRCA1 as LMO4
(603129)-binding proteins. The LMO4-BRCA1 interaction required the
C-terminal BRCT domains of BRCA1. LDB1 (603451) also associated with a
complex containing LMO4, CTIP, and BRCA1 in transfected human embryonic
kidney cells. In functional assays, LMO4 repressed BRCA1-mediated
transcriptional activation in both yeast and mammalian cells.

Huttley et al. (2000) used phylogeny-based maximum likelihood analysis
of the BRCA1 sequences from primates and other animals and found that
the ratios of replacement to silent nucleotide substitutions on the
human and chimpanzee lineages were not different from one another but
were different from those of other primate lineages, and were greater
than 1. This is consistent with the historic occurrence of positive
darwinian selection pressure on the BRCA1 protein in the human and
chimpanzee lineages. Analysis of genetic variation in a sample of female
Australians of northern European origin showed evidence for
Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium at polymorphic sites in BRCA1, consistent
with the possibility that natural selection is affecting genotype
frequencies in modern Europeans. The clustering of between-species
variation in the region of the gene encoding the RAD51-interacting
domain of BRCA1 suggests the maintenance of genomic integrity as a
possible target of selection.

Using a combination of affinity- and conventional chromatographic
techniques, Bochar et al. (2000) isolated a predominant form of a
multiprotein BRCA1-containing complex from human cells displaying
chromatin-remodeling activity. Mass spectrometric sequencing of
components of this complex indicated that BRCA1 is associated with a
SWI/SNF-related complex, and the authors showed that BRCA1 can directly
interact with the BRG1 (SMARCA4; 603254) subunit of the SWI/SNF complex.
Moreover, p53 (TP53; 191170)-mediated stimulation of transcription by
BRCA1 was completely abrogated by either a dominant-negative mutant of
BRG1 (Khavari et al., 1993) or the cancer-causing deletion of exon 11 of
BRCA1 (Xu et al., 1999). These findings revealed a direct function for
BRCA1 in transcriptional control through modulation of chromatin
structure.

Ye et al. (2001) found that BRCA1 induced large-scale chromatin
decondensation in Chinese hamster ovary cells. COBRA1 (611180) bound one
of the chromatin-unfolding domains of BRCA1, and by itself COBRA1
induced large-scale chromatin decondensation.

Wang et al. (2000) used immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry
analyses to identify BRCA1-associated proteins. They found that BRCA1 is
part of a large multisubunit protein complex of tumor suppressors, DNA
damage sensors, and signal transducers. They named this complex BASC,
for 'BRCA1-associated genome surveillance complex.' Among the DNA repair
proteins identified in the complex were ATM, BLM (604610), MSH2
(609309), MSH6 (600678), MLH1 (120436), the RAD50-MRE11-NBS1 complex,
and the RFC1 (102579)-RFC2 (600404)-RFC4 (102577) complex. Confocal
microscopy demonstrated that BRCA1, BLM, and the RAD50-MRE11-NBS1
complex colocalize to large nuclear foci. Wang et al. (2000) suggested
that BASC may serve as a sensor of abnormal DNA structures and/or as a
regulator of the postreplication repair process.

BRCA1 is implicated in the transcriptional regulation of DNA
damage-inducible genes that function in cell cycle arrest. To explore
the mechanistic basis for this regulation, Zheng et al. (2000) performed
a yeast 2-hybrid screen for proteins associated with BRCA1 and isolated
a cDNA encoding ZBRK1 (605422). ZBRK1 binds to a specific sequence,
GGGxxxCAGxxxTTT, within GADD45 (126335) intron 3 that supports the
assembly of a nuclear complex minimally containing both ZBRK1 and BRCA1.
Through this recognition sequence, ZBRK1 represses transcription in a
BRCA1-dependent manner. The results revealed a novel corepressor
function for BRCA1 and provided a mechanistic basis for the biologic
activity of BRCA1 through sequence-specific transcriptional regulation.

The nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathway minimizes the potential damage
caused by nonsense mutations. In-frame nonsense codons located at a
minimum distance upstream of the last exon-exon junction are recognized
as premature termination codons, targeting the mRNA for degradation.
Some nonsense mutations cause skipping of one or more exons, presumably
during pre-mRNA splicing in the nucleus; this phenomenon is termed
nonsense-mediated altered splicing (NAS). By analyzing NAS in BRCA1, Liu
et al. (2001) showed that inappropriate exon skipping can be reproduced
in vitro and that it results from disruption of a splicing enhancer in
the coding sequence. Enhancers can be disrupted by a single nonsense,
missense, or translationally silent point mutation, without recognition
of an open reading frame as such. These results argued against a nuclear
reading-frame scanning mechanism for NAS. Coding region
single-nucleotide polymorphisms within exonic splicing enhancers or
silencers may affect the patterns or efficiency of mRNA splicing, which
may in turn cause phenotypic variability and variable penetrance of
mutations elsewhere in a gene.

Hedenfalk et al. (2001) used microarray technology to determine
gene-expression profiles in BRCA1-positive breast cancers as contrasted
with BRCA2-positive breast cancers. The suspicion that a difference
might be found came from the fact that the 2 types of tumors are often
histologically distinctive. Furthermore, tumors with BRCA1 mutations are
generally negative for both estrogen and progesterone receptors, whereas
most tumors with BRCA2 mutations are positive for these hormone
receptors. RNA from samples of primary tumors from 7 carriers of the
BRCA1 mutation and 7 carriers of the BRCA2 mutation was compared with a
microarray of 6,512 cDNA clones of 5,361 genes. The authors found that
significantly different groups of genes are expressed by breast cancers
with BRCA1 mutations and breast cancers with BRCA2 mutations.

Garcia-Higuera et al. (2001) showed that a nuclear complex containing
the FANCA (607139), FANCC (227645), FANCF (603467), and FANCG (602956)
proteins is required for the activation of the FANCD2 protein (227646)
to a monoubiquitinated isoform. In normal cells, FANCD2 is
monoubiquitinated in response to DNA damage and is targeted to nuclear
foci (dots). Activated FANCD2 protein colocalizes with BRCA1 in ionizing
radiation-induced foci and in synaptonemal complexes of meiotic
chromosomes. The authors concluded that the FANCD2 protein therefore
provides the missing link between the FA protein complex and the
cellular BRCA1 repair machinery. Disruption of this pathway results in
the cellular and clinical phenotype common to all subtypes of Fanconi
anemia.

The Fanconi anemia (FA) nuclear complex (composed of the FA proteins A,
C, G, and F) is essential for protection against chromosome breakage. It
activates the downstream protein FANCD2 by monoubiquitylation; this then
forges an association with the BRCA1 protein at sites of DNA damage.
Pace et al. (2002) showed that the FANCE (600901) protein is part of
this nuclear complex, binding both FANCC and FANCD2. Indeed, FANCE is
required for the nuclear accumulation of FANCC and provides a critical
bridge between the FA complex and FANCD2. Disease-associated FANCC
mutants do not bind to FANCE, cannot accumulate in the nucleus and are
unable to prevent chromosome breakage.

Paull et al. (2001) demonstrated that recombinant human BRCA1 protein
binds strongly to DNA, an activity conferred by a domain in the center
of the BRCA1 polypeptide. As a result of this binding, BRCA1 inhibits
the nucleolytic activity of the MRE11/RAD50/NBS1 complex, an enzyme
implicated in numerous aspects of double-strand break repair. BRCA1
displays a preference for branched DNA structures and forms protein-DNA
complexes cooperatively between multiple DNA strands, but without DNA
sequence specificity.

Mutations in the TP53 tumor suppressor gene (191170) are found in 70 to
80% of BRCA1-mutated breast cancers but only 30% of those with wildtype
BRCA1 (Schuyer and Berns, 1999). The p53 protein regulates nucleotide
excision repair (NER) through transcriptional regulation of genes
involved in the recognition of adducts in genomic DNA. Loss of p53
function, as in Li-Fraumeni syndrome (151623), results in deficient
global genomic repair (GGR), a subset of NER that targets and removes
lesions from the whole genome (Ford and Hanawalt, 1995, 1997). Hartman
and Ford (2002) showed that BRCA1 specifically enhances the GGR pathway,
independent of p53, and can induce p53-independent expression of the NER
genes XPC (613208), DDB2 (600811), and GADD45. Defects in the NER
pathway in BRCA1-associated breast cancers may be causal in tumor
development, suggesting a multistep model of carcinogenesis.

Yarden et al. (2002) showed that BRCA1 is essential for activating the
Chk1 kinase (603078) that regulates DNA damage-induced G2/M arrest.
BRCA1 controls the expression, phosphorylation, and cellular
localization of Cdc25C (157680) and Cdc2/cyclin B kinase
(116940)--proteins that are crucial for the G2/M transition. Since BRCA1
regulates key effectors that control the G2/M checkpoint, it is involved
in regulating the onset of mitosis.

Ganesan et al. (2002) found that BRCA1 colocalized with markers of the
inactive X chromosome (Xi) on Xi in female somatic cells and associated
with XIST (314670) RNA, as detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation.
Breast and ovarian carcinoma cells lacking BRCA1 showed evidence of
defects in Xi chromatin structure. Reconstitution of BRCA1-deficient
cells with wildtype BRCA1 led to the appearance of focal XIST RNA
staining without altering XIST abundance. Inhibiting BRCA1 synthesis in
a suitable reporter line led to increased expression of an otherwise
silenced Xi-located GFP transgene. These observations suggested that
loss of BRCA1 in female cells may lead to Xi perturbation and
destabilization of its silenced state.

Folias et al. (2002) used yeast 2-hybrid analysis and
coimmunoprecipitation methods to demonstrate a direct interaction
between the FANCA and BRCA1 proteins. Direct interaction with other FANC
proteins was not demonstrable. The amino terminal portion of FANCA and
the central part (amino acids 740-1,083) of BRCA1 contained the sites of
interaction. The interaction did not depend on DNA damage, suggesting
that FANCA and BRCA1 may be constitutively interacting.

Yu et al. (2003) demonstrated that the BRCA1 BRCT domain directly
interacts with phosphorylated BRCA1-associated carboxyl-terminal
helicase (BACH1; 602751). The specific interaction between BRCA1 and
phosphorylated BACH1 is cell cycle regulated and is required for DNA
damage-induced checkpoint control during the transition from G2 to M
phase of the cell cycle. Further, Yu et al. (2003) showed that 2 other
BRCT domains interact with their respective physiologic partners in a
phosphorylation-dependent manner. Thirteen additional BRCT domains also
preferentially bind phosphopeptides rather than nonphosphorylated
control peptides. Yu et al. (2003) concluded that their data implied
that the BRCT domain is a phosphoprotein binding domain involved in cell
cycle control.

Dong et al. (2003) isolated a holoenzyme complex containing BRCA1,
BRCA2, BARD1 (601593), and RAD51 (179617), which they called the BRCA1-
and BRCA2-containing complex (BRCC). The complex showed UBC5 (see
UBE2D1; 602961)-dependent ubiquitin E3 ligase activity. Inclusion of BRE
(610497) and BRCC3 (300617) enhanced ubiquitination by the complex, and
cancer-associated truncations in BRCA1 reduced the association of BRE
and BRCC3 with the complex. RNA interference of BRE and BRCC3 in HeLa
cells increased cell sensitivity to ionizing radiation and resulted in a
defect in G2/M checkpoint arrest. Dong et al. (2003) concluded that the
BRCC is a ubiquitin E3 ligase that enhances cellular survival following
DNA damage.

Deng and Wang (2003) discussed the functions of BRCA1 in DNA damage
repair and cellular responses that link development and cancer.

Morris and Solomon (2004) demonstrated an association of cellular BRCA1
with conjugated ubiquitin. The association was apparent at DNA
replication structures in S-phase, following treatment with hydroxyurea,
and at sites of double-strand break repair after exposure to ionizing
radiation. Downregulation of endogenous, cellular BRCA1:BARD1 using
siRNA resulted in abrogation of ubiquitin conjugation in these
structures, suggesting that heterodimer activity may be required for
their formation. Conversely, ectopically expressed full-length BRCA1,
but not BRCA1 bearing specific N-terminal amino acid substitutions, was
able to cooperate with BARD1 to increase ubiquitin conjugation in cells.
Conjugation of ubiquitin in foci was inhibited by the expression of
ubiquitin bearing a lysine-6 mutation, suggesting that the ubiquitin
polymers formed at these sites may be dependent on lysine-6 for linkage.
The authors concluded that BRCA1-directed ligation of ubiquitin occurs
during S-phase and in response to replication stress and DNA damage.

Furuta et al. (2005) found that reduction of BRCA1 by RNA interference
enhanced proliferation and impaired acinus formation in a normal human
mammary epithelial cell line. Depletion of BRCA1 upregulated the
expression of genes involved in proliferation and downregulated genes
involved in differentiation. The C-terminal BRCT domain of BRCA1
appeared to be necessary to induce differentiation. Growth medium that
was conditioned by differentiating normal mammary epithelial cells could
induce differentiation in breast cancer cells with reduced BRCA1
function. Furuta et al. (2005) concluded that BRCA1 is involved in
secretion of certain paracrine/autocrine factors that induce mammary
epithelial cell differentiation in response to extracellular matrix
signals.

Farmer et al. (2005) showed that BRCA1 or BRCA2 (600185) dysfunction
unexpectedly and profoundly sensitizes cells to the inhibition of PARP
(173870) enzymatic activity, resulting in chromosomal instability, cell
cycle arrest, and subsequent apoptosis. The authors suggested that this
seems to be because the inhibition of PARP leads to the persistence of
DNA lesions normally repaired by homologous recombination. Farmer et al.
(2005) concluded that their results illustrate how different pathways
cooperate to repair damage, and suggest that the targeted inhibition of
particular DNA repair pathways may allow the design of specific and less
toxic therapies for cancer.

Joukov et al. (2006) found that the heterodimeric tumor suppressor
complex BRCA1/BARD1 was required for mitotic spindle-pole assembly and
for accumulation of TPX2 (605917), a major spindle organizer, on spindle
poles in both HeLa cells and Xenopus egg extracts. This BRCA1/BARD1
function was centrosome independent, operated downstream of Ran GTPase
(601179), and depended upon BRCA1/BARD1 E3 ubiquitin ligase activity.
Joukov et al. (2006) concluded that BRCA1/BARD1 function in mitotic
spindle assembly likely contributes to its role in chromosome stability
control and tumor suppression.

The BRCT repeats of the breast and ovarian cancer predisposition protein
BRCA1 are essential for tumor suppression. Using phosphopeptide affinity
proteomic analysis, Wang et al. (2007) identified a protein, Abraxas
(ABRA1; 611143), that directly binds to the BRCA1 BRCT repeats through a
phospho-ser-X-X-phe motif. Abraxas binds BRCA1 to the mutual exclusion
of BACH1 (602751) and CTIP (604124), forming a third type of BRCA1
complex. Abraxas recruits the ubiquitin-interacting motif
(UIM)-containing protein RAP80 (609433) to BRCA1. Both Abraxas and RAP80
were required for DNA damage resistance, G2/M checkpoint control, and
DNA repair. RAP80 was required for optimal accumulation of BRCA1 on
damaged DNA (foci) in response to ionizing radiation, and the UIM
domains alone were capable of foci formation. Wang et al. (2007)
concluded that the RAP80-Abraxas complex may help recruit BRCA1 to DNA
damage sites in part through recognition of ubiquitinated proteins.

Sobhian et al. (2007) reported the interaction of the BRCA1 BRCT domain
with RAP80, a ubiquitin-binding protein. RAP80 targets a complex
containing the BRCA1-BARD1 (1601593) E3 ligase and the deubiquitinating
enzyme BRCC36 (300617) to MDC1 (607593)-gamma-H2AX (601772)-dependent
lys6- and lys63-linked ubiquitin polymers at double-strand breaks.
Sobhian et al. (2007) stated that these events are required for cell
cycle checkpoint and repair response to ionizing radiation, implicating
ubiquitin chain recognition and turnover in the BRCA1-mediated repair of
double-strand breaks.

Kim et al. (2007) independently reported the identification of RAP80 as
a BRCA1-interacting protein in humans. RAP80 contains a tandem UIM
domain, which is required for its binding with ubiquitin in vitro and
its damage-induced foci formation in vivo. Moreover, Kim et al. (2007)
showed that RAP80 specifically recruits BRCA1 to DNA damage sites and
functions with BRCA1 in G2/M checkpoint control. Kim et al. (2007)
concluded that taken together, their results suggested the existence of
ubiquitination-dependent signaling pathway involved in the DNA damage
response.

Wang et al. (2008) found lower expression of SIRT1 (604479) in mouse and
human BRCA1-associated breast cancers compared with controls. Reduced
Sirt1 expression in Brca1-mutant mice was associated with increased
expression of survivin (BIRC5; 603352), and this expression pattern as
reversed by induced expression of Brca1. Wang et al. (2008) showed that
BRCA1 bound to the SIRT1 promoter and increased SIRT1 expression, which
in turn inhibited survivin expression. Furthermore, inhibition of
Brca1-mutant tumor growth by the anticancer agent resveratrol was
associated with upregulation of Sirt1 activity, followed by reduction in
survivin and apoptosis of the tumor cells.

Using gene conformation analysis with BRCA1 from human breast cancer
cell lines and mouse mammary tissue, Tan-Wong et al. (2008) found that
chromatin loops were imposed on the BRCA1 gene by the juxtaposition of
the promoter and 3-prime terminator regions in addition to internal
sequences. The repressed BRCA1 conformation was predicted to resemble a
4-leaf clover. The interaction between the BRCA1 promoter and terminator
regions was lost upon estrogen stimulation and during lactation
development in the mouse. This activated conformation was predicted to
have 3 loops and a long 3-prime tail. Loop formation was
transcription-dependent, and the terminator region suppressed
estrogen-induced transcription. Tan-Wong et al. (2008) also found that
BRCA1 promoter and terminator interactions varied in different breast
cancer cell lines. The authors concluded that estrogen-induced release
of the terminator region from the promoter allows BRCA1 transcription,
and that defects in BRCA1 chromatin structure may contribute to
dysregulated BRCA1 expression in breast tumors.

Yun and Hiom (2009) identified a role for CTIP in repair of DNA
double-strand breaks (DSBs) in the avian B-cell line DT40. They
established that CTIP is required not only for repair of DSBs by
homologous recombination in S/G2 phase but also for
microhomology-mediated end joining (MMEJ) in G1. The function of CTIP in
homologous recombination, but not MMEJ, is dependent on the
phosphorylation of serine residue 327 and recruitment of BRCA1. Cells
expressing CTIP protein that cannot be phosphorylated at ser327 are
specifically defective in homologous recombination and have a decreased
level of single-stranded DNA after DNA damage, whereas MMEJ remains
unaffected. Yun and Hiom (2009) concluded that their data support a
model in which phosphorylation of ser327 of CTIP as cells enter S phase
and the recruitment of BRCA1 functions as a molecular switch to shift
the balance of DSB repair from error-prone DNA end joining to error-free
homologous recombination.

Morris et al. (2009) reported that BRCA1 is modified by SUMO in response
to genotoxic stress, and colocalizes at sites of DNA damage with SUMO1
(601912), SUMO2 (603042)/SUMO3 (602231), and the SUMO conjugating-enzyme
Ubc9 (601661). PIAS SUMO E3 ligases (PIAS1; 603566 and PIAS4 605989)
colocalize with and modulate SUMO modification of BRCA1, and are
required for BRCA1 ubiquitin ligase activity in cells. In vitro, SUMO
modification of the BRCA1/BARD1 (601593) heterodimer greatly increases
its ligase activity, identifying it as a SUMO-regulated ubiquitin
ligase. Furthermore, PIAS SUMO ligases are required for complete
accumulation of double-stranded DNA damage repair proteins subsequent to
RNF8 (611685) accrual, and for proficient double-strand break repair.
Morris et al. (2009) concluded that the sumoylation pathway plays a
significant role in mammalian DNA damage response.

Zhu et al. (2011) showed that loss of BRCA1 in mice results in
transcriptional derepression of the tandemly repeated satellite DNA.
Brca1 deficiency is accompanied by a reduction of condensed DNA regions
in the genome and loss of ubiquitylation of histone H2A (see 613499) at
satellite repeats. BRCA1 binds to satellite DNA regions and
ubiquitylates H2A in vivo. Ectopic expression of H2A fused to ubiquitin
reverses the effects of BRCA1 loss, indicating that BRCA1 maintains
heterochromatin structure via ubiquitylation of histone H2A. Satellite
DNA derepression was also observed in mouse and human BRCA1-deficient
breast cancers. Ectopic expression of satellite DNA can phenocopy BRCA1
loss in centrosome amplification, cell-cycle checkpoint defects, DNA
damage, and genomic instability. Zhu et al. (2011) proposed that the
role of BRCA1 in maintaining global heterochromatin integrity accounts
for many of its tumor suppressor functions.

Using mouse embryonic stem cells, Chang et al. (2011) found that
expression of human BRCA1 with the arg1669-to-glu (R1669Q; 113705.0037)
mutation caused upregulation of microRNA-155 (MIR155; 609337) and
reduced embryonic stem cell survival. R1669Q interfered with
differentiation of stem cells into embryoid bodies with distinct cell
layers, which was associated with apoptotic cell death. In situ
hybridization revealed 40-fold upregulation of Mir155 in a subset of
cells from R1699Q embryoid bodies. Northern blot and RT-PCR analyses
revealed that MIR155 was upregulated in all cell lines and breast cancer
tumors with BRCA1 deficiency examined. Wildtype BRCA1, but not BRCA1
with the R1669Q substitution, downregulated mouse Mir155 expression by
recruiting Hdac2 (605164) to the Mir155 promoter, resulting in
deacetylation of histones H2a (see 613499) and H3 (see 602810). Chang et
al. (2011) concluded that BRCA1 has a role in the epigenetic control of
MIR155.

To determine whether the E3 ubiquitin ligase activity of BRCA1 is
required for tumor suppression, Shakya et al. (2011) generated mice that
express an enzymatically defective Brca1. The enzymatically defective
Brca1 prevented tumor formation to the same degree as did wildtype Brca1
in 3 different genetically engineered mouse models of cancer. In
contrast, a mutation that ablated phosphoprotein recognition by the BRCA
C terminus (BRCT) domains of BRCA1 elicited tumors in each of the 3
genetically engineered mouse models. Thus, Shakya et al. (2011)
concluded that BRCT phosphoprotein recognition, but not the E3 ligase
activity, is required for BRCA1 tumor suppression.

By expression screening, Lee et al. (2012) found that YY1 (600013) was a
potent positive regulator of BRCA1. YY1 directly bound the proximal
promoter region of BRCA1. Expression of Yy1 and Brca1 correlated
positively during the mammary cycle in mouse mammary gland. Expression
of YY1 and BRCA1 correlated positively in histologic examination of
normal human and tumor breast tissue, with generally lower expression of
both proteins in breast cancers. Overexpression of YY1 caused cell cycle
arrest in transfected breast cancer cells and inhibited tumor formation
following injection in nude mice.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Familial Breast-Ovarian Cancer Susceptibility 1

In affected members of 5 of 8 kindreds with hereditary breast-ovarian
cancer linked to chromosome 17q (BROVCA1; 604370), Miki et al. (1994)
identified 5 different heterozygous pathogenic mutations in the BRCA1
gene (see, e.g., 113705.0035). The mutations included an 11-bp deletion,
a 1-bp insertion, a stop codon, a missense substitution, and an inferred
regulatory mutation.

Castilla et al. (1994) found 8 putative disease-causing mutations in the
BRCA1 gene (see, e.g., 113705.0001; 113705.0006; 113705.0013;
113705.0014) in 50 probands with a family history of breast and/or
ovarian cancer. The authors used single-strand conformation polymorphism
(SSCP) analysis on PCR-amplified genomic DNA. The data were considered
consistent with a tumor suppressor model. The heterogeneity of
mutations, coupled with the large size of the gene, indicated that
clinical application of BRCA1 mutation testing would be technically
challenging.

In 10 families with breast-ovarian cancer, Friedman et al. (1994) used
SSCP analysis and direct sequencing to identify 9 different heterozygous
BRCA1 mutations (see, e.g., 113705.0004; 113705.0007-113705.0009). The
mutations in 7 instances led to protein truncation at sites throughout
the gene. A missense mutation, which occurred independently in 2
families, led to loss of a cysteine in the zinc-binding domain. An
intronic single basepair substitution destroyed an acceptor site and
activated a cryptic splice site, leading to a 59-bp insertion and chain
termination. In 4 families with both breast and ovarian cancer, chain
termination mutations were found in the N-terminal half of the protein.

Simard et al. (1994) identified mutations in the BRCA1 gene in 12 of 30
Canadian families with breast-ovarian cancer syndrome (see, e.g.,
113705.0003). Six frameshift mutations accounted for all 12 mutant
alleles, including nucleotide insertions (2 mutations) and deletions (4
mutations). The same 1-bp insertion mutation in codon 1,755 was found in
4 independent families, whereas 4 other families shared a 2-bp deletion
mutation in codons 22 to 23. These families were not known to be
related, but haplotype analysis suggested that the carriers of each of
these mutations had common ancestors.

Futreal et al. (1994) demonstrated allelic loss at the BRCA1 locus in
primary breast and ovarian tumors. Mutations were detected in 3 of 32
breast and 1 of 12 ovarian carcinomas; all 4 mutations were germline
alterations and occurred in cancers of early-onset type. These results
were interpreted as indicating that mutation in the BRCA1 gene may not
be critical to the development of most breast and ovarian cancers that
arise in the absence of a mutant germline allele. This situation is
unlike that in the APC gene (611731), which is involved in both
hereditary polyposis coli and sporadic colorectal cancer, and that of
some other genes involved in both familial and sporadic cancer.

In 4 of 47 sporadic ovarian cancers, Merajver et al. (1995) examined
tumor DNAs by SSCP and found 4 somatic mutations in the BRCA1 gene; all
4 had loss of heterozygosity at a BRCA1 intragenic marker. The findings
supported a tumor-suppressor mechanism for BRCA1; somatic mutation on
one chromosome and LOH on the other may result in inactivation of BRCA1
in some sporadic ovarian cancers.

Since more than 75% of the reported mutations in the BRCA1 gene result
in truncated proteins, Hogervorst et al. (1995) used the protein
truncation test (PTT) to screen for mutations in exon 11 which encodes
61% of the BRCA1 protein. In 45 patients from breast and/or ovarian
cancer families, they found 6 novel mutations: 2 single nucleotide
insertions, 3 small deletions (of 1-5 bp), and a nonsense mutation
identified in 2 unrelated families. Furthermore, they were able to
amplify the remaining coding region by RT-PCR using lymphocyte RNA.
Combined with the protein truncation test, they detected aberrantly
spliced products affecting exons 5 and 6 in 1 of 2 BRCA1-linked families
examined.

Serova et al. (1996) identified mutations in the BRCA1 gene in 16 of 20
families with breast-ovarian cancer, including 1 family with a case of
male breast cancer. Nine of these mutations had not been reported
previously. Most mutations generated a premature stop codon leading to
the formation of a truncated BRCA1 protein of 2 to 88% of the expected
normal length. The RING-finger domain was altered by 2 of the mutations.
A reduced quantity of BRCA1 transcript was associated with 8 of the
mutations. Of the 4 families with no detectable BRCA1 mutation, only 1
was clearly linked to the BRCA1 locus.

Dunning et al. (1997) examined the frequency of 4 polymorphisms in the
BRCA1 gene in a large series of breast and ovarian cancer cases and
matched controls. Due to strong linkage disequilibrium, the 4 sites
generated only 3 haplotypes with a frequency more than 1.3%. The 2 most
common haplotypes had frequencies of 0.57 and 0.32, respectively, and
these frequencies did not differ significantly between patient and
control groups. Dunning et al. (1997) concluded that the most common
polymorphisms of the BRAC1 gene do not make a significant contribution
to breast or ovarian cancer risk. However, the data suggested that a
gln356-to-arg (Q356R) allele may have a different genotype distribution
in breast cancer patients than that in controls; arg356 homozygotes were
more frequent in the control group (p = 0.01), indicating that it may be
protective against breast cancer.

Langston et al. (1996) found germline BRCA1 mutations in 6 of 80 women
in whom breast cancer was diagnosed before the age of 35 and who were
not selected on the basis of family history. Four additional rare
sequence variants of unknown functional significance were also
identified. Two of the mutations and 3 of the rare sequence variants
were found among the 39 women who reported no family history of breast
or ovarian cancer. None of the mutations and only 1 of the rare variants
was identified in a reference population of 73 unrelated subjects.

FitzGerald et al. (1996) obtained similar results in a study of 30 women
with breast cancer before the age of 30: 4 (13%) had chain-terminating
mutations and 1 had a missense mutation in the BRCA1 gene. Two of the 4
Jewish women in this cohort had the 185delAG mutation (113705.0003).
Among 39 Jewish women with breast cancer before the age of 40,
FitzGerald et al. (1996) found that 8 (21%) carried the 185delAG
mutation (95% CI, 9-36%). FitzGerald et al. (1996) concluded that
germline BRCA1 mutations can be present in young women with breast
cancer who do not belong to families with multiple affected members.

Gayther et al. (1996) stated that more than 65 distinct mutations
scattered throughout the coding region of BRCA1 had been detected.

Couch et al. (1996) reported a total of 254 BRCA1 mutations, 132 (52%)
of which were unique. These represented mutations entered into a
database established by the Breast Cancer Information Core (BIC). A
total of 221 (87%) of all mutations or 107 (81%) of the unique mutations
are small deletions, insertions, nonsense point mutations, splice
variants, and regulatory mutations that result in truncation or absence
of the BRCA1 protein. A total of 11 disease-associated missense
mutations (5 unique) and 21 variants (19 unique) as yet unclassified as
missense mutations or polymorphisms had been detected. Thirty-five
independent benign polymorphisms had been described. The most common
mutations were 185delAG (113705.0003) and 5382insC (113705.0018), which
accounted for 30 (11.7%) and 26 (10.1%), respectively, of all the
mutations.

Stoppa-Lyonnet et al. (1996) described 2 independent BRCA1 mutations in
a single family. A woman with breast cancer diagnosed at age 25
inherited a deleterious allele from her father. Her mother had ovarian
and breast cancer caused by a separate mutation, which was the basis of
breast cancer in 5 or more of her relatives. The authors pointed out
that the segregation of 2 BRCA1 mutations resulted in the failure to
demonstrate linkage to either chromosome 17 or chromosome 13 and could
lead to the erroneous hypothesis of the involvement of a third locus in
familial breast cancer. Narod et al. (1995) suggested that the fraction
of familial breast cancer that is not accounted for by BRCA1 or BRCA2
may be small.

In a screening of Hungarian breast/ovarian cancer families for germline
mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2, Ramus et al. (1997) found 1 individual who
carried the 185delAG mutation (113705.0003) in BRCA1, as well as the
6174delT mutation (600185.0009) in BRCA2. Each mutation had been shown
to have a frequency of approximately 1% in the Ashkenazi Jewish
population. Although the patient was not recorded as having a Jewish
origin, haplotype analysis suggested that both mutations were of the
Ashkenazi type. There was a maternal family history of breast cancer and
the paternal family history was unknown. The patient was found to have
breast cancer at age 48 and ovarian cancer at age 50 years. The ages at
diagnosis and the tumor types were not different from those of patients
with either BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations. Both mutations were present in 3
different samples from the patient: breast tumor, ovarian tumor, and
lymphocyte DNA. There was no evidence of loss of heterozygosity on
either chromosome 13 or chromosome 17.

Liede et al. (1998) found mutations of both BRCA1 and BRCA2 in a breast
cancer patient of Scottish descent. Grade II adenocarcinoma of the
breast was diagnosed at the age of 35 years. Simultaneous screening by
protein truncation tests of both BRCA genes detected a 2508G-T mutation
of the BRCA1 gene (113705.0023) and a 3295insA mutation of BRCA2
(600185.0011). The patient had both a maternal and a paternal history of
breast cancer. The maternal side contained cases of postmenopausal
breast cancer; the paternal side contained cases of premenopausal breast
cancer. The mother, however, did not have either mutation, suggesting
that both BRCA1 and BRCA2 germline mutations originated from the father
of the proband.

Using a comprehensive screen of the entire BRCA1 coding region, Janezic
et al. (1999) determined the prevalence of BRCA1 alterations in a
population-based series of 107 consecutive ovarian cancer cases
diagnosed in Orange County, California, between March 1, 1994 and
February 28, 1995. The participation rate was 82%. BRCA1 alterations
were sought using the RNase mismatch cleavage assay followed by direct
sequencing. Two truncating mutations, 962del4 (113705.0024) and
3600del11 (113705.0025), were identified. Both patients had a family
history of breast or ovarian cancer. Several novel as well as previously
reported uncharacterized variants were also identified, some of which
were associated with a family history of cancer. Using allele-specific
amplification, Janezic et al. (1999) determined the frequency
distribution of common polymorphisms in the 91 Caucasian cancer cases in
this series and 24 sister controls. The rare form of the Q356R
polymorphism was significantly (p = 0.03) associated with a family
history of ovarian cancer, suggesting that this polymorphism may
influence ovarian cancer risk.

Vallon-Christersson et al. (2001) characterized the effect of C-terminal
germline variants identified in Scandinavian breast and ovarian cancer
families. Seven familial missense mutations, a truncating mutation, 4
missense variants, and 1 in-frame deletion were studied using 2 separate
reporter genes. The authors concluded that transactivation activity may
reflect a tumor-suppressing function of BRCA1 and further support the
role of BRCA1 missense mutations in disease predisposition. A
discrepancy was noted between results from yeast- and mammalian-based
assays, indicating that it may not be possible to unambiguously
characterize variants with the yeast assay alone.

Perrin-Vidoz et al. (2002) assessed the relative amount of transcripts
encoded by BRCA1 alleles harboring 30 different truncating mutations in
lymphoblastoid cell lines established from carriers from breast/ovarian
cancer families. The authors observed that nonsense-mediated decay (NMD)
was triggered by 80% of alleles containing a premature termination codon
(PTC) and resulted in a 1.5- to 5-fold reduction in mRNA abundance. All
truncating mutations located in the 3.4-kb long central exon were
subject to NMD, irrespective of their distance to the downstream
exon-exon junction. PTCs not leading to NMD were either located in the
last exon or very close to the translation initiation codon.
Perrin-Vidoz et al. (2002) hypothesized that reinitiation could explain
why transcripts carrying early PTCs escape NMD.

Rostagno et al. (2003) performed mutation analysis of the BRCA1 gene in
140 families from the southeast of France with a history of breast
and/or ovarian cancer. As expected, BRCA1 gene alteration, including
missense mutations of unknown biologic significance, were more frequent
in families with a history of breast-ovarian cancer (32%) than in
breast-cancer-only families (12%).

The Scottish/Northern Irish BRCA1/BRCA2 Consortium (2003) identified 107
families in Scotland or Northern Ireland with mutations in the BRCA1 or
BRCA2 genes: 59 had BRCA1 mutations and 46 had BRCA2 mutations. Two
families had mutations in both genes. The most common mutations were the
BRCA1 2800delAA mutation (113705.0008) in 11 families and the BRCA2
6503delTT mutation (600185.0002) in 12 families. Prevalence of breast
cancer was similar for BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation families (average 3.7
and 3.6 per family, respectively), but those with BRCA1 mutations had a
much greater risk of ovarian cancer (average 1.5 and 0.6 per family,
respectively). Mutations within the 5-prime two-thirds of BRCA1 carried
a significantly higher relative risk of ovarian cancer, and the same was
true for mutations within the central portion of BRCA2 (the 'OCCR').

Among 349 Belgian families with breast-ovarian cancer, Claes et al.
(2004) found that 49 had BRCA1 mutations and 26 had BRCA2 mutations.
Male breast cancer was significantly indicative of a BRCA2 mutation.
Mutations in the 5-prime ends of BRCA1 and BRCA2 were associated with a
significantly increased risk of ovarian cancer relative to the center
portion of the gene.

In 64 Chilean families with breast-ovarian cancer, Jara et al. (2006)
found that 7 (10.9%) carried mutations in the BRCA1 gene and 3 (4.7%)
carried mutations in the BRCA2 gene. Only 2 families had the same BRCA1
mutation, indicating heterogeneity in the spectrum of BRCA mutations in
this population.

Among 300 US probands from high-risk families who tested negative for
BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutations by conventional testing, Walsh et al.
(2006) identified 31 with genomic rearrangements of BRCA1 and 4 with
genomic rearrangements of BRCA2, totaling 35 (12%) of 300. Inherited
rearrangements of BRCA1 or BRCA2 were found in a larger proportion of
families with ovarian and/or male breast cancer (18%) than in those with
only female breast cancer (4.2%). Fourteen probands (4%) had mutations
in the CHEK2 gene (604373), and 3 (1%) had mutations in p53 (191170).

By analysis of BRCA1 mutations in the BIC database, Pavlicek et al.
(2004) showed that distribution of reported missense mutations, but not
frameshift and nonsense mutations, was positively correlated with BRCA1
protein conservation. Based on protein sequence conservation, they
identified missense changes that are likely to compromise BRCA1
function.

Easton et al. (2007) undertook a systematic genetic assessment of 1,433
sequence variants of unknown clinical significance in the BRCA1 and
BRCA2 breast cancer predisposition genes. Easton et al. (2007)
identified 43 sequence variants with odds greater than 20 to 1 in favor
of causality of breast cancer in BRCA1 and 17 in BRCA2. A total of 133
variants of unknown clinical significance had odds of at least 100 to 1
in favor of neutrality with respect to risk. Those with evidence in
favor of causality were predicted to affect splicing, fell at positions
that are highly conserved among BRCA orthologs, and were more likely to
be located in specific domains of the proteins.

Wang et al. (2010) genotyped 3,451 BRCA1 and 2,006 BRCA2 mutation
carriers at 350 SNPs identified as candidate breast cancer risk factors
in 2 breast cancer genomewide association studies (GWAS). Eight SNPs in
BRCA1 carriers and 12 SNPs in BRCA2 carriers, representing an enrichment
over the number expected, were significantly associated with breast
cancer risk. The minor alleles of dbSNP rs6138178 in SNRPB (182282) and
dbSNP rs6602595 in CAMK1D (607957) displayed the strongest associations
in BRCA1 carriers (p(trend) = 3.6 x 10(-4), 95% CI 0.69-0.90 and
p(trend) = 4.2 x 10(-4), 95% CI 1.10-1.41, respectively). The magnitude
and direction of the associations were consistent with the original
GWAS. In subsequent risk assessment studies, the loci appeared to
interact multiplicatively for breast cancer risk in BRCA1 and BRCA2
carriers.

- Prostate Cancer

In Icelandic studies, Arason et al. (1993) suggested that male carriers
of the BRCA1 gene may have an increased risk of prostate cancer.
Langston et al. (1996) studied the BRCA1 gene in 61 men who met one or
more of these criteria: (1) under 53 years of age at diagnosis prostate
cancer; (2) a family history of breast cancer in a first-degree female
relative diagnosed under 51 years of age; or (3) a family history of
prostate cancer in 2 or more male relatives, with at least 1 relative
diagnosed at less than 56 years of age. They found 1 germline mutation,
185delAG (113705.0003), in 1 subject and 5 different rare sequence
variants (1 of which was detected in 2 unrelated men). None of the rare
variants were found in population-based controls. Isaacs et al. (1995)
failed to identify a significantly increased risk of breast cancer among
relatives of prostate cancer probands. The findings of Langston et al.
(1996) are not necessarily in conflict, since the contribution of
germline BRCA1 mutations to the overall incidence of prostate cancer
appears to be small, at most, and may be limited to specific subgroups
of patients.

Nastiuk et al. (1999) set out to determine whether the common germline
mutations of BRCA1 (113705.0003) or BRCA2 (600185.0009), which are
frequent in the Ashkenazi Jewish population, predispose Ashkenazi Jewish
men to prostate cancer. They found that each of these germline mutations
occurred at an incidence in prostate cancer patients that closely
matched that in the general Ashkenazi Jewish population. They suggested
that unlike cases of breast and ovarian cancers, mutations in BRCA1 or
BRCA2 do not significantly predispose men to prostate cancer. Vazina et
al. (2000) also concluded that BRCA1 and BRCA2 germline mutations that
are common in Jewish populations probably contribute little to the
occurrence of cancer of the prostate, to inherited predisposition, or to
early-onset disease in Jewish individuals.

In 940 Ashkenazi Israelis with prostate cancer, Giusti et al. (2003)
tested DNA obtained from paraffin sections for the 3 Jewish founder
mutations: 185delAG (113705.0003) and 5382insC (113705.0018) in BRCA1
and 6174delT (600185.0009) in BRCA2. They estimated that there is a
2-fold increase in BRCA mutation-related prostate cancer among Ashkenazi
Israelis. No differences were noted between the histopathologic features
of cases with or without founder mutations, and no difference was found
in the mean age at diagnosis between cases with or without a founder
mutation.

- Other Cancers

Al-Sukhni et al. (2008) found loss of heterozygosity at the BRCA1 locus
in pancreatic tumor DNA from 5 (71%) of 7 patients with pancreatic
cancer (see 614320) who carried a heterozygous germline BRCA1 mutation
(see, e.g., 113705.0003 and 113705.0018). Pancreatic tumor DNA was
available for sequencing in 4 cases, and 3 demonstrated loss of the
wildtype allele. In contrast, only 1 (11%) of 9 patients with sporadic
pancreatic cancer and no germline BRCA1 mutations showed LOH at the
BRCA1 locus. Al-Sukhni et al. (2008) concluded that BRCA1 germline
mutations likely predispose to the development of pancreatic cancer, and
suggested that individuals with these mutations be considered for
pancreatic cancer-screening programs.

- Mutation Detection Methodology

Hacia et al. (1996) noted that all of the then-current methods used to
detect BRCA1 mutations began with PCR amplification and required gel
electrophoresis, which seriously complicated the challenge of scale-up,
automation, and cost reduction. They demonstrated the feasibility of
using oligonucleotide arrays in a DNA chip-based assay to screen for a
wide range of heterozygous mutations in the 3.45-kb exon 11 of the BRCA1
gene. They concluded that DNA chip-based assays provided a valuable new
technology for high throughput, cost-efficient detection of genetic
alterations.

The detection of inactivating mutations in tumor suppressor genes is
critical to their characterization, as well as to the development of
diagnostic testing. Most approaches for mutational screening of germline
specimens are complicated by the fact that mutations are heterozygous
and that missense mutations are difficult to interpret in the absence of
information about protein function. Ishioka et al. (1997) described a
novel method using Saccharomyces cerevisiae for detecting
protein-truncating mutations in any gene of interest. In their
procedure, the PCR-amplified coding sequence of the gene is inserted by
homologous recombination into a yeast URA3 fusion protein, and
transformants are assayed for growth in the absence of uracil. The high
efficiency of homologous recombination in yeast ensures that both
alleles are represented among transformants and achieves separation of
alleles, which facilitates subsequent nucleotide sequencing of the
mutated transcript. The specificity of translational initiation of the
URA3 gene leads to minimal enzymatic activity in transformants harboring
an inserted stop codon, and hence to reliable distinction between
specimens with wildtype alleles and those with a heterozygous truncating
mutation. This yeast-based codon assay accurately detected heterozygous
truncating mutations in the BRCA1 gene in patients with early onset of
breast cancer and in the APC gene (611731) in patients with familial
adenomatous polyposis.

Petrij-Bosch et al. (1997) reported that the mutation spectrum of BRCA1
available at that time had been biased by PCR-based mutation-screening
methods, such as SSCP, the protein truncation test (PPT), and direct
sequencing, using genomic DNA as template. Three large genomic deletions
that were not detectable by those approaches comprised 36% of all BRCA1
mutations found in Dutch breast cancer families up to that time. A
510-bp Alu-mediated deletion comprising exon 22 was found in 8 of 170
breast cancer families recruited for research purposes and in 6 of 49
probands referred to the Amsterdam Family Cancer Clinic for genetic
counseling. In addition, a 3,835-bp Alu-mediated deletion encompassing
exon 13 was detected in 4 of the 170 research families, while a deletion
of approximately 14 kb was detected in a single family. Haplotype
analyses indicated that each recurrent mutation had a single common
ancestor.

Van Orsouw et al. (1999) reported an inexpensive system for mutation
analysis based on a combination of multiplex PCR amplification and
2-dimensional electrophoresis. In a panel of 60 samples, 14 mutations
were confirmed, and an additional 5 mutations were found. Fifteen
different polymorphic variants were also identified.

Montagna et al. (2003) applied multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA) methodology to 37 hereditary breast-ovarian cancer
families. All had a high prior probability of BRCA1 mutation, and 15
were previously shown to carry a mutation in either the BRCA2 gene (5
families) or the BRCA1 gene (10 families, including 1 genomic
rearrangement). The application of BRCA1 MLPA to the remaining 22
uninformative families allowed the identification of 5 additional
genomic rearrangements. Loss of constitutive heterozygosity of
polymorphic markers in linkage disequilibrium was predictive of such
BRCA1 alterations. BRCA1 genomic deletions accounted for more than
one-third (6 of 15) of the pathogenic BRCA1 mutations in this series.

Using a method that combines sequence alignment with calculation of
Grantham variation and deviation (A-GVGD), Tavtigian et al. (2006)
analyzed most of the missense substitutions observed in BRCA1 and
resolved known neutral and deleterious missense substitutions into
distinct sets. In addition, 8 previously unclassified BRCA1 missense
substitutions observed in trans with 1 or more deleterious mutations,
and within the cross-species range of variation observed at their
position in the protein, were classified as neutral. Tavtigian et al.
(2006) stated that these combined methods can classify as neutral about
50% of missense substitutions that have been observed with 2 or more
clearly deleterious mutations.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Gayther et al. (1995) analyzed 60 families with a history of breast
and/or ovarian cancer for germline mutations in BRCA1. In 32 families
(53%), a total of 22 different mutations were detected, of which 14 were
previously unreported. They observed a significant correlation between
the location of the mutation in the gene and the ratio of breast to
ovarian cancer incidence within the family. The data suggested to the
authors a transition in risk such that mutations in the 3-prime third of
the gene are associated with a lower proportion of ovarian cancer.
Haplotype analysis supported previous data suggesting that some BRCA1
mutation carriers have common ancestors; however, Gayther et al. (1995)
found at least 2 examples where recurrent mutations appeared to have
arisen independently, judging from the different haplotype background.

Studies of a number of diseases have indicated that fine-structure
haplotype analysis can provide insight into the 'genetic history' of a
particular mutation (or presumed mutation for rare diseases where the
disease gene is not yet identified). To address both the question of
mutation origin and the relationship between mutation and phenotype,
Neuhausen et al. (1996) constructed a haplotype of 9 polymorphic STR
markers within or immediately flanking the BRCA1 locus in a set of 61
families (selected to contain 1 of 6 BRCA1 mutations that had been
identified a minimum of 4 times). The mutation appeared to have an
effect on the relative proportion of cases of breast and ovarian cancer:
57% of women presumed affected because of the 1294del40 mutation
(113705.0006) had ovarian cancer, compared with 14% of affected women
with the splice site mutation in intron 5 of BRCA1 (113705.0034). A high
degree of haplotype conservation across the region was observed. Any
haplotype differences found were most often due to mutations in the
short-tandem-repeat markers, although some likely instances of
recombination also were observed. One mutation, 4184del4 (113705.0015),
had the same ancestral haplotype in two-thirds of the families studied.
Neuhausen et al. (1996) estimated that this mutation had arisen 170
generations ago.

To determine whether hereditary ovarian cancers have distinct clinical
and pathologic features compared with sporadic (nonhereditary) ovarian
cancers, Boyd et al. (2000) performed a retrospective cohort study of a
consecutive series of 933 ovarian cancers diagnosed and treated at the
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. This study was restricted to patients of
Jewish origin because of the ease of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genotyping in this
ethnic group. Of the 189 patients who identified themselves as Jewish,
88 hereditary cases were identified with the presence of a germline
founder mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2. The remaining 101 cases from the
same series not associated with a BRCA mutation, and 2 additional groups
with ovarian cancer from clinical trials (for survival analysis), were
included for comparison. Hereditary cancers were rarely diagnosed before
age 40 years and were common after age 60 years, with mean age at
diagnosis being significantly younger for BRCA1- versus BRCA2-linked
patients (54 vs 62 years). Histology, grade, stage, and success of
cytoreductive surgery were similar for hereditary and sporadic cases.
The hereditary group had a longer disease-free interval following
primary chemotherapy in comparison with the nonhereditary group, with a
median time to recurrence of 14 months and 7 months, respectively (p
less than 0.001). Those with hereditary cancers had improved survival
compared with the nonhereditary group. Boyd et al. (2000) concluded that
although BRCA-associated hereditary ovarian cancers in this population
have surgical and pathologic characteristics similar to those of
sporadic cancers, advanced-stage hereditary cancer patients survive
longer than nonhereditary cancer patients. Age penetrance is greater for
BRCA1-linked than for BRCA2-linked cancers in this population.

Hohenstein and Fodde (2003) reviewed genotype/phenotype correlations at
the BRCA1 locus in humans and mice.

Basal-like breast cancer is a subtype of breast cancer that is highly
proliferative, poorly differentiated, and has a poor prognosis. These
tumor cells express cytokeratin markers typical of basally oriented
epithelial cells of the normal mammary gland. Saal et al. (2008) found
that loss of PTEN (601728) protein expression was significantly
associated with the basal-like cancer subtype in both nonhereditary
breast cancer and hereditary BRCA1-deficient breast cancer. Loss of PTEN
in the BRCA1-deficient basal-like breast cancer tumors was associated
with frequent gross PTEN mutations, including intragenic chromosome
breaks, inversions, deletions, and micro copy number alterations,
consistent with a mechanism involving inappropriate repair of
double-strand DNA breaks. The findings indicated a specific and
recurrent oncogenic consequence of BRCA1-dependent dysfunction in DNA
repair and implied that the PTEN pathway is directly involved in
transformation of basal-like progenitor cells.

EVOLUTION

To establish the role of missense changes in the BRCA1 gene in breast
cancer susceptibility, Fleming et al. (2003) used comparative
evolutionary methods to identify potential functionally important amino
acid sites in exon 11. By aligning sequences from 57 eutherian mammals
and categorizing amino acid sites by degree of conservation, they
identified 41 missense mutations in exon 11 (38 in conserved and 3 in
rapidly evolving regions) likely to influence gene function and thereby
contribute to breast cancer susceptibility. They used Bayesian
phylogenetic analyses to determine relationships among orthologs and
identify codons evolving under positive selection. Most conserved
residues occurred in a region with the highest concentration of
protein-interacting domains. Rapidly evolving residues were concentrated
in the RAD51-interacting domain, suggesting that selection is acting
most strongly on the role of BRCA1 in DNA repair.

Pavlicek et al. (2004) isolated and characterized full-size BRCA1
homologs from rhesus macaque, orangutan, gorilla, and chimpanzee.
Analysis of human and nonhuman primate BRCA1 sequence revealed an
unusually high proportion of insertion/deletions in noncoding DNA that
were associated with Alu repeats. Most Alu elements involved in genomic
rearrangement in humans were retained in nonhuman primates, indicating
that structural instability of this locus may be intrinsic in
anthropoids. Analysis of the nonsynonymous/synonymous mutation ratio in
BRCA1 coding sequence showed that most of the internal sequence is
variable between primates and evolved under positive selection. In
contrast, the terminal regions of BRCA1, which encode the RING finger
and BRCT domains, experienced negative selection and are almost
identical between the compared primates.

ANIMAL MODEL

Gowen et al. (1996) described homozygous mice lacking the mouse Brca1
gene. The mice, possessing a deletion of the large exon 11, died between
days 10 and 13 of embryonic development, suffering from a variety of
neuroepithelial defects. Hakem et al. (1996) described another strain of
homozygous mice for a putative Brca1-null mutation produced by targeted
deletion of exons 5 and 6. These mutant mice were more severely
affected, dying at about embryonic day 7.5 with no signs of mesoderm
formation and exhibiting reduced cell proliferation. There were also
strong signs of disruptive cell cycle regulation via altered expression
levels of cyclin E (123837), mdm2 (164785) and p21 (116899). Hakem et
al. (1996) speculated that the death of mutant embryos was due to
failure of the proliferative burst required for germ layer development.
Hakem et al. (1996) reported that after about 1 year of age, Brca1
heterozygous female mice showed no evidence of cancer. Gowen et al.
(1996) also had been unable to detect tumors in 1-year-old
heterozygotes.

To study mechanisms underlying BRCA1-related tumorigenesis, Xu et al.
(1999) derived mouse embryonic fibroblast cells carrying a targeted
deletion of exon 11 of the Brca1 gene. The mutant cells maintained an
intact G1-S cell cycle checkpoint and proliferated poorly. However, a
defective G2-M checkpoint in these cells was accompanied by extensive
chromosomal abnormalities. Mutant fibroblasts contained multiple
functional centrosomes, leading to unequal chromosome segregation,
abnormal nuclear division, and aneuploidy. These data uncovered an
essential role for BRCA1 in maintaining genetic stability through the
regulation of centrosome duplication and the G2-M checkpoint.

Moynahan et al. (1999) reported that Brca1-deficient mouse embryonic
stem cells had impaired repair of chromosomal double-strand breaks by
homologous recombination. The relative frequencies of homologous and
nonhomologous DNA integration and double-strand break repair were also
altered. The results demonstrated a caretaker role for BRCA1 in
preserving genomic integrity by promoting homologous recombination and
limiting mutagenic nonhomologous repair processes.

Hakem et al. (1997) generated mice double mutant for Brca1(5-6) and p53,
or Brca1(5-6) and p21. Mutation in either p53 or p21 prolonged the
survival of Brca1(5-6) mutant embryos from embryonic day 7.5 to
embryonic day 9.5. The development of most Brca1(5-6)/p21 double-mutant
embryos was comparable to that of their wildtype littermates, although
no mutant survived past embryonic day 10.5. Because mutation of neither
p53 nor p21 completely rescued Brca1(5-6) embryos, the authors suggested
that the lethality of the embryos is likely due to a multifactorial
process.

Ludwig et al. (1997) created mice deficient for Brca1 by targeted
disruption, resulting in deletion of exon 2. They also disrupted Brca2
by replacing a segment of exon 11. Heterozygotes were indistinguishable
from wildtype littermates. Nullizygous embryos became developmentally
retarded and disorganized, and died early in development. In Brca1
mutants, the onset of abnormalities was earlier by 1 day and their
phenotypic features and time of death were highly variable, whereas the
phenotype of Brca2-null embryos was more uniform, and they survived for
at least 8.5 embryonic days. Brca1/Brca2 double mutants were similar to
Brca1-null mutants. Ludwig et al. (1997) reported that the impact of
Brca1- or Brca2-null mutation was less severe in a p53-null background.

Xu et al. (2001) found that mouse embryos homozygous for deletion of
exon 11 of the Brca1 gene died late in gestation because of widespread
apoptosis. Elimination of 1 p53 allele completely rescued this embryonic
lethality and restored normal mammary gland development. However, most
female mice homozygous for the Brca1 exon 11 deletion and heterozygous
for loss of the p53 gene developed mammary tumors with loss of the
remaining p53 allele within 6 to 12 months. Lymphomas and ovarian tumors
also occurred at lower frequencies. Heterozygous mutation of the p53
gene decreased p53 and resulted in attenuated apoptosis and G1-S
checkpoint control, allowing the homozygous Brca1 exon 11-deleted cells
to proliferate. The p53 protein regulates Brca1 transcription both in
vitro and in vivo, and Brca1 participates in p53 accumulation after
gamma irradiation. These findings provided a mechanism for
BRCA1-associated breast carcinogenesis.

McCarthy et al. (2003) determined that mouse embryos with double mutant
Bard1 -/- ; Brca1 -/- genotype were phenotypically indistinguishable
from either single Bard1 or single Brca1 homozygous mutants. Embryos
that carried at least 1 wildtype allele of both Bard1 and Brca1 were
normal and had 20 to 25 somites, while each embryo that was null for
either Bard1 or Brca1 exhibited the characteristic phenotype of severe
growth retardation, degeneration, and embryonic lethality. The
similarity of phenotypes indicated to McCarthy et al. (2003) that the
developmental functions of Brca1 and Bard1 are mediated by the
Brca1/Bard1 heterodimer.

Mouse embryonic fibroblasts carrying targeted deletion of exon 11 of the
Brca1 gene or a Gadd45a null mutation suffer centrosome amplification.
Wang et al. (2004) found that mouse embryos carrying both mutations were
exencephalic and exhibited a high incidence of apoptosis accompanied by
altered levels of Bax (600040), Bcl2 (151430), and p53. They concluded
that BRCA1 and GADD45A have a synergistic role in regulating centrosome
duplication and maintaining genome integrity.

Poole et al. (2006) demonstrated that mammary glands of nulliparous
Brca1/p53-deficient mice accumulate lateral branches and undergo
extensive alveologenesis, a phenotype that occurs only during pregnancy
in wildtype mice. Progesterone receptors, but not estrogen receptors,
are overexpressed in the mutant mammary epithelial cells because of a
defect in their degradation by the proteasome pathway. Treatment of
Brca1/p53-deficient mice with the progesterone antagonist mifepristone
(RU 486) prevented mammary tumorigenesis. Poole et al. (2006) concluded
that their findings revealed a tissue-specific function for the BRCA1
protein and raised the possibility that antiprogesterone treatment may
be useful for breast cancer prevention in individuals with BRCA1
mutations.

Shakya et al. (2008) found that conditional inactivation of Bard1 in
mouse mammary epithelial cells induced basal-like mammary carcinomas
with a frequency, latency, and histopathology indistinguishable from
those developed in conditional Brca1-mutant mice and in double
conditional Bard1/Brca1-mutant mice. Reminiscent of human breast
carcinomas due to BRCA1 mutation, the mouse tumors were triple negative
for estrogen receptor (see 133430) and progesterone receptor (PGR;
607311) expression and Her2/neu (ERBB2; 164870) amplification. They also
expressed basal cytokeratins Ck5 (KRT5; 148040) and Ck14 (KRT14;
148066), had elevated frequency of p53 lesions, and displayed high
levels of chromosomal instability. Shakya et al. (2008) concluded that
the tumor suppressor activities of both BARD1 and BRCA1 are mediated
through the BRCA1/BARD1 heterodimer.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, CYS64GLY

In a kindred in which 8 members had breast cancer and 5 members had
ovarian cancer (604370), Castilla et al. (1994) found a TGT-to-GGT
transversion in codon 64 leading to substitution of glycine for
cysteine. Analysis of tumor DNA in 2 affected members of this kindred
showed that the wildtype allele had been lost and only the cys64-to-gly
mutant allele remained, thus supporting the tumor suppressor model.

.0002
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, CYS61GLY

Gorski et al. (2000) identified a cys61-to-gly (C61G) mutation in the
BRCA1 gene to be a founder mutation in Polish families with
breast-ovarian cancer (604370), accounting for 20% of identified
mutations. They studied 66 families in which at least 3 related females
were affected with breast or ovarian cancer and at least 1 of these 3
had been diagnosed with cancer before the age of 50. Mutations were
identified in 35 (53%) of the 66 families.

Merajver et al. (1995) analyzed genomic DNA of tumor and normal
fractions of 47 ovarian cancers for mutations in BRCA1 using the SSCP
technique. Somatic mutations in the BRCA1 gene were identified in 4
tumors, all of which also had loss of heterozygosity at a BRCA1
intragenic marker. One of these, found in an endometrioid ovarian
carcinoma in a 53-year-old woman, was a C61G substitution in the zinc
finger motif. The data supported a tumor-suppressor mechanism for BRCA1.

.0003
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
PANCREATIC CANCER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 4, INCLUDED
BRCA1, 2-BP DEL, 185AG

BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER SUSCEPTIBILITY

Simard et al. (1994) studied 30 Canadian families with breast and/or
ovarian cancer (604370) for germline mutations in the coding region of
the BRCA1 candidate gene. They identified a 2-bp (AG185) deletion in the
normal sequence TTA GAG of codons 22-23 in exon 3. The AGAG presumably
predisposed to the deletion. This mutation changes the reading frame of
the mRNA and causes a premature termination codon at position 39. This
mutation was detected in index cases from 4 families that were not known
to be related and originated from different areas in Canada. In these 4
families there were a total of 12 cases of breast cancer and 11 cases of
ovarian cancer.

Struewing et al. (1995) pointed out that all 10 published families with
the 185delAG mutation (also called 187delAG) were Ashkenazi Jewish (of
Eastern European origin). They knew of an eleventh Ashkenazi
breast/ovarian cancer family with the 185delAG mutation; furthermore,
only 1 Ashkenazi Jewish family was known to have a BRCA1 mutation other
than 185delAG. In addition, Ashkenazi families with the 185delAG
mutation appeared to share a common haplotype. In a study of 858
Ashkenazim seeking genetic testing for conditions unrelated to cancer,
they observed the 185delAG mutation in 0.9% (95% confidence limit,
0.4%-1.8%), and in 815 reference individuals not selected for ethnic
origin, none had the mutation.

Roa et al. (1996) found the 185delAG mutation in 1.09% of approximately
3,000 Ashkenazi Jewish individuals and found the 5382insC mutation
(113705.0018) in 0.13%. BRCA2 analysis on 3,085 individuals from the
same population showed a carrier frequency of 1.52% for the 6174delT
mutation (600185.0009). The expanded population-based study confirmed
that the BRCA1 185delAG mutation and the BRCA2 6174delT mutation
constituted the 2 most frequent mutant alleles predisposing to
hereditary breast cancer among Ashkenazim and suggested a relatively
lower penetrance for the 6174delT mutation in BRCA2.

Bar-Sade et al. (1997) examined 639 unrelated healthy Jews of Iraqi
extraction, a presumed low-risk group for the 185delAG mutation which
occurs predominantly in Ashkenazim. Three individuals were identified as
185delAG mutation carriers, and haplotype analysis of the Iraqi mutation
carriers showed that 2 of the Iraqis shared a haplotype in common with 6
Ashkenazi mutation carriers, and a third had a haplotype that differed
by a single marker. This suggested to Bar-Sade et al. (1997) that the
BRCA1 185delAG mutation may have arisen before the dispersion of the
Jewish people in the Diaspora, at least at the time of Christ.

Bar-Sade et al. (1998) extended their analyses to other non-Ashkenazi
subsets: 354 of Moroccan origin, 200 Yemenites, and 150 Iranian Jews.
Four of Moroccan origin (1.1%) and none of the Yemenites or Iranians
were carriers of the 185delAG mutation. BRCA1 allelic patterns
(haplotypes) were determined for 4 of these individuals and for 12
additional non-Ashkenazi 185delAG mutation carriers who had
breast/ovarian cancer. The common 'Ashkenazi haplotype' was shared by 6
non-Ashkenazi individuals; 4 had a closely related pattern, and the rest
(n = 6) displayed a distinct BRCA1 allelic pattern. The authors
concluded that the 185delAG BRCA1 mutation occurs in some non-Ashkenazi
populations at rates comparable with that of Ashkenazim. The majority of
Jewish 185delAG mutation carriers have the same haplotype, supporting
the founder effect notion, but dating the mutation's origin to an
earlier date than previously estimated. The different allelic pattern at
the BRCA1 locus in some Jewish mutation carriers might suggest that the
mutation arose independently.

Bandera et al. (1998) demonstrated the 185delAG mutation in 2 women with
a personal or family history of breast cancer and papillary serous
carcinoma of the peritoneum (PSCP). PSCP is histologically
indistinguishable from serous epithelial ovarian carcinoma and it may
develop years after oophorectomy. Schorge et al. (1998) demonstrated
that the tumors were multifocal in these cases, indicating that patients
with germline BRCA1 mutations may develop PSCP in addition to breast and
ovarian carcinomas.

Ah Mew et al. (2002) reported the 185delAG mutation in a non-Jewish
Chilean family with no reported Jewish ancestry. The linked haplotype
present in this family was identical to that identified in the Ashkenazi
Jewish population.

Buisson et al. (2006) found that BRCA1 transcripts bearing the 185delAG
mutation are not degraded by nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Using Western
blot analysis, they examined HeLa cells transfected with minigenes for
this transcript and another with a premature termination codon at
position 36 and found that translation from these transcripts was
reinitiated at codon 128.

PANCREATIC CANCER SUSCEPTIBILITY

Al-Sukhni et al. (2008) found loss of heterozygosity at the BRCA1 locus
in pancreatic tumor DNA from 5 (71%) of 7 patients with pancreatic
cancer (PNCA4; 614320) who carried a heterozygous germline BRCA1
mutation. Three patients carried the 185delAG mutation. In contrast,
only 1 (11%) of 9 patients with sporadic pancreatic cancer and no
germline BRCA1 mutations showed LOH at the BRCA1 locus. Al-Sukhni et al.
(2008) concluded that BRCA1 germline mutations likely predispose to the
development of pancreatic cancer, and suggested that individuals with
these mutations be considered for pancreatic cancer-screening programs.

.0004
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 59-BP INS

Friedman et al. (1994) studied 63 breast cancer patients and 10 ovarian
cancer patients in 10 families with cancer linked to chromosome 17q21
(604370). They identified a T-to-G transition at nucleotide 332 in exon
5, leading to a premature termination codon at position 75 and a
truncated protein.

.0005
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 1-BP INS

Simard et al. (1994) studied 30 Canadian families with breast and/or
ovarian cancer (604370) for germline mutations in the coding region of
the BRCA1 candidate gene. They identified a 1-bp (A) insertion in the
normal sequence GAA AAA AAG of codons 337-339 in exon 11, changing the
reading frame of the mRNA and causing a premature termination codon at
position 345. This mutation was detected in the index case of a Canadian
family with a total of 4 cases of breast cancer and 3 cases of ovarian
cancer, bringing the probability of linkage to BRCA1 to 98.3%.

.0006
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 40-BP DEL, NT1294

Castilla et al. (1994) studied 50 probands with a family history of
breast and/or ovarian cancer (604370) for germline mutations in the
coding region of the BRCA1 candidate gene. Simard et al. (1994) studied
30 Canadian families with breast and/or ovarian cancer for germline
mutations in the coding region of the BRCA1 candidate gene. They both
identified a 40-bp deletion from position 1294 to 1333, which led to a
premature termination codon that was 5 codons distal to the deletion and
predicted a truncated BRCA1 protein of 396 amino acids.

.0007
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, SER766TER

Friedman et al. (1994) studied 63 breast cancer patients and 10 ovarian
cancer patients in 10 families with cancer linked to chromosome 17q21
(604370). They identified a 2-bp (AG) deletion at nucleotide 2415 in
exon 11, leading to a premature termination codon in place of serine-766
and a truncated protein.

.0008
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 2-BP DEL, 2800AA

Friedman et al. (1994) studied 63 breast cancer patients and 10 ovarian
cancer patients in 10 families with cancer linked to chromosome 17q21
(604370). They identified a 2-bp (AA) deletion at nucleotide 2800 in
exon 11, leading to a premature termination codon at position 901 and a
truncated protein.

.0009
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, SER915TER

Friedman et al. (1994) studied 63 breast cancer patients and 10 ovarian
cancer patients in 10 families with cancer linked to chromosome 17q21
(604370). They identified a 2-bp (TC) deletion at nucleotide 2863 in
exon 11, leading to a premature termination codon in place of serine-915
and a truncated protein.

.0010
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 1-BP DEL, 3121A

Simard et al. (1994) studied 30 Canadian families with breast and/or
ovarian cancer for germline mutations in the coding region of the BRCA1
candidate gene. They identified a 1-bp (A3121) deletion in the normal
sequence GAA AAC of codons 1001-1002 in exon 11, changing the reading
frame of the mRNA and causing a premature termination codon at position
1023. This mutation was detected in the index case of a Canadian family
with a total of 5 cases of breast cancer and 1 case of ovarian cancer
(604370), bringing the probability of linkage to BRCA1 to 90%.

.0011
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, SER1040ASN

Friedman et al. (1994) studied 63 breast cancer patients and 10 ovarian
cancer patients in 10 families with cancer linked to chromosome 17q21
(604370). They identified a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 3238 in exon
11 of the BRCA1 gene, changing serine to asparagine at position 1040.

.0012
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, ARG1203TER

Friedman et al. (1994) studied 63 breast cancer patients and 10 ovarian
cancer patients in 10 families with cancer linked to chromosome 17q21
(604370). They identified a C-to-T substitution in exon 11 at position
3726, leading to a premature termination codon in place of arginine-1203
and a truncated protein.

.0013
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, GLU1250TER

Castilla et al. (1994) studied 50 probands with a family history of
breast and/or ovarian cancer (604370) for germline mutations in the
coding region of the BRCA1 candidate gene. They identified a G-to-T
substitution in exon 11 at position 3867, leading to a premature
termination codon in place of glutamic acid-1250 and a truncated
protein.

.0014
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 4-BP DEL, NT3875

Castilla et al. (1994) studied 50 probands with a family history of
breast and/or ovarian cancer (604370) for germline mutations in the
coding region of the BRCA1 candidate gene. They identified a 4-bp
deletion at position 3875, leading to a premature termination codon at
position 1252 and a truncated protein.

.0015
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 4-BP DEL, 4185TCAA

Friedman et al. (1994) studied 63 breast cancer patients and 10 ovarian
cancer patients in 10 families with cancer linked to chromosome 17q21
(604370). Simard et al. (1994) studied 30 Canadian families with breast
and/or ovarian cancer for germline mutations in the coding region of the
BRCA1 candidate gene. They both identified a 4-bp (TCAA) deletion in
exon 11 at position 4184, leading to a premature termination codon at
position 1364 and a truncated protein.

.0016
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, ARG1443TER

Castilla et al. (1994) studied 50 probands with a family history of
breast and/or ovarian cancer (604370) for germline mutations in the
coding region of the BRCA1 candidate gene. They identified a C-to-T
substitution at position 4446 of the BRCA1 gene, leading to a premature
termination codon in place of arginine-1443 and a truncated protein.

.0017
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, ARG1443GLY

Castilla et al. (1994) studied 50 probands with a family history of
breast and/or ovarian cancer (604370) for germline mutations in the
coding region of the BRCA1 candidate gene. They identified a C-to-G
transition at position 4446, changing arginine1443 to glycine.

.0018
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
PANCREATIC CANCER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
BRCA1, 1-BP INS, 5382C

Simard et al. (1994) studied 30 Canadian families with breast and/or
ovarian cancer (604370) for germline mutations in the coding region of
the BRCA1 candidate gene. They identified a 1-bp (C) insertion at
position 5382 in exon 20, changing the reading frame of the mRNA and
causing a premature termination codon at position 1829 in exon 24. This
mutation was detected in the index case of 4 Canadian families. In 1 of
these families, 10 cases of cancer appeared in a single large sibship,
including 3 cases of breast cancer, 2 ovarian cancers, 2 leukemias, 2
pancreatic cancers, and 1 prostate cancer. A case of leukemia and a case
of Hodgkin disease were seen in more recent generations. In the 4
families with the 5382insC mutation, there were 14 cases of breast
cancer and 5 cases of ovarian cancer.

Gayther et al. (1997) found that the 5382insC and 4153delA (113705.0030)
mutations in the BRCA1 gene may account for 86% of cases of familial
ovarian cancer in Russia.

Gorski et al. (2000) found that 5382insC is a founder mutation in Polish
families with breast-ovarian cancer, accounting for 51% of identified
mutations. They studied 66 families in which at least 3 related females
were affected with breast or ovarian cancer and at least 1 of these 3
had been diagnosed with cancer before the age of 50. Mutations were
found in 35 (53%) of the 66 families; 18 of the families carried the
5382insC mutation. De Los Rios et al. (2001) reported findings in
Canadian families suggesting that most of the mutation-carrying families
of Polish ancestry have the BRCA1 5382insC mutation.

Al-Sukhni et al. (2008) found loss of heterozygosity at the BRCA1 locus
in pancreatic tumor DNA from 5 (71%) of 7 patients with pancreatic
cancer (PNCA4; 614320) who carried a heterozygous germline BRCA1
mutation. Three patients carried the 5382insC mutation. In contrast,
only 1 (11%) of 9 patients with sporadic pancreatic cancer and no
germline BRCA1 mutations showed LOH at the BRCA1 locus. Al-Sukhni et al.
(2008) concluded that BRCA1 germline mutations likely predispose to the
development of pancreatic cancer, and suggested that individuals with
these mutations be considered for pancreatic cancer-screening programs.

Porhanova et al. (2008) reported a 52-year-old Russian woman with
ovarian cancer who was found to be compound heterozygous for the 5382inC
mutation and a common Slavic mutation in the NBN gene (602667.0001).
Investigation of the ovarian cancer tissue showed somatic loss of
heterozygosity for NBN, but retention of heterozygosity for BRCA1. The
patient did not have a particularly severe cancer-prone phenotype, and
her parents did not have cancer, although 3 sibs developed cancer as
adults. Porhanova et al. (2008) commented that haploinsufficiency of the
BRCA1 gene may contribute to cancer progression without somatic changes.

.0019
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, TYR1853TER

Friedman et al. (1994) studied 63 breast cancer patients and 10 ovarian
cancer patients in 10 families with cancer linked to chromosome 17q21
(604370). They identified a 1-bp (A) insertion in exon 24 of the BRCA1
gene at position 5677, leading to a premature termination codon in place
of tyrosine-1853 and a truncated protein.

.0020
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 19-BP DEL, NT5085

Castilla et al. (1994) studied 50 probands with a family history of
breast and/or ovarian cancer (604370) for germline mutations in the
coding region of the BRCA1 candidate gene. They identified a 19-bp
deletion between basepairs 5085 and 5103, leading to a termination codon
at position 1656 and a truncated protein.

.0021
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 1-BP INS, 5438C

Castilla et al. (1994) studied 50 probands with a family history of
breast and/or ovarian cancer (604370) for germline mutations in the
coding region of the BRCA1 candidate gene. They identified a 1-bp (C)
insertion at nucleotide 5438, leading to a termination codon at position
1773 and a truncated protein.

.0022
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, ARG841TRP

Barker et al. (1996) reported an arg841-to-trp mutation (R814W) in the
BRCA1 gene as a common mutation identified in patients with
breast-ovarian cancer (604370).

.0023
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 2508G-T

In a breast cancer (604370) patient of Scottish descent, Liede et al.
(1998) found double heterozygosity for 2 high-penetrance mutations:
2508G-T resulting in a conversion of glutamic acid to a stop codon in
BRCA1 and a 3295insA mutation (600185.0011) in BRCA2. Both mutations
were thought to have come from the father.

.0024
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 4-BP DEL, 962CTCA

In a Caucasian patient with a positive family history of breast or
ovarian cancer (604370) in a first-degree relative, Janezic et al.
(1999) identified a 962delCTCA mutation in the BRCA1 gene.

.0025
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 11-BP DEL, NT3600

In a Caucasian patient with a positive family history of breast or
ovarian cancer (604370) in a first-degree relative, Janezic et al.
(1999) identified a 3600del11 mutation in the BRCA1 gene.

.0026
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 1675A DEL

Two BRCA1 founder mutations had been identified in the Norwegian
population: 1675delA (Dorum et al., 1997) and 1135insA (113705.0027)
(Andersen et al., 1996). Both result in a frameshift and a stop in exon
11. Dorum et al. (1999) ascertained 20 patients with breast-ovarian
cancer (604370) with the BRCA1 1675delA mutation and 10 with the
1135insA mutation. Their relatives were described with respect to
absence/presence of breast and/or ovarian cancer. Of 133 living female
relatives, 83 (62%) were tested for the presence of a mutation. No
difference in penetrance or expression between the 2 mutations was
found, whereas differences according to method of ascertainment were
seen. The overall findings were that disease started to occur at age 30
years and that by age 50 years 48% of the mutation-carrying women had
experienced breast and/or ovarian cancer. More ovarian cancers than
breast cancers were recorded. Both penetrance and expression (breast
cancer vs ovarian cancer) were different from those in reports of the
Ashkenazi founder mutations.

.0027
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 1-BP INS, 1135A

See 113705.0026 and Dorum et al. (1999).

.0028
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 2-BP DEL, 3888GA

Individuals with an inherited mutation in both BRCA1 and BRCA2 (600185)
had been rarely described. Furthermore, despite the large number of
variants identified in these genes, there appeared to be no published
reports of de novo mutations. Tesoriero et al. (1999) identified a woman
who developed high-grade breast cancer with axillary nodal metastases
before the age of 40 years (604370). Her father developed prostate
cancer during his early fifties. Her mother had no cancer. The patient
was found to have a de novo 2-bp deletion (GA) at nucleotide 3888 in
exon 11 of the BRCA1 gene (3888delGA), and a 1-bp deletion (T) at
nucleotide 6174 in exon 11 of the BRCA2 gene (600185.0009), which had
been inherited from the father. Studies of a heterozygous polymorphism
indicated that the 3888delGA mutation of BRCA1 originated from the
father.

.0029
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 10-BP INS, NT943

Mefford et al. (1999) suggested that a 10-bp insertion at nucleotide 943
of the BRCA1 gene represents a founder mutation of African origin in
patients with breast-ovarian cancer (604370).

.0030
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 1-BP DEL, 4153A

By mutation analysis of the BRCA1 gene in families with breast-ovarian
cancer (604370) in Russia, Gayther et al. (1997) identified a novel
4153delA mutation. They stated that this mutation and the 5382insC
(113705.0018) mutation in the BRCA1 gene may account for 86% of cases of
familial ovarian cancer in Russia.

.0031
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 16-KB INS, EX13

Puget et al. (1999) described a 6-kb duplication of exon 13 that created
a frameshift in the coding sequence in 3 unrelated U.S. families of
European ancestry and in 1 Portuguese family with breast-ovarian cancer
(604370). To estimate the frequency and geographic diversity of carriers
of this duplication, the BRCA1 Exon 13 Duplication Screening Group
(2000) studied 3,580 unrelated individuals with a family history of
breast cancer and 934 early-onset breast and/or ovarian cancer cases
ascertained through 39 institutions in 19 countries. A total of 11
additional families carrying this mutation were identified in Australia
(1), Belgium (1), Canada (1), Great Britain (6), and the United States
(2). Haplotyping showed that they were likely to have derived from a
common ancestor, possibly of northern British origin. The screening
group suggested that BRCA1 screening protocols, either in
English-speaking countries or in countries with historic links with
Great Britain, should include the PCR-based assay described in their
report.

.0032
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 1-BP DEL, 3744T

Sarantaus et al. (2000) performed haplotype analysis of 26 Finnish
patients with breast-ovarian cancer (604370) carrying a 3744delT
mutation in exon 11 of the BRCA1 gene. They estimated that the mutation
could be traced back 23 to 36 generations (500-700 years). The mutation
was observed in Swedish families also. Most of the Finnish families had
lived in Central Ostrobothnia for at least 300 years, whereas the
Swedish families came from the opposite side of the Gulf of Bothnia.
Thus, the mutation could have been brought across the sea from Sweden to
Finland with Swedish settlers.

.0033
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, 5-BP INS, NT3171

The 3171ins5 mutation in the BRCA1 gene is the most recurrent germline
BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation in Sweden (Johannsson et al., 1996). Bergman et al.
(2001) constructed haplotypes with polymorphic microsatellite markers
within and flanking the BRCA1 gene in 18 apparently unrelated families
with hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer (604370) with confirmed
3171ins5 mutation. All affected families originated from the same
geographic area along the west coast of Sweden. The microsatellite
markers spanned a region of 17.3 cM, and all of the analyzed families
shared a common 3.7 cM haplotype in the 3171ins5 carriers spanning over
4 markers located within or very close to the BRCA1 gene. This haplotype
was not present in any of the 116 control chromosomes, and the 3171ins5
mutation was likely to be identical by descent, i.e., a true founder.
The estimated age of the mutation was calculated to be approximately 50
generations, or a first appearance some time around the 6th century
(Bergman et al., 2001). No obvious correlation between the geographic
origin and genotype was observed. This is probably a reflection of how
the population of western Sweden historically has been a migrating
people along the west coast, with limited migration beyond this distinct
geographic area.

.0034
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, ARG71GLY

Vega et al. (2002) studied 30 Spanish breast and breast/ovarian cancer
(604370) families for mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. Mutations
were found in 8 of the 30 families (26.66%). All mutations were in the
BRCA1 gene. The 330A-G transition in the BRCA1 gene, which resulted in
an arg71-to-gly (R71G) substitution, was found in 4 unrelated families
and accounted for 50% of all identified mutations. It had been described
as a founder Spanish mutation, leading to aberrant splicing (Vega et
al., 2001). The proband in 1 family had bilateral breast cancer at 27
and 30 years of age. Her mother, who also had the mutation, was
diagnosed as having ovarian cancer at the age of 50.

Diez et al. (2003) stated that the 330A-G mutation affected the splice
donor site in intron 5; it caused aberrant splicing which resulted in a
deletion of 22 nucleotides in exon 5 and a stop at codon 64 (C64X). Diez
et al. (2003) observed this mutation in 7 families, most of them of
known Galician origin. As reported in the BRCA1 database, the 330A-G
mutation had been observed in families with probable Spanish origin in
diverse geographic locations in Europe other than Spain (France and the
United Kingdom), and in Caribbean and South American families.

.0035
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, MET1775ARG

In affected members of a family with breast-ovarian cancer (604370),
Miki et al. (1994) identified a heterozygous T-to-G transversion in exon
21 of the BRCA1 gene, resulting in a met1775-to-arg (M1775R)
substitution.

In the germline of patients with breast or ovarian cancer, Monteiro et
al. (1996) identified the M1775R mutation in the BRCA1 gene. This
mutation has impaired transcriptional activity on BRCA1. Williams and
Glover (2003) performed structural studies on the effect of this
mutation. The mutated side chain is extruded from the protein
hydrophobic core, thereby altering the protein surface. Charge-charge
repulsion, rearrangement of the hydrophobic core, and disruption of the
native hydrogen bonding network at the interface between the 2 BRCT
repeats contribute to the conformational instability of the mutant
protein. Williams and Glover (2003) concluded that destabilization and
global unfolding of the mutated BRCT domain at physiologic temperatures
explained the pleiotropic molecular and genetic defects associated with
the mutant protein.

Aglipay et al. (2006) showed that the M1775R mutation abrogated
interaction of BRCA1 with BRAT1 (614506), which is required for
activation of ATM (607585) following ionizing radiation-induced DNA
damage.

.0036
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, MET1775LYS

In 2 unrelated European families with a history of breast cancer
(604370), Tischkowitz et al. (2008) identified a met1775-to-lys (M1775K)
substitution in the BRCA1 gene and demonstrated its pathogenicity. The
authors showed that expression of the M1775K-mutant protein in yeast and
mammalian cells resulted in markedly reduced transcriptional activity of
BRCA1, indicating the pathogenicity of the variant. The M1775K mutation
disrupted the phosphopeptide-binding pocket of the BRCT domains, thereby
inhibiting BRCA1 interaction with the proteins BRIP1 (605882) and CTIP
(RBBP8; 604128), which are involved in DNA damage-induced checkpoint
control. These findings indicated that the BRCT phosphopeptide-binding
pocket is critical for the tumor suppression function of BRCA1.
Tischkowitz et al. (2008) used a combination of functional, structural,
molecular, and evolutionary methods in their study.

.0037
BREAST-OVARIAN CANCER, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
BRCA1, ARG1669GLU

In a Scandinavian family with breast-ovarian cancer (604370),
Vallon-Christersson et al. (2001) identified a G-to-A transition at
nucleotide 5215 in exon 18 of the BRCA1 gene, resulting in an
arg1669-to-glu (R1669Q) substitution. The R1669Q substitution lies
within alpha helix-2 of the C-terminal BRCT-N transactivation domain;
however, Vallon-Christersson et al. (2001) found that BRCA1 with this
substitution had wildtype transactivation activity.

Using mouse embryonic stem cells, Chang et al. (2011) found that
expression of human BRCA1 with the R1669Q substitution reduced embryonic
stem cell survival and caused upregulation of microRNA-155 (MIR155;
609337), which has a role in promoting cell growth and is upregulated in
various human cancers. Wildtype BRCA1, but not BRCA1 with the R1669Q
substitution, downregulated mouse Mir155 expression by recruiting Hdac2
(605164) to the Mir155 promoter, resulting in deacetylation of histones
H2a (see 142720) and H3 (see 601128).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Albertsen et al. (1994); Friedman et al. (1995); Piver et al. (1993);
Puget et al. (1999); Simard et al. (1993); Sobol et al. (1992); Stratton
et al. (1994); Struewing et al. (1995); Struewing et al. (1997)
REFERENCE 1. Aglipay, J. A.; Martin, S. A.; Tawara, H.; Lee, S. W.; Ouchi, T.
: ATM activation by ionizing radiation requires BRCA1-associated BAAT1. J.
Biol. Chem. 281: 9710-9718, 2006.

2. Ah Mew, N.; Hamel, N.; Galvez, M.; Al-Saffar, M.; Foulkes, W. D.
: Haplotype analysis of a BRCA1:185delAG mutation in a Chilean family
supports its Ashkenazi origins. Clin. Genet. 62: 151-156, 2002.

3. Al-Sukhni, W.; Rothenmund, H.; Eppel Borgida, A.; Zogopoulos, G.;
O'Shea, A.-M.; Pollett, A.; Gallinger, S.: Germline BRCA1 mutations
predispose to pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Hum. Genet. 124: 271-278,
2008.

4. Albertsen, H.; Plaetke, R.; Ballard, L.; Fujimoto, E.; Connolly,
J.; Lawrence, E.; Rodriguez, P.; Robertson, M.; Bradley, P.; Milner,
B.; Fuhrman, D.; Marks, A.; Sargent, R.; Cartwright, P.; Matsunami,
N.; White, R.: Genetic mapping of the BRCA1 region on chromosome
17q21. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 54: 516-525, 1994.

5. Albertsen, H. M.; Smith, S. A.; Mazoyer, S.; Fujimoto, E.; Stevens,
J.; Williams, B.; Rodriguez, P.; Cropp, C. S.; Slijepcevic, P.; Carlson,
M.; Robertson, M.; Bradley, P.; Lawrence, E.; Harrington, T.; Mei
Sheng, Z.; Hoopes, R.; Sternberg, N.; Brothman, A.; Callahan, R.;
Ponder, B. A. J.; White, R.: A physical map and candidate genes in
the BRCA1 region on chromosome 17q12-21. Nature Genet. 7: 472-479,
1994.

6. Andersen, T. I.; Borresen, A.-L.; Moller, P.: A common BRCA1 mutation
in Norwegian breast and ovarian cancer families? Am. J. Hum. Genet. 59:
486-487, 1996.

7. Anderson, S. F.; Schlegel, B. P.; Nakajima, T.; Wolpin, E. S.;
Parvin, J. D.: BRCA1 protein is linked to the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme
complex via RNA helicase A. Nature Genet. 19: 254-256, 1998.

8. Arason, A.; Barkardottir, R. B.; Egilsson, V.: Linkage analysis
of chromosome 17q markers and breast-ovarian cancer in Icelandic families,
and possible relationship to prostatic cancer. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 52:
711-717, 1993.

9. Bandera, C. A.; Muto, M. G.; Schorge, J. O.; Berkowitz, R. S.;
Rubin, S. C.; Mok, S. C.: BRCA1 gene mutations in women with papillary
serous carcinoma of the peritoneum. Obstet. Gynec. 92: 596-600,
1998.

10. Bar-Sade, R. B.; Kruglikova, A.; Modan, B.; Gak, E.; Hirsh-Yechezkel,
G.; Theodor, L.; Novikov, I.; Gershoni-Baruch, R.; Risel, S.; Papa,
M. Z.; Ben-Baruch, G.; Friedman, E.: The 185delAG BRCA1 mutation
originated before the dispersion of Jews in the Diaspora and is not
limited to Ashkenazim. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7: 801-805, 1998.

11. Bar-Sade, R. B.; Theodor, L.; Gak, E.; Kruglikova, A.; Hirsch-Yechezkel,
G.; Modan, B.; Kuperstein, G.; Seligsohn, U.; Rechavi, G.; Friedman,
E.: Could the 185delAG BRCA1 mutation be an ancient Jewish mutation? Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 5: 413-416, 1997.

12. Barker, D. F.; Almeida, E. R. A.; Casey, G.; Fain, P. R.; Liao,
S. Y.; Masunaka, I.; Noble, B.; Kurosaki, T.; Anton-Culver, H.: BRCA1
R841W: a strong candidate for a common mutation with moderate phenotype. Genet.
Epidemiol. 13: 595-604, 1996.

13. Bennett, L. M.; Haugen-Strano, A.; Cochran, C.; Brownlee, H. A.;
Fiedorek, F. T., Jr.; Wiseman, R. W.: Isolation of the mouse homologue
of BRCA1 and genetic mapping to mouse chromosome 11. Genomics 29:
576-581, 1995.

14. Bergman, A.; Einbeigi, Z.; Olofsson, U.; Taib, Z.; Wallgren, A.;
Karlsson, P.; Wahlstrom, J.; Martinsson, T.; Nordling, M.: The western
Swedish BRCA1 founder mutation 3171ins5; a 3.7 cM conserved haplotype
of today is a reminiscence of a 1500-year-old mutation. Europ. J.
Hum. Genet. 9: 787-793, 2001.

15. Bochar, D. A.; Wang, L.; Beniya, H.; Kinev, A.; Xue, Y.; Lane,
W. S.; Wang, W.; Kashanchi, F.; Shiekhattar, R.: BRCA1 is associated
with a human SWI/SNF-related complex: linking chromatin remodeling
to breast cancer. Cell 102: 257-265, 2000.

16. Boyd, J.; Sonoda, Y.; Federici, M. G.; Bogomolniy, F.; Rhei, E.;
Maresco, D. L.; Saigo, P. E.; Almadrones, L. A.; Barakat, R. R.; Brown,
C. L.; Chi, D. S.; Curtin, J. P.; Poynor, E. A.; Hoskins, W. J.:
Clinicopathologic features of BRCA-linked and sporadic ovarian cancer. JAMA 283:
2260-2265, 2000.

17. BRCA1 Exon 13 Duplication Screening Group: The exon 13 duplication
in the BRCA1 gene is a founder mutation present in geographically
diverse populations. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 207-212, 2000.

18. Brown, M. A.; Lo, L.-J.; Catteau, A.; Xu, C.-F.; Lindeman, G.
J.; Hodgson, S.; Solomon, E.: Germline BRCA1 promoter deletions in
UK and Australian familial breast cancer patients: identification
of a novel deletion consistent with BRCA1:psi-BRCA1 recombination. Hum.
Mutat. 19: 435-442, 2002.

19. Brown, M. A.; Nicolai, H.; Xu, C.-F.; Griffiths, B. L.; Jones,
K. A.; Solomon, E.; Hosking, L.; Trowsdale, J.; Black, D. M.; McFarlane,
R.: Regulation of BRCA1. (Letter) Nature 372: 733 only, 1994.

20. Brown, M. A.; Xu, C.-F.; Nicolai, H.; Griffiths, B.; Chambers,
J. A.; Black, D.; Solomon, E.: The 5-prime end of the BRCA1 gene
lies within a duplicated region of human chromosome 17q21. Oncogene 12:
2507-2513, 1996.

21. Buisson, M.; Anczukow, O.; Zetoune, A. B.; Ware, M. D.; Mazoyer,
S.: The 185delAG mutation (c.68_69delAG) in the BRCA1 gene triggers
translation reinitiation at a downstream AUG codon. Hum. Mutat. 27:
1024-1029, 2006.

22. Castilla, L. H.; Couch, F. J.; Erdos, M. R.; Hoskins, K. F.; Calzone,
K.; Garber, J. E.; Boyd, J.; Lubin, M. B.; Deshano, M. L.; Brody,
L. C.; Collins, F. S.; Weber, B. L.: Mutations in the BRCA1 gene
in families with early-onset breast and ovarian cancer. Nature Genet. 8:
387-391, 1994.

23. Chang, S.; Wang, R.-H.; Akagi, K.; Kim, K.-A.; Martin, B. K.;
Cavallone, L.; Kathleen Cunningham Foundation Consortium for Research
into Familial Breast Cancer (kConFab); Haines, D. C.; Basik, M.;
Mai, P.; Poggi, E.; Isaacs, C.; Looi, L. M.; Mun, K. S.; Greene, M.
H.; Byers, S. W.; Teo, S. H.; Deng, C.-X.; Sharan, S. K.: Tumor suppressor
BRCA1 epigenetically controls oncogenic microRNA-155. Nature Med. 17:
1275-1282, 2011. Note: Erratum: Nature Med. 17: 1521 only, 2011.

24. Chen, J.; Silver, D. P.; Walpita, D.; Cantor, S. B.; Gazdar, A.
F.; Tomlinson, G.; Couch, F. J.; Weber, B. L.; Ashley, T.; Livingston,
D. M.; Scully, R.: Stable interaction between the products of the
BRCA1 and BRCA2 tumor suppressor genes in mitotic and meiotic cells. Molec.
Cell 2: 317-328, 1998.

25. Chen, Y.; Chen, C.-F.; Riley, D. J.; Allred, D. C.; Chen, P.-L.;
Von Hoff, D.; Osborne, C. K.; Lee, W.-H.: Aberrant subcellular localization
of BRCA1 in breast cancer. Science 270: 789-791, 1995. Note: Erratum:
Science 270: 1424 only, 1995.

26. Chen, Y.; Farmer, A. A.; Chen, C.-F.; Jones, D. C.; Chen, P.-L.;
Lee, W.-H.: BRCA1 is a 220-kDa nuclear phosphoprotein that is expressed
and phosphorylated in a cell cycle-dependent manner. Cancer Res. 56:
3168-3172, 1996. Note: Erratum: Cancer Res. 56: 4074 only, 1996.

27. Claes, K.; Poppe, B.; Coene, I.; De Paepe, A.; Messiaen, L.:
BRCA1 and BRCA2 germline mutation spectrum and frequencies in Belgian
breast/ovarian cancer families. Brit. J. Cancer 90: 1244-1251, 2004.

28. Coene, E.; Van Oostveldt, P.; Willems, K.; van Emmelo, J.; De
Potter, C. R.: BRCA1 is localized in cytoplasmic tube-like invaginations
in the nucleus. (Letter) Nature Genet. 16: 122-124, 1997.

29. Cortez, D.; Wang, Y.; Qin, J.; Elledge, S. J.: Requirement of
ATM-dependent phosphorylation of Brca1 in the DNA damage response
to double-strand breaks. Science 286: 1162-1166, 1999.

30. Couch, F. J.; Weber, B. L.; Breast Cancer Information Core:
Mutations and polymorphisms in the familial early-onset breast cancer
(BRCA1) gene. Hum. Mutat. 8: 8-18, 1996.

31. De Gregorio, L.; Harshman, K.; Rosenthal, J.; Dragani, T. A.;
Pierotti, M. A.: Genetic mapping of the Brca1 gene on mouse chromosome
11. Mammalian Genome 7: 242, 1996.

32. De Los Rios, P.; Jack, E.; Kuperstein, G.; Lynch, H.; Lubinski,
J.; Narod, S. A.: Founder mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 in North American
families of Polish origin that are affected with breast cancer. (Letter) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 68: 546 only, 2001.

33. Deng, C.-X.; Wang, R.-H.: Roles of BRCA1 in DNA damage repair:
a link between development and cancer. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12(R1):
R113-R123, 2003.

34. Diez, O.; Osorio, A.; Duran, M.; Martinez-Ferrandis, J. I.; de
la Hoya, M.; Salazar, R.; Vega, A.; Campos, B.; Rodriguez-Lopez, R.;
Velasco, E.; Chaves, J.; Diaz-Rubio, E.; and 13 others: Analysis
of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in Spanish breast/ovarian cancer patients:
a high proportion of mutations unique to Spain and evidence of founder
effects. Hum. Mutat. 22: 301-312, 2003.

35. Dong, Y.; Hakimi, M.-A.; Chen, X.; Kumaraswamy, E.; Cooch, N.
S.; Godwin, A. K.; Shiekhattar, R.: Regulation of BRCC, a holoenzyme
complex containing BRCA1 and BRCA2, by a signalosome-like subunit
and its role in DNA repair. Molec. Cell 12: 1087-1099, 2003.

36. Dorum, A.; Heimdal, K.; Hovig, E.; Inganas, M.; Moller, P.: Penetrances
of BRCA1 1675delA and 1135insA with respect to breast cancer and ovarian
cancer. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65: 671-679, 1999.

37. Dorum, A.; Moller, P.; Kamsteeg, E. J.; Scheffer, H.; Burton,
M.; Heimdal, K. R.; Maehle, L. O.; Hovig, E.; Trope, C. G.; van der
Hout, A. H.; van der Meulen, M. A.; Buys, C. H. C. M.; te Meerman,
G. J.: A BRCA1 founder mutation, identified with haplotype analysis,
allowing genotype/phenotype determination and predictive testing. Europ.
J. Cancer 33: 2390-2392, 1997.

38. Dunning, A. M.; Chiano, M.; Smith, N. R.; Dearden, J.; Gore, M.;
Oakes, S.; Wilson, C.; Stratton, M.; Peto, J.; Easton, D.; Clayton,
D.; Ponder, B. A. J.: Common BRCA1 variants and susceptibility to
breast and ovarian cancer in the general population. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 6: 285-289, 1997.

39. Easton, D. F.; Deffenbaugh, A. M.; Pruss, D.; Frye, C.; Wenstrup,
R. J.; Allen-Brady, K.; Tavtigian, S. V.; Monteiro, A. N. A.; Iversen,
E. S.; Couch, F. J.; Goldgar, D. E.: A systematic genetic assessment
of 1,433 sequence variants of unknown clinical significance in the
BRCA1 and BRCA2 breast cancer-predisposition genes. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81:
873-883, 2007.

40. ElShamy, W. M.; Livingston, D. M.: Identification of BRCA1-IRIS,
a BRCA1 locus product. Nature Cell Biol. 6: 954-967, 2004.

41. Fan, S.; Wang, J.-A.; Yuan, R.; Ma, Y.; Meng, Q.; Erdos, M. R.;
Pestell, R. G.; Yuan, F.; Auborn, K. J.; Goldberg, I. D.; Rosen, E.
M.: BRCA1 inhibition of estrogen receptor signaling in transfected
cells. Science 284: 1354-1356, 1999.

42. Farmer, H.; McCabe, N.; Lord, C. J.; Tutt, A. N. J.; Johnson,
D. A.; Richardson, T. B.; Santarosa, M.; Dillon, K. J.; Hickson, I.;
Knights, C.; Martin, N. M. B.; Jackson, S. P.; Smith, G. C. M.; Ashworth,
A.: Targeting the DNA repair defect in BRCA mutant cells as a therapeutic
strategy. Nature 434: 917-921, 2005.

43. FitzGerald, M. G.; MacDonald, D. J.; Krainer, M.; Hoover, I.;
O'Neil, E.; Unsal, H.; Silva-Arrieto, S.; Finkelstein, D. M.; Beer-Romero,
P.; Englert, C.; Sgroi, D. C.; Smith, B. L.; Younger, J. W.; Garber,
J. E.; Duda, R. B.; Mayzel, K. A.; Isselbacher, K. J.; Friend, S.
H.; Haber, D. A.: Germ-line BRCA1 mutations in Jewish and non-Jewish
women with early-onset breast cancer. New Eng. J. Med. 334: 143-149,
1996.

44. Fleming, M. A.; Potter, J. D.; Ramirez, C. J.; Ostrander, G. K.;
Ostrander, E. A.: Understanding missense mutations in the BRCA1 gene:
an evolutionary approach. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 1151-1156,
2003.

45. Folias, A.; Matkovic, M.; Bruun, D,; Reid, S.; Hejna, J.; Grompe,
M.; D'Andrea, A.; Moses, R.: BRCA1 interacts directly with the Fanconi
anemia protein FANCA. Hum. Molec.Genet. 11: 2591-2597, 2002.

46. Ford, J. M.; Hanawalt, P. C.: Expression of wild-type p53 is
required for efficient global genomic nucleotide excision repair in
UV-irradiated human fibroblasts. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 28073-28080,
1997.

47. Ford, J. M.; Hanawalt, P. C.: Li-Fraumeni syndrome fibroblasts
homozygous for p53 mutations are deficient in global DNA repair but
exhibit normal transcription-coupled repair and enhanced UV resistance. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 8876-8880, 1995.

48. Friedman, L. S.; Ostermeyer, E. A.; Szabo, C. I.; Dowd, P.; Lynch,
E. D.; Rowell, S. E.; King, M.-C.: Confirmation of BRCA1 by analysis
of germline mutations linked to breast and ovarian cancer in ten families. Nature
Genet. 8: 399-404, 1994.

49. Friedman, L. S.; Szabo, C. I.; Ostermeyer, E. A.; Dowd, P.; Butler,
L.; Park, T.; Lee, M. K.; Goode, E. L.; Rowell, S. E.; King, M.-C.
: Novel inherited mutations and variable expressivity of BRCA1 alleles,
including the founder mutation 185delAG in Ashkenazi Jewish families. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 57: 1284-1297, 1995.

50. Furuta, S.; Jiang, X.; Gu, B.; Cheng, E.; Chen, P.-L.; Lee, W.-H.
: Depletion of BRCA1 impairs differentiation but enhances proliferation
of mammary epithelial cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 9176-9181,
2005.

51. Futreal, P. A.; Liu, Q.; Shattuck-Eidens, D.; Cochran, C.; Harshman,
K.; Tavtigian, S.; Bennett, L. M.; Haugen-Strano, A.; Swensen, J.;
Miki, Y.; Eddington, K.; McClure, M.; and 15 others: BRCA1 mutation
in primary breast and ovarian carcinomas. Science 266: 120-122,
1994.

52. Ganesan, S.; Silver, D. P.; Greenberg, R. A.; Avni, D.; Drapkin,
R.; Miron, A.; Mok, S. C.; Randrianarison, V.; Brodie, S.; Salstrom,
J.; Rasmussen, T. P.; Klimke, A.; Marrese, C.; Marahrens, Y.; Deng,
C.-X.; Feunteun, J.; Livingston, D. M.: BRCA1 supports XIST RNA concentration
on the inactive X chromosome. Cell 111: 393-405, 2002.

53. Garcia-Higuera, I.; Taniguchi, T.; Ganesan, S.; Meyn, M. S.; Timmers,
C.; Hejna, J.; Grompe, M.; D'Andrea, A. D.: Interaction of the Fanconi
anemia proteins and BRCA1 in a common pathway. Molec. Cell 7: 249-262,
2001.

54. Gayther, S. A.; Harrington, P.; Russell, P.; Kharkevich, G.; Garkavtseva,
R. F.; Ponder, B. A. J.: Frequently occurring germ-line mutations
of the BRCA1 gene in ovarian cancer families from Russia. (Letter) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 60: 1239-1242, 1997.

55. Gayther, S. A.; Harrington, P.; Russell, P.; Kharkevich, G.; Garkavtseva,
R. F.; Ponder, B. A. J.; UKCCCR Familial Ovarian Cancer Study Group
: Rapid detection of regionally clustered germ-line BRCA1 mutations
by multiplex heteroduplex analysis. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 58: 451-456,
1996.

56. Gayther, S. A.; Warren, W.; Mazoyer, S.; Russell, P. A.; Harrington,
P. A.; Chiano, M.; Seal, S.; Hamoudi, R.; van Rensburg, E. J.; Dunning,
A. M.; Love, R.; Evans, G.; Easton, D.; Clayton, D.; Stratton, M.
R.; Ponder, B. A. J.: Germline mutations of the BRCA1 gene in breast
and ovarian cancer families provide evidence for a genotype-phenotype
correlation. Nature Genet. 11: 428-433, 1995.

57. Giusti, R. M.; Rutter, J. L.; Duray, P. H.; Freedman, L. S.; Konichezky,
M.; Fisher-Fischbein, J.; Greene, M. H.; Maslansky, B.; Fischbein,
A.; Gruber, S. B.; Rennert, G.; Ronchetti, R. D.; Hewitt, S. M.; Struewing,
J. P.; Iscovich, J.: A twofold increase in BRCA mutation related
prostate cancer among Ashkenazi Israelis is not associated with distinctive
histopathology. J. Med. Genet. 40: 787-792, 2003. Note: Erratum:
J. Med. Genet. 41: 51 only, 2004.

58. Gorski, B.; Byrski, T.; Huzarski, T.; Jakubowska, A.; Menkiszak,
J.; Gronwald, J.; Pluzanska, A.; Bebenek, M.; Fischer-Maliszewska,
L.; Grzybowska, E.; Narod, S. A.; Lubinski, J.: Founder mutations
in the BRCA1 gene in Polish families with breast-ovarian cancer. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 66: 1963-1968, 2000.

59. Gowen, L. C.; Avrutskaya, A. V.; Latour, A. M.; Koller, B. H.;
Leadon, S. A.: Retraction. (Letter) Science 300: 1657 only, 2003.

60. Gowen, L. C.; Avrutskaya, A. V.; Latour, A. M.; Koller, B. H.;
Leadon, S. A.: BRCA1 required for transcription-coupled repair of
oxidative DNA damage. Science 281: 1009-1012, 1998. Note: Retraction:
Science 300: 1657 only, 2003.

61. Gowen, L. C.; Johnson, B. L.; Latour, A. M.; Sulik, K. K.; Koller,
B. H.: Brca1 deficiency results in early embryonic lethality characterized
by neuroepithelial abnormalities. Nature Genet. 12: 191-194, 1996.

62. Hacia, J. G.; Brody, L. C.; Chee, M. S.; Fodor, S. P. A.; Collins,
F. S.: Detection of heterozygous mutations in BRCA1 using high density
oligonucleotide arrays and two-colour fluorescence analysis. Nature
Genet. 14: 441-447, 1996.

63. Hakem, R.; de la Pompa, J. L.; Elia, A.; Potter, J.; Mak, T. W.
: Partial rescue of Brca1(5-6) early embryonic lethality by p53 or
p21 null mutation. Nature Genet. 16: 298-302, 1997.

64. Hakem, R.; de la Pompa, J. L.; Sirard, C.; Mo, R.; Woo, M.; Hakem,
A.; Wakeham, A.; Potter, J.; Reitmair, A.; Billia, F.; Firpo, E.;
Hui, C. C.; Roberts, J.; Rossant, J.; Mak, T. W.: The tumor suppressor
gene Brca1 is required for embryonic cellular proliferation in the
mouse. Cell 85: 1009-1023, 1996.

65. Harkin, D. P.; Bean, J. M.; Miklos, D.; Song, Y.-H.; Truong, V.
B.; Englert, C.; Christians, F. C.; Ellisen, L. W.; Maheswaran, S.;
Oliner, J. D.; Haber, D. A.: Induction of GADD45 and JNK/SAPK-dependent
apoptosis following inducible expression of BRCA1. Cell 97: 575-586,
1999.

66. Hartman, A.-R.; Ford, J. M.: BRCA1 induces DNA damage recognition
factors and enhances nucleotide excision repair. Nature Genet. 32:
180-184, 2002.

67. Hedenfalk, I.; Duggan, D.; Chen, Y.; Radmacher, M.; Bittner, M.;
Simon, R.; Meltzer, P.; Gusterson, B.; Esteller, M.; Kallioniemi,
O.-P.; Wilfond, B.; Borg, A.; Trent, J.: Gene-expression profiles
in hereditary breast cancer. New Eng. J. Med. 344: 539-548, 2001.

68. Hogervorst, F. B. L.; Cornelis, R. S.; Bout, M.; van Vliet, M.;
Oosterwijk, J. C.; Olmer, R.; Bakker, B.; Klijn, J. G. M.; Vasen,
H. F. A.; Meijers-Heijboer, H.; Menko, F. H.; Cornelisse, C. J.; den
Dunnen, J. T.; Devilee, P.; van Ommen, G.-J. B.: Rapid detection
of BRCA1 mutations by the protein truncation test. Nature Genet. 10:
208-212, 1995.

69. Hohenstein, P.; Fodde, R.: Of mice and (wo)men: genotype-phenotype
correlations in BRCA1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: R271-R277, 2003. Note:
Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 473 only, 2004.

70. Holt, J. T.; Thompson, M. E.; Szabo, C.; Robinson-Benion, C.;
Arteaga, C. L.; King, M.-C.; Jensen, R. A.: Growth retardation and
tumour inhibition by BRCA1. Nature Genet. 12: 298-302, 1996. Note:
Erratum: Nature Genet. 19: 102 only, 1998.

71. Huttley, G. A.; Easteal, S.; Southey, M. C.; Tesoriero, A.; Giles,
G. G.; McCredie, M. R. E.; Hopper, J. L.; Venter, D. J.; Australian
Breast Cancer Family Study: Adaptive evolution of the tumour suppressor
BRCA1 in humans and chimpanzees. Nature Genet. 25: 410-413, 2000.

72. Isaacs, S. D.; Kiemeney, L. A. L. M.; Baffoe-Bonnie, A.; Beaty,
T. H.; Walsh, P. C.: Risk of cancer in relatives of prostate cancer
probands. J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 87: 991-996, 1995.

73. Ishioka, C.; Suzuki, T.; Fitzgerald, M.; Krainer, M.; Shimodaira,
H.; Shimada, A.; Nomizu, T.; Isselbacher, K. J.; Haber, D.; Kanamaru,
R.: Detection of heterozygous truncating mutations in the BRCA1 and
APC genes by using a rapid screening assay in yeast. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 94: 2449-2453, 1997.

74. Janezic, S. A.; Ziogas, A.; Krumroy, L. M.; Krasner, M.; Plummer,
S. J.; Cohen, P.; Gildea, M.; Barker, D.; Haile, R.; Casey, G.; Anton-Culver,
H.: Germline BRCA1 alterations in a population-based series of ovarian
cancer cases. Hum. Molec. Genet. 8: 889-897, 1999.

75. Jara, L.; Ampuero, S.; Santibanez, E.; Seccia, L.; Rodriguez,
J.; Bustamante, M.; Martinez, V.; Catenaccio, A.; Lay-Son, G.; Blanco,
R.; Reyes, J. M.: BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in a South American population. Cancer
Genet. Cytogenet. 166: 36-45, 2006.

76. Jensen, R. A.; Thompson, M. E.; Jetton, T. L.; Szabo, C. I.; van
der Meer, R.; Helou, B.; Tronick, S. R.; Page, D. L.; King, M.-C.;
Holt, J. T.: BRCA1 is secreted and exhibits properties of a granin. Nature
Genet. 12: 303-308, 1996.

77. Jin, Y.; Xu, X. L.; Yang, M.-C. W.; Wei, F.; Ayi, T.-C.; Bowcock,
A. M.; Baer, R.: Cell cycle-dependent colocalization of BARD1 and
BRCA1 proteins in discrete nuclear domains. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94:
12075-12080, 1997.

78. Johannsson, O.; Ostermeyer, E. A.; Hakansson, S.; Friedman, L.
S.; Johansson, U.; Sellberg, G.; Brondum-Nielsen, K.; Sele, V.; Olsson,
H.; King, M.-C.; Borg, A.: Founding BRCA1 mutations in hereditary
breast and ovarian cancer in Southern Sweden. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 58:
441-450, 1996.

79. Joukov, V.; Groen, A. C.; Prokhorova, T.; Gerson, R.; White, E.;
Rodriguez, A.; Walter, J. C.; Livingston, D. M.: The BRCA1/BARD1
heterodimer modulates Ran-dependent mitotic spindle assembly. Cell 127:
539-552, 2006.

80. Khavari, P. A.; Peterson, C. L.; Tamkun, J. W.; Mendel, D. B.;
Crabtree, G. R.: BRG1 contains a conserved domain of the SWI2/SNF2
family necessary for normal mitotic growth and transcription. Nature 366:
170-174, 1993.

81. Kim, H.; Chen, J.; Yu, X.: Ubiquitin-binding protein RAP80 mediates
BRCA1-dependent DNA damage response. Science 316: 1202-1205, 2007.

82. Langston, A. A.; Malone, K. E.; Thompson, J. D.; Daling, J. R.;
Ostrander, E. A.: BRCA1 mutations in a population-based sample of
young women with breast cancer. New Eng. J. Med. 334: 137-142, 1996.

83. Langston, A. A.; Stanford, J. L.; Wicklund, K. G.; Thompson, J.
D.; Blazej, R. G.; Ostrander, E. A.: Germ-line BRCA1 mutations in
selected men with prostate cancer. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 58:
881-885, 1996.

84. Lee, C. G.; Hurwitz, J.: Human RNA helicase A is homologous to
the maleless protein of Drosophila. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 16822-16830,
1993.

85. Lee, J.-S.; Collins, K. M.; Brown, A. L.; Lee, C.-H.; Chung, J.
H.: hCds1-mediated phosphorylation of BRCA1 regulates the DNA damage
response. Nature 404: 201-204, 2000.

86. Lee, M.-H.; Lahusen, T.; Wang, R.-H.; Xiao, C.; Xu, X.; Hwang,
Y.-S.; He, W.-W.; Shi, Y.; Deng, C.-X.: Yin Yang 1 positively regulates
BRCA1 and inhibits mammary cancer formation. Oncogene 31: 116-127,
2012.

87. Li, S.; Ting, N. S. Y.; Zheng, L.; Chen, P.-L.; Ziv, Y.; Shiloh,
Y.; Lee, E. Y.-H. P.; Lee, W.-H.: Functional link of BRCA1 and ataxia
telangiectasia gene product in DNA damage response. Nature 406:
210-215, 2000.

88. Liede, A.; Rehal, P.; Vesprini, D.; Jack, E.; Abrahamson, J.;
Narod, S. A.: A breast cancer patient of Scottish descent with germ-line
mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62: 1543-1544,
1998.

89. Liu, H.-X.; Cartegni, L.; Zhang, M. Q.; Krainer, A. R.: A mechanism
for exon skipping caused by nonsense or missense mutations in BRCA1
and other genes. Nature Genet. 27: 55-58, 2001.

90. Lorick, K. L.; Jensen, J. P.; Fang, S.; Ong, A. M.; Hatakeyama,
S.; Weissman, A. M.: RING fingers mediate ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme
(E2)-dependent ubiquitination. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 11364-11369,
1999.

91. Ludwig, T.; Chapman, D. L.; Papaioannou, V. E.; Efstratiadis,
A.: Targeted mutations of breast cancer susceptibility gene homologs
in mice: lethal phenotypes of Brca1, Brca2, Brca1/Brca2, Brca1/p53,
and Brca2/p53 nullizygous embryos. Genes Dev. 11: 1226-1241, 1997.

92. Maor, S. B.; Abramovitch, S.; Erdos, M. R.; Brody, L. C.; Werner,
H.: BRCA1 suppresses insulin-like growth factor-I receptor promoter
activity: potential interaction between BRCA1 and Sp1. Molec. Genet.
Metab. 69: 130-136, 2000.

93. McCarthy, E. E.; Celebi, J. T.; Baer, R.; Ludwig, T.: Loss of
Bard1, the heterodimeric partner of the Brca1 tumor suppressor, results
in early embryonic lethality and chromosomal instability. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 23: 5056-5063, 2003.

94. Mefford, H. C.; Baumbach, L.; Panguluri, R. C. K.; Whitfield-Broome,
C.; Szabo, C.; Smith, S.; King, M.-C.; Dunston, G.; Stoppa-Lyonnet,
D.; Arena, F.: Evidence for a BRCA1 founder mutation in families
of West African ancestry. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65: 575-578,
1999.

95. Merajver, S. D.; Pham, T. M.; Caduff, R. F.; Chen, M.; Poy, E.
L.; Cooney, K. A.; Weber, B. L.; Collins, F. S.; Johnston, C.; Frank,
T. S.: Somatic mutations in the BRCA1 gene in sporadic ovarian tumours. Nature
Genet. 9: 439-443, 1995.

96. Miki, Y.; Swensen, J.; Shattuck-Eidens, D.; Futreal, P. A.; Harshman,
K.; Tavtigian, S.; Liu, Q.; Cochran, C.; Bennett, L. M.; Ding, W.;
Bell, R.; Rosenthal, J.; and 33 others: A strong candidate for
the breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility gene BRCA1. Science 266:
66-71, 1994.

97. Montagna, M.; Dalla Palma, M.; Menin, C.; Agata, S.; De Nicolo,
A.; Chieco-Bianchi, L.; D'Andrea, E.: Genomic rearrangements account
for more than one-third of the BRCA1 mutations in northern Italian
breast/ovarian cancer families. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 1055-1061,
2003.

98. Monteiro, A. N. A.; August, A.; Hanafusa, H.: Evidence for a
transcriptional activation function of BRCA1 C-terminal region. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 13595-13599, 1996.

99. Morris, J. R.; Boutell, C.; Keppler, M.; Densham, R.; Weekes,
D.; Alamshah, A.; Butler, L.; Galanty, Y.; Pangon, L.; Kiuchi, T.;
Ng, T.; Solomon, E.: The SUMO modification pathway is involved in
the BRCA1 response to genotoxic stress. Nature 462: 886-890, 2009.

100. Morris, J. R.; Solomon, E.: BRCA1:BARD1 induces the formation
of conjugated ubiquitin structures, dependent on K6 of ubiquitin,
in cells during DNA replication and repair. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13:
807-817, 2004.

101. Moynahan, M. E.; Chiu, J. W.; Koller, B. H.; Jasin, M.: Brca1
controls homology-directed DNA repair. Molec. Cell 4: 511-518, 1999.

102. Narod, S.; Ford, D.; Devilee, P.; Barkardottir, R. B.; Eyfjord,
J.; Lenoir, G.; Serova, O.; Easton, D.; Goldgar, D.; Breast Cancer
Linkage Consortium: Genetic heterogeneity of breast-ovarian cancer
revisited. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 57: 957-958, 1995.

103. Nastiuk, K. L.; Mansukhani, M.; Terry, M. B.; Kularatne, P.;
Rubin, M. A.; Melamed, J.; Gammon, M. D.; Ittmann, M.; Krolewski,
J. J.: Common mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 do not contribute to early
prostate cancer in Jewish men. Prostate 40: 172-177, 1999.

104. Neuhausen, S. L.; Mazoyer, S.; Friedman, L.; Stratton, M.; Offit,
K.; Caligo, A.; Tomlinson, G.; Cannon-Albright, L.; Bishop, T.; Kelsell,
D.; Solomon, E.; Weber, B.; Couch, F.; Struewing, J.; Tonin, P.; Durocher,
F.; Narod, S.; Skolnick, M. H.; Lenoir, G.; Serova, O.; Ponder, B.;
Stoppa-Lyonnet, D.; Easton, D.; King, M.-C.; Goldgar, D. E.: Haplotype
and phenotype analysis of six recurrent BRCA1 mutations in 61 families:
results of an international study. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 58: 271-280,
1996.

105. O'Connell, P.; Albertsen, H.; Matsunami, N.; Taylor, T.; Hundley,
J. E.; Johnson-Pais, T. L.; Reus, B.; Lawrence, E.; Ballard, L.; White,
R.; Leach, R. J.: A radiation hybrid map of the BRCA1 region. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 54: 526-534, 1994.

106. Pace, P.; Johnson, M.; Tan, W. M.; Mosedale, G.; Sng, C.; Hoatlin,
M.; de Winter, J.; Joenje, H.; Gergely, F.; Patel, K. J.: FANCE:
the link between Fanconi anaemia complex assembly and activity. EMBO
J. 21: 3414-3423, 2002.

107. Paull, T. T.; Cortez, D.; Bowers, B.; Elledge, S. J.; Gellert,
M.: Direct DNA binding by Brca1. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 6086-6091,
2001.

108. Pavlicek, A.; Noskov, V. N.; Kouprina, N.; Barrett, J. C.; Jurka,
J.; Larionov, V.: Evolution of the tumor suppressor BRCA1 locus in
primates: implications for cancer predisposition. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13:
2737-2751, 2004.

109. Perrin-Vidoz, L.; Sinilnikova, O. M.; Stoppa-Lyonnet, D.; Lenoir,
G. M.; Mazoyer, S.: The nonsense-mediated mRNA decay pathway triggers
degradation of most BRCA1 mRNAs bearing premature termination codons. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 11: 2805-2814, 2002.

110. Petrij-Bosch, A.; Peelen, T.; van Vliet, M.; van Eijk, R.; Olmer,
R.; Drusedau, M.; Hogervorst, F. B. L.; Hageman, S.; Arts, P. J. W.;
Ligtenberg, M. J. L.; Meijers-Heijboer, H.; Klijn, J. G. M.; Vasen,
H. F. A.; Cornelisse, C. J.; van't Veer, L. J.; Bakker, E.; van Ommen,
G.-J. B.; Devilee, P.: BRCA1 genomic deletions are major founder
mutations in Dutch breast cancer patients. Nature Genet. 17: 341-345,
1997. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 17: 503 only, 1997.

111. Piver, M. S.; Baker, T. R.; Jishi, M. F.; Sandecki, A. M.; Tsukada,
Y.; Natarajan, N.; Mettlin, C. J.; Blake, C. A.: Familial ovarian
cancer: a report of 658 families from the Gilda Radner Familial Ovarian
Cancer Registry 1981-1991. Cancer 71: 582-588, 1993.

112. Poole, A. J.; Li, Y.; Kim, Y.; Lin, S.-C. J.; Lee, W.-H.; Lee,
E. Y.-H. P.: Prevention of Brca1-mediated mammary tumorigenesis in
mice by a progesterone antagonist. Science 314: 1467-1470, 2006.

113. Porhanova, N. V.; Sokolenko, A. P.; Sherina, N. Y.; Ponomariova,
D. N.; Tkachenko, N. N.; Matsko, D. E.; Imyanitov, E. N.: Ovarian
cancer patient with germline mutations in both BRCA1 and NBN genes.
(Letter) Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 186: 122-124, 2008.

114. Puget, N.; Gad, S.; Perrin-Vidoz, L.; Sinilnikova, O. M.; Stoppa-Lyonnet,
D.; Lenoir, G. M.; Mazoyer, S.: Distinct BRCA1 rearrangements involving
the BRCA1 pseudogene suggest the existence of a recombination hot
spot. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 70: 858-865, 2002.

115. Puget, N.; Sinilnikova, O. M.; Stoppa-Lyonnet, D.; Audoynaud,
C.; Pages, S.; Lynch, H. T.; Goldgar, D.; Lenoir, G. M.; Mazoyer,
S.: An Alu-mediated 6-kb duplication in the BRCA1 gene: a new founder
mutation? Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64: 300-302, 1999.

116. Puget, N.; Stoppa-Lyonnet, D.; Sinilnikova, O. M.; Pages, S.;
Lynch, H. T.; Lenoir, G. M.; Mazoyer, S.: Screening for germline
rearrangements and regulatory mutations in BRCA1 led to the identification
of four new deletions. Cancer Res. 59: 455-461, 1999.

117. Ramus, S. J.; Friedman, L. S.; Gayther, S. A.; Ponder, B. A.
J.; Bobrow, L. G.; van der Looji, M.; Papp, J.; Olah, E.: A breast/ovarian
cancer patient with germline mutations in both BRCA1 and BRCA2. (Letter) Nature
Genet. 15: 14-15, 1997.

118. Roa, B. B.; Boyd, A. A.; Volcik, K.; Richards, C. S.: Ashkenazi
Jewish population frequencies for common mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2. Nature
Genet. 14: 185-187, 1996.

119. Rostagno, P.; Gioanni, J.; Garino, E.; Vallino, P.; Namer, M.;
Frenay, M.: A mutation analysis of the BRCA1 gene in 140 families
from southeast France with a history of breast and/or ovarian cancer. J.
Hum. Genet. 48: 362-366, 2003.

120. Ruffner, H.; Jiang, W.; Craig, A. G.; Hunter, T.; Verma, I. M.
: BRCA1 is phosphorylated at serine 1497 in vivo at a cyclin-dependent
kinase 2 phosphorylation site. Molec. Cell. Biol. 19: 4843-4854,
1999.

121. Saal, L. H.; Gruvberger-Saal, S. K.; Persson, C.; Lovgren, K.;
Jumppanen, M.; Staaf, J.; Jonsson, G.; Pires, M. M.; Maurer, M.; Holm,
K.; Koujak, S.; Subramaniyam, S.; and 13 others: Recurrent gross
mutations of the PTEN tumor suppressor gene in breast cancers with
deficient DSB repair. Nature Genet. 40: 102-107, 2008.

122. Sarantaus, L.; Huusko, P.; Eerola, H.; Launonen, V.; Vehmanen,
P.; Rapakko, K.; Gillanders, E.; Syrjakoski, K.; Kainu, T.; Vahteristo,
P.; Krahe, R.; Paakkonen, K.; and 14 others: Multiple founder effects
and geographical clustering of BRCA1 and BRCA2 families in Finland. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 8: 757-763, 2000.

123. Schorge, J. O.; Muto, M. G.; Welch, W. R.; Bandera, C. A.; Rubin,
S. C.; Bell, D. A.; Berkowitz, R. S.; Mok, S. C.: Molecular evidence
for multifocal papillary serous carcinoma of the peritoneum in patients
with germline BRCA1 mutations. J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 90: 841-845,
1998.

124. Schrock, E.; Badger, P.; Larson, D.; Erdos, M.; Wynshaw-Boris,
A.; Ried, T.; Brody, L.: The murine homolog of the human breast and
ovarian cancer susceptibility gene Brca1 maps to mouse chromosome
11D. Hum. Genet. 97: 256-259, 1996.

125. Schuyer, M.; Berns, E. M.: Is TP53 dysfunction required for
BRCA1-associated carcinogenesis? Molec. Cell. Endocr. 155: 143-152,
1999.

126. Scully, R.; Anderson, S. F.; Chao, D. M.; Wei, W.; Ye, L.; Young,
R. A.; Livingston, D. M.; Parvin, J. D.: BRCA1 is a component of
the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 5605-5610,
1997.

127. Scully, R.; Ganesan, S.; Brown, M.; De Caprio, J. A.; Cannistra,
S. A.; Feunteun, J.; Schnitt, S.; Livingston, D. M.: Location of
BRCA1 in human breast and ovarian cancer cells. Science 272: 123-125,
1996.

128. Scully, R.; Ganesan, S.; Vlasakova, K.; Chen, J.; Socolovsky,
M.; Livingston, D. M.: Genetic analysis of BRCA1 function in a defined
tumor cell line. Molec. Cell 4: 1093-1099, 1999.

129. Serova, O.; Montagna, M.; Torchard, D.; Narod, S. A.; Tonin,
P.; Sylla, B.; Lynch, H. T.; Feunteun, J.; Lenoir, G. M.: A high
incidence of BRCA1 mutations in 20 breast-ovarian cancer families. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 58: 42-51, 1996.

130. Shakya, R.; Reid, L. J.; Reczek, C. R.; Cole, F.; Egli, D.; Lin,
C.-S.; deRooij, D. G.; Hirsch, S.; Ravi, K.; Hicks, J. B.; Szabolcs,
M.; Jasin, M.; Baer, R.; Ludwig, T.: BRCA1 tumor suppression depends
on BRCT phosphoprotein binding, but not its E3 ligase activity. Science 334:
525-528, 2011.

131. Shakya, R.; Szabolcs, M.; McCarthy, E.; Ospina, E.; Basso, K.;
Nandula, S.; Murty, V.; Baer, R.; Ludwig, T.: The basal-like mammary
carcinomas induced by Brca1 or Bard1 inactivation implicate the BRCA1/BARD1
heterodimer in tumor suppression. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 7040-7045,
2008.

132. Simard, J.; Feunteun, J.; Lenoir, G.; Tonin, P.; Normand, T.;
The, V. L.; Vivier, A.; Lasko, D.; Morgan, K.; Rouleau, G. A.; Lynch,
H.; Labrie, F.; Narod, S. A.: Genetic mapping of the breast-ovarian
cancer syndrome to a small interval on chromosome 17q12-21: exclusion
of candidate genes EDH17B2 and RARA. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 1193-1199,
1993.

133. Simard, J.; Tonin, P.; Durocher, F.; Morgan, K.; Rommens, J.;
Gingras, S.; Samson, C.; Leblanc, J.-F.; Belanger, C.; Dion, F.; Liu,
Q.; Skolnick, M.; Goldgar, D.; Shattuck-Eidens, D.; Labrie, F.; Narod,
S. A.: Common origins of BRCA1 mutations in Canadian breast and ovarian
cancer families. Nature Genet. 8: 392-398, 1994.

134. Smith, T. M.; Lee, M. K.; Szabo, C. I.; Jerome, N.; McEuen, M.;
Taylor, M.; Hood, L.; King, M.-C.: Complete genomic sequence and
analysis of 117 kb of human DNA containing the gene BRCA1. Genome
Res. 6: 1029-1049, 1996.

135. Sobhian, B.; Shao, G.; Lilli, D. R.; Culhane, A. C.; Moreau,
L. A.; Xia, B.; Livingston, D. M.; Greenberg, R. A.: RAP80 targets
BRCA1 to specific ubiquitin structures at DNA damage sites. Science 316:
1198-1202, 2007.

136. Sobol, H.; Mazoyer, S.; Narod, S. A.; Smith, S. A.; Black, D.
M.; Kerbrat, P.; Jamot, B.; Solomon, E.; Ponder, B. A. J.; Guerin,
D.: Genetic heterogeneity of early-onset familial breast cancer. Hum.
Genet. 89: 381-383, 1992.

137. Steeg, P. S.: Granin expectations in breast cancer? Nature
Genet. 12: 223-225, 1996.

138. Stoppa-Lyonnet, D.; Fricker, J. P.; Essioux, L.; Pages, S.; Limacher,
J. M.; Sobol, H.; Laurent-Puig, P.; Thomas, G.: Segregation of two
BRCA1 mutations in a single family. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 59:
479-481, 1996.

139. Stratton, M. R.; Ford, D.; Neuhasen, S.; Seal, S.; Wooster, R.;
Friedman, L. S.; King, M.-C.; Egilsson, V.; Devilee, P.; McManus,
R.; Daly, P. A.; Smyth, E.; Ponder, B. A. J.; Peto, J.; Cannon-Albright,
L.; Easton, D. F.; Goldgar, D. E.: Familial male breast cancer is
not linked to the BRCA1 locus on chromosome 17q. Nature Genet. 7:
103-107, 1994.

140. Struewing, J. P.; Abeliovich, D.; Peretz, T.; Avishai, N.; Kaback,
M. M.; Collins, F. S.; Brody, L. C.: The carrier frequency of the
BRCA1 185delAG mutation is approximately 1 percent in Ashkenazi Jewish
individuals. Nature Genet. 11: 198-200, 1995. Note: Erratum: Nature
Genet. 12: 110 only, 1996.

141. Struewing, J. P.; Brody, L. C.; Erdos, M. R.; Kase, R. G.; Giambarresi,
T. R.; Smith, S. A.; Collins, F. S.; Tucker, M.A.: Detection of eight
BRCA1 mutations in 10 breast/ovarian cancer families, including 1
family with male breast cancer. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 57: 1-7, 1995.

142. Struewing, J. P.; Hartge, P.; Wacholder, S.; Baker, S. M.; Berlin,
M.; McAdams, M.; Timmerman, M. M.; Brody, L. C.; Tucker, M. A.: The
risk of cancer associated with specific mutations of BRCA1 and BRCA2
among Ashkenazi Jews. New Eng. J. Med. 336: 1401-1408, 1997.

143. Sum, E. Y. M.; Peng, B.; Yu, X.; Chen, J.; Byrne, J.; Lindeman,
G. J.; Visvader, J. E.: The LIM domain protein LMO4 interacts with
the cofactor CtIP and the tumor suppressor BRCA1 and inhibits BRCA1
activity. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 7849-7856, 2002.

144. Tan-Wong, S. M.; French, J. D.; Proudfoot, N. J.; Brown, M. A.
: Dynamic interactions between the promoter and terminator regions
of the mammalian BRCA1 gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 5160-5165,
2008.

145. Tavtigian, S. V.; Deffenbaugh, A. M.; Yin, L.; Judkins, T.; Scholl,
T.; Samollow, P. B.; de Silva, D.; Zharkikh, A.; Thomas, A.: Comprehensive
statistical study of 452 BRCA1 missense substitutions with classification
of eight recurrent substitutions as neutral. J. Med. Genet. 43:
295-305, 2006.

146. Tesoriero, A.; Andersen, C.; Southey, M.; Somers, G.; McKay,
M.; Armes, J.; McCredie, M.; Giles, G.; Hopper, J. L.; Venter, D.
: De novo BRCA1 mutation in a patient with breast cancer and an inherited
BRCA2 mutation. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65: 567-569, 1999.

147. The Scottish/Northern Irish BRCA1/BRCA2 Consortium: BRCA1
and BRCA2 mutations in Scotland and Northern Ireland. Brit. J. Cancer 88:
1256-1262, 2003.

148. Thompson, M. E.; Jensen, R. A.; Obermiller, P. S.; Page, D. L.;
Holt, J. T.: Decreased expression of BRCA1 accelerates growth and
is often present during sporadic breast cancer progression. Nature
Genet. 9: 444-450, 1995.

149. Tischkowitz, M.; Hamel, N.; Carvalho, M. A.; Birrane, G.; Soni,
A.; van Beers, E. H.; Joosse, S. A.; Wong, N.; Novak, D.; Quenneville,
L. A.; Grist, S. A.; Nederlof, P. M.; Goldgar, D. E.; Tavtigian, S.
V.; Monteiro, A. N.; Ladias, J. A. A.; Foulkes, W. D.: Pathogenicity
of the BRCA1 missense variant M1775K is determined by the disruption
of the BRCT phosphopeptide-binding pocket: a multi-modal approach. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 16: 820-832, 2008.

150. Vallon-Christersson, J.; Cayanan, C.; Haraldsson, K.; Loman,
N.; Bergthorsson, J. T.; Brondum-Nielsen, K.; Gerdes, A.-M.; Moller,
P.; Kristoffersson, U.; Olsson, H.; Borg, A.; Monteiro, A. N. A.:
Functional analysis of BRCA1 C-terminal missense mutations identified
in breast and ovarian cancer families. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 353-360,
2001.

151. van Orsouw, N. J.; Dhanda, R. K.; Elhaji, Y.; Narod, S. A.; Li,
F. P.; Eng, C.; Vijg, J.: A highly accurate, low cost test for BRCA1
mutations. J. Med. Genet. 36: 747-753, 1999.

152. Vazina, A.; Baniel, J.; Yaacobi, Y.; Shtriker, A.; Engelstein,
D.; Leibovitz, I.; Zehavi, M.; Sidi, A. A.; Ramon, Y.; Tischler, T.;
Livne, P. M.; Friedman, E.: The rate of the founder Jewish mutations
in BRCA1 and BRCA2 in prostate cancer patients in Israel. Brit. J.
Cancer 83: 463-466, 2000.

153. Vega, A.; Campos, B.; Bressac-de-Paillerets, B.; Bond, P. M.;
Janin, N.; Douglas, F. S.; Domenech, M.; Baena, M.; Pericay, C.; Alonso,
C.; Carracedo, A.; Baiget, M.; Diez, O.: The R71G BRCA1 is a founder
Spanish mutation and leads to aberrant splicing of the transcript. Hum.
Mutat. 17: 520-521, 2001.

154. Vega, A.; Torres, M.; Martinez, J. I.; Ruiz-Ponte, C.; Barros,
F.; Carracedo, A.: Analysis of BRCA1 and BRCA2 in breast and breast/ovarian
cancer families shows population substructure in the Iberian peninsula. Ann.
Hum. Genet. 66: 29-36, 2002.

155. Walsh, T.; Casadei, S.; Coats, K. H.; Swisher, E.; Stray, S.
M.; Higgins, J.; Roach, K. C.; Mandell, J.; Lee, M. K.; Ciernikova,
S.; Foretova, L.; Soucek, P.; King, M.-C.: Spectrum of mutations
in BRCA1, BRCA2, CHEK2, and TP53 in families at high risk of breast
cancer. JAMA 295: 1379-1388, 2006.

156. Wang, B.; Hurov, K.; Hofmann, K.; Elledge, S. J.: NBA1, a new
player in the Brca1 A complex, is required for DNA damage resistance
and checkpoint control. Genes Dev. 23: 729-739, 2009.

157. Wang, B.; Matsuoka, S.; Ballif, B. A.; Zhang, D.; Smogorzewska,
A.; Gygi, S. P.; Elledge, S. J.: Abraxas and RAP80 form a BRCA1 protein
complex required for the DNA damage response. Science 316: 1194-1198,
2007.

158. Wang, R.-H.; Zheng, Y.; Kim, H.-S.; Xu, X.; Cao, L.; Luhasen,
T.; Lee, M.-H.; Xiao, C.; Vassilopoulos, A.; Chen, W.; Gardner, K.;
Man, Y.-G.; Hung, M.-C.; Finkel, T.; Deng, C.-X.: Interplay among
BRCA1, SIRT1, and Survivin during BRCA1-associated tumorigenesis. Molec.
Cell 32: 11-20, 2008.

159. Wang, X.; Pankratz, V. S.; Fredericksen, Z.; Tarrell, R.; Karaus,
M.; McGuffog, L.; Pharaoh, P. D. P.; Ponder, B. A. J.; Dunning, A.
M.; Peock, S.; Cook, M.; Oliver, C.; and 36 others: Common variants
associated with breast cancer in genome-wide association studies are
modifiers of breast cancer risk in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 19: 2886-2897, 2010.

160. Wang, X.; Wang, R.-H.; Li, W.; Xu, X.; Hollander, M. C.; Fornace,
A. J., Jr.; Deng, C.-X.: Genetic interactions between Brca1 and Gadd45a
in centrosome duplication, genetic stability, and neural tube closure. J.
Biol. Chem. 279: 29606-29614, 2004.

161. Wang, Y.; Cortez, D.; Yazdi, P.; Neff, N.; Elledge, S. J.; Qin,
J.: BASC, a super complex of BRCA1-associated proteins involved in
the recognition and repair of aberrant DNA structures. Genes Dev. 14:
927-939, 2000.

162. Williams, R. S.; Glover, J. N.: Structural consequences of a
cancer-causing BRCA1-BRCT missense mutation. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
2630-2635, 2003.

163. Wu, L. C.; Wang, Z. W.; Tsan, J. T.; Spillman, M. A.; Phung,
A.; Xu, X. L.; Yang, M.-C. W.; Hwang, L.-Y.; Bowcock, A. M.; Baer,
R.: Identification of a RING protein that can interact in vivo with
the BRCA1 gene product. Nature Genet. 14: 430-440, 1996.

164. Xu, X.; Qiao, W.; Linke, S. P.; Cao, L.; Li, W.-M.; Furth, P.
A.; Harris, C. C.; Deng, C.-X.: Genetic interactions between tumor
suppressors Brca1 and p53 in apoptosis, cell cycle and tumorigenesis. Nature
Genet. 28: 266-271, 2001.

165. Xu, X.; Weaver, Z.; Linke, S. P.; Li, C.; Gotay, J.; Wang, X.-W.;
Harris, C. C.; Ried, T.; Deng, C.-X.: Centrosome amplification and
a defective G(2)-M cell cycle checkpoint induce genetic instability
in BRCA1 exon 11 isoform-deficient cells. Molec. Cell 3: 389-395,
1999.

166. Yarden, R. I.; Brody, L. C.: BRCA1 interacts with components
of the histone deacetylase complex. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 4983-4988,
1999.

167. Yarden, R. I.; Pardo-Reoyo, S.; Sgagias, M.; Cowan, K. H.; Brody,
L. C.: BRCA1 regulates the G2/M checkpoint by activating Chk1 kinase
upon DNA damage. Nature Genet. 30: 285-289, 2002.

168. Ye, Q.; Hu, Y.-F.; Zhong, H.; Nye, A. C.; Belmont, A. S.; Li,
R.: BRCA1-induced large-scale chromatin unfolding and allele-specific
effects of cancer-predisposing mutations. J. Cell Biol. 155: 911-921,
2001.

169. Yu, X.; Chini, C. C. S.; He, M.; Mer, G.; Chen, J.: The BRCT
domain is a phospho-protein binding domain. Science 302: 639-642,
2003.

170. Yun, M. H.; Hiom, K.: CtIP-BRCA1 modulates the choice of DNA
double-strand-break repair pathway throughout the cell cycle. Nature 459:
460-463, 2009.

171. Zhang, S.; Grosse, F.: Domain structure of human nuclear DNA
helicase II (RNA helicase A). J. Biol. Chem. 272: 11487-11494, 1997.

172. Zheng, L.; Pan, H.; Li, S.; Flesken-Nikitin, A.; Chen, P.-L.;
Boyer, T. G.; Lee, W.-H.: Sequence-specific transcriptional corepressor
function for BRCA1 through a novel zinc finger protein, ZBRK1. Molec.
Cell 6: 757-768, 2000.

173. Zhong, Q.; Chen, C.-F.; Li, S.; Chen, Y.; Wang, C.-C.; Xiao,
J.; Chen, P.-L.; Sharp, Z. D.; Lee, W.-H.: Association of BRCA1 with
the hRad50-hMre11-p95 complex and the DNA damage response. Science 285:
747-750, 1999.

174. Zhu, Q.; Pao, G. M.; Huynh, A. M.; Suh, H.; Tonnu, N.; Nederlof,
P. M.; Gage, F. H.; Verma, I. M.: BRCA1 tumour suppression occurs
via heterochromatin-mediated silencing. Nature 477: 179-184, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 09/05/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/11/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/28/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/29/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/26/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/21/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/6/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/17/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/5/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/24/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/14/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/30/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/11/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/30/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/22/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/24/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/5/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/20/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/28/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin  - updated: 1/8/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/28/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/27/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/6/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/20/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/22/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/21/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/6/2007
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 12/18/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/18/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/20/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/6/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/30/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/19/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/25/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/14/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/3/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/11/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/14/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/17/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/9/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/1/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/6/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/3/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/11/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/27/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/23/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/1/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/27/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/4/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/12/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/20/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/26/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/25/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/27/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/17/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/29/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/1/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/12/2002
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 4/29/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/12/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/11/2002
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 11/19/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/9/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/3/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/27/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/25/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/24/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/16/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/15/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 3/9/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/8/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/2/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/2/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/19/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/27/2000
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/16/2000
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/14/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/19/2000
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 10/3/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/11/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/18/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/8/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/1/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/26/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/20/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/12/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/31/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/18/2000
Michael J. Wright - updated: 3/22/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/18/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/11/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/7/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/19/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/1/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/24/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/15/1999
John F. Jackson - reorganized: 9/14/1999
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 7/16/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/14/1999
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 6/24/1999
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 5/21/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/20/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/17/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/5/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/2/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/7/1998
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/10/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/23/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/1/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/21/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/17/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/20/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/23/1998
Michael J. Wright - updated: 6/16/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/22/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/8/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/17/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/18/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/28/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/23/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/16/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/2/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/21/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/15/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/8/1997
Moyra Smith - updated: 3/3/1997
Moyra Smith - updated: 12/20/1996
Moyra Smith - updated: 12/11/1996
Lori M. Kelman - updated: 11/8/1996
Moyra Smith - updated: 10/4/1996
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/15/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/20/1990

EDITED alopez: 09/05/2013
carol: 8/7/2013
carol: 4/3/2013
mgross: 2/5/2013
mgross: 1/11/2013
terry: 12/21/2012
terry: 12/20/2012
terry: 11/28/2012
alopez: 11/27/2012
terry: 11/9/2012
terry: 10/10/2012
terry: 10/2/2012
mgross: 9/13/2012
terry: 9/11/2012
terry: 7/13/2012
carol: 7/6/2012
carol: 7/5/2012
mgross: 2/28/2012
alopez: 12/16/2011
alopez: 11/30/2011
terry: 11/29/2011
mgross: 10/31/2011
terry: 10/26/2011
alopez: 9/21/2011
terry: 9/21/2011
carol: 6/17/2011
wwang: 11/19/2010
mgross: 11/3/2010
alopez: 10/26/2010
terry: 10/4/2010
joanna: 7/27/2010
alopez: 5/12/2010
alopez: 4/9/2010
alopez: 1/15/2010
carol: 1/12/2010
terry: 1/6/2010
alopez: 8/19/2009
terry: 8/17/2009
wwang: 6/23/2009
ckniffin: 6/5/2009
terry: 6/3/2009
mgross: 4/27/2009
terry: 4/24/2009
mgross: 4/14/2009
wwang: 4/10/2009
ckniffin: 3/30/2009
wwang: 2/20/2009
ckniffin: 2/11/2009
carol: 2/9/2009
carol: 2/6/2009
ckniffin: 1/30/2009
wwang: 1/27/2009
ckniffin: 1/22/2009
mgross: 12/2/2008
terry: 11/24/2008
alopez: 6/26/2008
terry: 6/5/2008
wwang: 5/22/2008
ckniffin: 5/20/2008
wwang: 5/1/2008
ckniffin: 4/28/2008
ckniffin: 2/5/2008
wwang: 1/28/2008
ckniffin: 1/8/2008
terry: 12/17/2007
alopez: 12/7/2007
terry: 11/28/2007
ckniffin: 9/10/2007
carol: 9/6/2007
ckniffin: 8/27/2007
mgross: 7/9/2007
terry: 7/6/2007
alopez: 6/27/2007
terry: 6/20/2007
wwang: 5/30/2007
terry: 5/22/2007
alopez: 2/23/2007
terry: 2/21/2007
alopez: 2/8/2007
terry: 2/6/2007
mgross: 12/18/2006
wwang: 10/20/2006
terry: 10/18/2006
wwang: 10/16/2006
alopez: 9/20/2006
wwang: 7/6/2006
terry: 6/23/2006
alopez: 9/30/2005
alopez: 9/20/2005
terry: 9/19/2005
wwang: 7/28/2005
terry: 7/25/2005
mgross: 7/14/2005
mgross: 4/14/2005
terry: 3/16/2005
alopez: 3/3/2005
mgross: 2/11/2005
alopez: 1/18/2005
terry: 1/14/2005
tkritzer: 12/17/2004
mgross: 9/9/2004
terry: 4/1/2004
terry: 3/18/2004
carol: 3/17/2004
tkritzer: 2/6/2004
cwells: 2/3/2004
tkritzer: 1/13/2004
tkritzer: 11/13/2003
terry: 11/11/2003
carol: 11/7/2003
cwells: 10/31/2003
terry: 10/27/2003
carol: 10/24/2003
cwells: 10/24/2003
terry: 10/23/2003
tkritzer: 10/3/2003
tkritzer: 10/1/2003
carol: 10/1/2003
carol: 9/12/2003
cwells: 9/12/2003
terry: 8/27/2003
carol: 6/26/2003
cwells: 6/9/2003
terry: 6/4/2003
carol: 4/1/2003
tkritzer: 3/25/2003
terry: 3/12/2003
ckniffin: 3/11/2003
cwells: 2/20/2003
ckniffin: 1/24/2003
terry: 1/6/2003
mgross: 11/26/2002
cwells: 11/25/2002
terry: 11/20/2002
alopez: 10/1/2002
alopez: 9/27/2002
mgross: 9/17/2002
carol: 9/17/2002
tkritzer: 9/6/2002
tkritzer: 9/4/2002
terry: 8/29/2002
carol: 8/5/2002
terry: 8/2/2002
cwells: 7/23/2002
terry: 7/1/2002
terry: 6/26/2002
cwells: 6/24/2002
terry: 6/12/2002
cwells: 5/2/2002
cwells: 4/29/2002
alopez: 4/25/2002
cwells: 4/18/2002
terry: 4/12/2002
mgross: 4/8/2002
alopez: 3/21/2002
alopez: 3/12/2002
alopez: 2/12/2002
terry: 2/12/2002
terry: 2/11/2002
alopez: 1/16/2002
cwells: 11/29/2001
cwells: 11/19/2001
carol: 11/13/2001
mcapotos: 10/24/2001
terry: 10/9/2001
carol: 9/10/2001
cwells: 8/10/2001
cwells: 8/7/2001
terry: 8/3/2001
mgross: 6/27/2001
terry: 6/27/2001
terry: 6/25/2001
cwells: 6/20/2001
cwells: 5/1/2001
cwells: 4/24/2001
mcapotos: 3/27/2001
mcapotos: 3/26/2001
mcapotos: 3/23/2001
terry: 3/16/2001
terry: 3/15/2001
carol: 3/12/2001
mgross: 3/9/2001
cwells: 3/8/2001
terry: 3/8/2001
terry: 3/2/2001
mcapotos: 1/22/2001
joanna: 1/17/2001
carol: 1/2/2001
carol: 12/19/2000
terry: 12/19/2000
mgross: 11/27/2000
mgross: 11/16/2000
mgross: 11/14/2000
alopez: 10/19/2000
mcapotos: 10/3/2000
carol: 10/3/2000
mcapotos: 9/27/2000
mcapotos: 9/20/2000
terry: 9/11/2000
alopez: 8/18/2000
mgross: 8/8/2000
carol: 8/3/2000
alopez: 8/1/2000
mcapotos: 8/1/2000
mcapotos: 7/28/2000
terry: 7/26/2000
alopez: 7/24/2000
terry: 7/20/2000
alopez: 7/12/2000
alopez: 5/31/2000
alopez: 4/18/2000
alopez: 3/22/2000
mgross: 3/15/2000
terry: 2/18/2000
mgross: 2/15/2000
terry: 1/11/2000
mgross: 1/7/2000
terry: 12/2/1999
mgross: 11/19/1999
alopez: 11/15/1999
carol: 11/9/1999
terry: 11/1/1999
alopez: 10/26/1999
terry: 9/24/1999
carol: 9/15/1999
carol: 9/14/1999
carol: 7/16/1999
carol: 7/14/1999
mgross: 6/24/1999
mgross: 6/4/1999
mgross: 5/25/1999
mgross: 5/21/1999
alopez: 5/20/1999
terry: 5/17/1999
alopez: 3/5/1999
terry: 3/2/1999
alopez: 2/17/1999
carol: 12/11/1998
terry: 12/7/1998
carol: 11/10/1998
dkim: 11/6/1998
terry: 10/29/1998
carol: 10/27/1998
terry: 10/27/1998
terry: 10/23/1998
dkim: 10/12/1998
carol: 10/6/1998
terry: 10/1/1998
alopez: 8/21/1998
carol: 8/20/1998
terry: 8/17/1998
dholmes: 7/22/1998
terry: 7/20/1998
terry: 7/16/1998
terry: 7/9/1998
alopez: 6/29/1998
carol: 6/25/1998
terry: 6/23/1998
terry: 6/17/1998
terry: 6/16/1998
terry: 6/3/1998
terry: 5/22/1998
alopez: 5/14/1998
terry: 5/8/1998
mark: 3/2/1998
terry: 2/17/1998
mark: 2/11/1998
terry: 2/4/1998
mark: 1/10/1998
terry: 12/18/1997
alopez: 11/17/1997
jenny: 10/28/1997
terry: 10/28/1997
alopez: 8/8/1997
mark: 7/16/1997
alopez: 7/10/1997
alopez: 7/8/1997
mark: 7/8/1997
alopez: 7/3/1997
mark: 7/2/1997
jenny: 6/23/1997
mark: 6/18/1997
terry: 6/16/1997
terry: 6/5/1997
mark: 6/2/1997
terry: 6/2/1997
mark: 5/16/1997
mark: 4/21/1997
jenny: 4/15/1997
terry: 4/9/1997
jenny: 4/8/1997
terry: 4/4/1997
mark: 3/3/1997
terry: 1/17/1997
mark: 12/20/1996
terry: 12/16/1996
terry: 11/20/1996
jamie: 11/20/1996
jamie: 11/8/1996
mark: 11/7/1996
mark: 10/24/1996
mark: 10/5/1996
mark: 10/4/1996
mark: 9/18/1996
mark: 9/10/1996
terry: 9/3/1996
terry: 8/22/1996
mark: 8/10/1996
terry: 8/9/1996
terry: 8/5/1996
carol: 7/15/1996
terry: 7/12/1996
mark: 4/27/1996
mark: 4/25/1996
terry: 4/22/1996
mark: 4/19/1996
terry: 4/15/1996
mark: 3/6/1996
terry: 3/4/1996
mark: 2/29/1996
terry: 2/26/1996
mark: 2/23/1996
terry: 2/19/1996
mark: 2/16/1996
mark: 2/13/1996
mark: 1/25/1996
terry: 1/23/1996
mark: 12/15/1995
terry: 12/13/1995
mark: 12/7/1995
terry: 12/7/1995
mark: 11/17/1995
terry: 11/16/1995
jason: 6/7/1994
mimadm: 4/12/1994
pfoster: 3/25/1994
warfield: 3/23/1994

606301	TITLE *606301 PROTOCADHERIN-GAMMA, SUBFAMILY B, MEMBER 3; PCDHGB3
;;PCDH-GAMMA-B3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cadherins are calcium-dependent cell-cell adhesion molecules, and
protocadherins constitute a subfamily of nonclassic cadherins. PCDHGB3
is 1 of 22 tandemly arranged genes within the PCDHG gene cluster
(604968) on chromosome 5q31. The 22 PCDHG genes function as 'variable'
exons that are individually spliced to a downstream constant region to
form distinct PCDHG transcripts. The variable PCDHG exons encode the
extracellular and transmembrane domains of the protocadherin protein,
and the common region encodes the intracellular domain (Wu et al.,
2001). For further information on the PCDHG genes, see 604968.

CLONING

By PCR of a brain cDNA library, Wu and Maniatis (1999) cloned
full-length PCDHGB3.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Wu et al. (2001) mapped the PCDHGB3 gene
to chromosome 5q31, between the PCDHGA5 gene (606292) and the PCDHGA6
gene (606293). They localized the mouse PCDHG genes to chromosome 18c.

REFERENCE 1. Wu, Q.; Maniatis, T.: A striking organization of a large family
of human neural cadherin-like cell adhesion genes. Cell 97: 779-790,
1999.

2. Wu, Q.; Zhang, T.; Cheng, J.-F.; Kim, Y.; Grimwood, J.; Schmutz,
J.; Dickson, M.; Noonan, J. P.; Zhang, M. Q.; Myers, R. M.; Maniatis,
T.: Comparative DNA sequence analysis of mouse and human protocadherin
gene clusters. Genome Res. 11: 389-404, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/15/2007

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 9/27/2001

EDITED alopez: 04/05/2012
alopez: 4/5/2012
mgross: 10/15/2007
mgross: 9/27/2001

615317	TITLE *615317 IRON-SULFUR CLUSTER ASSEMBLY 2, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; ISCA2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ISCA2, like ISCA1 (611006) and IBA57 (615316), is part of the
iron-sulfur cluster (ISC) assembly machinery in mitochondria. These 3
proteins function late in the biosynthetic pathway of mitochondrial
4Fe-4S proteins (Sheftel et al., 2012).

CLONING

Using cell fractionation, immunoblot analysis, and confocal microscopy,
Sheftel et al. (2012) demonstrated mitochondrial localization of human
ISCA2.

MAPPING

Gross (2013) mapped the ISCA2 gene to chromosome 14q24.3 based on an
alignment of the ISCA2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC032893) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

Sheftel et al. (2012) used RNA interference to deplete HeLa cells of
ISCA1, ISCA2, and IBA57 and observed swollen mitochondria devoid of
cristae membranes. Depletion of these proteins also resulted in
diminished activities of mitochondrial 4Fe-4S proteins, including
aconitase (ACO2; 100850), respiratory complex I (see 602985), and lipoic
acid synthase (LIAS; 607031). In contrast, cellular heme content and
mitochondrial 2Fe-2S ferrochelatase (FECH; 612386) were unaffected.
Sheftel et al. (2012) proposed that ISCA1, ISCA2, and IBA57 are
specifically involved in the maturation of mitochondrial 4Fe-4S proteins
functioning late in the ISC assembly pathway.

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  7/18/2013.

2. Sheftel, A. D.; Wilbrecht, C.; Stehling, O.; Niggemeyer, B.; Elsasser,
H.-P.; Muhlenhoff, U.; Lill, R.: The human mitochondrial ISCA1, ISCA2,
and IBA57 proteins are required for [4Fe-4S] protein maturation. Molec.
Biol. Cell 23: 1157-1166, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 07/18/2013

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/18/2013

EDITED mgross: 07/18/2013
mgross: 7/18/2013

609436	TITLE *609436 FIBROBLAST GROWTH FACTOR 21; FGF21
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Nishimura et al. (2000) cloned mouse Fgf21 from an embryo cDNA library.
The deduced 210-amino acid protein contains an N-terminal signal
sequence and 1 of 2 cysteines conserved in FGF proteins. PCR and
Northern blot analyses of adult mouse tissues detected high expression
of Fgf21 in liver and weaker expression in thymus, with no expression in
other tissues examined. By searching a database for sequences similar to
mouse Fgf21, followed by PCR of a fetal brain cDNA library, Nishimura et
al. (2000) cloned human FGF21. The deduced 209-amino acid protein shares
about 75% identity with mouse Fgf21 and about 35% identity with human
FGF19 (603891).

Using RT-PCR, Zhang et al. (2008) found that Fgf21 was expressed in
several types of adipose tissue in mice, including subcutaneous and
epididymal fat pads and brown adipose tissue. The level of Fgf21
expression in adipose tissue was comparable to that in liver. Real-time
RT-PCR detected a progressive increase in FGF21 expression with
differentiation of human and mouse adipocytes in culture. ELISA detected
increased FGF21 secretion into the culture medium with differentiation
of human adipocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

Kharitonenkov et al. (2005) found that human recombinant FGF21
stimulated glucose incorporation in differentiated mouse adipocytes and
human primary adipocytes, but not in other cell types tested. The effect
was independent of insulin and additive to the activity of insulin upon
cotreatment. FGF21 treatment of mouse adipocytes was associated with
phosphorylation of Frs2 (607743), a docking protein linking FGF
receptors (see FGFR1; 136350) to the Ras (190020)/MAP kinase (see MAPK1;
176948) pathway. Following FGF21 injection in ob/ob mice (see 164160),
there was an increase in Glut1 (SLC2A1; 138140) mRNA in white adipose
tissue, but not in other tissues. FGF21 injection in ob/ob and db/db
(see 601007) mice and in Zucker diabetic fatty rats normalized fed blood
glucose and plasma triglyceride levels in a dose-dependent manner. FGF21
injection also improved insulin sensitivity and glucose clearance, with
no evidence of hypoglycemic effects. FGF21-transgenic mice were lean,
had lower fasted glucose levels, were resistant to diet-induced obesity,
and did not develop tumors or show evidence of other tissue hyperplasia
up to 10 months of age. Kharitonenkov et al. (2005) concluded that FGF21
is a metabolic factor with therapeutic characteristics appropriate for
an effective treatment of diabetes.

Ogawa et al. (2007) noted that FGF23 (605380) requires Klotho (KL;
604824) to bind FGFRs and activate FGF signaling in various cell types.
Using immunoblot analysis, they found that human embryonic kidney cells
overexpressing beta-Klotho (KLB; 611135), but not those overexpressing
KL, responded to FGF21. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis showed that FGF21
required KLB to bind FGFR1c and FGFR4 (134935). FGF21 stimulated glucose
uptake in adipocytes, which Ogawa et al. (2007) found expressed KLB, but
not in preadipocytes, which did not express KLB. Small interfering
RNA-mediated knockdown of KLB in adipocytes abolished the effect of
FGF21 on glucose uptake. Mice injected with Fgf21 displayed Erk1 (MAPK3;
601795)/Erk2 (MAPK1) phosphorylation in white adipose tissue, which
expressed Klb, but not in kidney or skeletal muscle, which did not
express Klb. Phosphorylation in kidney, which expressed Kl, occurred
only in response to Fgf23. Ogawa et al. (2007) concluded that KLB is an
essential cofactor for FGF21 activity.

Zhang et al. (2008) found that FGF21 levels were significantly elevated
in 98 overweight and 29 obese Chinese individuals compared with 105 lean
controls. In 29 healthy premenopausal Chinese women, FGF21 mRNA
expression in subcutaneous fat correlated well with circulating FGF21
protein concentration. Expression of Fgf21 was elevated in both liver
and adipose tissue of db/db obese mice (see LEPR; 601007) compared with
their lean littermates. After adjusting for age and body mass index,
serum FGF21 in humans correlated positively with adiposity, fasting
insulin, and triglycerides, but negatively with HDL cholesterol.
Logistic regression analysis demonstrated an independent association
between serum FGF21 and metabolic syndrome (see 605552). Zhang et al.
(2008) concluded that elevated serum FGF21 may be an independent risk
factor for metabolic syndrome, and they hypothesized that the
paradoxical increase of serum FGF21 in obese individuals may be
explained by a compensatory response or resistance to FGF21.

Galman et al. (2008) detected widely variable serum FGF21 levels,
ranging from 21 to 5,300 pg/ml, in 76 healthy, normal-weight Swedish
volunteers. FGF21 levels did not correlate with body mass index, age,
blood glucose, serum total LDL or HDL cholesterol, triglycerides, whole
body cholesterol synthesis, or bile acid synthesis. FGF21 levels did not
vary with feeding or fasting in 5 healthy individuals over a 25.5-hour
period and did not increase in 17 children on a ketogenic diet regimen.
In 5 women with rheumatoid arthritis (180300), serum FGF21 levels
increased following a 7-day fast. Serum FGF21 levels varied widely in 19
patients with primary hyperglyceridemia, but the mean level in these
individuals was about twice that in healthy individuals. Treatment of
HTG patients with the PPAR-alpha (PPARA; 170998) agonist fenofibrate
lowered serum triglycerides and increased serum FGF21 levels. Galman et
al. (2008) noted that their results differ considerably from those
obtained with mice, and they concluded that the physiologic role of
FGF21 may differ between mice and humans.

Hondares et al. (2010) showed that postnatal feeding in newborn mice
induced hepatic Fgf21 mRNA and increased plasma Fgf21 protein levels.
After weaning, Fgf21 mRNA levels decreased in mice fed the standard
high-carbohydrate chow diet, but elevated Fgf21 mRNA was maintained in
mice fed a high-fat diet. In contrast with fasted adults, fasted
neonates exhibited reduced Fgf21 expression. Changes in Fgf21 expression
due to suckling or nutritional manipulations were associated with
changes in circulating free fatty acid and ketone body levels. Injection
of Fgf21 into fasting neonates enhanced expression of genes involved in
mitochondrial oxidation, glucose transport, and brown fat thermogenic
activation, with increased body temperature in the pups. Induction of
Fgf21 and the associated metabolic changes were completely suppressed in
Ppara-null pups. In differentiated mouse brown adipocytes in culture,
Fgf21 treatment increased the expression of thermogenic genes, caused
higher total and uncoupled respiration, and enhanced glucose oxidation.
Hondares et al. (2010) concluded that FGF21 activates brown fat
thermogenesis during fetal-to-neonatal transition.

Dutchak et al. (2012) reported that FGF21 is an inducible, fed-state
autocrine factor in adipose tissue that functions in a feed-forward loop
to regulate the activity of peroxisome proliferator-activator
receptor-gamma (PPAR-gamma; 601487). FGF21 knockout (KO) mice displayed
defects in PPAR-gamma signaling including decreased body fat and
attenuation of PPAR-gamma-dependent gene expression. Moreover, FGF21-KO
mice were refractory to both the beneficial insulin-sensitizing effects
and the detrimental weight gain and edema side effects of the PPAR-gamma
agonist rosiglitazone. This loss of function in FGF21-KO mice was
coincident with a marked increase in the sumoylation of PPAR-gamma,
which reduces its transcriptional activity. Adding back FGF21 prevented
sumoylation and restored PPAR-gamma activity. Dutchak et al. (2012)
concluded that FGF21 is a key mediator of the physiologic and
pharmacologic actions of PPAR-gamma.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Nishimura et al. (2000) identified the
FGF21 gene within the 5-prime flanking region of the FUT1 gene (211100)
on chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Dutchak, P. A.; Katafuchi, T.; Bookout, A. L.; Choi, J. H.; Yu,
R. T.; Mangelsdorf, D. J.; Kliewer, S. A.: Fibroblast growth factor-21
regulates PPAR-gamma activity and the antidiabetic actions of thiazolidinediones. Cell 148:
556-567, 2012.

2. Galman, C.; Lundasen, T.; Kharitonenkov, A.; Bina, H. A.; Eriksson,
M.; Hafstrom, I.; Dahlin, M.; Amark, P.; Angelin, B.; Rudling, M.
: The circulating metabolic regulator FGF21 is induced by prolonged
fasting and PPAR-alpha activation in man. Cell Metab. 8: 169-174,
2008.

3. Hondares, E.; Rosell, M.; Gonzalez, F. J.; Giralt, M.; Igelsias,
R.; Villarroya, F.: Hepatic FGF21 expression is induced at birth
via PPAR-alpha in response to milk intake and contributes to thermogenic
activation of neonatal brown fat. Cell Metab. 11: 206-212, 2010.

4. Kharitonenkov, A.; Shiyanova, T. L.; Koester, A.; Ford, A. M.;
Micanovic, R.; Galbreath, E. J.; Sandusky, G. E.; Hammond, L. J.;
Moyers, J. S.; Owens, R. A.; Gromada, J.; Brozinick, J. T.; Hawkins,
E. D.; Wroblewski, V. J.; Li, D.-S.; Mehrbod, F.; Jaskunas, S. R.;
Shanafelt, A. B.: FGF-21 as a novel metabolic regulator. J. Clin.
Invest. 115: 1627-1635, 2005.

5. Nishimura, T.; Nakatake, Y.; Konishi, M.; Itoh, N.: Identification
of a novel FGF, FGF-21, preferentially expressed in the liver. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1492: 203-206, 2000.

6. Ogawa, Y.; Kurosu, H.; Yamamoto, M.; Nandi, A.; Rosenblatt, K.
P.; Goetz, R.; Eliseenkova, A. V.; Mohammadi, M.; Kuro-o, M.: Beta-Klotho
is required for metabolic activity of fibroblast growth factor 21. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 7432-7437, 2007.

7. Zhang, X.; Yeung, D. C. Y.; Karpisek, M.; Stejskal, D.; Zhou, Z.-G.;
Liu, F.; Wong, R. L. C.; Chow, W.-S.; Tso, A. W. K.; Lam, K. S. L.;
Xu, A.: Serum FGF21 levels are increased in obesity and are independently
associated with the metabolic syndrome in humans. Diabetes 57: 1246-1253,
2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/30/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/2/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/26/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/23/2005

EDITED alopez: 06/06/2012
terry: 5/30/2012
mgross: 12/3/2010
terry: 12/2/2010
mgross: 6/26/2007
mgross: 6/27/2005
mgross: 6/23/2005

194542	TITLE *194542 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 44; ZNF44
;;KOX7
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Bray et al. (1991) screened a placental genomic library at moderate
stringency with a degenerate oligodeoxynucleotide probe designed to
hybridize to the his/cys (H/C) link region between adjoining zinc
fingers. Genomic clones were cross-hybridized with a set of 30 zinc
finger-encoding cDNAs (KOX1-KOX30) isolated from a human T-cell cDNA
library. KOX7 matched one of the genomic clones.

MAPPING

Bray et al. (1991) mapped the ZNF44 gene to chromosome 16p11 by
chromosomal in situ suppression hybridization with fluorescent probe
detection. However, Gross (2011) mapped the ZNF44 gene to chromosome
19p13.2 based on an alignment of the ZNF44 sequence (GenBank GENBANK
BC136502) with the genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Bray, P.; Lichter, P.; Thiesen, H.-J.; Ward, D. C.; Dawid, I. B.
: Characterization and mapping of human genes encoding zinc finger
proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 9563-9567, 1991.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/7/2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 02/07/2011

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/4/1991

EDITED mgross: 02/07/2011
alopez: 7/7/2010
dkim: 6/26/1998
mark: 5/14/1996
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 12/4/1991

607705	TITLE *607705 PROTEASOME ACTIVATOR SUBUNIT 4; PSME4
;;PROTEASOME ACTIVATOR, 200-KD; PA200;;
KIAA0077
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated myeloid cell line
cDNA library, Nomura et al. (1994) cloned a partial PSME4 cDNA, which
they designated KIAA0077. Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous
expression, with highest expression in skeletal muscle and testis, and
lowest expression in colon and peripheral blood leukocytes.

Ustrell et al. (2002) cloned full-length mouse and human PSME4, which
they designated PA200. The deduced 1,843-amino acid proteins share over
90% sequence identity. PA200 contains a bipartite nuclear targeting
sequence and several potential phosphorylation sites, many of which are
sites for the DNA repair kinases ATM (607585) and PRKDC (600899).
Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis of bovine testis PA200 resolved the
200-kD band into several isoelectric variants that were unaffected by
phosphatase treatment. Western blot analysis of mouse tissues detected 3
species: a 200-kD species that was most abundant in testis; a 60-kD
species that was most prominent in brain but also abundant in liver and
lung; and a 160-kD species that was abundant in other organs.

GENE FUNCTION

Ustrell et al. (2002) found that PA200 purified from bovine testis
activated proteasomal hydrolysis of peptides, but not proteins. It
particularly activated the peptidylglutamyl peptidase activity, and
activation was ATP-independent. Proteasome activation was also
accompanied by the formation of a PA200-proteasome complex in HeLa
cells. Following gamma irradiation, but not UV irradiation or peroxide
treatment, the uniform nuclear distribution of endogenous PA200 in HeLa
cells reorganized into punctate nuclear foci. Ustrell et al. (2002)
hypothesized that PA200 is involved in DNA repair by recruiting
proteasomes to double-strand breaks.

MAPPING

By analysis of a panel of human/rodent hybrid cell lines, Nomura et al.
(1994) mapped the PSME4 gene to chromosome 2.

REFERENCE 1. Nomura, N.; Nagase, T.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Sato,
S.; Seki, N.; Kawarabayasi, Y.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. II. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0041-KIAA0080) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 1: 223-229, 1994.

2. Ustrell, V.; Hoffman, L.; Pratt, G.; Rechsteiner, M.: PA200, a
nuclear proteasome activator involved in DNA repair. EMBO J. 21:
3516-3525, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/22/2003

EDITED carol: 04/23/2003
carol: 4/23/2003

610684	TITLE *610684 C-TERMINAL DOMAIN NUCLEAR ENVELOPE PHOSPHATASE 1; CTDNEP1
;;CTD NUCLEAR ENVELOPE PHOSPHATASE 1;;
DULLARD, XENOPUS, HOMOLOG OF; DULLARD
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Satow et al. (2002) cloned Xenopus Dullard and, by database analysis,
identified its human homolog. The deduced 261-amino acid human protein
shares 92% identity with Xenopus Dullard, and both have the conserved
C-terminal domain of NLIIF (CTDSP1; 605323). In Xenopus embryos, Dullard
mRNA localized to the animal hemisphere before the gastrula stage. It
was restricted to the neural region as gastrulation proceeded and
subsequently localized to the neural tissues, branchial arches, and
pronephroi at the tail-bud stages.

GENE FUNCTION

By translational knockdown, Satow et al. (2002) found that Dullard was
involved in neural development in Xenopus embryos. Overexpression of
Dullard led to apoptosis in early Xenopus development.

Satow et al. (2006) found that Dullard negatively regulated BMP (see
BMP1; 112264) signaling by promoting ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal
degradation of BMP receptors (see BMPR2; 600799) in Xenopus. Dullard
phosphatase activity was essential for degradation of BMP receptors and
neural induction in Xenopus.

MAPPING

Hartz (2007) mapped the CTDNEP1 (DULLARD) gene to chromosome 17p13.1
based on an alignment of the CTDNEP1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AJ011916)
with the genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/4/2007.

2. Satow, R.; Chan, T.; Asashima, M.: Molecular cloning and characterization
of dullard: a novel gene required for neural development. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 295: 85-91, 2002.

3. Satow, R.; Kurisaki, A.; Chan, T.; Hamazaki, T. S.; Asashima, M.
: Dullard promotes degradation and dephosphorylation of BMP receptors
and is required for neural induction. Dev. Cell 11: 763-774, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/4/2007

EDITED alopez: 09/21/2012
mgross: 1/4/2007

604911	TITLE *604911 CCR4-NOT TRANSCRIPTION COMPLEX, SUBUNIT 4; CNOT4
;;NEGATIVE REGULATOR OF TRANSCRIPTION 4, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;
NOT4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CNOT4 is a subunit of the multifunctional CCR4 (see 608951)/NOT complex
implicated in transcriptional regulation and RNA deadenylation. CNOT4
has both positive and negative roles in transcriptional regulation and a
positive role in transcriptional elongation (Mersman et al., 2009).

CLONING

The yeast CCR4/NOT protein complex is a global regulator of RNA
polymerase II transcription. By searching sequence databases, Albert et
al. (2000) identified human ESTs encoding homologs of yeast CCR4/NOT
components, including CNOT4, which they called NOT4. The deduced human
protein contains 433 amino acid and shares 44% identity with the yeast
protein in the first 230 amino acids. In contrast, the C-terminal
regions of human and yeast NOT4 are much less conserved. Within the
highly conserved N-terminal domain are 2 putative zinc fingers of the
C2C2 type and an RNA recognition motif. Human NOT4 contains a putative
C-terminal bipartite nuclear localization signal, and several potential
phosphorylation sites are located proximal to this. Albert et al. (2000)
noted that the cDNA sequences of 2 isoforms of human NOT4 had been
deposited in GenBank. These deduced isoforms contain 642 amino acids
(GenBank GENBANK U71267) and 575 amino acids (GenBank GENBANK U71268).
The sequences of the 3 NOT4 isoforms are identical until residue 357 and
then differ in their C-terminal parts.

GENE FUNCTION

Using the yeast 2-hybrid assay, Albert et al. (2000) demonstrated that
recombinant human NOT4 could interact with yeast Not1 and an
N-terminally truncated human NOT1 protein (604917); it did not
significantly interact with human NOT3 (604910) or yeast Ccr4. Albert et
al. (2000) found that recombinant human NOT4 could complement a Not4
mutation in yeast.

Mersman et al. (2009) showed that yeast Not4 functioned as an E3
ubiquitin ligase and controlled the level of Jhd2, a histone H3 (see
602810) lys4 demethylase, by polyubiquitin-mediated protein degradation.
Purified human NOT4 could polyubiquitinate the first 700 amino acids of
JARID1C (KDM5C; 314690), the human Jhd2 ortholog, in vitro in the
presence of UBE1 (314370) and UBCH5A (UBE2D1; 602961).

REFERENCE 1. Albert, T. K.; Lemaire, M.; van Berkum, N. L.; Gentz, R.; Collart,
M. A.; Timmers, H. T. M.: Isolation and characterization of human
orthologs of yeast CCR4-NOT complex subunits. Nucleic Acids Res. 28:
809-817, 2000.

2. Mersman, D. P.; Du, H.-N.; Fingerman, I. M.; South, P. F.; Briggs,
S. D.: Polyubiquitination of the demethylase Jhd2 controls histone
methylation and gene expression. Genes Dev. 23: 951-962, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/21/2009

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 5/2/2000

EDITED mgross: 02/05/2013
mgross: 10/2/2009
terry: 9/21/2009
mgross: 9/28/2004
carol: 11/6/2000
mcapotos: 5/12/2000
mcapotos: 5/11/2000
psherman: 5/9/2000

109280	TITLE *109280 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 4 (ANION EXCHANGER), MEMBER 2; SLC4A2
;;ANION EXCHANGER, NONERYTHROID; AE2;;
ERYTHROCYTE MEMBRANE PROTEIN BAND 3-LIKE 1; EPB3L1;;
BAND 3-LIKE PROTEIN; BND3L;;
NONERYTHROID BAND 3; NBND3;;
HKB3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Demuth et al. (1986) isolated a cDNA clone, designated pHKB3, encoding a
human erythrocyte surface protein band 3-like gene product. Peptide
mapping shows substantial sequence homology between the erythrocyte band
3 protein (109270) and a band 3-like protein found in leukocytes.
Palumbo et al. (1986) described the partial sequence of a 2.7-kb human
cDNA clone encoding a band 3-related protein in nonerythroid cells.
Comparison of the predicted amino acid sequence for this cDNA with the
amino acid sequences of mouse and human erythroid band 3 proteins
confirmed that the human clone is related to but distinct from erythroid
band 3. Palumbo et al. (1986) symbolized the gene as HKB3, in part after
the name of the human cell line studied.

Tanner (1993) referred to this nonerythroid anion exchanger as AE2. The
ability of AE2 to mediate anion transport has been confirmed. Northern
blotting studies showed that the AE2 gene is transcribed in a wide
variety of tissues. In the mouse, Lindsey et al. (1990) found that AE2
is expressed only in choroid plexus, the site of cerebrospinal fluid
production. Kudrycki et al. (1990) found that, in the rat, AE2 is
particularly abundant in the stomach and portions of the
gastrointestinal tract.

GENE STRUCTURE

Medina et al. (1997) determined that the AE2 gene spans approximately 17
kb and consists of 23 exons.

MAPPING

Using somatic cell genetics and in situ hybridization, Palumbo et al.
(1986) mapped the HKB3 gene to 7q35-q36. Showe et al. (1993) identified
an MboI RFLP in the EPB3L1 gene. White et al. (1994) demonstrated that
the murine AE2 gene is located on chromosome 5. This result was obtained
by analysis of recombinant inbred lines and by interspecific backcross
analysis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Medina et al. (2003) disrupted the mouse Ae2 gene in a manner that
prevented the expression of 3 Ae2 isoforms normally found in testis.
Male Ae2 -/- mice, but not female Ae2 -/- mice, were infertile.
Histopathologic analysis of mutant testis showed an interruption in
spermiogenesis, with only a few late spermatids and a complete absence
of spermatozoa in the seminiferous tubules. The number of apoptotic
bodies was increased in the seminiferous tubules and in the epididymis,
which also showed squamous metaplasia of the epididymal epithelium.

REFERENCE 1. Demuth, D. R.; Showe, L. C.; Ballantine, M.; Palumbo, A.; Fraser,
P. J.; Cioe, L.; Rovera, G.; Curtis, P. J.: Cloning and structural
characterization of a human non-erythroid band 3-like protein. EMBO
J. 5: 1205-1214, 1986.

2. Kudrycki, K. E.; Newman, P. R.; Schull, G. E.: cDNA cloning and
tissue distribution of mRNAs for two proteins that are related to
the band 3 chloride-bicarbonate exchanger. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 462-471,
1990.

3. Lindsey, A. E.; Schneider, K.; Simmons, D. M.; Baron, R.; Lee,
B. S.; Kopito, R. R.: Functional expression and subcellular localization
of an anion exchanger cloned from choroid plexus. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 87: 5278-5282, 1990.

4. Medina, J. F.; Acin, A.; Prieto, J.: Molecular cloning and characterization
of the human AE2 anion exchanger (SLC4A2) gene. Genomics 39: 74-85,
1997. Note: Erratum: Genomics 46: 535 only, 1997.

5. Medina, J. F.; Recalde, S.; Prieto, J.; Lecanda, J.; Saez, E.;
Funk, C. D.; Vecino, P.; van Roon, M. A.; Ottenhoff, R.; Bosma, P.
J.; Bakker, C. T.; Oude Elferink, R. P. J.: Anion exchanger 2 is
essential for spermiogenesis in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100:
15847-15852, 2003.

6. Palumbo, A. P.; Isobe, M.; Huebner, K.; Shane, S.; Rovera, G.;
Demuth, D.; Curtis, P. J.; Ballantine, M.; Croce, C. M.; Showe, L.
C.: Chromosomal localization of a human band 3-like gene to region
7q35-7q36. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 39: 307-316, 1986.

7. Showe, M. K.; Williams, D.; Showe, L. C.: An MboI RFLP in the
human erythrocyte surface protein band 3-like 1 gene (EPB3L1) on chromosome
7q35-7q36. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 337 only, 1993.

8. Tanner, M. J. A.: Molecular and cellular biology of the erythrocyte
anion exchanger (AE1). Seminars Hemat. 30: 34-57, 1993.

9. White, R. A.; Geissler, E. N.; Adkison, L. R.; Dowler, L. L.; Alper,
S. L.; Lux, S. E.: Chromosomal location of the murine anion exchanger
genes encoding AE2 and AE3. Mammalian Genome 5: 827-829, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/6/2004
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 2/9/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/7/1987

EDITED terry: 07/06/2012
mgross: 7/13/2004
terry: 7/6/2004
carol: 3/8/2002
terry: 3/8/2002
alopez: 2/9/1998
joanna: 1/22/1998
carol: 2/17/1995
carol: 6/28/1993
carol: 4/26/1993
carol: 2/19/1993
carol: 2/18/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992

300525	TITLE *300525 PYRIMIDINERGIC RECEPTOR P2Y, G PROTEIN-COUPLED, 8; P2RY8
;;P2Y8
P2RY8/CRLF2 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

P2RY8 is a member of the purine nucleotide G protein-coupled receptor
gene family and is located in the pseudoautosomal region of the X
chromosome (Cantagrel et al., 2004).

CLONING

While investigating a pericentric inversion on the X chromosome,
inv(X)(p22.3)(q13.2), segregating in a family with mental retardation,
Cantagrel et al. (2004) identified 2 genes disrupted by the breakpoint:
P2RY8 and KIAA2022 (300524). P2RY8 encodes a deduced 359-amino acid
protein. Using RT-PCR and Northern blot analysis, Cantagrel et al.
(2004) found that P2RY8 is highly expressed in lymphocytes. Weaker
expression was seen in heart, kidney, and lung.

GENE FUNCTION

Adrian et al. (2000) analyzed the expression of several purinergic
receptors during differentiation in a promyelocytic leukemia cell line.
Granulocytic differentiation was induced by dimethylsulfoxide, and a
monocytic/macrophage phenotype was induced by phorbol esters. Moderate
P2Y8 expression was detected in undifferentiated cells, and expression
was completely downregulated during granulocyte differentiation. P2Y8
transcription decreased until 24 hours of monocytic differentiation,
then began to return to higher levels. P2Y8 expression was barely
detectable in normal blood leukocytes.

- P2RY8/CRLF2 FUSION GENE

Mullighan et al. (2009) reported a recurring interstitial deletion of
pseudoautosomal region 1 of chromosomes X and Y in B-progenitor ALL
(613035) that juxtaposes the first, noncoding exon of P2RY8 with the
coding region of CRLF2 (300357). They identified the P2RY8/CRLF2 fusion
in 7% of individuals with B-progenitor ALL and 53% of individuals with
ALL associated with Down syndrome. CRLF2 alteration was associated with
activating JAK mutations, and expression of human P2RY8/CRLF2 together
with mutated mouse Jak2 (147796) resulted in constitutive JAK-STAT
activation and cytokine-independent growth of Ba/F3 cells overexpressing
IL7 receptor-alpha (IL7R; 146661). Mullighan et al. (2009) concluded
that rearrangement of CRLF2 and JAK mutations together contribute to
leukemogenesis in B-progenitor ALL.

GENE STRUCTURE

Cantagrel et al. (2004) determined that the P2RY8 gene contains 2 exons
separated by a 70-kb intron.

MAPPING

Cantagrel et al. (2004) identified the P2RY8 gene at the Xp22.3
breakpoint of a pericentric inversion of the X chromosome.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In the family with the pericentric inversion inv(X)(q13;p22) studied by
Cantagrel et al. (2004), 2 males related as first cousins once removed
had severe mental retardation, whereas the carrier females who
represented the genealogic connection between the 2 affected males were
phenotypically unaffected. RT-PCR showed that the KIAA2022 transcript
was not expressed in the patients' cells, whereas the P2RY8 transcript
was expressed; the amount of P2RY8 was similar in the cells of the
affected patients and a tested carrier female. Because
haploinsufficiency of the P2RY8 gene in carrier mothers did not have a
phenotypic consequence, Cantagrel et al. (2004) concluded that the
severe mental retardation of the affected males was due to the absence
of the KIAA2022 gene product. However, screening of 20 probands from
X-linked mental retardation families revealed no mutation in the
KIAA2022 gene.

REFERENCE 1. Adrian, K.; Bernhard, M. K.; Breitinger, H.-G.; Ogilvie, A.: Expression
of purinergic receptors (ionotropic P2X1-7 and metabotropic P2Y1-11)
during myeloid differentiation of HL60 cells. Biochim. Biophys. Res.
Acta 1492: 127-138, 2000.

2. Cantagrel, V.; Lossi, A.-M.; Boulanger, S.; Depetris, D.; Mattei,
M.-G.; Gecz, J.; Schwartz, C. E.; Van Maldergem, L.; Villard, L.:
Disruption of a new X linked gene highly expressed in brain in a family
with two mentally retarded males. J. Med. Genet. 41: 736-742, 2004.

3. Mullighan, C. G.; Collins-Underwood, J. R.; Phillips, L. A. A.;
Loudin, M. G.; Liu, W.; Zhang, J.; Ma, J.; Coustan-Smith, E.; Harvey,
R. C.; Willman, C. L.; Mikhail, F. M.; Meyer, J.; and 12 others
: Rearrangement of CRLF2 in B-progenitor- and Down syndrome-associated
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Nature Genet. 41: 1243-1246, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/16/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/7/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/23/2005

EDITED alopez: 03/02/2010
alopez: 3/2/2010
terry: 2/16/2010
carol: 9/2/2009
mgross: 3/7/2005
tkritzer: 3/1/2005
tkritzer: 2/28/2005
tkritzer: 2/23/2005

106180	TITLE +106180 ANGIOTENSIN I-CONVERTING ENZYME; ACE
;;ACE1;;
DIPEPTIDYL CARBOXYPEPTIDASE 1; DCP1;;
KININASE II
ANGIOTENSIN I-CONVERTING ENZYME, PLASMA LEVEL OF, INCLUDED;;
ANGIOTENSIN I-CONVERTING ENZYME, BENIGN SERUM INCREASE, INCLUDED;;
IgA NEPHROPATHY, PROGRESSION TO RENAL FAILURE IN, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO,
INCLUDED;;
ANGIOTENSIN I-CONVERTING ENZYME, TESTICULAR, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Angiotensin I-converting enzyme (EC 3.4.15.1), or kininase II, is a
dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase that plays an important role in blood
pressure regulation and electrolyte balance by hydrolyzing angiotensin I
into angiotensin II, a potent vasopressor, and aldosterone-stimulating
peptide. The enzyme is also able to inactivate bradykinin, a potent
vasodilator.

CLONING

Ehlers et al. (1989) determined the cDNA sequence for human testicular
ACE. The predicted protein is identical, from residue 37 to its C
terminus, to the second half or C-terminal domain of the endothelial ACE
sequence. The inferred protein sequence consists of a 732-residue
preprotein including a 31-residue signal peptide. The mature polypeptide
has a molecular weight of 80,073.

Although angiotensin-converting enzyme has been studied primarily in the
context of its role in blood pressure regulation, this widely
distributed enzyme has many other physiologic functions. The ACE gene
encodes 2 isozymes. The somatic ACE isozyme is expressed in many
tissues, including vascular endothelial cells, renal epithelial cells,
and testicular Leydig cells, whereas the testicular or germinal ACE
isozyme is expressed only in sperm (Ramaraj et al., 1998).

By quantitative RT-PCR, Harmer et al. (2002) found ACE1 expressed in all
72 tissues examined. Expression was particularly high in ileum, jejunum,
duodenum, testis, lung, pulmonary blood vessels, and prostate.

GENE STRUCTURE

Howard et al. (1990) found that the testis-specific form of ACE has its
own promoter within intron 12, is encoded by the 3-prime region of the
gene, and is found only in postmeiotic spermatogenic cells and sperm.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Brown et al. (1996) found an association between the use of certain ACE
inhibitors (lisinopril or enalapril vs captopril) and emergent
angioedema in the African American population of Tennessee. The adjusted
relative risk of angioedema was 4.5 (95% CI, 2.9-6.8) in blacks compared
to whites. The African American patients were more severely affected: 7
of the 8 patients admitted to the intensive care unit were black, as
were all patients who required intubation. African American users of ACE
inhibitors tended to be younger and female when compared to their white
counterparts. The rate of angioedema was highest within the first 30
days of use (5.79 per 1,000 patient-years) compared to long-term use
(1.04 per 1,000 patient-years).

Large-scale trials of therapy for heart failure showed improvements in
outcome with ACE inhibitors and beta-blockers. These results led to the
recommendation that all patients who have heart failure accompanied by a
low ejection fraction and who can tolerate ACE inhibitors and
beta-blockers should be treated with both agents. Exner et al. (2001)
focused on the fact that black patients with heart failure have a poorer
prognosis than white patients and performed a study comparing racial
groups. They found that whereas therapy with enalapril is associated
with significant reduction in the risk of hospitalization for heart
failure among white patients with left ventricular function, it had no
such effect in similar black patients. The explanation for the lesser
response to the ACE inhibitor in black patients was not clear.

Use of ACE inhibitors during the second and third trimesters of
pregnancy is contraindicated because of their association with an
increased risk of fetopathy. In contrast, first-trimester use of ACE
inhibitors had not been linked to adverse fetal outcomes. From a study
of association between exposure to ACE inhibitors during the first
trimester of pregnancy only and the risk of congenital malformations,
Cooper et al. (2006) concluded that ACE inhibitors at that stage also
cannot be considered safe and should be avoided.

- Crystal Structure

Natesh et al. (2003) presented the x-ray structure of human testicular
ACE and its complex with one of the most widely used inhibitors,
lisinopril, at 2.0-angstrom resolution. Analysis of the 3-dimensional
structure of ACE shows that it bears little similarity to that of
carboxypeptidase A (see 114850), but instead resembles neurolysin
(611530) and Pyrococcus furiosus carboxypeptidase, zinc
metallopeptidases with no detectable sequence similarity to ACE.

GENE FUNCTION

ACE is an integral membrane protein that is proteolytically shed from
the cell surface by a zinc metallosecretase. Alfalah et al. (2001) found
that mutagenesis of asn631 to gln in the juxtamembrane stalk region of
ACE did not affect the enzymatic activity of the protein, but it was
more efficiently cleaved and secreted into the medium of transfected
cells than wildtype ACE. In contrast to wildtype ACE, which is cleaved
between asn638 and ser639 at the cell surface by a metalloprotease, the
mutant protein was cleaved between asn635 and ser636 by a serine
proteinase within the endoplasmic reticulum.

Hu et al. (1999) demonstrated an association between the ACE I/D
polymorphism (106180.0001) and Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300) in the
Japanese population. Hu et al. (2001) found that purified ACE inhibited
aggregation of amyloid-beta peptide (A-beta) in a dose-dependent manner.
Inhibition of A-beta aggregation was specifically blocked by an ACE
inhibitor. ACE also significantly inhibited A-beta cytotoxicity in a rat
neural precursor cell line. ACE degraded A-beta by cleaving the 40-amino
acid peptide between asp7 and ser8. Compared with the 40-amino acid
A-beta peptide, the degradation products, A-beta(1-7) and A-beta(8-40),
showed reduced aggregation and cytotoxic effects. Hu et al. (2001)
concluded that ACE alters susceptibility to AD by degrading A-beta and
preventing accumulation of amyloid plaques in vivo.

In testicular germ cells, Kondoh et al. (2005) identified ACE as the
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored protein-releasing (GPIase)
factor. ACE GPIase activity was not inactivated by substitutions of core
amino acid residues for peptidase activity, suggesting that the active
site elements for GPIase differ from those for peptidase activity;
analysis of the released products predicted the cleavage site at the
mannose-mannose linkage within the GPI moiety. GPI-anchored proteins
were released from the sperm membrane of wildtype mice but not in
Ace-knockout sperm in vivo; peptidase-inactivated mutant ACE and
bacterial phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipase rescued the
egg-binding deficiency of Ace-knockout sperm. Kondoh et al. (2005)
concluded that ACE plays a crucial role in fertilization through its
GPIase activity.

MAPPING

Mattei et al. (1989) assigned the ACE gene to 17q23 by in situ
hybridization. Using a DNA marker at the growth hormone gene locus
(139250), which they characterized as 'extremely polymorphic' and which
showed no recombination with ACE, Jeunemaitre et al. (1992) mapped ACE
to 17q22-q24, consistent with the in situ hybridization mapping to
17q23. A demonstration of linkage between the ACE locus and elevated
blood pressure in a rat model of hypertension (see 145500) pointed to
ACE as a candidate gene in human hypertension. In studies of
hypertensive families, they found no evidence to support linkage between
the ACE locus and the disease, however. Using affected sib-pair analysis
and parametric analysis with ascertainment correction, Julier et al.
(1997) found evidence of linkage of familial essential hypertension to 2
closely linked microsatellite markers, D17S183 and D17S934, located on
17q; these markers are, however, 18 cM proximal to the ACE locus.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Benign Serum Increase of ACE

In affected members of 8 families with a 5-fold increase in serum ACE,
Kramers et al. (2001) identified a heterozygous pro1199-to-leu mutation
in the ACE gene (P1199L; 106180.0002). There were no other clinical
abnormalities in any of the affected patients, indicating a benign
phenotype. Functional analysis showed that the mutation resulted in
increased shedding of the protein from the cell surface.

- Renal Tubular Dysgenesis

Gribouval et al. (2005) studied 11 individuals with renal tubular
dysgenesis (267430) belonging to 9 families and found that they had
homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the genes encoding
renin (REN; 179820), angiotensinogen (AGT; 106150), ACE, or angiotensin
II receptor type 1 (AGTR1; 106165). They proposed that renal lesions and
early anuria result from chronic low perfusion pressure of the fetal
kidney, a consequence of renin-angiotensin system inactivity. This
appeared to be the first identification of a renal mendelian disorder
linked to genetic defects in the renin-angiotensin system, highlighting
the crucial role of the renin-angiotensin system in human kidney
development.

- ACE Insertion/Deletion Polymorphism

The importance of ACE in circulatory homeostasis is well documented.
Besides being present as a membrane-bound enzyme on the surface of
vascular endothelial cells, ACE also circulates in plasma. The plasma
enzyme may be synthesized in vascular endothelium. In normal
individuals, plasma ACE levels can show as much as a 5-fold
interindividual variation; on the other hand, intra-individual variation
is small. Cambien et al. (1988) studied familial resemblance for plasma
ACE activity in 87 healthy families. The mean levels were 34.1, 30.7,
and 43.1 in fathers, mothers, and offspring, respectively. Plasma ACE
was uncorrelated with age, height, weight, or blood pressure in the
parents, but a negative correlation with age was observed in offspring.
Results of genetic analysis suggested that a major gene may affect the
interindividual variability of plasma ACE. Okabe et al. (1985) described
a family in which an abnormal elevation in plasma ACE levels was
transmitted apparently as an autosomal dominant trait. Plasma ACE levels
in affected individuals in this kindred were much higher than the values
observed in the 87 families studied by Cambien et al. (1988). Tiret et
al. (1992) demonstrated that the interindividual variability of plasma
ACE was associated with an insertion (I)/deletion (D) polymorphism
involving about 250 bp situated in intron 16 of the ACE gene, the
so-called ACE/ID polymorphism (106180.0001). Rigat et al. (1990) found
that the ACE/ID polymorphism was strongly associated with the level of
circulating enzyme. The mean plasma ACE level of DD subjects was about
twice that of II subjects, with ID subjects having intermediate levels.
Rigat et al. (1992) determined that the ACE insertion corresponds to an
Alu repetitive sequence and is 287 bp long.

Berge and Berg (1994) found no evidence of association between genotypes
in the insertion/deletion polymorphism and level of systolic or
diastolic blood pressure. In 2 series of monozygotic twin pairs, there
was no difference between genotypes in within-pair variation in systolic
or diastolic blood pressure. On the other hand, Schunkert et al. (1994)
found an association between left ventricular hypertrophy, as assessed
by electrocardiographic criteria, and the DD genotype of ACE.
Epidemiologic studies had shown that left ventricular hypertrophy is
often found in the absence of an elevated cardiac workload. The
association with the D/D genotype was stronger in men than in women and
was more prominent when blood pressure measurements were normal. The
findings suggest that the D/D genotype is a genetic marker associated
with an elevated risk of left ventricular hypertrophy in middle-aged
men.

Lindpaintner et al. (1996) were unable to confirm an association between
ACE genotype and electrocardiographically determined left ventricular
mass (determined by echocardiography) and left ventricular hypertrophy
(adjusted for clinical covariates) in an analysis of 2,439 subjects from
the Framingham Heart Study. Montgomery et al. (1997) reported a
prospective study of 460 normotensive Caucasian male military recruits
undergoing an intensive 10-week physical training course.
Echocardiographic indices of left ventricular mass increased by 18%
during training (p less than 0.0001); those individuals with the D ACE
allele showed a significantly greater response. In addition, Montgomery
et al. (1997) found that electrocardiographic evidence of left
ventricular hypertrophy occurred only in individuals with the DD
genotype. The authors concluded that exercise-induced left ventricular
growth in young males is strongly associated with the ACE I/D
polymorphism.

Yoshida et al. (1995) presented evidence suggesting that the deletion
polymorphism in the ACE gene, particularly the homozygote DD, is a risk
factor for progression to chronic renal failure in IgA nephropathy
(161950). Moreover, this deletion polymorphism appeared to predict the
therapeutic efficacy of ACE inhibition on proteinuria and, potentially,
on progressive deterioration of renal function in that disorder.

Marre et al. (1994) and Doria et al. (1994) reported that the I/D
polymorphism of the ACE gene is associated with diabetic nephropathy
(see 612624), but this association was disputed by others, e.g., Tarnow
et al. (1995) and Schmidt et al. (1995). Marre et al. (1997) performed a
large-scale, multicenter study on individuals with insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus (IDDM; 222100) at risk of kidney complications due to
long-term exposure to hyperglycemia, i.e., those who had developed
proliferative diabetic retinopathy, to test the relationship between
genetic factors and renal involvement in IDDM. The study, called
GENEDIAB (GEnetique de la NEphropathie DIABetique), was conducted
prospectively over 1 year. The degree of renal involvement of the
patients was classified according to the genetic polymorphism of ACE and
2 other elements of the renin-angiotensin system, AGT (106150) and AT2R1
(106165). The study concluded that the ACE gene is involved in both the
susceptibility to diabetic nephropathy and its progression toward renal
failure. The other 2 polymorphisms were found not to be contributive
alone, but an interaction between the ACE I/D and AGT M235T
(106150.0001) polymorphisms was found that could account for the degree
of renal involvement in the patients studied.

Yoshioka et al. (1998) studied the influence of the I/D polymorphism in
intron 16 of the ACE gene on the clinical manifestations of childhood
Henoch-Schonlein purpura nephritis (HSPN). One-fifth of patients with
HSPN had the DD genotype. The incidence of persisting proteinuria in
this group was significantly greater in DD homozygotes than in II
homozygotes, with an intermediate incidence in heterozygotes. This
effect was not seen in a control group of patients with IgA nephropathy.
The authors suggested that persisting proteinuria may be related to a
defective angiotensin system genetically determined by the I/D
polymorphism.

Singer et al. (1996) provided a review of the clinical literature.

There is evidence for a skeletal muscle renin-angiotensin system,
suggesting that muscle growth, and thus physical performance, might be
possibly associated with the D allele of the ACE insertion/deletion
polymorphism. However, in initial studies, Montgomery et al. (1998)
found that the ACE I allele was associated with improved endurance
performance. This association was investigated in 2 parallel
experiments. A relative excess of II genotype and a deficiency of DD
genotype was found in 25 elite unrelated male British mountaineers, with
a history of ascending beyond 7,000 meters without using supplementary
oxygen, as compared with 1,906 British males free from clinical
cardiovascular disease. Among 15 climbers who had ascended beyond 8,000
meters without oxygen, none was homozygous for the D allele.

In a second study, Montgomery et al. (1998) determined ACE genotype in
123 Caucasian males recruited to the U.K. Army consecutively. The
maximum duration (in seconds) for which they could perform repetitive
elbow flexion while holding a 15-kg barbell was assessed both before and
after the training period. Pre-training performance was independent of
insertion/deletion genotype. Duration of exercise improved significantly
for the 66 individuals of II and ID genotypes but not for the 12 of D/D
genotype. Improvement was 11-fold greater for those of II than for those
of DD genotype. The mechanism of the association of the I allele with
improved endurance was discussed.

Williams et al. (2000) examined training-related changes in the
mechanical efficiency of human skeletal muscle and found that the
presence of the II genotype confers an enhanced mechanical efficiency in
trained muscle over the DD genotype. Williams et al. (2000) concluded
that such benefits could be associated with the lower ACE activity of
the I allele, an idea that may partly explain the beneficial effects of
ACE inhibitors on myocardial cell survival during ischemia and on the
survival of patients with cardiac dysfunction.

Zhang et al. (2003) demonstrated that the ACE I allele was associated
with increased type I skeletal muscle fibers and suggested that this may
be a mechanism for the association between the ACE genotype and
endurance performance.

Winnicki et al. (2004) studied the relationship between the ACE I/D
polymorphism and physical activity status in 355 mild hypertensives in
whom power exercise was contraindicated. They found that a sedentary
lifestyle was more common among DD than II hypertensives, with ID
subjects having intermediate values (chi square = 13.9, p = 0.001).
Winnicki et al. (2004) suggested that the increased risk for the
development of cardiovascular complications associated with a deletion
polymorphism of the ACE gene could be partially explained by the
sedentary lifestyle of these subjects.

Keramatipour et al. (2000) provided genotype data on 258 subjects with
ruptured intracranial aneurysm and 299 controls from the same geographic
region. ACE allele frequencies were significantly different between the
cases and controls (chi square = 4.67, p = 0.03)(odds ratio for I allele
vs D allele = 1.3; odds ratio for II vs DD genotype = 1.67).

Low bone mineral density and muscle weakness are major risk factors for
postmenopausal osteoporotic fracture. Hormone replacement therapy
reverses the menopausal decline in maximum voluntary force of the
adductor pollicis and reduces serum ACE levels. The I allele of the ACE
gene polymorphism is associated with lower ACE activity and improved
muscle efficiency in response to physical training. Woods et al. (2001)
investigated whether the presence of the I allele in postmenopausal
women would affect the muscle response to hormone replacement therapy.
Those taking hormone replacement therapy showed a significant gain in
normalized muscle maximum voluntary force slope, the rate of which was
strongly influenced by ACE genotype (16.0 +/- 1.53%, 14.3 +/- 2.67%, and
7.76 +/- 4.13%, mean +/- SEM for II, ID, and DD genotype, respectively;
p = 0.017 for gene effect, p = 0.004 for I allele effect). There was
also a significant ACE gene effect in the response of bone mineral
density to hormone replacement therapy in the Ward triangle and a
significant I allele effect in the spine, but not in the neck of femur
or total hip. The authors concluded that low ACE activity associated
with the I allele confers an improved muscle and bone mineral density
response in postmenopausal women treated with hormone replacement
therapy.

Dynamic exercise is effective in lowering resting blood pressure, in
both the long- and short-term, and has been advocated as a primary
treatment for mild hypertension or as an adjunct therapy for more severe
hypertension, in part because of its low cost and few side effects. An
inverse relationship between baseline plasma renin activity and the
depressor effect of mild exercise has been observed. Furthermore,
resting diastolic blood pressure after upright bicycle exercise
decreased in children and young adults of normotensive parents but not
in those of hypertensive parents (Seguro et al., 1995). A twin study by
van den Bree et al. (1996) showed that blood pressure during dynamic
exercise is regulated by genetic factors. Zhang et al. (2002) studied
the association of the ACE ID polymorphism with the depressor response
to exercise therapy in 64 Japanese subjects with mild to moderate
essential hypertension. Each subject performed 10 weeks of mild exercise
therapy on a bicycle ergometer. Systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood
pressure, and mean arterial pressure were significantly decreased by
exercise therapy in subjects with the homozygous II and heterozygous ID
genotypes, but not in homozygous DD subjects.

Age-related macular degeneration-1 (ARMD1; 603075) is the leading cause
of blindness in the elderly. Hamdi et al. (2002) reported an association
between an Alu polymorphism in the ACE gene with the dry/atrophic form
of ARMD1. Using PCR on genomic DNA isolated from 173 patients with ARMD1
and 189 age-matched controls, they amplified a region polymorphic for an
Alu element insertion in the ACE gene. The Alu +/+ genotype (i.e., the
II genotype) occurred 4.5 times more frequently in the control
population than in the dry/atrophic ARMD1 patient population (p =
0.004). The predominance of the Alu +/+ genotype within the unaffected
control group represented a protective insertion with respect to
dry/atrophic ARMD1. This was the first demonstration of an Alu element
insertion exerting protective effects against a known human disease.

Kehoe et al. (2003) performed a large-scale study involving multiple
markers spanning ACE, in conjunction with a metaanalysis of previously
published data on a common Alu insertion/deletion polymorphism, which
supported the finding of Kehoe et al. (1999) that one or more alleles of
ACE contribute to Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300).

Suehiro et al. (2004) demonstrated that the D allele of the ACE I/D
polymorphism leads to higher expression of the ACE mRNA and may affect
the renin-angiotensin system in local regions.

- Other ACE Polymorphisms

Pedigree analyses showed that ACE levels are influenced by a
quantitative trait locus (QTL) located within or close to the ACE gene
and most likely residing in the 3-prime region of this locus. Zhu et al.
(2000) evaluated linkage disequilibrium involving 7 polymorphisms
spanning 13 kb in the 3-prime end of the ACE gene to narrow the genomic
region associated with elevated ACE levels using a cladistic analysis.

In a study in 332 Nigerian families, using 13 polymorphisms in the ACE
gene, Zhu et al. (2001) found strong linkage between the circulating
levels of ACE and the 17q23 region (maximum lod score 7.5). Likewise,
most of the polymorphisms in the ACE gene were significantly associated
with ACE concentration. They also found that the 2 polymorphisms
explaining the greatest variation in ACE concentration, ACE4 (A-240T)
and ACE8 (A2350G), were significantly associated with blood pressure,
through interaction, in this African population sample.

Kehoe et al. (2004) explored the potential influence of ACE on age at
onset (AAO) of AD. They examined 2,861 individuals from 3 European
populations, including 6 independent AD samples. A strong effect upon
AAO was observed for 1 marker in exon 17 and evidence was also obtained
indicating a possible independent effect of a second marker located in
the ACE promoter. Effects were consistent with data from previous
studies suggesting that alleles that confer risk to disease also appear
to reduce AAO. Equivalent effects were evident regardless of APOE4 (see
107741) carrier status and in both males and females.

In 4,000 Swedish individuals, Katzov et al. (2004) demonstrated
associations in males exclusively between ACE SNPs and several metabolic
traits, including fasting plasma glucose levels, insulin levels, and
measures of obesity (601665). Extending cladistic models to the study of
myocardial infarction (608446) and Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300),
significant associations were observed with greater effect sizes than
those typically obtained in large-scale metaanalyses based on the Alu
indel. Population frequencies of ACE genotypes changed with age,
congruent with previous data suggesting effects upon longevity. Clade
models consistently outperformed those based upon single markers,
reinforcing the importance of taking into consideration the possible
confounding effects of allelic heterogeneity in this genomic region.

Catarsi et al. (2005) studied 227 Italian nephrotic syndrome patients in
whom hypertension was the major side effect of treatment by cyclosporine
A (CsA). ACE haplotypes were determined in 304 Italian blood donors and
assembled in clades (A, B, C) that include 95% of observed haplotypes.
The association between ACE clade combinations and serum enzymatic
levels reconfirmed the role of a genetic variant in the intragenic
recombination site near intron 7. Haplotyping patients revealed that ACE
genotype and responsiveness to CsA were strictly associated, because
homozygosity for ACE B clade was able to influence CsA sensitivity. This
highlights the role of 5-prime variants that differentiate clades B and
C. Catarsi et al. (2005) hypothesized that the effect of ACE
polymorphisms on blood pressure may be detectable once environmental
factors, like CsA treatment, overcome physiologic homeostatic
mechanisms.

Meng et al. (2006) evaluated the association between 15 SNPs in the ACE
gene and AD in a sample of 92 patients with AD and 166 nondemented
controls from an inbred Israeli Arab community. They observed
significant association with 2 adjacent SNPs and with a combination of
the 2. Their haplotype 'GA' had a frequency of 0.21 in cases and 0.01 in
controls. Individuals with this haplotype had a 45-fold increased risk
of developing AD compared with those possessing any of the other 3
haplotypes. Longer range haplotypes including I/D were even more
significant.

ANIMAL MODEL

Krege et al. (1995) investigated the role of the ACE gene in blood
pressure control and reproduction using mice generated to carry an
insertional mutation that was designed to inactivate both forms of Ace.
All homozygous female mutants were found to be fertile, but the
fertility of homozygous male mutants was greatly reduced. Heterozygous
males but not females had blood pressures that were 15 to 20 mm Hg less
than normal, although both male and female heterozygotes had reduced
serum Ace activity.

Although significant ACE activity is found in plasma, the majority of
the enzyme is bound to tissue such as vascular endothelium. Esther et
al. (1997) used targeted homologous recombination to create mice
expressing a form of ACE that lacks the C-terminal half of the molecule.
This modified ACE protein was catalytically active but entirely secreted
from cells. Mice that expressed only this modified ACE had significant
plasma ACE activity but no tissue-bound enzyme. These animals had low
blood pressure, renal vascular thickening, and a urine-concentrating
defect. The phenotype was very similar to that of completely
ACE-deficient mice previously reported, except that the renal pathology
was less severe. These studies strongly supported the concept that the
tissue-bound ACE is essential for the control of blood pressure and the
structure and function of the kidney.

ACE gene knockout mice lack both isozymes and exhibit low blood
pressure, kidney dysfunctions, and male infertility. Ramaraj et al.
(1998) reported the use of a sperm-specific promoter and interbreeding
of transgenic and gene knockout mice for generating a mouse strain that
expressed ACE only in sperm. The experimental mice maintained the kidney
defects of ACE -/- mice, but unlike the knockout strain, the males were
fertile. Thus, Ramaraj et al. (1998) established that the role of ACE in
male fertility is completely dependent on its exclusive expression in
sperm. Their study demonstrated how transgenic and knockout techniques
can be combined for ascribing a specific physiologic function to the
expression of a multifunctional protein in a given tissue.

Hagaman et al. (1998) used transgenic mice lacking somatic and testis
ACE to investigate the male fertility defect. They demonstrated that
mice lacking both somatic and testis ACE isozymes have defects in sperm
transport within the oviducts and in binding to zonae pellucidae. Males
generated by gene targeting experiments that lack somatic ACE but retain
testis ACE are fertile. Both male and female mice lacking
angiotensinogen have normal fertility. The authors found that males
heterozygous for the mutation inactivating both ACE enzymes had
offspring of wildtype and heterozygous genotypes at the same frequency,
suggesting that sperm carrying the mutation are not at a selective
disadvantage.

As indicated by the work of Marre et al. (1994), Doria et al. (1994) and
others, nephropathy of type 1 diabetes (222100) is associated with the D
allele of the insertion/deletion (I/D) polymorphism in intron 16 of the
ACE gene. The D allele determines higher enzyme levels. To address
causality underlying this association, Huang et al. (2001) induced
diabetes in mice having 1, 2, or 3 copies of the Ace gene, normal blood
pressure, and an enzyme level range (65-162% of wildtype) comparable to
that seen in humans. Twelve weeks later, the 3-copy diabetic mice had
increased blood pressures and overt proteinuria. Proteinuria was
correlated to plasma ACE level in the 3-copy diabetic mice. Thus, a
modest genetic increase in ACE levels was sufficient to cause
nephropathy in diabetic mice.

Kessler et al. (2003) generated 2 strains of mice that express ACE in
only vascular endothelial cells or renal proximal tubules. Both strains
had equivalent serum ACE and angiotensin II levels and renal function,
but only the group that expressed ACE in vascular endothelial cells had
normal blood pressure. Kessler et al. (2003) concluded that ACE-mediated
blood pressure maintenance can be dissociated from its role in
maintaining renal structure and function, supporting the hypothesis that
specific physiologic functions of ACE are mediated by its expression in
specific tissues.

Because experiments in mice and computer simulations indicated that
modest increases in ACE have minimal effects on blood pressure and
angiotensin II levels but cause a significant decrease in bradykinin
levels (see 113503), Kakoki et al. (2004) hypothesized that bradykinin
is critical for protecting the kidney in diabetics. They confirmed this
by demonstrating that Akita diabetic mice lacking the bradykinin B2
receptor (BDKRB2; 113503) developed overt albuminuria, excreting the
equivalent of more than 550 mg/day of albumin in humans, which
contrasted with the microalbuminuria (equivalent to less than 150
mg/day) seen in their simply diabetic littermates. The overt albuminuria
was accompanied by a marked increase in glomerular mesangial sclerosis.

Tian et al. (2004) generated a transgenic rat model with selective
overexpression of human ACE1 in the cardiac ventricles. The left
ventricular ACE1 activity was elevated about 50-fold in transgenic rats.
Angiotensin-1 perfusion of isolated hearts demonstrated a significant
decrease in coronary artery flow compared with nontransgenic
littermates, suggesting that the transgenic ACE1 is functional. Neither
cardiac hypertrophy nor other morphologic abnormalities were observed in
transgenic rats under standard living conditions. After induction of
hypertension by suprarenal aortic banding, the degree of cardiac
hypertrophy in transgenic rats was significantly higher than that of
banded control rats. The expressions of both ANF (108780) and collagen
III (see 120180), molecular markers of cardiac hypertrophy, were also
increased in banded transgenic rats compared with banded control. Tian
et al. (2004) concluded that increased cardiac ACE1 does not trigger but
augments cardiac hypertrophy.

Jayasooriya et al. (2008) stated that Ace -/- mice have lower body
weight than wildtype mice, and they found that the reduced weight was
due to greater fed-state total energy expenditure and resting energy
expenditure. In addition, livers of Ace -/- mice showed pronounced
expression of genes related to lipolysis and fatty acid oxidation, and
plasma leptin (164160) levels were reduced. Jayasooriya et al. (2008)
concluded that reduced Ace activity causes increased metabolism of fatty
acids in the liver, with additional effect of increased glucose
tolerance.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ANGIOTENSIN I-CONVERTING ENZYME INSERTION/DELETION POLYMORPHISM
MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
MICROVASCULAR COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 3, INCLUDED;;
STROKE, HEMORRHAGIC, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
STROKE, ISCHEMIC, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
SEVERE ACUTE RESPIRATORY SYNDROME, PROGRESSION OF, INCLUDED;;
IgA NEPHROPATHY, PROGRESSION TO RENAL FAILURE IN, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO,
INCLUDED
ACE, INS/DEL (dbSNP rs1799752)

Cambien et al. (1992) stated that the ACE enzyme plays a key role in the
production of angiotensin I/I and in the catabolism of bradykinin, 2
peptides involved in the modulation of vascular tone and in the
proliferation of smooth muscle cells. Cambien et al. (1988) showed that
about 50% of the interindividual variability of plasma ACE concentration
is determined by a major gene effect. Soubrier et al. (1988) cloned the
ACE gene, and Tiret et al. (1992) demonstrated that this major gene
effect is associated with an insertion (I)/deletion (D) polymorphism
involving about 250 bp situated in intron 16 of the ACE gene, the
so-called ACE/ID polymorphism. Rigat et al. (1990) found that the ACE/ID
polymorphism was strongly associated with the level of circulating
enzyme. The mean plasma ACE level of DD subjects was about twice that of
II subjects, with ID subjects having intermediate levels. Rigat et al.
(1992) determined that the ACE insertion corresponds to an Alu
repetitive sequence and is 287 bp long.

Jeffery et al. (1999) studied 97 Ghanaian individuals and found
significantly lower ACE levels in those with the II genotype than in
those with the ID or DD genotype, but no difference between the ID or DD
groups. Jeffery et al. (1999) concluded that the D allele shows
dominance rather than codominance relative to the I allele.

Pharmacologic ACE inhibition enhances survival of human endothelial
cells (ECs) by upregulating genes involved in cell growth, survival, and
immortalization. Hamdi and Castellon (2004) found that human ECs with
the II genotype showed enhanced growth, increased cell survival in
culture after slow starvation, and reduced angiotensin II levels
compared with ECs with the DD genotype. The ACE inhibitor captopril
significantly enhanced the viability of DD cells, but it had little
effect on II cells. Hamdi and Castellon (2004) concluded that ACE
inhibitors protect DD cells by upregulating genes involved in cell
survival and renewal.

Association with Coronary Artery Disease and Myocardial Infarction

Factors involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, thrombosis, and
vasoconstriction contribute to the development of coronary heart
disease. In a study comparing patients after myocardial infarction (MI)
with controls, Cambien et al. (1992) found association between coronary
heart disease and the ACE/ID polymorphism. They determined that the
frequency of the ACE/DD genotype in the 'general population' is
approximately 0.27. The ACE polymorphism was unrelated to blood pressure
and hypertension. Cambien et al. (1992) estimated that in the low-risk
group, i.e., those without tobacco usage, high blood pressure, diabetes,
obesity, or hypercholesterolemia, the ACE/DD genotype may account for
35% of cases of myocardial infarction. The results of these studies
correlate with those of Pfeffer et al. (1992), which showed that
administration of an ACE inhibitor not only decreased the risk of
developing heart failure but also reduced the risk for recurrent
myocardial infarction. Experimental studies had shown that ACE gene
expression is increased in myocardial tissue after coronary artery
occlusion.

Among 185 male and 49 female survivors of myocardial infarction below 56
and 61 years of age, respectively, Bohn et al. (1993) failed to find
results similar to those reported by Cambien et al. (1992). They offered
several possible explanations for the different results. Bohn et al.
(1993) also studied the possible association between premature parental
myocardial infarction (before age 61 in mothers and/or before age 56
years in fathers) and the I/D polymorphism in the ACE gene in 181 male
and 48 female myocardial infarction survivors. In the total series, the
frequency of premature parental MI was 14% in DD, 10.6% in ID, and 6.1%
in II individuals. Thus, the ACE polymorphism may be an important
genetic marker of MI risk and contribute to clustering of premature MI
in families.

Schachter et al. (1994) undertook a case-control study of 338
centenarians in comparison with adults aged 20 to 70 years.
Surprisingly, they found that the DD genotype, which predisposes to
coronary heart disease, has an increased frequency in centenarians.

Ruiz et al. (1994) compared the frequency of the deletion polymorphism
in 132 unrelated individuals with noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
(NIDDM; 125853) who had had myocardial infarction or significant
coronary stenoses and 184 NIDDM individuals with no history of coronary
heart disease. They found that the D allele was a strong and independent
risk factor for coronary heart disease in NIDDM patients. It was
associated with early-onset coronary heart disease in NIDDM,
independently of hypertension and lipid values. A progressively
increasing relative risk was observed in individuals heterozygous and
homozygous for the D allele, suggesting a codominant effect. The
percentage of coronary heart disease attributable to the ACE deletion
allele was 24% in this NIDDM population.

Evans et al. (1994) determined the frequency of the ACE I/D polymorphism
in 313 fatal cases of definite and possible myocardial infarction that
came to autopsy in the Belfast, Northern Ireland area. In comparison to
controls from the same population, the autopsy cases had an increased
frequency of the ACE D allele (p less than 0.02). The overall odds
ratios were 2.2 for DD versus II, and 1.8 for ID versus II.

Lindpaintner et al. (1995) were unable to confirm the association
between the D allele and increased risk of ischemic heart disease or
myocardial infarction in a large, prospectively followed population of
U.S. male physicians.

In an angiographically defined study sample, Winkelmann et al. (1996)
failed to find an association between ACE I/D gene polymorphism and
coronary artery disease, although an effect on plasma ACE activity could
be demonstrated. On the other hand, in a study of 388 white Italian
patients of whom 255 had proven coronary atherosclerosis and 133 had
angiographically normal coronary arteries, Arbustini et al. (1995) found
that the deletion allele, whether homozygous or heterozygous, was the
strongest risk factor for atherosclerosis, and that the D allele was
significantly associated with the risk of infarction (although to a
lesser extent than with permanent atherosclerosis). Hypertension proved
to be unrelated with the ACE genotype.

Oike et al. (1995) suggested that the DD genotype relates to a greater
risk for myocardial infarction in patients with coronary artery spasm
(CAS). This would explain the greater risk for myocardial infarction of
persons with the D allele, especially persons normally considered to be
at low risk. Coronary artery spasm is considered to be one mechanism for
developing MI. Oike et al. (1995) studied 150 angiographically assessed
Japanese males, all more than 60 years of age. Coronary artery spasm was
detected using intracoronary injection of ergonovine maleate. The
subjects were divided into 3 groups: those with CAS, those without CAS
but with fixed organic stenosis, and those without CAS and no organic
stenosis. DD subjects were significantly represented in group 1 when
compared with groups 2 and 3.

Ohishi et al. (1993) presented data indicating that the DD genotype is
associated with an increased risk of restenosis after percutaneous
transluminal angioplasty for widening the lumen of coronary arteries
stenosed by atherosclerotic lesions. Amant et al. (1997) examined the
relationship between the ACE I/D polymorphism and restenosis following
coronary artery stenting in 146 consecutive patients. They found that
restenosis was more than twice as common in those patients with the DD
genotype than in those with the II genotype, possibly implicating the
renin-angiotensin system in the pathogenesis of restenosis after
coronary stenting.

In 2,267 male Caucasians, Gardemann et al. (1998) found an association
of the D allele with coronary artery disease in subjects less than 61.7
years of age but not in patients 61.7 years or older. Exclusion of
individuals with other cardiovascular risk factors (e.g., high body mass
index) produced an even stronger association of the D allele with
coronary artery disease.

Keavney et al. (2000) compared 4,629 myocardial infarction cases and
5,934 controls for presence or absence of the ACE I/D polymorphism. The
ACE DD genotype was found in 1,359 (29.4%) of the myocardial infarction
cases and in 1,637 (27.6%) of the controls (risk ratio 1.10 with a 95%
confidence interval of 1.00 to 1.21). The association between myocardial
infarction and the DD genotype did not seem to be stronger in the
subgroup defined as low risk by previously used criteria or in any other
subgroup. Nor was the ACE ID genotype predictive of subsequent survival.
Keavney et al. (2000) also performed a metaanalysis of previously
published studies, and found the risk ratio for myocardial infarction
with the DD genotype to lie between 1.0 and 1.1. Although an increase in
risk of up to 10 to 15% cannot be ruled out, substantially more extreme
risks can be.

Sayed-Tabatabaei et al. (2005) determined the ACE I/D polymorphism and
smoking status in 6,714 individuals and recorded fatal and nonfatal
myocardial infarctions and mortality events. Among smokers, they found
an increased risk of cardiovascular mortality for younger (below the
median age of 68.2 years) carriers of the D allele (p = 0.03). No
association was observed between ACE genotype and myocardial infarction.

Schurks et al. (2009) found no association between the ACE I/D
polymorphism (dbSNP rs1799752) and cardiovascular disease or migraine
(157300) in a cohort of 25,000 white women.

Association with IgA Nephropathy

Yoshida et al. (1995) found that the deletion polymorphism in the ACE
gene is a risk factor for progression to chronic renal failure in IgA
nephropathy (161950), and that the deletion polymorphism predicts
therapeutic efficacy of ACE inhibition on proteinuria and, potentially,
on progressive deterioration of renal function. They found that 43% of
patients who showed decline of renal function had the DD homozygous
genotype, whereas it was present in only 7% of age-matched individuals
without a history of the proteinuria and in only 16% of a group of
patients with IgA nephropathy and stable renal function. After 48 weeks
of ACE inhibitor administration, proteinuria significantly decreased in
patients with the DD genotype but not in those with ID or II genotypes.

Using multivariant analysis, Pei et al. (1997) found that the presence
of the ACE DD polymorphism adversely affected disease progression in IgA
nephropathy only in patients with the met235/met235 (MM) genotype of the
AGT gene (106150.0001).

Yoon et al. (2002) investigated the interdependent action of the
insertion/deletion polymorphism of the ACE gene and the ala379-to-val
polymorphism in exon 11 of PLA2G7 (601690.0003), which encodes a
functional agonist of platelet-activating factor (PAF) on the
progression of IgA nephropathy. They analyzed both polymorphisms in
patients with primary IgA nephropathy who were followed up for longer
than 3 years. During the follow-up, the disease progressed in 38 of the
191 patients. The D allele of the ACE gene in the absence of the T
allele of the PLA2G7 gene did not affect the prognosis, nor did the T
allele in the absence of the D allele. However, the presence of both was
a significant prognostic factor. The results suggested that the
interdependent effects of ACE and PLA2G7 polymorphisms on the
progression of IgA nephropathy may be more important than the effect of
the individual polymorphisms.

Association with Alzheimer Disease

Following reports that the DCP1*D allele of the common I/D polymorphism
in the DCP1 gene is associated with increased longevity (Schachter et
al., 1994), Kehoe et al. (1999) hypothesized that DCP1*D may protect
against the development of Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300) and that,
conversely, the DCP1*I allele may confer increased risk. They tested
this hypothesis in samples from Cardiff, London, and Belfast. They
reported findings suggesting that genetic variation at the DCP1 locus
predisposes to AD in a manner that is independent of APOE variation.
They considered the possibility that the low frequency of the DD
homozygous genotype in AD may have been due to the exclusion of cases
with cardiovascular disease. They thought this possibility unlikely for
a number of reasons: first, the impact of the DD genotype on
cardiovascular disease is controversial, relatively small, and
restricted to specific geographic areas and to patient subgroups with
highly heterogeneous clinical manifestations. Second, cases with
vascular symptoms were only excluded from the groups of patients they
studied if they had histories of obvious stepwise cognitive
deterioration consistent with vascular dementia. Third, vascular
dementia cases were also excluded from the screened age-matched control
groups. Fourth, their control allele and genotype frequencies were
similar to those reported for the general population by a number of
studies, including 1 from a very similar geographic location. Finally,
analysis of DCP1 genotypes in 15 additional vascular dementia cases, and
in 21 dementia cases with a history of stroke excluded from the London
sample, showed an excess of the DCP1*I allele rather than an excess of
the DD genotype.

Hu et al. (1999) studied the ACE I/D polymorphism in 133 Japanese
sporadic AD patients and 257 controls and found that the ACE II genotype
was associated with susceptibility to AD. The frequency of the II
genotype was 1.4 times higher in AD than controls, while that of the DD
genotype was only 0.4 times higher in AD than controls.

Elkins et al. (2004) performed a metaanalysis of 23 independent
published studies that investigated the association between Alzheimer
disease and the ACE I/D polymorphism. Review of the data showed that the
OR for AD in individuals with the I allele (II or ID genotype) was 1.27
compared to those with the DD genotype. The risk of AD was higher among
Asians (OR of 2.44) and in patients younger than 75 years of age (OR of
1.54). Elkins et al. (2004) concluded that the ACE I allele is
associated with an increased risk of late-onset AD, but noted that the
risk is very small compared to the effects of other alleles, especially
APOE4 (see 107741).

Association with Microvascular Complications of Diabetes 3

Marre et al. (1994) and Doria et al. (1994) reported that the I/D
polymorphism of the ACE gene is associated with diabetic nephropathy
(MVCD3; 612634), but this association was disputed by others, e.g.,
Tarnow et al. (1995) and Schmidt et al. (1995). Marre et al. (1997)
undertook a large-scale, multicenter study on insulin-dependent diabetic
subjects at risk of kidney complications due to long-term exposure to
hyperglycemia, i.e., those who had developed proliferative diabetic
retinopathy, to test the relationship between genetic factors and renal
involvement in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (222100). The study
concluded that the ACE gene is involved in both the susceptibility to
diabetic nephropathy and its progression toward renal failure, and an
interaction between ACE I/D and an M235T polymorphism in the AGT gene
(106150.0001) was found that could account for the degree of renal
involvement in the patients studied.

Vleming et al. (1999) studied the contribution of the I/D polymorphism
in 79 patients with end-stage renal failure due to diabetic nephropathy
and in 82 age-matched controls with 15 years of IDDM but without
microalbuminuria. There was significant overrepresentation of the DD
genotype with a significant increase of the D-allele frequency in the
cases compared to controls. The presence of the DD genotype increased
the risk of end-stage renal failure compared to other genotypes (odds
ratio, 2.1; 95% CI, 1.1-4.0). However, the presence of 1 D-allele did
not increase the risk.

In mice rendered diabetic, Huang et al. (2001) demonstrated that those
mice who had a third copy of the Ace gene, and as a result higher enzyme
levels (comparable to those associated with the variant D allele),
developed increased blood pressures and overt proteinuria indicative of
nephropathy.

Association with Type 2 Diabetes

The I allele of the I/D ACE polymorphism appears to be protective
against the complications of type 2 diabetes (125853). Low birth weight,
a marker of an adverse intrauterine environment, is associated with
higher rates of type 2 diabetes. Kajantie et al. (2004) examined whether
the ACE I/D polymorphism could explain or modify the association between
low birth weight and adulthood glucose tolerance. They measured plasma
glucose and insulin concentrations after an oral glucose challenge in a
group of 423 men and women, ages 65 to 75 years, with measurements at
birth recorded. The presence of the I allele was associated with shorter
duration of gestation (p = 0.006) and, relative to gestational age,
higher birth weight (p = 0.008) and length (p = 0.02). The I allele was
associated with lower glucose at 120 minutes (p = 0.04) and a greater
insulin response (p = 0.03 for insulin at 30 minutes and p = 0.06 for
insulin area under the curve) to a standard oral glucose tolerance test.
However, the associations between the ACE genotype and adulthood insulin
secretion were present only in people with low birth weight. The authors
concluded that the ACE I allele is associated with shorter duration of
gestation and higher birth weight. The association between the presence
of the ACE I allele and increased indices of adult insulin secretion is
confined to subjects with low birth weight. The authors suggested that
these findings reflect interactions between genotype and intrauterine
environment with resulting changes in gene expression.

Association with Meningococcal Disease

Harding et al. (2002) recorded illness severity for 110 consecutive
white pediatric patients with meningococcal disease and analyzed the
results in terms of the ACE I/D polymorphism. Compared to children with
an I allele, those with the DD genotype had a higher predicted risk of
mortality (p = 0.01), worse Glasgow Meningococcal Septicemia Prognostic
Scores (p = 0.014), greater need for inotropes (p = 0.034) and
ventilation (p = 0.044), and longer stays in the pediatric intensive
care unit (p = 0.021). DD genotype was 6% for the 18 children who did
not require PICU care, 33% for the 84 PICU survivors, and 45% for those
who died (p = 0.013). Harding et al. (2002) concluded that the ACE DD
genotype is associated with increased illness severity in meningococcal
disease.

Association with Preterm Cardiorespiratory Disease

Harding et al. (2003) determined ACE genotype in 148 preterm infants and
prospectively obtained intensive care data. Infants with the DD genotype
required higher oxygen (p = 0.028) and more blood pressure support (p =
0.039), and had worse base deficits (p = 0.020) than those with the ID
or II genotype. Harding et al. (2003) concluded that ACE polymorphism
has a role in the development of preterm cardiorespiratory disease and
that the DD genotype, which encodes higher ACE activity, may adversely
affect the early health status of preterm infants.

Association with Myophosphorylase Deficiency

In 47 patients with myophosphorylase deficiency (232600), Martinuzzi et
al. (2003) found an association between increased clinical severity and
the ACE D allele. The authors noted that because the ACE I/D
polymorphism had been shown to be associated with muscle function, it
may modulate some clinical aspects of myophosphorylase deficiency,
accounting for some of the phenotypic variability of the disorder.

Association with Hemorrhagic Stroke

Slowik et al. (2004) found an association between the ACE DD genotype
and spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhagic stroke (ICH; 614519) in deep
brain structures in 58 Polish patients (OR of 2.46). No association was
found between the DD genotype and 140 controls or 70 Polish patients
with small vessel disease and ischemic stroke.

Association with Ischemic Stroke

In a comprehensive metaanalysis of 11 case-control studies including
2,990 white adult patients, Casas et al. (2004) found a statistically
significant association between ischemic stroke (601367) and the ACE DD
genotype compared to the II or ID genotypes (OR of 1.21).

Association with Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome

Itoyama et al. (2004) genotyped 44 Vietnamese severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS) cases along with 103 healthy exposed and 50 unexposed
controls. They divided the SARS cases into hypoxemic and nonhypoxemic
groups, both of which had 22 individuals. The frequency of the D allele
of ACE1 was significantly higher in the hypoxemic group compared with
the nonhypoxemic group (20 of 44 alleles vs 9 of 44 alleles), whereas
there was no significant difference between the SARS cases and controls,
regardless of contact history. Itoyama et al. (2004) proposed that ACE1
may influence the progression to pneumonia in SARS.

Association with Athletic Excellence

Gayagay et al. (1998) concluded that the ACE I allele may be a genetic
marker associated with athletic excellence. They found that the I allele
was present in excess (P less than 0.02), as was also the homozygous II
genotype (p = 0.03), in 64 Australian national rowers, compared with a
normal population. They proposed that the underlying mechanism related
to a healthier cardiovascular system.

.0002
ANGIOTENSIN I-CONVERTING ENZYME, BENIGN SERUM INCREASE
ACE, PRO1199LEU

In affected members of 8 families with an autosomal dominant increase in
serum ACE activity, Kramers et al. (2001) identified a heterozygous
3705C-T transition in the ACE gene, resulting in a pro1199-to-leu
(P1199L) substitution in the stalk region of the protein. In all
families, the proband was investigated for ACE activity because of a
suspicion of sarcoidosis; the diagnosis was not made in any of the
individuals. ACE values in affected members from the 8 families showed a
5-fold increase compared to normal. Elevated ACE was not accompanied by
any apparent clinical abnormality. Analysis of leukocytes and dendritic
cells from individuals with the mutation showed a normal amount of ACE
on the cell surface, but there was a significant increase in the amount
of secreted ACE. Kramers et al. (2001) suggested that the P1199L
mutation results in more efficient cleavage of somatic ACE.

In 3 unrelated patients with high plasma ACE levels, Eyries et al.
(2001) identified the P1199L mutation. In vitro analysis revealed that
the shedding of the mutant protein was enhanced compared to wildtype;
the rate of solubilization was on average 2.5-fold higher than wildtype.
Two-dimensional structural analyses showed that the mutated residue was
critical for the positioning of a specific loop containing the cleavage
site, leading to more accessibility at the stalk region.

Linnebank et al. (2003) reported a 49-year-old woman with arterial
hypertension, transitory neurologic symptoms, and suspected
neurosarcoidosis based on elevated plasma and CSF levels of ACE. The
P1199L mutation was identified in the patient, as well as in her mother
and daughter who also had elevated serum ACE. There was no evidence of
neurosarcoidosis in the proband. Linnebank et al. (2003) emphasized the
importance of considering this benign inherited phenotype in order to
avoid unnecessary and potentially harmful treatment.

.0003
RENAL TUBULAR DYSGENESIS
ACE, TYR266TER

In 2 sibs with renal tubular dysgenesis (267430) in a family of Italian
and French origin, Gribouval et al. (2005) found a tyr266-to-ter (Y266X)
mutation in the ACE gene, arising from a 798C-G transversion in exon 5.
It was the only mutation found, inherited from the father.

.0004
RENAL TUBULAR DYSGENESIS
ACE, 4-BP DEL, 1319TGGA

In 2 sibs with renal tubular dysgenesis (267430) from a consanguineous
Turkish family, Gribouval et al. (2005) found homozygosity for a
frameshift mutation in exon 8 of the ACE gene. Deletion of 4
nucleotides, 1319_1322del TGGA, resulted in a frameshift at leucine-440
and a premature stop at codon 455.

.0005
RENAL TUBULAR DYSGENESIS
ACE, ARG496TER

In a girl with renal tubular dysgenesis (267430), who was born to
consanguineous Swiss parents, Gribouval et al. (2012) identified a
homozygous c.1486C-T transition in exon 9 of the ACE gene, resulting in
an arg496-to-ter (R496X) substitution. She died in the second hour of
life.

.0006
RENAL TUBULAR DYSGENESIS
ACE, ARG791TER

In an Italian boy with renal tubular dysgenesis (267430), who was born
to consanguineous parents, Gribouval et al. (2012) identified a
homozygous c.2371C-T transition in exon 16 of ACE gene, resulting in an
arg791-to-ter (R791X) substitution. He died on the seventh day of life.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Kurtz  (1992)
REFERENCE 1. Alfalah, M.; Parkin, E. T.; Jacob, R.; Sturrock, E. D.; Mentele,
R.; Turner, A. J.; Hooper, N. M.; Naim, H. Y.: A point mutation in
the juxtamembrane stalk of human angiotensin I-converting enzyme invokes
the action of a distinct secretase. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 21105-21109,
2001.

2. Amant, C.; Bauters, C.; Bodart, J.-C.; Lablanche, J.-M.; Grollier,
G.; Danchin, N.; Hamon, M.; Richard, F.; Helbecque, N.; McFadden,
E. P.; Amouyel, P.; Bertrand, M. E.: D allele of the angiotensin
I-converting enzyme is a major risk factor for restenosis after coronary
stenting. Circulation 96: 56-60, 1997.

3. Arbustini, E.; Grasso, M.; Fasani, R.; Klersy, C.; Diegoli, M.;
Porcu, E.; Banchieri, N.; Fortina, P.; Danesino, C.; Specchia, G.
: Angiotensin converting enzyme gene deletion allele is independently
and strongly associated with coronary atherosclerosis and myocardial
infarction. Brit. Heart J. 74: 584-591, 1995.

4. Berge, K. E.; Berg, K.: No effect of insertion/deletion polymorphism
at the ACE locus on normal blood pressure level or variability. Clin.
Genet. 45: 169-174, 1994.

5. Bohn, M.; Berge, K. E.; Bakken, A.; Erikssen, J.; Berg, K.: Insertion/deletion
(I/D) polymorphism at the locus for angiotensin I-converting enzyme
and myocardial infarction. Clin. Genet. 44: 292-297, 1993.

6. Bohn, M.; Berge, K. E.; Bakken, A.; Erikssen, J.; Berg, K.: Insertion/deletion
(I/D) polymorphism at the locus for angiotensin I-converting enzyme
and parental history of myocardial infarction. Clin. Genet. 44:
298-301, 1993.

7. Brown, N. J.; Ray, W. A.; Snowden, M.; Griffin, M. R.: Black Americans
have an increased rate of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor-associated
angioedema. Clin. Pharmacol. Therapeutics 60: 8-13, 1996.

8. Cambien, F.; Alhenc-Gelas, F.; Herbeth, B.; Andre, J. L.; Rakotovao,
R.; Gonzales, M. F.; Allegrini, J.; Bloch, C.: Familial resemblance
of plasma angiotensin-converting enzyme level: the Nancy study. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 43: 774-780, 1988.

9. Cambien, F.; Poirier, O.; Lecerf, L.; Evans, A.; Cambou, J.-P.;
Arveiler, D.; Luc, G.; Bard, J.-M.; Bara, L.; Ricard, S.; Tiret, L.;
Amouyel, P.; Alhenc-Gelas, F.; Soubrier, F.: Deletion polymorphism
in the gene for angiotensin-converting enzyme is a potent risk factor
for myocardial infarction. Nature 359: 641-644, 1992.

10. Casas, J. P.; Hingorani, A. D.; Bautista, L. E.; Sharma, P.:
Meta-analysis of genetic studies in ischemic stroke: thirty-two genes
involving approximately 18000 cases and 58000 controls. Arch. Neurol. 61:
1652-1662, 2004.

11. Catarsi, P.; Ravazzolo, R.; Emma, F.; Fruci, D.; Finos, L.; Frau,
A.; Morreale, G.; Carrea, A.; Ghiggeri, G. M.: Angiotensin-converting
enzyme (ACE) haplotypes and cyclosporine A (CsA) response: a model
of the complex relationship between ACE quantitative trait locus and
pathological phenotypes. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 2357-2367, 2005.

12. Cooper, W. O.; Hernandez-Diaz, S.; Arbogast, P. G.; Dudley, J.
A.; Dyer, S.; Gideon, P. S.; Hall, K.; Ray, W. A.: Major congenital
malformations after first-trimester exposure to ACE inhibitors. New
Eng. J. Med. 354: 2443-2451, 2006.

13. Doria, A.; Warram, J. H.; Krolewski, A. S.: Genetic predisposition
to diabetic nephropathy: evidence for a role of the angiotensin I-converting
enzyme gene. Diabetes 43: 690-695, 1994.

14. Ehlers, M. R. W.; Fox, E. A.; Strydom, D. J.; Riordan, J. F.:
Molecular cloning of human testicular angiotensin-converting enzyme:
the testis isozyme is identical to the C-terminal half of endothelial
angiotensin-converting enzyme. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 86: 7741-7745,
1989.

15. Elkins, J. S.; Douglas, V. C.; Johnston, S. C.: Alzheimer disease
risk and genetic variation in ACE: a meta-analysis. Neurology 62:
363-368, 2004.

16. Esther, C. R., Jr.; Marino, E. M.; Howard, T. E.; Machaud, A.;
Corvol, P.; Capecchi, M. R.; Bernstein, K. E.: The critical role
of tissue angiotensin-converting enzyme as revealed by gene targeting
in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 99: 2375-2385, 1997.

17. Evans, A. E.; Poirier, O.; Kee, F.; Lecerf, L.; McCrum, E.; Falconer,
T.; Crane, J.; O'Rourke, D. F.; Cambien, F.: Polymorphisms of the
angiotensin-converting-enzyme gene in subjects who die from coronary
heart disease. Quart. J. Med. 87: 211-214, 1994.

18. Exner, D. V.; Dries, D. L.; Domanski, M. J.; Cohn, J. N.: Lesser
response to angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor therapy in black
as compared with white patients with left ventricular dysfunction. New
Eng. J. Med. 344: 1351-1357, 2001.

19. Eyries, M.; Michaud, A.; Deinum, J.; Agrapart, M.; Chomilier,
J.; Kramers, C.; Soubrier, F.: Increased shedding of angiotensin-converting
enzyme by a mutation identified in the stalk region. J. Biol. Chem. 276:
5525-5532, 2001.

20. Gardemann, A.; Fink, M.; Stricker, J.; Nguyen, Q. D.; Humme, J.;
Katz, N.; Tillmanns, H.; Hehrlein, F. W.; Rau, M.; Haberbosch, W.
: ACE I/D gene polymorphism: presence of the ACE D allele increases
the risk of coronary artery disease in younger individuals. Atherosclerosis 139:
153-159, 1998.

21. Gayagay, G.; Yu, B.; Hambly, B.; Boston, T.; Hahn, A.; Celermajer,
D. S.; Trent, R. J.: Elite endurance athletes and the ACE I allele:
the role of genes in athletic performance. Hum. Genet. 103: 48-50,
1998.

22. Gribouval, O.; Gonzales, M.; Neuhaus, T.; Aziza, J.; Bieth, E.;
Laurent, N.; Bouton, J. M.; Feuillet, F.; Makni, S.; Ben Amar, H.;
Laube, G.; Delezoide, A.-L.; Bouvier, R.; Dijoud, F.; Ollagnon-Roman,
E.; Roume, J.; Joubert, M.; Antignac, C.; Gubler, M. C.: Mutations
in genes in the renin-angiotensin system are associated with autosomal
recessive renal tubular dysgenesis. Nature Genet. 37: 964-968, 2005.

23. Gribouval, O.; Moriniere, V.; Pawtowski, A.; Arrondel, C.; Sallinen,
S.-L.; Saloranta, C.; Clericuzio, C.; Viot, G.; Tantau, J.; Blesson,
S.; Cloarec, S.; Machet, M. C.; and 43 others: Spectrum of mutations
in the renin-angiotensin system genes in autosomal recessive renal
tubular dysgenesis. Hum. Mutat. 33: 316-326, 2012.

24. Hagaman, J. R.; Moyer, J. S.; Bachman, E. S.; Sibony, M.; Magyar,
P. L.; Welch, J. E.; Smithies, O.; Krege, J. H.; O'Brien, D. A.:
Angiotensin-converting enzyme and male fertility. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 95: 2552-2557, 1998.

25. Hamdi, H. K.; Castellon, R.: A genetic variant of ACE increases
cell survival: a new paradigm for biology and disease. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 318: 187-191, 2004.

26. Hamdi, H. K.; Reznik, J.; Castellon, R.; Atilano, S. R.; Ong,
J. M.; Udar, N.; Tavis, J. H.; Aoki, A. M.; Nesburn, A. B.; Boyer,
D. S.; Small, K. W.; Brown, D. J.; Kenney, M. C.: Alu DNA polymorphism
in ACE gene is protective for age-related macular degeneration. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 295: 668-672, 2002.

27. Harding, D.; Baines, P. B.; Brull, D.; Vassiliou, V.; Ellis, I.;
Hart, A.; Thomson, A. P. J.; Humphries, S. E.; Montgomery, H. E.:
Severity of meningococcal disease in children and the angiotensin-converting
enzyme insertion/deletion polymorphism. Am. J. Resp. Crit. Care Med. 165:
1103-1106, 2002.

28. Harding, D.; Dhamrait, S.; Marlow, N.; Whitelaw, A.; Gupta, S.;
Humphries,  S.; Montgomery, H.: Angiotensin-converting enzyme DD
genotype is associated with worse perinatal cardiorespiratory adaptation
in preterm infants. J.  Pediat. 143: 746-749, 2003.

29. Harmer, D.; Gilbert, M.; Borman, R.; Clark, K. L.: Quantitative
mRNA expression profiling of ACE 2, a novel homologue of angiotensin
converting enzyme. FEBS Lett. 532: 107-110, 2002.

30. Howard, T. E.; Shai, S. Y.; Langford, K. G.; Martin, B. M.; Bernstein,
K. E.: Transcription of testicular angiotensin-converting enzyme
(ACE) is initiated within the 12th intron of the somatic ACE gene. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 10: 4294-4302, 1990.

31. Hu, J.; Igarashi, A.; Kamata, M.; Nakagawa, H.: Angiotensin-converting
enzyme degrades Alzheimer amyloid beta-peptide (A-beta); retards A-beta
aggregation, deposition, fibril formation; and inhibits cytotoxicity. J.
Biol. Chem. 276: 47863-47868, 2001.

32. Hu, J.; Miyatake, F.; Aizu, Y.; Nakagawa, H.; Nakamura, S.; Tamaoka,
A.; Takahash, R.; Urakami, K.; Shoji, M.: Angiotensin-converting
enzyme genotype is associated with Alzheimer disease in the Japanese
population. Neurosci. Lett. 277: 65-67, 1999.

33. Huang, W.; Gallois, Y.; Bouby, N.; Bruneval, P.; Heudes, D.; Belair,
M.-F.; Krege, J. H.; Menteton, P.; Marre, M.; Smithies, O.; Alhenc-Gelas,
F.: Genetically increased angiotensin I-converting enzyme level and
renal complications in the diabetic mouse. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98:
13330-13334, 2001.

34. Itoyama, S.; Keicho, N.; Quy, T.; Phi, N. C.; Long, H. T.; Ha,
L. D.; Ban, V. V.; Ohashi, J.; Hijikata, M.; Matsushita, I.; Kawana,
A.; Yanai, H.; Kirikae, T.; Kuratsuji, T.; Sasazuki, T.: ACE1 polymorphism
and progression of SARS. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 323: 1124-1129,
2004.

35. Jayasooriya, A. P.; Mathai, M. L.; Walker, L. L.; Begg, D. P.;
Denton, D. A.; Cameron-Smith, D.; Egan, G. F.; McKinley, M. J.; Rodger,
P. D.; Sinclair, A. J.; Wark, J. D.; Weisinger, H. S.; Jois, M.; Weisinger,
R. S.: Mice lacking angiotensin-converting enzyme have increased
energy expenditure, with reduced fat mass and improved glucose clearance. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 6531-6536, 2008.

36. Jeffery, S.; Malik, A. K. S.; Crosby, A.; Bland, M.; Eastwood,
J. B.; Amoah-Danquah, J.; Acheampong, J. W.; Plange-Rhule, J.: A
dominant relationship between the ACE D allele and serum ACE levels
in a Ghanaian population. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 36: 869-870, 1999.

37. Jeunemaitre, X.; Lifton, R. P.; Hunt, S. C.; Williams, R. R.;
Lalouel, J.-M.: Absence of linkage between the angiotensin converting
enzyme locus and human essential hypertension. Nature Genet. 1:
72-75, 1992.

38. Julier, C.; Delepine, M.; Keavney, B.; Terwilliger, J.; Davis,
S.; Weeks, D. E.; Bui, T.; Jeunemaitre, X.; Velho, G.; Froguel, P.;
Ratcliffe, P.; Corvol, P.; Soubrier, F.; Lathrop, G. M.: Genetic
susceptibility for human familial essential hypertension in a region
of homology with blood pressure linkage on rat chromosome 10. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 6: 2077-2085, 1997.

39. Kajantie, E.; Rautanen, A.; Kere, J.; Andersson, S.; Yliharsila,
H.; Osmond, C.; Barker, D. J. P.; Forsen, T.; Eriksson, J.: The effects
of the ACE gene insertion/deletion polymorphism on glucose tolerance
and insulin secretion in elderly people are modified by birth weight. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 5738-5741, 2004.

40. Kakoki, M.; Takahashi, N.; Jennette, J. C.; Smithies, O.: Diabetic
nephropathy is markedly enhanced in mice lacking the bradykinin B2
receptor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 13302-13305, 2004.

41. Katzov, H.; Bennet, A. M.; Kehoe, P.; Wiman, B.; Gatz, M.; Blennow,
K.; Lenhard, B.; Pedersen, N. L.; de Faire, U.; Prince, J. A.: A
cladistic model of ACE sequence variation with implications for myocardial
infarction, Alzheimer disease and obesity. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13:
2647-2657, 2004.

42. Keavney, B.; McKenzie, C.; Parish, S.; Palmer, A.; Clark, S.;
Youngman, L.; Delepine, M.; Lathrop, M.; Peto, R.; Collins, R.: Large-scale
test of hypothesized associations between the angiotensin-converting-enzyme
insertion/deletion polymorphism and myocardial infarction in about
5000 cases and 6000 controls. Lancet 355: 434-442, 2000.

43. Kehoe, P. G.; Katzov, H.; Andreasen, N.; Gatz, M.; Wilcock, G.
K.; Cairns, N. J.; Palmgren, J.; de Faire, U.; Brookes, A. J.; Pedersen,
N. L.; Blennow, K.; Prince, J. A.: Common variants of ACE contribute
to variable age-at-onset of Alzheimer's disease. Hum. Genet. 114:
478-483, 2004.

44. Kehoe, P. G.; Katzov, H.; Feuk, L.; Bennet, A. M.; Johansson,
B.; Wiman, B.; de Faire, U.; Cairns, N. J.; Wilcock, G. K.; Brookes,
A. J.; Blennow, K.; Prince, J. A.: Haplotypes extending across ACE
are associated with Alzheimer's disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12:
859-867, 2003.

45. Kehoe, P. G.; Russ, C.; McIlroy, S.; Williams, H.; Holmans, P.;
Holmes, C.; Liolitsa, D.; Vahidassr, D.; Powell, J.; McGleenon, B.;
Liddell, M.; Plomin, R.; and 9 others: Variation in DCP1, encoding
ACE, is associated with susceptibility to Alzheimer disease. (Letter) Nature
Genet. 21: 71-72, 1999.

46. Keramatipour, M.; McConnell, R. S.; Kirkpatrick, P.; Tebbs, S.;
Furlong, R. A.; Rubinsztein, D. C.: The ACE I allele is associated
with increased risk for ruptured intracranial aneurysms. J. Med.
Genet. 37: 498-500, 2000.

47. Kessler, S. P.; deS. Senanayake, P.; Scheidemantel, T. S.; Gomos,
J. B.; Rowe, T. M.; Sen, G. C.: Maintenance of normal blood pressure
and renal functions are independent effects of angiotensin-converting
enzyme. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 21105-21112, 2003.

48. Kondoh, G.; Tojo, H.; Nakatani, Y.; Komazawa, N.; Murata, C.;
Yamagata, K.; Maeda, Y.; Kinoshita, T.; Okabe, M.; Taguchi, R.; Takeda,
J.: Angiotensin-converting enzyme is a GPI-anchored protein releasing
factor crucial for fertilization. Nature Med. 11: 160-166, 2005.

49. Kramers, C.; Danilov, S. M.; Deinum, J.; Balyasnikova, I. V.;
Scharenborg, N.; Looman, M.; Boomsma, F.; de Keijzer, M. H.; van Duijn,
C.; Martin, S.; Soubrier, F.; Adema, G. J.: Point mutation in the
stalk of angiotensin-converting enzyme causes a dramatic increase
in serum angiotensin-converting enzyme but no cardiovascular disease. Circulation 104:
1236-1240, 2001.

50. Krege, J. H.; John, S. W. M.; Langenbach, L. L.; Hodgin, J. B.;
Hagaman, J. R.; Bachman, E. S.; Jennette, J. C.; O'Brien, D. A.; Smithies,
O.: Male-female differences in fertility and blood pressure in ACE-deficient
mice. Nature 375: 146-148, 1995.

51. Kurtz, T. W.: The ACE of hearts. Nature 359: 588-589, 1992.

52. Lindpaintner, K.; Lee, M.; Larson, M. G.; Rao, V. S; Pfeffer,
M. A.; Ordovas, J. M.; Schaefer, E. J.; Wilson, A. F.; Wilson, P.
W. F.; Vasan, R. S.; Myers, R. H.; Levy, D.: Absence of association
or genetic linkage between the angiotensin-converting-enzyme gene
and left ventricular mass. New Eng. J. Med. 334: 1023-1028, 1996.

53. Lindpaintner, K.; Pfeffer, M. A.; Kreutz, R.; Stampfer, M. J.;
Grodstein, F.; LaMotte, F.; Buring, J.; Hennekens, C. H.: A prospective
evaluation of an angiotensin-converting-enzyme gene polymorphism and
the risk of ischemic heart disease. New Eng. J. Med. 332: 706-711,
1995.

54. Linnebank, M.; Kesper, K.; Jeub, M.; Urbach, H.; Wullner, U.;
Klockgether, T.; Schmidt, S.: Hereditary elevation of angiotensin
converting enzyme suggesting neurosarcoidosis. Neurology 61: 1819-1820,
2003.

55. Marre, M.; Bernadet, P.; Gallois, Y.; Savagner, F.; Guyene, T.-T.;
Hallab, M.; Cambien, F.; Passa, P.; Alhenc-Gelas, F.: Relationships
between angiotensin I converting enzyme gene polymorphism, plasma
levels, and diabetic retinal and renal complications. Diabetes 43:
384-388, 1994.

56. Marre, M.; Jeunemaitre, X.; Gallois, Y.; Rodier, M.; Chatellier,
G.; Sert, C.; Dusselier, L.; Kahal, Z.; Chaillous, L.; Halimi, S.;
Muller, A.; Sackmann, H.; Bauduceau, B.; Bled, F.; Passa, P.; Alhenc-Gelas,
F.: Contribution of genetic polymorphism in the renin-angiotensin
system to the development of renal complications in insulin-dependent
diabetes. J. Clin. Invest. 99: 1585-1595, 1997.

57. Martinuzzi, A.; Sartori, E.; Fanin, M.; Nascimbeni, A.; Valente,
L.; Angelini, C.; Siciliano, G.; Mongini, T.; Tonin, P.; Tomelleri,
G.; Toscano, A.; Merlini, L.; Bindoff, L. A.; Bertelli, S.: Phenotype
modulators in myophosphorylase deficiency. Ann. Neurol. 53: 497-502,
2003.

58. Mattei, M.-G.; Hubert, C.; Alhenc-Gelas, F.; Roeckel, N.; Corvol,
P.; Soubrier, F.: Angiotensin-I converting enzyme gene is on chromosome
17. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51: 1041, 1989.

59. Meng, Y.; Baldwin, C. T.; Bowirrat, A.; Waraska, K.; Inzelberg,
R.; Friedland, R. P.; Farrer, L. A.: Association of polymorphisms
in the angiotensin-converting enzyme gene with Alzheimer disease in
an Israeli Arab community. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 78: 871-877, 2006.

60. Montgomery, H. E.; Clarkson, P.; Dollery, C. M.; Prasad, K.; Losi,
M.-A.; Hemingway, H.; Statters, D.; Jubb, M.; Girvain, M.; Varnava,
A.; World, M.; Deanfield, J.; Talmud, P.; McEwan, J. R.; McKenna,
W. J.; Humphries, S.: Association of angiotensin-converting enzyme
gene I/D polymorphism with change in left ventricular mass in response
to physical training. Circulation 96: 741-747, 1997.

61. Montgomery, H. E.; Marshall, R.; Hemingway, H.; Myerson, S.; Clarkson,
P.; Dollery, C.; Hayward, M.; Holliman, D. E.; Jubb, M.; World, M.;
Thomas, E. L.; Brynes, A. E.; Saeed, N.; Barnard, M.; Bell, J. D.;
Prasad, K.; Rayson, M.; Talmud, P. J.; Humphries, S. E.: Human gene
for physical performance. (Letter) Nature 393: 221-222, 1998.

62. Natesh, R.; Schwager, S. L. U.; Sturrock, E. D.; Acharya, K. R.
: Crystal structure of the human angiotensin-converting enzyme-lisinopril
complex. Nature 421: 551-554, 2003.

63. Ohishi, M.; Fujii, K.; Minamino, T.; Hagaki, J.; Kamitani, A.;
Rakugi, H.; Zhao, Y.; Mikami, H.; Miki, T.; Ogihara, T.: A potent
genetic risk factor for restenosis. (Letter) Nature Genet. 5: 324-325,
1993.

64. Oike, Y.; Hata, A.; Ogata, Y.; Numata, Y.; Shido, K.; Kondo, K.
: Angiotensin converting enzyme as a genetic risk factor for coronary
artery spasm: implication in the pathogenesis of myocardial infarction. J.
Clin. Invest. 96: 2975-2979, 1995.

65. Okabe, T.; Fusisawa, M.; Yotsumoto, M.; Takaru, F.; Lanzillo,
J. J.; Fanburg, B. L.: Familial elevation of serum angiotensin-converting
enzyme. Quart. J. Med. 216: 55-61, 1985.

66. Pei, Y.; Scholey, J.; Thai, K.; Suzuki, M.; Cattran, D.: Association
of angiotensinogen gene T235 variant with progression of immunoglobulin
A nephropathy in Caucasian patients. J. Clin. Invest. 100: 814-820,
1997.

67. Pfeffer, M. A.; Braunwald, E.; Moye, L. A.; Basta, L.; Brown,
E. J., Jr.; Cuddy, T. E.; Davis, B. R.; Geltman, E. M.; Goldman, S.;
Flaker, G. C.; Klein, M.; Lamas, G. A.; Packer, M.; Rouleau, J.; Rouleau,
J. L.; Rutherford, J.; Wertheimer, J. H.; Hawkins, C. M.: Effect
of captopril on mortality and morbidity in patients with left ventricular
dysfunction after myocardial infarction: results of the survival and
ventricular enlargement trial. New Eng. J. Med. 327: 669-677, 1992.

68. Ramaraj, P.; Kessler, S. P.; Colmenares, C.; Sen, G. C.: Selective
restoration of male fertility in mice lacking angiotensin-converting
enzymes by sperm-specific expression of the testicular isozyme. J.
Clin. Invest. 102: 371-378, 1998.

69. Rigat, B.; Hubert, C.; Alhenc-Gelas, F.; Cambien, F.; Corvol,
P.; Soubrier, F.: An insertion/deletion polymorphism in the angiotensin
I-converting enzyme gene accounting for half the variance of serum
enzyme levels. J. Clin. Invest. 86: 1343-1346, 1990.

70. Rigat, B.; Hubert, C.; Corvol, P.; Soubrier, F.: PCR detection
of the insertion/deletion polymorphism of the human angiotensin converting
enzyme gene (DCP1) (dipeptidylcarboxypeptidase 1). Nucleic Acids
Res. 20: 1433, 1992.

71. Ruiz, J.; Blanche, H.; Cohen, N.; Velho, G.; Cambien, F.; Cohen,
D.; Passa, P.; Froguel, P.: Insertion/deletion polymorphism of the
angiotensin-converting enzyme gene is strongly associated with coronary
heart disease in non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 91: 3662-3665, 1994.

72. Sayed-Tabatabaei, F. A.; Schut, A. F. C.; Arias Vasquez, A.; Bertoli-Avella,
A. M.; Hofman, A.; Witteman, J. C. M.; van Duijn, C. M.: Angiotensin
converting enzyme gene polymorphism and cardiovascular morbidity and
mortality: the Rotterdam study. J. Med. Genet. 42: 26-30, 2005.

73. Schachter, F.; Faure-Delanef, L.; Guenot, F.; Rouger, H.; Froguel,
P.; Lesueur-Ginot, L.; Cohen, D.: Genetic associations with human
longevity at the APOE and ACE loci. Nature Genet. 6: 29-32, 1994.

74. Schmidt, S.; Schone, N.; Ritz, E.; Giesel, R.; Bergis, K.; Strojek,
K.; Greszczak, W.; Schroter, W.; Willms, B. H. L.; Petzold, R.; Henrichs,
H. R.; Rambausek, M.; Schwarzbeck, A.; Kohr, B.; Schneider, P.; Bosch,
A.: Association of ACE gene polymorphism and diabetic nephropathy? Kidney
Int. 47: 1176-1181, 1995. Note: Erratum: Kidney Int. 48: 915 only,
1995.

75. Schunkert, H.; Hense, H.-W.; Holmer, S. R.; Stender, M.; Perz,
S.; Keil, U.; Lorell, B. H.; Riegger, G. A. J.: Association between
a deletion polymorphism of the angiotensin-converting-enzyme gene
and left ventricular hypertrophy. New Eng. J. Med. 330: 1634-1638,
1994.

76. Schurks, M.; Zee, R. Y. L.; Buring, J. E.; Kurth, T.: ACE D/I
polymorphism, migraine, and cardiovascular disease in women. Neurology 72:
650-656, 2009.

77. Seguro, C.; Sau, F.; Zedda, N.; Mura, O.; Montaldo, C.; Scano,
G.; Arru, A.; Leo, M. R.; Aru, A.; Cherchi, A.: Hemodynamic assessment
at rest and during dynamic physical exercise in young subjects with
and without hypertensive parents. Cardiologia 40: 391-397, 1995.

78. Singer, D. R. J.; Missouris, C. G.; Jeffery, S.: Angiotensin-converting
enzyme gene polymorphism: what to do about all the confusion? (Editorial) Circulation 94:
236-239, 1996.

79. Slowik, A.; Turaj, W.; Dziedzic, T.; Haefele, A.; Pera, J.; Malecki,
M. T.; Glodzik-Sobanska, L.; Szermer, P.; Figlewicz, D. A.; Szczudlik,
A.: DD genotype of ACE gene is a risk factor for intracerebral hemorrhage. Neurology 63:
359-361, 2004.

80. Soubrier, F.; Alhenc-Gelas, F.; Hubert, C.; Allegrini, J.; John,
M.; Tregear, G.; Corvol, P.: Two putative active centers in human
angiotensin I-converting enzyme revealed by molecular cloning. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 9386-9390, 1988.

81. Suehiro, T.; Morita, T.; Inoue, M.; Kumon, Y.; Ikeda, Y.; Hashimoto,
K.: Increased amount of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) mRNA
originating from the ACE allele with deletion. Hum. Genet. 115:
91-96, 2004.

82. Tarnow, L.; Cambien, F.; Rossing, P.; Nielsen, F. S.; Hansen,
B. V.; Lecerf, L.; Poirier, O.; Danilov, S.; Parving, H.-H.: Lack
of relationship between an insertion/deletion polymorphism in the
angiotensin I-converting enzyme gene and diabetic nephropathy and
proliferative retinopathy in IDDM patients. Diabetes 44: 489-494,
1995.

83. Tian, X.-L.; Pinto, Y. M.; Costerousse, O.; Franz, W. M.; Lippoldt,
A.; Hoffmann. S.; Unger, T.; Paul, M.: Over-expression of angiotensin
converting enzyme-1 augments cardiac hypertrophy in transgenic rats. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 13: 1441-1450, 2004.

84. Tiret, L.; Rigat, B.; Visvikis, S.; Breda, C.; Corvol, P.; Cambien,
F.; Soubrier, F.: Evidence, from combined segregation and linkage
analysis, that a variant of the angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE)
gene controls plasma ACE levels. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 51: 197-205,
1992.

85. van den Bree, M. B. M.; Schieken, R. M.; Moskowitz, W. B.; et
al: Genetic regulation of hemodynamic variables during dynamic exercise.
The MCV Twin Study. Circulation 94: 1864-1869, 1996.

86. Vleming, L. J.; van der Pijl, J. W.; Lemkes, H. H. P. J.; Westendorp,
R. G. J.; Maassen, J. A.; Daha, M. R.; van Es, L. A.; van Kooten,
C.: The DD genotype of the ACE gene polymorphism is associated with
progression of diabetic nephropathy to end stage renal failure in
IDDM. Clin. Nephrol. 51: 133-140, 1999.

87. Williams, A. G.; Rayson, M. P.; Jubb, M.; World, M.; Woods, D.
R.; Hayward, M.; Martin, J.; Humphries, S. E.; Montgomery, H. E.:
The ACE gene and muscle performance. Nature 403: 614 only, 2000.

88. Winkelmann, B. R.; Nauck, M.; Klein, B.; Russ, A. P.; Bohm, B.
O.; Siekmeier, R.; Ihnken, K.; Verho, M.; Gross, W.; Marz, W.: Deletion
polymorphism of the angiotensin I-converting enzyme gene is associated
with increased plasma angiotensin-converting enzyme activity but not
with increased risk for myocardial infarction and coronary artery
disease. Ann. Intern. Med. 125: 19-25, 1996.

89. Winnicki, M.; Accurso, V.; Hoffmann, M.; Pawlowski, R.; Dorigatti,
F.; Santonastaso, M.; Longo, D.; Krupa-Wojciechowska, B.; Jeunemaitre,
X.; Pessina, A. C.; Somers, V. K.; Palatini, P.: Physical activity
and angiotensin-converting enzyme gene polymorphism in mild hypertensives. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 125A: 38-44, 2004.

90. Woods, D.; Onambele, G.; Woledge, R.; Skelton, D.; Bruce, S.;
Humphries, S. E.; Montgomery, H.: Angiotensin-I converting enzyme
genotype-dependent benefit from hormone replacement therapy in isometric
muscle strength and bone mineral density. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86:
2200-2204, 2001.

91. Yoon, H.-J.; Kim, H.; Kim, H. L.; Lee, S. G.; Zheng, S.; Shin,
J. H.; Lim, C. S.; Kim, S.; Lee, J. S.; Lee, D. S.; Kim, Y. S.: Interdependent
effect of angiotensin-converting enzyme and platelet-activating factor
acetylhydrolase gene polymorphisms on the progression of immunoglobulin
A nephropathy. Clin. Genet. 62: 128-134, 2002.

92. Yoshida, H.; Mitarai, T.; Kawamura, T.; Kitajima, T.; Miyazaki,
Y.; Nagasawa, R.; Kawaguchi, Y.; Kubo, H.; Ichikawa, I.; Sakai, O.
: Role of the deletion polymorphism of the angiotensin converting
enzyme gene in the progression and therapeutic responsiveness of IgA
nephropathy. J. Clin. Invest. 96: 2162-2169, 1995.

93. Yoshioka, T.; Xu, Y.; Yoshida, H.; Shiraga, H.; Muraki, T.; Ito,
K.: Deletion polymorphism of the angiotensin converting enzyme gene
predicts persistent proteinuria in Henoch-Schonlein purpura nephritis. Arch.
Dis. Child. 79: 394-399, 1998.

94. Zhang, B.; Sakai, T.; Miura, S.; Kiyonaga, A.; Tanaka, H.; Shindo,
M.; Saku, K.: Association of angiotensin-converting-enzyme gene polymorphism
with the depressor response to mild exercise therapy in patients with
mild to moderate essential hypertension. Clin. Genet. 62: 328-333,
2002.

95. Zhang, B.; Tanaka, H.; Shono, N.; Miura, S.; Kiyonaga, A.; Shindo,
M.; Saku, K.: The I allele of the angiotensin-converting enzyme gene
is associated with an increased percentage of slow-twitch type I fibers
in human skeletal muscle. Clin. Genet. 63: 139-144, 2003.

96. Zhu, X.; Bouzekri, N.; Southam, L.; Cooper, R. S.; Adeyemo, A.;
McKenzie, C. A.; Luke, A.; Chen, G.; Elston, R. C.; Ward, R.: Linkage
and association analysis of angiotensin I-converting enzyme (ACE)-gene
polymorphisms with ACE concentration and blood pressure. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 68: 1139-1148, 2001.

97. Zhu, X.; McKenzie, C. A.; Forrester, T.; Nickerson, D. A.; Broeckel,
U.; Schunkert, H.; Doering, A.; Jacob, H. J.; Cooper, R. S.; Rieder,
M. J.: Localization of a small genomic region associated with elevated
ACE. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 1144-1153, 2000. Note: Erratum: Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 67: 1365 only, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/1/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/7/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/12/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/12/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/24/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/13/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/21/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/22/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/14/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/10/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/6/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/27/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/12/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/2/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin -updated: 6/10/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/12/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/8/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/29/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/21/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/16/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/2/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/3/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/17/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/14/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/1/2004
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/18/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/3/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/27/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/22/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/3/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/25/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/6/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/13/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/14/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/13/2001
Michael J. Wright - updated: 7/23/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/13/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/10/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/21/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/9/2000
Michael J. Wright - updated: 3/22/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/7/2000
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 12/2/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/7/1999
Paul Brennan - updated: 2/3/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/23/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/19/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/13/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/27/1998
Clair A. Francomano - updated: 5/7/1998
Paul Brennan - updated: 11/17/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/20/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/19/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/27/1997
Cynthia K. Ewing - updated: 10/23/1996
Cynthia K. Ewing - updated: 10/11/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/14/1989

EDITED carol: 05/02/2013
ckniffin: 5/1/2013
terry: 3/15/2013
joanna: 3/13/2012
carol: 3/7/2012
ckniffin: 3/5/2012
joanna: 10/5/2011
terry: 11/24/2010
alopez: 8/30/2010
alopez: 7/2/2010
wwang: 5/27/2009
wwang: 5/20/2009
ckniffin: 5/7/2009
carol: 2/19/2009
carol: 2/13/2009
carol: 2/12/2009
wwang: 2/5/2009
wwang: 1/12/2009
alopez: 6/25/2008
terry: 6/24/2008
carol: 6/13/2008
wwang: 10/15/2007
wwang: 6/15/2007
terry: 6/13/2007
alopez: 12/6/2006
alopez: 9/21/2006
alopez: 6/27/2006
terry: 6/23/2006
terry: 6/22/2006
carol: 5/23/2006
alopez: 4/18/2006
terry: 4/14/2006
mgross: 11/29/2005
terry: 11/10/2005
wwang: 10/14/2005
terry: 10/6/2005
alopez: 9/28/2005
terry: 9/27/2005
mgross: 9/12/2005
alopez: 8/2/2005
carol: 6/13/2005
ckniffin: 6/10/2005
wwang: 4/25/2005
ckniffin: 4/12/2005
alopez: 4/8/2005
carol: 4/7/2005
wwang: 3/30/2005
wwang: 3/29/2005
wwang: 3/23/2005
wwang: 3/21/2005
wwang: 3/17/2005
terry: 3/16/2005
wwang: 3/2/2005
terry: 2/21/2005
terry: 2/18/2005
wwang: 2/10/2005
wwang: 2/9/2005
wwang: 2/8/2005
wwang: 2/7/2005
mgross: 11/3/2004
terry: 11/2/2004
tkritzer: 10/4/2004
ckniffin: 9/17/2004
tkritzer: 7/16/2004
terry: 7/14/2004
tkritzer: 6/23/2004
tkritzer: 6/9/2004
terry: 6/1/2004
carol: 5/19/2004
terry: 5/18/2004
carol: 3/17/2004
joanna: 2/10/2004
tkritzer: 2/9/2004
ckniffin: 2/3/2004
carol: 11/14/2003
tkritzer: 6/9/2003
ckniffin: 5/27/2003
tkritzer: 4/28/2003
terry: 4/22/2003
alopez: 4/3/2003
terry: 4/3/2003
cwells: 11/25/2002
terry: 11/20/2002
carol: 11/13/2002
tkritzer: 11/12/2002
terry: 11/6/2002
carol: 9/19/2002
tkritzer: 9/13/2002
alopez: 1/7/2002
mcapotos: 12/21/2001
terry: 12/14/2001
alopez: 8/13/2001
alopez: 8/1/2001
terry: 7/23/2001
cwells: 6/20/2001
cwells: 6/15/2001
terry: 6/13/2001
cwells: 5/18/2001
cwells: 5/16/2001
terry: 5/10/2001
mcapotos: 12/11/2000
mcapotos: 11/30/2000
terry: 11/21/2000
carol: 10/25/2000
alopez: 6/15/2000
terry: 6/9/2000
alopez: 3/22/2000
alopez: 2/9/2000
terry: 2/7/2000
alopez: 2/3/2000
carol: 12/14/1999
carol: 12/7/1999
carol: 12/6/1999
terry: 12/2/1999
mgross: 6/14/1999
terry: 6/7/1999
carol: 2/3/1999
carol: 1/6/1999
alopez: 12/23/1998
terry: 12/23/1998
carol: 8/24/1998
terry: 8/19/1998
carol: 8/17/1998
terry: 8/13/1998
dkim: 7/24/1998
dkim: 7/17/1998
alopez: 5/28/1998
terry: 5/27/1998
dholmes: 5/7/1998
carol: 1/26/1998
alopez: 1/5/1998
alopez: 12/18/1997
terry: 11/20/1997
terry: 11/10/1997
terry: 11/7/1997
jenny: 7/9/1997
alopez: 6/26/1997
jenny: 6/23/1997
alopez: 6/19/1997
mark: 5/30/1997
jenny: 5/30/1997
terry: 5/27/1997
terry: 11/4/1996
jamie: 10/23/1996
jamie: 10/16/1996
jamie: 10/11/1996
mark: 4/29/1996
terry: 4/24/1996
mark: 3/14/1996
terry: 3/5/1996
mark: 1/27/1996
terry: 1/26/1996
terry: 1/19/1996
mark: 1/5/1996
terry: 1/3/1996
mark: 6/15/1995
carol: 9/9/1994
jason: 7/19/1994
carol: 12/17/1993
carol: 1/19/1993
carol: 1/7/1993

134635	TITLE *134635 FARNESYLTRANSFERASE, CAAX BOX, ALPHA; FNTA
;;PROTEIN GERANYLGERANYLTRANSFERASE TYPE I, ALPHA SUBUNIT; PGGT1A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The FNTA gene encodes the alpha subunit for the heterodimeric enzymes
CAAX farnesyltransferase and CAAX geranylgeranyltransferase (Zhang et
al., 1994). The beta subunits are encoded by the FNTB (134636) and
PGGT1B (602031) genes, respectively.

GENE FAMILY

Eukaryotic cells contain 3 distinct prenyltransferases that attach
either a farnesyl group (15 carbons) or a geranylgeranyl group (20
carbons) in thioether linkage to C-terminal cysteine residues in a
variety of cellular proteins (Schafer and Rine, 1992). These
posttranslational modifications provide a mechanism for membrane
localization of proteins that lack a transmembrane domain. Prenylation
is a frequent covalent modification of proteins; Epstein et al. (1991)
estimated that approximately 0.5% of all proteins in mammalian tissues
are prenylated. The best characterized of the prenyltransferases, CAAX
farnesyltransferase (FTase), attaches a farnesyl group from farnesyl
pyrophosphate to cysteine residues at the fourth position from the C
terminus of proteins that end in the so-called CAAX box, where C is
cysteine, A is usually but not always an aliphatic amino acid, and X is
typically methionine or serine. This enzyme has the remarkable property
of farnesylating peptides as short as 4 residues in length that conform
to the CAAX consensus sequence (summary by Andres et al., 1993).

CLONING

Epstein et al. (1991) noted that full-length cDNAs for the alpha and
beta subunits of the rat farnesyltransferase were cloned, and both were
shown to be essential for catalytic activity. Andres et al. (1993) used
the rat cDNAs to clone cDNAs for the human alpha and beta (134636)
subunits. The human and rat amino acid sequences show 93% identity for
the alpha subunit and 96% identity for the beta subunit.

GENE FUNCTION

CAAX farnesyltransferase is an alpha-beta heterodimeric enzyme with a
molecular mass of approximately 100 kD. Geranylgeranyltransferase type I
(GGTase-I) is also a heterodimeric enzyme. Zhang et al. (1994) analyzed
tryptic digests of the bovine GGTase-I alpha subunit and showed that it
is identical to that of bovine FTase; GGTase-I uses a different beta
chain (PGGT1B; 602031). Coexpression of human PGGT1B and FNTA cDNAs in
E. coli produced recombinant GGTase-I with electrophoretic and enzymatic
properties indistinguishable from those of native GGTase-I. The beta
chains of both FTase (FNTB; 134636) and GGTase are catalytic for
specific substrates (e.g., p21ras; see 190020).

A role for the alpha subunit had been uncertain until Wang et al. (1996)
showed, using the 2-hybrid yeast assay, that FNTA is a specific
cytoplasmic interactor of the transforming growth factor-beta (190180)
and activin type I (102576) receptors. Wang et al. (1996) stated that
because of these interactions FNTA is likely to be a key component of
the signaling pathway which involves p21ras, an important substrate for
farnesyltransferase. Membrane localization and activity of RAS is
dependent on farnesylation; Wang et al. (1996) proposed that the actions
of TGF-beta and activin on cell growth may be mediated through their
ability to affect ras farnesylation via FNTA.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Long et al. (2002) presented a complete series of structures
representing the major steps along the reaction coordinate of the enzyme
protein farnesyltransferase. From these observations, Long et al. (2002)
deduced the determinants of substrate specificity and an unusual
mechanism in which product release requires binding of substrate,
analogous to classically processive enzymes. A structural model for the
transition state consistent with previous mechanistic studies was also
constructed.

MAPPING

By Southern blot hybridization and PCR analyses of panels of
human/Chinese hamster somatic cell hybrid lines and by fluorescence
chromosomal in situ hybridization, Andres et al. (1993) mapped the FNTA
gene to 8p22-q11. Two genes related to FNTA were also identified: FNTAL1
(FNTAP1) was assigned to 11q13.4-q14.1 and FNTAL2 (FNTAP2) to chromosome
13.

Using interspecific backcross analysis, Porter and Messer (1996) mapped
the Fnta gene to mouse chromosome 8.

REFERENCE 1. Andres, D. A.; Milatovich, A.; Ozcelik, T.; Wenzlau, J. M.; Brown,
M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.; Francke, U.: cDNA cloning of the two subunits
of human CAAX farnesyltransferase and chromosomal mapping of FNTA
and FNTB loci and related sequences. Genomics 18: 105-112, 1993.

2. Epstein, W. W.; Lever, D.; Leining, L. M.; Bruenger, E.; Rilling,
H. C.: Quantitation of prenylcysteines by a selective cleavage reaction. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 9668-9670, 1991.

3. Long, S. B.; Casey, P. J.; Beese, L. S.: Reaction path of protein
farnesyltransferase at atomic resolution. Nature 419: 645-650, 2002.

4. Porter, J. C.; Messer, A.: Genetic mapping of farnesyltransferase
alpha(Fnta) to mouse chromosome 8. Mammalian Genome 7: 622-623,
1996.

5. Schafer, W. R.; Rine, J.: Protein prenylation: genes, enzymes,
targets, and functions. Annu. Rev. Genet. 26: 209-237, 1992.

6. Wang, T.; Danielson, P. D.; Li, B.; Shah, P. C.; Kim, S. D.; Donahoe,
P. K.: The p21ras farnesyltransferase alpha subunit in TGF-beta and
activin signaling. Science 271: 1120-1122, 1996.

7. Zhang, F. L.; Diehl, R. E.; Kohl, N. E.; Gibbs, J. B.; Giros, B.;
Casey, P. J.; Omer, C. A.: cDNA cloning and expression of rat and
human protein geranylgeranyltransferase type-I. J. Biol. Chem. 269:
3175-3180, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/18/2002
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 10/3/1997
Alan F. Scott - updated: 4/22/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/14/1993

EDITED carol: 11/21/2011
alopez: 3/15/2010
alopez: 10/21/2002
terry: 10/18/2002
alopez: 11/3/1997
mark: 10/7/1997
terry: 10/3/1997
mark: 10/3/1997
terry: 11/14/1996
mark: 4/22/1996
terry: 4/22/1996
mark: 4/22/1996
carol: 10/14/1993

114090	TITLE *114090 CALPASTATIN; CAST
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Calpastatin is an endogenous inhibitor of calpains (see 114170)
consisting of 4 inhibitory repeats, each of which neutralizes an
activated calpain. Unlike proteinases, it is an intrinsically
unstructured protein, adopting a defined structure only upon binding to
active calpain ().

GENE FUNCTION

In erythrocytes of patients with essential hypertension (see 145500),
the level of calpastatin activity is significantly lower than in the red
cells of normotensive subjects. Pontremoli et al. (1988) demonstrated by
Western blot analysis that the decreased inhibitor activity is the
result of a decrease in the amount of the inhibitor protein. Calpastatin
isolated and purified from erythrocytes of normotensive and hypertensive
patients had identical specific activities. Pontremoli et al. (1988)
also presented evidence indicating that the decreased level of
calpastatin cannot be ascribed to accelerated decay during the red cell
life span.

Mimori et al. (1995) demonstrated that anti-calpastatin autoantibodies
are present in as many as 57% of rheumatoid arthritis patients and
concluded that they may participate in pathogenic mechanisms of this and
other rheumatic diseases which showed a lower frequency.

MAPPING

Using a cDNA probe encoding the 5-prime terminal region of CAST for
spot-blot analysis of sorted chromosomes and chromosomal in situ
hybridization, Inazawa et al. (1990) assigned the CAST gene to 5q14-q22.
Inazawa et al. (1991) mapped CAST to 5q15-q21 by 2 methods of in situ
hybridization and confirmed the results by spot-blot analysis of sorted
chromosomes.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Moldoveanu et al. (2008) reported the 3.0-angstrom crystal structure of
calcium-bound m-calpain (CAPN2; 114230) in complex with the first
calpastatin repeat, both from rat, revealing the mechanism of exclusive
specificity. The structure highlighted the complexity of calpain
activation by calcium, illustrating key residues in a peripheral domain
that serve to stabilize the protease core on calcium binding. Fully
activated calpain binds 10 Ca(2+) atoms, resulting in several
conformational changes allowing recognition by calpastatin. Calpain
inhibition is mediated by the intimate contact with 3 critical regions
of calpastatin. Two regions target the penta-EF-hand domains of calpain,
and the third occupies the substrate-binding cleft, projecting a loop
around the active site thiol to evade proteolysis.

Hanna et al. (2008) reported the 2.4-angstrom resolution crystal
structure of the calcium-bound calpain-2 (m-calpain) heterodimer bound
by 1 of the 4 inhibitory domains of calpastatin. They observed that
calpastatin inhibits calpain by occupying both sides of the active site
cleft. Although the inhibitor passes through the active site cleft it
escapes cleavage in a novel manner by looping out and around the active
site cysteine. The inhibitory domain of calpastatin recognizes multiple
lower affinity sites present only in the calcium-bound form of the
enzyme, resulting in an interaction that is tight, specific, and
calcium-dependent. Hanna et al. (2008) concluded that this crystal
structure, and that of the related complex described by Moldoveanu et
al. (2008), also revealed the conformational changes that calpain
undergoes on binding calcium, which include opening of the active site
cleft and movement of the domains relative to each other to produce a
more compact enzyme.

ANIMAL MODEL

Reduced sarcolemmal integrity in dystrophin (300377)-deficient muscles
of mdx mice and Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD; 310200) patients had
been reported to result in altered calcium homeostasis. Previous studies
had shown a correlative relationship between calpain activity in
dystrophic muscle and muscle necrosis, but had not tested whether
calpain activation precedes cell death or is a consequence of it.
Spencer and Mellgren (2002) generated mdx mice that overexpressed a
calpastatin transgene in muscle. Normal-appearing transgenic mice
overexpressing calpastatin were crossed with mdx mice. Two lines of mice
were examined, with different levels of calpastatin overexpression. Both
lines of transgenic/mdx mice showed reductions in muscle necrosis at 4
weeks of age. The extent of improvement correlated with the level of
calpastatin protein expression. Membrane damage, as assessed by procion
orange and creatine kinase assays, was unchanged, supporting the idea
that calpains act downstream of the primary muscle defect. The authors
hypothesized that calpains may play an active role in necrotic processes
in dystrophic muscle, and that inhibition of calpains might provide a
therapeutic option for treatment of DMD.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Mellgren  (2008)
REFERENCE 1. Hanna, R. A.; Campbell, R. L.; Davies, P. L.: Calcium-bound structure
of calpain and its mechanism of inhibition by calpastatin. Nature 456:
409-412, 2008.

2. Inazawa, J.; Nakagawa, H.; Misawa, S.; Abe, T.; Minoshima, S.;
Fukuyama, R.; Maki, M.; Murachi, T.; Hatanaka, M.; Shimizu, N.: Assignment
of the human calpastatin gene (CAST) to chromosome 5 at region q14-q22. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 54: 156-158, 1990.

3. Inazawa, J.; Nakagawa, H.; Misawa, S.; Abe, T.; Minoshima, S.;
Fukuyama, R.; Maki, M.; Murachi, T.; Hatanaka, M.; Shimizu, N.: Assignment
of the human calpastatin gene (CAST) to chromosome 5 at region q15-q21.
(Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 58: 1898 only, 1991.

4. Mellgren, R. L.: Enzyme knocked for a loop. Nature 456: 337-338,
2008.

5. Mimori, T.; Suganuma, K.; Tanami, Y.; Nojima, T.; Matsumura, M.;
Fujii, T.; Yoshizawa, T.; Suzuki, K.; Akizuki, M.: Autoantibodies
to calpastatin (an endogenous inhibitor for calcium-dependent neutral
protease, calpain) in systemic rheumatic diseases. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 92: 7267-7271, 1995.

6. Moldoveanu, T.; Gehring, K.; Green, D. R.: Concerted multi-pronged
attack by calpastatin to occlude the catalytic cleft of heterodimeric
calpains. Nature 456: 404-408, 2008.

7. Pontremoli, S.; Salamino, F.; Sparatore, B.; De Tullio, R.; Pontremoli,
R.; Melloni, E.: Characterization of the calpastatin defect in erythrocytes
from patients with essential hypertension. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 157: 867-874, 1988.

8. Spencer, M. J.; Mellgren, R. L.: Overexpression of a calpastatin
transgene in mdx muscle reduces dystrophic pathology. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 11: 2645-2655, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/11/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/5/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/20/1989

EDITED alopez: 03/16/2009
alopez: 3/16/2009
terry: 3/11/2009
cwells: 2/5/2004
mark: 9/19/1995
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/21/1992
carol: 8/8/1991
carol: 2/26/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990

164960	TITLE *164960 ONCOGENE PIM 1; PIM1
;;SERINE/THREONINE PROTEIN KINASE PIM1;;
PIM
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The protooncogene PIM1 encodes a protein kinase upregulated in prostate
cancer (Dhanasekaran et al., 2001).

CLONING

Viral leukemogenesis in mice is often initiated by proviral activation
of the highly conserved cellular gene Pim1. Domen et al. (1987) compared
the nucleotide sequence of human and mouse PIM1 cDNAs. Meeker et al.
(1987) also characterized the human PIM1 gene. The deduced amino acid
sequence showed significant homology to a number of the protein kinases
but did not have a transmembrane region. Studies of expression of this
gene using Northern blots of human cell lines showed it to be
transcribed primarily in B-lymphoid and myeloid cell lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Amson et al. (1989) showed that the 33-kD product of the PIM gene is
highly expressed in the liver and spleen during fetal hematopoiesis. In
contrast, it is only slightly expressed in circulating granulocytes in
adults. It was overexpressed in hematopoietic malignancies, particularly
in myeloid and lymphoid acute leukemias. The results implied a
physiologic role of the PIM1 oncogene during hematopoietic development
and a deregulation of the gene in various leukemias.

Saris et al. (1991) provided evidence that both the murine and the human
PIM1 gene products are protein-serine/threonine kinases. In the mouse,
at any rate, they showed that the gene encodes both a 44- and a 34-kD
protein, the former being an amino-terminal extension of the latter
which is synthesized by alternative translation initiation at an
upstream CUG codon.

Using cDNA microarrays, Dhanasekaran et al. (2001) examined gene
expression profiles of more than 50 normal and neoplastic prostate
specimens and 3 common prostate cancer cell lines. Signature expression
profiles of normal adjacent prostate, benign prostatic hypertrophy,
localized prostate cancer, and metastatic, hormone-refractory prostate
cancer were determined. Dhanasekaran et al. (2001) established many
associations between genes and prostate cancer. They assessed 2 of these
genes, hepsin (142440), a transmembrane serine protease, and PIM1, a
serine/threonine kinase, at the protein level using tissue microarrays
consisting of over 700 clinically stratified prostate cancer specimens.
Expression of hepsin and PIM1 proteins was significantly correlated with
measures of clinical outcome.

Using immunofluorescence analysis, Muraski et al. (2007) found that PIM1
showed cytoplasmic expression in normal adult human myocardium, but it
adopted a predominantly nuclear localization in failing human hearts.
PIM1 mRNA and protein abundance were also increased in failing
myocardium compared with normal controls. In a mouse model, perinuclear
Pim1 immunoreactivity increased in border-zone cardiomyocytes after
pressure overload-induced myocardial infarction. Cardioprotective
stimuli associated with Akt (164730) activation induced Pim1 expression,
and cardioprotection was not observed in Pim1-deficient mice. Transgenic
expression of Pim1 in myocardium protected mice from infarction injury
by activation of antiapoptotic signaling, with concomitant increases in
Bcl2 (151430) and Bclxl (600039) protein levels and Bad (603167)
phosphorylation. Calcium dynamics were significantly enhanced in
Pim1-overexpressing transgenic hearts in association with increased
Serca2a (ATP2A2; 108740) expression, and they were depressed in
Pim1-deficient hearts. Muraski et al. (2007) concluded that PIM1 has a
role in cardioprotection downstream of AKT activation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Meeker et al. (1987) analyzed genomic PIM1 clones from a human B cell
leukemia line. The PIM1 transcript was found to derive from 5 kb of
genomic DNA. Six exons and 5 introns were identified.

MAPPING

By means of Southern blot analysis of DNA from somatic cell hybrids,
Cuypers et al. (1986) assigned the human homolog of the murine PIM1
oncogene to 6pter-q12. In the mouse, this gene is located on chromosome
17. By a combination of deletion and linkage mapping, Zoghbi et al.
(1990) determined that the PIM1 locus is located between the MUT locus
(609058) and the HLA cluster, i.e., between 6p21.3 and 6p12. They
identified RFLPs at the PIM1 locus. By fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Ragoussis et al. (1992) refined the assignment to 6p21.2.
Ark et al. (1991) provided refined mapping of the Pim1 locus in the
mouse and used the Pim1 gene as a marker for further genetic analysis of
t-haplotypes on mouse chromosome 17.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In addition to immunoglobulin V genes, the 5-prime sequences of BCL6
(109565) and FAS (TNFRSF6; 134637) are mutated in normal germinal center
B lymphocytes. Genomic instability promotes tumorigenesis through
defective chromosome segregation and DNA mismatch repair inactivation.
By screening 18 loci for mutations, Pasqualucci et al. (2001) identified
changes in the germline sequences of PIM1, MYC (190080), ARHH (602037),
and/or PAX5 (167414), in addition to BCL6, in a majority of diffuse
large-cell lymphomas (DLCLs; see 601889). No mutations in PIM1, MYC,
ARHH, and PAX5 were detected in germinal-center lymphocytes, naive B
cells, or B-cell malignancies other than DLCLs. Most PIM1 mutations,
which were found in 43% of DLCLs, were located in a 1.2-kb stretch of
the first 2 kb from the transcription initiation site and were predicted
to alter the structure and, in some cases, the function of PIM1. FISH
analysis indicated that hypermutation in these genes is not due to
chromosomal translocation, as seen in Burkitt lymphoma (113970).
Chromosomal translocation, however, may be an outcome of hypermutation.
Specific features of the hypermutation process, including the
predominance of single nucleotide substitutions with occasional
deletions or duplications, a preference for transitions over
transversions, and a specific motif targeting RGYW, were recognizable in
each of the hypermutated loci. Pasqualucci et al. (2001) proposed that
aberrant hypermutation of regulatory and coding sequences of genes that
do not represent physiologic targets may provide the basis for DLCL
pathogenesis and explain its phenotypic and clinical heterogeneity. This
hypermutation malfunction is unlikely to be due to defective DNA
mismatch repair and does not appear to involve activation-induced
deaminase (AICDA; 605257)

ANIMAL MODEL

To understand the function of Pim1 and its role in hematopoietic
development, Laird et al. (1993) generated mice deficient in Pim1
function. Pim1-deficient mice were ostensibly normal, healthy, and
fertile; however, detailed analysis demonstrated a correlation of Pim1
deficiency with erythrocyte microcytosis, whereas overexpression of Pim1
in transgenic mice resulted in erythrocyte macrocytosis.

Mikkers et al. (2004) generated compound Pim-deficient mice lacking
Pim1, Pim2 (300295), and Pim3 (610580). These mice were viable and
fertile, but their body size was reduced at birth and throughout
postnatal life. Proliferation of hematopoietic cells in response to
growth factors was impaired in vitro and in vivo. In addition, Pim
proteins were required for efficient cell cycle induction of peripheral
T cells in response to synergistic T-cell receptor (see 186790) and
interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680) signaling.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Selten et al. (1986)
REFERENCE 1. Amson, R.; Sigaux, F.; Przedborski, S.; Flandrin, G.; Givol, D.;
Telerman, A.: The human protooncogene product p33pim is expressed
during fetal hematopoiesis and in diverse leukemias. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 86: 8857-8861, 1989.

2. Ark, B.; Gummere, G.; Bennett, D.; Artzt, K.: Mapping of the Pim-1
oncogene in mouse t-haplotypes and its use to define the relative
map positions of the tcl loci t-0(t-6) and t-w12 and the marker tf
(tufted). Genomics 10: 385-389, 1991.

3. Cuypers, H. T.; Selten, G.; Berns, A.; Geurts van Kessel, A. H.
M.: Assignment of the human homologue of Pim-1, a mouse gene implicated
in leukemogenesis, to the pter-q12 region of chromosome 6. Hum. Genet. 72:
262-265, 1986.

4. Dhanasekaran, S. M.; Barrette, T. R.; Ghosh, D.; Shah, R.; Varambally,
S.; Kurachi, K.; Pienta, K. J.; Rubin, M. A.; Chinnaiyan, A. M.:
Delineation of prognostic biomarkers in prostate cancer. Nature 412:
822-826, 2001.

5. Domen, J.; von Lindern, M.; Hermans, A.; Breuer, M.; Grosveld,
G.; Berns, A.: Comparison of the human and mouse PIM-1 cDNAs: nucleotide
sequence and immunological identification of the in vitro synthesized
PIM-1 protein. Oncogene Res. 1: 103-112, 1987.

6. Laird, P. W.; van der Lugt, N. M. T.; Clarke, A.; Domen, J.; Linders,
K.; McWhir, J.; Berns, A.; Hooper, M.: In vivo analysis of Pim-1
deficiency. Nucleic Acids Res. 21: 4750-4755, 1993.

7. Meeker, T. C.; Nagarajan, L.; ar-Rushdi, A.; Rovera, G.; Huebner,
K.; Croce, C. M.: Characterization of the human PIM-1 gene: a putative
proto-oncogene coding for a tissue specific member of the protein
kinase family. Oncogene Res. 1: 87-101, 1987.

8. Mikkers, H.; Nawijn, M.; Allen, J.; Brouwers, C.; Verhoeven, E.;
Jonkers, J.; Berns, A.: Mice deficient for all PIM kinases display
reduced body size and impaired responses to hematopoietic growth factors. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 24: 6104-6115, 2004.

9. Muraski, J. A.; Rota, M.; Misao, Y.; Fransioli, J.; Cottage, C.;
Gude, N.; Esposito, G.; Delucchi, F.; Arcarese, M.; Alvarez, R.; Siddiqi,
S.; Emmanuel, G. N.; and 13 others: Pim-1 regulates cardiomyocyte
survival downstream of Akt. Nature Med. 13: 1467-1475, 2007. Note:
Erratum: Nature Med. 14: 350 only, 2008.

10. Pasqualucci, L.; Neumeister, P.; Goossens, T.; Nanjangud, G.;
Chaganti, R. S. K.; Kuppers, R.; Dalla-Favera, R.: Hypermutation
of multiple proto-oncogenes in B-cell diffuse large-cell lymphomas. Nature 412:
341-346, 2001.

11. Ragoussis, J.; Senger, G.; Mockridge, I.; Sanseau, P.; Ruddy,
S.; Dudley, K.; Sheer, D.; Trowsdale, J.: A testis-expressed Zn finger
gene (ZNF76) in human 6p21.3 centromeric to the MHC is closely linked
to the human homolog of the t-complex gene tcp-11. Genomics 14:
673-679, 1992.

12. Saris, C. J. M.; Domen, J.; Berns, A.: The pim-1 oncogene encodes
two related protein-serine/threonine kinases by alternative initiation
at AUG and CUG. EMBO J. 10: 655-664, 1991.

13. Selten, G.; Cuypers, H. T.; Boelens, W.; Robanus-Maandag, E.;
Verbeek, J.; Domen, J.; van Beveren, C.; Berns, A.: The primary structure
of the putative oncogene pim-1 shows extensive homology with protein
kinases. Cell 46: 603-611, 1986.

14. Zoghbi, H. Y.; Ballantyne, C. M.; O'Brien, W. E.; McCall, A. E.;
Kwiatkowski, T. J., Jr.; Ledbetter, S. A.; Beaudet, A. L.: Deletion
and linkage mapping of eight markers from the proximal short arm of
chromosome 6. Genomics 6: 352-357, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/25/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/8/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/21/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/7/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/25/1986

EDITED wwang: 05/16/2008
mgross: 1/28/2008
terry: 1/25/2008
mgross: 11/17/2006
terry: 11/8/2006
ckniffin: 12/10/2004
alopez: 8/22/2001
terry: 8/21/2001
mgross: 8/7/2001
carol: 1/10/2001
carol: 12/16/1993
carol: 4/7/1993
carol: 11/12/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 5/22/1991
carol: 5/14/1991

611518	TITLE *611518 DEDICATOR OF CYTOKINESIS 10; DOCK10
;;KIAA0694;;
ZIZIMIN 3; ZIZ3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Ishikawa et al. (1998) cloned a partial DOCK10 cDNA, which they
called KIAA0694. RT-PCR analysis of human tissues detected moderate
expression in ovary, lung, and brain, with weak expression in spleen and
liver.

By database analysis with DOCK1 (601403) sequence as query, Cote and
Vuori (2002) identified DOCK10. DOCK10 is a member of the DOCKD
subfamily, which also includes DOCK9 (607325) and DOCK11 (300681).
Members of the DOCKD subfamily contain an N-terminal PH domain and
conserved DOCK-homology regions, DHR1 and DHR2, also known as CZH1 and
CZH2 (see 607325).

Nishikimi et al. (2005) identified mouse Dock10, which they called
zizimin-3. Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues detected expression
in brain, lung, spleen, and thymus.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Ishikawa et al. (1998) mapped the DOCK10
gene to chromosome 2.

REFERENCE 1. Cote, J.-F.; Vuori, K.: Identification of an evolutionarily conserved
superfamily of DOCK180-related proteins with guanine nucleotide exchange
activity. J. Cell Sci. 115: 4901-4913, 2002.

2. Ishikawa, K.; Nagase, T.; Suyama, M.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.;
Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. X. The complete sequences of 100 new
cDNA clones from brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA
Res. 5: 169-176, 1998.

3. Nishikimi, A.; Meller, N.; Uekawa, N.; Isobe, K.; Schwartz, M.
A.; Maruyama, M.: Zizimin2: a novel, DOCK180-related Cdc42 guanine
nucleotide exchange factor expressed predominantly in lymphocytes. FEBS
Lett. 579: 1039-1046, 2005.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 10/10/2007

EDITED wwang: 10/10/2007

605518	TITLE *605518 LIPIN 1; LPIN1
;;KIAA0188;;
PHOSPHATIDIC ACID PHOSPHOHYDROLASE 1; PAP1;;
PAH1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

LPIN1 is a Mg(2+)-dependent phosphatidic acid (PA) phosphohydrolase (EC
3.1.3.4) that catalyzes the dephosphorylation of PA to yield
diacylglycerol and inorganic phosphate (Han et al., 2006).

CLONING

Mice carrying mutations in the fatty liver dystrophy (fld) gene have
features of human lipodystrophy (Reue et al., 2000). In the human,
lipodystrophy is a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by
loss of body fat, fatty liver, hypertriglyceridemia, and insulin
resistance. Through positional cloning, Peterfy et al. (2001) isolated
the gene responsible for fatty liver dystrophy in mice and characterized
2 independent mutant alleles of the fld gene. They designated the gene
Lpin1 and named the novel nuclear protein which it encodes lipin.
Database analysis identified the human LPIN1 gene, as well as the human
and mouse LPIN2 (605519) and LPIN3 (605520) genes. Consistent with the
observed reduction of adipose tissue mass in fld mice, wildtype Lpin1
mRNA was expressed at high levels in adipose tissue and was induced
during differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. The results indicated
that lipin is required for normal adipose tissue development, and
provided a candidate gene for human lipodystrophy.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated myeloid leukemia
cell line cDNA library, Nagase et al. (1996) cloned LPIN1, which they
designated KIAA0188. The transcript contains an Alu element in its
3-prime UTR, and the deduced 899-amino acid protein shares significant
similarity with S. cerevisiae Pah1. Northern blot analysis detected
LPIN1 in all tissues and cell lines examined, with highest expression in
skeletal muscle and testis.

Peterson et al. (2011) reported that the 924-amino acid isoform of mouse
Lpin1 has an N-terminal conserved domain, followed by a nuclear
localization signal, a central region containing numerous possible
phosphorylation sites, and a C-terminal conserved domain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Suviolahti et al. (2006) stated that the LPIN1 gene contains 20 exons.

MAPPING

Using sequence databases, Peterfy et al. (2001) mapped the human LPIN1
gene to chromosome 2p21; linkage of fat mass and serum leptin levels to
this same region (LSL; 601694) is noteworthy. They mapped the mouse gene
to chromosome 12.

Using radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1996) mapped the LPIN1
gene to chromosome 2.

GENE FUNCTION

Han et al. (2006) showed that human recombinant LPIN1, which they called
PAH1, had Mg(2+)-dependent PA phosphatase activity.

Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex-1 (mTORC1; see FRAP1,
601231) regulates many processes that control growth, including protein
synthesis, autophagy, and lipogenesis. Using wildtype NIH3T3 cells, fld
mutant mouse fibroblasts, and HEK293 cells transfected with various
mouse Lpin1 constructs, Peterson et al. (2011) showed that lipin-1 was
crucial for mTORC1-dependent regulation of lipogenesis by Srebp1
(184756). mTORC1 phosphorylated Lpin1 on numerous sites, causing Lpin1
to be retained in the cytoplasm. Glucose or amino acid starvation, or
inhibition of mTORC1 activity, in HEK293T cells caused complete Lpin1
dephosphorylation and nuclear accumulation. In the nucleus, Lpin1
promoted nuclear remodeling and activation of Srebp1 and Srebp1 target
genes. Inhibition of mTORC1 in mouse liver significantly impaired SREBP
function, making mice resistant, in a Lpin1-dependent fashion, to
hepatic steatosis and hypercholesterolemia induced by a high fat and
high cholesterol diet. Peterson et al. (2011) concluded that LPIN1 is a
key component of the mTORC1-SREBP pathway.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Cao and Hegele (2002) sequenced the 21 exons of the LPIN1 gene in
lipodystrophy patients who had no mutations in known lipodystrophy
genes, and also in normal control subjects. They found no rare LPIN1
coding sequence variants that were exclusive to patients with
lipodystrophy. However, they found 4 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs).

In individuals with autosomal recessive recurrent myoglobinuria
(268200), Zeharia et al. (2008) identified homozygous or compound
heterozygous mutations in the LPIN1 gene (see, e.g.,
605518.0001-605518.0005). All patients presented before age 7 years with
myoglobinuria precipitated by catabolic stress. Development was normal
between episodes. Zeharia et al. (2008) postulated that a defect in
phosphatidic acid phosphatase may result in accumulation of
lysophosphatidate and other lysophospholipids in muscle tissue, which
may result in rhabdomyolysis during stress.

Zeharia et al. (2008) also identified a heterozygous mutation in the
LPIN1 gene (glu769-to-glu; E769G) in an Ashkenazi Jewish individual who
developed statin-induced myopathy. This variant was not detected in 14
individuals who did not have statin-induced myopathy or in 166 control
individuals. In vitro functional expression studies with the yeast
homolog indicated that the E769G variant was pathogenic and resulted in
poor growth, suggesting that the carrier state may predispose for
statin-induced myopathy.

Suviolahti et al. (2006) analyzed lipin transcript levels in human and
mouse adipose tissues and observed in both a strong negative correlation
between lipin mRNA levels and fasting glucose and insulin levels, as
well as an indicator of insulin resistance (see type 2 diabetes,
125853). They genotyped 7 LPIN1 SNPs in 1,109 individuals from 92
dyslipidemic Finnish families and in a case-control sample of 477 obese
and 821 lean individuals and identified SNPs and allelic haplotypes
associated with serum insulin levels and body mass index (BMI; see
606641) (p = 0.002 to 0.04). Suviolahti et al. (2006) concluded that
lipin plays a role in glucose homeostasis and suggested that variation
in LPIN1 has significance in human metabolic traits.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using 2 different tissue-specific lipin transgenic mouse strains, Phan
and Reue (2005) demonstrated that enhanced lipin expression in either
adipose tissue or skeletal muscle promotes obesity. Lipin levels in
adipose tissue influenced the fat storage capacity of the adipocyte,
whereas lipin levels in skeletal muscle acted as a determinant of
whole-body energy expenditure and fat utilization. Phan and Reue (2005)
concluded that variations in lipin levels alone are sufficient to induce
extreme states of adiposity and may represent a mechanism by which
adipose tissue and skeletal muscle modulate fat mass and energy balance.

Nadra et al. (2008) stated that Lpin1-knockout mice develop neonatal
fatty liver that resolves at weaning, a progressive demyelinating
neuropathy affecting peripheral nerves, and lipoatrophy. They found that
conditional deletion of Lpin1 in Schwann cells led to a similar Schwann
cell phenotype, with pronounced peripheral neuropathy characterized by
myelin degradation, Schwann cell dedifferentiation and proliferation,
and a reduction in nerve conduction velocity. Demyelination was mediated
by endoneurial accumulation of the substrate of the Pap1 enzyme,
phosphatidic acid (PA). In addition, Nadra et al. (2008) showed that PA
was a potent activator of the MEK/ERK pathway in Schwann cells, and that
MEK/ERK activation was required for PA-induced demyelination. Nadra et
al. (2008) concluded that PA has a role in Schwann cell fate
determination and that there is a direct link between diseases affecting
lipid metabolism and Schwann cell function.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MYOGLOBINURIA, RECURRENT, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
LPIN1, GLU215TER

In 3 affected members of an Arab Muslim family with autosomal recessive
recurrent myoglobinuria (268200), Zeharia et al. (2008) identified a
homozygous 643G-T transversion in the LPIN1 gene, resulting in a
glu215-to-ter (E215X) substitution. LPIN1 mRNA was 5.8% of control
values. The mutation was not detected in 166 control individuals.

.0002
MYOGLOBINURIA, RECURRENT, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
LPIN1, ARG388TER

In a 5-year-old Palestinian child, born of consanguineous parents, with
autosomal recessive recurrent myoglobinuria (268200) since age 3,
Zeharia et al. (2008) identified a homozygous 1162C-T transition in the
LPIN1 gene, resulting in an arg388-to-ter (R388X) substitution and a
truncated protein without catalytic activity.

.0003
MYOGLOBINURIA, RECURRENT, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
LPIN1, ARG801TER

In a French patient with recurrent myoglobinuria (268200) beginning at
age 15 months, Zeharia et al. (2008) identified compound heterozygosity
for 2 mutations in the LPIN1 gene: a 2401C-T transition resulting in an
arg801-to-ter (R801X) substitution, and a 2-kb deletion including exons
18 and 19 (605518.0004). Residual enzyme activity was 44% of control
values. This mutation was originally described by Zeharia et al. (2008)
as ARG800TER; the numbering was corrected in an erratum.

.0004
MYOGLOBINURIA, RECURRENT, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
LPIN1, 2-KB DEL, EX18-19

See 605518.0003, 605518.0005, and Zeharia et al. (2008).

.0005
MYOGLOBINURIA, RECURRENT, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
LPIN1, IVS8DS, T-C, +2

In a French patient with recurrent myoglobinuria (268200) beginning at
age 18 months, Zeharia et al. (2008) identified compound heterozygosity
for 2 mutations in the LPIN1 gene: a T-to-C transition resulting in a
splice site mutation (1441+2T-C) and skipping of exon 9, and a 2-kb
deletion including exons 18 and 19 (605518.0004). The patient's brother
had died of rhabdomyolysis at age 16 months.

REFERENCE 1. Cao, H.; Hegele, R. A.: Identification of single-nucleotide polymorphisms
in the human LPIN1 gene. J. Hum. Genet. 47: 370-372, 2002.

2. Han, G.-S.; Wu, W.-I.; Carman, G. M.: The Saccharomyces cerevisiae
lipin homolog is a Mg(2+)-dependent phosphatidate phosphatase enzyme. J.
Biol. Chem. 281: 9210-9218, 2006.

3. Nadra, K.; Charles, A.-S. P.; Medard, J.-J.; Hendriks, W. T.; Han,
G.-S.; Gres, S.; Carman, G. M.; Saulnier-Blache, J.-S.; Verheijen,
M. H. G.; Chrast, R.: Phosphatidic acid mediates demyelination in
Lpin1 mutant mice. Genes Dev. 22: 1647-1661, 2008.

4. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Tanaka, A.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. V. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0161-KIAA0200) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 3: 17-24, 1996.

5. Peterfy, M.; Phan, J.; Xu, P.; Reue, K.: Lipodystrophy in the
fld mouse results from mutation of a new gene encoding a nuclear protein,
lipin. Nature Genet. 27: 121-124, 2001.

6. Peterson, T. R.; Sengupta, S. S.; Harris, T. E.; Carmack, A. E.;
Kang, S. A.; Balderas, E.; Guertin, D. A.; Madden, K. L.; Carpenter,
A. E.; Finck, B. N.; Sabatini, D. M.: mTOR complex 1 regulates lipin
1 localization to control the SREBP pathway. Cell 146: 408-420,
2011.

7. Phan, J.; Reue, K.: Lipin, a lipodystrophy and obesity gene. Cell
Metab. 1: 73-83, 2005.

8. Reue, K.; Xu, P.; Wang, X.-P.; Slavin, B. G.: Adipose tissue deficiency,
glucose intolerance, and increased atherosclerosis result from mutation
in the mouse fatty liver dystrophy (fld) gene. J. Lipid Res. 41:
1067-1076, 2000.

9. Suviolahti, E.; Reue, K.; Cantor, R. M.; Phan, J.; Gentile, M.;
Naukkarinen, J.; Soro-Paavonen, A.; Oksanen, L.; Kaprio, J.; Rissanen,
A.; Salomaa, V.; Kontula, K.; Taskinen, M.-R.; Pajukanta, P.; Peltonen,
L.: Cross-species analyses implicate Lipin 1 involvement in glucose
metabolism. Hum. Molec. Genet. 15: 377-386, 2006.

10. Zeharia, A.; Shaag, A.; Houtkooper, R. H.; Hindi, T.; de Lonlay,
P.; Erez, G.; Hubert, L.; Saada, A.; de Keyzer, Y.; Eshel, G.; Vaz,
F. M.; Pines, O.; Elpeleg, O.: Mutations in LPIN1 cause recurrent
acute myoglobinuria in childhood. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 83: 489-494,
2008. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 84: 95 only, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/13/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/4/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/27/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/24/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/10/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/5/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/2/2001

EDITED alopez: 08/21/2012
terry: 7/13/2012
wwang: 1/14/2010
terry: 1/4/2010
alopez: 7/16/2009
alopez: 1/30/2009
wwang: 11/5/2008
ckniffin: 10/27/2008
wwang: 7/28/2008
terry: 7/24/2008
terry: 2/10/2005
tkritzer: 8/8/2002
tkritzer: 8/7/2002
tkritzer: 8/6/2002
terry: 8/5/2002
mgross: 1/23/2001
mgross: 1/2/2001

176912	TITLE *176912 PROTEIN KINASE, cAMP-DEPENDENT, REGULATORY, TYPE II, BETA; PRKAR2B
;;PRKAR2;;
RII-BETA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The cAMP-dependent protein kinase system is believed to mediate most, if
not all, cellular effects of the second messenger cAMP. The kinase
holoenzyme consists of 2 regulatory (R) and 2 catalytic (C) subunits
that dissociate upon the binding of 2 cAMP molecules to each of the R
subunits. The free, activated C subunits then catalyze the
phosphorylation of specific substrate proteins on serine and threonine
residues and thereby alter their activity or function. PRKAR2B is 1 of
several R subunits (Levy et al., 1988).

CLONING

Using rat Prkar2b as probe, Levy et al. (1988) cloned PRKAR2B, which
they designated RII-beta, from a human testis cDNA library. The deduced
418-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 54 kD.
PRKAR2B contains an N-terminal dimerization domain, an
autophosphorylation site (ser114), and 7 potential polyadenylation
signals. The human and rat proteins share 97% homology. Northern blot
analysis revealed a 3.3-kb transcript expressed at highest levels in
testis, fallopian tubes, and ovary. Low or undetectable levels were
found in myocardium, parotid gland, parotid tumor, epididymis, uterus,
placenta, and umbilical cord. Northern blot analysis also detected
cAMP-stimulated Prkar2b expression in rat Sertoli cell cultures.

GENE STRUCTURE

Levy et al. (1988) estimated the size of the PRKAR2B gene to be close to
28 kb.

MAPPING

Using both a rat skeletal muscle clone and a human clone of type II
regulatory subunit of cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase, Scambler et
al. (1987) demonstrated that the human gene is located on chromosome 7,
close to but separate from the cystic fibrosis locus (219700). These
conclusions were based on Southern blot analysis of DNA from hybrid cell
lines containing only chromosome 7 or parts thereof, as well as
human/mouse hybrid cell lines established by means of
chromosome-mediated gene transfer (CMGT) using MET (164860) as a
dominant selectable marker. Independence of PKR2 from CF was also
indicated by family linkage studies using a RFLP of the PKR2 probe.
Wainwright et al. (1987) showed that PKR2 is linked to several markers
on 7q. The closest and strongest linkage was to TCRB (see 186930), which
showed a maximum lod score of 3.01 at theta = 0.00.

Using RFLPs in the CEPH panel of 40 families, Solberg et al. (1992)
mapped the regulatory subunit RII-beta of cAMP-dependent protein kinase
to 7q. They constructed a 7-point framework map including PRKAR2B and
demonstrated the following order: cen--D7S371--(COL1A2,
D7S79)--PRKAR2B--MET--D7S87--TCRB--qter. Furthermore, by in situ
hybridization to metaphase chromosomes, Solberg et al. (1992) physically
mapped PRKAR2B to 7q22.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Zhang et al. (2012) described the 2.3-angstrom structure of full-length
tetrameric RII-beta(2):catalytic subunit-alpha(2) (see 601639)
holoenzyme. The structure showing a dimer of dimers provided a
mechanistic understanding of allosteric activation by cAMP. The
heterodimers are anchored together by an interface created by the
beta-4/beta-5 loop in the RII-beta subunit, which docks onto the
carboxyl-terminal tail of the adjacent C subunit, thereby forcing the C
subunit into a fully closed conformation in the absence of nucleotide.
Diffusion of magnesium ATP into these crystals trapped not ATP but the
reaction products adenosine diphosphate and the phosphorylated RII-beta
subunit. This complex has implications for the
dissociation-reassociation cycling of PKA. The quaternary structure of
the RII-beta tetramer differs appreciably from the model of the RI-alpha
tetramer, confirming the small-angle x-ray scattering prediction that
the structures of each PKA tetramer are different.

ANIMAL MODEL

Cummings et al. (1996) generated knockout mice for the cyclic AMP
dependent protein kinase regulatory subunit type II-beta (designated
RII-beta by them). They reported that the mutants appeared healthy but
had markedly diminished white adipose tissue despite normal food intake
and were protected against developing diet-induced obesity and fatty
livers. In the mutant mice, brown adipose tissue demonstrated a
compensatory increase in RI-alpha (188830). Cummings et al. (1996)
reported that RII-beta mutants exhibited markedly reduced leptin
(164160) mRNA and plasma levels; however, only mild hyperphagia was
present.

Mice bearing a targeted disruption of the Prkar2b gene were used by
Adams et al. (1997) to evaluate the importance of cAMP-dependent
signaling in transducing the effects of haloperidol on striatal gene
expression and behavioral responses. In wildtype mice, haloperidol
treatment induces the expression of Fos (164810) and neurotensin
(162650) in the dorsal lateral region of the striatum and produces an
acute cataleptic response that correlates with the motor side effects of
haloperidol in humans. However, Adams et al. (1997) did not observe
these responses in mice lacking Prka2b. Prkar2b-deficient mice were able
to generate a cataleptic response to intracerebral injections of
neurotensin, suggesting that the Prkar2b subunit is required to
transduce the acute response to haloperidol in both gene expression and
behavior.

A chromosomal deletion in agouti lethal yellow (Ay) mice causes ectopic
expression of agouti (ASIP; 600201), which is normally expressed in
skin. Agouti antagonizes melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R; 155541) in
neurons, resulting in hyperphagia, hypoactivity, and increased fat mass
in Ay mice. Czyzyk et al. (2008) found that RII-beta deletion rescued
elevated body weight, hyperphagia, and obesity of Ay mice. Partial
rescue of these Ay phenotypes was observed in RII-beta heterozygotes.

REFERENCE 1. Adams, M. R.; Brandon, E. P.; Chartoff, E. H.; Idzerda, R. L.;
Dorsa, D. M.; McKnight, G. S.: Loss of haloperidol induced gene expression
and catalepsy in protein kinase A-deficient mice. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 94: 12157-12161, 1997.

2. Cummings, D. E.; Brandon, E. P.; Planas, J. V.; Motamed, K.; Idzerda,
R. L.; McKnight, G. S.: Genetically lean mice result from targeted
disruption of the RII-beta subunit of protein kinase A. Nature 382:
:622-626, 1996.

3. Czyzyk, T. A.; Sikorski, M. A.; Yang, L.; McKnight, G. S.: Disruption
of the RII-beta subunit of PKA reverses the obesity syndrome of agouti
lethal yellow mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 276-281, 2008.

4. Levy, F. O.; Oyen, O.; Sandberg, M.; Tasken, K.; Eskild, W.; Hansson,
V.; Jahnsen, T.: Molecular cloning, complementary deoxyribonucleic
acid structure and predicted full-length amino acid sequence of the
hormone-inducible regulatory subunit of 3-prime-5-prime-cyclic adenosine
monophosphate-dependent protein kinase from human testis. Molec.
Endocr. 2: 1364-1373, 1988.

5. Scambler, P.; Oyen, O.; Wainwright, B.; Farrall, M.; Law, H.-Y.;
Estivill, X.; Sandberg, M.; Williamson, R.; Jahnsen, T.: Exclusion
of catalytic and regulatory subunits of cAMP-dependent protein kinase
as candidate genes for the defect causing cystic fibrosis. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 41: 925-932, 1987.

6. Solberg, R.; Sistonen, P.; Traskelin, A.-L.; Berube, D.; Simard,
J.; Krajci, P.; Jahnsen, T.; de la Chapelle, A.: Mapping of the regulatory
subunits RI-beta and RII-beta of cAMP-dependent protein kinase genes
on human chromosome 7. Genomics 14: 63-69, 1992.

7. Wainwright, B.; Lench, N.; Davies, K.; Scambler, P.; Kruyer, H.;
Williamson, R.; Jahnsen, T.; Farrall, M.: A human regulatory subunit
of type II cAMP-dependent protein kinase localized by its linkage
relationship to several cloned chromosome 7q markers. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 45: 237-239, 1987.

8. Zhang, P.; Smith-Nguyen, E. V.; Keshwani, M. M.; Deal, M. S.; Kornev,
A. P.; Taylor, S. S.: Structure and allostery of the PKA RII-beta
tetrameric holoenzyme. Science 335: 712-716, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/27/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/18/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/27/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/18/1993

EDITED mgross: 10/07/2013
alopez: 2/28/2012
terry: 2/27/2012
mgross: 4/18/2008
terry: 4/18/2008
mgross: 2/27/2003
terry: 9/5/1996
carol: 3/18/1993

601093	TITLE *601093 FORKHEAD BOX I1; FOXI1
;;FORKHEAD, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG-LIKE 10; FKHL10;;
FKH10;;
FORKHEAD-RELATED ACTIVATOR 6; FREAC6
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

FKH10 is a member of the forkhead family of winged helix transcription
regulators. The forkhead family is distinguished by a characteristic
100-amino acid motif that was originally identified in Drosophila (see
164874). Pierrou et al. (1994) identified 7 human genes containing a
forkhead domain and designated them forkhead related activators (FREAC)
1 through 7. Northern blot analysis revealed that the FREAC6, or FKHL10,
gene is expressed as a 2.3-kb mRNA only in kidney.

GENE FUNCTION

Larsson et al. (1995) showed that human FKHL10 is expressed in the adult
and fetal kidney, whereas 15 other tissues (which did not include any
inner ear-derived samples) were negative. Kidney-specific expression had
been observed also in the mouse. Although Fkh10 may play a role in the
kidney during later stages of development, it may be a minor, or perhaps
redundant, role, as no kidney dysfunction was observed in homozygous
knockout mice. On the contrary, Fkh10 appears to be unique in the sense
that it is an early otic vesicle-specific gene necessary for the
development of both cochlea and vestibulum. These findings implicated
Fkh10 as an early regulator necessary for development of both cochlea
and vestibulum and identified its human homolog, FKHL10, as a candidate
deafness gene at 5q34. The phenotype described by Hulander et al. (1998)
resembles a group of human congenital inner ear malformations called
'common cavity.' Hulander et al. (1998) proposed that mutations in FKH10
may cause a 'common cavity' phenotype in humans.

Yang et al. (2007) demonstrated that FOXI1 is a transcription factor for
SLC26A4 (605646) and identified and characterized a key transcriptional
regulatory element in the SLC26A4 promoter that binds FOXI1. The SLC26A4
cis element consists of 2 FOXI1 binding sites, FBS1 and FBS2, arranged
head to head. Both binding sites and this specific orientation are
required for FOXI1-mediated transcriptional activation.

MAPPING

Larsson et al. (1995) mapped the FKHL10 gene to 5q34 by fluorescence in
situ hybridization and somatic cell hybrid analysis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Genes encoding forkhead proteins are instrumental during embryogenesis
in mammals, in particular during development of the nervous system.
Hulander et al. (1998) reported that mice with a targeted disruption of
the Fkh10 locus exhibited circling behavior, poor swimming ability, and
abnormal reaching response, all common findings in mice with vestibular
dysfunction. These animals also failed to elicit a Preyer reflex in
response to a suprathreshold auditory stimulation, as seen in mice with
profound hearing impairment. Histologic examination of the inner ear
revealed a gross structural malformation of the vestibulum as well as of
the cochlea. These structures were replaced by a single irregular cavity
in which neither proper semicircular ducts nor cochlea could be
identified. Hulander et al. (1998) also showed that at 9.5 days
postcoitum, Fkh10 was exclusively expressed in the otic vesicle.

Blomqvist et al. (2004) found that whereas macro- and microscopic kidney
development appeared normal in Fkhl10-null mice, electron microscopy
revealed an altered ultrastructure of cells lining the distal nephron.
Northern blot analyses, cRNA in situ hybridizations, and
immunohistochemistry demonstrated complete loss of expression of several
anion transporters, proton pumps, and anion exchange proteins expressed
by intercalated cells of the collecting ducts. The normal renal
epithelium with its 2 major cell types, principal and intercalated
cells, had been replaced by a single cell type positive for both
principal and intercalated cell markers. The null mice were unable to
acidify urine and had a lowered systemic buffer capacity and overt
acidosis compared to their wildtype littermates. Blomqvist et al. (2004)
concluded that Fkhl10-null mice develop distal renal tubular acidosis
due to altered cellular composition of the distal nephron epithelium,
which lacks the proper gene expression pattern needed for maintaining
adequate acid-base homeostasis.

Mice homozygous for the targeted deletion of Foxi1 have a phenotype that
includes cochlear dysplasia and enlarged vestibular aqueduct (Hulander
et al., 2003). Also included in the Foxi1 -/- mouse phenotype are male
infertility and distal renal tubular acidosis (Blomqvist et al., 2004,
2006), 2 abnormalities that had not been reported in humans with Pendred
syndrome or enlarged vestibular aqueduct.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Recessive mutations in the anion transporter gene SLC26A4 (605646) are
known to be responsible for Pendred syndrome (274600) and for
nonsyndromic hearing loss associated with enlarged vestibular aqueduct
(DFNB4; 600791). However, a large percentage of patients with these
phenotypes lack mutations in the SLC26A4 coding region in one or both
alleles. Yang et al. (2007) identified and characterized a key
transcriptional regulatory element in the SLC26A4 promoter that binds
FOXI1, which is a transcriptional activator of SLC26A4. They found 9
patients with Pendred syndrome or nonsyndromic EVA who were heterozygous
for a novel -103T-C mutation (605646.0027) in this regulatory element,
which interfered with FOXI1 binding and completely abolished
FOXI1-mediated transcriptional activation. They also identified 2
Pendred and 4 EVA patients with heterozygous mutations in FOXI1 that
compromised its ability to activate SLC26A4 transcription; 1 of the EVA
patients was a double heterozygote who also carried a heterozygous
mutation in the SLC26A4 gene (see 605646.0028 and 601093.0001). This
finding was consistent with their observation that EVA occurs in the
mouse mutant doubly heterozygous for mutations in these 2 genes, and the
results supported a dosage-dependent model for the molecular
pathogenesis of Pendred syndrome and nonsyndromic EVA that involves
SLC26A4 and its transcriptional regulatory machinery. Mutations in many
transcription factors had been shown to lead to nonsyndromic or
syndromic hearing impairment, but the FOXI1/SLC26A4 connection was the
first identification of a specific downstream target gene; Yang et al.
(2007) stated the this was the first example of digenic inheritance to
be verified as a cause of human deafness.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 4, WITH ENLARGED VESTIBULAR AQUEDUCT,
DIGENIC
FOXI1, GLY258GLU

Yang et al. (2007) described a patient with enlarged vestibular aqueduct
as the basis of nonsyndromic hearing loss (DFNB4; 600791) in whom the
combination of a heterozygous glu29-to-gln (E29Q) mutation of SLC26A4
(605646.0028) and a gly258-to-glu (G258E) mutation of FOXI1 was
responsible. Each unaffected parent was heterozygous for 1 of the
mutations, and her unaffected sister carried only the E29Q mutation in
SLC26A4. Yang et al. (2007) concluded that this was the first example of
digenic inheritance to be verified as a cause of human deafness.

.0002
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 4, WITH ENLARGED VESTIBULAR AQUEDUCT
PENDRED SYNDROME, INCLUDED
FOXI1, ARG267GLN

In 2 families given a diagnosis of DFNB4 with EVA (600791), Yang et al.
(2007) found heterozygosity for an arg267-to-gln change (R267Q) in the
FOXI1 protein. Although both of these families were classified by the
authors as 'nonsyndromic EVA,' in one of them goiter reminiscent of
Pendred syndrome (274600) was noted. Both alleles of the SLC26A4 gene
(605646) were wildtype. The R267Q mutation showed significantly
decreased luciferase activation in promoter-reporter assays, suggesting
that this variant compromised FOXI1 transactivation ability of SLC26A4
expression and was causally related to disease.

REFERENCE 1. Blomqvist, S. R.; Vidarsson, H.; Fitzgerald, S.; Johansson, B.
R.; Ollerstam, A.; Brown, R.; Persson, A. E. G.; Bergstrom, G.; Enerback,
S.: Distal renal tubular acidosis in mice that lack the forkhead
transcription factor Foxi1. J. Clin. Invest. 113: 1560-1570, 2004.

2. Blomqvist, S. R.; Vidarsson, H.; Soder, O.; Enerback, S.: Epididymal
expression of the forkhead transcription factor Foxi1 is required
for male fertility. EMBO J. 25: 4131-4141, 2006.

3. Hulander, M.; Kiernan, A. E.; Blomqvist, S. R.; Carlsson, P.; Samuelsson,
E. J.; Johansson, B. R.; Steel, K. P.; Enerback, S.: Lack of pendrin
expression leads to deafness and expansion of the endolymphatic compartment
in inner ears of Foxi1 null mutant mice. Development 130: 2013-2025,
2003.

4. Hulander, M.; Wurst, W.; Carlsson, P.; Enerback, S.: The winged
helix transcription factor Fkh10 is required for normal development
of the inner ear. Nature Genet. 20: 374-376, 1998.

5. Larsson, C.; Hellqvist, M.; Pierrou, S.; White, I.; Enerback, S.;
Carlsson, P.: Chromosomal localization of six human forkhead genes,
freac-1 (FKHL5), -3 (FKHL7), -4 (FKHL8), -5 (FKHL9), -6 (FKHL10),
and -8 (FKHL12). Genomics 30: 464-469, 1995.

6. Pierrou, S.; Hellqvist, M.; Samuelsson, L.; Enerback, S.; Carlsson,
P.: Cloning and characterization of seven human forkhead proteins:
binding site specificity and DNA bending. EMBO J. 13: 5002-5012,
1994.

7. Yang, T.; Vidarsson, H.; Rodrigo-Blomqvist, S.; Rosengren, S. S.;
Enerback, S.; Smith, R. J. H.: Transcriptional control of SLC26A4
is involved in Pendred syndrome and nonsyndromic enlargement of vestibular
aqueduct (DFNB4). Am. J. Hum. Genet. 80: 1055-1063, 2007. Note:
Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81: 634 only, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/9/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/23/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/22/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/24/1998
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 11/4/1998

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 2/26/1996

EDITED terry: 12/21/2012
alopez: 6/13/2012
ckniffin: 6/12/2012
alopez: 10/27/2009
alopez: 10/13/2009
alopez: 8/9/2007
alopez: 5/23/2007
terry: 5/23/2007
terry: 4/5/2005
carol: 6/23/2004
carol: 6/22/2004
terry: 6/22/2004
alopez: 12/1/1998
terry: 11/24/1998
alopez: 11/4/1998
dkim: 10/12/1998
mark: 1/10/1998
mark: 2/26/1996

604277	TITLE *604277 SPASTIN; SPAST
;;SPG4 GENE; SPG4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a positional cloning strategy based on the spastic paraplegia-4
(SPG4; 182601) candidate region on chromosome 2p22-p21, Hazan et al.
(1999) identified a gene encoding a member of the AAA protein family
(see 601681) that they named 'spastin' (SPAST). The spastin open reading
frame encodes a 616-amino acid protein of approximately 67.2 kD. The AAA
cassette is located between amino acids 342 and 599. The 3 conserved
ATPase domains include Walker motifs A and B. Spastin and related
members of its AAA subgroup contain leucine zipper motifs, which in
spastin occur at amino acid positions 50-78 and 508-529. The spastin C
terminus has strong homology to several members of the AAA family.
Comparison of amino acid sequences of spastin and mitochondrial
metalloproteinases showed that homology is restricted to the AAA
cassette. Spastin shows only 29% identity between amino acid positions
342 and 599 with paraplegin (602783); paraplegin shows 57% identity with
yeast Afg3p over the same region, suggesting that spastin does not
belong to the same AAA subfamily as do paraplegin and other
metalloproteinases. SPG4 is ubiquitously expressed in human adult and
fetal tissue, showing slightly higher expression in fetal brain.

Hazan et al. (1999) cloned the mouse ortholog of SPAST, which between
amino acids 113 and 616 has 96% identity with human SPAST. Spast
transcripts are ubiquitously expressed in adult tissues and from
embryonic day 7 to 17 in mouse.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hazan et al. (1999) determined that the SPAST gene occupies
approximately 90 kb of genomic DNA and contains 17 putative exons.

GENE FUNCTION

By expressing wildtype or ATPase-defective spastin in several cell
types, Errico et al. (2002) showed that spastin interacts with
microtubules. Interaction with the cytoskeleton was mediated by the
N-terminal region of spastin and was regulated through the ATPase
activity of the AAA domain. Expression of missense mutations (including
604277.0001, 604277.0002, and 604277.0004) into the AAA domain led to
constitutive binding to microtubules in transfected cells and induced
the disappearance of the aster and the formation of thick perinuclear
bundles, suggesting a role of spastin in microtubule dynamics.
Consistently, wildtype spastin promoted microtubule disassembly in
transfected cells. The authors suggested that spastin may be involved in
microtubule dynamics similarly to the highly homologous
microtubule-severing protein katanin (606696). The authors hypothesized
that impairment of fine regulation of the microtubule cytoskeleton in
long axons, due to spastin mutations, may underlie the pathogenesis of
hereditary spastic paraplegia.

By multiple sequence alignment, Ciccarelli et al. (2003) identified a
domain of approximately 80 amino acids shared by spastin and spartin
(607111), the molecule that is mutated in the Amish type of hereditary
spastic paraplegia (SPG20; 275900). The domain is a slightly expanded
version of a domain that is a well established and consistent feature of
molecules with a role in endosomal trafficking. Both spastin and spartin
are likely to be involved in microtubule interaction. Ciccarelli et al.
(2003) proposed a new descriptive name MIT (contained within
microtubule-interacting and trafficking molecules) for the domain and
predicted endosomal trafficking as the principal functionality of all
molecules in which it is present.

In neuronal and nonneuronal cells expressing spastin, McDermott et al.
(2003) found that the wildtype protein was localized to the perinuclear
area within the cell soma, whereas mutant spastin was found throughout
the cytoplasm consistent with cytoskeletal staining, as well as
extending into the axons, but not the dendrites. Transfection of
proteins into the cells suggested that normal spastin acts as a
microtubule-severing protein and that mutant spastin colocalizes with,
but does not sever, microtubules. The abnormal interaction of mutant
spastin with microtubules was associated with abnormal cellular
distribution of mitochondria and peroxisomes. McDermott et al. (2003)
suggested that the disruption of organelle transport on the microtubule
cytoskeleton, including transport to distal axons, may be the primary
disease mechanism in SPG4.

Errico et al. (2004) demonstrated that spastin was enriched in cell
regions containing dynamic microtubules. During cell division spastin
was found in the spindle pole, the central spindle, and the midbody,
whereas in immortalized motoneurons it was enriched in the distal axon
and the branching points. Spastin interacted with the centrosomal
protein NA14 (SSNA1; 610882), and cofractionated with gamma-tubulin
(TUBG1; 191135). Deletion of the region required for binding to NA14
disrupted spastin interaction with microtubules, suggesting that NA14
may be an important adaptor to target spastin activity at the
centrosome. Errico et al. (2004) hypothesized that spastin may play a
role in cytoskeletal rearrangements and dynamics.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid approach, Reid et al. (2005) identified CHMP1B
(606486), a protein associated with the ESCRT (endosomal sorting complex
required for transport)-III complex, as a binding partner of spastin.
CHMP1B and spastin proteins showed clear cytoplasmic colocalization in
transfected cells; CHMP1B and spastin proteins interacted specifically
in vitro and in vivo in complementation assays, and spastin
coimmunoprecipitated with CHMP1B. The interaction was mediated by a
region of spastin lying between residues 80 and 196 and containing an
MIT domain. Expression of epitope-tagged CHMP1B in mammalian cells
prevented the development of the abnormal microtubule phenotype
associated with expression of ATPase-defective spastin. The authors
suggested a role for spastin in intracellular membrane traffic events,
and proposed that defects in intracellular membrane traffic may be a
significant cause of motor neuron pathology.

Svenson et al. (2005) developed a novel antiserum corresponding to a
portion of exon 6 of the SPG4 gene that was specific for all spastin
isoforms. Using this reagent, the authors found that endogenous spastin
was located at the centrosome in a variety of cell types at all points
in the cell cycle. Spastin remained localized at the centrosome even
after microtubule depolymerization, suggesting that spastin is an
integral centrosomal protein. Spastin was also enriched at discrete
clusters in dendrites, axons, and glial projections of rat hippocampal
neurons. Svenson et al. (2005) concluded that spastin plays a role in
microtubule dynamics and organization.

Independently, Evans et al. (2006) and Sanderson et al. (2006)
demonstrated that the N-terminal domain of spastin bound directly to the
C-terminal cytoplasmic domain of atlastin (ATL1; 606439), suggesting
that the 2 gene products interact in a common biologic pathway. Evans et
al. (2006) used yeast 2-hybrid analysis and coimmunoprecipitation
studies in HeLa cells, and Sanderson et al. (2006) used yeast 2-hybrid
analysis of a human fetal brain cDNA library and protein pull-down,
coimmunoprecipitation, and colocalization studies in HeLa cells, HEK293T
cells, and mouse NSC34 neuronal cells.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis and coimmunoprecipitation studies in mouse
fibroblast cells (NIH3T3) and HeLa cells, Mannan et al. (2006)
demonstrated that spastin interacts with reticulon-1 (RTN1; 600865),
which is primarily expressed in the endoplasmic reticulum. The
interaction is mediated through the spastin N-terminal region, which
contains a microtubule-interacting and trafficking domain. Intracellular
distribution studies showed colocalization of the 2 proteins in discrete
cytoplasmic vesicles. The findings strengthened the hypothesis that
disruption of intracellular vesicular transport processes may underlie
spastic paraplegia.

Using immunoprecipitation studies, Montenegro et al. (2012) showed that
spastin interacted with RTN2B (603183). Cellular expression of
ATPase-defective spastin redistributed the ER onto abnormally thickened
and elongated microtubule bundles, and RTN2B was also redistributed onto
these bundles. The findings indicated that RTN2 participates in the
network of hairpin loop-containing ER morphogens, including REEP1
(609139), atlastin-1 (ATL1; 606439), and spastin.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Roll-Mecak and Vale (2008) reported the x-ray crystal structure of the
Drosophila spastin AAA domain and provided a model for the active
spastin hexamer generated using small-angle x-ray scattering combined
with atomic docking. The spastin hexamer forms a ring with a prominent
central pore and 6 radiating arms that may dock onto the microtubule.
Helices unique to the microtubule-severing AAA ATPases surround the
entrances to the pore on either side of the ring, and 3 highly conserved
loops line the pore lumen. Mutagenesis revealed essential roles for
these structural elements in the severing reaction. Peptide and antibody
inhibition experiments further showed that spastin may dismantle
microtubules by recognizing specific features in the carboxy-terminal
tail of tubulin. Roll-Mecak and Vale (2008) concluded that their data
supported a model in which spastin pulls the C terminus of tubulin
through its central pore, generating a mechanical force that
destabilizes tubulin-tubulin interactions within the microtubule
lattice.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Hazan et al. (1999) amplified and sequenced overlapping cDNA fragments
spanning the entire spastin open reading frame from 1 individual of each
of 14 families affected with SPG4 and 6 control individuals. Using this
technique, they identified heterozygous mutations in 5 families (see
604277.0001-604277.0005). Three unrelated affected individuals
originating from the same area in Switzerland were heterozygous for a
mutation in the acceptor splice site of SPG4 intron 15 (604277.0005).

Fonknechten et al. (2000) analyzed DNA from 87 unrelated autosomal
dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia patients and detected 34 novel
mutations scattered along the coding region of the SPG4 gene (see, e.g.,
604277.0007 and 604277.0008). They found missense (28%), nonsense (15%),
and splice site point (26.5%) mutations as well as deletions (23%) and
insertions (7.5%). Six percent of 238 mutation carriers were
asymptomatic, while 20% of carriers were unaware of their symptoms,
indicating reduced penetrance. There was no difference in either age of
onset or clinical severity among groups of patients with missense
mutations versus truncation mutations.

Using the repeat expansion detection (RED) method, Nielsen et al. (1997)
analyzed 21 affected individuals from 6 SPG4 Danish families linked to
2p24-p21. They found that 20 of 21 affected individuals showed CAG
repeat expansions of the SPG4 gene versus 2 of 21 healthy spouses,
suggesting a strongly statistically significant association between the
occurrence of the repeat expansion and the disease. Hazan et al. (1999),
however, constructed a detailed high-resolution integrated map of the
SPG4 locus that excluded the involvement of a CAG repeat expansion in
SPG4-linked autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia. They noted that an
analysis of 20 autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia
families, including 4 linked to the SPG4 locus, by Benson et al. (1998)
had demonstrated that most repeat expansions detected by the RED method
were caused by nonpathogenic expansions at the 18q21.1 SEF2 (602272) and
17q21.3 ERDA1 (603279) loci.

Burger et al. (2000) identified 4 novel SPG4 mutations in German
families with autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia,
including 1 large family for which anticipation had been proposed
(Burger et al., 1996). Since no trinucleotide repeat expansion was found
in this family but instead a D441G missense mutation (604277.0009), the
authors presumed that the clinically observed anticipation was due to
ascertainment bias.

Svenson et al. (2001) screened the spastin gene for mutations in 15
families consistent with linkage to the SPG4 locus and identified 11
mutations, 10 of which were novel (see, e.g., 604277.0011-604277.0012).
Five of the mutations were in noninvariant splice junction sequences.
RT-PCR analysis of mRNA from patients showed that each of these 5
mutations resulted in aberrant splicing. One mutation was found to be
'leaky,' or partially penetrant; the mutant allele produced both mutant
(skipped exon) and wildtype (full-length) transcripts. The existence of
at least one leaky mutation suggested that relatively small differences
in the level of wildtype spastin expression can have significant
functional consequences. This may account, at least in part, for the
wide ranges in age at onset, symptom severity, and rate of symptom
progression that occurs both among and within families with SPG linked
to SPG4.

Sauter et al. (2002) analyzed the spastin gene in SPG patients from 161
apparently unrelated families in Germany and identified mutations in 27
of the families. Only 3 of the mutations had previously been described
and only 1 of the mutations was found in 2 families. Among the detected
mutations were 14 frameshift, 4 nonsense, and 4 missense mutations, 1
large deletion spanning several exons, and 4 splice mutations. Most of
the novel mutations were located in the conserved AAA cassette-encoding
region of the spastin gene. The relative frequency of spastin gene
mutations in an unselected group of German hereditary spastic paraplegia
patients was approximately 17%; frameshift mutations accounted for most
SPG4 mutations in the population. The proportion of splice mutations was
considerably lower than that reported elsewhere (Lindsey et al., 2000;
Svenson et al., 2001).

In 15 of 76 unrelated individuals from North America with hereditary
spastic paraplegia (HSP), Meijer et al. (2002) identified 5 previously
reported mutations and 8 novel mutations in the SPG4 gene: 4 missense, 1
nonsense, 1 frameshift, and 2 splice site mutations.

Charvin et al. (2003) used anti-spastin polyclonal antibodies to
identify 2 isoforms of 75 and 80 kD in both human and mouse tissues,
with a tissue-specific variability of the isoform ratio. Spastin is an
abundant protein in neural tissues and immunofluorescence microscopy
analysis revealed expression in neurons but not in glial cells. These
data suggested that axonal degeneration linked to SPG4 mutations may be
caused by a primary defect of neurons. Protein and transcript analyses
of patients carrying either nonsense or frameshift SPG4 mutations
revealed neither truncated protein nor mutated transcripts, providing
further evidence that these mutations are responsible for a loss of
spastin function.

Svenson et al. (2004) identified 2 rare polymorphisms in the SPG4 gene:
ser44 to leu (S44L; 604277.0015) and pro45 to gln (P45Q; 604277.0017).
In affected members of 4 SPG4 families, the presence of either the S44L
or P45Q polymorphism in addition to a disease-causing SPG4 mutation
(see, e.g., 604277.0016; 604277.0018) resulted in an earlier age at
disease onset. Svenson et al. (2004) concluded that the S44L and P45Q
polymorphisms, though benign alone, modified the SPG4 phenotype when
present with another SPG4 mutation.

In 8 of 18 Korean patients with spastic paraplegia, Park et al. (2005)
identified 8 different mutations in the SPG4 gene. Seven of the 8
patients had a family history of the disorder. No mutations were
identified in the SPG3A gene (ATL1; 606439).

Brugman et al. (2005) identified 6 mutations in the SPG4 gene in 6 (13%)
of 47 unrelated patients with adult-onset upper motor neuron symptoms
restricted to the legs. A seventh SPG4 mutation was identified in a
34-year-old woman with rapidly progressive spastic tetraparesis and
pseudobulbar dysarthria consistent with a diagnosis of amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS; see 105400). However, no spastin mutations were
identified in 51 additional patients with upper motor neuron involvement
of the arms or bulbar regions, suggesting that spastin mutations are not
a common cause of ALS.

In 13 (26%) of 50 unrelated Italian patients with pure hereditary
spastic paraplegia (HSP), Crippa et al. (2006) identified 12 different
mutations in the SPG4 gene, including 8 novel mutations. All 5 of the
familial cases analyzed carried an SPG4 mutation, confirming that the
most common form of autosomal dominant HSP is caused by mutations in
this gene. Eight (18%) of 45 sporadic patients had an SPG4 mutation. No
mutations were identified in 10 additional patients with complicated
HSP. Genotype-phenotype correlations were not observed.

In 24 (20%) of 121 probands with autosomal dominant SPG in whom
mutations in the SPG4 gene were not detected by DHPLC, Depienne et al.
(2007) identified 16 different heterozygous exonic deletions in the SPG4
gene using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). The
deletions ranged in size from 1 exon to the whole coding sequence. The
patients with deletions showed a similar clinical phenotype as those
with point mutations but an earlier age at onset. The findings confirmed
that haploinsufficiency of SPG4 is a major cause of autosomal dominant
SPG and that exonic deletions account for a large proportion of
mutation-negative SPG4 patients, justifying the inclusion of gene dosage
studies in appropriate clinical scenarios. Depienne et al. (2007) stated
that over 150 different pathogenic mutations in the SPG4 gene had been
identified to date.

McDermott et al. (2006) identified 44 different mutations in the SPG4
gene, including 27 novel mutations, in 53 (19%) of 285 individuals with
spastic paraplegia. The majority of mutations occurred within the
conserved AAA cassette or were predicted to cause premature termination
or missplicing within the AAA cassette. The heterozygous S44L change was
identified in 8 (2.8%) of 285 SPG individuals and in 3.1% of healthy
controls, indicating that it is a polymorphism.

Beetz et al. (2006) identified partial deletions in the SPG4 gene in 12
(18%) of 65 patients with spastic paraplegia who had previously been
regarded as spastin mutation-negative based on direct sequencing. The
authors suggested that partial spastin deletions act via
haploinsufficiency. Using MLPA analysis, Beetz et al. (2007) identified
partial deletions of the SPG4 gene in 7 of 8 families who had been
linked to the region, but in whom mutation screening had not identified
mutations. The families had been previously reported by Lindsey et al.
(2000), McMonagle et al. (2000), Meijer et al. (2002), and Svenson et
al. (2001). The findings indicated that large genomic deletions in SPG4
are not uncommon and should be part of a workup for autosomal dominant
SPG.

Beetz et al. (2007) reported a family in which spastic paraplegia
segregated with a deletion of exon 1 of the SPG4 gene in the proband,
her brother, and her 2 sons. Although the proband and her brother also
had a deletion of the SPG3A gene, the SPG3A deletion did not segregate
with the disorder in her sons and had no apparent effect on the severity
of the disorder. The findings suggested that haploinsufficiency is the
pathogenic mechanism for SPG4, whereas a dominant-negative effect is the
pathogenic mechanism for SPG3A.

Shoukier et al. (2009) identified SPG4 mutations in 57 (28.5%) of 200
unrelated, mostly German patients with SPG. There were 47 distinct
mutations identified, including 29 novel mutations. In a review of other
reported mutations, the authors found that most (72.7%) of the mutations
were clustered in the C-terminal AAA domain. However, clustering was
also observed in the MIT domain, MTBD, and an N-terminal region
(residues 228 to 269). In the original cohort of 57 patients, there was
a tentative genotype-phenotype correlation indicating that missense
mutations were associated with an earlier onset of the disease.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Ivanova et al. (2006) identified 5 different heterozygous mutations in
the SPG4 gene in 6 of 36 unrelated Bulgarian patients with hereditary
spastic paraplegia. All 6 probands with SPG4 mutations had affected
family members. There were 2 missense mutations, 1 premature
termination, and 2 splice site mutations. Affected individuals with the
missense mutations had a significantly earlier mean age at onset (4.5 to
8 years) compared to the other patients (17.5 to 42.5 years). In
addition, 3 affected members of 1 of the families with a missense
mutation also had scoliosis. Ivanova et al. (2006) predicted that the
splice site and truncation mutations decreased overall spastin function,
implying haploinsufficiency as a pathogenic mechanism, whereas the
missense mutations likely resulted in a dominant-negative pathogenic
mechanism and a more severe phenotype.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, SER362CYS

In a member of a family with spastic paraplegia-4 (182601), Hazan et al.
(1999) identified a C-to-G transversion at nucleotide 1210 in exon 7 of
the SPAST gene, resulting in a ser362-to-cys (S362C) substitution.

.0002
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, CYS448TYR

In a member of a family with spastic paraplegia-4 (182601), Hazan et al.
(1999) identified a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 1468 in exon 11 of
the SPAST gene, resulting in a cys448-to-tyr (C448Y) amino acid change.

.0003
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, 1-BP DEL, 1520T

In a member of a family with spastic paraplegia-4 (182601), Hazan et al.
(1999) identified a single basepair deletion, of a T at nucleotide
position 1520 in exon 11 of the SPAST gene, which would result in a
premature termination codon at amino acid position 466. If stable, this
protein would be truncated at 465 amino acids.

.0004
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, ARG499CYS

In a member of a family with spastic paraplegia-4 (182601), Hazan et al.
(1999) identified a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1620 in exon 13 of
the SPAST gene resulting in an arginine-to-cysteine substitution at
codon 499 (R499C). This mutation was identified in family 618.

The same mutation was found by Svenson et al. (2001) in a set of 11
mutations found in 15 families with SPG4, the other 10 of which were
novel.

.0005
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, 1813, A-G, -2

In 3 unrelated individuals from 3 kindreds with autosomal dominant
spastic paraplegia-4 (182601), Hazan et al. (1999) identified a
heterozygous A-to-G mutation in the acceptor splice site of intron 15 of
the SPAST gene, resulting in the skipping of exon 16 followed by
subsequent frameshift in the aberrant transcript. Each of the
individuals originated from the same area of Switzerland, suggesting
that these kindreds have a common ancestor.

.0006
REMOVED FROM DATABASE
.0007
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, LYS229TER

In a member of a family with spastic paraplegia-4 (182601), Fonknechten
et al. (2000) identified an A-to-T transversion at nucleotide 873 in
exon 5 of the SPAST gene, resulting in a premature termination codon at
amino acid position 229 (lys229 to ter; K229X).

.0008
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, 1-BP INS, 578A

In a member of a family with spastic paraplegia-4 (182601), Fonknechten
et al. (2000) identified a single base insertion of A after nucleotide
578 in exon 2 of the SPAST gene, resulting in a premature termination
codon 2 amino acids downstream from the insertion.

.0009
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, ASP441GLY

In a family with autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia (182601), Burger
et al. (2000) used direct sequencing of the PCR product corresponding to
exon 11 to demonstrate heterozygosity for an A-to-G substitution at the
first nucleotide of the exon. This alteration caused an aspartic
acid-to-glycine exchange (asp441 to gly; D441G) in the Walker B motif of
the peptide. Within this motif of 6 amino acids (IIFIDE), the fifth
position is D (aspartic acid) in 8 known proteins that exhibit high
homology to spastin (Hazan et al., 1999). Aspartic acid is very polar
and thus nearly always found on the outside of proteins, whereas glycine
is nonpolar and tends to be on the inside.

.0010
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, IVS16DS, G-C, +1

In a 5-generation Italian family with pure autosomal dominant spastic
paraplegia (182601) that showed marked intrafamilial variability in both
age of onset and clinical severity, ranging from severe congenital
presentation to mild involvement after age 55, Santorelli et al. (2000)
identified a G-to-C substitution at nucleotide 1853+1 of the SPAST gene.
This heterozygous mutation alters the consensus donor splice site of
SPAST intron 16, resulting in an aberrant transcript with a longer exon
16 and a premature termination codon at amino acid 578. This produces a
protein shortened by 38 amino acids in its conserved C terminus,
removing part of the spastin AAA cassette (amino acids 577-599) and
presumably causing loss of function.

.0011
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, IVS9, A-G, +4

Svenson et al. (2001) found a splice site mutation (ivs9+4A-G) in an
affected member of a family with SPG4 (182601). This 'leaky,' or
partially penetrant, mutation was present in heterozygous state. A
full-length, normally spliced transcript as well as an abnormally
spliced transcript was produced from the mutant allele of the patient.

.0012
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, 1-BP INS, T, IVS11, +2

Svenson et al. (2001) described another 'leaky' mutation, an IVS11+2T
insertion, in a patient with SPG4 (182601), causing skipping of exon 11
in the SPAST gene. This insertion would shift the basepairing by 1
nucleotide, resulting in a net loss of 4 basepairs relative to the
pairing with the wildtype sequence. Despite this drastic alteration in
heterogeneous nuclear RNA pairing, this mutation, in its full
genomic-sequence context, is only partially penetrant. Both normally and
aberrantly spliced transcripts were produced from the mutant allele.

.0013
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, ILE344LYS

In a Korean family with typical clinical features of pure autosomal
dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia-4 (182601), Ki et al. (2002)
found a novel T-to-A substitution at nucleotide 1031 in exon 7 of the
spastin gene. The alteration caused an ile334-to-lys (I344K) mutation
which affected the third amino acid of the highly conserved AAA cassette
domain.

.0014
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, ASN386SER

In affected members of 9 families with SPG4 (182601) originating from
southern Scotland, Orlacchio et al. (2004) identified a heterozygous
1157A-G transition in exon 8 of the SPAST gene, resulting in an
asn386-to-ser (N386S) substitution. Haplotype analysis suggested a
founder effect. The N386S mutation is located within a conserved region
in the spastin Walker motif A. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that the mutant protein bound to a subset of microtubules which
were reorganized in thick perinuclear bundles.

.0015
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4, MODIFIER OF
SPAST, SER44LEU

In a patient with a mild form of SPG4 (182601), Lindsey et al. (2000)
identified a homozygous 256C-T transition in exon 1 of the SPAST gene,
resulting in a ser44-to-leu (S44L) substitution. The patient had never
been able to run, but was otherwise asymptomatic until age 60 years,
when he began to have gait abnormalities and lower limb spasticity.
There was no family history of the disorder.

Svenson et al. (2004) found the L44 allele at a frequency of less than
0.6% (5 of 900 alleles) in a North American control population,
indicating that it is a rare polymorphism.

In affected individuals from 3 unrelated SPG4 families, Svenson et al.
(2004) identified compound heterozygosity for the S44L substitution and
another disease-causing mutation in the SPAST gene (see, e.g.,
604277.0016). Patients with both the disease-causing mutation and the
S44L change had a significantly earlier age at disease onset than
affected family members who carried only the disease-causing mutation.
Two individuals who carried only a single S44L allele were asymptomatic.
Using a bioinformatics approach, Svenson et al. (2004) found that the
highly conserved S44 residue is likely a phosphorylation target site of
cyclin-dependent kinases. The authors concluded that the S44L
polymorphism acts as a phenotypic modifier of SPG4.

In a female child with severe infantile-onset SPG4, Chinnery et al.
(2004) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the SPAST
gene: S44L and a missense mutation. The proband's father, who was mildly
affected, had the S44L mutation; the mother, who was unaffected, and the
maternal grandfather, who was severely affected, had the other mutation.
Chinnery et al. (2004) concluded that the severe phenotype in the child
resulted from 2 codominant mutations. The authors also noted that the
mother remained unaffected despite having an SPAST mutation.

McDermott et al. (2006) identified a heterozygous S44L change in 2.8% of
SPG individuals and in 3.1% of healthy controls, indicating that it is a
polymorphism. Two of 3 individuals heterozygous for the S44L variant
showed lower motor neuron dysfunction on EMG examination. The authors
suggested that S44L may act as a weak mutation, causing a noncritical
reduction in spastin activity that only becomes clinically significant
when combined with another defect in motor neuron function.

.0016
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, ASP470VAL

In 6 affected members spanning 3 generations of a family with SPG4
(182601), Svenson et al. (2004) identified a heterozygous 1534A-T
transversion in the SPAST gene, resulting in an asp470-to-val (D470V)
substitution. The 3 patients with only the heterozygous D470V mutation
had adult onset at ages 55, 40, and 18 years, respectively, whereas 3
patients who were compound heterozygous for the D470V mutation and the
S44L (604277.0015) polymorphism had disease onset in infancy, were
wheelchair-bound by age 40 years, had a stutter, and had mild to
moderate cognitive deficits. Svenson et al. (2004) concluded that
presence of the S44L polymorphism, in addition to the D470V mutation,
modified the SPG4 phenotype in this family.

.0017
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4, MODIFIER OF
SPAST, PRO45GLN

Svenson et al. (2004) identified a 259C-A transversion in the SPAST
gene, resulting in a pro45-to-gln (P45Q) substitution, at a frequency of
less than 0.2% (1 of 900 alleles) in a North American control
population, indicating that it is a rare polymorphism.

In 2 affected members of a family with SPG4 (182601), Svenson et al.
(2004) identified compound heterozygosity for the P45Q polymorphism and
a disease-causing arg562-to-gly mutation in the SPAST gene (R562G;
604277.0018). These 2 patients had disease onset in infancy, whereas
affected members with only the disease-causing R562G mutation had
significantly later onset. Two family members who carried only the P45Q
polymorphism were unaffected. Svenson et al. (2004) concluded that the
P45Q polymorphism was a modifier of the SPG4 phenotype.

.0018
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, ARG562GLY

In 11 affected members spanning 3 generations of a family with SPG4
(182601), Svenson et al. (2004) identified a heterozygous arg562-to-gly
(R562G) substitution in the SPAST gene. Two of the 11 patients, who were
compound heterozygous for the R562G mutation and the pro45-to-gln
polymorphism (P45Q; 604277.0017), had disease onset in infancy, whereas
7 of 9 patients who had only the D470V mutation had later onset at ages
ranging from 17 to 58 years. Two family members who carried only the
P45Q polymorphism were asymptomatic. The authors concluded that
inheritance of the P45Q polymorphism, when present with the
disease-causing R562G mutation, modified the SPG4 phenotype in this
family.

.0019
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, 2.3-KB DEL

In 6 affected members of a Japanese family with a relatively mild form
of SPG4 (182601), Iwanaga et al. (2005) identified a heterozygous
2,307-bp deletion in the SPAST gene. The deletion spanned from the
5-prime UTR, 114-bp upstream of the translation initiation site, to
1.8-kb downstream of the exon 1 splice donor site. The results suggested
that the primary SPAST mRNA transcript lacked the entire coding region
of exon 1, including the translation initiation site and the donor site
of exon 1, leading to defective splicing and subsequent rapid mRNA
degradation. The structural abnormality was detected by Southern blot
analysis followed by deletion-specific PCR amplification.

.0020
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, 30-BP DEL, NT1216

In a woman with SPG4 (182601), Schickel et al. (2006) identified a
heterozygous 1216A-G transition in exon 9 of the SPAST gene. Although
the mutation was predicted to result in an ile406-to-val (I406V)
substitution, RT-PCR and direct sequencing of lymphocyte-derived cDNA
revealed a 30-bp in-frame deletion of nucleotides 1216 to 1245 in exon
9, corresponding to deletion of codons 406 to 415. Thus, the 1216A-G
transition created a fully dominant ectopic splice donor site.
Transfection experiments in human cells showed that the mutant spastin
protein with the deletion showed normal subcellular localization but
lacked microtubule-severing activity, consistent with
haploinsufficiency. A mutant construct containing the I406V substitution
showed subcellular localization and microtubule-severing activity that
was similar to wildtype spastin protein, suggesting that the predicted
amino acid substitution was not pathogenic.

.0021
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, SER445ARG

In a patient with a severe form of SPG4 (182601), McDermott et al.
(2006) identified a 1335C-A transversion in exon 11 of the SPAST gene,
resulting in a ser445-to-arg (S445R) substitution. He developed walking
difficulties in his late teens with deteriorating gait in his 20s; he
was wheelchair-dependent at age 35. He later developed stiffness in the
upper limbs, bladder dysfunction, dysarthria, and swallowing
difficulties. In his 40s, he developed respiratory insufficiency and
distal muscle wasting in the lower limbs. The findings of bulbar and
respiratory involvement, as well as lower motor neuron degeneration,
broadened the phenotype associated with mutations in the SPAST gene.

.0022
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 4
SPAST, EX10-EX12, DUP

In affected individuals of a large Brazilian kindred with SPG4 (182601),
originally reported by Starling et al. (2002), Mitne-Neto et al. (2007)
identified a heterozygous tandem duplication of exons 10 through 12 of
the SPAST gene. Long-range PCR and sequencing showed nonhomology of the
sequences contributing to the novel fusion. The duplication was
predicted to result in premature termination and disruption of enzymatic
activity. Twelve of 30 mutation carriers had no clinical complaints.
Among these patients, 9 of 14 female carriers had no complaints,
indicating sex-dependent penetrance in this family, with women being
partially protected.

REFERENCE 1. Beetz, C.; Nygren, A. O. H.; Deufel, T.; Reid, E.: An SPG3A whole
gene deletion neither co-segregates with disease nor modifies phenotype
in a hereditary spastic paraplegia family with a pathogenic SPG4 mutation.
(Letter) Neurogenetics 8: 317-318, 2007.

2. Beetz, C.; Nygren, A. O. H.; Schickel, J.; Auer-Grumbach, M.; Burk,
K.; Heide, G.; Kassubek, J.; Klimpe, S.; Klopstock, T.; Kreuz, F.;
Otto, S.; Schule, R.; Schols, L.; Sperfeld, A.-D.; Witte, O. W.; Deufel,
T.: High frequency of partial SPAST deletions in autosomal dominant
hereditary spastic paraplegia. Neurology 67: 1926-1930, 2006.

3. Beetz, C.; Zuchner, S.; Ashley-Koch, A.; Auer-Grumbach, M.; Byrne,
P.; Chinnery, P. F.; Hutchinson, M.; McDermott, C. J.; Meijer, I.
A.; Nygren, A. O. H.; Pericak-Vance, M.; Pyle, A.; Rouleau, G. A.;
Schickel, J.; Shaw, P. J.; Deufel, T.: Linkage to a known gene but
no mutation identified: comprehensive reanalysis of SPG4 HSP pedigrees
reveals large deletions as the sole cause. (Letter) Hum. Mutat. 28:
739-740, 2007.

4. Benson, K. F.; Horwitz, M.; Wolff, J.; Friend, K.; Thompson, E.;
White, S.; Richards, R. I.; Raskind, W. H.; Bird, T. D.: CAG repeat
expansion in autosomal dominant familial spastic paraparesis: novel
expansion in a subset of patients. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7: 1779-1786,
1998.

5. Brugman, F.; Wokke, J. H. J.; Scheffer, H.; Versteeg, M. H. A.;
Sistermans, E. A.; van den Berg, L. H.: Spastin mutations in sporadic
adult-onset upper motor neuron syndromes. Ann. Neurol. 58: 865-869,
2005.

6. Burger, J.; Fonknechten, N.; Hoeltzenbein, M.; Neumann, L.; Bratanoff,
E.; Hazan, J.; Reis, A.: Hereditary spastic paraplegia caused by
mutations in the SPG4 gene. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 8: 771-776, 2000.

7. Burger, J.; Metzke, H.; Paternotte, C.; Schilling, F.; Hazan, J.;
Reis, A.: Autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia with anticipation
maps to a 4-cM interval on chromosome 2p21-p24 in a large German family. Hum.
Genet. 98: 371-375, 1996.

8. Charvin, D.; Cifuentes-Diaz, C.; Fonknechten, N.; Joshi, V.; Hazan,
J.; Melki, J.; Betuing, S.: Mutations of SPG4 are responsible for
a loss of function of spastin, an abundant neuronal protein localized
in the nucleus. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 71-78, 2003.

9. Chinnery, P. F.; Keers, S. M.; Holden, M. J.; Ramesh, V.; Dalton,
A.: Infantile hereditary spastic paraparesis due to codominant mutations
in the spastin gene. Neurology 63: 710-712, 2004.

10. Ciccarelli, F. D.; Proukakis, C.; Patel, H.; Cross, H.; Azam,
S.; Patton, M. A.; Bork, P.; Crosby, A. H.: The identification of
a conserved domain in both spartin and spastin, mutated in hereditary
spastic paraplegia. Genomics 81: 437-441, 2003.

11. Crippa, F.; Panzeri, C.; Martinuzzi, A.; Arnoldi, A.; Redaelli,
F.; Tonelli, A.; Baschirotto, C.; Vazza, G.; Mostacciuolo, M. L.;
Daga, A.; Orso, G.; Profice, P.; and 13 others: Eight novel mutations
in SPG4 in a large sample of patients with hereditary spastic paraplegia. Arch.
Neurol. 63: 750-755, 2006.

12. Depienne, C.; Fedirko, E.; Forlani, S.; Cazeneuve, C.; Ribai,
P.; Feki, I.; Tallaksen, C.; Nguyen, K.; Stankoff, B.; Ruberg, M.;
Stevanin, G.; Durr, A.; Brice, A.: Exon deletions of SPG4 are a frequent
cause of hereditary spastic paraplegia. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 44:
281-284, 2007.

13. Errico, A.; Ballabio, A.; Rugarli, E. I.: Spastin, the protein
mutated in autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia, is involved
in microtubule dynamics. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 153-163, 2002.

14. Errico, A.; Claudiani, P.; D'Addio, M.; Rugarli, E. I.: Spastin
interacts with the centrosomal protein NA14, and is enriched in the
spindle pole, the midbody and the distal axon. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13:
2121-2132, 2004.

15. Evans, K.; Keller, C.; Pavur, K.; Glasgow, K.; Conn, B.; Lauring,
B.: Interaction of two hereditary spastic paraplegia gene products,
spastin and atlastin, suggests a common pathway for axonal maintenance. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 10666-10671, 2006.

16. Fonknechten, N.; Mavel, D.; Byrne, P.; Davoine, C.-S.; Cruaud,
C.; Bonsch, D.; Samson, D.; Coutinho, P.; Hutchinson, M.; McMonagle,
P.; Burgunder, J.-M.; Tartaglione, A.; and 10 others: Spectrum
of SPG4 mutations in autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 637-644, 2000. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet.
14: 461 only, 2005.

17. Hazan, J.; Davoine, C. S.; Mavel, D.; Fonknechten, N.; Paternotte,
C.; Fizames, C.; Cruaud, C.; Samson, D.; Muselet, D.; Vega-Czarny,
N.; Brice, A.; Gyapay, G.; Heilig, R.; Fontaine, B.; Weissenbach,
J.: A fine integrated map of the SPG4 locus excludes an expanded
CAG repeat in chromosome 2p-linked autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia. Genomics 60:
309-319, 1999.

18. Hazan, J.; Fonknechten, N.; Mavel, D.; Paternotte, C.; Samson,
D.; Artiguenave, F.; Davoine, C.-S.; Cruaud, C.; Durr, A.; Wincker,
P.; Brottier, P.; Cattolico, L.; Barbe, V.; Burgunder, J.-M.; Prud'homme,
J.-F.; Brice, A.; Fontaine, B.; Heilig, R.; Weissenbach, J.: Spastin,
a new AAA protein, is altered in the most frequent form of autosomal
dominant spastic paraplegia. Nature Genet. 23: 296-303, 1999.

19. Ivanova, N.; Lofgren, A.; Tournev, I.; Rousev, R.; Andreeva, A.;
Jordanova, A.; Georgieva, V.; Deconinck, T.; Timmerman, V.; Kremensky,
I.; De Jonghe, P.; Mitev, V.: Spastin gene mutations in Bulgarian
patients with hereditary spastic paraplegia. Clin. Genet. 70: 490-495,
2006.

20. Iwanaga, H.; Tsujino, A.; Shirabe, S.; Eguchi, H.; Fukushima,
N.; Niikawa, N.; Yoshiura, K.; Eguchi, K.: Large deletion involving
the 5-prime-UTR in the spastin gene caused mild phenotype of autosomal
dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 133A:
13-17, 2005.

21. Ki, C.-S.; Lee, W. Y.; Han, D. H.; Sung, D. H.; Lee, K.-B.; Lee,
K.-A.; Cho, S. S.; Cho, S.; Hwang, H.; Sohn, K. M.; Choi, Y. J.; Kim,
J.-W.: A novel missense mutation (I344K) in the SPG4 gene in a Korean
family with autosomal-dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia. J.
Hum. Genet. 47: 473-477, 2002.

22. Lindsey, J. C.; Lusher, M. E.; McDermott, C. J.; White, K. D.;
Reid, E.; Rubinsztein, D. C.; Bashir, R.; Hazan, J.; Shaw, P. J.;
Bushby, K. M. D.: Mutation analysis of the spastin gene (SPG4) in
patients with hereditary spastic paraparesis. J. Med. Genet. 37:
759-765, 2000.

23. Mannan, A. U.; Boehm, J.; Sauter, S. M.; Rauber, A.; Byrne, P.
C.; Neesen, J.; Engel, W.: Spastin, the most commonly mutated protein
in hereditary spastic paraplegia interacts with reticulon 1 an endoplasmic
reticulum protein. Neurogenetics 7: 93-103, 2006.

24. McDermott, C. J.; Burness, C. E.; Kirby, J.; Cox, L. E.; Rao,
D. G.; Hewamadduma, C.; Sharrack, B.; Hadjivassiliou, M.; Chinnery,
P. F.; Dalton, A.; Shaw, P. J.: Clinical features of hereditary spastic
paraplegia due to spastin mutation. Neurology 67: 45-51, 2006. Note:
Erratum: Neurology 72: 1534 only, 2009.

25. McDermott, C. J.; Grierson, A. J.; Wood, J. D.; Bingley, M.; Wharton,
S. B.; Bushby, K. M. D.; Shaw, P. J.: Hereditary spastic paraparesis:
disrupted intracellular transport associated with spastin mutation. Ann.
Neurol. 54: 748-759, 2003.

26. McMonagle, P.; Byrne, P. C.; Fitzgerald, B.; Webb, S.; Parfrey,
N. A.; Hutchinson, M.: Phenotype of AD-HSP due to mutations in the
SPAST gene: comparison with AD-HSP without mutations. Neurology 55:
1794-1800, 2000.

27. Meijer, I. A.; Hand, C. K.; Cossette, P.; Figlewicz, D. A.; Rouleau,
G. A.: Spectrum of SPG4 mutations in a large collection of North
American families with hereditary spastic paraplegia. Arch. Neurol. 59:
281-286, 2002.

28. Mitne-Neto, M.; Kok, F.; Beetz, C.; Pessoa, A.; Bueno, C.; Graciani,
Z.; Martyn, M.; Monteiro, C. B. M.; Mitne, G.; Hubert, P.; Nygren,
A. O. H.; Valadares, M.; Cerqueira, A. M. P.; Starling, A.; Deufel,
T.; Zatz, M.: A multi-exonic SPG4 duplication underlies sex-dependent
penetrance of hereditary spastic paraplegia in a large Brazilian pedigree. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 15: 1276-1279, 2007.

29. Montenegro, G.; Rebelo, A. P.; Connell, J.; Allison, R.; Babalini,
C.; D'Aloia, M.; Montieri, P.; Schule, R.; Ishiura, H.; Price, J.;
Strickland, A.; Gonzalez, M. A.; and 13 others: Mutations in the
ER-shaping protein reticulon 2 cause the axon-degenerative disorder
hereditary spastic paraplegia type 12. J. Clin. Invest. 122: 538-544,
2012.

30. Nielsen, J. E.; Koefoed, P.; Abell, K.; Hasholt, L.; Eiberg, H.;
Fenger, K.; Niebuhr, E.; Sorensen, S. A.: CAG repeat expansion in
autosomal dominant pure spastic paraplegia linked to chromosome 2p21-p24. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 6: 1811-1816, 1997.

31. Orlacchio, A.; Kawarai, T.; Totaro, A.; Errico, A.; St George-Hyslop,
P. H.; Rugarli, E. I.; Bernardi, G.: Hereditary spastic paraplegia:
clinical genetic study of 15 families. Arch. Neurol. 61: 849-855,
2004.

32. Park, S.-Y.; Ki, C.-S.; Kim, H.-J.; Kim, J.-W.; Sung, D. H.; Kim,
B. J.; Lee, W. Y.: Mutation analysis of SPG4 and SPG3A genes and
its implication in molecular diagnosis of Korean patients with hereditary
spastic paraplegia. Arch. Neurol. 62: 1118-1121, 2005.

33. Reid, E.; Connell, J.; Edwards, T. L.; Duley, S.; Brown, S. E.;
Sanderson, C. M.: The hereditary spastic paraplegia protein spastin
interacts with the ESCRT-III complex-associated endosomal protein
CHMP1B. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 19-38, 2005.

34. Roll-Mecak, A.; Vale, R. D.: Structural basis of microtubule
severing by the hereditary spastic paraplegia protein spastin. Nature 451:
363-367, 2008.

35. Sanderson, C. M.; Connell, J. W.; Edwards, T. L.; Bright, N. A.;
Duley, S.; Thompson, A.; Luzio, J. P.; Reid, E.: Spastin and atlastin,
two proteins mutated in autosomal-dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia,
are binding partners. Hum. Molec. Genet. 15: 307-318, 2006.

36. Santorelli, F. M.; Patrono, C.; Fortini, D.; Tessa, A.; Comanducci,
G.; Bertini, E.; Pierallini, A.; Amabile, G. A.; Casali, C.: Intrafamilial
variability in hereditary spastic paraplegia associated with an SPG4
gene mutation. Neurology 55: 702-705, 2000.

37. Sauter, S.; Miterski, B.; Klimpe, S.; Bonsch, D.; Schols, L.;
Visbeck, A.; Papke, T.; Hopf, H. C.; Engel, W.; Deufel, T.; Epplen,
J. T.; Neesen, J.: Mutation analysis of the spastin gene (SPG4) in
patients in Germany with autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia. Hum.
Mutat. 20: 127-132, 2002.

38. Schickel, J.; Beetz, C.; Frommel, C.; Heide, G.; Sasse, A.; Hemmerich,
P.; Deufel, T.: Unexpected pathogenic mechanism of a novel mutation
in the coding sequence of SPG4 (spastin). Neurology 66: 421-423,
2006.

39. Shoukier, M.; Neesen, J.; Sauter, S. M.; Argyriou, L.; Doerwald,
N.; Pantakani, D. V. K.; Mannan, A. U.: Expansion of mutation spectrum,
determination of mutation cluster regions and predictive structural
classification of SPAST mutations in hereditary spastic paraplegia. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 17: 187-194, 2009. Note: Erratum: Europ. J. Hum. Genet.
17: 401-402, 2009.

40. Starling, A.; Rocco, P.; Passos-Bueno, M. R.; Hazan, J.; Marie,
S. K.; Zatz, M.: Autosomal dominant (AD) pure spastic paraplegia
(HSP) linked to locus SPG4 affects almost exclusively males in a large
pedigree. J. Med. Genet. 39: e77, 2002. Note: Electronic article.

41. Svenson, I. K.; Ashley-Koch, A. E.; Gaskell, P. C.; Riney, T.
J.; Cumming, W. J. K.; Kingston, H. M.; Hogan, E. L.; Boustany, R.-M.
N.; Vance, J. M.; Nance, M. A.; Pericak-Vance, M. A.; Marchuk, D.
A.: Identification and expression analysis of spastin gene mutations
in hereditary spastic paraplegia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68: 1077-1085,
2001.

42. Svenson, I. K.; Ashley-Koch, A. E.; Pericak-Vance, M. A.; Marchuk,
D. A.: A second leaky splice-site mutation in the spastin gene. (Letter) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 69: 1407-1409, 2001.

43. Svenson, I. K.; Kloos, M. T.; Gaskell, P. C.; Nance, M. A.; Garbern,
J. Y.; Hisanaga, S.; Pericak-Vance, M. A.; Ashley-Koch, A. E.; Marchuk,
D. A.: Intragenic modifiers of hereditary spastic paraplegia due
to spastin gene mutations. Neurogenetics 5: 157-164, 2004.

44. Svenson, I. K.; Kloos, M. T.; Jacon, A.; Gallione, C.; Horton,
A. C.; Pericak-Vance, M. A.; Ehlers, M. D.; Marchuk, D. A.: Subcellular
localization of spastin: implications for the pathogenesis of hereditary
spastic paraplegia. Neurogenetics 6: 135-141, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/1/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/11/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/14/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/19/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/21/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/27/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/6/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/31/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/20/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/24/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/8/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/27/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/21/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/6/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/5/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/23/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/7/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/6/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/16/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/4/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/12/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/27/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/26/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/26/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/27/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/6/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/2/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/27/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/2/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/17/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/20/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/20/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/13/2001
Majed J. Dasouki - updated: 1/30/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/3/2000
Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 9/21/2000
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/14/2000

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 11/2/1999

EDITED carol: 09/24/2013
terry: 3/15/2013
carol: 3/2/2012
ckniffin: 3/1/2012
wwang: 3/2/2011
carol: 2/2/2010
wwang: 1/8/2010
mgross: 11/13/2009
terry: 11/11/2009
wwang: 9/14/2009
wwang: 4/10/2008
ckniffin: 3/19/2008
alopez: 3/19/2008
terry: 2/21/2008
terry: 12/17/2007
wwang: 12/4/2007
ckniffin: 11/27/2007
wwang: 11/13/2007
ckniffin: 11/6/2007
alopez: 11/2/2007
terry: 10/31/2007
wwang: 9/6/2007
ckniffin: 8/20/2007
wwang: 8/3/2007
ckniffin: 7/24/2007
wwang: 6/28/2007
ckniffin: 6/8/2007
wwang: 6/8/2007
ckniffin: 4/27/2007
wwang: 3/23/2007
terry: 3/21/2007
wwang: 2/8/2007
ckniffin: 2/6/2007
wwang: 9/7/2006
ckniffin: 9/5/2006
wwang: 8/29/2006
ckniffin: 8/23/2006
wwang: 4/11/2006
ckniffin: 4/7/2006
wwang: 3/13/2006
ckniffin: 3/6/2006
wwang: 11/22/2005
ckniffin: 11/16/2005
wwang: 11/14/2005
ckniffin: 11/4/2005
wwang: 10/26/2005
wwang: 10/24/2005
ckniffin: 10/12/2005
joanna: 5/18/2005
tkritzer: 2/1/2005
ckniffin: 1/27/2005
tkritzer: 11/1/2004
ckniffin: 10/26/2004
tkritzer: 10/26/2004
tkritzer: 7/28/2004
ckniffin: 7/27/2004
tkritzer: 2/17/2004
ckniffin: 2/6/2004
joanna: 10/31/2003
cwells: 5/5/2003
terry: 5/2/2003
carol: 1/6/2003
ckniffin: 12/27/2002
carol: 12/4/2002
tkritzer: 10/2/2002
cwells: 9/17/2002
tkritzer: 8/26/2002
tkritzer: 8/23/2002
terry: 8/20/2002
alopez: 1/11/2002
cwells: 1/10/2002
terry: 12/20/2001
alopez: 10/30/2001
cwells: 6/19/2001
cwells: 6/14/2001
terry: 6/13/2001
carol: 1/30/2001
mcapotos: 11/16/2000
mcapotos: 11/14/2000
terry: 11/3/2000
carol: 9/27/2000
alopez: 9/21/2000
alopez: 4/17/2000
terry: 4/14/2000
alopez: 11/2/1999

611430	TITLE *611430 TETRATRICOPEPTIDE REPEAT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 21A; TTC21A
;;STRESS-INDUCIBLE PROTEIN 2; STI2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis to identify putative coding sequences in a region
of chromosome 3 associated with carcinomas, Protopopov et al. (2003)
identified TTC21A, which they called ST12. The deduced 1,320-amino acid
protein contains 10 N-terminal tetratricopeptide repeats of about 34
amino acids each. Northern blot analysis detected strong expression of a
6.5-kb transcript only in testis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Protopopov et al. (2003) determined that the TTC21A gene contains 27
exons and spans about 27 kb.

MAPPING

Using FISH and a deletion cell hybrid panel, Protopopov et al. (2003)
mapped the TTC21A gene to chromosome 3p21.3.

REFERENCE 1. Protopopov, A.; Kashuba, V.; Zabarovska, V. I.; Muravenko, O. V.;
Lerman, M. I.; Klein, G.; Zabarovsky, E. R.: An integrated physical
and gene map of the 3.5-Mb chromosome 3p21.3 (AP20) region implicated
in major human epithelial malignancies. Cancer Res. 63: 404-412,
2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/13/2007

EDITED mgross: 02/26/2013
alopez: 9/13/2007

604648	TITLE *604648 T-BOX 10; TBX10
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

T-box genes encode transcription factors that have a highly conserved
DNA-binding domain, the T box. T-box genes are expressed differentially
during embryogenesis and/or in a tissue-specific fashion throughout
adulthood. By screening a human genomic library with a mouse Tbx1 cDNA
(602054), Law et al. (1998) isolated a T-box-10 (TBX10) genomic clone.
The TBX10 gene encodes a protein containing a T box with high sequence
similarity to the T box of TBX1; the authors concluded that TBX10 is a
member of the TBX1 subfamily. TBX10 and TBX1 also share regions of high
sequence identity C-terminal to their T boxes. RT-PCR analysis suggested
that TBX10 is expressed in human brain, ovary, uterus, pituitary, and
fetal kidney. Northern blot analysis showed mouse Tbx10 expression in
adult brain, liver, and kidney, and at embryonic days 10.5 to 15.5.
RT-PCR analysis detected mouse Tbx10 expression in adult ovary, uterus,
and kidney, but not in testis. In situ hybridization analysis suggested
that the expression pattern of Tbx10 overlaps that of Tbx1 at 12.5 days'
gestation, particularly in lung mesenchyme and the tissues of the
developing ear.

MAPPING

By FISH, Law et al. (1998) mapped the human TBX10 gene to 11q13. Using
an STS based on TBX10 exonic sequence, they identified YAC clones
mapping to 11q13.1-q13.2 that contain the TBX10 gene. Law et al. (1998)
mapped the mouse Tbx10 gene to proximal chromosome 19, in a region
showing homology of synteny with human 11q13.

ANIMAL MODEL

Mice carrying the spontaneous mutation 'Dancer' (Dc) exhibit cleft lip
and palate (CL/P) in homozygotes and show significantly increased
susceptibility to CL/P in heterozygotes (Deol and Lane, 1966; Trasler et
al., 1984). Bush et al. (2004) mapped Dc to a 1-cM region near the
centromere of mouse chromosome 19. In situ hybridization analysis showed
that one positional candidate gene, Tbx10, is ectopically expressed in
Dc mutant embryos. Positional cloning of the Dc locus revealed an
insertion of a 3.3-kb sequence containing the 5-prime region of the P23
gene (607061) into the first intron of Tbx10, which causes ectopic
expression of a P23-Tbx10 chimeric transcript encoding a protein product
identical to a normal variant of the Tbx10 protein. Furthermore, Bush et
al. (2004) showed that ectopic expression of Tbx10 in transgenic mice
recapitulated the Dc mutant phenotype, indicating that CL/P in Dc mutant
mice results from the P23 insertion-induced ectopic Tbx10 expression.
These results identified gain of function of a T-box transcription
factor gene as a mechanism underlying the pathogenesis of cleft lip and
palate.

REFERENCE 1. Bush, J. O.; Lan, Y.; Jiang, R.: The cleft lip and palate defects
in Dancer mutant mice result from gain of function of the Tbx10 gene. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 7022-7027, 2004.

2. Deol, M. S.; Lane, P. W.: A new gene affecting the morphogenesis
of the vestibular part of the inner ear in the mouse. J. Embryol.
Exp. Morphol. 16: 543-558, 1966.

3. Law, D. J.; Garvey, N.; Agulnik, S. I.; Perlroth, V.; Hahn, O.
M.; Rhinehart, R. E.; Gebuhr, T. C.; Silver, L. M.: TBX10, a member
of the Tbx1-subfamily of conserved developmental genes, is located
at human chromosome 11q13 and proximal mouse chromosome 19. Mammalian
Genome 9: 397-399, 1998.

4. Trasler, D. G.; Kemp, D.; Trasler, T. A.: Increased susceptibility
to 6-aminonicotinamide-induced cleft lip of heterozygote dancer mice. Teratology 29:
101-104, 1984.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/2004

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 3/3/2000

EDITED alopez: 08/05/2005
terry: 11/4/2004
tkritzer: 5/20/2004
terry: 5/18/2004
mgross: 3/10/2000
psherman: 3/6/2000

605409	TITLE *605409 TRANSCRIPTION ELONGATION REGULATOR 1; TCERG1
;;TATA BOX-BINDING PROTEIN-ASSOCIATED FACTOR 2S; TAF2S;;
TBP-ASSOCIATED FACTOR, RNA POLYMERASE II, 150-KD;;
TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR CA150; CA150
DESCRIPTION Maximal expression of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1)
requires specific cellular factors in addition to the virus-encoded
transactivator protein Tat (see 601409) and the RNA element TAR.

Sune and Garcia-Blanco (1995) demonstrated the existence of a nuclear
factor that is a Tat coactivator. By affinity purification, functional
analysis, and micropeptide sequencing, followed by EST database
searching and probing of a HeLa cell cDNA library, Sune et al. (1997)
isolated a cDNA encoding this factor, which the authors called CA150.
The deduced 1,097-amino acid protein contains motifs found in
transcription factors. The sequence begins and ends with proline-rich
(48%) regions; it contains 2 N-terminal and 1 C-terminal WWP domains
involved in protein-protein interactions, a 76-amino acid
glutamine-alanine repeat, previously observed only in nonmammalian
transcription factors, followed by a serine-threonine-proline-rich
region, a highly charged KE region, a putative nuclear localization
signal, and a putative leucine zipper. Northern blot analysis revealed
ubiquitous expression of an approximately 4.5-kb transcript. Western
blot analysis confirmed that CA150 is a 150-kD protein present in all
cell lines tested. GST pull-down and yeast 2-hybrid analyses detected
weak or no interaction with Tat. Immunofluorescence analysis localized
CA150 in the nucleoplasm, outside the nucleoli. Immunoprecipitation and
Western blot analysis showed that CA150 is associated with the RNA
polymerase II holoenzyme (see 180660) independent of the presence of
Tat. Tat can also associate with the this holoenzyme. Immunodepletion of
CA150 from nuclear extracts eliminated Tat-mediated transactivation. On
the other hand, overexpression of truncated CA150 decreased Tat-mediated
transcriptional activation of the HIV-1 promoter but had little effect
on basal transcription. Sune et al. (1997) thus proposed that Tat action
is transduced through an RNA polymerase II holoenzyme containing CA150.

Sune and Garcia-Blanco (1999) found that CA150 has a selective role in
transcription from certain promoters and regulates transcription
elongation in a TATA box-dependent fashion. Overexpression of CA150
represses the transcription of the HIV-1 long terminal repeat and of the
ITGA4 (192975) promoter.

Bohne et al. (2000) cloned the cDNA encoding mouse Ca150 which shares
98% sequence identity with the human protein. Northern blot and
whole-mount in situ analyses detected expression in all adult and embryo
tissues tested.

By radiation hybrid panel analysis, Bohne et al. (2000) mapped the CA150
gene to chromosome 5q31. They mapped the mouse homolog to chromosome 18.

REFERENCE 1. Bohne, J.; Cole, S. E.; Sune, C.; Lindman, B. R.; Ko, V. D.; Vogt,
T. F.; Garcia-Blanco, M. A.: Expression analysis and mapping of the
mouse and human transcriptional regulator CA150. Mammalian Genome 11:
930-933, 2000.

2. Sune, C.; Garcia-Blanco, M. A.: Transcriptional cofactor CA150
regulates RNA polymerase II elongation in a TATA-box-dependent manner. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 19: 4719-4728, 1999.

3. Sune, C.; Garcia-Blanco, M. A.: Transcriptional trans activation
by human immunodeficiency virus type 1 Tat requires specific coactivators
that are not basal factors. J. Virol. 69: 3098-3107, 1995.

4. Sune, C.; Hayashi, T.; Liu, Y.; Lane, W. S.; Young, R. A.; Garcia-Blanco,
M. A.: CA150, a nuclear protein associated with the RNA polymerase
II holoenzyme, is involved in Tat-activated human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 transcription. Molec. Cell. Biol. 17: 6029-6039, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/20/2000

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/20/2000

EDITED carol: 01/31/2002
carol: 6/26/2001
terry: 1/18/2001
carol: 11/20/2000

607319	TITLE *607319 SCM-LIKE PROTEIN WITH 4 MBT DOMAINS 1; SFMBT1
;;SFMBT;;
RENAL UBIQUITOUS PROTEIN 1; RU1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SFMBT1 is a polycomb group protein (see 610231) that functions as a
transcriptional repressor (Wu et al., 2007).

CLONING

By immunoscreening with cytolytic T lymphocytes (CTLs), Morel et al.
(2000) obtained a cDNA encoding SFMBT1, which they called RU1. The
predicted RU1 protein has 866 amino acids. RT-PCR analysis detected
expression of RU1 in all cell lines and tissues tested. Western blot
analysis showed expression of a 116-kD protein.

Wu et al. (2007) reported that SFMBT1 contains 4 tandem N-terminal MBT
domains and a C-terminal sterile alpha motif (SAM) domain. Mouse and rat
SFMBT proteins have a similar structure. Drosophila Sfmbt shows
significant structural differences, but the MBT domains of fly and human
SFMBT share 34% amino acid identity. Western blot analysis detected
strong SFMBT1 expression in human cell lines of hematologic, but not
epithelial, origin. Endogenous SFMBT1 was enriched in nuclei of
erythroblastic K562 cells, and fluorescence-tagged SFMBT1 was enriched
within nuclei of transfected HeLa cells. Differential centrifugation
revealed that SFMBT1 copurified with markers of the nuclear matrix.

GENE FUNCTION

Morel et al. (2000) determined that the RU1 protein contains a
nonapeptide at residues 34 to 42 that is recognized by specific CTLs
when presented by HLA-B51-positive tumor cells containing a proteasome.
However, the nonapeptide is not presented by Epstein-Barr
virus-transformed B cells or by dendritic cells, both of which contain
an immunoproteasome that is incapable of cleaving the antigenic peptide.
Western blot analysis showed that the immunoproteasome, but not the
proteasome, contains LMP2 (PSMB9; 177045) and LMP7 (PSMB8; 177046),
possibly due to induction by gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570). Further
functional analysis showed that other, but not all, tumor antigens are
less efficiently processed by IFNG-treated proteasomes. Morel et al.
(2000) concluded that peptides rather than full-length proteins
requiring proteasome digestion may be more suitable as cancer vaccines.

Wu et al. (2007) confirmed that SFMBT1 bound to the nuclear matrix in
transfected HEK293 cells. SFMBT1 repressed transactivation driven by an
SV40 promoter, and it bound to histones H3 (see 602810) and H4 (see
602822). SFMBT1 also bound histones H2A (see 613499) and H2B (see
609904) with lower affinity, but it did not bind histone H1 (see
142709). Mutation analysis and reciprocal immunoprecipitations revealed
that the MBT domain of SFMBT bound specifically to the N-terminal tail
of histone H3. Mutation analysis showed that all 4 repeats of the MBT
domain were necessary and sufficient for SFMBT1 nuclear matrix
association, histone binding, and transcriptional repression. The MBT
repeats were predicted to fold into a propeller-like structure.

MAPPING

Gross (2013) mapped the SFMBT1 gene to chromosome 3p21.1 based on an
alignment of the SFMBT1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB189472) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/30/2013.

2. Morel, S.; Levy, F.; Burlet-Schiltz, O.; Brasseur, F.; Probst-Kepper,
M.; Peitrequin, A.-L.; Monsarrat, B.; Van Velthoven, R.; Cerottini,
J.-C.; Boon, T.; Gairin, J. E.; Van den Eynde, B. J.: Processing
of some antigens by the standard proteasome but not by the immunoproteasome
results in poor presentation by dendritic cells. Immunity 12: 107-117,
2000.

3. Wu, S.; Trievel, R. C.; Rice, J. C.: Human SFMBT is a transcriptional
repressor protein that selectively binds the N-terminal tail of histone
H3. FEBS Lett. 581: 3289-3296, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 08/30/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/30/2013

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/23/2002

EDITED mgross: 08/30/2013
mgross: 8/30/2013
mgross: 10/23/2002

603433	TITLE *603433 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 143; ZNF143
;;SPH-BINDING FACTOR; SBF
DESCRIPTION Transcriptional regulatory proteins containing tandemly repeated zinc
finger domains are thought to be involved in both normal and abnormal
cellular proliferation and differentiation. One abundant class of such
transcriptional regulators resembles the Drosophila Kruppel segmentation
gene product due to the presence of repeated Cys2-His2 (C2H2) zinc
finger domains that are connected by conserved sequences, called H/C
links. See ZNF91 (603971) for general information on zinc finger
proteins.

Vertebrate small nuclear RNA (snRNA) gene promoters are among the most
active known in growing cultured cells. Both proximal and distal
sequence elements (PSE and DSE, respectively) in these promoters play a
major role in transcription efficiency. The DSE, located approximately
200 bp upstream of the transcription start site, contains 2 adjacent
elements, 1 of which is often an SPH motif. Schuster et al. (1995)
isolated Staf (selenocysteine tRNA gene transcription-activating
factor), a Xenopus transcription factor that binds to the SPH motifs
present in the selenocysteine tRNA gene (TRSP; 165060) promoter and
activates the RNA polymerase III (pol III) promoter of the TRSP gene.
Staf contains 7 zinc fingers and a separate acidic activation domain.
Schaub et al. (1997) demonstrated that activation of the majority of
vertebrate snRNA and snRNA-type genes, transcribed by RNA polymerase II
(pol II) and pol III, also requires Staf. Schuster et al. (1998)
reported that Staf can also stimulate expression from a pol II mRNA
promoter. Staf contains 2 physically distinct activation domains: a
93-amino acid domain with 4 repeated units activates mRNA promoters, and
an 18-amino acid segment acts specifically on pol II and pol III snRNA
and snRNA-type promoters.

By screening a human insulinoma cDNA library with a degenerate
oligonucleotide corresponding to the H/C linker sequence, Tommerup et
al. (1993) isolated cDNAs potentially encoding zinc finger proteins.
Tommerup and Vissing (1995) performed sequence analysis on a number of
these cDNAs and identified several zinc finger protein genes, including
ZNF143. The ZNF143 cDNA predicts a protein that is a GLI (165220)-type
member of the Kruppel family of zinc finger proteins.

By searching an EST database for human sequences related to Staf,
Myslinski et al. (1998) found that 2 previously identified zinc finger
proteins, ZNF76 (194549) and ZNF143 (Tommerup and Vissing, 1995), had
homology to Staf. The predicted 626-amino acid ZNF143 protein shared 84%
identity with Staf, while ZNF76 was only 64% identical, leading
Myslinski et al. (1998) to conclude that ZNF143 is the human ortholog of
Staf. Like Staf, both ZNF76 and ZNF143 contain 7 zinc fingers and an
activation domain with the mRNA and snRNA activation regions. Both
proteins bound Staf-responsive elements in vitro. When expressed in
Drosophila cells, both activated transcription from an mRNA promoter
through the Staf binding site. Chimeric ZNF76 and ZNF143 proteins
activated a pol II mRNA promoter and snRNA pol II and pol III promoters
in Xenopus oocytes. Northern blot analysis revealed that the 3.5-kb
ZNF143 mRNA was expressed in all tissues tested, with the strongest
expression in ovary. Independently, Rincon et al. (1998) isolated cDNAs
encoding ZNF143, or SBF (SPH-binding factor). They found that antibodies
against SBF inhibited assembly of native SBF-DNA complexes. In vitro,
SBF stimulated transcription by pol III from a U6 (180692) snRNA gene
promoter containing an SPH element.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Tommerup and Vissing (1995)
mapped the ZNF143 gene to 11p15.4-p15.3.

REFERENCE 1. Myslinski, E.; Krol, A.; Carbon, P.: ZNF76 and ZNF143 are two
human homologs of the transcriptional activator Staf. J. Biol. Chem. 273:
21998-22006, 1998.

2. Rincon, J. C.; Engler, S. K.; Hargrove, B. W.; Kunkel, G. R.:
Molecular cloning of a cDNA encoding human SPH-binding factor, a conserved
protein that binds to the enhancer-like region of the U6 small nuclear
RNA gene promoter. Nucleic Acids Res. 26: 4846-4852, 1998.

3. Schaub, M.; Myslinski, E.; Schuster, C.; Krol, A.; Carbon, P.:
Staf, a promiscuous activator for enhanced transcription by RNA polymerase
II and III. EMBO J. 16: 173-181, 1997.

4. Schuster, C.; Krol, A.; Carbon, P.: Two distinct domains in Staf
to selectively activate small nuclear RNA-type and mRNA promoters. Mol.
Cell. Biol. 18: 2650-2658, 1998.

5. Schuster, C.; Myslinski, E.; Krol, A.; Carbon, P.: Staf, a novel
zinc finger protein that activates the RNA polymerase III promoter
of the selenocysteine tRNA gene. EMBO J. 14: 3777-3787, 1995.

6. Tommerup, N.; Aagaard, L.; Lund, C. L.; Boel, E.; Baxendale, S.;
Bates, G. P.; Lehrach, H.; Vissing, H.: A zinc-finger gene ZNF141
mapping at 4p16.3/D4S90 is a candidate gene for the Wolf-Hirschhorn
(4p-) syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 1571-1575, 1993.

7. Tommerup, N.; Vissing, H.: Isolation and fine mapping of 16 novel
human zinc finger-encoding cDNAs identify putative candidate genes
for developmental and malignant disorders. Genomics 27: 259-264,
1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Patti M. Sherman - updated: 7/29/1999

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 1/14/1999

EDITED terry: 12/03/1999
mgross: 7/30/1999
psherman: 7/29/1999
alopez: 1/14/1999

608370	TITLE *608370 STEAROYL-CoA DESATURASE 5; SCD5
;;ACYL-CoA DESATURASE 4; ACOD4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD; EC 1.14.99.5) is an integral membrane
protein of the endoplasmic reticulum that catalyzes the formation of
monounsaturated fatty acids from saturated fatty acids. SCD may be a key
regulator of energy metabolism with a role in obesity and dislipidemia.
Four SCD isoforms, Scd1 through Scd4, have been identified in mouse. In
contrast, only 2 SCD isoforms, SCD1 (604031) and SCD5, have been
identified in human. SCD1 shares about 85% amino acid identity with all
4 mouse SCD isoforms, as well as with rat Scd1 and Scd2. In contrast,
SCD5 shares limited homology with the rodent SCDs and appears to be
unique to primates (Wang et al., 2005).

CLONING

By analyzing a region of chromosome 4 involved in a balanced pericentric
inversion associated with a familial case of cleft lip (see 608371),
Beiraghi et al. (2003) cloned SCD5, which they called ACOD4. The deduced
330-amino acid protein has a predicted molecular mass of 37.6 kD. Like
other SCDs, SCD5 contains a unique N terminus followed by a
5-transmembrane region and 3 catalytic histidine boxes that are thought
to bind nonheme iron required for enzymatic activity. Northern blot
analysis detected a 3.0-kb transcript expressed at a high level in fetal
brain and at a lower level in fetal kidney. No SCD5 expression was
detected in fetal lung or in any adult tissue examined.

GENE STRUCTURE

Beiraghi et al. (2003) determined that the SCD5 gene contains 5 exons
and spans approximately 169 kb.

MAPPING

By FISH and genomic sequence analysis, Beiraghi et al. (2003) mapped the
SCD5 gene to chromosome 4q21.1.

REFERENCE 1. Beiraghi, S.; Zhou, M.; Talmadge, C. B.; Went-Sumegi, N.; Davis,
J. R.; Huang, D.; Saal, H.; Seemayer, T. A.; Sumegi, J.: Identification
and characterization of a novel gene disrupted by a pericentric inversion
inv(4)(p13.1q21.1) in a family with cleft lip. Gene 309: 11-21,
2003.

2. Wang, J.; Yu, L.; Schmidt, R. E.; Su, C.; Huang, X.; Gould, K.;
Cao, G.: Characterization of HSCD5, a novel human stearoyl-CoA desaturase
unique to primates. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 332: 735-742,
2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 11/4/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/20/2005

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/31/2003

EDITED mgross: 11/04/2005
mgross: 11/4/2005
terry: 10/20/2005
carol: 12/31/2003

605303	TITLE *605303 TRANSFORMING, ACIDIC, COILED-COIL-CONTAINING PROTEIN 3; TACC3
TACC3/FGFR3 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching an EST database with TACC1 (605301) as probe, Still et al.
(1999) identified cDNAs encoding TACC2 (605302) and TACC3. In contrast
to the highly similar coiled-coil regions of TACC1 and TACC2, the
coiled-coil region of the TACC3 protein is more divergent from that of
TACC1. Still et al. (1999) isolated full-length cDNAs encoding TACC3
from the Jurkat T-cell leukemia cell line. The deduced 838-amino acid
TACC3 protein contains a tyrosine phosphorylation site, like TACC1 and
TACC2, and high amounts of serine, proline, and acidic residues, like
TACC1; however, TACC3 lacks nuclear localization signals, suggesting
that it is a cytoplasmic protein. Northern blot analysis detected a
3.0-kb TACC3 transcript in testis, thymus, and at very low levels in
other immune system tissues. TACC3 was strongly expressed in most tumor
cell lines tested, the exception being Burkitt lymphoma. In mouse
embryonic tissue, the highest expression of a 2.0-kb Tacc3 transcript
was observed at day 15.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RNA interference in HeLa cells, Gergely et al. (2003) found that
TACC3 depletion did not alter spindle organization, but partly
destabilized microtubules and redistributed CHTOG (CKAP5; 611142) away
from spindle microtubules. In CHTOG-depleted cells, relatively robust
spindles formed, but they were highly disorganized. Gergely et al.
(2003) concluded that CHTOG plays a major role in organizing spindle
poles, whereas its role in stabilizing spindle microtubules is minor
and, at least in part, mediated via interaction with TACC3.

LeRoy et al. (2007) found that an evolutionarily conserved serine in
human TACC3 (ser558) was phosphorylated by Aurora A (AURKA; 603072), a
serine/threonine protein kinase essential for normal mitotic
progression. Phosphorylation of TACC3 by Aurora A in human cells was
essential for proper localization of TACC3 to centrosomes and proximal
mitotic spindles. Inhibition of Aurora A with the small molecular
inhibitor MLN8054 in cultured human tumor cells resulted in
mislocalization of TACC3 away from mitotic spindles in a
concentration-dependent manner. Furthermore, oral administration of
MLN8054 to nude mice bearing HCT-116 human tumor xenografts caused a
dose-dependent mislocalization of TACC3 away from spindle poles that
correlated with tumor growth inhibition.

During neurogenesis, the nuclei of progenitor cells of the proliferative
ventricular zone oscillate in a cell cycle-dependent manner called
interkinetic nuclear migration (INM). In most cell types, the nucleus
closely follows the centrosome during migration; however, in neural
progenitors, centrosomes remain near the ventricular zone during INM.
Xie et al. (2007) showed that INM in mice was dependent on the
regulation of centrosome-associated microtubules by Cep120 (613446) and
Taccs. Cep120 and Taccs regulated the integrity of microtubules coupling
the centrosome and the nucleus. Cep120 interacted with Taccs and
regulated the localization of Tacc3 to the centrosome. Both Cep120 and
Taccs were essential for maintaining the neural progenitor pool during
mouse neocortical development.

MAPPING

By PCR and radiation hybrid analysis, Still et al. (1999) mapped the
TACC3 gene to chromosome 4p16.3 and showed that, like TACC1 and TACC2,
TACC3 is associated with an FGFR family member, FGFR3 (134934). The
authors noted that 4p16.3 is the site of a consistent breakpoint in
patients with multiple myeloma carrying a t(4;14)(p16.3;q32.3)
translocation. Still et al. (1999) mapped the mouse Tacc3 gene to
chromosome 5B, with highest linkage to Fgfr3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the
TACC3 gene and susceptibility to urinary bladder cancer, see 109800.

- Fusion Gene in Glioblastoma Multiforme

Singh et al. (2012) reported that a small subset of glioblastoma
multiforme tumors (GBMs; 137800) (3.1%; 3 of 97 tumors examined) harbors
oncogenic chromosomal translocations that fuse in-frame the tyrosine
kinase coding domains of fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) genes
FGFR1 (136350) or FGFR3 to the transforming acidic coiled-coil (TACC)
coding domains of TACC1 or TACC3, respectively. The FGFR-TACC fusion
protein displayed oncogenic activity when introduced into astrocytes or
stereotactically transduced in the mouse brain. The fusion protein,
which localizes to mitotic spindle poles, has constitutive kinase
activity and induces mitotic and chromosomal segregation defects and
triggers aneuploidy. Inhibition of FGFR kinase corrected the aneuploidy,
and oral administration of an FGFR inhibitor prolonged survival of mice
harboring intracranial FGFR3-TACC3-initiated glioma. Singh et al. (2012)
concluded that FGFR-TACC fusions could potentially identify a subset of
GBM patients who would benefit from targeted FGFR kinase inhibition.

REFERENCE 1. Gergely, F.; Draviam, V. M.; Raff, J. W.: The ch-TOG/XMAP215 protein
is essential for spindle pole organization in human somatic cells. Genes
Dev. 17: 336-341, 2003.

2. LeRoy, P. J.; Hunter, J. J.; Hoar, K. M.; Burke, K. E.; Shinde,
V.; Ruan, J.; Bowman, D.; Galvin, K.; Ecsedy, J. A.: Localization
of human TACC3 to mitotic spindles is mediated by phosphorylation
on Ser-558 by Aurora A: a novel pharmacodynamic method for measuring
Aurora A activity. Cancer Res. 67: 5362-5370, 2007.

3. Singh, D.; Chan, J. M.; Zoppoli, P.; Niola, F.; Sullivan, R.; Castano,
A.; Liu, E. M.; Reichel, J.; Porrati, P.; Pellegatta, S.; Qiu, K.;
Gao, Z.; and 12 others: Transforming fusions of FGFR and TACC genes
in human glioblastoma. Science 337: 1231-1235, 2012.

4. Still, I. H.; Hamilton, M.; Vince, P.; Wolfman, A.; Cowell, J.
K.: Cloning of TACC1, an embryonically expressed, potentially transforming
coiled coil containing gene, from the 8p11 breast cancer amplicon. Oncogene 18:
4032-4038, 1999.

5. Still, I. H.; Vince, P.; Cowell, J. K.: The third member of the
transforming acidic coiled coil-containing gene family, TACC3, maps
in 4p16, close to translocation breakpoints in multiple myeloma, and
is upregulated in various cancer cell lines. Genomics 58: 165-170,
1999.

6. Xie, Z.; Moy, L. Y.; Sanada, K.; Zhou, Y.; Buchman, J. J.; Tsai,
L.-H.: Cep120 and TACCs control interkinetic nuclear migration and
the neural progenitor pool. Neuron 56: 79-93, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/31/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/11/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/3/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/25/2007

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 9/28/2000

EDITED alopez: 11/05/2012
terry: 10/31/2012
mgross: 6/16/2010
terry: 6/11/2010
ckniffin: 5/10/2010
mgross: 3/3/2008
mgross: 6/27/2007
terry: 6/25/2007
mgross: 9/28/2000

603721	TITLE *603721 UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME E2L 3; UBE2L3
;;UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME UBCH7; UBCH7
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes (E2s or UBCs) are essential components of
the posttranslational protein ubiquitination pathway, mediating the
transfer of activated ubiquitin to substrate proteins.

CLONING

The S. cerevisiae UBC1, UBC4, and UBC5 enzymes appear to participate in
the degradation of short-lived and abnormal proteins. Human UBE2L1
(600012) is a homolog of yeast UBC4 and UBC5. By screening a genomic
library with a UBE2L1 probe, Moynihan et al. (1996) isolated clones
corresponding to a novel gene, UBE2L3.

Nuber et al. (1996) cloned human keratinocyte cDNAs encoding UBE2L3,
which they referred to as UBCH7. The predicted 154-amino acid protein
has 64% sequence similarity to UBCH5. UBCH7 efficiently mediated E6AP
(UBE3A; 601623)-dependent ubiquitination in an in vitro assay.

By RT-PCR, Moynihan et al. (1998) determined that UBE2L3 is expressed as
4 mRNAs that differ in the length of the 3-prime untranslated region
(UTR). Sequence comparisons revealed that the human and mouse UBE2L3
cDNAs share 97% DNA sequence identity in the coding region and 93%
identity for 287 nucleotides extending into the 3-prime UTR. The
predicted mouse and human UBE2L3 proteins are identical.

GENE STRUCTURE

Moynihan et al. (1996) demonstrated that the UBE2L3 and UBE2L1 genes are
identical except that the UBE2L1 gene is intronless, while the UBE2L3
coding sequence is interrupted by 3 introns. Moynihan et al. (1998)
determined that the UBE2L3 gene spans approximately 57 kb.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids and by FISH, Moynihan et al. (1996)
mapped the UBE2L3 gene to chromosome 22q11.2-q13.1. They also mapped a
pseudogene, UBE2L2, to 12q12. Ardley et al. (1997) found that another
pseudogene, UBE2L4, was located at 19q13.1-q13.2.

GENE FUNCTION

Shimura et al. (2001) hypothesized that alpha-synuclein (163890) and
parkin (602544) interact functionally, namely, that parkin ubiquitinates
alpha-synuclein normally and that this process is altered in autosomal
recessive Parkinson disease (600116). Shimura et al. (2001) identified a
protein complex in normal human brain that includes parkin as the E3
ubiquitin ligase, UBCH7 as its associated E2 ubiquitin-conjugating
enzyme, and a novel 22-kD glycosylated form of alpha-synuclein
(alpha-Sp22) as its substrate. In contrast to normal parkin, mutant
parkin associated with autosomal recessive Parkinson disease failed to
bind alpha-Sp22. In an in vitro ubiquitination assay, alpha-Sp22 was
modified by normal, but not mutant, parkin into polyubiquitinated, high
molecular weight species. Accordingly, alpha-Sp22 accumulated in a
nonubiquitinated form in parkin-deficient Parkinson disease brains.
Shimura et al. (2001) concluded that alpha-Sp22 is a substrate for
parkin's ubiquitin ligase activity in normal human brain and that loss
of parkin function causes pathologic accumulation of alpha-Sp22. These
findings demonstrated a critical biochemical reaction between the 2
Parkinson disease-linked gene products and suggested that this reaction
underlies the accumulation of ubiquitinated alpha-synuclein in
conventional Parkinson disease.

Carrano et al. (2009) identified the E3 ubiquitin ligase Wwp1 (602307)
as a positive regulator of life span in C. elegans in response to
dietary restriction. Overexpression of Wwp1 in worms extended life span
by up to 20% under conditions of ad libitum feeding. Conversely,
reduction of Wwp1 completely suppressed the extended longevity of
diet-restricted animals. The E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme Ubc18,
which is homologous to human UBE2L3, interacted with Wwp1 and was
required for Wwp1 ubiquitin ligase activity and the extended longevity
of worms overexpressing Wwp1. Carrano et al. (2009) concluded that Wwp1
and Ubc18 function to ubiquitinate substrates that regulate longevity
induced by diet restriction.

Wenzel et al. (2011) showed that, unlike many ubiquitin-conjugating
enzymes (E2s) that transfer ubiquitin with RINGs, UBCH7 lacks intrinsic
ubiquitin ligase (E3)-independent reactivity with lysine, explaining its
preference for HECTs. Despite lacking lysine reactivity, UBCH7 exhibits
activity with the RING-in-between-RING (RBR) family of E3s that includes
parkin (602544) and human homolog of ariadne (HHARI; 605624). Found in
all eukaryotes, RBRs regulate processes such as translation and immune
signaling. RBRs contain a canonical C3HC4-type RING, followed by 2
conserved cys/his-rich zinc-binding domains, in-between-RING (IBR) and
RING2 domains, which together define this E3 family. Wenzel et al.
(2011) showed that RBRs function like RING/HECT hybrids: they bind E2s
via a RING domain, but transfer ubiquitin through an obligate
thioester-linked ubiquitin, requiring a conserved cysteine residue in
RING2. Wenzel et al. (2011) concluded that their results defined the
functional cadre of E3s for UBCH7, an E2 involved in cell proliferation
and immune function, and indicated a novel mechanism for an entire class
of E3s.

REFERENCE 1. Ardley, H. C.; Moynihan, T. P.; Thompson, J.; Leek, J. P.; Markham,
A. F.; Robinson, P. A.: Rapid isolation of genomic clones for individual
members of human multigene families: identification and localisation
of UBE2L4, a novel member of a ubiquitin conjugating enzyme dispersed
gene family. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 79: 188-192, 1997.

2. Carrano, A. C.; Liu, Z.; Dillin, A.; Hunter, T.: A conserved ubiquitination
pathway determines longevity in response to diet restriction. Nature 460:
396-399, 2009.

3. Moynihan, T. P.; Ardley, H. C.; Leek, J. P.; Thompson, J.; Brindle,
N. S.; Markham, A. F.; Robinson, P. A.: Characterization of a human
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme gene UBE2L3. Mammalian Genome 7: 520-525,
1996.

4. Moynihan, T. P.; Cole, C. G.; Dunham, I.; O'Neil, L.; Markham,
A. F.; Robinson, P. A.: Fine-mapping, genomic organization, and transcript
analysis of the human ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme gene UBE2L3. Genomics 51:
124-127, 1998.

5. Nuber, U.; Schwarz, S.; Kaiser, P.; Schneider, R.; Scheffner, M.
: Cloning of human ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes UbcH6 and UbcH7 (E2-F1)
and characterization of their interaction with E6-AP and RSP5. J.
Biol. Chem. 271: 2795-2800, 1996.

6. Shimura, H.; Schlossmacher, M. G.; Hattori, N.; Frosch, M. P.;
Trockenbacher, A.; Schneider, R.; Mizuno, Y.; Kosik, K. S.; Selkoe,
D. J.: Ubiquitination of a new form of alpha-synuclein by parkin
from human brain: implications for Parkinson's disease. Science 293:
263-269, 2001.

7. Wenzel, D. M.; Lissounov, A.; Brzovic, P. S.; Klevit, R. E.: UBCH7
reactivity profile reveals parkin and HHARI to be RING/HECT hybrids. Nature 474:
105-108, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/22/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/17/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/13/2001

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 4/12/1999

EDITED alopez: 06/23/2011
terry: 6/22/2011
wwang: 9/1/2009
mgross: 8/17/2009
alopez: 8/13/2001
terry: 8/13/2001
mgross: 4/15/1999

120940	TITLE *120940 COMPLEMENT COMPONENT 9; C9
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Activation of the complement system results in formation of the membrane
attack complex (MAC) on the membranes of target cells. The complex is
assembled by sequential addition of 1 molecule each of C5b (120900), C6
(217050), C7 (217070), and C8 (see 120950) and 6 to 16 molecules of the
ninth component, C9. MAC assembly results in membrane disruption,
leading to death of the target cell (summary by DiScipio et al., 1984).

CLONING

DiScipio et al. (1984) screened a human liver cDNA library by the
colony-hybridization technique using 2 radiolabelled oligonucleotide
probes corresponding to regions of the C9 amino acid sequence. The cDNA
coding for C9 was sequenced. The derived protein consists of 537 amino
acids in a single polypeptide chain. The N-terminal half of C9 is
predominantly hydrophilic, whereas the C-terminal half is more
hydrophobic. The amphipathic organization of the primary structure is
consistent with the potential of polymerized C9 to penetrate lipid
bilayers and cause the formation of transmembrane channels as part of
the lytic action of MAC.

Marazziti et al. (1988) compared the protein structure of C9 with that
of low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR; 606945).

GENE STRUCTURE

Marazziti et al. (1988) compared the gene structure of C9 with that of
LDLR (606945). The C9 gene contains 11 exons with lengths of 100 to 250
bp, except for exon 11, which includes the 3-prime UTR and extends over
more than 1 kb. Witzel-Schlomp et al. (1997) gave revised information on
the structure of the C9 gene, especially the exon-intron boundaries.

MAPPING

By hybridizing a cloned cDNA coding for human complement factor C9 to
hybrid cells containing subsets of human chromosomes on a rodent
background, Rogne et al. (1989) localized the gene for C9 to chromosome
5. Abbott et al. (1989) used a novel application of PCR to amplify
specifically the human C9 gene on a background of rodent DNA in somatic
cell hybrids. The assignment of the gene to 5p13 was confirmed and
regionalized by in situ hybridization.

Coto et al. (1991) identified RFLPs for the C6, C7, and C9 loci and
showed that these 3 loci are tightly linked. When examining the
haplotypes of unrelated parents in their family study, they found
significant linkage disequilibrium between C6 and C7 and between C7 and
C9. Thus, the so-called terminal complement components are encoded by a
cluster of genes. Coto et al. (1991) suggested that this cluster be
referred to as MACII, MACI being the C8A (120950) and C8B (120960)
cluster. Rogne et al. (1991) used DNA polymorphism of C9 and protein
variants of C6 to show that the 2 genes are closely linked (maximum lod
= 9.28 at theta = 0.00). They found no indication of allelic
association. Setien et al. (1993) found that although the C6 and C7
genes are contained in the same NotI fragment of 500 kb, no evidence of
physical linkage between C9 and C6 or C7 could be found in a range 50 kb
to 2.5 Mb.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- C9 Deficiency

Witzel-Schlomp et al. (1997) described 2 mutations of the C9 gene,
present in compound heterozygote state, in members of a Swiss family
with C9 deficiency (613825) reported by Zoppi et al. (1990).

Horiuchi et al. (1998) reported the molecular basis for C9 deficiency in
10 unrelated Japanese individuals. By use of exon-specific
PCR/single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis, they demonstrated
aberrantly migrating DNA bands in all 10 individuals. Subsequent direct
sequencing of exon 4 revealed that 8 of the 10 were homozygous for a
C-to-T transition at nucleotide 343 of the C9 gene, resulting in an
arg95-to-ter (R95X; 120940.0001) substitution. Family study for 1 of
these individuals confirmed the genetic nature of the defect. The
remaining 2 individuals with C9 deficiency were heterozygous for the
R95X mutation. One of these individuals was compound heterozygous for
R95X and a cys507-to-tyr (C507Y; 120940.0005) mutation, whereas the
genetic defect(s) in the other allele in the second heterozygous
individual was not identified.

Witzel-Schlomp et al. (1998) studied the genetic basis of inherited C9
deficiency in an adult of Irish origin reported previously by Hobart et
al. (1997) and in an unrelated Irish family in which 1 member had died
at the age of 22 years of meningitis, probably meningococcal. In the
first case, heterozygosity for C6, C7, and C9 DNA markers was found,
indicating probable compound heterozygosity of the C9 mutations. One
mutation was the same as one of those observed in the Swiss family of
Zoppi et al. (1990) (120940.0002). The second C9 mutation, a C-to-T
transition, was found in exon 4 at cDNA position 350, resulting in R95X.
Two different mutations were detected in the second Irish family: a
C-to-G transversion in exon 9 creating a TGA stop codon, located at cDNA
nucleotide 1284 (S406X; 120940.0004), and a T-to-G change in exon 4,
cDNA nucleotide 359, leading to a cys98-to-gly (C98G; 120940.0003)
substitution.

Ichikawa et al. (2001) reported a 28-year-old Japanese woman with C9
deficiency and dermatomyositis. DNA sequence analysis revealed a
nonsense mutation at arg95 of the C9 gene (120940.0001). This case
demonstrated that the muscle lesions of dermatomyositis can occur in the
presence of a complement defect that would prevent the formation of the
C5b-9 membrane attack complex.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
C9 DEFICIENCY
C9, ARG95TER

Horiuchi et al. (1998) found that 8 of 10 unrelated Japanese subjects
with C9 deficiency (613825) were homozygous for a C-to-T transition at
nucleotide 343, which converted codon 95 from CGA (arg) to TGA (stop).
Two other patients were heterozygous for the R95X mutation; one of these
had a C507Y (120940.0005) substitution, while the genetic defect in the
other allele of the second heterozygote remained unknown. Kira et al.
(1998) likewise found that all 4 Japanese C9-deficient patients who had
suffered from meningococcal meningitis had this CGA (arg)-to-TGA (stop)
mutation.

Ichikawa et al. (2001) found this mutation in a 28-year-old Japanese
woman with C9 deficiency and dermatomyositis. Whereas levels of serum
hemolytic complement (CH50) are characteristically normal or elevated in
patients with dermatomyositis, this patient showed markedly depressed
levels of CH50. This case demonstrated that the muscle lesions of
dermatomyositis can occur in the presence of a complement defect that
would prevent the formation of the C5b-9 membrane attack complex.

The R95X mutation is responsible for most Japanese C9 deficiency cases,
with a carrier frequency of 6.7%. Khajoee et al. (2003) showed that in
Koreans and Chinese, the R95X carrier frequencies were 2.0% and 1.0%,
respectively. The founder effect found in East Asians (Japanese,
Koreans, and Chinese) but not in Caucasians, as well as the haplotype
sharing in only a small chromosomal region, suggested that the R95X
mutation is ancient and occurred after the divergence of East Asians and
Caucasians, and before migration of the Yayoi people to Japan. Because
the mortality of meningococcal infections in complement-deficient
patients is lower than that in normal individuals, a founder effect and
a selective advantage in isolation might be the main reasons for the
high frequency of the R95X mutation in Japan.

.0002
C9 DEFICIENCY
C9, CYS33TER

Witzel-Schlomp et al. (1997) found heterozygosity at the C9 locus in
affected members of a Swiss family with C9 deficiency (613825) reported
by Zoppi et al. (1990). One of the mutations was located in exon 2 at
cDNA nucleotide 166, resulting in a change of amino acid 33 from cys
(TGC) to stop (TGA). The same mutation was found in compound
heterozygous state in an adult of Irish origin with inherited C9
deficiency. The second mutation in this case was a C-to-T transition in
exon 4 at cDNA nucleotide 350, changing arg95 (CGA) to stop (TGA)
(120940.0001).

.0003
C9 DEFICIENCY
C9, CYS98GLY

In an Irish family designated Y with C9 deficiency (613825),
Witzel-Schlomp et al. (1998) found compound heterozygosity for a
cys98-to-gly mutation, due to a T-to-G transversion in exon 4 (cDNA
nucleotide 359); and a C-to-G transversion in exon 9 at cDNA nucleotide
1284, changing amino acid 406 from ser (TCA) to stop (TGA)
(120940.0004).

.0004
C9 DEFICIENCY
C9, SER406TER

See 120940.0004 and Witzel-Schlomp et al. (1998).

.0005
C9 DEFICIENCY
C9, CYS507TYR

See 120940.0001 and Horiuchi et al. (1998).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Shiver et al. (1986)
REFERENCE 1. Abbott, C.; West, L.; Povey, S.; Jeremiah, S.; Murad, Z.; DiScipio,
R.; Fey, G.: The gene for human complement component C9 mapped to
chromosome 5 by polymerase chain reaction. Genomics 4: 606-609,
1989.

2. Coto, E.; Martinez-Naves, E.; Dominguez, O.; DiScipio, R. G.; Urra,
J. M.; Lopez-Larrea, C.: DNA polymorphism and linkage relationship
of the human complement component C6, C7, and C9 genes. Immunogenetics 33:
184-187, 1991.

3. DiScipio, R. G.; Gehring, M. R.; Podack, E. R.; Kan, C. C.; Hugli,
T. E.; Fey, G. H.: Nucleotide sequence of cDNA and derived amino
acid sequence of human complement component C9. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 81: 7298-7302, 1984.

4. Hobart, M. J.; Fernie, B. A.; Wurzner, R.; Oldroyd, R. G.; Harrison,
R. A.; Joysey, V.; Lachmann, P. J.: Difficulties in the ascertainment
of C9 deficiency: lessons to be drawn from a compound heterozygote
C9-deficient subject. Clin. Exp. Immun. 108: 500-506, 1997.

5. Horiuchi, T.; Nishizaka, H.; Kojima, T.; Sawabe, T.; Niho, Y.;
Schneider, P. M.; Inaba, S.; Sakai, K.; Hayashi, K.; Hashimura, C.;
Fukumori, Y.: A non-sense mutation at arg95 is predominant in complement
9 deficiency in Japanese. J. Immun. 160: 1509-1513, 1998.

6. Ichikawa, E.; Furuta, J.; Kawachi, Y.; Imakado, S.; Otsuka, F.
: Hereditary complement (C9) deficiency associated with dermatomyositis. Brit.
J. Derm. 144: 1080-1083, 2001.

7. Khajoee, V.; Ihara, K.; Kira, R.; Takemoto, M.; Torisu, H.; Sakai,
Y.; Guanjun, J.; Hee, P. M.; Tokunaga, K.; Hara, T.: Founder effect
of the C9 R95X mutation in Orientals. Hum. Genet. 112: 244-248,
2003.

8. Kira, R.; Ihara, K.; Takada, H.; Gondo, K.; Hara, T.: Nonsense
mutation in exon 4 of human complement C9 gene is the major cause
of Japanese complement C9 deficiency. Hum. Genet. 102: 605-610,
1998.

9. Marazziti, D.; Eggertsen, G.; Fey, G. H.; Stanley, K. K.: Relationships
between the gene and protein structure in human complement component
C9. Biochemistry 27: 6529-6534, 1988.

10. Rogne, S.; Myklebost, O.; Olving, J. H.; Tomter Kyrkjebo, H.;
Jonassen, R.; Olaisen, B.; Gedde-Dahl, T., Jr.: The human genes for
complement components 6 (C6) and 9 (C9) are closely linked on chromosome
5. J. Med. Genet. 28: 587-590, 1991.

11. Rogne, S.; Myklebost, O.; Stanley, K.; Geurts van Kessel, A.:
The gene for human complement C9 is on chromosome 5. Genomics 5:
149-152, 1989.

12. Setien, F.; Alvarez, V.; Coto, E.; DiScipio, R. G.; Lopez-Larrea,
C.: A physical map of the human complement component C6, C7, and
C9 genes. Immunogenetics 38: 341-344, 1993.

13. Shiver, J. W.; Dankert, J. R.; Donovan, J. J.; Esser, A. F.:
The ninth component of human complement (C9): functional activity
of the b fragment. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 9629-9636, 1986.

14. Witzel-Schlomp, K.; Hobart, M. J.; Fernie, B. A.; Orren, A.; Wurzner,
R.; Rittner, C.; Kaufmann, T.; Schneider, P. M.: Heterogeneity in
the genetic basis of human complement C9 deficiency. Immunogenetics 48:
144-147, 1998.

15. Witzel-Schlomp, K.; Spath, P. J.; Hobart, M. J.; Fernie, B. A.;
Rittner, C.; Kaufmann, T.; Schneider, P. M.: The human complement
C9 gene: identification of two mutations causing deficiency and revision
in the gene structure. J. Immun. 158: 5043-5049, 1997.

16. Zoppi, M.; Weiss, M.; Nydegger, U. E.; Hess, T.; Spath, P. J.
: Recurrent meningitis in a patient with congenital deficiency of
the C9 component of complement: first case of C9 deficiency in Europe. Arch.
Intern. Med. 150: 2395-2399, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/15/2011
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/25/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 2/20/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/12/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/19/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/3/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/10/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 04/22/2011
mgross: 3/23/2011
terry: 3/15/2011
carol: 3/17/2004
cwells: 11/7/2003
tkritzer: 4/1/2003
terry: 3/25/2003
alopez: 2/20/2003
ckniffin: 6/5/2002
carol: 4/13/1999
terry: 4/12/1999
mgross: 3/10/1999
carol: 2/22/1999
terry: 2/19/1999
carol: 8/4/1998
terry: 8/3/1998
carol: 6/11/1998
terry: 6/11/1998
dholmes: 6/10/1998
mark: 11/27/1996
carol: 3/19/1995
carol: 11/9/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 3/3/1992
carol: 11/8/1991
carol: 6/24/1991

611160	TITLE *611160 KERATIN 79; KRT79
;;KERATIN 6-LIKE; KRT6L;;
K6L
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Keratins, such as KRT6L, are filament proteins that make up one of the
major structural fibers of epithelial cells (Rogers et al., 2005).

CLONING

Using database analysis to identify keratin genes within the type II
keratin gene domain on chromosome 12, Rogers et al. (2005) identified
KRT6L, which they called K6L. The deduced 535-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 57.8 kD. Like other type II keratins, K6L
has N- and C-terminal domains and a central rod domain consisting of 4
alpha-helical regions separated by 3 non-helical linker sequences. In
addition, it has numerous GGG and GGX repeats in its head and tail
domains. Northern blot analysis detected expression of a 2.1-kb K6L
transcript in skeletal muscle, skin, and scalp, but not in any other
tissues or organs examined.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Rogers et al. (2005) mapped the KRT6L gene
to chromosome 12q13.13.

REFERENCE 1. Rogers, M. A.; Edler, L.; Winter, H.; Langbein, L.; Beckmann, I.;
Schweizer, J.: Characterization of new members of the human type
II keratin gene family and a general evaluation of the keratin gene
domain on chromosome 12q13.13. J. Invest. Derm. 124: 536-544, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/2/2007

EDITED carol: 03/26/2008
wwang: 7/2/2007

608475	TITLE *608475 3-@HYDROXYISOBUTYRATE DEHYDROGENASE; HIBADH
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

3-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase (3-hydroxy-2-methylpropanoate:NAD(+)
oxidoreductase, EC 1.1.1.31) is a dimeric mitochondrial enzyme that
catalyzes the NAD(+)-dependent, reversible oxidation of
3-hydroxyisobutyrate, an intermediate of valine catabolism, to
methylmalonate semialdehyde.

CLONING

Rougraff et al. (1989) cloned rat liver Hibadh. The deduced 300-amino
acid protein contains an N-terminal nucleotide-binding domain. The amino
acid sequence shows similarity to several other mammalian pyridine
nucleotide-dependent dehydrogenases. Northern blot analysis detected
expression of an approximately 2.0-kb transcript in all rat tissues
examined, which included kidney, liver, heart, and muscle.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the HIBADH
gene to chromosome 7 (TMAP RH103301).

REFERENCE 1. Rougraff, P. M.; Zhang, B.; Kuntz, M. J.; Harris, R. A.; Crabb,
D. W.: Cloning and sequence analysis of a cDNA for 3-hydroxyisobutyrate
dehydrogenase: evidence for its evolutionary relationship to other
pyridine nucleotide-dependent dehydrogenases. J. Biol. Chem. 264:
5899-5903, 1989.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/19/2004

EDITED cwells: 02/19/2004

606508	TITLE *606508 Fc RECEPTOR-LIKE PROTEIN 1; FCRL1
;;FCRH1
DESCRIPTION Receptors for the Fc region (FcRs) of immunoglobulins (Igs) modulate
cellular and humoral immunity by linking their antibody ligands with
effector cells of the immune system. FcRs sense humoral concentrations
of antibody, initiate cellular responses in host defense, and
participate in autoimmune disorders.

CLONING

By database searching using a consensus sequence corresponding to the
second Ig-like domains of FCGR1A (146760), FCGR2A (146790), and FCGR3A
(146740) as well as the third Ig-like domain of the polymeric Ig
receptor (PIGR; 173880), Davis et al. (2001) identified 2 BAC clones
located at chromosome 1q21.1-q22. They found that one of these clones
contained 3 novel putative Ig superfamily genes, which they designated
FCRH1, FCRH2 (SPAP1; 606509), and FCRH3 (606510), as well as 2
previously identified members of this family, FCRH4 (IRTA1; 605876) and
FCRH5 (IRTA2; 605877). Lymphochip microarray data analysis indicated
expression of FCRH1 in lymph nodes, tonsils, resting and germinal center
B cells as well as in different lymphoid malignancies. Sequence analysis
predicted that the 429-amino acid type I transmembrane protein possesses
a hydrophobic signal peptide, 3 extracellular C2 type Ig-like domains, 3
N-linked glycosylation sites, an uncharged transmembrane segment, and a
99-amino acid cytoplasmic tail with 2 ITAMs (immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motif) and an ITAM-like region. Northern blot
analysis revealed expression of approximately 3.5- and 6.0-kb
transcripts in secondary lymphoid tissues as well as 0.7- and 1.5-kb
transcripts in heart, skeletal muscle, kidney, liver, and, to a lesser
extent, in placenta. RT-PCR analysis detected expression in lymphoid and
myeloid cell lines and in circulating granulocytes. Davis et al. (2001)
suggested that FCRH1 may have an activating/inhibitory or a fine-tuning
role in regulation of immunologic function.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Davis et al. (2001) determined that the
FCRH1 gene contains 11 exons spanning approximately 28 kb.

MAPPING

By BAC and genomic sequence analysis, Davis et al. (2001) mapped the
FCRL1 gene to chromosome 1q21.2-q22, near the classic FCGR loci.

REFERENCE 1. Davis, R. S.; Wang, Y.-H.; Kubagawa, H.; Cooper, M. D.: Identification
of a family of Fc receptor homologs with preferential B cell expression. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 9772-9777, 2001.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/27/2001

EDITED alopez: 12/16/2009
carol: 11/27/2001

609156	TITLE *609156 NICALIN, ZEBRAFISH, HOMOLOG OF; NCLN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching databases for sequences containing the ectodomain of the
nicastrin (605254) family of proteins, Haffner et al. (2004) identified
nicalin. The deduced type I transmembrane protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 63.7 kD. Nicalin contains a region similar to an
aminopeptidase domain, but it lacks amino acids necessary for catalytic
activity. Northern blot analysis detected nicalin transcripts of 4.6,
4.0, and 2.3 kb. Highest expression was in pancreas and skeletal muscle,
with somewhat lower expression in heart and very low expression in all
other tissues examined. SDS-PAGE of enriched membrane preparations of
human embryonic kidney cells and neuroblastoma cells indicated that
endogenous nicalin has an apparent molecular mass of 60 kD. Nicalin was
also detected in a 500- to 550-kD complex containing NOMO2 (609158).
Nicalin and NOMO2 cofractionated with endoplasmic reticulum membranes.

GENE FUNCTION

By coimmunoprecipitation of cotransfected cells, Haffner et al. (2004)
confirmed that NOMO2 and nicalin associated in a high molecular mass
complex and interacted directly. Ectopic expression of both proteins in
zebrafish embryos caused cyclopia, a phenotype that can arise from a
defect in mesendoderm patterning mediated by the Nodal (601265)
signaling pathway. Furthermore, Nodal- and activin (see 147290)-induced
signaling was inhibited by nicalin and NOMO2 in a cell-based reporter
assay.

Using affinity purification and coimmunoprecipitation experiments,
Dettmer et al. (2010) showed that NOMO and nicalin interacted with
TMEM147 (613585). Knockdown of each of these components by RNA
interference showed that they stabilized one another. Knockdown and
overexpression studies suggested that nicalin is the key regulator of
the complex and that it binds to NOMO prior to inclusion of TMEM147 in
the complex. Mutation analysis revealed that the transmembrane domain of
nicalin was required for interaction with TMEM147, but not NOMO.
Coprecipitation studies with zebrafish embryos revealed conservation of
the nicalin-NOMO-TMEM147 complex.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the NCLN
gene to chromosome 19 (TMAP WI-15783).

REFERENCE 1. Dettmer, U.; Kuhn, P.-H.; Abou-Ajram, C.; Lichtenthaler, S. F.;
Kruger, M.; Kremmer, E.; Haass, C.; Haffner, C.: Transmembrane protein
147 (TMEM147) is a novel component of the nicalin-NOMO protein complex. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 26174-26181, 2010.

2. Haffner, C.; Frauli, M.; Topp, S.; Irmler, M.; Hofmann, K.; Regula,
J. T.; Bally-Cuif, L.; Haass, C.: Nicalin and its binding partner
Nomo are novel Nodal signaling antagonists. EMBO J. 23: 3041-3050,
2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/07/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/11/2005

EDITED mgross: 10/07/2010
mgross: 1/11/2005

