613903	TITLE *613903 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 540; ZNF540
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ZNF540 belongs to a large family of transcription factors characterized
by an N-terminal Kruppel-associated box (KRAB) domain and tandem
C-terminal C2H2-type zinc fingers (Qi et al., 2006).

CLONING

Using degenerate primers based on conserved sequences of KRAB
domain-containing zinc finger proteins to screen a 20-week-old embryonic
human heart cDNA library, followed by EST database analysis and 5-prime
and 3-prime RACE, Xiang et al. (2006) cloned ZNF540. The deduced
660-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 77.1 kD. It
has an N-terminal KRAB-A domain, followed by 17 tandem Kruppel C2H2-type
zinc fingers. Northern blot analysis detected variable ZNF540 expression
in all fetal tissues examined. Fluorescence-tagged ZNF540 localized to
both cytoplasm and nuclei of transfected COS-7 cells.

GENE FUNCTION

By cotransfecting COS-7 cells with ZNF540 and a reporter gene system,
Xiang et al. (2006) showed that ZNF540 repressed serum response element
(SRE)- and ELK1 (311040)-mediated transcriptional activation, suggesting
that it functions in the MAP kinase (see 176948) signal transduction
pathway. Deletion analysis identified the KRAB-A domain of ZNF540 as the
main repressive domain. Small interfering RNA directed against ZNF540
reduced the transcriptional repression by ZNF540.

GENE STRUCTURE

Xiang et al. (2006) determined that the ZNF540 gene contains 5 exons and
spans approximately 62.8 kb.

MAPPING

Xiang et al. (2006) mapped the ZNF540 gene to chromosome 19q13.13 by
genomic sequence analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Qi, X.; Li, Y.; Xiao, J.; Yuan, W.; Yan, Y.; Wang, Y.; Liang, S.;
Zhu, C.; Chen, Y.; Liu, M.; Wu, X.: Activation of transcriptional
activities of AP-1 and SRE by a new zinc-finger protein ZNF641. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 339: 1155-1164, 2006.

2. Xiang, Z.; Yuan, W.; Luo, N.; Wang, Y.; Tan, K.; Deng, Y.; Zhou,
X.; Zhu, C.; Li, Y.; Liu, M.; Wu, X.; Li, Y.: A novel human zinc
finger protein ZNF540 interacts with MVP and inhibits transcriptional
activities of the ERK signal pathway. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 347:
288-296, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/15/2011

EDITED mgross: 04/18/2011
mgross: 4/15/2011

600429	TITLE *600429 GLUCOSAMINYL (N-ACETYL) TRANSFERASE 2, I-BRANCHING ENZYME; GCNT2
;;BETA-1,6-N-ACETYLGLUCOSAMINYLTRANSFERASE 2;;
DEVELOPMENTAL I ANTIGEN;;
I-BETA-1,6-N-ACETYLGLUCOSAMINYLTRANSFERASE; IGNT
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The blood group i/I antigens were the first identified alloantigens that
display a dramatic change during human development (110800). The i and I
antigens are determined by linear and branched
poly-N-acetyllactosaminoglycans, respectively. In human erythrocytes
during embryonic development, the fetal (i) antigen is replaced by the
adult (I) antigen as the result of the appearance of a
beta-1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase, the I-branching enzyme
(GCNT2). Bierhuizen et al. (1993) cloned the cDNA for the branching
enzyme that converts the linear form into the branched form and studied
its expression with development of I antigen in transfected cells. The
cDNA sequence predicted a protein of type II membrane topology as has
been found for all other mammalian glycosyltransferases. Comparison of
the amino acid sequence with those of other glycosyltransferases
revealed that this I-branching enzyme and another
beta-1,6,N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase that forms a branch in
O-glycans (GCNT1; 600391) are strongly homologous in the center of their
putative catalytic domains.

GENE FUNCTION

Yu et al. (2003) demonstrated that the human I locus expresses 3 IGNT
forms, designated IGNTA, IGNTB, and IGNTC, which have different exons 1,
but identical exons 2 and 3. IGNTC is the only one of the 3 IGNT
transcripts expressed in reticulocytes, whereas only the IGNTB
transcript is expressed in lens epithelium cells.

MAPPING

In the course of mapping 39 ESTs to 6p24-p23, Olavesen et al. (1997)
concluded that the GCNT2 gene is located in the region between EDN1
(131240) at 6p24-p23 on the centromeric side and TFAP2 (107580) at 6p24
on the telomeric side.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The null phenotype of blood group I, the adult i phenotype (110800),
results from a defect in the specific transferase that converts the
structure of the antigen from linear to branched repeats of
N-acetyllactosamine, which characterize blood group antigen i and I,
respectively.

The adult i phenotype was found to be associated with congenital
cataract (CTRCT13; see 110800) in Japanese (Ogata et al., 1979) and
Taiwanese (Lin-Chu et al., 1991). Yu et al. (2001) identified molecular
defects in the GCNT2 gene in 3 Taiwanese families with adult i blood
group phenotype and congenital cataracts (110800.0001-110800.0003).

Yu et al. (2003) performed molecular genetic analyses of the 2 groups of
adult i, those with and those without congenital cataracts, and
performed enzyme function assays and expression patterns for the 3 IGNT
transcripts in reticulocytes and lens epithelium cells. The results
suggested a molecular genetic mechanism that may explain the partial
association of the adult i phenotype with congenital cataracts and
indicated that a defect in the I locus may lead directly to the
development of congenital cataracts. The results also suggested that the
human blood group I gene should be reassigned to the IGNTC form rather
than the IGNTB form. Of the 3 IGNT forms, Yu et al. (2003) found that
IGNTA and IGNTB were wildtype, but IGNTC was mutant, in adult i whites
without congenital cataracts. Two missense mutations of IGNTC, ala169 to
thr (600429.0004) and arg228 to gln (600429.0005), were identified in
adult i whites without congenital cataracts. Five of 6 whites were
homozygous for the thr169 allele and 1 was compound heterozygous for the
thr169 and gln228 missense changes. These mutations were found to be
uncommon in the general white population. Whereas only IGNTC was mutant
in adult i whites without congenital cataracts, all 3 IGNT forms were
mutated in the adult i Taiwanese individuals with congenital cataracts.
IGNTC is the only one of the 3 IGNT transcripts expressed in
reticulocytes, whereas only the IGNTB transcript is expressed in lens
epithelium cells.

HISTORY

Marsh and Depalma (1982) noted that the association of the adult i
phenotype with congenital cataract might be explained either by close
linkage between independent I- and cataract-related genes or by a
pleiotropic effect of the gene responsible for the adult i phenotype on
the development of cataracts. Because of the reduced 'strength' of the
association in whites, it had been suggested that the former hypothesis
of close linkage between 2 independent genes was the more tenable one.
Molecular factors suggested that the association may result from a
pleiotropic effect of the same gene mutation and not from a linkage of 2
independent genes, because it was unlikely that 2 nucleotide changes in
the I gene would be linked to the nearby gene that had, by chance, also
mutated to result in the development of cataracts.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CATARACT 13 WITH ADULT i PHENOTYPE
GCNT2, GLY348GLU

In 2 Taiwanese families with cataract and the adult i phenotype
(CTRCT13; see 110800), Yu et al. (2001) identified mutations in the
GCNT2 gene. Affected members of pedigree S had a homozygous 1043G-A
transition resulting in a gly348-to-glu (G348E) substitution. Affected
members of pedigree W were compound heterozygous for the G348E mutation
and a 1148G-A transition resulting in an arg383-to-his (R383H;
600429.0002) substitution. The parents were heterozygous for one or the
other of the mutations and neither family was consanguineous. Both
mutations abolished the original enzyme activity.

.0002
CATARACT 13 WITH ADULT i PHENOTYPE
GCNT2, ARG383HIS

See 600429.0001 and Yu et al. (2001).

.0003
CATARACT 13 WITH ADULT i PHENOTYPE
GCNT2, DEL

In a Taiwanese family (pedigree C), Yu et al. (2001) found that a member
with congenital cataract with the adult i phenotype (CTRCT13; see
110800) was homozygous for deletion of all 3 exons of the GCNT2 gene.
The parents were first cousins.

.0004
ADULT i PHENOTYPE
GCNT2, ALA169THR

In 5 of 6 whites with adult i blood type (110800), Yu et al. (2003)
found homozygosity for a 505G-A mutation in 1 of the isoforms expressed
from the GCNT2 gene, IGNTC. This predicted the amino acid change ala169
to thr (A169T). Yu et al. (2003) suggested that no cataract is
associated with this mutation because only the IGNTB transcript is
expressed in lens-epithelium cells.

.0005
ADULT i PHENOTYPE
GCNT2, ARG228GLN

In 1 of 6 whites with adult i phenotype without congenital cataract
(110800), Yu et al. (2003) found compound heterozygosity for mutations
in the IGNTC isoform of GNTC2: ala169-to-thr (600429.0004) and a 683G-A
transition, predicted to result in an arg228-to-gln (R228Q)
substitution. Yu et al. (2003) suggested that no cataract is associated
with this mutation because only the IGNTB transcript is expressed in
lens-epithelium cells.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Schwientek et al. (1999); Yeh et al. (1999)
REFERENCE 1. Bierhuizen, M. F. A.; Mattei, M.-G.; Fukuda, M.: Expression of
the developmental I antigen by a cloned human cDNA encoding a member
of a beta-1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase gene family. Genes
Dev. 7: 468-478, 1993.

2. Lin-Chu, M.; Broadberry, R. E.; Okubo, Y.; Tanaka, M.: The i phenotype
and congenital cataracts among Chinese in Taiwan (Letter) Transfusion 31:
676-677, 1991.

3. Marsh, W. L.; DePalma, H.: Association between the Ii blood group
and congenital cataract. Transfusion 22: 337-338, 1982.

4. Ogata, H.; Okubo, Y.; Akabane, T.: Phenotype i associated with
congenital cataract in Japanese. Transfusion 19: 166-168, 1979.

5. Olavesen, M. G.; Bentley, E.; Mason, R. V. F.; Stephens, R. J.;
Ragoussis, J.: Fine mapping of 39 ESTs on human chromosome 6p23-p25. Genomics 46:
303-306, 1997.

6. Schwientek, T.; Nomoto, M.; Levery, S. B.; Merkx, G.; Geurts van
Kessel, A.; Bennett, E. P.; Hollingsworth, M. A.; Clausen, H.: Control
of O-glycan branch formation: molecular cloning of human cDNA encoding
a novel beta-1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase forming core 2 and
core 4. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 4504-4512, 1999.

7. Yeh, J.-C.; Ong, E.; Fukuda, M.: Molecular cloning and expression
of a novel beta-1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase that forms core
2, core 4, and I branches. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 3215-3221, 1999.

8. Yu, L.-C.; Twu, Y.-C.; Chang, C.-Y.; Lin, M.: Molecular basis
of the adult i phenotype and the gene responsible for the expression
of the human blood group I antigen. Blood 98: 3840-3845, 2001.

9. Yu, L.-C.; Twu, Y.-C.; Chou, M.-L.; Reid, M. E.; Gray, A. R.; Moulds,
J. M.; Chang, C.-Y.; Lin, M.: The molecular genetics of the human
I locus and molecular background explain the partial association of
the adult i phenotype with congenital cataracts. Blood 101: 2081-2088,
2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/10/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/9/2013
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/23/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/15/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/4/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/24/1995

EDITED alopez: 06/28/2013
carol: 6/10/2013
mgross: 5/9/2013
terry: 2/16/2012
terry: 1/25/2012
alopez: 6/23/2003
terry: 6/23/2003
cwells: 3/29/2002
terry: 2/15/2002
mark: 2/5/1998
terry: 2/4/1998
joanna: 11/24/1997
jamie: 2/5/1997
carol: 2/27/1995
carol: 2/24/1995

163729	TITLE +163729 NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHASE 3; NOS3
;;NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHASE, ENDOTHELIAL; ENOS
CORONARY ARTERY SPASM 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
ALZHEIMER DISEASE, LATE-ONSET, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
HYPERTENSION, PREGNANCY-INDUCED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
HYPERTENSION RESISTANT TO CONVENTIONAL THERAPY, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Nitric oxide (NO) accounts for the biologic activity of
endothelium-derived relaxing factor (EDRF), discovered by Furchgott and
Zawadzki (1980) and Rapoport and Murad (1983). NO is synthesized in
endothelial cells from L-arginine by nitric oxide synthase (NOS). EDRF
is important in regulation of vasomotor tone and blood flow by
inhibiting smooth muscle contraction and platelet aggregation. Janssens
et al. (1992) isolated a cDNA encoding a human vascular NOS. The
translated human protein was 1,203 amino acids long with a predicted
molecular mass of 133 kD. They showed that the cDNA encodes a
calcium-regulated, constitutively expressed endothelial NOS, capable of
producing EDRF in blood vessels. Marsden et al. (1992) likewise cloned
and sequenced human endothelial NO synthase. Their cDNA clones predicted
a protein of 1,203 amino acids with about 60% identity with the rat
brain NO synthase isoform (163731). (Nitric oxide synthases have been
assigned to 2 classes: a constitutively expressed, calcium-regulated
class identified in brain, neutrophils, and endothelial cells, and a
calcium-independent class identified in endotoxin- or cytokine-induced
macrophages and endothelial cells (163730).)

GENE STRUCTURE

Marsden et al. (1993) isolated genomic clones encoding human endothelial
NO synthase and determined the structural organization of the gene. It
contains 26 exons spanning approximately 21 kb of genomic DNA and
encodes an mRNA of 4,052 nucleotides. Characterization of the
5-prime-flanking region indicated that the NOS3 gene is TATA-less and
exhibits proximal promoter elements consistent with a constitutively
expressed gene, namely, SP1 and GATA motifs.

MAPPING

By Southern blot hybridization of human/rodent somatic cell hybrids,
Marsden et al. (1993) assigned the NOS3 gene to chromosome 7 and
regionalized it to 7q35-q36 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. By
PCR amplification applied to a panel of DNAs from human/rodent somatic
cell hybrids, by Southern blot analysis, and by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Robinson et al. (1994) localized the NOS3 gene to 7q36.
By analysis of interspecific backcross progeny, Gregg et al. (1995)
mapped the mouse homolog to chromosome 5.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Raman et al. (1998) reported the crystal structure of the heme domain of
endothelial NOS in tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4)-free and -bound forms at
1.95-angstrom and 1.9-angstrom resolution, respectively. In both
structures a zinc ion is tetrahedrally coordinated to pairs of
symmetry-related cysteine residues at the dimer interface. The conserved
Cys-(X)4-Cys motif and its strategic location establish a structural
role for the metal center in maintaining the integrity of the
BH4-binding site. The unexpected recognition of the substrate L-arginine
at the BH4 site indicates that this site is poised to stabilize a
positively charged pterin ring and suggests a model involving a cationic
pterin radical in the catalytic cycle.

GENE FUNCTION

Fulton et al. (1999) demonstrated that AKT (164730) directly
phosphorylated eNOS and activated the enzyme leading to nitric oxide
production, whereas eNOS mutated at a putative AKT phosphorylation site
was resistant to phosphorylation and activation by AKT. Activated AKT
increased basal nitric oxide release from endothelial cells, and
activation-deficient AKT attenuated NO production stimulated by VEGF
(192290). Thus, Fulton et al. (1999) concluded the eNOS is an AKT
substrate linking signal transduction by AKT to the release of the
gaseous second messenger nitric oxide.

Dimmeler et al. (1999) stated that physiologically, the most important
stimulus for the continuous formation of nitric oxide is the viscous
drag (or shear stress) generated by the streaming blood on the
endothelial layer. PI3K (see 601232) and AKT are activated in
endothelial cells in response to shear stress. Dimmeler et al. (1999)
demonstrated that AKT mediates the activation of eNOS, leading to
increased nitric oxide production. Inhibition of the PI3K AKT pathway or
mutation of the AKT site on eNOS protein at serine-1177 attenuated the
serine phosphorylation and prevented the activation of eNOS. Mimicking
the phosphorylation of ser1177 directly enhanced enzyme activity and
altered the sensitivity of the enzyme to calcium, rendering its activity
maximal at subphysiologic concentrations of calcium. Thus,
phosphorylation of eNOS by AKT represented a novel calcium-independent
regulatory mechanism for activation of eNOS.

Napolitano et al. (2000) investigated the interactions between ET1
(131240) and the NO system in the feto-placental unit. They examined the
mRNA expression of ET1, inducible NOS (163730), and eNOS in human
cultured placental trophoblastic cells obtained from preeclamptic (PE)
and normotensive pregnancies. ET1 expression was increased in PE cells,
whereas iNOS, which represents the main source of NO synthesis, was
decreased; conversely, eNOS expression was increased. ET1 was able to
influence its own expression as well as NOS isoform expression in normal
and PE trophoblastic cultured cells. The findings suggested the
existence of a functional relationship between ET(s) and NOS isoforms
that could constitute the biologic mechanism leading to the reduced
placental blood flow and increased resistance to flow in the
feto-maternal circulation that are characteristic of the pathophysiology
of preeclampsia.

Autosomal dominant adult polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD; 173900) is
associated with altered endothelial-dependent vasodilation and decreased
vascular production of NO. Thus, eNOS could have a modifier effect in
ADPKD. To test this hypothesis, Persu et al. (2002) genotyped 173
unrelated European ADPKD patients for the glu298-to-asp (163729.0001),
intron 4 VNTR, and -786T-C (163729.0002) polymorphisms of ENOS and
looked for their influence on the age at end-stage renal disease (ESRD).
In 93 males, the glu298-to-asp polymorphism was associated with a lower
age at ESRD. This effect was confirmed in a subset of males linked to
PKD1 (601313) and reaching ESRD before age 45, and by a cumulative renal
survival analysis in PKD1-linked families. Further studies demonstrated
that NOS activity was decreased in renal artery samples from PKD males
harboring the asp298 allele, in association with posttranslational
modifications and partial cleavage of eNOS. No significant effect of the
other polymorphisms was found in males, and no polymorphism influenced
the age at ESRD in females. Persu et al. (2002) concluded that
glu298-to-asp is associated with a 5 year lower mean age at ESRD in a
subset of ADPKD males. They hypothesized that the effect could be due to
decreased NOS activity and a partial cleavage of eNOS, leading to a
further decrease in the vascular production of NO.

Nisoli et al. (2003) found that NO triggers mitochondrial biogenesis in
cells as diverse as brown adipocytes and 3T3-L1, U937, and HeLa cells.
This effect of NO was dependent on cGMP and was mediated by the
induction of PPARGC1 (604517), a master regulator of mitochondrial
biogenesis. Moreover, Nisoli et al. (2003) found that mitochondrial
biogenesis induced by exposure to cold was markedly reduced in brown
adipose tissue of eNOS -/- mice, which had a reduced metabolic rate and
accelerated weight gain compared to wildtype mice. Thus, Nisoli et al.
(2003) concluded that a NO-cGMP-dependent pathway controls mitochondrial
biogenesis and body energy balance.

Simoncini et al. (2004) demonstrated that tibolone and its estrogenic
metabolites activate NO synthesis by recruiting functional estrogen
receptors, whereas the progestogenic/androgenic metabolite had no
effect. During prolonged exposures, tibolone and the estrogenic
compounds enhanced the expression of eNOS. In addition, tibolone was
able to induce rapid activation of eNOS, leading to rapid increases in
the release of NO. Different from estrogen, rapid activation of eNOS did
not rely on recruitment of PI3K but rather on MAPK-dependent cascades.

Robb et al. (2004) found that the 5-prime UTR of the NOS3AS (612205)
transcript was complementary to the portion of NOS3 mRNA derived from
exons 23 to 26. RT-PCR analysis showed that expression of NOS3 in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and human aortic vascular
smooth muscle cells (HAOVSMCs) was inversely proportional to that of
NOS3AS. Both the NOS3 and NOS3AS genes were transcriptionally active;
however, NOS3AS appeared to downregulate the steady-state levels of NOS3
mRNA and protein. RT-PCR showed that overexpression of the overlapping
region of NOS3AS had little impact on NOS3 mRNA levels in HUVECs;
however, Western blot analysis showed that NOS3 protein levels were
markedly reduced. NOS3AS also reduced the expression of a chimeric
transcript containing the NOS3-overlapping sequence fused to a reporter
gene. Inhibition of NOS3AS expression by RNA interference (RNAi) in
HAOVSMCs increased NOS3 expression, and inhibition of histone
deacetylase (see HDAC1; 601241) in HAOVSMCs increased expression of
NOS3AS mRNA prior to decrease in NOS3 mRNA expression. Robb et al.
(2004) concluded that NOS3AS participates in the posttranscriptional
regulation of NOS3.

Fish et al. (2007) found that NOS3AS was induced by hypoxia in cultured
human endothelial and smooth muscle cells and in aortas of hypoxic rats.
NOS3AS induction preceded the decrease in NOS3 steady-state mRNA in
endothelial cells, and knockdown of NOS3AS by RNAi indicated that NOS3AS
downregulated NOS3 expression during hypoxia. Hypoxia did not induce
transcription of NOS3AS, but instead stabilized NOS3AS transcripts,
predominantly the short NOS3AS variant, leading to elevated NOS3AS
levels. RT-PCR of fractionated cells showed that both NOS3AS pre-mRNA
and mature NOS3AS mRNA were enriched in the nucleus under basal
conditions. Under hypoxic conditions, the cytoplasmic levels of mature
NOS3AS mRNA increased more than 30-fold, whereas levels in the nucleus
increased only moderately. In contrast, the nuclear/cytoplasmic
distribution of NOS3 mRNA was not altered under hypoxic conditions, with
NOS3 mRNA levels decreasing in both the cytoplasm and nucleus. NOS3
associated with polyribosomes in normoxic cells, but its association
with polyribosomes was attenuated in hypoxic cells, concurrent with
association of the short NOS3AS variant with polyribosomes. Fish et al.
(2007) concluded that NOS3 expression is regulated by its overlapping
NOS3AS transcript in a hypoxia-dependent fashion.

Nisoli et al. (2005) reported that calorie restriction for either 3 or
12 months induced eNOS expression and 3-prime/5-prime-cyclic GMP in
various tissues of male mice. This was accompanied by mitochondrial
biogenesis, with increased oxygen consumption and ATP production, and an
enhanced expression of Sirt1 (604479). Nisoli et al. (2005) reported
these effects were strongly attenuated in eNOS null-mutant mice. Thus,
Nisoli et al. (2005) concluded that nitric oxide plays a fundamental
role in the processes induced by calorie restriction and may be involved
in the extension of life span in mammals.

Using human platelets, Ji et al. (2007) demonstrated that polymerization
of beta-actin (ACTB; 102630) regulated the activation state of NOS3, and
hence NO formation, by altering its binding to heat-shock protein-90
(HSP90, or HSPCA; 140571). NOS3 bound the globular, but not the
filamentous, form of beta-actin, and the affinity of NOS3 for globular
beta-actin was, in turn, increased by HSP90. Formation of this ternary
complex of NOS3, globular beta-actin, and HSP90 increased NOS activity
and cyclic GMP, an index of bioactive NO, and increased the rate of
HSP90 degradation, thus limiting NOS3 activation. Ji et al. (2007)
concluded that beta-actin regulates NO formation and signaling in
platelets.

Lim et al. (2008) demonstrated that blocking phosphorylation of the AKT
substrate eNOS inhibits tumor initiation and maintenance. Moreover, eNOS
enhances the nitrosylation and activation of endogenous wildtype Ras
proteins (see 190020), which are required throughout tumorigenesis. Lim
et al. (2008) suggested that activation of the PI3K-AKT-eNOS-(wildtype)
Ras pathway by oncogenic Ras in cancer cells is required to initiate and
maintain tumor growth.

Chen et al. (2010) showed that S-glutathionylation of eNOS reversibly
decreases NOS activity with an increase in superoxide generation
primarily from the reductase, in which 2 highly conserved cysteine
residues are identified as sites of S-glutathionylation and found to be
critical for redox-regulation of eNOS function. Chen et al. (2010)
showed that e-NOS S-glutathionylation in endothelial cells, with loss of
nitric oxide and gain of superoxide generation, is associated with
impaired endothelium-dependent vasodilation. In hypertensive vessels,
eNOS S-glutathionylation is increased with impaired
endothelium-dependent vasodilation that is restored by thiol-specific
reducing agents, which reverse this S-glutathionylation. Chen et al.
(2010) concluded that S-glutathionylation of eNOS is a pivotal switch
providing redox regulation of cellular signaling, endothelial function,
and vascular tone.

Straub et al. (2012) reported a model for the regulation of NO signaling
by demonstrating that hemoglobin alpha, encoded by the HBA1 (141800) and
HBA2 (141850) genes, is expressed in human and mouse arterial
endothelial cells and enriched at the myoendothelial junction, where it
regulates the effects of NO on vascular reactivity. Notably, this
function is unique to hemoglobin alpha and is abrogated by its genetic
depletion. Mechanistically, endothelial hemoglobin alpha heme iron in
the Fe(3+) state permits NO signaling, and this signaling is shut off
when hemoglobin alpha is reduced to the Fe(2+) state by endothelial
CYB5R3 (613213). Genetic and pharmacologic inhibition of CYB5R3
increases NO bioactivity in small arteries. Straub et al. (2012)
concluded that their data revealed a mechanism by which the regulation
of the intracellular hemoglobin alpha oxidation state controls NOS
signaling in nonerythroid cells. The authors suggested that this model
may be relevant to heme-containing globins in a broad range of
NOS-containing somatic cells.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a Japanese study of 100 patients with essential hypertension (145500)
and 123 patients with normal blood pressure, Nakayama et al. (1997)
found that the distribution of allele frequencies for the CA repeat in
the NOS3 gene was not significantly different between the 2 groups.
However, comparing the allele frequencies in the hypertensive group
without left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) and the normotensive group,
the overall distributions were significantly different (p = 0.019). The
33-repeat allele was found more frequently in the hypertensive group
without LVH than in the normotensive group.

Bonnardeaux et al. (1995) found that the highly polymorphic (CA)n
repeats in intron 13 and 2 biallelic markers in intron 18 of the NOS3
gene are not associated with essential hypertension. Wang et al. (1996)
studied a marker closer to the 5-prime end of the NOS3 gene, the 27-bp
repeat in intron 4, in relation to coronary artery disease. They
identified 2 alleles: a common larger allele (allele frequency, 0.830)
and a smaller rare allele (0.170). The larger allele had 5 tandem 27-bp
repeats. The smaller allele had only 4 repeats that were apparently
missing the third repeat judging by minor a difference in sequence. The
distribution of the genotypes appeared to be in Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium and the polymorphism was inherited in a simple mendelian
fashion. Wang et al. (1996) found from study of 549 subjects with and
153 without coronary artery disease that in current and ex-cigarette
smokers, but not nonsmokers, there was a significant excess of
homozygotes for the rare allele in patients with severely stenosed
arteries, compared with those with no mild stenosis. This genotype was
also associated with a history of myocardial infarction. The authors
noted that, since endothelial-dependent vasodilatation is mediated by
release of nitric oxide formed by constitutively expressed endothelial
nitric oxide synthase, the smoking-dependent excess coronary risk in
homozygotes is consistent with a predisposition to endothelial
dysfunction.

Coronary spasm plays an important role in the pathogenesis not only of
variant angina but also of ischemic heart disease in general. However,
the prevalence of coronary spasm appears to be higher in Japanese than
in Caucasians (Bertrand et al., 1982; Yasue and Kugiyama, 1990),
suggesting that genetic factors may be involved in its pathogenesis.
Endothelial-derived nitric oxide has been implicated in the control of
vascular tone. Kugiyama et al. (1997) and Motoyama et al. (1997) showed
that basal acetylcholine-stimulated and flow-dependent nitric oxide
activities are decreased in both coronary and brachial arteries of
patients with coronary spasm. Yoshimura et al. (1998) identified a
glu298-to-asp variant (E298D; 163729.0001) in exon 7 of the NOS3 gene
that was more frequent in patients with coronary spasm. In studies of an
elderly population in Australia, Liyou et al. (1998) could find no
association of the E298D variant with coronary artery disease.

Nakayama et al. (1999) reported that a -786T-C mutation (163729.0002) in
the promoter region of the eNOS gene reduced transcription of the gene
and was strongly associated with coronary spastic angina and myocardial
infarction. To elucidate the molecular mechanism for the reduced eNOS
gene transcription, Miyamoto et al. (2000) purified a protein that
specifically binds to the mutant allele in nuclear extracts from HeLa
cells. The purified protein was identical to replication protein A1
(RPA1; 179835), known as a single-stranded DNA-binding protein essential
for DNA repair, replication, and recombination. In human umbilical vein
endothelial cells, inhibition of RPA1 expression using antisense
oligonucleotides restored transcription driven by the mutated promoter
sequence, whereas overexpression of RPA1 further reduced it. Serum
nitrite/nitrate levels among individuals carrying the -786T-C mutation
were significantly lower than among those without the mutation. The
authors concluded that RPA1 apparently functions as a repressor protein
in the -786T-C mutation-related reduction of eNOS gene transcription
associated with the development of coronary artery disease.

Pregnancy-induced hypertension (see 189800) may be regarded as a
manifestation of endothelial cell dysfunction. Constitutive nitric oxide
production in endothelial cells increases during pregnancy and
contributes to vasodilatation and blunting of vasopressor response. In
women developing pregnancy-induced hypertension, NO generation is
inappropriately low, and administration of an NO donor improves flow in
the uterine artery in normal early pregnancy and in women at high risk
of developing disease. Yallampalli and Garfield (1993) and others had
observed that inhibition of NO synthesis in rats during pregnancy
produces hypertension, proteinuria, thrombocytopenia, and fetal growth
retardation. These considerations prompted Arngrimsson et al. (1997) to
study linkage to the NOS3 gene in affected sisters and in multiplex
families. A lod score of 3.36 was obtained for D7S505 when a
best-fitting model derived from genetic epidemiologic data was used, and
lod scores of 2.54 to 4.03 were obtained when various other genetic
models were used. The transmission/disequilibrium test (TDT), a
model-free estimate of linkage, showed strongest association and linkage
with a microsatellite within intron 13 of the NOS3 gene (P = 0.005).

Lewis et al. (1999) were unable to detect linkage of preeclampsia to the
NOS3 region on 7q. They studied 2, separately ascertained, affected
sister-pairs collections, from Amsterdam and Cambridge (U.K.), that
contained 104 sibships. In the Cambridge Centre, a total of 21 extended
pedigrees suitable for conventional parametric linkage studies were also
identified. The reason for the discrepancy with the results of
Arngrimsson et al. (1997) was not clear. Lewis et al. (1999) concluded
that although abnormalities in NO production have been observed in
preeclampsia, the case for the NOS3 gene or its product, eNOS, having a
primary role in the pathophysiology of preeclampsia remained unproved.

Tempfer et al. (2001) performed a prospective case-control study of 105
women with idiopathic recurrent miscarriage and 91 healthy controls.
Using PCR, they identified the different alleles of a 27-basepair tandem
repeat polymorphism in intron 4 of the NOS3 gene. The wildtype allele
was identified in 329 of 392 chromosomes (frequency 0.84). The
polymorphic A allele was present on 63 chromosomes (frequency 0.16). The
genotype frequencies were as follows: 68% (B/B), 31% (A/B), and 0.5%
(A/A). The distribution of genotype frequencies was significantly
different between the study and in control groups for allele A/B
heterozygotes (36.7 vs 23.8%, P = 0.03, odds ratio 1.6, 95% CI 1.1-3.8).
Only 1 person in the study group was A/A.

Tanus-Santos et al. (2001) studied the distribution of genetic variants
of 3 clinically relevant NOS3 polymorphisms in 305 ethnically
well-characterized DNA samples (100 Caucasians, 100 African Americans,
and 105 Asians). They found marked interethnic differences in the
distribution of NOS3 variants, in the estimated haplotype frequency, and
in the association between variants. The asp298 variant (163729.0001)
was more common in Caucasians (34.5%) than in African Americans (15.5%)
or Asians (8.6%) (p less than 0.0001). The -786C variant (163729.0002)
was also more common in Caucasians (42.0%) than in African Americans
(17.5%) or Asians (13.8%) (p less than 0.0001). The 4a VNTR in intron 4
was more common in African Americans (26.5%) than in Caucasians (16.0%)
or Asians (12.9%) (p less than 0.0001). The most common predicted
haplotype in the 3 groups combined only wildtype variants. Asians had
the highest frequency of this haplotype (77% in Asians vs 46% in the
other groups). In Caucasians, the asp298 and -786C variants were
associated, and this haplotype was predicted to have a frequency of 24%.

Endothelial nitric oxide synthase plays a key role in the regulation of
normal function of the vessel wall. Heltianu et al. (2002) found a
relatively high frequency of 2 polymorphic variants of NOS3 in males
with Fabry disease (301500) and suggested that in addition to mutations
in the alpha-galactosidase A gene, variation in NOS3 may be significant
in determining the phenotype.

Casas et al. (2004) performed a metaanalysis of 26 case-control studies
evaluating the association between the NOS3 polymorphisms E298D,
-786T-C, and the intron 4 VNTR and ischemic heart disease (myocardial
infarction or angiographic coronary artery occlusion), involving 9,867
cases and 13,161 controls. They found that homozygosity for asp298 or
the intron 4 A allele was associated with an increased risk of ischemic
heart disease (OR, 1.31 and 1.34, respectively), but no significant
association was found with the -786C allele. Casas et al. (2004)
suggested that common genetic variations in the NOS3 gene contribute to
atherosclerosis susceptibility.

In 110 dizygotic white twin pairs, Persu et al. (2005) identified NOS3
haplotypes based on 3 polymorphisms, E298D, the intron 4 VNTR, and
-786T-C, and the intron 13 CA repeat. Haplotype analysis revealed a
significant association between NOS3 haplotypes and daytime ambulatory
diastolic and systolic blood pressure, with the latter remaining
significant after adjustment for multiple testing (p = 0.032) and mainly
attributable to 4 haplotypes accounting for 11.9% of all represented
haplotypes.

The therapeutic application of NO in high-altitude (HA) disorders, for
the improvement of oxygenation and vasodilation, prompted Ahsan et al.
(2005) to investigate the NOS3 gene with respect to high-altitude
adaptation. They screened 131 HA monks, 136 HA controls, and 170
lowlanders for the NOS3 894G-T (E298D; 163729.0001) polymorphism and for
the 4B/4A polymorphisms. NO levels were estimated and correlated with
the polymorphisms. The 3 groups were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for
the polymorphisms. Wildtype alleles G and 4B were significantly
overrepresented in the HA groups as compared with the lowlanders (p =
0.006 and p = 0.02, respectively). NO levels were highest in HA monks,
followed by HA controls, and then lowlanders (p less than 0.0001).
Combinations of the GG and BB genotypes were distributed significantly
more frequently in the HA monks (p less than 0.0001) and HA controls (p
= 0.0005) than in lowlanders. Ahsan et al. (2005) concluded that the
genotype combination of NOS3 wildtype homozygotes (GG, BB) occurs more
frequently in high-altitude groups that in lowlanders and contributes to
higher NO levels associated with high-altitude adaptation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Pharmacologic blockade of NO production with arginine analogs such as
L-nitroarginine or L-N-arginine methylester affects multiple isoforms of
nitric oxide synthase and so cannot distinguish their physiologic roles.
To study the role of endothelial NOS in vascular function, Huang et al.
(1995) disrupted the gene encoding endothelial NOS in mice by homologous
recombination. Homozygous mutant mice were found to be viable, fertile,
and indistinguishable from wildtype and heterozygous littermates in
appearance or routine behavior. Immunoreactive NOS3 protein was not
present, as shown by Western blot analysis of the brain, heart, lung,
and aorta. Endothelium-derived relaxing factor activity, as assayed by
acetylcholine-induced relaxation, was absent, and the NOS3 mutant mice
were hypertensive. Thus, the author concluded that NOS3 mediates basal
vasodilation. Responses to NOS blockade in the mutant mice suggested
that nonendothelial isoforms of NOS may be involved in maintaining blood
pressure. Huang et al. (1995) suggested that perhaps the
renin-angiotensin system and autonomic nervous system evolved to serve
primarily as a defense against hypotension, and diminution in their
activity is a poor buffer against hypertension. Alternatively, NOS3 may
be involved in establishing the baroreceptor set-point. The question of
whether subpopulations of humans suffering from hypertension have
defects in NOS3 expression awaits an answer from genetic analysis and
the development of more selective inhibitors of the NOS isoforms.

Snyder (1995) reviewed the significance of the findings of Huang et al.
(1995) in the NOS3 'knockout' mouse because so-called nNOS (NOS1;
163731) occurs in nerves that mediate penile erection and NOS inhibitors
block erection. It was thought that the null mutant nNOS mice would not
procreate. As it turned out, however, these animals do breed and appear
to be generally normal. However, they have dilated stomachs with a
constricted pyloric sphincter, and so provide a model for infantile
hypertrophic pyloric stenosis. The same mice are resistant to brain
damage caused by vascular strokes, confirming that nitric oxide is
crucial in mediating stroke damage. Further studies indicated that the
nNOS-negative mice are highly aggressive toward other males to the
extent that they will kill their wildtype littermates if left
unattended, and they display strikingly inappropriate and excessive
sexual behavior. Mice homozygous for a knockout in NOS2 (macrophage or
inducible NOS, iNOS) have markedly reduced defenses against
microorganisms such as Listeria and Leishmania and against the
proliferation of lymphoma tumor cells.

Champion et al. (1999) cited work indicating that NOS activity decreases
with age. To determine whether adenoviral-mediated overexpression of
NOS3 could enhance erectile responses, they administered a recombinant
adenovirus containing the NOS3 gene into the corpora cavernosum of the
aged rat. Adenoviral expression of the beta-galactosidase reporter gene
was observed in cavernosal tissue one day after the intracavernosal
administration of the beta-gal-marked adenovirus; one day after
administration of the construct containing NOS3, transgene expression
was confirmed by immunoblot staining of NOS3 protein, and cGMP levels
were increased. The increase in cavernosal pressure in response to
cavernosal nerve stimulation was enhanced in animals transfected with
NOS3, and erectile responses to acetylcholine and zaprinast were
enhanced. Champion et al. (1999) suggested that in vivo gene transfer of
NOS3, alone or in combination with a type V phosphodiesterase inhibitor,
may constitute a new therapeutic intervention for the treatment of
erectile dysfunction.

Steudel et al. (1998) investigated the effects of congenital deficiency
of NOS3 on the pulmonary vascular responses to hypoxia. The findings
suggested that congenital NOS3 deficiency in mice enhances hypoxic
pulmonary vascular remodeling and hypertension, and right ventricular
hypertrophy, and that NO production by NOS3 is vital to counterbalance
pulmonary vasoconstriction caused by chronic hypoxic stress.

To study the role of nitric oxide constitutively produced by NOS3 in the
regulation of blood pressure and vascular tone, Ohashi et al. (1998)
generated transgenic mice overexpressing bovine NOS3 in the vascular
wall using murine preproendothelin-1 (ET1) promoter. Blood pressure was
significantly lower in NOS3-overexpressing mice than in control
littermates. In the transgenic aorta, basal NO release and basal cGMP
levels were significantly increased. In contrast, relaxations of
transgenic aorta in response to acetylcholine and sodium nitroprusside
were significantly attenuated, and the reduced vascular reactivity was
associated with reduced response of cGMP elevation to these agents as
compared with control aortas. Thus, in addition to the essential role of
NOS3 in blood pressure regulation, tonic NO release by NOS3 in the
endothelium induces the reduced vascular reactivity to NO-mediated
vasodilatators, providing several insights into the pathogenesis of
nitrate tolerance.

In the heart, nitric oxide inhibits L-type calcium channels but
stimulates sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium release, leading to variable
effects on myocardial contractility. Barouch et al. (2002) demonstrated
that spatial confinement of specific nitric oxide synthase isoforms
regulates this process. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (NOS3)
localizes to caveolae, where compartmentalization with beta-adrenergic
receptors and L-type calcium channels allows nitric oxide to inhibit
beta-adrenergic-induced inotropy. Neuronal nitric oxide synthase (NOS1;
163731), however, is targeted to cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum. NO
stimulation of sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium release via the ryanodine
receptor (RYR2; 180902) in vitro, suggests that NOS1 has an opposite
facilitative effect on contractility. Barouch et al. (2002) demonstrated
that Nos1-deficient mice have suppressed inotropic response, whereas
Nos3-deficient mice have enhanced contractility, owing to corresponding
changes in sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium release. Both Nos1 -/- and
Nos3 -/- mice developed age-related hypertrophy, although only Nos3 -/-
mice were hypertensive. Nos1/3 -/- double knockout mice had suppressed
beta-adrenergic responses and an additive phenotype of marked
ventricular remodeling. Thus, NOS1 and NOS3 mediate independent, and in
some cases opposite, effects on cardiac structure and function.

Aicher et al. (2003) demonstrated that the impaired neovascularization
in mice lacking eNOS is related to a defect in progenitor cell
mobilization. Mice deficient in eNOS showed reduced vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF; 192240)-induced mobilization of endothelial
progenitor cells and increased mortality after myelosuppression.
Intravenous infusion of wildtype progenitor cells, but not bone marrow
transplantation, rescued the defective neovascularization of
Nos3-deficient mice in a model of hind-limb ischemia, suggesting that
progenitor mobilization from the bone marrow is impaired in Nos3-null
mice. Mechanistically, MMP9 (120361), required for stem cell
mobilization, was reduced in the bone marrow of Nos3-null mice. Aicher
et al. (2003) concluded that eNOS expressed by bone marrow stromal cells
influences recruitment of stem and progenitor cells. The authors
suggested that this may contribute to impaired regeneration processes in
ischemic heart disease patients, who are characterized by a reduced
systemic nitric oxide bioactivity.

Caveolin-3 (CAV3; 601253), a strong inhibitor of all NOS isoforms, is
expressed in sarcolemmal caveolae microdomains and binds to NOS3 in
cardiac myocytes and NOS1 in skeletal myocytes. Ohsawa et al. (2004)
characterized the biochemical and cardiac parameters of P104L
(601253.0001)-mutant Cav3 transgenic mice, a model of an autosomal
dominant limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD1C; 607801). Transgenic
mouse hearts demonstrated hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, enhanced basal
contractility, decreased left ventricular end diastolic diameter, and
loss and cytoplasmic mislocalization of Cav3 protein. Cardiac muscle
showed activation of NOS3 catalytic activity without increased
expression of all NOS isoforms. Ohsawa et al. (2004) suggested that a
moderate increase in NOS3 activity associated with loss of Cav3 may
result in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Bivalacqua et al. (2004) studied the contribution of RhoA (AHRA;
165390)/Rho kinase (ROCK1; 601702) signaling to erectile dysfunction in
streptozotocin (STZ) diabetic rats. Rho kinase and eNOS colocalized in
the endothelium of corpus cavernosum, and RhoA and Rho kinase abundance
and Mypt1 (602021) phosphorylation were elevated in STZ diabetic rat
penis. In addition, eNOS protein expression, cavernosal constitutive NOS
activity, and cGMP levels were reduced in STZ diabetic rat penis.
Bivalacqua et al. (2004) introduced a dominant-negative RhoA mutant and
found that erectile responses in the STZ diabetic rats improved to
values similar to controls.

Longo et al. (2005) crossbred Nos3-null and wildtype mice to generate 2
types of heterozygous litters, one with a maternally derived mutation
that developed in a Nos3-deficient environment and the other with a
paternally derived mutation that developed in a uterine environment
similar to wildtype mice. In studies of the in vitro reactivity of
carotid and mesenteric artery segments of adult mice to vasoactive
agents, the maternally derived heterozygous mice had abnormal vascular
reactivity that was similar to that of homozygous knockout mice
completely lacking functional NOS3, whereas the paternally derived
heterozygous mice had normal vascular reactivity that was not different
from that of wildtype mice. Longo et al. (2005) stated that this was the
first direct evidence in support of a role for uterine environment in
determining vascular function in later life.

In a mouse model of sepsis, Connelly et al. (2005) observed a temporal
reduction in iNOS expression and activity in lipopolysaccharide-treated
Nos3-knockout mice as compared with wildtype mice, which was reflected
in a more stable hemodynamic profile in Nos3-null mice during
endotoxemia. In human umbilical vein cells, lipopolysaccharide led to
the activation of Nos3 through phosphoinositide 3-kinase (see 171833)-
and Akt/protein kinase B (164730)-dependent enzyme phosphorylation.
Connelly et al. (2005) concluded that NOS3 has a proinflammatory role in
the pathogenesis of sepsis, in which following initial NOS3 activation
the resultant NO acts as a costimulus for the expression of iNOS.

Liu et al. (2005) presented evidence suggesting a role for G
protein-coupled receptor kinase-2 (GRK2; 109635) in the regulation of NO
production and hepatic vascular dynamics in a rat model of liver
sinusoidal endothelial injury and portal hypertension induced by bile
duct ligation. Sinusoidal endothelial cells isolated from the affected
animals had increased levels of GRK2, reduced levels of phosphorylated
AKT and eNOS, and decreased levels of NO. Gene silencing of GRK2 using
siRNA in injured sinusoidal endothelial cells restored AKT activity and
resulted in increased NO production. Liu et al. (2005) also found that
heterozygous Grk2 mice had increased levels of phosphorylated Akt and
decreased portal hypertension in response to injury compared to wildtype
mice. Liu et al. (2005) proposed a mechanism in which upregulation of
GRK2 after endothelial cell injury directly inhibits phosphorylation of
AKT, leading to reduced activation of eNOS and decreased production of
NO, and resulting in portal hypertension.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CORONARY ARTERY SPASM 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
ALZHEIMER DISEASE, LATE-ONSET, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
HYPERTENSION, PREGNANCY-INDUCED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
HYPERTENSION RESISTANT TO CONVENTIONAL THERAPY, INCLUDED;;
ISCHEMIC HEART DISEASE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
ISCHEMIC STROKE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
NOS3, GLU298ASP

Yoshimura et al. (1998) found a glu298-to-asp (E298D) variant (dbSNP
rs1799983) in exon 7 of the NOS3 gene. In a study of 113 patients with
coronary spasm, in whom the diagnosis of coronary spasm was made by
intracoronary injection of acetylcholine, and 100 control subjects, they
found a significant difference in the distribution of the variant; 21.2%
of the coronary spasm group and 9.0% of the control group (p = 0.014 for
dominant effect) showed the variant. In an elderly population in
Australia, Liyou et al. (1998) could demonstrate no difference in the
distribution of the E298D alleles in relation to the presence of
coronary artery disease.

Cai et al. (1999) genotyped 763 white Australians undergoing coronary
angiography for the eNOS glu298-to-asp mutation resulting from an 894G-T
transition. The frequencies of the GG, TG, and TT genotypes were not
significantly different in men or women with or without coronary artery
disease. The mutation was also not associated with myocardial infarction
(MI) in males or females, or with the number of significantly stenosed
vessels. The T allele frequency (32.5%) was much greater than that
reported for the Japanese population (7.8% in controls and 10% in MI
patients). Hingorani et al. (1999) investigated the relationship between
the glu298-to-asp variant in atherosclerotic coronary artery disease,
using 2 independent case-controlled studies. In the first study, cases
consisted of 298 unrelated patients with positive coronary angiograms
and controls were 138 unrelated healthy individuals ascertained through
a population health screen. In the second study, the cases were 249
patients with recent MI and a further 183 unrelated controls. There was
an excess of homozygotes for the asp298 variant among patients with
angiographic coronary artery disease, and among patients with recent MI
when compared with their respective controls (35.9% vs 10.2% in the
first study, and 18.1% vs 8.7% in the second study). In comparison to
glu298 homozygotes, homozygosity for asp298 was associated with an odds
ratio of 4.2 (95% confidence interval, 2.3 to 7.9) for angiographic
coronary artery disease and 2.5 (95% confidence interval, 1.3 to 4.2)
for MI.

Dahiyat et al. (1999) found a significant association of late-onset
Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300) and homozygosity for the glu allele in a
study of 122 early-onset and 317 late-onset Alzheimer cases compared to
392 controls. This was independent of apoE status. The authors remarked
on the interaction of beta-amyloid with endothelial cells. In contrast,
Higuchi et al. (2000) studied 411 Japanese patients with sporadic AD and
2 groups of controls: 350 Japanese controls and 52 Caucasian controls.
They found no difference in the glu298-to-asp polymorphism between AD
patients and controls, even when stratifying for age of onset and
presence of the APOE E4 allele. However, they observed that the glu
allele frequency was significantly higher in Japanese controls than in
Caucasian controls, suggesting that the association reported by Dahiyat
et al. (1999) may be a function of race. Akomolafe et al. (2006) found
that the glu298 allele was significantly associated with AD in a group
of over 200 African American patients, but not among a similar number of
Caucasians. A metaanalysis of 12 previously published similar studies
showed a small effect of the glu/glu genotype on AD risk across all
studies (OR of 1.15), but also showed significant heterogeneity.
Akomolafe et al. (2006) noted that the GG genotype (corresponding to
glu/glu) is prevalent in the general population (0.33 to 0.87),
suggesting that by itself the polymorphism plays only a modest role in
the development of AD and likely interacts with other factors.

In a study of 35 patients with histories of placental abruption and 170
control subjects, Yoshimura et al. (2001) found that the frequency of
glu298-to-asp homozygotes and heterozygotes was higher in the placental
abruption group than in the control group (40% vs 14%; p less than
0.001).

Kobashi et al. (2001) found in a study in Japan that the frequency of
heterozygotes and homozygotes for asp298 in the NOS3 gene was
significantly higher in patients with hypertension in pregnancy (0.23)
(see 189800) than in controls (0.12) (p less than 0.01). Multivariate
analysis showed that a family history of hypertension, the TT genotype
of the angiotensinogen gene (AGT; 106150.0001), the GA+AA NOS3 genotype,
and a prepregnancy body mass index of more than 24 were independent
potent risk factors, after adjustment for maternal age and parity. The
odds ratios of these factors were 2.7, 2.3, 2.2, and 2.1, respectively.
The results suggested that the asp298 of NOS3 is a potent, independent
risk factor for hypertension in pregnancy.

In a study of 150 'coloured' South African patients, 50 with normal
pregnancies, 50 with severe preeclampsia, and 50 with abruptio
placentae, Hillermann et al. (2005) found that the combined frequency of
the GT and TT NOS3 variant genotypes was significantly higher in the
abruptio placentae group than in the control group (p = 0.006). Among
preeclamptic patients who subsequently developed abruptio placentae, the
T allele emerged as a major risk factor for the development of abruptio
placentae (p less than 0.0001); the T variant did not seem to affect the
risk of preeclampsia itself, however.

Jachymova et al. (2001) found a significantly higher frequency of T
alleles (related to the E298D polymorphism) in hypertensives (see
145500) as compared to normotensives. Significant association was found
in patients showing resistance to conventional antihypertensive therapy.
In well-controlled hypertensives the tendency to a higher frequency of T
alleles was observed, but this did not reach statistical significance.
The presence of the T allele was thought to be predictive of the
patients' therapeutic response.

In a metaanalysis of 14 case-control studies evaluating the association
between E298D and ischemic heart disease (myocardial infarction or
angiographic coronary artery occlusion) involving 6,036 cases and 6,106
controls, Casas et al. (2004) found that homozygosity for asp298 was
associated with an increased risk of ischemic heart disease (OR, 1.31).

Berger et al. (2007) performed 2 large case-control studies involving
1,901 hospitalized stroke patients and 1,747 regional population
controls and found that E298D was significantly associated with ischemic
stroke (601367) independent of age, gender, hypertension, diabetes, and
hypercholesterolemia.

.0002
CORONARY ARTERY SPASM 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
NOS3, -786T-C

Nakayama et al. (1999) searched for possible mutations in the
endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene in patients with coronary spasm.
They found evidence of 3 linked mutations in the 5-prime flanking region
of the eNOS gene, among them a -786T-C transition. The incidence of
these alleles was significantly greater in 174 patients with coronary
artery spasm studied than in 161 controls. Multiple logistic regression
analysis with forward stepwise selection using the environmental risk
factors and the eNOS gene variant revealed that the most predictive
independent risk factor for coronary spasm was the mutant allele. As
assessed by luciferase reporter gene assays, the -786T-C mutation
resulted in a significant reduction of eNOS gene promoter activity,
whereas neither of the other mutations had any effect.

REFERENCE 1. Ahsan, A.; Norboo, T.; Baig, M. A.; Pasha, M. A. Q.: Simultaneous
selection of the wild-type genotypes of the G894T and 4B/4A polymorphisms
of NOS3 associate with high-altitude adaptation. Ann. Hum. Genet. 69:
260-267, 2005.

2. Aicher, A.; Heeschen, C.; Mildner-Rihm, C.; Urbich, C.; Ihling,
C.; Technau-Ihling, K.; Zeiher, A. M.; Dimmeler, S.: Essential role
of endothelial nitric oxide synthase for mobilization of stem and
progenitor cells. Nature Med. 9: 1370-1376, 2003. Note: Erratum:
Nature Med. 10: 999 only, 2004.

3. Akomolafe, A.; Lunetta, K. L.; Erlich, P. M.; Cupples, L. A.; Baldwin,
C. T.; Huyck, M.; Green, R. C.; Farrer, L. A.: Genetic association
between endothelial nitric oxide synthase and Alzheimer disease. Clin.
Genet. 70: 49-56, 2006.

4. Arngrimsson, R.; Hayward, C.; Nadaud, S.; Baldursdottir, A.; Walker,
J. J.; Liston, W. A.; Bjarnadottir, R. I.; Brock, D. J. H.; Geirsson,
R. T.; Connor, J. M.; Soubrier, F.: Evidence for a familial pregnancy-induced
hypertension locus in the eNOS-gene region. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61:
354-362, 1997.

5. Barouch, L. A.; Harrison, R. W.; Skaf, M. W.; Rosas, G. O.; Cappola,
T. P.; Kobeissi, Z. A.; Hobai, I. A.; Lemmon, C. A.; Burnett, A. L.;
O'Rourke, B.; Rodriguez, E. R.; Huang, P. L.; Lima, J. A. C.; Berkowitz,
D. E.; Hare, J. M.: Nitric oxide regulates the heart by spatial confinement
of nitric oxide synthase isoforms. Nature 416: 337-340, 2002.

6. Berger, K.; Stogbauer, F.; Stoll, M.; Wellmann, J.; Huge, A.; Cheng,
S.; Kessler, C.; John, U.; Assmann, G.; Ringelstein, E. B.; Funke,
H.: The glu298asp polymorphism in the nitric oxide synthase 3 gene
is associated with the risk of ischemic stroke in two large independent
case-control studies. Hum. Genet. 121: 169-178, 2007.

7. Bertrand, M. E.; LaBlanche, J. M.; Tilmant, P. Y.; Thieuleux, F.
A.; Delforge, M. R.; Carre, A. G.; Asseman, P.; Berzin, B.; Libersa,
C.; Laurent, J. M.: Frequency of provoked coronary arterial spasm
in 1089 consecutive patients undergoing coronary arteriography. Circulation 65:
1299-1306, 1982.

8. Bivalacqua, T. J.; Champion, H. C.; Usta, M. F.; Cellek, S.; Chitaley,
K.; Webb, R. C.; Lewis, R. L.; Mills, T. M.; Hellstrom, W. J. G.;
Kadowitz, P. J.: RhoA/Rho-kinase suppresses endothelial nitric oxide
synthase in the penis: a mechanism for diabetes-associated erectile
dysfunction. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 9121-9126, 2004.

9. Bonnardeaux, A.; Nadaud, S.; Charru, A.; Jeunemaitre, X.; Corvol,
P.; Soubrier, F.: Lack of evidence for linkage of the endothelial
cell nitric oxide synthase gene to essential hypertension. Circulation 91:
96-102, 1995.

10. Cai, H.; Wilcken, D. E. L.; Wang, X. L.: The glu298-asp (894G-T)
mutation at exon 7 of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene and
coronary artery disease. J. Molec. Med. 77: 511-514, 1999.

11. Casas, J. P.; Bautista, L. E.; Humphries, S. E.; Hingorani, A.
D.: Endothelial nitric oxide synthase genotype and ischemic heart
disease: meta-analysis of 26 studies involving 23028 subjects. Circulation 109:
1359-1365, 2004.

12. Champion, H. C.; Bivalacqua, T. J.; Hyman, A. L.; Ignarro, L.
J.; Hellstrom, W. J. G.; Kadowitz, P. J.: Gene transfer of endothelial
nitric oxide synthase to the penis augments erectile responses in
the aged rat. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 11648-11652, 1999.

13. Chen, C.-A.; Wang, T.-Y.; Varadharaj, S.; Reyes, L. A.; Hemann,
C.; Talukder, M. A. H.; Chen, Y.-R.; Druhan, L. J.; Zweier, J. L.
: S-glutathionylation uncouples eNOS and regulates its cellular and
vascular function. Nature 468: 1115-1118, 2010.

14. Connelly, L.; Madhani, M.; Hobbs, A. J.: Resistance to endotoxic
shock in endothelial nitric-oxide synthase (eNOS) knock-out mice:
a pro-inflammatory role for eNOS-derived NO in vivo. J. Biol. Chem. 280:
10040-10046, 2005.

15. Dahiyat, M.; Cumming, A.; Harrington, C.; Wischik, C.; Xuereb,
J.; Corrigan, F.; Breen, G.; Shaw, D.; St. Clair, D.: Association
between Alzheimer's disease and the NOS3 gene. Ann. Neurol. 46:
664-667, 1999.

16. Dimmeler, S.; Fleming, I.; Fisslthaler, B.; Hermann, C.; Busse,
R.; Zeiher, A. M.: Activation of nitric oxide synthase in endothelial
cells by Akt-dependent phosphorylation. Nature 399: 601-605, 1999.

17. Fish, J. E.; Matouk, C. C.; Yeboah, E.; Bevan, S. C.; Khan, M.;
Patil, K.; Ohh, M.; Marsden, P. A.: Hypoxia-inducible expression
of a natural cis-antisense transcript inhibits endothelial nitric-oxide
synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 282: 15652-15666, 2007.

18. Fulton, D.; Gratton, J.-P.; McCabe, T. J.; Fontana, J.; Fujio,
Y.; Walsh, K.; Franke, T. F.; Papapetropoulos, A.; Sessa, W. C.:
Regulation of endothelium-derived nitric oxide production by the protein
kinase Akt. Nature 399: 597-601, 1999. Note: Erratum: Nature 400:
792 only, 1999.

19. Furchgott, R. F.; Zawadzki, J. V.: The obligatory role of endothelial
cells in the relaxation of arterial smooth muscle by acetylcholine. Nature 288:
373-376, 1980.

20. Gregg, A. R.; Lee, C. G. L.; Herman, G. E.; O'Brien, W. E.: Endothelial
nitric oxide synthase (Nos3) maps to the proximal region of mouse
chromosome 5. Mammalian Genome 6: 152, 1995.

21. Heltianu, C.; Costache, G.; Azibi, K.; Poenaru, L.; Simionescu,
M.: Endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene polymorphisms in Fabry's
disease. Clin. Genet. 61: 423-429, 2002.

22. Higuchi, S.; Ohta, S.; Matsushita, S.; Matsui, T.; Yuzuriha, T.;
Urakami, K.; Arai, H.: NOS3 polymorphism not associated with Alzheimer's
disease in Japanese. (Letter) Ann. Neurol. 48: 685 only, 2000.

23. Hillermann, R.; Carelse, K.; Gebhardt, G. S.: The glu29-to-asp
variant of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene is associated
with an increased risk for abruptio placentae in pre-eclampsia. J.
Hum. Genet. 50: 415-419, 2005.

24. Hingorani, A. D.; Liang, C. F.; Fatibene, J.; Lyon, A.; Monteith,
S.; Parsons, A.; Haydock, S.; Hopper, R. V.; Stephens, N. G.; O'Shaughnessy,
K. M.; Brown, M. J.: A common variant of the endothelial nitric oxide
synthase (glu298-asp) is a major risk factor for coronary artery disease
in the UK. Circulation 100: 1515-1520, 1999.

25. Huang, P. L.; Huang, Z.; Mashimo, H.; Bloch, K. D.; Moskowitz,
M. A.; Bevan, J. A.; Fishman, M. C.: Hypertension in mice lacking
the gene for endothelial nitric oxide synthase. Nature 377: 239-242,
1995.

26. Jachymova, M.; Horky, K.; Bultas, J.; Kozich, V.; Jindra, A.;
Peleska, J.; Martasek, P.: Association of the glu298-to-asp polymorphism
in the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene with essential hypertension
resistant to conventional therapy. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 284:
426-430, 2001.

27. Janssens, S. P.; Shimouchi, A.; Quertermous, T.; Bloch, D. B.;
Bloch, K. D.: Cloning and expression of a cDNA encoding human endothelium-derived
relaxing factor/nitric oxide synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 14519-14522,
1992. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem. 267: 22694 only, 1992.

28. Ji, Y.; Ferracci, G.; Warley, A.; Ward, M.; Leung, K.-Y.; Samsuddin,
S.; Leveque, C.; Queen, L.; Reebye, V.; Pal, P.; Gkaliagkousi, E.;
Seager, M.; Ferro, A.: Beta-actin regulates platelet nitric oxide
synthase 3 activity through interaction with heat shock protein 90. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 8839-8844, 2007.

29. Kobashi, G.; Yamada, H.; Ohta, K.; Kato, E.-H.; Ebina, Y.; Fujimoto,
S.: Endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene (NOS3) variant and hypertension
in pregnancy. Am. J. Med. Genet. 103: 241-244, 2001.

30. Kugiyama, K.; Ohgushi, M.; Motoyama, T.; Sugiyama, S.; Ogawa,
H.; Yoshimura, M.; Inobe, Y.; Hirashima, O.; Kawano, H.; Soejima,
H.; Yasue, H.: Nitric oxide-mediated flow-dependent dilation is impaired
in coronary arteries in patients with coronary spastic angina. J.
Am. Coll. Cardiol. 30: 920-926, 1997.

31. Lewis, I.; Lachmeijer, G.; Downing, S.; Dekker, G.; Glazebrook,
C.; Clayton, D.; Morris, N. H.; O'Shaughnessy, K. M.: Failure to
detect linkage of preeclampsia to the region of the NOS3 locus on
chromosome 7q. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64: 310-313, 1999.

32. Lim, K.-H.; Ancrile, B. B.; Kashatus, D. F.; Counter, C. M.:
Tumour maintenance is mediated by eNOS. Nature 452: 646-649, 2008.

33. Liu, S.; Premont, R. T.; Kontos, C. D.; Zhu, S.; Rockey, D. C.
: A crucial role for GRK2 in regulation of endothelial cell nitric
oxide synthase function in portal hypertension. Nature Med. 11:
952-958, 2005.

34. Liyou, N.; Simons, L.; Friedlander, Y.; Simons, J.; McCallum,
J.; O'Shaughnessy, K.; Davis, D.; Johnson, A.: Coronary artery disease
is not associated with the E298D variant of the constitutive, endothelial
nitric oxide synthase gene. (Letter) Clin. Genet. 54: 528-529, 1998.

35. Longo, M.; Jain, V.; Vedernikov, Y. P.; Bukowski, R.; Garfield,
R. E.; Hankins, G. D.; Anderson, G. D.; Saade, G. R.: Fetal origins
of adult vascular dysfunction in mice lacking endothelial nitric oxide
synthase. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 288: R1114-R1121,
2005.

36. Marsden, P. A.; Heng, H. H. Q.; Scherer, S. W.; Stewart, R. J.;
Hall, A. V.; Shi, X.-M.; Tsui, L.-C.; Schappert, K. T.: Structure
and chromosomal localization of the human constitutive endothelial
nitric oxide synthase gene. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 17478-17488, 1993.

37. Marsden, P. A.; Schappert, K. T.; Chen, H. S.; Flowers, M.; Sundell,
C. L.; Wilcox, J. N.; Lamas, S.; Michel, T.: Molecular cloning and
characterization of human endothelial nitric oxide synthase. FEBS
Lett. 307: 287-293, 1992.

38. Miyamoto, Y.; Saito, Y.; Nakayama, M.; Shimasaki, Y.; Yoshimura,
T.; Yoshimura, M.; Harada, M.; Kajiyama, N.; Kishimoto, I.; Kuwahara,
K.; Hino, J.; Ogawa, E.; Hamanaka, I.; Kamitani, S.; Takahashi, N.;
Kawakami, R.; Kangawa, K.; Yasue, H.; Nakao, K.: Replication protein
A1 reduces transcription of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase
gene containing a -786T-C mutation associated with coronary spastic
angina. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 2629-2637, 2000.

39. Motoyama, T.; Kawano, H.; Kugiyama, K.; Okumura, K.; Ohgushi,
M.; Yoshimura, M.; Hirashima, O.; Yasue, H.: Flow-mediated, endothelium-dependent
dilatation of the brachial arteries is impaired in patients with coronary
spastic angina. Am. Heart J. 133: 263-267, 1997.

40. Nakayama, M.; Yasue, H.; Yoshimura, M.; Shimasaki, Y.; Kugiyama,
K.; Ogawa, H.; Motoyama, T.; Saito, Y.; Ogawa, Y.; Miyamoto, Y.; Nakao,
K.: T(-786)-C mutation in the 5-prime-flanking region of the endothelial
nitric oxide synthase gene is associated with coronary spasm. Circulation 99:
2864-2870, 1999.

41. Nakayama, T.; Soma, M.; Takahashi, Y.; Izumi, Y.; Kanmatsuse,
K.; Esumi, M.: Association analysis of CA repeat polymorphism of
the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene with essential hypertension
in Japanese. Clin. Genet. 51: 26-30, 1997.

42. Napolitano, M.; Miceli, F.; Calce, A.; Vacca, A.; Gulino, A.;
Apa, R.; Lanzone, A.: Expression and relationship between endothelin-1
messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) and inducible/endothelial nitric
oxide synthase mRNA isoforms from normal and preeclamptic placentas. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 2318-2323, 2000.

43. Nisoli, E.; Clementi, E.; Paolucci, C.; Cozzi, V.; Tonello, C.;
Sciorati, C.; Bracale, R.; Valerio, A.; Francolini, M.; Moncada, S.;
Carruba, M. O.: Mitochondrial biogenesis in mammals: the role of
endogenous nitric oxide. Science 299: 896-899, 2003.

44. Nisoli, E.; Tonello, C.; Cardile, A.; Cozzi, V.; Bracale, R.;
Tedesco, L.; Falcone, S.; Valerio, A.; Cantoni, O.; Clementi, E.;
Moncada, S.; Carruba, M. O.: Calorie restriction promotes mitochondrial
biogenesis by inducing the expression of eNOS. Science 310: 314-317,
2005.

45. Ohashi, Y.; Kawashima, S.; Hirata, K.; Yamashita, T.; Ishida,
T.; Inoue, N.; Sakoda, T.; Kurihara, H.; Yazaki, Y.; Yokoyama, M.
: Hypotension and reduced nitric oxide-elicited vasorelaxation in
transgenic mice overexpressing endothelial nitric oxide synthase. J.
Clin. Invest. 102: 2061-2071, 1998.

46. Ohsawa, Y.; Toko, H.; Katsura, M.; Morimoto, K.; Yamada, H.; Ichikawa,
Y.; Murakami, T.; Ohkuma, S.; Komuro, I.; Sunada, Y.: Overexpression
of P104L mutant caveolin-3 in mice develops hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
with enhanced contractility in association with increased endothelial
nitric oxide synthase activity. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 151-157,
2004.

47. Persu, A.; Stoenoiu, M. S.; Messiaen, T.; Davila, S.; Robino,
C.; El-Khattabi, O.; Mourad, M.; Horie, S.; Feron, O.; Balligand,
J.-L.; Wattiez, R.; Pirson, Y.; Chaveau, D.; Lens, X. M.; Devuyst,
O.: Modifier effect of ENOS in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney
disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 229-241, 2002.

48. Persu, A.; Vinck, W. J.; El Khattabi, O.; Janssen, R. G. J. H.;
Paulussen, A. D. C.; Devuyst, O.; Vlietinck, R.; Fagard, R. H.: Influence
of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene on conventional and
ambulatory blood pressure: sib-pair analysis and haplotype study. J.
Hypertens. 23: 759-765, 2005.

49. Raman, C. S.; Li, H.; Martasak, P.; Kral, V.; Masters, B. S. S.;
Poulos, T. L.: Crystal structure of constitutive endothelial nitric
oxide synthase: a paradigm for pterin function involving a novel metal
center. Cell 95: 939-950, 1998.

50. Rapoport, R. M.; Murad, F.: Agonist-induced endothelium-dependent
relaxation in rat thoracic aorta may be mediated through CGMP. Circ.
Res. 52: 352-357, 1983.

51. Robb, G. B.; Carson, A. R.; Tai, S. C.; Fish, J. E.; Singh, S.;
Yamada, T.; Scherer, S. W.; Nakabayashi, K.; Marsden, P. A.: Post-transcriptional
regulation of endothelial nitric-oxide synthase by an overlapping
antisense mRNA transcript. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 37982-37996, 2004.

52. Robinson, L. J.; Weremowicz, S.; Morton, C. C.; Michel, T.: Isolation
and chromosomal localization of the human endothelial nitric oxide
synthase (NOS3) gene. Genomics 19: 350-357, 1994.

53. Simoncini, T.; Mannella, P.; Fornari, L.; Caruso, A.; Varone,
G.; Garibaldi , S.; Genazzani, A. R.: Tibolone activates nitric oxide
synthesis in human endothelial cells. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89:
4594-4600, 2004.

54. Snyder, S. H.: No endothelial NO. Nature 377: 196-197, 1995.

55. Steudel, W.; Scherrer-Crosbie, M.; Bloch, K. D.; Weimann, J.;
Huang, P. L.; Jones, R. C.; Picard, M. H.; Zapol, W. M.: Sustained
pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular hypertrophy after chronic
hypoxia in mice with congenital deficiency of nitric oxide synthase
3. J. Clin. Invest. 101: 2468-2477, 1998.

56. Straub, A. C.; Lohman, A. W.; Billaud, M.; Johnstone, S. R.; Dwyer,
S. T.; Lee, M. Y.; Bortz, P. S.; Best, A. K.; Columbus, L.; Gaston,
B.; Isakson, B. E.: Endothelial cell expression of haemoglobin alpha
regulates nitric oxide signalling. Nature 491: 473-477, 2012.

57. Tanus-Santos, J. E.; Desai, M.; Flockhart, D. A.: Effects of
ethnicity on the distribution of clinically relevant endothelial nitric
oxide variants. Pharmacogenetics 11: 719-725, 2001.

58. Tempfer, C.; Unfried, G.; Zeillinger, R.; Hefler, L.; Nagele,
F.; Huber, J. C.: Endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene polymorphism
in women with idiopathic recurrent miscarriage. Hum. Reprod. 16:
1644-1647, 2001.

59. Wang, X. L.; Sim, A. S.; Badenhop, R. F.; McCredie, R. M.; Wilcken,
D. E. L.: A smoking-dependent risk of coronary artery disease associated
with a polymorphism of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene. Nature
Med. 2: 41-45, 1996.

60. Yallampalli, C.; Garfield, R. E.: Inhibition of nitric oxide
synthesis in rats during pregnancy produces signs similar to those
of preeclampsia. Am. J. Obstet. Gynec. 169: 1316-1320, 1993.

61. Yasue, H.; Kugiyama, K.: Coronary artery spasm: Japanese view. Coron.
Artery Dis. 1: 668-673, 1990.

62. Yoshimura, M.; Yasue, H.; Nakayama, M.; Shimasaki, Y.; Sumida,
H.; Sugiyama, S.; Kugiyama, K.; Ogawa, H.; Ogawa, Y.; Saito, Y.; Miyamoto,
Y.; Nakao, K.: A missense glu298asp variant in the endothelial nitric
oxide synthase gene is associated with coronary spasm in the Japanese. Hum.
Genet. 103: 65-69, 1998.

63. Yoshimura, T.; Yoshimura, M.; Tabata, A.; Yasue, H.; Okamura,
H.: The missense glu298-to-asp variant of the endothelial nitric
oxide synthase gene is strongly associated with placental abruption. Hum.
Genet. 108: 181-183, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/14/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/29/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/22/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/6/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/16/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/16/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/21/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/25/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/17/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/7/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/7/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/25/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/4/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/19/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/19/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/13/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/27/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/29/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/21/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/18/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/9/2002
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/14/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/8/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/19/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/5/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/29/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/10/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/6/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/25/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/29/2000
Orest Hurko - updated: 12/2/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/21/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/23/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/3/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/16/1999
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 2/4/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/18/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/19/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/26/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/24/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/24/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/14/1992

EDITED tpirozzi: 10/01/2013
carol: 4/4/2013
alopez: 12/17/2012
terry: 12/14/2012
alopez: 8/3/2012
carol: 6/7/2012
terry: 5/3/2011
terry: 4/29/2011
alopez: 3/31/2011
terry: 3/29/2011
wwang: 8/6/2010
wwang: 6/28/2010
terry: 6/22/2010
alopez: 1/13/2010
mgross: 5/15/2009
terry: 5/6/2009
joanna: 4/10/2009
alopez: 5/13/2008
terry: 4/16/2008
mgross: 1/25/2008
terry: 1/16/2008
wwang: 8/27/2007
terry: 8/21/2007
wwang: 9/1/2006
ckniffin: 8/25/2006
alopez: 3/28/2006
wwang: 3/9/2006
terry: 2/17/2006
carol: 12/7/2005
terry: 12/7/2005
wwang: 11/7/2005
alopez: 10/26/2005
terry: 10/25/2005
carol: 10/11/2005
ckniffin: 10/4/2005
wwang: 9/2/2005
wwang: 8/25/2005
terry: 8/19/2005
wwang: 7/25/2005
terry: 7/19/2005
carol: 5/25/2005
joanna: 5/25/2005
wwang: 5/11/2005
wwang: 4/13/2005
mgross: 10/27/2004
carol: 7/6/2004
alopez: 11/7/2003
cwells: 11/5/2003
alopez: 10/29/2003
terry: 10/29/2003
alopez: 2/24/2003
terry: 2/21/2003
alopez: 1/15/2003
terry: 1/14/2003
cwells: 9/18/2002
alopez: 9/9/2002
carol: 6/17/2002
ckniffin: 6/14/2002
alopez: 4/8/2002
cwells: 4/5/2002
cwells: 3/21/2002
terry: 3/19/2002
carol: 1/4/2002
carol: 11/13/2001
mcapotos: 10/15/2001
mcapotos: 10/10/2001
terry: 10/5/2001
cwells: 9/14/2001
cwells: 8/30/2001
terry: 8/29/2001
mgross: 5/10/2001
mcapotos: 4/16/2001
terry: 4/6/2001
mcapotos: 2/1/2001
mcapotos: 1/25/2001
alopez: 6/1/2000
terry: 5/29/2000
carol: 12/3/1999
terry: 12/2/1999
carol: 10/22/1999
terry: 10/21/1999
carol: 9/20/1999
alopez: 6/23/1999
mgross: 3/17/1999
carol: 3/10/1999
terry: 3/3/1999
carol: 2/16/1999
terry: 2/16/1999
carol: 2/4/1999
carol: 1/13/1999
terry: 12/18/1998
dkim: 9/10/1998
carol: 8/24/1998
terry: 8/19/1998
carol: 6/30/1998
terry: 6/26/1998
terry: 9/30/1997
terry: 9/24/1997
terry: 4/24/1997
terry: 4/21/1997
terry: 2/6/1996
mark: 1/5/1996
terry: 1/3/1996
terry: 10/30/1995
mark: 9/20/1995
carol: 2/15/1994
carol: 9/21/1993
carol: 9/13/1993
carol: 1/11/1993

126431	TITLE *126431 TOPOISOMERASE, DNA, II, BETA; TOP2B
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Human cells contain 2 topoisomerase II isozymes: alpha (TOP2A; 126430)
and beta (TOP2B). Chung et al. (1989) sequenced human cDNAs that had
been isolated by screening a cDNA library derived from a
mechlorethamine-resistant Burkitt lymphoma cell line (Raji-HN2) with a
Drosophila Topo II cDNA. They identified 2 classes of sequence, which
represent the TOP2 isoenzymes TOP2A and TOP2B. Southern blot analysis
indicated that the TOP2A and TOP2B cDNAs are derived from distinct
genes. Northern blot analysis using a TOP2B-specific probe detected a
6.5-kb transcript in the human cell line U937. Antibodies against a
TOP2B peptide recognized a 180-kD protein in U937 cell lysates.

By screening a human B-cell cDNA library with a partial TOP2B cDNA,
Jenkins et al. (1992) isolated the complete coding region of the TOP2B
gene. The deduced 1,621-amino acid TOP2B protein shares 72% sequence
similarity with TOP2A. With the exception of a short region at the
extreme N terminus, the sequences of the highly conserved N-terminal
ATPase domain and the central breakage/reunion domain of the TOP2A and
TOP2B proteins are colinear, with no insertions or deletions required
for alignment. In contrast, the C-terminal domains of TOP2A and TOP2B
differ markedly both in size and in sequence. The C-terminal domain of
TOP2B contains a number of potential phosphorylation sites. Jenkins et
al. (1992) examined the expression of TOP2A and TOP2B mRNAs in a panel
of human tumor cell lines of different origin using an RNase protection
assay. TOP2A and TOP2B were expressed in all cell lines examined,
including those of hemopoietic, epithelial, and fibroblast origin, but
at levels that differed markedly between different cell types. In
particular, TOP2B was expressed at a high level in U937 cells. There was
no obvious relationship between the levels of expression of the TOP2A
and TOP2B genes.

GENE FUNCTION

Ju et al. (2006) reported that the signal-dependent activation of gene
transcription by nuclear receptors and other classes of DNA binding
transcription factors, including AP1 (see 165160), requires
TOP2B-dependent, transient, site-specific double-stranded DNA (dsDNA)
break formation. Subsequent to the break, poly(adenosine
diphosphate-ribose) polymerase-1 (PAP1; 173870) enzymatic activity is
induced, which is required for a nucleosome-specific histone
H1-high-mobility group B exchange event and for local changes of
chromatin architecture. Ju et al. (2006) concluded that their data
mechanistically link TOP2B-dependent dsDNA breaks and the components of
the DNA damage and repair machinery in regulated gene transcription.

Perillo et al. (2008) analyzed how H3 histone methylation and
demethylation control expression of estrogen-responsive genes and showed
that a DNA-bound estrogen receptor (see ESRA, 133430) directs
transcription by participating in bending chromatin to contact the RNA
polymerase II (see 180660) recruited to the promoter. This process is
driven by receptor-targeted demethylation of H3K9 (see 602810) at both
enhancer and promoter sites and is achieved by activation of resident
LSD1 (609132) demethylase. Localized demethylation produces hydrogen
peroxide, which modifies the surrounding DNA and recruits
8-oxoguanine-DNA glycosylase-1 (601982) and topoisomerase II-beta,
triggering chromatin and DNA conformational changes that are essential
for estrogen-induced transcription. Perillo et al. (2008) concluded that
their data showed a strategy that uses controlled DNA damage and repair
to guide productive transcription.

Fusions between the TMPRSS2 (602060) and ERG (165080) genes are among
the most common oncogenic rearrangements observed in human cancer.
Haffner et al. (2010) showed that androgen signaling promotes
corecruitment of androgen receptor (AR; 313700) and TOP2B to sites of
TMPRSS2-ERG genomic breakpoints, triggering recombinogenic
TOP2B-mediated double-strand breaks. Furthermore, androgen stimulation
resulted in de novo production of TMPRSS2-ERG fusion transcripts in a
process that required TOP2B and components of the double-strand break
repair machinery. Finally, unlike normal prostate epithelium, prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia cells showed strong coexpression of AR and
TOP2B. Haffner et al. (2010) concluded that their findings implicated
androgen-induced TOP2B-mediated double-strand breaks in generating
TMPRSS2-ERG rearrangements.

King et al. (2013) found that topotecan, a topoisomerase-1 (TOP1;
126420) inhibitor, dose-dependently reduces the expression of extremely
long genes in mouse and human neurons, including nearly all genes that
are longer than 200 kb. Expression of long genes is also reduced after
knockdown of Top1 or Top2b in neurons, highlighting that both enzymes
are required for full expression of long genes. By mapping RNA
polymerase II density genomewide in neurons, King et al. (2013) found
that this length-dependent effect on gene expression was due to impaired
transcription elongation. Interestingly, many high-confidence autism
spectrum disorder (209850) candidate genes are exceptionally long and
were reduced in expression after TOP1 inhibition. King et al. (2013)
concluded that chemicals and genetic mutations that impair
topoisomerases could commonly contribute to autism spectrum disorders
and other neurodevelopmental disorders.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lang et al. (1998) reported the complete structures of the TOP2A and
TOP2B genes. The TOP2B gene spans at least 49 kb and contains 36 exons.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Wu et al. (2011) presented the crystal structure of a large fragment of
human TOP2-beta complexed to DNA and to the anticancer drug etoposide to
reveal structural details of drug-induced stabilization of a cleavage
complex. The interplay between the protein, the DNA, and the drug
explains the structure-activity relations of etoposide derivatives and
the molecular basis of drug-resistant mutations.

MAPPING

By study of somatic cell hybrids with a TOP2B cDNA, Tan et al. (1992)
mapped that gene to human chromosome 3. Linkage studies in the CEPH
families, performed with a RFLP related to the TOP2B gene, suggested
that the gene is located on 3p. By in situ hybridization, Jenkins et al.
(1992) mapped the TOP2B gene to 3p24.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yang et al. (2000) disrupted the murine Top2b gene by homologous
recombination. Heterozygous mice were phenotypically indistinguishable
from their wildtype littermates, but homozygous Top2b -/- embryos from
intercrosses of the heterozygotes were dead at birth. Neurogenesis was
normal in Top2b mutant mice, but motor axons failed to contact skeletal
muscles and sensory axons failed to enter the spinal cord. Despite an
absence of innervation, clusters of acetylcholine receptors were
concentrated in the central region of skeletal muscles, thereby
revealing patterning mechanisms that are autonomous to skeletal muscle.
The defects in motor axon growth in Top2b -/- mice resulted in the
breathing impairment and death of the pups shortly after birth.

REFERENCE 1. Chung, T. D. Y.; Drake, F. H.; Tan, K. B.; Per, S. R.; Crooke,
S. T.; Mirabelli, C. K.: Characterization and immunological identification
of cDNA clones encoding two human DNA topoisomerase II isozymes. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 86: 9431-9435, 1989.

2. Haffner, M. C.; Aryee, M. J.; Toubaji, A.; Esopi, D. M.; Albadine,
R.; Gurel, B.; Isaacs, W. B.; Bova, G. S.; Liu, W.; Xu, J.; Meeker,
A. K.; Netto, G.; De Marzo, A. M.; Nelson, W. G.; Yegnasubramanian,
S.: Androgen-induced TOP2B-mediated double-strand breaks and prostate
cancer gene rearrangements. Nature Genet. 42: 668-675, 2010.

3. Jenkins, J. R.; Ayton, P.; Jones, T.; Davies, S. L.; Simmons, D.
L.; Harris, A. L.; Sheer, D.; Hickson, I. D.: Isolation of cDNA clones
encoding the beta isozyme of human DNA topoisomerase II and localisation
of the gene to chromosome 3p24. Nucleic Acids Res. 20: 5587-5592,
1992.

4. Ju, B.-G.; Lunyak, V. V.; Perissi, V.; Garcia-Bassets, I.; Rose,
D. W.; Glass, C. K.; Rosenfeld, M. G.: A topoisomerase II-beta-mediated
dsDNA break required for regulated transcription. Science 312: 1798-1802,
2006. Note: Erratum: Science 332: 664 only, 2011.

5. King, I. F.; Yandava, C. N.; Mabb, A. M.; Hsiao, J. S.; Huang,
H.-S.; Pearson, B. L.; Calabrese, J. M.; Starmer, J.; Parker, J. S.;
Magnuson, T.; Chamberlain, S. J.; Philpot, B. D.; Zylka, M. J.: Topoisomerases
facilitate transcription of long genes linked to autism. Nature 501:
58-62, 2013.

6. Lang, A. J.; Mirski, S. E. L.; Cummings, H. J.; Yu, Q.; Gerlach,
J. H.; Cole, S. P. C.: Structural organization of the human TOP2A
and TOP2B genes. Gene 221: 255-266, 1998.

7. Perillo, B.; Ombra, M. N.; Bertoni, A.; Cuozzo, C.; Sacchetti,
S.; Sasso, A.; Chiariotti, L.; Malorni, A.; Abbondanza, C.; Avvedimento,
E. V.: DNA oxidation as triggered by H3K9me2 demethylation drives
estrogen-induced gene expression. Science 319: 202-206, 2008.

8. Tan, K. B.; Dorman, T. E.; Falls, K. M.; Chung, T. D. Y.; Mirabelli,
C. K.; Crooke, S. T.; Mao, J.: Topoisomerase II-alpha and topoisomerase
II-beta genes: characterization and mapping to human chromosomes 17
and 3, respectively. Cancer Res. 52: 231-234, 1992.

9. Wu, C.-C.; Li, T.-K.; Farh, L.; Lin, L.-Y.; Lin, T.-S.; Yu, Y.-J.;
Yen, T.-J.; Chiang, C.-W.; Chan, N.-L.: Structural basis of type
II topoisomerase inhibition by the anticancer drug etoposide. Science 333:
459-462, 2011.

10. Yang, X.; Li, W.; Prescott, E. D.; Burden, S. J.; Wang, J. C.
: DNA topoisomerase II-beta and neural development. Science 287:
131-134, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/16/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/7/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/2/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/6/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2006
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 9/15/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/29/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/4/1992

EDITED alopez: 10/16/2013
mgross: 2/5/2013
alopez: 9/9/2011
terry: 9/7/2011
alopez: 9/2/2011
alopez: 8/17/2011
alopez: 3/25/2008
terry: 3/6/2008
alopez: 7/28/2006
terry: 7/24/2006
mcapotos: 9/20/2000
psherman: 9/15/2000
alopez: 12/30/1999
terry: 12/29/1999
psherman: 2/23/1999
terry: 5/16/1996
carol: 7/6/1992
carol: 5/4/1992

147558	TITLE *147558 INTEGRIN, BETA-6; ITGB6
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Sheppard et al. (1990) used degenerate oligonucleotide mixtures,
designed to recognize consensus sequences in regions of conservation
among the several integrin beta subunits, as PCR primers to amplify
novel integrin subunits. They found and characterized a novel beta
subunit in guinea pig airway epithelial cells and in cultured human
pancreatic carcinoma cells. Ninety-four percent identity was found in
the sequences of the 2 species. Since the protein was clearly distinct
from previously described integrins numbered beta-1 through beta-5, they
designated the new protein beta-6.

MAPPING

Krissansen et al. (1992) assigned the gene encoding the beta-6 subunit
of integrin to chromosome 2 by analysis of somatic cell hybrids with a
fragment of a genomic clone. They commented on the possible significance
of the fact that the gene for vitronectin receptor, alpha subunit (VNRA;
193210) also maps to chromosome 2.

ANIMAL MODEL

Munger et al. (1999) showed that the TGFB1 (190180) latency-associated
peptide (LAP) is a ligand for the integrin alpha-V-beta-6 (see 193210)
and that alpha-V-beta-6-expressing cells induce spatially restricted
activation of TGF-beta-1. They suggested that their finding explains why
mice lacking this integrin develop exaggerated inflammation and, as they
showed, are protected from pulmonary fibrosis. Pittet et al. (2001)
showed that integrin alpha-V-beta-6 activates latent TGFB in the lungs
and skin. They also showed that mice lacking this integrin are
completely protected from pulmonary edema in a model of
bleomycin-induced acute lung injury. Pharmacologic inhibition of TGFB
also protected wildtype mice from pulmonary edema induced by bleomycin
or E. coli endotoxin. TGFB directly increased alveolar epithelial
permeability in vitro by a mechanism that involved depletion of
intracellular glutathione. Pittet et al. (2001) concluded that
integrin-mediated local activation of TGFB is critical to the
development of pulmonary edema in acute lung injury and that blocking
TGFB or its activation could be effective treatments.

Through a global analysis of pulmonary gene expression in the lungs of
mice lacking integrin beta-6, Kaminski et al. (2000) identified a marked
induction of macrophage metalloelastase (MMP12; 601046), a
metalloproteinase that preferentially degrades elastin and has been
implicated in the chronic lung disease emphysema. Morris et al. (2003)
demonstrated that Itgb6-null mice develop age-related emphysema that is
completely abrogated either by transgenic expression of versions of the
beta-6 integrin subunit that support TGFB activation, or by the loss of
MMP12. Furthermore, Morris et al. (2003) showed that the effects of
ITGB6 deletion are overcome by simultaneous transgenic expression of
active TGFB1. Morris et al. (2003) concluded that they had uncovered a
pathway in which the loss of integrin-mediated activation of latent TGFB
causes age-dependent pulmonary emphysema through alterations of
macrophage MMP12 expression. Furthermore, they showed that a functional
alteration in the TGFB activation pathway affects susceptibility to this
disease.

REFERENCE 1. Kaminski, N.; Allard, J. D.; Pittet, J. F.; Zuo, F.; Griffiths,
M. J.; Morris, D.; Huang, X.; Sheppard, D.; Heller, R. A.: Global
analysis of gene expression in pulmonary fibrosis reveals distinct
programs regulating lung inflammation and fibrosis. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 97: 1778-1783, 2000.

2. Krissansen, G. W.; Yuan, Q.; Jenkins, D.; Jiang, W.-M.; Rooke,
L.; Spurr, N. K.; Eccles, M.; Leung, E.; Watson, J. D.: Chromosomal
locations of the genes coding for the integrin beta-6 and beta-7 subunits. Immunogenetics 35:
58-61, 1992.

3. Morris, D. G.; Huang, X.; Kaminski, N.; Wang, Y.; Shapiro, S. D.;
Dolganov, G.; Glick, A.; Sheppard, D.: Loss of integrin alpha-v-beta-6-mediated
TGF-beta activation causes Mmp12-dependent emphysema. Nature 422:
169-173, 2003.

4. Munger, J. S.; Huang, X.; Kawakatsu, H.; Griffiths, M. J.; Dalton,
S. L.; Wu, J.; Pittet, J. F.; Kaminski, N.; Garat, C.; Matthay, M.
A.; Rifkin, D. B.; Sheppard, D.: The integrin alpha v beta 6 binds
and activates latent TGF beta 1: a mechanism for regulating pulmonary
inflammation and fibrosis. Cell 96: 319-328, 1999.

5. Pittet, J. F.; Griffiths, M. J.; Geiser, T.; Kaminski, N.; Dalton,
S. L.; Huang, X.; Brown, L. A.; Gotwals, P. J.; Koteliansky, V. E.;
Matthay, M. A.; Sheppard, D.: TGF-beta is a critical mediator of
acute lung injury. J. Clin. Invest. 107: 1537-1544, 2001.

6. Sheppard, D.; Rozzo, C.; Starr, L.; Quaranta, V.; Erle, D. J.;
Pytela, R.: Complete amino acid sequence of a novel integrin beta
subunit (beta-6) identified in epithelial cells using the polymerase
chain reaction. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 11502-11507, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/24/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/26/1992

EDITED cwells: 11/10/2003
cwells: 11/7/2003
alopez: 3/24/2003
terry: 3/24/2003
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 3/3/1992
carol: 2/26/1992

606107	TITLE *606107 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 44, MEMBER 4; SLC44A4
;;CHOLINE TRANSPORTER-LIKE PROTEIN 4; CTL4;;
C6ORF29
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Choline, a major constituent of cell membranes, participates in the
synthesis of acetylcholine in cholinergic neurons. It is taken up with
high affinity at cholinergic nerve terminals in a sodium-dependent
manner. O'Regan et al. (2000) cloned CTL1, a suppressor for a yeast
choline transport mutation, from a Torpedo electric lobe yeast
expression library by functional complementation. By EST database
searching and PCR on a sarcoma cell line, they obtained cDNAs encoding
human CTL1 (606105), CTL2 (606106), and CTL4. Sequence analysis
predicted that the 712-amino acid CTL4 protein is and 43% and 67%
homologous to human CTL1 and CTL2, respectively. The CTL proteins
contain 10 transmembrane domains, 11 highly conserved cysteines, and no
signal peptide.

MAPPING

O'Regan et al. (2000) stated that the CTL4 gene, or NG22, had been
sequenced as part of the major histocompatibility complex III at 6p21.3.

REFERENCE 1. O'Regan, S.; Traiffort, E.; Ruat, M.; Cha, N.; Compaore, D.; Meunier,
F.-M.: An electric lobe suppressor for a yeast choline transport
mutation belongs to a new family of transporter-like proteins. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 1835-1840, 2000.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/12/2001

EDITED mgross: 02/15/2010
joanna: 4/24/2009
mgross: 7/12/2001

600491	TITLE *600491 MICROFIBRILLAR-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 3; MFAP3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Microfibrils of diameter 10-12 nm are found either in association with
elastin (130160) or independently and are an important component of the
extracellular matrix of many tissues. The proteins composing the
microfibrils are distinct from elastin. The largest and possibly the
most important of these are the fibrillins, 350-kD glycoproteins that
form integral parts of the microfibril structure; see fibrillin-1 (FBN1;
134797). Another component of microfibrils is microfibrillar-associated
protein-2 (MFAP2; 156790). Other proteins localized to the elastic fiber
microfibrils include the enzyme lysyl oxidase (LOX; 153455) and
microfibrillar-associated protein-1 (MFAP1; 600215). Abrams et al.
(1995) cloned and characterized microfibrillar-associated protein-3
(MFAP3). Monospecific antibodies prepared against the recombinant
expressed protein reacted with the microfibrils found in ocular zonules.

MAPPING

Abrams et al. (1995) localized the MFAP3 gene to chromosome 5q32-q33.3
by Southern analysis of a hybrid cell panel containing deletions or
translocations involving chromosome 5. The location was near the locus
5q21-q31 reported for the fibrillin-2 gene (FBN2; 612570), but clearly
mapped to a different region inasmuch as the FBN2 locus was not present
in hybrid cells containing the MFAP3 gene.

REFERENCE 1. Abrams, W. R.; Ma, R.-I.; Kucich, U.; Bashir, M. M.; Decker, S.;
Tsipouras, P.; McPherson, J. D.; Wasmuth, J. J.; Rosenbloom, J.:
Molecular cloning of the microfibrillar protein MFAP3 and assignment
of the gene to human chromosome 5q32-q33.2. Genomics 26: 47-54,
1995.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/14/1995

EDITED carol: 02/04/2009
carol: 2/2/2009
mark: 10/2/1995
mark: 4/14/1995

605907	TITLE *605907 ALG1, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF; ALG1
;;ASPARAGINE-LINKED GLYCOSYLATION 1 HOMOLOG;;
BETA-1,4 MANNOSYLTRANSFERASE;;
HMAT1;;
HMT1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The biosynthesis of lipid-linked oligosaccharides is highly conserved
among eukaryotes and is catalyzed by 14 glycosyltransferases in an
ordered stepwise manner. Mannosyltransferase I (MT I) catalyzes the
first mannosylation step in this process.

CLONING

By EST database searching with the S. cerevisiae MT I gene (ALG1) and
subsequent screening of a human fetal brain cDNA library, Takahashi et
al. (2000) isolated a cDNA corresponding to the human homolog, which
they called HMAT1. HMAT1 encodes a 464-amino acid protein that shares
36% amino acid identity with the S. cerevisiae and C. elegans gene
products. HMAT1 contains a hydrophobic region at the N terminus followed
by short hydrophilic and hydrophobic regions. Takahashi et al. (2000)
demonstrated that HMAT1 complemented the temperature-sensitive phenotype
of a yeast strain lacking functional MT I due to an ALG1 mutation,
indicating that the function of this enzyme is conserved between yeast
and human.

MAPPING

Scott (2000) mapped the HMAT1 gene to chromosome 16p13.3 based on
sequence similarity between the MT1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB019038)
and a chromosome 16 clone (GenBank GENBANK AC007011).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In patients with congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ik (608540),
Schwarz et al. (2004) and Kranz et al. (2004) identified mutations in
the ALG1 gene (605907.0001-605907.0002).

Grubenmann et al. (2004) used a fluorescent method to detect
accumulation of dolichylpyrophosphate-GlcNAc2 in a previously untyped
CDG patient. The accumulation pattern suggested a deficiency of the ALG1
beta-1,4 mannosyltransferase. Sequence analysis identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ALG1 gene (see 605907.0003).

In 5 unrelated French patients with CDG type Ik, Dupre et al. (2010)
identified homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the ALG1
gene, including 7 novel mutations (see, e.g., 605907.0004-605907.0007).
The phenotype was severe, with neurologic impairment in all patients and
dysmorphic features in 4.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ik
ALG1, SER258LEU

In a patient with congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ik (CDG1K,
608540), Schwarz et al. (2004) identified a homozygous 773C-T transition
in exon 7 of the ALG1 gene, resulting in a ser258-to-leu (S258L)
substitution. Both parents were heterozygous for the mutation.

In a patient with CDG Ik, Kranz et al. (2004) identified homozygosity
for the S258L mutation.

.0002
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ik
ALG1, GLU342PRO

In a patient with congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ik (608540),
Kranz et al. (2004) identified compound heterozygosity for a 1025A-C
transversion in the ALG1 gene, resulting in a glu342-to-pro (E342P)
substitution, and the S258L (605907.0001) mutation.

.0003
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ik
ALG1, SER150ARG

In a patient with congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ik (608540),
Grubenmann et al. (2004) identified compound heterozygosity for a 450C-G
transversion in exon 4 of the ALG1 gene, resulting in a ser150-to-arg
(S150R), and the S258L (605907.0001) mutation.

.0004
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ik
ALG1, MET377VAL

In a patient with congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ik (608540),
Dupre et al. (2010) identified a homozygous 1129A-G transition in exon
11 of the ALG1 gene, resulting in a met377-to-val (M377V) substitution
in a conserved residue. The mutation was not found in 164 control
alleles. Detailed biochemical studies in patient cell lines showed an
accumulation of the second intermediate in the biosynthesis of LLO,
GlcNAc2-PP-dolichol, as well as a selective defect of MT1 activity (less
than 10% of wildtype). The phenotype was severe, with neurologic
impairment and dysmorphic features.

.0005
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ik
ALG1, GLY145ASP

In a patient with congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ik (608540),
Dupre et al. (2010) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations
in the ALG1 gene: a 434G-A transition in exon 4 resulting in a
gly145-to-asp (G145D) substitution, and S258L (605907.0001). Neither
mutation was found in 164 control alleles. Detailed biochemical studies
in patient cell lines showed an accumulation of the second intermediate
in the biosynthesis of LLO, GlcNAc2-PP-dolichol, as well as a selective
defect of MT1 activity (less than 10% of wildtype). The phenotype was
severe, with neurologic impairment and dysmorphic features.

.0006
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ik
ALG1, CYS396TER

In a patient with congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ik (608540),
Dupre et al. (2010) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations
in the ALG1 gene: a 1263G-A transition in exon 12 resulting in a
cys396-to-ter (C396X) substitution, and an 826C-T transition in exon 7
resulting in an arg276-to-trp (R276W; 605907.0007) substitution. The
mutations were not found in 164 control alleles. Detailed biochemical
studies in patient cell lines showed an accumulation of the second
intermediate in the biosynthesis of LLO, GlcNAc2-PP-dolichol, as well as
a selective defect of MT1 activity (less than 10% of wildtype). The
phenotype was severe, with neurologic impairment and dysmorphic
features.

.0007
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ik
ALG1, ARG276TRP

See 605907.0006 and Dupre et al. (2010).

REFERENCE 1. Dupre, T.; Vuillaumier-Barrot, S.; Chantret, I.; Yaye, H. S.; Le
Bizec, C.; Afenjar, A.; Altuzarra, C.; Barnerias, C.; Burglen, L.;
de Lonlay, P.; Feillet, F.; Napuri, S.; Seta, N.; Moore, S. E. H.
: Guanosine diphosphate-mannose:GlcNAc2-PP-dolichol mannosyltransferase
deficiency (congenital disorders of glycosylation type Ik): five new
patients and seven novel mutations. J. Med. Genet. 47: 729-735,
2010.

2. Grubenmann, C. E.; Frank, C. G.; Hulsmeier, A. J.; Schollen, E.;
Matthijs, G.; Mayatepek, E.; Berger, E. G.; Aebi, M.; Hennet, T.:
Deficiency of the first mannosylation step in the N-glycosylation
pathway causes congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ik. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 13: 535-542, 2004.

3. Kranz, C.; Denecke, J.; Lehle, L.; Sohlbach, K.; Jeske, S.; Meinhardt,
F.; Rossi, R.; Gudowius, S.; Marquardt, T.: Congenital disorder of
glycosylation type Ik (CDG-Ik): a defect of mannosyltransferase I. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 74: 545-551, 2004.

4. Schwarz, M.; Thiel, C.; Lubbehusen, J.; Dorland, B.; de Koning,
T.; von Figura, K.; Lehle, L.; Korner, C.: Deficiency of GDP-Man:GlcNAc2-PP-dolichol
mannosyltransferase causes congenital disorder of glycosylation type
Ik. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74: 472-481, 2004.

5. Scott, A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/8/2000.

6. Takahashi, T.; Honda, R.; Nishikawa, Y.: Cloning of the human
cDNA which can complement the defect of the yeast mannosyltransferase
I-deficient mutant alg 1. Glycobiology 10: 321-327, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/11/2012
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/1/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/22/2004

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 5/4/2001

EDITED carol: 01/12/2012
ckniffin: 1/11/2012
joanna: 1/13/2011
wwang: 12/7/2006
terry: 12/1/2006
tkritzer: 3/25/2004
ckniffin: 3/22/2004
carol: 5/9/2001
cwells: 5/9/2001
cwells: 5/7/2001

605474	TITLE *605474 TOLL-LIKE RECEPTOR 9; TLR9
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) recognize microbial products and initiate a
complex immune response designed to eliminate invading pathogens.
Stimulation of TLRs by pathogen-associated molecular pattern antigens
leads to activation of common and specific intracellular signaling
pathways resulting in nuclear factor kappa-B (NFKB; see 164011)
translocation, cell activation and differentiation, and secretion of
cytokines and chemokines. TLR9 is specialized to recognize microbial
nucleic acids, and 1 factor enabling TLR9 to discriminate between self
and foreign DNA is the presence of unmethylated CpG dinucleotides in
bacterial DNA (summary by Hasan et al., 2007).

CLONING

Hemmi et al. (2000) cloned mouse Tlr9, and by database analysis and
RACE, they isolated the full-length human homolog from a U937 monocyte
cDNA library. The deduced human TLR9 protein contains 1,032 amino acids
and shares an overall amino acid identity of 75.5% with mouse Tlr9. Like
other TLR proteins, TLR9 contains extracellular leucine-rich repeats
(LRRs) and a cytoplasmic toll/interleukin-1R (TIR) domain. It also has a
signal peptide (residues 1 to 25) and a transmembrane domain (residues
819 to 836). Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues revealed highest
Tlr9 expression in spleen.

By genomic DNA database searching for open reading frames with homology
to the cytoplasmic domain of TLR4 (603030), followed by 5-prime RACE and
PCR on a placenta cDNA library, Chuang and Ulevitch (2000) and Du et al.
(2000) obtained cDNAs encoding TLR7 (300365), TLR8 (600366), and TLR9.
By PCR analysis of cDNA libraries, Chuang and Ulevitch (2000) detected
preferential expression of TLR9 in immune cell-rich tissues, including
spleen, lymph node, bone marrow, and peripheral blood leukocytes.

Using RT-PCR and ELISA analysis, Kadowaki et al. (2001) defined the
differential expression of TLR1 through TLR10 and the
pathogen-associated molecular pattern recognition profiles and cytokine
production patterns of monocytes and dendritic cell precursors. They
concluded that neither monocytes nor dendritic cell precursors can
respond to all microbial antigens and that they have limited functional
plasticity.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Chuang and Ulevitch (2000) determined that
the TLR9 gene contains 4 exons. However, only the initiator methionine
is encoded on exon 3, and the remainder of the protein is encoded on
exon 4. They also detected a less abundant, nonsplicing form and 2
additional alternative splice isoforms. Du et al. (2000) stated that 1
form of TLR9 contains 2 exons, with exon 2 being the major coding exon,
and that the gene spans approximately 5 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Chuang and Ulevitch (2000) and Du et al.
(2000) mapped the TLR9 gene to 3p21.3, a region associated with several
neoplastic diseases.

GENE FUNCTION

DNA from bacteria has stimulatory effects on mammalian immune cells,
which depend on the presence of unmethylated CpG dinucleotides in the
bacterial DNA. In contrast, mammalian DNA has a low frequency of CpG
dinucleotides, and these are mostly methylated; therefore, mammalian DNA
does not have immunostimulatory activity. CpG DNA induces a strong T
helper-1-like inflammatory response. Using Tlr9 -/- mice, Hemmi et al.
(2000) showed that the cellular response to CpG DNA was mediated by Tlr9
(see ANIMAL MODEL).

Luciferase analysis by Chuang and Ulevitch (2000) showed that expression
of a chimeric TLR9 containing its transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains,
but not overexpression of full-length TLR9, activated NFKB.

Using RT-PCR analysis, Takeshita et al. (2001) detected TLR9 in
CpG-responsive monocytes but not in unresponsive cells. Gamma-interferon
(IFNG; 147570) treatment upregulated expression and responsiveness in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Verthelyi et al. (2001) had
established the differential recognition of optimal CpG motifs by
primates and rodents. Using luciferase reporter analysis and mutation
analysis, Takeshita et al. (2001) showed that expression of the TLR9 N
terminus and intracellular domain conferred the ability to respond to
CpG motifs that activate human PBMCs, but not to those that activate
rodent cells, with increased NFKB activity. This activity could be
inhibited by dominant-negative forms of IRAK1 (300283) and TRAF6
(602355), indicating that their activation by CpG DNA proceeds through
TLR9. Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated that TLR9 expression
dramatically increases uptake of CpG but not control DNA and that TLR9
and CpG oligonucleotides are colocalized in endocytic vesicles.
Takeshita et al. (2001) proposed that species-specific differences in
the recognition of bacterial DNA evolved through diversification of
TLR9.

Using a rheumatoid factor (RF+) transgenic B cell hybridoma line
originally isolated from an autoimmune MRL/lpr mouse used as a model for
SLE (152700), Leadbetter et al. (2002) determined that these cells
respond only to IgG2a immune complexes containing DNA and not to haptens
or proteins. After ruling out complement receptors (i.e., CD21/CR2,
120650) as a potential second receptor on B cells, screening of cells
expressing the adaptor protein Myd88 (602170), through which all
toll-like receptors signal, revealed that RF+ B cells lacking Myd88 are
completely unresponsive to IgG2a antinucleosome monoclonal antibodies
(mAb). TLR9 responsiveness to CpG oligodeoxynucleotides (ODN) is
presumed to require endosome acidification. The response to stimulation
of RF+ B cells by IgG2a mAb or CpG-ODN, but not by TLR2 (603028) or TLR4
(603030) agonists, was blocked by inhibitors of endosome acidification,
notably chloroquine, suggesting a mechanistic basis for its efficacy in
the treatment for both RA and SLE. Leadbetter et al. (2002) proposed
that other endogenous subcellular nucleic acid-protein autoantigens may
signal through other TLRs to abrogate peripheral B-cell tolerance. They
also suggested that infectious agent PAMP (patterns associated with
microbial pathogens) engaging TLRs may create a synergy with
autoantibody-autoantigen immune complexes, thus explaining the
association between infection and autoimmune disease flares.

Using fluorescence microscopy, Latz et al. (2004) demonstrated that TLR9
localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of dendritic cells (DCs) and
macrophages. Confocal microscopy showed that CpG DNA enters DCs in
vesicular structures and moves into a tubular compartment via a clathrin
(see 118955)-dependent, caveolin (see 601047)-independent pathway.
Concurrently, TLR9 redistributes from the ER to CpG DNA-containing
structures, where MYD88 also accumulates, and CpG DNA binds directly to
TLR9. Ligand-binding analysis determined that the interaction between
TLR9 and CpG DNA is sequence independent, suggesting that there may be
alternate inhibitors of signal transduction in DNA-related chronic
inflammatory diseases such as SLE. Latz et al. (2004) concluded that
recruitment of TLR9 from the ER to sites of CpG DNA uptake represents a
novel mechanism of signal transduction and cellular activation.

Honda et al. (2005) demonstrated that the spatiotemporal regulation of
MyD88 (602170)-IRF7 (605047) signaling is critical for a high level
interferon induction in response to TLR9 activation. The IFN-inducing
TLR9 ligand A/D-type CpG oligodeoxynucleotide (CpG-A) is retained for
long periods in the endosomal vesicles of plasmacytoid dendritic cells
together with the MyD88-IRF7 complex. However, in conventional dendritic
cells CpG-A is rapidly transferred to lysosomal vesicles. Honda et al.
(2005) further showed that conventional dendritic cells can also mount a
robust IFN induction if CpG-A is manipulated for endosomal retention
using a cationic lipid. This strategy also allowed them to demonstrate
endosomal activation of the IFN pathway by the otherwise inactive TLR9
ligand B/K-type oligodeoxynucleotide (CpG-B).

Using EMSA and reporter gene analysis, Takeshita et al. (2004) found
that TLR9 transcription was regulated via 4 cis-acting elements, a cAMP
response element, a 5-prime PU box, a 3-prime PU box, and a C/EBP site,
that interacted with CREB1 (123810), ETS2 (164740), ELF1 (189973), ELK1
(311040), and C/EBP-alpha (CEBPA; 116897) transcription factors.

Yang et al. (2005) found that IFNA (147660)/IFNB (147640) and IFNL
(IL29; 607403) production in response to stimulation of TLR7 (300365),
TLR8, and TLR9 was abolished in IRAK4 (606883)-deficient blood cells.

Using flow cytometry to assess the immunologic profiles of 32 patients
with common variable immunodeficiency (CVID; 240500), Cunningham-Rundles
et al. (2006) found that, in addition to reduced levels of CD27
(TNFRSF7; 186711)-positive memory B cells, CVID patients had unrelated,
pronounced TLR9 defects. CpG oligonucleotides did not activate CVID B
cells, even when costimulated by B-cell receptor, and they did not
stimulate surface or intracytoplasmic expression of TLR9 or production
of IL6 (147620) or IL10 (124092). In addition, CVID plasmacytoid
dendritic cells, which expressed normal amounts of intracytoplasmic
TLR9, produced only low amounts of IFNA. No TLR9 mutations or
polymorphisms were detected. Cunningham-Rundles et al. (2006) concluded
that CVID patients have broad TLR9 activation defects that result in
impaired CpG-initiated innate immunity.

Sato et al. (2006) found that some laboratory strains and clinical
isolates of herpes simplex viruses triggered surface-expressed TLR2 and
induced IL6 and IL12 (see 161561) in classical dendritic cells, and some
of these strains also activated intracellular TLR9. Plasmacytoid
dendritic cells recognized all strains through TLR9. Sato et al. (2006)
proposed that cells expressing multiple TLRs can detect pathogens with
multiple molecular patterns in an orchestrated manner, linking uptake
and degradation of pathogens to microbial recognition.

Membrane receptors on intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) are typically
assigned to either the apical surface facing the intestinal lumen or the
basolateral surface facing adjacent epithelial cells and the underlying
basement membrane in the lamina propria. Under severe inflammatory
conditions, IECs lose this polarity. Lee et al. (2006) found that
polarized IECs responded to certain TLR ligands by secreting IL8
(146930) into the basolateral chamber either exclusively on basolateral
stimulation or on apical stimulation, whereas nonpolarized IECs showed
no difference in response to these TLR ligands. Confocal microscopy
showed that TLR9 was expressed at similar levels on both the apical and
basolateral poles of IECs. Stimulation of TLR9 on either surface
resulted in activation of JNK (see 601158) or IKK (see 600664), which
led to IKBA (NFKBIA; 164008) phosphorylation. However, in contrast with
basolateral TLR9 stimulation, which resulted in IKBA degradation and
NFKB activation, apical TLR9 stimulation resulted in cytoplasmic
accumulation of IKBA and prevention of NFKB activation. Apical TLR9
stimulation conferred intracellular tolerance to subsequent TLR
challenges. Lee et al. (2006) concluded that colonic homeostasis and
tolerance of the intestinal microflora has evolved in polarized IECs to
regulate inflammatory responses.

Using ELISA, microarray analysis, RT-PCR, and flow cytometry, Hasan et
al. (2007) demonstrated that Btk (300300) -/- mouse B cells responded
more efficiently to CpG-DNA stimulation by producing higher levels of
proinflammatory cytokines and Il27 (608273), but lower levels of the
inhibitory cytokine Il10. Tlr9 protein and mRNA expression was enhanced
in Btk -/- cells, especially after Tlr9 stimulation. Whereas Btk -/- and
wildtype transitional stage-1 (T1) B cells failed to proliferate and
died after CpG stimulation, T2 cells, expressing higher levels of Tlr9,
proliferated and matured. Hasan et al. (2007) concluded that BTK
regulates both TLR9 activation and expression in B lymphocytes and is
necessary for inhibitory cytokine expression.

Hoarau et al. (2007) investigated a 14-year-old French boy with IRAK4
deficiency (607676) who was compound heterozygous for 2 mutations in the
IRAK4 gene (see 606883.0006 and 606883.0007). Stimulation of the
patient's PMNs with TLR agonists revealed the absence of IRAK1 (300283)
phosphorylation and impaired PMN responses. However, responses to the
TLR9 agonist CpG were normal, except for cytokine production. Impairment
of TLR9 responses was observed after pretreatment with PI3K (see 601232)
inhibitors. Hoarau et al. (2007) proposed that there may be an
alternative TLR9 pathway leading to PI3K activation independently of the
classical MYD88-IRAK4 pathway.

Asagiri et al. (2008) showed that inhibition of cathepsin K (CTSK;
601105) could potently suppress autoimmune inflammation of the joints as
well as osteoclastic bone resorption in autoimmune arthritis.
Furthermore, cathepsin K-null mice were resistant to experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Pharmacologic inhibition or targeted
disruption of cathepsin K resulted in defective Toll-like receptor-9
signaling in dendritic cells in response to unmethylated CpG cDNA, which
in turn led to attenuated induction of T helper-17 (Th17) cells without
affecting the antigen-presenting ability of dendritic cells. Asagiri et
al. (2008) suggested that cathepsin K plays an important role in the
immune system and may serve as a valid therapeutic target in autoimmune
diseases.

Ewald et al. (2008) defined the route by which TLR9 and TLR7 (300365)
exit the endoplasmic reticulum and travel to endolysosomes in mouse
macrophages and dendritic cells. The ectodomains of TLR9 and TLR7 are
cleaved in the endolysosome, such that no full-length protein is
detectable in the compartment where ligand is recognized. Notably,
although both the full-length and cleaved forms of TLR9 are capable of
binding ligand, only the processed form recruits MyD88 on activation,
indicating that this truncated receptor, rather than the full-length
form, is functional. Furthermore, conditions that prevent receptor
proteolysis, including forced TLR9 surface localization, render the
receptor nonfunctional. Ewald et al. (2008) proposed that ectodomain
cleavage represents a strategy to restrict receptor activation to
endolysosomal compartments and prevent TLRs from responding to self
nucleic acids.

Autoantibody secretion in mice requires sequential engagement of the
B-cell receptor (BCR) on the cell surface and TLRs in late endosomes.
However, nucleoprotein self-antigens fail to elicit productive TLR
activation and break self-tolerance in anergic DNA-reactive B cells.
Using anergic mouse strains, O'Neill et al. (2009) showed that endocytic
transit of both BCR and Tlr9 into late endosomes was abrogated. Anergy
reversal restored access to late endosomes in a Jnk-dependent manner and
rescued Tlr9 activation by BCR-captured ligands. O'Neill et al. (2009)
concluded that B-cell anergy is reinforced by exclusion of both TLRs and
their BCR-captured ligands from subcellular environments necessary for
TLR activation.

Imaeda et al. (2009) found that mice deficient in Tlr9 or the Nalp3
inflammasome components Nalp3 (NLRP3; 606416), Casp1 (147678), or Asc
(PYCARD; 606838), but not Ipaf (NLRC4; 606831), showed reduced mortality
and liver injury in response to acetaminophen (APAP). Apoptotic
hepatocytes released DNA that upregulated liver pro-Il1b (147720) and
pro-Il18 (600953) in a Tlr9-dependent manner. Treatment with the
antiinflammatory drug aspirin reduced sterile inflammation and liver
injury by decreasing activity of the Tlr9 pathway in a Cox1 (PTGS1;
176805)- and Cox2 (PTGS2; 600262)-independent manner. Aspirin directly
reduced IL1B and IL18 levels in a human monocytic cell line. Imaeda et
al. (2009) concluded that there is a 2-signal requirement of TLR9 and
the NALP3 inflammasome for APAP-induced injury, and they proposed that
coformulation of APAP and aspirin may reduce hepatotoxicity from APAP
overdose.

Zhang et al. (2010) showed that showed that injury releases
mitochondrial damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) into the
circulation with functionally important immune consequences.
Mitochondrial DAMPs include formyl peptides and mitochondrial DNA. These
activate human polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) through formyl
peptide receptor-1 (136537) and TLR9, respectively. Mitochondrial DAMPs
promote PMN calcium ion flux and phosphorylation of mitogen-activated
protein kinases, thus leading to PMN migration and degranulation in
vitro and in vivo. Circulating mitochondrial DAMPs can elicit
neutrophil-mediated organ injury. Cellular disruption by trauma releases
mitochondrial DAMPs with evolutionarily conserved similarities to
bacterial pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) into the
circulation. These signal through innate immune pathways identical to
those activated in sepsis to create a sepsis-like state. Zhang et al.
(2010) concluded that the release of such mitochondrial 'enemies within'
by cellular injury is a key link between trauma, inflammation, and the
systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS).

Guiducci et al. (2010) demonstrated that, in vitro and in vivo,
stimulation of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDCs) through TLR7 (300365)
and TLR9 can account for the reduced activity of glucocorticoids to
inhibit the interferon pathway in patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE; 152700) and in 2 lupus-prone mouse strains. The
triggering of PDCs through TLR7 and TLR9 by nucleic acid-containing
immune complexes or by synthetic ligands activates the NF-kappa-B (see
164011) pathway essential for PDC survival. Glucocorticoids do not
affect NF-kappa-B activation in PDCs, preventing glucocorticoid
induction of PDC death and the consequent reduction of systemic
IFN-alpha (147660) levels. Guiducci et al. (2010) concluded that their
findings unveiled a new role for self nucleic acid recognition by TLRs
and indicated that inhibitors of TLR7 and TLR9 signaling could prove to
be effective corticosteroid-sparing drugs.

Sasai et al. (2010) demonstrated that TLR9 signals leading to the
activation of type I IFN, but not of proinflammatory cytokine genes,
require TLR9 trafficking from endosomes to a specialized
lysosome-related organelle. Furthermore, they identified adaptor
protein-3 (see 602166) as the protein complex responsible for the
trafficking of TLR9 to this subcellular compartment. Sasai et al. (2010)
concluded that their results revealed an intracellular mechanism for
bifurcation of TLR9 signals by selective receptor trafficking within the
endosomal system.

By coimmunoprecipitation and confocal microscopic analysis, Baumann et
al. (2010) showed that CD14 (158120) interacted with TLR7 and TLR9 in
mouse and human cells and was required for TLR7- and TLR9-dependent
induction of proinflammatory cytokines. Cd14 was required for
Tlr9-dependent immune responses in mice and for optimal nucleic acid
uptake in mouse macrophages. Cd14 was dispensable for viral uptake in
mice, but it was required for triggering of TLR-dependent cytokine
responses. Baumann et al. (2010) concluded that CD14 has a dual role in
nucleic acid-mediated TLR activation by promoting selective uptake of
nucleic acids and acting as a coreceptor for endosomal TLR activation.

By immunoprecipitation analysis of mouse macrophages, Park et al. (2011)
found that granulin (GRN; 138945) interacted with Tlr9. Exposure of
mouse macrophages to TLR agonists and inhibitors of elastase (ELANE;
130130), which is required for conversion of granulin from its
precursor, blocked CpG-elicited Tnf (191160) production via Tlr9
signaling, but it did not interfere with signaling through other TLRs.
Inhibitors of elastase had no effect on Tlr9 cleavage. Depletion of
granulin in mouse cells impaired Tlr9 responses to CpG, whereas addition
of granulin potentiated Tlr9 responses to CpG. In the absence of serum,
macrophages from mice lacking granulin were also unable to generate
Tlr9-mediated responses. Addition of exogenous granulin restored
responses to CpG. Confocal microscopy demonstrated binding of CpG to
Tlr9 from wildtype macrophages, but not from granulin -/- macrophages.
Park et al. (2011) proposed that granulin contributes to innate immunity
by functioning as a critical soluble cofactor for TLR9 signaling.

Oka et al. (2012) showed that mitochondrial DNA that escapes from
autophagy cell-autonomously leads to TLR9-mediated inflammatory
responses in cardiomyocytes and is capable of inducing myocarditis and
dilated cardiomyopathy. Cardiac-specific deletion of lysosomal
deoxyribonuclease-2 (DNASE2; 126350) showed no cardiac phenotypes under
baseline conditions, but increased mortality and caused severe
myocarditis and dilated cardiomyopathy 10 days after treatment with
pressure overload. Early in the pathogenesis, DNase II-deficient hearts
showed infiltration of the inflammatory cells and increased mRNA
expression of inflammatory cytokines, with accumulation of mitochondrial
DNA deposits in autolyosomes in the myocardium. Administration of
inhibitory oligodeoxynucleotides against Tlr9, which is known to be
activated by bacterial DNA, or ablation of Tlr9 attenuated the
development of cardiomyopathy in DNase II-deficient mice. Furthermore,
Tlr9 ablation improved pressure overload-induced cardiac dysfunction and
inflammation even in mice with wildtype Dnase2a alleles.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Kubarenko et al. (2010) characterized 8 nonsynonymous SNPs in the TLR9
gene using HEK293 cells. They found that 2 SNPs located in the LRRs in
the TLR9 extracellular domain, pro99 to leu (P99L; dbSNP rs5743844) and
met400 to ile (M400I; dbSNP rs41308230), affected NFKB activation in
response to CpG oligodeoxynucleotides. Luciferase analysis showed
reduced NFKB activation for P99L and M400I compared with wildtype TLR9.
Cells expressing TLR9 P99L failed to respond (i.e., produce cytokines)
to artificial or natural TLR DNA ligands. Coimmunoprecipitation and
pull-down analysis revealed that TLR9 P99L could bind CpG but was unable
to respond to the ligand. Genotype analysis in multiple populations
showed that both P99L and M400I were extremely rare. P99L was not
polymorphic in any healthy population samples studied and was found in
only 1 individual and 2 of her 8 progeny, in whom it was heterozygous.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hemmi et al. (2000) generated mice deficient in Tlr9 by targeted
disruption. Tlr9-deficient mice did not show any response to CpG DNA,
including proliferation of splenocytes, inflammatory cytokine production
from macrophages, and maturation of dendritic cells. Tlr9 -/- mice
showed resistance to the lethal effect of CpG DNA without any elevation
of serum proinflammatory cytokine levels. The in vivo CpG DNA-mediated T
helper type-1 response was also abolished in Tlr9 -/- mice. Hemmi et al.
(2000) thus concluded that vertebrate immune systems appear to have
evolved a specific toll-like receptor that distinguishes bacterial DNA
from self-DNA.

Although Tlr9 is required for mice to respond to the adjuvant effects of
CpG oligonucleotides, which are present in plasmid DNA vaccines, Babiuk
et al. (2004) found that Tlr9 +/+ and Tlr9 -/- mice responded comparably
to plasmid DNA immunization, as measured by antigen-specific antibody
production and Ifng secretion. Babiuk et al. (2004) concluded that DNA
vaccines elicit immune responses by multiple mechanisms and that TLR9 is
not essential for such responses.

Lee et al. (2006) found that Tlr9 -/- mice had a lower threshold for
Nfkb activation and were highly susceptible to experimental colitis (see
266600) compared with wildtype and Tlr2 -/- mice.

Bhan et al. (2007) found that, compared with wildtype mice, Tlr9 -/-
mice exhibited reduced DC accumulation, decreased activation of lung
macrophages, natural killer cells, and T cells, and increased mortality
and bacterial burden after intratracheal administration of Klebsiella
pneumoniae. Adoptive transfer by the intratracheal route of wildtype
DCs, but not Tlr9 -/- DCs, reconstituted antibacterial immunity in TLR9
-/- mice. Bhan et al. (2007) concluded that TLR9 is required for
effective innate immune responses against extracellular gram-negative
bacterial pathogens.

Using Tlr9 -/- mice, Samuelsson et al. (2008) showed that Tlr9 was
required for DC recognition of the double-stranded DNA ectromelia virus
(ECTV), the causative agent of mousepox, a respiratory infection similar
to human smallpox caused by variola virus. The Tlr9 -/- mice were highly
susceptible to ECTV. In contrast, Samuelsson et al. (2008) found that
the attenuated modified vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA) activated DCs by
both Tlr9-dependent and -independent pathways. MVA given at the same
time as, or even up to 2 days after, a lethal dose of ECTV protected
Tlr9 -/- mice from death. Samuelsson et al. (2008) concluded that TLR9
is an important receptor for recognition of and defense against
pathogenic poxviruses. Moreover, the results showed that even under
certain conditions of compromised immunity, MVA activates and bridges
innate and adaptive immune responses.

Ito et al. (2009) observed altered Th17 cytokine phenotypes in Tlr9 -/-
mice during Mycobacterium antigen-elicited pulmonary granuloma
formulation, as well as decreased accumulation of granuloma-associated
myeloid DCs and profoundly impaired Dll4 (605185) expression. DCs, but
not macrophages, from wildtype mice promoted differentiation of Th17
cells from mycobacteria-challenged lung Cd4 (186940)-positive T cells.
Treating wildtype mice with anti-Dll4 during granuloma formation
resulted in larger granulomas and lower levels of Th17 cytokines. Ito et
al. (2009) concluded that DLL4 plays an important role in promoting Th17
effector activity during mycobacterial challenge. They suggested that
TLR9 may be required for optimal DLL4 expression and regulation of
granuloma formation in response to mycobacterial antigen.

REFERENCE 1. Asagiri, M.; Hirai, T.; Kunigami, T.; Kamano, S.; Gober, H.-J.;
Okamoto, K.; Nishikawa, K.; Latz, E.; Golenbock, D. T.; Aoki, K.;
Ohya, K.; Imai, Y.; Morishita, Y.; Miyazono, K.; Kato, S.; Saftig,
P.; Takayanagi, H.: Cathepsin K-dependent Toll-like receptor 9 signaling
revealed in experimental arthritis. Science 319: 624-627, 2008.

2. Babiuk, S.; Mookherjee, N.; Pontarollo, R.; Griebel, P.; van Drunen
Littel-van den Hurk, S.; Hecker, R.; Babiuk, L.: TLR9-/- and TLR9+/+
mice display similar immune responses to a DNA vaccine. Immunology 113:
114-120, 2004.

3. Baumann, C. L.; Aspalter, I. M.; Sharif, O.; Pichlmair, A.; Bluml,
S.; Grebien, F.; Bruckner, M.; Pasierbek, P.; Aumayr, K.; Planyavsky,
M.; Bennett, K. L.; Colinge, J.; Knapp, S.; Superti-Furga, G.: CD14
is a coreceptor of Toll-like receptors 7 and 9. J. Exp. Med. 207:
2689-2701, 2010.

4. Bhan, U.; Lukacs, N. W.; Osterholzer, J. J.; Newstead, M. W.; Zeng,
X.; Moore, T. A.; McMillan, T. R.; Krieg, A. M.; Akira, S.; Standiford,
T. J.: TLR9 is required for protective innate immunity in gram-negative
bacterial pneumonia: role of dendritic cells. J. Immun. 179: 3937-3946,
2007.

5. Chuang, T.-H.; Ulevitch, R. J.: Cloning and characterization of
a sub-family of human Toll-like receptors: hTLR7, hTLR8 and hTLR9. Europ.
Cytokine Netw. 11: 372-378, 2000.

6. Cunningham-Rundles, C.; Radigan, L.; Knight, A. K.; Zhang, L.;
Bauer, L.; Nakazawa, A.: TLR9 activation is defective in common variable
immune deficiency. J. Immun. 176: 1978-1987, 2006.

7. Du, X.; Poltorak, A.; Wei, Y.; Beutler, B.: Three novel mammalian
toll-like receptors: gene structure, expression, and evolution. Europ.
Cytokine Netw. 11: 362-371, 2000.

8. Ewald, S. E.; Lee, B. L.; Lau, L.; Wickliffe, K. E.; Shi, G.-P.;
Chapman, H. A.; Barton, G. M.: The ectodomain of Toll-like receptor
9 is cleaved to generate a functional receptor. Nature 456: 658-662,
2008.

9. Guiducci, C.; Gong, M.; Xu, Z.; Gill, M.; Chaussabel, D.; Meeker,
T.; Chan, J. H.; Wright, T.; Punaro, M.; Bolland, S.; Soumelis, V.;
Banchereau, J.; Coffman, R. L.; Pascual, V.; Barrat, F. J.: TLR recognition
of self nucleic acids hampers glucocorticoid activity in lupus. Nature 465:
937-941, 2010.

10. Hasan, M.; Lopez-Herrera, G.; Blomberg, K. E. M.; Lindvall, J.
M.; Berglof, A.; Smith, C. I. E.; Vargas, L.: Defective Toll-like
receptor 9-mediated cytokine production in B cells from Bruton's tyrosine
kinase-deficient mice. Immunology 123: 239-249, 2007.

11. Hemmi, H.; Takeuchi, O.; Kawai, T.; Kaisho, T.; Sato, S.; Sanjo,
H.; Matsumoto, M.; Hoshino, K.; Wagner, H.; Takeda, K.; Akira, S.
: A toll-like receptor recognizes bacterial DNA. Nature 408: 740-745,
2000. Note: Erratum: Nature 409: 646 only, 2001.

12. Hoarau, C.; Gerard, B.; Lescanne, E.; Henry, D.; Francois, S.;
Lacapere, J.-J.; El Benna, J.; Dang, P. M.-C.; Grandchamp, B.; Lebranchu,
Y.; Gougerot-Pocidalo, M.-A.; Elbim, C.: TLR9 activation induces
normal neutrophil responses in a child with IRAK-4 deficiency: involvement
of the direct PI3K pathway. J. Immun. 179: 4754-4765, 2007.

13. Honda, K.; Ohba, Y.; Yanai, H.; Negishi, H.; Mizutani, T.; Takaoka,
A.; Taya, C.; Taniguchi T.: Spatiotemporal regulation of MyD88-IRF-7
signalling for robust type-I interferon induction. Nature 434: 1035-1040,
2005.

14. Imaeda, A. B.; Watanabe, A.; Sohail, M. A.; Mahmood, S.; Mohamadnejad,
M.; Sutterwala, F. S.; Flavell, R. A.; Mehal, W. Z.: Acetaminophen-induced
hepatotoxicity in mice is dependent on Tlr9 and the Nalp3 inflammasome. J.
Clin. Invest. 119: 305-314, 2009.

15. Ito, T.; Schaller, M.; Hogaboam, C. M.; Standiford, T. J.; Sandor,
M.; Lukacs, N. W.; Chensue, S. W.; Kunkel, S. L.: TLR9 regulates
the mycobacteria-elicited pulmonary granulomatous immune response
in mice through DC-derived Notch ligand delta-like 4. J. Clin. Invest. 119:
33-46, 2009.

16. Kadowaki, N.; Ho, S.; Antonenko, S.; de Waal Malefyt, R.; Kastelein,
R. A.; Bazan, F.; Liu, Y.-J.: Subsets of human dendritic cell precursors
express different Toll-like receptors and respond to different microbial
antigens. J. Exp. Med. 194: 863-869, 2001.

17. Kubarenko, A. V.; Ranjan, S.; Rautanen, A.; Mills, T. C.; Wong,
S.; Vannberg, F.; Neumaier, M.; Bekeredjian-Ding, I.; Hill, A. V.
S.; Ahmad-Nejad, P.; Weber, A. N. R.: A naturally occurring variant
in human TLR9, P99L, is associated with loss of CpG oligonucleotide
responsiveness. J. Biol. Chem. 285: 36486-36494, 2010.

18. Latz, E.; Schoenemeyer, A.; Visintin, A.; Fitzgerald, K. A.; Monks,
B. G.; Knetter, C. F.; Lien, E.; Nilsen, N. J.; Espevik, T.; Golenbock,
D. T.: TLR9 signals after translocating from the ER to CpG DNA in
the lysosome. Nature Immun. 5: 190-198, 2004.

19. Leadbetter, E. A.; Rifkin, I. R.; Hohlbaum, A. M.; Beaudette,
B. C.; Shlomchik, M. J.; Marshak-Rothstein, A.: Chromatin-IgG complexes
activate B cells by dual engagement of IgM and Toll-like receptors. Nature 416:
603-607, 2002.

20. Lee, J.; Mo, J.-H.; Katakura, K.; Alkalay, I.; Rucker, A. N.;
Liu, Y.-T.; Lee, H.-K.; Shen, C.; Cojocaru, G.; Shenouda, S.; Kagnoff,
M.; Eckmann, L.; Ben-Neriah, Y.; Raz, E.: Maintenance of colonic
homeostasis by distinctive apical TLR9 signalling in intestinal epithelial
cells. Nature Cell Biol. 8: 1327-1336, 2006.

21. O'Neill, S. K.; Veselits, M. L.; Zhang, M.; Labno, C.; Cao, Y.;
Finnegan, A.; Uccellini, M.; Alegre, M.-L.; Cambier, J. C.; Clark,
M. R.: Endocytic sequestration of the B cell antigen receptor and
toll-like receptor 9 in anergic cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 106:
6262-6267, 2009.

22. Oka, T.; Hikoso, S.; Yamaguchi, O.; Taneike, M.; Takeda, T.; Tamai,
T.; Oyabu, J.; Murakawa, T.; Nakayama, H.; Nishida, K.; Akira, S.;
Yamamoto, A.; Komuro, I.; Otsu, K.: Mitochondrial DNA that escapes
from autophagy causes inflammation and heart failure. Nature 485:
251-255, 2012. Note: Erratum: Nature 490: 292 only, 2012.

23. Park, B.; Buti, L.; Lee, S.; Matsuwaki, T.; Spooner, E.; Brinkmann,
M. M.; Nishihara, M.; Ploegh, H. L.: Granulin is a soluble cofactor
for Toll-like receptor 9 signaling. Immunity 34: 505-513, 2011.

24. Samuelsson, C.; Hausmann, J.; Lauterbach, H.; Schmidt, M.; Akira,
S.; Wagner, H.; Chaplin, P.; Suter, M.; O'Keeffe, M.; Hochrein, H.
: Survival of lethal poxvirus infection in mice depends on TLR9, and
therapeutic vaccination provides protection. J. Clin. Invest. 118:
1776-1784, 2008.

25. Sasai, M.; Linehan, M. M.; Iwasaki, A.: Bifurcation of Toll-like
receptor 9 signaling by adaptor protein 3. Science 329: 1530-1534,
2010.

26. Sato, A.; Linehan, M. M.; Iwasaki, A.: Dual recognition of herpes
simplex viruses by TLR2 and TLR9 in dendritic cells. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 103: 17343-17348, 2006.

27. Takeshita, F.; Leifer, C. A.; Gursel, I.; Ishii, K. J.; Takeshita,
S.; Gursel, M.; Klinman, D. M.: Cutting edge: role of Toll-like receptor
9 in CpG DNA-induced activation of human cells. J. Immun. 167: 3555-3558,
2001.

28. Takeshita, F.; Suzuki, K.; Sasaki, S.; Ishii, N.; Klinman, D.
M.; Ishii, K. J.: Transcriptional regulation of the human TLR9 gene. J.
Immun. 173: 2552-2561, 2004.

29. Verthelyi, D.; Ishii, K. J.; Gursel, M.; Takeshita, F.; Klinman,
D. K.: Human peripheral blood cells differentially recognize and
respond to two distinct CpG motifs. J. Immun. 166: 2372-2377, 2001.

30. Yang, K.; Puel, A.; Zhang, S.; Eidenschenk, C.; Ku, C.-L.; Casrouge,
A.; Picard, C.; von Bernuth, H.; Senechal, B.; Plancoulaine, S.; Al-Hajjar,
S.; Al-Ghonaium, A.; and 16 others: Human TLR-7, -8-, and -9-mediated
induction of IFN-alpha/beta and -lambda is IRAK-4 dependent and redundant
for protective immunity to viruses. Immunity 23: 465-478, 2005.

31. Zhang, Q.; Raoof, M.; Chen, Y.; Sumi, Y.; Sursal, T.; Junger,
W.; Brohi, K.; Itagaki, K.; Hauser, C. J.: Circulating mitochondrial
DAMPs cause inflammatory responses to injury. Nature 464: 104-107,
2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/27/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/8/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/29/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/18/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/20/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/2/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/1/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/16/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/8/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/11/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/8/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/6/2009
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 11/25/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/21/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/28/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/21/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/9/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/14/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/4/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/14/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/10/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/3/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/28/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/3/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/10/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/11/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/5/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/30/2001

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 12/14/2000

EDITED alopez: 11/01/2012
terry: 9/24/2012
alopez: 7/2/2012
terry: 6/27/2012
mgross: 9/19/2011
terry: 9/8/2011
mgross: 5/11/2011
terry: 4/29/2011
terry: 3/18/2011
mgross: 2/4/2011
terry: 12/20/2010
alopez: 11/9/2010
terry: 11/2/2010
alopez: 7/2/2010
terry: 7/1/2010
alopez: 3/17/2010
terry: 3/16/2010
mgross: 10/9/2009
terry: 10/8/2009
mgross: 9/15/2009
terry: 9/11/2009
mgross: 5/13/2009
terry: 5/8/2009
alopez: 1/7/2009
terry: 1/6/2009
mgross: 11/25/2008
terry: 11/21/2008
mgross: 6/12/2008
terry: 5/28/2008
carol: 2/21/2008
terry: 2/21/2008
mgross: 3/13/2007
terry: 3/9/2007
mgross: 1/2/2007
terry: 12/14/2006
mgross: 8/30/2006
terry: 8/4/2006
mgross: 2/16/2006
terry: 2/14/2006
mgross: 11/10/2005
carol: 7/19/2005
alopez: 5/10/2005
terry: 5/3/2005
mgross: 1/28/2005
mgross: 3/3/2004
alopez: 4/10/2002
terry: 3/8/2002
mgross: 2/11/2002
mgross: 12/5/2001
mgross: 11/30/2001
joanna: 4/30/2001
carol: 12/18/2000
carol: 12/14/2000

608074	TITLE *608074 PROGRAMMED CELL DEATH 6-INTERACTING PROTEIN; PDCD6IP
;;PDCD6-INTERACTING PROTEIN;;
ALG2-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1; AIP1;;
ALG2-INTERACTING PROTEIN X; ALIX;;
KIAA1375
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PDCD6IP interacts with proteins associated with apoptosis, including
PDCD6 (601057), and with endophilins, which regulate membrane shape
(Chatellard-Causse et al., 2002).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned PDCD6IP, which they designated
KIAA1375. RT-PCR ELISA detected moderate expression in all adult and
fetal tissues tested except adult lung, spleen, and pancreas and fetal
brain, which all showed low expression. Moderate expression was detected
in all individual brain regions examined.

Wu et al. (2001) cloned full-length PDCD6IP, which they designated p95,
by searching databases for sequences similar to YNK1, the C. elegans
PDCD6IP homolog, followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE of a placenta cDNA
library. The deduced 868-amino acid PDCD6IP protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 96 kD. It has a proline-rich C terminus containing
several PxxP motifs, which are SRC (190090) homology domain-3
(SH3)-binding domains. PDCD6IP also contains a tyrosine
autophosphorylation consensus sequence that is conserved with SRC family
members, as well as several additional conserved tyrosines. PDCD6IP
shares significant homology with proteins from mouse, Xenopus,
Drosophila, several yeast species, and Arabidopsis. Northern blot
analysis detected an endogenous 3.5-kb transcript in HeLa cell RNA.
Western blot analysis of HeLa cell lysates determined that the PDCD6IP
protein has an apparent molecular mass of 95 kD.

Missotten et al. (1999) cloned mouse Pdcd6ip, which they called Alix, in
a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a brain cDNA library using Alg2 (PDCD6) as
bait. The deduced 869-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass
of about 96 kD. The authors noted that, in addition to several
SH3-binding domains, the C terminus of Alix contains a WW-binding
domain. Northern blot analysis detected 3.5- and 6.5-kb transcripts in
all adult mouse tissues tested.

GENE FUNCTION

Normal epithelial cells stop proliferating in culture following
cell-cell contact due to induction of G1 phase arrest in the cell cycle.
However, malignant HeLa cells do not inhibit proliferation upon
cell-cell contact and proceed toward multilayer growth. Wu et al. (2001)
determined that overexpression of PDCD6IP restored the ability of HeLa
cells to undergo G1 phase arrest and form a monolayer culture after
confluence. Overexpression of PDCD6IP did not inhibit HeLa cell growth
in sparse cultures.

Wu et al. (2002) found that overexpression of PDCD6IP in HeLa cells
promoted detachment-induced apoptosis, inhibited detachment of viable
cells from the substratum, and reduced tumorigenicity following
injection into nude mice. Overexpression in mouse fibroblasts promoted
flat cell morphology and slowed cell proliferation. Transfection of
antisense PDCD6IP had the opposite effects, with more rounded fibroblast
morphology and dense growth.

Missotten et al. (1999) determined that interaction between mouse Alix
and Alg2 is calcium-dependent.

Vito et al. (1999) determined that mouse Alix and Alg2 colocalized in
the cytosol of fibroblasts and required calcium for their association.
Overexpression of the C terminus of Alix protected HeLa and COS cells
from apoptosis induced by withdrawal of trophic factors.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Chatellard-Causse et al. (2002) determined
that mouse Alix binds to the endophilins Sh3p4 (604465), Sh3p8 (601768),
and Sh3p13 (603362). Coimmunoprecipitation and overlay experiments with
truncation mutants demonstrated that the SH3 domains of endophilins bind
to the C terminus of Alix, specifically within a 14-amino acid region
containing a PxRPPPP consensus sequence. Upon overexpression in human
embryonic kidney cells, full-length Alix and the N terminus of Alix
concentrated in the perinuclear region and at the cell periphery in
lamellipodia and filopodia. Overexpression of the C terminus of Alix in
several cell lines led to concentration around perinuclear vesicles and
to cytoplasmic vacuolization into tubulovesicular structures.
Immunolocalization revealed that the structures were lined by Alix and
endoplasmic reticulum resident proteins. Vacuolization was enhanced upon
coexpression of with Sh3p4, and Alix lacking the proline-rich domain did
not cause vacuolization when overexpressed alone or with Sh3p4.

Matsuo et al. (2004) found that the unconventional phospholipid
lysobisphosphatidic acid (LBPA) could induce the formation of
multivesicular liposomes that resembled the multivesicular endosomes
that exist where this lipid is found in vivo. This process depended on
the same pH gradient that exists across endosome membranes in vivo and
was selectively controlled by Alix. In turn, Alix regulated the
organization of LBPA-containing endosomes in vivo.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, coimmunoprecipitation analysis, and in vitro
protein pull-down assays, Katoh et al. (2003) showed that CHMP4B
(610897) interacted with ALIX. Overexpression of CHMP4B in HeLa cells
caused redistribution of ALIX from the cytoplasm to the perinuclear
area, where the 2 proteins colocalized. Transient overexpression of the
ALIX N-terminal region in HEK293 cells stably expressing CHMP4B induced
formation of vesicle-like structures in which CHMP4B and truncated ALIX
colocalized. A dominant-negative form of the AAA-type ATPase SKD1
(VPS4B; 609983), which plays critical roles in the endocytic pathway,
coimmunoprecipitated with CHMP4B. Furthermore, both CHMP4B and ALIX
colocalized with dominant-negative SKD1 in perinuclear dot-like
distributions in transfected HeLa cells, suggesting that the 3 proteins
are involved in formation of multivesicular bodies.

Using coimmunoprecipitation analysis and in vitro pull-down assays,
Katoh et al. (2004) showed that ALIX interacted with all 3 CHMP4
proteins, although the interaction was stronger between ALIX and CHMP4B
than between ALIX and CHMP4A (610051) or CHMP4C (610899).

Carlton and Martin-Serrano (2007) found that 2 proteins involved in
HIV-1 budding--tumor susceptibility gene 101 (TSG101; 601387), a subunit
of the endosomal sorting complex required for transport 1 (ESCRT-1), and
ALIX, an ESCRT-associated protein--were recruited to the midbody during
cytokinesis by interaction with centrosome protein 55 (CEP55; 610000), a
centrosome and midbody protein essential for abscission. TSG101, ALIX,
and possibly other components of ESCRT-1 were required for the
completion of cytokinesis. Carlton and Martin-Serrano (2007) concluded
that thus, HIV-1 budding and cytokinesis use a similar subset of
cellular components to carry out topologically similar membrane fission
events.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a human T-cell cDNA library, followed by
coimmunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence analyses, Chen et al.
(2009) identified ALIX as a binding partner for GAL3 (LGALS3; 153619)
and showed that ALIX translocated to the immunologic synapse in
activated T cells. Chen et al. (2009) concluded that GAL3 is an
inhibitory regulator of T-cell activation and that it functions
intracellularly by promoting T-cell receptor downregulation, possibly
through modulation of ALIX function at the immunologic synapse.

Feng et al. (2013) showed that hepatitis A virus (HAV) released from
cells is cloaked in host-derived membranes, thereby protecting the
virion from antibody-mediated neutralization. The enveloped viruses
(eHAV) resemble exosomes, small vesicles that are important in
intercellular communications. They are fully infectious, sensitive to
extraction with chloroform, and circulate in the blood of infected
humans. Their biogenesis is dependent on host proteins associated with
endosomal-sorting complexes required for transport, namely VPS4B and
ALIX. Feng et al. (2013) concluded that while the hijacking of membranes
by HAV facilitates escape from neutralizing antibodies and probably
promotes virus spread within the liver, anti-capsid antibodies restrict
replication after infection with eHAV, suggesting a possible explanation
for prophylaxis after exposure.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PDCD6IP
gene to chromosome 3 (TMAP sts-R60314).

REFERENCE 1. Carlton, J. G.; Martin-Serrano, J.: Parallels between cytokinesis
and retroviral budding: a role for the ESCRT machinery. Science 316:
1908-1912, 2007.

2. Chatellard-Causse, C.; Blot, B.; Cristina, N.; Torch, S.; Missotten,
M.; Sadoul, R.: Alix (ALG2-interacting protein X), a protein involved
in apoptosis, binds to endophilins and induces cytoplasmic vacuolization. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 29108-29115, 2002.

3. Chen, H.-Y.; Fermin, A.; Vardhana, S.; Weng, I.-C.; Lo, K. F. R.;
Chang, E.-Y.; Maverakis, E.; Yang, R.-Y.; Hsu, D. K.; Dustin, M. L.;
Liu, F.-T.: Galectin-3 negatively regulates TCR-mediated CD4+ T-cell
activation at the immunological synapse. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 106:
14496-14501, 2009.

4. Feng, Z.; Hensley, L.; McKnight, K. L.; Hu, F.; Madden, V.; Ping,
L.; Jeong, S.-H.; Walker, C.; Lanford, R. E.; Lemon, S. M.: A pathogenic
picornavirus acquires an envelope by hijacking cellular membranes. Nature 496:
367-371, 2013.

5. Katoh, K.; Shibata, H.; Hatta, K.; Maki, M.: CHMP4b is a major
binding partner of the ALG-2-interacting protein Alix among the three
CHMP4 isoforms. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 421: 159-165, 2004.

6. Katoh, K.; Shibata, H.; Suzuki, H.; Nara, A.; Ishidoh, K.; Kominami,
E.; Yoshimori, T.; Maki, M.: The ALG-2-interacting protein Alix associates
with CHMP4b, a human homologue of yeast Snf7 that is involved in multivesicular
body sorting. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 39104-39113, 2003.

7. Matsuo, H.; Chevallier, J.; Mayran, N.; Le Blanc, I.; Ferguson,
C.; Faure, J.; Blanc, N. S.; Matile, S.; Dubochet, J.; Sadoul, R.;
Parton, R. G.; Vilbois, F.; Gruenberg, J.: Role of LBPA and Alix
in multivesicular liposome formation and endosome organization. Science 303:
531-534, 2004.

8. Missotten, M.; Nichols, A.; Rieger, K.; Sadoul, R.: Alix, a novel
mouse protein undergoing calcium-dependent interaction with the apoptosis-linked-gene
2 (ALG-2) protein. Cell Death Differ. 6: 124-129, 1999.

9. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVI.
The complete sequences of 150 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 65-73, 2000.

10. Vito, P.; Pellegrini, L.; Guiet, C.; D'Adamio, L.: Cloning of
AIP1, a novel protein that associates with the apoptosis-linked gene
ALG-2 in a Ca(2+)-dependent reaction. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 1533-1540,
1999.

11. Wu, Y.; Pan, S.; Che, S.; He, G.; Nelman-Gonzalez, M.; Weil, M.
M.; Kuang, J.: Overexpression of Hp95 induces G1 phase arrest in
confluent HeLa cells. Differentiation 67: 139-153, 2001.

12. Wu, Y.; Pan, S.; Luo, W.; Lin, S.-H.; Kuang, J.: Hp95 promotes
anoikis and inhibits tumorigenicity of HeLa cells. Oncogene 21:
6801-6808, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 05/01/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/17/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/29/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/2/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/4/2003

EDITED alopez: 05/01/2013
terry: 11/4/2011
mgross: 11/3/2011
terry: 10/17/2011
alopez: 7/25/2007
terry: 7/24/2007
mgross: 3/29/2007
alopez: 2/2/2004
mgross: 9/5/2003
mgross: 9/4/2003

606103	TITLE *606103 SESTRIN 1; SESN1
;;SEST1;;
p53-ACTIVATED GENE 26;;
PA26
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Transcriptional activation of target genes is a major function of p53
(191170). Using differential cDNA subtraction to identify genes
activated by p53, Buckbinder et al. (1994) identified a cDNA encoding
A26. Northern blot analysis revealed expression of approximately 3.0-
and 4.0-kb A26 transcripts in an osteosarcoma cell line.

Velasco-Miguel et al. (1999) further characterized A26, which they
called PA26. Northern blot analysis detected wide expression of the 2.6-
and 4.0-kb PA26 transcripts in adult tissues. Only the smaller
transcript was transiently induced by p53 or by genotoxic agents in a
p53-dependent manner in a colon carcinoma cell line. By cDNA library
screening and 5-prime RACE, Velasco-Miguel et al. (1999) isolated cDNAs
encoding 3 PA26 variants, T1, T2, and T3, which differ at their N
termini. The deduced proteins, which are 99% identical to the mouse
proteins, contain 551, 491, and 426 amino acids, respectively. RT-PCR
analysis detected induction of T2 in response to p53 or genotoxic
stress; however, T1 was not induced and T3 was only weakly induced.
Western blot analysis showed induction of a predominant 55-kD T2 nuclear
protein rather than the 68-kD T1 protein or the 48-kD T3 protein.
Sequence analysis predicted, and EMSA and reporter analysis confirmed,
that PA26 has a p53-binding site within intron 2. Serum starvation
experiments suggested that PA26 may be a member of the growth arrest-
and DNA damage-inducible, or GADD, gene family (e.g., GADD45G; 604949).
Velasco-Miguel et al. (1999) concluded that PA26, like GADD45, is a p53
target gene and a member of the GADD family.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Velasco-Miguel et al. (1999) determined
that the PA26 gene contains at least 12 exons and spans more than 20 kb.

GENE FUNCTION

Acting as a signal, hydrogen peroxide circumvents antioxidant defense by
overoxidizing peroxiredoxins (Prxs), the enzymes that metabolize
peroxides. Budanov et al. (2004) showed that sestrins, a family of
proteins whose expression is modulated by p53, are required for
regeneration of Prxs containing cys-SO(2)H, thus reestablishing the
antioxidant firewall. Sestrins contain a predicted redox-active domain
homologous to AhpD, the enzyme catalyzing the reduction of a bacterial
peroxiredoxin, AhpC. Purified Hi95 (sestrin-2; 607767) protein supported
adenosine triphosphate-dependent reduction of overoxidized PrxI in
vitro, indicating that unlike AhpD, which is a disulfide reductase,
sestrins are cysteine sulfinyl reductases.

Sestrins are conserved proteins that accumulate in cells exposed to
stress, potentiate adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase
(AMPK; 602739), and inhibit activation of TOR (mTOR; 601231). Lee et al.
(2010) showed that the abundance of Drosophila sestrin is increased upon
chronic TOR activation through accumulation of reactive oxygen species
that cause activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (see 601158)and
transcription factor Forkhead box O (FoxO; see 136533). Loss of
Drosophila Sesn resulted in age-associated pathologies including
triglyceride accumulation, mitochondrial dysfunction, muscle
degeneration, and cardiac malfunction, which were prevented by
pharmacologic activation of AMPK or inhibition of TOR. Hence, Lee et al.
(2010) concluded that Drosophila Sesn appears to be a negative feedback
regulator of TOR that integrates metabolic and stress inputs and
prevents pathologies caused by chronic TOR activation that may result
from diminished autophagic clearance of damaged mitochondria, protein
aggregates, or lipids.

MAPPING

Using somatic cell hybrid and FISH analyses, Velasco-Miguel et al.
(1999) mapped the PA26 gene to 6q21, a region associated with deletions
in a number of cancers.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a patient with heterotaxia and a de novo reciprocal translocation,
t(6;18)(q21;q21), as reported by Kato et al. (1996) (see 606325),
Peeters et al. (2003) found that the PA26 gene was disrupted by the 6q21
breakpoint. Northern blot analysis showed decreased expression of the
PA26 gene in an Epstein-Barr virus-transformed cell line from this
patient. Mutation analysis of the PA26 gene in 40 unrelated individuals
with unexplained heterotaxia failed to identify mutations, indicating
that PA26 mutations are not a frequent cause of heterotaxia.

REFERENCE 1. Buckbinder, L.; Talbott, R.; Seizinger, B. R.; Kley, N.: Gene
regulation by temperature-sensitive p53 mutants: identification of
p53 response genes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 10640-10644, 1994.

2. Budanov, A. V.; Sablina, A. A.; Feinstein, E.; Koonin, E. V.; Chumakov,
P. M.: Regeneration of peroxiredoxins by p53-regulated sestrins,
homologs of bacterial AhpD. Science 304: 596-600, 2004.

3. Kato, R.; Yamada, Y.; Niikawa, N.: De novo balanced translocation
(6;18)(q21;q21.3) in a patient with heterotaxia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 66:
184-186, 1996. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Med. Genet. 70: 104 only, 1997.

4. Lee, J. H.; Budanov, A. V.; Park, E. J.; Birse, R.; Kim, T. E.;
Perkins, G. A.; Ocorr, K.; Ellisman, M. H.; Bodmer, R.; Bier, E.;
Karin, M.: Sestrin as a feedback inhibitor of TOR that prevents age-related
pathologies. Science 327: 1223-1228, 2010.

5. Peeters, H.; Debeer, P.; Bairoch, A.; Wilquet, V.; Huysmans, C.;
Parthoens, E.; Fryns, J. P.; Gewillig, M.; Nakamura, Y.; Niikawa,
N.; Van de Ven, W.; Devriendt, K.: PA26 is a candidate gene for heterotaxia
in humans: identification of a novel PA26-related gene family in human
and mouse. Hum. Genet. 112: 573-580, 2003.

6. Velasco-Miguel, S.; Buckbinder, L.; Jean, P.; Gelbert, L.; Talbott,
R.; Laidlaw, J.; Seizinger, B.; Kley, N.: PA26, a novel target of
the p53 tumor suppressor and member of the GADD family of DNA damage
and growth arrest inducible genes. Oncogene 18: 127-137, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/22/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/21/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/30/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/8/2003

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/12/2001

EDITED alopez: 04/26/2010
terry: 4/22/2010
ckniffin: 9/21/2006
alopez: 4/30/2004
terry: 4/30/2004
tkritzer: 5/13/2003
tkritzer: 5/12/2003
terry: 5/8/2003
mgross: 7/12/2001

611239	TITLE *611239 G PROTEIN-REGULATED INDUCER OF NEURITE OUTGROWTH 1; GPRIN1
;;GRIN1;;
KIAA1893
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Chen et al. (1999) cloned mouse Gprin1, which they called Grin1. By
database analysis, they identified human GPRIN1. Northern blot analysis
of human brain regions showed wide distribution in brain tissue and the
central nervous system with highest expression in the spinal cord.
Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues detected expression in brain
only, and Western analysis detected protein in mouse neuroblastoma and
rat pheochromocytoma cells. Using immunofluorescence studies and Western
analysis of cell fractions, the authors found that both GPRIN1 and GNAO1
(139311) are membrane-bound proteins that are enriched in the growth
cones of neurites.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2001) cloned GPRIN1, which they designated
KIAA1893. The deduced 800-amino acid protein shares 46% amino acid
identity with its mouse homolog. RT-PCR ELISA of human tissues detected
moderate expression in brain, with low expression in lung and spleen.
RT-PCR ELISA of specific brain regions detected high expression in
cerebellum, followed by amygdala, hippocampus, substantia nigra, caudate
nucleus, subthalamic nucleus, thalamus, and spinal cord, with low
expression in corpus callosum.

Iida and Kozasa, 2004 noted that the deduced 856-amino acid GPRIN1
sequence shares high homology with GPRIN2 (611240) and GPRIN3 (611241)
over the C-terminal region.

GENE FUNCTION

Using purified recombinant GPRIN1 and GPRIN2 expressed in insect cells,
as well as immunoprecipitation studies from transfected COS cells, Chen
et al. (1999) showed that both GPRIN1 and GPRIN2 interacted specifically
with G-alpha-o and G-alpha-z (GNAZ; 139160) bound to GTP-gamma-S or
GDP-AlF4(-), but did not interact with GDP-bound forms of either G
protein subunit. Chen et al. (1999) showed that coexpression of GPRIN1
or GPRIN2 with activated G-alpha-o caused formation and extension of
neurite-like processes in mouse neuroblastoma cells.

MAPPING

By database analysis, Nagase et al. (2001) mapped the GPRIN1 gene to
chromosome 5.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, L. T.; Gilman, A. G.; Kozasa, T.: A candidate target for
G protein action in brain. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 26931-26938, 1999.

2. Iida, N.; Kozasa, T.: Identification and biochemical analysis
of GRIN1 and GRIN2. Methods Enzymol. 390: 475-483, 2004.

3. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. XXI. The complete sequences of 60 new
cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins. DNA Res. 8:
179-187, 2001.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 7/23/2007

EDITED wwang: 07/23/2007

615143	TITLE *615143 UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE 20; USP20
;;VHL-INTERACTING DEUBIQUITINATING ENZYME 2; VDU2;;
KIAA1003
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Deubiquitinating enzymes (EC 3.4.19.12), such as USP20, remove ubiquitin
peptides from ubiquitin-containing substrates. These enzymes have a
major role in rescuing ubiquitinated proteins from proteasome-mediated
degradation (Curcio-Morelli et al., 2003).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned USP20, which they designated
KIAA1003. The deduced 913-amino acid protein shares significant
similarity with chicken Ubp41 (USP2; 604725). RT-PCR ELISA detected
relatively low USP20 expression in all adult and fetal tissues examined,
except spleen, which showed no USP20 expression. Highest levels were in
adult brain and ovary.

By searching databases for sequences similar to human VDU1 (USP33;
615146), followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE and PCR, Li et al. (2002)
cloned full-length human USP20, which they called VDU2. The deduced
protein contains 913 amino acids and has a calculated molecular mass of
102 kD. Human and mouse VDU2 share 92% amino acid identity, and human
VDU2 shares 59% amino acid identity with the human VDU1 type II isoform,
with strongest homology at the N- and C-terminal ends. VDU2 has 2 UCH
domains, which are crucial for deubiquitinating activity. Northern blot
analysis detected a 4.5-kb VDU2 transcript in all human tissues
examined, including brain, heart, placenta, lung, liver, muscle, kidney,
and pancreas.

By subcellular fractionation and immunofluorescence analysis,
Curcio-Morelli et al. (2003) found that both epitope-tagged VDU1 and
VDU2 localized to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in transfected HEK
cells.

By database analysis, Thorne et al. (2011) identified 3 USP20 variants
that encode the same protein.

GENE FUNCTION

Using in vivo and in vitro deubiquitination assays, Li et al. (2002)
showed that human VDU2 exhibited ubiquitin cleavage activity. They found
that human VDU1 and VDU2 competitively interacted with the E3 ubiquitin
ligase VHL (608537), resulting in ubiquitination and proteasome-mediated
degradation of both proteins.

Type II iodothyronine deiodinase (D2, or DIO2; 601413) converts
thyroxine into biologically active triiodothyronine (T3). T3 production
is terminated via ubiquitination and proteasome-mediated degradation of
D2. By coimmunoprecipitation analysis in transfected HEK293 cells,
Curcio-Morelli et al. (2003) found that both VDU1 and VDU2 bound D2.
Both VDU enzymes colocalized with D2 in the ER and reduced
ubiquitination and degradation of D2. Expression of Vdu1, but not Vdu2,
increased in mouse brown adipocytes following exposure to cold or
norepinephrine. Curcio-Morelli et al. (2003) concluded that VDU enzymes
recycle inactive ubiquitinated D2 to its active deubiquitinated form and
thereby regulate the supply of active thyroid hormone.

Thorne et al. (2011) found that knockdown of USP20 in HeLa cells
resulted in compensatory upregulation of USP33 expression.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1999) mapped the USP20 gene
to chromosome 9.

Hartz (2013) mapped the USP20 gene to chromosome 9q34.11 based on an
alignment of the USP20 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB023220) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Curcio-Morelli, C.; Zavacki, A. M.; Christofollete, M.; Gereben,
B.; de Freitas, B. C. G.; Harney, J. W.; Li, Z.; Wu, G.; Bianco, A.
C.: Deubiquitination of type 2 iodothyronine deiodinase by von Hippel-Lindau
protein-interacting deubiquitinating enzymes regulates thyroid hormone
activation. J. Clin. Invest. 112: 189-196, 2003.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/26/2013.

3. Li, Z.; Wang, D.; Na, X.; Schoen, S. R.; Messing, E. M.; Wu, G.
: Identification of a deubiquitinating enzyme subfamily as substrates
of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 294 -700-709, 2002.

4. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

5. Thorne, C.; Eccles, R. L.; Coulson, J. M.; Urbe, S.; Clague, M.
J.: Isoform-specific localization of the deubiquitinase USP33 to
the Golgi apparatus. Traffic 12: 1563-1574, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 04/17/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/17/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/27/2013

EDITED mgross: 04/17/2013
mgross: 4/17/2013
mgross: 3/27/2013

610812	TITLE *610812 HYDROCEPHALUS-INDUCING, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; HYDIN
;;HYDIN1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a candidate gene approach to identify the mutant gene in the Hy3
mouse model of hydrocephalus, Davy and Robinson (2003) identified mouse
Hydin and its human ortholog. The mouse Hydin protein contains 5,099
amino acids. In situ hybridization of embryonic day-15 mouse brain
revealed Hydin expression in the developing choroid plexus. Expression
in newborn brain was observed exclusively in ependymal cells, a
specialized ciliated epithelium lining the lateral, third, and fourth
ventricles. Hydin mRNA was also detected in bronchi of lung,
spermatocytes within seminiferous tubules, and the oviduct lining
extending out to the fimbriae.

Doggett et al. (2006) determined that the predicted 5,120-amino acid
human HYDIN protein shares 77% with the mouse protein. By genomic
sequence analysis, they identified a duplicated copy of HYDIN, HYDIN2
(610813), on chromosome 1. Database and sequence analyses revealed HYDIN
transcripts that had been isolated from lung, testis, NT2 neuronal
precursor cells, and Jurkat leukemic T cells, whereas HYDIN2 transcripts
had been isolated from brain and NT2 cells only. Both genes appeared to
be expressed as alternatively spliced transcripts. Northern blot
analysis of human testis detected HYDIN transcripts of 6 kb and more
than 9 kb. Database analysis indicated that HYDIN is evolutionarily
conserved.

GENE STRUCTURE

Doggett et al. (2006) determined that the HYDIN gene contains 86 exons
and spans more than 423 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Davy and Robinson (2003) mapped the HYDIN
gene to chromosome 16q22. They mapped the mouse Hydin gene to a region
of chromosome 8 that shows homology of synteny to human chromosome
16q22.

By genomic sequence analysis, Doggett et al. (2006) mapped the HYDIN
gene to chromosome 16q22.2, and they identified a duplicated copy,
HYDIN2, on chromosome 1q21.1.

EVOLUTION

Using PCR and FISH, Doggett et al. (2006) confirmed that duplication of
the HYDIN gene is specific to humans. A large and diverse sample of
humans contained both HYDIN and HYDIN2, and there was no evidence for
polymorphic presence of HYDIN2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 3 sibs, born of consanguineous German parent (family OP-305), with
primary ciliary dyskinesia-5 without situs inversus (CILD5; 608647),
Olbrich et al. (2012) identified a homozygous splice site mutation in
the HYDIN gene (610812.0001). The mutation was found by homozygosity
mapping followed by candidate gene sequencing. Olbrich et al. (2012)
also identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the HYDIN gene
(K307X; 610812.0002) in affected individuals from 3 families originating
from the Faroe Islands (UCL96, UCL109, and UCL139) with CILD5 without
situs inversus previously reported by Jeganathan et al. (2004). The
mutation was identified by whole-exome sequencing and confirmed by
Sanger sequencing in 2 sibs from 1 family (UCL109) and was not found in
several exome databases. Haplotype analysis indicated a founder effect
in these 3 families. The findings were consistent with a loss of
function. All patients had onset of respiratory distress in early
infancy. Other features included chronic wet cough, recurrent
bronchitis, pneumonia, otitis media, chronic rhinosinusitis, and
bronchiectasis. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of patient
respiratory cilia showed that most exhibited a normal 9+2 axonemal
composition, with 9 outer microtubule doublets surrounding 2 single
central microtubules, and both outer and inner dynein arms showed no
abnormalities. There were rare occurrences of 9+0 and 8+1 cilia, but
most cross-sections appeared entirely normal. Thus, routine TEM findings
were nonspecific and not sufficient for diagnosis of CILD. However,
imaging with the higher resolution electron microscopy tomography showed
that projection C2b was absent at the central pair (CP) apparatus.
High-speed videomicroscopy of respiratory cilia and sperm flagella
showed markedly reduced coordination of beating activity, reduced
beating amplitudes, and reduced bending capacity; some immotile cilia
were also observed. Olbrich et al. (2012) noted that the lack of situs
inversus in patients with HYDIN mutations is consistent with the
specific defect of the CP apparatus, which is not needed for cilia
function at the embryonic node.

In a 48-year-old man with primary ciliary dyskinesia from a
consanguineous family of European descent, Davidson et al. (2013)
identified homozygosity for a splice site mutation in the HYDIN gene
(610812.0003) that segregated with disease in the family. The patient,
who also had retinitis pigmentosa (615434), was also found to be
homozygous for a missense mutation in the ARL2BP gene (M45R;
615407.0002).

ANIMAL MODEL

Hy3 is a spontaneous autosomal recessive mutation in mice that causes
lethal communicating hydrocephalus with perinatal onset. Davy and
Robinson (2003) determined that Hy3 is caused by a 2-bp deletion in exon
15 of the Hydin gene, which results in premature termination of the
protein.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 5, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
HYDIN, 3985G-T

In 3 sibs, born of consanguineous German parents (family OP-305), with
primary ciliary dyskinesia-5 without situs inversus (CILD5; 608647),
Olbrich et al. (2012) identified a homozygous c.3985G-T transversion in
the first base of exon 27 of the HYDIN gene, affecting an evolutionarily
conserved acceptor splice site. RT-PCR on patient cells showed that the
mutation resulted in an abnormal transcript, with a 47-bp insertion
between exons 26 and 27, leading to a frameshift and premature
termination after the insertion of 62 novel amino acids. No normal HYDIN
transcripts were detected in patient cells. The results were consistent
with a loss of function. The mutation was found by homozygosity mapping
followed by candidate gene sequencing.

.0002
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 5, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
HYDIN, LYS307TER

In affected individuals from 3 families (UCL96, UCL109, and UCL139) with
CILD5 without situs inversus (608647), all originating from the Faroe
Islands (Jeganathan et al., 2004), Olbrich et al. (2012) identified a
homozygous 922A-T transversion in exon 8 of the HYDIN gene, resulting in
a lys307-to-ter (K307X) substitution. The mutation was identified by
whole-exome sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing in 2 sibs from
1 family (UCL109), and was not found in several exome databases. Each of
the unaffected parents was heterozygous for the mutation. Haplotype
analysis indicated a founder effect in these 3 families.

.0003
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 5, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
HYDIN, IVS24AS, G-T, -1

In a 48-year-old man with primary ciliary dyskinesia-5 (608647) from a
consanguineous family of European descent, Davidson et al. (2013)
identified homozygosity for a c.3786-1G-T transversion at the splice
acceptor site of intron 24 of the HYDIN gene that segregated with
disease in the family. The splice site mutation was also found in 1 of
12,331 control alleles from the NHLBI Exome Variant Server database.
Electron microscopy of nasal epithelial cells confirmed the absence of
the C2B projection of the motile cilia. In addition, the patient had
retinitis pigmentosa (615434) and a homozygous missense mutation in the
ARL2BP gene (M45R; 615407.0003).

REFERENCE 1. Davidson, A. E.; Schwarz, N.; Zelinger, L.; Stern-Schneider, G.;
Shoemark, A.; Spitzbarth, B.; Gross, M.; Laxer, U.; Sosna, J.; Sergouniotis,
P. I.; Waseem, N. H.; Wilson, R.; Kahn, R. A.; Plagnol, V.; Wolfrum,
U.; Banin, E.; Hardcastle, A. J.; Cheetham, M. E.; Sharon, D.; Webster,
A. R.: Mutations in ARL2BP, encoding ADP-ribosylation-factor-like
2 binding protein, cause autosomal-recessive retinitis pigmentosa. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 93: 321-329, 2013.

2. Davy, B. E.; Robinson, M. L.: Congenital hydrocephalus in hy3
mice is caused by a frameshift mutation in Hydin, a large novel gene. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12: 1163-1170, 2003.

3. Doggett, N. A.; Xie, G.; Meincke, L. J.; Sutherland, R. D.; Mundt,
M. O.; Berbari, N. S.; Davy, B. E.; Robinson, M. L.; Rudd, M. K.;
Weber, J. L.; Stallings, R. L.; Han, C.: A 360-kb interchromosomal
duplication of the human HYDIN locus. Genomics 88: 762-771, 2006.

4. Jeganathan, D.; Chodhari, R.; Meeks, M.; Faeroe, O.; Smyth, D.;
Nielsen, K.; Amirav, I.; Luder, A. S.; Bisgaard, H.; Gardiner, R.
M.; Chung, E. M. K.; Mitchison, H. M.: Loci for primary ciliary dyskinesia
map to chromosome 16p12.1-12.2 and 15q13.1-15.1 in Faroe Islands and
Israeli Druze genetic isolates. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 41: 233-240,
2004.

5. Olbrich, H.; Schmidts, M.; Werner, C.; Onoufriadis, A.; Loges,
N. T.; Raidt, J.; Banki, N. F.; Shoemark, A.; Burgoyne, T.; Al Turki,
S.; Hurles, M. E.; UK10K Consortium; and 10 others: Recessive
HYDIN mutations cause primary ciliary dyskinesia without randomization
of left-right body asymmetry. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 91: 672-684, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/26/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/16/2012
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 2/27/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/27/2007

EDITED carol: 09/27/2013
carol: 9/26/2013
carol: 9/24/2013
carol: 10/18/2012
ckniffin: 10/16/2012
alopez: 2/25/2009
mgross: 2/27/2007

606296	TITLE *606296 PROTOCADHERIN-GAMMA, SUBFAMILY A, MEMBER 9; PCDHGA9
;;PCDH-GAMMA-A9
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cadherins are calcium-dependent cell-cell adhesion molecules, and
protocadherins constitute a subfamily of nonclassic cadherins. PCDHGA9
is 1 of 22 tandemly arranged genes within the PCDHG gene cluster
(604968) on chromosome 5q31. The 22 PCDHG genes function as 'variable'
exons that are individually spliced to a downstream constant region to
form distinct PCDHG transcripts. The variable PCDHG exons encode the
extracellular and transmembrane domains of the protocadherin protein,
and the common region encodes the intracellular domain (Wu et al.,
2001). For further information on the PCDHG genes, see 604968.

CLONING

By PCR of a brain cDNA library, Wu and Maniatis (1999) cloned
full-length PCDHGA9.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Wu et al. (2001) mapped the PCDHGA9 gene
to chromosome 5q31, between the PCDHGB5 gene (606302) and the PCDHGB6
gene (606303). They localized the mouse PCDHG genes to chromosome 18c.

REFERENCE 1. Wu, Q.; Maniatis, T.: A striking organization of a large family
of human neural cadherin-like cell adhesion genes. Cell 97: 779-790,
1999.

2. Wu, Q.; Zhang, T.; Cheng, J.-F.; Kim, Y.; Grimwood, J.; Schmutz,
J.; Dickson, M.; Noonan, J. P.; Zhang, M. Q.; Myers, R. M.; Maniatis,
T.: Comparative DNA sequence analysis of mouse and human protocadherin
gene clusters. Genome Res. 11: 389-404, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/15/2007

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 9/27/2001

EDITED alopez: 04/05/2012
alopez: 4/5/2012
mgross: 10/15/2007
mgross: 9/27/2001

120700	TITLE *120700 COMPLEMENT COMPONENT 3; C3
C3a, INCLUDED;;
C3b, INCLUDED;;
C3c, INCLUDED;;
C3d, INCLUDED;;
ACYLATION-STIMULATING PROTEIN, INCLUDED; ASP, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The complement system is an important mediator of natural and acquired
immunity. It consists of approximately 30 proteins that can exhibit
catalytic activity, function as regulators, or act as cellular surface
receptors. These components normally circulate in inactive forms and are
activated by the classical, alternative, or lectin pathways. Complement
component 3 plays a central role in all 3 activation pathways (summary
by Reis et al., 2006).

For a review of the complement system and its components, see Degn et
al. (2011).

CLONING

De Bruijn and Fey (1985) presented the complete coding sequence of the
C3 gene and the derived amino acid sequence. C3 is an acute phase
reactant; increased synthesis of C3 is induced during acute
inflammation. The liver is the main site of synthesis, although small
amounts are also produced by activated monocytes and macrophages. A
single chain precursor (pro-C3) of approximately 200 kD is found
intracellularly; the cDNA shows that it comprises 1,663 amino acids.
This is processed by proteolytic cleavage into alpha (C3a) and beta
(C3b) subunits which in the mature protein are linked by disulfide
bonds. Pro-C3 contains a signal peptide of 22 amino acid residues, the
beta chain (645 residues) and the alpha chain (992 residues). The 2
chains are joined by 4 arginine residues that are not present in the
mature protein. Human C3 has 79% identity to mouse C3 at the nucleotide
level and 77% at the amino acid level.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Janssen et al. (2005) presented the crystal structures of native C3 and
its final major proteolytic fragment C3c. The structures revealed 13
domains, 9 of which were unpredicted, and suggested that the proteins of
the alpha-2-macroglobulin family evolved from a core of 8 homologous
domains. A double mechanism prevents hydrolysis of the thioester group,
essential for covalent attachment of activated C3 to target surfaces.
Marked conformational changes in the alpha chain, including movement of
a critical interaction site through a ring formed by the domains of the
beta chain, indicated an unprecedented, conformation-dependent mechanism
of activation, regulation, and biologic function of C3.

Janssen et al. (2006) presented the crystal structure at 4-angstrom
resolution of the activated complement protein C3b and described the
conformation rearrangements of the 12 domains that take place upon
proteolytic activation. In the activated form the thioester is fully
exposed for covalent attachment to target surfaces and is more than 85
angstroms away from the buried site in native C3. Marked domain
rearrangements in the alpha chain present an altered molecular surface,
exposing hidden and cryptic sites that are consistent with known
putative binding sites of factor B (CFB; 138470) and several complement
regulators. The structural data indicated that the large conformational
changes in the proteolytic activation and regulation of C3 take place
mainly in the first conversion step, from C3 to C3b.

Wiesmann et al. (2006) presented the crystal structure of C3b in complex
with CRIG (300353) and, using CRIG mutants, provided evidence that CRIG
acts as an inhibitor of the alternative pathway of complement. The
structure shows that activation of C3 induces major structural
rearrangements, including a dramatic movement (greater than 80
angstroms) of the thioester bond-containing domain through which C3b
attaches to pathogen surfaces. Wiesmann et al. (2006) showed that CRIG
is not only a phagocytic receptor, but also a potent inhibitor of the
alternative pathway convertases. Wiesmann et al. (2006) concluded that
the structure provides insights into the complex macromolecular
structural rearrangements that occur during complement activation and
inhibition.

Ajees et al. (2006) presented a structure of C3b that reveals a marked
loss of secondary structure in the CUB (complement C1r/Cls, Uegf, Bmp1)
domain, which together with the resulting translocation of the thioester
domain provides a molecular basis for conformational changes
accompanying the conversion of C3 to C3b. Ajees et al. (2006) suggested
that the total conformational changes make many proposed ligand-binding
sites more accessible and create a cavity that shields target peptide
bonds from access by factor I. A covalently bound N-acetyl-L-threonine
residue demonstrates the geometry of C3b attachment to surface hydroxyl
groups.

Forneris et al. (2010) presented crystal structures of the proconvertase
C3bB at 4-angstrom resolution and its complex with factor D at
3.5-angstrom resolution. Their data showed how factor B binding to C3b
forms an open 'activation' state of C3bB. Factor D specifically binds
the open conformation of factor B through a site distant from the
catalytic center and is activated by the substrate, which displaces
factor D's self-inhibitory loop. This concerted proteolytic mechanism,
which if cofactor-dependent and substrate-induced, restricts complement
amplification to C3b-tagged target cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Component C3 plays several important biologic roles in the classical,
alternative, and lectin activation pathways, e.g., (1) formation of C3-
and C5-convertases, both essential for the full activation of the
system; (2) production of opsonins that enhance phagocytosis of
microorganisms; (3) degranulation of mast cells and basophils medicated
by the fragments C3a and C5a; (4) solubilization and clearance of
C3b-bound immune complexes; (5) adjuvant function of fragments C3d and
C3dg; and (6) clearance of apoptotic cells (summary by Reis et al.,
2006).

Polymorphisms in complement factor H (CFH; 134370), the main regulator
of the activation of C3, have been associated with susceptibility to
age-related macular degeneration (see ARMD4, 610698). Sivaprasad et al.
(2007) noted that only the C3a des Arg form of C3a is present in human
plasma. They therefore studied the levels of C3a des Arg in 84 persons
with a clinical diagnosis of ARMD compared with those in age-matched
controls. The levels were significantly raised in the patient group
compared with those in the control group. Sivaprasad et al. (2007) also
found that the concentration of plasma C3a des Arg did not differ
significantly between those with different CFH genotypes. The authors
suggested that systemic activation of the complement system may
contribute to the pathogenesis of ARMD independent of CFH polymorphism.

By immunofluorescence microscopy, Rahpeymai et al. (2006) demonstrated
that mouse neural progenitor cells and immature neurons expressed C3ar
(605246) and C5ar (113995). Mice lacking C3 or C3ar, or treated with a
C3ar antagonist, show decreased basal neurogenesis and impaired
ischemia-induced neurogenesis in the subventricular zone and in the
ischemic region. Rahpeymai et al. (2006) concluded that, in the adult
mammalian CNS, complement activation products promote both basal and
ischemia-induced neurogenesis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Fong et al. (1990) reported that the complete C3 gene is 41 kb long,
comprising 41 exons. The beta chain spans 13 kb from exon 1 to exon 16.
Exon 16 encodes both alpha and beta chains. The alpha chain is 28 kb
long, with 26 exons, including exon 16.

MAPPING

Weitkamp et al. (1974) presented evidence that the Lewis blood group
locus and the C3 locus are linked. Three independent studies, by Ott et
al. (1974), Berg and Heiberg (1976) and Elston et al. (1976), strongly
suggested loose linkage between familial hypercholesterolemia and C3.

By the method of somatic cell hybridization, Whitehead et al. (1982)
assigned the gene for fibroblast-derived C3 to chromosome 19. It was at
first unclear whether fibroblast and serum C3 were identical; it was
known that fibroblast C1q (120560) and serum C1q (120550) are different
(Skok et al., 1981). Studies with a C3 probe (Davies et al., 1984)
suggested that there was only one C3 gene per haploid chromosome set; no
other hybridization was observed with relaxed stringency. Furthermore,
no recombination was observed between probe and serum C3 (Williamson,
1983). Thus, serum and fibroblast C3 almost certainly have the same
genetic basis. A specific antihuman C3 monoclonal antibody was used by
Whitehead et al. (1982) in their mapping studies. The assignment to
chromosome 19 was confirmed by use of a unique-sequence human genomic C3
DNA clone as a probe in DNA hybridization experiments with DNA prepared
from appropriate human-mouse somatic cell hybrids (Whitehead et al.,
1982).

Sanders et al. (1984) studied the linkage of polymorphic serum C3 to
Lewis (111100) and secretor (182100) and found low positive lod scores
for all 3 linkages. They favored the order SE--C3--LE. Eiberg et al.
(1983) found linkage of secretor with the serum C3 polymorphism (male
lod = 4.35, theta = 0.12). There was suggestive evidence of linkage of
secretor with PEPD (male and female lod = 2.41, theta = 0.00) and of C3
with PEPD (male lod = 0.95, theta = 0.17)--independent confirmation of
assignment to chromosome 19 where PEPD is known to be by somatic cell
studies. What they termed Lewis secretion (LES) was also linked to C3
(male lod = 3.63, theta = 0.04). They suggested that the most likely
sequence is LES--C3--DM--(Se-PEPD)--Lu.

Ball et al. (1984) regionalized C3 to 19pter-p13.2. Brook et al. (1984)
assigned the gene to 19pter-p13 and concluded that familial
hypercholesterolemia is probably distal to C3 in the pter-p13 segment.
Brook et al. (1985) later presented data suggesting that the LDL
receptor is proximal to C3.

Lusis et al. (1986) used a reciprocal whole arm translocation between
the long arm of 19 and the short arm of chromosome 1 to map APOC1,
APOC2, APOE, and GPI to the long arm and LDLR, C3, and PEPD to the short
arm. Furthermore, they isolated a single lambda phage that carried both
APOC1 and APOE separated by about 6 kb of genomic DNA. Since family
studies indicate close linkage of APOE and APOC2, the 3 must be in a
cluster on 19q. Judging by the sequence of loci suggested by linkage
data (pter--FHC--C3--APOE/APOC2), the location of LDLR is probably
19p13.2-p13.12 and of C3, 19p13.2-p13.11.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Data on gene frequencies of allelic variants were tabulated by
Roychoudhury and Nei (1988).

In a grandmother, mother, and 2 sons, Wieme and Demeulenaere (1967)
found a double electrophoretic band corresponding apparently to
complement component C-prime-3 (as it was then called). By means of high
voltage starch gel electrophoresis, Azen and Smithies (1968) also found
electrophoretic polymorphism of the third component of complement. This
component has many important functions in immune mechanisms. Alper and
Propp (1968) independently found polymorphism of C3.

- Complement Component 3 Deficiency

Alper et al. (1972) described an Afrikaner patient with a striking
susceptibility to pyogenic infection who was apparently homozygous for
C3 deficiency (613779). Her C3 levels were one-thousandth or less of
normal. Many relatives, including both parents, had approximately
half-normal levels. In the patient reported by Alper et al. (1972),
Botto et al. (1992) demonstrated homozygosity for a partial deletion of
the C3 gene (120700.0004) as the molecular basis of the deficiency.

Nilsson et al. (1992) described 3 sisters who were compound
heterozygotes for a null allele inherited from the father and a
dysfunctional C3 allele inherited from the mother. Alternative pathway
complement function was absent, but classic pathway complement function
was partially intact. One of the sisters, the proband, had an SLE-like
disease. The proband's C3 proved normally susceptible to trypsin
proteolysis and partially resistant to classical pathways, but
completely resistant to alternative pathway, convertase-dependent
cleavage.

In a 22-year-old Japanese male patient with C3 deficiency and an
SLE-like, who was born of consanguineous parents, Tsukamoto et al.
(2005) identified a homozygous splice site mutation (120700.0009).

- Age-Related Macular Degeneration

Yates et al. (2007) genotyped SNPs spanning the complement genes C3 and
C5 in 603 Caucasian English patients with age-related macular
degeneration (ARMD9; 611378) and 350 controls and found that the common
functional R102G polymorphism in the C3 gene (dbSNP rs2230199;
120700.0001), was strongly associated with ARMD (p = 5.9 x 10(-5)). The
association was replicated in a Scottish group of 244 cases and 351
controls (p = 5.0 x 10(-5)).

Maller et al. (2007) identified a nonsynonymous coding change in C3 that
was strongly associated with risk of age-related macular degeneration in
a large case-control sample (P less than 10(-12)). The nonsynonymous
coding change (R102G) in the third exon of C3 was the same as that
identified by Yates et al. (2007).

- Susceptibility to Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome 5

In 11 probands with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (AHUS5; 612925),
Fremeaux-Bacchi et al. (2008) identified 9 different mutations in the C3
gene (see, e.g., 120700.0005-120700.0008). Five of the mutations
resulted in a gain of function with resistance to degradation by MCP
(120920) and CFI (217030), and 2 resulted in haploinsufficiency. Family
history, when available, showed decreased penetrance.

EVOLUTION

Because C3, C4 (120810), and C5 (120900) are strikingly similar, a
common evolutionary origin has been supposed (Whitehead et al., 1982).
C4 is in the major histocompatibility complex on chromosome 6, but C3
and C5 are not. (In the mouse, both C3 and H2 are on chromosome 17, but
not in close proximity. In the chimpanzee, as in man, C2 (613927) and Bf
are closely linked to the MHC and neither C3 nor C8 (120950) is closely
linked to MHC. C6 deficiency was observed in the chimpanzee.) The
protease alpha-2-macroglobulin (103950) also shows considerable homology
to C3, suggesting a common evolutionary origin.

ANIMAL MODEL

Johnson et al. (1986) described C3 deficiency in Brittany spaniel dogs.
Like the human disorder, this appears to be due to a null gene which
apparently is not closely linked to the canine major histocompatibility
complex.

Circolo et al. (1999) generated C3-deficient mice by disrupting the
promoter region and exon 1 of the C3 gene. They detected C3 expression
in lung, kidney, heart, spleen, and adipose, but not liver tissue, in
these mice. Although pro-C3 could be found in lung tissue, there was no
detectable secretion of mature C3. The mutant mice had dramatically
decreased resistance to S. pneumoniae. Circolo et al. (1999) concluded
that this model could be useful for the study of complete C3 deficiency.

Functional impairment of ASP has been hypothesized to be a major cause
of hyperapobetalipoproteinemia. However, Wetsel et al. (1999) could not
detect significant differences in lipids or lipoproteins in sera of
Asp-deficient mice and wildtype mice. They concluded that Asp deficiency
does not cause hyperapobetalipoproteinemia in mice.

Using C3-deficient mice in an allergen-induced model of pulmonary
allergy, Drouin et al. (2001) showed that these mice had diminished
airway hyperresponsiveness and lung eosinophilia. ELISPOT analysis
demonstrated reduced numbers of interleukin-4 (IL4; 147780)-producing
cells and attenuated antigen-specific IgE and IgG responses. Drouin et
al. (2001) concluded that C3 contributes significantly to the
pathogenesis of asthma resulting from pulmonary allergy and that
complement has a role in the production of IL4, a Th2 cytokine that is
critical to the development of airway hyperresponsiveness and IgE
responses in asthma.

Pratt et al. (2002) noted that the role of local, as opposed to hepatic,
secretion of complement by epithelial and vascular cells is unclear.
Proximal tubular epithelial cells (PTECs) synthesize C3 in transplanted
kidneys and production by PTECs increases during transplant rejection.
Pratt et al. (2002) found that in mice, wildtype-donor transplanted
kidneys were rejected by recipients in 12 days, whereas C3 -/- donor
kidneys transplanted into immunocompetent recipients survived for over
100 days. When C3-deficient mice were the recipients, the grafts
survived only 16 days, suggesting that locally synthesized rather than
circulating C3 has a greater influence on graft rejection. RT-PCR and
immunohistochemical analysis indicated that the cortical tubular
epithelium is the principal site of C3 expression as well as being the
main site of graft inflammation. Stimulation ex vivo of T cells from
recipients of C3-null kidneys generated reduced responses in mixed
lymphocyte reactions. Interferon-gamma (IFNG; 147570) treatment of
wildtype PTECs enhanced C3 production, but the expression of CD80
(112203), CD86 (601020), or MHC class II was not different in treated
C3-deficient cells. IL2 (147680) production was also lower in response
to Ifng-treated PTECs from C3 -/- mice. Flow cytometric analysis
demonstrated an expanded population of CD4+ Th1-like cells expressing
complement receptors CR1 (120620) and CR2 (120650) in the spleens of the
recipients of wildtype kidneys. Immunofluorescence microscopy
demonstrated rejecting graft infiltrates containing a similar population
of T cells in the peritubular and perivascular regions. Pratt et al.
(2002) concluded that local tissue production of C3 is important in
renal graft survival and that rejection is most likely mediated by T
cell recognition of C3-tagged graft cells.

Acylation-stimulating protein (ASP) is an adipocyte-derived product of
C3 cleavage and modification. ASP acts as a paracrine anabolic regulator
toward adipose tissue by stimulating glucose uptake and nonesterified
fatty acid storage. Genetic deficiency of C3 in mice leads to reduced
body fat and decreased leptin (164160) levels. Some male mice also show
delayed triglyceride clearance. Xia et al. (2002) developed C3 and
leptin (ob/ob) double-knockout (2KO) mice. Compared with ob/ob mice, 2KO
mice had delayed postprandial triglyceride and fatty acid clearance that
was associated with decreased body weight and increased insulin
sensitivity. Food intake was increased over that of ob/ob mice, but this
was balanced by increased energy expenditure as measured by oxygen
consumption. Although several metabolic measures were improved relative
to ob/ob mice, they were not returned to normal. Xia et al. (2002)
concluded that the regulation of energy storage by ASP influences energy
expenditure and metabolic balance.

Huber-Lang et al. (2006) found that wildtype mice and C3 -/- mice
developed intense lung injury after immune complex deposition, whereas
injury was attenuated in C5 (120900) -/- mice. Wildtype and C3 -/- mice
had similar levels of C5a in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, and lung
injury was attenuated by administration of anti-C5a. Treatment of C3 -/-
mice, but not wildtype mice, with antithrombin or the leech
anticoagulant hirudin also attenuated lung injury. C3 -/- mice had
3-fold more thrombin (F2; 176930) activity than wildtype mice, and
levels of prothrombin mRNA and protein and thrombin protein in liver
were higher than in wildtype mice. Incubation of human C5 with thrombin
generated biologically active C5a. Huber-Lang et al. (2006) concluded
that, in the absence of C3, thrombin substitutes for C3-dependent C5
convertase and that there is linkage between the complement and
coagulation pathways to activate complement.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MACULAR DEGENERATION, AGE-RELATED, 9, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
C3S/C3F POLYMORPHISM
C3, ARG102GLY

Botto et al. (1990) studied the molecular basis of the C3F versus C3S
polymorphism. The less common variant, C3F, occurs with appreciable
frequencies (gene frequency = 0.20) only in the Caucasoid populations.
Botto et al. (1990) found a single nucleotide change, C-to-G, at
position 364 in exon 3, distinguishing C3S and C3F. This led to a
substitution of an arginine residue in C3S for a glycine residue in C3F
(R102G). The substitution resulted in a polymorphic restriction site for
the enzyme HhaI.

The 3 pathways of complement activation proceed through the cleavage of
C3, the most abundant and functionally diverse complement component. The
renal tubular epithelium is both an important extrahepatic source of C3
and a major target of immunologic injury during rejection of renal
grafts. The donor kidney contributes 5% of the total circulating C3 pool
when it is in its stable state but up to 16% during acute rejection.
Brown et al. (2006) determined the C3 allotypes of 662 pairs of adult
kidney donors and recipients and then related C3F/S polymorphism status
to demographic and clinical outcome data. Among white C3S/S recipients,
receipt of a C3F/F or C3F/S donor kidney, rather than a C3S/S donor
kidney, was associated with a significantly better long-term outcome.
These findings suggested that the 2 alleles have functional differences.

In a study of 603 Caucasian English patients with age-related macular
degeneration (ARMD9; 611378) and 350 controls, Yates et al. (2007) found
that the R102G polymorphism, which they referred to as R80G based on
numbering that eliminated the 22 residues of the signal peptide, was
strongly associated with ARMD (p = 5.9 x 10(-5)). The association was
replicated in a Scottish group of 244 cases and 351 controls (p = 5.0 x
10(-5)). The 102R and 102G alleles correspond to slow (C3S) and fast
(C3F) electrophoretic variants, respectively. The odds ratio for ARMD in
SF heterozygotes and FF homozygotes was 1.7 and 2.6, respectively,
compared to SS homozygotes. The estimated population attributable risk
for C3F was 22%.

Maller et al. (2007) also found association of ARMD with R102G in a
large case-control sample (P less than 10(-12)).

In a matched sample set from the Age-Related Eye Disease Study (AREDS)
cohort involving 424 patients with ARMD and 215 patients without ARMD
acting as controls, Bergeron-Sawitzke et al. (2009) confirmed
association between ARMD and dbSNP rs2230199, with both the CG (OR, 1.9;
p = 9.0 x 10(-4)) and GG (OR, 2.5; p = 0.03) genotypes.

Fritsche et al. (2013) identified association of the C allele of dbSNP
rs2230199 with increased risk of ARMD (OR 1.42, 95% CI 1.37-1.47,
combined p = 1 x 10(-41)).

.0002
C3 POLYMORPHISM, HAV 4-1 PLUS/MINUS TYPE
C3, LEU314PRO

Botto et al. (1990) identified the molecular basis of a structural
polymorphism of C3, identified by the monoclonal antibody HAV 4-1: codon
314 in exon 9 of the beta chain showed a change of a proline residue in
the HAV 4-1(-) form to a leucine residue in the HAV 4-1(+) form.

.0003
C3 DEFICIENCY
C3, 61-BP DEL, EX18

Botto et al. (1990) studied the DNA from a 10-year-old boy who had
suffered from recurrent attacks of otitis media during the first 3 years
of life. Between 5 and 8 years of age, he suffered from more than 20
episodes of rash which affected his face, forearms, and hands and
resembled the target lesions of erythema multiforme. Attacks were
normally preceded by an upper respiratory infection, and a group A
beta-hemolytic Streptococcus was isolated from his throat during 2
episodes. The parents were consanguineous ('share a common
great-grandparent'). C3 could not be detected by RIA of serum from the
patient (613779). Segregation of C3S and C3F allotypes within the family
confirmed the presence of a null allele, for which the patient was
homozygous. DNA studies showed a GT-to-AT mutation at the 5-prime donor
splice site of intron 18 of the C3 gene. Exons 17-21 were amplified by
PCR from first-strand cDNA synthesized from mRNA obtained from
peripheral blood monocytes. This revealed a 61-bp deletion in exon 18,
resulting from splicing of a cryptic 5-prime donor splice site in exon
18 with the normal 3-prime splice site in exon 19. The deletion led to a
disturbance of the reading frame of the mRNA with a stop codon 17 bp
downstream from the abnormal splice in exon 18. Both parents were
heterozygous for the C3*Q0 allele (Q0 = quantity zero, i.e., null
allele).

.0004
C3 DEFICIENCY
C3, 800-BP DEL

Botto et al. (1992) demonstrated partial gene deletion as the molecular
basis of C3 deficiency (613779) in an Afrikaner patient previously
described by Alper et al. (1972) as homozygous C3 deficient. By Southern
blot analysis, they demonstrated that the C3 null gene had an 800-bp
deletion in exons 22 and 23, resulting in a frameshift and a stop codon
19 bp downstream from the deletion. DNA sequence analysis showed that
the deletion probably arose from homologous recombination between 2 ALU
repeats flanking the deletion. This mutant allele was found to have a
gene frequency of 0.0057 in the South African Afrikaans-speaking
population.

.0005
HEMOLYTIC UREMIC SYNDROME, ATYPICAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 5
C3, ARG570GLN

In 2 sibs with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (AHUS5; 612925),
Fremeaux-Bacchi et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous 1775G-A
transition in exon 14 of the C3 gene, resulting in an arg570-to-gln
(R570Q) substitution. Both patients developed end-stage renal disease
and had a total of 5 renal transplants; disease recurred in 1 of the
patients after transplant. In vitro functional expression studies showed
that binding of the mutant C3 protein to MCP (120290) was decreased to
22% of wildtype, which would result in resistance to cleavage by factor
I (CFI; 217030). The mutant C3 also showed reduced binding to factor H
(CFH; 134370) and iC3. The findings indicated that a modification in
interactions with regulators results in a secondary gain of function of
mutant C3. A third unrelated patient also carried this mutation, which
was inherited from her unaffected mother.

.0006
HEMOLYTIC UREMIC SYNDROME, ATYPICAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 5
C3, ALA1072VAL

In a 2-year-old girl with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome-5 (612925),
Fremeaux-Bacchi et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous 3281C-T
transition in exon 26 of the C3 gene, resulting in an ala1072-to-val
(A1072V) substitution. She recovered by age 15 years. Her unaffected
father also carried the mutation. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that binding of the mutant C3 protein to MCP (120290) was
decreased to 18% of wildtype, which would result in resistance to
cleavage by factor I (CFI; 217030). The mutant C3 also showed reduced
binding to factor H (CFH; 134370) and iC3. The findings indicated that a
modification in interactions with regulators results in a secondary gain
of function of mutant C3.

.0007
HEMOLYTIC UREMIC SYNDROME, ATYPICAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 5
C3, ASP1093ASN

In a 23-year-old woman with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (AHUS5;
612925), Fremeaux-Bacchi et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous 3343G-A
transition in exon 26 of the C3 gene, resulting in an asp1093-to-asn
(D1093N) substitution. She had end-stage renal disease and 2 kidney
transplants. In vitro functional expression studies showed that binding
of the mutant C3 protein to MCP (120290) was decreased to 17% of
wildtype, which would result in resistance to cleavage by factor I (CFI;
217030). The mutant C3 also showed reduced binding to factor H (CFH;
134370) and iC3. The findings indicated that a modification in
interactions with regulators results in a secondary gain of function of
mutant C3.

.0008
HEMOLYTIC UREMIC SYNDROME, ATYPICAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 5
C3, TYR832TER

In a 6-year-old boy with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome-5 (612925),
Fremeaux-Bacchi et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous 2562C-G
transversion in exon 20 of the C3 gene, resulting in a tyr832-to-ter
(Y832X) substitution. The patient recovered by age 10 years. His
unaffected mother also carried the mutation. The mutation was predicted
to result in haploinsufficiency of C3. The authors noted that this
finding made the pathogenic mechanism difficult to explain relative to
the concept of increased complement activation as the predisposing event
in aHUS.

.0009
C3 DEFICIENCY
C3, IVS38AS, A-G

In a 22-year-old Japanese male patient with C3 deficiency (613779) and
systemic lupus erythematosus, born of consanguineous parents, Tsukamoto
et al. (2005) identified a homozygous A-to-G transition in the acceptor
site of intron 38 of the C3 gene, resulting in skipping of exon 39.
Complement assay detected no C3 in serum and only a trace amount of C3
hemolytic activity. Both parents and 2 sibs were heterozygous for the
mutation, and all had reduced levels of C3 hemolytic activity. The
patient had suffered from photosensitivity, recurrent fever, and facial
erythema from childhood. Expression of the mutant cDNA in COS-7 cells
resulted retention of the molecule in the ER-Golgi intermediate
compartment due to defective secretion. Tsukamoto et al. (2005)
concluded that SLE or an SLE-like disease is a complication of
hereditary homozygous C3 deficiency in Japan.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Alper et al. (1976); Alper et al. (1969); Alper and Rosen (1971);
Arvilommi et al. (1973); Ballow et al. (1975); Berg and Heiberg (1978);
Botto et al. (1990); Donald and Ball (1984); Einstein et al. (1977);
Gedde-Dahl et al. (1974); Goedde et al. (1970); Hoppe et al. (1978);
Koch and Behrendt (1986); McLean et al. (1985); Muller-Eberhard  (1968);
Raum et al. (1980); Raum et al. (1980); Teisberg  (1971); Teisberg
(1970); Walport  (2001); Whitehead et al. (1981); Winkelstein et al.
(1981)
REFERENCE 1. Ajees, A. A.; Gunasekaran, K.; Volanakis, J. E.; Narayana, S. V.
L.; Kotwal, G. J.; Krishna Murthy, H. M.: The structure of complement
C3b provides insights into complement activation and regulation. Nature 444:
221-225, 2006.

2. Alper, C. A.; Colten, H. R.; Gear, J. S. S.; Rabson, A. R.; Rosen,
F. S.: Homozygous human C3 deficiency: the role of C3 in antibody
production, C1s-induced vasopermeability, and cobra venom-induced
passive hemolysis. J. Clin. Invest. 57: 222-229, 1976.

3. Alper, C. A.; Colten, H. R.; Rosen, S. F.; Rabson, A. R.; MacNab,
G. M.; Gear, J. S. S.: Homozygous deficiency of C3 in a patient with
repeated infections. Lancet 300: 1179-1181, 1972. Note: Originally
Volume II.

4. Alper, C. A.; Propp, R. P.: Genetic polymorphism of the third
component of human complement (C-prime-3). J. Clin. Invest. 47:
2181-2192, 1968.

5. Alper, C. A.; Propp, R. P.; Klemperer, M. R.; Rosen, F. S.: Inherited
deficiency of the third component of human complement (C-prime-3). J.
Clin. Invest. 48: 553-557, 1969.

6. Alper, C. A.; Rosen, F. S.: Studies of a hypomorphic variant of
human C3. J. Clin. Invest. 50: 324-326, 1971.

7. Arvilommi, H.; Berg, K.; Eriksson, A. W.: C3 types and their inheritance
in Finnish Lapps, Maris (Cheremisses) and Greenland Eskimos. Humangenetik 18:
253-259, 1973.

8. Azen, E. A.; Smithies, O.: Genetic polymorphism of C-prime-3 (beta-1C-globulin)
in human serum. Science 162: 905-907, 1968.

9. Ball, S.; Buckton, K. E.; Corney, G.; Fey, G.; Monteiro, M.; Noades,
J. E.; Pym, B.; Robson, E. B.; Tippett, P.: Mapping studies with
peptidase D (PEPD). (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 37: 411 only,
1984.

10. Ballow, M.; Shira, J. E.; Harden, L.; Yang, S. Y.; Day, N. K.
: Complete absence of the third component of complement in man. J.
Clin. Invest. 56: 703-710, 1975.

11. Berg, K.; Heiberg, A.: Linkage studies on familial hypercholesterolemia
with xanthomatosis: normal lipoprotein markers and the C3 polymorphism. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 16: 266-270, 1976.

12. Berg, K.; Heiberg, A.: Linkage between familial hypercholesterolemia
with xanthomatosis and the C3 polymorphism confirmed. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 22: 621-623, 1978.

13. Bergeron-Sawitzke, J.; Gold, B.; Olsh, A.; Schlotterbeck, S.;
Lemon, K.; Visvanathan, K.; Allikmets, R.; Dean, M.: Multilocus analysis
of age-related macular degeneration. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 17: 1190-1199,
2009.

14. Botto, M.; Fong, K. Y.; So, A. K.; Barlow, R.; Routier, R.; Morley,
B. J.; Walport, M. J.: Homozygous hereditary C3 deficiency due to
a partial gene deletion. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 4957-4961, 1992.

15. Botto, M.; Fong, K. Y.; So, A. K.; Koch, C.; Walport, M. J.:
Molecular basis of polymorphisms of human complement component C3. J.
Exp. Med. 172: 1011-1017, 1990.

16. Botto, M.; Fong, K. Y.; So, A. K.; Rudge, A.; Walport, M. J.:
Molecular basis of hereditary C3 deficiency. J. Clin. Invest. 86:
1158-1163, 1990.

17. Brook, J. D.; Shaw, D. J.; Meredith, A. L.; Worwood, M.; Cowell,
J.; Scott, J.; Knott, T. J.; Litt, M.; Bufton, L.; Harper, P. S.:
A somatic cell hybrid panel for chromosome 19: localization of known
genes and RFLPs and orientation of the linkage group. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 40: 590-591, 1985.

18. Brook, J. D.; Shaw, D. J.; Meredith, L.; Bruns, G. A. P.; Harper,
P. S.: Localisation of genetic markers and orientation of the linkage
group on chromosome 19. Hum. Genet. 68: 282-285, 1984.

19. Brown, K. M.; Kondeatis, E.; Vaughan, R. W.; Kon, S. P.; Farmer,
C. K. T.; Taylor, J. D.; He, X.; Johnston, A.; Horsfield, C.; Janssen,
B. J. C.; Gros, P.; Zhou, W.; Sacks, S. H.; Sheerin, N. S.: Influence
of donor C3 allotype on late renal-transplantation outcome. New Eng.
J. Med. 354: 2014-2123, 2006.

20. Circolo, A.; Garnier, G.; Fukuda, W.; Wang, X.; Hidvegi, T.; Szalai,
A. J.; Briles, D. E.; Volanakis, J. E.; Wetsel, R. A.; Colten, H.
R.: Genetic disruption of the murine complement C3 promoter region
generates deficient mice with extrahepatic expression of C3 mRNA. Immunopharmacology 42:
135-149, 1999.

21. Davies, K. E.; Williamson, R.; Ball, S.; Sarfarazi, M.; Meredith,
L.; Fey, G.; Harper, P. S.: C3 DNA sequence and protein polymorphisms
in linkage analysis of myotonic dystrophy. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 37: 447 only, 1984.

22. de Bruijn, M. H. L.; Fey, G. H.: Human complement component C3:
cDNA coding sequence and derived primary structure. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 82: 708-712, 1985.

23. Degn, S. E.; Jensenius, J. C.; Thiel, S.: Disease-causing mutations
in genes of the complement system. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 88: 689-705,
2011.

24. Donald, J. A.; Ball, S. P.: Approximate linkage equilibrium between
two polymorphic sites within the gene for human complement component
3. Ann. Hum. Genet. 48: 269-273, 1984.

25. Drouin, S. M.; Corry, D. B.; Kildsgaard, J.; Wetsel, R. A.: Cutting
edge: the absence of C3 demonstrates a role for complement in Th2
effector functions in a murine model of pulmonary allergy. J. Immun. 167:
4141-4145, 2001.

26. Eiberg, H.; Mohr, J.; Nielsen, L. S.; Simonsen, N.: Genetics
and linkage relationships of the C3 polymorphism: discovery of C3-Se
linkage and assignment of LES-C3-DM-Se-PEPD-Lu synteny to chromosome
19. Clin. Genet. 24: 159-170, 1983.

27. Einstein, L. P.; Hansen, P. J.; Ballow, M.; Davis, A. E., III;
Davis, J. S., IV; Alper, C. A.; Rosen, F. S.; Colten, H. R.: Biosynthesis
of the third component of complement (C3) in vitro by monocytes from
both normal and homozygous C3-deficient humans. J. Clin. Invest. 60:
963-969, 1977.

28. Elston, R. C.; Namboodiri, K. K.; Go, R. C. P.; Siervogel, R.
M.; Glueck, C. J.: Probable linkage between essential familial hypercholesterolemia
and third complement component (C3). Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 16:
294-297, 1976.

29. Fong, K. Y.; Botto, M.; Walport, M. J.; So, A. K.: Genomic organization
of human complement component C3. Genomics 7: 579-586, 1990.

30. Forneris, F.; Ricklin, D.; Wu, J.; Tzekou, A.; Wallace, R. S.;
Lambris, J. D.; Gros, P.: Structures of C3b in complex with factors
B and D give insight into complement convertase formation. Science 330:
1816-1820, 2010.

31. Fremeaux-Bacchi, V.; Miller, E. C.; Liszewski, M. K.; Strain,
L.; Blouin, J.; Brown, A. L.; Moghal, N.; Kaplan, B. S.; Weiss, R.
A.; Lhotta, K.; Kapur, G.; Mattoo, T.; and 14 others: Mutations
in complement C3 predispose to development of atypical hemolytic uremic
syndrome. Blood 112: 4948-4952, 2008.

32. Fritsche, L. G.; Chen, W.; Schu, M.; Yaspan, B. L.; Yu, Y.; Thorleifsson,
G.; Zack, D. J.; Arakawa, S.; Cipriani, V.; Ripke, S.; Igo, R. P.,
Jr.; Buitendijk, G. H. S.; and 144 others: Seven new loci associated
with age-related macular degeneration. Nature Genet. 45: 433-439,
2013.

33. Gedde-Dahl, T., Jr.; Teisberg, P.; Thorsby, E.: C(3) polymorphism:
genetic linkage relations. Clin. Genet. 6: 66-72, 1974.

34. Goedde, H. W.; Benkmann, H.-G.; Hirth, L.: Genetic polymorphism
of C-prime-3(beta-1C-globulin) component of complement in a German
and a Spanish population. Humangenetik 10: 231-234, 1970.

35. Hoppe, H. H.; Goedde, H. W.; Agarwal, D. P.; Benkmann, H.-G.;
Hirth, L.; Janssen, W.: A silent (C-prime-3) producing partial deficiency
of the third component of human complement. Hum. Hered. 28: 141-146,
1978.

36. Huber-Lang, M.; Sarma, J. V.; Zetoune, F. S.; Rittirsch, D.; Neff,
T. A.; McGuire, S. R.; Lambris, J. D.; Warner, R. L.; Flierl, M. A.;
Hoesel, L. M.; Gebhard, F.; Younger, J. G.; Drouin, S. M.; Wetsel,
R. A.; Ward, P. A.: Generation of C5a in the absence of C3: a new
complement activation pathway. Nature Med. 12: 682-687, 2006.

37. Janssen, B. J. C.; Christodoulidou, A.; McCarthy, A.; Lambris,
J. D.; Gros, P.: Structure of C3b reveals conformational changes
that underlie complement activity. Nature 444: 213-216, 2006.

38. Janssen, B. J. C.; Huizinga, E. G.; Raaijmakers, H. C. A.; Roos,
A.; Daha, M. R.; Nilsson-Ekdahl, K.; Nilsson, B.; Gros, P.: Structures
of complement component C3 provide insights into the function and
evolution of immunity. Nature 437: 505-511, 2005.

39. Johnson, J. P.; McLean, R. H.; Cork, L. C.; Winkelstein, J. A.
: Genetic analysis of an inherited deficiency of the third component
of complement in Brittany spaniel dogs. Am. J. Med. Genet. 25: 557-562,
1986.

40. Koch, C.; Behrendt, N.: A novel polymorphism of human complement
component C3 detected by means of a monoclonal antibody. Immunogenetics 23:
322-325, 1986.

41. Lusis, A. J.; Heinzmann, C.; Sparkes, R. S.; Scott, J.; Knott,
T. J.; Geller, R.; Sparkes, M. C.; Mohandas, T.: Regional mapping
of human chromosome 19: organization of genes for plasma lipid transport
(APOC1, -C2, and -E and LDLR) and the genes C3, PEPD, and GPI. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 3929-3933, 1986.

42. Maller, J. B.; Fagerness, J. A.; Reynolds, R. C.; Neale, B. M.;
Daly, M. J.; Seddon, J. M.: Variation in complement factor 3 is associated
with risk of age-related macular degeneration. Nature Genet. 39:
1200-1201, 2007.

43. McLean, R. H.; Bryan, R. K.; Winkelstein, J.: Hypomorphic variant
of the slow allele of C3 associated with hypocomplementemia and hematuria. Am.
J. Med. 78: 865-868, 1985.

44. Muller-Eberhard, H. J.: Chemistry and reaction mechanisms of
complement. Adv. Immun. 8: 1-80, 1968.

45. Nilsson, U. R.; Nilsson, B.; Storm, K.-E.; Sjolin-Forsberg, G.;
Hallgren, R.: Hereditary dysfunction of the third component of complement
associated with a systemic lupus erythematosus-like syndrome and meningococcal
meningitis. Arthritis Rheum. 35: 580-586, 1992.

46. Ott, J.; Schrott, H. G.; Goldstein, J. L.; Hazzard, W. R.; Allen,
F. H.; Falk, C. T.; Motulsky, A. G.: Linkage studies in a large kindred
with familial hypercholesterolemia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 26: 598-603,
1974.

47. Pratt, J. R.; Basheer, S. A.; Sacks, S. H.: Local synthesis of
complement component C3 regulates acute renal transplant rejection. Nature
Med. 8: 582-587, 2002.

48. Rahpeymai, Y.; Hietala, M. A.; Wilhelmsson, U.; Fotheringham,
A.; Davies, I.; Nilsson, A.-K.; Zwirner, J.; Wetsel, R. A.; Gerard,
C.; Pekny, M.; Pekna, M.: Complement: a novel factor in basal and
ischemia-induced neurogenesis. EMBO J. 25: 1364-1374, 2006.

49. Raum, D.; Balner, H.; Petersen, B. H.; Alper, C. A.: Genetic
polymorphism of serum complement components in the chimpanzee. Immunogenetics 10:
455-468, 1980.

50. Raum, D.; Donaldson, V. H.; Rosen, F. S.; Alper, C. A.: Genetics
of complement. Curr. Top. Hemat. 3: 111-174, 1980.

51. Reis, E. S.; Falcao, D. A.; Isaac, L.: Clinical aspects and molecular
basis of primary deficiencies of complement component C3 and its regulatory
proteins factor I and factor H. Scand. J. Immun. 63: 155-168, 2006.

52. Roychoudhury, A. K.; Nei, M.: Human Polymorphic Genes: World
Distribution.  New York: Oxford Univ. Press (pub.)  1988.

53. Sanders, M. F.; Crandall, J.; Huey, B.; Leung, R.; King, M. C.
: Possible synteny of LE, SE, and C3. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 37: 575 only, 1984.

54. Sivaprasad, S.; Adewoyin, T.; Bailey, T. A.; Dandekar, S. S.;
Jenkins, S.; Webster, A. R.; Chong, N. V.: Estimation of systemic
complement C3 activity in age-related macular degeneration. Arch.
Ophthal. 125: 515-519, 2007.

55. Skok, J.; Solomon, E.; Reid, K. B. M.; Thompson, R. A.: Distinct
genes for fibroblast and serum C1q. Nature 292: 549-551, 1981.

56. Teisberg, P.: Another variant in the C3 system. Clin. Genet. 2:
298-302, 1971.

57. Teisberg, P.: New variants in the C3 system. Hum. Hered. 20:
631-637, 1970.

58. Tsukamoto, H.; Horiuchi, T.; Kokuba, H.; Nagae, S.; Nishizaka,
H.; Sawabe, T.; Harashima, S.; Himeji, D.; Koyama, T.; Otsuka, J.;
Mitoma. H.; Kimoto, Y.; Hashimura, C.; Kitano, E.; Kitamura, H.; Furue,
M.; Harada, M.: Molecular analysis of a novel hereditary C3 deficiency
with systemic lupus erythematosus. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 330:
298-304, 2005.

59. Walport, M. J.: Complement (first of two parts). New Eng. J.
Med. 344: 1058-1066, 2001.

60. Weitkamp, L. R.; Johnston, E.; Guttormsen, S. A.: Probable genetic
linkage between the loci for the Lewis blood group and complement
C3. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 13: 183-184, 1974.

61. Wetsel, R. A.; Kildsgaard, J.; Zsigmond E.; Liao, W.; Chan, L.
: Genetic deficiency of acylation stimulating protein (ASP(C3ades-Arg))
does not cause hyperapobetalipoproteinemia in mice. J. Biol. Chem. 274:
19429-19433, 1999.

62. Whitehead, A. S.; Sim, R. B.; Bodmer, W. F.: A monoclonal antibody
against human complement component C3: the production of C3 by human
cells in vitro. Europ. J. Immun. 11: 140-146, 1981.

63. Whitehead, A. S.; Solomon, E.; Chambers, S.; Bodmer, W. F.; Povey,
S.; Fey, G.: Assignment of the structural gene for the third component
of human complement to chromosome 19. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 79:
5021-5025, 1982.

64. Wieme, R. J.; Demeulenaere, L.: Genetically determined electrophoretic
variant of the human complement component C-prime-3. Nature 214:
1042-1043, 1967.

65. Wiesmann, C.; Katschke, K. J., Jr.; Yin, J.; Helmy, K. Y.; Steffek,
M.; Fairbrother, W. J.; McCallum, S. A.; Embuscado, L.; DeForge, L.;
Hass, P. E.; van Lookeren Campagne, M.: Structure of C3b in complex
with CRIg gives insights into regulation of complement activation. Nature 444:
217-220, 2006.

66. Williamson, R.: Personal Communication. London, England  8/25/1983.

67. Winkelstein, J. A.; Cork, L. C.; Griffin, D. E.; Griffin, J. W.;
Adams, R. J.; Price, D. L.: Genetically determined deficiency of
the third component of complement in the dog. Science 212: 1169-1170,
1981.

68. Xia, Z.; Sniderman, A. D.; Cianflone, K.: Acylation-stimulating
protein (ASP) deficiency induces obesity resistance and increased
energy expenditure in ob/ob mice. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 45874-45879,
2002.

69. Yates, J. R. W.; Sepp, T.; Matharu, B. K.; Khan, J. C.; Thurlby,
D. A.; Shahid, H.; Clayton, D. G.; Hayward, C.; Morgan, J.; Wright,
A. F.; Armbrecht, A. M.; Dhillon, B.; Deary, I. J.; Redmond, E.; Bird,
A. C.; Moore, A. T.: Complement C3 variant and the risk of age-related
macular degeneration. New Eng. J. Med. 357: 553-561, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/22/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/28/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/11/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/25/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/27/2010
Jane Kelly - updated: 10/30/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/18/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/21/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/28/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/20/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/22/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/3/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/28/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/31/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/11/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/25/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED alopez: 10/22/2013
alopez: 8/7/2013
carol: 7/6/2012
carol: 11/28/2011
terry: 5/17/2011
carol: 4/25/2011
terry: 3/22/2011
terry: 3/10/2011
carol: 3/1/2011
alopez: 2/3/2011
terry: 1/28/2011
mgross: 6/14/2010
terry: 6/11/2010
wwang: 5/25/2010
wwang: 1/29/2010
terry: 1/27/2010
carol: 7/30/2009
ckniffin: 7/27/2009
terry: 1/13/2009
terry: 1/12/2009
wwang: 12/27/2007
carol: 10/30/2007
alopez: 10/23/2007
terry: 10/18/2007
alopez: 10/4/2007
wwang: 8/27/2007
terry: 8/21/2007
ckniffin: 5/1/2007
alopez: 12/7/2006
terry: 11/28/2006
mgross: 8/7/2006
terry: 7/20/2006
terry: 6/22/2006
alopez: 11/7/2005
terry: 11/3/2005
terry: 5/17/2005
carol: 3/17/2004
mgross: 2/4/2004
terry: 4/28/2003
alopez: 5/31/2002
mgross: 1/9/2002
terry: 12/11/2001
carol: 4/30/2001
mcapotos: 4/26/2001
terry: 4/25/2001
carol: 8/4/1998
dkim: 6/30/1998
terry: 11/10/1997
mark: 7/30/1995
davew: 7/5/1994
mimadm: 6/25/1994
warfield: 4/8/1994
carol: 10/28/1992
carol: 8/17/1992

165080	TITLE *165080 V-ETS AVIAN ERYTHROBLASTOSIS VIRUS E26 ONCOGENE HOMOLOG; ERG
;;ONCOGENE ERG;;
ETS-RELATED GENE
ERG1, INCLUDED;;
ERG2, INCLUDED;;
ERG/TMPSSR2 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
ERG/EWS FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
ERG/FUS FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Reddy et al. (1987) isolated a cDNA representing the complete coding
sequence of oncogene ERG. Two regions of the predicted 363-residue
protein share about 40% and 70% homology with the 5-prime and 3-prime
regions of the viral Ets oncogene (see ETS1; 164720), respectively,
suggesting that ERG belongs to the ETS oncogene family.

By sequence analysis, Rao et al. (1987) identified 2 different ERG
transcripts, ERG1 and ERG2. ERG2 differs from ERG1 by a splicing event
that causes a frameshift resulting in an additional 99 amino acids at
the N terminus. In vitro transcription and translation resulted in 2
polypeptides of approximately 41 and 52 kD. Rao et al. (1987) concluded
that alternative sites of splicing and polyadenylation, together with
alternative sites of translation initiation, allow synthesis of 2 ERG
polypeptides.

Owczarek et al. (2004) stated that 5 alternatively spliced ERG
transcripts encode 5 proteins of 38 to 55 kD, all of which bind DNA at
ETS sites and act as transcriptional activators. By database analysis
and RT-PCR, they identified 4 additional ERG transcripts. RT-PCR
analysis of 6 ERG variants showed variable expression in placenta and
most human cell lines examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Murakami et al. (1993) found that ERG2 is a nuclear phosphoprotein that
binds purine-rich sequences. With a half-life of 21 hours, it is
considerably more stable than the short-lived ETS1 and ETS2 (164740)
proteins. Like other ETS proteins, ERG2 is a sequence-specific
DNA-binding protein and is expressed at higher levels in early myeloid
cells than in mature lymphoid cells. Murakami et al. (1993) suggested
that ERG2 acts as a regulator of genes required for maintenance and/or
differentiation of early hematopoietic cells.

Using binding studies and reporter gene assays, Oram et al. (2010) found
that ERG and FLI1 (193067) bound and activated the intermediate promoter
of the LMO2 gene (180385) in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL)
samples. LMO2 also bound enhancers in the FLI1 and ERG loci, and all 3
proteins bound an enhancer element in the first intron of the
hematopoietically expressed HHEX gene (604420) and upregulated
expression of an HHEX reporter gene. Oram et al. (2010) proposed that a
self-sustaining triad of LMO2, ERG, and FLI1 are involved in T-ALL by
stabilizing HHEX expression.

GENE STRUCTURE

Owczarek et al. (2004) determined that the ERG gene contains at least 17
exons and spans 282 kb. The 5-prime end contains a major CpG island. A
region upstream of exon 1 and a 1-kb region within intron 1 contain
multiple transcription factor-binding sites. Owczarek et al. (2004)
noted that not all exons of human ERG are conserved in mouse Erg.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis, Rao et al. (1987) mapped the ERG
oncogene to chromosome 21. By family linkage studies to DNA markers
translocated along with ETS2 to the derivative chromosome 8 in the
t(8;21) translocation of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML; 601626),
Sacchi et al. (1988) concluded that the ETS2 gene is located about 17 cM
from the breakpoint. By family linkage studies using RFLPs, Sacchi et
al. (1988) demonstrated that ERG is situated just proximal to ETS2. Rao
et al. (1988) and Modi et al. (1989) concluded from in situ
hybridization and somatic cell hybridization that the ERG gene is
located at chromosome 21q22.3.

Owczarek et al. (2004) mapped the mouse Erg gene to a region of
chromosome 16 that shares incomplete homology of synteny with human
chromosome 21q22.2-q22.3.

CYTOGENETICS

Rao et al. (1988) found that the ERG gene is translocated from
chromosome 21 to chromosome 8 in the t(8;21)(q22;q22), a nonrandom
translocation found in patients with acute myelogenous leukemia of the
subtype M2 (AML-M2).

- ERG/FUS and ERG/EWS Fusion Genes

Ichikawa et al. (1994) demonstrated that in human myeloid leukemia with
the t(16;21)(p11;q22) translocation the ERG gene is fused with the
TLS/FUS gene (137070) on chromosome 16. The chimeric gene product is an
RNA-binding protein that is highly homologous to the product of the EWS
gene (133450) involved in Ewing sarcoma (ES; 612219). Thus, the FUS/ERG
gene fusion in t(16;21) leukemia was predicted to produce a protein
similar to the EWS/ERG chimeric protein seen in Ewing sarcoma.

Ewing sarcoma, the second most common malignant bone tumor of children
and young adults, is an aggressive osteolytic tumor with a marked
propensity for dissemination. It belongs to the heterogeneous group of
small round cell tumors that are often a diagnostic challenge to the
pathologist and clinical oncologist. Ewing sarcoma and related
peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs or 'peanut' tumors)
show a t(11;22) translocation or a (21,22) rearrangement that is
associated with hybrid transcripts of the EWS gene with the FLI1
(193067) or ERG gene. ERG is a member of the ETS family of transcription
factors closely related to FLI1. The chimeric protein resulting from the
fusion of EWS with ERG is structurally similar to the typical EWS-FLI1
protein in which the N-terminal portion of EWS is linked to the ETS
domain of ERG. Delattre et al. (1994) explored the possibility that
these fusion genes may be the defining criterion for the Ewing family of
tumors. Samples of RNA from 114 tumors were reverse transcribed and
subjected to the polymerase chain reaction with primers designed to
amplify the relevant chimeric transcripts. In-frame transcripts were
observed in 89 cases. A hybrid transcript was found in 83 of 87 cases
(95%) of Ewing sarcoma or peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors.
Altogether, 78 tumors contained an EWS-FLI1 fusion transcript and 11
tumors had an EWS-ERG fusion transcript. Four different EWS-ERG
junctions were found. Kretschmar (1994) discussed the diagnostic and
therapeutic potential of these findings. The abnormal fusion transcript
might, for example, be targeted and scrambled by specific antisense
oligonucleotides, leading to improved eradication of disease in children
with these neoplasms based on biology-specific therapy.

By Western blot analysis, Yang et al. (2000) showed that the N-terminal
domain of TLS binds to RNA polymerase II and that this binding is
retained by the TLS-ERG fusion protein. However, the C-terminal domain
of TLS is required for interaction with the serine-arginine (SR)
splicing factor SC35 (SFRS2; 600813) and the TLS-associated SR proteins
TASR1 and TASR2; this binding is lost in the TLS-ERG fusion protein
because ERG replaces the C terminus of TLS.

- ERG/TMPRSS2 Fusion Gene

Tomlins et al. (2005) used a bioinformatics approach to discover
candidate oncogenic chromosomal aberrations on the basis of outlier gene
expression. Two ETS transcription factors, ERG and ETV1 (600541), were
identified as outliers in prostate cancer (see 176807). Tomlins et al.
(2005) identified recurrent gene fusions of the 5-prime untranslated
region of TMPRSS2 (602060) to ERG or ETV1 in prostate cancer tissues
with outlier expression. Using FISH, Tomlins et al. (2005) demonstrated
that 23 of 29 prostate cancer samples harbored rearrangements in ERG or
ETV1. Cell line experiments suggested that the androgen-responsive
promoter elements of TMPRSS2 mediate the overexpression of ETS family
members in prostate cancer.

The TMPRS22 and ERG genes are arranged tandemly on chromosome 21q22. The
TMPRSS2/ERG fusion joins TMPRSS2 exons 1 or 2 usually to ERG exons 2, 3
or 4, which results in activation of the ERG transcription factor. This
fusion separates the ERG 3-prime centromeric regions from the 5-prime
telomeric ends; deletions of this region can also occur. Attard et al.
(2008) performed FISH studies of the TMPRS22/ERG genes in 445 prostate
cancers from patients who had been managed conservatively. They
identified an alteration, called 2+Edel, characterized by duplication of
the TMPRS22/ERG fusion (detected as duplication of 3-prime ERG sequence)
together with interstitial deletion of 5-prime ERG sequences. The
alteration was found in 6.6% of cancers and was associated with very
poor clinical outcome compared to cancers with normal ERG loci (25% vs
90% survival at 8 years). Cancers with 1 copy of 3-prime ERG (1Edel) did
not have a worse clinical outcome. The findings were consistent with the
hypothesis that overexpression of ERG that results from the fusion of
5-prime TMPRSS2 to 3-prime ERG is responsible for driving cancer
progression. Attard et al. (2008) suggested that determination of ERG
gene status, including duplication of the fusion of TMPRSS2 to ERG
sequences in 2+Edel, may allow stratification of prostate cancer into
distinct survival categories.

Using dual-color FISH in LNCaP prostate cancer cells, which are
androgen-sensitive but lack the TMPRSS2-ERG fusion gene, Mani et al.
(2009) observed that stimulation with the androgen receptor (AR; 313700)
ligand dihydrotestosterone (DHT) for 60 minutes induced proximity
between the TMPRSS2 and ERG genomic loci. The effect was dependent upon
AR, as the same proximity was not induced in an androgen-insensitive
prostate cancer cell line. To determine whether the induced proximity
facilitates formation of these gene fusions, Mani et al. (2009) treated
LNCaP cells with DHT for 12 hours and then irradiated the cells to
induce DNA double-strand breaks. TMPRSS2-ERG fusions were detected in
25% of clones treated with 3-Gy irradiation but in only 2.3% of those
treated with 1-Gy. Mani et al. (2009) speculated that androgen signaling
colocalizes the 5- and 3-prime gene fusion partners, thereby increasing
the probability of a gene fusion when subjected to agents that cause DNA
double-strand breaks.

REFERENCE 1. Attard, G.; Clark, J.; Ambroisine, L.; Fisher, G.; Kovacs, G.;
Flohr, P.; Berney, D.; Foster, C. S.; Fletcher, A.; Gerald, W.; Moller,
H.; Reuter, V.; De Bono, J. S.; Scardino, P.; Cuzick, J.; Cooper,
C. S.: Duplication of the fusion of TMPRSS2 to ERG sequences identifies
fatal human prostate cancer. Oncogene 27: 253-263, 2008.

2. Delattre, O.; Zucman, J.; Melot, T.; Garau, X. S.; Zucker, J.-M.;
Lenoir, G. M.; Ambros, P. F.; Sheer, D.; Turc-Carel, C.; Triche, T.
J.; Aurias, A.; Thomas, G.: The Ewing family of tumors--a subgroup
of small-round-cell tumors defined by specific chimeric transcripts. New
Eng. J. Med. 331: 294-299, 1994.

3. Ichikawa, H.; Shimizu, K.; Hayashi, Y.; Ohki, M.: An RNA-binding
protein gene, TLS/FUS, is fused to ERG in human myeloid leukemia with
t(16;21) chromosomal translocation . Cancer Res. 54: 2865-2868,
1994.

4. Kretschmar, C. S.: Ewing's sarcoma and the 'peanut' tumors. (Editorial) New
Eng. J. Med. 331: 325-327, 1994.

5. Mani, R.-S.; Tomlins, S. A.; Callahan, K.; Ghosh, A.; Nyati, M.
K.; Varambally, S.; Palanisamy, N.; Chinnaiyan, A. M.: Induced chromosomal
proximity and gene fusions in prostate cancer. Science 326: 1230
only, 2009.

6. Modi, W. S.; Reddy, S. P.; Rao, V.; Papas, T. S.; O'Brien, S. J.
: Chromosomal localization of the ERG cellular proto-oncogene. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 51: 1046 only, 1989.

7. Murakami, K.; Mavrothalassitis, G.; Bhat, N. K.; Fisher, R. J.;
Papas, T. S.: Human ERG-2 protein is a phosphorylated DNA-binding
protein--a distinct member of the ETS family. Oncogene 8: 1559-1566,
1993.

8. Oram, S. H.; Thoms, J. A. I.; Pridans, C.; Janes, M. E.; Kinston,
S. J.; Anand, S.; Landry, J.-R.; Lock, R. B.; Jayaraman, P.-S.; Huntly,
B. J.; Pimanda, J. E.; Gottgens, B.: A previously unrecognized promoter
of LMO2 forms part of a transcriptional regulatory circuit mediating
LMO2 expression in a subset of T-acute lymphoblastic leukaemia patients. Oncogene 29:
5796-5808, 2010.

9. Owczarek, C. M.; Portbury, K. J.; Hardy, M. P.; O'Leary, D. A.;
Kudoh, J.; Shibuya, K.; Shimizu, N.; Kola, I.; Hertzog, P. J.: Detailed
mapping of the ERG-ETS2 interval of human chromosome 21 and comparison
with the region of conserved synteny on mouse chromosome 16. Gene 324:
65-77, 2004.

10. Rao, V. N.; Modi, W. S.; Drabkin, H. D.; Patterson, D.; O'Brien,
S. J.; Papas, T. S.; Reddy, E. S.: The human ERG gene maps to chromosome
21, band q22: relationship to the 8;21 translocation of acute myelogenous
leukemia. Oncogene 3: 497-500, 1988.

11. Rao, V. N.; Papas, T. S.; Reddy, E. S. P.: ERG, a human ETS-related
gene on chromosome 21: alternative splicing, polyadenylation, and
translation. Science 237: 635-639, 1987.

12. Reddy, E. S. P.; Rao, V. N.; Papas, T. S.: The ERG gene: a human
gene related to the ETS oncogene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 6131-6135,
1987.

13. Sacchi, N.; Cheng, S. V.; Tanzi, R. E.; Gusella, J. F.; Drabkin,
H. A.; Patterson, D.; Haines, J. H.; Papas, T. S.: The ETS genes
on chromosome 21 are distal to the breakpoint of the acute myelogenous
leukemia translocation (8;21). Genomics 3: 110-116, 1988.

14. Tomlins, S. A.; Rhodes, D. R.; Perner, S.; Dhanasekaran, S. M.;
Mehra, R.; Sun, X.-W.; Varambally, S.; Cao, X.; Tchinda, J.; Kuefer,
R.; Lee, C.; Montie, J. E.; Shah, R. B.; Pienta, K. J.; Rubin, M.
A.; Chinnaiyan, A. M.: Recurrent fusion of TMPRSS2 and ETS transcription
factor genes in prostate cancer. Science 310: 644-648, 2005.

15. Yang, L.; Embree, L. J.; Hickstein, D. D.: TLS-ERG leukemia fusion
protein inhibits RNA splicing mediated by serine-arginine proteins. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 20: 3345-3354, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 07/25/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/19/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/8/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/14/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/14/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/7/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/2/1987

EDITED mgross: 07/25/2013
wwang: 1/28/2010
ckniffin: 1/19/2010
alopez: 1/8/2010
carol: 8/5/2008
mgross: 1/15/2008
terry: 1/14/2008
alopez: 11/15/2005
terry: 11/14/2005
carol: 5/20/2003
mgross: 7/7/2000
mark: 7/12/1996
carol: 1/20/1995
terry: 8/25/1994
carol: 7/6/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 7/24/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990

600713	TITLE *600713 11-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE I; HSD11B1
;;HSD11L
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

There are at least 2 isoforms of 11-beta-HSD. The first discovered,
HSD11B1, was purified (Lakshmi and Monder, 1988) and cloned (Agarwal et
al., 1989) from rat liver. This glycoprotein enzyme (also called type I)
catalyzes both 11-beta-dehydrogenation and the reverse 11-oxoreduction
reaction. The enzyme and corresponding mRNA have been detected in a wide
range of rat and human tissues, including liver, lung, and testis. The
other isoform, type II, is expressed predominantly in the kidney and
placenta and catalyzes only the 11-beta-dehydrogenation reaction; see
HSD11B2 (614232).

Tannin et al. (1991) isolated human cDNA clones encoding
11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type I from a testis cDNA library
by hybridization with the previously isolated rat 11-HSD cDNA clone. The
cDNA contained an open reading frame of 876 nucleotides, which predicted
a protein of 292 amino acids. The sequence was 77% identical at the
amino acid level to the rat 11-HSD. The mRNA was widely expressed but
the level of expression was highest in the liver.

GENE STRUCTURE

Tannin et al. (1991) determined that the HSD11B1 gene consists of 6
exons and is at least 9 kb long.

MAPPING

By hybridization of the human cDNA to a human/hamster hybrid cell panel,
Tannin et al. (1991) localized the HSD11B1 gene to chromosome 1. The
localization was confirmed by isolating the gene from a chromosome
1-specific library using the cDNA as a probe. By genomic sequence
analysis, Schutte et al. (2000) mapped the HSD11B1 gene to 1q32-q41.

GENE FUNCTION

Ricketts et al. (1998) studied the localization of this isozyme, using
an antibody raised in sheep against amino acids 19-33 of human
11-beta-HSD1. 11-Beta-HSD1 immunoreactivity was observed more intensely
around the hepatic central vein, with no staining around the portal
vein, hepatic artery, or bile ducts. Whereas no staining for
11-beta-HSD1 was seen in the adrenal medulla, immunoreactive protein was
observed in all 3 zones of the adrenal cortex (greatest in the zona
reticularis, less in the zona glomerulosa, and least in the zona
fasciculata). In the human ovary, immunoreactivity was observed in the
developing oocyte and the luteinized granulosa cells of the corpus
luteum. No staining was observed in granulosa cells, thecal cells, or
ovarian stroma, which contrasted with the marked expression of
11-beta-HSD2 in the granulosa cell layer. Sections of human decidua
showed high expression of 11-beta-HSD1 in decidual cells. In omental
adipose tissue, 11-beta-HSD1 immunoreactivity was observed in both
stromal and adipocyte cells.

Work by Nikkila et al. (1993) indicated that the liver isozyme HSD11B1
is probably not the cause of apparent mineralocorticoid excess with
hypertension. Further studies by Mune et al. (1995) demonstrated that
this syndrome is due to mutations in the kidney/placental isozyme (type
II) of HSD11 (HSD11B2).

Draper et al. (2002) studied the microsatellites CA19 and CA15 from DNA
of 413 normal individuals enrolled in the MONICA study of cardiovascular
risk factors and 557 Danish men (ADIGEN study), of whom 234 were obese
(BMI greater than or equal to 31 kg/m2) at draft board exam and 323 were
randomly selected controls from the draftee population with BMI below 31
kg/m2. No association was observed between HSD11B1 genotype and BMI in
either population. These data suggested that 11-beta-HSD1 is not a major
factor in explaining genetic susceptibility to obesity per se. However,
weak associations between HSD11B1 genotype, increased 11-beta-HSD1
activity, and waist-to-hip ratio suggested that polymorphic variability
at the HSD11B1 locus may influence susceptibility to central obesity
through enhanced 11-beta-HSD1 activity (cortisone to cortisol
conversion) in visceral adipose tissue.

Individual susceptibility to glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis is
difficult to predict clinically. The findings of Cooper et al. (2003)
suggested that measures of HSD11B1 activity may predict individual
susceptibility to glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis.

To test the hypothesis that HSD11B1 expression would increase in fetal
membranes during pregnancy and at labor, creating the potential for
local increase in cortisol production at term, Alfaidy et al. (2003)
examined HSD11B1 expression in placenta and fetal membranes obtained
during normal pregnancy from 6 nonlaboring women from uncomplicated term
pregnancies after elective cesarean section. At term, immunoreactive
HSD11B1 expression was localized predominantly to the chorion
trophoblast cells, attached deciduas, and amnion epithelial cells.
HSD11B1 expression in fetal membranes increased with gestational age and
reflected increased enzyme reductase activity. No change in HSD11B1
expression was found in placental tissue from the same patients. There
was a significant increase in HSD11B1 expression in amnion but not in
chorion with the onset of labor. Alfaidy et al. (2003) suggested that
increases in HSD11B1 expression/activity by intrauterine membranes
during late gestation may result in increased potential for a local
increase in cortisol production and that fetal membranes should be
considered as an extraadrenal source of cortisol during late gestation.
This local cortisol production may be involved in different pathways
contributing to the regulation of parturition.

Sandeep et al. (2004) showed that 11-beta-HSD1, but not 11-beta-HSD2,
mRNA is expressed in the human hippocampus, frontal cortex, and
cerebellum.

GENE FAMILY

Agarwal et al. (1995) compared the genes encoding the liver and kidney
isozymes, which they symbolized HSD11L and HSD11K, respectively. HSD11K
has 5 exons; HSD11L has 6 exons. The coding sequences of these genes are
only 21% identical. In vitro, the NAD(+)-dependent kidney (type 2)
isozyme catalyzes 11-beta-dehydrogenase but not reductase reactions,
whereas the NADP(+)-dependent liver (type 1) isozyme catalyzes both
reactions.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Cortisone Reductase Deficiency 2

In cortisone reductase deficiency (614662), activation of cortisone to
cortisol does not occur, suggesting a defect in the HSD11B1 gene because
11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 is a primary regulator of
tissue-specific glucocorticoid bioavailability. In vivo, 11-beta-HSD1
catalyzes the reduction of cortisone to cortisol, whereas purified
enzyme acts as a dehydrogenase, converting cortisol to cortisone.
Oxoreductase activity can be regained via an NADPH-regeneration system
involving the cytosolic enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD;
305900); however, because the catalytic domain of 11-beta-HSD1 faces
into the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), Draper et al. (2003)
hypothesized that the endolumenal hexose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
(H6PD; 138090) regenerates NADPH in the ER, thereby influencing
directionality of 11-beta-HSD1 activity. Draper et al. (2003) identified
variation in the HSD11B1 gene that was later shown to be polymorphism
(see 600713.0001). The patients of Draper et al. (2003) carried
causative mutations in the H6PD gene (see CORTRD1, 604931).

In 2 young boys with a mild form of cortisone reductase deficiency, in
whom no mutations were detected in the H6PD gene (138090), Lawson et al.
(2011) identified heterozygosity for 2 different missense mutations in
the HSD11B1 gene (600713.0002 and 600713.0003). The mutations were
inherited from their mothers, who had similar biochemical profiles.
Expression of the mutants in bacterial and mammalian cells greatly
reduced or abolished HSD11B1 activity.

- Association with Alzheimer Disease Risk

Because glucocorticoid excess increases neuronal vulnerability, genetic
variations in the glucocorticoid system may be related to the risk for
Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300). De Quervain et al. (2004) analyzed SNPs
in 10 glucocorticoid-related genes in 351 AD patients and 463 unrelated
control subjects. Set-association analysis revealed that a rare
haplotype in the 5-prime regulatory region of the HSD11B1 gene was
associated with a 6-fold increased risk for sporadic AD. In a
reporter-gene assay, the rare risk-associated haplotype reduced HSD11B1
transcription by 20% compared with the common haplotype. De Quervain et
al. (2004) concluded that a functional variation in the glucocorticoid
system increases risk for AD.

OTHER FEATURES

In aging humans and rodents, interindividual differences in cognitive
function have been ascribed to variations in long-term glucocorticoid
exposure. In human populations, including those with Cushing disease
(see 219080), Alzheimer disease (see 104300), depression, and normal
aging, higher cortisol levels have been associated with poorer memory
and hippocampal shrinkage/neuronal loss. 11-Beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1 regenerates the active glucocorticoid cortisol from
circulating inert cortisone, thus amplifying intracellular
glucocorticoid levels in some tissues. Sandeep et al. (2004) showed that
11-beta-HSD1, but not 11-beta-HSD2, mRNA is expressed in the human
hippocampus, frontal cortex, and cerebellum. In 2 randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled crossover studies, administration of
the 11-beta-HSD inhibitor carbenoxolone improved verbal fluency after 4
weeks in 10 healthy elderly males and improved verbal memory after 6
weeks in 12 patients with type II diabetes (125853). Although
carbenoxolone had been reported to enhance hepatic insulin sensitivity
in short-term studies (Walker et al., 1995; Andrews et al., 2003), there
was no change in glycemic control or serum lipid profile, nor was plasma
cortisol altered. Sandeep et al. (2004) suggested that 11-beta-HSD1
inhibition may be an approach to prevent or ameliorate cognitive
decline.

11-Beta-HSD1 is a promising target for the treatment of type 2 diabetes
mellitus because of its role in the cortisone-to-cortisol conversion in
visceral adipose tissue. The nonselective 11-beta-HSD inhibitor
carbenoxolone had been found not clinically viable because of adverse
effects associated with inhibition of 11-beta-HSD2 (see 218030),
including cortisol-dependent mineralocorticoid excess and hypokalemic
alkalosis. Courtney et al. (2008) tested the safety, tolerability,
pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics of PF-00915275, a selective
11-beta-HSD1 inhibitor, in 60 healthy adult volunteers. They reported
that PF-00915275 was well tolerated across all doses studied for up to 2
weeks, and that prednisolone generation tests and ratios of urinary
corticosteroid metabolites are useful markers of 11-beta-HSD1
inhibition.

ANIMAL MODEL

Masuzaki et al. (2001) created transgenic mice overexpressing
11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 selectively in adipose
tissue to an extent similar to that found in adipose tissue from obese
humans. These mice had increased adipose levels of corticosterone and
developed visceral obesity that was exaggerated by a high-fat diet. The
mice also exhibited pronounced insulin-resistant diabetes,
hyperlipidemia, and, surprisingly, hyperphagia despite hyperleptinemia.
Increased adipocyte 11-beta-hydroxysteroid type 1 activity may be a
common molecular etiology for visceral obesity and the metabolic
syndrome.

Kotelevtsev et al. (1997) generated mice carrying a targeted disruption
of 11-beta-HSD1. Homozygous null mice were unable to regenerate
corticosterone from inert 11-dehydrocorticosterone. They observed
attenuated gluconeogenic responses upon stress and resistance to
hyperglycemia induced by chronic high-fat feeding. The authors concluded
that 11-beta-HSD1 activity is an important amplifier of intrahepatic
glucocorticoid action in vivo.

Morton et al. (2001) investigated liver-dependent changes in lipid and
lipoprotein metabolism in Hsd11b1 knockout mice (Kotelevtsev et al.
(1997)). By measuring circulating levels of lipids and lipoproteins,
Morton et al. (2001) observed lower plasma triglyceride levels,
increased HDL cholesterol and apolipoprotein AI levels in
Hsd11b1-deficient mice. Using Northern blot analysis, they detected
exaggerated induction of genes encoding lipogenic enzymes and a marked
suppression of genes for fat catabolism in Hsd11b1-null mice after
fasting and refeeding. By measuring plasma glucose levels after fasting
and refeeding, the authors determined that Hsd11b1-null mice have
improved glucose tolerance. Morton et al. (2001) concluded that HSD11B1
deficiency produces an improved metabolic profile characterized by
increased lipid catabolism, increased hepatic insulin sensitivity, and
reduced intracellular glucocorticoid concentrations.

Paterson et al. (2004) produced transgenic mice overexpressing Hsd11b1
selectively in liver. Transgenic animals with 2- and 5-fold elevated
liver Hsd11b1 activity exhibited mild insulin resistance without altered
fat depot mass. They showed fatty liver and dyslipidemia with increased
hepatic lipid synthesis/flux associated with elevated Lxra (602423) and
Ppara (170998) mRNA levels as well as impaired hepatic lipid clearance.
The transgenic mice also exhibited transgene dose-associated
hypertension and liver angiotensinogen expression.

In studies of angiogenesis in mice using an in vitro aortic ring model
and in vivo subcutaneously implanted polyurethane sponges, Small et al.
(2005) found that glucocorticoids administered at physiologic
concentrations inhibited angiogenesis. Blocking endogenous
glucocorticoid action with the glucocorticoid receptor antagonist
RU38486 enhanced angiogenesis in subcutaneous sponges, in healing
surgical wounds, and in the myocardium of mice 7 days after
ligation-induced myocardial infarction. Hsd11b1-null mice showed
enhanced angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo within sponges, wounds, and
infarcted myocardium. Small et al. (2005) concluded that HSD11B1
amplifies the angiostatic effect of glucocorticoids by regenerating
active glucocorticoids locally and thereby constrains the angiogenic
response after ischemia and injury.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RECLASSIFIED - VARIANT OF UNKNOWN SIGNIFICANCE
HSD11B1, 1-BP INS, 83557A AND 83597T-G (dbSNP rs45487298 AND dbSNP
rs12086634)

This variant, formerly titled CORTISONE REDUCTASE DEFICIENCY, has been
reclassified based on the findings of San Millan et al. (2005), White
(2005), Draper et al. (2006), and Smit et al. (2007).

In 3 unrelated individuals with cortisone reductase deficiency (CRD)
(see 614662), Draper et al. (2003) identified triallelic digenic
inheritance of mutations in the HSD11B1 and H6PD (138090) genes. All 3
patients were either homozygous or heterozygous with respect to 2
mutations in intron 3 of HSD11B1 that were in complete linkage
disequilibrium: an A insertion at position 83557 (83557insA) and a
T-to-G transversion 40 bp downstream at position 83597 (83597T-G). In
each kindred, at least 1 parent was heterozygous with respect to this
genotype. The allele frequency of the 83557insA/83597T-G haplotype was
14% in control populations. Luciferase reporter assays using mRNA from 1
of the patients demonstrated that transcriptional activity of mutant
constructs was 2.5 times lower than that of controls. In addition,
sequencing of H6PD identified mutations in exon 5 in all 3 patients (see
138090.0001 and 138090.0002). Draper et al. (2003) concluded that CRD
defines a new endoplasmic reticulum-specific redox potential and
establishes H6PD as a potential factor in the pathogenesis of polycystic
ovary syndrome (PCOS; 184700).

Because the phenotype of CRD resembles that of PCOS, San Millan et al.
(2005) investigated the R453Q variant of H6PD (138090.0002) and the
83557insA variant of HSD11B1 in 116 patients with PCOS and 76
nonhyperandrogenic controls. Four controls and 5 patients presented 3 of
4 mutant alleles of H6PD R453Q and HSD11B1 83557insA, which is the
genotype observed in some subjects with CRD. Estimates of 11-beta-HSD
oxoreductase activity were measured in 6 of these 9 women, ruling out
CRD. Patients homozygous for the R453 allele, which was more frequent in
PCOS patients, presented with increased cortisol and
17-hydroxyprogesterone levels compared with carriers of Q453 alleles;
these differences were not observed in controls. HSD11B1 83557insA
genotypes were not associated with PCOS and did not influence any
phenotypic variable. San Millan et al. (2005) concluded that digenic
triallelic genotypes of the H6PD R453Q variant and HSD11B1 83557insA
mutation do not always cause CRD.

In a population-based association study, White (2005) genotyped 3,551
individuals for the 83597T-G polymorphism in intron 3 of the HSD11B1
gene and the R453Q polymorphism in the H6PD gene. Both polymorphisms
occurred more frequently than previously reported, with the so-called
apparent CRD (ACRD) genotypes (at least 3 of 4 minor alleles present)
occurring in 7% of subjects. There were no associations between genotype
and body mass index; waist/hip ratio; visceral adiposity; measures of
insulin sensitivity; levels of testosterone, FSH, or LH (in females); or
risk of PCOS. In addition, there was no genotype effect on urinary free
cortisol/cortisone or corticosteroid metabolite ratios, which were
measured in 10 subjects, each carrying 0, 3, or 4 minor alleles. White
(2005) concluded that previously reported associations of ACRD with
HSD11B1 and H6PD alleles represented ascertainment bias, but noted that
rare severe mutations in these genes cannot be ruled out.

In a case-control study involving 256 nuclear families ascertained from
PCOS offspring, 213 singleton cases, and 549 controls, Draper et al.
(2006) analyzed CRD-related variants in the HSD11B1 (83597T-G; dbSNP
rs12086634) and H6PD (R453Q; dbSNP rs6688832) genes but found no
differences in genotype distribution between PCOS cases and controls.
Draper et al. (2006) concluded that the variants do not influence
susceptibility to PCOS and, noting that the genotype combination
previously implicated in the development of CRD had a similar prevalence
in PCOS patients and controls, they suggested that it was likely that
additional variants within these genes are required for the development
of CRD.

Smit et al. (2007) analyzed the 83557insA polymorphism in the HSD11B1
gene and the R453Q polymorphism in H6PD in 6,452 elderly Caucasian
individuals from 2 population-based cohorts and found no association
between genotype distribution or combined genotypes on body mass index,
adrenal androgen production, waist-to-hip ratio, systolic and diastolic
blood pressure, fasting glucose levels, glucose tolerance test, or
incidence of dementia (see 600274). Given the high frequency of the 2
polymorphisms in these 2 Caucasian populations, with 3.8% and 4.0%
carrying at least 3 affected alleles, respectively, Smit et al. (2007)
concluded that it was very unlikely that these SNPs interact to cause
CRD.

.0002
CORTISONE REDUCTASE DEFICIENCY 2
HSD11B1, ARG137CYS

In an 8-year-old boy with a mild form of cortisone reductase deficiency
(CORTRD2; 614662), Lawson et al. (2011) identified heterozygosity for a
409C-T transition in exon 4 of the HSD11B1 gene, resulting in an
arg137-to-cys (R137C) substitution. The mutation alters a highly
conserved residue on the edge of the dimer interface that forms a salt
bridge with another highly conserved residue on the other subunit. The
proband's mother, who had a biochemical profile similar to that of her
son, was also heterozygous for the R137C mutation, which was not found
in 120 control chromosomes. Transfection studies in HEK293 cells
demonstrated that the R137C mutant produced only 5% of wildtype
activity, and expression in a bacterial system yielded 6-fold less
soluble protein than wildtype, suggestive of interference with subunit
folding or dimer assembly. Simultaneous expression of the R137C mutant
and wildtype HSD11B1 in bacterial or mammalian cells, to simulate the
heterozygous condition, indicated a marked suppressive effect of the
mutant on the yield and activity of HSD11B1 dimers, consistent with a
dominant-negative effect.

.0003
CORTISONE REDUCTASE DEFICIENCY 2
HSD11B1, LYS187ASN

In a 13-year-old boy with a mild form of cortisone reductase deficiency
(CORTRD2; 614662), Lawson et al. (2011) identified heterozygosity for a
561G-T transversion in exon 5 of the HSD11B1 gene, resulting in a
lys187-to-asn (K187N) substitution at a highly conserved residue in the
core catalytic tetrad required for enzyme activity. The proband's
mother, who had a biochemical profile similar to that of her son, was
also heterozygous for the K187N mutation, which was not found in 120
control chromosomes. No enzyme activity could be detected when the K187N
mutant was expressed in either bacterial or mammalian cells, and in the
bacterial system, no soluble protein could be detected at all,
suggesting the importance of this residue to structural stability.
Simultaneous expression of the K187N mutant and wildtype HSD11B1 in
bacterial or mammalian cells, to simulate the heterozygous condition,
indicated a marked suppressive effect of the mutant on the yield and
activity of HSD11B1 dimers, consistent with a dominant-negative effect.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Biason-Lauber et al. (2000); Jamieson et al. (1999)
REFERENCE 1. Agarwal, A. K.; Monder, C.; Eckstein, B.; White, P. C.: Cloning
and expression of rat cDNA encoding corticosteroid 11-beta-dehydrogenase. J.
Biol. Chem. 264: 18939-18943, 1989.

2. Agarwal, A. K.; Rogerson, F. M.; Mune, T.; White, P. C.: Gene
structure and chromosomal localization of the human HSD11K gene encoding
the kidney (type 2) isozyme of 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. Genomics 29:
195-199, 1995.

3. Alfaidy, N.; Li, W.; Macintosh, T.; Yang, K.; Challis, J.: Late
gestation increase in 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 1 expression
in human fetal membranes: a novel intrauterine source of cortisol. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 5033-5038, 2003.

4. Andrews, R. C.; Rooyackers, O.; Walker, B. R.: Effects of the
11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase inhibitor carbenoxolone on insulin
sensitivity in men with type 2 diabetes. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88:
285-291, 2003.

5. Biason-Lauber, A.; Suter, S. L.; Shackleton, C. H. L.; Zachmann,
M.: Apparent cortisone reductase deficiency: a rare cause of hyperandrogenemia
and hypercortisolism. Hormone Res. 53: 260-266, 2000.

6. Cooper, M. S.; Blumsohn, A.; Goddard, P. E.; Bartlett, W. A.; Shackleton,
C. H.; Eastell, R.; Hewison, M.; Stewart, P. M.: 11-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1 activity predicts the effects of glucocorticoids
on bone. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 3874-3877, 2003.

7. Courtney, R.; Stewart, P. M.; Toh, M.; Ndongo, M.-N.; Calle, R.
A.; Hirshberg, B.: Modulation of 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
(11-beta-HSD) activity biomarkers and pharmacokinetics of PF-00915275,
a selective 11-beta-HSD1 inhibitor. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 93:
550-556, 2008.

8. de Quervain, D. J.-F.; Poirier, R.; Wollmer, M. A.; Grimaldi, L.
M. E.; Tsolaki, M.; Streffer, J. R.; Hock, C.; Nitsch, R. M.; Mohajeri,
M. H.; Papassotiropoulos, A.: Glucocorticoid-related genetic susceptibility
for Alzheimer's disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 47-52, 2004.

9. Draper, N.; Echwald, S. M.; Lavery, G. G.; Walker, E. A.; Fraser,
R.; Davies, E.; Sorensen, T. I. A.; Astrup, A.; Adamski, J.; Hewison,
M.; Connell, J. M.; Pedersen, O.; Stewart, P. M.: Association studies
between microsatellite markers within the gene encoding human 11-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1 and body mass index, waist to hip ratio, and
glucocorticoid metabolism. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 4984-4990,
2002.

10. Draper, N.; Powell, B. L.; Franks, S.; Conway, G. S.; Stewart,
P. M.; McCarthy, M. I.: Variants implicated in cortisone reductase
deficiency do not contribute to susceptibility to common forms of
polycystic ovary syndrome. Clin. Endocr. 65: 64-70, 2006.

11. Draper, N.; Walker, E. A.; Bujalska, I. J.; Tomlinson, J. W.;
Chalder, S. M.; Arlt, W.; Lavery, G. G.; Bedendo, O.; Ray, D. W.;
Laing, I.; Malunowicz, E.; White, P. C.; Hewison, M.; Mason, P. J.;
Connell, J. M.; Shackleton, C. H. L.; Stewart, P. M.: Mutations in
the genes encoding 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 and
hexose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase interact to cause cortisone reductase
deficiency. Nature Genet. 34: 434-439, 2003.

12. Jamieson, A.; Wallace, A. M.; Andrew, R.; Nunez, B. S.; Walker,
B. R.; Fraser, R.; White, P. C.; Connell, J. M. C.: Apparent cortisone
reductase deficiency: a functional defect in 11-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 3570-3574, 1999.

13. Kotelevtsev, Y.; Holmes, M. C.; Burchell, A.; Houston, P. M.;
Schmoll, D.; Jamieson, P.; Best, R.; Brown, R.; Edwards, C. R. W.;
Seckl, J. R.; Mullins, J. J.: 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
type 1 knockout mice show attenuated glucocorticoid-inducible responses
and resist hyperglycemia on obesity or stress. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94:
14924-14929, 1997.

14. Lakshmi, V.; Monder, C.: Purification and characterization of
the corticosteroid 11-beta-dehydrogenase component of the rat liver
11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase complex. Endocrinology 123:
2390-2398, 1988.

15. Lawson, A. J.; Walker, E. A.; Lavery, G. G.; Bujalska, I. J.;
Hughes, B.; Arlt, W.; Stewart, P. M.; Ride, J. P.: Cortisone-reductase
deficiency associated with heterozygous mutations in 11-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 108: 4111-4116, 2011.

16. Masuzaki, H.; Paterson, J.; Shinyama, H.; Morton, N. M.; Mullins,
J. J.; Seckl, J. R.; Flier, J. S.: A transgenic model of visceral
obesity and the metabolic syndrome. Science 294: 2166-2170, 2001.

17. Morton, N. M.; Holmes, M. C.; Fievet, C.; Staels, B.; Tailleux,
A.; Mullins, J. J.; Seck, J. R.: Improved lipid and lipoprotein profile,
hepatic insulin sensitivity, and glucose tolerance in 11-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1 null mice. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 41293-41300,
2001.

18. Mune, T.; Rogerson, F. M.; Nikkila, H.; Agarwal, A. K.; White,
P. C.: Human hypertension caused by mutations in the kidney isozyme
of 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. Nature Genet. 10: 394-399,
1995.

19. Nikkila, H.; Tannin, G. M.; New, M. I.; Taylor, N. F.; Kalaitzoglou,
G.; Monder, C.; White, P. C.: Defects in the HSD11 gene encoding
11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase are not found in patients with
apparent mineralocorticoid excess or 11-oxoreductase deficiency. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 77: 687-691, 1993.

20. Paterson, J. M.; Morton, N. M.; Fievet, C.; Kenyon, C. J.; Holmes,
M. C.; Staels, B.; Seckl, J. R.; Mullins, J. J.: Metabolic syndrome
without obesity: hepatic overexpression of 11-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1 in transgenic mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101:
7088-7093, 2004.

21. Ricketts, M. L.; Verhaeg, J. M.; Bujalska, I.; Howie, A. J.; Rainey,
W. E.; Stewart, P. M.: Immunohistochemical localization of type 1
11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase in human tissues. J.Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 83: 1325-1335, 1998.

22. Sandeep, T. C.; Yau, J. L. W.; MacLullich, A. M. J.; Noble, J.;
Deary, I. J.; Walker, B. R.; Seckl, J. R.: 11-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase inhibition improves cognitive function in healthy elderly
men and type 2 diabetics. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 6734-6739,
2004.

23. San Millan, J. L.; Boella-Carretero, J. I.; Alvarez-Blasco, F.;
Luque-Ramirez, M.; Sancho, J.; Moghetti, P.; Escobar-Morreale, H.
F.: A study of the hexose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase gene R453Q and
11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 gene 83557insA polymorphisms
in the polycystic ovary syndrome. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 4157-4162,
2005.

24. Schutte, B. C.; Bjork, B. C.; Coppage, K. B.; Malik, M. I.; Gregory,
S. G.; Scott, D. J.; Brentzell, L. M.; Watanabe, Y.; Dixon, M. J.;
Murray, J. C.: A preliminary gene map for the van der Woude syndrome
critical region derived from 900 kb of genomic sequence at 1q32-q41. Genome
Res. 10: 81-94, 2000.

25. Small, G. R.; Hadoke, P. W. F.; Sharif, I.; Dover, A. R.; Armour,
D.; Kenyon, C. J.; Gray, G. A.; Walker, B. R.: Preventing local regeneration
of glucocorticoids by 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1
enhances angiogenesis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 12165-12170, 2005.

26. Smit, P.; Dekker, M. J. H. J.; de Jong, F. J.; van den Beld, A.
W.; Koper, J. W.; Pols, H. A. P.; Brinkmann, A. O.; de Jong, F. H.;
Breteler, M. M. B.; Lamberts, S. W. J.: Lack of association of the
11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1 gene 83,557insA and hexose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase gene R453Q polymorphisms with body composition, adrenal
androgen production, blood pressure, glucose metabolism, and dementia. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 359-362, 2007.

27. Tannin, G. M.; Agarwal, A. K.; Monder, C.; New, M. I.; White,
P. C.: The human gene for 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase: structure,
tissue distribution, and chromosomal localization. J. Biol. Chem. 266:
16653-16658, 1991.

28. Walker, B. R.; Connacher, A. A.; Lindsay, R. M.; Webb, D. J.;
Edwards, C. R. W.: Carbenoxolone increases hepatic insulin sensitivity
in man: a novel role for 11-oxosteroid reductase in enhancing glucocorticoid
receptor activation. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 80: 3155-3159, 1995.

29. White, P. C.: Genotypes at 11-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
type 11B1 and hexose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase loci are not risk factors
for apparent cortisone reductase deficiency in a large population-based
sample. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 5880-5883, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/27/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/21/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/17/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/7/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/11/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/9/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/8/2004
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 8/11/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/7/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/30/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/8/2003
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 6/13/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/17/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 9/29/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/3/1995

EDITED alopez: 05/23/2012
alopez: 5/23/2012
carol: 9/23/2011
carol: 9/15/2009
alopez: 4/27/2009
carol: 12/8/2006
alopez: 8/21/2006
wwang: 3/6/2006
terry: 2/17/2006
wwang: 10/20/2005
terry: 10/7/2005
alopez: 10/11/2004
mgross: 8/9/2004
terry: 8/9/2004
terry: 7/27/2004
tkritzer: 7/9/2004
terry: 7/8/2004
joanna: 8/12/2003
joanna: 8/11/2003
alopez: 8/8/2003
terry: 8/7/2003
alopez: 8/4/2003
terry: 7/30/2003
tkritzer: 4/11/2003
terry: 4/8/2003
cwells: 6/13/2002
alopez: 12/18/2001
terry: 12/17/2001
mgross: 5/9/2000
terry: 3/22/2000
carol: 9/29/1998
joanna: 5/27/1997
mark: 10/3/1995

602228	TITLE *602228 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 7-LIKE 2; TCF7L2
;;T-CELL TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 4, FORMERLY; TCF4, FORMERLY
TCF7L2/VTI1A FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The TCL7L2 gene product is a high mobility group (HMG) box-containing
transcription factor implicated in blood glucose homeostasis. The study
of Yi et al. (2005) suggested that TCL7L2 acts through regulation of
proglucagon (138030) through repression of the proglucagon gene in
enteroendocrine cells via the Wnt signaling pathway.

CLONING

The HMG box is a DNA-binding domain. TCF7 (189908), also called TCF1,
and LEF1 (153245), also called TCF1-alpha, are human lymphoid
transcription factors that contain a virtually identical HMG box. By PCR
of human genomic DNA using degenerate oligonucleotides based on the HMG
boxes of TCF7 and LEF1, Castrop et al. (1992) identified the TCF7L1
(604652) and TCF7L2 genes, which they called TCF3 and TCF4,
respectively. TCF7L1 and TCF7L2 were not expressed in cells of the
lymphoid lineage. The deduced amino acid sequences of the HMG boxes of
TCF7L1, TCF7L2, and TCF7 show striking homology. The authors suggested
the existence of a subfamily of TCF7-like HMG box-containing
transcription factors.

Prokunina-Olsson et al. (2009) identified several TCF7L2 splice
variants. The full-length protein contains an N-terminal beta-catenin
(CTNNB1; 116806)-binding domain, followed by a Groucho (TLE1;
600189)-interacting domain, an evolutionarily conserved C-terminal CRARF
(MASP1; 600521)-type domain, and a C-terminal CTBP (602618)-binding
site. Using primers based on common exons for PCR analysis,
Prokunina-Olsson et al. (2009) detected highest overall TCF7L2
expression in pancreas, followed by colon, brain, small intestine,
monocytes, and lung. Lower expression was detected in all other tissues
examined, and little to no expression was detected in activated or
resting T and B cells. Exon-specific PCR showed tissue-specific
expression of several splice variants. Transcripts lacking exons 1 and 2
were predicted to encode proteins lacking the beta-catenin-binding
domain. Transcripts containing exon 13b, which encode proteins lacking
the CTBP-binding site, were detected only in pancreatic islets,
pancreas, and colon. Prokunina-Olsson et al. (2009) concluded that
alternative splicing results in TCF7L2 proteins that either repress or
activate the WNT signaling pathway.

GENE FUNCTION

Inactivation of the APC gene (611731) in colorectal cancers (114500)
allows beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806) to accumulate and complex with the
TCF4 transcription factor, thereby activating the expression of
TCF4-regulated genes (Korinek et al., 1997; Morin et al., 1997). That
gene activation by the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex is a critical event in
cancer development is indicated by the fact that a subset of colorectal
cancers that lack somatic mutations in APC show somatic mutations in the
beta-catenin gene. These mutations are presumed to render beta-catenin
insensitive to regulation by APC and GSK3B (605004). Consequently,
beta-catenin accumulates and activates TCF4-regulated genes (Morin et
al., 1997).

Rodova et al. (2002) presented evidence for beta-catenin-induced
expression of PKD1 (601313). They analyzed the promoter region of PKD1
and identified numerous transactivating factors, including 4 TCF-binding
elements (TBEs). Beta-catenin induced a reporter construct containing
TBE1 6-fold when cotransfected into HEK293T cells, which express TCF4.
Dominant-negative TCF4 or deletion of the TBE1 sequence inhibited the
induction. Gel shift assays confirmed that TCF4 and beta-catenin could
complex with the TBE1 site, and HeLa cells stably transfected with
beta-catenin responded with elevated levels of endogenous PKD1 mRNA.
Rodova et al. (2002) concluded that the PKD1 gene is a target of the
beta-catenin/TCF pathway.

Van de Wetering et al. (2002) showed that disruption of
beta-catenin/TCF4 activity in colorectal cancer cells induced a rapid G1
arrest and blocked a genetic program that was physiologically active in
the proliferative compartment of colon crypts. Coincidently, an
intestinal differentiation program was induced. The TCF4 target gene MYC
(190080) played a central role in this switch by direct repression of
the CDKN1A (116899) promoter. Following disruption of beta-catenin/TCF4
activity, the decreased expression of MYC released CDKN1A transcription,
which in turn mediated G1 arrest and differentiation. The authors
concluded that the beta-catenin/TCF4 complex constitutes the master
switch that controls proliferation versus differentiation in healthy and
malignant intestinal epithelial cells.

Batlle et al. (2002) showed that beta-catenin and TCF inversely control
the expression of the EphB2 (600997)/EphB3 (601839) receptors and their
ligand, ephrin B1 (EFNB1; 300035), in colorectal cancer and along the
crypt-villus axis. Disruption of EphB2 and EphB3 genes revealed that
their gene products restrict cell intermingling and allocate cell
populations within the intestinal epithelium. In EphB2/EphB3-null mice,
the proliferative and differentiated populations intermingled. In adult
EphB3 -/- mice, Paneth cells did not follow their downward migratory
path, but scattered along crypt and villus. The authors concluded that,
in the intestinal epithelium, beta-catenin and TCF couple proliferation
and differentiation to the sorting of cell populations through the
EphB/ephrin B system.

Nateri et al. (2005) showed that phosphorylated c-JUN (165160) interacts
with the HMG-box transcription factor TCF4 to form a ternary complex
containing c-JUN, TCF4, and beta-catenin. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays revealed JNK (see 601158)-dependent c-JUN-TCF4 interaction on the
c-JUN promoter, and c-JUN and TCF4 cooperatively activated the c-JUN
promoter in reporter assays in a beta-catenin-dependent manner. In the
Apc(Min) mouse model of intestinal cancer (see 611731), genetic
abrogation of c-JUN N-terminal phosphorylation or gut-specific
conditional c-JUN inactivation reduced tumor number and size and
prolonged life span. Therefore, Nateri et al. (2005) concluded that the
phosphorylation-dependent interaction between c-JUN and TCF4 regulates
intestinal tumorigenesis by integrating JNK and APC/beta-catenin, 2
distinct pathways activating WNT (see 164820) signaling.

Glucuronic acid epimerase (GLCE; 612134) is responsible for
epimerization of D-glucuronic acid (GlcA) to L-iduronic acid (IdoA) of
the cell surface polysaccharide heparan sulfate (HS), endowing the
nascent HS polysaccharide chain with the ability to bind growth factors
and cytokines. Using stepwise deletion and site-directed mutagenesis,
Ghiselli and Agrawal (2005) identified 2 cis-acting binding elements for
the beta-catenin-TCF4 complex in the enhancer region of the GLCE
promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift and supershift analyses
confirmed binding of beta-catenin-TCF4 to these sequences of GLCE. GLCE
expression in human colon carcinoma cell lines correlated with the
degree of activation of the beta-catenin-TCF4 transactivation complex.
Furthermore, ectopic expression of beta-catenin-TCF4 increased the GLCE
transcript level and enhanced the rate of GlcA epimerization in HS.
Ghiselli and Agrawal (2005) concluded that the beta-catenin-TCF4
transactivation pathway plays a major role in modulating GLCE
expression, thus contributing to regulation of HS biosynthesis and its
structural organization.

Moore et al. (2008) showed that epitope-tagged mammalian Mtgr1 (CBFA2T2;
603672), Mtg8 (RUNX1T1; 133435), and Mtg16 (CBFA2T3; 603870) interacted
with human TCF4 in cotransfected COS-7 cells. Beta-catenin disrupted
interaction of Mtg proteins with TCF4. Additional studies demonstrated
that MTG proteins act downstream of beta-catenin in the Wnt signaling
pathway.

Shu et al. (2009) found decreased TCF7L2 protein levels in pancreatic
sections from 7 patients with T2DM (NIDDM; 125853) compared with 7
healthy controls. Expression of the receptors for glucagon-like
peptide-1 (GLP1R; 138032) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic
polypeptide (GIPR; 137241) was decreased in human T2DM islets as well as
in isolated human islets treated with siRNA to TCF7L2 (siTCF7L2).
Insulin secretion stimulated by glucose, GLP1, and GIP (137240), but not
KCl or cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), was impaired in
siTCF7L2-treated isolated human islets. Loss of TCF7L2 resulted in
decreased GLP1 and GIP-stimulated AKT (AKT1; 164730) phosphorylation,
and AKT-mediated Foxo-1 (FOXO1A; 136533) phosphorylation and nuclear
exclusion. Shu et al. (2009) suggested that beta-cell function and
survival may be regulated through an interplay between TCF7L2 and
GLP1R/GIPR expression and signaling in T2DM.

Nakano et al. (2010) identified a conserved region within intron 1 of
the mouse and human TMEPAI genes (606564). Using mouse and human
constructs and cell lines, they found that a reporter construct driven
by the conserved region of mouse intron 1 could be activated via
TGF-beta (190180) or Wnt (see 606359) signaling individually or by these
pathways synergizing to elevate activity. Wnt signaling included an
interaction between beta-catenin (116806) and Tcf7l2, with Tcf7l2 bound
to a specific Tcf7l2-binding site. The TGF-beta signaling components
included Smad3 (603109), Smad4 (600993), and Tcf7l2, with the 2 Smad
proteins bound directly to 3 Smad-binding elements adjacent to the
Tcf7l2-binding site.

Sotelo et al. (2010) identified a highly conserved enhancer element,
designated enhancer E, over 340 kb telomeric to the MYC gene. Reporter
gene assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that
beta-catenin/TCF4 interacted with enhancer E and activated expression of
a MYC reporter. Chromosome conformation capture assays suggested
formation of long-range DNA looping between the enhancer and the MYC
promoter.

GENE STRUCTURE

Duval et al. (2000) determined the genomic structure of TCF4. They
identified 17 exons, of which 5 were alternative. Either experimentally
or in silico by a BLAST approach in EST databases, they observed 4
alternative splice sites. The alternative use of 3 consecutive exons
located in the 3-prime part of the TCF4 gene changed the reading frames
used in the last exon, leading to the synthesis of a number of TCF4
isoforms with short, medium, or long C-terminal ends.

Prokunina-Olsson et al. (2009) identified 18 exons in the TCF7L2 gene,
including 6 alternative exons (3a, 4a, 12, 13, 13a, and 13b). They also
identified several short in-frame insertions in exons 4a, 6, and 8. Six
possible transcription start sites are located upstream of exon 2, and
translational start codons are present in exons 1 and 3.

CYTOGENETICS

- VTI1A/TCF7L2 Fusion Gene

Bass et al. (2011) reported whole-genome sequencing from 9 individuals
with colorectal cancer (114500), including primary colorectal tumors and
matched adjacent nontumor tissues, at an average of 30.7x and 31.9x
coverage, respectively. They identified an average of 75 somatic
rearrangements per tumor, including complex networks of translocations
between pairs of chromosomes. Eleven rearrangements encode predicted
in-frame fusion proteins, including a fusion of VTI1A (614316) and
TCF7L2 found in 3 out of 97 colorectal cancers. Although TCF7L2 encodes
TCF4, which cooperates with beta-catenin in colorectal carcinogenesis,
the fusion lacks the TCF4 beta-catenin-binding domain. Bass et al.
(2011) found a colorectal carcinoma cell line harboring the fusion gene
to be dependent on VTI1A-TCF7L2 for anchorage-independent growth using
RNA interference-mediated knockdown.

MAPPING

Duval et al. (2000) mapped the TCF7L2 gene to chromosome 10q25.3 by
FISH.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Duval et al. (2000) performed a mutation screen of a series of 24
colorectal cancer cell lines using denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis (DGGE) and/or direct sequencing. They found a total of
12 variants, of which 8 were in coding regions. The variants included 4
examples of the deletion of an A in an (A)9 coding repeat previously
identified in a colorectal cancer cell line by Duval et al. (1999).

Reynisdottir et al. (2003) found suggestive linkage of type 2 diabetes
mellitus (NIDDM; 125853) to 10q in an Icelandic population. The 10q
linkage region had also been observed in Mexican Americans (Duggirala et
al., 1999). Grant et al. (2006) genotyped 228 microsatellite markers in
Icelandic individuals with type 2 diabetes and controls throughout a
10.5-Mb interval on 10q. A microsatellite, DG10S478, within intron 3 of
the TCF7L2 gene was associated with type 2 diabetes; p = 2.1 x 10(-9).
This was replicated in a Danish cohort, p = 4.8 x 10(-3), and also in a
U.S. cohort, p = 3.3 x 10(-9). Two SNPs, dbSNP rs12255372 (602228.0002)
and dbSNP rs7903146 (602228.0001), were in strong linkage disequilibrium
with DG10S478 and showed similarly robust associations with type 2
diabetes (p less than 10(-15)). Compared with noncarriers, heterozygous
and homozygous carriers of the at-risk alleles (38% and 7% of the
population, respectively) have relative risks of 1.45 and 2.41. This
corresponds to a population-attributable risk of 21%.

Florez et al. (2006) tested whether the 2 SNPS identified by Grant et
al. (2006) predicted the progression to diabetes in persons with
impaired glucose tolerance in a diabetes prevention program in which
lifestyle intervention or treatment with metformin was compared with
placebo. The 2 SNPs appeared to be associated with an increased risk of
diabetes among persons with impaired glucose tolerance. The
risk-conferring genotypes in TCF7L2 were associated with impaired
beta-cell function but not with insulin resistance.

To find genetic variants influencing susceptibility to type 2 diabetes,
Sladek et al. (2007) tested 392,935 SNPs in a French case-control
cohort. Markers with the most significant difference in genotype
frequencies between cases of type 2 diabetes and controls were
fast-tracked for testing in a second cohort. This identified 4 loci
containing variants that confer type 2 diabetes risk, in addition to
confirming the known association with the TCF7L2 gene. These loci
included a nonsynonymous polymorphism in the zinc transporter SLC30A8
(611145), which is expressed exclusively in insulin-producing beta
cells, and 2 linkage disequilibrium blocks that contain genes
potentially involved in beta cell development or function: IDE
(146680)-KIF11 (148760)-HHEX (604420) and EXT2 (608210)-ALX4 (605420).
Sladek et al. (2007) concluded that these associations explained a
substantial portion of disease risk and constituted proof of principle
for the genomewide approach to the elucidation of complex genetic
traits.

Using a logistic regression model incorporating individual ancestry,
sex, age, body mass index, and education in 286 Mexican patients with
type 2 diabetes mellitus and 275 controls, Parra et al. (2007) analyzed
the DG10S478 microsatellite in intron 3 and 2 SNPs, dbSNP rs12255372 and
dbSNP rs7903146, in introns 4 and 3, respectively, of the TCF7L2 gene.
All 3 markers were in tight disequilibrium in this Mexican sample. Parra
et al. (2007) observed a significant association between dbSNP
rs12255372 and DG10S478 with type 2 diabetes mellitus (OR = 1.78, p =
0.017, and OR = 1.62, p = 0.041, respectively). The results for dbSNP
rs7903146 were not significant.

Zeggini et al. (2007) performed a genomewide association study of type 2
diabetes using data for 1,924 diabetic cases and 2,938 population
controls generated by the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (2007)
and analysis of 3,757 additional cases and 5,346 controls, as well as
equivalent data from other international consortia. The strongest
association signals genomewide were observed for SNPs in the TCF7L2
gene. At SNP dbSNP rs7901695 an odds ratio of 1.37, CI = 1.25-1.49, p =
6.7 x 10(-13) was achieved. This SNP was in strong linkage
disequilibrium with dbSNP rs7903146. In a similar study by Scott et al.
(2007), the dbSNP rs7903146 SNP reached genomewide significance in the
all-data metaanalysis with an OR of 1.37, p = 1.0 x 10(-48). In the
study of the Diabetes Genetics Initiative of Broad Institute of Harvard
and MIT, Lund University, and Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Reserch
(2007), TCF7L2 was the third ranked association (P less than 10(-6)),
and the authors noted that this association was among the top results in
the whole-genome scans of the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium
(2007), Scott et al. (2007), and Sladek et al. (2007). The consistency
of these findings suggested that TCF7L2 is the single largest effect of
a common SNP on type 2 diabetes risk in European populations.

In 2 cohorts of Scandinavian subjects followed for 22 years, Lyssenko et
al. (2007) found that the CT/TT genotypes of dbSNP rs7903146 strongly
predicted future type 2 diabetes. Extensive metabolic studies in a
subset of Swedish and Finnish individuals from the cohort indicated that
increased risk of type 2 diabetes conferred by TCF7L2 variants involves
the enteroinsular axis, enhanced expression of the gene in islets, and
impaired insulin secretion.

Ng et al. (2007) examined 22 SNPs spanning the TCF7L2 gene for
association with type 2 diabetes in Hong Kong Chinese. In a case-control
study, they replicated an association with dbSNP rs11196205
(602228.0003) (OR, 2.11; 95% CI, 1.04-4.26), previously identified in
Japanese. They did not find an association with dbSNP rs7903146 (OR,
1.27; 95% CI, 0.71-2.29), previously identified in Caucasians, but did
identify another SNP, dbSNP rs11196218 G allele, located in an adjacent
linkage disequilibrium block, that conferred independent risk for type 2
diabetes (OR, 1.43; 95% CI, 1.14-1.79) and contributed high-population
attributable risk of 42%. They replicated the association with dbSNP
rs11196218 and its haplotype for type 2 diabetes in a family sample (p
less than 0.05).

Miyake et al. (2008) analyzed 5 SNPs in the TCF7L2 gene in 2,214
Japanese individuals with type 2 diabetes and 1,873 controls and
replicated significant association with the minor alleles of dbSNP
rs7903146, dbSNP rs12255372, and dbSNP rs11196205, confirming that
TCF7S2 is an important susceptibility gene for type 2 diabetes in the
Japanese population. They did not, however, replicate previously
reported associations with dbSNP rs11196218 or dbSNP rs290487.

ANIMAL MODEL

To study the physiologic role of Tcf4 (which is encoded by the Tcf7l2
gene), Korinek et al. (1998) disrupted Tcf7l2 by homologous
recombination. The homozygous-null mice died shortly after birth. A
single histopathologic abnormality was observed. An apparently normal
transition of intestinal endoderm into epithelium occurred at
approximately embryonic day (E) 14.5. However, no proliferative
compartments were maintained in the prospective crypt regions between
the villi. As a consequence, the neonatal epithelium was composed
entirely of differentiated, nondividing villus cells. Korinek et al.
(1998) concluded that the genetic program controlled by Tcf7l2 maintains
the crypt stem cells of the small intestine. The constitutive activity
of Tcf4 in APC-deficient epithelial cells may contribute to their
malignant transformation by maintaining stem cell characteristics.

Nguyen et al. (2009) found that knockout of Tcf3 or Tcf4 individually
had no overt effect on hair phenotype in mice, but Tcf3/Tcf4 double
knockout resulted in a severe skin and hair defects. Newborn
Tcf3/Tcf4-null skin was thinner than normal and often lacked whiskers.
Tcf3/Tcf4-null skin showed signs of apoptosis and, when grafted onto
nude mice, became shrunken, was unable to repair wounds, and was
progressively lost, showing an inability to maintain long-term
self-renewing populations of skin epithelia. Tcf3/Tcf4-null skin cells
grew poorly in culture and did not survive passaging. Microarray
analysis of mRNAs expressed by normal and Tcf3/Tcf4-null skin suggested
that Tcf3 and Tcf4 maintain skin epithelial stem cells through
Wnt-dependent and Wnt-independent signaling.

Shu et al. (2009) showed robust differences in TCF7L2 expression in
pancreatic beta cells of rodent models of type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM). While mRNA levels were approximately 2-fold increased in
isolated islets from the diabetic db/db mouse, the Vancouver Diabetic
Fatty (VDF) Zucker rat, and the high fat/high sucrose diet-treated mouse
compared with the nondiabetic rodent controls, protein levels were
decreased.

Savic et al. (2011) found that Tcf7l2 -/- mice were born at the expected
mendelian ratio, but they were hypoglycemic at birth and died within 24
hours. Tcf7l2 +/- mice were leaner than wildtype littermates and
displayed enhanced glucose tolerance when fed a high-fat diet. Mice
engineered to carry up to 3 extra copies of Tcf7l2 driven by a 92-kb
human TCF7L2 promoter region developed dose-dependent glucose
intolerance, with elevated fasting insulin levels compared with wildtype
littermates.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DIABETES MELLITUS, NONINSULIN-DEPENDENT, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
TCF7L2, IVS3, C-T (dbSNP rs7903146)

In an Icelandic population, Grant et al. (2006) found strong linkage
disequilibrium between a SNP in the TCF7L2 gene, dbSNP rs7903146, and a
microsatellite marker in intron 3, DG10S478, associated with type 2
diabetes (125853) (p = 2.1 x 10(-9)).

Helgason et al. (2007) refined the definition of the TCF7L2 type 2
diabetes risk variant, HapB(T2D), to the ancestral T allele of the SNP
dbSNP rs7903146 through replication in West African and Danish type 2
diabetes case-control studies and an expanded Icelandic study. They also
identified another variant of the same gene, HapA, that shows evidence
of positive selection in East Asian, European, and West African
populations. Notably, HapA shows a suggestive association with body mass
index (BMI) and altered concentrations of the hunger-satiety hormones
ghrelin (GHRL; 605353) and leptin (LEP; 164160) in males, indicating
that the selective advantage of HapA may have been mediated through
effects on energy metabolism.

Type 2 diabetes genes may influence birthweight through maternal
genotype, by increasing maternal glycemia in pregnancy, or through fetal
genotype, by altering fetal insulin secretion. Freathy et al. (2007)
assessed the role of the TCF7L2 gene in birthweight. They genotyped the
polymorphism dbSNP rs7903146 in 15,709 individuals whose birthweight was
available from 6 studies and in 8,344 mothers from 3 studies. Each fetal
copy of the predisposing allele was associated with an 18-gram increase
in birthweight (p = 0.001) and each maternal copy with a 30-gram
increase in offspring birthweight (p = 2.8 x 10(-5)).. Stratification by
fetal genotype suggested that the association was driven by maternal
genotype. Analysis of diabetes-related traits in 10,314 nondiabetic
individuals suggested that the most likely mechanism is that the risk
allele reduces maternal insulin secretion, which results in increased
maternal glycemia in pregnancy and hence increased offspring
birthweight. Freathy et al. (2007) combined information from the other
common variant known to alter fetal growth, the -30G-A polymorphism of
glucokinase (138079). The 4% of offspring born to mothers carrying 3 or
4 risk alleles were 119 grams heavier than were the 32% born to mothers
with none, comparable to the impact of maternal smoking during
pregnancy. Freathy et al. (2007) concluded that this was the first type
2 diabetes susceptibility allele to be reproducibly associated with
birthweight. Thus, common gene variants can substantially influence
normal birthweight variation.

In a study of 286 Mexican patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and 275
controls, Parra et al. (2007) did not find a significant association
between dbSNP rs7903146 and the disease.

In genomewide association studies of type 2 diabetes, The Diabetes
Genetics Initiative of Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Lund
University, and Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Reserch (2007),
Zeggini et al. (2007), and Scott et al. (2007) confirmed association of
the SNP dbSNP rs7903146 with diabetes susceptibility. Scott et al.
(2007) obtained an OR of 1.37, p = 1.0 x 10(-48) for dbSNP rs7903146 in
a metaanalysis of data from international consortia.

In a genomewide association study for type 2 diabetes in 1,399 Icelandic
cases and 5,275 controls, Steinthorsdottir et al. (2007) found that
dbSNP rs7903146 conferred the most significant risk, with an OR of 1.38
and p = 1.82 x 10(-10) in all individuals with type 2 diabetes.

Mayans et al. (2007) genotyped 4 SNPs in the TCF7L2 gene in 872 Swedish
patients with type 2 diabetes and 857 age-, sex-, and
geographically-matched controls and replicated the previously identified
association between dbSNP rs7093146 and disease (p = 0.00002).

In 2 cohorts of Scandinavian subjects followed for 22 years, Lyssenko et
al. (2007) found that the CT/TT genotypes of dbSNP rs7903146 strongly
predicted future type 2 diabetes. Extensive metabolic studies in a
subset of Swedish and Finnish individuals from the cohort showed that
the risk T allele was associated with impaired insulin secretion,
incretin effects, and an enhanced rate of hepatic glucose production.
TCF7L2 expression in human islets was increased 5-fold in type 2
diabetes, particularly in carriers of the TT genotype; overexpression of
TCF7L2 in human islets reduced glucose-stimulated insulin secretion.

Ng et al. (2007) examined 22 SNPs spanning the TCF7L2 gene in 433 Hong
Kong Chinese hospitalized with early-onset type 2 diabetes and 419
controls and did not find a significant association with dbSNP
rs7903146.

Miyake et al. (2008) analyzed 5 SNPs in the TCF7L2 gene in 2,214
Japanese individuals with type 2 diabetes and 1,873 controls and
confirmed significant association with the minor allele of dbSNP
rs7903146 (OR, 1.48; p = 2.7 x 10(-4)). The association remained
significant after adjustment for age, sex, and BMI (adjusted p =
0.0011).

To identify regulatory DNA active in human pancreatic islets, Gaulton et
al. (2010) profiled chromatin by formaldehyde-assisted isolation of
regulatory elements coupled with high-throughput sequencing (FAIRE-seq).
By mapping sequence variants to open chromatin sites, they found that
dbSNP rs7903146 is located in islet-selective open chromatin. In
addition, human islet samples heterozygous for dbSNP rs7903146 showed
allelic imbalance in islet FAIRE signals, with the chromatin state more
open in chromosomes carrying the risk 'T' allele. Using allele-specific
luciferase reporter constructs in islet beta-cell lines, Gaulton et al.
(2010) demonstrated that the dbSNP rs7903146 variant alters enhancer
activity, indicating that genetic variation at this locus acts in cis
with local chromatin and regulatory changes.

Prokunina-Olsson et al. (2009) stated that dbSNP rs7903146 in intron 3
and dbSNP rs12255372 (602228.0002) in intron 4 are 50 kb apart and
within a 92-kb block of linkage disequilibrium. Savic et al. (2011)
found that the 92-kb region containing dbSNP rs7903146 had strong
enhancer activity when expressed in transgenic mice.

.0002
DIABETES MELLITUS, NONINSULIN-DEPENDENT, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
TCF7L2, IVS4, G-T (dbSNP rs12255372)

In an Icelandic population, Grant et al. (2006) found strong linkage
disequilibrium between a SNP in intron 4 of the TCF7L2 gene, dbSNP
rs12255372, and a microsatellite marker in intron 3, DG10S478,
associated with type 2 diabetes (125853) (p = 2.1 x 10(-9)).

Using a logistic regression model incorporating individual ancestry,
sex, age, body mass index, and education in 286 Mexican patients with
type 2 diabetes mellitus and 275 controls, Parra et al. (2007) analyzed
the DG10S478 microsatellite in intron 3 and dbSNP rs12255372 in intron 4
of the TCF7L2 gene. All 3 markers were in tight disequilibrium in the
Mexican sample. Parra et al. (2007) observed a significant association
between dbSNP rs12255372 and DG10S478 and type 2 diabetes mellitus (OR =
1.78, p = 0.017, and OR = 1.62, p = 0.041, respectively).

Mayans et al. (2007) genotyped 4 SNPs in the TCF7L2 gene in 872 Swedish
patients with type 2 diabetes and 857 age-, sex-, and
geographically-matched controls and replicated the previously identified
association between dbSNP rs12255372 and disease (p = 0.000004).

Miyake et al. (2008) analyzed 5 SNPs in the TCF7L2 gene in 2,214
Japanese individuals with type 2 diabetes and 1,873 controls and
confirmed significant association with the minor allele of dbSNP
rs12255372 (OR, 1.70; p = 9.8 x 10(-5)). The association remained
significant after adjustment for age, sex, and BMI (adjusted p = 7.0 x
10(-4)).

.0003
DIABETES MELLITUS, NONINSULIN-DEPENDENT, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
TCF7L2, IVS3, G-C (dbSNP rs11196205)

Ng et al. (2007) examined 22 SNPs spanning the TCF7L2 gene for
association with type 2 diabetes in Hong Kong Chinese. In a case-control
study, they replicated an association with the at-risk C allele of dbSNP
rs11196205 (OR, 2.11; 95% CI, 1.04-4.26), previously identified in a
Japanese population (see Hayashi et al., 2007).

Miyake et al. (2008) analyzed 5 SNPs in the TCF7L2 gene in 2,214
Japanese individuals with type 2 diabetes and 1,873 controls and
confirmed significant association with the minor allele of dbSNP
rs11196205 (OR, 1.39; p = 4.6 x 10(-4)). The association remained
significant after adjustment for age, sex, and BMI (adjusted p =
0.0053).

REFERENCE 1. Bass, A. J.; Lawrence, M. S.; Brace, L. E.; Ramos, A. H.; Drier,
Y.; Cibulskis, K.; Sougnez, C.; Voet, D.; Saksena, G.; Sivachenko,
A.; Jing, R.; Parkin, M.; and 28 others: Genomic sequencing of
colorectal adenocarcinomas identifies a recurrent VTI1A-TCF7L2 fusion. Nature
Genet. 43: 964-968, 2011.

2. Batlle, E.; Henderson, J. T.; Beghtel, H.; van den Born, M. M.
W.; Sancho, E.; Huls, G.; Meeldijk, J.; Robertson, J.; van de Wetering,
M.; Pawson, T.; Clevers, H.: Beta-catenin and TCF mediate cell positioning
in the intestinal epithelium by controlling the expression of EphB/EphrinB. Cell 111:
251-263, 2002.

3. Castrop, J.; van Norren, K.; Clevers, H.: A gene family of HMG-box
transcription factors with homology to TCF-1. Nucleic Acids Res. 20:
611 only, 1992.

4. Diabetes Genetics Initiative of Broad Institute of Harvard and
MIT, Lund University, and Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research
: Genome-wide association analysis identifies loci for type 2 diabetes
and triglyceride levels. Science 316: 1331-1336, 2007.

5. Duggirala, R.; Blangero, J.; Almasy, L.; Dyer, T. D.; Williams,
K. L.; Leach, R. J.; O'Connell, P.; Stern, M. P.: Linkage of type
2 diabetes mellitus and of age at onset to a genetic location on chromosome
10q in Mexican Americans. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64: 1127-1140, 1999.

6. Duval, A.; Busson-Leconiat, M.; Berger, R.; Hamelin, R.: Assignment
of the TCF-4 (TCF7L2) to human chromosome band 10q25.3. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 88: 264-265, 2000.

7. Duval, A.; Gayet, J.; Zhou, X.-P.; Iacopetta, B.; Thomas, G.; Hamelin,
R.: Frequent frameshift mutations of the TCF-4 gene in colorectal
cancers with microsatellite instability. Cancer Res. 59: 4213-4215,
1999.

8. Duval, A.; Rolland, S.; Tubacher, E.; Bui, H.; Thomas, G.; Hamelin,
R.: The human T-cell transcription factor-4 gene: structure, extensive
characterization of alternative splicings, and mutational analysis
in colorectal cancer cell lines. Cancer Res. 60: 3872-3879, 2000.

9. Florez, J. C.; Jablonski, K. A.; Bayley, N.; Pollin, T. I.; de
Bakker, P. I. W.; Shuldiner, A. R.; Knowler, W. C.; Nathan, D. M.;
Altshuler, D.: TCF7L2 polymorphisms and progression to diabetes in
the Diabetes Prevention Program. New Eng. J. Med. 355: 241-250,
2006.

10. Freathy, R. M.; Weedon, M. N.; Bennett, A.; Hypponen, E.; Relton,
C. L.; Knight, B.; Shields, B.; Parnell, K. S.; Groves, C. J.; Ring,
S. M.; Pembrey, M. E.; Ben-Shlomo, Y.; Strachan, D. P.; Power, C.;
Jarvelin, M.-R.; McCarthy, M. I.; Smith, G. D.; Hattersley, A. T.;
Frayling, T. M.: Type 2 diabetes TCF7L2 risk genotypes alter birth
weight: a study of 24,053 individuals. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 80: 1150-1161,
2007.

11. Gaulton, K. J.; Nammo, T.; Pasquali, L.; Simon, J. M.; Giresi,
P. G.; Fogarty, M. P.; Panhuis, T. M.; Mieczkowski, P.; Secchi, A.;
Bosco, D.; Berney, T.; Montanya, E.; Mohlke, K. L.; Lieb, J. D.; Ferrer,
J.: A map of open chromatin in human pancreatic islets. Nature Genet. 42:
255-259, 2010.

12. Ghiselli, G.; Agrawal, A.: The human D-glucuronyl C5-epimerase
gene is transcriptionally activated through the beta-catenin-TCF4
pathway. Biochem. J. 390: 493-499, 2005.

13. Grant, S. F. A.; Thorleifsson, G.; Reynisdottir, I.; Benediktsson,
R.; Manolescu, A.; Sainz, J.; Helgason, A.; Stefansson, H.; Emilsson,
V.; Helgadottir, A.; Styrkarsdottir, U.; Magnusson, K. P.; and 17
others: Variant of transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene confers
risk of type 2 diabetes. Nature Genet. 38: 320-323, 2006.

14. Hayashi, T.; Iwamoto, Y.; Kaku, K.; Hirose, H.; Maeda, S.: Replication
study for the association of TCF7L2 with susceptibility to type 2
diabetes in a Japanese population. Diabetologia 50: 980-984, 2007.

15. Helgason, A.; Palsson, S.; Thorleifsson, G.; Grant, S. F. A.;
Emilsson, V.; Gunnarsdottir, S.; Adeyemo, A.; Chen, Y.; Chen, G.;
Reynisdottir, I.; Benediktsson, R.; Hinney, A.; and 21 others:
Refining the impact of TCF7L2 gene variants on type 2 diabetes and
adaptive evolution. Nature Genet. 39: 218-225, 2007.

16. Korinek, V.; Barker, N.; Moerer, P.; van Donselaar, E.; Huls,
G.; Peters, P. J.; Clevers, H.: Depletion of epithelial stem-cell
compartments in the small intestine of mice lacking Tcf-4. Nature
Genet. 19: 379-383, 1998.

17. Korinek, V.; Barker, N.; Morin, P. J.; van Wichen, D.; de Weger,
R.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.; Clevers, H.: Constitutive transcriptional
activation by a beta-catenin-Tcf complex in APC-/- colon carcinoma. Science 275:
1784-1787, 1997.

18. Lyssenko, V.; Lupi, R.; Marchetti, P.; Del Guerra, S.; Orho-Melander,
M.; Almgren, P.; Sjogren, M.; Ling, C.; Eriksson, K.-F.; Lethagen,
A.-L.; Mancarella, R.; Berglund, G.; Tuomi, T.; Nilsson, P.; Del Prato,
S.; Groop, L.: Mechanisms by which common variants in the TCF7L2
gene increase risk of type 2 diabetes. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 2155-2163,
2007.

19. Mayans, S.; Lackovic, K.; Lindgren, P.; Ruikka, K.; Agren, A.;
Eliasson, M.; Holmberg, D.: TCF7L2 polymorphisms are associated with
type 2 diabetes in northern Sweden. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 15: 342-346,
2007.

20. Miyake, K.; Horikawa, Y.; Hara, K.; Yasuda, K.; Osawa, H.; Furuta,
H.; Hirota, Y.; Yamagata, K.; Hinokio, Y.; Oka, Y.; Iwasaki, N.; Iwamoto,
Y.; and 11 others: Association of TCF7L2 polymorphisms with susceptibility
to type 2 diabetes in 4,087 Japanese patients. J. Hum. Genet. 53:
174-180, 2008.

21. Moore, A. C.; Amann, J. M.; Williams, C. S.; Tahinci, E.; Farmer,
T. E.; Martinez, J. A.; Yang, G.; Luce, K. S.; Lee, E.; Hiebert, S.
W.: Myeloid translocation gene family members associate with T-cell
factors (TCFs) and influence TCF-dependent transcription. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 28: 977-987, 2008.

22. Morin, P. J.; Sparks, A. B.; Korinek, V.; Barker, N.; Clevers,
H.; Vogelstein, B.; Kinzler, K. W.: Activation of beta-catenin-Tcf
signaling in colon cancer by mutations in beta-catenin or APC. Science 275:
1787-1790, 1997.

23. Nakano, N.; Itoh, S.; Watanabe, Y.; Maeyama, K.; Itoh, F.; Kato,
M.: Requirement of TCF7L2 for TGF-beta-dependent transcriptional
activation of the TMEPAI gene. J. Biol. Chem. 285: 38023-38033,
2010.

24. Nateri, A. S.; Spencer-Dene, B.; Behrens, A.: Interaction of
phosphorylated c-Jun with TCF4 regulates intestinal cancer development. Nature 437:
281-285, 2005.

25. Ng, M. C. Y.; Tam, C. H. T.; Lam, V. K. L.; So, W.-Y.; Ma, R.
C. W.; Chan, J. C. N.: Replication and identification of novel variants
at TCF7L2 associated with type 2 diabetes in Hong Kong Chinese. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 3733-3737, 2007.

26. Nguyen, H.; Merrill, B. J.; Polak, L.; Nikolova, M.; Rendl, M.;
Shaver, T. M.; Pasolli, H. A.; Fuchs, E.: Tcf3 and Tcf4 are essential
for long-term homeostasis of skin epithelia. Nature Genet. 41: 1068-1075,
2009.

27. Parra, E. J.; Cameron, E.; Simmonds, L.; Valladares, A.; McKeigue,
P.; Shriver, M.; Wacher, N.; Kumate, J.; Kittles, R.; Cruz, M.: Association
of TCF7L2 polymorphisms with type 2 diabetes in Mexico City. Clin.
Genet. 71: 359-366, 2007.

28. Prokunina-Olsson, L.; Welch, C.; Hansson, O.; Adhikari, N.; Scott,
L. J.; Usher, N.; Tong, M.; Sprau, A.; Swift, A.; Bonnycastle, L.
L.; Erdos, M. R.; He, Z.; and 9 others: Tissue-specific alternative
splicing of TCF7L2. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 3795-3804, 2009.

29. Reynisdottir, I.; Thorleifsson, G.; Benediktsson, R.; Sigurdsson,
G.; Emilsson, V.; Einarsdottir, A. S.; Hjorleifsdottir, E. E.; Orlygsdottir,
G. T.; Bjornsdottir, G. T.; Saemundsdottir, J.; Halldorsson, S.; Hrafnkelsdottir
, S.; and 11 others: Localization of a susceptibility gene for
type 2 diabetes to chromosome 5q34-q35.2. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 73:
323-335, 2003.

30. Rodova, M.; Islam, M. R.; Maser, R. L.; Calvet, J. P.: The polycystic
kidney disease-1 promoter is a target of the beta-catenin/T-cell factor
pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 29577-29583, 2002.

31. Savic, D.; Ye, H.; Aneas, I.; Park, S-Y.; Bell, C. I.; Nobrega,
M. A.: Alterations in TCF7L2 expression define its role as a key
regulator of glucose metabolism. Genome Res. 21: 1417-1425, 2011.

32. Scott, L. J.; Mohlke, K. L.; Bonnycastle, L. L.; Willer, C. J.;
Li, Y.; Duren, W. L.; Erdos, M. R.; Stringham, H. M.; Chines, P. S.;
Jackson, A. U.; Prokunina-Olsson, L.; Ding, C.-J.; and 29 others
: A genome-wide association study of type 2 diabetes in Finns detects
multiple susceptibility variants. Science 316: 1341-1345, 2007.

33. Shu, L.; Matveyenko, A. V.; Kerr-Conte, J.; Cho, J.-H.; McIntosh,
C. H. S.; Maedler, K.: Decreased TCF7L2 protein levels in type 2
diabetes mellitus correlate with downregulation of GIP- and GLP-1
receptors and impaired beta-cell function. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18:
2388-2399, 2009.

34. Sladek, R.; Rocheleau, G.; Rung, J.; Dina, C.; Shen, L.; Serre,
D.; Boutin, P.; Vincent, D.; Belisle, A.; Hadjadj, S.; Balkau, B.;
Heude, B.; and 10 others: A genome-wide association study identifies
novel risk loci for type 2 diabetes. Nature 445: 881-885, 2007.

35. Sotelo, J.; Esposito, D.; Duhagon, M. A.; Banfield, K.; Mehalko,
J.; Liao, H.; Stephens, R. M.; Harris, T. J. R.; Munroe, D. J.; Wu,
X.: Long-range enhancers on 8q24 regulate c-Myc. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 107: 3001-3005, 2010.

36. Steinthorsdottir, V.; Thorleifsson, G.; Reynisdottir, I.; Benediktsson,
R.; Jonsdottir, T.; Walters, G. B.; Styrkarsdottir, U.; Gretarsdottir,
S.; Emilsson, V.; Ghosh, S.; Baker, A.; Snorradottir, S.; and 33
others: A variant in CDKAL1 influences insulin response and risk
of type 2 diabetes. Nature Genet. 39: 770-775, 2007.

37. van de Wetering, M.; Sancho, E.; Verweij, C.; de Lau, W.; Oving,
I.; Hurlstone, A.; van der Horn, K.; Batlle, E.; Coudreuse, D.; Haramis,
A.-P.; Tjon-Pon-Fong, M.; Moerer, P.; van den Born, M.; Soete, G.;
Pals, S.; Eilers, M.; Medema, R.; Clevers, H.: The beta-catenin/TCF-4
complex imposes a crypt progenitor phenotype on colorectal cancer
cells. Cell 111: 241-250, 2002.

38. Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium: Genome-wide association
study of 14,000 cases of seven common diseases and 3,000 shared controls. Nature 447:
661-678, 2007.

39. Yi, F.; Brubaker, P. L.; Jin, T.: TCF-4 mediates cell type-specific
regulation of proglucagon gene expression by beta-catenin and glycogen
synthase kinase-3-beta. J. Biol. Chem. 280: 1457-1464, 2005.

40. Zeggini, E.; Weedon, M. N.; Lindgren, C. M.; Frayling, T. M.;
Elliott, K. S.; Lango, H.; Timpson, N. J.; Perry, J. R. B.; Rayner,
N. W.; Freathy, R. M.; Barrett, J. C.; Shields, B.; and 15 others
: Replication of genome-wide association signals in UK samples reveals
risk loci for type 2 diabetes. Science 316: 1336-1341, 2007. Note:
Erratum: Science 317: 1036 only, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/20/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/26/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/8/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/15/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/22/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/25/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/30/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/22/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/17/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/26/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 2/20/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/21/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/9/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/7/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/10/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/29/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/23/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/23/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/9/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/6/2006
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 12/3/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 12/2/2002
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/29/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/29/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 3/6/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/29/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/7/1998

EDITED carol: 07/26/2013
terry: 11/13/2012
mgross: 10/16/2012
terry: 9/20/2012
alopez: 6/26/2012
mgross: 6/8/2012
mgross: 2/9/2012
terry: 11/15/2011
mgross: 9/23/2011
terry: 9/22/2011
alopez: 5/25/2010
wwang: 4/1/2010
terry: 3/30/2010
mgross: 1/25/2010
terry: 1/22/2010
carol: 11/18/2008
terry: 11/17/2008
carol: 11/17/2008
mgross: 6/26/2008
wwang: 2/27/2008
carol: 2/26/2008
carol: 2/20/2008
ckniffin: 2/5/2008
wwang: 1/8/2008
terry: 12/21/2007
wwang: 11/29/2007
mgross: 11/14/2007
terry: 11/9/2007
alopez: 9/25/2007
alopez: 8/7/2007
alopez: 7/30/2007
alopez: 7/27/2007
terry: 7/24/2007
carol: 7/10/2007
terry: 7/10/2007
alopez: 7/3/2007
terry: 6/29/2007
alopez: 5/29/2007
terry: 5/23/2007
alopez: 3/8/2007
terry: 2/23/2007
carol: 8/11/2006
terry: 8/9/2006
alopez: 6/12/2006
terry: 6/6/2006
terry: 4/5/2005
mgross: 12/3/2002
mgross: 12/2/2002
mgross: 10/29/2002
carol: 1/16/2002
terry: 3/20/2001
mcapotos: 10/10/2000
mcapotos: 10/6/2000
terry: 9/29/2000
carol: 5/25/2000
mgross: 3/10/2000
psherman: 3/6/2000
alopez: 7/31/1998
alopez: 7/30/1998
terry: 7/29/1998
alopez: 1/26/1998
alopez: 1/13/1998
dholmes: 1/8/1998

611654	TITLE *611654 CENTROSOME SPINDLE POLE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; CSPP1
;;CSPP
CSPP1-S, INCLUDED;;
CSPP1-L, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CSPP1 interacts with centrosomes and microtubules and plays a role in
cell-cycle progression and spindle organization (Patzke et al., 2005;
Patzke et al., 2006).

CLONING

By cDNA representational difference analysis to search for genes
associated with high-grade human non-Hodgkin B-cell lymphoma, followed
by screening a human testis cDNA library, Patzke et al. (2005) cloned a
partial CSPP1 cDNA, herein termed CSPP1-S. The deduced 876-amino acid
protein is highly charged and has a calculated molecular mass of 101.5
kD. CSPP1 has an N-terminal bipartite nuclear localization signal, a
proline-rich region, a central domain consisting of 3 coiled-coil
regions, and a C-terminal domain. Immunofluorescence studies localized
CSPP1-S along microtubules, accumulating mainly around the centrosome in
transfected interphase HEK293T cells. Northern blot analysis of human
tissues detected a 4.4-kb transcript in testis.

By database analysis, Patzke et al. (2006) identified a CSPP1 isoform,
which they called CSPP1-L, of 1,221 amino acids and a calculated
molecular mass of 142 kD. CSPP1-L contains an N-terminal addition of 294
amino acids and a 51-amino acid insertion in the coiled-coil domain.
RT-PCR detected CSPP1-L expression at higher levels than CSPP1-S in
human testis and in asynchronously growing HEK293T cells and Reh cells.
Relative expression levels of CSPP1-S and CSPP1-L behaved inversely in
asynchronously growing Reh cells; CSPP1-S expression decreased from G1
to S and G2/M phase, whereas CSPP1-L levels increased throughout the
cell cycle. Immunofluorescence studies localized CSPP1-L to the
microtubules and centrosomes, accumulating at the microtubule
organization center in interphase, similar to CSPP1-S. By nocodazole
exposure, Patzke et al. (2006) showed that both CSPP1-S and CSPP1-L
localized to centrosomes independently of microtubules.

GENE FUNCTION

Patzke et al. (2005) showed that overexpression of CSPP1-S in HEK293T
cells blocked cell-cycle progression in G1 phase and perturbed spindle
formation and chromosome congression in mitosis, displaying multiple
spindle poles and condensed chromosomes aligned in ring-like structures
around the spindle poles. RNAi depletion of CSPP1-S perturbed cell-cycle
progression in late S phase under activation of the DNA replication
checkpoint.

Patzke et al. (2006) showed that overexpression of both CSPP1-S and
CSPP1-L impaired mitotic progression; however, different phenotypes were
associated with each isoform. Cells overexpressing CSPP1-L displayed
frequent bipolar spindles with lagging chromosomes as well as formation
of monopolar spindles. However, overexpression of CSPP1-S caused
multipolar spindles and seldom showed metaphase alignment. Using CSPP1-S
and CSPP1-L mutant constructs, they showed that the 294-amino acid
N-terminal extension was associated with increased multipolar spindles,
decreased numbers of monopolar spindles, and bipolar spindles with
lagging chromosomes. Both CSPP1-S and CSPP1-L-expressing cells impaired
cell-cycle progression in the G1 phase but to different degrees.
C-terminal truncated mutants containing a domain common to both CSPP1-S
and CSPP1-L localized to the centrosomes throughout the cell cycle.

GENE STRUCTURE

Patzke et al. (2006) determined that the CSPP1 gene contains 30 exons.
The CSPP1-S isoform results from alternative splicing of exon 4 and
lacks exon 17. The CSPP1-L isoform contains 29 exons and lacks exon 4.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Patzke et al. (2005) mapped the CSPP1 gene
to chromosome 8q13.2.

REFERENCE 1. Patzke, S.; Hauge, H.; Sioud, M.; Finne, E. F.; Sivertsen, E. A.;
Delabie, J.; Stokke, T.; Aasheim, H.-C.: Identification of a novel
centrosome/microtubule-associated coiled-coil protein involved in
cell-cycle progression and spindle organization. Oncogene 24: 1159-1173,
2005.

2. Patzke, S.; Stokke, T.; Aasheim, H.-C.: CSPP and CSPP-L associate
with centrosomes and microtubules and differently affect microtubule
organization. J. Cell. Physiol. 209: 199-210, 2006.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 12/10/2007

EDITED carol: 12/11/2007
wwang: 12/10/2007

606293	TITLE *606293 PROTOCADHERIN-GAMMA, SUBFAMILY A, MEMBER 6; PCDHGA6
;;PCDH-GAMMA-A6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cadherins are calcium-dependent cell-cell adhesion molecules, and
protocadherins constitute a subfamily of nonclassic cadherins. PCDHGA6
is 1 of 22 tandemly arranged genes within the PCDHG gene cluster
(604968) on chromosome 5q31. The 22 PCDHG genes function as 'variable'
exons that are individually spliced to a downstream constant region to
form distinct PCDHG transcripts. The variable PCDHG exons encode the
extracellular and transmembrane domains of the protocadherin protein,
and the common region encodes the intracellular domain (Wu et al.,
2001). For further information on the PCDHG genes, see 604968.

CLONING

By PCR of a brain cDNA library, Wu and Maniatis (1999) cloned
full-length PCDHGA6.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Wu et al. (2001) mapped the PCDHGA6 gene
to chromosome 5q31, between the PCDHGB3 gene (606301) and the PCDHGA7
gene (606294). They localized the mouse PCDHG genes to chromosome 18c.

REFERENCE 1. Wu, Q.; Maniatis, T.: A striking organization of a large family
of human neural cadherin-like cell adhesion genes. Cell 97: 779-790,
1999.

2. Wu, Q.; Zhang, T.; Cheng, J.-F.; Kim, Y.; Grimwood, J.; Schmutz,
J.; Dickson, M.; Noonan, J. P.; Zhang, M. Q.; Myers, R. M.; Maniatis,
T.: Comparative DNA sequence analysis of mouse and human protocadherin
gene clusters. Genome Res. 11: 389-404, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/15/2007

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 9/27/2001

EDITED alopez: 04/05/2012
alopez: 4/5/2012
mgross: 10/15/2007
mgross: 9/27/2001

607737	TITLE *607737 FIBROBLAST GROWTH FACTOR-BINDING PROTEIN 1; FGFBP1
;;FGF-BINDING PROTEIN 1; FGFBP;;
HEPARIN-BINDING GROWTH FACTOR-BINDING PROTEIN, 17-KD; HBP17;;
HBGF-BINDING PROTEIN, 17-KD
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

FGFBP1, or HBP17, binds to both acidic (FGF1; 131220) and basic (FGF2;
134920) fibroblast growth factors in a reversible manner. It also binds
to perlecan (HSPG2; 142461).

CLONING

Using affinity chromatography and biochemical analysis, followed by PCR
of an epidermoid carcinoma cell line, Wu et al. (1991) isolated a cDNA
encoding HBP17. The predicted 234-amino acid secreted protein contains a
signal sequence and a potential N-linked glycosylation site. Northern
blot analysis revealed expression of a 1.2-kb transcript in epidermoid
and squamous carcinoma cells, as well as in normal keratinocytes.
Expression was not detected in any other cell lines tested, including
nontumorigenic epidermoid cell lines. Immunoblot analysis detected a
17-kD protein that comigrated with FGF2.

GENE FUNCTION

By binding analyses, Wu et al. (1991) showed that HBP17 interacts with
both FGF1 and FGF2. Like heparin, HBP17 protected both FGF molecules
from acid inactivation. HBP17 inhibited the mitogenic activity of FGF1
more efficiently than that of FGF2 in the absence of heparin, and it
blocked binding to a liver cell line.

By yeast 2-hybrid and coimmunoprecipitation analyses with domain III of
HSPG2 as bait, Mongiat et al. (2001) showed that keratinocyte FGFBP1
interacts with HSPG2. Deletion analysis determined that FGFBP1 binds to
the second EGF motif of domain III, close to the binding site for FGF7
(148180). Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated low-level expression
of FGFBP1 in the suprabasal region of the epidermis and higher
expression and colocalization with HSPG2 in the pericellular stroma of
squamous cell carcinomas.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the FGFBP1
gene to chromosome 4 (TMAP D4S3140).

REFERENCE 1. Mongiat, M.; Otto, J.; Oldershaw, R.; Ferrer, F.; Sato, J. D.;
Iozzo, R. V.: Fibroblast growth factor-binding protein is a novel
partner for perlecan protein core. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 10263-10271,
2001.

2. Wu, D.; Kan, M.; Sato, G. H.; Okamoto, T.; Sato, J. D.: Characterization
and molecular cloning of a putative binding protein for heparin-binding
growth factors. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 16778-16785, 1991.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 4/30/2003

EDITED alopez: 05/09/2005
mgross: 4/30/2003

609205	TITLE *609205 DAB2-INTERACTING PROTEIN; DAB2IP
;;ASK1-INTERACTING PROTEIN; AIP1;;
KIAA1743
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DAB2IP is a Ras (190020) GTPase-activating protein (GAP) that acts as a
tumor suppressor. The DAB2IP gene is inactivated by methylation in
prostate and breast cancers (Yano et al., 2005).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated hippocampus cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned a partial DAB2IP cDNA, which they
designated KIAA1743. The deduced protein shares significant sequence
identity with nGAP (RASAL2; 606136). RT-PCR ELISA detected intermediate
to high expression in all adult and fetal tissues examined. Highest
expression was detected in adult brain, adult kidney, and fetal brain.
Within specific adult brain regions, highest expression was detected in
cerebellum, hippocampus, caudate nucleus, substantia nigra, and
subthalamic nucleus.

Using the rat Dab2ip homolog, Dip1/2, to design primers, Chen et al.
(2002) cloned human DAB2IP by PCR of a prostate epithelia cell line. The
deduced 967-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 110
kD. The N-terminal half of DAB2IP contains a protein kinase C (see
176960) conserved region-2 (C2) domain and a RasGAP domain. The
C-terminal half contains a proline-rich region and a leucine zipper
domain. PCR detected a single transcript in brain and 3 transcripts in
normal prostate cell lines. Chen et al. (2002) determined that the
variant transcripts result from the use of alternate first exons and
alternate transcription start sites.

Using the C-terminal domain of ASK1 (MAP3K5; 602448) as bait in a yeast
2-hybrid screen of a heart cDNA library, followed by PCR of an umbilical
vein endothelial cell cDNA library, Zhang et al. (2003) cloned DAB2IP,
which they designated AIP1. The deduced protein contains 1,065 amino
acids. Zhang et al. (2003) identified a pleckstrin homology (PH) domain
N-terminal to the C2 domain described by Chen et al. (2002).

GENE STRUCTURE

Chen et al. (2002) determined that the DAB2IP gene spans 96 kb and
contains 15 exons. In addition, they identified an alternative first
exon, which they designated exon 1b. Intron 1 spans about 56 kb, and the
translation initiation codon is within exon 3. Chen et al. (2002)
identified 2 potential promoters, P1, which is located within the first
intron, and P2, which is located 5-prime of exon 1a. Both lack canonical
TATA and CAAT boxes. The P2 region upstream of exon 1a is rich in CpG
and contains several Sp1 (189906)-binding sites. Binding sites for AP1
(165160), AP2 (107580), and other transcription factors are also present
within the promoter region.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (2002) found that rat Dab2ip interacted with the N-terminal
domain of Dab2 (601236). Dab2ip stimulated the GTPase activity of Ras in
vitro and in vivo. Increased expression of Dab2ip caused a
dose-dependent inhibition of basal transcription from a serum response
element in human prostate cancer cells. Dab2ip inhibited the growth of
prostate cancer cells, and the inhibition required the interaction
between Dab2ip and Dab2.

Using coimmunoprecipitation assays and mutation analysis, Zhang et al.
(2003) showed that a lysine-rich cluster within the C2 domain of DAB2IP
interacted with the C-terminal domain of ASK1. In contrast to the ASK1
inhibitor 14-3-3 (see 609009), DAB2IP preferentially bound
dephosphorylated ASK1. In quiescent endothelial cells, DAB2IP did not
bind ASK1, but existed in a closed form through an intramolecular
interaction between its N and C termini. DAB2IP was required for TNFA
(TNF; 191160)-induced ASK1 activation, which involved DAB2IP unfolding,
association of DAB2IP with ASK1, and facilitated release of 14-3-3 from
ASK1, resulting in downstream activation of JNK (see MAPK8; 601158).
TNFA activation of ASK1 required the ASK1-binding and GAP activities of
DAB2IP. Knockdown of DAB2IP by RNA interference blunted TNFA-induced
ASK1/JNK activation. Zhang et al. (2003) concluded that DAB2IP mediates
TNFA-induced ASK1 activation by facilitating dissociation of 14-3-3 from
ASK1.

Zhang et al. (2004) found that DAB2IP localized on the plasma membrane
in resting human and bovine endothelial cells in a complex with TNFR1
(TNFRSF1A; 191190). TNF binding induced release of DAB2IP from TNFR1,
resulting in cytoplasmic translocation and concomitant formation of an
intracellular signaling complex containing TRADD (603500), RIP1 (RIPK1;
603453), TRAF2 (601895), and DAB2IP. Mutation analysis indicated that
the C-terminal proline-rich domain of DAB2IP was critical in maintaining
the interaction between DAB2IP and TNFR1. A PERIOD (602260)-like domain
of DAB2IP interacted with the RING finger domain of TRAF2 and enhanced
TRAF2-induced ASK1 activation. At the same time, binding of DAB2IP to
TRAF2 inhibited TNF-induced IKK (see 600664)-NFKB (see 164011)
signaling.

- Role in Cancer

Chen et al. (2002) found that expression of DAB2IP was lower in prostate
cancer cell lines than in normal prostate epithelial cell lines. They
showed that the P1 promoter of DAB2IP was active in normal cells, but
inactive in the cancer cell lines.

Chen et al. (2003) found that acetylhistone H3 (see 602810) was
associated with the DAB2IP promoter region, and CpG islands remained
almost unmethylated, in normal prostate epithelium, but not in prostate
cancer cell lines. A histone deacetylase inhibitor and a DNA
hypomethylation agent acted cooperatively to reactivate DAB2IP gene
expression in the cancer cells. Histone acetylation played a more
significant role in gene activation, and the P2 promoter was more
important than P1 in regulating DAB2IP expression in prostate epithelial
cells.

Yano et al. (2005) reported that aberrant methylation in 2 separate
regions of the P2 promoter of DAB2IP was associated with lung cancers.
Aberrant methylation was also associated with advanced disease stage.

Chen et al. (2005) showed that increased EZH2 (601573) expression in
normal human prostate epithelial cells suppressed DAB2IP gene
expression. In contrast, knockdown of endogenous EZH2 levels in prostate
cancer cells via small interfering RNA increased DAB2IP expression. In
prostate cancer, but not normal prostate epithelial cells, an EZH2
complex that included EED (605984) and SUZ12 (606245) associated with
the DAB2IP promoter and increased promoter occupancy by lys27-methylated
histone H3 and HDAC1 (601241). Knockdown of EZH2 reduced the association
of methylated histone H3 and HDAC1 with the DAB2IP promoter. Chen et al.
(2005) concluded that DAB2IP is a target for EZH2-mediated gene
silencing in prostate epithelium.

Using predominantly a mouse tumor model and genetic manipulation of
human prostate cancer cells, Min et al. (2010) showed that direct
EZH2-mediated downregulation of DAB2IP induced an
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in the cancer cells and
increased their metastatic potential. DAB2IP downregulation activated
RAS and NFKB. RAS activation drove cell growth, while NFKB activation
triggered EMT and metastasis. Min et al. (2010) found an inverse
relationship between EZH2 and DAB2IP expression in human prostate cancer
tissues and an inverse relationship between DAB2IP expression and tumor
grade. Min et al. (2010) concluded that epigenetic suppression of DAB2IP
by EZH2 is a major mechanism of DAB2IP inactivation in human prostate
cancer and increases metastatic potential.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Chen et al. (2002) mapped the DAB2IP gene
to chromosome 9q33.1-q33.3.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, H.; Pong, R.-C.; Wang, Z.; Hsieh, J.-T.: Differential regulation
of the human gene DAB2IP in normal and malignant prostatic epithelia:
cloning and characterization. Genomics 79: 573-581, 2002.

2. Chen, H.; Toyooka, S.; Gazdar, A. F.; Hsieh, J.-T.: Epigenetic
regulation of a novel tumor suppressor gene (hDAB2IP) in prostate
cancer cell lines. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 3121-3130, 2003.

3. Chen, H.; Tu, S.; Hsieh, J.-T.: Down-regulation of human DAB2IP
gene expression mediated by polycomb Ezh2 complex and histone deacetylase
in prostate cancer. J. Biol. Chem. 280: 22437-22444, 2005.

4. Min, J.; Zaslavsky, A.; Fedele, G.; McLaughlin, S. K.; Reczek,
E. E.; De Raedt, T.; Guney, I.; Strochlic, D. E.; MacConaill, L. E.;
Beroukhim, R.; Bronson, R. T.; Ryeom, S.; Hahn, W. C.; Loda, M.; Cichowski,
K.: An oncogene-tumor suppressor cascade drives metastatic prostate
cancer by coordinately activating Ras and nuclear factor-kappa-B. Nature
Med. 16: 286-294, 2010.

5. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Hattori, A.; Kondo, Y.; Okumura, K.; Ohara,
O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes.
XIX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which
code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 347-355, 2000.

6. Wang, Z.; Tseng, C.-P.; Pong, R.-C.; Chen, H.; McConnell, J. D.;
Navone, N.; Hsieh, J.-T.: The mechanism of growth-inhibitory effect
of DOC-2/DAB2 in prostate cancer: characterization of a novel GTPase-activating
protein associated with N-terminal domain of DOC-2/DAB2. J. Biol.
Chem. 277: 12622-12631, 2002.

7. Yano, M.; Toyooka, S.; Tsukuda, K.; Dote, H.; Ouchida, M.; Hababata,
T.; Aoe, M.; Date, H.; Gazdar, A. F.; Shimizu, N.: Aberrant promoter
methylation of human DAB2 interactive protein (hDAB2IP) gene in lung
cancers. Int. J. Cancer 113: 59-66, 2005.

8. Zhang, H.; Zhang, R.; Luo, Y.; D'Alessio, A.; Pober, J. S.; Min,
W.: AIP1/DAB2IP, a novel member of the Ras-GAP family, transduces
TRAF2-induced ASK1-JNK activation. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 44955-44965,
2004.

9. Zhang, R.; He, X.; Liu, W.; Lu, M.; Hsieh, J.-T.; Min, W.: AIP1
mediates TNF-alpha-induced ASK1 activation by facilitating dissociation
of ASK1 from its inhibitor 14-3-3. J. Clin. Invest. 111: 1933-1943,
2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/18/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/15/2005

EDITED mgross: 02/05/2013
mgross: 5/18/2010
terry: 5/18/2010
mgross: 2/15/2005

602932	TITLE *602932 MOTHERS AGAINST DECAPENTAPLEGIC, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 7; SMAD7
;;MADH7;;
SMA- AND MAD-RELATED PROTEIN 7
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

MAD proteins, originally defined in Drosophila, are essential components
of the signaling pathways of the transforming growth factor-beta
receptor family (e.g., TGFBR1; 190181). Using a differential display
approach in cultured endothelial cells subjected to multiple soluble and
biomechanical stimuli, Topper et al. (1997) isolated a human endothelial
cell cDNA encoding MADH7, which they called SMAD7. The predicted
426-amino acid MADH7 protein lacks the C-terminal putative
phosphorylation sites present in other MAD proteins, suggesting that it
may be distinctly regulated. In situ hybridization and
immunohistochemical analyses on human tissues showed that MADH7 is
expressed predominantly in vascular endothelium.

GENE FUNCTION

Topper et al. (1997) demonstrated that MADH7 and MADH6 (602931) could
form complexes in endothelial cells. MADH7 was induced in cultured
vascular endothelium by fluid mechanical forces and was capable of
modulating endothelial gene expression in response to both humoral and
biomechanical stimuli in vitro.

Kavsak et al. (2000) found that the E3 ubiquitin ligase SMURF2 (605532)
associates constitutively with SMAD7. SMURF2 is nuclear, but binding to
SMAD7 induced export and recruitment to the activated TGFBR, where it
caused degradation of receptors and of SMAD7 via proteasomal and
lysosomal pathways. Gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570), which stimulates
expression of SMAD7, induced SMAD7-SMURF2 complex formation and
increased TGFBR turnover, which was stabilized by blocking SMAD7 or
SMURF2 expression. Furthermore, SMAD7 mutants that interfered with
recruitment of SMURF2 to the receptors were compromised in their
inhibitory activity. These studies defined SMAD7 as an adaptor in an E3
ubiquitin ligase complex that targets TGFBR for degradation.

Lallemand et al. (2001) showed that cells stably expressing SMAD7 had
increased susceptibility to apoptosis induced by TGFB (190180), TNFA
(191160), serum withdrawal, or loss of cell adhesion (anoikis). SMAD7
decreased NFKB (164011) activity, providing a mechanism for the
increased apoptosis. Stable expression of RAS (190020) suppressed SMAD7
inhibition of NFKB and SMAD7 potentiation of apoptosis.

Scleroderma is a chronic systemic disease that leads to fibrosis of the
skin and other affected organs. TGFB has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of scleroderma. SMAD proteins function as signaling
transducers downstream from TGFB receptors. Dong et al. (2002)
investigated the signaling components of the TGFB pathway and TGFB
activity in scleroderma lesions in vivo and in scleroderma fibroblasts
in vitro. Basal level and TGFB-inducible expression of SMAD7 were
selectively decreased, whereas SMAD3 (603109) expression was increased
both in scleroderma skin and in explanted scleroderma fibroblasts in
culture. TGFB signaling events were increased in scleroderma fibroblasts
relative to normal fibroblasts. In vitro adenoviral gene transfer with
SMAD7 restored normal TGFB signaling in scleroderma fibroblasts. These
results suggested that alterations in the SMAD pathway, including marked
SMAD7 deficiency and SMAD3 upregulation, may be responsible for TGFB
hyperresponsiveness observed in scleroderma.

Gronroos et al. (2002) presented evidence that SMAD7 interacts with the
transcriptional coactivator p300 (602700), resulting in acetylation of
SMAD7 on 2 lysine residues in its N terminus. Acetylation or mutation of
these lysine residues stabilized SMAD7 and protected it from
TGFB-induced degradation. The authors demonstrated that the acetylated
residues in SMAD7 also are targeted by ubiquitination and that
acetylation of these lysine residues prevents subsequent ubiquitination.
Specifically, acetylation of SMAD7 protected it against ubiquitination
and degradation mediated by the ubiquitin ligase SMURF1 (605568). The
data suggested that competition between ubiquitination and acetylation
of overlapping lysine residues constitutes another mechanism to regulate
protein stability.

Saika et al. (2007) determined the effects of Smad7 gene transfer in the
prevention of fibrogenic responses by the retinal pigment epithelium, a
major cause of proliferative vitreoretinopathy (193235) after retinal
detachment in mice. In a retinal detachment-induced proliferative
vitreoretinopathy in a mouse model, Smad7 gene transfer inhibited
TGFB2/Smad signaling in ARPE19 cells and expression of collagen type I
and TGFB1 but had no effect on their basal levels. In vivo Smad7
overexpression resulted in suppression of Smad2/3 signals and of the
fibrogenic response to epithelial-mesenchymal transition by the retinal
pigment epithelium. Saika et al. (2007) concluded that Smad7 gene
transfer suppressed fibrogenic responses to TGFB2 by retinal pigment
epithelial cells in vitro and in vivo.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis, Topper et al. (1997) mapped the MADH7
gene to human chromosome 18. By FISH, Roijer et al. (1998) refined the
localization to 18q21.1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a genomewide association study, genotyping 550,163 SNPs in 940
individuals with familial colorectal tumors including 627 with
colorectal cancer (CRC; 114500) and 313 with advanced adenomas, and 965
controls, Broderick et al. (2007) identified 3 SNPs in SMAD7 associated
with CRC. Across 4 sample sets, the association between dbSNP rs4939827
(602932.0001) and CRC was highly statistically significant.

ANIMAL MODEL

Fukasawa et al. (2004) investigated Smad-mediated Tgfb signaling in mice
with unilateral ureteral obstruction (UUO), a model of kidney disease
with progressive tubulointerstitial fibrosis. The level of Smad7
protein, but not mRNA, decreased progressively in UUO kidneys through
ubiquitination and degradation. Expression of Smurf1 and Smurf2, which
are E3 ubiquitin ligases for Smad7, increased, and they interacted with
Smad7 in UUO kidneys. Fukasawa et al. (2004) concluded that enhanced
ubiquitin-dependent degradation of SMAD7 plays a pathogenic role in
progression of tubulointerstitial fibrosis.

SMAD7 is expressed at low levels in normal epithelial tissues, but it is
overexpressed in some cancers, in inflammatory bowel disease (see
266600), and in progressive glomerulosclerosis in mice. Using a chimeric
transcript to drive expression of Smad7 from the keratin-5 (KRT5;
148040) promoter, He et al. (2002) overexpressed Smad7 in the skin of
mice. Transgenic mice exhibited severe defects in multiple epithelial
tissues, including significantly delayed and aberrant hair follicle
formation, marked hyperplasia in the epidermis and other stratified
epithelia, aberrant development of the eyelid and cornea, and severe
thymic atrophy.

Li et al. (2006) generated mice lacking exon 1 of the Smad7 gene. These
mice were viable but smaller than wildtype mice. Mutant mice showed
overactive Tgfb signaling, as measured by an increase in Smad2
(601366)-positive B cells. B cells from mutant mice had increased Ig
class switch recombination to IgA, enhanced spontaneous apoptosis, and
reduced proliferation in response to lipopolysaccharide stimulation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COLORECTAL CANCER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 3
SMAD7, IVS3, T/C

In a large genomewide association study to identify variants that
influence risk of colorectal cancer (CRCS3; 612229), Broderick et al.
(2007) identified the strongest association with a single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) in intron 3 of the SMAD7 gene, dbSNP rs4939827 (P =
1.0 x 10(-12)). The T allele confers risk.

Tomlinson et al. (2008) and Tenesa et al. (2008) confirmed the
association of dbSNP rs4939827 with risk of colorectal cancer.

REFERENCE 1. Broderick, P.; Carvajal-Carmona, L.; Pittman, A. M.; Webb, E.;
Howarth, K.; Rowan, A.; Lubbe, S.; Spain, S.; Sullivan, K.; Fielding,
S.; Jaeger, E.; Vijayakrishnan, J.; and 20 others: A genome-wide
association study shows that common alleles of SMAD7 influence colorectal
cancer risk. Nature Genet. 39: 1315-1317, 2007.

2. Dong, C.; Zhu, S.; Wang, T.; Yoon, W.; Li, Z.; Alvarez, R. J.;
ten Dijke, P.; White, B.; Wigley, F. M.; Goldschmidt-Clermont, P.
J.: Deficient Smad7 expression: a putative molecular defect in scleroderma. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 3908-3913, 2002.

3. Fukasawa, H.; Yamamoto, T.; Togawa, A.; Ohashi, N.; Fujigaki, Y.;
Oda, T.; Uchida, C.; Kitagawa, K.; Hattori, T.; Suzuki, S.; Kitagawa,
M.; Hishida, A.: Down-regulation of Smad7 expression by ubiquitin-dependent
degradation contributes to renal fibrosis in obstructive nephropathy
in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 8687-8692, 2004.

4. Gronroos, E.; Hellman, U.; Heldin, C.-H.; Ericsson, J.: Control
of Smad7 stability by competition between acetylation and ubiquitination. Molec.
Cell 10: 483-493, 2002.

5. He, W.; Li, A. G.; Wang, D.; Han, S.; Zheng, B.; Goumans, M.-J.;
ten Dijke, P.; Wang, X.-J.: Overexpression of Smad7 results in severe
pathological alterations in multiple epithelial tissues. EMBO J. 21:
2580-2590, 2002.

6. Kavsak, P.; Rasmussen, R. K.; Causing, C. G.; Bonni, S.; Zhu, H.;
Thomsen, G. H.; Wrana, J. L.: Smad7 binds to Smurf2 to form an E3
ubiquitin ligase that targets the TGF-beta receptor for degradation. Molec.
Cell 6: 1365-1375, 2000.

7. Lallemand, F.; Mazars, A.; Prunier, C.; Bertrand, F.; Kornprost,
M.; Gallea, S.; Roman-Roman, S.; Cherqui, G.; Atfi, A.: Smad7 inhibits
the survival nuclear factor kappa-B and potentiates apoptosis in epithelial
cells. Oncogene 20: 879-884, 2001.

8. Li, R.; Rosendahl, A.; Brodin, G.; Cheng, A. M.; Ahgren, A.; Sundquist,
C.; Kulkarni, S.; Pawson, T.; Heldin, C.-H.; Heuchel, R. L.: Deletion
of exon I of SMAD7 in mice results in altered B cell responses. J.
Immun. 176: 6777-6784, 2006.

9. Roijer, E.; Moren, A.; ten Dijke, P.; Stenman, G.: Assignment
of the Smad7 gene (MADH7) to human chromosome 18q21.1 by fluorescence
in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 81: 189-190, 1998.

10. Saika, S.; Yamanaka, O.; Nishikawa-Ishida, I.; Kitano, A.; Flanders,
K. C.; Okada, Y.; Ohnishi, Y.; Nakajima, Y.; Ikeda, K.: Effect of
Smad7 gene overexpression on transforming growth factor beta-induced
retinal pigment fibrosis in a proliferative vitreoretinopathy mouse
model. Arch. Ophthal. 125: 647-654, 2007.

11. Tenesa, A.; Farrington, S. M.; Prendergast, J. G. D.; Porteous,
M. E.; Walker, M.; Haq, N.; Barnetson, R. A.; Theodoratou, E.; Cetnarskyj,
R.; Cartwright, N.; Semple, C.; Clark, A. J.; and 45 others: Genome-wide
association scan identifies a colorectal cancer susceptibility locus
on 11q23 and replicates risk loci at 8q24 and 18q21. Nature Genet. 40:
631-637, 2008.

12. Tomlinson, I. P. M.; Webb, E.; Carvajal-Carmona, L.; Broderick,
P.; Howarth, K.; Pittman, A. M.; Spain, S.; Lubbe, S.; Walther, A.;
Sullivan, K.; Jaeger, E.; Fielding, S.; and 65 others: A genome-wide
association study identifies colorectal cancer susceptibility loci
on chromosomes 10p14 and 8q23.3. Nature Genet. 40: 623-630, 2008.

13. Topper, J. N.; Cai, J.; Qiu, Y.; Anderson, K. R.; Xu, Y.-Y.; Deeds,
J. D.; Feeley, R.; Gimeno, C. J.; Woolf, E. A.; Tayber, O.; Mays,
G. G.; Sampson, B. A.; Schoen, F. J.; Gimbrone, M. A., Jr.; Falb,
D.: Vascular MADs: two novel MAD-related genes selectively inducible
by flow in human vascular endothelium. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94:
9314-9319, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/20/2007
Jane Kelly - updated: 9/25/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/3/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/29/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/26/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/29/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/17/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/25/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/5/2001
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 5/25/2000

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 8/4/1998

EDITED alopez: 08/08/2008
alopez: 12/7/2007
terry: 11/20/2007
carol: 9/25/2007
mgross: 4/5/2007
terry: 4/3/2007
mgross: 10/12/2006
terry: 9/29/2006
tkritzer: 10/1/2004
mgross: 9/1/2004
terry: 8/26/2004
mgross: 5/1/2003
terry: 4/29/2003
mgross: 4/25/2002
terry: 4/17/2002
mgross: 1/25/2002
mgross: 1/5/2001
terry: 6/1/2000
joanna: 5/25/2000
alopez: 9/1/1998
psherman: 8/4/1998

614632	TITLE *614632 UV-STIMULATED SCAFFOLD PROTEIN A; UVSSA
;;KIAA1530
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Nucleotide excision repair (NER) removes a wide range of DNA damage,
including ultraviolet (UV) irradiation-induced lesions. UVSSA is part of
a UV-induced ubiquitinated protein complex involved in
transcription-coupled NER (TC-NER) (summary by Schwertman et al., 2012).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned UVSSA, which they designated
KIAA1530. The coding region of the transcript is flanked by several
repetitive elements, and the deduced protein contains 794 amino acids.
RT-PCR ELISA detected very high UVSSA expression in adult brain and
kidney, with high expression in all other fetal and adult tissues and
specific adult brain regions examined. Expression in fetal brain was
much lower than in adult brain.

Nakazawa et al. (2012) reported that the UVSSA protein contains 709
amino acids and has an N-terminal Vps27, HRS (HGS; 604375), and STAM
(601899) (VHS) ubiquitin-binding domain, followed by a putative nuclear
localization signal, a DUF2043 domain, and a second nuclear localization
signal. Database analysis revealed orthologs of UVSSA in several
vertebrates and in nematode.

GENE FUNCTION

By immunoprecipitation analysis, Nakazawa et al. (2012) found that UVSSA
interacted with several components of the transcription-coupled NER
complex and with ERCC6 (609413). UVSSA appeared to have a role in
ubiquitination and dephosphorylation of stalled RNA polymerase II (see
180660) after UV irradiation, as well as in stabilization of ERCC6.
Mutation analysis revealed that the VHS and DUF2043 domains of UVSSA
were required to restore RNA synthesis after UV irradiation.

Zhang et al. (2012) presented findings similar to those of Nakazawa et
al. (2012). In addition, they showed that UVSSA-dependent ERCC6
stabilization was mediated by interaction of UVSSA with USP7 (602519), a
protease that removes ubiquitin from proteins.

Schwertman et al. (2012) found that knockdown of UVSSA in U2OS cells via
RNA interference caused UV hypersensitivity and reduced recovery of RNA
synthesis after UV irradiation. UVSSA interacted with elongating RNA
polymerase II, localized to UV-induced lesions, resided in
chromatin-associated transcription-coupled NER complexes, and stabilized
the transcription-coupled NER organizing protein ERCC6 by delivering
USP7 to the NER complex. Schwertman et al. (2012) concluded that
UVSSA-USP7-mediated stabilization of ERCC6 is a critical regulatory
mechanism of transcription-coupled NER.

GENE STRUCTURE

Independently, Nakazawa et al. (2012) and Zhang et al. (2012) determined
that the UVSSA gene contains 14 exons and spans 40.7 kb. The first exon
is noncoding.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the UVSSA gene
to chromosome 4. Nakazawa et al. (2012) and Zhang et al. (2012) stated
that the UVSSA gene maps to chromosome 4p16.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By exome sequencing of 2 cell lines (Kps3 and XP24KO) derived from 2
unrelated Japanese patients with UV-sensitive syndrome-3 (UVSS3;
614640), Nakazawa et al. (2012) identified a homozygous truncating
mutation in the UVSSA gene (K123X; 614632.0001). One of the patients had
previously been reported by Itoh et al. (1994) and the other by Fujiwara
et al. (1985). Direct sequencing of the UVSSA gene identified additional
homozygous mutations in 2 unrelated patients (614632.0002 and
614632.0003). The patients had onset of cutaneous photosensitivity after
sun exposure in infancy and developed freckles and telangiectasia, but
did not have skin tumors or other abnormalities. All of the cell lines
showed defective RNA synthesis recovery after UV irradiation, which was
restored after expression of wildtype UVSSA. Unscheduled DNA synthesis
was not affected. The cellular studies were consistent with a defect in
TC-NER. Pathogenic UVSSA mutations were not found in 61 individuals with
Cockayne syndrome (see, e.g., CSA, 216400).

Zhang et al. (2012) used microcell-mediated chromosome transfers via
mouse cells to identify the gene responsible for UVSS3 in the Kps3 cell
line (Itoh et al., 1994). The results indicated that the causative gene
was on mouse chromosome 5. Sequencing of the UVSSA gene identified a
homozygous K123X mutation in the Kps3 cell line and in the XP24KO cell
line (Fujiwara et al., 1985). Expression of wildtype UVSSA in Kps3 cells
restored normal levels of recovery of RNA synthesis after UV irradiation
and UV resistance.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
UV-SENSITIVE SYNDROME 3
UVSSA, LYS123TER

By exome sequencing of 2 cell lines (Kps3 and XP24KO) derived from 2
unrelated Japanese patients with UV-sensitive syndrome-3 (UVSS3;
614640), Nakazawa et al. (2012) identified a homozygous 367A-T
transversion in the UVSSA gene, resulting in a lys123-to-ter (K123X)
substitution. The 80-kD UVSSA protein could not be detected in patient
cells. The mutation was found in heterozygous state in 1 of 576 control
individuals (allele frequency of 0.09%). One of the patients (Kps3) had
an affected sib (Itoh et al., 1994) with the same mutation; each
unaffected parent was a heterozygous carrier. Patient XP24KO had
originally been reported by Fujiwara et al. (1985) and reclassified as
UVSS by Itoh et al. (2000). All patients had onset of cutaneous
photosensitivity after sun exposure in infancy and developed freckles
and telangiectasia, but did not have skin tumors or other abnormalities.

Zhang et al. (2012) used microcell-mediated chromosome transfers via
mouse cells to identify the gene responsible for UVSS3 in the Kps3 cell
line. The results indicated that the causative gene was on mouse
chromosome 5. Sequencing of the UVSSA gene identified a homozygous K123X
mutation in the Kps3 cell line and in the XP24KO cell line. Expression
of wildtype UVSSA in Kps3 cells restored normal levels of recovery of
RNA synthesis after UV irradiation and UV resistance. Zhang et al.
(2012) noted that the Kps3 cell line is not hypersensitive to oxidative
damage (Nardo et al., 2009), which may explain the mild phenotype.

.0002
UV-SENSITIVE SYNDROME 3
UVSSA, 1-BP DEL, 87G

In a cell line derived from an Israeli patient (TA24) with UVSS3
(614640), Nakazawa et al. (2012) identified a homozygous 1-bp deletion
(87delG) in the UVSSA gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature
termination. The mutation was not found in 576 control individuals. The
UVSSA protein could not be detected in patient cells. Patient cells
showed normal levels of UV-induced DNA repair synthesis, but drastically
reduced survival and recovery of RNA synthesis after UV exposure.

.0003
UV-SENSITIVE SYNDROME 3
UVSSA, CYS32ARG

In a Japanese girl (XP70TO) with UVSS3 (614640), originally reported to
have a mild form of xeroderma pigmentosa (Kawada et al., 1986), Nakazawa
et al. (2012) identified a homozygous transition in exon 2 of the UVSSA
gene, resulting in a cys32-to-arg (C32R) substitution. The mutant
protein was stably expressed, but the band intensity was faint. The
mutation was not found in 576 control individuals. Crystallographic
studies suggested that the mutation would obstruct interactions between
the VHS domain and ubiquitinated proteins.

REFERENCE 1. Fujiwara, Y.; Uehara, Y.; Ichihashi, M.; Yamamoto, Y.; Nishioka,
K.: Assignment of 2 patients with xeroderma pigmentosum to complementation
group E. Mutat. Res. 145: 55-61, 1985.

2. Itoh, T.; Linn, S.; Ono, T.; Yamaizumi, M.: Reinvestigation of
the classification of five cell strains of xeroderma pigmentosum group
E with reclassification of three of them. J. Invest. Derm. 114:
1022-1029, 2000.

3. Itoh, T.; Ono, T.; Yamaizumi, M.: A new UV-sensitive syndrome
not belonging to any complementation groups of xeroderma pigmentosum
or Cockayne syndrome: siblings showing biochemical characteristics
of Cockayne syndrome without typical clinical manifestations. Mutat.
Res. 314: 233-248, 1994. Note: Erratum: Mutat. Res. 315: 197 only,
1994.

4. Kawada, A.; Satoh, Y.; Fujiwara, Y.: Xeroderma pigmentosum complementation
group E: a case report. Photoderm. 3: 233-238, 1986.

5. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 143-150, 2000.

6. Nakazawa, Y.; Sasaki, K.; Mitsutake, N.; Matsuse, M.; Shimada,
M.; Nardo, T.; Takahashi, Y.; Ohyama, K.; Ito, K.; Mishima, H.; Nomura,
M.; Kinoshita, A.; and 12 others: Mutations in UVSSA cause UV-sensitive
syndrome and impair RNA polymerase IIo processing in transcription-coupled
nucleotide-excision repair. Nature Genet. 44: 586-592, 2012.

7. Nardo, T.; Oneda, R.; Spivak, G.; Vaz, B.; Mortier, L.; Thomas,
P.; Orioli, D.; Laugel, V.; Stary, A.; Hanawalt, P. C.; Sarasin, A.;
Stefanini, M.: A UV-sensitive syndrome patient with a specific CSA
mutation reveals separable roles for CSA in response to UV and oxidative
DNA damage. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 106: 6209-6214, 2009.

8. Schwertman, P.; Lagarou, A.; Dekkers, D. H. W.; Raams, A.; van
der Hoek, A. C.; Laffeber, C.; Hoeijmakers, J. H. J.; Demmers, J.
A. A.; Fousteri, M.; Vermeulen, W.; Marteijn, J. A.: UV-sensitive
syndrome protein UVSSA recruits USP7 to regulate transcription-coupled
repair. Nature Genet. 44: 598-602, 2012.

9. Zhang, X.; Horibata, K.; Saijo, M.; Ishigami, C.; Ukai, A.; Kanno,
S.; Tahara, H.; Neilan, E. G.; Honma, M.; Nohmi, T.; Yasui, A.; Tanaka,
K.: Mutations in UVSSA cause UV-sensitive syndrome and destabilize
ERCC6 in transcription-coupled DNA repair. Nature Genet. 593-597,
2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/15/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/10/2012

EDITED carol: 09/11/2013
terry: 5/17/2012
carol: 5/16/2012
ckniffin: 5/15/2012
mgross: 5/10/2012

614693	TITLE *614693 ATM INTERACTOR; ATMIN
;;ATM SUBSTRATE CHK2-INTERACTING ZINC FINGER PROTEIN; ASCIZ;;
KIAA0431
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ATMIN functions in the DNA damage response and in embryonic development
(Jurado et al., 2012).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Ishikawa et al. (1997) cloned ATMIN, which they designated
KIAA0431. The transcript contains a repetitive element in its 3-prime
end, and the deduced protein contains 667 amino acids. RT-PCR detected
variable ATMIN expression in all tissues examined, with highest
expression in placenta, lung, and kidney.

Jurado et al. (2012) stated that there are 2 isoforms of ASCIZ that
differ only in their N-terminal ends. The full-length 823-amino acid
ASCIZ isoform contains 4 N-terminal zinc finger motifs, followed by a
central core domain and a C-terminal transcription activation domain
containing multiple SQ/TQ and TQT motifs. It also has several potential
ATM (607585)/ATR (601215) phosphorylation sites. The 667-amino acid
ASCIZ isoform has only 2 N-terminal zinc finger motifs.

GENE FUNCTION

Jurado et al. (2012) found that knockdown of ASCIZ resulted in
significantly reduced expression of DYNLL1 (601562) in mouse, chicken,
and human cells. Yeast 2-hybrid analysis revealed that DYNLL1 bound to
both isoforms of ASCIZ. DYNLL1 bound to each of 10 single TQT motifs
within the transactivation domain of ASCIZ, and DYNLL1 binding inhibited
ASCIZ-dependent transactivation of a reporter gene. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that ASCIZ bound directly to the
human DYNLL1 promoter and regulated its activity in a manner dependent
on the ASCIZ zinc finger domain. However, high DYNLL1 levels inhibited
the transcriptional activity of ASCIZ. DYNLL1 was also required for DNA
damage-induced ASCIZ focus formation. Jurado et al. (2012) concluded
that ASCIZ has the dual ability to activate DYNLL1 gene expression and
to sense free DYNLL1 protein levels, resulting in simple feedback loop
to adjust cellular content of DYNLL1.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Ishikawa et al. (1997) mapped the ATMIN
gene to chromosome 16.

Hartz (2012) mapped the ATMIN gene to chromosome 16q23.2 based on an
alignment of the ATMIN sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB007891) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/20/2012.

2. Ishikawa, K.; Nagase, T.; Nakajima, D.; Seki, N.; Ohira, M.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VIII. 78 new cDNA
clones from brain which code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4:
307-313, 1997.

3. Jurado, S.; Conlan, L. A.; Baker, E. K.; Ng, J.-L.; Tenis, N.;
Hoch, N. C.; Gleeson, K.; Smeets, M.; Izon, D.; Heierhorst, J.: ATM
substrate Chk2-interacting Zn(2+) finger (ASCIZ) is a bi-functional
transcriptional activator and feedback sensor in the regulation of
dynein light chain (DYNLL1) expression. J. Biol. Chem. 287: 3156-3164,
2012.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/25/2012

EDITED mgross: 06/25/2012

602268	TITLE *602268 AMINE OXIDASE, COPPER-CONTAINING, 2; AOC2
;;RETINA-SPECIFIC AMINE OXIDASE; RAO
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Copper amine oxidases (EC 1.4.3.6) catalyze the oxidative conversion of
amines to aldehydes and ammonia in the presence of copper and quinone
cofactor.

CLONING

Using a subtractive and differential cDNA cloning strategy, Imamura et
al. (1997) isolated the full-length, retina-specific human cDNA (AOC2)
for a novel member of the copper oxidase family, which they named
retina-specific amine oxidase (RAO). RAO is a 729-amino acid protein
with a predicted molecular mass of 80.6 kD. It shows high sequence
similarity to copper amine oxidases from various species ranging from
bacteria to mammals; RAO is most similar to bovine serum amine oxidase,
showing 58.8% identity over 765 amino acids. RAO contains several
conserved motifs including the active site of amine oxidases and the
histidine residues that likely bind copper. Northern blot analysis
showed that AOC2 is abundantly expressed as a 2.7-kb transcript in human
retina, but is not detectably expressed in any of the other adult or
fetal tissues examined. Imamura et al. (1997) suggested that RAO may be
a critical modulator of signal transmission in retina, possibly by
degrading the biogenic amines dopamine, histamine, and putrescine, and
proposed that AOC2 may be a candidate gene for hereditary ocular
diseases.

By in situ hybridization, Imamura et al. (1998) determined that the RAO
transcript is expressed preferentially in the ganglion cell layer of
mouse retina.

Imamura et al. (1998) screened a human retina cDNA library and
identified an alternatively spliced RAO cDNA variant with an additional
81 bp at the end of exon 2, encoding a deduced 756-amino acid protein.

GENE STRUCTURE

Imamura et al. (1998) determined that the RAO gene spans 6 kb and
contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

Imamura et al. (1997) mapped the RAO gene to chromosome 17q21 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Imamura, Y.; Kubota, R.; Wang, Y.; Asakawa, S.; Kudoh, J.; Mashima,
Y.; Oguchi, Y.; Shimizu, N.: Human retina-specific amine oxidase
(RAO): cDNA cloning, tissue expression, and chromosomal mapping. Genomics 40:
277-283, 1997.

2. Imamura, Y.; Noda, S.; Mashima, Y.; Kudoh, J.; Oguchi, Y.; Shimizu,
N.: Human retina-specific amine oxidase: genomic structure of the
gene (AOC2), alternatively spliced variant, and mRNA expression in
retina. Genomics 51: 293-298, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 5/22/2001

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 1/23/1998

EDITED carol: 01/23/2013
terry: 5/22/2001
psherman: 12/10/1998
psherman: 6/15/1998
dholmes: 1/27/1998
dholmes: 1/23/1998

600864	TITLE *600864 CASEIN KINASE I, DELTA; CSNK1D
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The CSNK1D gene encodes an isoform of casein kinase I, which is a
ubiquitous serine/threonine-specific protein kinase that constitutes
most of the kinase activity in eukaryotic cells, where it is distributed
in the nucleus, cytoplasm, and membrane fractions (summary by Kusuda et
al., 1996). CSNK1D is enriched in the brain (summary by Zhou et al.,
2010).

CLONING

Graves et al. (1993) cloned a full-length rat CKI-delta cDNA.

Kusuda et al. (1996) isolated and sequenced a cDNA clone for human
casein kinase I. An open reading frame of 415 amino acids was
identified, showing 97% homology to rat CKI-delta; within the kinase
domain of 284 amino acids the 2 were identical. The similarity of the
amino acid sequence of the kinase domain of human CSNK1D to yeast
enzymes that are involved in the repair of DNA strand breaks supported
speculation that the human gene product acts in DNA metabolism through
excision and recombinational repair.

MAPPING

Fish et al. (1995) mapped the human CKI-delta locus to 17q25 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization and PCR analysis of human/rodent
hybrid cell panels, Kusuda et al. (1996) mapped CSNK1D to 17q25.2-q25.3.

GENE FUNCTION

Lord et al. (2011) used a yeast transport assay to demonstrate that an
endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-derived vesicle retains its coat until it
reaches the Golgi. A Golgi-associated kinase, Hrr25p, which is a
CKI-delta ortholog, then phosphorylates the Sec23p (see 610511)/Sec24p
(see 607183) complex. Coat phosphorylation and dephosphorylation are
needed for vesicle fusion and budding, respectively. Additionally, Lord
et al. (2011) showed that Sec23p interacts in a sequential manner with
different binding partners, including the tethering factor complex
TRAPPI (see 610397) and Hrr25p, to ensure the directionality of ER-Golgi
traffic and prevent the back-fusion of a COPII vesicle with the ER. Lord
et al. (2011) stated that these events are conserved in mammalian cells.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Xu et al. (2005) identified a thr44-to-ala mutation in the CSNK1D gene
(T44A; 600864.0001) that cosegregated with familial advanced sleep phase
syndrome-2 (FASPS2; 615224) in a 3-generation family. The mutant kinase
showed decreased enzymatic activity in vitro. Transgenic Drosophila
carrying the human CKI-delta-T44A gene showed a phenotype with
lengthened circadian period. In contrast, transgenic mice carrying the
same mutation had a shorter circadian period, a phenotype mimicking
human FASPS. Xu et al. (2005) showed that CKI-delta is a central
component in the mammalian clock and that mammalian and Drosophila
clocks might have different regulatory mechanisms, despite the highly
conserved nature of their individual components.

Brennan et al. (2013) found that 5 of the mutation carriers with FASPS2
in the family reported by Xu et al. (2005) had migraine with or without
aura. One mutation carrier who did not have FASPS also had migraine.
However, 3 family members who were offspring of carriers but did not
carry the mutation also had migraine. In vitro functional expression
studies showed that the T44A mutant enzyme had significantly reduced
kinase activity compared to wildtype. Transgenic mice carrying the T44A
mutation were more sensitive to pain after treatment with the migraine
trigger nitroglycerin, and showed a reduced threshold for cortical
spreading depression, which is believed to be the physiologic analog of
migraine aura, as well as greater arterial dilation during cortical
spreading depression. The mutant enzyme showed decreased phosphorylation
of GJA1 (121014), which is a mediator of astrocyte signaling. Astrocytes
derived from mutant mice showed increased spontaneous and evoked calcium
signaling, which may underlie some of the vascular changes associated
with cortical spreading depression. These results suggested that
decreased CSNK1D activity can contribute to the pathogenesis of
migraine. Affected members of a second family with FASPS2 with or
without migraine carried a different heterozygous mutation in the CSNK1D
gene (H46R; 600864.0002).

ANIMAL MODEL

Zhou et al. (2010) found that mice with targeted overexpression of the
Csnk1d gene in the forebrain and striatum exhibited hyperactivity,
decreased anxiety, increased impulsivity, and defects in nesting
behavior compared to wildtype mice. Mutant mice also showed paradoxical
responses to dopamine receptor stimulation, showing hypoactivity
following injection of amphetamine or methylphenidate and certain
dopamine agonists. Csnk1d overexpression was also associated with
downregulation of DRD1 (126449) and DRD2 (126450) receptor levels. The
behavioral characteristics in these mice were reminiscent of the
symptoms and drug responses observed in attention deficit-hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD; 143465) in humans.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ADVANCED SLEEP PHASE SYNDROME, FAMILIAL, 2
CSNK1D, THR44ALA

In a 3-generation family segregating autosomal dominant familial
advanced sleep phase syndrome-2 (FASPS2; 615224), Xu et al. (2005)
identified a heterozygous A-to-G transition in the CSNK1D gene,
resulting in a thr44-to-ala substitution (T44A). This mutation occurs at
a residue that is conserved for mammalian CKIs through Drosophila CKI,
and was not identified in over 250 control DNA samples.

Brennan et al. (2013) found that 5 of the mutation carriers with FASPS2
in the family reported by Xu et al. (2005) had migraine with or without
aura. One mutation carrier who did not have FASPS also had migraine.
However, 3 family members who were offspring of carriers but did not
carry the mutation also had migraine. Brennan et al. (2013) noted that
the T44A substitution occurred at a highly conserved residue and was not
found in more than 2,600 control chromosomes. In vitro functional
expression studies showed that the T44A mutant enzyme had significantly
reduced kinase activity compared to wildtype. Transgenic mice carrying
the T44A mutation were more sensitive to pain after treatment with the
migraine trigger nitroglycerin, and showed a reduced threshold for
cortical spreading depression, which is believed to be the physiologic
analog of migraine aura, as well as greater arterial dilation during
cortical spreading depression. The mutant enzyme showed decreased
phosphorylation of GJA1 (121014), which is a mediator of astrocyte
signaling. Astrocytes derived from mutant mice showed increased
spontaneous and evoked calcium signaling, which may underlie some of the
vascular changes associated with cortical spreading depression. These
results suggested that decreased CSNK1D activity can contribute to the
pathogenesis of migraine. The relationship between the sleep alterations
and migraine was unclear.

.0002
ADVANCED SLEEP PHASE SYNDROME, FAMILIAL, 2
CSNK1D, HIS46ARG

In affected members of a family with FASPS2 (615224), Brennan et al.
(2013) identified a heterozygous mutation in the CSNK1D gene resulting
in a his46-to-arg (H46R) substitution at a highly conserved residue. The
mutation was not found in over 2,600 control chromosomes. Only 1 family
member without the mutation had migraine. In vitro functional expression
studies showed that the H46R mutant enzyme had a 53% reduction in kinase
activity compared to wildtype.

REFERENCE 1. Brennan, K. C.; Bates, E. A.; Shapiro, R. E.; Zyuzin, J.; Hallows,
W. C.; Huang, Y.; Lee, H.-Y.; Jones, C. R.; Fu, Y.-H.; Charles, A.
C.; Ptacek, L. J.: Casein kinase 1-delta mutations in familial migraine
and advanced sleep phase. Sci. Transl. Med. 5: 183ra56, 2013. Note:
Electronic Article.

2. Fish, K. J.; Cegielska, A.; Getman, M. E.; Landes, G. M.; Virshup,
D. M.: Isolation and characterization of human casein kinase I-epsilon
(CKI), a novel member of the CKI gene family. J. Biol. Chem. 270:
14875-14883, 1995.

3. Graves, P. R.; Haas, D. W.; Hagedorn, C. H.; DePaoli-Roach, A.
A.; Roach, P. J.: Molecular cloning, expression, and characterization
of a 49-kilodalton casein kinase I isoform from rat testis. J. Biol.
Chem. 268: 6394-6401, 1993.

4. Kusuda, J.; Hidari, N.; Hirai, M.; Hashimoto, K.: Sequence analysis
of the cDNA for the human casein kinase 1-delta (CSNK1D) gene and
its chromosomal localization. Genomics 32: 140-143, 1996.

5. Lord, C.; Bhandari, D.; Menon, S.; Ghassemian, M.; Nycz, D.; Hay,
J.; Ghosh, P.; Ferro-Novick, S.: Sequential interactions with Sec23
control the direction of vesicle traffic. Nature 473: 181-186, 2011.

6. Xu, Y.; Padiath, Q. S.; Shapiro, R. E.; Jones, C. R.; Wu, S. C.;
Saigoh, N.; Saigoh, K.; Ptacek, L. J.; Fu, Y.-H.: Functional consequences
of a CKI-delta mutation causing familial advanced sleep phase syndrome. Nature 434:
640-644, 2005.

7. Zhou, M.; Rebholz, H.; Brocia, C.; Warner-Schmidt, J. L.; Fienberg,
A. A.; Nairn, A. C.; Greengard, P.; Flajolet, M.: Forebrain overexpression
of CK1-delta leads to down-regulation of dopamine receptors and altered
locomotor activity reminiscent of ADHD. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 107:
4401-4406, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/6/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/26/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/23/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/25/2005

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 10/15/1995

EDITED carol: 05/16/2013
alopez: 5/10/2013
ckniffin: 5/6/2013
carol: 3/7/2013
ckniffin: 2/26/2013
alopez: 3/8/2012
alopez: 5/24/2011
terry: 5/23/2011
alopez: 11/30/2009
wwang: 5/27/2005
wwang: 5/25/2005
terry: 5/25/2005
psherman: 10/22/1999
terry: 4/17/1996
mark: 3/28/1996
mark: 3/13/1996
mark: 3/11/1996
terry: 3/7/1996
terry: 10/30/1995
mark: 10/15/1995

608272	TITLE *608272 NEURAMINIDASE 1; NEU1
;;SIALIDASE 1; SIAL1;;
SIALIDASE, LYSOSOMAL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Neuraminidase, or lysosomal sialidase (EC 3.2.1.18), has a dual
physiologic function: it participates in intralysosomal catabolism of
sialated glycoconjugates and is involved in cellular immune response.
The enzyme occurs in a complex with beta-galactosidase (GLB1; 230500)
and protective protein/cathepsin A (CTSA; 613111).

CLONING

By EST database searching, Bonten et al. (1996) identified a full-length
cDNA clone corresponding to human NEU1. The cDNA predicted a 415-amino
acid protein showing extensive homology to other mammalian and bacterial
neuraminidases. After the cleavage of a 47-amino acid N-terminal signal
peptide and glycosylation, it becomes a 48.3-kD mature active enzyme
similar to that found in the multienzyme lysosomal complex. Transient
expression of cDNA in deficient human fibroblasts showed that the enzyme
is compartmentalized in lysosomes and restores neuraminidase activity in
a PPCA-dependent manner.

Pshezhetsky et al. (1997) likewise reported identification of human
sialidase cDNA, its cloning, sequencing, and expression.

GENE STRUCTURE

Milner et al. (1997) determined that the NEU1 gene contains 6 exons and
spans approximately 3.5 kb of genomic DNA.

MAPPING

Oohira et al. (1985, 1986) provided evidence that the human NEU1 gene is
located inside the region of the major histocompatibility complex at
6p21.3. By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Bonten et al. (1996)
confirmed the localization of the gene to 6p21.3.

Klein and Klein (1982) and Womack and David (1982) mapped the mouse Neu1
locus very near H2 at its D end.

GENE FUNCTION

Verheijen et al. (1985) purified 2 neuraminidase subunits: a 76-kD
polypeptide and a 32-kD protective protein/cathepsin A (CTSA) that is
absent in galactosialidosis (256540). The protective protein is required
for the aggregation of beta-galactosidase monomers into high molecular
mass multimers. If this aggregation does not take place, monomeric
beta-galactosidase is rapidly degraded by the cell's own lysosomal
cathepsins. Later work of Verheijen et al. (1987) showed the second
function of the 32-kD protein: it acts as a subunit of
neuraminidase--hence, the neuraminidase deficiency in galactosialidosis.

Sialidase is targeted to the endosomal-lysosomal compartment as an
integral membrane protein by vesicular transport, which involves
association of the adaptor proteins with a tyrosine-containing
internalization signal at the C terminus of the enzyme (Lukong et al.,
2001). It is thought likely that the transmembrane domain in the
lysosome is cleaved similarly to that of acid phosphatase, resulting in
the appearance in the cell of 2 pools of lysosomal sialidase, soluble
and membrane-associated, which are both absent in cultured cells of
sialidosis patients.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Bonten et al. (1996) identified 3 independent mutations in the open
reading frame of NEU1 mRNA (see 608272.0001-608272.0003) from clinically
distinct sialidosis patients. Coexpression of the mutant cDNAs with PPCA
failed to generate neuraminidase activity, confirming the inactivating
effect of the mutations. Bonten et al. (1996) thus established the
molecular basis of sialidosis in these patients.

Pshezhetsky et al. (1997) examined 6 sialidosis patients and identified
3 mutations in the NEU1 gene: 1 frameshift insertion and 2 missense
mutations.

Lukong et al. (2000) identified mutations in 9 sialidosis patients and
measured the activity of the identified variants by transgenic
expression. One patient had a deletion (623delG; 608272.0006), resulting
in frameshift and introduction of a stop codon, truncating 113 amino
acids. All others had missense mutations. Molecular modeling revealed
that 5 mutations were clustered in 1 region on the surface of the
sialidase molecule. These mutations dramatically reduced enzyme activity
and caused a rapid intralysosomal degradation of the expressed protein.
The authors hypothesized that this region may be involved in binding of
sialidase to lysosomal cathepsin A and/or beta-galactosidase in their
high molecular weight complex.

Bonten et al. (2000) reported 8 novel mutations in the neuraminidase
gene of 11 sialidosis patients with various degrees of disease
penetrance. Comparison of the primary structure of human neuraminidase
with bacterial sialidases indicated that most of the single amino acid
substitutions occurred in functional motifs or conserved residues. On
the basis of the subcellular distribution and residual catalytic
activity of the mutant neuraminidases, the authors constructed 3
mutation groups: (1) catalytically inactive and not lysosomal; (2)
catalytically inactive, but localized in lysosome; and (3) catalytically
active and lysosomal. In general, there was a close correlation between
the residual activity of the mutant enzymes and the clinical severity of
disease. Patients with the severe infantile type II disease had
mutations from the first group, whereas patients with a mild form of
type I disease had at least 1 mutation from the third group. Mutations
from the second group were mainly found in juvenile type II patients
with intermediate clinical severity.

In 2 Japanese sialidosis patients, Itoh et al. (2002) identified 3 novel
missense mutations in the NEU1 gene.

Seyrantepe et al. (2003) summarized information on the 34 mutations in
the NEU1 gene identified in patients with sialidosis. Considerable
molecular heterogeneity was demonstrated, reflecting the diversity of
clinical phenotypes. Most sialidosis patients had missense mutations.

A structural model of sialidase allowed Seyrantepe et al. (2003) to
localize mutations in the sialidase molecule and to predict their impact
on the tertiary structure and biochemical properties of the enzyme.

Pattison et al. (2004) identified 5 novel mutations in a mutation screen
of 4 unrelated patients. Four were missense and 1 nonsense. One mutation
exerted its pathologic effect by this perturbing substrate binding,
while 2 others appeared to impair the folding of the sialidase enzyme.

EVOLUTION

Klein et al. (1986) concluded that it is an evolutionary accident that
the neuraminidase locus is in close relationship to the major
histocompatibility complex, viz., that it is in MHC but not of it. The
biology and genetics of neuraminidase were reviewed in detail.

ANIMAL MODEL

Womack et al. (1981) and Peters et al. (1981) determined that the low
activity of liver neuraminidase that is characteristic of mouse strain
SM/J is inherited as a single gene defect of the Neu1 gene. They noted
that previously described variations in the posttranslational processing
of acid phosphatase, alpha-mannosidase, arylsulfatase B, and
alpha-glucosidase are attributed to pleiotropic effects of this gene
(see Paigen, 1979).

Neu1 -/- mice show features of human sialidosis and develop a
pronounced, age-dependent splenomegaly characterized by elevated numbers
of hematopoietic progenitor cells (de Geest et al., 2002). Yogalingam et
al. (2008) found that Neu1 -/- mouse hematopoietic cells carried an
oversialylated form of Lamp1 (153330), and they showed that Lamp1, but
not other lysosomal membrane proteins, was an endogenous Neu1 substrate.
Oversialylated Lamp1 accumulated at the plasma membrane of Neu1 -/-
macrophages, and this accumulation was associated with enhanced
Ca(2+)-dependent exocytosis of lysosomal hydrolases. Yogalingam et al.
(2008) also observed enhanced exocytosis of catalytically active neutral
serine hydrolases into the extracellular space of Neu1 -/- bone marrow,
as well as inactivation of serine protease inhibitors. The resulting
increased extracellular protease activity caused premature degradation
of Vcam1 (192225), leading to depletion of bone marrow hematopoietic
progenitor cells and their appearance in peripheral blood.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SIALIDOSIS, TYPE I
NEU1, GLU377TER

In 2 sibs with type I sialidosis (256550), Bonten et al. (1996) found
compound heterozygosity for a G-to-T transversion at nucleotide 1258
(1258G-T) of their NEU cDNA, which introduced a premature TAG
termination codon at amino acid 377. The mutant protein would then have
a C-terminal truncation of 38 amino acids.

.0002
SIALIDOSIS, TYPE II
NEU1, LEU91ARG

In a patient with type II sialidosis (256550), Bonten et al. (1996)
identified compound heterozygosity for a T-to-G transversion at
nucleotide 401 (401T-G) and a 1-bp deletion at nucleotide 1337
(608272.0003) of the NEU gene. The point mutation gave rise to the amino
acid substitution leu91arg. The base deletion caused a frameshift at
amino acid 403 that extended the protein by 69 amino acids, which
explained the presence of a 53-kD protein immunoprecipitated from the
patient's fibroblasts (the normal protein was 45 kD).

.0003
SIALIDOSIS, TYPE II
NEU1, 1-BP DEL, 1337C

See 608272.0002 and Bonten et al. (1996).

.0004
SIALIDOSIS, TYPE II
NEU1, PHE260TYR

In a cell line (GM01718A) from a 2-month-old infant with type II
sialidosis (256550), Pshezhetsky et al. (1997) identified a T-to-A
transversion of nucleotide 779, resulting in a phe260-to-tyr amino acid
substitution in the NEU gene product; and a second mutation on the other
chromosome, a T-to-C transition of nucleotide 1088, leading to a
leu303-to-pro amino acid substitution (608272.0005). From study of cell
lines of the parents, these 2 mutations came from the mother and the
father, respectively. These were 2 of 6 mutations found by PShezhetsky
et al. (1997) in a total of 6 sialidosis patients.

.0005
SIALIDOSIS, TYPE II
NEU1, LEU303PRO

See 608272.0004 and Pshezhetsky et al. (1997).

.0006
SIALIDOSIS, TYPE II
NEU1, 1-BP DEL, 623G

Lukong et al. (2000) identified mutations in 9 sialidosis (256550)
patients and measured the activity of the identified variants by
transgenic expression. One patient was homozygous for a deletion
(623delG) resulting in frameshift and introduction of a stop codon,
truncating 113 amino acids. Cultured fibroblasts exhibited no sialidase
activity but normal beta-galactosidase activity.

.0007
SIALIDOSIS, TYPE I
NEU1, VAL217MET

Naganawa et al. (2000) described 2 Japanese adults, presumably
unrelated, with sialidosis type I (256550) due to compound
heterozygosity for 2 missense mutations: 649G-A and 727G-A in the NEU1
gene, resulting in amino acid alterations V217M and G243R (608272.0008),
respectively. Both patients were born of nonconsanguineous parents. The
first patient, a 25-year-old female, developed ataxic gait and speech
disturbance at the age of 17 years. There were subsequent episodes of
generalized convulsions and visual disturbance. Eye examination showed
macular cherry red spots. Her neurologic symptoms rapidly progressed,
such that she could not stand without support at the age of 18 years and
was bedridden at the age of 25 years. Her younger sister exhibited a
similar clinical course, although her brother had a milder course. The
second patient, a 42-year-old man, developed normally until the age of
32 years, when involuntary movements began in the arms. Thereafter, he
developed gait disturbance and slurred speech. Examination at the age of
41 years showed dysarthria, action myoclonus, and hyperactive deep
tendon reflexes. Lens opacities and macular cherry red spots were
detected. This man's brother showed similar clinical manifestations.
Lysosomal enzyme assays in both patients showed neuraminidase deficiency
with normal beta-galactosidase activity.

.0008
SIALIDOSIS, TYPE I
NEU1, GLY243ARG

See 608272.0007 and Naganawa et al. (2000).

.0009
SIALIDOSIS, TYPE II
NEU1, TRP29TER

Sergi et al. (2001) described a Turkish family with parental
consanguinity and a proband with sialidosis type II (256550). The
propositus was born prematurely with hydrops, hepatomegaly, respiratory
distress syndrome, and anemia, and died of respiratory insufficiency 2
months after birth. A previous pregnancy of the mother terminated in a
spontaneous abortion at 13 weeks' gestation. A successive pregnancy
showed hydrops fetalis, and an enzymatic assay of cultured amniotic
fluid cells indicated a deficiency of alpha-N-acetylneuraminidase.
Following termination of the pregnancy at 20 weeks' gestation, light
microscopy of fetal tissues revealed classic vacuolation not only in
liver, bone marrow, brain, and kidney, but also in endocrine organs such
as the thyroid gland, adrenal gland, hypophysis, and testes, and in the
thymus. DNA analysis of the family showed that both the proband and the
third sib had a novel homozygous nonsense point mutation at nucleotide
87 in exon 1 of the NEU1 gene, causing a substitution of tryptophan at
codon 29 by a termination codon (W29X). The parents were heterozygous
carriers. The very early termination codon with complete loss of
neuraminidase activity is thought to be the molecular basis of the
unusually severe vacuolation pattern in this form of congenital
sialidosis.

.0010
SIALIDOSIS, TYPE II
NEU1, PRO80LEU

In a patient with the severe, congenital form of type II sialidosis
(256550), Itoh et al. (2002) identified compound heterozygosity for a
C-to-T transition at nucleotide 239 of the NEU1 gene, resulting in a
pro80-to-leu (P80L) mutation, and a T-to-C transition at nucleotide 718,
resulting in a trp240-to-arg (W240R) mutation (608272.0011).

.0011
SIALIDOSIS, TYPE II
NEU1, TRP240ARG

See 608272.0010 and Itoh et al. (2002).

.0012
SIALIDOSIS, TYPE I
NEU1, PRO316SER

In a Japanese patient with mild, juvenile-onset sialidosis (type I;
256550), Itoh et al. (2002) identified homozygosity for a C-to-T
transition at nucleotide 946 of the NEU1 gene, resulting in a
pro316-to-ser (P316S) substitution.

.0013
SIALIDOSIS, TYPE II
NEU1, IVSEDS, G-C, +1

In a newborn with severe type II sialidosis (256550), Penzel et al.
(2001) identified a homozygous G-to-C transversion at nucleotide 2736 in
the genomic sequence of the NEU1 gene. The mutation occurred at the +1
position in the splice donor site of intron E and caused skipping of
exon 5 and complete loss of lysosomal neuraminidase activity.

.0014
SIALIDOSIS, TYPE II
NEU1, ARG225PRO

In a patient with type II sialidosis (256550), Pattison et al. (2004)
described compound heterozygosity for an arg225-to-pro (R225P) missense
mutation due to a 674G-C transversion in exon 5, and an ala298-to-val
(A298V; 608272.0015) amino acid change resulting from an 893C-T
transition in exon 4. The patient was 3 years old at the time of study
and presented clinically with hepatosplenomegly, coarse facies, and bony
deformation.

.0015
SIALIDOSIS, TYPE II
NEU1, ALA298VAL

See 608272.0014 and Pattison et al. (2004).

.0016
SIALIDOSIS, TYPE II
NEU1, TRP23TER

In 2 infants of Mennonite extraction with type II sialidosis (256550),
apparently not closely related, Pattison et al. (2004) found a
trp23-to-stop (W23X) nonsense mutation of the NEU1 gene. One child died
at age 3 months; the other at age 2 months.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Lalley and Shows (1977); Womack and Eicher (1977); Womack et al. (1980)
REFERENCE 1. Bonten, E.; van der Spoel, A.; Fornerod, M.; Grosveld, G.; d'Azzo,
A.: Characterization of human lysosomal neuraminidase defines the
molecular basis of the metabolic storage disorder sialidosis. Genes
Dev. 10: 3156-3169, 1996.

2. Bonten, E. J.; Arts, W. F.; Beck, M.; Covanis, A.; Donati, M. A.;
Parini, R.; Zammarchi., E.; d'Azzo, A.: Novel mutations in lysosomal
neuraminidase identify functional domains and determine clinical severity
in sialidosis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 2715-2725, 2000.

3. de Geest, N.; Bonten, E.; Mann, L.; de Sousa-Hitzler, J.; Hahn,
C.; d'Azzo, A.: Systemic and neurologic abnormalities distinguish
the lysosomal disorders sialidosis and galactosialidosis in mice. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 11: 1455-1464, 2002.

4. Itoh, K.; Naganawa, Y.; Matsuzawa, F.; Aikawa, S.; Doi, H.; Sasagasako,
N.; Yamada, T.; Kira, J.; Kobayashi, T.; Pshezhetsky, A. V.; Sakuraba,
H.: Novel missense mutations in the human lysosomal sialidase gene
in sialidosis patients and prediction of structural alterations of
mutant enzymes. J. Hum. Genet. 47: 29-37, 2002.

5. Klein, D.; Klein, J.: Polymorphism of the Apl (Neu-1) locus in
the mouse. Immunogenetics 16: 181-184, 1982.

6. Klein, J.; Klein, D.; Figueroa, F.: Should the neuraminidase-1
locus be considered as part of the major histocompatibility complex?. Hum.
Immun. 15: 396-403, 1986.

7. Lalley, P. A.; Shows, T. B.: Lysosomal acid phosphatase deficiency:
liver specific variant in the mouse. Genetics 87: 305-317, 1977.

8. Lukong, K. E.; Elsliger, M.-A.; Chang, Y.; Richard, C.; Thomas,
G.; Carey, W.; Tylki-Szymanska, A.; Czartoryska, B.; Buchholz, T.;
Rodriguez Criado, G.; Palmeri, S.; Pshezhetsky, A. V.: Characterization
of the sialidase molecular defects in sialidosis patients suggests
the structural organization of the lysosomal multienzyme complex. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 1075-1085, 2000.

9. Lukong, K. E.; Landry, K.; Elsliger, M. A.; Chang, Y.; Lefrancois,
S.; Morales, C. R.; Pshezhetsky, A. V.: Mutations in sialidosis impair
sialidase binding to the lysosomal multienzyme complex. J. Biol.
Chem. 276: 17286-17290, 2001.

10. Milner, C. M.; Smith, S. V.; Carrillo, M. B.; Taylor, G. L.; Hillinshead,
M.; Campbell, R. D.: Identification of a sialidase encoded in the
human major histocompatibility complex. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 4549,
1997.

11. Naganawa, Y.; Itoh, K.; Shimmoto, M.; Takiguchi, K.; Doi, H.;
Nishizawa, Y.; Kobayashi, T.; Kamei, S.; Lukong, K. E.; Pshezhetsky,
A. V.; Sakuraba, H.: Molecular and structural studies of Japanese
patients with sialidosis type 1. J. Hum. Genet. 45: 241-249, 2000.

12. Oohira, T.; Nagata, N.; Akaboshi, I.; Matsuda, I.; Naito, S.:
The infantile form of sialidosis type II associated with congenital
adrenal hyperplasia: possible linkage between HLA and the neuraminidase
deficiency gene. Hum. Genet. 70: 341-343, 1985.

13. Oohira, T.; Yoshida, M. C.; Matsuda, I.: Additional evidence
for the location of the alpha-neuraminidase gene on chromosome 6. Jinrui
Idengaku Zasshi 31: 309-310, 1986.

14. Paigen, K.: Acid hydrolases as models of genetic control. Ann.
Rev. Genet. 13: 417-466, 1979.

15. Pattison, S.; Pankarican, M.; Rupar, C. A.; Graham, F. L.; Igdoura,
S. A.: Five novel mutations in the lysosomal sialidase gene (NEU1)
in type II sialidosis patients and assessment of their impact on enzyme
activity and intracellular targeting using adenovirus-mediated expression. Hum.
Mutat. 23: 32-39, 2004.

16. Penzel, R.; Uhl, J.; Kopitz, J.; Beck, M.; Otto, H. F.; Cantz,
M.: Splice donor site mutation in the lysosomal neuraminidase gene
causing exon skipping and complete loss of enzyme activity in a sialidosis
patient. FEBS Lett. 501: 135-138, 2001.

17. Peters, J.; Swallow, D. M.; Andrews, S. J.; Evans, L.: A gene
(Neu-1) on chromosome 17 of the mouse affects acid alpha-glucosidase
and codes for neuraminidase. Genet. Res. Camb. 38: 47-55, 1981.

18. Pshezhetsky, A. V.; Richard, C.; Michaud, L.; Igdoura, S.; Wang,
S.; Elsliger, M.-A.; Qu, J.; Leclerc, D.; Gravel, R.; Dallaire, L.;
Potier, M.: Cloning, expression and chromosomal mapping of human
lysosomal sialidase and characterization of mutations in sialidosis. Nature
Genet. 15: 316-320, 1997.

19. Sergi, C.; Penzel, R.; Uhl, J.; Zoubaa, S.; Dietrich, H.; Decker,
N.; Rieger, P.; Kopitz, J.; Otto, H. F.; Kiessling, M.; Cantz, M.
: Prenatal diagnosis and fetal pathology in a Turkish family harboring
a novel nonsense mutation in the lysosomal alpha-N-acetyl-neuraminidase
(sialidase) gene. Hum. Genet. 109: 421-428, 2001.

20. Seyrantepe, V.; Poupetova, H.; Froissart, R.; Zabot, M.-T.; Maire,
I.; Pshezhetsky, A. V.: Molecular pathology of NEU1 gene in sialidosis. Hum.
Mutat. 22: 343-352, 2003.

21. Verheijen, F. W.; Palmieri, S.; Galjaard, H.: Purification and
partial characterization of lysosomal neuraminidase from human placenta. Europ.
J. Biochem. 162: 63-67, 1987.

22. Verheijen, F. W.; Palmieri, S.; Hoogeveen, A. T.; Galjaard, H.
: Human placental neuraminidase: activation, stabilization and association
with beta-galactosidase and its 'protective' protein. Europ. J. Biochem. 149:
315-321, 1985.

23. Womack, J. E.; David, C. S.: Mouse gene for neuraminidase activity
(Neu-1) maps to the D end of H-2. Immunogenetics 16: 177-180, 1982.

24. Womack, J. E.; Eicher, E.: Liver-specific lysosomal acid phosphatase
deficiency (Apl) on mouse chromosome 17. Molec. Genet. 155: 315-317,
1977.

25. Womack, J. E.; Yan, D. L. S.; Potier, M.: Liver neuraminidase
deficiency inherited as a single gene on mouse chromosome 17. (Abstract) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 32: 59A only, 1980.

26. Womack, J. E.; Yan, D. L. S.; Potier, M.: Gene for neuraminidase
activity on mouse chromosome 17 near H-2: pleiotropic effects on multiple
hydrolases. Science 212: 63-65, 1981.

27. Yogalingam, G.; Bonten, E. J.; van de Vlekkert, D.; Hu, H.; Moshiach,
S.; Connell, S. A.; d'Azzo, A.: Neuraminidase 1 is a negative regulator
of lysosomal exocytosis. Dev. Cell 15: 74-86, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/5/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/3/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/20/2003

EDITED carol: 11/04/2009
wwang: 7/29/2009
mgross: 9/10/2008
terry: 9/5/2008
terry: 8/6/2007
terry: 4/21/2005
alopez: 1/6/2005
cwells: 2/6/2004
terry: 2/3/2004
carol: 11/26/2003
ckniffin: 11/26/2003
carol: 11/24/2003

604965	TITLE *604965 SERINE/THREONINE PROTEIN KINASE 4; STK4
;;MAMMALIAN STERILE 20-LIKE 1; MST1;;
KINASE RESPONSIVE TO STRESS 2; KRS2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Protein kinase activation is a frequent response of cells to treatment
with growth factors, chemicals, heat shock, or apoptosis-inducing
agents. This protein kinase activation presumably allows cells to resist
unfavorable environmental conditions. The yeast 'sterile 20' (Ste20)
kinase acts upstream of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
cascade that is activated under a variety of stress conditions. By
screening a lymphocyte cDNA library using degenerate PCR primers
corresponding to the catalytic domains of serine/threonine kinases
(STKs) and using an Ste20-like probe, Creasy and Chernoff (1995)
obtained a cDNA encoding STK4, which they called MST1. Sequence analysis
indicated that the N terminus of the deduced 487-amino acid STK4 protein
contains the 11 subdomains typical of an STK. The C terminus of STK4 is
highly acidic. Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of
an approximately 7.0-kb STK4 transcript; abundant expression of a 3.4-kb
potential splice variant in kidney, placenta, and skeletal muscle was
also detected. Western blot analysis detected expression of a 56-kD STK4
protein in all cell lines examined.

Taylor et al. (1996) purified 61- and 63-kD protein kinases, referred to
as p61 and p63, that were activated by a subset of stress conditions but
not by common mitogenic stimuli. By screening a Jurkat cell cDNA library
using PCR primers corresponding to a peptide sequence derived from p61
and a predicted sequence from a previously reported partial cDNA, they
isolated cDNAs encoding STK3 (p63; 605030) and STK4 (p61), which they
designated KRS1 and KRS2, respectively. STK3 and STK4 share 94% amino
acid identity in the catalytic domain and 78% identity overall.

MAPPING

Gross (2012) mapped the STK4 gene to chromosome 20q13.12 based on an
alignment of the STK4 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC005231) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

Functional analyses by Creasy and Chernoff (1995) showed that STK4 can
phosphorylate itself or myelin basic protein (MBP; 159430) on serine and
threonine residues. Overexpression of STK4 did not activate the ERK1
(MAPK3; 601795)/ERK2 (MAPK1; 176948) MAPK pathway, and STK4 activity
decreased with epidermal growth factor (EGF; 131530) treatment but
increased with protein phosphatase-2A (see PPP2CA; 176915) treatment.

DNA in eukaryotic cells is associated with histone proteins; hence,
hallmark properties of apoptosis, such as chromatin condensation, may be
regulated by posttranslational histone modifications. Cheung et al.
(2003) reported that phosphorylation of histone H2B (see 609904) at
ser14 correlates with cells undergoing programmed cell death in
vertebrates. They identified a 34-kD apoptosis-induced H2B kinase as
caspase-cleaved MST1. MST1 could phosphorylate H2B at ser14 in vitro and
in vivo, and the onset of H2B ser14 phosphorylation was dependent upon
cleavage of MST1 by caspase-3 (600636). These data revealed a histone
modification uniquely associated with apoptotic chromatin in species
ranging from frogs to humans and provided insights into a physiologic
substrate for MST1. These data also provided evidence for a potential
apoptotic 'histone code.'

Using human and other mammalian cells, Lehtinen et al. (2006) found that
MST1 phosphorylated FOXO transcription factors at a site conserved
within the forkhead domain of FOXO proteins from mammals to C. elegans.
Oxidative stress induced MST1-mediated phosphorylation of FOXO3 (FOXO3A;
602681) at ser207, which disrupted interaction of FOXO3 with 14-3-3
proteins (see 113508), promoted FOXO3 nuclear translocation, and induced
cell death. Knockdown of the C. elegans MST1 ortholog Cst1 shortened
life span and accelerated tissue aging, whereas Cst1 overexpression
promoted life span and delayed tissue aging. The Cst1-induced life span
extension was dependent on the FOXO ortholog Daf16.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 2 consanguineous unrelated Turkish families with 4 patients affected
by combined immunodeficiencies with multiple bacterial and viral
infections, autoimmunity, and progressive CD4 and naive CD8 T-cell
lymphopenia (614868), Nehme et al. (2012) identified putative truncation
mutations in the STK4 gene. The patient in the first family was
homozygous for an arg117-to-ter substitution (604965.0001). The 3
affected sibs in the second family were homozygous for a 1-bp deletion
that resulted in a frameshift at residue 368 and a contiguous nonsense
codon at residue 369 (604965.0002). Parents and healthy sibs in both
families were heterozygous for the mutations, indicating autosomal
recessive inheritance. RT-PCR analysis showed loss of function and
expression of STK4 in patients. Lymphoproliferative responses and
lymphocyte survival were also impaired. FOXO1 (136533), IL7R (146661),
and BCL2 (151430) were poorly expressed in patient T cells, whereas FAS
(TNFRFS6; 134637) expression was upregulated. Nehme et al. (2012)
concluded that the STK4/FOXO1 pathway has a role in controlling the
death of naive T cells.

In 3 members of a consanguineous Iranian kindred with T- and
B-lymphopenia, neutropenia, cardiac malformations, and recurrent
bacterial, viral, and fungal infections, warts, and abscesses,
Abdollahpour et al. (2012) identified a homozygous premature termination
mutation in the STK4 gene (W250X; 604965.0003). Parents and healthy sibs
were heterozygous, indicating autosomal recessive inheritance. Western
blot analysis showed that patients with homozygous mutations expressed
no STK4, whereas heterozygous carriers expressed intermediate levels
compared to wildtype homozygous subjects. STK4-deficient lymphocytes and
neutrophils exhibited enhanced loss of mitochondrial membrane potential
and increased susceptibility to apoptosis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
T-CELL IMMUNODEFICIENCY, RECURRENT INFECTIONS, AUTOIMMUNITY, AND CARDIAC
MALFORMATIONS
STK4, ARG117TER

In a Turkish patient with T-cell immunodeficiency leading to multiple
bacterial and viral infections (614868), Nehme et al. (2012) identified
a homozygous 349C-T transition in exon 4 of the STK4 gene, resulting in
an arg117-to-ter (R117X) substitution. The boy's parents, who were
consanguineous, were heterozygous for the mutation. At age 5 years, the
boy was successfully treated for Epstein-Barr virus-positive Hodgkin
B-cell lymphoma and was alive at age 17 years with the support of
immunoglobulin replacement therapy and antiinfective prophylaxis.

.0002
T-CELL IMMUNODEFICIENCY, RECURRENT INFECTIONS, AUTOIMMUNITY, AND CARDIAC
MALFORMATIONS
STK4, 1-BP DEL, 1103T

In 3 Turkish sisters with T-cell immunodeficiency leading to multiple
bacterial and viral infections (614868), Nehme et al. (2012) identified
a homozygous 1-bp deletion (1103T) in the STK4 gene that created a
frameshift mutation at codon 368 followed by a contiguous nonsense codon
(369X) downstream of the CASP3 (600636) cleavage site. The girls'
parents, who were consanguineous, were heterozygous for the mutation.
The eldest daughter developed Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) B-cell
lymphoproliferative syndrome at age 9 years and died from
graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and infectious complications after
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). The second daughter
developed autoimmune hemolytic anemia with persistent EBV viremia and
died of GVHD and infectious complications after HSCT at age 14.5 years.
The third daughter received a T-cell depleted HSCT at age 4 years and
appeared to be cured 2 years later.

.0003
T-CELL IMMUNODEFICIENCY, RECURRENT INFECTIONS, AUTOIMMUNITY, AND CARDIAC
MALFORMATIONS
STK4, TRP250TER

Abdollahpour et al. (2012) identified a homozygous 750G-A substitution
in exon 7 of the STK4 gene, resulting in a trp250-to-ter (W250X)
substitution, in 3 members of a consanguineous Iranian family with
T-cell immunodeficiency leading to multiple bacterial and viral
infections (614868). Two of the patients were sibs, and 2 of their sibs
had died in infancy due to septicemia. The other patient was their
niece. The parents of the patients were heterozygous for the mutation.
The patients, aged 24, 20, and 9 years, had all experienced recurrent
respiratory tract bacterial and viral infections and pneumonias,
neutropenia, and lymphopenia with low numbers of CD4 (186940) T cells
and B cells and elevated CD8 (see 186910) T cells. The patients had
cutaneous warts caused by various human papillomavirus types, as well
recurrent oral herpes, and all 3 exhibited cardiac malformations.

REFERENCE 1. Abdollahpour, H.; Appaswamy, G.; Kotlarz, D.; Diestelhorst, J.;
Beier, R.; Schaffer, A. A.; Gertz, E. M.; Schambach, A.; Kreipe, H.
H.; Pfeifer, D.; Engelhardt, K. R.; Rezaei, N.; Grimbacher, B.; Lohrmann,
S.; Sherkat, R.; Klein, C.: The phenotype of human STK4 deficiency. Blood 119:
3450-3457, 2012.

2. Cheung, W. L.; Ajiro, K.; Samejima, K.; Kloc, M.; Cheung, P.; Mizzen,
C. A.; Beeser, A.; Etkin, L. D.; Chernoff, J.; Earnshaw, W. C.; Allis,
C. D.: Apoptotic phosphorylation of histone H2B is mediated by mammalian
sterile twenty kinase. Cell 113: 507-517, 2003.

3. Creasy, C. L.; Chernoff, J.: Cloning and characterization of a
human protein kinase with homology to Ste20. J. Biol. Chem. 270:
21695-21700, 1995.

4. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/12/2012.

5. Lehtinen, M. K.; Yuan, Z.; Boag, P. R.; Yang, Y.; Villen, J.; Becker,
E. B. E.; DiBacco, S.; de la Iglesia, N.; Gygi, S.; Blackwell, T.
K.; Bonni, A.: A conserved MST-FOXO signaling pathway mediates oxidative-stress
responses and extends life span. Cell 125: 987-1001, 2006.

6. Nehme, N. T.; Schmid, J. P.; Debeurme, F.; Andre-Schmutz, I.; Lim,
A.; Nitschke, P.; Rieux-Laucat, F.; Lutz, P.; Picard, C.; Mahlaoui,
N.; Fischer, A.; de Saint Basile, G.: MST1 mutations in autosomal
recessive primary immunodeficiency characterized by defective naive
T-cell survival. Blood 119: 3458-3468, 2012.

7. Taylor, L. K.; Wang, H.-C. R.; Erikson, R. L.: Newly identified
stress-responsive protein kinases, Krs-1 and Krs-2. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 93: 10099-10104, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/12/2012
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 4/14/2010
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/7/2003

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/15/2000

EDITED mgross: 01/29/2013
carol: 10/15/2012
mgross: 10/12/2012
wwang: 4/29/2010
mgross: 4/14/2010
mgross: 7/7/2003
mgross: 6/5/2000
mgross: 5/15/2000

602593	TITLE *602593 CORNEODESMOSIN; CDSN
;;S GENE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Corneodesmosomes are intercellular structures that are involved in
desquamation, the shedding of superficial corneocytes from the skin
surface. Corneocytes are anucleated cells derived from keratinocytes
during the late stages of terminal differentiation of cornified squamous
epithelia such as the epidermis. Using monoclonal antibodies raised
against plantar stratum corneum, Serre et al. (1991) identified
corneodesmosin, a protein in corneodesmosomes. Simon et al. (1997) found
that corneodesmosin has an isoelectric point higher than 8 and migrates
as a 52- to 56-kD protein on Western blots.

During an analysis of the class I region of the HLA complex (see
142800), Zhou and Chaplin (1993) identified a gene that is located
approximately 160 kb telomeric to HLA-C (142840) at 6p21.3 (see PSORS1;
177900). Since the gene was expressed only in skin, they designated it
the 'S gene.' In situ hybridization showed that S gene expression is
restricted to the differentiating keratinocytes in the granular layer of
the epidermis. By Northern blotting, the S gene is expressed as 2.2- and
2.6-kb mRNAs. The S gene contains 2 exons which encode a predicted
486-amino acid protein, including a putative 16-amino acid signal
sequence. The S protein shows homology to loricrin (152445), keratin-1
(139350), and keratin-10 (148080), all major components of the granular
layer. Partial amino acid sequencing of corneodesmosin indicated that it
is probably encoded by the S gene (Simon et al., 1997).

GENE STRUCTURE

Holm et al. (2003) determined that the CDSN gene contains 2 exons and
spans 4.5 kb.

MAPPING

The CDSN gene is located approximately 160 kb telomeric to HLA-C on
chromosome 6p21.3 (Zhou and Chaplin, 1993).

Holm et al. (2003) reported that both exons of the CDSN gene are located
within intron 1 of the SEEK1 gene (613525), which lies on the opposite
strand.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Psoriasis

Psoriasis is an inflammatory skin disease of unknown origin, but with a
clear genetic component. The strongest genetic association is with the
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) region, and specifically between
susceptibility to familial early-onset psoriasis and HLA-Cw6 (PSORS1;
177900). The basis of this association of HLA-C was not clear, and it
was possible that other genes, or a combination of genes, in the HLA
region are of functional importance. The CDSN gene is expressed
specifically in keratinocyte differentiation and, being located 160 kb
telomeric of HLA-C, was a plausible candidate gene. Ahnini et al. (1999)
analyzed the allelic distribution of 2 polymorphisms in the CDSN gene
(at +619 and +1243) in a case-control association study. They confirmed
a significant association between psoriasis and HLA-Cw6 (odds ratio =
7.75). No association was found between disease (or any subtype) and the
CDSN gene polymorphism at position +619, despite its close proximity to
HLA-C and the strong linkage disequilibrium between the loci. However, a
significant trend with the rarer allele at CDSN (+1243) and psoriasis
was detected in the overall data set (odds ratio = 2.66). This effect
was most pronounced in type 1a (early-onset) psoriasis (odds ratio =
3.43). Furthermore, homozygosity for the +1243 allele associated with
psoriasis increased the risk of disease over that for carriage of
HLA-Cw6 alone (odds ratio = 9.38), suggesting that allele 2 of CDSN
provides an additional risk in psoriasis susceptibility. The strong
association found by Ahnini et al. (1999), coupled with the biologic
involvement of the CDSN gene product, corneodesmosin, in skin
physiology, implicated this locus (or a haplotype across HLA-C and CDSN)
in the impaired desquamation characteristic of psoriasis.

Asumalahti et al. (2000) used association and haplotype analysis to
study a cohort of 142 Finnish psoriasis patients within 100 families.
The HLA-Cw*0602 allele was associated with a strong relative risk, but
association analysis did not support CDSN*5 (defined by +619T and
+1243C) as a psoriasis susceptibility allele in their sample.

In 52 Caucasian nuclear families with chronic stable early-onset
psoriasis, each with 1 affected child, Schmitt-Egonolf et al. (2001)
tested for locus interaction using the HLA haplotype EH-57.1/I and the
CDSN haplotype formed by 3 intragenic variant sites at nucleotides 619
(T), 1236 (T), and 1243 (C). On direct comparison of their
contributions, the corneodesmosin TTC haplotype was more closely
associated with psoriasis than EH-57.1/I by 1 order of magnitude, and
there was no higher order interaction between psoriasis, HLA, and CDSN.
Schmitt-Egonolf et al. (2001) suggested that there are 2 independent
genetic contributions to psoriasis within the MHC.

Capon et al. (2004) showed that mRNAs transcribed from a CDSN risk
haplotype presented a 2-fold increase in stability compared with mRNAs
transcribed from a neutral haplotype (P = 0.004). Site-directed
mutagenesis revealed that a single synonymous SNP (CDSN*971T) accounted
for the observed increase in RNA stability. CDSN*971T mapped to an RNA
stability motif, and UV crosslinking analysis demonstrated that the SNP
affected the transcript affinity for a 39-kD RNA-binding protein.
Association analyses show that haplotypes bearing CDSN*971T conferred
psoriasis susceptibility in a wide range of ethnic groups.

Orru et al. (2005) undertook fine mapping of the PSORS1 locus (177900)
in the major histocompatibility complex at 6p21.3. They set up a study
using 17 polymorphic markers in a 525-kb interval around the HLA-C
locus. The results uncovered 5 loci with alleles strongly associated
with psoriasis, all structured in a psoriasis-susceptibility haplotype
(PSH). Subsequent analysis of extended haplotypes showed that the PSH
was not only present in the traditional psoriasis-susceptibility
extended haplotypes but also on a haplotype of Sardinian origin found to
be associated with psoriasis because of an ancestral recombination with
one of the susceptibility haplotypes carrying a particular HLA-C allele.
Comparisons of the regions identical by descent among associated and
nonassociated haplotypes highlighted a minimum region of 70 kb not
recombinant with PSORS1, surrounding the CDSN gene.

- Hypotrichosis Simplex of Scalp

In 3 families with autosomal dominant hypotrichosis simplex of the scalp
(HTSS1; 146520) in which the disorder had been mapped to chromosome
6p21.3 (Betz et al., 2000; Kohn and Metzker, 1987; Levy-Nissenbaum et
al., 2003), Levy-Nissenbaum et al. (2003) identified heterozygous
mutations in the CDSN gene (602593.0001-602593.0002). Relative to the
possibility that corneodesmosin may be involved in the pathogenesis of
psoriasis, Levy-Nissenbaum et al. (2003) pointed out that none of the
individuals with HTSS1 showed clinical signs of psoriasis or any other
skin abnormalities.

- Peeling Skin Syndrome

In a large consanguineous Roma family from Germany with generalized skin
peeling, pruritus, and atopy mapping to chromosome 6p21, Oji et al.
(2010) analyzed the functional candidate gene CDSN and identified
homozygosity for a nonsense mutation (602593.0003). The mutation
segregated with disease in the family and was not found in 220
ethnically matched chromosomes. Oji et al. (2010) generated
3-dimensional skin models and demonstrated that lack of corneodesmosin
causes an epidermal barrier defect, which they suggested accounted for
the predisposition to atopic disease.

ANIMAL MODEL

Matsumoto et al. (2008) found that while Cdsn +/- mice showed no hair or
skin phenotypes, Cdsn -/- mice died within several hours after birth
with skin defects consistent with dehydration caused by defective skin
barrier function. Cdsn-null mouse skin showed detachment of the stratum
corneum from the underlying granular layer and/or detachment within the
upper granular layers due to disrupted integrity of corneodesmosomes.
When grafted onto immunodeficient mice, Cdsn-null skin showed rapid hair
loss together with epidermal abnormalities resembling psoriasis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPOTRICHOSIS 2
CDSN, GLN215TER

In 2 families with hypotrichosis simplex of the scalp-1 (146520), a
Spanish family reported by Betz et al. (2000) and an Israeli family of
Yemenite origin reported by Kohn and Metzker (1987), Levy-Nissenbaum et
al. (2003) identified a gln215-to-ter (Q215X) mutation in the CDSN gene.
Haplotype analysis showed that the mutation arose on a different genetic
background in each family.

.0002
HYPOTRICHOSIS 2
CDSN, GLN200TER

In a Dutch family with hypotrichosis simplex of the scalp-1 (146520)
reported by Betz et al. (2000), Levy-Nissenbaum et al. (2003) found a
gln200-to-ter (Q200X) mutation in the CDSN gene.

.0003
PEELING SKIN SYNDROME
CDSN, LYS59TER

In 2 brothers and a distantly related boy and girl with generalized skin
peeling and pruritus (270300) from a large consanguineous Roma family
from Germany, Oji et al. (2010) identified homozygosity for a 175A-T
transversion in exon 2 of the CDSN gene, resulting in a lys59-to-ter
(K59X) substitution. family members who were heterozygous carriers of
the K59X mutation showed no skin or hair phenotype. Analysis of primary
keratinocytes from 1 of the brothers showed a 75% reduction of CDSN
mRNA, indicative of nonsense-mediated decay, and immunoblot analysis
confirmed the absence of corneodesmosin in that patient's primary
keratinocytes. Antigen mapping of corneodesmosin was negative for all
patient skin biopsies.

REFERENCE 1. Ahnini, R. T.; Camp, N. J.; Cork, M. J.; Mee, J. B.; Keohane, S.
G.; Duff, G. W.; di Giovine, F. S.: Novel genetic association between
the corneodesmosin (MHC S) gene and susceptibility to psoriasis. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 8: 1135-1140, 1999. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet.
9: 659 only, 2000.

2. Asumalahti, K.; Laitinen, T.; Itkonen-Vatjus, R.; Lokki, M.-L.;
Suomela, S.; Snellman, E.; Saarialho-Kere, U.; Kere, J.: A candidate
gene for psoriasis near HLA-C, HCR (Pg8), is highly polymorphic with
a disease-associated susceptibility allele. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9:
1533-1542, 2000. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 301 only, 2001.

3. Betz, R. C.; Lee, Y.-A.; Bygum, A.; Brandrup, F.; Bernal, A. I.;
Toribio, J.; Alvarez, J. I.; Kukuk, G. M.; Ibsen, H. H. W.; Rasmussen,
H. B.; Wienker, T. F.; Reis, A.; Propping, P.; Kruse, R.; Cichon,
S.; Nothen, M. M.: A gene for hypotrichosis simplex of the scalp
maps to chromosome 6p21.3. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 66: 1979-1983, 2000.

4. Capon, F.; Allen, M. H.; Ameen, M.; Burden, A. D.; Tillman, D.;
Barker, J. N.; Trembath, R. C.: A synonymous SNP of the corneodesmosin
gene leads to increased mRNA stability and demonstrates association
with psoriasis across diverse ethnic groups. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13:
2361-2368, 2004.

5. Holm, S. J.; Carlen, L. M.; Mallbris, L.; Stahle-Backdahl, M.;
O'Brien, K. P.: Polymorphisms in the SEEK1 and SPR1 genes on 6p21.3
associate with psoriasis in the Swedish population. Exp. Derm. 12:
435-444, 2003.

6. Kohn, G.; Metzker, A.: Hereditary hypotrichosis simplex of the
scalp. Clin. Genet. 32: 120-124, 1987.

7. Levy-Nissenbaum, E.; Betz, R. C.; Frydman, M.; Simon, M.; Lahat,
H.; Bakhan, T.; Goldman, B.; Bygum, A.; Pierick, M.; Hillmer, A. M.;
Jonca, N.; Toribio, J.; Kruse, R.; Dewald, G.; Cichon, S.; Kubisch,
C.; Guerrin, M.; Serre, G.; Nothen, M. M.; Pras, E.: Hypotrichosis
simplex of the scalp is associated with nonsense mutations in CDSN
encoding corneodesmosin. Nature Genet. 34: 151-153, 2003.

8. Matsumoto, M.; Zhou, Y.; Matsuo, S.; Nakanishi, H.; Hirose, K.;
Oura, H.; Arase, S.; Ishida-Yamamoto, A.; Bando, Y.; Izumi, K.; Kiyonari,
H.; Oshima, N.; Nakayama, R.; Matsushima, A.; Hirota, F.; Mouri, Y.;
Kuroda, N.; Sano, S.; Chaplin, D. D.: Targeted deletion of the murine
corneodesmosin gene delineates its essential role in skin and hair
physiology. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 6720-6724, 2008.

9. Oji, V.; Eckl, K.-M.; Aufenvenne, K.; Natebus, M.; Tarinski, T.;
Ackermann, K.; Seller, N.; Metze, D.; Nurnberg, G.; Folster-Holst,
R.; Schafer-Korting, M.; Hausser, I.; Traupe, H.; Hennies, H. C.:
Loss of corneodesmosin leads to severe skin barrier defect, pruritus,
and atopy: unraveling the peeling skin disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 87:
274-281, 2010.

10. Orru, S.; Giuressi, E.; Carcassi, C.; Casula, M.; Contu, L.:
Mapping of the major psoriasis-susceptibility locus (PSORS1) in a
70-kb interval around the corneodesmosin gene (CDSN). Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 76: 164-171, 2005.

11. Schmitt-Egonolf, M.; Windemuth, C.; Hennies, H. C.; Albis-Camps,
M.; von Engelhardt, B.; Wienker, T.; Reis, A.; Traupe, H.; Blasczyk,
R.: Comparative association analysis reveals that corneodesmosin
is more closely associated with psoriasis than HLA-Cw*0602-B*5701
in German families. Tissue Antigens 57: 440-446, 2001.

12. Serre, G.; Mils, V.; Haftek, M.; Vincent, C.; Croute, F.; Reano,
A.; Ouhayoun, J.-P.; Bettinger, S.; Soleilhavoup, J.-P.: Identification
of late differentiation antigens of human cornified epithelia, expressed
in re-organized desmosomes and bound to cross-linked envelope. J.
Invest. Derm. 97: 1061-1072, 1991.

13. Simon, M.; Montezin, M.; Guerrin, M.; Durieux, J.-J.; Serre, G.
: Characterization and purification of human corneodesmosin, an epidermal
basic glycoprotein associated with corneocyte-specific modified desmosomes. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 31770-31776, 1997.

14. Zhou, Y.; Chaplin, D. D.: Identification in the HLA class I region
of a gene expressed late in keratinocyte differentiation. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 90: 9470-9474, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/17/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/10/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/24/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/21/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/12/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/15/2004
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 6/5/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/16/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/1/1999

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/4/1998

EDITED carol: 12/17/2012
terry: 8/22/2012
alopez: 9/20/2011
alopez: 5/18/2011
joanna: 5/18/2011
carol: 5/13/2011
joanna: 5/11/2011
wwang: 2/22/2011
terry: 2/17/2011
mgross: 8/12/2010
terry: 8/10/2010
alopez: 6/25/2008
terry: 6/24/2008
wwang: 6/22/2007
terry: 6/21/2007
carol: 7/12/2005
terry: 7/12/2005
alopez: 12/15/2004
terry: 12/15/2004
tkritzer: 9/17/2003
alopez: 6/5/2003
alopez: 6/3/2003
alopez: 5/19/2003
tkritzer: 5/19/2003
alopez: 10/16/2000
carol: 8/1/2000
jlewis: 6/7/1999
terry: 6/1/1999
carol: 6/18/1998
psherman: 5/14/1998
psherman: 5/7/1998
psherman: 5/5/1998
psherman: 5/4/1998

606739	TITLE *606739 OXYSTEROL-BINDING PROTEIN-LIKE PROTEIN 11; OSBPL11
;;OSBP-RELATED PROTEIN 11; ORP11
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

OSBPL11 is a member of the OSBP family of intracellular lipid receptors.
For background information on OSBPs, see OSBP2 (606729).

CLONING

Lehto et al. (2001) used database searching and RT-PCR analysis to
isolate a full-length cDNA encoding OSBPL11, which they called ORP11.
Sequence analysis predicted that the 747-amino acid protein contains a
C-terminal sterol-binding (SB) domain of approximately 400 amino acids
that includes the OSBP motif (EQVSHHPP). It has a pleckstrin homology
(PH) domain in its N terminus. OSBPL11 is 75% and 58% identical to
OSBPL10 (606738) in the SB and PH domains, respectively. Gene expression
database analysis indicated highest expression in lung and spleen,
followed by brain, liver, and placenta.

Jaworski et al. (2001) cloned multiple OSBPs, including OSBPL11. RT-PCR
analysis detected ubiquitous expression that was highest in lung, fetal
brain, and placenta, followed by retinal pigment epithelium and choroid.

GENE STRUCTURE

By sequence analysis, Lehto et al. (2001) determined that the OSBPL11
gene contains at least 13 exons. Jaworski et al. (2001) found that it
contains 13 exons.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Jaworski et al. (2001) mapped the OSBPL11 gene to
chromosome 8. The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium
mapped the OSBPL11 gene to chromosome 3 (TMAP RH75514)

REFERENCE 1. Jaworski, C. J.; Moreira, E.; Li, A.; Lee, R.; Rodriguez, I. R.
: A family of 12 human genes containing oxysterol-binding domains. Genomics 78:
185-196, 2001.

2. Lehto, M.; Laitinen, S.; Chinetti, G.; Johansson, M.; Ehnholm,
C.; Staels, B.; Ikonen, E.; Olkkonen, V. M.: The OSBP-related protein
family in humans. J. Lipid Res. 42: 1203-1213, 2001.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/28/2002

EDITED joanna: 11/01/2007
mgross: 2/28/2002

613799	TITLE *613799 COILED-COIL DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 40; CCDC40
;;KIAA1640
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned CCDC40, which they designated
KIAA1640. RT-PCR ELISA detected highest CCDC40 expression in ovary,
followed by brain, lung, kidney, testis, fetal brain, and fetal liver.
Lower expression was detected in heart, liver, and pancreas, with little
to no expression in skeletal muscle and spleen. CCDC40 was detected in
all specific adult brain regions examined, with highest expression in
caudate nucleus and subthalamic nucleus.

Becker-Heck et al. (2011) stated that the human CCDC40 protein contains
1,142 amino acids. They cloned mouse Ccdc40, which encodes a deduced
1,192 amino acid protein. Ccdc40 was expressed throughout the cytoplasm
of embryonic mouse node cells. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed
Ccdc40 localization to cilia of respiratory epithelium. In zebrafish,
Ccdc40 was expressed in tissues containing motile cilia, including
Kupffer vesicle, floorplate, pronephric tubule, and otic vesicle.

GENE STRUCTURE

Becker-Heck et al. (2011) determined that the CCDC40 gene contains 20
exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the CCDC40
gene to chromosome 17. Hartz (2011) mapped the CCDC40 gene to chromosome
17q25.3 based on an alignment of the CCDC40 sequence (GenBank GENBANK
AK000760) with the genomic sequence (GRCh37).

Becker-Heck et al. (2011) stated that the mouse Ccdc40 gene maps to
chromosome 11.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 17 patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia-15 (CILD15; 613808),
Becker-Heck et al. (2011) identified loss-of-function mutations in the
CCDC40 gene (see, e.g., 613799.0001-613799.0004). All patients except 1
were homozygous or compound heterozygous for the mutations; a second
mutant allele could not be found in 1 patient. Affected individuals had
recurrent upper and lower airway infections; in addition, 5 (32%) had
situs solitus (32%) and 11 (68%) showed situs inversus, consistent with
randomization of left-right body asymmetry. Videomicroscopy analyses of
respiratory cilia showed a severely altered beating pattern in all
analyzed samples, with markedly reduced beating amplitudes, and rigid
cilia with fast, flickery movements. Transmission electron microscopy
studies showed defects in several axonemal structures, including
occasional absent or eccentric central pairs, displacement of outer
doublets, reductions in the mean number of inner dynein arms, and
abnormal radial spokes and nexin links. Outer dynein arms appeared
normal. The was also an absence of the inner dynein arm component DNALI1
(610062) from respiratory ciliary axonemes, which accumulated in the
apical cytoplasm, as well as an accumulation of GAS8 (605278) in the
apical cytoplasm. These findings indicated that CCDC40 is necessary for
the correct assembly of at least 2 distinct axonemal complexes
regulating ciliary beat: the inner dynein arms and the dynein regulatory
complex. Further studies showed that CCDC40 deficiency affected axonemal
localization of CCDC39 (613798), which was absent from the cilium and
enriched in the apical cytoplasm at the ciliary base.

Antony et al. (2013) applied Sanger sequencing of the CCDC39 and CCDC40
genes and whole-exome sequencing to identify 12 different mutations in
the CCDC39 gene and 13 different mutations in the CCDC40 gene among
affected members of 37 (69%) of 54 unrelated families with primary
ciliary dyskinesia and a 'radial spoke defect.' These mutations were
absent from large control databases, segregated with the disorder in the
families, and were predicted to result in premature protein termination,
likely associated with nonsense-mediated mRNA and complete loss of
protein function. There was no clustering of the mutations to a
particular region of either gene, suggesting that protein termination at
any point leads to the same deleterious dysfunction. The 248delC
mutation in CCDC40 (613799.0001) was the most common mutation, found in
63% of mutant alleles of Northern European origin worldwide. All
patients had a classic homogeneous PCD phenotype, with respiratory tract
infections, pneumonia, rhinosinusitis, otitis media, and age-dependent
bronchiectasis. About half had situs inversus, and infertility was
documented in several males and females. Transmission electron
microscopy of patient respiratory bronchial epithelial cells showed
disorganization of the peripheral microtubular doublets, absent or
shifted central pairs, and partial or complete loss of inner dynein
arms. Outer dynein arms were intact. Immunohistochemical studies showed
the presence of components of the radial spoke head and stalk,
suggesting that the radial spoke structures are preserved in these
patients. Antony et al. (2013) suggested that the term 'radial spoke
defect' should be replaced with the more accurate term 'inner dynein arm
(IDA) and microtubular disorganization defect.'

ANIMAL MODEL

Using a genetic screen, Becker-Heck et al. (2011) identified homozygous
links (lnks) mutant mouse embryos that showed defects in left-right
patterning, including situs inversus and left isomerism. The majority of
lnks/lnks pups died before weaning. Hydrocephalus was present in 2
lnks/lnks pups that were examined. Becker-Heck et al. (2011) identified
the lnks mutation as a ser792-to-ter (S792X) substitution in the middle
of the coiled-coil domain of Ccdc40. Morpholino-mediated knockout of
Ccdc40 in zebrafish resulted in laterality defects: either reversed
organ patterning or randomized organ patterning. Becker-Heck et al.
(2011) identified a gln778-to-ter (Q778X) mutation in the Ccdc40 gene in
zebrafish with the lok phenotype, which is identical to the phenotype
resulting from Ccdc40 knockdown. Scanning electron microscopy showed
reduced length of cilia in nodal pit cells of lnks/lnks mice and reduced
length of cilia in Kupffer vesicles and pronephric tubules of Ccdc40
morphant zebrafish.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 15
CCDC40, 1-BP DEL, 248C

In 7 unrelated patients with primary ciliary dyskinesia-15 (CILD15;
613808), Becker-Heck et al. (2011) identified a 1-bp deletion (248delC)
in exon 3 of the CCDC40 gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature
termination. Two girls of German descent were homozygous for the
mutation, whereas all the other patients, except 1, were compound
heterozygous for the 248delC mutation and another pathogenic mutation in
the CCDC40 gene; a second mutant allele in 1 patient could not be found.

Antony et al. (2013) found that the 248delC mutation was the most common
mutation in their cohort of 28 families with CILD15; the mutation was
found in 63% of mutant alleles of Northern European origin worldwide.

.0002
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 15
CCDC40, GLN439TER

In a German boy with CILD15 (613808), Becker-Heck et al. (2011)
identified a homozygous 1315C-T transition in exon 8 of the CCDC40 gene,
resulting in a gln439-to-ter (Q439X) substitution.

.0003
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 15
CCDC40, GLN651TER

In an Austrian girl with CILD15 (613808), Becker-Heck et al. (2011)
identified a homozygous 1971C-T transition in exon 12 of the CCDC40
gene, resulting in a gln651-to-ter (Q651X) substitution.

.0004
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 15
CCDC40, ARG449TER

In 3 Hungarian sibs with CILD15 (613808), Becker-Heck et al. (2011)
identified compound heterozygosity for a 1366C-T transition in exon 9 of
the CCDC40 gene, resulting in an arg449-to-ter (R449X) substitution, and
a deletion in the CCDC40 gene.

REFERENCE 1. Antony, D.; Becker-Heck, A.; Zariwala, M. A.; Schmidts, M.; Onoufriadis,
A.; Forouhan, M.; Wilson, R.; Taylor-Cox, T.; Dewar, A.; Jackson,
C.; Goggin, P.; Loges, N. T.; and 23 others: Mutations in CCDC39
and CCDC40 are the major cause of primary ciliary dyskinesia with
axonemal disorganization and absent inner dynein arms. Hum. Mutat. 34:
462-472, 2013.

2. Becker-Heck, A.; Zohn, I. E.; Okabe, N.; Pollock, A.; Lenhart,
K. B.; Sullivan-Brown, J.; McSheene, J.; Loges, N. T.; Olbrich, H.;
Haeffner, K.; Fliegauf, M.; Horvath, J.; and 9 others: The coiled-coil
domain containing protein CCDC40 is essential for motile cilia function
and left-right axis formation. Nature Genet. 43: 79-84, 2011.

3. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/9/2011.

4. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Nakayama, M.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVIII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 273-281, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/2/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/14/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/10/2011

EDITED carol: 09/11/2013
alopez: 6/6/2013
alopez: 4/5/2013
ckniffin: 4/2/2013
wwang: 6/9/2011
wwang: 3/15/2011
ckniffin: 3/14/2011
terry: 3/11/2011
mgross: 3/10/2011

611122	TITLE *611122 ANKYRIN REPEAT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 28; ANKRD28
;;PHOSPHATASE INTERACTOR TARGETING K PROTEIN; PITK;;
KIAA0379
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1997) cloned ANKRD28, which they designated
KIAA0379. The deduced 882-amino acid protein shares 30.8% identity with
ANKRD3 (605706). RT-PCR analysis detected ubiquitous expression in all
human tissues tested.

By searching for PP1 (see 176875)-binding proteins in rabbit skeletal
muscle, followed by database analysis, Kwiek et al. (2006) identified
ANKRD28, which they called PITK. ANKRD28 contains putative PP1-binding
motifs at either terminus and 28 successive ankyrin repeats. Western
blot analysis of multiple mouse tissues revealed expression of ANKRD28
at similar levels in all tissues tested. In COS-7 cells,
immunofluorescence microscopy localized ANKRD28 to subnuclear bodies
with exclusion from nucleoli.

GENE FUNCTION

By in vitro studies, Kwiek et al. (2006) showed that recombinant ANKRD28
selectively inhibited the phosphorylase activity of PP1C in a
dose-dependent manner. Phosphorylation of ser1013 and ser1017, which lie
within the putative PP1-binding motif, negatively regulated ANKRD28
binding to PP1C. Immunoprecipitation studies showed that ANKRD28 bound
to hnRNP-K (600712). ANKRD28 selectively regulated phosphorylation of
hnRNP-K at ser284, an effect that was enhanced in vivo by an
S1013A/S1017A double mutant, suggesting that ANKRD28 targets PP1 in a
regulated manner to dephosphorylate hnRNP-K selectively at ser284.
Microarray analysis found that expression of ANKRD28 resulted in altered
expression of 47 genes, including marked induction of MEK5 (MAP2K5;
602520). Expression of only 2 of these genes was altered by the
S1013A/S1017A double mutant, indicating the importance of
phosphorylation in ANKRD28 function. In addition, the effects of ANKRD28
and S1013A/S1017A double-mutant ANKRD28 could be modulated by
coexpression of hnRNP-K.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1997) mapped the ANKRD28
gene to chromosome 3. Kwiek et al. (2006) noted that the ANKRD28 gene
maps to chromosome 3p25.1.

REFERENCE 1. Kwiek, N. C.; Thacker, D. F.; Datto, M. B.; Megosh, H. B.; Haystead,
T. A. J.: PITK, a PP1 targeting subunit that modulates the phosphorylation
of the transcriptional regulator hnRNP K. Cell. Signal. 18: 1769-1778,
2006.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Nakajima, D.; Ohira, M.; Seki, N.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which can code for large
proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4: 141-150, 1997.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 6/19/2007

EDITED carol: 01/02/2008
wwang: 6/20/2007

605110	TITLE *605110 LYSOPHOSPHATIDIC ACID RECEPTOR 2; LPAR2
;;LPA2;;
ENDOTHELIAL DIFFERENTIATION GENE 4; EDG4;;
LYSOPHOSPHATIDIC ACID RECEPTOR EDG4;;
LPA RECEPTOR EDG4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The lysophospholipids, lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) and sphingosine
1-phosphate (S1P; see 601974), are important extracellular signaling
molecules. These lipid mediators are pleiotropic; among the most common
cellular responses are mitogenesis, cell survival (antiapoptosis),
inhibition of adenylyl cyclase, and calcium mobilization. Physiologic
events associated with these mediators include platelet aggregation,
vasopressor activity, wound healing, immune modulation, and
angiogenesis. Many of the actions of LPA and S1P are mediated through a
set of G protein-coupled receptors, including EDG4 (Chun et al., 2002).

NOMENCLATURE

Chun et al. (2002) proposed a nomenclature scheme for the LPA and S1P
receptors that is consistent with the International Union of
Pharmacology (IUP) guidelines. According to these guidelines, a receptor
is to be named with the abbreviation of the natural agonist with the
highest potency, followed by a subscripted arabic number. Thus they
suggested that the designation EDG4 should be changed to LPA2.

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to EDG2 (602282), An
et al. (1998) identified a cDNA encoding EDG4. Sequence analysis
predicted that the 382-amino acid EDG4 protein, which shares 46% amino
acid identity with EDG2, contains 7 hydrophobic segments, potential
N-glycosylation sites in the N terminus, and potential serine/threonine
kinase phosphorylation sites in the intracellular portion. Expression of
EDG4 mediated increased transcription of the serum response element
(SRE) reporter gene in response to LPA and PA. Northern blot analysis
detected an 8-kb EDG4 transcript in peripheral blood leukocytes, thymus,
spleen, and all tumor types, as well as a 1.8-kb transcript in
leukocytes, testis, prostate, pancreas, and adherent cancer cell lines.
Little or no expression was detected in brain, heart, placenta, and
digestive tract, tissues where EDG2 expression is abundant.

GENE FUNCTION

Using the aequorin luminescence method to reduce nonspecific signals, An
et al. (1998) determined that LPA induced increased calcium mobilization
in cells expressing EDG2 or EDG4, probably through inositol triphosphate
generated by phospholipase C activation. EDG4-mediated calcium
mobilization utilizes both Gi (see GNAI1; 139310) and Gq (see GNAQ;
600998) proteins, whereas EDG2 utilizes pertussis toxin-sensitive Gi
proteins only.

By RT-PCR and Western blot analysis, Goetzl et al. (2000) showed that
CD4+ T cells and B cells but not CD8+ T cells express EDG4. Stimulation
of CD4+ but not CD8+ T cells in the presence of LPA or monoclonal
anti-N-terminal EDG4 suppressed interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680) secretion.

GENE STRUCTURE

Contos and Chun (2000) cloned the mouse cDNA encoding Edg4. Genomic
sequence analysis determined that the human and mouse EDG4 genes contain
3 exons.

MAPPING

An et al. (1998) stated that the EDG4 gene maps to 19p12. Contos and
Chun (2000) mapped the mouse Edg4 gene to central chromosome 8.

REFERENCE 1. An, S.; Bleau, T.; Hallmark, O. G.; Goetzl, E. J.: Characterization
of a novel subtype of human G protein-coupled receptor for lysophosphatidic
acid. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 7906-7910, 1998.

2. An, S.; Bleu, T.; Zheng, Y.; Goetzl, E. J.: Recombinant human
G protein-coupled lysophosphatidic acid receptors mediate intracellular
calcium mobilization. Molec. Pharm. 54: 881-888, 1998.

3. Chun, J.; Goetzl, E. J.; Hla, T.; Igarashi, Y.; Lynch, K. R.; Moolenaar,
W.; Pyne, S.; Tigyi, G.: International Union of Pharmacology. XXXIV.
Lysophospholipid receptor nomenclature. Pharm. Rev. 54: 265-269,
2002.

4. Contos, J. J. A.; Chun, J.: Genomic characterization of the lysophosphatidic
acid receptor gene, Ip(A2)/Edg4, and identification of a frameshift
mutation in a previously characterized cDNA. Genomics 64: 155-169,
2000.

5. Goetzl, E. J.; Kong, Y.; Voice, J. K.: Cutting edge: differential
constitutive expression of functional receptors for lysophosphatidic
acid by human blood lymphocytes. J. Immun. 164: 4996-4999, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/15/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/10/2000

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/6/2000

EDITED alopez: 04/22/2008
carol: 2/29/2008
alopez: 7/9/2001
mgross: 3/15/2001
mgross: 7/10/2000
mgross: 7/6/2000

606374	TITLE *606374 BETA-1,3-GLUCURONYLTRANSFERASE 3; B3GAT3
;;GLUCURONOSYLTRANSFERASE I; GLCATI
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using PCR with degenerate primers based on the sequence of rat Glcatp
(B3GAT1; 151290) to screen a placenta cDNA library, Kitagawa et al.
(1998) obtained a cDNA encoding B3GAT3, which they termed GLCATI. The
deduced 335-amino acid type II transmembrane protein, which is 43%
identical to rat Glcatp, has a potential N-glycosylation site and a
proline-rich domain, which is adjacent to its transmembrane region.
Functional analysis of soluble B3GAT3 showed that it is a
glycoserine-specific glucuronyltransferase.

By Northern blot analysis, Kitagawa et al. (2001) found ubiquitous
expression of a 1.5-kb B3GAT3 transcript, with highest levels in brain,
placenta, and liver, and lower levels in heart, lung, skeletal muscle,
kidney, and pancreas.

Using reverse-transcriptase quantitative PCR on corresponding mouse
tissues, Baasanjav et al. (2011) demonstrated expression of B3GAT3 in
heart, aorta, bone, and osteoblasts. In addition, B3GAT3 protein was
present in human aorta.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kitagawa et al. (2001) determined that the B3GAT3 gene spans 7 kb and
contains 5 exons. Sequence analysis of the promoter region revealed 2
putative start sites and consensus binding sites for several
transcription factors.

MAPPING

Kitagawa et al. (2001) mapped the B3GAT3 gene to chromosome 11q12-q13 by
in situ hybridization. They mapped a B3GAT3 pseudogene to chromosome 3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a consanguineous family in the United Arab Emirates in which 5 of 7
sibs had multiple joint dislocations, short stature, craniofacial
dysmorphism, and congenital heart defects mapping to chromosome 11q12
(245600), Baasanjav et al. (2011) sequenced 30 functional candidate
genes and identified homozygosity for a missense mutation at a highly
conserved residue in the B3GAT3 gene (R277Q; 606374.0001) that
segregated with disease in the family. Functional studies revealed a
significant reduction of glucuronyltansferase activity in mutant
fibroblasts compared to controls, and patient fibroblasts showed
decreased levels of all 3 lines of O-glycanated proteoglycans.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MULTIPLE JOINT DISLOCATIONS, SHORT STATURE, CRANIOFACIAL DYSMORPHISM,
AND CONGENITAL HEART DEFECTS
B3GAT3, ARG277GLN

In 5 sibs from a consanguineous family with multiple joint dislocations,
short stature, craniofacial dysmorphism, and congenital heart defects
(245600), Baasanjav et al. (2011) identified homozygosity for an 830G-A
transition in exon 4 of the B3GAT3 gene, resulting in an arg277-to-gln
(R277Q) substitution at a highly conserved residue in the GlcA-binding
domain. The mutation segregated with disease in the family and was not
found in 294 population-matched chromosomes or in 850 chromosomes from
Berlin blood donors. Patient fibroblasts showed a significant reduction
of glucuronyltransferase activity, to levels that were only 3 to 5% of
age-matched control levels. In addition, patient fibroblasts
demonstrated decreased levels of dermatan sulfate (see 125255),
chondroitin sulfate (see 155760), and heparan sulfate (see 142460)
proteoglycans, indicating that the defect in linker synthesis affected
all 3 lines of O-glycanated proteoglycans.

REFERENCE 1. Baasanjav, S.; Al-Gazali, L.; Hashiguchi, T.; Mizumoto, S.; Fischer,
B.; Horn, D.; Seelow, D.; Ali, B. R.; Aziz, S. A. A.; Langer, R; Saleh,
A. A. H.; Becker, C.; and 11 others: Faulty initiation of proteoglycan
synthesis causes cardiac and joint defects. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 89:
15-27, 2011.

2. Kitagawa, H.; Taoka, M.; Tone, Y.; Sugahara, K.: Human glycosaminoglycan
glucuronyltransferase I gene and a related processed pseudogene: genomic
structure, chromosomal mapping and characterization. Biochem. J. 358:
539-546, 2001.

3. Kitagawa, H.; Tone, Y.; Tamura, J.; Neumann, K. W.; Ogawa, T.;
Oka, S.; Kawasaki, T.; Sugahara, K.: Molecular cloning and expression
of glucuronyltransferase I involved in the biosynthesis of the glycosaminoglycan-protein
linkage region of proteoglycans. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 6615-6618,
1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/22/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/21/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/11/2001

EDITED carol: 01/13/2012
carol: 8/22/2011
mgross: 10/10/2005
carol: 3/21/2002
mgross: 10/11/2001

601958	TITLE *601958 CALCIUM CHANNEL, VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT, BETA-3 SUBUNIT; CACNB3
;;CALCIUM CHANNEL, L TYPE, BETA-3 POLYPEPTIDE; CACNLB3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Collin et al. (1994) isolated the beta subunit of a human
voltage-dependent calcium channel gene from a 9-week-old human
total-embryo cDNA library. The gene encodes a 482-amino acid polypeptide
with a predicted mass of 54,571 kD. The gene, called H beta 3 by them,
was expressed mostly in brain, smooth muscle, and ovary.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yamada et al. (1995) described the exon-intron structure of the CACNLB3
gene, which spans approximately 8 kb and comprises 13 exons.

MAPPING

Collin et al. (1994) localized the CACNB3 gene to chromosome 12q13 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

To elucidate the molecular mechanism of the interaction between calcium
channel alpha-1 (see 601011) and beta subunits, Chen et al. (2004)
determined the crystal structures of the conserved core region of beta-3
(CACNB3), alone and in complex with the alpha-interaction domain (AID),
and of beta-4 (CACNB4; 601949) alone. The structures showed that the
beta subunit core contains 2 interacting domains: a Src homology 3 (SH3)
domain and a guanylate kinase domain. The AID binds to a hydrophobic
groove in the guanylate kinase domain through extensive interactions,
conferring extremely high affinity between alpha-1 and beta subunits.
The beta-interaction domain (BID) is essential both for the structural
integrity of and for bridging the SH3 and guanylate kinase domains, but
it does not participate directly in binding alpha-1.

NOMENCLATURE

Lory et al. (1997) provided a unified nomenclature for voltage-gated
calcium channel genes (see 114207), tabulated 12 of these genes, and
gave the map location of each.

ANIMAL MODEL

Murakami et al. (2002) noted that the accessory beta-3 subunits of
calcium channels are preferentially associated with the alpha-1b subunit
(CACNA1B; 601012) in neuronal N-type channels. By gene targeting, they
deleted the beta-3 subunit in mice and found that the mutation dampened
the processing of painful stimuli, specifically pain induced by chemical
inflammation. The ascending pain pathways of the spinal chord showed
altered N-type channel activity. In vitro binding studies and
pharmacologic manipulation indicated reduced expression of alpha-1b
subunits in dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons. Murakami et al. (2002)
concluded that, since beta-3 controls the membrane targeting of alpha-1
subunits, the loss of beta-3 reduced the number of N-type calcium
channels present in the membranes of DRG neurons and dampened their
response to inflammatory stimuli.

Berggren et al. (2004) found that Cacnb3 -/- mice showed a more
efficient glucose homeostasis compared with wildtype mice due to
increased glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. The increased insulin
secretion resulted from increased glucose-induced cytoplasmic free
Ca(2+) concentration oscillation frequency in Cacnb3 -/- beta cells, an
effect accounted for by enhanced formation of inositol
1,4,5-trisphosphate (InsP3) and increased Ca(2+) mobilization from
intracellular stores. Berggren et al. (2004) concluded that CACNB3
negatively modulates InsP3-induced Ca(2+) release without affecting the
function of the voltage-gated L-type Ca(2+) channel.

REFERENCE 1. Berggren, P.-O.; Yang, S.-N.; Murakami, M.; Efanov, A. M.; Uhles,
S.; Kohler, M.; Moede, T.; Fernstrom, A.; Appelskog, I. B.; Aspinwall,
C. A.; Zaitsev, S. V.; Larsson, O.; and 11 others: Removal of Ca(2+)
channel beta-3 subunit enhances Ca(2+) oscillation frequency and insulin
exocytosis. Cell 119: 273-284, 2004.

2. Chen, Y.; Li, M.; Zhang, Y.; He, L.; Yamada, Y.; Fitzmaurice, A.;
Shen, Y.; Zhang, H.; Tong, L.; Yang, J.: Structural basis of the
alpha-1-beta subunit interaction of voltage-gated Ca(2+) channels. Nature 429:
675-680, 2004.

3. Collin, T.; Lory, P.; Taviaux, S.; Courtieu, C.; Guillbault, P.;
Berta, P.; Nargeot, J.: Cloning, chromosomal location and functional
expression of the human voltage-dependent calcium-channel beta 3 subunit. Europ.
J. Biochem. 220: 257-262, 1994.

4. Lory, P.; Ophoff, R. A.; Nahmias, J.: Towards a unified nomenclature
describing voltage-gated calcium channel genes. Hum. Genet. 100:
149-150, 1997.

5. Murakami, M.; Fleischmann, B.; De Felipe, C.; Freichel, M.; Trost,
C.; Ludwig, A.; Wissenbach, U.; Schwegler, H.; Hofmann, F.; Hescheler,
J.; Flockerzi, V.; Cavalie, A.: Pain perception in mice lacking the
beta-3 subunit of voltage-activated calcium channels. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
40342-40351, 2002.

6. Yamada, Y.; Masuda, K.; Li, Q.; Ihara, Y.; Kubota, A.; Miura, T.;
Nakamura, K.; Fujii, Y.; Seino, S.; Seino, Y.: The structures of
the human calcium channel alpha 1 subunit (CACNL1A2) and beta subunit
(CACNLB3) genes. Genomics 27: 312-319, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 3/30/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/27/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/21/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/26/1997

EDITED mgross: 03/30/2005
mgross: 3/30/2005
alopez: 7/27/2004
cwells: 11/6/2003
cwells: 4/25/2003
terry: 4/21/2003
dkim: 11/13/1998
mark: 10/20/1997
jenny: 8/28/1997
mark: 8/26/1997

601798	TITLE *601798 GLUCOSAMINE-6-PHOSPHATE DEAMINASE 1; GNPDA1
;;GNP1;;
GNPI;;
OSCILLIN, HAMSTER, HOMOLOG OF;;
KIAA0060
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Glucosamine-6-phosphate deaminase (EC 3.5.99.6) is an allosteric enzyme
that catalyzes the reversible conversion of D-glucosamine-6-phosphate
into D-fructose-6-phosphate and ammonium (Arreola et al., 2003).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from the KG-1 immature myeloid cell line,
Nomura et al. (1994) cloned GNPDA1, which they designated KIAA0060. The
deduced protein contains 289 amino acids. Northern blot analysis
detected GNPDA1 expression in all human tissues and cell lines examined,
with highest expression in ovary and colon and in KG-1 and HeLa cell
lines.

The hamster sperm oscillin protein is responsible for oocyte calcium
oscillations. By screening a testis cDNA library for a homolog of
hamster oscillin, Shevchenko et al. (1998) obtained a cDNA encoding
GNPI. The deduced 289-amino acid protein is 96% identical to the hamster
sequence. SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis showed that GNPI was
expressed as a 33-kD cytosolic protein in various cell lines.

By screening a mouse EST database for sequences similar to hamster
oscillin, followed by screening human BAC genomic libraries by PCR,
Nakamura et al. (2000) identified the GNPI gene. Northern and dot blot
analyses revealed ubiquitous expression that was highest in spleen,
ovary, kidney, uterus, and testis. Promoter analysis indicated that GNPI
is most likely a housekeeping gene.

GENE FUNCTION

In the course of investigating hexosamine catabolism in the human
malaria parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, Weidanz et al. (1995) became
aware of deficiencies in understanding the relevant enzymatic reactions
in the host erythrocyte. For that reason, they undertook studies of
human glucosamine-6-phosphate deaminase using a newly developed
sensitive radiometric assay. They characterized biochemically the
erythrocyte enzyme and reported data on its kinetics, temperature
stability, and chromatographic purification. Weidanz et al. (1995) noted
that the nucleotide sequence of the nagB gene, encoding the deaminase in
E. coli K12, had been determined (Rogers et al., 1988).

Functional analysis by Shevchenko et al. (1998) showed that GNPI had
glucosamine-6-phosphate deaminase activity. However, it did not induce
calcium oscillations in mammalian eggs.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Arreola et al. (2003) solved the crystal structure of human GNP1 in the
presence of an allosteric activator, a competitive inhibitor, ammonia,
inorganic sulfate, and a cryoprotectant to 1.75-angstrom resolution.
They found that, like E. coli Gnp1, human GNP1 formed a 6-monomer unit.
However, each of the 6 GNP1 monomers showed a different conformation for
the active-site lid, and all conformations differed from that observed
in the E. coli enzyme. Moreover, all human GNP1 monomers differed from
E. coli Gnp1 in the phosphate-binding loop.

GENE STRUCTURE

Shevchenko et al. (1998) determined that the single-copy GNPI gene
contains 8 exons.

Nakamura et al. (2000) found that the GNPI gene spans approximately 12.4
kb and contains 8 exons.

Arreola et al. (2003) determined that the GNPDA1 gene contains 6 exons.

MAPPING

Using FISH, Shevchenko et al. (1998) mapped the GNPI gene to chromosome
5q31.

REFERENCE 1. Arreola, R.; Valderrama, B.; Morante, M. L.; Horjales, E.: Two
mammalian glucosamine-6-phosphate deaminases: a structural and genetic
study. FEBS Lett. 551: 63-70, 2003.

2. Nakamura, Y.; Miura, K.; Fujino, Y.; Iwao, H.; Ogita, S.; Yamanaka,
S.: Evolution, structure, and expression of GNPI/oscillin orthologous
genes. Genomics 68: 179-186, 2000.

3. Nomura, N.; Nagase, T.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Sato,
S.; Seki, N.; Kawarabayasi, Y.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. II. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0041-KIAA0080) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 1: 223-229, 1994.

4. Rogers, M. J.; Ohgi, T.; Plumbridge, J.; Soll, D.: Nucleotide
sequences of the E. coli nagE and nagB genes: the structural genes
for the N-acetylglucosamine transport protein of the bacterial phosphoenolpyruvate:
sugar phosphotransferase system and for glucosamine 6-phosphate deaminase. Gene 62:
197-207, 1988.

5. Shevchenko, V.; Hogben, M.; Ekong, R.; Parrington, J.; Lai, F.
A.: The human glucosamine-6-phosphate deaminase gene: cDNA cloning
and expression, genomic organization and chromosomal localization. Gene 216:
31-38, 1998.

6. Weidanz, J. A.; Campbell, P.; DeLucas, L. J.; Jin, J.; Moore, D.;
Roden, L.; Yu, H.; Heilmann, E.; Vezza, A. C.: Glucosamine 6-phosphate
deaminase in normal human erythrocytes. Brit. J. Haemat. 91: 72-79,
1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/14/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/4/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/13/1997

EDITED mgross: 01/14/2010
mgross: 1/14/2010
mgross: 12/5/2000
terry: 12/4/2000
alopez: 9/10/1999
mark: 12/8/1997
jenny: 5/13/1997

610570	TITLE *610570 UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE 40; USP40
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Modification of cellular proteins by ubiquitin is an essential
regulatory mechanism controlled by the coordinated action of multiple
ubiquitin-conjugating and deubiquitinating enzymes. USP40 belongs to a
large family of cysteine proteases that function as deubiquitinating
enzymes (Quesada et al., 2004).

CLONING

By searching databases for sequences similar to USP family members,
followed by PCR of human cDNA libraries, Quesada et al. (2004) cloned
USP40. The deduced protein has a catalytic domain containing the cys
box, QQD box, and his box characteristic of USP enzymes. Northern blot
analysis detected variable expression in all tissues examined.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the USP40
gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP RH94290).

REFERENCE 1. Quesada, V.; Diaz-Perales, A.; Gutierrez-Fernandez, A.; Garabaya,
C.; Cal, S.; Lopez-Otin, C.: Cloning and enzymatic analysis of 22
novel human ubiquitin-specific proteases. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 314: 54-62, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/15/2006

EDITED mgross: 05/03/2007
wwang: 11/15/2006

300061	TITLE *300061 ZINC FINGER, MYM-TYPE 3; ZMYM3
;;ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 261; ZNF261;;
DXS6673E
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Van der Maarel et al. (1996) reported the cloning and characterization
of the ZNF261 gene, which the called DXS6673E. ZNF261 maps to the X
chromosome, is subject to X inactivation, and was disrupted in the
5-prime untranslated region by a balanced X;13 translocation in a
mentally retarded female. They identified a YAC clone that spanned the
breakpoint and used this YAC to isolate a cDNA from a fetal brain
library. The cDNA contains a 4,074-bp ORF encoding a predicted
1,358-amino acid polypeptide. By Northern analysis, van der Maarel et
al. (1996) showed that the DXS6673E gene is highly conserved among
vertebrates and that its expression is most abundant in brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Hakimi et al. (2003) identified a family of multiprotein corepressor
complexes that function through modifying chromatin structure to keep
genes silent. The polypeptide composition of these complexes includes a
common core of 2 subunits, HDAC1 (601241)/HDAC2 (605164) and the
FAD-binding protein BHC110 (AOF2; 609132). Other subunits of these
complexes include ZNF261, GTF2I (601679), and polypeptides associated
with cancer-causing chromosomal translocations.

GENE STRUCTURE

Van der Maarel et al. (1996) reported that the ZNF261 gene contains 25
exons, including 2 putative alternatively spliced noncoding exons (1A
and 1B).

MAPPING

Van der Maarel et al. (1996) mapped the ZNF261 gene to chromosome
Xq13.1.

CYTOGENETICS

Van der Maarel et al. (1996) reported a mentally retarded female whose
ZNF261 gene was disrupted in the 5-prime UTR by a balanced X;13
translocation. They noted that apart from mental retardation, the only
conspicuous clinical features in this patient were scoliosis and spotty
abdominal hypopigmentation.

REFERENCE 1. Hakimi, M.-A.; Dong, Y.; Lane, W. S.; Speicher, D. W.; Shiekhattar,
R.: A candidate X-linked mental retardation gene is a component of
a new family of histone deacetylase-containing complexes. J. Biol.
Chem. 278: 7234-7239, 2003.

2. van der Maarel, S. M.; Scholten, I. H. J. M.; Huber, I.; Philippe,
C.; Suijkerbuijk, R. F.; Gilgenkrantz, S.; Kere, J.; Cremers, F. P.
M.; Ropers, H.-H.: Cloning and characterization of DXS6673E, a candidate
gene for X-linked mental retardation in Xq13.1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5:
887-897, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/3/2005

CREATED Moyra Smith: 8/8/1996

EDITED carol: 09/02/2010
mgross: 1/3/2005
alopez: 10/12/1999
terry: 8/15/1996
mark: 8/15/1996
marlene: 8/9/1996
mark: 8/8/1996

