609061	TITLE *609061 ENABLED, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; ENAH
;;ENA;;
MAMMALIAN ENABLED; MENA;;
NDPP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Sazuka et al. (1992) cloned mouse Enah, which they called Ndpp1. The
3-prime UTR contains 7 ATTTA mRNA destabilization motifs. The deduced
389-amino acid protein has a proline-rich N terminus, followed by a
leucine/proline-rich region, a 4-arginine cluster near a possible alpha
helix, and a second possible alpha helix at the C terminus. Enah also
has 3 putative N-glycosylation sites. Northern blot analysis detected a
number of mRNA species that were downregulated during mouse embryonic
development and were only faintly detected in adult mouse brain.
Southern blot analysis of RT-PCR products found Enah expressed in
several adult mouse tissues, with highest expression in heart and
testis. Southern blot analysis detected homologs of mouse Enah in
several vertebrate species, including human.

Tani et al. (2003) cloned full-length mouse Enah, which they called
Mena, and a shorter splice variant, which they called Mena(S). The
full-length Mena cDNA encodes a deduced 541-amino acid protein
containing an N-terminal Ena/VASP (601703) homology-1 (EVH1) domain, an
arg-leu-glu-rich region, a pro-rich profilin (176610)-binding motif, and
a C-terminal EVH2 domain. The Mena(S) cDNA encodes a deduced 508-amino
acid protein that lacks a portion of the profilin-binding motif.
Immunofluorescence microscopy localized Mena at focal contacts and the
leading edge of mouse embryonic fibroblasts.

By database analysis and PCR and 5-prime RACE of adult and fetal brain
and fibroblast cDNA libraries, Urbanelli et al. (2006) cloned
full-length human ENAH. The deduced 570-amino acid ENAH protein shares
86.6% identity with mouse Enah. Human ENAH has N- and C-terminal EVH
domains separated by a LERER repeat region and a proline-rich region. It
also has potential phosphorylation sites and 2 short amino acid
stretches located in an arg-leu-glu-rich region that are not found in
mouse Enah. The LERER repeats are predicted to form an extended helix
with alternating charges. Northern blot analysis detected a major
transcript of about 4.8 kb in all tissues examined, with highest
expression in skeletal muscle, pancreas, and placenta, and lowest
expression in brain. A smaller transcript was also detected in skeletal
muscle. RT-PCR detected an ENAH splice variant homologous to the mouse
Enah(S) variant in a human glioblastoma cell line and 3 ENAH splice
variants homologous to 3 mouse neural-specific Enah variants in a human
neuroblastoma cell line.

GENE FUNCTION

By pull-down from mouse brain lysates and coimmunoprecipitation of COS
cells overexpressing rat Fe65 (APBB1; 602709), Ermekova et al. (1997)
determined that the WW domain of rat Fe65 interacted with the
polyproline-rich region of mouse Mena.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay, Tani et al. (2003) found that human ABI1
(SSH3BP1; 603050) bound mouse Mena. Binding analysis revealed that the
EVH1 domain of Mena bound a polyproline structure of ABI1. Endogenous
MENA and ABL1 (189980) coprecipitated with epitope-tagged ABI1 from
human embryonic kidney cells. ABI1 dramatically promoted ABL1-mediated
tyrosine phosphorylation of MENA, but not of other substrates. Mutation
analysis demonstrated that Mena was tyrosine phosphorylated on tyr296.

Using a rat adenocarcinoma cell line and nude mice, Philippar et al.
(2008) found that 1 splice variant of Mena encodes an isoform that
functions in cell invasion. This isoform, which they called Mena(INV),
promoted carcinoma cell motility and invasiveness in vivo and in vitro
and increased lung metastasis. Both Mena and Mena(INV) potentiated EGF
(131530)-induced membrane protrusion and increased the matrix
degradation activity of tumor cells. However, Mena(INV) more efficiently
drove metastases and sensitized cells to EGF-dependent membrane
protrusion and invasion.

GENE STRUCTURE

Urbanelli et al. (2006) determined that the ENAH gene contains 14 major
exons and spans approximately 157 kb. Alternative splicing results in
the inclusion of a larger form of exon 6, 2 additional minor exons in
intron 3, and/or an additional intron in exon 7.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Urbanelli et al. (2006) mapped the ENAH
gene to chromosome 1q42.13. They mapped the mouse Enah gene to
chromosome 1H5.

REFERENCE 1. Ermekova, K. S.; Zambrano, N.; Linn, H.; Minopoli, G.; Gertler,
F.; Russo, T.; Sudol, M.: The WW domain of neural protein FE65 interacts
with proline-rich motifs in Mena, the mammalian homolog of Drosophila
Enabled. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 32869-32877, 1997.

2. Philippar, U.; Roussos, E. T.; Oser, M.; Yamaguchi, H.; Kim, H.-D.;
Giampieri, S.; Wang, Y.; Goswami, S.; Wyckoff, J. B.; Lauffenburger,
D. A.; Sahai, E.; Condeelis, J. S.; Gertler, F. B.: A Mena invasion
isoform potentiates EGF-induced carcinoma cell invasion and metastasis. Dev.
Cell 15: 813-828, 2008.

3. Sazuka, T.; Tomooka, Y.; Kathju, S.; Ikawa, Y.; Noda, M.; Kumar,
S.: Identification of a developmentally regulated gene in the mouse
central nervous system which encodes a novel proline rich protein. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1132: 240-248, 1992.

4. Tani, K.; Sato, S.; Sukezane, T.; Kojima, H.; Hirose, H.; Hanafusa,
H.; Shishido, T.: Abl interactor 1 promotes tyrosine 296 phosphorylation
of mammalian Enabled (Mena) by c-Abl kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
21685-21692, 2003.

5. Urbanelli, L.; Massini, C.; Emiliani, C.; Orlacchio, A.; Bernardi,
G.; Oralcchio, A.: Characterization of human Enah gene. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1759: 99-107, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/13/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/6/2004

EDITED mgross: 10/13/2010
terry: 10/13/2010
mgross: 12/6/2004

