182144	TITLE *182144 SERINE HYDROXYMETHYLTRANSFERASE, CYTOSOLIC; SHMT1
DESCRIPTION Serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT), a pyridoxal phosphate-containing
enzyme, catalyzes the reversible conversion of serine and
tetrahydrofolate to glycine and 5,10-methylene tetrahydrofolate. Some
eukaryotic cells, including human cells, contain both cytosolic and
mitochondrial forms of SHMT. Mammalian cells that lack mitochondrial
SHMT activity are auxotrophic for glycine (SHMT2; 138450). It has been
suggested that glycine synthesis from serine occurs in the mitochondria,
whereas cytosolic SHMT may catalyze the conversion of glycine to serine,
although direct evidence for this proposal is lacking. Garrow et al.
(1993) cloned human cDNAs for cytosolic and mitochondrial SHMT by
functional complementation of an Escherichia coli glyA mutant with a
human cDNA library. The cDNA for the cytosolic enzyme encoded a
483-residue protein of M(r) 53,020. The deduced protein sequence shared
63% identity with that of the SHMT2 protein. By isotopic in situ
hybridization, Garrow et al. (1993) assigned the cytosolic and
mitochondrial SHMT genes to 17p11.2 and 12q13, respectively. The high
degree of nucleotide sequence identity between the 2 isozymes as well as
the presence of keratin genes in both chromosomal regions was consistent
with these regions of chromosomes 12 and 17 having arisen by a
duplication event.

Folate-dependent one-carbon metabolism is critical for the synthesis of
numerous cellular constituents required for cell growth, and SHMT is
central to this process. Elsea et al. (1995) found that the SHMT1 gene
maps to the critical interval for Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS; 182290)
on 17p11.2. They found that the gene spans approximately 40 kb. It was
found to be deleted in all 26 SMS patients examined by PCR, fluorescence
in situ hybridization, and/or Southern analysis. Furthermore,
haploinsufficiency was indicated by the fact that SHMT enzyme activity
in patient lymphoblasts was approximately 50% that of unaffected parent
lymphoblasts. They suggested that haploinsufficiency may play a role in
the SMS phenotype and that this finding may point to possible
therapeutic interventions.

Byrne et al. (1996) described an SHMT pseudogene with 90% identity to
SHMT cDNA. By fluorescence in situ hybridization, they mapped the
pseudogene to 1p33-p32.3.

REFERENCE 1. Byrne, P. C.; Shipley, J. M.; Chave, K. J.; Sanders, P. G.; Snell,
K.: Characterisation of a human serine hydroxymethyltransferase pseudogene
and its localisation of 1p32.3-33. Hum. Genet. 97: 340-344, 1996.

2. Elsea, S. H.; Juyal, R. C.; Jiralerspong, S.; Finucane, B. M.;
Pandolfo, M.; Greenberg, F.; Baldini, A.; Stover, P.; Patel, P. I.
: Haploinsufficiency of cytosolic serine hydroxymethyltransferase
in the Smith-Magenis syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 57: 1342-1350,
1995.

3. Garrow, T. A.; Brenner, A. A.; Whitehead, V. M.; Chen, X.-N.; Duncan,
R. G.; Korenberg, J. R.; Shane, B.: Cloning of human cDNAs encoding
mitochondrial and cytosolic serine hydroxymethyltransferases and chromosomal
localization. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 11910-11916, 1993.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/6/1993

EDITED psherman: 04/07/1998
alopez: 7/29/1997
terry: 7/7/1997
mark: 2/22/1996
terry: 2/20/1996
mark: 12/15/1995
terry: 12/14/1995
carol: 7/13/1993
carol: 7/6/1993

116951	TITLE *116951 CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASE 11A; CDK11A
;;CELL DIVISION CYCLE 2-LIKE 2; CDC2L2;;
PITSLRE A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

While characterizing the structure of the CDC2L1 (CDK11B; 176873)
candidate tumor suppressor gene located on 1p36, Lahti et al. (1994)
identified a highly related gene within a contiguous 100-kb genomic
region. They referred to CDC2L1 as PITSLRE B, following the convention
of naming CDC2-related kinases by the amino acid sequence of the region
corresponding to the conserved CDC2 PSTAIRE box. The related gene was
designated PITSLRE A, or CDC2L2.

Xiang et al. (1994) isolated multiple, alternatively spliced CDC2L2
mRNAs. The CDC2L2 transcripts encode 5 protein isoforms ranging in size
from 65 to 110 kD. The isoforms vary in the length and sequence of their
N-terminal regions; the protein kinase catalytic and C-terminal domains
are identical. All contain a 30-residue acid blob domain comprised
primarily of glutamic acid. The mRNAs encoding the 3 largest isoforms,
CDC2L2 alpha-2-1, -2-2, and -2-3, contain 2 alternative translation
initiation sites separated by 58 amino acids. In vitro translation of
these mRNAs yields the 90- and 110-kD isoforms observed in extracts of
HeLa cells. Subcellular fractionation studies indicated that the 110-kD
isoforms are primarily localized in the nucleus. The 65-kD isoform was
detected only in cells undergoing apoptosis. Using Northern blot
analysis, Xiang et al. (1994) found that the alpha-2 isoforms are
encoded by 3.5- and 3.7-kb mRNAs that are expressed in most human cell
lines and tissues. The mRNA encoding the 65-kD CDC2L2 alpha-1 isoform
had a more restricted expression pattern. The authors also detected an
antisense transcript corresponding to the 5-prime untranslated region of
the alpha-1 mRNA. The antisense and sense transcripts shared the same
expression pattern.

The CDC2L1 and CDC2L2 genes encode almost identical protein kinases of
110 kD that contain at their C termini the open reading frame of a
smaller isoform of 58 kD. Cornelis et al. (2000) found that 2 PITSLRE
protein kinase isoforms, p110 and p58, are translated from a single
transcript by initiation at alternative in-frame AUG codons. p110 is
produced by classic cap-dependent translation, whereas p58 results from
internal initiation of translation controlled by an internal ribosome
entry site (IRES) with unique properties. The IRES element is localized
to the mRNA coding region, and its activity is cell cycle regulated,
permitting translation of p58 in G2/M.

Loyer et al. (2008) stated that both CDC2L2 and CDC2L1 can produce a
third isoform, p46, by caspase-dependent proteolysis of either the p110
or p58 isoforms. By immunofluorescence analysis of several human cell
lines, they detected p110 in both nucleoplasm and nuclear speckles.
Western blot analysis showed robust expression of p110 in several human
cell lines and in activated human peripheral blood cells. Only activated
blood cells expressed p58 and p46. Size exclusion chromatography of HeLa
cells revealed that p110 fractionated with protein complexes of about
170 kD to over 1 MDa.

GENE FUNCTION

Advanced-stage neuroblastoma (256700) and tumor-derived cell lines
consistently contain a deletion of 1 allele of the distal short arm of
chromosome 1. The deletion correlates with enhanced metastatic
potential, suggesting that inactivation of a tumor suppressor gene or
genes on 1p may contribute to the pathogenesis of these tumors. Lahti et
al. (1994) demonstrated that 1 allele of the entire CDC2L gene complex
was either deleted or translocated in 18 of 20 neuroblastoma cell lines
investigated. They suggested that the CDC2L gene complex may harbor 1 or
more tumor suppressor genes affected by chromosome 1p36 modifications in
neuroblastoma.

By immunoprecipitation analysis and protein pull-down assays with human
cell lines, Loyer et al. (2008) found that p110 CDK11 associated with
the alpha and beta isoforms of cyclin L1 (CCNL1; 613384) and L2 (CCNL2;
613482) in a high molecular mass complex that showed splicing activity.
The p58 and p46 CDK11 isoforms interacted more weakly with the cyclin L
alpha isoforms. In vivo splicing assays showed that expression of cyclin
L1-alpha, L1-beta, L2-alpha, or L2-beta and/or p110 CDK11 increased
intron-splicing activity and altered alternative splice-site selection
in a cyclin L1 and L2 isoform- and cell type-specific manner. In
contrast with p110 CDK11, p58 and p46 CDK11 reduced splicing activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gururajan et al. (1998) determined the structure of the 140-kb CDC2L
genomic region. This region consists of 2 identical genomic segments
arranged in a tail-to-tail configuration. Each segment contains a CDC2L
gene linked to an MMP gene. See MMP21 (603320). In each case, the most
widely expressed products of the CDC2L gene are derived from a genomic
region that is composed of 20 exons and spans approximately 20 kb. The
authors reported that only 15 amino acids of the 773-786 residues that
encode the multiple CDC2L isoforms are unique to either CDC2L1 or
CDC2L2.

Feng et al. (2004) found that the promoter region of the CDK11A gene is
CG rich and does not contain TATA and CAAT boxes. They identified 2 ETS1
(164720)-binding sites, a cAMP-responsive element (see CREB1; 123810),
and a TCF11 (NFE2L1; 163260)-binding site. Feng et al. (2004) confirmed
binding of ETS1 and CREB1 to the CDK11A promoter region in vitro and in
vivo.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Lahti et al. (1994) mapped the
CDC2L2 gene to 1p36.3.

HISTORY

Protein kinase p58 (CDC2L1; 176873) is a human cell division control
(CDC)-related molecule that is structurally and functionally related to
p34 (CDC2; 116940). Whereas the p58 gene is located on 1p36, Eipers et
al. (1991) found by mouse-human somatic cell hybrid studies that a
highly related p58 sequence maps to chromosome 15. Subsequently, the
CDC2L2 gene on chromosome 15 was retired by the HUGO Nomenclature
Committee. The designation CDC2L2 represents a gene on 1p36.

Although Lahti et al. (1994) reported that a third gene, PITSLRE C, was
also present in the region of 1p36 containing the PITSLRE A and PITSLRE
B genes, Gururajan et al. (1998) found that PITSLRE C does not exist.

REFERENCE 1. Cornelis, S.; Bruynooghe, Y.; Denecker, G.; Van Huffel, S.; Tinton,
S.; Beyaert, R.: Identification and characterization of a novel cell
cycle-regulated internal ribosome entry site. Molec. Cell 5: 597-605,
2000.

2. Eipers, P. G.; Barnoski, B. L.; Han, J.; Carroll, A. J.; Kidd,
V. J.: Localization of the expressed human p58 protein kinase chromosomal
gene to chromosome 1p36 and a highly related sequence to chromosome
15. Genomics 11: 621-629, 1991.

3. Feng, Y.; Goulet, A.-C.; Nelson, M. A.: Identification and characterization
of the human Cdc2l2 gene promoter. Gene 330: 75-84, 2004.

4. Gururajan, R.; Grenet, J.; Lahti, J. M.; Kidd, V. J.: Isolation
and characterization of two novel metalloproteinase genes linked to
the Cdc2L locus on human chromosome 1p36.3. Genomics 52: 101-106,
1998.

5. Gururajan, R.; Lahti, J. M.; Grenet, J.; Easton, J.; Gruber, I.;
Ambros, P. F.; Kidd, V. J.: Duplication of a genomic region containing
the Cdc2L1-2 and MMP21-22 genes on human chromosome 1p36.3 and their
linkage to D1Z2. Genome Res. 8: 929-939, 1998.

6. Lahti, J. M.; Valentine, M.; Xiang, J.; Jones, B.; Amann, J.; Grenet,
J.; Richmond, G.; Look, A. T.; Kidd, V. J.: Alterations in the PITSLRE
protein kinase gene complex on chromosome 1p36 in childhood neuroblastoma. Nature
Genet. 7: 370-375, 1994.

7. Loyer, P.; Trembley, J. H.; Grenet, J. A.; Busson, A.; Corlu, A.;
Zhao, W.; Kocak, M.; Kidd, V. J.; Lahti, J. M.: Characterization
of cyclin L1 and L2 interactions with CDK11 and splicing factors:
influence of cyclin L isoforms on splice site selection. J. Biol.
Chem. 283: 7721-7732, 2008.

8. Xiang, J.; Lahti, J. M.; Grenet, J.; Easton, J.; Kidd, V. J.:
Molecular cloning and expression of alternatively spliced PITSLRE
protein kinase isoforms. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 15786-15794, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/3/2012
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 6/20/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 11/30/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/2/1992

EDITED mgross: 08/07/2012
mgross: 8/7/2012
terry: 8/3/2012
alopez: 11/19/2010
mgross: 6/20/2000
alopez: 11/30/1998
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/2/1992

602178	TITLE *602178 CHONDROADHERIN; CHAD
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Chondroadherin (CHAD) was initially described by Larsson et al. (1991)
as a 36-kD matrix protein isolated from bovine cartilage. It was shown
to mediate chondrocyte-matrix interactions. Analysis of cDNA generated
from a bovine chondrocyte mRNA demonstrated that chondroadherin belongs
to the family of leucine-rich repeat (LRR) proteins. Of the LRR
proteins, chondroadherin is most closely related to the proteoglycans
decorin (125255), biglycan (301870), fibromodulin (600245), and lumican
(600616), and the matrix protein PRELP (601914). Each of these molecules
is present in the extracellular matrix of cartilage, each possesses 10
adjacent LRR regions flanked by disulfide-bonded domains, and each
possesses consensus motifs within the LRR regions for N-linked
glycosylation.

Grover et al. (1997) cloned a cDNA of the human CHAD gene using
PCR-based techniques. The gene encodes a protein of 359 amino acids, of
which the first 21 amino acids represent a putative signal peptide
sequence. It possesses 11 leucine-rich repeats flanked by cysteine-rich
regions. The cDNA has a 5-prime untranslated region of 149 bp, a coding
region of 1,080 bp including the stop codon, and a 3-prime untranslated
region of 561 bp terminating in a poly(A) tail. The cDNA hybridized with
a single messenger RNA of 1.9 kb, which is present in chondrocytes at
all ages.

GENE STRUCTURE

Grover et al. (1997) determined that the CHAD gene contains 3 exons.

MAPPING

Using a cosmid clone spanning the CHAD gene, Grover et al. (1997)
assigned the gene to 17q21.33 by PCR analysis of human/hamster somatic
cell hybrids and by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Grover, J.; Chen, X.-N.; Korenberg, J. R.; Roughley, P. J.: The
structure and chromosome location of the human chondroadherin gene
(CHAD). Genomics 45: 379-385, 1997.

2. Larsson, T.; Sommarin, Y.; Paulsson, M.; Antonsson, P.; Hedbom,
E.; Wendel, M.; Heinegard, D.: Cartilage matrix proteins: a basic
36-kDa protein with a restricted distribution to cartilage and bone. J.
Biol. Chem. 266: 20428-20433, 1991.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/12/1997

EDITED alopez: 05/01/2007
mark: 12/14/1997
mark: 12/12/1997

606132	TITLE *606132 CDC42 EFFECTOR PROTEIN 2; CDC42EP2
;;CEP2;;
BINDER OF RHO GTPases 1; BORG1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CDC42 (116952), a small RHO GTPase, regulates the formation of
F-actin-containing structures through its interaction with several
downstream effector proteins. These effectors include the CEPs, also
called the BORGs, all of which contain a CDC42/RAC (602048) interactive
binding (CRIB) motif. The CDC42EP2 gene encodes a CDC42 effector protein
(summary by Hirsch et al., 2001).

CLONING

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen on a mouse embryo cDNA library with TC10
(605857) as the bait, followed by EST database searching, Joberty et al.
(1999) identified cDNAs encoding human and mouse BORG1 (CEP2), BORG2
(CEP3; 606133), BORG3 (CEP5), BORG4 (CEP4; 605468), and BORG5 (CEP1).
Sequence analysis predicted that the 210-amino acid BORG1 protein
contains a CRIB motif followed by a conserved 12-residue BORG homology-1
(BH1) domain in its N terminus; an 11-amino acid BH2 domain in its
central region; and a 22-residue BH3 domain in its C terminus. Northern
blot analysis detected ubiquitous but variable expression of 1.8- and
2.0-kb BORG1 transcripts, with high levels in heart and low levels in
pancreas and liver. By binding analysis, Joberty et al. (1999) confirmed
that BORG1 interacts with TC10 and CDC42. Immunofluorescence microscopy
demonstrated cytoplasmic expression of BORG1. BORG1 expression caused no
dramatic changes in cell shape and a reduced abundance of stress fibers.
Coexpression of BORG1 with CDC42 resulted in cells showing a 'porcupine'
phenotype characterized by an abundance of actin-filled spikes.

By EST database searching with CEP1 as the probe, Hirsch et al. (2001)
identified cDNAs encoding several CEPs, including CEP2. They referred to
the BH2 and BH3 domains as CI and CII, respectively, and considered the
BH1 domain to be part of an extended CRIB motif. Hirsch et al. (2001)
proposed that these motifs are potential signaling domains. Fluorescence
microscopy demonstrated cytoplasmic and membrane expression of CEP2 in
keratinocytes, with notable localization in a perinuclear cytoplasmic
compartment.

MAPPING

Scott (2001) mapped the CEP2 gene to 11q12-q13 based on identity between
the CEP2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF098290) and a chromosome 11 clone
(GenBank GENBANK AC000353).

REFERENCE 1. Hirsch, D. S.; Pirone, D. M.; Burbelo, P. D.: A new family of
Cdc42 effector proteins, CEPs, function in fibroblast and epithelial
cell shape changes. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 875-883, 2001.

2. Joberty, G.; Perlungher, R. R.; Macara, I. G.: The Borgs, a new
family of Cdc42 and TC10 GTPase-interacting proteins. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 19: 6585-6597, 1999.

3. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  7/20/2001.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/20/2001

EDITED alopez: 04/04/2012
mgross: 8/30/2002
mgross: 7/20/2001

614983	TITLE *614983 BASIC LEUCINE ZIPPER TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR, ATF-LIKE 2; BATF2
;;SUPPRESSOR OF ACTIVATOR PROTEIN 1, REGULATED BY INTERFERON; SARI;;
SUPPRESSOR OF AP1, REGULATED BY IFN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

BATF2 downregulates cell growth by inhibiting the transcriptional
activity of activator protein-1 (AP1; see 165160), an important
regulator of cell proliferation and oncogenic transformation (Su et al.,
2008).

CLONING

Using differential expression analysis to identify genes upregulated by
interferon (IFN)-beta (147640) in human melanoma cells, Su et al. (2008)
identified BATF2, which they called SARI. The deduced 274-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of 29.4 kD. SARI has an
N-terminal basic region, followed by an L-X(6)-L-X(6)-L-X(6)-L motif,
suggesting that it may be a basic leucine zipper-containing
transcription factor. Northern blot analysis of 23 human tissues and
peripheral blood leukocytes detected highest SARI expression in pancreas
and spleen. Expression was moderate in colon, heart, kidney, liver,
lung, and prostate, low in placenta, stomach, small intestine, and
salivary gland, and absent in several tissues, including brain, muscle,
and testis.

GENE FUNCTION

Su et al. (2008) found that INF-beta-induced expression of SARI or
overexpression of SARI in AP1-dependent human cancer cell lines
inhibited clonogenic cell growth and anchorage-independent growth and
induced apoptosis. SARI overexpression also inhibited tumor formation by
AP1-dependent DU-145 prostate cancer cells in xenografts in athymic nude
mice. In contrast, overexpression of SARI in normal human cells had no
effect on cell growth or viability. Knockdown of SARI in HeLa cells
abrogated IFN-beta-induced growth inhibition. Using protein interaction
reporter gene assays, Su et al. (2008) found that SARI inhibited
AP1-dependent cell growth by binding to JUN and blocking interaction of
AP1 with DNA, thereby inhibiting AP1-dependent gene expression.

CCN1 (CYR61; 602369) is a secretory integrin-binding protein that
regulates angiogenesis, cell adhesion, migration, proliferation,
survival, and apoptosis. Dash et al. (2010) showed that, by inhibiting
binding of AP1 to the CCN1 promoter, overexpression of SARI reduced CCN1
mRNA and protein expression, which attenuated CCN1-dependent downstream
signaling via ERK (see 176948) and AKT (see 164730)/PI3 kinase (see
601232) pathways.

Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML; 608232) is a common malignancy
characterized by expression of the fused oncogene BCR (151410)-ABL
(189980). BCR-ABL shows constitutive tyrosine kinase activity and
induces growth factor-independent cell growth via several signaling
pathways, including JAK (see 147795)/STAT (see 600555), PI3 kinase/AKT,
and RAS (190020)/MAPK. Huang et al. (2011) showed that SARI expression
was suppressed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of CML patients
compared with normal controls. Knockdown of BCR-ABL via small
interfering RNA (siRNA) in primary CML cells or K562 myelogenous
leukemia cells upregulated SARI expression. Treatment of cells with
inhibitors of JAK/STAT or RAS/MAPK, but not of PI3 kinase, also resulted
in SARI upregulation. Treatment of K562 cells with siRNA against SARI
decreased apoptosis induced by a BCR-ABL kinase inhibitor, suggesting
that SARI inhibits tumor cell growth by promoting apoptosis.

BATF3 (612470) is required for homeostatic development of CD8-alpha
(CD8A; 186910)-positive classical dendritic cells that prime CD8 T-cell
responses against intracellular pathogens. Tussiwand et al. (2012)
identified an alternative, Batf3-independent pathway in mice for
Cd8-alpha-positive dendritic cell development operating during infection
with intracellular pathogens and mediated by the cytokines
interleukin-12 (IL12; 161560) and interferon-gamma (IFNG; 147570). This
alternative pathway resulted from molecular compensation for Batf3
provided by the related AP1 factors Batf (612476), which also functions
in T and B cells, and Batf2 induced by cytokines in response to
infection. Reciprocally, physiologic compensation between Batf and Batf3
also occurred in T cells for expression of Il10 (124092) and Ctla4
(123890). Compensation among BATF factors was based on the shared
capacity of their leucine zipper domains to interact with non-AP1
factors such as Irf4 (601900) and Irf8 (601565) to mediate cooperative
gene activation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Su et al. (2008) determined that the BATF2 gene contains 3 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Su et al. (2008) mapped the BATF2 gene to
chromosome 11q12-q13.

REFERENCE 1. Dash, R.; Su, Z.-Z.; Lee, S.-G.; Azab, B.; Boukerche, H.; Sarkar,
D.; Fisher, P. B.: Inhibition of AP-1 by SARI negatively regulates
transformation progression mediated by CCN1. Oncogene 29: 4412-4423,
2010.

2. Huang, Q.; Yang, Y.; Li, X.; Huang, S.: Transcription suppression
of SARI (suppressor of AP-1, regulated by IFN) by BCR-ABL in human
leukemia cells. Tumor Biol. 32: 1191-1197, 2011.

3. Su, Z.-z; Lee, S.-G.; Emdad, L.; Lebdeva, I. V.; Gupta, P.; Valerie,
K.; Sarkar, D.; Fisher, P. B.: Cloning and characterization of SARI
(suppressor of AP-1, regulated by IFN). Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105:
20906-20911, 2008.

4. Tussiwand, R.; Lee, W.-L.; Murphy, T. L.; Mashayekhi, M.; Wumesh
KC; Albring, J. C.; Satpathy, A. T.; Rotondo, J. A.; Edelson, B. T.;
Kretzer, N. M.; Wu, X.; Weiss, L. A.; and 12 others: Compensatory
dendritic cell development mediated by BATF-IRF interactions. Nature 490:
502-507, 2012.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/14/2012

EDITED mgross: 12/14/2012

146738	TITLE *146738 INSULIN-LIKE 3; INSL3
;;INSULIN-LIKE PEPTIDE, LEYDIG CELL-SPECIFIC;;
RELAXIN-LIKE FACTOR; RLF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Leydig insulin-like protein belongs to the insulin-like hormone
superfamily (Adham et al., 1993), which comprises insulin (176730),
relaxin (179730), and insulin-like growth factors I (IGF1; 147440) and
II (IGF2; 147470). The members of this family are characterized by a
signal peptide, a B-chain, a connecting C-peptide, and an A-chain.
Burkhardt et al. (1994) reported the isolation and sequencing of the
human Leydig insulin-like protein. The deduced amino acid sequence of
the pro-Leydig insulin-like protein has a primary structure more similar
to that of proinsulin than to pro-IGF1 and pro-IGF2. The protein,
designated INSL3, is expressed exclusively in prenatal and postnatal
Leydig cells.

GENE FUNCTION

To determine the functional region of the mouse Insl3 promoter and
factors controlling Insl3 gene expression, Zimmermann et al. (1998) used
2.1 kb of the 5-prime-flanking region of the mouse Insl3 gene to
generate chimeric constructs with the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
(CAT) gene. Transient transfections of MA10 Leydig cells, LTK-
fibroblasts, and F9 embryonic cells by a series of 5-prime-deleted mouse
Insl3 promoter-CAT constructs revealed that the sequence between
nucleotides -157 and +4 directed the transcription of the reporter gene
in MA10 but not in LTK- and F9 cells, indicating that the determinants
of Leydig cell-specific expression reside within this region. DNase I
footprint analysis revealed that the sequences designated SF-1/1,
SF-1/2, and SF-1/3 within 3 DNase I-protected regions are homologous to
the consensus binding site of steroidogenic factor-1 (SF1; 184757). The
authors concluded that SF1 plays an essential role in transcriptional
activation of the Insl3 promoter.

Kumagai et al. (2002) noted that, like male mice lacking Insl3, male
mice lacking the Lgr8 gene (606655) show cryptorchidism. Using HEK293
cells transfected with human LGR8, they demonstrated increased cAMP
production following treatment with human, rat, or ovine INSL3.
Crosslinking experiments confirmed direct interaction between INSL3 and
LGR8. Cultured rat gubernacular cells expressed endogenous Lgr8, and
treatment with Insl3 led to a dose-dependent increase in cAMP production
and increased cell proliferation. Kumagai et al. (2002) concluded that
LGR8 is a cellular receptor for INSL3.

Wikstrom et al. (2006) studied changes in INSL3 levels during
spontaneous puberty in healthy boys, boys with aromatase
inhibitor-induced hypergonadotropic hyperandrogenism, and boys with
Leydig cell dysfunction (Klinefelter syndrome). Onset of puberty was
associated with a significant increase in INSL3 levels. Adult INSL3
levels (greater than 0.55 ng/ml) were attained at bone ages of 13 to 14
years. Boys with letrozole-induced hypergonadotropic hyperandrogenism
had, after 12 months of therapy, higher INSL3 levels than did
placebo-treated boys. In Klinefelter syndrome boys during spontaneous
puberty, after an initial increase similar to that in healthy boys, INSL
concentrations leveled off despite hyperstimulation by luteinizing
hormone (LH; see 152780). Positive correlations occurred between serum
INSL3 and LH and between INSL3 and testosterone levels in all 3 groups
(P less than 0.0001). The authors concluded that serum INSL3
concentrations may serve as novel markers for onset and normal
progression of puberty.

GENE STRUCTURE

Burkhardt et al. (1994) reported that the INSL3 gene comprises 2 exons
and 1 intron, and that the organization of the gene is similar to that
of insulin and relaxin. The transcription start site is localized 14 bp
upstream of the translation start site. The human genome contains a
single copy of the INSL3 gene.

MAPPING

By isotopic in situ hybridization, Burkhardt et al. (1994) mapped the
INSL3 gene to 19p13.2-p12.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Tomboc et al. (2000) used SSCP analysis to screen the coding regions of
the 2-exon INSL3 gene in genomic DNA samples obtained from 145 formerly
cryptorchid patients and 36 adult male controls. Two mutations and
several polymorphisms were identified. Both mutations were located in
the connecting peptide region of the protein. The authors concluded that
the frequency of INSL3 gene mutations as a cause of cryptorchidism is
low, because only 2 of 145 (1.4%) formerly cryptorchid patients were
found to have mutations: arg63 to ter (R63X; 146738.0005), which was
likely to be pathogenetic because it was found in a boy with undescended
right testis and history of incarcerated right inguinal hernia, and
pro93 to leu (P93L; 146738.0002), which was found in an 8-month-old baby
with nonpalpable intraabdominal right testis.

Canto et al. (2003) studied genomic DNA from 150 patients with
idiopathic cryptorchidism. A heterozygous asn86-to-lys mutation (N86K;
146738.0001) in the INSL3 gene was found in 1 patient whose mother was a
heterozygous carrier of the mutation and whose father was homozygous
wildtype.

Ferlin et al. (2003) sequenced the INSL3 and LGR8 genes in a cohort of
87 patients with corrected cryptorchidism and 80 controls and found 3
mutations in the INSL3 gene in 4 patients (e.g., 146738.0002) and 1 LGR8
mutation (T222P; 606655.0001) in 4 patients (8 of 87, 9.2%). The authors
concluded that INSL3-LGR8 mutations are frequently associated with human
cryptorchidism and are maternally inherited.

ANIMAL MODEL

Nef and Parada (1999) showed that mice mutant for Insl3, which is
expressed in the developing testis, are viable, but exhibit bilateral
cryptorchidism due to developmental abnormalities of the gubernaculum,
resulting in abnormal spermatogenesis and infertility. Female
homozygotes have impaired fertility associated with deregulation of the
estrous cycle. The findings revealed roles for INSL3 in the development
of the urogenital tract and in female fertility. INSL3 may act as a
hormone to regulate the growth and differentiation of the gubernaculum,
thereby mediating intraabdominal testicular descent.

Zimmermann et al. (1999) also reported that mice deficient in Insl3
displayed bilateral cryptorchidism and gubernaculum feminization during
embryogenesis. The findings of Nef and Parada (1999) differed from those
of Zimmermann et al. (1999) in 2 respects: first, Nef and Parada (1999)
found that heterozygous mice had partial cryptorchidism, suggesting
dosage sensitivity of Insl3 for testicular descent. In contrast,
Zimmermann et al. (1999) did not observe delays in testicular descent in
heterozygous males. The heterozygous phenotype appeared to resemble most
cases of human cryptorchidism, where partial testicular descent at birth
often self-corrects. In the second place, Zimmermann et al. (1999) found
no effects on the estrous cycle.

Adham et al. (2002) investigated whether in vivo the Insl3-mediated
gubernaculum development is independent of androgens. They generated
transgenic male and female mice that overexpressed Insl3 in the pancreas
during fetal and postnatal life. Expression of the transgenic allele in
the Insl3-deficient mice rescued the cryptorchidism in male mutants,
indicating that the islet beta-cells efficiently processed the Insl3
gene product to the functional hormone. All transgenic females displayed
bilateral inguinal hernia. The processus vaginalis developed containing
intestinal loops. The mullerian derivatives gave rise to oviduct,
uterus, and upper vagina, and wolffian duct derivatives were missing,
indicating the absence of the androgen- and anti-mullerian
hormone-mediated activities in transgenic females. The ovaries descended
into a position over the bladder and attached to the abdominal wall via
the well developed cranial suspensory ligament and the gubernaculum.
Administration of dihydrotestosterone during prenatal development
suppressed formation of the cranial suspensory ligament and thereby
allowed the descent of the ovaries into the processus vaginalis. The
authors concluded that Insl3-mediated activity induces gubernaculum
development and precludes a role of androgen in this process.
Furthermore, they noted that the transgenic females exhibited reduced
fertility, which is due to fetal mortality during midgestation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CRYPTORCHIDISM
INSL3, ASN86LYS

In 1 of 150 patients with idiopathic cryptorchidism (219050), Canto et
al. (2003) found a heterozygous 2560C-G transversion in exon 2 of the
INSL3 gene, resulting in an asn86-to-lys (N86K) substitution in the
A-chain of the protein. The change was considered probably deleterious
because it led to a nonconservative amino acid substitution, changing a
highly conserved residue.

.0002
CRYPTORCHIDISM
INSL3, PRO69LEU

In a patient with unilateral cryptorchidism (219050), Tomboc et al.
(2000) identified a heterozygous 2511C-T transition in the INSL3 gene,
resulting in a pro69-to-leu (P69L) substitution.

In a patient with unilateral cryptorchidism, Ferlin et al. (2003)
detected the same mutation, which they reported as a heterozygous 278C-T
transition in the INSL3 gene that caused a pro93-to-leu (P93L) change
within an alpha-helix of the insulin-like-3 protein. The mutation was
inherited from the phenotypically normal mother.

.0003
CRYPTORCHIDISM
INSL3, ARG102CYS

In a patient with unilateral cryptorchidism (219050) originally reported
by Marin et al. (2001), Ferlin et al. (2003) found a heterozygous 304C-T
transition in the INSL3 gene that caused an arg102-to-cys (R102C) amino
acid change. The mutation was inherited from the mother, whose history
was negative for reproductive dysfunction and any other pathologic
condition.

.0004
CRYPTORCHIDISM
INSL3, ARG102HIS

In 2 patients with bilateral cryptorchidism (219050) with bilateral
severe testiculopathy, Ferlin et al. (2003) detected a heterozygous
305G-A transition in the INSL3 gene that caused an arg102-to-his (R102H)
change in the insulin-like-3 protein.

.0005
CRYPTORCHIDISM
INSL3, ARG49TER

In a patient with unilateral cryptorchidism (219050), Tomboc et al.
(2000) identified a 2450C-T transition in the INSL3 gene, resulting in
an arg49-to-ter (R49X) substitution.

REFERENCE 1. Adham, I. M.; Burkhardt, E.; Benahmed, M.; Engel, W.: Cloning
of a cDNA for a novel insulin-like hormone of the testicular Leydig
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 26668-26672, 1993.

2. Adham, I. M.; Steding, G.; Thamm, T.; Bullesbach, E. E.; Schwabe,
C.; Paprotta, I.; Engel, W.: The overexpression of the Insl3 in female
mice causes descent of the ovaries. Molec. Endocr. 16: 244-252,
2002.

3. Burkhardt, E.; Adham, I. M.; Brosig, B.; Gastmann, A.; Mattei,
M.-G.; Engel, W.: Structural organization of the porcine and human
genes coding for a Leydig cell-specific insulin-like peptide (LEY
I-L) and chromosomal localization of the human gene (INSL3). Genomics 20:
13-19, 1994.

4. Canto, P.; Escudero, I.; Soderlund, D.; Nishimura, E.; Carranza-Lira,
S.; Gutierrez, J.; Nava, A.; Mendez, J. P.: A novel mutation of the
insulin-like 3 gene in patients with cryptorchidism. J. Hum. Genet. 48:
86-90, 2003.

5. Ferlin, A.; Simonato, M.; Bartoloni, L.; Rizzo, G.; Bettella, A.;
Dottorini, T.; Dallapiccola, B.; Foresta, C.: The INSL3-LGR8/GREAT
ligand-receptor pair in human cryptorchidism. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88:
4273-4279, 2003.

6. Kumagai, J.; Hsu, S. Y.; Matsumi, H.; Roh, J.-S.; Fu, P.; Wade,
J. D.; Bathgate, R. A. D.; Hsueh, A. J. W.: INSL3/leydig insulin-like
peptide activates the LGR8 receptor important in testis descent. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 31283-31286, 2002.

7. Marin, P.; Ferlin, A.; Moro, E.; Rossi, A.; Bartoloni, L.; Rossato,
M.; Foresta, C.: Novel insulin-like 3 (INSL3) gene mutation associated
with human cryptorchidism. Am. J. Med. Genet. 103: 348-349, 2001.

8. Nef, S.; Parada, L. F.: Cryptorchidism in mice mutant for Insl3. Nature
Genet. 22: 295-299, 1999.

9. Tomboc, M.; Lee, P. E.; Mitwally, M. F.; Schneck, F. X.; Bellinger,
M.; Witchel, S. F.: Insulin-like 3/relaxin-like factor gene mutations
are associated with cryptorchidism. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85:
4013-4018, 2000.

10. Wikstrom, A. M.; Bay, K.; Hero, M.; Andersson, A.-M.; Dunkel,
L.: Serum insulin-like factor 3 levels during puberty in healthy
boys and boys with Klinefelter syndrome. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 91:
4705-4708, 2006.

11. Zimmermann, S.; Schwarzler, A.; Buth, S.; Engel, W.; Adham, I.
M.: Transcription of the Leydig insulin-like gene is mediated by
steroidogenic factor-1. Molec. Endocr. 12: 706-713, 1998.

12. Zimmermann, S.; Steding, G.; Emmen, J. M.; Brinkmann, A. O.; Nayernia,
K.; Holstein, A. F.; Engel, W.; Adham, I. M.: Targeted disruption
of the Insl3 gene causes bilateral cryptorchidism. Molec. Endocr. 13:
681-691, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/1/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/11/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/26/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/9/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/10/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/3/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/24/1999
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/15/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/6/1994

EDITED carol: 09/13/2012
terry: 9/26/2008
wwang: 1/9/2008
alopez: 10/1/2007
carol: 2/28/2007
alopez: 7/11/2005
carol: 4/2/2003
tkritzer: 3/27/2003
terry: 3/26/2003
mgross: 10/9/2002
alopez: 7/10/2002
mgross: 1/30/2002
cwells: 10/8/2001
cwells: 10/3/2001
kayiaros: 7/13/1999
alopez: 6/29/1999
terry: 6/24/1999
mgross: 4/16/1999
mgross: 4/15/1999
terry: 5/29/1998
carol: 4/6/1994

608489	TITLE *608489 STROMALIN 3; STAG3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Pezzi et al. (2000) identified human and mouse EST fragments homologous
to the conserved nuclear stromalin proteins STAG1 (604358) and STAG2
(300826). Using these ESTs to screen testis cDNA libraries, they cloned
human and mouse STAG3 cDNAs encoding deduced proteins of 1,225 and 1,240
amino acids, respectively. Human STAG3 shares 75% sequence identity with
the mouse Stag3 protein and approximately 45% similarity with human
STAG1 and STAG2. STAG3 contains an acidic C-terminal domain, a 28-amino
acid domain conserved among mammalian stromalins, and an 86-amino acid
domain, designated SCD, conserved among all stromalin family members.
Northern blot analysis of human tissues revealed testis-specific
expression of a 4.5-kb STAG3 transcript. In mouse tissues, the highest
level of expression was found in male germ cells undergoing the first
meiotic division. Using immunofluorescence on developing male germline
cells, Pezzi et al. (2000) showed that STAG3 is associated with the
synaptonemal complex, exhibiting high expression in zygotene cells and
moderate expression in pachytene cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Pezzi et al. (2000) determined that STAG3 contains 34 exons spanning
more than 30 kb.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and radiation hybrid analysis, Pezzi et
al. (2000) mapped the human STAG3 gene to chromosome 7q22. By
interspecific backcross analysis, they mapped the mouse Stag3 gene to
chromosome 5 in a region of conserved synteny with human 7q22.

By genomic sequence analysis, Pezzi et al. (2000) identified 6 truncated
STAG3-like sequences that also mapped to chromosome 7. Pezzi et al.
(2000) noted that 2 of these sequences map to 7q11.23 and flank
breakpoints commonly associated with Williams-Beuren syndrome (194050).

REFERENCE 1. Pezzi, N.; Prieto, I.; Kremer, L.; Perez Jurado, L. A.; Valero,
C.; Del Mazo, J.; Martinez-A, C.; Barbero, J. L.: STAG3, a novel
gene encoding a protein involved in meiotic chromosome pairing and
location of STAG3-related genes flanking the Williams-Beuren syndrome
deletion. FASEB J. 14: 581-592, 2000.

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 2/26/2004

EDITED carol: 11/08/2010
carol: 2/26/2004

164810	TITLE *164810 V-FOS FBJ MURINE OSTEOSARCOMA VIRAL ONCOGENE HOMOLOG; FOS
;;ONCOGENE FOS;;
FBJ OSTEOSARCOMA VIRUS
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The human oncogene c-fos is homologous to the Finkel-Biskis-Jinkins
(FBJ) murine osteosarcoma virus oncogene. FOS was the first
transcription factor identified that has a critical function in
regulating the development of cells destined to form and maintain the
skeleton. FOS is also a major component of the activator protein-1
(AP-1) transcription factor complex, which includes members of the JUN
family (see also 165160).

CLONING

Van Straaten et al. (1983) determined that the human FOS gene encodes a
predicted 380-amino acid protein. Northern blot analysis revealed that
FOS is expressed as a 2.2-kb mRNA in placenta and fetal membranes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Van Straaten et al. (1983) reported that the human FOS gene contains 3
introns and spans approximately 4 kb.

GENE FUNCTION

Muller et al. (1983) reported that the level of the c-fos gene
transcripts is 100-fold greater in human term fetal membranes than in
other normal human tissues and cells. These levels of c-fos expression
in human amniotic and chorionic cells are close to that of v-fos
expression that results in the induction of osteosarcomas in mice and
transformation of fibroblasts in vitro. The human c-fms gene (164770) is
expressed at high levels in term placenta and trophoblastic cells.
Muller et al. (1983) suggested that the physiologic role of the proteins
encoded by the FOS and FMS genes may be related to these embryo-derived
cells whose primary functions are protection and nourishment of the
human fetus. Using the technique of in situ hybridization, Dony and
Gruss (1987) demonstrated that stage-specific expression of the FOS gene
in mouse embryos is restricted to the perichondrial growth regions of
the cartilaginous skeleton. The possibility of a defect in FOS in a
skeletal dysplasia is raised by these findings.

Visvader et al. (1988) described 2 elements in the FOS promoter that can
mediate the induction of FOS by nerve growth factor (162030).

In studies of the Hayflick phenomenon (Hayflick, 1965), i.e., the finite
life span of cultured nonneoplastic cells, Seshadri and Campisi (1990)
demonstrated loss of FOS inducibility as the result of a specific,
transcriptional block. They interpreted the multiple changes in gene
expression as supporting the view that cellular senescence is a process
of terminal differentiation.

The FOS and JUN oncoproteins form dimeric complexes that stimulate
transcription of genes containing AP-1 regulatory elements. Bakin and
Curran (1999) found, by representational difference analysis, that
expression of DNA 5-methylcytosine transferase (DNMT1; 126375) in
FOS-transformed cells is 3 times the expression in normal fibroblasts
and that FOS-transformed cells contain about 20% more 5-methylcytosine
than normal fibroblasts. Transfection of the DNMT1 gene induced
morphologic transformation, whereas inhibition of DNMT1 expression or
activity resulted in reversion of FOS transformation. Inhibition of
histone deacetylase (601241), which associates with methylated DNA, also
caused reversion. These results suggest that FOS may transform cells
through alterations in DNA methylation and in histone deacetylation.

Grigoriadis et al. (1995) reviewed the role of FOS in bone development
and the relationship to SCF1 (120420) and SRC (190090) which have a role
in osteoclast development.

The POMC gene (176830) is occasionally expressed in nonpituitary tumors
leading to Cushing syndrome (219080). Bronchial carcinoid tumors, one of
the most frequent sources for ectopic ACTH secretion, often display
numerous features of the corticotroph phenotype. To identify new markers
of corticotroph differentiation in these tumors, Le Tallec et al. (2002)
compared the pattern of POMC expression in ACTH-secreting (ACTH+) and
nonsecreting (ACTH-) bronchial carcinoids by differential
display/RT-PCR. In ACTH+ tumors, beside the expected POMC gene, they
identified cFos and KIAA1775, a large expressed sequence tag encoding a
putative protocadherin-related protein. On the other hand, the
tetraspanin TM4SF5 gene (604657) was specifically expressed in ACTH-
tumors. The authors concluded that corticotroph differentiation of
bronchial carcinoid tumors is accompanied by induction and repression of
specific genes.

Hikasa et al. (2003) found p21 (CDKN1A; 116899) downregulation in
conjunction with c-fos upregulation in the lymphocytes of patients with
rheumatoid arthritis. Phosphorylation of STAT1 (600555) was also
decreased in rheumatoid arthritis lymphocytes. Hikasa et al. (2003)
determined that c-fos overexpression led to downregulated
phosphorylation and dimerization of STAT1, which in turn downregulated
p21 gene expression. They concluded that this regulatory pathway may
enhance the proliferation of lymphocytes in rheumatoid arthritis
patients.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Glover and Harrison (1995) stated that members of the FOS and JUN
families of eukaryotic transcription factors heterodimerize to form
DNA-binding complexes. Each protein contains a bZIP region consisting of
a basic DNA-binding domain and a leucine zipper domain. The authors
determined the crystal structure of a heterodimer of the bZIP domains of
FOS and JUN bound to DNA.

MAPPING

By study of mouse-human cell hybrids and by in situ hybridization,
Barker et al. (1984) assigned the FOS gene to 14q21-q31. Ekstrand and
Zech (1987) mapped the FOS gene to 14q24.3-q31. They pointed to the high
number of neoplasms that have been found to have aberrations in this
chromosome region.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The long bones of transgenic mice overexpressing the FOS protooncogene
show lesions of fibrous dysplasia characterized by intense marrow
fibrosis and increased rates of bone turnover (Ruther et al., 1987). In
all 8 patients with fibrous dysplasia studied by Candeliere et al.
(1995), high levels of FOS expression were detected in the bone lesions.
No expression of FOS was detected in bone specimens from normal subjects
or from specimens of normal bone obtained from patients with fibrous
dysplasia. The cells that expressed FOS in the dysplastic lesions were
fibroblastic and populated the marrow space. A very low level of FOS
expression was detected in the biopsy specimens from the patients with
other bone diseases. One patient with polyostotic fibrous dysplasia had
the arg201-to-cys mutation (139320.0008) and 1 patient with the
McCune-Albright syndrome (174800) had the arg201-to-his mutation
(139320.0009) in the GNAS1 gene. The increased expression of the FOS
oncogene, presumably a consequence of increased adenylate cyclase
activity, may be important in the pathogenesis of the bone lesions in
patients with fibrous dysplasia.

Rogaev et al. (1993) excluded the FOS open reading frame as the site of
the type 3, or chromosome 14-linked, form of familial Alzheimer disease
(607822).

ANIMAL MODEL

Stable expression of c-fos in mice has been demonstrated in developing
bones and teeth, hematopoietic cells, germ cells, and the central
nervous system. The gene product is thought to have an important role in
signal transduction, cell proliferation, and differentiation. Wang et
al. (1991) demonstrated that overexpression of the gene in transgenic
and chimeric mice specifically affects bone, cartilage, and
hematopoietic cell development. Wang et al. (1992) studied the effects
of lack of c-fos by gene targeting in embryonic stem cells. They
reported that mice heterozygous for lack of the gene appeared normal,
although females exhibited a distorted transmission frequency. All
homozygous fos -/- mice were growth-retarded, developed osteopetrosis
with deficiencies in bone remodeling and tooth eruption, and had altered
hematopoiesis. Johnson et al. (1992) found similar results. Homozygous
mutants showed reduced placental and fetal weights and significant loss
of viability at birth. However, approximately 40% of the homozygous
mutants survived and grew at normal rates until severe osteopetrosis,
characterized by foreshortening of the long bones, ossification of the
marrow space, and absence of tooth eruption, began to develop at
approximately 11 days. Among other abnormalities, these mice showed
delayed or absent gametogenesis, lymphopenia, and altered behavior.
Despite these defects, many lived as long as their wildtype or
heterozygous littermates (currently 7 months).

Grigoriadis et al. (1994) found that FOS mutant mice that develop
osteopetrosis have a block in the differentiation of bone-resorbing
osteoclasts that was intrinsic to hematopoietic cells. Bone marrow
transplantation rescued the osteopetrosis, and ectopic FOS expression
overcame the differentiation block. The lack of FOS also caused a
lineage shift between osteoclasts and macrophages that resulted in
increased numbers of bone marrow macrophages. These results indicated
that FOS is a key regulator of osteoclast-macrophage lineage
determination in vivo.

Using the multistep skin carcinogenesis model, Saez et al. (1995) tested
the ability of c-fos-deficient mice to develop cancer. Upon treatment
with a tumor promoter, c-fos knockout mice carrying a v-H-ras transgene
were able to develop benign tumors with similar kinetics and relative
incidence as wildtype animals. However, c-fos-deficient papillomas
quickly became very dry and hyperkeratotic, taking on an elongated,
horny appearance. While wildtype papillomas eventually progressed into
malignant tumors, c-fos-deficient tumors failed to undergo malignant
conversion. Experiments in which v-H-ras-expressing keratinocytes were
grafted onto nude mice suggested that c-fos-deficient cells have an
intrinsic defect that hinders tumorigenesis. The results of Saez et al.
(1995) suggested that a member of the AP-1 family of transcription
factors is required for the development of a malignant tumor.

Excitotoxicity is a process in which glutamate or other excitatory amino
acids induce neuronal cell death. Excitotoxicity may contribute to human
neuronal cell death caused by acute insults and chronic degeneration in
the central nervous system. Evidence suggests that FOS is essential in
regulating neuronal cell survival versus death. Although FOS is induced
by neuronal activity, whether and how FOS is involved in excitotoxicity
was unknown. To address this issue, Zhang et al. (2002) generated a
mouse in which FOS expression was largely eliminated in the hippocampus.
They found that these mutant mice had more severe kainic acid-induced
seizures, increased neuronal excitability, and neuronal cell death,
compared with control mice. Moreover, FOS regulates the expression of
the kainic acid receptor GLUR6 (138244) and brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF; 113505), both in vivo and in vitro. The results suggested
that FOS is a genetic regulator for cellular mechanisms mediating
neuronal excitability and survival.

Using a Drosophila model synapse, Sanyal et al. (2002) analyzed cellular
functions and regulation of the immediate-early transcription factor
AP-1, a heterodimer of the basic leucine zipper proteins FOS and JUN
(165160). They observed that AP-1 positively regulates synaptic strength
and synapse number, thus showing a greater range of influence than CREB
(123810). Observations from genetic epistasis and RNA quantification
experiments indicate that AP-1 acts upstream of CREB, regulates levels
of CREB mRNA, and functions at the top of the hierarchy of transcription
factors known to regulate long-term plasticity. A JUN-kinase signaling
module provided a CREB-independent route for neuronal AP-1 activation;
thus, CREB regulation of AP-1 expression may, in some neurons,
constitute a positive feedback loop rather than the primary step in AP-1
activation.

David et al. (2005) demonstrated that ribosomal protein S6 kinase-2
(RSK2; 300075)-null mice develop progressive osteopenia due to impaired
osteoblast function and normal osteoclast differentiation. They also
observed that c-fos-dependent osteosarcoma formation was impaired in the
absence of Rsk2; the lack of c-fos phosphorylation led to reduced c-fos
protein levels, which were thought to be responsible for the observed
decreased proliferation and increased apoptosis of transformed
osteoblasts. David et al. (2005) concluded that Rsk2-dependent
stabilization of c-fos is essential for osteosarcoma formation in mice.

REFERENCE 1. Bakin, A. V.; Curran, T.: Role of DNA 5-methylcytosine transferase
in cell transformation by fos. Science 283: 387-390, 1999.

2. Barker, P. E.; Rabin, M.; Watson, M.; Breg, W. R.; Ruddle, F. H.;
Verma, I. M.: Human c-fos oncogene mapped within chromosomal region
14q21-q31. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 81: 5826-5830, 1984.

3. Candeliere, G. A.; Glorieux, F. H.; Prud'homme, J.; St.-Arnaud,
R.: Increased expression of the c-fos proto-oncogene in bone from
patients with fibrous dysplasia. New Eng. J. Med. 332: 1546-1551,
1995.

4. David, J.-P.; Mehic, D.; Bakiri, L.; Schilling, A. F.; Mandic,
V.; Priemel, M.; Idarraga, M. H.; Reschke, M. O.; Hoffmann, O.; Amling,
M.; Wagner, E. F.: Essential role of RSK2 in c-Fos-dependent osteosarcoma
development. J. Clin. Invest. 115: 664-672, 2005.

5. Dony, C.; Gruss, P.: Proto-oncogene c-fos expression in growth
regions of fetal bone and mesodermal web tissue. Nature 328: 711-714,
1987.

6. Ekstrand, A. J.; Zech, L.: Human c-fos proto-oncogene mapped to
chromosome 14, band q24.3-q31: possibilities for oncogene activation
by chromosomal rearrangements in human neoplasms. Exp. Cell Res. 169:
262-266, 1987.

7. Glover, J. N. M.; Harrison, S. C.: Crystal structure of the heterodimeric
bZIP transcription factor c-Fos--c-Jun bound to DNA. Nature 373:
257-261, 1995.

8. Grigoriadis, A. E.; Wang, Z.-Q.; Cecchini, M. G.; Hofstetter, W.;
Felix, R.; Fleisch, H. A.; Wagner, E. F.: c-Fos: a key regulator
of osteoclast-macrophage lineage determination and bone remodeling. Science 266:
443-448, 1994.

9. Grigoriadis, A. E.; Wang, Z.-Q.; Wagner, E. F.: Fos and bone cell
development: lessons from a nuclear oncogene. Trends Genet. 11:
:436-441, 1995.

10. Hayflick, L.: The limited in vitro lifetime of human diploid
cell strains. Exp. Cell Res. 37: 614-636, 1965.

11. Hikasa, M.; Yamamoto, E.; Kawasaki, H.; Komai, K.; Shiozawa, K.;
Hashiramoto, A.; Miura, Y.; Shiozawa, S.: p21(waf1/cip1) is down-regulated
in conjunction with up-regulation of c-Fos in the lymphocytes of rheumatoid
arthritis patients. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 304: 143-147,
2003.

12. Johnson, R. S.; Spiegelman, B. M.; Papaioannou, V.: Pleiotropic
effects of a null mutation in the c-fos proto-oncogene. Cell 71:
577-586, 1992.

13. Le Tallec, L. P.; Dulmet, E.; Bertagna, X.; De Keyzer, Y.: Identification
of genes associated with the corticotroph phenotype in bronchial carcinoid
tumors. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 5015-5022, 2002.

14. Muller, R.; Tremblay, J. M.; Adamson, E. D.; Verma, I. M.: Tissue
and cell type-specific expression of two human c-onc genes. Nature 304:
454-456, 1983.

15. Rogaev, E. I.; Lukiw, W. J.; Vaula, G.; Haines, J. L.; Rogaeva,
E. A.; Tsuda, T.; Alexandrova, N.; Liang, Y.; Mortilla, M.; Amaducci,
L.; Bergamini, L.; Bruni, A. C.; Foncin, J.-F.; Macciardi, F.; Montesi,
M. P.; Sorbi, S.; Rainero, I.; Pinessi, L.; Polinsky, R. J.; Frommelt,
P.; Duara, R.; Lopez, R.; Pollen, D.; Gusella, J. F.; Tanzi, R.; Crapper
MacLachlan, D.; St. George-Hyslop, P. H.: Analysis of the c-FOS gene
on chromosome 14 and the promoter of the amyloid precursor protein
gene in familial Alzheimer's disease. Neurology 43: 2275-2279, 1993.

16. Ruther, U.; Garber, C.; Komitowski, D.; Muller, R.; Wagner, E.
F.: Deregulated c-fos expression interferes with normal bone development
in transgenic mice. Nature 325: 412-416, 1987.

17. Saez, E.; Rutberg, S. E.; Mueller, E.; Oppenheim, H.; Smoluk,
J.; Yuspa, S. H.; Spiegelman, B. M.: c-fos is required for malignant
progression of skin tumors. Cell 82: 721-732, 1995.

18. Sanyal, S.; Sandstrom, D. J.; Hoeffer, C. A.; Ramaswami, M.:
AP-1 function upstream of CREB to control synaptic plasticity in Drosophila. Nature 416:
870-874, 2002.

19. Seshadri, T.; Campisi, J.: Repression of c-fos transcription
and an altered genetic program in senescent human fibroblasts. Science 247:
205-209, 1990.

20. van Straaten, F.; Muller, R.; Curran, T.; Van Beveren, C.; Verma,
I. M.: Complete nucleotide sequence of a human c-onc gene: deduced
amino acid sequence of the human c-fos protein. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 80: 3183-3187, 1983.

21. Visvader, J.; Sassone-Corsi, P.; Verma, I. M.: Two adjacent promoter
elements mediate nerve growth factor activation of the c-fos gene
and bind distinct nuclear complexes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 9474-9478,
1988.

22. Wang, Z.-Q.; Grigoriadis, A. E.; Mohle-Steinlein, U.; Wagner,
E. F.: A novel target cell for c-fos-induced oncogenesis: development
of chondrogenic tumours in embryonic stem cell chimeras. EMBO J. 10:
2437-2450, 1991.

23. Wang, Z.-Q.; Ovitt, C.; Grigoriadis, A. E.; Mohle-Steinlein, U.;
Ruther, U.; Wagner, E. F.: Bone and haematopoietic defects in mice
lacking c-fos. Nature 360: 741-745, 1992.

24. Zhang, J.; Zhang, D.; McQuade, J. S.; Behbehani, M.; Tsien, J.
Z.; Xu, M.: c-fos regulates neuronal excitability and survival. Nature
Genet. 30: 416-420, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 06/30/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/11/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/8/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/8/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/28/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/1999
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 10/9/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED wwang: 06/30/2005
tkritzer: 4/11/2005
terry: 4/11/2005
ckniffin: 5/28/2003
cwells: 4/30/2003
terry: 4/8/2003
alopez: 5/9/2002
terry: 5/8/2002
alopez: 4/12/2002
alopez: 3/1/2002
terry: 2/28/2002
alopez: 1/14/1999
joanna: 1/14/1999
alopez: 10/9/1998
mark: 3/4/1996
mark: 2/20/1996
terry: 10/26/1995
mark: 6/8/1995
carol: 11/18/1994
warfield: 4/1/1994
carol: 12/22/1993
carol: 2/17/1993

611966	TITLE *611966 TRAFFICKING PROTEIN PARTICLE COMPLEX, SUBUNIT 9; TRAPPC9
;;NIK- AND IKBKB-BINDING PROTEIN; NIBP;;
KIAA1882
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NIBP binds NIK (604655) and IKK-beta (IKBKB; 603258) and plays a role in
the neuronal NF-kappa-B (see 164011) signaling pathway (Hu et al.,
2005).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from an adult amygdala cDNA library,
Nagase et al. (2001) cloned a partial cDNA encoding NIBP, which they
designated KIAA1882. RT-PCR ELISA detected moderate expression in all
tissues and specific brain regions examined.

By yeast 2-hybrid screening of a human brain cDNA library using
N-terminal NIK (MAP3K14; 604655) as bait, followed by database analysis,
Hu et al. (2005) cloned NIBP. The deduced 1,246-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 139.4 kD and shares 80 to 90% homology with
the corresponding rodent sequences. Northern blot analysis of human
tissues detected a 4.5-kb transcript with high expression in muscle and
kidney, and lower levels in brain, heart, and placenta; 2 smaller
transcripts of 2.1 and 1.5 kb were also detected. Immunohistochemical
studies detected NIBP protein in neuronal cells in mouse brain with
staining localized to cell bodies and neuronal processes in the
pyramidal layer of mouse cortex, spinal cord motor neurons, and white
matter neurons.

Mochida et al. (2009) noted that there are 2 transcript variants of
TRAPPC9 in humans. Variant 1 is the longer form and encodes a
1,246-amino acid protein. Variant 2 uses an alternate 5-prime exon
initiating translation at a downstream start codon and encodes a
1,148-amino acid protein. In situ hybridization showed low levels of
expression in mouse embryonic brain with strong expression in adult
brain. Trappc9 was found in neurons of the cerebral cortex, hippocampus,
and deep gray matter. Trappc9 immunoreactivity was widespread in the
cytoplasm, without specific localization to any particular organelle,
and was not found in the nucleus. In 11.5-week human embryonic brain,
there was higher expression in the developing cortical plate compared to
the ventricular zone, indicating higher expression in postmitotic
neurons than in progenitor cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hu et al. (2005) determined that the TRAPPC9 gene contains 23 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Hu et al. (2005) mapped the TRAPPC9 gene
to chromosome 8q24.3.

GENE FUNCTION

By coimmunoprecipitation and GST pull-down assays, Hu et al. (2005)
showed that NIBP interacted with NIK and IKK-beta but showed no
interaction with IKK-alpha (CHUK; 600664) or IKK-gamma (IKBKG; 300248).
NIBP overexpression in HEK293T cells potentiated TNFA (191160)-induced
NF-kappa-B activation through increased phosphorylation of the IKK
complex and its downstream substrates IKBA (NFKBIA; 164008) and p65
(NFKB3; 164014). Mobility shift assays demonstrated increased NF-kappa-B
DNA binding. Knockdown of NIBP by siRNA reduced TNFA-induced NF-kappa-B
activation, prevented NGF (see 162030)-induced neuronal differentiation,
and decreased BCLXL (see BCL2L1; 600039) gene expression in PC12 cells.
Hu et al. (2005) suggested that NIBP may act as an adaptor to recruit
NIK or other kinases to the IKK complex, and that NIBP acts as a
downstream component of NGF in neuronal cells.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By genomewide linkage analysis, followed by candidate gene sequencing,
of an Israeli Arab family with nonsyndromic mental retardation (MRT13;
613192), Mochida et al. (2009) identified a homozygous truncating
mutation in the TRAPPC9 gene (R475X; 611966.0001).

Mir et al. (2009) identified the R475X mutation in affected members of a
Pakistani family with MRT13 and identified a 4-bp deletion (611966.0003)
in affected members of an Iranian family with MRT13, previously reported
by Najmabadi et al. (2007).

Philippe et al. (2009) identified a nonsense mutation in the TRAPPC9
gene (611966.0002) in 3 Tunisian brothers with autosomal recessive
mental retardation.

In 2 sisters, born of unrelated parents from southern Italy, with MRT13,
Marangi et al. (2013) identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the
TRAPPC9 gene (611966.0004).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 13
TRAPPC9, ARG475TER

In affected members of an Israeli Arab family with nonsyndromic
autosomal recessive mental retardation and postnatal microcephaly
(MRT13; 613192), Mochida et al. (2009) identified a homozygous 1423C-T
transition in exon 7 of the TRAPPC9 gene, resulting in an arg475-to-ter
(R475X) substitution in TRAPPC9 variant 1. The same change represents
1129C-T, resulting in an arg377-to-ter (R377X) substitution, in TRAPPC9
variant 2. Each unaffected parent was heterozygous for the mutation, and
it was not identified in 306 control chromosomes. The protein was not
detected in patient lymphoblast cell lines.

Mir et al. (2009) identified a homozygous 1422C-T transition in the
TRAPPC9 gene, resulting in an R475X mutation, in affected members of a
large consanguineous Pakistani family with mental retardation. The
mutant protein was not expressed, consistent with nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay. Affected individuals had borderline microcephaly, delayed
walking, and white matter abnormalities on brain MRI.

Abou Jamra et al. (2011) identified homozygosity for the R475X mutation
in affected members of a large consanguineous Syrian family with
autosomal recessive mental retardation. The patients had neonatal
hypotonia, severe motor delay with walking between ages 5 and 7 years,
single words or no speech, growth retardation, stereotypic movements,
and hand flapping. They also shared some dysmorphic features, including
low frontal hairline, synophrys, and microcephaly.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 13
TRAPPC9, ARG570TER

In 3 brothers, born of consanguineous Tunisian parents, with autosomal
recessive mental retardation (MRT13; 613192), Philippe et al. (2009)
identified a homozygous 1708C-T transition in exon 9 of the TRAPPC9
gene, resulting in an arg570-to-ter (R570X) substitution. The mutation
was not found in 1,120 control chromosomes. The protein was not detected
in patient fibroblasts, and the authors postulated nonsense-mediated
mRNA decay. In cultured patient fibroblasts, stimulation with TNF-alpha
(191160) showed a defect in IKBA (NFKBIA; 164008) degradation,
suggesting impaired function of the NF-kappa-B (see 164011) signaling
pathway.

.0003
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 13
TRAPPC9, 4-BP DEL, 2311TGTT

In affected members of an Iranian family (M001) with mental retardation
(613192), previously reported by Najmabadi et al. (2007) as showing
linkage to chromosome 8q24, Mir et al. (2009) identified a 4-bp deletion
(2311delTGTT) in the TRAPPC9 gene, resulting in a frameshift and
premature termination. Affected members had severe nonsyndromic mental
retardation, were ambulatory but nonverbal, and had microcephaly. There
were no seizures or dysmorphic features.

.0004
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 13
TRAPPC9, IVS17AS, A-C, -2

In 2 sisters, born of unrelated parents from southern Italy, with MRT13
(613192), Marangi et al. (2013) identified a homozygous A-to-C
transversion in intron 17 of the TRAPPC9 gene (2851-2A-C), resulting in
the skipping of exon 18, a frameshift, and premature termination
(Thr951TyrfsTer17). Each unaffected parent was heterozygous for the
mutation, which was identified by exome sequencing. PCR analysis of
patient cells did not show reduction of the TRAPPC9 transcript in the 2
sisters.

REFERENCE 1. Abou Jamra, R. A.; Wohlfart, S.; Zweier, M.; Uebe, S.; Priebe,
L.; Ekici, A.; Giesebrecht, S.; Abboud, A.; Al Khateeb, M. A.; Fakher,
M.; Hamdan, S.; Ismael, A.; Muhammad, S.; Nothen, M. M.; Schumacher,
J.; Reis, A.: Homozygosity mapping in 64 Syrian consanguineous families
with non-specific intellectual disability reveals 11 novel loci and
high heterogeneity. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 19: 1161-1166, 2011.

2. Hu, W.-H.; Pendergast, J. S.; Mo, X.-M.; Brambilla, R.; Bracchi-Ricard,
V.; Li, F.; Walters, W. M.; Blits, B.; He, L.; Schaal, S. M.; Bethea,
J. R.: NIBP, a novel NIK and IKK-beta-binding protein that enhances
NF-kappa-B activation. J. Biol. Chem. 280: 29233-29241, 2005.

3. Marangi, G.; Leuzzi, V.; Manti, F.; Lattante, S.; Orteschi, D.;
Pecile, V.; Neri, G.; Zollino, M.: TRAPPC9-related autosomal recessive
intellectual disability: report of a new mutation and clinical phenotype. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 21: 229-232, 2013.

4. Mir, A.; Kaufman, L.; Noor, A.; Motazacker, M. M.; Jamil, T.; Azam,
M.; Kahrizi, K.; Rafiq, M. A.; Weksberg, R.; Nasr, T.; Naeem, F.;
Tzschach, A.; Kuss, A. W.; Ishak, G. E.; Doherty, D.; Ropers, H. H.;
Barkovich, A. J.; Najmabadi, H.; Ayub, M.; Vincent, J. B.: Identification
of mutations in TRAPPC9, which encodes the NIK- and IKK-beta-binding
protein, in nonsyndromic autosomal-recessive mental retardation. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 85: 909-915, 2009.

5. Mochida, G. H.; Mahajnah, M.; Hill, A. D.; Basel-Vanagaite, L.;
Gleason, D.; Hill, R. S.; Bodell, A.; Crosier, M.; Straussberg, R.;
Walsh, C. A.: A truncating mutation of TRAPPC9 is associated with
autosomal-recessive intellectual disability and postnatal microcephaly. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 85: 897-902, 2009.

6. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. XXI. The complete sequences of 60 new
cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins. DNA Res. 8:
179-187, 2001.

7. Najmabadi, H.; Motazacker, M. M.; Garshasbi, M.; Kahrizi, K.; Tzschach,
A.; Chen, W.; Behjati, F.; Hadavi, V.; Nieh, S. E.; Abedini, S. S.;
Vazifehmand, R.; Firouzabadi, S. G.; and 9 others: Homozygosity
mapping in consanguineous families reveals extreme heterogeneity of
non-syndromic autosomal recessive mental retardation and identifies
8 novel gene loci. Hum. Genet. 121: 43-48, 2007.

8. Philippe, O.; Rio, M.; Carioux, A.; Plaza, J.-M.; Guigue, P.; Molinari,
F.; Boddaert, N.; Bole-Feysot, C.; Nitschke, P.; Smahi, A.; Munnich,
A.; Colleaux, L.: Combination of linkage mapping and microarray-expression
analysis identifies NF-kappa-B signaling defect as a cause of autosomal-recessive
mental retardation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 85: 903-908, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/20/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/17/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/21/2009

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 4/18/2008

EDITED carol: 09/13/2013
carol: 5/8/2013
carol: 3/27/2013
ckniffin: 3/20/2013
carol: 1/3/2012
carol: 11/17/2011
ckniffin: 11/17/2011
wwang: 12/30/2009
ckniffin: 12/21/2009
mgross: 12/17/2009
carol: 4/18/2008
wwang: 4/18/2008

606615	TITLE *606615 HYPOXIA-INDUCIBLE FACTOR 1-ALPHA INHIBITOR; HIF1AN
;;HIF1A INHIBITOR;;
FACTOR-INHIBITING HIF1A; FIH1
DESCRIPTION Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 activates transcription of genes whose
protein products either increase oxygen availability by promoting
erythropoiesis (see EPO; 133170) and angiogenesis (see VEGF; 192240) or
mediate adaptive responses to oxygen deprivation, such as increased
glycolytic metabolism. HIF1A (603348), whose expression is regulated by
cellular oxygen concentration, is part of a heterodimer with the
constitutively expressed HIF1B (ARNT; 126110). The C-terminal half of
HIF1A contains multiple regulatory domains that interact with specific
proteins, such as VHL (608537).

CLONING

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a brain cDNA library with
transactivating domain C (TAD-C) and the inhibitory domain of HIF1A as
bait, Mahon et al. (2001) isolated a cDNA encoding HIF1AN, which they
designated FIH1. EST database analysis suggested that HIF1AN is
expressed in multiple cell types. The deduced 349-amino acid HIF1AN
protein is homologous to rat Pass1 and to fly and worm sequences,
indicating evolutionary conservation of this protein family.

GENE FUNCTION

By binding analyses of truncated HIF1AN peptides, Mahon et al. (2001)
showed that the inhibitory domain rather than the transactivating
domains of HIF1A interacts with HIF1AN, although the presence of TAD-C
optimizes binding. Functional analysis indicated that HIAF1AN inhibits
HIF1A transcriptional activity in hypoxic and nonhypoxic cells. Further
binding analysis determined that the N terminus of HIF1AN interacts with
the N terminus of VHL, and that both interact with HIF1A at distinct
sites (VHL with TAD-N of HIF1A), allowing the formation of ternary
complexes of the 3 proteins. VHL, but not HIF1AN, interacts with and
recruits HDAC1 (601241), HDAC2 (605164), and HDAC3 (605166) to HIF1A,
thus functioning as a HIF1A corepressor. Mahon et al. (2001) proposed
that HIF1AN may instead interact, either directly or indirectly, with
other functionally and structurally distinct histone deacetylases.

Using mass spectrometry and coimmunoprecipitation analysis, Hoff et al.
(2013) found that the ciliary proteins ANKS6 (615370), NPHP3 (608002),
INVS (243305), and NEK8 (609799) interacted in a complex. ANKS6 also
interacted with HIF1AN (606615). Coimmunoprecipitation experiments
showed that HIF1AN facilitated formation of a complex containing rat
Anks6 and human NPHP3 and INVS. Association of rat Anks6 with human NEK8
required hydroxylation of Anks6. Hoff et al. (2013) concluded that
oxygen-dependent hydroxylation of ANKS6 by HIF1AN regulates the
composition of the ANKS6-containing ciliary complex.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Mahon et al. (2001) determined that the
HIF1AN gene contains 8 exons and spans 14 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Mahon et al. (2001) mapped the HIF1AN gene
to chromosome 10q24, a region deleted in gliomas in which increased
HIF1A-mediated transactivation of downstream genes, such as VEGF,
occurs.

REFERENCE 1. Hoff, S.; Halbritter, J.; Epting, D.; Frank, V.; Nguyen, T.-M.
T.; van Reeuwijk, J.; Boehlke, C.; Schell, C.; Yasunaga, T.; Helmstadter,
M.; Mergen, M.; Filhol, E.; [and 29 others: ANKS6 is a central component
of a nephronophthisis module linking NEK8 to INVS and NPHP3. Nature
Genet. 45: 951-956, 2013.

2. Mahon, P. C.; Hirota, K.; Semenza, G. L.: FIH-1: a novel protein
that interacts with HIF-1-alpha and VHL to mediate repression of HIF-1
transcriptional activity. Genes Dev. 15: 2675-2686, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 08/15/2013

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/14/2002

EDITED mgross: 08/15/2013
alopez: 8/17/2009
ckniffin: 3/23/2004
mgross: 1/14/2002

608100	TITLE *608100 NFU1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; NFU1
;;IRON-SULFUR CLUSTER SCAFFOLD PROTEIN NFU1;;
HIRA-INTERACTING PROTEIN 5; HIRIP5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The NFU1 gene encodes a protein that plays an essential role in the
production of iron-sulfur (Fe-S) clusters for the normal maturation of
lipoate-containing 2-oxoacid dehydrogenases and for the assembly of the
mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes (summary by Cameron et al.,
2011).

CLONING

Using a C-terminal fragment of HIRA (600237) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid
screen of a HeLa cell cDNA library, followed by screening a U937
monocyte cDNA library, Lorain et al. (2001) cloned HIRIP5. The HIRIP5
cDNA contains 3 putative start methionines, resulting in deduced
proteins of 230, 196, and 169 amino acids. By searching sequence
databases, Lorain et al. (2001) identified homologs of HIRIP5 in several
species, including mouse. The 3 start codons in the human sequence are
conserved in mouse, but the first is out of frame. Translation from the
first conserved in-frame start codon in mouse yields a 199-amino acid
protein that is 97% identical to the 196-amino acid human protein.
Alignment of HIRIP5 homologs revealed a protein structure consisting of
an N-terminal domain with 5 conserved residues; a central domain with 8
conserved residues; a linker region; a C-terminal domain; and a variable
C terminus. HIRIP5 may have a mitochondrial localization signal.
Northern blot analysis detected a 1.1-kb transcript in nearly all adult
and fetal tissues examined.

Tong et al. (2003) identified several clones corresponding to human NFU1
that differed from HIRIP5 in the human expressed sequence tag database.
The identified sequences extended the 5-prime sequence to include an
upstream in-frame ATG, indicating at least 2 mRNA isoforms. Exon 1
contains 2 potential 5-prime donor splice sites that are used to
generate isoform I containing exon 1A but not exon 1B, or isoform II
(HIRIP5) containing both exon 1A and exon 1B. However, exon 1B contains
a stop codon, so isoform II is initiated at a downstream codon. Isoform
I was shown to localize to mitochondria in COS-7 cells. Functional
isoform II lacks the first 24 amino acids found in isoform I and
localizes to the cytosol.

GENE FUNCTION

By in vitro pull-down assays of recombinant proteins, Lorain et al.
(2001) confirmed that HIRIP5 interacts with HIRA.

Using the yeast 2-hybrid system, Ganesh et al. (2003) determined that
the C-terminal NifU-like domain of HIRIP5 interacts specifically with
the N-terminal CBD4 domain of laforin, encoded by the EPM2A gene
(607566). They also determined that HIRIP5 is a substrate for the
phosphatase activity of laforin.

Using biochemical and spectroscopic techniques, Tong et al. (2003)
demonstrated that NFU1 is an iron-sulfur cluster scaffold protein that
assembles 1 labile 4Fe-4S cluster per 2 NFU1 monomers.

MAPPING

By radioactive in situ hybridization, Lorain et al. (2001) mapped the
HIRIP5 gene to chromosome 2p15-p13.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 3 Mexican sibs with fatal multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions
syndrome-1 (MMDS1; 605711) originally reported by Seyda et al. (2001),
Cameron et al. (2011) identified a homozygous splice site mutation in
the NFU1 gene (608100.0001) resulting in no detectable mature protein in
patient fibroblasts. Transduction of fibroblast lines with retroviral
vectors expressing the mitochondrial, but not the cytosolic, isoform of
NFU1 corrected the defects in respiratory chain and oxoacid
dehydrogenase complex function. The results indicated that NFU1 plays an
essential role in the production of iron-sulfur clusters for the normal
maturation of lipoate-containing 2-oxoacid dehydrogenases and for the
assembly of the respiratory chain complexes.

In 9 patients from unrelated Spanish families with fatal multiple
mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome-1, Navarro-Sastre et al. (2011)
identified a homozygous mutation in the NFU1 gene (G208C; 608100.0002).
Studies in yeast cells showed that it impaired NFU1 function.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MULTIPLE MITOCHONDRIAL DYSFUNCTIONS SYNDROME 1
NFU1, 545G-A

In 3 Mexican sibs with fatal multiple mitochondrial dysfunctions
syndrome-1 (MMDS1; 605711) originally reported by Seyda et al. (2001),
Cameron et al. (2011) identified a homozygous 545G-A transition in exon
6 of the NFU1 gene. Although 545G-A is predicted to result in an
arg182-to-gln (R182Q) substitution, it is also adjacent to a splice
site, and RT-PCR analysis showed that exon 6 is spliced out from the
majority of transcripts. There was no detectable mitochondrial NFU1
protein in fibroblasts of 1 of the patients. Biochemical studies of
patient fibroblasts showed a decrease in iron-sulfur cluster-containing
respiratory chain complexes and a lack of detectable lipoate in the
pyruvate dehydrogenase and oxoacid dehydrogenase complexes.
Mitochondrial, but not the cytosolic version, of NFU1 rescued the
respiratory chain and oxoacid dehydrogenase defects in immortalized
fibroblasts.

In a Spanish infant with fatal MMDS1, Navarro-Sastre et al. (2011)
identified compound heterozygosity for the 545G-A mutation and a
gly208-to-cys (G208C; 608100.0002) substitution in NFU1. Examination of
patient cells showed no mRNA expression of the 545G-A mutation,
consistent with nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Expression of the mutation
in COS-7 cells showed that it caused defective splicing and the skipping
of exon 6.

.0002
MULTIPLE MITOCHONDRIAL DYSFUNCTIONS SYNDROME 1
NFU1, GLY208CYS

In 9 patients from unrelated Spanish families with fatal multiple
mitochondrial dysfunctions syndrome-1 (605711), Navarro-Sastre et al.
(2011) identified a homozygous 622G-T transversion in exon 7 of the NFU1
gene, resulting in a gly208-to-cys (G208C) substitution in a highly
conserved residue close to the Fe-S cluster binding motif. The mutation
was not found in 220 controls. A tenth Spanish patient was compound
heterozygous for G208C and 545G-A (608100.0001). Four of the families
were of Basque origin, suggesting a founder effect. The patients
presented between 1 and 9 months of age with failure to thrive,
neurologic regression, or pulmonary hypertension. All died by age 15
months. Biochemical findings included increased lactate and glycine,
increased urinary 2-ketoacids, and impaired oxidation. Patient
fibroblasts showed decreased activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase
(PDH) complex and liver tissue showed low activity of the glycine
decarboxylase system (238300). Muscle homogenates from patients showed
evidence of defective lipoylation and impaired synthesis of lipoic acid,
with decreased levels of PDH- and alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase
(AKGDH; 613022)-bound lipoic acid. NFU1 protein levels were normal. The
findings indicated that proper NFU1 activity is required for lipoic acid
synthetase (LIAS; 607031) activity. Depletion of NFU1 in HeLa cells
showed decreased levels of lipoic acid bound to E2 subunits of the PDH
complex and AKGDH, and decreased levels and activity of succinate
dehydrogenase (SDH; mitochondrial complex II; 185470). In contrast to
ISCU (611911), which plays a scaffolding role, NFU1 appears to play a
specific, auxiliary role late in the biogenesis of SDH and LIAS, 2 Fe-S
apoproteins. Transfection of the homologous G208C mutation in yeast
showed that it was functionally impaired.

REFERENCE 1. Cameron, J. M.; Janer, A.; Levandovskiy, V.; MacKay, N.; Rouault,
T. A.; Tong, W.-H.; Ogilvie, I.; Shoubridge, E. A.; Robinson, B. H.
: Mutations in iron-sulfur cluster scaffold genes NFU1 and BOLA3 cause
a fatal deficiency of multiple respiratory chain and 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase
enzymes. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 89: 486-495, 2011.

2. Ganesh, S.; Tsurutani, N.; Suzuki, T.; Ueda, K.; Agarwala, K. L.;
Osada, H.; Delgado-Escueta, A. V.; Yamakawa, K.: The Lafora disease
gene product laforin interacts with HIRIP5, a phylogenetically conserved
protein containing a NifU-like domain. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 2359-2368,
2003.

3. Lorain, S.; Lecluse, Y.; Scamps, C.; Mattei, M.-G.; Lipinski, M.
: Identification of human and mouse HIRA-interacting protein-5 (HIRIP5),
two mammalian representatives in a family of phylogenetically conserved
proteins with a role in the biogenesis of Fe/S proteins. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1517: 376-383, 2001.

4. Navarro-Sastre, A.; Tort, F.; Stehling, O.; Uzarska, M. A.; Arranz,
J. A.; del Toro, M.; Labayru, M. T.; Landa, J.; Font, A.; Garcia-Villoria,
J.; Merinero, B.; Ugarte, M.; and 9 others: A fatal mitochondrial
disease is associated with defective NFU1 function in the maturation
of a subset of mitochondrial Fe-S proteins. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 89:
656-667, 2011.

5. Seyda, A.; Newbold, R. F.; Hudson, T. J.; Verner, A.; MacKay, N.;
Winter, S.; Feigenbaum, A.; Malaney, S.; Gonzalez-Halphen, D.; Cuthbert,
A. P.; Robinson, B. H.: A novel syndrome affecting multiple mitochondrial
functions, located by microcell-mediated transfer to chromosome 2p14-2p13. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 68: 386-396, 2001.

6. Tong, W.-H.; Jameson, G. N. L.; Huynh, B. H.; Rouault, T. A.:
Subcellular compartmentalization of human Nfu, an iron-sulfur cluster
scaffold protein, and its ability to assemble a [4Fe-4S] cluster. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 9762-9767, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/7/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/20/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/9/2005

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/16/2003

EDITED carol: 12/08/2011
ckniffin: 12/7/2011
mgross: 10/21/2011
terry: 10/21/2011
carol: 10/21/2011
ckniffin: 10/20/2011
alopez: 10/19/2005
terry: 9/9/2005
mgross: 9/16/2003

603844	TITLE *603844 NADH-UBIQUINONE OXIDOREDUCTASE 1, SUBUNIT C1; NDUFC1
DESCRIPTION The multisubunit NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) is the first
enzyme complex in the electron transport chain of mitochondria. See
NDUFA2 (602137). Ton et al. (1997) isolated human heart cDNAs encoding
CI-KFYI (NDUFC1) and 4 other complex I subunits. The predicted protein
contains 76 amino acids.

By radiation hybrid analysis, Mao et al. (1998) mapped the NDUFC1 gene
to 4q28.2-q31.1. By radiation hybrid analysis, Emahazion et al. (1998)
mapped the NDUFC1 gene to 4q28.2-q28.3.

Smeitink and van den Heuvel (1999) reviewed the available molecular data
regarding the human nuclear-encoded complex I subunits.

REFERENCE 1. Emahazion, T.; Beskow, A.; Gyllensten, U.; Brookes, A. J.: Intron
based radiation hybrid mapping of 15 complex I genes of the human
electron transport chain. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 82: 115-119, 1998.

2. Mao, M.; Fu, G.; Wu, J.-S.; Zhang, Q.-H.; Zhou, J.; Kan, L.-X.;
Huang, Q.-H.; He, K.-L.; Gu, B.-W.; Han, Z.-G.; Shen, Y.; Gu, J.;
Yu, Y.-P.; Xu, S.-H.; Wang, Y.-X.; Chen, S.-J.; Chen, Z.: Identification
of genes expressed in human CD34+ hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells
by expressed sequence tags and efficient full-length cDNA cloning. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 8175-8180, 1998.

3. Smeitink, J.; van den Heuvel, L.: Human mitochondrial complex
I in health and disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64: 1505-1510, 1999.

4. Ton, C.; Hwang, D. M.; Dempsey, A. A.; Liew, C.-C.: Identification
and primary structure of five human NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase
subunits. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 241: 589-594, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/7/1999

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/25/1999

EDITED mgross: 06/14/1999
mgross: 6/7/1999
alopez: 6/4/1999
alopez: 5/25/1999

610538	TITLE *610538 UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME E2T; UBE2T
;;HSPC150
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The covalent conjugation of ubiquitin to proteins regulates diverse
cellular pathways and proteins. Ubiquitin is transferred to a target
protein through a concerted action of a ubiquitin-activating enzyme
(E1), a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2), such as UBE2T, and a
ubiquitin ligase (E3) (Machida et al., 2006).

CLONING

Zhang et al. (2000) cloned UBE2T, which they designated HSPC150, from
CD34 (142230)-positive hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. The deduced
197-amino acid protein contains a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme active
site. EST database analysis indicated widespread UBE2T expression.

Machida et al. (2006) found homologs of UBE2T in only vertebrate
databases.

GENE FUNCTION

Machida et al. (2006) found that UBE2T is essential for the Fanconi
anemia pathway for the efficient repair of damaged DNA. UBE2T bound to
the C-terminal PH domain of FANCL (PHF9; 608111), the ubiquitin ligase
subunit of the Fanconi anemia core complex, leading to the
monoubiquitination of FANCD2 (227646). DNA damage in UBE2T-depleted
human osteosarcoma cells led to the formation of abnormal chromosomes
that are a hallmark of Fanconi anemia. Machida et al. (2006) also found
that UBE2T undergoes automonoubiquitination in vivo. This
monoubiquitination was stimulated by the presence of FANCL and
inactivated UBE2T. UBE2T activity was dependent on the conserved cys86,
where a ubiquitin molecule is transferred from E1, and UBE2T underwent
automonoubiquitination at lys91 in vivo. The monoubiquitination of UBE2T
occurred even in the absence of an E3 in vitro. Machida et al. (2006)
concluded that UBE2T is the E2 in the Fanconi anemia pathway and has a
self-inactivation mechanism that could be important for negative
regulation of the pathway.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhang et al. (2000) determined that the UBE2T gene contains 7 exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid and genomic sequence analyses, Zhang et al. (2000)
mapped the UBE2T gene to chromosome 1q31.

REFERENCE 1. Machida, Y. J.; Machida, Y.; Chen, Y.; Gurtan, A. M.; Kupfer, G.
M.; D'Andrea, A. D.; Dutta, A.: UBE2T is the E2 in the Fanconi anemia
pathway and undergoes negative autoregulation. Molec. Cell 23: 589-596,
2006.

2. Zhang, Q.-H.; Ye, M.; Wu, X.-Y.; Ren, S.-X.; Zhao, M.; Zhao, C.-J.;
Fu, G.; Shen, Y.; Fan, H.-Y.; Lu, G.; Zhong, M.; Xu, X.-R.; and 9
others: Cloning and functional analysis of cDNAs with open reading
frames for 300 previously undefined genes expressed in CD34+ hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells. Genome Res. 10: 1546-1560, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/31/2006

EDITED carol: 10/31/2006

607292	TITLE *607292 SEMAPHORIN 4A; SEMA4A
;;SEMAPHORIN B; SEMAB; SEMB
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SEMA4A is a member of the semaphorin family of soluble and transmembrane
proteins. Semaphorins are involved in guidance of axonal migration
during neuronal development and in immune responses.

CLONING

Using degenerate PCR primers based on motifs conserved in members of the
semaphorin family, Kumanogoh et al. (2002) identified mouse Sema4a,
which was originally identified as SemB (Puschel et al., 1995). RT-PCR
analysis detected prominent expression in adult mouse brain, spleen,
lung, kidney, and testis. Flow cytometric analysis showed expression in
B cells and dendritic cells (DCs) but not in resting T cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Kumanogoh et al. (2002) showed that activation upregulated expression of
mouse Sema4a in both B and T cells, and proliferation and interleukin-2
(IL2; 147680) production by T cells were enhanced in the presence of
Sema4a. However, Sema4a, unlike CD100 (SEMA4D; 601866), did not enhance
the activation of B cells or DCs. Mice treated with Sema4a had enhanced
priming of antigen-specific T cells secreting both IL4 (147780) and
gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570). Treatment of mice with anti-Sema4a
early after immunization with myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein
suppressed the development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
In these mice, infiltration of mononuclear inflammatory cells was
ablated by inhibition of the generation of antigen-specific T cells by
anti-Sema4a. Expression cloning determined that the high-affinity
receptor for Sema4a is Tim2. Sema4a stimulation of cells expressing Tim2
induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Tim2 but not of Tim3 (606652).
Kumanogoh et al. (2002) concluded that Sema4a and CD100 have crucial
roles in the reciprocal stimulation between T cell and
antigen-presenting cells.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Abid et al. (2006) screened 135 Pakistani patients with retinitis
pigmentosa (RP35; 610282), 25 with cone-rod dystrophy (CORD10; 610283),
and 30 with congenital blindness for mutations in the SEMA4A gene. They
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 substitutions
(607292.0001-607292.0002) in 2 RP and 2 CORD patients and heterozygosity
for another substitution (607292.0003) in 3 patients with RP and 1
patient with congenital blindness. No mutations in SEMA4A were found in
affected members of a Pakistani family with cone-rod dystrophy (CORD8;
605549) previously mapped to chromosome 1q12-q24 (Ismail et al., 2006).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 35
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 10, INCLUDED
SEMA4A, ASP345HIS

In 2 Pakistani patients with retinitis pigmentosa-35 (610282) and 2 with
cone-rod dystrophy-10 (610282), Abid et al. (2006) identified compound
heterozygosity for a G-to-C transversion in codon 345 and a T-to-G
transversion in codon 350 in exon 10 of the SEMA4A gene, resulting in an
asp345-to-his (D345H) and a phe350-to-cys (F350C; 607292.0002)
substitution in the conserved semaphorin domain, respectively. Sequence
analysis of the unaffected parents of 1 of the CORD patients revealed
that his father was heterozygous for the D345H mutation and his mother
was heterozygous for the F350C mutation. Neither mutation was found in
100 ethnically matched controls.

.0002
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 35
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 10, INCLUDED
SEMA4A, PHE350CYS

See 607292.0001 and Abid et al. (2006).

.0003
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 35
SEMA4A, ARG713GLN

In 3 Pakistani patients with retinitis pigmentosa-35 (610282) and 1 with
congenital blindness of uncertain phenotype, Abid et al. (2006)
identified heterozygosity for a G-to-A transition in codon 713 of exon
15 of the SEMA4A gene, resulting in an arg713-to-gln (R713Q)
substitution in the cytoplasmic tail. Sequence analysis of family
members of 1 of the RP patients confirmed that the R713Q mutation
segregated with the disease phenotype in an autosomal dominant mode of
inheritance, and the mutation was not found in 100 ethnically matched
controls.

REFERENCE 1. Abid, A.; Ismail, M.; Mehdi, S. Q.; Khaliq, S.: Identification
of novel mutations in the SEMA4A gene associated with retinal degenerative
diseases. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 43: 378-381, 2006.

2. Ismail, M.; Abid, A.; Anwar, K.; Mehdi, S. Q.; Khaliq, S.: Refinement
of the locus for autosomal recessive cone-rod dystrophy (CORD8) linked
to chromosome 1q23-q24 in a Pakistani family and exclusion of candidate
genes. J. Hum. Genet. 51: 827-831, 2006.

3. Kumanogoh, A.; Marukawa, S.; Suzuki, K.; Takegahara, N.; Watanabe,
C.; Ch'ng, E.; Ishida, I.; Fujimura, H.; Sakoda, S.; Yoshida, K.;
Kikutani, H.: Class IV semaphorin Sema4A enhances T-cell activation
and interacts with Tim-2. Nature 419: 629-633, 2002.

4. Puschel, A. W.; Adams, R. H.; Betz, H.: Murine semaphorin D/collapsin
is a member of a diverse gene family and creates domains inhibitory
for axonal extension. Neuron 14: 941-948, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/18/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/27/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/10/2002

EDITED carol: 07/26/2007
wwang: 12/18/2006
carol: 7/28/2006
carol: 7/27/2006
terry: 7/27/2006
mgross: 10/10/2002

