601340	TITLE *601340 MELANOMA INHIBITORY ACTIVITY PROTEIN; MIA
;;CARTILAGE-DERIVED RETINOIC ACID-SENSITIVE PROTEIN; CDRAP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Growth and expansion of tumor cells including malignant melanomas are
modulated by a complex network of growth factors, which regulate
proliferation and cell-matrix interaction through a variety of different
signal transduction pathways. Blesch et al. (1994) purified a protein
they called melanoma inhibitory activity (MIA) which is secreted by
malignant melanoma cells and elicits growth inhibition of melanoma cells
in vitro. Bosserhoff et al. (1996) cloned the gene encoding MIA and
described its genomic organization. The gene encodes a 131-amino acid
prepropolypeptide with a 24-residue secretion signal peptide sequence.
The authors identified the transcription start site of the gene and
studied the expression characteristics of the gene promoter in human
melanoma, epithelial, and undifferentiated cells. Bosserhoff et al.
(1996) found by Northern blot analysis that the MIA gene was expressed
in all melanoma cell lines tested but was not expressed in fibroblast or
epithelial cell lines.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bosserhoff et al. (1996) determined that the MIA gene comprises 4 exons.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Bosserhoff et al. (1997) determined that MIA levels in patients with
metastatic malignant melanoma were significantly above the 97th
percentile level (6.5 ng/ml) determined for 72 normal controls. In a
blinded, multicenter trial, Bosserhoff et al. (2000) analyzed serum MIA
levels by ELISA in 259 patients with stage III and stage IV metastatic
malignant melanoma. MIA levels were elevated in both groups and
decreased significantly after surgery. MIA levels subsequently increased
in 29 of 34 patients with rapid disease progression and decreased in 5
patients who responded to immunochemotherapy. Bosserhoff et al. (2000)
suggested that MIA levels have prognostic value in staging and
monitoring tumor load in malignant melanoma.

- Crystal Structure

Lougheed et al. (2001) reported the crystal structure of human MIA. They
stated that this was the first structural characterization of a secreted
protein with an SH3 subdomain.

MAPPING

Koehler et al. (1996) mapped the MIA gene to 19q13.32-q13.33 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Blesch, A.; Bosserhoff, A.; Apfel, R.; Behl, C.; Hessdoerfer, B;
Schmitt, A.; Jachimczak, P.; Lottspeich, F.; Buettner, R.; Bogdahn,
U.: Cloning of a novel malignant melanoma-derived growth-regulatory
protein, MIA. Cancer Res. 54: 5695-5701, 1994.

2. Bosserhoff, A. K.; Hauschild, A.; Hein, R.; Schadendorf, D.; Stockfleth,
E.; Bogenrieder, T.; Landthaler, M.; Buettner, R.; Stolz, W.: Elevated
MIA serum levels are of relevance for management of metastasized malignant
melanomas: results of a German multicenter study. J. Invest. Derm. 114:
395-396, 2000.

3. Bosserhoff, A. K.; Hein, R.; Bogdahn, U.; Buettner, R.: Structure
and promoter analysis of the gene encoding the human melanoma-inhibiting
protein MIA. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 490-495, 1996.

4. Bosserhoff, A. K.; Kaufmann, M.; Kaluza, B.; Bartke, I.; Zirngibl,
H.; Hein, R.; Stolz, W.; Buettner, R.: Melanoma-inhibiting activity,
a novel serum marker for progression of malignant melanoma. Cancer
Res. 57: 3149-3153, 1997.

5. Koehler, M. R.; Bosserhoff, A.-K.; von Beust, G.; Bauer, A.; Blesch,
A.; Buettner, R.; Schlegel, J.; Bogdahn, U.; Schmid, M.: Assignment
of the human melanoma inhibitory activity gene (MIA) to 19q13.32-q13.33
by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Genomics 35: 265-267,
1996.

6. Lougheed, J. C.; Holton, J. M.; Alber, T.; Bazan, J. F.; Handel,
T. M.: Structure of melanoma inhibitory activity protein, a member
of a recently identified family of secreted proteins. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 98: 5515-5520, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/1/2001
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 6/13/2000

CREATED Mark H. Paalman: 7/9/1996

EDITED alopez: 03/22/2005
mgross: 7/30/2003
mcapotos: 6/7/2001
terry: 6/1/2001
alopez: 6/13/2000
mcapotos: 12/8/1999
terry: 7/9/1997
terry: 12/11/1996
terry: 7/24/1996
terry: 7/15/1996
mark: 7/9/1996

610523	TITLE *610523 CENTROSOMAL PROTEIN, 41-KD; CEP41
;;TESTIS-SPECIFIC PROTEIN A14 TESTIS-SPECIFIC PROTEIN 14, FORMERLY;
TSGA14, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using genomic sequence analysis of a PAC/BAC contig containing the
imprinted MEST (601029) gene, followed by EST database searching, Yamada
et al. (2002) identified cDNAs corresponding to 2 splice variants of
TSGA14 encoding deduced proteins of 373 and 54 amino acids. Northern
blot analysis detected transcripts of the longer isoform in adult testis
(1.4 and 3.7 kb) and in fetal brain, lung, liver, and kidney (3.7 and
2.9 kb). A 1.1-kb transcript of the shorter isoform was weakly expressed
in adult testis and fetal tissues. Using methylation analysis of a CpG
island in TSGA14 intron 1 and analysis of biallelic expression of an
exon 1 SNP in fetal tissues and blood lymphocytes, Yamada et al. (2002)
showed that TSGA14 escapes genomic imprinting. Yamada et al. (2002)
suggested that the 7q32 imprinted region may be small compared to other
imprinted domains.

In zebrafish, Lee et al. (2012) found Cep41 expression in various
ciliary organs, including Kupffer vesicle, ear, heart, brain, and
kidney. Cep41 was also found in the centrioles and cilia of several
ciliated cell lines, including mouse inner medullary collecting duct
cells and human retinal pigment epithelial cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yamada et al. (2002) determined that the TSGA14 gene contains 11 exons
and spans approximately 50 kb. The short variant is encoded by 3 exons,
the first 2 exons in common with the long variant and a third exon
located in intron 2 of the long variant.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Yamada et al. (2002) mapped the TGSA14
gene to chromosome 7q32 at a position 50 kb proximal to the MEST gene in
a head to head orientation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 3 consanguineous families with Joubert
syndrome-15 (JBTS15; 614464), 2 of Egyptian origin and 1 Portuguese, Lee
et al. (2012) identified 3 different homozygous mutations in the CEP41
gene (610523.0001-610523.0003). The first mutation was found by linkage
analysis followed by candidate gene sequencing in 1 of the families.
Heterozygous CEP41 mutations (see, e.g., 610523.0004-610523.0007) were
found in 5 additional patients with Joubert syndrome, and 3 of them were
found to carry heterozygous mutations in other genes associated with
ciliopathies (KIF7; 611254.0007 and CC2D2A; 612013.0007 and
612013.0009). These findings indicated digenic inheritance, and
suggested that CEP41 may act as a modifier in the broader class of
ciliopathies. Primary cultured fibroblasts from patients showed lack of
CEP41 protein. Induction of ciliogenesis in these fibroblast resulted in
cilia with a reduction of staining for GT335, which recognizes the
glutamylated forms of tubulin. Forced expression of CEP41 increased the
percentage of cells with glutamylated cilia. These findings suggested a
potential role of CEP41 in regulating the posttranslational modification
of tubulin by glutamylation. The cilia of zebrafish deficient in Cep41
showed a defect in tubulin structural defects, as well as defects in
motility. Only the axoneme appeared to be affected, with the centriole
being properly modified. Further studies in zebrafish and mouse cells
indicated that Cep41 functions by mediating transport of TTLL6 (610849),
an evolutionarily conserved polyglutamylase enzyme, between the basal
body and cilium. The findings implicated tubulin posttranslational
modification in the pathogenesis of human ciliary dysfunction.

ANIMAL MODEL

Lee et al. (2012) demonstrated that morpholino knockout of Cep41 in
zebrafish resulted in peripheral heart edema and tail defects, along
with ciliopathy-related phenotypes, including hydrocephalus, abnormal
ear otolith formation, and small eyes. Transfection of human CEP41
resulted in partial rescue of the phenotype. Specific knockout of Cep41
in zebrafish myocardium resulted in inversion defects or failure to
develop asymmetry of the ventricle and atrium, suggesting a role in
heart laterality. Homozygous Cep41 mouse mutants showed a wide range of
phenotypes, including malformed hindbrain, exencephaly, brain
hemorrhage, dilated pericardial sac, and lethality. However, some
homozygous mutants showed normal development, suggesting the presence of
extragenic phenotypic modifiers. The cilia of zebrafish deficient in
Cep41 showed a defect in tubulin glutamylation, and electron microscopy
showed structural defects in zebrafish renal cilia, with the A-tubules
of the outer doublet microtubules of the axoneme being collapsed and/or
duplicated. The cilia of the Kupffer vesicle and kidney showed disabled
motility. The data suggested that Cep41 is involved in ciliary
structural formation and motility by having an essential role in tubulin
glutamylation at the cilium.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
JOUBERT SYNDROME 15
CEP41, IVS1DS, T-G, +2

In 5 affected members of a consanguineous Egyptian family with Joubert
syndrome-15 (JBTS15; 614464), Lee et al. (2012) identified a homozygous
T-to-G transversion in intron 1 of the CEP41 gene (33+2T-G). Studies of
patient cells showed absence of mature CEP41 mRNA, probably a result of
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. The mutation was found by linkage analysis
followed by candidate gene sequencing. The patients had hypotonia,
ataxia, psychomotor delay with borderline or mild mental retardation,
and the molar tooth sign on brain imaging. One of the patients had a
more severe phenotype, with unilateral retinopathy, coloboma,
nephronophthisis, mild liver abnormalities, postaxial polydactyly, and
ambiguous genitalia, and died at age 7 days. The other 4 patients did
not have liver or renal involvement.

.0002
JOUBERT SYNDROME 15
CEP41, 3-BP DEL, IVS1DS, 97GAG

In 2 sisters, born of consanguineous Egyptian parents, with JBTS15
(614464), Lee et al. (2012) identified a homozygous 3-bp deletion
(97+3_5delGAG) predicted to abolish the donor splice site from exon 2.
The mutation was demonstrated to cause skipping of exon 2 and premature
truncation of the protein in exon 3. The girls had hypotonia, ataxia,
mental retardation, oculomotor apraxia, breathing abnormalities, and
molar tooth sign on brain imaging, but no renal or liver involvement.
One had unilateral postaxial polydactyly. A third sib, a boy, who did
not have the molar tooth sign, was found to be heterozygous for the
mutation.

.0003
JOUBERT SYNDROME 15
CEP41, IVS6AS, A-C, -2

In a patient, born of consanguineous Portuguese parents, with JBTS15
(614464), Lee et al. (2012) identified a homozygous A-to-C transversion
(423-2A-C), predicted to abolish the splice acceptor site from exon 7.
The patient had hypotonia, ataxia, mental retardation, retinopathy,
polydactyly, and the molar tooth sign on brain imaging. He did not have
renal or hepatic involvement. He was also found to carry a heterozygous
mutation in the CEP290 gene (610142).

.0004
JOUBERT SYNDROME 12/15, DIGENIC
CEP41, ARG179HIS

In a German patient with digenic inheritance of Joubert syndrome, Lee et
al. (2012) identified a heterozygous 536A-G transition in exon 7 of the
CEP41 gene, resulting in an arg179-to-his (R179H) substitution in a
highly conserved residue consistent with JBTS15 (614464), and a
heterozygous truncating mutation in the KIF7 gene (811delG;
611254.0007), consistent with JBTS12 (see 200990). He had hypotonia,
ataxia, mental retardation, oculomotor apraxia, breathing abnormalities,
and the molar tooth sign on brain imaging, but no liver, renal, or
retinal involvement.

.0005
JOUBERT SYNDROME 9/15, DIGENIC
CEP41, MET36THR

In a Spanish patient with digenic inheritance of Joubert syndrome, Lee
et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous 107T-C transition in exon 3 of
the CEP41 gene, resulting in a met36-to-thr (M36T) substitution in a
highly conserved residue consistent with JBTS15 (614464), and a
heterozygous mutation in the CC2D2A gene (R1049X; 612013.0007),
consistent with JBTS9 (612285). She had hypotonia, ataxia, mental
retardation, and the molar tooth sign on brain MRI, but no liver, renal,
or retinal involvement.

.0006
JOUBERT SYNDROME 9/15, DIGENIC
CEP41, ARG360CYS

In a Swiss patient with digenic inheritance of Joubert syndrome, Lee et
al. (2012) identified a heterozygous 1078C-T transition in exon 11 of
the CEP41 gene resulting in an arg360-to-cys (R360C) substitution in a
conserved residue consistent with JBTS15 (614464), and a heterozygous
mutation in the CC2D2A gene (E1447A; 612013.0009), predicted to be a
potentially deleterious sequence variant and consistent with JBTS9
(612285). She had hypotonia, ataxia, mental retardation, oculomotor
apraxia, bilateral preaxial polydactyly, and the molar tooth sign on
brain MRI, but no liver, renal, or retinal involvement.

.0007
JOUBERT SYNDROME 15
CEP41, SER28TER

In an Italian patient with JBTS15 (614464), Lee et al. (2012) identified
a heterozygous 83C-A transversion in exon 2 of the CEP41 gene, resulting
in a ser28-to-ter (S28X) substitution. A second pathogenic mutation was
not identified. The patient had hypotonia, ataxia, mental retardation,
oculomotor apraxia, breathing difficulties, and the molar tooth sign on
brain MRI, but no liver, renal, or retinal involvement.

REFERENCE 1. Lee, J. E.; Silhavy, J. L.; Zaki, M. S.; Schroth, J.; Bielas, S.
L.; Marsh, S. E.; Olvera, J.; Brancati, F.; Iannicelli, M.; Ikegami,
K.; Schlossman, A. M.; Merriman, B.; and 18 others: CEP41 is mutated
in Joubert syndrome and is required for tubulin glutamylation at the
cilium. Nature Genet. 44: 193-199, 2012.

2. Yamada, T.; Kayashima, T.; Yamasaki, K.; Ohta, T.; Yoshiura, K.;
Matsumoto, N.; Fujimoto, S.; Niikawa, N.; Kishino, T.: The gene TSGA14,
adjacent to the imprinted gene MEST, escapes genomic imprinting. Gene 288:
57-63, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/1/2012

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 10/26/2006

EDITED carol: 02/02/2012
ckniffin: 2/1/2012
mgross: 1/27/2012
carol: 10/26/2006

602235	TITLE *602235 POTASSIUM CHANNEL, VOLTAGE-GATED, KQT-LIKE SUBFAMILY, MEMBER 2; KCNQ2
;;POTASSIUM CHANNEL, VOLTAGE-GATED, SUBFAMILY Q, MEMBER 2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The KCNQ2 gene encodes a voltage-gated potassium channel that is
expressed in the brain (Biervert et al., 1998).

CLONING

In the course of a search for the mutational basis of benign familial
neonatal seizures (BFNS1; 121200) mapping to chromosome 20, Singh et al.
(1998) identified a novel voltage-gated potassium channel gene that
showed significant homology to KVLQT1 (also known as KCNQ1 and KCNA9),
the chromosome 11 potassium channel gene responsible for long QT
syndrome-1 (192500) and a form of Jervell and Lange-Nielsen
cardioauditory syndrome (220400). A single cDNA isolated with the D20S24
probe in this region showed significant homology with KVLQT1. Singh et
al. (1998) found that the KCNQ2 cDNA hybridized to transcripts of
approximately 1.5, 3.8, and 9.5 kb on Northern blots made from brain.

By positional cloning from the 20q13.3 region where 1 form of benign
familial neonatal seizures is known to map, Biervert et al. (1998)
independently isolated the KCNQ2 gene and found that it was expressed in
brain.

Yang et al. (1998) described the cloning, tissue distribution, and
functional expression of KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 (602232), both of which are
associated with benign neonatal epilepsy. The deduced 871-amino acid
KCNQ2 protein has features of a voltage-gated potassium channel.
Northern blot analysis of 8 human tissues detected an 8.5-kb KCNQ2
transcript in brain only. Within brain, highest expression of KCNQ2 was
detected in cerebellar cortex, amygdala, caudate nucleus, and
hippocampus.

GENE STRUCTURE

Biervert and Steinlein (1999) determined that the KCNQ2 gene has at
least 18 exons, occupying more than 50 kb of genomic DNA. Splice
variants were identified. For example, in fetal brain, exon 8 was absent
in all transcripts, while this exon was present in clones derived from
adult brain RNA.

GENE FUNCTION

Biervert et al. (1998) found that expression of human KCNQ2 in Xenopus
laevis oocytes led to potassium-selective currents that activated slowly
with depolarization.

The M channel is a slowly activating and deactivating potassium
conductance that plays a critical role in determining the subthreshold
electroexcitability of neurons as well as the responsiveness to synaptic
inputs. The M current was first described in peripheral sympathetic
neurons, and differential expression of this conductance produces
subtypes of sympathetic neurons with distinct firing patterns. The M
channel is also expressed in many neurons in the central nervous system.
Wang et al. (1998) showed that the KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 channel subunits can
coassemble to form a channel with essentially identical biophysical
properties and pharmacologic sensitivities to the native M channel and
that the pattern of KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 gene expression is consistent with
these genes encoding the native M channel.

Yang et al. (1998) demonstrated that KCNQ2 and KCNQ3, both of which are
associated with benign neonatal epilepsy, interact functionally with
each other and with KCNE1 (176261), which is mutant in a form of Jervell
and Lange-Nielsen syndrome and in 1 form of long QT syndrome.

Cooper et al. (2000) provided information regarding the in vivo
distribution and biochemical characteristics of human brain KCNQ2 and
KCNQ3, the 2 channel subunits that form M channels when expressed in
vitro, and, when mutated, cause the dominantly inherited epileptic
syndrome, benign familial neonatal seizures. They found that the KCNQ2
and KCNQ3 proteins are colocalized in a somatodendritic pattern on
pyramidal and polymorphic neurons in the human cortex and hippocampus.
Immunoreactivity for KCNQ2, but not KCNQ3, is also prominent in some
terminal fields, suggesting a presynaptic role for a distinct subgroup
of M channels in the regulation of action potential propagation and
neurotransmitter release. KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 could be coimmunoprecipitated
from brain lysates. Further, both proteins were coassociated with
tubulin (see 602529) and protein kinase A (see 176911) within a triton
X-100-insoluble protein complex. Cooper et al. (2000) suggested that
these studies provided a view of a signaling complex that may be
important for cognitive function as well as epilepsy, and that analysis
of this complex may shed light on the transduction pathway linking
muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (see 118510) activation to M-channel
inhibition.

By recording channel currents produced in cRNA-injected Xenopus oocytes,
Zhang et al. (2003) found that phosphatidylinositol (4,5)-bisphosphate
(PIP2) activated all members of the KCNQ channel family analyzed,
including human KCNQ2 and heterodimers of human KCNQ2 and rat Kcnq3.
Similar results were obtained with mammalian cells expressing KCNQ2 and
Kcnq3. Mutation of his328-to-cys in KCNQ2 and his330-to-cys in Kcnq3
reduced or eliminated PIP2-mediated channel activation. Wortmannin, a
pharmacologic inhibitor of PIP2 regeneration, slowed the recovery from
PIP2 hydrolysis and decreased the sensitivity of the KCNQ2/Kcnq3 channel
to PIP2. Zhang et al. (2003) concluded that PIP2 acts as a
membrane-diffusible second messenger to regulate the activity of KCNQ
currents.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Benign Familial Neonatal Seizures 1

In affected members of a family with benign familial neonatal seizures-1
(BFNS1; 121200), Singh et al. (1998) identified a small deletion on
chromosome 20q encompassing the KCNQ2 gene. The finding was confirmed by
fluorescence in situ hybridization in an affected individual who
presented with seizures beginning at 3 days and had 118 generalized
seizures until the age of 23 days. A single seizure was observed at 3.5
months in conjunction with an acute infection of the middle ear with
fever, but no seizures were observed thereafter. Singh et al. (1998)
also identified different heterozygous mutations in the KCNQ2 gene (see,
e.g., 602235.0001 and 602235.0002) in additional families with BFNS1.

In a large pedigree with BFNS1, Biervert et al. (1998) found a 5-bp
insertion (602235.0003) that was predicted to delete more than 300 amino
acids from the C terminus of KCNQ2. Expression of the mutant channel did
not yield measurable currents. Thus, impairment of potassium-dependent
repolarization was indicated as the cause of this age-specific epileptic
syndrome.

Dedek et al. (2001) reported a Caucasian family in which BFNS was
followed later in life by myokymia, involuntary contractions of skeletal
muscles (see 121200). All affected members of the family carried an
arg207-to-trp mutation (R207W; 602235.0006) that neutralized a charged
amino acid in the S4 voltage-sensor segment of KCNQ2. This substitution
led to a shift of voltage-dependent activation of KCNQ2 and a dramatic
slowing of activation upon depolarization. Myokymia was thought to
result from hyperexcitability of the lower motoneuron; indeed both KCNQ2
and KCNQ3 mRNAs were detected in the anterior horn of the spinal cord
where the cells of the lower motoneurons arise. Dedek et al. (2001)
proposed that a difference in firing patterns between motoneurons and
central neurons, combined with the drastically slowed voltage activation
of the R207W mutant, explained by this particular KCNQ2 mutant caused
myokymia in addition to BFNC. Wuttke et al. (2007) identified a mutation
in the KCNQ2 gene (R207Q; 602235.0011) in a patient with isolated
myokymia.

Heron et al. (2007) identified 3 deletions and 1 duplication of more
than 1 exon of the KCNQ2 gene in 4 (44%) of 9 unrelated families with
benign familial neonatal seizures who had previously tested negative for
coding or splice site mutations. The changes were predicted to result in
haploinsufficiency. The authors suggested that multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) should be a second-tier
testing strategy in candidate cases.

- Early Infantile Epileptic Encephalopathy 7

In a mother and son with severe epilepsy, Dedek et al. (2003) identified
a heterozygous mutation in the KCNQ2 gene (602235.0008). Both patients
had an atypical course characterized by drug-resistant seizures
necessitating ACTH treatment. In addition, the son developed early
infantile epileptic encephalopathy with delayed psychomotor development
(EIEE7; 613720). Functional expression studies showed that the S247W
mutation reduced channel currents by more than 50% in homomeric KCNQ2
channels. Dedek et al. (2003) emphasized that some KCNQ2 mutations may
be associated with a more severe phenotype than is typical for BFNC.

Weckhuysen et al. (2012) identified 7 different heterozygous mutations
in the KCNQ2 gene (see, e.g., 602235.0012-602235.0014) in 8 (10%) of 80
patients with neonatal or early infantile seizures and associated
psychomotor retardation. The mutations arose de novo in 7 cases; in 1
case, a severely affected patient inherited the mutation from her
father, who had a milder phenotype and was mosaic for the mutation. The
findings indicated that KCNQ2 mutations can occur in a substantial
proportion of patients with EIEE.

ANIMAL MODEL

The electroconvulsive threshold (ECT) test has been used extensively to
determine the protection conferred by antiepileptic drug candidates
against induced seizures in rodents. Yang et al. (2003) adopted the ECT
test to screen the progeny of ethylnitrosourea-treated male C57BL/6J
mice. In a small-scale screen, several mutant lines conferring a low
threshold to ECT minimal clonic seizures were mapped to the telomeric
region of mouse chromosome 2 in independent founder families. Genetic
and physical mapping data indicated that several lines shared a single
mutation, Szt1 (seizure threshold-1), consisting of a 300-kb deletion of
genomic DNA involving 3 known genes. Two of these genes, Kcnq2 and
Chrna4 (118504), are known to be mutated in human epilepsy families.
Szt1 homozygotes and heterozygotes displayed similar phenotypes to those
found in the respective Kcnq2 knockout mutant mice, suggesting that
Kcnq2 haploinsufficiency may lie at the root of the Szt1 seizure
sensitivity.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SEIZURES, BENIGN FAMILIAL NEONATAL, 1
KCNQ2, TYR284CYS

In affected members of a family with benign familial neonatal seizures
(121200), Singh et al. (1998) demonstrated a TAC-to-TGC transition
converting codon 284 from tyrosine to cysteine. The family was too small
to permit demonstration of linkage to chromosome 20. The mutation
occurred in the pore region of the channel.

.0002
SEIZURES, BENIGN FAMILIAL NEONATAL, 1
KCNQ2, ALA306THR

In their BFNS kindred 1705, Singh et al. (1998) demonstrated that
individuals affected with benign familial neonatal seizures (121200) had
an ala306-to-thr (A306T) amino acid substitution in the S6 transmembrane
segment. This alanine residue was conserved in all members of the
Shaker, Shab, Shaw, and Shal subfamilies of potassium channels.

.0003
SEIZURES, BENIGN FAMILIAL NEONATAL, 1
KCNQ2, 5-BP INS

Biervert et al. (1998) identified an insertional mutation in the KCNQ2
gene in a large Australian Caucasian pedigree with benign familial
neonatal seizures (121200) previously reported by Berkovic et al.
(1994). Biervert et al. (1998) found a heterozygous 5-bp insertion at
the triplet encoding amino acid 534 in a segment highly conserved
between KCNQ2 and KCNQ1 (607542), which is mutated in type 1 long QT
syndrome (192500). The resulting frameshift was predicted to cause a
premature stop, which would truncate more than 300 amino acids. Of 13
affected family members, 10 had known neonatal seizures. Two patients
had afebrile seizures later, 1 of whom did not have neonatal seizures.
One mutation carrier was unaffected, indicating reduced penetrance.
Berkovic et al. (1994) noted the phenotypic heterogeneity in this
family.

.0004
SEIZURES, BENIGN FAMILIAL NEONATAL, 1
KCNQ2, 1-BP DEL, 1846T

In a patient with benign familial neonatal seizures (121200), Biervert
and Steinlein (1999) identified a 1-bp deletion, 1846delT, in the KCNQ2
gene which caused a frameshift in exon 16, removing 228 amino acids from
the predicted wildtype sequence and replacing them with a stretch of 283
amino acids showing a completely different sequence. The mutation was
also present in the DNA sample obtained from the father but not in that
from the mother. The paternal grandmother reportedly had also suffered
from neonatal seizures but was not available for study.

.0005
SEIZURES, BENIGN FAMILIAL NEONATAL, 1
KCNQ2, ARG214TRP

In a 4-generation Italian family segregating benign familial neonatal
seizures (121200), del Giudice et al. (2000) identified a 686C-T
mutation in exon 3 of the KCNQ2 gene, resulting in an arg214-to-trp
substitution. The mutation was found in the 8 affected members of the
pedigree and in 1 unaffected subject who was an obligate carrier. The
mutation occurred in the transmembrane domain S4, neutralizing one of
the conserved, positively charged residues of that segment. The
substitution abolished an AgeI restriction site and was not detected in
150 Italian controls.

.0006
SEIZURES, BENIGN FAMILIAL NEONATAL, 1, AND/OR MYOKYMIA
KCNQ2, ARG207TRP

In 5 affected members of a Caucasian family with BFNS and/or myokymia
(see 121200), Dedek et al. (2001) identified a heterozygous C-to-T
transition in exon 3 of the KCNQ2 gene, resulting in an arg207-to-trp
(R207W) substitution in the fourth transmembrane domain. Three mutation
carriers had BFNS with myokymia, 1 had isolated myokymia without
seizures, and 1 had neonatal seizures with no clinical signs of
myokymia, although electromyography demonstrated spontaneous discharges
of grouped motor unit potentials. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that the mutation resulted in a shift of voltage-dependent
activation of KCNQ2 and a dramatic slowing of activation upon
depolarization. The loss of potassium current was more severe compared
to other KCNQ2 mutations and showed a dominant-negative effect.

In a patient with isolated myokymia and no history of neonatal seizures,
Wuttke et al. (2007) identified an R207Q mutation (602235.0011) in the
same codon as the R207W mutation. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that mutant R207W and R207Q channels had large depolarizing
shifts and marked slowing of activation time compared to wildtype
channels. Coexpression with wildtype channels showed a dominant-negative
effect reducing the current amplitude by 70% after short depolarization.

.0007
SEIZURES, BENIGN FAMILIAL NEONATAL, 1
EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 7, INCLUDED
KCNQ2, LYS526ASN

In 4 affected members of a family with BFNS1 (121200), Borgatti et al.
(2004) identified a heterozygous 1620G-A transition in the KCNQ2 gene,
resulting in a lys526-to-asn (K526N) substitution in the C-terminal
region of the protein. The mutation is located in a highly conserved
region within alpha-helix B that is necessary for calmodulin binding.
Functional expression studies showed that the K526N mutation decreased
the voltage-dependence of the channel. Although 2 patients had a
phenotype consistent with typical BFNS, the other 2 patients had a
complex phenotype that was atypical and severe, consistent with an
encephalopathy (EIEE7; 613720). One developed an extremely unfavorable
outcome, profound mental retardation, and spastic quadriparesis. The
other continued to have focal seizures until late infancy with a
moderate degree of mental retardation and a mild cerebellar syndrome.
Borgatti et al. (2004) noted that some patients with BFNS may experience
seizures later in life or a different set of epileptic subtypes
sometimes associated with severe neurologic and intellectual impairment.
Overall, the clinical, genetic, and functional data did not provide a
definitive explanation for the wide range of phenotypic variability
observed in the described family, therefore preventing
genotype-phenotype correlations. The authors postulated that the
phenotypic variability could be due to the interplay of pathogenic
mutations, modifier genes, and more subtle environmental factors.

For a similar EIEE7 phenotype, see Dedek et al. (2003) and 602235.0008.

.0008
EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 7
KCNQ2, SER247TRP

In a mother and son with severe epilepsy, Dedek et al. (2003) identified
a heterozygous C-to-G transversion in exon 5 of the KCNQ2 gene,
resulting in a ser247-to-trp (S247W) substitution in the fifth
transmembrane residue of the protein. The mutation was not identified in
202 control chromosomes. Both patients had an atypical course
characterized by drug-resistant seizures necessitating ACTH treatment.
In addition, the son developed epileptic encephalopathy with delayed
psychomotor development (EIEE7; 613720). Functional expression studies
showed that the S247W mutation reduced channel currents by more than 50%
in homomeric KCNQ2 channels. Dedek et al. (2003) emphasized that some
KCNQ2 mutations may be associated with a more severe phenotype than is
typical for BFNS.

For a similar EIEE7 phenotype, see Borgatti et al. (2004) and
602235.0007.

.0009
SEIZURES, BENIGN FAMILIAL NEONATAL, 1
EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 7, INCLUDED
KCNQ2, 10-BP DEL/1-BP INS, NT761

In 9 affected members of a large Italian family with BFNS1 (121200),
Bassi et al. (2005) identified a heterozygous 10-bp deletion and 1-bp
insertion (761del10insA) in the KCNQ2 gene, resulting in a truncated
N-terminal peptide of 194 residues. The resultant mutant protein lacks
the S4 domain, which is critical for voltage sensing. In vitro
functional expression studies showed that the mutant KCNQ2 subunit was
unable to form functional homomeric potassium channels, suggesting
haploinsufficiency rather than a dominant-negative effect. One affected
family member developed severe epilepsy associated with mild mental
retardation and persistent neurologic problems in adult life (EIEE7;
613720); this phenotypic variability was considered by the authors to be
consistent with the fact that 10 to 15% of BFNS individuals experience
seizure manifestations later in life.

.0010
SEIZURES, BENIGN FAMILIAL NEONATAL, 1
KCNQ2, 1-BP DEL, 2127T

In affected members of a family with BFNS1 (121200), originally reported
by Rett and Teubel (1964), Zimprich et al. (2006) identified a
heterozygous 1-bp deletion (2127delT) in the last exon of the KCNQ2
gene, resulting in a replacement of the C terminus with 219 new amino
acids and a protein that is 56 residues longer than the wildtype
protein. Three of the 9 affected individuals later developed childhood
nocturnal generalized tonic-clonic seizures; 2 of the 3 also had simple
focal orofacial seizures.

.0011
SEIZURES, BENIGN FAMILIAL NEONATAL, 1, AND/OR MYOKYMIA
KCNQ2, ARG207GLN

In a 25-year-old Egyptian man with isolated myokymia (see 121200),
Wuttke et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous G-to-A transition in the
KCNQ2 gene, resulting in an arg207-to-gln (R207Q) substitution in a
highly conserved residue in the voltage sensor region of the potassium
channel. He had no history of neonatal seizures and no family history of
epilepsy or peripheral nerve hyperexcitability. Clinically, he had
permanent muscle overactivity in the distal upper extremities and small
amplitude movements of the fingers, which were not disabling. However,
he also reported exercise-induced cramps of both hands since childhood
and 4 episodes of exercise-induced generalized muscle stiffness. EMG
showed spontaneous irregular discharges consistent with myokymia. Wuttke
et al. (2007) noted that a mutation in the same codon (R207W;
602235.0006) had been associated with neonatal epilepsy and/or myokymia.
In vitro functional expression studies showed that mutant R207W and
R207Q channels had large depolarizing shifts and marked slowing of
activation time compared to wildtype channels. Coexpression with
wildtype channels showed a dominant-negative effect reducing the current
amplitude by 70% after short depolarization.

.0012
EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 7
KCNQ2, ARG213GLN

In a girl with EIEE7 (613720), Weckhuysen et al. (2012) identified a
heterozygous 638G-A transition in the KCNQ2 gene, resulting in an
arg213-to-gln (R213Q) substitution at a highly conserved residue in the
transmembrane domain. The mutation was not found in 276 control
individuals. The patient had onset of multiple daily seizures on the
second day of life, and the mother had noted jerking movements during
pregnancy. The patient had poor response to treatment, but the seizures
remitted at age 14 months. However, at age 2 years 10 months, she had
severe psychomotor retardation, could not roll over, was nonverbal, had
severe spastic quadriplegia, and some dysmorphic features. Her father,
who had benign neonatal seizures and myokymia, was mosaic for the
mutation, which was found in 30% of his lymphocytes.

.0013
EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 7
KCNQ2, MET546VAL

In a 9-year-old boy with EIEE7 (613720), Weckhuysen et al. (2012)
identified a de novo heterozygous 1636A-G transition in the KCNQ2 gene,
resulting in a met546-to-val (M546V) substitution at a highly conserved
residue in one of the calmodulin binding domains in the C-terminal
region. The mutation was not found in 276 control individuals. On the
third day of life, the patient had onset of multiple daily tonic
seizures resistant to treatment and associated with a burst suppression
pattern on EEG that evolved into multifocal epileptic activity. Seizures
remitted at age 3 years and the EEG was normal at age 8. However, he had
psychomotor retardation, mild spasticity, widely spaced gait, and lack
of speech development. Brain imaging showed lesions in the basal ganglia
and a thin posterior corpus callosum.

.0014
EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 7
KCNQ2, GLY290ASP

In 2 unrelated patients with EIEE7 (613720), Weckhuysen et al. (2012)
identified a de novo heterozygous 869G-A transition in the KCNQ2 gene,
resulting in a gly290-to-asp (G290D) substitution at a highly conserved
residue in the transmembrane domain. The mutation was not found in 276
control individuals. Both patients had onset of multiple daily tonic
seizures on the second day of life, but the seizures remitted at around
age 3 years. EEG studies were abnormal at first, but normalized over
time. Both patients showed psychomotor retardation and were nonverbal.
One had axial hypotonia and widely spaced gait, whereas the other had
spastic quadriparesis.

REFERENCE 1. Bassi, M. T.; Balottin, U.; Panzeri, C.; Piccinelli, P.; Castaldo,
P.; Barrese, V.; Soldovieri, M. V.; Miceli, F.; Colombo, M.; Bresolin,
N.; Borgatti, R.; Taglialatela, M.: Functional analysis of novel
KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 gene variants found in a large pedigree with benign
familial neonatal convulsions (BFNC). Neurogenetics 6: 185-193,
2005.

2. Berkovic, S. F.; Kennerson, M. L.; Howell, R. A.; Scheffer, I.
E.; Hwang, P. A.; Nicholson, G. A.: Phenotypic expression of benign
familial neonatal convulsions linked to chromosome 20. Arch. Neurol. 51:
1125-1128, 1994.

3. Biervert, C.; Schroeder, B. C.; Kubisch, C.; Berkovic, S. F.; Propping,
P.; Jentsch, T. J.; Steinlein, O. K.: A potassium channel mutation
in neonatal human epilepsy. Science 279: 403-406, 1998.

4. Biervert, C.; Steinlein, O. K.: Structural and mutational analysis
of KCNQ2, the major gene locus for benign familial neonatal convulsions. Hum.
Genet. 104: 234-240, 1999.

5. Borgatti, R.; Zucca, C.; Cavallini, A.; Ferrario, M.; Panzeri,
C.; Castaldo, P.; Soldovieri, M. V.; Baschirotto, C.; Bresolin, N.;
Dalla Bernardina, B.; Taglialatela, M.; Bassi, M. T.: A novel mutation
in KCNQ2 associated with BFNC, drug resistant epilepsy, and mental
retardation. Neurology 63: 57-65, 2004.

6. Cooper, E. C.; Aldape, K. D.; Abosch, A.; Barbaro, N. M.; Berger,
M. S.; Peacock, W. S.; Jan, Y. N.; Jan, L. Y.: Colocalization and
coassembly of two human brain M-type potassium channel subunits that
are mutated in epilepsy. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 4914-4919, 2000.

7. Dedek, K.; Fusco, L.; Teloy, N.; Steinlein, O. K.: Neonatal convulsions
and epileptic encephalopathy in an Italian family with a missense
mutation in the fifth transmembrane region of KCNQ2. Epilepsy Res. 54:
21-27, 2003.

8. Dedek, K.; Kunath, B.; Kananura, C.; Reuner, U.; Jentsch, T. J.;
Steinlein, O. K.: Myokymia and neonatal epilepsy caused by a mutation
in the voltage sensor of the KCNQ2 K(+) channel. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 98: 12272-12277, 2001.

9. del Giudice, E. M.; Coppola, G.; Scuccimarra, G.; Cirillo, G.;
Bellini, G.; Pascotto, A.: Benign familial neonatal convulsions (BFNC)
resulting from mutation of the KCNQ2 voltage sensor. Europ. J. Hum.
Genet. 8: 994-997, 2000.

10. Heron, S. E.; Cox, K.; Grinton, B. E.; Zuberi, S. M.; Kivity,
S.; Afawi, Z.; Straussberg, R.; Berkovic, S. F.; Scheffer, I. E.;
Mulley, J. C.: Deletions or duplications in KCNQ2 can cause benign
familial neonatal seizures. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 44: 791-796,
2007.

11. Rett, A.; Teubel, R.: Neugeborenenkraempfe im Rahmen einer epileptisch
belasteten Familie. Wien. Klin. Wschr. 76: 609-613, 1964.

12. Singh, N. A.; Charlier, C.; Stauffer, D.; DuPont, B. R.; Leach,
R. J.; Melis, R.; Ronen, G. M.; Bjerre, I.; Quattlebaum, T.; Murphy,
J. V.; McHarg, M. L.; Gagnon, D.; Rosales, T. O.; Peiffer, A.; Anderson,
V. E.; Leppert, M.: A novel potassium channel gene, KCNQ2, is mutated
in an inherited epilepsy of newborns. Nature Genet. 18: 25-29, 1998.

13. Wang, H.-S.; Pan, Z.; Shi, W.; Brown, B. S.; Wymore, R. S.; Cohen,
I. S.; Dixon, J. E.; McKinnon, D.: KCNQ2 and KCNQ3 potassium channel
subunits: molecular correlates of the M-channel. Science 282: 1890-1893,
1998.

14. Weckhuysen, S.; Mandelstam, S.; Suls, A.; Audenaert, D.; Deconinck,
T.; Claes, L. R. F.; Deprez, L.; Smets, K.; Hristova, D.; Yordanova,
I.; Jordanova, A.; Ceulemans, B.; and 11 others: KCNQ2 encephalopathy:
emerging phenotype of a neonatal epileptic encephalopathy. Ann. Neurol. 71:
15-25, 2012.

15. Wuttke, T. V.; Jurkat-Rott, K.; Paulus, W.; Garncarek, M.; Lehmann-Horn,
F.; Lerche, H.: Peripheral nerve hyperexcitability due to dominant-negative
KCNQ2 mutations. Neurology 69: 2045-2053, 2007.

16. Yang, W.-P.; Levesque, P. C.; Little, W. A.; Conder, M. L.; Ramakrishnan,
P.; Neubauer, M. G.; Blanar, M. A.: Functional expression of two
KvLQT1-related potassium channels responsible for an inherited idiopathic
epilepsy. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 19419-19423, 1998.

17. Yang, Y.; Beyer, B. J.; Otto, J. F.; O'Brien, T. P.; Letts, V.
A.; White, H. S.; Frankel, W. N.: Spontaneous deletion of epilepsy
gene orthologs in a mutant mouse with a low electroconvulsive threshold. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12: 975-984, 2003.

18. Zhang, H.; Craciun, L. C.; Mirshahi, T.; Rohacs, T.; Lopes, C.
M. B.; Jin, T.; Logothetis, D. E.: PIP(2) activates KCNQ channels,
and its hydrolysis underlies receptor-mediated inhibition of M currents. Neuron 37:
963-975, 2003.

19. Zimprich, F.; Ronen, G. M.; Stogmann, W.; Baumgartner, C.; Stogmann,
E.; Rett, B.; Pappas, C.; Leppert, M.; Singh, N.; Anderson, V. E.
: Andreas Rett and benign familial neonatal convulsions revisited. Neurology 67:
864-866, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/18/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/2/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/1/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/9/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/31/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/2/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/22/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/17/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/29/2001
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 4/5/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/20/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/23/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/3/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/18/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/13/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/30/1997

EDITED carol: 11/06/2012
ckniffin: 10/18/2012
carol: 2/10/2011
ckniffin: 2/9/2011
mgross: 8/18/2010
terry: 8/2/2010
carol: 10/5/2009
ckniffin: 9/11/2009
alopez: 10/13/2008
wwang: 4/14/2008
ckniffin: 4/1/2008
wwang: 1/23/2008
ckniffin: 1/9/2008
wwang: 8/20/2007
ckniffin: 7/31/2007
wwang: 3/14/2006
ckniffin: 3/2/2006
wwang: 2/25/2005
ckniffin: 2/23/2005
ckniffin: 2/22/2005
tkritzer: 12/17/2004
ckniffin: 2/5/2003
alopez: 11/1/2001
terry: 10/29/2001
carol: 4/5/2001
mcapotos: 7/20/2000
mcapotos: 7/19/2000
mcapotos: 7/17/2000
mcapotos: 7/11/2000
terry: 6/14/2000
carol: 6/30/1999
mgross: 5/6/1999
mgross: 4/28/1999
terry: 4/23/1999
carol: 2/17/1999
alopez: 12/3/1998
terry: 12/3/1998
carol: 10/5/1998
carol: 8/18/1998
terry: 8/18/1998
alopez: 3/13/1998
mark: 1/14/1998
terry: 1/13/1998
alopez: 1/7/1998

600753	TITLE *600753 GOLGI APPARATUS PROTEIN 1; GLG1
;;GOLGI SIALOGLYCOPROTEIN MG-160;;
E-SELECTIN LIGAND 1, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; ESL1
DESCRIPTION MG-160, originally isolated from rat brain, is a conserved membrane
sialoglycoprotein residing in the medial cisternae of the Golgi
apparatus of most cells (Gonatas et al., 1989). MG-160 appears early in
the developing chick embryo and persists in most cells throughout
embryonic development and in the adult animal (Mourelatos et al., 1995).
The early appearance and ubiquitous presence of MG-160 suggests that the
protein plays an important role in the biogenesis and function of the
Golgi apparatus. MG-160 binds basic fibroblast growth factor (FGFB;
134920) and displays 90% identity of amino acids with CFR, a
cysteine-rich receptor for several fibroblast growth factors that was
isolated from chick embryos. Unlike the fibroblast growth factor
receptors involved in signal transduction, MG-160 and its chick homolog,
CFR, do not display the extracellular Ig-like repeats and the
intracytoplasmic tyrosine kinase domains. In addition to CFR, MG-160 is
highly homologous to ESL-1, a ligand for E-selectin (SELE; 131210).

Mourelatos et al. (1996) isolated and characterized human GLG1 cDNAs.
The full-length cDNA encodes a predicted 1,179-amino acid protein that
has a signal peptide, a proline- and glutamine-rich region, a
cysteine-rich domain containing 5 potential asparagine-linked
glycosylation sites, a hydrophobic transmembrane domain, and a short
carboxy-terminal tail. The proline- and glutamine-rich segment contains
a polyglutamine stretch which is encoded by an uninterrupted exonic
sequence of CAG-CAA repeats. Human GLG1 shows between 88% and 95%
overall amino acid identity with rat Glg1, mouse Esl1, and chicken CRF.
The authors detected 3 transcripts of 10, 5, and 3.8 kb in several human
fetal and adult tissues by Northern blot analysis.

Mourelatos et al. (1995) localized the human GLG1 gene for MG-160 to
16q22-q23 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. If MG-160, as has been
postulated, mediates the secretion of fibroblast growth factors, the
chromosomal localization of the gene may facilitate understanding of the
role of the gene in human disease.

By Southern blot analysis of an interspecific backcross panel, Willmroth
and Beaudet (1999) mapped Esl1, the mouse homolog of the GLG1 gene, to
chromosome 8, in a region showing homology of synteny to human 16q. The
mouse gene contains 27 exons and extends over 75 kb.

REFERENCE 1. Gonatas, J. O.; Mezitis, S. G. E.; Stieber, A.; Fleischer, B.;
Gonatas, N. K.: MG-160. A novel sialoglycoprotein of the medical
cisternae of the Golgi apparatus. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 646-653, 1989.

2. Mourelatos, Z.; Gonatas, J. O.; Cinato, E.; Gonatas, N. K.: Cloning
and sequence analysis of the human MG160, a fibroblast growth factor
and E-selectin binding membrane sialoglycoprotein of the Golgi apparatus. DNA
Cell Biol. 15: 1121-1128, 1996.

3. Mourelatos, Z.; Gonatas, J. O.; Nycum, L. M.; Gonatas, N. K.; Biegel,
J. A.: Assignment of the GLG1 gene for MG-160, a fibroblast growth
factor and E-selectin binding membrane sialoglycoprotein of the Golgi
apparatus, to chromosome 16q22-q23 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 28:
354-355, 1995.

4. Willmroth, F.; Beaudet, A. L.: Structure of the murine E-selectin
ligand 1 (ESL-1) gene and assignment to chromosome 8. Mammalian Genome 10:
1085-1088, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 07/06/2000
Sheryl A. Jankowski - updated: 6/8/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/28/1995

EDITED mgross: 07/06/2000
psherman: 6/8/1999
jamie: 5/8/1997
mark: 8/28/1995

194510	TITLE *194510 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 3; ZNF3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a consensus sequence of a mouse zinc finger motif as probe,
Pannuti et al. (1988) obtained a partial clone of ZNF3, which they
called cHF.12, from a placenta cDNA library. ZNF3 has at least 6 finger
repeats. Northern blot analysis of mRNA from cell lines of various
tissue origin showed ubiquitous expression of a 3.5-kb transcript.
Expression of ZNF3 was drastically reduced upon terminal differentiation
of 2 human myeloid cell lines.

MAPPING

Using a cDNA probe isolated from a human liver cDNA library by means of
a mouse DNA segment containing multiple copies of a 7-amino acid zinc
finger domain, for the study of human-hamster cell hybrids, Archidiacono
et al. (1989) showed that one sequence identified by probe A8-51 is
located on chromosome 5.

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the ZNF3
gene to chromosome 7 (TMAP WI-30599).

REFERENCE 1. Archidiacono, N.; Grimaldi, G.; Rocchi, M.; Romeo, G.: Mapping
of three sequenced clones coding for Zn(++) finger proteins. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 51: 952 only, 1989.

2. Pannuti, A.; Lanfrancone, L.; Pascucci, A.; Pelicci, P.-G.; La
Mantia, G.; Lania, L.: Isolation of cDNAs encoding finger proteins
and measurement of the corresponding mRNA levels during myeloid terminal
differentiation. Nucleic Acids Res. 16: 4227-4237, 1988.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/25/2002
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 8/28/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/5/1989

EDITED mgross: 10/25/2002
joanna: 8/28/2002
dkim: 6/25/1998
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/13/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
carol: 12/14/1989
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 9/5/1989

611422	TITLE *611422 MEIOTIC NUCLEAR DIVISION 1, S. CEREVISIAE. HOMOLOG OF; MND1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The product of the MND1 gene associates with HOP2 (608665) to form a
stable heterodimeric complex that binds DNA and stimulates the
recombinase activity of RAD51 (179617) and DMC1 (602721) (Chi et al.,
2007). Both the MND1 and HOP2 genes are indispensable for meiotic
recombination.

GENE FUNCTION

Tsubouchi and Roeder (2002) found that Mnd1-null yeast cells arrested in
meiotic prophase, with most double-strand breaks unrepaired.
Synaptonemal complex formation was incomplete, and homolog pairing was
severely reduced. Mnd1 localized to chromatin throughout meiotic
prophase, and this localization required Hop2. Mnd1 localized to
chromosomes even in mutants that failed to initiate meiotic
recombination. Hop2 and Mnd1 proteins coimmunoprecipitated from meiotic
cell extracts. Tsubouchi and Roeder (2002) concluded that HOP2 and MND1
work as a complex to promote meiotic chromosome pairing and
double-strand break repair.

Enomoto et al. (2006) demonstrated that coexpression of human MND1 and
HOP2 in E. coli resulted in the formation of stable heterodimers. The
HOP2-MND1 complex stimulated DMC1- and RAD51-mediated DNA strand
exchange, and preferentially bound to a 3-stranded DNA branch, which
mimics the strand-exchange intermediate. Enomoto et al. (2006) concluded
that the HOP2-MND1 complex may ensure proper pairing between homologous
chromosomes by stimulating strand exchange during meiosis.

Chi et al. (2007) showed that the Hop2 component of the mouse
recombinant Hop2-Mnd1 complex was the major DNA-binding subunit, and
that Mnd1 interacted with Rad51. Hop2-Mnd1 stabilized the
Rad51-single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) nucleoprotein filament, and enhanced
the ability of the Rad51-ssDNA nucleoprotein filament to capture duplex
DNA, which is an obligatory step in the formation of the synaptic
complex critical for DNA joint formation.

Pezza et al. (2007) found that the mouse Hop2-Mnd1 complex stimulated
Dmc1 to promote synaptic complex formation on long duplex DNAs. Synaptic
alignment was a consequence of the ability of Hop2-Mnd1 to stabilize
Dmc1-ssDNA nucleoprotein complex and facilitate the conjoining of DNA
molecules through the capture of double-stranded DNA by the Dmc1-ssDNA
nucleoprotein filament.

MAPPING

Hartz (2007) mapped the MND1 gene to chromosome 4q31.3 based on an
alignment of the MND1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AY028916) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.2).

REFERENCE 1. Chi, P.; San Filippo, J.; Sehorn, M. G.; Petukhova, G. V.; Sung,
P.: Bipartite stimulatory action of the Hop2-Mnd1 complex on the
Rad51 recombinase. Genes Dev. 21: 1747-1757, 2007.

2. Enomoto, R.; Kinebuchi, T.; Sato, M.; Yagi, H.; Kurumizaka, H.;
Yokoyama, S.: Stimulation of DNA strand exchange by the human TBPIP/Hop2-Mnd1
complex. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 5575-5581, 2006.

3. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/11/2007.

4. Pezza, R. J.; Voloshin, O. N.; Vanevski, F.; Camerini-Otero, R.
D.: Hop2/Mnd1 acts on two critical steps in Dmc1-promoted homologous
pairing. Genes Dev. 21: 1758-1766, 2007.

5. Tsubouchi, H.; Roeder, G. S.: The Mnd1 protein forms a complex
with Hop2 to promote homologous chromosome pairing and meiotic double-strand
break repair. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22: 3078-3088, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/11/2007

EDITED alopez: 09/11/2007
alopez: 9/11/2007

611122	TITLE *611122 ANKYRIN REPEAT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 28; ANKRD28
;;PHOSPHATASE INTERACTOR TARGETING K PROTEIN; PITK;;
KIAA0379
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1997) cloned ANKRD28, which they designated
KIAA0379. The deduced 882-amino acid protein shares 30.8% identity with
ANKRD3 (605706). RT-PCR analysis detected ubiquitous expression in all
human tissues tested.

By searching for PP1 (see 176875)-binding proteins in rabbit skeletal
muscle, followed by database analysis, Kwiek et al. (2006) identified
ANKRD28, which they called PITK. ANKRD28 contains putative PP1-binding
motifs at either terminus and 28 successive ankyrin repeats. Western
blot analysis of multiple mouse tissues revealed expression of ANKRD28
at similar levels in all tissues tested. In COS-7 cells,
immunofluorescence microscopy localized ANKRD28 to subnuclear bodies
with exclusion from nucleoli.

GENE FUNCTION

By in vitro studies, Kwiek et al. (2006) showed that recombinant ANKRD28
selectively inhibited the phosphorylase activity of PP1C in a
dose-dependent manner. Phosphorylation of ser1013 and ser1017, which lie
within the putative PP1-binding motif, negatively regulated ANKRD28
binding to PP1C. Immunoprecipitation studies showed that ANKRD28 bound
to hnRNP-K (600712). ANKRD28 selectively regulated phosphorylation of
hnRNP-K at ser284, an effect that was enhanced in vivo by an
S1013A/S1017A double mutant, suggesting that ANKRD28 targets PP1 in a
regulated manner to dephosphorylate hnRNP-K selectively at ser284.
Microarray analysis found that expression of ANKRD28 resulted in altered
expression of 47 genes, including marked induction of MEK5 (MAP2K5;
602520). Expression of only 2 of these genes was altered by the
S1013A/S1017A double mutant, indicating the importance of
phosphorylation in ANKRD28 function. In addition, the effects of ANKRD28
and S1013A/S1017A double-mutant ANKRD28 could be modulated by
coexpression of hnRNP-K.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1997) mapped the ANKRD28
gene to chromosome 3. Kwiek et al. (2006) noted that the ANKRD28 gene
maps to chromosome 3p25.1.

REFERENCE 1. Kwiek, N. C.; Thacker, D. F.; Datto, M. B.; Megosh, H. B.; Haystead,
T. A. J.: PITK, a PP1 targeting subunit that modulates the phosphorylation
of the transcriptional regulator hnRNP K. Cell. Signal. 18: 1769-1778,
2006.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Nakajima, D.; Ohira, M.; Seki, N.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which can code for large
proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4: 141-150, 1997.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 6/19/2007

EDITED carol: 01/02/2008
wwang: 6/20/2007

194548	TITLE *194548 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 74; ZNF74
DESCRIPTION See 194543. Aubry et al. (1993) found that the ZNF74 gene was
hemizygously deleted in 23 out of 24 DiGeorge syndrome (188400) patients
tested. ZNF74 mRNA transcripts were detected in human and mouse embryos
but not in adult tissues. Sequence analysis of a corresponding cDNA
demonstrated an open reading frame encoding 12 zinc finger motifs of the
Kruppel/TFIIIA type, as well as N-terminal and C-terminal non-zinc
finger domains. Changes in dosage of this putative transcription factor
occurring with deletion of ZNF74 may be involved in DiGeorge
developmental anomalies.

REFERENCE 1. Aubry, M.; Demczuk, S.; Desmaze, C.; Aikem, M.; Aurias, A.; Julien,
J.-P.; Rouleau, G. A.: Isolation of a zinc finger gene consistently
deleted in DiGeorge syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 1583-1587, 1993.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/20/1992

EDITED dkim: 06/26/1998
mimadm: 6/7/1995
carol: 10/18/1993
carol: 7/20/1992

600267	TITLE *600267 PROTEIN-TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE, NONRECEPTOR-TYPE, 13; PTPN13
;;PROTEIN-TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE PTPL1;;
FAS-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN-TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE 1; FAP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a PCR-based approach, Saras et al. (1994) cloned a cytoplasmic
protein tyrosine phosphatase of nonreceptor type, which they designated
PTPL1. Overlapping cDNA clones encompassed an open reading frame of
7,398 bp, predicting a 2,466-amino acid protein with a molecular mass of
275 kD. PTPL1 was found to have a wide tissue distribution, a 9.5-kb
transcript being expressed in most tissues. PTPL1 has a protein-tyrosine
phosphatase domain located in the C terminus. In the nonenzymatic part
of PTPL1, 3 different structural motifs were identified; 2 of these are
often found in proteins at the interface between the plasma membrane and
the cytoskeleton, namely, a domain with similarity to the band 4.1
(130500) superfamily, and a region consisting of 5 copies of an 80-amino
acid repeat found in a variety of cytoskeleton-associated proteins. In
addition, PTPL1 has a leucine zipper motif. Saras et al. (1994) noted
that PTPL1 was the largest known PTP and the only one known to contain a
leucine zipper motif. Its structure suggests that it may be able to form
dimers and may localize to the submembranous cytoskeleton.

Both Banville et al. (1994) and Maekawa et al. (1994) isolated the same
nonreceptor-type protein-tyrosine phosphatase, PTPN13, which they
referred to as hPTP1E and PTP-BAS, respectively. Maekawa et al. (1994)
originally isolated a PCR product from basophil mRNA using degenerate
primers and RT-PCR. This was used as a probe to screen a
basophil-enriched KU812E cell cDNA library. The fully characterized cDNA
was over 8.1 kb and encoded a 2,485-amino acid predicted reading frame.
The Banville et al. (1994) cDNA was isolated by screening a ZR-75-1
breast carcinoma cell line at low stringency with a probe for LAR cDNA
(179590). The cDNA they identified was over 8.3 kb long and encoded a
2,490-amino acid reading frame. Both groups noted that the N-terminal
region contains motifs showing similarity to the GLGF motifs found in
guanylate kinase proteins that may play a role in the subcellular
distribution of these proteins within specialized structures of the cell
membrane where cell-cell interactions occur. Maekawa et al. (1994)
presented evidence for alternative splicing producing at least 3
different isoforms of PTPN13. Banville et al. (1994) expressed the
protein in E. coli and showed that the recombinant protein had the
expected protein-tyrosine phosphatase activity. Northern blot analysis
showed expression in a variety of tissues with especially high levels in
the kidney, lung, and fetal brain.

PTPN13 binds to a negative regulatory domain in Fas that inhibits
Fas-induced apoptosis; it has therefore also been called Fas-associated
protein-tyrosine-1 (FAP1) (Inazawa et al., 1996).

GENE STRUCTURE

Yoshida et al. (2002) determined that the PTPN13 gene is located only
633 bp upstream from JNK3 (602897) in a head-to-head orientation. A
short G/C-rich region between the cap sites of the 2 genes suggested
that they might share a bidirectional promoter region that appears to
contain multiple cis elements. They found that the PTPN13 gene, which
contains 48 exons, initiates transcription within exon 2 and terminates
in exon 48.

MAPPING

Banville et al. (1994) assigned the PTPN13 gene to chromosome 11 by PCR
of somatic cell hybrid DNAs. In an erratum, they stated that the gene
had been assigned to chromosome 4 and not 11 as reported.

Inazawa et al. (1996) localized the PTPN13 gene to 4q21.3 by both
fluorescence in situ hybridization and PCR analysis of somatic cell
hybrids. They noted that the 4q21.3 chromosomal region contains a gene
for autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (173910) and is
frequently deleted in liver and ovarian cancers.

The assignment to 4q21 was confirmed by van den Maagdenberg et al.
(1996) who also mapped the gene to mouse chromosome 5.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Wang et al. (2004) performed a mutational analysis of the tyrosine
phosphatase gene superfamily in human cancers and identified 83 somatic
mutations in 6 protein-tyrosine phosphatases (PTPRF, 179590; PTPRG,
176886; PTPRT, 608712; PTPN3, 176877; PTPN13; and PTPN14, 603155),
affecting 26% of colorectal cancers and a smaller fraction of lung,
breast, and gastric cancers. Fifteen mutations were nonsense,
frameshift, or splice site alterations predicted to result in truncated
proteins lacking phosphatase activity. Wang et al. (2004) biochemically
examined 5 missense mutations in PTPRT, the most commonly altered
protein-tyrosine phosphatase, and found that they reduced phosphatase
activity. Expression of wildtype but not a mutant PTPRT in human cancer
cells inhibited cell growth. Wang et al. (2004) concluded that their
observations suggested that the mutated tyrosine phosphatases are tumor
suppressor genes, regulating cellular pathways that may be amenable to
therapeutic intervention.

REFERENCE 1. Banville, D.; Ahmad, S.; Stocco, R.; Shen, S.-H.: A novel protein-tyrosine
phosphatase with homology to both the cytoskeletal proteins of the
band 4.1 family and junction-associated guanylate kinases. J. Biol.
Chem. 269: 22320-22327, 1994. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem. 270:
10359 only, 1995.

2. Inazawa, J.; Ariyama, T.; Abe, T.; Druck, T.; Ohta, M.; Huebner,
K.; Yanagisawa, J.; Reed, J. C.; Sato, T.: PTPN13, a Fas-associated
protein tyrosine phosphatase, is located on the long arm of chromosome
4 at band q21.3. Genomics 31: 240-242, 1996.

3. Maekawa, K.; Imagawa, N.; Nagamatsu, M.; Harada, S.: Molecular
cloning of a novel protein-tyrosine phosphatase containing a membrane-binding
domain and GLGF repeats. FEBS Lett. 337: 200-206, 1994.

4. Saras, J.; Claesson-Welsh, L.; Heldin, C.-H.; Gonez, L. J.: Cloning
and characterization of PTPL1, a protein tyrosine phosphatase with
similarities to cytoskeletal-associated proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 269:
24082-24089, 1994.

5. van den Maagdenberg, A. M. J. M.; Olde Weghuis, D.; Rijss, J.;
Merkx, G. F.; Wieringa, B.; Geurts van Kessel, A.; Hendriks, W. J.
A. J.: The gene (PTPN13) encoding the protein tyrosine phosphatase
PTP-BL/PTP-BAS is located in mouse chromosome region 5E/F and human
chromosome region 4q21. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 74: 153-155, 1996.

6. Wang, Z.; Shen, D.; Parsons, D. W.; Bardelli, A.; Sager, J.; Szabo,
S.; Ptak, J.; Silliman, N.; Peters, B. A.; van der Heijden, M. S.;
Parmigiani, G.; Yan, H.; Wang, T.-L.; Riggins, G.; Powell, S. M.;
Willson, J. K. V.; Markowitz, S.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.;
Velculescu, V. E.: Mutational analysis of the tyrosine phosphatome
in colorectal cancers. Science 304: 1164-1166, 2004.

7. Yoshida, S.; Harada, H.; Nagai, H.; Fukino, K.; Teramoto, A.; Emi,
M.: Head-to-head juxtaposition of Fas-associated phosphatase-1 (FAP-1)
and c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase 3 (JNK3) genes: genomic structure and
seven polymorphisms of the FAP-1 gene. J. Hum. Genet. 47: 614-619,
2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/9/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/31/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/3/1995

EDITED carol: 02/12/2013
alopez: 6/10/2004
terry: 6/9/2004
carol: 1/3/2003
terry: 12/31/2002
dkim: 7/23/1998
alopez: 8/7/1997
mark: 4/4/1997
jenny: 3/31/1997
jamie: 1/29/1997
terry: 12/9/1996
mark: 3/18/1996
terry: 3/6/1996
mark: 9/13/1995
carol: 1/3/1995

610365	TITLE *610365 C1q- AND TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR-RELATED PROTEIN 1; C1QTNF1
;;G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR-INTERACTING PROTEIN; GIP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using the second intracellular loop of V2R (AVPR2; 300538) as bait in a
yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human kidney cDNA library, followed by RACE
of heart and HEK293 mRNA, Innamorati et al. (2002) cloned C1QTNF1, which
they called GIP. The deduced protein contains 379 amino acids. The
extracellular N terminus contains a TNF (see 191160) family
cysteine-rich region, followed by a transmembrane domain, a C-terminal
collagen-like sequence of 14 Gly-X-Y repeats, and a globular domain.
Northern blot analysis detected prominent expression in heart and lower
expression in placenta, liver, skeletal muscle, kidney, prostate and
ovary. Little to no expression was detected in other tissues examined.
In transfected HEK293 and COS cells, epitope-tagged GIP was expressed in
vesicular structures surrounding the nucleus and near the cell surface.
Western blot analysis detected epitope-tagged GIP at about 40 kD and 130
kD, suggesting GIP can form trimers.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay and pull-down experiments, Innamorati et
al. (2002) confirmed the interaction between the second intracellular
loop of V2R and the C-terminal portion of GIP.

GENE STRUCTURE

Innamorati et al. (2002) determined that the C1QTNF1 gene contains 3
coding exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Innamorati et al. (2002) mapped the
C1QTNF1 gene to chromosome 17q25.

REFERENCE 1. Innamorati, G.; Whang, M. I.; Molteni, R.; Le Gouill, C.; Birnbaumer,
M.: GIP, a G-protein-coupled receptor interacting protein. Regul.
Pept. 109: 173-179, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/30/2006

EDITED wwang: 05/14/2008
wwang: 9/7/2006
wwang: 8/31/2006

608277	TITLE *608277 CARBOHYDRATE SULFOTRANSFERASE 15; CHST15
;;B-CELL RAG-ASSOCIATED GENE; BRAG;;
N-ACETYLGALACTOSAMINE 4-SULFATE 6-O-SULFOTRANSFERASE;;
GalNAc4S-6ST;;
KIAA0598
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1998) cloned KIAA0598. The 3-prime untranslated
region of the transcript contains an Alu repeat. The deduced 561-amino
acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 72 kD. RT-PCR
detected high expression in all tissues examined.

By differential display of genes coexpressed with RAG1 (179615),
followed by screening a pre-B-cell cDNA library, Verkoczy et al. (1998)
cloned BRAG. The deduced protein contains 503 amino acids and has a
calculated molecular mass of 55 kD. In vitro translation resulted in a
doublet that migrated between 69 and 49 kD by SDS-PAGE. BRAG is a type
II transmembrane glycoprotein with an 81-amino acid cytoplasmic N
terminus, followed by a transmembrane domain, and a 405-amino acid
extracellular C terminus. The N terminus contains a putative
palmitoylation site and several phosphorylation sites, and the C
terminus contains 4 putative N-glycosylation sites. Verkoczy et al.
(1998) also identified a putative splice variant that contains an
in-frame 12-bp deletion. Northern blot analysis detected a 5.0-kb BRAG
transcript expressed in all B-cell lines that also expressed RAG1.
Little or no expression was detected in several nonlymphoid cell lines,
and no expression was detected in T-cell lines, irrespective of RAG1
expression. Northern blot analysis of whole tissues detected expression
in bone marrow and tonsil, but not in heart, thymus, or placenta. RNA
dot blot analysis detected high levels in fetal and adult spleen,
peripheral blood leukocytes, and lymph node, moderate levels in heart,
ovary, stomach, and brain putamen, and low levels in bone marrow and
several other tissues. Zoo blot analysis performed under low stringency
conditions indicated that the BRAG gene is conserved across eukaryotes.
High stringency conditions revealed predominant bands only in human and
baboon DNA.

Verkoczy et al. (2000) determined that BRAG is a membrane-integrated
glycoprotein that is expressed as a disulfide-linked dimer in B cells.
They found glycosylated and unglycosylated forms of BRAG, with apparent
molecular masses of about 63 and 52 kD, respectively, in the
intracellular fraction of tonsillar B cells and in transfected
erythroleukemia cells; only the glycosylated product associated with the
cell surface.

Ohtake et al. (2001) determined that the KIAA0589 protein (Nagase et
al., 1998) shares significant similarity with GalNAc4S-6ST purified from
squid cartilage. They also noted that the nucleotide sequence of
KIAA0598 is nearly identical to that of BRAG (Verkoczy et al., 1998),
but the deduced proteins are significantly different. However, the
KIAA0598 and BRAG proteins are both type II transmembrane proteins, and
both contain a 3-prime-phosphoadenosine 5-prime-phosphosulfate
(PAPS)-binding domain characteristic of most sulfotransferases.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yuki et al. (2000) determined that the BRAG gene contains 7 exons.

GENE FUNCTION

Verkoczy et al. (1998) showed that BRAG induced RAG1 expression
following transfection into a B-cell line, but not following
transfection into a nonlymphoid cell line.

Verkoczy et al. (2000) found that BRAG associated with phosphorylated
proteins in unstimulated mature B cells, but not in B cells activated
through B-cell receptor cross-linking. They presented evidence that BRAG
functions as a cell surface receptor capable of cell signaling.

Ohtake et al. (2001) characterized the enzymatic activity of KIAA0598,
which they designated GalNAc4S-6ST, following transfection into COS-7
cells and confirmed that it displays sulfotransferase activity. They
found that GalNAc4S-6ST catalyzed the transfer of sulfate from PAPS to
position 6 of the nonreducing terminal and internal N-acetylgalatosamine
4-sulfate residues in chondroitin sulfate A and dermatan sulfate. Only
nonreducing terminal N-acetylgalactosamine 4-sulfate residues were
sulfated when a trisaccharide and a pentasaccharide with sulfated groups
at position 4 of N-acetylgalactosamine residues were used as acceptors.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the KIAA0598
gene to chromosome 10.

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and FISH, Verkoczy et al. (1998) mapped
the CHST15 gene to chromosome 10q26. Using Southern blot analysis, they
determined that CHST15 is a single-copy gene that is not likely to be a
member of a multigene family.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.;
Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified
human genes. IX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from
brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 31-39,
1998.

2. Ohtake, S.; Ito, Y.; Fukuta, M.; Habuchi, O.: Human N-acetylgalactosamine
4-sulfate 6-O-sulfotransferase cDNA is related to human B cell recombination
activating gene-associated gene. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 43894-43900,
2001.

3. Verkoczy, L. K.; Guinn, B.; Berinstein, N. L.: Characterization
of the human B cell RAG-associated gene, hBRAG, as a B cell receptor
signal-enhancing glycoprotein dimer that associates with phosphorylated
proteins in resting B cells. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 20967-20979, 2000.

4. Verkoczy, L. K.; Marsden, P. A.; Berinstein, N. L.: hBRAG, a novel
B cell lineage cDNA encoding a type II transmembrane glycoprotein
potentially involved in the regulation of recombination activating
gene 1 (RAG1). Europ. J. Immun. 28: 2839-2853, 1998.

5. Yuki, M.; Yoshinaga, K.; Yamakawa, H.; Sakurada, K.; Sato, S.;
Yajima, A.; Horii, A.: Structure, expression and mutational analysis
of the hBRAG gene on 10q in the frequently deleted region in human
endometrial cancer. Oncol. Rep. 7: 1339-1342, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/8/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/21/2003

EDITED alopez: 06/17/2010
mgross: 3/9/2004
terry: 3/8/2004
mgross: 11/21/2003

600009	TITLE *600009 INTERFERON-ALPHA-INDUCIBLE PROTEIN 27; IFI27
;;INTERFERON-STIMULATED GENE 12; ISG12;;
ISG12A
DESCRIPTION Rasmussen et al. (1993) isolated a new cDNA, which they called p27, from
estradiol-treated human breast carcinoma cells. It encoded a putative
highly hydrophobic protein of 122 amino acids that had a 33% overall
sequence similarity to the product of the interferon-induced protein
IFI-6-16 (IFI616; 147572). The latter gene is transcriptionally induced
by interferons of the alpha and beta type. Rasmussen et al. (1993)
mapped the IFI27 gene to 14q32 by isotopic in situ hybridization. They
showed that it also is induced by interferon-alpha in human cell lines
of different origin and that expression is independent of the presence
of estradiol receptor in the cells.

REFERENCE 1. Rasmussen, U. B.; Wolf, C.; Mattei, M.-G.; Chenard, M.-P.; Bellocq,
J.-P.; Chambon, P.; Rio, M.-C.; Basset, P.: Identification of a new
interferon-alpha-inducible gene (p27) on human chromosome 14q32 and
its expression in breast carcinoma. Cancer Res. 53: 4096-4101, 1993.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/28/1994

EDITED mgross: 08/14/2007
carol: 5/24/1999
alopez: 6/19/1998
mimadm: 7/30/1994
jason: 6/28/1994

613321	TITLE *613321 GLUCOSIDE XYLOSYLTRANSFERASE 1; GXYLT1
;;GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE 8 DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 3; GLT8D3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

GXYLT1 is a xylosyltransferase (EC 2.4.2.-) that adds the first xylose
to O-glucose-modified residues in the epidermal growth factor (EGF;
131530) repeats of proteins such as NOTCH1 (190198) (Sethi et al.,
2010).

CLONING

By searching a database for sequences similar to the catalytic domain of
UGGT1 (605897), Sethi et al. (2010) identified human GXYLT1 and GXYLT2
(613322). The deduced 409-amino acid GXYLT1 protein contains a short
N-terminal cytoplasmic domain, followed by a transmembrane domain, a
stem region, and a large glycosyltransferase domain containing the
conserved DxD motif. GXYLT1 and GXYLT2 share about 50% amino acid
identity.

GENE FUNCTION

Using in vitro assays, Sethi et al. (2010) showed that engineered
soluble forms of GXYLT1 and GXYLT2 specifically used UDP-xylose as
substrate and transferred xylose to a synthetic acceptor containing an
O-glucose modification. HPLC analysis showed that the bond formed by
GXYLT1 involved an alpha-1,3 linkage. GXYLT1 and GXYLT2 functioned as
xylosyltransferases for the glucosylated peptide substrates EGF repeat 1
of factor VII (F7; 613878) and EGF repeats 1 through 5 of mouse Notch1.
Sethi et al. (2010) concluded that GXYLT1 and GXYLT2 are
UDP-D-xylose:beta-D-glucoside alpha-1,3-D-xylosyltransferases.

MAPPING

Hartz (2010) mapped the GXYLT1 gene to chromosome 12q12 based on an
alignment of the GXYLT1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC015597) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/19/2010.

2. Sethi, M. K.; Buettner, F. F. R.; Krylov, V. B.; Takeuchi, H.;
Nifantiev, N. E.; Haltiwanger, R. S.; Gerardy-Schahn, R.; Bakker,
H.: Identification of glycosyltransferase 8 family members as xylosyltransferases
acting on O-glucosylated Notch epidermal growth factor repeats. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 1582-1586, 2010.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/23/2010

EDITED carol: 04/11/2011
mgross: 3/29/2010
mgross: 3/23/2010

608065	TITLE *608065 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 38 (AMINO ACID TRANSPORTER), MEMBER 4; SLC38A4
;;NEUTRAL AMINO ACID TRANSPORTER 3; NAT3;;
N-SYSTEM AMINO ACID TRANSPORTER 3;;
AMINO ACID TRANSPORTER A3; ATA3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SLC38A4 is found predominantly in liver and transports both cationic and
neutral amino acids. The transport of cationic amino acids by SLC38A4 is
Na(+) and pH independent, while the transport of neutral amino acids is
Na(+) and pH dependent (Hatanaka et al., 2001).

CLONING

Using rat Ata3 as probe, Hatanaka et al. (2001) cloned SLC38A4, which
they designated ATA3, from a hepatoma cell line cDNA library. The
deduced 547-amino acid protein contains 10 or 11 transmembrane domains.
ATA3 shares 88% amino acid identity with rat Ata3, and it shares 47 to
57% identity with ATA1 (SLC38A1), ATA2 (SLC38A2; 605180), SN1 (SLC38A3;
604437), and SN2 (SLC38A5; 300649). Northern blot analysis of several
tissues detected a 4.0-kb transcript expressed almost exclusively in
liver; much lower expression was detected in kidney.

By searching databases for sequences similar to mouse Nat (SCN11A;
604385) and human SLC38A3, followed by library screening and nested PCR
of a breast carcinoma cell line cDNA library, Gu et al. (2001) cloned
SLC38A4, which they designated NAT3. The deduced 547-amino acid protein
contains 10 putative transmembrane domains and lacks a signal peptide.
NAT3 and mouse Nat share 55% amino acid identity. Northern blot analysis
of hepatoma and breast carcinoma cell lines detected a 4.0-kb
transcript. RT-PCR detected high expression of NAT3 in adult and
embryonic liver, with lower levels in muscle, kidney, and pancreas, and
trace amounts in placenta and heart. NAT3 transfected into Xenopus
oocytes was expressed at the plasma membrane.

GENE FUNCTION

By functional expression in retinal pigment epithelial cells, Hatanaka
et al. (2001) found that ATA3 mediated high-affinity, Na(+)-independent
transport of cationic amino acids, similar to system y(+)L transporters
(see 604235). Arginine uptake was saturable and occurred at all pH
values within the range 5.5 to 9.0. ATA3 also displayed low-affinity,
Na(+)-coupled transport of all neutral amino acids tested, including
alpha-(methylamino)isobutyric acid (MeAIB), the model substrate for
system A. Transport of glycine showed pH dependence, with maximal
transport at pH 8.5. Since liver does not express other high-affinity
cationic amino acid transporters, Hatanaka et al. (2001) hypothesized
that ATA3 may provide the major route for arginine uptake in liver.

Gu et al. (2001) found that Xenopus oocytes transfected with NAT3
displayed low-affinity alanine transport. Transport was Na(+) and pH
dependent. Alanine transport increased at higher pH, and like N system
transporters, Li(+) could partially substitute for Na(+). NAT3 also
transported histidine, glutamine, and lysine. By competition assay, Gu
et al. (2001) found that alanine transport was significantly inhibited
by several cationic and neutral amino acids, but not by MeAIB.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hatanaka et al. (2001) and Gu et al. (2001) determined that the SLC3A4
gene contains 16 exons and spans at least 40 kb. Exon 1 is not
translated.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Hatanaka et al. (2001) mapped the SLC38A4
gene to chromosome 12q13. Gu et al. (2001) mapped the SLC38A4 gene to
chromosome 12q12-q13 by electronic PCR and FISH.

REFERENCE 1. Gu, S.; Adan-Rice, D.; Leach, R. J.; Jiang, J. X.: A novel human
amino acid transporter, hNAT3: cDNA cloning, chromosomal mapping,
genomic structure, expression, and functional characterization. Genomics 74:
262-272, 2001.

2. Hatanaka, T.; Huang, W.; Ling, R.; Prasad, P. D.; Sugawara, M.;
Leibach, F. H.; Ganapathy, V.: Evidence for the transport of neutral
as well as cationic amino acids by ATA3, a novel and liver-specific
subtype of amino acid transport system A. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1510:
10-17, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/28/2003

EDITED mgross: 06/11/2007
alopez: 3/1/2004
mgross: 8/28/2003

604409	TITLE *604409 GLUCOCORTICOID MODULATORY ELEMENT-BINDING PROTEIN 1; GMEB1
;;PARVOVIRUS INITIATION FACTOR, p96 SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using heat-shock protein-27 (HSP27; 602195) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid
assay, Theriault et al. (1999) cloned a human cDNA encoding a deduced
573-amino acid protein that they called glucocorticoid modulatory
element-binding protein-1 (GMEB1). The GMEB1 protein has a KDWK domain,
contains sequences that are 95% identical to 3 tryptic peptides of rat
GMEB1, and shares 38% identity with rat GMEB2. A rabbit antibody raised
against a recombinant GMEB1 fusion protein detected an 85-kD polypeptide
in several human and mouse cell lines, in rat liver, and in different
mouse tissues. The authors suggested that the difference between the
apparent molecular mass of this polypeptide and the calculated molecular
mass of 62.5-kD derived from the protein sequence might reflect the high
content of acidic residues in GMEB1. By immunofluorescence of HeLa cells
expressing recombinant GMEB1, the authors localized the protein to the
nucleus. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments confirmed the in vivo
interaction of HSP27 with GMEB1. GMEB1 translated in reticulocyte
lysates bound to 21-bp GME oligonucleotides in a gel-shift assay. The
resulting complex was similar in size to the complex obtained using rat
liver nucleotide extracts. Both complexes were supershifted with an
antibody specific to human GMEB1. The authors concluded that GMEB1 is a
trans-acting DNA-binding protein that may mediate the demonstrated
functions of GME as a positive modulator of the glucocorticoid response.

Christensen et al. (1999) copurified GMEB1 in a complex with GMEB2
(607451) from HeLa cell nuclear extracts. Using degenerate primers
designed from the amino acid sequence followed by 5-prime and 3-prime
RACE, they cloned the full-length cDNAs. The deduced GMEB1 protein,
which they called p96, contains 563 amino acids and has a calculated
molecular mass of 60.4 kD. By SDS/PAGE analysis, the apparent molecular
mass was 96 kD. GMEB1 contains an N-terminal KDWK domain, and a highly
acidic C terminus that likely forms a coiled-coil structure. Recombinant
and endogenous GMEB1 share identical mobilities when analyzed by
SDS/PAGE analysis, indicating a lack of posttranslational modification.
Within the N-terminal KDWK domain, GMEB1 shares about 80% identity with
GMEB2; overall, they share about 40% identity.

GENE FUNCTION

Christensen et al. (1999) noted that the complex of GMEB1 and GMEB2,
which they designated parvovirus initiation factor (PIF) subunits p96
and p79, respectively, was originally recognized as a site-specific
DNA-binding complex essential for parvovirus DNA replication.
Christensen et al. (1999) found that GMEB2 and GMEB1 self-associate when
expressed alone, and that they form heterodimers when expressed
together. Cross-linking experiments indicated that no higher-order
multimers were formed. Each protein was active in promoter activation
assays, and the complex bound regulatory elements within the promoter
regions of tyrosine animotransferase (613018) and the transferrin
receptor gene (190010). Within its recognition site, PIF coordinately
bound 2 copies of the tetranucleotide PuCGPy, and these could be spaced
from 1 to 15 nucleotides apart.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the GMEB1
gene to chromosome 1 (TMAP stSG1681R).

REFERENCE 1. Christensen, J.; Cotmore, S. F.; Tattersall, P.: Two new members
of the emerging KDWK family of combinatorial transcription modulators
bind as a heterodimer to flexibly spaced PuCGPy half sites. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 19: 7741-7750, 1999.

2. Theriault, J. R.; Charette, S. J.; Lambert, H.; Landry, J.: Cloning
and characterization of hGMEB1, a novel glucocorticoid modulatory
element binding protein. FEBS Lett. 452: 170-176, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/27/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/6/2000

EDITED carol: 09/17/2009
wwang: 5/27/2005
cwells: 12/27/2002
carol: 1/7/2000

610589	TITLE *610589 RHO GTPase-ACTIVATING PROTEIN 11A; ARHGAP11A
;;KIAA0013
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated immature myeloid
leukemia cell line cDNA library, Nomura et al. (1994) cloned ARHGAP11A,
which they designated KIAA0013. The cDNA contains a repetitive element
at its 3-prime end, and the deduced 1,023-amino acid protein has a
rhoGAP domain and a putative tyrosine phosphorylation site. Northern
blot analysis detected highest expression in thymus, intermediate
expression in placenta, kidney, testis, and colon, weak expression in
heart, brain, lung, liver, skeletal muscle, pancreas, spleen, ovary,
small intestine, and peripheral blood leukocytes, and none in prostate.

Nomura et al. (1994) presented sequence features, including
hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity and regions of similarity to other known
genes, of genes identified by Nomura et al. (1994).

MAPPING

By PCR of a panel of human-rodent hybrid cell lines, Nomura et al.
(1994) mapped the ARHGAP11A gene to chromosome 15.

REFERENCE 1. Nomura, N.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Kawarabayasi,
Y.; Sato, S.; Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. I. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0001-KIAA0040) deduced by analysis
of randomly sampled cDNA clones from human immature myeloid cell line
KG-1 (Supplement). DNA Res. 1 (Suppl.): 47-56, 1994.

2. Nomura, N.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Kawarabayasi,
Y.; Sato, S.; Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. I. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0001-KIAA0040) deduced by analysis
of randomly samples cDNA clones from human immature myeloid cell line
KG-1. DNA Res. 1: 27-35, 1994. Note: Erratum: DNA Res. 2: 210 only,
1995.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/21/2006

EDITED alopez: 04/30/2013
alopez: 6/27/2007
wwang: 11/21/2006

125855	TITLE *125855 DIACYLGLYCEROL KINASE, ALPHA, 80-KD; DGKA
;;DIACYLGLYCEROL KINASE, ALPHA; DAGK1;;
DAGK, 80-KD;;
DGK-ALPHA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Diacylglycerol (DAG) kinases (DGKs or DAGKs; EC 2.7.1.107), such as
DGKA, phosphorylate DAG to phosphatidic acid, thus removing DAG.
Phosphatidic acid functions both in signaling and phospholipid
synthesis. In intracellular signaling pathways, DAGK can be viewed as a
modulator that competes with protein kinase C (PKC; see 600448) for the
second messenger DAG (summary by Topham and Prescott, 1999).

CLONING

By sequencing tryptic peptides of DG kinase purified from human white
blood cells, followed by PCR of human Jurkat leukemic T cells and
screening human DND41 leukemic T cells, Schaap et al. (1990) obtained
full-length DAGK cDNA. The deduced 735-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 82.7 kD. It has 2 EF-hand motifs predicted
to bind calcium, 2 cysteine-repeat regions, 2 putative ATP-binding
sites, and a C-terminal stretch of 110 amino acids that is fully
conserved between human and pig DAGK. One of the ATP-binding sites is
contained within the first cysteine-rich region. Northern blot analysis
detected a 3.2-kb DAGK transcript in Jurkat cells and in normal human T
cells. Purified human DAGK had an apparent molecular mass of 86 kD by
SDS-PAGE and 87 kD by gel filtration.

GENE FUNCTION

Schaap et al. (1990) found that DAGK purified from human white blood
cells showed optimal activity in the presence of phosphatidylserine and
deoxycholate. It showed relatively broad specificity, and DAG analogs
containing an unsaturated fatty acid at the sn-2 position gave optimal
enzymatic activity in the presence or absence of deoxycholate. Activity
was not altered by calcium or calcium chelation. COS-7 cells
overexpressing human DAGK showed 6- to 7-fold higher DAGK activity than
controls.

Several mammalian isozymes of DAGK have been identified. The isoform
described by Schaap et al. (1990) has been designated DGK-alpha or
DAGK1. Topham and Prescott (1999) stated that all DGKs have a conserved
catalytic domain and at least 2 cysteine-rich regions homologous to the
C1A and C1B motifs of PKCs. Most DGKs have structural motifs that are
likely to play regulatory roles, and these motifs form the basis for
dividing the DGKs into 5 subtypes. Type I DGKs, such as DGK-alpha, -beta
(604070), and -gamma (601854), have calcium-binding EF-hand motifs at
their N termini. DGK-delta (601826) and DKG-eta (604071) contain
N-terminal pleckstrin homology (PH) domains and are defined as type II.
DGK-epsilon (601440) contains no identifiable regulatory domains and is
a type III DGK. The defining characteristic of type IV isozymes, such as
DGK-zeta (601441) and -iota (604072), is that they have C-terminal
ankyrin repeats. Group V is exemplified by DGK-theta (601207), which
contains 3 cysteine-rich domains and a PH domain.

Pilz et al. (1995) pointed to the growing evidence to support some form
of light-activated phosphoinositide signal transduction pathway in the
mammalian retina. Although this pathway had no obvious role in mammalian
phototransduction, mutations in this pathway were known to cause retinal
degeneration in Drosophila. For example, the 'retinal degeneration A'
mutant in Drosophila is caused by an alteration in the eye-specific DAGK
gene.

To maintain cellular homeostasis, intracellular DAG levels must be
tightly regulated. DAG functions in intracellular signaling pathways as
an allosteric activator of PKC. In addition, DAG appears to play a role
in regulating RAS (see 190020) and RHO (see 165370) family proteins by
activating the guanine nucleotide exchange factors VAV (164875) and
RASGRP1 (603962). DAG also occupies a central position in the synthesis
of major phospholipids and triacylglycerols. Topham and Prescott (1999)
summarized the roles of mammalian DAGKs.

Seven-transmembrane receptor signaling is transduced by second
messengers such as DAG generated in response to the heterotrimeric
guanine nucleotide-binding protein G(q) (600998) and is terminated by
receptor desensitization and degradation of the second messengers.
Nelson et al. (2007) showed that beta-arrestins (see 107940) coordinate
both processes for the G(q)-coupled M1 muscarinic receptor (CHRM1;
118510). Beta-arrestins physically interact with diacylglycerol kinases,
enzymes that degrade DAG. Moreover, beta-arrestins are essential for
conversion of DAG to phosphatidic acid after agonist stimulation, and
this activity requires recruitment of the beta-arrestin-DGK complex to
activated 7-transmembrane receptors. The dual function of
beta-arrestins, limiting production of diacylglycerol (by receptor
desensitization) while enhancing its rate of degradation, is analogous
to their ability to recruit adenosine 3-prime,5-prime-monophosphate
phosphodiesterases to G(s) (139320)-coupled beta-2-adrenergic receptors
(ADRB2; 109690). Thus, Nelson et al. (2007) concluded that
beta-arrestins can serve similar regulatory functions for disparate
classes of 7-transmembrane receptors through structurally dissimilar
enzymes that degrade chemically distinct second messengers.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Solution Structure

Van Horn et al. (2009) solved the solution structure of prokaryotic Dagk
solubilized in dodecylphosphocholine micelles. The 121-amino acid Dagk
subunits formed homotrimers in solution, and each subunit contributed 3
transmembrane helices to the holoenzyme. The structure suggested domain
swapping between Dagk monomers, where transmembrane helix 3 of each
subunit interacted with transmembrane helices 1 and 2 from an adjacent
subunit, stabilizing the structure.

- Crystal Structure

Li et al. (2013) presented the crystal structure for 3 functional forms
of the 121-amino acid prokaryotic diacylglycerol kinase subunit, one of
which was wildtype. The structure revealed a homotrimeric enzyme with 3
transmembrane helices and an amino-terminal amphiphilic helix per
monomer. Bound lipid substrate and docked ATP identified the putative
active site that is of the composite, shared site type. The crystal
structures rationalized extensive biochemical and biophysical data on
the enzyme. They were, however, at variance with the solution NMR model
of van Horn et al. (2009) in that domain swapping, a key feature of the
solution form, was not observed in the crystal structures.

MAPPING

In an effort to consider genes mutated in Drosophila as candidates for
mammalian eye disease, Pilz et al. (1995) determined the map position of
3 DAGK genes in the mouse. They localized the mouse homolog of DAGK1 to
chromosome 10 by linkage analysis.

By Southern blot analysis of human-hamster somatic cell hybrid DNA, Hart
et al. (1994) assigned the DAGK gene to chromosome 12. Hart et al.
(1994) further localized the gene to 12q13.3 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Hart, T. C.; Champagne, C.; Zhou, J.; Van Dyke, T. E.: Assignment
of the gene for diacylglycerol kinase (DAGK) to human chromosome 12. Mammalian
Genome 5: 123-124, 1994.

2. Hart, T. C.; Zhou, J.; Champagne, C.; Van Dyke, T. E.; Rao, P.
N.; Pettenati, M. J.: Assignment of the human diacylglycerol kinase
gene (DAGK) to 12q13.3 using fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis. Genomics 22:
246-247, 1994.

3. Li, D.; Lyons, J. A.; Pye, V. E.; Vogeley, L.; Aragao, D.; Kenyohn,
C. P.; Shah, S. T. A.; Doherty, C.; Aherne, M.; Caffrey, M.: Crystal
structure of the integral membrane diacylglycerol kinase. Nature 497:
521-524, 2013.

4. Nelson, C. D.; Perry, S. J.; Regier, D. S.; Prescott, S. M.; Topham,
M. K.; Lefkowitz, R. J.: Targeting of diacylglycerol degradation
to M1 muscarinic receptors by beta-arrestins. Science 315: 663-666,
2007.

5. Pilz, A.; Schaap, D.; Hunt, D.; Fitzgibbon, J.: Chromosomal localization
of three mouse diacylglycerol kinase (DAGK) genes: genes sharing sequence
homology to the Drosophila retinal degeneration A (rdgA) gene. Genomics 26:
599-601, 1995.

6. Schaap, D.; de Widt, J.; van der Wal, J.; Vandekerckhove, J.; van
Damme, J.; Gussow, D.; Ploegh, H. L.; van Blitterswijk, W. J.; van
der Bend, R. L.: Purification, cDNA-cloning and expression of human
diacylglycerol kinase. FEBS Lett. 275: 151-158, 1990.

7. Topham, M. K.; Prescott, S. M.: Mammalian diacylglycerol kinases,
a family of lipid kinases with signaling functions. J. Biol. Chem. 274:
11447-11450, 1999.

8. Van Horn, W. D.; Kim, H.-J.; Ellis, C. D.; Hadziselimovic, A.;
Sulistijo, E. S.; Karra, M. D.; Tian, C.; Sonnichsen, F. D.; Sanders,
C. R.: Solution nuclear magnetic resonance structure of membrane-integral
diacylglycerol kinase. Science 324: 1726-1729, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/10/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/1/2007
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 7/28/1999
Lori M. Kelman - updated: 9/24/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/5/1993

EDITED alopez: 07/19/2013
alopez: 7/10/2013
alopez: 5/1/2007
carol: 1/5/2000
mgross: 7/28/1999
mgross: 3/16/1999
alopez: 10/16/1998
alopez: 6/24/1997
alopez: 6/10/1997
jamie: 10/23/1996
jamie: 10/16/1996
mark: 10/2/1996
mark: 9/24/1996
terry: 9/24/1996
mark: 9/24/1996
mark: 4/17/1996
terry: 4/10/1996
mark: 5/16/1995
carol: 10/7/1994
carol: 2/5/1993

601212	TITLE *601212 PROTEIN-TYROSINE KINASE 2, BETA; PTK2B
;;PROLINE-RICH TYROSINE KINASE 2; PYK2;;
FOCAL ADHESION KINASE 2; FAK2;;
CELL ADHESION KINASE, BETA; CAKB
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Focal adhesion kinases are cytoplasmic protein-tyrosine kinases
associated with focal adhesions and whose activity is induced by ligand
binding to various receptors including those for integrin, growth
factors, etc. FAKs are known to target paxillin (602505) and are
substrates for Src family kinases (see 190090) (Calalb et al., 1995).
Herzog et al. (1996) identified a gene for another focal adhesion kinase
by low-stringency screening of a hippocampus cDNA library. They
symbolized the gene FAK2. The FAK2 cDNA encodes a predicted 1,009-amino
acid protein with 42% identity to FAK1 (600758). Northern blot analysis
detected a 4.5-kb mRNA in brain, kidney, spleen, and lymphocytes.

Protein-tyrosine kinases in the central nervous system are activated in
response to a variety of neurotrophic factors that control neuronal
differentiation and survival via cell surface receptors. Also, protein
phosphorylation is involved in membrane excitability and the function of
ion channels. Lev et al. (1995) discovered a nonreceptor type protein
kinase that is highly expressed in adult rat brain. The kinase, which
they symbolized PYK2 (proline-rich tyrosine kinase-2), was cloned from a
rat spinal cord cDNA library using degenerate PCR primers corresponding
to conserved tyrosine kinase motifs of PYK1 (see Manser et al., 1993).
Lev et al. (1995) cloned the human homolog from a human fetal brain cDNA
library using the rat sequence as a probe. The predicted protein of
1,009 amino acids has 61% sequence identity to the FAK1 protein (PTK2;
600758).

GENE FUNCTION

Lev et al. (1995) showed that the PYK2 protein undergoes rapid tyrosine
phosphorylation in response to various stimuli that elevate
intracellular calcium concentration, such as addition of bradykinin, a
neuropeptide hormone that binds to a G protein-coupled receptor and in
turn stimulates phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis. PYK2 is also tyrosine
phosphorylated following activation of the nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor (see 100690), by membrane depolarization, and by treatment of
cells with a calcium ionophore. Protein kinase C (176960) activation
also induces PYK2 phosphorylation. Activation of PYK2 leads to the
modulation of ion channel function and activation of the MAP kinase
signaling pathway. Lev et al. (1995) proposed that PYK2 may represent an
important signaling intermediate between neuropeptide activated
receptors or neurotransmitters that increase calcium flux and the
downstream signals that regulate neuronal activity. PYK2 may also
provide a mechanism for a variety of short- and long-term
calcium-dependent signaling events in the nervous system.

Matsuya et al. (1998) found specific interaction between the C-terminal
region of PYK2 and HIC5 (TGFB1I1; 602353). Both proteins were
tyrosine-phosphorylated in parallel in rat fibroblasts exposed to
hypertonic osmotic stress or stimulated with lysophosphatidic acid.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) causes acute and chronic infection of the liver
and is also a risk factor for hepatic cancer. The virus has only 4 open
reading frames, 3 of which encode the capsid, envelope, and polymerase
proteins. The fourth encodes HBX, a poorly expressed protein required
for viral replication (Ganem, 2001). Bouchard et al. (2001) showed that
HBX induces release of calcium into the cytoplasm, presumably from
mitochondria or endoplasmic reticulum. HBX expression thereby induces
activation of PYK2, which activates SRC and HBV DNA replication.
Inhibition of PYK2 or calcium signaling mediated by mitochondrial
calcium channels could block HBV DNA replication, and enhancement of
cytoplasmic calcium was able to substitute for HBX in stimulating HBV
DNA replication.

In a kidney proximal epithelial cell line (OKP) incubated in acid media,
Li et al. (2004) observed an increase in PYK2 phosphorylation and
PYK2/SRC binding. Transfection of OKP cells with dominant-negative PYK2
or small interfering PYK2 duplex RNA blocked acid activation of
sodium/hydrogen exchanger-3 (NHE3, or SLC9A3; 182307), whereas neither
had an effect on glucocorticoid activation of NHE3. Dominant-negative
PYK2 also blocked acid activation of SRC kinase, which is required for
acid regulation of NHE3. Li et al. (2004) concluded that PYK2 is
directly activated by acidic pH and that PYK2 activation is required for
acid activation of SRC kinase and NHE3. Partially purified PYK2 was
activated by acid in a cell-free system, leading Li et al. (2004) to
suggest that PYK2 may serve as the pH sensor that initiates the
acid-regulated signaling cascade involved in NHE3 regulation.

MAPPING

Herzog et al. (1996) assigned the FAK2 gene to chromosome 8 by PCR
analysis of somatic cell hybrid DNAs and localized it to 8p22-p11.2 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

ANIMAL MODEL

Buckbinder et al. (2007) found that Pyk2-null mice were normal in
appearance and body weight, but they had increased bone mass and
improved bone microstructure. Mouse bone marrow cultures showed that
Pyk2 deficiency enhanced differentiation and activity of osteoprogenitor
cells, as did expression of PYK2-specific short hairpin RNA or dominant
interfering proteins in human mesenchymal stem cells. Daily
administration of a small molecule Pyk2 inhibitor increased bone
formation and protected against bone loss in ovariectomized rats, an
established preclinical model of postmenopausal osteoporosis.

Using Pyk2 -/- mice, Kamen et al. (2011) showed that Pyk2 was required
for integrin-mediated degranulation responses in polymorphonuclear
neutrophils (PMNs), but not in adhesion-induced cell spreading or
activation of superoxide production. Pyk2-deficient PMNs also displayed
reduced migration on fibrinogen (see 134820)-coated surfaces and reduced
paxillin and Vav (VAV1; 164875) phosphorylation after integrin ligation.
Clearance of Staphylococcus aureus skin abscesses was poor in Pyk2 -/-
mice. The response to soluble agonists, however, was normal. Kamen et
al. (2011) concluded that PYK2 is involved in regulating
adhesion-mediated release of PMN granule contents.

REFERENCE 1. Bouchard, M. J.; Wang, L.-H.; Schneider, R. J.: Calcium signaling
by HBx protein in hepatitis B virus DNA replication. Science 294:
2376-2378, 2001.

2. Buckbinder, L.; Crawford, D. T.; Qi, H.; Ke, H. Z.; Olson, L. M.;
Long, K. R.; Bonnette, P. C.; Baumann, A. P.; Hambor, J. E.; Grasser,
W. A., III; Pan, L. C.; Owen, T. A.; and 11 others: Proline-rich
tyrosine kinase 2 regulates osteoprogenitor cells and bone formation,
and offers an anabolic treatment approach for osteoporosis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 10619-10624, 2007.

3. Calalb, M. B.; Polte, T. R.; Hanks, S. K.: Tyrosine phosphorylation
of focal adhesion kinase at sites in the catalytic domain regulates
kinase activity: a role for Src family kinases. Molec. Cell. Biol. 15:
954-963, 1995.

4. Ganem, D.: The X files--one step closer to closure. Science 294:
2299-2300, 2001.

5. Herzog, H.; Nicholl, J.; Hort, Y. J.; Sutherland, G. R.; Shine,
J.: Molecular cloning and assignment of FAK2, a novel human focal
adhesion kinase, to 8p11.2-p22 by nonisotopic in situ hybridization. Genomics 32:
484-486, 1996.

6. Kamen, L. A.; Schlessinger, J.; Lowell, C. A.: Pyk2 is required
for neutrophil degranulation and host defense responses to bacterial
infection. J. Immun. 186: 1656-1665, 2011.

7. Lev, S.; Moreno, H.; Martinez, R.; Canoll, P.; Peles, E.; Musacchio,
J. M.; Plowman, G. D.; Rudy, B.; Schlessinger, J.: Protein tyrosine
kinase PYK2 involved in Ca(2+)-induced regulation of ion channel and
MAP kinase functions. Nature 376: 737-745, 1995.

8. Li, S.; Sato, S.; Yang, X.; Preisig, P. A.; Alpern, R. J.: Pyk2
activation is integral to acid stimulation of sodium/hydrogen exchanger
3. J. Clin. Invest. 114: 1782-1789, 2004.

9. Manser, E.; Leung, T.; Salihuddin, H.; Tan, L.; Lim, L.: A non-receptor
tyrosine kinase that inhibits the GTPase activity of p21(cdc42). Nature 363:
364-367, 1993.

10. Matsuya, M.; Sasaki, H.; Aoto, H.; Mitaka, T.; Nagura, K.; Ohba,
T.; Ishino, M.; Takahashi, S.; Suzuki, R.; Sasaki, T.: Cell adhesion
kinase beta forms a complex with a new member, Hic-5, of proteins
localized at focal adhesions. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 1003-1014, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/15/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/10/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/14/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/3/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/18/2002

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 4/18/1996

EDITED mgross: 03/20/2012
mgross: 3/20/2012
terry: 3/15/2012
mgross: 8/8/2007
terry: 7/10/2007
carol: 1/19/2005
terry: 1/14/2005
mgross: 2/5/2004
carol: 4/3/2002
mgross: 1/18/2002
alopez: 1/12/1999
alopez: 4/8/1998
mark: 4/18/1996
terry: 4/18/1996
mark: 4/18/1996

108731	TITLE *108731 ATPase, Ca(2+)-TRANSPORTING, PLASMA MEMBRANE, 1; ATP2B1
;;PLASMA MEMBRANE Ca(2+)-ATPase, TYPE 1; PMCA1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The Ca(2+)-ATPases are a family of plasma membrane pumps encoded by at
least 4 genes: ATP2B1; ATP2B2 (108733) on chromosome 3p26; ATP2B3
(300014) on Xq28; and ATP2B4 (108732) on 1q25. The diversity of these
enzymes is further increased by alternative splicing of transcripts.

CLONING

Verma et al. (1988) isolated a cDNA corresponding to a Ca(2+) plasma
membrane pump from a human teratoma cDNA library. The 1,220-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of 134.6 kD. The translated
sequence contains a putative calmodulin-binding domain near the C
terminus and domains matching those of cAMP-dependent protein kinase
substrates.

Kumar et al. (1993) isolated a cDNA corresponding to the ATP2B1 gene
from a human osteoblast cDNA library. The cDNA encoded a deduced
1,220-amino acid protein.

Brandt et al. (1992) described 4 PMCA1 splice variants, which they
referred to as PMCA1a through PMCA1d, and examined their expression
using PCR. PMCA1a was expressed in spinal cord, brain, skeletal muscle,
and heart. PMCA1b was expressed in all tissues examined. PMCA1c was
expressed in skeletal muscle, heart, spinal cord, and brain. PMCA1d was
expressed in heart and skeletal muscle.

By RT-PCR, Santiago-Garcia et al. (1996) found variable expression of
the PMCA and SERCA (see 108730) genes during human fetal heart
development. PMCA1 and PMCA4 (ATP2B4) were expressed in 8-, 12-, and
20-week fetal heart and in adult heart.

Okunade et al. (2004) examined Pmca1 and Pmca4 expression in mouse
tissues. Pmca1 was expressed in all tissues examined, and Pmca4 was
expressed in all tissues examined except liver. Pmca1 predominated in
brain, intestine, kidney, lung, and stomach, whereas Pmca4 predominated
in aorta, portal vein, bladder, diaphragm, seminal vesicles, and testis.

GENE FUNCTION

The Ca(2+)-ATPases are members of the P class of ion-motive ATPases;
they form an acylphosphate intermediate as part of the reaction
mechanism. PMCA removes bivalent calcium ions from eukaryotic cells and
plays a critical role in intracellular calcium homeostasis by its
capacity for removing calcium ions from cells against very large
concentration gradients (Olson et al., 1991).

Mammalian PMCA1 is expressed in calcium-transporting epithelia and bone
mesenchymal cells, and it is upregulated by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 in
both tissues. Glendenning et al. (2000) presented evidence showing
tissue-specific sensitivity of the PMCA1 promoter to direct
transcriptional downregulation by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3. Their
results suggested that any positive regulatory vitamin D response
element in PMCA1 must lie outside the core promoter.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hilfiker et al. (1993) determined that the PMCA1 gene contains 22 exons
and a putative alternative exon 1 that they called exon 1*. The ATG
start codon is in exon 2. The promoter and 5-prime flanking region is
embedded in a CpG island and is characterized by numerous Sp1
(189906)-binding sites and the absence of a TATA box. The PMCA1 gene
spans more than 100 kb.

MAPPING

Olson et al. (1991) mapped the ATP2B1 gene to chromosome 12q21-q23 by 3
independent methods: Southern analysis of human-rodent somatic cell
hybrids, in situ hybridization of human metaphase spreads, and genetic
linkage analysis in the CEPH pedigrees.

ANIMAL MODEL

Okunade et al. (2004) found that loss of both copies of the Atp2b1 gene
caused embryonic lethality in mice, whereas heterozygous mutants had no
overt phenotype.

REFERENCE 1. Brandt, P.; Neve, R. L.; Kammesheidt, A.; Rhoads, R. E.; Vanaman,
T. C.: Analysis of the tissue-specific distribution of mRNAs encoding
the plasma membrane calcium-pumping ATPases and characterization of
an alternately spliced form of PMCA4 at the cDNA and genomic levels. J.
Biol. Chem. 267: 4376-4385, 1992.

2. Glendenning, P.; Ratajczak, T.; Prince, R. L.; Garamszegi, N.;
Strehler, E. E.: The promoter region of the human PMCA1 gene mediates
transcriptional downregulation by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 277: 722-728, 2000.

3. Hilfiker, H.; Strehler-Page, M.-A.; Stauffer, T. P.; Carafoli,
E.; Strehler, E. E.: Structure of the gene encoding the human plasma
membrane calcium pump isoform 1. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 19717-19725,
1993.

4. Kumar, R.; Haugen, J. D.; Penniston, J. T.: Molecular cloning
of a plasma membrane calcium pump from human osteoblasts. J. Bone
Miner. Res. 8: 505-513, 1993.

5. Okunade, G. W.; Miller, M. L.; Pyne, G. J.; Sutliff, R. L.; O'Connor,
K. T.; Neumann, J. C.; Andringa, A.; Miller, D. A.; Prasad, V.; Doetschman,
T.; Paul, R. J.; Shull, G. E.: Targeted ablation of plasma membrane
Ca(2+)-ATPase (PMCA) 1 and 4 indicates a major housekeeping function
for PMCA1 and a critical role in hyperactivated sperm motility and
male fertility for PMCA4. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 33742-33750, 2004.

6. Olson, S.; Wang, M. G.; Carafoli, E.; Strehler, E. E.; McBride,
O. W.: Localization of two genes encoding plasma membrane Ca(2+)-transporting
ATPases to human chromosomes 1q25-32 and 12q21-23. Genomics 9: 629-641,
1991.

7. Santiago-Garcia, J.; Mas-Oliva, J.; Saavedra, D.; Zarain-Herzberg,
A.: Analysis of mRNA expression and cloning of a novel plasma membrane
Ca(2+)-ATPase splice variant in human heart. Molec. Cell. Biol. 155:
173-182, 1996.

8. Verma, A. K.; Filoteo, A. G.; Stanford, D. R.; Wieben, E. D.; Penniston,
J. T.; Strehler, E. E.; Fischer, R.; Heim, R.; Vogel, G.; Mathews,
S.; Strehler-Page, M.-A.; James, P.; Vorherr, T.; Krebs, J.; Carafoli,
E.: Complete primary structure of a human plasma membrane Ca(2+)
pump. J. Biol. Chem. 263: 14152-14159, 1988.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/8/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 11/29/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/22/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/1/1991

EDITED terry: 12/16/2009
terry: 12/20/2005
mgross: 2/9/2005
mgross: 2/8/2005
tkritzer: 11/29/2004
ckniffin: 11/22/2004
carol: 10/15/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/27/1992
carol: 7/2/1991
carol: 3/22/1991
carol: 2/4/1991

176992	TITLE *176992 S100 CALCIUM-BINDING PROTEIN A3; S100A3
;;S100E
DESCRIPTION Engelkamp et al. (1993) demonstrated that the S100E protein is encoded
by a gene located in a tight cluster of genes of similar structure in a
15-kb region of 1q21. The order of the genes from 5-prime to 3-prime was
found to be S100E, CAPL (S100A4; 114210), S100D (S100A5; 176991), CACY
(S100A6; 114110). The product of the S100E gene is cysteine-rich. The 4
genes were arranged in head-to-tail order. Despite the tight clustering,
each of the genes was expressed in different human tissues and probably
even at different times. Disruption of the cluster may occur in
neoplasia since the region 1q21 often shows structural alterations.

Schafer et al. (1995) isolated a YAC clone from 1q21 on which 9
different genes coding for S100 calcium-binding proteins could be
localized. Clustered organization allowed introduction of a new logical
nomenclature for these genes, based on their physical arrangement on the
chromosome. S100E became S100A3 in the new nomenclature. The 9 genes are
in sequence with S100A1 (176940) being closest to the telomere and
S100A9 (123886) being closest to the centromere.

REFERENCE 1. Engelkamp, D.; Schafer, B. W.; Mattei, M. G.; Erne, P.; Heizmann,
C. W.: Six S100 genes are clustered on human chromosome 1q21: identification
of two genes coding for the two previously unreported calcium-binding
proteins S100D and S100E. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 6547-6551, 1993.

2. Schafer, B. W.; Wicki, R.; Engelkamp, D.; Mattei, M.-G.; Heizmann,
C. W.: Isolation of a YAC clone covering a cluster of nine S100 genes
on human chromosome 1q21: rationale for a new nomenclature of the
S100 calcium-binding protein family. Genomics 25: 638-643, 1995.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/25/1993

EDITED alopez: 10/12/1998
mark: 12/21/1996
mark: 6/15/1995
carol: 1/23/1995
carol: 8/25/1993

108361	TITLE *108361 ASIALOGLYCOPROTEIN RECEPTOR 2; ASGR2
;;C-TYPE LECTIN DOMAIN FAMILY 4, MEMBER H2; CLEC4H2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ASGR2 gene encodes a glycoprotein that forms the asialoglycoprotein
receptor, also known as the Ashwell receptor, which is specific for
desialylated (galactosyl-terminal) glycoproteins and is expressed
exclusively in hepatic parenchymal cells (Spiess and Lodish, 1985).

See also ASGR1 (108360).

CLONING

From the same cDNA library that was made from the human hepatoma cell
line HepG2 and was used to isolate ASGR1, Spiess and Lodish (1985)
isolated and sequenced a clone encoding a second asialoglycoprotein
receptor, which they referred to as H2 and which had protein sequence
homology of 58% to H1. The rat similarly has 2 ASG receptors, R1 and R2.
Spiess and Lodish (1985) found that H1 is more homologous to R1 than to
H2, and H2 is more homologous to R2 than to H1. Thus, the 2 receptor
genes evolved before the separation of rat and man. Spiess and Lodish
(1985) identified 2 versions of H2 cDNA, differing only by the presence
or absence of a segment of 15 bp within the coding region. They
interpreted this as reflecting differential splicing of an intron.

ANIMAL MODEL

Grewal et al. (2008) found that platelet deficiency associated with
St3gal4 (104240) deficiency and disruption of sialyltransferase function
was restored in Asgr1- or Asgr2-deficient mice. The studies suggested
that ST3GAL4 deficiency exposes endogenous glycan ligands on platelets
that are recognized by the Ashwell receptor in an interaction that
promotes asialo-platelet clearance by hepatocytes and leads to
thrombocytopenia. Wildtype mice infected with Streptococcus pneumoniae,
a pathogen with sialidase (neuraminidase) activity, showed progressively
desialylated platelets and thrombocytopenia due to increased removal of
platelets from the circulation by the hepatic Ashwell receptor. Asgr1-
or Asgr2-deficient mice who were infected showed decreased survival and
signs of severe disseminated intravascular coagulation compared to
infected wildtype mice, with the outcome worse for Asgr1-deficient mice.
Grewal et al. (2008) concluded that the thrombocytopenia in disseminated
intravascular coagulation results from Ashwell receptor-dependent
clearance of platelets that are first desialylated by the sialidase of
the pathogen. The findings revealed that von Willebrand factor (VWF;
613160) and platelets are endogenous ligands of the Ashwell receptor,
implying that hepatocytes are involved in the clearance of these
coagulation factors from the circulation, which is an unexpected
biologic activity for this cell type.

REFERENCE 1. Grewal, P. K.; Uchiyama, S.; Ditto, D.; Varki, N.; Le, D. T.; Nizet,
V.; Marth, J. D.: The Ashwell receptor mitigates the lethal coagulopathy
of sepsis. Nature Med. 14: 648-655, 2008.

2. Spiess, M.; Lodish, H. F.: Sequence of a second human asialoglycoprotein
receptor: conservation of two receptor genes during evolution. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 6465-6469, 1985.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/19/2008

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/12/1990

EDITED carol: 10/04/2010
alopez: 6/27/2008
ckniffin: 6/19/2008
mgross: 3/16/2006
dkim: 6/30/1998
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 8/20/1990
carol: 7/13/1990
carol: 7/12/1990

611629	TITLE *611629 NEURON NAVIGATOR 3; NAV3
;;PORE MEMBRANE- AND/OR FILAMENT-INTERACTING-LIKE PROTEIN 1; POMFIL1;;
KIAA0938
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) obtained a partial NAV3 clone, which they
designated KIAA0938. RT-PCR ELISA detected moderate expression in adult
and fetal brain and in adult ovary, lung, and testis. Weaker expression
was detected in adult heart and spleen and in fetal liver, and little to
no expression was detected adult skeletal muscle, liver, pancreas, and
kidney. NAV3 was expressed moderately in all specific brain regions
examined, with highest level in amygdala.

By screening a fetal brain cDNA library, Coy et al. (2002) cloned NAV3,
which they called POMFIL1. The deduced 1,902-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 205.3 kD. POMFIL1 contains 3 N-terminal
hydrophobic domains, several phosphorylation and N-glycosylation sites,
3 ATP/GTP-binding A motifs (P loops), and coiled-coil structures. The C
terminus of POMFIL1 is highly conserved with the C termini of POMFIL2
(NAV2; 607026) and POMFIL3 (NAV1; 611629) and shares significant
homology with Unc53, a C. elegans protein involved in axon guidance.
Northern blot analysis detected a 9-kb POMFIL1 transcript in adult and
fetal brain, but not in other tissues examined. Immunohistochemical
analysis and in situ hybridization of adult mouse brain and developing
embryos showed that Pomfil1 was predominantly expressed in the central
and peripheral nervous system. Electron microscopy localized Pomfil1 at
the outer nuclear membrane of neurons, and mutation analysis showed
thatthat the N terminus of Pomfil1 was required for nuclear targeting.

By searching databases for homologs of NAV1 and NAV2, followed by PCR of
a human colon carcinoma cell line cDNA library, Maes et al. (2002)
obtained a full-length cDNA encoding NAV3. The deduced 2,280-amino acid
protein has an N-terminal calponin (see 600806) homology domain, several
coiled-coil regions, an actin-binding domain, a GTP/ATP-binding domain,
and an AAA-type ATPase domain. Maes et al. (2002) also identified
several NAV3 variants arising from a complex splicing pattern and the
use of alternative transcription start and stop sites. Northern blot
analysis detected a major 10-kb NAV3 transcript and minor shorter
transcripts predominantly in brain. RT-PCR detected variable expression
of several NAV3 transcripts in brain, placenta, colon, and a colon
carcinoma cell line.

GENE FUNCTION

Coy et al. (2002) found that Pomfil1 expression increased 24 hours after
brain injury in mice. Immunohistochemical analysis detected Pomfil1 at
the scar, which consisted mainly of astrocytes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Maes et al. (2002) determined that the NAV3 transcript contains at least
39 exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Coy et al. (2002) mapped the NAV3 gene to
chromosome 12q21. Maes et al. (2002) mapped the NAV3 gene to chromosome
12q21.1 by genomic sequence analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Coy, J. F.; Wiemann, S.; Bechmann, I.; Bachner, D.; Nitsch, R.;
Kretz, O.; Christiansen, H.; Poustka, A.: Pore membrane and/or filament
interacting like protein 1 (POMFIL1) is predominantly expressed in
the nervous system and encodes different protein isoforms. Gene 290:
73-94, 2002.

2. Maes, T.; Barcelo, A.; Buesa, C.: Neuron navigator: a human gene
family with homology to unc-53, a cell guidance gene from Caenorhabditis
elegans. Genomics 80: 21-30, 2002.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/27/2007

EDITED joanna: 02/06/2008
mgross: 11/28/2007
mgross: 11/27/2007

300089	TITLE *300089 ISOCITRATE DEHYDROGENASE 3, GAMMA SUBUNIT; IDH3G
;;ISOCITRATE DEHYDROGENASE, NAD(+)-SPECIFIC, MITOCHONDRIAL, GAMMA SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION Brenner et al. (1997) presented the entire genomic sequence, as well as
the cDNA sequence, of the human gene encoding the gamma subunit of the
NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH-gamma). The gene,
symbolized IDH3G, is located in the region Xq28, approximately 70 kb
telomeric to the ABCD1 gene (300371) and adjacent to the TRAP-delta gene
(300090), which they also cloned. The sequences of the transcripts of
IDH-gamma and TRAP-delta were obtained by searching the EST database
with genomic data. Identified ESTs were completely sequenced and
assembled to cDNAs comprising the entire coding region. For IDH-gamma,
several EST clones indicated differential splicing. The 2 genes are
arranged in a compact head-to-head manner. The nontranscribed intergenic
region comprises only 133 bp and is embedded in a CpG island. Brenner et
al. (1997) concluded that the CpG island functions as a bidirectional
promoter to initiate the transcription of both functionally unrelated
genes with quite distinct expression patterns. Brenner et al. (1997)
showed that in both rat and mouse, this region of the genome is
similarly compact and comprises less than 249 bp in rat and not more
than 164 bp in mouse. In both cases this intergenic region is embedded
in a CpG island and is highly conserved, with nucleotide identity values
ranging from 70.1% between human and rat to 92.6% between mouse and rat.

In a male patient with periventricular heterotopia (300049) and a large
duplication of Xq28 reported by Fink et al. (1997), Fox et al. (1998)
found that the centromeric boundary of the duplicated segment of Xq28
was base 3377 of the 3,395 bases of intron 1 of the IDH3G gene,
approximately 600 kb distal to DXS15.

REFERENCE 1. Brenner, V.; Nyakatura, G.; Rosenthal, A.; Platzer, M.: Genomic
organization of two novel genes on human Xq28: compact head to head
arrangement of IDH-gamma and TRAP-delta is conserved in rat and mouse. Genomics 44:
8-14, 1997.

2. Fink, J. M.; Dobyns, W. B.; Guerrini, R.; Hirsch, B. A.: Identification
of a duplication of Xq28 associated with bilateral periventricular
nodular heterotopia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61: 379-387, 1997.

3. Fox, J. W.; Lamperti, E. D.; Eksioglu, Y. Z.; Hong, S. E.; Feng,
Y.; Graham, D. A.; Scheffer, I. E.; Dobyns, W. B.; Hirsch, B. A.;
Radtke, R. A.; Berkovic, S. F.; Huttenlocher, P. R.; Walsh, C. A.
: Mutations in filamin 1 prevent migration of cerebral cortical neurons
in human periventricular heterotopia. Neuron 21: 1315-1325, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/13/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/26/1997

EDITED carol: 01/13/2003
psherman: 2/9/2000
terry: 4/14/1999
terry: 4/13/1999
mark: 9/26/1997

159555	TITLE +159555 MYELOID/LYMPHOID OR MIXED LINEAGE LEUKEMIA GENE; MLL
;;MLL1;;
TRITHORAX, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; TRX1;;
HRX;;
MYELOID/LYMPHOID LEUKEMIA GENE;;
MIXED LINEAGE LEUKEMIA GENE;;
ALL1 GENE; ALL1;;
CXXC FINGER PROTEIN 7; CXXC7
MIXED LINEAGE LEUKEMIA, INCLUDED;;
MLL/AF4 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/ENL FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/AF9 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/GMPS FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/FBP17 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/LPP FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/GPH FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/PNUTL1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/CDK6 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/LASP1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/GRAF FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/ABI1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/LAF4 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/CBL FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/LARG FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/AF10 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/AF15q14 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/AF6 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/CIP29 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/SEPT6 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/MAML2 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/KIAA1524 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The MLL gene encodes a DNA-binding protein that methylates histone H3
(see 602810) lys4 (H3K4) and positively regulates expression of target
genes, including multiple HOX genes (see 142980). MLL is a frequent
target for recurrent translocations in acute leukemias that may be
characterized as acute myeloid leukemia (AML; 601626), acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), or mixed lineage (biphenotypic) leukemia
(MLL). Leukemias with translocations involving MLL possess unique
clinical and biologic characteristics and are often associated with poor
prognosis. MLL rearrangements are found in more than 70% of infant
leukemias, whether the immunophenotype is more consistent with ALL or
AML6, but are less frequent in leukemias from older children. MLL
translocations are also found in approximately 10% of AMLs in adults, as
well as in therapy-related leukemias, most often characterized as AML,
that develop in patients previously treated with topoisomerase II
inhibitors for other malignancies. More than 50 different MLL fusion
partners have been identified. Leukemogenic MLL translocations encode
MLL fusion proteins that have lost H3K4 methyltransferase activity. A
key feature of MLL fusion proteins is their ability to efficiently
transform hematopoietic cells into leukemia stem cells (Krivtsov and
Armstrong, 2007).

CLONING

Recurring chromosomal translocations involving chromosome 11q23 have
been observed in both acute lymphoid leukemia and acute myeloid leukemia
(AML; 601626), especially acute monoblastic leukemia (AML-M5) and acute
myelomonocytic leukemia (AMML-M4). Rowley et al. (1990) demonstrated
that the breakpoints in four 11q23 translocations associated with
leukemia were contained within a yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) clone
bearing the CD3D (186790) and CD3G (186740) genes. Within this YAC,
Ziemin-van der Poel et al. (1991) identified a transcription unit
spanning the breakpoint junctions of 3 of these translocations, 4;11,
9;11, and 11;19. They described 2 other related transcripts that were
upregulated in a translocation cell line. Ziemin-van der Poel et al.
(1991) named the gene MLL for myeloid/lymphoid, or mixed lineage,
leukemia. Cimino et al. (1991) identified the same gene and called it
ALL1.

Gu et al. (1992) determined that the ALL1 gene encodes a protein of more
than 3,910 amino acids containing 3 regions with homology to sequences
within the Drosophila 'trithorax' gene, including cysteine-rich regions
that can be folded into 6 zinc finger-like domains. Tkachuk et al.
(1992) showed that the ALL1 gene, which they referred to as HRX (for
'homolog of trithorax'), codes for a 431-kD protein. Djabali et al.
(1992) also cloned an 11.5-kb transcript spanning the 11q23
translocation breakpoint.

Parry et al. (1993) showed that the sequence of a partial TRX1 cDNA
contained an open reading frame encoding 1,012 amino acids with
extensive homology to the Drosophila trithorax protein, particularly in
the zinc finger-like domains. The TRX1 gene appears to be unique in the
human genome and has been conserved during evolution.

Butler et al. (1997) analyzed the distribution and localization of HRX
proteins in cell lines and human tissues, using both polyclonal and
monoclonal antibodies. Immunocytochemical analysis showed a punctate
distribution of wildtype and chimeric HRX proteins within cell nuclei,
suggesting that HRX localizes to nuclear structures in cells with and
without 11q23 translocations. Nuclear staining was found in the majority
of tissues studied, with the strongest reactivity in cerebral cortex,
kidney, thyroid, and lymphoid tissues. Thus, Butler et al. (1997)
concluded that HRX is widely expressed in most cell types, including
hematopoietic cells, a finding that precludes an immunocytochemical
approach for diagnosis of leukemias bearing 11q23 structural
abnormalities.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gu et al. (1992) determined that the MLL gene spans approximately 100 kb
and contains at least 21 exons.

MAPPING

The MLL gene maps to chromosome 11q23 (Ziemin-van der Poel et al., 1991;
Cimino et al., 1991).

GENE FUNCTION

Milne et al. (2002) showed that MLL regulates target HOX gene expression
through direct binding to promoter sequences. They determined that the
MLL SET domain is a histone H3 (see 601128) lys4 (K4)-specific
methyltransferase whose activity is stimulated with acetylated H3
peptides. This methylase activity was found to be associated with HOX
gene activation and H3 K4 methylation at cis regulatory sequences in
vivo. A leukemogenic MLL fusion protein that activates HOX expression
had no effect on histone methylation, suggesting a distinct mechanism
for gene regulation by MLL and MLL fusion proteins.

Nakamura et al. (2002) found that ALL1 is present within a stable
multiprotein supercomplex composed of at least 29 proteins. The majority
of the complex proteins are components of transcription complexes,
including TFIID (see 604912). Other components are involved in RNA
processing or histone methylation. The authors found that the complex
remodels, acetylates, deacetylates, and methylates nucleosomes and/or
free histones, and that the H3 K4 methylation activity of the complex is
conferred by the ALL1 SET domain. Chromatin immunoprecipitations showed
that ALL1 and other complex components examined were bound at the
promoter of an active ALL1-dependent HOXA9 gene (142956). In parallel,
H3 K4 was methylated, and histones H3 and H4 were acetylated at this
promoter.

The MLL gene encodes a large nuclear protein that is required for the
maintenance of HOX gene expression. MLL is cleaved at 2 conserved sites
to generate an N-terminal 320-kD fragment (N320) and a C-terminal 180-kD
fragment (C180), which heterodimerize to stabilize the complex and
confer its subnuclear destination. Hsieh et al. (2003) purified and
cloned the protease responsible for cleaving MLL, which they entitled
taspase-1 (608270). They determined that taspase-1 initiates a class of
endopeptidases that utilize an N-terminal threonine as the active-site
nucleophile to proteolyze polypeptide substrates following aspartate.
RNA interference-mediated knockdown of taspase-1 in HeLa cells resulted
in the appearance of unprocessed MLL and the loss of proper HOX gene
expression.

Lim et al. (2009) showed that Mll1 is required for neurogenesis in the
mouse postnatal brain. Mll1-deficient subventricular zone neural stem
cells survive, proliferate, and efficiently differentiate into glial
lineages; however, neuronal differentiation is severely impaired. In
Mll1-deficient cells, early proneural Mash1 (100790) and gliogenic Olig2
(606386) expression are preserved, but Dlx2 (126255), a key downstream
regulator of subventricular zone neurogenesis, is not expressed.
Overexpression of Dlx2 can rescue neurogenesis in Mll1-deficient cells.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrates that Dlx2 is a direct target
of MLL in subventricular zone cells. In differentiating wildtype
subventricular zone cells, Mash1, Olig2, and Dlx2 loci have high levels
of histone-3 trimethylated at lys4 (H3K4me3), consistent with their
transcription. In contrast, in Mll1-deficient subventricular zone cells,
chromatin at Dlx2 is bivalently marked by both H3K4me3 and H3K27me3, and
the Dlx2 gene fails to properly activate. Lim et al. (2009) concluded
that their data supported a model in which Mll1 is required to resolve
key silenced bivalent loci in postnatal neural precursors to the
actively transcribed state for the induction of neurogenesis, but not
for gliogenesis.

Liu et al. (2010) assigned MLL as a novel effector in the mammalian
S-phase checkpoint network and identified checkpoint dysfunction as an
underlying mechanism of MLL leukemias. MLL is phosphorylated at ser516
by ATR (601215) in response to genotoxic stress in the S phase, which
disrupts its interaction with, and hence its degradation by, the
SCF(Skp2) E3 ligase (see 601436), leading to its accumulation.
Stabilized MLL protein accumulates on chromatin, methylates histone H3
lysine-4 at late replication origins, and inhibits the loading of CDC45
(603465) to delay DNA replication. Cells deficient in MLL showed
radioresistant DNA synthesis and chromatid-type genomic abnormalities,
indicative of S-phase checkpoint dysfunction. Reconstitution of Mll-null
mouse embryonic fibroblasts with wildtype but not S516A or delta-SET
mutant MLL rescued the S-phase checkpoint defects. Moreover, murine
myeloid progenitor cells carrying an Mll-CBP (600140) knockin allele
that mimics human t(11;16) leukemia showed a severe radioresistant DNA
synthesis phenotype. Liu et al. (2010) demonstrated that MLL fusions
function as dominant-negative mutants that abrogate the ATR-mediated
phosphorylation/stabilization of wildtype MLL on damage to DNA, and thus
compromise the S-phase checkpoint. Together, Liu et al. (2010) concluded
that their results identified MLL as a key constituent of the mammalian
DNA damage response pathway and showed that deregulation of the S-phase
checkpoint incurred by MLL translocations probably contributes to the
pathogenesis of human MLL leukemias.

- MLL Fusion Proteins

Human ML-2 leukemia cells lack a normal MLL gene and exclusively express
an MLL/AF6 (MLLT4; 159559) fusion protein. Yokoyama et al. (2005) showed
that MLL/AF6 associated with menin (MEN1; 613733) in ML-2 cells.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed both proteins present on
upstream sites of the HOXA7 (142950), HOXA9 (142956), and HOXA10
(142957) promoters. Deletions and point mutations performed in the MLL
portion of the MLL/ENL (MLLT1; 159556) fusion protein revealed a high
affinity menin-binding motif (RXRFP) near the N terminus. Interaction
between oncogenic MLL and menin was required for initiation of
MLL-mediated leukemogenesis in mouse stem/progenitor cells, and menin
was essential to maintain MLL-associated myeloid transformation. Acute
genetic ablation of menin in mice reversed aberrant Hox gene expression
mediated by MLL-menin promoter-associated complexes and specifically
abrogated differentiation arrest and oncogenic properties of
MLL-transformed leukemic blasts.

By gel filtration, mass spectrometry, and Western blot analysis of human
cell lines, Nie et al. (2003) identified unique low-abundance SWI/SWF
complexes that contained ENL, several common SWI/SNF subunits, and
either BAF250A (ARID1A; 603024) or BAF250B (ARID1B; 614556). Western
blot analysis of HB(11;19) leukemia cells, which express the oncogenic
MLL/ENL fusion protein, revealed that MLL/ENL also interacted with the
BAF250B-containing complex. MLL/ENL-containing SWI/SNF complexes
coactivated the HOXA7 promoter in a reporter gene assay.

CYTOGENETICS

- MLL Breakpoint Cluster Region

The ALL1 gene is rearranged in acute leukemias with interstitial
deletions or reciprocal translocations between chromosome 11q23 and
chromosomes 1, 4, 6, 9, 10, or 19. Gu et al. (1992) cloned translocation
fragments from leukemic cells from t(4;11) and showed clustering of the
breakpoints in areas of 7 to 8 kb on both chromosome 4 and 11.
Sequencing indicated heptamer and nonamer-like sequences, associated
with rearrangements of immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor genes, near
the breakpoints. This suggested a direct involvement of the VDJ
recombinase in the 11q23 translocations. Gu et al. (1992) determined
that the breakpoint cluster region within ALL1 spans 8 kb and
encompasses several small exons, most of which begin in the same phase
of the open reading frame.

McCabe et al. (1992) presented evidence that the breakpoints in all the
translocations involving 11q23 in leukemia cells, e.g., t(4;11) t(6;11),
t(9;11), and t(11;19), are clustered within a 9-kb BamHI genomic region
of the MLL gene. McCabe et al. (1992) detected rearrangements of DNA in
a fragment of the MLL gene by Southern blot hybridization. Djabali et
al. (1992) concluded that most of the breakpoints in infant leukemias
with t(4;11) and t(9;11) translocations lie within a 5-kb region.

Using a human TRX1 cDNA as a probe, Parry et al. (1993) demonstrated
that the gene is interrupted in both infant and adult acute myeloid
(AML) and lymphoid (ALL) leukemia patients with 11q23 translocations.
The structure of the TRX1 gene around the breakpoints show that this
part of the human gene is interrupted by 9 introns. As a result of the
rearrangement, zinc finger domains are translocated in both ALL and AML
patients.

Strout et al. (1998) analyzed the fusion sequences in genomic DNA from 9
patients with AML. Each had a partial tandem repeat spanning exons 2 to
6 of the ALL1 gene on 11q23. The breakpoint in intron 6 occurred in the
breakpoint cluster region and the other near the 3-prime end of intron
1. In 7 cases, a distinct point of fusion could not be identified;
instead, the sequence gradually diverged from an Alu element in intron 6
to an Alu element in intron 1 through heteroduplex fusion. The results
supported the hypothesis that a recombination event between homologous
Alu sequences is responsible for the partial tandem duplication of ALL1,
probably through an intrastrand slipped-mispairing mechanism, in the
majority of AML cases with this defect. This appeared to be the first
demonstration identifying Alu element-mediated recombination as a
consistent mechanism for gene rearrangement in somatic tissue.

- MLL/AF4 Fusion Gene

Gu et al. (1992) determined that the t(4;11) chromosome translocation in
leukemia results in 2 reciprocal fusion products coding for chimeric
proteins derived from ALL1 and from a gene on chromosome 4 that they
termed AF4 (MLLT2; 159557).

Translocations involving 11q23 in leukemia result in the translocation
of zinc finger domains with fusion to other genes on chromosome 4,
chromosome 9, or chromosome 19. The gene on chromosome 19 with which it
is fused is ENL (159556). Nakamura et al. (1993) showed that the genes
with which it is fused on chromosome 4 (AF4) and chromosome 9 (AF9;
159558) show high homology of sequence to ENL. The protein products of
the AF4, AF9, and ENL proteins contained nuclear targeting sequences as
well as serine-rich and proline-rich regions.

Independently, Domer et al. (1993) characterized the MLL/AF4 fusion
product generated by the t(4;11) translocation. The sequence of the
complete open reading frame for this fusion transcript revealed that the
MLL protein is homologous to DNA methyltransferase. In the fusion gene,
the 5-prime portion is derived from the MLL gene and the 3-prime portion
from the AF4 gene.

Gale et al. (1997) demonstrated that unique or clonotypic MLL-AF4
genomic fusion sequences were detectable in neonatal blood spots from
individuals who developed ALL at ages 5 months to 2 years, thus
providing unequivocal evidence for a prenatal initiation of acute
leukemia in young patients. They stated that common subtypes due to
other translocation fusion genes can be expected to have a similar
prenatal initiation.

In an infant diagnosed at the age of 3 weeks with ALL after presenting
with hepatosplenomegaly and marked leukocytosis, Raffini et al. (2002)
found a 3-way rearrangement of the MLL, AF4, and CDK6 (603368) genes. By
reverse-panhandle PCR, they identified a breakpoint junction of CDK6
from band 7q21-q22 and MLL intron 9. Thus, the patient had an in-frame
CDK6-MLL transcript along with an in-frame MLL-AF4 transcript.

Wang et al. (2010) studied leukemia stem cells in mouse models of acute
myelogenous leukemia induced by either coexpression of the Hoxa9
(142956) and Meis1a (601739) oncogenes or by the fusion oncoprotein
MLL-AF9. The authors showed that the Wnt (see 164820)/beta-catenin
(116806) signaling pathway is required for self-renewal of leukemia stem
cells that are derived from either hematopoietic stem cells or more
differentiated granulocyte-macrophage progenitors. Because the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is normally active in hematopoietic stem cells
but not in granulocyte-macrophage progenitors, Wang et al. (2010)
concluded that reactivation of beta-catenin signaling is required for
the transformation of progenitor cells by certain oncogenes.
Beta-catenin is not absolutely required for self-renewal of adult
hematopoietic stem cells; thus, targeting the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway
may represent a new therapeutic opportunity in acute myelogenous
leukemia.

- MLL/ENL Fusion Gene

In studies of a t(11;19)-carrying cell line, Tkachuk et al. (1992)
identified fusion transcripts expressed from both derivative
chromosomes. The more abundant derivative 11 transcript coded for a
chimeric protein containing the amino terminal 'AT-hook' motifs of the
HRX gene fused to the ENL gene (MLLT1; 159556) from chromosome 19. (ENL
was so named for '11-19 leukemia.') The HRX protein may have effects
mediated by DNA binding within the minor groove at AT-rich sites.
Tkachuk et al. (1992) referred to this type of leukemia as representing
the multilineage leukemias rather than mixed lineage leukemias. The cell
line carrying the t(11;19) was from a patient with T-cell precursor
acute lymphocytic leukemia (Smith et al., 1989).

Translocations involving 11q23 in leukemia result in the translocation
of zinc finger domains with fusion to other genes on chromosome 4,
chromosome 9, or chromosome 19. The gene on chromosome 19 with which it
is fused is ENL. Nakamura et al. (1993) showed that the genes with which
it is fused on chromosome 4 (AF4) and chromosome 9 (AF9; 159558) show
high homology of sequence to ENL. The protein products of the AF4, AF9,
and ENL proteins contained nuclear targeting sequences as well as
serine-rich and proline-rich regions.

- MLL/AF9 Fusion Gene

Translocations involving 11q23 in leukemia result in the translocation
of zinc finger domains with fusion to other genes on chromosome 4,
chromosome 9, or chromosome 19. The gene on chromosome 19 with which it
is fused is ENL. Nakamura et al. (1993) showed that the genes with which
it is fused on chromosome 4 (AF4) and chromosome 9 (AF9; 159558) show
high homology of sequence to ENL. The protein products of the AF4, AF9,
and ENL proteins contained nuclear targeting sequences as well as
serine-rich and proline-rich regions.

The human AF9 gene is one of the most common fusion partner genes with
MLL, resulting in the t(9;11)(p22;q23). Strissel et al. (2000)
identified several different structural elements in AF9, including a
colocalizing DNA topo II cleavage site and a DNase I hypersensitive
(DNase I HS) site. In addition, 2 scaffold-associated regions (SARs) are
located centromeric to the topo II and DNase I HS cleavage sites and
border breakpoint regions in 2 leukemic cell lines. The authors thus
demonstrated that the patient breakpoint regions of AF9 share the same
structural elements as the MLL BCR, and they proposed a DNA breakage and
repair model for nonhomologous recombination between MLL and its partner
genes, particularly AF9.

- MLL/AF6 Fusion Gene

Prasad et al. (1993) identified AF6 (MLLT4; 159559) as the fusion
partner of MLL in a common translocation, t(6;11)(q27;q23), associated
with leukemia. The t(6;11)(q27;q23) translocation results in a chimeric
MLL/AF6 protein with a calculated molecular mass of 325 kD. In the
chimeric protein, the N-terminal portion of MLL, including 3 AT hook
motifs, is fused to all of AF6 except the first 35 amino acids, leaving
the Ras-interacting domain and the DHR motif of AF6 intact. By Western
blot analysis of transfected COS cells and a human cell line with the
t(6;11)(q27;q23) translocation, Joh et al. (1997) found that the MLL/AF6
fusion protein had an apparent molecular mass of 360 kD.
Immunolocalization and cell fractionation followed by Western blot
analysis indicated that MLL/AF6 was targeted to the nucleus, whereas AF6
itself was cytoplasmic. Mutation analysis indicted that the region of
MLL containing AT hook motifs was responsible for the nuclear
localization of the chimeric protein.

- MLL/GPH Fusion Gene

Eguchi et al. (2001) found that the gephyrin gene (GPH; 603930) can
partner with MLL in leukemia associated with the translocation
t(11;14)(q23;q24). The child in whom this translocation was discovered
showed signs of acute undifferentiated leukemia 3 years after intensive
chemotherapy that included the topoisomerase II inhibitor VP16. The AT
hook motifs and a DNA methyltransferase homology domain of the MLL gene
were fused to the C-terminal half of GPH, including a presumed
tubulin-binding site and a domain homologous to the E. coli molybdenum
cofactor biosynthesis protein. Eguchi et al. (2001) suggested that
MLL-GPHN may have been generated by the chemotherapeutic agent, followed
by error-prone DNA repair via nonhomologous end-joining.

- MLL/GMPS Fusion Gene

In a patient with treatment-related acute myeloid leukemia and the
karyotype t(3;11)(q25;q23), Pegram et al. (2000) identified GMPS
(600358) to be the partner gene of MLL. The authors stated that GMPS was
the first partner gene of MLL to be identified on 3q and the first gene
of this type to be found in leukemia-associated translocations.

- MLL/FBP17 Fusion Gene

Fuchs et al. (2001) reported fusion of the gene encoding formin-binding
protein-17 (FBP17; 606191) to MLL in a child with acute myelogeneous
leukemia and a complex chromosome rearrangement,
ins(11;9)(q23;134)inv(11)(q13q23). The fused mRNA was represented by MLL
at the 5-prime end and FBP17 at the 3-prime end.

- MLL/LPP Fusion Gene

By FISH and Southern blot analyses, Daheron et al. (2001) identified a
rearrangement in the mixed lineage leukemia gene due to a novel
t(3;11)(q28;q23) translocation in a patient who developed acute myeloid
leukemia of the M5 type 3 years after treatment for a follicular
lymphoma. Through inverse PCR, they identified the LPP gene (600700) on
3q28 as the MLL fusion partner. The breakpoint occurred in intron 8 of
MLL and LPP. They found that the MLL/LPP and LPP/MLL predicted proteins
contain many of the features present in other MLL rearrangements.

- MLL/PNUTL1 Fusion Gene

Megonigal et al. (1998) examined the MLL genomic translocation
breakpoint in acute myeloid leukemia of infant twins. Southern blot
analysis showed 2 identical MLL gene rearrangements indicating
chromosomal translocation. The rearrangements were detected in the
second twin before signs of clinical disease and the intensity relative
to the normal fragment indicated that the translocation was not
constitutional. Fluorescence in situ hybridization with an MLL-specific
probe and karyotype analyses suggested that a t(11;22)(q23;q11.2)
disrupted MLL. Megonigal et al. (1998) used panhandle variant PCR to
clone the translocation breakpoint and identified a region of 22q11.2
involved in both leukemia and a constitutional disorder. By ligating a
single-stranded oligonucleotide that was homologous to known 5-prime MLL
genomic sequence to the 5-prime ends of BamHI-digested DNA through a
bridging oligonucleotide, they formed the stem-loop template for
panhandle variant PCR, which yielded products of 3.9 kb. The MLL genomic
breakpoint was in intron 7. The sequence of the partner DNA from 22q11.2
was identical to the human CDCrel (cell division cycle-related) gene
(PNUTL1; 602724) that maps to chromosome 22. Both MLL and PNUTL1
contained homologous CT, TTTGTG, and GAA sequences within a few
basepairs of their respective breakpoints, which may have been important
in uniting these 2 genes by translocation. RT-PCR amplified an in-frame
fusion of MLL exon 7 to PNUTL1 exon 3, indicating that a chimeric mRNA
had been transcribed.

- MLL/CDK6 Fusion Gene

In an infant diagnosed at the age of 3 weeks with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL; 613065) after presenting with hepatosplenomegaly and
marked leukocytosis, Raffini et al. (2002) found a 3-way rearrangement
of the MLL, AF4, and CDK6 (603368) genes. By reverse-panhandle PCR, they
identified a breakpoint junction of CDK6 from band 7q21-q22 and MLL
intron 9. Thus, the patient had an in-frame CDK6-MLL transcript along
with an in-frame MLL-AF4 transcript.

- MLL/LASP1 Fusion Gene

Strehl et al. (2003) identified a new MLL fusion partner on chromosome
17q in the case of an infant with AML-M4 and a t(11;17)(q23;q21)
translocation. FISH and RT-PCR analyses indicated a rearrangement of the
MLL gene, but no fusion with previously identified MLL fusion partners
at 17q, such as AF17 (600328) or MSF (604061). RACE revealed an in-frame
fusion of MLL to LASP1 (602920), a gene that is amplified and
overexpressed in breast cancer. The authors stated that retroviral
transduction of myeloid progenitors demonstrated that MLL/LASP1 was the
fourth known fusion of MLL with a cytoplasmic protein that has no in
vitro transformation capability, the others being GRAF (605370), ABI1
(603050), and FBP17.

- MLL/LAF4 Fusion Gene

Von Bergh et al. (2002) identified an MLL/LAF4 (601464) fusion gene in
an infant with ALL and a t(2;11)(p15;p14) translocation. Bruch et al.
(2003) also reported an infant with ALL and an MLL/LAF4 fusion caused by
an ins(11;2)(q23;q11.2q11.2) insertion.

- MLL/LARG Fusion Gene

In a patient with primary acute myeloid leukemia and a complex
karyotype, Kourlas et al. (2000) found that the 5-prime end of MLL at
exon 6 was fused in-frame with the 3-prime end of almost the entire open
reading frame of the LARG gene (604763), which lies on 11q23.
Transcriptional orientation of both genes at 11q23 was found to be from
centromere to telomere, consistent with other data that suggested that
the MLL/LARG fusion resulted from an interstitial deletion rather than a
balanced translocation.

- MLL/CBL Fusion Gene

Fu et al. (2003) found that the CBL gene (165360), which lies telomeric
to MLL on 11q23, was fused to MLL in an adult patient with de novo acute
myeloid leukemia (FAB M1). MLL exon 6 was fused in-frame with CBL exon
8. The genomic junction region involved the fusion of the 3-prime
portion of an Alu element in intron 6 of MLL with the 5-prime portion of
an Alu element in intron 7 of CBL. The absence of extensive sequence
similarity at both breakpoints of MLL and CBL indicated that the
recombination was not generated through homologous recombination. The
transcriptional orientation of both genes is from centromere to
telomere. The results of Southern blot analysis in conjunction with FISH
suggested that the MLL/CBL fusion was the result of an interstitial
deletion. CBL was the second MLL fusion partner identified on 11q23, the
first being the LARG gene. Fu et al. (2003) stated that at least 34
partner genes for MLL had been identified.

- MLL/AF10 Fusion Gene

Tanabe et al. (1996) identified an invins(10;11)(p12;q23q12) and other
complex chromosomal rearrangements in a 2-year old boy with acute
monoblastic leukemia (AML-M5). Cloning of the proximal 10p breakpoint
showed that the MLL gene at chromosome 11q23 was fused to the 3-prime
portion of AF10 (MLLT10; 602409) at chromosome 10p12. Cloning of the
telomeric 10p junction revealed that the 5-prime portion of AF10 was
fused with the HEAB gene (608757). The 5-prime AF10/HEAB fusion
transcript was out of frame, while the MLL/3-prime AF10 fusion was in
frame.

- MLL/AF15q14 Fusion Gene

Hayette et al. (2000) described a 48-year-old man with AML-M4 who was
cytogenetically characterized as 46,XY,-3,t(11;15)(q23;q1 4),+mar. The
bone marrow was hypercellular, with 80% blast cells. The patient was
treated by intensive chemotherapy and died 4 month after diagnosis. The
translocation resulted in a in-frame fusion between exon 8 of the MLL
gene and exon 10 of the AF15q14 gene (609173). The fusion transcript was
predicted to encode a 1,503-amino acid protein composed of 1,418
N-terminal amino acids of MLL and 85 C-terminal amino acids of AF15q14,
including the bipartite nuclear localization signal.

Kuefer et al. (2003) identified a similar t(11;15)(q23;q14) in a
3-year-old boy with de novo T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. In this
translocation, exon 9 of the MLL gene was fused in-frame to exon 12 of
the AF15q14 gene. The deduced 1,886-amino acid fusion protein, which
contains the N terminus of MLL up to lys1362 fused to the entire C
terminus of AF15q14 starting from residue ile1819, has a calculated
molecular mass of 208 kD. It differs from the fusion protein described
by Hayette et al. (2000) in that it has a coiled-coil domain but no
nuclear localization signal.

- MLL/CIP29 Fusion Gene

In an infant with AML-M4, Hashii et al. (2004) identified a
translocation, t(11;12)(q23;q13), in which the coding region of the
CIP29 gene (610049) was fused in-frame to exon 9 of the MLL gene. The
fusion protein had the N-terminal AT hooks and central DNA
methyltransferase homology region of MLL fused to nearly all of the
CIP29 protein, including the N-terminal SAP domain and 2 C-terminal
nuclear localization signals. RT-PCR confirmed expression of the fusion
transcript in patient peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

- MLL/SEPT6 Fusion Gene

Kadkol et al. (2006) described an infant with AML who had a
rearrangement between chromosomes 11q23 and Xq24. FISH analysis showed a
break in MLL, and RT-PCR analysis confirmed expression of an MLL/SEPT6
(300683) fusion transcript.

- MLL/MAML2 Fusion Gene

Nemoto et al. (2007) isolated MLL/MAML2 (607537) fusion transcripts from
secondary AML and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) cells with
inv(11)(q21q23). RT-PCR revealed that exon 7 of MLL was fused to exon 2
of MAML2 in the AML and MDS cells. The inv(11)(q21q23) resulted in a
chimeric RNA encoding a putative fusion protein containing 1,408 amino
acids from the N-terminal part of MLL and 952 amino acids from the
C-terminal part of MAML2. The N-terminal part of MAML2, a basic domain
that includes a binding site for the NOTCH (see NOTCH1; 190198)
intracellular domain, was deleted in MLL/MAML2. The MLL/MAML2 fusion
protein in secondary AML and MDS and the MECT1/MAML2 fusion protein in
mucoepithelioid carcinoma, benign Warthin tumor, and clear cell
hidradenoma contained the same C-terminal part of MAML2. Reporter gene
assays revealed that MLL/MAML2 suppressed HES1 (139605) promoter
activation by the NOTCH1 intracellular domain.

- MLL/GRAF Fusion Gene

Borkhardt et al. (2000) found that the GRAF gene (605370) was fused with
MLL in a unique t(5;11)(q31;q23) that occurred in an infant with
juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia.

- MLL/ABI1 Fusion Gene

Taki et al. (1998) analyzed a patient with AML and t(10;11)(p11.2;q23)
and identified, as a fusion partner with MLL, the gene ABI1 (603050) on
10p11.2. The ABI1 gene bore no homology with partner genes of MLL
previously described, but the ABI1 protein exhibited sequence similarity
to protein of homeotic genes, contained several polyproline stretches,
and included a Src homology-3 (SH3) domain at the C terminus. The
MLL-ABI1 fusion transcript in this patient was formed by an
alternatively spliced ABI1. In-frame MLL-ABI1 fusion transcripts
combined the MLL AT-hook motifs and DNA methyltransferase homology
region with the homeodomain homologous region, polyproline stretches,
and SH3 domain of the alternatively spliced transcript of ABI1.

- MLL/KIAA1524 Fusion Gene

Coenen et al. (2011) identified the karyotype 46,XX,t(3;11)(q12-13;q23)
in bone marrow of a 4-month-old Caucasian girl who presented with the M5
subtype of AML and central nervous system involvement. The patient died
9 weeks after diagnosis. The translocation resulted in fusion of intron
10 of the MLL gene on chromosome 11 to intron 16 of the KIAA1524 gene
(610643) on chromosome 3. The 2 genes are transcribed in opposite
orientations, suggesting that the translocation also required a
microinversion. RT-PCR analysis confirmed expression of the fusion
transcript, which was predicted to encode a 1,673-amino acid protein
containing the N-terminal AT-hook domain, subnuclear localization sites,
and methyltransferase domain of MLL fused to the C-terminal coiled-coil
domain of KIAA1524.

- MLL Duplication

In a study of patients with acute leukemia but no microscopically
visible change at 11q23, Schichman et al. (1994) found molecular
evidence of partial duplication of the ALL1 gene. The direct tandem
duplication involved a region spanning exons 2 to 6, and a partially
duplicated protein gene product was demonstrated. Thus, the ALL1 gene is
leukemogenic when it fuses with itself as well as when it fuses with one
of the genes on other chromosomes.

In addition to the translocations involving fusion of the ALL1 gene with
genes on other chromosomes producing acute lymphoblastic and myelogenous
leukemia, the ALL1 gene undergoes self-fusion in acute myeloid leukemias
with normal karyotype or trisomy 11. In addition, Baffa et al. (1995)
reported rearrangement of the ALL1 gene in a gastric carcinoma cell
line. A complex, 3-way translocation involving chromosomes 1 and 11 and
resulting in partial duplication of the ALL1 gene was found. Sequencing
of RT-PCR products and Northern blot analysis show that only the
partially duplicated ALL1 gene was transcribed, producing an mRNA with
exon 8 fused to exon 2. Thus, ALL1 gene rearrangement may play a role in
the pathogenesis of some solid malignancies. The absence of the normal
transcript in this cell line, in association with loss of heterozygosity
on 11q23 seen in solid tumors, suggests that ALL1 is involved in
tumorigenesis by a loss-of-function mechanism.

Approximately 90% of adult patients with de novo AML and trisomy 11
(+11) as a sole abnormality and 11% of adult patients with de novo AML
and normal cytogenetics carry a molecular rearrangement of the ALL1
gene. The rearranged ALL1 gene results from the direct tandem
duplication of a portion of ALL1 itself. Caligiuri et al. (1997) showed
that in cytogenetically normal cases of AML and cases with +11 as the
sole cytogenetic abnormality, only 1 chromosome contains the mutated
ALL1 allele. Thus, a single mutated ALL1 allele with the partial tandem
duplication is sufficient for ALL1-associated leukemogenesis,
irrespective of the number of normal genes present. The frequently
occurring specific association of +11 and ALL1 gene mutation in the
leukemic clone remained unexplained.

- Detection of MLL Rearrangements

Thirman et al. (1993) demonstrated that MLL gene rearrangements can be
detected with a single probe and a single restriction-enzyme digest. The
ability to detect an MLL gene rearrangement rapidly and reliably,
especially in patients with limited material for cytogenetic analysis,
should make it possible to identify patients who have a poor prognosis
and therefore require aggressive chemotherapy or marrow transplantation.

PHENOTYPE

The MLL gene spans the breakpoint in translocations involving 11q23,
which are responsible for approximately 70% of AML and ALL in infants
and are also observed in treatment-related leukemias, especially in
patients previously treated with drugs inhibiting topoisomerase II
(Gibbons et al., 1990; Thirman et al., 1993).

In 15 of 26 AML cases in infants, Sorensen et al. (1994) found
rearrangement of the MLL gene at the molecular level. These
rearrangements were clustered within an 11-kb region containing 9 exons
of the gene. In 14 of the 15 cases with rearrangements, the leukemia was
associated with myelomonocytic or monocytic phenotypes (M4 or M5 FAB
subtypes, respectively), both of which are associated with a poor
prognosis in childhood AML. In contrast, only 1 of 11 nonrearranged
cases had an M4 or M5 phenotype. Rearrangement also correlated
significantly with hyperleukocytosis, another clinical parameter
associated with poor outcome.

Kobayashi et al. (1993) described a case of acute lymphoblastic leukemia
in a 44-year-old woman after adjuvant chemotherapy of breast cancer;
they demonstrated rearrangement of the HRX gene.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemias carrying a chromosomal translocation
involving the MLL gene have a particularly poor prognosis. Armstrong et
al. (2002) showed that they have a characteristic, highly distinct gene
expression profile that is consistent with an early hematopoietic
progenitor expressing select multilineage markers and individual HOX
genes. Clustering algorithms showed that lymphoblastic leukemias with
MLL translocations can clearly be separated from conventional acute
lymphoblastic and acute myelogenous leukemias. Armstrong et al. (2002)
proposed that they constitute a distinct disease, denoted as MLL, and
showed that the differences in gene expression are robust enough to
classify leukemias correctly as MLL versus acute lymphoblastic leukemia
or acute myelogenous leukemia. Establishing that MLL is a unique entity
is critical, as it mandates the examination of selectively expressed
genes for urgently needed molecular targets.

PATHOGENESIS

Chromosomal translocations involving the MLL gene occur in about 80% of
infant leukemias. Epidemiologic studies have suggested that maternal
exposure to various substances such as pesticides, marijuana, or an
excess of flavonoids (naturally occurring inhibitors of topoisomerase
II) might be associated with acute leukemia in infants (Ross et al.,
1994). In search of possible agents inducing infant leukemia, Strick et
al. (2000) investigated bioflavonoids, natural substances in food as
well as in dietary supplements, that cause site-specific DNA cleavage in
the MLL breakpoint cluster region (BCR) in vivo. The MLL BCR DNA
cleavage was shown in primary progenitor hematopoietic cells from
healthy newborns and adults as well as in cell lines; it colocalized
with the MLL BCR cleavage site induced by chemotherapeutic agents, such
as etoposide (VP16) and doxorubicin (Dox). Both in vivo and additional
in vitro experiments demonstrated topoisomerase II (TOP2A; 126430) as
the target of bioflavonoids similar to the 2 chemotherapeutic agents.
Based on 20 bioflavonoids tested, Strick et al. (2000) identified a
common structure essential for topoisomerase II cleavage. The authors'
observations supported a 2-stage model of cellular processing of
topoisomerase II inhibitors: the first and reversible stage of this
cleavage resulted in DNA repair, but also rarely in chromosome
translocations; whereas the second, nonreversible stage led to cell
death because of an accumulation of DNA damage. These results suggested
that maternal ingestion of bioflavonoids may induce MLL breaks and
potentially translocations in utero leading to infant and early
childhood leukemia. Strick et al. (2000) concluded that although
bioflavonoids may be beneficial in certain circumstances, a potential
counterbalancing disadvantage is their possible role in causing
chromosome translocations leading to leukemia in all age groups,
analogous to the translocation forms of AML and ALL after cancer
chemotherapy. Ross (2000) commented on the observations of Strick et al.
(2000) in the context of clinical and epidemiologic findings on
childhood leukemia.

Wang et al. (2008) reported pharmacologic, physiologic, and genetic
studies that demonstrated an oncogenic requirement for glycogen synthase
kinase-3 (GSK3; see 606784) in the maintenance of a specific subtype of
poor prognosis human leukemia, genetically defined by mutations of the
MLL protooncogene. In contrast to its previously characterized roles in
suppression of neoplasia-associated signaling pathways, GSK3
paradoxically supports MLL leukemia cell proliferation and
transformation by a mechanism that ultimately involves destabilization
of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27(KIP1) (600778). Inhibition
of GSK3 in a preclinical murine model of MLL leukemia provided promising
evidence of efficacy and earmarked GSK3 as a candidate cancer drug
target.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Huang et al. (2012) reported the crystal structures of human menin
(613733) in its free form and in complexes with MLL1 or with JUND
(165162), or with an MLL1-LEDGF (603620) heterodimer. These structures
showed that menin contains a deep pocket that binds short peptides of
MLL1 or JUND in the same manner, but that it can have opposite effects
on transcription. The menin-JUND interaction blocks JUN N-terminal
kinase-mediated JUND phosphorylation and suppresses JUND-induced
transcription. In contrast, menin promotes gene transcription by binding
the transcription activator MLL1 through the peptide pocket while still
interacting with the chromatin-anchoring protein LEDGF at a distinct
surface formed by both menin and MLL1.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yu et al. (1995) reported that Mll deletion in mice was embryonic
lethal. Mll +/- mice had retarded growth, hemopoietic abnormalities, and
bidirectional homeotic transformation of the axial skeleton, as well as
sternal malformations.

Yamashita et al. (2006) examined the role of MLL in the immune system
using Mll +/- mice. Mll +/- Cd4-positive T cells differentiated normally
into antigen-specific effector Th1 and Th2 cells in vitro, but the
ability of memory Th2 cells to produce Th2 cytokines was dramatically
decreased. Histone methylation and acetylation at Th2 cytokine gene loci
was not maintained in Mll +/- memory Th2 cells. Levels of Gata3 (131320)
mRNA were normal in Mll +/- effector Th2 cells, but they were
substantially decreased in Mll +/- memory Th2 cells; mRNA levels of
other transcription factors were not affected in Mll +/- memory Th2
cells. Histone modifications of Gata3 were also aberrant in Th2 cell
lines in which Mll expression had been knocked down by small interfering
RNA. Ovalbumin-induced allergic eosinophilic inflammation was reduced in
Mll +/- Th2 cell-transferred mice. Yamashita et al. (2006) concluded
that MLL plays a crucial role in control of memory Th2 cell responses by
maintaining expression of GATA3 and production of Th2 cytokines.

Barabe et al. (2007) demonstrated that upon transplantation into
immunodeficient mice, primitive human hematopoietic cells expressing a
mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion gene generated myeloid or lymphoid
acute leukemias, with features that recapitulated human diseases.
Analysis of serially transplanted mice revealed that the disease is
sustained by leukemia-initiating cells that have evolved over time from
a primitive cell type with a germline immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH)
gene configuration to a cell type containing rearranged IgH genes. The
leukemia-initiating cells retained both myeloid and lymphoid lineage
potential and remained responsive to microenvironmental cues. Barabe et
al. (2007) concluded that the properties of these cells provide a
biologic basis for several clinical hallmarks of MLL leukemias.

McMahon et al. (2007) found that fetal liver from Mll-knockout mouse
embryos showed defects in the hematopoietic stem and progenitor pool,
including reductions in long-term and short-term hematopoietic stem cell
numbers and a decrease in the quiescent hematopoietic stem cell
fraction. Adult mice with conditional Mll knockout had no apparent
abnormalities in mature hematopoietic cells in bone marrow, spleen, and
thymus. However, conditional Mll-knockout bone marrow cells produced
reduced numbers of colony-forming units and showed reduced ability to
compete in hematopoietic reconstitution assays. McMahon et al. (2007)
concluded that MLL has a critical role in regulating stem cell
self-renewal.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Jones et al. (2012) performed whole-exome sequencing in 4 patients with
hypertrichosis cubiti, short stature, a distinctive facial appearance,
and intellectual disability (Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome; 605130), and
identified 3 different heterozygous de novo truncating mutations, all
within exon 27 of the MLL gene (159555.0001-159555.0003) in 3 of the 4
patients. Analysis of MLL in 2 additional patients with a similar
phenotype revealed heterozygosity for 2 more de novo truncating
mutations (159555.0004 and 159555.0005). The variants were confirmed by
Sanger sequencing, and none were found in dbSNP, the 1000 Genomes
Project, 600 unrelated control exome profiles, or DNA from the
unaffected parents.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HAIRY ELBOWS, SHORT STATURE, FACIAL DYSMORPHISM, AND DEVELOPMENTAL
DELAY
MLL, 4-BP DEL, NT8806

In a 6-year-old boy with hairy elbows, short stature, facial
dysmorphism, and moderate developmental delay (Wiedemann-Steiner
syndrome; 605130), Jones et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a
de novo 4-bp deletion (8806_8809del) in exon 27 of the MLL gene,
predicted to cause a frameshift and premature termination (Val2936Ter).
The mutation was not found in the unaffected parents, dbSNP, the 1000
Genomes Project, or 600 unrelated control exome profiles.

.0002
HAIRY ELBOWS, SHORT STATURE, FACIAL DYSMORPHISM, AND DEVELOPMENTAL
DELAY
MLL, 1-BP DEL, NT8267

In an 8-year-old girl with hairy elbows, short stature, facial
dysmorphism, and moderate developmental delay (605130), Jones et al.
(2012) identified heterozygosity for a de novo 1-bp deletion (8267del)
in exon 27 of the MLL gene, predicted to cause a frameshift and
premature termination (Leu2756Ter). The mutation was not found in the
unaffected parents, dbSNP, the 1000 Genomes Project, or 600 unrelated
control exome profiles.

.0003
HAIRY ELBOWS, SHORT STATURE, FACIAL DYSMORPHISM, AND DEVELOPMENTAL
DELAY
MLL, 1-BP DEL, NT6913

In a 12-year-old girl with hairy elbows, short stature, facial
dysmorphism, and moderate developmental delay (605130), Jones et al.
(2012) identified heterozygosity for a de novo 1-bp deletion (6913del)
in exon 27 of the MLL gene, predicted to cause a frameshift and
premature termination (Ser2305LeufsTer2). The mutation was not found in
the unaffected parents, dbSNP, the 1000 Genomes Project, or 600
unrelated control exome profiles. The level of MLL transcript in patient
skin fibroblasts was reduced in comparison to unrelated healthy
controls, indicating nonsense-mediated decay.

.0004
HAIRY ELBOWS, SHORT STATURE, FACIAL DYSMORPHISM, AND DEVELOPMENTAL
DELAY
MLL, ARG2382TER

In an 8-year-old boy with hairy elbows, short stature, facial
dysmorphism, and mild developmental delay (605130), Jones et al. (2012)
identified heterozygosity for a de novo 7144C-T transition in exon 27 of
the MLL gene, resulting in an arg2382-to-ter (R2382X) substitution. The
mutation was not found in the unaffected parents, dbSNP, the 1000
Genomes Project, or 600 unrelated control exome profiles.

.0005
HAIRY ELBOWS, SHORT STATURE, FACIAL DYSMORPHISM, AND DEVELOPMENTAL
DELAY
MLL, 1-BP DUP, NT4599

In a 24-year-old woman with hairy elbows, short stature, facial
dysmorphism, and mild developmental delay (605130), Jones et al. (2012)
identified heterozygosity for a de novo 1-bp duplication (4599dup) in
the MLL gene, predicted to cause a frameshift and premature termination
(Lys1534Ter). The mutation was not found in the unaffected parents,
dbSNP, the 1000 Genomes Project, or 600 unrelated control exome
profiles.

REFERENCE 1. Armstrong, S. A.; Staunton, J. E.; Silverman, L. B.; Pieters, R.;
den Boer, M. L.; Minden, M. D.; Sallan, S. E.; Lander, E. S.; Golub,
T. R.; Korsmeyer, S. J.: MLL translocations specify a distinct gene
expression profile that distinguishes a unique leukemia. Nature Genet. 30:
41-47, 2002.

2. Baffa, R.; Negrini, M.; Schichman, S. A.; Huebner, K.; Croce, C.
M.: Involvement of the ALL-1 gene in a solid tumor. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 92: 4922-4926, 1995.

3. Barabe, F.; Kennedy, J. A.; Hope, K. J.; Dick, J. E.: Modeling
the initiation and progression of human acute leukemia in mice. Science 316:
600-604, 2007.

4. Borkhardt, A.; Bojesen, S.; Haas, O. A.; Fuchs, U.; Bartelheimer,
D.; Loncarevic, I. F.; Bohle, R. M.; Harbott, J.; Repp, R.; Jaeger,
U.; Viehmann, S.; Henn, T.; Korth, P.; Scharr, D.; Lampert, F.: The
human GRAF gene is fused to MLL in a unique t(5;11)(q31;q23) and both
alleles are disrupted in three cases of myelodysplastic syndrome/acute
myeloid leukemia with a deletion 5q. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 9168-9173,
2000.

5. Bruch, J.; Wilda, M.; Teigler-Schlegel, A.; Harbott, J.; Borkhardt,
A.; Metzler, M.: Occurrence of an MLL/LAF4 fusion gene caused by
the insertion ins(11;2)(q23;q11.2q11.2) in an infant with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. (Letter) Genes Chromosomes Cancer 37: 106-109, 2003.

6. Butler, L. H.; Slany, R.; Cui, X.; Cleary, M. L.; Mason, D. Y.
: The HRX proto-oncogene product is widely expressed in human tissues
and localizes to nuclear structures. Blood 89: 3361-3370, 1997.

7. Caligiuri, M. A.; Strout, M. P.; Oberkircher, A. R.; Yu, F.; de
la Chapelle, A.; Bloomfield, C. D.: The partial tandem duplication
of ALL1 in acute myeloid leukemia with normal cytogenetics or trisomy
11 is restricted to one chromosome. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 3899-3902,
1997.

8. Cimino, G.; Moir, D. T.; Canaani, O.; Williams, K.; Crist, W. M.;
Katzav, S.; Cannizzaro, L.; Lange, B.; Nowell, P. C.; Croce, C. M.;
Canaani, E.: Cloning of ALL-1, the locus involved in leukemias with
the t(4;11)(q21;q23), t(9;11)(p22;q23), and t(11;19)(q23;p13) chromosome
translocations. Cancer Res. 51: 6712-6714, 1991.

9. Coenen, E. A.; Zwaan, C. M.; Meyer, C.; Marschalek, R.; Pieters,
R.; van der Veken, L. T.; Beverloo, H. B.; van den Heuvel-Eibrink,
M. M.: KIAA1524: a novel MLL translocation partner in acute myeloid
leukemia. Leukemia Res. 35: 133-135, 2011.

10. Daheron, L.; Veinstein, A.; Brizard, F.; Drabkin, H.; Lacotte,
L.; Guilhot, F.; Larsen, C. J.; Brizard, A.; Roche, J.: Human LPP
gene is fused to MLL in a secondary acute leukemia with a t(3;11)(q28;q23). Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 31: 382-389, 2001.

11. Djabali, M.; Selleri, L.; Parry, P.; Bower, M.; Young, B. D.;
Evans, G. A.: A trithorax-like gene is interrupted by chromosome
11q23 translocations in acute leukaemias. Nature Genet. 2: 113-118,
1992. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 4: 431 only, 1993.

12. Domer, P. H.; Fakharzadeh, S. S.; Chen, C.-S.; Jockel, J.; Johansen,
L.; Silverman, G. A.; Kersey, J. H.; Korsmeyer, S. J.: Acute mixed-lineage
leukemia t(4;11)(q21;q23) generates an MLL-AF4 fusion product. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 7884-7888, 1993.

13. Eguchi, M.; Eguchi-Ishimae, M.; Seto, M.; Morishita, K.; Suzuki,
K.; Ueda, R.; Ueda, K.; Kamada, N.; Greaves, M.: GPHN, a novel partner
gene fused to MLL in a leukemia with t(11;14)(q23;q24). Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 32: 212-221, 2001.

14. Fu, J.-F.; Hsu, J.-J.; Tang, T.-C.; Shih, L.-Y.: Identification
of CBL, a proto-oncogene at 11q23.3, as a novel MLL fusion partner
in a patient with de novo acute myeloid leukemia. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 37: 214-219, 2003.

15. Fuchs, U.; Rehkamp, G.; Haas, O. A.; Slany, R.; Konig, M.; Bojesen,
S.; Bohle, R. M.; Damm-Welk, C.; Ludwig, W.-D.; Harbott, J.; Borkhardt,
A.: The human formin-binding protein 17 (FBP17) interacts with sorting
nexin, SNX2, and is an MLL-fusion partner in acute myelogeneous leukemia. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 8756-8761, 2001.

16. Gale, K. B.; Ford, A. M.; Repp, R.; Borkhardt, A.; Keller, C.;
Eden, O. B.; Greaves, M. F.: Backtracking leukemia to birth: identification
of clonotypic gene fusion sequences in neonatal blood spots. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 13950-13954, 1997.

17. Gibbons, B.; Katz, F. E.; Ganly, P.; Chessells, J. M.: Infant
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia with t(11;19). Brit. J. Haemat. 74:
264-269, 1990.

18. Gu, Y.; Cimino, G.; Alder, H.; Nakamura, T.; Prasad, R.; Canaani,
O.; Moir, D. T.; Jones, C.; Nowell, P. C.; Croce, C. M.; Canaani,
E.: The (4;11)(q21;q23) chromosome translocations in acute leukemias
involve the VDJ recombinase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 10464-10468,
1992.

19. Gu, Y.; Nakamura, T.; Alder, H.; Prasad, R.; Canaani, O.; Cimino,
G.; Croce, C. M.; Canaani, E.: The t(4;11) chromosome translocation
of human acute leukemias fuses the ALL-1 gene, related to Drosophila
trithorax, to the AF-4 gene. Cell 71: 701-708, 1992.

20. Hashii, Y.; Kim, J. Y.; Sawada, A.; Tokimasa, S.; Hiroyuki, F.;
Ohta, H.; Makiko, K.; Takihara, Y.; Ozono, K.; Hara, J.: A novel
partner gene CIP29 containing a SAP domain with MLL identified in
infantile myelomonocytic leukemia. (Letter) Leukemia 18: 1546-1548,
2004.

21. Hayette, S.; Tigaud, I.; Vanier, A.; Martel, S.; Corbo, L.; Charrin,
C.; Beillard, E.; Deleage, G.; Magaud, J. P.; Rimokh, R.: AF15q14,
a novel partner gene fused to the MLL gene in an acute myeloid leukaemia
with a t(11;15)(q23;q14). Oncogene 19: 446-4450, 2000.

22. Hsieh, J. J.-D.; Cheng, E. H.-Y.; Korsmeyer, S. J.: Taspase1:
a threonine aspartase required for cleavage of MLL and proper HOX
gene expression. Cell 115: 293-303, 2003.

23. Huang, J.; Gurung, B.; Wan, B.; Matkar, S.; Veniaminova, N. A.;
Wan, K.; Merchant, J. L.; Hua, X.; Lei, M.: The same pocket in menin
binds both MLL and JUND but has opposite effects on transcription. Nature 482:
542-546, 2012.

24. Joh, T.; Yamamoto, K.; Kagami, Y.; Kakuda, H.; Sato, T.; Yamamoto,
T.; Takahashi, T.; Ueda, R.; Kaibuchi, K.; Seto, M.: Chimeric MLL
products with a Ras binding cytoplasmic protein AF6 involved in t(6;11)(q27;q23)
leukemia localize in the nucleus. Oncogene 15: 1681-1687, 1997.

25. Jones, W. D.; Dafou, D.; McEntagart, M.; Woollard, W. J.; Elmslie,
F. V.; Holder-Espinasse, M.; Irving, M.; Saggar, A. K.; Smithson,
S.; Trembath, R. C.; Deshpande, C.; Simpson, M. A.: De novo mutations
in MLL cause Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 91:
358-364, 2012.

26. Kadkol, S. S.; Bruno, A.; Oh, S.; Schmidt, M. L.; Lindgren, V.
: MLL-SEPT6 fusion transcript with a novel sequence in an infant with
acute myeloid leukemia. Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 168: 162-167, 2006.

27. Kobayashi, Y.; Yang, J.; Shindo, E.; Tojo, A.; Tani, K.; Ozawa,
K.; Asano, S.: HRX gene rearrangement in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
after adjuvant chemotherapy of breast cancer. (Letter) Blood 82:
3220-3223, 1993.

28. Kourlas, P. J.; Strout, M. P.; Becknell, B.; Veronese, M. L.;
Croce, C. M.; Theil, K. S.; Krahe, R.; Ruutu, T.; Knuutila, S.; Bloomfield,
C. D.; Caligiuri, M. A.: Identification of a gene at 11q23 encoding
a guanine nucleotide exchange factor: evidence for its fusion with
MLL in acute myeloid leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 2145-2150,
2000.

29. Krivtsov, A. V.; Armstrong, S. A.: MLL translocations, histone
modifications and leukaemia stem-cell development. Nature Rev. Cancer 7:
823-833, 2007.

30. Kuefer, M. U.; Chinwalla, V.; Zeleznik-Le, N. J.; Behm, F. G.;
Naeve, C. W.; Rakestraw, K. M.; Mukatira, S. T.; Raimondi, S. C.;
Morris, S. W.: Characterization of the MLL partner gene AF15q14 involved
in t(11;15)(q23;q14). Oncogene 22: 1418-1424, 2003.

31. Lim, D. A.; Huang, Y.-C.; Swigut, T.; Mirick, A. L.; Garcia-Verdugo,
J. M.; Wysocka, J.; Ernst, P.; Alvarez-Buylla, A.: Chromatin remodelling
factor Mll1 is essential for neurogenesis from postnatal neural stem
cells. Nature 458: 529-533, 2009.

32. Liu, H.; Takeda, S.; Kumar, R.; Westergard, T. D.; Brown, E. J.;
Pandita, T. K.; Cheng, E. H.-Y.; Hsieh, J. J.-D.: Phosphorylation
of MLL by ATR is required for execution of mammalian S-phase checkpoint. Nature 467:
343-346, 2010.

33. McCabe, N. R.; Burnett, R. C.; Gill, H. J.; Thirman, M. J.; Mbangkollo,
D.; Kipiniak, M.; van Melle, E.; Ziemin-van der Poel, S.; Rowley,
J. D.; Diaz, M. O.: Cloning of cDNAs of the MLL gene that detect
DNA rearrangements and altered RNA transcripts in human leukemic cells
with 11q23 translocations. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 11794-11798,
1992.

34. McMahon, K. A.; Hiew, S. Y.-L.; Hadjur, S.; Veiga-Fernandes, H.;
Menzel, U.; Price, A. J.; Kioussis, D.; Williams, O.; Brady, H. J.
M.: Mll has a critical role in fetal and adult hematopoietic stem
cell self-renewal. Cell Stem Cell 1: 338-345, 2007.

35. Megonigal, M. D.; Rappaport, E. F.; Jones, D. H.; Williams, T.
M.; Lovett, B. D.; Kelly, K. M.; Lerou, P. H.; Moulton, T.; Budarf,
M. L.; Felix, C. A.: t(11;22)(q23;q11.2) in acute myeloid leukemia
of infant twins fuses MLL with hCDCrel, a cell division cycle gene
in the genomic region of deletion in DiGeorge and velocardiofacial
syndromes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 6413-6418, 1998. Note: Erratum:
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 10344 only, 1998.

36. Milne, T. A.; Briggs, S. D.; Brock, H. W.; Martin, M. E.; Gibbs,
D.; Allis, C. D.; Hess, J. L.: MLL targets SET domain methyltransferase
activity to Hox gene promoters. Molec. Cell 10: 1107-1117, 2002.

37. Nakamura, T.; Alder, H.; Gu, Y.; Prasad, R.; Canaani, O.; Kamada,
N.; Gale, R. P.; Lange, B.; Crist, W. M.; Nowell, P. C.; Croce, C.
M.; Canaani, E.: Genes on chromosomes 4, 9, and 19 involved in 11q23
abnormalities in acute leukemia share sequence homology and/or common
motifs. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 4631-4635, 1993.

38. Nakamura, T.; Mori, T.; Tada, S.; Krajewski, W.; Rozovskaia, T.;
Wassell, R.; Dubois, G.; Mazo, A.; Croce, C. M.; Canaani, E.: ALL-1
is a histone methyltransferase that assembles a supercomplex of proteins
involved in transcriptional regulation. Molec. Cell 10: 1119-1128,
2002.

39. Nemoto, N.; Suzukawa, K.; Shimizu, S.; Shinagawa, A.; Takei, N.;
Taki, T.; Hayashi, Y.; Kojima, H.; Kawakami, Y.; Nagasawa, T.: Identification
of a novel fusion gene MLL-MAML2 in secondary acute myelogenous leukemia
and myelodysplastic syndrome with inv(11)(q21q23). Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 46: 813-819, 2007.

40. Nie, Z.; Yan, Z.; Chen, E. H.; Sechi, S.; Ling, C.; Zhou, S.;
Xue, Y.; Yang, D.; Murray, D.; Kanakubo, E.; Cleary, M. L.; Wang,
W.: Novel SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complexes contain a mixed-lineage
leukemia chromosomal translocation partner. Molec. Cell. Biol. 23:
2942-2952, 2003.

41. Parry, P.; Djabali, M.; Bower, M.; Khristich, J.; Waterman, M.;
Gibbons, B.; Young, B. D.; Evans, G.: Structure and expression of
the human trithorax-like gene 1 involved in acute leukemias. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 4738-4742, 1993.

42. Pegram, L. D.; Megonigal, M. D.; Lange, B. J.; Nowell, P. C.;
Rowley, J. D.; Rappaport, E. F.; Felix, C. A.: t(3;11) translocation
in treatment-related acute myeloid leukemia fuses MLL with the GMPS
(guanosine 5-prime monophosphate synthetase) gene. Blood 96: 4360-4362,
2000.

43. Prasad, R.; Gu, Y.; Alder, H.; Nakamura, T.; Canaani, O.; Saito,
H.; Huebner, K.; Gale, R. P.; Nowell, P. C.; Kuriyama, K.; Miyazaki,
Y.; Croce, C. M.; Canaani, E.: Cloning of the ALL-1 fusion partner,
the AF-6 gene, involved in acute myeloid leukemias with the t(6;11)
chromosome translocation. Cancer Res. 53: 5624-5628, 1993.

44. Raffini, L. J.; Slater, D. J.; Rappaport, E. F.; Lo Nigro, L.;
Cheung, N.-K. V.; Biegel, J. A.; Nowell, P. C.; Lange, B. J.; Felix,
C. A.: Panhandle and reverse-panhandle PCR enable cloning of der(11)
and der(other) genomic breakpoint junctions of MLL translocations
and identify complex translocation of MLL, AF-4, and CDK6. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 4568-4573, 2002.

45. Ross, J. A.: Dietary flavonoids and the MLL gene: a pathway to
infant leukemia? (Commentary) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 4411-4413,
2000.

46. Ross, J. A.; Davies, S. M.; Potter, J. D.; Robison, L. L.: Epidemiology
of childhood leukemia, with a focus on infants. Epidemiol. Rev. 16:
243-272, 1994.

47. Rowley, J. D.; Diaz, M. O.; Espinosa, R., III; Patel, Y. D.; van
Melle, E.; Ziemin, S.; Taillon-Miller, P.; Lichter, P.; Evans, G.
A.; Kersey, J. H.; Ward, D. C.; Domer, P. H.; Le Beau, M. M.: Mapping
chromosome band 11q23 in human acute leukemia with biotinylated probes:
identification of 11q23 translocation breakpoints with a yeast artificial
chromosome. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 9358-9362, 1990.

48. Schichman, S. A.; Caligiuri, M. A.; Gu, Y.; Strout, M. P.; Canaani,
E.; Bloomfield, C. D.; Croce, C. M.: ALL-1 partial duplication in
acute leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 6236-6239, 1994.

49. Smith, S. D.; McFall, P.; Morgan, R.; Link, M.; Hecht, F.; Cleary,
M.; Sklar, J.: Long-term growth of malignant thymocytes in vitro. Blood 73:
2182-2187, 1989.

50. Sorensen, P. H. B.; Chen, C.-S.; Smith, F. O.; Arthur, D. C.;
Domer, P. H.; Bernstein, I. D.; Korsmeyer, S. J.; Hammond, G. D.;
Kersey, J. H.: Molecular rearrangements of the MLL gene are present
in most cases of infant acute myeloid leukemia and are strongly correlated
with monocytic or myelomonocytic phenotypes. J. Clin. Invest. 93:
429-437, 1994.

51. Strehl, S.; Borkhardt, A.; Slany, R.; Fuchs, U. E.; Konig, M.;
Haas, O. A.: The human LASP1 gene is fused to MLL in an acute myeloid
leukemia with t(11;17)(q23;q21). Oncogene 22: 157-160, 2003.

52. Strick, R.; Strissel, P. L.; Borgers, S.; Smith, S. L.; Rowley,
J. D.: Dietary bioflavonoids induce cleavage in the MLL gene and
may contribute to infant leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 4790-4795,
2000.

53. Strissel, P. L.; Strick, R.; Tomek, R. J.; Roe, B. A.; Rowley,
J. D.; Zeleznik-Le, N. J.: DNA structural properties of AF9 are similar
to MLL and could act as recombination hot spots resulting in MLL/AF9
translocations and leukemogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1671-1679,
2000.

54. Strout, M. P.; Marcucci, G.; Bloomfield, C. D.; Caligiuri, M.
A.: The partial tandem duplication of ALL1 (MLL) is consistently
generated by Alu-mediated homologous recombination in acute myeloid
leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 2390-2395, 1998.

55. Taki, T.; Shibuya, N.; Taniwaki, M.; Hanada, R.; Morishita, K.;
Bessho, F.; Yanagisawa, M.; Hayashi, Y.: ABI-1, a human homolog to
mouse Abl-interactor 1, fuses the MLL gene in acute myeloid leukemia
with t(10;11)(p11.2;q23). Blood 92: 1125-1130, 1998.

56. Tanabe, S.; Bohlander, S. K.; Vignon, C. V.; Espinosa, R., III;
Zhao, N.; Strissel, P. L.; Zeleznik-Le, N. J.; Rowley, J. D.: AF10
is split by MLL and HEAB, a human homolog to a putative Caenorhabditis
elegans ATP/GTP-binding protein in an invins(10;11)(p12;q23q12). Blood 88:
3535-3545, 1996.

57. Thirman, M. J.; Gill, H. J.; Burnett, R. C.; Mbangkollo, D.; McCabe,
N. R.; Kobayashi, H.; Ziemin-van der Poel, S.; Kaneko, Y.; Morgan,
R.; Sandberg, A. A.; Chaganti, R. S. K.; Larson, R. A.; Le Beau, M.
M.; Diaz, M. O.; Rowley, J. D.: Rearrangement of the MLL gene in
acute lymphoblastic and acute myeloid leukemias with 11q23 chromosomal
translocations. New Eng. J. Med. 329: 909-914, 1993.

58. Tkachuk, D. C.; Kohler, S.; Cleary, M. L.: Involvement of a homolog
of Drosophila trithorax by 11q23 chromosomal translocations in acute
leukemias. Cell 71: 691-700, 1992.

59. von Bergh, A. R. M.; Beverloo, H. B.; Rombout, P.; van Wering,
E. R.; van Weel, M. H.; Beverstock, G. C.; Kluin, P. M.; Slater, R.
M.; Schuuring, E.: LAF4, an AF4-related gene, is fused to MLL in
infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 35:
92-96, 2002.

60. Wang, Y.; Krivtsov, A. V.; Sinha, A. U.; North, T. E.; Goessling,
W.; Feng, Z.; Zon, L. I.; Armstrong, S. A.: The Wnt/beta-catenin
pathway is required for the development of leukemia stem cells in
AML. Science 327: 1650-1653, 2010.

61. Wang, Z.; Smith, K. S.; Murphy, M.; Piloto, O.; Somervaille, T.
C. P.; Cleary, M. L.: Glycogen synthase kinase 3 in MLL leukaemia
maintenance and targeted therapy. Nature 455: 1205-1209, 2008.

62. Yamashita, M.; Hirahara, K.; Shinnakasu, R.; Hosokawa, H.; Norikane,
S.; Kimura, M. Y.; Hasegawa, A.; Nakayama, T.: Crucial role of MLL
for the maintenance of memory T helper type 2 cell responses. Immunity 24:
611-622, 2006.

63. Yokoyama, A.; Somervaille, T. C. P.; Smith, K. S.; Rozenblatt-Rosen,
O.; Meyerson, M.; Cleary, M. L.: The menin tumor suppressor protein
is an essential oncogenic cofactor for MLL-associated leukemogenesis. Cell 123:
207-218, 2005.

64. Yu, B. D.; Hess, J. L.; Horning, S. E.; Brown, G. A. J.; Korsmeyer,
S. J.: Altered Hox expression and segmental identity in Mll-mutant
mice. Nature 378: 505-508, 1995.

65. Ziemin-van der Poel, S.; McCabe, N. R.; Gill, H. J.; Espinosa,
R., III; Patel, Y.; Harden, A.; Rubinelli, P.; Smith, S. D.; Le Beau,
M. M.; Rowley, J. D.; Diaz, M. O.: Identification of a gene, MLL,
that spans the breakpoint in 11q23 translocations associated with
human leukemias. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 10735-10739, 1991. Note:
Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 4220 only, 1992.

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS 
Heme:
Acute lymphoid leukemia;
Acute myeloid leukemia;
Myeloid/lymphoid leukemia;
Mixed-lineage leukemia;
Acute monoblastic leukemia (AML-M5);
Acute myelomonocytic leukemia (AMML-M4)

Misc:
Homology to sequences within Drosophila 'trithorax' gene;
MLL protein is homologous to DNA methyltransferase

Lab:
Recurring 11q23 chromosomal translocations

Inheritance:
Autosomal dominant (11q23)

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/11/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/23/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/13/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/31/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/29/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/15/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/28/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/30/2008
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/13/2008
Matthew B. Gross - reorganized: 10/13/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/2/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/19/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/30/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/10/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/4/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/8/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/13/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/8/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/28/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/26/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/19/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/29/2003
Jane Kelly - updated: 3/10/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/14/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/20/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/13/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/17/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/2/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/18/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/19/2000
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 9/22/1999
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 7/23/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/3/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/18/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/27/1992

EDITED carol: 09/06/2013
mgross: 2/5/2013
alopez: 1/30/2013
carol: 10/9/2012
carol: 9/11/2012
carol: 8/17/2012
terry: 7/6/2012
mgross: 3/27/2012
terry: 3/23/2012
alopez: 3/14/2012
terry: 3/13/2012
joanna: 3/5/2012
mgross: 8/31/2011
carol: 4/7/2011
carol: 2/9/2011
terry: 11/3/2010
alopez: 10/5/2010
terry: 9/29/2010
terry: 9/8/2010
alopez: 4/21/2010
terry: 4/15/2010
wwang: 10/13/2009
alopez: 5/5/2009
terry: 4/28/2009
alopez: 12/31/2008
terry: 12/30/2008
carol: 12/4/2008
mgross: 10/13/2008
mgross: 5/2/2008
mgross: 3/19/2008
terry: 3/19/2008
mgross: 10/30/2007
terry: 9/14/2007
wwang: 8/17/2007
terry: 8/10/2007
alopez: 6/12/2007
terry: 6/4/2007
mgross: 1/8/2007
mgross: 4/13/2006
mgross: 2/8/2006
carol: 5/27/2005
alopez: 2/7/2005
mgross: 1/28/2005
mgross: 1/7/2005
mgross: 8/26/2004
joanna: 3/16/2004
terry: 2/20/2004
mgross: 11/19/2003
alopez: 11/13/2003
carol: 11/6/2003
carol: 8/14/2003
tkritzer: 8/12/2003
carol: 7/31/2003
tkritzer: 7/30/2003
mgross: 4/29/2003
tkritzer: 3/27/2003
tkritzer: 3/26/2003
carol: 3/10/2003
tkritzer: 10/17/2002
tkritzer: 10/14/2002
carol: 4/19/2002
carol: 4/18/2002
carol: 2/20/2002
alopez: 1/16/2002
terry: 1/14/2002
carol: 11/13/2001
carol: 8/17/2001
carol: 4/2/2001
alopez: 9/18/2000
mcapotos: 7/20/2000
mcapotos: 7/19/2000
mcapotos: 7/17/2000
mcapotos: 7/11/2000
terry: 6/15/2000
carol: 9/27/1999
carol: 9/22/1999
carol: 7/23/1999
carol: 2/22/1999
terry: 9/8/1997
terry: 9/3/1997
alopez: 6/18/1997
mark: 10/18/1996
mark: 6/19/1995
mimadm: 12/2/1994
carol: 10/20/1994
pfoster: 3/30/1994
carol: 10/4/1993
carol: 9/20/1993

614092	TITLE *614092 RAB-INTERACTING LYSOSOMAL PROTEIN-LIKE 1; RILPL1
;;RILP-LIKE PROTEIN 1; RLP1;;
GAPDH COMPETITOR OF SIAH PROTEIN ENHANCES LIFE; GOSPEL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to RILP (607848),
Wang et al. (2004) identified RILPL1 and RILPL2 (614093), which they
called RLP1 and RLP2, respectively. The deduced 403-amino acid RLP1
protein shares highest identity with RILP in 2 domains that Wang et al.
(2004) called RILP homology domain-1 (RH1) and RH2. Overall, RLP1 shares
32% and 22% amino acid identity with RLP2 and RILP, respectively.
Proteins containing RH domains were detected in several multicellular
organisms, but not in unicellular organisms. PCR analysis of human
tissues detected RLP1 expression in heart, brain, placenta, lung,
skeletal muscle, and pancreas, but not in liver or kidney.
Epitope-tagged RLP1 was expressed in the cytoplasm of transfected normal
rat kidney cells.

GENE FUNCTION

N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) stimulation of rodent cerebellar granule
neurons elicits nitric oxide generation, followed by S-nitrosylation of
Gapdh (138400), binding between Gapdh and Siah (see 602212),
Siah-mediated nuclear translocation of Gapdh, and neurotoxicity. Sen et
al. (2009) found that rat Rilpl1, which they called Gospel, bound the
N-terminal region of Gapdh and competed with Siah for Gapdh binding,
thereby preventing Gapdh nuclear translocation. S-nitrosylation of
Gospel was required for binding to Gapdh, as a Gospel mutant unable to
be S-nitrosylated was not neuroprotective. Overexpression of Gospel
reduced nuclear accumulation of Gapdh in HEK293 and mouse cortical
neuron cultures and reduced NMDA-glutamate neuronal excitotoxicity.
Conversely, depletion of Gospel by RNA interference enhanced Gapdh
nuclear accumulation and cell death in primary neuron cultures.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sen et al. (2009) determined that the RILPL1 gene contains at least 7
exons.

MAPPING

Hartz (2011) mapped the RILPL1 gene to chromosome 12q24.31 based on an
alignment of the RILPL1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK096697) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

Sen et al. (2009) stated that the mouse Rilpl1 gene maps to a region of
chromosome 5 that is syntenic with human chromosome 12q24.31.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  7/11/2011.

2. Sen, N.; Hara, M. R.; Ahmad, A. S.; Cascio, M. B.; Kamiya, A.;
Ehmsen, J. T.; Agrawal, N.; Hester, L.; Dore, S.; Snyder, S. H.; Sawa,
A.: GOSPEL: a neuroprotective protein that binds to GAPDH upon S-nitrosylation. Neuron 63:
81-91, 2009. Note: Erratum: Neuron 63: 709 only, 2009.

3. Wang, T.; Wong, K. K.; Hong, W.: A unique region of RILP distinguishes
it from its related proteins in its regulation of lysosomal morphology
and interaction with Rab7 and Rab34. Molec. Biol. Cell 15: 815-826,
2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/15/2011

EDITED terry: 07/27/2012
mgross: 7/15/2011

602106	TITLE *602106 POTASSIUM CHANNEL, INWARDLY RECTIFYING, SUBFAMILY J, MEMBER 15; KCNJ15
;;KIR4.2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The potassium channel inward rectifiers (Kir) constitute a family of
potassium channels that maintain the resting membrane potential close to
the equilibrium potential for potassium ions.

CLONING

By isolating, mapping, and sequencing trapped exons and captured cDNAs
from cosmids of the Down syndrome (190685) chromosome region (DSCR) on
21q22.2, Gosset et al. (1997) discovered a gene, designated KCNJ15,
encoding a member of the Kir family. The deduced protein contains 375
amino acids. Gosset et al. (1997) found that KCNJ15 is expressed in
kidney and lung during human development and in several adult tissues
including kidney and brain.

Okamoto et al. (2010) stated that expression of KCNJ15 in the pancreas
is relatively high, as is that in the kidney, thymus, and whole blood.
Immunofluorescence staining of tissue from nondiabetic patients revealed
that expression of KCNJ15 in Langerhans islets of the pancreas was
prominent compared to that of the exocrine glands.

MAPPING

Gosset et al. (1997) identified the KCNJ15 gene within the Down syndrome
chromosome region on 21q22.2. Another inwardly rectifying potassium
channel gene, that encoding Kir3.2 (KCNJ6; 600877), had been mapped
within the DSCR.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Okamoto et al. (2010) identified a synonymous SNP in exon 4 of the
KCNJ15 gene (dbSNP rs3746876, C566T) that showed significant association
with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM; 125853) affecting lean individuals
in 3 independent Japanese sample sets (p = 2.5 x 10(-7); odds ratio,
2.54) and with unstratified T2DM (p = 6.7 x 10(-6); OR, 1.76). The
diabetes risk allele frequency was, however, very low among Europeans
and no association between the variant and T2DM could be shown in a
Danish case-control study. Functional analysis in HEK293 cells
demonstrated that the risk T allele increased KCNJ15 expression via
increased mRNA stability, which resulted in higher expression of protein
compared to the C allele.

REFERENCE 1. Gosset, P.; Ghezala, G. A.; Korn, B.; Yaspo, M.-L.; Poutska, A.;
Lehrach, H.; Sinet, P.-M.; Creau, N.: A new inward rectifier potassium
channel gene (KCNJ15) localized on chromosome 21 in the Down syndrome
chromosome region 1 (DCR1). Genomics 44: 237-241, 1997.

2. Okamoto, K.; Iwasaki, N.; Nishimura, C.; Doi, K.; Noiri, E.; Nakamura,
S.; Takizawa, M.; Ogata, M.; Fujimaki, R.; Grarup, N.; Pisinger, C.;
Borch-Johnsen, K.; and 13 others: Identification of KCNJ15 as a
susceptibility gene in Asian patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 86: 54-64, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 02/26/2010

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/7/1997

EDITED carol: 02/26/2010
carol: 3/8/2001
carol: 11/23/1998
jenny: 11/7/1997

604575	TITLE *604575 ZINC FINGER HIT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; ZNHIT2
;;HIT-TYPE ZINC FINGER DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2;;
CHROMOSOME 11 OPEN READING FRAME 5; C11ORF5;;
FON
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By genome sequence sampling, subcloning, and sequence homology searches,
Lemmens et al. (2000) obtained a cDNA for C11ORF5, also termed FON. The
C11ORF5 cDNA encodes a deduced 403-amino acid acidic (pI 5.8) protein
predicted to have 11 phosphorylation and 6 N-myristoylation sites. The
human and mouse C11ORF5 proteins have 81% sequence identity. Northern
blot analysis revealed low expression of a 1.4-kb transcript in all
tissues tested except for testis in which high expression was seen.
Additional 4- and 7-kb transcripts were seen in skeletal muscle and
heart. In mice, in situ hybridization revealed high expression of
C11orf5 in adult testis, particularly in seminiferous tubules, and lower
expression in all other tissues tested.

GENE STRUCTURE

The C11ORF5 gene contains only 1 exon (Lemmens et al., 2000).

MAPPING

The European Consortium on MEN1 (1997) described 3 gene clusters in the
11q13 region. One 40-kb cluster, termed FAUNA (FAU neighboring area),
contains 7 genes, including FAU (134690), TM7SF2 (603414), and C11ORF5
(Lemmens et al., 1998).

The C11ORF5 gene is positioned in the same transcriptional orientation
as FAU, which is 4 kb upstream. It is located 171 nucleotides upstream
of TM7SF2 in a tail-to-tail configuration (Lemmens et al., 2000).

REFERENCE 1. Lemmens, I. H.; Farnebo, F.; Piehl, F.; Merregaert, J.; Van de
Ven, W. J. M.; Larsson, C.; Kas, K.: Molecular characterization of
human and murine C11orf5, a new member of the FAUNA gene cluster. Mammalian
Genome 11: 78-80, 2000.

2. Lemmens, I. H.; Kas, K.; Merregaert, J.; Van de Ven, W. J. M.:
Identification and molecular characterization of TM7SF2 in the FAUNA
gene cluster on human chromosome 11q13. Genomics 49: 437-442, 1998.

3. The European Consortium on MEN1: Construction of a 1.2-Mb sequence-ready
contig of chromosome 11q13 encompassing the multiple endocrine neoplasia
type 1 (MEN1) gene. Genomics 44: 94-100, 1997.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/19/2000

EDITED mgross: 02/23/2011
carol: 2/22/2011
carol: 2/9/2011
carol: 2/19/2000

607412	TITLE *607412 BPI FOLD-CONTAINING PROTEIN, FAMILY A, MEMBER 1; BPIFA1
;;PALATE, LUNG, AND NASAL EPITHELIUM CARCINOMA-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN; PLUNC;;
SPLUNC1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The upper respiratory tract, including the nasal and oral cavities, is
the major route of entry of pathogens into the body, and early
recognition of bacterial products in this region is critical for host
defense. A well-established family of 4 proteins involved in this
process includes BPI (109195) and LBP (151990), which are central to the
host defense against bacteria, and CETP (118470) and PLTP (172425),
which have also been implicated in this response. Bingle and Craven
(2002) described a family of 7 candidate host defense proteins in
humans, which they designated PLUNC for palate, lung, and nasal
epithelium clone.

CLONING

Weston et al. (1999) used differential display to identify a gene
transcript that was expressed in the presumptive nasal epithelium of the
mouse embryo. In situ hybridization analysis showed discrete regions of
expression associated with the palate, nasal septum, nasal conchae,
adult trachea, and bronchi of the lung. They designated the gene Plunc.

Bingle and Bingle (2000) reported the cloning and characterization of
the human homolog of Plunc. The cDNA encodes a leucine-rich protein of
256 amino acids that is 72% identical to the murine protein. They
demonstrated by RNA blot analysis that expression of PLUNC was
restricted to the trachea, upper airway, nasopharyngeal epithelium, and
salivary gland.

Bingle and Craven (2002) uncovered the family of PLUNC genes by
searching of sequence databases using the PLUNC sequence as a starting
point. They noted that PLUNC proteins are encoded by adjacent genes
found within a 300-kb region of chromosome 20, suggesting that they may
be under transcriptional control of shared genomic elements. Expression
data showed that PLUNC proteins are found in overlapping regions of the
pulmonary, nasopharyngeal, and oral epithelium, sites where the BPI
family members are not expressed. Bingle and Craven (2002) split the 7
PLUNC family members into short (SPLUNC; less than 256 amino acids) and
long (LPLUNC; more than 458 amino acids) groups. They noted that within
the human PLUNC family, amino acid sequence identity is low, ranging
from 16 to 28%. Members of the BPI family are predicted to share very
closely similar 3-dimensional structures, whereas the PLUNC family is
predicted to have much greater variability in the N-terminal domain,
corresponding to the active domain of BPI, thus creating the notion of a
BPI/PLUNC structural superfamily.

Sung et al. (2002) found that rat Plunc mRNA was expressed in heart,
lung, thymus, and salivary gland, as well as in nasal epithelium.
Western blot analysis detected a 31-kD protein in rat lung, heart, and
spleen and in rat and human mucus. In situ hybridization and
immunohistochemical analyses detected expression on the microvilli layer
of respiratory epithelium, and expression was upregulated on the
ipsilateral side after olfactory bulbectomy.

GENE FUNCTION

Bingle and Craven (2002) suggested that members of the PLUNC family may
function in the innate immune response in regions of the mouth, nose,
and lungs, which are sites of significant bacterial exposure.

Using multiple techniques, Chu et al. (2007) showed that human and mouse
bronchial epithelial cells expressed SPLUNC1. Expression of SPLUNC1
decreased Mycoplasma pneumoniae (Mp) levels and inhibited IL8 (146930)
production. Conversely, SPLUNC1 RNA interference enhanced Mp growth and
IL8 production. IL13 (147683) significantly decreased SPLUNC1 expression
and Mp clearance. Chu et al. (2007) concluded that SPLUNC1 is a
host-defense protein against Mp. They suggested that in an allergic
setting, such as in asthma with increased IL13 expression, SPLUNC1
expression is reduced, which may in part account for the role of Mp and
other respiratory infections in asthma pathobiology.

The multisubunit epithelial Na+ channel (ENaC; see 600228) must be
proteolytically activated before it can conduct Na+ and absorb excess
mucosal liquid in airways. Using mass spectrometric and Western blot
analyses, Garcia-Caballero et al. (2009) found that normal human
bronchial epithelial cultures secreted SPLUNC1, which could inhibit
proteolytic activation of ENaC. SPLUNC1 did not show intrinsic
antiprotease activity, but immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that
SPLUNC1 directly bound all 3 ENaC subunits. Recombinant SPLUNC1
inhibited ENaC activity in human bronchial epithelial cultures and in
Xenopus oocytes. Knockdown of SPLUNC1 by short hairpin RNA resulted in
failure of bronchial epithelial cultures to regulate surface liquid
height and transepithelial voltage. Garcia-Caballero et al. (2009)
concluded that SPLUNC1 binds and blocks ENaC from proteolytic
activation. They proposed that SPLUNC1 acts as a reporter molecule whose
concentration in airway fluid can adjust ENaC activity and regulate
airway hydration.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bingle and Bingle (2000) determined that the human PLUNC gene contains 9
exons and covers 7.3 kb; the first and last exons are noncoding.

MAPPING

Bingle and Bingle (2000) noted that the EST (Z24371) corresponding to
the microsatellite marker D20S195 contained portions of exons 2 and 3 of
PLUNC. The clone had been localized to chromosome 20q11.2 by Tomer et
al. (1998). Linkage of human PLUNC (BPIFA1) to chromosome 20 was
unequivocally confirmed by the existence of partial genomic clones in
the chromosome 20 sequencing project database.

Bingle and Craven (2002) mapped 3 mouse Plunc orthologs to chromosome 2,
which is syntenic with human chromosome 20q11.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

He et al. (2005) screened all exons, relevant exon-intron boundaries,
and the approximately 2-kb promoter region of the PLUNC gene (BPIFA1)
and identified 8 SNPs. Three haplotype-tagged SNPs were genotyped in a
case-control Chinese population composed of 239 unrelated patients with
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC; 161550) and 286 healthy controls. Two
promoter SNPs, -2128T-C and -1888T-C, showed significant associations
with susceptibility to NPC (OR = 2.8, p less than 0.0006, and OR = 3.3,
p less than 0.0001, respectively). The distribution of haplotypes
constructed based on the -2128T-C and -1888T-C polymorphisms was
significantly different between NPC patients and controls: individuals
with the C/C haplotype had significantly increased susceptibility to NPC
(OR = 1.86, p = 0.00016). He et al. (2005) concluded that genetic
variation in BPIFA1 may influence susceptibility to NPC in the Chinese
population.

REFERENCE 1. Bingle, C. D.; Bingle, L.: Characterisation of the human plunc
gene, a gene product with an upper airways and nasopharyngeal restricted
expression pattern. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1493: 363-367, 2000.

2. Bingle, C. D.; Craven, C. J.: PLUNC: A novel family of candidate
host defence proteins expressed in the upper airways and nasopharynx. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 11: 937-943, 2002.

3. Chu, H. W.; Thaikoottathil, J.; Rino, J. G.; Zhang, G.; Wu, Q.;
Moss, T.; Refaeli, Y.; Bowler, R.; Wenzel, S. E.; Chen, Z.; Zdunek,
J.; Breed, R.; Young, R.; Allaire, E.; Martin, R. J.: Function and
regulation of SPLUNC1 protein in mycoplasma infection and allergic
inflammation. J. Immun. 179: 3995-4002, 2007.

4. Garcia-Caballero, A.; Rasmussen, J. E.; Gaillard, E.; Watson, M.
J.; Olsen, J. C.; Donaldson, S. H.; Stutts, M. J.; Tarran, R.: SPLUNC1
regulates airway surface liquid volume by protecting ENaC from proteolytic
cleavage. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 106: 11412-11417, 2009. Note: Erratum:
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 106: 15091 only, 2009.

5. He, Y.; Zhou, G.; Zhai, Y.; Dong, X.; Lv, L.; He, F.; Yao, K.:
Association of PLUNC gene polymorphisms with susceptibility to nasopharyngeal
carcinoma in a Chinese population. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 42: 172-176,
2005.

6. Sung, Y. K.; Moon, C.; Yoo, J.-Y.; Moon, C.; Pearse, D.; Pevsner,
J.; Ronnett, G. V.: Plunc, a member of the secretory gland protein
family, is up-regulated in nasal respiratory epithelium after olfactory
bulbectomy. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 12762-12769, 2002.

7. Tomer, Y.; Barbesino, G.; Greenberg, D. A.; Concepcion, E.; Davies,
T. F.; International Consortium for the Genetics of Autoimmune Thyroid
Disease: A new Graves disease-susceptibility locus maps to chromosome
20q11.2. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63: 1749-1756, 1998.

8. Weston, W. M.; LeClair, E. E.; Trzyna, W.; McHugh, K. M.; Nugent,
P.; Lafferty, C. M.; Ma, L.; Tuan, R. S.; Greene, R. M.: Differential
display identification of plunc, a novel gene expressed in embryonic
palate, nasal epithelium, and adult lung. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 13698-13703,
1999. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem. 275: 8262 only, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/21/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/8/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/1/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/5/2003

CREATED George E. Tiller: 12/10/2002

EDITED carol: 03/18/2013
alopez: 5/11/2012
mgross: 2/9/2011
terry: 1/21/2011
mgross: 5/14/2009
terry: 5/8/2009
wwang: 3/11/2005
wwang: 3/8/2005
terry: 3/1/2005
cwells: 9/17/2003
mgross: 5/5/2003
cwells: 12/19/2002
cwells: 12/18/2002
cwells: 12/12/2002

102578	TITLE *102578 ACUTE PROMYELOCYTIC LEUKEMIA, INDUCER OF; PML
;;MYL
PML/RARA FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The PML tumor suppressor protein is essential for the formation of a
dynamic macromolecular nuclear structure called the PML-nuclear body
(PML-NB). PML-NBs have also been referred to as nuclear domains-10,
Kremer bodies, and PML oncogenic domains. Unlike more specialized
subnuclear structures, PML-NBs are involved in diverse cellular
functions, including sequestration and release of proteins, mediation of
posttranslational modifications, and promotion of nuclear events in
response to various cellular stresses. The PML gene is involved in the
t(15;17) translocation of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL; 612376),
which generates the oncogenic fusion protein PML-retinoic acid
receptor-alpha (RARA; 180240). PML-NBs are disrupted in APL and are thus
implicated in APL pathogenesis (Bernardi and Pandolfi, 2007; Salomoni et
al., 2008).

CLONING

In the process of analyzing the RARA gene in the t(15;17)(q22;q11.2-q12)
translocation specifically associated with APL, de The et al. (1990)
identified a novel gene on chromosome 15 involved with the RARA gene in
formation of a fusion product. This gene, which they called MYL for
'myelocytic leukemia,' was transcribed in the same direction as RARA on
the translocated chromosome. De The et al. (1990) identified a 144-bp
region, flanked by canonical splice acceptor and donor sequences, that
had a high probability of being an exon and showed no significant
similarity to any sequence in a protein data bank, thus suggesting that
MYL is a previously undescribed gene. In a later report, de The et al.
(1991) changed the name of the gene from MYL to PML. They reported,
furthermore, that the gene product contains a novel zinc finger motif
common to several DNA-binding proteins.

Goddard et al. (1991) demonstrated that PML is a putative zinc finger
protein and potential transcription factor that is commonly expressed,
with at least 3 major transcription products.

Goddard et al. (1995) cloned the murine Pml gene. The predicted amino
acid sequence of mouse Pml, a ring-finger protein, shows 80% similarity
to that of the human homolog, with greater than 90% similarity in the
proposed functional domains.

MAPPING

The PML gene maps to chromosome 15q22 (de The et al., 1990).

Goddard et al. (1995) mapped the mouse Pml gene to a region of
chromosome 9 with known homology of synteny to the region of 15q where
PML is located.

GENE FUNCTION

While PML does not colocalize with proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA; 176740) or spliceosomes, Dyck et al. (1994) showed that it is
part of a macromolecular structure, composed of at least 4 nuclear
proteins, that is adhered to the nuclear matrix. This structure shows a
labeling pattern resembling spheres that vary in both size and number
among individual cells of a given cell line. PML-RAR expression appears
to disrupt the integrity of these structures (referred to by Dyck et al.
(1994) as PML oncogenic domains, or PODs) and thus appears to be the
possible cause of their altered morphology. Retinoid treatment leads to
a striking reassembly of the POD, which in turn is linked to
differentiation of the leukemic cells. These results identified a novel
macromolecular nuclear structure and suggested that it may serve as a
target of cellular transformation.

From their analysis of the phosphoamino acids of the PML protein, Chang
et al. (1995) concluded that both tyrosine and serine residues are
phosphorylated. To investigate whether expression of the PML protein is
cell cycle related, HeLa cells synchronized at various phases of the
cell cycle were analyzed by immunofluorescence staining and confocal
microscopy. They found that PML was expressed at a lower level in S, G2,
and M phases and at a significantly higher level in G1 phase. Other
studies showed that PML is a phosphoprotein and is associated with the
nuclear matrix. Chang et al. (1995) noted that PML shares many
properties with tumor suppressors such as RB (614041).

Fusion of PML and TIF1A (603406) to RARA and BRAF (164757),
respectively, results in the production of PML-RAR-alpha and
TIF1-alpha-B-RAF (T18) oncoproteins. Zhong et al. (1999) showed that
PML, TIF1-alpha, and RXR-alpha (180245)/RAR-alpha function together in a
retinoic acid-dependent transcription complex. Zhong et al. (1999) found
that PML acts as a ligand-dependent coactivator of RXR-alpha/RARA-alpha.
PML interacts with TIF1-alpha and CREB-binding protein (CBP; 600140). In
PML -/- cells, the retinoic acid-dependent induction of genes such as
RARB2, and the ability of TIF1-alpha and CBP to act as transcriptional
coactivators on retinoic acid, are impaired. Zhong et al. (1999) showed
that both PML and TIF1-alpha are growth suppressors required for the
growth-inhibitory activity of retinoic acid. T18, similar to
PML-RAR-alpha, disrupts the retinoic acid-dependent activity of this
complex in a dominant-negative manner, resulting in a growth advantage.
PML-RAR-alpha was the first example of an oncoprotein generated by the
fusion of 2 molecules participating in the same pathway, specifically
the fusion of a transcription factor to one of its own cofactors. Since
the PML and RAR-alpha pathways converge at the transcriptional level,
there is no need for a double-dominant-negative product to explain the
pathogenesis of APL.

Pearson et al. (2000) reported that the tumor suppressor PML regulates
the p53 response to oncogenic signals. Pearson et al. (2000) found that
oncogenic RAS (190020) upregulates PML expression, and that
overexpression of PML induces senescence in a p53-dependent manner. p53
is acetylated at lysine-382 upon RAS expression, an event that is
essential for its biologic function. RAS induces relocalization of p53
and the CBP acetyltransferase within the PML nuclear bodies and induces
the formation of a trimeric p53-PML-CBP complex. Lastly, RAS-induced p53
acetylation, p53-CBP complex stabilization, and senescence are lost in
PML -/- fibroblasts. Pearson et al. (2000) concluded that their data
established a link between PML and p53 and indicated that integrity of
the PML bodies is required for p53 acetylation and senescence upon
oncogene expression.

Khan et al. (2001) showed that PML interacts with multiple corepressors
(SKI (164780), NCOR, and Sin3A (607776)) and histone deacetylase-1
(HDAC1; 601241), and that this interaction is required for
transcriptional repression mediated by the tumor suppressor MAD
(600021). PML-RARA has the 2 corepressor-interacting sites and inhibits
MAD-mediated repression, suggesting that aberrant binding of PML-RARA to
the corepressor complexes may lead to abrogation of the corepressor
function. The authors suggested that these mechanisms may contribute to
events leading to leukemogenesis.

Turelli et al. (2001) showed that incoming retroviral preintegration
complexes trigger the exportin (602559)-mediated cytoplasmic export of
the SWI/SNF component INI1 (601607) and of the nuclear body constituent
PML. They further showed that the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
genome associates with these proteins before nuclear migration. In the
presence of arsenic, PML was sequestered in the nucleus, and the
efficiency of HIV-mediated transduction was markedly increased. These
results unveiled an unsuspected cellular response that interferes with
the early steps of HIV replication.

Yang et al. (2002) determined that PML and checkpoint kinase-2 (CHEK2;
604373) mediated p53 (191170)-independent apoptosis following gamma
irradiation of several human cell lines. Endogenous CHEK2 bound PML
within PML nuclear bodies. Following gamma irradiation, CHEK2
phosphorylated PML on ser117, causing dissociation of the 2 proteins.
Apoptosis through this mechanism also required ATM (208900). Yang et al.
(2002) concluded that this pathway to gamma irradiation-induced
apoptosis utilizes ATM, CHEK2, and PML. Overexpression of PML alone
caused apoptosis in U937 myeloid cells.

Lin et al. (2004) demonstrated that cytoplasmic PML is an essential
modulator of TGF-beta signaling. Primary cells from Pml-null mice are
resistant to TGF-beta-dependent growth arrest, induction of cellular
senescence, and apoptosis. These cells also have impaired
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of the TGF-beta signaling
proteins Smad2 (601366) and Smad3 (603109), as well as impaired
induction of TGF-beta target genes. Expression of cytoplasmic Pml is
induced by TGF-beta. Furthermore, cytoplasmic Pml physically interacts
with Smad2, Smad3, and SMAD anchor for receptor activation (SARA;
603755), and is required for association of Smad2 and Smad3 with Sara
and for the accumulation of Sara and TGF-beta receptor (see 190181) in
the early endosome. The PML-RAR-alpha oncoprotein of acute promyelocytic
leukemia can antagonize cytoplasmic PML function, and acute
promyelocytic leukemia cells have defects in TGF-beta signaling similar
to those observed in Pml-null cells. Lin et al. (2004) concluded that
their findings identified cytoplasmic PML as a critical TGF-beta
receptor and further implicated deregulated TGF-beta signaling in cancer
pathogenesis.

Trotman et al. (2006) demonstrated that the PML tumor suppressor
prevents cancer by inactivating phosphorylated AKT (164730) inside the
nucleus. They found in a mouse model that Pml loss markedly accelerated
tumor onset, incidence, and progression in Pten (601728) heterozygous
mutants, and led to female sterility with features that recapitulate the
phenotype of Foxo3a knockout mice. Trotman et al. (2006) showed that PML
deficiency on its own leads to tumorigenesis in the prostate, a tissue
that is exquisitely sensitive to phosphorylated AKT levels, and
demonstrated that PML specifically recruits the AKT phosphatase PP2a
(see 603113) as well phosphorylated AKT into PML nuclear bodies.
Notably, Trotman et al. (2006) found that PML-null cells are impaired in
PP2a phosphatase activity towards AKT, and thus accumulate nuclear
phosphorylated AKT. As a consequence, the progressive reduction in PML
dose leads to inactivation of FOXO3A-mediated transcription of
proapoptotic BIM (603827) and the cell cycle inhibitor p27(KIP1)
(600778). Trotman et al. (2006) concluded that their results demonstrate
that PML orchestrates a nuclear tumor suppressor network for
inactivation of nuclear phosphorylated AKT, and thus highlight the
importance of AKT compartmentalization in human cancer pathogenesis and
treatment.

Bernardi et al. (2006) identified PML as a critical inhibitor of
neoangiogenesis (the formation of new blood vessels) in vivo, in both
ischemic and neoplastic conditions, through the control of protein
translation. Bernardi et al. (2006) demonstrated that in hypoxic
conditions PML acts as a negative regulator of the synthesis rate of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha (HIF1A; 603348) by repressing MTOR
(601231). PML physically interacts with MTOR and negatively regulates
its association with the small GTPase RHEB (601293) by favoring MTOR
nuclear accumulation. Notably, PML-null cells and tumors display higher
sensitivity both in vitro and in vivo to growth inhibition by rapamycin,
and lack of PML inversely correlates with phosphorylation of ribosomal
protein S6 (180460) and tumor angiogenesis in mouse and human tumors.
Thus, Bernardi et al. (2006) concluded that their findings identified
PML as a novel suppressor of mTOR and neoangiogenesis.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a human fetal brain cDNA library, followed
by coimmunoprecipitation analysis, Kunapuli et al. (2006) found that
ZNF198 (ZMYM2; 602221) was covalently modified by SUMO1 (601912).
Confocal microscopy showed that a proportion of ZNF198 colocalized with
SUMO1 and PML in PML nuclear bodies, and coimmunoprecipitation analysis
revealed that all 3 proteins resided in a protein complex. Mutation of
the SUMO1-binding site of ZNF198 resulted in degradation of ZNF198,
nuclear dispersal of PML, and loss of punctate PML nuclear bodies.
Kunapuli et al. (2006) found that the MDA-MB-157 breast cancer cell
line, which has a deletion in chromosome 13q11 encompassing the ZNF198
gene, lacked PML nuclear bodies, although PML protein levels appeared
normal. The fusion protein ZNF198/FGFR1 (136350), which occurs in
atypical myeloproliferative disease (613523) and lacks the SUMO1-binding
site of ZNF198, could dimerize with wildtype ZNF198 and disrupt its
function. Expression of ZNF198/FGFR1 disrupted PML sumoylation and
nuclear body formation and resulted in cytoplasmic localization of
SUMO1. Kunapuli et al. (2006) concluded that sumoylation of ZNF198 is
required for PML nuclear body formation.

Ito et al. (2008) showed that PML is critical in the maintenance of
quiescent leukemia-initiating cells and normal hematopoietic stem cells.
They suggested that targeting PML may be an effective treatment for
prevention of relapse in CML (608232).

Song et al. (2008) found that PTEN was aberrantly localized in APL in
which PML function was disrupted by the PML-RARA fusion oncoprotein.
Treatment with drugs that triggered PML-RARA degradation restored
nuclear PTEN. PML opposed the activity of HAUSP (USP7; 602519) towards
PTEN through a mechanism involving DAXX (603186). Confocal microscopy
and immunohistochemistry demonstrated that HAUSP was overexpressed in
prostate cancer and that levels of HAUSP directly correlated with tumor
aggressiveness and with PTEN nuclear exclusion. Song et al. (2008)
concluded that a PML-HAUSP network controls PTEN deubiquitinylation and
subcellular localization, which is perturbed in human cancers.

Arsenic, an ancient drug used in traditional Chinese medicine, has
attracted worldwide interest because it shows substantial anticancer
activity in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Arsenic
trioxide exerts its therapeutic effect by promoting degradation of
PML-RARA. PML and PML-RARA degradation is triggered by their
sumoylation, but the mechanism by which arsenic trioxide induces this
posttranslational modification was unclear. Zhang et al. (2010) showed
that arsenic binds directly to cysteine residues in zinc fingers located
within the RBCC domain of PML-RARA and PML. Arsenic binding induces PML
oligomerization, which increases its interaction with the small
ubiquitin-like protein modifier (SUMO)-conjugating enzyme UBC9 (601661),
resulting in enhanced sumoylation and degradation. Zhang et al. (2010)
concluded that the identification of PML as a direct target of arsenic
trioxide provides insights into the drug's mechanism of action and its
specificity for APL.

In mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Giorgi et al. (2010) found that
extranuclear Pml was specifically enriched at the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) and at the mitochondria-associated membranes, signaling domains
involved in ER-to-mitochondria calcium ion transport and in induction of
apoptosis. They found Pml in complexes of large molecular size with the
inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor (IP3R; 147265), protein kinase Akt
(164730), and protein phosphatase 2a (176915). Pml was essential for
Akt- and PP2a-dependent modulation of Ip3r phosphorylation and in turn
for Ip3r-mediated calcium ion release from the endoplasmic reticulum.
Giorgi et al. (2010) concluded that their findings provided a
mechanistic explanation for the pleiotropic role of Pml in apoptosis.

- Reviews of PML Function

Bernardi and Pandolfi (2007) reviewed the structure, dynamics, and
functions of PML-NBs.

Salomoni et al. (2008) reviewed the role of PML in tumor suppression.

- PML/RARA Fusion Protein

For information on the generation of PML/RARA fusion genes through
translocations associated with APL, see CYTOGENETICS.

Grignani et al. (1993) expressed the PML-RARA protein in U937 myeloid
precursor cells and showed that they lost the capacity to differentiate
under the action of stimuli such as vitamin D3 and transforming growth
factor beta-1 (TGFB1; 190180), acquired enhanced sensitivity to retinoic
acid, and exhibited a higher growth rate consequent to diminished
apoptotic cell death. These results provided evidence of biologic
activity of the fusion protein and recapitulated critical features of
the promyelocytic leukemia phenotype.

Lin et al. (1998) reported that the association of PLZF-RAR-alpha (see
176797) and PML-RAR-alpha with the histone deacetylase complex (see
605164) helps to determine both the development of APL and the ability
of patients to respond to retinoids. Consistent with these observations,
inhibitors of histone deacetylase dramatically potentiate
retinoid-induced differentiation of retinoic acid-sensitive, and restore
retinoid responses of retinoic acid-resistant, APL cell lines. Lin et
al. (1998) concluded that oncogenic retinoic acid receptors mediate
leukemogenesis through aberrant chromatin acetylation, and that
pharmacologic manipulation of nuclear receptor cofactors may be a useful
approach in the treatment of human disease.

Grignani et al. (1998) demonstrated that both PML-RAR-alpha and
PLZF-RAR-alpha fusion proteins recruit the nuclear corepressor (NCOR;
see 600849)-histone deacetylase complex through the RAR-alpha CoR box.
PLZF-RAR-alpha contains a second, retinoic acid-resistant binding site
in the PLZF amino-terminal region. High doses of retinoic acid release
histone deacetylase activity from PML-RAR-alpha, but not from
PLZF-RAR-alpha. Mutation of the NCOR binding site abolishes the ability
of PML-RAR-alpha to block differentiation, whereas inhibition of histone
deacetylase activity switches the transcriptional and biologic effects
of PLZF-RAR-alpha from being an inhibitor to an activator of the
retinoic acid signaling pathway. Therefore, Grignani et al. (1998)
concluded that recruitment of histone deacetylase is crucial to the
transforming potential of APL fusion proteins, and the different effects
of retinoic acid on the stability of the PML-RAR-alpha and
PLZF-RAR-alpha corepressor complexes determines the differential
response of APLs to retinoic acid.

RAR and acute myeloid leukemia-1 (AML1; 151385) transcription factors
are found in leukemias as fusion proteins with PML and ETO (CBFA2T1;
133435), respectively. Association of PML-RAR and AML1-ETO with the
NCOR-histone deacetylase complex is required to block hematopoietic
differentiation. Minucci et al. (2000) showed that PML-RAR and AML1-ETO
exist in vivo within high molecular weight nuclear complexes, reflecting
their oligomeric state. Oligomerization requires PML or ETO coiled-coil
regions and is responsible for abnormal recruitment of NCOR,
transcriptional repression, and impaired differentiation of primary
hematopoietic precursors. Fusion of RAR to a heterologous
oligomerization domain recapitulated the properties of PML-RAR,
indicating that oligomerization per se is sufficient to achieve
transforming potential. These results showed that oligomerization of a
transcription factor, imposing an altered interaction with
transcriptional coregulators, represents a novel mechanism of oncogenic
activation.

The recruitment of the nuclear receptor corepressor SMRT (NCOR2; 600848)
and subsequent repression of retinoid target genes is critical for the
oncogenic function of PML-RARA. Lin and Evans (2000) showed that the
ability of PML-RARA to form homodimers is both necessary and sufficient
for its increased binding efficiency to corepressor and its inhibitory
effects on hormonal responses in myeloid differentiation. Furthermore,
the authors found that altered stoichiometric interaction of SMRT with
PML-RARA homodimers may underlie these processes. An RXR mutant lacking
transactivation function AF2 recapitulated many biochemical and
functional properties of PML-RARA. Taken together, these results
indicated that altered dimerization of a transcription factor can be
directly linked to cellular transformation, and they implicated
dimerization interfaces of oncogenes as potential drug targets.

Pandolfi (2001) reviewed the roles of the RARA and PML genes in the
pathogenesis of APL and discussed the multiple oncogenic activities of
PML-RARA.

Di Croce et al. (2002) demonstrated that PML-RARA fusion protein induces
gene hypermethylation and silencing by recruiting DNA methyltransferases
to target promoters and that hypermethylation contributes to its
leukemogenic potential. Retinoic acid treatment induces promoter
demethylation, gene reexpression, and reversion of the transformed
phenotype. Di Croce et al. (2002) concluded that their results establish
a mechanistic link between genetic and epigenetic changes during
transformation and suggest that hypermethylation contributes to the
early steps of carcinogenesis.

The fusion protein PML-RARA initiates APL when expressed in the early
myeloid compartment of transgenic mice. Lane and Ley (2003) found that
PML-RARA was cleaved in several positions by a neutral serine protease
in a human myeloid cell line; purification revealed that the protease
was neutrophil elastase (ELA2; 130130). Immunofluorescence localization
studies suggested that cleavage of PML-RARA must have occurred within
the cell, perhaps within the nucleus. The functional importance of ELA2
for APL development was assessed in Ela2-deficient mice. More than 90%
of bone marrow PML-RARA-cleaving activity was lost in the absence of
Ela2, and Ela2-deficient animals, but not cathepsin G (116830)-deficient
animals, were protected from APL development. The authors determined
that primary mouse and human APL cells also contained ELA2-dependent
PML-RARA-cleaving activity. Lane and Ley (2003) concluded that, since
ELA2 is maximally produced in promyelocytes, it may play a role in APL
pathogenesis by facilitating the leukemogenic potential of PML-RARA.

Villa et al. (2006) found that MBD1 (156535) cooperated with PML-RARA in
transcriptional repression and cellular transformation in human cell
lines. PML-RARA recruited MBD1 to its target promoter through an HDAC3
(605166)-mediated mechanism. Binding of HDAC3 and MBD1 was not confined
to the target promoter, but was instead spread over the locus. Knockdown
of HDAC3 expression by RNA interference in acute promyelocytic leukemia
cells alleviated PML-RARA-induced promoter silencing. Furthermore,
retroviral expression of dominant-negative mutants of MBD1 in human
hematopoietic precursors interfered with PML-RARA-induced repression and
restored cell differentiation. Villa et al. (2006) concluded that
PML-RARA recruits an HDAC3-MBD1 complex to target promoters to establish
and maintain chromatin silencing.

CYTOGENETICS

- PML/RARA Fusion Gene

In the process of analyzing the RARA gene in the t(15;17)(q22;q11.2-q12)
translocation specifically associated with acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL), de The et al. (1990) identified a novel gene on chromosome 15
involved with the RARA gene in formation of a fusion product. This gene,
which they called MYL, was transcribed in the same direction as RARA on
the translocated chromosome. In the chimeric gene, the promoter and
first exon of the RARA gene were replaced by part of the MYL gene. De
The et al. (1990) established that the translocation chromosome
generates an MYL-RARA chimeric transcript. The findings strongly
implicated RARA in leukemogenesis. The possibility was raised that the
altered retinoic acid receptor behaves as a dominant-negative mutant
that blocks the expression of retinoic acid target genes involved in
granulocytic differentiation. In a later report, de The et al. (1991)
changed the name of the gene from MYL to PML. The PML-RARA mRNA encoded
a predicted 106-kD chimeric protein containing most of the PML sequences
fused to a large part of the RARA gene, including its DNA- and
hormone-binding domains.

Goddard et al. (1991) determined that the PML breakpoints were clustered
in 2 regions on either side of an alternatively spliced exon. Although
leukemic cells with translocations characteristically expressed only 1
fusion product, both PML-RARA (on the 15q+ derivative chromosome) and
RARA-PML (on the 17q- derivative) were transcribed. The contribution of
PML to the oncogenicity of the fusion products was demonstrated by the
following: no mutations affecting RARA alone were observed in 20 APLs
analyzed; 2 APLs cytogenetically lacking t(15;17) chromosomes were found
to have rearrangements of both PML and RARA; and PML but not RARA was
molecularly rearranged in a variant APL translocation in which
chromosome 15 had been translocated to another chromosome with no
visible involvement of chromosome 17.

Tong et al. (1992) found that in 20 of 22 patients with a detectable MYL
rearrangement the breakpoints were clustered within a 4.4-kb segment,
which they designated MYL(bcr). The 2 remaining patients exhibited a
more 5-prime rearrangement at about 10-kb upstream of the MYL(bcr)
region, indicating the lack of at least one MYL gene exon in the
resulting MYL-RARA fusion gene.

Cleary (1991) pointed out that detection of the PML-RARA fusion links a
specific molecular defect in neoplasia with a characteristic biologic
and clinical response to pharmacologic therapy. It is a useful marker
for the diagnosis of APL and for the identification of patients who may
benefit from retinoid treatment.

PML, the gene involved in the breakpoint on chromosome 15, is a putative
transcription factor: it contains a cysteine-rich motif that resembles a
zinc finger DNA-binding domain common to several classes of
transcriptional factors. Two fusion genes, PML-RARA and RARA-PML, are
formed as a result of the characteristic translocation in APL.
Heterogeneity of the chromosome 15 breakpoints accounts for the diverse
architecture of the PML-RARA mRNAs isolated from different APL patients,
and alternative splicing of PML exons gives rise to multiple isoforms of
the PML-RARA mRNAs even within a single patient. Alcalay et al. (1992)
investigated the organization and expression pattern of the RARA/PML
gene in a series of APL patients. A RARA-PML transcript was present in
most but not all APL patients. Among 70 patients with APL, Diverio et
al. (1992) found an abnormality in intron 2 of the RARA gene in all
cases, with clustering of rearrangements within the 20-kb intronic
region separating exons 2 and 3. A curious difference was found in the
location of breakpoints in males and females: breakpoints at the 5-prime
end of intron 2 of the RARA gene occurred in females and 3-prime
breakpoints predominated in males.

Stock et al. (2000) pointed out that breakpoints in chromosomes 15 and
17 leading to the translocation associated with APL had been described
as located between 15q22 and 15q26, and between 17q11 and 17q25. Most
studies using FISH had indicated the chromosome 15 breakpoint to be in
15q22. Stock et al. (2000) used a combination of G-banding, FISH, and
chromosome microdissection/reverse in situ hybridization to map the
breakpoints precisely to 15q24 and 17q21.1.

Zaccaria et al. (2002) studied a rare example of cryptic translocation
causing APL. Conventional cytogenetics showed a normal karyotype; PCR
showed a typical PML-RARA rearrangement in exon 1. FISH analysis
revealed that a submicroscopic part of chromosome 15 had been inserted
into 17q. Zaccaria et al. (2002) reviewed other cases of cryptic
translocation; their report appeared to be the first in which both pairs
of chromosomes 15 and 17 were cytogenetically normal and a PML-RARA
fusion gene, discovered after FISH analysis, was located on chromosome
17. A poor response to ATRA therapy was postulated to have a
relationship to the atypical translocation.

Abreu e Lima et al. (2005) described a 47-year-old woman with acute
myeloid leukemia who had simultaneous expression of the PML/RARA and the
AML1/ETO (133435) fusion genes. Despite prolonged use of therapeutic
doses of ATRA plus chemotherapy, the patient did not achieve remission,
in contrast to the experience of most patients with such fusion genes.
Conventional cytogenetics in this case showed the presence of only the
t(8;21) translocation. In previous reports of coexpression of these 2
fusion genes there was evidence of the presence of 2 or 3 distinct
leukemic clones harboring either or both chromosomal translocations.

ANIMAL MODEL

Brown et al. (1997) established a transgenic mouse model that documented
the ability of the chimeric PML-RARA gene to initiate leukemogenesis.
The mice developed 2 currently unrelated abnormalities. The first was a
severe papillomatosis of the skin; the second was a disturbance of
hematopoiesis that presented as a partial block of differentiation in
the neutrophil lineage of the transgenic mice and then progressed at low
frequency to overt APL. The leukemia appeared to be a faithful
reproduction of the human disease, including a therapeutic response to
retinoic acid that reflected differentiation of the leukemic cells. Both
the preleukemic state and the overt leukemia could be transplanted into
nontransgenic hosts. Brown et al. (1997) commented that the model should
be useful for exploring the pathogenesis and treatment of APL.

From studies in mice with disruption of the Pml gene, Wang et al. (1998)
demonstrated that normally, PML regulates hemopoietic differentiation
and controls cell growth and tumorigenesis. PML function is essential
for the tumor-growth-suppressive activity of retinoic acid (RA) and for
its ability to induce terminal myeloid differentiation of precursor
cells. PML was needed for the RA-dependent transactivation of the
p21(Waf1/Cip1) gene (116899), which regulates cell cycle progression and
cellular differentiation. These results provided a framework for
understanding the molecular pathogenesis of APL. Whereas APL might
result from the functional interference of PML/RARA with 2 independent
pathways, PML and RXR/RAR, Wang et al. (1998) showed that these proteins
act, at least in part, in the same pathway. Thus, by simultaneously
interacting with RXR and PML, the fusion gene product may inactivate
this pathway at multiple levels, leading to the proliferative advantage
and the block of hemopoietic differentiation that characterize APL.

David et al. (1997) generated an inducible line of transgenic mice in
which the expression of PML-RARA is driven by the metallothionein
promoter. After 5 days zinc stimulation, 27 of 54 mice developed hepatic
preneoplasia and neoplasia including foci of basophilic hepatocytes,
dysplasia, and carcinoma, with a significantly higher incidence of
lesions in females than in males. The rapid onset of liver pathologies
was dependent on overexpression of the transgene, since it was not
detected in noninduced transgenic animals of the same age. The PML-RARA
protein was always present in altered tissues at much higher levels than
in the surrounding normal liver tissues. In addition, overexpression of
PML-RARA resulted in a strong proliferative response in the hepatocytes.
David et al. (1997) concluded that overexpression of PML-RARA
deregulates subproliferation and can induce tumorigenic changes in vivo.

In an animal model of acute promyelocytic leukemia, Padua et al. (2003)
developed a DNA-based vaccine by fusing the human PML-RARA oncogene to
tetanus fragment C (FrC) sequences. Padua et al. (2003) showed for the
first time that a DNA vaccine specifically targeted to an oncoprotein
can have a pronounced effect on survival, both alone and in combination
with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). The survival advantage was
concomitant with time-dependent antibody production and an increase in
interferon-gamma (IFNG; 147570). Padua et al. (2003) also showed that
ATRA therapy on its own triggered an immune response in this model. When
DNA vaccination and conventional ATRA therapy were combined, they
induced protective immune responses against leukemia progression in
mice. Padua et al. (2003) concluded that this may provide a new approach
to improve clinical outcome in human leukemia.

REFERENCE 1. Abreu e Lima, R. S.; Baruffi, M. R.; de Lima, A. S. G.; de Oliveira,
F. M.; de Figueiredo-Pontes, L. L.; Tone, L. G.; Rogatto, S. R.; Falcao,
R. P.; Ferrari Chauffaille, M. de L. L.; Rego, E. M.: The co-expression
of PML/RAR-alpha and AML1/ETO fusion genes is associated with ATRA
resistance. Brit. J. Haemat. 128: 405-409, 2005.

2. Alcalay, M.; Zangrilli, D.; Fagioli, M.; Pandolfi, P. P.; Mencarelli,
A.; Lo Coco, F.; Biondi, A.; Grignani, F.; Pelicci, P. G.: Expression
pattern of the RAR-alpha-PML fusion gene in acute promyelocytic leukemia. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 4840-4844, 1992.

3. Bernardi, R.; Guernah, I.; Jin, D.; Grisendi, S.; Alimonti, A.;
Teruya-Feldstein, J.; Cordon-Cardo, C.; Simon, M. C.; Rafii, S.; Pandolfi,
P. P.: PML inhibits HIF-1-alpha translation and neoangiogenesis through
repression of mTOR. Nature 442: 779-785, 2006.

4. Bernardi, R.; Pandolfi, P. P.: Structure, dynamics and functions
of promyelocytic leukaemia nuclear bodies. Nature Rev. Molec. Cell
Biol. 8: 1006-1016, 2007.

5. Brown, D.; Kogan, S.; Lagasse, E.; Weissman, I.; Alcalay, M.; Pelicci,
P. G.; Atwater, S.; Bishop, J. M.: A PMLRAR-alpha transgene initiates
murine acute promyelocytic leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 2551-2556,
1997.

6. Chang, K.-S.; Fan, Y.-H.; Andreeff, M.; Liu, J.; Mu, Z.-M.: The
PML gene encodes a phosphoprotein associated with the nuclear matrix. Blood 85:
3646-3653, 1995.

7. Cleary, M. L.: Oncogenic conversion of transcription factors by
chromosomal translocations. Cell 66: 619-622, 1991.

8. David, G.; Terris, B.; Marchio, A.; Lavau, C.; Dejean, A.: The
acute promyelocytic leukemia PML-RAR-alpha protein induces hepatic
preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions in transgenic mice. Oncogene 14:
1547-1554, 1997.

9. de The, H.; Chomienne, C.; Lanotte, M.; Degos, L.; Dejean, A.:
The t(15;17) translocation of acute promyelocytic leukaemia fuses
the retinoic acid receptor alpha gene to a novel transcribed locus. Nature 347:
558-561, 1990.

10. de The, H.; Lavau, C.; Marchio, A.; Chomienne, C.; Degos, L.;
Dejean, A.: The PML-RAR-alpha fusion mRNA generated by the t(15;17)
translocation in acute promyelocytic leukemia encodes a functionally
altered RAR. Cell 66: 675-684, 1991.

11. Di Croce, L.; Raker, V. A.; Corsaro, M.; Fazi, F.; Fanelli, M.;
Faretta, M.; Fuks, F.; Lo Coco, F.; Kouzarides, T.; Nervi, C.; Minucci,
S.; Pelicci, P. G.: Methyltransferase recruitment and DNA hypermethylation
of target promoters by an oncogenic transcription factor. Science 295:
1079-1082, 2002.

12. Diverio, D.; Lo Coco, F.; D'Adamo, F.; Biondi, A.; Fagioli, M.;
Grignani, F.; Rambaldi, A.; Rossi, V.; Avvisati, G.; Petti, M. C.;
Testi, A. M.; Liso, V.; Specchia, G.; Fioritoni, G.; Recchia, A.;
Frassoni, F.; Ciolli, S.; Pelicci, P. G.: Identification of DNA rearrangements
at the retinoic acid receptor-alpha (RAR-alpha) locus in all patients
with acute promyelocytic leukemia and mapping of APL breakpoints within
the RAR-alpha second intron. Blood 79: 3331-3336, 1992.

13. Dyck, J. A.; Maul, G. G.; Miller, W. H., Jr.; Chen, J. D.; Kakizuka,
A.; Evans, R. M.: A novel macromolecular structure is a target of
the promyelocyte-retinoic acid receptor oncoprotein. Cell 76: 333-343,
1994.

14. Giorgi, C.; Ito, K.; Lin, H.-K.; Santangelo, C.; Wieckowski, M.
R.; Lebiedzinska, M.; Bononi, A.; Bonora, M.; Duszynski, J.; Bernardi,
R.; Rizzuto, R.; Tacchetti, C.; Pinton, P.; Pandolfi, P. P.: PML
regulates apoptosis at endoplasmic reticulum by modulating calcium
release. Science 330: 1247-1251, 2010.

15. Goddard, A. D.; Borrow, J.; Freemont, P. S.; Solomon, E.: Characterization
of a zinc finger gene disrupted by the t(15;17) in acute promyelocytic
leukemia. Science 254: 1371-1374, 1991.

16. Goddard, A. D.; Yuan, J. Q.; Fairbairn, L.; Dexter, M.; Borrow,
J.; Kozak, C.; Solomon, E.: Cloning of the murine homolog of the
leukemia-associated PML gene. Mammalian Genome 6: 732-737, 1995.

17. Grignani, F.; De Matteis, S.; Nervi, C.; Tomassoni, L.; Gelmetti,
V.; Cioce, M.; Fanelli, M.; Ruthardt, M.; Ferrara, F. F.; Zamir, I.;
Seiser, C.; Grignani, F.; Lazar, M. A.; Minucci, S.; Pelicci, P. G.
: Fusion proteins of the retinoic acid receptor-alpha recruit histone
deacetylase in promyelocytic leukaemia. Nature 391: 815-818, 1998.

18. Grignani, F.; Ferrucci, P. F.; Testa, U.; Talamo, G.; Fagioli,
M.; Alcalay, M.; Mencarelli, A.; Grignani, F.; Peschle, C.; Nicoletti,
I.; Pelicci, P. G.: The acute promyelocytic leukemia-specific PML-RAR-alpha
fusion protein inhibits differentiation and promotes survival of myeloid
precursor cells. Cell 74: 423-431, 1993.

19. Ito, K.; Bernardi, R.; Morotti, A.; Matsuoka, S.; Saglio, G.;
Ikeda, Y.; Rosenblatt, J.; Avigan, D. E.; Teruya-Feldstein, J.; Pandolfi,
P. P.: PML targeting eradicates quiescent leukaemia-initiating cells. Nature 453:
1072-1078, 2008.

20. Khan, M. M.; Nomura, T.; Kim, H.; Kaul, S. C.; Wadhwa, R.; Shinagawa,
T.; Ichikawa-Iwata, E.; Zhong, S.; Pandolfi, P. P.; Ishii, S.: Role
of PML and PML-RAR-alpha in Mad-mediated transcriptional repression. Molec.
Cell 7: 1233-1243, 2001.

21. Kunapuli, P.; Kasyapa, C. S.; Chin, S.-F.; Caldas, C.; Cowell,
J. K.: ZNF198, a zinc finger protein rearranged in myeloproliferative
disease, localizes to the PML nuclear bodies and interacts with SUMO-1
and PML. Exp. Cell Res. 312: 3739-3751, 2006.

22. Lane, A. A.; Ley, T. J.: Neutrophil elastase cleaves PML-RAR-alpha
and is important for the development of acute promyelocytic leukemia
in mice. Cell 115: 305-318, 2003.

23. Lin, H.-K.; Bergmann, S.; Pandolfi, P. P.: Cytoplasmic PML function
in TGF-beta signalling. Nature 431: 205-211, 2004.

24. Lin, R. J.; Evans, R. M.: Acquisition of oncogenic potential
by RAR chimeras in acute promyelocytic leukemia through formation
of homodimers. Molec. Cell 5: 821-830, 2000.

25. Lin, R. J.; Nagy, L.; Inoue, S.; Shao, W.; Miller, W. H., Jr.;
Evans, R. M.: Role of the histone deacetylase complex in acute promyelocytic
leukaemia. Nature 391: 811-814, 1998.

26. Minucci, S.; Maccarana, M.; Cioce, M.; De Luca, P.; Gelmetti,
V.; Segalla, S.; Di Croce, L.; Giavara, S.; Matteucci, C.; Gobbi,
A.; Bianchini, A.; Colombo, E.; Schiavoni, I.; Badaracco, G.; Hu,
X.; Lazar, M. A.; Landsberger, N.; Nervi, C.; Pelicci, P. G.: Oligomerization
of RAR and AML1 transcription factors as a novel mechanism of oncogenic
activation. Molec. Cell 5: 811-820, 2000.

27. Padua, R. A.; Larghero, J.; Robin, M.; le Pogam, C.; Schlageter,
M.-H.; Muszlak, S.; Fric, J.; West, R.; Rousselot, P.; Phan, T. H.;
Mudde, L.; Teisserenc, H.; Carpentier, A. F.; Kogan, S.; Degos, L.;
Pla, M.; Bishop, J. M.; Stevenson, F.; Charron, D.; Chomienne, C.
: PML-RARA-targeted DNA vaccine induces protective immunity in a mouse
model of leukemia. Nature Med. 9: 1413-1417, 2003.

28. Pandolfi, P. P.: Oncogenes and tumor suppressors in the molecular
pathogenesis of acute promyelocytic leukemia. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10:
769-775, 2001.

29. Pearson, M.; Carbone, R.; Sebastiani, C.; Cioce, M.; Fagioli,
M.; Saito, S.; Higashimoto, Y.; Appella, E.; Minucci, S.; Pandolfi,
P. P.; Pelicci, P. G.: PML regulates p53 acetylation and premature
senescence induced by oncogenic Ras. Nature 406: 207-210, 2000.

30. Salomoni, P.; Ferguson, B. J.; Wyllie, A. H.; Rich, T.: New insights
into the role of PML in tumour suppression. Cell Res. 18: 622-640,
2008.

31. Song, M. S.; Salmena, L.; Carracedo, A.; Egia, A.; Lo-Coco, F.;
Teruya-Feldstein, J.; Pandolfi, P. P.: The deubiquitinylation and
localization of PTEN are regulated by a HAUSP-PML network. Nature 455:
813-817, 2008.

32. Stock, A. D.; Dennis, T. R.; Spallone, P. A.: Precise localization
by microdissection/reverse ISH and FISH of the t(15;17)(q24;q21.1)
chromosomal breakpoints associated with acute promyelocytic leukemia. Cancer
Genet. Cytogenet. 119: 15-17, 2000.

33. Tong, J.-H.; Dong, S.; Geng, J.-P.; Huang, W.; Wang, Z.-Y.; Sun,
G.-L.; Chen, S.-J.; Chen, Z.; Larsen, C.-J.; Berger, R.: Molecular
rearrangements of the MYL gene in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL,
M3) define a breakpoint cluster region as well as some molecular variants. Oncogene 7:
311-316, 1992.

34. Trotman, L. C.; Alimonti, A.; Scaglioni, P. P.; Koutcher, J. A.;
Cordon-Cardo, C.; Pandolfi, P. P.: Identification of a tumour suppressor
network opposing nuclear Akt function. Nature 441: 523-536, 2006.

35. Turelli, P.; Doucas, V.; Craig, E.; Mangeat, B.; Klages, N.; Evans,
R.; Kalpana, G.; Trono, D.: Cytoplasmic recruitment of INI1 and PML
on incoming HIV preintegration complexes: interference with early
steps of viral replication. Molec. Cell 7: 1245-1254, 2001.

36. Villa, R.; Morey, L.; Raker, V. A.; Buschbeck, M.; Gutierrez,
A.; De Santis, F.; Corsaro, M.; Varas, F.; Bossi, D.; Minucci, S.;
Pelicci, P. G.; Di Croce, L.: The methyl-CpG binding protein MBD1
is required for PML-RAR-alpha function. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103:
1400-1405, 2006.

37. Wang, Z. G.; Delva, L.; Gaboli, M.; Rivi, R.; Giorgio, M.; Cordon-Cardo,
C.; Grosveld, F.; Pandolfi, P. P.: Role of PML in cell growth and
the retinoic acid pathway. Science 279: 1547-1551, 1998.

38. Yang, S.; Kuo, C.; Bisi, J. E.; Kim, M. K.: PML-dependent apoptosis
after DNA damage is regulated by the checkpoint kinase hCds1/Chk2. Nature
Cell Biol. 4: 865-870, 2002.

39. Zaccaria, A.; Valenti, A.; Toschi, M.; Salvucci, M.; Cipriani,
R.; Ottaviani, E.; Martinelli, G.: Cryptic translocation of PML/RARA
on 17q. A rare event in acute promyelocytic leukemia. Cancer Genet.
Cytogenet. 138: 169-173, 2002.

40. Zhang, X.-W.; Yan, X.-J.; Zhou, Z.-R.; Yang, F.-F.; Wu, Z.-Y.;
Sun, H.-B.; Liang, W.-X.; Song, A.-X.; Lallemand-Breitenbach, V.;
Jeanne, M.; Zhang, Q.-Y.; Yang, H.-Y.; and 9 others: Arsenic trioxide
controls the fate of the PML-RAR-alpha oncoprotein by directly binding
PML. Science 328: 240-243, 2010. Note: Erratum: Science 328: 974
only, 2010.

41. Zhong, S.; Delva, L.; Rachez, C.; Cenciarelli, C.; Gandini, D.;
Zhang, H.; Kalantry, S.; Freedman, L. P.; Pandolfi, P. P.: A RA-dependent,
tumour-growth suppressive transcription complex is the target of the
PML-RAR-alpha and T18 oncoproteins. Nature Genet. 23: 287-295, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/31/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/19/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/25/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/19/2008
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/14/2008
Matthew B. Gross - reorganized: 10/13/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/9/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/8/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/29/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/21/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/25/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/29/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/8/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/19/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/14/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/3/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/12/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/3/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/19/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/1/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/30/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/12/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 6/21/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/29/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/2/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/15/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/1/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/2/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/21/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/30/1990

EDITED terry: 03/14/2013
carol: 6/17/2011
alopez: 2/4/2011
terry: 1/31/2011
wwang: 11/22/2010
mgross: 10/19/2010
alopez: 5/26/2010
terry: 5/25/2010
mgross: 11/19/2008
mgross: 10/28/2008
mgross: 10/14/2008
mgross: 10/13/2008
wwang: 7/17/2008
terry: 7/9/2008
alopez: 9/19/2006
terry: 9/8/2006
alopez: 7/27/2006
terry: 7/24/2006
mgross: 3/29/2006
carol: 4/4/2005
wwang: 3/30/2005
wwang: 3/23/2005
terry: 3/21/2005
tkritzer: 3/17/2005
terry: 1/25/2005
tkritzer: 10/1/2004
terry: 9/29/2004
tkritzer: 1/12/2004
terry: 1/8/2004
mgross: 11/19/2003
mgross: 5/12/2003
mgross: 3/18/2003
terry: 3/14/2003
tkritzer: 3/10/2003
terry: 3/3/2003
alopez: 2/12/2002
terry: 2/12/2002
terry: 11/15/2001
mgross: 7/3/2001
cwells: 6/20/2001
cwells: 6/19/2001
alopez: 5/1/2001
alopez: 4/30/2001
alopez: 7/12/2000
mgross: 6/21/2000
alopez: 6/2/2000
terry: 5/29/2000
alopez: 11/3/1999
alopez: 11/2/1999
mgross: 9/23/1999
terry: 9/15/1999
carol: 10/6/1998
terry: 10/1/1998
dkim: 9/11/1998
alopez: 3/6/1998
terry: 3/2/1998
alopez: 7/9/1997
carol: 6/20/1997
jenny: 4/21/1997
terry: 4/12/1997
mark: 11/30/1995
mark: 10/5/1995
carol: 8/13/1992
carol: 6/16/1992
carol: 5/28/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

607767	TITLE *607767 SESTRIN 2; SESN2
;;SEST2;;
HYPOXIA-INDUCED GENE 95; HI95
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a microarray-based analysis, Budanov et al. (2002) identified
SEST2, which they designated HI95, as a gene upregulated in a glioma
cell line maintained under hypoxic conditions for 16 hours. The
full-length SEST2 cDNA encodes a deduced 480-amino acid protein
predicted to be a compact globular domain protein composed predominantly
of alpha-helical structures. SEST2 has several potential
serine-threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation sites, most of them
located within the alpha helices. Northern blot analysis revealed a
3.9-kb transcript expressed at low to moderate levels in most tissues
examined. In vitro translation of the cDNA resulted in a protein with an
apparent molecular mass of about 60 kD.

Peeters et al. (2003) analyzed the structure of p53 (191170)-activated
gene-26 (PA26, or sestrin-1; 606103) and identified a novel PA26-related
gene family, which they termed the sestrin family, comprising 3 closely
related genes in human and in mouse, PA26, SEST2, and SEST3 (607768).

GENE FUNCTION

In addition to observing upregulation of SEST2 following hypoxia in
cultured glioma cells, Budanov et al. (2002) found SEST2 expression
increased following DNA damage or oxidative stress, but not following
hyperthermia or serum starvation. Induction of SEST2 by prolonged
hypoxia or by oxidative stress appeared to be independent of p53
activation, but its induction following DNA damage (by gamma or
ultraviolet irradiation, or by doxorubicin) occurred in a p53-dependent
manner. Overexpression of SEST2 was toxic to many cultured cell types
and led to apoptotic cell death or to sensitization to experimental
insults. However, overexpression of SEST2 in a breast cancer cell line
resulted in protection from apoptotic cell death. Budanov et al. (2002)
concluded that SEST2 is involved in complex regulation of cell viability
in response to different stress conditions.

Acting as a signal, hydrogen peroxide circumvents antioxidant defense by
overoxidizing peroxiredoxins (Prxs), the enzymes that metabolize
peroxides. Budanov et al. (2004) showed that sestrins, a family of
proteins whose expression is modulated by p53, are required for
regeneration of Prxs containing cys-SO(2)H, thus reestablishing the
antioxidant firewall. Sestrins contain a predicted redox-active domain
homologous to AhpD, the enzyme catalyzing the reduction of a bacterial
peroxiredoxin, AhpC. Purified Hi95 (sestrin-2) protein supported
adenosine triphosphate-dependent reduction of overoxidized PrxI in
vitro, indicating that unlike AhpD, which is a disulfide reductase,
sestrins are cysteine sulfinyl reductases.

MAPPING

Using FISH, Peeters et al. (2003) mapped the human sestrin genes PA26,
SEST2, and SEST3 (607768) to chromosomes 6q21, 1p35.3, and 11q21,
respectively. They mapped the mouse Pa26, Sest2, and Sest3 genes to
syntenic regions on chromosomes 4, 9, and 10, respectively.

REFERENCE 1. Budanov, A. V.; Sablina, A. A.; Feinstein, E.; Koonin, E. V.; Chumakov,
P. M.: Regeneration of peroxiredoxins by p53-regulated sestrins,
homologs of bacterial AhpD. Science 304: 596-600, 2004.

2. Budanov, A. V.; Shoshani, T.; Faerman, A.; Zelin, E.; Kamer, I.;
Kalinski, H.; Gorodin, S.; Fishman, A.; Chajut, A.; Einat, P.; Skaliter,
R.; Gudkov, A. V.; Chumakov, P. M.; Feinstein, E.: Identification
of a novel stress-responsive gene Hi95 involved in regulation of cell
viability. Oncogene 21: 6017-6031, 2002.

3. Peeters, H.; Debeer, P.; Bairoch, A.; Wilquet, V.; Huysmans, C.;
Parthoens, E.; Fryns, J. P.; Gewillig, M.; Nakamura, Y.; Niikawa,
N.; Van de Ven, W.; Devriendt, K.: PA26 is a candidate gene for heterotaxia
in humans: identification of a novel PA26-related gene family in human
and mouse. Hum. Genet. 112: 573-580, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/30/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/27/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/8/2003

EDITED alopez: 04/26/2010
terry: 4/22/2010
alopez: 4/30/2004
terry: 4/30/2004
mgross: 5/27/2003
terry: 5/27/2003
tkritzer: 5/13/2003
tkritzer: 5/12/2003

605995	TITLE *605995 KINESIN FAMILY MEMBER 1B; KIF1B
;;KIAA0591
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Nangaku et al. (1994) cloned a member of the mouse kinesin superfamily,
Kif1b, which encodes an N-terminal-type motor protein. Kif1b was
expressed in all tissues tested. In situ hybridization revealed that
Kif1b was expressed abundantly in differentiated nerve cells.

Zhao et al. (2001) identified an isoform of mouse Kif1b, which they
called Kif1b-beta, that is distinct from Kif1b-alpha (Nangaku et al.,
1994) in its cargo-binding domain.

Yang et al. (2001) identified the KIF1B gene in a homozygously deleted
region of chromosome 1p36.2 in a neuroblastoma cell line. They reported
results suggesting that the gene is not a candidate for tumor suppressor
gene of neuroblastoma. Northern blot analysis demonstrated that human
KIF1B has at least 2 isoforms. The long isoform (KIF1B-beta) was
expressed in a wide variety of tissues, while the short isoform
(KIF1B-alpha) was detected only in adult testis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Schlisio et al. (2008) stated that the KIF1B gene contains 46 coding
exons.

MAPPING

By STS analysis, Gong et al. (1996) mapped the human KIF1B gene to
chromosome 1p36. They mapped the mouse Kif1b gene to chromosome 4.

Zuchner et al. (2004) stated that the KIF1B gene maps to chromosome
1p36.2, about 1.65 Mb telomeric to the MFN2 gene (608507), which is
mutant in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease-2A2 (CMT2A2; 609260).

NOMENCLATURE

Lawrence et al. (2004) presented a standardized kinesin nomenclature
based on 14 family designations. Under this system, KIF1B belongs to the
kinesin-3 family.

GENE FUNCTION

Nangaku et al. (1994) found that mouse Kif1b works as a monomer, having
a microtubule plus-end-directed motility. Rotary shadowing electron
microscopy revealed mostly single globular structures.
Immunocytochemically, Kif1b was colocalized with mitochondria in vivo. A
subcellular fractionation study showed that Kif1b was concentrated in
the mitochondrial fraction, and purified Kif1b could transport
mitochondria along microtubules in vitro. These data suggested that
Kif1b works as a monomeric motor for anterograde transport of
mitochondria.

Schlisio et al. (2008) found that apoptosis caused by NGF (see NGFB;
162030) withdrawal from cultured neuronal cells was mediated by EGLN3
(606426) and its downstream effector, KIF1B-beta.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease 2A1

In all affected members of a family with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease-2A1
(CMT2A1; 118210), Zhao et al. (2001) identified a loss-of-function
mutation in the KIF1B gene (605995.0001).

- Role in Cancer

In 1 medulloblastoma (155255), 3 neuroblastomas (NBLST1; 256700), and 2
pheochromocytoma (171300) tumor samples, Schlisio et al. (2008)
identified 6 different missense mutations in the KIF1B gene. In 3 tumors
there was loss of the wildtype allele and in 3 there was retention,
including 1 in which there was low-level amplification of the mutant
allele. In the 4 cases in which corresponding germline DNA samples from
the respective patients were available, the mutations were also present
(605995.0002-605995.0005). Functional studies in primary rat sympathetic
neurons revealed that induction of apoptosis was impaired with all of
the KIF1B variants compared to wildtype.

- Other Disease Associations

For discussion of an association between variation in the KIF1B gene and
multiple sclerosis, see MS4 (612596).

ANIMAL MODEL

Zhao et al. (2001) generated Kif1b knockout mice by gene targeting.
Kif1b knockout mice died at birth from apnea due to nervous system
defects. Death of knockout neurons in culture could be rescued by
expression of the Kif1b-beta isoform. The Kif1b heterozygotes had a
defect in transporting synaptic vesicle precursors and suffered from
progressive muscle weakness similar to human neuropathies.

Lyons et al. (2009) identified a mutation in the zebrafish Kif1b gene
that disrupted localization of Mbp (159430) mRNA in the central nervous
system (CNS) and outgrowth of the posterior lateral line nerve in the
peripheral nervous system (PNS). Using antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides to block translation of individual Kif1b isoforms, they
found that the phenotype was due to loss of Kif1b-beta rather than
Kif1b-alpha, even though the mutation occurred in the common region
shared by both isoforms. Examination of the zebrafish mutants revealed
that Kif1b was required to localize myelin mRNA to oligodendrocyte
processes, to elaborate the correct amount of myelin around axons, and
to prevent ectopic production of myelin-like membrane. Normal Kif1b
function was also required for development of certain axons in the CNS
and PNS.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, AXONAL, TYPE 2A1
KIF1B, GLN98LEU

In all affected individuals of a Japanese family (family 694) with
autosomal dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2A1 (CMT2A1; 118210)
reported by Saito et al. (1997), Zhao et al. (2001) identified an A-to-T
transversion in the KIF1B gene, resulting in a gln98-to-leu (Q98L)
substitution. The Q98L mutation was not identified in 95 healthy,
unrelated Japanese controls. The mutation occurred in the middle of the
P loop, the consensus ATP-binding site, and was predicted to disrupt the
function of this mechanochemical enzyme. Zhao et al. (2001) tested the
motor activity of recombinant mouse Kif1b with the Q98L mutation. The
microtubule-activated ATP turnover rates were reduced in the mutant
protein. Furthermore, the Q98L mutant protein remained and aggregated in
the perinuclear region, while the wildtype Kif1b protein accumulated at
the cell periphery. These data suggested that the Q98L mutation resulted
in a functional loss of motor activity.

.0002
NEUROBLASTOMA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
KIF1B, GLU656VAL

In a neuroblastoma (256700) tumor sample and in germline DNA from the
corresponding patient, Schlisio et al. (2008) identified an A-T
transversion in exon 20 of the KIF1B gene, resulting in a glu646-to-val
(E646V) substitution. There was loss of the wildtype allele in the tumor
sample, and MYCN (164840) amplification was present.

.0003
NEUROBLASTOMA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
KIF1B, THR827ILE

In a neuroblastoma (256700) tumor sample and in germline DNA from the
corresponding patient, Schlisio et al. (2008) identified a C-T
transition in exon 24 of the KIF1B gene, resulting in a thr827-to-ile
(T827I) substitution. The wildtype allele was retained in the tumor
sample; no amplification of MYCN (164840) was present, but low-level
(2-fold) amplification of the mutant allele was detected.

.0004
NEUROBLASTOMA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
KIF1B, PRO1217SER

In a neuroblastoma (256700) tumor sample and in germline DNA from the
corresponding patient, Schlisio et al. (2008) identified a C-T
transition in exon 33 of the KIF1B gene, resulting in a pro1217-to-ser
(P1217S) substitution. There was loss of the wildtype allele in the
tumor sample, and no MYCN (164840) amplification was present.

.0005
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
NEUROBLASTOMA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1, INCLUDED
KIF1B, SER1481ASN

In a pheochromocytoma (171300) tumor sample and in germline DNA from the
corresponding patient, Schlisio et al. (2008) identified a 4442G-A
transition in exon 41 of the KIF1B gene, resulting in a ser1481-to-asn
(S1481N) substitution. The wildtype allele was retained in the tumor
sample. The proband was a 28-year-old female who presented at 17 months
of age with a neuroblastoma (256700) and in adulthood developed a mature
ganglioneuroma and bilateral pheochromocytoma. Her paternal grandfather
harbored the mutant S1481N allele and also developed bilateral
pheochromocytoma. In vitro functional expression studies showed that the
mutant protein was deficient in the ability to induce apoptosis of
sympathetic precursor cells in response to growth factor withdrawal
compared to wildtype KIF1B.

Yeh et al. (2008) reported further analysis of the family reported by
Schlisio et al. (2008). The proband developed a leiomyosarcoma, and her
father, who also carried the S1481N mutation, developed adenocarcinoma
of the lung (211980). Analysis of tumor tissue revealed that all 4
neural crest tumors and the leiomyosarcoma retained both KIF1B alleles
and showed no loss of heterozygosity (LOH), consistent with a
haploinsufficiency mechanism. Yeh et al. (2008) postulated that the
leiomyosarcoma may have evolved secondary to the proband's childhood
treatment for neuroblastoma. In contrast, about 45% of cells from the
lung tumor showed LOH at this locus, suggesting a possible role for gene
dosage in development of this nonneural tumor.

REFERENCE 1. Gong, T.-W. L.; Burmeister, M.; Lomax, M. I.: The novel gene D4Mil1e
maps to mouse chromosome 4 and human chromosome 1p36. Mammalian Genome 7:
790-791, 1996.

2. Lawrence, C. J.; Dawe, R. K.; Christie, K. R.; Cleveland, D. W.;
Dawson, S. C.; Endow, S. A.; Goldstein, L. S. B.; Goodson, H. V.;
Hirokawa, N.; Howard, J.; Malmberg, R. L.; McIntosh, J. R.; and 10
others: A standardized kinesin nomenclature. J. Cell Biol. 167:
19-22, 2004.

3. Lyons, D. A.; Naylor, S. G.; Scholze, A.; Talbot, W. S.: Kif1b
is essential for mRNA localization in oligodendrocytes and development
of myelinated axons. Nature Genet. 41: 854-858, 2009.

4. Nangaku, M.; Sato-Yoshitake, R.; Okada, Y.; Noda, Y.; Takemura,
R.; Yamazaki, H.; Hirokawa, N.: KIF1B, a novel microtubule plus end-directed
monomeric motor protein for transport of mitochondria. Cell 79:
1209-1220, 1994.

5. Saito, M.; Hayashi, Y.; Suzuki, T.; Tanaka, H.; Hozumi, I.; Tsuji,
S.: Linkage mapping of the gene for Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type
2 to chromosome 1p (CMT2A) and the clinical features of CMT2A. Neurology 49:
1630-1635, 1997.

6. Schlisio, S.; Kenchappa, R. S.; Vredeveld, L. C. W.; George, R.
E.; Stewart, R.; Greulich, H.; Shahriari, K.; Nguyen, N. V.; Pigny,
P.; Dahia, P. L.; Pomeroy, S. L.; Maris, J. M.; Look, A. T.; Meyerson,
M.; Peeper, D. S.; Carter, B. D.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.: The kinesin
KIF1B-beta (sic) acts downstream from EglN3 to induce apoptosis and
is a potential 1p36 tumor suppressor. Genes Dev. 22: 884-893, 2008.

7. Yang, H. W.; Chen, Y. Z.; Takita, J.; Soeda, E.; Piao, H. Y.; Hayashi,
Y.: Genomic structure and mutational analysis of the human KIF1B
gene which is homozygously deleted in neuroblastoma at chromosome
1p36.2. Oncogene 20: 5075-5083, 2001.

8. Yeh, I.-T.; Lenci, R. E.; Qin, Y.; Buddavarapu, K.; Ligon, A. H.;
Leteurtre, E.; Do Cao, C.; Cardot-Bauters, C.; Pigny, P.; Dahia, P.
L. M.: A germline mutation of the KIF1B gene on 1p36 in a family
with neural and nonneural tumors. Hum. Genet. 124: 279-285, 2008.

9. Zhao, C.; Takita, J.; Tanaka, Y.; Setou, M.; Nakagawa, T.; Takeda,
S.; Yang, H. W.; Terada, S.; Nakata, T.; Takei, Y.; Saito, M.; Tsuji,
S.; Hayashi, Y.; Hirokawa, N.: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2A
caused by mutation in a microtubule motor KIF1B-beta. Cell 105:
587-597, 2001. Note: Erratum: Cell 106: 127 only, 2001.

10. Zuchner, S.; Mersiyanova, I. V.; Muglia, M.; Bissar-Tadmouri,
N.; Rochelle, J.; Dadali, E. L.; Zappia, M.; Nelis, E.; Patitucci,
A.; Senderek, J.; Parman, Y.; Evgrafov, O.; and 10 others: Mutations
in the mitochondrial GTPase mitofusin 2 cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth
neuropathy type 2A. Nature Genet. 36: 449-451, 2004. Note: Erratum:
Nature Genet. 36: 660 only, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/21/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/10/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/30/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/9/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/28/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/21/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/4/2001

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 6/6/2001

EDITED terry: 10/10/2012
terry: 8/3/2012
mgross: 6/21/2012
ckniffin: 9/24/2009
ckniffin: 9/18/2009
mgross: 8/12/2009
terry: 8/10/2009
wwang: 4/10/2009
ckniffin: 3/30/2009
wwang: 2/13/2009
ckniffin: 2/9/2009
alopez: 12/5/2008
wwang: 7/8/2008
mgross: 5/30/2008
terry: 5/28/2008
mgross: 3/15/2005
ckniffin: 3/4/2005
terry: 2/21/2005
carol: 4/29/2003
ckniffin: 4/23/2003
mcapotos: 1/2/2002
mcapotos: 12/4/2001
mgross: 11/16/2001
mgross: 6/6/2001

601639	TITLE *601639 PROTEIN KINASE, cAMP-DEPENDENT, CATALYTIC, ALPHA; PRKACA
DESCRIPTION Most of the effects of cAMP in the eukaryotic cell are mediated through
the phosphorylation of target proteins on serine or threonine residues
by the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (EC 2.7.1.37). The inactive
cAMP-dependent protein kinase is a tetramer composed of 2 regulatory and
2 catalytic subunits. The cooperative binding of 4 molecules of cAMP
dissociates the enzyme in a regulatory subunit dimer and 2 free active
catalytic subunits. In the human, 4 different regulatory subunits
(PRKAR1A, 188830; PRKAR1B, 176911; PRKAR2A, 176910; and PRKAR2B, 176912)
and 3 catalytic subunits (PRKACA; PRKACB, 176892; and PRKACG 176893)
have been identified.

MAPPING

Using PCR and Southern blot analysis, Tasken et al. (1996) assigned the
PRKACA gene to chromosome 19. By 2-color fluorescence in situ
hybridization, they regionalized the assignment to 19p13.1.

GENE FUNCTION

Studying hippocampal slices from rats of different ages, Yasuda et al.
(2003) found that protein kinase A is required for long-term
potentiation (LTP) in neonatal tissue (less than 9 postnatal days).
After that time, LTP requires calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein
kinase II (see CAMK2A, 114078). Yasuda et al. (2003) suggested that
developmental changes in synapse morphology, including a shift from
dendritic shafts to dendritic spines and compartmentalization of
calcium, may underlie the changes in kinase activity.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Kim et al. (2005) determined the crystal structure of the cAMP-dependent
protein kinase catalytic subunit bound to a deletion mutant of the
regulatory subunit (RI-alpha; PRKAR1A, 188830) at 2.0-angstrom
resolution. This structure defines a previously unidentified extended
interface in which the large lobe of the catalytic subunit is like a
stable scaffold where tyr247 in the G helix and trp196 in the
phosphorylated activation loop serve as anchor points for binding the
RI-alpha subunit. These residues compete with cAMP for the
phosphate-binding cassette in RI-alpha. In contrast to this catalytic
subunit, RI-alpha undergoes major conformational changes when the
complex is compared with cAMP-bound RI-alpha. Kim et al. (2005)
concluded that the complex provides a molecular mechanism for inhibition
of PKA and suggests how cAMP binding leads to activation.

Zhang et al. (2012) described the 2.3-angstrom structure of full-length
tetrameric RII-beta (PRKAR2B; 176912)(2):catalytic subunit-alpha(2)
holoenzyme. The structure showing a dimer of dimers provided a
mechanistic understanding of allosteric activation by cAMP. The
heterodimers are anchored together by an interface created by the
beta-4/beta-5 loop in the RII-beta subunit, which docks onto the
carboxyl-terminal tail of the adjacent C subunit, thereby forcing the C
subunit into a fully closed conformation in the absence of nucleotide.
Diffusion of magnesium ATP into these crystals trapped not ATP but the
reaction products adenosine diphosphate and the phosphorylated RII-beta
subunit. This complex has implications for the
dissociation-reassociation cycling of PKA. The quaternary structure of
the RII-beta tetramer differs appreciably from the model of the RI-alpha
tetramer, confirming the small-angle x-ray scattering prediction that
the structures of each PKA tetramer are different.

ANIMAL MODEL

The intracellular second messenger cAMP affects cell physiology by
directly interacting with effector molecules that include cyclic
nucleotide-gated ion channels, cAMP-regulated G protein exchange
factors, and cAMP-dependent protein kinases (PKA). Two catalytic
subunits, C-alpha (PRKACA) and C-beta (PRKACB), are expressed in the
mouse and mediate the effects of PKA. Skalhegg et al. (2002) generated a
null mutation in the major catalytic subunit of PKA, C-alpha, and
observed early postnatal lethality in the majority of C-alpha knockout
mice. Surprisingly, a small percentage of C-alpha knockout mice,
although runted, survived to adulthood. This growth retardation was not
due to decreased GH (139250) production but did correlate with a
reduction in IGF1 (147440) mRNA in the liver and diminished production
of the major urinary proteins in kidney. In these animals, compensatory
increases in C-beta levels occurred in brain whereas many tissues,
including skeletal muscle, heart, and sperm, contained less than 10% of
the normal PKA activity. Analysis of sperm in C-alpha knockout males
revealed that spermatogenesis progressed normally but that mature sperm
had defective forward motility.

REFERENCE 1. Kim, C.; Xuong, N.-H.; Taylor, S. S.: Crystal structure of a complex
between the catalytic and regulatory (RI-alpha) subunits of PKA. Science 307:
690-696, 2005.

2. Skalhegg, B. S.; Huang, Y.; Su, T.; Idzerda, R. L.; McKnight, G.
S.; Burton, K. A.: Mutation of the C-alpha subunit of PKA leads to
growth retardation and sperm dysfunction. Molec. Endocr. 16: 630-639,
2002.

3. Tasken, K.; Solberg, R.; Zhao, Y.; Hansson, V.; Jahnsen, T.; Siciliano,
M. J.: The gene encoding the catalytic subunit C-alpha of cAMP-dependent
protein kinase (locus PRKACA) localizes to human chromosome region
19p13.1. Genomics 36: 535-538, 1996.

4. Yasuda, H.; Barth, A. L.; Stellwagen, D.; Malenka, R. C.: A developmental
switch in the signaling cascades for LTP induction. Nature Neurosci. 6:
15-16, 2003.

5. Zhang, P.; Smith-Nguyen, E. V.; Keshwani, M. M.; Deal, M. S.; Kornev,
A. P.; Taylor, S. S.: Structure and allostery of the PKA RII-beta
tetrameric holoenzyme. Science 335: 712-716, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/27/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/25/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/3/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/10/2002

CREATED Lori M. Kelman: 1/21/1997

EDITED alopez: 02/28/2012
alopez: 2/28/2012
terry: 2/27/2012
wwang: 3/3/2005
terry: 2/25/2005
alopez: 1/9/2003
alopez: 12/3/2002
ckniffin: 12/3/2002
alopez: 10/10/2002
jamie: 1/21/1997

604231	TITLE *604231 PITUITARY TUMOR-TRANSFORMING GENE 2; PTTG2
DESCRIPTION During the course of studies mapping the PTTG1 (604147) gene to 5q33,
Prezant et al. (1999) found evidence for a related intronless gene,
which they referred to as PTTG2, on chromosome 4. They stated that PTTG1
and PTTG2 are highly conserved at both the nucleotide and amino acid
levels, including the potential SH3 binding domain. They found low-level
PTTG2 expression in normal pituitary and in some other normal tissues,
and moderately elevated expression in some pituitary tumors. By
radiation hybrid mapping, Prezant et al. (1999) mapped the PTTG2 gene to
human chromosome 4p12.

REFERENCE 1. Prezant, T. R.; Kadioglu, P.; Melmed, S.: An intronless homolog
of human proto-oncogene hPTTG is expressed in pituitary tumors: evidence
for hPTTG family. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 1149-1152, 1999.

CREATED John A. Phillips, III: 10/13/1999

EDITED alopez: 10/14/1999

609561	TITLE *609561 CARBOXYPEPTIDASE A5; CPA5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Carboxypeptidases have functions ranging from digestion of food to
selective biosynthesis of neuroendocrine peptides. Members of the A/B
subfamily of carboxypeptidases, such as CPA5, contain an approximately
90-amino acid pro region that assists in the folding of the active
carboxypeptidase domain. Cleavage of the pro region activates the enzyme
(Wei et al., 2002).

CLONING

By searching databases for sequences similar to CPA1 (114850) and CPB1
(114852), Wei et al. (2002) identified CPA5. The deduced 436-amino acid
protein contains an N-terminal signal peptide, followed by a pro domain
and a carboxypeptidase catalytic domain that includes residues involved
in zinc coordination and substrate catalysis and a single disulfide
bond. CPA5 ESTs were found in testis, adult brain, and fetal heart cDNA
libraries. One of the CPA5 sequences from testis contains an alternative
exon 2 (exon 2B) not found in the other CPA5 sequences. Northern blot
analysis of mouse tissues detected Cpa5 expression in testis, but not in
kidney, liver, brain, and lung. RT-PCR detected expression in mouse
testis and pancreas and in a mouse pituitary corticotrophic cell line,
but not in any other mouse tissues examined. In situ hybridization
revealed stage-specific expression of Cpa5 in germ cells of mouse
testis. Cpa5 was also expressed in the anterior and intermediate lobes
of the pituitary, but not in the neural lobe.

GENE FUNCTION

Modeling analysis by Wei et al. (2002) predicted that, like CPA1, CPA2
(600688), and CPA3 (114851), CPA5 cleaves substrates with C-terminal
hydrophobic residues. Wei et al. (2002) found that CPA5 cleaved a
synthetic substrate, furylacryloyl-gly-leu, following removal of its pro
domain. CPA5 activity was much greater at pH 7.4 than at pH 5.6.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wei et al. (2002) determined that the CPA5 gene contains 14 exons,
including 2 alternative second exons, exons 2A and 2B. Exons 1, 2A, and
2B of CPA5 are noncoding.

MAPPING

Wei et al. (2002) mapped the CPA5 gene to a CPA gene cluster on
chromosome 7. The order of the genes is CPA2--CPA4 (607635)--CPA5--CPA1.
Bentley et al. (2003) determined that the CPA gene cluster containing
CPA5 maps to chromosome 7q32.

REFERENCE 1. Bentley, L.; Nakabayashi, K.; Monk, D.; Beechey, C.; Peters, J.;
Birjandi, Z.; Khayat, F. E.; Patel, M.; Preece, M. A.; Stanier, P.;
Scherer, S. W.; Moore, G. E.: The imprinted region on human chromosome
7q32 extends to the carboxypeptidase A gene cluster: an imprinted
candidate for Silver-Russell syndrome. J. Med. Genet. 40: 249-256,
2003. Note: Erratum: J. Med. Genet. 41: 640 only, 2004.

2. Wei, S.; Segura, S.; Vendrell, J.; Aviles, F. X.; Lanoue, E.; Day,
R.; Feng, Y.; Fricker, L. D.: Identification and characterization
of three members of the human metallocarboxypeptidase gene family. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 14954-14964, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/31/2005

EDITED mgross: 08/31/2005

