605219	TITLE *605219 DIRECT IAP-BINDING PROTEIN WITH LOW pI; DIABLO
;;SECOND MITOCHONDRIA-DERIVED ACTIVATOR OF CASPASE; SMAC
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Caspase activation is a key regulatory step for apoptosis. Cytochrome c
(123970) released from the mitochondrial intermembrane space triggers 1
major caspase activation cascade. Upon its release to the cytosol,
cytochrome c binds to APAF1 (602233) in the presence of dATP or ATP. The
cytochrome c/APAF1 complex then recruits procaspase-9 (CASP9; 602234),
inducing its autoactivation and leading to the activation of downstream
caspases. Proteins of the BCL2 (see 603167) and inhibitor-of-apoptosis,
or IAP (see API3; 300079), families are major regulators of the
cytochrome c/APAF1/CASP9 pathway. SMAC promotes caspase activation in
this pathway.

CLONING

Du et al. (2000) identified and purified a protein, which they termed
SMAC (second mitochondria-derived activator of caspase), that promotes
caspase activation in the cytochrome c/APAF1/CASP9 pathway. By
microsequence analysis, searching an EST database, and screening a HeLa
cell cDNA library, they isolated a cDNA encoding SMAC. The predicted
SMAC polypeptide contains 239 amino acids. Northern blot analysis
detected a 1.5-kb SMAC transcript in all tissues tested, with highest
expression in adult testis, high expression in heart, liver, kidney,
spleen, prostate, and ovary, and low expression in brain, lung, thymus,
and peripheral blood leukocytes.

Cheng et al. (2011) noted that the N-terminal 55 residues serve as a
mitochondrial-targeting sequence, which is removed after the Diablo
protein is imported into mitochondria intermembrane space. They found
broad expression of DIABLO in human embryonic tissue at 17 weeks'
gestation. The highest expression was in the testis, adrenal gland, and
ears, with moderate expression in the brain, eyes, liver, kidney, lung,
and spinal cord. Low expression was seen in the spleen. In the
developing mouse cochlea, Diablo was significantly upregulated in hair
cells from E18.5 to P0, but was subsequently downregulated. The extended
distribution of Diablo at different stages of development in the mouse
inner ear and the particular enrichment in hair cells suggested that
Diablo functions in the development and homeostasis of the inner ear and
in hair cells in particular.

GENE STRUCTURE

Cheng et al. (2011) noted that the DIABLO gene contains 7 exons.

MAPPING

Scott (2000) mapped the DIABLO gene to chromosome 12 based on sequence
similarity between the DIABLO sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF262240) and
the chromosome 12 clone RP11-512M8 (GenBank GENBANK AC048338).

Cheng et al. (2011) noted that the DIABLO gene maps to chromosome
12q24.31.

GENE FUNCTION

Du et al. (2000) showed that SMAC promotes CASP9 activation by binding
to IAPs and removing their inhibitory activity. SMAC is normally a
mitochondrial protein, but it is released into the cytosol when cells
undergo apoptosis. Mitochondrial import and cleavage of its signal
peptide are required for SMAC to gain its apoptotic activity.
Overexpression of SMAC increases cell sensitivity to apoptotic stimuli.
SMAC was the second mitochondrial protein identified (the first being
cytochrome c) that promotes apoptosis by activating caspases.

Verhagen et al. (2000) identified the murine homolog of SMAC, which they
called DIABLO (direct IAP-binding protein with low pI). They showed that
DIABLO can bind mammalian IAP homolog A (MIHA, or API3) and can also
interact with MIHB (API1; 601712), MIHC (API2; 601721), and OpIAP, the
baculoviral IAP. Immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis indicated
that the N-terminally processed, IAP-interacting form of DIABLO is
concentrated in membrane fractions in healthy cells but is released into
the MIHA-containing cytosolic fractions upon ultraviolet (UV)
irradiation. Since transfection of cells with DIABLO was able to counter
the protection afforded by MIHA against UV irradiation, the authors
suggested that DIABLO may promote apoptosis by binding to IAPs and
preventing them from inhibiting caspases.

Chai et al. (2000) showed that SMAC/DIABLO promotes not only the
proteolytic activation of procaspase-3, but also the enzymatic activity
of mature caspase-3, both of which depend upon its ability to interact
physically with IAPs.

Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can prevent colonic tumor
progression in both experimental animals and humans. Kohli et al. (2004)
found that NSAID-induced apoptosis in a human colorectal cancer cell
line was accompanied by release of SMAC from mitochondria into the
cytosol. When SMAC was disrupted by homologous recombination and RNA
interference, the NSAID-induced apoptosis was abrogated. SMAC release
was dependent on BAX (600040), since SMAC release was not found in BAX
knockout cells.

Burri et al. (2005) identified mouse Imp1 (IMMP1L; 612323) and Imp2
(IMMP2L; 605977) as the catalytic subunits of the mitochondrial inner
membrane peptidase (IMP) complex. Imp1 and Imp2 activated Diablo by
removing its presequence, resulting in sequestration of Diablo in the
intermembrane space prior to activation by an apoptotic signal.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Chai et al. (2000) determined the crystal structure of SMAC/DIABLO at
2.2-angstrom resolution, which revealed that it homodimerizes through an
extensive hydrophobic interface. Missense mutations inactivating this
dimeric interface significantly compromised the function of SMAC/DIABLO.
The N-terminal amino acids of SMAC/DIABLO are indispensable for its
function, and a 7-residue peptide derived from the N terminus promotes
procaspase-3 activation in vitro.

To understand the structural basis of molecular recognition between SMAC
and the IAPs, Liu et al. (2000) determined the solution structure of the
BIR3 domain of XIAP (300079) complexed with a functionally active
9-residue peptide derived from the N terminus of SMAC. Wu et al. (2000)
performed the same experiment. They found that the N-terminal 4 residues
(ala-val-pro-ile) in SMAC/DIABLO recognize a surface groove on BIR3,
with the first residue ala binding a hydrophobic pocket and making 5
hydrogen bonds to neighboring residues on BIR3. These observations
provided a structural explanation for the roles of the SMAC N terminus
as well as for the conserved N-terminal sequences in the Drosophila
proteins Hid/Grim/Reaper. In conjunction with other observations, Wu et
al. (2000) concluded that their results reveal how SMAC may relieve IAP
inhibition of caspase-9 activity. In addition to explaining a number of
biologic observations, both Liu et al. (2000) and Wu et al. (2000)
suggested that their structural analyses identified potential targets
for drug screening that may be used for the treatment of cancers that
overexpress IAPs.

XIAP interacts with caspase-9 and inhibits its activity, whereas SMAC
(also known as DIABLO) relieves this inhibition through interaction with
XIAP. Srinivasula et al. (2001) demonstrated that XIAP associates with
the active caspase-9-APAF1 holoenzyme complex through binding to the
amino terminus of the linker peptide on the small subunit of caspase-9,
which becomes exposed after proteolytic processing of procaspase-9 at
asp315. Supporting this observation, point mutations that abrogate the
proteolytic processing but not the catalytic activity of caspase-9, or
deletion of the linker peptide, prevented caspase-9 association with
XIAP and its concomitant inhibition. Srinivasula et al. (2001) noted
that the N-terminal 4 residues of caspase-9 linker peptide share
significant homology with the N-terminal tetrapeptide in mature SMAC and
in the Drosophila proteins Hid/Grim/Reaper, defining a conserved class
of IAP-binding motifs. Consistent with this finding, binding of the
caspase-9 linker peptide and SMAC to the BIR3 domain of XIAP is mutually
exclusive, suggesting that SMAC potentiates caspase-9 activity by
disrupting the interaction of the linker peptide of caspase-9 with BIR3.
Srinivasula et al. (2001) concluded that their studies reveal a
mechanism in which binding to the BIR3 domain of XIAP by 2 conserved
peptides, one from SMAC and the other from caspase-9, has opposing
effects on caspase activity and apoptosis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of a large Chinese family with young-adult onset of
autosomal dominant nonsyndromic deafness-64 (DFNA64; 614152), Cheng et
al. (2011) identified a heterozygous mutation in the DIABLO gene (S126L;
605219.0001). In vitro functional expression studies in E. coli and HeLa
cells showed that the mutant protein did not increase apoptotic activity
compared to wildtype. However, transfection of HeLa cells with the
mutant protein enhanced the degradation of mutant and wildtype DIABLO
via heterodimerization. Cells expressing the mutant protein showed
increased susceptibility to calcium-induced loss of mitochondrial
potential compared to wildtype, indicating increased sensitivity to
mitochondrial stress and suggestive of mitochondrial dysfunction. A
decrease in wildtype protein did not yield similar findings, suggesting
that the existence of mutant DIABLO leads to activation of a degradation
machinery for constant clearance of aberrant proteins.

ANIMAL MODEL

Okada et al. (2002) generated Diablo-deficient mice by homologous
recombination. Western blot analysis confirmed the null mutation. The
mice were fertile and appeared grossly normal at more than 1 year of
age, and histologic analysis failed to detect any abnormalities. In
vitro analysis indicated an inhibition of procaspase-3 (CASP3; 600636)
cleavage in Diablo -/- cell lysates, but all types of Diablo -/- cells
tested responded normally to a number of apoptotic stimuli. Fas
(134637)-mediated apoptosis in liver was also normal in vivo in these
mice. The authors concluded that a redundant molecule, possibly Omi
(HTRA2; 606441), or molecules are capable of compensating for the loss
of Diablo function. Alternatively, they suggested that Diablo may only
regulate programmed cell death in specific situations or tissues not yet
identified.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 64
DIABLO, SER126LEU

In affected members of a large Chinese family with young-adult onset of
autosomal dominant nonsyndromic deafness-64 (DFNA64; 614152), Cheng et
al. (2011) identified a heterozygous 377C-T transition in exon 5 of the
DIABLO gene, resulting in a ser126-to-leu (S126L) substitution in a
highly conserved residue. The S126L mutation corresponds to a
ser71-to-leu (S71L) mutation in the mature protein. The mutation was not
found in 1,000 Chinese control chromosomes. In vitro functional
expression studies in E. coli and HeLa cells showed that the mutant
protein did not increase apoptotic activity compared to wildtype.
However, transfection of HeLa cells with the mutant protein enhanced the
degradation of mutant and wildtype DIABLO via heterodimerization. Cells
expressing the mutant protein showed increased susceptibility to
calcium-induced loss of mitochondrial potential compared to wildtype,
indicating increased sensitivity to mitochondrial stress and suggestive
of mitochondrial dysfunction. A decrease in wildtype protein did not
yield similar findings, suggesting that the existence of mutant DIABLO
leads to activation of a degradation machinery for constant clearance of
aberrant proteins.

REFERENCE 1. Burri, L.; Strahm, Y.; Hawkins, C. J.; Gentle, I. E.; Puryer, M.
A.; Verhagen, A.; Callus, B.; Vaux, D.; Lithgow, T.: Mature DIABLO/Smac
is produced by the IMP protease complex on the mitochondrial inner
membrane. Molec. Biol. Cell 16: 2926-2933, 2005.

2. Chai, J.; Du, C.; Wu, J.-W.; Kyin, S.; Wang, X.; Shi, Y.: Structural
and biochemical basis of apoptotic activation by Smac/DIABLO. Nature 406:
855-862, 2000.

3. Cheng, J.; Zhu, Y.; He, S.; Lu, Y.; Chen, J.; Han, B.; Petrillo,
M.; Wrzeszczynski, K. O.; Yang, S.; Dai, P.; Zhai, S.; Han, D.; Zhang,
M. Q.; Li, W.; Liu, X.; Li, H.; Chen, Z. Y.; Yuan, H.: Functional
mutation of SMAC/DIABLO, encoding a mitochondrial proapoptotic protein,
causes human progressive hearing loss DFNA64. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 89:
56-66, 2011.

4. Du, C.; Fang, M.; Li, Y.; Li, L.; Wang, X.: Smac, a mitochondrial
protein that promotes cytochrome c-dependent caspase activation by
eliminating IAP inhibition. Cell 102: 33-42, 2000.

5. Kohli, M.; Yu, J.; Seaman, C.; Bardelli, A.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein,
B.; Lengauer, C.; Zhang, L.: SMAC/Diablo-dependent apoptosis induced
by nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in colon cancer cells. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 16897-16902, 2004.

6. Liu, Z.; Sun, C.; Olejniczak, E. T.; Meadows, R. P.; Betz, S. F.;
Oost, T.; Herrmann, J.; Wu, J. C.; Fesik, S. W.: Structural basis
for binding of Smac/DIABLO to the XIAP BIR3 domain. Nature 408:
1004-1008, 2000.

7. Okada, H.; Suh, W.-K.; Jin, J.; Woo, M.; Du, C.; Elia, A.; Duncan,
G. S.; Wakeham, A.; Itie, A.; Lowe, S. W.; Wang, X.; Mak, T. W.:
Generation and characterization of Smac/DIABLO-deficient mice. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 22: 3509-3517, 2002.

8. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/18/2000.

9. Srinivasula, S. M.; Hegde, R.; Saleh, A.; Datta, P.; Shiozaki,
E.; Chai, J.; Lee, R.-A.; Robbins, P. D.; Fernandes-Alnemri, T.; Shi,
Y.; Alnemri, E. S.: A conserved XIAP-interaction motif in caspase-9
and Smac/DIABLO regulates caspase activity and apoptosis. Nature 410:
112-116, 2001. Note: Erratum: Nature 114: 1081 only, 2001.

10. Verhagen, A. M.; Ekert, P. G.; Pakusch, M.; Silke, J.; Connolly,
L. M.; Reid, G. E.; Moritz, R. L.; Simpson, R. J.; Vaux, D. L.: Identification
of DIABLO, a mammalian protein that promotes apoptosis by binding
to and antagonizing IAP proteins. Cell 102: 43-53, 2000.

11. Wu, G.; Chai, J.; Suber, T. L.; Wu, J.-W.; Du, C.; Wang, X.; Shi,
Y.: Structural basis of IAP recognition by Smac/DIABLO. Nature 408:
1008-1012, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/8/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/18/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/16/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/29/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/23/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/31/2000
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 8/18/2000

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 8/18/2000

EDITED terry: 04/04/2013
wwang: 8/23/2011
ckniffin: 8/8/2011
mgross: 9/26/2008
terry: 9/18/2008
wwang: 2/22/2007
alopez: 1/16/2007
mgross: 2/16/2005
mgross: 5/29/2002
alopez: 2/28/2001
carol: 12/23/2000
mgross: 9/1/2000
terry: 8/31/2000
mgross: 8/21/2000
carol: 8/18/2000
mgross: 8/18/2000

604739	TITLE *604739 RNA BINDING MOTIF PROTEIN 39; RBM39
;;SPLICING FACTOR HCC1;;
COACTIVATOR OF ACTIVATOR PROTEIN 1 AND ESTROGEN RECEPTORS; CAPER;;
RNA-BINDING REGION-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; RNPC2
HCC1.3, INCLUDED;;
HCC1.4, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Autoantibodies to intracellular components can occur in patients with
autoimmune disease and occasionally in patients with other diseases. The
antibodies often recognize determinants corresponding to functional
sites. Using serum from a patient who progressed from liver cirrhosis to
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) to screen a liver cell cDNA library, Imai
et al. (1993) isolated full-length cDNA clones encoding a nuclear
protein that they called HCC1. The HCC1 clones encode deduced proteins
of 530 amino acids (clone HCC1.4) and 524 amino acids (clone HCC1.3),
and the authors suggested that these represent splice variants. Sequence
analysis of HCC1 revealed the presence of 15 arginine-serine (RS)
motifs, characteristic of mRNA splicing factors (e.g., SFRS1; 600812).
Imai et al. (1993) also noted the presence of ribonucleoprotein
consensus sequences (see SNRPA; 182285) and a structural resemblance to
U2AF65 (191318). Western blot analysis showed expression of a 64-kD
cellular protein. Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated the
presence of nuclear speckles that colocalized with SFRS2 (600813) and a
5-prime cap structure of U-snRNAs (e.g., RNU2; 180690). Northern blot
analysis detected 2 major HCC1 transcripts of 2.3 and 3.2 kb, as well as
2 minor transcripts of 4.3 and 5.0 kb, in human cancer cell lines and in
all normal tissues tested, with higher expression in pancreas, skeletal
muscle, lung, and brain, and lower expression in kidney, liver, and
heart.

Using ASC2 (NCOA6; 605299) as bait to screen a mouse liver cDNA library,
Jung et al. (2002) cloned Rnpc2, which they called Caper. The deduced
protein contains an N-terminal RS-rich domain, followed by 3 RNA
recognition motifs. An autonomous transactivation domain partly overlaps
RNA recognition motifs 2 and 3.

GENE FUNCTION

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Jung et al. (2002) found that mouse Caper
specifically interacted with the AP1 component Jun (165160) and
estradiol-bound ligand-binding domains of estrogen receptor (ER)-alpha
(ESR1; 133430) and ER-beta (ESR2; 601663), but not with any other
transcription factor tested. Binding to estradiol-bound ER activated the
cryptic autonomous transactivation function of Caper.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium assigned the HCC1
gene to chromosome 20 (TMAP sts-R02552).

REFERENCE 1. Imai, H.; Chan, E. K. L.; Kiyosawa, K.; Fu, X.-D.; Tan, E. M.:
Novel nuclear autoantigen with splicing factor motifs identified with
antibody from hepatocellular carcinoma. J. Clin. Invest. 92: 2419-2426,
1993.

2. Jung, D.-J.; Na, S.-Y.; Na, D. S.; Lee, J. W.: Molecular cloning
and characterization of CAPER, a novel coactivator of activating protein-1
and estrogen receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 1229-1234, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/10/2005

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 3/24/2000

EDITED carol: 06/04/2012
ckniffin: 6/4/2012
mgross: 11/16/2005
terry: 11/10/2005
mgross: 4/5/2000
mgross: 4/4/2000
mgross: 3/30/2000
mgross: 3/29/2000
mgross: 3/27/2000

609168	TITLE *609168 SHUGOSHIN-LIKE 1; SGOL1
;;SGO; SGO1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kitajima et al. (2004) cloned yeast Sgo1 and Sgo2, and by database
analysis, they identified 2 similar human proteins, SGOL1 and SGOL2
(612425), which they referred to as Q9BVA8 and tripin, respectively. All
Sgo-like proteins contain an N-terminal coiled-coil domain and a
C-terminal basic region.

By searching for sequences similar to Xenopus Sgo, Salic et al. (2004)
identified mouse and human SGOL1, which they called SGO. The human
protein shares significant similarity with mouse and frog Sgo at the N-
and C-terminal ends.

Wang et al. (2008) noted that full-length SGO1 contains 527 amino acids.
An SGO1 splice variant lacking exon 6 encodes a 292-amino acid isoform
designated sSGO1. Using fluorescence microscopy, Wang et al. (2008)
showed that full-length SGO1 localized to kinetochores during mitosis.
In contrast, sSGO1 localized to centrosomes at interphase and to spindle
poles at mitosis, but not to kinetochores.

GENE FUNCTION

Salic et al. (2004) determined that the N terminus of mouse Sgo bound
and stabilized microtubules. Following transfection in HeLa cells,
epitope-tagged mouse Sgo localized to kinetochores between the fibrous
corona and the underlying centromeric chromatin, around the inner or
outer kinetochore plate. Endogenous HeLa cell SGOL1 was degraded by both
CDC20 (603618)- and CDH1 (603619)-activated anaphase-promoting complex
(APC), resulting in loss of SGOL1 from kinetochores during the
metaphase-to-anaphase transition. SGOL1 depletion by RNA interference
(RNAi) caused mitotic arrest with loss of sister kinetochore cohesion.
Chromosomes and their centromeres did not align to form a metaphase
plate; instead they scattered throughout the cell. SGOL1 depletion also
destabilized kinetochore microtubules. Salic et al. (2004) concluded
that SGOL1 is required for mitotic progression and chromosome
segregation and provides a link between sister centromere cohesion and
microtubule interactions at kinetochores.

Tang et al. (2004) found that depletion of BUB1 (602452) and SGO1 in
HeLa cells by RNAi caused massive missegregation of sister chromatids
that originated at centromeres. Loss of chromatid cohesion in BUB1 and
SGO1 RNAi cells did not appear to require activation of separase (see
604143), but instead triggered mitotic arrest dependent on MAD2 (601467)
and Aurora B (604970). Tang et al. (2004) determined that BUB1 maintains
the steady-state level and centromeric localization of SGO1, and they
concluded that BUB1 protects centromeric cohesion in mitosis through
SGO1.

Riedel et al. (2006) showed in both fission and budding yeast that Sgo1
recruited to centromeres a specific form of protein phosphatase-2A
(PP2A; 176915). Its inactivation caused loss of centromeric cohesin (see
RAD21; 606462) at anaphase I and random segregation of sister
centromeres at the second meiotic division. Artificial recruitment of
PP2A to chromosome arms prevented Rec8 (608193) phosphorylation and
hindered resolution of chiasmata. Riedel et al. (2006) concluded that
their data were consistent with the notion that efficient cleavage of
Rec8 requires phosphorylation of cohesin and that this is blocked by
PP2A at meiosis I centromeres.

In mitotic cells, phosphorylation of cohesin promotes its dissociation
from chromosomes, but centromeric cohesin is protected from
phosphorylation until kinetochores are properly captured by the spindle
microtubules. Kitajima et al. (2006) found that a shugoshin complex made
up of SGO1, SGO2, and a specific subtype of PP2A containing the
regulatory B56 subunit (see 601643) was required for protection of
centromeric cohesin in HeLa cells. The shugoshin-PP2A complex protected
cohesin by reversing phosphorylation of the cohesin subunit SA2 (STAG2;
300826). Both SGO1 and SGO2 bound PP2A directly, although SGO1 appeared
to bind the regulatory subunit PP2A-B56, while SGO2 appeared to bind the
core subunit PP2A-A (see 605983). Knockdown studies showed that SGO2
tethered PP2A to the centromere, whereas SGO1 had the more important
role in centromere protection and appeared to facilitate PP2A function
at centromeres.

Brar et al. (2006) showed that phosphorylation of the cohesin subunit
REC8 contributes to stepwise cohesin removal. Their data further
implicated 2 other key regulators of meiotic chromosome segregation, the
cohesin protector SGO1 and meiotic recombination in bringing about the
stepwise loss of cohesins and thus the establishment of the meiotic
chromosome segregation pattern.

Wang et al. (2008) found that SGO1 depletion via RNA interference
induced formation of multiple centrosome-like structures in mitotic HeLa
cells due to separation of paired centrioles. Sgo1 +/- mouse embryonic
fibroblasts displayed split centrosomes. sSGO1 interacted with PLK1
(602098) in HeLa cells, and mutation of PLK1 phosphorylation sites in
sSGO1 (ser73 and thr146) resulted in mislocalization of sSGO1 from
mitotic spindle poles. Centriole splitting induced by SGO1 depletion or
expression of a dominant-negative mutant was suppressed by ectopic
expression of sSGO1 or by PLK1 knockdown. Wang et al. (2008) concluded
that sSGO1 plays an essential role in protecting centriole cohesion,
which is partly regulated by PLK1.

Yamagishi et al. (2008) showed that the requirement of heterochromatin
for mitotic chromosome segregation is largely replaced by forcibly
enriching cohesin at centromeres in fission yeast. However, this
enrichment of cohesin is not sufficient to replace the meiotic
requirement for heterochromatin. Yamagishi et al. (2008) found that the
heterochromatin protein Swi6 (whose human homolog is HP1, 604478)
associates directly with meiosis-specific shugoshin Sgo1, a protector of
cohesin at centromeres. A point mutation of Sgo1 (V243E), which
abolishes the interaction with Swi6, impairs the centromeric
localization and function of Sgo1. The forced centromeric localization
of Sgo1 restores proper meiotic chromosome segregation in swi6-delta
cells. Yamagishi et al. (2008) also showed that the direct link between
HP1 and shugoshin is conserved in human cells. Yamagishi et al. (2008)
suggested that the recruitment of shugoshin is the important primary
role for centromeric heterochromatin in ensuring eukaryotic chromosome
segregation.

Kawashima et al. (2010) demonstrated that BUB1 (602452) phosphorylates
the conserved ser121 of histone H2A in fission yeast S. pombe. The
h2a-SA mutant, in which all cellular H2A-S121 is replaced with alanine,
phenocopies the Bub1 kinase-dead mutant (bub1-KD) in losing the
centromeric localization of shugoshin proteins. Artificial tethering of
shugoshin to centromeres largely restores the h2a-SA or bub1-KD-related
chromatin instability defects, a function that is evolutionarily
conserved. Kawashima et al. (2010) concluded that Bub1 kinase creates a
mark for shugoshin localization and the correct partitioning of
chromosomes.

MAPPING

Hartz (2005) mapped the SGOL1 gene to chromosome 3p24.3 based on an
alignment of the SGOL1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF308299) with the
genomic sequence.

REFERENCE 1. Brar, G. A.; Kiburz, B. M.; Zhang, Y.; Kim, J.-E.; White, F.; Amon,
A.: Rec8 phosphorylation and recombination promote the step-wise
loss of cohesins in meiosis. Nature 441: 532-536, 2006.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/18/2005.

3. Kawashima, S. A.; Yamagishi, Y.; Honda, T.; Ishiguro, K.; Watanabe,
Y.: Phosphorylation of H2A by Bub1 prevents chromosomal instability
through localizing shugoshin. Science 327: 172-177, 2010.

4. Kitajima, T. S.; Kawashima, S. A.; Watanabe, Y.: The conserved
kinetochore protein shugoshin protects centromeric cohesion during
meiosis. Nature 427: 510-517, 2004.

5. Kitajima, T. S.; Sakuno, T.; Ishiguro, K.; Iemura, S.; Natsume,
T.; Kawashima, S. A.; Watanabe, Y.: Shugoshin collaborates with protein
phosphatase 2A to protect cohesin. Nature 441: 46-52, 2006.

6. Riedel, C. G.; Katis, V. L.; Katou, Y.; Mori, S.; Itoh, T.; Helmhart,
W.; Galova, M.; Petronczki, M.; Gregan, J.; Cetin, B.; Mudrak, I.;
Ogris, E.; Mechtler, K.; Pelletier, L.; Buchholz, F.; Shirahige, K.;
Nasmyth, K.: Protein phosphatase 2A protects centromeric sister chromatid
cohesion during meiosis I. Nature 441: 53-61, 2006.

7. Salic, A.; Waters, J. C.; Mitchison, T. J.: Vertebrate Shugoshin
links sister centromere cohesion and kinetochore microtubule stability
in mitosis. Cell 118: 567-578, 2004.

8. Tang, Z.; Sun, Y.; Harley, S. E.; Zou, H.; Yu, H.: Human Bub1
protects centromeric sister-chromatid cohesion through Shugoshin during
mitosis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 18012-18017, 2004.

9. Wang, X.; Yang, Y.; Duan, Q.; Jiang, N.; Huang, Y.; Darzynkiewicz,
Z.; Dai, W.: sSgo1, a major splice variant of Sgo1, functions in
centriole cohesion where it is regulated by Plk1. Dev. Cell 14:
331-341, 2008.

10. Yamagishi, Y.; Sakuno, T.; Shimura, M.; Watanabe, Y.: Heterochromatin
links to centromeric protection by recruiting shugoshin. Nature 455:
251-255, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/26/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/20/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/2/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/28/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/1/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/18/2005

EDITED carol: 11/08/2010
alopez: 2/1/2010
terry: 1/26/2010
mgross: 11/20/2008
alopez: 10/7/2008
terry: 10/2/2008
mgross: 4/28/2008
alopez: 7/27/2006
terry: 7/24/2006
alopez: 6/4/2006
terry: 6/1/2006
mgross: 1/18/2005

614705	TITLE *614705 SLIT-ROBO RHO GTPase-ACTIVATING PROTEIN 2D; SRGAP2D
DESCRIPTION The SRGAP2D gene represents a human-specific partial duplication of the
SRGAP2A gene (SRGAP2; 606524).

CLONING

During the assembly of BAC contigs corresponding to SRGAP2A paralogs
SRGAP2B (614703) and SRGAP2C (614704), Dennis et al. (2012) identified a
single BAC clone that harbored sequence for an SRPGAP2 paralog (exons
7-9) but did not share greater than 99.9% identity with any of the 3
contigs, suggesting that a fourth SRGAP2 duplicate existed (SRGAP2D).
Dennis et al. (2012) determined that the SRGAP2D gene originated from
the incomplete duplication of the SRGAP2B gene approximately 1 million
years ago.

Using sequence data from 661 individuals from 14 populations from the
1000 Genomes project, Dennis et al. (2012) estimated the diploid copy
number of the SRGAP2 paralogs. The SRGAP2D and SRGAP2B copies varied
from 0 to 4 copies among all individuals tested. The ancestral SRGAP2
(SRGAP2A) and the derived SRGAP2C copy are fixed at diploid copy number
2 across all humans assayed. Dennis et al. (2012) identified 3
individuals who were homozygously deleted for SRGAP2B, as well as normal
individuals homozygously deleted for SRGAP2D, the granddaughter copy
with an acquired internal deletion of exons 2 and 3.

GENE STRUCTURE

Dennis et al. (2012) determined that the SRGAP2D gene is derived from
the 9-exon SRGAP2B gene and contains a 115-kb deletion corresponding to
exons 2 and 3 relative to the SRGAP2B gene.

GENE FUNCTION

Dennis et al. (2012) noted that while the SRGAP2D gene shows evidence of
transcription, it is unlikely that it and its neighboring paralog
SRGAP2B are functional. The transcripts produced by SRGAP2D lack 2
internal exons leading to a premature termination codon. SRGAP2B has a
markedly reduced expression in human brain compared to SRGAP2C. Both
SRGAP2B and SRGAP2D are highly copy number polymorphic, with normal
individuals identified that completely lack these paralogs.

MAPPING

Using FISH, Dennis et al. (2012) mapped the SRGAP2D gene to chromosome
1q21.1 proximal to the SRGAP2B gene.

EVOLUTION

Dennis et al. (2012) leveraged a haploid hydatidiform mole to identify
highly identical sequences missing from the reference genome and
confirmed that the SRGAP2 gene duplicated 3 times exclusively in humans.
Dennis et al. (2012) showed that the promoter and first 9 exons of
SRGAP2 duplicated from 1q32.1 (SRGAP2A) to 1q21.1 (SRGAP2B)
approximately 3.4 million years ago. Two larger duplications later
copied SRGAP2B to chromosome 1p12 (SRGAP2C) and to proximal 1q21.1
(SRGAP2D) approximately 2.4 and 1 million years ago, respectively.
Dennis et al. (2012) observed that SRGAP2B, SRGAP2C, and SRGAP2D were
absent from all assayed nonhuman great apes but were present in both the
Neanderthal and Denisova genomes. Dennis et al. (2012) therefore
concluded that no new SRGAP2 duplications have occurred since Homo
sapiens and Homo neanderthalensis diverged about 1 million years ago.

REFERENCE 1. Dennis, M. Y.; Nuttle, X.; Sudmant, P. H.; Antonacci, F.; Graves,
T. A.; Nefedov, M.; Rosenfeld, J. A.; Sajjadian, S.; Malig, M.; Kotkiewicz,
H.; Curry, C. J.; Shafer, S.; Shaffer, L. G.; de Jong, P. J.; Wilson,
R. K.; Eichler, E. E.: Evolution of human-specific neural SRGAP2
genes by incomplete segmental duplication. Cell 149: 912-922, 2012.

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 7/9/2012

EDITED terry: 07/12/2012
alopez: 7/10/2012

180467	TITLE *180467 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L30; RPL30
DESCRIPTION See 180466. Using a PCR product for the analysis of rodent/human somatic
cell hybrids, Feo et al. (1992) mapped the RPL30 gene to chromosome 8.

REFERENCE 1. Feo, S.; Davies, B.; Fried, M.: The mapping of seven intron-containing
ribosomal protein genes shows they are unlinked in the human genome.
Genomics 13: 201-207, 1992.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/6/1992

EDITED carol: 6/6/1992

600799	TITLE *600799 BONE MORPHOGENETIC PROTEIN RECEPTOR, TYPE II; BMPR2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are a family of proteins that induce
bone formation at extracellular sites in vivo. BMPs act on osteoblasts
and chondrocytes as well as other cell types, including neurocells, and
they play important roles in embryonal development. Members of the BMP
family include BMP1 (112264) to BMP6 (112266), BMP7 (112267), also
called osteogenic protein-1 (OP1), OP2 (BMP8; 602284), and others. BMPs
belong to the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) superfamily,
which includes, in addition to the TGF-betas (e.g., 190180),
activin/inhibins (e.g., alpha-inhibin; 147380), mullerian inhibiting
substance (600957), and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor
(600837). TGF-betas and activins transduce their signals through the
formation of heteromeric complexes of 2 different types of serine
(threonine) kinase receptors: type I receptors of about 50 to 55 kD and
type II receptors of about 70 to 80 kD. Type II receptors bind ligands
in the absence of type I receptors, but they require their respective
type I receptors for signaling, whereas type I receptors require their
respective type II receptors for ligand binding. BMPR2 is a type II
receptor for BMPs.

CLONING

Rosenzweig et al. (1995) reported the cDNA cloning and characterization
of a human type II receptor for BMPs, which they called BMPR II, that is
distantly related to DAF4, a BMP type II receptor in Caenorhabditis
elegans.

MAPPING

By analysis of a monochromosome hybrid mapping panel and by FISH, Astrom
et al. (1999) mapped the BMPR2 gene to chromosome 2q33-q34.

GENE FUNCTION

Rosenzweig et al. (1995) showed that, in transfected COS-1 cells, BMP7
and, less efficiently, BMP4 (112262) bound to BMPR II. BMPR II bound
ligands only weakly alone, but the binding was facilitated by the
presence of previously identified type I receptors for BMPs. A
transcriptional activation signal was transduced by BMPR II in the
presence of type I receptors after stimulation by BMP7.

In an investigation of the molecular bases of common nonfamilial forms
of pulmonary hypertension, Du et al. (2003) evaluated the pattern of
expression of several genes in lung biopsy specimens from patients with
pulmonary hypertension and from normotensive control patients. The genes
included angiopoietin-1 (ANGPT1; 601667), a protein involved in the
recruitment of smooth muscle cells around blood vessels; TIE2 (600221),
the endothelial-specific receptor for angiopoietin-1; bone morphogenetic
protein receptor 1A (BMPR1A; 601299); and BMPR2. The effect of
angiopoietin-1 on the modulation of BMPR expression was also evaluated
in subcultures of human pulmonary arteriolar endothelial cells. The
expression of angiopoietin-1 mRNA and the protein itself and the
phosphorylation of TIE2 were strongly upregulated in the lungs of
patients with various forms of pulmonary hypertension, correlating
directly with the severity of disease. A mechanistic link between
familial and acquired pulmonary hypertension was demonstrated by the
finding that angiopoietin-1 shuts off the expression of BMPR1A, a
transmembrane protein required for BMPR2 signaling, in pulmonary
arteriolar endothelial cells. Similarly, the expression of BMPR1A was
severely reduced in the lungs of patients with various forms of acquired
as well as primary nonfamilial pulmonary hypertension. The findings
suggested that all forms of pulmonary hypertension are linked by defects
in the signaling pathway involving angiopoietin-1, TIE2, BMPR1A, and
BMPR2, and consequently identified specific molecular targets for
therapeutic intervention.

Machado et al. (2003) determined that TCTEL1 (601554), a light chain of
the motor complex dynein, interacted with the cytoplasmic domain of
BMPR2 and was also phosphorylated by BMPR2, a function disrupted by
primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600)-causing mutations within
exon 12 (e.g., 600799.0002). BMPR2 and TCTEL1 colocalized to endothelium
and smooth muscle within the media of pulmonary arterioles, key sites of
vascular remodeling in PPH. The authors proposed that loss of
interaction and lack of phosphorylation of TCTEL1 by BMPR2 may
contribute to the pathogenesis of PPH.

Using RT-PCR, immunofluorescence, and flow cytometric analyses, Cejalvo
et al. (2007) demonstrated that human thymus and cortical epithelial
cells produced BMP2 (112261) and BMP4 and that both thymocytes and
thymic epithelium expressed the molecular machinery to respond to these
proteins. The receptors BMPR1A and BMPR2 were mainly expressed by
cortical thymocytes, whereas BMPR1B (603248) was expressed in the
majority of thymocytes. BMP4 treatment of chimeric human-mouse fetal
thymic organ cultures seeded with CD34 (142230)-positive human thymic
progenitors resulted in reduced cell recovery and inhibition of
differentiation of CD4 (186940)/CD8 (see 186910) double-negative to
double-positive stages. Cejalvo et al. (2007) concluded that BMP2 and
BMP4 have a role in human T-cell differentiation.

Tsang et al. (2009) showed that mammalian NIPA1 (608145) is an inhibitor
of BMP signaling. NIPA1 physically interacted with the BMPR2, and this
interaction did not require the cytoplasmic tail of BMPR2. The mechanism
by which NIPA1 inhibited BMP signaling involved downregulation of BMP
receptors by promoting their endocytosis and lysosomal degradation.
Disease-associated mutant versions of NIPA1 altered the trafficking of
BMPR2 and were less efficient at promoting BMPR2 degradation than
wildtype NIPA1. In addition, 2 other members of the endosomal group of
hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) proteins, spastin (SPAST; 604277)
and spartin (SPG20; 607111), inhibited BMP signaling. Since BMP
signaling is important for distal axonal function, Tsang et al. (2009)
proposed that dysregulation of BMP signaling could be a unifying
pathologic component in this endosomal group of HSPs, and perhaps of
importance in other conditions in which distal axonal degeneration is
found.

Davis et al. (2008) demonstrated that induction of a contractile
phenotype in human vascular smooth muscle cells by TGF-beta and BMPs is
mediated by miR21 (611020). miR21 downregulates PDCD4 (608610), which in
turn acts as a negative regulator of smooth muscle contractile genes.
Surprisingly, TGF-beta and BMP signaling promoted a rapid increase in
expression of mature miR21 through a posttranscriptional step, promoting
the processing of primary transcripts of miR21 (pri-miR21) into
precursor miR21 (pre-miR21) by the Drosha complex (608828). TGF-beta and
BMP-specific SMAD signal transducers SMAD1 (601595), SMAD2 (601366),
SMAD3 (603109), and SMAD5 (603110) are recruited to pri-miR21 in a
complex with the RNA helicase p68 (DDX5; 180630), a component of the
Drosha microprocessor complex. The shared cofactor SMAD4 (600993) is not
required for this process. Davis et al. (2008) concluded that regulation
of microRNA biogenesis by ligand-specific SMAD proteins is critical for
control of the vascular smooth muscle cell phenotype and potentially for
SMAD4-independent responses mediated by the TGF-beta and BMP signaling
pathways.

In a follow-up to the report of Davis et al. (2008), Drake et al. (2011)
found that BMPR2 was essential for the SMAD-mediated miR processing.
Loss of SMAD9 (603295) also affected miR processing in smooth muscle
cells and in endothelial cells, but it did not affect canonical BMP
signaling. Knockdown of individual receptor SMADs 1, 5, and 9 decreased
levels of processed miR21 levels in both types of cells, suggesting that
the miR processing pathway forms a complex.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The International PPH Consortium et al. (2000) and Deng et al. (2000)
reported that mutations in the BMPR2 gene can cause primary pulmonary
hypertension (PPH), a locus for which resides on chromosome 2q33 (PPH1;
178600). BMPR2 mutations were found in 7 of 8 of the PPH1 families
exhibiting linkage to markers adjacent to BMPR2 by the International PPH
Consortium et al. (2000) and in 9 of 19 of the families exhibiting
linkage and/or haplotype sharing with markers adjacent to BMPR2 by Deng
et al. (2000). Both groups reported heterogeneous BMPR2 mutations that
included termination, frameshift, and nonconservative missense changes
in amino acid sequence.

Thomson et al. (2000) analyzed the BMPR2 gene in 50 unrelated patients
with apparent sporadic PPH and identified 11 different heterozygous
mutations in 13 of the 50 PPH patients, including 3 missense, 3 nonsense
(see, e.g., 600799.0019), and 5 frameshift mutations. Analysis of
parental DNA was possible in 5 cases and showed 3 occurrences of
paternal transmission and 2 of de novo mutation of the BMPR2 gene.
Thomson et al. (2000) noted that because of low penetrance, in the
absence of detailed genealogic data, familial cases may be overlooked.

Machado et al. (2001) reported the molecular spectrum of BMPR2 mutations
in 47 families with PPH and in 3 patients with sporadic PPH. In the
cohort of patients, they identified 22 novel mutations, including 4
partial deletions, distributed throughout the BMPR2 gene. The majority
(58%) of mutations were predicted to lead to a premature termination
codon. In vitro expression analysis demonstrated loss of BMPR2 function
for a number of the identified mutations. These data suggested that
haploinsufficiency represents the common molecular mechanism in PPH.
Marked variability of the age at onset of disease was observed both
within and between families. The observed overall range for the age at
onset of symptoms of PPH was 1 to 60 years. In 1 family, the age at
onset for the 8 affected individuals ranged from 14 to 60 years. The
authors interpreted these observations as indicating that additional
factors, genetic and/or environmental, may be required for the
development of the clinical phenotype.

Most patients with primary pulmonary hypertension are thought to have
sporadic, not inherited, disease. Because clinical disease develops in
only 10 to 20% of persons carrying the gene for familial primary
pulmonary hypertension, Newman et al. (2001) hypothesized that many
patients with apparently sporadic primary pulmonary hypertension may
actually have familial primary pulmonary hypertension. Over a period of
20 years, they developed a registry of 67 families affected by familial
primary pulmonary hypertension. They discovered shared ancestry among 5
subfamilies, including 394 known members spanning several generations,
which were traced back to a founding couple in the mid-1800s. PPH had
been diagnosed in 18 family members, 12 of whom were first thought to
have sporadic disease. In 7 of the 18, the initial misdiagnosis was
another form of cardiopulmonary disease. The cys118-to-trp mutation
(600799.0005) was found in 6 members affected by PPH and in 6
individuals who were from the pedigree recognized as being carriers.

To determine the mechanism of altered BMPR2 function in primary
pulmonary hypertension, Rudarakanchana et al. (2002) transiently
transfected pulmonary vascular smooth muscle cells with mutant BMPR2
constructs and fusion proteins. Substitution of cysteine residues in the
ligand binding (i.e., 600799.0005, 600799.0016) or kinase (600799.0006)
domain prevented trafficking of BMPR2 to the cell surface, and reduced
binding of radiolabeled BMP4. In addition, transfection of
cysteine-substituted BMPR2 markedly reduced basal and BMP4-stimulated
transcriptional activity of a BMP/SMAD-responsive luciferase reporter
gene (3GC2wt-Lux), compared with wildtype BMPR2, suggesting a
dominant-negative effect of these mutants on SMAD signaling. In
contrast, BMPR2 containing noncysteine substitutions in the kinase
domain (600799.0007, 600799.0008, 600799.0013) were localized to the
cell membrane, although these also suppressed the activity of
3GC2wt-Lux. Interestingly, BMPR2 mutations within the cytoplasmic tail
(600799.0002) trafficked to the cell surface, but retained the ability
to activate 3GC2wt-Lux. Transfection of mutant, but not wildtype,
constructs into a mouse epithelial cell line led to activation of p38
MAPK (MAPK14; 600289) and increased serum-induced proliferation compared
with the wildtype receptor, which was partly p38 MAPK-dependent. The
authors concluded that mutations in BMPR2 heterogeneously inhibit
BMP/SMAD-mediated signaling by diverse molecular mechanisms. However,
all mutants studied demonstrate a gain of function involving
upregulation of p38 MAPK-dependent pro-proliferative pathways.

Humbert et al. (2002) analyzed the BMPR2 gene in 33 unrelated patients
with sporadic PPH and 2 sisters with PPH, all of whom had taken
fenfluramine derivatives. Three BMPR2 mutations (see, e.g., 600799.0020)
were identified in 3 (9%) of the 33 unrelated patients, and a fourth
mutation (R211X; 600799.0019) was identified in the 2 sisters. The
latter mutation, as well as 1 of the sporadic mutations, had previously
been identified in patients with PPH unassociated with fenfluramine
derivatives.

In a family in which the proband had pulmonary venoocclusive disease
(PVOD; 265450) and her mother had pulmonary hypertension, Runo et al.
(2003) analyzed the BMPR2 gene and identified heterozygosity for a 1-bp
deletion (600799.0021) in the proband and her unaffected sister. DNA was
not available from their mother, who had known pulmonary hypertension
and died of right heart failure, or from the maternal grandparents.

In a patient with pulmonary arterial hypertension and PVOD, Machado et
al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for a nonsense mutation
(600799.0022) the BMPR2 gene.

In 25 families with PPH and 106 patients with sporadic PPH, all of whom
were negative for mutations in the BMPR2 gene by DHPLC analysis or
direct sequencing, Aldred et al. (2006) performed multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis to detect gross
BMPR2 rearrangements. Ten different deletions were identified in 7
families and 6 sporadic cases (see, e.g., 600799.0023-600799.0025). One
patient with familial PPH had histologic features of pulmonary
venoocclusive disease and was found to have a deletion of exon 2 of the
BMPR2 gene (600799.0023); the exon 2 deletion was also identified in an
unrelated family with PPH and no known evidence of PVOD. Aldred et al.
(2006) noted that 2 large deletions were predicted to result in null
alleles (see 600799.0025), providing support for the hypothesis that the
predominant molecular mechanism for disease predisposition is
haploinsufficiency.

Phillips et al. (2008) studied SNP genotypes of TGF-beta (190180) in
BMPR2 mutation carriers with pulmonary hypertension and examined the age
of diagnosis and penetrance of the pulmonary hypertension phenotype.
BMPR2 heterozygotes with least active -509 or codon 10 TGFB1 SNPs had
later mean age at diagnosis of familial pulmonary arterial hypertension
(39.5 and 43.2 years, respectively), than those with more active
genotypes (31.6 and 33.1 years, P = 0.03 and 0.02, respectively).
Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that those with less active SNPs had later
age at diagnosis. BMPR2 mutation heterozygotes with nonsense-mediated
decay (NMD)-resistant BMPR2 mutations and the least, intermediate, and
most active -509 TGFB1 SNP phenotypes had penetrances of 33%, 72%, and
80%, respectively (P = 0.003), whereas those with 0-1, 2, or 3-4 active
SNP alleles had penetrances of 33%, 72%, and 75% (P = 0.005). Phillips
et al. (2008) concluded that the TGFB1 SNPs studied modulate age at
diagnosis and penetrance of familial pulmonary arterial hypertension in
BMPR2 mutation heterozygotes, likely by affecting TGFB/BMP signaling
imbalance. The authors considered this modulation an example of
synergistic heterozygosity.

Using enzymatic and fluorescence activity-based techniques, Nasim et al.
(2008) demonstrated that PPH-causing nonsense and frameshift BMPR2
mutations (see, e.g., 600799.0002) trigger NMD, providing further
evidence that haploinsufficiency is a major molecular consequence of
disease-related BMPR2 mutations. Missense mutations (see, e.g.,
600799.0006, 600799.0007, and 600799.0013) resulted in heterogeneous
functional defects in BMPR2 activity, including impaired phosphorylation
of the type 1 receptors BMPR1A and BMPR1B (603248), reduced
receptor-receptor interactions, and altered receptor complex
stoichiometry leading to perturbation of downstream signaling pathways.
Nasim et al. (2008) concluded that the intracellular domain of BMPR2 is
both necessary and sufficient for receptor complex interaction, and
suggested that stoichiometric imbalance, due to either
haploinsufficiency or loss of optimal receptor-receptor interactions,
impairs BMPR2-mediated signaling in PPH.

In a cohort of 48 patients with PAH, 24 of whom had histologic evidence
of PVOD, Montani et al. (2008) identified mutations in the BMPR2 gene in
2 patients with PVOD (600799.0027 and 600799.0028) and in 4 patients
with no evidence of PVOD.

In pulmonary endothelial cells derived from 2 of 3 PPH1 patients with
BMPR2 mutations, Drake et al. (2011) found loss of miR21 induction in
response to BMP9. These cells also showed greater proliferation compared
to controls; overexpression of miR21 induced growth suppression.
However, canonical BMP signaling was only mildly attenuated in these
cells. The findings suggested that disruption of the noncanonical
BMP-mediated pathway resulting in aberrant miR processing may play an
important role in the pathogenesis of PPH.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, 1-BP DEL, 2579T

In a family with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600), the
International PPH Consortium et al. (2000) reported deletion of a T in
an ATT repeat (2579delT) in exon 12 of the BMPR2 gene. This frameshift
mutation was predicted to result in premature termination after 10 amino
acid residues. The resulting truncation includes the large cytoplasmic
domain of the 1,038-amino acid BMPR2 protein. The authors concluded that
this mutation is likely to impede heteromeric receptor complex formation
at the cell surface, a requirement for normal signal transduction. They
also concluded that the mechanism of PPH1 causation may be either
haploinsufficiency or a dominant-negative mechanism. In a family with
primary pulmonary hypertension, Deng et al. (2000) independently
identified the 2579delT mutation.

.0002
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, ARG899TER

In a family with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600), the
International PPH Consortium et al. (2000) reported a nonsense mutation
in exon 12 of the BMPR2 gene, an arg899-to-ter (R899X) substitution that
was caused by a C-to-T transition at base 2695. This termination
mutation was predicted to truncate the large cytoplasmic domain of the
1,038-amino acid BMPR2 protein. The authors concluded that this mutation
is likely to impede heteromeric receptor complex formation at the cell
surface.

.0003
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, SER73TER

In a family with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600), the
International PPH Consortium et al. (2000) reported a nonsense mutation
in exon 2 of the BMPR2 gene, ser73-to ter (S73X), that was caused by a
C-to-G transversion at base 218. This termination mutation was predicted
to truncate the protein before the transmembrane domain; if translated,
the protein may fail to reach the cell surface.

.0004
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, 1-BP DEL, 355A

In a family with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600), the
International PPH Consortium et al. (2000) reported a deletion of an A
in exon 3 of the BMPR2 gene at position 355. This frameshift mutation
was predicted to result in a premature termination that would truncate
the protein before the transmembrane domain; if translated, the protein
may fail to reach the cell surface.

.0005
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, CYS118TRP

In a family with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600), the
International PPH Consortium et al. (2000) reported a T-to-G
transversion at position 354 of the BMPR2 gene resulting in a
cys118-to-trp (C118W) substitution. This amino acid substitution, which
occurs at a highly conserved and functionally important site of the
BMPR2 protein, was predicted to perturb ligand binding.

.0006
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, CYS347TYR

In a family with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600), the
International PPH Consortium et al. (2000) reported a G-to-A transition
at position 1042 in exon 8 of the BMPR2 gene resulting in a
cys347-to-tyr (C347Y) substitution. This amino acid substitution occurs
at a highly conserved and functionally important site of the BMPR2
protein.

.0007
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, ASP485GLY

In a family with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600), the
International PPH Consortium et al. (2000) reported an A-to-G transition
at position 1454 in exon 11 of the BMPR2 gene that was predicted to
result in an asp485-to-gly (D485G) substitution. This amino acid
substitution occurs at a highly conserved and functionally important
site of the BMPR2 protein.

.0008
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, ARG491TRP

In a family with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600), Deng et
al. (2000) reported a C-to-T transition at position 1471 in exon 11 of
the BMPR2 gene that was predicted to result in an arg491-to-trp (R491W)
substitution. This amino acid substitution occurs at an arginine that is
highly conserved in all type II TGF-beta receptors and appears to be
homologous to the invariant arg280 in subdomain XI in other protein
kinases (Hanks et al., 1988).

.0009
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, 5-BP DEL, NT1099

In a family with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600), Deng et
al. (2000) reported a GGGGA deletion at position 1099-1103 in exon 8 of
the BMPR2 gene that results in a frameshift and premature termination of
the BMPR2 protein following codon 368.

.0010
MOVED TO 600799.0001
.0011
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, CYS169TER

In a family with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600), Deng et
al. (2000) reported a 4-bp deletion (CTTT) and 3-bp insertion (AAA) at
position 507-510 in exon 4 of the BMPR2 gene that results in premature
termination of the BMPR2 protein, changing cysteine-169 to ter (C169X).

.0012
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, ARG873TER

In a family with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600), Deng et
al. (2000) reported a C-to-T transition at position 2617 in exon 12 of
the BMPR2 gene that was predicted to result in an arg873-to-ter mutation
(R873X).

.0013
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, ARG491GLN

In a family with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600), Deng et
al. (2000) reported a G-to-A transition at position 1472 in exon 11 of
the BMPR2 gene that was predicted to result in an arg491-to-gln mutation
(R491Q). This amino acid substitution occurs at an arginine that is
highly conserved in all type II TGF-beta receptors and appears to be
homologous to arg280 in subdomain XI in other protein kinases (Hanks et
al., 1988).

.0014
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, 2-BP DEL, 1-BP INS, NT690

In a family with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600), Deng et
al. (2000) reported a 2-bp deletion (AG) and 1-bp insertion (T) at
position 690-691 in exon 6 of the BMPR2 gene that results in a
frameshift leading to premature termination of the BMPR2 protein 21
amino acid residues following codon 230.

.0015
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, CYS123ARG

In 2 affected members of the same generation of a family with primary
pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600), Machado et al. (2001) identified
a T-to-C transition at nucleotide 367 of the BMPR2 gene, predicted to
result in a cys123-to-arg substitution. The ages of onset were 9 and 26
years.

.0016
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, CYS123SER

In 5 affected members of 2 generations of a family with primary
pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600), Machado et al. (2001) identified
a T-to-A transversion at nucleotide 367 of the BMPR2 gene, predicted to
result in a cys123-to-ser substitution.

.0017
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, ARG332TER

In 2 apparently unrelated families, Machado et al. (2001) found that
multiple members affected by primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1;
178600) carried a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 994 of the BMPR2 gene,
resulting in an arg332-to-ter mutation. In one family, a parent and
child were affected, with onset at 28 and 32 years of age; in the other
family, 8 members of 3 generations were affected with an age of onset
ranging from 13 to 42 years.

.0018
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, ARG899PRO

In a Finnish patient with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600),
Sankelo et al. (2005) identified a heterozygous 2696G-C transversion in
exon 12 of the BMPR2 gene, resulting in an arg899-to-pro (R899P)
substitution in the C-terminal cytoplasmic domain. Functional expression
studies showed that the R899P mutation resulted in constitutive
activation of MAPK14 (600289). A nonsense mutation at the same codon
(R899X; 600799.0002) had previously been reported.

.0019
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, DEXFENFLURAMINE-ASSOCIATED, INCLUDED
BMPR2, ARG211TER

In a patient with sporadic primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1;
178600), Thomson et al. (2000) identified heterozygosity for a 631C-T
transition in exon 6 of the BMPR2 gene, resulting in an arg211-to-ter
(R211X) substitution. The mutation was not found in 150 normal
chromosomes.

Machado et al. (2001) found the R211X mutation in 2 affected members of
the same generation of an Italian family with primary pulmonary
hypertension. Age of onset of disease was 17 and 18 years, respectively.

Humbert et al. (2002) analyzed the BMPR2 gene in 2 sisters who developed
pulmonary arterial hypertension after 1 and 2 months' exposure to
dexfenfluramine, respectively, and identified the R211X mutation in both
sisters. The mutation was not found in 260 ethnically matched control
chromosomes.

.0020
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, FENFLURAMINE-ASSOCIATED
BMPR2, GLY182ASP

In a patient who developed pulmonary arterial hypertension (PPH1;
178600) after taking fenfluramine for 2 months, Humbert et al. (2002)
identified a 545G-A transition in exon 5 of the BMPR2 gene, resulting in
a gly182-to-asp (G182D) substitution in the kinase domain of the
protein.

.0021
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
PULMONARY VENOOCCLUSIVE DISEASE, INCLUDED
BMPR2, 1-BP DEL, 44C

In 2 affected members from 2 generations of a family with primary
pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600), Machado et al. (2001) identified
heterozygosity for a 1-bp deletion in exon 1 of the BMPR2 gene (44delC),
predicted to cause premature termination of the protein 30 codons
downstream. Age at onset of disease was 36 and 38 years, respectively.

In a woman who presented with pulmonary venoocclusive disease (PVOD;
265450) at age 36, Runo et al. (2003) identified heterozygosity for the
44delC mutation in the BMPR2 gene. The patient's deceased mother was
known to have had pulmonary hypertension and died of complications of
right heart failure; because lung biopsy and autopsy were not performed,
it was unknown whether the mother's pulmonary hypertension was from PPH
or PVOD.

.0022
PULMONARY VENOOCCLUSIVE DISEASE
BMPR2, TYR40TER

In a patient with pulmonary arterial hypertension and pulmonary
venoocclusive disease (265450), Machado et al. (2006) identified
heterozygosity for a 120T-G transversion in exon 2 of the BMPR2 gene,
resulting in a tyr40-to-ter (Y40X) substitution.

.0023
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
PULMONARY VENOOCCLUSIVE DISEASE, INCLUDED
BMPR2, EX2DEL

In the probands of 2 families with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1;
178600), Aldred et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for deletion of
exon 2 of the BMPR2 gene, predicted to result in loss of 57 amino acids
from the extracellular ligand-binding domain. The affected relatives, 1
in the first family and 3 in the second, were all deceased. The proband
of the second family had histologic features of pulmonary venoocclusive
disease (PVOD; 265450).

.0024
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, EX10DEL

In 2 sibs and an unrelated pediatric patient with primary pulmonary
hypertension (PPH1; 178600), Aldred et al. (2006) identified
heterozygosity for deletion of exon 10 of the BMPR2 gene, resulting in
loss of 45 amino acids from the kinase domain. The deletion was
predicted to cause a frameshift and premature termination of exon 11
that was expected to result in nonsense-mediated decay (NMD). The sibs
inherited the mutation from their unaffected father; in the other case,
the mutation was inherited from the unaffected mother.

.0025
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1
BMPR2, EX1-13DEL

In a patient with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600), Aldred
et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for a deletion of exons 1
through 13 in the BMPR2 gene, confirmed to extend into the 5-prime
untranslated region and predicted to result in a complete null allele.
The mutation was not found in either parent.

.0026
PULMONARY HYPERTENSION, PRIMARY, 1, WITH HEREDITARY HEMORRHAGIC TELANGIECTASIA
BMPR2, GLN433TER

In a woman with primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH1; 178600) diagnosed
at age 24 years, Rigelsky et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous
1297C-T transition in exon 10 of the BMPR2 gene, resulting in a
gln433-to-ter (Q433X) substitution. She developed massive hemoptysis at
age 35, prompting the discovery of multiple pulmonary arteriovenous
malformations consistent with a diagnosis of hereditary hemorrhagic
telangiectasia (HHT). She also had recurrent epistaxis and nasal
telangiectasia. The patient was adopted, and there was no family history
available. Rigelsky et al. (2008) noted that, although PAH with HHT had
usually only been associated with mutations in the ACVRL1 gene (601284),
their patient was the first report of PAH and HHT associated with a
mutation in the BMPR2 gene. The findings indicated a common molecular
pathogenesis in PAH and HHT, most likely dysregulated BMP9 (GDF2;
605120) signaling.

.0027
PULMONARY VENOOCCLUSIVE DISEASE
BMPR2, ASN202TYR

Montani et al. (2008) reported a patient with pulmonary artery
hypertension who had histologic evidence of pulmonary venoocclusive
disease (PVOD; 265450) and a heterozygous 604A-T transversion in exon 5
of the BMPR2 gene, resulting in an asn202-to-tyr (N202Y) substitution.

.0028
PULMONARY VENOOCCLUSIVE DISEASE
BMPR2, GLU195TER

Montani et al. (2008) reported a patient with pulmonary artery
hypertension who had histologic evidence of pulmonary venoocclusive
disease (PVOD; 265450) and a heterozygous 583G-T transversion in exon 5
of the BMPR2 gene, resulting in a glu195-to-ter (E195X) substitution.

REFERENCE 1. Aldred, M. A.; Vijayakrishnan, J.; James, V.; Soubrier, F.; Gomez-Sanchez,
M. A.; Martensson, G.; Galie, N.; Manes, A.; Corris, P.; Simonneau,
G.; Humbert, M.; Morrell, N. W.; Trembath, R. C.: BMPR2 gene rearrangements
account for a significant proportion of mutations in familial and
idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension. (Abstract) Hum. Mutat. 27:
212-213, 2006. Note: Full article online.

2. Astrom, A.-K.; Jin, D.; Imamura, T.; Roijer, E.; Rosenzweig, B.;
Miyazono, K.; ten Dijke, P.; Stenman, G.: Chromosomal localization
of three human genes encoding bone morphogenetic protein receptors. Mammalian
Genome 10: 299-302, 1999.

3. Cejalvo, T.; Sacedon, R.; Hernandez-Lopez, C.; Diez, B.; Gutierrez-Frias,
C.; Valencia, J.; Zapata, A. G.; Varas, A.; Vicente, A.: Bone morphogenetic
protein-2/4 signalling pathway components are expressed in the human
thymus and inhibit early T-cell development. Immunology 121: 94-104,
2007.

4. Davis, B. N.; Hilyard, A. C.; Lagna, G.; Hata, A.: SMAD proteins
control DROSHA-mediated microRNA maturation. Nature 454: 56-61,
2008.

5. Deng, Z.; Morse, J. H.; Slager, S. L.; Cuervo, N.; Moore, K. J.;
Venetos, G.; Kalachikov, S.; Cayanis, E.; Fischer, S. G.; Barst, R.
J.; Hodge, S. E.; Knowles, J. A.: Familial primary pulmonary hypertension
(gene PPH1) is caused by mutations in the bone morphogenetic protein
receptor-II gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 737-744, 2000.

6. Drake, K. M.; Zygmunt, D.; Mavrakis, L.; Harbor, P.; Wang, L.;
Comhair, S. A.; Erzurum, S. C.; Aldred, M. A.: Altered microRNA processing
in heritable pulmonary arterial hypertension: an important role for
Smad-8. Am. J. Resp. Crit. Care Med. 184: 1400-1408, 2011.

7. Du, L.; Sullivan, C. C.; Chu, D.; Cho, A. J.; Kido, M.; Wolf, P.
L.; Yuan, J. X.-J.; Deutsch, R.; Jamieson, S. W.; Thistlethwaite,
P. A.: Signaling molecules in nonfamilial pulmonary hypertension. New
Eng. J. Med. 348: 500-509, 2003.

8. Hanks, S. K.; Quinn, A. M.; Hunter, T.: The protein kinase family:
conserved features and deduced phylogeny of the catalytic domains. Science 241:
42-52, 1988.

9. Humbert, M.; Deng, Z.; Simonneau, G.; Barst, R. J.; Sitbon, O.;
Wolf, M.; Cuervo, N.; Moore, K. J.; Hodge, S. E.; Knowles, J. A.;
Morse, J. H.: BMPR2 germline mutations in pulmonary hypertension
associated with fenfluramine derivatives. Europ. Resp. J. 20: 518-523,
2002.

10. International PPH Consortium; Lane, K. B.; Machado, R. D.; Pauciulo,
M. W.; Thomson, J. R.; Phillips, J. A., III; Loyd, J. E.; Nichols,
W. C.; Trembath, R. C.: Heterozygous germline mutations in BMPR2,
encoding a TGF-beta receptor, cause familial primary pulmonary hypertension. Nature
Genet. 26: 81-84, 2000.

11. Machado, R. D.; Aldred, M. A.; James, V.; Harrison, R. E.; Patel,
B.; Schwalbe, E. C.; Gruenig, E.; Janssen, B.; Koehler, R.; Seeger,
W.; Eickelberg, O.; Olschewski, H.; and 21 others: Mutations of
the TGF-beta type II receptor BMPR2 in pulmonary arterial hypertension. Hum.
Mutat. 27: 121-132, 2006.

12. Machado, R. D.; Pauciulo, M. W.; Thomson, J. R.; Lane, K. B.;
Morgan, N. V.; Wheeler, L.; Phillips, J. A., III; Newman, J.; Williams,
D.; Galie, N.; Manes, A.; McNeil, K.; and 11 others: BMPR2 haploinsufficiency
as the inherited molecular mechanism for primary pulmonary hypertension. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 68: 92-102, 2001.

13. Machado, R. D.; Rudarakanchana, N.; Atkinson, C.; Flanagan, J.
A.; Harrison, R.; Morrell, N. W.; Trembath, R. C.: Functional interaction
between BMPR-II and Tctex-1, a light chain of dynein, is isoform-specific
and disrupted by mutations underlying primary pulmonary hypertension. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12: 3277-3286, 2003.

14. Montani, D.; Achouh, L.; Dorfmuller, P.; Le Pavec, J.; Sztrymf,
B.; Tcherakian, C.; Rabiller, A.; Haque, R.; Sitbon, O.; Jais, X.;
Dartevelle, P.; Maitre, S.; Capron, F.; Musset, D.; Simonneau, G.;
Humbert, M.: Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease: clinical, functional,
radiologic, and hemodynamic characteristics and outcome of 24 cases
confirmed by histology. Medicine 87: 220-233, 2008.

15. Nasim, M. T.; Ghouri, A.; Patel, B.; James, V.; Rudarakanchana,
N.; Morrell, N. W.; Trembath, R. C.: Stoichiometric imbalance in
the receptor complex contributes to dysfunctional BMPR-II mediated
signalling in pulmonary arterial hypertension. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17:
1683-1694, 2008.

16. Newman, J. H.; Wheeler, L.; Lane, K. B.; Loyd, E.; Gaddipati,
R.; Phillips, J. A., III; Loyd, J. E.: Mutation in the gene for bone
morphogenetic protein receptor II as a cause of primary pulmonary
hypertension in a large kindred. New Eng. J. Med. 345: 319-324,
2001. Note: Erratum: New Eng. J. Med. 345: 1506 only, 2001.

17. Phillips, J. A., III; Poling, J. S.; Phillips, C. A.; Stanton,
K. C.; Austin, E. D.; Cogan, J. D.; Wheeler, L.; Yu, C.; Newman, J.
H.; Dietz, H. C.; Loyd, J. E.: Synergistic heterozygosity for TGF-beta-1
SNPs and BMPR2 mutations modulates the age at diagnosis and penetrance
of familial pulmonary arterial hypertension. Genet. Med. 10: 359-365,
2008.

18. Rigelsky, C. M.; Jennings, C.; Lehtonen, R.; Minai, O. A.; Eng,
C.; Aldred, M. A.: BMPR2 mutation in a patient with pulmonary arterial
hypertension and suspected hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 146A: 2551-2556, 2008.

19. Rosenzweig, B. L.; Imamura, T.; Okadome, T.; Cox, G. N.; Yamashita,
H.; ten Dijke, P.; Heldin, C.-H.; Miyazono, K.: Cloning and characterization
of a human type II receptor for bone morphogenetic proteins. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 7632-7636, 1995.

20. Rudarakanchana, N.; Flanagan, J.; Chen, H.; Upton, P. D.; Machado,
R.; Patel, D.; Trembath, R. C.; Morrell, N. W.: Functional analysis
of bone morphogenetic protein type II receptor mutations underlying
primary pulmonary hypertension. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 1517-1525,
2002.

21. Runo, J. R.; Vnencak-Jones, C. L.; Prince, M.; Loyd, J. E.; Wheeler,
L.; Robbins, I. M.; Lane, K. B.; Newman, J. H.; Johnson, J.; Nichols,
W. C.; Phillips, J. A., III.: Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease caused
by an inherited mutation in bone morphogenetic protein receptor II. Am.
J. Resp. Crit. Care Med. 167: 889-894, 2003.

22. Sankelo, M.; Flanagan, J. A.; Machado, R.; Harrison, R.; Rudarakanchana,
N.; Morrell, N.; Dixon, M.; Halme, M.; Puolijoki, H.; Kere, J.; Elomaa,
O.; Kupari, M.; Raisanen-Sokolowski, A.; Trembath, R. C.; Laitinen,
T.: BMPR2 mutations have short lifetime expectancy in primary pulmonary
hypertension. Hum. Mutat. 26: 119-124, 2005.

23. Thomson, J. R.; Machado, R. D.; Pauciulo, M. W.; Morgan, N. V.;
Humbert, M.; Elliott, G. C.; Ward, K.; Yacoub, M.; Mikhail, G.; Rogers,
P.; Newman, J.; Wheeler, L.; and 13 others: Sporadic primary pulmonary
hypertension is associated with germline mutations of the gene encoding
BMPR-II, a receptor member of the TGF-beta family. J. Med. Genet. 37:
741-745, 2000.

24. Tsang, H. T. H.; Edwards, T. L.; Wang, X.; Connell, J. W.; Davies,
R. J.; Durrington, H. J.; O'Kane, C. J.; Luzio, J. P.; Reid, E.:
The hereditary spastic paraplegia proteins NIPA1, spastin and spartin
are inhibitors of mammalian BMP signalling. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18:
3805-3821, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/30/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/16/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/12/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/25/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/6/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/18/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/15/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/5/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/14/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/10/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/22/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/29/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/10/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/20/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/23/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/11/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/25/1995

EDITED carol: 09/16/2013
carol: 7/31/2013
ckniffin: 7/30/2013
carol: 1/23/2013
terry: 1/16/2013
terry: 9/25/2012
wwang: 3/2/2011
mgross: 10/18/2010
terry: 10/12/2010
wwang: 8/27/2010
terry: 8/25/2010
wwang: 8/9/2010
terry: 8/6/2010
alopez: 2/25/2010
terry: 2/18/2010
terry: 6/4/2009
wwang: 5/7/2009
ckniffin: 4/15/2009
wwang: 4/13/2007
wwang: 4/5/2007
wwang: 8/22/2006
ckniffin: 8/14/2006
wwang: 1/31/2006
wwang: 1/30/2006
terry: 1/10/2006
mgross: 3/31/2004
terry: 3/22/2004
cwells: 5/29/2003
carol: 2/25/2003
tkritzer: 2/21/2003
terry: 2/10/2003
carol: 11/19/2001
mcapotos: 10/2/2001
mcapotos: 9/27/2001
mcapotos: 9/20/2001
terry: 9/20/2001
carol: 1/24/2001
mgross: 1/24/2001
terry: 1/23/2001
terry: 1/19/2001
terry: 11/9/2000
terry: 9/18/2000
alopez: 8/11/2000
dkim: 11/6/1998
mark: 11/11/1996
mark: 12/12/1995
terry: 11/13/1995
mark: 9/25/1995

612115	TITLE *612115 RHO GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE FACTOR 3; ARHGEF3
;;XPLN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Rho-like GTPases (see RHOA; 165390), which are involved in a variety of
cellular processes, are activated by binding GTP and inactivated by
conversion of GTP to GDP by their intrinsic GTPase activity. Guanine
nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs), such as ARHGEF3, accelerate the
GTPase activity of Rho GTPases by catalyzing their release of bound GDP
(Thiesen et al., 2000).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences encoding a Dbl (MCF2; 311030)
homology (DH) domain, followed by screening a neuronal teratocarcinoma
cDNA library and 5-prime RACE of adult human brain RNA, Thiesen et al.
(2000) obtained a full-length ARHGEF3 cDNA. The deduced 526-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of 59.8 kD and contains the
tandem DH and pleckstrin (PLEK; 173570) homology (PH) domains
characteristic of RhoGEFs. Northern blot analysis detected a 3.8-kb
transcript in heart, brain, kidney, lung, pancreas, spleen, and skeletal
muscle.

By searching databases for sequences encoding ARHGEF-like domains,
followed by PCR of acute myeloid leukemia and total brain cDNA
libraries, Arthur et al. (2002) cloned ARHGEF3. They referred to ARHGEF3
as XPLN (pronounced 'zeppelin') for 'exchange factor found in platelets
and leukemic and neuronal libraries.' ARHGEF3 shares 99% and 94% amino
acid identity with its monkey and mouse orthologs, respectively. Western
blot analysis detected prominent ARHGEF3 expression in adult brain and
skeletal muscle, with weaker expression in heart and kidney. ARHGEF3
protein expression was also detected in human platelets, mouse
macrophages, and rat pheochromocytoma cells, but not in other cell lines
examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Using in vitro assays, Arthur et al. (2002) found that recombinant
ARHGEF3 stimulated guanine nucleotide exchange on RHOA and RHOB
(165370), but not on RHOC (165380), RHOG (179505), RAC1 (602048), or
CDC42 (116952). Mutation analysis showed that the inability of ARHGEF3
to catalyze nucleotide exchange on RHOC was due to ile43 of RHOC, a
position occupied by valine in RHOA and RHOB. ARHGEF3 activated RHOA and
RHOB, but not RHOC, in transfected cells and stimulated assembly of
stress fibers and focal adhesions in mouse fibroblasts in a Rho kinase
(ROCK1; 601702)-dependent manner. ARHGEF3 also showed transforming
activity in cells expressing a permissive RAF (164760) mutant.

MAPPING

Using FISH, Thiesen et al. (2000) mapped the ARHGEF3 gene to chromosome
3p21-p13.

REFERENCE 1. Arthur, W. T.; Ellerbroek, S. M.; Der, C. J.; Burridge, K.; Wennerberg,
K.: XPLN, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor for RhoA and RhoB,
but not RhoC. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 42964-42972, 2002.

2. Thiesen, S.; Kubart, S.; Ropers, H.-H.; Nothwang, H. G.: Isolation
of two novel human RhoGEFs, ARHGEF3 and ARHGEF4, in 3p13-21 and 2q22. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 273: 364-369, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/18/2008

EDITED mgross: 06/18/2008

606045	TITLE *606045 INTRAFLAGELLAR TRANSPORT 122, CHLAMYDOMONAS, HOMOLOG OF; IFT122
;;WD REPEAT-CONTAINING PROTEIN 10; WDR10
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

A conserved core of 4 or more modular repeat units defines a group of
functionally diverse regulatory proteins in eukaryotes known as the WD
repeat family. WD repeats are minimally conserved regions of
approximately 40 amino acids typically bracketed by gly-his and trp-asp
(GH-WD), which may facilitate formation of heterotrimeric or
multiprotein complexes. Proteins belonging to the WD repeat family are
involved in a variety of cellular processes, including cell cycle
progression, signal transduction, apoptosis, and gene regulation
(summary by Claudio et al., 1999).

CLONING

Gross et al. (2001) screened human HL60 leukemia and prostate and colon
cancer cDNA libraries with degenerate oligonucleotide primers directed
to sequences encoding the AF2 domains of class III nuclear receptors.
They then used 5-prime and 3-prime RACE and screening of a testis cDNA
library to clone IFT122, which they designated WDR10. They also isolated
a longer variant of this cDNA, which appeared to have an additional
153-bp exon near the 5-prime end. The full-length WDR10 cDNA encodes a
deduced 1,242-amino acid protein with an AF2-like domain, 7 N-terminal
WD repeat units, and 2 potential nuclear localization sequences.
Northern blot analysis detected a single 4-kb WDR10 transcript in most
tissues tested, with predominant expression in testis and pituitary; a
3.5-kb transcript was detected in HL60 leukemia cells. Study of a
WDR10-GFP fusion protein demonstrated that WDR10 is localized in the
cytoplasm. In situ hybridization on reproductive tissues in the rat
showed stage-specific expression of WDR10 within developing sperm and
ovarian follicles.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gross et al. (2001) determined that the IFT122 gene has at least 28
exons spanning approximately 65 kb of genomic DNA.

MAPPING

By FISH, Gross et al. (2001) mapped the IFT122 gene to chromosome 3q21.

GENE FUNCTION

Walczak-Sztulpa et al. (2010) performed morpholino knockdown of ift122
in zebrafish embryos and observed defects typical of other ciliopathy
models including shortened body axis and curvature, cardiac edema, and
small eyes at 80 hours postfertilization, with pronephric cysts and a
distended cranium consistent with hydrocephalus and otolith defects at 5
days postfertilization. Cilia and their basal bodies were dramatically
reduced in the pronephric duct of morphant embryos compared to control
embryos, and primary cilia shortening was observed in the morphant
zebrafish Kupffer vesicle.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a consanguineous Polish family with cranioectodermal dysplasia
mapping to chromosome 3q21-q24 (CED1; 218330), Walczak-Sztulpa et al.
(2010) sequenced 79 candidate genes and identified homozygosity for a
missense mutation in the IFT122 gene (V553G; 606045.0001) that
segregated with the disease. Fibroblasts from 1 of the sibs showed
significantly reduced cilia frequency and length compared to controls.
Analysis of IFT122 in 11 additional unrelated patients with CED revealed
homozygosity and compound heterozygosity for mutations in 2 of the
patients (606045.0002-606045.0004, respectively).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CRANIOECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA 1
IFT122, VAL553GLY

In an affected sister and brother with cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED1;
218330), born of distantly related Polish parents, Walczak-Sztulpa et
al. (2010) identified homozygosity for a T-G transversion in the IFT122
gene, resulting in a val553-to-gly (V553G) substitution at a highly
conserved residue. The unaffected parents were heterozygous for the
mutation, which was not found in 340 ethnically matched control
chromosomes. Analysis of fibroblasts from the brother showed
significantly reduced cilia frequency and length compared to 3
unrelated, healthy German controls.

.0002
CRANIOECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA 1
IFT122, SER373PHE

In a boy with cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED1; 218330), born of
fourth-cousin Norwegian parents and previously reported by Fry et al.
(2009), Walczak-Sztulpa et al. (2010) identified homozygosity for a C-T
transition in the IFT122 gene, resulting in a ser373-to-phe (S373F)
substitution at a highly conserved residue. The unaffected parents were
heterozygous for the mutation, which was not found in 340 ethnically
matched control chromosomes. The patient had an unaffected sister.

.0003
CRANIOECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA 1
IFT122, IVS6, G-A, +5

In an Italian boy with cranioectodermal dysplasia (CED1; 218330),
originally reported by Zaffanello et al. (2006), Walczak-Sztulpa et al.
(2010) identified compound heterozygosity for a G-A transition in intron
6 (502+5G-A) of the IFT122 gene and a de novo trp7-to-cys substitution
(W7C; 606045.0004) at a highly conserved residue in exon 1. The mother
was a heterozygous carrier of the splice site mutation but the missense
mutation was not detected in either parent; neither mutation was found
in 340 ethnically matched control chromosomes.

.0004
CRANIOECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA 1
IFT122, TRP7CYS

See 606045.0003 and Walczak-Sztulpa et al. (2010).

REFERENCE 1. Claudio, J. O.; Liew, C.-C.; Ma, J.; Heng, H. H. Q.; Stewart, A.
K.; Hawley, R. G.: Cloning and expression analysis of a novel WD
repeat gene, WDR3, mapping to 1p12-p13. Genomics 59: 85-89, 1999.

2. Fry, A. E.; Klingenberg, C.; Matthes, J.; Heimdal, K.; Hennekam,
R C. M.; Pilz, D. T.: Connective tissue involvement in two patients
with features of cranioectodermal dysplasia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A:
2212-2215, 2009.

3. Gross, C.; De Baere, E.; Lo, A.; Chang, W.; Messiaen, L.: Cloning
and characterization of human WDR10, a novel gene located at 3q21
encoding a WD-repeat protein that is highly expressed in pituitary
and testis. DNA Cell Biol. 20: 41-52, 2001.

4. Walczak-Sztulpa, J.; Eggenschwiler, J.; Osborn, D.; Brown, D. A.;
Emma, F.; Klingenberg, C.; Hennekam, R. C.; Torre, G.; Garshasbi,
M.; Tzschach, A.; Szczepanska, M.; Krawczynski, M.; Zachwieja, J.;
Zwolinska, D.; Beales, P. L.; Ropers, H.-H.; Latos-Bielenska, A.;
Kuss, A. W.: Cranioectodermal dysplasia, Sensenbrenner syndrome,
is a ciliopathy caused by mutations in the IFT122 gene. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 86: 949-956, 2010.

5. Zaffanello, M.; Diomedi-Camassei, F.; Melzi, M. L.; Torre, G.;
Callea, F.; Emma, F.: Sensenbrenner syndrome: a new member of the
hepatorenal fibrocystic family. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A: 2336-2340,
2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/12/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/15/2010

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 6/20/2001

EDITED wwang: 07/20/2011
terry: 7/12/2011
carol: 7/15/2010
carol: 7/1/2010
joanna: 1/22/2004
mcapotos: 6/20/2001
carol: 6/20/2001

613147	TITLE *613147 MICRO RNA 205; MIR205
;;miRNA205;;
MIRN205
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), such as MIR205, are small noncoding RNAs that
mediate posttranscriptional silencing by binding with partial
complementarity to the 3-prime UTRs of target mRNAs. miRNAs have
important roles in development and differentiation, cellular stress
responses, and cancer (summary by Yu et al., 2008).

GENE FUNCTION

Using the MDCK canine epithelial cell line and a subclone with a
mesenchymal phenotype, Gregory et al. (2008) found that the miR200
family of miRNAs (see 612090) and miR205 regulated expression of Zeb1
(189909) and Zeb2 (605802) and controlled epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition. Furthermore, expression of the miR200 family and miR205 was
lost in invasive human breast cancer cell lines with mesenchymal
phenotype and in primary breast cancer specimens lacking E-cadherin
(CDH1; 192090), an epithelial cell marker.

Using human epithelial cell lines and primary human corneal and
epidermal keratinocytes, Yu et al. (2008) identified SHIP2 (INPPL1;
600829), a lipid phosphatase that functions in the AKT (see 164730)
signaling pathway, as a target of MIR205. They also showed that MIR184
(613146) interfered with the ability of MIR205 to downregulate
expression of SHIP2. A synthetic antagomir targeting MIR205 or ectopic
expression of MIR184 induced SHIP2 expression in keratinocytes, with
coordinated damping of AKT signaling and increased apoptosis.
Examination of the 3-prime UTR of SHIP2 revealed overlapping binding
sites for MIR184 and MIR205. Coexpression of MIR184 with MIR205 reversed
MIR205-induced inhibition of a reporter gene containing the SHIP2
3-prime UTR. MIR184 had no direct effect on SHIP2 expression, but
instead interfered with MIR205 binding to the 3-prime UTR of SHIP2.

MAPPING

Gross (2009) mapped the MIR205 gene to chromosome 1q32.2 based on an
alignment of the mature MIR205 sequence (UCCUUCAUUCCACCGGAGUCUG) with
the genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Gregory, P. A.; Bert, A. G.; Paterson, E. L.; Barry, S. C.; Tsykin,
A.; Farshid, G.; Vadas, M. A.; Khew-Goodall, Y.; Goodall, G. J.:
The miR-200 family and miR-205 regulate epithelial to mesenchymal
transition by targeting ZEB1 and SIP1. Nature Cell Biol. 10: 593-601,
2008.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  11/24/2009.

3. Yu, J.; Ryan, D. G.; Getsios, S.; Oliveira-Fernandes, M.; Fatima,
A.; Lavker, R. M.: MicroRNA-184 antagonizes microRNA-205 to maintain
SHIP2 levels in epithelia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 19300-19305,
2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/24/2009

CREATED Matthew B. Gross: 11/24/2009

EDITED mgross: 11/24/2009

604417	TITLE *604417 AF4/FMR2 FAMILY, MEMBER 4; AFF4
;;ALL1-FUSED GENE FROM CHROMOSOME 5q31; AF5Q31
DESCRIPTION Infantile acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with rearrangements of the
MLL gene (159555) is characterized by early pre-B phenotype and poor
treatment outcome. Taki et al. (1999) studied a 4-month-old girl with
the diagnosis of ALL. Leukemic cells were characterized cytogenetically
as ins(5;11)(q31;q13q23), i(17q). By molecular studies, Taki et al.
(1999) identified a gene on 5q31 as a fusion partner of the MLL gene.
The AF5q31 gene (GenBank GENBANK AF197927), so termed for 'ALL1-fused
gene partner from 5q31,' encodes a protein of 1,163 amino acids, is
located in the vicinity of the cytokine cluster region of 5q31, and
contains at least 16 exons. The AF5q31 gene was expressed in fetal
heart, lung, and brain at relatively high levels and in fetal liver at a
low level, but the expression in these tissues was decreased in adults.
The AF5q31 protein was homologous to AF4-related proteins, including AF4
(159557), LAF4 (601464), and FMR2 (309548). The AF5q31 and AF4 proteins
had 3 homologous regions, including the transactivation domain of AF4,
and the breakpoint of AF5q31 was located within the region homologous to
the transactivation domain of AF4. Furthermore, the clinical features of
the patient with the MLL-AF5q31 fusion transcript, characterized by the
early pre-B phenotype and poor outcome, were similar to those of
patients having MLL-AF4 chimeric transcripts. Taki et al. (1999)
suggested that these findings may indicate that AF5q31 and AF4 defines a
new family particularly involved in the pathogenesis of 11q23-associated
ALL.

REFERENCE 1. Taki, T.; Kano, H.; Taniwaki, M.; Sako, M.; Yanagisawa, M.; Hayashi,
Y.: AF5q31, a newly identified AF4-related gene, is fused to MLL
in infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia with ins(5;11)(q31;q31q23). Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 14535-14540, 1999.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/11/2000

EDITED carol: 06/25/2009
carol: 6/13/2000
alopez: 1/11/2000

126255	TITLE *126255 DISTAL-LESS HOMEOBOX 2; DLX2
;;TES1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

To isolate genes involved in forebrain development, Porteus et al.
(1992) used subtractive hybridization of cDNA libraries to enrich for
cDNAs that are encoded by genes preferentially expressed in mouse
gestational day-15 telencephalon. In an attempt to find genes that are
candidates for the regulation of forebrain development, the subtracted
cDNA library was screened with probes homologous to the homeobox, a
conserved motif found in transcriptional regulators that often control
development. A novel cDNA, named Tes1, that encodes a homeodomain was
identified. Its sequence showed that Tes1 was a member of the
'Distal-less' family of homeodomain-encoding genes. Related by amino
acid homology within their homeodomains, the known members of the family
are Tes1, Dlx1 (600029), and Dll (a Drosophila melanogaster gene).

McGuinness et al. (1996) reported the DNA sequence of the human DLX2
gene and compared it to the murine gene. The deduced sequence of the
human DLX2 protein shows that the human and mouse DLX2 proteins are 92%
identical. The human DLX2 protein is 330 amino acids in length, while
the mouse DLX2 protein contains 332 amino acids. The introns have 63 to
71% identity. Domains identified in the human and mouse DLX2 protein
include a homeodomain and short stretches of homology to several
transcription factors.

GENE STRUCTURE

McGuinness et al. (1996) determined that the human DLX2 gene has 3
exons.

MAPPING

Ozcelik et al. (1992) determined the chromosomal location of the DLX2
gene in mouse and human. By Southern analysis of somatic cell hybrid
lines, they assigned the human locus to chromosome 2cen-q33 and the
mouse locus to chromosome 2. An EcoRI dimorphism was used for
recombinant inbred strain mapping in the mouse. The results placed the
Dlx2 gene near the Hox4 cluster on mouse chromosome 2.

Simeone et al. (1994) found that the DLX1 and DLX2 genes are localized
to chromosome 2q32 near the HOXD (formerly HOX4; 142980-142989) cluster
at 2q31, as had previously been suggested for the mouse. The mapping was
done by study of rodent/human hybrid cells and by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. The genes were found to be closely linked, i.e., about 8
kb apart, in an inverted convergent (i.e., tail-to-tail) configuration.

Zerucha et al. (2000) reported that the vertebrate Dlx1 and Dlx2 genes
are organized in a conserved tail-to-tail arrangement.

GENE FUNCTION

Using retroviral labeling in organotypic slice cultures of the embryonic
human forebrain, Letinic et al. (2002) demonstrated the existence of 2
distinct lineages of neocortical GABAergic neurons. One lineage
expresses DLX1 and DLX2 and MASH1 (100790) transcription factors,
represents 65% of neocortical GABAergic neurons in humans, and
originates from MASH1-expressing progenitors of the neocortical
ventricular and subventricular zone of the dorsal forebrain. The second
lineage, characterized by the expression of DLX1 and DLX2 but not MASH1,
forms around 35% of the GABAergic neurons and originates from the
ganglionic eminence of the ventral forebrain. Letinic et al. (2002)
suggested that modifications in the expression pattern of transcription
factors in the forebrain may underlie species-specific programs for the
generation of neocortical local circuit neurons and that distinct
lineages of cortical interneurons may be differentially affected in
genetic and acquired diseases of the human brain.

PITX2 (601542) and DLX2 are transcription markers observed during early
tooth development. Espinoza et al. (2002) demonstrated that PITX2 binds
to bicoid and bicoid-like elements in the DLX2 promoter and activates
this promoter 30-fold in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Mutations in PITX2
associated with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (see 180500) provided the first
link of this homeodomain transcription factor to tooth development. One
mutation produces Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome with iris hypoplasia but
without tooth anomalies; this allele has a similar DNA binding
specificity compared to wildtype PITX2 and transactivates the DLX2
promoter. In contrast, a different PITX2 mutation produces Rieger
syndrome with the full spectrum of developmental anomalies, including
tooth anomalies; this allele is unable to transactivate the DLX2
promoter. Since DLX2 expression is required for tooth and craniofacial
development, the lack of tooth anomalies in the patient with iris
hypoplasia may be due to the residual activity of this mutant in
activating the DLX2 promoter. The authors proposed a molecular mechanism
for tooth development involving DLX2 gene expression in Axenfeld-Rieger
patients.

Thomas et al. (2000) identified regulatory regions of the mouse Dlx2
upstream sequence that drove epithelial but not mesenchymal expression
of Dlx2 in the first branchial arch. Epithelial expression of Dlx2 was
regulated by planar signaling by Bmp4 (112262), which was coexpressed in
distal oral epithelium. Mesenchymal expression was regulated by a
different mechanism involving Fgf8 (600483), which was expressed in the
overlying epithelium. Fgf8 also inhibited expression of Dlx2 in the
epithelium by a signaling pathway that required the mesenchyme. Thomas
et al. (2000) concluded that Bmp4 and Fgf8 maintain the strict
epithelial and mesenchymal expression of Dlx2 in the first branchial
arch of developing mice.

Zerucha et al. (2000) found that, like DLX1 and DLX2, the mouse and
human DLX5 (600028) and DLX6 (600030) genes, as well as their zebrafish
orthologs, Dlx4 and Dlx6, respectively, are arranged in a tail-to-tail
orientation. The intergenic region between zebrafish, mouse, and human
DLX5 and DLX6 is highly conserved, with 2 nucleotide stretches reaching
about 85% nucleotide identity among these species. Using knockdown and
reporter gene assays, Zerucha et al. (2000) showed that the zebrafish
Dlx4/Dlx6 intergenic region drove expression of mouse Dlx5 and Dlx6
reporter genes in the ventral thalamus/hypothalamus and in basal
telencephalon in transgenic mouse forebrain. Although their expression
patterns overlapped, the Dlx5 reporter was more highly expressed in the
subventricular zone, whereas the Dlx6 reporter was more highly expressed
in the mantle zone, similar to endogenous mouse Dlx5 and Dlx6. Activity
of the zebrafish intergenic enhancer was reduced in the subventricular
zone, but not in the mantle zone, in mice lacking Dlx1 and Dlx2,
consistent with decreased endogenous Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression. In
zebrafish forebrain, Dlx1 and Dlx2 were expressed in more immature cells
than Dlx4 and Dlx6. Cotransfection and DNA-protein binding experiments
with mouse and zebrafish proteins suggested that Dlx1 and/or Dlx2 are
required for Dlx5 and Dlx6 expression in forebrain and that this
regulation is mediated by the intergenic enhancer sequence.

Glutamic acid decarboxylases (see GAD1; 605363) are required for
synthesis of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in GABAergic neurons. Using
electroporation to introduce Dlx1, Dlx2, and Dlx5 plasmids in embryonic
mouse cerebral cortex, Stuhmer et al. (2002) found that Dlx2 and Dlx5,
but not Dlx1, induced expression of the glutamic acid decarboxylases
Gad65 (GAD2; 138275) and Gad67 (GAD1) to variable degrees. Dlx2 induced
expression of endogenous Dlx5, but not Dlx6. Dlx2 and Dlx5 induced
expression of a mouse Dlx5/Dlx6 intergenic region reporter in all brain
regions examined, whereas Dlx1 induced expression of the reporter in a
more restricted pattern.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the DLX2
gene and susceptibility to autism, see AUTS5 (606053).

ANIMAL MODEL

Qiu et al. (1995) utilized information about the genomic structure of
the murine Dlx2 gene to carry out gene targeting experiments and made
deletions in the Dlx2 gene in mouse embryonic stem cells for use in
transgenic mice. They reported that heterozygous mice appeared normal
and homozygous mice died on the day of birth. The mutant mice had
altered differentiation of interneurons in the olfactory bulb and
abnormal morphogenesis of the cranial neural crest-derived skeletal
structures formed from the proximal first and second branchial arches,
causing cleft palate.

Kraus and Lufkin (2006) reviewed mouse studies of Dlx gene family loss-
and gain-of-function mutations and the role of Dlx homeobox genes in
craniofacial, limb, and bone development.

REFERENCE 1. Espinoza, H.; Cox, C. J.; Semina, E. V.; Amendt, B. A.: A molecular
basis for differential developmental anomalies in Axenfeld-Rieger
syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 743-753, 2002.

2. Kraus, P.; Lufkin, T.: Dlx homeobox gene control of mammalian
limb and craniofacial development. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A: 1366-1374,
2006.

3. Letinic, K.; Zoncu, R.; Rakic, P.: Origin of GABAergic neurons
in the human neocortex. Nature 417: 645-649, 2002.

4. McGuinness, T.; Porteus, M. H.; Smiga, S.; Bulfone, A.; Kingsley,
C.; Qiu, M.; Liu, J. K.; Long, J. E.; Xu, D.; Rubenstein, J. L. R.
: Sequence, organization, and transcription of the Dlx-1 and the Dlx-2
locus. Genomics 35: 473-485, 1996.

5. Ozcelik, T.; Porteus, M. H.; Rubenstein, J. L. R.; Francke, U.
: DLX2 (TES1), a homeobox gene of the Distal-less family, assigned
to conserved regions on human and mouse chromosomes 2. Genomics 13:
1157-1161, 1992.

6. Porteus, M. H.; Brice, A. E. J.; Bulfone, A.; Usdin, T. B.; Ciaranello,
R. D.; Rubenstein, J. L. R.: Isolation and characterization of a
library of cDNA clones that are preferentially expressed in the embryonic
telencephalon. Molec. Brain Res. 12: 7-22, 1992.

7. Qiu, M.; Bulfone, A.; Martinez, S.; Meneses, J. J.; Shimamura,
K.; Pedersen, R. A.; Rubenstein, J. L.: Null mutation of Dlx-2 results
in abnormal morphogenesis of proximal first and second branchial arch
derivatives and abnormal differentiation in the forebrain. Genes
Dev. 9: 2523-2538, 1995.

8. Simeone, A.; Acampora, D.; Pannese, M.; D'Esposito, M.; Stornaiuolo,
A.; Gulisano, M.; Mallamaci, A.; Kastury, K.; Druck, T.; Huebner,
K.; Boncinelli, E.: Cloning and characterization of two members of
the vertebrate Dlx gene family. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 2250-2254,
1994.

9. Stuhmer, T.; Anderson, S. A.; Ekker, M.; Rubenstein, J. L. R.:
Ectopic expression of the Dlx gene induces glutamic acid decarboxylase
and Dlx expression. Development 129: 245-252, 2002.

10. Thomas, B. L.; Liu, J. K.; Rubenstein, J. L. R.; Sharpe, P. T.
: Independent regulation of Dlx2 expression in the epithelium and
mesenchyme of the first branchial arch. Development 127: 217-224,
2000.

11. Zerucha, T.; Stuhmer, T.; Hatch, G.; Park, B. K.; Long, Q.; Yu,
G.; Gambarotta, A.; Schultz, J. R.; Rubenstein, J. L. R.; Ekker, M.
: A highly conserved enhancer in the Dlx5/Dlx6 intergenic region is
the site of cross-regulatory interactions between Dlx genes in the
embryonic forebrain. J. Neurosci. 20: 709-721, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/21/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/19/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/23/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/25/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/12/2002
Moyra Smith - updated: 12/17/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/14/1992

EDITED mgross: 01/07/2013
terry: 11/21/2012
wwang: 9/14/2009
ckniffin: 8/28/2009
wwang: 4/19/2007
mgross: 4/12/2004
terry: 3/23/2004
terry: 3/18/2004
cwells: 10/25/2002
alopez: 7/15/2002
terry: 7/12/2002
mcapotos: 5/3/2000
dkim: 9/9/1998
alopez: 7/29/1997
alopez: 7/7/1997
mark: 6/11/1997
mark: 12/17/1996
terry: 12/17/1996
mark: 12/11/1996
carol: 8/31/1994
jason: 7/13/1994
terry: 5/13/1994
carol: 1/8/1993
carol: 9/2/1992
carol: 8/14/1992

601988	TITLE *601988 LIM DOMAIN KINASE 2; LIMK2
DESCRIPTION Okano et al. (1995) isolated a human cDNA encoding LIMK2, a second
member of the LIMK family, with a domain structure similar to LIMK1
(601329) and 50% overall amino acid identity with LIMK1. They also
identified 2 alternative transcripts, LIMK2a and LIMK2b, which are
probably due to variation in transcriptional initiation. The 3.7-kb
LIMK2 mRNA was detected in all tissues tested, with the highest level in
placenta and a moderate level in liver, lung, kidney, and pancreas,
whereas the 1.6-kb mRNA was detected only in skeletal muscle and heart.
The 3.7-kb transcript was detected in lung, stomach, and renal cancer
cell lines. Osada et al. (1996) found that LIMK2a transcripts were more
abundant than LIMK2b in liver, colon, stomach, and spleen, while in
brain, kidney, and placenta LIMK2b transcripts were the dominant form.
The former encodes a protein containing 2 LIM domains, a PDZ domain, and
a kinase domain, while the latter has only 1.5 LIM domains. (The LIM
domain is thought to be involved in protein-protein interactions; the
PDZ domain was originally recognized in a family of proteins related to
the Drosophila lethal discs-large tumor suppressor gene product Dlga
(see 601014) and was shown to function in protein-protein interactions
targeting the protein to the submembranous compartment.) Transfection
studies have shown an association of 63-kD and 58-kD proteins with the
LIMK2a and LIMK2b proteins. The former is distributed in the cytoplasm
and nucleus and the latter occurs mainly in the cytoplasm. A truncated
LIMK2-kinase has a nuclear location, not showing the protein
association. Okano et al. (1995) demonstrated the
serine/threonine-specific kinase activity of LIMK1 and LIMK2 by in vitro
analysis.

Maekawa et al. (1999) demonstrated that LIM kinase is phosphorylated and
activated by ROCK (601702), a downstream effector of Rho, and that LIM
kinase, in turn, phosphorylates cofilin (601442), inhibiting its
actin-depolymerizing activity. They concluded that this pathway
contributes to Rho-induced reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton.

REFERENCE 1. Maekawa, M.; Ishizaki, T.; Boku, S.; Watanabe, N.; Fujita, A.;
Iwamatsu, A.; Obinata, T.; Ohashi, K.; Mizuno, K.; Narumiya, S.:
Signaling from Rho to the actin cytoskeleton through protein kinases
ROCK and LIM-kinase. Science 285: 895-898, 1999.

2. Okano, I.; Hiraoka, J.; Otera, H.; Nunoue, K.; Ohashi, K.; Iwashita,
S.; Hirai, M.; Mizuno, K.: Identification and characterization of
a novel family of serine/threonine kinases containing two N-terminal
LIM motifs. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 31321-31330, 1995.

3. Osada, H.; Hasada, K.; Inazawa, J.; Uchida, K.; Ueda, R.; Takahashi,
T.; Takahashi, T.: Subcellular localization and protein interaction
of the human LIMK2 gene expressing alternative transcripts with tissue-specific
regulation. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 229: 582-589, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 08/05/1999

CREATED Ethylin Wang Jabs: 9/11/1997

EDITED alopez: 08/05/1999
terry: 9/11/1997

611730	TITLE *611730 ERYTHROCYTE MEMBRANE PROTEIN BAND 4.1-LIKE 5; EPB41L5
;;KIAA1548
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned EPB41L5, which they designated
KIAA1548. RT-PCR ELISA detected expression in all tissues tested, with
highest expression in kidney, ovary, and brain.

Jensen and Westerfield (2004) identified human EPB41L5 as the homolog of
the zebrafish 'mosaic eyes' (moe) gene. The deduced EPB41L5 and moe
proteins share 61% overall sequence identity and 87% identity in the N
terminus. Both proteins contain a conserved FERM domain present in
members of the EPB41 (130500) family of cytoskeletal proteins.

GENE FUNCTION

Jensen et al. (2001) showed that the zebrafish moe gene is expressed in
the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and that mutations in the gene
produce retinal lamination defects. Jensen and Westerfield (2004) found
that mutant fish also show defects in the kidney and brain, including
edema and small or absent brain ventricles. Jensen and Westerfield
(2004) proposed that moe is required for tight junction formation in the
RPE and is part of the pathway that controls apical cell polarity in
photoreceptor morphogenesis as well as in other epithelial-derived
tissues.

Using an antibody to the mouse Epb41l5 protein, Gosens et al. (2007)
showed that at early embryonic stages the protein localizes to the
basolateral membrane compartment, whereas in adult tissues it is found
at the apical domain along with Crumbs proteins (Crb1, 604210; Crb2,
609720; Crb3, 609737) and Mpp5 (606958). Overexpression of Epb41l5
affected tightness of cell junctions and resulted in disorganization of
the tight junction markers ZO1 (601009) and PATJ (603199). Gosens et al.
(2007) showed that Epb41L5 binds to conserved motifs in Crb1, Crb2,
Crb3, and Mpp5, and is a component of the Crumbs polarity complex first
identified in Drosophila. They concluded that EPB41L5 is likely to be
important in cell polarity processes in many epithelial-derived tissues
in addition to the retina.

Laprise et al. (2009) reported that the Drosophila FERM proteins Yurt
(Yrt) and Coracle (Cora) and the membrane proteins Neurexin IV (Nrx-IV)
and the sodium-potassium ATPase are a group of functionally cooperating
epithelial polarity proteins. This Yrt/Cora group promotes basolateral
membrane stability and shows negative regulatory interactions with the
apical determinant Crumbs (see 604210). Genetic analyses indicate that
the Nrx-IV and sodium-potassium ATPase act together with Cora in one
pathway whereas Yrt acts in a second redundant pathway. Laprise et al.
(2009) showed that the Yrt/Cora group is essential for epithelial
polarity during organogenesis but not when epithelial polarity is first
established or during terminal differentiation. They also found that the
mammalian Yrt ortholog EPB41L5 (also known as YMO1 and Limulus) is
required for lateral membrane formation, indicating a conserved function
of Yrt proteins in epithelial polarity.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the EPB41L5
gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP RH79778).

Jensen and Westerfield (2004) stated that the EPB41L5 gene maps to
chromosome 2q14 and is adjacent to the PTPN4 gene (176878), and that the
moe gene in zebrafish is also adjacent to the Ptpn4 gene. Scott (2008)
noted that these findings indicate that EPB41L5 and moe are true
orthologs.

REFERENCE 1. Gosens, I.; Sessa, A.; den Hollander, A. I.; Letteboer, S. J. F.;
Belloni, V.; Arends, M. L.; Le Bivic, A.; Cremers, F. P. M.; Broccoli,
V.; Roepman, R.: FERM protein EPB41L5 is a novel member of the mammalian
CRB-MPP5 polarity complex. Exp. Cell Res. 313: 3959-3970, 2007.

2. Jensen, A. M.; Walker, C.; Westerfield, M.: Mosaic eyes: a zebrafish
gene required in pigmented epithelium for apical localization of retinal
cell division and lamination. Development 128: 95-105, 2001.

3. Jensen, A. M.; Westerfield, M.: Zebrafish mosaic eyes is a novel
FERM protein required for retinal lamination and retinal pigmented
epithelial tight junction formation. Curr. Biol. 14: 711-717, 2004.

4. Laprise, P.; Lau, K. M.; Harris, K. P.; Silva-Gagliardi, N. F.;
Paul, S. M.; Beronja, S.; Beitel, G. J.; McGlade, C. J.; Tepass, U.
: Yurt, Coracle, Neurexin IV and the Na+,K+-ATPase form a novel group
of epithelial polarity proteins. Nature 459: 1141-1145, 2009.

5. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Nakayama, M.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVIII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 273-281, 2000.

6. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/9/2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/9/2009

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 1/17/2008

EDITED alopez: 07/16/2009
terry: 7/9/2009
terry: 6/6/2008
carol: 1/17/2008

151990	TITLE *151990 LIPOPOLYSACCHARIDE-BINDING PROTEIN; LBP
;;LPS-BINDING PROTEIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Lipopolysaccharide-binding protein is an acute-phase reactant produced
during gram-negative bacterial infections. Higher eukaryotes have
evolved several mechanisms for protecting against such infections.
Gram-negative bacteria express lipopolysaccharide (LPS; endotoxin) on
their outer cell wall, and mammals respond rapidly to the presence of
LPS in serum. LBP and another acute-phase reactant, bactericidal
permeability-increasing protein (BPI; 109195), bind LPS with high
affinity. LBP is made in the liver during the acute phase of infections
and is thought to function as a carrier for LPS and to help control
LPS-dependent monocyte responses. See CD14 (158120) for information on
the receptor for the lipopolysaccharide binding
protein/lipopolysaccharide complex.

CLONING

By screening a human liver cDNA library with an oligonucleotide derived
from the rabbit LBP protein sequence, Schumann et al. (1990) isolated
cDNAs encoding LBP. The predicted human LBP protein consists of a
25-amino acid signal sequence followed by a 452-amino acid mature
protein containing 4 cysteine residues and 5 potential glycosylation
sites. Human LBP shares 69% amino acid identity with rabbit LBP, 44%
identity with human BPI, and 23% identity with human CETP (118470). In
rabbits, Schumann et al. (1990) found that LBP functions as a carrier
protein for LPS in plasma and controls LPS-dependent monocytic
responses.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hubacek et al. (1997) found that the LBP gene spans approximately 28.5
kb of DNA and contains 14 exons. Comparison of the genomic structures of
LBP, BPI, PLTP (172425), and CETP, which constitute a family of
functionally related proteins, revealed a remarkable conservation of
exon/intron junctions and exon size.

GENE FUNCTION

LPS interacts with LBP and CD14 to present LPS to TLR4 (603030), which
activates inflammatory gene expression through NF-kappa-B (see 164011)
and MAPK signaling. Bochkov et al. (2002) demonstrated that oxidized
phospholipids inhibit LPS-induced but not TNF-alpha (191160)-induced or
interleukin-1-beta (147720)-induced NF-kappa-B-mediated upregulation of
inflammatory genes by blocking the interaction of LPS with LBP and CD14.
Moreover, in LPS-injected mice, oxidized phospholipids inhibited
inflammation and protected mice from lethal endotoxin shock. Thus, in
severe gram-negative bacterial infection, endogenously formed oxidized
phospholipids may function as a negative feedback to blunt innate immune
responses. Furthermore, Bochkov et al. (2002) identified chemical
structures capable of inhibiting the effects of endotoxins such as LPS
that could be used for the development of new drugs for treatment of
sepsis.

Weber et al. (2003) found that LBP was present in the cerebrospinal
fluid of patients with pneumococcal meningitis. Injection of living
pneumococci or pneumococcal cell wall (PCW) into spinal canals of Lbp
+/- mice resulted in leukocyte influx and severe meningitis. In
contrast, injection into Lbp -/- mice produced no meningeal
inflammation. Lbp enhanced PCW-induced signaling and Tnf release in
rodent cell lines, and Lbp bound to PCW multimers independently of the
phosphorylcholine and teichoic acid components of PCW. Experiments using
human LBP suggested that the binding site for PCW may overlap with that
for LPS. Weber et al. (2003) concluded that LBP is also involved in
gram-positive infections.

MAPPING

In addition to the functional relationship and extensive structural
similarity between the LBP and BPI proteins, the LBP and BPI genes were
found by Southern blot analysis of human/mouse somatic cell hybrids and
by in situ hybridization to map to the same region of the genome:
20q11.23-q.12 (Gray et al., 1993).

ANIMAL MODEL

By using mice deficient in LBP through gene knockout experiments, Jack
et al. (1997) investigated how LBP functions in vivo. To their surprise,
they found that LBP is not required in vivo for the clearance of LPS
from the circulation, but is essential for the rapid induction of an
inflammatory response by small amounts of LPS or gram-negative bacteria
and for survival of an intraperitoneal Salmonella infection.

REFERENCE 1. Bochkov, V. N.; Kadl, A.; Huber, J.; Gruber, F.; Binder, B. R.;
Leitinger, N.: Protective role of phospholipid oxidation products
in endotoxin-induced tissue damage. Nature 419: 77-81, 2002.

2. Gray, P. W.; Corcorran, A. E.; Eddy, R. L., Jr.; Byers, M. G.;
Shows, T. B.: The genes for the lipopolysaccharide binding protein
(LBP) and the bactericidal permeability increasing protein (BPI) are
encoded in the same region of human chromosome 20. Genomics 15:
188-190, 1993.

3. Hubacek, J. A.; Buchler, C.; Aslanidis, C.; Schmitz, G.: The genomic
organization of the genes for human lipopolysaccharide binding protein
(LBP) and bactericidal permeability increasing protein (BPI) is highly
conserved. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 236: 427-430, 1997.

4. Jack, R. S.; Fan, X.; Bernheiden, M.; Rune, G.; Ehlers, M.; Webert,
A.; Kirsch, G.; Mentel, R.; Furll, B.; Freudenberg, M.; Schmitz, G.;
Stelter, F.; Schutt, C.: Lipopolysaccharide-binding protein is required
to combat a murine gram-negative bacterial infection. Nature 389:
742-744, 1997.

5. Schumann, R. R.; Leong, S. R.; Flaggs, G. W.; Gray, P. W.; Wright,
S. D.; Mathison, J. C.; Tobias, P. S.; Ulevitch, R. J.: Structure
and function of lipopolysaccharide binding protein. Science 249:
1429-1431, 1990.

6. Weber, J. R.; Freyer, D.; Alexander, C.; Schroder, N. W. J.; Reiss,
A.; Kuster, C.; Pfeil, D.; Tuomanen, E. I.; Schumann, R. R.: Recognition
of pneumococcal peptidoglycan: an expanded, pivotal role for LPS binding
protein. Immunity 19: 269-279, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/2/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/12/2002
Sheryl A. Jankowski - updated: 8/5/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/15/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/17/1993

EDITED mgross: 05/10/2006
terry: 5/2/2006
tkritzer: 3/24/2003
alopez: 9/12/2002
psherman: 8/5/1999
psherman: 11/19/1998
mark: 10/15/1997
terry: 10/14/1997
carol: 2/17/1993

300736	TITLE *300736 G ANTIGEN 2E; GAGE2E
DESCRIPTION See GAGE1 (300594) for more information about the GAGE gene cluster.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gjerstorff and Ditzel (2008) stated that the GAGE2E gene is contained
within a 9.5-kb GAGE repeat. The GAGE2E gene contains 5 exons spanning
about 6.3 kb and has a LINE insertion.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Gjerstorff and Ditzel (2008) mapped the
GAGE2E gene to a GAGE gene cluster on chromosome Xp11.23.

REFERENCE 1. Gjerstorff, M. F.; Ditzel, H. J.: An overview of the GAGE cancer/testis
antigen family with the inclusion of newly identified members. Tissue
Antigens 71: 187-192, 2008.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/6/2008

EDITED wwang: 08/18/2008
wwang: 8/6/2008

601743	TITLE *601743 ONCOSTATIN M RECEPTOR; OSMR
;;ONCOSTATIN M-SPECIFIC RECEPTOR, BETA; OSMRB
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Oncostatin M (OSM; 165095) is a member of the IL6 (147620) family of
cytokines. Functional receptors for IL6 family cytokines are
multisubunit complexes involving members of the hematopoietin receptor
superfamily. Many IL6 cytokines utilize gp130 (IL6ST; 600694) as a
common receptor subunit. OSM binds to the gp130 receptor subunit and, in
association with leukemia inhibitory factor receptor (LIFR; 151443),
induces a proliferative response in permissive cells. Mosley et al.
(1996) used degenerate PCR to clone a novel hematopoietin receptor which
they called the oncostatin M-specific receptor beta subunit (OSMR-beta).
Sequencing revealed that this gene encodes a 979-amino acid protein
containing characteristic motifs of the hematopoietin receptor family.

GENE FUNCTION

Mosley et al. (1996) found that IL3 (147740)-dependent murine pre-B
cells coexpressing gp130 and OSMR-beta showed a proliferative response
after OSM stimulation, but they showed no response to LIF.

Dillon et al. (2004) demonstrated that OSMR and IL31RA (609510) form the
heterodimeric receptor through which IL31 (609509) signals. Expression
of IL31RA and OSMR mRNA was induced in activated monocytes, and both
mRNAs were constitutively expressed in epithelial cells Expression of
IL31RA was upregulated in monocytes after stimulation with IFNG
(147570), and OSMR expression was upregulated with lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) treatment. Treatment with LPS plus IFNG upregulated both
receptors.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By candidate gene analysis in a 5p13.1-q11.2 region of linkage
identified in families with primary localized cutaneous amyloidosis
(PLCA1; 105250), Arita et al. (2008) identified missense mutations in
the OSMR gene in 3 families (601743.0001-601743.0002). OSMR-beta is a
component of the oncostatin-M (OSM; 165095) type II receptor and the
interleukin-31 receptor (IL31RA; 609510). Arita et al. (2008) found that
PLCA keratinocytes showed reduced activation of Jak/Stat, MAPK, and
p13K/Akt pathways after OSM or IL31 cytokine stimulation. The 2
pathogenic amino acid substitutions found by Arita et al. (2008) were
located within the extracellular fibronectin type III-like (FnIII)
domains, regions critical for receptor dimerization and function.
Oncostatin M (OSM; 165095) and IL31 (609509) have been implicated in
keratinocyte cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, and
inflammation. Arita et al. (2008) pointed to this as the first
demonstration of human germline mutations in this cytokine receptor
complex and suggested that it provides new insight into mechanisms of
skin itching.

By whole-exome sequencing of the OSMR gene in Taiwanese patients with
PLCA mapping to chromosome 5, Lin et al. (2010) identified 3 novel
heterozygous mutations (601743.0003-601743.0005). In 1 Taiwanese family
they identified a heterozygous mutation in the IL31RA gene
(609510.0001), which occurred in a fnIII domain as observed in the OSMR
mutations.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
AMYLOIDOSIS, PRIMARY LOCALIZED CUTANEOUS, 1
OSMR, ILE691THR

In an extensively affected Brazilian pedigree with primary localized
cutaneous amyloidosis (105250), Arita et al. (2008) identified a
heterozygous 2072T-C transition in the OSMR gene resulting in an
ile691-to-thr substitution (I691T) in all affected but no unaffected
members.

.0002
AMYLOIDOSIS, PRIMARY LOCALIZED CUTANEOUS, 1
OSMR, GLY618ALA

In affected members of 2 white families with primary localized cutaneous
amyloidosis (105250), Arita et al. (2008) found an 1853G-C transversion
in the OSMR gene that resulted in a gly618-to-ala substitution (G618A).
Microsatellite analysis around the OSMR gene indicated that the 2
families probably shared a common British ancestry.

.0003
AMYLOIDOSIS, PRIMARY LOCALIZED CUTANEOUS, 1
OSMR, ASP647VAL

In affected members of a Taiwanese family segregating primary localized
cutaneous amyloidosis (105250), Lin et al. (2010) identified a
heterozygous 1940A-T transversion in the OSMR gene, resulting in an
asp647-to-val (D647V) substitution in the fnIII domain. The mutation was
not found in 142 control subjects from Taiwan or in over 250 control
chromosomes from other populations.

.0004
AMYLOIDOSIS, PRIMARY LOCALIZED CUTANEOUS, 1
OSMR, PRO694LEU

In affected members of 6 Taiwanese families segregating primary
localized cutaneous amyloidosis (105250), Lin et al. (2010) identified a
heterozygous 2081C-T transition in the OSMR gene, resulting in a
pro694-to-leu (P694L) substitution in the fnIII domain. The mutation was
also detected in 2 Taiwanese sporadic cases. Five of the 6 families and
the 2 sporadic cases carried the same associated haplotype. The mutation
was not found in 142 control subjects from Taiwan or in over 250 control
chromosomes from other populations.

.0005
AMYLOIDOSIS, PRIMARY LOCALIZED CUTANEOUS, 1
OSMR, LYS697THR

In affected members of 3 Taiwanese families segregating primary
localized cutaneous amyloidosis (105250), Lin et al. (2010) identified a
heterozygous 2090A-C transversion in the OSMR gene, resulting in a
lys697-to-thr substitution in the fnIII domain. The mutation was not
found in 142 control subjects from Taiwan or in over 250 control
chromosomes from other populations.

REFERENCE 1. Arita, K.; South, A. P.; Hans-Filho, G.; Sakuma, T. H.; Lai-Cheong,
J.; Clements, S.; Odashiro, M.; Odashiro, D. N.; Hans-Neto, G.; Hans,
N. R.; Holder, M. V.; Bhogal, B. S.; Hartshorne, S. T.; Akiyama, M.;
Shimizu, H.; McGrath, J. A.: Oncostatin M receptor-beta mutations
underlie familial primary localized cutaneous amyloidosis. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 82: 73-80, 2008.

2. Dillon, S. R.; Sprecher, C.; Hammond, A.; Bilsborough, J.; Rosenfeld-Franklin,
M.; Presnell, S. R.; Haugen, H. S.; Maurer, M.; Harder, B.; Johnston,
J.; Bort, S.; Mudri, S.; and 18 others: Interleukin 31, a cytokine
produced by activated T cells, induces dermatitis in mice. Nature
Immun. 5: 752-760, 2004. Note: Erratum: Nature Immun. 6: 114 only,
2005.

3. Lin, M.-W.; Lee, D.-D.; Liu, T.-T.; Lin, Y.-F.; Chen, S.-Y.; Huang,
C.-C.; Weng, H.-Y.; Liu, Y.-F.; Tanaka, A.; Arita, K.; Lai-Cheong,
J.; Palisson, F.; Chang, Y.-T.; Wong, C.-K.; Matsuura, I.; McGrath,
J. A.; Tsai, S.-F.: Novel IL31RA gene mutation and ancestral OSMR
mutant allele in familial primary cutaneous amyloidosis. Europ. J.
Hum. Genet. 18: 26-32, 2010.

4. Mosley, B.; De Imus, C.; Friend, D.; Boiani, N.; Thoma, B.; Park,
L. S.; Cosman, D.: Dual oncostatin M (OSM) receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 271:
32635-32643, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 5/5/2011
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/19/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/1/2005

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 4/9/1997

EDITED terry: 05/05/2011
carol: 5/5/2011
alopez: 2/25/2008
terry: 2/19/2008
mgross: 8/1/2005
carol: 2/17/1999
alopez: 11/5/1997
alopez: 5/5/1997
alopez: 4/14/1997
alopez: 4/10/1997

611859	TITLE *611859 MITOCHONDRIAL RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L55; MRPL55
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mitochondria have their own translation system for production of 13
inner membrane proteins essential for oxidative phosphorylation. MRPL55
is a component of the large subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome that
is encoded by the nuclear genome (Koc et al., 2001).

CLONING

By searching databases using bovine Mrpl55 as query, Koc et al. (2001)
identified human MRPL55. They also identified MRPL55 homologs in mouse,
Drosophila, and C. elegans, but not in yeast, E. coli, or Arabidopsis.
Mouse and human MRPL55 share 71.7% amino acid identity.

MAPPING

Hartz (2008) mapped the MRPL55 gene to chromosome 1q42.13 based on an
alignment of the MRPL55 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AY358771) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/5/2008.

2. Koc, E. C.; Burkhart, W.; Blackburn, K.; Moyer, M. B.; Schlatzer,
D. M.; Moseley, A.; Spremulli, L. L.: The large subunit of the mammalian
mitochondrial ribosome: analysis of the complement of ribosomal proteins
present. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 43958-43969, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/26/2008

EDITED mgross: 03/05/2008

605255	TITLE *605255 ETS VARIANT GENE 7; ETV7
;;ETS TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR TEL2; TEL2;;
TELB
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ETS (E26 transformation-specific) family of transcription factors,
of which ETV7 is a member, is a large group of evolutionarily conserved
transcriptional regulators that play an important role in a variety of
cellular processes throughout development and differentiation, and are
involved in oncogenesis as well (Potter et al., 2000).

CLONING

Potter et al. (2000) sequenced cDNA clones corresponding to a novel ETS
gene from an activated T-cell cDNA library, as well as from breast
tissue and meningioma cDNA libraries. The cDNA, which the authors
designated TEL2, encodes a deduced 341-amino acid protein that shares
38% sequence identity with TEL1 (ETV6; 600618). TEL2 contains a
C-terminal ETS domain and an N-terminal PNT domain, which is thought to
mediate protein-protein interactions. Northern blot analysis revealed
expression of TEL2 mRNA predominantly in hematopoietic tissues; a
predominant band of approximately 1.2 kb was present in fetal liver and
bone marrow and was faintly present in peripheral blood leukocytes.
Using antibodies raised against the C terminus of the TEL2 protein,
Potter et al. (2000) showed that TEL2 localizes to the nucleus. The
striking similarities of TEL2 to TEL1, its expression in hematopoietic
tissues, and its ability to associate with TEL1 suggested that TEL2 may
be an important hematopoietic regulatory protein.

Poirel et al. (2000) identified the TELB gene by comparison of the TEL
sequence with genomic sequence databases. Northern blot analysis
detected ubiquitous expression of TELB.

GENE STRUCTURE

Potter et al. (2000) determined that the TEL2 gene contains 8 exons
spanning approximately 21 kb.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization and by inclusion within a PAC
clone, Potter et al. (2000) mapped the TEL2 gene to chromosome 6p21.

Poirel et al. (2000) mapped the TELB gene to 6p21 by genomic sequence
analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Poirel, H.; Lopez, R. G.; Lacronique, V.; Valle, V. D.; Mauchauffe,
M.; Berger, R.; Ghysdael, J.; Bernard, O. A.: Characterization of
a novel ETS gene, TELB, encoding a protein structurally and functionally
related to TEL. Oncogene 19: 4802-4806, 2000.

2. Potter, M. D.; Buijs, A.; Kreider, B.; van Rompaey, L.; Grosveld,
G. C.: Identification and characterization of a new human ETS-family
transcription factor, TEL2, that is expressed in hematopoietic tissues
and can associate with TEL1/ETV6. Blood 95: 3341-3348, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/9/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/11/2000

EDITED mgross: 01/12/2012
terry: 1/11/2012
alopez: 7/17/2009
mcapotos: 1/22/2001
mcapotos: 1/16/2001
terry: 1/9/2001
carol: 9/11/2000

604708	TITLE *604708 NUCLEAR FACTOR OF ACTIVATED T CELLS 5; NFAT5
;;TONICITY-RESPONSIVE ENHANCER-BINDING PROTEIN; TONEBP;;
NFAT-LIKE PROTEIN 1; NFATL1;;
KIAA0827
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Tonicity-responsive enhancers (TonEs) in kidney medulla cells play a key
role in hypertonicity-induced transcriptional stimulation of
sodium/myoinositol cotransporter (SLC5A3; 600444),
sodium/chloride/betaine cotransporter (SLC6A12; 603080), and aldose
reductase (AKR1B1; 103880). Using a yeast 1-hybrid strategy followed by
screening of a HeLa cDNA library, Miyakawa et al. (1999) obtained a cDNA
encoding NFAT5, which they called TONEBP (TonE-binding protein). By
searching an EST database for sequences related to NFATC family members
(e.g., NFATC1; 600489), Lopez-Rodriguez et al. (1999) also isolated a
cDNA encoding NFAT5. The 1,455-amino acid NFAT5 protein contains a
region near the N terminus that has high homology to the Rel-like
DNA-binding domain of the NFATC family. However, NFAT5 lacks the
N-terminal sequence that functions as an interface for calcineurin (see
114105) and regulatory kinases. Northern blot analysis detected an
approximately 13-kb NFAT5 transcript that was ubiquitously expressed. By
electrophoretic mobility shift analyses, Miyakawa et al. (1999) showed
that the NFAT5 Rel region binds to TonE DNA, and Lopez-Rodriguez et al.
(1999) showed that it binds to sequences similar to those preferred by
NFATC1, but not to FOS (164810) or JUN (165160). Western blot analysis
detected expression of a 200-kD NFAT5 protein in a kidney cell line
(Lopez-Rodriguez et al., 1999). By immunostaining, Miyakawa et al.
(1999) showed that NFAT5 is present in both cytoplasm and nucleus of
isotonic kidney cells, but is found predominantly in the nucleus of
cells cultured in hypertonic medium; Lopez-Rodriguez et al. (1999)
detected staining only in the nucleus of resting and stimulated T
lymphocytes, HeLa cells, and myoblast cells.

By Western blot analysis of mouse tissue, Trama et al. (2000) detected
abundant expression of NFAT5, which they termed NFATL1, in thymus, with
much lower amounts in testis, lung, and brain, and no expression in
other tissues, including lymph nodes. Stimulated mouse splenocytes
expressed NFAT5, whereas quiescent mouse splenocytes and T cells exposed
to cyclosporin A or FK506 did not. Reporter gene analysis showed that
T-cell receptor cross-linking resulted in the induction of NFAT5 in
human Jurkat cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Jauliac et al. (2002) found that both NFATC2 (600490) and NFAT5 were
expressed in invasive human ductal breast carcinomas. Using cell lines
derived from breast and colon carcinomas, they found that these NFATs
promoted carcinoma invasion and that their activity correlated with
expression of alpha-6 (147556)/beta-4 (147557) integrin. The
transcriptional activity of NFAT5 was induced by alpha-6/beta-4
clustering in the presence of chemoattractants, resulting in enhanced
cell migration. Jauliac et al. (2002) determined that the activity of
NFAT5 required an intact beta-4 cytoplasmic tail.

In studies in rats, Machnik et al. (2009) demonstrated that TONEBP-VEGFC
(601528) signaling in mononuclear phagocytes is a major determinant of
extracellular volume and blood pressure homeostasis, and is intimately
involved in salt-induced hypertension (see 145500).

Kleinewietfeld et al. (2013) demonstrated that increased salt
concentrations found locally under physiologic conditions in vivo
markedly boost the induction of murine and human T(H)17 cells. High-salt
conditions activated the p38/MAPK (600289) pathway involving NFAT5 and
serum/glucocorticoid-regulated kinase-1 (SGK1; 602958) during
cytokine-induced T(H)17 polarization. Gene silencing or chemical
inhibition of p38/MAPK, NFAT5, or SGK1 abrogated the high-salt-induced
T(H)17 cell development. The T(H)17 cells generated under high-salt
conditions displayed a highly pathogenic and stable phenotype
characterized by the upregulation of the proinflammatory cytokines GMCSF
(138960), TNF-alpha (191160), and IL2 (147680). Moreover, mice fed with
a high-salt diet developed a more severe form of autoimmune
encephalomyelitis (EAE), in line with augmented central nervous system
infiltrating and peripherally induced antigen-specific T(H)17 cells.
Thus, Kleinewietfeld et al. (2013) suggested that increased dietary salt
intake might represent an environmental risk factor for the development
of autoimmune diseases through the induction of pathogenic T(H)17 cells.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the NFAT5
gene, which they called KIAA0827, to chromosome 16. Hebinck et al.
(2000) mapped the NFAT5 gene to chromosome 16q22.1 by FISH and radiation
hybrid analysis. Using the latter method, they mapped the mouse homolog
to chromosome 8D.

ANIMAL MODEL

Lopez-Rodriguez et al. (2004) found that homozygous Nfat5-deficient mice
were genetically underrepresented after embryonic day 14.5. Surviving
mice manifested a progressive and profound atrophy of the kidney medulla
with impaired activation of several osmoprotective genes, including
Akr1b1, Slc6a12, and Slc5a3. The Akr1b1 gene is controlled by a
tonicity-responsive enhancer, which was refractory to hypertonic stress
in fibroblasts lacking Nfat5, establishing this enhancer as a direct
transcriptional target of NFAT5. Lopez-Rodriguez et al. (2004) concluded
that NFAT5 is a tonicity-responsive transcription factor with a central
role in kidney homeostasis and function.

REFERENCE 1. Hebinck, A.; Dalski, A.; Engel, H.; Mattei, M.-G.; Hawken, R.;
Schwinger, E.; Zuhlke, C.: Assignment of transcription factor NFAT5
to human chromosome 16q22.1, murine chromosome 8D and porcine chromosome
6p1.4 and comparison of the polyglutamine domains. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 90: 68-70, 2000.

2. Jauliac, S.; Lopez-Rodriguez, C.; Shaw, L. M.; Brown, L. F.; Rao,
A.; Toker, A.: The role of NFAT transcription factors in integrin-mediated
carcinoma invasion. Nature Cell Biol. 4: 540-544, 2002.

3. Kleinewietfeld, M.; Manzel, A.; Titze, J.; Kvakan, H.; Yosef, N.;
Linker, R. A.; Muller, D. N.; Hafler, D. A.: Sodium chloride drives
autoimmune disease by the induction of pathogenic T(H)17 cells. Nature 496:
518-522, 2013.

4. Lopez-Rodriguez, C.; Antos, C. L.; Shelton, J. M.; Richardson,
J. A.; Lin, F.; Novobrantseva, T. I.; Bronson, R. T.; Igarashi, P.;
Rao, A.; Olson, E. N.: Loss of NFAT5 results in renal atrophy and
lack of tonicity-responsive gene expression. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101:
2392-2397, 2004.

5. Lopez-Rodriguez, C.; Aramburu, J.; Rakeman, A. S.; Rao, A.: NFAT5,
a constitutively nuclear NFAT protein that does not cooperate with
Fos and Jun. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 7214-7219, 1999.

6. Machnik, A.; Neuhofer, W.; Jantsch, J.; Dahlmann, A.; Tammela,
T.; Machura, K.; Park, J.-K.; Beck, F.-X.; Muller, D. N.; Derer, W.;
Goss, J.; Ziomber, A.; and 10 others: Macrophages regulate salt-dependent
volume and blood pressure by a vascular endothelial growth factor-C-dependent
buffering mechanism. Nature Med. 15: 545-552, 2009.

7. Miyakawa, H.; Woo, S. K.; Dahl, S. C.; Handler, J. S.; Kwon, H.
M.: Tonicity-responsive enhancer binding protein, a Rel-like protein
that stimulates transcription in response to hypertonicity. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 2538-2542, 1999.

8. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 355-364, 1998.

9. Trama, J.; Lu, Q.; Hawley, R. G.; Ho, S. N.: The NFAT-related
protein NFATL1 (TonEBP/NFAT5) is induced upon T cell activation in
a calcineurin-dependent manner. J. Immun. 165: 4884-4894, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 05/07/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/6/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/16/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/25/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/1/2001

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 3/21/2000

EDITED alopez: 05/07/2013
carol: 7/7/2009
terry: 7/6/2009
mgross: 3/23/2004
terry: 3/16/2004
mgross: 10/22/2003
mgross: 10/25/2002
carol: 2/12/2001
mgross: 2/7/2001
mcapotos: 2/1/2001
mgross: 3/22/2000
mgross: 3/21/2000

609837	TITLE *609837 SMALL NUCLEOLAR RNA, C/D BOX, 115-1; SNORD115-1
;;RNA, HBII-52 SMALL NUCLEOLAR;;
snoRNA, HBII-52;;
MBII-52, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for small non-mRNAs specifically expressed in mouse brain,
followed by searching human sequence databases, Cavaille et al. (2000)
identified SNORD115, which they called HBII-52. HBII-52 is a C/D box
small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) with a 5-prime C box, followed by a D-prime
box, a C-prime box, an antisense box, and a 3-prime D box. Northern blot
analysis detected expression of HBII-52 in human brain, but not in
liver, muscle, lung, kidney, and heart. Cavaille et al. (2000)
determined that HBII-52 maps to an imprinted region of chromosome 15
associated with Angelman syndrome (AS; 105830) and Prader-Willi syndrome
(PWS; 176270). They concluded that HBII-52 is a paternally imprinted
gene, since it was expressed in cortex RNA from a normal control brain
and from an AS patient with a maternally inherited deletion, but was
absent from cortex RNA from a PWS patient with a paternally inherited
deletion and from a mouse model of PWS.

GENE FUNCTION

Cavaille et al. (2000) identified an 18-nucleotide phylogenetically
conserved region in HBII-52 complementary to a critical segment of the
serotonin-2C receptor mRNA (HTR2C; 312861), suggesting that HBII-52 may
have a role in processing HTR2C mRNA.

The snoRNA HBII-52 is contained within the Prader-Willi deleted region
on chromosome 15q11 and exhibits sequence complementarity to the
alternatively spliced exon Vb of the serotonin receptor HTR2C. Kishore
and Stamm (2006) found that HBII-52 regulates alternative splicing of
HTR2C by binding to a silencing element in exon Vb. Prader-Willi
syndrome patients do not express HBII-52. They have different HTR2C mRNA
isoforms than healthy individuals. Kishore and Stamm (2006) concluded
that a snoRNA regulates the processing of an mRNA expressed from a gene
located on a different chromosome, and the results indicate that a
defect in pre-mRNA processing contributes to the Prader-Willi syndrome.

Using bioinformatic predictions and experimental verification, Kishore
et al. (2010) identified 5 pre-mRNAs (DPM2, 603564; TAF1, 313650;
RALGPS1, 614444; PBRM1, 606083; and CRHR1, 122561) containing
alternative exons that are regulated by MBII-52, the mouse homolog of
HBII-52. Analysis of a single member of the MBII-52 cluster of snoRNAs
by RNase protection and Northern blot analysis showed that the MBII-52
expressing unit generated shorter RNAs that originate from the
full-length MBII-52 snoRNA through additional processing steps. These
novel RNAs associated with hnRNPs and not with proteins associated with
canonical C/D box snoRNAs. Kishore et al. (2010) concluded that not a
traditional C/D box snoRNA MBII-52, but a processed version lacking the
snoRNA stem, is the predominant MBII-52 RNA missing in Prader-Willi
syndrome. This processed snoRNA functions in alternative splice site
selection.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Cavaille et al. (2000) identified 47
tandem copies of the SNORD115 gene on chromosome 15q11-q13. The SNORD115
copies are slightly divergent units of about 1.9 kb regularly spaced
within a stretch of 99 kb.

Runte et al. (2001) determined that HBII-52 and several other snoRNAs
are encoded within intronic segments of the SNURF-SNRPN (182279)
transcript. HBII-52 is located within introns between exons 63 and 144
of SNURF-SNRPN.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Runte et al. (2005) found that individuals with complete deletion of all
copies of HBII-52 had no obvious clinical phenotype, suggesting that
HBII-52 does not play a major role in PWS.

Sato et al. (2007) reported a Japanese family in which a boy with AS and
his asymptomatic mother and maternal grandfather all had a 1,487-kb
deletion on chromosome 15, encompassing HBII-52. The mother was
evaluated with regard to diagnostic criteria for PWS but the diagnosis
was considered unlikely, suggesting that HBII-52 may not be important in
the pathogenesis of PWS.

ANIMAL MODEL

In a mouse model for PWS lacking expression of Mbii-52, Doe et al.
(2009) showed an increase in editing, but not alternative splicing, of
the Htr2c pre-RNA. This change in posttranscriptional modification was
associated with alterations in a number of brain serotonin-related
behaviors, including impulsive responding, locomotor activity and
reactivity to palatable foodstuffs. For marble burying, a behavior not
related to brain serotonin, loss of Mbii-52 was without effect. The
specificity of the behavioral effects to changes in Htr2c function was
further confirmed using drug challenges. These data illustrated the
physiologic consequences of altered RNA editing of Htr2c linked to
Mbii-52 loss that may underlie specific aspects of the complex PWS
phenotype and point to an important functional role for this imprinted
snoRNA.

REFERENCE 1. Cavaille, J.; Buiting, K.; Kiefmann, M.; Lalande, M.; Brannan,
C. I.; Horsthemke, B.; Bachellerie, J.-P.; Brosius, J.; Huttenhofer,
A.: Identification of brain-specific and imprinted small nucleolar
RNA genes exhibiting an unusual genomic organization. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 97: 14311-14316, 2000.

2. Doe, C. M.; Relkovic, D.; Garfield, A. S.; Dalley, J. W.; Theobald,
D. E. H.; Humby, T.; Wilkinson, L. S.; Isles, A. R.: Loss of imprinted
snoRNA mbii-52 leads to increased 5htr2c pre-RNA editing and altered
5HT(2C)R-mediated behaviour. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 2140-2148, 2009.

3. Kishore, S.; Khanna, A.; Zhang, Z.; Hui, J.; Balwierz, P. J.; Stefan,
M.; Beach, C.; Nicholls, R. D.; Zavolan, M.; Stamm, S.: The snoRNA
MBII-52 (SNORD 115) is processed into smaller RNAs and regulates alternative
splicing. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 1153-1164, 2010.

4. Kishore, S.; Stamm, S.: The snoRNA HBII-52 regulates alternative
splicing of the serotonin receptor 2C. Science 311: 230-232, 2006.

5. Runte, M.; Huttenhofer, A.; Gross, S.; Kiefmann, M.; Horsthemke,
B.; Buiting, K.: The IC-SNURF-SNRPN transcript serves as a host for
multiple small nucleolar RNA species and as an antisense RNA for UBE3A. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 10: 2687-2700, 2001.

6. Runte, M.; Varon, R.; Horn, D.; Horsthemke, B.; Buiting, K.: Exclusion
of the C/D box snoRNA gene cluster HBII-52 from a major role in Prader-Willi
syndrome. Hum. Genet. 116: 228-230, 2005.

7. Sato, K.; Iwakoshi, M.; Shimokawa, O.; Sakai, H.; Ohta, T.; Saitoh,
S.; Miyake, N.; Niikawa, N.; Harada, N.; Saitsu, H.; Mizuguchi, T.;
Matsumoto, N.: Angelman syndrome caused by an identical familial
1,487-kb deletion. (Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 143A: 98-101, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 11/14/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/2/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/26/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/18/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/19/2006

EDITED mgross: 01/25/2012
carol: 11/15/2011
terry: 11/14/2011
wwang: 3/11/2010
terry: 3/2/2010
wwang: 6/26/2007
alopez: 4/21/2006
terry: 4/18/2006
mgross: 1/19/2006

