606537	TITLE *606537 MYOSIN IB; MYO1B
DESCRIPTION Myosins are molecular motors that, upon interaction with actin
filaments, utilize energy from ATP hydrolysis to generate mechanical
force. For further background information on myosins, see MYO1A
(601478).

CLONING

By RT-PCR analysis of an intestinal epithelial cell line and a liver
cDNA library, Bement et al. (1994) obtained multiple cDNAs encoding
unconventional myosins, among them a liver cDNA encoding MYO1B. RNase
protection analysis detected expression of MYO1B in the intestinal
epithelial cell line.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the MYO1B
gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP stSG32097).

REFERENCE 1. Bement, W. M.; Hasson, T.; Wirth, J. A.; Cheney, R. E.; Mooseker,
M. S.: Identification and overlapping expression of multiple unconventional
myosin genes in vertebrate cell types. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91:
6549-6553, 1994. Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 11767 only,
1994.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/7/2001

EDITED carol: 10/01/2002
mgross: 12/7/2001

601118	TITLE *601118 CALCIUM-MODULATING CYCLOPHILIN LIGAND; CAMLG
;;CAML
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Calcium-modulating cyclophilin ligand (CAML) was identified by Bram and
Crabtree (1994) in a 2-hybrid screen of a fetal brain cDNA library for
signaling molecules that interacted with cyclophilin B (123841). The
deduced 296-amino acid protein has a large N-terminal cytoplasmic domain
with a central alpha helix and 3 C-terminal transmembrane regions. In
vitro translation resulted in a protein with an apparent molecular mass
of 33 kD, consistent with its predicted molecular mass. Northern blot
analysis detected a 1.35-kb transcript in all tissues examined, with
highest expression in testis and brain. Immunolocalization of
epitope-tagged CAML in transfected COS cells showed CAML at
vesicular-like structures scattered throughout the cytoplasm.

GENE FUNCTION

Bram and Crabtree (1994) found that CAML appeared to be involved in
regulation of calcium signaling to T lymphocytes and other cells.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay, Guo et al. (2005) demonstrated that mouse
Caml interacted with Atrap (AGTRAP; 608729). The N-terminal hydrophilic
domain of Caml mediated the interaction, and the proteins colocalized in
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Atrap knockdown increased NFAT (see
NFATC2; 600490) activity, and overexpression of Atrap decreased
angiotensin II (see 106150)- or Caml-induced NFAT transcriptional
activation. Overexpression of the N-terminal ATRAP-interacting domain of
Caml increased angiotensin II-induced NFAT promoter activity, whereas
overexpression of the C-terminal end of Caml disrupted the effect of
angiotensin II on NFAT signaling.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis with HIV-1 Vpu protein as bait, followed
by coimmunoprecipitation assays and immunofluorescence microscopy,
Varthakavi et al. (2008) identified strong interaction with the N
terminus of CAML. Expression of human CAML in green monkey cells, in
which endogenous Caml has weak binding activity, showed that CAML
restricted HIV-1 release. Expression of Vpu or HIV-2 Env overcame
CAML-mediated inhibition of viral release. Inhibition of CAML expression
with siRNA rescued release of HIV-1 Vpu-negative virus and nonhuman
retroviruses. Varthakavi et al. (2008) concluded that CAML is a
Vpu-sensitive host restriction factor that inhibits HIV release from
human cells.

Using several cell systems, Kuhl et al. (2010) found that tetherin
(BST2; 600534), and not CAML, restricted Vpu-mediated retroviral release
in HIV-1 nonpermissive cells, in contrast with the findings of
Varthakavi et al. (2008). In a retraction, 4 of the authors of
Varthakavi et al. (2008) stated that, although they are confident that
CAML interacts with HIV-1 Vpu, direct head-to-head comparisons showed
that knockdown of tetherin, but not CAML, permitted HIV-1 particle
release. They also noted that several other labs were unable to
reproduce the restrictive effects of CAML in human cells, and that the
report of Kuhl et al. (2010) added to this consensus. Thus, these 4
authors concluded that the report of Varthakavi et al. (2008) should be
retracted. However, Varthakavi and 3 other authors of Varthakavi et al.
(2008) declined to retract the paper, maintaining that the original
observations are correct and reproducible. These 4 authors, in a reply
to Kuhl et al. (2010) (Varthakavi et al., 2010), suggested that
variation across individual cell clones and other experimental variables
may account for the discrepant findings, and they hypothesized that
tetherin and CAML inhibit HIV-1 particle release at different steps.
Varthakavi et al. (2010) reported that studies using live imaging and
electron microscopy supported this hypothesis.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Bram et al. (1996) localized the
human CAMLG gene to chromosome 5q23, a region known to be syntenic to
mouse chromosome 13, which contains Camlg.

ANIMAL MODEL

Tran et al. (2003) found that disruption of the Caml gene in mice caused
early embryonic lethality. Homozygous mutant blastocysts developed into
embryonic stem cells that differentiated into an epithelioid phenotype
with retinoic acid. The resulting epithelial cells expressed a
functional EGF receptor (EGFR; 131550). However, in the absence of Caml,
EGF (131530) stimulation resulted in impaired Egfr recycling and
cytoplasmic accumulation of Egfr. Immunoprecipitation analysis indicated
a direct interaction between wildtype Caml and Egfr that was dependent
on ligand binding. Mutation analysis indicated that Caml bound the
kinase domain of Egfr, and the proteins colocalized in the ER.

To avoid embryonic lethality, Tran et al. (2005) generated mice lacking
Caml specifically in thymocytes. These mice had reduced numbers of
double-positive and single-positive thymocytes, impaired positive
selection, enhanced negative selection, and nearly complete loss of
peripheral T cells. Caml-deficient thymocytes underwent increased cell
death upon T-cell receptor ligation. Caml interacted with Lck (153390)
and negatively regulated its activation. Immunoblot analysis and
immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated disrupted localization of Lck
in resting and activated Caml-deficient cells. Tran et al. (2005)
concluded that CAML is an essential mediator of T-cell survival during
thymopoiesis and is important for the regulation of LCK signaling.

REFERENCE 1. Bram, R. J.; Crabtree, G. R.: Calcium signalling in T cells stimulated
by a cyclophilin B-binding protein. Nature 371: 355-358, 1994.

2. Bram, R. J.; Valentine, V.; Shapiro, D. N.; Jenkins, N. A.; Gilbert,
D. J.; Copeland, N. G.: The gene for calcium-modulating cyclophilin
ligand (CAMLG) is located on human chromosome 5q23 and a syntenic
region of mouse chromosome 13. Genomics 31: 257-260, 1996.

3. Guo, S.; Lopez-Ilasaca, M.; Dzau, V. J.: Identification of calcium-modulating
cyclophilin ligand (CAML) as transducer of angiotensin II-mediated
nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) activation. J. Biol. Chem. 280:
12536-12541, 2005.

4. Kuhl, A.; Munch, J.; Sauter, D.; Bertram, S.; Glowacka, I.; Steffen,
I.; Sprecht, A.; Hofmann, H.; Schneider, H.; Behrens, G.; Pohlmann,
S.: Calcium-modulating cyclophilin ligand does not restrict retrovirus
release. (Letter) Nature Med. 16: 155-157, 2010.

5. Tran, D. D.; Edgar, C. E.; Heckman, K. L.; Sutor, S. L.; Huntoon,
C. J.; van Deursen, J.; McKean, D. L.; Bram, R. J.: CAML is a p56(Lck)-interacting
protein that is required for thymocyte development. Immunity 23:
139-152, 2005.

6. Tran, D. D.; Russell, H. R.; Sutor, S. L.; van Deursen, J.; Bram,
R. J.: CAML is required for efficient EGF receptor recycling. Dev.
Cell 5: 245-256, 2003.

7. Varthakavi, V.; Heimann-Nichols, E.; Smith, R. M.; Rose, J.: Reply
to Kuhl et al. (Letter) Nature Med. 16: 157 only, 2010.

8. Varthakavi, V.; Heimann-Nichols, E.; Smith, R. M.; Sun, Y.; Bram,
R. J.; Ali, S.; Rose, J.; Ding, L.; Spearman, P.: Identification
of calcium-modulating cyclophilin ligand as a human host restriction
to HIV-1 release overcome by Vpu. Nature Med. 14: 641-647, 2008.
Note: Retraction: Nature Med. 16: 238 only, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/10/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/26/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/31/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/16/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/11/1996

EDITED mgross: 03/10/2010
terry: 3/10/2010
wwang: 10/14/2008
alopez: 6/27/2008
terry: 6/26/2008
alopez: 4/23/2007
mgross: 10/31/2006
mgross: 9/16/2005
alopez: 5/3/2000
mark: 3/18/1996

603895	TITLE *603895 REGULATOR OF G PROTEIN SIGNALING 11; RGS11
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the RGS (regulator of G protein signaling) family act as
GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) on the alpha subunits of
heterotrimeric, signal-transducing G proteins. As such, RGS proteins can
serve as negative regulators of G protein-mediated signaling pathways by
speeding the inactivation of GTP-bound G-alpha subunits.

CLONING

Snow et al. (1998) identified sequences encoding human RGS11 by database
searches. The predicted 467-amino acid human protein contains a DEP
(Dishevelled, EGL-10, pleckstrin) domain and an RGS domain. In addition,
sequence analysis revealed that RGS11, RGS6 (603894), RGS7 (602517),
RGS9, and C. elegans EGL-10 all contain a conserved 64-amino acid region
that the authors called a GGL (G protein gamma subunit-like) domain
because of its similarity to G protein gamma subunits (see 600874). In
vitro, the GGL domains of RGS11 and RGS7 interact preferentially with
the G protein beta-5 subunit. Coexpression of RGS11 with different
G-beta subunits indicated that RGS11 interacted specifically with
G-beta-5 in mammalian cells. The G-beta-5/RGS11 heterodimer acted as a
GAP on G-0-alpha (139311) in vitro. Northern blot analysis revealed that
RGS11 and G-beta-5 are expressed in overlapping patterns, with the
highest levels of RGS11 mRNA observed in brain and retina.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sierra et al. (2002) determined that the RGS11 gene contains 16 exons
and spans 8.1 kb.

MAPPING

By inclusion within mapped clones, Snow et al. (1998) mapped the RGS11
gene to 16p13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Sierra, D. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Householder, D.; Grishin, N. V.;
Yu, K.; Ukidwe, P.; Barker, S. A.; He, W.; Wensel, T. G.; Otero, G.;
Brown, G.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Wilkie, T. M.: Evolution
of the regulators of G-protein signaling multigene family in mouse
and human. Genomics 79: 177-185, 2002.

2. Snow, B. E.; Krumins, A. M.; Brothers, G. M.; Lee, S.-F.; Wall,
M. A.; Chung, S.; Mangion, J.; Arya, S.; Gilman, A. G.; Siderovski,
D. P.: A G protein gamma subunit-like domain shared between RGS11
and other RGS proteins specifies binding to G beta 5 subunits. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 13307-13312, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 09/12/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/11/1999

EDITED mgross: 09/12/2002
jlewis: 6/14/1999
jlewis: 6/11/1999

604833	TITLE *604833 CHEMOKINE, CC MOTIF, LIGAND 27; CCL27
;;SMALL INDUCIBLE CYTOKINE SUBFAMILY A, MEMBER 27; SCYA27;;
IL11RA-LOCUS CHEMOKINE; ILC;;
CUTANEOUS T CELL-ATTRACTING CHEMOKINE; CTACK;;
ESKINE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Chemokines are a group of small (approximately 8 to 14 kD), mostly
basic, structurally related molecules that regulate cell trafficking of
various types of leukocytes through interactions with a subset of
7-transmembrane, G protein-coupled receptors. Chemokines also play
fundamental roles in the development, homeostasis, and function of the
immune system, and they have effects on cells of the central nervous
system as well as on endothelial cells involved in angiogenesis or
angiostasis. Chemokines are divided into 2 major subfamilies, CXC and
CC, based on the arrangement of the first 2 of the 4 conserved cysteine
residues; the 2 cysteines are separated by a single amino acid in CXC
chemokines and are adjacent in CC chemokines. The skin-associated
chemokine CCL27 has a role in T cell-mediated skin inflammation (Homey
et al., 2002).

CLONING

Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) is a poxvirus that infects young
children and sexually active adults, causing long-lasting benign
proliferative lesions of the skin with little or no inflammatory
response. Sequence analysis of the MCV-1 genome revealed a CC-like open
reading frame (Senkevich et al., 1996). By searching a public EST
database using the MCV-1 sequence as the probe, Ishikawa-Mochizuki et
al. (1999) identified mouse ESTs encoding a novel CC chemokine. Sequence
analysis of the mouse cDNAs indicated that the gene is located close to
the Il11ra gene (600939) in a tail-to-tail orientation. By searching the
human genomic sequence containing the IL11RA gene, Ishikawa-Mochizuki et
al. (1999) identified exons encoding a novel CC sequence in the same
arrangement with IL11RA as that seen in the mouse. They isolated a
full-length cDNA encoding SCYA27, which they called IL11RA-locus
chemokine (ILC), by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE using a human thymus cDNA
library. The SCYA27 gene encodes a deduced 112-amino acid protein
containing a 24-amino acid signal peptide. Northern blot analysis
detected weak expression of a 0.8-kb SCYA27 transcript in thymus and
placenta, and PCR analysis detected SCYA27 expression in thymus,
placenta, testis, and ovary. RT-PCR analysis detected SCYA27 expression
in normal skin.

GENE FUNCTION

By searching a private EST database, Morales et al. (1999) identified a
human EST encoding SCYA27, which they termed cutaneous T cell-attracting
chemokine (CTACK). Southern blot analysis detected SCYA27 expression in
cDNA libraries derived from normal or psoriatic skin but not those
derived from other tissues. RT-PCR analysis detected SCYA27 expression
that was upregulated after incubation with the proinflammatory cytokines
TNF (191160) and IL1B (147720) in cultured keratinocytes but not in
dermal fibroblasts, melanocytes, or gamma-delta T cells. Morales et al.
(1999) found that SCYA27 attracts a subset of cutaneous
lymphocyte-associated antigen (CLA)-positive CD4 (186940)-positive and
CD8 (186910)-positive memory (i.e., CD45RO-positive) T cells; the
CLA-positive cells migrated only in the presence of an SCYA27 gradient.

Jarmin et al. (2000) and Homey et al. (2000) determined that the
receptor for SCYA27 is GPR2 (CCR10; 600240).

Using immunohistochemical analysis, Homey et al. (2002) demonstrated
expression of CCL27 in normal keratinocytes and its strong upregulation
in skin lesions of atopic dermatitis, contact dermatitis, and psoriasis
patients. CCR10+ T lymphocytes were detected in lesional but not normal
skin of these patients. Flow cytometric analysis showed that CCL27 binds
extracellular matrix components and dermal microvascular endothelial
cells and fibroblasts and mediates adhesion and transendothelial
migration of CCR10+ circulating leukocytes. CCR10 is predominantly
expressed on CD4+CLA+ (cutaneous lymphocyte antigen), rather than CD8+,
circulating T cells. RT-PCR, confocal microscopy, and ELISA analysis
indicated that keratinocytes exposed to TNF or IL1B but not to IL4
(147780) or IFNG (147570) in vitro express increased CCL27.

Using quantitative PCR and immunohistochemical analysis, Pivarcsi et al.
(2007) found decreased expression of CCL27 in actinic keratosis (AK),
basal cell carcinoma (BCC), and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) lesions
compared with healthy skin and nonlesional tissue. Immunoblot analysis,
RT-PCR, and ELISA showed that oncogenic RAS (HRAS; 190020) and EGFR
(131550) activation suppressed CCL27 expression in primary keratinocytes
and in a keratinocyte cell line. Tumor patients treated with EGFR
inhibitors frequently develop inflammation, and Pivarcsi et al. (2007)
found that these inflamed lesions showed increased CCL27 expression.
Immunohistochemistry and image analysis showed that the ratio of
phosphorylated ERK1 (MAPK3; 601795)/ERK2 (MAPK1; 176948) to total
ERK1/ERK2 increased somewhat in AK and markedly in BCC and SCC.
Neutralization of Ccl27 in a mouse skin tumor model significantly
enhanced tumor growth, impaired Ifng production, and inhibited
recruitment of Cd4- and Cd8-positive T lymphocytes expressing Ccr10.
Pivarcsi et al. (2007) concluded that transformed keratinocytes may
evade host immune responses by progressively downregulating homeostatic
expression of CCL27 and reducing T-cell trafficking.

MAPPING

The IL11RA gene maps to 9p13. By genomic sequence analysis,
Ishikawa-Mochizuki et al. (1999) mapped the SCYA27 gene to the same
location. They noted that the SCYA19 (602227) and SCYA21 (602737) genes
also map to 9p13. By interspecific backcross analysis, Morales et al.
(1999) mapped the mouse Scya27 gene to the proximal region of chromosome
4.

ANIMAL MODEL

Homey et al. (2002) injected mice with human CCL27 intradermally. RT-PCR
analysis revealed dose-dependent expression of IL2, CCR10, and LFA1A
(153370). Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated that treatment with
glucocorticosteroid or anti-Ccl27 markedly reduced skin thickness and
leukocyte recruitment in contact hypersensitivity and atopic dermatitis
mouse models. Homey et al. (2002) concluded that neutralization of
CCL27-CCR10 interactions impairs lymphocyte recruitment and inhibits
allergen-induced skin inflammation. They suggested that these molecules
could be targets for selective therapy of inflammatory and autoimmune
skin diseases.

REFERENCE 1. Homey, B.; Alenius, H.; Muller, A.; Soto, H.; Bowman, E. P.; Yuan,
W.; McEvoy, L.; Lauerma, A. I.; Assmann, T.; Bunemann, E.; Lehto,
M.; Wolff, H.; Yen, D.; Marxhausen, H.; To, W.; Sedgwick, J.; Ruzicka,
T.; Lehmann, P.; Zlotnik, A.: CCL27-CCR10 interactions regulate T
cell-mediated skin inflammation. Nature Med. 8: 157-165, 2002.

2. Homey, B.; Wang, W.; Soto, H.; Buchanan, M. E.; Wiesenborn, A.;
Catron, D.; Muller, A.; McClanahan, T. K.; Dieu-Nosjean, M.-C.; Orozco,
R.; Ruzicka, T.; Lehmann, P.; Oldham, E.; Zlotnik, A.: Cutting edge:
the orphan chemokine receptor G protein-coupled receptor-2 (GPR-2,
CCR10) binds the skin-associated chemokine CCL27 (CTACK/ALP/ILC). J.
Immun. 164: 3465-3470, 2000.

3. Ishikawa-Mochizuki, I.; Kitaura, M.; Baba, M.; Nakayama, T.; Izawa,
D.; Imai, T.; Yamada, H.; Hieshima, K.; Suzuki, R.; Nomiyama, H.;
Yoshie, O.: Molecular cloning of a novel CC chemokine, interleukin-11
receptor alpha-locus chemokine (ILC), which is located on chromosome
9p13 and a potential homologue of a CC chemokine encoded by molluscum
contagiosum virus. FEBS Lett. 460: 544-548, 1999.

4. Jarmin, D. I.; Rits, M.; Bota, D.; Gerard, N. P.; Graham, G. J.;
Clark-Lewis, I.; Gerard, C.: Cutting edge: identification of the
orphan receptor G-protein-coupled receptor 2 as CCR10, a specific
receptor for the chemokine ESkine. J. Immun. 164: 3460-3464, 2000.

5. Morales, J.; Homey, B.; Vicari, A. P.; Hudak, S.; Oldham, E.; Hedrick,
J.; Orozco, R.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; McEvoy, L. M.; Zlotnik,
A.: CTACK, a skin-associated chemokine that preferentially attracts
skin-homing memory T cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 14470-14475,
1999.

6. Pivarcsi, A.; Muller, A.; Hippe, A.; Rieker, J.; van Lierop, A.;
Steinhoff, M.; Seeliger, S.; Kubitza, R.; Pippirs, U.; Meller, S.;
Gerber, P. A.; Liersch, R.; and 16 others: Tumor immune escape
by the loss of homeostatic chemokine expression. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 104: 19055-19060, 2007.

7. Senkevich, T. G.; Bugert, J. J.; Sisler, J. R.; Koonin, E. V.;
Darai, G.; Moss, B.: Genome sequence of a human tumorigenic poxvirus:
prediction of specific host response-evasion genes. Science 273:
813-816, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/3/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/31/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 4/13/2000

EDITED mgross: 06/05/2008
terry: 6/3/2008
mgross: 7/20/2005
mgross: 9/26/2002
alopez: 1/31/2002
mgross: 4/14/2000
mgross: 4/13/2000

602378	TITLE *602378 DYNAMIN 2; DNM2
;;DYN2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Dynamins (DNMs) are members of a group of GTPases that share high
homology in their N-terminal regions. Mammals have at least 3 DNMs: DNM1
(602377), DNM2, and DNM3 (611445). Diatloff-Zito et al. (1995) had
previously isolated a human genomic DNA fragment by its capacity to
correct the mitomycin C hypersensitivity of cells from a Fanconi anemia
patient belonging to genetic complementation group D (FACD; 227646).
Using this fragment, they screened a human fibroblast cDNA library and
isolated a cDNA encoding DNM2. The predicted 866-amino acid protein is
73% and 98% identical to DNM1 and rat Dnm2, respectively. It contains
the 3 consensus sequence elements characteristic of GTP-binding proteins
at its N terminus, a pleckstrin homology (PH) domain, and a basic,
proline-rich C-terminal region that contains multiple SRC homology 3
domains. DNM2 contains 9 consensus motifs for CDC2 (116940)
phosphorylation, indicating a potential role at the G2/mitosis
transition. Northern blot analysis detected a 3.6-kb transcript in all
tissues examined, with highest expression in heart and skeletal muscle.
Sequencing and RT-PCR identified alternative splicing variants of DNM2.
The authors suggested that multiple rounds of duplication and divergence
occurred within DNM gene evolution. No alterations in DNM2 sequence or
mRNA expression were detected in the FACD patient studied.

By in situ hybridization with a Dnm2 mRNA probe, Koutsopoulos et al.
(2013) found Dnm2 expression in most mouse embryonic tissues, including
the peripheral nervous system, but not in skeletal muscle or heart.

GENE FUNCTION

Gomez et al. (2005) found that DYN2 accumulated at the T cell-antigen
presenting cell (APC) interface in the presence of antigen. DYN2
knockdown experiments showed that DYN2 coupled T-cell receptor
(TCR)-mediated signaling pathways to those regulating IL2 (147680)
promoter activity and CD69 (107273) expression. Further experiments
identified DYN2 as a critical regulator of the actin cytoskeleton in
response to TCR engagement. The proline-rich domain of DYN2 interacted
directly with the SH3 domain of VAV1 (164875), and this interaction was
required for T-cell activation. Gomez et al. (2005) concluded that DYN2
regulates actin reorganization at the immunologic synapse and links to
VAV1 and its downstream signaling pathways after TCR engagement.

Orth and McNiven (2003) found that Dyn2 associated with amphiphysin
(600418) on phagosomes in cultured cells. Expression of a
GTPase-deficient Dyn2 mutant prevented vesiculation and induced the
formation of long plasma membrane invaginations coated with the mutant
protein and terminated with a clathrin (see 118955) tip or bulb.

In studies in cultured mouse podocytes and rodent models of proteinuria,
Sever et al. (2007) showed that during proteinuric kidney disease,
induction of cytoplasmic cathepsin L (CTSL; 116880) led to cleavage of
dynamin at a conserved site between amino acids 354 and 359, resulting
in reorganization of the podocyte actin cytoskeleton and proteinuria.
Dynamin mutants that lacked the CTSL site, or rendered the CTSL site
inaccessible through dynamin self-assembly, were resistant to CTSL
cleavage. When delivered into mice, these mutants restored podocyte
function and resolved proteinuria. Sever et al. (2007) concluded that
dynamin is a critical regulator of renal permselectivity that is
specifically targeted by proteolysis under pathologic conditions.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zuchner et al. (2005) determined that the DNM2 gene contains 22 exons,
20 of which are coding.

MAPPING

By interspecific backcross analysis, Klocke et al. (1997) found that the
mouse Dnm2 gene is closely linked to the Icam1 gene (147840) on the
proximal portion of chromosome 9, in a region with homologies to human
19p, 8q, and 11q. That the human ICAM1 gene is located on 19p13.3-p13.2
is evidence that the DNM2 gene is also in that region. The finding of
mutations in the DNM2 gene in families with a form of dominant
intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (606482) that maps to
19p13.2-p12 is further confirmation of the mapping of DNM2 to chromosome
19.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Because the DNM2 gene maps to 19p13.2-p12 and shares domains similar to
those of genes known to be involved in axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease (see 118210), Zuchner et al. (2005) considered it a candidate
gene for the form of dominant intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
that maps to chromosome 19p13.2-p12 (DI-CMTB; 606482). They identified 3
unique mutations in the DNM2 pleckstrin homology domain in 3 unrelated
families with DI-CMTB. These mutations disturbed the function of DNM2 in
a cellular model. DNM2 represented the third protein mutated in CMT that
contains a GTPase domain and is related to fusion or fission of cellular
membranes. In 2 of the families neutropenia cosegregated with the
neuropathy; these families each had a mutation affecting lys558
(602378.0002, 602378.0003), which suggested that this residue has a
function in maturation or survival of peripheral blood cells.

Bitoun et al. (2005) carried out genomewide linkage mapping analysis in
2 families with autosomal dominant centronuclear myopathy (CNM1;
160150), narrowing the CNM1 locus to an 11-Mb interval on 19p13.2. The
DNM2 gene, which maps to this region, was considered a good candidate.
Sequencing of exons and intron-exon boundaries in the probands of 3
families identified heterozygous mutations. Two were located in exon 8
and involved the same arg369 residue, (R369Q, 602378.0004; R369W,
602378.0005), and 1 was in exon 11 and involved an R465W mutation
(602378.0006). Another mutation, E368K (602378.0007), was a de novo
mutation in 1 family.

Tosch et al. (2006) described a patient with centronuclear myopathy who
carried heterozygous mutations in both the DNM2 (E368K; 602378.0007) and
MTMR14 (Y462C; 611089.0002) genes. They noted that whereas centronuclear
myopathy patients with other characterized mutations in DYN2 usually
have an age of onset in childhood or adulthood, the age of onset in
their patient was neonatal. The report raised the possibility of MTMR14
being a modifier of the phenotype in some cases of centronuclear
myopathy.

Bitoun et al. (2007) identified 4 different de novo heterozygous DNM2
mutations (see, e.g., 602378.0010; 602378.0011) in 5 unrelated patients
with sporadic CNM. All mutations were in exon 16 of the DNM2 gene within
the pleckstrin homology domain. Three of the patients had a severe
disorder with onset at birth.

Using in vitro sedimentation assays, Wang et al. (2010) showed that
centronuclear myopathy-associated mutant DNM2 proteins (see, e.g.,
602378.0005-602378.0007) formed more stable dynamin polymers in the
presence of GTP compared to wildtype, presumably reflecting abnormally
strong dynamin-dynamin interactions. The mutant protein aggregates were
less sensitive to disassociation by GTP, and retained higher GTPase
activities compared to wildtype. The observations suggested that the
affected residues, such as glu368, arg369, and arg465, normally function
to prevent excessive or prolonged dynamin assembly.

- Lethal Congenital Contracture Syndrome 5

In 3 sibs, born of consanguineous Pakistani parents, with lethal
congenital contracture syndrome-5 (LCCS5; 615368), Koutsopoulos et al.
(2013) identified a homozygous missense mutation in the DNM2 gene
(F379V; 602378.0013). The infants all showed severe hypotonia with lack
of spontaneous movement and respiratory insufficiency at birth,
resulting in death in a few days to months. Each also showed retinal
hemorrhages. Studies on patient cells and in vitro functional analysis
indicated that the mutation was hypomorphic. Animal studies in mice and
zebrafish suggested a role for Dnm2 in the development of muscle fibers
and vasculature.

ANIMAL MODEL

Koutsopoulos et al. (2013) found that morpholino knockdown of Dnm2 in
zebrafish embryos resulted in lethality in 10% and bent tails in 20%.
Morphant muscle fibers showed mild misalignment of muscle fibers;
muscular innervation appeared normal. There were also defects in the
endothelium of the vascular system. The findings suggested that Dnm2 has
a pleiotropic role during development.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, DOMINANT INTERMEDIATE B
DNM2, 9-BP DEL, NT1652

In a North American family with dominant intermediate
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (606482), Zuchner et al. (2005) found a 9-bp
deletion of the 3-prime end of exon 14 of the DNM2 gene
(1652_1659+1delATGAGGAGg). The mutation was predicted to result in 2
alternative mRNA products, one with a premature stop codon resulting
from a shift of the open reading frame (D550fs) and the other an
in-frame mRNA with a predicted deletion of 3 amino acids (D551_E553del)
produced by disruption of the original 3-prime splice site and use of a
newly introduced splice site with higher predicted splicing activity.

.0002
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, DOMINANT INTERMEDIATE B, WITH NEUTROPENIA
DNM2, LYS558GLU

In an Australian family with dominant intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease (606482), Zuchner et al. (2005) found that affected individuals
carried a mutation in exon 15 of the DNM2 gene, 1672A-G, resulting in
the amino acid substitution lys558-to-glu (K558E). Subclinically low
counts of neutrophils and, in some affected individuals, few
lymphocytes, erythrocytes, and platelets cosegregated with CMT.

.0003
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, DOMINANT INTERMEDIATE B, WITH NEUTROPENIA
DNM2, LYS558 DEL

In a Belgian family with dominant intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease and associated neutropenia (606482), Zuchner et al. (2005)
identified a deletion of nucleotides 1672 through 1674 (1672_1674delAAG)
in the DNM2 gene, resulting in deletion of a single amino acid, lys558.
That an abnormality of lys558 was found in 2 families (see also
602378.0002) in which neutropenia, not a general feature of dominant
intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, cosegregated with the
neuropathy implied that this residue has a function in maturation or
survival of peripheral blood cells. Congenital neutropenia (202700) is
caused by mutations in the gene elastase-2 gene (ELA2; 130130), which
maps to 19p13.3. In the Belgian family, Zuchner et al. (2005) excluded
mutations in ELA2 as the cause of neutropenia by sequence analysis of
all coding exons.

In a follow-up of the Belgian family reported by Zuchner et al. (2005),
Claeys et al. (2009) found that 1 mutation carrier had neutropenia and
cataracts without signs of a neuropathy. In addition, 5 members of this
family had early-onset cataracts in their teenage years.

.0004
MYOPATHY, CENTRONUCLEAR, 1
DNM2, ARG369GLN

In a family from French Guyana, Bitoun et al. (2005) found that 14
members with autosomal dominant centronuclear myopathy (160150) carried
an 1106G-A mutation in exon 8 of the DNM2 gene, resulting in the amino
acid substitution arg369-to-gln (R369Q).

.0005
MYOPATHY, CENTRONUCLEAR, 1
DNM2, ARG369TRP

In a French family with autosomal dominant centronuclear myopathy
(160150), Bitoun et al. (2005) found an 1105C-to-T transition in exon 8
of the DNM2 gene that resulted in an arg369-to-trp (R369W) amino acid
substitution.

.0006
MYOPATHY, CENTRONUCLEAR, 1
DNM2, ARG465TRP

In a French family with autosomal dominant centronuclear myopathy
(160150), Bitoun et al. (2005) found an arg465-to-trp (R465W) mutation,
caused by 1393C-T transition in exon 11 of the DNM2 gene. This mutation
was found in 5 additional families, 2 Belgian, 1 German, 1 from Great
Britain, and 1 from the United States.

.0007
MYOPATHY, CENTRONUCLEAR, 1
DNM2, GLU368LYS

In a French proband with centronuclear myopathy (160150), Bitoun et al.
(2005) found an 1102G-to-A transition in exon 8 of the DNM2 gene that
resulted in a glu368-to-lys amino acid substitution (E368K). The
mutation occurred de novo.

Tosch et al. (2006) reported this mutation in heterozygosity in a
36-year-old woman with centronuclear myopathy who presented with
neonatal hypotonia, muscle weakness, and ophthalmoparesis. She also
carried a heterozygous missense mutation in the myotubularin-related
protein-14 gene (MTMR14; 611089.0002). Both mutations occurred de novo.
The report raised the possibility of MTMR14 being a modifier of the
phenotype in some cases of centronuclear myopathy.

.0008
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, AXONAL, TYPE 2M
DNM2, GLY533CYS

In affected members of a family with autosomal dominant CMT2M (see
606482), Fabrizi et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous 1597G-T
transversion in the DNM2 gene, resulting in a gly533-to-cys (G533C)
substitution. The phenotype was milder than that reported for other CMT
patients with DNM2 mutations and was more consistent with an axonal form
of CMT.

.0009
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, AXONAL, TYPE 2M
DNM2, LEU566HIS

In a 45-year-old proband of a family with autosomal dominant CMT2M (see
606482), Fabrizi et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous 1697T-A
transversion in the DNM2 gene, resulting in a leu566-to-his (L566H)
substitution. The phenotype was milder than that reported for other CMT
patients with DNM2 mutations and was more consistent with an axonal form
of CMT.

.0010
MYOPATHY, CENTRONUCLEAR, 1
DNM2, SER619LEU

In 2 unrelated patients with sporadic centronuclear myopathy (160150),
Bitoun et al. (2007) identified a de novo heterozygous 1856C-T
transition in exon 16 of the DNM2 gene, resulting in a ser619-to-leu
(S619L) substitution within the pleckstrin homology domain. Both
patients had a severe phenotype, with onset at birth necessitating
ventilation and nasogastric feeding, and delayed motor development.
Another unrelated patient with a milder phenotype had a different
heterozygous mutation in the same codon (S619W; 602378.0011).

.0011
MYOPATHY, CENTRONUCLEAR, 1
DNM2, SER619TRP

In a patient with sporadic centronuclear myopathy (160150), Bitoun et
al. (2007) identified a de novo heterozygous 1856C-G transversion in
exon 16 of the DNM2 gene, resulting in a ser619-to-trp (S619W)
substitution. Two other unrelated patients with a more severe phenotype
had a different heterozygous mutation in the same codon (S619L;
602378.0010).

.0012
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, AXONAL, TYPE 2M
DNM2, GLY358ARG

In a mother and her 2 adult daughters with autosomal dominant CMT2M (see
606482), Gallardo et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous 1072G-A
transition in exon 7 of the DNM2 gene, resulting in a gly358-to-arg
(G358R) substitution in a highly conserved region in the middle domain.
The patients were ages 55, 32, and 23, and motor nerve conduction
velocities were 33, 46, and 50 m/s, respectively. All had progressive
gait unsteadiness and foot deformities, including pes cavus and toe
clawing, in the first decade of life. All had distal muscle weakness and
atrophy of the lower limbs, and the mother also had hand weakness and
atrophy. Ankle reflexes were absent in all 3, and all had hypoesthesia
of the lower limbs. MRI studies showed fatty infiltration of the calf
muscles, particularly in the anterior compartment. The fatty
infiltration increased distally and was massive in the foot musculature.
Muscle edema was also present in affected muscles. In a follow-up of the
family reported by Gallardo et al. (2008), Claeys et al. (2009) stated
that the phenotype was consistent with axonal CMT2.

.0013
LETHAL CONGENITAL CONTRACTURE SYNDROME 5 (1 family)
DNM2, PHE379VAL

In 3 sibs, born of consanguineous Pakistani parents, with lethal
congenital contracture syndrome-5 (LCCS5; 615368), Koutsopoulos et al.
(2013) identified a homozygous c.1135T-G transversion in exon 9 of the
DNM2 gene, resulting in a phe379-to-val (F379V) substitution at a highly
conserved residue in the middle domain of the protein. The mutation,
which was found by homozygosity mapping followed by candidate gene
sequencing, was not present in 100 Pakistani controls and was absent
from SNP databases. Patient fibroblasts showed a 20% reduction in
DNM2-dependent endocytosis, and recombinant F379V DNM2 showed a 20%
reduction in GTPase activity, consistent with its being a hypomorphic
allele. The patients showed decreased fetal movements and severe
hypotonia with respiratory insufficiency at birth. They had areflexia,
lack of spontaneous movement, joint contractures, and thin ribs and
bones. In addition, all had retinal hemorrhages and 2 had evidence of
intracranial bleeding (subdural hematoma and blood in the subarachnoid
cavity). Muscle biopsy of 1 patient showed small rounded fibers with
some centralized nuclei, suggestive of a congenital myopathy component,
whereas muscle biopsy of another patient showed showed atrophic fibers
without obvious centralization of nuclei. EMG studies of 1 patient
suggested a myopathy or lower motor neuron disease, whereas in the other
2 patients, EMG revealed low nerve conduction velocities, suggesting a
hypomyelinating neuropathy or anterior horn disease. Death occurred at
ages 5 days, 19 days, and 4 months. Both parents showed decreased
reflexes on examination, and skeletal muscle biopsy of the mother showed
fiber size variation and centralized nuclei, suggestive of a mild form
of centronuclear myopathy.

REFERENCE 1. Bitoun, M.; Bevilacqua, J. A.; Prudhon, B.; Maugenre, S.; Taratuto,
A. L.; Monges, S.; Lubieniecki, F.; Cances, C.; Uro-Coste, E.; Mayer,
M.; Fardeau, M.; Romero, N. B.; Guicheney, P.: Dynamin 2 mutations
cause sporadic centronuclear myopathy with neonatal onset. Ann. Neurol. 62:
666-670, 2007.

2. Bitoun, M.; Maugenre, S.; Jeannet, P.-Y.; Lacene, E.; Ferrer, X.;
Laforet, P.; Martin, J.-J.; Laporte, J.; Lochmuller, H.; Beggs, A.
H.; Fardeau, M.; Eymard, B.; Romero, N. B.; Guicheney, P.: Mutations
in dynamin 2 cause dominant centronuclear myopathy. Nature Genet. 37:
1207-1209, 2005.

3. Claeys, K. G.; Zuchner, S.; Kennerson, M.; Berciano, J.; Garcia,
A.; Verhoeven, K.; Storey, E.; Merory, J. R.; Bienfait, H. M. E.;
Lammens, M.; Nelis, E.; Baets, J.; De Vriendt, E.; Berneman, Z. N.;
De Veuster, I.; Vance, J. M.; Nicholson, G.; Timmerman, V.; De Jonghe,
P.: Phenotypic spectrum of dynamin 2 mutations in Charcot-Marie-Tooth
neuropathy. Brain 132: 1741-1752, 2009.

4. Diatloff-Zito, C.; Gordon, A. J. E.; Duchaud, E.; Merlin, G.:
Isolation of an ubiquitously expressed cDNA encoding human dynamin
II, a member of the large GTP-binding protein family. Gene 163:
301-306, 1995.

5. Fabrizi, G. M.; Ferrarini, M.; Cavallaro, T.; Cabrini, I.; Cerini,
R.; Bertolasi, L.; Rizzuto, N.: Two novel mutations in dynamin-2
cause axonal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Neurology 69: 291-295,
2007.

6. Gallardo, E.; Claeys, K. G.; Nelis, E.; Garcia, A.; Canga, A.;
Combarros, O.; Timmerman, V.; De Jonghe, P.; Berciano, J.: Magnetic
resonance imaging findings of leg musculature in Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease type 2 due to dynamin 2 mutation. J. Neurol. 255: 986-992,
2008.

7. Gomez, T. S.; Hamann, M. J.; McCarney, S.; Savoy, D. N.; Lubking,
C. M.; Heldebrant, M. P.; Labno, C. M.; McKean, D. J.; McNiven, M.
A.; Burkhardt, J. K.; Billadeau, D. D.: Dynamin 2 regulates T cell
activation by controlling actin polymerization at the immunological
synapse. Nature Immun. 6: 261-270, 2005.

8. Klocke, R.; Augustin, A.; Ronsiek, M.; Stief, A.; van der Putten,
H.; Jockusch, H.: Dynamin genes Dnm1 and Dnm2 are located on proximal
mouse chromosomes 2 and 9, respectively. Genomics 41: 290-292, 1997.

9. Koutsopoulos, O. S.; Kretz, C.; Weller, C. M.; Roux, A.; Mojzisova,
H.; Bohm, J.; Koch, C.; Toussaint, A.; Heckel, E.; Stemkens, D.; ter
Horst, S. A. J.; Thibault, C.; Koch, M.; Mehdi, S. Q.; Bijlsma, E.
K.; Mandel, J.-L.; Vermot, J.; Laporte, J.: Dynamin 2 homozygous
mutation in humans with a lethal congenital syndrome. Europ. J. Hum.
Genet. 21: 637-642, 2013.

10. Orth, J. D.; McNiven, M. A.: Dynamin at the actin-membrane interface. Curr.
Opin. Cell Biol. 15: 31-39, 2003.

11. Sever, S.; Altintas, M. M.; Nankoe, S. R.; Moller, C. C.; Ko,
D.; Wei, C.; Henderson, J.; del Re, E. C.; Hsing, L.; Erickson, A.;
Cohen, C. D.; Kretzler, M.; Kerjaschki, D.; Rudensky, A.; Nikolic,
B.; Reiser, J.: Proteolytic processing of dynamin by cytoplasmic
cathepsin L is a mechanism for proteinuric kidney disease. J. Clin.
Invest. 117: 2095-2104, 2007.

12. Tosch, V.; Rohde, H. M.; Tronchere, H.; Zanoteli, E.; Monroy,
N.; Kretz, C.; Dondaine, N.; Payrastre, B.; Mandel, J.-L.; Laporte,
J.: A novel PtdIns3P and PtdIns(3,5)P2 phosphatase with an inactivating
variant in centronuclear myopathy. Hum. Molec. Genet. 15: 3098-3106,
2006.

13. Wang, L.; Barylko, B.; Byers, C.; Ross, J. A.; Jameson, D. M.;
Albanesi, J. P.: Dynamin 2 mutants linked to centronuclear myopathies
form abnormally stable polymers. J. Biol. Chem. 285: 22753-22757,
2010.

14. Zuchner, S.; Noureddine, M.; Kennerson, M.; Verhoeven, K.; Claeys,
K.; De Jonghe, P.; Merory, J.; Oliveira, S. A.; Speer, M. C.; Stenger,
J. E.; Walizada, G.; Zhu, D.; Pericak-Vance, M. A.; Nicholson, G.;
Timmerman, V.; Vance, J. M.: Mutations in the pleckstrin homology
domain of dynamin 2 cause dominant intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease. Nature Genet. 37: 289-294, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/13/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/1/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/1/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/31/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/15/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/21/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/22/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/19/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/2/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/1/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/4/2005

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 2/23/1998

EDITED carol: 08/15/2013
carol: 8/15/2013
ckniffin: 8/13/2013
carol: 12/29/2011
ckniffin: 12/22/2011
wwang: 10/7/2010
ckniffin: 10/1/2010
carol: 3/2/2010
ckniffin: 3/1/2010
wwang: 4/4/2008
ckniffin: 3/31/2008
wwang: 1/31/2008
ckniffin: 1/15/2008
wwang: 1/8/2008
terry: 12/21/2007
alopez: 9/17/2007
terry: 8/22/2007
alopez: 7/19/2007
alopez: 2/1/2007
mgross: 5/5/2006
terry: 5/2/2006
alopez: 11/3/2005
terry: 11/1/2005
alopez: 3/2/2005
alopez: 2/9/2005
terry: 2/4/2005
psherman: 5/22/1998
dholmes: 2/23/1998

600871	TITLE *600871 GROWTH FACTOR-INDEPENDENT 1; GFI1
;;ZNF163
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

GFI1 is a transcriptional repressor that is transiently induced during
T-cell differentiation. GFI1 plays critical roles in enhancing T
helper-2 (Th2) cell expansion and in repressing induction of Th17 (see
IL17A; 603149) and CD103 (ITGAE; 604682)-positive inducible regulatory T
(Treg) cells (Zhu et al., 2009).

CLONING

Rat T-cell lymphomas induced by Moloney murine leukemia virus (Mo-MuLV)
are dependent upon interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680) for growth in cell
culture. Gilks et al. (1993) grew Mo-MuLV-induced rat T-cell lymphoma
lines in IL-2-free medium in order to select for IL2-independent
mutants. Following selection for an IL2-independent phenotype, they
cloned a full-length cDNA of the gene, symbolized Gfi1 for 'growth
factor independence-1.' They speculated that the GFI1 protein may be
involved in events occurring after the interaction of IL-2 with its
receptor. Indeed, the GFI1 protein may regulate the expression of genes
during S phase of the cell cycle in T cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Nolo et al. (2000) identified and characterized the Drosophila
'senseless' (sens) protein, which shares homology with the human GFI1
protein. They found that the sens gene is required for proper
development of most cell types of the embryonic and adult peripheral
nervous system (PNS) of Drosophila. Sens is a nuclear protein with 4
zinc fingers that is expressed and required in the sensory organ
precursors (SOP) for proper proneural gene expression. It shares 87%
amino acid identity with the GFI1 protein in the zinc finger domains.
Ectopic expression of Sens in many ectodermal cells caused induction of
PNS external sensory organ formation and was able to recreate an ectopic
proneural field. Hence, sens is both necessary and sufficient for PNS
development. These data indicated that proneural genes activate sens
expression. Sens is then in turn required to further activate and
maintain proneural gene expression. This feedback mechanism is essential
for selective enhancement and maintenance of proneural gene expression
in the SOPs in Drosophila.

Liu and Cowell (2000) cloned and characterized the human GFI1 promoter.
They found that its nucleotide sequence is GC-rich and does not contain
a typical TATA or CAAT box. Computer predictions indicated that either
of 2 Sp1 sites might serve as the site for transcription initiation.

Using microarray analysis of IL4 (147780)-stimulated and unstimulated
mouse Cd4 T cells, Zhu et al. (2002) identified Gfi1, a Stat6
(601512)-dependent transcriptional repressor, as a strongly induced
immediate-early gene that promoted proliferation of Th2 cells during
their polarization. Prolongation of Gfi1 expression by retroviral
infection resulted in enhanced Il2 (147680)-induced Stat5 (STAT5A;
601511) phosphorylation and repressed p27(Kip1) (CDKN1B; 600778)
expression, as well as greater proliferation. Zhu et al. (2002)
concluded that GFI1, in cooperation with GATA3 (131320), plays a major
role in IL4-driven CD4 T-cell proliferation.

As indicated later, Gfi1-deficient mice, produced by gene targeting, are
neutropenic. Furthermore, Person et al. (2003) demonstrated that
heritable GFI1 mutations cause human neutropenia. Mutant GFI1 in these
cases fails to repress ELA2 (130130), encoding neutrophil elastase,
mutations of which are the major cause of inherited human neutropenia
syndromes. In both mice and humans with GFI1 mutations, myeloid
progenitor cells fail to differentiate to mature neutrophils, causing
the accumulation of monocytes and abnormal cells that blend features of
monocytes and granulocytes. Only 1 cellular promoter had been known to
be repressed by GFI1, that for the antiapoptotic factor BAX (600040). To
identify genes regulated by GFI1 during hematopoiesis in vivo, Duan and
Horwitz (2003) performed large-scale chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assays. They found that GFI1 binds to a functionally diverse set
of genes acting concertedly during hematopoietic differentiation.

Hock et al. (2004) reported that GFI1 restricted proliferation of
hematopoietic stem cells. After loss of GFI1, hematopoietic stem cells
displayed elevated proliferation rates as assessed by
5-bromodeoxyuridine incorporation and cell cycle analysis. Gfi1 null
hematopoietic stem cells were functionally compromised in competitive
repopulation and serial transplantation assays and were rapidly
outcompeted in the bone marrow of mouse chimeras generated with Gfi1
null embryonic stem cells. Hock et al. (2004) concluded that GFI1 is
essential to restrict hematopoietic stem cell proliferation and to
preserve functional integrity.

Using mouse mutants, Zeng et al. (2004) showed that Gfi1 was
differentially expressed in hematopoietic stem cells and subsets of
hematopoietic progenitor cells, and that loss of Gfi1 resulted in
significant alteration of stem and precursor cell frequencies.
Functional assays showed that Gfi1 maintained hematopoietic stem cell
self-renewal, multilineage differentiation, and efficient reconstitution
of hematopoiesis in transplanted hosts by restricting stem cell
proliferation.

By coimmunoprecipitation assays with mouse and human cells, Saleque et
al. (2007) showed that LSD1 (AOF2; 609132), COREST (RCOR; 607675), HDAC1
(601241), and HDAC2 (605164) interacted with both GFI1 and GFI1B
(604383) in endogenous complexes. The N-terminal SNAG repression domain
of GFI1 and GFI1B was required for their association with COREST and
LSD1. Mouse Gfi1b recruited these cofactors to the majority of target
gene promoters in vivo. Inhibition of Corest and Lsd1 perturbed
differentiation of mouse erythroid, megakaryocytic, and granulocytic
cells, as well as primary erythroid progenitors. Lsd1 depletion
derepressed GFI targets in lineage-specific patterns, accompanied by
enhanced histone-3 (see 602810) lys4 methylation at the respective
promoters. Saleque et al. (2007) concluded that GFI complexes catalyze
serial histone modification of their targets, leading to their graded
silencing.

MAPPING

Bell et al. (1995) mapped the GFI1 gene to mouse chromosome 5 by linkage
analysis and mapped the GFI1 gene to rat chromosome 14p22 and to human
chromosome 1p22 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. The assignment to
chromosome 1 was confirmed using a mapping-panel blot.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Mice lacking the transcriptional repressor oncoprotein Gfi1 are
unexpectedly neutropenic (Karsunky et al., 2002; Hock et al., 2003).
Person et al. (2003) screened GFI1 as a candidate for association with
neutropenia in individuals without mutations in ELA2 (130130), the most
common cause of autosomal dominant severe congenital neutropenia (SCN1;
202700). They found dominant-negative zinc finger mutations that
disabled transcriptional repressor activity. The phenotype also included
immunodeficient lymphocytes and production of a circulating population
of myeloid cells that appeared immature. They showed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation, gel shift, reporter assays, and elevated expression
of ELA2 in vivo in neutropenic individuals that GFI1 represses ELA2,
thus linking these 2 genes in a common pathway involved in myeloid
differentiation. The 2 amino acid substitutions found in cases of
neutropenia by Person et al. (2003) involved amino acids identical in
Gfi1 homologs in divergent species and also conserved in the paralog
GFI1B. One of the mutations was found in individuals with SCN2 (613107),
and the other mutation was found in an individual with nonimmune chronic
idiopathic neutropenia of adults (607847).

ANIMAL MODEL

Karsunky et al. (2002) found that Gfi1 is expressed outside the lymphoid
system in granulocytes and activated macrophages, cells that mediate
innate immunity (i.e., nonspecific immunity). They generated
Gfi1-deficient mice (Gfi1 -/-) and showed that these animals are
severely neutropenic and accumulate immature monocytic cells in blood
and bone marrow. Their myeloid precursor cells were unable to
differentiate into granulocytes upon stimulation with granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (138970) but could develop into mature
macrophages. They found that macrophages of the Gfi1-null animals
produced enhanced levels of inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor
necrosis factor (191160), interleukin-10 (124092), and
interleukin-1-beta (147720), when stimulated with bacterial
lipopolysaccharide, and that Gfi1-null mice succumb to low doses of this
endotoxin that were tolerated by wildtype mice. They concluded that Gfi1
influences the differentiation of myeloid precursors into granulocytes
or monocytes and acts in limiting the inflammatory immune response.

A mutation of the POU4F3 gene (602460) underlies human autosomal
dominant nonsyndromic progressive hearing loss (DFNA15; 602459). By
comparing inner ear gene expression profiles of embryonic day 16.5
wildtype and Pou4f3-mutant deaf mice, Hertzano et al. (2004) identified
the GFI1 gene as a target gene regulated by Pou4f3. Deficiency of Pou4f3
led to a reduction in Gfi1 expression levels, and the dynamics of Gfi1
mRNA abundance closely followed the pattern of expression for Pou4f3.
Immunohistochemical and ultrastructural analyses revealed that loss of
Gfi1 resulted in outer hair cell degeneration, which appeared comparable
to that observed in Pou4f3 mutants. Hertzano et al. (2004) concluded
that GFI1 is the first downstream target of a hair cell-specific
transcription factor, and they suggested that outer hair cell
degeneration in Pou4f3 mutants may be largely or entirely a result of
the loss of expression of GFI1.

Zhu et al. (2006) tested the physiologic function of Gfi1 in peripheral
T cells by generating conditional Gfi1-knockout mice. Deletion of Gfi
impaired proliferation and increased apoptosis of Th2 cells, but not Th1
cells, in vitro and in vivo in response to Il2. Overexpression of Stat5
failed to restore normal Th2 expansion in Gfi1-deficient cells. Mutant
mice infected with Schistosoma mansoni had a reduced frequency of Il4
(147780)-producing cells, whereas Th1 responses to Toxoplasma gondii
were unimpaired.

Zhu et al. (2009) generated conditional knockout mice in which Gfi1 was
deleted only in T cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation, flow cytometric,
and RT-PCR analyses demonstrated defects in Th2 cell expansion and
enhanced Ifng (147570) production in the mutant mice. Il4-induced Gfi1
expression inhibited Il17 (603149) production, but not induction of
Ror-gamma-t (602943) in cells primed with Tgfb (190180) plus Il6
(147620). Gfi1 also limited Tgfb-mediated differentiation of inducible
Treg cells. In the absence of Gfi1, the percentage of natural Treg cells
expressing Cd103 and Foxp3 (300292) was increased. Gfi1 expression was
also downregulated by Tgfb. Zhu et al. (2009) concluded that GFI1 plays
a critical role both in enhancing Th2 cell expansion and in the
epigenetic regulation of Th17 and Cd103-positive inducible Treg cell
differentiation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NEUTROPENIA, SEVERE CONGENITAL, 2, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
GFI1, ASN382SER

Person et al. (2003) identified a heterozygous 1412A-G transition in the
GFI1 gene causing an asn382-to-ser (N382S) substitution in the fifth
zinc finger in a 4-month-old boy with severe congenital neutropenia
(SCN2; 613107) who had a neutrophil count of zero and marked
monocytosis. The mutation segregated with his 3-year-old paternal half
brother, who was identically affected, and with their father, who had
recurrent pneumonia and pyogenic abscesses abating during childhood. The
father's childhood blood counts were not available, but at age 27 his
neutrophil count was low and monocytes high. His peripheral blood showed
a population of myeloid cells that appeared immature. The myeloid, but
not erythroid, colony formation potential of his cultured peripheral
blood was lower than normal; nonerythroid colonies had intact
differentiation to monocytes or macrophages but had an excess of myeloid
precursors with no mature neutrophils. The absolute cell number of CD4 T
lymphocytes was reduced. Moreover, B lymphocytes were also reduced.
Peripheral blood lymphocytes from both the father and the older son
showed similar trends, and both had poor uptake of 3H-thymidine after
stimulation with phytohemagglutinin, alloantigen, and Candida albicans
compared with normal individuals. Nonetheless, the child had adequate
circulating titers to immunizations, and all immunoglobulin isotypes
were present in his serum, indicating that, though reduced in number and
activation potential, the T and B lymphocyte populations were
functional. Person et al. (2003) demonstrated that GFI1 represses ELA2
(130130), mutant in most cases of autosomal dominant severe congenital
neutropenia, linking these 2 genes in a common pathway involved in
myeloid differentiation.

.0002
NEUTROPENIA, NONIMMUNE CHRONIC IDIOPATHIC, OF ADULTS
GFI1, LYS403ARG

Nonimmune chronic idiopathic neutropenia of adults (NI-CINA; 607847) is
manifested by neutropenia milder than that in severe congenital
neutropenia (see SCN2; 613107), is diagnosed in adults, and also
predisposes to leukemia in a subset of patients (Papadaki et al., 2002).
Person et al. (2003) identified heterozygosity for a 1475A-G transition
in GFI1, causing the amino acid substitution lys403-to-arg (K403R) in
the sixth zinc finger. The patient had been found to be neutropenic 10
years earlier and thereafter had persistently low neutrophil count and
elevated monocytes. Analysis for acquired causes had proven negative,
including drug exposures and autoimmune serologies (antibodies against
nuclear antigens, against double-stranded DNA, against polymorphonuclear
leukocytes, and against rheumatoid factors). She was not known ever to
have had a normal blood count. There was no history of infectious
complications. There were no living close relatives.

REFERENCE 1. Bell, D. W.; Taguchi, T.; Jenkins, N. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Copeland,
N. G.; Gilks, C. B.; Zweidler-McKay, P.; Grimes, H. L.; Tsichlis,
P. N.; Testa, J. R.: Chromosomal localization of a gene, GFI1, encoding
a novel zinc finger protein reveals a new syntenic region between
man and rodents. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 70: 263-267, 1995.

2. Duan, Z.; Horwitz, M.: Targets of the transcriptional repressor
oncoprotein Gfi-1. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 5932-5937, 2003. Note:
Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 108: 16134 only, 2011.

3. Gilks, C. B.; Bear, S. E.; Grimes, H. L.; Tsichlis, P. N.: Progression
of interleukin-2 (IL-2)-dependent rat T cell lymphoma lines to IL-2-independent
growth following activation of a gene (Gfi1) encoding a novel zinc
finger protein. Molec. Cell Biol. 13: 1759-1768, 1993.

4. Hertzano, R.; Montcouquiol, M.; Rashi-Elkeles, S.; Elkon, R.; Yucel,
R.; Frankel, W. N.; Rechavi, G.; Moroy, T.; Friedman, T. B.; Kelley,
M. W.; Avraham, K. B.: Transcription profiling of inner ears from
Pou4f3(ddl/ddl) identifies Gfi1 as a target of the Pou4f3 deafness
gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 2143-2153, 2004.

5. Hock, H.; Hamblen, M. J.; Rooke, H. M.; Schindler, J. W.; Saleque,
S.; Fujiwara, Y.; Orkin, S. H.: Gfi-1 restricts proliferation and
preserves functional integrity of haematopoietic stem cells. Nature 431:
1002-1007, 2004.

6. Hock, H.; Hamblen, M. J.; Rooke, H. M.; Traver, D.; Bronson, R.
T.; Cameron, S.; Orkin, S. H.: Intrinsic requirement for zinc finger
transcription factor Gfi-1 in neutrophil differentiation. Immunity 18:
109-120, 2003.

7. Karsunky, H.; Zeng, H.; Schmidt, T.; Zevnik, B.; Kluge, R.; Schmid,
K. W.; Duhrsen, U.; Moroy, T.: Inflammatory reactions and severe
neutropenia in mice lacking the transcriptional repressor Gfi1. Nature
Genet. 30: 295-300, 2002.

8. Liu, S.; Cowell, J. K.: Cloning and characterization of the TATA-less
promoter from the human GFI1 proto-oncogene. Ann. Hum. Genet. 64:
83-86, 2000.

9. Nolo, R.; Abbott, L. A.; Bellen, H. J.: Senseless, a Zn finger
transcription factor, is necessary and sufficient for sensory organ
development in Drosophila. Cell 102: 349-362, 2000.

10. Papadaki, H. A.; Kosteas, T.; Gemetzi, C.; Alexandrakis, M.; Psyllaki,
M.; Eliopoulos, G. D.: Two patients with nonimmune chronic idiopathic
neutropenia of adults developing acute myeloid leukemia with aberrant
phenotype and complex karyotype but no mutations in granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor receptor. Ann. Hemat. 81: 50-54, 2002.

11. Person, R. E.; Li, F.-Q.; Duan, Z.; Benson, K. F.; Wechsler, J.;
Papadaki, H. A.; Eliopoulos, G.; Kaufman, C.; Bertolone, S. J.; Nakamoto,
B.; Papayannopoulou, T.; Grimes, H. L.; Horwitz, M.: Mutations in
proto-oncogene GFI1 cause human neutropenia and target ELA2. Nature
Genet. 34: 308-312, 2003.

12. Saleque, S.; Kim, J.; Rooke, H. M.; Orkin, S. H.: Epigenetic
regulation of hematopoietic differentiation by Gfi-1 and Gfi-1b is
mediated by the cofactors CoREST and LSD1. Molec. Cell 27: 562-572,
2007.

13. Zeng, H.; Yucel, R.; Kosan, C.; Klein-Hitpass, L.; Moroy, T.:
Transcription factor Gfi1 regulates self-renewal and engraftment of
hematopoietic stem cells. EMBO J. 23: 4116-4125, 2004.

14. Zhu, J.; Davidson, T. S.; Wei, G.; Jankovic, D.; Cui, K.; Schones,
D. E.; Guo, L.; Zhao, K.; Shevach, E. M.; Paul, W. E.: Down-regulation
of Gfi-1 expression by TGF-beta is important for differentiation of
Th17 and CD103+ inducible regulatory T cells. J. Exp. Med. 206:
329-341, 2009.

15. Zhu, J.; Guo, L.; Min, B.; Watson, C. J.; Hu-Li, J.; Young, H.
A.; Tsichlis, P. N.; Paul, W. E.: Growth factor independent-1 induced
by IL-4 regulates Th2 cell proliferation. Immunity 16: 733-744,
2002.

16. Zhu, J.; Jankovic, D.; Grinberg, A.; Guo, L.; Paul, W. E.: Gfi-1
plays an important role in IL-2-mediated Th2 cell expansion. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 18214-18219, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/29/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/27/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/26/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/21/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/26/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/28/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/19/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/3/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/29/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/15/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/7/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/2/1995

EDITED mgross: 02/05/2013
terry: 11/27/2012
wwang: 6/7/2011
mgross: 10/29/2009
terry: 10/27/2009
mgross: 10/2/2007
terry: 9/26/2007
wwang: 3/26/2007
terry: 3/21/2007
alopez: 1/31/2007
mgross: 1/26/2007
alopez: 10/29/2004
alopez: 9/30/2004
carol: 9/28/2004
terry: 6/3/2004
terry: 7/30/2003
alopez: 7/28/2003
alopez: 6/25/2003
terry: 6/19/2003
alopez: 6/3/2003
terry: 6/3/2003
alopez: 3/12/2002
alopez: 1/29/2002
terry: 1/29/2002
mcapotos: 10/9/2000
mcapotos: 9/28/2000
terry: 9/15/2000
mgross: 9/7/2000
alopez: 12/30/1999
dkim: 7/2/1998
mark: 11/2/1995

182266	TITLE *182266 SMALL PROLINE-RICH PROTEIN 1B; SPRR1B
;;CORNIFIN
DESCRIPTION See SPRR1A (182265). Gibbs et al. (1993) found that there are 2 genes
for the SPRR1 subfamily of small proline-rich proteins. All SPRR genes
are closely linked within a 300-kb DNA segment on 1q21-q22.

Marvin et al. (1992) characterized a cDNA clone corresponding to mRNA
abundantly expressed in differentiating squamous cells originally
isolated from a rabbit squamous cell library. The gene encodes a 14-kD
protein that appears to function as a component of the crosslinked
envelope in squamous differentiating cells. Called cornifin, the protein
has a high content of proline (31%), glutamine (20%), and cysteine (11%)
and contains 13 repeats of an octapeptide (consensus sequence, EPCQPKVP)
at its C terminus. In situ hybridization analysis showed that the mRNA
is restricted to the suprabasal layers of the epidermis. Crosslinking of
the protein appears to be mediated by transglutaminase type I.

REFERENCE 1. Gibbs, S.; Fijneman, R.; Wiegant, J.; Geurts van Kessel, A.; van
de Putte, P.; Backendorf, C.: Molecular characterization and evolution
of the SPRR family of keratinocyte differentiation markers encoding
small proline-rich proteins. Genomics 16: 630-637, 1993.

2. Marvin, K. W.; George, M. D.; Fujimoto, W.; Saunders, N. A.; Bernacki,
S. H.; Jetten, A. M.: Cornifin, a cross-linked envelope precursor
in keratinocytes that is down-regulated by retinoids. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 89: 11026-11030, 1992.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/18/1993

EDITED carol: 07/21/1999
terry: 7/11/1994
carol: 6/18/1993

120240	TITLE *120240 COLLAGEN, TYPE VI, ALPHA-2; COL6A2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The COL6A2 gene encodes the alpha-2 subunit of type VI collagen, an
ubiquitously expressed extracellular matrix protein. It is 1 of the 3
subunits comprising the full collagen VI protein (see also COL6A1,
120220 and COL6A3, 120250) (summary by Zhang et al., 2010).

CLONING

Weil et al. (1988) isolated clones corresponding to the COL6A2 gene from
a human placenta expression library. Northern blot analysis detected a
3.5-kb mRNA transcript. The molecular mass of the protein is
approximately 140 kD.

Chu et al. (1989) determined that the COL6A2 protein contains 998 amino
acids with 31% identity to COL6A1 in the N-terminal and C-terminal
globular domains, which are connected by a triple helical segment. Both
COL6A1 and COL6A2 contain small signal peptide sequences. Internal
alignment of the globular sequences showed a repetitive 200-residue
structure (15 to 23% identity) occurring 3 times (N1, C1, C2) in each
chain. Sequencing of COL6A2 cDNA clones revealed 2 variant chains with a
distinct C2 subdomain and 3-prime noncoding region. The repetitive
segments C1, C2 and, to a lesser extent, N1 showed significant identity
(15 to 18%) to the collagen-binding A domains of von Willebrand factor
(VWF; 613160). These results suggested that the globular domains of the
COL6 proteins bind to collagenous structures.

Saitta et al. (1992) found that the human COL6A2 gene uses alternative
processing to produce multiple mRNA transcripts differing in the 5-prime
untranslated region as well as in the 3-prime coding and noncoding
sequences.

GENE STRUCTURE

Saitta et al. (1992) demonstrated that the COL6A2 gene contains 30 exons
and spans 36 kb.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid and FISH analysis, Weil et al. (1988) mapped the
COL6A2 gene to chromosome 21q22.3.

GENE FUNCTION

Klewer et al. (1998) studied COL6A2 gene expression in the developing
mammalian heart. The pattern of expression was identical to that of
COL6A1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 9 kindreds with the Bethlem form of autosomal dominant myopathy with
contractures (158810), Jobsis et al. (1996) demonstrated genetic linkage
to the COL6A1-COL6A2 cluster on 21q22.3. By sequence analysis in 4
families, Jobsis et al. (1996) identified a mutation in COL6A1 in 1
kindred and a mutation in COL6A2 in 2 others. Both mutations disrupted
the Gly-X-Y motif of the triple helical domain by substitution of gly
for either val or ser. Analogous to the putative perturbation of the
anchoring function of the dystrophin-associated complex in congenital
muscular dystrophy with mutations in the alpha-2-subunit of laminin
(156225), the observation suggested a similar mechanism in Bethlem
myopathy.

Ullrich scleroatonic muscular dystrophy, also known as Ullrich
congenital muscular dystrophy (UCMD; 254090), shares some clinical
features with Bethlem myopathy, such as joint contractures, but displays
a more severe course. Vanegas et al. (2001) demonstrated recessive
mutations in the COL6A2 gene (see 120240.0002) leading to UCMD.

Lampe et al. (2005) developed a method for rapid direct sequence
analysis of all 107 coding exons of the COL6 genes (COL6A1, COL6A2,
COL6A3; 120250) using single condition amplification/internal primer
(SCAIP) sequencing. They sequenced all 3 COL6 genes from genomic DNA in
79 patients with UCMD or Bethlem myopathy, and found putative mutations
in 1 of the COL6 genes in 62% of patients. Some patients showed changes
in more than one of the COL6 genes, and some UCMD patients appeared to
have dominant rather than recessive disease. Lampe et al. (2005)
concluded that these findings may explain some or all of the cases of
UCMD that are unlinked to the COL6 gene under a recessive model.

In 2 unrelated patients with Bethlem myopathy, Baker et al. (2007)
identified 2 different heterozygous mutations in the COL6A2 gene
(120240.0009; 120240.0010). In vitro studies indicated defective
collagen VI synthesis and secretion.

In 2 sibs with autosomal recessive myosclerosis (255600), Merlini et al.
(2008) identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the COL6A2 gene
(120240.0011).

Nadeau et al. (2009) identified a homozygous COL6A2 mutation (C777R;
120240.0012) in 3 patients with autosomal recessive UCMD. Two additional
patients had 2 different heterozygous COL6A2 mutations (see, e.g.,
G283R, 120240.0013), consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance.
Another patient was compound heterozygous for a mutation in the COL6A1
gene (G281R; 120220.0014) and a mutation in the COL6A2 gene (R498H;
120240.0014), consistent with digenic inheritance.

- Role of COL6A2 in Atrioventricular Septal Defect

Ackerman et al. (2012) used a candidate gene approach among individuals
with Down syndrome and complete atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD)
(141 cases) and Down syndrome with no congenital heart defect (141
controls) to determine whether rare genetic variants in genes involved
in atrioventricular valvuloseptal morphogenesis contribute to AVSD in
this sensitized population. Ackerman et al. (2012) found a significant
excess (p less than 0.0001) of variants predicted to be deleterious in
cases compared to controls. At the most stringent level of filtering,
they found potentially damaging variants in nearly 20% of cases but in
fewer than 3% of controls. The variants with the highest probability of
being damaging in cases only were found in 6 genes: COL6A1, COL6A2,
CRELD1 (607170) (already identified as a cause of AVSD; see 606217),
FBLN2 (135821), FRZB (605083), and GATA5 (611496). Several of the
case-specific variants were recurrent in unrelated individuals,
occurring in 10% of cases studied. No variants with an equal probability
of being damaging were found in controls, demonstrating a highly
specific association with AVSD. Of note, all of these genes are in the
VEGFA (192240) pathway, suggesting to Ackerman et al. (2012) that rare
variants in this pathway might contribute to the genetic underpinnings
of AVSD in humans.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Gualandi et al. (2009) reported 2 unrelated patients with Bethlem
myopathy who were each compound heterozygous for a truncating and a
missense mutation in the COL6A2 gene (Q819X, 120240.0011 and
R830Q/R843W, 120240.0017; R366X, 120240.0018 and D871N; 120240.0019,
respectively). Both patients remained ambulatory as adults, and muscle
biopsies and studies of fibroblasts showed variable degrees of aberrant
collagen VI microfilament formation. Gualandi et al. (2009) noted that
autosomal recessive inheritance had not been reported in Bethlem
myopathy and suggested that collagen VI-related myopathies comprise a
spectrum of conditions with variable severity. In addition, the findings
did not support pure haploinsufficiency as a causative mechanism for
Bethlem myopathy, and suggested that some previously reported patients
may harbor a second missed mutation. The genotype findings in these
patients had important implications for genetic counseling.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BETHLEM MYOPATHY
COL6A2, GLY250SER

In 2 kindreds with Bethlem myopathy (158810), Jobsis et al. (1996)
demonstrated that affected members had a heterozygous missense mutation
(898G-A) resulting in a G250S amino acid substitution in the triple
helical region.

.0002
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, 1-BP INS, 1151C

In an Italian family, Vanegas et al. (2001) found that a son with
Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (254090) had a homozygous
insertion of a C leading to a premature termination codon in the triple
helical domain of COL6A2 mRNA. Both healthy consanguineous parents were
carriers. The insertion of the C was in a stretch of 5 cytosines between
nucleotides 1147 and 1151 of the COL6A2 cDNA, causing a slippage of the
reading frame with a premature termination codon at nucleotides
1347-1349. The affected patient in this family showed reduced fetal
movements. At birth he was unusually long (55 cm), showed multiple joint
contractures of his knees and elbows, a kyphotic contracture of the
spine, a left hip dislocation, bilateral congenital convex pes valgus,
long and slender fingers and toes with adducted thumbs, ogival palate,
micrognathia, and a short neck with torticollis. He also showed marked
bilateral distal hyperlaxity of fingers, toes, calcanei, and wrists. The
child walked at the age of 13 months, but generalized muscle weakness
persisted thereafter, and progressive scoliosis and respiratory failure
developed. He underwent tracheostomy and nocturnal positive pressure
mechanical ventilation at the age of 8 years, with signs of
diaphragmatic insufficiency. At the age of 11 years, he was still
ambulant and had normal intelligence.

In fibroblasts from the patient reported by Vanegas et al. (2001), Zhang
et al. (2002) showed almost complete absence of COL6A2 mRNA by Northern
blot analysis, suggesting that the mutation led to nonsense-mediated
mRNA decay. There was complete absence of secreted COL6A2 protein in the
medium of the patient's cells, suggesting that the mutation in the
triple helical domain prevented microfibrillar assembly and secretion.
Although both parents showed decreased levels of COL6A2 mRNA, long-term
collagen VI deposition was essentially normal.

.0003
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, IVS17, A-G, -2

In an Italian family, Vanegas et al. (2001) found that 2 brothers with
Ullrich scleroatonic muscular dystrophy (254090) had a splice acceptor
site mutation in the COL6A2 gene. Deletion of 28 nucleotides was caused
by an A-to-G substitution at nucleotide -2 of intron 17, causing
activation of a cryptic acceptor site within exon 18. The normal parents
were unrelated. Severe contractures of elbows and knees, rigidity of the
spine, ogival (gothic) palate, and hypotonia were present. In 1 brother
there was distal hyperlaxity and marked weakness of head flexors but
almost complete disappearance of limb joint contractures at the age of 2
years. In the brothers, this mutation was found in compound
heterozygosity with a splice site mutation in intron 23 (120240.0004).
The first mutation was present in the healthy mother, whereas the second
mutation was carried by the healthy father. In another Italian family,
Vanegas et al. (2001) found the same 28-bp deletion but did not find the
mutation in the other allele. This mutation occurred de novo in the
patient.

In fibroblasts from 1 of the patients reported by Vanegas et al. (2001)
who was a compound heterozygote for mutations in the COL6A2 gene, Zhang
et al. (2002) showed decreased levels of COL6A2 mRNA by Northern blot
analysis, suggesting that the mutations led to nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay. Low levels of COL6A2 protein were detected in the medium of the
patient's cells, suggesting that the mutations, which occurred at the
distal part of the triple helical domain, allowed secretion of a small
amount of mutant collagen VI protein. Further analysis showed that the
truncated proteins were able to form triple helical monomers, but unable
to assemble into dimers and tetramers for the completed collagen VI
protein. Zhang et al. (2002) noted that the IVS23 mutation (120240.0004)
retains the triple helical domain and thus can assemble into monomers,
but has a shorter C-terminal globular domain which prevents further
assembly into higher ordered structures. Although both parents showed
decreased levels of COL6A2 mRNA, long-term collagen VI deposition was
essentially normal.

.0004
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, IVS23, G-A, -1

Vanegas et al. (2001) described 2 brothers with Ullrich scleroatonic
muscular dystrophy (254090) who were compound heterozygotes for 2 splice
site mutations in the COL6A2 gene, one in intron 17 (120240.0003) and
the other a G-to-A substitution at nucleotide -1 in intron 23.

.0005
BETHLEM MYOPATHY
COL6A2, ASP620ASN

In a Caucasian family from Mississippi and North Carolina, Scacheri et
al. (2002) found 9 members with an autosomal dominant limb-girdle
muscular dystrophy phenotype. A causative missense mutation, asp620 to
asn (D620N), was present in heterozygous state. This mutation did not
overtly affect the expression of proteins of the extracellular matrix
(ECM), but did alter the expression of laminin beta-1 (150240) in the
basement membrane of muscle fibers. Type VI collagen was thought to
anchor the basal lamina to the extracellular matrix by interacting with
collagen type IV, which in turn was thought to bind laminin beta-1 (Kuo
et al., 1997). Scacheri et al. (2002) suggested that their studies widen
the clinical spectrum of Bethlem myopathy (158810) and indicated that
autosomal dominant limb-girdle muscular dystrophy should be studied for
possible collagen VI etiology.

.0006
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, 26-BP DEL, NT731

In a patient with Ullrich disease (254090), Higuchi et al. (2001)
identified a homozygous 26-bp deletion (nucleotides 731-756) in exon 14
of the COL6A2 gene, causing a frameshift and premature termination
codon, and resulting in a truncated collagen VI alpha-2 chain. Collagen
VI expression was absent from the patient's skeletal muscle and skin
samples.

.0007
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, IVS12AS, A-G, -10

In a patient with Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (254090),
Lucarini et al. (2005) identified a homozygous A-to-G transition in
intron 12 of the COL6A2 gene, resulting in deletion of exon 13, which
removed 21 amino acids from the N terminus of the triple helical domain.
The misaligned N-terminal region was predicted to interfere with the
assembly of collagen VI microfibrils. The intron mutation activated
numerous cryptic acceptor sites, generating both normal and exon
13-deleted COL6A2 mRNA as well as multiple transcripts containing
frameshifts that were degraded through nonsense-mediated decay.

.0008
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
COL6A2, 1.3-KB DEL

In a patient with Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (254090), Baker
et al. (2005) identified heterozygosity for a 1,332-bp deletion of the
COL6A2 gene, which included part of intron 5, all of exon 6 and intron
6, and part of exon 7 and was predicted to result in loss of 27 amino
acids in the triple helical region. The patient's mother was a mosaic
carrier of the deletion.

.0009
BETHLEM MYOPATHY
COL6A2, IVS10AS, A-G, -2

In a 40-year-old man with Bethlem myopathy (158810), Baker et al. (2007)
identified a heterozygous A-to-G transition in intron 10 of the COL6A2
gene, resulting in the skipping of exon 11. Exon 11 codes for the only
cysteine residue in the triple helical domain of the protein, which is
predicted to form a disulfide bond critical for dimerization. This would
result in decreased assembly of the collagen VI protein. Further
evidence indicated nonsense-mediated decay of an mRNA with a premature
stop codon, and reduced secretion of structurally abnormal collagen. The
patient had proximal muscle weakness, decreased motor capacity, joint
contractures, and dystrophic features on muscle biopsy.

.0010
BETHLEM MYOPATHY
COL6A2, PRO932LEU

In a 42-year-old Australian man with Bethlem myopathy (158810), Baker et
al. (2007) identified a heterozygous 2795C-T transition in exon 28 of
the COL6A2 gene, resulting in a pro932-to-leu (P932L) substitution in
the globular C2 A-domain. Three first cousins and a niece were affected
and also carried the mutation. The proband had proximal muscle weakness
and joint contractures. Further studies indicated that the mutant P932L
resulted in reduced intracellular collagen VI assembly and secretion.

.0011
MYOSCLEROSIS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
BETHLEM MYOPATHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, GLN819TER

In 2 sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with autosomal recessive
myosclerosis (255600), Merlini et al. (2008) identified a homozygous
2537C-T transition in exon 27 in the COL6A2 gene, resulting in a
gln819-to-ter (Q819X) substitution in the C1 domain. RT-PCR studies
showed that the mutation did not result in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay;
the translated truncated protein lacked the C2 domain. Studies in
patient fibroblasts showed decreased COL6A2 transcripts and decreased
amounts of collagen VI deposited in the extracellular matrix. The
secreted collagen VI microfibrils were abnormally organized and did not
assemble properly into tetramers. The heterozygous parents were
unaffected, suggesting that the mutation is not pathogenic in the
heterozygous state.

Gualandi et al. (2009) identified compound heterozygosity for the Q819X
mutation and a complex missense allele (R830Q/R843W; 120240.0017) in a
25-year-old woman with Bethlem myopathy (158800). Although this genotype
suggested autosomal recessive inheritance, the R819X mutation escaped
nonsense-mediated decay and was thought not to be pathogenic in the
heterozygous state, based on the report of Merlini et al. (2008).
However, the fact that the woman reported by Gualandi et al. (2009)
carried COL6A2 mutations on both alleles had implications for genetic
counseling.

.0012
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, CYS777ARG

In 3 patients with UCMD (254090), including 2 cousins, Nadeau et al.
(2009) identified a homozygous 2329T-C transition in exon 26 of the
COL6A2 gene, resulting in a cys777-to-arg (C777R) substitution. Onset
ranged from birth to 2 years. One child had congenital hip dislocation.
All had proximal muscle weakness and learned to walk independently at
about 1 year of age, but became wheelchair-bound at ages 6.8, 9, and
11.5 years, respectively. Other features included spinal rigidity,
scoliosis, and kyphosis. All also required nocturnal ventilation, and 1
needed gastrostomy for chewing difficulties. Only 1 had follicular
hyperkeratosis.

.0013
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
COL6A2, GLY283ARG

In a 20-year-old patient with UCMD (254090), Nadeau et al. (2009)
identified a heterozygous 847G-A transition in exon 6 of the COL6A2
gene, resulting in a gly283-to-arg (G283R) substitution. The patient had
onset at birth with hypotonia, contractures, scoliosis, and delayed
motor development. Walking with support was achieved at age 3.3 years,
but the patient became wheelchair-bound at age 10. Nocturnal ventilation
was also required. Skin changes included follicular hyperkeratosis and
keloid formation.

.0014
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, DIGENIC, COL6A1/COL6A2
COL6A2, ARG498HIS

In a 25-year-old patient with UCMD (254090), Nadeau et al. (2009)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in 2 different genes:
a 1493G-A transition in exon 18 of the COL6A2 gene, resulting in an
arg498-to-his (R498H) substitution, and a substitution in the COL6A1
gene (G281R; 120220.0014). The findings were consistent with digenic
inheritance. The patient had onset at age 1.5 years of delayed motor
development with proximal muscle weakness. Independent walking was
achieved, but the patient became wheelchair-bound at age 19. Spinal
rigidity, scoliosis, and contractures were also present, as well as
follicular hyperkeratosis and a requirement for nocturnal ventilation.

.0015
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, GLU624LYS

In a Brazilian girl with Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (254090),
Zhang et al. (2010) identified a homozygous 1870G-A transition in the
COL6A2 gene, resulting in a glu624-to-lys (E624K) substitution in the C1
globular subdomain. Sequence alignment and molecular modeling indicated
that the mutation occurred in a consensus metal ion-dependent adhesion
site (MIDAS). Patient fibroblasts deposited abundant collagen VI
microfibrils that were thick and abnormally knotty. HEK293 cells
transfected with the mutation assembled low levels of short collagen VI
microfibrils. The E624K mutation did not affect collagen VI formation
and assembly and did not exert a dominant-negative effect, as
heterozygous family members were unaffected. However, the E624K-mutant
chain was less efficient in supporting microfibrillar assembly than
wildtype.

.0016
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, ARG876SER

In a young man, born of consanguineous Filipino parents, with Ullrich
congenital muscular dystrophy (254090), Zhang et al. (2010) identified a
homozygous 2626C-A transversion in the COL6A2 gene, resulting in an
arg876-to-ser (R876S) substitution in the beta-2 strand of the C2
globular subdomain. Patient fibroblasts produced almost no collagen VI
microfibrils in the extracellular matrix. The minute amounts of COL6A2
that were produced consisted of the C2a splice variant with a shorter
alternative C2 subdomain not affected by the missense mutation. The C2a
splice variant COL6A2 was not assembled into a triple-helical collagen
VI molecule. HEK293 cells transfected with the R876S mutation showed
intracellular retention of the mutant chain and were unable to
synthesize normal collagen VI microfibrils. However, the patient showed
a slightly less severe phenotype than another affected patient with a
different mutation (see 120240.0015), suggesting that the low levels of
COL6A2 with alternatively spliced C2a may have functionally compensated
for loss of normal COL6A2.

.0017
BETHLEM MYOPATHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, ARG830GLN AND ARG843TRP

In a 25-year-old woman with Bethlem myopathy (158810), Gualandi et al.
(2009) identified compound heterozygosity for variations in the COL6A2
gene. The maternal allele carried a 2571G-A and a 2609C-T transition,
both in exon 28, resulting in an arg830-t-gln (R830Q) and an
arg843-to-trp (R843W) substitution, respectively, in the C2 domain. Both
mutations affected highly conserved residues. The paternal allele
carried a Q819X (120240.0011) substitution. The patient had onset of
progressive proximal muscle weakness at age 2 years. During the course
of the disorder, she developed prominent joint contractures and
decreased forced vital capacity (65% of predicted), but retained
independent ambulation. Muscle biopsy showed a myopathic pattern and
fibrosis with mildly decreased collagen VI staining. Studies of
fibroblasts showed absence of collagen VI tetramer formation, but
electron microscopy showed correct filamentous and interconnected
collagen VI microfilaments. Gualandi et al. (2009) concluded that this
woman showed rare autosomal recessive inheritance of Bethlem myopathy
based on her genotype. However, the authors noted that the R819X
mutation escaped nonsense-mediated decay and was thought not to be
pathogenic in the heterozygous state, based on the report of Merlini et
al. (2008). The fact that the woman reported by Gualandi et al. (2009)
carried COL6A2 mutations on both alleles had implications for genetic
counseling.

.0018
BETHLEM MYOPATHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, ARG366TER

In a 47-year-old man with Bethlem myopathy (158810), Gualandi et al.
(2009) identified compound heterozygous mutations in the COL6A2 gene: a
1178C-T transition in exon 12, resulting in an arg366-to-ter (R366X)
substitution, and a de novo 2693G-A transition in exon 28, resulting in
an asp871-to-asn (D871N; 120240.0019) substitution in a conserved region
of the C2 domain. The nonsense mutation was demonstrated to undergo
nonsense-mediated decay. The patient's unaffected mother carried the
heterozygous R377X mutation, suggesting that it is not pathogenic in the
heterozygous state. The patient was born with talipes equinovarus and
had Achilles contractures in childhood. He had limb-girdle weakness with
joint contractures and reduced vital capacity (64% of predicted). At age
47, he could walk with aid, but could no longer rise from the floor.
Muscle biopsy showed dystrophic features and decreased collagen VI.
Studies of fibroblasts showed severely decreased levels of all forms of
collagen VI, and electron microscopy showed irregular collagen VI
microfilaments with absence of normal network structure. Gualandi et al.
(2009) concluded that this patient had autosomal recessive Bethlem
myopathy because of the genotype and his ability to remain ambulatory.
The authors stated that the combination of a missense and a nonsense
mutation in the COL6A2 gene had not previously been reported, yielding
implications for genetic counseling.

.0019
BETHLEM MYOPATHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, ASP871ASN

See 120240.0018 and Gualandi et al. (2009).

.0020
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, 6-BP DEL, 1855

In a girl with UCMD (254090), Tooley et al. (2010) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the COL6A2 gene: a 6-bp deletion in
exon 25 (1855_1860del6) causing an in-frame deletion of 2 amino acids in
the N-terminal C1 VWA domain (V619_I620del2), and a G-to-T transversion
in intron 23 (1771-1G-T; 120240.0021), resulting in the skipping of exon
24, a frameshift, and premature termination. Each mutation was inherited
from an unaffected parent. Northern blot analysis of patient fibroblasts
showed that the intron 23 mutation resulted in nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay. Patient fibroblasts showed reduced, but present, collagen VI
production, indicating that the COL6A1 and COL6A3 chains could associate
with mutant COL6A2, forming monomers, dimers, and tetramers. However,
kinetic studies showed that the mutation delayed the assembly and
secretion of collagen VI compared to controls, and several additional
approaches showed that the mutation prevented the association of
secreted tetramers into collagen VI microfibrils. Recombinant C1 domains
containing the mutation were insoluble and retained intracellularly as
disulfide-bonded aggregates, consistent with misfolding. The findings
indicated that a correctly folded COL6A2 C1 domain is important for
microfibril assembly.

.0021
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A3, IVS23AS, G-T, -1

See 120240.0020 and Tooley et al. (2010).

REFERENCE 1. Ackerman, C.; Locke, A. E.; Feingold, E.; Reshey, B.; Espana, K.;
Thusberg, J.; Mooney, S.; Bean, L. J. H.; Dooley, K. J.; Cua, C. L.;
Reeves, R. H.; Sherman, S. L.; Maslen, C. L.: An excess of deleterious
variants in VEGF-A pathway genes in Down-syndrome-associated atrioventricular
septal defects. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 91: 646-659, 2012.

2. Baker, N. L.; Morgelin, M.; Pace, R. A.; Peat, R. A.; Adams, N.
E.; Gardner, R. J. M.; Rowland, L. P.; Miller, G.; De Jonghe, P.;
Ceulemans, B.; Hannibal, M. C.; Edwards, M.; Thompson, E. M.; Jacobson,
R.; Quinlivan, R. C. M.; Aftimos, S.; Kornberg, A. J.; North, K. N.;
Bateman, J. F.; Lamande, S. R.: Molecular consequences of dominant
Bethlem myopathy collagen VI mutations. Ann. Neurol. 62: 390-405,
2007.

3. Baker, N. L.; Morgelin, M.; Peat, R.; Goemans, N.; North, K. N.;
Bateman, J. F.; Lamande, S. R.: Dominant collagen VI mutations are
a common cause of Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 14: 279-293, 2005.

4. Chu, M.-L.; Pan, T.-C.; Conway, D.; Kuo, H.-J.; Glanville, R. W.;
Timpl, R.; Mann, K.; Deutzmann, R.: Sequence analysis of alpha 1(VI)
and alpha 2(VI) chains of human type VI collagen reveals internal
triplication of globular domains similar to the A domains of von Willebrand
factor and two alpha-2(VI) chain variants that differ in the carboxy
terminus. EMBO J. 8: 1939-1946, 1989.

5. Gualandi, F.; Urciuolo, A.; Martoni, E.; Sabatelli, P.; Squarzoni,
S.; Bovolenta, M.; Messina, S.; Mercuri, E.; Franchella, A.; Ferlini,
A.; Bonaldo, P; Merlini, L.: Autosomal recessive Bethlem myopathy. Neurology 73:
1883-1891, 2009.

6. Higuchi, I.; Shiraishi, T.; Hashiguchi, T,; Suehara, M.; Niiyama,
T.; Nakagawa, M.; Arimura, K.; Maruyama, I.; Osame, M.: Frameshift
mutation in the collagen VI gene causes Ullrich's disease. Ann. Neurol. 50:
261-265, 2001.

7. Jobsis, G. J.; Bolhuis, P. A.; Boers, J. M.; Baas, F.; Wolterman,
R. A.; Hensels, G. W.; de Visser, M.: Genetic localization of Bethlem
myopathy. Neurology 46: 779-782, 1996.

8. Jobsis, G. J.; Keizers, H.; Vreijling, J. P.; de Visser, M.; Speer,
M. C.; Wolterman, R. A.; Baas, F.; Bohlhuis, P. A.: Type VI collagen
mutations in Bethlem myopathy, an autosomal dominant myopathy with
contractures. Nature Genet. 14: 113-115, 1996.

9. Klewer, S. E.; Krob, S. L.; Kolker, S. J.; Kitten, G. T.: Expression
of type VI collagen in the developing mouse heart. :Dev. Dyn. 211:
248-255, 1998.

10. Kuo, H.-J.; Maslen, C. L.; Keene, D. R.; Glanville, R. W.: Type
VI collagen anchors endothelial basement membranes by interacting
with type IV collagen. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 26522-26529, 1997.

11. Lampe, A. K.; Dunn, D. M.; von Niederhausern, A. C.; Hamil, C.;
Aoyagi, A.; Laval, S. H.; Marie, S. K.; Chu, M.-L.; Swoboda, K.; Muntoni,
F.; Bonnemann, C. G.; Flanigan, K. M.; Bushby, K. M. D.; Weiss, R.
B.: Automated genomic sequence analysis of the three collagen VI
genes: applications to Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy and Bethlem
myopathy. J. Med. Genet. 42: 108-120, 2005.

12. Lucarini, L.; Giusti, B.; Zhang, R.-Z.; Pan, T.-C.; Jimenez-Mallebrera,
C.; Mercuri, E.; Muntoni, F.; Pepe, G.; Chu, M.-L.: A homozygous
COL6A2 intron mutation causes in-frame triple-helical deletion and
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay in a patient with Ullrich congenital
muscular dystrophy. Hum. Genet. 117: 460-466, 2005.

13. Merlini, L.; Martoni, E.; Grumati, P.; Sabatelli, P.; Squarzoni,
S.; Urciuolo, A.; Ferlini, A.; Gualandi, F.; Bonaldo, P.: Autosomal
recessive myosclerosis myopathy is a collagen VI disorder. Neurology 71:
1245-1253, 2008.

14. Nadeau, A.; Kinali, M.; Main, M.; Jimenez-Mallebrera, C.; Aloysius,
A.; Clement, E.; North, B.; Manzur, A. Y.; Robb, S. A.; Mercuri, E.;
Muntoni, F.: Natural history of Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy. Neurology 73:
25-31, 2009.

15. Saitta, B.; Timpl, R.; Chu, M.-L.: Human alpha-2(VI) collagen
gene: heterogeneity at the 5-prime-untranslated region generated by
an alternate exon. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 6188-6196, 1992.

16. Scacheri, P. C.; Gillanders, E. M.; Subramony, S. H.; Vedanarayanan,
V.; Crowe, C. A.; Thakore, N.; Bingler, M.; Hoffman, E. P.: Novel
mutations in collagen VI genes: expansion of the Bethlem myopathy
phenotype. Neurology 58: 593-602, 2002.

17. Tooley, L. D.; Zamurs, L. K.; Beecher, N.; Baker, N. L.; Peat,
R. A.; Adams, N. E.; Bateman, J. F.; North, K. N.; Baldock, C.; Lamande,
S. R.: Collagen VI microfibril formation is abolished by an alpha-2(VI)
von Willebrand factor type A domain mutation in a patient with Ullrich
congenital muscular dystrophy. J. Biol. Chem. 285: 33567-33576,
2010.

18. Vanegas, O. C.; Bertini, E.; Zhang, R.-Z.; Petrini, S.; Minosse,
C.; Sabatelli, P.; Giusti, B.; Chu, M.-L.; Pepe, G.: Ullrich scleroatonic
muscular dystrophy is caused by recessive mutations in collagen type
VI. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 7516-7521, 2001.

19. Weil, D.; Mattei, M.-G.; Passage, E.; Van Cong, N.; Pribula-Conway,
D.; Mann, K.; Deutzmann, R.; Timpl, R.; Chu, M.-L.: Cloning and chromosomal
localization of human genes encoding the three chains of type VI collagen. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 42: 435-445, 1988.

20. Zhang, R.-Z.; Sabatelli, P.; Pan, T.-C.; Squarzoni, S.; Mattioli,
E.; Bertini, E.; Pepe, G.; Chu, M.-L.: Effects on collagen VI mRNA
stability and microfibrillar assembly of three COL6A2 mutations in
two families with Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy. J. Biol.
Chem. 277: 43557-43564, 2002.

21. Zhang, R.-Z.; Zou, Y.; Pan, T.-C.; Markova, D.; Fertala, A.; Hu,
Y.; Squarzoni, S.; Reed, U. C.; Marie, S. K. N.; Bonnemann, C. G.;
Chu, M.-L.: Recessive COL6A2 C-globular missense mutations in Ullrich
congenital muscular dystrophy: role of the C2a splice variant. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 10005-10015, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/14/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/17/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/28/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/14/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/15/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/30/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/23/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/8/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/11/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/1/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/8/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/8/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/8/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/3/2001
Paul Brennan - updated: 5/21/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 09/18/2013
joanna: 8/21/2013
alopez: 2/14/2013
carol: 8/2/2012
ckniffin: 7/17/2012
terry: 2/18/2011
wwang: 2/18/2011
ckniffin: 1/28/2011
wwang: 1/6/2011
ckniffin: 12/14/2010
alopez: 6/8/2010
carol: 12/23/2009
ckniffin: 12/15/2009
wwang: 4/13/2009
ckniffin: 3/30/2009
wwang: 7/8/2008
ckniffin: 5/23/2008
wwang: 11/30/2007
terry: 11/8/2007
wwang: 10/26/2005
ckniffin: 10/11/2005
wwang: 3/14/2005
wwang: 3/8/2005
terry: 3/1/2005
cwells: 1/15/2003
ckniffin: 1/8/2003
carol: 11/13/2002
ckniffin: 11/8/2002
terry: 6/26/2002
cwells: 4/19/2002
cwells: 4/17/2002
terry: 4/8/2002
carol: 7/19/2001
joanna: 7/18/2001
alopez: 7/17/2001
mcapotos: 7/3/2001
dkim: 12/10/1998
dkim: 12/9/1998
carol: 5/21/1998
mark: 9/6/1996
terry: 9/5/1996
terry: 9/3/1996
mimadm: 4/18/1994
warfield: 4/8/1994
carol: 4/6/1993
carol: 6/17/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990

613247	TITLE *613247 PERILIPIN 4; PLIN4
;;S3-12;;
KIAA1881
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the perilipin family, such as PLIN4, coat intracellular lipid
storage droplets (Wolins et al., 2003).

CLONING

By searching for cDNAs encoding large proteins expressed in brain,
Nagase et al. (2001) identified PLIN4, which they called KIAA1881. The
predicted 1,348-amino acid protein is homologous to the mouse plasma
membrane-associated protein S3-12. RT-PCR ELISA detected ubiquitous
expression of PLIN4, with highest expression in skeletal muscle,
followed by heart and liver, and lowest expression in adult whole brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunofluorescence microscopy, Wolins et al. (2003) demonstrated
that supplementation of mouse adipocytes with fatty acids resulted in a
shift from diffuse S3-12 cytoplasmic expression to S3-12 coating of
lipid droplets on the cell periphery. Over time, Plin1 (170290)
coexpression was observed. Formation of S3-12-coated droplets required
glucose and fatty acids that could be incorporated into triacylglycerol
and was dependent on insulin.

MAPPING

By database analysis, Nagase et al. (2001) mapped the KIAA1881 gene to
chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. XXI. The complete sequences of 60 new
cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins. DNA Res. 8:
179-187, 2001.

2. Wolins, N. E.; Skinner, J. R.; Schoenfish, M. J.; Tzekov, A.; Bensch,
K. G.; Bickel, P. E.: Adipocyte protein S3-12 coats nascent lipid
droplets. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 37713-37721, 2003.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/4/2010

EDITED alopez: 05/12/2010
mgross: 2/4/2010

602189	TITLE *602189 REGULATOR OF G PROTEIN SIGNALING 3; RGS3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The region of homology between the yeast SST2 gene product, which
regulates G protein signaling, and the C. elegans EGL-10 protein defines
the 'regulator of G protein signaling' (RGS) domain (see 602517).
Proteins containing the RGS domain constitute a family of molecules that
appear to function as negative regulators of heterotrimeric G protein
signaling. Several mammalian RGS proteins function as GTPase-activating
proteins for G protein alpha-subunits; see RGS1 (600323) and RGS2
(600861). Based on Southern blotting, Druey et al. (1996) estimated that
there are at least 15 human RGS family members.

CLONING

Druey et al. (1996) searched for homologs of yeast SST2 and cloned an
RGS3 cDNA from a human B-cell cDNA library. It encodes a predicted
519-amino acid protein that has a coiled-coil domain and 4 PEST
sequences. By Northern blotting, RGS3 was expressed as 2 major
transcripts in all tissues tested. RGS3 partially complemented a yeast
SST2 mutation.

Chatterjee et al. (1997) studied RGS3, the largest member of the RGS
family then identified. They found that the RGS domain, conserved among
all RGS proteins, is encoded by 3 exons, while the unique N-terminal
domain of RGS3 is encoded by a single exon.

By screening a mouse embryonic cDNA library using the yeast 2-hybrid
system with the cytoplasmic domain of ephrin-B2 (EFNB2; 600527) as bait,
Lu et al. (2001) isolated cDNAs encoding a cytoplasmic protein, which
they designated Pdz-Rgs3. Pdz-Rgs3 binds ephrin-B2 through a PDZ domain,
and it has an RGS domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Mouse Pdz-Rgs3 can mediate signaling from the ephrin-B cytoplasmic tail.
Lu et al. (2001) showed that Sdf1 (600835), a chemokine with a G
protein-coupled receptor, and Bdnf (113505) are chemoattractants for
cerebellar granule cells, and that Sdf1 chemoattraction is selectively
inhibited by soluble ephrin-B receptor (see 602757). This inhibition
could be blocked by a truncated Pdz-Rgs3 protein lacking the RGS domain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chatterjee et al. (1997) found that the coding region of the human RGS3
gene spans 14.7 kb and contains 6 exons; the 5-prime untranslated region
spans 3.2 kb and contains 2 exons. Comparison of the locations of the
intron-exon boundaries of the human RGS3 gene to those of the human RGS2
gene revealed a remarkable similarity. Using 5-prime-RACE analysis, they
mapped the transcription start site 517 bp upstream of the translation
start site. Many potential regulatory elements were identified in the
5-prime flanking region.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid mapping, Chatterjee et al. (1997) assigned the RGS3
gene to chromosome 9q31-q33.

REFERENCE 1. Chatterjee, T. K.; Eapen, A.; Kanis, A. B.; Fisher, R. A.: Genomic
organization, 5-prime-flanking region, and chromosomal localization
of the human RGS3 gene. Genomics 45: 429-433, 1997.

2. Druey, K. M.; Blumer, K. J.; Kang, V. H.; Kehrl, J. H.: Inhibition
of G-protein-mediated MAP kinase activation by a new mammalian gene
family. Nature 379: 742-746, 1996.

3. Lu, Q.; Sun, E. E.; Klein, R. S.; Flanagan, J. G.: Ephrin-B reverse
signaling is mediated by a novel PDZ-RGS protein and selectively inhibits
G protein-coupled chemoattraction. Cell 105: 69-79, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/26/2001
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 4/15/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/15/1997

EDITED carol: 01/23/2013
mgross: 4/26/2001
psherman: 4/15/1998
mark: 12/15/1997

600532	TITLE *600532 NADH-UBIQUINONE OXIDOREDUCTASE FLAVOPROTEIN 2; NDUFV2
;;COMPLEX I, MITOCHONDRIAL RESPIRATORY CHAIN, 24-KD SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION The NDUFV2 gene encodes the 24-kD subunit of the mitochondrial
NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I of the respiratory chain).

See NDUFV1 (161015) and NDUFV3 (602184) for discussion of this gene
family.

CLONING

De Coo et al. (1995) detected 2 distinct loci for the 24-kD subunit of
complex I in the human genome: a transcribed gene on chromosome 18 and
an inactive locus on chromosome 19. Cosmid clones containing the
functional gene (NDUFV2) and the pseudogene (NDUFV2P1) were isolated.

GENE STRUCTURE

De Coo et al. (1995) determined that the NDUFV2 gene spans approximately
20 kb and contains 8 exons.

Hattori et al. (1995) demonstrated that the NDUFV2 gene spans 31.5 kb.
The 5-prime flanking region lacks typical CAAT and TATA boxes but
contains 3 putative GC boxes. There is 1 GC box at the beginning of the
first intron.

MAPPING

De Coo et al. (1995) assigned the NDUFV2 gene to chromosome 18 by
Southern blot analysis of a panel of human/rodent somatic cell hybrids.
They regionalized the gene to 18p11.31-p11.2 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH). The NDUFV2P1 gene was assigned to 19q13.3-qter by
FISH. The pseudogene differed from the cDNA sequence by the lack of the
methionine initiator codon, an additional 165 bp in the first intron
sequence, and a 1-bp deletion.

Hattori et al. (1995) mapped NDUFV2 to 18p11.3 by FISH.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a patient with mitochondrial complex I deficiency (252010)
characterized by early-onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and
encephalopathy, Benit et al. (2003) identified a mutation in the NDUFV2
gene (600532.0002).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RECLASSIFIED - VARIANT OF UNKNOWN SIGNIFICANCE
NDUFV2, ALA29VAL

This variant, formerly titled PARKINSON DISEASE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, has
been reclassified based on the lack of replication studies.

Within the central nervous system, complex I deficiency appears to be
confined to the substantia nigra. Evidence implicates the 24-kD subunit
of mitochondrial complex I in the pathogenesis of Parkinson disease (see
556500). Hattori et al. (1998) analyzed the NDUFV2 gene in 126 patients
with Parkinson disease and in 113 unrelated individuals without
neurodegenerative disorders. They identified a novel ala29-to-val
polymorphism. The frequency of homozygotes for val29 was significantly
higher in PD patients (23.8%) than in control subjects (11.5%). The risk
of developing PD associated with homozygosity for this mutation was
calculated as 2.40.

.0002
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY
NDUFV2, 4-BP DEL, NT5

In an infant with isolated complex I deficiency (252010), Benit et al.
(2003) identified a 4-bp deletion of nucleotides 5 to 8 at the 5-prime
end of IVS2 of the NDUFV2 gene, resulting in skipping of exon 2. The
parents were first cousins of African ancestry. The male infant
presented at 5 days of life with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, truncal
hypotonia, and encephalopathy. Benit et al. (2003) stated that whereas
mutations in a number of genes encoding complex I subunits result in
neurologic symptoms, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and encephalopathy have
been described previously only with a mutation in NDUFS2 (Loeffen et
al., 2001; see 602985.0001).

REFERENCE 1. Benit, P.; Beugnot, R.; Chretien, D.; Giurgea, I.; De Lonlay-Debeney,
P.; Issartel, J.-P.; Corral-Debrinski, M.; Kerscher, S.; Rustin, P.;
Rotig, A.; Munnich, A.: Mutant NDUFV2 subunit of mitochondrial complex
I causes early onset hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and encephalopathy. Hum.
Mutat. 21: 582-586, 2003.

2. de Coo, R.; Buddiger, P.; Smeets, H.; Geurts van Kessel, A.; Morgan-Hughes,
J.; Weghuis, D. O.; Overhauser, J.; van Oost, B.: Molecular cloning
and characterization of the active human mitochondrial NADH:ubiquinone
oxidoreductase 24-kDa gene (NDUFV2) and its pseudogene. Genomics 26:
461-466, 1995.

3. Hattori, N.; Suzuki, H.; Wang, Y.; Minoshima, S.; Shimizu, N.;
Yoshino, H.; Kurashima, R.; Tanaka, M.; Ozawa, T.; Mizuno, Y.: Structural
organization and chromosomal localization of the human nuclear gene
(NDUFV2) for the 24-kDa iron-sulfur subunit of complex I in mitochondrial
respiratory chain. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 216: 771-777,
1995.

4. Hattori, N.; Yoshino, H.; Tanaka, M.; Suzuki, H.; Mizuno, Y.:
Genotype in the 24-kDa subunit gene (NDUFV2) of mitochondrial complex
I and susceptibility to Parkinson disease. Genomics 49: 52-58, 1998.

5. Loeffen, J.; Elpeleg, O.; Smeitink, J.; Smeets, R.; Stockler-Ipsiroglu,
S.; Mandel, H.; Sengers, R.; Trijbels, F.; van den Heuvel, L.: Mutations
in the complex I NDUFS2 gene of patients with cardiomyopathy and encephalomyopathy. Ann.
Neurol. 49: 195-201, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/11/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/17/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/17/1995

EDITED ckniffin: 11/16/2010
carol: 9/21/2005
ckniffin: 8/29/2005
cwells: 7/17/2003
terry: 7/11/2003
jlewis: 6/29/1999
jlewis: 6/24/1999
terry: 6/17/1999
carol: 8/19/1998
mark: 12/14/1997
mark: 2/1/1996
terry: 1/25/1996
mark: 5/17/1995

602707	TITLE *602707 PROTEASOME 26S SUBUNIT, ATPase, 4; PSMC4
;;TAT-BINDING PROTEIN 7; TBP7;;
PROTEASE 26S, SUBUNIT 6; S6
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Ohana et al. (1993) identified a cDNA encoding Tat-binding protein-7
(TBP7). The predicted 458-amino acid TBP7 protein is 57% identical to
TBP1 (PSMC3; 186852) over a 210-amino acid stretch. Using the yeast
2-hybrid system, Ohana et al. (1993) found that TBP1 and TBP7 can form
heterodimers. They suggested that the dimerization was mediated by the
N-terminal leucine zipper domains of these proteins. By
immunofluorescence, Ohana et al. (1993) showed that TBP7 is located
primarily in the nucleus.

Ubiquitinated proteins are degraded by a 26S ATP-dependent protease that
consists of more than 30 subunits (see PSMC1; 602706). By protein
sequence analysis, Dubiel et al. (1994) found that subunit 6 (S6), an
approximately 50-kD polypeptide, is encoded by the TBP7 gene. Dubiel et
al. (1994) noted differences between the C-terminal regions of S6 and
the predicted TBP7 protein described by Ohana et al. (1993) and
attributed them to a hypothetical frameshift in TBP7 resulting from a
sequencing error. The predicted 418-amino acid S6 protein contains an
ATPase domain similar to those of PSMC1 and PSMC2 (154365).

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Tanahashi et al. (1998) mapped
the PSMC4 gene to 19q13.11-q13.13. By interspecific backcross analysis,
Sakao et al. (2000) mapped the mouse Psmc4 gene to chromosome 7.

REFERENCE 1. Dubiel, W.; Ferrell, K.; Rechsteiner, M.: Tat-binding protein
7 is a subunit of the 26S protease. Biol. Chem. Hoppe Seyler 375:
237-240, 1994.

2. Ohana, B.; Moore, P. A.; Ruben, S. M.; Southgate, C. D.; Green,
M. R.; Rosen, C. A.: The type 1 human immunodeficiency virus Tat
binding protein is a transcriptional activator belonging to an additional
family of evolutionarily conserved genes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90:
138-142, 1993.

3. Sakao, Y.; Kawai, T.; Takeuchi, O.; Copeland, N. G.; Gilbert, D.
J.; Jenkins, N. A.; Takeda, K.; Akira, S.: Mouse proteasomal ATPases
Psmc3 and Psmc4: genomic organization and gene targeting. Genomics 67:
1-7, 2000.

4. Tanahashi, N.; Suzuki, M.; Fujiwara, T.; Takahashi, E.; Shimbara,
N.; Chung, C. H.; Tanaka, K.: Chromosomal localization and immunological
analysis of a family of human 26S proteasomal ATPases. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 243: 229-232, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 2/15/2001

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/10/1998

EDITED carol: 06/11/2012
terry: 9/17/2010
carol: 2/15/2001
psherman: 6/13/1998
psherman: 6/11/1998

609748	TITLE *609748 UBIQUITIN-LIKE 7; UBL7
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

From large-scale screening of a bone marrow stromal cell (BMSC) cDNA
library, Liu et al. (2003) identified UBL7, a novel cDNA encoding a
deduced 380-amino acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of 40.6
kD. The protein, which they designated BMSC-UbP, contains a UBQ domain
at its N terminus and a ubiquitin-associated domain at its C terminus.
It shares moderate homology with several ubiquitin-like proteins
including UBQLN1 (605046) and UBQLN2 (300264). Northern blot analysis
revealed an approximately 1.3-kb UBL7 transcript in all human tissues
tested. RT-PCR detected expression of UBL7 in several tumor cell lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Liu et al. (2003) found that expression of UBL7 was significantly
down-regulated in PMA-stimulated BMSC but was not obviously changed in
LPS-stimulated BMSC. UBL7 expression was up-regulated in LPS-stimulated
acute promyelocytic HL60 cells but remained unchanged in PMA-stimulated
HL60 cells. Liu et al. (2003) suggested that UBL7 may play a role in the
regulation of BMSC function or cell differentiation through an evocator-
and cell-specific pattern.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Liu et al. (2003) mapped the UCL7 gene to
chromosome 15q22.3-q23.

REFERENCE 1. Liu, S.; Yu, Y.; An, H.; Li, N.; Lin, N.; Wang, W.; Zhang, W.;
Wan, T.; Cao, X.: Cloning and identification of a novel ubiquitin-like
protein, BMSC-UbP, from bone marrow stromal cells. Immun. Lett. 68:
169-175, 2003.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 12/1/2005

EDITED carol: 12/01/2005
carol: 12/1/2005

602848	TITLE *602848 BROMODOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 8; BRD8
;;SKELETAL MUSCLE ABUNDANT PROTEIN; SMAP;;
THYROID HORMONE RECEPTOR-INTERACTING PROTEIN p120
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Nielsen et al. (1996) isolated a random human cDNA that they termed
SMAP. The cDNA predicted a 757-amino acid protein with a mass of 81 kD.
Northern blot analysis revealed that the gene is expressed predominantly
as a 3.5-kb mRNA most strongly in skeletal muscle and at varying levels
in other tissues and cell lines. The SMAP protein sequence contains a
bromodomain at its C terminus, many acidic residues, several small
proline-rich segments, and a number of potential phosphorylation sites.
These sequence motifs suggest that SMAP is a transcription factor.

Monden et al. (1997) isolated a human cDNA, termed p120, based on its
interaction with the ligand-binding domain of the thyroid hormone
receptor (190160). The p120 cDNA encodes a 920-amino acid protein with a
mass of 120 kD that Monden et al. (1997) suggested was a longer,
alternatively spliced transcript of SMAP. The 2 cDNAs differ at their
5-prime ends. Northern blot analysis revealed that the p120 cDNA is
transcribed as mRNAs of 3.5 and 4.8 kb at varying levels in all human
tissues tested.

GENE FUNCTION

Monden et al. (1997) expressed the p120 cDNA in vitro and showed that it
interacts with the thyroid hormone receptor in a ligand-dependent manner
and enhances thyroid hormone-dependent activation of a reporter
construct. Binding is dependent on a 111-amino acid region at the N
terminus of the p120 protein. They found that p120 is similar to steroid
receptor coactivator 1 (602691) in mediating coactivation on thyroid
response elements (TREs). They reported that p120 also efficiently
coactivates the androgen receptor (313700) in the presence of its
ligand. Thus, Monden et al. (1997) concluded that p120 appears to be a
nuclear receptor coactivator.

The NuA4 histone acetyltransferase (HAT) complex is responsible for
acetylation of the N-terminal tails of histone H4 (see 602822) and H2A
(see 613499) in yeast. Its catalytic subunit, Esa1, is homologous to
human TIP60 (HTATIP; 601409). Using affinity purification, Western blot
analysis, cell fractionation, immunoprecipitation, and mass
spectrometry, Doyon et al. (2004) found that TIP60 and its splice
variant, TIP60B/PLIP, were part of a multisubunit NuA4 complex with HAT
activity in several human cell lines. They identified BRD8 as 1 of 3
subunits specific to the human NuA4 complex.

REFERENCE 1. Doyon, Y.; Selleck, W.; Lane, W. S.; Tan, S.; Cote, J.: Structural
and functional conservation of the NuA4 histone acetyltransferase
complex from yeast to humans. Molec. Cell. Biol. 24: 1884-1896,
2004.

2. Monden, T.; Wondisford, F. E.; Hollenberg, A. N.: Isolation and
characterization of a novel ligand-dependent thyroid hormone receptor-coactivating
protein. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 29834-29841, 1997.

3. Nielsen, M. S.; Petersen, C. M.; Gliemann, J.; Madsen, P.: Cloning
and sequencing of a human cDNA encoding a putative transcription factor
containing a bromodomain. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1306: 14-16, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/8/2007

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 7/14/1998

EDITED mgross: 02/08/2013
mgross: 1/11/2013
mgross: 5/8/2007
mgross: 9/9/2004
alopez: 7/14/1998

179512	TITLE *179512 RAS-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN RAB5A; RAB5A
;;RAB5
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The S. cerevisiae YPT1 and SEC4 genes encode Ras-related GTP-binding
proteins involved in the regulation of secretion. Mammalian cells
express a large number of RAB proteins, GTP-binding proteins closely
related to YPT1 and SEC4. By screening a human pheochromocytoma library
with probes derived from the SEC4 gene and from various rat and human
RAB cDNAs, Zahraoui et al. (1989) isolated cDNAs encoding RAB1 (179508),
RAB2 (179509), RAB3A (179490), RAB3B (179510), RAB4 (179511), RAB5, and
RAB6 (179513). Except for the closely related RAB3A and RAB3B, the
deduced human RAB proteins share 32 to 50% homology. The predicted
214-amino acid RAB5 protein is 31% and 38% identical to SEC4 and YPT1,
respectively. All 6 human RAB proteins tested bound GTP and exhibited
GTPase activities in vitro. Northern blot analysis revealed that RAB5
was expressed as 2.7- and 2.8-kb mRNAs in a human fibroblast cell line.

GENE FUNCTION

Bucci et al. (1992) demonstrated that RAB5 is a rate-limiting component
of the machinery regulating the kinetics of membrane traffic in the
early endocytic pathway.

Stenmark et al. (1995) reported that rabaptin-5 (603616) is an effector
of RAB5 that transmits the signal of the active GTP-bound RAB5
conformation to the membrane docking and/or fusion apparatus. Xiao et
al. (1997) found that tuberin (191092) exhibits substantial
GTPase-activating protein (GAP) activity towards RAB5, and that
rabaptin-5 mediates the tuberin association with RAB5. The authors
suggested that tuberin functions as a RAB5GAP in vivo to negatively
regulate RAB5-GTP activity in endocytosis.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR; 131550) signaling involves small
GTPases of the Rho family, and EGFR trafficking involves small GTPases
of the Rab family. Lanzetti et al. (2000) reported that the EPS8
(600206) protein connects these signaling pathways. EPS8 is a substrate
of EGFR that is held in a complex with SOS1 (182530) by the adaptor
protein E3B1 (603050), thereby mediating activation of RAC (602048).
Through its SH3 domain, EPS8 interacts with RNTRE (605405). Lanzetti et
al. (2000) showed that RNTRE is a RAB5 GTPase-activating protein whose
activity is regulated by EGFR. By entering in a complex with EPS8, RNTRE
acts on RAB5 and inhibits internalization of the EGFR. Furthermore,
RNTRE diverts EPS8 from its RAC-activating function, resulting in the
attenuation of RAC signaling. Thus, depending on its state of
association with E3B1 or RNTRE, EPS8 participates in both EGFR signaling
through RAC and EGFR trafficking through RAB5.

Otomo et al. (2003) showed that the ALS2 protein (ALSIN; 606352)
specifically binds to small GTPase RAB5 and functions as a guanine
nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) for RAB5. Ectopically expressed ALS2
localized with RAB5 and early endosome antigen-1 (EEA1; 605070) onto
early endosomal compartments and stimulated the enlargement of endosomes
in cultured cortical neurons. The C terminus of ALS2 carrying a VPS9
domain mediated not only the activation of RAB5 via a guanine-nucleotide
exchanging reaction but also the endosomal localization of ALS2, whereas
the N-terminal half containing the RCC1 (179710)-like domain acted
suppressive in its membranous localization. The DH/PH domain in the
middle portion of ALS2 enhanced the VPS9 domain-mediated endosome
fusions. Otomo et al. (2003) hypothesized that a perturbation of
endosomal dynamics caused by loss of the ALS2 functional domain that
confers RAB5 GEF activity might underlie neuronal dysfunction and
degeneration in a number of motor neuron diseases.

Miaczynska et al. (2004) identified a pathway directly linking the small
GTPase RAB5, a key regulator of endocytosis, to signal transduction and
mitogenesis. This pathway operated via APPL1 (604299) and APPL2
(606231), 2 RAB5 effectors that reside on a subpopulation of endosomes.
In response to extracellular stimuli such as EGF (131530) and oxidative
stress, APPL1 translocated from the membranes to the nucleus, where it
interacted with the nucleosome remodeling and histone deacetylase (NURD)
multiprotein complex, a regulator of chromatin structure and gene
expression. Both APPL1 and APPL2 were essential for cell proliferation,
and their function required RAB5 binding. These findings identified an
endosomal compartment bearing RAB5 and APPL proteins as an intermediate
in signaling between the plasma membrane and the nucleus.

Lanzetti et al. (2004) demonstrated that RAB5 is indispensable for a
form of receptor tyrosine kinase-induced actin remodeling called
circular ruffling. Three independent signals, originating from RAB5,
phosphatidylinositol-3-hydroxykinase, and RAC (see 602048),
respectively, are simultaneously required for the induction of circular
ruffles. RAB5 signals to the actin cytoskeleton through RNTRE, a
RAB5-specific GTPase-activating protein (GAP). Lanzetti et al. (2004)
demonstrated that RNTRE has the dual function of RAB5-GAP and RAB5
effector. They also showed that RNTRE is critical for macropinocytosis,
a process connected to the formation of circular ruffles. Finally, RNTRE
interacts with both F-actin and actinin-4 (604638), an F-actin bundling
protein. Lanzetti et al. (2004) proposed that RNTRE establishes a
3-pronged connection with RAB5, F-actin, and actinin-4. This may aid
crosslinking of actin fibers into actin networks at the plasma membrane.
Lanzetti et al. (2004) concluded that they showed that RAB5 is a
signaling GTPase and elucidated the major molecular elements of its
downstream pathway.

Using a genetically encoded fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET) biosensor, Kitano et al. (2008) described a change in RAB5
activity during the engulfment of apoptotic thymocytes. RAB5 activity on
phagosome membranes began to increase on disassembly of the actin coat
encapsulating phagosomes. RAB5 activation was either continuous or
repetitive for up to 10 minutes, but it ended before the collapse of
engulfed apoptotic cells. Expression of a dominant-negative mutant of
RAB5 delayed this collapse of apoptotic thymocytes, showing a role for
RAB5 in phagosome maturation. Disruption of microtubules with nocodazole
inhibited RAB5 activation on the phagosome membrane without perturbing
the engulfment of apoptotic cells. Furthermore, Kitano et al. (2008)
found that GAPEX5 (611714) is the guanine nucleotide exchange factor
essential for RAB5 activation during the engulfment of apoptotic cells.
GAPEX5 was bound to a microtubule tip-associating protein, EB1 (603108),
whose depletion inhibited RAB5 activation during phagocytosis. Kitano et
al. (2008) therefore proposed a mechanistic model in which the
recruitment of GAPEX5 to phagosomes through the microtubule network
induces the transient RAB5 activation.

Ohya et al. (2009) reported the reconstitution of early endosomal canine
Rab5 GTPase, its key regulators, and effectors together with SNAREs into
proteoliposomes using a set of 17 recombinant human proteins. These
vesicles behave like minimal synthetic endosomes, fusing with purified
early endosomes or with each other in vitro. Membrane fusion measured by
content-mixing and morphologic assays requires the cooperativity between
Rab5 effectors and cognate SNAREs which, together, form a more efficient
core machinery than SNAREs alone. Ohya et al. (2009) concluded that in
reconstituting a fusion mechanism dependent on both a Rab GTPase and
SNAREs, their work showed that the 2 machineries act coordinately to
increase the specificity and efficiency of the membrane tethering and
fusion process.

Kinchen and Ravichandran (2010) used genetic, cell biologic, and
molecular studies in C. elegans and mammalian cells to identify SAND1
and its partner CCZ1 as factors in corpse removal. In worms deficient in
either sand1 or ccz1, apoptotic cells were internalized and the
phagosomes recruited the small GTPase Rab5 but failed to progress to the
subsequent Rab7 (602298)-positive stage. The mammalian orthologs of
SAND1, namely MON1A (611464) and MON1B (608954), were similarly required
for phagosome maturation. Mechanistically, Mon1 interacts with GTP-bound
Rab5, identifying Mon1 as a previously unrecognized Rab5 effector.
Moreover, a Mon1-Ccz1 complex (but neither protein alone) could bind
Rab7 and could also influence Rab7 activation, suggesting Mon1-Ccz1 as
an important link in progression from the Rab5-positive stage to the
Rab7-positive stage of phagosome maturation. Taken together, Kinchen and
Ravichandran (2010) concluded that these data identified SAND1 and CCZ1
as critical and evolutionarily conserved components regulating the
processing of ingested apoptotic cell corpses.

To test the hypothesis that Rab5 is a master regulator of endosome
biogenesis, Zeigerer et al. (2012) developed a mathematical model of
endosome dependency on Rab5 and validated it by titrating down all 3
Rab5 isoforms in adult mouse liver using state-of-the-art RNA
interference technology. Unexpectedly, the endocytic system was
resilient to depletion of Rab5 and collapsed only when Rab5 decreased to
a critical level. Loss of Rab5 below this threshold caused a marked
reduction in the number of early endosomes, late endosomes, and
lysosomes, associated with a block of low-density lipoprotein
endocytosis. Loss of endosomes caused failure to deliver apical proteins
to the bile canaliculi, suggesting a requirement for polarized cargo
sorting. Zeigerer et al. (2012) concluded that their results
demonstrated for the first time the role of Rab5 as an endosome
organizer in vivo and revealed the resilience mechanisms of the
endocytic system.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Rousseau-Merck et al. (1991) mapped the RAB5
gene to 3p24-p22. This gene was designated RAB5A after the
identification and naming of RAB5B (179514).

REFERENCE 1. Bucci, C.; Parton, R. G.; Mather, I. H.; Stunnenberg, H.; Simons,
K.; Hoflack, B.; Zerial, M.: The small GTPase rab5 functions as a
regulatory factor in the early endocytic pathway. Cell 70: 715-728,
1992.

2. Kinchen, J. M.; Ravichandran, K. S.: Identification of two evolutionarily
conserved genes regulating processing of engulfed apoptotic cells. Nature 464:
778-782, 2010.

3. Kitano, M.; Nakaya, M.; Nakamura, T.; Nagata, S.; Matsuda, M.:
Imaging of Rab5 activity identifies essential regulators for phagosome
maturation. Nature 453: 241-245, 2008.

4. Lanzetti, L.; Palamidessi, A.; Areces, L.; Scita, G.; Di Fiore,
P. P.: Rab5 is a signalling GTPase involved in actin remodelling
by receptor tyrosine kinases. Nature 429: 309-314, 2004.

5. Lanzetti, L.; Rybin, V.; Malabarba, M. G.; Christoforidis, S.;
Scita, G.; Zerial, M.; Di Fiore, P. P.: The Eps8 protein coordinates
EGF receptor signalling through Rac and trafficking through Rab5. Nature 408:
374-377, 2000.

6. Miaczynska, M.; Christoforidis, S.; Giner, A.; Shevchenko, A.;
Uttenweiler-Joseph, S.; Habermann, B.; Wilm, M.; Parton, R. G.; Zerial,
M.: APPL proteins link Rab5 to nuclear signal transduction via an
endosomal compartment. Cell 116: 445-456, 2004.

7. Ohya, T.; Miaczynska, M.; Coskun, U.; Lommer, B.; Runge, A.; Drechsel,
D.; Kalaidzidis, Y.; Zerial, M.: Reconstitution of Rab- and SNARE-dependent
membrane fusion by synthetic endosomes. Nature 459: 1091-1097, 2009.

8. Otomo, A.; Hadano, S.; Okada, T.; Mizumura, H.; Kunita, R.; Nishijima,
H.; Showguchi-Miyata, J.; Yanagisawa, Y.; Kohiki, E.; Suga, E.; Yasuda,
M.; Osuga, H.; Nishimoto, T.; Narumiya, S.; Ikeda, J.-E.: ALS2, a
novel guanine nucleotide exchange factor for the small GTPase Rab5,
is implicated in endosomal dynamics. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 1671-1687,
2003.

9. Rousseau-Merck, M. F.; Zahraoui, A.; Touchot, N.; Tavitian, A.;
Berger, R.: Chromosome assignment of four RAS-related RAB genes. Hum.
Genet. 86: 350-354, 1991.

10. Stenmark, H.; Vitale, G.; Ullrich, O.; Zerial, M.: Rabaptin-5
is a direct effector of the small GTPase Rab5 in endocytic membrane
fusion. Cell 83: 423-432, 1995.

11. Xiao, G.-H.; Shoarinejad, F.; Jin, F.; Golemis, E. A.; Yeung,
R. S.: The tuberous sclerosis 2 gene product, tuberin, functions
as a Rab5 GTPase activating protein (GAP) in modulating endocytosis. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 6097-6100, 1997.

12. Zahraoui, A.; Touchot, N.; Chardin, P.; Tavitian, A.: The human
rab genes encode a family of GTP-binding proteins related to yeast
YPT1 and SEC4 products involved in secretion. J. Biol. Chem. 264:
12394-12401, 1989.

13. Zeigerer, A.; Gilleron, J.; Bogorad, R. L.; Marsico, G.; Nonaka,
H.; Seifert, S.; Epstein-Barash, H.; Kuchimanchi, S.; Peng, C. G.;
Ruda, V. M.; Del Conte-Zerial, P.; Hengstler, J. G.; Kalaidzidis,
Y.; Koteliansky, V.; Zerial, M.: Rab5 is necessary for the biogenesis
of the endolysosomal system in vivo. Nature 485: 465-470, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/5/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/28/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/9/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/12/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/5/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 5/3/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/15/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 3/9/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/9/1990

EDITED alopez: 06/07/2012
terry: 6/5/2012
alopez: 4/29/2010
terry: 4/28/2010
alopez: 7/15/2009
terry: 7/9/2009
alopez: 6/17/2008
terry: 6/12/2008
tkritzer: 5/5/2005
alopez: 7/12/2004
terry: 7/8/2004
mgross: 5/3/2004
mgross: 11/15/2000
mgross: 3/10/1999
mgross: 3/9/1999
carol: 8/18/1998
carol: 5/4/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 3/22/1991
carol: 7/9/1990

600283	TITLE *600283 GLUTAMATE RECEPTOR, IONOTROPIC, KAINATE 5; GRIK5
DESCRIPTION See GRIK4 (KA1; 600282). The chromosomal localization of the human and
rat genes encoding the kainate-preferring glutamate receptor subunit KA2
(gene symbol, GRIK5) was determined by Southern analysis of rat/mouse
and human/mouse somatic cell hybrid panels and by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (Szpirer et al., 1994). The localization of the mouse
Grik5 gene was established by interspecific backcross mapping. GRIK5 was
found to be located on human 19q13.2, mouse chromosome 7, and rat
chromosome 1.

REFERENCE 1. Szpirer, C.; Molne, M.; Antonacci, R.; Jenkins, N. A.; Finelli,
P.; Szpirer, J.; Riviere, M.; Rocchi, M.; Gilbert, D. J.; Copeland,
N. G.; Gallo, V.: The genes encoding the glutamate receptor subunits
KA1 and KA2 (GRIK4 and GRIK5) are located on separate chromosomes
in human, mouse, and rat. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 11849-11853,
1994.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/5/1995

EDITED carol: 1/5/1995

606165	TITLE *606165 BOL-LIKE; BOLL
;;BOULE, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; BOULE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Deletions encompassing the Y chromosomal DAZ genes (deleted in
azoospermia; 400003) are the most common molecularly defined cause of
infertility in humans. An array of 4 DAZ genes in 2 clusters is located
on the Y chromosome and encodes RNA-binding proteins with a common RNA
recognition motif and a series of 8 to 18 DAZ repeats consisting of 24
amino acids each that are rich in N, Y, and Q amino acid residues. DAZ
homologs, identified in diverse organisms, are required for germ cell
development but differ in null phenotypes and expression patterns. In
flies, disruption of the DAZ homolog 'Boule' causes male meiotic arrest
(Eberhart et al., 1996).

CLONING

Using the yeast 2-hybrid system with a DAZ/DAZL (601486) construct as
bait, Xu et al. (2001) identified an additional member of the human DAZ
gene family, BOULE. The protein encoded by human BOULE is more similar
to Drosophila Boule than to human DAZ or DAZL. The BOULE protein
contains a single RNA binding domain with signature RNP1 and RNP2
repeats. Extensive similarity is shared by the potential RNA binding
domains of fly Boule, human BOULE, DAZ, and DAZL. The protein predicted
by a mouse Boule cDNA clone was 86% identical to human BOULE.

GENE FUNCTION

Xu et al. (2001) found that human and mouse BOULE resemble the
invertebrate meiotic regulator Boule, the proposed ortholog of DAZ, in
sequence and expression pattern, and hence likely perform a similar
meiotic function. In contrast, human DAZ and DAZL are expressed much
earlier than BOULE in prenatal germ stem cells and spermatogonia; DAZL
also is expressed in female germ cells. These data suggested that
homologs of the DAZ gene family can be grouped into 2 subfamilies (BOULE
and DAZL) and that members of the DAZ family evolved from an ancestral
meiotic regulator, Boule, to assume distinct, yet overlapping, functions
in germ cell development.

Xu et al. (2003) reported that a human BOULE transgene was capable of
advancing meiosis in infertile Boule mutant flies. The authors proposed
that BOULE may encode a key conserved switch that regulates progression
of germ cells through meiosis in men.

In Drosophila, Boule is expressed in the prophase of the first meiotic
division and regulates the expression of 'twine,' a cdc25 phosphatase
required for entering the G2/M transition phase to complete the first
meiotic division. Luetjens et al. (2004) investigated whether a common
mechanism underlies the block of germ cell maturation observed in
idiopathic and nonidiopathic azoospermic patients with meiotic arrest
(270960). They examined, by immunohistochemistry, expression of BOULE
and CDC25A phosphatase protein (116947), the human homolog of Drosophila
'twine,' in 47 men with meiotic arrest, mixed atrophy, or normal
spermatogenesis. The presence of genetic alterations in the BOULE gene
was investigated by SSCP. BOULE protein expression in men with complete
spermatogenesis was restricted to stages from leptotene up to stages of
late spermatocytes, whereas CDC25A expression ranged from leptotene
spermatocytes to elongating spermatids. Although spermatocytes were
present in all testicular biopsies with meiotic arrest (28 testes),
BOULE protein expression was completely lacking. In addition, in nearly
all biopsies in which BOULE was absent, CDC25A was concomitantly
lacking. However, no mutations or polymorphisms in the BOULE gene were
identified that could explain the lack of BOULE or CDC25A expression.
The authors concluded that a major group of infertile men with meiotic
arrest lack BOULE protein and its putative target, CDC25A expression.
They also concluded that spermatogenic failure seems to arise from
factor(s) upstream of BOULE, which are possibly involved in regulating
transcription and/or translation of BOULE.

Kee et al. (2009) used a germ cell reporter to quantify and isolate
primordial germ cells derived from both male and female human embryonic
stem cells. By silencing and overexpressing genes that encode germ
cell-specific cytoplasmic RNA-binding proteins (not transcription
factors), Kee et al. (2009) modulated human germ cell formation and
developmental progression and observed that human DAZL (601486)
functions in primordial germ cell formation, whereas closely related
genes DAZ (400003) and BOULE promote later stages of meiosis and
development of haploid gametes.

EVOLUTION

Phylogenetic analyses suggested to Xu et al. (2001) that the DAZ gene
family is composed of 2 subfamilies required for different stages of
germ cell development: DAZL for early germ cell function and Boule for
meiotic function. Boule is the ancestral gene that is conserved from
flies to humans, whereas DAZL arose in the early vertebrate lineage and
DAZ arrived on the Y chromosome during primate evolution. Thus, Xu et
al. (2001) referred to DAZL as the 'father' of DAZ; homologs are
required for both female and male germ cell development in other
organisms. They referred to Boule as the 'grandfather' of DAZ.

Xu et al. (2003) investigated the micro- and macroevolution of BOULE
within primates, mammals, and metazoans. Sequence divergence of BOULE
was unexpectedly low, and rapid evolution was not detectable.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid mapping, Xu et al. (2001) placed the human BOLL gene
on chromosome 2q33 and verified the location by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. The mouse Boule gene maps to chromosome 1, in a region
syntenic to human 2q33. A male sterile mouse mutation, jsd (juvenile
spermatogonial degeneration), maps to mouse chromosome 1 in that region.

ANIMAL MODEL

VanGompel and Xu (2010) generated Boule knockout mice and found it to be
required only for spermatogenesis, as in Drosophila. Meiosis completed
normally in the absence of Boule, and haploid round spermatids were
readily detected. However, round spermatids did not progress beyond step
6, revealing a novel role for Boule in spermiogenesis: the
differentiation of round spermatids into mature spermatozoa. Expression
of key regulators of spermiogenesis was unaffected in Boule -/- mice,
suggesting to the authors that Boule may regulate germ cell
differentiation through a novel pathway.

REFERENCE 1. Eberhart, C. G.; Maines, J. Z.; Wasserman, S. A.: Meiotic cell
cycle requirement for a fly homologue of human deleted in azoospermia. Nature 381:
783-785, 1996.

2. Kee, K.; Angeles, V. T.; Flores, M.; Nguyen, H. N.; Reijo Pera,
R. A.: Human DAZL, DAZ and BOULE genes modulate primordial germ-cell
and haploid gamete formation. Nature 462: 222-225, 2009.

3. Luetjens, C. M.; Xu, E. Y.; Rejo Pera, R. A.; Kamischke, A.; Nieschlag,
E.; Gromoll, J.: Association of meiotic arrest with lack of BOULE
protein expression in infertile men. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89:
1926-1933, 2004.

4. VanGompel, M. J. W.; Xu, E. Y.: A novel requirement in mammalian
spermatid differentiation for the DAZ-family protein Boule. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 19: 2360-2369, 2010.

5. Xu, E. Y.; Lee, D. F.; Klebes, A.; Turek, P. J.; Kornberg, T. B.;
Reijo Pera, R. A.: Human BOULE gene rescues meiotic defects in infertile
flies. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 169-175, 2003.

6. Xu, E. Y.; Moore, F. L.; Reijo Pera, R. A.: A gene family required
for human germ cell development evolved from an ancient meiotic gene
conserved in metazoans. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 7414-7419, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 08/02/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/29/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/2/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/26/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/31/2001

EDITED alopez: 08/02/2013
terry: 9/9/2010
alopez: 1/5/2010
terry: 12/29/2009
alopez: 8/2/2005
tkritzer: 11/2/2004
terry: 10/26/2004
alopez: 7/31/2001

600379	TITLE *600379 MYELIN TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 1; MYT1
;;PROTEOLIPID PROTEIN-BINDING PROTEIN; PLPB1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kim and Hudson (1992) cloned a partial cDNA encoding MYT1, which they
called PLPB1, from a human fetal brain cDNA library. The deduced
726-amino acid sequence has 2 tandem zinc fingers and 4 tandem zinc
fingers separated by a 316-amino acid region containing acidic and
serine-rich domains. The sequence also has numerous potential
phosphorylation sites. Northern blot analysis detected highest
expression of a major 5.5-kb MYT1 transcript in embryonic day-15 mouse
brain and in 8-month-old human brain. Lower expression was detected in
adult mouse and human brain, and no expression was detected in other
tissues. Gel shift analysis indicated that MYT1 was expressed
predominantly in the nervous system and in glial cell lines.

Kim et al. (1997) cloned full-length mouse Myt1. The transcript contains
RNA instability elements in its 3-prime UTR. The deduced 1,077-amino
acid protein contains clusters of 2 zinc fingers and 4 zinc fingers
separated by 289 amino acids. Northern blot analysis of developing rat
brain detected Myt1 expression from embryonic day 13, with a peak at
embryonic days 15 to 17. Expression then declined and was maintained at
very low levels in adult. Northern blot analysis detected highest Myt1
expression in cultured rat oligodendrocyte progenitor cells, with little
to no expression in cultured astrocytes or oligodendrocytes. In situ
hybridization of postnatal day-3 cervical spinal cord revealed a pattern
of Myt1 expression consistent with glial cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Using gel mobility shift assays, Kim and Hudson (1992) demonstrated that
recombinant MYT1 fragments containing either the upstream 2 zinc fingers
or the downstream 4 zinc fingers bound the same cis regulatory element
in the PLP1 (300401) promoter in vitro. DNA binding required Zn(2+), but
not other divalent cations.

MAPPING

By PCR of a panel of human/rodent cell lines, Kim et al. (1997) mapped
the MYT1 gene to chromosome 20. They mapped the mouse Myt1 gene to a
region of chromosome 2 that shares homology of synteny with human
chromosome 20q13.

REFERENCE 1. Kim, J. G.; Armstrong, R. C.; Agoston, D.; Robinsky, A.; Wiese,
C.; Nagle, J.; Hudson, L. D.: Myelin transcription factor 1 (Myt1)
of the oligodendrocyte lineage, along with a closely related CCHC
zinc finger, is expressed in developing neurons in the mammalian central
nervous system. J. Neurosci. Res. 50: 272-290, 1997.

2. Kim, J. G.; Hudson, L. D.: Novel member of the zinc finger superfamily:
a C(2)-HC finger that recognizes a glia-specific gene. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 12: 5632-5639, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/9/2009

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 2/8/1995

EDITED mgross: 10/14/2009
terry: 9/9/2009
wwang: 4/19/2006
ckniffin: 8/28/2002
alopez: 3/26/1999
alopez: 3/24/1999
terry: 4/17/1996
joanna: 3/11/1996
joanna: 3/4/1996
carol: 2/9/1995
carol: 2/8/1995

608938	TITLE *608938 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN S6 KINASE, 70-KD, 1; RPS6KB1
;;S6K1;;
p70 S6 KINASE, ALPHA;;
p70(S6K)-ALPHA;;
p70-ALPHA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

RPS6KB1 mediates the rapid phosphorylation of ribosomal protein S6
(180460) on multiple serine residues in response to insulin or several
classes of mitogens (Grove et al., 1991).

CLONING

By screening fibroblast and hepatoma cell line cDNA libraries using a
rat Rps6kb1 probe, Grove et al. (1991) cloned 2 splice variants of human
RPS6KB1, which they designated alpha-I and alpha-II. The deduced
proteins contain 525 and 502 amino acids, respectively, and are
identical except for the 23 additional N-terminal residues present in
alpha-I. Exogenous expression of alpha-I cDNA in COS-7 cells resulted in
closely-spaced ladders of polypeptides between 65 and 70 kD and between
85 and 90 kD, whereas expression of the alpha-II cDNA resulted in
peptides between 65 and 70 kD only. Grove et al. (1991) determined that
alpha-I produced both polypeptide clusters by utilizing 2 initiator
methionine codons, the second of which is present in the alpha-II
transcript. The laddering within the 2 clusters was caused
posttranslational modification of the kinase polypeptide by
phosphorylation at multiple sites.

Gout et al. (1998) described the domain organization of the p70 alpha-1
protein, which includes an N-terminal noncatalytic region, a catalytic
domain, a kinase extension domain, an autoinhibitory domain, and a
C-terminal tail. The p70 alpha-1 protein shares 70% amino acid identity
with the p70 beta protein (RPS6KB2; 608939), and 7 serine or threonine
phosphorylation sites are completely conserved. Northern blot analysis
detected 3.4- and 7.4-kb transcripts in all tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Grove et al. (1991) found that transient expression of p70 S6K alpha-I
and alpha-II in COS-7 cells resulted in a 2.5- to 4.0-fold increase in
overall S6 kinase activity. Immunoblot analysis detected alpha-I and
alpha-II as closely spaced ladders of polypeptides between 85 and 90 kD
and between 65 and 70 kD, respectively. Only the alpha-I and alpha-II
proteins of slowest mobility were associated with S6 kinase activity.
The slower mobility and higher enzymatic activity of the rat p70 S6K
proteins were due to serine/threonine phosphorylation, since
phosphatase-2A inactivated the kinase activity and increased the
mobility of the bands on polyacrylamide gels. Grove et al. (1991)
concluded that acquisition of S6 protein kinase catalytic function is
restricted to the most extensively phosphorylated polypeptides.

Gout et al. (1998) examined the catalytic activity of p70 alpha-1
transiently expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells stably expressing
human insulin receptor (147670). S6 kinase activity was stimulated by
insulin, serum, phorbol ester, and PDGF (see 190040). In transfected
human embryonic kidney cells, serum-activated kinase activity was
potently inhibited by rapamycin and wortmannin in a dose-dependent
manner, suggesting that MTOR (601231) and PI3 kinase (see 602925) are
involved in p70 alpha-1 activation.

Saitoh et al. (1998) characterized p70 S6K-alpha expressed by human
embryonic kidney cells. A 32-mer S6 peptide was phosphorylated by the
wildtype kinase, but not by a catalytically inactivated lys100-to-arg
mutant kinase.

In mammals, MTOR cooperates with PI3K-dependent effectors in a
biochemical signaling pathway to regulate the size of proliferating
cells. Fingar et al. (2002) presented evidence that rat S6k1 alpha-II,
Eif4e (133440), and Eif4ebp1 (602223) mediate Mtor-dependent cell size
control.

Holz et al. (2005) showed that MTOR and S6K1 maneuvered on and off the
EIF3 (see 602039) translation initiation complex in HEK293 cells in a
signal-dependent, choreographed fashion. When inactive, S6K1 associated
with the EIF3 complex, while the S6K1 activator MTOR, in association
with its binding partner RAPTOR (607130), did not. Hormone- or
mitogen-mediated cell stimulation promoted MTOR/RAPTOR binding to the
EIF3 complex and phosphorylation of S6K1. Phosphorylation resulted in
S6K1 dissociation and activation, followed by phosphorylation of S6K1
targets, including EIF4B (603928), which, upon phosphorylation, was
recruited into the EIF3 complex. Holz et al. (2005) concluded that the
EIF3 preinitiation complex acts as a scaffold to coordinate responses to
stimuli that promote efficient protein synthesis.

Dorrello et al. (2006) found that the tumor suppressor programmed cell
death protein-4 (PDCD4; 608610) inhibits the translation initiation
factor EIF4A (see 602641), an RNA helicase that catalyzes the unwinding
of secondary structure at the 5-prime untranslated region of mRNAs. In
response to mitogens, PDCD4 was rapidly phosphorylated on ser67 by the
protein kinase S6K1 and subsequently degraded via the ubiquitin ligase
SCF-beta(TRCP) (603482). Expression in cultured cells of a stable PDCD4
mutant that was unable to bind beta-TRCP inhibited translation of an
mRNA with a structured 5-prime untranslated region, resulted in smaller
cell size, and slowed down cell cycle progression. Dorrello et al.
(2006) proposed that regulated degradation of PDCD4 in response to
mitogens allows efficient protein synthesis and consequently cell
growth.

Robitaille et al. (2013) found that mTORC1 indirectly phosphorylates the
trifunctional protein CAD (carbamoyl phosphate synthetase-2/aspartate
transcarbamoylase/ dihydroorotase; 114010), which catalyzes the first 3
steps in de novo pyrimidine synthesis, on residue S1859 through S6K.
CAD-S1859 phosphorylation promoted CAD oligomerization and thereby
stimulated de novo synthesis of pyrimidines and progression through S
phase of the cell cycle in mammalian cells. Ben-Sahra et al. (2013)
independently showed that activation of mTORC1 led to the acute
stimulation of metabolic flux through the de novo pyrimidine synthesis
pathway. mTORC1 signaling posttranslationally regulated this metabolic
pathway via its downstream target S6K1, which directly phosphorylates
S1859 on CAD. Growth signaling through mTORC1 thus stimulates the
production of new nucleotides to accommodate an increase in RNA and DNA
synthesis needed for ribosome biogenesis and anabolic growth.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the RPS6KB1
gene to chromosome 17 (TMAP SHGC-34099).

ANIMAL MODEL

Shima et al. (1998) generated mice deficient in S6k1 by targeted
disruption. These mice were viable and fertile, but exhibited a
conspicuous reduction in body size during embryogenesis, an effect that
was mostly overcome by adulthood. Shima et al. (1998) hypothesized that
the weak penetrance of the phenotype may arise from increased expression
in S6k1-deficient mice of the highly homologous gene S6k2.

Pende et al. (2000) showed that mice deficient for S6k1, a known
effector of the phosphatidylinositide-3-OH kinase signaling pathway,
were hypoinsulinemic and glucose intolerant. Whereas insulin resistance
was not observed in isolated muscle, such mice exhibited a sharp
reduction in glucose-induced insulin secretion and in pancreatic insulin
content. This was not due to a lesion in glucose sensing or insulin
production, but to a reduction in pancreatic endocrine mass, which was
accounted for by a selective decrease in beta-cell size. Pende et al.
(2000) concluded that the observed phenotype closely parallels those of
preclinical type II diabetes mellitus, in which malnutrition-induced
hypoinsulinemia predisposes individuals to glucose intolerance.

Pende et al. (2004) found that mice deficient in S6k1 or S6k2 were born
at expected mendelian ratios. Compared with wildtype mice, S6k1 -/- mice
were significantly smaller, and S6k2 -/- mice tended to be slightly
larger. Mice lacking both genes showed a sharp reduction in viability
due to perinatal lethality. Analysis of S6 phosphorylation in the
cytoplasm and nucleoli of cells derived from each S6k genotype suggested
that both kinases are required for full S6 phosphorylation, but that
S6k2 may contribute more to the response. Despite the impairment of S6
phosphorylation in cells from double-knockout mice, cell cycle
progression and translation of 5-prime terminal oligopyrimidine mRNAs
were still modulated by mitogens in a rapamycin-dependent manner.
Double-knockout cells also showed persistence of S6 phosphorylation on
the first 2 serines phosphorylated in response to mitogens, and this
step was catalyzed by a MAPK-dependent kinase. Pende et al. (2004)
concluded that a redundancy exists between the S6K and MAPK pathways in
mediating early S6 phosphorylation in response to mitogens.

Um et al. (2004) reported that S6k1-deficient mice are protected against
obesity due to enhanced beta-oxidation; however, on a high-fat diet,
levels of glucose and free fatty acids still rose in S6k1-deficient
mice, resulting in insulin receptor desensitization. Nevertheless,
S6k1-deficient mice remained sensitive to insulin due to the apparent
loss of a negative feedback loop from S6k1 to insulin receptor
substrate-1 (IRS1; 147545), which blunts phosphorylation of serines at
positions 307, 636, and 639, all sites involved in insulin resistance.
Moreover, wildtype mice on a high-fat diet as well as K/K A(y) and ob/ob
mice had markedly elevated S6k1 activity and, unlike S6k1-deficient
mice, increased phosphorylation of Irs1 serines at positions 307, 636,
and 639. Um et al. (2004) concluded that under conditions of nutrient
satiation, S6K1 negatively regulates insulin signaling.

Selman et al. (2009) demonstrated in mice that deletion of S6K1, a
component of the nutrient-responsive mTOR signaling pathway, led to
increased life span and resistance to age-related pathologies such as
bone, immune, and motor dysfunction and loss of insulin sensitivity.
Deletion of S6K1 induced gene expression patterns similar to those seen
in caloric restriction or with pharmacologic activation of adenosine
monophosphate (AMP)-activated protein kinase (AMPK), a conserved
regulator of the metabolic response to caloric restriction.

REFERENCE 1. Ben-Sahra, I.; Howell, J. J.; Asara, J. M.; Manning, B. D.: Stimulation
of de novo pyrimidine synthesis by growth signaling through mTOR and
S6K1. Science 339: 1323-1328, 2013.

2. Dorrello, N. V.; Peschiaroli, A.; Guardavaccaro, D.; Colburn, N.
H.; Sherman, N. E.; Pagano, M.: S6K1- and beta-TRCP-mediated degradation
of PDCD4 promotes protein translation and cell growth. Science 314:
467-471, 2006.

3. Fingar, D. C.; Salama, S.; Tsou, C.; Harlow, E.; Blenis, J.: Mammalian
cell size is controlled by mTOR and its downstream targets S6K1 and
4EBP1/eIF4E. Genes Dev. 16: 1472-1487, 2002.

4. Gout, I.; Minami, T.; Hara, K.; Tsujishita, Y.; Filonenko, V.;
Waterfield, M. D.; Yonezawa, K.: Molecular cloning and characterization
of a novel p70 S6 kinase, p70 S6 kinase beta containing a proline-rich
region. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 30061-30064, 1998.

5. Grove, J. R.; Banerjee, P.; Balasubramanyam, A.; Coffer, P. J.;
Price, D. J.; Avruch, J.; Woodgett, J. R.: Cloning and expression
of two human p70 S6 kinase polypeptides differing only at their amino
termini. Molec. Cell. Biol. 11: 5541-5550, 1991.

6. Holz, M. K.; Ballif, B. A.; Gygi, S. P.; Blenis, J.: mTOR and
S6K1 mediate assembly of the translation preinitiation complex through
dynamic protein interchange and ordered phosphorylation events. Cell 123:
569-580, 2005.

7. Pende, M.; Kozma, S. C.; Jaquet, M.; Oorschot, V.; Burcelin, R.;
Le Marchand-Brustel, Y.; Klumperman, J.; Thorens, B.; Thomas, G.:
Hypoinsulinaemia, glucose intolerance and diminished beta-cell size
in S6K1-deficient mice. Nature 408: 994-997, 2000.

8. Pende, M.; Um, S. H.; Mieulet, V.; Sticker, M.; Goss, V. L.; Mestan,
J.; Mueller, M.; Fumagalli, S.; Kozma, S. C.; Thomas, G.: S6K1-/-/S6K2-/-
mice exhibit perinatal lethality and rapamycin-sensitive 5-prime-terminal
oligopyrimidine mRNA translation and reveal a mitogen-activated protein
kinase-dependent S6 kinase pathway. Molec. Cell. Biol. 24: 3112-3124,
2004.

9. Robitaille, A. M.; Christen, S.; Shimobayashi, M.; Cornu, M.; Fava,
L. L.; Moes, S.; Prescianotto-Baschong, C.; Sauer, U.; Jenoe, P.;
Hall, M. N.: Quantitative phosphoproteomics reveal mTORC1 activates
de novo pyrimidine synthesis. Science 339: 1320-1323, 2013.

10. Saitoh, M.; ten Dijke, P.; Miyazono, K.; Ichijo, H.: Cloning
and characterization of p70(S6K-beta) defines a novel family of p70
S6 kinases. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 253: 470-476, 1998.

11. Selman, C.; Tullet, J. M. A.; Wieser, D.; Irvine, E.; Lingard,
S. J.; Choudhury, A. I.; Claret, M.; Al-Qassab, H.; Carmignac, D.;
Ramadani, F.; Woods, A.; Robinson, I. C. A.; and 10 others: Ribosomal
protein S6 kinase 1 signaling regulates mammalian life span. Science 326:
140-144, 2009. Note: Erratum: Science 334: 39 only, 2011.

12. Shima, H.; Pende, M.; Chen, Y.; Fumagalli, S.; Thomas, G.; Kozma,
S. C.: Disruption of the p70(s6k)/p85(s6k) gene reveals a small mouse
phenotype and a new functional S6 kinase. EMBO J. 17: 6649-6659,
1998.

13. Um, S. H.; Frigerio, F.; Watanabe, M.; Picard, F.; Joaquin, M.;
Sticker, M.; Fumagalli, S.; Allegrini, P. R.; Kozma, S. C.; Auwerx,
J.; Thomas, G.: Absence of S6K1 protects against age- and diet-induced
obesity while enhancing insulin sensitivity. Nature 431: 200-205,
2004. Note: Erratum: Nature 431: 485 only, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 07/08/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/13/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/5/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/31/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/29/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/29/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/22/2004

EDITED alopez: 07/08/2013
terry: 9/14/2012
alopez: 11/16/2009
terry: 11/13/2009
mgross: 5/5/2009
terry: 5/5/2009
alopez: 11/6/2006
terry: 10/31/2006
tkritzer: 11/29/2004
terry: 11/29/2004
tkritzer: 9/30/2004
terry: 9/29/2004
mgross: 9/23/2004
mgross: 9/22/2004

604663	TITLE *604663 WINGLESS-TYPE MMTV INTEGRATION SITE FAMILY, MEMBER 6; WNT6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The WNT genes are a family of highly conserved developmental control
genes. They encode secreted glycoproteins that are involved in
short-range signaling during embryonic patterning. Aberrant expression
of WNTs may contribute to tumorigenesis. See Cadigan and Nusse (1997)
for a review of WNT function and signaling mechanisms.

CLONING

Using degenerate PCR and cDNA library screening to search for new
members of the mouse Wnt family, Gavin et al. (1990) identified Wnt6. By
Northern blot analysis, they detected Wnt6 expression in brain and at
high levels in testis.

In developing mouse embryos, Wnt6 is expressed panectodermally and in
the somites, limb bud, and reproductive system. In adult mice, Wnt6 is
expressed in the mammary gland (Parr et al., 1993, Vainio et al., 1997).
By PCR of human genomic DNA using oligonucleotides designed from regions
of the mouse Wnt6 nucleotide sequence that encode conserved amino acid
sequences, Rankin et al. (1999) isolated a partial WNT6 genomic
sequence. Using this genomic fragment, they identified human ESTs
representing a partial WNT6 coding sequence.

During analysis of human genome draft sequence containing WNT10A
(606268), Kirikoshi et al. (2001) identified WNT6 genomic sequence and
used PCR techniques to assemble a cDNA sequence. WNT6 encodes a deduced
365-amino acid peptide containing residues conserved among WNTs, 2
N-linked glycosylation sites, an N-terminal signal peptide, and an RGD
motif. It shares 47.4% sequence identity with WNT1 (164820). Northern
blot analysis detected expression of a 2.0-kb WNT6 transcript at
moderate levels in placenta and adult spleen. WNT6 was overexpressed in
human cancer cell lines, including HeLa S3 (cervical cancer) and SW480
(colorectal cancer); in the latter cell line, it was coexpressed with
WNT10A. Kirikoshi et al. (2001) hypothesized that, like WNT1 and WNT10B,
WNT10A and WNT6 may play key roles in human carcinogenesis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kirikoshi et al. (2001) determined that WNT6 contains 4 exons and is
clustered with WNT10A in a head-to-tail manner with an interval of less
than 7 kb.

MAPPING

By FISH, Rankin et al. (1999) mapped the human WNT6 gene to 2q35. Nusse
et al. (1991) mapped the mouse Wnt6 gene to chromosome 1. Rankin et al.
(1999) noted that mouse chromosome 1 shares homology of synteny with
human chromosome 2.

REFERENCE 1. Cadigan, K. M.; Nusse, R.: Wnt signaling: a common theme in animal
development. Genes Dev. 11: 3286-3305, 1997.

2. Gavin, B. J.; McMahon, J. A.; McMahon, A. P.: Expression of multiple
novel Wnt-1/int-1-related genes during fetal and adult mouse development. Genes
Dev. 4: 2319-2332, 1990.

3. Kirikoshi, H.; Sekihara, H.; Katoh, M.: WNT10A and WNT6, clustered
in human chromosome 2q35 region with head-to-tail manner, are strongly
coexpressed in SW480 cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 283:
798-805, 2001.

4. Nusse, R.; Brown, A.; Papkoff, J.; Scambler, P.; Shackleford, G.;
McMahon, A.; Moon, R.; Varmus, H.: A new nomenclature for int-1 and
related genes: the Wnt gene family. (Letter) Cell 64: 231-232, 1991.

5. Parr, B. A.; Shea, M. J.; Vassileva, G.; McMahon, A. P.: Mouse
Wnt genes exhibit discrete domains of expression in the early embryonic
CNS and limb buds. Development 119: 247-261, 1993.

6. Rankin, J.; Strachan, T.; Lako, M.; Lindsay, S.: Partial cloning
and assignment of WNT6 to human chromosome band 2q35 by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 84: 50-52, 1999.

7. Vainio, S.; Parr, B.; McMahon, A.: Sexually dimorphic development
of the mammalian reproductive system is regulated by WNT-signaling.
(Abstract) Molec. Biol. Cell (suppl.) 8: 349a only, 12/1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 2/1/2002
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 10/8/2001

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 3/7/2000

EDITED carol: 02/04/2002
terry: 2/1/2002
carol: 10/8/2001
terry: 3/21/2001
mgross: 3/13/2000
psherman: 3/8/2000

194531	TITLE *194531 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 7; ZNF7
;;KOX4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

On the basis of sequence similarity in the repeated zinc finger domain,
Lania et al. (1990) identified and characterized 2 human cDNA clones,
designated ZNF7 and ZNF8, both of which encoded proteins containing
potential finger-like nucleic acid binding motifs. The predicted
686-amino acid ZNF7 protein contains 15 zinc finger domains that
comprise nearly 70% of the protein. Northern blot analysis revealed that
ZNF7 is expressed as 2.8- and 3.3-kb mRNAs in a variety of human cell
lines.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Lania et al. (1990) localized ZNF7 to 8q24 and
ZNF8 to 20q13. Bray et al. (1991) likewise mapped ZNF7 to 8qter by
chromosomal in situ suppression hybridization with fluorescent probe
detection. Bray et al. (1991) determined that the genomic locus
designated ZNF7 corresponds to KOX4 in the set of 30 zinc finger
protein-encoding cDNAs (KOX1-KOX30) previously isolated from a T-cell
library (Thiesen, 1990). They concluded that the human genome contains
many, probably several hundred, zinc finger genes with consensus his/cys
(H/C) link regions.

Huebner et al. (1993) confirmed the assignment of ZNF7 to chromosome
8q24 by analysis of rodent/human somatic cell hybrids and by in situ
hybridization. They showed that ZNF7 is telomeric to the MYC locus
(190080).

REFERENCE 1. Bray, P.; Lichter, P.; Thiesen, H.-J.; Ward, D. C.; Dawid, I. B.
: Characterization and mapping of human genes encoding zinc finger
proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 9563-9567, 1991.

2. Huebner, K.; Druck, T.; LaForgia, S.; Lasota, J.; Croce, C. M.;
Lanfrancone, L.; Donti, E.; Pengue, G.; La Mantia, G.; Pelicci, P.-G.;
Lania, L.: Chromosomal localization of four human zinc finger cDNAs. Hum.
Genet. 91: 217-222, 1993.

3. Lania, L.; Donti, E.; Pannuti, A.; Pascucci, A.; Pengue, G.; Feliciello,
I.; La Mantia, G.; Lanfrancone, L.; Pelicci, P.-G.: cDNA isolation,
expression analysis, and chromosomal localization of two human zinc
finger genes. Genomics 6: 333-340, 1990.

4. Thiesen, H.-J.: Multiple genes encoding zinc finger domains are
expressed in human T cells. New Biologist 2: 363-374, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 5/27/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/11/1990

EDITED alopez: 07/07/2010
alopez: 5/27/1999
dkim: 6/25/1998
mark: 5/14/1996
carol: 6/25/1993
carol: 9/17/1992
carol: 4/1/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/9/1992
carol: 12/4/1991

600933	TITLE *600933 COAGULATION FACTOR II RECEPTOR-LIKE 1; F2RL1
;;G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR 11; GPR11;;
PROTEINASE-ACTIVATED RECEPTOR 2; PAR2;;
PROTEASE-ACTIVATED RECEPTOR 2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Proteinase-activated receptor-2 (PAR2) is a member of the large family
of 7-transmembrane-region receptors that couple to guanine
nucleotide-binding proteins (Nystedt et al., 1995).

CLONING

Nystedt et al. (1994) cloned the mouse Par2 sequence from genomic DNA.

Nystedt et al. (1995) cloned the human PAR2 gene. The deduced 397-amino
acid protein contains an N-terminal signal peptide and 7 transmembrane
domains. Human PAR2 shares 83% amino acid identity with the 399-amino
acid mouse Par2 protein. Northern blot analysis showed that the PAR2
transcript was widely expressed in human tissues, with especially high
levels in pancreas, liver, kidney, small intestine, and colon. Moderate
expression was detected in many organs, but no expression was found in
brain or skeletal muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Nystedt et al. (1994) found that, when expressed in frog oocytes, mouse
Par2 could be activated with nanomolar concentrations of the serine
protease trypsin (276000) but not with thrombin (176930) in doses up to
100 nM.

Nystedt et al. (1995) found that, when expressed in Chinese hamster
ovary cells, human PAR2 responded to trypsin and a peptide from the
receptor sequence. Nystedt et al. (1995) found that the physiologic
activator at PAR2 was apparently not activated by ordinary ligand
binding but by proteolytic cleavage of its extracellular N terminus. The
cleavage left the new amino terminus, a tethered ligand, free to
interact with some other region of the receptor, presumably to effect
receptor activation. Nystedt et al. (1995) noted that PAR2 shares this
special mode of activation with thrombin receptor (F2R, or PAR1;
187930), for which this mechanism was first described.

PAR2 is highly expressed in colon in epithelial and neuronal elements.
Fiorucci et al. (2001) showed that PAR2 activation prevents the
development and induces healing of T helper cell type 1-mediated
experimental colitis induced by intrarectal administration of
2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid (TNBS) in mice. Protection exerted
by PAR2 in TNBS-treated mice was reverted by injecting mice with a
truncated form of calcitonin gene-related peptide (114130) and by
ablation of sensory neurons with the neurotoxin capsaicin. Collectively,
these studies showed that PAR2 is an antiinflammatory receptor in the
colon and suggested that PAR2 ligands might be effective in the
treatment of inflammatory bowel diseases (see 266600).

Ferrell et al. (2003) demonstrated that PAR2 plays a key role in chronic
joint inflammation. Using an adjuvant monoarthritis mouse model of
chronic inflammation, they found that expression of PAR2 was
substantially upregulated in inflamed tissues. Proinflammatory effects
such as prolonged joint swelling and synovial hyperemia were also
induced by PAR2 agonists. Consistent with this, PAR2-deficient mice had
no joint swelling and virtually no histologic evidence of joint damage
after the administration of the adjuvant, whereas heterozygous mice
showed an intermediate phenotype.

Dai et al. (2007) provided evidence for a mechanism in which the
proteases trypsin or tryptase (191080) activate PAR2, which in turn
sensitizes the TRPA1 (604775) channel. Trpa1 and Par2 colocalized in
primary afferent neurons within rat dorsal root ganglia, and patch-clamp
studies in HEK293 cells showed that PAR2 agonists increased TRPA1
currents. The increased sensitivity of TRPA1 was due to phospholipase C
(see 172420), which hydrolyzes plasma membrane
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) and thus releases
PIP2-mediated inhibition of TRPA1. Studies in rats showed that AITC- or
cinnamaldehyde-evoked pain behavior was enhanced by Par2 activation in
vivo.

Pepducins are lipid-conjugated, membrane-tethered, cell-penetrating
peptides that act as agonists or antagonists of their cognate receptor.
Kaneider et al. (2007) found that pepducin antagonists and agonists
based on the third intracellular loop of PAR1 had substantial beneficial
or harmful effects on survival, vascular integrity, and disseminated
intravascular coagulation in mice depending on the stage of sepsis. The
effects of the pepducins were lost in Par1-deficient mice. RNA
interference-mediated suppression of PAR2 expression in human
endothelial cells showed that the protective effects of PAR1 activation
required PAR2. Transactivation of PAR2 signaling by PAR1 was enhanced by
endotoxin-dependent recruitment of PAR1-PAR2 complexes to the
endothelial cell surface. Kaneider et al. (2007) proposed that
therapeutics that selectively activate PAR1-PAR2 complexes may be
beneficial in the treatment of sepsis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Nystedt et al. (1995) determined that the F2RL1 gene contains 2 exons
separated by about 14 kb. Exon 1 encodes 27 amino acids, and exon 2
encodes the remainder of the protein.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Nystedt et al. (1995) mapped the
PAR2 gene to chromosome 5q13. They noted that the thrombin receptor gene
(F2R) also maps to 5q13, raising questions concerning the evolution of
proteinase-activated receptors.

ANIMAL MODEL

Badeanlou et al. (2011) found that tissue factor (TF) (F3; 134390)
activity was upregulated in plasma and epididymal visceral adipose
tissue extracts in mice fed a high-fat diet. Mutant mice lacking the
cytoplasmic domain of Tf (Tf-delta-CT mice) or deficient in Par2
expression (Par2 -/- mice) gained less weight than wildtype mice when
fed a high-fat diet. Tf-delta-CT or Par2 -/- mice also had lower plasma
concentrations of free fatty acids and fasting insulin and glucose, with
improved insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance, compared with
wildtype mice fed a high-fat diet. Tf-delta-CT Par2 -/- double-mutant
mice showed no additive effects. In hematopoietic cells, ablation of
Tf/Par2 signaling reduced adipose tissue macrophage inflammation, and
specific inhibition of macrophage Tf signaling ameliorated insulin
resistance. In nonhematopoietic cells, Tf/activated factor VII (F7;
613878)/Par2 signaling promoted obesity.

REFERENCE 1. Badeanlou, L.; Furlan-Freguia, C.; Yang, G.; Ruf, W.; Samad, F.
: Tissue factor-protease-activated receptor 2 signaling promotes diet-induced
obesity and adipose inflammation. Nature Med. 17: 1490-1497, 2011.

2. Dai, Y.; Wang, S.; Tominaga, M.; Yamamoto, S.; Fukuoka, T.; Higashi,
T.; Kobayashi, K.; Obata, K.; Yamanaka, H.; Noguchi, K.: Sensitization
of TRPA1 by PAR2 contributes to the sensation of inflammatory pain. J.
Clin. Invest. 117: 1979-1987, 2007. Note: Erratum: J. Clin. Invest.
117: 3140 only, 2007.

3. Ferrell, W. R.; Lockhart, J. C.; Kelso, E. B.; Dunning, L.; Plevin,
R.; Meek, S. E.; Smith, A. J. H.; Hunter, G. D.; McLean, J. S.; McGarry,
F.; Ramage, R.; Jiang, L.; Kanke, T.; Kawagoe, J.: Essential role
for proteinase-activated receptor-2 in arthritis. J. Clin. Invest. 111:
35-41, 2003.

4. Fiorucci, S.; Mencarelli, A.; Palazzetti, B.; Distrutti, E.; Vergnolle,
N.; Hollenberg, M. D.; Wallace, J. L.; Morelli, A.; Cirino, G.: Proteinase-activated
receptor 2 is an anti-inflammatory signal for colonic lamina propria
lymphocytes in a mouse model of colitis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98:
13936-13941, 2001.

5. Kaneider, N. C.; Leger, A. J.; Agarwal, A.; Nguyen, N.; Perides,
G.; Derian, C.; Covic, L.; Kuliopulos, A.: 'Role reversal' for the
receptor PAR1 in sepsis-induced vascular damage. Nature Immun. 8:
1303-1312, 2007.

6. Nystedt, S.; Emilsson, K.; Larsson, A.-K.; Strombeck, B.; Sundelin,
J.: Molecular cloning and functional expression of the gene encoding
the human proteinase activated receptor 2. Europ. J. Biochem. 232:
84-89, 1995.

7. Nystedt, S.; Emilsson, K.; Wahlestedt, C.; Sundelin, J.: Molecular
cloning of a potential proteinase-activated receptor. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 91: 9208-9212, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/21/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/11/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/26/2007
Denise L. M. Goh - updated: 4/16/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/7/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/10/1995

EDITED mgross: 12/22/2011
terry: 12/21/2011
mgross: 9/15/2008
terry: 9/11/2008
mgross: 11/6/2007
wwang: 8/15/2007
ckniffin: 7/26/2007
carol: 4/16/2003
carol: 1/20/2002
mcapotos: 1/11/2002
terry: 1/7/2002
carol: 6/28/2000
alopez: 7/7/1998
mark: 4/8/1997
jenny: 4/4/1997
mark: 11/10/1995

614245	TITLE *614245 ACYL-CoA SYNTHETASE FAMILY, MEMBER 3; ACSF3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Fatty acids are incorporated into membranes and signaling molecules and
have roles in energy storage and metabolism. These essential functions
require activation of the fatty acid by acyl-coenzyme A (CoA)
synthetases, such as ACSF3, which form an activating thioester linkage
between the fatty acid and CoA (Watkins et al., 2007).

CLONING

Using highly conserved acyl-CoA synthetase motifs 1 and 2 in a database
search, followed by PCR of a liver cDNA library, Watkins et al. (2007)
cloned human ACSF3. The deduced 576-amino acid protein contains all 5
motifs characteristic of acyl-CoA synthetases.

By Western blot analysis of mouse tissues, Witkowski et al. (2011) found
highest Acsf3 expression in brown adipose tissue, followed by kidney,
and liver. Lower expression was detected in brain, skeletal muscle, and
heart.

GENE FUNCTION

By assaying human ACSF3 expressed in COS-1 cells, Watkins et al. (2007)
showed that ACSF3 preferred a very long chain fatty acid, lignoceric
acid (C24), over palmitate (C16) or octanoic acid (C8).

Sloan et al. (2011) compared human ACSF3 to Bradyrhizobium japonicum
malonyl-CoA synthetase, a well-characterized enzyme, and found that the
proteins were more identical (32%) and similar (50%) to each other than
ACSF3 was to the next closest human ACS family member. Phylogenetic
analyses rooted human ACSF3 with the malonyl-CoA synthetase (MCS)
enzymes and not other ACSs. Sloan et al. (2011) found that ACSF3
activated malonate and methylmalonate, but not acetate, into the
respective coenzyme thioesters. The specific activity of GST-tagged
ACSF3 was higher with malonate as a substrate compared to
methylmalonate, similar to its prokaryotic homologs. Because the first
59 amino acids of ACSF3 were predicted to be a mitochondrial leader
sequence, Sloan et al. (2011) performed immunostaining with fibroblasts
overexpressing ACSF3 and a C-terminal GFP-ACSF3 fusion protein to
experimentally validate the subcellular localization. ACSF3 staining
showed a distinct mitochondrial distribution and colocalized with a
mitochondrial antibody. The comparative sequence analysis, enzymatic
data, and subcellular localization suggested that ACSF3 is a
mitochondrial methylmalonyl-CoA and MCS synthetase, an enzyme postulated
to catalyze the first step of intramitochondrial fatty acid synthesis.

Independently, Witkowski et al. (2011) found that recombinant human
ACSF3 converted malonate to malonyl-CoA in the presence of ATP, Mg(2+),
and CoA. ACSF3 also used methylmalonate and, much more weakly, acetate.
Mutation of a conserved arginine at position 354 abrogated malonyl-CoA
synthetase activity. Knockdown of ACSF3 in HEK293T cells via small
interfering RNA significantly reduced malonyl-CoA synthetase activity
and reduced the amount of malonyl bound to acyl carrier protein
(NDUFAB1; 603836).

GENE STRUCTURE

Watkins et al. (2007) determined that the ACSF3 gene contains 11 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Watkins et al. (2007) mapped the ACSF3
gene to chromosome 16q24.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 8 of 9 patients with combined malonic and methylmalonic aciduria
(CMAMMA; 614265), Sloan et al. (2011) identified mutations in the ACSF3
gene in homozygosity or compound heterozygosity, including 9 missense
mutations, 1 in-frame deletion, and 1 nonsense mutation. Four subjects
were homozygous for their variants. Most of the variants resided in the
C-terminal portion of ACFS3. Eight of the 9 missense mutations and the
in-frame deletion were located in conserved ACS motifs predicted to be
involved in AMP binding (motif I), conformational change and catalytic
function (motif II), substrate binding (motifs III and IV), or catalysis
(motif V). Protein analyses using fibroblasts from subjects 1 through 4
and 7 showed the presence of crossreactive ACSF3. Fibroblasts from
subjects 1 through 4 produced 2.4- to 6-fold more MMA than control cells
after chemical stimulation. Viral expression of ACSF3 but not GFP
restored metabolism and provided validation of ACSF3 function in a cell
culture biochemical assay.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COMBINED MALONIC AND METHYLMALONIC ACIDURIA
ACSF3, ARG558TRP

In 4 individuals with CMAMMA (614265) Sloan et al. (2011) identified a
C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1672 in exon 11 of the ACSF3 gene,
resulting in an arg-to-trp substitution at codon 558 (R558W). One of the
patients was homozygous; she presented at 22 months of age with seizure,
encephalopathy, and recurrent ketoacidosis. The other individuals, who
were compound heterozygous, presented in adulthood at ages ranging from
43 to 55 years with neurologic manifestations. The R558W mutation occurs
in motif V of the ACSF3 protein, a conserved region involved in
catalysis.

.0002
COMBINED MALONIC AND METHYLMALONIC ACIDURIA
ACSF3, ARG523TER

In a 51-year-old man with CMAMMA (614265), Sloan et al. (2011)
identified a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1567 in exon 10 of the
ACSF3 gene, resulting in an arg-to-ter substitution at codon 523
(R523X). The patient presented with complex partial seizures and memory
problems that had onset at age 43. He carried the R558W mutation
(614245.0001) on the other allele. The R523X mutation occurs in motif II
of the ACSF3 protein, a conserved region involved in conformational
change and catalytic function.

.0003
COMBINED MALONIC AND METHYLMALONIC ACIDURIA
ACSF3, GLU359LYS

In a woman with CMAMMA (614265), Sloan et al. (2011) identified compound
heterozygosity for a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 1075 in exon 6 of
the ACSF3 gene, resulting in a glu-to-lys substitution at codon 359
(E359K). The patient presented at age 55 with psychiatric symptoms and
T2 hyperintensities on brain MRI and died at the age of 60. The other
allele of the patient carried the R558W mutation (614245.0001). The
E359K mutation occurs in motif III, involved in substrate binding, of
the ACSF3 gene.

.0004
COMBINED MALONIC AND METHYLMALONIC ACIDURIA
ACSF3, ARG471TRP

In a 66-year-old female with CMAMMA (614265), Sloan et al. (2011) found
homozygosity for a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1411 in exon 9 of the
ACSF3 gene, resulting in an arg-to-trp substitution at codon 471
(R471W). The mutation occurs in motif II, involved in conformational
change and catalytic function. The patient presented with incontinence
and mild memory problems.

.0005
COMBINED MALONIC AND METHYLMALONIC ACIDURIA
ACSF3, ARG471GLN

In a 5-year-old female with CMAMMA (614265), Sloan et al. (2011)
identified a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 1412 in exon 9 of the ACSF3
gene, resulting in arg-to-gln substitution at codon 471 (R471Q). This
mutation was found in compound heterozygosity with a thr358-to-ile
mutation (614245.0006). The patient presented at the age of 4 years with
hypoglycemia, acidosis, poor weight gain, and diarrhea episodes. The
R471Q mutation occurs in motif II of the ACSF3 protein, involved in
conformational change and catalytic function.

.0006
COMBINED MALONIC AND METHYLMALONIC ACIDURIA
ACSF3, THR358ILE

In a patient with CMAMMA (614265), Sloan et al. (2011) identified a
C-to-T transition in exon 6 at nucleotide 1073 of the ACSF3 gene,
resulting in a thr358-to-ile substitution at codon 358 (T358I). This
mutation was found in compound heterozygosity with an R471Q mutation
(614245.0005). The T358I mutation occurs in motif III of the ACSF3
protein, involved in substrate binding.

.0007
COMBINED MALONIC AND METHYLMALONIC ACIDURIA
ACSF3, PRO243LEU

In a 16-month-old male with CMAMMA (614265), Sloan et al. (2011)
identified a homozygous C-to-T transition at nucleotide 728 in exon 4 of
the ACSF3 gene, resulting in a pro-to-leu substitution at codon 243
(P243L). Both parents were heterozygotes. The patient presented at 6
months of age with failure to thrive and elevated transaminases. This
mutation occurs in motif IV of the ACSF3 protein, involved in substrate
binding.

.0008
COMBINED MALONIC AND METHYLMALONIC ACIDURIA
ACSF3, MET198ARG

In a 17-month-old male with CMAMMA (614265), Sloan et al. (2011)
identified a T-to-G transversion at nucleotide 593 in exon 3 of the
ACSF3 gene, resulting in a met-to-arg substitution at codon 198 (M198R).
This mutation was found in homozygosity; the parents were second
cousins. The patient presented with psychomotor delay without regression
at 5 months, microcephaly, dystonia, axial hypotonia, and speech delay.
The mutation occurs in motif I, involved in AMP binding.

.0009
COMBINED MALONIC AND METHYLMALONIC ACIDURIA
ACSF3, LYS462THR AND GLY465_GLY470 DEL

In a 46-year-old female with CMAMMA (614265), Sloan et al. (2011)
identified 2 mutations in cis in the ACSF3 gene: a A-to-C transversion
at nucleotide 1385 resulting in a lys-to-thr substitution at codon 462
(K462T), and an in-frame deletion from nucleotide 1394 to 1411
encompassing the glutamine at position 465 to the glycine at position
470 (del1394_1411, gln465_gly470del). This complex mutation was found in
compound heterozygosity with the R558W mutation (614245.0001). The
patient presented at age 43 with ocular migraines, memory problems, and
T2 hyperintensities on brain MRI.

REFERENCE 1. Sloan, J. L.; Johnston, J. J.; Manoli, I.; Chandler, R. J.; Krause,
C.; Carrillo-Carrasco, N.; Chandrasekaran, S. D.; Sysol, J. R.; O'Brien,
K.; Hauser, N. S.; Sapp, J. C.; Dorward, H. M.; and 13 others:
Exome sequencing identifies ACSF3 as a cause of combined malonic and
methylmalonic aciduria. Nature Genet. 43: 883-886, 2011.

2. Watkins, P. A.; Maiguel, D.; Jia, Z.; Pevsner, J.: Evidence for
26 distinct acyl-coenzyme A synthetase genes in the human genome. J.
Lipid Res. 48: 2736-2750, 2007.

3. Witkowski, A.; Thweatt, J.; Smith, S.: Mammalian ACSF3 protein
is a malonyl-CoA synthetase that supplies the chain extender units
for mitochondrial fatty acid synthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 286: 33729-33736,
2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/9/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/3/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/22/2011

EDITED mgross: 02/17/2012
terry: 2/9/2012
mgross: 12/2/2011
alopez: 10/4/2011
terry: 10/3/2011
mgross: 9/23/2011
mgross: 9/22/2011

604480	TITLE *604480 SIRTUIN 2; SIRT2
;;SIR2, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG-LIKE 2; SIR2L2;;
SIR2L
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The yeast Sir2 (silent information regulator-2) protein (Shore et al.,
1984) regulates epigenetic gene silencing and, as a possible antiaging
effect, suppresses recombination of rDNA. Studies involving cobB, a
bacterial Sir2-like gene, have suggested that Sir2 may encode a pyridine
nucleotide transferase. By in silico and PCR-cloning techniques, Frye
(1999) obtained cDNA sequences encoding 5 human Sir2-like genes, which
they called sirtuin-1 to -5 (SIRT1 to SIRT5). The SIRT1 (604479)
sequence has the closest homology to the S. cerevisiae Sir2 protein,
while SIRT4 (604482) and SIRT5 (604483) more closely resemble
prokaryotic sirtuin sequences. PCR analysis showed that the 5 human
sirtuins are widely expressed in fetal and adult tissues.

Afshar and Murnane (1999) sequenced a full-length SIRT2 (SIR2L) EST
clone. The deduced 352-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular
mass of 39.5 kD. It has 2 potential leucine zipper motifs, 6 possible
N-myristoylation sites, and several potential protein kinase C (see
PRKCA, 176960) phosphorylation sites. Northern blot analysis detected
variable expression of a 2.1-kb transcript in all tissues examined, with
higher expression in heart, brain, and skeletal muscle, and lower
expression in placenta and lung. Fluorescence-tagged SIRT2 localized
primarily in the cytoplasm of transfected human fibroblasts and a tumor
cell line.

GENE FUNCTION

Frye (1999) found that recombinant human SIRT2 was able to cause
radioactivity to be transferred from (32P)NAD to bovine serum albumin
(BSA). When a conserved histidine within SIRT2 was converted to
tyrosine, the mutant recombinant protein was unable to transfer
radioactivity from (32P)NAD to BSA. These results suggested that the
sirtuins may function via mono-ADP-ribosylation of proteins.

Tanny et al. (1999) showed that the yeast Sir2 protein can transfer
labeled phosphate from nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide to itself and
histones in vitro. A modified form of Sir2, which results from its
automodification activity, was specifically recognized by
anti-mono-ADP-ribose antibodies, suggesting that Sir2 is an
ADP-ribosyltransferase. Mutation of a phylogenetically invariant
histidine (his364 to tyr) in Sir2 abolished both its enzymatic activity
in vitro and its silencing functions in vivo. However, the mutant
protein was associated with chromatin and other silencing factors in a
manner similar to wildtype Sir2. These findings suggested that Sir2
contains an ADP-ribosyltransferase activity that is essential for its
silencing function.

Rogina et al. (2002) found that under 2 life-extending conditions, Rpd3
(601241) mutants fed normal food and wildtype flies fed low calorie
food, Sir2 expression was increased 2-fold.

Carbonylated proteins, which are a sign of irreversible oxidative
damage, were visualized in single cells of S. cerevisiae, revealing that
they accumulate with replicative age. Aguilaniu et al. (2003) showed the
carbonylated proteins were not inherited by daughter cells during
cytokinesis. Mother cells of a yeast strain lacking the Sir2 gene, a
life-span determinant, failed to retain oxidatively damaged proteins
during cytokinesis. Aguilaniu et al. (2003) concluded that a genetically
determined, SIR2-dependent asymmetric inheritance of oxidatively damaged
proteins may contribute to free-radical defense and the fitness of
newborn cells.

North et al. (2003) reported that SIRT2 is a predominantly cytoplasmic
protein that colocalizes with microtubules. SIRT2 was found to
deacetylate lys40 of alpha-tubulin (602530) both in vitro and in vivo.
Knockdown of SIRT2 via small interfering RNA resulted in tubulin
hyperacetylation. SIRT2 colocalized and interacted in vivo with HDAC6
(300272), another tubulin deacetylase. Enzymatic analysis of recombinant
SIRT2 in comparison to a yeast homolog of Sir2 protein showed a striking
preference of SIRT2 for acetylated tubulin peptide as a substrate
relative to acetylated histone H3 peptide. These observations
established SIRT2 as a bona fide tubulin deacetylase.

By Western blot analysis of a human osteosarcoma cell line, Dryden et
al. (2003) resolved SIRT2 into isoforms of about 48 kD and above that
differed in their degree of phosphorylation. Using synchronized cells,
they found that the hyperphosphorylated forms of SIRT2 were confined to
the M phase of the cell cycle, coincident with the G2/M transition, and
maintained throughout the M phase. Overexpression of SIRT2 resulted in
increased NAD-dependent deacetylase activity and delayed cell cycle
progression through mitosis. Overexpression of CDC14B (603505), but not
CDC14A (603504) or a CDC14B mutant lacking phosphatase activity, led to
the loss of hyperphosphorylated SIRT2. In the presence of other mitotic
regulators, such as B-type cyclins (see 123836), SIRT2 became
ubiquitinated and was degraded via the 26S proteasome pathway. Dryden et
al. (2003) concluded that SIRT2 is a regulator of mitotic progression
that acts downstream from CDC14B in a pathway regulating mitotic exit or
subsequent cytokinesis.

By mutation analysis, Sherman et al. (1999) found that the conserved
core domain of SIR2 proteins, which includes 2 sequence motifs and 4
cysteines of a putative zinc finger, is essential for gene silencing.
Chimeras between yeast and human SIR2 homologs showed that the human
core domain can substitute for that of yeast, confirming that the
conserved core is a silencing domain.

Outeiro et al. (2007) identified a potent inhibitor of SIRT2 and found
that inhibition of SIRT2 rescued alpha-synuclein (163890) toxicity and
modified inclusion morphology in a cellular model of Parkinson disease
(168600). Genetic inhibition of SIRT2 via small interfering RNA
similarly rescued alpha-synuclein toxicity. The inhibitors protected
against dopaminergic cell death both in vitro and in a Drosophila model
of Parkinson disease. Outeiro et al. (2007) concluded that their results
suggest a link between neurodegeneration and aging.

Das et al. (2009) demonstrated that the histone acetyltransferase CBP
(600140) in flies, and CBP and p300 in humans, acetylate histone H3 on
lys56 (H3K56), whereas Drosophila sir2 and human SIRT1 (604479) and
SIRT2 deacetylate H3K56 acetylation. The histone chaperones ASF1A
(609189) in humans and Asf1 in Drosophila are required for acetylation
of H3K56 in vivo, whereas the histone chaperone CAF1 (see 601245) in
humans and Caf1 in Drosophila are required for the incorporation of
histones bearing this mark into chromatin. Das et al. (2009) showed
that, in response to DNA damage, histones bearing acetylated K56 are
assembled into chromatin in Drosophila and human cells, forming foci
that colocalize with sites of DNA repair. Furthermore, acetylation of
H3K56 is increased in multiple types of cancer, correlating with
increased levels of ASF1A in these tumors. Das et al. (2009) concluded
that their identification of multiple proteins regulating the levels of
H3K56 acetylation in metazoans will allow future studies of this
critical and unique histone modification that couples chromatin assembly
to DNA synthesis, cell proliferation, and cancer.

Narayan et al. (2012) showed that the NAD-dependent deacetylase SIRT2
binds constitutively to RIP3 (605817) and the deletion or knockdown of
SIRT2 prevents formation of the RIP1 (603453)-RIP3 complex in mice.
Furthermore, genetic or pharmacologic inhibition of SIRT2 blocks
cellular necrosis induced by TNF-alpha (191160). Narayan et al. (2012)
further demonstrated that RIP1 is a critical target of SIRT2-dependent
deacetylation. Using gain- and loss-of-function mutants, Narayan et al.
(2012) demonstrated that acetylation of RIP1 lysine-530 modulates
RIP1-RIP3 complex formation in TNF-alpha-stimulated necrosis. In a
setting of ischemia-reperfusion injury, RIP1 was deacetylated in a
SIRT2-dependent fashion. Furthermore, the hearts of Sirt2-null mice, or
wildtype mice treated with a specific pharmacologic inhibitor of SIRT2,
showed marked protection from ischemic injury. Narayan et al. (2012)
concluded that, taken together, their results implicated SIRT2 as an
important regulator of programmed necrosis and indicated that inhibitors
of this deacetylase may constitute a novel approach to protect against
necrotic injuries, including ischemic stroke and myocardial infarction.

By infecting HeLa cells or mice with Listeria monocytogenes, Eskandarian
et al. (2013) found that histone H3 (see 602820) was deacetylated at
lys18 (K18), but not at K9 or K14. H3K18 deacetylation was mediated by
SIRT2, which was targeted to the nucleus and associated with chromatin
upon infection. Screening infection-defective Listeria mutants showed
that induction of deacetylation required another virulence factor, InlB,
in addition to the listeriolysin virulence factor. InlB interacted with
the surface MET receptor (MET; 164860). Alternatively, the MET ligand,
HGF (142409), but not EGF (131530), induced H3K18 deacetylation through
PI3K (see 601232)/AKT (164730) signaling. Transcriptome analysis
revealed that L. monocytogenes infection induced SIRT2-dependent
modulation of host gene expression with imposition of H3K18
deacetylation at transcriptional start sites, resulting in gene
repression. Treating cells with small interfering RNA to SIRT2, but not
to other SIRTs, showed that SIRT2 was critical for infection with L.
monocytogenes. Eskandarian et al. (2013) concluded that L. monocytogenes
hijacks the host histone deacetylase, SIRT2, to impose a transcriptional
program on the host through activation of the PI3K/AKT signaling
cascade.

MAPPING

Frye (1999) stated that EST sequence fragments of the SIRT2 cDNA have
been mapped to chromosome 19q.

REFERENCE 1. Afshar, G.; Murnane, J. P.: Characterization of a human gene with
sequence homology to Saccharomyces cerevisiae SIR2. Gene 234: 161-168,
1999.

2. Aguilaniu, H.; Gustafsson, L.; Rigoulet, M.; Nystrom, T.: Asymmetric
inheritance of oxidatively damaged proteins during cytokinesis. Science 299:
1751-1753, 2003.

3. Das, C.; Lucia, M. S.; Hansen, K. C.; Tyler, J. K.: CBP/p300-mediated
acetylation of histone H3 on lysine56. Nature 459: 113-117, 2009.
Note: Erratum: Nature 460: 1164 only, 2009.

4. Dryden, S. C.; Nahhas, F. A.; Nowak, J. E.; Goustin, A.-S.; Tainsky,
M. A.: Role for human SIRT2 NAD-dependent deacetylase activity in
control of mitotic exit in the cell cycle. Molec. Cell Biol. 23:
3173-3185, 2003.

5. Eskandarian, H. A.; Impens, F.; Nahori, M.-A.; Soubigou, G.; Coppee,
J.-Y.; Cossart, P.; Hamon, M. A.: A role for SIRT2-dependent histone
H3K18 deacetylation in bacterial infection. Science. 341: 525 only,
2013. Note: Full Article Online.

6. Frye, R. A.: Characterization of five human cDNAs with homology
to the yeast SIR2 gene: Sir2-like proteins (sirtuins) metabolize NAD
and may have protein ADP-ribosyltransferase activity. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 260: 273-279, 1999.

7. Narayan, N.; Lee, I. H.; Borenstein, R.; Sun, J.; Wong, R.; Tong,
G.; Fergusson, M. M.; Liu, J.; Rovira, I. I.; Cheng, H.-L.; Wang,
G.; Gucek, M.; Lombard, D.; Alt, F. W.; Sack, M. N.; Murphy, E.; Cao,
L.; Finkel, T.: The NAD-dependent deacetylase SIRT2 is required for
programmed necrosis. Nature 492: 199-204, 2012.

8. North, B. J.; Marshall, B. L.; Borra, M. T.; Denu, J. M.; Verdin,
E.: The human Sir2 ortholog, SIRT2, is an NAD(+)-dependent tubulin
deacetylase. Molec. Cell 11: 437-444, 2003.

9. Outeiro, T. F.; Kontopoulous, E.; Altmann, S. M.; Kufareva, I.;
Strathearn, K. E.; Amore, A. M.; Volk, C. B.; Maxwell, M. M.; Rochet,
J.-C.; McLean, P. J.; Young, A. B.; Abagyan, R.; Feany, M. B.; Hyman,
B. T.; Kazantsev, A. G.: Sirtuin 2 inhibitors rescue alpha-synuclein-mediated
toxicity in models of Parkinson's disease. Science 317: 516-519,
2007.

10. Rogina, B.; Helfand, S. L.; Frankel, S.: Longevity regulation
by Drosophila Rpd3 deacetylase and caloric restriction. Science 298:
1745 only, 2002.

11. Sherman, J. M.; Stone, E. M.; Freeman-Cook, L. L.; Brachmann,
C. B.; Boeke, J. D.; Pillus, L.: The conserved core of a human SIR2
homologue functions in yeast silencing. Molec. Biol. Cell 10: 3045-3059,
1999.

12. Shore, D.; Squire, M.; Nasmyth, K. A.: Characterization of two
genes required for the position-effect control of yeast mating-type
genes. EMBO J. 3: 2817-2823, 1984.

13. Tanny, J. C.; Dowd, G. J.; Huang, J.; Hilz, H.; Moazed, D.: An
enzymatic activity in the yeast Sir2 protein that is essential for
gene silencing. Cell 99: 735-745, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/14/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/29/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/9/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/19/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/15/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/13/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/12/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/21/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/3/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/13/2003

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 1/31/2000

EDITED mgross: 10/14/2013
alopez: 1/31/2013
terry: 1/29/2013
carol: 4/5/2010
terry: 9/9/2009
alopez: 6/4/2009
terry: 5/19/2009
carol: 8/15/2007
terry: 8/13/2007
alopez: 7/23/2007
wwang: 12/12/2005
mgross: 4/21/2003
alopez: 4/8/2003
terry: 4/3/2003
alopez: 2/19/2003
terry: 2/13/2003
cwells: 11/19/2002
terry: 11/15/2002
carol: 3/23/2001
alopez: 2/21/2000
mgross: 1/31/2000

300061	TITLE *300061 ZINC FINGER, MYM-TYPE 3; ZMYM3
;;ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 261; ZNF261;;
DXS6673E
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Van der Maarel et al. (1996) reported the cloning and characterization
of the ZNF261 gene, which the called DXS6673E. ZNF261 maps to the X
chromosome, is subject to X inactivation, and was disrupted in the
5-prime untranslated region by a balanced X;13 translocation in a
mentally retarded female. They identified a YAC clone that spanned the
breakpoint and used this YAC to isolate a cDNA from a fetal brain
library. The cDNA contains a 4,074-bp ORF encoding a predicted
1,358-amino acid polypeptide. By Northern analysis, van der Maarel et
al. (1996) showed that the DXS6673E gene is highly conserved among
vertebrates and that its expression is most abundant in brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Hakimi et al. (2003) identified a family of multiprotein corepressor
complexes that function through modifying chromatin structure to keep
genes silent. The polypeptide composition of these complexes includes a
common core of 2 subunits, HDAC1 (601241)/HDAC2 (605164) and the
FAD-binding protein BHC110 (AOF2; 609132). Other subunits of these
complexes include ZNF261, GTF2I (601679), and polypeptides associated
with cancer-causing chromosomal translocations.

GENE STRUCTURE

Van der Maarel et al. (1996) reported that the ZNF261 gene contains 25
exons, including 2 putative alternatively spliced noncoding exons (1A
and 1B).

MAPPING

Van der Maarel et al. (1996) mapped the ZNF261 gene to chromosome
Xq13.1.

CYTOGENETICS

Van der Maarel et al. (1996) reported a mentally retarded female whose
ZNF261 gene was disrupted in the 5-prime UTR by a balanced X;13
translocation. They noted that apart from mental retardation, the only
conspicuous clinical features in this patient were scoliosis and spotty
abdominal hypopigmentation.

REFERENCE 1. Hakimi, M.-A.; Dong, Y.; Lane, W. S.; Speicher, D. W.; Shiekhattar,
R.: A candidate X-linked mental retardation gene is a component of
a new family of histone deacetylase-containing complexes. J. Biol.
Chem. 278: 7234-7239, 2003.

2. van der Maarel, S. M.; Scholten, I. H. J. M.; Huber, I.; Philippe,
C.; Suijkerbuijk, R. F.; Gilgenkrantz, S.; Kere, J.; Cremers, F. P.
M.; Ropers, H.-H.: Cloning and characterization of DXS6673E, a candidate
gene for X-linked mental retardation in Xq13.1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5:
887-897, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/3/2005

CREATED Moyra Smith: 8/8/1996

EDITED carol: 09/02/2010
mgross: 1/3/2005
alopez: 10/12/1999
terry: 8/15/1996
mark: 8/15/1996
marlene: 8/9/1996
mark: 8/8/1996

300126	TITLE *300126 DYSKERIN; DKC1
;;NOPP140-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN, 57-KD; NAP57
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Dyskerin is a nucleolar protein present in small nucleolar
ribonucleoprotein particles that modify specific uridine residues of
ribosomal RNA by converting them to pseudouridine. Dyskerin is also a
component of the telomerase complex (summary by Mochizuki et al., 2004).

CLONING

By positional cloning, Heiss et al. (1998) identified a gene, symbolized
DKC1, in the Xq28 region that is the cause of X-linked recessive
dyskeratosis congenita (DKCX; 305000). Heiss et al. (1998) found that
the DKC1 gene is highly conserved across species barriers and is the
ortholog of rat Nap57 and S. cerevisiae Cbf5. The gene product, referred
to as dyskerin, contains 2 TruB pseudouridine synthase motifs, multiple
phosphorylation sites, and a carboxy-terminal lysine-rich domain. By
analogy to the function of known dyskerin orthologs, Heiss et al. (1998)
predicted that dyskerin is involved in the cell cycle and nucleolar
function.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hassock et al. (1999) determined that the DKC1 gene comprises 15 exons
spanning at least 16 kb and is transcribed into a widely expressed
2.6-kb message. The single-copy DKC1 gene is transcribed from a CpG
island 60 kb centromeric to the factor VIII gene (F8; 300841) in distal
Xq28 and lies tail to tail with the palmitoylated erythrocyte membrane
protein-1 gene (MPP1; 305360).

MAPPING

Hassock et al. (1999) determined that the DKC1 gene maps to chromosome
Xq28, centromeric to the factor VIII gene (F8; 300841).

GENE FUNCTION

McGrath (1999) commented on the function of dyskerin in relation to its
widespread tissue distribution, the array of clinical features in DKC,
and the need to explain the cause of the dysplasia and the bone marrow
abnormalities in this disorder. Sequence homology assessment predicted
that dyskerin is a nuclear protein that is responsible for some early
steps in ribosomal RNA processing, although it was not clear whether
dyskerin mutations slow ribosome synthesis or make ribosomes
functionally abnormal (Heiss et al., 1998; Luzzatto and Karadimitris,
1998). The ubiquitous distribution of dyskerin suggested to McGrath
(1999) that there may be functional redundancy in some tissues, but that
its function may be more critical in cells with a high turnover, such as
keratinocytes, mucosal epithelium, and bone marrow. Perhaps in these
tissues the risk of development of malignant tumors reflects the
consequences of defective translation brought about through mutated
dyskerin. Dyskerin also seems to be a centromere or microtubule protein
and, if mutated, may give rise to abnormalities with chromosome
segregation and consequent malignant predisposition.

Mitchell et al. (1999) demonstrated that dyskerin is associated not only
with H/ACA small nucleolar RNAs but also with human telomerase RNA
(TERC; 602322), which contains an H/ACA RNA motif. Telomerase adds
simple sequence repeats to chromosome ends using an internal region of
its RNA as a template and is required for the proliferation of primary
human cells. Mitchell et al. (1999) found that primary fibroblasts and
lymphoblasts from DKC-affected males were not detectably deficient in
conventional H/ACA small nucleolar RNA accumulation or function.
However, DKC cells had a lower level of telomerase RNA, produced lower
levels of telomerase activity than matched normal cells, and had shorter
telomeres. Mitchell et al. (1999) concluded that the pathology of DKC is
consistent with compromised telomerase function leading to a defect in
telomere maintenance, which may limit the proliferative capacity of
human somatic cells in epithelia and blood.

Using immunoprecipitation studies and Western blot analysis, Pogacic et
al. (2000) found that NOP10 (NOLA3; 606471) associates with NHP2 (NOLA2;
606470), dyskerin, and GAR1 (NOLA1; 606468) in structures corresponding
to H/ACA small nucleolar RNPs (snoRNPs), but not to C/D snoRNPs, and to
telomerase. SnoRNPs of the H/ACA class specify the sites of
uridine-to-pseudouridine conversion. Immunofluorescence microscopy
demonstrated colocalization of NOLA3 with NOLA1, NOLA2, and DKC1, but
not with fibrillarin (FBL; 134795), in nucleolar dense fibrillar
components and in Cajal bodies (also called coiled bodies; see 600272).

The protein dyskerin is a component of the box H/ACA small nucleolar
RNAs (snoRNAs) and is also functionally associated with the RNA
component of TERC. Most mutations causing dyskeratosis congenita are
missense mutations, although noncoding mutations have been described.
One of these is a point mutation (-141C-G; 300126.0008) in a putative
Sp1 binding site in the 5-prime upstream region of the DKC1 gene, which
presumably represents the promoter region of the gene. Salowsky et al.
(2002) compared the promoter sequences of both the human and mouse genes
and provided a functional characterization of the human DKC1 promoter
that included a characterization of the disease-associated implications
caused by the -141C-G mutation. By reporter gene analysis, functional
regions of the DKC1 promoter were delineated. The core promoter region
critical for basal level of transcription was found to lie at -10 to
-180. Bandshift and supershift experiments clearly demonstrated a mutual
binding of transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 to 2 of 5 putative GC
box/Sp1 binding sites located in the core promoter region. An additional
GC box interacts only with the Sp1 transcription factor. Salowsky et al.
(2002) provided evidence that the mentioned DKC1 mutation in one of the
Sp1 binding sites results in reduced promoter activity.

Montanaro et al. (2002) observed that in lymphoblastoid cell lines from
patients with dyskeratosis congenita, rRNA transcription and maturation
and proliferative capability remained unimpaired. Increasing the number
of cell cycles led to a steep rise in the apoptotic fraction of
dyskeratosis congenita cells. These findings demonstrated that whereas
dyskeratosis congenita cell lines do not display proliferation defects,
they do show progressively increasing levels of apoptosis in relation to
the number of cell divisions. This observation is consistent with the
delayed onset of dyskeratosis congenita proliferating-tissue defects,
which do not emerge during embryonal development as would be expected
with ribosomal biogenesis alterations, and with the increasing severity
of the proliferating-tissue defects over time.

Wong and Collins (2006) found that primary dermal fibroblasts cultured
from a DKC patient underwent premature senescence, consistent with the
presence of short telomeres, compared with dermal fibroblasts cultured
from his asymptomatic maternal grandmother. Expression of exogenous TERT
(187270) from a retroviral vector increased telomerase activity in DKC
patient cells, resulting in increased steady-state levels of TERC and
elimination of premature senescence, but did not confer telomere length
maintenance. DKC patient cells expressing both TERT and TERC from a
single retroviral vector gained and maintained long telomeres. Following
rescue from premature senescence, DKC patient cells from 2 different
families had normal levels of rRNA pseudouridine modification and no
dramatic delay in rRNA precursor processing, in contrast with phenotypes
reported for mouse models of DKC. Wong and Collins (2006) concluded that
defects in DKC patient cells arise solely from reduced accumulation of
TERC.

Cohen et al. (2007) purified human telomerase 10(8)-fold, with the final
elution dependent on the enzyme's ability to catalyze nucleotide
addition onto a DNA oligonucleotide of telomeric sequence, thereby
providing specificity for catalytically active telomerase. Mass
spectrometric sequencing of the protein components and molecular size
determination indicated an enzyme composition of 2 molecules each of
TERT, TERC, and dyskerin.

Machado-Pinilla et al. (2008) showed that expression of GSE24-2, a
genetic suppressor element coding for the pseudouridine synthase domain
of DKC1, increased survival against cisplatin and telomerase inhibitors
in human cells. GSE24-2 activated the MYC (190080) promoter through
nuclease hypersensitive element III (NHEIII) and, consequently,
activated the TERT promoter. Expression of GSE24-2 was associated with
increased telomerase activity in a human lung fibroblast cell line and
in cells from patients with X-linked DKC. Furthermore, expression of
GSE24-2 rescued X-linked DKC cells from premature senescence.

Venteicher et al. (2009) showed that TCAB1 (612661) associates with
active telomerase enzyme (TERT; 187270), established telomerase
components including dyskerin and TERC (602322), and small Cajal body
RNAs (scaRNAs), which are involved in modifying splicing RNAs. Depletion
of TCAB1 by using RNA interference prevented TERC from associating with
Cajal bodies, disrupted telomerase-telomere association, and abrogated
telomere synthesis in telomerase. Thus, Venteicher et al. (2009)
concluded that TCAB1 controls telomerase trafficking and is required for
telomere synthesis in human cancer cells.

Grozdanov et al. (2009) stated that NAP57 together with NOP10 and NHP2
forms a core trimer that is essential for the stability of all H/ACA
RNPs. A fourth H/ACA core protein GAR1 interacts with NAP57
independently. They previously found that H/ACA RNP assembly factor SHQ1
(613663) binds to NAP57. Protein interaction assays using NAP57 deletion
constructs showed that the N terminus (NT) and C terminus (CT) of NAP57
together formed the binding surface for SHQ1. By 3-dimensional modeling,
Grozdanov et al. (2009) showed that the NT folded around the CT and that
the domain did contact any other proteins of the particle or the H/ACA
RNA. DKC mutations are concentrated in the NT and CT but not in the
central catalytic domain of NAP57. The authors showed that various
mutations (see, e.g., 300126.0006 and 300126.0010) resulted in increased
or decreased binding affinity for SHQ1, thus reducing NAP57 availability
for RNP assembly.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Rashid et al. (2006) determined the crystal structure of the Pyrococcus
furiosus dyskerin homolog, Cbf5, in complex with Nop10 (NOLA3; 606471)
and Gar1 (NOLA1; 606468) to 2.1-angstrom resolution. Based on the Cbf5
crystal structure and sequence alignment of Cbf5 with human dyskerin,
Rashid et al. (2006) determined that most dyskeratosis-causing mutations
colocalize on 1 side of the pseudouridine synthase and Archaeosine
transglycosylase (PUA) domain of dyskerin, which is predicted to play a
specific role in binding H/ACA and telomerase RNAs. Rashid et al. (2006)
suggested that mutations within the PUA domain may weaken interactions
between dyskerin and its cognate RNAs, leading to decreased cellular
accumulation of the RNAs. Alternatively, the mutations may affect a
binding site of an unidentified factor.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In patients with X-linked dyskeratosis congenita (305000), Heiss et al.
(1998) identified missense mutations in the DKC1 gene
(300126.0001-300126.0005).

Knight et al. (1999) detected mutations in the DKC1 gene in 21 of 37
families with dyskeratosis congenita. These mutations consisted of 11
different single-nucleotide substitutions, which resulted in 10 missense
mutations and 1 putative splicing mutation within an intron. The
missense change A353V (300126.0006) was observed in 11 different
families and was shown to be a recurring de novo event. Two
polymorphisms were also detected, 1 of which resulted in the insertion
of an additional lysine in the C-terminal polylysine domain. It is
striking that X-linked dyskeratosis congenita is predominantly caused by
missense mutations.

Knight et al. (2001) screened male patients with dyskeratosis congenita
from 25 families for mutations in the DKC1 gene. Sequence variations
were detected in 10 of these families. In 5 families, previously
identified mutations were detected. Of the 5 novel sequence changes, 3
were coding changes. A fourth sequence change was detected in the
5-prime flanking region that disrupts a putative Sp1 transcription
factor binding site (300126.0008). An intronic change was also detected
that resulted in the partial incorporation of a portion of intron 1 into
the mRNA (300126.0009). This was the first report of DKC1 mutations that
are predicted to affect the level of expression of dyskerin rather than
its amino acid sequence. This suggests that a decrease in the amount of
the normal protein may cause the disorder.

Knight et al. (1999) identified mutations in the DKC1 gene in patients
with Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome (305000), a severe clinical variant
of dyskeratosis congenita; see 300126.0010-300126.0011.

In 5 male Japanese patients with presumed X-linked dyskeratosis
congenita, Kanegane et al. (2005) identified 4 mutations in the DKC1
gene, including 2 novel missense mutations, Q31K (300126.0013) and T357A
(300126.0014).

ANIMAL MODEL

He et al. (2002) used the inducible Cre/loxP system to produce deletions
in the murine Dkc1 gene in early embryogenesis. A large deletion lacking
exons 12-15 and a small deletion lacking only the last exon were
produced. They found that both deletions showed a parent-of-origin
effect with 100% embryonic lethality when the mutation occurred on the
maternal Dkc1. Embryonic analysis at days 7.5 and 9.5 of gestation
showed no male embryos carrying either deletion, whereas females with
maternally derived deletions died around day 9.5 of gestation, with
degeneration of the extra embryonic tissue, in which the paternal X
chromosome was inactivated. Female mice carrying the deletion in the
paternally derived Dkc1 showed extreme skewing of X inactivation with
the wildtype X chromosome active in all cells. Since mice with no
telomerase are viable in the first generations, the lethality observed
by He et al. (2002) was unlikely to be caused by the effects of mutated
dyskerin on telomerase activity.

Ruggero et al. (2003) generated hypomorphic Dkc1 mutant mice. that
recapitulated the DKC (305000) phenotype in the first and second
generations. Cells from hemizygous male and heterozygous female mutant
mice displayed a decreased level of Dkc1 expression (4-fold and 2-fold,
respectively). Hypomorphic Dkc1 cells from the first and second
generation were impaired in ribosomal RNA pseudouridylation before the
onset of disease. Reduction of telomere length in hypomorphic mice
became evident only in later generations. Ruggero et al. (2003)
concluded that deregulated ribosome function is important in the
initiation of dyskeratosis congenita, whereas telomere shortening may
modify and/or exacerbate dyskeratosis congenita.

To test the extent to which disruption of pseudouridylation or
telomerase activity may contribute to the pathogenesis of dyskeratosis
congenita, Mochizuki et al. (2004) introduced 2 dyskerin mutations into
murine embryonic stem cells: ala353 to val (A353V; 300126.0006), which
is the most frequent mutation in patients with X-linked dyskeratosis
congenita, and gly402 to glu (G402E; 300126.0005), which had been
identified in a single patient. The A353V, but not the G402E, mutation
led to severe destabilization of telomerase RNA, reduction in telomerase
activity, and a significant continuous loss of telomere length with
increasing number of cell divisions during in vitro culture. Both
mutations caused a defect in overall pseudouridylation and a small but
detectable decrease in the rate of pre-ribosomal RNA processing. In
addition, both mutant embryonic stem cell lines showed a decrease in the
accumulation of a subset of H/ACA small nucleolar RNAs, correlating with
a significant decrease in site-specific pseudouridylation efficiency.
Mochizuki et al. (2004) concluded that point mutations in dyskerin may
affect both the telomerase and pseudouridylation pathways and that the
extent to which these functions are altered can vary for different
mutations.

Using an unbiased proteomics strategy, Yoon et al. (2006) discovered a
specific defect in IRES (internal ribosome entry site)-dependent
translation in Dkc1 mutated mice and in cells from X-linked dyskeratosis
congenita patients. This defect results in impaired translation of mRNAs
containing IRES elements, including those encoding the tumor suppressor
p27(Kip1) (600778) and the antiapoptotic factors Bcl-xl (600039) and
XIAP (300079). Moreover, ribosomes derived from Dkc1 mutated mice were
unable to direct translation from IRES elements present in viral mRNAs.
Yoon et al. (2006) concluded that their findings revealed a potential
mechanism by which defective ribosome activity leads to disease and
cancer.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, X-LINKED
DKC1, PHE36VAL

In a patient with dyskeratosis congenita (305000), Heiss et al. (1998)
identified an T-to-G transversion at nucleotide 198 of the cDNA,
resulting in an phe36-to-val (F36V) amino acid substitution in dyskerin.
The amino acid is phenylalanine in the homologous protein in both rat
and yeast. The family had previously been reported by Devriendt et al.
(1997).

.0002
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, X-LINKED
DKC1, LEU37DEL

In a patient with dyskeratosis congenita (305000), Heiss et al. (1998)
found deletion of nucleotides 201-203 (CTT), leading to deletion of
leucine-37 from dyskerin.

.0003
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, X-LINKED
DKC1, PRO40ARG

In a patient with dyskeratosis congenita (305000), Heiss et al. (1998)
identified a C-to-G transversion of nucleotide 211, resulting in a
pro40-to-arg (P40R) amino acid substitution in dyskerin. The family had
previously been reported by Connor et al. (1986).

.0004
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, X-LINKED
DKC1, LEU72TYR

In a patient with dyskeratosis congenita (305000), Heiss et al. (1998)
identified a leu72-to-tyr (L72Y) mutation resulting from a change of
nucleotides 306 and 307 from CT to TA.

.0005
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, X-LINKED
DKC1, GLY402GLU

In a patient with dyskeratosis congenita (305000), Heiss et al. (1998)
described a G-to-A transition in nucleotide 1297 of the full-length DKC1
cDNA, resulting in a gly402-to-glu (G402Q) amino acid substitution in
dyskerin. The family had previously been reported by Dokal et al.
(1992).

.0006
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, X-LINKED
DKC1, ALA353VAL

In a study that demonstrated missense mutations to be the predominant
abnormality in the DKC1 gene leading to dyskeratosis congenita (305000),
Knight et al. (1999) found that the missense mutation ala353 to val
(A353V) was present in 11 of 21 families in which they could demonstrate
a mutation. The amino acid substitution was due to a 1058C-T transition
in exon 11. It was found in both sporadic cases and multiplex families
and in patients in the United Kingdom, Italy, France, United States, and
Spain. In at least 5 instances, the mutation was de novo in the proband;
in another case it was de novo in grandparents. Heiss et al. (2001)
found the A353V mutation in another case of DKC.

Yaghmai et al. (2000) reported a patient with striking features of
Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome and DKC who carried the A353V mutation.
Yaghmai et al. (2000) concluded that Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome may
be a severe form of DKC in which affected individuals die before
characteristic mucocutaneous features develop.

Grozdanov et al. (2009) showed that the A353V mutation resulted in
decreased binding affinity for SHQ1, likely resulting in loss of NAP57
due to degradation.

.0007
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, X-LINKED
DKC1, 2-KB DEL

Vulliamy et al. (1999) presented a case of dyskeratosis congenita
(305000) caused by a 2-kb deletion that removed the last exon of the
DKC1 gene. Normal levels of mRNA were produced from the deleted gene,
with the transcripts using a cryptic polyadenylation site in the
antisense strand of the adjacent MPP1 gene (305360), which is normally
located 1 kb downstream of DKC1 in a tail-to-tail orientation. The
predicted truncated protein lacked a lysine-rich peptide that is less
conserved than the rest of the dyskerin molecule and is dispensable in
yeast, supporting the contention that it may retain some activity and
that null mutations at this locus may be lethal. The affected boy had an
unaffected brother with the same haplotype around the DKC1 gene and a
sister who was heterozygous for the deletion. The authors concluded,
therefore, that the mother must be a germline mosaic with respect to
this deletion. Investigation of her blood cells and other somatic
tissues showed that a small proportion of these cells also carried the
deletion, making her a somatic mosaic and indicating that the deletion
took place early in development.

.0008
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, X-LINKED
DKC1, -141C-G

In a patient with dyskeratosis congenita (305000), Knight et al. (2001)
found a mutation in the promoter region of the DKC1 gene: -141C-G. The
mutation disrupts one of the Sp1 transcription factor binding sites.
Salowsky et al. (2002) showed that the core promoter region of the DKC1
gene was critical for the basal level of transcription that lies at -10
to -180. They showed that this mutation is in one of the Sp1 binding
sites and that it reduces promoter activity.

.0009
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, X-LINKED
DKC1, IVS1, C-G, +592

In an affected male from a family with dyskeratosis congenita (305000)
studied by Devriendt et al. (1997), Knight et al. (2001) found an
anomalous transcript resulting from the incorporation of 246 bp of
intron 1. Sequencing of the intron flanking the 'cryptic exon' revealed
a single nucleotide change (IVS1 +592C-G). This sequence change created
a cryptic donor splice site that resulted in the partial incorporation
of part of intron 1 into the dyskerin mRNA. The fact that the reading
frame was disrupted by an early stop codon strongly suggested that the
'cryptic exon' did not correspond to a functional alternatively spliced
transcript.

.0010
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, X-LINKED
DKC1, THR49MET

In a family segregating the Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome, the severe
variant of DKC (305000), Knight et al. (1999) identified a C-to-T change
at nucleotide 146 in exon 3 of the DKC1 gene, resulting in a
thr49-to-met (T49M) substitution. Heiss et al. (2001) identified the
same mutation in a patient with DKC. Grozdanov et al. (2009) showed that
the T49M mutation resulted in increased binding affinity for SHQ1,
likely resulting in NAP57 sequestration.

.0011
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, X-LINKED
DKC1, SER121GLY

In a family originally reported by Aalfs et al. (1995) with
Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome (305000), Knight et al. (1999) identified
an A-to-G change at nucleotide 361 in exon 5 of the DKC1 gene, resulting
in a ser121-to-gly (S121G) substitution. Grozdanov et al. (2009) showed
that the S121G mutation did not affect SHQ1 binding, consistent with its
location in the catalytic domain and suggesting that the mutation
affects the catalytic activity of NAP57.

.0012
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, X-LINKED
DKC1, ILE38THR

In a Sardinian infant with X-linked Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome
(305000) in whom the disorder was characterized by severe combined
immunodeficiency and bone marrow failure, Cossu et al. (2002) described
a 113T-C transition in the DKC1 gene, resulting in an ile38-to-thr
(I38T) mutation. Treatment with a sib bone marrow transplantation was
associated with low toxicity, prompt engraftment with adequate immune
reconstitution, and full donor hemopoiesis.

.0013
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, X-LINKED
DKC1, GLN31LYS

In a Japanese patient with dyskeratosis congenita (305000), Kanegane et
al. (2005) detected a 91C-A transversion in exon 3 of the DKC1 gene that
resulted in a gln31-to-lys (Q31K) amino acid substitution in dyskerin.

.0014
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, X-LINKED
DKC1, THR357ALA

In a Japanese patient with dyskeratosis congenita (305000), Kanegane et
al. (2005) detected a 1069A-G transition in exon 11 of the DKC1 gene
that resulted in a thr357-to-ala (T357A) amino acid substitution in
dyskerin.

.0015
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, X-LINKED
DKC1, IVS12DS, G-A, +1

In an Italian boy with Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome (305000), Pearson
et al. (2008) identified a hemizygous G-to-A transition in intron 12 of
the DKC1 gene, resulting in premature termination. He had poor
intrauterine and postnatal growth, developed persistent
thrombocytopenia, and died at age 2 years. His unaffected mother was a
carrier of the mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Aalfs, C. M.; van den Berg, H.; Barth, P. G.; Hennekam, R. C. M.
: The Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome: the fourth case of a separate
entity with prenatal growth retardation, progressive pancytopenia
and cerebellar hypoplasia. Europ. J. Pediat. 154: 304-308, 1995.

2. Cohen, S. B.; Graham, M. E.; Lovrecz, G. O.; Bache, N.; Robinson,
P. J.; Reddel, R. R.: Protein composition of catalytically active
human telomerase from immortal cells. Science 315: 1850-1853, 2007.

3. Connor, J. M.; Gatherer, D.; Gray, F. C.; Pirrit, L. A.; Affara,
N. A.: Assignment of the gene for dyskeratosis congenita to Xq28. Hum.
Genet. 72: 348-351, 1986.

4. Cossu, F.; Vulliamy, T. J.; Marrone, A.; Badiali, M.; Cao, A.;
Dokal, I.: A novel DKC1 mutation, severe combined immunodeficiency
(T+B-NK-SCID) and bone marrow transplantation in an infant with Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson
syndrome. Brit. J. Haemat. 119: 765-768, 2002.

5. Devriendt, K.; Matthijs, G.; Legius, E.; Schollen, E.; Blockmans,
D.; van Geet, C.; Degreef, H.; Cassiman, J.-J.; Fryns, J.-P.: Skewed
X-chromosome inactivation in female carriers of dyskeratosis congenita. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 60: 581-587, 1997.

6. Dokal, I.; Bungey, J.; Williamson, P.; Oscier, D.; Hows, J.; Luzzatto,
L.: Dyskeratosis congenita fibroblasts are abnormal and have unbalanced
chromosomal rearrangements. Blood 80: 3090-3096, 1992.

7. Grozdanov, P. N.; Fernandez-Fuentes, N.; Fiser, A.; Meier, U. T.
: Pathogenic NAP57 mutations decrease ribonucleoprotein assembly in
dyskeratosis congenita. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 4546-4551, 2009.

8. Hassock, S.; Vetrie, D.; Giannelli, F.: Mapping and characterization
of the X-linked dyskeratosis congenita (DKC) gene. Genomics 55:
21-27, 1999.

9. He, J.; Navarrete, S.; Jasinski, M.; Vulliamy, T.; Dokal, I.; Bessler,
M.; Mason, P. J.: Targeted disruption of Dkc1, the gene mutated in
X-linked dyskeratosis congenita, causes embryonic lethality in mice. Oncogene 21:
7740-7744, 2002.

10. Heiss, N. S.; Knight, S. W.; Vulliamy, T. J.; Klauck, S. M.; Wiemann,
S.; Mason, P. J.; Poustka, A.; Dokal, I.: X-linked dyskeratosis congenita
is caused by mutations in a highly conserved gene with putative nucleolar
functions. Nature Genet. 19: 32-38, 1998.

11. Heiss, N. S.; Megarbane, A.; Klauck, S. M.; Kreuz, F. R.; Makhoul,
E.; Majewski, F.; Poustka, A.: One novel and two recurrent missense
DKC1 mutations in patients with dyskeratosis congenita (DKC). Genet.
Counsel. 12: 129-136, 2001.

12. Kanegane, H.; Kasahara, Y.; Okamura, J.; Hongo, T.; Tanaka, R.;
Nomura, K.; Kojima, S.; Miyawaki, T.: Identification of DKC1 gene
mutations in Japanese patients with X-linked dyskeratosis congenita. Brit.
J. Haemat. 129: 432-434, 2005.

13. Knight, S. W.; Heiss, N. S.; Vulliamy, T. J.; Aalfs, C. M.; McMahon,
C.; Richmond, P.; Jones, A.; Hennekam, R. C. M.; Poustka, A.; Mason,
P. J.; Dokal, I.: Unexplained aplastic anaemia, immunodeficiency,
and cerebellar hypoplasia (Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome) due to mutations
in the dyskeratosis congenita gene, DKC1. Brit. J. Haemat. 107:
335-339, 1999.

14. Knight, S. W.; Heiss, N. S.; Vulliamy, T. J.; Greschner, S.; Stavrides,
G.; Pai, G. S.; Lestringant, G.; Varma, N.; Mason, P. J.; Dokal, I.;
Poustka, A.: X-linked dyskeratosis congenita is predominantly caused
by missense mutations in the DKC1 gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65: 50-58,
1999.

15. Knight, S. W.; Vulliamy, T. J.; Morgan, B.; Devriendt, K.; Mason,
P. J.; Dokal, I.: Identification of novel DKC1 mutations in patients
with dyskeratosis congenita: implications for pathophysiology and
diagnosis. Hum. Genet. 108: 299-303, 2001.

16. Luzzatto, L.; Karadimitris, A.: Dyskeratosis and ribosomal rebellion. Nature
Genet. 19: 6-7, 1998.

17. Machado-Pinilla, R.; Sanchez-Perez, I.; Murguia, J. R.; Sastre,
L.; Perona, R.: A dyskerin motif reactivates telomerase activity
in X-linked dyskeratosis congenita and in telomerase-deficient human
cells. Blood 111: 2606-2614, 2008.

18. McGrath, J. A.: Dyskeratosis congenita: new clinical and molecular
insights into ribosome function. Lancet 353: 1204-1205, 1999.

19. Mitchell, J. R.; Wood, E.; Collins, K.: A telomerase component
is defective in the human disease dyskeratosis congenita. Nature 402:
551-555, 1999.

20. Mochizuki, Y.; He, J.; Kulkarni, S.; Bessler, M.; Mason, P. J.
: Mouse dyskerin mutations affect accumulation of telomerase RNA and
small nucleolar RNA, telomerase activity, and ribosomal RNA processing. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 10756-10761, 2004.

21. Montanaro, L.; Chilla, A.; Trere, D.; Pession, A.; Govoni, M.;
Tazzari, P. L; Derenzini, M.: Increased mortality rate and not impaired
ribosomal biogenesis is responsible for proliferative defect in dyskeratosis
congenita cell lines. J. Invest. Derm. 118: 193-198, 2002.

22. Pearson, T.; Curtis, F.; Al-Eyadhy, A.; Al-Tamemi, S.; Mazer,
B.; Dror, Y.; Abish, S.; Bale, S.; Compton, J.; Ray, R.; Scott, P.;
Der Kaloustian, V. M.: An intronic mutation in DKC1 in an infant
with Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome. (Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 146A:
2159-2161, 2008.

23. Pogacic, V.; Dragon, F.; Filipowicz, W.: Human H/ACA small nucleolar
RNPs and telomerase share evolutionarily conserved proteins NHP2 and
NOP10. Molec. Cell. Biol. 20: 9028-9040, 2000.

24. Rashid, R.; Liang, B.; Baker, D. L.; Youssef, O. A.; He, Y.; Phipps,
K.; Terns, R. M.; Terns, M. P.; Li, H.: Crystal structure of a Cbf5-Nop10-Gar1
complex and implications in RNA-guided pseudouridylation and dyskeratosis
congenita. Molec. Cell 21: 249-260, 2006.

25. Ruggero, D.; Grisendi, S.; Piazza, F.; Rego, E.; Mari, F.; Rao,
P. H.; Cordon-Cardo, C.; Pandolfi, P. P.: Dyskeratosis congenita
and cancer in mice deficient in ribosomal RNA modification. Science 299:
259-262, 2003.

26. Salowsky, R.; Heiss, N. S.; Benner, A.; Wittig, R.; Poustka, A.
: Basal transcription activity of the dyskeratosis congenita gene
is mediated by Sp1 and Sp3 and a patient mutation in a Sp1 binding
site is associated with decreased promoter activity. Gene 293: 9-19,
2002.

27. Venteicher, A. S.; Abreu, E. B.; Meng, Z.; McCann, K. E.; Terns,
R. M.; Veenstra, T. D.; Terns, M. P.; Artandi, S. E.: A human telomerase
holoenzyme protein required for Cajal body localization and telomere
synthesis. Science 323: 644-648, 2009.

28. Vulliamy, T. J.; Knight, S. W.; Heiss, N. S.; Smith, O. P.; Poustka,
A.; Dokal, I.; Mason, P. J.: Dyskeratosis congenita caused by a 3-prime
deletion: germline and somatic mosaicism in a female carrier. Blood 94:
1254-1260, 1999.

29. Wong, J. M. Y.; Collins, K.: Telomerase RNA level limits telomere
maintenance in X-linked dyskeratosis congenita. Genes Dev. 20: 2848-2858,
2006.

30. Yaghmai, R.; Kimyai-Asadi, A.; Rostamiani, K.; Heiss, N. S.; Poustka,
A.; Eyaid, W.; Bodurtha, J.; Nousari, H. C.; Hamosh, A.; Metzenberg,
A.: Overlap of dyskeratosis congenita with the Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson
syndrome. J. Pediat. 136: 390-393, 2000.

31. Yoon, A.; Peng, G.; Brandenburger, Y.; Zollo, O.; Xu, W.; Rego,
E.; Ruggero, D.: Impaired control of IRES-mediated translation in
X-linked dyskeratosis congenita. Science 312: 902-905, 2006. Note:
Erratum: Science 313: 1238 only, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 10/28/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/10/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/6/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/20/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/12/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/8/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/6/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/9/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/17/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/21/2004
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 3/6/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/24/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/3/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/21/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/27/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/27/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/11/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/7/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/4/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/1/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/30/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/28/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/12/1999
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 4/5/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/27/1998

EDITED carol: 09/19/2013
ckniffin: 9/11/2013
carol: 5/26/2011
ckniffin: 5/25/2011
carol: 4/7/2011
alopez: 1/10/2011
mgross: 12/7/2010
wwang: 11/9/2010
terry: 10/28/2010
alopez: 4/26/2010
terry: 4/22/2010
alopez: 3/13/2009
terry: 3/10/2009
mgross: 1/7/2009
terry: 1/6/2009
wwang: 10/22/2008
ckniffin: 10/20/2008
carol: 5/4/2007
alopez: 4/13/2007
terry: 4/12/2007
mgross: 11/9/2006
terry: 11/8/2006
carol: 9/6/2006
alopez: 6/9/2006
terry: 6/6/2006
mgross: 2/24/2006
terry: 2/9/2006
alopez: 6/22/2005
terry: 6/17/2005
tkritzer: 9/22/2004
terry: 9/21/2004
alopez: 3/6/2003
alopez: 2/24/2003
tkritzer: 2/20/2003
tkritzer: 2/11/2003
terry: 2/3/2003
cwells: 1/24/2003
tkritzer: 1/21/2003
cwells: 12/31/2002
terry: 12/27/2002
alopez: 9/27/2002
mcapotos: 10/26/2001
mcapotos: 10/11/2001
mcapotos: 5/18/2001
mcapotos: 5/11/2001
terry: 5/7/2001
alopez: 4/7/2000
terry: 4/4/2000
alopez: 12/1/1999
terry: 12/1/1999
alopez: 10/5/1999
terry: 9/30/1999
carol: 7/9/1999
jlewis: 7/7/1999
terry: 6/28/1999
mgross: 5/20/1999
mgross: 5/18/1999
terry: 5/12/1999
mgross: 4/7/1999
carol: 4/5/1999
carol: 3/7/1999
alopez: 2/17/1999
carol: 2/17/1999
alopez: 4/27/1998

606610	TITLE *606610 NSFL1 COFACTOR; NSFL1C
;;p47
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The ATPases NSF (601633) and p97 (VCP; 601023) are involved in the
heterotypic fusion of transport vesicles with their target membranes and
the homotypic fusion of membrane compartments. By biochemical
purification of a 47-kD protein complexed with p97 in rat liver cytosol,
followed by micropeptide sequence analysis and PCR with degenerate
primers, Kondo et al. (1997) isolated a cDNA encoding rat p47. Rat p47
binds specifically to p97. Northern blot analysis revealed ubiquitous
expression of a 1.5-kb p47 transcript in rat tissues. Kondo et al.
(1997) also identified a human EST with approximately 89% sequence
identity to rat p47. They concluded that the p97/p47 complex is probably
the active component in the fusion reaction that leads to cisternal
regrowth.

Zhang et al. (2000) screened CD34 (142230)-positive hemopoietic
stem/progenitor cells for novel cDNAs and obtained a human homolog of
p47. The deduced human p47 protein has 370 amino acids. Northern blot
and macroarray analyses revealed abundant and ubiquitous expression of
p47.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhang et al. (2000) determined that human p47 is encoded by a single
exon.

MAPPING

Zhang et al. (2000) mapped the p47 gene to the distal end of chromosome
20p by STS analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Kondo, H.; Rabouille, C.; Newman, R.; Levine, T. P.; Pappin, D.;
Freemont, P.; Warren, G.: p47 is a cofactor for p97-mediated membrane
fusion. Nature 388: 75-78, 1997.

2. Zhang, Q.-H.; Ye, M.; Wu, X.-Y.; Ren, S.-X.; Zhao, M.; Zhao, C.-J.;
Fu, G.; Shen, Y.; Fan, H.-Y.; Lu, G.; Zhong, M.; Xu, X.-R.; and 9
others: Cloning and functional analysis of cDNAs with open reading
frames for 300 previously undefined genes expressed in CD34+ hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells. Genome Res. 10: 1546-1560, 2000.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/14/2002

EDITED mgross: 01/04/2007
mgross: 1/14/2002

607386	TITLE *607386 INTRAFLAGELLAR TRANSPORT 172, CHLAMYDOMONAS, HOMOLOG OF; IFT172
;;SELECTIVE LIM-BINDING FACTOR, RAT, HOMOLOG OF; SLB;;
KIAA1179
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Hirosawa et al. (1999) cloned SLB, which they designated
KIAA1179. The deduced protein contains 1,090 amino acids and shares
significant homology with the kinesin light chain repeat (see 600025)
sequence. RT-PCR analysis revealed highest expression of SLB in testis
and lowest expression in spleen. All other tissues and brain regions
tested showed low-to-moderate expression.

Howard and Maurer (2000) cloned Slb from a rat pituitary cell cDNA
library. The 1,749-amino acid protein contains 7 N-terminal WD40 repeats
and a nuclear localization signal. Highest expression was found in rat
testis and pituitary cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Howard and Maurer (2000) determined that rat Slb specifically binds to
Lhx3 (600577) and Lhx4 (602146) with high affinity both in vitro and in
vivo. Expression of the LIM-interacting domain of Slb reduced the
expression of an Lhx3-responsive reporter gene.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Hirosawa et al. (1999) mapped the SLB gene
to chromosome 2.

ANIMAL MODEL

In a screen for embryonic patterning mutations induced by
ethylnitrosourea, Huangfu et al. (2003) identified 2 mouse mutants,
wimple (wim) and flexo (fxo), that lack ventral neural cell types and
show other phenotypes characteristic of defects in Sonic hedgehog
(600725) signaling. Both mutations disrupt intraflagellar transport
proteins: the wim mutation is an allele of the previously
uncharacterized mouse homolog of Ift172, and fxo is a hypomorphic allele
of polaris, the mouse homolog of Ift88 (600595). Genetic analysis showed
that wim, polaris, and the intraflagellar transport motor protein Kif3a
(604683) are required for hedgehog signaling at a step downstream of the
hedgehog receptor Patched-1 (see 601309). Wimple embryos have an open
anterior neural tube and lack a groove on the ventral midline of the
anterior neural tube. In 5 of 8 wim embryos, nodal expression was
observed bilaterally; the other 3 showed wildtype expression. Huangfu et
al. (2003) concluded that intraflagellar transport machinery has an
essential and vertebrate-specific role in hedgehog signal transduction.

REFERENCE 1. Hirosawa, M.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Kikuno, R.; Nomura, N.;
Ohara, O.: Characterization of cDNA clones selected by the GeneMark
analysis from size-fractionated cDNA libraries from human brain. DNA
Res. 6: 329-336, 1999.

2. Howard, P. W.; Maurer, R. A.: Identification of a conserved protein
that interacts with specific LIM homeodomain transcription factors. J.
Biol. Chem. 275: 13336-13342, 2000.

3. Huangfu, D.; Liu, A.; Rakeman, A. S.; Murcia, N. S.; Niswander,
L.; Anderson, K. V.: Hedgehog signalling in the mouse requires intraflagellar
transport proteins. Nature 426: 83-87, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/29/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/26/2002

EDITED carol: 01/13/2010
terry: 10/8/2008
tkritzer: 9/29/2004
mgross: 11/26/2002

607491	TITLE *607491 PROTEIN O-FUCOSYLTRANSFERASE 1; POFUT1
;;OFUT1; OFUCT1;;
KIAA0180
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The O-fucose modification is found on epidermal growth factor (EGF;
131530)-like repeats of a number of cell surface and secreted proteins.
O-fucose glycans play important roles in ligand-induced receptor
signaling. For example, elongation of O-fucose on Notch (190198) by the
beta-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase fringe (602577) modulates the
ability of Notch to respond to its ligands. The enzyme that adds
O-fucose to EGF-like repeats is GDP-fucose protein O-fucosyltransferase,
or POFUT1 (Wang et al., 2001).

CLONING

By screening sequence databases using a probe deduced from N-terminal
sequence analysis of Pofut1 purified from CHO cells, Wang et al. (2001)
identified a partial cDNA, KIAA0180, that had been cloned by Nagase et
al. (1996). Wang et al. (2001) obtained a full-length cDNA encoding
POFUT1, which they called OFUCT1, by screening a human heart cDNA
library. The full-length cDNA encodes a 388-amino acid protein with a
predicted N-terminal transmembrane sequence typical of a type II
membrane orientation. Wang et al. (2001) identified POFUT1 homologs in
mouse, Drosophila, and C. elegans that share 90.4%, 41.2%, and 29.4%
amino acid identity with human POFUT1, respectively. Northern blot
analysis detected major POFUT1 transcripts of approximately 5 kb in all
tissues examined, consistent with the widespread localization of the
O-fucose modification. Several other weaker bands were also detected,
suggesting that other transcripts may be expressed in some tissues.

Li et al. (2013) demonstrated that Pofut1 is expressed in the skin and
other organs of zebrafish, with highest expression in the testis, fin,
and ovary.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Wang et al. (2001) mapped the POFUT1 gene
to chromosome 20q11, near the centromere. It is located between the
PLAGL2 (604866) and KIF3B (603754) genes. They mapped the mouse gene to
a homologous region of mouse chromosome 2.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (2001) showed that expression of a soluble form of human
POFUT1 in insect cells yielded a protein of the predicted molecular mass
with kinetic and enzymatic properties similar to those of Pofut1
purified from CHO cells.

Using RNA interference to decrease Pofut1 expression in Drosophila,
Okajima and Irvine (2002) demonstrated that O-linked fucose is
positively required for Notch signaling, including both fringe-dependent
and fringe-independent processes. The requirement for Pofut1 was found
to be cell autonomous, in the signal-receiving cell, and upstream of
Notch activation. The transcription of Pofut1 was developmentally
regulated, and overexpression of Pofut1 inhibited Notch signaling. The
authors concluded that POFUT1 is a core component of the Notch pathway
that is required for the activation of Notch by its ligands and whose
regulation may contribute to the pattern of Notch activation during
development.

Notch receptor signaling regulates cell growth and differentiation, and
core components of Notch signaling pathways are conserved from
Drosophila to humans. Shi and Stanley (2003) showed that mouse embryos
lacking protein O-fucosyltransferase-1 die at midgestation with severe
defects in somitogenesis, vasculogenesis, cardiogenesis, and
neurogenesis. The phenotype is similar to that of embryos lacking
downstream effectors of all Notch signaling pathways such as
presenilins, and is different from null phenotypes of Cripto (187395),
Notch receptor, Notch ligand, or Fringe. Protein O-fucosyltransferase-1
is, therefore, an essential core member of Notch signaling pathways in
mammals.

Okajima et al. (2005) found that Drosophila Pofut1 has a distinct Notch
chaperone activity. They localized Ofut1 to the endoplasmic reticulum
and showed that this localization was essential for function in vivo.
Ofut1 could bind to Notch, was required for the trafficking of wildtype
Notch out of the endoplasmic reticulum, and could partially rescue
defects in secretion and ligand binding associated with Notch point
mutations. This ability of Ofut1 to facilitate folding of Notch did not
require its fucosyltransferase activity. Okajima et al. (2005) concluded
that a glycosyltransferase can bind its substrate in the endoplasmic
reticulum to facilitate normal folding.

In HaCaT cells, Li et al. (2013) demonstrated that knockdown of POFUT1
reduces the expression of NOTCH1 (190198), NOTCH2 (600275), HES1
(139605), and KRT5 (148040).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 2 unrelated Chinese families with Dowling-Degos
disease (DDD2; 615327), Li et al. (2013) identified heterozygous
truncating mutations in the POFUT1 gene (607491.0001 and 607491.0002,
respectively); the mutations cosegregated with disease in each family
and neither was found in 600 Chinese controls.

ANIMAL MODEL

Li et al. (2013) observed that morpholino knockdown of POFUT1 in
zebrafish produced a hypopigmentation phenotype at 48 hours
postfertilization (hpf) and abnormal melanin distribution at 72 hpf,
replicating the clinical phenotype seen in patients with Dowling-Degos
disease (see 615327).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DOWLING-DEGOS DISEASE 2
POFUT1, GLU144TER

In affected members of a 4-generation Chinese family with Dowling-Degos
disease (DDD2; 615327), Li et al. (2013) identified heterozygosity for a
c.430G-T transversion in exon 4 of the POFUT1 gene, resulting in a
glu144-to-ter (E144X) substitution. Analysis of RNA from immortalized
lymphocytes from 2 affected individuals showed normal POFUT1 transcripts
but no truncated transcripts, presumably due to nonsense-mediated decay.

.0002
DOWLING-DEGOS DISEASE 2
POFUT1, 1-BP DEL, 482A

In a 53-year-old Chinese woman with Dowling-Degos disease (DDD2;
615327), Li et al. (2013) identified heterozygosity for a 1-bp deletion
(c.482delA) in exon 4 of the POFUT1 gene, causing a frameshift predicted
to result in premature termination (Lys161SerfsTer42).

REFERENCE 1. Li, M.; Cheng, R.; Liang, J.; Yan, H.; Zhang, H.; Yang, L.; Li,
C.; Jiao, Q.; Lu, Z.; He, J.; Ji, J.; Shen, Z.; Li, C.; Hao, F.; Yu,
H.; Yao, Z.: Mutations in POFUT1, encoding protein O-fucosyltransferase
1, cause generalized Dowling-Degos disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 92:
895-903, 2013. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 92: 1014 only, 2013.

2. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Tanaka, A.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. V. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0161-KIAA0200) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 3: 17-24, 1996.

3. Okajima, T.; Irvine, K. D.: Regulation of Notch signaling by O-linked
fucose. Cell 111: 893-904, 2002.

4. Okajima, T.; Xu, A.; Lei, L.; Irvine, K. D.: Chaperone activity
of protein O-fucosyltransferase 1 promotes Notch receptor folding. Science 307:
1599-1603, 2005.

5. Shi, S.; Stanley, P.: Protein O-fucosyltransferase 1 is an essential
component of Notch signaling pathways. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100:
5234-5239, 2003.

6. Wang, Y.; Shao, L.; Shi, S.; Harris, R. J.; Spellman, M. W.; Stanley,
P.; Haltiwanger, R. S.: Modification of epidermal growth factor-like
repeats with O-fucose: molecular cloning and expression of a novel
GDP-fucose protein O-fucosyltransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 40338-40345,
2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/23/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/1/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/13/2003

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 1/17/2003

EDITED carol: 09/17/2013
carol: 7/23/2013
wwang: 6/2/2005
wwang: 6/1/2005
terry: 6/1/2005
alopez: 6/23/2003
terry: 6/13/2003
mgross: 1/17/2003

606455	TITLE *606455 PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 1, REGULATORY SUBUNIT 13B; PPP1R13B
;;APOPTOSIS-STIMULATING PROTEIN OF p53, 1; ASPP1;;
KIAA0771
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening human brain cDNAs for the potential to encode proteins that
are at least 50 kD, Nagase et al. (1998) isolated a cDNA encoding
PPP1R13B, which they called KIAA0771. The deduced 948-amino acid
KIAA0771 protein shares 37.7% amino acid identity with BBP (TP53BP2;
602143). RT-PCR followed by ELISA detected expression of KIAA0771 in all
10 tissues tested.

By searching a genome database for sequences homologous to BBP,
Samuels-Lev et al. (2001) obtained a cDNA encoding ASPP1. The predicted
ASPP1 protein contains 1,090 amino acids. KIAA0771 is identical to ASPP1
but lacks its N-terminal 143 amino acids. The authors also identified a
full-length TP53BP2 sequence, which they termed ASPP2.

GENE FUNCTION

Samuels-Lev et al. (2001) determined that the ASPP proteins interact
with p53 (191170) and specifically enhance p53-induced apoptosis but not
cell cycle arrest. Inhibition of endogenous ASPP function suppressed the
apoptotic function of endogenous p53 in response to apoptotic stimuli.
ASPPs enhanced the DNA binding and transactivation function of p53 on
the promoters of proapoptotic genes in vivo. Two tumor-derived p53
mutants with reduced apoptotic function were defective in cooperating
with ASPP in apoptosis induction. Expression of the ASPPs was frequently
downregulated in human breast carcinomas expressing wildtype p53 but not
in those expressing mutant p53. Samuels-Lev et al. (2001) concluded that
ASPPs regulate the tumor suppression function of p53 in vivo.

MAPPING

Nagase et al. (1998) stated that the PPP1R13B gene, or KIAA0771, maps to
chromosome 14.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Miyajima, N.;
Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the
coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XI. The complete sequences
of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in
vitro. DNA Res. 5: 277-286, 1998.

2. Samuels-Lev, Y.; O'Connor, D. J.; Bergamaschi, D.; Trigiante, G.;
Hsieh, J.-K.; Zhong, S.; Campargue, I.; Naumovski, L.; Crook, T.;
Lu, X.: ASPP proteins specifically stimulate the apoptotic function
of p53. Molec. Cell 8: 781-794, 2001.

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 11/13/2001

EDITED mgross: 11/14/2001
mgross: 11/13/2001

611434	TITLE *611434 CYTOKINE-DEPENDENT HEMATOPOIETIC CELL LINKER; CLNK
;;MAST CELL IMMUNORECEPTOR SIGNAL TRANSDUCER; MIST
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CLNK is a member of the SLP76 family of adaptors (see LCP2, 601603;
BLNK, 604515). CLNK plays a role in the regulation of immunoreceptor
signaling, including PLC-gamma (PLCG1; 172420)-mediated B cell antigen
receptor (BCR) signaling and FC-epsilon R1 (see FCER1A, 147140)-mediated
mast cell degranulation (Cao et al., 1999; Goitsuka et al., 2000, 2001).

CLONING

By yeast 2-hybrid screening of a mouse primitive hematopoietic cell
(EML-16) cDNA library using the immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory
motifs (ITIMs) of PECAM1 (173445) as bait followed by 5-prime RACE, Cao
et al. (1999) cloned mouse Clnk. The deduced 435-amino acid mouse
protein contains a basic domain, a tyrosine- and proline-rich region,
and an SH2 domain that shares 40 to 53% amino acid identity with the SH2
domains of SLP76 (LCP2) and Blnk (604515). RNase protection assay
detected low or undetectable Clnk expression in most mouse tissues,
including bone marrow, lymph node, spleen, thymus, kidney, and
hematopoietic cell lines. Cao et al. (1999) noted higher Clnk levels in
cell lines dependent on cytokines for sustained growth, including a
mastocytoma cell line P815, IL3 (147740)-dependent myeloid cell lines, a
primitive leukemia cell line, and an IL2 (147680)-dependent T cell CTLL
line. Cao et al. (1999) showed that mouse Clnk expression required
sustained cytokine exposure, such as IL3 stimulation of bone marrow mast
cells and IL2 stimulation of isolated mouse splenic T cells and of NK
cells.

By EST database analysis using the SH2 domain of chicken Bash (Blnk) as
probe, Goitsuka et al. (2000) independently isolated mouse Mist cDNA and
used PCR to clone a partial human MIST cDNA from human cord
blood-derived mast cells (HCMC) mRNA. Immunohistochemistry studies
detected mouse skin Mist protein in mast cells exclusively. Goitsuka et
al. (2000, 2001) stated that the deduced mouse Mist protein and partial
human MIST sequence contain 5 conserved potentially phosphorylated
tyrosine residues.

GENE FUNCTION

Cao et al. (1999) showed that mouse Clnk was tyrosine phosphorylated
upon immunoreceptor stimulation, and that Clnk expression in Jurkat T
cells enhanced activation of the NFAT (nuclear factors of activated T
cells) transcription complex (see NFATC2, 600490). Cao et al. (1999)
concluded that Clnk is involved in immunoreceptor-mediated signaling
events.

Using coexpression and immunoprecipitation of MIST/CLNK and various
protein tyrosine kinases in a rat mast cell line, Goitsuka et al. (2000)
showed that MIST/CLNK is phosphorylated primarily by Lyn (165120).
Overexpression of mutant MIST/CLNK suppressed FC-epsilon R1-mediated
mast cell degranulation. Goitsuka et al. (2000) concluded that MIST/CLNK
acts as an adaptor protein downstream of FC-epsilon R1-associated
signaling.

Goitsuka et al. (2001) showed that tyr69 and tyr96 are tyrosine
phosphorylated upon MIST crosslinking with B cell antigen receptor
(BCR). Coimmunoprecipitation studies showed that the MIST N-terminal
region binds the SH3 domain of PLC-gamma (PLCG1; 172420). Goitsuka et
al. (2001) showed that MIST plays a role in PLC-gamma-mediated BCR
signaling in BLNK-deficient cells that involved MIST tyrosine residues
tyr96 and tyr69. However, the presence of the linker for activation of T
cells, LAT (602354), decreases the requirement for MIST tyr96 and tyr69.
Goitsuka et al. (2001) concluded that MIST may cooperate with LAT in BCR
signaling and that this signaling requires the MIST N-terminal
proline-rich region, which also mediated localization of MIST and LAT to
the glycolipid-enriched microdomain (GEM).

ANIMAL MODEL

Utting et al. (2004) generated mice lacking Clnk. They showed that
Clnk-null mice displayed normal T cell, mast cell, and NK cell
functions, and concluded that Clnk is not essential for normal immune
functions.

REFERENCE 1. Cao, M. Y.; Davidson, D.; Yu, J.; Latour, S.; Veillette, A.: Clnk,
a novel SLP-76-related adaptor molecule expressed in cytokine-stimulated
hemopoietic cells. J. Exp. Med. 190: 1527-1534, 1999.

2. Goitsuka, R.; Kanazashi, H.; Sasanuma, H.; Fujimura, Y.; Hidaka,
Y.; Tatsuno, A.; Ra, C.; Hayashi, K.; Kitamura, D.: A BASH/SLP-76-related
adaptor protein MIST/Clnk involved in IgE receptor-mediated mast cell
degranulation. Int. Immun. 12: 573-580, 2000.

3. Goitsuka, R.; Tatsuno, A.; Ishiai, M.; Kurosaki, T.; Kitamura,
D.: MIST functions through distinct domains in immunoreceptor signaling
in the presence and absence of LAT. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 36043-36050,
2001.

4. Utting, O.; Sedgmen, B. J.; Watts, T. H.; Shi, X.; Rottapel, R.;
Iulianella, A.; Lohnes, D.; Veillette, A.: Immune functions in mice
lacking Clnk, an SLP-76-related adaptor expressed in a subset of immune
cells. Molec. Cell. Biol. 24: 6067-6075, 2004.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 9/13/2007

EDITED wwang: 05/05/2011
alopez: 9/13/2007

604633	TITLE *604633 EGF-CONTAINING FIBULIN-LIKE EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX PROTEIN 2; EFEMP2
;;FIBULIN 4; FBLN4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

A large number of extracellular matrix proteins contain variations of
the epidermal growth factor (EGF; 131530) domain, e.g., fibrillin (FBN1;
134797) and Notch (190198). As part of their efforts in transcriptional
mapping of the human 11q13.1-q13.2 genomic region, Katsanis et al.
(2000) identified a novel partial cDNA from a human brain cDNA library.
They called the cDNA 'EGF-containing fibulin-like extracellular matrix
protein-2' (EFEMP2) because of its significant homology to EFEMP1
(601548). Sequence analysis detected 6 putative calcium-binding EGF
domains and 4 EGF modules. Katsanis et al. (2000) observed expression of
a 2.0-kb EFEMP2 transcript in all adult tissues tested by Northern blot
analysis, with highest levels in heart. RT-PCR detected a 105-bp
amplicon from the 3-prime untranslated region in fetal brain, kidney,
and heart, but not in lung. EFEMP1 is likewise expressed in a wide range
of adult and fetal tissues. In contrast to EFEMP1, however, EFEMP2 was
not significantly overexpressed in senescent or quiescent fibroblasts,
suggesting a diversity of function within this EGF-like domain
subfamily. Katsanis et al. (2000) also cloned the mouse Efemp2 homolog.

MAPPING

By analysis of a somatic cell hybrid panel and by placement on a series
of genomic clones by PCR, Katsanis et al. (2000) mapped the EFEMP2 gene
to chromosome 11q13, in an area where several retinopathies have shown
genetic linkage.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Doyne Honeycomb Retinal Dystrophy

Given that EFEMP1 is the site of mutations causing Doyne honeycomb
retinal dystrophy (126600), Katsanis et al. (2000) suggested EFEMP2 as a
candidate for retinal dystrophies. Toto et al. (2002) studied linkage of
both the EFEMP2 and EFEMP1 genes to malattia leventinese in a
3-generation Swiss-Italian family. Linkage was found only to EFEMP1 in 2
of 5 affected family members.

- Autosomal Recessive Cutis Laxa

Cutis laxa is a condition characterized by redundant, pendulous, and
inelastic skin. A severe autosomal recessive form of cutis laxa (ARCL1A;
219100) is caused by mutation in the fibulin-5 gene (FBLN5; 604580).
Hucthagowder et al. (2006) hypothesized that mutations in other members
of the fibulin gene family may cause cutis laxa as well. In a child of
Iraqi descent with cutis laxa and severe systemic connective tissue
abnormalities (ARCL1B; 614437), Hucthagowder et al. (2006) detected a
homozygous missense mutation in the FBLN4 gene (604633.0001). The role
of fibulin-4 in elastic fiber formation is evolutionarily conserved in
mammals (McLaughlin et al., 2006); however, additional observations in
the patient of Hucthagowder et al. (2006) suggested that fibulin-4 may
have additional pleiotropic functions in vascular patterning and
collagen biosynthesis.

In an infant girl who died at day 27 of life with apparent
arachnodactyly, cutis laxa, and severe systemic vascular abnormalities
similar to those of the patient described by Hucthagowder et al. (2006),
and who was negative for mutation in the FBLN5 gene, Dasouki et al.
(2007) identified compound heterozygosity for a missense mutation and a
4-bp duplication in the FBLN4 gene (604633.0002 and 604633.0003,
respectively). Dasouki et al. (2007) concluded that deficiency in
fibulin-4 leads to a perinatal lethal condition associated with elastic
tissue abnormalities.

Hoyer et al. (2009) reported the third case of cutis laxa due to
mutation in FBLN4, an infant girl who died immediately after birth with
extreme bradycardia and who was found to be homozygous for a missense
mutation (604633.0004). Hoyer et al. (2009) stated that this case
extended the phenotypic spectrum of FBLN4 mutations to include
microcephaly, overgrowth, and arachnodactyly.

Renard et al. (2010) sequenced the FBLN4 gene in 17 patients with
prominent cutis laxa but no major cardiovascular findings, and detected
no mutations. Analysis of FBLN4 in a second cohort of 22 patients who
had mild skin involvement but significant cardiovascular features,
including arterial tortuosity, stenosis, and aneurysms, revealed
homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for mutations in the FBLN4 gene
in 3 patients (604633.0005-604633.0008). Renard et al. (2010) concluded
that patients with recessive FBLN4 mutations are predominantly
characterized by aortic aneurysms and arterial tortuosity and stenosis.
Immunostaining of aortic and lung tissue showed an increase in TGF-beta
(190180), which was confirmed by phosphorylated SMAD2 (601366)
immunoblotting of fibroblast cultures; Renard et al. (2010) stated that
this was the first evidence of involvement of altered TGFB signaling in
the pathogenesis of FBLN4 mutations in humans.

Kappanayil et al. (2012) reported 22 unrelated infants from the Malabar
region of the southern Indian state of Kerala. All were Muslims and came
from the community known as the Mappilas. Twenty-one of 22 were
homozygous for a missense mutation in exon 7 of FBLN4 (604633.0009). One
patient was compound heterozygous for this mutation and a second, de
novo, mutation (604633.0010) on her paternal chromosome. Both mutations
occurred in the same calcium-binding EGF domain of the protein. Neither
mutation was found among 200 control alleles.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE IB
EFEMP2, GLU57LYS

In a child of nonconsanguineous parents of Iraqi descent with cutis laxa
(ARCL1B; 614437), Hucthagowder et al. (2006) found homozygosity for a
169G-A transition in the FBLN4 gene that resulted in a glu57-to-lys
(E57K) amino acid substitution. Each of her parents was heterozygous for
this mutation. Multiple alignments showed that the E57 residue was
completely conserved in calcium-binding epidermal growth factor (EGF)
modules, consistent with this residue being essential for calcium
binding. Hucthagowder et al. (2006) pointed out that the same
substitution at a homologous residue in fibulin-1, E1073K (134797.0038),
causes severe, neonatal Marfan syndrome.

.0002
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE IB
EFEMP2, ARG279CYS

In an infant girl with cutis laxa, apparent arachnodactyly, and severe
systemic vascular abnormalities (ARCL1B; 614437), who died at day 27 of
life, Dasouki et al. (2007) identified compound heterozygosity for an
835C-T transition in exon 8 of the EFEMP2 gene, resulting in an
arg279-to-cys (R279C) substitution at a highly conserved residue at the
end of the fifth cbEGF module, and a 4-bp duplication in exon 10
(1070dupCCGC; 604633.0003), predicted to truncate the protein and
replace the last 85 amino acids of the FC domain with an incorrect arg
residue. The missense mutation was not found in 50 controls. Analysis of
the patient's fibroblasts revealed that fibulin-4 protein was barely
detectable in culture medium and not seen in cell extract and matrix,
and immunostaining of patient fibroblasts showed a total absence of
fibulin-4 fibers from the extracellular matrix.

Renard et al. (2010) performed immunohistochemical staining of fibulin-4
on aortic tissue from the patient previously studied by Dasouki et al.
(2007) and confirmed the near absence of extracellular fibulin-4 in the
aortic wall compared to the control, whereas intracellular staining was
similar to that of the control, suggesting that the mutant protein is
either not secreted or is secreted into extracellular space to a lesser
extent. Immunohistochemical staining for phosphorylated SMAD2 (601366)
and CTGF (121009), an effector of TGF-beta (190180) signaling and a
TGF-beta-driven gene product, respectively, in patient aorta and lungs
showed a more intense and increased nuclear staining compared to control
tissues.

.0003
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE IB
EFEMP2, 4-BP DUP, 1070CCGC

See 604633.0002 and Dasouki et al. (2007).

.0004
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE IB
EFEMP2, CYS267TYR

In an infant girl with cutis laxa (ARCL1B; 614437), born of
consanguineous Iraqi parents, Hoyer et al. (2009) identified
homozygosity for an 800G-A transition in exon 7 of the FBLN4 gene,
resulting in a cys267-to-tyr (C267Y) substitution involving the fifth of
six highly conserved residues in the fifth cbEGF module. The unaffected
parents were heterozygous for the mutation.

Renard et al. (2010) performed immunoblotting experiments on the culture
medium of dermal fibroblasts from the patient previously studied by
Hoyer et al. (2009), and observed a complete absence of fibulin-4.
Immunoblotting after TGF-beta (190180) stimulation of patient fibroblast
cultures indicated a significantly increased phosphorylated SMAD2
(601366) signal compared to controls, suggesting that mutation in FBLN4
has an effect on the TGFB signaling pathway.

.0005
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE IB
EFEMP2, GLU126LYS

In a 20-year-old woman with velvety skin and severe arterial tortuosity,
aneurysm, and stenosis (ARCL1B; 614437), originally reported by Ades et
al. (1996), Renard et al. (2010) identified homozygosity for a 376G-A
transition in exon 5 of the EFEMP2 gene, resulting in a glu126-to-lys
(E126K) substitution at an evolutionarily conserved residue in the DINE
consensus sequence of the second cbEGF-like domain. The mutation was not
found in 200 control chromosomes. Immunoblotting experiments on dermal
fibroblast culture medium showed only a slightly diminished amount of
fibulin-4 compared to control, which the authors suggested was
consistent with the longer survival of the patient. In addition,
immunoblotting after TGF-beta (190180) stimulation of patient fibroblast
cultures indicated a significantly increased phosphorylated SMAD2
(601366) signal compared to controls, suggesting that mutation in FBLN4
has an effect on the TGFB signaling pathway.

.0006
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE IB
EFEMP2, GLU126VAL

In a female infant with arterial tortuosity and aneurysm (ARCL1B;
614437), who suffered a large hemispheric stroke at 5 weeks of age and
died at age 18 months from cardiorespiratory failure, Renard et al.
(2010) identified compound heterozygosity for a 377A-T transversion in
exon 5 of the EFEMP2 gene, resulting in a glu126-to-val (E126V)
substitution at an evolutionarily conserved residue in the DINE
consensus sequence of the second cbEGF-like domain, and a 1-bp deletion
(577delC) in exon 6, causing a frameshift predicted to result in a
premature termination codon (Q193Sfs*12). The unaffected parents were
each heterozygous for 1 of the mutations, neither of which was present
in 200 control chromosomes. Clinical features in this patient included a
prominent forehead, mild hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral fissures,
depressed nasal bridge, low-set and distorted external ears, and long
fingers. Echocardiogram showed severe dilation of the ascending aorta
and severe tortuosity of the entire aorta with hypoplasia of the
transverse aortic arch, proximal descending, thoracic, and abdominal
aorta. MRI showed severe tortuosity of the carotid and cerebral
arteries.

.0007
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE IB
EFEMP2, 1-BP DEL, 577C

See 604633.0006 and Renard et al. (2010).

.0008
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE IB
EFEMP2, ALA397THR

In a 7-year-old boy with arterial tortuosity, aneurysm, and joint laxity
(ARCL1B; 614437), originally reported by Baspinar et al. (2005), Renard
et al. (2010) identified homozygosity for a 1189G-A transition in exon
11 of the EFEMP2 gene, resulting in an ala397-to-thr (A397T)
substitution at a highly conserved residue in the C-terminal
fibulin-like module. His unaffected parents were heterozygous for the
mutation.

.0009
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE 1B
EFEMP2, ASP203ALA

In 21 patients, 11 male and 10 female, with ARCL1B (614437), Kappanayil
et al. (2012) identified homozygosity for an A-to-C transversion at
nucleotide 608 in exon 7 of the EFEMP2 gene that resulted in an aspartic
acid-to-alanine substitution at codon 203 (D203A). All patients were
Muslims from the Mappila community of the Malabar region of the Indian
state of Kerala; 8 came from consanguineous families. All parents tested
were normal and carried this mutation in heterozygosity. Homozygosity
was lethal in 17 of the 21 patients, who died at a median age of 4
months. In another patient from the same community, Kappanayil et al.
(2012) detected compound heterozygosity for this mutation and a de novo
missense mutation (604633.0010).

.0010
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE 1B
EFEMP2, ARG227CYS

In 1 patient with ARCL1B (614437) from the Indian Mappila community,
Kappanayil et al. (2012) detected compound heterozygosity for an
asp203-to-ala mutation (D203A; 604633.0009) and a de novo C-to-T
transition at nucleotide 679 resulting in an arginine-to-cysteine
substitution at codon 227 (R227C). The mutation was found on the
paternal allele; paternity was proven. Both the D203A and R227C
mutations occurred in the same calcium-binding EGF domain of FBLN4.
While this patient had vascular abnormalities similar to those seen in
D203A homozygotes, the majority of whom died before the age of 4 months,
she remained asymptomatic at the age of 7 years.

REFERENCE 1. Ades, L. C.; Knight, W. B.; Byard, R. W.; Bateman, J. F.; Esquivel,
J. A. D.; Mee, R. B. B.; Haan, E. A.; Milewicz, D. M.: Clinicopathologic
findings in congenital aneurysms of the great vessels. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 66: 289-299, 1996.

2. Baspinar, O.; Kilinc, M.; Bajat, A.; Celkan, M. A.; Coskun, Y.
: Long tortuous aorta in a child with Larsen syndrome. Can. J. Cardiol. 21:
299-301, 2005.

3. Dasouki, M.; Markova, D.; Garola, R.; Sasaki, T.; Charbonneau,
N. L.; Sakai, L. Y.; Chu, M.-L.: Compound heterozygous mutations
in fibulin-4 causing neonatal lethal pulmonary artery occlusion, aortic
aneurysm, arachnodactyly, and mild cutis laxa. Am. J. Med. Genet. 143A:
2635-2641, 2007.

4. Hoyer, J.; Kraus, C.; Hammersen, G.; Geppert, J.-P.; Rauch, A.
: Lethal cutis laxa with contractual arachnodactyly, overgrowth and
soft tissue bleeding due to a novel homozygous fibulin-4 gene mutation. Clin.
Genet. 76: 276-281, 2009.

5. Hucthagowder, V.; Sausgruber, N.; Kim, K. H.; Angle, B.; Marmorstein,
L. Y.; Urban, Z.: Fibulin-4: a novel gene for an autosomal recessive
cutis laxa syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 78: 1075-1080, 2006.

6. Kappanayil, M.; Nampoothiri, S.; Kannan, R.; Renard, M.; Coucke,
P.; Malfait, F.; Menon, S.; Ravindran, H. K.; Kurup, R.; Faiyaz-Ul-Haque,
M.; Kumar, K.; De Paepe, A.: Characterization of a distinct lethal
arteriopathy syndrome in twenty-two infants associated with an identical,
novel mutation in the FBLN4 gene, confirms fibulin-4 as a critical
determinant of human vascular elastogenesis. Orphanet J. Rare Dis. 7:
61, 2012. Note: Electronic Article.

7. Katsanis, N.; Venable, S.; Smith, J. R.; Lupski, J. R.: Isolation
of a paralog of the Doyne honeycomb retinal dystrophy gene from the
multiple retinopathy critical region on 11q13. Hum. Genet. 106:
66-72, 2000.

8. McLaughlin, P. J.; Chen, Q.; Horiguchi, M.; Starcher, B. C.; Stanton,
J. B.; Broekelmann, T. J.; Marmorstein, A. D.; McKay, B.; Mecham,
R.; Nakamura, T.; Marmorstein, L. Y.: Targeted disruption of fibulin-4
abolishes elastogenesis and causes perinatal lethality in mice. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 26: 1700-1709, 2006.

9. Renard, M.; Holm, T.; Veith, R.; Callewaert, B. L.; Ades, L. C.;
Baspinar, O.; Pickart, A.; Dasouki, M.; Hoyer, J.; Rauch, A.; Trapane,
P.; Earing, M. G.; Coucke, P. J.; Sakai, L. Y.; Dietz, H. C.; De Paepe,
A. M.; Loeys, B. L.: Altered TGF-beta signaling and cardiovascular
manifestations in patients with autosomal recessive cutis laxa type
I caused by fibulin-4 deficiency. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 18: 895-901,
2010.

10. Toto, L.; Parodi, M. B.; Baralle, F.; Casari, G.; Ravalico, G.;
Romano, M.: Genetic heterogeneity in malattia leventinese. Clin.
Genet. 62: 399-403, 2002. Note: Erratum: Clin. Genet. 66: 251 only,
2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 04/26/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/13/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/7/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/5/2009
Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 5/22/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/18/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/29/2000

EDITED alopez: 04/26/2013
alopez: 4/26/2013
carol: 2/15/2013
terry: 2/13/2013
alopez: 1/26/2012
alopez: 1/24/2012
wwang: 2/24/2011
terry: 2/7/2011
wwang: 9/1/2009
terry: 8/5/2009
alopez: 5/22/2006
terry: 5/18/2006
carol: 5/4/2005
carol: 8/31/2004
carol: 8/11/2004
carol: 12/23/2002
tkritzer: 12/20/2002
terry: 12/18/2002
alopez: 3/3/2000
alopez: 2/29/2000

611317	TITLE *611317 PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL 3-KINASE, REGULATORY SUBUNIT 5; PIK3R5
;;p101
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Receptor-regulated class I phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks)
phosphorylate the membrane lipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
(PtdIns(4,5)P2) to PtdIns(3,4,5)P3, which in turn recruits and activates
cytosolic effectors involved in proliferation, survival, or chemotaxis.
PIK3R5 is a PI3K regulatory subunit (Brock et al., 2003).

CLONING

Al Tassan et al. (2012) found high expression of the PIK3R5 gene in
human fetal brain, with lesser expression in adult brain. It was
expressed in several regions, including the cerebellum and cortex.
Studies of mouse tissue showed no Pik3r5 expression in E17 embryos,
although it was expressed in adult mouse brain, suggesting developmental
stage-specific expression.

GENE FUNCTION

Brock et al. (2003) showed that fluorescence-tagged porcine p101 and
human p110-gamma (PIK3CG; 601232) interacted in transfected human
embryonic kidney cells and retained the essential functions of wildtype
heterodimeric PI3K-gamma. G protein-beta (see GNB1; 139380)-gamma (see
GNG2; 606981) recruited PI3K-gamma from the cytosol to the membrane
through interaction with the p101 subunit. Accordingly, p101 was
required for G protein-mediated activation of PI3K-gamma.
Membrane-targeted p110-gamma displayed basal enzymatic activity, but it
was further stimulated by G-beta-gamma, even in the absence of p101.
Brock et al. (2003) concluded that the noncatalytic p101 subunit of
PI3K-gamma is an adaptor molecule that recruits the catalytic subunit to
the plasma membrane through high-affinity interaction with G-beta-gamma.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PIK3R5
gene to chromosome 17 (TMAP RH16346).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 4 sibs, born of consanguineous Saudi Arabian parents, with
ataxia-oculomotor apraxia-3 (AOA3; 615217), Al Tassan et al. (2012)
identified a homozygous missense mutation in the PIK3R5 gene (P629S;
611317.0001). The mutation, which was found by linkage analysis followed
by sequencing of genes in the candidate region, segregated with the
disorder in the family and was not found in 477 ethnically matched
controls. The variant had been identified at low frequencies
(0.011-0.021) in other control populations.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ATAXIA-OCULOMOTOR APRAXIA 3 (1 family)
PIK3R5, PRO629SER dbSNP rs61761068

In 4 sibs, born of consanguineous Saudi Arabian parents, with
oculomotor-apraxia-3 (AOA3; 611317), Al Tassan et al. (2012) identified
a homozygous c.1885C-T transition in exon 12 of the PIK3R5 gene,
resulting in a pro629-to-ser (P629S; dbSNP rs61761068) substitution. The
mutation, which was found by linkage analysis followed by sequencing of
genes in the candidate region, segregated with the disorder in the
family and was not found in 477 ethnically matched controls. The variant
had been identified at low frequencies (0.011-0.021) in other control
populations. Functional studies were not performed.

REFERENCE 1. Al Tassan, N.; Khalil, D.; Shinwari, J.; Al Sharif, L.; Bavi, P.;
Abduljaleel, Z.; Abu Dhaim, N.; Magrashi, A.; Bobis, S.; Ahmed, H.;
AlAhmed, S.; Bohlega, S.: A missense mutation in PIK3R5 gene in a
family with ataxia and oculomotor apraxia. Hum. Mutat. 33: 351-354,
2012.

2. Brock, C.; Schaefer, M.; Reusch, H. P.; Czupalla, C.; Michalke,
M.; Spicher, K.; Schultz, G.; Nurnberg, B.: Roles of G-beta-gamma
in membrane recruitment and activation of p110-gamma/p101 phosphoinositide
3-kinase gamma. J. Cell Biol. 160: 89-99, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/1/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/13/2007

EDITED carol: 05/01/2013
ckniffin: 5/1/2013
mgross: 8/13/2007

430000	TITLE *430000 INTERLEUKIN 3 RECEPTOR, Y-CHROMOSOMAL; IL3RA
;;IL3RY;;
IL3RAY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The receptor for interleukin-3 (IL3; 147740) is a heterodimer that
shares a beta chain (CSF2RB; 138981) in common with the receptors for
IL5 (IL5R; 147851) and GMCSF (CSF2R; 306250), and, like these other
cytokine receptors, has a ligand-specific alpha chain (IL3RA).

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Kremer et al. (1993) demonstrated
that the IL3RY gene is located in the pseudoautosomal region of the X
and Y chromosomes. See 308385.

REFERENCE 1. Kremer, E.; Baker, E.; D'Andrea, R. J.; Slim, R.; Phillips, H.;
Moretti, P. A. B.; Lopez, A. F.; Petit, C.; Vadas, M. A.; Sutherland,
G. R.; Goodall, G. J.: A cytokine receptor gene cluster in the X-Y
pseudoautosomal region? Blood 82: 22-28, 1993.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/1/1993

EDITED terry: 08/26/2008
mgross: 9/6/2006
dkim: 7/2/1998
mark: 7/26/1995
mimadm: 3/11/1994
carol: 10/1/1993

606323	TITLE *606323 CYTOPLASMIC FMRP-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2; CYFIP2
;;p53-INDUCIBLE PROTEIN; PIR121
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

To identify novel proteins that interact with the fragile X mental
retardation protein (FMRP), encoded by the FMR1 gene (309550), Schenck
et al. (2001) used yeast 2-hybrid screening with the FMRP N terminus as
bait. They identified 2 proteins as FMRP interactors, which they called
cytoplasmic FMRP-interacting protein-1 (CYFIP1; 606322) and -2 (CYFIP2).
CYFIP2 contains 1,252 amino acids and shares 88% sequence identity with
CYFIP1. CYFIP1/2 are members of a highly conserved protein family and
share approximately 99% sequence identity with their mouse orthologs.
CYFIP1 interacts exclusively with FMRP, whereas CYFIP2 also interacts
with the FMRP-related proteins FXR1P (600819) and FXR2P (605339). The
interaction of FMRP and CYFIP involves the domain of FMRP that also
mediates homo- and heteromerization, suggesting a competition between
interaction among the FXR proteins and interaction with CYFIP. Schenck
et al. (2001) determined that CYFIP1/2 are distributed in an identical
pattern in the cytoplasm, showing colocalization with FMRP and
ribosomes. Consistent with FMRP and RAC1 localization in dendritic fine
structures, CYFIP1/2 are present in synaptosomal extracts.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the CYFIP2
gene to chromosome 5 (TMAP stSG9917).

REFERENCE 1. Schenck, A.; Bardoni, B.; Moro, A.; Bagni, C.; Mandel, J. L.:
A highly conserved protein family interacting with the fragile X mental
retardation protein (FMRP) and displaying selective interactions with
FMRP-related proteins FXR1P and FXR2P. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98:
8844-8849, 2001.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/28/2001

EDITED wwang: 04/10/2009
alopez: 3/19/2004
joanna: 8/12/2002
carol: 9/28/2001

602130	TITLE *602130 MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE 3; MAPKAPK3
;;MAPKAP3;;
MAPKAP KINASE 3;;
3PK
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Sithanandam et al. (1996) identified a mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK)-activated protein kinase with a single potential SH3-binding site
in the proline-rich N terminus, a putative ATP-binding site, 2 MAP
kinase phosphorylation site motifs, and a putative nuclear localization
signal. They called the protein 3pK. The gene was cloned from NotI
linking clones and codes for a 2.5-kd mRNA that was expressed in all
human tissues examined, being especially high in the heart and skeletal
muscle. Sequence analysis revealed a 382-amino acid protein of 42 kD. It
shares 72% nucleotide and 75% amino acid identity with MAPKAP kinase-2
(602006). In HL60 cells and transiently transfected HEK293 cells,
activation of 3pK in vivo by the growth inducers serum and tetradecanoyl
phorbol acetate was Raf dependent and was mediated by the Raf/MEK/ERK
kinase cascade.

GENE FUNCTION

Ludwig et al. (1996) showed that 3pK is the first kinase to be activated
through all 3 MAPK cascades: extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK;
see 176948), MAPKAP kinase-2, and Jun-N-terminal
kinases/stress-activated protein kinases. They showed also that 3pK has
a novel substrate specificity from other MAPKAPs. Thus, Ludwig et al.
(1996) concluded that 3pK functions as an integrative element of
signaling in both mitogen and stress responses.

Maizels et al. (2001) investigated the activation in vivo and regulation
of the expression of components of the p38 MAPK (600289) pathway during
gonadotropin-induced formation and development of the rat corpus luteum.
They postulated that the p38 MAPK pathway could serve to promote
phosphorylation of key substrates during luteal maturation, since
maturing luteal cells, thought to be cAMP-nonresponsive, nevertheless
maintain critical phosphoproteins. The p38 MAPK downstream protein
kinase target MAPKAPK3 was newly induced at both mRNA and protein levels
during luteal formation and maturation, while mRNA and protein
expression of the closely related MAPKAPK2 diminished. MAPKAPK3-specific
immune complex kinase assays provided direct evidence that MAPKAPK3 was
in an activated state during luteal maturation in vivo. Transient
transfection studies provided direct evidence that MAPKAPK3 was capable
of signaling to activate CREB (123810) transcriptional activity, as
assessed by means of GAL4-CREB fusion protein construct coexpressed with
GAL4-luciferase reporter construct. Introduction of wildtype, but not
kinase-dead mutant, MAPKAPK3 cDNA, into a mouse ovarian cell line
stimulated GAL4-CREB-dependent transcriptional activity approximately
3-fold. Maizels et al. (2001) concluded that MAPKAPK3 is uniquely poised
to support luteal maturation through the phosphorylation and activation
of the nuclear transcription factor CREB.

GENE STRUCTURE

Maizels et al. (2001) determined that the MAPKAPK3 gene contains 10
exons.

MAPPING

Maizels et al. (2001) mapped the MAPKAPK3 gene to chromosome 3p21.3.

REFERENCE 1. Ludwig, S.; Engel, K.; Hoffmeyer, A.; Sithanandam, G.; Neufeld,
B.; Palm, D.; Gaestel, M.; Rapp, U.: 3pK, a novel mitogen-activated
protein (MAP) kinase-activated protein kinase, is targeted by three
MAP kinase pathways. Molec. Cell. Biol. 16: 6687-6697, 1996.

2. Maizels, E. T.; Mukherjee, A.; Sithanandam, G.; Peters, C. A.;
Cottom, J.; Mayo, K. E.; Hunzicker-Dunn, M.: Developmental regulation
of mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated kinases-2 and -3 (MAPKAPK-2/-3)
in vivo during corpus luteum formation in the rat. Molec. Endocr. 15:
716-733, 2001.

3. Sithanandam, G.; Latif, F.; Duh, F.-M.; Bernal, R.; Smola, U.;
Li, H.; Kuzmin, I.; Wixler, V.; Geil, L.; Shrestha, S.; Lloyd, P.;
Bader, S.; Sekido, Y.; Tartof, K. D.; Kashuba, V. I.; Zabarovsky,
E. R.; Dean, M.; Klein, G.; Lerman, M. I.; Minna, J. D.; Rapp, U.
R.; Allikmets, R.: 3pK, a new mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated
protein kinase located in the small cell lung cancer tumor suppressor
gene region. Molec. Cell. Biol. 16: 868-876, 1996. Note: Erratum:
Molec. Cell. Biol. 16: 1880 only, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/11/2002

CREATED Ethylin Wang Jabs: 11/19/1997

EDITED carol: 04/12/2013
carol: 9/8/2003
alopez: 7/11/2002
psherman: 3/26/1999
psherman: 4/21/1998
mark: 12/19/1997

