603894	TITLE *603894 REGULATOR OF G PROTEIN SIGNALING 6; RGS6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the RGS (regulator of G protein signaling) family, such as
RGS6, modulate G protein function by activating the intrinsic GTPase
activity of the alpha (guanine nucleotide-binding) subunits (Seki et
al., 1999).

CLONING

By EST database analysis and PCR of a brain cDNA library, Posner et al.
(1999) obtained a full-length cDNA encoding RGS6. The predicted
472-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 54.4 kD. It
contains an N-terminal dishevelled (see 601365)/egl10/pleckstrin
(173570) (DEP) domain, a central G protein gamma subunit (see GNG2;
606981)-like (GGL) domain, and an RGS domain near the C terminus.

Using RT-PCR, Seki et al. (1999) showed that RGS6 was expressed in
various tissues.

By PCR of a brain cDNA library, Chatterjee et al. (2003) identified 36
RGS6 splice variants resulting from the use of 2 alternative
transcription sites and complex alternative splicing. The variants
encode proteins with long or short N-terminal domains, complete or
incomplete GGL domains, 7 distinct C-terminal domains, and a common
internal domain that includes the RGS domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Posner et al. (1999) expressed RGS6 in insect cells and found that it
formed a cytosolic heterodimer via its GGL domain with the G protein
beta-5 (GNB5; 604447) subunit, but not with other G protein beta
subunits tested. The RGS6/GNB5 complex acted as a GTPase-activating
protein, but it did not form heterotrimeric complexes with G-alpha-o
(GNAO1; 139311)-GDP or G-alpha-q (GNAQ; 600998)-GDP, it did not alter
activity of adenyl cyclase types I, II, or V, and it did not activate
phospholipase C-beta-1 (PLCB1; 607120) or PLCB2 (604114). However, the
RGS6/GNB5 complex inhibited GNB1/GNG2-mediated activation of PLCB2.

Chatterjee et al. (2003) found that RGS6 isoforms with complete GGL
domains interacted with GNB5, irrespective of their N-terminal domain,
following expression in COS-7 cells. In contrast, RGS6 isoforms lacking
a complete GGL domain did not interact with GNB5. Subcellular
distribution patterns for RGS6 isoforms ranged from exclusively
cytoplasmic to exclusively nuclear/nucleolar, and coexpression of GNB5
promoted nuclear localization of RGS6 isoforms.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sierra et al. (2002) determined that the RGS6 gene contains 17 exons.
Chatterjee et al. (2003) determined that the RGS6 gene contains 20 exons
and spans 630 kb.

MAPPING

By somatic cell and radiation hybrid analysis, Seki et al. (1999) mapped
the RGS6 gene to chromosome 14q24.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In an epidemiologic study of 477 bladder cancer patients and 446 matched
controls, Berman et al. (2004) identified 3 noncoding SNPs in RGS2
(600861) and RGS6 that were each associated with a significantly reduced
risk of bladder cancer. When analyzed separately, a C-to-T SNP in the
3-prime UTR of RGS6, dbSNP rs2074647, conferred the greatest overall
reduction in bladder cancer risk, with a significant odds ratio of 0.66.
The reduction of risk was more pronounced in those who had ever smoked.
Expression of dbSNP rs2074647 increased the activity of a luciferase-RGS
fusion protein nearly 3-fold. PCR analysis confirmed that RGS6 splice
variants were expressed in bladder cancer tissue and cell lines. Berman
et al. (2004) proposed that RGS proteins may be important modulators of
cancer risk.

REFERENCE 1. Berman, D. M.; Wang, Y.; Liu, Z.; Dong, Q.; Burke, L.-A.; Liotta,
L. A.; Fisher, R.; Wu, X.: A functional polymorphism in RGS6 modulates
the risk of bladder cancer. Cancer Res. 64: 6820-6826, 2004.

2. Chatterjee, T. K.; Liu, Z.; Fisher, R. A.: Human RGS6 gene structure,
complex alternative splicing, and role of N terminus and G protein
gamma-subunit-like (GGL) domain in subcellular localization of RGS6
splice variants. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 30261-30271, 2003.

3. Posner, B. A.; Gilman, A. G.; Harris, B. A.: Regulators of G protein
signaling 6 and 7: purification of complexes with G-beta-5 and assessment
of their effects on G protein-mediated signaling pathways. J. Biol.
Chem. 274: 31087-31093, 1999.

4. Seki, N.; Hattori, A.; Hayashi, A.; Kozuma, S.; Hori, T.; Saito,
T.: The human regulator of G-protein signaling protein 6 gene (RGS6)
maps between markers WI-5202 and D14S277 on chromosome 14q24.3. J.
Hum. Genet. 44: 138-140, 1999.

5. Sierra, D. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Householder, D.; Grishin, N. V.;
Yu, K.; Ukidwe, P.; Barker, S. A.; He, W.; Wensel, T. G.; Otero, G.;
Brown, G.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Wilkie, T. M.: Evolution
of the regulators of G-protein signaling multigene family in mouse
and human. Genomics 79: 177-185, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/22/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/12/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/11/1999

EDITED mgross: 10/22/2008
mgross: 9/12/2002
jlewis: 6/14/1999
jlewis: 6/11/1999

613336	TITLE *613336 MEMBRANE-ASSOCIATED RING-CH FINGER PROTEIN 9; MARCH9
;;MARCH IX
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MARCH9 is a member of the MARCH family of membrane-bound E3 ubiquitin
ligases (EC 6.3.2.19). MARCH enzymes add ubiquitin (see 191339) to
target lysines in substrate proteins, thereby signaling their vesicular
transport between membrane compartments. MARCH9 induces internalization
of several membrane glycoproteins and directs them to the endosomal
compartment (Bartee et al., 2004; Hoer et al., 2007).

CLONING

Poxviruses and gamma-2 herpesviruses express ubiquitin ligases called K3
proteins that inhibit the surface expression of glycoproteins, including
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules (see 142800).
By searching a database for sequences similar to the functional domains
of viral K3 proteins, Bartee et al. (2004) identified 9 human MARCH
proteins, including MARCH9. The deduced full-length MARCH9 protein
contains a short N terminus, followed by a RING-CH domain and 2
transmembrane domains. It shares 90% identity with MARCH4 (608208) in
the RING-CH and transmembrane domains. Bartee et al. (2004) also
identified a MARCH9 variant that encodes a protein lacking the RING-CH
domain. Real-time PCR analysis showed that both MARCH9 variants were
expressed in all human tissues examined at variable levels.

Hoer et al. (2007) determined that the short MARCH9 variant, which they
called MARCH9 RINGless, uses a transcription initiation site within
intron 2 of the MARCH9 gene. The deduced protein contains the same 2
C-terminal transmembrane domains as full-length MARCH9, but it has a
unique 57-amino acid N terminus that replaces the RING-CH domain.
Epitope-tagged full-length MARCH9 colocalized with a lysosomal marker.
When overexpressed, it also colocalized with the trans-Golgi network
(TGN).

Using RT-PCR, De Gassart et al. (2008) detected robust MARCH9 expression
in all human cells and cell lines examined, including immature and
mature dendritic cells, HeLa and B-cell lines, and monocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

Using an in vitro ubiquitination assay, Bartee et al. (2004) found that
the isolated RING-CH domain of MARCH9 could not function as an E3
ubiquitin ligase with any E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes tested,
including UBCH2 (UBE2H; 601082), UBCH3 (CDC34; 116948), UBCH5A (UBE2D1;
602961), UBCH6 (UBE2E1; 602916), and UBCH7 (UBE2L3; 603721). Following
transfection into HeLa cells, full-length MARCH9 downregulated the
surface expression of cotransfected CD4 (186940) and endogenous MHC I.
Mutation analysis showed that the RING-CH domain of MARCH9 was essential
for MHC I downregulation, and the MARCH9 isoform lacking the RING-CH
domain did not downregulate MHC I surface expression. MHC I was
internalized to lysosomes via multivesicular bodies, and inhibition of
endosome acidification or expression of a dominant-negative VPS4 (see
609982) mutant abrogated MARCH9-induced MHC I internalization. Deletion
of lysines in the tails of HLA-A2.1 (600642) and CD4 made these proteins
resistant to MARCH9-induced degradation, suggesting that ubiquitination
of these lysines is required for their uptake and degradation.

Hoer et al. (2007) found that overexpression of full-length MARCH9
downregulated the surface expression of ICAM1 (147840), a critical cell
adhesion molecule, and MHC I in transfected HeLa and 293T cells.
Downregulation of ICAM1 involved monoubiquitination of ICAM1 on a
cytoplasmic lysine. Mutation analysis revealed that a critical aspartate
within the transmembrane region of MARCH9 was required for recognition
of MHC I molecules, but not ICAM1. The MARCH9 RINGless isoform
stabilized full-length MARCH9 via heterodimerization, resulting in
enhanced MARCH9-mediated MHC I and ICAM1 downregulation. Full-length
MARCH9 was also able to homodimerize.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hoer et al. (2007) determined that the MARCH9 gene contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

Hartz (2010) mapped the MARCH9 gene to chromosome 12q14.1 based on an
alignment of the MARCH9 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC009489) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Bartee, E.; Mansouri, M.; Nerenberg, B. T. H.; Gouveia, K.; Fruh,
K.: Downregulation of major histocompatibility complex class I by
human ubiquitin ligases related to viral immune evasion proteins. J.
Virology 78: 1109-1120, 2004.

2. De Gassart, A.; Camosseto, V.; Thibodeau, J.; Ceppi, M.; Catalan,
N.; Pierre, P.; Gatti, E.: MHC class II stabilization at the surface
of human dendritic cells is the result of maturation-dependent MARCH
I down-regulation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 3491-3496, 2008.

3. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/29/2010.

4. Hoer, S.; Smith, L.; Lehner, P. J.: MARCH-IX mediates ubiquitination
and downregulation of ICAM-1. FEBS Lett. 581: 45-51, 2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/30/2010

EDITED mgross: 03/31/2010

