610051	TITLE *610051 CHMP FAMILY, MEMBER 4A; CHMP4A
;;CHROMATIN-MODIFYING PROTEIN 4A;;
CHARGED MULTIVESICULAR BODY PROTEIN 4A;;
CHMP4;;
SNF7, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF, 1;;
SNF7-1;;
HSPC134
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CHMP4A belongs to the chromatin-modifying protein/charged multivesicular
body protein (CHMP) family. These proteins are components of ESCRT-III
(endosomal sorting complex required for transport III), a complex
involved in degradation of surface receptor proteins and formation of
endocytic multivesicular bodies (MVBs). Some CHMPs have both nuclear and
cytoplasmic/vesicular distributions, and one such CHMP, CHMP1A (164010),
is required for both MVB formation and regulation of cell cycle
progression (Tsang et al., 2006).

CLONING

Using the N-terminal region of ALIX (PDCD6IP; 608074) as bait in a yeast
2-hybrid screen of a HeLa cell cDNA library, Katoh et al. (2003) cloned
CHMP4A. The deduced 223-amino acid protein has 3 coiled-coil regions, a
basic N-terminal half, and an acidic C-terminal half.

By Northern blot analysis, Katoh et al. (2004) detected a 1-kb CHMP4A
transcript in all tissues examined, with highest expression in heart and
moderate expression in skeletal muscle, kidney, and liver.

By PCR of a human melanoma cDNA library, Lin et al. (2005) cloned
CHMP4A, which they designated SNF7-1. They identified 2 PxxP motifs near
the C terminus of CHMP4A. Northern blot analysis detected CHMP4A
expression in all tissues examined, with highest levels in kidney,
liver, skeletal muscle, and heart.

GENE FUNCTION

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Katoh et al. (2003) found that CHMP4A
interacted with ALIX.

Lin et al. (2005) found that overexpressed SNF7-1 associated with COS-7
cell membranes and perturbed normal multivesicular body biogenesis. The
N-terminal half of SNF7-1 localized to membranes and formed
detergent-resistant polymers, whereas the C-terminal half associated
with the ESCRT-III component SKD1 (VPS4B; 609983).

Tsang et al. (2006) performed a systematic yeast 2-hybrid analysis of
human ESCRT-III components, including CHMP4A. CHMP4A interacted with the
ESCRT-III protein VPS4A (609982) and with the signal transduction
molecule CC2D1A (610055).

In S. cerevisiae, ESCRT-III consists of Vps20 (610901), Snf7, Vps24
(610052), and Vps2 (610893), which assemble in that order and require
the ATPase Vps4 for their disassembly. Wollert et al. (2009)
reconstituted and visualized by fluorescence microscopy the
ESCRT-III-dependent budding and scission of intralumenal vesicles into
giant unilamellar vesicles. Wollert et al. (2009) showed that 3 subunits
of ESCRT-III, Vps20, Snf7, and Vps24, are sufficient to detach
intralumenal vesicles. Vps2, the ESCRT-III subunit responsible for
recruiting Vps4, and the ATPase activity of Vps4 were required for
ESCRT-III recycling and supported additional rounds of budding. The
minimum set of ESCRT-III and Vps4 proteins capable of multiple cycles of
vesicle detachment corresponds to the ancient set of ESCRT proteins
conserved from archaea to animals.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Katoh et al. (2003) mapped the CHMP4A gene
to chromosome 14q11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Katoh, K.; Shibata, H.; Hatta, K.; Maki, M.: CHMP4b is a major
binding partner of the ALG-2-interacting protein Alix among the three
CHMP4 isoforms. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 421: 159-165, 2004.

2. Katoh, K.; Shibata, H.; Suzuki, H.; Nara, A.; Ishidoh, K.; Kominami,
E.; Yoshimori, T.; Maki, M.: The ALG-2-interacting protein Alix associates
with CHMP4b, a human homologue of yeast Snf7 that is involved in multivesicular
body sorting. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 39104-39113, 2003.

3. Lin, Y.; Kimpler, L. A.; Naismith, T. V.; Lauer, J. M.; Hanson,
P. I.: Interaction of the mammalian endosomal sorting complex required
for transport (ESCRT) III protein hSnf7-1 with itself, membranes,
and the AAA+ ATPase SKD1. J. Biol. Chem. 280: 12799-12809, 2005.
Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem. 281: 38966 only, 2006.

4. Tsang, H. T. H.; Connell, J. W.; Brown, S. E.; Thompson, A.; Reid,
E.; Sanderson, C. M.: A systematic analysis of human CHMP protein
interactions: additional MIT domain-containing proteins bind to multiple
components of the human ESCRT III complex. Genomics 88: 333-346,
2006.

5. Wollert, T.; Wunder, C.; Lippincott-Schwartz, J.; Hurley, J. H.
: Membrane scission by the ESCRT-III complex. Nature 458: 172-177,
2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/12/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/28/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/13/2006

EDITED terry: 08/22/2012
alopez: 5/15/2009
terry: 5/12/2009
mgross: 3/28/2007
mgross: 4/13/2006

606091	TITLE *606091 SIALIC ACID-BINDING IMMUNOGLOBULIN-LIKE LECTIN 10; SIGLEC10
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SIGLECs are members of the immunoglobulin superfamily that are expressed
on the cell surface. Most SIGLECs have 1 or more cytoplasmic immune
receptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs, or ITIMs. SIGLECs are
typically expressed on cells of the innate immune system, with the
exception of the B-cell expressed SIGLEC6 (604405).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences resembling CD33 (SIGLEC3;
159590) and screening a spleen cDNA library, Munday et al. (2001)
isolated a cDNA encoding SIGLEC10. Sequence analysis predicted that the
697-amino acid SIGLEC10 protein contains a signal peptide, an N-terminal
V-set Ig-like domain and 4 C2-set Ig-like domains, 5 potential N-linked
glycosylation sites, a transmembrane region, and a 126-residue
cytoplasmic tail with 3 putative ITIMs. Northern blot analysis detected
a major 3.0-kb SIGLEC10 transcript, with highest levels in spleen, lymph
node, blood leukocytes, and appendix. Little or no expression was
observed in pancreas, thyroid, and testis. Flow cytometric analysis
demonstrated eosinophil-specific expression of SIGLEC10, but at a lower
level than that of SIGLEC8 (605639). Expression was also detected on
monocytes and a CD16 (146740)-positive/CD56-negative natural killer-like
lymphocyte population. After sialidase treatment, which is necessary for
unmasking the sialic acid-binding site on SIGLECs interacting with cell
surface sialic acids, cells expressing SIGLEC10 bound to red blood
cells. Immunoprecipitation analysis indicated expression of a 100- to
120-kD monomeric protein, higher than the predicted molecular mass,
suggesting that SIGLEC10 is glycosylated.

By random sequencing and by comparison with known SIGLEC sequences, Li
et al. (2001) independently cloned SIGLEC10 from a dendritic cell cDNA
library. The cDNA predicted a deduced 607-amino acid protein containing
3 C2-set domains and 3 putative N-glycosylation sites. Northern blot
analysis of multiple human tissues revealed a transcript of about 3.3 kb
in peripheral blood lymphocytes, ovary, and spleen, and a transcript of
about 1.8 kb in liver, spleen, thymus, and lung.

Using the positional candidate cloning approach, Yousef et al. (2001)
identified SIGLEC10 and found that it encodes 3 variants: a deduced
protein of 697 amino acids, a shorter variant missing exon 8, and a
variant with multiple combined exons including intronic sequences.
RT-PCR detected expression of SIGLEC10 primarily in bone marrow, spleen,
brain, small intestine, colon, and spinal cord.

GENE FUNCTION

With use of SIGLEC10-transfected COS-7 cells, Li et al. (2001) found
moderate red blood cell binding and rosette formation that was augmented
by sialidase pretreatment to eliminate sialylated (cis ligands) on the
COS-7 cell surface. With use of polyacrylamide glycoconjugates, they
determined that SIGLEC10 preferentially bound glycoconjugates carrying
sialic acid in either alpha-2,3 or alpha-2,6 linkages, similar to the
binding observed for SIGLEC5 (604200).

Pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and danger (cell
injury)-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) both trigger activation of
the innate immune system. Chen et al. (2009) reported that Cd24
(600074)-deficient mice exhibit increased susceptibility to DAMPs but
not PAMPs. CD24 associates with high mobility group box-1 (HMGB1;
163905), heat shock protein-70 (HSP70; 140550), and heat shock
protein-90 (HSP90; 140571). CD24 negatively regulates their stimulatory
activity and inhibits nuclear factor kappa-B (see 164011) activation.
Chen et al. (2009) reported that this occurs at least in part through
CD24 association with SIGLEC10 in humans or SiglecG in mice. Chen et al.
(2009) concluded that the CD24-SiglecG pathway protects the host against
a lethal response to pathologic cell death and discriminates danger-
versus pathogen-associated molecular patterns.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yousef et al. (2001) determined that the SIGLEC10 gene contains 11 exons
and spans about 6.5 kb.

MAPPING

Using FISH, Munday et al. (2001) mapped the SIGLEC10 gene to 19q13.3,
where it is closely linked to other CD33-related SIGLECs. Yousef et al.
(2001) identified the SIGLEC10 gene on overlapping BAC clones localized
to chromosome 19q13.4. SIGLEC10 lies 278 kb telomeric to SIGLEC9
(605640) and 35 kb centromeric to SIGLEC8.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, G.-Y.; Tang, J.; Zheng, P.; Liu, Y.: CD24 and Siglec-10
selectively repress tissue damage-induced immune responses. Science 323:
1722-1725, 2009.

2. Li, N.; Zhang, W.; Wan, T.; Zhang, J.; Chen, T.; Yu, Y.; Wang,
J.; Cao, X.: Cloning and characterization of Siglec-10, a novel sialic
acid binding member of the Ig superfamily, from human dendritic cells. J.
Biol. Chem. 276: 28106-28112, 2001.

3. Munday, J.; Kerr, S.; Ni, J.; Cornish, A. L.; Zhang, J. Q.; Nicoll,
G.; Floyd, H.; Mattei, M.-G.; Moore, P.; Liu, D.; Crocker, P. R.:
Identification, characterization and leucocyte expression of Siglec-10,
a novel human sialic acid-binding receptor. Biochem. J. 355: 489-497,
2001.

4. Yousef, G. M.; Ordon, M. H.; Foussias, G.; Diamandis, E. P.: Molecular
characterization, tissue expression, and mapping of a novel Siglec-like
gene (SLG2) with three splice variants. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 284:
900-910, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/18/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/11/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/9/2001

EDITED alopez: 06/23/2009
terry: 6/18/2009
carol: 6/12/2002
carol: 6/11/2002
mgross: 7/9/2001

610955	TITLE *610955 TRAFFICKING PROTEIN PARTICLE COMPLEX, SUBUNIT 3; TRAPPC3
;;BET3, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF; BET3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TRAPPC3 is a component of the TRAPP complex, which is involved in
tethering of transport vesicles to the cis-Golgi membrane (Turnbull et
al., 2005).

CLONING

Loh et al. (2005) reported that the human TRAPPC3 protein, which they
called BET3, contains 180 amino acids. Northern blot analysis detected
Bet3 expression in all mouse tissues examined. Western blot analysis of
fractionated rat liver showed that most Bet3 was present in the
cytosolic fraction, with a lesser amount in the Golgi-enriched membrane
fraction.

By immunohistochemical analysis, Yu et al. (2006) found that endogenous
BET3 showed perinuclear localization in several mammalian cell lines,
including HeLa cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Loh et al. (2005) found that antibodies against Bet3 inhibited in vitro
transport of the envelope glycoprotein of vesicular stomatitis virus
from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to the Golgi apparatus of
semi-intact rat kidney cells in a dose-dependent manner. Cytosol
depleted of Bet3 was also defective in this transport and could be
rescued by recombinant Bet3. Bet3 acted after coat protein II (COPII;
see 601924) but before Rab1 (179508), alpha-Snap (NAPA; 603215), and the
EGTA-sensitive stage during ER-Golgi transport.

Turnbull et al. (2005) found that both human and yeast BET3 were
palmitoylated in recombinant yeast cells, but palmitoylation of BET3 was
only partly responsible for the its membrane localization. Both wildtype
yeast Bet3 and mutant yeast Bet3 lacking palmitoylation rescued cell
viability in Bet3-deleted yeast, suggesting that palmitoylation is not
required for cell viability. Despite high sequence conservation, human
BET3 failed to rescue Bet3-deleted yeast.

In mammalian cells, COPII vesicles derived from the transitional ER do
not tether directly to the Golgi, but rather tether to each other to
form vesicular tubular clusters (VTCs). Using various mammalian cell
lines, including HeLa cells, Yu et al. (2006) showed that BET3 resided
in the transitional ER and adjacent to VTCs. Inactivation of BET3
resulted in accumulation of cargo in membranes that colocalized with the
COPII coat. Using an assay that reconstituted VTC biogenesis in vitro,
Yu et al. (2006) demonstrated that BET3 was required for the tethering
and fusion of COPII vesicles to each other. Depletion of BET3 by small
interfering RNA disrupted a VTC marker and Golgi architecture. Yu et al.
(2006) concluded that BET3 is essential for VTC biogenesis.

Cai et al. (2007) reported that in yeast and mammalian cells the
tethering complex TRAPP I binds to the coat subunit SEC23 (see 610511).
This event requires the BET3 subunit. In vitro studies demonstrated that
the interaction between SEC23 and BET3 targets TRAPP I to COPII vesicles
to mediate vesicle tethering. Cai et al. (2007) proposed that the
binding of TRAPP I to SEC23 marks a coated vesicle for fusion with
another COPII vesicle or the Golgi apparatus. An implication of these
findings is that the intracellular destination of a transport vesicle
may be determined in part by its coat and its associated cargo.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Turnbull et al. (2005) determined the crystal structure of human BET3 to
1.55-angstrom resolution. BET3 assumes an alpha/beta-plait topology
constructed by a twisted, antiparallel, 4-stranded beta sheet on one
side, with the 5 alpha helices forming the other side of the structural
motif. BET3 forms a dimer around the crystallographic 2-fold axis. A
hydrophobic pocket within the core of the alpha-helical face contains an
internal palmitate molecule covalently attached through a thioester
linkage to the conserved cys68.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the TRAPPC3
gene to chromosome 1 (TMAP RH80455).

REFERENCE 1. Cai, H.; Yu, S.; Menon, S.; Cai, Y.; Lazarova, D.; Fu, C.; Reinisch,
K.; Hay, J. C.; Ferro-Novick, S.: TRAPPI tethers COPII vesicles by
binding the coat subunit Sec23. Nature 445: 941-944, 2007.

2. Loh, E.; Peter, F.; Subramaniam, V. N.; Hong, W.: Mammalian Bet3
functions as a cytosolic factor participating in transport from the
ER to the Golgi apparatus. J. Cell Sci. 118: 1209-1222, 2005.

3. Turnbull, A. P.; Kummel, D.; Prinz, B.; Holz, C.; Schultchen, J.;
Lang, C.; Niesen, F. H.; Hofmann, K.-P.; Delbruck, H.; Behlke, J.;
Muller, E.-C.; Jarosch, E.; Sommer, T.; Heinemann, U.: Structure
of palmitoylated BET3: insights into TRAPP complex assembly and membrane
localization. EMBO J. 24: 875-884, 2005.

4. Yu, S.; Satoh, A.; Pypaert, M.; Mullen, K.; Hay, J. C.; Ferro-Novick,
S.: mBet3p is required for homotypic COPII vesicle tethering in mammalian
cells. J. Cell Biol. 174: 359-368, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/29/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/20/2007

EDITED alopez: 07/03/2007
terry: 6/29/2007
mgross: 4/20/2007

614452	TITLE *614452 ATPASE FAMILY, AAA DOMAIN-CONTAINING, MEMBER 1; ATAD1
;;THORASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the AAA+ ATPase family, such as ATAD1, often performs
chaperone-like functions, including membrane dynamics, protein
transport, and assembly or disassembly of protein complexes. ATAD1
appears to regulate surface expression of AMPA receptors (AMPARs; see
138248) (Zhang et al., 2011).

CLONING

Zhang et al. (2011) cloned rat Atad1, which they named thorase after
Thor, the Norse god of thunder and lightning. By database analysis, they
identified orthologs of thorase in human, mouse, orangutan, and cow. The
deduced thorase proteins from these species all contain 361 amino acids
and are 100% identical except for rat thorase, which has 1 amino acid
substitution. Thorase contains an N-terminal linker domain, followed by
an AAA ATPase domain, which is composed of Walker A and Walker B motifs,
and a C-terminal second region of homology that defines classic AAA
proteins. Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues detected a 3-kb
transcript in most tissues, with highest expression in heart, brain,
thymus, and ovary. Strong expression of a smaller transcript was
detected in testis. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed heterogeneous
thorase expression in mouse brain, with relatively strong staining of
hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cells. Confocal microscopy revealed that
thorase colocalized with postsynaptic markers. Subcellular fractionation
of whole mouse brain showed that thorase segregated with crude
synaptosomes.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhang et al. (2011) showed that rat thorase had ATPase activity and
required both Walker A and B boxes for full activity.
Coimmunoprecipitation of thorase with coexpressed postsynaptic proteins
in HEK293 cells revealed that thorase specifically interacted with the
AMPAR subunits Grip1 (604597) and Glur2 (GRIA2; 138247). Mutation
analysis revealed that the PDZ5 domain of Grip1 and the C terminus of
Glur2 were involved in the interactions with thorase. Overexpression of
thorase in mouse cortical and hippocampal neural cultures reduced the
surface expression of Glur2 and regulated AMPAR surface expression in an
ATPase-dependent manner. Binding of Grip1 and thorase to the Glur2
complex increased in the presence of ATP-gamma-S, a nonhydrolyzable ATP
analog, and the complex disassembled in the presence of ATP and Mg(2+).
Zhang et al. (2011) proposed that thorase acts at GLUR2-GRIP1 complexes
to control the endocytosis and removal of AMPARs from postsynaptic
membranes.

MAPPING

Hartz (2012) mapped the ATAD1 gene to chromosome 10q23.31 based on an
alignment of the ATAD1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK027506) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

ANIMAL MODEL

Zhang et al. (2011) found that thorase-knockout (KO) mice were viable
but significantly smaller than their wildtype littermates. Most
thorase-KO mice died by postnatal day 25 with seizures associated with
increased AMPA currents. Examination of thorase-KO brains revealed no
substantial abnormalities in dendritic complexity, or number, density,
or size of dendritic spines. However, thorase-KO brains showed elevated
steady-state surface expression of the AMPAR subunits Glur1 (GRIA1;
138248) and Glur2 compared with wildtype littermates. Loss of thorase in
thorase-KO brains resulted in reduced endocytosis of AMPARs, but not of
transferrin receptors (190010). Conditional thorase-KO mice exhibited
seizures and showed deficits in short-term memory and in
hippocampal-dependent spatial working memory.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/6/2012.

2. Zhang, J.; Wang, Y.; Chi, Z.; Keuss, M. J.; Pai, Y.-M. E.; Kang,
H. C.; Shin, J.; Bugayenko, A.; Wang, H.; Xiong, Y.; Pletnikov, M.
V.; Mattson, M. P.; Dawson, T. M.; Dawson, V. L.: The AAA+ ATPase
thorase regulates AMPA receptor-dependent synaptic plasticity and
behavior. Cell 145: 284-299, 2011.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/27/2012

EDITED mgross: 01/27/2012

611966	TITLE *611966 TRAFFICKING PROTEIN PARTICLE COMPLEX, SUBUNIT 9; TRAPPC9
;;NIK- AND IKBKB-BINDING PROTEIN; NIBP;;
KIAA1882
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NIBP binds NIK (604655) and IKK-beta (IKBKB; 603258) and plays a role in
the neuronal NF-kappa-B (see 164011) signaling pathway (Hu et al.,
2005).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from an adult amygdala cDNA library,
Nagase et al. (2001) cloned a partial cDNA encoding NIBP, which they
designated KIAA1882. RT-PCR ELISA detected moderate expression in all
tissues and specific brain regions examined.

By yeast 2-hybrid screening of a human brain cDNA library using
N-terminal NIK (MAP3K14; 604655) as bait, followed by database analysis,
Hu et al. (2005) cloned NIBP. The deduced 1,246-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 139.4 kD and shares 80 to 90% homology with
the corresponding rodent sequences. Northern blot analysis of human
tissues detected a 4.5-kb transcript with high expression in muscle and
kidney, and lower levels in brain, heart, and placenta; 2 smaller
transcripts of 2.1 and 1.5 kb were also detected. Immunohistochemical
studies detected NIBP protein in neuronal cells in mouse brain with
staining localized to cell bodies and neuronal processes in the
pyramidal layer of mouse cortex, spinal cord motor neurons, and white
matter neurons.

Mochida et al. (2009) noted that there are 2 transcript variants of
TRAPPC9 in humans. Variant 1 is the longer form and encodes a
1,246-amino acid protein. Variant 2 uses an alternate 5-prime exon
initiating translation at a downstream start codon and encodes a
1,148-amino acid protein. In situ hybridization showed low levels of
expression in mouse embryonic brain with strong expression in adult
brain. Trappc9 was found in neurons of the cerebral cortex, hippocampus,
and deep gray matter. Trappc9 immunoreactivity was widespread in the
cytoplasm, without specific localization to any particular organelle,
and was not found in the nucleus. In 11.5-week human embryonic brain,
there was higher expression in the developing cortical plate compared to
the ventricular zone, indicating higher expression in postmitotic
neurons than in progenitor cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hu et al. (2005) determined that the TRAPPC9 gene contains 23 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Hu et al. (2005) mapped the TRAPPC9 gene
to chromosome 8q24.3.

GENE FUNCTION

By coimmunoprecipitation and GST pull-down assays, Hu et al. (2005)
showed that NIBP interacted with NIK and IKK-beta but showed no
interaction with IKK-alpha (CHUK; 600664) or IKK-gamma (IKBKG; 300248).
NIBP overexpression in HEK293T cells potentiated TNFA (191160)-induced
NF-kappa-B activation through increased phosphorylation of the IKK
complex and its downstream substrates IKBA (NFKBIA; 164008) and p65
(NFKB3; 164014). Mobility shift assays demonstrated increased NF-kappa-B
DNA binding. Knockdown of NIBP by siRNA reduced TNFA-induced NF-kappa-B
activation, prevented NGF (see 162030)-induced neuronal differentiation,
and decreased BCLXL (see BCL2L1; 600039) gene expression in PC12 cells.
Hu et al. (2005) suggested that NIBP may act as an adaptor to recruit
NIK or other kinases to the IKK complex, and that NIBP acts as a
downstream component of NGF in neuronal cells.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By genomewide linkage analysis, followed by candidate gene sequencing,
of an Israeli Arab family with nonsyndromic mental retardation (MRT13;
613192), Mochida et al. (2009) identified a homozygous truncating
mutation in the TRAPPC9 gene (R475X; 611966.0001).

Mir et al. (2009) identified the R475X mutation in affected members of a
Pakistani family with MRT13 and identified a 4-bp deletion (611966.0003)
in affected members of an Iranian family with MRT13, previously reported
by Najmabadi et al. (2007).

Philippe et al. (2009) identified a nonsense mutation in the TRAPPC9
gene (611966.0002) in 3 Tunisian brothers with autosomal recessive
mental retardation.

In 2 sisters, born of unrelated parents from southern Italy, with MRT13,
Marangi et al. (2013) identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the
TRAPPC9 gene (611966.0004).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 13
TRAPPC9, ARG475TER

In affected members of an Israeli Arab family with nonsyndromic
autosomal recessive mental retardation and postnatal microcephaly
(MRT13; 613192), Mochida et al. (2009) identified a homozygous 1423C-T
transition in exon 7 of the TRAPPC9 gene, resulting in an arg475-to-ter
(R475X) substitution in TRAPPC9 variant 1. The same change represents
1129C-T, resulting in an arg377-to-ter (R377X) substitution, in TRAPPC9
variant 2. Each unaffected parent was heterozygous for the mutation, and
it was not identified in 306 control chromosomes. The protein was not
detected in patient lymphoblast cell lines.

Mir et al. (2009) identified a homozygous 1422C-T transition in the
TRAPPC9 gene, resulting in an R475X mutation, in affected members of a
large consanguineous Pakistani family with mental retardation. The
mutant protein was not expressed, consistent with nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay. Affected individuals had borderline microcephaly, delayed
walking, and white matter abnormalities on brain MRI.

Abou Jamra et al. (2011) identified homozygosity for the R475X mutation
in affected members of a large consanguineous Syrian family with
autosomal recessive mental retardation. The patients had neonatal
hypotonia, severe motor delay with walking between ages 5 and 7 years,
single words or no speech, growth retardation, stereotypic movements,
and hand flapping. They also shared some dysmorphic features, including
low frontal hairline, synophrys, and microcephaly.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 13
TRAPPC9, ARG570TER

In 3 brothers, born of consanguineous Tunisian parents, with autosomal
recessive mental retardation (MRT13; 613192), Philippe et al. (2009)
identified a homozygous 1708C-T transition in exon 9 of the TRAPPC9
gene, resulting in an arg570-to-ter (R570X) substitution. The mutation
was not found in 1,120 control chromosomes. The protein was not detected
in patient fibroblasts, and the authors postulated nonsense-mediated
mRNA decay. In cultured patient fibroblasts, stimulation with TNF-alpha
(191160) showed a defect in IKBA (NFKBIA; 164008) degradation,
suggesting impaired function of the NF-kappa-B (see 164011) signaling
pathway.

.0003
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 13
TRAPPC9, 4-BP DEL, 2311TGTT

In affected members of an Iranian family (M001) with mental retardation
(613192), previously reported by Najmabadi et al. (2007) as showing
linkage to chromosome 8q24, Mir et al. (2009) identified a 4-bp deletion
(2311delTGTT) in the TRAPPC9 gene, resulting in a frameshift and
premature termination. Affected members had severe nonsyndromic mental
retardation, were ambulatory but nonverbal, and had microcephaly. There
were no seizures or dysmorphic features.

.0004
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 13
TRAPPC9, IVS17AS, A-C, -2

In 2 sisters, born of unrelated parents from southern Italy, with MRT13
(613192), Marangi et al. (2013) identified a homozygous A-to-C
transversion in intron 17 of the TRAPPC9 gene (2851-2A-C), resulting in
the skipping of exon 18, a frameshift, and premature termination
(Thr951TyrfsTer17). Each unaffected parent was heterozygous for the
mutation, which was identified by exome sequencing. PCR analysis of
patient cells did not show reduction of the TRAPPC9 transcript in the 2
sisters.

REFERENCE 1. Abou Jamra, R. A.; Wohlfart, S.; Zweier, M.; Uebe, S.; Priebe,
L.; Ekici, A.; Giesebrecht, S.; Abboud, A.; Al Khateeb, M. A.; Fakher,
M.; Hamdan, S.; Ismael, A.; Muhammad, S.; Nothen, M. M.; Schumacher,
J.; Reis, A.: Homozygosity mapping in 64 Syrian consanguineous families
with non-specific intellectual disability reveals 11 novel loci and
high heterogeneity. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 19: 1161-1166, 2011.

2. Hu, W.-H.; Pendergast, J. S.; Mo, X.-M.; Brambilla, R.; Bracchi-Ricard,
V.; Li, F.; Walters, W. M.; Blits, B.; He, L.; Schaal, S. M.; Bethea,
J. R.: NIBP, a novel NIK and IKK-beta-binding protein that enhances
NF-kappa-B activation. J. Biol. Chem. 280: 29233-29241, 2005.

3. Marangi, G.; Leuzzi, V.; Manti, F.; Lattante, S.; Orteschi, D.;
Pecile, V.; Neri, G.; Zollino, M.: TRAPPC9-related autosomal recessive
intellectual disability: report of a new mutation and clinical phenotype. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 21: 229-232, 2013.

4. Mir, A.; Kaufman, L.; Noor, A.; Motazacker, M. M.; Jamil, T.; Azam,
M.; Kahrizi, K.; Rafiq, M. A.; Weksberg, R.; Nasr, T.; Naeem, F.;
Tzschach, A.; Kuss, A. W.; Ishak, G. E.; Doherty, D.; Ropers, H. H.;
Barkovich, A. J.; Najmabadi, H.; Ayub, M.; Vincent, J. B.: Identification
of mutations in TRAPPC9, which encodes the NIK- and IKK-beta-binding
protein, in nonsyndromic autosomal-recessive mental retardation. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 85: 909-915, 2009.

5. Mochida, G. H.; Mahajnah, M.; Hill, A. D.; Basel-Vanagaite, L.;
Gleason, D.; Hill, R. S.; Bodell, A.; Crosier, M.; Straussberg, R.;
Walsh, C. A.: A truncating mutation of TRAPPC9 is associated with
autosomal-recessive intellectual disability and postnatal microcephaly. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 85: 897-902, 2009.

6. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. XXI. The complete sequences of 60 new
cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins. DNA Res. 8:
179-187, 2001.

7. Najmabadi, H.; Motazacker, M. M.; Garshasbi, M.; Kahrizi, K.; Tzschach,
A.; Chen, W.; Behjati, F.; Hadavi, V.; Nieh, S. E.; Abedini, S. S.;
Vazifehmand, R.; Firouzabadi, S. G.; and 9 others: Homozygosity
mapping in consanguineous families reveals extreme heterogeneity of
non-syndromic autosomal recessive mental retardation and identifies
8 novel gene loci. Hum. Genet. 121: 43-48, 2007.

8. Philippe, O.; Rio, M.; Carioux, A.; Plaza, J.-M.; Guigue, P.; Molinari,
F.; Boddaert, N.; Bole-Feysot, C.; Nitschke, P.; Smahi, A.; Munnich,
A.; Colleaux, L.: Combination of linkage mapping and microarray-expression
analysis identifies NF-kappa-B signaling defect as a cause of autosomal-recessive
mental retardation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 85: 903-908, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/20/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/17/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/21/2009

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 4/18/2008

EDITED carol: 09/13/2013
carol: 5/8/2013
carol: 3/27/2013
ckniffin: 3/20/2013
carol: 1/3/2012
carol: 11/17/2011
ckniffin: 11/17/2011
wwang: 12/30/2009
ckniffin: 12/21/2009
mgross: 12/17/2009
carol: 4/18/2008
wwang: 4/18/2008

606878	TITLE *606878 ACIDIC LEUCINE-RICH NUCLEAR PHOSPHOPROTEIN 32 FAMILY, MEMBER D; ANP32D
;;PP32R2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kadkol et al. (1999) identified and cloned ANP32C (606877) and ANP32D,
which they called PP32R1 and PP32R2, respectively, by RT-PCR of
prostatic adenocarcinoma amplified with primers for PP32 (600832).
ANP32D, ANP32C, and PP32 share approximately 90% amino acid sequence
identity.

GENE FUNCTION

Kadkol et al. (1999) determined that, whereas PP32 is a tumor
suppressor, both ANP32C and ANP32D are tumorigenic. ANP32C and ANP32D
were able to stimulate transformed focus formation when cotransfected
into NIH 3T3 cells along with tumor promoters. NIH 3T3 cells transformed
with ANP32C or ANP32D were also tumorigenic in nude mice. Kadkol et al.
(1999) suggested that alternative use of ANP32D, ANP32C, and PP32 may
modulate the oncogenic potential of human prostate cancer.

Brody et al. (1999) determined that the region of PP32 spanning amino
acids 150 to 174 is responsible for its tumor suppressor activity and
that this region is truncated in ANP32D.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kadkol et al. (1999) stated that the ANP32D gene is intronless.

MAPPING

Kadkol et al. (1999) stated that the ANP32D gene maps to chromosome 12.

REFERENCE 1. Brody, J. R.; Kadkol, S. S.; Mahmoud, M. A.; Rebel, J. M. J.; Pasternack,
G. R.: Identification of sequences required for inhibition of oncogene-mediated
transformation by pp32. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 20053-20055, 1999.

2. Kadkol, S. S.; Brody, J. R.; Pevsner, J.; Bai, J.; Pasternack,
G. R.: Modulation of oncogenic potential by alternative gene use
in human prostate cancer. Nature Med. 5: 275-279, 1999. Note: Erratum:
Nature Med. 5: 1087 only, 1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/24/2002

EDITED carol: 04/25/2002
carol: 4/24/2002

613110	TITLE *613110 BLADDER CANCER-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN; BLCAP
;;BLADDER CANCER-ASSOCIATED, 10-KD; BC10
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The BLCAP gene is a tumor suppressor that limits cell proliferation and
stimulates apoptosis. BLCAP protein or message is downregulated or
absent in a variety of human cancers (Schulz et al., 2009).

CLONING

Using differential display to identify genes upregulated in tumor
biopsies obtained from a noninvasive compared with invasive bladder
transitional cell carcinomas (TCCs), Gromova et al. (1999) identified
BLCAP, which they designated BC10. Gromova et al. (2002) cloned
full-length BC10 from a cDNA library developed from a noninvasive TCC.
The deduced 87-amino acid peptide has a calculated molecular mass of 9.8
kD. It has an N-terminal cytoplasmic region, followed by a proline-rich
region with characteristics of the SRC (190090) homology-3
domain-binding site, 2 highly hydrophobic regions, and a C terminus with
a putative casein kinase II (see CSNK2A1, 115440) phosphorylation site.
Human and mouse BC10 share 100% amino acid identity, and the
corresponding transcripts share 95% nucleotide identity in the coding
region. Close orthologs were also detected in nematode and fly,
suggesting a high degree of conservation. Northern blot analysis
detected a transcript of about 2 kb in noninvasive TCC. Two-dimensional
separation of proteins in BC10-expressing COS cells, followed by Western
blot analysis, revealed a major acidic form of BC10, and a minor basic
form of BC10, both at an apparent molecular mass of 10 kD. The acidic
form is likely phosphorylated.

Schulz et al. (2009) identified at least 4 distinct human BLCAP
transcripts and 2 distinct mouse transcripts. They referred to BLCAP
transcripts with translation start sites downstream of NNAT (603106),
which is within intron 1 of BLCAP, as BLCAP-V1A, -V1B, and -V1C, and
they referred to the BLCAP transcript with translation start site
upstream of NNAT as BLCAP-V2A.

GENE FUNCTION

Using Northern blot analysis and RT-PCR, Gromova et al. (2002) confirmed
that the expression of BLCAP was downregulated in invasive bladder TCCs.

Yao et al. (2007) stated that expression of BLCAP is downregulated in
several types of carcinomas and overexpression of BLCAP in HeLa cells
induces apoptosis. They found that BLCAP overexpression in a human
tongue carcinoma cell line induced S phase arrest and apoptosis,
accompanied by upregulation of p21 (CDKN1A; 116899) and downregulation
of BCL2 (151430) and BCLXL (BCL2L1; 600039).

GENE STRUCTURE

Schulz et al. (2009) noted that the BLCAP gene consists of 2 exons
traversing approximately 13 kb, with evidence for 2 alternative exons
resulting in minor splice variants. In mouse and human, the first intron
of the BLCAP gene contains the distinct neuronatin (NNAT; 603106) gene,
which is an imprinted gene exclusively expressed from the paternally
inherited allele.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Gromova et al. (2002) mapped the BLCAP
gene to chromosome 20q11.2-q12.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Schulz et al. (2009) found that mouse Blcap-v1 transcripts were
preferentially expressed from maternally-inherited alleles in adult and
fetal brain but not in other murine tissues, and likewise human BLCAP-V1
transcripts showed similar preferential expression from
maternally-inherited alleles in adult and fetal brain. Mouse and human
BLCAP-V2A transcripts were found predominantly expressed from
paternally-inherited alleles in brain. They proposed that the
tissue-specific imprinting of BLCAP may be due to the particularly high
transcriptional activity of NNAT in brain. Schulz et al. (2009)
hypothesized that the imprinted expression of BLCAP and its interplay
with NNAT at the transcriptional level may be relevant to human
carcinogenesis.

REFERENCE 1. Gromova, I.; Gromov, P.; Celis, J. E.: bc10: a novel human bladder
cancer-associated protein with a conserved genomic structure downregulated
in invasive cancer. Int. J. Cancer 98: 539-546, 2002.

2. Gromova, I.; Gromov, P.; Celis, J. E.: Identification of true
differentially expressed mRNAs in a pair of human bladder transitional
cell carcinomas using an improved differential display procedure. Electrophoresis 20:
241-248, 1999.

3. Schulz, R.; McCole, R. B.; Woodfine, K.; Wood, A. J.; Chahal, M.;
Monk, D.; Moore, G. E.; Oakey, R. J.: Transcript- and tissue-specific
imprinting of a tumour suppressor gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 118-127,
2009.

4. Yao, J. Duan, L.; Fan, M.; Yuan, J.; Wu, X.: Overexpression of
BLCAP induces S phase arrest and apoptosis independent of p53 and
NF-kappa-B in human tongue carcinoma: BLCAP overexpression induces
S phase arrest and apoptosis. Molec. Cell. Biochem. 297: 81-92,
2007.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 11/13/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/13/2009

EDITED wwang: 11/13/2009

184755	TITLE *184755 STEROL CARRIER PROTEIN 2; SCP2
;;STEROL CARRIER PROTEIN X; SCPX
DESCRIPTION Sterol carrier protein-2 (SC2) is a peroxisomal enzyme with thiolase
activity that is required for the breakdown of branched-chain fatty
acids (summary by Ferdinandusse et al., 2006).

Sterol carrier protein-2 was the second peroxisomal thiolase to be
identified; see ACAA1 (604054).

CLONING

Yamamoto et al. (1991) used rat SCP2 cDNA to isolate a homologous human
liver SCP2 cDNA. SCP2 encodes a deduced 143-amino acid protein that
shares 89% sequence identity with the rat protein. SCP2 contains a
20-residue N-terminal leader sequence before the mature 13.2-kD
polypeptide, which contains a C-terminal tripeptide related to the
peroxisome targeting sequence. Northern blot analysis identified 2 mRNA
transcripts of 1.8 and 3.2 kb in liver; in fibroblasts and placenta, the
1.8-kb transcript was most abundant.

GENE FUNCTION

Yamamoto et al. (1991) noted that in steroid hormone producing cells
SCP2 is thought to facilitate the transport of cholesterol to
mitochondria, where the first committed step in steroidogenesis takes
place. Yamamoto et al. (1991) demonstrated that coexpression of the SCP2
cDNA with expression vectors for cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme
and adrenodoxin resulted in a 2.5-fold enhancement of progestin
synthesis over that obtained with expression of the steroidogenic enzyme
system alone.

Sterol carrier protein-2 is present in low levels in Zellweger syndrome
(see 214100), in which the cells are deficient in peroxisomes (van
Amerongen et al., 1987).

MAPPING

Yamamoto et al. (1991) used sequences in the 3-prime untranslated region
of the SCP2 cDNA to design PCR primers for use in mapping studies of
human/rodent somatic cell hybrids. In this way, they demonstrated that
the gene is located on the segment 1pter-p21 (He et al., 1991).

Vesa et al. (1994) refined the chromosomal assignment of SCP2 to 1p32 by
analysis of a somatic cell hybrid panel by both PCR and hybridization
methods applied to cell lines with various rearrangements of chromosome
1.

By interspecific backcross analysis, Welch et al. (1996) mapped the Scp2
gene to mouse chromosome 4.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a patient with leukoencephalopathy, dystonia, and motor neuropathy
who was found to have deficiency of SCP2, Ferdinandusse et al. (2006)
identified a homozygous 1-nucleotide insertion (545_546insA;
184755.0001) in the SCP2 gene.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY WITH DYSTONIA AND MOTOR NEUROPATHY
SCP2, 1-BP INS, 545A

In a man with leukoencephalopathy with dystonia and motor neuropathy
(613724) and his similarly affected brother, Ferdinandusse et al. (2006)
found homozygosity for a 1-bp insertion of an adenine after nucleotide
position 545 (545_546insA) of the SCP2 gene, leading to a frameshift and
premature stop codon (I184fsX7).

REFERENCE 1. Ferdinandusse, S.; Kostopoulos, P.; Denis, S.; Rusch, H.; Overmars,
H.; Dillmann, U.; Reith, W.; Haas, D.; Wanders, R. J. A.; Duran, M.;
Marziniak, M.: Mutations in the gene encoding peroxisomal sterol
carrier protein X (SCPx) cause leukencephalopathy with dystonia and
motor neuropathy. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 78: 1046-1052, 2006.

2. He, Z.; Yamamoto, R.; Furth, E. E.; Schantz, L. J.; Naylor, S.
L.; George, H.; Billheimer, J. T.; Strauss, J. F., III: cDNAs encoding
members of a family of proteins related to human sterol carrier protein
2 and assignment of the gene to human chromosome 1p21-pter. DNA Cell
Biol. 10: 559-569, 1991.

3. van Amerongen, A.; Helms, J. B.; van der Krift, T. P.; Schutgens,
R. B. H.; Wirtz, K. W. A.: Purification of nonspecific lipid transfer
protein (sterol carrier protein 2) from human liver and its deficiency
in livers from patients with cerebro-hepato-renal (Zellweger) syndrome. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 919: 149-155, 1987.

4. Vesa, J.; Hellsten, E.; Barnoski, B. L.; Emanuel, B. S.; Billheimer,
J. T.; Mead, S.; Cowell, J. K.; Strauss, J. F., III; Peltonen, L.
: Assignment of sterol carrier protein X/sterol carrier protein 2
to 1p32 and its exclusion as the causative gene for infantile neuronal
ceroid lipofuscinosis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 341-346, 1994.

5. Welch, C. L.; Xia, Y.-R.; Billheimer, J. T.; Strauss, J. F., III;
Lusis, A. J.: Assignment of the mouse sterol carrier protein gene
(Scp2) to chromosome 4. Mammalian Genome 7: 624-625, 1996.

6. Yamamoto, R.; Kallen, C. B.; Babalola, G. O.; Rennert, H.; Billheimer,
J. T.; Strauss, J. F., III: Cloning and expression of a cDNA encoding
human sterol carrier protein 2. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 463-467,
1991.

7. Yamamoto, R.; Naylor, S. L.; George, H.; Billheimer, J. T.; Strauss,
J. F., III: Assignment of the gene encoding sterol carrier protein
2 to human chromosome 1pter-p21. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 58:
1866-1867, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/12/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/8/1991

EDITED terry: 02/18/2011
terry: 2/3/2011
carol: 2/3/2011
joanna: 7/27/2010
alopez: 5/19/2006
terry: 5/18/2006
carol: 3/24/2006
ckniffin: 12/7/2005
terry: 5/17/2005
alopez: 6/14/2002
terry: 6/12/2002
dkim: 7/23/1998
dkim: 7/16/1998
terry: 11/14/1996
mark: 3/4/1996
terry: 2/21/1996
carol: 1/15/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/23/1992
carol: 8/8/1991

608684	TITLE *608684 NINEIN; NIN
;;GSK3B-INTERACTING PROTEIN;;
KIAA1565
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ninein is a centrosomal protein required for the centrosome to function
as a microtubule-organizing center (MTOC) and is essential for the
reformation of the interphase centrosome architecture following mitosis
(Ou et al., 2002).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned NIN, which they designated
KIAA1565. RT-PCR ELISA detected high NIN expression in ovary, spleen,
adult whole brain, and all individual brain regions examined. Expression
was intermediate in all other adult and fetal tissues examined except
testis, which showed no expression.

Using GSK3B (605004) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a fetal liver
cDNA library, followed by EST contig searching and 5-prime RACE of fetal
liver cDNA, Hong et al. (2000) cloned full-length NIN. The deduced
2,047-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 239 kD. NIN
contains an N-terminal GTP-binding site, a large coiled-coil domain with
4 leucine zipper motifs, and a C-terminal domain responsible for GSK
binding. Unlike mouse Nin, it does not have an N-terminal Ca(2+)-binding
site. Northern blot analysis detected a 9.0-kb transcript in all tissues
examined and a 7.0-kb transcript predominantly in heart and skeletal
muscle. Fluorescence-labeled NIN localized in the perinuclear foci
characteristic of centrosomes in transfected COS-1 cells.

Hong et al. (2000) cloned a splice variant of NIN, which they designated
ninein-lm (ninein like mouse) because the protein contains an N-terminal
Ca(2+)-binding site. This variant lacks intron 1 and utilizes an
alternate splice site in exon 2 that results in more 5-prime sequence of
exon 2. Ninein-lm encodes a deduced 2,041-amino acid protein with a
calculated molecular mass of 238 kD. RT-PCR and Southern blot analysis
indicated that ninein-lm expression was 20- to 50-fold higher than
ninein expression in all tissues tested except pancreas.

By Western blot analysis, Chen et al. (2003) determined that endogenous
HeLa cell ninein had an apparent molecular mass of about 230 kD.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hong et al. (2000) determined that the NIN gene contains 29 exons and
spans about 130 kb. The promoter region contains a TATA box, 2 CCAAT
boxes, and 3 GC boxes. It also has 4 Sp1 (189906)-binding sites, 2 p300
(602700)-binding sites, and 1 AP1 (165160)-binding site.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis and radiation hybrid analysis, Hong et al.
(2000) mapped the NIN gene to chromosome 14q22.

GENE FUNCTION

Hong et al. (2000) determined that the C termini of ninein and ninein-lm
bound GSK3B. The coiled-coil domain, but not the leucine-zipper domains,
mediated the interaction. The coiled-coil domain also mediated
oligomerization.

The mammalian centrosome consists of a pair of centrioles surrounded by
pericentriolar material (PCM). Ou et al. (2002) stated that a subset of
PCM proteins are arranged in a tubular conformation with an open and a
closed end within the centrosome. They found that, in the mother
centrosome, ninein and CEP110 (605496) were distributed at both ends of
the centrosome tube, including the site of centrosome duplication.
However, in the daughter centrosome, ninein and CEP110 were present only
at the closed end, where they colocalized with CEP250. The appearance of
ninein and CEP110 at the open end of the daughter centrosome occurred
during the telophase-G1 transition of the next cell cycle, concomitant
with the maturation of the daughter centrosome into a mother centrosome.
Microinjection of antibodies against either ninein or CEP110 into
metaphase HeLa cells disrupted the reformation of the tubular
conformation of proteins within the centrosome following cell division
and led to dispersal of centrosomal material throughout the cytosol.
Microinjection of antibodies to either ninein or CEP110 into metaphase
kangaroo rat kidney cells not only disrupted the tubular configuration
within the centrosome, but also affected the centrosome's ability to
function as an MTOC. Centrosomal architecture was not disrupted if
antibodies were microinjected into postmitotic cells with fully formed
centrosomes, but the MTOC function of the centrosomes was disrupted.

Chen et al. (2003) showed that the coiled-coil II (CCII) domain of
ninein, which contains a centrosome targeting signal, colocalized with
gamma-tubulin (191135) and centrin (see CENT1 603187) at the centrosome
of transfected HeLa cells. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed that
ninein protein disappeared from spindle poles during metaphase and
anaphase, but reaccumulated at centrosomes at the end of cell division.
In vitro kinase assays indicated that the CCII domain was readily
phosphorylated by AIK (AURKA; 603072) and PKA (see 176911).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 2 sisters with severe short stature, microcephaly, and developmental
delay (Seckel syndrome-7; SCKL7, 614851), Dauber et al. (2012)
identified compound heterozygosity for missense mutations in the NIN
gene, Q1222R (608684.0001) and N1709S (608684.0002).

ANIMAL MODEL

Dauber et al. (2012) performed morpholino knockdown of ninein in
zebrafish and observed defects in the anterior neuroectoderm that
resulted in a deformity of the developing cranium, with a small, squared
skull highly reminiscent of the human phenotype.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SECKEL SYNDROME 7
NIN, GLN1222ARG

In 2 sisters with severe short stature, microcephaly, and developmental
delay (SCKL7; 614851), Dauber et al. (2012) identified compound
heterozygosity for a 3667G-A transition in exon 18 of the NIN gene,
resulting in a gln1222-to-arg (Q1222R) substitution, and a 5128A-G
transition in exon 23, resulting in an asn1709-to-ser (N1709S;
608684.0002) substitution; both substitutions occurred at evolutionarily
conserved residues. The unaffected parents were each heterozygous for 1
of the mutations, neither of which was present in the SNP database or
the NHLBI exome variant server; however, the Q1222R variant was present
in the 1000 Genomes pilot data, with an overall minor allele frequency
of 0.001. Functional analysis of patient fibroblasts suggested that the
compound heterozygous NIN defects did not disrupt ninein expression or
localization or affect mitotic functions in an obvious way.

.0002
SECKEL SYNDROME 7
NIN, ASN1709SER

See 608684.0001 and Dauber et al. (2012).

REFERENCE 1. Chen, C.-H.; Howng, S.-L.; Cheng, T.-S.; Chou, M.-H.; Huang, C.-Y.;
Hong, Y.-R.: Molecular characterization of human ninein protein:
two distinct subdomains required for centrosomal targeting and regulating
signals in cell cycle. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 308: 975-983,
2003.

2. Dauber, A.; LaFranchi, S. H.; Maliga, Z.; Lui, J. C.; Moon, J.
E.; McDeed, C.; Henke, K.; Zonana, J.; Kingman, G. A.; Pers, T. H.;
Baron, J.; Rosenfeld, R. G.; Hirschhorn, J. N.; Harris, M. P.; Hwa,
V.: Novel microcephalic primordial dwarfism disorder associated with
variants in the centrosomal protein ninein. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 6Aug,
2012. Note: Advance Electronic Publication.

3. Hong, Y.-R.; Chen, C.-H.; Chang, J.-H.; Wang, S.; Sy, W.-D.; Chou,
C.-K.; Howng, S.-L.: Cloning and characterization of a novel human
Ninein protein that interacts with the glycogen synthase kinase 3-beta. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1492: 513-516, 2000.

4. Hong, Y.-R.; Chen, C.-H.; Chuo, M.-H.; Liou, S.-Y.; Howng, S.-L.
: Genomic organization and molecular characterization of the human
Ninein gene. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 279: 989-995, 2000.

5. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Nakayama, M.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVIII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 273-281, 2000.

6. Ou, Y. Y.; Mack, G. J.; Zhang, M.; Rattner, J. B.: CEP110 and
ninein are located in a specific domain of the centrosome associated
with centrosome maturation. J. Cell Sci. 115: 1825-1835, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/8/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/24/2004

EDITED carol: 10/08/2012
terry: 10/8/2012
carol: 9/19/2008
mgross: 5/26/2004
mgross: 5/24/2004

610594	TITLE *610594 FOLLICULIN-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1; FNIP1
;;KIAA1961
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By randomly sequencing clones derived from an adult brain cDNA library,
Nagase et al. (2001) cloned FNIP1, which they designated KIAA1961.
RT-PCR ELISA detected ubiquitous expression in all human adult and fetal
tissues and specific brain regions examined, with highest expression in
spleen, testis, ovary, and adult and fetal liver.

Using coimmunoprecipitation with HA-tagged folliculin (FLCN; 607273)
expressed in HEK293 cells to identify FLCN-interacting proteins,
followed by mass spectrometry and database analysis, and PCR of a pooled
human tissue cDNA library, Baba et al. (2006) isolated full-length
FNIP1. The deduced 1,166-amino acid protein has no known functional
domains. Expression of FNIP1 in HEK293 cells yielded a protein that
migrated at 130 kD on SDS-PAGE. Northern blot analysis detected
strongest expression in heart, liver, and placenta with moderate
expression in kidney and lung.

Using quantitative real-time PCR, Hasumi et al. (2008) detected variable
FNIP1 expression in most human tissues. Highest expression was in
salivary gland, nasal mucosa, parathyroid gland, and muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Using coimmunoprecipitation of FNIP1 and FLCN expressed in HEK293 cells
and in vitro binding assays, Baba et al. (2006) showed that the C
terminus of FLCN and amino acids 300 to 1166 of FNIP1 were required for
optimal FLCN-FNIP1 binding. FLCN and FNIP1 colocalized to the cytoplasm
in a reticular pattern. FNIP1 interacted with HSP90 (HSPCA; 140571) and
with the alpha (PRKAA1; 602739), beta (PRKAB1; 602740), and gamma
(PRKAG1; 602742) subunits of AMPK. FNIP1 was phosphorylated by AMPK, and
its phosphorylation was inhibited in a dose-dependent manner by an AMPK
inhibitor, resulting in reduced FNIP1 expression. FLCN phosphorylation
was diminished by rapamycin and amino acid starvation and facilitated by
FNIP1 overexpression, suggesting that FLCN phosphorylation may be
regulated by mTOR (FRAP1; 601231) and AMPK signaling. Baba et al. (2006)
concluded that FLCN and FNIP1 may be involved in energy and/or nutrient
sensing through the AMPK and mTOR signaling pathways.

Using coimmunoprecipitation analysis with HEK293 cells, Hasumi et al.
(2008) detected FNIP2 (612768) in protein complexes with FNIP1, FLCN,
and AMPK. FNIP1 and FNIP2 formed homo- and heterodimers.

Takagi et al. (2008) found that, when expressed alone, FLCN localized to
the nucleus, but when coexpressed with FNIP1 or FNIP2, the coexpressed
proteins localized to the cytoplasm in a reticular pattern.
Downregulation of FLCN, FNIP1, or FNIP2 via small interfering RNA
resulted in decreased S6K1 (RPS6KB1; 608938) phosphorylation, suggesting
that the FLCN complex regulates S6K1 phosphorylation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Baba et al. (2006) determined that the FNIP1 gene contains 18 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Nagase et al. (2001) mapped the FNIP1 gene
to chromosome 5.

REFERENCE 1. Baba, M.; Hong, S.-B.; Sharma, N.; Warren, M. B.; Nickerson, M.
L.; Iwamatsu, A.; Esposito, D.; Gillette, W. K.; Hopkins, R. F., III;
Hartley, J. L.; Furihata, M.; Oishi, S.; Zhen, W.; Burke, T. R., Jr.;
Linehan, W. M.; Schmidt, L. S.; Zbar, B.: Folliculin encoded by the
BHD gene interacts with a binding protein, FNIP1, and AMPK, and is
involved in AMPK and mTOR signaling. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103:
15552-15557, 2006.

2. Hasumi, H.; Baba, M.; Hong, S.-B.; Hasumi, Y.; Huang, Y.; Yao,
M.; Valera, V. A.; Linehan, W. M.; Schmidt, L. S.: Identification
and characterization of a novel folliculin-interacting protein FNIP2. Gene 415:
60-67, 2008.

3. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. XXII. The complete sequences of 50 new
cDNA clones which code for large proteins. DNA Res. 8: 319-327,
2001.

4. Takagi, Y.; Kobayashi, T.; Shiono, M.; Wang, L.; Piao, X.; Sun,
G.; Zhang, D.; Abe, M.; Hagiwara, Y.; Takahashi, K.; Hino, O.: Interaction
of folliculin (Birt-Hogg-Dube gene product) with a novel Fnip1-like
(FnipL/Fnip2) protein. Oncogene 27: 5339-5347, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/24/2009

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 11/27/2006

EDITED mgross: 04/28/2009
terry: 4/24/2009
wwang: 11/27/2006

603486	TITLE *603486 UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE 4; USP4
;;UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE; UNP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ubiquitin-specific proteases (UBPs) are a group of deubiquitinating
enzymes that possess 2 signature motifs, the Cys box and the His box
(summary by Frederick et al., 1998).

CLONING

Gupta et al. (1993) isolated mouse cDNAs encoding Unp, a protein similar
to the human TRE oncogene. Using Western blots, Gupta et al. (1994)
found that Unp has an apparent molecular mass of 180 kD. They reported
that overexpression of Unp led to oncogenic transformation of NIH 3T3
cells injected into athymic mice.

By screening a human frontal cortex library with a murine Unp cDNA, Gray
et al. (1995) isolated cDNAs encoding human UNP. Analysis of the clones
revealed a large open reading with the potential to encode a protein of
854 amino acids, with a molecular mass of 97 kD. The human and mouse
proteins share 90% sequence identity. Northern blot analysis of primary
lung tumor samples indicated that levels of UNP mRNA were elevated in
small cell carcinomas and adenocarcinomas relative to normal adult lung.

Frederick et al. (1998) sequenced additional UNP cDNAs and found several
differences from the sequence reported by Gray et al. (1995), including
2 single nucleotide insertions that increased the length of the
predicted protein, UNPEL (UNP extended, long isoform), to 963 amino
acids. They also recovered cDNAs encoding a shorter isoform designated
UNPES. Both isoforms exhibited deubiquitinating activity. Antibodies
against UNP detected 2 proteins of 105 to 110 kD on Western blots. Using
immunocytochemistry of mammalian cells expressing epitope-tagged UNP and
cell fractionation studies, Frederick et al. (1998) demonstrated that
both isoforms of the human protein are localized primarily in the
cytosol. (In an erratum, Frederick et al. (1998) cited a personal
communication from the Gray laboratory stating that the data in Gupta et
al. (1993) locating Unp in the nuclear fraction of mammalian cell
extracts was apparently in error.) Northern blot analysis revealed UNP
expression as a closely-migrating cluster of mRNAs in all tissues
tested. However, the authors found no evidence for overexpression of UNP
transcripts in cell lines derived from small cell lung carcinomas.

GENE STRUCTURE

Di Fruscio et al. (1998) reported that the mouse Unp gene contains 22
exons distributed over 47 kb. A processed ribosomal S2 pseudogene was
identified in the third intron.

MAPPING

By analysis of an interspecific backcross, Gupta et al. (1993) mapped
the Unp gene to mouse chromosome 9 in a region showing homology of
synteny with human chromosome 3p.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Gray et al. (1995) mapped the
human UNP gene to 3p21.3, a region implicated in neoplasms of the lung.
Using the same technique, Frederick et al. (1998) refined the map
position to 3p21.31.

REFERENCE 1. Di Fruscio, M.; Gilchrist, C. A.; Baker, R. T.; Gray, D. A.: Genomic
structure of Unp, a murine gene encoding a ubiquitin-specific protease. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1398: 9-17, 1998.

2. Frederick, A.; Rolfe, M.; Chiu, M. I.: The human UNP locus at
3p21.31 encodes two tissue-selective, cytoplasmic isoforms with deubiquitinating
activity that have reduced expression in small cell lung carcinoma
cell lines. Oncogene 16: 153-165, 1998. Note: Erratum: Oncogene
16: 2293 only, 1998.

3. Gray, D. A.; Inazawa, J.; Gupta, K.; Wong, A.; Ueda, R.; Takahashi,
T.: Elevated expression of Unph, a proto-oncogene at 3p21.3, in human
lung tumors. Oncogene 10: 2179-2183, 1995.

4. Gupta, K.; Chevrette, M.; Gray, D. A.: The Unp proto-oncogene
encodes a nuclear protein. Oncogene 9: 1729-1731, 1994.

5. Gupta, K.; Copeland, N. G.; Gilbert, D. J.; Jenkins, N. A.; Gray,
D. A.: Unp, a mouse gene related to the tre oncogene. Oncogene 8:
2307-2310, 1993.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/3/1999

EDITED carol: 06/11/2013
carol: 1/3/2013
alopez: 2/3/1999

603456	TITLE *603456 DPH2, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; DPH2
;;DPH2-LIKE 2; DPH2L2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Diphthamide is a unique posttranslationally modified histidine found
only in translation elongation factor-2 (EEF2; 130610). This
modification is conserved from archaebacteria to humans and serves as
the target for ADP-ribosylation and inactivation of EEF2 by diphtheria
toxin (DT) and Pseudomonas exotoxin A. DPH2 is 1 of several enzymes
involved in synthesis of diphthamide in EEF2 (Liu et al., 2004).

CLONING

Mattheakis et al. (1993) found that dph2, a S. cerevisiae diphtheria
resistance gene, encodes a protein involved in diphthamide biosynthesis.
By searching an EST database, Schultz et al. (1998) identified a human
cDNA with 63% identity to the corresponding nucleotide sequence of human
DPH2-like 1 (DPH2L1, or DPH1; 603527). Using a PCR strategy, they
recovered cDNAs corresponding to the entire coding region of the gene,
which they called DPH2L2. The predicted 489-amino acid protein shared
24% and 28% sequence identity with DPH2L1 and yeast dph2, respectively.
Northern blot analysis revealed that DPH2L2 was expressed ubiquitously
as a 2.5-kb mRNA. An additional 3-kb transcript was found in several
tissues.

Liu et al. (2004) cloned mouse Dph2. The deduced 489-amino acid protein
shares 83% identity with human DPH2.

GENE FUNCTION

Liu et al. (2004) showed that mouse Dph2 could complement the
DT-resistant phenotype of diphthamide-deficient mutant Chinese hamster
ovary cell lines. Immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that yeast and
mouse Dph1 (603527) and Dph2 interacted, suggesting that these enzymes
may function in diphthamide biosynthesis as a dimer or multimer.

Carette et al. (2009) used insertional mutagenesis to develop a
screening method to generate null alleles in a human cell line haploid
for all chromosomes except chromosome 8. Using this approach, they
identified genes encoding important elements of the biosynthetic pathway
of diphthamide, which are required for the cytotoxic effects of
diphtheria toxin and exotoxin A. Mutants of the DPH1, DPH2, and DPH5
(611075) genes, involved in diphthamide biosynthesis, were identified as
resistant to both anthrax toxin and diphtheria toxin.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Schultz et al. (1998) mapped the
DPH2L2 gene to 1p34.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Foley et al. (1995)
REFERENCE 1. Carette, J. E.; Guimaraes, C. P.; Varadarajan, M.; Park, A. S.;
Wuethrich, I.; Godarova, A.; Kotecki, M.; Cochran, B. H.; Spooner,
E.; Ploegh, H. L.; Brummelkamp, T. R.: Haploid genetic screens in
human cells identify host factors used by pathogens. Science 326:
1231-1235, 2009.

2. Foley, B. T.; Moehring, J. M.; Moehring, T. J.: Mutations in the
elongation factor 2 gene which confer resistance to diphtheria toxin
and Pseudomonas exotoxin A: genetic and biochemical analyses. J.
Biol. Chem. 270: 23218-23225, 1995.

3. Liu, S.; Milne, G. T.; Kuremsky, J. G.; Fink, G. R.; Leppla, S.
H.: Identification of the proteins required for biosynthesis of diphthamide,
the target of bacterial ADP-ribosylating toxins on translation elongation
factor 2. Molec. Cell. Biol. 24: 9487-9497, 2004.

4. Mattheakis, L. C.; Sor, F.; Collier, R. J.: Diphthamide synthesis
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae: structure of the DPH2 gene. Gene 132:
149-154, 1993.

5. Schultz, D. C.; Balasara, B. R.; Testa, J. R.; Godwin, A. K.:
Cloning and localization of a human diphthamide biosynthesis-like
protein-2 gene, DPH2L2. Genomics 52: 186-191, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/22/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/16/2007

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 1/25/1999

EDITED alopez: 01/08/2010
terry: 12/22/2009
mgross: 6/5/2007
terry: 5/16/2007
alopez: 2/12/1999
alopez: 1/25/1999

603110	TITLE *603110 MOTHERS AGAINST DECAPENTAPLEGIC, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 5; SMAD5
;;MADH5;;
SMA- AND MAD-RELATED PROTEIN 5
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Drosophila Mad transduces signals from TGF-beta (e.g., 190180) family
members. By searching an expressed sequence tag (EST) database with the
protein sequences of Mad and Mad homologs, Riggins et al. (1996)
isolated partial human cDNAs encoding MADH5, which they called JV5-1.
The deduced MADH5 protein has 465 amino acids, with 57 of the C-terminal
59 residues identical to those of Mad.

Gemma et al. (1998) determined the full-length cDNA sequence of human
MADH5, which they called SMAD5. Using PCR-SSCP analysis to investigate
the frequency of SMAD5 somatic mutations in human cancers, Gemma et al.
(1998) did not detect either homozygous deletions or point mutations in
40 primary gastric tumors or 51 cell lines derived from diverse types of
cancer, including 20 cell lines resistant to the growth inhibitory
effects of TGF-beta. The SMAD5 protein has strong homology with SMAD1
(601595), SMAD2 (601366), SMAD3 (603109), and SMAD4 (600993) in the N-
and C-terminal domains, which are separated by a proline-rich sequence;
SMAD5 shows the greatest homology to SMAD1.

GENE FUNCTION

Bruno et al. (1998) showed that SMAD5 plays a critical role in the
signaling pathway by which TGF-beta inhibits the proliferation of human
hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Davis et al. (2008) demonstrated that induction of a contractile
phenotype in human vascular smooth muscle cells by TGF-beta and bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs; see 112264) is mediated by miR21 (611020).
miR21 downregulates PDCD4 (608610), which in turn acts as a negative
regulator of smooth muscle contractile genes. TGF-beta and BMP signaling
promoted a rapid increase in expression of mature miR21 through a
posttranscriptional step, promoting the processing of primary
transcripts of miR21 (pri-miR21) into precursor miR21 (pre-miR21) by the
Drosha complex (see 608828). TGF-beta and BMP-specific SMAD signal
transducers SMAD1, SMAD2, SMAD3, and SMAD5 (603110) are recruited to
pri-miR21 in a complex with the RNA helicase p68 (DDX5; 180630), a
component of the Drosha microprocessor complex. The shared cofactor
SMAD4 (600993) is not required for this process. Thus, Davis et al.
(2008) concluded that regulation of microRNA biogenesis by
ligand-specific SMAD proteins is critical for control of the vascular
smooth muscle cell phenotype and potentially for SMAD4-independent
responses mediated by the TGF-beta and BMP signaling pathways.

GENE STRUCTURE

By comparison of the SMAD5 cDNA sequence with the SMAD5 genomic
sequence, obtained from YAC clones, Gemma et al. (1998) showed that the
SMAD5 gene has 8 exons, with the coding sequence contained in exons 3 to
8. By 5-prime RACE, the authors identified a SMAD5 cDNA derived from an
alternatively spliced transcript that lacks the 75-bp exon 2.

MAPPING

Riggins et al. (1996) mapped the MADH5 gene to 5q31 by somatic cell
hybrid analysis and screening of YAC clones.

REFERENCE 1. Bruno, E.; Horrigan, S. K.; Van Den Berg, D.; Rozler, E.; Fitting,
P. R.; Moss, S. T.; Westbrook, C.; Hoffman, R.: The Smad5 gene is
involved in the intracellular signaling pathways that mediate the
inhibitory effects of transforming growth factor-beta on human hematopoiesis. Blood 91:
1917-1923, 1998.

2. Davis, B. N.; Hilyard, A. C.; Lagna, G.; Hata, A.: SMAD proteins
control DROSHA-mediated microRNA maturation. Nature 454: 56-61,
2008.

3. Gemma, A.; Hagiwara, K.; Vincent, F.; Ke, Y.; Hancock, A. R.; Nagashima,
M.; Bennett, W. P.; Harris, C. C.: hSmad5 gene, a human hSmad family
member: its full length cDNA, genomic structure, promoter region and
mutation analysis in human tumors. Oncogene 16: 951-956, 1998.

4. Riggins, G. J.; Thiagalingam, S.; Rozenblum, E.; Weinstein, C.
L.; Kern, S. E.; Hamilton, S. R.; Willson, J. K. V.; Markowitz, S.
D.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.: Mad-related genes in the human. Nature
Genet. 13: 347-349, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/29/2008

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 10/9/1998

EDITED alopez: 09/11/2008
terry: 8/29/2008
tkritzer: 10/1/2004
carol: 10/13/1998

601231	TITLE *601231 MECHANISTIC TARGET OF RAPAMYCIN; MTOR
;;MAMMALIAN TARGET OF RAPAMYCIN;;
FKBP12-RAPAMYCIN COMPLEX-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; FRAP1;;
FK506-BINDING PROTEIN 12-RAPAMYCIN COMPLEX-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1;;
FRAP;;
FRAP2;;
RAFT1
MTOR COMPLEX, INCLUDED; MTORC, INCLUDED;;
MECHANISTIC TARGET OF RAPAMYCIN COMPLEX 1, INCLUDED; MTORC1, INCLUDED;;
MECHANISTIC TARGET OF RAPAMYCIN COMPLEX 2, INCLUDED; MTORC2, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MTOR is a highly conserved protein kinase that is found in 2
structurally and functionally distinct protein complexes: TOR complex-1
(TORC1) and TORC2. TORC1 is a key regulator of cell growth and
proliferation and mRNA translation, whereas TORC2 promotes actin
cytoskeletal rearrangement, cell survival, and cell cycle progression
(summary by Jacinto et al. (2004) and Thoreen et al. (2012)).

CLONING

To identify the target for the FKBP12-rapamycin complex in human, Brown
et al. (1994) used a FKBP12/glutathione-S-transferase fusion protein and
glutathione affinity chromatography to purify a 220-kD bovine brain
protein which bound the FKBP12-rapamycin complex. They designed
oligonucleotide probes based on the bovine protein sequence and screened
a human Jurkat T-cell cDNA library. Their complete human cDNA for FRAP
encoded a predicted 2,549-amino acid protein with a calculated molecular
mass of approximately 300 kD. Brown et al. (1994) showed by Northern
blot analysis that the 7.6-kb gene transcript was present in a variety
of human tissues. They noted that, while the precise functions of FRAP
and its yeast homologs TOR1/TOR2 are unknown, the C-terminal regions of
these proteins share amino acid homology (approximately 21% identity on
average) with several phosphatidylinositol kinases; see 171834.

In a review, Hay and Sonenberg (2004) described the domain structure of
MTOR. The N-terminal half of the protein contains 20 tandem HEAT
repeats, which are implicated in protein-protein interactions. Each HEAT
repeat consists of 2 alpha helices of about 40 amino acids. The
C-terminal half contains a large FRAP-ATM (607585)-TRRAP (603015) (FAT)
domain, followed by the FKB12- and rapamycin-binding domain, a
serine/threonine kinase catalytic domain, a negative regulatory domain,
and a C-terminal FAT (FATC) domain necessary for MTOR activity.

GENE FUNCTION

FKBP12-rapamycin associated protein (FRAP) is one of a family of
proteins involved in cell cycle progression, DNA recombination, and DNA
damage detection. In rat, it is a 245-kD protein (symbolized RAFT1) with
significant homology to the Saccharomyces cerevisiae protein TOR1 and
has been shown to associate with the immunophilin FKBP12 (186945) in a
rapamycin-dependent fashion (Sabatini et al., 1994). Brown et al. (1994)
noted that the FKBP12-rapamycin complex was known to inhibit progression
through the G1 cell cycle stage by interfering with mitogenic signaling
pathways involved in G1 progression in several cell types, as well as in
yeast. The authors stated that the binding of FRAP to FKBP12-rapamycin
correlated with the ability of these ligands to inhibit cell cycle
progression.

Rapamycin is an efficacious anticancer agent against solid tumors. In a
hypoxic environment, the increase in mass of solid tumors is dependent
on the recruitment of mitogens and nutrients. When nutrient
concentrations change, particularly those of essential amino acids, the
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR/FRAP) functions in regulatory
pathways that control ribosome biogenesis and cell growth. In bacteria,
ribosome biogenesis is independently regulated by amino acids and ATP.
Dennis et al. (2001) demonstrated that the human mTOR pathway is
influenced by the intracellular concentration of ATP, independent of the
abundance of amino acids, and that mTOR/FRAP itself is an ATP sensor.

Castedo et al. (2001) delineated the apoptotic pathway resulting from
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 envelope glycoprotein (Env)-induced
syncytia formation in vitro and in vivo. Immunohistochemical analysis
demonstrated the presence of phosphorylated ser15 of p53 (191170) as
well as the preapoptotic marker tissue transglutaminase (TGM2; 190196)
in syncytium in the apical light zone (T-cell area) of lymph nodes, as
well as in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, from HIV-1-positive but
not HIV-1-negative donors. The presence of these markers correlated with
viral load (HIV-1 RNA levels). Quantitative immunoblot analysis showed
that phosphorylation of ser15 of p53 in response to HIV-1 Env is
mediated by FRAP and not by other phosphatidylinositol kinase-related
kinases, and it is accompanied by downregulation of protein phosphatase
2A (see 176915). The phosphorylation is significantly inhibited by
rapamycin. Immunofluorescence microscopy indicated that FRAP is enriched
in syncytial nuclei and that the nuclear accumulation precedes the
phosphorylation of ser15 of p53. Castedo et al. (2001) concluded that
HIV-1 Env-induced syncytium formation leads to apoptosis via a pathway
that involves phosphorylation of ser15 of p53 by FRAP, followed by
activation of BAX (600040), mitochondrial membrane permeabilization,
release of cytochrome C, and caspase activation.

Fang et al. (2001) identified phosphatidic acid as a critical component
of mTOR signaling. In their study, mitogenic stimulation of mammalian
cells led to a phospholipase D-dependent accumulation of cellular
phosphatidic acid, which was required for activation of mTOR downstream
effectors. Phosphatidic acid directly interacted with the domain in mTOR
that is targeted by rapamycin, and this interaction was positively
correlated with mTOR's ability to activate downstream effectors. The
involvement of phosphatidic acid in mTOR signaling reveals an important
function of this lipid in signal transduction and protein synthesis, as
well as a direct link between mTOR and mitogens. Fang et al. (2001)
concluded that their study suggested a potential mechanism for the in
vivo actions of the immunosuppressant rapamycin.

Kim et al. (2002) and Hara et al. (2002) reported that MTOR binds with
RAPTOR (607130), an evolutionarily conserved protein with at least 2
roles in the MTOR pathway. Kim et al. (2002) showed that RAPTOR has a
positive role in nutrient-stimulated signaling to the downstream
effector S6K1 (608938), maintenance of cell size, and MTOR protein
expression. The association of RAPTOR with MTOR also negatively
regulates MTOR kinase activity. Conditions that repress the pathway,
such as nutrient deprivation and mitochondrial uncoupling, stabilize the
MTOR-RAPTOR association and inhibit MTOR kinase activity. Kim et al.
(2002) proposed that RAPTOR is a component of the MTOR pathway that,
through its association with MTOR, regulates cell size in response to
nutrient levels.

In mammals, MTOR cooperates with PI3K (see 171834)-dependent effectors
in a biochemical signaling pathway to regulate the size of proliferating
cells. Fingar et al. (2002) presented evidence that rat S6k1 alpha-II,
Eif4e (133440), and Eif4ebp1 (602223) mediate Mtor-dependent cell size
control.

Hara et al. (2002) showed that the binding of RAPTOR to MTOR is
necessary for the MTOR-catalyzed phosphorylation of 4EBP1 in vitro and
that it strongly enhances the MTOR kinase activity toward p70-alpha
(S6K1). Rapamycin or amino acid withdrawal increased, whereas insulin
strongly inhibited, the recovery of 4EBP1 and RAPTOR on 7-methyl-GTP
sepharose. Partial inhibition of RAPTOR expression by RNA interference
reduced MTOR-catalyzed 4EBP1 phosphorylation in vitro. RNA interference
of C. elegans Raptor yielded an array of phenotypes that closely
resembled those produced by inactivation of CE-Tor. Thus, the authors
concluded that RAPTOR is an essential scaffold for the MTOR-catalyzed
phosphorylation of 4EBP1 and mediates TOR action in vivo.

Vellai et al. (2003) demonstrated that TOR deficiency in C. elegans more
than doubles its natural life span. The absence of Let363/TOR activity
caused developmental arrest at the L3 larval stage. At 25.5 degrees C,
the mean life span of Let363 mutants was 25 days compared with a life
span of 10 days in wildtype worms.

By immunoprecipitation analysis, Kim et al. (2003) identified GBL
(612190) as an additional subunit of the MTOR signaling complex in human
embryonic kidney cells. GBL bound the kinase domain of MTOR and
stabilized the interaction of raptor with MTOR. Loss-of-function
experiments using small interfering RNA showed that, like MTOR and
raptor, GBL participated in nutrient- and growth factor-mediated
signaling to S6K1 and in control of cell size. Binding of GBL to MTOR
strongly stimulated MTOR kinase activity toward S6K1 and 4EBP1, and this
effect was reversed by stable interaction of raptor with MTOR. Nutrients
and rapamycin regulated the association of MTOR with raptor only in
complexes that also contained GBL. Kim et al. (2003) proposed that GBL
and raptor function together to modulate MTOR kinase activity.

Huntington disease (HD; 143100) is an inherited neurodegenerative
disorder caused by a polyglutamine tract expansion in which expanded
polyglutamine proteins accumulate abnormally in intracellular
aggregates. Ravikumar et al. (2004) showed that mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) is sequestered in polyglutamine aggregates in cell
models, transgenic mice, and human brains. Sequestration of mTOR impairs
its kinase activity and induces autophagy, a key clearance pathway for
mutant huntingtin (613004) fragments. This protects against
polyglutamine toxicity, as the specific mTOR inhibitor rapamycin
attenuates huntingtin accumulation and cell death in cell models of HD,
and inhibition of autophagy has converse effects. Furthermore, rapamycin
protects against neurodegeneration in a fly model of HD, and the
rapamycin analog CCI-779 improved performance on 4 different behavioral
tasks and decreased aggregate formation in a mouse model of HD. The data
provided proof of principle for the potential of inducing autophagy to
treat HD.

Scott et al. (2004) found that signaling through Tor and its upstream
regulators, Pi3k and Rheb (601293), was necessary and sufficient to
suppress starvation-induced autophagy in the Drosophila fat body. In
contrast, a downstream Tor effector, S6k, promoted rather than
suppressed autophagy, suggesting S6K downregulation may limit autophagy
during extended starvation.

Hay and Sonenberg (2004) reviewed the roles of MTOR in protein
synthesis, cell growth and proliferation, synaptic plasticity, and
cancer.

Brugarolas et al. (2004) showed that downregulation of Mtor by hypoxia
in mice required de novo transcription and expression of Redd1 (607729)
and an intact Tsc1 (605284)/Tsc2 (191092) complex.

Beuvink et al. (2005) showed that the drug RAD001 (everolimus), a
rapamycin derivative, dramatically enhanced cisplatin-induced apoptosis
in wildtype p53 but not mutant p53 tumor cells. The use of isogenic
tumor cell lines expressing either wildtype MTOR cDNA or an MTOR mutant
unable to bind RAD001 demonstrated that the effects of RAD001 resulted
from inhibition of MTOR function. Beuvink et al. (2005) showed that
RAD001 sensitized cells to cisplatin by inhibiting p53-induced p21
(116899) expression. This effect was attributed to a small but
significant inhibition of p21 translation, combined with the short
half-life of p21.

Kwon et al. (2003) found that inhibition of Mtor decreased the seizure
frequency and death rate in mice with conditional Pten (601728)
deficiency, prevented the increase in Pten-deficient neuronal soma size
in young mice, and reversed neuronal soma enlargement in adult mice.
Mtor inhibition did not decrease the size of wildtype adult neurons.
Kwon et al. (2003) concluded that MTOR is required for neuronal
hypertrophy downstream of PTEN deficiency, but it is not required for
maintenance of normal neuronal soma size. They proposed that MTOR
inhibitors may be useful therapeutic agents for the treatment of brain
diseases resulting from PTEN deficiency, such as Lhermitte-Duclos
disease (see 158350) or glioblastoma multiforme (137800).

Akt/PKB (164730) activation requires the phosphorylation of ser473.
Sarbassov et al. (2005) showed that in Drosophila and in human cells TOR
and its associated protein rictor are necessary for ser473
phosphorylation, and that a reduction in rictor or mTOR expression
inhibited an AKT/PKB effector. The rictor-mTOR complex directly
phosphorylated Akt/PKB on ser473 in vitro and facilitated thr308
phosphorylation by PDK1 (605213).

Holz et al. (2005) showed that MTOR and S6K1 maneuvered on and off the
EIF3 (see 602039) translation initiation complex in HEK293 cells in a
signal-dependent, choreographed fashion. When inactive, S6K1 associated
with the EIF3 complex, while the S6K1 activator MTOR, in association
with RAPTOR, did not. Hormone- or mitogen-mediated cell stimulation
promoted MTOR/RAPTOR binding to the EIF3 complex and phosphorylation of
S6K1. Phosphorylation resulted in S6K1 dissociation and activation,
followed by phosphorylation of S6K1 targets, including EIF4B (603928),
which, upon phosphorylation, was recruited into the EIF3 complex. Holz
et al. (2005) concluded that the EIF3 preinitiation complex acts as a
scaffold to coordinate responses to stimuli that promote efficient
protein synthesis.

Cota et al. (2006) demonstrated that mTOR signaling plays a role in the
brain mechanisms that respond to nutrient availability, regulating
energy balance. In the rat, mTOR signaling is controlled by energy
status in specific regions of the hypothalamus and colocalizes with
neuropeptide Y (162640) and proopiomelanocortin (POMC; 176830) neurons
in the arcuate nucleus. Central administration of leucine increases
hypothalamic mTOR signaling and decreases food intake and body weight.
The hormone leptin (164160) increases hypothalamic mTOR activity, and
the inhibition of mTOR signaling blunts leptin's anorectic effect. Thus,
Cota et al. (2006) concluded that mTOR is a cellular fuel sensor whose
hypothalamic activity is directly tied to the regulation of energy
intake.

Laviano et al. (2006) questioned the clinical validity of the
experiments performed by Cota et al. (2006) given that in human
conditions such as hepatic encephalopathy and cancer, and in
malnourished uremic patients undergoing hemodialysis, supplementation
with 7 grams per day of leucine, which comprises 50% of a branched-chain
amino acid mix, improves appetite and muscle protein synthesis. Cota et
al. (2006) responded that their experiments were done in healthy rats of
normal weight to investigate the physiologic role of hypothalamic mTOR
in the regulation of food intake.

Bernardi et al. (2006) identified PML (102578) as a critical inhibitor
of neoangiogenesis (the formation of new blood vessels) in vivo, in both
ischemic and neoplastic conditions, through the control of protein
translation. Bernardi et al. (2006) demonstrated that in hypoxic
conditions PML acts as a negative regulator of the synthesis rate of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha (HIF1A; 603348) by repressing mTOR. PML
physically interacts with mTOR and negatively regulates its association
with the small GTPase RHEB (601293) by favoring mTOR nuclear
accumulation. Notably, PML-null cells and tumors displayed higher
sensitivity both in vitro and in vivo to growth inhibition by rapamycin,
and lack of PML inversely correlated with phosphorylation of ribosomal
protein S6 (180460) and tumor angiogenesis in mouse and human tumors.
Thus, Bernardi et al. (2006) concluded that their findings identified
PML as a novel suppressor of mTOR and neoangiogenesis.

Li et al. (2006) demonstrated that Tor1 is dynamically distributed in
the cytoplasm and nucleus in yeast. Tor1 nuclear localization is
nutrient-dependent and rapamycin-sensitive: starvation or treatment with
rapamycin causes Tor1 to exit from the nucleus. Tor1 nuclear
localization is critical for 35S rRNA synthesis, but not for the
expression of amino acid transporters and ribosomal protein genes. Li et
al. (2006) further showed that Tor1 is associated with 35S ribosomal DNA
(rDNA) promoter chromatin in a rapamycin- and starvation-sensitive
manner; this association is necessary for 35S rRNA synthesis and cell
growth. Li et al. (2006) concluded that the spatial regulation of Tor1
complex 1 (TORC1; see later) might be involved in differential control
of its target genes.

Raab-Graham et al. (2006) found that the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin
increased the Kv1.1 (KCNA1; 176260) voltage-gated potassium channel
protein in hippocampal neurons and promoted Kv1.1 surface expression on
dendrites without altering its axonal expression. Moreover, endogenous
Kv1.1 mRNA was detected in dendrites. Using Kv1.1 fused to the
photoconvertible fluorescence protein Kaede as a reporter for local
synthesis, Raab-Graham et al. (2006) observed Kv1.1 synthesis in
dendrites upon inhibition of mTOR or the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
glutamate receptor (see 138251). Thus, Raab-Graham et al. (2006)
concluded that synaptic excitation may cause local suppression of
dendritic Kv1 channels by reducing their local synthesis.

Hoyer-Hansen et al. (2007) showed that Ca(2+)-induced autophagy in
mammalian cells utilized a signaling pathway that included CAMKK2, AMPK
(PRKAA2; 600497), and mTOR. Ca(2+)-induced autophagy was inhibited by
BCL2 (151430) but only when BCL2 was localized to the endoplasmic
reticulum.

The activity of mTOR is regulated by RHEB, a Ras-like small GTPase, in
response to growth factor stimulation and nutrient availability. Bai et
al. (2007) showed that RHEB regulates mTOR through FKBP38 (604840), a
member of the FK506-binding protein (FKBP) family that is structurally
related to FKBP12 (186945). FKBP38 binds to mTOR and inhibits its
activity in a manner similar to that of the FKBP12-rapamycin complex.
RHEB interacts directly with FKBP38 and prevents its association with
mTOR in a GTP-dependent manner. Bai et al. (2007) concluded that their
findings suggested that FKBP38 is an endogenous inhibitor of mTOR, whose
inhibitory activity is antagonized by RHEB in response to growth factor
stimulation and nutrient availability.

Cunningham et al. (2007) showed that mTOR is necessary for the
maintenance of mitochondrial oxidative function. In skeletal muscle
tissues and cells, the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin decreased the gene
expression of the mitochondrial transcriptional regulators PGC1-alpha
(604517), estrogen-related receptor alpha (ESRRA; 601998), and nuclear
respiratory factors, resulting in a decrease in mitochondrial gene
expression and oxygen consumption. Using computational genomics,
Cunningham et al. (2007) identified the transcription factor yin-yang 1
(YY1; 600013) as a common target of mTOR and PGC1-alpha. Knockdown of
YY1 caused a significant decrease in mitochondrial gene expression and
in respiration, and YY1 was required for rapamycin-dependent repression
of those genes. Moreover, inhibition of mTOR resulted in a failure of
YY1 to interact with and be coactivated by PGC1-alpha. Cunningham et al.
(2007) concluded that they identified a mechanism by which a nutrient
sensor (mTOR) balances energy metabolism by means of the transcriptional
control of mitochondrial oxidative function.

Mao et al. (2008) demonstrated that mTOR is targeted for ubiquitination
and consequent degradation by binding to the tumor suppressor protein
FBXW7 (606278). Human breast cancer cell lines and primary tumors showed
a reciprocal relation between loss of FBXW7 and deletion or mutation of
PTEN (601728), which also activates mTOR. Tumor cell lines harboring
deletions or mutations in FBXW7 are particularly sensitive to rapamycin
treatment, suggesting to Mao et al. (2008) that loss of FBXW7 may be a
biomarker for human cancers susceptible to treatment with inhibitors of
the mTOR pathway.

To test for the role of intrinsic impediments to axon regrowth, Park et
al. (2008) analyzed cell growth control genes using a virus-assisted in
vivo conditional knockout approach. Deletion of PTEN, a negative
regulator of the mTOR pathway, in adult retinal ganglion cells promoted
robust axon regeneration after optic nerve injury. In wildtype adult
mice, the mTOR activity was suppressed and new protein synthesis was
impaired in axotomized retinal ganglion cells, which may have
contributed to the regeneration failure. Reactivating this pathway by
conditional knockout of the TSC1 gene (605284), another negative
regulator of the mTOR pathway, also led to axon regeneration.

Genomewide copy number analyses of human cancers identified a frequent
5p13 amplification in several solid tumor types, including lung (56%),
ovarian (38%), breast (32%), prostate (37%), and melanoma (32%). Using
integrative analysis of a genomic profile of the region, Scott et al.
(2009) identified a Golgi protein, GOLPH3 (612207), as a candidate
targeted for amplification. Gain- and loss-of-function studies in vitro
and in vivo validated GOLPH3 as a potent oncogene. Physically, GOLPH3
localizes to the trans-Golgi network and interacts with components of
the retromer complex, which in yeast has been linked to TOR signaling.
Mechanistically, GOLPH3 regulates cell size, enhances growth
factor-induced mTOR signaling in human cancer cells, and alters the
response of an mTOR inhibitor in vivo. Thus, Scott et al. (2009)
concluded that genomic and genetic, biologic, functional, and
biochemical data in yeast and humans established GOLPH3 as a novel
oncogene that is commonly targeted for amplification in human cancer,
and is capable of modulating the response to rapamycin, a cancer drug in
clinical use.

Mutations in the TSC1 (605284) and TSC2 (191092) genes cause tuberous
sclerosis (191100 and 613254, respectively); the protein products of
these genes form a complex in the TOR pathway that integrates
environmental signals to regulate cell growth, proliferation, and
survival. DiBella et al. (2009) showed that morpholino knockdown of
zebrafish Tsc1a led to a ciliary phenotype including kidney cyst
formation and left-right asymmetry defects. Tsc1a localized to the
Golgi, but morpholinos against it, nonetheless, acted synthetically with
ciliary genes in producing kidney cysts. Consistent with a role of the
cilium in the same pathway as Tsc genes, the TOR pathway was found to be
aberrantly activated in ciliary mutants, resembling the effect of Tsc1a
knockdown, and kidney cyst formation in ciliary mutants was blocked by
rapamycin. DiBella et al. (2009) suggested a signaling network between
the cilium and the TOR pathway wherein ciliary signals can feed into the
TOR pathway and where Tsc1a may regulate the length of the cilium
itself.

Araki et al. (2009) demonstrated that mTOR is a major regulator of
memory CD8 T-cell differentiation and that the immunosuppressive drug
rapamycin has immunostimulatory effects on the generation of memory CD8
T cells. Treatment of mice with rapamycin following acute lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus infection enhanced not only the quantity but also
the quality of virus-specific CD8 T cells. Similar effects were seen
after immunization of mice with a vaccine based on nonreplicating
virus-like particles. In addition, rapamycin treatment also enhanced
memory T-cell responses in nonhuman primates following vaccination with
modified vaccinia virus Ankara. Rapamycin was effective during both the
expansion and contraction phases of the T cell response; during the
expansion phase it increased the number of memory precursors, and during
the contraction phase (effector to memory transition) it accelerated the
memory T cell differentiation program. Experiments using RNA
interference to inhibit expression of mTOR, raptor (607130) or FKBP12
(186945) in antigen-specific CD8 T cells showed that mTOR acts
intrinsically through the mTORC1 (mTOR complex 1; see later) pathway to
regulate memory T-cell differentiation. Araki et al. (2009) concluded
that their studies identified a molecular pathway to regulate memory
T-cell differentiation and provided a strategy for improving the
functional qualities of vaccine- or infection-induced memory T cells.

Sestrins (see 606103) are conserved proteins that accumulate in cells
exposed to stress, potentiate adenosine monophosphate-activated protein
kinase (AMPK; 602739), and inhibit activation of TOR (mTOR). Lee et al.
(2010) showed that the abundance of Drosophila sestrin is increased upon
chronic TOR activation through accumulation of reactive oxygen species
that cause activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (see 601158) and
transcription factor Forkhead box O (Foxo; see 136533). Loss of
Drosophila Sesn resulted in age-associated pathologies including
triglyceride accumulation, mitochondrial dysfunction, muscle
degeneration, and cardiac malfunction, which were prevented by
pharmacologic activation of AMPK or inhibition of TOR. Hence, Lee et al.
(2010) concluded that Drosophila Sesn appears to be a negative feedback
regulator of TOR that integrates metabolic and stress inputs and
prevents pathologies caused by chronic TOR activation that may result
from diminished autophagic clearance of damaged mitochondria, protein
aggregates, or lipids.

Using naive CD8 T (OT-I) cells from Rag2 (179616) -/- mice, Rao et al.
(2010) showed that IL12 (161560) enhanced and sustained antigen and B7.1
(CD80; 112203) costimulatory molecule-induced mTor kinase activity via
Pi3k and Stat4 (600558) pathways. Blocking mTor activity with rapamycin
reversed IL12-induced effector functions through loss of Tbet (TBX21;
604895) expression. Rapamycin treatment of IL12-conditioned OT-I cells
also induced Eomes (604615) expression and memory T cell precursors with
greater antitumor efficacy. Rao et al. (2010) concluded that mTOR is the
central regulator of transcriptional programs determining effector
and/or memory cell fates of CD8+ T cells.

Yu et al. (2010) showed that mTOR signaling in rat kidney cells is
inhibited during initiation of autophagy, but reactivated by prolonged
starvation. Reactivation of mTOR is autophagy-dependent and requires the
degradation of autolysosomal products. Increased mTOR activity
attenuates autophagy and generates protolysosomal tubules and vesicles
that extrude from autolysosomes and ultimately mature into functional
lysosomes, thereby restoring the full complement of lysosomes in the
cell--a process Yu et al. (2010) identified in multiple animal species.
Thus, Yu et al. (2010) concluded that an evolutionarily conserved cycle
in autophagy governs nutrient sensing and lysosome homeostasis during
starvation.

Ketamine results in a rapid antidepressant response after administration
in treatment-resistant depressed patients. Li et al. (2010) observed
that ketamine rapidly activated the mTOR pathway, leading to increased
synaptic signaling proteins and increased number and function of new
spine synapses in the prefrontal cortex of rats. Moreover, blockade of
mTOR signaling completely blocked ketamine induction of synaptogenesis
and behavioral responses in models of depression. Li et al. (2010)
concluded that these effects of ketamine are opposite to the synaptic
deficits that result from exposure to stress and could contribute to the
fast antidepressant actions of ketamine. Furthermore, Li et al. (2010)
demonstrated that another compound, which selectively acts on NR2B
(138252), had similar effects to ketamine, suggesting that this effect
is mediated through NMDA receptors.

Sathaliyawala et al. (2010) found that the Mtor inhibitor rapamycin
impaired mouse Flt3l (FLT3LG; 600007)-driven dendritic cell (DC)
development in vitro, with plasmacytoid DCs and classical DCs most
profoundly affected. Depletion of the Pi3k-Mtor negative regulator Pten
facilitated Flt3l-driven DC development in culture. Targeting Pten in
DCs in vivo caused expansion of Cd8-positive and Cd103 (ITGAE;
604682)-positive classical DCs, which could be reversed by rapamycin.
Increased Cd8-positive classical DC numbers caused by Pten deletion
correlated with increased susceptibility to Listeria infection.
Sathaliyawala et al. (2010) concluded that PI3K-MTOR signaling
downstream of FLT3L controls DC development, and that restriction by
PTEN ensures optimal DC numbers and subset composition.

Protein synthesis and autophagic degradation are regulated in an
opposite manner by mTOR, whereas under certain conditions it would be
beneficial if they occurred in unison to handle rapid protein turnover.
Narita et al. (2011) observed a distinct cellular compartment at the
trans side of the Golgi apparatus, the TOR-autophagy spatial coupling
compartment (TASCC), where (auto)lysosomes and mTOR accumulated during
Ras-induced senescence. mTOR recruitment to the TASCC was amino acid-
and Rag guanosine triphosphatase (e.g., 612194)-dependent, and
disruption of mTOR localization to the TASCC suppressed interleukin-6/8
(147620/146930) synthesis. TASCC formation was observed during
macrophage differentiation and in glomerular podocytes; both displayed
increased protein secretion. Narita et al. (2011) concluded that the
spatial coupling of cells' catabolic and anabolic machinery could
augment their respective functions and facilitate the mass synthesis of
secretory proteins.

Using ribosome profiling, Hsieh et al. (2012) uncovered specialized
translation of the prostate cancer genome by oncogenic mTOR signaling,
revealing a remarkably specific repertoire of genes involved in cell
proliferation, metabolism, and invasion. Hsieh et al. (2012) extended
these findings by functionally characterizing a class of translationally
controlled proinvasion mRNAs that direct prostate cancer invasion and
metastatis downstream of oncogenic mTOR signaling. Hsieh et al. (2012)
developed a clinically relevant ATP site inhibitor of mTOR, called
INK128, which reprograms this gene expression signature with therapeutic
benefit for prostate cancer metastasis.

- MTOR Complexes 1 and 2

Jacinto et al. (2004) identified 2 distinct mammalian TOR complexes:
TORC1, which contains TOR, LST8 (612190), and RAPTOR (607130), and
TORC2, which contains TOR, LST8, and RICTOR (609022), which they called
AVO3. Like yeast TORC2, mammalian TORC2 was rapamycin-insensitive and
functioned upstream of Rho GTPases to regulate the actin cytoskeleton.
TORC2 did not regulate S6K (see 608938) activity. Knockdown of TORC2,
but not TORC1, prevented paxillin (602505) phosphorylation, actin
polymerization, and cell spreading.

Sarbassov et al. (2004) identified a RICTOR (609022)-containing MTOR
complex that contains GBL (LST8) but not RAPTOR. The RICTOR-MTOR complex
did not regulate the MTOR effector S6K1 and was not bound by FKBP12
(186945)-rapamycin. Rapamycin treatment of human embryonic kidney cells
eliminated the binding of MTOR to RAPTOR, but did not affect the
interaction of MTOR with RICTOR. Knockdown of RICTOR caused accumulation
of thick actin fibers throughout much of the cytoplasm in HeLa cells,
loss of actin at the cell cortex, altered distribution of cytoskeletal
proteins, and reduced protein kinase C (PKC)-alpha (see 176960)
activity. Sarbassov et al. (2004) concluded that the RICTOR-MTOR complex
modulates the phosphorylation of PKC-alpha and the actin cytoskeleton,
similar to TOR signaling in yeast.

The multiprotein mTORC1 protein kinase complex is the central component
of a pathway that promotes growth in response to insulin, energy levels,
and amino acids and is deregulated in common cancers. Sancak et al.
(2008) found that the Rag proteins, a family of 4 related small
guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases) (RAGA, 612194; RAGB, 300725; RAGC,
608267; and RAGD, 608268), interact with mTORC1 in an amino
acid-sensitive manner and are necessary for the activation of the mTORC1
pathway by amino acids. A Rag mutant that was constitutively bound to
guanosine triphosphate interacted strongly with mTORC1, and its
expression within cells made the mTORC1 pathway resistant to amino acid
deprivation. Conversely, expression of a guanosine diphosphate-bound Rag
mutant prevented stimulation of mTORC1 by amino acids. Sancak et al.
(2008) concluded that the Rag proteins do not directly stimulate the
kinase activity of mTORC1, but, like amino acids, promote the
intracellular localization of mTOR to a compartment that also contains
its activator RHEB (601293).

Dowling et al. (2010) inhibited the mTORC1 pathway in cells lacking the
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E binding proteins EIF4EBP1
(602223), EIF4EBP2 (602224), and EIF4EBP3 (603483) and analyzed the
effects on cell size, cell proliferation, and cell cycle progression.
Although the EIF4EBPs had no effect on cell size, they inhibited cell
proliferation by selectively inhibiting the translation of mRNAs that
encode proliferation-promoting proteins and proteins involved in cell
cycle progression. Thus, Dowling et al. (2010) concluded that control of
cell size and cell cycle progression appear to be independent in
mammalian cells, whereas in lower eukaryotes, EIF4E binding proteins
influence both cell growth and proliferation.

Rosner et al. (2009) reported that the mTORC1-mediated consequences on
cell cycle and cell size were separable and did not involve effects on
mTORC2 activity. However, mTORC2 itself was a potent regulator of
mammalian cell size and cell cycle via a mechanism involving the Akt
(see 164730)/TSC2 (191092)/Rheb (601293) cascade.

Heublein et al. (2010) stated that path, a Drosophila amino acid
transporter, functions in nutrient-dependent growth via MTORC1. They
showed that the human orthologs of path, PAT1 (SLC36A1; 606561) and PAT4
(SLC36A4; 613760), had similar growth regulatory functions when
expressed in flies. Knockdown of PAT1 or PAT4 in human MCF-7 breast
cancer cells or HEK293 cells via small interfering RNA inhibited cell
proliferation without affecting cell survival, similar to the effect of
MTOR knockdown. Knockdown of PAT1, PAT4, or MTOR reduced phosphorylation
of the MTORC1 targets S6K1, S6, and 4EBP1, but had a much smaller effect
on signaling through PI3K and AKT and had no effect on MTORC2. Knockdown
of PAT1, PAT4, or MTOR in serum- and nutrient-starved cells reduced
amino acid-dependent MTORC1 signaling following refeeding. Conversely,
overexpression of PAT1 in starved cells enhanced the sensitivity of the
MTORC1 response to amino acids during refeeding. Heublein et al. (2010)
hypothesized that PAT1 and PAT4 participate in amino acid sensing and
contribute to the MTORC1 response to amino acids.

Sengupta et al. (2010) showed that mTORC1 controls ketogenesis in mice
in response to fasting. The authors found that liver-specific loss of
TSC1 (605284), an mTORC1 inhibitor, led to a fasting-resistant increase
in liver size, and to a pronounced defect in ketone body production and
ketogenic gene expression on fasting. The loss of raptor (607130), an
essential mTORC1 component, had the opposite effect. In addition,
Sengupta et al. (2010) found that the inhibition of mTORC1 is required
for the fasting-induced activation of PPAR-alpha (170998) and that
suppression of NCoR1 (600849), a corepressor of PPAR-alpha, reactivates
ketogenesis in cells and livers with hyperactive mTORC1 signaling. Like
livers with activated mTORC1, livers from aged mice have a defect in
ketogenesis, which correlates with an increase in mTORC1 signaling.
Moreover, Sengupta et al. (2010) showed that suppressive effects of
mTORC1 activation and aging on PPAR-alpha activity and ketone production
are not additive, and that mTORC1 inhibition is sufficient to prevent
the aging-induced defect in ketogenesis. Thus, Sengupta et al. (2010)
concluded that their findings revealed that mTORC1 is a key regulator of
PPAR-alpha function and hepatic ketogenesis and suggested a role for
mTORC1 activity in promoting the aging of the liver.

Hsu et al. (2011) defined the mTOR-regulated phosphoproteome by
quantitative mass spectrometry and characterized the primary sequence
motif specificity of mTOR using positional scanning peptide libraries.
Hsu et al. (2011) found that the phosphorylation response to insulin is
largely mTOR-dependent and that mTOR exhibits a unique preference for
proline, hydrophobic, and aromatic residues at the +1 position. The
adaptor protein growth factor receptor-bound protein-10 (GRB10; 601523)
was identified as an mTORC1 substrate that mediates the inhibition of
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K; see 171834) typical of cells lacking
tuberous sclerosis complex-2 (TSC2; 191092), a tumor suppressor and
negative regulator of mTORC1.

Yu et al. (2011) used large-scale quantitative phosphoproteomics
experiments to define the signaling networks downstream of mTORC1 and
mTORC2. Characterization of an mTORC1 substrate, Grb10, showed that
mTORC1-mediated phosphorylation stabilized Grb10, leading to feedback
inhibition of the PI3K and extracellular
signal-regulated/mitogen-activated protein kinase (ERK/MAPK; see 176872)
pathways. Grb10 expression is frequently downregulated in various
cancers, and loss of Grb10 and loss of the well-established tumor
suppressor phosphatase PTEN (601728) appear to be mutually exclusive
events, suggesting that Grb10 might be a tumor suppressor regulated by
mTORC1.

Amino acids activate the Rag GTPases, which promote the translocation of
mTORC1 to the lysosomal surface, the site of mTORC1 activation. Zoncu et
al. (2011) found that the vacuolar hydrogen proton-adenosine
triphosphatase ATPase (v-ATPase; see 607027) is necessary for amino
acids to activate mTORC1. The v-ATPase engages in extensive amino
acid-sensitive interactions with the Ragulator, a scaffolding complex
that anchors the Rag GTPases to the lysosome. In a cell-free system, ATP
hydrolysis by the v-ATPase was necessary for amino acids to regulate the
v-ATPase-Ragulator interaction and promote mTORC1 translocation. The
results obtained in vitro and in human cells suggested that amino acid
signaling begins within the lysosomal lumen. Zoncu et al. (2011)
concluded that their results identified the v-ATPase as a component of
the mTOR pathway and delineated a lysosome-associated machinery for
amino acid sensing.

Yilmaz et al. (2012) found that Paneth cells, a key constituent of the
mammalian intestinal stem cell (ISC) niche, augment stem cell function
in response to calorie restriction. Calorie restriction acts by reducing
mTORC1 signaling in Paneth cells, and the ISC-enhancing effects of
calorie restriction can be mimicked by rapamycin. Calorie intake
regulates mTORC1 in Paneth cells, but not ISCs, and forced activation of
mTORC1 in Paneth cells during calorie restriction abolishes the
ISC-augmenting effects of the niche. Finally, increased expression of
bone stromal antigen-1 (BST1; 600387), an ectoenzyme that produces the
paracrine factor cyclic ADP ribose, in Paneth cells mediates the effects
of calorie restriction and rapamycin on ISC function. Yilmaz et al.
(2012) concluded that their findings established that mTORC1
non-cell-autonomously regulates stem cell self-renewal, and highlighted
a significant role of the mammalian intestinal niche in coupling stem
cell function to organismal physiology.

Thoreen et al. (2012) used high-resolution transcriptome-scale ribosome
profiling to monitor translation in mouse cells acutely treated with the
mTOR inhibitor Torin-1, which, unlike rapamycin, fully inhibits mTORC1.
Their data revealed a surprisingly simple model of the mRNA features and
mechanisms that confer mTORC1-dependent translation control. The subset
of mRNAs that are specifically regulated by mTORC1 consists almost
entirely of transcripts with established 5-prime terminal
oligopyrimidine (TOP) motifs, or, like Hsp90ab1 (140572) and Ybx1
(154030), with previously unrecognized TOP or related TOP-like motifs
that were identified. Thoreen et al. (2012) found no evidence to support
proposals that mTORC1 preferentially regulates mRNAs with increased
5-prime untranslated region length or complexity. mTORC1 phosphorylates
a myriad of translational regulators, but how it controls TOP mRNA
translation was unknown. Remarkably, loss of just the E4-BP family of
translational repressors, arguably the best characterized mTORC1
substrates, is sufficient to render TOP and TOP-like mRNA translation
resistant to Torin-1. The 4E-BPs inhibit translation initiation by
interfering with the interaction between the cap-binding protein eIF4E
(133440) and eIF4G1 (600495). Loss of this interaction diminishes the
capacity of eIF4E to bind TOP and TOP-like mRNAs much more than other
mRNAs, explaining why mTOR inhibition selectively suppresses their
translation.

Efeyan et al. (2013) generated knock-in mice that express a
constitutively active form of RagA (612194), RagA(GTP), from its
endogenous promoter. RagA(GTP/GTP) homozygous mice developed normally
but failed to survive postnatal day 1. When delivered by cesarean
section, fasted RagA(GTP/GTP) neonates die almost twice as rapidly as
wildtype littermates. Within an hour of birth wildtype neonates strongly
inhibit mTORC1, which coincides with profound hypoglycemia and a
decrease in plasma amino acid concentrations. In contrast, mTORC1
inhibition does not occur in RagA(GTP/GTP) neonates, despite identical
reductions in blood nutrient amounts. With prolonged fasting, wildtype
neonates recover their plasma glucose concentrations, but RagA(GTP/GTP)
mice remain hypoglycemic until death, despite using glycogen at a faster
rate. The glucose homeostasis defect correlates with the inability of
fasted RagA(GTP/GTP) neonates to trigger autophagy and produce amino
acids for de novo glucose production. Because profound hypoglycemia does
not inhibit mTORC1 in RagA(GTP/GTP) neonates, Efeyan et al. (2013)
considered the possibility that the Rag pathway signals glucose as well
as amino acid sufficiency to mTORC1. Indeed, mTORC1 is resistant to
glucose deprivation in RagA(GTP/GTP) fibroblasts, and glucose, like
amino acids, controls its recruitment to the lysosomal surface, the site
of mTORC1 activation. Thus, the Rag GTPases signal glucose and amino
acid concentrations to mTORC1, and have an unexpectedly key role in
neonates in autophagy induction and thus nutrient homeostasis and
viability.

Robitaille et al. (2013) used quantitative phosphoproteomics to identify
substrates or downstream effectors of the 2 mTOR complexes. mTOR
controlled the phosphorylation of 335 proteins, including CAD (carbamoyl
phosphate synthetase-2/aspartate transcarbamoylase/ dihydroorotase;
114010). The trifunctional CAD protein catalyzes the first 3 steps in de
novo pyrimidine synthesis. mTORC1 indirectly phosphorylated CAD-S1859
through S6 kinase (S6K; see RPSKB1, 608938). CAD-S1859 phosphorylation
promoted CAD oligomerization and thereby stimulated de novo synthesis of
pyrimidines and progression through S phase of the cell cycle in
mammalian cells. Ben-Sahra et al. (2013) independently showed that
activation of mTORC1 led to the acute stimulation of metabolic flux
through the de novo pyrimidine synthesis pathway. mTORC1 signaling
posttranslationally regulated this metabolic pathway via its downstream
target S6K1, which directly phosphorylates S1859 on CAD. Growth
signaling through mTORC1 thus stimulates the production of new
nucleotides to accommodate an increase in RNA and DNA synthesis needed
for ribosome biogenesis and anabolic growth.

Zeng et al. (2013) demonstrated that mTORC1 signaling is a pivotal
positive determinant of regulatory T cell (Treg) function in mice. Tregs
have elevated steady-state mTORC1 activity compared to naive T cells.
Signals through the T cell antigen receptor (TCR; see 186880) and
interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680) provide major inputs for mTORC1 activation,
which in turn programs the suppressive function of Tregs. Disruption of
mTORC1 through Treg-specific deletion of the essential component raptor
(607130) leads to a profound loss of Treg-suppressive activity in vivo
and the development of a fatal early-onset inflammatory disorder.
Mechanistically, raptor/mTORC1 signaling in Tregs promotes cholesterol
and lipid metabolism, with the mevalonate pathway particularly important
for coordinating Treg proliferation and upregulation of the suppressive
molecules CTLA4 (123890) and ICOS (604558) to establish Treg functional
competency. By contrast, mTORC1 does not directly affect the expression
of Foxp3 (300292) or anti- and proinflammatory cytokines in Treg cells,
suggesting a nonconventional mechanism for Treg functional regulation.
Finally, Zeng et al. (2013) provided evidence that mTORC1 maintains Treg
function partly through inhibiting the mTORC2 pathway. Zeng et al.
(2013) concluded that their results showed that mTORC1 acts as a
fundamental rheostat in Tregs to link immunologic signals from TCR and
IL2 to lipogenic pathways and functional fitness, and highlighted a
central role of metabolic programming of Treg suppressive activity in
immune homeostasis and tolerance.

Loss of MTM1 (300415), a phosphatase that can dephosphorylate
PtdIns(3)P, causes X-linked myotubular myopathy (310400) in humans and
in the Mtm1 -/- mouse model. Fetalvero et al. (2013) found that mTORC1
activity was inhibited in Mtm1 -/- mouse skeletal muscle, concomitant
with increased content of PtdIns(3)P, ubiquitinated proteins, and
lipidated proteins normally degraded via autophagy. Mtm1 -/- muscle also
showed accumulation of defective mitochondria with decreased COX enzyme
activity. No change in mTORC1, mitochondria, or content of nondegraded
proteins was observed in liver, heart, or brain of Mtm1 -/- mice.
Overnight fasting activated mTORC1-dependent inhibition of autophagy in
wildtype, but not Mtm1 -/-, skeletal muscle. Inhibition of
hyperactivated mTORC1 normalized autophagy and rescued muscle mass in
Mtm1 -/- mice. Fetalvero et al. (2013) concluded that MTM1 is involved
in the regulation of mTORC1 and autophagy specifically in skeletal
muscle.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Yang et al. (2013) reported cocrystal structures of a complex of
truncated mTOR and mammalian lethal with SEC13 protein-8 (mLST8; 612190)
with an ATP transition state mimic and with ATP-site inhibitors. The
structures revealed an intrinsically active kinase conformation, with
catalytic residues and a catalytic mechanism remarkably similar to
canonical protein kinases. The active site is highly recessed owing to
the FKBP12 (186945)-rapamycin-binding (FRB) domain and an inhibitory
helix protruding from the catalytic cleft. mTOR-activating mutations map
to the structural framework that holds these elements in place,
indicating that the kinase is controlled by restricted access. In vitro
biochemistry showed that the FRB domain acts as a gatekeeper, with its
rapamycin-binding site interacting with substrates to grant them access
to the restricted active site. Rapamycin-FKBP12 inhibits the kinase by
directly blocking substrate recruitment and by further restricting
active-site access. Yang et al. (2013) concluded that the structures
also revealed active-site residues and conformational changes that
underlie inhibitor potency and specificity.

PATHOGENESIS

- Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors

Jiao et al. (2011) explored the genetic basis of pancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors (PanNETs) by determining the exomic sequence of 10
nonfamilial PanNETs and then screened the most commonly mutated genes in
58 additional PanNETs. Jiao et al. (2011) found mutations in genes in
the mTOR pathway in 14% of the tumors, a finding that could potentially
be used to stratify patients for treatments with mTOR inhibitors. The
most frequently mutated genes specify proteins implicated in chromatin
remodeling: 44% of the tumors had somatic inactivating mutations in MEN1
(613733), and 43% had mutations in genes encoding either of the 2
subunits of a transcription/chromatin remodeling complex consisting of
DAXX (603186) and ATRX (300032). Clinically, mutations in the MEN1 and
DAXX/ATRX genes were associated with better prognosis.

MAPPING

Moore et al. (1996) assigned the FRAP gene to chromosome 1p36 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Lench et al. (1997) mapped
the FRAP gene to 1p36.2 by FISH following radiation-hybrid mapping to
that general region. Chromosome 1p36.2 is the region most consistently
deleted in neuroblastomas. Given the role of PIK-related kinase proteins
in DNA repair, recombination, and cell cycle checkpoints, the authors
suggested that the possible role of FRAP in solid tumors with deletions
at 1p36 should be investigated. Onyango et al. (1998) established the
order of genes in the 1p36 region, telomere to centromere, as CDC2L1
(176873)--PTPRZ2 (604008)--ENO1 (172430)--PGD (172200)--XBX1--FRAP2
(FRAP1)--CD30 (153243).

ANIMAL MODEL

Murakami et al. (2004) generated mTor-knockout mice by disrupting the
kinase domain of mouse mTor and found that mTor +/- mice were normal and
fertile, but that mTor -/- mice exhibited embryonic lethality shortly
after implantation. Although homozygous blastocysts appeared normal,
their inner cell mass and trophoblast did not proliferate in vitro.
Mutation analysis showed that the 6 C-terminal amino acids of mTOR are
essential for kinase activity and are necessary for normal cell size and
proliferation in embryonic stem cells. Murakami et al. (2004) concluded
that mTOR controls both cell size and proliferation in early mouse
embryos and embryonic stem cells. Independently, Gangloff et al. (2004)
observed defects in mTor -/- mice but not in mTor +/- mice confirming
the findings of Murakami et al. (2004).

By generating mice with a deletion of mTor specifically in T
lymphocytes, Delgoffe et al. (2009) demonstrated that mTor activation is
not necessary for normal activation and IL2 (147680) secretion but is
necessary for Th1 (see IFNG, 147570), Th2 (see IL4, 147780), and Th17
(see IL17, 603149) differentiation. Under fully activating conditions,
mTor-null T cells differentiated into Foxp3 (300292)-positive regulatory
T cells. This differentiation was associated with hyperactive Smad3
(603109) activation in the absence of exogenous Tgfb (190180). T cells
lacking the Torc1 protein complex did not divert to a regulatory
pathway, thus implicating both Torc1 and Torc2 in preventing the
generation of regulatory T cells. Delgoffe et al. (2009) suggested that
MTOR kinase signaling regulates the commitment to effector or regulatory
T cell lineages.

Harrison et al. (2009) found that rapamycin feeding increased both
median and maximum life span in genetically heterogeneous mice, even
when started late in life. The effect was observed in both male and
female mice and occurred in the absence of diet restriction or reduction
in body weight. Rapamycin did not change the distribution of presumptive
causes of death.

N-acylethanolamines (NAEs) are lipid-derived signaling molecules, which
include the mammalian endocannabinoid arachidonoyl ethanolamide. Given
its involvement in regulating nutrient intake and energy balance, the
endocannabinoid system is an excellent candidate for a metabolic signal
that coordinates the organismal response to dietary restriction and
maintains homeostasis when nutrients are limited. Lucanic et al. (2011)
identified NAEs in C. elegans and showed that NAE abundance is reduced
under dietary restriction and that NAE deficiency is sufficient to
extend life span through a dietary restriction mechanism requiring PHA4,
a homolog of FOXA1 (602294). Conversely, dietary supplementation with
the nematode NAE eicosapentaenoyl ethanolamide not only inhibited
dietary restriction-induced life span extension in wildtype worms, but
also suppressed life span extension in a TOR pathway mutant. Lucanic et
al. (2011) concluded that their study demonstrated a role for NAE
signaling in aging and indicated that NAEs represent a signal that
coordinates nutrient status with metabolic changes that ultimately
determine life span.

Calorie restriction, which increases life span and insulin sensitivity,
is proposed to function by inhibition of mTORC1, yet paradoxically,
chronic administration of rapamycin substantially impairs glucose
tolerance and insulin action. Lamming et al. (2012) demonstrated that
rapamycin disrupted a second mTOR complex, mTORC2, in vivo and that
mTORC2 was required for the insulin-mediated suppression of hepatic
gluconeogenesis. Further, decreased mTORC1 signaling was sufficient to
extend life span independently from changes in glucose homeostasis, as
female mice heterozygous for both mTOR and mLST8 (612190) exhibited
decreased mTORC1 activity and extended life span but had normal glucose
tolerance and insulin sensitivity. Thus, Lamming et al. (2012) concluded
that mTORC2 disruption is an important mediator of the effects of
rapamycin in vivo.

Cina et al. (2012) targeted Mtor disruption to mouse podocytes. Mutant
mice developed proteinuria at 3 weeks and end stage renal failure by 5
weeks after birth. Podocytes from mutant mice exhibited accumulation of
autophagosomes, autophagolysosomal vesicles, and damaged mitochondria.
Similarly, human podocytes treated with rapamycin accumulated
autophagosomes and autophagolysosomes.

HISTORY

Crino (2008) noted that rapamycin was discovered in the 1970s as a
macrolide antibiotic and antifungal in a soil sample from Rapa Nui, also
known as Easter Island.

REFERENCE 1. Araki, K.; Turner, A. P.; Shaffer, V. O.; Gangappa, S.; Keller,
S. A.; Bachmann, M. F.; Larsen, C. P.; Ahmed, R.: mTOR regulates
memory CD8 T-cell differentiation. Nature 460: 108-112, 2009.

2. Bai, X.; Ma, D.; Liu, A.; Shen, X.; Wang, Q. J.; Liu, Y.; Jiang,
Y.: Rheb activates mTOR by antagonizing its endogenous inhibitor,
FKBP38. Science 318: 977-980, 2007.

3. Ben-Sahra, I.; Howell, J. J.; Asara, J. M.; Manning, B. D.: Stimulation
of de novo pyrimidine synthesis by growth signaling through mTOR and
S6K1. Science 339: 1323-1328, 2013.

4. Bernardi, R.; Guernah, I.; Jin, D.; Grisendi, S.; Alimonti, A.;
Teruya-Feldstein, J.; Cordon-Cardo, C.; Simon, M. C.; Rafii, S.; Pandolfi,
P. P.: PML inhibits HIF-1-alpha translation and neoangiogenesis through
repression of mTOR. Nature 442: 779-785, 2006.

5. Beuvink, I.; Boulay, A.; Fumagalli, S.; Zilbermann, F.; Ruetz,
S.; O'Reilly, T.; Natt, F.; Hall, J.; Lane, H. A.; Thomas, G.: The
mTOR inhibitor RAD001 sensitizes tumor cells to DNA-damaged induced
apoptosis through inhibition of p21 translation. Cell 120: 747-759,
2005.

6. Brown, E. J.; Albers, M. W.; Shin, T. B.; Ichikawa, K.; Keith,
C. T.; Lane, W. S.; Schreiber, S. L.: A mammalian protein targeted
by G1-arresting rapamycin-receptor complex. Nature 369: 756-758,
1994.

7. Brugarolas, J.; Lei, K.; Hurley, R. L.; Manning, B. D.; Reiling,
J. H.; Hafen, E.; Witters, L. A.; Ellisen, L. W.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.
: Regulation of mTOR function in response to hypoxia by REDD1 and
the TSC1/TSC2 tumor suppressor complex. Genes Dev. 18: 2893-2904,
2004.

8. Castedo, M.; Ferri, K. F.; Blanco, J.; Roumier, T.; Larochette,
N.; Barretina, J.; Amendola, A.; Nardacci, R.; Metivier, D.; Este,
J. A.; Piacentini, M.; Kroemer, G.: Human immunodeficiency virus
1 envelope glycoprotein complex-induced apoptosis involves mammalian
target of rapamycin/FKBP12-rapamycin-associated protein-mediated p53
phosphorylation. J. Exp. Med. 194: 1097-1110, 2001.

9. Cina, D. P.; Onay, T.; Paltoo, A.; Li, C.; Maezawa, Y.; De Arteaga,
J.; Jurisicova, A.; Quaggin, S. E.: Inhibition of MTOR disrupts autophagic
flux in podocytes. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 23: 412-420, 2012.

10. Cota, D.; Proulx, K.; Smith, K. A. B.; Kozma, S. C.; Thomas, G.;
Woods, S. C.; Seeley, R. J.: Hypothalamic mTOR signaling regulates
food intake. Science 312: 927-930, 2006.

11. Cota, D.; Proulx, K.; Woods, S. C.; Seeley, R. J.: Response to
Role of leucine in regulating food intake. (Letter) Science 313:
1236-1238, 2006.

12. Crino, P. B.: Rapamycin and tuberous sclerosis complex: from
Easter Island to epilepsy. Ann. Neurol. 63: 415-417, 2008.

13. Cunningham, J. T.; Rodgers, J. T.; Arlow, D. H.; Vazquez, F.;
Mootha, V. K.; Puigserver, P.: mTOR controls mitochondrial oxidative
function through a YY1-PGC-1-alpha transcriptional complex. Nature 450:
736-740, 2007.

14. Delgoffe, G. M.; Kole, T. P.; Zheng, Y.; Zarek, P. E.; Matthews,
K. L.; Xiao, B.; Worley, P. F.; Kozma, S. C.; Powell, J. D.: The
mTOR kinase differentially regulates effector and regulatory T cell
lineage commitment. Immunity 30: 832-844, 2009.

15. Dennis, P. B.; Jaeschke, A.; Saitoh, M.; Fowler, B.; Kozma, S.
C.; Thomas, G.: Mammalian TOR: a homeostatic ATP sensor. Science 294:
1102-1105, 2001.

16. DiBella, L. M.; Park, A.; Sun, Z.: Zebrafish Tsc1 reveals functional
interactions between the cilium and the TOR pathway. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 18: 595-606, 2009.

17. Dowling, R. J. O.; Topisirovic, I.; Alain, T.; Bidinosti, M.;
Fonseca, B. D.; Petroulakis, E.; Wang, X.; Larsson, O.; Selvaraj,
A.; Liu, Y.; Kozma, S. C.; Thomas, G.; Sonenberg, N.: mTORC1-mediated
cell proliferation, but not cell growth, controlled by the 4E-BPs. Science 328:
1172-1176, 2010.

18. Efeyan, A.; Zoncu, R.; Chang, S.; Gumper, I.; Snitkin, H.; Wolfson,
R. L.; Kirak, O.; Sabatini, D. D.; Sabatini, D. M.: Regulation of
mTORC1 by the Rag GTPases is necessary for neonatal autophagy and
survival. Nature 493: 679-683, 2013.

19. Fang, Y.; Vilella-Bach, M.; Bachmann, R.; Flanigan, A.; Chen,
J.: Phosphatidic acid-mediated mitogenic activation of mTOR signaling. Science 294:
1942-1945, 2001.

20. Fetalvero, K. M.; Yu, Y.; Goetschkes, M.; Liang, G.; Valdez, R.
A.; Gould, T.; Triantafellow, E.; Bergling, S.; Loureiro, J.; Eash,
J.; Lin, V.; Porter, J. A.; Finan, P. M.; Walsh, K.; Yang, Y.; Mao,
X.; Murphy, L. O.: Defective autophagy and mTORC1 signaling in myotubularin
null mice. Molec. Cell. Biol. 33: 98-110, 2013.

21. Fingar, D. C.; Salama, S.; Tsou, C.; Harlow, E.; Blenis, J.:
Mammalian cell size is controlled by mTOR and its downstream targets
S6K1 and 4EBP1/eIF4E. Genes Dev. 16: 1472-1487, 2002.

22. Gangloff, Y.-G.; Mueller, M.; Dann, S. G.; Svoboda, P.; Sticker,
M.; Spetz, J.-F.; Um, S. H.; Brown, E. J.; Cereghini, S.; Thomas,
G.; Kozma, S. C.: Disruption of the mouse mTOR gene leads to early
postimplantation lethality and prohibits embryonic stem cell development. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 24: 9508-9516, 2004.

23. Hara, K.; Maruki, Y.; Long, X.; Yoshino, K.; Oshiro, N.; Hidayat,
S.; Tokunaga, C.; Avruch, J.; Yonezawa, K.: Raptor, a binding partner
of target of rapamycin, mediates TOR action. Cell 110: 177-189,
2002.

24. Harrison, D. E.; Strong, R.; Sharp, Z. D.; Nelson, J. F.; Astle,
C. M.; Flurkey, K.; Nadon, N. L.; Wilkinson, J. E.; Frenkel, K.; Carter,
C. S.; Pahor, M.; Javors, M. A.; Fernandez, E.; Miller, R. A.: Rapamycin
fed late in life extends lifespan in genetically heterogeneous mice. Nature 460:
392-395, 2009.

25. Hay, N.; Sonenberg, N.: Upstream and downstream of mTOR. Genes
Dev. 18: 1926-1945, 2004.

26. Heublein, S.; Kazi, S.; Ogmundsdottir, M. H.; Attwood, E. V.;
Kala, S.; Boyd, C. A. R.; Wilson, C.; Goberdhan, D. C. I.: Proton-assisted
amino-acid transporters are conserved regulators of proliferation
and amino-acid-dependent mTORC1 activation. Oncogene 29: 4068-4079,
2010.

27. Holz, M. K.; Ballif, B. A.; Gygi, S. P.; Blenis, J.: mTOR and
S6K1 mediate assembly of the translation preinitiation complex through
dynamic protein interchange and ordered phosphorylation events. Cell 123:
569-580, 2005.

28. Hoyer-Hansen, M.; Bastholm, L.; Szyniarowski, P.; Campanella,
M.; Szabadkai, G.; Farkas, T.; Bianchi, K.; Fehrenbacher, N.; Elling,
F.; Rizzuto, R.; Mathiasen, I. S.; Jaattela, M.: Control of macrophagy
by calcium, calmodulin-dependent kinase kinase-beta, and Bcl-2. Molec.
Cell 25: 193-205, 2007.

29. Hsieh, A. C.; Liu, Y.; Edlind, M. P.; Ingolia, N. T.; Janes, M.
R.; Sher, A.; Shi, E. Y.; Stumpf, C. R.; Christensen, C.; Bonham,
M. J.; Wang, S.; Ren, P.; Martin, M.; Jessen, K.; Feldman, M. E.;
Weissman, J. S.; Shokat, K. M.; Rommel, C.; Ruggero, D.: The translational
landscape of mTOR signalling steers cancer initiation and metastasis. Nature 485:
55-61, 2012.

30. Hsu, P. P.; Kang, S. A.; Rameseder, J.; Zhang, Y.; Ottina, K.
A.; Lim, D.; Peterson, T. R.; Choi, Y.; Gray, N. S.; Yaffe, M. B.;
Marto, J. A.; Sabatini, D. M.: The mTOR-regulated phosphoproteome
reveals a mechanism of mTORC1-mediated inhibition of growth factor
signaling. Science 332: 1317-1322, 2011.

31. Jacinto, E.; Loewith, R.; Schmidt, A.; Lin, S.; Ruegg, M. A.;
Hall, A.; Hall, M. N.: Mammalian TOR complex 2 controls the actin
cytoskeleton and is rapamycin insensitive. Nature Cell Biol. 6:
1122-1128, 2004.

32. Jiao, Y.; Shi, C.; Edil, B. H.; de Wilde, R. F.; Klimstra, D.
S.; Maitra, A.; Schulick, R. D.; Tang, L. H.; Wolfgang, C. L.; Choti,
M. A.; Velculescu, V. E.; Diaz, L. A., Jr.; Vogelstein, B.; Kinzler,
K. W.; Hruban, R. H.; Papadopoulos, N.: DAXX/ATRX, MEN1, and mTOR
pathway genes are frequently altered in pancreatic neuroendocrine
tumors. Science 331: 1199-1203, 2011.

33. Kim, D.-H.; Sarbassov, D. D.; Ali, S. M.; King, J. E.; Latek,
R. R.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Tempst, P.; Sabatini, D. M.: mTOR interacts
with raptor to form a nutrient-sensitive complex that signals to the
cell growth machinery. Cell 110: 163-175, 2002.

34. Kim, D.-H.; Sarbassov, D. D.; Ali, S. M.; Latek, R. R.; Guntur,
K. V. P.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Tempst, P.; Sabatani, D. M.: G-beta-L,
a positive regulator of the rapamycin-sensitive pathway required for
the nutrient-sensitive interaction between raptor and mTOR. Molec.
Cell 11: 895-904, 2003.

35. Kwon, C.-H.; Zhu, X.; Zhang, J.; Baker, S. J.: mTor is required
for hypertrophy of Pten-deficient neuronal soma in vivo. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 100: 12923-12928, 2003.

36. Lamming, D. W.; Ye, L.; Katajisto, P.; Goncalves, M. D.; Saitoh,
M.; Stevens, D. M.; Davis, J. G.; Salmon, A. B.; Richardson, A.; Ahima,
R. S.; Guertin, D. A.; Sabatini, D. M.; Baur, J. A.: Rapamycin-induced
insulin resistance is mediated by mTORC2 loss and uncoupled from longevity. Science 335:
1638-1643, 2012.

37. Laviano, A.; Meguid, M. M.; Inui, A.; Rossi-Fanelli, F.: Role
of leucine in regulating food intake. (Letter) Science 313: 1236
only, 2006.

38. Lee, J. H.; Budanov, A. V.; Park, E. J.; Birse, R.; Kim, T. E.;
Perkins, G. A.; Ocorr, K.; Ellisman, M. H.; Bodmer, R.; Bier, E.;
Karin, M.: Sestrin as a feedback inhibitor of TOR that prevents age-related
pathologies. Science 327: 1223-1228, 2010.

39. Lench, N. J.; Macadam, R.; Markham, A. F.: The human gene encoding
FKBP-rapamycin associated protein (FRAP) maps to chromosomal band
1p36.2. Hum. Genet. 99: 547-549, 1997.

40. Li, H.; Tsang, C. K.; Watkins, M.; Bertram, P. G.; Zheng, X. F.
S.: Nutrient regulates Tor1 nuclear localization and association
with rDNA promoter. Nature 442: 1058-1061, 2006.

41. Li, N.; Lee, B.; Liu, R.-J.; Banasr, M.; Dwyer, J. M.; Iwata,
M.; Li, X.-Y.; Aghajanian, G.; Duman, R. S.: mTOR-dependent synapse
formation underlies the rapid antidepressant effects of NMDA antagonists. Science 329:
959-964, 2010.

42. Lucanic, M.; Held, J. M.; Vantipalli, M. C.; Klang, I. M.; Graham,
J. B.; Gibson, B. W.; Lithgow, G. J.; Gill, M. S.: N-acylethanolamine
signalling mediates the effect of diet on lifespan in Caenorhabditis
elegans. Nature 473: 226-229, 2011.

43. Mao, J.-H.; Kim, I.-J.; Wu, D.; Climent, J.; Kang, H. C.; DelRosario,
R.; Balmain, A.: FBXW7 targets mTOR for degradation and cooperates
with PTEN in tumor suppression. Science 321: 1499-1502, 2008.

44. Moore, P. A.; Rosen, C. A.; Carter, K. C.: Assignment of the
human FKBP12-rapamycin-associated protein (FRAP) gene to chromosome
1p36 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 33: 331-332,
1996.

45. Murakami, M.; Ichisaka, T.; Maeda, M.; Oshiro, N.; Hara, K.; Edenhofer,
F.; Kiyama, H.; Yonezawa, K.; Yamanaka, S.: mTOR is essential for
growth and proliferation in early mouse embryos and embryonic stem
cells. Molec. Cell. Biol. 24: 6710-6718, 2004.

46. Narita, M.; Young, A. R. J.; Arakawa, S.; Samarajiwa, S. A.; Nakashima,
T.; Yoshida, S.; Hong, S.; Berry, L. S.; Reichelt, S.; Ferreira, M.;
Tavare, S.; Inoki, K.; Shimizu, S.; Narita, M.: Spatial coupling
of mTOR and autophagy augments secretory phenotypes. Science 332:
966-970, 2011.

47. Onyango, P.; Lubyova, B.; Gardellin, P.; Kurzbauer, R.; Weith,
A.: Molecular cloning and expression analysis of five novel genes
in chromosome 1p36. Genomics 50: 187-198, 1998.

48. Park, K. K.; Liu, K.; Hu, Y.; Smith, P. D.; Wang, C.; Cai. B.;
Xu, B.; Connolly, L.; Kramvis, I.; Sahin, M.; He, Z.: Promoting axon
regeneration in the adult CNS by modulation of the PTEN/mTOR pathway. Science 322:
963-966, 2008.

49. Raab-Graham, K. F.; Haddick, P. C. G.; Jan, Y. N.; Jan, L. Y.
: Activity- and mTOR-dependent suppression of Kv1.1 channel mRNA translation
in dendrites. Science 314: 144-148, 2006.

50. Rao, R. R.; Li, Q.; Odunsi, K.; Shrikant, P. A.: The mTOR kinase
determines effector versus memory CD8+ T cell fate by regulating the
expression of transcription factors T-bet and Eomesodermin. Immunity 32:
67-78, 2010.

51. Ravikumar, B.; Vacher, C.; Berger, Z.; Davies, J. E.; Luo, S.;
Oroz, L. G.; Scaravilli, F.; Easton, D. F.; Duden, R.; O'Kane, C.
J.; Rubinsztein, D. C.: Inhibition of mTOR induces autophagy and
reduces toxicity of polyglutamine expansions in fly and mouse models
of Huntington disease. Nature Genet. 36: 585-596, 2004.

52. Robitaille, A. M.; Christen, S.; Shimobayashi, M.; Cornu, M.;
Fava, L. L.; Moes, S.; Prescianotto-Baschong, C.; Sauer, U.; Jenoe,
P.; Hall, M. N.: Quantitative phosphoproteomics reveal mTORC1 activates
de novo pyrimidine synthesis. Science 339: 1320-1323, 2013.

53. Rosner, M.; Fuchs, C.; Siegel, N.; Valli, A.; Hengstschlager,
M.: Functional interaction of mammalian target of rapamycin complexes
in regulating mammalian cell size and cell cycle. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18:
3298-3310, 2009.

54. Sabatini, D. M.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Lui, M.; Tempst, P.; Snyder,
S. H.: RAFT1: a mammalian protein that binds to FKBP12 in a rapamycin-dependent
fashion and is homologous to yeast TORs. Cell 78: 35-43, 1994.

55. Sancak, Y.; Peterson, T. R.; Shaul, Y. D.; Lindquist, R. A.; Thoreen,
C. C.; Bar-Peled, L.; Sabatini, D. M.: The Rag GTPases bind raptor
and mediate amino acid signaling to mTORC1. Science 320: 1496-1501,
2008.

56. Sarbassov, D. D.; Ali, S. M.; Kim, D.-H.; Guertin, D. A.; Latek,
R. R.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Tempst, P.; Sabatini, D. M.: Rictor,
a novel binding partner of mTOR, defines a rapamycin-insensitive and
raptor-independent pathway that regulates the cytoskeleton. Curr.
Biol. 14: 1296-1302, 2004.

57. Sarbassov, D. D.; Guertin, D. A.; Ali, S. M.; Sabatini, D. M.
: Phosphorylation and regulation of Akt/PKB by the rictor-mTOR complex. Science 307:
1098-1101, 2005.

58. Sathaliyawala, T.; O'Gorman, W. E.; Greter, M.; Bogunovic, M.;
Konjufca, V.; Hou, Z. E.; Nolan, G. P.; Miller, M. J.; Merad, M.;
Reizis, B.: Mammalian target of rapamycin controls dendritic cell
development downstream of Flt3 ligand signaling. Immunity 33: 597-606,
2010.

59. Scott, K. L.; Kabbarah, O.; Liang, M.-C.; Ivanova, E.; Anagnostou,
V.; Wu, J.; Dhakal, S.; Wu, M.; Chen, S.; Feinberg, T.; Huang, J.;
Saci, A.; Widlund, H. R.; Fisher, D. E.; Xiao, Y.; Rimm, D. L.; Protopopov,
A.; Wong, K.-K.; Chin, L.: GOLPH3 modulates mTOR signalling and rapamycin
sensitivity in cancer. Nature 459: 1085-1090, 2009.

60. Scott, R. C.; Schuldiner, O.; Neufeld, T. P.: Role and regulation
of starvation-induced autophagy in the Drosophila fat body. Dev.
Cell 7: 167-178, 2004.

61. Sengupta, S.; Peterson, T. R.; Laplante, M.; Oh, S.; Sabatini,
D. M.: mTORC1 controls fasting-induced ketogenesis and its modulation
by ageing. Nature 468: 1100-1104, 2010.

62. Thoreen, C. C.; Chantranupong, L.; Keys, H. R.; Wang, T.; Gray,
N. S.; Sabatini, D. M.: A unifying model for mTORC1-mediated regulation
of mRNA translation. Nature 485: 109-113, 2012.

63. Vellai, T.; Takacs-Vellai, K.; Zhang, Y.; Kovacs, A. L.; Orosz,
L.; Muller, F.: Influence of TOR kinase on lifespan in C. elegans. Nature 426:
620 only, 2003.

64. Yang, H.; Rudge, D. G.; Koos, J. D.; Vaidialingam, B.; Yang, H.
J.; Pavletich, N. P.: mTOR kinase structure, mechanism and regulation. Nature 497:
217-223, 2013.

65. Yilmaz, O. H.; Katajisto, P.; Lamming, D. W.; Gultekin, Y.; Bauer-Rowe,
K. E.; Sengupta, S.; Birsoy, K.; Dursun, A.; Yilmaz, V. O.; Selig,
M.; Nielsen, G. P.; Mino-Kenudson, M.; Zukerberg, L. R.; Bhan, A.
K.; Deshpande, V.; Sabatini, D. M.: mTORC1 in the Paneth cell niche
couples intestinal stem-cell function to calorie intake. Nature 486:
490-495, 2012.

66. Yu, L.; McPhee, C. K.; Zheng, L.; Mardones, G. A.; Rong, Y.; Peng,
J.; Mi, N.; Zhao, Y.; Liu, Z.; Wan, F.; Hailey, D. W.; Oorschot, V.;
Klumperman, J.; Baehrecke, E. H.; Lenardo, M. J.: Termination of
autophagy and reformation of lysosomes regulated by mTOR. Nature 465:
942-946, 2010.

67. Yu, Y.; Yoon, S.-O.; Poulogiannis, G.; Yang, Q.; Ma, X. M.; Villen,
J.; Kubica, N.; Hoffman, G. R.; Cantley, L. C.; Gygi, S. P.; Blenis,
J.: Phosphoproteomic analysis identifies Grb10 as an mTORC1 substrate
that negatively regulates insulin signaling. Science 332: 1322-1326,
2011.

68. Zeng, H.; Yang, K.; Cloer, C.; Neale, G.; Vogel, P.; Chi, H.:
mTORC1 couples immune signals and metabolic programming to establish
T(reg)-cell function. Nature 499: 485-490, 2013.

69. Zoncu, R.; Bar-Peled, L.; Efeyan, A.; Wang, S.; Sancak, Y.; Sabatini,
D. M.: mTORC1 senses lysosomal amino acids through an inside-out
mechanism that requires the vacuolar H(+)-ATPase. Science 334: 678-683,
2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/1/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/30/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/22/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/21/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/8/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/20/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/17/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/24/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/29/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/26/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/6/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/24/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/31/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/21/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/24/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/3/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/29/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/7/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/1/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/14/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/26/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/22/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/25/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/13/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/10/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/9/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/5/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/15/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/30/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/29/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/23/2008
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 7/22/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/22/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/26/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/3/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/24/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/8/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/6/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/10/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/2/2006
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/6/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/1/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/10/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/23/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/9/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/16/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/31/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/7/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/11/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/14/2001
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 7/13/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/19/1997

CREATED Mark H. Paalman: 4/29/1996

EDITED mgross: 11/07/2013
mgross: 11/7/2013
mcolton: 11/1/2013
mgross: 10/4/2013
alopez: 10/1/2013
alopez: 9/30/2013
alopez: 7/8/2013
alopez: 5/22/2013
alopez: 3/26/2013
terry: 3/21/2013
mgross: 11/8/2012
terry: 11/8/2012
alopez: 9/24/2012
terry: 9/20/2012
alopez: 7/19/2012
terry: 7/17/2012
alopez: 4/24/2012
terry: 4/24/2012
alopez: 11/30/2011
terry: 11/29/2011
carol: 11/22/2011
alopez: 8/8/2011
terry: 7/26/2011
alopez: 6/14/2011
terry: 6/6/2011
alopez: 5/24/2011
alopez: 3/31/2011
mgross: 2/22/2011
terry: 2/21/2011
mgross: 1/26/2011
terry: 1/24/2011
wwang: 12/27/2010
terry: 12/3/2010
alopez: 10/5/2010
terry: 9/29/2010
wwang: 7/20/2010
terry: 7/7/2010
alopez: 7/2/2010
terry: 7/1/2010
alopez: 6/18/2010
terry: 6/14/2010
wwang: 5/26/2010
alopez: 4/26/2010
terry: 4/22/2010
carol: 2/18/2010
wwang: 9/15/2009
wwang: 9/1/2009
alopez: 8/27/2009
terry: 8/25/2009
mgross: 8/13/2009
terry: 8/13/2009
wwang: 8/13/2009
terry: 8/10/2009
alopez: 7/15/2009
terry: 7/9/2009
mgross: 5/5/2009
terry: 5/5/2009
wwang: 4/15/2009
alopez: 1/5/2009
terry: 12/30/2008
alopez: 9/30/2008
terry: 9/29/2008
mgross: 9/22/2008
alopez: 7/23/2008
wwang: 7/22/2008
mgross: 7/22/2008
alopez: 1/23/2008
terry: 1/22/2008
alopez: 11/29/2007
terry: 11/26/2007
wwang: 5/3/2007
alopez: 10/25/2006
terry: 10/24/2006
alopez: 9/19/2006
terry: 9/8/2006
alopez: 6/9/2006
terry: 6/6/2006
alopez: 2/21/2006
terry: 2/10/2006
mgross: 2/9/2006
terry: 2/2/2006
mgross: 11/3/2005
mgross: 4/6/2005
mgross: 2/1/2005
alopez: 12/1/2004
mgross: 11/10/2004
mgross: 9/23/2004
mgross: 9/9/2004
alopez: 5/28/2004
alopez: 5/19/2004
terry: 5/18/2004
carol: 3/5/2004
alopez: 12/17/2003
terry: 12/16/2003
mgross: 7/31/2002
alopez: 1/7/2002
mgross: 1/3/2002
terry: 12/11/2001
terry: 12/7/2001
alopez: 11/15/2001
terry: 11/14/2001
alopez: 7/20/1999
alopez: 7/13/1999
carol: 8/17/1998
jamie: 6/3/1997
mark: 5/20/1997
terry: 5/19/1997
mark: 4/29/1996
terry: 4/29/1996
mark: 4/29/1996

605509	TITLE *605509 INTERLEUKIN 36, ALPHA; IL36A
;;INTERLEUKIN 1 FAMILY, MEMBER 6; IL1F6;;
FAMILY OF INTERLEUKIN 1-EPSILON;;
FIL1-EPSILON
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the IL1 (see IL1A; 147760) family, such as IL1F6, are
structurally related cytokines and cell surface receptors that mediate
inflammation. IL1F6 is part of an IL1 signaling system in epithelia and
has proinflammatory properties (summary by Johnston et al., 2011).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences resembling IL1 and probing a
human genomic library, Smith et al. (2000) identified a cDNA encoding
IL1F6, which they designated FIL1-epsilon. The deduced 158-amino acid
protein, like FIL1-delta (IL1F5; 605507), contains neither a signal
peptide nor a prodomain. It shares 48% sequence identity with FIL1-eta
(IL1F8; 605508). PCR analyses detected expression in immune system and
fetal brain, but not in other tissues tested or in multiple
hematopoietic cell lines. Modeling indicated that FIL1-epsilon has a
conserved 12-stranded beta-trefoil structure.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RT-PCR and immunohistochemical analysis, Johnston et al. (2011)
demonstrated increased expression of IL1F5, IL1F6, IL1F8, and IL1F9
(605542) in psoriasis (177900) plaque compared with uninvolved skin from
psoriasis patients. Analysis of 2 mouse psoriasis models produced
similar results. IL1A and TNF (191160) induced expression of the IL1F
transcripts in normal human keratinocytes. Microarray analysis showed
that IL1F cytokines, particularly IL1F8, increased mRNA expression of
human beta-defensins and secretion of HBD2 (DEFB4; 602215) and HBD3
(DEFB103A; 606611). Johnston et al. (2011) concluded that IL1F cytokines
have important roles in inflammatory skin diseases and may be targets
for antipsoriatic therapies.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Smith et al. (2000) mapped the
FIL1-epsilon gene to chromosome 2q between D2S121 and D2S110, where
other members of the IL1 family are located.

Nicklin et al. (2002) determined that the gene order within the IL1 gene
cluster on chromosome 2, from centromere to telomere, is IL1A-IL1B
(147720)-IL1F7 (IL37; 605510)-IL1F9-IL1F6-IL1F8-IL1F5-IL1F10
(615296)-IL1RN (147679). Of these, only IL1A, IL1B, and IL36B are
transcribed toward the centromere.

Gross (2011) mapped the IL1F6 gene to chromosome 2q13 based on an
alignment of the IL1F6 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC107043) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/11/2011.

2. Johnston, A.; Xing, X.; Guzman, A. M.; Riblett, M.; Loyd, C. M.;
Ward, N. L.; Wohn, C.; Prens, E. P.; Wang, F.; Maier, L. E.; Kang,
S.; Voorhees, J. J.; Elder, J. T.; Gudjonsson, J. E.: IL-1F5, -F6,
-F8, and -F9: a novel IL-1 family signaling system that is active
in psoriasis and promotes keratinocyte antimicrobial peptide expression. J.
Immun. 186: 2613-2622, 2011.

3. Nicklin, M. J. H.; Barton, J. L.; Nguyen, M.; FitzGerald, M. G.;
Duff, G. W.; Kornman, K.: A sequence-based map of the nine genes
of the human interleukin-1 cluster. Genomics 79: 718-725, 2002.

4. Smith, D. E.; Renshaw, B. R.; Ketchem, R. R.; Kubin, M.; Garka,
K. E.; Sims, J. E.: Four new members expand the interleukin-1 superfamily. J.
Biol. Chem. 275: 1169-1175, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 07/08/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/11/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/5/2011

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/28/2000

EDITED mgross: 07/08/2013
carol: 9/1/2011
mgross: 5/11/2011
terry: 5/5/2011
mgross: 2/19/2009
mgross: 8/29/2002
carol: 1/2/2001
carol: 12/28/2000

613486	TITLE *613486 MICRO RNA 33B; MIR33B
;;miRNA33B;;
MIRN33B
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of noncoding RNA genes whose final
product is an approximately 22-nucleotide functional RNA molecule. They
play important roles in the regulation of target genes by binding to
complementary regions of messenger transcripts to repress their
translation or regulate degradation (summary by Griffiths-Jones et al.,
2006).

Two genes encoding miR33 isoforms exist in humans: miR33B, which is
present in intron 17 of the SREBP1 (184756) gene on chromosome 17, and
miR33A (612156), which is located in intron 16 of the SREBP2 (600481)
gene on chromosome 22. In mice, however, there is only 1 miR33 gene,
which is conserved with human miR33A, located within intron 15 of the
mouse Srebp2 gene. The mature miR33A and miR33B miRNAs differ at only 2
nucleotides. One of the targets of both miR33A and miR33B is the
cholesterol transporter ABCA1 (600046) (Najafi-Shoushtari et al., 2010).

CLONING

During an investigation of gene regulation by sterol regulatory
element-binding proteins (SREBPs), Najafi-Shoushtari et al. (2010)
identified the miR33B gene within intron 17 of the SREBP1 gene.
Najafi-Shoushtari et al. (2010) gave the sequence of mature miR33B as
GUGCAUUGCUGUUGCAUUGC. Using quantitative RT-PCR, they found that miR33B
was expressed in all human tissues examined, with highest levels in
brain, ovary, liver, prostate, heart, and cervix. Najafi-Shoushtari et
al. (2010) noted that miR33B appeared to be coexpressed with its host
gene, SREBP1.

MAPPING

The MIR33B gene resides on chromosome 17p11.2, within intron 17 of the
SREBP1 gene (Najafi-Shoushtari et al., 2010).

GENE FUNCTION

The sterol regulatory element-binding proteins SREBP1 and SREBP2 are key
transcription regulators of genes involved in cholesterol biosynthesis
and uptake. Najafi-Shoushtari et al. (2010) demonstrated that miRNA33A
and miRNA33B, embedded within introns of the SREBP2 and SREBP1 genes,
respectively, target adenosine triphosphate-binding cassette transporter
A1 (ABCA1), an important regulator of high density lipoprotein (HDL)
synthesis and reverse cholesterol transport, for posttranscriptional
repression. Antisense inhibition of miRNA33 in mouse and human cell
lines caused upregulation of ABCA1 expression and increased cholesterol
efflux, and injection of mice on a western-type diet with locked nucleic
acid-antisense oligonucleotides resulted in elevated plasma HDL.
Najafi-Shoushtari et al. (2010) concluded that miRNA33 acts in concert
with the SREBP host genes to control cholesterol homeostasis.

MiR33A and miR33B are intronic miRNAs whose encoding regions are
embedded in the sterol response element-binding protein genes SREBF2 and
SREBF1, respectively. These miRNAs repress expression of the cholesterol
transporter ABCA1, which is a key regulator of HDL biogenesis. Studies
in mice suggested that antagonizing miR33a may be an effective strategy
for raising plasma HDL levels and providing protection against
atherosclerosis; however, extrapolating these findings to humans is
complicated by the fact that mice lack miR33b, which is present only in
the SREBF1 gene of medium and large mammals. Rayner et al. (2011) showed
in African green monkeys that systemic delivery of an anti-miRNA
oligonucleotide that targets both miR33a and miR33b increased hepatic
expression of ABCA1 and induced a sustained increase in plasma HDL
levels over 12 weeks. Notably, miR33 antagonism in this nonhuman primate
model also increased the expression of miR33 target genes involved in
fatty acid oxidation (CROT, 606090; CPT1A, 600528; HADHB, 143450; and
PRKAA1, 602739) and reduced the expression of genes involved in fatty
acid synthesis (SREBF1; FASN, 600212; ACLY, 108728; and ACACA, 200350),
resulting in a marked suppression of the plasma levels of very low
density lipoprotein (VLDL)-associated triglycerides, a finding that had
not previously been observed in mice. Rayner et al. (2011) concluded
that their results established, in a model that is highly relevant to
humans, that pharmacologic inhibition of miR33a and miR33b is a
promising therapeutic strategy to raise plasma HDL and lower VLDL
triglyceride levels for the treatment of dyslipidemias that increase
cardiovascular disease risk.

EVOLUTION

Brown et al. (2010) noted that the miR33A/B genes exhibit a remarkable
degree of evolutionary conservation. The precursor for mature miR33A is
found within the same intron of SREBP2 from many animal species,
including large and small mammals, chickens, and frogs. There is even a
perfectly conserved mature form of miR33A in the single SREBP-like gene
of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. The latter is most remarkable
because insects do not synthesize sterols; their single SREBP gene
controls fatty acid production. Moreover, the fruit fly genome does not
contain ABCA1. In contrast to the uniform conservation of miR33A in
SREBP2, there is a gap in the evolutionary conservation of miR33B in
SREBP1. The SREBP1 genes from large mammals encode miR33B, but there is
no trace of miR33b in the Srebp1 genes of small mammals (rats and mice)
or chickens.

REFERENCE 1. Brown, M. S.; Ye, J.; Goldstein, J. L.: HDL miR-ed down by SREBP
introns. Science 328: 1495-1496, 2010.

2. Griffiths-Jones, S.; Grocock, R. J.; van Dongen, S.; Bateman, A.;
Enright, A. J.: miRBase: microRNA sequences, targets and gene nomenclature. Nucleic
Acids Res. 34: D140-D144, 2006.

3. Najafi-Shoushtari, S. H.; Kristo, F.; Li, Y.; Shioda, T.; Cohen,
D. E.; Gerszten, R. E.; Naar, A. M.: MicroRNA-33 and the SREBP host
genes cooperate to control cholesterol homeostasis. Science 328:
1566-1569, 2010.

4. Rayner, K. J.; Esau, C. C.; Hussain, F. N.; McDaniel, A. L.; Marshall,
S. M.; van Gils, J. M.; Ray, T. D.; Sheedy, F. J.; Goedeke, L.; Liu,
X.; Khatsenko, O. G.; Kaimal, V.; Lees, C. J.; Fernandez-Hernando,
C.; Fisher, E. A.; Temel, R. E.; Moore, K. J.: Inhibition of miR-33a/b
in non-human primates raises plasma HDL and lowers VLDL triglycerides. Nature 478:
404-407, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/29/2011

CREATED Anne M. Stumpf: 7/15/2010

EDITED alopez: 03/08/2012
alopez: 12/1/2011
terry: 11/29/2011
terry: 12/8/2010
mgross: 7/16/2010
alopez: 7/16/2010

