180664	TITLE *180664 POLYMERASE II, RNA, SUBUNIT E; POLR2E
;;RPB5, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;;
RNA POLYMERASE II, 25-KD SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION The eukaryotic DNA-dependent RNA polymerase II (or B) is composed of 10
to 14 polypeptides ranging from 220 to 10 kD. For general information on
the structure and function of RNA polymerase II, see 180660.

CLONING

Acker et al. (1994) isolated cDNAs of 5 subunits of RNA polymerase II.

MAPPING

Using in situ hybridization, Acker et al. (1994) showed that the POLR2E
gene, encoding the 25-kD subunit, maps to 19p13.3. A second site of
hybridization to 11q23.1 was thought to represent a pseudogene, most
likely a retroposon, since no remnants of introns could be identified in
the study of genomic DNA.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Cramer et al. (2000) derived a backbone model of a 10-subunit yeast RNA
polymerase II using x-ray diffraction data extending to 3-angstrom
resolution. All 10 subunits exhibited a high degree of identity with the
corresponding human proteins, and 9 of the 10 subunits are conserved
among the 3 eukaryotic RNA polymerases I, II, and III. Notable features
of the model include a pair of jaws, formed by subunits Rpb1 (180660),
Rpb5 (homologous to human POLR2E), and Rpb9 (180662), that appear to
grip DNA downstream of the active center. A clamp on the DNA nearer the
active center, formed by Rpb1, Rpb2 (180661), and Rpb6 (604414), may be
locked in the closed position by RNA, accounting for the great stability
of transcribing complexes. A pore in the protein complex beneath the
active center may allow entry of substrates for polymerization and exit
of the transcript during proofreading and passage through pause sites in
the DNA.

REFERENCE 1. Acker, J.; Mattei, M.-G.; Wintzerith, M.; Roeckel, N.; Depetris,
D.; Vigneron, M.; Kedinger, C.: Chromosomal localization of human
RNA polymerase II subunit genes. Genomics 20: 496-499, 1994.

2. Cramer, P.; Bushnell, D. A.; Fu, J.; Gnatt, A. L.; Maier-Davis,
B.; Thompson, N. E.; Burgess, R. R.; Edwards, A. M.; David, P. R.;
Kornberg, R. D.: Architecture of RNA polymerase II and implications
for the transcription mechanism. Science 288: 640-648, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/2/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/18/1994

EDITED alopez: 06/21/2001
alopez: 6/19/2001
carol: 6/15/2001
alopez: 5/2/2000
psherman: 9/2/1999
alopez: 2/5/1999
terry: 8/24/1998
joanna: 4/4/1996
carol: 4/18/1994

604881	TITLE *604881 RABPHILIN 3A-LIKE; RPH3AL
;;NOC2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a DNA fragment encoding the Rab3A (179490)-binding domain of a
mouse rabphilin-3A (RPH3A; 612159) cDNA, Kotake et al. (1997) probed a
rat islet cDNA library under low stringency and identified rat Rph3al,
which they designated Noc2. A full-length Noc2 clone was isolated from a
rat insulin-secreting cell line cDNA library. The Noc2 cDNA encodes a
302-amino acid protein that shows 40.7% amino acid identity and 77.9%
similarity to the N-terminal region of rat rabphilin-3A. However, it
lacks the C2 domains, and hence the Noc2 (no C2 domain) designation.
Noc2 contains 1 potential protein kinase A and 3 potential protein
kinase C phosphorylation sites. RNA blot analysis revealed that a single
2.2- or 2.6-kb transcript of Noc2 is expressed at very high levels in
pancreatic islets, and at low to moderate or high levels in other
endocrine tissues and hormone-secreting cell lines, but at very low
levels in brain. Screening a mouse embryonic cDNA library with the yeast
2-hybrid system, Kotake et al. (1997) showed that Noc2 interacts with
the LIM domain-containing protein zyxin (602002), a component of the
cytoskeleton. The authors suggested that Noc2 is probably involved in
regulated exocytosis in endocrine cells by interacting with the
cytoskeleton.

Using cDNA selection, Smith et al. (1999) identified a human transcript
spanning a common deletion on 17p13.3 found in approximately 40% of
medulloblastomas. The full-length coding sequence predicted a 315-amino
acid protein displaying 77% amino acid identity with the rat Noc2
(Rph3al) protein. Northern blot analysis detected moderate to high
expression of a 2.6-kb RPH3AL transcript in thyroid, ovary, stomach,
heart, pancreas, skeletal muscle, kidney, and liver.

GENE STRUCTURE

Smith et al. (1999) determined that the RPH3AL gene contains 9 exons.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Smith et al. (1999) determined that at least 1 exon of the RPH3AL gene
maps within the common 9-kb deletion on chromosome 17p13.3 found in
medulloblastomas. However, they found no mutations in this gene in 33
tumor samples with allelic loss of 17p13, including 10 medulloblastomas,
14 follicular thyroid cancers, and 9 ovarian cancers.

REFERENCE 1. Kotake, K.; Ozaki, N.; Mizuta, M.; Sekiya, S.; Inagaki, N.; Seino,
S.: Noc2, a putative zinc finger protein involved in exocytosis in
endocrine cells. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 29407-29410, 1997.

2. Smith, J. S.; Tachibana, I.; Allen, C.; Chiappa, S. A.; Lee, H.
K.; McIver, B.; Jenkins, R. B.; Raffel, C.: Cloning of a human ortholog
(RPH3AL) of (RNO)Rph3al from a candidate 17p13.3 medulloblastoma tumor
suppressor locus. Genomics 59: 97-101, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 7/10/2000

CREATED Wilson H. Y. Lo: 4/26/2000

EDITED wwang: 11/23/2010
wwang: 7/2/2008
carol: 7/10/2000
carol: 4/27/2000

608216	TITLE *608216 COMM DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 5; COMMD5
;;COPPER METABOLISM MURR1 DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 5;;
HYPERTENSION-RELATED CALCIUM-REGULATED GENE; HCARG
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Solban et al. (2000) cloned rat Hcarg from a cDNA library constructed
from the spontaneously hypertensive rat parathyroid gland. The deduced
224-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 22.5 kD.
Hcarg has a 67% alpha helix content, a calcium-binding EF-hand motif, 4
putative leucine zipper motifs, a nuclear receptor-binding domain, and
no transmembrane domain. It also contains several putative
phosphorylation sites and an N-glycosylation site. Using rat Hcarg as
probe, Solban et al. (2000) cloned human HCARG from a vascular smooth
muscle cell cDNA library. The deduced 224-amino acid protein shares 80%
homology with rat Hcarg. Multiple-tissue expression array analysis
detected high expression in heart, stomach, jejunum, kidney, liver, and
adrenal gland. Expression was generally higher in adult organs than in
fetal tissues, particularly in heart, kidney, and liver. In situ
hybridization of rat tissues detected expression in the medulla and zona
fasciculata of the adrenal cortex and in the tubules of the kidney, but
showed no expression in renal glomeruli. Immunofluorescence microscopy
of transfected COS-7 cells and immunohistochemical staining of rat
pituitary detected Hcarg predominantly localized to the nucleus, with
some staining at sites of protein synthesis.

GENE FUNCTION

Solban et al. (2000) found that expression of Hcarg was higher in the
adrenal cortex and kidney tubules of hypertensive rats compared with
their normotensive controls. Rat Hcarg inhibited cell proliferation in
human embryonic kidney cells following transfection.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Solban et al. (2002) mapped the COMMD5
gene to chromosome 8q24.3.

REFERENCE 1. Solban, N.; Dumas, P.; Gossard, F.; Sun, Y.; Pravenec, M.; Kren,
V.; Lewanczuk, R.; Hamet, P.; Tremblay, J.: Chromosomal mapping of
HCaRG, a novel hypertension-related, calcium-regulated gene. Folia
Biologica 48: 9-14, 2002.

2. Solban, N.; Jia, H.-P.; Richard, S.; Tremblay, S.; Devlin, A. M.;
Peng, J.; Gossard, F.; Guo, D.-F.; Morel, G.; Hamet, P.; Lewanczuk,
R.; Tremblay, J.: HCaRG, a novel calcium-regulated gene coding for
a nuclear protein, is potentially involved in the regulation of cell
proliferation. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 32234-32243, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/30/2003

EDITED mgross: 02/27/2009
alopez: 5/12/2008
terry: 5/10/2006
mgross: 10/30/2003

190040	TITLE *190040 PLATELET-DERIVED GROWTH FACTOR, BETA POLYPEPTIDE; PDGFB
;;V-SIS PLATELET-DERIVED GROWTH FACTOR, BETA POLYPEPTIDE;;
PLATELET-DERIVED GROWTH FACTOR, B CHAIN;;
PDGF, B CHAIN;;
PDGF2;;
ONCOGENE SIS;;
SIMIAN SARCOMA VIRAL ONCOGENE HOMOLOG; SSV
PDGFB/COL1A1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Retroviruses have been identified as the etiologic agents of naturally
occurring tumors in several animal species, including certain human
T-cell leukemias and lymphomas. Some of the viruses rapidly induce
tumors when inoculated into animals and can transform cells in vitro.
The genomes of these viruses contain sequences, called viral onc genes,
which are directly responsible for transformation both in vitro and in
vivo. Evidence indicates that these onc genes originated from normal
cellular genes by recombination between a parent nontransforming virus
and host cellular DNA. Molecular hybridization indicates considerable
evolutionary conservation of the cellular genes that give rise to viral
transforming genes, suggesting that cellular onc genes may code for
important functions in cell growth or tissue differentiation.
Dalla-Favera et al. (1981) reported the detection, molecular cloning and
genomic organization of the human onc gene (c-sis) related to the
transforming gene (v-sis) of simian sarcoma virus (SSV) derived from the
woolly monkey. The gene was cloned from the human DNA library of
Maniatis. The protein product of the c-sis gene has not been identified.
Many of the known transforming proteins are kinases that have the
unusual property of phosphorylating tyrosine residues. Some are
structurally and functionally similar to cellular protein kinases
involved in the regulation of the Na-K-ATPase pump. In an addendum to
another paper (Wong-Staal et al., 1981), the same workers reported
finding more than 1 allelic form of the c-sis locus.

Doolittle et al. (1983) concluded that the SIS oncogene is the same as,
or very closely related to, the gene for platelet-derived growth factor.
The conclusion was based on the demonstration of extensive sequence
similarity. Waterfield et al. (1983) likewise pointed out the close
structural similarity. PDGF is the major polypeptide mitogen in serum
for cells of mesenchymal origin.

Josephs et al. (1984) concluded that the SIS gene encodes 1 chain of
human PDGF. PDGF has 2 dissimilar subunits, A and B. It is the B chain
that has homology to SIS (Collins et al., 1985).

GENE FUNCTION

Kelly et al. (1985) showed that the PDGF B chain alone is sufficient for
mitogenesis.

Hermansson et al. (1988) presented evidence implicating an autocrine
growth stimulation by PDGFB in the pathologic proliferation of
endothelial cells characteristically found in glioblastomas.

Most proliferating cells are programmed to undergo apoptosis unless
specific survival signals are provided. Platelet-derived growth factor
promotes cellular proliferation and inhibits apoptosis. Romashkova and
Makarov (1999) showed that PDGF activates the RAS/PIK3/AKT1/IKK/NFKB1
pathway. In this pathway, NFKB1 (164011) does not induce c-myc and
apoptosis, but instead induces putative antiapoptotic genes. In response
to PDGF, AKT1 (164730) transiently associates with IKK (see 600664) and
induces IKK activation. The authors suggested that under certain
conditions PIK3 (see 171834) may activate NFKB1 without the involvement
of NFKBIA (164008) or NFKBIB (604495) degradation.

Choi et al. (2005) demonstrated that PRDX2 (600538) is a negative
regulator of PDGF signaling. Peroxiredoxin type II (Prx II) deficiency
results in increased production of peroxide, enhanced activation of PDGF
receptor (PDGFR; see 173490) and phospholipase C-gamma-1 (172420), and
subsequently increased cell proliferation and migration in response to
PDGF. These responses are suppressed by expression of wildtype Prx II,
but not an inactive mutant. Notably, Prx II is recruited to PDGFR upon
PDGF stimulation, and suppresses protein tyrosine phosphatase
inactivation. Prx II also leads to the suppression of PDGFR activation
in primary culture and in a murine restenosis model, including
PDGF-dependent neointimal thickening of vascular smooth muscle cells.
Choi et al. (2005) concluded that their results demonstrate a localized
role for endogenous peroxide in PDGF signaling, and indicate a biologic
function for Prx II in cardiovascular disease.

Kratchmarova et al. (2005) found that the differentiation of human
mesenchymal stem cells into bone-forming cells is stimulated by
epidermal growth factor (EGF; 131530) but not PDGF. They used mass
spectrometry-based proteomics to comprehensively compare proteins that
were tyrosine-phosphorylated in response to EGF and PDGF and their
associated partners. More than 90% of these signaling proteins were used
by both ligands, whereas the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway was
exclusively activated by PDGF, implicating it as a possible control
point. Indeed, chemical inhibition of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (see
603157) in PDGF-stimulated cells removed the differential effect of the
2 growth factors, bestowing full differentiation effect onto PDGF.
Kratchmarova et al. (2005) concluded that their study shows that
quantitative proteomics can directly compare entire signaling networks
and discover critical differences capable of changing cell fate.

During the development of atherosclerotic plaques, vascular smooth
muscle cells change from the physiologic contractile phenotype to the
pathophysiologic synthetic phenotype. They then migrate into the intima
where they proliferate and produce extracellular matrix. Chen et al.
(2006) found that PDGFB and IL1B (147720) cooperate in inducing
contractile-to-synthetic phenotype modulation of human aortic smooth
muscle cells in culture. Phenotypic modulation by PDGFB and IL1B
involved crosstalk between their corresponding receptors PDGFRB (173410)
and IL1R1 (147810) and was mediated through the PI3K (see 171834)/AKT
(see 164730)/P70S6K (608938) signaling pathway.

Chojnacki et al. (2008) found that PDGF stimulated fetal human
PDGF-responsive neural precursor cells (PRPs) to generate neurospheres
that differentiated primarily into oligodendrocytes, which acquired
myelin basic protein (159430) expression, as well as neurons and a small
number of astrocytes. Together with PDGF, FGF2 (134920) promoted fetal
human PRP expansion and self-renewal. In contrast, adult human PRPs
isolated from the corpus callosum required twice the culture period to
generate neurospheres, which contained oligodendrocytes, as well as
astrocytes, but not neurons. FGF2 did not promote adult human PRP
self-renewal. Chojnacki et al. (2008) concluded that differences in the
intrinsic proliferation, phenotype, and self-renewal properties of fetal
and adult human PRPs indicate that they are distinct populations, which
may result in distinct myelin-production capabilities.

In a cultured bovine retinal pericyte model, Geraldes et al. (2009)
demonstrated that hyperglycemia persistently activates PRKCD (176977)
and MAPK14, thus increasing expression of SHP1 (PTPN6; 176883), and that
this occurs independently of NFKB activation. This signaling cascade
leads to PDGFRB dephosphorylation and a reduction in downstream
signaling from this receptor, resulting in pericyte apoptosis, the most
specific vascular histopathology associated with diabetic complications
(see 603933). The authors observed increased PRKCD activity and an
increase in the number of acellular capillaries in diabetic mouse
retinas, which were not reversible with insulin treatment that achieved
normoglycemia. Unlike diabetic age-matched wildtype mice, diabetic Prkcd
-/- mice did not show activation of MAPK14 or SHP1, inhibition of PDGFB
signaling in vascular cells, or the presence of acellular capillaries.
The authors also observed PRKCD, MAPK14, and SHP1 activation in brain
pericytes and in the renal cortex of diabetic mice. Geraldes et al.
(2009) concluded that this represents a new signaling pathway by which
hyperglycemia can induce PDGFB resistance and increased vascular cell
apoptosis to cause diabetic vascular complications.

GENE STRUCTURE

Dalla-Favera et al. (1981) determined that the SIS gene extends over a
region of about 12 kb, which includes 1.2 kb of v-sis-related sequences
interrupted by 4 intervening sequences.

MAPPING

Studies of hybrids between thymidine kinase-deficient mouse cells and
human fibroblasts carrying a 22/17 translocation showed that the sis
gene is in the region 22q11-qter (Dalla-Favera et al., 1982). Swan et
al. (1982) also mapped c-sis to chromosome 22 by somatic cell
hybridization. They pointed out that the simian sarcoma virus was the
only known transforming retrovirus of primate origin.

On germline chromosomes by in situ hybridization, Jhanwar et al. (1984)
assigned SIS to 22q13.1, a site distal to the breakpoint involved in
formation of the Philadelphia chromosome, 22q11. Julier et al. (1985)
concluded from multilocus linkage tests that the oncogene SIS locus is
most likely distal to MB and that both are distal to IGL. The following
tentative map was derived: cen--IGL--0.10--D22S1--0.20--MB--0.07--(SIS,
P1).

In the mouse SIS maps to chromosome 15 (Kozak et al., 1983), which shows
other evidence of homology of synteny to human chromosome
22--diaphorase-1 (613213) and arylsulfatase A (607574) are on MM15 and
HSA22.

Chromosomal translocations involving 22q12 have been found in most cases
of Ewing sarcoma (612219) (Aurias et al., 1983; Turc-Carel et al.,
1983). Bechet et al. (1984) showed that the SIS oncogene is not
activated in Ewing sarcoma. By in situ hybridization, Bartram et al.
(1984) concluded that SIS is located in the region 22q12.3-22q13.1, far
from the breakpoint 22q11 of CML (608232), and that SIS segregates with
the translocated part of chromosome 22 to various chromosomes in
Ph1-positive cases of CML but remains on chromosome 22 in Ph1-negative
cases. Thus, SIS is probably not involved in the malignant process.

CYTOGENETICS

- PDGFB/COL1A1 Fusion Gene

Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP; 607907), an infiltrative skin
tumor of intermediate malignancy, presents specific cytogenetic features
such as reciprocal translocations t(17;22)(q22;q13) and supernumerary
ring chromosomes derived from t(17;22). Simon et al. (1997)
characterized the breakpoints from translocations and rings in
dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans and its juvenile form, giant cell
fibroblastoma, on the genomic and RNA levels. They found that these
rearrangements fuse the PDGFB gene and the COL1A1 gene (120150). Simon
et al. (1997) commented that PDGFB has transforming activity and is a
potent mitogen for a number of cell types, but its role in oncogenic
processes was not fully understood. They noted that neither COL1A1 nor
PDGFB had hitherto been implicated in tumor translocations. The gene
fusions deleted exon 1 of PDGFB and released this growth factor from its
normal regulation; see 190040.0002.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Nakanishi et al. (2007) used RT-PCR to examine the COL1A1/PDGFB
transcript using frozen biopsy specimens from 3 unrelated patients with
DFSP and identified fusion of COL1A1 exon 25, exon 31, and exon 46,
respectively, to exon 2 of the PDGFB gene. Clinical features and
histopathology did not demonstrate any specific characteristics
associated with the different transcripts.

- Meningioma

In a family in which 4 persons developed meningiomas (607174) at a
median age about 10 years younger than that found for meningioma
patients in the general population, as reported by Bolger et al. (1985),
Smidt et al. (1990) identified a deletion in the fifth intron of the
PDGFB (SIS) gene (190040.0001).

- Idiopathic Basal Ganglia Calcification 5

Keller et al. (2013) identified 6 different heterozygous putative
loss-of-function mutations in the PDGFB gene (see, e.g.,
190040.0003-190040.0007) in 6 (18.8%) of 13 families with idiopathic
basal ganglia calcification-5 (IBGC5; 615483). The phenotype was
characterized by progressive neurologic symptoms and associated with
brain calcification mainly affecting the basal ganglia, although some
patients had more extensive calcification affecting the thalamus,
cerebellum, or white matter. Symptoms included motor disturbances, such
as dyskinesias or parkinsonism, headache, cognitive impairment, and
psychiatric manifestations, including apathy and depression. Some
patients were asymptomatic.

ANIMAL MODEL

Disruption of the Pdgfb gene or the gene for its receptor in mice leads
to the development of lethal hemorrhage and edema in late embryogenesis
and absence of kidney glomerular mesangial cells. Lindahl et al. (1997)
found that mouse embryos deficient in Pdgfb lack microvascular
pericytes, which normally form part of the capillary wall, and develop
numerous capillary microaneurysms that rupture at late gestation.
Endothelial cells of the sprouting capillaries in mutant mice appeared
to be unable to attract PDGF-receptor-beta-positive pericyte progenitor
cells. Pericytes may contribute to the mechanical stability of the
capillary wall. Comparisons made between PDGF-null mouse phenotypes
suggested a general role for PDGFs in the development of myofibroblasts.

By targeting Pdgfb ablation to the endothelium, Enge et al. (2002)
created viable mice with extensive inter- and intra-individual variation
in the density of pericytes throughout the central nervous system. They
found a strong inverse correlation between pericyte density and the
formation of a range of retinal microvascular abnormalities reminiscent
of those seen in diabetic humans. Proliferative retinopathy invariably
developed when pericyte density was less than 50% of normal. Since a
reduction of pericyte density was sufficient to cause retinopathy in
mice, Enge et al. (2002) hypothesized that pericyte loss may also lead
to human diabetic retinopathy (see 603933).

Cao et al. (2003) reported that a combination of 2 angiogenic factors,
PDGF-BB and FGF2 (134920), synergistically induces vascular networks,
which remain stable for more than a year even after depletion of
angiogenic factors. In both rat and rabbit ischemic hindlimb models,
PDGF-BB and FGF2 together markedly stimulated collateral arteriogenesis
after ligation of the femoral artery, with a significant increase in
vascularization and improvement in paw blood flow. A possible mechanism
of angiogenic synergism between PDGF-BB and FGF2 involves upregulation
of the expression of PDGF receptor-alpha (PDGFRA; 173490) and PDGF
receptor-beta (PDGFRB; 173410) by FGF2 in newly formed blood vessels.
Cao et al. (2003) showed that single angiogenic factors, including FGF2,
VEGF (192240), and PDGF-BB, were unable to establish stable vascular
networks. In contrast, a combination of PDGF-BB and FGF2, but not
PDGF-BB and VEGF or VEGF and FGF2, synergistically induced angiogenesis
and long-lasting functional vessels. While each of the angiogenic
factors FGF2, VEGF and PDGF-BB is able to stimulate angiogenesis in the
short term, none of these factors alone is able to maintain these newly
formed vessels.

Keller et al. (2013) found that 4-month-old mice homozygous for a
hypomorphic Pdgfb allele developed clusters of calcified nodules in the
midbrain and thalamus. At age 1 year, mutant mice had more extensive
calcification involving the basal forebrain, midbrain, and pons. The
lesions were punctate and composed of calcium phosphate. Transgenic
reexpression of 2 copies of wildtype endothelial Pdgfb in Pdgfb-null
mice prevented the development of brain calcification, whereas
reexpression of 1 copy of the rescue allele did not prevent
calcification. The findings suggested that it is endothelial Pdgfb,
rather than neuronal Pdgfb, that drives the pathology. Keller et al.
(2013) postulated that the brain calcification may result from defects
in pericytes and the blood-brain barrier.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENINGIOMA
PDGFB, 135-BP DEL, IVS5

In a family in which 4 persons developed meningiomas (607174) at a
median age about 10 years younger than that found for meningioma
patients in the general population, as reported by Bolger et al. (1985),
Smidt et al. (1990) identified a deletion in the fifth intron of the SIS
gene. Normally the SIS gene has an Alu sequence in this region which
includes 2 perfect 130-nucleotide repeated sequences, separated by 5 bp.
The deleted allele was missing 1 copy of the 130-bp repeat and the
intervening 5 bp. An identical deletion was also found in DNA from 1 of
13 sporadic meningiomas. Whether the deletion inactivates the SIS
allele, in analogy to the loss of function of suppressor genes in the
development of retinoblastoma and Wilms tumor, or activates the
expression of the SIS gene is not clear. A point mutation in the fourth
intron of the HRAS gene (190020) is associated with overexpression
(Cohen and Levinson, 1988).

.0002
DERMATOFIBROSARCOMA PROTUBERANS, SOMATIC
PDGFB, PDGFB/COL1A1 FUSION

Simon et al. (1997) demonstrated a fusion between intron 43 of the type
I collagen (COL1A1; 120150) gene and intron 1 of the platelet-derived
growth factor-beta gene that resulted in dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans
(DFSP; 607907). The fusion process deleted exon 1 of PDGFB and released
its growth factor from normal regulation. Normally, PDGFB is believed to
reach the cell surface in order to generate an autocrine growth signal.
In the case of a putative chimeric COL1A1/PDGFB protein, COL1A1 would
provide the signal peptide, which is a prerequisite for export of the
protein. Simon et al. (1997) showed breaks in 4 different regions of the
COL1A1 gene in the 5 tumors studied, indicating that the COL1A1
contribution to the putative chimeric protein may be accessory and less
likely to be crucial for potential growth factor activity. Normally
PDGFB is processed by N- and C-terminal peptidases into a mature growth
factor. The domains that are recognized by these enzymes are present in
the putative chimeric COL1A1/PDGFB protein, as they are encoded by PDGFB
exon 3 and exon 6, respectively. This suggested that the proteolytic
processing of the putative chimeric COL1A1/PDGFB protein may occur as
for the normal PDGFB. Shimizu et al. (1999) concluded that the
COL1A1/PDGFB fusion gene associated with DFSP contributes to tumor
formation through ectopic production of PDGF-BB, the homodimer formed by
disulfide-linking, and the formation of an autocrine loop. Their
findings thus suggested that PDGF receptors could be a target for
pharmacologic treatment of DFSP and giant cell fibroblastoma, through
the use of PDGF receptor kinase inhibitors.

To characterize the functional and structural properties of the
COL1A1/PDGFB fusion protein, Shimizu et al. (1999) generated a stable
NIH 3T3 cell line that contained a tumor-derived chimeric gene resulting
from a COL1A1 intron-7/PDGFB intron-1 fusion. Expression of the fusion
protein led to morphologic transformation and increased growth rate of
these cells. A PDGF receptor kinase inhibitor reversed the transformed
phenotype and reduced the growth rate of the cells expressing the fusion
protein but had no effect on control cells. The presence of dimeric
fusion protein precursors was demonstrated through PDGFB
immunoprecipitation of metabolically labeled cells and also by PDGFB
immunoprecipitation followed by immunoblotting with COL1A1 antibodies.
Pulse-chase studies demonstrated that the COL1A1/PDGFB precursor was
processed to an end product that was indistinguishable from wildtype
PDGF-BB, the homodimer formed by disulfide linking. Finally,
COL1A1/PDGFB-expressing cells generated tumors after subcutaneous
injection into nude mice, and tumor growth was reduced by treatment with
the PDGF receptor kinase inhibitor. Shimizu et al. (1999) concluded that
the COL1A1/PDGFB fusion gene associated with DFSP contributes to tumor
formation through ectopic production of PDGF-BB and the formation of an
autocrine loop. Their findings thus suggested that PDGF receptors could
be a target for pharmacologic treatment of DFSP and giant cell
fibroblastoma, through the use of PDGF receptor kinase inhibitors.

Simon et al. (2001) demonstrated that stably transfected clones that
expressed the COL1A1-PDGFB chimeric protein became growth-factor
independent and tumorigenic in nude mice. In addition, supernatants of
the transfected cells significantly stimulated fibroblastic cell growth
through the activation of the PDGFB receptor pathway. These results
strongly suggested that the chimeric gene expression associated with
DFSP induces tumor formation through production of mature PDGFB in an
autocrine or paracrine way.

.0003
BASAL GANGLIA CALCIFICATION, IDIOPATHIC, 5
PDGFB, GLN145TER

In affected members of a Serbian family (family S) with idiopathic basal
ganglia calcification-5 (IBGC5; 615483), originally reported by Kostic
et al. (2011), Keller et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous c.433C-T
transition in exon 4 of the PDGFB gene, resulting in a gln145-to-ter
(Q145X) substitution. The mutation, which was found by genome sequencing
and confirmed by Sanger sequencing, segregated with the disorder in the
family. The mutation was not present in the Exome Variant Server
database, in 173 in-house controls, or in 578 ancestry-matched controls.
The mutation was predicted to lead to a loss of protein function.

.0004
BASAL GANGLIA CALCIFICATION, IDIOPATHIC, 5
PDGFB, LEU119PRO

In 3 members of a Brazilian family (family B) with IBGC5 (615483),
Keller et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous c.356T-C transition in
exon 4 of the PDGFB gene, resulting in a leu119-to-pro (L119P)
substitution in a predicted receptor-binding loop. The mutation was not
present in the Exome Variant Server or dbSNP databases, in 173 in-house
controls, or in 378 ancestry-matched controls. No functional studies
were performed on the variant, but the mutation was predicted to lead to
a loss of protein function. (In the article, the nucleotide change was
cited as c.356T-C and c.356C-T; Keller (2013) confirmed that the correct
change is c.356T-C.)

.0005
BASAL GANGLIA CALCIFICATION, IDIOPATHIC, 5
PDGFB, NT726G-C

In 9 affected members of a large 3-generation French family (family F)
with IBGC5 (615483), Keller et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous
c.726G-C transversion after exon 6 of the PDGFB gene, resulting in an
extension of the protein beyond the termination codon
(Ter242TyrExtTer89). The mutation was not present in the Exome Variant
Server database or in 173 in-house controls. No functional studies were
performed on the variant, but the mutation was predicted to lead to a
loss of protein function.

.0006
BASAL GANGLIA CALCIFICATION, IDIOPATHIC, 5
PDGFB, ARG149TER

In 5 affected members of a German family (family F8) with IBGC5
(615483), Keller et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous c.445C-T
transition in exon 4 of the PDGFB gene, resulting in an arg149-to-ter
(R149X) substitution. The mutation was not present in the Exome Variant
Server database or in 173 in-house controls or 278 German controls. The
mutation was predicted to lead to a loss of protein function.

.0007
BASAL GANGLIA CALCIFICATION, IDIOPATHIC, 5
PDGFB, MET1?

In affected members of a family (family 10) with IBGC5 (615483), Keller
et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous c.3G-A transition in exon 1 of
the PDGFB gene, resulting in disruption of the translation initiation
codon. The mutation was not present in the Exome Variant Server database
or in 173 in-house controls. No functional studies were performed on the
variant, but the mutation was predicted to lead to a loss of protein
function.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Bishop  (1981); Deuel et al. (1983); Devare et al. (1983); Groffen
et al. (1983); Josephs et al. (1983); Josephs et al. (1984); Julier
et al. (1985); Julier et al. (1985); Leal et al. (1985); Owen et al.
(1984); Rao et al. (1986); Robbins et al. (1983); Robbins et al. (1982)
REFERENCE 1. Aurias, A.; Rimbaut, C.; Buffe, D.; Dubousset, J.; Mazabraud, A.
: Chromosomal translocations in Ewing's sarcoma. (Letter) New Eng.
J. Med. 309: 496-497, 1983.

2. Bartram, C. R.; de Klein, A.; Hagemeijer, A.; Grosveld, G.; Heisterkamp,
N.; Groffen, J.: Localization of the human c-sis oncogene in Ph-1-positive
and Ph-1-negative chronic myelocytic leukemia by in situ hybridization. Blood 63:
223-225, 1984.

3. Bechet, J.-M.; Bornkamm, G.; Freese, U.-K.; Lenoir, G. M.: The
c-sis oncogene is not activated in Ewing's sarcoma. (Letter) New
Eng. J. Med. 310: 393 only, 1984.

4. Bishop, J. M.: Enemies within: the genesis of retrovirus oncogenes. Cell 23:
5-6, 1981.

5. Bolger, G. B.; Stamberg, J.; Kirsch, I. R.; Hollis, G. F.; Schwarz,
D. F.; Thomas, G. H.: Chromosomal translocation t(14;22) and oncogene
(c-sis) variant in a pedigree with familial meningioma. New Eng.
J. Med. 312: 564-567, 1985.

6. Cao, R.; Brakenhielm, E.; Pawliuk, R.; Wariaro, D.; Post, M. J.;
Wahlberg, E.; Leboulch, P.; Cao, Y.: Angiogenic synergism, vascular
stability and improvement of hind-limb ischemia by a combination of
PDGF-BB and FGF-2. Nature Med. 9: 604-613, 2003.

7. Chen, C.-N.; Li, Y.-S. J.; Yeh, Y.-T.; Lee, P.-L.; Usami, S.; Chien,
S.; Chiu, J.-J.: Synergistic roles of platelet-derived growth factor-BB
and interleukin-1-beta in phenotypic modulation of human aortic smooth
muscle cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 2665-2670, 2006.

8. Choi, M. H.; Lee, I. K.; Kim, G. W.; Kim, B. U.; Han, Y.-H.; Yu,
D.-Y.; Park, H. S.; Kim, K. Y.; Lee, J. S.; Choi, C.; Bae, Y. S.;
Lee, B. I.; Rhee, S. G.; Kang, S. W.: Regulation of PDGF signalling
and vascular remodelling by peroxiredoxin II. Nature 435: 347-353,
2005.

9. Chojnacki, A.; Kelly, J. J. P.; Hader, W.; Weiss, S.: Distinctions
between fetal and adult human platelet-derived growth factor-responsive
neural precursors. Ann. Neurol. 64: 127-142, 2008.

10. Cohen, J. B.; Levinson, A. D.: A point mutation in the last intron
responsible for increased expression and transforming activity of
the c-Ha-ras oncogene. Nature 334: 119-124, 1988.

11. Collins, T.; Ginsburg, D.; Boss, J. M.; Orkin, S. H.; Pober, J.
S.: Cultured human endothelial cells express platelet-derived growth
factor B chain: cDNA cloning and structural analysis. Nature 316:
748-750, 1985.

12. Dalla-Favera, R.; Gallo, R. C.; Giallongo, A.; Croce, C.: Chromosomal
localization of the human homolog (c-sis) of the simian sarcoma virus
onc gene. Science 218: 686-688, 1982.

13. Dalla-Favera, R.; Gelmann, E. P.; Gallo, R. C.; Wong-Staal, F.
: A human onc gene homologous to the transforming gene (v-sis) of
simian sarcoma virus. Nature 292: 31-35, 1981.

14. Deuel, T. F.; Huang, J. S.; Huang, S. S.; Stroobant, P.; Waterfield,
M. D.: Expression of a platelet-derived growth factor-like protein
in simian sarcoma virus transformed cells. Science 221: 1348-1350,
1983.

15. Devare, S. G.; Reddy, E. P.; Law, J. D.; Robbins, K. C.; Aaronson,
S. A.: Nucleotide sequence of the simian sarcoma virus genome: demonstration
that its acquired cellular sequences encode the transforming gene
product p28-sis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 731-735, 1983.

16. Doolittle, R. F.; Hunkapiller, M. W.; Hood, L. E.; Devare, S.
G.; Robbins, K. C.; Aaronson, S. A.; Antoniades, H. N.: Simian sarcoma
virus onc gene, v-sis, is derived from the gene (or genes) encoding
a platelet-derived growth factor. Science 221: 275-277, 1983.

17. Enge, M.; Bjarnegard, M.; Gerhardt, H.; Gustafsson, E.; Kalen,
M.; Asker, N.; Hammes, H.-P.; Shani, M.; Fassler, R.; Betsholtz, C.
: Endothelium-specific platelet-derived growth factor-B ablation mimics
diabetic retinopathy. EMBO J. 21: 4307-4316, 2002.

18. Geraldes, P.; Hiraoka-Yamamoto, J.; Matsumoto, M.; Clermont, A.;
Leitges, M.; Marette, A.; Aiello, L. P.; Kern, T. S.; King, G. L.
: Activation of PKC-delta and SHP-1 by hyperglycemia causes vascular
cell apoptosis and diabetic retinopathy. Nature Med. 15: 1298-1306,
2009.

19. Groffen, J.; Heisterkamp, N.; Stephenson, J. R.; Geurts van Kessel,
A.; de Klein, A.; Grosveld, G.; Bootsma, D.: c-sis is translocated
from chromosome 22 to chromosome 9 in chronic myelocytic leukemia. J.
Exp. Med. 158: 9-15, 1983.

20. Hermansson, M.; Nister, M.; Betsholtz, C.; Heldin, C.-H.; Westermark,
B.; Funa, K.: Endothelial cell hyperplasia in human glioblastoma:
coexpression of mRNA for platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) B chain
and PDGF receptor suggests autocrine growth stimulation. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 85: 7748-7752, 1988.

21. Jhanwar, S. C.; Neel, B. G.; Hayward, W. S.; Chaganti, R. S. K.
: Localization of the cellular oncogenes ABL, SIS, and FES on human
germ-line chromosomes. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 38: 73-75, 1984.

22. Josephs, S. F.; Dalla-Favera, R.; Gelmann, E. P.; Gallo, R. C.;
Wong-Staal, F.: 5-prime viral and human cellular sequences corresponding
to the transforming gene of simian sarcoma virus. Science 219: 503-505,
1983.

23. Josephs, S. F.; Guo, C.; Ratner, L.; Wong-Staal, F.: Human proto-oncogene
nucleotide sequences corresponding to the transforming region of simian
sarcoma virus. Science 223: 487-491, 1984.

24. Josephs, S. F.; Ratner, L.; Clarke, M. F.; Westin, E. H.; Reitz,
M. S.; Wong-Staal, F.: Transforming potential of human c-sis nucleotide
sequences encoding platelet-derived growth factor. Science 225:
636-639, 1984.

25. Julier, C.; Lathrop, M.; Lalouel, J. M.; Kaplan, J. C.: Use of
multilocus tests of gene order: example for chromosome 22. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 40: 663-664, 1985.

26. Julier, C.; Lathrop, M.; Lalouel, J. M.; Reghis, A.; Szajnert,
M. F.; Kaplan, J. C.: New restriction fragment length polymorphisms
on human chromosome 22 at loci SIS, MB and IGLV. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 40: 664 only, 1985.

27. Julier, C.; Reghis, A.; Szajnert, M. F.; Kaplan, J. C.; Lathrop,
G. M.; Lalouel, J. M.: A preliminary linkage map of human chromosome
22. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 40: 665 only, 1985.

28. Keller, A.: Personal Communication. Zurich, Switzerland  10/25/2013.

29. Keller, A.; Westenberger, A.; Sobrido, M. J.; Garcia-Murias, M.;
Domingo, A.; Sears, R. L.; Lemos, R. R.; Ordonez-Ugalde, A.; Nicolas,
G.; Gomes da Cunha, J. E.; Rushing, E. J.; Hugelshofer, M.; and 37
others: Mutations in the gene encoding PDGF-B cause brain calcifications
in humans and mice. Nature Genet. 45: 1077-1082, 2013.

30. Kelly, J. D.; Raines, E. W.; Ross, R.; Murray, M. J.: The B chain
of PDGF alone is sufficient for mitogenesis. EMBO J. 4: 3399-3405,
1985.

31. Kostic, V. S.; Lukic-Jecmenica, M.; Novakovic, I.; Dobricic, V.;
Brajkovic, L.; Krajinovic, M.; Klein, C.; Pavlovic, A.: Exclusion
of linkage to chromosomes 14q, 2q37 and 8p21.1-q11.23 in a Serbian
family with idiopathic basal ganglia calcification. J. Neurol. 258:
1637-1642, 2011.

32. Kozak, C. A.; Sears, J. F.; Hoggan, M. D.: Genetic mapping of
the mouse proto-oncogene c-sis to chromosome 15. Science 221: 867-869,
1983.

33. Kratchmarova, I.; Blagoev, B.; Haack-Sorensen, M.; Kassem, M.;
Mann, M.: Mechanism of divergent growth factor effects in mesenchymal
stem cell differentiation. Science 308: 1472-1477, 2005.

34. Leal, F.; Williams, L. T.; Robbins, K. C.; Aaronson, S. A.: Evidence
that the v-sis gene product transforms by interaction with the receptor
for platelet-derived growth factor. Science 230: 327-330, 1985.

35. Lindahl, P.; Johansson, B. R.; Leveen, P.; Betsholtz, C.: Pericyte
loss and microaneurysm formation in PDGF-B-deficient mice. Science 277:
242-245, 1997.

36. Nakanishi, G.; Lin, S.-N.; Asagoe, K.; Suzuki, N.; Matsuo, A.;
Tanaka, R.; Makino, E.; Fukimoto, W.; Iwatsuki, K.: A novel fusion
gene of collagen type I alpha 1 (exon 31) and platelet-derived growth
factor B-chain (exon 2) in dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. Europ.
J. Derm. 17: 217-219, 2007.

37. Owen, A. J.; Pantazis, P.; Antoniades, H. N.: Simian sarcoma
virus-transformed cells secrete a mitogen identical to platelet-derived
growth factor. Science 225: 54-56, 1984.

38. Rao, C. D.; Igarashi, H.; Chiu, I.-M.; Robbins, K. C.; Aaronson,
S. A.: Structure and sequence of the human c-sis/platelet-derived
growth factor 2 (SIS/PDGF2) transcriptional unit. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 83: 2392-2396, 1986.

39. Robbins, K. C.; Antoniades, H. N.; Devare, S. G.; Hunkapiller,
M. W.; Aaronson, S. A.: Structural and immunological similarities
between simian sarcoma virus gene product(s) and human platelet-derived
growth factor. Nature 305: 605-608, 1983.

40. Robbins, K. C.; Devare, S. G.; Reddy, E. P.; Aaronson, S. A.:
In vivo identification of the transforming gene product of simian
sarcoma virus. Science 218: 1131-1133, 1982.

41. Romashkova, J. A.; Makarov, S. S.: NF-kappa-B is a target of
AKT in anti-apoptotic PDGF signalling. Nature 401: 86-90, 1999.

42. Shimizu, A.; O'Brien, K. P.; Sjoblom, T.; Pietras, K.; Buchdunger,
E.; Collins, V. P.; Heldin, C.-H.; Dumanski, J. P.; Ostman, A.: The
dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans-associated collagen type I-alpha-1/platelet-derived
growth factor (PDGF) beta-chain fusion gene generates a transforming
protein that is processed to functional PDGF-BB. Cancer Res. 59:
3719-3723, 1999.

43. Simon, M.-P.; Navarro, M.; Roux, D.; Pouyssegur, J.: Structural
and functional analysis of a chimeric protein COL1A1-PDGFB generated
by the translocation t(17;22)(q22;q13.1) in dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans
(DP). Oncogene 20: 2965-2975, 2001.

44. Simon, M.-P.; Pedeutour, F.; Sirvent, N.; Grosgeorge, J.; Minoletti,
F.; Coindre, J.-M.; Terrier-Lacombe, M.-J.; Mandahl, N.; Craver, R.
D.; Blin, N.; Sozzi, G.; Turc-Carel, C.; O'Brien, K. P.; Kedra, D.;
Fransson, I.; Guilbaud, C.; Dumanski, J. P.: Deregulation of the
platelet-derived growth factor B-chain gene via fusion with collagen
gene COL1A1 in dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans and giant-cell fibroblastoma. Nature
Genet. 15: 95-98, 1997.

45. Smidt, M.; Kirsch, I.; Ratner, L.: Deletion of Alu sequences
in the fifth c-sis intron in individuals with meningiomas. J. Clin.
Invest. 86: 1151-1157, 1990.

46. Swan, D. C.; McBride, O. W.; Robbins, K. C.; Keithley, D. A.;
Reddy, E. P.; Aaronson, S. A.: Chromosomal mapping of the simian
sarcoma virus onc gene analogue in human cells. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 79: 4691-4695, 1982.

47. Turc-Carel, C.; Philip, I.; Berger, M. P.; Philip, T.; Lenoir,
G. M.: Chromosomal translocations in Ewing's sarcoma. (Letter) New
Eng. J. Med. 309: 497-498, 1983.

48. Waterfield, M. D.; Scrace, G. T.; Whittle, N.; Stroobant, P.;
Johnsson, A.; Wasteson, A.; Westermark, B.; Heldin, C.-H.; Huang,
J. S.; Deuel, T. F.: Platelet-derived growth factor is structurally
related to the putative transforming protein p28(sis) of simian sarcoma
virus. Nature 304: 35-39, 1983.

49. Wong-Staal, F.; Dalla-Favera, R.; Franchini, G.; Gelmann, E. P.;
Gallo, R. C.: Three distinct genes in human DNA related to the transforming
genes of mammalian sarcoma retroviruses. Science 213: 226-228, 1981.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/17/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/2/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/14/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/21/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/21/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/10/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/2/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/2/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/31/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/4/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/23/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/7/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/29/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/19/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/10/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED carol: 10/25/2013
carol: 10/24/2013
ckniffin: 10/17/2013
carol: 5/29/2013
carol: 5/23/2011
carol: 1/20/2010
joanna: 1/18/2010
wwang: 12/7/2009
terry: 12/2/2009
wwang: 7/31/2009
ckniffin: 7/14/2009
terry: 2/19/2009
carol: 2/13/2009
carol: 8/5/2008
wwang: 10/2/2007
ckniffin: 9/21/2007
wwang: 4/25/2006
terry: 4/21/2006
wwang: 3/24/2006
terry: 3/10/2006
alopez: 8/3/2005
terry: 8/2/2005
alopez: 6/6/2005
wwang: 6/3/2005
terry: 6/2/2005
alopez: 11/17/2003
mgross: 6/23/2003
terry: 6/20/2003
alopez: 5/16/2003
alopez: 3/31/2003
terry: 3/31/2003
ckniffin: 2/28/2003
alopez: 9/7/2001
terry: 9/4/2001
mcapotos: 8/23/2001
carol: 3/7/2000
mgross: 10/13/1999
terry: 9/29/1999
carol: 2/22/1999
terry: 2/19/1999
dkim: 12/15/1998
alopez: 7/21/1998
terry: 7/28/1997
mark: 7/10/1997
terry: 7/9/1997
terry: 7/8/1997
mark: 1/15/1997
jenny: 1/14/1997
terry: 1/9/1997
mark: 6/10/1996
mimadm: 6/7/1995
terry: 4/27/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/29/1992
carol: 11/14/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990

605351	TITLE *605351 FIBRINOGEN-LIKE 2; FGL2
;;FIBROLEUKIN
DESCRIPTION For general information on fibrinogen, see FGA (134820), FGB (134830),
and FGG (134850).

CLONING

By screening a human small intestine cDNA library with a mouse Fgl2 cDNA
as probe, Ruegg and Pytela (1995) isolated a cDNA encoding FGL2, which
they called T49. The full-length cDNA encodes a deduced 439-amino acid
polypeptide that shares approximately 25% identity with human FGB and
FGG and 80% identity with mouse Fgl2. The protein contains a 15-amino
acid signal peptide, conserved cysteines important for interactions
between the chains in fibrinogen, coiled-coil regions, 5 potential
N-glycosylation sites, and a C-terminal fibrinogen-related domain (FRED)
similar to those in several extracellular proteins. Northern blot
analysis detected expression of a major 4.5- and a minor 1.5-kb
transcript that was strongest in peripheral blood T lymphocytes. RT-PCR
revealed expression in 2 major subpopulations of peripheral blood T
lymphocytes: the CD3+/CD4+ and CD3+/CD8+ subsets. Lack of expression in
other lymphoid- and nonlymphoid-derived cell lines suggested that
expression of FGL2 may be restricted to lymphocytes.

Marazzi et al. (1998) generated antibodies that specifically recognized
FGL2, which they termed fibroleukin, as a 70-kD protein. Additional 65-
and 62-kD products were observed in peripheral blood mononuclear cell
(PBMC) lysates and were thought to correspond to nonsialylated and
incompletely glycosylated precursors. Immunoprecipitation of PBMC
supernatant showed that FGL2 is secreted as a disulfide-bonded complex.
In immunoprecipitation studies, Marazzi et al. (1998) confirmed
expression of FGL2 in CD3+/CD4+ and CD3+/CD8+ T lymphocytes. By RT-PCR,
they demonstrated that FGL2 is preferentially expressed in memory T
lymphocytes and at low levels or not at all in naive T lymphocytes. FGL2
expression was significantly reduced in PBMC cultures within 2 days and
could not be recovered by T-cell activation. Immunohistologic study of
colon mucosa revealed expression of FGL2 in the extracellular matrix of
the T lymphocyte-rich upper portion of the lamina propria mucosa.

GENE FUNCTION

By Northern blot analysis, Hancock et al. (2004) confirmed that Ifng
(147570), but not Il12 (see 161560) or Il4 (147780), upregulated Fgl2
expression in mouse macrophages and lymphocytes. Il2 (147680) and T-cell
receptor (see 186740) stimulation or Th1-promoting conditions also
enhanced Fgl2 expression in T cells. Infection of mice with Toxoplasma
gondii increased Fgl2 expression in an Ifng-dependent manner. Hancock et
al. (2004) concluded that FGL2 is induced via a mechanism involving IFNG
and components of the IFNG signaling pathway, including STAT1 (600555)
and IRF1 (147575).

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the FGL2
gene to chromosome 7.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hancock et al. (2004) generated healthy Fgl2-deficient mice with normal
numbers of lymphoid cells. These mice survived infection with T. gondii,
Listeria monocytogenes, Yersinia enterocolitica, and Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, indicating that FGL2 is dispensable for IFNG-dependent
protection against these pathogens. All immune mechanisms for resistance
to these organisms, as well as for resistance to viruses and for
allograft rejection, were intact. Hancock et al. (2004) concluded that
FGL2 is dispensable for IFNG-dependent immunity, suggesting that other
molecules compensate for FGL2 deficiency or that FGL2 functions during
novel responses.

REFERENCE 1. Hancock, W. W.; Szaba, F. M.; Berggren, K. N.; Parent, M. A.; Mullarky,
I. K.; Pearl, J.; Cooper, A. M.; Ely, K. H.; Woodland, D. L.; Kim,
I.-J.; Blackman, M. A.; Johnson, L. L.; Smiley, S. T.: Intact type
1 immunity and immune-associated coagulative responses in mice lacking
IFN-gamma-inducible fibrinogen-like protein 2. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101:
3005-3010, 2004.

2. Marazzi, S.; Blum, S.; Hartmann, R.; Gundersen, D.; Schreyer, M.;
Argraves, S.; von Fliedner, V.; Pytela, R.; Ruegg, C.: Characterization
of human fibroleukin, a fibrinogen-like protein secreted by T lymphocytes. J.
Immun. 161: 138-147, 1998.

3. Ruegg, C.; Pytela, R.: Sequence of a human transcript expressed
in T-lymphocytes and encoding a fibrinogen-like protein. Gene 160:
257-262, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/14/2008

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 10/18/2000

EDITED mgross: 01/25/2008
terry: 1/14/2008
carol: 10/18/2000

603920	TITLE *603920 CRYSTALLIN, ZETA-LIKE 1; CRYZL1
;;QUINONE OXIDOREDUCTASE-LIKE 1
DESCRIPTION To search for novel genes located within a specific YAC that was mapped
to 21q22.1, Kim et al. (1999) screened a human brain cDNA library with
the YAC. They isolated a cDNA encoding a protein with high sequence
similarity to human zeta-crystallin (123691), and thus named the gene
zeta-crystallin-like-1 (CRYZL1). The open reading frame of the CRYZL1
cDNA predicts a 349-amino acid protein with a conserved NAD(P)H-binding
site. Northern blot analysis showed that the CRYZL1 gene is ubiquitously
expressed as a 1.4-kb transcript in human tissues. The CRYZL1 gene
contains at least 12 exons and spans more than 35 kb.

Kim et al. (1999) mapped the CRYZL1 gene to 21q22.1 by FISH.

REFERENCE 1. Kim, M.-Y.; Lee, H.-K.; Park, J.-S.; Park, S.-H.; Kwon, H.-B.;
Soh, J.: Identification of a zeta-crystallin (quinone reductase)-like
1 gene (CRYZL1) mapped to human chromosome 21q22.1. Genomics 57:
156-159, 1999.

CREATED Barbara J. Biery: 6/17/1999

EDITED psherman: 06/17/1999

606776	TITLE *606776 TRANSGLUTAMINASE 7; TGM7
;;TRANSGLUTAMINASE Z
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Transglutaminases (TGM; EC 2.3.2.13) are a family of structurally and
functionally related enzymes that stabilize protein assemblies through
the formation of gamma-glutamyl-epsilon lysine crosslinks. For
additional background information on transglutaminases, see TGM1
(190195).

CLONING

Grenard et al. (2001) cloned a novel TGM cDNA, designated TGM7, by
RT-PCR and anchored PCR of human prostate carcinoma tissues and cells,
using degenerate primers based on the conserved active site sequence.
The deduced 710-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of
about 80 kD. TGM7 contains a conserved cys-his-asp catalytic triad and a
calcium-binding domain. Its core domain shares 50% sequence identity
with other TGMs. Northern dot blot analysis detected ubiquitous low
level expression of TGM7, with highest levels in testis and lung.

MAPPING

Grenard et al. (2001) identified TGM7 as one of a cluster of TGM genes,
including TGM5 (603805) and EPB42 (177070), on chromosome 15. Using
long-range PCR, they placed TGM7 in tandem and about 9 kb upstream of
TGM5, which maps to 15q15.2. By radiation hybrid analysis, they mapped
the mouse Tgm7, Tgm5, and Epb4.2 genes to a region of syntenic homology
on chromosome 2.

REFERENCE 1. Grenard, P.; Bates, M. K.; Aeschlimann, D.: Evolution of transglutaminase
genes: identification of a transglutaminase gene cluster on human
chromosome 15q15: structure of the gene encoding transglutaminase
X and a novel gene family member, transglutaminase Z. J. Biol. Chem. 276:
33066-33078, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/21/2002

EDITED alopez: 12/16/2005
carol: 3/25/2002

611823	TITLE *611823 MITOCHONDRIAL RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L4; MRPL4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mitochondria have their own translation system for production of 13
proteins essential for oxidative phosphorylation. MRPL4 is 1 of more
than 70 protein components of mitochondrial ribosomes that are encoded
by the nuclear genome (Kenmochi et al., 2001).

CLONING

By searching databases using bovine Mrpl4 as query, followed by PCR of
human genomic DNA, Kenmochi et al. (2001) cloned MRPL4.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis and analysis of an integrated BAC-STS map,
Kenmochi et al. (2001) mapped the MRPL4 gene to chromosome 19p13.2.

REFERENCE 1. Kenmochi, N.; Suzuki, T.; Uechi, T.; Magoori, M.; Kuniba, M.; Higa,
S.; Watanabe, K.; Tanaka, T.: The human mitochondrial ribosomal protein
genes: mapping of 54 genes to the chromosomes and implications for
human disorders. Genomics 77: 65-70, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/26/2008

EDITED mgross: 02/26/2008

613917	TITLE *613917 MUCIN 22; MUC22
;;PANBRONCHIOLITIS-RELATED MUCIN-LIKE 1; PBMUCL1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for genes in a region of chromosome 6 linked to diffuse
panbronchiolitis (DPB; 604809), Hijikata et al. (2011) identified
PBMUCL1 and PBMUCL2 (HCG22; 613918), which they initially called G4 and
G2, respectively. They cloned the genes by RT-PCR and RACE of primary
cultured human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells. The deduced 1,773-amino
acid PBMUCL1 protein has an N-terminal signal sequence, followed by a
mucin-like domain, which contains 124 serine- and threonine-rich repeats
of about 10 amino acids each, and a C-terminal transmembrane domain. The
serines and threonines within the mucin-like domain may be
O-glycosylated, and PBMUCL1 also has 7 putative N-glycosylation sites.
By 5-prime RACE of the pulmonary carcinoma cell line NCI-H292, Hijikata
et al. (2011) identified a second possible transcription start site for
PBMUCL1 that was not detected in HBE cells and normal adult lung total
RNA. RT-PCR analysis revealed PBMUCL1 expression in placenta, lung, and
testis, but not in 12 other tissues examined. Immunohistochemical
analysis of lung tissue revealed weak PBMUCL1 expression in serous cells
of the submucosal glands.

GENE FUNCTION

Hijikata et al. (2011) found that expression of PBMUCL1 was relatively
low in cultured HBE cells. However, PBMUCL1 expression was elevated in
HBE cells redifferentiated at the air-liquid interface or following
stimulation with polyinosine-polycytidylic acid. PBMUCL1 expression was
more weakly stimulated by lipopolysaccharide. Hijikata et al. (2011)
also found elevated expression of PBMUCL1 in serous cells of the
submucosal glands in DPB lung tissue compared with control lung tissue.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hijikata et al. (2011) determined that the PBMUCL1 gene contains 5
coding exons and spans about 29 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Hijikata et al. (2011) mapped the MUC22
gene to a mucin gene cluster on chromosome 6p21.3. The order of
clustered genes, from telomere to centromere, is DPCR1 (613928), MUC21,
MUC22, and PBMUCL2.

REFERENCE 1. Hijikata, M.; Matsushita, I.; Tanaka, G.; Tsuchiya, T.; Ito, H.;
Tokunaga, K.; Ohashi, J.; Homma, S.; Kobashi, Y.; Taguchi, Y.; Azuma,
A.; Kudoh, S.; Keicho, N.: Molecular cloning of two novel mucin-like
genes in the disease-susceptibility locus for diffuse panbronchiolitis. Hum.
Genet. 129: 117-128, 2011.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/20/2011

EDITED alopez: 10/17/2011
mgross: 4/25/2011
mgross: 4/20/2011

600065	TITLE *600065 INTEGRIN, BETA-2; ITGB2
;;LEUKOCYTE CELL ADHESION MOLECULE CD18; CD18
LEUKOCYTE-ASSOCIATED ANTIGENS CD18/11A, CD18/11B, CD18/11C, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The leukocyte cell adhesion molecule belongs to the class of cell
membrane glycoproteins known as integrins, which are alpha-beta
heterodimers. The alpha subunits vary in size from 120 to 180 kD and
each is noncovalently associated with a beta subunit (90 to 110 kD).
There are 8 known beta subunits and 14 known alpha subunits. Although
the alpha and beta subunits could in theory associate to give more than
100 integrin heterodimers, the diversity is restricted and different
combinations are associated with different cell types (Hynes, 1992).

NOMENCLATURE

The beta-2 integrin chain gene is designated ITGB2 and the leukocyte
antigen has been designated CD18. The 3 alpha integrin chains associated
individually with the beta-2 chain as a heterodimer have gene
designations of ITGAL (153370), ITGAM (120980), and ITGAX (151510), and
leukocyte antigen designations of CD11A, CD11B, and CD11C, respectively.

The 3 integrin molecules associated with leukocyte adhesion deficiency
have leukocyte antigen designations of (1) CD18/CD11A: also referred to
as LFA-1, Leu CAMa, and integrin beta-2/alpha-L; (2) CD18/CD11B: also
referred to as CR3, Leu CAMb, Mac-1, Mo1, OKM-1, and integrin
beta-2/alpha-M; (3) CD18/CD11C: also referred to as p150 (p150, 95), Leu
CAMc, and integrin beta-2/alpha-X (Barclay et al., 1993).

GENE FUNCTION

By quantitative fluorescence flow cytometric analysis, Taylor et al.
(1988) showed that the expression of CD18 was increased in
lymphoblastoid cells from persons with Down syndrome, consistent with
the location of the gene on chromosome 21.

Bianchi et al. (2000) showed that JAB1 (604850) interacts with the
cytoplasmic domain of the beta-2 subunit of the alpha-L/beta-2 integrin
LFA-1. They demonstrated that a fraction of JAB1 colocalizes with LFA-1
at the cell membrane and that LFA-1 engagement is followed by an
increase of the nuclear pool of JAB1, paralleled by enhanced binding of
c-Jun-containing AP1 complexes to their DNA consensus site and increased
transactivation of an AP1-dependent promoter. Bianchi et al. (2000)
suggested that signaling through the LFA-1 integrin may affect
c-Jun-driven transcription by regulating JAB1 nuclear localization. This
represented a new pathway for integrin-dependent modulation of gene
expression.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis and leukocyte adhesion assays, Ostermann et
al. (2002) demonstrated that under both static and physiologic flow
conditions, JAM1 (605721), through its membrane-proximal domain 2, is a
ligand of the LFA-1 integrin that contributes to the LFA-1-dependent
transendothelial migration of CD45RO (151460)-positive memory T cells
expressing the CXCR4 (162643) chemokine receptor and of neutrophils.
These interactions also facilitated LFA-1-mediated arrest of T cells.
Activation of endothelium with inflammatory cytokines enhanced memory
T-cell transmigration. Ostermann et al. (2002) suggested that a complex
interplay of heterophilic binding of LFA-1 to JAM1 and homophilic
trans-interactions of JAM1 may provide a molecular 'zipper' for
leukocyte transmigration.

Lu and Cyster (2002) studied the mechanisms that control localization of
marginal zone B cells. They demonstrated that marginal zone B cells
express elevated levels of the integrins LFA-1 and alpha-4-beta-1 (see
192975 and 135630), and that the marginal zone B cells bind to the
ligands ICAM1 (147840) and VCAM1 (192225). These ligands are expressed
within the marginal zone in a lymphotoxin-dependent manner. Combined
inhibition of LFA-1 and alpha-4-beta-1 causes a rapid and selective
release of B cells from the marginal zone. Furthermore,
lipopolysaccharide-triggered marginal zone B cell relocalization
involves downregulation of integrin-mediated adhesion. Lu and Cyster
(2002) concluded that their studies identified key requirements for
marginal zone B cell localization and established a role for integrins
in peripheral lymphoid tissue compartmentalization.

In a patient with features of Glanzmann thrombasthenia (see 173470) and
leukocyte adhesion deficiency-1 (LAD1; 116920), McDowall et al. (2003)
identified a novel form of integrin dysfunction involving ITGB1
(135630), ITGB2, and ITGB3 (173470). ITGB2 and ITGB3 were constitutively
clustered. Although all 3 integrins were expressed on the cell surface
at normal levels and were capable of function following extracellular
stimulation, they could not be activated via the 'inside-out' signaling
pathways.

Kim et al. (2003) investigated cytoplasmic conformational changes in the
integrin LFA1 (alpha-L, 153370; beta-2) in living cells by measuring
fluorescence resonance energy transfer between cyan fluorescent
protein-fused and yellow fluorescent protein-fused alpha-L and beta-2
cytoplasmic domains. In the resting state these domains were close to
each other, but underwent significant spatial separation upon either
intracellular activation of integrin adhesiveness (inside-out signaling)
or ligand binding (outside-in signaling). Thus, bidirectional integrin
signaling is accomplished by coupling extracellular conformational
changes to an unclasping and separation of the alpha and beta
cytoplasmic domains, which Kim et al. (2003) noted as a distinctive
mechanism for transmitting information across the plasma membrane.

Cherry et al. (2004) generated T-cell clones expressing less than half
the wildtype amount of RHOH (602037), a leukocyte-specific inhibitory
Rho family member. Resting cells expressed constitutively adhesive LFA1
and bound spontaneously to ICAM1, ICAM2 (146630), and ICAM3 (146631).
Reconstituting RHOH mRNA levels reverted the adhesion phenotype to that
of relatively nonadhesive wildtype cells. Treatment of peripheral blood
lymphocytes with RHOH RNA interference altered the nonadhesive
phenotype. Cherry et al. (2004) concluded that RHOH is required for
maintenance of lymphocyte LFA1 in a nonadhesive state.

Lammermann et al. (2008) studied the interplay between adhesive,
contractile, and protrusive forces during interstitial leukocyte
chemotaxis in vivo and in vitro. The authors ablated genes encoding
integrin heterodimeric partners ITGA5 (135620), ITGB1 (135630), ITGB2,
and ITGB7 (147559) from murine leukocytes and demonstrated that
functional integrins do not contribute to migration in 3-dimensional
environments. Instead, these cells migrate by the sole force of actin
network expansion, which promotes protrusive flowing of the leading
edge. Myosin II-dependent contraction is required only on passage
through narrow gaps, where a squeezing contraction of the trailing edge
propels the rigid nucleus.

GENE STRUCTURE

Weitzman et al. (1991) determined that the ITGB2 gene spans
approximately 40 kb and contains 16 exons.

MAPPING

Suomalainen et al. (1985, 1986) showed that the integrin beta-2 gene is
located on chromosome 21. The method used involved somatic cell hybrids
between mouse and human lymphocytes, indirect immunofluorescence, and
cell sorting. By somatic cell hybridization, Akao et al. (1987)
confirmed the chromosomal assignment. By human-mouse T-cell fusion
studies, Marlin et al. (1986) also showed that the beta subunit maps to
chromosome 21. Using a cDNA probe for in situ hybridization, Solomon et
al. (1988) localized the ITGB2 (CD18) gene to 21q22.1-qter. Petersen et
al. (1991) assigned CD18 to 21q22.3 and positioned it in that band
relative to 15 other genes or DNA markers.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Mutations in the beta-2 subunit of the leukocyte cell adhesion molecule
have been found to cause the autosomal recessive disorder of neutrophil
function known as leukocyte adhesion deficiency; see, e.g., 600065.0001.
LAD is characterized by recurrent bacterial infections and a lack of
beta-2/alpha-L (see 153370), beta-2/alpha-M (see 120980), and
beta-2/alpha-X (see 151510) expression.

Rivera-Matos et al. (1995) described an infant in whom clinical signs
suggesting Hirschsprung disease were the initial manifestation of LAD.
Chromosome studies showed a deletion of the distal third of the long arm
of one chromosome 21, and flow cytometric studies confirmed the
defective expression of CD18. Leukocyte adhesion deficiency was
suspected because of leukocytosis, poor wound healing, frequent
infections, and biopsy specimens showing a paucity of neutrophils. It
seems quite possible that the patient indeed had Hirschsprung disease as
well as leukocyte adhesion deficiency. Aganglionic megacolon is a
frequent finding in trisomy 21 and preliminary evidence for a genetic
modifier of Hirschsprung disease on 21q22 has been presented (600156).

ANIMAL MODEL

Wilson et al. (1993) found that a hypomorphic mutation in CD18,
generated by gene targeting in mice, showed in homozygosity increased
circulating neutrophil counts, defects in the response to chemically
induced peritonitis, and delays in transplantation rejection. When this
mutation was backcrossed onto the PL/J inbred strain by Bullard et al.
(1996), virtually all homozygous mice developed a chronic inflammatory
skin disease with a mean age of onset of 11 weeks after birth. The
disease was characterized by erythema, hair loss, and the development of
scales and crusts. The histopathology revealed changes of a type found
in human psoriasis (177900) and other hyperproliferative inflammatory
skin disorders. No bacterial or fungal organisms were found to be
involved in the pathogenesis of the disease, and the dermatitis resolved
rapidly after subcutaneous administration of dexamethasone. The findings
of Bullard et al. (1996) were notable since no comparable skin disease
had been reported in humans or cattle with LAD deficiency type I and
since this disorder did not occur in mice when the mutation was studied
on a C57BL/6 or 129/Sv background. From backcross experiments the
authors suggested that a small number of genes (perhaps as few as one),
in addition to CD18, determined susceptibility to the disorder.

Vazquez-Torres et al. (1999) reported that Salmonella is transported
from the gastrointestinal tract to the bloodstream by CD18-expressing
phagocytes, and that CD18-deficient mice are resistant to dissemination
of Salmonella to the liver and spleen after oral administration.
Vazquez-Torres et al. (1999) hypothesized that the CD18-dependent
pathway of extraintestinal dissemination may be important for the
development of systemic immunity to gastrointestinal pathogens, because
oral challenge with Salmonella pathogenicity island-1 (SPI1)-deficient
S. typhimurium elicits a specific systemic IgG humoral immune response,
despite an inability to stimulate production of specific mucosal IgA.

Lee et al. (2003) generated mice lacking Cd18. In vitro, activated
lymphocytes from these mice had normal Th1 and Th2 cytokine production.
The Cd18 -/- mice were more resistant than C57BL/6 mice to challenge
with Leishmania major, but they were also resistant to allergic lung
inflammation, even though they produced amounts of T cell-dependent
allergen-specific antibody comparable to wildtype mice. The authors
found that disease production required the homing of Th2 cells
(IL4-positive) to the lungs, and this migration was impaired in Cd18 -/-
mice and in mice treated with anti-Cd18. Lee et al. (2003) proposed that
integrin blockade could be a tactic for selectively excluding Th2 cells
under diverse inflammatory conditions.

Miura et al. (2005) found that Cd18-null mice had defective
osteoclastogenesis due to reduced expression of the osteogenic master
regulator Runx2 (600211). Radiographic analysis of Cd18-null mice showed
reduced bone mineral density and features of osteoporosis. Cd18 was
expressed by bone marrow stromal stem cells, and constitutive
overexpression of Cd18 in this cell population in normal mice enhanced
bone formation. The authors suggested that LAD patients may be
predisposed to develop osteoporosis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY
ITGB2, ARG593CYS

Arnaout et al. (1990) found that a patient with LAD (116920) was a
genetic compound for 2 mutations: arg593-to-cys and lys196-to-thr. These
amino acids lie in regions necessary for normal cell surface expression
of CD18 and possibly other integrin-beta subunits. Arnaout et al. (1990)
demonstrated that each mutant allele resulted in impaired CD18
expression on the cell surface membrane of transfected COS M6 cells.

.0002
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY
ITGB2, LYS196THR

See Arnaout et al. (1990).

.0003
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY
ITGB2, LEU149PRO

In a patient identified as no. 14 with moderately severe LAD (116920),
Wardlaw et al. (1990) demonstrated a T-to-C transition resulting in
substitution for leucine-149 by proline. Cotransfection of the beta
subunit cDNA containing this mutation with the wildtype alpha subunit of
LFA-1 in a mammalian expression system resulted in no expression of
LFA-1. Normal life of the mutant beta subunits and previous
demonstration of the lack of alpha/beta complex formation during
biosynthesis in the patient's cells suggested a defect in association
with the alpha subunit. Loss of functional expression of this
beta-subunit mutation suggests that it lies in a site critical for
association with the alpha subunit. (In MIM10, this mutation was
improperly listed as pro149-to-leu. The wildtype residue is leu
(Bairoch, 1994).)

.0004
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY
ITGB2, GLY169ARG

In a patient identified as no. 2 with severe LAD deficiency (116920),
Wardlaw et al. (1990) demonstrated a G-to-A transition resulting in a
glycine-to-arginine change at amino acid 169 of the beta subunit. As in
the case of the leu149-to-pro mutation, there appeared to be
interference with association between the mutant beta subunit and the
normal alpha subunit.

.0005
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY
ITGB2, INITIATION MUTATION

Sligh et al. (1989) found an ATG-to-AAG alteration in the initiation
codon of the CD18 gene in a patient with moderately severe leukocyte
adhesion deficiency (116920). In fact, the patient was a genetic
compound; the particular mutation was found in the patient and in the
father.

.0006
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY
ITGB2, ARG586TRP

In a patient with partial (type II) deficiency of leukocyte adhesion
molecule, Nelson et al. (1992) demonstrated 2 mutant alleles. The allele
from the mother contained 2 mutations: a 12-bp insertion resulting in an
in-frame addition of 4 amino acids between proline-247 and glutamic
acid-248 (see 600065.0007), and a C1756T nucleotide transition resulting
in an arg586-to-trp substitution in the CD18 protein.

.0007
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY
ITGB2, IVS?AS, -12, 12-BP INS

In a patient with partial Leu-CAM deficiency, Nelson et al. (1992) found
2 mutations in the allele inherited from the mother (see 600065.0006). A
12-bp insertion that added 4 amino acids (pro-ser-ser-gln) arose by a
single C-to-A transversion in the 3-prime terminus of an intron,
generating an aberrant splice acceptor site. COS cells cotransfected
with normal alpha chain gene (CD11B) and the mother's doubly mutant
allele showed no surface expression of CD18; when transfected with the
arg586-to-trp mutant gene, expression was 22% of normal.

.0008
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY
ITGB2, ASN351SER

In one CD18 allele in a patient with partial Leu-CAM deficiency
previously reported by Arnaout et al. (1984), Nelson et al. (1992) found
an A1052G nucleotide transition, not present in either parent, resulting
in substitution of serine for asparagine-351. The other chromosome
carried 2 mutations, represented by 600065.0006 and 600065.0007.

.0009
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY
ITGB2, PRO178LEU

In a child with the severe deficiency form of what they termed leukocyte
adherence deficiency, Back et al. (1992) found in one allele a C-to-T
transition resulting in substitution of leucine for proline at amino
acid 178. The change occurred in a region that is highly conserved among
the integrin beta subunits and where previous defects had been
identified in LAD. The other allele had a 220-bp deletion in the cDNA
coding for a portion of the extracellular domain and resulting in a
frameshift into a premature stop codon. The deleted region corresponded
to exon 13 of the ITGB2 (CD18) gene. The patient had previously been
reported by Bowen et al. (1982) and Beatty et al. (1984).

.0010
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY
ITGB2, ASP128ASN

Matsuura et al. (1992) identified a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 454
which resulted in an asp128-to-asn substitution. The asp128 residue is
located in a region which is crucial for the association of beta
subunits with alpha subunits and is strictly conserved among the
integrin beta subunits.

.0011
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY
ITGB2, IVSDS, G-A, +1

In a patient with leukocyte adhesion deficiency, Matsuura et al. (1992)
identified a G-to-A substitution at the first nucleotide of the splice
donor site of a 1.2-kb intron.

.0012
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY
ITGB2, GLY284SER

In an 18-year-old girl reported by Bowen et al. (1982) with moderately
severe leukocyte adhesion deficiency, type I, Back et al. (1993) found a
single base substitution resulting in a glycine-to-serine amino acid
substitution at position 284. The change occurred in a highly conserved
region of the extracellular domain of CD18 in which several other
mutations had been identified.

.0013
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY
ITGB2, SER138PRO

Hogg et al. (1999) described a patient with clinical features compatible
with a markedly severe phenotype of leukocyte adhesion deficiency type I
who was found to express the beta-2 integrins LFA-1 and Mac-1 at 40 to
60% of normal levels. This level of expression should be adequate for
normal integrin function, but both the patient's Mac-1 on neutrophils
and LFA-1 on T cells failed to bind ligands such as fibrinogen and
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM1; 147840), or to display a
beta-2 integrin activation epitope after adhesion-inducing stimuli.
Unexpectedly, divalent cation treatment induced the patient's T cells to
bind to ICAM2 (146630) and ICAM3 (146631). Sequencing of the patient's 2
CD18 alleles revealed compound heterozygosity of 2 missense mutations,
S138P and G273R (600065.0014). Both mutations were in the beta-2-subunit
conserved domain, with S138P a putative divalent cation coordinating
residue in the metal ion-dependent adhesion site (MIDAS) motif. After
transfection of K562 cells with alpha subunits, the mutated S138P
beta-subunit was coexpressed but did not support function, whereas the
G273R mutant was not expressed. Thus, the patient exhibited failure of
the beta-2 integrins to function despite adequate levels of cell surface
expression.

The 15-year-old patient studied by Hogg et al. (1999) first presented as
an infant with severe and recurrent skin infections requiring prolonged
treatment with intravenous antibiotics and surgery to remove necrotic
tissue. In spite of attentive oral hygiene, the patient suffered from
severe periodontitis and gingivitis. Otitis media and chest infections
had also been consistent features. Organisms isolated from infected
sites included Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas, and Streptococcus
species. The neutrophil count was persistently elevated, reaching peaks
of more than 10 times normal at times of infection. Phagocytosis by the
patient's neutrophils was less than 25% that of a healthy adult control.
On the other hand, respiratory burst was either normal or slightly
enhanced, and intracellular killing of S. epidermidis was within normal
limits. Therefore, although the uptake of the organisms was faulty,
intracellular processes by which phagocytes deal with bacteria appeared
normal.

.0014
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY
ITGB2, GLY273ARG

See 600065.0013 and Hogg et al. (1999).

.0015
LEUKOCYTE ADHESION DEFICIENCY
ITGB2, IVS4AS, 169-BP DEL, -37

By studying a herpesvirus saimiri-transformed T cell line from a patient
with severe leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD; 116920), Allende et al.
(2000) identified a 169-bp genomic deletion in the ITGB2 gene (from -37
of intron 4 to +132 of exon 5) that abolished the intron 4 acceptor
splicing site, resulting in the total skipping of exon 5. The genomic
deletion led to a 171-bp in-frame mRNA deletion (nucleotides 329 to 500)
that resulted in the absence of cell surface and cytoplasmic CD18
expression. Functional analysis showed a severe, selective T-cell
activation impairment in the CD2 but not the CD3 pathway. The male
patient, whose father was not known and who had no family history of
LAD, died at age 12 months after unsuccessful bone marrow transplants at
7 and 10 months of age.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Abramson et al. (1981); Anderson et al. (1985); Anderson and Springer
(1987); Arnaout et al. (1982); Bissenden et al. (1981); Boucheix
(1987); Crowley et al. (1980); Dana et al. (1987); Dana et al. (1984);
Fischer et al. (1986); Fujita et al. (1985); Fujita et al. (1988);
Harvath and Andersen (1979); Hayward et al. (1979); Hibbs et al. (1990);
Kehrli et al. (1992); Kishimoto et al. (1987); Kishimoto et al. (1987);
Kobayashi et al. (1984); Krauss et al. (1991); Niethammer et al. (1976);
Pierce et al. (1986); Rosmarin et al. (1995); Ross  (1986); Ross et
al. (1985); Shuster et al. (1992); Springer et al. (1986); Springer
et al. (1985); Springer et al. (1984); Todd and Freyer (1988); van
der Meer et al. (1975); Vedder et al. (1988); Weening et al. (1976);
Wilson et al. (1990); Yorifuji et al. (1993)
REFERENCE 1. Abramson, J. S.; Mills, E. L.; Sawyer, M. K.; Regelmann, W. R.;
Nelson, J. D.; Quie, P. G.: Recurrent infections and delayed separation
of the umbilical cord in an infant with abnormal phagocytic cell locomotion
and oxidative response during particle phagocytosis. J. Pediat. 99:
887-894, 1981.

2. Akao, Y.; Utsumi, K. R.; Naito, K.; Ueda, R.; Takahashi, T.; Yamada,
K.: Chromosomal assignments of genes coding for human leukocyte common
antigen, T-200, and lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1, LFA-1
beta subunit. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 13: 273-278, 1987.

3. Allende, L. M.; Hernandez, M.; Corell, A.; Garcia-Perez, M. A.;
Varela, P.; Moreno, A.; Caragol, I.; Garcia-Martin, F.; Guillen-Perales,
J.; Olive, T.; Espanol, T.; Arnaiz-Villena, A.: A novel CD18 genomic
deletion in a patient with severe leucocyte adhesion deficiency: a
possible CD2/lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 functional association
in humans. Immunology 99: 440-450, 2000.

4. Anderson, D. C.; Schmalstieg, F. C.; Finegold, M. J.; Hughes, B.
J.; Rothlein, R.; Miller, L. J.; Kohl, S.; Tosi, M. F.; Jacobs, R.
L.; Waldrop, T. C.; Goldman, A. S.; Shearer, W. T.; Springer, T. A.
: The severe and moderate phenotypes of heritable Mac-1, LFA-1 deficiency:
their quantitative definition and relation to leukocyte dysfunction
and clinical features. J. Infect. Dis. 152: 668-689, 1985.

5. Anderson, D. C.; Springer, T. A.: Leukocyte adhesion deficiency:
an inherited defect in the Mac-1, LFA-1, and p150,95 glycoproteins. Annu.
Rev. Med. 38: 175-194, 1987.

6. Arnaout, M. A.; Dana, N.; Gupta, S. K.; Tenen, D. G.; Fathallah,
D. M.: Point mutations impairing cell surface expression of the common
beta subunit (CD18) in a patient with leukocyte adhesion molecule
(Leu-CAM) deficiency. J. Clin. Invest. 85: 977-981, 1990.

7. Arnaout, M. A.; Pitt, J.; Cohen, H. J.; Melamed, J.; Rosen, F.
S.; Colten, H. R.: Deficiency of a granulocyte-membrane glycoprotein
(gp150) in a boy with recurrent bacterial infections. New Eng. J.
Med. 306: 693-699, 1982.

8. Arnaout, M. A.; Spits, H.; Terhorst, C.; Pitt, J.; Todd, R. F.,
III: Deficiency of a leukocyte surface glycoprotein (LFA-1) in two
patients with Mo1 deficiency: effects of cell activation on Mo1/LFA-1
surface expression in normal and deficient leukocytes. J. Clin. Invest. 74:
1291-1300, 1984.

9. Back, A. L.; Kerkering, M.; Baker, D.; Bauer, T. R.; Embree, L.
J.; Hickstein, D. D.: A point mutation associated with leukocyte
adhesion deficiency type 1 of moderate severity. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 193: 912-918, 1993.

10. Back, A. L.; Kwok, W. W.; Hickstein, D. D.: Identification of
two molecular defects in a child with leukocyte adherence deficiency. J.
Biol. Chem. 267: 5482-5487, 1992.

11. Bairoch, A.: Personal Communication. Geneva, Switzerland  5/13/1994.

12. Barclay, A. N.; Birkeland, M. L.; Brown, M. H.; Beyers, A. D.;
Davis, S. J.; Somoza, C.; Williams, A. F.: The Leukocyte Antigen
Facts Book.  New York: Academic Press (pub.)  1993. Pp. 124-127
and 140-141.

13. Beatty, P. G.; Ochs, H. D.; Harlan, J. M.; Price, T. H.; Rosen,
H.; Taylor, R. F.; Hansen, J. A.; Klebanoff, S. J.: Absence of monoclonal-antibody-defined
protein complex in a boy with abnormal leucocyte function. Lancet 323:
535-537, 1984. Note: Originally Volume I.

14. Bianchi, E.; Denti, S.; Granata, A.; Bossi, G.; Geginat, J.; Villa,
A.; Rogge, L.; Pardi, R.: Integrin LFA-1 interacts with the transcriptional
co-activator JAB1 to modulate AP-1 activity. Nature 404: 617-621,
2000.

15. Bissenden, J. G.; Haeney, M. R.; Tarlow, M. J.; Thompson, R. A.
: Delayed separation of the umbilical cord, severe widespread infections,
and immunodeficiency. Arch. Dis. Child. 56: 397-399, 1981.

16. Boucheix, C.: Personal Communication. Villejuif, France  1/31/1987.

17. Bowen, T. J.; Ochs, H. D.; Altman, L. C.; Price, T. H.; Van Epps,
D. E.; Brautigan, D. L.; Rosin, R. E.; Perkins, W. D.; Babior, B.
M.; Klebanoff, S. J.; Wedgwood, R. J.: Severe recurrent bacterial
infections associated with defective adherence and chemotaxis in two
patients with neutrophils deficient in a cell-associated glycoprotein. J.
Pediat. 101: 932-940, 1982.

18. Bullard, D. C.; Scharffetter-Kochanek, K.; McArthur, M. J.; Chosay,
J. G.; McBride, M. E.; Montgomery, C. A.; Beaudet, A. L.: A polygenic
mouse model of psoriasiform skin disease in CD18-deficient mice. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 2116-2121, 1996.

19. Cherry, L. K.; Li, X.; Schwab, P.; Lim, B.; Klickstein, L. B.
: RhoH is required to maintain the integrin LFA-1 in a nonadhesive
state on lymphocytes. Nature Immun. 5: 961-967, 2004.

20. Crowley, C. A.; Curnutte, J. T.; Rosin, R. E.; Andre-Schwartz,
J.; Gallin, J. I.; Klempner, M.; Snyderman, R.; Southwick, F. S.;
Stossel, T. P.; Babior, B. M.: An inherited abnormality of neutrophil
adhesion: its genetic transmission and its association with a missing
protein. New Eng. J. Med. 302: 1163-1168, 1980.

21. Dana, N.; Clayton, L. K.; Tennen, D. G.; Pierce, M. W.; Lachmann,
P. J.; Law, S. A.; Arnaout, M. A.: Leukocytes from four patients
with complete or partial Leu-CAM deficiency contain the common beta-subunit
precursor and beta-subunit messenger RNA. J. Clin. Invest. 79: 1010-1015,
1987.

22. Dana, N.; Todd, R. F., III; Pitt, J.; Springer, T. A.; Arnaout,
M. A.: Deficiency of a surface membrane glycoprotein (Mo1) in man. J.
Clin. Invest. 73: 153-159, 1984.

23. Fischer, A.; Griscelli, C.; Friedrich, W.; Kubanek, B.; Levinsky,
R.; Morgan, G.; Vossen, J.; Wagemaker, G.; Landais, P.: Bone-marrow
transplantation for immunodeficiencies and osteopetrosis: European
survey, 1968-1985. Lancet 328: 1080-1084, 1986. Note: Originally
Volume II.

24. Fujita, K.; Kobayashi, K.; Kajii, T.: Impaired neutrophil adhesion:
a new patient in a previously reported family. Acta Paediat. Jpn. 27:
527-534, 1985.

25. Fujita, K.; Kobayashi, K.; Okino, F.: Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
in two siblings with congenital leucocyte adhesion deficiency. Europ.
J. Pediat. 148: 118-119, 1988.

26. Harvath, L.; Andersen, B. R.: Defective initiation of oxidative
metabolism in polymorphonuclear leukocytes. New Eng. J. Med. 300:
1130-1135, 1979.

27. Hayward, A. R.; Leonard, J.; Harvey, B. A. M.; Greenwood, M. C.;
Wood, C. B. S.; Soothill, J. F.: Delayed separation of the umbilical
cord, widespread infections, and defective neutrophil mobility. Lancet 313:
1099-1101, 1979. Note: Originally Volume I.

28. Hibbs, M. L.; Wardlaw, A. J.; Stacker, S. A.; Anderson, D. C.;
Lee, A.; Roberts, T. M.; Springer, T. A.: Transfection of cells from
patients with leukocyte adhesion deficiency with an integrin beta
subunit (CD18) restores lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 expression
and function. J. Clin. Invest. 85: 674-681, 1990.

29. Hogg, N.; Stewart, M. P.; Scarth, S. L.; Newton, R.; Shaw, J.
M.; Law, S. K. A.; Klein, N.: A novel leukocyte adhesion deficiency
caused by expressed but nonfunctional beta-2 integrins Mac-1 and LFA-1. J.
Clin. Invest. 103: 97-106, 1999.

30. Hynes, R. O.: Integrins: versatility, modulation and signaling
in cell adhesion. Cell 69: 11-25, 1992.

31. Kehrli, M. E., Jr.; Ackermann, M. R.; Shuster, D. E.; van der
Maaten, M. J.; Schmalstieg, F. C.; Anderson, D. C.; Hughes, B. J.
: Bovine leukocyte adhesion deficiency: beta(2) integrin deficiency
in young Holstein cattle. Am. J. Path. 140: 1489-1492, 1992.

32. Kim, M.; Carman, C. V.; Springer, T. A.: Bidirectional transmembrane
signaling by cytoplasmic domain separation in integrins. Science 301:
1720-1725, 2003.

33. Kishimoto, T. K.; Hollander, N.; Roberts, T. M.; Anderson, D.
C.; Springer, T. A.: Heterogeneous mutations in the beta subunit
common to the LFA-1, Mac-1, and p150,95 glycoproteins cause leukocyte
adhesion deficiency. Cell 50: 193-202, 1987.

34. Kishimoto, T. K.; O'Connor, K.; Lee, A.; Roberts, T. M.; Springer,
T. A.: Cloning of the beta subunit of the leukocyte adhesion proteins:
homology to an extracellular matrix receptor defines a novel supergene
family. Cell 48: 681-690, 1987.

35. Kobayashi, K.; Fujita, K.; Okino, F.; Kajii, T.: An abnormality
of neutrophil adhesion: autosomal recessive inheritance associated
with missing neutrophil glycoproteins. Pediatrics 73: 606-610, 1984.

36. Krauss, J. C.; Mayo-Bond, L. A.; Rogers, C. E.; Weber, K. L.;
Todd, R. F., III; Wilson, J. M.: An in vivo animal model of gene
therapy for leukocyte adhesion deficiency. J. Clin. Invest. 88:
1412-1417, 1991.

37. Lammermann, T.; Bader, B. L.; Monkley, S. J.; Worbs, T.; Wedlich-Soldner,
R.; Hirsch, K.; Keller, M.; Forster, R.; Critchley, D. R.; Fassler,
R.; Sixt, M.: Rapid leukocyte migration by integrin-independent flowing
and squeezing. Nature 453: 51-55, 2008.

38. Lee, S.-H.; Prince, J. E.; Rais, M.; Kheradmand, F.; Shardonofsky,
F.; Lu, H.; Beaudet, A. L.; Smith, C. W.; Soong, L.; Corry, D. B.
: Differential requirement for CD18 in T-helper effector homing. Nature
Med. 9: 1281-1286, 2003.

39. Lu, T. T.; Cyster, J. G.: Integrin-mediated long-term B cell
retention in the splenic marginal zone. Science 297: 409-412, 2002.

40. Marlin, S. D.; Morton, C. C.; Anderson, D. C.; Springer, T. A.
: LFA-1 immunodeficiency disease: definition of the genetic defect
and chromosomal mapping of alpha and beta subunits of the lymphocyte
function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1) by complementation in hybrid
cells. J. Exp. Med. 164: 855-867, 1986.

41. Matsuura, S.; Kishi, F.; Tsukahara, M.; Nunoi, H.; Matsuda, I.;
Kobayashi, K.; Kajii, T.: Leukocyte adhesion deficiency: identification
of novel mutations in two Japanese patients with a severe form. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 184: 1460-1467, 1992.

42. McDowall, A.; Inwald, D.; Leitinger, B.; Jones, A.; Liesner, R.;
Klein, N.; Hogg, N.: A novel form of integrin dysfunction involving
beta-1, beta-2, and beta-3 integrins. J. Clin. Invest. 111: 51-60,
2003.

43. Miura, Y.; Miura, M.; Gronthos, S.; Allen, M. R.; Cao, C.; Uveges,
T. E.; Bi, Y.; Ehirchiou, D.; Kortesidis, A.; Shi, S.; Zhang, L.:
Defective osteogenesis of the stromal stem cells predisposes CD18-null
mice to osteoporosis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 14022-14027, 2005.

44. Nelson, C.; Rabb, H.; Arnaout, M. A.: Genetic cause of leukocyte
adhesion molecule deficiency: abnormal splicing and a missense mutation
in a conserved region of CD18 impair cell surface expression of beta-2
integrins. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 3351-3357, 1992.

45. Niethammer, D.; Dieterle, U.; Kleihauer, E.; Wildfeuer, A.; Haferkamp,
O.; Hitzig, W. H.: An inherited defect in granulocyte function: impaired
chemotaxis, phagocytosis and intracellular killing of microorganisms. Helv.
Paediat. Acta 30: 537-541, 1976.

46. Ostermann, G.; Weber, K. S. C.; Zernecke, A.; Schroder, A.; Weber,
C.: JAM-1 is a ligand of the beta-2 integrin LFA-1 involved in transendothelial
migration of leukocytes. Nature Immun. 3: 151-158, 2002.

47. Petersen, M. B.; Slaugenhaupt, S. A.; Lewis, J. G.; Warren, A.
C.; Chakravarti, A.; Antonarakis, S. E.: A genetic linkage map of
27 markers on human chromosome 21. Genomics 9: 407-419, 1991.

48. Pierce, M. W.; Remold-O'Donnell, E.; Todd, R. F., III; Arnaout,
M. A.: N-terminal sequence of human leukocyte glycoprotein Mo1: conservation
across species and homology to platelet IIb/IIIa. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 874: 368-371, 1986.

49. Rivera-Matos, I. R.; Rakita, R. M.; Mariscalco, M. M.; Elder,
F. F. B.; Dreyer, S. A.; Cleary, T. G.: Leukocyte adhesion deficiency
mimicking Hirschsprung disease. J. Pediat. 127: 755-757, 1995.

50. Rosmarin, A. G.; Caprio, D.; Levy, R.; Simkevich, C.: CD18 (beta-2
leukocyte integrin) promoter requires PU.1 transcription factor for
myeloid activity. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 801-805, 1995.

51. Ross, G. D.: Clinical and laboratory features of patients with
an inherited deficiency of neutrophil membrane complement receptor
type 3 (CR3) and the related membrane antigens LFA-1 and p150,95. J.
Clin. Immun. 6: 107-113, 1986.

52. Ross, G. D.; Thompson, R. A.; Walport, M. J.; Springer, T. A.;
Watson, J. V.; Ward, R. H. R.; Lida, J.; Newman, S. L.; Harrison,
R. A.; Lachmann, P. J.: Characterization of patients with an increased
susceptibility to bacterial infections and a genetic deficiency of
leukocyte membrane complement receptor type three (CR3) and the related
membrane antigen LFA-1. Blood 66: 882-890, 1985.

53. Shuster, D. E.; Kehrli, M. E., Jr.; Ackermann, M. R.; Gilbert,
R. O.: Identification and prevalence of a genetic defect that causes
leukocyte adhesion deficiency in Holstein cattle. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 89: 9225-9229, 1992.

54. Sligh, J. E., Jr.; Anderson, D. C.; Beaudet, A. L.: A mutation
in the initiation codon of the CD18 gene in a patient with the moderate
phenotype of leukocyte adhesion deficiency. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 45 (suppl.): A219, 1989.

55. Solomon, E.; Palmer, R. W.; Hing, S.; Law, S. K. A.: Regional
localization of CD18, the beta-subunit of the cell surface adhesion
molecule LFA-1, on human chromosome 21 by in situ hybridization. Ann.
Hum. Genet. 52: 123-128, 1988.

56. Springer, T. A.; Miller, L. J.; Anderson, D. C.: p150,95, the
third member of the Mac-1, LFA-1 human leukocyte adhesion glycoprotein
family. J. Immun. 136: 240-245, 1986.

57. Springer, T. A.; Teplow, D. B.; Dreyer, W. J.: Sequence homology
of the LFA-1 and Mac-1 leukocyte adhesion glycoproteins and unexpected
relation to leukocyte interferon. Nature 314: 540-542, 1985.

58. Springer, T. A.; Thompson, W. S.; Miller, L. J.; Schmalstieg,
F. C.; Anderson, D. C.: Inherited deficiency of the Mac-1, LFA-1,
p150,95 glycoprotein family and its molecular basis. J. Exp. Med. 160:
1901-1918, 1984.

59. Suomalainen, H. A.; Gahmberg, C. G.; Patarroyo, M.; Beatty, P.
G.; Schroder, J.: Genetic assignment of GP90, leukocyte adhesion
glycoprotein to human chromosome 21. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 12:
297-302, 1986.

60. Suomalainen, H. A.; Gahmberg, C. G.; Patarroyo, M.; Schroder,
J.: GP90 (Leu-CAM antigen) is coded for by genes on chromosome 21.
(Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 40: 755, 1985.

61. Taylor, G. M.; Williams, A.; D'Souza, S. W.; Fergusson, W. D.;
Donnai, D.; Fennell, J.; Harris, R.: The expression of CD18 is increased
on trisomy 21 (Down syndrome) lymphoblastoid cells. Clin. Exp. Immun. 71:
324-328, 1988.

62. Todd, R. F., III; Freyer, D. R.: The CD11/CD18 leukocyte glycoprotein
deficiency. Hemat. Oncol. Clin. North Am. 2: 13-31, 1988.

63. van der Meer, J. W. M.; van Zwet, T. L.; van Furth, R.: New familial
defect in microbicidal function of polymorphonuclear leucocytes. Lancet 306:
630-632, 1975. Note: Originally Volume II.

64. Vazquez-Torres, A.; Jones-Carson, J.; Baumler, A. J.; Falkow,
S.; Valdivia, R.; Brown, W.; Le, M.; Berggren, R.; Parks, W. T.; Fang,
F. C.: Extraintestinal dissemination of Salmonella by CD18-expressing
phagocytes. Nature 401: 804-808, 1999.

65. Vedder, N. B.; Winn, R. K.; Rice, C. L.; Chi, E. Y.; Arfors, K.-E.;
Harlan, J. M.: A monoclonal antibody to the adherence-promoting leukocyte
glycoprotein, CD18, reduces organ injury and improves survival from
hemorrhagic shock and resuscitation in rabbits. J. Clin. Invest. 81:
939-944, 1988.

66. Wardlaw, A. J.; Hibbs, M. L.; Stacker, S. A.; Springer, T. A.
: Distinct mutations in two patients with leukocyte adhesion deficiency
and their functional correlates. J. Exp. Med. 172: 335-345, 1990.

67. Weening, R. S.; Roos, D.; Weemaes, C. M. R.; Homan-Muller, J.
W. T.; van Schaik, M. L. J.: Defective initiation of the metabolic
stimulation in phagocytizing granulocytes: a new congenital defect. J.
Lab. Clin. Med. 88: 757-768, 1976.

68. Weitzman, J. B.; Wells, C. E.; Wright, A. H.; Clark, P. A.; Law,
S. K. A.: The gene organisation of the human beta-2 integrin subunit
(CD18). FEBS Lett. 294: 97-103, 1991.

69. Wilson, J. M.; Ping, A. J.; Krauss, J. C.; Mayo-Bond, L.; Rogers,
C. E.; Anderson, D. C.; Todd, R. F., III: Correction of CD18-deficient
lymphocytes by retrovirus-mediated gene transfer. Science 248: 1413-1416,
1990.

70. Wilson, R. W.; Ballantyne, C. M.; Smith, C. W.; Montgomery, C.;
Bradley, A.; O'Brien, W. E.; Beaudet, A. L.: Gene targeting yields
a CD18-mutant mouse for study of inflammation. J. Immun. 151: 1571-1578,
1993.

71. Yorifuji, T.; Wilson, R. W.; Beaudet, A. L.: Retroviral mediated
expression of CD18 in normal and deficient human bone marrow progenitor
cells. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 1443-1448, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/12/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/10/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/26/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/26/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/24/2003
Denise L. M. Goh - updated: 4/16/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/11/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/29/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/18/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/14/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/20/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/3/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/28/1994

EDITED terry: 04/03/2009
terry: 3/31/2009
alopez: 6/17/2008
terry: 6/12/2008
wwang: 3/27/2006
terry: 3/10/2006
mgross: 11/8/2005
terry: 10/26/2005
alopez: 10/16/2003
alopez: 9/29/2003
terry: 9/26/2003
mgross: 9/24/2003
carol: 4/16/2003
alopez: 9/11/2002
tkritzer: 9/11/2002
mgross: 4/29/2002
mgross: 5/18/2000
alopez: 4/18/2000
terry: 4/14/2000
terry: 12/1/1999
alopez: 10/20/1999
terry: 10/20/1999
alopez: 9/7/1999
carol: 3/8/1999
terry: 3/3/1999
alopez: 3/2/1999
psherman: 8/1/1998
terry: 6/4/1998
dholmes: 5/12/1998
mark: 6/12/1997
terry: 4/19/1996
mark: 4/10/1996
terry: 4/4/1996
mark: 1/22/1996
joanna: 1/16/1996
mark: 7/20/1995
mark: 4/10/1995
pfoster: 3/1/1995
pfoster: 10/17/1994
pfoster: 10/3/1994

604552	TITLE *604552 HEPATOCYTE GROWTH FACTOR ACTIVATOR; HGFAC
;;HGF ACTIVATOR; HGFA
DESCRIPTION Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF; 142409) is a potent mitogen for
parenchymal liver cells, epithelial cells, and endothelial cells. It is
first synthesized as an inactive single-chain precursor before being
activated to a heterodimeric form by endoproteolytic processing.
Shimomura et al. (1992) purified from bovine serum a 34-kD serine
protease responsible for this activation. Miyazawa et al. (1993)
determined the partial amino acid sequence of the homologous human
serine protease and used it to design degenerate primers to screen a
human liver cDNA library. They identified a 655-amino acid inactive
precursor protein, designated hepatocyte growth factor activator
(HGFAC), with a calculated molecular mass of 70,681 Da. They determined
that the active protein purified from serum is derived from the C
terminus of the precursor by proteolytic cleavage of the bonds between
arg372-val373 and arg407-ile408. The precursor has about 39% similarity
with blood coagulation factor XII (610619), which circulates in plasma
as an inactive zymogen. Shimomura et al. (1993) determined that the
serum form of the HGFAC precursor is a 96- to 98-kD protein that can be
activated to a 2-chain form of 66 and 32 kD by thrombin in the presence
of dextran sulfate by cleavage at the arg407-ile408 bond. The
proteolytically cleaved form activates single-chain HGF. By Northern
blot analysis, Miyazawa et al. (1993) identified HGFAC transcripts of
3.5 and 2.2 kb in liver but not in lung, kidney, leukocytes, or
placenta.

Miyazawa et al. (1998) determined the complete sequence of the HGFAC
gene, which spans about 7.5 kb of DNA and consists of 14 exons separated
by 13 introns. Sequence analysis revealed that factor XII and HGFAC
share multiple structural homologies, suggesting that they arose through
gene duplication.

Miyazawa et al. (1998) mapped the HGFAC gene to chromosome 4p16, using
spot-blot hybridization on sorted chromosomes and fluorescence in situ
hybridization on metaphase chromosome spreads.

REFERENCE 1. Miyazawa, K.; Shimomura, T.; Kitamura, A.; Kondo, J.; Morimoto,
Y.; Kitamura, N.: Molecular cloning and sequence analysis of the
cDNA for a human serine protease responsible for activation of hepatocyte
growth factor: structural similarity of the protease precursor to
blood coagulation factor XII. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 10024-10028, 1993.

2. Miyazawa, K.; Wang, Y.; Minoshima, S.; Shimizu, N.; Kitamura, N.
: Structural organization and chromosomal localization of the human
hepatocyte growth factor activator gene--phylogenetic and functional
relationship with blood coagulation factor XII, urokinase, and tissue-type
plasminogen activator. Europ. J. Biochem. 258: 355-361, 1998.

3. Shimomura, T.; Kondo, J.; Ochiai, M.; Naka, D.; Miyazawa, K.; Morimoto,
Y.; Kitamura, N.: Activation of the zymogen of hepatocyte growth
factor activator by thrombin. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 22927-22932, 1993.

4. Shimomura, T.; Ochiai, M.; Kondo, J.; Morimoto, Y.: A novel protease
obtained from FBS-containing culture supernatant, that processes single
chain form hepatocyte growth factor to two chain form in serum-free
culture. Cytotechnology 8: 219-229, 1992.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/16/2000

EDITED alopez: 12/01/2006
carol: 7/10/2000
carol: 2/16/2000

608465	TITLE *608465 SENATAXIN; SETX
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By a positional cloning strategy, Moreira et al. (2004) identified the
SETX gene within the interval on chromosome 9q34 associated with
autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia-1 (SCAR1; 606002), also
referred to as ataxia-ocular apraxia-2 (AOA2). The predicted 2,677-amino
acid protein contains at its C terminus a classic 7-motif domain found
in the superfamily 1 of helicases. Moreira et al. (2004) named the gene
'senataxin' (SETX) for its extensive homology to fungal Sen1p proteins.
In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Sen1p is involved in splicing and
termination of tRNA, small nuclear RNA, and small nucleolar RNA, and has
RNA helicase activity encoded by its C-terminal domain. Senataxin shares
significant similarity with another helicase, IGHMBP2 (600502), which is
mutant in spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress-1 (SMARD1,
DSMA1; 604320), a disorder of motor neurons, and in mouse neuromuscular
degeneration (Cox et al., 1998). Moreira et al. (2004) suggested that
senataxin may have both RNA and DNA helicase activities and that
senataxin acts in the DNA repair pathway, like several other proteins
defective in autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxias.

Chen et al. (2004) determined that the SETX gene encodes a 302.8-kD
protein. Northern blot analysis identified 2 prominent transcripts of
11.5 and 9.0 kb in all tissues examined, including brain and spinal
cord. SETX contains a DNA/RNA helicase domain with strong homology to
human RENT1 (601430) and IGHMBP2 (600502), 2 genes that encode proteins
known to have roles in RNA processing.

GENE STRUCTURE

Moreira et al. (2004) determined that the SETX gene comprises 24 exons.

GENE FUNCTION

Suraweera et al. (2009) identified novel senataxin-interacting proteins,
the majority of which are involved in transcription and RNA processing,
including RNA polymerase II (see POLR2A, 180660). Binding of RNA
polymerase II to candidate genes was significantly reduced in
senataxin-deficient cells, accompanied by decreased transcription of
these genes, thus suggesting a role for senataxin in the
regulation/modulation of transcription. RNA polymerase II-dependent
transcription termination was defective in cells depleted of senataxin,
in keeping with the observed interaction of senataxin with poly(A)
binding proteins 1 (PABP1; 604679) and 2 (PABP2; 602279). Splicing
efficiency of specific mRNAs and alternate splice site selection of both
endogenous genes and artificial minigenes were altered in
senataxin-depleted cells. Suraweera et al. (2009) suggested that
senataxin, similar to its yeast homolog Sen1p, may play a role in
coordinating transcriptional events, in addition to its role in DNA
repair.

MAPPING

The SETX gene lies within the 9q34 region linked to ataxia-ocular
apraxia-2 (Moreira et al., 2004).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Autosomal Recessive Spinocerebellar Ataxia 1

Moreira et al. (2004) sequenced exons 1 through 18 of the SETX gene and
flanking intronic sequences in families with ataxia linked to the 9q34
region and in additional individuals with either ataxia-ocular apraxia
or ataxia with elevated levels of alpha-fetoprotein (SCAR1; 606002) and
found 15 different disease-associated mutations in 15 families.

In affected members of 10 French-Canadian families with ataxia, distal
amyotrophy, and peripheral neuropathy, Duquette et al. (2005) identified
mutations in the SETX gene. A founder mutation, leu1976 to arg (L1976R;
606465.0009), was identified in all families.

Fogel and Perlman (2006) identified 6 SETX mutations, including 5 novel
mutations (see, e.g., 606465.0012) in 3 unrelated patients with SCAR1.
Three of the mutations were in the DNA/RNA helicase functional domain,
illustrating the importance of this region to the pathogenesis of the
disorder.

Arning et al. (2008) reported a patient with AOA2 who was found to be
compound heterozygous for a point mutation in the SETX gene and a large
out-of-frame tandem duplication encompassing exons 7 through 10 of the
SETX gene. The duplication occurred by unequal homologous recombination
between AluY sequences. The authors suggested that gross deletions or
duplications in the SETX gene may be an underestimated cause of the
disorder.

Airoldi et al. (2010) identified a homozygous in-frame deletion of
leu144 in the SETX gene (L144del; 608465.0014) in 2 sisters with SCAR1.
The deletion affected an N-terminal region predicted to act as a
protein-protein interaction domain. Studies of lymphoblastoid cells
derived from the proband showed that the mutant protein was expressed,
and that the cells were hypersensitive to DNA-damaging agents. The
defect in DNA repair was corrected by silencing of the mutant protein.
In contrast, cells from patients with complete lack of protein
expression resulting from a nonsense mutation did not show enhanced
sensitivity to DNA-damaging agents. Airoldi et al. (2010) postulated
that the L114del mutation caused abnormal interactions with other
proteins involved in the response to oxidative damage, resulting in a
toxic gain of function effect. The findings also suggested that the main
function of the SETX protein is not to confer cellular protection
against damage.

- Juvenile Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 4

Juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS4; 602433) is a rare
autosomal dominant form of juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
characterized by distal muscle weakness and atrophy, normal sensation,
and pyramidal signs. Chen et al. (2004) tested 19 genes within the ALS4
interval on 9q34 and detected 3 missense mutations in the SETX gene. The
observations of ALS4 suggested that mutations in SETX may cause neuronal
degeneration through dysfunction of helicase activity or other steps in
RNA processing.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
SETX, ARG1363TER

In 3 seemingly unrelated families with autosomal recessive
spinocerebellar ataxia-1 (606002), Moreira et al. (2004) found
homozygosity for a 4087C-T transition in the SETX gene, resulting in an
arg1363-to-ter (R1363X) premature termination of the protein product.
The 3 families originated from Portugal, Cabo Verde (once a Portuguese
colony), and Spain, suggesting an Iberian founder event, although
recurrent C-T changes on this CpG dinucleotide could not be formally
excluded.

.0002
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
SETX, GLN868TER

In an Algerian family with SCAR1 (606002), Moreira et al. (2004) found a
homozygous 2602C-T transition in the SETX gene which resulted in a
gln868-to-stop (Q868X) protein truncation.

.0003
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
SETX, PRO2213LEU

In a Japanese family with ataxia-ocular apraxia-2 (606002), Moreira et
al. (2004) found homozygosity for a 6638C-T transition in the SETX gene,
resulting in a pro2213-to-leu (P2213L) amino acid substitution.

.0004
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
SETX, 5-BP DEL, NT2966

In a French family with SCAR1 (606002), Moreira et al. (2004) found a
5-bp deletion in exon 8 of the SETX gene, 2966-2970delGGAAA, causing
frameshift after Q988. This mutation was in compound heterozygous state
with an arg332-to-trp (608465.0005) mutation.

.0005
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
SETX, ARG332TRP

See Moreira et al. (2004) and 608465.0004. The arg332-to-trp (R332W)
substitution arose from a 994C-T transition.

.0006
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS 4, JUVENILE
SETX, LEU389SER

In the large Maryland family with an autosomal dominant form of juvenile
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis described by Chance et al. (1998) and
others (ALS4; 602433), Chen et al. (2004) found heterozygosity for a
leu389-to-ser (L389S) substitution in senataxin that arose from an
1166T-C transition in the SETX gene. At the time of the report of Chen
et al. (2004), 55 members of this family were affected. Mean age at
onset was 17 years. Approximately 10% of affected persons had minimal
sensory impairment, usually limited to a slight elevation of vibratory
threshold in middle-aged or elderly patients. Otherwise, affected
persons had no overt clinical signs of sensory nerve impairment.

.0007
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS 4, JUVENILE
SETX, THR3ILE

In a family classified as autosomal dominant juvenile ALS (ALS4;
602433), Chen et al. (2004) found a heterozygous 8C-T transversion in
exon 3 of the SETX gene (exons 1 and 2 are noncoding) leading to a
thr3-to-ile (T3I) amino acid substitution. The mean age of onset was 8
years.

.0008
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS 4, JUVENILE
SETX, ARG2136HIS

In a Belgian family, Chen et al. (2004) found that autosomal dominant
ALS (ALS4; 602433) was associated with a missense mutation, arg2136 to
his (R2136H), in the SETX gene.

.0009
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
SETX, LEU1976ARG

In affected members of 7 unrelated French-Canadian families with SCAR1
(606002), Duquette et al. (2005) identified a homozygous 5927T-G
transversion in the SETX gene, resulting in a leu1976-to-arg (L1976R)
substitution in the helicase domain of the protein. Affected members
from 3 additional families had the L1986R mutation in compound
heterozygosity with another disease-causing SETX mutation. The carrier
rate for the L1986R mutation was estimated at 3.5% for Quebecois of
Anglo-Norman descent and 2.1% in the French-Canadian population of
Gaspesie. All patients had a similar phenotype characterized by
progressive ataxia, distal amyotrophy, and sensory impairment, but
without oculomotor apraxia as strictly defined.

In a patient with SCAR1, Fogel and Perlman (2006) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the SETX gene: L1976R and L1977F
(608465.0012).

.0010
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
SETX, ASN603ASP AND GLN653LYS

In an African American mother and daughter with a restricted form of
SCAR1 (606002), Bassuk et al. (2007) identified 2 mutations in cis in
the SETX gene: a 1807A-G transition, resulting in an asn603-to-asp
(N603D) substitution, and a 1957C-A transversion, resulting in a
gln653-to-lys (Q653K) substitution. The mutations are in a region
adjacent to a putative N-terminal protein interaction domain. Detailed
analysis confirmed that the 2 mutations were on the same allele and were
part of the same haplotype. Although both mother and daughter had
frequent falls, oculomotor deficits, and tremor, neither had peripheral
neuropathy or 'head thrusting' associated with horizontal gaze, both of
which are classic findings in SCAR1. Bassuk et al. (2007) postulated
that the 2 mutations acted synergistically, leading to a
dominant-negative mutant protein with partial function and an incomplete
phenotype.

.0011
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
SETX, MET274ILE AND ARG1294CYS

In 2 Japanese sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with autosomal
recessive spinocerebellar ataxia-1 (606002), Asaka et al. (2006)
identified homozygosity for 2 mutations in the SETX gene: met274-to-ile
(M274I) and arg1294-to-cys (R1294C). Both had late-teenage onset of
severe cerebellar ataxia with rapid progression, peripheral neuropathy,
increased serum AFP, and distal muscle atrophy. Oculomotor apraxia was
unclear. The mutations affected conserved residues and were not
identified in 400 control chromosomes. Three unaffected sibs were
heterozygous for the 2 mutations, and all had normal serum AFP.

.0012
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
SETX, LEU1977PHE

In a 22-year-old man with SCAR1 (606002), Fogel and Perlman (2006)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the SETX gene:
leu1977-to-phe (L1977F) and L1976R (608465.0009). Both mutations lie in
the conserved DNA/RNA helicase domain of the protein. The patient had
onset of progressive gait and limb ataxia at age 16. Other features
included oculomotor apraxia, dysarthria, axonal peripheral sensory
neuropathy, and tremor. Each unaffected parent was heterozygous for 1 of
the mutations.

.0013
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
SETX, GLU343TER

In 4 sibs, born of consanguineous Algerian parents, with SCAR1 (606002),
Anheim et al. (2008) identified a homozygous 1027G-T transversion in
exon 7 of the SETX gene, resulting in a glu343-to-ter (E343X)
substitution. All had teenage onset of progressive cerebellar ataxia and
areflexia. Each unaffected parent was heterozygous for the mutation.

.0014
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
SETX, 3-BP DEL, 340CTT

In 2 sisters with SCAR1 (606002), who were born of consanguineous
parents, Airoldi et al. (2010) identified a homozygous 3-bp deletion
(340delCTT) in the SETX gene, resulting in an in-frame deletion of
leu144 (L144del) in an N-terminal region predicted to act as a
protein-protein interaction domain. The deletion was outside of the
putative helicase region. Both sisters had onset in their twenties of
progressive cerebellar ataxia resulting in wheelchair-dependence in
their forties. Other features included tremor, dysarthria, ocular motor
deficits, and severe distal muscular atrophy. Studies of lymphoblastoid
cells derived from the proband showed that the mutant protein was
expressed, and that the cells were hypersensitive to DNA-damaging
agents. The defect in DNA repair was corrected by silencing of the
mutant protein. In contrast, cells from patients with complete lack of
protein expression resulting from a nonsense mutation did not show
enhanced sensitivity to DNA-damaging agents. Airoldi et al. (2010)
postulated that the L114del mutation caused abnormal interactions with
other proteins involved in the response to oxidative damage, resulting
in a toxic gain of function effect. The findings also suggested that the
main function of the SETX protein is not to confer cellular protection
against damage.

REFERENCE 1. Airoldi, G.; Guidarelli, A.; Cantoni, O.; Panzeri, C.; Vantaggiato,
C.; Bonato, S.; Grazia D'Angelo, M.; Falcone, S.; De Palma, C.; Tonelli,
A.; Crimella, C.; Bondioni, S.; Bresolin, N.; Clementi, E.; Bassi,
M. T.: Characterization of two novel SETX mutations in AOA2 patients
reveals aspects of the pathophysiological role of senataxin. Neurogenetics 11:
91-100, 2010.

2. Anheim, M.; Fleury, M.-C.; Franques, J.; Moreira, M.-C.; Delaunoy,
J.-P.; Stoppa-Lyonnet, D.; Koenig, M.; Tranchant, C.: Clinical and
molecular findings of ataxia with oculomotor apraxia type 2 in 4 families. Arch.
Neurol. 65: 958-962, 2008.

3. Arning, L.; Schols, L.; Cin, H.; Souquet, M.; Epplen, J. T.; Timmann,
D.: Identification and characterisation of a large senataxin (SETX)
gene duplication in ataxia with ocular apraxia type 2 (AOA2). Neurogenetics 9:
295-299, 2008.

4. Asaka, T.; Yokoji, H.; Ito, J.; Yamaguchi, K.; Matsushima, A.:
Autosomal recessive ataxia with peripheral neuropathy and elevated
AFP: novel mutations in SETX. Neurology 66: 1580-1581, 2006.

5. Bassuk, A. G.; Chen, Y. Z.; Batish, S. D.; Nagan, N.; Opal, P.;
Chance, P. F.; Bennett, C. L.: In cis autosomal dominant mutation
of senataxin associated with tremor/ataxia syndrome. Neurogenetics 8:
45-49, 2007.

6. Chance, P. F.; Rabin, B. A.; Ryan, S. G.; Ding, Y.; Scavina, M.;
Crain, B.; Griffin, J. W.; Cornblath, D. R.: Linkage of the gene
for an autosomal dominant form of juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
to chromosome 9q34. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62: 633-640, 1998.

7. Chen, Y.-Z.; Bennett, C. L.; Huynh, H. M.; Blair, I. P.; Puls,
I.; Irobi, J.; Dierick, I.; Abel, A.; Kennerson, M. L.; Rabin, B.
A.; Nicholson, G. A.; Auer-Grumbach, M.; Wagner, K.; De Jonghe, P.;
Griffin, J. W.; Fischbeck, K. H.; Timmerman, V.; Cornblath, D. R.;
Chance, P. F.: DNA/RNA helicase gene mutations in a form of juvenile
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS4). Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74: 1128-1135,
2004.

8. Cox, G. A.; Mahaffey, C. L.; Frankel, W. N.: Identification of
mouse neuromuscular degeneration gene and mapping of a second site
suppressor allele. Neuron 21: 1327-1337, 1998.

9. Duquette, A.; Roddier, K.; McNabb-Baltar, J.; Gosselin, I.; St-Denis,
A.; Dicaire, M.-J.; Loisel, L.; Labuda, D.; Marchand, L.; Mathieu,
J.; Bouchard, J.-P.; Brais, B.: Mutations in senataxin responsible
for Quebec cluster of ataxia with neuropathy. Ann. Neurol. 57: 408-414,
2005.

10. Fogel, B. L.; Perlman, S.: Novel mutations in the senataxin DNA/RNA
helicase domain in ataxia with oculomotor apraxia 2. Neurology 67:
2083-2084, 2006.

11. Moreira, M.-C.; Klur, S.; Watanabe, M.; Nemeth, A. H.; Le Ber,
I.; Moniz, J.-C.; Tranchant, C.; Aubourg, P.; Tazir, M.; Schols, L.;
Pandolfo, P.; Schulz, J. B.; and 22 others: Senataxin, the ortholog
of a yeast RNA helicase, is mutant in ataxia-ocular apraxia 2. Nature
Genet. 36: 225-227, 2004.

12. Suraweera, A.; Lim, Y.; Woods, R.; Birrell, G. W.; Nasim, T.;
Becherel, O. J.; Lavin, M. F.: Functional role for senataxin, defective
in ataxia oculomotor apraxia type 2, in transcriptional regulation. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 18: 3384-3396, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 7/7/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/1/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/28/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/16/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/6/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/7/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/27/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/11/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/20/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/13/2004

EDITED alopez: 07/20/2010
terry: 7/7/2010
wwang: 3/3/2010
ckniffin: 3/1/2010
wwang: 11/7/2008
ckniffin: 10/28/2008
wwang: 10/17/2008
ckniffin: 10/16/2008
wwang: 11/12/2007
ckniffin: 11/6/2007
wwang: 8/22/2007
ckniffin: 8/7/2007
wwang: 3/5/2007
ckniffin: 2/27/2007
tkritzer: 5/16/2005
ckniffin: 5/11/2005
alopez: 5/24/2004
terry: 5/20/2004
alopez: 3/1/2004
alopez: 2/16/2004
alopez: 2/13/2004

612436	TITLE *612436 SOLUTE CARRIER ORGANIC ANION TRANSPORTER FAMILY, MEMBER 4A1; SLCO4A1
;;ORGANIC ANION TRANSPORTER E; OATPE;;
ORGANIC ANION TRANSPORTER 4A1; OATP4A1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching EST databases for sequences similar to OATP (SLCO1A2;
602883), followed by RT-PCR of adult lung RNA and screening a kidney
cDNA library, Tamai et al. (2000) cloned SLCO4A1, which they designated
OATPE. The deduced 722-amino acid protein has 12 potential transmembrane
regions and several phosphorylation and N-glycosylation sites. RT-PCR
detected OATPE expression in all adult and fetal tissues examined except
adult spleen and peripheral blood leukocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

Tamai et al. (2000) overexpressed OATPE in HEK293 cells and found that
it mediated transport of estrone-3-sulfate and, more weakly,
prostaglandin E2.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Tamai et al. (2000) mapped the SLCO4A1
gene to chromosome 20, between marker D20S173 and 20qter.

REFERENCE 1. Tamai, I.; Nezu, J.; Uchino, H.; Sai, Y.; Oku, A.; Shimane, M.;
Tsuji, A.: Molecular identification and characterization of novel
members of the human organic anion transporter (OATP) family. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 273: 251-260, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/21/2008

EDITED mgross: 11/21/2008

602864	TITLE *602864 WINGLESS-TYPE MMTV INTEGRATION SITE FAMILY, MEMBER 9B; WNT9B
;;WINGLESS-TYPE MMTV INTEGRATION SITE FAMILY, MEMBER 15; WNT15
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the WNT family, such as WNT9B, are structurally related genes
that encode cysteine-rich secreted glycoproteins that act as
extracellular signaling factors. All mammalian WNT proteins contain
approximately 350 to 400 amino acids and have an N-terminal secretory
signal peptide followed by a short domain of low sequence conservation
and a large conserved domain that includes 22 cysteines, the relative
spacing of which is exactly conserved in the majority of WNT proteins.
WNT genes are implicated in a wide variety of biologic processes,
including cell fate determination and patterning in early embryos and in
cell growth and/or differentiation in certain adult mammalian tissues
(Bergstein et al., 1997).

CLONING

By PCR with degenerate primers, Bergstein et al. (1997) isolated 2 novel
members of the WNT family in humans, WNT14 (WNT9A; 602863) and WNT15.
WNT15 shows 53% amino acid identity to chicken Wnt14, 54% identity to
human WNT14, and 65% identity to shark Wnt9. Bergstein et al. (1997)
reported that, based on both an unusual cysteine spacing pattern and
amino acid sequence comparison, WNT14 and WNT15 are more closely related
to Drosophila Wnt4 (603490) and hagfish Wnt9 than to other members of
the WNT family and may share common ancestry.

Qian et al. (2003) cloned mouse Wnt9b. The deduced 359-amino acid
protein shares significant identity with the 331-amino acid human WNT9B
protein, and both proteins contain all 23 cysteines conserved in Wnt
proteins. Northern blot analysis of adult mouse tissues detected highest
expression in kidney and lower expression in liver, brain, male
preputial gland, and female mammary gland. No expression was detected in
other adult tissues examined. In situ hybridization of 16.5-day mouse
embryos detected Wnt9b in organs or tissues that normally undergo
epithelial-mesenchymal induction during development, including vibrissae
follicles, lung, nephros of the kidney, enamel epithelium of the
developing tooth, and epithelium of the submandibular gland. High
expression was also detected in brain, spinal cord, cranial ganglia, and
olfactory epithelium. Lower expression was detected in intestinal
epithelium, epidermis, and muscle, and little or no expression was
detected in heart, liver, and cartilage.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybridization, Bergstein et al. (1997) mapped the human
WNT15 gene to chromosome 17. By interspecific backcross analysis, they
mapped the mouse Wnt15 gene to distal chromosome 11. As this region is
homologous to a segment of human 17q, Bergstein et al. (1997) verified
the presence of WNT15 on 17q by PCR screening of human-hamster hybrid
cell lines containing deleted portions of 17q. They refined the position
to 17q21 within 125 kb of WNT3 (165330) by radiation hybrid and YAC
mapping.

ANIMAL MODEL

The urogenital system forms due to inductive interactions between the
wolffian duct, its derivative the uretic bud, and their adjacent
mesenchymes. These establish epithelial primordia within the mesonephric
(embryonic) and metanephric (adult) kidneys and the mullerian duct, the
anlage of much of the female reproductive tract. Carroll et al. (2005)
found that Wnt9b was expressed in the inductive epithelia of mouse
embryos. Using Wnt9b -/- mice, they showed that Wnt9b was essential for
the development of mesonephric and metanephric tubules and caudal
extension of the mullerian duct. Wnt9b -/- mice died within 24 hours of
birth and displayed incompletely penetrant cleft lip and palate,
vestigial kidneys, and lack of reproductive ducts. Further analysis of
Wnt9b -/- mice showed that Wnt9b was required for the earliest inductive
response in metanephric mesenchyme, and that it acted upstream of Wnt4.
Carroll et al. (2005) concluded that canonical WNT signaling is a major
pathway in the organization of the mammalian urogenital system.

Karner et al. (2009) found that disruption of Wnt9b signaling in mouse
kidney via a hypomorphic Wnt9b allele or knockout of Wnt9b specifically
in collecting duct stalks increased survival to postnatal day 30.
However, these mutant mice showed postnatal development of renal cysts,
with little normal epithelium remaining by postnatal day 30. Histologic
and cytologic examination of wildtype and mutant kidneys revealed that
Wnt9b was required for the oriented cell division and polarized
elongation of renal tubule cells that occur postnatally and regulate
kidney tubule diameter. Furthermore, Jnk2 (MAPK9; 602896)
phosphorylation and the level of GTP-bound Rho (see RHOA; 165390), but
not of Cdc42 (116952) or Rac (602048), were significantly decreased in
mutant kidney, suggesting that Wnt9b signals through a noncanonical
planar cell polarity pathway to regulate kidney tubule morphogenesis.
Karner et al. (2009) concluded that WNT9B signals through the canonical
WNT pathway to induce renal vesicle formation and through the
noncanonical pathway to control renal tubule morphogenesis, and that
defects in planar cell polarity, rather than cell growth, underlie
cystogenesis in Wnt9b mutant mouse kidney.

REFERENCE 1. Bergstein, I.; Eisenberg, L. M.; Bhalerao, J.; Jenkins, N. A.;
Copeland, N. G.; Osborne, M. P.; Bowcock, A. M.; Brown, A. M. C.:
Isolation of two novel WNT genes, WNT14 and WNT15, one of which (WNT15)
is closely linked to WNT3 on human chromosome 17q21. Genomics 46:
450-458, 1997.

2. Carroll, T. J.; Park, J.-S.; Hayashi, S.; Majumdar, A.; McMahon,
A. P.: Wnt9b plays a central role in the regulation of mesenchymal
to epithelial transitions underlying organogenesis of the mammalian
urogenital system. Dev. Cell 9: 283-292, 2005.

3. Karner, C. M.; Chirumamilla, R.; Aoki, S.; Igarashi, P.; Wallingford,
J. B.; Carroll, T. J.: Wnt9b signaling regulates planar cell polarity
and kidney tubule morphogenesis. Nature Genet. 41: 793-799, 2009.

4. Qian, J.; Jiang, Z.; Li, M.; Heaphy, P.; Liu, Y.-H.; Shackleford,
G. M.: Mouse Wnt9b transforming activity, tissue-specific expression,
and evolution. Genomics 81: 34-46, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/10/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/21/2005

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 7/21/1998

EDITED mgross: 08/12/2009
terry: 8/10/2009
terry: 9/26/2008
mgross: 9/21/2005
alopez: 10/17/2002
carol: 7/29/1998

603925	TITLE *603925 SYNAPTOGYRIN 1; SYNGR1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Rat synaptogyrin, or RATSYNGR1, is an integral membrane protein
associated with presynaptic vesicles in neuronal cells. See SYNGR2
(603926). As part of an effort to sequence the long arm of human
chromosome 22, Kedra et al. (1998) identified the human homolog of
RATSYNGR1, synaptogyrin-1 (SYNGR1). By a combination of EST database
searching and library screening, the authors isolated cDNAs
corresponding to 3 alternatively spliced transcripts, which they
designated SYNGR1a-c. The predicted 1a, 1b, and 1c proteins contain 234,
191, and 192 amino acids, respectively. Northern blot analysis revealed
that the 4.5-kb SYNGR1a mRNA is expressed at high levels in brain. The
other transcript forms are expressed at low levels in nonneuronal
tissues. In situ hybridization to embryonic and adult mouse tissues
confirmed that SYNGR1a, the most abundant transcript form, shows
predominantly neuronal expression. Kedra et al. (1998) also identified
cDNAs encoding the related human proteins SYNGR2 and SYNGR3 (603927) and
mouse Syngr1b. Like RATSYNGR1, the mouse and human synaptogyrin family
members contain 4 membrane-spanning domains. The conserved central
portion of SYNGR1a shares 54%, 61%, and 92% identity with that of
SYNGR2, SYNGR3, and RATSYNGR1, respectively.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kedra et al. (1998) determined that the SYNGR1 gene contains 6 exons.

MAPPING

By inclusion within mapped clones, Kedra et al. (1998) mapped the SYNGR1
gene to chromosome 22q13. These authors found that SYNGR2 is located on
17qter and noted that the synaptogyrins and several other gene families
contain paralogous genes located on chromosomes 17 and 22. They stated
that this result supports the hypothesis that 17q and 22q are
evolutionarily closely related, and that these 2 regions in the human
genome are the result of a large chromosome duplication.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using gene targeting, Janz et al. (1999) generated mice lacking Syngr1.
They bred these Syngr1 knockout mice against Syp (313475) knockout mice
generated by McMahon et al. (1996) to create double knockout mice
deficient in both Syp and Syngr1. Both single and double knockout mice
were viable and fertile. Morphologic and biochemical analysis showed
that the architecture and composition of synapses were unaltered in the
brains of Syngr1 single knockout and Syngr1/Syp double knockout mutant
mice. Electrophysiologic recordings in the hippocampal CA1 region
revealed that short- and long-term synaptic plasticity was severely
reduced in the Syngr1/Syp double knockout mice without changes in the
fundamental release apparatus, vesicle cycling, or release probability.
Janz et al. (1999) concluded that Syngr1 and Syp perform essential and
redundant functions in synaptic plasticity without being required for
synaptic transmission as such.

From the results of cotransfection experiments, Janz et al. (1999)
concluded that Syp and Syngr1 are phosphorylated by c-fyn and c-src
tyrosine kinases. The absence of Syp and Syngr1 in knockout mice did not
markedly affect tyrosine phosphorylation of other proteins.

REFERENCE 1. Janz, R.; Sudhof, T. C.; Hammer, R. E.; Unni, V.; Siegelbaum, S.
A.; Bolshakov, V. Y.: Essential roles in synaptic plasticity for
synaptogyrin I and synaptophysin I. Neuron 24: 687-700, 1999.

2. Kedra, D.; Pan, H.-Q.; Seroussi, E.; Fransson, I.; Guilbaud, C.;
Collins, J. E.; Dunham, I.; Blennow, E.; Roe, B. A.; Piehl, F.; Dumanski,
J. P.: Characterization of the human synaptogyrin gene family. Hum.
Genet. 103: 131-141, 1998.

3. McMahon, H. T.; Bolshakov, V. Y.; Janz, R.; Hammer, R. E.; Siegelbaum,
S. A.; Sudhof, T. C.: Synaptophysin, a major synaptic vesicle protein,
is not essential for neurotransmitter release. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93:
4760-4764, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 11/28/2001

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/18/1999

EDITED carol: 11/28/2001
jlewis: 6/22/1999

606115	TITLE *606115 RIBONUCLEASE P/MRP, 30-KD SUBUNIT; RPP30
;;RIBONUCLEASE P, 30-KD SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ribonuclease P (RNase P) removes the 5-prime leader sequences from
precursor tRNA molecules. RNase P consists of an RNA species (H1 RNA),
the POP1 protein (602486), and at least 7 proteins called RPPs. The RPPs
have apparent molecular masses of 14 kD (RPP14; 606112), 20 kD (RPP20;
606113), 25 kD (RPP25), 29 kD (RPP29; 606114), 30 kD (RPP30), 38 kD
(RPP38; 606116), and 40 kD (RPP40; 606117). Patients with scleroderma
(181750) have serum reactive with RNase P, the Th antigen, which is also
referred to as the To antigen, and RPP30 and RPP38 (summary by Jarrous
et al., 1998, 1999).

CLONING

By biochemical purification of RNase P, micropeptide sequence analysis,
and EST database searching, Eder et al. (1997) obtained a cDNA encoding
RPP30. The deduced protein contains 268 amino acids with a predicted
molecular mass of nearly 30 kD.

Jarrous et al. (1998) determined that RPP30 is a target for antisera
from systemic sclerosis patients. Immunoprecipitation analysis showed
that polyclonal antibodies raised against RPP20, RPP30, RPP38, or RPP40
interact with RNase P from HeLa cells.

MAPPING

Gross (2013) mapped the RPP30 gene to chromosome 10q23.31 based on an
alignment of the RPP30 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC006991) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Eder, P. S.; Kekuda, R.; Stolc, V.; Altman, S.: Characterization
of two scleroderma autoimmune antigens that copurify with human ribonuclease
P. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 1101-1106, 1997.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/9/2013.

3. Jarrous, N.; Eder, P. S.; Guerrier-Takada, C.; Hoog, C.; Altman,
S.: Autoantigenic properties of some protein subunits of catalytically
active complexes of human ribonuclease P. RNA 4: 407-417, 1998.

4. Jarrous, N.; Eder, P. S.; Wesolowski, D.; Altman, S.: Rpp14 and
Rpp29, two protein subunits of human ribonuclease P. RNA 5: 153-157,
1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 9/9/2013

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/16/2001

EDITED mgross: 09/09/2013
mgross: 9/9/2013
alopez: 11/8/2005
mgross: 7/16/2001

609410	TITLE *609410 SYNAPTOJANIN 2; SYNJ2
;;KIAA0348
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Synaptojanin-2 is a ubiquitously expressed inositol polyphosphate
5-phosphatase (Malecz et al., 2000).

CLONING

By sequencing clones isolated from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1997) cloned SYNJ2, which they designated
KIAA0348. The deduced protein shares 42.4% amino acid identity with rat
synaptojanin (SYNJ1; 604297) over 932 amino acids. RT-PCR detected low
SYNJ2 expression in kidney, pancreas, thymus, prostate, and ovary.

Seet et al. (1998) cloned several mouse Synj2 isoforms. The longest
deduced protein, designated Synj2-alpha, contains 1,216 amino acids and
has a calculated molecular mass of 140 kD. Synj2 contains an N-terminal
Sac1 (SACM1L; 606869) homology domain, a central inositol
5-prime-phosphatase domain, and a C-terminal proline-rich region. The
nucleotide sequence of Synj2-alpha shares 86% identity with the human
SYNJ2 clone isolated by Nagase et al. (1997). Synj2 variants arise from
the use of 2 possible initiation sites and at least 6 different exons
encoding C-terminal domains. Initiation from the alternative start sites
results in isoforms that vary in the presence of 84 amino acids in the
N-terminal part of the Sac1 homology domain. Database analysis indicated
the presence of a third putative initiation site in human SYNJ2,
resulting in a protein that lacks most of the Sac1 homology domain. Seet
et al. (1998) suggested that variation in the C-terminal proline-rich
region, which includes PxxP motifs, may alter interactions between SYNJ2
and SH3 domain-containing proteins.

Nemoto et al. (2001) cloned 2 splice variants of rat Synj2. They
designated these variants Synj2b1 and Synj2b2 and referred to the
original rat Synj2 cloned by Nemoto et al. (1997) as Synj2a. Synj2a
contains a C-terminal PDZ-binding domain, whereas Synj2b1 and Synj2b2
contain multiple potential SH3 domain-binding regions in their C
termini. Synj2b2 has a 46-amino acid C-terminal sequence absent in
Synj2b1. By RT-PCR of human lung, peripheral leukocytes, placenta, and
brain using primers based on the KIAA0348 sequence isolated by Nagase et
al. (1997), Nemoto et al. (2001) obtained a human SYNJ2 cDNA encoding a
1,443-amino acid protein. Nemoto et al. (2001) suggested that this human
isoform is homologous to rat Synj2b2 and is incomplete at its 5-prime
end, lacking the region that encodes the most N-terminal 50 amino acids.
By immunofluorescence microscopy, Nemoto et al. (2001) localized the
Synj2b isoforms to nerve terminals in rat brain and at spermatid
manchette in rat testis.

GENE FUNCTION

Nemoto and DeCamilli (1999) found that the PDZ domain of rat Omp25
(SYNJ2BP; 609411) interacted with a C-terminal domain of Synj2a.
Overexpression of Omp25 resulted in perinuclear clustering of
mitochondria in transfected cells, and this effect was mimicked by
enforced expression of Synj2a on the mitochondrial outer membrane but
not by a Synj2a mutant lacking the inositol 5-phosphatase domain. Nemoto
and DeCamilli (1999) concluded that OMP25 mediates recruitment of SYNJ2A
to mitochondria.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis and in vitro binding assays, Malecz et al.
(2000) showed that a 56-amino acid domain in the C terminus of human
SYNJ2 interacted with RAC1 (602048). Expression of constitutively active
RAC1 caused the translocation of SYNJ2 from the cytoplasm to the plasma
membrane. Both activated RAC1 and a membrane-targeted version of SYNJ2
inhibited endocytosis of EGF receptor (EGFR; 131550) and transferrin
receptor (TFRC; 190010), a process that depends on
polyphosphoinositides.

Nemoto et al. (2001) found that both amphiphysin (AMPH; 600418) and
endophilin (see SH3GL2; 604465) bound rat Synj2b2, but only amphiphysin
bound Synj2b1. Nemoto et al. (2001) identified an endophilin-binding
site within Synj2b2 that could affinity purify endophilin from rat
brain. The SAC1 domain of Synj2 showed phosphoinositide phosphatase
activity similar to the Sac1 domain of Synj1.

By Northern and Western blot analyses, Spaenij-Dekking et al. (2003)
showed that SYNJ2 expression was increased in hairy cell leukemia (HCL)
samples compared with other B cells. They also found that an epitope of
SYNJ2 was an autoantigen for HCL-specific T cells.

Chuang et al. (2004) found that small interfering RNA-mediated depletion
of RAC1 or SYNJ2 in 2 human glioblastoma cell lines inhibited migration
of the cells through 3-dimensional gel and rat brain slices, and it
inhibited cell migration on glioma-derived extracellular matrix.
Depletion of RAC1 or SYNJ2 inhibited formation of lamellipodia and
invadopodia, specialized membrane structures involved in extracellular
matrix degradation. Chuang et al. (2004) concluded that SYNJ2 and RAC1
contribute to cell invasion and migration by regulating the formation of
invadopodia and lamellipodia.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1997) mapped the SYNJ2 gene
to chromosome 6. By FISH, Seet et al. (1998) mapped the mouse Synj2 gene
to chromosome 17A2-A3.1.

REFERENCE 1. Chuang, Y.; Tran, N. L.; Rusk, N.; Nakada, M.; Berens, M. E.; Symons,
M.: Role of synaptojanin 2 in glioma cell migration and invasion. Cancer
Res. 64: 8271-8275, 2004.

2. Malecz, N.; McCabe, P. C.; Spaargaren, C.; Qiu, R.-G.; Chuang,
Y.; Symons, M.: Synaptojanin 2, a novel Rac1 effector that regulates
clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Curr. Biol. 10: 1383-1386, 2000.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Nakajima, D.; Ohira, M.; Seki, N.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which can code for large
proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4: 141-150, 1997.

4. Nemoto, Y.; Arribas, M.; Haffner, C.; DeCamilli, P.: Synaptojanin
2, a novel synaptojanin isoform with a distinct targeting domain and
expression pattern. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 30817-30821, 1997.

5. Nemoto, Y.; De Camilli, P.: Recruitment of an alternatively spliced
form of synaptojanin 2 to mitochondria by the interaction with the
PDZ domain of a mitochondrial outer membrane protein. EMBO J. 18:
2991-3006, 1999.

6. Nemoto, Y.; Wenk, M. R.; Watanabe, M.; Daniell, L.; Murakami, T.;
Ringstad, N.; Yamada, H.; Takei, K.; De Camilli, P.: Identification
and characterization of a synaptojanin 2 splice isoform predominantly
expressed in nerve terminals. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 41133-41142, 2001.

7. Seet, L.-F.; Cho, S.; Hessel, A.; Dumont, D. J.: Molecular cloning
of multiple isoforms of synaptojanin 2 and assignment of the gene
to mouse chromosome 17A2-3.1. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 247:
116-122, 1998.

8. Spaenij-Dekking, E. H. A.; Van Delft, J.; Van der Meijden, E.;
Hiemstra, H. S.; Falkenburg, J. H. F.; Koning, F.; Drijfhout, J. W.;
Kluin-Nelemans, J. C.: Synaptojanin 2 is recognized by HLA class
II-restricted hairy cell leukemia-specific T cells. Leukemia 17:
2467-2473, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 06/13/2005

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/10/2005

EDITED mgross: 06/13/2005
mgross: 6/10/2005

180381	TITLE *180381 G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR KINASE 1; GRK1
;;GPRK1;;
RHODOPSIN KINASE; RHOK;;
RK
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Light-dependent deactivation of rhodopsin as well as homologous
desensitization of beta-adrenergic receptors (109630, 109760) involves
receptor phosphorylation that is mediated by the highly specific protein
kinases rhodopsin kinase (RHOK, or GRK1) and beta-adrenergic receptor
kinase (BARK, or ADRBK1; 109635), respectively. Lorenz et al. (1991)
cloned a cDNA for RHOK. The deduced amino acid sequence showed a high
degree of homology to the beta-adrenergic receptor kinase. From
similarities to cyclic nucleotide-dependent protein kinase and protein
kinase C, they concluded that RHOK and BARK are members of a newly
delineated gene family of guanine nucleotide-binding protein (G
protein)-coupled receptor kinases that may function in diverse pathways
to regulate the function of such receptors.

Rhodopsin kinase mediates rapid desensitization of rod photoreceptors to
light by catalyzing phosphorylation of the visual pigment rhodopsin.
Khani et al. (1996) isolated and characterized cDNA and genomic clones
derived from the human GRK1 locus using a bovine rhodopsin kinase cDNA
fragment as a probe. The deduced 564-amino acid polypeptide is 92%
identical to bovine rhodopsin kinase.

MAPPING

Khani et al. (1996) assigned the GRK1 gene to chromosome 13 by probing a
panel of somatic cell hybrids and to 13q34 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

GENE STRUCTURE

Khani et al. (1996) determined that the GRK1 gene contains 7 exons.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Individuals with Oguchi disease-1 (258100) have mutations in the gene
encoding SAG (181031), also known as arrestin, a member of the rod
phototransduction pathway. Because rhodopsin kinase works with arrestin
in shutting off rhodopsin after it has been activated by a photon of
light, Yamamoto et al. (1997) suspected that some cases of Oguchi
disease might be caused by defects in the GRK1 gene. They analyzed the
arrestin and rhodopsin kinase genes in 3 unrelated European patients
with Oguchi disease previously reported by Carr and Gouras (1965) and by
Carr and Ripps (1967). No defects in arrestin were detected, but all 3
patients had mutations in the GRK1 gene (e.g., 180381.0001). The
disorder in these patients is designated Oguchi disease-2 (613411).

Hayashi et al. (2007) reported the first Japanese patients with Oguchi
disease who had a mutation in the GRK1 gene (180381.0004) rather than a
mutation in the arrestin gene.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
OGUCHI DISEASE 2
GRK1, EX5DEL

In 2 European patients with Oguchi disease-2 (613411), Yamamoto et al.
(1997) found homozygosity for a deletion encompassing exon 5 of the GRK1
gene, predicted to lead to a nonfunctional protein. The abnormality was
detected by SSCP. The deletion of exon 5 began in intron 4,
approximately 2.5 kb downstream of exon 4 and within a region of 8 to 9
tandemly repeated units of 63 bp. Sequence analysis revealed the same
breakpoint in 2 patients. Exon 5 contains codons 357-398, encoding amino
acid residues within the catalytic domain of rhodopsin kinase. Its
deletion from mRNA would lead to the loss of these residues and a
predicted frameshift with a premature stop 18 codons downstream. Other
family members were heterozygous for the deletion. Although the families
of these 2 individuals knew of no relationship between themselves, both
had Jewish ancestors who came from northern Hungary or Ukraine.

Cideciyan et al. (1998) demonstrated that both homozygotes and
heterozygotes with the exon 5 deletion had recovery phase abnormalities
of rod-isolated photoresponses by electroretinography (ERG);
photoactivation was normal. The investigators concluded that the role of
rhodopsin kinase in rods is to accelerate inactivation of activated
rhodopsin molecules that, in concert with regeneration, leads to the
normal rate of recovery of sensitivity. Cones may rely mainly on
regeneration for the inactivation of photolyzed visual pigment, but
rhodopsin kinase contributes to cone recovery also.

.0002
OGUCHI DISEASE 2
GRK1, VAL380ASP

In a patient with Oguchi disease-2 (613411), Yamamoto et al. (1997)
found compound heterozygosity for 2 allelic mutations at the GRK1 locus:
a missense mutation (val380 to asp) affecting a residue in the catalytic
domain, and a frameshift mutation, ser536(4-bp del), resulting in
truncation of the C terminus (180381.0003). The val380-to-asp mutation
was due to a GTC-to-GAC transversion in exon 5; the 4-bp deletion
involved codons 536-537 which were changed from TCGGAC to TC. The
deletion mutation was predicted to interfere with the normal
isoprenylation of the C terminus, a posttranslational modification
necessary for full function of rhodopsin kinase. The parents and an
unaffected sib carried only one or the other of the mutations.

.0003
OGUCHI DISEASE 2
GRK1, 4-BP DEL

See 180381.0002 and Yamamoto et al. (1997).

.0004
OGUCHI DISEASE 2
GRK1, PRO391HIS

In 2 Japanese sibs with Oguchi disease-2 (613411), whose parents were
first cousins, Hayashi et al. (2007) identified homozygosity for a
1172C-A transversion in exon 5 of the GRK1 gene, resulting in a
pro391-to-his (P391H) substitution. Visual function in the sibs had not
deteriorated with age. The authors noted that this was the first report
of any patient with GRK1-associated Oguchi disease with markedly reduced
cone responses.

REFERENCE 1. Carr, R. E.; Gouras, P.: Oguchi's disease. Arch. Ophthal. 73:
646-656, 1965.

2. Carr, R. E.; Ripps, H.: Rhodopsin kinetics and rod adaptation
in Oguchi's disease. Invest. Ophthal. 6: 426-436, 1967.

3. Cideciyan, A. V.; Zhao, X.; Nielsen, L.; Khani, S. C.; Jacobson,
S. G.; Palczewski, K.: Null mutation in the rhodopsin kinase gene
slows recovery kinetics of rod and cone phototransduction in man. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 328-333, 1998.

4. Hayashi, T.; Gekka, T.; Takeuchi, T.; Goto-Omoto, S.; Kitahara,
K.: A novel homozygous GRK1 mutation (P391H) in 2 siblings with Oguchi
disease with markedly reduced cone responses. Ophthalmology 114:
134-141, 2007.

5. Khani, S. C.; Abitbol, M.; Yamamoto, S.; Maravic-Magovcevic, I.;
Dryja, T. P.: Characterization and chromosomal localization of the
gene for human rhodopsin kinase. Genomics 35: 571-576, 1996.

6. Lorenz, W.; Inglese, J.; Palczewski, K.; Onorato, J. J.; Caron,
M. G.; Lefkowitz, R. J.: The receptor kinase family: primary structure
of rhodopsin kinase reveals similarities to the beta-adrenergic receptor
kinase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 8715-8719, 1991.

7. Yamamoto, S.; Sippel, K. C.; Berson, E. L.; Dryja, T. P.: Defects
in the rhodopsin kinase gene in the Oguchi form of stationary night
blindness. Nature Genet. 15: 175-178, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Jane Kelly - updated: 4/2/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/10/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/3/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/4/1991

EDITED mgross: 05/18/2012
carol: 5/18/2010
joanna: 12/2/2009
carol: 3/31/2009
wwang: 10/4/2007
carol: 4/2/2007
carol: 5/12/2005
carol: 9/29/1998
terry: 8/5/1998
terry: 6/17/1998
mark: 2/16/1998
terry: 2/10/1998
terry: 9/15/1997
mark: 6/14/1997
alopez: 5/16/1997
mark: 5/14/1997
mark: 2/3/1997
terry: 1/30/1997
terry: 9/10/1996
terry: 8/23/1996
carol: 2/4/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 11/4/1991

612962	TITLE *612962 DYNACTIN 5; DCTN5
;;p25
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Dynactin (see 601143) is a multimeric protein essential for
minus-end-directed transport driven by the microtubule-based motor
dynein (see DYNC1H1; 600112). DCTN5 is a subunit of the pointed-end
subcomplex of dynactin that is thought to interact with membranous cargo
(Parisi et al., 2004).

CLONING

Eckley et al. (1999) identified Dctn5, which they called p25, as a
component of the pointed-end dynactin subcomplex in bovine brain. By
database analysis, they identified mouse p25, which encodes a 182-amino
acid protein with a calculated molecular mass of 20.1 kD. Eckley et al.
(1999) also identified p25 orthologs in fly and worm.

By searching databases for proteins containing an isoleucine-patch motif
predicted to adopt a left-handed parallel beta-helix fold, Parisi et al.
(2004) identified mouse p25.

MAPPING

Hartz (2009) mapped the DCTN5 gene to chromosome 16p12.2 based on an
alignment of the DCTN5 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK027387) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Eckley, D. M.; Gill, S. R.; Melkonian, K. A.; Bingham, J. B.; Goodson,
H. V.; Heuser, J. E.; Schroer, T. A.: Analysis of dynactin subcomplexes
reveals a novel actin-related protein associated with the Arp1 minifilament
pointed end. J. Cell Biol. 147: 307-319, 1999.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/13/2009.

3. Parisi, G.; Fornasari, M. S.; Echave, J.: Dynactins p25 and p27
are predicted to adopt the L-beta-H fold. FEBS Lett. 562: 1-4, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/13/2009

EDITED mgross: 08/13/2009

601489	TITLE +601489 INSULIN-LIKE GROWTH FACTOR-BINDING PROTEIN, ACID-LABILE SUBUNIT; IGFALS
;;IGFBP, SOLUBLE;;
ACID-LABILE SUBUNIT; ALS
ACID-LABILE SUBUNIT DEFICIENCY, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

In vivo, insulin-like growth factors I (IGF1; 147440) and II (IGF2;
147470) are always complexed to one of a family of 6 IGF-binding
proteins, IGFBP1 (146730), IGFBP2 (146731), IGFBP3 (146732), IGFBP4
(146733), IGFBP5 (146734), and IGFBP6 (146735). Until birth, binary
IGFBP/IGF complexes of 50 kD predominate in serum, with IGFBP2 being the
most frequently occurring IGFBP moiety. In juvenile and adult mammals,
however, 80% to 85% of serum IGFs are found in a ternary complex of 150
kD composed of 1 molecule each of IGF, IGFBP3, and a protein that is
found only in serum, the acid-labile subunit (ALS). ALS migrates at an
apparent molecular mass of 84-86 kD. ALS retains the IGFBP3/IGF
complexes in the vascular compartment and extends the half-life of IGFs
in the circulation. Synthesis of ALS occurs mainly in liver after birth
and is stimulated by growth hormone (139250) (summary by Boisclair et
al., 1996).

CLONING

Dai and Baxter (1992) and Baxter and Dai (1994) studied the acid-labile
subunit of the rat IGF binding protein complex. Boisclair et al. (1996)
cloned and characterized the mouse Igfals gene.

Leong et al. (1992) isolated full-length clones encoding the acid-labile
subunit of the IGF binding protein complex from human liver cDNA
libraries by using probes based on amino acid sequence data from the
purified protein. These clones encode a mature protein of 578 amino
acids preceded by a 27-amino acid hydrophobic sequence indicative of a
secretion signal. Expression of the cDNA clones in mammalian tissue
culture cells resulted in the secretion into the culture media of ALS
activity that could form the expected complex with IGF1 and IGFBP3. The
amino acid sequence of ALS is largely composed of 18 to 20 leucine-rich
repeats of 24 amino acids. These repeats are found in a number of
diverse proteins that, like ALS, participate in protein-protein
interactions.

GENE STRUCTURE

Boisclair et al. (1996) found that the mouse Igfals gene contains 2
exons. Domene et al. (2004) stated that the human IGFALS gene contains 2
exons.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the IGFALS
gene to chromosome 16 (TMAP WI-7742).

Boisclair et al. (1996) mapped the mouse Igfals gene to chromosome 17 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Domene et al. (2004) described a 17-year-old boy who had delayed onset
of puberty, slow pubertal progress, and only minimal slowing of linear
growth in association with inactivation of the IGFALS gene caused by a
homozygous mutation (601489.0001).

ANIMAL MODEL

To evaluate the importance of IGFALS and ternary complexes, Ueki et al.
(2000) generated mice in which the Igfals gene had been inactivated. The
mutation was inherited in a mendelian manner, without any effects on
survival rates and birth weights. A growth deficit was observed in null
mice after 3 weeks of age and reached 13% by 10 weeks. This modest
phenotype was observed despite reductions of 62% and 88% in the
concentrations of plasma IGF1 and IGFBP-3, respectively. Increased
turnover accounted for these reductions because indices of synthesis in
liver and kidney were not decreased. Surprisingly, absence of Igfals did
not affect glucose and insulin homeostasis. Therefore, Igfals is
required for postnatal accumulation of IGF1 and IGFBP3 but, consistent
with findings supporting a predominant role for locally produced IGF1,
is not critical for growth.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ACID-LABILE SUBUNIT DEFICIENCY
IGFALS, 1-BP DEL, 1338G

Domene et al. (2004) described a 17-year-old boy with delayed onset of
puberty and slow pubertal progress. Childhood medical history was
unremarkable, and psychomotor and neurologic development were normal. He
was first referred at 14 years of age for evaluation of growth pubertal
delay, at which time his height was 145.2 cm (2.05 SD below the mean)
and his weight was 35.9 kg. He was Tanner stage 1 for both sexual
development and pubic hair. Both testes were 3 ml in volume. Bone age
was 12.5 years. Growth hormone responses to provocative tests were
normal, but there was marked reduction of both IGF1 (147440) and IGFBP3
(146732), which remained unchanged after stimulation with growth
hormone. The acid-labile subunit was undetectable in the serum before
and after growth hormone stimulation. Sequencing of exons 1 and 2 of the
IGFALS gene revealed a 1-bp deletion, 1338delG, which involved 1 of 5
consecutive guanines at positions 1334-1338. This frameshift point
mutation resulted in the substitution of a lysine for a glutamic acid at
codon 35 (E35K) and the appearance of a premature stop codon at position
120 of the precursor form of the acid-labile subunit. The patient was
thought to be homozygous for the mutation; parental DNA was not
available because the patient had been adopted. After 6 months of
treatment with recombinant human growth hormone, reduction in the
subscapular skinfold thickness was observed but there was no beneficial
effect on either the velocity of growth or the serum levels of IGF1,
IGFBP3, and the acid-labile subunit.

.0002
ACID-LABILE SUBUNIT DEFICIENCY
IGFALS, CYS540ARG

Domene et al. (2007) described a family with 3 affected sibs with
complete acid-labile subunit deficiency. The index case was an
adolescent male with delayed growth and pubertal development (Tanner
stage I, -2.00 standard deviation (SD) score for height at the age of
15.3 years) and poor response to GH (139250) treatment. Complete
sequencing of the IGFALS gene revealed compound heterozygosity for
mutations in exon 2: a 1618C-T transition resulting in a cys540-to-arg
(C540R) substitution on the maternal allele, and a 9-bp duplication on
the paternal allele (601489.0003). The index patient's affected brother
and sister carried the same mutations; a fourth sib carried the
duplication mutation. The 3 affected sibs had marked reduction of IGF1
(147440) and IGFBP3 (146732) levels, undetectable serum levels of
acid-labile subunit, inability to form ternary complexes, and moderate
insulin resistance. All of them attained a normal adult height that was
nonetheless lower than that of their heterozygous brother. The IGF
system was only modestly affected in the heterozygous carriers. Domene
et al. (2007) concluded that haploinsufficiency of the IGFALS gene has
no discernible clinical effects, with only modest impact on the IGF
system.

.0003
ACID-LABILE SUBUNIT DEFICIENCY
IGFALS, 9-BP DUP

The 3 affected sibs with acid-labile subunit deficiency described by
Domene et al. (2007) as well as their unaffected father and brother
carried a 9-bp duplication, 583_591dup9, that predicted the insertion of
3 extra amino acids in the seventh leucine-rich repeat of IGFALS
(S195_197Rdup).

REFERENCE 1. Baxter, R. C.; Dai, J.: Purification and characterization of the
acid-labile subunit of rat serum insulin-like growth factor binding
protein complex. Endocrinology 134: 848-852, 1994.

2. Boisclair, Y. R.; Seto, D.; Hsieh, S.; Hurst, K. R.; Ooi, G. T.
: Organization and chromosomal localization of the gene encoding the
mouse acid labile subunit of the insulin-like growth factor binding
complex. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 10028-10033, 1996.

3. Dai, J.; Baxter, R. C.: Molecular cloning of the acid-labile subunit
of the rat insulin-like growth factor binding protein complex. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 188: 304-309, 1992.

4. Domene, H. M.; Bengolea, S. V.; Martinez, A. S.; Ropelato, M. G.;
Pennisi, P.; Scaglia, P.; Heinrich, J. J.; Jasper, H. G.: Deficiency
of the circulating insulin-like growth factor system associated with
inactivation of the acid-labile subunit gene. New Eng. J. Med. 350:
570-577, 2004.

5. Domene, H. M.; Scaglia, P. A.; Lteif, A.; Mahmud, F. H.; Kirmani,
S.; Frystyk, J.; Bedecarras, P.; Gutierrez, M.; Jasper, H. G.: Phenotypic
effects of null and haploinsufficiency of acid-labile subunit in a
family with two novel IGFALS gene mutations. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92:
4444-4450, 2007.

6. Leong, S. R.; Baxter, R. C.; Camerato, T.; Dai, J.; Wood, W. I.
: Structure and functional expression of the acid-labile subunit of
the insulin-like growth factor-binding protein complex. Molec. Endocr. 6:
870-876, 1992.

7. Ueki, I.; Ooi, G. T.; Tremblay, M. L.; Hurst, K. R.; Bach, L. A.;
Boisclair, Y. R.: Inactivation of the acid labile subunit gene in
mice results in mild retardation of postnatal growth despite profound
disruptions in the circulating insulin-like growth factor system. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 6868-6873, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 6/24/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/24/2004
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 8/30/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/30/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/7/1996

EDITED carol: 08/30/2013
carol: 1/4/2012
alopez: 6/24/2008
carol: 8/9/2007
joanna: 3/17/2004
tkritzer: 2/27/2004
terry: 2/24/2004
terry: 5/15/2001
carol: 8/30/2000
alopez: 7/21/1998
jenny: 12/12/1996
terry: 12/9/1996
mark: 11/7/1996

606546	TITLE *606546 HYDATIDIFORM MOLE-ASSOCIATED AND IMPRINTED TRANSCRIPT; HYMAI
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Transient neonatal diabetes mellitus (TNDM; 601410) is a rare disease
characterized by intrauterine growth retardation, dehydration, and
failure to thrive due to a lack of normal insulin secretion. This
disease is associated with paternal uniparental disomy or paternal
duplication of chromosome 6, suggesting that the causative gene(s) for
TNDM may be imprinted. By database searching for ESTs that mapped to the
TNDM candidate region on 6q24.1-q24.3, followed by RT-PCR analysis using
monochromosomal hybrid cells with a human chromosome 6 of defined
parental origin, Arima et al. (2000) identified a novel imprinted gene
at 6q24, which they named hydatidiform mole-associated and imprinted
transcript (HYMAI). The gene, which generates an untranslated mRNA,
exhibits differential DNA methylation between the 2 parental alleles at
an adjacent CpG island and is expressed only from the paternal
chromosome. A previously characterized imprinted gene, ZAC/LOT1 (PLAGL1;
603044), is located 70 kb downstream of HYMAI and is also expressed only
from the paternal allele. In the pancreas, both genes were moderately
expressed. The authors proposed that HYMAI and ZAC/LOT1 are candidate
genes for involvement in TNDM.

GENE FUNCTION

Arima et al. (2001) showed that the differentially methylated CpG island
that partially overlaps Zac1 and Hymai at the syntenic mouse locus is a
likely imprinting control region (ICR) for the 120- to 200-kb domain.
The region is unmethylated in sperm but probably methylated in oocytes,
a difference that persists between parental alleles throughout pre- and
postimplantation development. Within this ICR, there is a region that
exhibits a high degree of homology between mouse and human and acts as a
strong transcriptional repressor when methylated. In 5 of 6 TNDM
patients with a normal karyotype studied, loss of methylation at 8 CpG
sites within the region was demonstrated. ZAC is a transcriptional
regulator of the type 1 receptor for pituitary adenylate
cyclase-activating polypeptide (102981), a potent insulin secretagogue
and an important mediator of autocrine control of insulin secretion in
the pancreatic islet. The authors proposed that the ICR adjacent to ZAC
may regulate expression of imprinted genes within the domain, and that
epigenetic or genetic mutations of this region probably result in TNDM
by affecting expression of ZAC in the pancreas and/or the pituitary.

Mackay et al. (2002) demonstrated imprinted expression of the ZAC and
HYMAI genes in cases of TNDM.

Arima et al. (2006) found that a transgene carrying the human
HYMAI/PLAGL1 differentially methylated CpG island was methylated in the
correct parent origin-specific manner in mice, and that this methylation
was sufficient to confer imprinted expression from the transgene. They
concluded that the differentially methylated CpG island functions as the
imprinting center for the HYMAI/PLAGL1 imprinted domain.

MAPPING

Arima et al. (2000) identified the HYMAI gene on 6q24, within the
critical region for TNDM.

REFERENCE 1. Arima, T.; Drewell, R.; Arney, K. L.; Inoue, J.; Makita, Y.; Hata,
A.; Oshimura, M.; Wake, N.; Surani, M. A.: A conserved imprinting
control region at the HYMAI/ZAC domain is implicated in transient
neonatal diabetes mellitus. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 1475-1483, 2001.

2. Arima, T.; Drewell, R. A.; Oshimura, M.; Wake, N.; Surani, M. A.
: A novel imprinted gene, HYMAI, is located within an imprinted domain
on human chromosome 6 containing ZAC. Genomics 67: 248-255, 2000.

3. Arima, T.; Yamasaki, K.; John, R. M.; Kato, K.; Sakumi, K.; Nakabeppu,
Y.; Wake, N.; Kono, T.: The human HYMAI/PLAGL1 differentially methylated
region acts as an imprint control region in mice. Genomics 88: 650-658,
2006.

4. Mackay, D. J. G.; Coupe, A.-M.; Shield, J. P. H.; Storr, J. N.
P.; Temple, I. K.; Robinson, D. O.: Relaxation of imprinted expression
of ZAC and HYMAI in a patient with transient neonatal diabetes mellitus. Hum.
Genet. 110: 139-144, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/8/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/11/2002

CREATED George E. Tiller: 12/10/2001

EDITED mgross: 11/28/2006
terry: 11/8/2006
mgross: 3/11/2002
cwells: 12/18/2001
alopez: 12/18/2001
cwells: 12/18/2001

603486	TITLE *603486 UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE 4; USP4
;;UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE; UNP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ubiquitin-specific proteases (UBPs) are a group of deubiquitinating
enzymes that possess 2 signature motifs, the Cys box and the His box
(summary by Frederick et al., 1998).

CLONING

Gupta et al. (1993) isolated mouse cDNAs encoding Unp, a protein similar
to the human TRE oncogene. Using Western blots, Gupta et al. (1994)
found that Unp has an apparent molecular mass of 180 kD. They reported
that overexpression of Unp led to oncogenic transformation of NIH 3T3
cells injected into athymic mice.

By screening a human frontal cortex library with a murine Unp cDNA, Gray
et al. (1995) isolated cDNAs encoding human UNP. Analysis of the clones
revealed a large open reading with the potential to encode a protein of
854 amino acids, with a molecular mass of 97 kD. The human and mouse
proteins share 90% sequence identity. Northern blot analysis of primary
lung tumor samples indicated that levels of UNP mRNA were elevated in
small cell carcinomas and adenocarcinomas relative to normal adult lung.

Frederick et al. (1998) sequenced additional UNP cDNAs and found several
differences from the sequence reported by Gray et al. (1995), including
2 single nucleotide insertions that increased the length of the
predicted protein, UNPEL (UNP extended, long isoform), to 963 amino
acids. They also recovered cDNAs encoding a shorter isoform designated
UNPES. Both isoforms exhibited deubiquitinating activity. Antibodies
against UNP detected 2 proteins of 105 to 110 kD on Western blots. Using
immunocytochemistry of mammalian cells expressing epitope-tagged UNP and
cell fractionation studies, Frederick et al. (1998) demonstrated that
both isoforms of the human protein are localized primarily in the
cytosol. (In an erratum, Frederick et al. (1998) cited a personal
communication from the Gray laboratory stating that the data in Gupta et
al. (1993) locating Unp in the nuclear fraction of mammalian cell
extracts was apparently in error.) Northern blot analysis revealed UNP
expression as a closely-migrating cluster of mRNAs in all tissues
tested. However, the authors found no evidence for overexpression of UNP
transcripts in cell lines derived from small cell lung carcinomas.

GENE STRUCTURE

Di Fruscio et al. (1998) reported that the mouse Unp gene contains 22
exons distributed over 47 kb. A processed ribosomal S2 pseudogene was
identified in the third intron.

MAPPING

By analysis of an interspecific backcross, Gupta et al. (1993) mapped
the Unp gene to mouse chromosome 9 in a region showing homology of
synteny with human chromosome 3p.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Gray et al. (1995) mapped the
human UNP gene to 3p21.3, a region implicated in neoplasms of the lung.
Using the same technique, Frederick et al. (1998) refined the map
position to 3p21.31.

REFERENCE 1. Di Fruscio, M.; Gilchrist, C. A.; Baker, R. T.; Gray, D. A.: Genomic
structure of Unp, a murine gene encoding a ubiquitin-specific protease. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1398: 9-17, 1998.

2. Frederick, A.; Rolfe, M.; Chiu, M. I.: The human UNP locus at
3p21.31 encodes two tissue-selective, cytoplasmic isoforms with deubiquitinating
activity that have reduced expression in small cell lung carcinoma
cell lines. Oncogene 16: 153-165, 1998. Note: Erratum: Oncogene
16: 2293 only, 1998.

3. Gray, D. A.; Inazawa, J.; Gupta, K.; Wong, A.; Ueda, R.; Takahashi,
T.: Elevated expression of Unph, a proto-oncogene at 3p21.3, in human
lung tumors. Oncogene 10: 2179-2183, 1995.

4. Gupta, K.; Chevrette, M.; Gray, D. A.: The Unp proto-oncogene
encodes a nuclear protein. Oncogene 9: 1729-1731, 1994.

5. Gupta, K.; Copeland, N. G.; Gilbert, D. J.; Jenkins, N. A.; Gray,
D. A.: Unp, a mouse gene related to the tre oncogene. Oncogene 8:
2307-2310, 1993.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/3/1999

EDITED carol: 06/11/2013
carol: 1/3/2013
alopez: 2/3/1999

139150	TITLE *139150 RAS p21 PROTEIN ACTIVATOR 1; RASA1
;;GUANOSINE TRIPHOSPHATASE-ACTIVATING PROTEIN;;
GTPase-ACTIVATING PROTEIN; GAP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The RAS gene family encodes membrane-associated, guanine
nucleotide-binding proteins (p21) that are involved in the control of
cellular proliferation and differentiation. Similar to other
guanine-binding proteins (such as the heterotrimeric G proteins), the
RAS proteins cycle between an active guanosine-triphosphate (GTP) bound
form and an inactive, guanosine-diphosphate (GDP) bound form. The weak
intrinsic GTPase activity of RAS proteins is greatly enhanced by the
action of GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs), such as RASA1, which are
effectors of RAS oncogene action (Trahey et al., 1988).

CLONING

Trahey et al. (1988) purified RASA1 protein, which they called GAP, from
placenta and obtained internal amino acid sequence of the protein from
which they cloned 2 RASA1 transcripts. One transcript predicted a
protein with molecular weight similar to purified GAP and corresponded
to the human equivalent of bovine GAP cDNA. The other transcript
predicted a smaller protein with a different N-terminal sequence,
presumably the result of differential splicing. Both transcripts
produced protein with GAP activity.

MAPPING

By the combination of somatic cell hybrid analysis and in situ
hybridization, Hsieh et al. (1989) assigned the RASA1 gene to chromosome
5q13.3. Lemons et al. (1990) localized the RASA1 gene to chromosome
5q13-q15 by Southern analysis of somatic cell hybrids and by in situ
hybridization.

Hsieh and Francke (1989) mapped the mouse Rasa1 gene to the distal end
of chromosome 13.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Point mutations in RAS genes ('activating' or oncogenic mutants)
decrease the intrinsic GTPase activity of RAS and are insensitive to
stimulation by GAPs. This suggested to Friedman et al. (1993) that at
least some of the transforming activity of mutant RAS is conferred by
the RAS protein being constitutively activated in its GTP-bound state.
Mutations in RAS that render it insensitive to GAP regulation result in
tumor formation. Mutations in GAP that ablate its ability to
downregulate RAS might result in a similar phenotype. To test this
hypothesis, Friedman et al. (1993) analyzed 188 human tumor samples for
mutations within the catalytic domain of the GAP gene and for mutations
within its C-terminal SH2 region. Although no mutations could be
demonstrated in the catalytic domain, 3 different nonsense mutations
were observed in basal cell carcinomas. The region in which the
mutations were clustered is A/T rich, raising the possibility that UV
radiation is a contributing factor. The 3 mutations were found in the
first 5 tumors examined. No abnormality was found in 16 other basal cell
carcinomas. Thus, the apparent prevalence of GAP mutation was about 14%
(3 of 21). The tumors analyzed included a great variety, including
cancers of thyroid, lung, breast, colon, and pancreas. No GAP mutation
was found in any of these. Mitsudomi et al. (1994) could not demonstrate
mutations in the catalytic domain of the GAP gene in human lung cancer
cell lines.

Starting with a family study of capillary malformation, or 'port-wine
stain' (163000), Eerola et al. (2002, 2003) identified a susceptibility
locus on 5q, which was initially referred to as CMC1. Eerola et al.
(2003) screened for mutations in RASA1, which was a positional
candidate, in 17 families. Heterozygous inactivating RASA1 mutations
were detected in 6 families manifesting atypical capillary malformations
associated with either arteriovenous malformation, arteriovenous
fistula, or Parkes Weber syndrome (608355). Eerola et al. (2003) named
this new entity caused by RASA1 mutations 'capillary
malformation-arteriovenous malformation' (CMAVM; 608354). The phenotypic
variability was thought to be explained by the involvement of
p120-RasGAP in signaling for various growth factor receptors that
control proliferation, migration, and survival of several cell types,
including vascular endothelial cells.

Another inherited vascular malformation, cerebral capillary malformation
(CCM; 116860), has also been related to misregulated Ras signaling. The
mutated protein, KRIT1 (604214) was originally identified as a binding
partner of Rap1a (179520), an antagonist of Ras transformation. KRIT1
has also been shown to bind ICAP1 (607153), a protein that links
integrins and the actin cytoskeleton, which implies a process of
integrin-signaling-mediated cellular adhesion in the pathogenesis of
CCM. CMAVM and CCM may be due to similar cellular processes, since
p120-RasGAP can bind Rap1a, which has an important role in
integrin-mediated cellular adhesion. It is noteworthy that in certain
families with CCM and mutations in KRIT1, some members also have
cutaneous lesions characterized as hyperkeratotic capillary-venous
malformations (Labauge et al., 1999; Eerola et al., 2000).

In affected members of 3 Ashkenazi Jewish families with capillary
malformations, Hershkovitz et al. (2008) identified heterozygous
mutations in the RASA1 gene (139150.0006-139150.0008). An arteriovenous
malformation was only identified in 1 of the families, suggesting that
the phenotypic spectrum of RASA1-related CMAVM can include patients with
only capillary malformations.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BASAL CELL CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
RASA1, ARG398LEU

Using denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) and direct sequence
analysis, Friedman et al. (1993) screened a basal cell carcinoma tumor
and identified a missense mutation in the SH2 domain of GAP. A change in
codon 398 from CGA to CTA resulted in substitution of leucine for
arginine.

.0002
BASAL CELL CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
RASA1, LYS400GLY

Using DGGE and direct sequence analysis, Friedman et al. (1993) screened
a basal cell carcinoma tumor and identified a missense mutation in the
SH2 domain of GAP. A change in codon 400 from AAA to GAA resulted in
substitution of glycine for lysine.

.0003
BASAL CELL CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
RASA1, ILE401VAL

Using DGGE and direct sequence analysis, Friedman et al. (1993) screened
a basal cell carcinoma tumor and identified a missense mutation in the
SH2 domain of GAP. A change in codon 401 from ATA to GTA resulted in
substitution of valine for isoleucine.

.0004
CAPILLARY MALFORMATION-ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATION
PARKES WEBER SYNDROME, INCLUDED
RASA1, 2-BP DEL, 475CT

Eerola et al. (2003) described a family PW1 in which the proband had
Parkes Weber syndrome (608355) in the lower limb. Both parents and 1
grandparent on both sides of the family had capillary malformation
('port-wine stain'; 163000). The brother of the proband had an
intracranial arteriovenous malformation as well as multiple cutaneous
capillary malformations (CMAVM; 608354). A 2-bp deletion in the RASA1
cDNA,, 475_476delCT, was found, causing frameshift and a subsequent
premature stop codon at residue 178; the frameshift occurred at amino
acid 159. The father of the proband, with a large facial capillary
malformation, was pictured, as was a grandfather of the proband, who had
a large nuchal capillary malformation. Neither of these individuals had
the mutation in the RASA1 gene.

.0005
CAPILLARY MALFORMATION-ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATION
RASA1, CYS540TYR

In their family CM11, Eerola et al. (2003) found association of
capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation (608354) with a
missense mutation of the RASA1 cDNA: a 1619G-A transition predicted to
result in a cys540-to-tyr (C540Y) amino acid change in the PH domain of
the corresponding RASA1 protein. Eight individuals in 4 sibships in 2
generations of the family carried the mutation. One member of family
CM11 had a facial capillary stain and hypertrophy distal to an
arteriovenous fistula, which was located between the left carotid artery
and the jugular vein and caused cardiac overload, requiring medication
since infancy.

.0006
CAPILLARY MALFORMATION WITHOUT ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATION
RASA1, ARG285TER

In affected members of an Ashkenazi Jewish family with capillary
malformation without arteriovenous malformations (see 608354),
Hershkovitz et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous 853C-T transition in
the RASA1 gene, resulting in an arg285-to-ter (R285X) substitution.

.0007
CAPILLARY MALFORMATION-ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATION
RASA1, IVS3AS, G-A, -9

In 2 twin brothers of Ashkenazi Jewish descent with capillary
malformation-arteriovenous malformation (608354), Hershkovitz et al.
(2008) identified a heterozygous G-to-A transition in intron 3 of the
RASA1 gene (829-9G-A), resulting in a frameshift and premature
termination. The proband had a small arteriovenous shunt in the outer
ear.

.0008
CAPILLARY MALFORMATION WITHOUT ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATION
RASA1, 4-BP DUP, 2252TCAT

In affected members of an Ashkenazi Jewish family with capillary
malformation without arteriovenous malformations (see 608354),
Hershkovitz et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous 4-bp duplication
(2252dupTCAT) in the RASA1 gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature
termination.

REFERENCE 1. Eerola, I.; Boon, L. M.; Mulliken, J. B.; Burrows, P. E.; Dompmartin,
A.; Watanabe, S.; Vanwijck, R.; Vikkula, M.: Capillary malformation-arteriovenous
malformation, a new clinical and genetic disorder caused by RASA1
mutations. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 73: 1240-1249, 2003.

2. Eerola, I.; Boon, L. M.; Watanabe, S.; Grynberg, H.; Mulliken,
J. B.; Vikkula, M.: Locus for susceptibility for familial capillary
malformation ('port-wine stain') maps to 5q. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 10:
375-380, 2002.

3. Eerola, I.; Plate, K. H.; Spiegel, R.; Boon, L. M.; Mulliken, J.
B.; Vikkula, M.: KRIT1 is mutated in hyperkeratotic cutaneous capillary-venous
malformation associated with cerebral capillary malformation. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 1351-1355, 2000.

4. Friedman, E.; Gejman, P. V.; Martin, G. A.; McCormick, F.: Nonsense
mutations in the C-terminal SH2 region of the GTPase activating protein
(GAP) gene in human tumours. Nature Genet. 5: 242-247, 1993.

5. Hershkovitz, D.; Bercovich, D.; Sprecher, E.; Lapidot, M.: RASA1
mutations may cause hereditary capillary malformations without arteriovenous
malformations. Brit. J. Derm. 158: 1035-1040, 2008.

6. Hsieh, C. L.; Francke, U.: The gene for GTPase activating protein
(GAP) is on human chromosome 5q and mouse chromosome 13. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 51: 1016 only, 1989.

7. Hsieh, C. L.; Vogel, U. S.; Dixon, R. A.; Francke, U.: Chromosome
localization and cDNA sequence of murine and human genes for ras p21
GTPase activating protein (GAP). Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 15: 579-590,
1989.

8. Labauge, P.; Enjolras, O.; Bonerandi, J.-J.; Laberge, S.; Dandurand,
M.; Joujoux, J.-M.; Tournier-Lasserve, E.: An association between
autosomal dominant cerebral cavernomas and a distinctive hyperkeratotic
cutaneous vascular malformation in 4 families. Ann. Neurol. 45:
250-254, 1999.

9. Lemons, R. S.; Espinosa, R., III; Rebentisch, M.; McCormick, F.;
Ladner, M.; Le Beau, M. M.: Chromosomal localization of the gene
encoding GTPase-activating protein (RASA) to human chromosome 5, bands
q13-q15. Genomics 6: 383-385, 1990.

10. Mitsudomi, T.; Friedman, E.; Gejman, P. V.; McCormick, F.; Gazdar,
A. F.: Genetic analysis of the catalytic domain of the GAP gene in
human lung cancer cell lines. Hum. Genet. 93: 27-31, 1994.

11. Trahey, M.; Wong, G.; Halenbeck, R.; Rubinfeld, B.; Martin, G.
A.; Ladner, M.; Long, C. M.; Crosier, W. J.; Watt, K.; Koths, K.;
McCormick, F.: Molecular cloning of two types of GAP complementary
DNA from human placenta. Science 242: 1697-1700, 1988.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/4/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/16/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/18/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/13/1989

EDITED carol: 09/05/2013
carol: 8/12/2011
joanna: 6/10/2011
wwang: 10/11/2010
ckniffin: 10/4/2010
wwang: 2/20/2009
ckniffin: 2/16/2009
joanna: 12/19/2005
alopez: 12/19/2003
terry: 12/18/2003
alopez: 12/23/1998
psherman: 6/19/1998
mark: 12/20/1996
jamie: 12/19/1996
carol: 3/18/1994
carol: 12/9/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 5/16/1991
carol: 7/2/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990

602515	TITLE *602515 PHOSPHOLIPASE D1, GLYCOSYLPHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL-SPECIFIC; GPLD1
;;PHOSPHOLIPASE D, PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL-GLYCAN-SPECIFIC; PIGPLD;;
GLYCOSYLPHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL-SPECIFIC PHOSPHOLIPASE D; GPIPLD
DESCRIPTION Many proteins are attached to the plasma membrane via a
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor. Phosphatidylinositol-glycan
(PIG)-specific phospholipases D (PLDs) selectively hydrolyze the
inositol phosphate linkage, allowing release of the protein. Scallon et
al. (1991) cloned a cDNA encoding a PIGPLD from a bovine liver cDNA
library. The deduced amino acid sequence contains 4 regions of internal
homology that are similar to the metal ion binding domains of integrin
alpha subunits (see ITGA2, 192974). Bovine PIGPLD does not exhibit
phosphatidylcholine-specific PLD (602382) activity. By PCR and screening
of a human liver cDNA library, Tsang et al. (1992) isolated a cDNA
(GENBANK L11701) encoding a PIGPLD. The protein product contains 841
amino acids, including a 24-residue signal sequence. Tsang et al. (1992)
isolated a cDNA (GENBANK L11702) encoding a related but distinct PIGPLD
from a human pancreas cDNA library. The pancreas-derived PIGPLD contains
840 amino acids, including a 23-residue signal sequence.

LeBoeuf et al. (1998) isolated a mouse Gpld1 cDNA. They reported that
the predicted mouse and human GPIPLD proteins are 74% identical.

Schofield and Rademacher (2000) determined that the GPLD1 gene contains
25 exons and spans at least 80 kb. Northern blot analysis revealed
expression of 5.8-kb transcript that was restricted to liver. Southern
blot analysis indicated that GPLD1 is a single-copy gene.

By analysis of an interspecific backcross, LeBoeuf et al. (1998) mapped
the mouse Gpld1 gene to chromosome 13. Using FISH, Schofield and
Rademacher (2000) mapped the GPLD1 gene to 6p22.1.

REFERENCE 1. LeBoeuf, R. C.; Caldwell, M.; Guo, Y.; Metz, C.; Davitz, M. A.;
Olson, L. K.; Deeg, M. A.: Mouse glycosylphosphatidylinositol-specific
phospholipase D (Gpld1) characterization. Mammalian Genome 9: 710-714,
1998.

2. Scallon, B. J.; Fung, W.-J. C.; Tsang, T. C.; Li, S.; Kado-Fong,
H.; Huang, K.-S.; Kochan, J. P.: Primary structure and functional
activity of a phosphatidylinositol-glycan-specific phospholipase D. Science 252:
446-448, 1991.

3. Schofield, J. N.; Rademacher, T. W.: Structure and expression
of the human glycosylphosphatidylinositol phospholipase D1 (GPLD1)
gene. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1494: 189-194, 2000.

4. Tsang, T. C.; Fung, W.-J.; Levine, J.; Metz, C. N.; Davitz, M.
A.; Burns, D. K.; Huang, K.-S.; Kochan, J. P.: Isolation and expression
of two human glycosylphosphatidylinositol phospholipase D (GPI-PLD)
cDNAs. (Abstract) FASEB J. (supp.) 6: A1922 only, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 03/15/2001
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 4/26/1999

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 4/14/1998

EDITED mgross: 03/15/2001
alopez: 4/26/1999
mgross: 3/24/1999
dholmes: 5/12/1998
dholmes: 4/14/1998

605964	TITLE *605964 SORTING NEXIN 15; SNX15
DESCRIPTION SNX15 is a member of the sorting nexin family of phox homology domain
(PX)-containing proteins that are homologous to yeast proteins involved
in protein trafficking (Phillips et al., 2001).

CLONING

By EST database searching with a consensus sequence for the PX domain of
several SNX molecules, followed by nested PCR on brain, lung, and liver
cDNA libraries, Phillips et al. (2001) obtained a full-length SNX15
cDNA. SNX15 encodes a deduced 342-amino acid protein as well as a
256-amino acid splice variant, designated SNX15A. SNX15 contains a
124-amino acid PX domain in the N terminus and a novel 73-amino acid
domain in the C terminus, which the authors designated the ESP domain.
SNX15A is identical to SNX15 except that it lacks 86 amino acids within
its C terminus, including a large portion of the ESP domain. Northern
blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of an approximately 2-kb
SNX15 transcript, with highest expression in skeletal muscle, heart,
brain, kidney, spleen, thymus, and small intestine. Screening of 8
tissues by PCR detected SNX15 expression in lung, liver, skeletal
muscle, prostate, pancreas, and adult and fetal brain, and SNX15A
expression in adult brain, liver, and placenta. Although predicted to be
a soluble protein, both endogenous and overexpressed SNX15 were found on
membranes and in the cytosol.

MAPPING

Phillips et al. (2001) determined that SNX15 is identical to a clone
identified as an expressed gene on chromosome 11q13 by Guru et al.
(1997).

GENE FUNCTION

Using cotransfection experiments, Phillips et al. (2001) showed that
SNX15 associates with itself as well as with SNX1 (601272), SNX2
(605929), SNX4 (605931), and platelet-derived growth factor receptor
(PDGFR; see 173490). Its PX domain is required for its membrane
association and for its association with PDGFR. No association of SNX15
with receptors for epidermal growth factor (131550) or insulin (147670)
was found, but overexpression of SNX15 led to a decrease in the
processing of insulin and hepatocyte growth factor receptors (164860) to
their mature subunits. Immunofluorescence studies showed that
overexpression of SNX15 resulted in mislocalization of furin (136950),
the endoprotease responsible for cleavage of insulin and hepatocyte
growth factor receptors.

REFERENCE 1. Guru, S. C.; Agarwal, S. K.; Manickam, P.; Olufemi, S.-E.; Crabtree,
J. S.; Weisemann, J. M.; Kester, M. B.; Kim, Y. S.; Wang, Y.; Emmert-Buck,
M. R.; Liotta, L. A.; Spiegel, A. M.; Boguski, M. S.; Roe, B. A.;
Collins, F. S.; Marx, S. J.; Burns, L.; Chandrasekharappa, S. C.:
A transcript map for the 2.8-Mb region containing the multiple endocrine
neoplasia type 1 locus. Genome Res. 7: 725-735, 1997.

2. Phillips, S. A.; Barr, V. A.; Haft, D. H.; Taylor, S. I.; Haft,
C. R.: Identification and characterization of SNX15, a novel sorting
nexin involved in protein trafficking. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 5074-5084,
2001.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 5/24/2001

EDITED carol: 10/19/2009
carol: 5/24/2001
mcapotos: 5/24/2001
carol: 5/24/2001

600661	TITLE *600661 MADS BOX TRANSCRIPTION ENHANCER FACTOR 2, POLYPEPTIDE B; MEF2B
DESCRIPTION See MEF2A (600660).

CLONING

The process of differentiation from mesodermal precursor cells to
myoblasts has led to the discovery of a variety of tissue-specific
factors that regulate muscle gene expression (e.g., 159970). Pollock and
Treisman (1991) cloned a cDNA for MEF2B which they designated as a
member of the RSRF (related to serum response factor) family. They
described its DNA binding properties and discussed its potential role as
a regulator of muscle-specific genes. Yu et al. (1992) also obtained
MEF2B cDNAs by screening an expression library of primary human skeletal
myocytes from vastus lateralis with a DNA probe containing the MEF2
binding sequence. The predicted MEF2B protein includes the conserved
MADS and MEF2 domains but otherwise is distinct from MEF2A.

MAPPING

Hobson et al. (1995) mapped the MEF2B gene using somatic cell hybrid
panel DNAs including deletion or derivative chromosome cell lines and
regionalized it to 19p12 by identifying cosmids in a chromosome 19
contig, members of which had previously been mapped to this band and
close to the beginning of 19p13.1.

GENE FUNCTION

T cell receptor (TCR)-induced apoptosis of thymocytes is mediated by
calcium-dependent expression of the steroid receptors Nur77 (see 139139)
and Nor1 (see 600542). MEF2 had been implicated as a calcium-dependent
transcription factor for Nur77 expression. Youn et al. (1999)
demonstrated that Cabin1 (604251), a calcineurin (see 114105) inhibitor,
regulated MEF2. MEF2 was normally sequestered by Cabin1 in a
transcriptionally inactive state. TCR engagement led to an increase in
intracellular calcium concentration and the dissociation of MEF2 from
Cabin1, as a result of competitive binding of activated calmodulin
(114180) to Cabin1. The interplay between Cabin1, MEF2, and calmodulin
defines a distinct signaling pathway from the TCR to the Nur77 promoter
during T cell apoptosis.

Youn and Liu (2000) reported that CABIN1 represses MEF2 by 2 distinct
mechanisms. CABIN1 recruits mSIN3 and its associated histone
deacetylases 1 (601241) and 2 (605164); CABIN1 also competes with p300
(602700) for binding to MEF2. Thus, Youn and Liu (2000) concluded that
activation of MEF2 and the consequent transcription of NUR77 are
controlled by the association of MEF2 with the histone deacetylases via
the calcium-dependent repressor CABIN1.

Youn et al. (2000) reported that HDAC4 (605314) and MITR (606543)
contain calmodulin-binding domains that overlap with their MEF2 binding
domains. Binding of calmodulin to HDAC4 leads to its dissociation from
MEF2, relieving MEF2 from the transcriptional repression by HDAC4.
Together, HDAC4, MITR, and CABIN1 constitute a family of
calcium-sensitive transcriptional repressors of MEF2.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Han et al. (2003) reported the crystal structure of the MADS-box/MEF2S
domain of human MEF2B bound to a motif of the transcriptional
corepressor CABIN1 and DNA at 2.2-angstrom resolution. The crystal
structure reveals a stably folded MEF2S domain on the surface of the
MADS box. CABIN1 adopts an amphipathic alpha-helix to bind a hydrophobic
groove on the MEF2S domain, forming a triple-helical interaction. Han et
al. (2003) concluded that their studies of the ternary CABIN1/MEF2/DNA
complex show a general mechanism by which MEF2 recruits the
transcriptional corepressor CABIN1 and class II HDACs to specific DNA
sites.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Morin et al. (2011) found that somatic mutations in MEF2B are present in
11.4% of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) and 13.4% of follicular
lymphoma cases. Mutations in MEF2B were found only in the germinal
center B-cell subtype of DLBCL.

REFERENCE 1. Han, A.; Pan, F.; Stroud, J. C.; Youn, H.-D.; Liu, J. O.; Chen,
L.: Sequence-specific recruitment of transcriptional co-repressor
Cabin1 by myocyte enhancer factor-2. Nature 422: 730-734, 2003.

2. Hobson, G. M.; Krahe, R.; Garcia, E.; Siciliano, M. J.; Funanage,
V. L.: Regional chromosomal assignments for four members of the MADS
domain transcription enhancer factor 2 (MEF2) gene family to human
chromosomes 15q26, 19p12, 5q14, and 1q12-q23. Genomics 29: 704-711,
1995.

3. Morin, R. D.; Mendez-Lago, M.; Mungall, A. J.; Goya, R.; Mungall,
K. L.; Corbett, R. D.; Johnson, N. A.; Severson, T. M.; Chiu, R.;
Field, M.; Jackman, S.; Krzywinski, M.; and 38 others: Frequent
mutation of histone-modifying genes in non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Nature 476:
298-303, 2011.

4. Pollock, R.; Treisman, R.: Human SRF-related proteins: DNA-binding
properties and potential regulatory targets. Genes Dev. 5: 2327-2341,
1991.

5. Youn, H.-D.; Grozinger, C. M.; Liu, J. O.: Calcium regulates transcriptional
repression of myocyte enhancer factor 2 by histone deacetylase 4. J.
Biol. Chem. 275: 22563-22567, 2000.

6. Youn, H.-D.; Liu, J. O.: Cabin1 represses MEF2-dependent Nur77
expression and T cell apoptosis by controlling association of histone
deacetylases and acetylases with MEF2. Immunity 13: 85-94, 2000.

7. Youn, H.-D.; Sun, L.; Prywes, R.; Liu, J. O.: Apoptosis of T cells
mediated by Ca(2+)-induced release of the transcription factor MEF2. Science 286:
790-793, 1999.

8. Yu, Y.-T.; Breitbart, R. E.; Smoot, L. B.; Lee, Y.; Mahdavi, V.;
Nadal-Ginard, B.: Human myocyte-specific enhancer factor 2 comprises
a group of tissue-restricted MADS box transcription factors. Genes
Dev. 6: 1783-1798, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/6/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/6/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/22/1999
Alan F. Scott - updated: 11/8/1995

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 7/17/1995

EDITED alopez: 09/07/2011
terry: 9/6/2011
alopez: 5/12/2003
terry: 5/6/2003
alopez: 10/22/1999
terry: 1/17/1997
mark: 4/7/1996
mark: 7/17/1995

600849	TITLE *600849 NUCLEAR RECEPTOR COREPRESSOR 1; NCOR1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Thyroid hormone receptor (THR1; 190160) and retinoic acid receptor
(RARA, 180240; RARB, 180220; RARG, 180190) exert their regulatory
functions by acting as both activators and repressors of gene
expression. Horlein et al. (1995) identified a mouse cDNA for a nuclear
receptor corepressor (Ncor) of relative molecular mass 270,000 that
mediates ligand-independent inhibition of gene transcription by Thr1 and
Rars. Their finding suggested that the molecular mechanisms of
repression by thyroid hormone and retinoic acid receptors are analogous
to the corepressor-dependent transcriptional inhibitory mechanisms of
yeast and Drosophila. They suggested that the corepressor is a member of
a new gene family, which they termed TRAC (thyroid hormone- and retinoic
acid receptor-associated corepressor).

GENE FUNCTION

Grignani et al. (1998) demonstrated that both PML-RAR-alpha (see 102578)
and PLZF-RAR-alpha (see 176797) fusion proteins recruit the NCOR-histone
deacetylase (see 601241) complex through the RAR-alpha CoR box.
PLZF-RAR-alpha contains a second, retinoic acid-resistant binding site
in the PLZF amino-terminal region. High doses of retinoic acid release
histone deacetylase activity from PML-RAR-alpha, but not from
PLZF-RAR-alpha. Mutation of the NCOR binding site abolishes the ability
of PML-RAR-alpha to block differentiation, whereas inhibition of histone
deacetylase activity switches the transcriptional and biologic effects
of PLZF-RAR-alpha from being an inhibitor to an activator of the
retinoic acid signaling pathway. Therefore, Grignani et al. (1998)
concluded that recruitment of histone deacetylase is crucial to the
transforming potential of APL fusion proteins, and the different effects
of retinoic acid on the stability of the PML-RAR-alpha and
PLZF-RAR-alpha corepressor complexes determines the differential
response of APLs to retinoic acid.

Binding of ligand to nuclear hormone receptors induces a conformation
that attracts coactivator proteins containing a Leu-x-x-Leu-Leu motif,
the so-called NR box. Hu and Lazar (1999) showed that NCOR1 and SMRT
(600848) contain sequences that are similar to the NR box and are
repeated in each of 2 nuclear hormone receptor interaction domains. Hu
and Lazar (1999) called this box (L/I-x-x-I/V-I) the 'corner box,' or
CoRNR box (for 'corepressor/nuclear receptor box'). The CoRNR box is
required for nuclear hormone receptor interaction, and the CoRNR box
peptides specifically block corepressor interaction in vitro and
repression in vivo. Sequences flanking the CoRNR box determine nuclear
hormone receptor specificity. Thus, Hu and Lazar (1999) concluded that
the key feature of hormone action, differential recognition of
unliganded and liganded nuclear hormone receptors by coactivators and
corepressors, is due to very subtle differences between CoRNR and NR
boxes.

Baek et al. (2002) demonstrated that interleukin-1-beta (IL1B; 147720)
causes nuclear export of a specific NCOR corepressor complex, resulting
in derepression of a specific subset of nuclear factor-kappa-B (NFKB;
see 164011)-regulated genes. These genes are exemplified by the
tetraspanin KAI1 (600623), which regulates membrane receptor function.
Nuclear export of the NCOR/TAB2 (605101)/HDAC3 (605166) complex by IL1B
is temporally linked to selective recruitment of a TIP60 (601409)
coactivator complex. KAI1 is also directly activated by a ternary
complex, dependent on the acetyltransferase activity of TIP60, that
consists of the presenilin-dependent C-terminal cleavage product of the
beta amyloid precursor protein (APP; 104760), FE65 (602709), and TIP60,
identifying a specific in vivo gene target of an APP-dependent
transcription complex in the brain.

Zhang et al. (2002) reported that GPS2 (601935), a protein involved in
intracellular signaling, is an integral subunit of the NCOR1 NCOR1-HDAC3
complex. They determined structural motifs that direct the formation of
a highly stable and active deacetylase complex. GPS2 and TBL1 (300196),
another component of the NCOR1-HDAC3 complex, interact cooperatively
with repression domain-1 of NCOR1 to form a heterotrimeric structure and
are indirectly linked to HDAC3 via an extended NCOR1 SANT domain that
also activates latent HDAC3 activity. Zhang et al. (2002) also showed
that the NCOR1-HDAC3 complex inhibits JNK (601158) activation through
the associated GPS2 subunit and thus could potentially provide an
alternative mechanism for hormone-mediated antagonism of AP1 (165160)
function.

Yoon et al. (2003) purified NCOR complexes, which contained 10 to 12
proteins, from HeLa cell nuclear extracts and characterized the
interactions of TBL1 and TBLR1 (608628) with NCOR. TBL1 and TBLR1
interacted with NCOR through 2 independent interactions. Their
N-terminal regions interacted with the RD1 region of NCOR, and their
C-terminal WD40 repeats interacted with the RD4 region of NCOR. In
vitro, TBL1 and TBLR1 also bound histones H2B (see 609904) and H4 (see
602822), and transcriptional repression by TBL1 and TBLR1 correlated
with their interactions with histones. Using small interfering RNAs,
Yoon et al. (2003) demonstrated that HDAC3 was essential for repression
by unliganded thyroid hormone receptor. TBL1 and TBLR1 were also
essential, but they were functionally redundant.

Virtually all neural stem cells maintain an undifferentiated state and
the capacity to self-renew in response to fibroblast growth factor-2
(FGF2; 134920). Hermanson et al. (2002) reported that NCOR, a repressor
or transcription, is a principal regulator in neural stem cells, since
FGF2-treated embryonic cortical progenitors from NCOR gene-disrupted
mice displayed impaired self-renewal and spontaneous differentiation
into astroglia-like cells. Stimulation of wildtype neural stem cells
with ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF; 118945), a
differentiation-inducing cytokine, resulted in a
phosphatidyl-inositol-3-OH kinase/Akt1 kinase-dependent (see 164730)
phosphorylation of NCOR, and caused a temporally correlated
redistribution of NCOR to the cytoplasm. Hermanson et al. (2002)
observed that this is a critical strategy for cytokine-induced astroglia
differentiation and lineage-characteristic gene expression. Recruitment
of protein phosphatase-1 (see 176875) to a specific binding site on NCOR
exerted a reciprocal effect on the cellular localization of NCOR.
Hermanson et al. (2002) proposed that repression by NCOR, modulated by
opposing enzymatic activities, is a critical mechanism in neural stem
cells that underlies the inhibition of glial differentiation.

Using transfected mouse and human cells, Sardi et al. (2006) found that,
upon NRG1 (142445)-induced activation and presenilin (PSEN1;
104311)-dependent cleavage of ERBB4 (600543), the ERBB4 intracellular
domain formed a complex with TAB2 and NCOR. This complex translocated to
the nucleus of undifferentiated rat neural precursors and inhibited
their differentiation into astrocytes by repressing transcription of
glial genes. Consistent with this observation, cortical astrogenesis
occurred precociously in Erbb4-knockout mice, and this phenotype could
be rescued by reexpression of a cleavable isoform of human ERBB4, but
not by reexpression of an uncleavable ERBB4 isoform.

MAPPING

Using a mapped bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) containing 158 kb
of genomic NCOR1, Ordentlich et al. (1999) mapped the human NCOR1 gene
to chromosome 11p11.2.

ANIMAL MODEL

Jepsen et al. (2000) generated mice with targeted disruption of the
Ncor1 gene. Altered patterns of transcription in tissues and cells
derived from Ncor1-deficient mice and the resulting block at specific
points in central nervous system, erythrocyte, and thymocyte development
indicated that NCOR1 is a required component of short-term active
repression by nuclear receptors and MAD (600021) and of a subset of
long-term repression events mediated by REST (600571). Unexpectedly,
NCOR1 and HDAC3 were also required for transcriptional activation of 1
class of retinoic acid response element. Together, these findings
suggested that specific combinations of corepressors and histone
deacetylases mediate the gene-specific actions of DNA-bound repressors
in development of multiple organ systems.

Alenghat et al. (2008) created a knockin mouse model in which a missense
mutation, Y478A, was introduced into the Ncor1 deacetylase activation
domain (DAD). This created a mutant protein that was stable but unable
to associate with or activate Hdac3. The DADm mice were viable, born at
normal mendelian frequencies, and morphologically indistinguishable from
wildtype littermates at birth. Thus, Ncor1 binding to Hdac3 is not
required for normal development, and the embryonic defects of mice
lacking Ncor1 are due to factors other than, or in addition to, Hdac3
recruitment by Ncor1. However, the DADm mice had aberrant regulation of
clock genes and had abnormal circadian behavior. These mice were leaner
and more insulin-sensitive owing to increased energy expenditure.
Unexpectedly, loss of a functional Ncor1-Hdac3 complex in vivo did not
lead to sustained increases in known catabolic genes, but instead
significantly altered the oscillatory patterns of several metabolic
genes, demonstrating that circadian regulation of metabolism is critical
for normal energy balance. Alenghat et al. (2008) concluded that
activation of Hdac3 by Ncor1 is a nodal point in the epigenetic
regulation of circadian and metabolic physiology.

REFERENCE 1. Alenghat, T.; Meyers, K.; Mullican, S. E.; Leitner, K.; Adeniji-Adele,
A.; Avila, J.; Bucan, M.; Ahima, R. S.; Kaestner, K. H.; Lazar, M.
A.: Nuclear receptor corepressor and histone deacetylase 3 govern
circadian metabolic physiology. Nature 456: 997-1000, 2008.

2. Baek, S. H.; Ohgi, K. A.; Rose, D. W.; Koo, E. H.; Glass, C. K.;
Rosenfeld, M. G.: Exchange of N-CoR corepressor and Tip60 coactivator
complexes links gene expression by NF-kappa-B and beta-amyloid precursor
protein. Cell 110: 55-67, 2002.

3. Grignani, F.; De Matteis, S.; Nervi, C.; Tomassoni, L.; Gelmetti,
V.; Cioce, M.; Fanelli, M.; Ruthardt, M.; Ferrara, F. F.; Zamir, I.;
Seiser, C.; Grignani, F.; Lazar, M. A.; Minucci, S.; Pelicci, P. G.
: Fusion proteins of the retinoic acid receptor-alpha recruit histone
deacetylase in promyelocytic leukaemia. Nature 391: 815-818, 1998.

4. Hermanson, O.; Jepsen, K.; Rosenfeld, M. G.: N-CoR controls differentiation
of neural stem cells into astrocytes. Nature 419: 934-939, 2002.

5. Horlein, A. J.; Naar, A. M.; Heinzel, T.; Torchia, J.; Gloss, B.;
Kurokawa, R.; Ryan, A.; Kamel, Y.; Soderstrom, M.; Glass, C. K.; Rosenfeld,
M. G.: Ligand-independent repression by the thyroid hormone receptor
mediated by a nuclear receptor co-repressor. Nature 377: 397-403,
1995.

6. Hu, X.; Lazar, M. A.: The CoRNR motif controls the recruitment
of corepressors by nuclear hormone receptors. Nature 402: 93-96,
1999.

7. Jepsen, K.; Hermanson, O.; Onami, T. M.; Gleiberman, A. S.; Lunyak,
V.; McEvilly, R. J.; Kurokawa, R.; Kumar, V.; Liu, F.; Seto, E.; Hedrick,
S. M.; Mandel, G.; Glass, C. K.; Rose, D. W.; Rosenfeld, M. G.: Combinatorial
roles of the nuclear receptor corepressor in transcription and development. Cell 102:
753-763, 2000.

8. Ordentlich, P.; Downes, M.; Xie, W.; Genin, A.; Spinner, N. B.;
Evans, R. M.: Unique forms of human and mouse nuclear receptor corepressor
SMRT. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 2639-2644, 1999.

9. Sardi, S. P.; Murtie, J.; Koirala, S.; Patten, B. A.; Corfas, G.
: Presenilin-dependent ErbB4 nuclear signaling regulates the timing
of astrogenesis in the developing brain. Cell 127: 185-197, 2006.

10. Yoon, H.-G.; Chan, D. W.; Huang, Z.-Q.; Li, J.; Fondell, J. D.;
Qin, J.; Wong, J.: Purification and functional characterization of
the human N-CoR complex: the roles of HDAC3, TBL1 and TBLR1. EMBO
J. 22: 1336-1346, 2003.

11. Zhang, J.; Kalkum, M.; Chait, B. T.; Roeder, R. G.: The N-CoR-HDAC3
nuclear receptor corepressor complex inhibits the JNK pathway through
the integral subunit GPS2. Molec. Cell 9: 611-623, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/8/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/18/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/1/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/12/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/10/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/29/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/1/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/20/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/10/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/21/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/6/1995

EDITED mgross: 02/08/2013
mgross: 1/29/2013
terry: 11/3/2010
wwang: 5/12/2009
mgross: 5/8/2009
alopez: 2/23/2009
terry: 2/18/2009
mgross: 6/1/2004
alopez: 11/13/2002
terry: 11/12/2002
mgross: 10/10/2002
mgross: 7/29/2002
alopez: 5/1/2001
mgross: 11/20/2000
alopez: 2/10/2000
mgross: 12/20/1999
psherman: 12/17/1999
carol: 4/26/1999
mgross: 4/21/1999
psherman: 2/15/1999
mark: 10/6/1995

608458	TITLE *608458 NEUROCHONDRIN; NCDN
;;NORBIN;;
KIAA0607
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1998) cloned NCDN, which they designated
KIAA0607. The 3-prime UTR of the cDNA contains repetitive sequences. The
deduced 731-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of about
78 kD. Over a 718-amino acid stretch, NCDN shares 98% identity with rat
norbin. RT-PCR detected moderate to high NCDN expression in all tissues
examined, with highest expression in brain and kidney and lowest
expression in pancreas.

By PCR of a fetal brain cDNA library using primers designed from mouse
Ncdn, Mochizuki et al. (1999) obtained cDNAs encoding 2 NCDN splice
variants, which they designated NCDN1 and NCDN2. Full-length NCDN1
encodes a deduced 729-amino acid protein with a calculated molecular
mass of 78.9 kD. NCDN2, which contains a 68-nucleotide deletion relative
to NCDN1, encodes a deduced 712-amino acid protein with a calculated
molecular mass of 77.2 kD. NCDN1 and NCDN2 are leucine rich, and NCDN1
shares 98.2% amino acid identity with mouse Ncdn1. Northern blot
analysis detected a 4.0-kb transcript abundantly expressed in whole
adult brain and in all individual brain regions examined, including
spinal cord. A faint band was observed in ovary, testis, and fetal
brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (2009) reported that the neuron-specific protein Norbin
physically interacts with mouse GluR5 (138245) in vivo, increases the
cell surface localization of the receptor, and positively regulates
GluR5 signaling. Genetic deletion of Norbin attenuated GluR5-dependent
stable changes in synaptic function measured as long-term depression or
long-term potentiation of synaptic transmission in the hippocampus. As
with GluR5 knockout mice or mice treated with GluR5-selective
antagonists, Norbin knockout mice showed a behavioral phenotype
associated with a rodent model of schizophrenia (see 181500), as indexed
by alternations both in sensorimotor gating and psychotomimetic-induced
locomotor activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mochizuki et al. (2003) reported that the mouse Ncdn gene contains at
least 7 exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the NCDN gene
to chromosome 1.

ANIMAL MODEL

Mochizuki et al. (2003) found that mice homozygous for an Ncdn null
mutation died between 3.5 and 6.5 days postcoitum. Heterozygous mutant
mice showed no gross anatomic abnormalities; however, histologic
examination revealed abnormalities in developing cartilage. Expression
of Ncdn in the developing mouse central nervous system varied depending
on the developmental stage. Expression was prominent in the olfactory
bulb and in the lateral choroid plexus.

REFERENCE 1. Mochizuki, R.; Dateki, M.; Yanai, K.; Ishizuka, Y.; Amizuka, N.;
Kawashima, H.; Koga, Y.; Ozawa, H.; Fukamizu, A.: Targeted disruption
of the neurochondrin/norbin gene results in embryonic lethality. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 310: 1219-1226, 2003.

2. Mochizuki, R.; Ishizuka, Y.; Yanai, K.; Murakami, K.; Koga, Y.;
Fukamizu, A.: Molecular cloning and expression of human neurochondrin-1
and -2. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1446: 397-402, 1999. Note: Erratum:
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1490: 367-368, 2000.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.;
Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified
human genes. IX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from
brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 31-39,
1998.

4. Wang, H.; Westin, L.; Nong, Y.; Birnbaum, S.; Bendor, J.; Brismar,
H.; Nestler, E.; Aperia, A.; Flajolet, M.; Greengard, P.: Norbin
is an endogenous regulator of metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 signaling. Science 326:
1554-1557, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/6/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/10/2004

EDITED alopez: 08/08/2012
alopez: 1/19/2010
terry: 1/6/2010
mgross: 2/10/2004

606157	TITLE *606157 PANTOTHENATE KINASE 2; PANK2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Pantothenate kinase (EC 2.7.2.33) is an essential regulatory enzyme in
CoA biosynthesis, catalyzing the cytosolic phosphorylation of
pantothenate (vitamin B5), N-pantothenoylcysteine, and pantetheine. CoA
is the major acyl carrier, playing a central role in intermediary and
fatty acid metabolism. In both yeast and fly, each with only 1
pantothenate kinase gene, the null mutant is inviable (summary by Zhou
et al., 2001).

CLONING

Using linkage analysis of an extended Amish pedigree, Taylor et al.
(1996) defined an interval on 20p13 that contains the gene mutant in
Hallervorden-Spatz disease, now known as neurodegeneration with brain
iron accumulation-1 (NBIA1; 234200). Zhou et al. (2001) narrowed the
critical region for the disorder by genotyping polymorphic
microsatellite markers in affected families. Analysis of candidate genes
in this 1.4-Mb region led to the identification in the index family of a
7-bp deletion in the coding sequence of a gene with homology to murine
pantothenate kinase-1. PANK2 is a member of a family of eukaryotic genes
consisting of a group of 6 exons that encode homologous core proteins,
preceded by a series of alternate initiating exons, some of which encode
unique N-terminal peptides. By 5-prime RACE and EST analysis, Zhou et
al. (2001) found evidence for at least 5 initiating exons for PANK2, but
only 1 of these, exon 1C, has an open reading frame with potential
initiation codons that splices in-frame to exon 2. Zhou et al. (2001)
found a sequence similar to that of human PANK2 in mouse, with homology
in the derived amino acid sequence extending to the leucine codon at
nucleotide 31 but diverging 5-prime of it. There is precedence for the
use of a leucine initiating codon in humans, which is probably read by a
methionine tRNA. The leucine codon is flanked by a reasonable initiation
consensus sequence. Zhou et al. (2001) also noted the presence of a
stem-loop structure 14 nucleotides downstream from this leucine, the
location of which has been shown to enhance translation initiation at
nonconserved AUG and non-AUG initiation codons. The mouse stem-loop
sequence is nearly identical, with only 3 nucleotide changes, 2 in the
postulated loop of the stem loop and 1 that changes a GC to a GU
basepair, which implies structural conservation. Because of this strong
conservation, Zhou et al. (2001) proposed that the CUG may serve as an
alternative initiation codon for translation in addition to one of the
methionine codons downstream. There is also a 22-bp palindrome at the
junction of spliced exons 1C and 2. This sequence may form a hairpin
structure and thus explain why most PANK2 ESTs terminate just 3-prime of
the palindrome. Zhou et al. (2001) speculated that this sequence may
serve a regulatory function. PANK2 is ubiquitously expressed, including
in retina and infant basal ganglia. Zhou et al. (2001) provided evidence
for pantothenic kinase activity in PANK2 by showing that the human gene
PANK2 can rescue the temperature-sensitive E. coli pantothenate kinase
mutant.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hortnagel et al. (2003) determined the exon-intron structure of the
human PANK2 gene and identified 2 alternatively used first exons. The
resulting transcripts encode distinct isoforms of PANK2, one of which
carries an N-terminal extension with a predicted mitochondrial targeting
signal. An in vitro import assay and in vivo immunolocalization
experiments demonstrated a mitochondrial localization of this isoform.
The authors concluded that the symptoms observed in pantothenate
kinase-associated neurodegeneration (234200) may be caused by a
deficiency of the mitochondrial isoform; they further postulated the
existence of a complete intramitochondrial pathway for de novo synthesis
of coenzyme A.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Zhou et al. (2001) identified 3 nonsense mutations in exon 1C of the
PANK2 gene in affected individuals with classic Hallervorden-Spatz
disease (234200), also known as neurodegeneration with brain iron
accumulation-1 (NBIA1) or pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (PKAN), but not in controls.

In the original patient with HARP syndrome (607236) reported by Higgins
et al. (1992), Ching et al. (2002) identified homozygosity for a
mutation in the PANK2 gene (606157.0011). HARP syndrome shares many
clinical and radiographic features with PKAN, but is distinguished by a
specific lipoprotein abnormality. The mutation identified by Ching et
al. (2002) confirmed that HARP syndrome is part of the PKAN disease
spectrum.

Hayflick et al. (2003) performed clinical assessment and mutation screen
of the PANK2 gene on 123 patients from 98 families with a diagnosis of
Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome, classified on the basis of clinical
assessment as having classic disease (characterized by early onset with
rapid progression) or atypical disease (later onset with slow
progression). PANK2 mutations were found in 66 of the 98 families. Of 49
families whose members had classic disease, all had mutations in PANK2.
Of 49 families whose members had atypical disease, mutations were found
in 17 (35%). Whereas almost all mutations in patients with atypical
disease led to amino acid changes, those in patients with classic
disease more often resulted in predicted protein truncation. Patients
with atypical disease who had PANK2 mutations were more likely to have
prominent speech-related and psychiatric symptoms than patients with
classic disease or mutation-negative patients with atypical disease. In
all patients with pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration,
whether classic or atypical, T2-weighted MRI of the brain showed a
specific pattern of hyperintensity within the hypointense medial globus
pallidus. This pattern was not seen in any patients without mutations.
Predicted levels of pantothenate kinase-2 protein correlated with the
severity of the disease.

In the 66 families with mutations in the PANK2 gene studied by Hayflick
et al. (2003), 2 PANK2 mutations, both of them missense mutations,
accounted for one-third of the disease alleles, G411R (606157.0002) and
T418M (606157.0010). G411R constituted 31 disease-related alleles in 27
families. Eighty-one percent of the 27 families with the G411R mutation
were of European descent. In 6 families (4 with classic disease and 2
with atypical disease), the G411R mutation was found on one chromosome
and no mutation was identified on the other. Families with only 1
identified mutation were not distinguishable from those with 2. Some of
these mutations were undetectable with the screening method used, e.g.,
promoter mutations. Six of the 9 families with a single mutant allele
had only the allele with the G411R mutation. This observation is
striking because mutations in both alleles were detected in nearly all
families, and it suggests that G411R may be semidominant, with 1 allele
sufficient to cause disease given certain genetic backgrounds. Against
this hypothesis was the fact that no disease phenotype was observed in
G411R-heterozygous carrier parents of affected persons.

In 16 patients with PKAN, Pellecchia et al. (2005) identified 12
mutations in the PANK2 gene, including 5 novel mutations. They found no
genotype/phenotype correlations.

Hartig et al. (2006) identified homozygous or compound heterozygous
PANK2 mutations in 48 of 72 patients with PKAN. Deletions accounted for
4% of mutated alleles. There was a correlation between predicted
loss-of-function alleles and earlier age at disease onset.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kuo et al. (2005) generated a mouse knockout of the murine Pank2 gene.
Homozygous null mice gradually developed retinal degeneration with
progressive photoreceptor decline, significantly lower scotopic a- and
b-wave amplitudes, decreased cell number and disruption of the outer
segment, and reduced pupillary constriction response. Homozygous male
mutants were infertile due to azoospermia, a condition that was not
appreciated in affected humans with pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200). In contrast to the human, homozygous null
mice exhibited no basal ganglia changes or dystonia. By
immunohistochemistry, Pank2 was localized to mitochondria in both retina
and spermatozoa.

Drosophila has only 1 PANK gene, fumble (fbl), which encodes several
isoforms of pantothenate kinase, including a long isoform fblL that
localizes to mitochondria and shorter isoforms fblS1 and fblS2 that
localize to the cytosol. Wu et al. (2009) introduced various isoforms of
Drosophila fbl and human PANK2 into flies to study their in vivo
functions. Only mitochondria-targeted FblL or human PANK2 was able to
rescue a hypomorphic fbl(1) mutation, with the rescuing ability
dependent on the expression level of the transgene. Transgenic lines
with low expression of normal fbl or PANK2 displayed similar phenotypes
as PANK2-mutant transgenic flies. These PANK2 mutants all showed reduced
enzyme activity, and phenotype severity correlated with in vitro enzyme
activity. Cytosolic PANK3 (606161) and PANK4 (606162) could partially
rescue all fbl defects except male sterility. The authors concluded that
fbl is the ortholog of human PANK2, and PANK2 is functionally more
potent than PANK3 and PANK4 in vivo. Wu et al. (2009) suggested that
mitochondria-located pantothenate kinase is required to achieve the
maximal enzymatic activity to fulfill the most challenging biologic
tasks such as maintaining male fertility and optimal neuronal function,
and PKAN features are mainly due to the reduction of the total cellular
pantothenate kinase activity in the most susceptible regions.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, 7-BP DEL, NT627

In an individual with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified a homozygous
7-bp deletion in exon 2 of the PANK2 gene, resulting in a frameshift.

.0002
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, ATYPICAL, INCLUDED
PANK2, GLY411ARG

In 10 individuals with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified a homozygous
1261G-A transition in exon 6 of the PANK2 gene, resulting in a
glycine-to-arginine substitution at codon 411 (G411R). The mutation was
also seen in 7 individuals with atypical PKAN.

.0003
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, TYR80TER

In an individual with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified a C-to-G
transversion at nucleotide 270 in exon 1C of the PANK2 gene, resulting
in a tyrosine-to-termination substitution at codon 80 (Y80X). This
mutation was found in compound heterozygosity with arg154 to tyr
(606157.0004). In another affected individual, the mutation was found in
homozygosity.

.0004
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, ARG154TRP

In an individual with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) found a C-to-T transition
at nucleotide 490 of the PANK2 gene, resulting in an arg-to-trp
substitution at codon 154 (R154W). This patient was compound
heterozygous for the Y80X mutation (606157.0003).

.0005
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, ARG176CYS

In an individual with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified a C-to-T
transition at nucleotide 556 of the PANK2 gene, resulting in an
arg-to-cys substitution at codon 176 (R176C). This individual was a
compound heterozygote for the G411R mutation (606157.0002).

.0006
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, SER361ASN

In an individual with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200) who was compound heterozygous for an R145W
mutation (606157.0004) in the PANK2 gene, Zhou et al. (2001) identified
a G-to-A transition on the other allele, resulting in a ser361-to-asn
(S361N) amino acid substitution.

.0007
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, ATYPICAL
PANK2, SER240PRO

In an individual with atypical pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified a homozygous
mutation, a T-to-C transition at nucleotide 751 of the PANK2 gene,
resulting in a serine-to-proline substitution at codon 240 (S240P).

.0008
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, ATYPICAL
PANK2, THR124ALA

In an individual with atypical pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified an A-to-G
transition at nucleotide 400 of the PANK2 gene, resulting in a
threonine-to-alanine substitution at codon 124 (T124A).

.0009
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, ATYPICAL
PANK2, ARG168CYS

In an individual with atypical pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified a C-to-T
transition at nucleotide 532of the PANK2 gene, resulting in an
arg-to-cys substitution at codon 168 (R168C). This patient was compound
heterozygous for the G411R mutation (606157.0002).

.0010
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, ATYPICAL, INCLUDED
PANK2, THR418MET

In individuals with both typical and atypical pantothenate
kinase-associated neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001)
identified a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1283 of the PANK2 gene,
resulting in a threonine-to-methionine substitution at codon 418
(T418M). This mutation was found in homozygosity in 2 patients with
classical PKAN, and in compound heterozygosity with the G411R mutation
(606157.0002) in an individual with atypical PKAN.

Hayflick et al. (2003) found the T418M mutation on 10 alleles in 6 of 66
families with PANK2 mutations causing Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome.

.0011
HARP SYNDROME
PANK2, ARG371TER

In the patient originally reported by Higgins et al. (1992) with HARP
syndrome (607236), Ching et al. (2002) demonstrated homozygosity for a
C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1111 in exon 5 of the PANK2 gene. The
mutation changed an arginine codon to a stop codon at amino acid 371 and
shortened PANK2 by 89 amino acids. Ching et al. (2002) suspected that
the patient was the offspring of consanguineous parents because they
came from a village of 500 inhabitants. The patient demonstrated severe
spasticity and dystonia from early childhood. At age 10, she was shown
to have pigmentary retinopathy on funduscopic examination and the 'eye
of the tiger' sign on brain MRI. Peripheral blood smear and electron
microscopy demonstrated marked acanthocytosis that was not due to an
intrinsic erythrocyte protein defect. On high-resolution lipoprotein
electrophoresis, she demonstrated absence of the pre-beta fraction and
normal blood levels of cholesterol, triglycerides, high and low density
lipoprotein cholesterol, and apolipoproteins A, B, and E.

.0012
HARP SYNDROME
PANK2, MET327THR

In a patient with HARP syndrome (607236) initially reported by Orrell et
al. (1995), Houlden et al. (2003) identified compound heterozygosity for
mutations in the PANK2 gene: a 980T-C change in exon 4, resulting in a
met327-to-thr (M327T) substitution, and a splice site mutation
(606157.0013). Her unaffected father and 2 of his unaffected brothers
were heterozygous for the M327T mutation.

.0013
HARP SYNDROME
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, INCLUDED
PANK2, IVS4, G-T, -1

In a patient with HARP syndrome (607236) initially reported by Orrell et
al. (1995), Houlden et al. (2003) identified compound heterozygosity for
mutations in the PANK2 gene: a G-to-T transversion at the splice site of
exon 5 (IVS4-1G-T), and M327T (606157.0012). The patient's mother and
sister, both of whom had acanthocytosis and hypoprebetalipoproteinemia
without neurologic abnormalities, were heterozygous for the splice site
mutation. Houlden et al. (2003) noted that the IVS4 mutation had been
reported in 2 patients with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200) (Hayflick et al., 2003), thus confirming that
the 2 disorders are allelic.

.0014
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, 3-BP DEL, 1142GAG

In affected members from 4 Dutch families with pantothenate
kinase-associated neurodegeneration (234200), Rump et al. (2005)
identified a 3-bp deletion (1142delGAG) in the PANK2 gene. The in-frame
deletion is predicted to result in substitution of arg371 and glu372
with a glutamine in the catalytic domain of the protein. Five patients
from 3 families were homozygous for the mutation. The patient from the
fourth family was compound heterozygous for the deletion and a second
mutation (S68X; 606157.0015). Haplotype analysis suggested a founder
effect that arose in Friesland, a northern province of the Netherlands,
at the beginning of the ninth century, approximately 38 generations ago.

.0015
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, SER68TER

In a Dutch patient with pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration
(234200), Rump et al. (2005) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
mutations in the PANK2 gene: a 3-bp deletion (606157.0014) and a 233C-A
transversion, resulting in a ser68-to-ter (S68X) substitution. The
patient had a severe form of the disorder and died at age 12 years.

REFERENCE 1. Ching, K. H. L.; Westaway, S. K.; Gitschier, J.; Higgins, J. J.;
Hayflick, S. J.: HARP syndrome is allelic with pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration. Neurology 58: 1673-1674, 2002.

2. Hartig, M. B.; Hortnagel, K.; Garavaglia, B.; Zorzi, G.; Kmiec,
T.; Klopstock, T.; Rostasy, K.; Svetel, M.; Kostic, V. S.; Schuelke,
M.; Botz, E.; Weindl, A.; Novakovic, I.; Nardocci, N.; Prokisch, H.;
Meitinger, T.: Genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of PANK2 mutations
in patients with neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation. Ann.
Neurol. 59: 248-256, 2006.

3. Hayflick, S. J.; Westaway, S. K.; Levinson, B.; Zhou, B.; Johnson,
M. A.; Ching, K. H. L.; Gitschier, J.: Genetic, clinical, and radiographic
delineation of Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome. New Eng. J. Med. 348:
33-40, 2003.

4. Higgins, J. J.; Patterson, M. C.; Papadopoulos, N. M.; Brady, R.
O.; Pentchev, P. G.; Barton, N. W.: Hypoprebetalipoproteinemia, acanthocytosis,
retinitis pigmentosa, and pallidal degeneration (HARP syndrome). Neurology 42:
194-198, 1992.

5. Hortnagel, K.; Prokisch, H.; Meitinger, T.: An isoform of hPANK2,
deficient in pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration, localizes
to mitochondria. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 321-327, 2003.

6. Houlden, H.; Lincoln, S.; Farrer, M.; Cleland, P. G.; Hardy, J.;
Orrell, R. W.: Compound heterozygous PANK2 mutations confirm HARP
and Hallervorden-Spatz syndromes are allelic. Neurology 61: 1423-1426,
2003.

7. Kuo, Y.-M.; Duncan, J. L.; Westaway, S. K.; Yang, H.; Nune, G.;
Xu, E. Y.; Hayflick, S. J.; Gitschier, J.: Deficiency of pantothenate
kinase 2 (Pank2) in mice leads to retinal degeneration and azoospermia. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 49-57, 2005.

8. Orrell, R. W.; Amrolia, P. J.; Heald, A.; Cleland, P. G.; Owen,
J. S.; Morgan-Hughes, J. A.; Harding, A. E.; Marsden, C. D.: Acanthocytosis,
retinitis pigmentosa, and pallidal degeneration: a report of three
patients, including the second reported case with hypoprebetalipoproteinemia
(HARP syndrome). Neurology 45: 487-492, 1995.

9. Pellecchia, M. T.; Valente, E. M.; Cif, L.; Salvi, S.; Albanese,
A.; Scarano, V.; Bonuccelli, U.; Bentivoglio, A. R.; D'Amico, A.;
Marelli, C.; Di Giorgio, A.; Coubes, P.; Barone, P.; Dallapiccola,
B.: The diverse phenotype and genotype of pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration. Neurology 64: 1810-1812, 2005.

10. Rump, P.; Lemmink, H. H.; Verschuuren-Bemelmans, C. C.; Grootscholten,
P. M.; Fock, J. M.; Hayflick, S. J.; Westaway, S. K.; Vos, Y. J.;
van Essen, A. J.: A novel 3-bp deletion in the PANK2 gene of Dutch
patients with pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration: evidence
for a founder effect. Neurogenetics 6: 201-207, 2005.

11. Taylor, T. D.; Litt, M.; Kramer, P.; Pandolfo, M.; Angelini, L.;
Nardocci, N.; Davis, S.; Pineda, M.; Hattori, H.; Flett, P. J.; Cilio,
M. R.; Bertini, E.; Hayflick, S. J.: Homozygosity mapping of Hallervorden-Spatz
syndrome to chromosome 20p12.3-p13. Nature Genet. 14: 479-481, 1996.
Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 16: 109 only, 1997.

12. Wu, Z.; Li, C.; Lv, S.; Zhou, B.: Pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration: insights from a Drosophila model. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 18: 3659-3672, 2009.

13. Zhou, B.; Westaway, S. K.; Levinson, B.; Johnson, M. A.; Gitschier,
J.; Hayflick, S. J.: A novel pantothenate kinase gene (PANK2) is
defective in Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome. Nature Genet. 28: 345-349,
2001.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 7/8/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/31/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/11/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/2/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/16/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/3/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/3/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/24/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/3/2002

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 7/30/2001

EDITED carol: 04/16/2013
terry: 5/25/2012
wwang: 7/22/2010
terry: 7/8/2010
carol: 3/8/2010
carol: 3/1/2010
carol: 2/25/2010
alopez: 11/2/2007
terry: 10/31/2007
wwang: 4/19/2006
ckniffin: 4/11/2006
wwang: 3/14/2006
ckniffin: 3/2/2006
wwang: 8/23/2005
ckniffin: 8/16/2005
alopez: 1/3/2005
tkritzer: 2/6/2004
ckniffin: 2/3/2004
cwells: 11/18/2003
terry: 1/24/2003
alopez: 11/1/2002
carol: 9/18/2002
tkritzer: 9/17/2002
terry: 9/3/2002
alopez: 7/30/2001

604150	TITLE *604150 POLYMERASE II, RNA, SUBUNIT J; POLR2J
;;RPB11, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;;
RNA POLYMERASE II, 13.3-KD SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION The S. cerevisiae RPB11 protein is 1 component of the multisubunit
eukaryotic RNA polymerase II complex. For general information on the
structure and function of RNA polymerase II, see 180660.

CLONING

Using differential display PCR to identify mRNAs downregulated in colon
carcinoma cell lines treated with the chemotherapeutic agent
doxorubicin, Fanciulli et al. (1996) isolated cDNAs encoding a human
homolog of RPB11. The predicted 117-amino acid human protein is 52%
identical to yeast RPB11. Human RPB11 contains a conserved 18-amino acid
region that is present in other RNA polymerase subunits and which may be
involved in interactions among the subunits during assembly of the
complex. Northern blot analysis revealed that the 0.6-kb RPB11
transcript is expressed ubiquitously, with the highest levels in heart
and skeletal muscle.

Fanciulli et al. (1996) stated that RPB11 is the same gene identified by
Pati (1994) as RPB14. However, Fanciulli et al. (1996) noted that the
C-terminal regions of RPB11 and RPB14 are different, perhaps due to
alternative splicing.

By Northern blot analysis, Grandemange et al. (2001) detected a 0.85-kb
RPB11A transcript expressed at highest levels in heart and skeletal
muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Fanciulli et al. (1996) determined that doxorubicin treatment of cell
lines reduced expression of RPB11 at both the mRNA and protein levels.
They suggested that this drug may specifically inhibit transcriptional
activity in vivo.

Using protein pull-down assays, Grandemange et al. (2001) determined
that recombinant RPB11A interacted with RPB3 (POLR2C; 180663) but not
with any of the 11 other human RNA polymerase II subunits examined.

GENE STRUCTURE

Grandemange et al. (2001) determined that the POLR2J gene contains 4
exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Grandemange et al. (2001) identified 3
possible loci on chromosome 7 for the POLR2J gene: 7p12, 7q11.23, and
7q22. They mapped the mouse Polr2j gene to a region of chromosome 5G
that shares homology of synteny to human 7q11.23.

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the POLR2J
gene to chromosome 7q22-q31.1 (TMAP sts-L37127).

REFERENCE 1. Fanciulli, M.; Bruno, T.; Cerboni, C.; Bonetto, F.; Iacobini, C.;
Frati, L.; Piccoli, M.; Floridi, A.; Santoni, A.; Punturieri, A.:
Cloning of a novel human RNA polymerase II subunit downregulated by
doxorubicin: new potential mechanisms of drug related toxicity. FEBS
Lett. 384: 48-52, 1996.

2. Grandemange, S.; Schaller, S.; Yamano, S.; Du Manoir, S.; Shpakovski,
G. V.; Mattei, M.-G.; Kedinger, C.; Vigneron, M.: A human RNA polymerase
II subunit is encoded by a recently generated multigene family. BMC
Molec. Biol. 2: 14, 2001. Note: Electronic Article.

3. Pati, U. K.: Human RNA polymerase II subunit hRPB14 is homologous
to yeast RNA polymerase I, II, and III subunits (AC19 and RPB11) and
is similar to a portion of the bacterial RNA polymerase alpha subunit. Gene 145:
289-292, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/16/2006

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 9/2/1999

EDITED carol: 02/07/2008
alopez: 3/16/2006
alopez: 6/19/2001
carol: 6/15/2001
psherman: 9/2/1999
alopez: 9/2/1999

