609731	TITLE *609731 CYSTATIN 11; CST11
;;CST8L
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using subtractive hybridization to identify genes expressed in Macaca
mulatta epididymis, Hamil et al. (2002) identified a novel member of the
cystatin type 2 family of competitive reversible cysteine protease
inhibitors, which they called cystatin 11. By database searching, Hamil
et al. (2002) also identified a human homolog of CST11. An additional
CST11 cDNA, missing exon 2, was amplified by PCR from a human
caput/corpus library, indicating the presence of an alternatively
spliced mRNA. Northern blot analysis of multiple M. mulatta tissues
detected abundant expression of an 0.8-kb CST11 mRNA in all 3 regions of
the epididymis but not in any other tissues tested. Imunnohistochemical
staining of human epididymis localized the CST11 protein in epithelial
cell cytoplasm and nuclei and in the lumen throughout the epididymis.
Immuonofluorescence studies showed that CST11 is also found on
ejaculated human sperm, where it is localized to the postacrosomal and
tail regions.

GENE FUNCTION

Hamil et al. (2002) found that a 3-dimensional model of CST11, based on
x-ray crystallography data for chicken CST, suggested that the 3 regions
corresponding to the protease inhibitory wedge of cystatin-3 (CST3;
604312) are similarly juxtaposed in CST11, consistent with protease
inhibitory function.

Using Northern blot analysis to study the level of CST11 mRNA in M.
Mulatta epididymis after castration and with or without androgen
replacement, Hamil et al. (2002) found that expression of CST11 is
dependent on testosterone. Consistent with this result, they showed that
the putative CST11 promoter contains a potential androgen response
element and at least 2 half sites.

Hamil et al. (2002) demonstrated that a 2-hour incubation of E. coli
with recombinant CST11 or exon 2-deleted CST11 protein resulted in a 30%
loss of colony-forming units, indicating that both forms have
antimicrobial activity.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Hamil et al. (2002) mapped the CST11 gene to
chromosome 20p11.21 near 3 other CST genes that are predominantly
expressed in the male reproductive tract.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hamil et al. (2002) demonstrated that the structure of CST11 is well
conserved with other CST2 family genes, having 3 exons and 2 identically
positioned introns.

REFERENCE 1. Hamil, K. G.; Liu, Q.; Sivashanmugam, P.; Yenugu, S.; Soundararajan,
R.; Grossman, G.; Richardson, R. T.; Zhang, Y.-L.; O'Rand, M. G.;
Petrusz, P.; French, F. S.; Hall, S. H.: Cystatin 11: a new member
of the cystatin type 2 family. Endocrinology 143: 2787-2796, 2002.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 11/22/2005

EDITED carol: 11/22/2005

613039	TITLE *613039 CHROMODOMAIN HELICASE DNA-BINDING PROTEIN 1-LIKE; CHD1L
;;AMPLIFIED IN LIVER CANCER 1; ALC1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

In response to DNA strand breaks, chromatin adopts a relaxed structure
due to the addition of poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) to chromatin proteins by
PARP enzymes (see PARP1; 173870), and this relaxation facilitates the
repair of DNA damage. CHD1L interacts with PAR and has a role in
chromatin relaxation following DNA damage (Ahel et al., 2009).

CLONING

By searching for genes in a region of chromosome 1q amplified in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC; 114550), Ma et al. (2008) cloned CHD1L,
which they designated ALC1. The deduced 897-amino acid protein contains
an SNF2 (see 300012)-like N-terminal helicase domain, followed by a
helicase superfamily C-terminal domain and a putative PAR-binding macro
domain. Fluorescence-tagged ALC1 localized to the nucleus in transfected
cells. Western blot analysis detected ALC1 at an apparent molecular mass
of 98 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunohistochemical analysis, Ma et al. (2008) found that ALC1 was
overexpressed in more than 50% of informative HCC cases, primary HCCs,
and HCC cell lines. Transfection of ALC1 in human liver and HCC cell
lines increased colony formation in soft agar compared with vector
controls and increased tumorigenicity of these cell lines in nude mice.
Overexpression of ALC1 facilitated DNA synthesis and promoted G1/S phase
transition. ALC1 downregulated expression of the cell growth inhibitors
p53 (TP53; 191170) and p21(Waf1) (CDKN1A; 116899) and the proapoptotic
proteins caspase-3 (600636) and BAX (600040) and upregulated the cell
cycle regulators CDK2 (116953) and cyclin E (CCNE1; 123837). Knockdown
of ALC1 by RNA interference reduced the percentage of cells in S phase,
reduced colony formation in soft agar, and inhibited the cell cycle at
the G1/S checkpoint. Ma et al. (2008) concluded that ALC1 is an oncogene
that plays a role in HCC pathogenesis.

Using immunoprecipitation analysis, Ahel et al. (2009) showed that human
ALC1 bound PAR in vitro, and the interaction required the macro domain
of ALC1. Epitope-tagged ALC1 immunoprecipitated endogenous PAR from
transfected 293 cells, along with PARP1 and core nucleosome components.
Mass spectroscopy also revealed the presence of several DNA repair
enzymes in the immunoprecipitate. ALC1 showed weak ATPase activity on
its own that was attributed to its helicase domain, and this activity
was stimulated by the addition of DNA and nucleosomes. PARP1 also
stimulated the ATPase activity of ALC1 in an NAD(+)- and DNA-dependent
manner. Wildtype ALC1, but not an ATPase-dead mutant, promoted
nucleosome sliding in an ATP-dependent manner. Endogenous ALC1 rapidly
but transiently localized to sites of DNA damage, and this localization
required ALC1 ATPase activity and functional PARP1. Ahel et al. (2009)
concluded that ALC1 is a nucleosome-repositioning enzyme that is
targeted to sites of DNA damage through its interaction with PAR, and
that ALC1 functions to regulate chromatin during DNA repair.

MAPPING

By FISH, Ma et al. (2008) mapped the CHD1L gene to a region of
chromosome 1q21 amplified in HCCs and other solid tumors.

REFERENCE 1. Ahel, D.; Horejsi, Z.; Wiechens, N.; Polo, S. E.; Garcia-Wilson,
E.; Ahel, I.; Flynn, H.; Skehel, M.; West, S. C.; Jackson, S. P.;
Owen-Hughes, T.; Boulton, S. J.: Poly(ADP-ribose)-dependent regulation
by DNA repair by the chromatin remodeling enzyme ALC1. Science 325:
1240-1243, 2009.

2. Ma, N.-F.; Hu, L.; Fung, J. M.; Xie, D.; Zheng, B.-J.; Chen, L.;
Tang, D.-J.; Fu, L.; Wu, Z.; Chen, M.; Fang, Y.; Guan, X.-Y.: Isolation
and characterization of a novel oncogene, amplified in liver cancer
1, within a commonly amplified region at 1q21 in hepatocellular carcinoma. Hepatology 47:
503-510, 2008.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/28/2009

EDITED mgross: 09/28/2009

