608821	TITLE *608821 KERATIN-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1-4; KRTAP1-4
;;KAP1.4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The main structural proteins of mammalian hair fiber are the hair
keratins (see 601077) and the keratin-associated proteins (KAPs), which
form a rigid and resistant hair shaft through extensive disulfide bond
crosslinking with the abundant cysteines of hair keratins (Shimomura et
al., 2002).

CLONING

By screening a human PAC library and an arrayed human scalp cDNA
library, Rogers et al. (2001) cloned KAP1.4. The deduced 121-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of 12.3 kD. KAP1.4 is classified
as a high sulfur protein owing to a cysteine content of 24.8 mol %. It
contains 2 unique motifs conserved among KAP1 family members, several
characteristic pentapeptide repeats, and a 20-amino acid subdomain that
was conserved among KAP1 family members in all species examined. KAP1.4
lacks an amino-terminal motif common to other members of the KAP1
family.

Shimomura et al. (2002) analyzed the KAP1.4 gene in unrelated Japanese
and Caucasian individuals. By in situ hybridization, Shimomura et al.
(2002) demonstrated KAP1.4 expression in the middle to upper cortex
region of the human hair follicle. While Shimomura et al. (2002) found
polymorphism in the KAP1.1 (608819) and KAP1.3 (608820) genes in
Japanese and Caucasian individuals, they found none in the KAP1.4 gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rogers et al. (2001) stated that the KRTAP1-4 gene is about 1.0 kb long
and consists of a single exon.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Rogers et al. (2001) mapped the KRTAP1-4
gene to a region of chromosome 17q12-q21 that contains 8 other
identified KAP genes or pseudogenes.

REFERENCE 1. Rogers, M. A.; Langbein, L.; Winter, H.; Ehmann, C.; Praetzel,
S.; Korn, B.; Schweizer, J.: Characterization of a cluster of human
high/ultrahigh sulfur keratin-associated protein genes embedded in
the type I keratin gene domain on chromosome 17q12-21. J. Biol. Chem. 276:
19440-19451, 2001.

2. Shimomura, Y.; Aoki, N.; Schweizer, J.; Langbein, L.; Rogers, M.
A.; Winter, H.; Ito, M.: Polymorphisms in the human high sulfur hair
keratin-associated protein 1, KAP1, gene family. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
45493-45501, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/29/2004

EDITED alopez: 07/29/2004

601265	TITLE *601265 NODAL, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; NODAL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

NODAL is a member of the TGF-beta gene family and is expressed during
mouse gastrulation (Zhou et al., 1993). Nodal has a left-sided
expression pattern that is disrupted in mouse models of LR axis
development (see Lowe et al. (1996)).

Gebbia et al. (1997) stated that they had characterized the human
homolog of mouse Nodal to search for mutations in individuals with LR
axis malformations.

GENE FUNCTION

Collignon et al. (1996) showed that some mice manifest LR axis
malformations when doubly heterozygous for null mutations in Nodal and
in the transcription factor Hnf3b (600288).

Olson and Srivastava (1996) reviewed the role of the morphogen Nodal in
the control of the direction of cardiac looping and in the development
of left to right asymmetry in chick and mouse.

Brennan et al. (2001) demonstrated that signals from the epiblast are
responsible for the initiation of the proximal-distal polarity in the
mouse embryo. Nodal acts to promote posterior cell fates in the epiblast
and to maintain molecular pattern in the adjacent extra-embryonic
ectoderm. Both of these functions are independent of SMAD2 (601366).
Moreover, Nodal signals from the epiblast also pattern the visceral
endoderm by activating the SMAD2-dependent pathway required for
specification of anterior identity in overlying epiblast cells. Brennan
et al. (2001) concluded that proximal-distal and subsequent
anterior-posterior polarity of the pregastrulation embryo result from
reciprocal cell-cell interactions between the epiblast and the 2
extraembryonic tissues.

By analyzing mouse mutants lacking left-sided expression of Lefty2
(601877), Meno et al. (2001) observed that Nodal is able to diffuse over
a large distance in the absence of Lefty2. They concluded that Nodal is
a long-range signaling molecule but that its range of action is normally
limited by the feedback inhibitor Lefty2.

Iratni et al. (2002) demonstrated that the transcriptional corepressor
DRAP1 (602289) has a very specific role in regulation of Nodal activity
during mouse embryogenesis. Iratni et al. (2002) found that loss of
DRAP1 leads to severe gastrulation defects that are consistent with
increased expression of Nodal and can be partially suppressed by Nodal
heterozygosity. Biochemical studies indicated that DRAP1 interacts with
and inhibits DNA binding by the winged-helix transcription factor FOXH1
(FAST1; 603621), a critical component of a positive feedback loop for
Nodal activity. Iratni et al. (2002) proposed that DRAP1 limits the
spread of a morphogenetic signal by downmodulating the response to the
Nodal autoregulatory loop.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mohapatra et al. (2009) noted that the NODAL gene contains 3 exons.

MAPPING

The mouse Nodal gene maps to chromosome 10 (Zhou et al., 1993). The
International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the human NODAL
gene to chromosome 10 (TMAP stSG2607).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a family in which several members had situs ambiguus shown to be due
to mutation in the ZIC3 gene (300265), Gebbia et al. (1997) found a
normal male with a daughter with situs ambiguus; neither the father nor
the daughter carried any mutation in the coding region of ZIC3 and both
parents were anatomically normal. Paternity was confirmed, the mother
was unrelated to the rest of the family, and the daughter had a 46,XX
karyotype. Because observations in mice had suggested that heterozygous
mutations in human NODAL may be associated with human situs
abnormalities, Gebbia et al. (1997) searched for mutations in the NODAL
gene. In the affected daughter and her unaffected mother, they found an
arg183-to-gln substitution (R183Q; 601265.0001) in the prodomain of
NODAL. None of more than 200 control chromosomes carried this
substitution, and no other NODAL mutations were identified in other
members of that family or in any other individual harboring a mutant
ZIC3 allele.

In 14 of 269 patients with either classic heterotaxy or looping
cardiovascular malformations (CVM), Mohapatra et al. (2009) identified 4
different missense variants (see, e.g., 601265.0002), 1 in-frame
insertion/deletion (601265.0003), and 2 conserved splice site variants
(see, e.g., 601265.0004) in the NODAL gene. Although similar with regard
to other associated defects, individuals with the NODAL mutations had a
significantly higher occurrence of pulmonary valve atresia (p = 0.001)
compared with individuals without a detectable NODAL mutation.
Functional analysis demonstrated that the missense variant forms of
NODAL exhibited significant impairment of signaling as measured by
decreased Cripto (TDGF1; 187395) coreceptor-mediated activation of
artificial reporters. Expression of these NODAL proteins also led to
reduced induction of SMAD2 phosphorylation and impaired SMAD2 nuclear
import. Mohapatra et al. (2009) proposed a role for mutations and rare
deleterious variants in NODAL as a cause for sporadic human left-right
patterning defects.

ANIMAL MODEL

Krebs et al. (2003) showed that mouse embryos mutant for the Notch
ligand Dll1 (606582) or doubly mutant for Notch1 (190198) and Notch2
(600275) exhibited multiple defects in left-right asymmetry. Dll1 -/-
embryos did not express Nodal in the region around the node. Analysis of
the enhancer regulating node-specific Nodal expression revealed binding
sites for Rbpj (RBPSUH; 147183). Mutation of these sites destroyed the
ability of the enhancer to direct node-specific gene expression in
transgenic mice. Krebs et al. (2003) concluded that Dll1-mediated Notch
signaling is essential for generation of left-right asymmetry, and that
perinodal expression of Nodal is an essential component of left-right
asymmetry determination in mice.

Using gain- and loss-of-function experiments in zebrafish and mouse,
Raya et al. (2003) showed that activity of the Notch pathway was
necessary and sufficient for Nodal expression around the node and for
proper left-right determination. They also identified critical
Rbpj-binding sequences in the Nodal promoter.

Ware et al. (2006) found that mice compound heterozygous for a Zic3 and
a Nodal mutation had significantly increased lethality compared to
Zic3-null mice. No males and a reduced number of females survived.
Accordingly, the laterality defects observed in compound heterozygous
mice were more severe than in mice with either mutant alone. The
findings indicated that the 2 genes interact in the same pathway.
Further studies indicated that Zic3 activates an upstream enhancer of
Nodal.

Yang et al. (2010) reported that holoprosencephaly (see HPE, 236100) in
mice can result from simultaneous reduction in both Nodal (601265)
signaling and expression levels of the Bmp antagonists chordin (CHRD;
603475) or Noggin (NOG; 602991). HPE defects are the result of reduced
production of tissues that promote forebrain and craniofacial
development. Nodal promotes the expression of genes in the anterior
primitive streak important for the development of these tissues, whereas
Bmp inhibits their expression. Pharmacologic and transgenic manipulation
of these signaling pathways suggested that the Bmp and Nodal pathways
antagonize each other prior to intracellular signal transduction. In
vitro experiments indicated that secreted Bmp2 (112261) and Nodal can
form extracellular complexes, potentially interfering with receptor
activation. Yang et al. (2010) concluded that the patterning of
forebrain and medial craniofacial elements requires a fine balance
between BMP and NODAL signaling during primitive streak development.

Reaction-diffusion models postulated that differences in signaling range
are caused by differential diffusivity of inhibitor and activator. Other
models suggested that differential clearance underlies different
signaling ranges. To test these models, Muller et al. (2012) measured
the biophysical properties of the Nodal/Lefty (see 603037)
activator/inhibitor system during zebrafish embryogenesis. Analysis of
Nodal and Lefty gradients revealed that Nodals have a shorter range than
Lefty proteins. Pulse-labeling analysis indicated that Nodals and Leftys
have similar clearance kinetics, whereas fluorescence recovery assays
revealed that Leftys have a higher effective diffusion coefficient than
Nodals. Muller et al. (2012) concluded that their results indicated that
differential diffusivity is the major determinant of the differences in
Nodal/Lefty range and provided biophysical support for
reaction-diffusion models of activator/inhibitor-mediated patterning.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HETEROTAXY, VISCERAL, 5, AUTOSOMAL
NODAL, ARG183GLN

In a kindred in which several members had X-linked abnormalities of
left-right body axis formation (306955) due to mutation in the ZIC3 gene
(300265), Gebbia et al. (1997) found a normal male who had fathered a
daughter with situs ambiguus (270100). Neither she nor the father
carried any mutation in ZIC3, and both parents were anatomically normal.
The daughter and her unaffected mother who was unrelated to the father
were found to be heterozygous for an arg182-to-gln (R183Q) mutation in
the prodomain of the NODAL gene.

.0002
HETEROTAXY, VISCERAL, 5, AUTOSOMAL
NODAL, GLY260ARG

In 8 of 82 unrelated Hispanic patients with heterotaxy (270100),
Mohapatra et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous 778G-A transition in
exon 2 of the NODAL gene, resulting in a gly260-to-arg (G260R)
substitution in a highly conserved residue. Most patients had
d-transposition of the great arteries in addition to other cardiac
anomalies, 3 had abdominal situs inversus, and 2 had asplenia. The
detection of this variant in the unaffected father of 1 patient and 1 of
108 Hispanic controls, suggested incomplete penetrance. None of the 190
Caucasian or African American controls examined carried the variant.
Functional analysis showed reduced NODAL signaling through both
FOXH1-dependent and -independent pathways, as well as reduced SMAD2
phosphorylation and impaired nuclear import.

.0003
HETEROTAXY, VISCERAL, 5, AUTOSOMAL
NODAL, 9-BP INS/24-BP DEL, NT700

In a male Hispanic patient with heterotaxy (270100), Mohapatra et al.
(2009) identified an in-frame 9-bp insertion (700insTTGACTTCC) and 24-bp
deletion (nucleotide 700-723) in exon 2 of the NODAL gene. The patient
had d-transposition of the great arteries, pulmonary atresia, and
double-inlet left ventricle. Parental DNA was not available for testing,
and the mutation was not detected in 298 controls. Functional analysis
showed reduced NODAL signaling through both FOXH1-dependent and
-independent pathways, as well as reduced SMAD2 phosphorylation and
impaired nuclear import.

.0004
HETEROTAXY, VISCERAL, 5, AUTOSOMAL
NODAL, IVS2DS, G-A, +1

In a male Hispanic patient with heterotaxy (270100), Mohapatra et al.
(2009) identified a G-to-A transition (891+1G-A) in the donor splice
site of intron 2 of the NODAL gene, predicted to result in altered
splicing activity. The patient had dextrocardia, levo-transposition of
the great arteries, double-outlet right ventricle, pulmonary valve
stenosis, and a ventricular septal defect. The mutation was not detected
in 298 controls.

REFERENCE 1. Brennan, J.; Lu, C. C.; Norris, D. P.; Rodriguez, T. A.; Beddington,
R. S. P.; Robertson, E. J.: Nodal signalling in the epiblast patterns
the early mouse embryo. Nature 411: 965-969, 2001.

2. Collignon, J.; Varlet, I.; Robertson, E. J.: Relationship between
asymmetric nodal expression and the direction of embryonic turning. Nature 381:
155-158, 1996.

3. Gebbia, M.; Ferrero, G. B.; Pilia, G.; Bassi, M. T.; Aylsworth,
A. S.; Penman-Splitt, M.; Bird, L. M.; Bamforth, J. S.; Burn, J.;
Schlessinger, D.; Nelson, D. L.; Casey, B.: X-linked situs abnormalities
result from mutations in ZIC3. Nature Genet. 17: 305-308, 1997.

4. Iratni, R.; Yan, Y.-T.; Chen, C.; Ding, J.; Zhang, Y.; Price, S.
M.; Reinberg, D.; Shen, M. M.: Inhibition of excess Nodal signaling
during mouse gastrulation by the transcriptional corepressor DRAP1. Science 298:
1996-1999, 2002.

5. Krebs, L. T.; Iwai, N.; Nonaka, S.; Welsh, I. C.; Lan, Y.; Jiang,
R.; Saijoh, Y.; O'Brien, T. P.; Hamada, H.; Gridley, T.: Notch signaling
regulates left-right asymmetry determination by inducing Nodal expression. Genes
Dev. 17: 1207-1212, 2003.

6. Lowe, L. A.; Supp, D. M.; Sampath, K.; Yokoyama, T.; Wright, C.
V.; Potter, S. S.; Overbeek, P.; Kuehn, M. R.: Conserved left-right
asymmetry of nodal expression and alterations in murine situs inversus. Nature 381:
158-161, 1996.

7. Meno, C.; Takeuchi, J.; Sakuma, R.; Koshiba-Takeuchi, K.; Ohishi,
S.; Saijoh, Y.; Miyazaki, J.; ten Dijke, P.; Ogura, T.; Hamada, H.
: Diffusion of nodal signaling activity in the absence of the feedback
inhibitor lefty2. Dev. Cell 1: 127-138, 2001.

8. Mohapatra, B.; Casey, B.; Li, H.; Ho-Dawson, T.; Smith, L.; Fernbach,
S. D.; Molinari, L.; Niesh, S. R.; Jefferies, J. L.; Craigen, W. J.;
Towbin, J. A.; Belmont, J. W.; Ware, S. M.: Identification and functional
characterization of NODAL rare variants in heterotaxy and isolated
cardiovascular malformations. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 861-871, 2009.

9. Muller, P.; Rogers, K. W.; Jordan, B. M.; Lee, J. S.; Robson, D.;
Ramanathan, S.; Schier, A. F.: Differential diffusivity of Nodal
and Lefty underlies a reaction-diffusion patterning system. Science 336:
721-724, 2012.

10. Olson, E.; Srivastava, D.: Molecular pathways controlling heart
development. Science 272: 671-676, 1996.

11. Raya, A.; Kawakami, Y.; Rodriguez-Esteban, C.; Buscher, D.; Koth,
C. M.; Itoh, T.; Morita, M.; Raya, R. M.; Dubova, I.; Bessa, J. G.;
de la Pompa, J. L.; Belmonte, J. C. I.: Notch activity induces Nodal
expression and mediates the establishment of left-right asymmetry
in vertebrate embryos. Genes Dev. 17: 1213-1218, 2003.

12. Ware, S. M.; Harutyunyan, K. G.; Belmont, J. W.: Heart defects
in X-linked heterotaxy: evidence for a genetic interaction of Zic3
with the Nodal signaling pathway. Dev. Dyn. 235: 1631-1637, 2006.

13. Yang, Y.-P.; Anderson, R. M.; Klingensmith, J.: BMP antagonism
protects Nodal signaling in the gastrula to promote the tissue interactions
underlying mammalian forebrain and craniofacial patterning. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 19: 3030-3042, 2010.

14. Zhou, X.; Sasaki, H.; Lowe, L.; Hogan, B. L. M.; Kuehn, M. R.
: Nodal is a novel TGF-beta-like gene expressed in the mouse node
during gastrulation. Nature 361: 543-547, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/30/2012
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/12/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/21/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/10/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/5/2003
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 10/31/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/15/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/20/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/28/1997

CREATED Moyra Smith: 5/16/1996

EDITED carol: 09/16/2013
tpirozzi: 8/30/2013
tpirozzi: 8/29/2013
alopez: 6/1/2012
terry: 5/30/2012
wwang: 8/26/2009
terry: 8/12/2009
carol: 2/25/2008
ckniffin: 2/21/2008
mgross: 9/27/2007
terry: 7/10/2007
wwang: 6/15/2006
alopez: 2/10/2003
terry: 2/5/2003
carol: 11/4/2002
tkritzer: 10/31/2002
mgross: 2/15/2002
alopez: 6/21/2001
terry: 6/20/2001
carol: 10/31/2000
alopez: 6/11/1998
dholmes: 11/18/1997
mark: 10/28/1997
terry: 10/28/1997
carol: 5/29/1996

607790	TITLE *607790 TET ONCOGENE FAMILY, MEMBER 1; TET1
;;METHYLCYTOSINE DIOXYGENASE TET1;;
TET ONCOGENE 1;;
CXXC FINGER PROTEIN 6; CXXC6;;
LEUKEMIA-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN WITH A CXXC DOMAIN; LCX;;
KIAA1676
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Methylation of DNA on cytosines is an important mechanism for silencing
gene expression, and cytosine demethylation is required for gene
activation. TET1 is the founding member of a family of methylcytosine
dioxygenases that perform several steps required for cytosine
demethylation and gene activation (Ito et al., 2011; He et al., 2011).

CLONING

To identify the fusion partner of MLL in the translocation
t(10;11)(q22;q23), Ono et al. (2002) analyzed leukemic cells from an
individual with AML-M2 associated with t(10;11)(q22;q23), and identified
TET1, which they called LCX (leukemia-associated protein with a CXXC
domain) as a novel fusion partner of the MLL gene. Ono et al. (2002)
found that the LCX gene encodes a 2,136-amino acid protein with a
zinc-binding CXXC domain (which MLL also contains) within a
methyltransferase domain, 3 nuclear localizations signals, and an
alpha-helical coiled-coil region. Ono et al. (2002) found 3 RNA
transcripts of LCX, each with a distinctive pattern of tissue
expression. LCX was expressed in 8 of 22 leukemic cell lines, but not in
EBV-induced normal B-cell lines. The MLL-LCX fusion protein lacked a
CXXC domain of LCX, but retained an alpha-helical coiled-coil region at
the C terminus, similar to MLL-AF6 (see 159559), MLL-AF1P (see 600051),
and other fusion proteins involved in the pathogenesis of
11q23-associated leukemia.

GENE FUNCTION

In a computational search for enzymes that could modify 5-methylcytosine
(5mC), Tahiliani et al. (2009) identified TET proteins as mammalian
homologs of the trypanosome proteins JBP1 and JBP2, which have been
proposed to oxidize the 5-methyl group of thymine. They showed that
TET1, a fusion partner of the MLL gene in acute myeloid leukemia, is a
2-oxoglutarate (2OG)- and Fe(II)-dependent enzyme that catalyzes
conversion of 5mC to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (hmC) in cultured cells and
in vitro. hmC is present in the genome of mouse embryonic stem cells,
and hmC levels decrease upon RNA interference-mediated depletion of
TET1. Thus, Tahiliani et al. (2009) concluded that TET proteins have
potential roles in epigenetic regulation through modification of 5mC to
hmC.

Ito et al. (2010) extended the study of Tahiliani et al. (2009) by
demonstrating that all 3 mouse TET proteins, Tet1, Tet2 (612839), and
Tet3 (613555), can catalyze the conversion of 5mC to 5hmC. Tet1 has an
important role in mouse embryonic stem cell maintenance through
maintaining the expression of Nanog (607937) in embryonic stem cells.
Downregulation of Nanog via Tet1 knockdown correlated with methylation
of the Nanog promoter, supporting a role for Tet1 in regulating DNA
methylation status. Furthermore, knockdown of Tet1 in preimplantation
embryos resulted in a bias towards trophectoderm differentiation. Thus,
Ito et al. (2010) concluded that their studies not only uncovered the
enzymatic activity of the Tet proteins, but also demonstrated a role for
Tet1 in embryonic stem cell maintenance and inner cell mass cell
specification.

Williams et al. (2011) showed that TET1 binds throughout the genome of
embryonic stem cells, with the majority of binding sites located at
transcription start sites of CpG-rich promoters and within genes. The
hmC modification is found in gene bodies and in contrast to mC is also
enriched at CpG-rich transcription start sites. Williams et al. (2011)
provided further evidence that TET1 has a role in transcriptional
repression. TET1 binds a significant proportion of Polycomb group target
genes. Furthermore, TET1 associates and colocalizes with the SIN3A
(607776) corepressor complex. Williams et al. (2011) proposed that TET1
fine tunes transcription, opposes aberrant DNA methylation at CpG-rich
sequences, and thereby contributes to the regulation of DNA methylation
fidelity.

Using chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with high-throughput DNA
sequencing, Wu et al. (2011) demonstrated in mouse embryonic stem (ES)
cells that Tet1 is preferentially bound to CpG-rich sequences at
promoters of both transcriptionally active and Polycomb-repressed genes.
Despite an increase in levels of DNA methylation at many Tet1-binding
sites, Tet1 depletion does not lead to downregulation of all the Tet1
targets. Interestingly, although Tet1-mediated promoter hypomethylation
is required for maintaining the expression of a group of
transcriptionally active genes, it is also involved in repression of
Polycomb-targeted developmental regulators. Tet1 contributes to
silencing of this group of genes by facilitating recruitment of Polycomb
repressive complex-2 (PRC2; see 601573) to CpG-rich gene promoters.
Thus, Wu et al. (2011) concluded that their study not only establishes a
role for Tet1 in modulating DNA methylation levels at CpG-rich
promoters, but also reveals a dual function of Tet1 in promoting
transcription of pluripotency factors as well as participating in the
repression of Polycomb-targeted developmental regulators.

Pastor et al. (2011) described 2 novel and specific approaches to
profile the genomic localization of 5hmC. The first approach, which they
called GLIB (glucosylation, periodate oxidation, biotinylation), uses a
combination of enzymatic and chemical steps to isolate DNA fragments
containing as few as a single 5hmC. The second approach involves
conversion of 5hmC to cytosine 5-methylenesulfonate (CMS) by treatment
of genomic DNA with sodium bisulfite, followed by immunoprecipitation of
CMS-containing DNA with a specific antiserum to CMS. High-throughout
sequencing of 5hmC-containing DNA from mouse embryonic stem cells showed
strong enrichment within exons and near transcriptional start sites.
5hmC was especially enriched at the start sites of genes whose promoters
bear dual histone-3 lysine-27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) and histone-3
lysine-4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) marks. Pastor et al. (2011) concluded
that 5hmC has a probable role in transcriptional regulation, and
suggested a model in which 5hmC contributes to the 'poised' chromatin
signature found at developmentally-regulated genes in embryonic stem
cells.

Ficz et al. (2011) used antibodies against 5hmC and 5mC together with
high-throughput sequencing to determine genomewide patterns of
methylation and hydroxymethylation in mouse wildtype and mutant ES cells
and differentiating embryoid bodies. They found that 5hmC is mostly
associated with euchromatin and that whereas 5mC is underrepresented at
gene promoters and CpG islands, 5hmC is enriched and is associated with
increased transcriptional levels. Most, if not all, 5hmC in the genome
depends on preexisting 5mC and the balance between these 2 modifications
is different between genomic regions. Knockdown of Tet1 and Tet2 causes
downregulation of a group of genes that includes pluripotency-related
genes (Esrrb, 602167; Prdm14, 611781; Dppa3, 608408; Klf2, 602016; Tcl1,
186960; and Zfp42) and a concomitant increase in methylation of their
promoters, together with an increased propensity of ES cells for
extraembryonic lineage differentiation. Declining levels of TETs during
differentiation are associated with decreased hydroxymethylation levels
at the promoters of ES cell-specific genes together with increased
methylation and gene silencing. Ficz et al. (2011) proposed that the
balance between hydroxymethylation and methylation in the genome is
inextricably linked with the balance between pluripotency and lineage
commitment.

Ito et al. (2011) showed that, in addition to 5hmC, the Tet proteins can
generate 5-formylcytosine (5fC) and 5-carboxylcytosine (5caC) from 5mC
in an enzymatic activity-dependent manner. Furthermore, Ito et al.
(2011) revealed the presence of 5fC and 5caC in genomic DNA of mouse
embryonic stem cells and mouse organs. The genomic content of 5hmC, 5fC,
and 5caC can be increased or reduced through overexpression or depletion
of Tet proteins. Thus, Ito et al. (2011) concluded that they identified
2 previously unknown cytosine derivatives in genomic DNA as the products
of Tet proteins, and raised the possibility that DNA demethylation may
occur through Tet-catalyzed oxidation followed by decarboxylation.

He et al. (2011) demonstrated that 5mC and 5hmC in DNA are oxidized to
5caC by Tet dioxygenases in vitro and in cultured cells. 5caC is
specifically recognized and excised by thymine-DNA glycosylase (TDG;
601423). Depletion of TDG in mouse embryonic stem cells leads to
accumulation of 5caC to a readily detectable level. He et al. (2011)
concluded that oxidation of 5mC by Tet proteins followed by TDG-mediated
base excision of 5caC constitutes a pathway for active DNA
demethylation.

Guo et al. (2011) found that transfection of HEK293 cells with TET1
induced DNA replication-independent demethylation of 5hmC in the context
of both CpG and non-CpG DNA. Pharmacologic inhibition of the base
excision repair enzymes PARP (see 173870) or APE1 (APEX1; 107748)
reduced demethylation of 5hmC DNA. Expression of the cytidine deaminase
AID (AICDA; 605257) or of the APOBEC cytidine deaminases mouse Apobec1
(600130) or human APOBEC2 (604797), APOBEC3A (607109), APOBEC3C
(607750), or APOBEC3E (APOBEC3D; 609900), but not APOBEC3B (607110) or
APOBEC3G (607113), significantly increased demethylation of 5hmC DNA.
Overexpression of TET1 or AID in adult mouse dentate gyrus via
adenovirus-mediated gene transfer increased and decreased 5hmC levels,
respectively, and resulted in upregulated expression of brain-specific
variants of Bdnf (113505) and Fgf1 (131220). Knockdown of endogenous
Tet1 or Apobec1 expression in adult dentate gyrus abolished
stimulation-induced demethylation of brain-specific Bdnf and Fgf1
promoters. Guo et al. (2011) concluded that TET1, AID, and APOBEC
cooperate in a base excision-mediated pathway of active DNA
demethylation.

Using a loss-of-function approach in mice, Yamaguchi et al. (2012)
showed that the 5mC-specific dioxygenase Tet1 has an important role in
regulating meiosis in mouse oocytes. Tet1 deficiency significantly
reduced female germ cell numbers and fertility. Univalent chromosomes
and unresolved DNA double-strand breaks were also observed in
Tet1-deficient oocytes. Tet1 deficiency does not greatly affect the
genomewide demethylation that takes place in primordial germ cells, but
leads to defective DNA demethylation and decreased expression of a
subset of meiotic genes. Yamaguchi et al. (2012) concluded that their
study established a function for Tet1 in meiosis and meiotic gene
activation in female germ cells.

Mouse primordial germ cells (PGCs) undergo sequential epigenetic changes
and genomewide DNA demethylation to reset the epigenome for totipotency.
Hackett et al. (2013) demonstrated that erasure of CpG methylation in
PGCs occurs via conversion to 5hmC, driven by high levels of Tet1 and
Tet2 (612839). Global conversion to 5hmC initiates asynchronously among
PGCs at embryonic day (E) 9.5 to E10.5 and accounts for the unique
process of imprint erasure. Mechanistically, 5hmC enrichment is followed
by its protracted decline thereafter at a rate consistent with
replication-coupled dilution. The conversion to 5hmC is an important
component of parallel redundant systems that drive comprehensive
reprogramming in PGCs. Nonetheless, Hackett et al. (2013) identified
rare regulatory elements that escape systematic DNA demethylation in
PGCs, providing a potential mechanistic basis for transgenerational
epigenetic inheritance.

Using enhanced purification techniques and a stringent computational
algorithm, Costa et al. (2013) identified 27 high-confidence protein
interaction partners of Nanog (607937) in mouse embryonic stem cells.
These consisted of 19 partners of Nanog, including the ten-eleven
translocation (TET) family methylcytosine hydroxylase Tet1. Costa et al.
(2013) confirmed physical association of Nanog with Tet1, and
demonstrated that Tet1, in synergy with Nanog, enhanced the efficiency
of reprogramming. Costa et al. (2013) also found physical association
and reprogramming synergy of Tet2 with Nanog, and demonstrated that
knockdown of Tet2 abolished the reprogramming synergy of Nanog with a
catalytically deficient mutant of Tet1. These results indicated that the
physical interaction between Nanog and Tet1/Tet2 proteins facilitates
reprogramming in a manner that is dependent on the catalytic activity of
Tet1/Tet2. Tet1 and Nanog cooccupy genomic loci of genes associated with
both maintenance of pluripotency and lineage commitment in embryonic
stem cells, and Tet1 binding is reduced upon Nanog depletion.
Coexpression of Nanog and Tet1 increased 5-hydroxymethylcytosine levels
at the top-ranked common target loci Esrrb (602167) and Oct4 (164177),
resulting in priming of their expression before reprogramming to naive
pluripotency. Costa et al. (2013) proposed that TET1 is recruited by
NANOG to enhance the expression of a subset of key reprogramming target
genes.

Blaschke et al. (2013) reported that addition of vitamin C to mouse
embryonic stem cells promotes Tet activity, leading to a rapid and
global increase in 5hmC. This is followed by DNA demethylation of many
gene promoters and upregulation of demethylated germline genes. Tet1
binding is enriched near the transcription start site of genes affected
by vitamin C treatment. Importantly, vitamin C, but not other
antioxidants, enhances the activity of recombinant Tet1 in a biochemical
assay, and the vitamin C-induced changes in 5hmC and 5mC are entirely
suppressed in Tet1 and Tet2 (612839) double-knockout embryonic stem
cells. Vitamin C has a stronger effect on regions that gain methylation
in cultured embryonic stem cells compared to blastocysts, and in vivo
are methylated only after implantation. In contrast, imprinted regions
and intracisternal A particle retroelements, which are resistant to
demethylation in the early embryo, are resistant to vitamin C-induced
DNA demethylation. Blaschke et al. (2013) concluded that the results of
this study established vitamin C as a direct regulator of Tet activity
and DNA methylation fidelity in embryonic stem cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ono et al. (2002) found that the TET1 gene consists of at least 12
exons.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis of a mapped BAC clone and by FISH, Ono et al.
(2002) mapped the TET1 gene to chromosome 10q22.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Exclusion Studies

Abdel-Wahab et al. (2009) did not find somatic mutations in the TET1
gene among 96 patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms.

REFERENCE 1. Abdel-Wahab, O.; Mullally, A.; Hedvat, C.; Garcia-Manero, G.; Patel,
J.; Wadleigh, M.; Malinge, S.; Yao, J.; Kilpivaara, O.; Bhat, R.;
Huberman, K.; Thomas, S.; and 12 others: Genetic characterization
of TET1, TET2, and TET3 alterations in myeloid malignancies. Blood 114:
144-147, 2009.

2. Blaschke, K.; Ebata, K. T.; Karimi, M. M.; Zepeda-Martinez, J.
A.; Goyal, P.; Mahapatra, S.; Tam, A.; Laird, D. J.; Hirst, M.; Rao,
A.; Lorincz, M. C.; Ramalho-Santos, M.: Vitamin C induces Tet-dependent
DNA demethylation and a blastocyst-like state in ES cells. Nature 500:
222-226, 2013.

3. Costa, Y.; Ding, J.; Theunissen, T. W.; Faiola, F.; Hore, T. A.;
Shliaha, P. V.; Fidalgo, M.; Saunders, A.; Lawrence, M.; Dietmann,
S.; Das, S.; Levasseur, D. N.; Li, Z.; Xu, M.; Reik, W.; Silva, J.
C. R.; Wang, J.: NANOG-dependent function of TET1 and TET2 in establishment
of pluripotency. Nature 495: 370-374, 2013.

4. Ficz, G.; Branco, M. R.; Seisenberger, S.; Santos, F.; Krueger,
F.; Hore, T. A.; Marques, C. J.; Andrews, S.; Reik, W.: Dynamic regulation
of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in mouse ES cells and during differentiation. Nature 473:
398-402, 2011.

5. Guo, J. U.; Su, Y.; Zhong, C.; Ming, G.-I.; Song, H.: Hydroxylation
of 5-methylcytosine by TET1 promotes active DNA demethylation in the
adult brain. Cell 145: 423-434, 2011.

6. Hackett, J. A.; Sengupta, R.; Zylicz, J. J.; Murakami, K.; Lee,
C.; Down, T. A.; Surani, M. A.: Germline DNA demethylation dynamics
and imprint erasure through 5-hydroxymethylcytosine. Science 339:
448-452, 2013.

7. He, Y.-F.; Li, B.-Z.; Li, Z.; Liu, P.; Wang, Y.; Tang, Q.; Ding,
J.; Jia, Y.; Chen, Z.; Li, L.; Sun, Y.; Li, X.; Dai, Q.; Song, C.-X.;
Zhang, K.; He, C.; Xu, G.-L.: Tet-mediated formation of 5-carboxylcytosine
and its excision by TDG in mammalian DNA. Science 333: 1303-1307,
2011.

8. Ito, S.; D'Alessio, A. C.; Taranova, O. V.; Hong, K.; Sowers, L.
C.; Zhang, Y.: Role of Tet proteins in 5mC to 5hmC conversion, ES-cell
self-renewal and inner cell mass specification. Nature 466: 1129-1133,
2010.

9. Ito, S.; Shen, L.; Dai, Q.; Wu, S. C.; Collins, L. B.; Swenberg,
J. A.; He, C.; Zhang, Y.: Tet proteins can convert 5-methylcytosine
to 5-formylcytosine and 5-carboxylcytosine. Science 333: 1300-1303,
2011.

10. Ono, R.; Taki, T.; Taketani, T.; Taniwaki, M.; Kobayashi, H.;
Hayashi, Y.: LCX, leukemia-associated protein with a CXXC domain,
is fused to MLL in acute myeloid leukemia with trilineage dysplasia
having t(10;11)(q22;q23). Cancer Res. 62: 4075-4080, 2002.

11. Pastor, W. A.; Pape, U. J.; Huang, Y.; Henderson, H. R.; Lister,
R.; Ko, M.; McLoughlin, E. M.; Brudno, Y.; Mahapatra, S.; Kapranov,
P.; Tahiliani, M.; Daley, G. Q.; Liu, X. S.; Ecker, J. R.; Milos,
P. M.; Agarwal, S.; Rao, A.: Genome-wide mapping of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine
in embryonic stem cells. Nature 473: 394-397, 2011.

12. Tahiliani, M.; Koh, K. P.; Shen, Y.; Pastor, W. A.; Bandukwala,
H.; Brudno, Y.; Agarwal, S.; Iyer, L. M.; Liu, D. R.; Aravind, L.;
Rao, A.: Conversion of 5-methylcytosine to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine
in mammalian DNA by MLL partner TET1. Science 324: 930-935, 2009.

13. Williams, K.; Christensen, J.; Pedersen, M. T.; Johansen, J. V.;
Cloos, P. A. C.; Rappsilber, J.; Helin, K.: TET1 and hydroxymethylcytosine
in transcription and DNA methylation fidelity. Nature 473: 343-348,
2011.

14. Wu, H.; D'Alessio, A. C.; Ito, S.; Xia, K.; Wang, Z.; Cui, K.;
Zhao, K.; Sun, Y. E.; Zhang, Y.: Dual functions of Tet1 in transcriptional
regulation in mouse embryonic stem cells. Nature 473: 389-393, 2011.

15. Yamaguchi, S.; Hong, K.; Liu, R.; Shen, L.; Inoue, A.; Diep, D.;
Zhang, K.; Zhang, Y.: Tet1 controls meiosis by regulating meiotic
gene expression. Nature 492: 443-447, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/7/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/15/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/21/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/30/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/14/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/21/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/6/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/25/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/14/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/17/2009

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/14/2003

EDITED alopez: 10/07/2013
alopez: 10/7/2013
alopez: 7/15/2013
alopez: 2/26/2013
terry: 2/21/2013
alopez: 2/8/2013
terry: 1/30/2013
mgross: 5/18/2012
terry: 3/14/2012
alopez: 9/22/2011
terry: 9/21/2011
alopez: 7/8/2011
terry: 7/6/2011
wwang: 10/29/2010
ckniffin: 10/25/2010
alopez: 9/15/2010
terry: 9/14/2010
ckniffin: 9/8/2010
alopez: 8/21/2009
terry: 8/17/2009
mgross: 6/4/2009
mgross: 5/29/2009
mgross: 1/7/2005
alopez: 5/15/2003
alopez: 5/14/2003

