611297	TITLE *611297 ODD-SKIPPED-RELATED 2; OSR2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

OSR2 is a mammalian homolog of the Drosophila odd-skipped family of
transcription factors (Lan et al., 2004).

CLONING

By database searching with mouse Osr1 (608891) as query Lan et al (2001)
identified human OSR2. They subsequently cloned mouse Osr2, which
encodes a 276-amino acid protein. Northern blot analysis detected Osr2
in mouse embryonic RNA. In situ hybridization detected Osr2 expression
in a dynamic pattern during craniofacial, limb, and kidney development
with expression first detected at embryonic day (E) 9.5 in the
mesonephric vesicles, followed by expression in the mesenchyme adjacent
to the maxillary processes. In developing limb buds, Osr2 expression
follows a distinct dorsal to ventral developmental time sequence. Mouse
Osr2 was expressed at sites of epithelial-mesenchyme interaction during
tooth and kidney development. Osr2 shares 65% amino acid identity with
Osr1 and 98% identity over the zinc finger domains.

Kawai et al. (2005) cloned mouse splice variants Osr2a and Osr2b
containing 312 and 276 amino acids, respectively, and differing by an
additional C-terminal sequence in Osr2a. Osr2a contains 5 predicted zinc
finger domains, while Osr2b contains 3 zinc finger domains. Database
analysis confirmed the presence of 2 splice variants in rat and human.
PCR analysis of Osr2 splice variant expression in mouse tissues detected
both transcripts in kidney, muscle, testis, and mouse embryos with weak
expression in the lung. The ratio of Osr2a to Osr2b varied in the
tissues tested, with Osr2b predominantly transcribed.
Immunocytochemistry studies in COS-7 cells expressing Osr2a and Osr2b
localized both isoforms to the nucleus.

GENE FUNCTION

Using transcriptional activity studies with Gal4 fusions and luciferase
assay systems, Kawai et al. (2005) showed that both Osr2 variants affect
transcriptional activity, with the 2 variants expressing opposite
transcriptional activities. Osr2a repressed transcriptional activity,
and Osr2b activated transcription. In the luciferase assay, the opposite
results were obtained with Osr2a activating and Osr2b repressing
transcription.

MAPPING

Lan et al. (2004) stated that the OSR2 gene mapped to chromosome 8q23,
which Prescott et al. (2000) reported as a region associated with
nonsyndromic orofacial clefting.

Kawai et al. (2005) mapped the mouse Osr2 gene to mouse chromosome 15.

ANIMAL MODEL

Lan et al. (2004) generated mice with target disruption of Osr2.
Homozygous mutant mice displayed complete embryogenesis but died within
24 hours of birth. All homozygous mutant mice exhibited open eyelids,
bilateral cleft of the secondary palate, and thickened tympanic rings.
No abnormalities of kidney or limb development were detected. Histologic
analysis of mutant mice showed early normal palatal growth and initial
downward palatal outgrowth. However, between embryonic days 13.5 and
14.5, homozygous mutant mice displayed retarded palatal shelves that
remained vertically oriented rather than the normal rapid growth and
reorientation to a horizontal position detected in wildtype and
heterozygous mutant embryos. During continued normal development,
palatal shelves initiate fusion at the midline by embryonic day 15.5;
however, homozygous mutant mice showed no fusion of palatal shelves,
resulting in bilateral cleft of the secondary palate at birth.
Homozygous mutant mice exhibited a 26% reduction in palatal cell
proliferation at embryonic day 13.5. In situ hybridization showed that
the palatal mesenchyme proliferation defect in the homozygous mutant
mice was correlated with the spatiotemporal downregulation of Osr1
expression. Homozygous mutant mice displayed altered mRNA expression and
spatial distribution of Osr1, Tgfb3 (190230), and Pax9 (167416) during
palate development. Lan et al. (2004) concluded that Osr2 acts as a
regulator of palatal growth and patterning.

Zhang et al. (2009) observed that Osr2 -/- embryos exhibited
supernumerary tooth development lingual to their molar teeth. Because
Osr2 -/- mice die shortly after birth, Zhang et al. (2009) transplanted
embryonic day-13.5 mandibular molar tooth germs under renal capsules of
adult mice to allow complete tooth morphogenesis. After 21 days,
wildtype and Osr2 +/- molar tooth germs gave rise to 2 or 3 mineralized
molar teeth, whereas Osr2 -/- mutant molar tooth germs gave rise to 4 or
5 mineralized teeth. In the developing tooth mesenchyme of wildtype
embryos, Osr2 was expressed in a lingual-to-buccal gradient that was
complementary to the expression pattern of Bmp4 (112262), an essential
odontogenic signal. In Osr2 -/- embryos, expression of several ontogenic
factors, including Pitx2 (601542), Shh (600725), Msx1 (142983), and Lef1
(153245), was spatially expanded or upregulated compared with expression
in wildtype embryos. Msx1 -/- Osr2 -/- double-mutant embryos showed
largely normalized tooth development, suggesting that expansion of the
odontogenic field in Osr2 -/- embryos required Msx1, a feedback
activator of Bmp4. Zhang et al. (2009) concluded that MSX1 and OSR2 act
antagonistically to pattern the tooth morphogenic field by controlling
the expression and spatial distribution of mesenchymal odontogenic
signals along the buccolingual axis.

REFERENCE 1. Kawai, S.; Kato, T.; Inaba, H.; Okahashi, N.; Amano, A.: Odd-skipped
related 2 splicing variants show opposite transcriptional activity. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 328: 306-311, 2005.

2. Lan, Y.; Kingsley, P. D.; Cho, E.-S.; Jiang, R.: Osr2, a new mouse
gene related to Drosophila odd-skipped, exhibits dynamic expression
patterns during craniofacial, limb, and kidney development. Mech.
Dev. 107: 175-179, 2001.

3. Lan, Y.; Ovitt, C. E.; Cho, E.-S.; Maltby, K. M.; Wang, W.; Jiang,
R.: Odd-skipped related 2 (Osr2) encodes a key intrinsic regulator
of secondary palate growth and morphogenesis. Development 131: 3207-3216,
2004.

4. Prescott, N. J.; Lees, M. M.; Winter, R. M.; Malcolm, S.: Identification
of susceptibility loci for nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without
cleft palate in a two stage genome scan of affected sib-pairs. Hum.
Genet. 106: 345-350, 2000.

5. Zhang, Z.; Lan, Y.; Chai, Y.; Jiang, R.: Antagonistic actions
of Msx1 and Osr2 pattern mammalian teeth into a single row. Science 323:
1232-1234, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/9/2009

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 8/3/2007

EDITED mgross: 09/10/2009
mgross: 9/10/2009
terry: 9/9/2009
wwang: 8/9/2007
wwang: 8/3/2007

611417	TITLE *611417 SMALL G PROTEIN SIGNALING MODULATOR 1; SGSM1
;;KIAA1941
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching a region of chromosome 22 for protein-coding sequences,
followed by RT-PCR and RACE of an adult brain cDNA library, Yang et al.
(2007) cloned SGSM1, which had previously been cloned and named KIAA1941
by Nagase et al. (2001). Nagase et al. (2001) reported a deduced
1,233-amino acid protein with 2 RUN domains and a TBC domain, whereas
Yang et al. (2007) reported a deduced 1,093-amino acid protein with an
N-terminal RUN domain and a C-terminal TBC domain. By Northern blot
analysis, Yang et al. (2007) detected expression of a 7.0-kb SGSM1
transcript predominantly in adult heart, brain, kidney, pancreas, and
testis; in fetal brain, skeletal muscle, and heart; and in nearly all
specific adult brain regions examined. In mouse, Sgsm1 was detected only
in adult brain and there was evidence of splice variants. In situ
hybridization and immunohistochemical analysis of adult mouse brain
showed that Sgsm1 was predominantly expressed in the layer of Ammon's
horn (CA1, CA2, CA3), in dentate gyrus, hippocampus, granular and
Purkinje cell layer of cerebellum, and in neurons of the cerebral
cortex. Immunofluorescence analysis detected endogenous Sgsm1 associated
with the Golgi apparatus in a mouse neuroblastoma cell line.

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunoprecipitations and Western blot analysis with a mouse
neuroblastoma cell line, Yang et al. (2007) showed that SGSM1 interacted
with endogenous Rap1 (see RAP1A, 179520) and Rap2 (see RAP2A, 179540).
Further work with transfected cells and epitope-tagged proteins showed
SGSM1, as well as 2 other SGSM proteins, SGSM2 (611418), and SGSM3
(610440), coimmunoprecipitated with all RAP proteins examined, including
RAP1A, RAP1B (179530), RAP2A, and RAP2B (179541). Using deletion
mutants, Yang et al. (2007) identified a RAP-interacting domain (RAPID)
(amino acids 301-350), containing 5 conserved blocks of sequence
following the RUN motif, shared by all the SGSM proteins. Yang et al.
(2007) also found that endogenous Rab4 (179511) and Rab11 (see RAB11A,
605570) interacted with all of the SGSM proteins in the mouse
neuroblastoma cell line; however, Rab3 (see RAB3A, 179490), Rab5 (see
RAB5A, 179512), and Rab8 (see RAB8A, 165040) interacted only with SGSM1
and SGSM3.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yang et al. (2007) determined that the SGSM1 gene contains 25 exons.

MAPPING

By sequencing the euchromatic region of chromosome 22 as part of the
Human Genome Project, Yang et al. (2007) identified the SGSM1 gene on
chromosome 22q11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. XXII. The complete sequences of 50 new
cDNA clones which code for large proteins. DNA Res. 8: 319-327,
2001.

2. Yang, H.; Sasaki, T.; Minoshima, S.; Shimizu, N.: Identification
of three novel proteins (SGSM1, 2, 3) which modulate small G protein
(RAP and RAB)-mediated signaling pathway. Genomics 90: 249-260,
2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/10/2007

EDITED carol: 09/13/2007
carol: 9/10/2007

607170	TITLE *607170 CYSTEINE-RICH PROTEIN WITH EGF-LIKE DOMAINS 1; CRELD1
;;CIRRIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Epidermal growth factor (EGF; 131530)-like repeats are a class of
cysteine-rich domains that mediate interactions between proteins of
diverse function. EGF domains are found in proteins that are either
completely secreted or have transmembrane regions that tether the
protein to the cell surface. CRELD1 is the founding member of a family
of matricellular proteins.

CLONING

By screening EST clones mapped to chromosome 3p25-p24.2, Rupp et al.
(2002) identified CRELD1, which shows sequence similarity to
extracellular matrix proteins. The full-length clone encodes a deduced
420-amino acid protein. Structural analysis suggested that CRELD1 is a
cell adhesion molecule that contains an N-terminal signal sequence; 2
type III transmembrane domains separated by a short cytoplasmic loop; a
tandem array of EGF-like repeats; and a region rich in glutamate and
tryptophan residues (WE domain). It also has 2 putative N-linked
glycosylation sites and several possible serine, threonine, and tyrosine
phosphorylation sites. Utilization of an alternative exon 9 (exon 9b
within intron 9) results in a protein with a unique C terminus that has
no predicted transmembrane domain. Rupp et al. (2002) also cloned the
cow and mouse orthologs of CRELD1, which share 94% and 92% amino acid
identity with human CRELD1, respectively. Database analysis revealed
that the CRELD1 gene is highly conserved across species, including
Drosophila and C. elegans.

Using Northern blot analysis, Rupp et al. (2002) detected ubiquitous
expression of a major 2.1-kb CRELD1 transcript, with highest expression
in fetal lung, liver, and kidney, and in adult heart, brain, and
skeletal muscle. Adult brain also showed an alternative transcript of
2.5 kb, and several heart regions showed an additional transcript of 2.3
kb. By Northern array analysis, Rupp et al. (2002) determined that the
variant that utilizes exon 9b is expressed in adult brain, thymus, lymph
node, and several areas of the gastrointestinal tract, and in fetal
spleen, thymus, and lung. In situ hybridization in developing chick
embryos revealed expression of Creld1 at all time points and localized
high levels of expression in the developing heart, limb buds, mandible,
branchial arches, and brain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rupp et al. (2002) determined that the CRELD1 gene contains 11 exons
spanning approximately 12 kb. The major 2.1-kb transcript utilizes exons
1 through 10. There are repetitive elements (SINE and LINE class) in
introns 1, 2, 3, 4, and 9 and a simple hexanucleotide repeat in intron
6.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis and analysis of a BAC contig, Rupp et al.
(2002) mapped the CRELD1 gene to chromosome 3p25.3. Radiation hybrid
analysis localized the mouse Creld1 gene to distal chromosome 6, which
shows homology of synteny with human chromosome 3p25.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Rupp et al. (2002) noted that the CRELD1 gene is in a region of loss of
heterozygosity for several types of cancer.

In a patient with an isolated atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD2;
606217), Robinson et al. (2003) identified an arg329-to-cys mutation
(R329C; 607170.0001) in the CRELD1 gene, which was present but not
expressed in the proband's father, brother, or sister. These findings
were consistent with previous observations of incomplete penetrance in
AVSD (Pierpont et al., 2000). Given the low penetrance observed in this
family, Robinson et al. (2003) proposed that CRELD1 is an AVSD
susceptibility gene and that CRELD1 mutations increase the risk of
developing a heart defect, rather than being directly causative. In 2
other patients, Robinson et al. (2003) identified thr311-to-ile (T311I;
607170.0002) and arg107-to-his (R107H; 607170.0003) mutations,
respectively.

Among 49 patients with AVSD, Zatyka et al. (2005) identified 5 novel
sequence variants in the CRELD1 gene. Three of the novel variants were
also identified in normal controls, 1 was a silent change, and 1 was
also seen in 2 family members without congenital heart disease
(607170.0004). Genetic analysis of 12 patients with 3p- syndrome
(613792) showed that the CRELD1 gene was deleted in all 5 patients with
an AVSD but was also deleted in 4 patients without congenital heart
disease. Zatyka et al. (2005) concluded that CRELD1 deletions are
unlikely to account for AVSD in children with 3p deletions but that rare
missense mutations may confer susceptibility to AVSD in a subset of
patients.

Because trisomy 21 (190685) is by far the most common finding associated
with AVSD, Maslen et al. (2006) analyzed the CRELD1 gene in 39
individuals with Down syndrome and complete AVSD. They identified
heterozygosity for missense mutations in 2 infants (607170.0001 and
607170.0005, respectively), and suggested that defects in CRELD1 may
contribute to the pathogenesis of AVSD in the context of trisomy 21.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ATRIOVENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECT, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 2
CRELD1, ARG329CYS

In an individual with an isolated partial atrioventricular septal defect
(606217), Robinson et al. (2003) identified a heterozygous 4201C-T
transition in exon 9 of the CRELD1 gene, resulting in an arg329-to-cys
(R329C) substitution in the second cb-EGF domain. The addition of a free
cysteine residue to a cb-EGF domain disrupted its disulfide bonding
pattern. The mutation was inherited from the father who, like a brother
and sister of the proband who also carried the mutation, did not report
having a heart defect. Special studies likewise showed structurally
normal hearts. These findings were consistent with previous observations
of incomplete penetrance in AVSD (Pierpont et al., 2000).

In an infant with Down syndrome (190685) and complete atrioventricular
septal defect, Maslen et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for the
R329C mutation. The infant also had patent ductus arteriosus, tricuspid
regurgitation, anomalous hepatic drainage to the right atrium, and
pulmonary hypertension. The mutation was inherited from the mother, a
normal euploid individual with no evidence of a heart defect. The
mutation was not found in 30 individuals with Down syndrome and no heart
defect by echocardiography.

Ackerman et al. (2012) identified this mutation in 2 individuals with
Down syndrome and atrioventricular septal defect. The mutation was not
seen in 141 controls who had Down syndrome but no AVSD.

.0002
ATRIOVENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECT, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 2
CRELD1, THR311ILE

In an individual with an isolated partial atrioventricular septal defect
(606217), Robinson et al. (2003) identified a heterozygous 4148C-T
transition in exon 9 of the CRELD1 gene, resulting in a thr311-to-ile
(T311I) mutation in the second cb-EGF domain.

.0003
ATRIOVENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECT, PARTIAL, WITH HETEROTAXY SYNDROME
CRELD1, ARG107HIS

In a patient of mixed Hispanic and African American descent with partial
atrioventricular septal defect and features of heterotaxy syndrome
(dextrocardia, right ventricle aorta with pulmonary atresia, and right
aortic arch) (see 606217), Robinson et al. (2003) identified a
heterozygous 1566G-A transition in exon 3 of the CRELD1 gene, resulting
in an arg107-to-his (R107H) mutation in the highly conserved WE domain
of the gene. No extracardiac abnormalities were detected.

.0004
ATRIOVENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECT, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 2
CRELD1, PRO162ALA

In a patient with sporadic partial atrioventricular septal defect
(600309) and a 47,XXX karyotype, Zatyka et al. (2005) identified a
484C-G transversion in exon 5 of the CRELD1 gene, resulting in a
pro162-to-ala (P162A) substitution. The mutation was not identified in
200 control chromosomes but was found in the patient's mother and
maternal grandmother, neither of whom had congenital heart disease.
Zatyka et al. (2005) suggested that the P162A mutation, if causative,
showed reduced penetrance.

.0005
ATRIOVENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECT, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 2
CRELD1, GLU414LYS

In an infant with Down syndrome (190685) and complete balanced
atrioventricular septal defect and tricuspid regurgitation, Maslen et
al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for a 1240G-A transition in exon 10
of the CRELD1 gene, resulting in a glu414-to-lys (E414K) substitution.
The mutation was not found in either parent, in 400 race-relevant
chromosomes, or in 30 individuals with Down syndrome and no heart defect
by echocardiography.

Ackerman et al. (2012) identified this mutation in 1 patient with Down
syndrome and AVSD; it was not identified in 141 individuals with Down
syndrome and no congenital heart defect.

REFERENCE 1. Ackerman, C.; Locke, A. E.; Feingold, E.; Reshey, B.; Espana, K.;
Thusberg, J.; Mooney, S.; Bean, L. J. H.; Dooley, K. J.; Cua, C. L.;
Reeves, R. H.; Sherman, S. L.; Maslen, C. L.: An excess of deleterious
variants in VEGF-A pathway genes in Down-syndrome-associated atrioventricular
septal defects. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 91: 646-659, 2012.

2. Maslen, C.; Babcock, D.; Robinson, S. W.; Bean, L. J. H.; Dooley,
K. J.; Willour, V. L.; Sherman, S. L.: CRELD1 mutations contribute
to the occurrence of cardiac atrioventricular septal defects in Down
syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A: 2501-2505, 2006.

3. Pierpont, M. E. M.; Markwald, R. R.; Lin, A. E.: Genetic aspects
of atrioventricular septal defects. Am. J. Med. Genet. 97: 289-296,
2000.

4. Robinson, S. W.; Morris, C. D.; Goldmuntz, E.; Reller, M. D.; Jones,
M. A.; Steiner, R. D.; Maslen, C. L.: Missense mutations in CRELD1
are associated with cardiac atrioventricular septal defects. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 72: 1047-1052, 2003.

5. Rupp, P. A.; Fouad, G. T.; Egelston, C. A.; Reifsteck, C. A.; Olson,
S. B.; Knosp, W. M.; Glanville, R. W.; Thornburg, K. L.; Robinson,
S. W.; Maslen, C. L.: Identification, genomic organization and mRNA
expression of CRELD1, the founding member of a unique family of matricellular
proteins. Gene 293: 47-57, 2002.

6. Zatyka, M.; Priestley, M.; Ladusans, E. J.; Fryer, A. E.; Mason,
J.; Latif, F.; Maher, E. R.: Analysis of CRELD1 as a candidate 3p25
atrioventicular (sic) septal defect locus (AVSD2). (Letter) Clin.
Genet. 67: 526-528, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/7/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/5/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/18/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/23/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/11/2003

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/27/2002

EDITED alopez: 02/13/2013
terry: 2/7/2013
carol: 4/11/2011
carol: 3/3/2011
alopez: 3/7/2008
wwang: 2/5/2007
tkritzer: 5/19/2005
ckniffin: 5/18/2005
tkritzer: 10/29/2003
carol: 4/23/2003
tkritzer: 4/23/2003
tkritzer: 4/17/2003
terry: 4/11/2003
mgross: 8/27/2002

603816	TITLE *603816 AXIS INHIBITOR 1; AXIN1
;;AXIN;;
FUSED, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

During embryonic development and tissue homeostasis in adults, the Wnt
(see 164820)-beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806) signaling pathway modulates
cellular differentiation, proliferation, movement, and polarity. AXIN1
has both positive and negative regulatory roles in Wnt-beta-catenin
signaling. AXIN1 is a core component of a 'destruction complex' that
promotes phosphorylation and polyubiquitination of cytoplasmic
beta-catenin, resulting in beta-catenin proteasomal degradation in the
absence of Wnt signaling. Nuclear accumulation of AXIN1 can positively
influence beta-catenin-mediated transcription during Wnt signaling (Lui
et al., 2011).

CLONING

In the vertebrate embryo, the formation of the dorsal-ventral axis
depends on the activity of the Wnt signaling pathway (see 164820).
Mutations in the mouse gene 'fused' (fu) cause axis duplication in
homozygous mouse embryos. Zeng et al. (1997) renamed the fu gene 'axin'
to distinguish it from the unrelated Drosophila 'fused' gene, and cloned
mouse and human axin cDNAs. The human AXIN gene encodes a 900-amino acid
polypeptide with 87% identity to the mouse protein. Although the
sequence contains a bipartite nuclear localization signal, Zeng et al.
(1997) did not find that the protein was localized to the nucleus. The
sequence also contains a regulator of G protein signaling domain (RGS;
see 602189) and a C-terminal region with homology to a conserved
sequence near the N terminus of Drosophila and vertebrate 'dishevelled'
proteins (see 601365).

GENE FUNCTION

Zeng et al. (1997) found that injection of axin mRNA into frog embryos
inhibited dorsal axis formation, apparently by interfering with
signaling through the Wnt pathway.

The WNT signaling pathway is essential for development and
organogenesis. WNT signaling stabilizes beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806),
which accumulates in the cytoplasm, binds to T-cell factor, also known
as lymphoid enhancer-binding factor-1 (LEF1; 153245), and then
upregulates downstream genes. Mutations in CTNNB1 or APC (611731) occur
in human neoplasms including colon cancers and hepatocellular carcinomas
(HCC; 114550). Because hepatocellular carcinomas tend to show
accumulation of beta-catenin more often than mutations in CTNNB1, Satoh
et al. (2000) looked for mutations in AXIN1, which encodes a key factor
for WNT signaling, in 6 HCC cell lines and 100 primary HCCs. Among the 4
cell lines and 87 HCCs in which they did not detect CTNNB1 mutations,
they identified AXIN1 mutations in 3 cell lines and 6 mutations in 5 of
the primary HCCs. In cell lines containing mutations in either gene,
they observed increased DNA binding of T-cell factor associated with
beta-catenin in nuclei. Adenovirus-mediated gene transfer of wildtype
AXIN1 induced apoptosis in hepatocellular and colorectal cancer cells
that had accumulated beta-catenin as a consequence of either APC,
CTNNB1, or AXIN1 mutation, suggested that axin may be an effective
therapeutic molecule for suppressing growth of hepatocellular and
colorectal cancers.

To investigate whether the '2-hit' mutation of AXIN1 occurred in 5
primary HCCs in which AXIN1 mutations were found, Satoh et al. (2000)
examined loss of heterozygosity (LOH) using 2 polymorphic markers and
found LOH in 3 tumors, indicating that AXIN1 is likely to function as a
tumor suppressor. All of the AXIN1 mutations detected in hepatoma cell
lines and primary HCCs predicted truncated proteins lacking the binding
site for beta-catenin; hence, these products would lack the ability to
form complexes with beta-catenin, which would thus not be degraded
properly.

To understand how the WNT coreceptor LRP5 (603506) is involved in
transducing the canonical WNT signals, Mao et al. (2001) identified axin
as a protein that interacts with the intracellular domain of LRP5. LRP5,
when expressed in fibroblast cells, showed no effect on the canonical
WNT signaling pathway by itself, but acted synergistically with WNT. In
contrast, LRP5 mutants lacking the extracellular domain functioned as
constitutively active forms that bound axin and that induced LEF1
activation by destabilizing axin and stabilizing beta-catenin. Addition
of WNT caused the translocation of axin to the membrane and enhanced the
interaction between axin and LRP5. In addition, the LRP5 sequences
involved in interactions with axin were found to be required for LEF1
activation. The authors concluded that the binding of axin to LRP5 is an
important part of the WNT signal transduction pathway. In Rat1 and P19
cells, Chen et al. (2006) found that Macf1 (608271) interacted directly
with Axin and translocated with the Axin complex to the cell membrane
upon Wnt stimulation.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) have the ability to renew themselves and
to give rise to all lineages of the blood. Reya et al. (2003) showed
that the WNT signaling pathway has an important role in this process.
Overexpression of activated beta-catenin expands the pool of HSCs in
long-term cultures by both phenotype and function. Furthermore, HSCs in
their normal microenvironment activate a LEF1/TCF reporter, which
indicates that HSCs respond to WNT signaling in vivo. To demonstrate the
physiologic significance of this pathway for HSC proliferation, Reya et
al. (2003) showed that the ectopic expression of axin or a frizzled
(603408) ligand-binding domain, inhibitors of the WNT signaling pathway,
led to inhibition of HSC growth in vitro and reduced reconstitution in
vivo. Furthermore, activation of WNT signaling in HSCs induced increased
expression of HOXB4 (142965) and NOTCH1 (190198), genes previously
implicated in self-renewal of HSCs. Reya et al. (2003) concluded that
the WNT signaling pathway is critical for normal HSC homeostasis in
vitro and in vivo, and provide insight into a potential molecular
hierarchy of regulation of HSC development.

Huang et al. (2009) used a chemical genetic screen to identify a small
molecule, XAV939, which selectively inhibits beta-catenin-mediated
transcription. XAV939 stimulates beta-catenin degradation by stabilizing
axin, the concentration-limiting component of the destruction complex.
Using a quantitative chemical proteomic approach, Huang et al. (2009)
found that XAV939 stabilizes axin by inhibiting the
poly-ADP-ribosylating enzymes tankyrase-1 (603303) and tankyrase-2
(607128). Both tankyrase isoforms interact with a highly conserved
domain of axin and stimulate its degradation through the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

Kim et al. (2013) reported that WNT signaling is governed by
phosphorylation regulation of the axin scaffolding function.
Phosphorylation by GSK3 (see 605004) kept axin activated (open) for
beta-catenin (116806) interaction and poised for engagement of LRP6
(603507). Formation of the WNT-induced LRP6-axin signaling complex
promoted axin dephosphorylation by protein phosphatase-1 (see 176875)
and inactivated (closed) axin through an intramolecular interaction.
Inactivation of axin diminished its association with beta-catenin and
LRP6, thereby inhibiting beta-catenin phosphorylation and enabling
activated LRP6 to selectively recruit active axin for inactivation
reiteratively.

Lui et al. (2011) found that the deubiquitinating protease USP34
(615295) stabilized nuclear AXIN1 in human cell lines and promoted
expression of beta-catenin target genes. USP34 immunoprecipitated with
ubiquitinated AXIN1. Lui et al. (2011) noted that tankyrase-dependent
poly-ADP-ribosylation of AXIN1 is a prerequisite for AXIN1
ubiquitination. Knockdown of USP34 or both AXIN1 and AXIN2 together in
human cell lines reduced Wnt reporter activity, suggesting that rescue
of AXIN1 from proteasomal degradation contributes to the positive effect
of AXIN1 on Wnt signaling. Lui et al. (2011) concluded that nuclear
AXIN1 has a positive regulatory role in Wnt-beta-catenin signaling that
is controlled by USP34 opposing tankyrase-dependent ubiquitination of
AXIN1.

MAPPING

By inclusion within mapped cosmids, Zeng et al. (1997) mapped the human
AXIN1 gene to 16p13.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The high rate of discordance in monozygotic twin pairs for most complex
diseases is a puzzle. The possibility has been considered that
stochastically or environmentally triggered differences in the
epigenetic status of key genes may be responsible for some MZ
discordance and, indeed, for much of the burden of complex disease. For
most complex traits, there are very few identified genes whose
methylation status can be investigated or pertinent tissue is accessible
for methylation studies on living subjects. Until such genes for common
diseases become known, therefore, it is worth investigating cases of MZ
discordance for rare diseases in which the causal gene(s) are known or
strongly suspected. Caudal duplication anomaly (607864) resembles the
spinal duplication seen in Axin(Fu) mice, which carry a mutation in the
Axin locus (Zeng et al., 1997). Highly penetrant mice displayed
bifurcating tails as a result of caudal duplication in the distal
region.

Oates et al. (2006) studied a pair of monozygotic (MZ) twins discordant
for a caudal duplication anomaly (607864), in whom Kroes et al. (2002)
had found no mutation in the AXIN1 gene. Using bisulfite sequencing,
they examined methylation at the promoter region of the AXIN1 gene in
these twins and in age-related singleton controls. Methylation of the
promoter region (608271.0002) in peripheral blood mononuclear cells was
variable among individuals, including MZ pairs. In the MZ pair
discordant for the caudal duplication, this region of the affected twin
was significantly more methylated than that of the unaffected twin (P
less than 0.0001), which was significantly more methylated than those of
the controls (P = 0.02). Oates et al. (2006) confirmed that this CpG
island functions as a promoter in vitro and that its activity is
inversely proportional to the extent of methylation. This finding raised
the possibility that hypermethylation of the AXIN1 promoter is
associated with the malformation. The authors suggested that this case
may be paradigmatic for some cases of MZ discordance.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
AXIN1, 33-BP DEL

In a primary hepatocellular carcinoma (114550), Satoh et al. (2000)
found a 33-bp deletion in exon 3 of the AXIN1 gene, involving 2 glycogen
synthase kinase-3-beta (GSK3B; 605004) phosphorylation sites. In
addition to this deletion they found 12 missense mutations, of which 9
occurred in codons encoding serine or threonine residues. They confirmed
that all 13 mutations found in primary HCCs occurred as somatic events.

.0002
CAUDAL DUPLICATION ANOMALY
AXIN1, PROMOTER HYPERMETHYLATION

Oates et al. (2006) examined methylation at the promoter region of the
AXIN1 gene in monozygotic twins discordant for a caudal duplication
anomaly (607864). Methylation of the promoter region in the peripheral
blood mononucleated cells was variable among individuals. The promoter
region of the AXIN1 gene was significantly more methylated in the twin
with the caudal duplication than in the unaffected twin, which was
significantly more methylated than those in controls.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, H.-J.; Lin, C.-M.; Lin, C.-S.; Perez-Olle, R.; Leung, C.
L.; Liem, R. K. H.: The role of microtubule actin cross-linking factor
1 (MACF1) in the Wnt signaling pathway. Genes Dev. 20: 1933-1945,
2006.

2. Huang, S.-M. A.; Mishina, Y. M.; Liu, S.; Cheung, A.; Stegmeier,
F.; Michaud, G. A.; Charlat, O.; Wiellette, E.; Zhang, Y.; Wiessner,
S.; Hild, M.; Shi, X.; and 24 others: Tankyrase inhibition stabilizes
axin and antagonizes Wnt signalling. Nature 461: 614-620, 2009.

3. Kim, S.-E.; Huang, H.; Zhao, M.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, A.; Semonov,
M. V.; MacDonald, B. T.; Zhang, X.; Abreu, J. G.; Peng, L.; He, X.
: Wnt stabilization of beta-catenin reveals principles for morphogen
receptor-scaffold assemblies. Science 340: 867-870, 2013.

4. Kroes, H. Y.; Takahashi, M.; Zijlstra, R. J.; Baert, J. A. L. L.;
Kooi, K. A.; Hofstra, R. M. W.: Two cases of the caudal duplication
anomaly including a discordant monozygotic twin. Am. J. Med. Genet. 112:
390-393, 2002.

5. Lui, T. T. H.; Lacroix, C.; Ahmed, S. M.; Goldenberg, S. J.; Leach,
C. A.; Daulat, A. M.; Angers, S.: The ubiquitin-specific protease
USP34 regulates axin stability and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 31: 2053-2065, 2011.

6. Mao, J.; Wang, J.; Liu, B.; Pan, W.; Farr, G. H., III; Flynn, C.;
Yuan, H.; Takada, S.; Kimelman, D.; Li, L.; Wu, D.: Low-density lipoprotein
receptor-related protein-5 binds to axin and regulates the canonical
Wnt signaling pathway. Molec. Cell 7: 801-809, 2001.

7. Oates, N. A.; van Vliet, J.; Duffy, D. L.; Kroes, H. Y.; Martin,
N. G.; Boomsma, D. I.; Campbell, M.; Coulthard, M. G.; Whitelaw, E.;
Chong, S.: Increased DNA methylation at the AXIN1 gene in a monozygotic
twin from a pair discordant for a caudal duplication anomaly. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 79: 155-162, 2006.

8. Reya, T.; Duncan, A. W.; Ailles, L.; Domen, J.; Scherer, D. C.;
Willert, K.; Hintz, L.; Nusse, R.; Weissman, I. L.: A role for Wnt
signalling in self-renewal of haematopoietic stem cells. Nature 423:
409-414, 2003.

9. Satoh, S.; Daigo, Y.; Furukawa, Y.; Kato, T.; Miwa, N.; Nishiwaki,
T.; Kawasoe, T.; Ishiguro, H.; Fujita, M.; Tokino, T.; Sasaki, Y.;
Imaoka, S.; Murata, M.; Shimano, T.; Yamaoka, Y.; Nakamura, Y.: AXIN1
mutations in hepatocellular carcinomas, and growth suppression in
cancer cells by virus-mediated transfer of AXIN1. Nature Genet. 24:
245-250, 2000.

10. Zeng, L.; Fagotto, F.; Zhang, T.; Hsu, W.; Vasicek, T. J.; Perry,
W. L., III; Lee, J. J.; Tilghman, S. M.; Gumbiner, B. M.; Costantini,
F.: The mouse fused locus encodes axin, an inhibitor of the Wnt signaling
pathway that regulates embryonic axis formation. Cell 90: 181-192,
1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 06/27/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/25/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/13/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/18/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/16/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/6/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/6/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/1/2000

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 5/18/1999

EDITED mgross: 06/27/2013
alopez: 6/25/2013
alopez: 11/18/2009
terry: 11/13/2009
ckniffin: 2/5/2008
wwang: 9/18/2006
alopez: 6/23/2006
terry: 6/16/2006
alopez: 5/28/2003
alopez: 5/6/2003
terry: 5/6/2003
carol: 11/14/2001
mgross: 8/6/2001
carol: 5/25/2000
alopez: 3/1/2000
terry: 3/1/2000
alopez: 9/13/1999
alopez: 5/18/1999

615143	TITLE *615143 UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE 20; USP20
;;VHL-INTERACTING DEUBIQUITINATING ENZYME 2; VDU2;;
KIAA1003
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Deubiquitinating enzymes (EC 3.4.19.12), such as USP20, remove ubiquitin
peptides from ubiquitin-containing substrates. These enzymes have a
major role in rescuing ubiquitinated proteins from proteasome-mediated
degradation (Curcio-Morelli et al., 2003).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned USP20, which they designated
KIAA1003. The deduced 913-amino acid protein shares significant
similarity with chicken Ubp41 (USP2; 604725). RT-PCR ELISA detected
relatively low USP20 expression in all adult and fetal tissues examined,
except spleen, which showed no USP20 expression. Highest levels were in
adult brain and ovary.

By searching databases for sequences similar to human VDU1 (USP33;
615146), followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE and PCR, Li et al. (2002)
cloned full-length human USP20, which they called VDU2. The deduced
protein contains 913 amino acids and has a calculated molecular mass of
102 kD. Human and mouse VDU2 share 92% amino acid identity, and human
VDU2 shares 59% amino acid identity with the human VDU1 type II isoform,
with strongest homology at the N- and C-terminal ends. VDU2 has 2 UCH
domains, which are crucial for deubiquitinating activity. Northern blot
analysis detected a 4.5-kb VDU2 transcript in all human tissues
examined, including brain, heart, placenta, lung, liver, muscle, kidney,
and pancreas.

By subcellular fractionation and immunofluorescence analysis,
Curcio-Morelli et al. (2003) found that both epitope-tagged VDU1 and
VDU2 localized to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in transfected HEK
cells.

By database analysis, Thorne et al. (2011) identified 3 USP20 variants
that encode the same protein.

GENE FUNCTION

Using in vivo and in vitro deubiquitination assays, Li et al. (2002)
showed that human VDU2 exhibited ubiquitin cleavage activity. They found
that human VDU1 and VDU2 competitively interacted with the E3 ubiquitin
ligase VHL (608537), resulting in ubiquitination and proteasome-mediated
degradation of both proteins.

Type II iodothyronine deiodinase (D2, or DIO2; 601413) converts
thyroxine into biologically active triiodothyronine (T3). T3 production
is terminated via ubiquitination and proteasome-mediated degradation of
D2. By coimmunoprecipitation analysis in transfected HEK293 cells,
Curcio-Morelli et al. (2003) found that both VDU1 and VDU2 bound D2.
Both VDU enzymes colocalized with D2 in the ER and reduced
ubiquitination and degradation of D2. Expression of Vdu1, but not Vdu2,
increased in mouse brown adipocytes following exposure to cold or
norepinephrine. Curcio-Morelli et al. (2003) concluded that VDU enzymes
recycle inactive ubiquitinated D2 to its active deubiquitinated form and
thereby regulate the supply of active thyroid hormone.

Thorne et al. (2011) found that knockdown of USP20 in HeLa cells
resulted in compensatory upregulation of USP33 expression.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1999) mapped the USP20 gene
to chromosome 9.

Hartz (2013) mapped the USP20 gene to chromosome 9q34.11 based on an
alignment of the USP20 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB023220) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Curcio-Morelli, C.; Zavacki, A. M.; Christofollete, M.; Gereben,
B.; de Freitas, B. C. G.; Harney, J. W.; Li, Z.; Wu, G.; Bianco, A.
C.: Deubiquitination of type 2 iodothyronine deiodinase by von Hippel-Lindau
protein-interacting deubiquitinating enzymes regulates thyroid hormone
activation. J. Clin. Invest. 112: 189-196, 2003.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/26/2013.

3. Li, Z.; Wang, D.; Na, X.; Schoen, S. R.; Messing, E. M.; Wu, G.
: Identification of a deubiquitinating enzyme subfamily as substrates
of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 294 -700-709, 2002.

4. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

5. Thorne, C.; Eccles, R. L.; Coulson, J. M.; Urbe, S.; Clague, M.
J.: Isoform-specific localization of the deubiquitinase USP33 to
the Golgi apparatus. Traffic 12: 1563-1574, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 04/17/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/17/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/27/2013

EDITED mgross: 04/17/2013
mgross: 4/17/2013
mgross: 3/27/2013

139259	TITLE *139259 G1- TO S-PHASE TRANSITION 1; GSPT1
;;GST1, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF; GST1;;
PEPTIDE CHAIN RELEASE FACTOR 3A; ERF3A;;
ETF3A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kikuchi et al. (1988) isolated a gene from a yeast genomic library that
could complement a temperature-sensitive mutant of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. The gene, termed GST1, seemed to be essential for the G1- to
S-phase transition in the yeast cell cycle. The gene product appeared to
be a GTP-binding protein of molecular mass 76,565 Da with 38% identity
in amino acid sequence with the alpha subunit of elongation factor-1
(130590). Hoshino et al. (1989) cloned the human equivalent from a cDNA
library.

Hoshino et al. (1998) cloned mouse Gspt1. The deduced 635-amino acid
protein has a unique N terminus and a conserved C-terminal eukaryotic
elongation factor-1-alpha-like domain. The mouse and human Gspt1
proteins share 94% sequence identity. RT-PCR analysis indicated
expression of Gspt1 in all mouse tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Eukaryotic RF1 (ETF1; 600285) and RF3 are involved in translation
termination. In vitro, RF1 catalyzes the release of the polypeptide
chain without any stop codon specificity; the GTP-binding protein RF3
confers GTP dependence to the termination process and stimulates RF1
activity. Le Goff et al. (1997) used tRNA-mediated nonsense suppression
of different stop codons in a CAT reporter gene to analyze the
polypeptide chain release factor activities of recombinant human RF1 and
RF3 proteins overexpressed in human cells. Using a CAT assay, they
measured the competition between the suppressor tRNA and the release
factors when a stop codon was present in the ribosomal A site.
Regardless of which of the 3 stop codons was present in the CAT open
reading frame, the overexpression of RF1 alone markedly decreased
translational read-through by suppressor tRNA. Thus, Le Goff et al.
(1997) concluded that RF1 has intrinsic antisuppressor activity. The
levels of antisuppression when both RF1 and RF3 were overexpressed were
almost the same as those when RF1 was overexpressed alone, suggesting
that RF1-RF3 complex-mediated termination may be controlled by the
expression level of RF1. Overexpression of RF3 alone had an inhibitory
effect on CAT gene expression. CAT mRNA stability studies suggested that
RF3 inhibits gene expression at the transcriptional level. Le Goff et
al. (1997) suggested that RF3 may perform other functions, including the
stimulation of RF1 activity, in vivo.

Hoshino et al. (1998) found that expression of Gspt1 by Swiss 3T3 cells
increased with serum or phorbol ester stimulation. By
coimmunoprecipitation and yeast 2-hybrid analyses, they found
interaction between mouse Gspt1 and human eRF1. Hoshino et al. (1998)
hypothesized that Gspt1, in a binary complex with eRF1, functions as a
polypeptide chain release factor.

Alkalaeva et al. (2006) reconstituted eukaryotic translation initiation,
elongation, and termination processes in vitro on a model mRNA encoding
a tetrapeptide followed by a UAA stop codon using individual 40S and 60S
ribosomal subunits and the complete set of individual initiation,
elongation, and release factors. They found that binding of human ERF1
and ERF3A and GTP to the ribosomal pretermination complex induced a
structural rearrangement characterized by a 2-nucleotide forward shift
of the toeprint attributed to the pretermination complex. Subsequent GTP
hydrolysis was required for rapid hydrolysis of peptidyl tRNA in the
pretermination complex. Cooperativity between ERF1 and ERF3A in ensuring
fast peptidyl-tRNA hydrolysis required the ERF3A-binding C-terminal
domain of ERF1.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen and in vitro and in vivo binding assays,
including reciprocal immunoprecipitation assays, Tompkins et al. (2006)
showed that GSPT1 bound the p19(ARF) isoform of CDKN2A (600160), but not
the p16(INK4A) isoform.

MAPPING

By nonradioactive in situ hybridization, Ozawa et al. (1992) mapped the
GSPT1 gene, the human homolog of the yeast gene GST1, to human
chromosome 16p13.1. Southern blot hybridization with a panel of
human-rodent somatic cells confirmed the localization of the GSPT1 gene
on chromosome 16 and also showed the existence of a homologous gene on
the X chromosome (GSPT2; 300418). They pointed out that a breakpoint for
nonrandom chromosome rearrangements has been found in the region of
GSPT1 in patients with acute nonlymphocytic leukemia.

REFERENCE 1. Alkalaeva, E. Z.; Pisarev, A. V.; Frolova, L. Y.; Kisselev, L.
L.; Pestova, T. V.: In vitro reconstitution of eukaryotic translation
reveals cooperativity between release factors eRF1 and eRF3. Cell 125:
1125-1136, 2006.

2. Hoshino, S.; Imai, M.; Mizutani, M.; Kikuchi, Y.; Hanaoka, F.;
Ui, M.; Katada, T.: Molecular cloning of a novel member of the eukaryotic
polypeptide chain-releasing factors (eRF): its identification as eRF3
interacting with eRF1. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 22254-22259, 1998.

3. Hoshino, S.; Miyazawa, H.; Enomoto, T.; Hanaoka, F.; Kikuchi, Y.;
Kikuchi, A.; Ui, M.: A human homologue of the yeast GST1 gene codes
for a GTP-binding protein and is expressed in a proliferation-dependent
manner in mammalian cells. EMBO J. 8: 3807-3814, 1989.

4. Kikuchi, Y.; Shimatake, H.; Kikucki, A.: A yeast gene required
for the G1-to-S transition encodes a protein containing an A-kinase
target site and GTPase domain. EMBO J. 7: 1175-1182, 1988.

5. Le Goff, X.; Philippe, M.; Jean-Jean, O.: Overexpression of human
release factor 1 alone has an antisuppressor effect in human cells. Molec.
Cell Biol. 17: 3164-3172, 1997.

6. Ozawa, K.; Murakami, Y.; Eki, T.; Yokoyama, K.; Soeda, E.; Hoshino,
S.; Ui, M.; Hanaoka, F.: Mapping of the human GSPT1 gene, a human
homolog of the yeast GST1 gene, to chromosomal band 16p13.1. Somat.
Cell Molec. Genet. 18: 189-194, 1992.

7. Tompkins, V.; Hagen, J.; Zediak, V. P.; Quelle, D. E.: Identification
of novel ARF binding proteins by two-hybrid screening. Cell Cycle 5:
641-646, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 4/28/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/29/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/13/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/18/1990

EDITED wwang: 05/05/2010
mgross: 4/28/2010
mgross: 11/29/2006
mgross: 12/13/2002
carol: 8/16/1999
terry: 8/11/1998
carol: 8/13/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/29/1992
carol: 2/11/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
supermim: 1/18/1990

614570	TITLE *614570 KINESIN FAMILY MEMBER 18B; KIF18B
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

KIF18B belongs to the kinesin superfamily of ATPases that move cargo
molecules or organelles along microtubules from the center of the cell
toward the cell periphery. Kinesins contain 4 major domains: a globular
motor domain with binding sites for microtubules and ATP; a short linker
region; a long coiled-coil stalk for dimerization; and a cargo-binding
C-terminal tail domain (summary by Lee et al., 2010).

CLONING

By RT-PCR of HeLa cell mRNA, Lee et al. (2010) cloned KIF18B. The
deduced 842-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 92 kD.
The motor and stalk domains of KIF18B share 60% identity with the
corresponding region of KIF18A (611271). RT-PCR of several human cell
lines revealed a KIF18B splice variant encoding a deduced 873-amino acid
protein, which the authors called isoform-2. Compared with isoform-1,
isoform-2 contains a unique C-terminal end that includes 3 overlapping
PxxP motifs. Northern blot analysis of HeLa cell RNA revealed a 3.0-kb
transcript. RNA dot-blot analysis of several tissues revealed high
KIF18B expression only in amygdala, with weak expression in a limited
number of other adult tissues, fetal tissues, and human cell lines.
RT-PCR analysis revealed variable KIF18B expression in all human cell
lines examined. Western blot analysis of synchronized HeLa cells showed
that KIF18B expression was elevated at late G2 through metaphase and
that KIF18B had an apparent molecular mass of 120 kD.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that KIF18B was present
predominantly in the nucleus and to a lesser extent in the cytoplasm of
interphase cells. During mitosis, most KIF18B was closely associated
with the plus end of astral microtubules emanating from the spindle pole
during prometaphase and metaphase. KIF18B was not detected at anaphase
and telophase. Database analysis revealed orthologs of KIF18B in several
vertebrate species.

Tanenbaum et al. (2011) found that KIF18B localized to microtubule plus
ends during early prometaphase in human U2OS osteosarcoma cells. KIF18B
was not expressed in G1 and was sequestered in the nucleus in G2. KIF18B
was completely degraded at the metaphase-anaphase transition.

GENE FUNCTION

By mutation analysis, Lee et al. (2010) found that only 1 of 3 putative
nuclear localization signals in KIF18B directed nuclear localization.

Using U2OS human osteosarcoma cells, Tanenbaum et al. (2011) identified
KIF18B as an essential component of a microtubule-depolymerizing complex
containing MCAK (KIF2C; 604538) and EB1 (MAPRE1; 603108). KIF18B
interacted independently with MCAK and a subset of EB1 at microtubule
plus ends. All 3 proteins, in addition to KIF18B motor activity, were
required for efficient plus-end microtubule depolymerization. Knockdown
of either KIF18B or MCAK reduced the localization of the other protein
at microtubule plus ends and reduced microtubule depolymerization.
Disruption of the MCAK-KIF18B interaction by mutation of the interacting
domains, or phosphorylation of MCAK by the microtubule-polymerizing
agents Aurora A (AURKA; 603072) or Aurora B (AURKB; 604970), similarly
blocked microtubule depolymerization. Use of a KIF5B (602809)/KIF18B
chimera revealed that the major role of KIF18B motor domain in this
process was to provide plus end-directed movement along microtubules.
Tanenbaum et al. (2011) hypothesized that KIF18B, released into the
cytoplasm upon mitotic nuclear envelope breakdown, is recruited to
microtubule plus ends through interaction with EB1 and MCAK. The motor
activity of KIF18B directs the complex to the tip of microtubules, and
the depolymerizing activity of the complex is modulated by Aurora A and
Aurora B.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lee et al. (2010) determined that the KIF18B gene contains 15 exons, the
last of which is alternatively spliced.

MAPPING

Hartz (2012) mapped the KIF18B gene to chromosome 17q21.31 based on an
alignment of the KIF18B sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC044933) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/28/2012.

2. Lee, Y. M.; Kim, E.; Park, M.; Moon, E.; Ahn, S.-M.; Kim, W.; Hwang,
K. B.; Kim, Y. K.; Choi, W.; Kim, W.: Cell cycle-regulated expression
and subcellular localization of a kinesin-8 member human KIF18B. Gene 466:
16-25, 2010.

3. Tanenbaum, M. E.; Macurek, L.; van der Vaart, B.; Galli, M.; Akhmanova,
A.; Medema, R. H.: A complex of Kif18b and MCAK promotes microtubule
depolymerization and is negatively regulated by Aurora kinases. Curr.
Biol. 21: 1356-1365, 2011.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/13/2012

EDITED terry: 05/08/2012
mgross: 4/13/2012

114070	TITLE *114070 ANNEXIN A6; ANXA6
;;ANNEXIN VI; ANX6;;
CALCIUM-BINDING PROTEIN p68;;
CALELECTRIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ANXA6 is a member of a family of proteins that bind membrane or
cytoskeleton in a Ca(2+)-dependent manner. These proteins are
characterized by homologous amino acid sequences that are present in
multiple copies in each protein. The family is variously known as
calelectrins, annexins, calpactins, endonexins, and lipocortins.

CLONING

Three members of the calelectrin family with apparent molecular masses
of 67 kD, 35 kD, and 32.5 kD had been purified to homogeneity. Sudhof et
al. (1988) reported the cDNA cloning and primary structure of human
67-kD calelectrin. The deduced sequence contains 8 similar repeats, each
consisting of about 68 amino acids. Comparison of the 67-kD calelectrin
sequence with the protein sequences of lipocortins I and II (151690,
151740) demonstrated a close relationship (42 to 45% identity).

Thomas et al. (2002) found that Anxa6 showed a punctate supranuclear and
apical distribution in rat pancreatic acinary cells. Anxa6 colocalized
with Crhsp28, a component of a protein complex associated with vesicular
structures.

MAPPING

Davies et al. (1989) assigned the ANXA6 gene to 5q32-q34 by use of a
cDNA clone to probe genomic DNA from rodent-human somatic cell hybrids
and for in situ hybridization. The corresponding gene in the mouse was
assigned to chromosome 11 by probing DNA from rodent-rodent somatic cell
hybrids. Warrington and Bengtsson (1994) used 3 physical mapping methods
(radiation hybrid mapping, pulsed field gel electrophoresis, and
fluorescence in situ hybridization of interphase nuclei) to determine
the order and relative distances between 12 loci in the 5q31-q33 region.
ANXA6 was one of those loci.

GENE STRUCTURE

Smith et al. (1994) demonstrated that the ANX6 gene is approximately 60
kb long and contains 26 exons. The genomic sequence at the 3-prime end
does not contain a canonical polyadenylylation signal. The genomic
sequence upstream of the transcription start site contains TATAA and
CAAT motifs. The spatial organization of the exons revealed no obvious
similarities between the 2 halves of the ANX6 gene. Comparison of the
intron/exon boundary positions of ANX6 with those of ANX1 (151690) and
ANX2 (151740) revealed that within the repeated domains the breakpoints
are perfectly conserved except for exon 8, which is 1 codon smaller in
ANX2. The corresponding point in the second half of ANX6 is represented
by 2 exons, exons 20 and 21. The latter exon is alternatively spliced,
giving rise to annexin VI isoforms that differ with respect to a 6-amino
acid insertion at the start of repeat 7.

GENE FUNCTION

Thomas et al. (2002) found that stimulation of rat pancreatic acinary
cells with the secretagogue cholecystokinin (118440) enhanced the
colocalization of Anxa6 and Crhsp28 within regions of acini immediately
below the apical plasma membrane. Thomas et al. (2002) concluded that
Ca(2+)-dependent binding between CRHSP28 and ANXA6 is required for
acinar cell membrane trafficking events and digestive enzyme secretion.

REFERENCE 1. Davies, A. A.; Moss, S. E.; Crompton, M. R.; Jones, T. A.; Spurr,
N. K.; Sheer, D.; Kozak, C.; Crumpton, M. J.: The gene coding for
the p68 calcium-binding protein is localized to bands q32-q34 of human
chromosome 5, and to mouse chromosome 11. Hum. Genet. 82: 234-238,
1989.

2. Smith, P. D.; Davies, A.; Crumpton, M. J.; Moss, S. E.: Structure
of the human annexin VI gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 2713-2717,
1994.

3. Sudhof, T. C.; Slaughter, C. A.; Leznicki, I.; Barjon, P.; Reynolds,
G. A.: Human 67-kDa calelectrin contains a duplication of four repeats
found in 35-kDa lipocortins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 664-668,
1988.

4. Thomas, D. D. H.; Kaspar, K. M.; Taft, W. B.; Weng, N.; Rodenkirch,
L. A.; Groblewski, G. E.: Identification of annexin VI as a Ca(2+)-sensitive
CRHSP-28-binding protein in pancreatic acinar cells. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
35496-35502, 2002.

5. Warrington, J. A.; Bengtsson, U.: High-resolution physical mapping
of human 5q31-q33 using three methods: radiation hybrid mapping, interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridization, and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Genomics 24:
395-398, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/7/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/7/1989

EDITED terry: 05/20/2010
wwang: 6/22/2005
wwang: 6/17/2005
terry: 6/7/2005
alopez: 6/5/2002
mgross: 9/17/1999
psherman: 3/31/1998
terry: 1/9/1995
jason: 7/15/1994
carol: 11/3/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
supermim: 2/9/1990

606605	TITLE *606605 ATR-INTERACTING PROTEIN; ATRIP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Cortez et al. (2001) searched for substrates of ATM (see 607585) and ATR
(601215) and identified a protein of 86 kD, which they called ATRIP for
'ATR-interacting protein.' The full-length cDNA encodes a deduced
791-amino acid protein with a coiled-coil domain near its N terminus.
RNA blotting indicated that ATRIP is expressed in all tissues tested.
Cortez et al. (2001) also identified an alternatively spliced exon
encoding amino acids 658 to 684 near the C-terminus. RT-PCR from 2 cell
lines indicated that both forms were expressed.

GENE FUNCTION

ATRIP is phosphorylated by ATR, regulates ATR expression, and is an
essential component of the DNA damage checkpoint pathway. Cortez et al.
(2001) demonstrated that ATR and ATRIP both localize to intranuclear
foci after DNA damage or inhibition of replication. Deletion of ATR
mediated by the Cre recombinase caused the loss of ATR and ATRIP
expression, loss of DNA damage checkpoint responses, and cell death.
Therefore, ATR is essential for the viability of human somatic cells.
Small interfering RNA directed against ATRIP caused the loss of both
ATRIP and ATR expression and the loss of checkpoint responses to DNA
damage. Cortez et al. (2001) concluded that ATRIP and ATR are mutually
dependent partners in cell cycle checkpoint signaling pathways.

The function of the ATR-ATRIP protein kinase complex is crucial for the
cellular response to replication stress and DNA damage. Zou and Elledge
(2003) demonstrated that replication protein A (RPA) complex, which
associates with single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), is required for recruitment
of ATR to sites of DNA damage and for ATR-mediated CHK1 (603078)
activation in human cells. In vitro, RPA stimulates the binding of ATRIP
to single-stranded DNA. The binding of ATRIP to RPA-coated
single-stranded DNA enables the ATR-ATRIP complex to associate with DNA
and stimulates phosphorylation of the RAD17 (603139) protein that is
bound to DNA. Furthermore, Ddc2, the budding yeast homolog of ATRIP, is
specifically recruited to double-stranded DNA breaks in an RPA-dependent
manner. A checkpoint-deficient mutant of RPA, rfa1-t11, is defective for
recruiting Ddc2 to single-stranded DNA both in vivo and in vitro. Zou
and Elledge (2003) concluded that RPA-coated single-stranded DNA is the
critical structure at sites of DNA damage that recruits the ATR-ATRIP
complex and facilitates its recognition of substrates for
phosphorylation and the initiation of checkpoint signaling.

By mutation analysis, Namiki and Zou (2006) identified 2 major
RPA-ssDNA-interacting domains of ATRIP in regions flanking the conserved
coiled-coil domain. They also identified an internal region of ATRIP
that exhibited affinity to single-stranded DNA. Namiki and Zou (2006)
concluded that there are multiple interactions between ATRIP and
RPA-ssDNA and that ATRIP may interact directly with ssDNA in the
ATRIP-RPA-ssDNA complex.

REFERENCE 1. Cortez, D.; Guntuku, S.; Qin, J.; Elledge, S. J.: ATR and ATRIP:
partners in checkpoint signaling. Science 294: 1713-1716, 2001.

2. Namiki, Y.; Zou, L.: ATRIP associates with replication protein
A-coated ssDNA through multiple interactions. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103:
580-585, 2006.

3. Zou, L.; Elledge, S. J.: Sensing DNA damage through ATRIP recognition
of RPA-ssDNA complexes. Science 300: 1542-1548, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/27/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/22/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/18/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/15/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/10/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/17/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/28/2002

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 1/10/2002

EDITED alopez: 01/14/2010
carol: 6/1/2007
alopez: 4/2/2007
terry: 3/27/2007
mgross: 8/22/2006
carol: 8/18/2006
ckniffin: 8/17/2006
terry: 8/15/2006
wwang: 3/24/2006
terry: 3/10/2006
alopez: 6/19/2003
terry: 6/17/2003
ckniffin: 3/11/2003
alopez: 1/28/2002
alopez: 1/10/2002

607927	TITLE *607927 ANKYRIN REPEATS- AND FYVE DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; ANKFY1
;;ANKYRIN REPEATS HOOKED TO A ZINC FINGER MOTIF; ANKHZN;;
KIAA1255
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ANKFY1 contains several protein-interacting domains and shares
significant identity with a number of S. cerevisiae proteins involved in
vesicular trafficking (Kuriyama et al., 2000).

CLONING

Ito et al. (1999) cloned mouse Ankfy1, which they designated Ankhzn. The
deduced 1,184-amino acid protein has an apparent molecular mass of 130
kD. Ankhzn contains an N-terminal coiled-coil domain, a BTB/POZ domain,
17 ankyrin repeats, and a C-terminal zinc finger motif. The ankyrin
repeats are separated into a group of 4 repeats in the N-terminal half
and a group of 13 repeats in the C-terminal half. Ito et al. (1999)
determined that there is a soluble form of Ankhzn and a form that
associates with endosomes.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned ANKFY1, which they designated
KIAA1255. The deduced protein shares 88% identity with mouse Ankhzn.
RT-PCR ELISA detected high expression in whole adult brain and
intermediate expression in all other tissues and specific brain regions
examined, including fetal brain.

By searching databases for sequences sharing homology with mouse Ankhzn,
followed by PCR, Kuriyama et al. (2000) cloned ANKHZN from a fetal brain
cDNA library. The deduced 1,166 amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of about 128 kD. ANKHZN shares 85% identity with mouse
Ankhzn, and the 2 proteins have the same domain structure. Kuriyama et
al. (2000) noted that the C-terminal zinc finger (FYVE) domain, which
contains 8 potential Zn(2+)-coordinating cysteine residues that bind 2
Zn(2+) ions, is well conserved among proteins related to intracellular
trafficking. Northern blot analysis detected a 7-kb transcript in both
human and mouse brain. RT-PCR detected expression in all tissues
examined. Subcellular fractionation of human kidney recovered ANKHZN in
both the soluble and membrane fractions.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kuriyama et al. (2000) determined that the ANKFY1 gene contains 25
exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1999) mapped the ANKFY1
gene to chromosome 17. By radiation hybrid analysis and FISH, Kuriyama
et al. (2000) mapped the ANKFY1 gene to chromosome 17p13. Southern blot
analysis indicated that ANKFY1 is a single-copy gene.

REFERENCE 1. Ito, K.; Ishii, N.; Miyashita, A.; Tominaga, K.; Kuriyama, H.;
Maruyama, H.; Shirai, M.; Naito, M.; Arakawa, M.; Kuwano, R.: Molecular
cloning of a novel 130-kDa cytoplasmic protein, Ankhzn, containing
ankyrin repeats hooked to a zinc finger motif. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 257: 206-213, 1999.

2. Kuriyama, H.; Asakawa, S.; Minoshima, S.; Maruyama, H.; Ishii,
N.; Ito, K.; Gejyo, F.; Arakawa, M.; Shimizu, N.; Kuwano, R.: Characterization
and chromosomal mapping of a novel human gene, ANKHZN. Gene 253:
151-160, 2000.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.; Nomura, N.;
Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human
genes. XV. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain
which code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 337-345, 1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/27/2003

EDITED mgross: 06/27/2003

