611569	TITLE *611569 CYTOSKELETON-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2; CKAP2
;;TUMOR- AND MICROTUBULE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN; TMAP;;
LB1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CKAP2 is a cytoskeleton-associated protein involved in mitotic
progression (Seki and Fang, 2007).

CLONING

By differential screening of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, followed by
database analysis, RT-PCR, and screening a human Jurkat T-cell cDNA
library, Maouche-Chretien et al. (1998) cloned CKAP2, which they called
LB1. The transcript contains 2 consensus polyadenylation signals and an
AU-rich mRNA-destabilizing motif. The deduced 683-amino acid protein has
a leucine- and isoleucine-rich domain and numerous potential
phosphorylation sites. Northern blot analysis detected variable
expression of a major 3.6- to 3.9-kb transcript and a minor 2.2-kb
transcript in all human tissues and cell lines examined. In vitro
transcription/translation produced a protein with an apparent molecular
mass of 85 kD by SDS-PAGE. Immunofluorescence analysis of transfected
COS cells showed that epitope-tagged CKAP2 localized to cytoplasmic
cytoskeletal filaments.

By differential display-PCR of primary human gastric adenocarcinomas,
followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE, Bae et al. (2003) cloned
full-length CKAP2 and a shorter variant, CKAP2S, resulting from
alternative splicing in exon 6. The full-length CKAP2 protein contains
682 amino acids, and the CKAP2S protein contains 494 amino acids.
Northern blot analysis showed that CKAP2 expression was higher in brain,
thymus, kidney, and placenta than in heart, skeletal muscle, lung,
leukocytes, and gastrointestinal tract. A second, smaller transcript was
detected in tissues with high CKAP2 expression. Endogenous CKAP2 and
fluorescence-tagged CKAP2 associated with the microtubule-organizing
center and with microtubules in HeLa cells, and this localization was
lost following treatment with a microtubule-destabilizing agent. Western
blot analysis detected endogenous CKAP2 at an apparent molecular mass of
75 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Maouche-Chretien et al. (1998) found that expression of LB1 was
upregulated in a patient with an immunoblastic subtype of diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma and in a patient with a multilobated centroblastic
subtype of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. In contrast, expression was
low or undetectable in 4 patients with polymorphic centroblastic diffuse
large B-cell lymphomas.

Using ribonuclease protection assays and RT-PCR, Bae et al. (2003) found
that CKAP2 and CKAP2S expression was upregulated in gastric tumor
tissues compared with matched normal mucosa. Immunohistochemical
analysis detected no CKAP2 protein in normal gastric mucosa, but it was
detected in all gastric adenocarcinomas and tubular adenomas examined.

Jeon et al. (2006) found that CKAP2 was not expressed in G0/G1-arrested
human foreskin fibroblasts, but that it was expressed in actively
dividing cells, gradually increasing between late G1 and G2/M. Knockdown
of CKAP2 reduced RB1 (614041) phosphorylation and increased p27 (CDKN1B;
600778) expression, and consequently reduced cell proliferation, whereas
constitutive CKAP2 expression increased RB phosphorylation and enhanced
proliferation.

The anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C; see 608473) is a
ubiquitin ligase that controls sister chromatid separation and exit from
mitosis. It recognizes 2 motifs in its substrates: the destruction (D)
box and the KEN box. Seki and Fang (2007) found that CKAP2 was degraded
by CDH1 (192090)-activated APC/C in Xenopus interphase extracts, but not
in mitotic extracts. CKAP2 contains 4 D boxes and a KEN box, and
mutation analysis showed that only the KEN box was required for
ubiquitination by APC/C-CDH1 and degradation in CDH1-activated
interphase extracts. Overexpression of CDH1 in HeLa cells reduced CKAP2
levels in a KEN box-dependent manner, whereas knockdown of CDH1
increased the half-life of CKAP2. CKAP2 associated with centrosomal
microtubules in late G2 in HeLa cells, but only after separation of
duplicated centrosomes. During mitosis, CKAP2 associated with spindle
poles and with spindle microtubules from prophase through anaphase and
disappeared from microtubules during cytokinesis. Knockdown of CKAP2 did
not alter the cell cycle distribution of cells or generate mitotic
effects. On the other hand, ectopic expression of either wildtype CKAP2
or a nondegradable CKAP2 mutant led to mitotic arrest with monopolar
spindles containing highly bundled microtubules. Seki and Fang (2007)
concluded that regulation of CKAP2 by APC/C is critical for normal
mitotic progression.

MAPPING

By FISH, Maouche-Chretien et al. (1998) mapped the CKAP2 gene to
chromosome 13q14.

REFERENCE 1. Bae, C.-D.; Sung, Y.-S.; Jeon, S.-M.; Suh, Y.; Yang, H.-K.; Kim,
Y. I.; Park, K.-H.; Choi, J.; Ahn, G.; Park, J.: Up-regulation of
cytoskeletal-associated protein 2 in primary human gastric adenocarcinomas. J.
Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 129: 621-630, 2003.

2. Jeon, S.-M.; Choi, B.; Hong, K. U.; Kim, E.; Seong, Y.-S.; Bae,
C.-D.; Park, J.: A cytoskeleton-associated protein, TMAP/CKAP2, is
involved in the proliferation of human foreskin fibroblasts. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 348: 222-228, 2006. Note: Erratum: Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 354: 839 only, 2007.

3. Maouche-Chretien, L.; Deleu, N.; Badoual, C.; Fraissignes, P.;
Berger, R.; Gaulard, P.; Romeo, P. H.; Leroy-Viard, K.: Identification
of a novel cDNA, encoding a cytoskeletal associated protein, differentially
expressed in diffuse large B cell lymphomas. Oncogene 17: 1245-1251,
1998.

4. Seki, A.; Fang, G.: CKAP2 is a spindle-associated protein degraded
by APC/C-Cdh1 during mitotic exit. J. Biol. Chem. 282: 15103-15113,
2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/31/2007

EDITED terry: 12/20/2012
alopez: 6/17/2011
alopez: 3/1/2011
mgross: 10/31/2007

