609178	TITLE *609178 MIS12, S. POMBE, HOMOLOG OF; MIS12
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for sequences similar to yeast Mis12, followed by PCR of a
HeLa cell cDNA library, Goshima et al. (2003) cloned MIS12. The deduced
205-amino acid protein contains 2 conserved blocks in its N-terminal 100
amino acids, followed by a coiled-coil region of about 50 amino acids.
Endogenous HeLa cell MIS12 had an apparent molecular mass of about 25
kD. Immunolocalization showed MIS12 colocalized at kinetochores with
CENPA (117139) and CENPC (117141), and its position during the cell
cycle was that of a typical kinetochore protein. The level of MIS12 did
not fluctuate during the cell cycle.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RNA interference (RNAi) in HeLa cells, Goshima et al. (2003)
demonstrated that reduced MIS12 resulted in misaligned metaphase
chromosomes, abnormally extended metaphase spindle length, lagging
anaphase chromosomes, and interphase micronuclei without mitotic delay.
Spindle checkpoint protein MAD2 (601467) temporally localized at
kinetochores at early mitotic stages after MIS12 RNAi. Kinetochore
localization of MIS12 was unaffected by CENPA RNAi.

Following MIS12 overexpression in HeLa cells, Obuse et al. (2004)
immunoprecipitated MIS12 in a kinetochore-associated complex that
contained PMF1 (609176), DC8 (609174), C20ORF172 (609175), and HP1-alpha
(CBX5; 604478). ZWINT (609177) also associated with the complex at
kinetochores during mitosis. Immunoprecipitation of transfected cells
indicated that MIS12 could form stable complexes with C20ORF172 and DC8.
Much weaker interaction was detected between MIS12 and ZWINT. Exclusion
chromatography revealed 3 peaks containing MIS12 and C20ORF172, but only
the middle peak, which had a mass of 669 kD, contained HP1-alpha. MIS12
knockdown by RNAi abolished the kinetochore association of ZWINT, DC8,
and C20ORF172.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the MIS12
gene to chromosome 17 (TMAP SHGC-36031).

REFERENCE 1. Goshima, G.; Kiyomitsu, T.; Yoda, K.; Yanagida, M.: Human centromere
chromatin protein hMis12, essential for equal segregation, is independent
of CENP-A loading pathway. J. Cell Biol. 160: 25-39, 2003.

2. Obuse, C.; Iwasaki, O.; Kiyomitsu, T.; Goshima, G.; Toyoda, Y.;
Yanagida, M.: A conserved Mis12 centromere complex is linked to heterochromatic
HP1 and outer kinetochore protein Zwint-1. Nature Cell Biol. 6:
1135-1141, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/27/2005

EDITED mgross: 01/28/2005
mgross: 1/27/2005

609542	TITLE *609542 ATPase, CLASS I, TYPE 8A, MEMBER 1; ATP8A1
;;ATPase II
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening a human skeletal muscle cDNA library using bovine ATPase
II, a presumed aminophospholipid translocase, followed by 5-prime RACE,
Mouro et al. (1999) cloned ATP8A1, which they called ATPase II. The
deduced 1,164 amino acid protein contains characteristics of members of
the third subfamily of P-type ATPases. Northern blot analysis detected a
9.5-kb transcript in most adult and fetal tissues examined. Highest
expression was in heart, brain, and skeletal muscle, and no expression
was detected in adult liver, testis, and placenta. RT-PCR revealed an
ATP8A1 splice variant that encodes a protein lacking 15 amino acids in
the predicted second intracytoplasmic loop near a phosphorylation site.
Transcripts encoding proteins with the insert were detected in brain,
skeletal muscle, and heart, and transcripts encoding proteins without
the sequence were detected in all tissues examined.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sobocki et al. (2005) determined that the ATP8A1 gene contains 37 exons
and spans 244 kb. A CpG island covers the entire 5-prime UTR, the entire
first exon, and part of the first intron. The promoter region lacks a
TATA box, but it contains a core promoter region for CPBP (602053)
binding and many other enhancer and repressor elements. The promoter
also has multiple transcription start sites. Sobocki et al. (2005)
identified 2 promoter variants distinguished by the presence or absence
of a 15-bp direct repeat within the GC-rich core promoter region.
Reporter gene assays showed strong promoter activity in human
oligodendroglioma, neuroblastoma, and endothelial cell lines.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Mouro et al. (1999) mapped the ATP8A1 gene to
chromosome 4p14-p12.

REFERENCE 1. Mouro, I.; Halleck, M. S.; Schlegel, R. A.; Mattei, M. G.; Williamson,
P.; Zachowski, A.; Devaux, P.; Cartron, J.-P.; Colin, Y.: Cloning,
expression, and chromosomal mapping of a human ATPase II gene, member
of the third subfamily of P-type ATPases and orthologous to the presumed
bovine and murine aminophospholipid translocase. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 257: 333-339, 1999.

2. Sobocki, T.; Jayman, F.; Sobocka, M. B.; Duchatellier, R.; Banerjee,
P.: Isolation, sequencing, and functional analysis of the TATA-less
human ATPase II promoter. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1728: 186-198,
2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/22/2005

EDITED mgross: 08/22/2005

608230	TITLE *608230 CALCIUM CHANNEL, VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT, T TYPE, ALPHA-1I SUBUNIT; CACNA1I
;;KIAA1120
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Voltage-dependent calcium channels control the rapid entry of Ca(2+)
into a variety of cell types and are therefore involved in both
electrical and cellular signaling. T-type channels, such as CACNA1I, are
activated by small membrane depolarizations and can generate burst
firing and pacemaker activity.

CLONING

By searching a database for T-type alpha-1 sequences, followed by PCR of
a brain cDNA library, Mittman et al. (1999) cloned CACNA1I. The deduced
2,016-amino acid protein shows a membrane topology with 4 domains, each
consisting of 6 membrane-spanning segments, a pore loop, and cytoplasmic
and extracellular connecting loops. The N and C termini are cytoplasmic.
The putative extracellular loops contain 5 potential N-glycosylation
sites and 17 cysteines that may contribute to proper protein
conformation. The long intracellular interdomain loops contain 28
potential phosphorylation sites. The membrane-spanning segments of
CACNA1I are 84% identical to the membrane-spanning segments of CACNA1G
(604065) and CACNA1H (607904).

By screening a database for sequences weakly homologous to alpha-1
calcium channel subunits, followed by PCR of a brain cDNA library,
Monteil et al. (2000) cloned CACNA1I. The deduced 1,981-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 220.8 kD. Northern blot
analysis detected a 10.5-kb transcript almost exclusively in brain.
Northern and mRNA dot blot analyses detected expression in most
individual brain regions examined, and dot blot analysis also detected
expression in adrenal gland and thyroid gland.

By screening brain cDNA libraries using rat Cacna1i as probe, followed
by genomic sequence analysis and PCR, Gomora et al. (2002) cloned
CACNA1I, which they called Ca(v)3.3. The deduced 2,188-amino acid
protein differs from those reported by Mittman et al. (1999) and Monteil
et al. (2000) in that it has a C-terminal extension containing a leucine
zipper motif.

GENE FUNCTION

By functional expression in human embryonic kidney cells, Monteil et al.
(2000) determined that CACNA1I was activated at a more positive voltage
than CACNA1G. Activation and inactivation kinetics were up to 6 times
slower in CACNA1I-transfected cells than in CACNA1G-transfected cells,
while deactivation kinetics were faster and showed little voltage
dependence. Other characteristics of CACNA1I currents included a slower
recovery from inactivation, lower sensitivity to Ni(2+), and a larger
channel conductance. Monteil et al. (2000) concluded that CACNA1I is a
T-type channel with distinct channel properties.

Gomora et al. (2002) determined that the full-length 2,188-amino acid
CACNA1I protein and 2 CACNA1I constructs with truncated C termini showed
similar kinetics of channel activation, inactivation, deactivation, and
recovery. A major difference was that the 2,188-amino acid protein
generated 2-fold more current than the truncated isoforms. A fraction of
the CACNA1I channels did not gate as low voltage-activated channels but
required stronger depolarizations to open. A strong depolarizing
prepulse increased the fraction of channels that gated at low voltage.
The C-terminally truncated CACNA1I isoforms were less affected by a
prepulse. Gomora et al. (2002) concluded that CACNA1I is similar to high
voltage-activated Ca(2+) channels in that depolarizing prepulses can
regulate its activity and its C terminus plays a role in modulating
channel activity.

By action potential clamp studies, Chemin et al. (2002) found
significant differences in the biochemical properties of CACNA1G,
CACNA1H, and CACNA1I following transient transfection in human embryonic
kidney cells. Using firing activities recorded in dissociated rat
cerebellar Purkinje neurons and thalamocortical relay neurons as
voltage-clamp waveforms, they showed that CACNA1I currents contributed
to sustained electrical activities, while CACNA1G and CACNA1H currents
generated short burst firing. Chemin et al. (2002) hypothesized that
each of the T-channel pore-forming subunits displays specific gating
properties that uniquely contribute to neuronal firing and that CACNA1I
channels provide pacemaker activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mittman et al. (1999) determined that the CACNA1I gene contains at least
36 exons and spans more than 115 kb. Exon 1 is untranslated. Mittman et
al. (1999) stated that alternative splicing occurs in at least 2 exons.
Gomora et al. (2002) identified an additional exon in the CACNA1I gene,
exon 37, which encodes a C-terminal extension.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Mittman et al. (1999) and Monteil et al.
(2000) mapped the CACNA1I gene to chromosome 22q12.3-q13.2. Gomora et
al. (2002) stated that the CACNA1I gene maps to chromosome 22q13.1.

REFERENCE 1. Chemin, J.; Monteil, A.; Perez-Reyes, E.; Bourinet, E.; Nargeot,
J.; Lory, P.: Specific contribution of human T-type calcium channel
isotypes (alpha-1G, alpha-1H, and alpha-1I) to neuronal excitability. J.
Physiol. 540: 3-14, 2002.

2. Gomora, J. C.; Murbartian, J.; Arias, J. M.; Lee, J.-H.; Perez-Reyes,
E.: Cloning and expression of the human T-type channel Ca(v)3.3:
insights into prepulse facilitation. Biophys. J. 83: 229-241, 2002.

3. Mittman, S.; Guo, J.; Emerick, M. C.; Agnew, W. S.: Structure
and alternative splicing of the gene encoding alpha-1I, a human brain
T calcium channel alpha-1 subunit. Neurosci. Lett. 269: 121-124,
1999.

4. Monteil, A.; Chemin, J.; Leuranguer, V.; Altier, C.; Mennessier,
G.; Bourinet, E.; Lory, P.; Nargeot, J.: Specific properties of T-type
calcium channels generated by the human alpha-1I subunit. J. Biol.
Chem. 275: 16530-16535, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/6/2003

EDITED mgross: 11/06/2003

308380	TITLE *308380 INTERLEUKIN 2 RECEPTOR, GAMMA; IL2RG
;;INTERLEUKIN RECEPTOR, COMMON GAMMA CHAIN;;
INTERLEUKIN RECEPTOR, GAMMA-C;;
CD132 ANTIGEN; CD132
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cytokines are potent, soluble mediators that regulate homeostasis of the
immune system. IL2RG is known as the interleukin receptor common gamma
chain, or gamma-c, because it heterodimerizes with at least 6 unique
cytokine-specific interleukin receptor alpha chains, IL2RA (147730),
IL4RA (147781), IL7RA (146661), IL9RA (300007), IL15RA (601070), and
IL21RA (605383), to form distinct receptor complexes for the cytokines
IL2 (147680), IL4 (147780), IL7 (146660), IL9 (146931), IL15 (600554),
and IL21 (605384), respectively. The IL2 and IL21 receptor complexes are
heterotrimers that also include a shared beta chain, IL2RB/IL15RB
(146710) (Brandt et al., 2007).

CLONING

IL2 affects the growth and differentiation of T cells, B cells, natural
killer cells, glioma cells, and cells of the monocyte lineage after
specifically interacting with its receptors. The IL2 receptor (IL2R)
consists of 2 subunits, alpha (IL2RA) and beta (IL2RB). Takeshita et al.
(1992) identified a third IL2R subunit, the gamma chain, and isolated
the corresponding cDNA from a human T-cell line. The deduced 369-amino
acid protein has a molecular mass of 39.9 kD and shows sequence
similarity to members of the cytokine receptor family. Northern blot
analysis detected a dominant 1.8-kb mRNA transcript in human T and B
cells; a second 3.6-kb mRNA transcript was also detected. No IL2RG mRNA
transcripts were detected in human nonlymphoid cells, such as
promonocytes, epithelial cells, or hepatocytes.

Noguchi et al. (1993) found that the IL2RG protein, like the IL2RB
protein, contains 2 pairs of conserved cysteines typical of cytokine
receptor superfamily proteins.

GENE STRUCTURE

Noguchi et al. (1993) determined that the IL2RG gene contains 8 exons
and spans approximately 4.2 kb. Southern blot analysis suggested that
the gene is present in single copy.

Puck et al. (1993) sequenced the IL2RG gene and elucidated its genomic
organization.

MAPPING

By study of somatic cell hybrids, Noguchi et al. (1993) and Puck et al.
(1993) independently mapped the IL2RG gene to chromosome Xq13.
Relationships to markers in linkage studies suggested that IL2RG and
XSCID, the locus for X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (300400),
had the same location. By fluorescence in situ hybridization and PCR
amplification of somatic cell hybrid DNAs, Puck et al. (1993) mapped
IL2RG to Xq13.1.

Cao et al. (1993) localized the murine Il2rg gene to the X chromosome
between Rsvp and Plp and demonstrated that a defect in the gene is not
responsible for the X-linked xid mutation, which maps to the same
region; see 300300.

GENE FUNCTION

Functional expression studies by Takeshita et al. (1992) showed that the
IL2 receptor gamma chain was necessary for formation of high- and
intermediate-affinity IL2 receptors, which consist of alpha-beta-gamma
heterotrimers and beta-gamma heterodimers, respectively. Takeshita et
al. (1992) concluded that the gamma chain is an indispensable component
of the functional IL2 receptor.

The gamma subunit of the IL2 receptor is a subunit also of the IL4
receptor and of the IL7 receptor, i.e., it is a shared or common
component of at least 3 cytokine receptors. The designation 'common
gamma chain' (gamma-c) was proposed (Kondo et al., 1993; Noguchi et al.,
1993; Russell et al., 1993).

Russell et al. (1993) suggested that the gamma-c subunit may be shared
with the interleukin-9 receptor. The sharing of the gamma subunit by
several receptors explained why humans and mice that lack IL2 entirely
show milder symptoms than those with IL2RG deficiency.

Sharfe et al. (1997) stated that the gamma-c chain is shared by 5
interleukin receptor complexes: IL2, IL4, IL7, IL9, and IL15.

Asao et al. (2001) showed that IL21 binds to IL21R in IL2RG-deficient
cell lines, but fails to transduce signals. In cell lines expressing
IL2RG, binding and activation of JAK1 (147795), JAK3 (600173), STAT1
(600555), and STAT3 (102582) occurs, indicating that IL2RG is an
indispensable subunit of the functional IL21R complex.

Lamaze et al. (2001) selectively blocked clathrin (see 118960)-dependent
endocytosis using dominant-negative mutants of EPS15 (600051) and showed
that clathrin-mediated endocytosis of transferrin (190000) was
inhibited, while endocytosis of the IL2Rs proceeded normally.
Ultrastructural and biochemical experiments showed that
clathrin-independent endocytosis of IL2Rs existed constitutively in
lymphocytes and was coupled to their association with
detergent-resistant membrane domains. Clathrin-independent endocytosis
required dynamin (see 602377) and was specifically regulated by Rho
family GTPases (see 604980). These results defined novel properties of
receptor-mediated endocytosis and established that IL2R is efficiently
internalized through this clathrin-independent pathway.

Using flow cytometry, Corrigall et al. (2001) detected expression of a
functional IL2R of intermediate affinity composed solely of IL2RB and
IL2RG on fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS) obtained from rheumatoid
arthritis and osteoarthritis patients. Addition of recombinant IL2, IL1B
(147720), or TNFA (191160) independently did not upregulate expression
of the receptors on FLS, but IL2 or IL1B significantly increased
expression of intracellular tyrosine-phosphorylated proteins and the
production of MCP1 (158105). Corrigall et al. (2001) proposed that MCP1
in the synovial membrane serves to recruit macrophages and perpetuate
inflammation in the joints of patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Wang et al. (2005) reported the crystal structure of the quaternary
complex of IL2 with IL2RA, IL2RB, and IL2RG at a resolution of 2.3
angstroms.

LaPorte et al. (2008) reported the crystal structures of the complete
set of IL4 and IL13 (147683) type I (IL4RA/IL2RG/IL4) and type II
(IL4RA/IL13RA1/IL4 and IL4RA/IL13RA1/IL13) ternary signaling complexes
at the 3.0-angstrom level. They noted that the type I receptor complex
is more active in regulating Th2 development, whereas the type II
receptor complex is not found on T cells and is more active in
regulating cells that mediate airway hypersensitivity and mucus
secretion. The type I complex revealed a structural basis for the
ability of IL2RG to recognize 6 different IL2RG cytokines.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 3 unrelated patients with X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency
(300400), Noguchi et al. (1993) identified 3 different mutations in the
IL2RG gene (308380.0001-308380.0003).

In 4 unrelated affected males with SCID Puck et al. (1993) identified
unique mutations in the IL2RG gene (308380.0004-308380.0007).

Pepper et al. (1995) found that of 40 IL2RG mutations found in unrelated
SCID males, 6 were point mutations at the CpG dinucleotide at cDNA
residues 690-691 encoding amino acid arg226. This residue lies in the
extracellular domain of the protein in a region not previously
recognized to be significantly conserved in the cytokine receptor gene
family, 11 amino acids upstream from the highly conserved WSXWS motif.
Three additional instances of mutation at another CpG dinucleotide at
cDNA residue 879 produced a premature termination signal in the
intracellular domain of IL2RG, resulting in loss of the SH2-homologous
intracellular domain known to be essential for signaling from the IL2
receptor complex. Pepper et al. (1995) stated that mutations at these 2
hotspots constituted more than 20% of all XSCID mutations.

Leonard (1996) provided a review of the molecular basis of X-linked SCID
with a listing of the mutations identified in the IL2RG gene. Fugmann et
al. (1998) studied the IL2RG gene in 31 patients with SCID. Among 11
patients with XSCID, 10 different mutations were identified in the IL2RG
gene, including 8 novel mutations.

In a patient with X-linked combined immunodeficiency (312863), Sharfe et
al. (1997) identified a mutation in the IL2RG gene (308380.0012), which
resulted in a protein that was sufficiently stable to be expressed at
the cell surface. Although clinically immunodeficient, the patient had
normal numbers of peripheral T and B cells, responded normally to
mitogenic stimuli, and had a normal thymus gland. While the T-cell
receptor repertoire appeared complete, suggesting normal T-cell
differentiation, the patient's T cells demonstrated a reduced ability to
bind IL2, resulting in immunodeficiency.

Cacalano and Johnston (1999) reviewed IL2 signaling in relation to
inherited immunodeficiency. Formal genetic proof that the IL2R
components are critical for T-cell development came with the
identification of patients lacking either IL2RG or JAK3 (600173). These
patients presented with phenotypically identical
T-negative/B-positive/NK-negative SCID, inherited as an X-linked
recessive or an autosomal recessive (600802) disorder, respectively.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY, X-LINKED
IL2RG, LYS97TER

In a patient with X-linked SCID (300400), Noguchi et al. (1993)
identified an A-to-T transversion in exon 3 of the IL2RG gene, resulting
in a lys97-to-ter (K97X) substitution and a truncation of the C-terminal
251 amino acids of the interleukin-2 receptor gamma chain.

.0002
SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY, X-LINKED
IL2RG, ARG267TER

In a patient with X-linked SCID (300400), Noguchi et al. (1993)
identified a C-to-T transition in exon 7 of the IL2RG gene, resulting in
an arg267-to-ter (R267X) substitution and truncation of 81 amino acids
of the protein.

.0003
SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY, X-LINKED
IL2RG, SER286TER

In a patient with X-linked SCID (300400), Noguchi et al. (1993)
identified a C-to-A transversion in exon 7 of the IL2RG gene, resulting
in a ser286-to-ter (S286X) substitution and the truncation of 62 amino
acids of the protein. This patient became known as Bubble Boy David
because he lived in an isolation bubble in Houston for a long time and
his disease became known as Bubble Boy disease. His early clinical
course and immune function were reported by South et al. (1977) and
Shearer et al. (1985). A male sib was also affected. His
immunodeficiency was characterized by panhypogammaglobulinemia,
lymphopenia with diminished T cells (varying from 10 to 40% over 12
years), elevated B cells, and essentially absent proliferation to
mitogens or antigens. Following T-depleted haploidentical bone marrow
transplantation from his sister, there was no improvement in immune
function. He died 124 days posttransplant from an EBV-associated
lymphoproliferative syndrome.

.0004
SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY, X-LINKED
IL2RG, CYS62TER

In a patient with X-linked SCID (300400), Puck et al. (1993) identified
a 200T-A transversion in exon 2 of the IL2RG gene, resulting in a
cys62-to-ter (C62X) substitution.

.0005
SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY, X-LINKED
IL2RG, GLY114ASP

In a patient with X-linked SCID (300400), Puck et al. (1993) identified
a 355G-A transition in exon 3 of the IL2RG gene, resulting in a
gly114-to-asp (G114D) substitution.

.0006
SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY, X-LINKED
IL2RG, IVS3DS, G-A, +1

In a boy with X-linked SCID (300400) and no detectable IL2RG mRNA, Puck
et al. (1993) identified a G-to-A transition in the first position of
the splice donor site of intron 3 of the IL2RG gene.

.0007
SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY, X-LINKED
IL2RG, ILE153ASN

In a boy with X-linked SCID (300400), Puck et al. (1993) identified a
472T-A transversion in exon 4 of the IL2RG gene, resulting in an
ile153-to-asn (I153N) substitution.

.0008
COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY, X-LINKED
IL2RG, LEU271GLN

In 3 affected males with X-linked combined immunodeficiency (XCID;
312863), which is phenotypically milder than X-linked severe combined
immunodeficiency (300400), Schmalstieg et al. (1995) identified a
leu271-to-gln (L271Q) substitution in exon 7 of the IL2RG gene. A normal
brother did not have the mutation.

.0009
SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY, X-LINKED
IL2RG, 9-BP DUP, GLN-HIS-TRP INS

By genetic linkage studies in a large Canadian pedigree with XSCID
(300400), Puck et al. (1995) found the source of the mutation in the
proband's grandmother. Despite her having 1 affected son and 2 carrier
daughters with skewed X inactivation, her T cells did not show the
expected skewed inactivation. Single-strand conformation polymorphism
analysis of IL2RG in the affected proband demonstrated an abnormality in
exon 5; sequencing demonstrated a 9-nucleotide in-frame
duplication-insertion resulting in a duplication of 3 extracellular
amino acids (glutamine, histidine, and tryptophan) just adjacent to and
including the first tryptophan of the WSXWS motif found in all members
of the cytokine receptor gene superfamily. The 3 additional amino acids
were inserted just before residue 235. Mutation detection in the
pedigree confirmed that the founder grandmother's somatic cells had only
normal IL2RG, and that the SCID-associated X-chromosome haplotype was
inherited by 3 daughters, 1 with a wildtype IL2RG gene and 2 others with
the insertional mutation. The findings indicated that the grandmother
had germline mosaicism, an unusual finding in females. This X-linked
SCID family emphasized the limitations of genetic diagnosis by linkage
as compared with direct mutation analysis.

.0010
SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY, X-LINKED
IL2RG, CYS115ARG

In a male infant in whom XSCID (300400) was suspected at 1 year of age,
Stephan et al. (1996) identified a 343T-C transition in exon 3 of the
IL2RG gene, resulting in a cys115-to-arg (C115R) substitution. The
patient's mother was heterozygous for the mutation. A maternal uncle and
a maternal granduncle had died of pneumonia at ages 4 months and 6
months, respectively. The affected child had BCG vaccination at the age
of 2 weeks. At 6 months of age, he was hospitalized for severe
interstitial pneumonia. Physical examination at 1 year of age showed no
signs of graft-versus-host disease (GVHD; see 614395) and no
abnormalities except for a large abscess in the left lumbar region from
which acid-fast bacilli with genetic characteristics of the
Calmette-Guerin bacillus were identified. Immunologic investigations
showed a normal number of T cells, a high B-cell count, and
hypogammaglobulinemia with no detectable specific antibody responses.
The skin test for purified protein derivative was positive and there
were at least attenuated proliferative responses to antigens and
mitogens. These unusual findings led to genetic analysis which showed
that the gamma chain of IL2R was not expressed in the patient's B cells.
Because of the unexpected presence of circulating mature T cells,
Stephan et al. (1996) sorted and analyzed the patient's CD3+ T cells for
expression of the gamma-c chain. Surprisingly, expression of this chain
by T cells with either the CD4+ or CD8+ phenotype was normal, and
sequencing of the IL2RG gene revealed the wildtype sequence at position
343. In contrast, the sorted CD19+ B cells, the sorted CD14+ monocytes,
and the polymorphonuclear-cell population had no detectable expression
of the gamma-c chain on their surface and contained the C115R mutation.
The possibility that the patient's circulating T-cell population was
derived from the engraftment of T cells in the mother in utero was
excluded by T-cell karyotyping and HLA typing. In addition, the X
chromosome present in the patient's T-cell and B-cell populations was
assessed by study of 2 microsatellites flanking the IL2RG locus. These
cell populations had only 1 X chromosome derived from the mother with
the same X chromosome present in both T-cell and B-cell populations.
Stephan et al. (1996) suggested that a single reversion event had
occurred in a T-cell progenitor that gave rise to a number of
diversified T-cell clones.

.0011
SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY, X-LINKED
IL2RG, ARG285GLN

In a patient with T-, B+ X-linked SCID (300400), Clark et al. (1995)
identified a 2943G-A transition in the IL2RG gene, resulting in an
arg285-to-gln (R285Q) substitution.

Jones et al. (1997) noted that X-linked SCID is characterized by the
absence, or very low numbers, of T cells, with normal or even high
numbers of B cells. However, in a boy with SCID who had very low numbers
of both B cells and T cells, Jones et al. (1997) identified the R285Q
mutation. The patient's mother and a maternal aunt were both found to
have unilateral X inactivation in their T cells. Jones et al. (1997)
stated that in about one-third of the cases of typical SCIDX1, there is
no previous family history. In these families, the suspicion of SCIDX1
is raised by the phenotype and may be confirmed by X inactivation in T
cells and/or by mutation analysis. The authors cautioned that the
unexpected finding of low B cells may mistakenly suggest an autosomal
form of SCID.

.0012
COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY, X-LINKED
IL2RG, ARG222CYS

In a 1-year-old Caucasian male with X-linked combined immunodeficiency
(312863), Sharfe et al. (1997) identified an arg222-to-cys (R222C)
mutation in the IL2RG gene. The mutation occurs in the extracellular
domain of the protein, which was predicted to affect ligand binding. The
authors noted that the mutation was distinctive in that the protein was
stable enough to be expressed at the cell surface.

.0013
SEVERE COMBINED IMMUNODEFICIENCY, X-LINKED
IL2RG, LEU151PRO

In a boy with a relatively mild form of X-linked SCID (300400),
Speckmann et al. (2008) identified a 466T-C transition in the IL2RG
gene, resulting in a leu151-to-pro (L151P) substitution. The mutation
was inherited from his unaffected mother. Genetic analysis of peripheral
blood cells in the patient showed a dual signal, with the wildtype IL2RG
gene in T cells and a mutant IL2RG gene in B cells, NK cells, and
granulocytes. The findings were consistent with reversion of the L151P
mutation within a common T-cell precursor in the patient. The patient
had normal T-cell function, despite low levels of T cells, and impaired
B cell antibody response. Functional analysis with mutant IL2RG showed a
poor response to IL2 in B cells. The absence of mutated T cells in the
patient suggested that mutant IL2RG did not allow proper T-cell
development. In addition, X-inactivation studies in the mother showed
that her T cells exclusively expressed the wildtype allele. A similar
patient with reversion of mutation in a T-cell progenitor was reported
by Stephan et al. (1996) (see 308380.0010). However, Speckmann et al.
(2008) noted that the patient reported by Stephan et al. (1996)
ultimately showed a deteriorating course and required bone marrow stem
cell transplantation at almost 7 years of age. The findings indicated
that close immunologic surveillance is still needed in patients with
mutation reversion.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Cavazzano-Calvo et al. (2000); Dave et al. (2004); Hacein-Bey-Abina
et al. (2002)
REFERENCE 1. Asao, H.; Okuyama, C.; Kumaki, S.; Ishii, N.; Tsuchiya, S.; Foster,
D.; Sugamura, K.: Cutting edge: the common gamma-chain is an indispensable
subunit of the IL-21 receptor complex. J. Immun. 167: 1-5, 2001.

2. Brandt, K.; Singh, P. B.; Bulfone-Paus, S.; Ruckert, R.: Interleukin-21:
a new modulator of immunity, infection, and cancer. Cytokine Growth
Factor Rev. 18: 223-232, 2007.

3. Cacalano, N. A.; Johnston, J. A.: Interleukin-2 signaling and
inherited immunodeficiency. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65: 287-293, 1999.

4. Cao, X.; Kozak, C. A.; Liu, Y.-J.; Noguchi, M.; O'Connell, E.;
Leonard, W. J.: Characterization of cDNAs encoding the murine interleukin
2 receptor (IL-2R) gamma chain: chromosomal mapping and tissue specificity
of IL-2R gamma chain expression. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 8464-8468,
1993.

5. Cavazzano-Calvo, M.; Hacein-Bey, S.; de Saint Basile, G.; Gross,
F.; Yvon, E.; Nusbaum, P.; Selz, F.; Hue, C.; Certain, S.; Casanova,
J.-L.; Bousso, P.; Le Deist, F.; Fischer, A.: Gene therapy of human
severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID)-X1 disease. Science 288:
669-672, 2000.

6. Clark, P. A.; Lester, T.; Genet, S.; Jones, A. M.; Hendriks, R.;
Levinsky, R. J.; Kinnon, C.: Screening for mutations causing X-linked
severe combined immunodeficiency in the IL-2R-gamma chain gene by
single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis. Hum. Genet. 96:
427-432, 1995.

7. Corrigall, V. M.; Arastu, M.; Khan, S.; Shah, C.; Fife, M.; Smeets,
T.; Tak, P.-P.; Panayi, G. S.: Functional IL-2 receptor beta (CD122)
and gamma (CD132) chains are expressed by fibroblast-like synoviocytes:
activation by IL-2 stimulates monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 production. J.
Immun. 166: 4141-4147, 2001.

8. Dave, U. P.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland, N. G.: Gene therapy insertional
mutagenesis insights. Science 303: 333 only, 2004.

9. Fugmann, S. D.; Muller, S.; Friedrich, W.; Bartram, C. R.; Schwarz,
K.: Mutations in the gene for the common gamma chain (gamma-c) in
X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency. Hum. Genet. 103: 730-731,
1998.

10. Hacein-Bey-Abina, S.; Le Deist, F.; Carlier, F.; Bouneaud, C.;
Hue, C.; De Villartay, J.-P.; Thrasher, A. J.; Wulffraat, N.; Sorensen,
R.; Dupuis-Girod, S.; Fischer, A.; Cavazzana-Calvo, M.: Sustained
correction of X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency by ex vivo
gene therapy. New Eng. J. Med. 346: 1185-1193, 2002.

11. Jones, A. M.; Clark, P. A.; Katz, F.; Genet, S.; McMahon, C.;
Alterman, L.; Cant, A.; Kinnon, C.: B-cell-negative severe combined
immunodeficiency associated with a common gamma chain mutation. Hum.
Genet. 99: 677-680, 1997.

12. Kondo, M.; Takeshita, T.; Ishii, N.; Nakamura, M.; Watanabe, S.;
Arai, K.; Sugamura, K.: Sharing of the interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor
gamma chain between receptors for IL-2 and IL-4. Science 262: 1874-1877,
1993.

13. Lamaze, C.; Dujeancourt, A.; Baba, T.; Lo, C. G.; Benmerah, A.;
Dautry-Varsat, A.: Interleukin 2 receptors and detergent-resistant
membrane domains define a clathrin-independent endocytic pathway. Molec.
Cell 7: 661-671, 2001.

14. LaPorte, S. L.; Juo, Z. S.; Vaclavikova, J.; Colf, L. A.; Qi,
X.; Heller, N. M.; Keegan, A. D.; Garcia, K. C.: Molecular and structural
basis of cytokine receptor pleiotropy in the interleukin-4/13 system. Cell 132:
259-272, 2008.

15. Leonard, W. J.: The molecular basis of X-linked severe combined
immunodeficiency: defective cytokine receptor signaling. Annu. Rev.
Med. 47: 229-239, 1996.

16. Noguchi, M.; Adelstein, S.; Cao, X.; Leonard, W. J.: Characterization
of the human interleukin-2 receptor gamma chain gene. J. Biol. Chem. 268:
13601-13608, 1993.

17. Noguchi, M.; Nakamura, Y.; Russell, S. M.; Ziegler, S. F.; Tsang,
M.; Cao, X.; Leonard, W. J.: Interleukin-2 receptor gamma chain:
a functional component of the interleukin-7 receptor. Science 262:
1877-1880, 1993.

18. Noguchi, M.; Yi, H.; Rosenblatt, H. M.; Filipovich, A. H.; Adelstein,
S.; Modi, W. S.; McBride, O. W.; Leonard, W. J.: Interleukin-2 receptor
gamma chain mutation results in X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency
in humans. Cell 73: 147-157, 1993.

19. Pepper, A. E.; Buckley, R. H.; Small, T. N.; Puck, J. M.: Two
mutational hotspots in the interleukin-2 receptor gamma chain gene
causing human X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 57: 564-571, 1995.

20. Puck, J. M.; Deschenes, S. M.; Porter, J. C.; Dutra, A. S.; Brown,
C. J.; Willard, H. F.; Henthorn, P. S.: The interleukin-2 receptor
gamma chain maps to Xq13.1 and is mutated in X-linked severe combined
immunodeficiency, SCIDX1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 1099-1104, 1993.

21. Puck, J. M.; Pepper, A. E.; Bedard, P.-M.; Laframboise, R.: Female
germ line mosaicism as the origin of a unique IL-2 receptor gamma-chain
mutation causing X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency. J. Clin.
Invest. 95: 895-899, 1995.

22. Russell, S. M.; Keegan, A. D.; Harada, N.; Nakamura, Y.; Noguchi,
M.; Leland, P.; Friedmann, M. C.; Miyajima, A.; Puri, R. K.; Paul,
W. E.; Leonard, W. J.: Interleukin-2 receptor gamma-chain: a functional
component of the interleukin-4 receptor. Science 262: 1880-1883,
1993.

23. Schmalstieg, F. C.; Leonard, W. J.; Noguchi, M.; Berg, M.; Rudloff,
H. E.; Denney, R. M.; Dave, S. K.; Brooks, E. G.; Goldman, A. S.:
Missense mutation in exon 7 of the common gamma chain gene causes
a moderate form of X-linked combined immunodeficiency. J. Clin. Invest. 95:
1169-1173, 1995.

24. Sharfe, N.; Shahar, M.; Roifman, C. M.: An interleukin-2 receptor
gamma chain mutation with normal thymus morphology. J. Clin. Invest. 100:
3036-3043, 1997.

25. Shearer, W. T.; Ritz, J.; Finegold, M. J.; Guerra, I. C.; Rosenblatt,
H. H.; Lewis, D. E.; Pollack, M. S.; Taber, L. H.; Suyama, C. V.;
Grumet, F. C.; Cleary, M. L.; Warnke, R.; Sklar, J.: Epstein-Barr
virus-associated B-cell proliferations of diverse clonal origins after
bone marrow transplantation in a 12-year-old patient with severe combined
immunodeficiency. New Eng. J. Med. 312: 1151-1159, 1985.

26. South, M. A.; Montgomery, J. R.; Richie, E.; Mukhopadhyay, N.;
Criswell, B. S.; Mackler, B. F.; De Fazio, S. R.; Bealmear, P.; Heim,
L. R.; Trentin, J. J.; Dressman, G. R.; O'Neill, P.: Four-year study
of a boy with combined immune deficiency maintained in strict reverse
isolation from birth. IV. Immunologic studies. Pediat. Res. 11:
71-78, 1977.

27. Speckmann, C.; Pannicke, U.; Wiech, E.; Schwarz, K.; Fisch, P.;
Friedrich, W.; Neihues, T.; Gilmour, K.; Buiting, K.; Schlesier, M.;
Eibel, H.; Rohr, J.; Superti-Furga, A.; Gross-Wieltsch, U.; Ehl, S.
: Clinical and immunological consequences of a somatic reversion in
a patient with X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency. Blood 112:
4090-4097, 2008.

28. Stephan, V.; Wahn, V.; Le Deist, F.; Dirksen, U.; Broker, B.;
Muller-Fleckenstein, I.; Horneff, G.; Schroten, H.; Fischer, A.; de
Saint Basile, G.: Atypical X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency
due to possible spontaneous reversion of the genetic defect in T cells. New
Eng. J. Med. 335: 1563-1567, 1996.

29. Takeshita, T.; Asao, H.; Ohtani, K.; Ishii, N.; Kumaki, S.; Tanaka,
N.; Munakata, H.; Nakamura, M.; Sugamura, K.: Cloning of the gamma
chain of the human IL-2 receptor. Science 257: 379-382, 1992.

30. Wang, X.; Rickert, M.; Garcia, K. C.: Structure of the quaternary
complex of interleukin-2 with its alpha, beta, and gamma-c receptors. Science 310:
1159-1163, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/9/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/5/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/21/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/10/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 10/28/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/2/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/14/2002
Jane Kelly - updated: 1/25/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/22/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/27/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/17/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/4/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/2/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/21/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/3/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/16/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/13/1993

EDITED mgross: 12/16/2011
wwang: 3/18/2009
ckniffin: 3/9/2009
mgross: 5/5/2008
mgross: 3/21/2008
mgross: 4/4/2006
terry: 3/16/2006
mgross: 1/10/2006
carol: 10/28/2004
terry: 10/28/2004
ckniffin: 10/27/2004
ckniffin: 10/20/2004
alopez: 2/2/2004
alopez: 11/10/2003
alopez: 6/10/2003
terry: 5/14/2002
carol: 2/15/2002
terry: 1/25/2002
mgross: 10/22/2001
mgross: 4/27/2001
mgross: 4/17/2001
alopez: 5/4/2000
mgross: 2/2/2000
terry: 1/21/1999
dkim: 7/2/1998
terry: 6/4/1998
alopez: 5/21/1998
psherman: 5/20/1998
mark: 2/5/1998
terry: 2/3/1998
carol: 6/23/1997
mark: 5/26/1997
terry: 5/16/1997
terry: 2/13/1997
jamie: 12/17/1996
jamie: 12/6/1996
terry: 11/26/1996
terry: 11/6/1996
mark: 1/31/1996
mark: 9/10/1995
carol: 5/16/1994
terry: 4/21/1994
warfield: 3/31/1994
mimadm: 2/27/1994
carol: 12/6/1993

137780	TITLE *137780 GLIAL FIBRILLARY ACIDIC PROTEIN; GFAP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Glial fibrillary acidic protein is an intermediate-filament (IF) protein
that is highly specific for cells of astroglial lineage. Reeves et al.
(1989) isolated a cDNA encoding GFAP and determined its nucleotide
sequence. The predicted amino acid sequence indicated that GFAP shares
structural similarities--particularly in the central rod domain and to a
lesser degree in the carboxyl-terminal domain--with other IF proteins
found in nonepithelial cell types. Considerable sequence divergence in
the amino-terminal region of GFAP suggested that the tissue-specific
functions of this IF protein may be mediated through this region of the
molecule. GFAP is a useful marker of astroglia in the brain.

Using PS1 (104311) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen, Nielsen et al.
(2002) cloned a splice variant of GFAP, which they called GFAP-epsilon,
from a fetal brain cDNA library. GFAP-epsilon contains 42 amino acids
encoded by exon 7a at its C terminus in place of the 43-amino acid C
terminus encoded by exons 8 and 9 of GFAP-alpha, the originally
identified GFAP transcript.

MAPPING

Bernier et al. (1988) used cDNA probes to determine the chromosomal
location of the GFAP gene in the mouse by following its segregation in a
panel of interspecies somatic cell hybrids. Furthermore, they defined
RFLPs associated with the gene. Patterns of inheritance of these RFLPs
in recombinant inbred strains of mice showed that GFAP is encoded by a
single genetic locus on mouse chromosome 11. The murine gene is in close
proximity to the genes encoding p53 and myeloperoxidase. By Southern
blot hybridization of somatic cell hybrids and by in situ hybridization,
Bongcam-Rudloff et al. (1991) mapped the GFAP gene to human 17q21.
Brownell et al. (1991) also assigned the GFAP gene to chromosome 17 by
screening a mouse/human somatic cell hybrid panel with a GFAP cDNA
fragment.

GENE FUNCTION

Using binding assays with recombinant proteins, Nielsen et al. (2002)
determined that the unique C terminus of the GFAP-epsilon splice variant
was required for interaction with PS1, as were the coiled-coil 2 and
linker 1-2 regions shared with GFAP-alpha. GFAP-alpha did not interact
with PS1. Yeast 2-hybrid analysis of point mutations introduced into PS1
indicated that 2 nonconservative amino acid substitutions abolished
interaction with GFAP-epsilon, but 2 conservative substitutions, both
associated with Alzheimer disease, did not effect GFAP-epsilon binding.
By transfection in human embryonic kidney cells and in mouse
neuroblastoma cells, Nielsen et al. (2002)found that GFAP-epsilon
associated with intermediate filaments and perfectly colocalized with
GFAP-alpha, suggesting that both isoforms are polymerized into the same
filamentous structures. A subpopulation of GFAP-epsilon also colocalized
with PS1 in the perinuclear region and in cytoplasmic granules.

Radomska et al. (2013) stated that 3 major GFAP splice variants,
GFAP-alpha, -delta, and -kappa, are present in human central nervous
system. They found that GFAP-alpha was the dominant GFAP variant in
primary cultured human astrocytes. Knockdown of the RNA-binding protein
QKI (609590), predominantly the QKI7 variant, reduced astrocyte content
of GFAP-alpha mRNA. Treatment of astrocytes with the antipsychotic drug
haloperidol increased the expression of both QKI7 and GFAP-alpha.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Alexander disease (203450) is a rare disorder of the central nervous
system. Infants with Alexander disease develop a leukoencephalopathy
with macrocephaly, seizures, and psychomotor retardation, leading to
death usually within the first decade; patients with juvenile or adult
forms typically experience ataxia, bulbar signs and spasticity, and a
more slowly progressive course. The pathologic hallmark of all forms of
Alexander disease is the presence of Rosenthal fibers, cytoplasmic
inclusions in astrocytes that contain the intermediate filament protein
GFAP in association with small heat-shock proteins. By sequence analysis
of DNA from patients representing different Alexander disease
phenotypes, Brenner et al. (2001) found that most cases were associated
with nonconservative mutations in the coding region of the GFAP gene.
Alexander disease, therefore, represents the first example of a primary
genetic disorder of astrocytes, one of the major cell types in the
vertebrate CNS. Each mutation identified in the GFAP gene was
heterozygous, suggesting a dominant mutation. Because parental DNA was
normal in all instances where it was available, the authors concluded
that most cases of Alexander disease result from de novo mutations. It
was noteworthy that mutations in only 4 codons accounted for Alexander
disease in 10 of 11 patients, and these were all arginine codons.
Arginine codons are recognized as particularly prone to mutation,
presumably due to methylation of the CpG dinucleotide. Brenner et al.
(2001) suggested that the GFAP mutations in Alexander disease most
likely act in a dominant gain-of-function manner, as the phenotype of
Gfap-null mice is subtle and does not resemble Alexander disease. They
pointed out that the results do not exclude the possibility that defects
in other genes may be responsible for some cases of Alexander disease.
For example, Schuelke et al. (1999) reported a child with a phenotype
resembling Alexander disease (but without pathologic confirmation) who
was homozygous for a mutation in the NDUFV1 gene (161015.0003).

Rodriguez et al. (2001) searched for GFAP mutations in a series of
patients who had heterogeneous clinical symptoms but were candidates for
Alexander disease on the basis of suggestive neuroimaging abnormalities.
De novo heterozygous missense GFAP mutations were found in exon 1 or
exon 4 in 14 of the 15 patients analyzed, including patients without
macrocephaly. Nine patients carried arginine mutations that had been
described elsewhere: 4 had arg239 to cys (137780.0001); 1 had arg239 to
his (137780.0002); and 1 had arg79 to his (137780.0004). The other 5
patients had 1 of 4 novel mutations, of which 2 affected arginine and 2
affected nonarginine residues. All mutations were located in the rod
domain of GFAP, and there was a correlation between clinical severity
and the affected amino acid.

Li et al. (2005) identified mutations in the GFAP gene in 41 patients
with Alexander disease. They stated that a total of 42 different GFAP
mutations had been identified, and almost all mutations resulted in a
gain-of-function dominant effect. There was a suggestion of male
predominance of the disorder.

Li et al. (2006) determined that the paternal chromosome carried the
GFAP mutation in 24 of 28 unrelated cases of Alexander disease analyzed,
suggesting that most mutations occur during spermatogenesis rather than
in the embryo. No effect of paternal age was observed.

In 13 unrelated Italian patients with Alexander disease, including 8
with the infantile, 2 with the juvenile, and 3 with the adult form,
Caroli et al. (2007) identified 11 different mutations in the GFAP gene
(see, e.g., 137780.0005), including 4 novel mutations. Ten mutations
occurred in the rod domains and 1 in the tail domain.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Rodriguez et al. (2001) could discern a genotype-phenotype correlation
for the 2 most frequently mutated arginine residues, R79 (8 patients)
and R239 (10 patients), with the phenotype of the R79 mutations
appearing much less severe than that of the R239 mutations. The 4
patients they found with R79 mutations appeared to be the least severely
affected: none developed macrocephaly, 3 achieved independent walking,
and, at the time of report, all were alive at ages 2.5 to 20 years.
Similarly, among the 4 patients with R79 mutations who were reported by
Brenner et al. (2001), 2 lived until the ages of 14 and 48 years, the
other 2 were still alive, at ages 7 and 8 years, at the time of report
by Rodriguez et al. (2001). Patients with R239 mutations, reported by
both Brenner et al. (2001) and Rodriguez et al. (2001), had marked
impairment of psychomotor development, and some had progressive
macrocephaly.

Gorospe et al. (2002) reported 12 genetically confirmed cases of
Alexander disease caused by 9 heterozygous point mutations in the GFAP
gene. The cases demonstrated variable ages of onset and symptoms. The
authors stated that no clear-cut genotype-phenotype correlations were
apparent.

ANIMAL MODEL

Messing et al. (1998) found that overexpression of human GFAP in
astrocytes of transgenic mice was fatal and was accompanied by the
presence of inclusion bodies indistinguishable from human Rosenthal
fibers, the pathologic hallmark of all forms of Alexander disease. These
results suggested that a primary alteration in the GFAP gene may be
responsible for Alexander disease.

Gomi et al. (1995), Pekny et al. (1995), Shibuki et al. (1996), and
Liedtke et al. (1996) independently reported generation of
GFAP-deficient mice. In all cases, the mutant mice are normal at birth
and develop grossly normal. Using immunohistochemical analysis, Pekny et
al. (1995) concluded that GFAP knockout mice are lacking intermediate
filaments in astrocytes of the hippocampus and in the white matter of
the spinal cord. Using microscopic analysis of brain sections, Liedtke
et al. (1996) observed a mutant phenotype characterized by abnormal
myelination, alterations in the blood-brain barrier, disorganization of
white matter architecture and vascularization, and hydrocephalus in
older mice associated with loss of white matter. They concluded that
GFAP is necessary for the long-term maintenance of normal CNS
myelination. Shibuki et al. (1996) observed that long-term depression at
parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapses is deficient in GFAP knockout
mice. Furthermore, GFAP mutant mice exhibited a significant impairment
of eyeblink conditioning without any detectable deficits in motor
coordination tasks. They concluded that GFAP may be required for
communications between Bergmann glia and Purkinje cells during long-term
depression induction and maintenance.

Hagemann et al. (2005) performed gene expression analysis on olfactory
bulbs of transgenic mice overexpressing wildtype human GFAP at 2
different ages. Expression profiles revealed a stress response that
included genes involved in glutathione metabolism, peroxide
detoxification, and iron homeostasis. Many of these genes are regulated
by the transcription factor Nfe2l2 (600492), which is also increased in
expression at 3 weeks. An immune-related response occurred with
activation of cytokine and cytokine receptor genes, complement
components, and acute phase response genes. These transcripts were
further elevated with age, with additional induction of
macrophage-specific markers, such as Mac1 (ITGAM; 120980) and CD68
(153634), suggesting activation of microglia. At 4 months, decreased
expression of genes for microtubule-associated proteins, vesicular
trafficking proteins, and neurotransmitter receptors became apparent.
Interneuron-specific transcription factors, including Dlx family members
and Pax6 (607108), were downregulated as well as Gad1 (605363) and Gad2
(138275), suggesting impairment of GABAergic granule cells. Hagemann et
al. (2005) proposed a mechanism wherein an initial stress response by
astrocytes results in the activation of microglia and compromised
neuronal function.

Hagemann et al. (2009) noted that Rosenthal fibers in the complex
astrocytic inclusions characteristic of Alexander disease contain GFAP,
vimentin (VIM; 193060), plectin (PLEC1; 601282), ubiquitin (UBB;
191339), HSP27 (HSPB1; 602195), and alpha-B-crystallin (CRYAB; 123590).
CRYAB regulates GFAP assembly, and elevation of CRYAB is a consistent
feature of Alexander disease; however, its role in Rosenthal fibers and
disease pathology is not known. In a mouse model of Alexander disease,
Hagemann et al. (2009) showed that loss of Cryab resulted in increased
mortality, whereas elevation of Cryab rescued animals from terminal
seizures. When mice with Rosenthal fibers induced by overexpression of
GFAP were crossed into a Cryab-null background, over half died at 1
month of age. Restoration of Cryab expression through the GFAP promoter
reversed this outcome, showing the effect was astrocyte-specific.
Conversely, in mice carrying an Alexander disease-associated mutation
and in mice overexpressing wildtype GFAP, which, despite natural
induction of Cryab also died at 1 month, transgenic overexpression of
Cryab resulted in a markedly reduced CNS stress response, restored
expression of the glutamate transporter Glt1 (SLC1A2; 600300), and
protected these animals from death.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ALEXANDER DISEASE
GFAP, ARG239CYS

Brenner et al. (2001) found that 5 unrelated patients with Alexander
disease (203450) were heterozygous for mutations in codon 239 of the
GFAP gene. In 4 of these, a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 729 led to
an arg239-to-cys mutation (R239C). Age at death in these 4 patients
varied from 4 years to 11 years. The fifth patient had an arg239-to-his
mutation (137780.0002). DNA was normal in the parents where available.

In a 1-year-old female with typical features of Alexander disease,
Shiroma et al. (2001) identified the frequent R239C missense mutation.
The patient was born of nonconsanguineous parents. Early developmental
milestones were normal, but at the age of 1 year she had the first
febrile seizure, and after 2 weeks she had status epilepticus with
fever. Thereafter, she lost the ability to stand with help and to speak
words. Examination showed increased head circumference (+2.3 SD) and
good social response. Plantar responses were bilaterally extensor. In
addition to the typical manifestations of macrocephaly, psychomotor
retardation, spasticity, and seizures, the radiologic findings were
typical of Alexander disease.

Rodriguez et al. (2001) found the arg239-to-cys mutation in heterozygous
state in 4 of 14 patients with infantile Alexander disease. One of the
patients was 18 months old at the time of onset, underwent deterioration
of psychomotor development at the age of 6 years, had a head
circumference of 1.5 standard deviations above the mean, and was alive
at age 8 years.

Li et al. (2005) reported 2 unrelated patients with juvenile-onset
Alexander disease who were heterozygous for the R239C mutation. One
patient had onset at age 2 years and the other at age 4 years.

.0002
ALEXANDER DISEASE
GFAP, ARG239HIS

In a patient with Alexander disease (203450), Brenner et al. (2001)
identified a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 730 of the GFAP gene,
causing an arg239-to-his substitution. This infant died at the age of 11
months. Four other patients had an arg239-to-cys mutation; see
137780.0001.

Li et al. (2005) reported 5 unrelated patients with Alexander disease
resulting from the R239H mutation. All patients had a severe form of the
disease, with onset by age 6 months and death by age 5 years.

.0003
ALEXANDER DISEASE
GFAP, ARG416TRP

In 2 unrelated patients with Alexander disease (203450) that led to
death at ages 7 and 8, respectively, Brenner et al. (2001) identified a
C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1260 of the GFAP gene, resulting in an
arg416-to-trp substitution.

Li et al. (2005) noted that the R416W mutation had been identified in
patients with infantile-, juvenile-, and adult-onset Alexander disease.

A pathologic hallmark of Alexander disease is the abundance of protein
aggregates in astrocytes. These aggregates, termed Rosenthal fibers,
contain the protein chaperones alpha-B crystallin (123590) and HSP27
(602195) as well as GFAP. Perng et al. (2006) showed that the R416W
mutation in GFAP significantly perturbs in vitro filament assembly. The
filamentous structures formed resemble assembly intermediates but
aggregated more strongly. Consistent with the heterozygosity of the
mutation, this effect was dominant over wildtype GFAP in coassembly
experiments. Transient transfection studies demonstrated that R416W GFAP
induces the formation of GFAP-containing cytoplasmic aggregates in a
wide range of different cell types, including astrocytes. Monoclonal
antibodies specific for R146W GFAP revealed, for the first time for any
intermediate filament-based disease, the presence of the mutant protein
in the characteristic histopathologic features of the disease, namely,
Rosenthal fibers. The data confirmed that the effects of the R416W GFAP
are dominant, changing the assembly process in a way that encourages
aberrant filament-filament interactions that then lead to protein
aggregation and chaperone sequestration as early events in Alexander
disease.

.0004
ALEXANDER DISEASE
GFAP, ARG79HIS

In a patient with Alexander disease (203450) with onset at age 10 years
and death at age 48 years, Brenner et al. (2001) identified a G-to-A
transition at nucleotide 250 of the GFAP gene, leading to an
arg79-to-his substitution. Brenner et al. (2001) found the same mutation
in a patient with Alexander disease still living at the age of 8 years.

.0005
ALEXANDER DISEASE
GFAP, ARG79CYS

In a patient with Alexander disease (203450) with onset at 3 months and
death at 14 years, Brenner et al. (2001) identified a C-to-T transition
at nucleotide 249 of the GFAP gene, leading to an arg79-to-cys (R79C)
substitution. Brenner et al. (2001) found the same mutation in a patient
with Alexander disease still living at the age of 7 years.

Caroli et al. (2007) identified the R79C mutation in 3 unrelated Italian
boys with Alexander disease. All had onset before age 10 months. One of
the patients died at age 19 years.

.0006
ALEXANDER DISEASE
GFAP, ARG88CYS

In 2 unrelated patients with Alexander disease (203450), Rodriguez et
al. (2001) found an arg88-to-cys (R88C) mutation in the GFAP gene.

.0007
ALEXANDER DISEASE
GFAP, ARG88SER

In a patient with Alexander disease (203450), Rodriguez et al. (2001)
found an arg88-to-ser (R88S) missense mutation in heterozygous state in
the GFAP gene.

.0008
ALEXANDER DISEASE
GFAP, LEU76PHE

In a patient with Alexander disease (203450), Rodriguez et al. (2001)
found a leu76-to-phe (L76F) heterozygous missense mutation in the GFAP
gene.

.0009
ALEXANDER DISEASE
GFAP, ASN77TYR

In a patient with Alexander disease (203450), Rodriguez et al. (2001)
found a de novo, heterozygous missense mutation, asn77-to-tyr (N77Y), in
the GFAP gene.

.0010
ALEXANDER DISEASE
GFAP, GLU362ASP

In a patient with juvenile-onset Alexander disease (203450), Sawaishi et
al. (2002) identified a homozygous 1100G-C transition in the GFAP gene,
resulting in a glu362-to-asp substitution. A brother and the parents did
not carry the mutation. The mutation occurred in the C-terminal end of
the central rod domain, a highly conserved region of GFAP and other
types of intermediate filaments (e.g., vimentin (193060), desmin
(125660), keratin-1 (139350)).

.0011
ALEXANDER DISEASE
GFAP, ARG276LEU

In 2 Japanese brothers with Alexander disease (203450), Namekawa et al.
(2002) described an 841G-T transition at nucleotide 841, resulting in an
arg276-to-leu (R276L) substitution. Both brothers had spastic paresis
without palatal myoclonus, and MRI showed marked atrophy of the medulla
oblongata and cervicothoracic cord. The autopsy showed severely involved
shrunken pyramids but scarce Rosenthal fibers. Moderate numbers of
Rosenthal fibers were observed in the stratum subcallosum and
hippocampal fimbria. One patient was well until age 33; the second
brother developed regressive spastic gait at the age of 48 years and
gradually noticed that he could not raise his left arm. The parents were
nonconsanguineous and both died in their eighth decade without apparent
evidence of a neurologic disorder. They had only the 2 offspring, both
of whom had no children. The R276L mutation was heterozygous in both
brothers. Assuming accurate attribution of paternity, one might suggest
that this represented an example of parental gonadal mosaicism.

.0012
ALEXANDER DISEASE
GFAP, LEU352PRO

In a patient with a severe form of infantile Alexander disease (203450),
Bassuk et al. (2003) identified a heterozygous 1055T-C transition in the
GFAP gene, resulting in a leu352-to-pro (L352P) substitution. Residue
352 is a highly conserved amino acid that is found in all intermediate
filament proteins and across species.

.0013
ALEXANDER DISEASE
GFAP, ASP78GLU

In a family with an autosomal dominant adult form of Alexander disease
(203450), Stumpf et al. (2003) identified a heterozygous C-to-A change
in exon 1 of the GFAP gene, resulting in an asp78-to-glu (D78E)
substitution. Amino acid 78 lies in the rod domain of the protein. The
clinical phenotype varied in severity, but the pattern of evolution was
similar in all affected members. Although sleep disturbances and
dysautonomia, primarily constipation, began in childhood, the major
neurologic features began in the third or fourth decade of life. MRI of
the older patients showed atrophy of the medulla without signal
abnormalities.

REFERENCE 1. Bassuk, A. G.; Joshi, A.; Burton, B. K.; Larsen, M. B.; Burrowes,
D. M.; Stack, C.: Alexander disease with serial MRS and a new mutation
in the glial fibrillary acidic protein gene. Neurology 61: 1014-1015,
2003.

2. Bernier, L.; Colman, D. R.; D'Eustachio, P.: Chromosomal locations
of genes encoding 2-prime,3-prime cyclic nucleotide 3-prime-phosphodiesterase
and glial fibrillary acidic protein in the mouse. J. Neurosci. Res. 20:
497-504, 1988.

3. Bongcam-Rudloff, E.; Nister, M.; Betsholtz, C.; Wang, J.-L.; Stenman,
G.; Huebner, K.; Croce, C. M.; Westermark, B.: Human glial fibrillary
acidic protein: complementary DNA cloning, chromosome localization,
and messenger RNA expression in human glioma cell lines of various
phenotypes. Cancer Res. 51: 1553-1560, 1991.

4. Brenner, M.; Johnson, A. B.; Boespflug-Tanguy, O.; Rodriguez, D.;
Goldman, J. E.; Messing, A.: Mutations in GFAP, encoding glial fibrillary
acidic protein, are associated with Alexander disease. Nature Genet. 27:
117-120, 2001.

5. Brownell, E.; Lee, A. S.; Pekar, S. K.; Pravtcheva, D.; Ruddle,
F. H.; Bayney, R. M.: Glial fibrillary acid protein, an astrocytic-specific
marker, maps to human chromosome 17. Genomics 10: 1087-1089, 1991.

6. Caroli, F.; Biancheri, R.; Seri, M.; Rossi, A.; Pessagno, A.; Bugiani,
M.; Corsolini, F.; Savasta, S.; Romano, S.; Antonelli, C.; Romano,
A.; Pareyson, D.; Gambero, P.; Uziel, G.; Ravazzolo, R.; Ceccherini,
I.; Filocamo, M.: GFAP mutations and polymorphisms in 13 unrelated
Italian patients affected by Alexander disease. Clin. Genet. 72:
427-433, 2007.

7. Gomi, H.; Yokoyama, T.; Fujimoto, K.; Ikeda, T.; Katoh, A.; Itoh,
T.; Itohara, S.: Mice devoid of the glial fibrillary acidic protein
develop normally and are susceptible to scrapie prions. Neuron 14:
29-41, 1995.

8. Gorospe, J. R.; Naidu, S.; Johnson, A. B.; Puri, V.; Raymond, G.
V.; Jenkins, S. D.; Pedersen, R. C.; Lewis, D.; Knowles, P.; Fernandez,
R.; De Vivo, D.; van der Knapp, M. S.; Messing, A.; Brenner, M.; Hoffman,
E. P.: Molecular findings in symptomatic and pre-symptomatic Alexander
disease patients. Neurology 58: 1494-1500, 2002.

9. Hagemann, T. L.; Boelens, W. C.; Wawrousek, E. F.; Messing, A.
: Suppression of GFAP toxicity by alpha-B-crystallin in mouse models
of Alexander disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 1190-1199, 2009.

10. Hagemann, T. L.; Gaeta, S. A.; Smith, M. A.; Johnson, D. A.; Johnson,
J. A.; Messing, A.: Gene expression analysis in mice with elevated
glial fibrillary acidic protein and Rosenthal fibers reveals a stress
response followed by glial activation and neuronal dysfunction. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 2443-2458, 2005.

11. Li, R.; Johnson, A. B.; Salomons, G.; Goldman, J. E.; Naidu, S.;
Quinlan, R.; Cree, B.; Ruyle, S. Z.; Banwell, B.; D'Hooghe, M.; Siebert,
J. R.; Rolf, C. M.; Cox, H.; Reddy, A.; Gutierrez-Solana, L. G.; Collins,
A.; Weller, R. O.; Messing, A.; van der Knaap, M. S.; Brenner, M.
: Glial fibrillary acidic protein mutations in infantile, juvenile,
and adult forms of Alexander disease. Ann. Neurol. 57: 310-326,
2005.

12. Li, R.; Johnson, A. B.; Salomons, G. S.; van der Knapp, M. S.;
Rodriguez, D.; Boespflug-Tanguy, O.; Gorospe, J. R.; Goldman, J. E.;
Messing, A.; Brenner, M.: Propensity for paternal inheritance of
de novo mutations in Alexander disease. Hum. Genet. 119: 137-144,
2006.

13. Liedtke, W.; Edelmann, W.; Bieri, P. L.; Chiu, F.-C.; Cowan, N.
J.; Kucherlapati, R.; Raine, C. S.: GFAP is necessary for the integrity
of CNS white matter architecture and long-term maintenance of myelination. Neuron 17:
607-615, 1996.

14. Messing, A.; Head, M. W.; Galles, K.; Galbreath, E. J.; Goldman,
J. E.; Brenner, M.: Fatal encephalopathy with astrocyte inclusions
in GFAP transgenic mice. Am. J. Path. 152: 391-398, 1998.

15. Namekawa, M.; Takiyama, Y.; Aoki, Y.; Takayashiki, N.; Sakoe,
K.; Shimazaki, H.; Taguci, T.; Tanaka, Y.; Nishizawa, M.; Saito, K.;
Matsubara, Y.; Nakano, I.: Identification of GFAP gene mutation in
hereditary adult-onset Alexander's disease. Ann. Neurol. 52: 779-785,
2002.

16. Nielsen, A. L.; Holm, I. E.; Johansen, M.; Bonven, B.; Jorgensen,
P.; Jorgensen, A. L.: A new splice variant of glial fibrillary acidic
protein, GFAP-epsilon, interacts with the presenilin proteins. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 29983-29991, 2002.

17. Pekny, M.; Leveen, P.; Pekna, M.; Eliasson, C.; Berthold, C.-H.;
Westermark, B.; Betsholtz, C.: Mice lacking glial fibrillary acidic
protein display astrocytes devoid of intermediate filaments but develop
and reproduce normally. EMBO J. 14: 1590-1598, 1995.

18. Perng, M. D.; Su, M.; Wen, S. F.; Li, R.; Gibbon, T.; Prescott,
A. R.; Brenner, M.; Quinlan, R. A.: The Alexander disease-causing
glial fibrillary acidic protein mutant, R416W, accumulates into Rosenthal
fibers by a pathway that involves filament aggregation and the association
of alpha-B-crystallin and HSP27. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 79: 197-213,
2006.

19. Radomska, K. J.; Halvardson, J.; Reinius, B.; Carlstrom, E. L.;
Emilsson, L.; Feuk, L.; Jazin, E.: RNA-binding protein QKI regulates
Glial fibrillary acidic protein expression in human astrocytes. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 22: 1373-1382, 2013.

20. Reeves, S. A.; Helman, L. J.; Allison, A.; Israel, M. A.: Molecular
cloning and primary structure of human glial fibrillary acidic protein. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 86: 5178-5182, 1989.

21. Rodriguez, D.; Gauthier, F.; Bertini, E.; Bugiani, M.; Brenner,
M.; N'guyen, S.; Goizet, C.; Gelot, A.; Surtees, R.; Pedespan, J.-M.;
Hernandorena, X.; Troncoso, M.; Uziel, G.; Messing, A.; Ponsot, G.;
Pham-Dinh, D.; Dautigny, A.; Boespflug-Tanguy, O.: Infantile Alexander
disease: spectrum of GFAP mutations and genotype-phenotype correlation. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 69: 1134-1140, 2001. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet.
69: 1413 only, 2001.

22. Sawaishi, Y.; Yano, T.; Takaku, I.; Takada, G.: Juvenile Alexander
disease with a novel mutation in glial fibrillary acidic protein gene. Neurology 58:
1541-1543, 2002.

23. Schuelke, M.; Smeitink, J.; Mariman, E.; Loeffen, J.; Plecko,
B.; Trijbels, F.; Stockler-Ipsiroglu, S.; van den Heuvel, L.: Mutant
NDUFV1 subunit of mitochondrial complex I causes leukodystrophy and
myoclonic epilepsy. (Letter) Nature Genet. 21: 260-261, 1999.

24. Shibuki, K.; Gomi, H.; Chen, L.; Bao, S.; Kim, J. J.; Wakatsuki,
H.; Fujisaki, T.; Fujimoto, K.; Katoh, A.; Ikeda, T.; Chen, C.; Thompson,
R. F.; Itohara, S.: Deficient cerebellar long-term depression, impaired
eyeblink conditioning, and normal motor coordination in GFAP mutant
mice. Neuron 16: 587-599, 1996.

25. Shiroma, N.; Kanazawa, N.; Izumi, M.; Sugai, K.; Fukumizu, M.;
Sasaki, M.; Hanaoka, S.; Kaga, M.; Tsujino, S.: Diagnosis of Alexander
disease in a Japanese patient by molecular genetic analysis. J. Hum.
Genet. 46: 579-582, 2001.

26. Stumpf, E.; Masson, H.; Duquette, A.; Berthelet, F.; McNabb, J.;
Lortie, A.; Lesage, J.; Montplaisir, J.; Brais, B.; Cossette, P.:
Adult Alexander disease with autosomal dominant transmission: a distinct
entity caused by mutation in the glial fibrillary acid protein gene. Arch.
Neurol. 60: 1307-1312, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 09/05/2013
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/27/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/12/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/21/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/7/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/18/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/21/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/22/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/27/2002
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/8/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/27/2001
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 11/25/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/30/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/2/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/23/1988

EDITED mgross: 09/05/2013
wwang: 11/10/2009
terry: 10/27/2009
wwang: 1/12/2009
wwang: 9/2/2008
ckniffin: 8/21/2008
alopez: 7/14/2006
terry: 7/7/2006
wwang: 5/18/2006
wwang: 6/16/2005
wwang: 6/2/2005
ckniffin: 5/24/2005
tkritzer: 1/23/2004
ckniffin: 1/21/2004
tkritzer: 1/14/2004
ckniffin: 1/7/2004
cwells: 1/30/2003
tkritzer: 1/22/2003
carol: 12/4/2002
ckniffin: 12/4/2002
carol: 12/4/2002
ckniffin: 11/27/2002
tkritzer: 11/14/2002
tkritzer: 11/8/2002
carol: 7/31/2002
carol: 5/8/2002
alopez: 12/3/2001
terry: 11/27/2001
carol: 11/25/2001
carol: 11/9/2001
mcapotos: 11/7/2001
terry: 10/30/2001
alopez: 4/5/2001
alopez: 3/26/2001
terry: 3/21/2001
mgross: 1/2/2001
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 8/9/1991
carol: 5/22/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 9/6/1989

602947	TITLE *602947 SUPPRESSOR OF TY 3, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; SUPT3H
;;SPT3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Ogryzko et al. (1998) identified a human polypeptide, which they called
SPT3, as a subunit of the P/CAF complex (602303). The predicted
317-amino acid protein shows 51% amino acid sequence similarity with
yeast SPT3. Struhl and Moqtaderi (1998) reviewed the potential roles of
the PCAF complex in transcription.

By searching for genes within a region of chromosome 6 associated with
cleidocranial dysplasia (119600), followed by database analysis and
screening of a human craniofacial cDNA library, Yu et al. (1998) cloned
the SUPT3H gene. The deduced protein contains 399 amino acids.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Yu et al. (1998) mapped the SUPT3H gene to
chromosome 6p21.3-p21.1.

REFERENCE 1. Ogryzko, V. V.; Kotani, T.; Zhang, X.; Schiltz, R. L.; Howard,
T.; Yang, X.-J.; Howard, B. H.; Qin, J.; Nakatani, Y.: Histone-like
TAFs within the PCAF histone acetylase complex. Cell 94: 35-44,
1998.

2. Struhl, K.; Moqtaderi, Z.: The TAFs in the HAT. Cell 94: 1-4,
1998.

3. Yu, J.; Madison, J. M.; Mundlos, S.; Winston, F.; Olsen, B. R.
: Characterization of a human homologue of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae
transcription factor Spt3 (SUPT3H). Genomics 53: 90-96, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/19/2005

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 8/6/1998

EDITED wwang: 12/19/2005
carol: 10/9/1998
carol: 8/6/1998

134935	TITLE *134935 FIBROBLAST GROWTH FACTOR RECEPTOR 4; FGFR4
;;TYROSINE KINASE RELATED TO FIBROBLAST GROWTH FACTOR RECEPTOR; TKF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Partanen et al. (1991) reported the cDNA cloning and analysis of a novel
member of the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) gene family
expressed in K562 erythroleukemia cells. Its deduced amino acid sequence
was 55% identical with the previously characterized FGFRs, FLG (FGFR1;
136350) and BEK (176943), and had the structural characteristics of an
FGFR family member including 3 immunoglobulin-like domains in its
extracellular part. The expression pattern of FGFR4 was found to be
distinct from that of FLG and BEK and also distinct from that of FGFR3
(134934), which they (Keegan et al., 1991) had also cloned from K562
erythroleukemia cells.

To elucidate further the physiologic relevance of protein-tyrosine
kinases and to search for additional members of the gene family as
possible factors in carcinogenesis, Holtrich et al. (1991) amplified
mRNA from lung tissue by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using
PTK-specific primers followed by sequencing of the clones. They
identified a novel protein-tyrosine kinase, which they called TKF
(tyrosine kinase related to fibroblast growth factor receptor). Among a
wide variety of cells and tissues tested, including human lymphocytes
and macrophages, TKF was found to be expressed only in lung and in some
tumors of lung origin as well as in malignancies not derived from lung
tissues. Sequence comparison has demonstrated that TKF is identical to
FGFR4 (Scott, 1999).

GENE STRUCTURE

Vainikka et al. (1992) described structural and functional peculiarities
that are specific to FGFR4 within the FGFR family. Kostrzewa and Muller
(1998) found that the FGFR4 gene spans approximately 11.3 kb and is
composed of 18 exons ranging in size from 17 to 600 bp. Exon 1 is
untranslated and preceded by structural elements characteristic of a
TATA-free promoter. Short tandem repeat polymorphisms were identified in
introns 2 and 16 of FGFR4.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids and by in situ hybridization,
Armstrong et al. (1992) mapped the FGFR4 gene to 5q33-qter, an area
involved in leukemias and lymphomas. In a radiation hybrid mapping of 18
genes on distal 5q, Warrington et al. (1992) found that the FGFR4 gene
lies distal to DRD1 with high probability. Assuming that the mapping of
DRD1 is correct, FGFR4 would be located in the segment 5q35.1-qter.
Using an interspecific backcross mapping panel, Avraham et al. (1994)
mapped the Fgfr4 gene to mouse chromosome 13 in a region of homology of
synteny with distal human 5q.

GENE FUNCTION

Jung et al. (1999) studied the initiation of mammalian liver development
from endoderm by fibroblast growth factors. The hepatogenic response was
restricted to endoderm tissue, which selectively coexpresses FGFR1 and
FGFR4.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In the FGFR4 gene transcript from a mammary carcinoma cell line, Bange
et al. (2002) discovered a G-to-A transition that resulted in the
substitution of glycine by arginine at position 388 in the transmembrane
domain of the receptor. The arg388 allele was also found in cell lines
derived from a variety of other tumor types as well as in the germline
of cancer patients and healthy individuals. Analysis of 3 geographically
separated groups indicated that it occurs in approximately 50% of
humans. Investigation of the clinical data of 84 breast cancer patients
revealed that homo- or heterozygous carriers of the arg388 allele had a
significantly reduced disease-free survival time (P = 0.01) within a
median follow-up of 62 months. Moreover, the FGFR4 arg388 allele was
associated with early metastasis and advanced tumor-node metastasis
stage in 82 colon cancer patients. Consistent with this finding, the
mammary tumor cell line expressing FGFR4 arg388 exhibited increased
motility relative to cells expressing the FGFR4 gly388 isotype. The
results supported the conclusion that the FGFR4 arg388 allele represents
a determinant that is innocuous in healthy individuals but predisposes
cancer patients for significantly accelerated disease progression.

Taylor et al. (2009) noted that FGFR4 is expressed in myoblasts during
normal development, in regenerating muscle following injury, and in
rhabdomyosarcomas, but not in normal mature skeletal muscle. They found
that FGFR4 was significantly overexpressed in rhabdomyosarcoma tumors of
high metastatic potential, and higher FGFR4 expression was associated
with a lower rate of survival. Taylor et al. (2009) identified 6
missense mutations in the FGFR4 tyrosine kinase domain among 7 of 94
(7.5%) primary rhabdomyosarcomas, and none of these substitutions were
found in normal controls. Comparison with the available genomic data
suggested that the mutations were somatic. Four of the mutations
affected residues asn535 and val550 and were predicted to be activating
mutations that would alter conformational dynamics during
phosphorylation, in the case of asn535 substitutions, and ATP binding,
in the case of val550 substitutions. Using human and mouse
rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines, Taylor et al. (2009) found that 2 of these
mutations, asn535 to lys (N535K) and val550 to glu (V550E), increased
autophosphorylation, Stat3 (102582) signaling, cell growth, tumor
proliferation, and metastatic potential when injected into nude mice.
These mutants also transformed mouse NIH3T3 cells and led to enhanced
metastatic phenotype.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CANCER PROGRESSION AND TUMOR CELL MOTILITY
FGFR4, GLY388ARG

Bange et al. (2002) found a relationship between the gly388-to-arg
substitution in FGFR4 and cancer progression and tumor cell motility.
The arg388 allele was associated with metastasis and poor prognosis in
breast cancer and in colon cancer. In a control group of 123 subjects,
the frequencies of the gly/gly, gly/arg, and arg/arg genotypes were 45%,
49%, and 6%, respectively.

REFERENCE 1. Armstrong, E.; Partanen, J.; Cannizzaro, L.; Huebner, K.; Alitalo,
K.: Localization of the fibroblast growth factor receptor-4 gene
to chromosome region 5q33-qter. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 4: 94-98,
1992.

2. Avraham, K. B.; Givol, D.; Avivi, A.; Yayon, A.; Copeland, N. G.;
Jenkins, N. A.: Mapping of murine fibroblast growth factor receptors
refines regions of homology between mouse and human chromosomes. Genomics 21:
656-658, 1994.

3. Bange, J.; Prechtl, D.; Cheburkin, Y.; Specht, K.; Harbeck, N.;
Schmitt, M.; Knyazeva, T.; Muller, S.; Gartner, S.; Sures, I.; Wang,
H.; Imyanitov, E.; Haring, H.-U.; Knayzev, P.; Iacobelli, S.; Hofler,
H.; Ullrich, A.: Cancer progression and tumor cell motility are associated
with the FGFR4 Arg388 allele. Cancer Res. 62: 840-847, 2002.

4. Holtrich, U.; Brauninger, A.; Strebhardt, K.; Rubsamen-Waigmann,
H.: Two additional protein-tyrosine kinases expressed in human lung:
fourth member of the fibroblast growth factor receptor family and
an intracellular protein-tyrosine kinase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88:
10411-10415, 1991.

5. Jung, J.; Zheng, M.; Goldfarb, M.; Zaret, K. S.: Initiation of
mammalian liver development from endoderm by fibroblast growth factors. Science 284:
1998-2003, 1999.

6. Keegan, K.; Johnson, D. E.; Williams, L. T.; Hayman, M. J.: Isolation
of an additional member of the fibroblast growth factor receptor family,
FGFR-3. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 1095-1099, 1991.

7. Kostrzewa, M.; Muller, U.: Genomic structure and complete sequence
of the human FGFR4 gene. Mammalian Genome 9: 131-135, 1998.

8. Partanen, J.; Makela, T. P.; Eerola, E.; Korhonen, J.; Hirvonen,
H.; Claesson-Welsh, L.; Alitalo, K.: FGFR-4, a novel acidic fibroblast
growth factor receptor with a distinct expression pattern. EMBO J. 10:
1347-1354, 1991.

9. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/12/1999.

10. Taylor, J. G., VI; Cheuk, A. T.; Tsang, P. S.; Chung, J.-Y.; Song,
Y. K.; Desai, K.; Yu, Y.; Chen, Q.-R.; Shah, K.; Youngblood, V.; Fang,
J.; Kim, S. Y.; and 13 others: Identification of FGFR4-activating
mutations in human rhabdomyosarcomas that promote metastasis in xenotransplanted
models. J. Clin. Invest. 119: 3395-3407, 2009.

11. Vainikka, S.; Partanen, J.; Bellosta, P.; Coulier, F.; Basilico,
C.; Jaye, M.; Alitalo, K.: Fibroblast growth factor receptor-4 shows
novel features in genomic structure, ligand binding and signal transduction. EMBO
J. 11: 4273-4280, 1992. Note: Erratum: EMBO J. 12: 810 only, 1993.

12. Warrington, J. A.; Bailey, S. K.; Armstrong, E.; Aprelikova, O.;
Alitalo, K.; Dolganov, G. M.; Wilcox, A. S.; Sikela, J. M.; Wolfe,
S. F.; Lovett, M.; Wasmuth, J. J.: A radiation hybrid map of 18 growth
factor, growth factor receptor, hormone receptor, or neurotransmitter
receptor genes on the distal region of the long arm of chromosome
5. Genomics 13: 803-808, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/28/2010
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/23/2002
Alan F. Scott - updated: 10/12/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/18/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/27/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/26/1991

EDITED terry: 11/27/2012
mgross: 1/11/2011
terry: 12/28/2010
alopez: 5/3/2002
terry: 4/23/2002
carol: 10/12/1999
alopez: 6/18/1999
carol: 4/10/1998
dholmes: 3/27/1998
jason: 7/1/1994
carol: 12/22/1993
carol: 7/20/1992
carol: 5/4/1992
carol: 3/25/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

610276	TITLE *610276 PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL GLYCAN, CLASS X; PIGX
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) is a complex glycolipid that anchors
many proteins to the cell surface. PIGX is a subunit of a GPI
mannosyltransferase complex involved in the synthesis of the core GPI
structure in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (Ashida et al., 2005).

CLONING

Ashida et al. (2005) cloned rat Pigx cDNA, which contained an unusual
CTG (leu) initiation codon. The deduced 252-amino acid protein has a
22-amino acid signal peptide, a C-terminal transmembrane region, and 2
N-glycosylation sites. Human and rat Pigx proteins share 77% sequence
identity. Pigx colocalized with an ER marker in transfected CHO cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Using coprecipitation experiments, Ashida et al. (2005) determined that
rat Pigx bound Pigm (610273). The expression of Pigm in CHO cells was
very low in the absence of coexpressed Pigx, suggesting that Pigx
stabilizes Pigm.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ashida et al. (2005) determined that the PIGX gene contains 6 exons and
spans 25 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Ashida et al. (2005) mapped the PIGX gene
to chromosome 3q29.

REFERENCE 1. Ashida, H.; Hong, Y.; Murakami, Y.; Shishioh, N.; Sugimoto, N.;
Kim, Y. U.; Maeda, Y.; Kinoshita, T.: Mammalian PIG-X and yeast Pbn1p
are the essential components of glycosylphosphatidylinositol-mannosyltransferase
I. Molec. Biol. Cell 16: 1439-1448, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/23/2006

EDITED carol: 07/23/2006
carol: 7/23/2006

603551	TITLE *603551 HYALURONOGLUCOSAMINIDASE 2; HYAL2
;;LUCA2;;
HYALURONIDASE 2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Hyaluronidases degrade hyaluronic acid (HA), a glycosaminoglycan present
in the extracellular matrix of vertebrates. However, hyaluronidase-2
exhibits very low hyaluronidase activity.

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences related to the PH-20 (600930)
hyaluronidase, Lepperdinger et al. (1998) identified HYAL2 cDNAs. The
HYAL2 cDNAs encode a preprotein with an N-terminal signal peptide. The
predicted 452-amino acid mature protein is 36.5% identical to PH-20.
Northern blot analysis indicated that HYAL2 was expressed in all human
tissues tested except adult brain, and Western blot analysis detected
Hyal2 protein in all mouse tissues examined except adult brain.

Strobl et al. (1998) characterized Hyal2, the mouse homolog of HYAL2.
The deduced proteins are 82% identical.

GENE FUNCTION

Lepperdinger et al. (1998) found that, unlike HYAL1 (607071), whose
properties suggested that it was membrane associated, a fusion protein
of HYAL2 and green fluorescent protein (GFP) localized to lysosomes of
mammalian cells. HYAL2 hyaluronidase activity had a pH optimum below 4.
Also in contrast to HYAL1, the HYAL2 enzyme hydrolyzed only HA of high
molecular mass, yielding intermediate-sized HA fragments of
approximately 20 kD, which were further hydrolyzed to small
oligosaccharides by PH-20. The authors noted that the intermediate-sized
HA fragments have specific biologic functions. Lepperdinger et al.
(1998) concluded that HYAL2 encodes a lysosomal hyaluronidase that is
present in many cell types.

Rai et al. (2001) and Dirks et al. (2002) showed that HYAL2 is a
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored protein on the cell surface
and serves as a receptor for entry into the cell of the jaagsiekte sheep
retrovirus (JSRV). In sheep, JSRV causes a contagious form of lung
cancer that arises from epithelial cells in the lower airway, including
type II aveolar and bronchiolar epithelial cells. De las Heras et al.
(2000) reported that antiserum directed against the JSRV capsid protein
crossreacted with 30% of human pulmonary adenocarcinoma samples but not
with normal lung tissue or adenocarcinomas from other tissues. These
findings supported the possibility of a viral etiology of some human
lung cancers, particularly the bronchioloalveolar adenocarcinoma type,
which is morphologically very similar to the sheep tumors. The viral
envelope (Env) protein alone can transform cultured cells, and
Danilkovitch-Miagkova et al. (2003) hypothesized that Env could bind and
sequester the HYAL2 receptor and thus liberate a potential oncogenic
factor bound and negatively controlled by HYAL2. They showed that the
HYAL2 receptor protein is associated with the RON receptor tyrosine
kinase, also called macrophage stimulating-1 receptor (MST1R; 600168),
rendering it functionally silent. In human cells expressing a JSRV Env
transgene, the Env protein physically associated with HYAL2. RON
liberated from the association with HYAL2 becomes functionally active
and consequently activates the AKT1 (164730) and mitogen-activated
protein kinase-1 (MAPK1; 176948) pathways, leading to oncogenic
transformation of immortalized human bronchial epithelial cells.
Danilkovitch-Miagkova et al. (2003) demonstrated activated RON in a
subset of human bronchioloalveolar carcinoma tumors, suggesting RON
involvement in this type of human lung cancer.

Miller (2002) provided an explanation for the discrepancy between the
conclusions of Lepperdinger et al. (1998) and Rai et al. (2001), the
former that HYAL2 is a lysosomal enzyme and the latter that it is a cell
surface enzyme. Lepperdinger et al. (1998) linked GFP to the carboxy end
of HYAL2 and found GFP in the lysosome, leading to the conclusion that
HYAL2 is also in the lysosome. The findings of Rai et al. (2001) that
HYAL2 is a GPI-anchored protein on the cell surface showed that GFP
would likely be cleaved from HYAL2 during GPI addition, leaving HYAL2 on
the cell surface and resulting in GFP transit to the lysosome for
degradation. Rai et al. (2001) also showed that HYAL2 has very low
hyaluronidase activity, if any, compared to serum hyaluronidase HYAL1,
and that HYAL2 serves as a receptor for JSRV.

Using hyaluronan as substrate, Vigdorovich et al. (2007) demonstrated
that recombinant soluble HYAL2 had hyaluronidase activity, with a sharp
pH optimum of 5.6. Mutation analysis showed that hyaluronidase activity
was not required for HYAL2 to function as JSRV receptor.

GENE STRUCTURE

Strobl et al. (1998) found that the human and mouse HYAL2 genes contain
4 exons and have the same exon-intron organization.

MAPPING

Lepperdinger et al. (1998) stated that the HYAL2 gene is identical to
LUCA2, which Wei et al. (1996) positioned on a contig of human
chromosome 3p21.3, a region frequently deleted in lung cancer (see
182280). Wei et al. (1996) observed that LUCA2 is located near LUCA1
(HYAL1; 607071). By analysis of an interspecific backcross, Strobl et
al. (1998) mapped the Hyal2 gene to mouse chromosome 9 in a region
showing homology of synteny with human 3p21.

ANIMAL MODEL

Jaagsiekte sheep retrovius (JSRV) causes a contagious lung cancer in
sheep and goats, with significant animal health and economic
consequences. The host range of JSRV is in part limited by
species-specific differences in the virus entry receptor,
hyaluronidase-2 (Hyal2), which is not functional as a receptor in mice
but is functional in humans. Sheep are immunotolerant of JSRV because of
expression of closely related endogenous retroviruses, which are not
present in humans and most other species, and that may facilitate
oncogenesis. Using a replication-incompetent adeno-associated virus
vector, Wootton et al. (2005) showed that expression of the JSRV
envelope (Env) protein alone in lungs of mice results in tumors with a
brochioloalveolar localization like those seen in sheep. Whereas lethal
disease was observed in immunodeficient mice, tumor development was
almost entirely blocked in immunocompetent mice. Wootton et al. (2005)
concluded that their results provided a rare example of an oncogenic
viral structural protein, showed that interaction of the viral Env
protein with the virus entry receptor Hyal2 is not required for
tumorigenesis, and indicated that immune recognition of Env can protect
against JSRV tumorigenesis.

The naked mole rat (Heterocephalus glaber) displays exceptional
longevity, with a maximum lifespan exceeding 30 years. In addition, it
is unusually resistant to cancer. Tian et al. (2013) identified a
mechanism responsible for the cancer resistance. Tian et al. (2013)
found that naked mole rat fibroblasts secrete extremely high molecular
mass hyaluronan (HA), which is over 5 times larger than human or mouse
HA. This high molecular mass HA accumulates abundantly in naked mole rat
tissues owing to the decreased activity of HA-degrading enzymes and a
species-specific sequence of hyaluranan synthase-2 (HAS2; 601636).
Furthermore, the naked mole rat cells are more sensitive to HA
signaling, as they have a higher affinity to HA compared to mouse or
human cells. Perturbation of the signaling pathways sufficient for
malignant transformation of mouse fibroblasts failed to transform naked
mole rat cells. However, once high molecular mass HA was removed by
either knocking down HAS2 or overexpressing the HA-degrading enzyme
HYAL2, naked mole rat cells became susceptible to malignant
transformation and readily formed tumors in mice. Tian et al. (2013)
speculated that naked mole rats have evolved a higher concentration of
HA in the skin to provide skin elasticity needed for life in underground
tunnels and that this trait may have then been coopted to provide cancer
resistance and longevity to this species.

REFERENCE 1. Danilkovitch-Miagkova, A.; Duh, F.-M.; Kuzmin, I.; Angeloni, D.;
Liu, S.-L.; Miller, A. D.; Lerman, M. I.: Hyaluronidase 2 negatively
regulates RON receptor tyrosine kinase and mediates transformation
of epithelial cells by jaagsiekte sheep retrovirus. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 100: 4580-4585, 2003.

2. De las Heras, M.; Barsky, S. H.; Hasleton, P.; Wagner, M.; Larson,
E.; Egan, J.; Ortin, A.; Gimenez-Mas, J. A.; Palmarini, M.; Sharp,
J. M.: Evidence for a protein related immunologically to the jaagsiekte
sheep retrovirus in some human lung tumours. Europ. Resp. J. 15:
330-332, 2000.

3. Dirks, C.; Duh, F.-M.; Rai, S. K.; Lerman, M. I.; Miller, A. D.
: Mechanism of cell entry and transformation by enzootic nasal tumor
virus. J. Virol. 76: 2141-2149, 2002.

4. Lepperdinger, G.; Strobl, B.; Kreil, G.: HYAL2, a human gene expressed
in many cells, encodes a lysosomal hyaluronidase with a novel type
of specificity. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 22466-22470, 1998.

5. Miller, A. D.: Personal Communication. Seattle, Wash.  12/10/2002.

6. Rai, S. K.; Duh, F.-M.; Vigdorovich, V.; Danilkovitch-Miagkova,
A.; Lerman, M. I.; Miller, A. D.: Candidate tumor suppressor HYAL2
is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored cell-surface receptor
for jaagsiekte sheep retrovirus, the envelope protein of which mediates
oncogenic transformation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 4443-4448, 2001.

7. Strobl, B.; Wechselberger, C.; Beier, D. R.; Lepperdinger, G.:
Structural organization and chromosomal localization of Hyal2, a gene
encoding a lysosomal hyaluronidase. Genomics 53: 214-219, 1998.

8. Tian, X.; Azpurua, J.; Hine, C.; Vaidya, A.; Myakishev-Rempel,
M.; Ablaeva, J.; Mao, Z.; Nevo, E.; Gorbunova, V.; Seluanov, A.:
High-molecular-mass hyaluronan mediates the cancer resistance of the
naked mole rat. Nature 499: 346-349, 2013.

9. Vigdorovich, V.; Miller, A. D.; Strong, R. K.: Ability of hyaluronidase
2 to degrade extracellular hyaluronan is not required for its function
as a receptor for jaagsiekte sheep retrovirus. J. Virol. 81: 3124-3129,
2007.

10. Wei, M.-H.; Latif, F.; Bader, S.; Kashuba, V.; Chen, J.-Y.; Duh,
F.-M.; Sekido, Y.; Lee, C.-C.; Geil, L.; Kuzmin, I.; Zabarovsky, E.;
Klein, G.; Zbar, B.; Minna, J. D.; Lerman, M. I.: Construction of
a 600-kilobase cosmid clone contig and generation of a transcriptional
map surrounding the lung cancer tumor suppressor gene (TSG) locus
on human chromosome 3p21.3: progress toward the isolation of a lung
cancer TSG. Cancer Res. 56: 1487-1492, 1996.

11. Wootton, S. K.; Halbert, C. L.; Miller, A. D.: Sheep retrovirus
structural protein induces lung tumours. Nature 434: 904-907, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 09/20/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/5/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/19/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/6/2003

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/18/1999

EDITED alopez: 09/20/2013
terry: 4/2/2010
mgross: 6/21/2007
terry: 6/5/2007
alopez: 9/20/2005
terry: 9/19/2005
alopez: 9/23/2004
tkritzer: 10/15/2003
tkritzer: 6/13/2003
terry: 6/6/2003
mgross: 6/26/2002
mgross: 7/16/1999
terry: 7/14/1999
psherman: 2/18/1999

179730	TITLE *179730 RELAXIN 1; RLN1
;;RELAXIN H1; RLXH1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Relaxin is a peptide hormone produced by the corpora lutea of ovaries
during pregnancy in many mammalian species, including man. The secretion
of the hormone into the blood stream just before parturition results in
a marked softening and lengthening of the pubic symphysis and a
softening of the cervix, which facilitates the birth process. By
inhibiting uterine contractions, relaxin may influence the timing of
parturition. Like insulin, relaxin consists of two peptide chains, A and
B, covalently linked by disulfide bonds. By further analogy to insulin,
the two peptides are synthesized as a single-chain precursor polypeptide
with the B chain at the NH2-terminus.

CLONING

Hudson et al. (1981) sequenced the rat relaxin gene. Later, Hudson et
al. (1983) determined the structure of the entire coding region of a
human preprorelaxin gene and synthesized biologically active relaxin
with the structure predicted from that of the genomic clone. Hudson et
al. (1984) isolated a second human relaxin gene sequence (RLN2; 179740)
from a cDNA clone band prepared from human pregnant ovarian tissue. This
(designated H2) appeared to be different from the gene first recovered,
called H1, and to be selectively expressed in the ovary during
pregnancy. Nucleotide sequence showed striking differences in the
predicted structure of relaxin encoded by the 2 genes. There was no
evidence of expression of the H1 gene in ovary; whether H1 is expressed
in other tissues or is a pseudogene is unclear.

GENE FUNCTION

See review by Schwabe and Bullesbach (1994).

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

By treating cells expressing LGR7 (606654) or LGR8 (606655) with pig
relaxin, Hsu et al. (2002) observed a dose-dependent increase in cAMP
production. In contrast, treatment with insulin was ineffective. They
concluded that LGR7 and LGR8 are receptors for relaxin.

MAPPING

By study of mouse-human cell hybrids, Crawford et al. (1984) found that
both relaxin genes are on 9p (9pter-9q12). Only a single relaxin gene is
found in the pig, rat and mouse. In the case of the growth hormone
genes, 'extra' genes not predicted by known gene products are found in
man only. Structural similarities of relaxin to insulin exist at the
level of both the gene and the product.

Naggert and Mu (1994) stated that the relaxin gene maps to mouse
chromosome 19 near D19Mit23.

ANIMAL MODEL

Zhao et al. (1999) used gene targeting to generate Rln -/- mice. These
mice were fertile but had deficient mammary development such that pups
were unable to suckle and died within 24 hrs unless cross-fostered with
a wildtype foster mother. Nipple enlargement during pregnancy was slight
and histologic analysis demonstrated an appearance of the virgin state,
though mammary ducts were grossly dilated and milk was produced.
Heterozygous mice lactated normally. Zhao et al. (1999) also noted that
the intrapubic ligament failed to relax during pregnancy in Rln -/-
mice.

By treating mice with 7BP, the soluble 60-kD extracellular domain of
LGR7, from days 17 to 20 after conception, Hsu et al. (2002) blocked
parturition for more than a day and caused underdevelopment of nipples,
as seen in relaxin null mice. They suggested that analogs of relaxin
agonists and antagonists could be useful for the treatment of disorders
of labor onset and other conditions affecting organs expressing relaxin
receptors.

REFERENCE 1. Crawford, R. J.; Hudson, P.; Shine, J.; Niall, H. D.; Eddy, R.
L.; Shows, T. B.: Two human relaxin genes are on chromosome 9. EMBO
J. 3: 2341-2345, 1984.

2. Hsu, S. Y.; Nakabayashi, K.; Nishi, S.; Kumagai, J.; Kudo, M.;
Sherwood, O. D.; Hsueh, A. J. W.: Activation of orphan receptors
by the hormone relaxin. Science 295: 671-674, 2002.

3. Hudson, P.; Haley, J.; Cronk, M.; Shine, J.; Niall, H.: Molecular
cloning and characterization of cDNA sequences coding for rat relaxin. Nature 291:
127-131, 1981.

4. Hudson, P.; Haley, J.; John, M.; Cronk, M.; Crawford, R.; Haralambidis,
J.; Tregear, G.; Shine, J.; Niall, H.: Structure of a genomic clone
encoding biologically active human relaxin. Nature 301: 628-831,
1983.

5. Hudson, P.; John, M.; Crawford, R.; Haralambidis, J.; Scanlon,
D.; Gorman, J.; Tregear, G.; Shine, J.; Niall, H.: Relaxin gene expression
in human ovaries and the predicted structure of a human preprorelaxin
by analysis of cDNA clones. EMBO J. 3: 2333-2339, 1984.

6. Naggert, J. K.; Mu, J.-L.: The mouse very low density lipoprotein
receptor (Vldlr) gene maps to chromosome 19. Mammalian Genome 5:
453-455, 1994.

7. Schwabe, C.; Bullesbach, E. E.: Relaxin: structures, functions,
promises, and nonevolution. FASEB J. 8: 1152-1160, 1994.

8. Zhao, L.; Roche, P. J.; Gunnerson, J. M.; Hammond, V. E.; Tregear,
G. W.; Wintour, E. M.; Beck, F.: Mice without a functional relaxin
gene are unable to deliver milk to their pups. Endocrinology 140:
445-453, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/31/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED mgross: 01/31/2002
mgross: 1/31/2002
alopez: 3/8/2001
terry: 11/6/1995
mimadm: 3/25/1995
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 3/5/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989

609381	TITLE *609381 SYNTAXIN-BINDING PROTEIN 5-LIKE; STXBP5L
;;LETHAL GIANT LARVAE, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 4; LLGL4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The Drosophila gene Lethal giant larvae (Lgl) regulates epithelial
polarity, and when mutated leads to tumor formation. Using homology
searches with the human Lgl homolog LLGL1 (600966) as query, Katoh and
Katoh (2004) identified the cDNA KIAA1006, which contained a homologous
open reading frame that the authors named LLGL4. The LLGL4 gene encodes
a protein of 1,186 amino acids that shares 95.8% and 68.4% amino acid
identity with mouse Llgl4 and human LLGL3, respectively. Based on the
sources of ESTs derived from the human LLGL4 gene, Katoh and Katoh
(2004) determined that LLGL4 mRNA is expressed in hippocampus, kidney,
lung carcinoid, and germ cell tumors. Sequence comparisons of LGL family
members identified 3 conserved domains. In addition to these domains,
LLGL4 contains 5 WD40 repeats and a C-terminal syntaxin-binding (STXB)
domain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Using cDNA and genomic sequence alignment, Katoh and Katoh (2004) showed
that the LGL4 gene contains 28 exons.

MAPPING

Using BLAST analysis, Katoh and Katoh (2004) showed that the STXBP5L
gene maps to 3q13.33.

REFERENCE 1. Katoh, M.; Katoh, M.: Identification and characterization of human
LLGL4 gene and mouse Llgl4 gene in silico. Int. J. Oncol. 24: 737-742,
2004.

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 5/23/2005

EDITED alopez: 05/23/2005

607581	TITLE *607581 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 22 (ORGANIC ANION TRANSPORTER), MEMBER 8; SLC22A8
;;ORGANIC ANION TRANSPORTER 3; OAT3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using homology with rat Oat1 (SLC22A6; 607582), Race et al. (1999)
identified ESTs for SLC22A8, which they designated OAT3. They obtained
the full-length clone from a kidney cDNA library. The deduced 568-amino
acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 62.1 kD. SLC22A8
contains 12 transmembrane-spanning domains that are separated by 5
intracellular loops and 6 extracellular loops, and the N and C termini
are intracellular. It also has 3 motifs conserved in the amphiphilic
solute facilitator family of proteins. SLC22A8 shares 42 to 43% amino
acid similarity with human, mouse, and rat OAT1 and 25% similarity with
the organic cation transporters OCT1 (SLC22A1; 602607) and OCT2
(SLC22A2; 602608). Northern blot analysis revealed strong expression of
a 3.0-kb transcript in kidney, with weaker expression in brain.

By screening liver and kidney cDNA libraries for homology with rat Oat1,
Sun et al. (2001) cloned what they considered to be a splice variant of
the OAT3 sequence reported by Race et al. (1999). The deduced protein
contains 542 amino acids. Northern blot analysis detected expression of
a major 2.6-kb OAT3 transcript and a minor 4.5-kb OAT3 transcript only
in kidney.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SLC22A8
gene to chromosome 11 (TMAP WI-14966).

REFERENCE 1. Race, J. E.; Grassl, S. M.; Williams, W. J.; Holtzman, E. J.:
Molecular cloning and characterization of two novel human renal organic
anion transporters (hOAT1 and hOAT3). Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 255:
508-514, 1999.

2. Sun, W.; Wu, R. R.; van Poelje, P. D.; Erion, M. D.: Isolation
of a family of organic anion transporters from human liver and kidney. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 283: 417-422, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/25/2003

EDITED mgross: 02/25/2003
mgross: 2/25/2003

600617	TITLE *600617 STEROIDOGENIC ACUTE REGULATORY PROTEIN; STAR
;;START DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; STARD1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

STAR appears to mediate the rapid increase in pregnenolone synthesis
stimulated by tropic hormones (Sugawara et al., 1995).

CLONING

Clark et al. (1994) had previously identified a 37-kD precursor protein
and several forms of a 30-kD mature protein that were synthesized in
response to luteinizing hormone (LH; see 152780) and that were localized
to mitochondria in the MA10 mouse Leydig tumor cell line. They cloned a
full-length cDNA encoding the precursor protein, which they called Star,
from mouse MA10 cells. The deduced protein contains 284 amino acids,
including a mitochondrial targeting sequence, and has a calculated
molecular mass of 31.6 kD. In vitro transcription/translation confirmed
that Star encodes the 37-kD precursor protein and all forms of the
mature 30-kD protein previously observed in MA10 cells.

Sugawara et al. (1995) isolated cDNAs encoding STAR from a human adrenal
cortex library. A major STAR transcript of 1.6 kb and less abundant
transcripts of 4.4 and 7.5 kb were detected in ovary and testis. Kidney
had a lower amount of the 1.6-kb message. STAR mRNA was not detected in
other tissues, including placenta. Sugawara et al. (1995) concluded that
STAR expression is restricted to tissues that carry out mitochondrial
sterol oxidations subject to acute regulation by cAMP and that STAR mRNA
levels are regulated by cAMP.

MAPPING

Using somatic cell hybrid mapping panels, Sugawara et al. (1995) mapped
the STAR gene to chromosome 8p. Fluorescence in situ hybridization
placed the STAR gene in the 8p11.2 region. A pseudogene was mapped to
chromosome 13.

GENE FUNCTION

Clark et al. (1994) found that expression of mouse Star in MA10 cells in
the absence of hormone stimulation was sufficient to induce steroid
production. They concluded that Star is required for hormone-induced
steroidogenesis.

Sugawara et al. (1995) found that coexpression of human STAR in COS-1
cells with cytochrome P450scc (118485) and adrenodoxin (103260)
increased pregnenolone synthesis more than 4-fold.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 3 unrelated patients with lipoid congenital adrenal hyerplasia, Lin
et al. (1995) demonstrated homozygous mutations in the STAR gene
(600617.0002; 600617.0014).

Tee et al. (1995) described an unusual intronic mutation (600617.0001)
that resulted in an mRNA splicing error in a patient with lipoid CAH. At
the time of report, all patients studied had mutations in STAR,
suggesting that such mutations are the sole cause of lipoid CAH.

From a study of 15 patients with congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia
from 10 countries, Bose et al. (1996) concluded that the primary defect
in this disorder resides in STAR. However, the congenital lipoid adrenal
hyperplasia phenotype is the result of 2 separate events. The genetic
loss of steroidogenesis resulting from mutation in the STAR gene is the
primary defect; there is a subsequent loss of steroidogenesis that is
independent of STAR due to cellular damage from accumulated cholesterol
esters in the adrenal cortex, leading to salt wasting, hyponatremia,
hypovolemia, hyperkalemia, acidosis, and death in infancy, although
patients can survive to adulthood with appropriate mineralocorticoid-
and glucocorticoid-replacement therapy. Bose et al. (1996) identified 15
different mutations in the STAR gene among 14 patients. The
gln258-to-ter mutation (600617.0002) was found in 80% of affected
alleles from Japanese and Korean patients, while the mutation arg182leu
(600617.0003) was found in 78% of affected alleles from Palestinian
patients.

Nakae et al. (1997) did a genomic mutation screen of the STAR gene in 19
Japanese patients with lipoid CAH from 16 different families. Ten
patients had a 46,XX karyotype and 9 had a 46,XY karyotype. Six of the
46,XX patients experienced spontaneous pubertal changes, including
breast development and irregular menstruation, whereas none of the 46,XY
subjects displayed pubertal changes. Eight different mutations were
identified. Sixteen patients were either homozygotes or compound
heterozygotes for the gln258-to-ter (Q258X) mutation (600617.0002). The
7 other mutations identified were 189delG, 246insG, 564del13bp, 838delA,
gln212-to-ter (Q212X), ala218-to-val (A218V; 600617.0008), and
met225-to-thr (M225T). COS-1 cells transfected with expression vectors
encoding cDNAs for the mutant STAR proteins that affected the C terminus
(838delA, A218V, and Q258X) exhibited no steroidogenesis-enhancing
activity. However, the M225T mutant retained some steroidogenic
activity. The patient with the M225T mutation had late onset of the
disorder and some capacity to secrete testosterone in response to
chorionic gonadotropin. Nakae et al. (1997) suggested that the Q258X
mutation can be used as a genetic marker for the screening of Japanese
for lipoid CAH since it occurred in 16 of 19 patients; that the C
terminus of STAR plays an important role in the protein's activity; and
that there are differences in the extent of functional impairment of the
testis and ovaries in lipoid CAH, with more severe effects in the male.

Lipoid CAH is common among the Japanese, Korean, and Palestinian Arab
populations, but is rare elsewhere. Bose et al. (2000) described 6
patients with lipoid CAH: 4 Japanese, 1 Palestinian, and 1 Guatemalan
Native American. All had classical clinical presentations of normal
female external genitalia in both genetic sexes, with severe
glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid deficiency presenting in the first
month of life. Quite atypically, one patient had small adrenal glands
shown by computed tomographic scanning. The STAR genes were
characterized in all 6 patients. Three of the Japanese patients were
compound heterozygotes for the common Japanese mutation gln258 to ter
(600617.0002) in association with 3 different novel frameshift
mutations; the fourth Japanese patient was homozygous for the mutation
arg182 to leu (600617.0003), which is common among Palestinian patients
but had not been described previously in a Japanese patient. The
Palestinian and Native American patients were each homozygous for novel
frameshift mutations. Thus, the authors found 5 new frameshift
mutations, but no new missense mutations. The authors concluded that
this was consistent with the view that only a small number of residues
in the STAR protein are crucial for biologic activity. They also
inferred that the tomographic finding of small adrenals in a patient
with genetically proven lipoid CAH due to a STAR mutation suggested a
substantially broader spectrum of clinical findings in this disease than
had been appreciated previously.

Calvo et al. (2001) used heteroduplex analysis to screen the genes
encoding STAR, SF1 (184757), DAX1 (300473), and CYP11A (118485) for
mutations in genomic DNA from 19 women presenting with hirsutism and
increased serum androgen levels. They identified a basepair change in
the STAR gene. Three of 48 patients and 3 of 43 controls presented this
variant. No mutations were found in coding regions of the STAR gene. The
authors concluded that mutations in STAR, SF1, CYP11A, and DAX1 are
seldom found in hirsute patients and do not explain the steroidogenic
abnormalities found in these women.

Gonzalez et al. (2004) reported a 2-month-old female patient, karyotype
46,XY, who presented with growth failure, convulsions, dehydration,
hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, hypotension, and severe hyperpigmentation
suggestive of adrenal insufficiency. Serum cortisol,
17-hydroxyprogesterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, testosterone,
17-hydroxypregnenolone, and aldosterone levels were undetectable in the
presence of high ACTH and plasma renin activity levels.
Immunohistochemical analysis of testis tissues revealed the absence of
STAR protein. Molecular analysis of the STAR gene demonstrated a
homozygous G-to-T mutation within the splice donor site of exon 1
(600617.0009).

Baker et al. (2006) studied the gene encoding STAR in 3 children from 2
families who presented with primary adrenal insufficiency at 2 to 4
years of age; the males had normal genital development. DNA sequencing
identified homozygous STAR mutations val187 to met (600617.0011) and
arg188 to cys (600617.0012) in these 2 families. Functional studies of
STAR activity in cells and in vitro and cholesterol-binding assays
showed these mutants retained approximately 20% of wildtype activity.
The authors referred to these patients as cases of nonclassic lipoid
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, and stated that they represented a new
cause of nonautoimmune Addison disease (primary adrenal failure).

ANIMAL MODEL

Caron et al. (1997) used targeted gene disruption to produce STAR
knockout mice. Initially, the knockout mice were indistinguishable from
wildtype littermates, except that males and females had female external
genitalia. After birth, they failed to grow normally and died from
adrenocortical insufficiency. Hormone assays confirmed severe defects in
adrenal steroids--with loss of negative feedback regulation at
hypothalamic-pituitary levels--whereas hormones constituting the gonadal
axis did not differ significantly from levels in wildtype littermates.
Histologically, the adrenal cortex of STAR knockout mice contained
florid lipid deposits, with lesser deposits in the steroidogenic
compartment of the testis and none in the ovary. The sex-specific
differences in gonadal involvement supported a 2-stage model of the
pathogenesis of STAR deficiency, with trophic hormone stimulation
inducing progressive accumulation of lipids within the steroidogenic
cells and ultimately causing their death.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LIPOID CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
STAR, IVS4AS, T-A, -11

Tee et al. (1995) described a splice acceptor site mutation in a 46,XY
patient of Vietnamese ancestry with lipoid CAH (201710) of somewhat
milder form than the usual. Diagnosis was at 10 weeks of age. Testicular
RNA for STAR demonstrated a 185-bp deletion corresponding to all of exon
5. The mRNA did not encode active protein in transfected cells. Genomic
DNA revealed only a T-to-A transversion in intron 4, 11 bp from the
splice acceptor site of exon 5. This transversion destroyed an NcoI
restriction site; digestion of PCR-amplified genomic DNA from the
patient and both parents confirmed that the patient was homozygous and
the parents were heterozygous. RNase protection assays showed that
expression of a vector with normal intron 4 yielded correctly spliced
STAR mRNA in transfected COS-1 cells, while most, but not all, STAR mRNA
from a vector with the T-to-A transversion in intron 4 was abnormally
spliced. The same was true for the patient's testicular RNA. The authors
noted that the low level of normal STAR mRNA produced in this patient
may account for the later clinical presentation and the low but not
absent levels of steroid hormones detected in the patient. They also
noted that splicing errors as remote as this from the splice junction
site are easily missed but, despite that fact, are probably unusual.
Another notable example is the A-to-G mutation 13 bp from the junction
between intron 2 and exon 3 of the human gene for steroid
21-hydroxylase, which is the most common single cause of virilizing
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (201910.0006).

.0002
LIPOID CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
STAR, GLN258TER

In 2 unrelated patients with lipoid congenital adrenal hyperplasia
(201710), Lin et al. (1995) identified a homozygous C-to-T transition in
the STAR gene, resulting in a gln258-to-ter (Q258X) substitution. One
patient was Korean and the other was Japanese.

Bose et al. (1996) found that 8 of 10 affected STAR alleles in patients
with lipoid congenital adrenal hyperplasia from Japan and Korea (where
congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia is not as rare as it is in U.S.)
had the gln258-to-ter mutation, suggesting a founder effect. The
responsible C-to-T mutation destroyed the recognition site for 3
restriction enzymes. Bose et al. (1996) estimated that the carrier rate
for this mutation in Japan is about 1 in 200.

Bose et al. (2000) described 6 patients with lipoid CAH: 4 Japanese, 1
Palestinian, and 1 Guatemalan Native American. All had classical
clinical presentations of normal female external genitalia in both
genetic sexes, with severe glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid
deficiency presenting in the first month of life. Three of the Japanese
patients were compound heterozygotes for the common Japanese mutation
Q258X in association with 3 different novel frameshift mutations.

.0003
LIPOID CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
STAR, ARG182LEU

Six of 15 patients with lipoid congenital adrenal hyperplasia (201710)
studied by Bose et al. (1996) were of Palestinian ancestry. Two were
sibs and another patient was from a consanguineous marriage. Thus, 6
patients represented 9 unique alleles, 7 of which had the arg182-to-leu
mutation. These apparently unrelated patients were from Jordan, Israel,
Kuwait, and Denmark. Identification of intronic polymorphisms and other
mutations within the STAR gene showed that the arg182-to-leu mutation
was found in various sequence contexts, confirming that the patients
were unrelated.

Bose et al. (2000) described 6 patients with lipoid CAH: 4 Japanese, 1
Palestinian, and 1 Guatemalan Native American. All had classical
clinical presentations of normal female external genitalia in both
genetic sexes, with severe glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid
deficiency presenting in the first month of life. One Japanese patient
was homozygous for the R182L mutation, which is common among Palestinian
patients but had not been described previously in a Japanese patient.

.0004
LIPOID CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
STAR, 1-BP DEL, 261T

Bose et al. (1997) reported a 15.5-year-old 46,XX female with a classic
history of lipoid congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH; 201710) who
underwent spontaneous feminization and developed cyclical vaginal
bleeding at age 13. Genetic analysis of the patient and her parents
showed that she was homozygous for a novel STAR gene (261delT)
frameshift mutation. Finding an inactive STAR gene in this patient
confirmed their 2-hit model of the pathogenesis of lipoid CAH, in which
loss of STAR activity initially preserves STAR-independent
steroidogenesis, which is lost only after cells undergo chronic tropic
stimulation and subsequent damage from accumulation of cholesterol
esters.

.0005
LIPOID CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
STAR, IVS2, 1-BP INS, T, +3

Okuyama et al. (1997) sequenced the cytochrome P450scc (118485) and STAR
genes in a patient from a Korean family with a mild form of lipoid CAH
(201710). The only mutation found in the 2 genes was a thymine (T)
insertion into intron 2 of the STAR gene, 3 bp from the splice donor
site of exon 2. Northern and reverse transcriptase-PCR analyses showed
that mRNA transcribed from the mutant STAR gene construct retained
intron 2, while that from the normal STAR gene construct spliced exons 2
and 3 correctly. The authors concluded that the T insertion into the
STAR gene accounts for the lipoid CAH phenotype in this patient.

.0006
LIPOID CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
STAR, TRP250TER

Korsch et al. (1999) described a 15-year-old 46,XY phenotypic female
with lack of pubertal development (lipoid CAH; 201710). ACTH and
gonadotropin concentrations were elevated. Aldosterone, cortisol and its
precursors, and sex steroids before and after stimulation were below the
lower limit of detection. Homozygosity for a nonsense mutation (TGG to
TAG) encoding a trp250-to-ter substitution was identified in exon 7 of
the STAR gene. Histologic examination after gonadectomy showed
seminiferous tubules containing immature Sertoli cells and a few single
germ cells with positive placental-like alkaline phosphatase
immunoreactivity, indicating carcinoma in situ.

.0007
LIPOID CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
STAR, ARG217THR

Katsumata et al. (1999) reported a Japanese patient with lipoid
congenital adrenal hyperplasia (201710) who was a compound heterozygote
for mutations in the STAR gene. In one allele, they identified a G-to-C
transversion in codon 217, involving the last base of exon 5, which
resulted in an arg217-to-thr substitution. This mutation also was
predicted to alter the splice donor site sequence. The other allele, a
C-to-T transition in codon 218, was predicted to encode an ala218-to-val
substitution (600617.0008), which abolishes STAR activity. In vitro
expression analysis of a construct harboring the arg217-to-thr mutation
disrupted normal splicing, resulting in the complete skipping of exon 5,
which alters the translation reading frame of exon 6, introduces a stop
codon at amino acid position 174, and thus impairs activity. A
functional expression study of the arg217-to-thr mutation revealed that
it has no steroidogenesis-enhancing activity if its transcripts are ever
spliced normally and translated into protein.

.0008
LIPOID CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
STAR, ARG218VAL

See 600617.0007 and Katsumata et al. (1999).

.0009
LIPOID CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
STAR, IVS1, G-T, +1

In a 2-month-old Chilean female, karyotype 46,XY, with lipoid congenital
adrenal hyperplasia (201710), Gonzalez et al. (2004) found a homozygous
G-to-T mutation within the splice donor site of exon 1 of the STAR gene
(IVS1+1G-T). RT-PCR analyses of the mutant gene showed an abnormal mRNA
transcript of 2430 bp (normal size 433 bp). Sequence analysis of the
mutant mRNA demonstrated the retention of intron 1. The authors
concluded that this mutation gives rise to a truncated STAR protein,
which lacks an important N-terminal region and the entire lipid transfer
domain.

.0010
LIPOID CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
STAR, ARG182HIS

Among 8 patients with congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia (201710)
from 6 apparently unrelated Saudi Arabian families, Chen et al. (2005)
reported that 7 were homozygous for an arg182-to-his (R182H) mutation in
the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (STAR). Onset of symptoms
ranged from 1 month to 14 months. The R182H mutation was recreated in a
human STAR cDNA expression vector and found to be wholly inactive in a
standard assay of COS-1 cells cotransfected with the cholesterol
side-chain cleavage enzyme system. Thus, the loss of all assayable
activity in vitro correlated poorly with the later onset of clinical
symptoms in these patients. Chen et al. (2005) concluded that lipoid CAH
may present much later in life than previously thought.

Achermann et al. (2001) described this mutation in a patient from Qatar
with onset of clinical symptoms and laboratory evidence of salt loss
noted at 3 weeks of age.

.0011
LIPOID CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
STAR, VAL187MET

In a Pakistani 46,XX phenotypic female with lipoid congenital adrenal
hyperplasia (201710), Baker et al. (2006) detected homozygosity for a
G-to-A transition in the STAR gene that resulted in a val-to-met
substitution at codon 187 of the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein
(V187M). The patient presented with fever and vomiting at 2 years of age
and was hypoglycemic during a viral illness at 4 years of age.
Progressive hyperpigmentation prompted a referral at 4.5 years, at which
time basal cortisol was undetectable.

.0012
LIPOID CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
STAR, ARG188CYS

In 2 Pakistani brothers with lipoid congenital adrenal hyperplasia
(201710), Baker et al. (2006) found homozygosity for a C-to-T transition
in the STAR gene that resulted in a substitution of cys for arg at codon
188 of the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (R188C). The karyotype
of both brothers was 46,XY, and genital development was normal. The
older brother presented with hyperpigmentation at 1.5 years; at 2.2
years low basal cortisol and other signs of compensated primary adrenal
failure were detected.

.0013
LIPOID CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
STAR, 2-BP DEL, 201CT

Abdulhadi-Atwan et al. (2007) studied 8 Palestinians from 4 unrelated
families with congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia (210710). All
affected individuals (3 XY, 5 XX) presented neonatally with undetectable
adrenocortical hormones and are responding to replacement therapy. Only
2 sisters, originally reported by Bhangoo et al. (2005), had
neurodevelopmental deficits. Histopathologic findings of excised XY
gonads included accumulation of fat in Leydig cells. As early as 1 year
of age, positive placental alkaline phosphatase and octamer binding
transcription factor staining indicated neoplastic potential. Sequence
analysis of STAR revealed homozygosity for a 2-bp deletion
(201_202delCT) in all 8 cases, causing premature termination at amino
acid 68 of the STAR protein. All of the parents were carriers of the
mutation, which was confirmed to be a founder mutation. The mutation was
not found in 100 normal Jerusalem Palestinians. Abdulhadi-Atwan et al.
(2007) noted that Bhangoo et al. (2005) had reported this mutation in
the 2 sisters as 327_328delCT based on a different numbering system.

.0014
LIPOID CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
STAR, ARG193TER

In a Caucasian patient with lipoid congenital adrenal hyperplasia
(201710), Lin et al. (1995) identified a homozygous C-to-T transition in
the STAR gene, resulting in an arg193-to-ter (R193X) substitution. Both
parents were carriers of the mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Abdulhadi-Atwan, M.; Jean, A.; Chung, W. K.; Meir, K.; Neriah,
Z. B.; Stratigopoulos, G.; Oberfield, S. E.; Fennoy, I.; Hirsch, H.
J.; Bhangoo, A.; Ten, S.; Lerer, I.; Zangen, D. H.: Role of a founder
c.201-202delCT mutation and new phenotypic features of congenital
lipoid adrenal hyperplasia in Palestinians. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92:
4000-4008, 2007.

2. Achermann, J. C.; Meeks, J. J.; Jeffs, B.; Das, U.; Clayton, P.
E.; Brook, C. G.; Jameson, J. L.: Molecular and structural analysis
of two novel StAR mutations in patients with lipoid congenital adrenal
hyperplasia. Molec. Genet. Metab. 73: 354-357, 2001.

3. Baker, B. Y.; Lin, L.; Kim, C. J.; Raza, J.; Smith, C. P.; Miller,
W. L.; Achermann, J. C.: Nonclassic congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia:
a new disorder of the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein with
very late presentation and normal male genitalia. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 91: 4781-4785, 2006.

4. Bhangoo, A.; Gu, W.-X.; Pavlakis, S.; Anhalt, H.; Heier, L.; Ten,
S.; Jameson, J. L.: Phenotypic features associated with mutations
in steroidogenic acute regulatory protein. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90:
6303-6309, 2005.

5. Bose, H. S.; Pescovitz, O. H.; Miller, W. L.: Spontaneous feminization
in a 46,XX female patient with congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia
due to a homozygous frameshift mutation in the steroidogenic acute
regulatory protein. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 82: 1511-1515, 1997.

6. Bose, H. S.; Sato, S.; Aisenberg, J.; Shalev, S. A.; Matsuo, N.;
Miller, W. L.: Mutations in the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein
(StAR) in six patients with congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 3636-3639, 2000.

7. Bose, H. S.; Sugawara, T.; Strauss, J. F., III; Miller, W. L.:
The pathophysiology and genetics of congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia. New
Eng. J. Med. 335: 1870-1878, 1996.

8. Calvo, R. M.; Asuncion, M.; Telleria, D.; Sancho, J.; Millan, J.
L. S.; Escobar-Morreale, H. F.: Screening for mutations in the steroidogenic
acute regulatory protein and steroidogenic factor-1 genes, and in
CYP11A and dosage-sensitive sex reversal-adrenal hypoplasia gene on
the X chromosome, gene-1 (DAX-1), in hyperandrogenic hirsute women. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86: 1746-1749, 2001.

9. Caron, K. M.; Soo, S.-C.; Wetsel, W. C.; Stocco, D. M.; Clark,
B. J.; Parker, K. L.: Targeted disruption of the mouse gene encoding
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein provides insights into congenital
lipoid adrenal hyperplasia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 11540-11545,
1997.

10. Chen, X.; Baker, B. Y.; Abduljabbar, M. A.; Miller, W. L.: A
genetic isolate of congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia with atypical
clinical findings. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 835-840, 2005.

11. Clark, B. J.; Wells, J.; King, S. R.; Stocco, D. M.: The purification,
cloning, and expression of a novel luteinizing hormone-induced mitochondrial
protein in MA-10 mouse Leydig tumor cells: characterization of the
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR). J. Biol. Chem. 269:
28314-28322, 1994.

12. Gonzalez, A. A.; Reyes, M. L.; Carvajal, C. A.; Tobar, J. A.;
Mosso, L. M.; Baquedano, P.; Solar, A.; Venegas, A.; Fardella, C.
E.: Congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia caused by a novel splicing
mutation in the gene for the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 946-951, 2004.

13. Katsumata, N.; Kawada, Y.; Yamamoto, Y.; Noda, M.; Nimura, A.;
Horikawa, R.; Tanaka, T.: A novel compound heterozygous mutation
in the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene in a patient with
congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84:
3983-3987, 1999.

14. Korsch, E.; Peter, M.; Hiort, O.; Sippell, W. G.; Ure, B. M.;
Hauffa, B. P.; Bergmann, M.: Gonadal histology with testicular carcinoma
in situ in a 15-year-old 46,XY female patient with a premature termination
in the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein causing congenital lipoid
adrenal hyperplasia. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 1628-1632, 1999.

15. Lin, D.; Sugawara, T.; Strauss, J. F., III; Clark, B. J.; Stocco,
D. M.; Saenger, P.; Rogol, A.; Miller, W. L.: Role of steroidogenic
acute regulatory protein in adrenal and gonadal steroidogenesis. Science 267:
1828-1831, 1995.

16. Nakae, J.; Tajima, T.; Sugawara, T.; Arakane, F.; Hanaki, K.;
Hotsubo, T.; Igarashi, N.; Igarashi, Y.; Ishii, T.; Koda, N.; Kondo,
T.; Kohno, H.; Nakagawa, Y.; Tachibana, K.; Takeshima, Y.; Tsubouchi,
K.; Strauss, J. F., III; Fujieda, K.: Analysis of the steroidogenic
acute regulatory protein (StAR) gene in Japanese patients with congenital
lipoid adrenal hyperplasia. Hum. Molec. Genet. 6: 571-576, 1997.

17. Okuyama, E.; Nishi, N.; Onishi, S.; Itoh, S.; Ishii, Y.; Miyanaka,
H.; Fujita, K.; Ichikawa, Y.: A novel splicing junction mutation
in the gene for the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein causes
congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 82:
2337-2342, 1997.

18. Sugawara, T.; Holt, J. A.; Driscoll, D.; Strauss, J. F., III;
Lin, D.; Miller, W. L.; Patterson, D.; Clancy, K. P.; Hart, I. M.;
Clark, B. J.; Stocco, D. M.: Human steroidogenic acute regulatory
protein: functional activity in COS-1 cells, tissue-specific expression,
and mapping of the structural gene to 8p11.2 and a pseudogene to chromosome
13. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 4778-4782, 1995.

19. Tee, M.-K.; Lin, D.; Sugawara, T.; Holt, J. A.; Guiguen, Y.; Buckingham,
B.; Strauss, J. F., III; Miller, W. L.: T-to-A transversion 11 bp
from a splice acceptor site in the human gene for steroidogenic acute
regulatory protein causes congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 4: 2299-2305, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 7/20/2011
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/20/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/9/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/22/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/11/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/13/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/26/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/2/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/20/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/6/1997
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/30/1997
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/29/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/24/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/19/1995

EDITED carol: 07/24/2012
carol: 7/24/2012
mgross: 7/20/2011
carol: 5/20/2008
alopez: 11/9/2007
carol: 5/31/2007
alopez: 8/22/2006
alopez: 4/11/2005
carol: 2/23/2004
mgross: 6/25/2002
cwells: 6/25/2002
cwells: 7/13/2001
alopez: 3/26/2001
mgross: 10/13/2000
terry: 10/2/2000
mgross: 3/31/2000
terry: 3/20/2000
terry: 8/11/1998
terry: 6/18/1998
terry: 11/6/1997
dholmes: 10/30/1997
dholmes: 10/24/1997
jenny: 6/20/1997
jamie: 5/29/1997
jenny: 5/29/1997
alopez: 4/30/1997
alopez: 4/24/1997
terry: 4/23/1997
mark: 1/6/1997
terry: 1/3/1997
mark: 1/16/1996
mark: 1/10/1996
terry: 1/5/1996
mark: 6/19/1995

612697	TITLE *612697 VAULT RNA 1-3; VTRNA1-3
;;HVG3;;
VAULT RNA COMPONENT 3; VAULTRC3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Vaults are large cytoplasmic ribonucleoproteins composed largely of MVP
(605088) and a nontranslated vault RNA component. By PCR of a human
genomic DNA library, Kickhoefer et al. (1998) cloned 3 vault RNA genes,
HVG1 (VTRNA1-1; 612695), HVG2 (VTRNA1-2; 612696), and HVG3 (VTRNA1-3).
Both HVG2 and HVG3 contain 86 bases and have an internal RNA polymerase
III (see 606007)-type promoter element and a typical polymerase III
termination signal. They both have an internal 10-base deletion compared
with HVG1.

Kickhoefer et al. (1999) found that only HVG1 was expressed in all human
cell lines examined. When expressed, HVG2 and HVG3 were often associated
with the supernatant fraction rather than microsomal pellets containing
vaults.

Nandy et al. (2009) described the structure of VTRNA1-3. The
89-nucleotide RNA forms an extended stem-loop structure with asymmetric
internal bulges. It contains characteristic internal polymerase III
A-box and B-box promoter elements and a downstream B2-box motif.

GENE FUNCTION

Kickhoefer et al. (1998) found that HVG1, but not HVG2 or HVG3,
associated with vaults in human cell lines.

Nandy et al. (2009) found that expression of VTRNA1-1, VTRNA1-2,
VTRNA1-3, and CBL3 (VTRNA2-1; 614938) was upregulated in cord blood
lymphocytes infected with Epstein-Barr virus. Upregulation was highest
for VTRNA1-1 (about 1,100-fold) and lowest for CBL3 (about 3-fold).

GENE STRUCTURE

Kickhoefer et al. (2003) determined that the upstream region of the
VTRNA1-3 gene contains a TATA-like element, a consensus proximal
sequence, and a cAMP response element.

MAPPING

Kickhoefer et al. (2003) stated that the VTRNA1-1, VTRNA1-2, and
VTRNA1-3 genes map to a 16-kb region of chromosome 5.

Nandy et al. (2009) stated that the VTRNA1-3 gene is located near the
PCDHA gene cluster (604966), which Wu and Maniatis (1999) mapped to
chromosome 5q31.

REFERENCE 1. Kickhoefer, V. A.; Emre, N.; Stephen, A. G.; Poderycki, M. J.;
Rome, L. H.: Identification of conserved vault RNA expression elements
and a non-expressed mouse vault RNA gene. Gene 309: 65-70, 2003.

2. Kickhoefer, V. A.; Rajavel, K. S.; Scheffer, G. L.; Dalton, W.
S.; Scheper, R. J.; Rome, L. H.: Vaults are up-regulated in multidrug-resistant
cancer cell lines. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 8971-8974, 1998.

3. Kickhoefer, V. A.; Stephen, A. G.; Harrington, L.; Robinson, M.
O.; Rome, L. H.: Vaults and telomerase share a common subunit, TEP1. J.
Biol. Chem. 274: 32712-32717, 1999.

4. Nandy, C.; Mrazek, J.; Stoiber, H.; Grasser, F. A.; Huttenhofer,
A.; Polacek, N.: Epstein-Barr virus-induced expression of a novel
human vault RNA. J. Molec. Biol. 388: 776-784, 2009.

5. Wu, Q.; Maniatis, T.: A striking organization of a large family
of human neural cadherin like cell adhesion genes. Cell 97: 779-790,
1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/19/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/25/2009

EDITED mgross: 11/15/2012
terry: 10/19/2012
mgross: 3/26/2009

300162	TITLE *300162 ACETYLSEROTONIN METHYLTRANSFERASE-LIKE; ASMTL
;;ACETYLSEROTONIN METHYLTRANSFERASE-LIKE, X-LINKED; ASMTLX
DESCRIPTION The human Y chromosome is an extreme case with respect to recombination
frequencies. Over most of its entire length, the Y chromosome is
virtually a nonrecombining chromosome. At its distal ends, however,
within the 2 X-Y homologous pseudoautosomal regions (PAR1 and PAR2),
recombination frequencies are extremely high. Indeed, PAR1 on Xp/Yp
exhibits one of the highest recombination rates in male meiosis in the
human genome. This is due to the fact that males have an obligatory
crossover within the 2.6-Mb region of PAR1 (Rappold, 1993). The
preponderance of gene families expressed specifically in the testes has
been described on the nonrecombining portion of the human Y chromosome
(Lahn and Page, 1997). This has raised questions about the evolutionary
forces that led to their creation as well as to the molecular mechanisms
involved. In contrast, the evolution of genes and gene families in the
recombining portion of Y is likely to follow very different principles.
For example, the high frequency of recombination may have rendered this
region more prone to unequal crossing over, leading to gene duplications
in the ancestral PAR1 region. Ried et al. (1998) stated that to that
time 9 genes and 1 pseudogene had been characterized within PAR1. Only 2
of them, ASMT (300015) and XE7 (312095), had been characterized as
'single' genes, whereas all the others had close relatives in the genome
or were duplicated within PAR1. In this connection, Ried et al. (1998)
isolated a novel pseudoautosomal gene, ASMTL (N-acetylserotonin
O-methyltransferase-like), showing significant homology to the ASMT
gene. ASMT is an enzyme catalyzing the last step in the synthesis of
melatonin, a hormone that depresses body temperature and facilitates
sleep onset by inducing the circadian rhythm. It is exclusively
expressed in brain, retina, and pineal gland. Besides the homology of
ASMTL to ASMT in its 3-prime part, the N-terminal part of ASMTL is
similar to the entire length of the multicopy associated filamentation
(maf) protein of Bacillus subtilis and to orfE of Escherichia coli, gene
products involved in the regulation of cell division and growth. The
bipartite structure suggested that ASMTL is the product of a gene fusion
event, during which 2 different full-length genes are joined to form a
single gene. Ried et al. (1998) also detected the identity of 1 exon
(1A) of ASMT to exon 3 in yet another pseudoautosomal gene, XE7. The
data suggested that exon duplication and exon shuffling as well gene
fusion may represent common characteristics of the evolution of the
pseudoautosomal region.

Ried et al. (1998) found that ASMTL resides proximal to and in the close
vicinity of ANT3 (300151). The cosmid used in the initial cDNA selection
approach contained not only the 3-prime end of ASMTL but also the entire
ANT3 gene. ANT3 had previously been shown to be associated with a CpG
island located approximately 1,300 kb from the telomere. Sequencing
indicated that the 5-prime end of ASMTL is located approximately 1,350
kb from Xptel. Thus, the homologous genes ASMTL and ASMT (previously
mapped 1,700-1,800 kb from Xptel) reside within 500 kb in the middle
portion of PAR1.

REFERENCE 1. Lahn, B. T.; Page, D. C.: Functional coherence of the human Y
chromosome. Science 278: 675-680, 1997.

2. Rappold, G. A.: The pseudoautosomal regions of the human sex chromosomes. Hum.
Genet. 92: 315-324, 1993.

3. Ried, K.; Rao, E.; Schiebel, K.; Rappold, G. A.: Gene duplications
as a recurrent theme in the evolution of the human pseudoautosomal
region 1: isolation of the gene ASMTL. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7: 1771-1778,
1998.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/30/1998

EDITED alopez: 06/21/1999
carol: 12/2/1998

605890	TITLE *605890 EH DOMAIN-CONTAINING 2; EHD2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening a human fetal brain cDNA library with exons derived from a
BAC mapping to the 19q13.3 glioma tumor suppressor candidate region,
Pohl et al. (2000) identified 3 novel genes, designated EHD2, EHD3
(605891), and EHD4 (605892), which are homologous to human EHD1
(605888). The deduced protein identities between EHD1 and EHD2, between
EHD1 and EHD3, and between EHD1 and EHD4, are 71%, 86%, and 76%,
respectively. All contain multiple conserved regions, including a
nucleotide-binding consensus site at the N terminus, a bipartite nuclear
localization signal, and an EPS15 (600051) homology (EH) protein-binding
domain with an EF-hand motif at the C terminus. EHD2 encodes a deduced
543-amino acid protein. Northern blot analysis detected a 3.6-kb EHD2
transcript that was highly expressed in heart and moderately expressed
in placenta, lung, and skeletal muscle, as well as an approximately
6.0-kb transcript that was expressed at low levels in heart and skeletal
muscle.

Guilherme et al. (2004) cloned mouse Ehd2. Northern blot analysis
detected highest expression in lung, fat, skeletal muscle, and heart.
Subcellular fractionation of mouse adipocytes showed Ehd2 associated
with plasma membrane and microsomal fractions. Endogenous Ehd2 localized
near the plasma membrane in tubulovesicular ring-shaped structures that
appeared to be linked to the plasma membrane through actin filaments.

GENE STRUCTURE

Pohl et al. (2000) determined that the EHD2 gene contains 5 exons.

MAPPING

By PCR-amplification of sequences from EHD2 using a BAC as a template,
Pohl et al. (2000) confirmed that EHD2 maps to 19q13.3.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Daumke et al. (2007) demonstrated that EHD-containing proteins share
many common features with the dynamin superfamily, such as a low
affinity for nucleotides, the ability to tubulate liposomes in vitro,
oligomerization around lipid tubules in ring-like structures, and
stimulated nucleotide hydrolysis in response to lipid binding. Daumke et
al. (2007) presented the structure of EHD2, bound to a nonhydrolyzable
ATP analog, and provided evidence consistent with a role for EHDs in
nucleotide-dependent membrane remodeling in vivo. The nucleotide-binding
domain is involved in dimerization, which creates a highly curved
membrane-binding region in the dimer. Oligomerization of dimers occurs
on another interface of the nucleotide-binding domain, and this allowed
Daumke et al. (2007) to model the EHD oligomer.

GENE FUNCTION

Guilherme et al. (2004) found Ehd2 mRNA elevated upon differentiation of
a mouse preadipocyte cell line. Overexpression of Ehd2 interfered with
internalization and recycling of the glucose transporter Glut4 (SLC2A4;
138190) following its insulin-stimulated surface expression. Using
protein pull-down assays, Guilherme et al. (2004) showed that the NPF
motifs of human EHBP1 (609922) bound the EH domain of Ehd2.
Overexpression of the EH domain of Ehd2 or the NPF motifs of EHBP1
disrupted cortical actin structures, and depletion of Ehd2 or Ehbp1 in
mouse adipocytes by small interfering RNA inhibited endocytosis.
Guilherme et al. (2004) concluded that EHD2 and EHBP1 function in
endocytic trafficking.

REFERENCE 1. Daumke, O.; Lundmark, R.; Vallis, Y.; Martens, S.; Butler, P. J.
G.; McMahon, H. T.: Architectural and mechanistic insights into an
EHD ATPase involved in membrane remodelling. Nature 449: 923-927,
2007.

2. Guilherme, A.; Soriano, N. A.; Bose, S.; Holik, J.; Bose, A.; Pomerleau,
D. P.; Furcinitti, P.; Leszyk, J.; Corvera, S.; Czech, M. P.: EHD2
and the novel EH domain binding protein EHBP1 couple endocytosis to
the actin cytoskeleton. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 10593-10605, 2004.

3. Pohl, U.; Smith, J. S.; Tachibana, I.; Ueki, K.; Lee, H. K.; Ramaswamy,
S.; Wu, Q.; Mohrenweiser, H. W.; Jenkins, R. B.; Louis, D. N.: EHD2,
EHD3, and EHD4 encode novel members of a highly conserved family of
EH domain-containing proteins. Genomics 63: 255-262, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/21/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/22/2006

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 5/1/2001

EDITED carol: 02/29/2008
terry: 2/21/2008
mgross: 2/23/2006
terry: 2/22/2006
carol: 5/1/2001

602214	TITLE *602214 CASEIN KINASE I, GAMMA-2; CSNK1G2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kitabayashi et al. (1997) isolated a clone of immature cDNA encoding
human casein kinase I gamma-2 (CSNK1G2) by screening a human testis cDNA
library with a PCR-amplified probe representing the kinase domain of rat
casein kinase I gamma-2. The predicted amino acid sequence consists of
416 residues, 94% of which are identical to those of the rat homolog.

MAPPING

Kitabayashi et al. (1997) mapped the human CSNK1G2 gene to 19p13.3 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization and PCR analysis of a human/rodent
hybrid cell panel.

REFERENCE 1. Kitabayashi, A. N.; Kusuda, J.; Hirai, M.; Hashimoto, K.: Cloning
and chromosomal mapping of human casein kinase I gamma 2 (CSNK1G2). Genomics 46:
133-137, 1997.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/22/1997

EDITED alopez: 05/03/2010
psherman: 10/25/1999
psherman: 10/22/1999
mark: 12/22/1997

136539	TITLE *136539 FORMYL PEPTIDE RECEPTOR 3; FPR3
;;FORMYL PEPTIDE RECEPTOR-LIKE 2; FPRL2;;
FORMYL PEPTIDE RECEPTOR HOMOLOG 2; FPRH2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Bao et al. (1992) identified 2 structural homologs of FMLP receptor
(FPR1; 136537), FPRL1 (FPR2; 136538) and FPRL2 (FPR3). Since these 2
structural homologs did not recognize the ligand FMLP, Bao et al. (1992)
referred to them as orphan receptors. Nonetheless, they probably
function as chemotactic receptors.

GENE FUNCTION

By screening organ extracts on cell lines expressing FPRL2, Migeotte et
al. (2005) isolated F2L (FPRL2 ligand) from spleen. F2L is an acetylated
21-amino acid peptide derived from the N terminus of intracellular
heme-binding protein (HEBP1; 605826). F2L bound and activated FPRL2 in
the nanomolar range, triggering intracellular calcium release,
inhibition of cAMP accumulation, and phosphorylation of MAP kinases.
Testing on monocytes and monocyte-derived dendritic cells showed that
F2L promoted calcium mobilization and chemotaxis. Migeotte et al. (2005)
concluded that F2L is a natural chemoattractant peptide for dendritic
cells and monocytes and is specific for FPRL2.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis, Bao et al. (1992) showed that, like
FPR1, FPR2 and FPR3 map to chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Bao, L.; Gerard, N. P.; Eddy, R. L., Jr.; Shows, T. B.; Gerard,
C.: Mapping of genes for the human C5a receptor (C5AR), human FMLP
receptor (FPR), and two FMLP receptor homologue orphan receptors (FPRH1,
FPRH2) to chromosome 19. Genomics 13: 437-440, 1992.

2. Migeotte, I.; Riboldi, E.; Franssen, J.-D.; Gregoire, F.; Loison,
C.; Wittamer, V.; Detheux, M.; Robberecht, P.; Costagliola, S.; Vassart,
G.; Sozzani, S.; Parmentier, M.; Communi, D.: Identification and
characterization of an endogenous chemotactic ligand specific for
FPRL2. J. Exp. Med. 201: 83-93, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/31/2006

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/3/1992

EDITED alopez: 08/24/2009
mgross: 4/3/2006
terry: 3/31/2006
dkim: 7/2/1998
mark: 3/6/1998
jason: 6/17/1994
carol: 8/25/1992
carol: 6/3/1992

600641	TITLE *600641 SULFOTRANSFERASE FAMILY 1A, PHENOL-PREFERRING, MEMBER 3; SULT1A3
;;SULFOTRANSFERASE, MONOAMINE-PREFERRING; STM
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Sulfate conjugation is a key metabolic process controlled by a number of
genes. These include STD (125263), the dehydroepiandrosterone
(DHEA)-preferring sulfotransferase; STE (600043), the
estrogen-preferring form; STP1 (171150) and STP2 (601292), the
phenol-preferring forms; and STM, the monoamine-preferring form. STM,
the thermolabile or monoamine-metabolizing form of phenol
sulfotransferase, is responsible for the sulfate conjugation of
monoamine neurotransmitters such as dopamine, over 95% of which is
sulfate conjugated (Aksoy and Weinshilboum, 1995).

CLONING

Zhu et al. (1993) and Wood et al. (1994) cloned the STM cDNA from brain
and liver libraries, respectively. The same cDNA was later isolated by
Jones et al. (1995). The 3 sequences were in agreement and predicted a
295-amino acid protein.

Aksoy et al. (1994) expressed the STM cDNA in COS-1 cells as a 35.5-kD
protein. Northern blots showed a 1.4-kb mRNA in liver, kidney, lung,
small intestine, spleen and leukocytes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Aksoy and Weinshilboum (1995) determined that the STM gene has a total
length of approximately 8.4 kb and includes 10 exons, the first 3 of
which are untranslated. Many of the exon-intron borders are at the same
positions as in the human DHEA sulfotransferase gene. The first 2 exons
are present in the 5-prime UTR of a longer mRNA expressed in brain and
liver, while exon 3 is present in the 5-prime UTR of a shorter mRNA also
present in these tissues.

Dooley and Huang (1996) determined the genomic organization of the human
STP1, STP2, and STM genes. These 3 genes each have 8 exons with the
initiator methionine on exon 2. All 3 colocalize on a single cosmid from
chromosome 16p12.1-p11.2 and have a high degree of sequence homology,
suggesting that these 3 genes arose by gene duplication. Dooley and
Huang (1996) stated that the previously identified PST gene sequences
HAST3 and M-PST are isolates of the STM gene.

GENE FUNCTION

Weinshilboum et al. (1997) reviewed the molecular biology of the
sulfotransferases. These enzymes catalyze sulfate conjugation of many
hormones, neurotransmitters, drugs, and xenobiotic compounds. They
stated that at that time the 5 known human cytosolic sulfotransferases
were STE (symbolized EST by them), a hydroxysteroid sulfotransferase
STD, and 3 phenol-preferring sulfotransferases (STP1, STP2, and STM).
The genes for these human enzymes, as well as those of other mammalian
cytosolic sulfotransferases that had been cloned, showed a high degree
of structural homology, with conservation of location of most
intron-exon splice junctions. Genetic polymorphisms of several of these
that have been demonstrated through family studies are suspected on the
basis of large differences among individuals in the expression.

MAPPING

Aksoy et al. (1994) used PCR screening of DNAs from human-rodent somatic
cell hybrid mapping panels to assign the STM gene to chromosome 16.
Regional localization to 16p11.2 was achieved by PCR analysis of a
high-resolution mouse-human somatic cell hybrid panel containing defined
portions of human chromosome 16.

Bernier et al. (1994) assigned the placental estrogen sulfotransferase
to chromosome 16 using DNA from panels of human/rodent somatic cell
hybrids and PCR amplification. Weinshilboum (1995) pointed out that the
'placental estrogen sulfotransferase' gene that Bernier et al. (1994)
mapped to chromosome 16 is, in fact, the STM gene. Bernier et al. (1994)
reported, on the basis of expression data, that the mRNA encoded by
their gene can catalyze the sulfate conjugation of estrogens, although
with a much lower affinity than the mRNA encoded by the human STE gene
that is localized on 4q13.1 (600043).

The STM gene, a thermolabile phenol sulfotransferase, maps very near the
location of the thermostable phenol sulfotransferase, STP1. Her et al.
(1996) showed that a second thermolabile phenol sulfotransferase, STP2
(601292), also maps to chromosome 16.

REFERENCE 1. Aksoy, I. A.; Callen, D. F.; Apostolou, S.; Her, C.; Weinshilboum,
R. M.: Thermolabile phenol sulfotransferase gene (STM) localization
to human chromosome 16p11.2. Genomics 23: 275-277, 1994.

2. Aksoy, I. A.; Weinshilboum, R. M.: Human thermolabile phenol sulfotransferase
gene (STM): molecular cloning and structural characterization. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 208: 786-795, 1995.

3. Aksoy, I. A.; Wood, T. C.; Weinshilboum, R.: Human liver estrogen
sulfotransferase: identification by cDNA cloning and expression. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 200: 1621-1629, 1994.

4. Bernier, F.; Leblanc, G.; Labrie, F.; Luu-The, V.: Structure of
human estrogen and aryl sulfotransferase gene: two mRNA species issued
from a single gene. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 28200-28205, 1994.

5. Dooley, T. P.; Huang, Z.: Genomic organization and DNA sequences
of two human phenol sulfotransferase genes (STP1 and STP2) on the
short arm of chromosome 16. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 228:
134-140, 1996.

6. Her, C.; Raftogianis, R.; Weinshilboum, R. M.: Human phenol sulfotransferase
STP2 gene: molecular cloning, structural characterization, and chromosomal
localization. Genomics 33: 409-420, 1996.

7. Jones, A. L.; Hagen, M.; Coughtrie, M. W. H.; Roberts, R. C.; Glatt,
H.: Human platelet phenolsulfotransferases: cDNA cloning, stable
expression in V79 cells and identification of a novel allelic variant
of the phenol-sulfating form. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 208:
855-862, 1995.

8. Weinshilboum, R.: Personal Communication. Rochester, Minn.
10/9/1995.

9. Weinshilboum, R. M.; Otterness, D. M.; Aksoy, I. A.; Wood, T. C.;
Her, C.; Raftogianis, R. B.: Sulfotransferase molecular biology:
cDNAs and genes. FASEB J. 11: 3-14, 1997.

10. Wood, T. C.; Aksoy, I. A.; Aksoy, S.; Weinshilboum, R. M.: Human
liver thermolabile phenol sulfotransferase: cDNA cloning, expression
and characterization. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 198: 1119-1127,
1994.

11. Zhu, X.; Veronese, M. E.; Bernard, C. C. A.; Sansom, L. N.; McManus,
M. E.: Identification of two human brain aryl sulfotransferase cDNAs. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 195: 120-127, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 5/20/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/16/1997

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 7/9/1995

EDITED alopez: 04/09/2009
alopez: 6/14/1999
alopez: 7/24/1997
mark: 6/9/1997
alopez: 5/27/1997
alopez: 5/19/1997
terry: 5/16/1997
jamie: 5/8/1997
terry: 6/6/1996
terry: 5/30/1996
joanna: 12/8/1995
terry: 10/27/1995
carol: 7/20/1995

614605	TITLE *614605 ZINC FINGER DHHC DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 21; ZDHHC21
;;DHHC21
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The classical sex steroid receptors, estrogen receptor (ER)-alpha (ESR1;
133430), progesterone receptor (PGR; 607311), and androgen receptor (AR;
313700), translocate from the plasma membrane to the nucleus following
ligand binding and influence gene transcription. Sex steroid receptors
also engage in cell signaling at the plasma membrane, and this function
requires both ligand binding and receptor palmitoylation at a conserved
cysteine residue. ZDHHC21 is a palmitoylacyltransferase that functions
in palmitoylation of sex steroid receptors (Pedram et al., 2012).

CLONING

By immunofluorescence analysis, Pedram et al. (2012) found that
endogenous DHHC21 and DHHC7 (614604) localized to the Golgi apparatus in
human MCF-7 breast cancer cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Palmitoylacyltransferases contain an asp-his-his-cys (DHHC) signature
sequence. By expressing plasmids encoding each mouse DHHC protein in
MCF-7 cells, Pedram et al. (2012) found that only Dhhc7 and Dhhc21
functioned in ER-alpha palmitoylation. Knockdown of endogenous DHHC7 and
DHHC21 via small interfering RNA reduced ER-alpha localization at the
plasma membrane and impaired intracellular signaling by
17-beta-estradiol via ERK (see 176948) and AKT (see 164730) kinases and
cAMP generation. Nuclear ER-alpha localization and transcriptional
activation were unaffected. Mutation of a cysteine in the C-terminal
region of mouse ER-alpha abrogated palmitoylation by Dhhc7 and Dhhc21
and inhibited cell signaling from the plasma membrane. Knockdown studies
revealed that DHHC7 and DHHC21 also functioned as specific
palmitoylacyltransferases for progesterone and androgen receptors.

MAPPING

Hartz (2012) mapped the ZDHHC21 gene to chromosome 9p22.3 based on an
alignment of the ZDHHC21 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK096860) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  4/26/2012.

2. Pedram, A.; Razandi, M.; Deschenes, R. J.; Levin, E. R.: DHHC-7
and -21 are palmitoylacyltransferases for sex steroid receptors. Molec.
Biol. Cell 23: 188-199, 2012.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/27/2012

EDITED mgross: 04/27/2012

600944	TITLE *600944 DEOXYHYPUSINE SYNTHASE; DHPS
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Joe et al. (1995) stated that the unusual amino acid hypusine is formed
posttranslationally and is only found in a single cellular protein,
eukaryotic translation initiation factor-5A (EIF5A; see 600187).
Hypusine biosynthesis involves 2 enzymatic steps. In the first step,
deoxyhypusine synthase (EC 2.5.1.46) catalyzes the NAD-dependent
transfer of the butylamine moiety of spermidine to the epsilon-amino
group of a specific lysine residue of the EIF5A precursor protein to
form the intermediate deoxyhypusine residue. In the second step,
mediated by deoxyhypusine hydroxylase (611262), the conversion of the
deoxyhypusine residue to the hypusine residue completes EIF5A
maturation. Hypusine is found in all eukaryotes and in some
archaebacteria, but not in eubacteria. The amino acid sequence of EIF5A
is highly conserved, especially in the region surrounding the hypusine
residue, suggesting an important fundamental function for this protein
throughout eukaryotic evolution. Hypusine and EIF5A appear to be vital
for cell proliferation in eukaryotes.

CLONING

Joe et al. (1995) isolated cDNA clones encoding deoxyhypusine synthase
from a human HeLa cell library. Full-length cDNA clones encoding a
369-amino acid protein (calculated molecular mass of 40,970 Da) and a
shorter cDNA clone (that would potentially encode a protein with an
internal deletion of 56 amino acids) were isolated. The deduced amino
acid sequence of the human enzyme showed a high degree of identity to
that of the yeast enzyme.

From a human peripheral blood mononuclear cell cDNA library, Bevec et
al. (1996) isolated 2 independent sequences encoding biologically active
deoxyhypusine synthase. DNA sequence analysis predicted a 369-amino acid
protein with a molecular mass of 41,055 Da.

GENE FUNCTION

Bevec et al. (1996) demonstrated that recombinant DHPS showed
significant catalytic activity in synthesis of deoxyhypusine after in
vitro transcription and translation as well as on expression in
Escherichia coli.

Hauber et al. (2005) demonstrated that inhibition of DHPS by the
experimental drug CNI-1493 or RNA interference efficiently suppressed
retroviral replication in cell culture and primary cells with no
measurable drug-induced adverse effects on cell cycle transition,
apoptosis, or general cytotoxicity. They showed that the antiviral
effect of CNI-1493 was due to inhibition of the HIV-1 Rev regulatory
protein, for which the hypusine-requiring EIF5A is a cofactor.

MAPPING

Using a panel of somatic rodent/human cell hybrids, Bevec et al. (1996)
localized the DHPS gene to human chromosome 19. Jones et al. (1996)
localized the DHPS gene to 19p13.12-p13.11, using fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis in a combination with somatic human/rodent
translocation hybrid analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Bevec, D.; Kappel, B.; Jaksche, H.; Csonga, R.; Hauber, J.; Klier,
H.; Steinkasserer, A.: Molecular characterization of a cDNA encoding
functional human deoxyhypusine synthase and chromosomal mapping of
the corresponding gene locus. FEBS Lett. 378: 195-198, 1996.

2. Hauber, I.; Bevec, D.; Heukeshoven, J.; Kratzer, F.; Horn, F.;
Choidas, A.; Harrer, T.; Hauber, J.: Identification of cellular deoxyhypusine
synthase as a novel target for antiretroviral therapy. J. Clin. Invest. 115:
76-85, 2005.

3. Joe, Y. A.; Wolff, E. C.; Park, M. H.: Cloning and expression
of human deoxyhypusine synthase cDNA: structure-function studies with
the recombinant enzyme and mutant proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 270:
22386-22392, 1995.

4. Jones, T.; Sheer, D.; Kapetanopoulos, A.; Hauber, J.; Bevec, D.;
Steinkasserer, A.: The gene coding for human deoxyhypusine synthase
(DHPS) maps to chromosome 19p13.11-p13.12. Genomics 35: 635-636,
1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/2/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/13/1995

EDITED carol: 07/27/2007
terry: 2/2/2005
terry: 9/10/1996
terry: 8/23/1996
mark: 3/18/1996
terry: 3/6/1996
mark: 12/11/1995
mark: 11/13/1995

614241	TITLE *614241 LYSOCARDIOLIPIN ACYLTRANSFERASE 1; LCLAT1
;;ACYL-CoA:LYSOCARDIOLIPIN ACYLTRANSFERASE 1; ALCAT1;;
1-@ACYLGLYCEROL-3-PHOSPHATE O-ACYLTRANSFERASE 8; AGPAT8
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Phospholipids are remodeled through the Lands cycle to attain
appropriate fatty acid composition for biologic activity. LCLAT1
functions as an acyltransferase in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and
predominantly remodels anionic phospholipids, including
phosphatidyinositol and phosphatidylglycerol (Zhao et al., 2009).

CLONING

Cao et al. (2004) cloned mouse Lclat1, which they called Alcat1. The
deduced 376-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 44.4
kD. Alcat1 has an N-terminal signal peptide, a C-terminal transmembrane
domain, and an ER retention motif (KKxx) at its C terminus. Northern
blot analysis detected a 4.3-kb Alcat1 transcript in most mouse tissues
examined, with highest expression in heart and kidney. A slightly
shorter Alcat1 variant was also detected in heart. Immunohistochemical
analysis of transfected COS-7 cells showed that Alcat1 colocalized with
ER marker proteins. EST database analysis revealed orthologs of Alcat1
from humans to fish.

By database analysis and PCR of a skeletal muscle cDNA library, Agarwal
et al. (2006) cloned human LCLAT1, which they called AGPAT8. The deduced
376-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 44.4 kD.
AGPAT8 has 2 conserved motifs seen in AGPATs, NHx4D and an EGTR-like
motif (EGTD), which are involved in catalysis and substrate binding,
respectively. AGPAT8 shares 89.1% amino acid identity with mouse Agpat8.
Northern blot analysis detected a 5-kb AGPAT8 transcript in most tissues
examined, with highest expression in heart and kidney. Quantitative
real-time PCR detected AGPAT8 in all tissues examined, with highest
expression in heart, skeletal muscle, kidney, ovary, small intestine,
leukocytes, brain, and placenta. Database analysis revealed orthologs of
AGPAT8 in plants, nematode worms, and cyanobacteria.

Using quantitative RT-PCR, Zhao et al. (2009) detected ALCAT1 expression
in all tissues examined except skeletal muscle. Highest expression was
detected in pancreas. Epitope-tagged ALCAT1 localized to the ER of
transfected COS-7 cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Cao et al. (2004) showed that mouse Alcat1 expressed in insect or
mammalian cells catalyzed acylation of lysocardiolipin and
dilysocardiolipin and preferentially used the unsaturated C18 acyl
donors linoleoyl-CoA and oleoyl-CoA as substrates. Similar activity was
detected in rat liver and heart microsomes, with much lower activity in
isolated liver and heart mitochondria.

Agarwal et al. (2006) showed that human AGPAT8 expressed in Chinese
hamster ovary cells could acylate lysophosphatidic acids with C16 or C18
chains in either the sn-1 or sn-2 position, with variable tolerance for
unsaturation. AGPAT8 did not appear to acylate lysocardiolipin. AGPAT8
used linoleoyl-CoA to synthesize phosphatidylethanolamine,
phosphatidylcholine, and phosphatidic acid.

By assaying membrane preparations of HEK293 cells overexpressing human
ALCAT1, Zhao et al. (2009) found that ALCAT1 possessed acyltransferase
activity toward lysocardiolipin, dilysocardiolipin,
lysophosphatidylinositol, and lysophosphatidylglycerol, but not
lysophosphatidylcholine and lisophosphatidylethanolamine. ALCAT1
accepted these substrates with varying chain lengths in the sn-1
position. ALCAT1 transferred the acyl groups from several fatty
acid-CoAs of long chain length, but not from fatty acid-CoAs with short
chain length (8:0) or highly unsaturated arachidonyl-CoA. Knockdown of
ALCAT1 in HeLa cells via small interfering RNA reduced in vitro
synthesis of phosphatidylglycerol and phosphatidylinositol, but not
cardiolipin. Mutation of asp168 to arg or cys completely abolished
ALCAT1 activity, whereas mutation of thr169 to leu reduced synthesis of
phosphatidylinositol, but not phosphatidylglycerol. Taking into account
the localization of ALCAT1 in ER membranes, Zhao et al. (2009) concluded
that ALCAT1 predominantly remodels phosphatidylinositol and
phosphatidylglycerol in the ER, but that it is unlikely to remodel
cardiolipin, a mitochondrial lipid.

GENE STRUCTURE

Agarwal et al. (2006) determined that the LCLAT1 gene contains 6 exons
and spans around 170 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Agarwal et al. (2006) mapped the LCLAT1
gene to chromosome 2p. Gross (2011) mapped the LCLAT1 gene to chromosome
2p23.1 based on an alignment of the LCLAT1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK
BC146817) and the genomic sequence (GRCh37).

Agarwal et al. (2006) mapped the mouse Lclat1 gene to chromosome 17.

REFERENCE 1. Agarwal, A. K.; Barnes, R. I.; Garg, A.: Functional characterization
of human 1-acylglycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase isoform 8: cloning,
tissue distribution, gene structure, and enzymatic activity. Arch.
Biochem. Biophys. 449: 64-76, 2006.

2. Cao, J.; Liu, Y.; Lockwood, J.; Burn, P.; Shi, Y.: A novel cardiolipin-remodeling
pathway revealed by a gene encoding an endoplasmic reticulum-associated
acyl-CoA:lysocardiolipin acyltransferase (ALCAT1) in mouse. J. Biol.
Chem. 279: 31727-31734, 2004.

3. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/22/2011.

4. Zhao, Y.; Chen, Y.-Q.; Li, S.; Konrad, R. J.; Cao, G.: The microsomal
cardiolipin remodeling enzyme acyl-CoA lysocardiolipin acyltransferase
is an acyltransferase of multiple anionic lysophospholipids. J. Lipid
Res. 50: 945-956, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 9/22/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/22/2011

EDITED mgross: 09/22/2011
mgross: 9/22/2011

612212	TITLE *612212 PLASMINOGEN-LIKE A; PLGLA
;;PLASMINOGEN-RELATED GENE A; PRGA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using primers based on PRGB (PLGLB1; 173340) for PCR amplification of
placental genomic DNA, Lewis et al. (1999) cloned PLGLA, which they
called PRGA. The deduced 96-amino peptide has a signal sequence followed
by a 77-amino acid stretch that is identical to the N terminus of
plasminogen (PLG; 173350) and differs from the homologous PRGB sequence
at only 4 positions. Northern blot analysis using a probe that did not
differentiate between PRGA and PRGB detected PRG only in liver and in a
lymphoblastic leukemia cell line.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lewis et al. (1999) determined that the PLGLA gene contains 4 coding
exons.

Kida et al. (1997) characterized the 5-prime flanking region of the
human PLGLA gene and found 3 TATA boxes 550 to 600 bp upstream of the
transcription initiation site, a TATA-like sequence (TGTAA) at position
-16, and putative binding sites for several transcription factors. The
1.1-kb 5-prime flanking sequence directed basal liver-specific
expression in HepG2 cells, and deletion analysis identified 2 negative
elements in the PLGLA promoter.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PLGLA
gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP D2S2643)

REFERENCE 1. Kida, M.; Wakabayashi, S.; Ichinose, A.: Characterization of the
5-prime-flanking regions of plasminogen-related genes A and B. FEBS
Lett. 404: 95-99, 1997.

2. Lewis, V. O.; Gehrmann, M.; Weissbach, L.; Hyman, J. E.; Rielly,
A.; Jones, D. G.; Llinas, M.; Schaller, J.: Homologous plasminogen
N-terminal and plasminogen-related gene A and B peptides: characterization
of cDNAs and recombinant fusion proteins. Europ. J. Biochem. 259:
618-625, 1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/31/2008

EDITED carol: 07/01/2010
wwang: 7/31/2008

608388	TITLE *608388 EVOLUTIONARILY-CONSERVED SIGNALING INTERMEDIATE IN TOLL PATHWAY; ECSIT
;;SITPEC
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ECSIT protein interacts with the TLR signaling adaptor TRAF6
(602355), localizes to mitochondria, and has a role in oxidative
phosphorylation complex I assembly (summary by West et al., 2011).

CLONING

Using mouse Traf6 as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen, Kopp et al. (1999)
cloned 3 splice variants of mouse Ecsit from liver and pre-B-cell cDNA
libraries. The longest deduced protein contains 435 amino acids, and the
variants differ in their C termini. Northern blot analysis detected a
transcript of about 1.6 kb in all mouse tissues examined.

Vogel et al. (2007) stated that 10 ECSIT splice variants are predicted,
but only the 2 longest have been identified in experimental studies. The
longest, called variant 1, utilizes all 8 exons and encodes a deduced
431-amino acid protein with a calculated molecular mass of 50 kD.
Variant 2 lacks exon 6 and encodes a deduced 382-amino acid protein with
a calculated molecular mass of 33 kD. Western blot analysis of
fractionated human embryonic kidney cells detected a protein of about 50
kD in the cytoplasm/nuclear fraction and a protein of about 45 kD in the
mitochondrial fraction. The first 48 amino acids of ECSIT constitute a
mitochondrial targeting signal.

GENE FUNCTION

Kopp et al. (1999) determined that mouse Ecsit is an intermediate in the
activation of the Toll (see 603030)/Il1 (see 147760) pathway and
regulates Mekk1 (600982) processing for activation of Nfkb (see 164011).
Expression of wildtype Ecsit accelerated the processing of Mekk1, and a
dominant-negative fragment of Ecsit blocked Mekk1 processing and
activation of Nfkb.

Using 2-dimensional native PAGE analysis of mitochondria enriched from
HEK293 and HeLa cells, Vogel et al. (2007) found that the 45-kD
mitochondrial ECSIT protein, but not the 50-kD cytosolic protein, was a
component of higher molecular mass complexes of about 500, 600, and 850
kD. ECSIT copurified with the mitochondrial complex I assembly chaperone
NDUFAF1 (606934), and knockdown of ECSIT resulted in impaired complex I
assembly and disturbed mitochondrial function.

West et al. (2011) demonstrated that engagement of a subset of Toll-like
receptors (TLR1, 601194; TLR2, 603028; and TLR4, 603030) results in the
recruitment of mitochondria to macrophage phagosomes and augments
mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mROS) production. This response
involves translocation of a TLR signaling adaptor, TRAF6, to
mitochondria, where it engages the protein ECSIT, which is implicated in
mitochondrial respiratory chain assembly. Interaction with TRAF6 leads
to ECSIT ubiquitination and enrichment at the mitochondrial periphery,
resulting in increased mitochondrial and cellular ROS generation. ECSIT-
and TRAF6-depleted macrophages have decreased levels of TLR-induced ROS
and are significantly impaired in their ability to kill intracellular
bacteria. Additionally, reducing macrophage mROS levels by expressing
catalase (115500) in mitochondria results in defective bacterial
killing, confirming the role of mROS in bactericidal activity. West et
al. (2011) concluded that their results revealed a novel pathway linking
innate immune signaling to mitochondria, implicated mROS as an important
component of antibacterial responses, and further established
mitochondria as hubs for innate immune signaling.

GENE STRUCTURE

Vogel et al. (2007) stated that the ECSIT gene contains 8 exons.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the ECSIT
gene to chromosome 19 (TMAP RH98319).

ANIMAL MODEL

Xiao et al. (2003) found that targeted disruption of Ecsit in mice led
to reduced cell proliferation, altered epiblast patterning, impaired
mesoderm formation, and lethality at embryonic day 7.5. The phenotype
mimicked that of Bmpr1a (601299) null mice. Biochemical analysis
demonstrated that Ecsit associated constitutively with Smad4 (600993)
and Smad1 (601595) in a Bmp-inducible manner. Together with Smad1 and
Smad4, Ecsit bound to the promoter of specific Bmp target genes.
Knockdown of Ecsit expression with short hairpin RNA inhibited both Bmp
and Toll signaling.

REFERENCE 1. Kopp, E.; Medzhitov, R.; Carothers, J.; Xiao, C.; Douglas, I.;
Janeway, C. A.; Ghosh, S.: ECSIT is an evolutionarily conserved intermediate
in the Toll/IL-1 signal transduction pathway. Genes Dev. 13: 2059-2071,
1999.

2. Vogel, R. O.; Janssen, R. J. R. J.; van den Brand, M. A. M.; Dieteren,
C. E. J.; Verkaart, S.; Koopman, W. J. H.; Willems, P. H. G. M.; Pluk,
W.; van den Heuvel, L. P. W. J.; Smeitink, J. A. M.; Nijtmans, L.
G. J.: Cytosolic signaling protein Ecsit also localizes to mitochondria
where it interacts with chaperone NDUFAF1 and functions in complex
I assembly. Genes Dev. 21: 615-624, 2007.

3. West, A. P.; Brodsky, I. E.; Rahner, C.; Woo, D. K.; Erdjument-Bromage,
H.; Tempst, P.; Walsh, M. C.; Choi, Y.; Shadel, G. S.; Ghosh, S.:
TLR signalling augments macrophage bactericidal activity through mitochondrial
ROS. Nature 472: 476-480, 2011.

4. Xiao, C.; Shim, J.; Kluppel, M.; Zhang, S. S.-M.; Dong, C.; Flavell,
R. A.; Fu, X.-Y.; Wrana, J. L.; Hogan, B. L. M.; Ghosh, S.: Ecsit
is required for Bmp signaling and mesoderm formation during mouse
embryogenesis. Genes Dev. 17: 2933-2949, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/7/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/9/2004

EDITED alopez: 06/21/2011
wwang: 5/7/2007
mgross: 1/9/2004

605101	TITLE *605101 TAK1-BINDING PROTEIN 2; TAB2
;;TGF-BETA ACTIVATED KINASE 1/MAP3K7-BINDING PROTEIN 2;;
MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE KINASE KINASE 7-INTERACTING PROTEIN
2; MAP3K7IP2;;
KIAA0733
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen, Shibuya et al. (1996) isolated cDNAs
encoding 2 TAK1 (MAP3K7; 602614)-binding proteins, TAB1 (602615) and
TAB2. Takaesu et al. (2000) isolated a full-length cDNA encoding TAB2 by
screening a kidney cell cDNA library. Sequence analysis predicted that
the TAB2 protein contains 693 amino acids and has a molecular mass of 77
kD. One distinctive feature of the TAB2 protein is the presence of amino
acids (residues 535 to 609) that have the potential to form an
amphipathic alpha helix (coiled-coil structure). Northern blot analysis
detected a single 5-kb TAB2 transcript in a variety of tissues.

Thienpont et al. (2010) used immunohistochemistry to analyze TAB2
expression in 5.5-week and 7.5-week human embryos and found cytoplasmic
expression of TAB2 in cells of the ventricular trabeculae, in
endothelial cells of the conotruncal cushions of the outflow tract, and
in the endothelial cells lining the developing aortic valves.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the TAB2
gene to chromosome 6 (TMAP WI-20522).

GENE FUNCTION

Takaesu et al. (2000) showed that TAB2 functionally links TAK1 to TRAF6
(602355). Expression of TAB2 induced JNK (see 601158) and nuclear factor
kappa-B (NFKB; see 164011) activation, whereas a dominant-negative TAB2
mutant impaired JNK and NFKB activation by interleukin-1 (IL1; see IL1B,
147720). IL1 stimulates translocation of TAB2 from the membrane to the
cytosol, where it mediates the IL1-dependent association of TAK1 with
TRAF6. These results defined TAB2 as an adaptor linking TAK1 and TRAF6
and as a mediator of TAK1 activation in the IL1 signaling pathway.

Baek et al. (2002) demonstrated that IL1B causes nuclear export of a
specific NCOR (600849) corepressor complex, resulting in derepression of
a specific subset of NFKB-regulated genes. These genes are exemplified
by the tetraspanin KAI1 (600623), which regulates membrane receptor
function. Nuclear export of the NCOR/TAB2/HDAC3 (605166) complex by IL1B
is temporally linked to selective recruitment of a TIP60 (601409)
coactivator complex. KAI1 is also directly activated by a ternary
complex, dependent on the acetyltransferase activity of TIP60, that
consists of the presenilin-dependent C-terminal cleavage product of the
beta amyloid precursor protein (APP; 104760), FE65 (602709), and TIP60,
identifying a specific in vivo gene target of an APP-dependent
transcription complex in the brain.

Activation of the NF-kappa-B pathway by the TNF-receptor EDAR (604095)
and its downstream adaptor EDARADD (606603) is essential for the
development of hair follicles, teeth, exocrine glands, and other
ectodermal derivatives. Morlon et al. (2005) performed a yeast 2-hybrid
screen and isolated TAB2 as a binding partner of EDARADD. TAB2 bridges
TRAF6 to TAK1 (NR2C2; 601426), allowing TAK1 activation and subsequent
IKK activation. Endogenous and overexpressed TAB2, TRAF6, and TAK1
coimmunoprecipitated with EDARADD in HEK293 cells. Moreover,
dominant-negative forms of TAB2, TRAF6, and TAK1 blocked the NF-kappa-B
activation induced by EDARADD. Morlon et al. (2005) concluded that the
TAB2/TRAF6/TAK1 signaling complex is involved in the EDAR signal
transduction pathway.

Using transfected mouse and human cells, Sardi et al. (2006) found that,
upon NRG1 (142445)-induced activation and presenilin (PSEN1;
104311)-dependent cleavage of ERBB4 (600543), the ERBB4 intracellular
domain formed a complex with TAB2 and NCOR. This complex translocated to
the nucleus of undifferentiated rat neural precursors and inhibited
their differentiation into astrocytes by repressing transcription of
glial genes. Consistent with this observation, cortical astrogenesis
occurred precociously in Erbb4-knockout mice, and this phenotype could
be rescued by reexpression of a cleavable isoform of human ERBB4, but
not by reexpression of an uncleavable ERBB4 isoform.

Zhu et al. (2006) reported that specific interactions between prostate
cancer cells and macrophages occurred in most human prostate cancers
examined and converted selective androgen receptor (AR; 313700)
antagonists/modulators to agonists. This effect required TAB2, which was
recruited as a component of an NCOR corepressor complex to steroid
hormone receptors by an evolutionarily conserved N-terminal motif
selectively present in sex steroid receptors, but not other nuclear
receptors. TAB2 acted as a sensor for inflammatory signals by serving as
a molecular beacon for recruitment of MEKK1 (MAP3K1; 600982), which in
turn mediated dismissal of the NCOR/HDAC complex and permitted
derepression of AR and estrogen receptor (see 133430) target genes.

By reconstituting TAK1 (602614) activation in vitro using purified
proteins, Xia et al. (2009) demonstrated that free lys63 polyubiquitin
chains, which are not conjugated to any target protein, directly
activate TAK1 by binding to the ubiquitin receptor TAB2. This binding
leads to autophosphorylation and activation of TAK1. Furthermore, Xia et
al. (2009) found that unanchored polyubiquitin chains synthesized by
TRAF6 (602355) and UBCH5C (also known as UBE2D3, 602963) activate the
IKK (see 600664) complex. Disassembly of the polyubiquitin chains by
deubiquitination enzymes prevented TAK1 and IKK activation. Xia et al.
(2009) concluded that unanchored polyubiquitin chains directly activate
TAK1 and IKK, suggesting a new mechanism of protein kinase regulation.

Using whole-mount in situ hybridization (WISH) on staged wildtype
zebrafish embryos, Thienpont et al. (2010) observed ubiquitous tab2
expression during early development followed by a more restricted
pattern, with expression in the developing cardiac outflow tract, the
dorsal aorta, and the posterior cardinal vein. The authors noted that
this expression pattern is reminiscent of expression during human heart
development and thus suggests a conserved role for TAB2 in the cardiac
outflow tract. Zebrafish embryos with tab2 knockdown showed defects
during gastrulation that included delayed epiboly progression and
convergent extension defects; later in development, severe heart failure
became apparent, with a thin, elongated heart tube and blood pooling in
the common cardinal vein before entry into the heart. Titrated knockdown
of tab2 in zebrafish embryos revealed a critical, dosage-sensitive role
during development, with phenotypes becoming apparent at a dose
corresponding to 41 to 58% reduction of normal expression, thus showing
that haploinsufficiency of tab2 causes developmental defects.

Zhang et al. (2012) showed that human TAB2 and TAB3 (300480), ubiquitin
chain sensory proteins involved in NF-kappa-B (see 164011) signaling,
are directly inactivated by enteropathogenic E. coli NleE, a conserved
bacterial type III-secreted effector responsible for blocking host
NF-kappa-B signaling. NleE harbored an unprecedented
S-adenosyl-L-methionine-dependent methyltransferase activity that
specifically modified a zinc-coordinating cysteine in the Npl4 zinc
finger (NZF) domains in TAB2 and TAB3. Cysteine-methylated TAB2-NZF and
TAB3-NZF (truncated proteins comprising only the NZF domain) lost the
zinc ion as well as the ubiquitin chain binding activity. Ectopically
expressed or type III secretion system-delivered NleE methylated TAB2
and TAB3 in host cells and diminished their ubiquitin chain binding
activity. Replacement of the NZF domain of TAB3 with the NleE
methylation-insensitive Npl4 NZF domain resulted in NleE-resistant
NF-kappa-B activation. Zhang et al. (2012) postulated that, given the
prevalence of zinc finger motifs and activation of cysteine thiol by
zinc binding, methylation of zinc finger cysteine might regulate other
eukaryotic pathways in addition to NF-kappa-B signaling.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Thienpont et al. (2010) analyzed the TAB2 gene in 402 patients with
cardiac outflow tract defects and identified heterozygosity for missense
mutations in 2 patients (605101.0001 and 604101.0002), neither of which
was found in 658 ethnically matched control chromosomes. In addition, in
a family with congenital aortic stenosis and cardiac arrhythmias
segregating with a balanced t(2;6)(q21;q25) translocation, mapping of
the breakpoints showed that the translocation disrupted TAB2. Thienpont
et al. (2010) concluded that taken together, their data clearly
demonstrated a role for TAB2 in human cardiac development.

ANIMAL MODEL

Sanjo et al. (2003) found that Tab2 deficiency in mice was embryonic
lethal due to liver degeneration and apoptosis. The phenotype was
similar to that of Nfkb-, Ikk-beta (603258)-, and Ikk-gamma
(300248)-deficiency. However, the Il1 (see 147810)-induced activation of
Nfkb and MAP kinases (see 176948) was not impaired in Tab2-deficient
embryonic fibroblasts. Sanjo et al. (2003) concluded that Tab2 is
essential for embryonic liver development but not for the Il1
receptor-mediated signaling pathway.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE, MULTIPLE TYPES, 2
TAB2, PRO208SER

In a woman with nonsyndromic congenital heart disease (CHTD2; 614980),
Thienpont et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for a 622C-T
transition in the TAB2 gene, resulting in a pro208-to-ser (P208S)
substitution at a highly conserved residue. The patient had left
ventricular outflow tract obstruction, subaortic stenosis due to a
fibromuscular shelf, residual aortic regurgitation, and atrial
fibrillation; she died from heart failure at 61 years of age. Family
members were not available for phenotypic data or DNA samples, but the
mutation was not found in 658 ethnically matched control chromosomes.

.0002
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE, MULTIPLE TYPES, 2
TAB2, GLN230LYS

In a man with nonsyndromic congenital heart disease (CHTD2; 614980),
Thienpont et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for a 688C-A
transversion in the TAB2 gene, resulting in a gln230-to-lys (Q230K)
substitution at a highly conserved residue. The patient had a bicuspid
aortic valve and aortic dilation. Family members were not available for
phenotypic data or DNA samples, but the mutation was not found in 658
ethnically matched control chromosomes.

REFERENCE 1. Baek, S. H.; Ohgi, K. A.; Rose, D. W.; Koo, E. H.; Glass, C. K.;
Rosenfeld, M. G.: Exchange of N-CoR corepressor and Tip60 coactivator
complexes links gene expression by NF-kappa-B and beta-amyloid precursor
protein. Cell 110: 55-67, 2002.

2. Morlon, A.; Munnich, A.; Smahi, A.: TAB2, TRAF6 and TAK1 are involved
in NF-kappa-B activation induced by the TNF-receptor, Edar and its
adaptator (sic) Edaradd. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 3751-3757, 2005.

3. Sanjo, H.; Takeda, K.; Tsujimura, T.; Ninomiya-Tsuji, J.; Matsumoto,
K.; Akira, S.: TABS is essential for prevention of apoptosis in fetal
liver but not for interleukin-1 signaling. Molec. Cell. Biol. 23:
1231-1238, 2003.

4. Sardi, S. P.; Murtie, J.; Koirala, S.; Patten, B. A.; Corfas, G.
: Presenilin-dependent ErbB4 nuclear signaling regulates the timing
of astrogenesis in the developing brain. Cell 127: 185-197, 2006.

5. Shibuya, H.; Yamaguchi, K.; Shirakabe, K.; Tonegawa, A.; Gotoh,
Y.; Ueno, N.; Irie, K.; Nishida, E.; Matsumoto, K.: TAB1: an activator
of the TAK1 MAPKKK in TGF-beta signal transduction. Science 272:
1179-1182, 1996.

6. Takaesu, G.; Kishida, S.; Hiyama, A.; Yamaguchi, K.; Shibuya, H.;
Irie, K.; Ninomiya-Tsuji, J.; Matsumoto, K.: TAB2, a novel adaptor
protein, mediates activation of TAK1 MAPKKK by linking TAK1 to TRAF6
in the IL-1 signal transduction pathway. Molec. Cell 5: 649-658,
2000.

7. Thienpont, B.; Zhang, L.; Postma, A. V.; Breckpot, J.; Tranchevent,
L.-C.; Van Loo, P.; Mollgard, K.; Tommerup, N.; Bache, I.; Tumer,
Z.; van Engelen, K.; Menten, B.; Mortier, G.; Waggoner, D.; Gewillig,
M.; Moreau, Y.; Devriendt, K.; Larsen, L. A.: Haploinsufficiency
of TAB2 causes congenital heart defects in humans. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 86:
839-849, 2010.

8. Xia, Z.-P.; Sun, L.; Chen, X.; Pineda, G.; Jiang, X.; Adhikari,
A.; Zeng, W.; Chen, Z. J.: Direct activation of protein kinases by
unanchored polyubiquitin chains. Nature 461: 114-119, 2009.

9. Zhang, L.; Ding, X.; Cui, J.; Xu, H.; Chen, J.; Gong, Y.-N.; Hu,
L.; Zhou, Y.; Ge, J.; Lu, Q.; Liu, L.; Chen, S.; Shao, F.: Cysteine
methylation disrupts ubiquitin-chain sensing in NF-kappa-B activation. Nature 481:
204-208, 2012.

10. Zhu, P.; Baek, S. H.; Bourk, E. M.; Ohgi, K. A.; Garcia-Bassets,
I.; Sanjo, H.; Akira, S.; Kotol, P. F.; Glass, C. K.; Rosenfeld, M.
G.; Rose, D. W.: Macrophage/cancer cell interactions mediate hormone
resistance by a nuclear receptor derepression pathway. Cell 124:
615-629, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/7/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/15/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/13/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/16/2009
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/21/2009
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/8/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/21/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/29/2002
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 3/7/2002

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 6/30/2000

EDITED carol: 12/11/2012
alopez: 11/30/2012
alopez: 2/13/2012
terry: 2/7/2012
carol: 7/15/2010
alopez: 10/23/2009
terry: 10/13/2009
wwang: 6/16/2009
wwang: 5/28/2009
mgross: 5/21/2009
wwang: 5/12/2009
mgross: 5/8/2009
cwells: 4/24/2003
terry: 4/21/2003
mgross: 7/29/2002
joanna: 3/7/2002
mgross: 6/30/2000

194536	TITLE *194536 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 12; ZNF12
;;KOX3
DESCRIPTION 
MAPPING

Seite et al. (1991) localized 1 member of the human zinc finger Kruppel
family, ZNF12 (KOX3), to chromosome 7p22-p21 by a combination of
analysis of mouse-human somatic cell hybrids and in situ hybridization.
Rousseau-Merck et al. (1993) described pulsed field gel electrophoresis
experiments indicating that ZNF12 and ZNF26 (194537) are within the same
DNA fragment less than 300 kb long.

HISTORY

The control of gene expression in prokaryotes and eukaryotes is
mediated, at least in part, by the binding of regulatory proteins to
specific DNA sequences. Many of these proteins share evolutionarily
conserved DNA binding domains, e.g. homeodomains (Gehring, 1987) or zinc
finger structures (Schuh et al., 1986). These homologies have been used
to clone individual genes of these multigene families from higher
eukaryotic organisms.

REFERENCE 1. Gehring, W. J.: Homeo boxes in the study of development. Science 236:
1245-1252, 1987.

2. Rousseau-Merck, M.-F.; Hillion, J.; Jonveaux, P.; Couillin, P.;
Seite, P.; Thiesen, H.-J.; Berger, R.: Chromosomal localization of
9 KOX zinc finger genes: physical linkages suggest clustering of KOX
genes on chromosomes 12, 16, and 19. Hum. Genet. 92: 583-587, 1993.

3. Schuh, R.; Aicher, W.; Gaul, U.; Cote, S.; Preiss, A.; Maier, D.;
Seifert, E.; Nauber, U.; Schroder, C.; Kemler, R.; Jackle, H.: A
conserved family of nuclear proteins containing structural elements
of the finger protein encoded by Kruppel, a Drosophila segmentation
gene. Cell 47: 1025-1032, 1986.

4. Seite, P.; Huebner, K.; Rousseau-Merck, M. F.; Berger, R.; Thiesen,
H. J.: Two human genes encoding zinc finger proteins, ZNF12 (KOX3)
and ZNF26 (KOX20), map to chromosomes 7p22-p21 and 12q24.33, respectively. Hum.
Genet. 86: 585-590, 1991.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/28/1991

EDITED alopez: 07/07/2010
terry: 3/19/2004
dkim: 6/25/1998
mark: 5/14/1996
carol: 2/24/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 5/28/1991

610837	TITLE *610837 BCL2-LIKE 12; BCL2L12
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

BCL2L12 belongs to the BCL2 family of apoptosis-regulating proteins (see
BCL2; 151430) (Scorilas et al., 2001).

CLONING

Scorilas et al. (2001) identified a BAC clone encoding a BH2 domain,
which is conserved among BCL2 proteins, and by database analysis,
RT-PCR, and 3-prime and 5-prime RACE, they obtained a full-length cDNA
encoding BCL2L12. The deduced 334-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 36.8 kD. It contains several PxxP motifs, a C-terminal
BH2 domain, and multiple sites for O-glycosylation, phosphorylation, and
N-myristoylation. Scorilas et al. (2001) also cloned a BCL2L12 splice
variant lacking exon 3, which encodes a C-terminally truncated 176-amino
acid protein that lacks several PxxP motifs and the BH2 domain. RT-PCR
detected both variants in all adult and fetal tissues examined. The
full-length transcript showed highest expression in thymus, prostate,
fetal liver, mammary gland, colon, placenta, small intestine, kidney,
and bone marrow. The splice variant showed highest expression in
skeletal muscle, fetal liver, and spinal cord. The full-length
transcript was expressed at higher levels than the splice variant in all
tissues examined except skeletal muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

By microarray analysis, Stegh et al. (2007) found that BCL2L12
expression was upregulated in 53 of 55 human primary glioblastomas
relative to surrounding normal brain tissue. Immunohistochemical
analysis detected BCL2L12 in tumor cell cytoplasm and in endothelial
cells within abnormal tumor vasculature. A modest amount was detected in
normal neurons, but no staining was detected in normal glia. Expression
of human BCL2L12 conferred marked resistance to apoptosis in mouse
primary cortical astrocytes. Conversely, knockdown of BCL2L12 via RNA
interference sensitized human glioma cell lines to apoptotic stimuli and
impaired tumor growth in mouse xenografts via increased intratumoral
apoptosis. BCL2L12 expression did not affect cytochrome c (123970)
release or protect the mitochondrial membrane, but instead inhibited
postmitochondrial apoptotic signaling at the level of effector caspase
activation. BCL2L12 interacted directly with and neutralized caspase-7
(CASP7; 601761), and it neutralized caspase-3 (CASP3; 600636) by an
indirect mechanism. While BCL2L12 overexpression inhibited apoptosis, it
also induced a necrotic state following activation of apoptotic
signaling.

GENE STRUCTURE

Scorilas et al. (2001) determined that the SLC2L12 gene contains 7
coding exons and spans 8.8 kb. The promoter region contains a TATA box.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Scorilas et al. (2001) mapped the BCL2L12
gene to chromosome 19q13.3, between the RRAS gene (165090) and the PRMT1
gene (602950).

REFERENCE 1. Scorilas, A.; Kyriakopoulou, L.; Yousef, G. M.; Ashworth, L. K.;
Kwamie, A.; Diamandis, E. P.: Molecular cloning, physical mapping,
and expression analysis of a novel gene, BCL2L12, encoding a proline-rich
protein with a highly conserved BH2 domain of the Bcl-2 family. Genomics 72:
217-221, 2001.

2. Stegh, A. H.; Kim, H.; Bachoo, R. M.; Forloney, K. L.; Zhang, J.;
Schulze, H.; Park, K.; Hannon, G. J.; Yuan, J.; Louis, D. N.; DePinho,
R A.; Chin, L.: Bcl2L12 inhibits post-mitochondrial apoptosis signaling
in glioblastoma. Genes Dev. 21: 98-111, 2007. Note: Erratum: Genes
Dev. 21: 481 only, 2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/7/2007

EDITED carol: 04/11/2013
mgross: 3/7/2007

