613579	TITLE *613579 C-TYPE LECTIN DOMAIN FAMILY 6, MEMBER A; CLEC6A
;;DECTIN 2;;
CLEC4N, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Like dectin-1 (CLEC7A; 606264), CLEC6A, or dectin-2, is a type II
membrane receptor with an extracellular C-type lectin-like domain fold.
However, unlike dectin-1, dectin-2 lacks an immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM) in its cytoplasmic domain
(Kanazawa et al., 2004).

CLONING

By analysis of a chromosome 12 BAC clone, followed by RACE using a
spleen cDNA library, Kanazawa et al., (2004) cloned human CLEC6A, which
they called dectin-2. The predicted 209-amino acid protein shares 68%
identity with mouse dectin-2. It has a short N-terminal cytoplasmic
region that lacks a tyrosine-based signaling motif, a 27-residue
transmembrane domain with a charged arginine, and a C-terminal
extracellular portion with 6 cysteines predicted to form a carbohydrate
recognition domain. RT-PCR analysis revealed strong expression in lung
and weak expression in spleen, lymph node, and blood leukocytes. Among
in vitro-generated dendritic cells (DCs), expression of dectin-2 was
strongest in immature Langerhans cell (LC)-type DCs.

By searching databases for homologs of rat dectin-2, followed by RT-PCR
of leukocyte mRNA, Flornes et al. (2004) cloned human dectin-2. RT-PCR
analysis showed expression of dectin-2 in purified DCs, but not in
lymphocytes.

Using degenerative PCR on mRNA from LC-like DCs, followed by RACE,
Gavino et al. (2005) obtained a cDNA encoding human dectin-2. They also
identified a splice variant lacking exon 2. RT-PCR detected expression
of dectin-2 in lung, spleen, and leukocytes, with lower levels in lymph
node, bone marrow, and tonsil.

GENE FUNCTION

Gavino et al. (2005) found that expression of human dectin-2 could be
upregulated in CD4 (186940)-positive T cells, but not in B cells, by
mitogen activation. Dectin-2 expression was downregulated in a
dose-dependent manner after ultraviolet B exposure.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kanazawa et al. (2004) determined that the CLEC6A gene has 6 exons.

MAPPING

Using radiation hybrid and in silico analyses, Flornes et al. (2004)
mapped the CLEC6A gene to chromosome 12p13.31-p13.2, proximal to the
natural killer cell complex.

ANIMAL MODEL

Saijo et al. (2010) generated healthy, fertile Clec4n -/- mice with
normal lymphoid cells. Clec4n -/- mice showed reduced survival after
intravenous Candida albicans infection compared with wildtype mice,
whereas no difference was observed between Clec4n -/- and wildtype mice
following infection with Cryptococcus neoformans. Fungal burden was
higher in kidneys of Clec4n -/- mice, and Clec4n -/- mice produced lower
levels of inflammatory cytokines and Th17 cells (see IL17A; 603149) in
response to yeast antigen. Mice lacking Il17a, but not Il17f (606496),
also had reduced survival after infection. Saijo et al. (2010) proposed
that Clec4n is important in host defense against C. albicans by inducing
Th17 differentiation.

The propensity of helminths, such as schistosomes (see 181460), to
immunomodulate the host's immune system is an essential aspect of their
survival. Ritter et al. (2010) stimulated mouse bone marrow-derived
dendritic cells (BMDCs) with soluble schistosomal egg antigens (SEAs)
after prestimulation with different TLR ligands and observed suppressed
secretion of Tnf (191160) and Il6 (147620) and increased Nlrp3
(606416)-dependent Il1b (147720) production. Induction of Il1b was
phagocytosis-independent, but it required production of reactive oxygen
species, potassium efflux, and functional Syk (600085) signaling,
suggesting inflammasome activation. SEA stimulation of BMDCs lacking
Fcrg (see 146740) or dectin-2 resulted in significantly reduced Il1b
production compared with wildtype BMDCs, suggesting that SEA triggers
dectin-2, which couples with Fcrg to activate the Syk kinase signaling
pathway that controls Nlrp3 inflammasome activation and Il1b release.
Infection of mice lacking Nlrp3 or the central inflammasome adaptor Asc
(PYCARD; 606838) with S. mansoni resulted in no difference in parasite
burden, but decreased liver pathology and downregulated Th1, Th2, and
Th17 adaptive immune responses. Ritter et al. (2010) concluded that SEA
components induce IL1B production and that NLRP3 plays a crucial role
during S. mansoni infection.

REFERENCE 1. Flornes, L. M.; Bryceson, Y. T.; Spurkland, A.; Lorentzen, J. C.;
Dissen, E.; Fossum, S.: Identification of lectin-like receptors expressed
by antigen presenting cells and neutrophils and their mapping to a
novel gene complex. Immunogenetics 56: 506-517, 2004.

2. Gavino, A. C. P.; Chung, J.-S.; Sato, K.; Arrizumi, K.; Cruz, P.
D., Jr.: Identification and expression profiling of a human C-type
lectin, structurally homologous to mouse dectin-2. Exp. Derm. 14:
281-288, 2005.

3. Kanazawa, N.; Tashiro, K.; Inaba, K.; Lutz, M. B.; Miyachi, Y.
: Molecular cloning of human dectin-2. (Letter) J. Invest. Derm. 122:
1522-1524, 2004.

4. Ritter, M.; Gross, O.; Kays, S.; Ruland, J.; Nimmerjahn, F.; Saijo,
S.; Tschopp, J.; Layland, L. E.; Prazeres da Costa, C.: Schistosoma
mansoni triggers Dectin-2, which activates the Nlrp3 inflammasome
and alters adaptive immune responses. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 107:
20459-20464, 2010.

5. Saijo, S.; Ikeda, S.; Yamabe, K.; Kakuta, S.; Ishigame, H.; Akitsu,
A.; Fujikado, N.; Kusaka, T.; Kubo, S.; Chung, S.; Komatsu, R.; Miura,
N.; and 9 others: Dectin-2 recognition of alpha-mannans and induction
of Th17 cell differentiation is essential for host defense against
Candida albicans. Immunity 32: 681-691, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/17/2012

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 9/30/2010

EDITED mgross: 09/19/2012
mgross: 9/19/2012
terry: 9/17/2012
mgross: 9/30/2010

615103	TITLE *615103 TUBULIN, BETA-6; TUBB6
;;TUBULIN, BETA, CLASS V
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Microtubules are dynamic polymeric structures consisting of heterodimers
of alpha-tubulins (see 602529) and beta-tubulins, such as TUBB6, that
are continuously incorporated and released. Microtubules function in
mitosis, intracellular transport, neuron morphology, and ciliary and
flagellar motility (Leandro-Garcia et al., 2010).

CLONING

Using database analysis, Leandro-Garcia et al. (2010) identified 8 major
beta-tubulins, including TUBB6. Quantitative RT-PCR detected relatively
low TUBB6 expression in all 21 normal human tissues examined, with
highest expression in heart, and lowest expression in liver and
peripheral blood leukocytes. Expression of TUBB6 was decreased in all
tumors examined, except kidney tumors, compared with their normal
counterparts.

MAPPING

Hartz (2013) mapped the TUBB6 gene to chromosome 18p11.21 based on an
alignment of the TUBB6 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK092677) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/27/2013.

2. Leandro-Garcia, L. J.; Leskela, S.; Landa, I.; Montero-Conde, C.;
Lopez-Jimenez, E.; Leton, R.; Cascon, A.; Robledo, M.; Rodriguez-Antona,
C.: Tumoral and tissue-specific expression of the major human beta-tubulin
isotypes. Cytoskeleton 67: 214-223, 2010.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/27/2013

EDITED mgross: 02/27/2013

610981	TITLE *610981 WWBP2 N-TERMINAL-LIKE PROTEIN; WBP2NL
;;POSTACROSOMAL SHEATH WW DOMAIN-BINDING PROTEIN; PAWP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

WBP2NL is a sperm-specific WW domain-binding protein that promotes
meiotic resumption and pronuclear development during oocyte
fertilization (Wu et al., 2007).

CLONING

By searching databases for homologs of bull Pawp, followed by RT-PCR of
testis RNA, Wu et al. (2007) cloned human and mouse PAWP. The predicted
309-amino acid human protein contains an N-terminal region homologous to
WW domain-binding protein-2 (WBP2; 606962) and a proline-rich C-terminal
half with a PPxY motif and 9 YGxPPxG repeats. Northern blot analysis
detected a predominant 1.6-kb transcript and a less abundant 2-kb
transcript in human testis. Western blot analysis showed a 32-kD protein
in human testis. Immunostaining of bull testis showed that Pawp was
expressed solely in elongating spermatids, and Pawp localized to the
postacrosomal sheath region of the perinuclear theca of mature
spermatozoa of various species, including monkey, bull, and pig.

GENE FUNCTION

Wu et al. (2007) found that injection of recombinant bull Pawp into
metaphase II-arrested oocytes from pig, cow, macaque, and Xenopus
produced a high rate of pronuclear formation. This effect was blocked
when a peptide containing the PPxY motif of Pawp was coinjected as a
competitive inhibitor. Likewise, injection of sperm into pig oocytes
combined with either the competitive PPxY peptide or an antibody to Pawp
prevented pronuclear formation. Conversely, injection of sperm with a
control peptide containing a mutation in the PPxY motif did not arrest
fertilization. Wu et al. (2007) concluded that PAWP promotes meiotic
resumption and pronuclear development by interacting through its PPxY
motif with a WW domain protein in ooctyes.

REFERENCE 1. Wu, A. T. H.; Sutovsky, P.; Manandhar, G.; Xu, W.; Katayama, M.;
Day, B. N.; Park, K.-W.; Yi, Y.-J.; Xi, Y. W.; Prather, R. S.; Oko,
R.: PAWP, a sperm-specific WW domain-binding protein, promotes meiotic
resumption and pronuclear development during fertilization. J. Biol.
Chem. 282: 12164-12175, 2007.

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 4/25/2007

EDITED mgross: 04/25/2007
mgross: 4/25/2007

615507	TITLE *615507 NISCHARIN; NISCH
;;IMIDAZOLINE RECEPTOR ANTISERA-SELECTED; IRAS;;
KIAA0975
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Full-length nischarin is an integrin-binding protein with a role in cell
motility (Alahari et al., 2004).

CLONING

Using antisera developed against nonadrenergic imidazoline-binding
proteins to screen a human hippocampal cDNA expression library, Ivanov
et al. (1998) cloned NISCH. The deduced 595-amino acid protein has 4
transmembrane domains, a zinc finger domain, and a glutamic acid- and
aspartic acid-rich region. NISCH shows regions of similarity with
chromogranin-A precursor (118910) and ryanodine receptor (see RYR1,
180901). Northern blot analysis detected variable expression of 6.0- and
9.5-kb transcripts in all 36 human tissues examined. The smaller
transcript predominated, and highest overall expression was detected in
pituitary. In situ hybridization of rat brain showed strongest
expression in pyramidal cell layers of hippocampus and granular layer
and hillus of the dentate gyrus.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned NISCH, which they designated
KIAA0975. The deduced protein contains 1,528 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA
detected variable NISCH expression in all adult and fetal tissues
examined. Very high expression was detected in fetal brain, followed by
adult kidney, testis, ovary, brain, and spinal cord. Within specific
adult brain regions, highest expression was detected in corpus callosum,
amygdala, cerebellum, and caudate nucleus.

By EST database analysis, Piletz et al. (2003) identified 3 splice
variants of NISCH, which they called IRAS. The transcripts differed in
splicing between exons 13 and 14. The transcript of the primary isoform,
IRAS-M, encodes the full-length 1,504-amino acid protein. The shorter
transcript, IRAS-S, includes an internal polyadenylation signal sequence
and encodes a deduced 515-amino acid protein. The longer truncated
transcript, IRAS-L, encodes a deduced 583-amino acid protein. The 3
proteins are identical for the first 510 amino acids, which includes the
PxxP and leucine-rich repeat domains. Only IRAS-M contains the putative
imidazoline-binding region, alpha-5 integrin (ITGA5; 135620)-binding
domain, and C-terminal domain with similarity to insulin receptor
substrate proteins (see IRS1, 147545). Northern blot analysis detected
IRAS transcripts at 9.5, 5.5, and 3.0 kb in all human brain regions
examined and in spinal cord. In most areas, IRAS-M predominated.
Following expression in CHO cells, SDS-PAGE detected IRAS-M, IRAS-S, and
IRAS-L at apparent molecular masses of 167, 57, and 65 kD, respectively.

Alahari et al. (2004) stated that full-length mouse nischarin is 1,354
amino acids long. It has an N-terminal leucine-rich repeat region,
followed by 2 PxxP motifs, an integrin-binding domain, a central
proline- and alanine-rich domain, and a C-terminal leucine zipper with
an additional PxxP motif. The integrin-binding domain contains a leucine
zipper and a cytochrome P450 (see CYP3A4, 124010) cysteine heme-iron
ligand signature.

GENE FUNCTION

Piletz et al. (2003) found that human IRAS-M and IRAS-L, but not IRAS-S,
increased binding of radiolabeled iodoclonidine to transfected CHO
cells.

Alahari et al. (2004) stated that full-length mouse nischarin interacts
with the cytoplasmic domain of alpha-5 integrin in the alpha-5/beta-1
integrin (ITGB1; 135630) complex and that nischarin inhibits cell
migration when overexpressed. By cotransfecting COS-7 cells, they found
that nischarin also specifically interacted with the kinase domain of
human PAK1 (602590), which is involved in cell motility. Mouse nischarin
and human PAK1 colocalized to membrane ruffles in transfected rat
embryonic fibroblasts. Domain and mutation analysis revealed that an
N-terminal domain of nischarin interacted with PAK1 in the active 'open'
conformation, which normally occurs following Rac (see 602048)-dependent
phosphorylation. Binding to nischarin inhibited PAK1 kinase activity and
cell migration, and the presence of alpha-5/beta-1 integrin further
enhanced the interaction between nischarin and PAK1. Knockout of
nischarin in rat PC12 cells via small interfering RNA resulted in Pak
activation and increased cell migration. Alahari et al. (2004) concluded
that nischarin has a role in regulating cell migration.

Using reciprocal coprecipitation assays, Jain et al. (2013) found that
endogenous nischarin and the kinase LKB1 (STK11; 602216) interacted in
the cytoplasm of human breast cancer cell lines. Knockdown of both
nischarin and LKB1 enhanced cell migration, which was due to elevated
PAK1 and LIMK1 (601329) phosphorylation. Absence of nischarin and LKB1
increased breast cancer cell growth following injection in nude mice.

GENE STRUCTURE

Piletz et al. (2003) determined that the NISCH gene contains 21 exons
and spans 37 kb. Intron 13 is subject to alternative splicing and
contains stop codons and an internal polyadenylation site.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Piletz et al. (2003) mapped the NISCH gene
to chromosome 3p21.1.

REFERENCE 1. Alahari, S. K.; Reddig, P. J.; Juliano, R. L.: The integrin-binding
protein nischarin regulates cell migration by inhibiting PAK. EMBO
J. 23: 2777-2788, 2004.

2. Ivanov, T. R.; Jones, J. C.; Dontenwill, M.; Bousquet, P.; Piletz,
J. E.: Characterization of a partial cDNA clone detected by imidazoline
receptor-selective antisera. J. Auton. Nerv. Syst. 72: 98-110, 1998.

3. Jain, P.; Baranwal, S.; Dong, S.; Struckhoff, A. P.; Worthylake,
R. A.; Alahari, S. K.: Integrin-binding protein nischarin interacts
with tumor suppressor liver kinase B1 (LKB1) to regulate cell migration
of breast epithelial cells. J. Biol. Chem. 288: 15495-15509, 2013.

4. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

5. Piletz, J. E.; Deleersnijder, W.; Roth, B. L.; Ernsberger, P.;
Zhu, H.; Ziegler, D.: IRAS splice variants. Ann. New York Acad.
Sci. 1009: 419-426, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/31/2013

EDITED alopez: 11/01/2013
alopez: 10/31/2013

607331	TITLE *607331 RP9 GENE; RP9
;;PIM1-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; PAP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Maita et al. (2000) cloned the cDNA encoding the mouse RP9 ortholog,
PIM1 (164960)-associated protein (PAP1). The PIM1 kinase (encoded by the
PIM1 protooncogene) was shown to bind to the first half of PAP1 and to
phosphorylate 2 serine residues near the carboxy terminus. PAP1 was thus
thought to be a target protein for PIM1 kinase.

Keen et al. (2002) described the human homolog of the mouse PAP1 gene.
This gene was found to be mutated in autosomal dominant retinitis
pigmentosa-9 (180104) and was termed RP9. The predicted peptide sequence
of the mouse ortholog showed 93% identity to the human protein. An
expression profile based on EST sequence representation suggested that
the human gene is transcribed in most tissues. The human RP9 protein
contains 221 amino acids and analysis of the primary sequence suggested
that it is a soluble protein. The most prominent features are a
positively charged domain in the carboxy terminus and a motif between
residues 95 and 120, which is also present in the human protein CIR
(605228), a component of a transcriptional control complex. A regional
duplication resulted in an almost exact copy of the RP9 gene, which is
located in tandem array approximately 166 kb distal to it, and analysis
of EST representation suggested that the duplicated distal gene is not
as transcriptionally active as the RP9 gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

Keen et al. (2002) found that the RP9 gene consists of 6 exons
comprising an open reading frame of 666 bp, spread over 14.1 kb of
genomic DNA.

MAPPING

Keen et al. (2002) reported that the RP9 gene maps to chromosome 7p14.2,
to the critical interval of autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa-9.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Keen et al. (2002) identified a missense mutation in the RP9 gene
(607331.0001), which segregated with the disease in the RP9-linked
family originally described by Inglehearn et al. (1993). The mechanism
whereby mutations in this widely expressed gene could lead to retinal
degeneration remained unknown.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 9
RP9, HIS137LEU

In the 9-generation British family with the RP9 form of autosomal
dominant retinitis pigmentosa (180104) originally described by
Inglehearn et al. (1993), which established linkage to chromosome 7p14,
Keen et al. (2002) identified an his137-to-leu (H137L) missense mutation
in exon 5 of the RP9 gene in affected members and obligate carriers.
This residue was conserved in all orthologous sequences present in
nucleotide databases and the mutation was absent from 280 control
samples.

.0002
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 9
RP9, ASP170GLY

By screening a panel of 300 dominant, recessive, and genetically
undefined retinitis pigmentosa patients, Keen et al. (2002) identified
an asp170-to-gly (D170G) missense mutation in exon 6 of the RP9 gene in
a single retinitis pigmentosa patient. This residue was highly conserved
and the mutation was absent from 279 control samples. The phenotype of
this patient was consistent with that described for the original RP9
(180104) family.

Bischof et al. (2006) identified a colocalized, nonprocessed pseudogene
for the RP9 gene that carries the D170G (509A-G) substitution. The
authors considered it likely that the D170G mutation arises in the RP9
progenitor gene through gene conversion with its pseudogene. The D170G
mutation had not been theretofore recognized as an instance of gene
conversion between the progenitor gene and its pseudogene.

REFERENCE 1. Bischof, J. M.; Chiang, A. P.; Scheetz, T. E.; Stone, E. M.; Casavant,
T. L.; Sheffield, V. C.; Braun, T. A.: Genome-wide identification
of pseudogenes capable of disease-causing gene conversion. Hum. Mutat. 27:
545-552, 2006.

2. Inglehearn, C. F.; Carter, S. A.; Keen, T. J.; Lindsey, J.; Stephenson,
A. M.; Bashir, R.; Al-Maghtheh, M.; Moore, A. T.; Jay, M.; Bird, A.
C.; Bhattacharya, S. S.: A new locus for autosomal dominant retinitis
pigmentosa on chromosome 7p. Nature Genet. 4: 51-53, 1993.

3. Keen, T. J.; Hims, M. M.; McKie, A. B.; Moore, A. T.; Doran, R.
M.; Mackey, D. A.; Mansfield, D. C.; Mueller, R. F.; Bhattacharya,
S. S.; Bird, A. C.; Markham, A. F.; Inglehearn, C. F.: Mutations
in a protein target of the Pim-1 kinase associated with the RP9 form
of autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 10:
245-249, 2002.

4. Maita, H.; Harada, Y.; Nagakubo, D.; Kitaura, H.; Ikeda, M.; Tamai,
K.; Takahashi, K.; Ariga, H.; Iguchi-Ariga, S. M. M.: PAP-1, a novel
target protein of phosphorylation by Pim-1 kinase. Europ. J. Biochem. 267:
5168-5178, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/12/2006

CREATED Michael B. Petersen: 11/8/2002

EDITED carol: 11/20/2007
alopez: 7/19/2006
terry: 7/12/2006
cwells: 11/20/2002
cwells: 11/8/2002

604824	TITLE +604824 KLOTHO; KL
;;ALPHA-KLOTHO
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kuro-o et al. (1997) cloned a mouse gene, which they called klotho (Kl),
from a transgenic mouse model with several age-related disorders. The
name of the gene, Klotho, is that of the Fate in Greek mythology who
spins the thread of life. By screening human kidney and hippocampus cDNA
libraries with a mouse Kl cDNA fragment at low stringency, Matsumura et
al. (1998) isolated cDNA clones for human klotho. Sequence analysis of
the cDNAs revealed that they encode 2 different transcripts. One
transcript encodes a putative 1,012-amino acid single-pass membrane
protein with an N-terminal signal sequence, an extracellular domain with
2 internal repeats, and a short intracellular domain, as found in the
mouse klotho protein by Kuro-o et al. (1997). Northern blot analysis
revealed expression of a single 5.2-kb transcript in kidney, placenta,
small intestine, and prostate. The other transcript contains a 50-bp
insertion encoding a truncated putative secreted protein of 549 amino
acids that lacks the second internal repeat, the transmembrane domain,
and the intracellular domain. Genomic sequence analysis showed that the
2 transcripts arise by alternative RNA splicing. By RNase protection
analysis, the secreted form predominated in all tissues examined, i.e.,
brain, hippocampus, placenta, kidney, prostate, and small intestine.

GENE STRUCTURE

Matsumura et al. (1998) determined that the KL gene contains 5 exons and
spans approximately 50 kb of genomic DNA.

MAPPING

Kuro-o et al. (1997) mapped the human KL gene to chromosome 13q12 by
FISH and by inclusion within a BAC contig.

GENE FUNCTION

Patients with chronic renal failure (CRF) develop multiple complications
reminiscent of the phenotype observed in Kl mutant mice. By RNase
protection, immunoblot, and immunohistochemical analyses, Koh et al.
(2001) observed severely reduced KL mRNA expression and protein
production in kidneys of CRF patients. They proposed that decreased KL
expression may be one of the factors underlying the degenerative
processes (e.g., arteriosclerosis, osteoporosis, and skin atrophy) seen
in CRF.

Chang et al. (2005) reported that the transient receptor potential ion
channel TRPV5 (606679) is stimulated by the mammalian hormone klotho.
Klotho, a beta-glucuronidase, hydrolyzes extracellular sugar residues on
TRPV5, entrapping the channel in the plasma membrane. This maintains
durable calcium channel activity and membrane calcium permeability in
kidney. Thus, Chang et al. (2005) concluded that klotho activates a cell
surface channel by hydrolysis of its extracellular N-linked
oligosaccharides.

Urakawa et al. (2006) demonstrated that a previously undescribed
receptor conversion by Klotho generates the FGF23 (605380) receptor.
Using a renal homogenate, Urakawa et al. (2006) found that Klotho binds
to FGF23. Forced expression of Klotho enabled the high affinity binding
of FGF23 to the cell surface and restored the ability of a renal cell
line to respond to FGF23 treatment. Moreover, FGF23 incompetence was
induced by injecting wildtype mice with an anti-Klotho monoclonal
antibody. Thus, Klotho is essential for endogenous FGF23 function.
Because Klotho alone seemed to be incapable of intracellular signaling,
Urakawa et al. (2006) searched for other components of the FGF23
receptor and found FGFR1(IIIc) (see 136350), which was directly
converted by Klotho into the FGF23 receptor. Thus, the concerted action
of Klotho and FGFR1(IIIc) reconstitutes the FGF23 receptor. The FGF23
receptor shows a strong affinity, one that is sufficient for interacting
with physiologic concentrations of FGF23. Moreover, the tissue-specific
unique biologic activity of FGF23 is likely to be regulated by a limited
local distribution of Klotho. Urakawa et al. (2006) suggested that given
that Klotho, with its homologs beta-klotho (KLB; 611135) and KLPH, forms
a family, other FGF-FGFR systems may be subject to similar conversions.

Urakawa et al. (2006) suggested that Klotho may convert other members of
the FGF/FGFR receptor system.

Imura et al. (2007) found the molecular association of Klotho (referred
to as alpha-Klotho) and Na+,K+ ATPase and provided evidence for an
increase of abundance of Na+,K+ ATPase at the plasma membrane. Low
concentrations of extracellular free calcium rapidly induced regulated
parathyroid hormone (168450) secretion in an alpha-Klotho-Na+,K+
ATPase-dependent manner. The authors suggested that the increased sodium
ion gradient created by Na+,K+ ATPase activity might drive the
transepithelial transport of calcium in cooperation with ion channels
and transporters in the choroid plexus and kidney. Imura et al. (2007)
concluded that their findings revealed fundamental roles of alpha-Klotho
in the regulation of calcium metabolism.

Chen et al. (2007) found that ADAM10 (602192) and ADAM17 (603639)
mediated shedding of Klotho from cell membranes of Klotho-transfected
COS-7 cells, a model system they validated by studies in rat kidney
slices. Insulin enhanced Klotho shedding, and this effect was abolished
by silencing of ADAM10 or ADAM17. Insulin appeared to stimulate ADAM10
and ADAM17 proteolytic activity toward Klotho, but did not increase
their mRNA or protein levels.

CYTOGENETICS

In a 23-year-old woman with hypophosphatemic rickets and
hyperparathyroidism (612089), Brownstein et al. (2008) identified a de
novo balanced translocation t(9;13)(q21.13;q13.1). The authors mapped
the translocation breakpoints and found that the 5-prime end of the
KLOTHO gene was -49 kb distal to the breakpoint on chromosome 13. Plasma
alpha-klotho levels and beta-glucuronidase activity were markedly
increased in the patient, as was circulating FGF23. Brownstein et al.
(2008) concluded that the patient's novel phenotype was caused by a
positional effect of the translocation, causing increased levels of
alpha-klotho.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a population-based association study, Arking et al. (2002) determined
that allele 17 of microsatellite marker 1, which is 11 kb 3-prime of the
last exon of the KL gene, is significantly more prevalent in Bohemian
Czech newborns than in individuals more than 75 years old, independent
of sex and health status. SSCP analysis identified another KL allele,
which the authors termed KL-VS, defined by the presence of 6
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in an 800-bp region spanning exon
2 and flanking sequence. Allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization
analysis showed complete linkage disequilibrium for the coding region
mutations. Of the 3 mutations in exon 2, 1 is silent and 2 encode amino
acid changes, phe352 to val (F352V) and cys370 to ser (C370S). The F352V
mutation occurs at a completely conserved amino acid. Genotype analysis
indicated that heterozygosity for F352V is significantly more prevalent
in elderly Bohemians than in newborns, while homozygosity for V352,
which is rare, is more prevalent in newborns. Kaplan-Meier survival
analysis revealed that the heterozygote advantage promotes not only
survival but also longevity (152430) in elderly individuals more than 80
years old. Analysis of Caucasians and African Americans in Baltimore did
not detect a heterozygote advantage for F352V, but did find decreased
V352 homozygosity in the elderly. Western blot analysis of expression of
the V352, S370, V352/S370, and wildtype alleles in HeLa cells or
fibroblasts showed enhanced secretion of S370 mutant and decreased
secretion of V352 variant compared with the 65-kD wildtype protein. The
double mutant was secreted at intermediate levels, and the V352 mutant
was most abundant intracellularly, suggesting a KL secretion defect.
Functional analysis of a KL paralog, cytosolic beta-glucosidase (CBGL1;
606619), which has a known substrate, p-nitrophenyl-beta-D-glucoside,
established that a mutation (F289V) at the position in CBGL1
corresponding to KL F352V results in a complete loss of ability to
cleave the substrate. Arking et al. (2002) concluded that the KL-VS
mutation impairs the trafficking and catalytic activity of KL, which may
in turn contribute to differences in the onset and severity of
age-related phenotypes. They also suggested that additional deleterious
mutations remained to be identified, since KL-VS is found on multiple
marker allele haplotypes and is negatively associated with marker 1
allele 17.

Kuro-o et al. (1997) found that klotho-deficient mice display extensive
and accelerated arteriosclerosis in association with medial
calcification of the aorta and both medial calcification and intimal
thickening of medium-sized muscular arteries. To determine whether
klotho influences atherosclerotic risk in humans, Arking et al. (2003)
performed cross-sectional studies to assess the association between the
KL-VS allele and adult coronary artery disease (CAD) in 2 independent
samples of apparently healthy sibs of individuals with onset of CAD
under the age of 60 years. Analysis incorporating known CAD risk factors
demonstrated that the KL-VS allele is an independent risk factor and
that the imposed risk of KL-VS allele status is influenced by modifiable
risk factors. Hypertension and increasing high-density lipoprotein
cholesterol levels masked or reduced the risk conferred by the KL-VS
allele, respectively, whereas current smoking increased the risk. The
results demonstrated that the KL-VS allele is an independent risk factor
for occult CAD in 2 independent high-risk samples. Modifiable risk
factors, including hypertension, smoking status, and HDL cholesterol
level, appear to influence the risk imposed by this allele.

Priapism, a vasoocclusive manifestation of sickle cell disease (603903),
affects more than 30% of males with the disorder. In sickle cell anemia
patients, 148 with priapism and 529 without, Nolan et al. (2004)
searched SNPs from 44 genes of different functional classes for an
association with priapism. By genotypic and haplotype analysis, they
found an association between SNPs in the KL gene and priapism (dbSNP
rs2249358 and dbSNP rs211239; adjusted odds ratio of 2.6 and 1.7,
respectively).

In a 13-year-old girl with hyperphosphatemic tumoral calcinosis
(211900), Ichikawa et al. (2007) identified a homozygous mutation in the
KL gene (604824.0002). In vitro functional expression studies showed
that the mutation led to decreased complex formation with FGF23 and to
decreased FGF23 signaling.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kuro-o et al. (1997) described a transgenic mouse with several
age-related disorders: infertility, genital and thymus atrophy, skin
atrophy as revealed by a reduction in hair follicle number,
arteriosclerosis, hypokinesis, gait disturbance, ectopic calcification,
osteoporosis, emphysema, pituitary abnormalities, and increases in serum
calcium and phosphorus. The phenotypes appeared only in mice homozygous
for the mutant Kl transgene and only after at least 2 weeks of age. The
average life span of the mice was approximately 60 days with no mice
surviving more than 100 days. Mice with the normal Kl gene did not
express the age-related disorders.

Manya et al. (2002) showed that, while calpain-1 (114220) activity was
unchanged in kidneys of klotho-null mice, the activity of calpain-2
(114230) was elevated, and the activity of its endogenous inhibitor,
calpastatin (114090), was significantly decreased. Proteolysis of
alpha-II spectrin (182860) also increased with decreasing levels of
klotho protein. Manya et al. (2002) observed similar phenomena in normal
aged mice.

Using the Otsuka Long-Evans Tokushima Fatty (OLETF) rat model of
atherosclerotic disease, Saito et al. (2000) observed significantly
reduced levels of klotho mRNA in the kidneys of these animals. Saito et
al. (2000) established that adenovirus-mediated klotho gene delivery
improves endothelial dysfunction, increases nitric oxide production, and
reduces elevated blood pressure to control rat levels, but does not have
a detectable effect on weight or blood glucose levels. Klotho treatment
also suppresses the medial thickness of the thoracic aorta and
perivascular fibrosis in the coronary artery.

Mori et al. (2000) showed that klotho mice had a barely detectable
amount of white adipose tissue, whereas brown adipose tissue (BAT) was
comparably preserved. Although klotho mice consumed as much food as
wildtype mice when normalized for body weight, they exhibited changes in
parameters for energy homeostasis similar to those found under
food-restricted conditions. The klotho mice had increased glucose
tolerance and insulin sensitivity, as well as increased hepatic Pepck
(261680) expression. Levels of uncoupling protein-1 (UCP1; 113730) and
body temperature were significantly lower in klotho mice. Histologic
analysis demonstrated lower glycogen, insulin, and lipid in the liver,
pancreas, and BAT, respectively.

Fukino et al. (2002) found that mice heterozygously deficient for the
klotho gene showed impaired blood flow recovery and impaired
angiogenesis following ischemic hindlimb injury.

Bektas et al. (2004) sequenced the mouse klotho gene and examined renal
expression of the secreted and membrane-bound klotho isoforms from 16
laboratory-derived and 4 wild-derived inbred strains. Among the
laboratory-derived strains, no sequence variation was found in any of
the exons or intron-exon boundaries. Among the wild-derived strains,
they found 45 sequence variants with 6 resulting in amino acid
substitutions. One wild-derived strain, SPRET/Ei, had 4 amino acid
substitutions and higher levels of the membrane form and total klotho
mRNA. These mice had longer life spans, decreased atherosclerosis risk
factors, and better hearing than almost all other mouse strains.

Kurosu et al. (2005) showed that overexpression of klotho in mice
extends life span. Klotho protein functions as a circulating hormone
that binds to a cell surface receptor and represses intracellular
signals of insulin and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF1; 147440), an
evolutionarily conserved mechanism for extending life span. Alleviation
of aging-like phenotypes in klotho-deficient mice was observed by
perturbing insulin and IGF1 signaling, suggesting that klotho-mediated
inhibition of insulin and IGF1 signaling contributes to its anti-aging
properties. Kurosu et al. (2005) suggested that klotho protein may
function as an anti-aging hormone in mammals.

In a Tenc1 (607717)-mutant mouse model of glomerulonephritis (ICGN),
Haruna et al. (2007) introduced a Klotho transgene and found that
overexpression of the Klotho gene resulted in a 70% survival rate
compared to 30% for ICGN mice without the Klotho transgene. Survival was
associated with dramatic improvement in renal functions, morphologic
lesions, and cytochrome c oxidase activity, as well reduced
beta-galactosidase (see 230500) activity, mitochondrial DNA
fragmentation, superoxide anion generation, lipid peroxidation, and Bax
(600004) protein expression and apoptosis. Improvement was seen in both
the tubular and glomerular compartments of the kidney, suggesting that
the Klotho gene product may serve as a renoprotective circulating
hormone while mitigating mitochondrial oxidative stress.

Liu et al. (2007) explored the contribution of stem and progenitor cell
dysfunction and depletion to aging in the Klotho mouse model. Analysis
of various tissues and organs from young Klotho mice revealed a decrease
in stem cell number and an increase in progenitor cell senescence.
Because Klotho is a secreted protein, Liu et al. (2007) postulated that
Klotho might interact with other soluble mediators of stem cells. They
found that Klotho bound to various Wnt family members. In a cell culture
model, the Wnt-Klotho interaction resulted in the suppression of Wnt
biologic activity. Tissues and organs from Klotho-deficient animals
showed evidence of increased Wnt signaling, and ectopic expression of
Klotho antagonized the activity of endogenous and exogenous Wnt. Both in
vitro and in vivo, continuous Wnt exposure triggered accelerated
cellular senescence. Thus, Liu et al. (2007) concluded that Klotho
appears to be a secreted Wnt antagonist and that Wnt proteins have an
unexpected role in mammalian aging.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
KL, KL-VS HAPLOTYPE

Arking et al. (2002) identified a functional variant of klotho, a
haplotype termed KL-VS, which is defined by the presence of 6
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in an 800-bp region spanning exon
2 and flanking sequence. Allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization
analysis showed complete linkage disequilibrium for the coding region
mutations. Of the 3 mutations in exon 2, 1 is silent and 2 encode amino
acid changes, phe352 to val (F352V) and cys370 to ser (C370S). The
variant was associated with reduced human longevity when in
homozygosity. The prevalence of the variant in the general population
was estimated to be 0.157.

Arking et al. (2003) demonstrated an association between the variant
allele and susceptibility to coronary artery disease that proved to be a
risk factor independent of known risk factors. The authors found,
however, that the risk imposed by KL-VS was influenced by other risk
factors, including hypertension, smoking status, and HDL cholesterol
level.

.0002
TUMORAL CALCINOSIS, HYPERPHOSPHATEMIC
KL, HIS193ARG

In a 13-year-old girl with hyperphosphatemic tumoral calcinosis
(211900), Ichikawa et al. (2007) identified a homozygous 578A-G
transition in exon 1 of the KL gene, resulting in a his193-to-arg
(H193R) substitution in the first of 2 tandem putative glycosidase
domains. The substitution was predicted to destabilize the tertiary fold
of the glycosidase domain, leading to decreased expression and secretion
of the protein. In vitro functional expression studies indicated that
the H193R mutant protein was not fully glycosylated, was not fully
secreted, and had decreased stability compared to wildtype. In addition,
the mutation led to decreased complex formation with FGF23 (605380) and
to decreased FGF23 signaling. The patient had hyperphosphatemia,
increased serum vitamin D, tumoral calcinosis in the dura, and
osteopenia. She also had hyperparathyroidism due to hyperplastic glands;
the relationship of this feature to the KL mutation was unclear.

REFERENCE 1. Arking, D. E.; Becker, D. M.; Yanek, L. R.; Fallin, D.; Judge,
D. P.; Moy, T. F.; Becker, L. C.; Dietz, H. C.: Klotho allele status
and the risk of early-onset occult coronary artery disease. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 72: 1154-1161, 2003.

2. Arking, D. E.; Krebsova, A.; Macek, M., Sr.; Macek, M., Jr.; Arking,
A.; Mian, I. S.; Fried, L.; Hamosh, A.; Dey, S.; McIntosh, I.; Dietz,
H. C.: Association of human aging with a functional variant of klotho. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 856-861, 2002.

3. Bektas, A.; Schurman, S. H.; Sharov, A. A.; Carter, M. G.; Dietz,
H. C.; Francomano, C. A.: Klotho gene variation and expression in
20 inbred mouse strains. Mammalian Genome 15: 759-767, 2004.

4. Brownstein, C. A.; Adler, F.; Nelson-Williams, C.; Iijima, J.;
Li, P.; Imura, A.; Nabeshima, Y.; Reyes-Mugica, M.; Carpenter, T.
O.; Lifton, R. P.: A translocation causing increased alpha-klotho
level results in hypophosphatemic rickets and hyperparathyroidism. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 3455-3460, 2008.

5. Chang, Q.; Hoefs, S.; van der Kemp, A. W.; Topala, C. N.; Bindels,
R. J.; Hoenderop, J. G.: The beta-glucuronidase klotho hydrolyzes
and activates the TRPV5 channel. Science 310: 490-493, 2005.

6. Chen, C.-D.; Podvin, S.; Gillespie, E.; Leeman, S. E.; Abraham,
C. R.: Insulin stimulates the cleavage and release of the extracellular
domain of Klotho by ADAM10 and ADAM17. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104:
19796-19801, 2007.

7. Fukino, K.; Suzuki, T.; Saito, Y.; Shindo, T.; Amaki, T.; Kurabayashi,
M.; Nagai, R.: Regulation of angiogenesis by the aging suppressor
gene klotho. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 293: 332-337, 2002.

8. Haruna, Y.; Kashihara, N.; Satoh, M.; Tomita, N.; Namikoshi, T.;
Sasaki, T.; Fujimori, T.; Xie, P.; Kanwar, Y. S.: Amelioration of
progressive renal injury by genetic manipulation of Klotho gene. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 2331-2336, 2007.

9. Ichikawa, S.; Imel, E. A.; Kreiter, M. L.; Yu, X.; Mackenzie, D.
S.; Sorenson, A. H.; Goetz, R.; Mohammadi, M.; White, K. E.; Econs,
M. J.: A homozygous missense mutation in human KLOTHO causes severe
tumoral calcinosis. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 2684-2691, 2007.

10. Imura, A.; Tsuji, Y.; Murata, M.; Maeda, R.; Kubota, K.; Iwano,
A.; Obuse, C.; Togashi, K.; Tominaga, M.; Kita, N.; Tomiyama, K.;
Iijima, J.; and 13 others: Alpha-Klotho as a regulator of calcium
homeostasis. Science 316: 1615-1618, 2007.

11. Koh, N.; Fujimori, T.; Nishiguchi, S.; Tamori, A.; Shiomi, S.;
Nakatani, T.; Sugimura, K.; Kishimoto, T.; Kinoshita, S.; Kuroki,
T.; Nabeshima, Y.: Severely reduced production of Klotho in human
chronic renal failure kidney. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 280:
1015-1020, 2001.

12. Kuro-o, M.; Matsumura, Y.; Aizawa, H.; Kawaguchi, H.; Suga, T.;
Utsugi, T.; Ohyama, Y.; Kurabayashi, M.; Kaname, T.; Kume, E.; Iwasaki,
H.; Iida, A.; Shiraki-Iida, T.; Nishikawa, S.; Nagai, R.; Nabeshima,
Y.: Mutation of the mouse klotho gene leads to a syndrome resembling
ageing. Nature 390: 45-51, 1997.

13. Kurosu, H.; Yamamoto, M.; Clark, J. D.; Pastor, J. V.; Nandi,
A.; Gurnani, P.; McGuinness, O. P.; Chikuda, H.; Yamaguchi, M.; Kawaguchi,
H.; Shimomura, I.; Takayama, Y.; Herz, J.; Kahn, C. R.; Rosenblatt,
K. P.; Kuro-o, M.: Suppression of aging in mice by the hormone klotho. Science 309:
1829-1833, 2005.

14. Liu, H.; Fergusson, M. M.; Castilho, R. M.; Liu, J.; Cao, L.;
Chen, J.; Malide, D.; Rovira, I. I.; Schimel, D.; Kuo, C. J.; Gutkind,
J. S.; Hwang, P. M.; Finkel, T.: Augmented Wnt signaling in a mammalian
model of accelerated aging. Science 317: 803-806, 2007.

15. Manya, H.; Inomata, M.; Fujimori, T.; Dohmae, N.; Sato, Y.; Takio,
K.; Nabeshima, Y.; Endo, T.: Klotho protein deficiency leads to overactivation
of mu-calpain. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 35503-35508, 2002.

16. Matsumura, Y.; Aizawa, H.; Shiraki-Iida, T.; Nagai, R.; Kuro-o,
M.; Nabeshima, Y.: Identification of the human klotho gene and its
two transcripts encoding membrane and secreted klotho protein. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 242: 626-630, 1998.

17. Mori, K.; Yahata, K.; Mukoyama, M.; Suganami, T.; Makino, H.;
Nagae, T.; Masuzaki, H.; Ogawa, Y.; Sugawara, A.; Nabeshima, Y.; Nakao,
K.: Disruption of klotho gene causes an abnormal energy homeostasis
in mice. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 278: 665-670, 2000.

18. Nolan, V. G.; Baldwin, C.; Ma, Q.; Wyszynski, D. F.; Amirault,
Y.; Farrell, J. J.; Bisbee, A.; Embury, S. H.; Farrer, L. A.; Steinberg,
M. H.: Association of single nucleotide polymorphisms in klotho with
priapism in sickle cell anaemia. Brit. J. Haemat. 128: 266-272,
2004.

19. Saito, Y.; Nakamura, T.; Ohyama, Y; Suzuki, T.; Iida, A.; Shiraki-Iida,
T.; Kuro-o, M.; Nabeshima, Y.; Kurabayashi, M.; Nagai, R.: In vivo
klotho gene delivery protects against endothelial dysfunction in multiple
risk factor syndrome. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 276: 767-772,
2000.

20. Urakawa, I.; Yamazaki, Y.; Shimada, T.; Iijima, K.; Hasegawa,
H.; Okawa, K.; Fujita, T.; Fukumoto, S.; Yamashita, T.: Klotho converts
canonical FGF receptor into a specific receptor for FGF23. Nature 444:
770-774, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/29/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/29/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/13/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/29/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/26/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/19/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/23/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/14/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/12/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/20/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/8/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/4/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/7/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/28/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/6/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/17/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/6/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/1/2001

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 4/11/2000

EDITED joanna: 01/22/2013
carol: 5/29/2008
mgross: 2/7/2008
terry: 1/29/2008
wwang: 12/12/2007
ckniffin: 11/13/2007
carol: 10/10/2007
alopez: 9/6/2007
terry: 8/29/2007
alopez: 6/29/2007
terry: 6/26/2007
mgross: 6/26/2007
mgross: 6/14/2007
terry: 6/11/2007
wwang: 4/19/2007
alopez: 1/24/2007
terry: 1/23/2007
alopez: 3/28/2006
alopez: 11/16/2005
alopez: 11/15/2005
terry: 11/14/2005
wwang: 6/7/2005
wwang: 5/12/2005
carol: 12/28/2004
terry: 12/20/2004
carol: 7/6/2004
mgross: 7/8/2003
cwells: 6/10/2003
terry: 6/4/2003
tkritzer: 11/14/2002
tkritzer: 11/7/2002
mgross: 5/28/2002
terry: 4/23/2002
terry: 2/6/2002
mgross: 1/17/2002
mgross: 4/6/2001
cwells: 2/6/2001
cwells: 2/1/2001
carol: 4/11/2000

605802	TITLE *605802 ZINC FINGER E BOX-BINDING HOMEOBOX 2; ZEB2
;;ZINC FINGER HOMEOBOX 1B; ZFHX1B;;
SMAD-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1; SMADIP1;;
SIP1;;
KIAA0569
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ZEB2 gene is a member of the ZEB1 (189909)/Drosophila Zfh1 family of
2-handed zinc finger/homeodomain proteins and functions as a DNA-binding
transcriptional repressor that interacts with activated SMADs (see
601595), the transducers of TGF-beta (190180) signaling, and interacts
with the nucleosome remodeling and histone deacetylation (NURD) complex
(Verstappen et al., 2008).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1998) cloned ZEB2, which they designated
KIAA0569. The deduced 1,214-amino acid protein shares significant
similarity with rat Zeb1. RT-PCR analysis of human tissues detected
highest ZEB2 expression in heart, brain, lung, placenta, and kidney,
with moderate expression in ovary, skeletal muscle, liver, and small
intestine.

Using the yeast 2-hybrid analysis of mouse embryos, Verschueren et al.
(1999) identified Zeb2, which they called Smadip1. The Smadip1 protein
contains a SMAD-binding domain, a homeodomain-like sequence, and 2
separate clusters of zinc fingers, one N-terminal and the other
C-terminal.

Comparison of human and mouse homologs of ZEB2 at nucleotide and amino
acid levels revealed 93% and 97% similarities, respectively (Wakamatsu
et al., 2001).

By immunohistochemical analysis of mouse embryos, Seuntjens et al.
(2009) found that Sip1 was expressed in the cortical plate, but not in
neural progenitor cells. In the medial/cingulate cortex at late
gestation (embryonic day 18.5), Sip1 expression was restricted to cells
of the deep cortical layers.

GENE STRUCTURE

The ZEB2 gene spans approximately 70 kb and consists of 10 exons
(Wakamatsu et al., 2001).

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the ZEB2 gene
to chromosome 2. Wakamatsu et al. (2001) mapped the ZEB2 gene to
chromosome 2q22.

GENE FUNCTION

Verschueren et al. (1999) found that, although SMADIP1 interacted with
the MH2 domain of receptor-regulated SMADs in yeast and in vitro, its
interaction with full-length SMADs (see 601595) in mammalian cells
required receptor-mediated SMAD activation. Like delta-EF1, SMADIP1
bound to 5-prime-CACCT sequences in different promoters, including the
Xenopus 'brachyury' (Xbra) promoter (Remacle et al., 1999).
Overexpression of either full-length SMADIP1 or its C-terminal zinc
finger cluster, which bound to the Xbra2 promoter in vitro, prevented
expression of the endogenous Xbra gene in early Xenopus embryos.
Therefore, SMADIP1 is likely to be a transcriptional repressor that may
be involved in the regulation of at least 1 immediate response gene for
activin-dependent signal transduction pathways. Verschueren et al.
(1999) concluded that identification of this SMAD-interacting protein
opens routes to investigate the mechanisms by which TGF-beta (190180)
members exert their effects on expression of target genes in responsive
cells and in the vertebrate embryo.

Comijn et al. (2001) reported that expression of wildtype but not
mutated SIP1 downregulated mammalian E-cadherin (192090) transcription
via binding to both conserved E2 boxes of the minimal E-cadherin
promoter. SIP1 and Snail (SNAI1; 604238) bound to partly overlapping
promoter sequences and showed similar silencing effects. SIP1 could be
induced by TGFB treatment and showed high expression in several
E-cadherin-negative human carcinoma cell lines. Conditional expression
of SIP1 in E-cadherin-positive MDCK cells abrogated E-cadherin-mediated
intercellular adhesion and simultaneously induced invasion. The authors
concluded that SIP1 therefore appears to be a promoter of invasion in
malignant epithelial tumors.

To explore telomerase regulation, Lin and Elledge (2003) employed a
general genetic screen in HeLa cells to identify negative regulators of
TERT (187270). They discovered 3 tumor suppressor/oncogene pathways
involved in TERT repression, including SIP1, which mediates
TGF-beta-regulated repression of TERT.

Vandewalle et al. (2005) showed that expression of mouse Sip1 in human
epithelial cells caused a morphologic change from an epithelial to a
mesenchymal phenotype. Dedifferentiation was accompanied by repression
of several cell junction proteins and their corresponding mRNAs. In
addition to E-cadherin, other genes encoding crucial proteins of tight
junctions, desmosomes, and gap junctions were downregulated by Sip1.
Reporter gene assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated
direct repression of promoters of some of these genes by Sip1.

TGF-beta is a key regulator of extracellular matrix collagens in
mesangial cells (MCs) in diabetic nephropathy. Kato et al. (2007) found
that TGF-beta increased miR192 (MIRN192; 610939) levels in primary mouse
MCs, and they identified Sip1 as a target of miR192 in mouse MCs.
TGF-beta treatment or transfection with miR192 decreased expression of
endogenous Sip1 and activity of a reporter construct containing the
3-prime UTR of Sip1. Conversely, inhibition of miR192 enhanced reporter
activity, confirming Sip1 to be an miR192 target. Glomeruli isolated
from streptozotocin-injected diabetic mice and diabetic db/db mice (see
601007) showed elevated miR192 levels relative to corresponding
nondiabetic controls, which paralleled increased Tgf-beta and Col1a2
(120160) expression. Transfection of mouse MCs with miR192 and short
hairpin RNAs targeting delta-EF1 synergistically enhanced activity of a
reporter construct containing upstream E-box elements of the Col1a2
gene. Kato et al. (2007) concluded that TGF-beta-mediated collagen
regulation in MCs involves crosstalk between miR192 and the E-box
repressors delta-EF1 and SIP1.

Expression of SNAI1 in epithelial cells triggers an
epithelial-mesenchyme transition. Beltran et al. (2008) showed that
synthesis of ZEB2 was upregulated following SNAI1 expression in human
cell lines. SNAI1 did not alter ZEB2 mRNA levels, but it prevented
processing of a large intron in the 5-prime UTR of ZEB2 that contains an
internal ribosome entry site (IRES) necessary for ZEB2 expression.
Maintenance of the 5-prime ZEB2 intron was dependent on expression of an
antisense transcript that overlapped the 5-prime splice site in the
intron. Ectopic overexpression of this antisense transcript in
epithelial cells prevented splicing of the ZEB2 5-prime UTR, resulting
in elevated ZEB2 protein expression and, consequently, downregulation of
E-cadherin mRNA and protein.

Park et al. (2008) found that expression of the miR200 family of
microRNAs (e.g., MIRN200A; 612090) in human cell lines was associated
with an epithelial phenotype and with expression of E-cadherin, an
epithelial cell marker. They identified multiple miR200 target sequences
in the 3-prime UTRs of the E-cadherin transcriptional repressors ZEB1
and ZEB2. Using the 3-prime UTRs of mouse and human ZEB1 and ZEB2, they
showed that endogenous miR200s suppressed ZEB1 and ZEB2 expression.
Increasing miR200 levels induced mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition
(MET) in human cancer cell lines, reducing their aggressiveness.
Conversely, reducing miR200 levels induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). Park et al. (2008) concluded that the miR200 family
regulates EMT/MET by targeting ZEB1 and ZEB2, which control expression
of E-cadherin.

Using mass spectrometry, Verstappen et al. (2008) found that ZEB2
associated with multiple subunits of the NURD complex, which plays a key
role in transcriptional repression. Mi2-beta (CHD4; 603277) was
identified as a specific cofactor for ZEB2-mediated repression of
E-cadherin (CDH1; 192090). The N-terminal 289 amino acids of ZEB2 were
sufficient for interaction with NURD complex subunits. In vitro studies
in Xenopus oocytes showed broad Zeb2 expression at the gastrula stage,
with stronger expression in neural tissues and neural crest cells at the
neurula stage, suggesting a role in neural development. Endogenous
Mi2-beta expression broadly overlapped Zeb2 expression, and antisense
morpholino knockdown of Mi2-beta resulted in reduced Zeb2-mediated
repression of Bmp4 (112262) and decreased induction of neural marker
Ncam (116930). Further studies showed that a mutant ZEB2 protein
(605802.0014), differing in the first 24 amino acids from the wildtype
protein and causing a mild form of Mowat-Wilson syndrome (235730), was
unable to interact with the NURD complex and showed decreased
transcriptional repression of Bmp4.

Uterine quiescence during pregnancy is mediated by increased
progesterone, which represses factors involved in contraction. Renthal
et al. (2010) identified MIRN200 family members (MIRN200B, 612091;
MIRN429, 612094) as microRNAs that mediate myometrial transition to a
contractile phenotype. In human and mouse uterus during pregnancy,
Renthal et al. (2010) found that ZEB1 and ZEB2 were transcriptional
repressors of the contraction-associated genes connexin-43 (GJA1;
121014) and the oxytocin receptor (OXTR; 167055) in myometrial cells.
ZEB1 was directly upregulated by progesterone at the ZEB1 promoter.
During preterm labor in mice, there was an unregulation of
Mirn200b/Mirn429, which downregulated Zeb1 and Zeb2, resulting in
derepression of transcription of the contractility-associated proteins.
In addition, Zeb1 was found to directly bind and repress
Mirn200b/Mirn429, indicating a feedback mechanism. The findings
implicated MIRN200B/MIRN429 and their targets, ZEB1 and ZEB2, as unique
progesterone-mediated regulators of uterine quiescence and contractility
during pregnancy and labor.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In patients with Hirschsprung disease associated with microcephaly,
mental retardation, hypertelorism, submucous cleft palate, and short
stature, consistent with Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MOWS; 235730), Wakamatsu
et al. (2001) identified nonsense or frameshift mutations in the SMADIP1
gene. These mutations represented null alleles, suggesting that
haploinsufficiency for SMADIP1 is sufficient to cause this phenotype.
Wakamatsu et al. (2001) found that the SMADIP1 gene resides in a segment
on 2q22 deleted in 3 patients with the Hirschsprung disease-mental
retardation syndrome. They concluded that the SMADIP1 gene appears to be
essential to embryonic neural and neural crest development.

To investigate the breadth of clinical variation associated with
mutations in ZFHX1B, Yamada et al. (2001) studied DNA samples from 6
patients with clinical features similar to those described for ZFHX1B
deficiency, except that they did not have Hirschsprung disease. The
results showed the R695X mutation (605802.0002) to be present in 3
cases, with 3 novel mutations being identified in the other 3 patients.
All mutations occurred in 1 allele and were de novo events. The results
demonstrated that ZFHX1B deficiency is an autosomal dominant complex
developmental disorder and that individuals with functional null
mutations present with mental retardation, delayed motor development,
epilepsy, and a wide spectrum of clinically heterogeneous features
suggestive of neurocristopathies at the cephalic, cardiac, and vagal
levels.

Amiel et al. (2001) found that 8 of 19 patients with Hirschsprung
disease and mental retardation had large-scale ZFHX1B deletions or
truncating mutations. These results allowed further delineation of the
spectrum of malformations ascribed to haploinsufficiency of this gene,
which includes frequent features such as hypospadias and agenesis of the
corpus callosum. Thus, the ZFHX1B gene, which encodes a transcriptional
corepressor of Smad target genes, may play a role not only in the
patterning of neural crest-derived cells and of the central nervous
system but also in the development of midline structures in humans.

Zweier et al. (2002) analyzed the ZFHX1B gene in 5 patients, 3 of whom
had Hirschsprung disease syndrome, 2 with and 1 without the facial
phenotype described by Mowat et al. (1998), and 2 of whom had the
distinct facial gestalt without Hirschsprung disease. Zweier et al.
(2002) excluded large deletions in all 5 patients and found truncating
ZFHX1B mutations (605802.0007-605802.0010) in all 4 patients with the
characteristic facial phenotype but not in the patient with syndromic
Hirschsprung disease without the distinct facial appearance. Zweier et
al. (2002) suggested the name Mowat-Wilson syndrome (235730) for the
clinical entity of distinct facial appearance, mental retardation, and
variable multiple congenital anomalies (MCA).

Ishihara et al. (2004) identified 5 novel nonsense and frameshift
mutations in the ZFHX1B gene in patients with Mowat-Wilson syndrome and
characterized the clinical features and molecular basis of a total of 27
cases with mutations or deletions in ZFHX1B. All of the deletions were
of paternal origin, and clinical features in cases with deletions of up
to about 5 Mb overlapped those found in cases with nonsense and
frameshift mutations. However, 2 of their patients with large deletions
(10.42 Mb and 8.83 Mb) had significantly delayed psychomotor
development, and 1 of them also had a cleft palate and complicated heart
disease, features not previously reported in patients with Mowat-Wilson
syndrome.

Zweier et al. (2006) reported a 5-year-old boy with a facial gestalt
similar to that seen in Mowat-Wilson syndrome but who exhibited an
unusually mild phenotype and in whom they identified heterozygosity for
a splice site mutation in the ZFHX1B gene (605802.0014).

Heinritz et al. (2006) described a 2.5-year-old boy with a heterozygous
missense mutation in the ZFHX1B gene (605802.0015) who had bilateral
cleft lip and palate and brachytelephalangy, features unusual in
Mowat-Wilson syndrome.

Dastot-Le Moal et al. (2007) stated that more than 110 different
mutations in the ZEB2 gene had been described. Nonsense mutations
accounted for approximately 41% of the known punctual mutations and were
localized mainly in exon 8. No obvious genotype-phenotype correlations
had been observed.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

The majority of ZEB2 mutations identified in patients with Mowat-Wilson
syndrome lead to haploinsufficiency through premature termination or
large gene deletions. In 3 unrelated patients with a mild form of MOWS,
Ghoumid et al. (2013) identified 3 different missense mutations in the
ZEB2 gene (see, e.g., S1071P, 605802.0016 and H1045R, 605802.0017). All
3 mutations occurred in the conserved C-terminal zinc finger cluster
domain. In vitro functional expression studies showed that these 3
missense mutations lost the ability to bind to the E-cadherin (CDH1;
192090) promoter and to repress transcription of this target gene,
consistent with a loss of function and without a dominant-negative
effect. However, these mutant mRNAs showed significant phenotypic rescue
of morpholino knockout zebrafish embryos: complete rescue with S1071P
(84%) and partial rescue with H1045R (55%), indicating that they are
hypomorphic alleles; wildtype mRNA showed 81% rescue. The patients had
mild facial gestalt of MOWS and moderate intellectual disability, but no
microcephaly, heart defects, or HSCR. The variable embryonic rescue
correlated with the severity of the patients' phenotype.

ANIMAL MODEL

To clarify the molecular mechanisms underlying the clinical features of
Hirschsprung disease-mental retardation syndrome, Van de Putte et al.
(2003) generated mice that carried a Zfhx1b mutation comparable to those
found in several human patients. They showed that Zfhx1b knockout mice
did not develop postotic vagal neural crest cells, the precursors of the
enteric nervous system that is affected in patients with Hirschsprung
disease, and displayed a delamination arrest of cranial neural crest
cells, which form the skeletomuscular elements of the vertebral head.
This suggests that the gene product is essential for the development of
vagal neural crest precursors and the migratory behavior of cranial
neural crest in the mouse. Furthermore, they showed that the gene
product is involved in the specification of neuroepithelium.
Sip1-knockout embryos died around embryonic day 9.5, with failed neural
tube closure, lack of a sharp boundary between the neural plate and the
rest of the ectoderm, and lack of the first branchial arch.

Van de Putte et al. (2007) found that conditional deletion of Zeb2 in
mouse neural crest precursors was embryonic lethal. Mutant mice
displayed craniofacial and gastrointestinal malformations similar to
those of patients with Mowat-Wilson syndrome. In addition, mutant mice
had defects in the heart, melanoblasts, and sympathetic and
parasympathetic anlagen.

A single layer of neuroepithelial cells lining the embryonic neural tube
gives rise to the entire repertoire of neurons, astrocytes, and
oligodendrocytes in the adult central nervous system. Seuntjens et al.
(2009) found that conditional Sip1 deletion in young mouse neurons
induced premature production of upper layer neurons at the expense of
deep layers, precocious and increased generation of glial precursors,
and elevated numbers of astrocytes at early postnatal stages. Microarray
analysis showed that Ntf3 (162660) and Fgf9 (600921) were over- and
prematurely expressed in mutant brains. In the absence of Sip1, there
was also a premature peak of MAPK (see 176948) signaling in neural
progenitor cells. Seuntjens et al. (2009) concluded that SIP1 functions
in the postmitotic compartment of the neocortex to control the
expression of growth factor genes that feed back to progenitors to
regulate production of the neurons and glial cells required for
corticogenesis.

Ghoumid et al. (2013) found that morpholino knockout of the zebrafish
Zeb2 ortholog sip1b in zebrafish embryos resulted in severe
neurodevelopmental abnormalities, including small brains and defects of
tectum development, as well as impaired neuronal crest cell migration
with a lack of development of pharyngeal arches and jaw cartilages.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MOWAT-WILSON SYNDROME
ZEB2, ARG549TER

In a patient with Hirschsprung disease associated with microcephaly,
mental retardation, hypertelorism, submucous cleft palate, and short
stature (235730), Wakamatsu et al. (2001) identified an A-to-T
transversion at nucleotide 1645 of the SMADIP1 gene, resulting in an
arg-to-ter substitution at codon 549 (R549X).

.0002
MOWAT-WILSON SYNDROME
ZEB2, ARG695TER

In a patient with Hirschsprung disease associated with microcephaly,
mental retardation, hypertelorism, submucous cleft palate, and short
stature (235730), Wakamatsu et al. (2001) identified a C-to-T transition
at nucleotide 2083 of the SMADIP1 gene, resulting in an arg-to-ter
substitution at codon 695 (R695X).

In a study of 6 patients with clinical features similar to those
reported in patients with ZFHX1B mutations but without Hirschsprung
disease, Yamada et al. (2001) found that 3 had the R695X mutation. Thus,
Hirschsprung disease is not a consistent feature.

.0003
MOWAT-WILSON SYNDROME
ZEB2, 4-BP DEL, NT1173

In a patient with Hirschsprung disease associated with microcephaly and
mental retardation, hypertelorism, submucous cleft palate, and short
stature (235730), Wakamatsu et al. (2001) identified a 4-bp deletion
(AACA) at nucleotide 1173 of the SMADIP1 gene, resulting in a frameshift
at codon 392 leading to a termination codon at amino acid residue 394 in
exon 8.

.0004
MOWAT-WILSON SYNDROME
ZEB2, 1-BP INS, 1421A

In a patient with Hirschsprung disease associated with microcephaly and
mental retardation, hypertelorism, submucous cleft palate, and short
stature (235730) originally reported by Mowat et al. (1998), Cacheux et
al. (2001) identified insertion of an adenine residue following
nucleotide 1421 of the SMADIP1 gene, resulting in a frameshift and
leading to a termination codon at amino acid residue 481 in exon 8.

.0005
MOWAT-WILSON SYNDROME
ZEB2, 2-BP INS, 760CA

In a 25-year-old male patient with many features of the Hirschsprung
disease-mental retardation syndrome but without Hirschsprung disease
(235730), Yamada et al. (2001) found a 2-bp insertion (760insCA) in the
ZFHX1B gene. The patient showed hypertelorism and microcephaly (head
circumference 2 standard deviations below the mean) at birth. He
developed epilepsy at age 1 year. He showed delayed motor development,
with neck control developing at age 8 months and walking without support
at age 2 years. He was severely mentally retarded, with only a few words
of speech.

.0006
MOWAT-WILSON SYNDROME
ZEB2, 1-BP INS, 2453T

In a patient with Hirschsprung disease-mental retardation syndrome
(235730), Amiel et al. (2001) found a 1-bp insertion (2453insT) in the
ZFHX1B gene. The patient had the characteristic facies, with sunken
eyes, downslanting palpebral fissures, strabismus, thick eyebrows with
lateral flaring, saddle nose, pointed chin, thick antehelix, and rotated
ears with uplifted, fleshy earlobes. The patient did not have agenesis
of the corpus callosum but did have hydronephrosis as well as heart
defects: atrial septal defects, ventricular septal defects, and pulmonic
stenosis.

.0007
MOWAT-WILSON SYNDROME
ZEB2, 1-BP DEL, 1892A

In a patient with Hirschsprung disease-mental retardation syndrome
(235730), Zweier et al. (2002) found a heterozygous 1-bp deletion
(1892delA) in exon 8 of the ZFHX1B gene, resulting in a premature stop
codon after 14 amino acids.

.0008
MOWAT-WILSON SYNDROME
ZEB2, 2-BP INS, 553TG

In a patient with many features of the Hirschsprung disease-mental
retardation syndrome (235730) but without Hirschsprung disease, Zweier
et al. (2002) found a heterozygous 2-bp insertion in exon 5 in the
ZFHX1B gene, leading to a stop codon after 27 amino acids. To
investigate if this truncating mutation led to mRNA decay, Zweier et al.
(2002) performed RT-PCR of mRNA from the patient's peripheral blood and
found the mutated transcript.

.0009
MOWAT-WILSON SYNDROME
ZEB2, SER852TER

In a patient with many features of the Hirschsprung disease-mental
retardation syndrome (235730) but without Hirschsprung disease, Zweier
et al. (2002) found a heterozygous C-to-G substitution in exon 8 of the
ZFHX1B gene, resulting in a ser852-to-ter substitution.

.0010
MOWAT-WILSON SYNDROME
ZEB2, 2-BP INS, 3567CC

In a patient with Hirschsprung disease-mental retardation syndrome
(235730), Zweier et al. (2002) found a heterozygous 2-bp insertion
(3567insCC) in exon 10, resulting in a frameshift and an enlarged
protein of 1,241 amino acids.

.0011
HIRSCHSPRUNG DISEASE-MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME, LATE INFANTILE
ZEB2, 3-BP DEL, 295AAC

Yoneda et al. (2002) reported a 48-year-old woman with late
infantile-onset mental retardation who developed megacolon. Although the
patient had no typical clinical features of Hirschsprung disease-mental
retardation syndrome (235730), a 3-bp deletion eliminating asn99 was
identified in exon 3 of the ZFHX1B gene. The woman was born of
nonconsanguineous parents. She was noted to have mental retardation but
received a full education in elementary school. She sometimes had
constipation but did not require medication until age 48 years, when she
presented with severe constipation and was found to have megacolon. This
patient would appear to represent an intermediate stage between the
full-blown Hirschsprung disease-mental retardation syndrome and
Hirschsprung disease-mental retardation syndrome without Hirschsprung
disease.

.0012
MOWAT-WILSON SYNDROME
ZEB2, 300-KB DEL

In a patient with typical features of Mowat-Wilson syndrome (235730),
Zweier et al. (2003) described a deletion of approximately 300 kb on
chromosome 2q22, encompassing the ZFHX1B gene, as defined by FISH and
marker analysis. The patient was pictured at age 10 years with a facial
gestalt typical of Mowat-Wilson syndrome. Birth weight and length were
at the 90th centile. He had ventricular septal defect and pulmonary
stenosis. He was described as being affectionate and happy.

.0013
MOWAT-WILSON SYNDROME
ZEB2, 1-BP DEL, 1862T

In a sister and brother with Mowat-Wilson syndrome (235730), McGaughran
et al. (2005) identified heterozygosity for a 1-bp deletion (1862delT)
in exon 8 of the ZFHX1B gene, resulting in a stop codon at position 645
and predicting a truncated protein missing the homeodomain and the
C-terminal zinc finger domain. The mutation was not found in the
unaffected parents' lymphocyte-derived DNA, suggesting germline
mosaicism in the sibs. McGaughran et al. (2005) stated that this was the
first report of a sib recurrence of Mowat-Wilson syndrome.

.0014
MOWAT-WILSON SYNDROME
ZEB2, IVS1AS, G-A, -1

In a 5-year-old boy with a facial gestalt of Mowat-Wilson syndrome
(235730) and an unusually mild phenotype, Zweier et al. (2006)
identified heterozygosity for a G-to-A transition at the -1 position in
the splice acceptor site of exon 2 of the ZFHX1B gene (alternatively,
-70G-A), predicted to result in skipping of exon 2 including the start
codon. The aberrant transcript contains an alternative upstream start
codon, resulting in a mutant protein differing only for the first 24
amino acids from the wildtype protein. The mutation was excluded in both
parents, revealing its de novo origin. The patient's facial gestalt was
less striking than the majority of MWS patients, and his psychomotor
development was much better than expected in classic MWS. Except for
increased disposition for seizures on EEG and body measurements at the
third centile, he showed no other anomalies frequently observed in MWS.

Verstappen et al. (2008) showed the protein resulting from the -70G-A
mutation was unable to interact with the NURD complex, which plays a key
role in transcriptional repression, as well as decreased transcriptional
repression of Bmp4 (112262). The findings were important because they
demonstrated the effect of aberrant function of a single domain of the
ZEB2 protein, which resulted in a relatively milder phenotype compared
to complete haploinsufficiency.

.0015
MOWAT-WILSON SYNDROME
ZEB2, GLN1119ARG

In a 2.5-year-old boy with the overall facial phenotype of Mowat-Wilson
syndrome (235730) but with cleft lip and palate and lacking the
characteristic eyebrows, Heinritz et al. (2006) identified
heterozygosity for a de novo 3356A-G transition in exon 10 of the ZFHX1B
gene, resulting in a gln1119-to-arg (Q1119R) substitution. The patient
also had brachytelephalangy, which the authors stated had never been
described before in Mowat-Wilson syndrome.

.0016
MOWAT-WILSON SYNDROME
ZEB2, SER1071PRO

In a boy with a relatively mild form of Mowat-Wilson syndrome (235730),
Ghoumid et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous c.3211T-C transition in
the ZEB2 gene, resulting in a ser1071-to-pro (S1071P) substitution at a
highly conserved residue in the C-terminal zinc finger domain. The
mutation was not present in the mother, in 200 control chromosomes, or
in SNP databases; DNA from the father was not available. In vitro
functional expression studies showed that the mutant protein lost the
ability to bind to the E-cadherin (CDH1; 192090) promoter and to repress
transcription of this target gene, consistent with a loss of function
and without a dominant-negative effect. However, this mutant mRNA showed
complete phenotypic rescue of morpholino knockout zebrafish embryos,
indicating that it is a hypomorphic allele. The patient had the typical
facial gestalt of the disorder, moderate intellectual disability,
delayed walking, and seizures, but no microcephaly and no cardiac or
gastrointestinal abnormalities.

.0017
MOWAT-WILSON SYNDROME
ZEB2, HIS1045ARG

In a boy with a relatively mild form of Mowat-Wilson syndrome (235730),
Ghoumid et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous de novo c.3134A-G
transition in the ZEB2 gene, resulting in a his1045-to-arg (H1045R)
substitution at a highly conserved residue in the C-terminal zinc finger
domain. The mutation was not present in 200 control chromosomes or in
SNP databases. In vitro functional expression studies showed that the
mutant protein lost the ability to bind to the E-cadherin (CDH1; 192090)
promoter and to repress transcription of this target gene, consistent
with a loss of function and without a dominant-negative effect. However,
this mutant mRNA showed 53% phenotypic rescue of morpholino knockout
zebrafish embryos, indicating that it is a hypomorphic allele. The
patient had a mild facial gestalt of the disorder, moderate intellectual
disability, delayed walking, hippocampal abnormalities, frontal cortical
atrophy, and hypospadias, but no microcephaly and no cardiac or
gastrointestinal abnormalities.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Postigo and Dean (2000)
REFERENCE 1. Amiel, J.; Espinosa-Parrilla, Y.; Steffann, J.; Gosset, P.; Pelet,
A.; Prieur, M.; Boute, O.; Choiset, A.; Lacombe, D.; Philip, N.; Le
Merrer, M.; Tanaka, H.; Till, M.; Touraine, R.; Toutain, A.; Vekemans,
M.; Munnich, A.; Lyonnet, S.: Large-scale deletions and SMADIP1 truncating
mutations in syndromic Hirschsprung disease with involvement of midline
structures. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 69: 1370-1377, 2001.

2. Beltran, M.; Puig, I.; Pena, C.; Garcia, J. M.; Alvarez, A. B.;
Pena, R.; Bonilla, F.; Garcia de Herreros, A.: A natural antisense
transcript regulates Zeb2/Sip1 gene expression during Snail1-induced
epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Genes Dev. 22: 756-769, 2008.

3. Cacheux, V.; Dastot-Le Moal, F.; Kaariainen, H.; Bondurand, N.;
Rintala, R.; Boissier, B.; Wilson, M.; Mowat, D.; Goossens, M.: Loss-of-function
mutations in SIP1 Smad interacting protein 1 result in a syndromic
Hirschsprung disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 1503-1510, 2001.

4. Comijn, J.; Berx, G.; Vermassen, P.; Verschueren, K.; van Grunsven,
L.; Bruyneel, E.; Mareel, M.; Huylebroeck, D.; van Roy, F.: The two-handed
E box binding zinc finger protein SIP1 downregulates E-cadherin and
induces invasion. Molec. Cell 7: 1267-1278, 2001.

5. Dastot-Le Moal, F.; Wilson, M.; Mowat, D.; Collot, N.; Niel, F.;
Goossens, M.: ZFHX1B mutations in patients with Mowat-Wilson syndrome. Hum.
Mutat. 28: 313-321, 2007.

6. Ghoumid, J.; Drevillon, L.; Alavi-Naini, S. M.; Bondurand, N.;
Rio, M.; Briand-Suleau, A.; Nasser, M.; Goodwin, L.; Raymond, P.;
Yanicostas, C.; Goossens, M.; Lyonnet, S.; Mowat, D.; Amiel, J.; Soussi-Yanicostas,
N.; Giurgea, I.: ZEB2 zinc-finger missense mutations lead to hypomorphic
alleles and a mild Mowat-Wilson syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 22:
2652-2661, 2013.

7. Heinritz, W.; Zweier, C.; Froster, U. G.; Strenge, S.; Kujat, A.;
Syrbe, S.; Rauch, A.; Schuster, V.: A missense mutation in the ZFHX1B
gene associated with an atypical Mowat-Wilson syndrome phenotype. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 140A: 1223-1227, 2006.

8. Ishihara, N.; Yamada, K.; Yamada, Y.; Miura, K.; Kato, J.; Kuwabara,
N.; Hara, Y.; Kobayashi, Y.; Hoshino, K.; Nomura, Y.; Mimaki, M.;
Ohya, K.; and 16 others: Clinical and molecular analysis of Mowat-Wilson
syndrome associated with ZFHX1B mutations and deletions at 2q22-q24.1.
(Letter) J. Med. Genet. 41: 387-393, 2004.

9. Kato, M.; Zhang, J.; Wang, M.; Lanting, L.; Yuan, H.; Rossi, J.
J.; Natarajan, R.: MicroRNA-192 in diabetic kidney glomeruli and
its function in TGF-beta-induced collagen expression via inhibition
of E-box repressors. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 3432-3437, 2007.

10. Lin, S.-Y.; Elledge, S. J.: Multiple tumor suppressor pathways
negatively regulate telomerase. Cell 113: 881-889, 2003.

11. McGaughran, J.; Sinnott, S.; Dastot-Le Moal, F.; Wilson, M.; Mowat,
D.; Sutton, B.; Goossens, M.: Recurrence of Mowat-Wilson syndrome
in siblings with the same proven mutation. Am. J. Med. Genet. 137A:
302-304, 2005.

12. Mowat, D. R.; Croaker, G. D. H.; Cass, D. T.; Kerr, B. A.; Chaitow,
J.; Ades, L. C.; Chia, N. L.; Wilson, M. J.: Hirschsprung disease,
microcephaly, mental retardation, and characteristic facial features:
delineation of a new syndrome and identification of a locus at chromosome
2q22-q23. J. Med. Genet. 35: 617-623, 1998.

13. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.;
Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified
human genes. IX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from
brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 31-39,
1998.

14. Park, S.-M.; Gaur, A. B.; Lengyel, E.; Peter, M. E.: The miR-200
family determines the epithelial phenotype of cancer cells by targeting
the E-cadherin repressors ZEB1 and ZEB2. Genes Dev. 22: 894-907,
2008. Note: Erratum: Genes Dev. 23: 1378 only, 2009.

15. Postigo, A. A.; Dean, D. C.: Differential expression and function
of members of the zfh-1 family of zinc finger/homeodomain repressors. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 6391-6396, 2000.

16. Remacle, J. E.; Kraft, H.; Lerchner, W.; Wuytens, G.; Collart,
C.; Verschueren, K.; Smith, J. C.; Huylebroeck, D.: New mode of DNA
binding of multi-zinc finger transcription factors: deltaEF1 family
members bind with two hands to two target sites. EMBO J. 18: 5073-5084,
1999.

17. Renthal, N. E.; Chen, C.-C.; Williams. K. C.; Gerard, R. D.; Prange-Kiel,
J.; Mendelson, C. R.: miR-200 family and targets, ZEB1 and ZEB2,
modulate uterine quiescence and contractility during pregnancy and
labor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 107: 20828-20833, 2010.

18. Seuntjens, E.; Nityanandam, A.; Miquelajauregui, A.; Debruyn,
J.; Stryjewska, A.; Goebbels, S.; Nave, K.-A.; Huylebroeck, D.; Tarabykin,
V.: Sip1 regulates sequential fate decisions by feedback signaling
from postmitotic neurons to progenitors. Nature Neurosci. 12: 1373-1380,
2009.

19. Van de Putte, T.; Francis, A.; Nelles, L.; van Grunsven, L. A.;
Huylebroeck, D.: Neural crest-specific removal of Zfhx1b in mouse
leads to a wide range of neurocristopathies reminiscent of Mowat-Wilson
syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 16: 1423-1436, 2007.

20. Van de Putte, T.; Maruhashi, M.; Francis, A.; Nelles, L.; Kondoh,
H.; Huylebroeck, D.; Higashi, Y.: Mice lacking Zfhx1b, the gene that
codes for Smad-interacting protein-1, reveal a role for multiple neural
crest cell defects in the etiology of Hirschsprung disease-mental
retardation syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 72: 465-470, 2003.

21. Vandewalle, C.; Comijn, J.; De Craene, B.; Vermassen, P.; Bruyneel,
E.; Andersen, H.; Tulchinsky, E.; Van Roy, F.; Berx, G.: SIP1/ZEB2
induces EMT by repressing genes of different epithelial cell-cell
junctions. Nucleic Acids Res. 33: 6566-6578, 2005.

22. Verschueren, K.; Remacle, J. E.; Collart, C.; Kraft, H.; Baker,
B. S.; Tylzanowski, P.; Nelles, L.; Wuytens, G.; Su, M.-T.; Bodmer,
R.; Smith, J. C.; Huylebroeck, D.: SIP1, a novel zinc finger/homeodomain
repressor, interacts with Smad proteins and binds to 5-prime-CACCT
sequences in candidate target genes. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 20489-20498,
1999.

23. Verstappen, G.; van Grunsven, L. A.; Michiels, C.; Van de Putte,
T.; Souopgui, J.; Van Damme, J.; Bellefroid, E.; Vandekerckhove, J.;
Huylebroeck, D.: Atypical Mowat-Wilson patient confirms the importance
of the novel association between ZFHX1B/SIP1 and NuRD corepressor
complex. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17: 1175-1183, 2008.

24. Wakamatsu, N.; Yamada, Y.; Yamada, K.; Ono, T.; Nomura, N.; Taniguchi,
H.; Kitoh, H.; Mutoh, N.; Yamanaka, T.; Mushiake, K.; Kato, K.; Sonta,
S.; Nagaya, M.: Mutations in SIP1, encoding Smad interacting protein-1,
cause a form of Hirschsprung disease. Nature Genet. 27: 369-370,
2001.

25. Yamada, K.; Yamada, Y.; Nomura, N.; Miura, K.; Wakako, R.; Hayakawa,
C.; Matsumoto, A.; Kumagai, T.; Yoshimura, I.; Miyazaki, S.; Kato,
K.; Sonta, S.; Ono, H.; Yamanaka, T.; Nagaya, M.; Wakamatsu, N.:
Nonsense and frameshift mutations in ZFHX1B, encoding Smad-interacting
protein 1, cause a complex developmental disorder with a great variety
of clinical features. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 69: 1178-1185, 2001.

26. Yoneda, M.; Fujita, T.; Yamada, Y.; Yamada, K.; Fujii, A.; Inagaki,
T.; Nakagawa, H.; Shimada, A.; Kishikawa, M.; Nagaya, M.; Azuma, T.;
Kuriyama, M.; Wakamatsu, N.: Late infantile Hirschsprung disease-mental
retardation syndrome with a 3-bp deletion in ZFHX1B. Neurology 59:
1637-1640, 2002.

27. Zweier, C.; Albrecht, B.; Mitulla, B.; Behrens, R.; Beese, M.;
Gillessen-Kaesbach, G.; Rott, H.-D.; Rauch, A.: 'Mowat-Wilson' syndrome
with and without Hirschsprung disease is a distinct, recognizable
multiple congenital anomalies-mental retardation syndrome caused by
mutations in the zinc finger homeo box 1B gene. Am. J. Med. Genet. 108:
177-181, 2002.

28. Zweier, C.; Horn, D.; Kraus, C.; Rauch, A.: Atypical ZFHX1B mutation
associated with a mild Mowat-Wilson syndrome phenotype. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 140A: 869-872, 2006.

29. Zweier, C.; Temple, I. K.; Beemer, F.; Zackai, E.; Lerman-Sagie,
T.; Weschke, B.; Anderson, C. E.; Rauch, A.: Characterisation of
deletions of the ZFHX1B region and genotype-phenotype analysis in
Mowat-Wilson syndrome. J. Med. Genet. 40: 601-605, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/24/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/21/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/18/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/8/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/29/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/30/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/29/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/29/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/18/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/11/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/11/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/3/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/24/2004
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/11/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/1/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/27/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/22/2003
Deborah L. Stone - updated: 4/25/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/12/2001

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 3/29/2001

EDITED carol: 09/13/2013
carol: 7/24/2013
ckniffin: 7/24/2013
mgross: 5/22/2013
alopez: 11/26/2012
terry: 4/26/2011
wwang: 3/25/2011
ckniffin: 3/21/2011
mgross: 3/22/2010
terry: 3/18/2010
mgross: 1/25/2010
terry: 12/8/2009
wwang: 12/2/2009
ckniffin: 10/29/2009
wwang: 11/24/2008
joanna: 8/27/2008
mgross: 5/30/2008
mgross: 4/29/2008
wwang: 6/11/2007
ckniffin: 5/29/2007
mgross: 4/18/2007
wwang: 10/13/2006
terry: 10/11/2006
wwang: 8/29/2006
wwang: 8/17/2006
terry: 8/11/2006
wwang: 10/10/2005
terry: 10/3/2005
mgross: 3/9/2005
mgross: 11/24/2004
tkritzer: 6/25/2004
carol: 6/14/2004
terry: 6/11/2004
terry: 3/18/2004
tkritzer: 10/21/2003
tkritzer: 10/6/2003
tkritzer: 10/1/2003
tkritzer: 5/19/2003
tkritzer: 2/28/2003
terry: 2/27/2003
cwells: 1/29/2003
tkritzer: 1/22/2003
carol: 4/25/2002
terry: 4/25/2002
alopez: 1/11/2002
cwells: 1/10/2002
terry: 12/20/2001
cwells: 12/18/2001
cwells: 12/14/2001
cwells: 12/12/2001
mgross: 10/31/2001
alopez: 4/13/2001
alopez: 4/2/2001
alopez: 3/29/2001

300090	TITLE *300090 SIGNAL SEQUENCE RECEPTOR, DELTA; SSR4
;;TRANSLOCON-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN, DELTA SUBUNIT; TRAPD
DESCRIPTION Brenner et al. (1997) described 2 novel genes that are located in the
Xq28 region, are driven by a bidirectional promoter located between
them, and encode proteins involved in unrelated biochemical pathways
located in different compartments of the cell. Translocon-associated
protein (TRAP)-delta subunit is assumed to be involved in the secretion
of proteins. The highest concentration of TRAP-delta transcripts was
observed in pancreas, where large quantities of lipases, nucleases, and
proteases are synthesized and secreted. The second gene, IDH3G (300089),
encodes the gamma subunit of the NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate
dehydrogenase, which is involved in the energy metabolism of the cell.
Correspondingly, the highest expression levels are in tissues with
increased energy turnover, like heart, skeletal muscle, and brain. IDH3G
and TRAP-delta were found to be arranged in a compact head-to-head
manner. The nontranscribed intergenic region represents only 133 bp and
is embedded in a CpG island. Brenner et al. (1997) concluded that the
CpG island functions as a bidirectional promoter to initiate the
transcription of both functionally unrelated genes with quite distinct
expression patterns. The authors showed that in rat and mouse this area
is similarly compact, representing less than 249 bp in rat and not more
than 164 bp in mouse. In both species, this intergenic region is
embedded in a CpG island and is highly conserved, with nucleotide
identity values ranging from 70.1% between human and rat to 92.6%
between mouse and rat.

REFERENCE 1. Brenner, V.; Nyakatura, G.; Rosenthal, A.; Platzer, M.: Genomic
organization of two novel genes on human Xq28: compact head to head
arrangement of IDH-gamma and TRAP-delta is conserved in rat and mouse. Genomics 44:
8-14, 1997.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/26/1997

EDITED mark: 11/04/1997
mark: 9/26/1997

601988	TITLE *601988 LIM DOMAIN KINASE 2; LIMK2
DESCRIPTION Okano et al. (1995) isolated a human cDNA encoding LIMK2, a second
member of the LIMK family, with a domain structure similar to LIMK1
(601329) and 50% overall amino acid identity with LIMK1. They also
identified 2 alternative transcripts, LIMK2a and LIMK2b, which are
probably due to variation in transcriptional initiation. The 3.7-kb
LIMK2 mRNA was detected in all tissues tested, with the highest level in
placenta and a moderate level in liver, lung, kidney, and pancreas,
whereas the 1.6-kb mRNA was detected only in skeletal muscle and heart.
The 3.7-kb transcript was detected in lung, stomach, and renal cancer
cell lines. Osada et al. (1996) found that LIMK2a transcripts were more
abundant than LIMK2b in liver, colon, stomach, and spleen, while in
brain, kidney, and placenta LIMK2b transcripts were the dominant form.
The former encodes a protein containing 2 LIM domains, a PDZ domain, and
a kinase domain, while the latter has only 1.5 LIM domains. (The LIM
domain is thought to be involved in protein-protein interactions; the
PDZ domain was originally recognized in a family of proteins related to
the Drosophila lethal discs-large tumor suppressor gene product Dlga
(see 601014) and was shown to function in protein-protein interactions
targeting the protein to the submembranous compartment.) Transfection
studies have shown an association of 63-kD and 58-kD proteins with the
LIMK2a and LIMK2b proteins. The former is distributed in the cytoplasm
and nucleus and the latter occurs mainly in the cytoplasm. A truncated
LIMK2-kinase has a nuclear location, not showing the protein
association. Okano et al. (1995) demonstrated the
serine/threonine-specific kinase activity of LIMK1 and LIMK2 by in vitro
analysis.

Maekawa et al. (1999) demonstrated that LIM kinase is phosphorylated and
activated by ROCK (601702), a downstream effector of Rho, and that LIM
kinase, in turn, phosphorylates cofilin (601442), inhibiting its
actin-depolymerizing activity. They concluded that this pathway
contributes to Rho-induced reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton.

REFERENCE 1. Maekawa, M.; Ishizaki, T.; Boku, S.; Watanabe, N.; Fujita, A.;
Iwamatsu, A.; Obinata, T.; Ohashi, K.; Mizuno, K.; Narumiya, S.:
Signaling from Rho to the actin cytoskeleton through protein kinases
ROCK and LIM-kinase. Science 285: 895-898, 1999.

2. Okano, I.; Hiraoka, J.; Otera, H.; Nunoue, K.; Ohashi, K.; Iwashita,
S.; Hirai, M.; Mizuno, K.: Identification and characterization of
a novel family of serine/threonine kinases containing two N-terminal
LIM motifs. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 31321-31330, 1995.

3. Osada, H.; Hasada, K.; Inazawa, J.; Uchida, K.; Ueda, R.; Takahashi,
T.; Takahashi, T.: Subcellular localization and protein interaction
of the human LIMK2 gene expressing alternative transcripts with tissue-specific
regulation. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 229: 582-589, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 08/05/1999

CREATED Ethylin Wang Jabs: 9/11/1997

EDITED alopez: 08/05/1999
terry: 9/11/1997

606969	TITLE *606969 GEM-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 4; GEMIN4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

GEMIN4 is part of a high molecular mass multiprotein complex that also
contains SMN (600354), GEMIN2 (SIP1; 602595) and GEMIN3 (DDX20; 606168).
In the cytoplasm, this complex is associated with small nuclear
ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs).

CLONING

Charroux et al. (2000) identified GEMIN4 as a 97-kD protein that
copurified in a complex with SMN. Sequence analysis of the digested
protein led to identification of an EST clone which was used to screen a
human leukemia cDNA library. The GEMIN4 cDNA encodes a deduced
1,058-amino acid protein with a calculated molecular mass of about 120
kD. Immunofluorescence microscopy of HeLa cells revealed intense
staining of discrete bodies in the nucleus and staining of nucleoli.
Charroux et al. (2000) determined that the nuclear structures were gems
and not coiled bodies.

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunoprecipitation of in vitro translated proteins and HeLa cell
extracts, Charroux et al. (2000) isolated GEMIN4 in a complex with
spliceosomal snRNPs together with SMN, GEMIN2, and GEMIN3. By in vitro
protein-binding assays with recombinant proteins, they confirmed direct
interaction between GEMIN3 and GEMIN4. No direct interaction was found
between GEMIN4 and SMN. GEMIN4 also associated with U1 and U5 snRNAs in
the cytoplasm of Xenopus oocytes, but not after these snRNAs had been
assembled into snRNPs and imported into the nucleus.

Mourelatos et al. (2002) reported that, in addition to the SMN complex,
GEMIN3 and GEMIN4 are in a separate complex that contains EIF2C2
(606229), a member of the argonaute protein family. This novel complex
is a large, approximately 15S RNP that contains numerous microRNAs, a
class of small endogenous RNAs.

REFERENCE 1. Charroux, B.; Pellizzoni, L.; Perkinson, R. A.; Yong, J.; Shevchenko,
A.; Mann, M.; Dreyfuss, G.: Gemin4: a novel component of the SMN
complex that is found in both gems and nucleoli. J. Cell Biol. 148:
1177-1186, 2000.

2. Mourelatos, Z.; Dostie, J.; Paushkin, S.; Sharma, A.; Charroux,
B.; Abel, L.; Rappsilber, J.; Mann, M.; Dreyfuss, G.: miRNPs: a novel
class of ribonucleoproteins containing numerous microRNAs. Genes
Dev. 16: 720-728, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2003

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/23/2002

EDITED mgross: 07/14/2003
terry: 7/8/2003
carol: 5/23/2002

612308	TITLE *612308 ZINC FINGER AND BTB DOMAIN-CONTAINING 4; ZBTB4
;;KIAA1538
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned ZBTB4, which they designated
KIAA1538. RT-PCR ELISA detected moderate to high expression in all adult
and fetal tissues examined. Highest expression was detected in adult
heart, brain, ovary, and spinal cord, in fetal brain, and in all
specific adult brain regions examined.

By searching the human genome for sequences encoding KAISO (300329)-like
triple zinc finger domains, Filion et al. (2006) identified ZBTB4 and
ZBTB38 (612218). The deduced 1,013-amino acid ZBTB4 protein contains an
N-terminal BTB/PPZ domain followed by 4 zinc fingers, a proline-rich
domain, a glutamate-rich domain, 2 additional zinc fingers, and an
additional C-terminal proline-rich region. The BTB/POZ domain of ZBTB4
is interrupted by a 60-amino acid stretch, and the N-terminal zinc
finger region of ZBTB4 contains the KAISO-like triple zinc finger
domain. Northern blot analysis detected Zbtb4 in all mouse tissues
examined, with highest expression in brain, lung, kidney, muscle, and
heart. In situ hybridization of mouse brain detected Zbtb4 mainly in
neurons. Expression was highest in hippocampus, in structures involved
in olfaction, in arcuate nuclei, in motor nuclei of the brainstem, and
in granular layer of the cerebellum. Upon transfection into mouse
fibroblasts, ZBTB4 and ZBTB38 localized to chromocenters, which are
heavily methylated chromosome aggregates found in mouse, but not human,
cells; however, their positions did not completely overlap. Both
proteins had a more diffuse nuclear localization in mouse cells impaired
in DNA methylation.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a gel retardation assay, Filion et al. (2006) showed that the
isolated zinc finger domains of KAISO, ZBTB4, and ZBTB38 bound
methylated CpGs, and that all 3 proteins repressed the expression of a
methylated reporter gene. ZBTB4 lacking the KAISO-like zinc fingers was
inactive. ZBTB4, but not ZBTB38, also bound the KAISO-binding sequence
TCCTGCNA. Filion et al. (2006) also showed that the zinc finger domains
of ZBTB4 and ZBTB38 homo- and heterodimerize.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the ZBTB4 gene
to chromosome 17.

REFERENCE 1. Filion, G. J. P.; Zhenilo, S.; Salozhin, S.; Yamada, D.; Prokhortchouk,
E.; Defossez, P.-A.: A family of human zinc finger proteins that
bind methylated DNA and repress transcription. Molec. Cell. Biol. 26:
169-181, 2006.

2. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 143-150, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/19/2008

EDITED alopez: 09/19/2008

180660	TITLE *180660 POLYMERASE II, RNA, SUBUNIT A; POLR2A
;;RPB1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;;
RNA POLYMERASE II, 220-KD SUBUNIT;;
RNA POLYMERASE II, LARGE SUBUNIT; RPO2; RPOL2; POLR2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DNA-dependent RNA polymerase II (EC 2.7.7.6), a complex multisubunit
enzyme, is responsible for the transcription of protein-coding genes. It
is composed of 10 to 14 subunits ranging in size from 220 to 10 kD.
POLR2A encodes the 220-kD subunit. RNA polymerase II interacts with the
promoter regions of genes as well as with a variety of elements and
transcription factors to determine essentially all of the parameters
that govern transcription, e.g., tissue and development specificity,
stress response, etc.

Dynamic phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of 3 serines within a
heptapeptide sequence repeated 52 times in the POLR2A C-terminal domain
(CTD) and other CTD modifications specify recruitment of proteins that
regulate various transcription-related events (Ni et al., 2011).

CLONING

Cho et al. (1985) isolated genomic sequences for the large subunit of
human RNA polymerase II (pol II). Sequences homologous to Drosophila pol
II large subunit sequences were present in single copy.

Wintzerith et al. (1992) cloned and sequenced the complete human gene
for POLR2A and symbolized it RPBh1. The deduced 1,970-amino acid protein
contains 10 conserved domains, designated A through J, a putative
C2H2-type zinc-binding element, and a C-terminal domain (CTD) containing
52 copies of a heptapeptide repeat.

Mita et al. (1995) also cloned and sequenced the human POLR2A gene and
referred to it as RpIILS. The deduced amino acid sequence was identical
to that reported by Wintzerith et al. (1992). The sequence of the
5-prime flanking region is approximately 84% identical to the mouse gene
(vs 90% for the coding regions).

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Cramer et al. (2000) derived a backbone model of a 10-subunit yeast RNA
polymerase II using x-ray diffraction data extending to 3-angstrom
resolution. All 10 subunits exhibited a high degree of identity with the
corresponding human proteins, and 9 of the 10 subunits are conserved
among the 3 eukaryotic RNA polymerases I, II, and III. Notable features
of the model include a pair of jaws, formed by subunits Rpb1, Rpb5
(180664), and Rpb9 (180662), that appear to grip DNA downstream of the
active center. A clamp on the DNA nearer the active center, formed by
Rpb1, Rpb2 (180661), and Rpb6 (604414), may be locked in the closed
position by RNA, accounting for the great stability of transcribing
complexes. A pore in the protein complex beneath the active center may
allow entry of substrates for polymerization and exit of the transcript
during proofreading and passage through pause sites in the DNA.

Cramer et al. (2001) determined the structure of a 10-subunit yeast RNA
polymerase II (lacking 2 small subunits dispensable for transcription)
derived from 2 crystal forms at 2.8- and 3.1-angstrom resolution.
Comparison of the structures reveals a division of the polymerase into 4
mobile modules, including a clamp, shown previously to swing over the
active center. In the 2.8-angstrom structure, the clamp is in an open
state, allowing entry of straight promoter DNA for the initiation of
transcription. Gnatt et al. (2001) determined the crystal structure of
RNA polymerase II in the act of transcription at 3.3-angstrom
resolution. They observed duplex DNA entering the main cleft of the
enzyme and unwinding before the active site. Nine basepairs of DNA-RNA
hybrid extend from the active center at nearly right angles to the
entering DNA, with the 3-prime end of the RNA in the nucleotide addition
site. Protein-nucleic acid contacts help explain DNA and RNA strand
separation, the specificity of RNA synthesis, 'abortive cycling' during
transcription initiation, and RNA and DNA translocation during
transcription elongation.

Bushnell et al. (2004) reported the crystal structure of RNA polymerase
II with general transcription factor IIB (TFIIB; 189963) at 4.5-angstrom
resolution. The structure reveals 3 features crucial for transcription
initiation: an N-terminal zinc ribbon domain of TFIIB that contacts the
dock domain of the polymerase, near the path of RNA exit from a
transcribing enzyme; a 'finger' domain of TFIIB that is inserted into
the polymerase active center; and a C-terminal domain, whose interaction
with both the polymerase and with a TATA box-binding protein-promoter
DNA complex orients the DNA for unwinding and transcription. TFIIB
stabilizes an early initiation complex, containing an incomplete RNA-DNA
hybrid region. It may interact with the template strand, which sets the
location of the transcription start site, and may interfere with RNA
exit, which leads to abortive initiation or promoter escape. Westover et
al. (2004) determined the structure of an RNA polymerase II-transcribing
complex in the posttranslocation state, with a vacancy at the growing
end of the RNA-DNA hybrid helix. At the opposite end of the hybrid
helix, the RNA separates from the template DNA. This separation of
nucleic acid strands is brought about by interaction with a set of
protein loops in a strand/loop network. Westover et al. (2004) concluded
that formation of the network must occur in the transition from abortive
initiation to promoter escape.

Meinhart and Cramer (2004) described the structure of a
ser2-phosphorylated C-terminal domain peptide of RNA polymerase II bound
to the C-terminal domain-interacting domain of PCF11 (608876). The
C-terminal domain motif of ser2-pro3-thr4-ser5 forms a beta turn that
binds to a conserved groove in the C-terminal domain-interacting domain
of PCF11. The ser2 phosphate group does not make direct contact with
PCF11, but may be recognized indirectly because it stabilizes the beta
turn with an additional hydrogen bond. Iteration of the peptide
structure results in a compact beta spiral model of the C-terminal
domain. Meinhart and Cramer (2004) suggested that during the mRNA
transcription processing cycle, compact spiral regions in the C-terminal
domain are unraveled and regenerated in a phosphorylation-dependent
manner.

Wang et al. (2009) reported the crystal structure of RNA polymerase II
in the third state, the reverse translocated or 'backtracked' state. The
defining feature of the backtracked structure is a binding site for the
first backtracked nucleotide. This binding site is occupied in case of
nucleotide misincorporation in the RNA or damage to the DNA, and is
termed the 'P' site because it supports proofreading. The predominant
mechanism of proofreading is the excision of a dinucleotide in the
presence of the elongation factor SII (TFIIS; see 604784). Structure
determination of a cocrystal with TFIIS revealed a rearrangement whereby
cleavage of the RNA may take place.

Kostrewa et al. (2009) presented the crystal structure of the complete
Pol II-B complex at 4.3-angstrom resolution, and complementary
functional data. The results indicated the mechanism of transcription
initiation, including the transition to RNA elongation. Promoter DNA is
positioned over the Pol II active center cleft with the 'B-core' domain
that binds the wall at the end of the cleft. DNA is then opened with the
help of the B-linker that binds the Pol II rudder and clamp coiled-coil
at the edge of the cleft. The DNA template strand slips into the cleft
and is scanned for the transcription start site with the help of the
B-reader that approaches the active site. Synthesis of the RNA chain and
rewinding of upstream DNA displace the B-reader and the B-linker,
respectively, to trigger B release and elongation complex formation.

Liu et al. (2010) developed a crystal structure of the RNA polymerase
II-TFIIB complex at 3.8-angstrom resolution obtained under different
solution conditions from the structure obtained by Bushnell et al.
(2004) and complementary with it. The crystal structure revealed the
carboxy-terminal region of TFIIB, located above the polymerase active
center cleft, but showing none of the B finger. In the new structure,
the linker between the amino- and carboxyl-terminal regions can also be
seen, snaking down from above the cleft toward the active center.

- Quantitative Mass Spectrometry

One of the primary goals of proteomics is the description of the
composition, dynamics, and connections of the multiprotein modules that
catalyze a wide range of biologic functions in cells (Hartwell et al.,
1999). The yeast 2-hybrid (Y2H) method is designed to detect binary
interactions between proteins in the nucleus of a yeast cell. A
limitation of this technique is that it does not detect protein-protein
interactions in the context of their physiologic environment. Another
approach for the analysis of protein complexes involves the use of
affinity chromatography for isolation or enrichment of complexes,
followed by mass spectrometric identification of the constituent
proteins. Ranish et al. (2003) described a generic strategy for
determining the specific composition, changes in composition, and
changes in abundance of protein complexes. It was based on the use of
isotope-coded affinity tag (ICAT) reagents and mass spectrometry to
compare the relative abundances of tryptic peptides derived from
suitable pairs of purified or partially purified protein complexes. In a
first application, the genuine protein components of a large RNA
polymerase II (Pol II) preinitiation complex (PIC) were distinguished
from a background of copurifying proteins by comparing the relative
abundances of peptides derived from a control sample and the specific
complex that was purified from nuclear extracts by a single-step
promoter DNA affinity procedure. This was the first time that a fully
assembled RNA Pol II PIC had been comprehensively analyzed. The
quantitative mass spectrometry technique provided for the first time a
detailed description of the partially purified core Pol II complex and
led to the detection of potential new components of this extensively
studied complex.

Lehmann et al. (2007) showed the intrinsic RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
(RdRP) activity of Pol II with only pure polymerase, an RNA
template-product scaffold, and nucleoside triphosphates (NTPs).
Crystallography revealed the template-product duplex in the site
occupied by the DNA-RNA hybrid during transcription. RdRP activity
resided at the active site used during transcription, but it was slower
and less processive than DNA-dependent activity. RdRP activity was also
obtained with part of the hepatitis delta virus (HDV) antigenome. The
complex of transcription factor IIS (604784) with Pol II could cleave
one HDV strand, create a reactive stem loop in the hybrid site, and
extend the new RNA 3-prime end. Short RNA stem loops with a 5-prime
extension sufficed for activity, but their growth to a critical length
appeared to impair processivity. Lehmann et al. (2007) concluded that
the RdRP activity of Pol II provides a missing link in molecular
evolution, because it suggests that Pol II evolved from an ancient
replicase that duplicated RNA genomes.

GENE FUNCTION

Kornberg and Lorch (1991) discussed the mechanism by which genes become
accessible for transcription, particularly the final stages of the
process in which activator proteins and the transcription machinery
confront the nucleosome and also specifically in relation to
transcription by RNA pol II.

Buratowski (1994) reviewed 'the basics of basal transcription by RNA
polymerase II.' For this enzyme to transcribe a gene, the authors
commented that an array of over 20 proteins must be assembled at its
promoter. Buratowski (1994) reviewed progress in identifying and
purifying these transcription factors, as well as cloning the genes that
encode them.

Damage to actively transcribed DNA is preferentially repaired by the
transcription-coupled repair (TCR) system. TCR requires RNA pol II, but
the mechanism by which repair enzymes preferentially recognize and
repair DNA lesions on PolB II-transcribed genes is incompletely
understood. Bregman et al. (1996) demonstrated that a fraction of the
large subunit of Pol II (PolIILS) is ubiquitinated after exposing cells
to UV radiation or cisplatin, but not to several other DNA-damaging
agents. This novel covalent modification of PolIILS occurs within 15
minutes of exposing cells to UV-radiation and persists for about 8 to 12
hours. Ubiquitinated PolIILS is also phosphorylated on the C-terminal
domain. UV-induced ubiquitination of PolIILS is deficient in fibroblasts
from persons with either Cockayne syndrome type A (CS-A; 216400) or type
B (CS-B; see 133540). In both of these disorders transcription-coupled
repair is disrupted. UV-induced ubiquitination of PolIILS can be
restored by introducing cDNA constructs encoding the CSA or CSB genes,
respectively, into CS-A or CS-B fibroblasts. These results suggested
that ubiquitination of PolIILS plays a role in the recognition and/or
repair of damage to actively transcribed genes. Alternatively, these
findings may reflect a role played by the CSA and CSB gene products in
transcription, a possibility that had been suggested on other grounds.

The monoclonal antibody CC-3 recognizes a phosphodependent epitope on a
255-kD nuclear matrix protein (p255) shown to associate with spliceosome
complexes. Vincent et al. (1996) showed that p255 represents a highly
phosphorylated form of Pol II large subunit (IIo) that physically
associates with spliceosomes. They suggested that IIo is involved in
coupling transcription with RNA processing.

High levels of gene transcription by RNA polymerase II depend on high
rates of transcription initiation and reinitiation. Initiation requires
recruitment of the complete transcription machinery to a promoter, a
process facilitated by activators and chromatin remodeling factors.
Reinitiation is thought to occur through a different pathway. After
initiation, a subset of the transcription machinery remains at the
promoter, forming a platform for assembly of a second transcription
complex. Yudkovsky et al. (2000) described the isolation of a
reinitiation intermediate in yeast that includes transcription factors
TFIID (see 313650), TFIIA (see 600520), TFIIH (see 189972), TFIIE (see
189962), and Mediator (see 602984). This intermediate can act as a
scaffold for formation of a functional reinitiation complex. Formation
of this scaffold is dependent on ATP and TFIIH. In yeast, the scaffold
is stabilized in the presence of the activator Gal4-VP16, but not
Gal4-AH, suggesting a new role for some activators and Mediator in
promoting high levels of transcription.

In a yeast 2-hybrid screen to identify proteins that interact with the
phosphorylated C-terminal domain (CTD) of POLR2A, Bourquin et al. (1997)
identified PPIG (606093). Using GST fusion proteins, they demonstrated
direct interaction between PPIG and the CTD of POLR2A.

Dye and Proudfoot (2001) performed in vivo analysis of transcriptional
termination for the human beta-globin gene (141900) and demonstrated
cotranscriptional cleavage (CoTC). This primary cleavage event within
beta-globin pre-mRNA, downstream of the poly(A) site, is critical for
efficient transcriptional termination by RNA pol II. Teixeira et al.
(2004) showed that the CoTC process in the human beta-globin gene
involves an RNA self-cleaving activity. They characterized the
autocatalytic core of the CoTC ribozyme and showed its functional role
in efficient termination in vivo. The identified core CoTC is highly
conserved in the 3-prime flanking regions of other primate beta-globin
genes. Functionally, it resembles the 3-prime processive, self-cleaving
ribozymes described for the protein-encoding genes from the myxomycetes
Didymium iridis and Physarum polycephalum, indicating evolutionary
conservation of this molecular process. Teixeira et al. (2004) predicted
that regulated autocatalytic cleavage elements within pre-mRNAs may be a
general phenomenon and that functionally it may provide an entry point
for exonucleases involved in mRNA maturation, turnover, and, in
particular, transcriptional termination.

Using a variety of RNA-binding assays, Kaneko and Manley (2005) showed
that the CTD of mammalian POLR2A interacted with RNA in a
sequence-specific manner in vitro and in vivo. The CTD-binding consensus
sequence downstream of a polyadenylation signal suppressed mRNA 3-prime
end formation and transcription termination. In vitro assays indicated
that the inhibition of processing is CTD dependent.

In yeast, the Paf1 complex interacts with DNA polymerase II and is
involved in multiple aspects of histone methylation. By
immunoprecipitation, Rozenblatt-Rosen et al. (2005) determined the
components of the human PAF1 complex (see 610506). The immunoprecipitate
also contained POLR2A that was unphosphorylated, phosphorylated on ser5,
or phosphorylated on ser2, suggesting that the PAF1 complex may be
involved in both initiation and elongation.

Cells use transcription-coupled repair to efficiently eliminate DNA
lesions such as ultraviolet light-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers
(CPDs). Brueckner et al. (2007) presented the structure-based mechanism
for the first step in eukaryotic transcription-coupled repair,
CPD-induced stalling of RNA polymerase (Pol) II. A CPD in the
transcribed strand slowly passes a translocation barrier and enters the
polymerase active site. The CPD 5-prime thymine then directs uridine
misincorporation into mRNA, which blocks translocation. Artificial
replacement of the uridine by adenosine enables CPD bypass; thus, Pol II
stalling requires CPD-directed misincorporation. In the stalled complex,
the lesion is inaccessible, and the polymerase conformation is
unchanged. Brueckner et al. (2007) concluded that this is consistent
with nonallosteric recruitment of repair factors and excision of a
lesion-containing DNA fragment in the presence of Pol II.

The carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of the large subunit of mammalian
polymerase II consists of 52 repeats of a consensus heptapeptide
tyr-ser-pro-thr-ser-pro-ser. Differential phosphorylation of ser2 and
ser5 at the 5-prime and 3-prime regions of genes appears to coordinate
the localization of transcription and RNA processing factors to the
elongating polymerase complex (Chapman et al., 2007). Egloff et al.
(2007) showed that mutation of ser7 to ala causes a specific defect in
snRNA gene expression. They also presented evidence that phosphorylation
of ser7 facilitates interaction with the snRNA gene-specific integrator
complex. Egloff et al. (2007) concluded that their findings assigned a
biologic function to this amino acid and highlighted a gene
type-specific requirement for a residue within the CTD heptapeptide,
supporting the existence of a CTD code.

Using monoclonal antibodies, Chapman et al. (2007) revealed ser7
phosphorylation of RNA polymerase-2 on transcribed genes. This position
did not appear to be phosphorylated in CTDs of less than 20 consensus
repeats. The position of repeats where ser7 was substituted influenced
the appearance of distinct phosphorylated forms, suggesting functional
differences between CTDs. Chapman et al. (2007) concluded that
restriction of ser7 epitopes to the linker-proximal regions limits CTD
phosphorylation patterns and is a requirement for optimal gene
expression.

To study nutritional control of C. elegans in larval development, Baugh
et al. (2009) analyzed growth and gene expression profiles during L1
arrest and recovery. Larvae that were fed responded relatively slowly to
starvation compared with the rapid response of arrested larvae to
feeding. Chromatin immunoprecipitation of RNA polymerase II followed by
deep sequencing showed that during L1 arrest, Pol II continued
transcribing starvation-response genes, but the enzyme accumulated on
the promoters of growth and development genes. In response to feeding,
promoter accumulation decreased, and elongation and mRNA levels
increased. Therefore, Baugh et al. (2009) concluded that accumulation of
Pol II at promoters anticipates nutritionally-controlled gene expression
during C. elegans development.

Natalizio et al. (2009) noted that the CTD of POLR2A is not present in
homologous subunits of RNA polymerases I and III. They found that fusing
the CTD of POLR2A to POLR3A (614258) did not enhance the
cotranscriptional pre-mRNA splicing or capping activity of POLR3A in
transfected cells. Furthermore, fusing the CTD of POLR2A to the
bacteriophage T7 RNA did not enhance pre-mRNA splicing or capping in
vitro or in vivo. Natalizio et al. (2009) proposed that efficient
coupling of transcription to pre-mRNA processing requires not only the
phosphorylated CTD of POLR2A but also other RNA polymerase II-specific
subunits or associated factors.

Kasowski et al. (2010) examined genomewide differences in transcription
factor binding in several humans and a single chimpanzee by using
chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing. They mapped the
binding sites of RNA polymerase II and NF-kappa-B (see 164011) in 10
lymphoblastoid cell lines and found that 25% and 7.5% of the respective
binding regions differed between individuals. Binding differences were
frequently associated with SNPs and genomic structural variants, and
these differences were often correlated with differences in gene
expression, suggesting functional consequences of binding variation.
Furthermore, the results of comparing PolII binding between humans and
chimpanzee suggested extensive divergence in transcription factor
binding.

The carboxy-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II in mammals undergoes
extensive posttranslational modification, which is essential for
transcriptional initiation and elongation. Sims et al. (2011) showed
that the carboxy-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II is methylated at a
single arginine (R1810) by the coactivator-associated arginine
methyltransferase-1 (CARM1; 603934). Although methylation at R1810 is
present on the hyperphosphorylated form of RNA polymerase II in vivo,
ser2 or ser5 phosphorylation inhibits CARM1 activity toward this site in
vitro, suggesting that methylation occurs before transcription
initiation. Mutation of R1810 results in the misexpression of a variety
of small nuclear RNAs and small nucleolar RNAs, an effect that is also
observed in Carm1 -/- mouse embryo fibroblasts. Sims et al. (2011)
concluded that carboxy-terminal domain methylation facilitates the
expression of select RNAs, perhaps serving to discriminate the RNA
polymerase II-associated machinery recruited to distinct gene types.

The RNA polymerase II largest subunit contains a CTD with up to 52
Tyr(1)-Ser(2)-Pro(3)-Thr(4)-Ser(5)-Pro(6)-Ser(7) consensus repeats.
Serines 2, 5, and 7 are known to be phosphorylated, and these
modifications help to orchestrate the interplay between transcription
and processing of mRNA precursors. Hsin et al. (2011) provided evidence
that phosphorylation of CTD Thr(4) residues is required specifically for
histone mRNA 3-prime end processing, functioning to facilitate
recruitment of 3-prime processing factors to histone genes. Like Ser(2),
Thr(4) phosphorylation requires the CTD kinase CDK9 (603251) and is
evolutionarily conserved from yeast to human. Hsin et al. (2011)
concluded that their data illustrate how a CTD modification can play a
highly specific role in facilitating efficient gene expression.

Using affinity chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry with HEK293
cells to isolate RNA polymerase II-interacting proteins, Ni et al.
(2011) identified RPRD1A (610347), RPRD1B (614694), and RPRD2 (614695),
in addition to RECQL5 (603781), GRINL1A (606485), and the putative RNA
polymerase II phosphatase RPAP2 (611476). RPRD1A and RPRD1B accompanied
RNA polymerase II from promoter regions to 3-prime UTRs during
transcription in vivo. RPRD1A and RPRD1B coprecipitated with the
C-terminal domain of POLR2A when it was serine phosphorylated, but not
when it was unphosphorylated. Overexpression of RPRD1A or RPRD1B reduced
the amount of serine-phosphorylated POLR2A associated with a target
gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mita et al. (1995) determined that the POLR2A gene contains 29 exons and
spans about 32 kb of DNA. Intron size varies considerably between
species, largely as a consequence of Alu and B1 insertions in the human
and mouse genes, respectively. The 5-prime flanking region of POL2RA
contains several binding sites for the transcription factor Sp1
(189906), a CCAAT sequence, and a sequence homologous to a heat-shock
element.

MAPPING

Cannizzaro et al. (1986) assigned the human gene to the distal portion
of the short arm of chromosome 17 (17pter-p12) by in situ hybridization
and Southern analysis of DNA from somatic cell hybrids.

Pravtcheva et al. (1986) mapped the gene encoding the largest subunit of
RNA pol II to mouse chromosome 11 by Southern blot analysis of
mouse-Chinese hamster somatic cell hybrids and by in situ hybridization.
This is another example of the homology of mouse chromosome 11 and human
chromosome 17. Somatic cell hybrid studies by vanTuinen and Ledbetter
(1987) narrowed the assignment to 17p13.105-p12. Using in situ
hybridization, Acker et al. (1994) likewise mapped the POLR2A gene to
17p13.

HISTORY

From a strain of fetal human lung diploid fibroblasts, Buchwald and
Ingles (1976) isolated clones resistant to the cytotoxic action of
alpha-amanitin. The resistant clones were recovered at a frequency of 5
x 10(-8) following mutagenesis with ethyl methanane sulfonate. The
clones retained the resistant phenotype after propagation in drug-free
medium. The amanitin sensitivity of RNA pol II purified from the mutant
cells suggested the presence of 2 forms of the enzyme, one similar to
that in wildtype cells and the second with increased resistance to
alpha-amanitin inhibition. Thus, alpha-amanitin resistance behaves as a
dominant. It is dominant in Chinese hamster and rat cells, also.
Amanitin is a bicyclic octapeptide produced by the mushroom Amanita
phaloides. In Drosophila, alpha-amanitin resistance mutations are
located in the genes for the large subunit of RNA pol II. The same is
presumably true for amanitin-resistance in human cells. Transfection
experiments referred to by Cannizzaro et al. (1986) supported this idea.
A relationship to homeotic genes (142960) and other genes on 17p was
raised, as well as a possible etiologic role of mutation in RPOL2 in the
Miller-Dieker syndrome (247200). Drosophila mutants of RNA pol II show
developmental abnormalities.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Shander et al. (1982); vanTuinen et al. (1988)
REFERENCE 1. Acker, J.; Mattei, M.-G.; Wintzerith, M.; Roeckel, N.; Depetris,
D.; Vigneron, M.; Kedinger, C.: Chromosomal localization of human
RNA polymerase II subunit genes. Genomics 20: 496-499, 1994.

2. Baugh, L. R.; DeModena, J.; Sternberg, P. W.: RNA Pol II accumulates
at promoters of growth genes during developmental arrest. Science 324:
92-95, 2009.

3. Bourquin, J.-P.; Stagljar, I.; Meier, P.; Moosmann, P.; Silke,
J.; Baechi, T.; Georgiev, O.; Schaffner, W.: A serine/arginine-rich
nuclear matrix cyclophilin interacts with the C-terminal domain of
RNA polymerase II. Nucleic Acids Res. 25: 2055-2061, 1997.

4. Bregman, D. B.; Halaban, R.; van Gool, A. J.; Henning, K. A.; Friedberg,
E. C.; Warren, S. L.: UV-induced ubiquitination of RNA polymerase
II: a novel modification deficient in Cockayne syndrome cells. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 11586-11590, 1996.

5. Brueckner, F.; Hennecke, U.; Carell, T.; Cramer, P.: CPD damage
recognition by transcribing RNA polymerase II. Science 315: 859-862,
2007.

6. Buchwald, M.; Ingles, C. J.: Human diploid fibroblast mutants
with altered RNA polymerase II. Somat. Cell Genet. 2: 225-233, 1976.

7. Buratowski, S.: The basics of basal transcription by RNA polymerase
II. Cell 77: 1-3, 1994.

8. Bushnell, D. A.; Westover, K. D.; Davis, R. E.; Kornberg, R. D.
: Structural basis of transcription: an RNA polymerase II-TFIIB cocrystal
at 4.5 angstroms. Science 303: 983-988, 2004.

9. Cannizzaro, L. A.; Emanuel, B. S.; Cho, K. W. Y.; Weinmann, R.
: The gene encoding the large subunit of human RNA polymerase II is
located on the short arm of chromosome 17. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 38:
812-818, 1986.

10. Chapman, R. D.; Heidemann, M.; Albert, T. K.; Mailhammer, R.;
Flatley, A.; Meisterernst, M.; Kremmer, E.; Eick, D.: Transcribing
RNA polymerase II is phosphorylated at CTD residue serine-7. Science 318:
1780-1782, 2007.

11. Cho, K. W. Y.; Khalili, K.; Zandomeni, R.; Weinmann, R.: The
gene encoding the large subunit of human RNA polymerase II. J. Biol.
Chem. 260: 15204-15210, 1985.

12. Cramer, P.; Bushnell, D. A.; Fu, J.; Gnatt, A. L.; Maier-Davis,
B.; Thompson, N. E.; Burgess, R. R.; Edwards, A. M.; David, P. R.;
Kornberg, R. D.: Architecture of RNA polymerase II and implications
for the transcription mechanism. Science 288: 640-648, 2000.

13. Cramer, P.; Bushnell, D. A.; Kornberg, R. D.: Structural basis
of transcription: RNA polymerase II at 2.8 angstrom resolution. Science 292:
1863-1876, 2001.

14. Dye, M. J.; Proudfoot, N. J.: Multiple transcript cleavage precedes
polymerase release in termination by RNA polymerase II. Cell 105:
669-681, 2001.

15. Egloff, S.; O'Reilly, D.; Chapman, R. D.; Taylor, A.; Tanzhaus,
K.; Pitts, L.; Eick, D.; Murphy, S.: Serine-7 of the RNA polymerase
II CTD is specifically required for snRNA gene expression. Science 318:
1777-1779, 2007.

16. Gnatt, A. L.; Cramer, P.; Fu, J.; Bushnell, D. A.; Kornberg, R.
D.: Structural basis of transcription: an RNA polymerase II elongation
complex at 3.3 angstrom resolution. Science 292: 1876-1882, 2001.

17. Hartwell, L. H.; Hopfield, J. J.; Leibler, S.; Murray, A. W.:
From molecular to modular cell biology. Nature 402: C47-C52, 1999.

18. Hsin, J.-P.; Sheth, A.; Manley, J. L.: RNAP II CTD phosphorylated
on threonine-4 is required for histone mRNA 3-prime end processing. Science 334:
683-686, 2011.

19. Kaneko, S.; Manley, J. L.: The mammalian RNA polymerase II C-terminal
domain interacts with RNA to suppress transcription-coupled 3-prime
end formation. Molec. Cell 20: 91-103, 2005.

20. Kasowski, M.; Grubert, F.; Heffelfinger, C.; Hariharan, M.; Asabere,
A.; Waszak, S. M.; Habegger, L.; Rozowsky, J.; Shi, M.; Urban, A.
E.; Hong, M.-Y.; Karczewski, K. J.; Huber, W.; Weissman, S. M.; Gerstein,
M. B.; Korbel, J. O.; Snyder, M.: Variation in transcription factor
binding among humans. Science 328: 232-235, 2010.

21. Kornberg, R. D.; Lorch, Y.: Irresistible force meets immovable
object: transcription and the nucleosome. Cell 67: 833-836, 1991.

22. Kostrewa, D.; Zeller, M. E.; Armache, K.-J.; Seizl, M.; Leike,
K.; Thomm, M.; Cramer, P.: RNA polymerase II-TFIIB structure and
mechanism of transcription initiation. Nature 462: 323-330, 2009.

23. Lehmann, E.; Brueckner, F.; Cramer, P.: Molecular basis of RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase II activity. Nature 450: 445-449, 2007.

24. Liu, X.; Bushnell, D. A.; Wang, D.; Calero, G.; Kornberg, R. D.
: Structure of an RNA polymerase II-TFIIB complex and the transcription
initiation mechanism. Science 327: 206-209, 2010.

25. Meinhart, A.; Cramer, P.: Recognition of RNA polymerase II carboxy-terminal
domain by 3-prime-RNA-processing factors. Nature 430: 223-226, 2004.

26. Mita, K.; Tsuji, H.; Morimyo, M.; Takahashi, E.; Nenoi, M.; Ichimura,
S.; Yamauchi, M.; Hongo, E.; Hayashi, A.: The human gene encoding
the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II. Gene 159: 285-286, 1995.

27. Natalizio, B. J.; Robson-Dixon, N. D.; Garcia-Blanco, M. A.:
The carboxyl-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II is not sufficient
to enhance the efficiency of pre-mRNA capping or splicing in the context
of a different polymerase. J. Biol. Chem. 284: 8692-8702, 2009.

28. Ni, Z.; Olsen, J. B.; Guo, X.; Zhong, G.; Ruan, E. D.; Marcon,
E.; Young, P.; Guo, H.; Li, J.; Moffat, J.; Emili, A.; Greenblatt,
J. F.: Control of the RNA polymerase II phosphorylation state in
promoter regions by CTD interaction domain-containing proteins RPRD1A
and RPRD1B. Transcription 2: 237-242, 2011.

29. Pravtcheva, D.; Rabin, M.; Bartolomei, M.; Corden, J.; Ruddle,
F. H.: Chromosomal assignment of gene encoding the largest subunit
of RNA polymerase II in the mouse. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 12:
523-528, 1986.

30. Ranish, J. A.; Yi, E. C.; Leslie, D. M.; Purvine, S. O.; Goodlett,
D. R.; Eng, J.; Aebersold, R.: The study of macromolecular complexes
by quantitative proteomics. Nature Genet. 33: 349-356, 2003.

31. Rozenblatt-Rosen, O.; Hughes, C. M.; Nannepaga, S. J.; Shanmugam,
K. S.; Copeland, T. D.; Guszczynski, T.; Resau, J. H.; Meyerson, M.
: The parafibromin tumor suppressor protein is part of a human Paf1
complex. Molec. Cell. Biol. 25: 612-620, 2005.

32. Shander, M. T. M.; Croce, C.; Weinmann, R.: Human mutant cell
lines with altered RNA polymerase II. J. Cell. Physiol. 113: 324-328,
1982.

33. Sims, R. J., III; Rojas, L. A.; Beck, D.; Bonasio, R.; Schuller,
R.; Drury, W. J., III; Eick, D.; Reinberg, D.: The C-terminal domain
of RNA polymerase II is modified by site-specific methylation. Science 332:
99-103, 2011.

34. Teixeira, A.; Tahiri-Alaoui, A.; West, S.; Thomas, B.; Ramadass,
A.; Martianov, I.; Dye, M.; James, W.; Proudfoot, N. J.; Akoulitchev,
A.: Autocatalytic RNA cleavage in the human beta-globin pre-mRNA
promotes transcription termination. Nature 432: 526-530, 2004.

35. vanTuinen, P.; Dobyns, W. B.; Rich, D. C.; Summers, K. M.; Robinson,
T. J.; Nakamura, Y.; Ledbetter, D. H.: Molecular detection of microscopic
and submicroscopic deletions associated with Miller-Dieker syndrome. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 43: 587-596, 1988.

36. vanTuinen, P.; Ledbetter, D. H.: Construction and utilization
of a detailed somatic cell hybrid mapping panel for human chromosome
17: localization of an anonymous clone to the critical region of Miller-Dieker
syndrome, deletion 17p13. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46:
708-709, 1987.

37. Vincent, M.; Lauriault, P.; Dubois, M.-F.; Lavoie, S.; Bensaude,
O.; Chabot, B.: The nuclear matrix protein p255 is a highly phosphorylated
form of RNA polymerase II largest subunit which associates with spliceosomes. Nucleic
Acids Res. 24: 4649-4652, 1996.

38. Wang, D.; Bushnell, D. A.; Huang, X.; Westover, K. D.; Levitt,
M.; Kornberg, R. D.: Structural basis of transcription: backtracked
RNA polymerase II at 3.4 angstrom resolution. Science 324: 1203-1206,
2009.

39. Westover, K. D.; Bushnell, D. A.; Kornberg, R. D.: Structural
basis of transcription: separation of RNA from DNA by RNA polymerase
II. Science 303: 1014-1016, 2004.

40. Wintzerith, M.; Acker, J.; Vicaire, S.; Vigneron, M.; Kedinger,
C.: Complete sequence of the human RNA polymerase II largest subunit. Nucleic
Acids Res. 20: 910, 1992.

41. Yudkovsky, N.; Ranish, J. A.; Hahn, S.: A transcription reinitiation
intermediate that is stabilized by activator. Nature 408: 225-229,
2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/21/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/30/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/29/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/3/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/25/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/26/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/22/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/16/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/22/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/5/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/17/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/19/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/12/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/28/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/26/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/10/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/20/2003
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 7/10/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/19/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/8/2000
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 2/20/1997
Alan F. Scott - updated: 10/5/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED mgross: 06/27/2012
terry: 6/21/2012
alopez: 11/30/2011
mgross: 9/29/2011
alopez: 5/6/2011
terry: 5/3/2011
alopez: 5/26/2010
terry: 5/25/2010
alopez: 2/1/2010
terry: 1/26/2010
alopez: 1/7/2010
terry: 12/22/2009
alopez: 6/22/2009
terry: 6/16/2009
alopez: 1/12/2009
terry: 1/9/2009
alopez: 5/9/2008
terry: 4/22/2008
alopez: 2/5/2008
alopez: 4/19/2007
terry: 4/17/2007
mgross: 10/24/2006
alopez: 10/19/2006
wwang: 12/20/2005
wwang: 12/12/2005
terry: 2/7/2005
tkritzer: 1/4/2005
terry: 12/28/2004
tkritzer: 8/30/2004
terry: 8/26/2004
mgross: 3/17/2004
alopez: 3/11/2004
terry: 3/10/2004
alopez: 2/28/2003
alopez: 2/21/2003
terry: 2/20/2003
carol: 7/10/2001
alopez: 6/21/2001
alopez: 6/20/2001
alopez: 6/19/2001
carol: 6/15/2001
alopez: 11/8/2000
carol: 5/25/2000
psherman: 9/2/1999
terry: 8/24/1998
terry: 11/7/1997
mark: 2/20/1997
jamie: 12/18/1996
jamie: 12/17/1996
jamie: 12/6/1996
joanna: 4/4/1996
mark: 10/5/1995
mark: 9/27/1995
jason: 7/13/1994
carol: 4/18/1994
carol: 4/28/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992

608752	TITLE *608752 C1q- AND TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR-RELATED PROTEIN 5; C1QTNF5
;;CTRP5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The CTRP5 protein is a member of the C1q (see 120550)/tumor necrosis
factor (191160) superfamily, which shows diverse functions including
cell adhesion and basement membrane components (Shapiro and Scherer,
1998).

CLONING

CTRP5 was identified by Agarwal et al. (1995) in a cDNA library enriched
for genes showing expression specific for the retinal pigment epithelium
(RPE). Hayward et al. (2003) determined that the CTRP5 gene encodes a
281-amino acid protein. RT-PCR demonstrated CTRP5 expression in RPE,
liver, lung, placenta, and brain. The 25-kD CTRP5 protein contains an
N-terminal signal domain, followed by a short-chain collagen domain and
a C-terminal C1q domain, which is essential to nucleation of triple
helix formation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hayward et al. (2003) determined that the CTRP5 gene consists of 3 exons
that generate a 1.8-kb transcript. It is contained within the 3-prime
untranslated region of exon 13 of the MFRP gene (606227). CTRP5 is
present in the same orientation as MFRP, and both genes are expressed as
a bicistronic transcript.

MAPPING

The CTRP5 gene lies within the 3-prime untranslated region of the MFRP
gene, which maps to 11q23 (Katoh, 2001). Hayward et al. (2003)
identified the CTRP5 gene within the 9-Mb region on chromosome 11q23.3
associated with late-onset retinal degeneration (LORD; 605670).

GENE FUNCTION

Hayward et al. (2003) observed that CTRP5 and MFRP interact directly in
a yeast 2-hybrid system. Other observations suggested that CTRP5 is
secreted by the RPE and is a constituent of the Bruch membrane. On the
basis of similarity to COL7A1 (120120) and COL10A1 (120110), Hayward et
al. (2003) hypothesized that CTRP5 may form an extracellular hexagonal
lattice, facilitating the adhesion of basal RPE to Bruch membrane.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 7 of 14 families with late-onset retinal degeneration (LORD; 605670),
Hayward et al. (2003) described a proposed founder mutation in the CTRP5
gene that changed a highly conserved serine to arginine (S163R;
608752.0001) in the globular C1q domain of the protein. The mutation
resulted in abnormal high molecular weight aggregate formation, which
may alter the higher order protein structure and interactions of CTRP5.
The authors proposed a novel disease mechanism involving abnormal
adhesion between the RPE and Bruch membrane.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RETINAL DEGENERATION, LATE-ONSET, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
C1QTNF5, SER163ARG

In affected members of 7 unrelated families with late-onset retinal
degeneration (LORD; 605670), Hayward et al. (2003) described a C-to-G
transversion at nucleotide 686 in exon 3 of the CTRP5 gene that resulted
in a ser163-to-arg (S163R) amino acid substitution. The affected members
of these 7 Scottish and North American families shared a 3-Mb haplotype
on chromosome 11q23, suggesting a founder effect. The highly
evolutionarily conserved serine-163 lies in the carboxy-terminal C1q
region, a region which is thought to be essential for trimerization of
the collagen domain. Biochemical studies revealed a propensity for high
molecular weight aggregates of the mutant protein.

REFERENCE 1. Agarwal, N.; Swaroop, A.; Zheng, K.; Liou, J.; O'Rourke, K.; Graves,
K. A.; Gieser, L.; Del Monte, M.; Yang-Feng, T. L.: Expression and
chromosomal localization of cDNA clones from an enriched human retinal
pigment epithelial (RPE) cell line library: identification of two
RPE-specific genes. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 69: 71-74, 1995.

2. Hayward, C.; Shu, X.; Cideciyan, A. V.; Lennon, A.; Barran, P.;
Zareparsi, S.; Sawyer, L.; Hendry, G.; Dhillon, B.; Milam, A. H.;
Luthert, P. J.; Swaroop, A.; Hastie, N.; Jacobson, S. G.; Wright,
A. F.: Mutation in a short-chain collagen gene, CTRP5, results in
extracellular deposit formation in late-onset retinal degeneration:
a genetic model for age-related macular degeneration. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 12: 2657-2667, 2003.

3. Katoh, M.: Molecular cloning and characterization of MFRP, a novel
gene encoding a membrane-type Frizzled-related protein. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 282: 116-123, 2001.

4. Shapiro, L.; Scherer, P. E.: The crystal structure of a complement-1q
family protein suggests an evolutionary link to tumor necrosis factor. Curr.
Biol. 8: 335-338, 1998.

CREATED George E. Tiller: 6/21/2004

EDITED carol: 12/30/2011
wwang: 5/14/2008
terry: 2/14/2005
alopez: 6/24/2004

610903	TITLE *610903 VACUOLAR PROTEIN SORTING 36, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; VPS36
;;ELL-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN, 45-KD; EAP45
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

VPS36, VPS22 (SNF8; 610904), and VPS25 (610907) form ESCRT-II (endosomal
sorting complex required for transport II), a complex involved in
endocytosis of ubiquitinated membrane proteins. VPS36, VPS22, and VPS25
are also associated in a multiprotein complex with RNA polymerase II
elongation factor (ELL; 600284) (Slagsvold et al., 2005; Kamura et al.,
2001).

CLONING

Kamura et al. (2001) purified an Ell-containing complex from rat liver
extracts, and by peptide sequencing and database analysis, they
identified mouse and human VPS36, which they called EAP45. The deduced
386-amino acid human protein shares 97% identity with mouse Eap45.

GENE FUNCTION

Using mouse proteins expressed in mammalian and insect cells, Kamura et
al. (2001) found that Eap30 (SNF8) and Eap20 (VPS25) could be
coimmunoprecipitated in the absence of Eap45, and that Eap20 and Eap45
could be coimmunoprecipitated in the absence of Eap30. However, little
Eap30 was coimmunoprecipitated with Eap45 in the absence of Eap20.
Kamura et al. (2001) concluded that EAP20 bridges EAP30 and EAP45 and
thereby nucleates assembly of the EAP complex.

Slagsvold et al. (2005) found that mouse Eap45 contains a novel
N-terminal ubiquitin-binding domain that they called the GLUE (GRAM-like
ubiquitin binding in Eap45) domain. The Eap45 GLUE domain shares primary
and secondary structures with those of the phosphoinositide-binding GRAM
and pleckstrin (PLEK; 173570) homology (PH) domains. Slagsvold et al.
(2005) showed that the GLUE domain of Eap45 bound ubiquitin with similar
affinity and specificity as other ubiquitin-binding domains. The GLUE
domain of Eap45 also bound specifically to phosphatidylinositol
3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdIns(3,4,5)P3) and more weakly to PtdIns(3,4)P2
and PtdIns(3,5)P2. Eap45 colocalized with ubiquitinated proteins on late
endosomes. Slagsvold et al. (2005) concluded that binding of
phosphoinositides on endosomal membranes by EAP45 may control the
localization and/or activity of EAP45.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Alam et al. (2006) solved the crystal structure of the human EAP45 GLUE
domain complexed with ubiquitin. The GLUE domain adopted a PH domain
fold, with a 7-stranded beta sandwich capped by a C-terminal alpha
helix. The PH domain fold was split by a 16-residue insertion that
formed an exposed loop. Ubiquitin bound along one edge of the beta
sandwich, and Alam et al. (2006) predicted that phosphoinositides would
bind a noncanonical binding site on the other side at the apex of the
beta sandwich.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the VPS36
gene to chromosome 13 (TMAP RH183).

REFERENCE 1. Alam, S. L.; Langelier, C.; Whitby, F. G.; Koirala, S.; Robinson,
H.; Hill, C. P.; Sundquist, W. I.: Structural basis for ubiquitin
recognition by the human ESCRT-II EAP45 GLUE domain. Nature Struct.
Biol. 13: 1029-1030, 2006.

2. Kamura, T.; Burian, D.; Khalili, H.; Schmidt, S. L.; Sato, S.;
Liu, W.-J.; Conrad, M. N.; Conaway, R. C.; Conaway, J. W.; Shilatifard,
A.: Cloning and characterization of ELL-associated proteins EAP45
and EAP20: a role for yeast EAP-like proteins in regulation of gene
expression by glucose. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 16528-16533, 2001.

3. Slagsvold, T.; Aasland, R.; Hirano, S.; Bache, K. G.; Raiborg,
C.; Trambaiolo, D.; Wakatsuki, S.; Stenmark, H.: Eap45 in mammalian
ESCRT-II binds ubiquitin via a phosphoinositide-interacting GLUE domain. J.
Biol. Chem. 280: 19600-19606, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/2/2007

EDITED mgross: 04/02/2007
mgross: 4/2/2007

137167	TITLE *137167 GAMMA-GLUTAMYL CARBOXYLASE; GGCX
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Gamma-glutamyl carboxylase accomplishes the posttranslational
modification required for the activity of all of the vitamin K-dependent
proteins (Wu et al., 1991). These include some of the blood coagulation
and anticoagulation proteins as well as bone gamma-carboxyglutamic acid
(Gla) protein (BGLAP; 112260) and bone matrix protein (MGP; 154870).

CLONING

Wu et al. (1991) cloned a cDNA corresponding to GGCX and showed that
expression resulted in an increase in carboxylase activity in microsomes
of transfected cells. The GGCX gene encodes a 758-residue integral
membrane protein with 3 transmembrane domains near its amino terminus.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wu et al. (1997) found that the GGCX gene spans about 13 kb and contains
about 15 exons.

GENE FUNCTION

Vitamin K is a necessary cofactor for the hepatic carboxylation of
glutamic acid residues in a number of proteins, including the
procoagulants factors II, VII, IX, and X; the anticoagulants protein C
and protein S; and other proteins such as osteocalcin and matrix Gla
protein (Brenner et al., 1990). This carboxylation is required for
normal hemostasis, because it enables calcium binding and attachment of
the procoagulants and anticoagulants to phospholipids. Gamma-glutamyl
carboxylase is an integral membrane microsomal enzyme located in the
rough endoplasmic reticulum. It carboxylates glutamate residues located
in the Gla domain of vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors. The
carboxylation reaction is dependent on reduced vitamin K, which is
converted to vitamin K epoxide during carboxylation, and must be
regenerated by the vitamin K epoxide reductase (EPHX1; 132810) for
carboxylation to continue.

MAPPING

Kuo et al. (1995) mapped the GGCX gene to chromosome 2 using
human/rodent somatic cell hybrid DNAs and localized it to 2p12 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Combined Deficiency of Vitamin K-Dependent Clotting Factors-1

Brenner et al. (1990) described an offspring of a consanguineous
marriage with hereditary combined deficiency of vitamin K-dependent
procoagulants (VKCFD1; 277450). Epoxide reductase function was found to
be normal. Impairment of Gla-dependent calcium reduction binding was
suggested by cross-immunoelectrophoresis studies of prothrombin. They
therefore suggested that the abnormality in the kindred resulted from
GGCX deficiency, with autosomal recessive inheritance. Brenner et al.
(1998) identified a homozygous T-to-G transversion at codon 394 of the
GGCX gene that resulted in substitution of arginine for leucine (R394L;
137167.0001). The mutation was identified in all 4 children with
clinical and analytical findings of hereditary deficiency of all vitamin
K-dependent coagulation factors. This was the first reported mutation in
the GGCX gene.

Rost et al. (2004) reported what they stated to be the third case of
hereditary combined deficiency of the vitamin K-dependent coagulation
factors (VKCFD1) caused by mutation in the GGCX gene
(137167.0003-137167.0004).

- PXE-like Disorder with Multiple Coagulation Factor Deficiency

Vanakker et al. (2007) described a pseudoxanthoma elasticum-like
phenotype with associated multiple coagulation factor deficiency
(610842). They found mutations in the GGCX gene in 6 of 7 patients with
this phenotype and compared the findings in these 6 patients with the 4
previously described in the literature. None of the patients had
mutations in the ABCC6 gene (603234), which is the site of mutations in
pseudoxanthoma elasticum (264800), and none had mutations in the VKORC1
gene (608547), which is the site of mutations causing type 2 combined
deficiency of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors (607473). Marked
laxity of skin which extended over the trunk was a feature in these
patients. Changes in the eye consisted of limited angioid streaks or
peau d'orange with no progression and no impairment of vision. Elastic
fibers in the dermis showed fragmentation and calcification as in PXE,
although by electron microscopy it was suggested that the changes could
be differentiated from those of PXE. Mutation analysis indicated that
PXE-like disorder with multiple coagulation factor deficiency is
inherited as a recessive. Vanakker et al. (2007) found homozygosity for
a missense mutation in 1 case (137167.0007), and compound heterozygosity
in 3 other cases (e.g., 137167.0005). In 2 other cases, only 1 mutant
allele was characterized (137167.0010, 137167.0011).

In 2 sisters with PXE-like disorder and multiple coagulation factor
deficiency, Li et al. (2009) identified compound heterozygosity for the
V255M (137167.0012) and S300F (137167.0013) mutations in the GGCX gene.
Skin biopsies from the patients showed undercarboxylated matrix gla
proteins (MGP; 154870) in the areas of abnormal mineralization. The
family was unusual in that the sisters' mother and maternal aunt had
PXE-like skin changes, but no coagulopathy. Genetic analysis showed
compound heterozygosity for the V255M mutation and a common mutation in
the ABCC6 gene (R1141X; 603234.0001), which can cause classic PXE
(264800) when present with another ABCC6 mutation, but not in isolation.
The findings suggested that the mother and aunt had digenic inheritance
of PXE. In contrast, the unaffected father and brother, who were
compound heterozygous for S300F and the ABCC6 R1141X mutation had no
signs of either disorder. However, plasma levels of total
undercarboxylated MGP in the father and son were at the lower end of
normal. Although the reasons for the lack of clinical findings in the
father and son remained unclear, Li et al. (2009) concluded that
undercarboxylation of MGP plays a critical role in aberrant
mineralization of tissues in PXE.

ANIMAL MODEL

Congenital deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent blood coagulation
factors due to a defective vitamin K-dependent carboxylase was studied
in Devon Rex cats by Soute et al. (1992).

Zhu et al. (2007) found that Ggcx +/-mice developed normally, exhibited
normal survival and fertility, and showed normal plasma levels of
vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors and prothrombin. However, only
50% of Ggcx -/- offspring survived to term, and those that were born
succumbed to massive intraabdominal hemorrhage shortly after birth.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VITAMIN K-DEPENDENT CLOTTING FACTORS, COMBINED DEFICIENCY OF, 1
GGCX, LEU394ARG

Brenner et al. (1998) described a homozygous leu394-to-arg (L394R)
missense mutation in exon 9 of the GGCX gene in all 4 affected members
of an inbred kindred with deficiency of vitamin K-dependent blood
coagulation factors (277450). The first case, reported by Brenner et al.
(1990), was presented shortly after birth with multiple ecchymoses and
bleeding from puncture sites. An older sib had died at birth from
uncontrollable umbilical bleeding. The second patient presented at 5
months of age with knee hemarthrosis. The third and fourth affected
members were examined shortly after birth and were found to have
deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent procoagulants and anticoagulants.
Thus, chronic weekly administration of vitamin K resulted in a stable
increase of procoagulant and anticoagulant levels and successfully
prevented bleeding during a follow-up period of 30 patient years.

By Western blot analysis, Mutucumarana et al. (2000) showed that both
wildtype and L394R are expressed as 95-kD proteins. They found that the
variant appears to have a defect in its glutamate-binding site. In
addition, they identified a striking defect in the catalytic efficiency
of the carboxylase towards a phe-leu-glu-glu-leu (FLEEL) substrate.

.0002
VITAMIN K-DEPENDENT CLOTTING FACTORS, COMBINED DEFICIENCY OF, 1
GGCX, TRP501SER

Spronk et al. (2000) described a Lebanese boy, with consanguineous
parents, who suffered from combined congenital deficiency of all vitamin
K-dependent coagulation factors (277450). He was found to be homozygous
for a point mutation in exon 11 of the gamma-glutamyl carboxylase gene,
converting codon 501 from TGG to TCG and resulting in a trp501-to-ser
(W501S) mutation. Oral vitamin K1 administration resulted in resolution
of the clinical symptoms. Ten asymptomatic relatives were heterozygous
for the mutation.

.0003
VITAMIN K-DEPENDENT CLOTTING FACTORS, COMBINED DEFICIENCY OF, 1
GGCX, ARG485PRO

In a patient with combined deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent blood
coagulation factors (277450), Rost et al. (2004) identified compound
heterozygosity for mutations in the GGCX gene: a G-to-C transversion in
exon 11, resulting in an arg485-to-pro (R485P) substitution, and a
G-to-T transversion in the 3-prime splice site of intron 2, resulting in
loss of exon 3 (137167.0004).

.0004
VITAMIN K-DEPENDENT CLOTTING FACTORS, COMBINED DEFICIENCY OF, 1
GGCX, IVS2AS, G-T

See 137167.0003 and Rost et al. (2004).

.0005
PXE-LIKE DISORDER WITH MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GGCX, PHE299SER

In a patient reported by Le Corvaisier-Pieto et al. (1996) with a
PXE-like disorder with multiple coagulation factor deficiency (610842),
Vanakker et al. (2007) found compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in
the GGCX gene: 924T-C (phe299 to ser; F299S) in exon 8 and 1700G-A
(gly558 to arg; G558R) in exon 12. The patient was a male, aged 40, with
onset of skin symptoms at age 16, generalized skin folds with laxity,
and positive calcium staining of elastic fibers.

.0006
PXE-LIKE DISORDER WITH MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GGCX, GLY558ARG

See 137167.0005 and Vanakker et al. (2007).

.0007
PXE-LIKE DISORDER WITH MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GGCX, TRP493SER

In a 46-year-old woman with a PXE-like disorder with multiple
coagulation factor deficiency (610842), Vanakker et al. (2007)
identified homozygosity for a missense mutation in exon 12 of the GGCX
gene, a 1506G-C transversion that resulted in a trp493 to ser (W493S)
amino acid substitution. The patient had onset of skin symptoms at age
18 years and showed generalized skin folds with laxity. Limited angioid
streaks with no visual defect were present in the eyes. Calcium stain
was positive and deficiency of multiple vitamin K-dependent coagulation
factors was present. Cerebral aneurysms discovered at ages 36 and 46
years were successfully treated.

.0008
PXE-LIKE DISORDER WITH MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GGCX, GLN374TER

In a 46-year-old woman and 44-year-old man with PXE-like disorder with
multiple coagulation factor deficiency (610842), Vanakker et al. (2007)
found compound heterozygosity for the same 2 mutations in the GGCX gene:
1149C-T in exon 8 (gln374 to ter; Q374X) and 1339G-T in exon 12 (gly537
to tyr; G537Y).

.0009
PXE-LIKE DISORDER WITH MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GGCX, GLY537TYR

See 137167.0008 and Vanakker et al. (2007).

.0010
PXE-LIKE DISORDER WITH MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GGCX, ARG476CYS

In a 67-year-old woman with PXE-like disorder with multiple coagulation
factor deficiency (610842), Vanakker et al. (2007) found a missense
mutation in exon 10 of the GGCX gene, a 1454C-T transition that resulted
in an arg476-to-cys substitution (R476). No mutation was identified on
the other allele.

.0011
PXE-LIKE DISORDER WITH MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GGCX, ARG476HIS

In a 32-year-old woman with PXE-like disorder with multiple coagulation
factor deficiency (610842), Vanakker et al. (2007) found a missense
mutation in exon 10 of the GGCX gene, a 1455G-A transition that resulted
in an arg476-to-his amino acid substitution (R476H). No mutation was
identified on the other allele.

.0012
PXE-LIKE DISORDER WITH MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GGCX, VAL255MET

In 2 sisters with PXE-like disorder and multiple coagulation factor
deficiency (610842), Li et al. (2009) identified compound heterozygosity
for a 791G-A transition in exon 7 of the GGCX gene, resulting in a
val255-to-met (V255M) substitution, and a 927C-T transition in exon 8 of
the GGCX gene, resulting in a ser300-to-phe (S300F; 137167.0013)
substitution. Neither mutation was identified in 100 control alleles.
Val255 was highly conserved, whereas ser300 was less well conserved. The
sisters showed milder coagulation factor defects than previously
reported patients, suggesting some residual GGCX activity. In vitro
functional expression studies using a small peptide showed that the
V255M mutant had about 5% residual GGCX activity and the S300F variant
had essentially no activity. However, when present with a factor X
propeptide, the V255M mutant showed GGCX activity similar to wildtype,
whereas the S300F mutant activity remained low at 3% of wildtype. Skin
biopsies from the patients showed undercarboxylated matrix gla proteins
(MGP; 154870) in the areas of abnormal mineralization. The family was
unusual in that the sisters' mother and maternal aunt had mild PXE-like
skin changes, but no coagulopathy. Skin biopsies in the mother and aunt
showed undercarboxylated MGP in the areas of abnormal mineralization.
Genetic analysis showed compound heterozygosity for the V255M mutation
and a common mutation in the ABCC6 gene (R1141X; 603234.0001), which can
cause classic PXE (264800) when present with another ABCC6 mutation, but
not in isolation. The findings suggested that the mother and aunt had
digenic inheritance of a 'forme fruste' of PXE (177850). In contrast,
the unaffected father and brother, who were compound heterozygous for
the S300F mutation and the ABCC6 R1141X mutation had no signs of either
disorder on clinical exam but refused to participate in further clinical
testing. Plasma levels of total undercarboxylated MGP in the father and
son were at the lower end of normal. Although the reasons for the lack
of clinical findings in the father and son remained unclear, Li et al.
(2009) concluded that undercarboxylation of MGP plays a critical role in
aberrant mineralization of tissues in PXE.

.0013
PXE-LIKE DISORDER WITH MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GGCX, SER300PHE

See 137167.0012 and Li et al. (2009).

REFERENCE 1. Brenner, B.; Sanchez-Vega, B.; Wu, S.-M.; Lanir, N.; Stafford,
D. W.; Solera, J.: A missense mutation in a gamma-glutamyl carboxylase
gene causes combined deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent blood coagulation
factors. Blood 92: 4554-4559, 1998.

2. Brenner, B.; Tavori, S.; Zivelin, A.; Keller, C. B.; Suttie, J.
W.; Tatarsky, I.; Seligsohn, U.: Hereditary deficiency of all vitamin
K-dependent procoagulants and anticoagulants. Brit. J. Haemat. 75:
537-542, 1990.

3. Kuo, W.-L.; Stafford, D. W.; Cruces, J.; Gray, J.; Solera, J.:
Chromosomal localization of the gamma-glutamyl carboxylase gene at
2p12. Genomics 25: 746-748, 1995.

4. Le Corvaisier-Pieto, C.; Joly, P.; Thomine, E.; Lair, G.; Lauret,
P.: Generalized pseudoxanthoma elasticum combined with vitamin K
dependent clotting factors deficiency. Ann. Derm. Venerol. 123:
555-558, 1996.

5. Li, Q.; Grange, D. K.; Armstrong, N. L.; Whelan, A. J.; Hurley,
M. Y.; Rishavy, M. A.; Hallgren, K. W.; Berkner, K. L.; Schurgers,
L. J.; Jiang, Q.; Uitto, J.: Mutations in the GGCX and ABCC6 genes
in a family with pseudoxanthoma elasticum-like phenotypes. J. Invest.
Derm. 129: 553-563, 2009.

6. Mutucumarana, V. P.; Stafford, D. W.; Stanley, T. B.; Jin, D.-Y.;
Solera, J.; Brenner, B.; Azerad, R.; Wu, S.-M.: Expression and characterization
of the naturally occurring mutation L394R in human gamma-glutamyl
carboxylase. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 32572-32577, 2000.

7. Rost, S.; Fregin, A.; Koch, D.; Compes, M.; Muller, C. R.; Oldenburg,
J.: Compound heterozygous mutations in the gamma-glutamyl carboxylase
gene cause combined deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent blood coagulation
factors. Brit. J. Haemat. 126: 546-549, 2004.

8. Soute, B. A. M.; Ulrich, M. M. W.; Watson, A. D. J.; Maddison,
J. E.; Ebberink, R. H. M.; Vermmer, C.: Congenital deficiency of
all vitamin K-dependent blood coagulation factors due to a defective
vitamin K-dependent carboxylase in Devon Rex cats. Thromb. Haemost. 68:
521-525, 1992.

9. Spronk, H. M. H.; Farah, R. A.; Buchanan, G. R.; Vermeer, C.; Soute,
B. A. M.: Novel mutation in the gamma-glutamyl carboxylase gene resulting
in congenital combined deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent blood
coagulation factors. Blood 96: 3650-3652, 2000.

10. Vanakker, O. M.; Martin, L.; Gheduzzi, D.; Leroy, B. P.; Loeys,
B. L.; Guerci, V. I.; Matthys, D.; Terry, S. F.; Coucke, P. J.; Pasquali-Ronchetti,
I.; De Paepe, A.: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum-like phenotype with cutis
laxa and multiple coagulation factor deficiency represents a separate
genetic entity. J. Invest. Derm. 127: 581-587, 2007.

11. Wu, S.-M.; Cheung, W.-F.; Frazier, D.; Stafford, D. W.: Cloning
and expression of the cDNA for human gamma-glutamyl carboxylase. Science 254:
1634-1636, 1991.

12. Wu, S. M.; Stafford, D. W.; Frazier, L. D.; Fu, Y. Y.; High, K.
A.; Chu, K.; Sanchez-Vega, B.; Solera, J.: Genomic sequence and transcription
start site for the human gamma-glutamyl carboxylase. Blood 89: 4058-4062,
1997.

13. Zhu, A.; Sun, H.; Raymond, R. M., Jr.; Furie, B. C.; Furie, B.;
Bronstein, M.; Kaufman, R. J.; Westrick, R.; Ginsburg, D.: Fatal
hemorrhage in mice lacking gamma-glutamyl carboxylase. Blood 109:
5270-5275, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/14/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/30/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/6/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/20/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/5/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/1/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/2/1992

EDITED carol: 11/02/2010
carol: 4/15/2010
ckniffin: 11/3/2009
wwang: 10/30/2009
ckniffin: 10/14/2009
mgross: 11/30/2007
terry: 11/30/2007
alopez: 3/12/2007
terry: 3/6/2007
tkritzer: 10/22/2004
terry: 10/20/2004
mcapotos: 1/17/2001
mcapotos: 1/11/2001
terry: 1/5/2001
mgross: 12/12/2000
terry: 12/11/2000
mgross: 3/16/1999
carol: 2/15/1999
terry: 2/1/1999
terry: 5/3/1995
mark: 4/19/1995
jason: 7/28/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/2/1992

602959	TITLE *602959 EUKARYOTIC TRANSLATION ELONGATION FACTOR 1, ALPHA-2; EEF1A2
;;ELONGATION FACTOR 1, ALPHA-2
DESCRIPTION The autosomal recessive mutation 'wasted' (wst) arose spontaneously in
an inbred mouse colony at the Jackson laboratory in 1972 (Shultz et al.,
1982). Homozygous wst/wst mice have neurologic defects, waste away, and
show immune system abnormalities that include a defective response to
DNA damage in lymphoid cells. Homozygous mice appear completely normal
until weaning; at approximately 21 days, they develop tremors and
ataxia. Histologic examination shows extensive neuronal vacuolar
degeneration of anterior horn cells of the spinal cord with less severe
abnormalities of motor nuclei in the brainstem. The mice then lose
weight (presumably through muscle wasting), develop progressive
paralysis, and die by approximately 28 days of age. The time course of
the disease progression varies little, regardless of genetic background,
weaning time, or environmental factors such as specific pathogen-free
conditions. During the postweaning period, wst/wst mice also develop
progressive atrophy of the spleen and thymus and a concomitant decrease
in circulating lymphocytes. Cells derived from lymphoid tissues of
wasted mice from 26 days onward show a defective response to
radiation-induced DNA damage, which is reminiscent of a checkpoint
defect; however, this defect is not seen in fibroblasts nor is it seen
in lymphoid-derived cells of mice at 22 days.

The wst gene maps within the most distal group of markers on chromosome
2. Chambers et al. (1998) used a positional cloning/positional candidate
approach to isolate the wst gene. Because those genes that map close to
wst on chromosome 2 are located on distal human 20q, genes that map to
20q13 in the human were considered as a source of new markers and/or
candidate genes. One such gene encodes a protein that displays a high
level of homology (92% identity and 98% similarity at the amino acid
level) to the translation elongation factor EF1-alpha (EEF1A1; 130590)
and is called EF1-alpha-2 or S1 (EEF1A2); see Ann et al. (1991) and Lund
et al. (1996). EF1-alpha is distributed widely, although expression is
very low or undetectable in skeletal and cardiac muscle postnatally, and
expression in the brain declines between embryonic life and adulthood in
rats. EF1-alpha-2 is found exclusively in terminally differentiated
cells of skeletal muscle, heart, and certain areas of the brain. In
those tissues where both genes are expressed, Eef1a2 is consistently
more highly expressed than Eef1a. In rat muscle and heart, EF1-alpha
levels declined by 95% within the first month of postnatal life;
EF1-alpha-2 levels, on the other hand, increased during this period and
are constant through adult life. There appears, therefore, to be some
degree of reciprocal expression of the 2 genes. Although fibroblasts
normally do not express Eef1a2, the mouse 3T3 fibroblast cell line does,
and this line was used to study regulation of Eef1a2 at different stages
of the cell cycle. It was found that the gene was highly expressed when
cells were serum-starved, in G0 phase, but expression declined
dramatically when cells were serum stimulated and reentered the cell
cycle. Eef1a, however, was expressed at all stages of the cell cycle in
this cell line (Ann et al., 1991). Whereas EEF1A2 appears to be a
single-copy gene, numerous pseudogenes for EEF1A1 exist in the human
genome (Lund et al., 1996).

By screening a genomic DNA library with probes derived from the 5-prime
and 3-prime untranslated regions (UTRs) of EEF1A2, followed by PCR
amplification, Bischoff et al. (2000) isolated the complete sequence of
the EEF1A2 gene. The gene spans 12 kb, including a 2-kb upstream
promoter region, and, like EEF1A1, it contains 8 exons. Although the
coding regions of the EEF1A genes are highly similar, the introns, UTRs,
and promoter regions are highly divergent. Primer extension analysis
localized the start site to an adenine 166 bp upstream of the initiator
codon in exon 1. Sequence analysis revealed no TATA box but did identify
a CpG island, 12 E boxes, 3 EGR-type binding sites, a GATA motif, and a
MEF2 (see 600660)-binding site. Transient transfection analysis mapped
the core promoter to a region spanning positions -16 to +92.

Chambers et al. (1998) showed that the wasted mutation is a deletion
spanning 15.8 kb that removes the promoter region and first noncoding
exon of the mouse Eef1a2 gene, abolishing transcription of the gene. No
other gene was detected within the deleted region. Expression of Eef1a2
was reciprocal with that of Eef1a. Expression of Eef1a2 takes over from
Eef1a in heart and muscle at precisely the time at which the wasted
phenotype becomes manifest. The findings suggested that there are
tissue-specific forms of the translation elongation apparatus essential
for postnatal survival in the mouse.

Anand et al. (2002) found that the EEF1A2 gene is amplified in 25% of
primary ovarian tumors and is highly expressed in approximately 30% of
ovarian tumors and established cell lines. They also demonstrated that
the EEF1A2 protein has oncogenic properties: it enhances focus
formation, allows anchorage-independent growth, and decreases the
doubling time of rodent fibroblasts. In addition, EEF1A2 expression made
NIH 3T3 fibroblasts tumorigenic and increased the growth rate of ovarian
carcinoma cells xenografted in nude mice. Thus, EEF1A2 and the process
of protein elongation are likely to be critical in the development of
ovarian cancer.

REFERENCE 1. Anand, N.; Murthy, S.; Amann, G.; Wernick, M.; Porter, L. A.; Cukier,
I. H.; Collins, C.; Gray, J. W.; Diebold, J.; Demetrick, D. J.; Lee,
J. M.: Protein elongation factor EEF1A2 is a putative oncogene in
ovarian cancer. Nature Genet. 31: 301-305, 2002.

2. Ann, D. K.; Moutsatsos, I. K.; Nakamura, T.; Lin, H. H.; Mao, P.-L.;
Lee, M.-J.; Chin, S.; Liem, R. K. H.; Wang, E.: Isolation and characterization
of the rat chromosomal gene for a polypeptide (p21) antigenically
related to statin. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 10429-10437, 1991.

3. Bischoff, C.; Kahns, S.; Lund, A.; Jorgensen, H. F.; Praestegaard,
M.; Clark, B. F. C.; Leffers, H.: The human elongation factor 1 A-2
gene (EEF1A2): complete sequence and characterization of gene structure
and promoter activity. Genomics 68: 63-70, 2000.

4. Chambers, D. M.; Peters, J.; Abbott, C. M.: The lethal mutation
of the mouse wasted (wst) is a deletion that abolishes expression
of a tissue-specific isoform of translation elongation factor 1-alpha,
encoded by the Eef1a2 gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 4463-4468,
1998.

5. Lund, A.; Knudsen, S. M.; Vissing, H.; Clark, B.; Tommerup, N.
: Assignment of human elongation factor 1-alpha genes: EEF1A maps
to chromosome 6q14 and EEF1A2 to 20q13.3. Genomics 36: 359-361,
1996.

6. Shultz, L. D.; Sweet, H. O.; Davisson, M. T.; Coman, D. R.: 'Wasted,'
a new mutant of the mouse with abnormalities characteristic of ataxia
telangiectasia. Nature 297: 402-404, 1982.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/10/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/4/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/11/1998

EDITED terry: 03/03/2005
alopez: 7/25/2002
terry: 6/10/2002
mgross: 12/4/2000
terry: 12/4/2000
dkim: 12/15/1998
carol: 8/11/1998

609448	TITLE *609448 THIOREDOXIN DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 12; TXNDC12
;;THIOREDOXIN-LIKE PROTEIN p19; TLP19;;
ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM PROTEIN, 18-KD; ERP18;;
ANTERIOR GRADIENT 1, XENOPUS, HOMOLOG OF; AGR1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TXNDC12 belongs to the thioredoxin superfamily (see TXN; 187700).
Members of this superfamily possess a thioredoxin fold with a consensus
active-site sequence (CxxC) and have roles in redox regulation, defense
against oxidative stress, refolding of disulfide-containing proteins,
and regulation of transcription factors (Liu et al., 2003).

CLONING

By searching genomic and EST databases for putative secretory proteins,
followed by RT-PCR of human liver RNA, Liu et al. (2003) cloned TXNDC12,
which they called TLP19. The transcript contains 2 putative poly(A)
signals in its 3-prime UTR. The deduced 172-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 19.2 kD. TLP19 has an N-terminal signal
peptide and a central thioredoxin-like domain containing the consensus
active-site motif. Northern blot analysis detected a 1.6-kb TLP19
transcript in all tissues examined, with highest expression in placenta
and liver. Placenta also expressed a 1.2-kb TLP19 transcript.
Epitope-tagged TLP19 was expressed in the Golgi apparatus of transiently
transfected COS-7 cells, and it was secreted into the culture medium.

Alanen et al. (2003) cloned TXNDC12, which they called ERP18, from a
liver cDNA library. They identified a putative C-terminal endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) retention signal (EDEL) within the deduced protein.
Alanen et al. (2003) also noted that the active-site motif of ERP18
(CGAC) is unlike the catalytic motifs of other thioredoxin superfamily
members, including thioredoxins, isomerases, and oxidating enzymes. The
overall structure of the ERP18 catalytic domain most strongly resembles
those of protein disulfide isomerases (PDI; see 176790). In contrast to
the findings of Liu et al. (2003), Alanen et al. (2003) found that
fluorescence-tagged ERP18 was retained in the ER of transfected COS-7
cells, and the staining did not overlap that of a Golgi marker.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

From circular dichroism and NMR measurements, Alanen et al. (2003)
determined that ERP18 undergoes only a minor conformational change upon
dithiol-disulfide exchange in the active site. Guanidinium chloride
denaturation curves indicated that the reduced form of the protein is
more stable than the oxidized form, suggesting that ERP18 is involved in
disulfide bond formation.

GENE FUNCTION

Liu et al. (2003) found that recombinant TLP19 without the signal
peptide showed reducing activity against an insulin-disulfide substrate.

Alanen et al. (2003) found that ERP18 showed significant peptide
thiol-disulfide oxidase activity in vitro, and the activity was
dependent on the presence of both active-site cysteines. The activity
differed from that of the human PDI family in that it was limited by
substrate oxidation and not by enzyme reoxidation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Liu et al. (2003) determined that the TLP19 gene contains 7 exons and
spans more than 35 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Liu et al. (2003) mapped the TLP19 gene to
chromosome 1p32.3.

REFERENCE 1. Alanen, H. I.; Williamson, R. A.; Howard, M. J.; Lappi, A.-K.;
Jantti, H. P.; Rautio, S. M.; Kellokumpu, S.; Ruddock, L. W.: Functional
characterization of ERp18, a new endoplasmic reticulum-located thioredoxin
superfamily member. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 28912-28920, 2003.

2. Liu, F.; Rong, Y.-P.; Zeng, L.-C.; Zhang, X.; Han, Z.-G.: Isolation
and characterization of a novel human thioredoxin-like gene hTLP19
encoding a secretory protein. Gene 315: 71-78, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/28/2005

EDITED alopez: 09/09/2008
mgross: 6/28/2005

194525	TITLE *194525 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 19; ZNF19
;;KOX12
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Bray et al. (1991) screened a placental genomic library at moderate
stringency with a degenerate oligodeoxynucleotide probe designed to
hybridize to the his/cys (H/C) link region between adjoining zinc
fingers. Genomic clones were cross-hybridized with a set of 30 zinc
finger-encoding cDNAs (KOX1-KOX30) isolated from a human T-cell cDNA
library. KOX12 matched one of the genomic clones.

MAPPING

Bray et al. (1991) mapped the ZNF19 gene (KOX12) to 16q22 by chromosomal
in situ suppression hybridization with fluorescent probe detection.

HISTORY

Rousseau-Merck et al. (1991) concluded from in situ hybridization
experiments that ZNF19 shows 'a double localization on chromosome 19q13
and chromosome 16q23.'

REFERENCE 1. Bray, P.; Lichter, P.; Thiesen, H.-J.; Ward, D. C.; Dawid, I. B.
: Characterization and mapping of human genes encoding zinc finger
proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 9563-9567, 1991.

2. Rousseau-Merck, M.-F.; Berger, R.; Thiesen, H.-J.: Chromosomal
localization of ZNF19, ZNF22 and ZNF25, three members of the Kox genes
family. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 58: 1953, 1991.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/4/1991

EDITED alopez: 07/06/2010
dkim: 6/26/1998
mark: 5/14/1996
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/23/1992
carol: 12/17/1991
carol: 12/4/1991

182134	TITLE *182134 5-@HYDROXYTRYPTAMINE RECEPTOR 1F; HTR1F
;;5-@HYDROXYTRYPTAMINE-1E-LIKE RECEPTOR; HTR1EL;;
SEROTONIN 5-HT-1F RECEPTOR;;
SEROTONIN 5-HT-1E-LIKE RECEPTOR;;
MR77
DESCRIPTION Lovenberg et al. (1993) isolated a new G protein-coupled serotonin
receptor, which they called MR77, of the 5-HT-1 class. MR77 was
expressed at low levels throughout the brain, with the greatest
expression in the cortex, hippocampus, and striatum. HeLa cells
transfected with the MR77 gene exhibited inhibition of adenylate cyclase
in response to serotonin. Human MR77 is 86% and 93% identical to rat
MR77 at the nucleic acid and amino acid sequence levels, respectively.
Its amino acid sequence showed the greatest similarity to HTR1E
(182132). Amlaiky et al. (1992) described the mouse homolog.

Using a monochromosomal mapping panel, followed by a radiation-reduced
hybrid mapping and fluorescence in situ hybridization, VanDenBrink et
al. (1998) mapped the HTR1F gene to 3p12. They investigated the presence
of polymorphisms by SSCP analysis in 14 migraine patients who
consistently responded well to sumatriptan, 12 patients who consistently
experienced recurrence of the headache after initial relief, 12 patients
with no response to sumatriptan, and 13 patients who consistently
experienced chest symptoms after use of sumatriptan. No polymorphisms
were detected in any of the patients. They therefore concluded that
genetic diversity of the HTR1F gene is probably not responsible for the
variable clinical response to the drug.

REFERENCE 1. Amlaiky, N.; Ramboz, S.; Boschert, U.; Plassat, J.-L.; Hen, R.
: Isolation of a mouse '5HT1E-like' serotonin receptor expressed predominantly
in hippocampus. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 19761-19764, 1992.

2. Lovenberg, T. W.; Erlander, M. G.; Baron, B. M.; Racke, M.; Slone,
A. L.; Siegel, B. W.; Craft, C. M.; Burns, J. E.; Danielson, P. E.;
Sutcliffe, J. G.: Molecular cloning and functional expression of
5-HT-1E-like rat and human 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor genes. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 2184-2188, 1993.

3. VanDenBrink, A. M.; Vergouwe, M. N.; Ophoff, R. A.; Naylor, S.
L.; Dauwerse, H. G.; Saxena, P. R.; Ferrari, M. D.; Frants, R. R.
: Chromosomal localization of the 5-HT(1F) receptor gene: no evidence
for involvement in response to sumatriptan in migraine patients. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 77: 415-420, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/29/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/21/1991

EDITED carol: 08/03/1998
terry: 7/29/1998
dholmes: 1/12/1998
dholmes: 12/22/1997
carol: 4/29/1993
carol: 4/28/1993
carol: 1/7/1993
carol: 7/7/1992
carol: 6/5/1992
carol: 6/7/1991

611668	TITLE *611668 CORONIN 7; CORO7
;;POLARITY-OSMOTIC DEFECTIVE 1, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; POD1;;
CRN7
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Coronins, such as CORO7, constitute an evolutionarily conserved family
of WD-repeat actin-binding proteins. CORO7 plays a role in Golgi complex
morphology and function (Rybakin et al., 2004, 2006).

CLONING

By EST database analysis, followed by RT-PCR of human liver carcinoma
cDNA, Rybakin et al. (2004) cloned CORO7, which they called CRN7. The
deduced 924-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 100.5
kD, which was confirmed experimentally. CORO7 contains 2 coronin WD
repeat-containing domains with a proline-, serine-, and
threonine-enriched region (PST motif) preceding the second WD-repeat.
CORO7 shares 30% and 29% amino acid identity with Drosophila Pod1 and C.
elegans Pod1, respectively. Northern blot analysis detected expression
in mouse embryos as early as day 5 postcoitum and expression increased
through day 15. Coro7 expression was detected in most mouse tissues
examined with high levels in brain, thymus, and kidney and low levels in
heart, liver, testis, and muscle. Western blot analysis of mouse tissues
showed a similar distribution of Coro7 with low expression in skeletal
and heart muscle. Immunofluorescence studies detected developmental
expression of mouse Coro7 in embryonic brain, thymus, intestine, skin,
and eye. Indirect immunofluorescence studies detected Coro7 in
vesicle-like structures and in a Golgi-like perinuclear compartment in
mouse fibroblasts. Sucrose gradient centrifugation and
immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated that Coro7 localized to
cytosolic vesicles and to the cis-Golgi region. The membrane-associated
form of Coro7 was tyrosine-phosphorylated, whereas the cytosolic form
was not.

GENE FUNCTION

By electron microscopy, Rybakin et al. (2006) showed that siRNA
knockdown of CORO7 in HeLa cells caused loss of Golgi integrity and
membrane scattering. CORO7 knockdown caused a defect in Golgi export of
vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein (VSVG) but did not alter protein
import into the trans-Golgi network. Golgi cargo glycosylation was not
affected. Using in vitro binding, coimmunoprecipitation, and
colocalization studies, the authors demonstrated that CORO7 interacted
with clathrin adaptor AP1 (see 600157) and that this interaction takes
place at Golgi membranes. Rybakin et al. (2006) showed that CORO7 was
not required for AP1 targeting to Golgi membranes and suggested that
CORO7 acts downstream of AP1 recruitment.

REFERENCE 1. Rybakin, V.; Gounko, N. V.; Spate, K.; Honing, S.; Majoul, I. V.;
Duden, R.; Noegel, A. A.: Crn7 interacts with AP-1 and is required
for the maintenance of Golgi morphology and protein export from the
Golgi. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 31070-31078, 2006.

2. Rybakin, V.; Stumpf, M.; Schulze, A.; Majoul, I. V.; Noegel, A.
A.; Hasse, A.: Coronin 7, the mammalian POD-1 homologue, localizes
to the Golgi apparatus. FEBS Lett. 573: 161-167, 2004.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 12/13/2007

EDITED wwang: 12/14/2007
wwang: 12/13/2007

603599	TITLE *603599 CASP8- AND FADD-LIKE APOPTOSIS REGULATOR; CFLAR
;;FLICE INHIBITORY PROTEIN; FLIP;;
INHIBITOR OF FLICE; I-FLICE;;
CASPASE-EIGHT-RELATED PROTEIN; CASPER;;
FADD-LIKE ANTIAPOPTOTIC MOLECULE 1; FLAME1;;
CASPASE HOMOLOG; CASH;;
CASPASE-LIKE APOPTOSIS REGULATORY PROTEIN; CLARP;;
MACH-RELATED INDUCER OF TOXICITY; MRIT
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Caspases are cysteine proteases that play a central role in apoptosis.
Caspase-8 (FLICE; 601763) may be the first enzyme of the proteolytic
cascade that is activated by the FAS ligand (FASL; 134638) and tumor
necrosis factor (TNF; 191160). Caspase-8 is recruited to FAS (134637)
and TNF receptor-1 (TNFR1; 191190) through interaction of its prodomain
with the death effector domain (DED) of the receptor-associating protein
FADD (602457). By searching EST databases for sequences related to FADD,
Shu et al. (1997) identified cDNAs encoding a protein that they
designated CASPER. The predicted 480-amino acid CASPER protein contains
2 DED-like modules at its N terminus and a C-terminal caspase-like
protease domain. However, CASPER is not a caspase since it lacks several
conserved amino acids found in all identified caspases. Northern blot
analysis detected several CASPER transcripts, with highest expression in
human skeletal muscle, pancreas, and heart.

The viral FLICE inhibitory proteins (v-FLIPs) contain 2 DEDs and block
the early signaling events of the cellular death receptors. By searching
EST databases for cellular homologs of v-FLIPs, Irmler et al. (1997)
isolated human cDNAs encoding 2 isoforms of FLIP. FLIP(L), the longer
isoform, contains 2 DEDs and a caspase-like domain, and FLIP(S), the
shorter isoform, contains only the 2 DEDs followed by a C-terminal
extension of approximately 50 amino acids.

Goltsev et al. (1997), Han et al. (1997), Hu et al. (1997), Inohara et
al. (1997), and Srinivasula et al. (1997) isolated FLIP cDNAs; they
designated the gene CASH (caspase homolog), MRIT (MACH-related inducer
of toxicity; 'mrit' also means 'death' in Sanskrit), I-FLICE (inhibitor
of FLICE), CLARP (caspase-like apoptosis regulatory protein), and FLAME1
(FADD-like antiapoptotic molecule-1), respectively. Han et al. (1997)
cloned a cDNA encoding an MRIT isoform, which they called MRIT-alpha-2,
that lacks the first DED.

Irmler et al. (1997) and Goltsev et al. (1997) isolated cDNAs encoding
the mouse homolog of FLIP.

By microarray analysis, Jun et al. (2001) demonstrated expression of the
CFLAR gene in human donor corneas.

GENE FUNCTION

Shu et al. (1997) showed that CASPER interacted with FADD, caspase-8
(601763), caspase-3 (CASP3; 600636), TRAF1 (601711), and TRAF2 (601895)
through distinct domains. Overexpression of CASPER or its C-terminal
protease-like domain potently induced apoptosis, whereas a deletion
mutant lacking 45 C-terminal residues inhibited TNF- and FAS-induced
apoptosis. Since this truncated form is encoded by a natural splice
variant of CASPER, Shu et al. (1997) suggested that alternative splicing
of CASPER may provide a mechanism to regulate apoptosis triggered by
cell death pathways.

Irmler et al. (1997) found that activation of T cells induced a
transient resistance to FAS-induced apoptotic signals that correlated
with increased expression of FLIP(L). High levels of FLIP(L) protein
were detected in melanoma cell lines and malignant melanoma tumors. The
authors concluded that FLIP may be implicated in tissue homeostasis as
an important regulator of apoptosis.

Han et al. (1997) found that, when expressed in mammalian cells, MRIT
simultaneously and independently interacted with FLICE and BCLX(L)
(600039), an antiapoptotic member of the BCL2 family. Han et al. (1997)
suggested that MRIT may function as a link between cell survival and
cell death pathways in mammalian cells.

In human islets, elevated glucose concentrations impair beta-cell
proliferation and induce beta-cell apoptosis via upregulation of the FAS
receptor. Maedler et al. (2002) observed expression of FLIP in human
pancreatic beta-cells of nondiabetic individuals and decreased
expression in tissue sections of type 2 diabetic patients. In vitro
exposure of islets from nondiabetic organ donors to high glucose levels
decreased FLIP expression and increased the percentage of apoptotic
beta-cells, in which FLIP was no longer detectable. Upregulation of
FLIP, by incubation with transforming growth factor beta (TGFB1; 190180)
or by transfection with an expression vector coding for FLIP, protected
beta cells from glucose-induced apoptosis, restored beta-cell
proliferation, and improved beta-cell function. The beneficial effects
of FLIP overexpression were blocked by an antagonistic anti-FAS
antibody, indicating the dependence of these effects on FAS receptor
activation. The data provided evidence for expression of FLIP in the
human beta cell and suggested a novel approach to prevent and treat
diabetes by switching FAS signaling from apoptosis to proliferation.

The biologic outcome of TNF treatment is determined by the balance
between NF-kappa-B (see 164011), which promotes survival, and JNK (see
601158), which promotes cell death. Chang et al. (2006) found that Jnk
activity controlled Tnf-induced cell death through proteasomal
processing of Flip(L) in mice. Instead of direct phosphorylation of
Flip(L), Jnk promoted accelerated decay of Flip(L) through
phosphorylation and activation of the ubiquitin ligase Itch (606409).
Jnk1 or Itch deficiency or treatment with a Jnk inhibitor rendered mice
resistant in 3 distinct models of Tnf-induced liver failure, and cells
from these mice did not show inducible Flip(L) ubiquitination and
degradation. Chang et al. (2006) concluded that JNK antagonizes
NF-kappa-B during TNF signaling by promoting proteasomal elimination of
FLIP(L).

Oberst et al. (2011) showed that development of caspase-8-deficient mice
is completely rescued by ablation of receptor-interacting protein
kinase-3 (RIPK3; 605817). Adult animals lacking both caspase-8 and Ripk3
displayed a progressive lymphoaccumulative disease resembling that seen
with defects in Cd95 (FAS; 134637) or Cd95 ligand (FASL; 134638), and
resisted the lethal effects of Cd95 ligation in vivo. Oberst et al.
(2011) found that caspase-8 prevents RIPK3-dependent necrosis without
inducing apoptosis by functioning in a proteolytically active complex
with CFLAR and that this complex is required for the protective
function.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hadano et al. (2001) determined that the CFLAR gene contains 14 exons
and spans about 48 kb. It is transcribed in the centromere-to-telomere
direction.

MAPPING

Han et al. (1997) used fluorescence in situ hybridization and
Srinivasula et al. (1997) used radiation hybrid mapping to localize the
FLIP gene to 2q33-q34. Based on sequence similarity to STSs, Irmler et
al. (1997) and Inohara et al. (1997) tentatively mapped the FLIP gene to
2q33. Irmler et al. (1997) noted that the FLIP gene colocalizes with
caspase-10 (CASP10; 601762) on 2q33, suggesting that these genes arose
by gene duplication. Hadano et al. (2001) determined that the CFLAR,
CASP10, and CASP8 (601763) genes are tandemly located within 200 kb.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yeh et al. (2000) observed that mice deficient in Cflar failed to
survive beyond embryonic day 10.5 and exhibited impaired heart
development, similar to mice lacking Fadd or Casp8. Unlike mice lacking
Fadd or Casp8, however, Cflar -/- embryonic fibroblasts were highly
sensitive to FASL- or TNF-induced apoptosis, showing rapid induction of
Casp3 and Casp8 activities. Both nuclear factor kappa-B and Jnk/Sapk
were activated in Cflar-deficient and wildtype cells in response to TNF.
Yeh et al. (2000) proposed that CFLAR cooperates with CASP8 and FADD
during embryonic development and regulates death factor-induced
apoptosis induced by FAS or TNFR1 engagement.

Huang et al. (2010) generated mice with conditional loss of Flip
expression in myeloid cells. These mice exhibited growth retardation,
premature death, and splenomegaly with extramedullary hematopoiesis.
They also showed increased circulating neutrophils with multiorgan
neutrophil infiltration. Monocytes were also increased, but macrophages
were reduced. In vitro, differentiation to macrophages was Flip
dependent. Huang et al. (2010) concluded that FLIP is necessary for
macrophage differentiation and homeostatic regulation of granulopoiesis.

REFERENCE 1. Chang, L.; Kamata, H.; Solinas, G.; Luo, J.-L.; Maeda, S.; Venuprasad,
K.; Liu, Y.-C.; Karin, M.: The E3 ubiquitin ligase Itch couples JNK
activation to TNF-alpha-induced cell death by inducing c-FLIP(L) turnover. Cell 124:
601-613, 2006.

2. Goltsev, Y. V.; Kovalenko, A. V.; Arnold, E.; Varfolomeev, E. E.;
Brodianskii, V. M.; Wallach, D.: CASH, a novel caspase homologue
with death effector domains. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 19641-19644, 1997.

3. Hadano, S.; Yanagisawa, Y.; Skaug, J.; Fichter, K.; Nasir, J.;
Martindale, D.; Koop, B. F.; Scherer, S. W.; Nicholson, D. W.; Rouleau,
G. A.; Ikeda, J.-E.; Hayden, M. R.: Cloning and characterization
of three novel genes, ALS2CR1, ALS2CR2, and ALS2CR3, in the juvenile
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS2) critical region at chromosome
2q33-q34: candidate genes for ALS2. Genomics 71: 200-213, 2001.

4. Han, D. K. M.; Chaudhary, P. M.; Wright, M. E.; Friedman, C.; Trask,
B. J.; Riedel, R. T.; Baskin, D. G.; Schwartz, S. M.; Hood, L.: MRIT,
a novel death-effector domain-containing protein, interacts with caspases
and BclX(L) and initiates cell death. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94:
11333-11338, 1997.

5. Hu, S.; Vincenz, C.; Ni, J.; Gentz, R.; Dixit, V. M.: I-FLICE,
a novel inhibitor of tumor necrosis factor receptor-1- and CD-95-induced
apoptosis. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 17255-17257, 1997.

6. Huang, Q.-Q.; Perlman, H.; Huang, Z.; Birkett, R.; Kan, L.; Agrawal,
H.; Misharin, A.; Gurbuxani, S.; Crispino, J. D.; Pope, R. M.: FLIP:
a novel regulator of macrophage differentiation and granulocyte homeostasis. Blood 116:
4968-4977, 2010.

7. Inohara, N.; Koseki, T.; Hu, Y.; Chen, S.; Nunez, G.: CLARP, a
death effector domain-containing protein interacts with caspase-8
and regulates apoptosis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 10717-10722,
1997.

8. Irmler, M.; Thome, M.; Hahne, M.; Schneider, P.; Hofmann, K.; Steiner,
V.; Bodmer, J.-L.; Schroter, M.; Burns, K.; Mattmann, C.; Rimoldi,
D.; French, L. E.; Tschopp, J.: Inhibition of death receptor signals
by cellular FLIP. Nature 388: 190-195, 1997.

9. Jun, A. S.; Liu, S. H.; Koo, E. H.; Do, D. V.; Stark, W. J.; Gottsch,
J. D.: Microarray analysis of gene expression in human donor corneas. Arch.
Ophthal. 119: 1629-1634, 2001.

10. Maedler, K.; Fontana, A.; Ris, F.; Sergeev, P.; Toso, C.; Oberholzer,
J.; Lehmann, R.; Bachmann, F.; Tasinato, A.; Spinas, G. A.; Halban,
P. A.; Donath, M. Y.: FLIP switches Fas-mediated glucose signaling
in human pancreatic beta cells from apoptosis to cell replication. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 8236-8241, 2002.

11. Oberst, A.; Dillon, C. P.; Weinlich, R.; McCormick, L. L.; Fitzgerald,
P.; Pop, C.; Hakem, R.; Salvesen, G. S.; Green, D. R.: Catalytic
activity of the caspase-8-FLIP(L) complex inhibits RIPK3-dependent
necrosis. Nature 471: 363-367, 2011.

12. Shu, H.-B.; Halpin, D. R.; Goeddel, D. V.: Casper is a FADD-
and caspase-related inducer of apoptosis. Immunity 6: 751-763, 1997.

13. Srinivasula, S. M.; Ahmad, M.; Ottilie, S.; Bullrich, F.; Banks,
S.; Wang, Y.; Fernandes-Alnemri, T.; Croce, C. M.; Litwack, G.; Tomaselli,
K. J.; Armstrong, R. C.; Alnemri, E. S.: FLAME-1, a novel FADD-like
anti-apoptotic molecule that regulates Fas/TNFR1-induced apoptosis. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 18542-18545, 1997.

14. Yeh, W.-C.; Itie, A.; Elia, A. J.; Ng, M.; Shu, H.-B.; Wakeham,
A.; Mirtsos, C.; Suzuki, N.; Bonnard, M.; Goeddel, D. V.; Mak, T.
W.: Requirement for Casper (c-FLIP) in regulation of death receptor-induced
apoptosis and embryonic development. Immunity 12: 633-642, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/7/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/1/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/21/2009
Jane Kelly - updated: 11/21/2002
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/8/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/3/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/23/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 3/2/1999

EDITED alopez: 06/14/2011
terry: 6/7/2011
mgross: 6/6/2011
terry: 6/1/2011
wwang: 5/28/2009
mgross: 5/21/2009
carol: 11/21/2002
mgross: 11/8/2002
cwells: 7/19/2002
cwells: 7/18/2002
terry: 7/3/2002
mgross: 4/23/2002
psherman: 5/7/1999
psherman: 3/2/1999

603022	TITLE *603022 E4F TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 1; E4F1
;;TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR E4F; E4F;;
p120 E4F
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Oncogenic transformation by the adenovirus E1A gene is a consequence of
E1A proteins altering the activity or function of cellular transcription
factors that are involved in the regulation of cell growth, survival, or
differentiation. E4F is one of several cellular transcription factors
whose DNA-binding activities are regulated through the action of E1A.
Rooney et al. (1998) determined the pattern of tissue expression of the
E4F gene in humans and mice.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a yeast 2-hybrid system, Fenton et al. (2004) found that RASSF1A
(605082) interacted with E4F1, a phosphoprotein involved in cell cycle
progression. The 2 proteins formed a complex in vivo in a mouse
fibroblast cell line and in a human nonsmall cell lung cancer line.
Specific inactivation of RASSF1A by short interfering RNA disrupted the
binding of RASSF1A to E4F1 in immunoprecipitation assays. In addition,
there was enhanced G1 cell cycle arrest and S-phase inhibition by E4F1
in the presence of RASSF1A.

Chagraoui et al. (2006) found that knockdown of E4f1 levels by RNA
interference was sufficient to rescue the clonogenic and repopulating
ability of Bmi1 (164831) -/- mouse hematopoietic cells up to 3 months
posttransplantation. They concluded that E4F1 is a key modulator of BMI1
activity in primitive hematopoietic cells.

Le Cam et al. (2006) found that human E4F1 functioned as a ubiquitin
(191339) E3 ligase for p53 (TP53; 191170) both in vitro and in vivo.
E4F1-mediated ubiquitylation of p53 occurred at sites distinct from
those targeted by MDM2 (164785), competed with PCAF (602303)-induced
acetylation of p53, and did not target p53 for proteasomal degradation.
E4F1-stimulated p53-ubiquitin conjugates were associated with chromatin,
and their stimulation coincided with induction of a p53-dependent
transcriptional program specifically involved in cell cycle arrest, but
not apoptosis. Le Cam et al. (2006) concluded that E4F1 is a key
posttranslational regulator of p53 that plays an important role in the
cellular life-or-death decision controlled by p53.

MAPPING

Rooney et al. (1998) determined the chromosomal location of the E4F gene
in humans and mice. The mouse chromosomal location of E4f1 was
determined by interspecific backcross analysis to be chromosome 17. PCR
analysis of DNAs from human/rodent somatic cell hybrids showed 100%
concordance for the human gene with chromosome 16. PCR analysis of DNAs
from somatic cell hybrids specific for human chromosome 16 and
containing defined truncations in the terminal region of 16p localized
the E4F gene to a region of approximately 500 kb within 16p13.3. Burn et
al. (1996) had likewise mapped a sequence that appeared to be that of
E4F to 16p13.3 in exon trapping experiments. A major portion of the gene
was located 100 to 200 kb proximal to the start of the polycystic kidney
disease gene (601313). By fluorescence in situ hybridization and
radiation hybrid mapping, Saccone et al. (1998) assigned the E4F gene to
16p13.3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Le Cam et al. (2004) generated E4f1 knockout mice. Embryos lacking E4f1
died at the periimplantation stage, and in vitro-cultured mutant
blastocysts exhibited defects in mitotic progression, chromosomal
missegregation, and increased apoptosis. Consistent with these
observations, E4f1 localized to the mitotic spindle during the M phase
of early embryos. Le Cam et al. (2004) concluded that E4F1 is crucial
during early embryonic cell cycles and functions in mitosis.

REFERENCE 1. Burn, T. C.; Connors, T. D.; Van Raay, T. J.; Dackowski, W. R.;
Millholland, J. M.; Klinger, K. W.; Landes, G. M.: Generation of
a transcriptional map for a 700-kb region surrounding the polycystic
kidney disease type 1 (PKD1) and tuberous sclerosis type 1 (TSC2)
disease genes on human chromosome 16p13.3. Genome Res. 6: 525-537,
1996.

2. Chagraoui, J.; Niessen, S. L.; Lessard, J.; Girard, S.; Coulombe,
P.; Sauvageau, M.; Meloche, S.; Sauvageau, G.: E4F1: a novel candidate
factor for mediating BMI1 function in primitive hematopoietic cells. Genes
Dev. 20: 2110-2120, 2006.

3. Fenton, S. L.; Dallol, A.; Agathanggelou, A.; Hesson, L.; Ahmed-Choudhury,
J.; Baksh, S.; Sardet, C.; Dammann, R.; Minna, J. D.; Downward, J.;
Maher, E. R.; Latif, F.: Identification of the E1A-regulated transcription
factor p120(E4F) as an interacting partner of the RASSF1A candidate
tumor suppressor gene. Cancer Res. 64: 102-107, 2004.

4. Le Cam, L.; Lacroix, M.; Ciemerych, M. A.; Sardet, C.; Sicinski,
P.: The E4F protein is required for mitotic progression during embryonic
cell cycles. Molec. Cell. Biol. 24: 6467-6475, 2004.

5. Le Cam, L.; Linares, L. K.; Paul, C.; Julien, E.; Lacroix, M.;
Hatchi, E.; Triboulet, R.; Bossis, G.; Shmueli, A.; Rodriguez, M.
S.; Coux, O.; Sardet, C.: E4F1 is an atypical ubiquitin ligase that
modulates p53 effector functions independently of degradation. Cell 127:
775-788, 2006.

6. Rooney, R. J.; Daniels, R. R.; Jenkins, N. A.; Gilbert, D. J.;
Rothammer, K.; Morris, S. W.; Higgs, D. R.; Copeland, N. G.: Chromosomal
location and tissue expression of the gene encoding the adenovirus
E1A-regulated transcription factor E4F in humans and mice. Mammalian
Genome 9: 320-323, 1998.

7. Saccone, S.; Sandy, P.; Meroni, G.; Gostissa, M.; Della Valle,
G.; Del Sal, G.: Assignment of the E1A-regulated transcription factor
E4F gene (E4F1) to human chromosome band 16p13.3 by in situ hybridization
and somatic cell hybrids. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 82: 99-100, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/7/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/3/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/16/2004
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 11/17/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/9/1998

EDITED carol: 07/06/2011
alopez: 7/16/2009
wwang: 5/11/2009
mgross: 5/7/2009
mgross: 10/4/2006
terry: 10/3/2006
wwang: 7/27/2005
mgross: 7/27/2005
mgross: 9/7/2004
terry: 8/16/2004
terry: 11/17/1998
carol: 11/16/1998
dkim: 9/10/1998
alopez: 9/9/1998

602872	TITLE *602872 CHLORIDE INTRACELLULAR CHANNEL 1; CLIC1
;;NCC27
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Ion channels are present on the plasma membrane of virtually all cells
and have been found on the membranes of various organelles. Valenzuela
et al. (1997) identified a cDNA encoding a nuclear chloride channel
protein, CLIC1, which they called NCC27. The predicted 241-amino acid
protein is 57% identical to a bovine chloride channel protein, p64,
thought to localize to organelles. NCC27 contains 2 putative
transmembrane domains and 2 putative nuclear localization sequences. It
migrated as a 27-kD protein on Western blots of mammalian cell extracts.
Using immunohistochemistry, Valenzuela et al. (1997) showed that NCC27
localized principally to the nucleus and nuclear membrane in Chinese
hamster ovary (CHO) cells. Northern blot analysis showed that NCC27 was
expressed as 1.0- and 1.2-kb mRNAs in various cells and cell lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Valenzuela et al. (1997) used patch clamp studies of CHO cells
expressing NCC27 and observed an increased level of chloride ion channel
activity at their nuclear membrane.

Singh et al. (2007) showed that recombinant human CLIC1 mediated a
single-channel current when reconstituted on a planar lipid bilayer.
Currents produced by CLIC1 and by CLIC5 (607293) were strongly and
reversibly inactivated by addition of purified platelet F-actin (see
102560) to the cytosolic face of the bilayer. Inhibition by F-actin was
reversed by disruption of F-actin.

REFERENCE 1. Singh, H.; Cousin, M. A.; Ashley, R. H.: Functional reconstitution
of mammalian 'chloride intracellular channels' CLIC1, CLIC4 and CLIC5
reveals differential regulation by cytoskeletal actin. FEBS J. 274:
6306-6316, 2007.

2. Valenzuela, S. M.; Martin, D. K.; Por, S. B.; Robbins, J. M.; Warton,
K.; Bootcov, M. R.; Schofield, P. R.; Campbell, T. J.; Breit, S. N.
: Molecular cloning and expression of a chloride ion channel of cell
nuclei. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 12575-12582, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/28/2010

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/21/1998

EDITED mgross: 11/19/2010
terry: 10/28/2010
alopez: 7/21/1998

609074	TITLE *609074 F-BOX AND WD40 DOMAIN PROTEIN 9; FBXW9
;;FBW9
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the F-box protein family, such as FBXW9, are characterized by
an approximately 40-amino acid F-box motif. SCF complexes, formed by
SKP1 (601434), cullin (see CUL1; 603034), and F-box proteins, act as
protein-ubiquitin ligases. F-box proteins interact with SKP1 through the
F box, and they interact with ubiquitination targets through other
protein interaction domains (Jin et al., 2004).

CLONING

Jin et al. (2004) reported that the FBXW9 protein contains an N-terminal
F box, followed by 6 WD40 repeats.

MAPPING

Jin et al. (2004) stated that the FBXW9 gene maps to chromosome 19p13.2
and the mouse Fbxw9 gene maps to chromosome 9.

REFERENCE 1. Jin, J.; Cardozo, T.; Lovering, R. C.; Elledge, S. J.; Pagano,
M.; Harper, J. W.: Systematic analysis and nomenclature of mammalian
F-box proteins. Genes Dev. 18: 2573-2580, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/10/2004

EDITED mgross: 12/10/2004

612050	TITLE *612050 NEDD4 FAMILY-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1; NDFIP1
;;NEDD4 WW DOMAIN-BINDING PROTEIN 5; N4WBP5
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By Far Western screening of mouse embryonic cDNA libraries using the
NEDD4 (602278) WW domain as probe, Jolliffe et al. (2000) identified
mouse Ndfip1, which they called N4wbp5. By database analysis, Harvey et
al. (2002) identified human NDFIP1, which shares a high degree of
similarity with its mouse homolog. The deduced 221-amino acid NDFIP1
protein has a calculated molecular mass of 26 kD and contains 2
N-terminal PY motifs and 3 predicted transmembrane regions. Northern
blot analysis of human tissues detected expression in most adult tissues
with high expression in adult brain tissues, such as cerebellum,
pituitary, and thalamus, and kidney, liver, testis, salivary gland, and
adult placenta. High expression was also detected in fetal brain,
kidney, and lung. Immunofluorescence studies and subcellular
fractionation localized NDFIP1 to the Golgi complex.

GENE FUNCTION

By Far Western analysis using wildtype and mutated proteins, Jolliffe et
al. (2000) showed that NDFIP1-NEDD4 binding occurred via the first PY
motif of NDFIP1 and the second and third WW domains of NEDD4.

By coimmunoprecipitation and GST pull-down assay, Harvey et al. (2002)
demonstrated that both NDFIP1 PY domains bound the NEDD4 WW2 and WW3
domains but not WW1; however, the first NDFIP1 PY motif displayed
significantly higher binding affinity than the second PY motif. Far
Western analysis showed that NDFIP1 bound the WW domains of NEDD4 family
members, including NEDD4L (606384), KIAA0322 (HECW1; 610384), WWP2
(602308), and AIP4 (606409). SDS-PAGE, immunoblot, and
immunoprecipitation studies showed that NDFIP1 is ubiquitinated.
Ectopically expressed NDFIP1 caused disruption of the Golgi structure,
suggesting that NDFIP1 plays a role in structural maintenance of the
Golgi complex. Pulse-chase studies with COS cells coexpressing NDFIP1
and NEDD4 showed that active NEDD4 expression significantly increased
the NDFIP1 turnover rate. Harvey et al. (2002) suggested that NDFIP1 may
be a target for NEDD4 ubiquitin ligase activity and that based on
inhibitor studies NDFIP1 turnover involved both proteasomal and
lysosomal/endosomal pathways.

MAPPING

Although Harvey et al. (2002) stated that the NDFIP1 gene mapped to
chromosome 5q24, Hartz (2008) mapped the NDFIP1 gene to chromosome
5q31.3 based on an alignment of the NDFIP1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK
AA496123) with the genomic sequence (build 36.1).

ANIMAL MODEL

Foot et al. (2011) stated that NDFIP1 and NDFIP2 (610041) regulate DMT1
(SLC11A2; 600523) by acting as adaptors between DMT1 and the ubiquitin
ligases WWP2 and NEDD4-2 (NEDD4L), thereby directing DMT1 ubiquitination
and subsequent degradation. They found that Dmt1 expression and activity
were increased in duodenal enterocytes of Ndfip1 -/- mice, particularly
in Ndfip1 -/- mice fed a low-iron diet. Increased duodenal Dmt1 activity
led to higher serum iron levels and greater transferrin (TF; 190000)
saturation. Ndfip1 -/- mice also developed anemia, which appeared to be
due to reduced erythropoiesis in bone marrow and inflammation. Anemia
developed earlier in Ndfip1 -/- mice on a low-iron diet.

REFERENCE 1. Foot, N. J.; Leong, Y. A.; Dorstyn, L. E.; Dalton, H. E.; Ho, K.;
Zhao, L.; Garrick, M. D.; Yang, B.; Hiwase, D.; Kumar, S.: Ndfip1-deficient
mice have impaired DMT1 regulation and iron homeostasis. Blood 117:
638-646, 2011.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/11/2008.

3. Harvey, K. F.; Shearwin-Whyatt, L. M.; Fotia, A.; Parton, R. G.;
Kumar, S.: N4WBP5, a potential target for ubiquitination by the Nedd4
family of proteins, is a novel Golgi-associated protein. J. Biol.
Chem. 277: 9307-9317, 2002.

4. Jolliffe, C. N.; Harvey, K. F.; Haines, B. P.; Parasivam, G.; Kumar,
S.: Identification of multiple proteins expressed in murine embryos
as binding partners for the WW domains of the ubiquitin-protein ligase
Nedd4. Biochem. J. 351: 557-565, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/2/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/11/2008

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 5/15/2008

EDITED mgross: 09/27/2011
terry: 9/2/2011
wwang: 6/11/2008
joanna: 6/11/2008
carol: 5/19/2008
wwang: 5/15/2008

191316	TITLE *191316 NEUROTROPHIC TYROSINE KINASE, RECEPTOR, TYPE 3; NTRK3
;;TYROSINE KINASE RECEPTOR C; TRKC;;
NEUROTROPHIN 3 RECEPTOR
NTRK3/ETV6 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION For background information on the neurotrophic tyrosine receptor kinase
(NTRK) family, see NTRK1 (191315).

CLONING

Lamballe et al. (1991) isolated and characterized TRKC, a member of the
TRK family of tyrosine protein kinase genes. They found that TRKC is
preferentially expressed in the brain; in situ hybridization studies
showed transcripts in the hippocampus, cerebral cortex, and the granular
cell layer of the cerebellum. The product of the TRKC gene is a
glycoprotein of 145 kD, gp145(trkC), which is equally related to the
previously characterized gp140(trk) (TRKA) and gp145(trkB) (TRKB;
600456) tyrosine kinases. Lamballe et al. (1991) demonstrated that
gp145(trkC) is a receptor for NTF3, a factor important in the
development of certain areas of the central nervous system, but does not
bind NGF or BDNF.

McGregor et al. (1994) cloned and sequenced the human TRKC cDNA and
found that the predicted amino acid sequence is 97% and 98% homologous
to the rat and porcine TRKC sequences, respectively. The rat Trkc had
several isoforms due to alternative splicing in the tyrosine kinase
domain. McGregor et al. (1994) cloned one human splice variant that had
a nucleic acid sequence identical to the rat isoform with an insert of
14 amino acids.

GENE FUNCTION

Medulloblastoma, the most common malignant brain tumor of childhood, has
a variable prognosis. Although half of the children and young adults
with the disease survive longer than 10 years after diagnosis, the
others relapse and die despite identical therapy. Segal et al. (1994)
examined the expression of neurotrophins and their receptors in
medulloblastoma samples snap-frozen in the operating room to preserve
RNA integrity. All 12 tumors were found to express mRNA encoding
neurotrophin-3 and its receptor TRKC. The level of TRKC expression was
highly variable, with a more than 50-fold difference between the highest
and lowest values. By Kaplan-Meier analysis, patients with tumors
expressing high levels of TRKC mRNA had significantly longer intervals
without disease progression than those with low levels and a more
favorable overall survival. Thus, TRKC expression is a prognostic
indicator for patients with medulloblastoma.

See ETV6 (600618) and Knezevich et al. (1998) for discussion of an
ETV6-NTRK3 fusion gene involved in congenital (or infantile)
fibrosarcoma (CFS).

Schwann cells in developing and regenerating peripheral nerves express
elevated levels of the neurotrophin receptor p75(NTR) (162010).
Neurotrophins are key mediators of peripheral nervous system
myelination. Cosgaya et al. (2002) demonstrated that myelin formation is
inhibited in the absence of functional p75(NTR) and enhanced by blocking
TRKC activity. Moreover, the enhancement of myelin formation by
endogenous BDNF (113505) is mediated by the p75(NTR) receptor, whereas
TRKC receptors are responsible for neurotrophin-3 (NT3; 162660)
inhibition. Thus, Cosgaya et al. (2002) concluded that p75(NTR) and TRKC
receptors have opposite effects on myelination. Cosgaya et al. (2002)
developed a model for the actions of endogenous neurotrophins and their
receptors throughout myelination. During glial proliferation,
elongation, and ensheathment, NT3 levels decrease whereas TRKC and
p57(NTR) remain constant. The activation of TRKC by NT3 during these
phases prevents the myelination program from proceeding. When
myelination is initiated, NT3 protein levels have already become
undetectable, thereby removing its inhibitory action. At the same time
BDNF acts as a positive modulator of myelination through the activation
of p75(NTR). Once active myelination is underway, extracellular BDNF is
removed through its binding to the increased levels of TRKB-T1 (600456).
After the myelination is complete, all the neurotrophins and their
receptors are downregulated.

Neurotrophins (NTFs) act as survival and differentiation factors in the
nervous system and have been detected in the developing rodent testis.
To determine whether neurotrophins could influence development and
maturation of the human fetal testis, Robinson et al. (2003) examined
the cell-specific expression and distribution of several members of the
neurotrophin family and their receptors during the second trimester,
with particular emphasis on NT4 and TRKB. They detected expression of
mRNA for nerve growth factor (NGF; 162030), NTF3 and NTF4, BDNF, the
high-affinity receptors TRKA (191315), TRKB, and TRKC, and the
low-affinity p75 receptor (NGFR; 162010) in the human testis between 14
and 19 weeks' gestation. NT4 mRNA and protein were predominantly
localized to the peritubular cells. These cells were also the site of
expression of p75. By contrast, NGF and NT3 were mainly expressed in
Sertoli and interstitial cells. The authors concluded that these data
demonstrate the expression of neurotrophins and their receptors in the
human fetal testis during the second trimester and indicate possible
roles in the regulation of proliferation and survival of germ cells and
peritubular cells.

Laneve et al. (2007) identified the mRNA encoding a truncated isoform of
NTRK3 (t-NTRK3) lacking the kinase domain as the target of 3 microRNAs
(miRNAs), MIRN9 (see 611186), MIRN125A (611191), and MIRN125B (see
610104), that were upregulated in a human neuroblastoma cell line by
retinoic acid. The 3-prime UTR of the t-NTRK3 transcript has a binding
site for MIRN9 and another for both MIRN125A and MIRN125B, which share
the same seed sequence. These miRNAs repressed t-NTRK3 expression in an
additive manner, and downregulation of t-NTRK3 was critical for
regulating neuroblastoma cell growth. Consistent with their function,
MIRN9, MIRN125A, and MIRN125B were downmodulated in primary
neuroblastoma tumors.

By functional studies in HeLa cells, Muinos-Gimeno et al. (2009)
demonstrated that 5 miRNAs regulate the truncated form of NTRK3.
MIRN485-3p decreased activity by 17%, whereas MIRN509 and MIRN625 caused
a striking reduction of more than 50% in luciferase activity, indicating
strong repression. MIRN128 (611774) and MIRN765 showed intermediate
repressive activity.

Using engineered embryonic stem cells, Nikoletopoulou et al. (2010)
demonstrated that the neurotrophin receptors TRKA and TRKC instruct
developing neurons to die, both in vitro and in vivo. By contrast, TRKB
(600456), a closely related receptor primarily expression in the central
nervous system, does not. These results indicated that TRKA and TRKC
behave as dependence receptors, explaining why developing sympathetic
and sensory neurons become trophic factor-dependent for survival.
Nikoletopoulou et al. (2010) suggested that the expansion of the TRK
gene family that accompanied the segregation of the peripheral from the
central nervous system generated a novel mechanism of cell number
control.

MAPPING

By PCR analysis of a somatic cell hybrid panel and by fluorescence in
situ hybridization with the cDNA clone, McGregor et al. (1994) mapped
the NTRK3 gene to 15q24-q25.

Valent et al. (1997) confirmed the assignment of NTRK3 to 15q25 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Muinos-Gimeno et al. (2009) identified 4 SNPs in the 3-prime
untranslated region of the truncated isoform of NTRK3 that were within
MIRN target sites. Analysis of 212 patients with panic disorder (see
607834), 153 patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder (164230), and
324 controls showed that 2 SNPs were common variants (dbSNP ss102661463
and dbSNP rs28521337). The other 2 SNPs were rare, each identified only
in 1 chromosome of a patient with panic disorder: a T-to-C change (dbSNP
ss102661458), in the target sites of MIRN128 and MIRN509, and a G-to-C
change (dbSNP ss102661460), in the target site of MIRN765. Both patients
were male and had the agoraphobic phenotype. Functional studies showed
that the C alleles of both SNPs resulted in modest but significant
recovery of luciferase activity (10 to 15%) when expressed with their
corresponding MIRNs compared to the wildtype alleles. In another study,
the common C-to-G SNP dbSNP rs28521337, located in the binding site for
MIRN485-3p, showed a significant association with the hoarding subtype
of obsessive-compulsive disorder (odds ratio of 0.53, p = 0.0048 after
Bonferroni correction). The findings suggested that the C allele of this
SNP could have a moderate protective effect against the hoarding
phenotype. However, functional studies showed no significant change in
luciferase levels for the G compared to the C allele (92% versus 85%),
indicating that the variant does not interfere significantly with MIRN
binding. Muinos-Gimeno et al. (2009) suggested that functional variation
in expression of the NTRK3 gene may influence susceptibility to the
development of anxiety disorders.

EVOLUTION

Human evolution is characterized by a dramatic increase in brain size
and complexity. To probe its genetic basis, Dorus et al. (2004) examined
the evolution of genes involved in diverse aspects of nervous system
biology. These genes, including NTRK3, displayed significantly higher
rates of protein evolution in primates than in rodents. This trend was
most pronounced for the subset of genes implicated in nervous system
development. Moreover, within primates, the acceleration of protein
evolution was most prominent in the lineage leading from ancestral
primates to humans. Dorus et al. (2004) concluded that the phenotypic
evolution of the human nervous system has a salient molecular correlate,
i.e., accelerated evolution of the underlying genes, particularly those
linked to nervous system development.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Bibel and Barde (2000); Bothwell  (1996); Carter and Lewin (1997);
Ip et al. (1993)
REFERENCE 1. Bibel, M.; Barde, Y.-A.: Neurotrophins: key regulators of cell
fate and cell shape in the vertebrate nervous system. Genes Dev. 14:
2919-2937, 2000.

2. Bothwell, M.: p75(NTR): a receptor after all. Science 272: 506-507,
1996.

3. Carter, B. D.; Lewin, G. R.: Neurotrophins live or let die: does
p75(NTR) decide? Neuron 18: 187-190, 1997.

4. Cosgaya, J. M.; Chan, J. R.; Shooter, E. M.: The neurotrophin
receptor p75(NTR) as a positive modulator of myelination. Science 298:
1245-1248, 2002.

5. Dorus, S.; Vallender, E. J.; Evans, P. D.; Anderson, J. R.; Gilbert,
S. L.; Mahowald, M.; Wyckoff, G. J.; Malcom, C. M.; Lahn, B. T.:
Accelerated evolution of nervous system genes in the origin of Homo
sapiens. Cell 119: 1027-1040, 2004.

6. Ip, N. Y.; Stitt, T. N.; Tapley, P.; Klein, R.; Glass, D. J.; Fandl,
J.; Greene, L. A.; Barbacid, M.; Yancopoulos, G. D.: Similarities
and differences in the way neurotrophins interact with the Trk receptors
in neuronal and nonneuronal cells. Neuron 10: 137-149, 1993.

7. Knezevich, S. R.; McFadden, D. E.; Tao, W.; Lim, J. F.; Sorensen,
P. H. B.: A novel ETV6-NTRK3 gene fusion in congenital fibrosarcoma. Nature
Genet. 18: 184-187, 1998.

8. Lamballe, F.; Klein, R.; Barbacid, M.: TRKC, a new member of the
TRK family of tyrosine protein kinases, is a receptor for neurotrophin-3. Cell 66:
967-979, 1991.

9. Laneve, P.; Di Marcotullio, L.; Gioia, U.; Fiori, M. E.; Ferretti,
E.; Gulino, A.; Bozzoni, I.; Caffarelli, E.: The interplay between
microRNAs and the neurotrophin receptor tropomyosin-related kinase
C controls proliferation of human neuroblastoma cells. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 104: 7957-7962, 2007.

10. McGregor, L. M.; Baylin, S. B.; Griffin, C. A.; Hawkins, A. L.;
Nelkin, B. D.: Molecular cloning of the cDNA for human TrkC (NTRK3),
chromosomal assignment, and evidence for a splice variant. Genomics 22:
267-272, 1994.

11. Muinos-Gimeno, M.; Guidi, M.; Kagerbauer, B.; Martin-Santos, R.;
Navines, R.; Alonso, P.; Menchon, J. M.; Gratacos, M.; Estivill, X.;
Espinosa-Parrilla, Y.: Allele variants in functional microRNA target
sites of the neurotrophin-3 receptor gene (NTRK3) as susceptibility
factors for anxiety disorders. Hum. Mutat. 30: 1062-1071, 2009.

12. Nikoletopoulou, V.; Lickert, H.; Frade, J. M.; Rencurel, C.; Giallonardo,
P.; Zhang, L.; Bibel, M.; Barde, Y.-A.: Neurotrophin receptors TrkA
and TrkC cause neuronal death whereas TrkB does not. Nature 467:
59-63, 2010.

13. Robinson, L. L. L.; Townsend, J.; Anderson, R. A.: The human
fetal testis is a site of expression of neurotrophins and their receptors:
regulation of the germ cell and peritubular cell population. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 88: 3943-3951, 2003.

14. Segal, R. A.; Goumnerova, L. C.; Kwon, Y. K.; Stiles, C. D.; Pomeroy,
S. L.: Expression of the neurotrophin receptor TrkC is linked to
a favorable outcome in medulloblastoma. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91:
12867-12871, 1994.

15. Valent, A.; Danglot, G.; Bernheim, A.: Mapping of the tyrosine
kinase receptors trkA (NTRK1), trkB (NTRK2) and trkC (NTRK3) to human
chromosomes 1q22, 9q22 and 15q25 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 5: 102-104, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/27/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/11/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/6/2007
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/10/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/6/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/13/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/15/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/26/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/12/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/30/1991

EDITED alopez: 09/27/2010
terry: 9/27/2010
alopez: 11/12/2009
ckniffin: 11/11/2009
ckniffin: 12/5/2008
mgross: 7/10/2007
terry: 7/6/2007
mgross: 1/10/2005
alopez: 10/6/2004
alopez: 11/13/2002
terry: 11/12/2002
tkritzer: 11/7/2002
mgross: 5/15/2001
carol: 4/12/1999
psherman: 6/24/1998
mark: 1/26/1998
jenny: 9/19/1997
terry: 9/12/1997
carol: 1/13/1995
carol: 10/2/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 10/30/1991

300112	TITLE *300112 PROTEOLIPID PROTEIN 2; PLP2
;;PROTEOLIPID PROTEIN, COLONIC EPITHELIUM-ENRICHED;;
DIFFERENTIATION-DEPENDENT PROTEIN A4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Oliva et al. (1993) cloned a cDNA encoding the A4
differentiation-dependent protein from a human colon cell line.

Fisher et al. (1997) determined that the product of the A4 gene is an
integral membrane protein, containing 4 putative transmembrane domains.
The protein may play a role in cell differentiation in the intestinal
epithelium.

GENE STRUCTURE

In a study of the gene-rich region Xp11.23-p11.22, Fisher et al. (1997)
identified the promoter and complete coding sequence of the A4 gene,
which is organized into 5 exons spanning approximately 3.5 kb of DNA.

MAPPING

Fisher et al. (1997) identified the A4 gene on chromosome
Xp11.23-p11.22.

REFERENCE 1. Fisher, S. E.; Ciccodicola, A.; Tanaka, K.; Curci, A.; Desicato,
S.; D'Urso, M.; Craig, I. W.: Sequence-based exon prediction around
the synaptophysin locus reveals a gene-rich area containing novel
genes in human proximal Xp. Genomics 45: 340-347, 1997.

2. Oliva, M. M.; Wu, T. C.; Yang, V. W.: Isolation and characterization
of a differentiation-dependent gene in the human colonic cell line
HT29-18. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 302: 183-192, 1993.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/11/1997

EDITED carol: 08/20/2012
alopez: 9/30/1999
mark: 12/11/1997

