605568	TITLE *605568 SMAD-SPECIFIC E3 UBIQUITIN PROTEIN LIGASE 1; SMURF1
;;SMAD UBIQUITINATION REGULATORY FACTOR 1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen with frog Smad1 (601595) as bait, Zhu et
al. (1999) identified cDNAs encoding frog and human SMURF1. Frog and
human SMURF1 contain 731 amino acids, share 91% identity, are most
closely related to yeast Pub1, and have significant homology to the Hect
subclass of E3 ubiquitin ligases.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhu et al. (1999) found that expression of SMURF1 caused a
dose-dependent decrease in expression of SMAD1 and SMAD5 (603110), which
function in bone morphogenetic protein (BMP; see 603248) signaling, but
not in expression of SMAD2 (601366) or SMAD3 (603109), which function in
TGFB (190180) signaling. Pulse-chase analysis demonstrated that
degradation of SMAD proteins occurs by ubiquitination of the SMAD Hect
domain and transport to the proteasome. Mutational analysis indicated
that the WW motif of SMURF1 associates with SMAD1 and SMAD5 through
their PY motifs. In frog eggs, Smurf1 mRNA was localized to the animal
pole; ectopic Smurf1 in frog embryos inhibited the transmission of BMP
signals, affecting pattern formation.

Wang et al. (2003) found that Smurf1, a HECT domain E3 ubiquitin ligase,
regulated cell polarity and protrusive activity and was required to
maintain the transformed morphology and motility of a tumor cell.
Atypical protein kinase C-zeta (PKC2; 176982), an effector of the Cdc42
(116952)/Rac1 (602048)-PAR6 (607484) polarity complex, recruited Smurf1
to cellular protrusions, where it controlled the local level of RhoA
(165390). Smurf1 thus links the polarity complex to degradation of RhoA
in lamellipodia and filopodia to prevent RhoA signaling during dynamic
membrane movements.

Using RNA interference, Crose et al. (2009) showed that knockdown of
Ccm2 (607929) in mouse brain endothelial cells led to increased
monolayer permeability, decreased tubule formation, and reduced cell
migration following wounding. These effects were associated with
elevated levels of RhoA. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis revealed that
Ccm2 directly bound Smurf1. Domain analysis revealed that the PTB domain
of Ccm2 directly bound the HECT domain of Smurf1, and the interaction
targeted Smurf1 to Ccm2 complexes localized primarily at the cell
periphery. Coexpression of Ccm2 and Smurf1 led to cell rounding, likely
due to loss of RhoA. Crose et al. (2009) concluded that CCM2 contributes
to endothelial cell integrity by regulating SMURF1-directed RHOA
degradation

Orvedahl et al. (2011) performed a high-content, image-based, genomewide
small interfering RNA screen to detect genes required for the
colocalization of Sindbis virus capsid protein with autophagolysosomes.
They identified 141 candidate genes required for viral autophagy, which
were enriched for cellular pathways related to mRNA processing,
interferon signaling, vesicle trafficking, cytoskeletal motor function,
and metabolism. Ninety-six of these genes were also required for Parkin
(602544)-mediated mitophagy, indicating that common molecular
determinants may be involved in autophagic targeting of viral
nucleocapsids and autophagic targeting of damaged mitochondria. Murine
embryonic fibroblasts lacking one of these gene products, the C2
domain-containing protein SMURF1, are deficient in the autophagosomal
targeting of Sindbis and herpes simplex viruses and in the clearance of
damaged mitochondria. Moreover, SMURF1-deficient mice accumulated
damaged mitochondria in the heart, brain, and liver. Thus, Orvedahl et
al. (2011) concluded that their study identified candidate determinants
of selective autophagy, and defined SMURF1 as a mediator of both viral
autophagy and mitophagy.

MAPPING

Scott (2001) mapped the SMURF1 gene to 7q21.1-q31.1 based on sequence
similarity between the SMURF1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF199364) and
the chromosome 7 clone RP4-808A1 (GenBank GENBANK AC004893).

ANIMAL MODEL

Yamashita et al. (2005) found that Smurf1 -/- mice were born at the
expected mendelian ratio, developed normally, and were fertile, but
their bone mineral density increased with age due to enhanced osteoblast
activity. Osteoblast number appeared normal in Smurf1 -/- mice. Smurf1
-/- osteoblasts cultured from calvaria bones showed increased production
of collagen matrix and increased size and number of mineralized bone
nodules. Biochemical analysis revealed that Smurf1 promoted
ubiquitination and degradation of Mekk2 (MAP3K2; 609487), an upstream
kinase in the JNK (see 601158) signaling pathway. Loss of Smurf1
increased the sensitivity of Smurf1 -/- cells to BMP signaling.
Immunoprecipitation analysis revealed a direct interaction between
Smurf1 and Mekk2, and the interaction depended upon Mekk2
phosphorylation.

Guo et al. (2008) noted that transgenic mice overexpressing human TNF
(191160) exhibit reduced long bone volume, decreased mineralized bone
nodule formation, and arthritis. They showed that TNF overexpression
induced bone loss by increasing expression of Smurf1, resulting in
ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of Smad1 and Runx2 (600211).
Deletion of Smurf1 in TNF-transgenic mice prevented systemic bone loss
and improved bone strength.

REFERENCE 1. Crose, L. E. S.; Hilder, T. L.; Sciaky, N.; Johnson, G. L.: Cerebral
cavernous malformation 2 protein promotes Smad ubiquitin regulatory
factor 1-mediated RhoA degradation in endothelial cells. J. Biol.
Chem. 284: 13301-13305, 2009.

2. Guo, R.; Yamashita, M.; Zhang, Q.; Zhou, Q.; Chen, D.; Reynolds,
D. G.; Awad, H. A.; Yanoso, L.; Zhao, L.; Schwarz, E. M.; Zhang, Y.
E.; Boyce, B. F.; Xing, L.: Ubiquitin ligase Smurf1 mediates tumor
necrosis factor-induced systemic bone loss by promoting proteasomal
degradation of bone morphogenetic signaling proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 283:
23084-23092, 2008.

3. Orvedahl, A.; Sumpter, R., Jr.; Xiao, G.; Ng, A.; Zou, Z.; Tang,
Y.; Narimatsu, M.; Gilpin, C.; Sun, Q.; Roth, M.; Forst, C. V.; Wrana,
J. L.; Zhang, Y. E.; Luby-Phelps, K.; Xavier, R. J.; Xie, Y.; Levine,
B.: Image-based genome-wide siRNA screen identifies selective autophagy
factors. Nature 480: 113-117, 2011.

4. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/22/2001.

5. Wang, H.-R.; Zhang, Y.; Ozdamar, B.; Ogunjimi, A. A.; Alexandrova,
E.; Thomsen, G. H.; Wrana, J. L.: Regulation of cell polarity and
protrusion formation by targeting RhoA for degradation. Science 302:
1775-1779, 2003.

6. Yamashita, M.; Ying, S.-X.; Zhang, G.; Li, C.; Cheng, S. Y.; Deng,
C.; Zhang, Y. E.: Ubiquitin ligase Smurf1 controls osteoblast activity
and bone homeostasis by targeting MEKK2 for degradation. Cell 121:
101-113, 2005.

7. Zhu, H.; Kavsak, P.; Abdollah, S.; Wrana, J. L.; Thomsen, G. H.
: A SMAD ubiquitin ligase targets the BMP pathway and affects embryonic
pattern formation. Nature 400: 687-693, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/4/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/5/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/15/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/30/2003

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/22/2001

EDITED alopez: 01/12/2012
terry: 1/4/2012
mgross: 1/5/2011
mgross: 9/21/2010
terry: 9/15/2010
alopez: 1/24/2007
mgross: 10/1/2004
alopez: 12/30/2003
terry: 12/30/2003
mgross: 1/22/2001

613599	TITLE *613599 ABHYDROLASE DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 12; ABHD12
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The endocannabinoid lipid transmitter 2-arachidonoyl glycerol (2-AG)
acts on cannabinoid receptors CB1 (CNR1; 114610) and CB2 (CNR2; 605051)
and functions in synaptic plasticity and neuroinflammation. ABHD12
inactivates 2-AG by converting it into the metabolites arachidonate and
glycerol (Fiskerstrand et al., 2010).

CLONING

By searching for genes in a region of chromosome 20 associated with
polyneuropathy, hearing loss, ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa, and cataract
(PHARC; 612674), Fiskerstrand et al. (2010) identified ABHD12. Abhd12
was expressed at variable levels in all mouse tissues examined, with
highest expression in microglia, followed by prostate and macrophages.
High expression was also detected in all mouse brain regions examined.

GENE STRUCTURE

Fiskerstrand et al. (2010) determined that the ABHD12 gene contains 13
coding exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Fiskerstrand et al. (2010) mapped the
ABHD12 gene to chromosome 20p11.21.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 19 persons from 9 families from Norway, United Arab Emirates, United
States, and Algeria, with an autosomal recessive disorder characterized
by slowly progressive polyneuropathy, hearing loss, ataxia, retinitis
pigmentosa, and cataract (PHARC; 612674), Fiskerstrand et al. (2010)
identified 4 different homozygous loss-of-function mutations in the
ABHD12 gene (613599.0001-613599.0004). Common mutations were found in
families from Norway (613599.0001) and Algeria (613599.0003). All the
mutations were predicted to result in complete loss of enzyme function.
None of the patients had behavioral disturbances or appetite
abnormalities potentially related to increased levels of 2-AG. The
findings indicated that ABHD12 performs essential functions in the
central and peripheral nervous systems and the eye. Fiskerstrand et al.
(2010) noted that future drug-mediated interference with this enzyme to
treat neurodegenerative diseases must consider the potential risk of
long-term effects.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
POLYNEUROPATHY, HEARING LOSS, ATAXIA, RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA, AND CATARACT
ABHD12, 2-BP DEL/3-BP INS, 337GA/TTT

In 8 affected members from 4 Norwegian families with polyneuropathy,
hearing loss, ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa, and cataract (PHARC;
612674), Fiskerstrand et al. (2010) identified a homozygous indel
mutation in exon 3 of the ABHD12 gene (337_338delGAinsTTT). The mutation
was predicted to result in a premature stop codon. Population-based
screening found that 2 of 190 healthy individuals were heterozygous
carriers of the mutation, resulting in an estimated incidence of 1 in
36,000 in this population. The phenotype was characterized by onset of
peripheral neuropathy in adulthood, although many had pes cavus,
decreased sensation, and sensorineural hearing loss from childhood. The
disorder was slowly progressive with retinitis pigmentosa and cataracts
developing in adulthood. Frank ataxia was variable and also showed a
later onset in adulthood.

.0002
POLYNEUROPATHY, HEARING LOSS, ATAXIA, RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA, AND CATARACT
ABHD12, 14-KB DEL

In 3 affected members of a family from the United Arab Emirates with
polyneuropathy, hearing loss, ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa, and cataract
(612674), Fiskerstrand et al. (2010) identified a homozygous 14-kb
deletion and 2-bp insertion (del14007insGG) in the ABHD12 gene
encompassing the promoter region and exon 1 of the gene. Two patients
were in their twenties, and 1 was age 6 years. Common features included
absent tendon reflexes, hearing loss, ataxia, cataracts; hearing loss
occurred in childhood in all 3. Only the older 2 patients had retinitis
pigmentosa.

.0003
POLYNEUROPATHY, HEARING LOSS, ATAXIA, RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA, AND CATARACT
ABHD12, 7-BP DUP, NT846

In 7 patients from 4 Algerian families with PHARC (612674), Fiskerstrand
et al. (2010) identified a homozygous 7-bp duplication in exon 9 of the
ABHD12 gene (846_852dupTAAGAGC), resulting in a premature stop codon at
residue 285. The patients ranged in age from 10 to 44 years. The older
individuals were more severely affected. All patients had some evidence
of a polyneuropathy, with hyporeflexia, pes cavus, and/or sensory loss,
and most had gait ataxia with onset in the childhood. Four of the older
patients had hearing loss, but only 1 had retinitis pigmentosa and
cataract. Other common features included extensor plantar responses and
cerebellar atrophy.

.0004
POLYNEUROPATHY, HEARING LOSS, ATAXIA, RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA, AND CATARACT
ABHD12, ARG352TER

In a 50-year-old woman from the U.S., who was of French Canadian
descent, with PHARC (612674), Fiskerstrand et al. (2010) identified a
homozygous 1054C-T transition in exon 12 of the ABHD12 gene, resulting
in an arg352-to-ter (R352X) substitution. She developed sensorineural
hearing loss at age 17 years, ataxia and dysarthria at 18, and retinitis
pigmentosa and cataracts in her twenties. She had pes cavus and
hammertoes, and a mild peripheral neuropathy when examined at age 34
years. She had myoclonic seizures, but cognition was not affected, and
the disease showed a slowly progressive course.

REFERENCE 1. Fiskerstrand, T.; H'mida-Ben Brahim, D.; Johansson, S.; M'zahem,
A.; Haukanes, B. I.; Drouot, N.; Zimmermann, J.; Cole, A. J.; Vedeler,
C.; Bredrup, C.; Assoum, M.; Tazir, M.; Klockgether, T.; Hamri, A.;
Steen, V. M.; Boman, H.; Bindoff, L. A.; Koenig, M.; Knappskog, P.
M.: Mutations in ABHD12 cause the neurodegenerative disease PHARC:
an inborn error of endocannabinoid metabolism. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 87:
410-417, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/21/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/12/2010

EDITED terry: 01/11/2011
wwang: 10/25/2010
ckniffin: 10/21/2010
mgross: 10/12/2010

614783	TITLE *614783 POC1 CENTRIOLAR PROTEIN, CHLAMYDOMONAS, HOMOLOG OF, A; POC1A
;;PIX2;;
PROTEOME OF CENTRIOLE 1A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

POC1A and POC1B (614784) localize to centrioles and related structures
and appear to play roles in centriole duplication and/or maintenance
(Keller et al., 2009).

CLONING

By searching a human database for sequences similar to Xenopus Pix1,
Hames et al. (2008) identified POC1A, which they called PIX2, and
obtained the full-length cDNA clone. The deduced 407-amino acid PIX2
protein contains an N-terminal WD40 domain predicted to fold into a
7-bladed beta propeller and a C-terminal coiled-coil domain. Variable
expression of PIX2 was detected in all human cell lines examined. Hames
et al. (2008) also identified Xenopus Pix2 and human PIX1 (POC1B) and 1
or 2 PIX orthologs in rodents, zebrafish, Drosophila, and amphioxus, but
not in C. elegans or yeast. Using an antibody that did not differentiate
between PIX1 and PIX2 for immunohistochemical analysis, Hames et al.
(2008) found that PIX associated with mitochondria, centrioles, and
basal bodies in human cell lines. Immunoelectron microscopic analysis of
human RPE1 retinal pigment epithelial cells revealed that PIX mostly
associated with the central region and distal end of the centriole
barrel, with concentration in the lumen. Epitope-tagged PIX1 and PIX2
were expressed in overlapping but distinct patterns in mitochondria,
centrosome, basal body, and spindle microtubules during the cell cycle
in transfected U2OS cells. Western blot analysis of several human cell
lines detected PIX2 at an apparent molecular mass of about 45 kD.

Shaheen et al. (2012) performed in situ hybridization on mouse embryos
at embryonic day 10.5 and quantitative RT-PCR on various mouse embryo
stages and adult tissues and found widespread expression of Poc1a.

EVOLUTION

Keller et al. (2009) stated that all organisms with standard triplet
microtubule-containing centrioles in at least part of their life cycle
have a POC1 gene. In vertebrates, the POC1 gene is duplicated.

MAPPING

Hames et al. (2008) stated that the human POC1A gene maps to chromosome
3p21.2.

GENE FUNCTION

Hames et al. (2008) found that epitope-tagged PIX2, and more weakly
PIX1, associated with microtubules in transfected HeLa cells. Inhibition
of PIX protein function via interfering antibodies disrupted cell
division in U2OS cells, resulting in a high proportion of cells that
were multinucleated or remained connected by a thin cytoplasmic bridge.

Shaheen et al. (2012) performed POC1A-knockdown experiments in
fibroblast cells using RNAi and demonstrated that POC1A deficiency
causes a severe ciliogenesis defect. A supernumerary centriole
phenotype, similar to that of a patient with a nonsense mutation in
POC1A (614783.0001), was observed in cells in which there was highly
efficient but low-frequency (5%) knockdown of POC1A.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 5 children with primordial dwarfism and distinctive facial features
(SOFT syndrome; 614813) from 3 consanguineous Saudi families, Shaheen et
al. (2012) identified homozygosity for a nonsense mutation in the POC1A
gene (R81X; 614783.0001). Cells derived from the index patient had
abnormal mitotic mechanics with multipolar spindles, in addition to
clearly impaired ciliogenesis, and RNAi knockdown of POC1A in
fibroblasts recapitulated this ciliogenesis defect.

In 2 consanguineous Israeli families of Arab Muslim origin segregating
autosomal recessive short stature, onychodysplasia, facial dysmorphism,
and hypotrichosis, Sarig et al. (2012) identified homozygosity for a
missense mutation in the POC1A gene (L171P; 614783.0002) that segregated
with disease in both families and was not found in 300
population-matched controls. Functional analysis showed that the mutant
protein results in centrosome disorganization and an increase in
centrosome number, which is associated with abnormal trafficking from
the plasma membrane to the Golgi.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SHORT STATURE, ONYCHODYSPLASIA, FACIAL DYSMORPHISM, AND HYPOTRICHOSIS
POC1A, ARG81TER

In 5 children with primordial dwarfism and distinctive facial features
(SOFT syndrome; 614813) from 3 consanguineous Saudi families, Shaheen et
al. (2012) identified homozygosity for a 241C-T transition in exon 3 of
the POC1A gene, resulting in an arg81-to-ter (R81X) substitution.
Metaphase-stage fibroblast cells from the index patient showed
multipolar spindle formation at a frequency of 20% and supernumerary
centrioles at a frequency of 13%, whereas neither was observed in
control cells. In addition, control fibroblasts were almost uniformly
capable of forming normal cilia after serum starvation, whereas patient
fibroblasts were severely deficient in that regard (70% reduction).
Cilia from patient fibroblasts were also significantly shorter than
cilia from control cells.

.0002
SHORT STATURE, ONYCHODYSPLASIA, FACIAL DYSMORPHISM, AND HYPOTRICHOSIS
POC1A, LEU171PRO

In 8 affected members of 2 consanguineous Israeli families of Arab
Muslim origin with short stature, onychodysplasia, facial dysmorphism,
and hypotrichosis (614813), originally described by Shalev et al.
(2012), Sarig et al. (2012) identified homozygosity for a 512T-C
transition in the POC1A gene, resulting in a leu171-to-pro (L171P)
substitution at a highly conserved residue. The mutation segregated with
disease in both families and was not found in 300 population-matched
controls. Analysis of patient fibroblasts showed that although
centrosomal structure was preserved, the number of centrosomes was
increased and their distribution was abnormal compared to controls. In
addition, the Golgi apparatus presented a dispersed morphology,
cholera-toxin trafficking from the plasma membrane to the Golgi was
aberrant, and large vesicles accumulated in the cytosol.

REFERENCE 1. Hames, R. S.; Hames, R.; Prosser, S. L.; Euteneuer, U.; Lopes,
C. A. M.; Moore, W.; Woodland, H. R.; Fry, A. M.: Pix1 and Pix2 are
novel WD40 microtubule-associated proteins that colocalize with mitochondria
in Xenopus germ plasm and centrosomes in human cells. Exp. Cell Res. 314:
574-589, 2008.

2. Keller, L. C.; Geimer, S.; Romijn, E.; Yates, J., III; Zamora,
I.; Marshall, W. F.: Molecular architecture of the centriole proteome:
the conserved WD40 domain protein POC1 is required for centriole duplication
and length control. Molec. Biol. Cell 20: 1150-1166, 2009.

3. Sarig, O.; Nahum, S.; Rapaport, D.; Ishida-Yamamoto, A.; Fuchs-Telem,
D.; Qiaoli, L.; Cohen-Katsenelson, K.; Spiegel, R.; Nousbeck, J.;
Israeli, S.; Borochowitz, Z.-U.; Padalon-Brauch, G.; Uitto, J.; Horowitz,
M.; Shalev, S.; Sprecher, E.: Short stature, onychodysplasia, facial
dysmorphism, and hypotrichosis syndrome is caused by a POC1A mutation. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 91: 337-342, 2012.

4. Shaheen, R.; Faqeih, E.; Shamseldin, H. E.; Noche, R. R.; Sunker,
A.; Alshammari, M. J.; Al-Sheddi, T.; Adly, N.; Al-Dosari, M. S.;
Megason, S. G.; Al-Husain, M.; Al-Mohanna, F.; Alkuraya, F. S.: POC1A
truncation mutation causes a ciliopathy in humans characterized by
primordial dwarfism. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 91: 330-336, 2012.

5. Shalev, S. A.; Spiegel, R.; Borochowitz, Z. U.: A distinctive
autosomal recessive syndrome of severe disproportionate short stature
with short long bones, brachydactyly, and hypotrichosis in two consanguineous
Arab families. Europ. J. Med. Genet. 55: 256-264, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/7/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/27/2012

EDITED terry: 12/05/2012
carol: 9/10/2012
terry: 9/7/2012
carol: 8/27/2012

604655	TITLE *604655 MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE KINASE KINASE 14; MAP3K14
;;NF-KAPPA-B-INDUCING KINASE; NIK;;
SERINE/THREONINE PROTEIN KINASE NIK;;
HSNIK
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Several members of the tumor necrosis factor/nerve growth factor
receptor family (e.g., TNFR1; 191190) activate the transcription factor
NF-kappa-B (see NFKB1; 164011) through a common adaptor protein, TRAF2
(601895), whereas the type I interleukin-1 receptor (IL1R1; 147810)
activates NF-kappa-B independently of TRAF2. Using TRAF2 as bait in a
yeast 2-hybrid screening of a B-cell cDNA library and PCR, Malinin et
al. (1997) cloned a cDNA encoding MAP3K14, which they called NIK. The
deduced 947-amino acid NIK protein has a serine/threonine protein kinase
motif that resembles those of several MAP3Ks (see 600982). Northern blot
analysis detected a NIK transcript of 5 kb that was expressed at low
levels in testis, small intestine, spleen, thymus, peripheral blood
leukocytes, prostate, ovary, and colon.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Malinin et al. (1997) showed that TRAF2
interacted with NIK. Binding of full-length NIK to TRAF2 involved both
the N- and C-terminal regions of TRAF2. Overexpression of NIK in
293-EBNA cells induced NF-kappa-B, caused degradation of IKB-alpha
(164008), and did not directly affect REL (164910), a subunit of the
NK-kappa-B complex. Induction of NF-kappa-B by NIK required the NIK
kinase domain. TNFA (TNF; 191160), IL1 (see IL1A; 147760), and CD95
(134637) required intact NIK to activate NFKB, indicating that NIK
participates in a cascade common to the receptors of all 3 of these
activators.

By functional analysis of NIK and a kinase-deficient NIK expressed in
primary human cells and in inflamed rheumatoid arthritis tissue, Smith
et al. (2001) showed that NIK has a selective role in signaling by the
lymphotoxin-beta receptor (LTBR; 600979). They determined that NIK is
not required for signaling in response to lipopolysaccharide, IL1, and
TNFA and is not a generic IKK kinase.

Rosebeck et al. (2011) demonstrated that the API2 (BIRC2; 601712)/MALT1
(604860) fusion oncoprotein created by the recurrent t(11;18)(q21;q21)
in mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma induced proteolytic
cleavage of NIK at arg325. NIK cleavage required the concerted actions
of both fusion partners and generated a C-terminal NIK fragment that
retained kinase activity and was resistant to proteasomal degradation.
The resulting deregulated NIK activity was associated with constitutive
noncanonical NF-kappa-B signaling, enhanced B-cell adhesion, and
apoptosis resistance. Rosebeck et al. (2011) concluded that their study
revealed the gain-of-function proteolytic activity of a fusion
oncoprotein and highlighted the importance of the noncanonical
NF-kappa-B pathway in B-lymphoproliferative disease.

GENE STRUCTURE

By PCR analysis of a cosmid containing NIK, Aronsson et al. (1998)
determined that NIK contains 15 exons.

MAPPING

By FISH and radiation hybrid analysis, Aronsson et al. (1998) mapped the
gene for NIK to chromosome 17q21. Shinkura et al. (1999) mapped the
mouse gene to chromosome 11 by linkage analysis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using exon-intron maps and mutation screening, Aronsson et al. (1998)
found no disease-specific alterations in the NIK gene in a pedigree with
frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17
(600274).

Thair et al. (2011) found that the CC genotype of the SNP dbSNP
rs7222094 within the NIK gene was associated with increased 28-day
mortality compared with the CT or TT genotypes in 2 cohorts of Caucasian
septic shock patients. In addition, patients with the CC genotype
experienced greater renal dysfunction. In lymphoblastoid cell lines, the
dbSNP rs7222094 genotype was most strongly associated with mRNA
expression of CXCL10 (147310). Accordingly , the CC genotype of dbSNP
rs7222094 was associated with significantly lower CXCL10 protein levels
compared with the TT genotype in both lymphoblastoid cell lines and
septic shock patients. Thair et al. (2011) proposed that the CC genotype
of dbSNP rs7222094 is associated with increased mortality and organ
dysfunction in septic shock patients, perhaps due to altered regulation
of NFKB pathway genes, including CXCL10.

ANIMAL MODEL

The alymphoplasia (aly) mutation of mouse is autosomal recessive and
characterized by the systemic absence of lymph nodes and Peyer patches
and disorganized splenic and thymic structures with immunodeficiency.
Shinkura et al. (1999) cloned the mouse Nik gene and determined that a
G-to-A transition leads to a gly855-to-arg substitution in the C
terminus of the protein, causing alymphoplasia in aly/aly mice.

Using gene targeting, Yin et al. (2001) generated Nik-deficient mice.
Nik -/- mice were grossly normal but lacked all lymph nodes, similar to
mice lacking LTBR. In addition, they had abnormal spleen and thymus
architecture and formed poor antibody responses upon immunization.
Electrophoretic mobility shift analysis (EMSA) showed that NFKB binding
of DNA by Nik -/- mouse fibroblasts and other cell types in response to
IL1, TNF, or LTB (600978) was normal compared with wildtype. However,
induction of the IKBA and MCP1 (158105) genes was defective in Nik -/-
cells after stimulation of LTBR but not after stimulation with TNF,
indicating a selective inability to transactivate at least some
NFKB-regulated genes. Yin et al. (2001) concluded that NIK is not the
common upstream regulatory kinase activating IKKs in the NFKB signaling
pathway. Instead, NIK acts in a receptor-selective manner. They also
proposed that different receptors that signal through NFKB may use
distinct serine kinases to regulate the transcriptional activity of the
NFKB complex.

Matsushima et al. (2001) found that both Nik -/- and Ikka -/- mice had
impaired NFKB activation in response to lymphotoxin B receptor
stimulation but not TNF receptor-1 stimulation. These mice also had
defective development of Peyer patches.

Claudio et al. (2002) showed that bone marrow (BM) cells from
Nfkb2-deficient mice, but not Nfkb1-deficient mice, failed to increase
relative and total IgD-positive transitional-1 (T1) stage B cells in
response to Baff (603969). In vivo, however, Nfkb2-deficient mice did
generate mature B cells, but at reduced numbers. Mice of the aly/aly
strain, which are naturally deficient in Nik, and mice of the A/WySNJ
strain, which have a mutation in Baffr (606269), also failed to produce
T1 B cells in response to Baff. Baff stimulation enhanced expression of
Bcl2 (151430) in T1 B cells, thereby promoting B-cell survival, and
caused the processing of the p100 form of Nfkb2 to p52, which again
required Baffr and Nik, but not Nemo (IKKG; 300248). Immunoblot analysis
showed that BM cells contained primarily p100. In contrast, T1 splenic
cells had higher levels of p52, and even higher amounts of p52 were
found in T2/mature B-cell subsets. Claudio et al. (2002) concluded that
through sustained exposure, BAFF activates NFKB in B cells primarily via
processing of p100 and contributes to B-cell survival in vivo probably
from the T1 stage onwards.

Using Nik -/- mice in a mouse model of inflammatory arthritis, Aya et
al. (2005) observed inflammation comparable to that seen in wildtype
controls but significantly less periarticular osteoclastogenesis and
bone erosion. The mutant mice were also completely resistant to
antigen-induced arthritis. Aya et al. (2005) suggested that NIK is a
possible therapeutic target in the immune and bone-destructive
components of inflammatory arthritis.

REFERENCE 1. Aronsson, F. C.; Magnusson, P.; Andersson, B.; Karsten, S. L.;
Shibasaki, Y.; Lendon, C. L.; Goate, A. M.; Brookes, A. J: The NIK
protein kinase and C17orf1 genes: chromosomal mapping, gene structures
and mutational screening in frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism
linked to chromosome 17. Hum. Genet. 103: 340-345, 1998.

2. Aya, K.; Alhawagri, M.; Hagen-Stapleton, A.; Kitaura, H.; Kanagawa,
O.; Veis Novack, D.: NF-kappa-B-inducing kinase controls lymphocyte
and osteoclast activities in inflammatory arthritis. J. Clin. Invest. 115:
1848-1854, 2005.

3. Claudio, E.; Brown, K.; Park, S.; Wang, H.; Siebenlist, U.: BAFF-induced
NEMO-independent processing of NF-kappa-B2 in maturing B cells. Nature
Immun. 3: 958-965, 2002.

4. Malinin, N. L.; Boldin, M. P.; Kovalenko, A. V.; Wallach, D.:
MAP3K-related kinase involved in NF-kappaB induction by TNF, CD95
and IL-1. Nature 385: 540-544, 1997.

5. Matsushima, A.; Kaisho, T.; Rennert, P. D.; Nakano, H.; Kurosawa,
K.; Uchida, D.; Takeda, K.; Akira, S.; Matsumoto, M.: Essential role
of nuclear factor (NF)-kappa-B-inducing kinase and inhibitor of kappa-B
(I-kappa-B) kinase alpha in NF-kappa-B activation through lymphotoxin
beta receptor, but not through tumor necrosis factor receptor I. J.
Exp. Med. 193: 631-636, 2001.

6. Rosebeck, S.; Madden, L.; Jin, X.; Gu, S.; Apel, I. J.; Appert,
A.; Hamoudi, R. A.; Noels, H.; Sagaert, X.; Van Loo, P.; Baens, M.;
Du, M.-Q.; Lucas, P. C.; McAllister-Lucas, L. M.: Cleavage of NIK
by the API1-MALT1 fusion oncoprotein leads to noncanonical NF-kappa-B
activation. Science 331: 468-472, 2011. Note: Erratum: Science 332:
421 only, 2011.

7. Shinkura, R.; Kitada, K.; Matsuda, F.; Tashiro, K.; Ikuta, K.;
Suzuki, M.; Kogishi, K.; Serikawa, T.; Honjo, T.: Alymphoplasia is
caused by a point mutation in the mouse gene encoding Nf-kappa-b-inducing
kinase. Nature Genet. 22: 74-77, 1999.

8. Smith, C.; Andreakos, E.; Crawley, J. B.; Brennan, F. M.; Feldmann,
M.; Foxwell, B. M. J.: NF-kappa-B-inducing kinase is dispensable
for activation of NF-kappa-B in inflammatory settings but essential
for lymphotoxin beta receptor activation of NF-kappa-B in primary
human fibroblasts. J. Immun. 167: 5895-5903, 2001.

9. Thair, S. A.; Walley, K. R.; Nakada, T.; McConechy, M. K.; Boyd,
J. H.; Wellman, H.; Russell, J. A.: A single nucleotide polymorphism
in NF-kappa-B inducing kinase is associated with mortality in septic
shock. J. Immun. 186: 2321-2328, 2011.

10. Yin, L.; Wu, L.; Wesche, H.; Arthur, C. D.; White, J. M.; Goeddel,
D. V.; Schreiber, R. D.: Defective lymphotoxin-beta receptor-induced
NF-kappa-B transcriptional activity in NIK-deficient mice. Science 291:
2162-2165, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/29/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/30/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/31/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/26/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/14/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/4/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/19/2001

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 3/6/2000

EDITED terry: 03/15/2013
mgross: 5/4/2011
terry: 4/29/2011
alopez: 3/31/2011
terry: 3/30/2011
alopez: 10/31/2005
alopez: 10/18/2002
mgross: 9/26/2002
mgross: 2/14/2002
mgross: 10/4/2001
mgross: 3/19/2001
alopez: 1/8/2001
mgross: 12/4/2000
alopez: 8/15/2000
alopez: 4/14/2000
carol: 3/7/2000

118455	TITLE *118455 CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY VIIA, POLYPEPTIDE 1; CYP7A1
;;CYP7;;
CHOLESTEROL 7-ALPHA-HYDROXYLASE;;
CHOLESTEROL 7-ALPHA-MONOOXYGENASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cholesterol 7-alpha-hydroxylase is a microsomal cytochrome P450 that
catalyzes the first step in bile acid synthesis.

CLONING

Noshiro and Okuda (1990) cloned human CYP7A1, using the rat homolog as
probe. The deduced 504-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular
mass of 57.6 kD and contains putative heme and steroid-binding domains.
The human and rat proteins share 82% sequence identity.

GENE FUNCTION

By transfection of reporter constructs, mutation analysis, and DNase
footprinting, Molowa et al. (1992) identified areas of the CYP7A1
promoter region that showed hepatocyte-specific activation. They found
HNF3 (see 602294) to be an activator of CYP7A1 activity.

Nitta et al. (1999) identified a liver-specific regulatory element
within the CYP7A promoter and isolated a transcription factor, CPF (also
called LRH1 or NR5A2; 604453), that binds to the promoter of the human
CYP7A gene. Cotransfection of a CPF expression plasmid and a CYP7A
reporter gene resulted in specific induction of CYP7A-directed
transcription. These and other observations suggested that CPF is a key
regulator of human CYP7A gene expression in the liver.

In an elegant series of experiments designed to understand the effect of
retinoid X receptor (RXR; see 180245) activation on cholesterol balance,
Repa et al. (2000) treated animals with the rexinoid LG268. Animals
treated with rexinoid exhibited marked changes in cholesterol balance,
including inhibition of cholesterol absorption and repressed bile acid
synthesis. Studies with receptor-selective agonists revealed that
oxysterol receptors (LXRs, see 602423 and 600380) and the bile acid
receptor, FXR (603826), are the RXR heterodimeric partners that mediate
these effects by regulating expression of the reverse-cholesterol
transporter, ABC1 (600046), and the rate-limiting enzyme of bile acid
synthesis, CYP7A1, respectively. These RXR heterodimers serve as key
regulators in cholesterol homeostasis by governing reverse cholesterol
transport from peripheral tissues, bile acid synthesis in liver, and
cholesterol absorption in intestine. Activation of RXR/LXR heterodimers
inhibits cholesterol absorption by upregulation of ABC1 expression in
the small intestine. Activation of RXR/FXR heterodimers represses CYP7A1
expression and bile acid production, leading to a failure to solubilize
and absorb cholesterol. Studies have shown that RXR/FXR-mediated
repression of CYP7A1 is dominant over RXR/LXR-mediated induction of
CYP7A1, which explains why the rexinoid represses rather than activates
CYP7A1 (Lu et al., 2000). Activation of the LXR signaling pathway
results in the upregulation of ABC1 in peripheral cells, including
macrophages, to efflux free cholesterol for transport back to the liver
through high density lipoprotein, where it is converted to bile acids by
the LXR-mediated increase in CYP7A1 expression. Secretion of biliary
cholesterol in the presence of increased bile acid pools normally
results in enhanced reabsorption of cholesterol; however, with the
increased expression of ABC1 and efflux of cholesterol back into the
lumen, there is a reduction in cholesterol absorption and net excretion
of cholesterol and bile acid. Rexinoids therefore offer a novel class of
agents for treating elevated cholesterol.

Agellon et al. (2002) found that wildtype mice and mice transgenic for
human CYP7A1 respond differently to cholesterol feeding. Cholesterol
feeding stimulated Cyp7a1 mRNA abundance and enzymatic activity in
wildtype mice, but repressed human CYP7A1 mRNA and activity in
transgenic mice. In transfected hepatoma cells, cholesterol increased
mouse Cyp7a1 gene promoter activity, but had no effect on the human
CYYP7A1 gene promoter. By electrophoretic mobility shift assays, Agellon
et al. (2002) found interaction of LXR:RXR with the mouse promoter, but
no binding to the human promoter.

The catabolism of cholesterol into bile acids is regulated by oxysterols
and bile acids, which induce or repress transcription of the pathway's
rate-limiting enzyme, CYP7A1. The nuclear receptor LXR-alpha (LXRA, or
NR1H3; 602423) binds oxysterols and mediates feed-forward induction. Lu
et al. (2000) showed that repression is coordinately regulated by a
triumvirate of nuclear receptors, including the bile acid receptor, FXR;
the promoter-specific activator, LRH1; and the promoter-specific
repressor, SHP (NR0B2; 604630). Feedback repression of CYP7A1 is
accomplished by the binding of bile acids to FXR, which leads to
transcription of SHP. Elevated SHP protein then inactivates LRH1 by
forming a heterodimeric complex that leads to promoter-specific
repression of both CYP7A1 and SHP. These results revealed an elaborate
autoregulatory cascade mediated by nuclear receptors for the maintenance
of hepatic cholesterol catabolism.

Goodwin et al. (2000) used a potent, nonsteroidal FXR ligand to show
that FXR induces expression of SHP1, an atypical member of the nuclear
receptor family that lacks a DNA-binding domain. SHP1 represses
expression of CYP7A1 by inhibiting the activity of LRH1, an orphan
nuclear receptor that regulates CYP7A1 expression positively. This bile
acid-activated regulatory cascade provides a molecular basis for the
coordinate suppression of CYP7A1 and other genes involved in bile acid
biosynthesis.

Drover et al. (2002) examined the molecular basis by which
triiodothyronine (T3) regulates the human CYP7A1 promoter. T3 decreased
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) activity in hepatoma cells
cotransfected with a plasmid encoding the T3 receptor TR-alpha and a
chimeric gene containing nucleotides -372 to +61 of the human CYP7A1
gene fused to the CAT structural gene. DNase I footprinting revealed
that recombinant TR-alpha protected 2 regions in this segment of the
human CYP7A1 gene promoter. The binding was competed by oligonucleotides
bearing an idealized TR-alpha binding motif and abolished by mutation of
these elements. The results indicated that T3-dependent repression of
human CYP7A1 gene expression is mediated via a novel site in the human
CYP7A1 gene promoter.

Inborn errors in bile acid synthesis represent one category of metabolic
liver disease. Specific defects are recognized in the enzymes catalyzing
reactions responsible for changes to the steroid nucleus of cholesterol
and its intermediates in the pathway leading to the formation of cholic
and chenodeoxycholic acids: 3-beta-hydroxy-delta-5 ceroid
dehydrogenase/isomerase in neonatal giant cell hepatitis (231100) and
delta(4)-3-oxysteroid 5-beta-reductase in neonatal cholestatic hepatitis
(235555). Other specific defects have been identified in enzymes
catalyzing reactions responsible for changes to the side chain of
cholesterol and its intermediates in this pathway, e.g., sterol
27-hydroxylase in cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (213700). These
familial conditions are clinically manifest as syndromes of progressive
cholestatic liver disease, neurologic disease, and fat-soluble vitamin
malabsorption. Early diagnosis is important because patients with these
disorders can be successfully treated by oral administration of cholic
acid; normalization in serum liver enzymes and bilirubin, and resolution
of the histologic lesion are consistent responses to bile acid therapy,
and the need for liver transplantation in most cases can be
circumvented. Recognition of defects in bile acid synthesis has relied
on mass spectrometric analysis of the urine and serum to establish an
absence or marked reduction in synthesis of the normal primary bile
acids, cholic and chenodeoxycholic acids, concomitant with the presence
of excessive amounts of atypical bile acids and sterols that are
synthesized as a consequence of the enzyme deficiency.

GENE STRUCTURE

Cohen et al. (1992) determined that the CYP7 gene spans 10 kb and
contains 6 exons. The exon-intron boundaries are completely conserved
between human and rat genes. Sequencing of the 5-prime flanking region
revealed consensus recognition sequences for a number of liver-specific
transcription factors.

Molowa et al. (1992) identified a TATA box and a modified CAAT box in
the promoter region of the CYP7 gene. They also identified a modified
sterol response element and 3 potential recognition sites for hepatocyte
nuclear factor-3 (HNF3A; 602294).

MAPPING

Using both mouse-human somatic cell hybrids and in situ chromosomal
hybridization, Cohen et al. (1992) mapped the CYP7 gene to 8q11-q12.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Cohen et al. (1992) found 4 single-stranded conformation-dependent DNA
polymorphisms and an Alu sequence-related polymorphism in the CYP7 gene.
Of the 20 unrelated Caucasians analyzed, 80% were heterozygous for at
least one of these 5 polymorphisms. The localization and
characterization of the CYP7 gene as well as the identification of
polymorphisms provided molecular tools for investigating the role of the
gene in disorders of cholesterol and bile acid metabolism. Paumgartner
and Sauerbruch (1991) suggested that cholesterol 7-alpha-hydroxylase is
a candidate for a defect in gallstone disease and Angelin et al. (1978,
1987) suggested that it might be involved in familial
hypertriglyceridemia. The central role of the enzyme in cholesterol
homeostasis renders the CYP7 gene a candidate for determination of both
primary hyper- and hypocholesterolemia.

Wang et al. (1998) investigated the relationship between plasma
concentrations of low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDLC) and 3 genes
with pivotal roles in LDL metabolism: the low density lipoprotein
receptor (LDLR; 606945), apolipoprotein B (APOB; 107730), and CYP7.
Their investigation involved sib-pair linkage analyses, variant
component linkage analyses, and association studies. Analysis of 150
nuclear families indicated statistically significant linkage between
plasma LDLC concentrations and CYP7, but not LDLR or APOB. Further
sib-pair analyses using individuals with high plasma LDLC concentrations
as probands indicated that the CYP7 locus is linked to high plasma LDLC,
but not to low plasma LDLC concentrations. This finding was replicated
in an independent sample. DNA sequencing revealed 2 linked polymorphisms
in the 5-prime flanking region of CYP7. The allele defined by these
polymorphisms was associated with increased plasma LDLC concentrations,
both in sib pairs and in unrelated individuals. Common polymorphisms in
LDLR and APOB account for little of the heritable variability in plasma
LDLC concentrations in the general population. On the other hand, the
findings of the study by Wang et al. (1998) indicate that polymorphisms
in CYP7 contribute to heritable variability in these concentrations.

Teslovich et al. (2010) performed a genomewide association study for
plasma lipids in more than 100,000 individuals of European ancestry and
reported 95 significantly associated loci (P = less than 5 x 10(-8)),
with 59 showing genomewide significant association with lipid traits for
the first time. The newly reported associations included SNPs near known
lipid regulators (e.g., CYP7A1; NPC1L1, 608010; and SCARB1, 601040) as
well as in scores of loci not previously implicated in lipoprotein
metabolism. The 95 loci contributed not only to normal variation in
lipid traits but also to extreme lipid phenotypes and had an impact on
lipid traits in 3 non-European populations (East Asians, South Asians,
and African Americans).

REFERENCE 1. Agellon, L. B.; Drover, V. A. B.; Cheema, S. K.; Gbaguidi, G. F.;
Walsh, A.: Dietary cholesterol fails to stimulate the human cholesterol
7-alpha-hydroxylase gene (CYP7A1) in transgenic mice. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
20131-20134, 2002.

2. Angelin, B.; Einarsson, K.; Hellstrom, K.; Leijd, B.: Bile acid
kinetics in relation to endogenous triglyceride metabolism in various
types of hyperlipoproteinemia. J. Lipid Res. 19: 1004-1016, 1978.

3. Angelin, B.; Hershon, K. S.; Brunzell, J. D.: Bile acid metabolism
in hereditary forms of hypertriglyceridemia: evidence for an increased
synthesis rate in monogenic familial hypertriglyceridemia. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 5434-5438, 1987.

4. Cohen, J. C.; Cali, J. J.; Jelinek, D. F.; Mehrabian, M.; Sparkes,
R. S.; Lusis, A. J.; Russell, D. W.; Hobbs, H. H.: Cloning of the
human cholesterol 7-alpha-hydroxylase gene (CYP7) and localization
to chromosome 8q11-q12. Genomics 14: 153-161, 1992.

5. Drover, V. A. B.; Wong, N. C. W.; Agellon, L. B.: A distinct thyroid
hormone response element mediates repression of the human cholesterol
7-alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1) gene promoter. Molec. Endocr. 16: 14-23,
2002.

6. Goodwin, B.; Jones, S. A.; Price, R. R.; Watson, M. A.; McKee,
D. D.; Moore, L. B.; Galardi, C.; Wilson, J. G.; Lewis, M. C.; Roth,
M. E.; Maloney, P. R.; Willson, T. M.; Kliewer, S. A.: A regulatory
cascade of the nuclear receptors FXR, SHP-1, and LRH-1 represses bile
acid biosynthesis. Molec. Cell 6: 517-526, 2000.

7. Lu, T. T.; Makishima, M.; Repa, J. J.; Schoonjans, K.; Kerr, T.
A.; Auwerx, J.; Mangelsdorf, D. J.: Molecular basis for feedback
regulation of bile acid synthesis by nuclear receptors. Molec. Cell 6:
507-515, 2000.

8. Molowa, D. T.; Chen, W. S.; Cimis, G. M.; Tan, C. P.: Transcriptional
regulation of the human cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase gene. Biochemistry 31:
2539-2544, 1992.

9. Nitta, M.; Ku, S.; Brown, C.; Okamoto, A. Y.; Shan, B.: CPF: an
orphan nuclear receptor that regulates liver-specific expression of
the human cholesterol 7-alpha-hydroxylase gene. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 96: 6660-6665, 1999.

10. Noshiro, M.; Okuda, K.: Molecular cloning and sequence analysis
of cDNA encoding human cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase. FEBS Lett. 268:
137-140, 1990.

11. Paumgartner, G.; Sauerbruch, T.: Gallstones: pathogenesis. Lancet 338:
1117-1121, 1991.

12. Repa, J. J.; Turley, S. D.; Lobaccaro, J.-M. A.; Medina, J.; Li,
L.; Lustig, K.; Shan, B.; Heyman, R. A.; Dletschy, J. M.; Mangelsdorf,
D. J.: Regulation of absorption and ABC1-mediated efflux of cholesterol
by RXR heterodimers. Science 289: 1524-1529, 2000.

13. Teslovich, T. M.; Musunuru, K.; Smith, A. V.; Edmondson, A. C.;
Stylianou, I. M.; Koseki, M.; Pirruccello, J. P.; Ripatti, S.; Chasman,
D. I.; Willer, C. J.; Johansen, C. T.; Fouchier, S. W.; and 197 others
: Biological, clinical and population relevance of 95 loci for blood
lipids. Nature 466: 707-713, 2010.

14. Wang, J.; Freeman, D. J.; Grundy, S. M.; Levine, D. M.; Guerra,
R.; Cohen, J. C.: Linkage between cholesterol 7-alpha-hydroxylase
and high plasma low-density lipoprotein cholesterol concentrations. J.
Clin. Invest. 101: 1283-1291, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/27/2010
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/9/2002
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/1/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/10/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/31/2000
Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 2/18/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/17/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/25/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/22/1992

EDITED alopez: 09/27/2010
alopez: 9/27/2010
alopez: 7/9/2002
carol: 7/1/2002
ckniffin: 6/5/2002
mgross: 10/10/2000
mgross: 8/31/2000
alopez: 8/11/2000
mcapotos: 3/15/2000
mcapotos: 2/21/2000
mcapotos: 2/18/2000
carol: 4/8/1999
terry: 11/18/1998
terry: 11/17/1998
carol: 6/24/1998
carol: 5/2/1998
terry: 4/25/1998
terry: 5/24/1996
carol: 5/11/1994
carol: 10/23/1992
carol: 9/22/1992

607700	TITLE *607700 RING FINGER PROTEIN 40; RNF40
;;BRE1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF, B; BRE1B;;
SYNTAXIN 1-INTERACTING RING FINGER PROTEIN; STARING;;
RB1-BINDING PROTEIN, 95-KD; RBP95;;
KIAA0661
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis to identify syntaxin-1 (see
186590)-interacting proteins, Chin et al. (2002) identified rat Rnf40,
which they called Staring. By searching EST databases, they identified
human RNF40. The human RNF40 protein contains 1,001 amino acids and
shares about 93% amino acid identity with the rat protein. Both proteins
have 6 coiled-coil domains and a C-terminal RING finger motif. Northern
blot analysis of human and rat tissue panels showed that RNF40 is
expressed ubiquitously. Western blot analysis showed expression of Rnf40
throughout rat brain, where it exists in both cytosolic and
membrane-associated pools.

Hwang et al. (2003) identified an S. cerevisiae protein, Bre1, as an
evolutionarily conserved RING finger protein that is required in vivo
for both ubiquitination of histone H2B and methylation of histone H3 on
lys4 (see 142711 for information on histones). They identified 2 human
homologs of Bre1, RNF20 (607699) and RNF40, which they termed BRE1A and
BRE1B, respectively.

GENE FUNCTION

Chin et al. (2002) showed that the rat Rpf40 protein binds and recruits
the brain-enriched E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme Ubch8 (603890) to
syntaxin-1 and facilitates the ubiquitination and proteasome-dependent
degradation of syntaxin-1. These findings suggested that RPF40 is a
novel E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase that targets syntaxin-1 for
degradation by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

Hwang et al. (2003) showed that the S. cerevisiae Bre1 protein is
required in vivo for both H2B ubiquitination and H3 lys4 methylation.
They determined that the RING domain of Bre1 is essential for both of
these modifications, as is large-1 (Lge1), a protein required for cell
size control that copurifies with Bre1. In cells lacking the
euchromatin-associated histone variant H2A.Z, Bre1, Rad6 (see 312180),
and Lge1 were each essential for cell viability, supporting redundant
functions for H2B ubiquitination and H2A substitution in the formation
of active chromatin. Analysis of mutants demonstrated a function for
Bre1/Lge1-dependent H2B monoubiquitination in the control of cell size.

Wood et al. (2003) showed that the RING finger of S. cerevisiae Bre1 is
required for ubiquitination of H2B, methylation of lys4 and lys79 of H3,
and for telomeric silencing. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments
indicated that both Rad6 and Bre1 are recruited to a promoter. The
authors determined that Bre1 is essential for this recruitment of Rad6
and is dedicated to the transcriptional pathway of Rad6. The results
suggested that Bre1 is the likely E3 enzyme that directs Rad6 to modify
chromatin and ultimately to affect gene expression.

REFERENCE 1. Chin, L.-S.; Vavalle, J. P.; Li, L.: Staring, a novel E3 ubiquitin-protein
ligase that targets syntaxin 1 for degradation. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
35071-35079, 2002.

2. Hwang, W. W.; Venkatasubrahmanyam, S.; Ianculescu, A. G.; Tong,
A.; Boone, C.; Madhani, H. D.: A conserved RING finger protein required
for histone H2B monoubiquitination and cell size control. Molec.
Cell 11: 261-266, 2003.

3. Wood, A.; Krogan, N. J.; Dover, J.; Schneider, J.; Heidt, J.; Boateng,
M. A.; Dean, K.; Golshani, A.; Zhang, Y.; Greenblatt, J. F.; Johnston,
M.; Shilatifard, A.: Bre1, an E3 ubiquitin ligase required for recruitment
and substrate selection of Rad6 at a promoter. Molec. Cell 11: 267-274,
2003.

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 4/22/2003

EDITED carol: 10/19/2003
mgross: 4/22/2003

607576	TITLE *607576 CAT EYE SYNDROME CHROMOSOME REGION, CANDIDATE 2; CECR2
;;KIAA1740
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult hippocampus
cDNA library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned CECR2, which they designated
KIAA1740. The deduced protein contains 1,119 amino acids. RT-PCR
followed by ELISA detected moderate expression in all tissues tested
except spleen. In brain, KIAA1740 expression was high in cerebellum,
elevated in hippocampus, and moderate in all other regions tested.

Footz et al. (2001) cloned CECR2 by genomic sequencing of the cat eye
syndrome (115470) critical region of chromosome 22, followed by 5-prime
and 3-prime RACE. The deduced 1,464-amino acid protein contains a
bromodomain.

Using the SEC1 homology domain of LRPPRC (607544) as bait in a yeast
2-hybrid screen, Liu and McKeehan (2002) cloned CECR2 from a liver cDNA
library. Northern blot analysis of 12 tissues detected distinct CECR2
banding only in placenta, with transcripts of about 2, 4, 6.5, and 9 kb.
Other tissues showed a smear beginning at about 10 kb, with variable
intensities between tissues. Liu and McKeehan (2002) concluded that the
smearing may indicate particular lability of CECR2 mRNA.

GENE STRUCTURE

Footz et al. (2001) determined that the CECR2 gene contains 19 exons and
spans about 186 kb. Intron 1 extends about 106 kb. The mouse Cecr2 gene
has a similar structure.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Footz et al. (2001) mapped the CECR2 gene
within the cat eye syndrome critical region on chromosome 22q11.2.

ANIMAL MODEL

Banting et al. (2005) generated a mutant mouse line containing a gene
trap insertion within Cecr2. Cecr2 expression was predominantly neural
in the embryo, and mice homozygous for the Cecr2 gene trap insertion
showed a high penetrance of exencephaly, which is the human equivalent
of anencephaly, in a strain-dependent fashion. In HEK293 cells, they
isolated CECR2 and SMARCA1 (300012) as components of a complex, which
they termed CECR2-containing remodeling factor (CERF). CERF was capable
of remodeling chromatin in vitro and displayed an ATP-hydrolyzing
activity that was stimulated by nucleosomes. Banting et al. (2005)
suggested that CERF plays a critical role in neurulation.

REFERENCE 1. Banting, G. S.; Barak, O.; Ames, T. M.; Burnham, A. C.; Kardel,
M. D.; Cooch, N. S.; Davidson, C. E.; Godbout, R.; McDermid, H. E.;
Shiekhattar, R.: CECR2, a protein involved in neurulation, forms
a novel chromatin remodeling complex with SNF2L. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14:
513-524, 2005.

2. Footz, T. K.; Brinkman-Mills, P.; Banting, G. S.; Maier, S. A.;
Riazi, M. A.; Bridgland, L.; Hu, S.; Birren, B.; Minoshima, S.; Shimizu,
N.; Pan, H.; Nguyen, T.; and 15 others: Analysis of the cat eye
syndrome critical region in humans and the region of conserved synteny
in mice: a search for candidate genes at or near the human chromosome
22 pericentromere. Genome Res. 11: 1053-1070, 2001.

3. Liu, L.; McKeehan, W. L.: Sequence analysis of LRPPRC and its
SEC1 domain interaction partners suggest roles in cytoskeletal organization,
vesicular trafficking, nucleocytosolic shuttling, and chromosome activity. Genomics 79:
124-136, 2002.

4. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Hattori, A.; Kondo, Y.; Okumura, K.; Ohara,
O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes.
XIX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which
code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 347-355, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 1/3/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/24/2003

EDITED terry: 01/20/2010
wwang: 1/11/2008
terry: 1/3/2008
mgross: 2/24/2003

609787	TITLE *609787 UBIQUITIN-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; UBAP1
;;UBAP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening the expression patterns of ESTs located in a region at
9p22-p21 undergoing loss of heterozygosity in nasopharyngeal carcinoma
(NPC), Yang et al. (1999) identified an EST that is downregulated in
NPC. Using the clone for this EST and 5-prime RACE, Qian et al. (2001)
identified the full-length cDNA sequence, which they designated UBAP1.
The deduced 502-amino acid protein has a predicted molecular mass of 55
kD and contains 2 putative tandem UBA domains at the C terminus, a
coiled-coil domain, 2 possible N-glycosylation sites, 5 PKC
phosphorylation sites, 7 casein kinase II phosphorylation sites, and 3
N-myristoylation sites. Qian et al. (2001) also identified mouse Ubap1.
The human and mouse proteins share 90% sequence identity. Northern blot
analysis of human tissues detected ubiquitous expression of a 2.7-kb
transcript, with highest expression in heart, skeletal muscle, and
liver. RT-PCR of mouse tissues also revealed ubiquitous expression.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using RT-PCR and direct sequencing, Qian et al. (2001) screened the NPC
cell line HNE1 and 10 primary NPCs for mutations in the UBAP1 gene. They
found no sequence alterations.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Qian et al. (2001) mapped the UBAP1 gene to
chromosome 9p22-p21.

REFERENCE 1. Qian, J.; Yang, J.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, B.; Wang, J.; Zhou, M.; Tang,
K.; Li, W.; Zeng, Z.; Zhao, X.; Shen, S.; Li, G.: Isolation and characterization
of a novel cDNA, UBAP1, derived from the tumor suppressor locus in
human chromosome 9p21-22. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 127: 613-618,
2001.

2. Yang, J. B.; Tang, X. N.; Deng, L. W.: Detailed deletion mapping
of chromosome 9p21-22 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Chin. J. Oncol. 21:
419-421, 1999. Note: Article in Chinese.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 12/13/2005

EDITED terry: 04/12/2012
carol: 12/13/2005

601540	TITLE *601540 BROMODOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; BRD2
;;FEMALE STERILE HOMEOTIC-RELATED GENE 1, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; FSRG1;;
RING3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

BRD2 is a putative nuclear transcriptional regulator and a member of a
family of genes that are expressed during development.

CLONING

In a search for novel genes in the human major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class II region on chromosome 6p21.3, Okamoto et al.
(1991) and Beck et al. (1992) identified a gene that they termed RING3.
('RING' is an acronym for 'really interesting new gene.') Based on
mapping and genomic sequencing, RING3 was located in the middle of the
class II region between the genes HLA-DNA (142930) and HLA-DMA (142855).
In contrast to all the other genes encoded in the class II region, RING3
appeared to have no obvious function associated with the immune system
based on sequence comparisons. The striking sequence similarity to the
female sterile homeotic (fsh) gene in Drosophila, however, suggested a
conserved biologic function for RING3.

Denis and Green (1996) discovered that the RING3 product is, in fact, a
mitogen-activated nuclear kinase involved in signal transduction and
that it is upregulated in certain types of leukemia.

With the aim of learning more about the phylogeny of RING3, Thorpe et
al. (1996) identified further homologs in different species and
determined their gene structures. The functional analysis of RING3 had
been further complicated by the finding of a second, non-MHC-linked copy
of RING3 in humans by Nomura et al. (1994). This was referred to by them
as ORFX (601541).

GENE FUNCTION

Dawson et al. (2011) demonstrated that I-BET151, a novel small molecule
inhibitor of the BET family, of which BRD2 is a member, has profound
efficacy against human and murine MLL-fusion leukemia cell lines through
the induction of early cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. I-BET151
treatment in 2 human leukemia cell lines with different MLL fusions
altered the expression of a common set of genes whose function may
account for these phenotypic changes. The mode of action of I-BET151 is,
at least in part, due to the inhibition of transcription at key genes
BCL2 (151430), C-MYC (190080), and CDK6 (603368) through the
displacement of BRD3/4, PAFc, and SEC components from chromatin. In vivo
studies indicated that I-BET151 has significant therapeutic value,
providing survival benefit in 2 distinct mouse models of murine MLL-AF9
and human MLL-AF4 leukemia.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the BRD2
gene and juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, see EJM3 (608816).

REFERENCE 1. Beck, S.; Hanson, I.; Kelly, A.; Pappin, D. J.; Trowsdale, J.:
A homologue of the Drosophila female sterile homeotic (fsh) gene in
the class II region of the human MHC. DNA Sequence 2: 203-210, 1992.

2. Dawson, M. A.; Prinjha, R. K.; Dittmann, A.; Giotopoulos, G.; Bantscheff,
M.; Chan, W.-I.; Robson, S. C.; Chung, C.; Hopf, C.; Savitski, M.
M.; Huthmacher, C.; Gudgin, E.; and 15 others: Inhibition of BET
recruitment to chromatin as an effective treatment for MLL-fusion
leukaemia. Nature 478: 529-533, 2011.

3. Denis, G. V.; Green, M. R.: A novel, mitogen-activated nuclear
kinase is related to a Drosophila developmental regulator. Genes
Dev. 10: 261-271, 1996.

4. Nomura, N.; Nagase, T.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Sato,
S.; Seki, N.; Kawarabayasi, Y.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. II. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0041-KIAA0080) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 1: 223-229, 1994.

5. Okamoto, N.; Ando, A.; Kawai, J.; Yoshiwara, T.; Tsuji, K.; Inoko,
H.: Orientation of HLA-DNA gene and identification of a CpG island-associated
gene adjacent to DNA in human major histocompatibility complex class
II region. Hum. Immun. 32: 221-228, 1991.

6. Thorpe, K. L.; Abdulla, S.; Kaufman, J.; Trowsdale, J.; Beck, S.
: Phylogeny and structure of the RING3 gene. Immunogenetics 44:
391-396, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/4/2012
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/8/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/27/1996

EDITED alopez: 01/06/2012
terry: 1/4/2012
ckniffin: 10/2/2009
tkritzer: 8/14/2003
tkritzer: 8/13/2003
terry: 8/8/2003
mgross: 7/24/2000
psherman: 12/30/1999
alopez: 6/21/1999
carol: 6/2/1998
terry: 4/23/1998
alopez: 6/27/1997
jenny: 12/5/1996
mark: 11/27/1996

611605	TITLE *611605 ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM LIPID RAFT-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2; ERLIN2
;;SPFH DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; SPFH2;;
CHROMOSOME 8 OPEN READING FRAME 2; C8ORF2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By genomic sequence analysis, followed by PCR and RACE of adult and
fetal cDNA libraries, Ikegawa et al. (1999) cloned 2 splice variants of
ERLIN2, which they designated C8ORF2. The deduced 339- and 152-amino
acid proteins share the first 141 N-terminal amino acids, then diverge.
Both proteins have an N-glycosylation site and type-2 membrane topology,
and the longer protein has a lysine- and glutamic acid-rich region.
Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of 1.6- and 2.5-kb
transcripts; a minor 4.4-kb transcript was also observed.

Using monoclonal antibodies to human lipid raft proteins, Browman et al.
(2006) identified ERLIN1 (611604) and ERLIN2 as components of lipid
rafts. Immunohistochemical analysis of endogenous and
fluorescence-tagged proteins revealed that ERLIN1 and ERLIN2 localized
specifically to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and nuclear envelope. The
2 proteins share 83% identity, and both contain a conserved prohibitin
(PHB; 176705) homology domain of about 160 amino acids.

GENE FUNCTION

The ER-associated degradation (ERAD) pathway removes aberrant proteins
and metabolically regulated native proteins from the ER. Pearce et al.
(2007) found that SPFH2 associated rapidly with activated IP3 receptors
(see IP3R1; 147265), which are substrates for the ERAD pathway, in
various mammalian cell lines. A proportion of SPFH2 associated with
several components of the ERAD pathway, and RNA interference-mediated
depletion of SPFH2 inhibited polyubiquitination and degradation of IP3R1
and turnover of model ERAD substrates. Pearce et al. (2007) concluded
that SPFH2 is a key ERAD pathway component that may act as a substrate
recognition factor.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ikegawa et al. (1999) determined that the ERLIN2 gene contains 16 exons
and spans more than 16.5 kb. The first 4 exons encode alternative
5-prime UTRs, exon 5 contains the initiating methionine, and exons 10
and 16 encode alternative 3-prime UTRs.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Ikegawa et al. (1999) mapped the ERLIN2
gene to chromosome 8p11.2.

CYTOGENETICS

By autozygosity mapping followed by candidate gene sequencing in a
consanguineous Saudi family with complicated SPG18 (611225), Alazami et
al. (2011) identified a homozygous 20-kb deletion on chromosome 8, with
the distal breakpoint near physical position 37,694,857 (NCBI36) and the
proximal breakpoint near 37,714,575 immediately upstream of exon 2 of
the ERLIN2 gene. This 20-kb interval spans 2 protein-coding genes,
ERLIN2 and FLJ34378. RT-PCR analysis of patient lymphoblasts showed loss
of ERLIN2 transcription, consistent with a null allele. Alazami et al.
(2011) noted that ERLIN2 is involved in the endoplasmic
reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) pathway, and postulated that
loss of ERLIN2 may result in persistent activation of IP3 signaling and
neuronal channel activity since ERAD normally degrades IP3 receptors.
Alazami et al. (2011) concluded that ERLIN2 depletion caused the
phenotype, although they could not exclude a role for FLJ34378.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of a consanguineous Turkish family with autosomal
recessive spastic paraplegia-18 (SPG18; 611225), Yildirim et al. (2011)
identified a truncation mutation in the ERLIN2 gene (611605.0001) by
linkage analysis followed by candidate gene sequencing. The authors
termed the disorder 'intellectual disability, motor dysfunction, and
contractures (IDMDC).' Affected individuals presented between ages 6
months and 2 years with an arrest and regression of motor function. They
developed progressive severe contractures of all joints, resulting in
severe motor disability and a fixed position. All had severe
intellectual disability, and none could speak, read, or write. Features
suggestive of spasticity included hyperactive reflexes, ankle clonus,
and extensor plantar responses, but the neurologic examination was
difficult to perform in most. Electron microscopy of white blood cells
from 2 affected sibs showed large membrane-bound vacuoles containing
flocculent material in 7 to 10% of cells, and these vacuoles appeared to
be associated with the endoplasmic reticulum.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 18, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
ERLIN2, 2-BP INS, 812AC

In affected members of a consanguineous Turkish family with autosomal
recessive intellectual disability, motor dysfunction, and contractures,
or spastic paraplegia-18 (SPG18; 611225), Yildirim et al. (2011)
identified a 2-bp insertion (812insAC) in exon 11 of the ERLIN2 gene,
resulting in a frameshift and premature termination in the
oligomerization domain. The protein was predicted to be truncated by
20%, but the mutant transcript did not appear to undergo
nonsense-mediated decay. The mutation was not found in 109 control
individuals.

REFERENCE 1. Alazami, A. M.; Adly, N.; Al Dhalaan, H.; Alkuraya, F. S.: A nullimorphic
ERLIN2 mutation defines a complicated hereditary spastic paraplegia
locus (SPG18). Neurogenetics 12: 333-336, 2011.

2. Browman, D. T.; Resek, M. E.; Zajchowski, L. D.; Robbins, S. M.
: Erlin-1 and erlin-2 are novel members of the prohibitin family of
proteins that define lipid-raft-like domains of the ER. J. Cell Sci. 119:
3149-3160, 2006.

3. Ikegawa, S.; Isomura, M.; Koshizuka, Y.; Nakamura, Y.: Cloning
and characterization of a novel gene (C8orf2), a human representative
of a novel gene family with homology to C. elegans C42.C1.9. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 85: 227-231, 1999.

4. Pearce, M. M. P.; Wang, Y.; Kelley, G. G.; Wojcikiewicz, R. J.
H.: SPFH2 mediates the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation
of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors and other substrates in
mammalian cells. J. Biol. Chem. 282: 20104-20115, 2007.

5. Yildirim, Y.; Orhan, E. K.; Iseri, S. A. U.; Serdaroglu-Oflazer,
P.; Kara, B.; Solakoglu, S.; Tolun, A.: A frameshift mutation of
ERLIN2 in recessive intellectual disability, motor dysfunction and
multiple joint contractures. Hum. Molec. Genet. 20: 1886-1892, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/3/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/20/2007

EDITED carol: 09/12/2013
carol: 1/3/2012
ckniffin: 1/3/2012
mgross: 11/20/2007

603762	TITLE *603762 PHOSPHORIBOSYLPYROPHOSPHATE SYNTHETASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2; PRPSAP2
;;PAP41
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate (PRPP) is a primary substrate and a critical
control factor for de novo synthesis of purine and pyrimidine
nucleotides, histidine, tryptophan, and NAD. The enzyme PRPP synthetase
(PRPS), which catalyzes the formation of PRPP, exists in an aggregate
composed of 2 catalytic subunits, PRPS I (PRPS1; 311850) and PRPS II
(PRPS2; 311860), and 2 associated subunits, PAP39 (601249) and PAP41. By
searching an EST database for sequences related to PAP39, Katashima et
al. (1998) identified cDNAs encoding PAP41. The predicted 369-amino acid
protein exhibited 72%, 51%, and 50% sequence identity with PAP39, PRPS2,
and PRPS2, respectively. The rat and human PAP41 proteins are 99%
identical. Northern blot analysis revealed that PAP41 is expressed as a
2.1-kb mRNA in several human cell lines.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Katashima et al. (1998) mapped
the PRPSAP2 gene to 17p12-p11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Katashima, R.; Iwahana, H.; Fujimura, M.; Yamaoka, T.; Ishizuka,
T.; Tatibana, M.; Itakura, M.: Molecular cloning of a human cDNA
for the 41-kDa phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase-associated protein. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1396: 245-250, 1998.

2. Katashima, R.; Iwahana, H.; Fujimura, M.; Yamaoka, T.; Itakura,
M.: Assignment of the human phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase-associated
protein 41 gene (PRPSAP2) to 17p11.2-p12. Genomics 54: 180-181,
1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 4/21/1999

EDITED carol: 08/17/2007
alopez: 4/21/1999

609516	TITLE *609516 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 382; ZNF382
;;KRAB/ZINC FINGER SUPPRESSOR PROTEIN 1, RAT, HOMOLOG OF; KS1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the C2H2 zinc finger transcription factor family, such as
ZNF382, play key roles in the regulation of cell proliferation,
differentiation, and apoptosis in response to a variety of stimuli
(Gebelein et al., 1998).

CLONING

Gebelein et al. (1998) cloned rat Znf382, which they called Ks1.
Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of Ks1, with
highest levels in lung, kidney, and testis. Immunofluorescence
localization detected epitope-tagged Ks1 in the nucleus following
transfection of a human pancreatic cell line.

By screening a fetal heart cDNA library using PCR primers designed to
amplify KRAB domain-encoding sequences, followed by EST database
analysis and RACE of fetal heart RNA, Luo et al. (2002) cloned ZNF382.
The deduced 548-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of
about 64 kD. ZNF382 contains N-terminal KRAB A and KRAB B domains,
followed by a vestigial zinc finger, a nuclear localization signal, and
9 tandemly repeated Kruppel-type C2H2-zinc finger domains at its C
terminus. ZNF382 shares 91% and 83% amino acid identity with rat Ks1 in
the KRAB and zinc finger domains, respectively. Northern blot analysis
detected a 2.9-kb transcript abundantly expressed in heart. Weaker
expression was detected in skeletal muscle, but no expression was
detected in 6 other tissues examined. Expression of ZNF382 was more
widespread in human fetal tissues. Whole 34- and 40-day embryos showed
high ZNF382 expression. At later developmental stages, ZNF382 was
detected predominantly in cerebellum, kidney, and cerebrum, and to a
lesser extent in lung, heart, skeletal muscle, tongue, and adrenal
gland.

GENE FUNCTION

By biochemical analysis, Gebelein et al. (1998) determined that rat Ks1
contains 2 transcriptional repressor domains, R1 and R2. R1 corresponds
to the KRAB A motif, and R2 is located immediately after the KRAB B
motif. Expression of rat Ks1 in a mouse fibroblast line suppressed
neoplastic transformation mediated by Hras (190020) and other potent
oncogenes. Deletion analysis indicated that R2 was required to suppress
transformation.

Using a random oligonucleotide-binding assay, Gebelein and Urrutia
(2001) identified a 27-bp rat Ks1-binding element (KBE). Deletion and
site-directed mutagenesis revealed that the 9 C-terminal zinc fingers
and the KRAB domain of Ks1 were required for transcriptional repression
through the KBE site. The KRAB domain of Ks1 interacted with the KAP1
(TRIM28; 601742) corepressor, and mutations that abolished this
interaction alleviated Ks1-mediated transcriptional repression.

GENE STRUCTURE

Luo et al. (2002) determined that the ZNF382 gene contains 5 exons and
spans about 23 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Luo et al. (2002) mapped the ZNF382 gene
to chromosome 19q13.13.

REFERENCE 1. Gebelein, B.; Fernandez-Zapico, M.; Imoto, M.; Urrutia, R.: KRAB-independent
suppression of neoplastic cell growth by the novel zinc finger transcription
factor KS1. J. Clin. Invest. 102: 1911-1919, 1998.

2. Gebelein, B.; Urrutia, R.: Sequence-specific transcriptional repression
by KS1, a multiple-zinc-finger-Kruppel-associated box protein. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 21: 928-939, 2001.

3. Luo, K.; Yuan, W.; Zhu, C.; Li, Y.; Wang, Y.; Zeng, W.; Jiao, W.;
Liu, M.; Wu, X.: Expression of a novel Krupple-like zinc-finger gene,
ZNF382, in human heart. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 299: 606-612,
2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/4/2005

EDITED mgross: 08/04/2005

606605	TITLE *606605 ATR-INTERACTING PROTEIN; ATRIP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Cortez et al. (2001) searched for substrates of ATM (see 607585) and ATR
(601215) and identified a protein of 86 kD, which they called ATRIP for
'ATR-interacting protein.' The full-length cDNA encodes a deduced
791-amino acid protein with a coiled-coil domain near its N terminus.
RNA blotting indicated that ATRIP is expressed in all tissues tested.
Cortez et al. (2001) also identified an alternatively spliced exon
encoding amino acids 658 to 684 near the C-terminus. RT-PCR from 2 cell
lines indicated that both forms were expressed.

GENE FUNCTION

ATRIP is phosphorylated by ATR, regulates ATR expression, and is an
essential component of the DNA damage checkpoint pathway. Cortez et al.
(2001) demonstrated that ATR and ATRIP both localize to intranuclear
foci after DNA damage or inhibition of replication. Deletion of ATR
mediated by the Cre recombinase caused the loss of ATR and ATRIP
expression, loss of DNA damage checkpoint responses, and cell death.
Therefore, ATR is essential for the viability of human somatic cells.
Small interfering RNA directed against ATRIP caused the loss of both
ATRIP and ATR expression and the loss of checkpoint responses to DNA
damage. Cortez et al. (2001) concluded that ATRIP and ATR are mutually
dependent partners in cell cycle checkpoint signaling pathways.

The function of the ATR-ATRIP protein kinase complex is crucial for the
cellular response to replication stress and DNA damage. Zou and Elledge
(2003) demonstrated that replication protein A (RPA) complex, which
associates with single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), is required for recruitment
of ATR to sites of DNA damage and for ATR-mediated CHK1 (603078)
activation in human cells. In vitro, RPA stimulates the binding of ATRIP
to single-stranded DNA. The binding of ATRIP to RPA-coated
single-stranded DNA enables the ATR-ATRIP complex to associate with DNA
and stimulates phosphorylation of the RAD17 (603139) protein that is
bound to DNA. Furthermore, Ddc2, the budding yeast homolog of ATRIP, is
specifically recruited to double-stranded DNA breaks in an RPA-dependent
manner. A checkpoint-deficient mutant of RPA, rfa1-t11, is defective for
recruiting Ddc2 to single-stranded DNA both in vivo and in vitro. Zou
and Elledge (2003) concluded that RPA-coated single-stranded DNA is the
critical structure at sites of DNA damage that recruits the ATR-ATRIP
complex and facilitates its recognition of substrates for
phosphorylation and the initiation of checkpoint signaling.

By mutation analysis, Namiki and Zou (2006) identified 2 major
RPA-ssDNA-interacting domains of ATRIP in regions flanking the conserved
coiled-coil domain. They also identified an internal region of ATRIP
that exhibited affinity to single-stranded DNA. Namiki and Zou (2006)
concluded that there are multiple interactions between ATRIP and
RPA-ssDNA and that ATRIP may interact directly with ssDNA in the
ATRIP-RPA-ssDNA complex.

REFERENCE 1. Cortez, D.; Guntuku, S.; Qin, J.; Elledge, S. J.: ATR and ATRIP:
partners in checkpoint signaling. Science 294: 1713-1716, 2001.

2. Namiki, Y.; Zou, L.: ATRIP associates with replication protein
A-coated ssDNA through multiple interactions. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103:
580-585, 2006.

3. Zou, L.; Elledge, S. J.: Sensing DNA damage through ATRIP recognition
of RPA-ssDNA complexes. Science 300: 1542-1548, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/27/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/22/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/18/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/15/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/10/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/17/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/28/2002

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 1/10/2002

EDITED alopez: 01/14/2010
carol: 6/1/2007
alopez: 4/2/2007
terry: 3/27/2007
mgross: 8/22/2006
carol: 8/18/2006
ckniffin: 8/17/2006
terry: 8/15/2006
wwang: 3/24/2006
terry: 3/10/2006
alopez: 6/19/2003
terry: 6/17/2003
ckniffin: 3/11/2003
alopez: 1/28/2002
alopez: 1/10/2002

606839	TITLE *606839 CADHERIN-RELATED FAMILY, MEMBER 5; CDHR5
;;MUCIN AND CADHERIN-LIKE; MUCDHL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Paris and Williams (2000) identified several genes, including CDHR5,
which they called MUCDHL, by constructing a physical map of chromosome
11p15.5. They found that MUCDHL contains nonpolymorphic tandem repeats
similar to mucin proteins and a consensus calcium-binding motif found in
all cadherins.

MAPPING

Paris and Williams (2000) constructed a physical map of chromosome
11p15.5 and located the CDHR5 gene less than 250 kb telomeric to a mucin
gene cluster.

REFERENCE 1. Paris, M. J.; Williams, B. R. G.: Characterization of a 500-kb
contig spanning the region between c-Ha-Ras and MUC2 on chromosome
11p15.5. Genomics 69: 196-202, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/10/2002

EDITED wwang: 12/03/2010
carol: 4/10/2002

603182	TITLE *603182 INTERLEUKIN ENHANCER-BINDING FACTOR 3; ILF3
;;NUCLEAR FACTOR OF ACTIVATED T CELLS, 90-KD; NF90;;
DOUBLE-STRANDED RNA-BINDING PROTEIN, 76-KD; DRBP76;;
M-PHASE PHOSPHOPROTEIN 4; MPP4; MPHOSPH4;;
NUCLEAR FACTOR ASSOCIATED WITH DOUBLE-STRANDED RNA; NFAR
DESCRIPTION For background information, see NF45 (ILF2; 603181).

CLONING

Kao et al. (1994) cloned cDNAs encoding NF45 and NF90. The NF90 gene
encodes a 671-amino acid polypeptide with limited similarity to several
RNA-binding proteins. The NF90 gene also appears to encode an
alternatively spliced 404-amino acid polypeptide, of which the first 394
amino acids are identical to the longer clone. Northern and Western blot
analysis demonstrated NF45 and NF90 expression in several cell types,
including both unstimulated and stimulated Jurkat T cells.

By immunoscreening a HeLa cell cDNA library for phosphoproteins,
Matsumoto-Taniura et al. (1996) isolated a partial cDNA encoding ILF3,
which they termed MPP4. Immunoprecipitation analysis indicated that MPP4
encodes 90- and 110-kD proteins. Immunofluorescence microscopy
demonstrated cytoplasmic expression during M phase and nuclear/nucleolar
expression during interphase.

Patel et al. (1999) purified double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)-binding
proteins from HeLa cell extracts and microsequenced a 90-kD protein with
identity to MPP4 in its N terminus. Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen with a
mutant RNA-activated protein kinase (PRKR; 176871) as bait, followed by
RT-PCR, they isolated a full-length cDNA encoding ILF3, which they
called DRBP76. Sequence analysis predicted that the 702-amino acid
protein has a bipartite nuclear localization signal, 2 dsRNA-binding
domains, an RG2 domain, and multiple potential phosphorylation sites.
SDS-PAGE analysis showed expression of a 90-kD protein, larger than the
calculated 76 kD. EMSA analysis confirmed the dsRNA binding activity of
DRBP76. Autoradiographic analysis indicated that DRBP76 is
phosphorylated by PRKR.

Langland et al. (1999) noted that NF90 is primarily localized to
ribosomes.

Saunders et al. (2001) obtained a cDNA encoding DRBP76, which they
termed NFAR1, as well as a variant cDNA encoding a 110-kD, 894-amino
acid protein they designated NFAR2. Sequence analysis showed that the
NFAR proteins share homology with a known PRKR substrate, the
translation initiation factor EIF2S1 (603907). Northern blot analysis
revealed ubiquitous expression of multiple transcripts ranging from 4.0
to 8.0 kb. Immunoblot analysis indicated variable expression with lower
amounts particularly notable in liver and spleen, suggesting
differential regulation at the translational or posttranslational level.
Immunoblot analysis and confocal microscopy demonstrated that PRKR and
both NFAR variants reciprocally coimmunoprecipitate and colocalize in
the nucleus. Immunoprecipitation analysis indicated an association with
spliceosomes.

Viranaicken et al. (2006) identified splice variants of human and mouse
ILF3 that encode long and short isoforms of the ILF3 and NF90 proteins
via inclusion or exclusion of 13 N-terminal residues, respectively.

GENE FUNCTION

Kao et al. (1994) showed that the NF45 and NF90 proteins form an NFAT
DNA-binding activity that is enhanced by T-cell stimulation and
inhibited by cyclosporin A and FK506.

Functional analysis by Saunders et al. (2001) indicated that both NFAR
proteins regulate gene transcription, probably at the level of mRNA
elongation. NFAR2 exhibited potent, constitutive regulatory activity
through its unique C-terminal region, which specifically interacted with
FUS (137070) and SMN1 (600354). Saunders et al. (2001) concluded that
NFARs facilitate dsRNA-regulated gene expression at the level of
posttranscription.

Shim et al. (2002) showed that NF90 binds to a subregion of the 3-prime
untranslated region that contains several AU-rich elements (AREs) and
slows down the degradation of IL2 (147680) mRNA. In nonstimulated cells,
NF90 was mostly nuclear, but T-cell activation resulted in its
accumulation in the cytoplasm. The authors concluded that nuclear export
of NF90 is required for IL2 mRNA stabilization.

Pfeifer et al. (2008) found that NFAR1 and NFAR2 were involved in
retaining cellular transcripts in intranuclear foci and could regulate
mRNA export to the cytoplasm. They also remained associated with
exported ribonucleoprotein complexes. Treatment of HeLa cells with small
interfering RNA to NFAR1 and/or NFAR2 resulted in an increase in protein
synthesis rates, particularly in the presence the mRNA export factors
TAP (NXF1; 602647), p15 (NXT1; 605811), or RAE1 (603343). Depletion of
NFAR in mouse fibroblasts or HeLa cells dramatically increased their
susceptibility to vesicular stomatitis virus or influenza virus,
respectively. Pfeifer et al. (2008) concluded that NFAR1 and NFAR2 are
retained on polyribosomes and act to govern translation rates, and that
they also play a role in innate immune defense to virus infection.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Saunders et al. (2001) determined that the
NFAR gene contains 21 exons and spans 16.2 kb. The 90-kD NFAR1 variant
expresses exon 18, which contains several stop codons that lead to
termination at amino acid 702. The 110-kD NFAR2 variant lacks exon 18
but contains exons 19, 20, and 21.

Viranaicken et al. (2006) identified an additional alternatively spliced
exon within intron 2 of the mouse and human ILF3 genes, increasing the
total number of exons to 22.

MAPPING

Saunders et al. (2001) mapped the NFAR gene to chromosome 19p13 by FISH.

ANIMAL MODEL

Pfeifer et al. (2008) found that mice lacking Nfar died in utero.

REFERENCE 1. Kao, P. N.; Chen, L.; Brock, G.; Ng, J.; Kenny, J.; Smith, A. J.;
Corthesy, B.: Cloning and expression of cyclosporin A- and FK506-sensitive
nuclear factor of activated T-cells: NF45 and NF90. J. Biol. Chem. 269:
20691-20699, 1994.

2. Langland, J. O.; Kao, P. N.; Jacobs, B. L.: Nuclear factor-90
of activated T-cells: a double-stranded RNA-binding protein and substrate
for the double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase, PKR. Biochemistry 38:
6361-6368, 1999.

3. Matsumoto-Taniura, N.; Pirollet, F.; Monroe, R.; Gerace, L.; Westendorf,
J. M.: Identification of novel M phase phosphoproteins by expression
cloning. Molec. Biol. Cell 7: 1455-1469, 1996.

4. Patel, R. C.; Vestal, D. J.; Xu, Z.; Bandyopadhyay, S.; Guo, W.;
Erme, S. M.; Williams, B. R. G.; Sen, G. C.: DRBP76, a double-stranded
RNA-binding nuclear protein, is phosphorylated by the interferon-induced
protein kinase, PKR. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 20432-20437, 1999.

5. Pfeifer, I.; Elsby, R.; Fernandez, M.; Faria, P. A.; Nussenzveig,
D. R.; Lossos, I. S.; Fontoura, B. M. A.; Martin, W. D.; Barber, G.
N.: NFAR-1 and -2 modulate translation and are required for efficient
host defense. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 4173-4178, 2008.

6. Saunders, L. R.; Jurecic, V.; Barber, G. N.: The 90- and 110-kDa
human NFAR proteins are translated from two differentially spliced
mRNAs encoded on chromosome 19p13. Genomics 71: 256-259, 2001.

7. Saunders, L. R.; Perkins, D. J.; Balachandran, S.; Michaels, R.;
Ford, R.; Mayeda, A.; Barber, G. N.: Characterization of two evolutionarily
conserved, alternatively spliced nuclear phosphoproteins, NFAR-1 and
-2, that function in mRNA processing and interact with the double-stranded
RNA-dependent protein kinase, PKR. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 32300-32312,
2001.

8. Shim, J.; Lim, H.; Yates, J. R., III; Karin, M.: Nuclear export
of NF90 is required for interleukin-2 mRNA stabilization. Molec.
Cell 10: 1331-1344, 2002.

9. Viranaicken, W.; Gasmi, L.; Chauvin, C.; Denoulet, P.; Larcher,
J.-C.: Identification of a newly spliced exon in the mouse Ilf3 gene
generating two long and short isoforms of Ilf3 and NF90. Genomics 88:
622-632, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/2/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/8/2006
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/28/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/4/2002

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 10/22/1998

EDITED mgross: 07/11/2008
mgross: 7/11/2008
terry: 7/2/2008
mgross: 11/28/2006
terry: 11/8/2006
mgross: 4/28/2003
mgross: 3/4/2002
alopez: 10/22/1998

603483	TITLE *603483 EUKARYOTIC TRANSLATION INITIATION FACTOR 4E-BINDING PROTEIN 3; EIF4EBP3
;;4EBP3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Eukaryotic initiation factor 4F (EIF4F), which recognizes the cap
structure mediating translation initiation, consists of 3 polypeptides,
including EIF4E (133440), the cap-binding protein subunit. EIF4E
activity is regulated in part by 2 translational repressors, EIF4EBP1
(602223) and EIF4EBP2 (602224), which bind to it and prevent its
assembly into EIF4F. Poulin et al. (1998) isolated a prostate carcinoma
cell line cDNA encoding EIF4EBP3, which they designated 4EBP3, a new
member of the EIF4EBP family. The deduced 100-amino acid protein shares
57% and 59% identity with EIF4EBP1 and EIF4EBP2, respectively. Northern
blot analysis detected a major 800-bp transcript in almost every tissue
examined, although at varying levels. The authors demonstrated that the
14.6-kD EIF4EBP3 phosphoprotein is heat stable and binds to EIF4E in
vitro as well as in vivo. EIF4EBP3 overexpression specifically reduced
EIF4E-dependent translation.

By real-time quantitative RT-PCR of several mouse tissues, Poulin et al.
(2003) found 4Ebp3 highly expressed in liver, at a level 10-fold higher
than that in kidney. Other tissues expressed variable and significantly
lower levels of 4Ebp3 mRNA.

- MASK-BP3 Intergenic Splice Variant

Poulin et al. (2003) identified an mRNA of about 8.5 kb that hybridized
with a 4EBP3 probe in Northern blots and included exons 1 through 33 of
the MASK gene (ANKHD1; 610500) spliced to an intermediate exon 0,
followed by 4EBP3 exons B and C. The transcript lacked MASK exon 34 and
4EBP3 exon A.

GENE FUNCTION

By Western blot analysis, Kleijn et al. (2002) found 4EBP3 in the
cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions of normal human primary T cells and of
HEK293 and HeLa cells. 4EBP3 was associated with EIF4E in both cell
compartments. The association of cytoplasmic 4EBP3 and EIF4E in HEK293
and HeLa cells was reduced by serum or interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680)
starvation. In primary T cells, the interaction was reduced by cell
activation.

Dowling et al. (2010) inhibited the mTORC1 (601231) pathway in cells
lacking EIF4EBP1, EIF4EBP2, and EIF4EBP3 and analyzed the effects on
cell size, cell proliferation, and cell cycle progression. Although the
EIF4EBPs had no effect on cell size, they inhibited cell proliferation
by selectively inhibiting the translation of mRNAs that encode
proliferation-promoting proteins and proteins involved in cell cycle
progression. Thus, Dowling et al. (2010) concluded that control of cell
size and cell cycle progression appear to be independent in mammalian
cells, whereas in lower eukaryotes, EIF4E binding proteins influence
both cell growth and proliferation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Poulin et al. (2003) determined that the EIF4EBP3 gene contains 3 exons
and spans 1.9 kb. The last exon is noncoding.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Poulin et al. (2003) mapped the EIF4EBP3
gene to chromosome 5q31.3, where it lies downstream of the ANKHD1 gene.
Southern blot analysis demonstrated that EIF4EBP3 is present in single
copy. Poulin et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Eif4ebp3 gene to a region of
chromosome 18 that shares homology of synteny with human chromosome
5q31.

REFERENCE 1. Dowling, R. J. O.; Topisirovic, I.; Alain, T.; Bidinosti, M.; Fonseca,
B. D.; Petroulakis, E.; Wang, X.; Larsson, O.; Selvaraj, A.; Liu,
Y.; Kozma, S. C.; Thomas, G.; Sonenberg, N.: mTORC1-mediated cell
proliferation, but not cell growth, controlled by the 4E-BPs. Science 328:
1172-1176, 2010.

2. Kleijn, M.; Scheper, G. C.; Wilson, M. L.; Tee, A. R.; Proud, C.
G.: Localisation and regulation of the eIF4E-binding protein 4E-BP3. FEBS
Lett. 532: 319-323, 2002.

3. Poulin, F.; Brueschke, A.; Sonenberg, N.: Gene fusion and overlapping
reading frames in the mammalian genes for 4E-BP3 and MASK. J. Biol.
Chem. 278: 52290-52297, 2003.

4. Poulin, F.; Gingras, A.-C.; Olsen, H.; Chevalier, S.; Sonenberg,
N.: 4E-BP3, a new member of the eukaryotic initiation factor 4E-binding
protein family. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 14002-14007, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/14/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/25/2006

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 2/3/1999

EDITED alopez: 09/24/2012
terry: 9/20/2012
alopez: 6/18/2010
terry: 6/14/2010
alopez: 10/17/2006
terry: 8/25/2006
psherman: 2/3/1999

314998	TITLE *314998 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 81; ZNF81
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Marino et al. (1993) isolated a novel zinc finger protein gene (ZNF81)
from an X chromosome-specific library. The pattern of segregation in
human-hamster somatic cell hybrids with various deletions established
that the gene resides within the Xp22.1-p11 region.

MAPPING

Knight et al. (1994) confirmed the assignment to Xp22.11-p11.23 in a
region occupied also by ZNF21 (314993) and ZNF41 (314995) by
demonstrating that they were located in the same YAC contig spanning
approximately 1.5 Mb of DNA. The ELK1 gene (311040) was shown to be
linked to the PFC gene (300383), which had previously been shown to be
in a cluster with ARAF1 (311010), SYN1 (313440), and TIMP (305370); all
5 genes were contained within a distance of 120 kb. ZNF21 and ZNF81 lay
150 kb distal to the chromosomal breakpoint associated with synovial
sarcoma (312820).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Kleefstra et al. (2004) characterized the breakpoints of a de novo
translocation, t(X;9)(p11.23;q34.3), in a female patient with severe
mental retardation and found that the translocation disrupted the ZNF81
gene. Mutation analysis in more than 300 families and patients with
nonspecific X-linked mental retardation revealed a ser179-to-asn
substitution (314998.0001) in ZNF81 in family MRX45 (300498), reported
by Hamel et al. (1999), that fully segregated with the phenotype.
Kleefstra et al. (2004) suggested that mutation in the ZNF81 gene may be
a rare cause of nonspecific X-linked mental retardation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED 45
ZNF81, SER179ASN

In affected members of family MRX45 (300498) reported by Hamel et al.
(1999), Kleefstra et al. (2004) identified a 536G-A transition in the
ZNF81 gene, resulting in a ser179-to-asn (S179N) substitution. The
mutation was not detected in 451 X chromosomes of controls.

REFERENCE 1. Hamel, B. C. J.; Smits, A. P. T.; van den Helm, B.; Smeets, D.
F. C. M.; Knoers, N. V. A. M.; van Roosmalen, T.; Thoonen, G. H. J.;
Assman-Hulsmans, C. F. C. H.; Ropers, H.-H.; Mariman, E. C. M.; Kremer,
H.: Four families (MRX43, MRX44, MRX45, MRX52) with nonspecific X-linked
mental retardation: clinical and psychometric data and results of
linkage analysis. Am. J. Med. Genet. 85: 290-304, 1999.

2. Kleefstra, T.; Yntema, H. G.; Oudakker, A. R.; Banning, M. J. G.;
Kalscheuer, V. M.; Chelly, J.; Moraine, C.; Ropers, H.-H.; Fryns,
J.-P.; Janssen, I. M.; Sistermans, E. A.; Nillesen, W. N.; de Vries,
L. B. A.; Hamel, B. C. J.; van Bokhoven, H.: Zinc finger 81 (ZNF81)
mutations associated with X-linked mental retardation. (Letter) J.
Med. Genet. 41: 394-399, 2004.

3. Knight, J. C.; Grimaldi, G.; Thiesen, H.-J.; Bech-Hansen, N. T.;
Fletcher, C. D. M.; Coleman, M. P.: Clustered organization of Kruppel
zinc-finger genes at Xp11.23, flanking a translocation breakpoint
at OATL1: a physical map with locus assignments for ZNF21, ZNF41,
ZNF81, and ELK1. Genomics 21: 180-187, 1994.

4. Marino, M.; Archidiacono, N.; Franze, A.; Rosati, M.; Rocchi, M.;
Ballabio, A.; Grimaldi, G.: A novel X-linked member of the human
zinc finger protein gene family: isolation, mapping, and expression. Mammalian
Genome 4: 252-257, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/11/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/9/1994

EDITED carol: 11/28/2011
alopez: 7/7/2010
carol: 6/17/2004
carol: 6/15/2004
carol: 6/14/2004
terry: 6/11/2004
dkim: 6/26/1998
jason: 6/24/1994
carol: 2/9/1994

611870	TITLE *611870 CENTLEIN; CNTLN
;;C9ORF39;;
C9ORF101
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Makino et al. (2008) used ion exchange chromatography and tandem mass
spectrometry to study components of isolated centrosomes that
cosedimented with microtubules. They identified one of these components
as a 721-amino acid protein, called centlein, in rat brain. The protein
contains coiled-coil domains. Western blot analysis detected an
approximately 90-kD protein in all adult rat tissues tested and in
various cell lines. Transfection experiments in HeLa cells demonstrated
that centlein colocalizes with the centrosomal protein gamma-tubulin
(191135).

MAPPING

Scott (2008) mapped the CNTLN gene to chromosome 9p22.2 based on an
alignment of the CNTLN sequence (GenBank GENBANK AA492222) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.2).

REFERENCE 1. Makino, K.; Umeda, K.; Uezu, A.; Hiragami, Y.; Sakamoto, T.; Ihn,
H.; Nakanishi, H.: Identification and characterization of the novel
centrosomal protein centlein. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 366:
958-962, 2008.

2. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/15/2008.

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 2/29/2008

EDITED carol: 02/29/2008

613586	TITLE *613586 NIN1/RPN12-BINDING PROTEIN 1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; NOB1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

In yeast, over 200 protein and RNA cofactors are required for ribosome
assembly, and these are generally conserved in eukaryotes. These factors
orchestrate modification and cleavage of the initial 35S precursor rRNA
transcript into the mature 18S, 5.8S, and 25S rRNAs, folding of the
rRNA, and binding of ribosomal proteins and 5S RNA. Nob1 is involved in
pre-rRNA processing. In a late cytoplasmic processing step, Nob1 cleaves
a 20S rRNA intermediate at cleavage site D to produce the mature 18S
rRNA (Lamanna and Karbstein, 2009).

CLONING

Fatica et al. (2003) cloned yeast Nob1 and, by database analysis, they
identified human NOB1. The deduced 412-amino acid human protein shares
significant homology with yeast Nob1 and its eukaryotic orthologs,
including a highly conserved PIN domain, which is predicted to be
involved in RNA degradation, and complete conservation of 4 cysteines in
the metal-binding zinc ribbon domain. Immunofluorescence microscopy of
yeast detected Nob1 in both the nucleus and cytoplasm.

GENE FUNCTION

Fatica et al. (2003) found that yeast Nob1 associated with pre-40S
ribosomal particles. Conditional Nob1 knockout in yeast led to
accumulation of the 20S rRNA intermediate and a block in processing of
the 20S pre-rRNA to the mature 18S rRNA. Fatica et al. (2003) concluded
that Nob1 is required for cytoplasmic conversion of the 20S pre-rRNA to
the mature 18S rRNA.

Lamanna and Karbstein (2009) showed that yeast Nob1 bound as a tetramer
to pre-18S rRNA fragments containing cleavage site D. RNA binding and
methylation protection experiments showed that Nob1 interacted with
helix 44 of 18S rRNA, around cleavage site D, as well as with part of
internal transcribed spacer-1, around cleavage site A2. Contacts at
cleavage site D were made by the PIN nuclease domain.

MAPPING

Hartz (2010) mapped the NOB1 gene to chromosome 16q22.1 based on an
alignment of the NOB1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB026125) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Fatica, A.; Oeffinger, M.; Dlakic, M.; Tollervey, D.: Nob1p is
required for cleavage of the 3-prime end of 18S rRNA. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 23: 1798-1807, 2003.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/6/2010.

3. Lamanna, A. C.; Karbstein, K.: Nob1 binds the single-stranded
cleavage site D at the 3-prime end of 18S rRNA with its PIN domain. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 106: 14259-14264, 2009.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/7/2010

EDITED mgross: 10/07/2010

