603518	TITLE *603518 TIA1 CYTOTOXIC GRANULE-ASSOCIATED RNA-BINDING PROTEIN; TIA1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The TIA1 gene encodes an RNA-binding protein involved in splicing
regulation and translational repression. It is a key component of stress
granules, which are cytoplasmic foci that sequester untranslated mRNAs
during different types of cellular stress. TIA1 is widely expressed,
including in skeletal muscle (summary by Hackman et al., 2013).

CLONING

TIA1 is a 15-kD cytoplasmic granule-associated protein expressed in
cytolytic lymphocytes (CTLs) and natural killer cells (Anderson et al.,
1990). Upon activation with mitogens or with antibodies reactive with
the T-cell receptor complex, the expression of TIA1 greatly increases
and 28-, 40-, and 53-kD forms of the protein are induced.

Tian et al. (1991) described the cDNA cloning and functional
characterization of 2 TIA1 isoforms. By immunoscreening a cytolytic
T-cell cDNA expression library with a monoclonal antibody against TIA1,
they isolated a 1.6-kb TIA1 cDNA encoding a deduced 146-amino acid
protein, referred to as rp15-TIA1, that has an apparent molecular mass
of 15 kD by SDS-PAGE. Using the 1.6-kb cDNA to screen a
phytohemagglutinin-activated T-cell cDNA library, the authors isolated a
2.2-kb cDNA encoding a deduced 375-amino acid protein, referred to as
rp40-TIA1, that has an apparent molecular mass of 40 kD by SDS-PAGE. The
1.6-kb cDNA is identical in sequence to the last 1,618 bp of the 2.2-kb
cDNA. The rp40-TIA1 protein contains 3 RNA-binding domains, each with 2
ribonucleoprotein consensus octapeptide sequences, at the N terminus,
and a glutamine-rich domain and a lysosomal membrane-targeting motif at
the C terminus; the rp15-TIA1 protein contains the glutamine-rich domain
and the lysosomal membrane-targeting motif. Tian et al. (1991) suggested
that the 15-kD TIA1 isoform may be derived from the 40-kD isoform by
proteolytic processing and showed that peripheral blood lymphocytes
express a protease capable of specifically cleaving rp40-TIA1, resulting
in the release of its 15-kD C terminus. Northern blot analysis detected
2.7- and 4.0-kb TIA1 transcripts in lymphocytes and 1.7-, 2.2-, 2.7-,
and 4.0-kb TIA1 transcripts in a cytotoxic T-cell clone.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kawakami et al. (1994) determined that the TIA1 gene contains 13 exons
and spans over 46 kb of genomic DNA. Although they identified the
transcription start site of the mRNA encoding the 40-kD TIA1 protein,
they could not identify a second promoter capable of initiating an mRNA
encoding the 15-kD TIA1 protein. This supports the possibility that the
15-kD isoform is derived from the 40-kD isoform by proteolysis.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Kawakami et al. (1994) mapped the TIA1 gene to
chromosome 2p13.

GENE FUNCTION

Tian et al. (1991) demonstrated that TIA1 is a nucleic acid-binding
protein that preferentially recognizes poly(A) homopolymers and induces
DNA fragmentation in permeabilized thymocytes. They suggested that TIA1
may be involved in the induction of apoptosis in CTL targets.

Forch et al. (2000) reported that the apoptosis-promoting protein TIA1
regulates alternative pre-mRNA splicing of the Drosophila male-specific
lethal-2 gene (MSL2; 614802) and of the human apoptotic gene FAS
(TNFRSF6; 134637). TIA1 associates selectively with pre-mRNAs that
contain 5-prime splice sites followed by U-rich sequences. TIA1 binding
to the U-rich stretches facilitates 5-prime splice site recognition by
U1 snRNP (see 180740). This activity is critical for activation of the
weak 5-prime splice site of Msl2 and for modulating the choice of splice
site partner in FAS. Structural and functional similarities with the S.
cerevisiae splicing factor Nam8 suggest striking evolutionary
conservation of a mechanism of pre-mRNA splicing regulation that
controls biologic processes as diverse as meiosis in yeast, dosage
compensation in fruit flies, or programmed cell death in humans.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By targeted high-throughput sequencing and Sanger sequencing of the
candidate Welander distal myopathy (WDM; 604454) region on chromosome
2p13, Hackman et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous mutation in the
TIA1 gene (E384K; 603518.0001) that segregated with the disorder in all
57 Swedish and Finnish patients studied. The same mutation was also
found in 3 patients from Great Britain, who had a partially shared
haplotype with the Nordic patients, indicating common ancestry.
Immunofluorescence microscopy of patient muscle showed diffuse
TIA1-labeled cytoplasmic aggregates or granules in some atrophic fibers
and fibers containing rimmed vacuoles. Expression of the mutant protein
in HeLa cells resulted in a mild increase (10-20%) of stress granule
numbers compared to controls. The increased number was apparently due to
a change in stress-granule dynamics, which Hackman et al. (2013)
concluded resulted from a gain of function.

Klar et al. (2013) also restricted the WDM-associated haplotype and
performed exome sequencing of 43 patients from 35 families with the
disorder. They identified a heterozygous E384K mutation in the TIA1 gene
in all patients. Patient muscle biopsies showed increased splicing of
exon 7 of the SMN2 gene (601627), reflecting impaired TIA1 function.
Klar et al. (2013) hypothesized that reduced activity of TIA1 may result
in decreased response to cellular stress, such as oxidative stress, that
may cause age-related cellular atrophy in patients carrying the
mutation. The mutation was estimated to have arisen 1,050 years earlier,
coinciding with the epoch of early seafaring across the Baltic Sea.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
WELANDER DISTAL MYOPATHY
TIA1, GLU384LYS

By targeted high-throughput sequencing and Sanger sequencing of the
candidate Welander distal myopathy (WDM; 604454) region on chromosome
2p13, Hackman et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous 1362G-A transition
in exon 13 of the TIA1 gene, resulting in a glu384-to-lys (E384K;
603518.0001) substitution that segregated with the disorder in all 57
Swedish and Finnish patients studied. The same mutation was also found
in 3 patients from Great Britain who had a partially shared haplotype
with the Nordic patients, indicating common ancestry. The mutation was
not found in 202 Finnish control samples. The E384K mutation occurred at
a highly conserved residue in the RNA-binding domain of the protein at
the C terminus, also known as the prion-related domain that is required
for TIA1 aggregation in stress granules. Immunofluorescence microscopy
of patient muscle showed diffuse TIA1-labeled cytoplasmic aggregates or
granules in some atrophic fibers and fibers containing rimmed vacuoles.
However, most fibers appeared normal and had normal TIA1 nuclear
localization. Analysis of TIA1 splice isoforms and protein stability
showed no consistent differences between WDM muscle and control muscle.
Expression of the mutant protein in HeLa cells resulted in a mild
increased (10-20%) of stress granule numbers compared to controls. The
increased number was apparently due to a change in stress-granule
dynamics resulting from a gain of function.

Klar et al. (2013) also restricted the WDM-associated haplotype and
performed exome sequencing of 43 patients from 35 families with the
disorder. They identified a heterozygous E384K mutation resulting from a
1150G-A transition in the TIA1 gene and occurring in a Q-rich domain.
The mutation was not found in 800 control chromosomes. Patient muscle
biopsies showed increased splicing of exon 7 of the SMN2 gene (601627),
reflecting impaired TIA1 function. Klar et al. (2013) hypothesized that
reduced activity of TIA1 may result in decreased response to cellular
stress, such as oxidative stress, that may cause age-related cellular
atrophy in patients carrying the mutation. The age of the mutation was
estimated to be 1,050 year ago, coinciding with the epoch of early
seafaring across the Baltic Sea.

REFERENCE 1. Anderson, P.; Nagler-Anderson, C.; O'Brien, C.; Levine, H.; Watkins,
S.; Slayter, H. S.; Blue, M. L.; Schlossman, S. F.: A monoclonal
antibody reactive with a 15-kDa cytoplasmic granule-associated protein
defines a subpopulation of CD8+ T lymphocytes. J. Immun. 144: 574-582,
1990.

2. Forch, P.; Puig, O.; Kedersha, N.; Martinez, C.; Granneman, S.;
Seraphin, B.; Anderson, P.; Valcarcel, J.: The apoptosis-promoting
factor TIA-1 is a regulator of alternative pre-mRNA splicing. Molec.
Cell 6: 1089-1098, 2000.

3. Hackman, P.; Sarparanta, J.; Lehtinen, S.; Vihola, A.; Evila, A.;
Jonson, P. H.; Luque, H.; Kere, J.; Screen, M.; Chinnery, P. F.; Ahlberg,
G.; Edstrom, L.; Udd, B.: Welander distal myopathy is caused by a
mutation in the RNA-binding protein TIA1. Ann. Neurol. 73: 500-509,
2013.

4. Kawakami, A.; Tian, Q.; Streuli, M.; Poe, M.; Edelhoff, S.; Disteche,
C. M.; Anderson, P.: Intron-exon organization and chromosomal localization
of the human TIA-1 gene. J. Immun. 152: 4937-4945, 1994.

5. Klar, J.; Sobol, M.; Melberg, A.; Mabert, K.; Ameur, A.; Johansson,
A. C. V.; Feuk, L.; Entesarian, M.; Orlen, H.; Casar-Borota, O.; Dahl,
N.: Welander distal myopathy caused by an ancient founder mutation
in TIA1 associated with perturbed splicing. Hum. Mutat. 34: 572-577,
2013.

6. Tian, Q.; Streuli, M.; Saito, H.; Schlossman, S. F.; Anderson,
P.: A polyadenylate binding protein localized to the granules of
cytolytic lymphocytes induces DNA fragmentation in target cells. Cell 67:
629-639, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/4/2013
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 12/14/2000

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 2/11/1999

EDITED carol: 07/08/2013
carol: 4/4/2013
ckniffin: 4/4/2013
mgross: 9/5/2012
carol: 9/8/2010
terry: 9/8/2010
mgross: 12/14/2000
psherman: 2/12/1999

604572	TITLE *604572 DNAJ/HSP40 HOMOLOG, SUBFAMILY B, MEMBER 1; DNAJB1
;;HEAT-SHOCK 40-KD PROTEIN 1; HSPF1;;
HDJ1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The E. coli heat-shock protein DnaJ functions together with DnaK
(HSPA1A; 140550) and GrpE (GRPEL1; 606173) as a molecular chaperone,
involving them in assembly and disassembly of protein complexes, protein
folding, renaturation of denatured proteins, prevention of protein
aggregation, and protein export. By screening a human placenta cDNA
library with anti-Hsp40 antibody, Ohtsuka (1993) isolated a cDNA
encoding a 40-kD heat-shock protein designated HSPF1. The deduced
340-amino acid HSPF1 protein is 34% identical to E. coli DnaJ and 34%
and 36% identical to HSJ1 (604139) and HSJ2 (602837), respectively. By
Northern blot analysis, Hata and Ohtsuka (1998) showed that expression
of a major 2.4-kb and a minor 1.4-kb HSPF1 transcript is drastically
induced by heat shock.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hata et al. (1996) determined that the HSPF1 gene spans over 7 kb and
contains 3 exons and 2 introns. The 5-prime region of the gene is highly
GC rich, and there are multiple basal elements for transcription
factors, including typical heat-shock elements (HSEs).

GENE FUNCTION

Hata and Ohtsuka (1998) found by gel mobility supershift assays that
HSF1 (140580) but not HSF2 (140581) interacts with the 8 exonic HSEs of
HSPF1. An intronic HSE in HSPF1 is inactive.

Several dominant human neurodegenerative diseases involve the expansion
of a polyglutamine within the disease proteins. This expansion confers
toxicity on the proteins and is associated with nuclear inclusion
formation. Data indicate that molecular chaperones can modulate
polyglutamine pathogenesis. To elucidate the basis of polyglutamine
toxicity and the mechanism by which chaperones suppress
neurodegeneration, Chan et al. (2000) studied transgenic Drosophila
disease models of Machado-Joseph disease (109150) and Huntington disease
(143100). They demonstrated that Hsp70 (see 140559) and Hdj1, the
Drosophila homolog to human HSP40 (see 604139), showed substrate
specificity for polyglutamine proteins as well as synergy in suppression
of neurotoxicity, and altered the solubility properties of the mutant
polyglutamine protein.

Using a Drosophila model for Huntington disease and other polyglutamine
diseases to screen for genetic factors modifying the degeneration caused
by expression of polyglutamine in the eye, Kazemi-Esfarjani and Benzer
(2000) isolated several suppressor strains, 2 of which led to the
discovery of suppressor genes. The predicted product of one is TPR2
(601964), which is homologous to the human tetratricopeptide repeat
protein-2. That of the second is HDJ1. The suppression of polyglutamine
toxicity was verified in transgenic flies.

MAPPING

By FISH, Hata et al. (1996) mapped the HSPF1 gene to chromosome 19p13.2.

REFERENCE 1. Chan, H. Y. E.; Warrick, J. M.; Gray-Board, G. L.; Paulson, H.
L.; Bonini, N. M.: Mechanisms of chaperone suppression of polyglutamine
disease: selectivity, synergy and modulation of protein solubility
in Drosophila. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 2811-2820, 2000.

2. Hata, M.; Ohtsuka, K.: Characterization of HSE sequences in human
Hsp40 gene: structural and promoter analysis. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1397:
43-55, 1998.

3. Hata, M.; Okumura, K.; Seto, M.; Ohtsuka, K.: Genomic cloning
of a human heat shock protein 40 (Hsp40) gene (HSPF1) and its chromosomal
localization to 19p13.2. Genomics 38: 446-449, 1996.

4. Kazemi-Esfarjani, P.; Benzer, S.: Genetic suppression of polyglutamine
toxicity in Drosophila. Science 287: 1837-1840, 2000.

5. Ohtsuka, K.: Cloning of a cDNA for heat-shock protein Hsp40, a
human homologue of bacterial DnaJ. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 197:
235-240, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 2/5/2001

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/18/2000

EDITED carol: 08/17/2007
alopez: 11/20/2001
mgross: 8/3/2001
carol: 3/13/2001
cwells: 2/5/2001
carol: 2/18/2000

601103	TITLE *601103 MICROFIBRILLAR-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 5; MFAP5
;;MICROFIBRIL-ASSOCIATED GLYCOPROTEIN 2; MAGP2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Microfibrillar-associated protein-5 (MFAP5, MAGP2) is a component of
fibrillin-containing microfibrils where it partners with MFAP2 (MAGP;
156790) and other microfibril-associated proteins to define microfibril
function (summary by Combs et al., 2013).

CLONING

Gibson et al. (1996) found that MAGP2 (MFAP5), also referred to as MP25,
is approximately 80% homologous in bovine and human and contains 170 and
173 amino acids, respectively. MAGP (MFAP2; 156790) was referred to as
MAGP1 by Gibson et al. (1996). The close similarity between MAGP1 and
MAGP2 was confined to a central region of 60 amino acids where there is
precise alignment of 7 cysteine residues. Elsewhere, the MAGP2 molecule
is rich in serine and threonine residues and contains an RGD motif.
MAGP2 lacks the proline-, glutamine-, and tyrosine-rich sequences and a
hydrophobic carboxyl terminus, characteristic of MAGP1. These structural
differences suggest that MAGP2 has some functions that are distinct from
those of MAGP1.

MAPPING

Gibson et al. (1996) mapped the MFAP5 gene to chromosome 12p13.1-p12.3
by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

GENE FUNCTION

Combs et al. (2013) found that mice with targeted inactivation of the
Mfap5 (MAGP2) gene appeared normal by several measures, were fertile,
and had a normal lifespan, but were neutropenic. The authors noted that,
in contrast, Mfap2 -/- (MAGP1) mice had been found to be monocytopenic.
Combs et al. (2013) demonstrated that double knockout of both genes
resulted in age-related aortic dilation, indicating that the MAGP genes
are important in maintaining large vessel integrity. MAGP2 protein was
shown to bind active TGFB1 (190180), TGFB2 (190220), and BMP2 (112261).

REFERENCE 1. Combs, M. D.; Knutsen, R. H.; Broekelmann, T. J.; Toennies, H.
M.; Brett, T. J.; Miller, C. A.; Kober, D. L.; Craft, C. S.; Atkinson,
J. J.; Shipley, J. M.; Trask, B. C.; Mecham, R. P.: Microfibril-associated
glycoprotein 2 (MAGP2) loss of function has pleiotropic effects in
vivo. J. Biol. Chem. 288: 28869-28880, 2013.

2. Gibson, M. A.; Hatzinikolas, G.; Kumaratilake, J. S.; Sandberg,
L. B.; Nicholl, J. K.; Sutherland, G. R.; Cleary, E. G.: Further
characterization of proteins associated with elastic fiber microfibrils
including the molecular cloning of MAGP-2 (MP25). J. Biol. Chem. 271:
1096-1103, 1996. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem. 271: 5288 only, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Alan F. Scott - updated: 10/21/2013
Harry C. Dietz - updated: 3/8/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/6/1996

EDITED carol: 10/21/2013
carol: 4/18/2013
carol: 2/4/2009
mark: 10/1/1997
alopez: 9/5/1997
mark: 4/11/1996
mark: 3/21/1996
mark: 3/8/1996
mark: 3/6/1996

605383	TITLE *605383 INTERLEUKIN 21 RECEPTOR; IL21R
IL21R/BCL6 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Type I cytokine receptors, such as IL21R, include receptors for
hematopoietic growth factors, as well as for many of the interleukins
(e.g., IL2; 147680). Some type I receptors are capable of signaling
through homodimerization, whereas others share a common beta chain or
the common cytokine receptor gamma chain, gamma(c) (IL2RG; 308380),
mutation of which results in X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency
(XSCID; 300400) (Ozaki et al., 2000; Parrish-Novak et al., 2000).

CLONING

By scanning the genome for 'virtual' open reading frames using a gene
prediction program and BLAST comparisons, followed by nested RT-PCR of
various immune system tissues, Ozaki et al. (2000) identified a cDNA
encoding IL21R, which they called NILR (novel interleukin receptor).
Sequence analysis predicted that the deduced 538-amino acid IL21R
protein, which is most closely related to human IL2RB (146710) and is
62% identical to mouse Il21r, contains 4 conserved cys residues, 5
potential N-linked glycosylation sites, numerous potential O-linked
glycosylation sites, and a WSXWS motif in the extracellular region,
typical of type I cytokine receptors. IL21R also has a Box 1 region in
its intracellular region. Immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis
revealed the expression of an 80- to 100-kD IL21R protein on NK-, T-,
and B-cell lines and showed that IL21R associates with JAK1 (147795).

By searching an EST database, Parrish-Novak et al. (2000) also
identified a cDNA encoding IL21R. In addition to the motifs reported by
Ozaki et al. (2000), Parrish-Novak et al. (2000) noted the presence of
an intracellular Box 2 motif as an additional potential signaling
sequence in IL21R. Northern blot analysis detected IL21R transcripts
only in lymphoid tissue. In situ hybridization analysis detected IL21R
mRNA in a subset of cells in normal lymphoid tissue and in fibrotic but
not normal lung. Flow cytometric analysis showed that CD23
(151445)-positive B cells, B-cell lines, a T-cell leukemia line, and
NK-cell lines express an IL21 (605384)-binding partner. RT-PCR analysis
detected IL21R on peripheral NK cells.

GENE FUNCTION

By expressing chimeric proteins with an IL21R cytoplasmic tail, Ozaki et
al. (2000) found that IL21R can transduce growth signals. Binding
analysis could not detect any interactions between IL21R and IL2, IL4
(147780), IL7 (146660), or IL15 (600554) in the presence or absence of
IL2RG.

By expressing chimeric proteins with an IL21R cytoplasmic tail,
Parrish-Novak et al. (2000) confirmed that IL21R can transduce growth
signals. Through expression of full-length IL21R, Parrish-Novak et al.
(2000) determined that T-cell conditioned media contains a
growth-inducing ligand for the receptor, IL21, that can be blocked by
soluble IL21R. Functional analysis indicated that IL21R appears to
transduce signals through homodimerization.

Asao et al. (2001) showed that IL21 binds to IL21R in IL2RG-deficient
cell lines but fails to transduce signals. In cell lines expressing
IL2RG, binding and activation of JAK1, JAK3 (600173), STAT1 (600555),
and STAT3 (102582) occurs, indicating that IL2RG is an indispensable
subunit of the functional IL21R complex.

Using ELISA, Pene et al. (2006) found that recombinant human IL21
enhanced proliferation and IgE (see 147180) production by both CD19
(107265)-positive/CD27 (TNFRSF7; 186711)-negative naive and
CD19-positive/CD27-positive memory B lymphocytes after stimulation with
anti-CD40 (109535) and recombinant IL4. However, reporter assays and
Northern blot analysis showed that recombinant IL21 did not affect IgE
constant region promoter activation or mRNA expression in response to
anti-CD40 and recombinant IL4. In the absence of anti-CD40, recombinant
IL21 induced IFNG (147570) production and inhibition of recombinant
IL4-induced IgE production. Individuals heterozygous for the -83T-C
promoter polymorphism in the IL21R gene (6050383.0001) had reduced
recombinant IL21-induced IFNG production and inhibition of IgE synthesis
compared with individuals with wildtype IL21R. Pene et al. (2006)
concluded that IL21 differentially regulates IgE production, in part,
due to a polymorphism in the IL21R gene.

By mutation analysis, Zeng et al. (2007) showed that tyr510 of mouse
Il21r was required for Il21-induced phosphorylation of Stat1 and Stat3
and for maximal Il21-mediated proliferation of Il3 (147740)-dependent
pro-B Ba/F3 cells. Cd8 (see 186910)-positive T cells from Stat1/Stat3
double-knockout mice exhibited decreased proliferation in response to
Il21 plus Il15 (600554). Il21 weakly induced phosphorylation of Shc
(SHC1; 600560) and Akt (AKT1; 164730), and consistent with this,
specific inhibitors of the MAPK (see 176948) and PI3K (see 601232)
pathways inhibited Il21-mediated proliferation. Zeng et al. (2007)
concluded that the JAK-STAT, MAPK, and PI3K pathways are involved in
IL21 signaling.

Jin et al. (2009) found increased expression of IL21 and IL21R in skin
lesions of patients with atopic dermatitis (see 603165) compared to
controls. IL21 was expressed by mononuclear leukocytes that infiltrated
the dermis and was weakly detected in the epidermis of skin lesions,
particularly in areas with more severe acute eczematous changes. IL21R
expression was observed in epidermal keratinocytes of skin lesions and
along the dermal/epidermal junction in a granular expression pattern. In
contrast, normal skin had no IL21 protein expression and only weak IL21R
expression.

Using confocal microscopy, Barnett et al. (2012) showed that after
immunization, Bcl6 (109565), Il21r, and Prkcz (176982) colocalized with
the microtubule-organizing center in a polarized manner to 1 side of the
plane of division in mouse germinal center B cells, generating unequal
inheritance of fate-altering molecules by daughter cells. Germinal
center B cells from mice lacking Icam1 (147840) failed to divide
asymmetrically. Barnett et al. (2012) proposed that motile cells lacking
constitutive attachment can receive provisional polarity cues from the
microenvironment to generate daughter cell diversity and self-renewal.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic analysis, Ozaki et al. (2000) determined that the IL21R gene
contains 9 coding exons. Parrish-Novak et al. (2000) found that the
IL21R gene spans about 20 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic analysis, Ozaki et al. (2000) determined that the IL21R gene
is adjacent to IL4R (147781) on 16p12. Using radiation hybrid analysis,
Parrish-Novak et al. (2000) mapped the IL21R gene to 16p11.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Hecker et al. (2003) identified a SNP in the promoter region of the
IL21R gene, -83T-C (605383.0001), that was significantly associated with
elevated IgE levels (147050) in females, but not in males.

In 4 patients from 2 unrelated consanguineous families with IL21R
immunodeficiency (615207), Kotlarz et al. (2013) identified 2 different
homozygous loss-of-function mutations in the IL21R gene (605383.0002 and
605383.0003, respectively). The patients had early onset of recurrent
infections, and all developed chronic liver disease due to
Cryptosporidium infection. Laboratory studies showed normal numbers of
lymphocytes, but defective class-switched B cells, low IgG, defective
antibody response, and defective T-cell responses to certain antigens.
Patient cells showed impaired IL21R-mediated signaling and severe
abrogation of phosphorylation of downstream mediators, including STAT
proteins (see, e.g., STAT3, 102582).

CYTOGENETICS

Ueda et al. (2002) found that the IL21R gene is the partner of BCL6
(109565) in the t(3;16)(q27;p11) translocation. In 2 cases they found
that the breakpoints on 16p11 were located within the 27-kb intron 1 of
IL21R. As a result of t(3;16), the promoter region of IL21R was
substituted for the regulatory sequences of BCL6 in the same
transcriptional orientation. Fluorescence in situ chromosomal
hybridization of lymphoma metaphase cells revealed fusion signals that
contained both the BCL6 and IL21R sequences on the der(3)t(3;16)
chromosome. To the list of nonimmunoglobulin partners of BCL6
translocations, this study added a new class of gene, i.e., cytokine
receptor gene, the expression of which is closely associated with
lymphoid cells.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kasaian et al. (2002) generated Il21r-deficient mice by homologous
recombination and deletion of exon 1. The mice had normal NK cell
development and responses to poly I:C in vivo or IL15 in vitro, but not
to IL21. In wildtype mice, IL21 limited the growth but not activation of
NK cells, but not T cells, in response to IL15 or IL2 in antigen-free
cultures. IL21 could boost the function of activated NK cells from these
mice without promoting NK cell viability or preventing apoptosis.
CD8-positive T cells from either wildtype or Il21r -/- mice treated with
IL15 proliferated and expressed high levels of CD44 (107269), a marker
for 'memory' T cells. Addition of IL21 counteracted the effects of IL15
in wildtype but not Il21r-deficient mice and also prevented the
expansion of cells expressing the IFNG receptor, CD119 (IFNGR1; 107470),
as well as those expressing IL2RA (CD25; 147730) and IL2RB/IL15RB
(CD122), but not IL2RG (CD132). IL21 enhanced proliferation and effector
functions of wildtype cytolytic T cells stimulated with either anti-CD3
(see 186830) or allogeneic cells. Kasaian et al. (2002) proposed that
IL21 promotes the transition between innate and adaptive immunity.

In addition to XSCID caused by mutations in the common cytokine receptor
gamma chain subunit, an autosomal form of SCID (600802) with T-cell
deficiency occurs in patients with a mutation in the IL7R gene (146661).
IL7 is vital for B-cell development in mice, but not in humans. Ozaki et
al. (2002) developed a mouse model with a phenotype resembling human
XSCID by knocking out the genes for both Il4 and Il21r. Mice lacking
only the Il21r gene had normal B- and T-cell phenotypes and functions,
with the exception of lower IgG1 and IgG2b and higher serum IgE levels.
After immunization with various antigens and with the parasite
Toxoplasma gondii, the normal increase in IgG1 antibodies, as well as
antigen-specific IgG2b and IgG3 antibodies, was significantly lower than
in wildtype mice, and there was an uncharacteristic marked increase in
antigen-specific IgE responses. In contrast, mice lacking both Il4 and
Il21r exhibited lower levels of IgG and IgA, but not IgM, analogous to
humans with XSCID. After immunization, these double-knockout mice did
not upregulate IgE, indicating that this phenomenon is Il4-dependent,
nor did they upregulate the IgG subclasses. The double-knockout mice,
but not mice lacking only Il4 or Il21r, had disorganized germinal
centers. Ozaki et al. (2002) proposed that defective signaling by IL4
and IL21 might explain the B-cell defect in XSCID.

Pesce et al. (2006) found that granulomatous inflammation and liver
fibrosis were significantly reduced in Il21r -/- mice infected with the
Th2-inducing pathogen Schistosoma mansoni (see 604201), as well as in
infected wildtype mice treated with soluble Il21r. Inhibition of the
granulomatous response was associated with reduced Th2 cytokine
expression in tissues, but not with changes in worm or egg burden. In
vitro analysis showed that Il21 augmented Il4r and Il13ra1 (300119)
expression in macrophages, resulting in increased Fizz1 and arginase-1
(ARG1; 608313) activity following Il4 or Il13 (147683) stimulation.
Pesce et al. (2006) concluded that IL21R has an essential role in
progression of Th2 cytokine-mediated fibrotic liver pathology in
schistosomiasis.

Jin et al. (2009) presented evidence that Il21r plays a role in allergic
skin inflammation and sensitization in mice. Mechanical tape stripping,
which induces scratching dry itchy skin similar to atopic dermatitis in
humans, was found to upregulate Il21 and Il21r expression in the skin.
Il21r-null mice showed no epidermal or dermal thickening and only weak
infiltration of CD4+ T cells after OVA (ovalbumin) sensitization
compared to wildtype mice, suggesting that Il21r is essential for the
development of allergic skin inflammation. Il21r-null mice also showed
an impaired systemic response to allergic sensitization, with decreased
serum antibodies compared to wildtype mice. Although Il21r-null mice had
normal dendritic cell function, dendritic cells failed to migrate to
lymph nodes properly after sensitization, in part because of impaired
upregulation of CCR7 (600242).

Using different strains of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) to
induce acute or chronic infection in mice, Elsaesser et al. (2009) found
that high levels of Il21 were produced by Cd4-positive T cells in the
chronic phase of infection, at which time Il2 production was
extinguished. Mice lacking Il21r exhibited an increased presence of
virus-specific Cd4-positive T cells but an exhaustion of Cd8-positive T
cells, with little or no effect on antigen-presenting cells or B cells,
during chronic LCMV infection. Elsaesser et al. (2009) concluded that
IL21 sustains CD8-positive T-cell effector activity and provides a
mechanism of CD4-positive T-cell help during chronic viral infection.

Frohlich et al. (2009) showed that Il21r -/- mice had normal
Cd8-positive T-cell expansion, effector function, memory homeostasis,
and recall response during acute and after resolved infections, but not
during chronic infections. They proposed that IL21-IL21R signaling is
required during chronic viral infections and may also be important in
responses to other persisting antigens, such as tumors.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
IgE, ELEVATED LEVEL OF
IL21R, -83T-C

Hecker et al. (2003) identified a SNP in the promoter region of the
IL21R gene, -83T-C, that was significantly associated with elevated IgE
levels (147050) in females, but not in males.

.0002
IL21R IMMUNODEFICIENCY
IL21R, ARG201LEU

In 2 sibs, born of consanguineous Lebanese parents, with IL21R
immunodeficiency (615207), Kotlarz et al. (2013) identified a homozygous
c.602G-T transversion in the IL21R gene, resulting in an arg201-to-leu
(R201L) substitution in the extracellular region. The mutation, which
was identified by exome sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing,
segregated with the disorder in the family. Molecular modeling predicted
that the R201L substitution would cause steric clashing and
destabilization. In vitro functional expression studies in HeLa cells
showed that the mutation resulted in defective trafficking of the
protein, with misfolding, impaired processing, and abnormal subcellular
distribution rather than proper expression at the plasma membrane.
Patient cells showed impaired IL21R-mediated signaling and severe
abrogation of phosphorylation of downstream mediators, including STAT
proteins (see, e.g., STAT3, 102582). The patients had early onset of
recurrent infections, as well as chronic cholangitis and biliary and
hepatic cirrhosis associated with Cryptosporidium infection. One patient
died after complications of liver transplantation and the other patient
died after complications from hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
Laboratory studies showed relatively normal numbers of lymphocytes, but
decreased numbers of class-switched B cells, defective antibody
responses, reduced proliferative capacity of B cells, decreased T-cell
proliferation in response to certain antigens, and decreased NK
cell-mediated lysis. Serum IgE was increased and IgG was decreased.
Patient cells also showed decreased secretion of certain cytokines,
including IL17F (606496) and IL22 (605330), which may have explained the
increased susceptibility to Cryptosporidium infection.

.0003
IL21R IMMUNODEFICIENCY
IL21R, 6-BP DEL, 240CTGCCA

In 2 sibs, born of consanguineous parents from Colombia, with IL21R
immunodeficiency (615207), Kotlarz et al. (2013) identified a homozygous
6-bp deletion in exon 4 of the IL21R gene (c.240_245delCTGCCA;
cys81_his82del). Protein structure analysis suggested that the mutation
would result in misfolding of the mutant protein. The patients had
recurrent infections and liver disease due to Cryptosporidium infection.
Laboratory studies showed normal lymphocyte numbers, but there were
functional abnormalities, including decreased IgG, decreased antibody
and T-cell responses to activation, increased IgE, and decreased
IL21-dependent class-switching. One patient had impaired NK
cell-mediated cytotoxicity.

REFERENCE 1. Asao, H.; Okuyama, C.; Kumaki, S.; Ishii, N.; Tsuchiya, S.; Foster,
D.; Sugamura, K.: Cutting edge: the common gamma-chain is an indispensable
subunit of the IL-21 receptor complex. J. Immun. 167: 1-5, 2001.

2. Barnett, B. E.; Ciocca, M. L.; Goenka, R.; Barnett, L. G.; Wu,
J.; Laufer, T. M.; Burkhardt, J. K.; Cancro, M. P.; Reiner, S. L.
: Asymmetric B cell division in the germinal center reaction. Science 335:
342-344, 2012.

3. Elsaesser, H.; Sauer, K.; Brooks, D. G.: IL-21 is required to
control chronic viral infection. Science 324: 1569-1572, 2009. Note:
Erratum: Science 325: 946 only, 2009.

4. Frohlich, A.; Kisielow, J.; Schmitz, I.; Freigang, S.; Shamshiev,
A. T.; Weber, J.; Marsland, B. J.; Oxenius, A.; Kopf, M.: IL-21R
on T cells is critical for sustained functionality and control of
chronic viral infection. Science 324: 1576-1580, 2009.

5. Hecker, M.; Bohnert, A.; Konig, I. R.; Bein, G.; Hackstein, H.
: Novel genetic variation of human interleukin-21 receptor is associated
with elevated IgE levels in females. Genes Immun. 4: 228-233, 2003.

6. Jin, H.; Oyoshi, M. K.; Le, Y.; Bianchi, T.; Koduru, S.; Mathias,
C. B.; Kumar, L.; Le Bras, S.; Young, D.; Collins, M.; Grusby, M.
J.; Wenzel, J.; Bieber, T.; Boes, M.; Silberstein, L. E.; Oettgen,
H. C.; Geha, R. S.: IL-21R is essential for epicutaneous sensitization
and allergic skin inflammation in humans and mice. J. Clin. Invest. 119:
47-60, 2009.

7. Kasaian, M. T.; Whitters, M. J.; Carter, L. L.; Lowe, L. D.; Jussif,
J. M.; Deng, B.; Johnson, K. A.; Witek, J. S.; Senices, M.; Konz,
R. F.; Wurster, A. L.; Donaldson, D. D.; Collins, M.; Young, D. A.;
Grusby, M. J.: IL-21 limits NK cell responses and promotes antigen-specific
T cell activation: a mediator of the transition from innate to adaptive
immunity. Immunity 16: 559-569, 2002.

8. Kotlarz, D.; Zietara, N.; Uzel, G.; Weidemann, T.; Braun, C. J.;
Diestelhorst, J.; Krawitz, P. M.; Robinson, P. N.; Hecht, J.; Puchalka,
J.; Gertz, E.M.; Schaffer, A. A.; and 14 others: Loss-of-function
mutations in the IL-21 receptor gene cause a primary immunodeficiency
syndrome. J. Exp. Med. 210: 433-443, 2013.

9. Ozaki, K.; Kikly, K.; Michalovich, D.; Young, P. R.; Leonard, W.
J.: Cloning of a type I cytokine receptor most related to the IL-2
receptor beta chain. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 11439-11444, 2000.

10. Ozaki, K.; Spolski, R.; Feng, C. G.; Qi, C.-F.; Cheng, J.; Sher,
A.; Morse, H. C., III; Liu, C.; Schwartzberg, P. L.; Leonard, W. J.
: A critical role for IL-21 in regulating immunoglobulin production. Science 298:
1630-1634, 2002.

11. Parrish-Novak, J.; Dillon, S. R.; Nelson, A.; Hammond, A.; Sprecher,
C.; Gross, J. A.; Johnston, J.; Madden, K.; Xu, W.; West, J.; Schrader,
S.; Burkhead, S.; and 26 others: Interleukin 21 and its receptor
are involved in NK cell expansion and regulation of lymphocyte function. Nature 408:
57-63, 2000.

12. Pene, J.; Guglielmi, L.; Gauchat, J.-F.; Harrer, N.; Woisetschlager,
M.; Boulay, V.; Fabre, J.-M.; Demoly, P.; Yssel, H.: IFN-gamma-mediated
inhibition of human IgE synthesis by IL-21 is associated with a polymorphism
in the IL-21R gene. J. Immun. 177: 5006-5013, 2006.

13. Pesce, J.; Kaviratne, M.; Ramalingam, T. R.; Thompson, R. W.;
Urban, J. F., Jr.; Cheever, A. W.; Young, D. A.; Collins, M.; Grusby,
M. J.; Wynn, T. A.: The IL-21 receptor augments Th2 effector function
and alternative macrophage activation. J. Clin. Invest. 116: 2044-2055,
2006.

14. Ueda, C.; Akasaka, T.; Kurata, M.; Maesako, Y.; Nishikori, M.;
Ichinohasama, R.; Imada, K.; Uchiyama, T.; Ohno, H.: The gene for
interleukin-21 receptor is the partner of BCL6 in t(13;16)(q27;p11),
which is recurrently observed in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Oncogene 21:
368-376, 2002.

15. Zeng, R.; Spolski, R.; Casas, E.; Zhu, W.; Levy, D. E.; Leonard,
W. J.: The molecular basis of IL-21-mediated proliferation. Blood 109:
4135-4142, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/29/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/14/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/17/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/24/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/2/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/2/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/16/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/3/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/15/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/7/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/22/2001

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/1/2000

EDITED carol: 04/29/2013
ckniffin: 4/29/2013
mgross: 2/14/2012
terry: 2/14/2012
alopez: 9/10/2009
mgross: 7/17/2009
wwang: 7/17/2009
ckniffin: 6/24/2009
mgross: 5/2/2008
mgross: 3/8/2007
terry: 3/2/2007
mgross: 12/1/2006
terry: 11/16/2006
mgross: 4/16/2004
mgross: 12/3/2002
mgross: 5/15/2002
cwells: 3/18/2002
cwells: 3/15/2002
terry: 3/7/2002
mgross: 10/22/2001
mgross: 11/1/2000

156540	TITLE *156540 METHYLTHIOADENOSINE PHOSPHORYLASE; MTAP
;;MeSAdo PHOSPHORYLASE; MSAP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The MTAP gene encodes methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (EC 24.2.28), a
homotrimeric-subunit enzyme that plays a major role in polyamine
metabolism and is important for the salvage of both adenine and
methionine. For example, as much as 97% of the endogenous adenine
produced by human lymphoblasts in culture is formed by catabolism of
methylthioadenosine (MeSAdo) by the phosphorylase. MeSAdo, a by-product
of the synthesis of the polyamines spermidine and spermine, potently
inhibits polyamine aminopropyltransferase reactions if not removed by
the above phosphorylase reaction. MeSAdo phosphorylase is abundant in
normal cells and tissues but lacking from many human and murine
malignant cell lines and from some human leukemias in vivo (summary by
Carrera et al., 1984; Camacho-Vanegas et al., 2012).

CLONING

Olopade et al. (1995) constructed a long-range physical map of 2.8 Mb
from chromosome 9p21, where the MTAP gene is located, using overlapping
YAC and cosmid clones. Sequence analysis of a 2.5-kb cDNA clone isolated
from a CpG island located in the contig between the IFN genes (see IFNA;
147660) and CDKN2 (600160) revealed a predicted ORF for MTAP of 283
amino acids followed by 1,302-bp of 3-prime UTR. The MTAP gene is
evolutionarily conserved and shows significant amino acid homology to
mouse and human purine nucleotide phosphorylases.

Using RT-PCR, Burdon et al. (2011) demonstrated expression of MTAP in
human ocular tissues, including in the iris, ciliary body, retina, and
optic nerve.

Camacho-Vanegas et al. (2012) identified 6 additional transcripts of the
MTAP gene that used previously uncharacterized exons. None of these 6
additional isoforms contained the archetypal terminal exon 8, and all
affected the C terminus of the protein product in different ways. Four
contained either a short or long form of exon 9, and 4 contained a
unique sequence containing 2 additional downstream exons, 10 and 11. The
alternative splice site variants were named on the basis of their
electrophoretic mobility: MTAP v1 (exons 1-7 and 9S-11), v2 (exons 1-7
and 9L), v3 (exons 1-7, 10, and 11), v4 (exons 1-6 and 9S-11), v5 (exons
1-6 and 9L), and v6 (exons 1-6, 10, and 11). Splice variants 1-3
contained the wildtype exon 7 sequence; variants 4-6 did not. The
variants were all translated and able to interact with archetypal MTAP.
However, only isoforms v1, v2, and v3 demonstrated MTAP activity; v4,
v5, and v6 showed shorter half-lives and had no detectable MTAP
activity. Molecular modeling suggested that MTAP is a trimer with
heterologous assembly of different subunits composed of archetype and
splice variants.

GENE STRUCTURE

Nobori et al. (1996) determined that the MTAP gene contains 8 exons.

Camacho-Vanegas et al. (2012) identified 3 additional exons of MTAP,
which they termed 9, 10, and 11. Sequence analysis of the 3 terminal
exons showed that exons 9 and 10 shared high homology with different
primate-specific retroviral sequences that are known to have integrated
multiple times into different chromosomes throughout the genome.

MAPPING

Carrera et al. (1984) studied hybrids between MeSAdo
phosphorylase-deficient mouse L cells and human fibroblasts to show that
the MTAP gene is located in the 9pter-q12 segment.

As indicated by the findings of Olopade et al. (1992), the MTAP locus is
centromeric to the cluster of interferon genes (e.g., 147640). Thus, the
likely location of MTAP is 9p21.

Nobori et al. (1996) cloned the MTAP gene and constructed a topologic
map of the 9p21 region using YAC clones, pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis, and sequence tagged-site PCR. They found that the gene
order on chromosome 9p21, starting from the centromeric end, is p15
(600431)--p16 (600160)--MTAP--IFNA--IFNB (147640).

Kadariya et al. (2009) stated that the mouse Mtap gene maps to
chromosome 4.

GENE FUNCTION

Ragione et al. (1996) expressed recombinant human MTAP and showed it to
have the expected enzymatic properties.

The MTAP enzyme is missing in malignant cells in cases of lymphomatous
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (247640); many of these cases have
abnormality of 9p22-p21 (Chilcote et al., 1985).

Nobori et al. (1996) found that of 23 malignant cell lines deficient in
MTAP, all but 1 had complete or partial deletion of the MTAP gene. They
also found partial or total deletion of the MTAP gene in primary T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemias. In both cases, the deletion breakpoint of
partial deletions occurred within intron 4. Nobori et al. (1996)
suggested that MTAP deficiency in malignancy results from total or
partial deletion of the MTAP gene, which is closely linked to the p16
and p15 genes. They noted that both p16 and p15 are homozygously deleted
in many different malignant cell lines as well as in acute leukemias.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Camacho-Vanegas et al. (2012) identified 2 different heterozygous
mutations affecting exon 9 of the MTAP gene (156540.0001 and
156540.0002) in affected members of 5 unrelated families with diaphyseal
medullary stenosis with malignant fibrous histiocytoma (DMSMFH; 112250).
Four of the families had previously been reported by Arnold (1973),
Hardcastle et al. (1986), Norton et al. (1996), and Watts et al. (2005).
The mutations were found by positional cloning and examination of
putative open reading frames within the candidate region. The analysis
identified previously unrecognized exons in the MTAP gene, including
exon 9. Both mutations affected splicing, with altered expression of
MTAP isoforms. Serum samples from 2 patients showed accumulation of
methylthioadenosine (MTA), whereas MTA was not present in serum from 3
controls. These findings implicated a defect in MTAP enzyme activity in
patients with mutations. DNA analysis of tumor tissue from an
osteosarcoma of 1 patient showed homozygosity for the mutation with loss
of heterozygosity (LOH) of the wildtype allele. The findings of the
study suggested that MTAP can also act as a tumor suppressor gene.

EVOLUTION

Camacho-Vanegas et al. (2012) identified 3 previously unrecognized exons
of MTAP, which they termed 9, 10, and 11. Sequence analysis of these 3
terminal exons showed that exons 9 and 10 share high homology with
different primate-specific retroviral sequences that are known to have
integrated multiple times into different chromosomes throughout the
genome. Exon 9 arose from part of a MER50I element, and exon 10 arose
from part of a THE1A element, 1 of several families of primate-specific
long terminal repeat (LTR) retrotransposons. Sequencing of PCR amplicons
covering exon 9 in great apes and Old and New World monkeys indicated
that the MER50I remnant was integrated over 40 million years ago into
the lineage leading to anthropoid primates.

ANIMAL MODEL

After demonstrating by FISH that the chromosome 9 breakpoint in a deaf
patient with a balanced translocation t(8;9)(q12.1;p21.3) disrupted the
MTAP gene, Williamson et al. (2007) created a mouse model for MTAP
deficiency and found that Mtap +/- mice had no significant pathology;
specifically, no hearing loss was observed. Mtap-deficient mice were
embryonic lethal.

Independently, Kadariya et al. (2009) found that homozygous Mtap
deletion in mice was embryonic lethal. Mtap +/- mice appeared normal for
the first year of life, and they had normal serum amino acid profiles.
However, Mtap +/- mice had reduced life span compared with wildtype
littermates. Necropsy showed marked splenomegaly, often with enlargement
of the liver and thymus, and severe lymphoproliferative disease
resembling T-cell lymphoma.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DIAPHYSEAL MEDULLARY STENOSIS WITH MALIGNANT FIBROUS HISTIOCYTOMA
MTAP, 885A-G, ARG100ARG

In affected members of 3 unrelated families with diaphyseal medullary
stenosis with malignant fibrous histiocytoma (DMSMFH; 112250),
Camacho-Vanegas et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous 885A-G
transition in exon 9 of the MTAP gene, resulting in a synonymous
arg100-to-arg (R100R) substitution. The mutation was not found in 1,000
control chromosomes. Two of the families had previously been reported by
Arnold (1973) and Norton et al. (1996). The 885A-G transition was
predicted to abolish an exonic splicing enhancer sequence, and in vitro
functional expression studies using minigene constructs demonstrated
that the mutation resulted in markedly decreased (70%) expression of
exon-9-containing transcripts. There was also an increase in expression
of the 2 isoforms lacking exon 9. The dysregulated expression pattern
was also observed in patient-derived tissues.

.0002
DIAPHYSEAL MEDULLARY STENOSIS WITH MALIGNANT FIBROUS HISTIOCYTOMA
MTAP, IVS9AS, A-G, -2

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with DMSMFH (112250),
Camacho-Vanegas et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous A-to-G
transition in intron 9 of the MTAP gene (IVS9-2A-G). The mutation was
not found in 1,000 control chromosomes. One of the families was of
Australian origin and had previously been reported by Hardcastle et al.
(1986); the other family had been reported by Henry et al. (1958), Watts
et al. (2005), and Mehta et al. (2006). The A-to-G transition was
predicted to result in the loss of an acceptor splice site, and in vitro
functional expression studies using minigene constructs demonstrated
that the mutation ablated expression of all isoforms containing exon 9
and increased the expression of the archetypal isoform ending at exon 8
as well as an increase in the isoforms lacking exon 9. In addition, the
first 3 amino acids were lacking from both 9S isoforms. The dysregulated
expression pattern was also observed in patient-derived tissues.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Williams-Ashman et al. (1982)
REFERENCE 1. Arnold, W. H.: Hereditary bone dysplasia with sarcomatous degeneration. Ann.
Intern. Med. 78: 902-906, 1973.

2. Burdon, K. P.; Macgregor, S.; Hewitt, A. W.; Sharma, S.; Chidlow,
G.; Mills, R. A.; Danoy, P.; Casson, R.; Viswanathan, A. C.; Liu,
J. Z.; Landers, J.; Henders, A. K.; and 13 others: Genome-wide association
study identifies susceptibility loci for open angle glaucoma at TMCO1
and CDKN2B-AS1. Nature Genet. 43: 574-578, 2011.

3. Camacho-Vanegas, O.; Camacho, S. C.; Till, J.; Miranda-Lorenzo,
I.; Terzo, E.; Ramirez, M. C.; Schramm, V.; Cordovano, G.; Watts,
G.; Mehta, S.; Kimonis, V.; Hoch, B.; Philibert, K. D.; Raabe, C.
A.; Bishop, D. F.; Glucksman, M. J.; Martignetti, J. A.: Primate
genome gain and loss: a bone dysplasia, muscular dystrophy, and bone
cancer syndrome resulting from mutated retroviral-derived MTAP transcripts. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 90: 614-627, 2012.

4. Carrera, C. J.; Eddy, R. L.; Shows, T. B.; Carson, D. A.: Assignment
of the gene for methylthioadenosine phosphorylase to human chromosome
9 by mouse-human somatic cell hybridization. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 81:
2665-2668, 1984.

5. Chilcote, R. R.; Brown, E.; Rowley, J. D.: Lymphoblastic leukemia
with lymphomatous features associated with abnormalities of the short
arm of chromosome 9. New Eng. J. Med. 313: 286-291, 1985.

6. Hardcastle, P.; Nade, S.; Arnold, W.: Hereditary bone dysplasia
with malignant change: report of three families. J. Bone Joint Surg.
Am. 68: 1079-1089, 1986.

7. Henry, E. W.; Auckland, N. L.; McIntosh, H. W.; Starr, D. E.:
Abnormality of the long bones and progressive muscular dystrophy in
a family. Canad. Med. Assoc. J. 78: 331-336, 1958.

8. Kadariya, Y.; Yin, B.; Tang, B.; Shinton, S. A.; Quinlivan, E.
P.; Hua, X.; Klein-Szanto, A.; Al-Saleem, T. I.; Bassing, C. H.; Hardy,
R. R.; Kruger, W. D.: Mice heterozygous for germ-line mutations in
methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) die prematurely of T-cell
lymphoma. Cancer Res. 69: 5961-5969, 2009.

9. Mehta, S. G.; Watts, G. D. J.; McGillivray, B.; Mumm, S.; Hamilton,
S. J.; Ramdeen, S.; Novack, D.; Briggs, C.; Whyte, M. P.; Kimonis,
V. E.: Manifestations in a family with autosomal dominant bone fragility
and limb-girdle myopathy. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A: 322-330, 2006.

10. Nobori, T.; Takabayashi, K.; Tran, P.; Orvis, L.; Batova, A.;
Yu, A. L.; Carson, D. A.: Genomic cloning of methylthioadenosine
phosphorylase: a purine metabolic enzyme deficient in multiple different
cancers. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 6203-6208, 1996.

11. Norton, K. I.; Wagreich, J. M.; Granowetter, L.; Martignetti,
J. A.: Diaphyseal medullary stenosis (sclerosis) with bone malignancy
(malignant fibrous histiocytoma): Hardcastle syndrome. Pediat. Radiol. 26:
675-677, 1996.

12. Olopade, O. I.; Jenkins, R. B.; Ransom, D. T.; Malik, K.; Pomykala,
H.; Nobori, T.; Cowan, J. M.; Rowley, J. D.; Diaz, M. O.: Molecular
analysis of deletions of the short arm of chromosome 9 in human gliomas. Cancer
Res. 52: 2523-2529, 1992.

13. Olopade, O. I.; Pomykala, H. M.; Hagos, F.; Sveen, L. W.; Espinosa,
R., III; Dreyling, M. H.; Gursky, S.; Stadler, W. M.; Le Beau, M.
M.; Bohlander, S. K.: Construction of a 2.8-megabase yeast artificial
chromosome contig and cloning of the human methylthioadenosine phosphorylase
gene from the tumor suppressor region on 9p21. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92:
6489-6493, 1995.

14. Ragione, F. D.; Takabayashi, K.; Mastropietro, S.; Mercurio, C.;
Oliva, A.; Russo, G. L.; Pietra, V. D.; Borriello, A.; Nobori, T.;
Carson, D. A.; Zappia, V.: Purification and characterization of recombinant
human 5-prime-methylthioadenosine phosphorylase: definite identification
of coding cDNA. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 223: 514-519, 1996.

15. Watts, G. D. J.; Mehta, S. G.; Zhao, C.; Ramdeen, S.; Hamilton,
S. J.; Novack, D. V.; Mumm, S.; Whyte, M. P.; McGillivray, B.; Kimonis,
V. E.: Mapping autosomal dominant progressive limb-girdle myopathy
with bone fragility to chromosome 9p21-p22: a novel locus for a musculoskeletal
syndrome. Hum. Genet. 118: 508-514, 2005.

16. Williams-Ashman, H. G.; Seidenfeld, J.; Galletti, P.: Trends
in the biochemical pharmacology of 5-prime-deoxy-5-prime-methylthioadenosine. Biochem.
Pharm. 31: 277-288, 1982.

17. Williamson, R. E.; Darrow, K. N.; Michaud, S.; Jacobs, J. S.;
Jones, M. C.; Eberl, D. F.; Maas, R. L.; Liberman, M. C.; Morton,
C. C.: Methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) in hearing: gene
disruption by chromosomal rearrangement in a hearing impaired individual
and model organism analysis. Am. J. Med. Genet. 143A: 1630-1639,
2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/3/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/6/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/2/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/30/2008
Alan F. Scott - updated: 9/25/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED carol: 05/03/2012
terry: 5/3/2012
ckniffin: 5/3/2012
terry: 12/6/2011
mgross: 11/3/2010
terry: 11/2/2010
carol: 6/3/2008
terry: 5/30/2008
mgross: 4/8/1999
terry: 9/25/1996
mark: 9/25/1996
terry: 8/28/1996
terry: 7/16/1996
mark: 7/24/1995
carol: 6/6/1994
carol: 7/8/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 6/11/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990

604730	TITLE *604730 TUBBY-LIKE PROTEIN 3; TULP3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By degenerate PCR screening, Nishina et al. (1998) identified a novel
member of the TUB gene (601197) family, tubby-like-3 (TULP3). They
isolated human and mouse TULP3 cDNAs containing complete coding
sequences. The deduced 442-amino acid human TULP3 protein contains 2
putative nuclear localization signals, several potential
phosphorylation, myristoylation, and glycosylation sites, and a
C-terminal stretch of 15 predominantly hydrophobic residues flanked by
charged residues, which is a feature found in all known tubby family
members and which is reminiscent of a membrane anchor domain. The human
and mouse TULP3 proteins share 69% amino acid sequence identity, with
higher identity at the N and C termini than in the central region.
Phylogenetic analysis indicated that TULP3 is more closely related to
TUB than to TULP1 (602280) or TULP2 (602309). Northern blot analysis of
human tissues detected a major 3.4-kb TULP3 transcript in most of the
tissues examined, with highest expression in brain, spinal cord, ovary,
testis, thyroid, adrenal gland, and bone marrow. Mouse Tulp3 was also
highly expressed in eye and adipose depots, tissues not tested in human.
Within human brain, highest TULP3 expression was found in the
cerebellum, occipital pole, and corpus callosum.

MAPPING

By analysis of a radiation hybrid mapping panel, Nishina et al. (1998)
mapped the TULP3 gene to chromosome 12p13. They mapped the mouse Tulp3
gene to chromosome 6.

GENE FUNCTION

Santagata et al. (2001) demonstrated that tubby functions in signal
transduction from heterotrimeric G protein-coupled receptors. Tubby
localizes to the plasma membrane by binding phosphatidylinositol
4,5-bisphosphate through its carboxy-terminal 'tubby domain.' X-ray
crystallography reveals the atomic-level basis of this interaction and
implicates tubby domains as phosphorylated-phosphatidylinositol-binding
factors. Receptor-mediated activation of G protein alpha-q (G-alpha-q;
600998) releases tubby from the plasma membrane through the action of
phospholipase C-beta (604114), triggering translocation of tubby to the
cell nucleus. The localization of TULP3 is similarly regulated.
Santagata et al. (2001) concluded that tubby proteins function as
membrane-bound transcription regulators that translocate to the nucleus
in response to phosphoinositide hydrolysis, providing a direct link
between G protein signaling and the regulation of gene expression.

ANIMAL MODEL

Ikeda et al. (2001) generated a germline mutation in the mouse Tulp3
gene by homologous recombination. Embryos homozygous for the Tulp3
mutant allele exhibited failure of neural tube closure and died by
embryonic day 14.5. Failure of cranial neural tube closure coincided
with increased neuroepithelial apoptosis specifically in the hindbrain
and the caudal neural tube. In addition, the number of beta-III-tubulin
positive cells was significantly decreased in the hindbrain of Tulp3 -/-
embryos. The authors hypothesized that disruption of the Tulp3 gene
affects the development of a particular neuronal cell population.

Patterson et al. (2009) described the 'hitchhiker' mouse that carries
strongly hypomorphic Tulp3 allele and exhibited expansion of ventral
markers in the caudal spinal cord, as well as neural tube defects and
preaxial polydactyly, consistent with increased Shh (600725) signaling.
Tulp3 acted downstream of Shh and Smoothened (SMO; 601500) in neural
tube patterning and exhibited a genetic interaction with Gli3 (165240)
in limb development. Tulp3 did not appear to alter expression or
processing of Gli3, and transcriptional regulation of negative
regulators Rab23 (606144), Fkbp8 (604840), Thm1 (TTC21B; 612014), Sufu
(607035) and PKA (see 188830) was not affected.

Norman et al. (2009) generated mutant mice lacking the tubby domain of
the Tulp3 gene. They found that ventral cell types in the lumbar neural
tube, which acquire their identities in response to Shh signaling, were
ectopically specified at the expense of dorsal cell types. Genetic
epistasis experiments showed that this ventralized phenotype occurred
independently of Shh and Smo, but was dependent on the transcription
factor Gli2 (165230). The ventralized phenotype was also dependent on
the kinesin II subunit Kif3A (604683), which is required for
intraflagellar transport and ciliogenesis. In addition, Tulp3 was
required for proper Shh-dependent limb patterning and for maintaining
the correct balance between differentiation and proliferation in the
neural tube. Norman et al. (2009) speculated that, since TULP3 was
localized to the tips of primary cilia, it may regulate the Hedgehog
pathway within this structure.

REFERENCE 1. Ikeda, A.; Ikeda, S.; Gridley, T.; Nishina, P. M.; Naggert, J.
K.: Neural tube defects and neuroepithelial cell death in Tulp3 knockout
mice. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 1325-1334, 2001.

2. Nishina, P. M.; North, M. A.; Ikeda, A.; Yan, Y.; Naggert, J. K.
: Molecular characterization of a novel tubby gene family member,
TULP3, in mouse and humans. Genomics 54: 215-220, 1998.

3. Norman, R. X.; Ko, H. W.; Huang, V.; Eun, C. M.; Abler, L. L.;
Zhang, Z.; Sun, X.; Eggenschwiler, J. T.: Tubby-like protein 3 (TULP3)
regulates patterning in the mouse embryo through inhibition of Hedgehog
signaling. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 1740-1754, 2009.

4. Patterson, V. L.; Damrau, C.; Paudyal, A.; Reeve, B.; Grimes, D.
T.; Stewart, M. E.; Williams, D. J.; Siggers, P.; Greenfield, A.;
Murdoch, J. N.: Mouse hitchhiker mutants have spina bifida, dorso-ventral
patterning defects and polydactyly: identification of Tulp3 as a novel
negative regulator of the Sonic hedgehog pathway. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18:
1719-1739, 2009.

5. Santagata, S.; Boggon, T. J.; Baird, C. L.; Gomez, C. A.; Zhao,
J.; Shan, W. S.; Myszka, D. G.; Shapiro, L.: G-protein signaling
through tubby proteins. Science 292: 2041-2050, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 2/22/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/16/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/9/2001

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 3/23/2000

EDITED wwang: 02/23/2010
terry: 2/22/2010
cwells: 11/21/2001
cwells: 11/16/2001
alopez: 7/9/2001
mcapotos: 4/10/2000
psherman: 3/23/2000

608199	TITLE *608199 PEPTIDOGLYCAN RECOGNITION PROTEIN 2; PGLYRP2
;;PEPTIDOGLYCAN RECOGNITION PROTEIN, LONG; PGRPL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Peptidoglycan recognition proteins, such as PGRPL, are part of the
innate immune system and recognize peptidoglycan, a ubiquitous component
of bacterial cell walls.

CLONING

By searching an EST database for homologs of PGRPS (PGLYRP1; 604963),
followed by PCR of a pooled cDNA library and a liver cDNA library, Liu
et al. (2001) cloned full-length PGRPL. The deduced 576-amino acid
precursor protein contains an N-terminal signal peptide, followed by 2
transmembrane segments and an extracellular C terminus containing PGRP
domains III, II, and I. PGRPL shares 40%, 33%, and 32% identity with
PGRPS, PGRPI-alpha (608197), and PGRPI-beta (608198), respectively. RNA
dot blot analysis detected strong PGRPL expression in adult liver and
weak expression in fetal liver. Northern blot analysis detected 2.1- and
0.8-kb transcripts expressed in adult and fetal liver. PCR also detected
low expression in transverse colon, lymph nodes, heart, thymus,
pancreas, descending colon, stomach, and testis. Transiently transfected
COS-7 and human embryonic kidney cells expressed PGRPL as a Triton
X-100-soluble membrane protein with an apparent molecular mass of 65 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Liu et al. (2001) determined that recombinant PGRPL expressed by COS-7
cells and human embryonic kidney cells bound to gram-positive bacteria,
B. subtilis and M. luteus, with high affinity.

Xu et al. (2004) determined that murine Pgrpl is a secreted serum
protein that can form multimers, most likely homodimers.

GENE STRUCTURE

Liu et al. (2001) determined that the PGRPL gene contains 5 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Liu et al. (2001) mapped the PGRPL gene to
chromosome 19.

ANIMAL MODEL

Xu et al. (2004) created Pgrpl-deficient mice. They found that Pgrpl
contributed little to systemic challenge using gram-negative bacteria,
gram-positive bacteria, or yeast. Peritoneal macrophages from
Pgrpl-deficient mice produced decreased amounts of the inflammatory
cytokines Il6 (147620) and Tnfa (191160) when stimulated with E. coli or
lipopolysaccharide, but comparable amounts when stimulated with S.
aureus, C. albicans, or their cell wall components. The cells produced
similar amounts of cytokines when challenged with gram-positive or
gram-negative peptidoglycans. Xu et al. (2004) concluded that, in
contrast to its critical role in immunity in flies, Pgrpl is largely
dispensable for mammalian immunity against bacteria and fungi.

REFERENCE 1. Liu, C.; Xu, Z.; Gupta, D.; Dziarski, R.: Peptidoglycan recognition
proteins: a novel family of four human innate immunity pattern recognition
molecules. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 34686-34694, 2001.

2. Xu, M.; Wang, Z.; Locksley, R. M.: Innate immune responses in
peptidoglycan recognition protein L-deficient mice. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 24: 7949-7957, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 09/28/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/23/2003

EDITED mgross: 09/28/2004
mgross: 9/28/2004
mgross: 10/24/2003

605025	TITLE *605025 INTEGRIN, ALPHA-3; ITGA3
;;CD49C;;
VERY LATE ACTIVATION PROTEIN 3 RECEPTOR, ALPHA-3 SUBUNIT; VLA3;;
GALACTOPROTEIN B3; GAPB3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Integrins are a family of cell surface adhesion molecules. Each integrin
consists of a pair of noncovalently associated alpha and beta chains.
Integrin alpha-chain sequences are characterized by a 7-fold repeated
amino acid motif, of which the last 3 or 4 contain divalent
cation-binding sites. The ITGA3 subunit is associated with ITGB1
(135630).

CLONING

By screening a bladder carcinoma cDNA library with a hamster
galactoprotein B3 (Gapb3) probe, Tsuji et al. (1991) isolated cDNAs
encoding ITGA3. The deduced 1,019-amino acid mature ITGA3 protein
contains 14 potential N-glycosylation sites and a potential cleavage
site. Northern blot analysis detected a 4.8-kb ITGA3 transcript whose
expression was induced by SV-40 transformation.

By immunoscreening an endothelial cell cDNA library for ITGA3 protein,
Takada et al. (1991) obtained an ITGA3 cDNA. Western blot analysis
showed that recombinant ITGA3 was expressed as a 150-kD protein, the
same size as the native protein. The deduced 1,051-amino acid ITGA3
protein has a 32-amino acid signal peptide, a 28-amino acid
transmembrane domain, and a 32-amino acid cytoplasmic segment. ITGA3
also contains 13 potential N-glycosylation sites, 2 potential cleavage
sites, and the 7 N-terminal repeating units characteristic of ITGAs.
Northern blot analysis detected a 5-kb ITGA3 transcript in fibroblasts.

GENE STRUCTURE

Jones et al. (1998) determined that the ITGA3 gene spans 36.3 kb and
contains 26 exons.

MAPPING

By searching for sequences related to murine Itga3, Jones et al. (1998)
identified a chromosome 17 clone corresponding to ITGA3.

GENE FUNCTION

Dulabon et al. (2000) showed through immunoprecipitation experiments
that alpha-3-beta-1 integrin associates with reelin (RELN; 600514) in
mouse embryonic brain. Using immunolabeling, they detected coexpression
of alpha-3-beta-1 integrin with Dab1 (603448), a signaling protein
acting downstream of reelin, in embryonic cortical neurons. In cerebral
cortices of alpha-3-beta-1 integrin-deficient mice, Dulabon et al.
(2000) observed a reduction in Dab1 protein levels and elevated
expression of a reelin fragment. They concluded that reelin may regulate
neuronal migration and layer formation through modulation of
alpha-3-beta-1 integrin-mediated neuronal adhesion and migration.

Sanada et al. (2004) found that individual neurons in the cortex of
Dab1-deficient scrambler mice exhibited an abnormal mode and tempo of
radial migration, that was associated with impaired detachment from
radial glial cells. Glial detachment depended on Itga3 signaling that
was regulated by the phosphorylation state of Dab1 residues tyr220 and
tyr232. Sanada et al. (2004) concluded that a functional link between
DAB1 phosphorylation and ITGA3 signaling drives the timely detachment of
migrating neurons from radial glial fibers.

Human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8) is implicated in the pathogenesis of Kaposi
sarcoma. HHV-8 envelope glycoprotein B possesses the RGD amino acid
motif known to interact with integrin molecules. Akula et al. (2002)
found that HHV-8 infectivity was inhibited by RGD peptides, antibodies
against the RGD-dependent integrins ITGA3 and ITGB1, and by soluble
ITGA3/ITGB1. Expression of human ITGA3 increased the infectivity of
virus for Chinese hamster ovary cells. Anti-glycoprotein B antibodies
immunoprecipitated the virus-ITGA3 and -ITGB1 complexes, and
virus-binding studies suggested a role for ITGA3/ITGB1 in HHV-8 entry.
Further, HHV-8 infection induced the integrin-mediated activation of
focal adhesion kinase (FAK; 600758). These findings implicated a role
for ITGA3/ITGB1 and the associated signaling pathways in HHV-8 entry
into target cells.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a boy and 2 girls with congenital interstitial lung disease,
nephrotic syndrome, and mild epidermolysis bullosa (614748), all of whom
died in infancy, Has et al. (2012) identified homozygosity for mutations
in the ITGA3 gene (605025.0001-605025.0003). Examination of lung,
kidney, and skin samples from the boy demonstrated that loss of integrin
alpha-3 impairs both epidermal adhesion and basement-membrane assembly
and remodeling.

ANIMAL MODEL

DiPersio et al. (1997) studied the skin of integrin
alpha-3/beta-1-deficient mice generated by null mutation of the alpha-3
subunit. Immunofluorescence and electron microscopy of
alpha-3/beta-1-deficient skin revealed regions of disorganized basement
membrane, which first appeared on embryonic day 15.5 and became
progressively more extensive. In neontal skin, matrix disorganization
was frequently accompanied by blistering at the dermal-epidermal
junction due to rupture of the basement membrane. In culture,
alpha-3/beta-1-deficient keratinocytes spread poorly on laminin-5 (see
600805) compared with wildtype, demonstrating a postattachment
requirement for alpha-3/beta-1.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASE, NEPHROTIC SYNDROME, AND EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA,
CONGENITAL
ITGA3, 1-BP DEL, NT1173

In a male infant from southern Italy with congenital interstitial lung
disease, nephrotic syndrome, and mild epidermolysis bullosa (614748),
who died at 7.5 months of age of a lung infection, Has et al. (2012)
identified homozygosity for a 1-bp deletion (1173_1174del) in exon 8 of
the ITGA3 gene, predicted to cause a frameshift resulting in premature
termination 2 codons downstream. The unaffected parents were both
heterozygous for the deletion, which was not found in at least 100
ethnically matched chromosomes. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated loss
of integrin alpha-3 expression from patient skin, kidney, and lung
samples compared to controls. Immunofluorescence showed that the
basement membranes in the patient's kidneys and lungs had a weak and
interrupted signal and that the epidermal basement membrane was clearly
disorganized, compared to the strong linear staining of normal basement
membranes.

.0002
INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASE, NEPHROTIC SYNDROME, AND EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA,
CONGENITAL
ITGA3, IVS11AS, G-A, -1

In a female infant with congenital interstitial lung disease and
nephrotic syndrome (614748), who was born to consanguineous parents from
Gaza and died of multiorgan failure at 2 months of age, Has et al.
(2012) identified homozygosity for a G-A transition in intron 11
(1538-1G-A) of the ITGA3 gene, predicted to abolish the splice acceptor
site of exon 12. The mutation was not found in at least 100 ethnically
matched chromosomes.

.0003
INTERSTITIAL LUNG DISEASE, NEPHROTIC SYNDROME, AND EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA,
CONGENITAL
ITGA3, ARG628PRO

In a female infant with congenital interstitial lung disease, nephrotic
syndrome, and mild epidermolysis bullosa (614748), who was born to
consanguineous Pakistani parents and died at 19 months of age due to
infection-related multiorgan failure, Has et al. (2012) identified
homozygosity for a 1883G-C transversion in exon 14 of the ITGA3 gene,
resulting in an arg628-to-pro (R628P) substitution at a conserved
residue in the extracellular domain. The mutation was not found in at
least 100 ethnically matched chromosomes.

REFERENCE 1. Akula, S. M.; Pramod, N. P.; Wang, F.-Z.; Chandran, B.: Integrin
alpha-3/beta-1 (CD 49c/29) is a cellular receptor for Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus (KSHV/HHV-8) entry into the target cells. Cell 108:
407-419, 2002.

2. DiPersio, C. M.; Hodivala-Dilke, K. M.; Jaenisch, R.; Kreidberg,
J. A.; Hynes, R. O.: Alpha-3-beta-1 integrin is required for normal
development of the epidermal basement membrane. J. Biol. Chem. 137:
729-742, 1997.

3. Dulabon, L.; Olson, E. C.; Taglienti, M. G.; Eisenhuth, S.; McGrath,
B.; Walsh, C. A.; Kreidberg, J. A.; Anton, E. S.: Reelin binds alpha-3-beta-1
integrin and inhibits neuronal migration. Neuron 27: 33-44, 2000.

4. Has, C.; Sparta, G.; Kiritsi, D.; Weibel, L.; Moeller, A.; Vega-Warner,
V.; Waters, A.; He, Y.; Anikster, Y.; Esser, P.; Straub, B. K.; Hausser,
I.; Bockenhauer, D.; Dekel, B.; Hildebrandt, F.; Bruckner-Tuderman,
L.; Laube, G. F.: Integrin alpha-3 mutations with kidney, lung, and
skin disease. New Eng. J. Med. 366: 1508-1514, 2012.

5. Jones, S. D.; van der Flier, A.; Sonnenberg, A.: Genomic organization
of the human alpha-3 integrin subunit gene. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 248: 896-898, 1998.

6. Sanada, K.; Gupta, A.; Tsai, L.-H.: Disabled-1-regulated adhesion
of migrating neurons to radial glial fiber contributes to neuronal
positioning during early corticogenesis. Neuron 42: 197-211, 2004.

7. Takada, Y.; Murphy, E.; Pil, P.; Chen, C.; Ginsberg, M. H.; Hemler,
M. E.: Molecular cloning and expression of the cDNA for alpha-3 subunit
of human alpha-3/beta-1 (VLA-3), an integrin receptor for fibronectin,
laminin, and collagen. J. Cell Biol. 115: 257-266, 1991.

8. Tsuji, T.; Hakomori, S.; Osawa, T.: Identification of human galactoprotein
b3, an oncogenic transformation-induced membrane glycoprotein, as
VLA-3 alpha subunit: the primary structure of human integrin alpha-3. J.
Biochem. 109: 659-665, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/14/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/27/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/17/2005
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 10/31/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 3/22/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/1/2000

EDITED mgross: 11/04/2013
tpirozzi: 10/14/2013
carol: 7/27/2012
terry: 7/27/2012
carol: 9/13/2011
wwang: 5/19/2005
wwang: 5/17/2005
carol: 11/4/2002
tkritzer: 10/31/2002
mgross: 3/22/2002
mgross: 6/2/2000
mgross: 6/1/2000

609072	TITLE *609072 F-BOX AND WD40 DOMAIN PROTEIN 5; FBXW5
;;FBW5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the F-box protein family, such as FBXW5, are characterized by
an approximately 40-amino acid F-box motif. SCF complexes, formed by
SKP1 (601434), cullin (see CUL1; 603134), and F-box proteins, act as
protein-ubiquitin ligases. F-box proteins interact with SKP1 through the
F box, and they interact with ubiquitination targets through other
protein interaction domains (Jin et al., 2004).

CLONING

By yeast 2-hybrid screening to isolate SKP1-binding proteins, and by
searching an EST database, Winston et al. (1999) identified a number of
F-box proteins, including FBW5. The deduced protein contains an
N-terminal F box, followed by a WD40 repeat, a large spacer region, and
2 more WD40 repeats. Quantitative PCR detected expression of Fbw5 in all
mouse tissues and embryonic developmental stages examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Winston et al. (1999) showed that in vitro translated FBW5 interacted
with SKP1 in an in vitro binding assay and in transfected human
embryonic kidney cells.

Tuberous sclerosis (191100; 613254) is an autosomal dominant disease
caused by mutations in either the TSC1 (605284) or the TSC2 (191092)
gene. The majority of disease-associated mutations result in substantial
decreases in TSC1 or TSC2 protein levels, suggesting that protein
turnover plays a critical role in TSC regulation. Hu et al. (2008)
showed that FBW5 associated with DDB1 (600045), CUL4A (CUL4A; 603137),
and ROC1 (RBX1; 603814) to form an E3 ubiquitin ligase that regulated
TSC2 protein stability and TSC complex turnover.

MAPPING

Jin et al. (2004) stated that the FBXW5 gene maps to chromosome 9q34.3
and the mouse Fbxw5 gene maps to chromosome 2A3.

REFERENCE 1. Hu, J.; Zacharek, S.; He, Y. J.; Lee, H.; Shumway, S.; Duronio,
R. J.; Xiong, Y.: WD40 protein FBW5 promotes ubiquitination of tumor
suppressor TSC2 by DDB1-CUL4-ROC1 ligase. Genes Dev. 22: 866-871,
2008.

2. Jin, J.; Cardozo, T.; Lovering, R. C.; Elledge, S. J.; Pagano,
M.; Harper, J. W.: Systematic analysis and nomenclature of mammalian
F-box proteins. Genes Dev. 18: 2573-2580, 2004.

3. Winston, J. T.; Koepp, D. M.; Zhu, C.; Elledge, S. J.; Harper,
J. W.: A family of mammalian F-box proteins. Curr. Biol. 9: 1180-1182,
1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/28/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/10/2004

EDITED carol: 02/18/2010
mgross: 5/29/2008
terry: 5/28/2008
mgross: 12/10/2004

603504	TITLE *603504 CELL DIVISION CYCLE 14, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG A; CDC14A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In S. cerevisiae, the cdc14 gene is essential for cell cycle
progression. Analysis of the cdc14 point of action suggests that the
protein acts in late nuclear division, and may play a role in
preparation for DNA replication during the subsequent cell cycle. By
searching an EST database for cdc14 homologs, Li et al. (1997)
identified partial CDC14A and PTEN (601728) cDNAs. They used the CDC14A
cDNA to screen heart and fetal libraries and recovered additional CDC14A
cDNAs and a CDC14B (603505) cDNA. Like the yeast cdc14 protein, CDC14A,
CDC14B, and PTEN contain a putative protein-tyrosine phosphatase
(PTPase) domain. The predicted 580-amino acid CDC14A protein shares 64%
identity with yeast cdc14, while PTEN is more closely related to a
different yeast gene. Using a chimeric GFP-CDC14A protein, Li et al.
(1997) localized CDC14A specifically to the nucleus of mammalian cells.
Northern blot analysis revealed that the CDC14A gene is expressed as
1.8- and 4.4-kb mRNAs in all tissues, with the strongest expression in
kidney, heart, and skeletal muscle. The authors observed additional
transcripts in some tissues, which they considered to be either
alternatively spliced CDC14A mRNAs or transcripts from related genes.

GENE FUNCTION

Li et al. (1997) found that recombinant CDC14A exhibited the kinetic
properties of dual-specific phosphatases (see 602038) in vitro. Plasmids
expressing CDC14A specifically rescued the cell cycle-arrest phenotype
of a cdc14 mutant yeast strain. Li et al. (1997) stated that the
structural and functional equivalence of the yeast and human CDC14
PTPases suggests that the human protein may play an essential role in
controlling mammalian cell cycle events.

Using derivatives of an osteosarcoma cell line conditionally expressing
CDC14A, Mailand et al. (2002) determined that both overexpression and
downregulation of CDC14A caused aberrant chromosome partitioning into
daughter cells. CDC14A interacted with interphase centrosomes, and this
interaction was independent of microtubules and CDC14A phosphatase
activity. The interaction required nuclear export, however, and
disruption of the nuclear export signal (NES) led to CDC14A accumulation
in nucleoli. Conditional overexpression of CDC14A resulted in premature
centrosome splitting and formation of supernumerary mitotic spindles,
and these effects were independent of CDC14A phosphatase activity.
Downregulation of endogenous CDC14A by short inhibitory RNA duplexes
induced mitotic defects, including impaired centrosome separation and
failure to undergo cytokinesis.

The inner centromere-like protein (INCENP; 604411) forms a complex with
the evolutionarily conserved family of Aurora B kinases (see 604970).
The INCENP-Aurora complex helps coordinate chromosome segregation,
spindle behavior, and cytokinesis during mitosis. INCENP-Aurora
associates with kinetochores in metaphase and with spindle microtubules
in anaphase. Pereira and Schiebel (2003) demonstrated that the conserved
phosphatase CDC14 regulates the yeast INCENP-Aurora complex, Sli15-lpl1.
CDC14 dephosphorylated Sli15 and thereby directed the complex to
spindles. Activation of CDC14 by separase (604143) was sufficient for
Sli15 dephosphorylation and relocalization. CDC14 not only regulates
mitotic exit but also modulates spindle midzone assembly through
Sli15-lpl1.

Anaphase is initiated when a ubiquitin ligase, the anaphase-promoting
complex (APC; see 608473), triggers the destruction of securin (604147),
thereby allowing separase, a protease, to disrupt sister chromatid
cohesion. Holt et al. (2008) demonstrated that the cyclin-dependent
kinase-1 (CDK1; 116940)-dependent phosphorylation of securin near its
destruction-box motif inhibits securin ubiquitination by the APC. The
phosphatase Cdc14 reverses securin phosphorylation, thereby increasing
the rate of securin ubiquitination. Because separase is known to
activate Cdc14, Holt et al. (2008) concluded that their results
supported the existence of a positive feedback loop that increases the
abruptness of anaphase. Consistent with this model, they showed that
mutations that disrupt securin phosphoregulation decreased the synchrony
of chromosome segregation. Holt et al. (2008) also concluded that
coupling securin degradation with changes in Cdk1 and Cdc14 activities
helps coordinate the initiation of sister chromatid separation with
changes in spindle dynamics.

Clemente-Blanco et al. (2009) demonstrated that Cdc14, a protein
phosphatase required for nucleolar segregation and mitotic exit,
inhibits transcription of yeast ribosomal genes (rDNA) during anaphase.
The phosphatase activity of Cdc14 is required for RNA polymerase I (Pol
I) inhibition in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, Cdc14-dependent inhibition
involves nucleolar exclusion of Pol I subunits. The authors demonstrated
that transcription inhibition is necessary for complete chromosome
disjunction, because ribosomal RNA transcripts block condensin binding
to rDNA, and show that bypassing the role of Cdc14 in nucleolar
segregation requires in vivo degradation of nascent transcripts.
Clemente-Blanco et al. (2009) concluded that transcription interferes
with chromosome condensation, not the reverse, and that budding yeast,
like most eukaryotes, inhibit Pol I transcription before segregation as
a prerequisite for chromosome condensation and faithful genome
separation.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Wong et al. (1999) determined that the
CDC14A gene contains 16 exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Wong et al., (1999) mapped the CDC14A gene
to chromosome 1p21.

REFERENCE 1. Clemente-Blanco, A.; Mayan-Santos, M.; Schneider, D. A.; Machin,
F.; Jarmuz, A.; Tschochner, H.; Aragon, L.: Cdc14 inhibits transcription
by RNA polymerase I during anaphase. Nature 458: 219-222, 2009.

2. Holt, L. J.; Krutchinsky, A. N.; Morgan, D. O.: Positive feedback
sharpens the anaphase switch. Nature 454: 353-357, 2008.

3. Li, L.; Ernsting, B. R.; Wishart, M. J.; Lohse, D. L.; Dixon, J.
E.: A family of putative tumor suppressors is structurally and functionally
conserved in humans and yeast. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 29403-29406,
1997.

4. Mailand, N.; Lukas, C.; Kaiser, B. K.; Jackson, P. K.; Bartek,
J.; Lukas, J.: Deregulated human Cdc14A phosphatase disrupts centrosome
separation and chromosome segregation. Nature Cell Biol. 4: 317-322,
2002. Note: Erratum: Nature Cell Biol. 8: 897 only, 2006.

5. Pereira, G.; Schiebel, E.: Separase regulates INCENP-Aurora B
anaphase spindle function through Cdc14. Science 302: 2120-2124,
2003.

6. Wong, A. K. C.; Chen, Y.; Lian, L.; Ha, P. C.; Peterson, K.; Laity,
K.; Carillo, A.; Emerson, M.; Heichman, K.; Gupte, J.; Tavtigian,
S. V.; Teng, D. H.-F.: Genomic structure, chromosomal location, and
mutation analysis of the human CDC14A gene. Genomics 59: 248-251,
1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/12/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/12/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/12/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/30/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/5/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/13/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/9/1999

EDITED mgross: 10/12/2012
alopez: 5/15/2009
terry: 5/12/2009
alopez: 8/25/2008
terry: 8/12/2008
alopez: 12/30/2003
terry: 12/30/2003
mgross: 2/5/2003
mgross: 1/28/2003
tkritzer: 11/18/2002
terry: 11/13/2002
alopez: 2/9/1999

606723	TITLE *606723 MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE 5; MAPKAPK5
;;MAPKAP KINASE 5;;
p38-REGULATED/ACTIVATED KINASE; PRAK
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using MAPKAPK (see MAPKAPK2; 602006) and RSK (see 300075) peptide
sequences to search an EST database, followed by screening a placenta
cDNA library, New et al. (1998) isolated a full-length cDNA encoding
MAPKAPK5, a serine/threonine kinase that they called PRAK. MAPKAPK5
encodes a predicted 471-amino acid protein that shares 20 to 30%
sequence identity with RSK, MNK (see 606724), and MAPKAPK kinases.
MAPKAPK5 contains the conserved protein kinase domains I through XI,
which are characteristic of all protein kinases. Using Western blot
analysis, New et al. (1998) observed a 54-kD MAPKAPK5 protein in all 5
cell lines tested. By Northern blot analysis, they detected a 2.4-kb
MAPKAPK5 transcript in all 8 human tissues examined.

By searching an EST database with the MAPKAPK2 sequence, followed by
screening a murine spleen cDNA library, Ni et al. (1998) isolated a cDNA
encoding murine Mapkapk5. They detected a wide tissue distribution of
murine Mapkapk5 using Northern blot analysis.

GENE FUNCTION

New et al. (1998) observed that MAPKAPK5 was activated in HeLa cells in
response to cellular stress and proinflammatory cytokines. MAPKAPK5
activity was regulated by p38-alpha (MAPK14; 600289) and p38-beta
(MAPK11; 602898) both in vitro and in vivo, and the authors demonstrated
that thr182 is the regulatory phosphorylation site of MAPKAPK5.
Activated MAPKAPK5 specifically phosphorylated heat-shock protein-27
(HSP27; 602195) at the physiologically relevant sites in vitro.

Ni et al. (1998) showed that murine Mapkapk5 can be phosphorylated and
activated by extracellular-regulated kinase (ERK; see 601795) and p38
kinase, but not by JNK (601158), in vitro. Recombinant Mapkapk5 protein
could phosphorylate a peptide derived from the regulatory light chain of
myosin II (160781). Ni et al. (1998) concluded that MAPKAPK5 is an in
vitro substrate for ERK and p38 kinase.

Sun et al. (2007) found that Prak deletion in primary mouse embryonic
and skin fibroblasts abolished senescence induced by an activated human
HRAS (190020) allele, HRASV12. Similarly, knockdown of PRAK by short
hairpin RNA in BJ primary human fibroblasts prevented HRASV12-induced
senescence. BJ cells can be fully transformed by a combination of
HRASV12, MDM2 (164785), and adenovirus E1A, and PRAK knockdown could
functionally replace MDM2 in this cellular transformation model. PRAK
kinase activity was induced in senescent BJ cells in a p38-dependent
manner, and PRAK overexpression enhanced HRASV12-induced senescence in
BJ cells. Knockdown experiments in BJ cells showed that PRAK was
essential for senescence-induced p53 (TP53; 191170) transcriptional
activity, and additional experiments revealed that PRAK activated p53 by
direct phosphorylation of ser37. Sun et al. (2007) proposed that
phosphorylation of p53 by PRAK following activation of p38 by HRAS plays
an important role in HRAS-induced senescence and tumor suppression.

MAPPING

Gross (2010) mapped the MAPKAPK5 gene to chromosome 12q24.12-q24.13
based on an alignment of the MAPKAPK5 sequence (GenBank GENBANK
AF032437) with the genomic sequence (GRCh37)

ANIMAL MODEL

Sun et al. (2007) found that Prak -/- mice were viable and fertile with
no apparent health problems. Prak -/- mice responded normally to
endotoxin shock and showed unaltered cytokine production in response to
lipopolysaccharide, suggesting that PRAK may not be essential for
inflammatory responses. Both Prak +/- and Prak -/- mice were highly
susceptible to skin carcinogenesis induced by the mutagen
dimethylbenzanthracene (DMBA). Senescence induction was compromised in
DMBA-induced skin tumors from Prak +/- and Prak -/- mice. Sun et al.
(2007) concluded that PRAK-mediated senescence suppresses skin
carcinogenesis, most likely at the tumor promotion stage.

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/6/2010.

2. New, L.; Jiang, Y.; Zhao, M.; Liu, K.; Zhu, W.; Flood, L. J.; Kato,
Y.; Parry, G. C. N.; Han, J.: PRAK, a novel protein kinase regulated
by the p38 MAP kinase. EMBO J. 17: 3372-3384, 1998.

3. Ni, H.; Wang, X. S.; Diener, K.; Yao, Z.: MAPKAPK5, a novel mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK)-activated protein kinase, is a substrate of
the extracellular-regulated kinase (ERK) and p38 kinase. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 243: 492-496, 1998.

4. Sun, P.; Yoshizuka, N.; New, L.; Moser, B. A.; Li, Y.; Liao, R.;
Xie, C.; Chen, J.; Deng, Q.; Yamout, M.; Dong, M.-Q.; Frangou, C.
G.; Yates, J. R., III; Wright, P. E.; Han, J.: PRAK is essential
for ras-induced senescence and tumor suppression. Cell 128: 295-308,
2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/6/2010

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 2/26/2002

EDITED wwang: 05/14/2010
mgross: 5/6/2010
mgross: 2/27/2002
mgross: 2/26/2002

605877	TITLE *605877 Fc RECEPTOR-LIKE PROTEIN 5; FCRL5
;;IMMUNOGLOBULIN SUPERFAMILY RECEPTOR TRANSLOCATION-ASSOCIATED GENE
2; IRTA2;;
BXMAS1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Chromosomal abnormalities involving translocation breakpoints at
1q21-q23 are frequent in B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (see BCL9; 602597)
and multiple myeloma (MM; see 254500). By cloning the breakpoints of a
(1;14)(q21;q32) chromosomal translocation in the FR4 multiple myeloma
cell line, followed by exon trapping and screening a spleen cDNA
library, Hatzivassiliou et al. (2001) obtained cDNAs encoding 3 isoforms
of IRTA1 (605876) and 4 isoforms of IRTA2. The 3 major IRTA2 mRNA
isoforms (ITRA2A, ITRA2B, and ITRA2C) each have their own unique 3-prime
untranslated region, and the proteins they encode share a common amino
acid sequence until residue 560, including a signal peptide and 6
extracellular Ig-type domains. Sequence analysis predicted that IRTA2A
is a 759-amino acid secreted glycoprotein with 8 total extracellular
Ig-type domains followed by 13 unique, predominantly polar residues at
its C terminus. After the common 560 amino acids, IRTA2B has only 32
additional residues, whose hydrophobicity is compatible with its docking
to the plasma membrane via a GPI anchor. The 977-amino acid IRTA2C
protein shares the first 746 amino acids with IRTA2A. IRTA2C has a total
of 9 extracellular Ig-type domains with 8 potential N-linked
glycosylation sites; a 23-residue transmembrane region; and a
104-residue cytoplasmic domain with 3 consensus SH2-binding domains, all
of which exhibit features of ITIMs (immune-receptor tyrosine-based
inhibition motifs) and are encoded by separate exons. The fourth
isoform, IRTA2D, encodes a peptide of 152 amino acids. Northern blot
analysis detected 2.8-, 4.4-, 5.3-, and 0.6-kb IRTA2 transcripts in
lymph node, spleen, bone marrow, and small intestine, with a
preponderance of the IRTA2A isoform. In situ hybridization analysis
detected IRTA2 expression in tonsillar germinal center centrocytes, but
not in centroblasts, as well as in intraepithelial and interfollicular
regions.

Nakayama et al. (2001) independently cloned IRTA2, which they called
BXMAS1, by representational difference analysis of genes activated by
anti-IgM crosslinking of a human B-cell line. The deduced 977-amino acid
protein contains 8 ITIMs and 8 potential N-linked glycosylation sites.
Northern blot analysis detected a 6.7-kb transcript and a larger
transcript between 14- and 17-kb in B cells 24 to 36 hours after
activation. Northern blot analysis of tissues detected expression only
in spleen In situ hybridization analysis demonstrated expression of
IRTA2 in the mantle zone of tonsil tissue but not in germinal center
cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Using FISH and Northern blot analysis, Hatzivassiliou et al. (2001)
determined that Burkitt lymphoma (BL; see 113970) cell lines with 1q21
abnormalities frequently overexpress the IRTA2 gene. However, in BL cell
lines with normal 1q21 chromosomes and in germinal center centroblasts,
from which BLs derive, IRTA2 expression was undetectable. Hatzivassiliou
et al. (2001) concluded that IRTA2 expression is frequently deregulated
in BLs with 1q21 chromosomal aberrations.

Orthopoxvirus MHC class I-like protein (OMCP) binds with high affinity
to NKG2D (KLRK1; 611817) on NK and T cells. Campbell et al. (2010)
showed that OMCP also bound to human and mouse monocytes and B cells,
which lack NKG2D. Using flow cytometric analysis, they demonstrated
binding of OMCP to mouse Fcrl5, which is highly expressed by B cells.
Campbell et al. (2010) suggested that FCRL5 and B lymphocytes are
involved in defense against zoonotic poxviruses.

GENE STRUCTURE

Nakayama et al. (2001) determined that the IRTA2 gene contains 16 exons
spanning 58 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Hatzivassiliou et al. (2001) determined
that the IRTA1 and IRTA2 genes are separated by 21 kb on chromosome 1q21
and are transcribed in the same orientation. Furthermore, the IRTA1 and
IRTA2 genes form a contig on 1q21 with additional IRTA-related genes
(IRTA3, IRTA4, and IRTA5) and are telomeric to the MUC1 gene (158340)
and centromeric to the FCGR2B gene (604590).

REFERENCE 1. Campbell, J. A.; Davis, R. S.; Lilly, L. M.; Fremont, D. H.; French,
A. R.; Carayannopoulos, L. N.: Cutting edge: FcR-like 5 on innate
B cells is targeted by a poxvirus MHC class I-like immunoevasin. J.
Immun. 185: 28-32, 2010.

2. Hatzivassiliou, G.; Miller, I.; Takizawa, J.; Palanisamy, N.; Rao,
P. H.; Iida, S.; Tagawa, S.; Taniwaki, M.; Russo, J.; Neri, A.; Cattoretti,
G.; Clynes, R.; Mendelsohn, C.; Chaganti, R. S. K.; Dalla-Favera,
R.: IRTA1 and IRTA2, novel immunoglobulin superfamily receptors expressed
in B cells and involved in chromosome 1q21 abnormalities in B cell
malignancy. Immunity 14: 277-289, 2001.

3. Nakayama, Y.; Weissman, S. M.; Bothwell, A. L. M.: BXMAS1 identifies
a cluster of homologous genes differentially expressed in B cells. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 285: 830-837, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/10/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/29/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 4/24/2001

EDITED mgross: 09/14/2010
terry: 9/10/2010
carol: 5/1/2002
carol: 4/30/2002
terry: 4/29/2002
mgross: 4/24/2001

611088	TITLE *611088 COILED-COIL DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 65; CCDC65
;;NYD-SP28
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CCDC65 is a sperm tail protein that is posttranslationally modified
during sperm capacitation (Zheng et al., 2006).

CLONING

By differential display of genes upregulated in human adult versus fetal
testis, Zheng et al. (2006) cloned CCDC65, which they called NYD-SP28.
The deduced 484-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 57
kD and contains 2 potential sites for N-glycosylation, 2 for
N-myristoylation, and many potential phosphorylation sites. Western blot
analysis detected high CCDC65 expression in adult human testis, but no
detectable expression in fetal testis. Immunohistochemical studies of
CCDC65 expression in spermatozoa detected protein primarily in the
spermatocyte and spermatid, with weak expression in spermatogonia and no
signal in Leydig cells. Immunofluorescence analysis detected CCDC65
throughout the entire sperm tail in human noncapacitated, capacitated,
and acrosome-reacted spermatozoa. Using 2-dimensional SDS-PAGE analysis
of proteins from human noncapacitated and capacitated sperm extracts,
Zheng et al. (2006) concluded that CCDC65 is posttranslationally
modified during capacitation. Transfection experiments in 7721 cells
localized CCDC65 to the cytoplasm.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zheng et al. (2006) determined that the CCDC65 gene contains 8 exons
spanning more than 17 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Zheng et al. (2006) mapped the CCDC65 gene
to chromosome 12q13.12.

GENE FUNCTION

Austin-Tse et al. (2013) noted that the Chlamydomonas CCDC65 ortholog
Fap250 is a subunit of the nexin-dynein regulatory complex (N-DRC). The
Chlamydomonas ida6 motility mutant with inner arm dynein defects was
rescued by transformation with Fap250, and a causative mutation was
identified in the Fab250/Ccdc65 gene. Analysis of isolated ida6 axonemes
showed defects in the assembly of both the inner dynein arms and the
N-DRC. These data, together with the predicted size of the FAP250
polypeptide, strongly suggested that FAP250 corresponds to the DRC2
subunit of N-DRC and that DRC2/FAP250/CCDC65 plays a critical role in
the assembly of the N-DRC.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 3 Ashkenazi Jewish patients, including 2 brothers, with primary
ciliary dyskinesia-27 (CILD27; 615504), Austin-Tse et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the CCDC65 gene
(611088.0001). The patients were ascertained from a larger cohort of 295
individuals with CILD. The patients had recurrent bronchitis, sinusitis,
and/or otitis media, but no situs inversus. Fertility status could not
be ascertained. Cilia ultrastructure showed normal outer dynein arms,
radial spokes, and central pairs, but there was a reduction in inner
dynein arms and nexin links. Microtubule disorganization was also
observed in 5 to 15% of cilia cross sections, suggesting that the
reduction in nexin links may lead to overall structural instability in a
subset of cilia. Live imaging of patient nasal epithelial cilia showed a
stiff, dyskinetic cilia waveform.

ANIMAL MODEL

Austin-Tse et al. (2013) found that morpholino knockdown of the CCDC65
gene in zebrafish resulted in a strong ciliopathy phenotype, including
pronephric cysts, axis curvature, left-right asymmetry defects, and
hydrocephalus. Immunostaining for certain ciliary proteins did not
detect structural abnormalities, and ultrastructure analysis showed that
the outer dynein arms were not missing. High-speed video microscopy
showed stiff, dyskinetic cilia, consistent with a motility defect.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 27, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
CCDC65, 2-BP DEL, 877AT

In 2 brothers of Ashkenazi Jewish descent with primary ciliary
dyskinesia-27 without situs inversus (CILD27; 615504), Austin-Tse et al.
(2013) identified a homozygous 2-bp deletion (877delAT) in exon 6 of the
CCDC65 gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination
(Ile293ProfsTer2). An unrelated girl of Ashkenazi Jewish descent was
also found to be homozygous for the mutation; her unaffected parents
were heterozygous for the mutation. The patients had recurrent
bronchitis, sinusitis, and/or otitis media. Fertility status could not
be ascertained. Cilia ultrastructure showed normal outer dynein arms,
radial spokes, and central pairs, but there was a reduction in inner
dynein arms and nexin links. Microtubule disorganization was also
observed in 5 to 15% of cilia cross sections, suggesting that the
reduction in nexin links may lead to overall structural instability in a
subset of cilia. Live imaging of patient nasal epithelial cilia showed a
stiff, dyskinetic cilia waveform.

REFERENCE 1. Austin-Tse, C.; Halbritter, J.; Zariwala, M. A.; Gilberti, R. M.;
Gee, H. Y.; Hellman, N.; Pathak, N.; Liu, Y.; Panizzi, J. R.; Patel-King,
R. S.; Tritschler, D.; Bower, R.; and 31 others: Zebrafish ciliopathy
screen plus human mutational analysis identifies C21orf59 and CCDC65
defects as causing primary ciliary dyskinesia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 93:
672-686, 2013.

2. Zheng, Y.; Zhang, J.; Wang, L.; Zhou, Z.; Xu, M.; Li, J.; Sha,
J.-H.: Cloning and characterization of a novel sperm tail protein,
NYD-SP28. Int. J. Molec. Med. 18: 1119-1125, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/31/2013

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 6/6/2007

EDITED carol: 11/06/2013
carol: 11/5/2013
ckniffin: 10/31/2013
carol: 6/6/2007

612174	TITLE *612174 CALCIUM-BINDING PROTEIN 39; CAB39
;;MO25-ALPHA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching databases using peptide fragments of proteins that
interacted with the serine/threonine protein kinase LKB1 (STK11; 602216)
in HeLa cells, Boudeau et al. (2003) identified CAB39, which they
designated MO25-alpha. The deduced 341-amino acid protein shares a high
degree of conservation with its C. elegans and Drosophila orthologs.
Northern blot analysis detected a 4.2-kb MO25-alpha transcript in all
tissues examined, with highest expression in skeletal muscle. Western
blot analysis detected MO25-alpha in most tissues and cell lines
examined. Endogenous MO25-alpha in HeLa cells had an apparent molecular
mass of 40 kD by SDS-PAGE.

GENE FUNCTION

By immunoprecipitation analysis of human and rat cells, Boudeau et al.
(2003) showed that MO25-alpha associated with STRAD-alpha (608626) and
LKB1. Cotransfection and mutation analysis revealed that MO25-alpha
interacted directly with STRAD-alpha rather than with LKB1, and the
interaction required the last 3 residues of STRAD-alpha. MO25-alpha also
interacted with STRAD-beta (ALS2CR2; 607333) in a complex with LKB1.
MO25-alpha and STRAD-alpha anchored LKB1 in the cytoplasm, excluding it
from the nucleus. Moreover, MO25-alpha enhanced formation of
LKB1-STRAD-alpha complexes in vivo and stimulated LKB1 catalytic
activity about 10-fold. Boudeau et al. (2003) concluded that MO25-alpha
may function as a scaffolding component of the LKB1-STRAD complex and
regulate LKB1 activity and cellular localization.

Using mutagenesis, Boudeau et al. (2004) identified 2 binding sites on
opposite surfaces of MO25-alpha that were required for assembly of the
MO25-alpha-STRAD-alpha-LKB1 complex.

Denning et al. (2012) identified a mechanism of cell extrusion that is
caspase-independent and that can eliminate a subset of the C. elegans
cells programmed to die during embryonic development. In wildtype
animals, these cells die soon after their generation through
caspase-mediated apoptosis. However, in mutants lacking all 4 C. elegans
caspase genes, these cells were eliminated by being extruded from the
developing embryo into the extraembryonic space of the egg. The shed
cells showed apoptosis-like cytologic and morphologic characteristics,
indicating that apoptosis can occur in the absence of caspases in C.
elegans. Denning et al. (2012) described a kinase pathway required for
cell extrusion involving Par4, Strd1, and Mop25.1/25.2, the C. elegans
homologs of the mammalian tumor suppressor kinase LKB1 (602216) and its
binding partners STRAD-alpha (608626) and MO25-alpha. The AMPK-related
kinase Pig1, a possible target of the Par4-Strd1-Mop25 kinase complex,
is also required for cell shedding. Pig1 promotes shed cell detachment
by preventing the cell surface expression of cell adhesion molecules.
Denning et al. (2012) concluded that their findings revealed a mechanism
for apoptotic cell elimination that is fundamentally distinct from that
of canonical programmed cell death.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Zeqiraj et al. (2009) described the structure of the core heterotrimeric
LKB1-STRAD-alpha-MO25-alpha complex, revealing an unusual allosteric
mechanism of LKB1 activation. STRAD-alpha adopts a closed conformation
typical of active protein kinases and binds LKB1 as a pseudosubstrate.
STRAD-alpha and MO25-alpha promote the active conformation of LKB1,
which is stabilized by MO25-alpha interacting with the LKB1 activation
loop. Zeqiraj et al. (2009) suggested that this previously undescribed
mechanism of kinase activation may be relevant to understanding the
evolution of other pseudokinases, and also commented that the structure
reveals how mutations found in Peutz-Jeghers (175200) syndrome and in
various sporadic cancers impair LKB1 function.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the CAB39
gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP RH94102).

REFERENCE 1. Boudeau, J.; Baas, A. F.; Deak, M.; Morrice, N. A.; Kieloch, A.;
Schutkowski, M.; Prescott, A. R.; Clevers, H. C.; Alessi, D. R.:
MO25-alpha/beta interact with STRAD-alpha/beta enhancing their ability
to bind, activate and localize LKB1 in the cytoplasm. EMBO J. 22:
5102-5114, 2003.

2. Boudeau, J.; Scott, J. W.; Resta, N.; Deak, M.; Kieloch, A.; Komander,
D.; Hardie, D. G.; Prescott, A. R.; van Aalten, D. M. F.; Alessi,
D. R.: Analysis of the LKB1-STRAD-MO25 complex. J. Cell Sci. 117:
6365-6375, 2004.

3. Denning, D. P.; Hatch, V.; Horvitz, H. R.: Programmed elimination
of cells by caspase-independent cell extrusion in C. elegans. Nature 488:
226-230, 2012.

4. Zeqiraj, E.; Filippi, B. M.; Deak, M.; Alessi, D. R.; van Aalten,
D. M. F.: Structure of the LKB1-STRAD-MO25 complex reveals an allosteric
mechanism of kinase activation. Science 326: 1707-1711, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/28/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/8/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/14/2008

EDITED alopez: 08/29/2012
terry: 8/28/2012
alopez: 1/11/2010
terry: 1/8/2010
terry: 9/4/2009
mgross: 7/14/2008

300808	TITLE *300808 G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR 143; GPR143
;;OA1 GENE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

GPR143 is a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) that is exclusively
expressed by melanocytes and retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). Unlike
other GPCRs, GPR143 is not localized to the cell surface, but is
exclusively found on the membranes of intracellular organelles, namely
late endosomes/lysosomes and melanosomes (summary by Palmisano et al.
(2008)).

CLONING

By hybridization of the ocular albinism type I (OA1; 300500) critical
region in 4 patients to a human retina cDNA library, followed by
RACE-PCR analysis, Bassi et al. (1995) cloned GPR143. RT-PCR analysis
detected a 1.6-kb transcript that was expressed at high levels in RNA
samples from retina, including RPE, and from melanoma, with weak
expression in brain and adrenal gland. The deduced 424-amino acid GPR143
protein has at least 6 putative transmembrane domains.

Newton et al. (1996) cloned and characterized mouse Gpr143, which they
referred to as Moa1. Two Moa1 variants were isolated from a melanoma
cDNA library and predicted proteins of 405 and 249 amino acids with 6
and 2 transmembrane-spanning regions, respectively. In adult tissues,
both Moa1 isoforms were detected in the eye by Northern hybridization.
In neonatal tissues, Moa1 RNA was detected in both skin and eye by
Northern hybridization and was not affected by the absence of pigment in
mice carrying the 'albino' mutation or by the type of pigment
synthesized, i.e., eumelanin or pheomelanin, in mice carrying the
'black-and-tan' mutation. Expression of Moa1 RNA was not detected in
embryonic tissues by Northern analysis or by in situ hybridization
despite the active synthesis of ocular pigment by embryonic stage E16.5.

By immunogold electron microscopy of human melanocytic cell line MNT-1,
Giordano et al. (2009) showed that GPR143 was widely distributed
throughout the endo-melanosomal system but that most of the endogenous
protein was localized in unpigmented stage II melanosomes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Schiaffino et al. (1995) determined that the GPR143 gene contains 9
exons and spans 40 kb.

Vetrini et al. (2004) identified several putative transcription
factor-binding sites in the 5-prime proximal region of the OA1 promoter,
including sites for SP1 (189906), GBX2 (601135), HES1 (139605), and MITF
(156845). There is no TATA box. The mouse Oa1 promoter region shows a
nearly identical organization. Using several in vitro and in vivo
approaches, Vetrini et al. (2004) confirmed that the MITF site, an E-box
at position -28 from the transcription start site, was bound by the
MITF-M isoform and was functional in pigmented mouse and human cells.
MITF-M could drive expression of OA1 in melanocytes and retinal pigment
epithelium.

MAPPING

Bassi et al. (1995) mapped the GPR143 gene to chromosome Xp22.3-p22.2,
approximately 20 kb on the telomeric side of the APXL gene (SHROOM2;
300103). APXL spans 80 of the 110 kb of the OA1 critical region.

Comparative mapping of the X chromosome in eutherian mammals has
revealed distinct regions of conservation as well as evolutionary
rearrangements between human and mouse. Dinulos et al. (1996) mapped the
murine homologs of OA1 and APXL. They found that the 2 genes map to
bands F2-F3 in both M. spretus and the laboratory strains C57BL/6J,
defining a new rearrangement between human and mouse X chromosomes.

Interspecific backcross mapping by Newton et al. (1996) yielded a map
order and distances (in cM) of cen-Moa1-3.1 +/- 1.8-Piga (311770)-2.1
+/- 1.5-Amel (AMELX; 300391), indicating that Moa1 is located much
farther away from the pseudoautosomal region than its human homolog.

GENE FUNCTION

GPCRs participate in the most common signal transduction system at the
plasma membrane. The wide distribution of heterotrimeric G proteins in
the internal membranes suggests that a similar signaling mechanism might
also be used at intracellular locations. Schiaffino et al. (1999)
provided structural evidence that the protein product of the OA1 gene, a
pigment cell-specific integral membrane glycoprotein, represents a novel
member of the GPCR superfamily and demonstrated that it binds
heterotrimeric G proteins. Moreover, they showed that OA1 is not found
at the plasma membrane, being instead targeted to specialized
intracellular organelles, the melanosomes. The data suggested that OA1
represents the first example of an exclusively intracellular GPCR and
supported the hypothesis that GPCR-mediated signal transduction systems
also operate at the internal membranes in mammalian cells.

Giordano et al. (2009) used siRNA inactivation of GPR143 and combined
morphologic and biochemical methods to investigate melanosome
ultrastructure, melanosomal protein localization and expression in human
pigmented melanocytic cells. GPR143 loss of function led to decreased
pigmentation and caused formation of enlarged aberrant premelanosomes
harboring disorganized fibrillar structures and displaying proteins of
mature melanosomes and lysosomes at their membrane. GPR143 interacted
biochemically with the premelanosomal protein MART1 (MLANA; 605513).
Inactivation of MART1 by siRNA led to decreased stability of GPR143 and
was accompanied by similar defects in premelanosome biogenesis and
composition. Giordano et al. (2009) concluded that melanosome
composition and identity are regulated at early stages by GPR143 and
that MART1 likely acts as an escort protein for GPR143.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Ocular Albinism Type I

Bassi et al. (1995) identified 5 patients with OA1 (300500) who were
carrying mutations within the GPR143 gene. Five intragenic deletions and
a 2-bp insertion resulting in a premature stop codon (300808.0001) were
identified by DNA analysis of patients with OA1. Some of these deletions
were not overlapping, making it highly unlikely that the mutation
involved in OA1 is located in an intron of the gene. Fine molecular
characterization of the gene in 1 patient demonstrated that the deletion
removed part of a coding exon. The APXL gene was completely deleted in 1
patient with isolated OA1. However, an extensive search for point
mutations was performed in the 4,848-bp coding region of APXL from 57
patients and no functionally relevant mutation was identified.

Schiaffino et al. (1995) screened the entire OA1 coding region and
5-prime and 3-prime sequences for mutations and detected mutations in
only one-third (21 of 60) of their patients with OA, including 2
frameshifts (e.g., 300808.0002) and a splice site mutation leading to
truncated OA1 proteins, a deletion of a threonine codon at position 290,
and 4 missense mutations (e.g., 300808.0008), 2 of which involved amino
acids located within putative transmembrane domains.

Schnur et al. (1998) reported results of deletion and mutation screening
of the full-length OA1 gene in 29 unrelated North American and
Australian OA probands, including 5 with additional, nonocular
phenotypic abnormalities (Schnur et al., 1994). They detected 13
intragenic gene deletions, including 3 of exon 1, 2 of exon 2, 2 of exon
4, and 6 others, which span exons 2 to 8. They also identified 8 novel
missense mutations that clustered within exons 1, 2, 3, and 6 in
conserved and/or putative transmembrane domains of the protein. There
was also a splice acceptor site mutation, a nonsense mutation, a single
base deletion, and a previously reported 17-bp exon 1 deletion. All
patients with nonocular phenotypic abnormalities had detectable
mutations. All told, 26 (approximately 90%) of 29 probands had
detectable alterations in the OA1 gene, thus confirming that OA1 is the
major locus for X-linked OA.

In Denmark, Rosenberg and Schwartz (1998) performed a retrospective
survey of 112 patients with ocular albinism identified in a national
register, including 60 male patients with proven or presumed X-linked
ocular albinism. Based on the birth year cohorts 1960 to 1989, a point
prevalence for OA1 at birth of 1 in 60,000 live born was calculated.
They identified 14 OA1 families in the Danish population and obtained
DNA from affected persons in 9 families. Mutation analysis demonstrated
7 presumed pathogenic mutations in the 9 families: 5 single nucleotide
substitutions predicting a change of conserved amino acids, including
G35D (300808.0008) and W133R (300808.0006), when compared with the mouse
OA1 homolog, 1 deletion leading to the skipping of exon 2, and 1 example
of a single nucleotide substitution expected to affect the 5-prime
splice site of intron 2 (300808.0007). Subsequent genealogic
investigations in the 3 families harboring the same mutation, W133R,
disclosed that 2 of the 3 belonged to the same family. Clinical
examination failed to identify any phenotype-genotype pattern except for
the finding of a milder phenotype lacking iris translucency in the
patient with the 5-prime splice site mutation of intron 2.

D'Addio et al. (2000) characterized 19 independent missense mutations
with respect to processing and subcellular distribution on expression in
COS-7 cells. Eleven of the 19 OA1 mutants (approximately 60%) were
retained in the endoplasmic reticulum, showing defective intracellular
transport and glycosylation, consistent with protein misfolding. The
remaining 8 OA1 mutants (approximately 40%) displayed sorting and
processing behaviors indistinguishable from those of the wildtype
protein. Most of the latter mutations clustered within the second and
third cytosolic loops, 2 regions that in canonical GPCRs are known to be
critical for their downstream signaling, including G protein coupling
and effector activation.

Oetting (2002) found that a total of 25 missense, 2 nonsense, 9
frameshift, and 5 splicing mutations in the OA1 gene had been reported
in association with type I ocular albinism. There were also reports of
several deletions of some or all exons of the OA1 gene with deletions of
exon 2 resulting from unequal crossing-over, due to flanking Alu
repeats. Oetting (2002) referred to an albinism database website.

In a Chinese patient with ocular albinism, Xiao and Zhang (2009)
identified an intragenic deletion in the GPR143 gene (300808.0013).

- X-linked Congenital Nystagmus 6

In a large 6-generation Chinese family with congenital nystagmus as the
main feature (NYS6; 300814), Liu et al. (2007) analyzed 21 candidate
genes and identified a missense mutation in the GPR143 gene (S89F;
300808.0009) in affected males and carrier females.

Zhou et al. (2008) and Peng et al. (2009) identified mutations in the
GPR143 gene (300808.0011 and 300808.0012, respectively) in 2 unrelated
Chinese families with X-linked recessive congenital nystagmus without
features of ocular albinism. Female carriers were unaffected.

ANIMAL MODEL

Incerti et al. (2000) generated and characterized Oa1-deficient mice by
gene targeting. Knockout males were viable, fertile, and phenotypically
indistinguishable from wildtype littermates. Ophthalmologic examination
showed hypopigmentation of the ocular fundus in mutant animals compared
with wildtype. Analysis of the retinofugal pathway revealed a reduction
in the size of the uncrossed pathway, demonstrating a misrouting of the
optic fibers at the chiasm, as observed in OA1 patients. Microscopic
examination of the RPE showed the presence of giant melanosomes
comparable with those described in OA1 patients. Ultrastructural
analysis of the RPE cells suggested that the giant melanosomes may form
by abnormal growth of single melanosomes rather than by the fusion of
several organelles.

Palmisano et al. (2008) found reduced melanosome number and abnormal
melanosome distribution toward the apical pole of Oa1 -/- RPE at
embryonic stages that preceded the formation of macromelanosomes. In
cultured -/- skin melanocytes, melanosomes were depleted from the
perinuclear area and accumulated toward the cell periphery. In Oa1 -/-
melanocytes, melanosomes interacted normally with the microtubule
cytoskeleton and recruited factors required for actin-mediated
melanosome capture; however, Oa1 -/- melanosomes appeared unable to
release from the peripheral actin filaments. Palmisano et al. (2008)
concluded that OA1 plays a regulatory role in distributing melanosomes
between microtubule- and actin-based cytoskeletal elements.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ALBINISM, OCULAR, TYPE I
GPR143, 2-BP INS, NT992

In 4 apparently unrelated families with OA1 (300500), Bassi et al.
(1995) found an insertional mutation of a CG dinucleotide at position
992 of the cDNA. Such CG dinucleotide insertions have been attributed to
the symmetric element GCCG immediately following the insertion site
(Cooper and Krawczak, 1991). The mutation completely cosegregated with
the disease allele in the 4 families and produced a frameshift in the
predicted protein product with a subsequent premature stop codon 20
amino acids downstream. The identification of this same mutational event
in 4 families from the same region in the Netherlands suggested founder
effect. Since all 4 families had multiple affected members in at least 4
generations, it was not possible to trace the origin of the mutation. It
is likely that they share a common ancestor. Another such large pedigree
on which clinical records date back to the 19th century was identified
in Newfoundland by the Canadian National Institute for the Blind
(Johnson et al., 1971).

.0002
ALBINISM, OCULAR, TYPE I
GPR143, 17-BP DEL

In probands of a British family with OA1 (300500), Schiaffino et al.
(1995) identified a 17-bp deletion within exon 1 of the GPR143 gene,
producing a frameshift leading to a premature stop codon. Schnur et al.
(1998) identified the same mutation in probands of an Australian-British
family with OA1.

.0003
ALBINISM, OCULAR, TYPE I
GPR143, TRP133ARG

In a patient with OA1 (300500), Schnur et al. (1998) identified a
missense mutation that converted codon 133 from TGG (trp) to CGG (arg)
(W133R). The patients also showed developmental delay and renal and
immune dysfunction. In another family, the same W133R mutation was
found. That family was of interest because a manifesting female had a
45,XO karyotype (Turner syndrome).

.0004
ALBINISM, OCULAR, TYPE I
GPR143, SER152ASN

In a patient with ocular albinism (OA1; 300500) and giant pigment
granules in melanocytes, Schnur et al. (1998) demonstrated a mutation
changing codon 152 from AGC (ser) to AAC (asn) (S152N) in the OA1 gene.
The patient also had Becker-type muscular dystrophy (300376), which
Schnur et al. (1998) concluded was probably coincidental.

.0005
ALBINISM, OCULAR, TYPE I
GPR143, THR232LYS

In a patient with OA1 (300500) characterized by the presence of giant
pigment granules in melanocytes, Schnur et al. (1998) identified a
thr232-to-lys (T232K) missense mutation resulting from a change of ACG
to AAG in the OA1 gene. The mother had a normal fundus examination; the
mother and the affected grandfather had 'vitiligo.'

.0006
ALBINISM, OCULAR, TYPE I
GPR143, TRP133ARG

In 3 presumably unrelated Danish families with OA1 (300500), Rosenberg
and Schwartz (1998) found a T-to-A transversion at nucleotide 457 of the
OA1 gene that resulted in a trp133-to-arg (W133R) missense mutation in
the gene product. Subsequently, 2 of the families were found to be
related.

.0007
ALBINISM, OCULAR, TYPE I
GPR143, 420G-A

In a patient with X-linked ocular albinism (OA1; 300500), Rosenberg and
Schwartz (1998) found deletion of exon 2 and part of the flanking
introns resulting from a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 420 of the
GPR143 gene. The mutation changed the last nucleotide of exon 2, which
per se did not cause any amino acid change; however, the mutation
changed the consensus sequence of the donor splice site from GCGgt to
GCAgt. The most frequent 3-prime exon sequence of the donor splice site
is GAG (Krawczak et al., 1992). The change of the 3-prime sequence of
exon 2 to GCA would be expected to weaken or destroy the splicing
signal. Such mutations have been found in several genes, e.g., PROC
(612283) (Lind et al., 1993), and have been shown to result in exon
skipping. The patient with the splice site mutation showed a milder
phenotype than did other patients with missense mutations; there was no
iris translucency.

.0008
ALBINISM, OCULAR, TYPE I
GPR143, GLY35ASP

In a study of 9 families with X-linked ocular albinism (OA1; 300500),
Rosenberg and Schwartz (1998) identified 7 pathogenic mutations. Only 1
of these, gly35 to asp (G35D), had previously been identified
(Schiaffino et al., 1995).

.0009
NYSTAGMUS, 6, CONGENITAL, X-LINKED
GPR143, SER89PHE

In a large 6-generation Chinese family in which 8 males had congenital
nystagmus (NYS6; 300814), Liu et al. (2007) identified a 266C-T
transition in exon 2 of the GPR143 gene, resulting in a ser89-to-phe
(S89F) substitution at a highly conserved residue. The mutation was
found in 5 affected males and 4 carrier females and was not found in 4
unaffected family members or 200 controls. The pedigree pattern was
consistent with X-linked recessive inheritance.

.0010
ALBINISM, OCULAR, TYPE I
GPR143, 14-BP DEL, NT816

In affected members of a 3-generation family with variable features of
ocular albinism (300500), Preising et al. (2001) identified a 14-bp
deletion beginning at nucleotide 816 and affecting the splice donor
signal of intron 6 of the GPR143 gene. The male proband was diagnosed
with OA1 at age 3 months with typical clinical features, including
congenital nystagmus, iris translucency, macular hypoplasia, fundus
hypopigmentation, and normal pigmentation of skin and hair. Examination
at age 4 years showed increased pigmentation of the iris and fundus and
improved visual acuity. A 51-year-old maternal uncle also had congenital
nystagmus, clear macular hypoplasia and stromal focal hypopigmentation
of the iris, but no iris translucency or fundus hypopigmentation.
Macromelanosomes were present on skin biopsy. A 79-year-old maternal
relative had congenital nystagmus and high myopia with macular change,
but no iris translucency. Two carrier females had mosaic pattern of
hypopigmented retinal epithelium, consistent with a carrier status of
ocular albinism. RT-PCR studies showed that the 14-bp deletion resulted
in a frameshift and premature termination of the protein at residue 259.
The resulting gene product lacks the last transmembrane domain from the
extracellular loop 3 to the C terminus. Preising et al. (2001) suggested
that this mutation results in a hypomorphic allele that causes impaired
membrane fusion of melanosomes and the plasma membrane. They proposed a
model of OA1 in this family that allowed increase of pigmentation with
age. Thus, postnatal normalization of the extracellular dopamine levels
due to delayed distribution and membrane budding or fusion of
melanosomes in melanocytes could result in increasing pigmentation and a
seemingly variable phenotype.

.0011
NYSTAGMUS 6, CONGENITAL, X-LINKED
GPR143, 37-BP DEL

In affected males in a 4-generation Chinese family with congenital
nystagmus (300814), Zhou et al. (2008) identified a 37-bp deletion in
exon 1 of the GPR143 gene, predicted to result in a frameshift and
premature termination. The mutant transcript is likely to be degraded by
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and loss of function. All male mutation
carriers had X-linked congenital nystagmus without evidence of ocular
albinism. Obligate mutation carriers did not have nystagmus, consistent
with X-linked recessive inheritance.

.0012
NYSTAGMUS 6, CONGENITAL, X-LINKED
GPR143, 19-BP DUP

In affected members of a Chinese family with X-linked congenital
nystagmus (300814), Peng et al. (2009) identified a 19-bp duplication
(291_309) in exon 1 of the GPR143 gene, resulting in a frameshift,
premature termination, and nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. All patients
were male, and had binocular spontaneous horizontal oscillations without
head nodding. They all had reduced vision, amblyopia, and mild compound
hypermetropic astigmatism. None of the patients had classic features of
ocular albinism. Female carriers were unaffected, consistent with
X-linked recessive inheritance.

.0013
OCULAR ALBINISM, TYPE I
GPR143, EX1-2DEL

In a Chinese patient with ocular albinism (OA1; 300500), Xiao and Zhang
(2009) identified a deletion of exons 1 and 2 of the GPR143 gene. The
patient and his carrier mother both demonstrated an unusual phenotype of
iris hyperpigmentation without translucency, with apparent mosaic
pigmentation of the fundus.

REFERENCE 1. Bassi, M. T.; Schiaffino, M. V.; Renieri, A.; De Nigris, F.; Galli,
L.; Bruttini, M.; Gebbia, M.; Bergen, A. A. B.; Lewis, R. A.; Ballabio,
A.: Cloning of the gene for ocular albinism type 1 from the distal
short arm of the X chromosome. Nature Genet. 10: 13-19, 1995.

2. Cooper, D. N.; Krawczak, M.: Mechanisms of insertional mutagenesis
in human genes causing genetic disease. Hum. Genet. 87: 409-415,
1991.

3. d'Addio, M.; Pizzigoni, A.; Bassi, M. T.; Baschirotto, C.; Valetti,
C.; Incerti, B.; Clementi, M.; De Luca, M.; Ballabio, A.; Schiaffino,
M. V.: Defective intracellular transport and processing of OA1 is
a major cause of ocular albinism type 1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 3011-3018,
2000.

4. Dinulos, M. B.; Bassi, M. T.; Rugarli, E. I.; Chapman, V.; Ballabio,
A.; Disteche, C. M.: A new region of conservation is defined between
human and mouse X chromosomes. Genomics 35: 244-247, 1996.

5. Giordano, F.; Bonetti, C.; Surace, E. M.; Marigo, V.; Raposo, G.
: The ocular albinism type 1 (OA1) G-protein-coupled receptor functions
with MART-1 at early stages of melanogenesis to control melanosome
identity and composition. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 4530-4545, 2009.

6. Incerti, B.; Cortese, K.; Pizzigoni, A.; Surace, E. M.; Varani,
S.; Coppola, M.; Jeffery, G.; Seeliger, M.; Jaissle, G.; Bennett,
D. C.; Marigo, V.; Schiaffino, M. V.; Tacchetti, C.; Ballabio, A.
: Oa1 knock-out: new insights on the pathogenesis of ocular albinism
type 1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 2781-2788, 2000.

7. Johnson, G. J.; Gillan, J. G.; Pearce, W. G.: Ocular albinism
in Newfoundland. Can. J. Ophthal. 6: 237-248, 1971.

8. Krawczak, M.; Reiss, J.; Cooper, D. N.: The mutational spectrum
of single base-pair substitutions in mRNA splice junctions of human
genes: causes and consequences. Hum. Genet. 90: 41-54, 1992.

9. Lind, B.; van Solinge, W. W.; Schwartz, M.; Thorsen, S.: Splice
site mutation in the human protein C gene associated with venous thrombosis:
demonstration of exon skipping by ectopic transcript analysis. Blood 82:
2423-2432, 1993.

10. Liu, J. Y.; Ren, X.; Yang, X.; Guo, T.; Yao, Q.; Li, L.; Dai,
X.; Zhang, M.; Wang, L.; Liu, M.; Wang, Q. K.: Identification of
a novel GPR143 mutation in a large Chinese family with congenital
nystagmus as the most prominent and consistent manifestation. J.
Hum. Genet. 52: 565-570, 2007.

11. Newton, J. M.; Orlow, S. J.; Barsh, G. S.: Isolation and characterization
of a mouse homolog of the X-linked ocular albinism (OA1) gene. Genomics 37:
219-225, 1996.

12. Oetting, W. S.: New insights into ocular albinism type 1 (OA1):
mutations and polymorphisms of the OA1 gene. Hum. Mutat. 19: 85-92,
2002.

13. Palmisano, I.; Bagnato, P.; Palmigiano, A.; Innamorati, G.; Rotondo,
G.; Altimare, D.; Venturi, C.; Sviderskaya, E. V.; Piccirillo, R.;
Coppola, M.; Marigo, V.; Incerti, B.; Ballabio, A.; Surace, E. M.;
Tacchetti, C.; Bennett, D. C.; Schiaffino, M. V.: The ocular albinism
type 1 protein, an intracellular G protein-coupled receptor, regulates
melanosome transport in pigment cells. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17: 3487-3501,
2008.

14. Peng, Y.; Meng, Y.; Wang, Z.; Qin, M.; Li, X.; Dian, Y.; Huang,
S.: A novel GPR143 duplication mutation in a Chinese family with
X-linked congenital nystagmus. Molec. Vis. 15: 810-814, 2009.

15. Preising, M.; Op de Laak, J.-P.; Lorenz, B.: Deletion in the
OA1 gene in a family with congenital X linked nystagmus. Brit. J.
Ophthal. 85: 1098-1103, 2001.

16. Rosenberg, T.; Schwartz, M.: X-linked ocular albinism: prevalence
and mutations--a national study. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 6: 570-577,
1998.

17. Schiaffino, M. V.; Bassi, M. T.; Galli, L.; Renieri, A.; Bruttini,
M.; De Nigris, F.; Bergen, A. A. B.; Charles, S. J.; Yates, J. R.
W.; Meindl, A.; Lewis, R. A.; King, R. A.; Ballabio, A.: Analysis
of the OA1 gene reveals mutations in only one-third of patients with
X-linked ocular albinism. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 2319-2325, 1995.

18. Schiaffino, M. V.; d'Addio, M.; Alloni, A.; Baschirotto, C.; Valetti,
C.; Cortese, K.; Puri, C.; Bassi, M. T.; Colla, C.; De Luca, M.; Tacchetti,
C.; Ballabio, A.: Ocular albinism: evidence for a defect in an intracellular
signal transduction system. Nature Genet. 23: 108-112, 1999.

19. Schnur, R. E.; Gao, M.; Wick, P. A.; Keller, M.; Benke, P. J.;
Edwards, M. J.; Grix, A. W.; Hockey, A.; Jung, J. H.; Kidd, K. K.;
Kistenmacher, M.; Levin, A. V.; and 11 others: OA1 mutations and
deletions in X-linked ocular albinism. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62: 800-809,
1998.

20. Schnur, R. E.; Wick, P. A.; Bailey, C.; Rebbeck, T.; Weleber,
R. G.; Wagstaff, J.; Grix, A. W.; Pagon, R. A.; Hockey, A.; Edwards,
M. J.: Phenotypic variability in X-linked ocular albinism: relationship
to linkage genotypes. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 55: 484-496, 1994.

21. Vetrini, F.; Auricchio, A.; Du, J.; Angeletti, B.; Fisher, D.
E.; Ballabio, A.; Marigo, V.: The microphthalmia transcription factor
(Mitf) controls expression of the ocular albinism type 1 gene: link
between melanin synthesis and melanosome biogenesis. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 24: 6550-6559, 2004.

22. Xiao, X.; Zhang, Q.: Iris hyperpigmentation in a Chinese family
with ocular albinism and the GPR143 mutation. Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A:
1786-1788, 2009.

23. Zhou, P.; Wang, Z.; Zhang, J.; Hu, L.; Kong, X.: Identification
of a novel GPR143 deletion in a Chinese family with X-linked congenital
nystagmus. Molec. Vis. 14: 1015-1019, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/10/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/28/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/15/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/9/2009

CREATED Matthew B. Gross: 11/9/2009

EDITED carol: 09/05/2013
wwang: 6/16/2011
terry: 6/10/2011
wwang: 11/8/2010
terry: 10/28/2010
carol: 5/4/2010
ckniffin: 1/15/2010
mgross: 11/9/2009

610258	TITLE *610258 SEC31, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF, B; SEC31B
;;SEC31-LIKE 2; SEC31L2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching databases for sequences similar to SEC31A (SEC31L1;
610257), Tang et al. (2000) identified SEC31B. Northern blot analysis
detected a 6.5-kb SEC31B transcript in thymus and testis. Expression was
low in all other tissues examined.

By searching a database for sequences similar to rat Sec31, followed by
PCR of human testis, brain, and fetal brain cDNA libraries and 5-prime
RACE, Stankewich et al. (2006) cloned several SEC31B splice variants.
The full-length cDNA encodes a deduced 1,180-amino acid protein with a
calculated molecular mass of 128.7 kD. The N-terminal half contains 7
canonical WD repeats, and the C-terminal half contains proline-rich
regions. Full-length SEC31B shares 47.3% identity with SEC31A. Most
other SEC31B variants contain exon 13, which has an in-frame stop codon
that results in truncated proteins of no more than 53 kD. Northern blot
analysis detected 2 or 3 transcripts of about 6.5 kb in all tissues
examined, with highest expression in testis. Weakly expressed
transcripts of 1.0 and at least 11 kb were also detected. RNA dot blot
analysis showed ubiquitous expression, with highest levels in testis and
cerebellum. Western blot analysis detected proteins of 129, 83, and 53
kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Stankewich et al. (2006) found that fluorescence-tagged full-length
Sec31b coimmunoprecipitated with Sec13 (SEC13L1; 600152) in canine
kidney cells. Domain analysis indicated that the WD repeats bound Sec13.
Sec31b displayed pharmacologic and dynamic behaviors that confirmed its
participation with COPII (see 601924)-coated organelles.

GENE STRUCTURE

Stankewich et al. (2006) determined that the SEC31L2 gene contains 29
exons and spans 33.2 kb. Sixteen exons were present in all transcripts
identified, whereas the other 13 were variably expressed.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Stankewich et al. (2006) mapped the
SEC31L2 gene to chromosome 10q24.

REFERENCE 1. Stankewich, M. C.; Stabach, P. R.; Morrow, J. S.: Human Sec31B:
a family of new mammalian orthologues of yeast Sec31p that associate
with the COPII coat. J. Cell Sci. 119: 958-969, 2006.

2. Tang, B. L.; Zhang, T.; Low, D. Y. H.; Wong, E. T.; Horstmann,
H.; Hong, W.: Mammalian homologues of yeast Sec31p: an ubiquitously
expressed form is localized to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) exit sites
and is essential for ER-Golgi transport. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 13597-13604,
2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/14/2006

EDITED mgross: 03/08/2012
alopez: 7/18/2006
mgross: 7/14/2006

601891	TITLE *601891 CYSTATIN 6; CST6
;;CYSTATIN M;;
CYSTATIN M/E
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Cystatins are endogenous inhibitors of mammalian lysosomal cysteine
proteinases, such as cathepsins B (116810), L (116880), H (116820), and
S (116845), and the plant cysteine proteinases papain, acinidin, and
ficin. They function both intracellularly and extracellularly. All
inhibitory cystatins display structural and functional similarities, and
are members of a single protein superfamily comprising 3 distinct
families of closely related proteins: stefins (see 184600), cystatins
(see 123855), and kininogens (see 612358). Using differential display,
Sotiropoulou et al. (1997) identified a novel human cystatin, cystatin
M, as being downregulated in metastatic breast tumor cells as compared
to primary tumor cells.

Cystatin M/E has a restricted expression pattern in humans which is
largely limited to cutaneous epithelia (Zeeuwen et al., 2001, 2002).

Zeeuwen et al. (2002) reported the isolation and characterization of the
mouse Cst6 ortholog. Mouse and human CST6 share 69% amino acid identity
and 82% amino acid conservation.

Zeeuwen et al. (2003) obtained the complete sequence of the human CST6
gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zeeuwen et al. (2003) determined that the CST6 gene comprises 3 exons
and spans 1,354 basepairs of genomic DNA from the translation start site
to the translation termination site. They detected 3 transcription start
sites.

MAPPING

Stenman et al. (1997) mapped the gene encoding cystatin M (CST6) to
11q13 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. CST6 is a member of the
type 2 cystatin gene family. All 7 previously cloned members of this
family had been found to be clustered in a narrow region on 20p11.2.

Zeeuwen et al. (2002) assigned the mouse Cst6 ortholog to the proximal
end of chromosome 19. This region corresponds to the locus of the
spontaneous harlequin ichthyosis (ichq) mouse mutation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Zeeuwen et al. (2003) evaluated the involvement of CST6 in harlequin
ichthyosis (242500) by sequencing the entire coding region and
intron-exon boundaries for mutations in 11 sporadic harlequin ichthyosis
patients. No CST6 mutations were detected in this group. Disturbed
transcription/translation due to mutations in regulatory and noncoding
regions of cystatin M/E was unlikely because cystatin M/E protein
expression was observed in all patients examined, as assessed by
immunohistochemistry.

ANIMAL MODEL

Zeeuwen et al. (2002) found a nonsense mutation in the Cst6 gene of
BALB/cJ-ichq/+ mice, which precluded the synthesis of functional
protein. Immunohistochemistry confirmed the absence of cystatin M/E at
the protein level in ichq/ichq mice. Mice that were homozygous for 2
null alleles displayed a hyperplastic, hyperkeratotic epidermis and
abnormal hair follicles and died between 5 and 12 days of age. In
wildtype mice, cystatin M/E was found in the stratum granulosum and in
the infundibulum of the hair follicle, indicating that the anatomic site
in the skin where cystatin M/E is normally expressed correlates with the
abnormalities at the tissue level in ichq/ichq mice. Zeeuwen et al.
(2002) suggested that cystatin M/E is required for viability and for
correct formation of cornified layers in the epidermis and hair
follicles.

In the ichq (Cst6-null) mouse, Zeeuwen et al. (2004) reported
unrestricted activity of the target protease legumain (602620) in hair
follicles and epidermis. Analysis of stratum corneum proteins revealed a
strong decrease of soluble loricrin (152445) monomers in skin extracts
of ichq mice, although normal levels of loricrin were present in the
stratum granulosum and stratum corneum. This suggested a premature or
enhanced crosslinking of loricrin monomers in ichq mice by
transglutaminase-3 (TGM3; 600238). Increased levels of TGM3 were
processed into activated 30- and 47-kD subunits, compared to wildtype
mice. The authors concluded that cystatin M/E and legumain form a
functional dyad in epidermis in vivo. They further proposed that
disturbance of this protease-antiprotease balance may cause increased
enzyme activity of TGM3 that could explain the observed abnormal
cornification.

REFERENCE 1. Sotiropoulou, G.; Anisowicz, A.; Sager, R.: Identification, cloning,
and characterization of cystatin M, a novel cysteine proteinase inhibitor,
down-regulated in breast cancer. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 903-910, 1997.

2. Stenman, G.; Astrom, A.-K.; Roijer, E.; Sotiropoulou, G.; Zhang,
M.; Sager, R.: Assignment of a novel cysteine proteinase inhibitor
(CST6) to 11q13 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 76: 45-46, 1997.

3. Zeeuwen, P. L. J. M.; Dale, B. A.; de Jongh, G. J.; van Vlijmen-Willems,
I. M. J. J.; Fleckman, P.; Kimball, J. R.; Stephens, K.; Schalkwijk,
J.: The human cystatin M/E gene (CST6): exclusion candidate gene
for harlequin ichthyosis. J. Invest. Derm. 121: 65-68, 2003.

4. Zeeuwen, P. L. J. M.; van Vlijmen-Willems, I. M. J. J.; Egami,
H.; Schalkwijk, J.: Cystatin M/E expression in inflammatory and neoplastic
skin disorders. Brit. J. Derm. 147: 87-94, 2002.

5. Zeeuwen, P. L. J. M.; van Vlijmen-Willems, I. M. J. J.; Hendriks,
W.; Merkx, G. F. M.; Schalkwijk, J.: A null mutation in the cystatin
M/E gene of ichq mice causes juvenile lethality and defects in epidermal
cornification. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 2867-2875, 2002.

6. Zeeuwen, P. L. J. M.; van Vlijmen-Willems, I. M. J. J.; Jansen,
B. J. H.; Sotiropoulou, G.; Curfs, J. H.; Mies, J. F. G. M.; Janssen,
J. J. M.; van Ruissen, F.; Schalkwijk, J.: Cystatin M/E expression
is restricted to differentiated epidermal keratinocytes and sweat
glands: a new skin-specific proteinase inhibitor that is a target
for cross-linking by transglutaminase. J. Invest Derm. 116: 693-701,
2001.

7. Zeeuwen, P. L. J. M.; van Vlijmen-Willems, I. M. J. J.; Olthuis,
D.; Johansen, H. T.; Hitomi, K.; Hara-Nishimura, I.; Powers, J. C.;
James, K. E.; op den Camp, H. J.; Lemmens, R.; Schalkwijk, J.: Evidence
that unrestricted legumain activity is involved in disturbed epidermal
cornification in cystatin M/E deficient mice. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13:
1069-1079, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 9/5/2006
Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 9/4/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 9/4/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/23/1997

EDITED mgross: 10/24/2008
alopez: 9/5/2006
alopez: 9/4/2003
jenny: 6/27/1997
mark: 6/23/1997
jenny: 6/23/1997

609867	TITLE *609867 UBIQUITIN-LIKE DOMAIN-CONTAINING CTD PHOSPHATASE 1; UBLCP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

During large-scale cDNA sequencing, Zheng et al. (2005) cloned a novel
phosphatase, which they named ubiquitin-like domain-containing CTD
phosphatase-1 (UBLCP1), from a human fetal brain cDNA library. UBLCP1
encodes a 318-amino acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of 36.8
kD. It has a CTD phosphatase catalytic domain containing several
residues essential for catalytic activity that are conserved with those
in the CTD phosphatases CTDSP1 (605323) and CTDP1 (604927). UBLCP1 also
contains an N-terminal ubiquitin-like domain that harbors a
proteasome-interacting motif. RT-PCR detected relatively high expression
of UBLCP1 in placenta, lung, testis, and ovary, with weaker expression
in heart, liver, kidney, spleen, thymus, colon, and peripheral blood
leukocytes. UBLCP1 expression was particularly high in breast, lung,
colon, prostate, ovarian, and pancreas tumor tissues. Immunofluorescence
analysis localized UBLCP1 to the nucleus.

GENE FUNCTION

Using in vitro phosphatase assays, Zheng et al. (2005) demonstrated that
UBLCP1 shows magnesium-dependent phosphatase activity towards the
substrate p-nitrophenyl phosphate that is optimal at pH 5. In vitro
assays also showed that UBLCP1 dephosphorylates the C-terminal domain of
RNA polymerase II (180660), with highest activity at serine-5.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zheng et al. (2005) determined that the UBLCP1 gene contains 11 exons
spanning over 22.7 kb.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Zheng et al. (2005) mapped the UBLCP1 gene to
chromosome 5q33.3.

REFERENCE 1. Zheng, H.; Ji, C.; Gu, S.; Shi, B.; Wang, J.; Xie, Y.; Mao, Y.
: Cloning and characterization of a novel RNA polymerase II C-terminal
domain phosphatase. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 331: 1401-1407,
2005.

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 1/31/2006

EDITED carol: 12/26/2007
carol: 1/31/2006

609511	TITLE *609511 ZINC FINGER FYVE DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 20; ZFYVE20
;;RABENOSYN 5
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a gel overlay assay, Nielsen et al. (2000) identified ZFYVE20,
which they called rabenosyn-5, as a protein that directly interacts with
RAB5 (179512). By peptide analysis, EST database analysis, and PCR of a
HeLa cell cDNA library, they cloned rabenosyn-5 cDNA. The deduced
784-amino acid protein contains an N-terminal C2H2-type zinc finger
domain, a central FYVE finger domain, and 5 copies of the amino acid
motif NPF at its C terminus. SDS-PAGE showed rabenosyn-5 with an
apparent molecular mass of 110 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Nielsen et al. (2000) determined that rabenosyn-5 colocalized with EEA1
(605070) on RAB5-positive endosomes in HeLa cells. Recruitment of
rabenosyn-5 and EEA1 was dependent upon phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(see 601232). Mutation analysis indicated that the FYVE domain of
rabenosyn-5 was required for endosome targeting. Rabenosyn-5 was
complexed with the Sec1-like protein VPS45 (VPS45A; 610035), and
rabenosyn-5 appeared to serve as a molecular link between VPS45 and
RAB5. Both EEA1 and rabenosyn-5 were required for early endosomal
fusion, but only rabenosyn-5 overexpression inhibited processing of
procathepsin D (116840) to its 47-kD intermediate, suggesting that the 2
proteins play distinct roles in endosomal trafficking.

By immunofluorescence microscopy of HeLa cells, Naslavsky et al. (2004)
detected rabenosyn-5 partly colocalized with EHD1 (605888) in vesicular
and tubular structures. Depletion of either EHD1 or rabenosyn-5 in HeLa
cells by RNA interference (RNAi) delayed recycling of transferrin
(190000) and its receptor (TFRC; 190010), as well as major
histocompatibility complex class I (see HLA-A; 142800), to the plasma
membrane. Depletion of EHD1 caused accumulation of internalized cargo in
a compact juxtanuclear compartment, but depletion of rabenosyn-5 caused
retention of cargo within a dispersed peripheral compartment.
Simultaneous depletion of both rabenosyn-5 and EHD1 resulted in a
phenotype similar to that observed with rabenosyn-5 RNAi alone,
suggesting that rabenosyn-5 acts before EHD1 in the regulation of
endocytic recycling. Naslavsky et al. (2004) concluded that rabenosyn-5
and EHD1 act sequentially in the transport of proteins from early
endosomes to the endosomal recycling compartment and back to the plasma
membrane.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Using a structural proteomic approach, Eathiraj et al. (2005) determined
the specificity and structural basis underlying the interaction of the
multivalent effector rabenosyn-5 with the Rab family. The results
demonstrated that even the structurally similar effector domains in
rabenosyn-5 can achieve highly selective recognition of distinct subsets
of Rab GTPases exclusively through interactions with the switch and
interswitch regions. The observed specificity is determined at a
family-wide level by structural diversity in the active conformation,
which governs the spatial disposition of critical conserved recognition
determinants, and by a small number of both positive and negative
sequence determinants that allow further discrimination between Rab
GTPases with similar switch conformations.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the ZFYVE20
gene to chromosome 3 (TMAP STS-N59228).

REFERENCE 1. Eathiraj, S.; Pan, X.; Ritacco, C.; Lambright, D. G.: Structural
basis of family-wide Rab GTPase recognition by rabenosyn-5. (Letter) Nature 436:
415-419, 2005.

2. Naslavsky, N.; Boehm, M.; Backlund, P. S., Jr.; Caplan, S.: Rabenosyn-5
and EHD1 interact and sequentially regulate protein recycling to the
plasma membrane. Molec. Biol. Cell 15: 2410-2422, 2004.

3. Nielsen, E.; Christoforidis, S.; Uttenweiler-Joseph, S.; Miaczynska,
M.; Dewitte, F.; Wilm, M.; Hoflack, B.; Zerial, M.: Rabenosyn-5,
a novel Rab5 effector, is complexed with hVPS45 and recruited to endosomes
through a FYVE finger domain. J. Cell Biol. 151: 601-612, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/16/2005

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/2/2005

EDITED mgross: 04/10/2006
terry: 8/16/2005
mgross: 8/3/2005
mgross: 8/2/2005

612972	TITLE *612972 TIGGER TRANSPOSABLE ELEMENT-DERIVED GENE 1; TIGD1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DNA transposons are repetitive elements that move in the genome by
excision and reintegration without an RNA intermediate. Tiggers are
ancestral transposons that appear to be the source of several medium
reiterated frequency repeats (MERs) in the human genome. TIGD1 belongs
to a family of genes derived from Tiggers (Smit and Riggs, 1996; Dou et
al., 2004).

MAPPING

Hartz (2009) mapped the TIGD1 gene to chromosome 2q37.1 based on an
alignment of the TIGD1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK056329) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

EVOLUTION

- Tigger Transposons

DNA transposons are characterized by terminal inverted repeats (TIRs) of
10 to 500 bp, and they encode a transposase that binds to the TIRs and
catalyzes the cutting and pasting of the element. By searching the human
genome for repetitive elements containing TIRs, followed by database
analysis, Smit and Riggs (1996) identified 2 related elements with
coding capacity that they designated Tigger1 and Tigger2. The deduced
Tigger1 and Tigger2 products share 48% amino acid identity, and both are
related to the Drosophila pogo transposase. Smit and Riggs (1996)
identified several MERs within the genome that appeared to arise by
Tigger duplication. Tigger1 was represented primarily by full-length
elements, whereas most elements related to Tigger2 were partial copies
or included an internal deletion.

REFERENCE 1. Dou, T.; Gu, S.; Zhou, Z.; Ji, C.; Zeng, L.; Ye, X.; Xu, J.; Ying,
K.; Xie, Y.; Mao, Y.: Isolation and characterization of a Jerky and
JRK/JH8 like gene, Tigger transposable element derived 7, TIGD7. Biochem.
Genet. 42: 279-285, 2004.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/20/2009.

3. Smit, A. F. A.; Riggs, A. D.: Tiggers and other DNA transposon
fossils in the human genome. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 1443-1448,
1996.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/20/2009

EDITED mgross: 08/20/2009

605570	TITLE *605570 RAS-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN RAB11A; RAB11A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Small GTP-binding proteins of the RAB family, such as RAB11A, play
essential roles in vesicle and granule targeting (Bao et al., 2002).

CLONING

Using PCR to amplify Ras and Ras-like sequences from carcinoma and
T-cell cDNA libraries, Drivas et al. (1991) obtained a cDNA encoding
RAB11A, which they termed YL8. RAB11A shares 69% homology with yeast
Ypt3. The deduced 651-amino acid protein has many conserved features of
Ras and Rab proteins, except that its C terminus lacks the cys-cys found
in other Rab family members. Northern blot analysis detected expression
in 4 tumor cell lines.

By screening lambda libraries for small GTP-binding proteins, Gromov et
al. (1998) identified 2 cDNAs, arising from alternative splicing, that
encode RAB11A. Northern blot analysis revealed ubiquitous expression of
1.0- and 2.3-kb RAB11A transcripts, with highest levels in heart and
lowest levels in liver. The larger transcript was more abundant in brain
and lung, whereas the smaller transcript was more abundant in placenta
and heart.

Using RT-PCR, Bao et al. (2002) cloned RAB11A from human platelets.
Western blot analysis detected RAB11A at an apparent molecular mass of
26 kD in human platelets and leukemia cell lines. Western blot analysis
of rat tissues detected high Rab11a expression in platelets and much
lower expression in kidney, liver, heart, lung, and brain. Differential
centrifugation of human platelets showed enrichment of RAB11A in the
granule/mitochondrion and membrane fractions, with a small amount in the
cytosolic fraction.

GENE FUNCTION

Bao et al. (2002) noted that mutation of a conserved glutamine (Q70) to
leucine within the GTP-binding motif of RAB11A does not inhibit its
GTPase activity (Casanova et al., 1999), in contrast to the effect of
similar mutations in most small GTPases. Bao et al. (2002) found that
mutation of the conserved glutamines in RAB31 (605694) and RAB32
(612906) also had no effect on their GTPase activities, suggesting that
these proteins form a subfamily of small GTPases.

Shirane and Nakayama (2006) identified protrudin (ZFYVE27; 610243) as a
mammalian protein that promoted neurite formation through interaction
with the guanosine diphosphate (GDP)-bound form of Rab11.
Phosphorylation of protrudin by extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK; 600997) in response to nerve growth factor (NGFB; 162030) promoted
protrudin association with Rab11-GDP. Downregulation of protrudin by RNA
interference induced membrane extension in all directions and inhibited
neurite formation. Thus, Shirane and Nakayama (2006) concluded that
protrudin regulates Rab11-dependent membrane recycling to promote the
directional membrane trafficking required for neurite formation.

In muscle and fat cells, insulin (INS; 176730) stimulation activates a
signaling cascade that causes intracellular vesicles containing glucose
transporter-4 (GLUT4, or SLC2A4; 138190) to translocate to and fuse with
the plasma membrane. Using mass spectrometry, Larance et al. (2005)
identified Rab10 (612672), Rab11, and Rab14 (612673) on Glut4 vesicles
from cultured mouse adipocytes. These vesicles also contained the RAB
GTPase-activating protein As160 (TBC1D4; 612465), suggesting that the
RAB proteins may be AS160 substrates.

In lethal systemic anthrax, proliferating bacilli secrete large
quantities of the toxins lethal factor (LF) and edema factor (EF),
leading to widespread vascular leakage and shock. Host targets of LF
(mitogen-activated protein-kinase kinases) and EF (cAMP-dependent
processes) have been implicated in the initial phase of anthrax. In an
investigation of toxin action during the final stage of infection,
Guichard et al. (2010) used Drosophila melanogaster to identify the
Rab11/Sec15 (609672) exocyst, which acts at the last step of endocytic
recycling, as a novel target of both EF and LF. EF reduces levels of
apically localized Rab11 and indirectly blocks vesicle formation by its
binding partner and effector Sec15 (Sec15-GFP), whereas LF acts more
directly to reduce Sec15-GFP vesicles. Convergent effects of EF and LF
on Rab11/Sec15 inhibited expression of and signaling by the Notch ligand
Delta and reduced DE-cadherin levels at adherens junctions. In human
endothelial cells, the 2 toxins acted in a conserved fashion to block
formation of Sec15 vesicles, inhibit Notch signaling through Delta
(DLL4; 605185), and reduce cadherin (CDH1; 192090) expression at
adherens junctions. Guichard et al. (2010) suggested that this
coordinated disruption of the Rab11/Sec15 exocyst by anthrax toxins may
contribute to toxin-dependent barrier disruption and vascular
dysfunction during Bacillus anthracis infection.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis and FISH, Gromov et al. (1998) mapped the
RAB11A gene to 15q21.3-q22.31.

REFERENCE 1. Bao, X.; Faris, A. E.; Jang, E. K.; Haslam, R. J.: Molecular cloning,
bacterial expression and properties of Rab31 and Rab32: new blood
platelet Rab proteins. Europ. J. Biochem. 269: 259-271, 2002.

2. Casanova, J. E.; Wang, X.; Kumar, R.; Bhartur, S. G.; Navarre,
J.; Woodrum, J. E.; Altschuler, Y.; Ray, G. S.; Goldenring, J. R.
: Association of Rab25 and Rab11a with the apical recycling system
of polarized Madin-Darby canine kidney cells. Molec. Biol. Cell 10:
47-61, 1999.

3. Drivas, G. T.; Shih, A.; Coutavas, E. E.; D'Eustachio, P.; Rush,
M. G.: Identification and characterization of a human homolog of
the Schizosaccharomyces pombe ras-like gene YPT-3. Oncogene 6: 3-9,
1991.

4. Gromov, P. S.; Celis, J. E.; Hansen, C.; Tommerup, N.; Gromova,
I.; Madsen, P.: Human rab11a: transcription, chromosome mapping
and effect on the expression levels of host GTP-binding proteins. FEBS
Lett. 429: 359-364, 1998.

5. Guichard, A.; McGillivray, S. M.; Cruz-Moreno, B.; van Sorge, N.
M.; Nizet, V.; Bier, E.: Anthrax toxins cooperatively inhibit endocytic
recycling by the Rab11/Sec15 exocyst. Nature 467: 854-858, 2010.

6. Larance, M.; Ramm, G.; Stockli, J.; van Dam, E. M.; Winata, S.;
Wasinger, V.; Simpson, F.; Graham, M.; Junutula, J. R.; Guilhaus,
M.; James, D. E.: Characterization of the role of the Rab GTPase-activating
protein AS160 in insulin-regulated GLUT4 trafficking. J. Biol. Chem. 280:
37803-37813, 2005.

7. Shirane, M.; Nakayama, K. I.: Protrudin induces neurite formation
by directional membrane trafficking. Science 314: 818-821, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/11/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/2/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/27/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/28/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/22/2001

EDITED alopez: 11/15/2010
terry: 11/11/2010
mgross: 7/10/2009
terry: 7/2/2009
mgross: 3/18/2009
terry: 2/27/2009
alopez: 12/6/2006
terry: 11/28/2006
carol: 3/14/2006
cwells: 11/7/2003
mgross: 1/22/2001

611325	TITLE *611325 TRANSFORMING GROWTH FACTOR-BETA REGULATOR 4; TBRG4
;;KIAA0948;;
CELL CYCLE PROGRESSION RESTORATION 2; CPR2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening a hepatoma cDNA expression library for clones that could
block mating pheromone-induced G1 arrest in yeast, Edwards et al. (1997)
cloned TBRG4, which they called CPR2. The deduced protein contains
multiple putative leucine zipper domains characteristic of transcription
factors.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned TBRG4, which they designated
KIAA0948. The transcript contains several repetitive elements in the
3-prime untranslated region. The deduced 521-amino acid protein shares
significant similarity with rat Cpr2. RT-PCR ELISA detected moderate
expression in ovary, and little to no expression in all other tissues
and specific brain regions examined.

MAPPING

By FISH, Edwards et al. (1997) mapped the TBRG4 gene to chromosome
7p14-p13.

REFERENCE 1. Edwards, M. C.; Liegeois, N.; Horecka, J.; DePinho, R. A.; Sprague,
G. F., Jr.; Tyers, M.; Elledge, S. J.: Human CPR (cell cycle progression
restoration) genes impart a Far- phenotype on yeast cells. Genetics 147:
1063-1076, 1997.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/15/2007

EDITED carol: 08/16/2007
carol: 8/15/2007

