601517	TITLE *601517 ATAXIN 2; ATXN2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ataxin-2, the protein encoded by the ATXN2 gene, contains a
polyglutamine tract, long expansions (greater than 33 repeats) of which
result in spinocerebellar ataxia-2 (SCA2; 183090), an autosomal dominant
form of olivopontocerebellar atrophy. Intermediate-length expansions
(27-33 glutamines) contribute to susceptibility to amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS13; see 183090).

CLONING

Using a monoclonal antibody that recognizes expanded polyglutamine
stretches in TATA box-binding protein (600075), mutant huntingtin
(613004), mutant ataxin-1 (164400), and glutamine expanded proteins in
patients with SCA3 (109150), Trottier et al. (1995) used Western
blotting to detect a 150-kD protein in a patient with SCA2, but not his
normal relative. By analogy to other disorders associated with
anticipation in expanded triplet repeats, they suggested that this may
be the protein encoded by the mutant gene responsible for this disorder.

Pulst et al. (1996) isolated the ATXN2 gene through a positional cloning
approach. They assembled a 1.1-Mb contig in the 12q24.1 region where the
disease SCA2 had been mapped, and then identified a genomic clone that
contained CAG repeats. By screening human adult and human fetal brain
libraries, Pulst et al. (1996) identified a cDNA clone with a 3,936-kb
open reading frame (ORF) that encodes a 1,312-amino acid polypeptide
with a molecular mass of 140 kD. The (CAG)n repeat (601517.0001) is
located in the 5-prime end of the coding region of the ATXN2 gene, which
they also referred to as the ataxin-2 gene. The ataxin-2 gene showed no
homology with genes of known function. ATXN2 did, however, show homology
with cDNAs in an EST database, and Pulst et al. (1996) cloned a related
human cDNA they called ataxin-2-related protein (A2RP; GenBank U70671)
and a cDNA for a mouse gene homologous to ATXN2. These 2 genes, however,
lacked the polyglutamine repeat region.

Sanpei et al. (1996) devised a novel strategy for identification of
triplet-repeat expansion genes referred to by them as DIRECT (direct
identification of repeat expansion and cloning technique). This
technique involved preparation of a probe with high specific
radioactivity by PCR internal labeling, preparation of single-stranded
probe, and detection of disease-specific expanded repeats by Southern
blot hybridization under stringent conditions, followed by cloning of
the genomic segment containing the pathologically expanded repeat.
Sanpei et al. (1996) applied this technique to the identification of
expanded repeats in patients with SCA2. Southern blots of genomic DNA
digested with TspEI revealed a 2.5-kb fragment which was absent from
normal individuals. A genomic clone containing the expanded (CAG)n
repeat was isolated and sequenced, and was predicted to encode a
1,313-amino acid polypeptide with a molecular mass of 140 kD, referred
to as ataxin-2. Northern blot analysis with ataxin-2 gene sequences
revealed a 4.7-kb transcript which was expressed in brain, heart, liver,
muscle, pancreas, and placenta. Sanpei et al. (1996) noted that there
was another ATG codon 120 codons downstream of the first ATG codon and
that if this was a functional initiation site, the smaller transcript
would result in a predicted 124-kD polypeptide.

The gene encoding the protein that is mutant in SCA2 was also cloned by
Imbert et al. (1996), who screened cDNA expression libraries with an
antibody specific for polyglutamine repeats. They identified 6
unreported (CAG)n repeat expansion-containing genes and designed primers
from the DNA region flanking the gene associated with SCA2 patients. One
genomic clone they isolated (DAN1), which corresponded to ATXN2, was
fully sequenced and was found to contain a 2,745-bp ORF, a 243-bp
untranslated region, and a GC-rich upstream sequence. They found a
putative internal poly(A) site and presented amino acid sequences from 2
reading frames of the 2,745-bp ORF that may be related by ribosomal
frameshifting. A 2.5-kb fragment of the DAN1 clone was used to probe
Northern blots, from which they detected ubiquitous expression in brain,
heart, skeletal muscle, and placenta. They also summarized their
findings on the (CAG)n and (CAA)n repeats identified in both normal and
affected individuals (see 601517.0001). From zoo blot analysis they
found that the gene was highly conserved in 5 different mammalian
species and in chicken. Imbert et al. (1996) reported that ATXN2 mutant
protein is cytoplasmic in location and has an apparent molecular weight
of 150 kD.

Nechiporuk et al. (1998) isolated and characterized the mouse homolog of
the ATXN2 gene. Sequence and amino acid analyses revealed 89% and 91%
identity at the nucleotide and amino acid level, respectively. However,
there was no extended polyglutamine tract in the mouse Sca2 cDNA,
suggesting that the normal function of ATXN2 is not dependent on this
domain. Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues indicated that the mouse
gene is expressed in most tissues, but at varying levels. Alternative
splicing seen in human ATXN2 was conserved in the mouse. By Northern
blot analysis, ATXN2 was found to be expressed during embryogenesis as
early as day 8 of gestation. Immunohistochemical staining using
affinity-purified antibodies demonstrated that ataxin-2 is expressed in
the cytoplasm of Purkinje cells as well as in other neurons of the CNS.

By RT-PCR of human peripheral blood lymphocyte total RNA, Affaitati et
al. (2001) cloned an ATXN21 splice variant lacking exon 21. In this
variant, which the authors called ATXN2 type IV, exon 20 is spliced
in-frame to exon 22, resulting in a deduced protein of 1,294 amino
acids. RT-PCR detected both full-length ATXN2 and ATXN2 type IV in human
brain, spinal cord, cerebellum, heart, and placenta. Both variants were
also detected in mouse brain, heart, and liver, as well as in all stages
of mouse development examined.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Sahba et al. (1998) determined that the
ATXN2 gene contains 25 exons and spans approximately 130 kb. Exon sizes
range from 37 to 890 bp. The CAG repeat is in exon 1. Sahba et al.
(1998) also identified an isoform resulting from alternative splicing in
exon 10, predicted to encode a protein truncated by 70 amino acids.

GENE FUNCTION

Sanpei et al. (1996) reported that ataxin-2 contained a consensus
cleavage site (amino acids DXXD) for apopain (600636) at amino acid
residues 397-400. They noted that apopain is the human counterpart of
the nematode cysteine protease death-gene product CED3 and that apopain
may be involved in the processing of huntingtin (613004). Furthermore,
Goldberg et al. (1996) reported that the rate of cleavage increases with
the length of the polyglutamine repeat and suggested that the truncated
protein products may be toxic to neuronal cells.

Huynh et al. (1999) used antibodies to study the distribution of
ataxin-2 in normal individuals and patients with SCA2. The staining was
cytoplasmic. Highest levels were observed in the ependyma and choroid
plexus. High levels were present in cerebellar Purkinje cells, large
neurons of the substantia nigra, and the trochlear nuclei. Moderate
staining was observed in apical cytoplasm of hippocampal and cortical
pyramidal neurons, olivary nuclei, inferior colliculus, globus pallidus,
and amygdala. Glial cells in the superficial molecular area of the
cerebral cortex, granule cells in cortical layer II, and large neurons
in the putamen were weakly labeled. The level of ataxin-2 in Purkinje
cells of normal individuals increased with age. Staining was more
intense in individuals with SCA2.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid system, Shibata et al. (2000) identified a novel
protein, A2BP1 (ataxin-2-binding protein-1; 605104), which binds to the
C terminus of ataxin-2. In sections from 3 SCA2 brains, neuronal
labeling for A2BP1 as well as for ataxin-2 appeared to be enhanced and
was more diffusely distributed.

Using yeast 2-hybrid screens, coaffinity purification analysis of
transfected HEK293 cells, and bioinformatic analysis, Lim et al. (2006)
developed an interaction network for 54 human proteins involved in 23
inherited ataxias. By database analysis, they expanded the core network
to include more distantly related interacting proteins that could
function as genetic modifiers. A majority (18 of 23) of ataxia-causing
proteins interacted either directly or indirectly. A strong direct
interaction was detected between ATXN1 and ATXN2.

Ralser et al. (2005) demonstrated that ataxin-2 interacted with
endophilin-A1 (SH3GL2; 604465) and endophilin-A3 (SH3GL3; 603362). In a
yeast model system, expression of ataxin-2 as well as both endophilin
proteins was toxic for yeast lacking Sac6, which encodes fimbrin (PLS3;
300131) a protein involved in actin filament organization and
endocytotic processes. Expression of huntingtin (613004), another
polyglutamine protein interacting with endophilin-A3, was also toxic in
Sac6-null yeast. These effects could be suppressed by simultaneous
expression of 1 of the 2 human fimbrin orthologs, L-plastin (LCP1;
153430) or T-plastin (PLS3). Ataxin-2 associated with L- and T-plastin,
and overexpression of ataxin-2 led to accumulation of T-plastin in
mammalian cells. Ralser et al. (2005) suggested an interplay between
ataxin-2, endophilin proteins, and huntingtin in plastin-associated
cellular pathways.

Elden et al. (2010) showed that the polyglutamine repeat protein
ataxin-2 is a potent modifier of TDP43 (605078) toxicity in animal and
cellular models of ALS (105400). ATXN2 and TDP43 associate in a complex
that depends on RNA. In spinal cord neurons of ALS patients, ATXN2 is
abnormally localized; likewise, TDP43 shows mislocalization in
spinocerebellar ataxia-2.

Lim and Allada (2013) found that Atx2 is a translational activator of
the rate-limiting clock component Period (PER; 602260) in Drosophila.
Atx2 specifically interacted with 'Twenty-four' (Tyf), an activator of
Per translation. RNA interference-mediated depletion of Atx2 or the
expression of a mutant Atx2 protein that does not associate with
polyadenylate-binding protein (PABP; 604679) suppressed behavioral
rhythms and decreased abundance of Per. Although Atx2 can repress
translation, depletion of Atx2 from Drosophila S2 cells inhibited
translational activation by RNA-tethered Tyf and disrupted the
association between Tyf and Pabp. Thus, Lim and Allada (2013) concluded
that ATX2 coordinates an active translation complex important for PER
expression and circadian rhythms in Drosophila.

Zhang et al. (2013) independently found that the Drosophila homolog of
ATXN2 was required for circadian locomotor behavior. Atx2 was necessary
for Per accumulation in circadian pacemaker neurons and thus determined
period length of circadian behavior. Atx2 was required for the function
of Tyf, a crucial activator of Per translation. Atx2 formed a complex
with Tyf and promoted its interaction with Pabp. Zhang et al. (2013)
concluded that their work uncovered a role for ATX2 in circadian timing
and revealed that this protein functions as an activator of PER
translation in circadian neurons.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Spinocerebellar Ataxia 2

In patients with spinocerebellar ataxia-2 (183090), Pulst et al. (1996)
identified a (CAG)n repeat located in the 5-prime end of the coding
region of the ATXN2 gene (601517.0001). Cancel et al. (1997) screened
184 index patients with autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia type I for
the CAG repeat in the ataxin-2 gene. They found the mutation in 109
patients from 30 families of different geographic origins (15%) and in 2
isolated cases with no known family histories (2%). The SCA2 chromosomes
contained from 34 to 57 repeats and consisted of a pure stretch of CAG,
whereas all tested normal chromosomes (14 to 31 repeats), except 1 with
14 repeats, were interrupted by 1 to 3 repeats of CAA. As in other
diseases caused by unstable mutations, a strong negative correlation was
observed between the age at onset and the size of the CAG repeat.
Frequency of several clinical signs such as myoclonus, dystonia, and
myokymia increased with the number of CAG repeats, whereas the frequency
of others was related to disease duration. The CAG repeat was highly
unstable during transmission with variations ranging from -8 to +12, and
a mean increase of +2.2, but there was no significant difference
according to the parental sex. This instability was confirmed by the
high degree of gonadal mosaicism observed in sperm DNA of 1 patient.

Choudhry et al. (2001) identified 2 novel single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in exon 1 of the ATXN2 gene and genotyped 215
normal and 64 expanded chromosomes. The 2 biallelic SNPs distinguished 2
haplotypes, GT and CC, each of which formed a predominant haplotype
associated with normal and expanded ATXN2 alleles. All the expanded
alleles segregated with CC haplotype, which otherwise was associated
with only 29.3% of the normal chromosomes. CAA interspersion analysis
revealed that a majority of the normal alleles with CC haplotype were
either pure or lacked the most proximal 5-prime CAA interruption. The
repeat length variation at the ATXN2 locus also appeared to be polar,
with changes occurring mostly at the 5-prime end of the repeat. The
authors concluded that CAA interruptions may play an important role in
conferring stability to ATXN2 repeats and that their absence may
predispose alleles towards instability and pathologic expansion.

Although repeat length and age at disease onset are inversely related,
approximately 50% of the age at onset variance in SCA2 remains
unexplained. Other familial factors have been proposed to account for at
least part of the remaining variance in the polyglutamine disorders. The
ability of polyglutamine tracts to interact with each other, as well as
the presence of intranuclear inclusions in other polyglutamine
disorders, led Hayes et al. (2000) to hypothesize that other
CAG-containing proteins may interact with expanded ataxin-2 and affect
the rate of protein accumulation, and thus influence age at onset. To
test this hypothesis, they used step-wise multiple linear regression to
examine 10 CAG-containing genes for possible influences on SCA2 age at
onset. One locus, RAI1 (607642), contributed an additional 4.1% of the
variance in SCA2 age at onset after accounting for the effect of the
ATXN2 expanded repeat. SCA3 (109150) age at onset, on the other hand,
showed no effect from the RAI1 locus.

Huynh et al. (2003) confirmed that ataxin-2 is predominantly located in
the Golgi apparatus. Deletion of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) exit and
trans-Golgi signals in ataxin-2 resulted in an altered subcellular
distribution. Expression of full-length ataxin-2 with an expanded repeat
disrupted the normal morphology of the Golgi complex and colocalization
with Golgi markers was lost. Intranuclear inclusions were only seen when
the polyQ repeat was expanded to 104 glutamines, and even then were only
observed in a small minority of cells. Expression of ataxin-2 with
expanded repeats in PC12 and COS-1 cells increased cell death compared
with normal ataxin-2 and elevated the levels of activated caspase-3
(600636) and TdT-mediated dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL)-positive cells.
These results suggested a link between cell death mediated by mutant
ataxin-2 and the stability of the Golgi complex. Huynh et al. (2003)
concluded that formation of intranuclear aggregates is not necessary for
in vitro cell death caused by expression of full-length mutant ataxin-2.

- Susceptibility to Late-Onset Parkinson Disease

Gwinn-Hardy et al. (2000) described 4 patients from a Chinese kindred
with parkinsonian features (168600) and CAG expansions at the SCA2
locus. The youngest patient had findings typical for the SCA2 ataxic
phenotype, but also had parkinsonian features. His SCA2 CAG repeat
length was 43. Three patients from earlier generations had mildly
elevated CAG repeat lengths of 33 to 36 with varying phenotypes, but all
predominantly parkinsonian features, including masked facies, diminished
blink rate, and bradykinesia in addition to mild cerebellar findings
such as broad-based gait. Two benefited from carbidopa-levodopa therapy.
None of the patients had cognitive disturbance or resting tremor. The
authors suggested that some cases of familial parkinsonism may be due to
SCA2 mutations.

Among 23 Chinese patients with familial parkinsonism, Shan et al. (2001)
identified 2 patients who had expanded trinucleotide repeats (mildly
elevated at 36 and 37 repeats) in the ATXN2 gene. Both patients had
onset of leg tremor at age 50 years, followed by gait difficulty,
rigidity, and slow, hypometric saccades. L-dopa produced marked
improvement in symptoms in both patients. In addition, PET scan showed
reduced dopamine distribution in the caudate and putamen in both
patients. Shan et al. (2001) noted that these 2 patients represented
approximately one-tenth of their population with familial parkinsonism.

Charles et al. (2007) found that 3 (2%) of 164 French families with
autosomal dominant parkinsonism (168600) had SCA2 expansions ranging in
size from 37 to 39 repeats that were interrupted by CAA triplets. These
interrupted expansions were stable in transmission. All 9 patients had
levodopa-responsive parkinsonism without cerebellar signs and had less
rigidity and more symmetric signs compared to patients with other causes
of PD. Two sisters with both the SCA2 expansion and the LRRK2 mutation
G2019S (609007.0006) had earlier onset that their mother who had only
the SCA2 expansion, suggesting an additive pathogenic effect in the
sisters. As a phenotypic comparison, 53 SCA2 patients with
similar-sized, uninterrupted SCA2 repeats showed predominant cerebellar
ataxia with rare signs of parkinsonism. The findings suggested that the
configuration of SCA2 repeat expansions plays an important role in
phenotypic variability.

Ross et al. (2011) found no association between intermediate ATXN2 CAG
repeat expansions (greater than 30 units; 601517.0002) and PD in a study
of 702 patients with Parkinson disease and 4,877 controls. Expansions
were found in 2 (0.3%) patients and 9 (0.2%) controls.

- Susceptibility to Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 13

The genetic, biochemical, and neuropathologic interactions between TDP43
and ATXN2 raised the possibility to Elden et al. (2010) that mutations
in ATXN2 could have a causative role in ALS (see ALS13, 183090). The
ATXN2 polyQ tract length, although variable, is most frequently 22-23,
with expansions of greater than 34 causing SCA2. However, the variable
nature of the polyQ repeat indicated a mechanism by which such mutations
in ATXN2 could be linked to ALS: Elden et al. (2010) proposed that
intermediate-length expansions greater than 23 but below the threshold
for SCA2 may be associated with ALS. They studied the frequency of
intermediate-length ATXN2 polyglutamine repeats in ALS, comparing 915
subjects with ALS with 980 neurologically normal subjects. Among those
with ALS, 4.7% had repeat lengths of 27 to 33, whereas only 1.4% of
neurologically normal subjects had glutamine expansions. The P value for
this difference was 3.6 x 10(-5) with an odds ratio of 2.80.

In a case-control study of 556 ALS patients and 471 controls of French
or French Canadian origin, Daoud et al. (2011) found that 7.2% of
patients and 5.1% of controls had 1 intermediate repeat allele (24-33
repeats), which was not significantly different. However, receiver
operating characteristic curve analysis yielded a significant
association between ALS and high-length ATXN2 repeat alleles (more than
29 CAG repeats). CAG repeats of 29 or higher were found in only 4
controls (0.8%), whereas they were found in 25 patients (4.5%) (OR, 5.5;
p = 2.4 x 10(-4)). The association was even stronger for familial cases
when stratified by familial versus sporadic cases (OR for familial
cases, 9.29; p = 5.2 x 10(-5)). There was no correlation between size of
repeat and age of onset. In addition, 2 familial and 9 sporadic ALS
cases carried SCA2-sized pathogenic alleles (greater than 32 repeats),
and none of them had features of SCA2 such as cerebellar or brainstem
atrophy.

Among 1,845 sporadic and 103 familial ALS cases and 2,002 controls from
Belgium and the Netherlands, Van Damme et al. (2011) found an
association between ALS and an expanded CAG repeat of 29 or greater in
the ATXN2 gene (OR, 1.92; p = 0.036). In controls, the repeat length
ranged from 16 to 31, with 22 being the most abundant. Repeat sizes of
31 or less were not significantly different between patients and
controls. However, receiver operating characteristic analysis showed
that the greatest sensitivity and specificity of discriminating ALS from
control was using a cutoff of 29 repeats: 1.5% of patients had 29 or
more repeats compared to 0.8% of controls (OR, 1.92; p = 0.036). There
was no correlation between repeat length and disease parameters. When
combined in a metaanalysis with the data of Elden et al. (2010), the
association was highly significant (OR, 2.93; p less than 0.0001). Ten
patients (0.05%) with sporadic ALS had repeat sizes of 32 or more, and
none of these patients had signs of SCA2. Two of 91 families with ALS
(2.2%) had expanded repeats: 1 with 31 repeats and the other with 33
repeats. In the 33-repeat family, which was consanguineous, 2 affected
individuals had repeat expansions on both alleles, 33:33 and 33:31,
respectively, although the phenotype was not significantly different
from classic ALS, except for some sensory abnormalities. Two sibs from a
third family with a heterozygous repeat length of 34 and 35,
respectively, had classic SCA2 with no signs of upper motor neuron
involvement. The findings indicated a genetic overlap between SCA2 and
ALS13.

Among 3,919 patients with various neurodegenerative diseases, including
532 with ALS, 641 with frontotemporal dementia (FTD; 600274), 1,530 with
Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300), 702 with Parkinson disease (PD; 168600),
and 514 with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP; 601104), and 4,877
healthy controls, Ross et al. (2011) found that ATXN2 repeat lengths
greater than 30 units were significantly associated with ALS (odds ratio
of 5.57; p = 0.001) and with PSP (OR of 5.83; p = 0.004). Significant
associations between repeats greater than 30 were not observed in
patients with FTD, AD, or PD. Importantly, expanded repeat alleles (31
to 33) were also observed in 9 (0.2%) control individuals, indicating
that caution should be taken when attributing specific disease
phenotypes to these repeat lengths. However, 6 of the controls with
expanded repeats were under the mean onset age of all patient groups
except PD. The findings confirmed the role of ATXN2 as an important risk
factor for ALS and suggested that expanded ATXN2 repeats may predispose
to other neurodegenerative diseases, including progressive supranuclear
palsy.

Mutations in FUS (137070) cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-6 (ALS6;
608030). Farg et al. (2013) found that ataxin-2 with an intermediate
glutamine expansion (Q31) interacted with wildtype FUS and, more
strongly, with FUS containing the arg521-to-cys (R521C; 137070.0004) or
arg521-to-his (R521H; 137070.0005) mutations. The interactions were
independent of RNA. Ataxin-2 colocalized with FUS in sporadic and
FUS-linked familial ALS patient motor neurons, coprecipitated with FUS
in ALS spinal cord lysates, and colocalized with FUS in the ER and Golgi
compartments in a mouse neuronal cell line. Ataxin-2 Q31 exacerbated the
cellular phenotype of mutant FUS, increasing translocation of FUS from
the nucleus to the cytoplasm, markers of ER stress, and Golgi
fragmentation. Neither FUS with the R521H mutation nor ataxin-2 Q31
alone induced apoptosis in transfected mouse neuronal cells, but
coexpression of both induced markers of early apoptosis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kiehl et al. (2006) found that Atxn2 -/- mice appeared normal and were
fertile, but there was a significant reduction in the number of female
Atxn2 +/- and Atxn2 -/- mice born. Histopathologic examination of the
central nervous system and other organs demonstrated no morphologic
abnormalities in Atxn2 -/- mice except in liver, which showed micro- and
macrovesicular steatosis at 1 year of age. At this age, Atxn2 -/- mice
were also susceptible to adult-onset obesity when placed on a moderately
fat-enriched diet, but not when placed on a low-fat diet. Atxn2 -/- mice
showed a slight deficit in motor performance in the rotarod test
compared with wildtype controls.

Lastres-Becker et al. (2008) found that Atxn2 -/- mice showed reduced
fertility, locomotor hyperactivity, and abdominal obesity and
hepatosteatosis by age 6 months. Insulin levels were increased in
pancreas and blood, consistent with insulin resistance, and the mice
demonstrated increased serum cholesterol levels. These changes were
associated with reduced insulin receptor (INSR; 147670) expression in
liver and cerebellum, although the mRNA levels were increased,
suggesting a posttranscriptional effect on the insulin receptor status.
Thus, loss of Atxn2 may affect cellular endocytosis machinery. Analysis
of brain lipids in Atxn2 -/- mice showed increased gangliosides and
decreased sphingomyelin in the cerebellum, and there was evidence for
altered cholesterol homeostasis. Lastres-Becker et al. (2008) postulated
that these lipid changes may alter neuronal membrane signaling and
excitability.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 2
PARKINSON DISEASE, LATE-ONSET, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
ATXN2, (CAG)n EXPANSION, LONG

In patients with spinocerebellar ataxia-2 (183090), Pulst et al. (1996)
identified a (CAG)n repeat located in the 5-prime end of the coding
region of the ATXN2 gene. They detected expansions of 36 to 52 repeats
in affected individuals the most common allele contained 37 repeats.
They noted that the ATXN2 repeat is unusual in that only 2 alleles were
demonstrated in the normal population. A common allele with 22 repeats
was found in people of European descent. Using RT-PCR, Pulst et al.
(1996) determined that the ATXN2 (CAG)n repeat is transcribed in
lymphoblastoid cell lines and that the cells could be used to express
the expanded repeat genes from patients with SCA2.

Sanpei et al. (1996) analyzed 286 normal chromosomes and found that the
(CAG)n repeats ranged in size from 15 to 24, with a unit of 22 repeats
accounting for 94% of the alleles. In contrast, SCA2 patient chromosomes
contained expanded repeats ranging in size from 35 to 59 units. Sanpei
et al. (1996) reported that there was a strong inverse correlation
between the size of the repeat and the onset of symptoms. Imbert et al.
(1996) reported that normal ATXN2 alleles contained 17 to 29 (CAG)n
repeats and 1 to 3 (CAA)n repeats (also glutamine-encoding). Mutated
alleles contained 37 to 50 repeats and appeared to be particularly
unstable in maternal and paternal transmissions. Sequence analysis of
expanded repeats from 3 individuals revealed pure CAG stretches. Imbert
et al. (1996) reported that there was a steep inverse correlation
between the age of onset of disease and (CAG)n repeat number.

Susceptibility to Late-Onset Parkinson Disease

Gwinn-Hardy et al. (2000) described 4 patients from a Chinese kindred
with parkinsonian features (168600) and CAG expansions at the SCA2
locus. The youngest patient had findings typical for the SCA2 ataxic
phenotype, but also had parkinsonian features. His SCA2 CAG repeat
length was 43. Three patients from earlier generations had mildly
elevated CAG repeat lengths of 33 to 36 with varying phenotypes, but all
predominantly parkinsonian features, including masked facies, diminished
blink rate, and bradykinesia in addition to mild cerebellar findings
such as broad-based gait. Two benefited from carbidopa-levodopa therapy.
None of the patients had cognitive disturbance or resting tremor. The
authors suggested that some cases of familial parkinsonism may be due to
SCA2 mutations.

Charles et al. (2007) found that 3 (2%) of 164 French families with
autosomal dominant parkinsonism (168600) had SCA2 expansions ranging in
size from 37 to 39 repeats that were interrupted by CAA triplets. These
interrupted expansions were stable in transmission. All 9 patients had
levodopa-responsive parkinsonism without cerebellar signs and had less
rigidity and more symmetric signs compared to patients with other causes
of PD. Two sisters with both the SCA2 expansion and the LRRK2 mutation
G2019S (609007.0006) had earlier onset that their mother who had only
the SCA2 expansion, suggesting an additive pathogenic effect in the
sisters. As a phenotypic comparison, 53 SCA2 patients with
similar-sized, uninterrupted SCA2 repeats showed predominant cerebellar
ataxia with rare signs of parkinsonism. The findings suggested that the
configuration of SCA2 repeat expansions plays an important role in
phenotypic variability.

.0002
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 13
ATXN2, (CAG)n EXPANSION, INTERMEDIATE

Among 915 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Elden et al.
(2010) identified 43 (4.7%) with expansions of the ATXN2 polyQ repeat of
intermediate length, 27 through 33 repeats (ALS13; 183090). Among a
neurologically normal control cohort of 980 individuals, similar
expansions were detected in only 14 (1.4%) individuals (p = 3.6 x
10(-5), odds ratio, 2.80, 95% CI, 1.54-5.12). Elden et al. (2010)
analyzed ATXN2 protein levels in patient-derived lymphoblastoid cells
from ALS cases harboring intermediate-length polyQ expansions, ALS cases
with normal-range repeat lengths, and controls. These studies showed
that whereas the steady state levels of ATXN2 were comparable,
cycloheximide treatment, which blocks new protein synthesis, revealed an
increase in stability (or decreased degradation) of ATXN2 in cells with
intermediate-length polyQ repeats. Elden et al. (2010) then found that
polyQ expansions in ATXN2 enhance its interaction with TDP43 (605078).
Both ATXN2 and TDP43 relocalize to stress granules, sites of RNA
processing, under various stress situations such as heat shock and
oxidative stress. Under normal conditions TDP43 localized to the nucleus
and ATXN2 to the cytoplasm in both control cells and cells harboring
polyQ repeat expansions. Elden et al. (2010) proposed that
intermediate-length ATXN2 polyQ repeats might confer genetic risk for
ALS by making TDP43 more prone to mislocalize from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm under situations of stress.

The findings of Elden et al. (2010) were replicated in 2 independent
studies by Daoud et al. (2011) and Van Damme et al. (2011), who studied
French, French Canadian, and Belgian populations. Each study identified
an association between development of ALS and high-length ATXN2 repeat
alleles (29 or more repeats), using receiver operating characteristic
curve analysis of patients and controls. Neither study found a
correlation between size of repeat and disease parameters. Moreover,
each study found ALS patients with expansion sizes in the range of SCA2
(greater than 32 repeats), and none had features of SCA2 such as
cerebellar or brainstem atrophy. The findings indicated a genetic
overlap between SCA2 and ALS13.

Corrado et al. (2011) identified intermediate expansion of the CAG
repeat (greater than 30 repeats) in exon 1 of the ATXN2 gene in 7 (3.0%)
of 232 Italian patients with ALS. None of 395 controls had an allele
larger than 30 repeats. Four of the 7 patients had an allele in the
intermediate-fully pathologic range: 1 with 32 repeats, 2 with 33
repeats, and 1 with 37 repeats, accounting for 1.7% of the ALS cohort.
Sequencing of these fully expanded alleles showed that they were all
interrupted with at least one CAA triplet. The phenotype of the patients
was typical of ALS with no signs or symptoms of ataxia or parkinsonism.

Among 3,919 patients with various neurodegenerative diseases, including
532 with ALS, 641 with frontotemporal dementia (FTD; 600274), 1,530 with
Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300), 702 with Parkinson disease (PD; 168600),
and 514 with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP; see 601104), and 4,877
healthy controls, Ross et al. (2011) found that ATXN2 repeat lengths
greater than 30 units were significantly associated with ALS (odds ratio
of 5.57; p = 0.001) and with PSP (OR of 5.83; p = 0.004). Repeat
expansions were found in 8 (1.5%) ALS patients, 4 (0.8%) PSP patients,
and 9 (0.2%) controls. Significant associations between repeats greater
than 30 were not observed in patients with FTD, AD, or PD. The findings
of expanded repeat alleles (31 to 33) in control individuals indicated
that caution should be taken when attributing specific disease
phenotypes to these repeat lengths. However, 6 of the controls with
expanded repeats were under the mean onset age of all patient groups
except PD. The findings confirmed the role of ATXN2 as an important risk
factor for ALS and suggested that expanded ATXN2 repeats may predispose
to other neurodegenerative diseases, including progressive supranuclear
palsy.

REFERENCE 1. Affaitati, A.; de Cristofaro, T.; Feliciello, A.; Varrone, S.:
Identification of alternative splicing of spinocerebellar ataxia type
2 gene. Gene 267: 89-93, 2001.

2. Cancel, G.; Durr, A.; Didierjean, O.; Imbert, G.; Burk, K.; Lezin,
A.; Belal, S.; Benomar, A.; Abada-Bendib, M.; Vial, C.; Guimaraes,
J.; Chneiweiss, H.; and 12 others: Molecular and clinical correlations
in spinocerebellar ataxia 2: a study of 32 families. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 6: 709-715, 1997.

3. Charles, P.; Camuzat, A.; Benammar, N.; Sellal, F.; Destee, A.;
Bonnet, A.-M.; Lesage, S.; Le Ber, I.; Stevanin, G.; Durr, A.; Brice,
A.; French Parkinson's Disease Genetic Study Group: Are interrupted
SCA2 CAG repeat expansions responsible for parkinsonism? Neurology 69:
1970-1975, 2007.

4. Choudhry, S.; Mukerji, M.; Srivastava, A. K.; Jain, S.; Brahmachari,
S. K.: CAG repeat instability at SCA2 locus: anchoring CAA interruptions
and linked single nucleotide polymorphisms. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10:
2437-2446, 2001.

5. Corrado, L.; Mazzini, L.; Oggioni, G. D.; Luciano, B.; Godi, M.;
Brusco, A.; D'Alfonso, S.: ATXN-2 CAG repeat expansions are interrupted
in ALS patients. Hum. Genet. 130: 575-580, 2011.

6. Daoud, H.; Belzil, V.; Martins, S.; Sabbagh, M.; Provencher, P.;
Lacomblez, L.; Meininger, V.; Camu, W.; Dupre, N.; Dion, P. A.; Rouleau,
G. A.: Association of long ATXN2 CAG repeat sizes with increased
risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Arch. Neurol. 68: 739-742,
2011.

7. Elden, A. C.; Kim, H.-J.; Hart, M. P.; Chen-Plotkin, A. S.; Johnson,
B. S.; Fang, X.; Armakola, M.; Geser, F.; Greene, R.; Lu, M. M.; Padmanabhan,
A.; Clay-Falcone, D.; and 11 others: Ataxin-2 intermediate-length
polyglutamine expansions are associated with increased risk for ALS. Nature 466:
1069-1075, 2010.

8. Farg, M. A.; Soo, K. Y.; Warraich, S. T.; Sundaramoorthy, V.; Blair,
I. P.; Atkin, J. D.: Ataxin-2 interacts with FUS and intermediate-length
polyglutamine expansions enhance FUS-related pathology in amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 22: 717-728, 2013.

9. Goldberg, Y. P.; Nicholson, D. W.; Rasper, D. M.; Kalchman, M.
A.; Koide, H. B.; Graham, R. K.; Bromm, M.; Kazemi-Esfarjani, P.;
Thornberry, N. A.; Vaillancourt, J. P.; Hayden, M. R.: Cleavage of
huntingtin by apopain, a proapoptotic cysteine protease, is modulated
by the polyglutamine tract. Nature Genet. 13: 442-449, 1996.

10. Gwinn-Hardy, K.; Chen, J. Y.; Liu, H.-C.; Liu, T. Y.; Boss, M.;
Seltzer, W.; Adam, A.; Singleton, A.; Koroshetz, W.; Waters, C.; Hardy,
J.; Farrer, M.: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 with parkinsonism in
ethnic Chinese. Neurology 55: 800-805, 2000.

11. Hayes, S.; Turecki, G.; Brisebois, K.; Lopes-Cendes, I.; Gaspar,
C.; Riess, O.; Ranum, L. P. W.; Pulst, S.-M.; Rouleau, G. A.: CAG
repeat length in RAI1 is associated with age at onset variability
in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2). Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1753-1758,
2000.

12. Huynh, D. P.; Del Bigio, M. R.; Ho, D. H.; Pulst, S. M.: Expression
of ataxin-2 in brains from normal individuals and patients with Alzheimer's
disease and spinocerebellar ataxia 2. Ann. Neurol. 45: 232-241,
1999.

13. Huynh, D. P.; Yang, H.-T.; Vakharia, H.; Nguyen, D.; Pulst, S.
M.: Expansion of the polyQ repeat in ataxin-2 alters its Golgi localization,
disrupts the Golgi complex and causes cell death. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12:
1485-1496, 2003.

14. Imbert, G.; Saudou, F.; Yvert, G.; Devys, D.; Trottier, Y.; Garnier,
J.-M.; Weber, C.; Mandel, J.-L.; Cancel, G.; Abbas, N.; Durr, A.;
Didierjean, O.; Stevanin, G.; Agid, Y.; Brice, A.: Cloning of the
gene for spinocerebellar ataxia 2 reveals a locus with high sensitivity
to expanded CAG/glutamine repeats. Nature Genet. 14: 285-291, 1996.

15. Kiehl, T.-R.; Nechiporuk, A.; Figueroa, K. P.; Keating, M. T.;
Huynh, D. P.; Pulst, S.-M.: Generation and characterization of Sca2
(ataxin-2) knockout mice. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 339: 17-24,
2006.

16. Lastres-Becker, I.; Brodesser, S.; Lutjohann, D.; Azizov, M.;
Buchmann, J.; Hintermann, E.; Sandhoff, K.; Schurmann, A.; Nowock,
J.; Auburger, G.: Insulin receptor and lipid metabolism pathology
in ataxin-2 knock-out mice. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17: 1465-1481, 2008.

17. Lim, C.; Allada, R.: ATAXIN-2 activates PERIOD translation to
sustain circadian rhythms in Drosophila. Science 340: 875-879, 2013.

18. Lim, J.; Hao, T.; Shaw, C.; Patel, A. J.; Szabo, G.; Rual, J.-F.;
Fisk, C. J.; Li, N.; Smolyar, A.; Hill, D. E.; Barabasi, A.-L.; Vidal,
M.; Zoghbi, H. Y.: A protein-protein interaction network for human
inherited ataxias and disorders of Purkinje cell degeneration. Cell 125:
801-814, 2006.

19. Nechiporuk, T.; Huynh, D. P.; Figueroa, K.; Sahba, S.; Nechiporuk,
A.; Pulst, S.-M.: The mouse SCA2 gene: cDNA sequence, alternative
splicing and protein expression. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7: 1301-1309,
1998.

20. Pulst, S.-M.; Nechiporuk, A.; Nechiporuk, T.; Gispert, S.; Chen,
X.-N.; Lopes-Cendes, I.; Pearlman, S.; Starkman, S.; Orozco-Diaz,
G.; Lunkes, A.; DeJong, P.; Rouleau, G. A.; Auburger, G.; Korenberg,
J. R.; Figueroa, C.; Sahba, S.: Moderate expansion of a normally
biallelic trinucleotide repeat in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2. Nature
Genet. 14: 269-276, 1996.

21. Ralser, M.; Nonhoff, U.; Albrecht, M.; Lengauer, T.; Wanker, E.
E.; Lehrach, H.; Krobitsch, S.: Ataxin-2 and huntingtin interact
with endophilin-A complexes to function in plastin-associated pathways. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 2893-2909, 2005.

22. Ross, O. A.; Rutherford, N. J.; Baker, M.; Soto-Ortolaza, A. I.;
Carrasquillo, M. M.; DeJesus-Hernandez, M.; Adamson, J.; Li, M.; Volkening,
K.; Finger, E.; Seeley, W. W.; Hatanpaa, K. J.; and 21 others:
Ataxin-2 repeat-length variation and neurodegeneration. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 20: 3207-3212, 2011.

23. Sahba, S.; Nechiporuk, A.; Figueroa, K. P.; Nechiporuk, T.; Pulst,
S.-M.: Genomic structure of the human gene for spinocerebellar ataxia
type 2 (SCA2) on chromosome 12q24.1. Genomics 47: 359-364, 1998.

24. Sanpei, K.; Takano, H.; Igarashi, S.; Sato, T.; Oyake, M.; Sasaki,
H.; Wakisaka, A.; Tashiro, K.; Ishida, Y.; Ikeuchi, T.; Koide, R.;
Saito, M.; Sato, A.; Tanaka, T.; Hanyu, S.; Takiyama, Y.; Nishizawa,
M.; Shimizu, N.; Nomura, Y.; Segawa, M.; Iwabuchi, K.; Eguchi, I.;
Tanaka, H.; Takahashi, H.; Tsuji, S.: Identification of the spinocerebellar
ataxia type 2 gene using a direct identification of repeat expansion
and cloning technique, DIRECT. Nature Genet. 14: 277-284, 1996.

25. Shan, D.-E.; Soong, B.-W.; Sun, C.-M.; Lee, S.-J.; Liao, K.-K.;
Liu, R.-S.: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 presenting as familial
levodopa-responsive parkinsonism. Ann. Neurol. 50: 812-815, 2001.

26. Shibata, H.; Huynh, D. P.; Pulst, S.-M.: A novel protein with
RNA-binding motifs interacts with ataxin-2. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9:
1303-1313, 2000. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1903 only, 2000.

27. Trottier, Y.; Lutz, Y.; Stevanin, G.; Imbert, G.; Devys, D.; Cancel,
G.; Saudou, F.; Weber, C.; David, G.; Tora, L.; Agid, Y.; Brice, A.;
Mandel, J.-L.: Polyglutamine expansion as a pathological epitope
in Huntington's disease and four dominant cerebellar ataxias. Nature 378:
403-406, 1995.

28. Van Damme, P.; Veldink, J. H.; van Blitterswijk, M.; Corveleyn,
A.; van Vught, P. W. J.; Thijs, V.; Dubois, B.; Matthijs, G.; van
den Berg, L. H.; Robberecht, W.: Expanded ATXN2 CAG repeat size in
ALS identifies genetic overlap between ALS and SCA2. Neurology 76:
2066-2072, 2011.

29. Zhang, Y.; Ling, J.; Yuan, C.; Dubruille, R.; Emery, P.: A role
for Drosophila ATX2 in activation of PER translation and circadian
behavior. Science 340: 879-882, 2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/17/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/24/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/30/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/7/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/6/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/14/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/29/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/22/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/15/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/22/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/21/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 9/13/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/3/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/28/2000
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/30/2000
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/7/2000
Orest Hurko - updated: 3/22/1999
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/8/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/23/1997

CREATED Moyra Smith: 11/19/1996

EDITED carol: 10/25/2013
mgross: 7/17/2013
alopez: 6/24/2013
terry: 11/28/2012
terry: 6/1/2012
carol: 5/31/2012
ckniffin: 5/30/2012
carol: 12/5/2011
carol: 11/9/2011
ckniffin: 11/7/2011
carol: 10/13/2011
terry: 10/12/2011
ckniffin: 10/6/2011
ckniffin: 11/16/2010
alopez: 9/21/2010
terry: 9/14/2010
wwang: 8/6/2010
ckniffin: 7/29/2010
carol: 9/15/2009
wwang: 5/7/2009
terry: 4/22/2009
mgross: 1/15/2009
tkritzer: 4/22/2005
tkritzer: 11/8/2004
alopez: 3/21/2003
terry: 3/21/2003
carol: 9/13/2002
ckniffin: 9/13/2002
ckniffin: 9/11/2002
ckniffin: 8/28/2002
cwells: 5/14/2002
cwells: 5/3/2002
alopez: 8/28/2000
terry: 8/28/2000
alopez: 6/30/2000
carol: 6/8/2000
carol: 6/7/2000
mgross: 9/22/1999
terry: 9/15/1999
carol: 3/22/1999
carol: 10/8/1998
carol: 7/22/1998
carol: 5/19/1998
carol: 5/12/1998
terry: 7/28/1997
terry: 7/8/1997
joanna: 7/7/1997
terry: 6/23/1997
terry: 6/18/1997
terry: 12/4/1996
mark: 11/20/1996
terry: 11/20/1996
mark: 11/19/1996

606494	TITLE *606494 ST3 BETA-GALACTOSIDE ALPHA-2,3-SIALYLTRANSFERASE 3; ST3GAL3
;;SIALYLTRANSFERASE 6; SIAT6;;
N-ACETYLLACTOSAMINIDE ALPHA-2,3-SIALYLTRANSFERASE;;
ALPHA-2,3-SIALYLTRANSFERASE II; ST3GALII;;
ST3N
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ST3GAL3 gene encodes
beta-galactoside-alpha-2,3-sialyltransferase-III, a Golgi resident
membrane protein that forms the sialyl Lewis a (sLe-a) epitope on
glyocoproteins. These glycoproteins form the glycocalyx, composed of
sialic acids that act as key determinants of a variety of cellular
recognition and communication processes (summary by Hu et al., 2011).

CLONING

By screening a human placenta cDNA library with a probe based on the
sialyl motif (a highly conserved region in the catalytic domain of
sialyltransferases), Kitagawa and Paulson (1993) isolated a cDNA
encoding SIAT6, which they termed ST3N (EC 2.4.99.6). The deduced
375-amino acid protein is 97% identical to the rat protein. SDS-PAGE
analysis showed expression of an 80-kD protein having sialyltransferase
activity. Northern blot analysis revealed wide expression of a 2.7-kb
transcript with abundant expression in skeletal muscle and high
expression in fetal tissue but low expression in placenta.

Using Northern blot analysis, Kitagawa and Paulson (1994) evaluated the
differential expression of 5 human sialyltransferase genes in adult and
fetal tissues. A 2.7-kb ST3N transcript was expressed highly in skeletal
muscle and moderately in most other tissues examined. A 3.8-kb
transcript was also expressed in testis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Taniguchi et al. (2003) determined that the 5-prime UTR of the ST3GAL3
gene consists of 2 exons. The 5-prime flanking region of the promoter
lacks canonical TATA or CCAAT boxes, but it contains several putative
transcriptional factor binding sites.

Hu et al. (2011) stated that the ST3GAL3 gene contains 15 exons, 12 of
which are coding exons.

MAPPING

The International RH Mapping Consortium mapped the SIAT6 gene to
chromosome 1 (TMAP stSG22084).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Autosomal Recessive Mental Retardation 12

In affected members of 2 unrelated consanguineous Iranian families with
autosomal recessive nonsyndromic mental retardation-12 (MRT12; 611090),
Hu et al. (2011) used linkage analysis, chromosome sorting, and
next-generation sequencing to identify 2 different homozygous mutations
in the ST3GAL3 gene (A13D, 606494.0001 and D370Y, 606494.0002,
respectively.) Neither mutation affected the highly conserved sialyl
motifs, but rather affected the N-terminal transmembrane domain and
catalytic domain, respectively. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that the mutant proteins were mislocalized to the endoplasmic
reticulum and that one (D370Y) had loss of catalytic activity. The
findings demonstrated a link between the glycoprotein complex,
sialyltransferase activity, and higher cognitive functioning.

- Early Infantile Epileptic Encephalopathy 15

In 4 members of a consanguineous Palestinian family with early infantile
epileptic encephalopathy-15 (EIEE15; 615006), Edvardson et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous mutation in the ST3GAL3 gene (A320P;
606494.0003). The mutation was identified by linkage analysis combined
with whole-exome sequencing of 1 individual and confirmed by Sanger
sequencing. The mutation affected the highly conserved sialyl motif S,
which is crucially involved in binding of both donor and acceptor
substrate. In vitro functional expression studies showed that secretion
of the mutant protein was reduced to 25% of control levels and it had no
detectable enzymatic activity. The phenotype was severe: patients showed
delayed psychomotor development and had onset of refractory infantile
spasms between ages 3 and 7 months associated with hypsarrhythmia on
EEG. Other features included hypotonia, poor eye contact, and inability
to speak or walk, even later in childhood. All were profoundly mentally
retarded. Edvardson et al. (2013) noted that the phenotype was more
severe than that observed by Hu et al. (2011), who had identified
ST3GAL3 mutations outside of the highly conserved and functionally
important sialyl motifs.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 12
ST3GAL3, ALA13ASP

In affected members of a consanguineous Iranian family with autosomal
recessive mental retardation-12 (MRT12; 611090), previously reported by
Najmabadi et al. (2007), Hu et al. (2011) identified a homozygous 38C-A
transversion in exon 2 of the ST3GAL3 gene, resulting in an ala13-to-asp
(A13D) substitution in the transmembrane domain. The mutation was not
found in 278 copies of chromosome 1 from ethnically matched controls or
in 385 control individuals. In vitro functional expression studies in
murine fibroblasts showed that most of the mutant protein was improperly
localized to the endoplasmic reticulum, preventing the protein from
interacting with its substrates in the Golgi, resulting in a loss of
function. Catalytic activity of the A13D mutant enzyme was similar to
wildtype.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 12
ST3GAL3, ASP370TYR

In affected members of a consanguineous Iranian family with autosomal
recessive mental retardation-12 (MRT12; 611090), Hu et al. (2011)
identified a homozygous 1108G-T transversion in exon 14 of the ST3GAL3
gene, resulting in an asp370-to-tyr (D370Y) substitution in the
catalytic domain at the C-terminal end of the protein. The mutation was
not found in 278 copies of chromosome 1 from ethnically matched controls
or in 385 control individuals. In vitro functional expression studies in
murine fibroblasts showed that the mutant protein was improperly
localized to the endoplasmic reticulum, preventing the protein from
interacting with its substrates in the Golgi, resulting in a loss of
function. The D370Y mutant protein also showed a complete lack of enzyme
activity. Studies of recombinant proteins in CHO cells indicated that
secretion of the D370Y mutant protein was dramatically reduced compared
to wildtype. Hu et al. (2011) concluded that the mutant protein was
cleared by the endoplasmic reticulum-mediated system, suggesting that
the C terminus is important for the proper folding of functional
ST3GAL3.

.0003
EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 15
ST3GAL3, ALA320PRO

In 4 members of a consanguineous Palestinian family with early infantile
epileptic encephalopathy-15 (EIEE15; 615006), Edvardson et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous 958G-C transversion in exon 12 of the ST3GAL3
gene, resulting in an ala320-to-pro (A320P) substitution at a highly
conserved residue in the sialyl motif S. The mutation was identified by
linkage analysis combined with whole-exome sequencing of 1 individual
and confirmed by Sanger sequencing. It segregated with the disorder in
the family and was not found in 123 controls of the same ethnic origin
or in 5,379 control exomes. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that secretion of the mutant protein was reduced to 25% of
control levels and that the protein had no detectable enzymatic
activity.

REFERENCE 1. Edvardson, S.; Baumann, A.-M.; Muhlenhoff, M.; Stephan, O.; Kuss,
A. W.; Shaag, A.; He, L.; Zenvirt, S.; Tanzi, R.; Gerardy-Schahn,
R.; Elpeleg, O.: West syndrome caused by ST3Gal-III deficiency. Epilepsia 54:
e24-e27, 2013. Note: Electronic Article.

2. Hu, H.; Eggers, K.; Chen, W.; Garshasbi, M.; Motazacker, M. M.;
Wrogemann, K.; Kahrizi, K.; Tzschach, A.; Hosseini, M.; Bahman, I.;
Hucho, T.; Muhlenhoff, M.; Gerardy-Schahn, R.; Najmabadi, H.; Ropers,
H. H.; Kuss, A. W.: ST3GAL3 mutations impair the development of higher
cognitive functions. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 89: 407-414, 2011.

3. Kitagawa, H.; Paulson, J. C.: Cloning and expression of human
Gal-beta-1,3(4)GlcNAc alpha-2,3-sialyltransferase. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 194: 375-382, 1993.

4. Kitagawa, H.; Paulson, J. C.: Differential expression of five
sialyltransferase genes in human tissues. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 17872-17878,
1994.

5. Najmabadi, H.; Motazacker, M. M.; Garshasbi, M.; Kahrizi, K.; Tzschach,
A.; Chen, W.; Behjati, F.; Hadavi, V.; Nieh, S. E.; Abedini, S. S.;
Vazifehmand, R.; Firouzabadi, S. G.; and 9 others: Homozygosity mapping
in consanguineous families reveals extreme heterogeneity of non-syndromic
autosomal recessive mental retardation and identifies 8 novel gene
loci. Hum. Genet. 121: 43-48, 2007.

6. Taniguchi, A.; Saito, K.; Kubota, T.; Matsumoto, K.: Characterization
of the promoter region of the human Gal-beta-1,3(4)GlcNAc alpha-2,3-sialyltransferase
III (hST3Gal III) gene. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1626: 92-96, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/8/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/17/2006
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/1/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/26/2001

EDITED carol: 07/08/2013
carol: 1/8/2013
ckniffin: 1/8/2013
carol: 10/3/2011
ckniffin: 9/27/2011
mgross: 5/23/2006
terry: 5/17/2006
mgross: 5/1/2006
mgross: 4/28/2006
alopez: 12/4/2003
terry: 12/3/2003
mgross: 8/22/2002
alopez: 11/26/2001

610662	TITLE *610662 PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL GLYCAN, CLASS Y; PIGY
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Glycosylphosphatidylinositol, which acts as a membrane anchor for
numerous cell surface proteins, is initially synthesized by the transfer
of N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) from UDP-GlcNAc to generate
GlcNAc-phosphatidylinositol (GlcNAc-PI). This reaction is catalyzed by
the enzymatic complex of GPI-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (GPI-GnT),
which in mammalian cells consists of at least 6 proteins: PIGA (311770),
PIGH (600154), PIGC (601730), PIGP (605938), PIGQ (605754) and DPM2
(603564). Murakami et al. (2005) determined that Daudi Burkitt lymphoma
cells, which are defective in GPI-GnT activity, could not be rescued by
any of the 6 known proteins contained in GPI-GnT, suggesting that an
additional protein was required for GPI-GnT activity. Using affinity
purification followed by SDS-PAGE analysis and peptide sequencing, the
authors identified and cloned the gene encoding this protein,
phosphatidylinositol glycan class Y (PIGY). PIGY is a 71-amino acid
protein with a molecular mass of 6.5 kD, and contains 2 putative
transmembrane domains. PIGY has homologs in mouse, rice, and yeast, with
amino acid identities of 79%, 25%, and 22%, respectively.
Permeabilization experiments using tagged PIGY showed that the N
terminus of PIGY is cytoplasmic, and Murakami et al. (2005) predicted
the C terminus to be cytoplasmic as well based on the hydrophobicity
profile. Transfection of PIGY into Daudi cells restored GPI-GnT
activity, and RT-PCR demonstrated that Daudi cells contained no PIGY
transcript. Northern blot analysis, RT-PCR, and database analysis showed
that PIGY is translated from a bicistronic mRNA that encodes both PIGY
and an upstream gene named PreY. Expression of mutagenized constructs in
HeLa cells showed that separate PIGY translation is initiated by leaky
scanning at the PreY initiation site.

GENE FUNCTION

Using coimmunoprecipitation experiments, Murakami et al. (2005) showed
that PIGY is not required for the other members of the GPI-GnT complex
to associate, and that PIGY associates strongly with PIGA and weakly
with the other GPI-GnT complex proteins.

GENE STRUCTURE

Using genomic sequence analysis, Murakami et al. (2005) found that PIGY
is encoded by a bicistronic mRNA that contains 2 exons. PIGY is
contained within exon 2, and the gene PreY is contained within exon 1
and the 5-prime portion of exon 2.

REFERENCE 1. Murakami, Y.; Siripanyaphinyo, U.; Hong, Y.; Tashima, Y.; Maeda,
Y.; Kinoshita, T.: The initial enzyme for glycosylphosphatidylinositol
biosynthesis requires PIG-Y, a seventh component. Molec. Biol. Cell 16:
5236-5246, 2005.

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 12/19/2006

EDITED alopez: 12/20/2006

609925	TITLE *609925 DIPEPTIDASE 2; DPEP2
;;MEMBRANE-BOUND DIPEPTIDASE 2; MBD2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DPEP2 belongs to the membrane-bound dipeptidase (EC 3.4.13.19) family.
These enzymes hydrolyze a variety of dipeptides, including leukotriene
D4, the beta-lactam ring of some antibiotics, and cystinyl-bis-glycine
(cys-bis-gly) formed during glutathione degradation (Habib et al.,
2003).

CLONING

Habib et al. (2003) cloned mouse Dpep2, which they called Mbd2, and
identified human MBD2 by database analysis. The deduced 578-amino acid
mouse protein contains several residues conserved among MBDs, including
6 cysteines, 3 histidines, and a glutamic acid that is important for
catalytic activity. Mouse and human MBD2 share 80% amino acid identity.
Northern blot analysis detected 2 Mbd2 RNAs in mouse heart and lung, but
only 1 in testis. Spleen, liver, and skeletal muscle expressed low Mbd2
levels, and no expression was detected in kidney and brain.
Phospholipase treatment released Mbd2 from transfected COS-7 cell
membranes, indicating that Mbd2 is anchored to the membrane through
glycosylphosphatidylinositol modification.

GENE FUNCTION

Habib et al. (2003) demonstrated that COS-7 cells transfected with mouse
Mbd2 could convert leukotriene D4 to leukotriene E4, but they could not
hydrolyze cys-bis-gly or beta-lactam. Inhibition of Mbd2 by
penicillamine indicated that it is a metallopeptidase.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the DPEP2
gene to chromosome 16 (TMAP SHGC-60762).

REFERENCE 1. Habib, G. M.; Shi, Z.-Z.; Cuevas, A. A.; Lieberman, M. W.: Identification
of two additional members of the membrane-bound dipeptidase family. FASEB
J. 17: 1313-1315, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/23/2006

EDITED mgross: 02/23/2006

603451	TITLE *603451 LIM DOMAIN-BINDING 1; LDB1
;;CARBOXYL-TERMINAL LIM DOMAIN PROTEIN 2; CLIM2;;
NUCLEAR LIM DOMAIN INTERACTOR; NLI
DESCRIPTION For general information on LIM domain-binding factors, see CLIM1
(603450).

CLONING

Semina et al. (1998) isolated 2 human genes encoding LIM domain-binding
factors, CLIM1 and CLIM2. The 2 genes have a very high level of identity
to each other and to the homologs in other species. CLIM2 encodes a
375-amino acid protein.

Using FACS analysis of adult mouse bone marrow and fetal liver cells, Li
et al. (2010) showed that Ldb1 was expressed in hematopoietic stem
cells, with lower levels in myeloid and megakaryocyte progenitor cells.
Ldb1 was expressed at all stages of erythroid development.

GENE FUNCTION

Sum et al. (2002) found that LDB1 associated with a complex containing
LMO4 (603129), CTIP (604124), and BRCA1 (113705) in transfected human
embryonic kidney cells.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, protein pull-down assays, and
coimmunoprecipitation assays, Han et al. (2005) found that human LMO2
(180385) interacted with human BEX2 (300691). Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays showed that BEX2 and LMO2 were part of a DNA-binding
complex that recognized the E-box element. Other components of this
complex included NSCL2 (NHLH2; 162361) and LDB1.

Abrahams et al. (2007) used 2 sets of microarray analyses followed by
selective in situ hybridization to identify differentially expressed
genes in the superior temporal gyrus and cerebral cortex in midgestation
human fetal brains. LDB1 was consistently enriched in the superior
temporal gyrus posterior temporal cortex, and perisylvian cortex.
Abrahams et al. (2007) suggested that LDB1 may be involved in asymmetric
patterning of the developing human cortex.

MAPPING

By PCR analysis of a Genebridge 4 radiation hybrid panel, Semina et al.
(1998) mapped the CLIM2 gene to 10q24-q25. Yamashita et al. (1998)
mapped the mouse Lbd1 gene to a region of conserved homology in distal
chromosome 19.

ANIMAL MODEL

Li et al. (2010) reported that Ldb1 -/- mice died between embryonic days
9 and 10. They found that Ldb1 -/- embryonic stem cells generated
myeloid, but not erythroid, lineage cells. Conditional deletion of Ldb1
showed that it was required for fetal and adult erythropoiesis, as well
as for megakaryopoiesis.

REFERENCE 1. Abrahams, B. S.; Tentler, D.; Perederiy, J. V.; Oldham, M. C.;
Coppola, G.; Geschwind, D. H.: Genome-wide analyses of human perisylvian
cerebral cortical patterning. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 17849-17854,
2007.

2. Han, C.; Liu, H.; Liu, J.; Yin, K.; Xie, Y.; Shen, X.; Wang, Y.;
Yuan, J.; Qiang, B.; Liu, Y.-J.; Peng, X.: Human Bex2 interacts with
LMO2 and regulates the transcriptional activity of a novel DNA-binding
complex. Nucleic Acids Res. 33: 6555-6565, 2005.

3. Li, L.; Lee, J. Y.; Gross, J.; Song, S.-H.; Dean, A.; Love, P.
E.: A requirement for Lim domain binding protein 1 in erythropoiesis. J.
Exp. Med. 207: 2543-2550, 2010.

4. Semina, E. V.; Altherr, M. R.; Murray, J. C.: Cloning and chromosomal
localization of two novel human genes encoding LIM-domain binding
factors CLIM1 and CLIM2/LDB1/NL1. Mammalian Genome 9: 921-924, 1998.

5. Sum, E. Y. M.; Peng, B.; Yu, X.; Chen, J.; Byrne, J.; Lindeman,
G. J.; Visvader, J. E.: The LIM domain protein LMO4 interacts with
the cofactor CtIP and the tumor suppressor BRCA1 and inhibits BRCA1
activity. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 7849-7856, 2002.

6. Yamashita, T.; Agulnick, A. D.; Copeland, N. G.; Gilbert, D. J.;
Jenkins, N. A.; Westphal, H.: Genomic structure and chromosomal localization
of the mouse LIM domain-binding protein 1 gene, Ldb1. Genomics 48:
87-92, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/5/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/16/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/29/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/14/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/20/1999

EDITED mgross: 05/06/2011
terry: 5/5/2011
mgross: 12/16/2008
wwang: 2/21/2008
ckniffin: 1/29/2008
mgross: 7/14/2005
carol: 2/4/1999
carol: 1/20/1999

604554	TITLE *604554 HEAT-SHOCK TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 2-BINDING PROTEIN; HSF2BP
DESCRIPTION Heat-shock transcription factors (HSFs) bind to heat-shock elements
(HSE) that are promoter sites for heat-shock proteins (HSPs; see
140560). Unlike HSF1 (140580) and HSF3, HSF2 (140581) is not activated
by environmental stresses such as heat; instead, it is thought to be
important in differentiation and development. Furthermore, its
HSE-binding activity and HSP expression do not clearly correlate. Using
a yeast 2-hybrid system to screen a human testis cDNA library with
transcriptionally active and inactive HSF2 mutants as bait, Yoshima et
al. (1998) isolated a full-length cDNA, designated HSF2-binding protein
(HSF2BP). HSF2BP encodes a deduced 344-amino acid protein with an
N-terminal hydrophilic region predicted to form an alpha-helical
structure containing 2 leucine zipper motifs. The C-terminal region is
largely hydrophobic and forms beta sheets. Northern blot analysis
revealed that a 1.9-kb transcript of HSF2BP is expressed in testis only.
In vitro, HSF2BP bound to both HSF2 and HSF1 in a GST pull-down assay.
In vivo, it bound to HSF2 but not HSF1 in K572 cells expressing these
proteins.

By nucleotide sequence database searching, Yoshima et al. (1998) mapped
the HSF2BP gene to chromosome 21q22.3.

REFERENCE 1. Yoshima, T.; Yura, T.; Yanagi, H.: Novel testis-specific protein
that interacts with heat shock factor 2. Gene 214: 139-146, 1998.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/16/2000

EDITED carol: 12/26/2002
carol: 2/16/2000

605180	TITLE *605180 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 38 (AMINO ACID TRANSPORTER), MEMBER 2; SLC38A2
;;AMINO ACID TRANSPORTER A2; ATA2;;
SODIUM-DEPENDENT NEUTRAL AMINO ACID TRANSPORTER 2; SNAT2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Amino acid transport system A, named for its preference for alanine as
substrate, is present in most mammalian tissues. SLC38A2, or ATA2, is
responsible for system A activity in most tissues. The characteristics
of system A include sodium dependence, preference for short-chain
neutral amino acids, such as alanine, serine, proline, and glutamine, as
substrates, pH sensitivity, and transinhibition. Bulky hydrophobic amino
acids, anionic amino acids, and cationic amino acids are excluded by the
system. System A can be discriminated from other transport systems for
neutral amino acids by its unique ability to transport N-methylated
amino acids. System A is defined as the component of sodium-dependent
transport of any neutral amino acid that is inhibitable by the model
substrate alpha-(methylamino)isobutyric acid (MeAIB). System A is
upregulated by a variety of hormones, growth factors, and mitogens. It
is also subject to adaptive regulation mediated by altered levels of
intracellular amino acids. Expression of system A in the skeletal muscle
and liver, and its regulation by glucagon and insulin in these tissues,
are particularly important with respect to various physiologic
conditions, such as starvation and pregnancy, and pathologic states,
such as diabetes (Sugawara et al., 2000).

CLONING

By screening human fetal brain cDNAs for the potential to encode large
proteins, Nagase et al. (2000) isolated a partial ATA2 cDNA, which they
called KIAA1382, that lacks 5-prime coding sequence. The deduced
462-amino acid ATA2 partial protein shares 57% amino acid sequence
identity with the human transporter protein g17 across 98% of its
length. RT-PCR followed by ELISA detected ATA2 expression in all human
tissues examined, with the highest level in adult brain. Within the
brain, ATA2 expression was found in all regions tested, with the highest
level in the subthalamic nucleus.

Sugawara et al. (2000) cloned a rat skeletal muscle Ata2 cDNA. The
deduced Ata2 protein shares 55% sequence identity with the rat glutamine
transporter GlnT (ATA1, or SLC38A1; 608490).

Using rat Ata2 as probe, Hatanaka et al. (2000) cloned full-length human
ATA2 from a HepG2 cDNA library. The deduced 506-amino acid protein has
12 putative transmembrane domains and shares 88% identity with rat Ata2.
Northern blot analysis detected variable expression of a 4.5-kb ATA2
transcript in all 12 human tissues examined, with highest expression in
placenta.

Hyde et al. (2007) found that an epitope linked to the C terminus of rat
Snat2 was exposed on the surface of transfected cells. They concluded
that Snat2 has 11 transmembrane domains rather than 12.

GENE FUNCTION

Sugawara et al. (2000) found that rat Ata2 mediated sodium-dependent
transport of MeAIB when expressed in mammalian cells. The Ata2
transporter was specific for neutral amino acids, and it was pH
sensitive and lithium intolerant. The sodium:amino acid stoichiometry
was 1:1. When expressed in Xenopus oocytes, transport of neutral amino
acids via Ata2 was associated with inward currents, and the
substrate-induced current was sodium dependent and pH sensitive.

Hatanaka et al. (2000) showed that overexpression of human ATA2 in HRPE
cells increased transport of MeAIB. Transport was Na+ dependent, was
inhibited by Li+, and showed a pH optimum of 8. Competition experiments
revealed that human ATA2 recognized several neutral amino acids as
substrates, with a preference for short-chain neutral amino acids.
Hatanaka et al. (2000) concluded that ATA2 is a system A amino acid
transporter.

Freeman et al. (2002) found that Ata2-mediated MeAIB transport increased
in regenerating rat liver 12 hours after partial hepatectomy. Elevated
MeAIB transport appeared to be due to redistribution of Ata2 from an
intracellular compartment to the plasma membrane and not to increased
Ata2 mRNA content or translation.

Using reporter gene assays, Palii et al. (2004) found that a highly
conserved CAAT box and nearby amino acid response element (AARE) within
intron 1 of the SNAT2 gene had enhancer activity in amino acid-deprived
HepG2 cells. The SNAT2 proximal promoter was not responsive to amino
acid deprivation.

Using mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Palii et al. (2006) determined that
Snat2 upregulation due to amino acid deprivation required Gcn2 (EIF2AK4;
609280) and Eif2-alpha (EIF2S1; 603907). The AARE of SNAT2 formed
specific nuclear complexes that increased in abundance following amino
acid deprivation in HepG2 cells. In vitro supershift analysis revealed
increased AARE binding by ATF4 (604064), CEBPA (116897), CEBPB (189965),
and CEBPG (138972).

Hyde et al. (2007) identified 2 distinct signaling pathways that
controlled expression of rat Snat2 during amino acid deprivation. Amino
acids that were poor Snat2 substrates, such as tyrosine, suppressed
functional Snat2 expression in rat L6 myotubes and HeLa cells via
inhibition of the MAP kinase JNK (MAPK8; 601158). Amino acids that were
good Snat2 substrates, such as the alanine isomer sarcosine, suppressed
Snat2 expression via a JNK-independent mechanism. In addition, Snat2
protein was stabilized during amino acid withdrawal. Hyde et al. (2007)
concluded that SNAT2 may function as both a transporter and receptor for
amino acids.

By mutation analysis of rat Snat2, Zhang et al. (2008) found that the
conserved residue asn82 in transmembrane domain-1 was required for avid
Na+ binding by Snat2 and, consequently, alanine cotransport in
transfected cells.

Arsenite is a toxic environmental contaminant that can react with
thiols, resulting in oxidative protein damage and endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress. Using a genomewide RNA interference screen with HEK293
cells, Oh et al. (2012) identified SNAT2 among a set of genes required
for the arsenite-induced ER stress response. SNAT2 expression was
directly upregulated by arsenite exposure in HEK293 and mouse 3T3L1
adipocytes, and its expression was dependent upon ATF4. Inhibition of
SNAT2 expression or deprivation of its primary substrate, glutamine,
specifically suppressed ER stress due to arsenite exposure, but not ER
stress induced by other factors. Induction of SNAT2 was coincident with
activation of the nutrient-sensing MTOR pathway (see 601231). Oh et al.
(2012) concluded that SNAT2 has an important role in amino acid
signaling in the arsenic-induced stress response.

GENE STRUCTURE

Palii et al. (2004) determined that the SLC38A2 gene contains 16 exons.
The first exon is noncoding. Intron 1 contains a CAAT box, a purine-rich
box, and an AARE, all of which are highly conserved among human, rat,
and mouse genes.

MAPPING

Hartz (2013) mapped the SLC38A2 gene to chromosome 12q13.11 based on an
alignment of the SLC38A2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB037803) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Freeman, T. L.; Thiele, G. M.; Tuma, D. J.; Machu, T. K.; Mailliard,
M. E.: ATA2-mediated amino acid uptake following partial hepatectomy
is regulated by redistribution to the plasma membrane. Arch. Biochem.
Biophys. 400: 215-222, 2002.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/27/2013.

3. Hatanaka, T.; Huang, W.; Wang, H.; Sugawara, M.; Prasad, P. D.;
Leibach, F. H.; Ganapathy, V.: Primary structure, functional characteristics
and tissue expression pattern of human ATA2, a subtype of amino acid
transport system A. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1467: 1-6, 2000.

4. Hyde, R.; Cwiklinski, E. L.; MacAulay, K.; Taylor, P. M.; Hundal,
H. S.: Distinct sensor pathways in the hierarchical control of SNAT2,
a putative amino acid transceptor, by amino acid availability. J.
Biol. Chem. 282: 19788-19798, 2007.

5. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVI.
The complete sequences of 150 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 65-73, 2000.

6. Oh, R. S.; Pan, W.-C.; Yalcin, A.; Zhang, H.; Guilarte, T. R.;
Hotamisligil, G. S.; Christiani, D. C.; Lu, Q.: Functional RNA interference
(RNAi) screen identifies system A neutral amino acid transporter 2
(SNAT2) as a mediator of arsenic-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress. J.
Biol. Chem. 287: 6025-6034, 2012.

7. Palii, S. S.; Chen, H.; Kilberg, M. S.: Transcriptional control
of the human sodium-coupled neutral amino acid transporter system
A gene by amino acid availability is mediated by an intronic element. J.
Biol. Chem. 279: 3463-3471, 2004.

8. Palii, S. S.; Thiaville, M. M.; Pan, Y.-X.; Zhong, C.; Kilberg,
M. S.: Characterization of the amino acid transporter 2 (SNAT2) system
A transporter gene. Biochem. J. 395: 517-527, 2006.

9. Sugawara, M.; Nakanishi, T.; Fei, Y.-J.; Huang, W.; Ganapathy,
M. E.; Leibach, F. H.; Ganapathy, V.: Cloning of an amino acid transporter
with functional characteristics and tissue expression pattern identical
to that of system A. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 16473-16477, 2000.

10. Zhang, Z.; Gameiro, A.; Grewer, C.: Highly conserved asparagine
82 controls the interaction of Na+ with the sodium-coupled neutral
amino acid transporter SNAT2. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 12284-12292, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/27/2013

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 7/31/2000

EDITED mgross: 03/13/2013
terry: 2/27/2013
mgross: 8/28/2003
carol: 1/28/2002
mcapotos: 8/4/2000
psherman: 7/31/2000

610577	TITLE *610577 RHO GTPase-ACTIVATING PROTEIN 12; ARHGAP12
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

RHO GTPases (see ARHA, 165390) that participate in a wide variety of
cellular processes are active in their GTP-bound form and inactive in
their GDP-bound form. The hydrolysis of GTP and the inactivation of
these GTPases are regulated by GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs), such
as ARHGAP12 (Zhang et al., 2002).

CLONING

During the large-scale sequencing of a fetal brain cDNA library, Zhang
et al. (2002) cloned 2 splice variants of ARHGAP12, which they called
ARHGAP12a and ARHGAP12b. ARHGAP12a encodes a deduced 816-amino acid
protein, and ARHGAP12b encodes a deduced 846-amino acid protein. Both
proteins have an N-terminal SH3 domain, followed by 2 WW domains, a
pleckstrin homology (PH) domain, and a C-terminal RHO GAP domain.
ARHGAP12b contains an insert between the second WW domain and the PH
domain that is not found in ARHGAP12a. Transcripts encoding both
variants utilize alternate polyadenylation signals. Northern blot
analysis detected a double band of about 4 kb in all 8 tumor cell lines
examined. RT-PCR detected both ARHGAP12 transcripts in lung, kidney,
liver, brain, and pancreas, with higher levels of ARHGAP12a than
ARHGAP12b in kidney, liver, brain, and pancreas. Only ARHGAP12a was
detected in heart. By phylogenetic analysis, Peck et al. (2002)
determined that the GAP domain of ARHGAP12 is most closely related to
the GAP domain of ARHGAP9 (610576).

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhang et al. (2002) determined that the ARHGAP12 gene contains 20 exons.
The first 2 exons are noncoding, and exon 20 contains 2 alternate
polyadenylation signals.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Peck et al. (2002) mapped the ARHGAP12
gene to chromosome 10p12.

REFERENCE 1. Peck, J.; Douglas, G., IV; Wu, C. H.; Burbelo, P. D.: Human RhoGAP
domain-containing proteins: structure, function and evolutionary relationships. FEBS
Lett. 528: 27-34, 2002.

2. Zhang, Z.; Wu, C.; Wang, S.; Huang, W.; Zhou, Z.; Ying, K.; Xie,
Y.; Mao, Y.: Cloning and characterization of ARHGAP12, a novel human
rhoGAP gene. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 34: 325-331, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/16/2006

EDITED wwang: 11/16/2006

605880	TITLE *605880 LYSINE ACETYLTRANSFERASE 6B; KAT6B
;;HISTONE ACETYLTRANSFERASE MYST4; MYST4;;
MONOCYTIC LEUKEMIA ZINC FINGER PROTEIN-RELATED FACTOR; MORF
MORF/CBF FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Champagne et al. (1999) identified and characterized monocytic leukemia
zinc finger protein-related factor (MORF), a novel human histone
acetyltransferase. MORF is a 1,781-residue protein that is ubiquitously
expressed in adult human tissues. MORF also contains a strong
transcriptional repression domain at its N terminus and a highly potent
activation domain at its C terminus, and may be involved in both
positive and negative regulation of transcription.

Using immunohistochemistry on mice of various developmental ages,
Campeau et al. (2012) demonstrated expression of Myst4 in the
telencephalic vesicles, trigeminal ganglion, spinal cord, dorsal root
ganglia, digestive tract, pancreas, liver, and ribs of developing
embryo; after birth, it is strongly expressed in the diaphysis of the
long bones, the kidney, and the patella, among other organs.

- MORF/CBP Fusion Gene

Panagopoulos et al. (2001) reported a novel t(10;16)(q22;p13)
chromosomal translocation in a childhood acute myelogenous leukemia
(AML-M5a) leading to a MORF-CBP (600140) chimera. RT-PCR experiments
yielded in-frame MORF-CBP and CBP-MORF fusion transcripts. Genomic
analyses revealed that the breaks were close to Alu elements in intron
16 of MORF and intron 2 of CBP and that duplications had occurred near
the breakpoints. The authors constructed an exon/intron map of the MORF
gene. The MORF-CBP protein retained the zinc fingers, 2 nuclear
localization signals, the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) domain, a
portion of the acidic domain of MORF, and the CBP protein downstream of
codon 29. The part of CBP encoding the RARA-binding domain, the
CREB-binding domain, the 3 cys/his-rich regions, the bromodomain, the
HAT domain and the glu-rich domains was present. In the reciprocal
CBP-MORF, part of the acidic domain, and the C-terminal ser- and
met-rich regions of MORF may be driven by the CBP promoter.

MAPPING

Champagne et al. (1999) mapped the MORF gene to chromosome 10q22 by
FISH.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) studied a cohort of 19 individuals with a
presumed diagnosis of the Ohdo syndrome SBBYS variant (SBBYSS; 603736).
Twelve individuals were considered to have typical features of the
syndrome, 2 had suggestive but milder features, and 5 were classified as
atypical. By whole-exome sequencing in 4 individuals with typical
features, Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified heterozygous mutations
in the KAT6B gene: a nonsense mutation (E1357X; 605880.0004) in
individual 4, a 1-bp insertion (605880.0001) in individual 1, and a 2-bp
deletion (605880.0002) in individual 2. Subsequently, all 19 individuals
with an SBBYSS or an SBBYSS-like phenotype were sequenced for the entire
KAT6B coding region by classic Sanger sequencing. Truncating mutations
in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene were confirmed in 12 individuals, and
individual 3 was found to have a heterozygous frameshift mutation in
exon 15 (605880.0003), which had not been detected on whole-exome
sequencing. When parental samples were available, the mutations were
shown to have occurred de novo. Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) suggested
that mutations of protein-protein interaction domains in exon 18 result
in a more complex phenotype than the phenotype due to simple
haploinsufficiency of KAT6B and raised the possibility that exon 18
mutations are activating or have a dominant-negative effect.

In 6 patients with genitopatellar syndrome (GTPTS; 606170), Campeau et
al. (2012) identified 5 different heterozygous de novo truncating
mutations in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene (605880.0005-605880.0009), all of
which were predicted to result in loss of the highly conserved
transcription activation domain. Campeau et al. (2012) noted that
SBBYSS, also caused by mutation in KAT6B, is a disorder with features
overlapping those of genitopatellar syndrome, but with clinical
differences.

Simpson et al. (2012) identified mutations in the KAT6B gene in 5
unrelated patients with genitopatellar syndrome (see, e.g., 605880.0006
and 605880.0010); they stated that the form of Ohdo syndrome (SBBYSS) in
which mutations in KAT6B had been found is phenotypically distinct from
genitopatellar syndrome.

In 2 children with clinical features of SBBYSS, including a 4-year-old
girl previously reported by Szakszon et al. (2011), Szakszon et al.
(2013) identified different de novo truncating mutations in the distal
region of exon 18 of the KAT6B gene (605880.0011-605880.0012).

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Szakszon et al. (2013) noted that truncating mutations of KAT6B exon 18
between positions c.3018 and c.3892 had been shown to cause GTPTS,
whereas truncating mutations distal to position c.4069 in the same exon
cause SBBYSS (with one exception, a c.4360_4368delins mutation in a
patient with GTPTS; see 605880.0005). They stated that their finding of
truncating mutations of KAT6B exon 18 at positions c.5064_5071
(605880.0011) and c.5389 (605880.0012) in patients with SBBYSS confirmed
this genotype-phenotype correlation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) examined mice carrying a gene trap insertion
in the mouse ortholog Kat6b (Qkf/Myst4/Morf) that produces approximately
5% of the normal amount of Kat6b mRNA. The Qkf gt/gt hypomorphic mutant
displayed a number of defects that mirror SBBYSS syndrome, although the
phenotype in the mice is milder. Mice are of normal size at birth but
fail to thrive and have brain developmental defects as well as
craniofacial defects. Observed abnormalities include short and narrow
palpebral fissures, low set ears, and malocclusion. Qkf mRNA is strongly
expressed in the eyelids and teeth primordia during development. Similar
to individuals with SBBYSS, the Qkf gt/gt mice have long, slender feet
and disproportionately long first digits.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, 1-BP INS, NT4405

By whole-exome sequencing in a patient (individual 1) with typical
features of SBBYSS (603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a
1-bp insertion at nucleotide 4405 in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, which
resulted in a frameshift.

.0002
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, 2-BP DEL, NT5370

By whole-exome sequencing in a patient (individual 2) with typical
features of SBBYSS (603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a
2-bp deletion at nucleotide 5370 in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, which
resulted in a frameshift.

.0003
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, 1-BP DEL, NT3018

By Sanger sequencing in a patient (individual 3) with typical SBBYSS
(603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a 1-bp deletion at
nucleotide 3018 in exon 15 of the KAT6B gene, which resulted in a
frameshift. The mutation was not initially detected on whole-exome
sequencing. The parents did not have the mutation. The patient also had
a 1q21 duplication, which the authors considered to be incidental.

.0004
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, GLU1357TER

By whole-exome sequencing in a patient (individual 4) with typical
features of SBBYSS (603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a
heterozygous 4069G-T transversion in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene,
resulting in a glu1357-to-ter (E1357X) substitution. The parents did not
have the mutation.

.0005
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, DEL/INS, NT4360

In a male patient with genitopatellar syndrome (GTPTS; 606170),
originally reported by Abdul-Rahman et al. (2006) ('patient 2'), Campeau
et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a de novo deletion/insertion
(4360_4368delinsAAAAACCAAAA) in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, predicted to
result in premature termination and loss of the highly conserved
transcription activation domain. The mutation was not found in the
patient's unaffected parents or in the Exome Variant Server.

.0006
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, 4-BP DEL, 3769TCTA

In 2 unrelated male patients with genitopatellar syndrome (606170), 1 of
whom was originally reported by Lifchez et al. (2003), Campeau et al.
(2012) identified heterozygosity for a de novo 4-bp deletion
(3769delTCTA) in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, predicted to result in
premature termination and loss of the highly conserved transcription
activation domain. The mutation was not found in the patients'
unaffected parents or in the Exome Variant Server.

In an unrelated 7-month-old girl and 3-month-old boy with genitopatellar
syndrome (606170), Simpson et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for
the 3769delTCTA mutation in the KAT6B gene, which was not present in
their unaffected parents, in the 1000 Genomes Project, or in 600 control
exome profiles. Quantitative assessment of global H3/H4 acetylation of
extracted histones in primary skin fibroblasts from the infant girl
demonstrated a significant reduction in H3 and H4 acetylation compared
to control fibroblasts.

.0007
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, 2-BP DEL, 3788AA

In a female patient with genitopatellar syndrome (606170), Campeau et
al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a de novo 2-bp deletion
(3788delAA) in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, predicted to result in
premature termination and loss of the highly conserved transcription
activation domain. The mutation was not found in the patients'
unaffected parents or in the Exome Variant Server.

.0008
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, GLY1298TER

In an African American girl with genitopatellar syndrome (606170),
originally reported by Abdul-Rahman et al. (2006), Campeau et al. (2012)
identified heterozygosity for a 3892G-T transversion in exon 18 of the
KAT6B gene, predicted to result in premature termination and loss of the
highly conserved transcription activation domain. DNA from the patient's
parents was unavailable; however, the mutation was not found in the
Exome Variant Server.

.0009
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, GLY1268TER

In a female patient with genitopatellar syndrome (606170), originally
reported by Lammer and Abrams (2002), Campeau et al. (2012) identified
heterozygosity for a de novo 3802G-T transversion in exon 18 of the
KAT6B gene, predicted to result in premature termination and loss of the
highly conserved transcription activation domain. The mutation was not
found in the patient's unaffected parents or in the Exome Variant
Server.

.0010
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, 4-BP DEL, NT1227

In a female patient with genitopatellar syndrome (606170), originally
reported by Reardon (2002), Simpson et al. (2012) identified
heterozygosity for a de novo 4-bp deletion (3680_3695del) in exon 18 of
the KAT6B gene. The mutation was not found in her unaffected parents, in
the 1000 Genomes Project, or in 600 control exome profiles.

.0011
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, 8-BP DEL/4-BP INS, NT5064

In a child of Sicilian ancestry with SBBYSS (603736), Szakszon et al.
(2013) identified a heterozygous, de novo, complex insertion/deletion
mutation, c.5064_5071delTACTATGGinsCACA, in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene,
leading to a net loss of 4 bp, a frameshift, and a premature stop codon
(met1690glufs*24).

.0012
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, ARG1797TER

By Sanger sequencing in a patient (individual 13) with typical SBBYSS
(603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous de novo
c.5389C-T transition in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, resulting in an
arg1797-to-ter (R1797X) substitution. The parents did not have the
mutation.

In a child of Hungarian ancestry with typical SBBYSS, previously
reported by Szakszon et al. (2011), Szakszon et al. (2013) identified de
novo heterozygosity for the same R2797X mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Abdul-Rahman, O. A.; La, T. H.; Kwan, A.; Schlaubitz, S.; Barsh,
G. S.; Enns, G. M.; Hudgins, L.: Genitopatellar syndrome: expanding
the phenotype and excluding mutations in LMX1B and TBX4. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 140A: 1567-1572, 2006.

2. Campeau, P. M.; Kim, J. C.; Lu, J. T.; Schwartzentruber, J. A.;
Abdul-Rahman, O. A.; Schlaubitz, S.; Murdock, D. M.; Jiang, M.-M.;
Lammer, E. J.; Enns, G. M.; Rhead, W. J.; Rowland, J.; and 9 others
: Mutations in KAT6B, encoding a histone acetyltransferase, cause
genitopatellar syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90: 282-289, 2012.

3. Champagne, N.; Bertos, N. R.; Pelletier, N.; Wang, A. H.; Vezmar,
M.; Yang,Y.; Heng, H. H.; Yang, X. J.: Identification of a human
histone acetyltransferase related to monocytic leukemia zinc finger
protein. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 28528-28536, 1999.

4. Clayton-Smith, J.; O'Sullivan, J.; Daly, S.; Bhaskar, S.; Day,
R.; Anderson, B.; Voss, A. K.; Thomas, T.; Biesecker, L. G.; Smith,
P.; Fryer, A.; Chandler, K. E.; and 13 others: Whole-exome-sequencing
identifies mutations in histone acetyltransferase gene KAT6B in individuals
with the Say-Barber-Biesecker variant of Ohdo syndrome. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 89: 675-681, 2011.

5. Lammer, E. J.; Abrams, L.: Genitopatellar syndrome: delineating
the anomalies of female genitalia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 111: 316-318,
2002.

6. Lifchez, C. A.; Rhead, W. J.; Leuthner, S. R.; Lubinsky, M. S.
: Genitopatellar syndrome: expanding the phenotype. Am. J. Med. Genet. 122A:
80-83, 2003.

7. Panagopoulos, I.; Fioretos, T.; Isaksson, M.; Samuelsson, U.; Billstrom,
R.; Strombeck, B.; Mitelman, F.; Johansson, B.: Fusion of the MORF
and CBP genes in acute myeloid leukemia with the t(10;16)(q22;p13). Hum.
Molec. Genet. 10: 395-404, 2001.

8. Reardon, W.: Genitopatellar syndrome: a recognizable phenotype. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 111: 313-315, 2002.

9. Simpson, M. A.; Deshpande, C.; Dafou, D.; Vissers, L. E. L. M.;
Woollard, W. J.; Holder, S. E.; Gillessen-Kaesbach, G.; Derks, R.;
White, S. M.; Cohen-Snuijf, R.; Kant, S. G.; Hoefsloot, L. H.; Reardon,
W.; Brunner, H. G.; Bongers, E. M. H. F.; Trembath, R. C.: De novo
mutations of the gene encoding the histone acetyltransferase KAT6B
cause genitopatellar syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90: 290-294, 2012.

10. Szakszon, K.; Berenyi, E.; Jakab, A.; Bessenyei, B.; Balogh, E.;
Kobling, T.; Szilvassy, J.; Knegt, A. C.; Olah, E.: Blepharophimosis
mental retardation syndrome Say-Barber/Biesecker/Young-Simpson type:
new findings with neuroimaging. Am. J. Med. Genet. 155A: 634-637,
2011.

11. Szakszon, K.; Salpietro, C.; Kakar, N.; Knegt, A. C.; Olah, E.;
Dallapiccola, B.; Borck, G.: De novo mutations of the gene encoding
the histone acetyltransferase KAT6B in two patients with Say-Barber/Biesecker/Young-Simpson
syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 161A: 884-888, 2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Nara Sobreira - updated: 5/14/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/10/2012
Nara Sobreira - updated: 12/13/2011

CREATED George E. Tiller: 4/26/2001

EDITED carol: 08/29/2013
carol: 5/14/2013
carol: 4/24/2012
carol: 4/10/2012
terry: 4/10/2012
carol: 12/13/2011
carol: 12/12/2011
mgross: 2/21/2006
cwells: 5/2/2001
cwells: 4/26/2001

606975	TITLE *606975 COMPONENT OF OLIGOMERIC GOLGI COMPLEX 3; COG3
;;SEC34, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; SEC34
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Multiprotein complexes are key determinants of Golgi apparatus structure
and its capacity for intracellular transport and glycoprotein
modification. Several complexes have been identified, including the
Golgi transport complex (GTC), the LDLC complex, which is involved in
glycosylation reactions, and the SEC34 complex, which is involved in
vesicular transport. These 3 complexes are identical and have been
termed the conserved oligomeric Golgi (COG) complex, which includes COG3
(Ungar et al., 2002).

CLONING

By database searching for homologs of the yeast Sec34 protein, followed
by 5-prime RACE and PCR of a fetal brain cDNA library, Suvorova et al.
(2001) isolated a cDNA encoding COG3, which they termed SEC34. The
deduced 828-amino acid protein, which is 41% similar to the yeast
protein, contains a conserved N-terminal coiled-coil domain and a
putative leucine zipper motif but no transmembrane sequence. Northern
blot analysis revealed abundant and ubiquitous expression of a 4.5-kb
transcript, with the highest level in pancreas and testis and the lowest
level in lung. Immunoblot analysis showed expression of a 94-kD Golgi
membrane protein, the same size as predicted from the primary sequence.
Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated colocalization with the Golgi
SNAP receptor, membrin (GOSR2; 604027). Further analysis showed partial
nocodazole-sensitive colocalization in the same juxtanuclear membranes
as p115 (603344) and TGN38 (603062). The cis/medial Golgi association of
COG3 was found to be brefeldin-A sensitive, and COG3 was not associated
with COPB (600959).

By SDS-PAGE analysis of bovine brain cytosol, Ungar et al. (2002)
identified the 8 subunits of the COG complex. Immunofluorescence
microscopy demonstrated that COG1 (LDLB; 606973) colocalizes with COG7
(606978), as well as with COG3 and COG5 (606821), with a Golgi marker in
a perinuclear distribution. Immunoprecipitation analysis showed that all
COG subunits interact with COG2 (LDLC; 606974). Ungar et al. (2002)
concluded that the COG complex is critical for the structure and
function of the Golgi apparatus and can influence intracellular membrane
trafficking.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Suvorova et al. (2001) mapped the COG3
gene to chromosome 13.

REFERENCE 1. Suvorova, E. S.; Kurten, R. C.; Lupashin, V. V.: Identification
of a human orthologue of Sec34p as a component of the cis-Golgi vesicle
tethering machinery. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 22810-22818, 2001.

2. Ungar, D.; Oka, T.; Brittle, E. E.; Vasile, E.; Lupashin, V. V.;
Chatterton, J. E.; Heuser, J. E.; Krieger, M.; Waters, M. G.: Characterization
of a mammalian Golgi-localized protein complex, COG, that is required
for normal Golgi morphology and function. J. Cell Biol. 157: 405-415,
2002.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/23/2002

EDITED mgross: 05/23/2002

608205	TITLE *608205 MITOCHONDRIAL TRANS-2-ENOYL-CoA REDUCTASE; MECR
;;TRANS-2-ENOYL-CoA REDUCTASE, MITOCHONDRIAL;;
2-@ENOYL THIOESTER REDUCTASE;;
NUCLEAR RECEPTOR-BINDING FACTOR 1; NRBF1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to S. cerevisiae
trans-2-enoyl thioesterase, followed by PCR amplification, Miinalainen
et al. (2003) cloned NRBF1. The deduced 373-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 37 kD. Homologous proteins were identified
in mammalian, nematode, and yeast databases. The mammalian proteins
contain a putative N-terminal mitochondrial targeting signal, and all
contain a tyrosine residue critical for catalysis in the yeast enzyme.
Northern blot analysis detected a 1.4-kb NRBF1 transcript expressed at
highest levels in skeletal and heart muscle. Expression was weaker in
brain, placenta, liver, kidney, and pancreas, and no expression was
detected in lung. SDS-PAGE showed that purified recombinant NRBF1 had an
apparent molecular mass of about 37 kD. Size exclusion chromatography
estimated a native mass of 65 kD, indicating that NRBF1 forms
homodimers.

GENE FUNCTION

Miinalainen et al. (2003) demonstrated that recombinant NRBF1 reduced
trans-2-enoyl-CoA to acyl-CoA with chain lengths from C6 to C16 in an
NADPH-dependent manner, with preference for medium chain-length
substrates. Furthermore, expression of human NRBF1 in a yeast strain
deficient in 2-enoyl thioester reductase restored mitochondrial
respiratory function and allowed growth on glycerol.

GENE STRUCTURE

Miinalainen et al. (2003) determined that the NRBF1 gene contains 10
exons and spans more than 37 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Miinalainen et al. (2003) mapped the NRBF1
gene to chromosome 1p22.3.

REFERENCE 1. Miinalainen, I. J.; Chen, Z.-J.; Torkko, J. M.; Pirila, P. L.;
Sormunen, R. T.; Bergmann, U.; Qin, Y.-M.; Hiltunen, J. K.: Characterization
of 2-enoyl thioester reductase from mammals: an ortholog of Ybr026p/Mrf1'p
of the yeast mitochondrial fatty acid synthesis type II. J. Biol.
Chem. 278: 20154-20161, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/24/2003

EDITED mgross: 03/22/2007
mgross: 10/24/2003

613367	TITLE *613367 LIN54, C. ELEGANS, HOMOLOG OF; LIN54
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

LIN54 is a component of the LIN, or DREAM, complex, an essential
regulator of cell cycle genes (Schmit et al., 2009).

CLONING

Using mass spectrometry to identify proteins associated with the LIN
complex isolated from MOLT-4 human T cells, followed by database
analysis, Schmit et al. (2007) identified LIN54. The deduced 749-amino
acid protein contains 2 cysteine-rich C-terminal CxC domains separated
by a short spacer. SDS-PAGE of MOLT-4 cells and Western blot analysis of
HeLa cells detected LIN54 at an apparent molecular mass of 110 kD.

Schmit et al. (2009) identified a helix-coil-helix region at the extreme
C terminus of the LIN54 protein.

GENE FUNCTION

By gel filtration of MOLT-4 cells, Schmit et al. (2007) identified LIN54
as a subunit of the over 669-kD LIN complex. Other stable LIN complex
components included LIN9 (609375), LIN37, BMYB (MYBL2; 601415), and
RBAP48 (RBBP4; 602923). All endogenous or epitope-tagged LIN complex
subunits coimmunoprecipitated with one another, and all were efficiently
codepleted together with antibodies directed to LIN9. The LIN complex
associated with E2F (see 189971)-regulated promoters in the T98G human
glioblastoma cell line and was required for activation of G2/M genes.
Depletion of LIN complex subunits had no significant effect on
expression of G1/S genes.

Using small hairpin RNA, Schmit et al. (2009) showed that depletion of
LIN54 significantly slowed the proliferation of BJ human fibroblasts.
Domain analysis revealed that the C-terminal helix-coil-helix region of
LIN54 was essential for its binding to p130 (RBL2; 180203) and BMYB. The
CxC domain of LIN54 was identified as a DNA-binding domain that could
bind the promoter region of the CDC2 (116940) gene in a
sequence-specific manner. LIN54 bound 2 regions in the CDC2 promoter, 1
of which overlaps with the cell cycle homology region at the
transcription start site. In quiescent cells, LIN54 binding at the cell
cycle homology region was stabilized by E2F4 (600659) bound to the
adjacent cell cycle-dependent element.

MAPPING

Hartz (2010) mapped the LIN54 gene to chromosome 4q21.22 based on an
alignment of the LIN54 gene (GenBank GENBANK AB111889) with the genomic
sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  4/16/2010.

2. Schmit, F.; Cremer, S.; Gaubatz, S.: LIN54 is an essential core
subunit of the DREAM/LINC complex that binds to the cdc2 promoter
in a sequence-specific manner. FEBS J. 276: 5703-5716, 2009.

3. Schmit, F.; Korenjak, M.; Mannefeld, M.; Schmitt, K.; Franke, C.;
von Eyss, B.; Gagrica, S.; Hanel, F.; Brehm,A.; Gaubatz, S.: LINC,
a human complex that is related to pRB-containing complexes in invertebrates
regulates the expression of G2/M genes. Cell Cycle 6: 1903-19113,
2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/16/2010

EDITED terry: 12/02/2010
mgross: 4/16/2010

603894	TITLE *603894 REGULATOR OF G PROTEIN SIGNALING 6; RGS6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the RGS (regulator of G protein signaling) family, such as
RGS6, modulate G protein function by activating the intrinsic GTPase
activity of the alpha (guanine nucleotide-binding) subunits (Seki et
al., 1999).

CLONING

By EST database analysis and PCR of a brain cDNA library, Posner et al.
(1999) obtained a full-length cDNA encoding RGS6. The predicted
472-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 54.4 kD. It
contains an N-terminal dishevelled (see 601365)/egl10/pleckstrin
(173570) (DEP) domain, a central G protein gamma subunit (see GNG2;
606981)-like (GGL) domain, and an RGS domain near the C terminus.

Using RT-PCR, Seki et al. (1999) showed that RGS6 was expressed in
various tissues.

By PCR of a brain cDNA library, Chatterjee et al. (2003) identified 36
RGS6 splice variants resulting from the use of 2 alternative
transcription sites and complex alternative splicing. The variants
encode proteins with long or short N-terminal domains, complete or
incomplete GGL domains, 7 distinct C-terminal domains, and a common
internal domain that includes the RGS domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Posner et al. (1999) expressed RGS6 in insect cells and found that it
formed a cytosolic heterodimer via its GGL domain with the G protein
beta-5 (GNB5; 604447) subunit, but not with other G protein beta
subunits tested. The RGS6/GNB5 complex acted as a GTPase-activating
protein, but it did not form heterotrimeric complexes with G-alpha-o
(GNAO1; 139311)-GDP or G-alpha-q (GNAQ; 600998)-GDP, it did not alter
activity of adenyl cyclase types I, II, or V, and it did not activate
phospholipase C-beta-1 (PLCB1; 607120) or PLCB2 (604114). However, the
RGS6/GNB5 complex inhibited GNB1/GNG2-mediated activation of PLCB2.

Chatterjee et al. (2003) found that RGS6 isoforms with complete GGL
domains interacted with GNB5, irrespective of their N-terminal domain,
following expression in COS-7 cells. In contrast, RGS6 isoforms lacking
a complete GGL domain did not interact with GNB5. Subcellular
distribution patterns for RGS6 isoforms ranged from exclusively
cytoplasmic to exclusively nuclear/nucleolar, and coexpression of GNB5
promoted nuclear localization of RGS6 isoforms.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sierra et al. (2002) determined that the RGS6 gene contains 17 exons.
Chatterjee et al. (2003) determined that the RGS6 gene contains 20 exons
and spans 630 kb.

MAPPING

By somatic cell and radiation hybrid analysis, Seki et al. (1999) mapped
the RGS6 gene to chromosome 14q24.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In an epidemiologic study of 477 bladder cancer patients and 446 matched
controls, Berman et al. (2004) identified 3 noncoding SNPs in RGS2
(600861) and RGS6 that were each associated with a significantly reduced
risk of bladder cancer. When analyzed separately, a C-to-T SNP in the
3-prime UTR of RGS6, dbSNP rs2074647, conferred the greatest overall
reduction in bladder cancer risk, with a significant odds ratio of 0.66.
The reduction of risk was more pronounced in those who had ever smoked.
Expression of dbSNP rs2074647 increased the activity of a luciferase-RGS
fusion protein nearly 3-fold. PCR analysis confirmed that RGS6 splice
variants were expressed in bladder cancer tissue and cell lines. Berman
et al. (2004) proposed that RGS proteins may be important modulators of
cancer risk.

REFERENCE 1. Berman, D. M.; Wang, Y.; Liu, Z.; Dong, Q.; Burke, L.-A.; Liotta,
L. A.; Fisher, R.; Wu, X.: A functional polymorphism in RGS6 modulates
the risk of bladder cancer. Cancer Res. 64: 6820-6826, 2004.

2. Chatterjee, T. K.; Liu, Z.; Fisher, R. A.: Human RGS6 gene structure,
complex alternative splicing, and role of N terminus and G protein
gamma-subunit-like (GGL) domain in subcellular localization of RGS6
splice variants. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 30261-30271, 2003.

3. Posner, B. A.; Gilman, A. G.; Harris, B. A.: Regulators of G protein
signaling 6 and 7: purification of complexes with G-beta-5 and assessment
of their effects on G protein-mediated signaling pathways. J. Biol.
Chem. 274: 31087-31093, 1999.

4. Seki, N.; Hattori, A.; Hayashi, A.; Kozuma, S.; Hori, T.; Saito,
T.: The human regulator of G-protein signaling protein 6 gene (RGS6)
maps between markers WI-5202 and D14S277 on chromosome 14q24.3. J.
Hum. Genet. 44: 138-140, 1999.

5. Sierra, D. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Householder, D.; Grishin, N. V.;
Yu, K.; Ukidwe, P.; Barker, S. A.; He, W.; Wensel, T. G.; Otero, G.;
Brown, G.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Wilkie, T. M.: Evolution
of the regulators of G-protein signaling multigene family in mouse
and human. Genomics 79: 177-185, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/22/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/12/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/11/1999

EDITED mgross: 10/22/2008
mgross: 9/12/2002
jlewis: 6/14/1999
jlewis: 6/11/1999

605566	TITLE *605566 RETICULON 4 RECEPTOR; RTN4R
;;NOGO RECEPTOR; NGR
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

NOGO (604475) has been identified as a component of the central nervous
system myelin that prevents axonal regeneration in the adult vertebrate
central nervous system. Analysis of NogoA (amino-Nogo) has shown that an
axon-inhibiting domain of 66 amino acids is expressed at the
extracellular surface and at the endoplasmic reticulum lumen of
transfected cells and oligodendrocytes. The acidic amino terminus of
NogoA is detected at the cytosolic face of cellular membranes and may
contribute to inhibition of axon regeneration at sites of
oligodendrocyte injury. Fournier et al. (2001) showed that the
extracellular domain of Nogo (Nogo-66) inhibits axonal extension but
does not alter nonneuronal cell morphology. In contrast, a multivalent
form of the N terminus of NogoA affects the morphology of both neurons
and other cell types. Fournier et al. (2001) identified a
brain-specific, leucine-rich-repeat protein with high affinity for
soluble Nogo-66. Cleavage of the Nogo-66 receptor and other
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-linked proteins from axonal surfaces
renders neurons insensitive to Nogo-66. Nogo-66 receptor expression is
sufficient to impart Nogo-66 axonal inhibition to unresponsive neurons.
Disruption of the interaction between Nogo-66 and its receptor provides
the potential for enhanced recovery after human central nervous system
(CNS) injury. The Nogo-66 receptor gene encodes a protein of 473 amino
acids. The predicted protein contains a signal sequence followed by 8
leucine-rich-repeat (LRR) domains, a flanking LRR C-terminal domain that
is cysteine rich, a unique region, and a GPI anchorage site.
Subsequently, both Barton et al. (2003) and Pignot et al. (2003) showed
that there is an N-terminal LRR domain preceding the 8 LRR domains. By
Northern blot analysis Fournier et al. (2001) showed that expression of
the Nogo-66 receptor is widespread in the brain; the areas richest in
gray matter express the highest levels. Nogo-66 receptor mRNA is not
detectable in white matter, where NogoA is expressed by
oligodendrocytes. Northern blot analysis in mouse showed a single band
of 2.3 kb in the adult brain, indicating that the isolated NgR clone is
full length. Low levels of this mRNA are observed in heart and kidney
but not in other peripheral tissues.

Fournier et al. (2001) used oligonucleotide primers based on the
predicted NOGO receptor cDNA from the genomic sequence to amplify the
human receptor from an adult brain cDNA library. The deduced protein
shares 89% sequence identity with the mouse protein. The exons of the
human NOGO receptor gene are separated by nearly 30 kb.

By Northern blot analysis, Pignot et al. (2003) found a 2.4-kb NGR
transcript highly expressed in brain, moderately expressed in spleen and
liver, and weakly expressed in skeletal muscle, lung, kidney, and
placenta. A brain multitissue array revealed highest NGR expression in
cerebellum, followed by several cortical areas, amygdala, hippocampus,
and accumbens nucleus. Much weaker expression was detected in other
brain regions examined. By digestion of NGR with phospholipase C, Pignot
et al. (2003) confirmed that NGR has a GPI anchor, and sucrose density
fractionation of transfected Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells
demonstrated the association of human NGR with lipid rafts.

GENE FUNCTION

GrandPre et al. (2002) identified competitive antagonists of the NOGO
receptor derived from amino-terminal peptide fragments of NOGO-66. The
NOGO-66(1-40) antagonist peptide blocks NOGO-66 or CNS myelin inhibition
of axonal outgrowth in vitro, demonstrating that the NOGO receptor
mediates a significant portion of axonal outgrowth inhibition by myelin.
Intrathecal administration of the amino-terminal antagonist peptide to
rats with midthoracic spinal cord hemisection resulted in significant
axon outgrowth of the corticospinal tract, and improved functional
recovery. Thus, GrandPre et al. (2002) concluded that NOGO-66 and the
NOGO receptor have central roles in limiting axonal regeneration after
CNS injury.

Wang et al. (2002) demonstrated that a GPI-anchored central nervous
system myelin protein, oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein (OMG;
164345), is a potent inhibitor of neurite outgrowth in cultured neurons.
Like NOGOA (604475), OMGP contributes significantly to the inhibitory
activity associated with CNS myelin. To further elucidate the mechanisms
that mediate this inhibitory activity, Wang et al. (2002) screened an
expression library and identified the NOGO receptor as a high affinity
OMGP-binding protein. Cleavage of NOGO receptor and other GPI-linked
proteins from the cell surface renders axons of dorsal root ganglia
insensitive to OMGP. Introduction of exogenous NOGO receptor confers
OMGP responsiveness to otherwise insensitive neurons. Thus, OMGP is an
important inhibitor of neurite outgrowth that acts through the NOGO
receptor and its associated receptor complex. Wang et al. (2002)
suggested that interfering with the OMGP/NOGO receptor pathway may allow
lesioned axons to regenerate after injury in vivo.

Axonal regeneration in the adult CNS is limited by 2 proteins in myelin,
Nogo and myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG; 159640). The NOGO receptor
(NgR) had been identified as an axonal GPI-anchored protein, whereas the
MAG receptor had remained elusive. Liu et al. (2002) demonstrated that
MAG binds directly, with high affinity, to NgR. Cleavage of GPI-linked
proteins from axons protects growth cones from MAG-induced collapse, and
dominant-negative NgR eliminates MAG inhibition of neurite outgrowth.
MAG-resistant embryonic neurons were rendered MAG-sensitive by
expression of NgR. MAG and Nogo-66 activate NgR independently and serve
as redundant NgR ligands that may limit axonal regeneration after CNS
injury.

Domeniconi et al. (2002) showed that MAG inhibits axonal regeneration
through interaction with NgR. They demonstrated that MAG binds
specifically to an NgR-expressing cell line in a GPI-dependent and
sialic acid-independent manner. Consistent with a direct interaction of
MAG and NgR, Domeniconi et al. (2002) observed that MAG precipitates NgR
from NgR-expressing cells, dorsal root ganglia, and cerebellar neurons.
Experiments blocking NgR from interacting with MAG prevented inhibition
of neurite outgrowth by MAG. Using NgR-expressing cell cultures, the
authors found that MAG and NOGO-66 compete directly for binding to NgR.

In inhibiting neurite outgrowth, several myelin components, including
the extracellular domain of NOGOA, OMGP, and MAG, exert their effects
through the same NOGO receptor. The GPI-anchored nature of the NOGO
receptor indicates the requirement for an additional transmembrane
protein to transduce the inhibitory signals into the interior of
responding neurons. Wang et al. (2002) demonstrated that p75 (NGFR;
162010), a transmembrane protein known to be a receptor for the
neurotrophin family of growth factors, specifically interacts with the
NOGO receptor. p75 is required for NOGO receptor-mediated signaling, as
neurons from p75 knockout mice were no longer responsive to myelin or to
any of the known NOGO receptor ligands. Blocking the p75-NOGO receptor
interaction also reduced the activities of these inhibitors. Moreover, a
truncated p75 protein lacking the intracellular domain, when
overexpressed in primary neurons, attenuated the same set of inhibitory
activities, suggesting that p75 is a signal transducer of the Nogo
receptor-p75 receptor complex. Wang et al. (2002) suggested that
interfering with p75 and its downstream signaling pathways may allow
lesioned axons to overcome most of the inhibitory activities associated
with central nervous system myelin.

Wong et al. (2002) reported that p75(NTR) is a coreceptor for the NOGO
receptor for MAG (159460) signaling. In cultured human embryonic kidney
(HEK) cells expressing the NOGO receptor, p75(NTR) was required for
MAG-induced intracellular calcium elevation. Coimmunoprecipitation
showed an association of the NOGO receptor with p75(NTR) that could be
disrupted by an antibody against p75(NTR), and extensive coexpression
was observed in the developing rat nervous system. Furthermore, a
p75(NTR) antibody abolished MAG-induced repulsive turning of Xenopus
axonal growth cones and calcium elevation, both in neurons and in the
NOGO receptor/p75(NTR)-expressing HEK cells.

Yu et al. (2004) observed that Ngr and p75 were colocalized in
low-density membrane raft fractions of rat forebrain and cerebellum and
in cultured cerebellar granule cells. Disruption of lipid rafts by a
cholesterol-binding reagent reduced Nogo-66 signaling in the cultured
cells. Yu et al. (2004) concluded that lipid rafts facilitate the
interaction between Nogo receptor components.

By deletion analysis, Barton et al. (2003) showed that the binding of
soluble fragments of NOGO, MAG, and NGR itself to cell-surface NGR
required the entire LRR region (the N-terminal LRR, the 8 central LRRs,
and the C-terminal LRR) of NGR, but not other portions of the protein.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

He et al. (2003) reported the 1.5-angstrom crystal structure of NGR.
They found that NGR adopts a leucine-rich repeat (LRR) module whose
concave exterior surface contains a broad region of evolutionarily
conserved patches of aromatic residues. A deep cleft at the C-terminal
base of the LRR may play a role in the association of NGR with the p75
coreceptor.

Barton et al. (2003) reported the NGR structure to 2.3-angstrom
resolution. They found that NGR has an elongated banana-like shape with
approximate dimensions of 80 by 35 by 35 angstroms. It has low secondary
structure content, consisting mostly of short beta strands that generate
a long parallel beta sheet spanning the concave surface of the molecule.

MAPPING

Fournier et al. (2001) identified human sequence corresponding to the
mouse NogoA receptor within a genomic cosmid sequence (GenBank GENBANK
AC007663) on chromosome 22q11.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Schizophrenia (181500) or schizoaffective disorders are rather common
features in patients with DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome (DGS
188400/VCFS 192430) as a result of 22q11.2 haploinsufficiency. Sinibaldi
et al. (2004) evaluated the RTN4R gene, which maps within the DGS/VCFS
critical region, as a potential candidate for schizophrenia
susceptibility. They screened 120 unrelated Italian patients with
schizophrenia for mutations in RTN4R using denaturing high performance
liquid chromatography. Three mutant alleles were detected, including 2
missense changes (R119W, 605566.0001; R196H, 605566.0002) and 1
synonymous codon variant. The 2 schizophrenia patients with missense
changes were strongly resistant to neuroleptic treatment at any dosage.
Both missense changes were absent in 300 control subjects. Molecular
modeling revealed that both changes lead to putative structural
alterations of the native protein.

ANIMAL MODEL

McGee et al. (2005) found that mutations in NgR affect cessation of
ocular dominance plasticity. In NgR -/- mice, plasticity during the
critical period was normal, but it continued abnormally such that ocular
dominance at 45 or 120 days postnatal was subject to the same plasticity
as at juvenile ages. Thus, physiologic Ngr signaling from myelin-derived
Nogo, Mag, and Omgp (164345) consolidated the neural circuitry
established during experience-dependent plasticity. McGee et al. (2005)
concluded that after pathologic trauma, similar NgR signaling limits
functional recovery and axonal regeneration.

In vitro, Zheng et al. (2005) found that neurite outgrowth from NgR-null
mouse dorsal root ganglion or cerebellar granule neurons were inhibited
by myelin or by a Nogo-66 substrate, similar to wildtype. Ngfr-deficient
dorsal root ganglion neurons, but not cerebellar neurons, demonstrated
somewhat less inhibition to myelin, suggesting that Ngfr works through a
mechanism separate from NgR. In vivo, NgR-null and Ngfr-deficient mice
did not show enhanced regeneration of corticospinal tract axons after
spinal hemisection compared to wildtype. Zheng et al. (2005) concluded
that NgR is not essential for mediating inhibitory signals from CNS
myelin and does not play a central role in inhibition of axonal growth.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SCHIZOPHRENIA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
RTN4R, ARG119TRP

In an Italian patient with schizophrenia (181500), Sinibaldi et al.
(2004) identified a 355C-T transition in the RTN4R gene that resulted in
an arg119-to-trp (R119W) amino acid substitution. This patient was
strongly resistant to neuroleptic treatment at any dosage. Molecular
modeling revealed that this change led to putative structural
alterations of the native protein.

.0002
SCHIZOPHRENIA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
RTN4R, ARG196HIS

In an Italian patient with schizophrenia (181500), Sinibaldi et al.
(2004) identified a 587G-A transition in the RTN4R gene that resulted in
an arg196-to-his (R196H) amino acid substitution. This patient was
strongly resistant to neuroleptic treatment at any dosage. Molecular
modeling revealed that this change led to putative structural
alterations of the native protein.

REFERENCE 1. Barton, W. A.; Liu, B. P.; Tzvetkova, D.; Jeffrey, P. D.; Fournier,
A. E.; Sah, D.; Cate, R.; Strittmatter, S. M.; Nikolov, D. B.: Structure
and axon outgrowth inhibitor binding of the Nogo-66 receptor and related
proteins. EMBO J. 22: 3291-3302, 2003.

2. Domeniconi, M.; Cao, Z.; Spencer, T.; Sivasankaran, R.; Wang, K.
C.; Nikulina, E.; Kimura, N.; Cai, H.; Deng, K.; Gao, Y.; He, Z.;
Filbin, M. T.: Myelin-associated glycoprotein interacts with the
Nogo66 receptor to inhibit neurite outgrowth. Neuron 35: 283-290,
2002.

3. Fournier, A. E.; GrandPre, T.; Strittmatter, S. M.: Identification
of a receptor mediating Nogo-66 inhibition of axonal regeneration. Nature 409:
341-346, 2001.

4. GrandPre, T.; Li, S.; Strittmatter, S. M.: Nogo-66 receptor antagonist
peptide promotes axonal regeneration. Nature 417: 547-551, 2002.

5. He, X. L.; Bazan, J. F.; McDermott, G.; Park, J. B.; Wang, K.;
Tessier-Lavigne, M.; He, Z.; Garcia, K. C.: Structure of the Nogo
receptor ectodomain: a recognition module implicated in myelin inhibition. Neuron 38:
177-185, 2003.

6. Liu, B. P.; Fournier, A.; GrandPre, T.; Strittmatter, S. M.: Myelin-associated
glycoprotein as a functional ligand for the Nogo-66 receptor. Science 297:
1190-1193, 2002.

7. McGee, A. W.; Yang, Y.; Fischer, Q. S.; Daw, N. W.; Strittmatter,
S. M.: Experience-driven plasticity of visual cortex limited by myelin
and Nogo receptor. Science 309: 2222-2226, 2005.

8. Pignot, V.; Hein, A. E.; Barske, C.; Wiessner, C.; Walmsley, A.
R.; Kaupmann, K.; Mayeur, H.; Sommer, B.; Mir, A. K.; Frentzel, S.
: Characterization of two novel proteins, NgRH1 and NgRH2, structurally
and biochemically homologous to the Nogo-66 receptor. J. Neurochem. 85:
717-728, 2003.

9. Sinibaldi, L.; De Luca, A.; Bellacchio, E.; Conti, E.; Pasini,
A.; Paloscia, C.; Spalletta, G.; Caltagirone, C.; Pizzuti, A.; Dallapiccola,
B.: Mutations of the Nogo-66 receptor (RTN4R) gene in schizophrenia.
(Abstract) Hum. Mutat. 24: 534-535, 2004. Note: Full article online.

10. Wang, K. C.; Kim, J. A.; Sivasankaran, R.; Segal, R.; He, Z.:
p75 interacts with the Nogo receptor as a co-receptor for Nogo, MAG
and OMgp. Nature 420: 74-78, 2002.

11. Wang, K. C.; Koprivica, V.; Kim, J. A.; Sivasankaran, R.; Guo,
Y.; Neve, R. L.; He, Z.: Oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein in a
Nogo receptor ligand that inhibits neurite outgrowth. Nature 417:
941-944, 2002.

12. Wong, S. T.; Henley, J. R.; Kanning, K. C.; Huang, K.; Bothwell,
M.; Poo, M.: A p75(NTR) and Nogo receptor complex mediates repulsive
signaling by myelin-associated glycoprotein. Nature Neurosci. 5:
1302-1308, 2002.

13. Yu, W.; Guo, W.; Feng, L.: Segregation of Nogo66 receptors into
lipid rafts in rat brain and inhibition of Nogo66 signaling by cholesterol
depletion. FEBS Lett. 577: 87-92, 2004.

14. Zheng, B.; Atwal, J.; Ho, C.; Case, L.; He, X.; Garcia, K. C.;
Steward, O.; Tessier-Lavigne, M.: Genetic deletion of the Nogo receptor
does not reduce neurite inhibition in vitro or promote corticospinal
tract regeneration in vivo. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 1205-1210,
2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/29/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/24/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/10/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/26/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/10/2005
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 11/27/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/14/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/18/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/12/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/28/2002

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 1/19/2001

EDITED wwang: 10/06/2006
wwang: 10/5/2006
terry: 9/29/2006
wwang: 5/10/2006
ckniffin: 4/24/2006
alopez: 10/11/2005
terry: 10/10/2005
carol: 8/8/2005
carol: 7/21/2005
wwang: 6/7/2005
terry: 5/26/2005
alopez: 2/15/2005
wwang: 1/25/2005
terry: 1/10/2005
alopez: 12/19/2002
carol: 12/6/2002
tkritzer: 11/27/2002
alopez: 11/20/2002
terry: 11/18/2002
alopez: 11/14/2002
terry: 11/12/2002
alopez: 9/20/2002
tkritzer: 9/18/2002
alopez: 7/16/2002
terry: 7/12/2002
alopez: 5/29/2002
terry: 5/28/2002
carol: 1/19/2001

606880	TITLE *606880 CASPASE 8-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2; CASP8AP2
;;FLICE-ASSOCIATED HUGE PROTEIN; FLASH;;
KIAA1315
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Imai et al. (1999) cloned Casp8ap2, which they called Flash, from a
mouse T-cell lymphoma cDNA library. The deduced 1,962-amino acid protein
has a calculated molecular mass of 219.1 kD. It contains a motif
structurally related to CED4/Apaf1 (602233) and a C-terminal death
effector domain (DED)-recruiting domain (DRD). Imai et al. (1999)
identified transcripts of 4.7 kb and 7 kb in adult mouse tissues, with
highest expression in heart, brain, thymus, lung, testis, and spleen,
and much lower expression in liver, kidney, and skeletal muscle. By
Western blot analysis of mouse fibroblasts and thymocytes, Imai et al.
(1999) observed endogenous Casp8ap2 as a protein band at 220 kD.

Kimura et al. (1999) cloned full-length human FLASH from a KT-cell cDNA
library. The deduced 1,982-amino acid protein shares 66% identity with
mouse Flash. Human FLASH lacks the CED4 homologous region found in mouse
Flash, but it contains the C-terminal DRD.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned CASP8AP2, which they designated
KIAA1315. RT-PCR analysis showed significant CASP8AP2 expression in
testis and ovary only, with much weaker expression in amygdala. Little
to no expression was detected in other tissues examined.

Using immunofluorescence analysis of Drosophila and HeLa cells, Yang et
al. (2009) found that FLASH concentrated in nuclear bodies called
histone locus bodies (HLBs), which are distinct from Cajal bodies.

GENE FUNCTION

Through coimmunoprecipitation and transfection experiments, Imai et al.
(1999) determined that the DRD of Flash bound the DEDs of caspase-8
(601763) and Fadd (602457). It also specifically coimmunoprecipitated
with activated Fas (134637), suggesting that Casp8ap2 is part of the
death-inducing signaling complex (DISC).

Using luciferase reporter analysis, Choi et al. (2001) showed that
inhibition of FLASH expression abolished TNF (191160)-induced NFKB
(164011) activation in embryonic kidney cells. Expression or
overexpression of FLASH activated NFKB through a central oligomerization
domain, called the NFKB activation domain (NAD), in a TRAF2 (601895)-NIK
(604655)-IKKA (600664)-dependent pathway. Immunoprecipitation analysis
indicated that the FLASH NAD interacted with TRAF2. Choi et al. (2001)
concluded that FLASH coordinates downstream NFKB activity via a
TRAF2-dependent pathway in TNF signaling.

Using a library of endoribonuclease-prepared short interfering RNAs
(esiRNAs), Kittler et al. (2004) identified 37 genes required for cell
division, one of which was CASP8AP2. These 37 genes included several
splicing factors for which knockdown generates mitotic spindle defects.
In addition, a putative nuclear-export terminator was found to speed up
cell proliferation and mitotic progression after knockdown.

Barcaroli et al. (2006) found that FLASH colocalized with coilin (COIL;
600272) and NPAT (601448) in Cajal bodies in several human cell lines
and primary fibroblasts. Knockdown of NPAT by small interfering RNA
resulted in FLASH delocalization, and downregulation of FLASH resulted
in altered localization of coilin and other Cajal body components.

Barcaroli et al. (2006) stated that Cajal body components such as NPAT
and CDK2 (116953) play a role in S-phase regulation and histone
precursor mRNA transcription. They found that depletion of FLASH
resulted in reduced histone H4 (see 602822) mRNA and protein levels and
an S-phase block.

Unlike the majority of pre-mRNAs, replication-dependent histone
pre-mRNAs are not processed at the 3-prime end to include a polyA tail.
Instead, they are proteolytically cleaved between a conserved stem-loop
structure and a purine-rich histone downstream element (HDE), resulting
in histone mRNAs that terminate with a stem loop followed by a
5-nucleotide single-stranded tail. Processing of histone pre-mRNAs at
the 3-prime end requires the U7 small nucleolar ribonuclear particle
(snRNP), which binds the HDE and recruits the endonuclease CPSF73
(CPSF3; 606029). Yang et al. (2009) found that FLASH was required for
3-prime end processing of histone pre-mRNA. Truncation analysis showed
that the N-terminal domain of FLASH interacted with an N-terminal domain
of the U7 snRNP-specific subunit LSM11. Drosophila Flash also interacted
directly with human and Drosophila LSM11. Depletion of Flash in
Drosophila cells resulted in polyadenylation of histone mRNAs.

By immunoprecipitation analysis, Kiriyama et al. (2009) found that FLASH
interacted with ARS2 (SRRT; 614469) in human cell lines. Both proteins
colocalized at nuclear foci. Knockdown of either FLASH or ARS2 inhibited
cell growth and reduced mRNA levels of replication-dependent histones.
Mutation analysis revealed that the N-terminal coiled-coil domain of
FLASH was required for both self-association and for S-phase
progression. A central region of FLASH, which the authors called the
FLASH-ARS2-binding (FARB) region, was required and sufficient for
interaction with the conserved C-terminal domain of ARS2. Interaction of
FLASH with ARS2 was also required for FLASH-dependent S-phase
progression.

MAPPING

Hartz (2012) mapped the CASP8AP2 gene to chromosome 6q15 based on an
alignment of the CASP8AP2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF154415) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Barcaroli, D.; Bongiorno-Borbone, L.; Terrinoni, A.; Hofmann, T.
G.; Rossi, M.; Knight, R. A.; Matera, A. G.; Melino, G.; De Laurenzi,
V.: FLASH is required for histone transcription and S-phase progression. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 14808-14812, 2006.

2. Barcaroli, D.; Dinsdale, D.; Neale, M. H.; Bongiorno-Borbone, L.;
Ranalli, M.; Munarriz, E.; Sayan, A. E.; McWilliam, J. M.; Smith,
T. M.; Fava, E.; Knight, R. A.; Melino, G.; De Laurenzi, V.: FLASH
is an essential component of Cajal bodies. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103:
14802-14807, 2006.

3. Choi, Y.-H.; Kim, K.-B.; Kim, H.-H.; Hong, G.-S.; Kwon, Y.-K.;
Chung, C.-W.; Park, Y.-M.; Shen, Z.-J.; Kim, B. J.; Lee, S.-Y.; Jung,
Y.-K.: FLASH coordinates NF-kappa-B activity via TRAF2. J. Biol.
Chem. 276: 25073-25077, 2001.

4. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/1/2012.

5. Imai, Y.; Kimura, T.; Murakami, A.; Yajima, N.; Sakamaki, K.; Yonehara,
S.: The CED-4-homologous protein FLASH is involved in Fas-mediated
activation of caspase-8 during apoptosis. Nature 398: 777-785, 1999.
Note: Erratum: Nature 400: 89 only, 1999.

6. Kimura, T.; Imai, Y.; Yonehara, S.: Reply to Koonin et al. (Letter) Nature 401:
662-663, 1999.

7. Kiriyama, M.; Kobayashi, Y.; Saito, M.; Ishikawa, F.; Yonehara,
S.: Interaction of FLASH with arsenite resistance protein 2 is involved
in cell cycle progression at S phase. Mol. Cell. Biol. 29: 4729-4741,
2009.

8. Kittler, R.; Putz, G.; Pelletier, L.; Poser, I.; Heninger, A.-K.;
Drechsel, D.; Fischer, S.; Konstantinova, I.; Habermann, B.; Grabner,
H.; Yaspo, M.-L.; Himmelbauer, H.; Korn, B.; Neugebauer, K.; Pisabarro,
M. T.; Buchholz, F.: An endoribonuclease-prepared siRNA screen in
human cells identifies genes essential for cell division. Nature 432:
1036-1040, 2004.

9. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVI.
The complete sequences of 150 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 65-73, 2000.

10. Yang, X.; Burch, B. D.; Yan, Y.; Marzluff, W. F.; Dominski, Z.
: FLASH, a proapoptotic protein involved in activation of caspase-8,
is essential for 3-prime end processing of histone pre-mRNAs. Molec.
Cell 36: 267-278, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/1/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/14/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/25/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/8/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/29/2002

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/24/2002

EDITED mgross: 02/08/2013
terry: 9/4/2012
mgross: 2/3/2012
terry: 2/1/2012
mgross: 1/5/2010
terry: 12/14/2009
mgross: 1/25/2007
alopez: 3/8/2005
carol: 4/29/2002
terry: 4/29/2002
carol: 4/24/2002

601581	TITLE *601581 NEURONAL CELL ADHESION MOLECULE; NRCAM
;;KIAA0343
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) are a subset of the immunoglobin (Ig)
superfamily found in the nervous systems of both vertebrates and
invertebrates. They are usually surface membrane proteins with multiple
Ig domains at their N termini followed by several fibronectin type III
repeats and either a transmembrane intracellular domain or a
glycophosphatidylinositol-linked membrane anchor at the C terminus (Lane
et al., 1996).

CLONING

The chicken Bravo/Nr-CAM was described by Grumet et al. (1991) and
Kayyem et al. (1992) and shown to play a role in nervous system
development. The protein interacts with other cell surface molecules of
the Ig superfamily and appears to be necessary for specific pathfinding
by axonal growth cones during development (Lane et al., 1996). Lane et
al. (1996) cloned the human homolog (NRCAM) of the chicken gene from a
fetal brain library. Like its chicken counterpart, the predicted
1,275-amino acid protein has 6 V-like Ig domains and 5 fibronectin type
III repeats. The transmembrane and intracellular domains of human and
chicken NRCAM are entirely conserved and the proteins are 82% identical
overall. Alternative splice variants were observed involving sequence
around the fifth fibronectin repeat. Northern blots showed an
approximately 7-kb transcript in all tissues of adult human brain
examined.

Wang et al. (1998) found expression of a 7.0-kb NRCAM transcript at
highest levels in brain, adrenal medulla, and adrenal cortex and at
intermediate levels in placenta, pancreas, thyroid, and testis. In a PCR
survey of splice variants in fetal and adult tissues, they found spatial
and temporal variations in the exons utilized. They noted that this
phenomenon is conserved in the chick NrCAM and has been observed in
other related CAMs.

GENE STRUCTURE

Dry et al. (2001) determined that the NRCAM gene contains 34 exons
spanning over 316 kb.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Lane et al. (1996) mapped the
NRCAM gene to 7q31.1-q31.2. By radiation hybrid analysis, Wang et al.
(1998) mapped the NRCAM gene close to marker D7S666, which Dry et al.
(2001) noted is located at 7q31.

REFERENCE 1. Dry, K.; Kenwrick, S.; Rosenthal, A.; Platzer, M.: The complete
sequence of the human locus for NgCAM-related cell adhesion molecule
reveals a novel alternative exon in chick and man and conserved genomic
organization for the L1 subfamily. Gene 273: 115-122, 2001.

2. Grumet, M.; Mauro, V.; Burgoon, M. P.; Edelman, G. M.; Cunningham,
B. A.: Structure of a new nervous system glycoprotein, Nr-CAM, and
its relationship to subgroups of neural cell adhesion molecules. J.
Cell. Biol. 113: 1399-1412, 1991.

3. Kayyem, J. F.; Roman, J. M.; de la Rosa, E. J.; Schwarz, U.; Dreyer,
W. J.: Bravo/Nr-CAM is closely related to the cell adhesion molecules
L1 and Ng-CAM and has a similar heterodimer structure. J. Cell. Biol. 118:
1259-1270, 1992.

4. Lane, R. P.; Chen, X.-N.; Yamakawa, K.; Vielmetter, J.; Korenberg,
J. R.; Dreyer, W. J.: Characterization of a highly conserved human
homolog to the chicken neural cell surface protein Bravo/Nr-CAM that
maps to chromosome band 7q31. Genomics 35: 456-465, 1996.

5. Wang, B.; Williams, H.; Du, J.-S.; Terrett, J.; Kenwrick, S.:
Alternative splicing of human NrCAM in neural and nonneural tissues. Molec.
Cell. Neurosci. 10: 287-295, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 05/13/2002

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 12/17/1996

EDITED carol: 05/13/2002
jamie: 1/6/1997
jamie: 12/20/1996
jamie: 12/19/1996
jamie: 12/18/1996
mark: 12/18/1996

602807	TITLE *602807 HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H2B HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER I; HIST1H2BI
;;HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H2BI;;
HIST1 CLUSTER, H2BI;;
H2B HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER K; H2BFK;;
H2B/K
DESCRIPTION For background information on histones, histone gene clusters, and the
H2B histone family, see HIST1H2BA (609904).

MAPPING

By analysis of a YAC contig from chromosome 6p21.3, Albig et al. (1997)
characterized a cluster of 35 histone genes that included H2B/k.

By genomic sequence analysis, Marzluff et al. (2002) determined that the
histone gene cluster on chromosome 6p22-p21, which they called histone
gene cluster-1 (HIST1), contains 55 histone genes, including HIST1H2BI.

GENE FUNCTION

See HIST1H2BA (609904) for functional information on H2B histones.

REFERENCE 1. Albig, W.; Kioschis, P.; Poustka, A.; Meergans, K.; Doenecke, D.
: Human histone gene organization: nonregular arrangement within a
large cluster. Genomics 40: 314-322, 1997.

2. Marzluff, W. F.; Gongidi, P.; Woods, K. R.; Jin, J.; Maltais, L.
J.: The human and mouse replication-dependent histone genes. Genomics 80:
487-498, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 01/29/2013

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/9/1998

EDITED mgross: 01/29/2013
mgross: 7/22/2010
tkritzer: 3/31/2003
alopez: 8/26/1998
alopez: 7/14/1998
alopez: 7/9/1998

602120	TITLE *602120 CHROMODOMAIN HELICASE DNA-BINDING PROTEIN 3; CHD3
;;Mi2-ALPHA
DESCRIPTION See CHD1 (602118) for a description of this gene family.

CLONING

Anti-Mi2 autoantibody is strongly associated with dermatomyositis and is
found in sera of 20% of dermatomyositis patients. Mi2 antigen consists
of at least 8 components. By immunoscreening human thymocyte and HeLa
cell cDNA expression libraries with anti-Mi2 patient sera, Ge et al.
(1995) isolated a partial cDNA encoding Mi2-alpha, or CHD3. The deduced
partial protein contains 4 potential zinc finger domains. Antibodies
against recombinant Mi2-alpha reacted with a 240-kD HeLa cell protein.
Northern blot analysis detected a single 7.5- to 8.0-kb Mi2-alpha
transcript in HeLa cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Seelig et al. (1996) noted that the Mi2-alpha and Mi2-beta (CHD4;
603277) proteins react with most or all dermatomyositis patient anti-Mi2
sera. While these proteins are distinct, they have stretches of
identical sequence that could result in shared epitopes.

Woodage et al. (1997) characterized the CHD3 gene. The predicted
1,944-amino acid protein shares 22.9% identity and 34.5% similarity
overall with the mouse Chd1 gene product.

MAPPING

Woodage et al. (1997) mapped the CHD3 gene to 17p13 by PCR screening of
the Genebridge 4 radiation hybrid mapping panel.

REFERENCE 1. Ge, Q.; Nilasena, D. S.; O'Brien, C. A.; Frank, M. B.; Targoff,
I. N.: Molecular analysis of a major antigenic region of the 240-kD
protein of Mi-2 autoantigen. J. Clin. Invest. 96: 1730-1737, 1995.

2. Seelig, H. P.; Renz, M.; Targoff, I. N.; Ge, Q.; Frank, M. B.:
Two forms of the major antigenic protein of the dermatomyositis-specific
Mi-2 autoantigen. (Letter) Arthritis Rheum. 39: 1769-1771, 1996.

3. Woodage, T.; Basrai, M. A.; Baxevanis, A. D.; Hieter, P.; Collins,
F. S.: Characterization of the CHD family of proteins. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 94: 11472-11477, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Patti M. Sherman - updated: 11/25/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/13/1997

EDITED alopez: 03/15/2010
carol: 11/25/1998
psherman: 11/25/1998
psherman: 11/6/1998
mark: 11/13/1997

611596	TITLE *611596 SHORT-CHAIN DEHYDROGENASE/REDUCTASE FAMILY, MEMBER 4; DHRS4
;;SDR FAMILY, MEMBER 4;;
NADPH-DEPENDENT RETINOL DEHYDROGENASE/REDUCTASE; NRDR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase enzymes, like DHRS4, are
NAD/NADP-dependent oxidoreductases that function in the breakdown of
steroids, retinoids, prostaglandins, and xenobiotics. DHRS2 also has a
noncatalytic role in the regulation of the cell cycle and apoptosis
(summary by Gabrielli and Tofanelli, 2012).

CLONING

By searching databases for homologs of rat Dhrs4, Fransen et al. (1999)
identified 3 variants of human DHRS4, which they called SDR-SRL because
the protein belongs to the short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR)
family and has a C-terminal SRL peroxisome-targeting sequence.
Fluorescence-tagged rat Dhrs4 localized to peroxisomes in transfected
Chinese hamster ovary cells.

By RT-PCR and RACE of a human liver cDNA library, Du et al. (2004)
cloned full-length DHRS4, which they called NRDR, and a shorter variant
lacking exons 4, 5, and 6. Both deduced proteins contain a classical
alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH)-short domain, a short-chain ADH (SCAD)
motif, phosphorylation and fatty acylation sites, and a peroxisomal
targeting signal. RT-PCR detected variable expression of both
transcripts in most tissues examined.

By RT-PCR and RACE of a HeLa cell cDNA library, Song et al. (2007)
cloned full-length NRDR and a variant lacking exon 3, which they called
NRDRB1. The deduced NRDR and NRDRB1 proteins have calculated molecular
masses of 29 and 27 kD, respectively. Song et al. (2007) detected NRDRB1
mRNA expression in 14 (53.9%) of 26 cervical cancer tissues, but
expression was not detected in 12 normal cervical tissues.
Immunohistochemical analysis detected NRDRB1 protein only in tumor
tissues. The full-length NRDR mRNA was observed in both normal and
neoplastic cervical tissues, but NRDR protein was only expressed in
normal cervical epithelium, where it localized in peroxisomes.

Gabrielli and Tofanelli (2012) reported that the full-length DHRS4
protein contains 278 amino acids.

GENE FUNCTION

Gabrielli and Tofanelli (2012) noted that differences in the
substrate-binding sites of DHRS2 (615194) and DHRS4 are associated with
different substrate specificities. In general, DHRS4 accepts a broader
range of substrates than DHRS2.

GENE STRUCTURE

Du et al. (2004) determined that the DHRS4 gene contains 8 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Du et al. (2004) mapped the DHRS4 gene to
chromosome 14q11.2.

EVOLUTION

Gabrielli and Tofanelli (2012) found that DHRS2 and DHRS4, which are
located within 315 kb of each other on chromosome 14, originated from a
duplication of the DHRS4 gene that took place before the formation of
the mammalian clade. DHRS2 evolved more rapidly and underwent positive
selection on more sites than the DHRS4 gene. DHRS2 sites under positive
selection were mainly located in the enzyme active site. Two other
duplicated DHRS4 genes, DHRS4L2 (615196) and DHRS4L1 (615195), are
located 20 and 47 kb downstream of DHRS4, respectively.

REFERENCE 1. Du, J.; Huang, D.-Y.; Liu, G.-F.; Wang, G.-L.; Xu, X.-L.; Wang,
B.; Zhu, L.: cDNA cloning of a short isoform of human liver NADP(H)-dependent
retinol dehydrogenase/reductase and analysis of its characteristics. Acta
Genet. Sin. 31: 661-667, 2004.

2. Fransen, M.; Van Veldhoven, P. P.; Subramani, S.: Identification
of peroxisomal proteins by using M13 phage protein VI phage display:
molecular evidence that mammalian peroxisomes contain a 2,4-dienoyl-CoA
reductase. Biochem. J. 340: 561-568, 1999.

3. Gabrielli, F.; Tofanelli, S.: Molecular and functional evolution
of human DHRS2 and DHRS4 duplicated genes. Gene 511: 461-469, 2012.

4. Song, X.-H.; Liang, B.; Liu, G.-F.; Li, R.; Xie, J.-P.; Du, K.;
Huang, D.-Y.: Expression of a novel alternatively spliced variant
of NADP(H)-dependent retinol dehydrogenase/reductase with deletion
of exon 3 in cervical squamous carcinoma. Int. J. Cancer 120: 1618-1626,
2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 04/24/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/13/2007

EDITED mgross: 04/24/2013
terry: 11/21/2008
mgross: 11/13/2007

609398	TITLE *609398 ATPase, H+ TRANSPORTING, LYSOSOMAL, 34-KD, V1 SUBUNIT D; ATP6V1D
;;ATP6M
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Vacuolar H(+)-ATPases (V-ATPases) acidify endosomes, lysosomes, Golgi,
and secretory vesicles and transport protons across the plasma membrane
into the extracellular space. The structure of the multiprotein V-ATPase
complex comprises a globular head attached to the membrane by a stalk;
subunit D proteins are contained in the stalk. ATP6V1D was originally
named ATP6M but was renamed to conform to the revised nomenclature for
mammalian vacuolar-type proton pump ATPases (Smith et al., 2003).

CLONING

Using RT-PCR, Kennell et al. (2001) cloned murine Atp6v1d from spleen.
Human and mouse ATP6V1D share 98% amino acid identity, with most of the
variation occurring in the C terminus.

GENE FUNCTION

Using phylogenetic and evolutionary analysis, Kennell et al. (2001)
showed that the ATP6V1D gene has been under strong negative selection
during evolution and is highly conserved among mammals, flies, worms,
yeast, plants, and bacteria.

Using a library of endoribonuclease-prepared short interfering RNAs
(esiRNAs), Kittler et al. (2004) identified 37 genes required for cell
division, one of which was ATP6V1D. These 37 genes included several
splicing factors for which knockdown generates mitotic spindle defects.
In addition, a putative nuclear-export terminator was found to speed up
cell proliferation and mitotic progression after knockdown.

GENE STRUCTURE

By sequence alignment, Kennell et al. (2001) showed that the ATP6V1D
gene contains at least 9 exons.

MAPPING

Kennell et al. (2001) mapped the human ATP6V1D gene by BLAST analysis to
chromosome 14q24, in a region that exhibits conserved synteny with mouse
chromosome 12.

REFERENCE 1. Kennell, J. A.; Richards, N. W.; Schaner, P. E.; Gumucio, D. L.
: cDNA cloning, chromosomal localization and evolutionary analysis
of mouse vacuolar ATPase subunit D, Atp6m. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 92:
337-341, 2001.

2. Kittler, R.; Putz, G.; Pelletier, L.; Poser, I.; Heninger, A.-K.;
Drechsel, D.; Fischer, S.; Konstantinova, I.; Habermann, B.; Grabner,
H.; Yaspo, M.-L.; Himmelbauer, H.; Korn, B.; Neugebauer, K.; Pisabarro,
M. T.; Buchholz, F.: An endoribonuclease-prepared siRNA screen in
human cells identifies genes essential for cell division. Nature 432:
1036-1040, 2004.

3. Smith, A. N.; Lovering, R. C.; Futai, M.; Takeda, J.; Brown, D.;
Karet, F. E.: Revised nomenclature for mammalian vacuolar-type H+-ATPase
subunit genes. Molec. Cell 12: 801-803, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 06/03/2005

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 5/31/2005

EDITED alopez: 06/03/2005
alopez: 5/31/2005

607444	TITLE *607444 SBDS GENE; SBDS
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Boocock et al. (2003) screened 18 positional candidate genes in the
critical region on chromosome 7q11 identified by linkage analysis for
the Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS; 260400), an autosomal recessive
disorder with clinical features that include pancreatic exocrine
insufficiency, hematologic dysfunction, and skeletal abnormalities. They
discovered mutations associated with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (260400)
in an uncharacterized gene represented by the 1.6-kb cDNA clone FLJ10917
(GenBank GENBANK AK001779). They designated the gene SBDS for
'Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond syndrome.' SBDS is a member of a highly
conserved protein family, with orthologs in species ranging from archaea
to vertebrates and plants. Indirect lines of evidence suggested that the
orthologs may function in RNA metabolism. The predicted protein is 28.8
kD with a pI of 8.9.

GENE STRUCTURE

Boocock et al. (2003) determined that the SBDS gene is composed of 5
exons spanning 7.9 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Boocock et al. (2003) mapped the SBDS gene
to chromosome 7q11. SBDS and an adjacent gene reside in a block of 305
kb that is locally duplicated. The paralogous duplicon is located 5.8 Mb
distally and contains an unprocessed pseudogene copy of SBDS designated
SBDSP. The pseudogene transcript is 97% identical to SBDS and contains
deletions and nucleotide changes that disrupt coding potential.

GENE FUNCTION

Austin et al. (2005) found that SBDS protein was present in both the
nucleus and the cytoplasm of normal control fibroblasts, but was
particularly concentrated within the nucleolus. SBDS localization was
cell cycle-dependent, with nucleolar localization during G1 and G2 and
diffuse nuclear localization during S phase. The intranucleolar
localization of SBDS provided further supportive evidence for its
postulated role in the processing of ribosomal RNA (rRNA).

Ganapathi et al. (2007) presented in vitro evidence indicating that the
SBDS gene is involved with ribosomal RNA. Nucleolar localization of SBDS
was dependent on active ribosomal RNA transcription. Lymphoblast cell
lines derived from SDS patients showed hypersensitivity to actinomycin
D, which inhibits RNA polymerase I, indicating an underlying impairment
of ribosome biogenesis. SBDS migrated with the 60S ribosomal precursor
protein, and associated with the 28S subunit (see 180450) and
nucleophosmin (see 164040). SBDS knockdown markedly decreased production
of newly synthesized rRNA, although an imbalance of ribosomal subunits
could not be detected.

Menne et al. (2007) identified the function of the yeast SBDS ortholog
Sdo1, showing that it is critical for the release and recycling of the
nucleolar shuttling factor Tif6 from pre-60S ribosomes, a key step in
60S maturation and translational activation of ribosomes. Using
genome-wide synthetic genetic array mapping, they identified multiple
TIF6 gain-of-function alleles that suppressed the pre-60S nuclear export
defects and cytoplasmic mislocalization of Tif6 observed in sdo1-delta
cells. Sdo1 appears to function within a pathway containing elongation
factor-like 1, and together they control translational activation of
ribosomes. The data of Menne et al. (2007) linked defective 60S
ribosomal subunit maturation to an inherited bone marrow failure
syndrome associated with leukemia predisposition.

Austin et al. (2008) found that SBDS colocalized with mitotic spindles
and bound to purified microtubules, thus preventing genomic instability,
in wildtype human bone marrow stromal cells, lymphoblasts, and skin
fibroblasts. Primary bone marrow stromal cells and lymphoblasts from SDS
patients exhibited an increased incidence of abnormal mitoses. Depletion
of the SBDS gene using siRNA in normal skin fibroblasts resulted in
increased mitotic abnormalities and aneuploidy that accumulated over
time. Treatment of primary cells from SDS patients with nocodazole, a
microtubule destabilizing agent, led to increased mitotic arrest and
apoptosis compared to treated wildtype cells. In addition, SDS patient
cells were resistant to taxol, a microtubule stabilizing agent. These
findings suggested that spindle instability in SDS contributes to bone
marrow failure and leukemogenesis.

Vitiello et al. (2010) demonstrated that CLN3 (607042) interacts with
SBDS. The protein-protein interaction was conserved between Btn1 and
Sdo1, the respective S. cerevisiae orthologs of CLN3 and SBDS. It had
been shown that deletion of Btn1 resulted in alterations in vacuolar pH
and vacuolar (H+)-ATPase (V-ATPase)-dependent H+ transport and ATP
hydrolysis. Vitiello et al. (2010) found that an Sdo1 deletion strain
had decreased vacuolar pH and V-ATPase-dependent H+ transport and ATP
hydrolysis; the alterations resulted from decreased V-ATPase subunit
expression. Overexpression of Btn1 or the presence of ionophore carbonyl
cyanide chlorophenil hydrazone (CCCP) caused decreased growth in yeast
lacking Sdo1. In normal cells, overexpression of Btn1 mirrored the
effect of CCCP, with both resulting in increased vacuolar pH due to
alterations in the coupling of V-ATPase-dependent H+ transport and ATP
hydrolysis. Vitiello et al. (2010) proposed that Sdo1 and SBDS work to
regulate Btn1 and CLN3, respectively.

Raaijmakers et al. (2010) demonstrated that deletion of Dicer1 (606241)
specifically in mouse osteoprogenitors, but not in mature osteoblasts,
disrupts the integrity of hematopoiesis. Myelodysplasia resulted and
acute myelogenous leukemia emerged that had acquired several genetic
abnormalities while having intact Dicer1. Examining gene expression
altered in osteoprogenitors as a result of Dicer1 deletion showed
reduced expression of Sbds, the gene mutated in Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond
syndrome, a human bone marrow failure and leukemia predisposition
condition. Deletion of Sbds in mouse osteoprogenitors induced bone
marrow dysfunction with myelodysplasia. Therefore, Raaijmakers et al.
(2010) concluded that perturbation of specific mesenchymal subsets of
stromal cells can disorder differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis
of heterologous cells, and disrupt tissue homeostasis. Furthermore,
Raaijmakers et al. (2010) concluded that primary stromal dysfunction can
result in secondary neoplastic disease, supporting the concept of
niche-induced oncogenesis.

Using affinity capture and mass spectrometry, Ball et al. (2009)
developed an SBDS interactome and reported SBDS binding partners with
diverse molecular functions, notably components of the large ribosomal
subunit and proteins involved in DNA metabolism. Reciprocal
coimmunoprecipitation confirmed the interaction of SBDS with the large
ribosomal subunit protein RPL4 (180479) and with DNA-PK (PRKDC; 600899)
and RPA70 (RPA1; 179835), 2 proteins with critical roles in DNA repair.
SBDS-depleted HEK293 cells were hypersensitive to multiple types of DNA
damage as well as chemically induced endoplasmic reticulum stress,
suggesting a role for SBDS in response to cellular stress.
SBDS-dependent hypersensitivity of HEK293 cells to UV irradiation could
be distinguished from a role of SBDS in translation.

Finch et al. (2011) showed that GTP and recombinant human SBDS and
elongation factor-like-1 (EFL1, or EFTUD1) cooperated to trigger release
of human EIF6 (602912) from pre60S ribosomes isolated from
Sbds-deficient mouse livers. EFL1 and SBDS independently and
noncooperatively bound to the 60S subunit in vitro. The 60S subunit
activated the GTPase activity of EFL1, but SBDS was required to
stimulate EIF6 release. Two SBDS mutants with different SDS-associated
missense mutations varied in their ability to enhance 60S-dependent
GTPase activity of EFL1, but neither triggered EIF6 release. Finch et
al. (2011) concluded that SBDS and EFL1 catalyze translational
activation and proposed that SDS is a ribosomopathy caused by uncoupling
GTP hydrolysis from EIF6 release.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Independently, Savchenko et al. (2005) and Shammas et al. (2005)
determined the crystal structure of the Archaeglobus fulgidus ortholog
of SBDS. They found that A. fulgidus Sbds assumes a highly conserved
3-domain structure consisting of an N-terminal domain with a novel
3-dimensional fold structure, a central domain containing a winged
helix-turn-helix motif, and a C-terminal domain that shares structural
homology with RNA-binding proteins.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Boocock et al. (2003) reported mutations identified in affected
individuals from 158 families. Gene conversion mutations accounted for
74.4% of alleles associated with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (235 of
316). Observations indicated that gene conversion due to recombination
between SBDS and its pseudogene had occurred. Conversion mutations were
found in 89% of individuals with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (141 of
158). Boocock et al. (2003) suggested that the conversion events are
confined to a short segment spanning approximately 240 bp in exon 2. In
a study of Japanese patients with SDS, Nakashima et al. (2004) likewise
found mutations in the SBDS gene caused by gene conversion. The sites of
the gene conversion events varied, extending from intron 1 to exon 3.

Abnormalities in chromosome 7 have been reported in association with
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome, especially an isochromosome i(7)(q10). In a
25-year-old patient with SDS who suffered from mild aplastic anemia but
showed no signs of either myelodysplasia or leukemic transformation,
Mellink et al. (2004) identified an isochromosome i(7)(q10) in the bone
marrow and also identified 2 different mutations in the SBDS gene: a
183-184TA-CT mutation (607444.0001) was present in 1 allele and the
splice site mutation 258+2T-C (IVS2DS+2T-C; 607444.0002) was present in
the other. The 2 mutations were the most commonly found in the study of
Boocock et al. (2003). Mellink et al. (2004) concluded that the
isochromosome 7q phenomenon may have a very indirect association with
the pathogenesis of malignant transformation in SDS patients. It may be
the first presentation of chromosome instability that could eventually
result in more significant additional chromosomal aberrations involved
in the clinical manifestation of acute myeloid leukemia and
myelodysplasia syndrome.

Austin et al. (2005) characterized the SBDS protein expression and
intracellular localization in 7 patients with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome
and healthy controls. As predicted by gene mutation, 4 patients with SDS
exhibited no detectable full-length SBDS protein. One patient, who was
homozygous for the IVS2DS+2T-C mutation, expressed scant levels of SBDS
protein. A second patient expressed low levels of SBDS protein harboring
a missense mutation. A third patient who carried no detectable gene
mutations expressed wildtype levels of SBDS protein, adding further
support to the growing body of evidence for additional genes that might
contribute to the pathogenesis of the disease phenotype.

Calado et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for the IVS2DS+2T-C
mutation in 4 of 91 unrelated patients with aplastic anemia (609135).
These patients were younger on average (5 to 19 years) compared to other
patients with aplastic anemia. Two mothers tested were carriers of the
mutation; these 2 and another mother who was not tested had histories of
subclinical mild anemia. Heterozygous mutation carriers had partial loss
of SBDS protein expression, indicating haploinsufficiency. Although
telomere shortening was observed in patients' granulocytes, lymphocytes
had normal telomere length. None of the patients with aplastic anemia
had pancreatic exocrine failure or skeletal anomalies as seen in SDS.
One of the 4 probands was also heterozygous for a presumed pathogenic
variant in the TERT gene (187270). The outcome of these patients was
poor, with 2 deaths. Calado et al. (2007) concluded that SBDS deficiency
predisposes to marrow failure by causing telomere shortening, thus
indicating a role for SBDS in the maintenance of telomere length.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Kuijpers et al. (2005) sequenced the SBDS gene in 20 unrelated patients
with clinical SDS and identified mutations in 15 (75%), with identical
compound heterozygosity in 11 patients (see 607444.0001 and
607444.0002). The authors examined hematologic parameters over 5 years
of follow-up and observed persistent neutropenia in 43% in the absence
of apoptosis and unrelated to chemotaxis defects or infection rate.
Irrespective of the absolute neutrophil count in vivo, abnormal
granulocyte-monocyte colony formation was observed in all patients with
SDS tested (14 of 14), whereas erythroid and myeloid colony formation
was less often affected (9 of 14). Cytogenetic aberrations occurred in 5
of 19 patients in the absence of myelodysplasia. Kuijpers et al. (2005)
concluded that in patients with genetically proven SDS, a
genotype/phenotype relationship does not exist in clinical and
hematologic terms.

ANIMAL MODEL

Zhang et al. (2006) reported that loss of the Sbds gene resulted in
early lethality in mice prior to embryonic day 6.5. Heterozygous mutant
mice had a normal phenotype and were indistinguishable from wildtype
littermates.

Finch et al. (2011) also found that Sbds deletion in mice was embryonic
lethal. Sbds -/- mice showed prominent histologic abnormalities in
liver, with disordered architecture between the portal triads and
central veins, degenerative hepatocyte appearance, and scattered
subcapsular areas of hepatocyte necrosis with an associated acute
inflammatory reaction. Sbds-deleted liver extracts showed accumulation
of free cytoplasmic 40S and 60S subunits and 43S initiation complexes
that were stalled at the AUG start codon awaiting binding of 60S
subunits, suggesting a ribosomal subunit-joining defect.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SHWACHMAN-DIAMOND SYNDROME
SBDS, LYS62TER

In 79 of 141 families with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS; 260400) with
conversion mutations, Boocock et al. (2003) found that affected
individuals were compound heterozygous for 2 mutations in exon 2 of the
SBDS gene: 183-184TA-CT and 258+2T-C (IVS2DS+2T-C; 607444.0002). The
dinucleotide alteration 183-184TA-CT introduced an in-frame stop codon
(lys62 to ter; K62X). The 258+2T-C mutation was predicted to disrupt the
donor splice site of intron 2; it resulted in an 8-bp deletion
consistent with use of an upstream cryptic splice donor site at position
251-252. The 258+2T-C and the resultant 8-bp deletion caused premature
termination of the encoded protein by frameshift. In 44 families there
was compound heterozygosity of 258+2T-C with another allele. In 7
families there was homozygosity for 258+2T-C. No incidence of
homozygosity for 183-184TA-CT was observed. In 8 alleles of the SBDS
gene found by Boocock et al. (2003) in patients with SDS, both the
183-184TA-CT and the 258+2T-C change were on the same allele.

In 11 patients with SDS, Kuijpers et al. (2005) identified compound
heterozygosity for the K62X and 258+2T-C mutations in the SBDS gene.

.0002
SHWACHMAN-DIAMOND SYNDROME
APLASTIC ANEMIA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
SBDS, IVS2DS, T-C, +2

See 607444.0001. Boocock et al. (2003) referred to this mutation as
258+2T-C. Nakashima et al. (2004) identified this mutation in affected
members of 4 Japanese families, making it the most prevalent mutation.
Recurrent gene conversion was considered the most likely explanation for
the recurrence, rather than founder effect.

See 607444.0001 and Kuijpers et al. (2005).

Calado et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for the IVS2DS+2T-C
mutation in 4 of 91 unrelated patients with aplastic anemia (609135).
These patients were younger on average (5 to 19 years) compared to other
patients with aplastic anemia. Two mothers tested were carriers of the
mutation; these 2 and another mother who was not tested had histories of
subclinical mild anemia. Heterozygous mutation carriers had partial loss
of SBDS protein expression, indicating haploinsufficiency. Although
telomere shortening was observed in patients' granulocytes, lymphocytes
had normal telomere length. None of the patients with aplastic anemia
had pancreatic exocrine failure or skeletal anomalies as seen in SDS.
One of the 4 probands was also heterozygous for a presumed pathogenic
variant in the TERT gene (187270).

.0003
SHWACHMAN-DIAMOND SYNDROME
SBDS, ASN8LYS

In 1 allele from individuals with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (260400),
Boocock et al. (2003) found a 24C-A transversion in the SBDS gene,
predicted to result in an asn8-to-lys (N8K) amino acid change.

.0004
SHWACHMAN-DIAMOND SYNDROME
SBDS, 1-BP INS, 96A

In affected members of 4 Japanese families with Shwachman-Diamond
syndrome (260400), Nakashima et al. (2004) found compound heterozygosity
for 2 recurrent mutations in the SBDS gene: IVS2DS+2T-C (607444.0002)
and a 1-bp insertion (96insA) in exon 1.

REFERENCE 1. Austin, K. M.; Gupta, M. L., Jr.; Coats, S. A.; Tulpule, A.; Mostoslavsky,
G.; Balazs, A. B.; Mulligan, R. C.; Daley, G.; Pellman, D.; Shimamura,
A.: Mitotic spindle destabilization and genomic instability in Shwachman-Diamond
syndrome. J. Clin. Invest. 118: 1511-1518, 2008.

2. Austin, K. M.; Leary, R. J.; Shimamura, A.: The Shwachman-Diamond
SBDS protein localizes to the nucleolus. Blood 106: 1253-1258, 2005.

3. Ball, H. L.; Zhang, B.; Riches, J. J.; Gandhi, R.; Li, J.; Rommens,
J. M.; Myers, J. S.: Shwachman-Bodian Diamond syndrome is a multi-functional
protein implicated in cellular stress responses. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18:
3684-3695, 2009.

4. Boocock, G. R. B.; Morrison, J. A.; Popovic, M.; Richards, N.;
Ellis, L.; Durie, P. R.; Rommens, J. M.: Mutations in SBDS are associated
with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. Nature Genet. 33: 97-101, 2003.

5. Calado, R. T.; Graf, S. A.; Wilkerson, K. L.; Kajigaya, S.; Ancliff,
P. J.; Dror, Y.; Chanock, S. J.; Lansdorp, P. M.; Young, N. S.: Mutations
in the SBDS gene in acquired aplastic anemia. Blood 110: 1141-1146,
2007.

6. Finch, A. J.; Hilcenko, C.; Basse, N.; Drynan, L. F.; Goyenechea,
B.; Menne, T. F.; Gonzalez Fernandez, A.; Simpson, P.; D'Santos, C.
S.; Arends, M. J.; Donadieu, J.; Bellanne-Chantelot, C.; Costanzo,
M.; Boone, C.; McKenzie, A. N.; Freund, S. M. V.; Warren, A. J.:
Uncoupling of GTP hydrolysis from eIF6 release on the ribosome causes
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. Genes Dev. 25: 917-929, 2011.

7. Ganapathi, K. A.; Austin, K. M.; Lee, C.-S.; Dias, A.; Malsch,
M. M.; Reed, R.; Shimamura, A.: The human Shwachman-Diamond syndrome
protein, SBDS, associates with ribosomal RNA. Blood 110: 1458-1465,
2007.

8. Kuijpers, T. W.; Alders, M.; Tool, A. T. J.; Mellink, C.; Roos,
D.; Hennekam, R. C. M.: Hematologic abnormalities in Shwachman Diamond
syndrome: lack of genotype-phenotype relationship. Blood 106: 356-361,
2005.

9. Mellink, C. H. M.; Alders, M.; van der Lelie, H.; Hennekam, R.
H. C.; Kuijpers, T. W.: SBDS mutations and isochromosome 7q in a
patient with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome: no predisposition to malignant
transformation? Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 154: 144-149, 2004.

10. Menne, T. F.; Goyenechea, B.; Sanchez-Puig, N.; Wong, C. C.; Tonkin,
L. M.; Ancliff, P. J.; Brost, R. L.; Costanzo, M.; Boone, C.; Warren,
A. J.: The Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond syndrome protein mediates translational
activation of ribosomes in yeast. Nature Genet. 39: 486-495, 2007.

11. Nakashima, E.; Mabuchi, A.; Makita, Y.; Masuno, M.; Ohashi, H.;
Nishimura, G.; Ikegawa, S.: Novel SBDS mutations caused by gene conversion
in Japanese patients with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. Hum. Genet. 114:
345-348, 2004.

12. Raaijmakers, M. H. G. P.; Mukherjee, S.; Guo, S.; Zhang, S.; Kobayashi,
T.; Schoonmaker, J. A.; Ebert, B. L.; Al-Shahrour, F.; Hasserjian,
R. P.; Scadden, E. O.; Aung, Z.; Matza, M.; Merkenschlager, M.; Lin,
C.; Rommens, J. M.; Scadden, D. T.: Bone progenitor dysfunction induces
myelodysplasia and secondary leukaemia. Nature 464: 852-857, 2010.

13. Savchenko, A.; Krogan, N.; Cort, J. R.; Evdokimova, E.; Lew, J.
M.; Yee, A. A.; Sanchez-Pulido, L.; Andrade, M. A.; Bochkarev, A.;
Watson, J. D.; Kennedy, M. A.; Greenblatt, J.; Hughes, T.; Arrowsmith,
C. H.; Rommens, J. M.; Edwards, A. M.: The Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond
syndrome protein family is involved in RNA metabolism. J. Biol. Chem. 280:
19213-19220, 2005.

14. Shammas, C.; Menne, T. F.; Hilcenko, C.; Michell, S. R.; Goyenechea,
B.; Boocock, G. R. B.; Durie, P. R.; Rommens, J. M.; Warren, A. J.
: Structural and mutational analysis of the SBDS protein family: insight
into the leukemia-associated Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. J. Biol.
Chem. 280: 19221-19229, 2005.

15. Vitiello, S. P.; Benedict, J. W.; Padilla-Lopez, S.; Pearce, D.
A.: Interaction between Sdo1p and Btn1p in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae
model for Batten disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 931-942, 2010.

16. Zhang, S.; Shi, M.; Hui, C.; Rommens, J. M.: Loss of the mouse
ortholog of the Shwachman-Diamond syndrome gene (Sbds) results in
early embryonic lethality. Molec. Cell Biol. 26: 6656-6663, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 11/8/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/16/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/8/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/26/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/14/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/25/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/26/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/12/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/5/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/31/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/2/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/23/2002

EDITED carol: 09/19/2013
alopez: 11/15/2011
terry: 11/8/2011
mgross: 6/10/2011
terry: 5/16/2011
wwang: 7/22/2010
terry: 7/8/2010
alopez: 5/27/2010
terry: 5/26/2010
wwang: 7/16/2008
ckniffin: 7/14/2008
terry: 6/6/2008
wwang: 3/5/2008
ckniffin: 2/25/2008
alopez: 4/30/2007
terry: 4/26/2007
carol: 1/30/2007
wwang: 12/12/2005
alopez: 12/7/2005
terry: 12/5/2005
tkritzer: 2/4/2005
terry: 1/31/2005
tkritzer: 12/13/2004
carol: 8/11/2004
tkritzer: 4/7/2004
terry: 4/2/2004
joanna: 2/26/2004
alopez: 12/23/2002

300333	TITLE *300333 RAS-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN RAB33A; RAB33A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Small GTP-binding proteins, including RAB33A, are involved in many
cellular functions, including signal transduction, vesicular transport,
and control of cytoskeleton and chromatin structure. These proteins all
contain conserved regions, termed G1 through G5, that are involved in
GTP/GDP binding and GTPase activity (Koda and Kakinuma, 1993).

CLONING

By RT-PCR analysis using degenerate primers from conserved regions of
small GTP-binding proteins and screening a Jurkat T-lymphocyte cDNA
library, Koda and Kakinuma (1993) isolated a cDNA encoding RAB33A, which
they called S10. The deduced 237-amino acid RAB33A protein belongs to
the RAB subfamily of small GTPases (see RAB1; 179508), other members of
which are involved in vesicular transport. Northern blot analysis showed
that expression of RAB33A is restricted to lymphoid and monocytic
lineage.

Zheng et al. (1997) cloned and characterized the mouse Rab33a gene,
which is composed of 2 exons and is predominantly expressed in brain.
The mouse protein is 98% identical to the human protein.

MAPPING

Scott (2001) mapped the RAB33A gene to the X chromosome based on
sequence similarity between the RAB33A sequence (GenBank GENBANK D14889)
and an X chromosome clone (GenBank GENBANK Z81370).

REFERENCE 1. Koda, T.; Kakinuma, M.: Molecular cloning of a cDNA encoding a
novel small GTP-binding protein. FEBS Lett. 328: 21-24, 1993.

2. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/14/2001.

3. Zheng, J. Y.; Koda, T.; Arimura, Y.; Kishi, M.; Kakinuma, M.:
Structure and expression of the mouse S10 gene. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1351: 47-50, 1997.

CREATED Yen-Pei C. Chang: 5/14/2001

EDITED wwang: 02/04/2010
mgross: 5/14/2001

610624	TITLE *610624 ADP-RIBOSYLHYDROLASE-LIKE 2; ADPRHL2
;;ADP-RIBOSYLHYDROLASE 3; ARH3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ADP-ribosylation is a reversible posttranslational modification used to
regulate protein function. ADP-ribosyltransferases (see ART1; 601625)
transfer ADP-ribose from NAD+ to the target protein, and
ADP-ribosylhydrolases, such as ADPRHL2, reverse the reaction (Glowacki
et al., 2002).

CLONING

By database analysis and PCR of brain cDNA libraries, Oka et al. (2006)
cloned mouse and human ADPRHL2, which they called ARH3. The deduced
human protein contains 363 amino acids and is 92% identical to its mouse
homolog. Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues showed ubiquitous
expression of Arh3. Western blot analysis of a human liver carcinoma
cell line detected ARH3 in the cytosolic fraction, but not in nuclei.
Analysis of mouse brain and liver revealed Arh3 in both the cytosolic
and nuclear fractions.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Mueller-Dieckmann et al. (2006) determined the crystal structure of ARH3
lacking its N-terminal 16 amino acids in the presence and absence of ADP
to 1.6 angstrom resolution. They found that ARH3 assumes an
all-alpha-helical fold, and that 2 magnesium ions are flanked by highly
conserved amino acids in the active-site crevice.

GENE FUNCTION

Oka et al. (2006) found that mouse and human ARH3 degraded
poly(ADP-ribose) covalently linked to PARP (173870), but they were
unable to hydrolyze ADP-ribose-arginine, -cysteine, -diphthamide, or
-asparagine bonds. ARH3 activity was enhanced by MgCl(2+). Mutation of
asp77 and asp78 of ARH3 eliminated ribosylhydrolase activity, but not
binding to ADP ribose.

Mueller-Dieckmann et al. (2006) found that human ARH3 bound free
ADP-ribose with micromolar affinity and efficiently de-ADP-ribosylated
poly- but not mono-ADP-ribosylated proteins. Binding, docking, and
mutagenesis experiments suggested a mode of substrate binding and a
reaction mechanism involving Mg(2+) and critical aspartic acid residues.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Glowacki et al. (2002) mapped the ADPRH2
gene to chromosome 1p35.3-p34.1.

REFERENCE 1. Glowacki, G.; Braren, R.; Firner, K.; Nissen, M.; Kuhl, M.; Reche,
P.; Bazan, F.; Cetkovic-Cvrlje, M.; Leiter, E.; Haag, F.; Koch-Nolte,
F.: The family of toxin-related ecto-ADP-ribosyltransferases in humans
and the mouse. Protein Sci. 11: 1657-1670, 2002.

2. Mueller-Dieckmann, C.; Kernstock, S.; Lisurek, M.; von Kries, J.
P.; Haag, F.; Weiss, M. S.; Koch-Nolte, F.: The structure of human
ADP-ribosylhydrolase 3 (ARH3) provides insights into the reversibility
of protein ADP-ribosylation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 15026-15031,
2006.

3. Oka, S.; Kato, J.; Moss, J.: Identification and characterization
of a mammalian 39-kDa poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase. J. Biol. Chem. 281:
705-713, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/30/2006

EDITED mgross: 11/30/2006

606600	TITLE *606600 RAS PROTEIN-SPECIFIC GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE-RELEASING FACTOR 1; RASGRF1
;;GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE-RELEASING FACTOR, 55-KD; GRF55
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The activation of cellular RAS (190020) requires the release of bound
GDP. In yeast, the Cdc25 gene product enhances GDP release. Using PCR
with degenerate primers based on a mouse homolog of yeast Cdc25 and
screening a human brain cDNA library, Schweighoffer et al. (1993)
obtained a cDNA encoding RASGRF1, which they termed GRF55. Sequence
analysis predicted that the 488-amino acid RASGRF1 protein is most
homologous to rat and mouse Rasgrf1, particularly at the C terminus,
where the guanine nucleotide exchange activity is associated. Northern
blot analysis revealed expression of a 5.5-kb RASGRF1 transcript
restricted to brain. Western blot analysis showed expression of a major
55-kD protein in brain. Functional analysis indicated that the
C-terminal 281 amino acids of RASGRF1 stimulate the dissociation of GDP
from RAS but not from RAP1A (179520) or RAB5 (179512). RASGRF1 was found
to complement Cdc25 in yeast.

ANIMAL MODEL

By generating mice that lacked a repeated sequence localized 3-prime of
a differentially methylated domain (DMD) located 30 kb 5-prime of the
Rasgrf1 promoter, Yoon et al. (2002) showed that this region regulates
the establishment of DNA methylation in the male germ line at Rasgrf1.
Methylation of the DMD was found to be required for imprinted Rasgrf1
expression.

MAPPING

Schweighoffer et al. (1993) mapped the RASGRF1 gene to chromosome 15q24
by FISH. Pearsall et al. (1998) mapped the paternally expressed
imprinted Rasgrf1 gene in mouse to chromosome 9 by haplotype analysis of
a backcross panel.

REFERENCE 1. Pearsall, R. S.; Imai, K.; Shibata, H.; Hayashizaki, Y.; Chapman,
V. M.; Held, W. A.; Plass, C.: The Rasgrf1-repeat sequence (D9Ncvs53)
maps between Mod1 and Rbp1 on mouse chromosome 9 and may define a
putative imprinted region. Mammalian Genome 9: 261-262, 1998.

2. Schweighoffer, F.; Faure, M.; Fath, I.; Chevallier-Multon, M.-C.;
Apiou, F.; Dutrillaux, B.; Sturani, E.; Jacquet, M.; Tocque, B.:
Identification of a human guanine nucleotide-releasing factor (H-GRF55)
specific for Ras proteins. Oncogene 8: 1477-1485, 1993.

3. Yoon, B. J.; Herman, H.; Sikora, A.; Smith, L. T.; Plass, C.; Soloway,
P. D.: Regulation of DNA methylation of Rasgrf1. Nature Genet. 30:
92-96, 2002.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/9/2002

EDITED mgross: 01/09/2002

612358	TITLE *612358 KININOGEN 1; KNG1
;;KININOGEN; KNG
HIGH MOLECULAR WEIGHT KININOGEN, INCLUDED; HMWK, INCLUDED; HK, INCLUDED;;
LOW MOLECULAR WEIGHT KININOGEN, INCLUDED; LMWK, INCLUDED; LK, INCLUDED;;
BRADYKININ, INCLUDED; BK, INCLUDED;;
FITZGERALD FACTOR, INCLUDED;;
FLAUJEAC FACTOR, INCLUDED;;
WILLIAMS FACTOR, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

High molecular weight kininogen (HMWK) plays an important role in
assembly of the plasma kallikrein (see 147910)-kinin system. The KNG1
gene generates both HMWK and low molecular weight kininogen (LMWK)
through alternative splicing. Both HMWK and LMWK contain an identical
heavy chain consisting of protein domains 1, 2, and 3. However, HMWK
contains a 56-kD light chain that consists of domains 5 and 6H, whereas
LMWK contains a unique 4-kD light chain that consists of domain 5L. In
both proteins, the heavy and light chains are linked by domain 4, which
contains the bradykinin (BK) nonapeptide. BK, which is released by
plasma kallikrein, is a potent inflammatory mediator that causes
vasodilation and enhanced capillary permeability, induces pain, and
stimulates production of nitric oxide and prostacyclin (see 601699) from
endothelial cells. During vascular damage, BK stimulates smooth muscle
proliferation and intimal hypertrophy. Release of BK from HMWK generates
a 2-chain HMWK, termed HMWKa, containing the heavy and light chains
joined by a disulfide bond (Merkulov et al., 2008).

CLONING

In the 1970s, a number of similar patients with abnormal coagulation
tests but no apparent bleeding tendency were identified and described as
lacking a coagulation factor variously termed Fitzgerald factor,
Flaujeac factor, or Williams factor, among other names (see 228960). At
first the nature of these factors was uncertain, but further studies
showed that they were identical to high molecular weight kininogen
(Davie, 1979; Giangrande, 2003).

Takagaki et al. (1985) isolated human cDNAs encoding the HMW and LMW
prekininogens. They determined that the HMW and LMW prekininogen mRNAs
are identical throughout the 5-prime UTR and the protein-coding region
up to the sequence encoding the 12 amino acids distal to the BK
sequence, after which the 2 mRNAs completely diverge. The HMW and LMW
prekininogens contain 626 and 427 amino acids, respectively. They share
a common signal peptide, heavy chain, and BK moiety, which consist of
18, 362, and 9 amino acids, respectively. The unique light chains of HMW
and LMW prekininogens consist of 255 and 38 amino acids, respectively.
There are 17 cysteines in both the bovine and human heavy chain,
indicating that the human heavy chain, like its bovine counterpart, can
form 8 loops, each connected by 2 adjacent cysteines.

Merkulov et al. (2008) determined that the mouse genome contains 2
kininogen genes, Kng1 and Kng2, that are 91% identical. Using RT-PCR,
they found that Kng1 was expressed predominantly in liver and adrenal
gland, whereas Kng2 was expressed predominantly in kidney, with lower
expression in liver.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kitamura et al. (1985) determined that the KNG1 gene contains 11 exons
and spans 27 kb. Exons 1 through 9 encode the 5-prime UTR and the signal
peptide and heavy chain sequences common to both HMWK and LMWK. Exon 10
encodes the common sequence for BK and the unique sequence for HMWK, and
exon 11 encodes the unique sequence for LMWK.

MAPPING

Fong et al. (1991) mapped the KNG gene to chromosome 3 using
human-hamster somatic cell hybrids and the PCR of hybrid DNA with
gene-specific primers. KNG was further assigned to chromosome 3q26-qter
using DNA from a second panel of chromosome 3 deletion mapping cell
hybrids. Cheung et al. (1992) also mapped the KNG gene to chromosome
3q26-qter by in situ hybridization. The assignment substantiated the
evolutionary relationship of kininogen to 2 other members of the
cystatin superfamily, alpha-2HS-glycoprotein (AHSG; 138680) and
histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG; 142640), which also map to the long
arm of chromosome 3.

Merkulov et al. (2008) determined that the 2 mouse kininogen genes, Kng1
and Kng2, are located in a head-to-head orientation on chromosome 16.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Cheung et al. (1993) demonstrated that Ms. Williams, the patient with
total kininogen deficiency (228960) reported by Colman et al. (1975),
was homozygous for a nonsense mutation in the KNG1 gene (612358.0001).

Krijanovski et al. (2003) found that a 6-year-old boy with cerebral
artery thrombosis and HMWK deficiency was homozygous for a 1-bp deletion
of 1492A in the KNG1 gene (612358.0002), corresponding to amino acid 480
of the mature protein. The mutation resulted in a frameshift and
premature termination at amino acid 532 of the mature protein. Each
parent and a sib were heterozygous for the mutation. Krijanovski et al.
(2003) found that truncation or frameshift at or before position 480 of
mature HMWK prevented biosynthesis, processing, and/or secretion of the
protein into plasma. Krijanovski et al. (2003) also identified the
causative mutation in Fitzgerald trait as a 17-bp substitution in intron
9 of the KNG1 gene (612358.0003). They provided a diagram comparing the
molecular defects of Williams trait (612358.0001), their reported
deletion of 1492A, and Fitzgerald trait with normal HMWK.

Using immunoblot and Southern blot analyses, Hayashi et al. (1990)
detected no molecular abnormality of kininogen in the DNA from patients
from 4 Japanese families with total kininogen deficiency or from 1
patient with isolated HMWK deficiency. However, in the patient with
isolated HMWK deficiency, a partial deletion in intron 7 was found by
restriction analysis. This partial deletion was assumed to be related to
an abnormality of alternative splicing of HMW prekininogen mRNA.
However, Shigekiyo et al. (2007) found that this patient with isolated
HMWK deficiency was homozygous for a 1-bp insertion (C) at nucleotide
1217 in exon 10 of the KNG1 gene (612358.0004). The insertion resulted
in a frameshift in codon 406 and a premature stop signal in codon 415.
The patient's parents and brother were heterozygous for the mutation.

- Association with Decreased Activated Partial Thromboplastin
Time

Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) is considered a global test
of thrombotic tendency. A shortened aPTT is associated with an increased
risk of thrombosis as well as several prothrombotic risk factors
including age, female sex, estrogen use, and obesity. Prolonged aPTT is
an indicator of coagulation disorders in patients with deficiencies of
factors in the intrinsic pathways of coagulation. Houlihan et al. (2010)
conducted a genomewide association study for activated partial
thromboplastin time (aPTT) in a total of 1,477 relatively healthy adults
from the Lothian Birth Cohorts of 1936 (LBC1936) and 1921 (LBC1921). A
highly significant association with a relatively large effect size was
found between aPTT and a SNP in the KNG1 gene, dbSNP rs710446 (combined
p = 9.52 x 10(-22)). The SNP dbSNP rs710446 represents a missense
change, ile581 to thr (I581T, 1742T-C), in exon 10 of kininogen 1
isoform 1. The effects of dbSNP rs710446 were additive, with each G
allele decreasing aPTT by 0.36 standard deviations. This SNP explained
5.2% and 8.1% of the variance in aPTT in LBC1936 and LBC1921,
respectively. Mutations in KNG1 cause high molecular weight kininogen
(HMWK) deficiency, an autosomal recessive coagulation defect; Kng1
knockout mice demonstrate prolonged aPTT and delayed arterial thrombosis
(Merkulov et al., 2008).

Among 1,542 European patients with venous thrombosis (see 188050) and
1,110 controls, Morange et al. (2011) found a significant association
between the C allele of dbSNP rs710446 and risk of thrombosis (odds
ratio (OR) of 1.196; p = 0.0012) A borderline association was observed
in a small independent sample of 590 controls and 596 patients (OR of
1.171; p = 0.059). This allele was also associated with decreased aPTT
levels. Morange et al. (2011) concluded that the I581T variant is a
genetic risk factor for venous thrombosis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Merkulov et al. (2008) found that Kng1 -/- mice were viable and appeared
normal, although they lacked plasma HMWK and LMWK. Kng1 -/- mice showed
normal tail vein bleeding times, but they displayed significantly
prolonged time to vessel occlusion in an induced arterial thrombosis
model.

NOMENCLATURE

For a historical account of the nomenclature of coagulation factors,
including high molecular weight kininogen, see Giangrande (2003).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
KININOGEN DEFICIENCY, TOTAL
KNG1, ARG196TER

In the patient (Ms. Williams) with total kininogen deficiency (228960)
reported by Colman et al. (1975) as having Williams trait, Cheung et al.
(1993) found homozygosity for a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 22 in
exon 5 (nucleotide 587 of the cDNA) of the KNG1 gene, resulting in a CGA
(arg)-to-TGA (stop) mutation in exon 5. All 3 daughters were found to be
heterozygous and a granddaughter was found to be normal. In the proband,
both high and low molecular weight kininogens were completely absent;
the 3 daughters had approximately 50% high molecular weight kininogen
and the granddaughter had normal high molecular weight kininogen. Using
the amino acid count according to Nakanishi, which includes the signal
peptide, Kunapuli (1993) determined that the amino acid altered was
arg196.

.0002
HIGH MOLECULAR WEIGHT KININOGEN DEFICIENCY
KNG1, 1-BP DEL, 1492A

Krijanovski et al. (2003) described studies of the plasma and DNA of a
6-year-old male, born of first-cousin parents, with cerebral artery
thrombosis and HMWK deficiency (228960). The previously healthy child
had headache and vomiting 10 days after moderate cerebral trauma,
followed by loss of consciousness and subsequent visual impairment. CT
scan and angiography showed extensive left vertebral-basilar artery
thrombosis and a left vertebral artery dissection. The patient had a
prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) and received
fresh frozen plasma before arteriography and then daily for 8 days,
which resulted in normalization of the APTT and resolution of neurologic
symptoms. There was full neurologic recovery with warfarin anticoagulant
therapy for 6 months, and there had been no recurrence after 2 years of
follow-up. The child had no high molecular weight kininogen procoagulant
activity and antigen (less than 1%). He was found to be homozygous for
deletion of an adenine at cDNA position 1492 in exon 10 of the KNG1
gene, corresponding to position 480 of the mature protein. The mutation
resulted in a frameshift and premature termination at amino acid 532 of
the mature protein. Each parent and a sib were heterozygous for the same
defect. Krijanovski et al. (2003) found that truncation or frameshift at
or before position 480 of mature HMWK prevented biosynthesis,
processing, and/or secretion of the protein into plasma.

.0003
HIGH MOLECULAR WEIGHT KININOGEN DEFICIENCY
KNG1, 17-BP DEL/17-BP INS, NT1559

The first plasma with HMWK deficiency (228960) to be recognized was
derived from an African American of the surname Fitzgerald (Waldmann et
al., 1975). Studying DNA prepared from a more that 25-year-old frozen
plasma specimen, Krijanovski et al. (2003) determined that the KNG1
defect in Fitzgerald trait resides in intron 9, with substitution of 17
consecutive basepairs at nucleotides 1559 through 1575. The substituted
segment had 1559T and 1575A at its 2 ends and consisted of 5 TGT
triplets, which in Fitzgerald DNA were changed to 5 GTG triplets, the
end nucleotides being changed to 1559G and 1575G. Also at nucleotide
position 1578, a GT sequence in normal DNA was changed to TG in
Fitzgerald intron 9. Furthermore, in Fitzgerald intron 9, single
basepair polymorphisms were found at nucleotide positions 119 (C to T),
1586 (T to G), and 1736 (A to G).

.0004
HIGH MOLECULAR WEIGHT KININOGEN DEFICIENCY
KNG1, 1-BP INS, 1217C

Using restriction analysis, Hayashi et al. (1990) found that a Japanese
patient with isolated HMWK deficiency (228960) had a partial deletion in
intron 7 of the KNG1 gene. This partial deletion was assumed to be
related to an abnormality of alternative splicing of HMW prekininogen
mRNA. However, Shigekiyo et al. (2007) found that this patient with
isolated HMWK deficiency was homozygous for a 1-bp insertion (C) at
nucleotide 1217 in exon 10 of the KNG1 gene. The insertion resulted in a
frameshift in codon 406 and a premature stop signal in codon 415. The
patient's brother and parents, who were second cousins, were
heterozygous for the mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Cheung, P. P.; Cannizzaro, L. A.; Colman, R. W.: Chromosomal mapping
of human kininogen gene (KNG) to 3q26-qter. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 59:
24-26, 1992.

2. Cheung, P. P.; Kunapuli, S. P.; Scott, C. F.; Wachtfogel, Y. T.;
Colman, R. W.: Genetic basis of total kininogen deficiency in Williams'
trait. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 23361-23365, 1993.

3. Colman, R. W.; Bagdasarian, A.; Talamo, R. C.; Scott, C. F.; Seavey,
M.; Guimaraes, J. A.; Pierce, J. V.; Kaplan, A. P.: Williams trait:
human kininogen deficiency with diminished levels of plasminogen proactivator
and prekallikrein associated with abnormalities of the Hageman factor
dependent pathways. J. Clin. Invest. 56: 1650-1662, 1975.

4. Davie, E. W.: Personal Communication. Seattle, Wash.  11/26/1979.

5. Fong, D.; Smith, D. I.; Hsieh, W.-T.: The human kininogen gene
(KNG) mapped to chromosome 3q26-qter by analysis of somatic cell hybrids
using the polymerase chain reaction. Hum. Genet. 87: 189-192, 1991.

6. Giangrande, P. L. F.: Six characters in search of an author: the
history of the nomenclature of coagulation factors. Brit.  J. Haemat. 121:
703-712, 2003.

7. Hayashi, H.; Ishimaru, F.; Fujita, T.; Tsurumi, N.; Tsuda, T.;
Kimura, I.: Molecular genetic survey of five Japanese families with
high molecular weight kininogen deficiency. Blood 75: 1296-1304,
1990.

8. Houlihan, L. M.; Davies, G.; Tenesa, A.; Harris, S. E.; Luciano,
M.; Gow, A. J.; McGhee, K. A.; Liewald, D. C.; Porteous, D. J.; Starr,
J.  M.; Lowe, G. D.; Visscher, P. M.; Deary, I. J.: Common variants
of large effect in F12, KNG1, and HRG are associated with activated
partial thromboplastin time. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 86: 626-631, 2010.

9. Kitamura, N.; Kitagawa, H.; Fukushima, D.; Takagaki, Y.; Miyata,
T.; Nakanishi, S.: Structural organization of the human kininogen
gene and a model for its evolution. J. Biol. Chem. 260: 8610-8617,
1985.

10. Krijanovski, Y.; Proulle, V.; Mahdi, F.; Dreyfus, M.; Muller-Esterl,
W.; Schmaier, A. H.: Characterization of molecular defects of Fitzgerald
trait and another novel high-molecular-weight kininogen-deficient
patient: insights into structural requirements for kininogen expression. Blood 101:
4430-4436, 2003.

11. Kunapuli, S. P.: Personal Communication. Philadelphia, Pa.
12/21/1993.

12. Merkulov, S.; Zhang, W.-M.; Komar, A. A.; Schmaier, A. H.; Barnes,
E.; Zhou, Y.; Lu, X.; Iwaki, T.; Castellino, F. J.; Luo, G.; McCrae,
K. R.: Deletion of murine kininogen gene 1 (mKng1) causes loss of
plasma kininogen and delays thrombosis. Blood 111: 1274-1281, 2008.

13. Morange, P.-E.; Oudot-Mellakh, T.; Cohen, W.; Germain, M.; Saut,
N.; Antoni, G.; Alessi, M.-C.; Bertrand, M.; Dupuy, A.-M.; Letenneur,
L.; Lathrop, M.; Lopez, L. M.; Lambert, J.-C.; Emmerich, J.; Amouyel,
P.; Tregouet, D.-A.: KNG1 Ile581Thr and susceptibility to venous
thrombosis. Blood 117: 3692-3694, 2011.

14. Shigekiyo, T.; Miyagi, J.; Shirakami, A.; Shibata, H.; Tsukai,
K.; Aihara, K.: Isolated high-molecular-weight kininogen deficiency:
a novel frameshift mutation in exon 10. (Letter) Blood 109: 5062-5063,
2007.

15. Takagaki, Y.; Kitamura, N.; Nakanishi, S.: Cloning and sequence
analysis of cDNAs for human high molecular weight and low molecular
weight prekininogens: primary structures of two human prekininogens. J.
Biol. Chem. 260: 8601-8609, 1985.

16. Waldmann, R.; Abraham, J. P.; Rebuck, J. W.; Caldwell, J.; Saito,
H.; Ratnoff, O. D.: Fitzgerald factor: a hitherto unrecognized coagulation
factor. Lancet 305: 949-951, 1975. Note: Originally Volume I.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/1/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/10/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/24/2008

CREATED Matthew B. Gross: 10/23/2008

EDITED ckniffin: 02/23/2012
wwang: 8/11/2011
ckniffin: 8/1/2011
alopez: 9/10/2010
alopez: 6/18/2010
terry: 6/14/2010
terry: 4/8/2009
mgross: 10/24/2008

601233	TITLE *601233 INHIBIN, BETA C; INHBC
DESCRIPTION Activins are homo- or heterodimers of related beta subunits (see 147290)
while inhibins are dimers composed of an alpha subunit (147380) and an
activin beta subunit. These proteins belong to the TGF-beta superfamily
(see 190180), the members of which have important roles in cell
determination, differentiation, and growth (summary by Schmitt et al.,
1996). Members of the inhibin/activin subgroup were originally
identified by their opposing roles in the control of
follicle-stimulating hormone (118850) release by cultured pituitary
cells (Ling et al., 1986).

CLONING

Hotten et al. (1995) isolated a cDNA related to the inhibin/activin
subgroup which they designated activin beta-C. The authors used
degenerate PCR to isolate a cDNA from a human liver cDNA library. The
predicted 352-amino acid prepropeptide has a hydrophobic region at the
amino terminus which may serve as a signal peptide. The 116-amino acid
mature protein derives from the C-terminus of the prepropeptide and
shows 53% amino acid identity to activin beta-B (147390) and 51%
identity to activin beta-A (147290). Hotten et al. (1995) noted that,
because beta-A and beta-B show 64% identity to one another, the beta-C
gene must be a more distant member of the group.

Schmitt et al. (1996) cloned a cDNA for the mouse inhibin/activin beta-C
gene. The mouse gene encodes a predicted 352-amino acid prepropeptide
and a 116-amino acid mature protein which is 94% identical to the human
sequence. Ribonuclease protein assays showed that mouse Inhbc is mainly
expressed in adult liver.

GENE STRUCTURE

Schmitt et al. (1996) characterized the mouse Inhbc gene, which contains
2 exons and spans approximately 14 kb.

GENE FUNCTION

Activin ligands act as growth and differentiation factors in many cells
and tissues. Mellor et al. (2000) examined the localization of and
dimerization among activin subunits. The results demonstrated that
activin beta-C can form dimers with activin beta-A and beta-B in vitro,
but not with the inhibin alpha subunit. Using a specific antibody,
activin beta-C protein was localized to human liver and prostate and
colocalized with beta-A and beta-B subunits to specific cell types in
benign and malignant prostate tissues. The capacity to form novel
activin heterodimers (but not inhibin C) appears to reside in the human
liver and prostate. The authors concluded that formation of activin AC
or BC heterodimers may have significant implications in the regulation
of levels and/or biologic activity of other activins in these tissues.

MAPPING

Schmitt et al. (1996) used fluorescence in situ hybridization with a
human cDNA probe to map the INHBC gene to 12q13.1. Schmitt et al. (1996)
used interspecific backcross analysis to map the Inhbc gene to mouse
chromosome 10, a region with homology of synteny to human 12q13.1.

REFERENCE 1. Hotten, G.; Neidhardt, H.; Schneider, C.; Pohl, J.: Cloning of
a new member of the TGF-beta family: a putative new activin betaC
chain. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 206: 608-613, 1995.

2. Ling, N.; Ying, S. Y.; Ueno, N.; Shimasaki, S.; Esch, F.; Hotta,
M.; Guillemin, R.: Pituitary FSH is released by a heterodimer of
the beta-subunits from the two forms of inhibin. Nature 321: 779-782,
1986.

3. Mellor, S. L.; Cranfield, M.; Ries, R.; Pedersen, J.; Cancilla,
B.; de Kretser, D.; Groome, N. P.; Mason, A. J.; Risbridger, G. P.
: Localization of activin beta(A)-, beta(B)-, and beta(C)-subunits
in human prostate and evidence for formation of new activin heterodimers
of beta(C)-subunit. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 4851-4858, 2000.

4. Schmitt, J.; Hotten, G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Copeland,
N. G.; Pohl, J.; Schrewe, H.: Structure, chromosomal localization,
and expression analysis of the mouse inhibin/activin betaC (Inhbc)
gene. Genomics 32: 358-366, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/9/2001

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 4/29/1996

EDITED alopez: 03/08/2012
alopez: 7/9/2001
jamie: 6/3/1997
mark: 4/29/1996
terry: 4/29/1996
mark: 4/29/1996

604384	TITLE *604384 ATPase, Ca(2+)-TRANSPORTING, TYPE 2C, MEMBER 1; ATP2C1
;;ATPase, Ca(2+)-SEQUESTERING;;
SECRETORY PATHWAY Ca(2+) ATPase 1; SPCA1;;
PMR1, RAT, HOMOLOG OF;;
KIAA1347
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ATP2C1 is a Golgi-localized ATPase that mediates Golgi uptake of
cytosolic Ca(2+) and Mg(2+) and has a role in regulating Ca(2+) and
Mn(2+) cellular content (Ton et al., 2002).

CLONING

Hu et al. (2000) identified an EST corresponding to the ATP2C1 gene
within a 1.3-Mb YAC/BAC contig spanning the region of chromosome
3q21-q24 deleted in a family with Hailey-Hailey disease (HHD; 169600).
This EST had been annotated as homologous to a yeast gene encoding a
calcium ATPase with a function predicted to be related to that of SERCA2
(ATP2A2; 108740). Hu et al. (2000) isolated the full-length cDNA
corresponding to the human EST. Similar to other Ca(2+) ATPase genes,
the ATP2C1 gene encodes 2 alternatively spliced transcripts, ATP2C1a and
ATP2C1b. These transcripts differed in their C termini (encoding amino
acids 877 to the end), but had the same expression patterns in all
tissues examined. ATP2C1a was predicted to encode 919 amino acids, and
ATP2C1b was predicted to encode 888 amino acids. The protein encoded by
ATP2C1 was highly homologous (97% identity) to rat Pmr1, which in turn
is homologous to the yeast calcium pump Pmr1, but less homologous to
other calcium pumps. Northern blot analysis detected a 4.4-kb ATP2C1
transcript in keratinocytes and in all 12 whole tissues examined.
Highest expression was in kidney and heart, and lowest expression was in
colon, thymus, and leukocytes. Patients with HHD are not known to have
extracutaneous manifestations of the disease. Hu et al. (2000) found no
differences in ATP2C1 mRNA levels between skin taken from the axilla and
skin from the buttock (sites particularly prone vs resistant to
blistering, respectively, in HHD patients) of one normal individual and
little change in ATP2C1 mRNA levels in normal human epidermal
keratinocytes cultured with glucocorticoid.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned ATP2C1 clone, which they designated
KIAA1347. The deduced 918-amino acid protein shares 97% identity with
its rat ortholog, a calcium-transporting ATPase. RT-PCR ELISA detected
variable ATP2C1 expression in all adult and fetal tissues examined, with
highest expression in ovary, followed by lung, testis, brain, liver, and
kidney. Within specific adult brain regions, highest expression was
detected in thalamus, followed by amygdala and substantia nigra.

Ton et al. (2002) showed that epitope-tagged human SPCA1 localized to
the Golgi compartment following expression in yeast and Chinese hamster
ovary cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hu et al. (2000) detected 27 exons in the ATP2C1 gene. Dobson-Stone et
al. (2002) detected 28 translated exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the ATP2C1
gene to chromosome 3. Hu et al. (2000) mapped the ATP2C1 gene to
chromosome 3q21-q24.

GENE FUNCTION

Pmr1, the yeast ortholog of SPCA1, is expressed in the Golgi compartment
and functions as a high-affinity Ca(2+)/Mn(2+) pump involved in Ca(2+)
and Mn(2+) secretion. Deletion of Pmr1 in yeast causes hypersensitivity
to Ca(2+) chelators and Mn(2+) toxicity, with defects in protein
glycosylation, processing, sorting, and endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-related glycosylation. Ton et al. (2002) found that heterologous
expression of human SPCA1, but not SERCA-type Ca(2+)-transporting
ATPases, reduced Mn(2+) toxicity and complemented Ca(2+)-related
phenotypes in Pmr1-null yeast. Yeast Golgi vesicles expressing human
SPCA1 showed high-affinity Ca(2+) transport activity that was
inhibitable by Mn(2+), but not by thapsigargin, an inhibitor of
SERCA-type ATPases. Ton et al. (2002) proposed that SPCA1 plays a role
in maintaining Ca(2+) and Mn(2+) concentrations in Golgi and the
secretory pathway.

Using RNA interference with HeLa cells, Van Baelen et al. (2003) showed
that SPCA1 was completely responsible for thapsigargin-insensitive
Ca(2+) uptake into Golgi vesicles. Knockdown of SPCA1 did not alter
Ca(2+) handling in the ER and had only a small effect on baseline
histamine-induced Ca(2+) oscillations in whole cells.

Mukhopadhyay and Linstedt (2011) found that exposure of HeLa cells to
increased extracellular Mn(2+), but not Ca(2+), induced trafficking of
the Golgi phosphoprotein GPP130 (GOLIM4; 606805) from the Golgi to
multivesicular bodies and then to lysosomes, followed by GPP130
degradation. They showed that a gln747-to-ala (Q747A) point mutation in
SPCA1 increased Golgi uptake of cellular Mn(2+), leading to increased
GPP130 degradation and reduced Mn(2+) toxicity via secretion. In
contrast, SPCA1 containing either an asp350-to-ala (D350A) mutation,
which blocks autophosphorylation and transport of Mn(2+) and Ca(2+), or
a gly309-to-cys (G309C) mutation, which blocks transport of Mn(2+), but
not Ca(2+), reduced Golgi uptake of Mn(2+), resulting in reduced GPP130
degradation and increased Mn(2+) toxicity.

Kourtis et al. (2012) demonstrated that heat stroke triggers pervasive
necrotic cell death and neurodegeneration in C. elegans. Preconditioning
of animals at a mildly elevated temperature strongly protected from
heat-induced necrosis. The heat-shock transcription factor HSF1 (140580)
and the small heat-shock protein HSP-16.1 mediate cytoprotection by
preconditioning. HSP-16.1 localizes to the Golgi, where it functions
with the calcium- and magnesium-transporting ATPase PMR1 to maintain
calcium homeostasis under heat stroke. Preconditioning also suppresses
cell death inflicted by diverse insults, and protects mammalian neurons
from heat cytotoxicity. Kourtis et al. (2012) concluded that their
findings revealed an evolutionarily conserved mechanism that defends
against diverse necrotic stimuli. In mouse cortical neurons and striatal
cells, Kourtis et al. (2012) found that overexpression of crystallin
alpha-A (123580), which colocalizes with the Golgi marker
alpha-mannosidase-II (154582) and the PMR1 ATPase, was sufficient to
protect mammalian neurons from heat stroke-induced death, even in the
absence of preconditioning. Heat stroke caused massive necrotic death
and axonal degeneration in neurons expressing short hairpin RNAs against
Pmr1, even after preconditioning.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Hailey-Hailey disease (HHD; 169600) is an autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by persistent blisters and erosions of the skin. By family
linkage studies, the HHD region was localized to 3q21-q24. Study of a
family carrying a deletion helped narrow the location. To screen HHD
patients for ATP2C1 mutations, Hu et al. (2000) identified intron sites
by comparison of genomic and cDNA sequences, designed primers flanking
the 27 identified exons, and assessed PCR products from patients and
controls by single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) or
conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE) analyses. Among 51
unrelated kindreds of European descent and 10 of Japanese descent, they
identified 21 abnormalities (16/51 and 5/10). Of the abnormal sequences,
6 predicted single amino acid substitutions, 2 predicted aberrant
splicing, and 13 predicted prematurely truncated products through
frameshifts or single-basepair substitution. A high frequency of the
last type of mutation supported a haploinsufficiency pathogenesis
consistent with the complete deletion of the gene in 1 kindred and
further suggested that calcium pumps of the PMR1 family function as
monomers. The mechanism by which mutant ATPC1 causes acantholysis is
unknown, but it may be through abnormally elevated cytoplasmic calcium
or abnormally low Golgi Ca(2+) levels. Elevated cytoplasmic calcium
might act by altering posttranslational modification of proteins or by
inducing changes in gene expression.

Sudbrak et al. (2000) identified 13 different mutations, including
nonsense, frameshift insertion and deletions, splice-site mutations, and
nonconservative missense mutations, in ATP2C1 in patients with
Hailey-Hailey disease. The identification of ATP2A2 as the gene
defective in Darier disease (124200) provided further evidence of the
critical role of Ca(2+) signaling in maintaining epidermal integrity.

Ikeda et al. (2001) reported ATP2C1 mutations in 11 Japanese patients
with Hailey-Hailey disease. Some affected individuals had unique
clinical features (generalization of Hailey-Hailey disease and
generalized skin eruption resembling keratotic papules in Darier
disease), but other affected individuals did not, suggesting the
presence of intrafamilial phenotypic variations. These findings
reinforced the conclusion that differences in clinical phenotypes in
Hailey-Hailey disease are probably related to factors other than the
type of causative mutation.

Chao et al. (2002) identified 7 different ATP2C1 mutations, 6 of them
novel, in 7 Taiwanese kindreds with Hailey-Hailey disease. They found 3
deletion mutations, 2 nonsense mutations, 1 missense mutation, and 1
splicing mutation.

Dobson-Stone et al. (2002) screened all 28 translated exons of ATP2C1 in
24 Hailey-Hailey disease families and 3 sporadic cases and identified 22
mutations (18 novel) in 25 probands. The novel mutations comprised 3
nonsense, 6 insertion/deletion, 3 splice site, and 6 missense mutations,
and were distributed throughout the ATP2C1 gene. They noted that 6 of
the mutations were found in multiple families in their study as well as
in the studies of Sudbrak et al. (2000) and Hu et al. (2000). Haplotype
analysis revealed that 2 of these were recurrent mutations. Comparison
between genotype and phenotype in 23 families failed to yield any clear
correlation between the nature of the mutation and clinical features of
Hailey-Hailey disease. The extensive inter- and intrafamilial phenotypic
variability suggested that modifying genes and/or environmental factors
may greatly influence the clinical features of this disease.

In a patient with unilateral segmental exacerbations of Hailey-Hailey
disease, Poblete-Gutierrez et al. (2004) identified heterozygosity for a
splice site mutation in exon 22 of the ATP2C1 gene (604384.0009).
Haplotype analysis of the more severely affected segmental skin regions
revealed consistent loss of the paternal wildtype allele, confirming the
authors' hypothesis that such segmental exacerbations represent a form
of mosaicism with hemizygosity for the mutation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, 4-BP INS, 767CCCT

In a family with Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Hu et al. (2000) found
a 4-bp insertion after nucleotide 767 in exon 10 of the ATP2C1 gene. The
insertion resulted in a frameshift with a premature termination codon 42
amino acids downstream of the mutation.

.0002
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, ALA304THR

In a family with Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Hu et al. (2000)
identified a G-to-T transversion of nucleotide 910 of the ATP2C1 gene,
resulting in an ala304-to-thr amino acid substitution.

.0003
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, ARG468TER

In a family with Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Hu et al. (2000) found
a 1402C-T transition in the ATP2C1 gene that altered codon 468 from
arginine to stop.

.0004
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, 4-BP DEL, 2374TTTG

In 2 unrelated families with Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Hu et al.
(2000) found an identical 4-bp deletion of 2374delTTTG in the ATP2C1
gene. The 2 families had different alleles of the D3S1587 marker, a
locus less than 100 kb from the mutant gene, on the mutant chromosome.
This may indicate that these were independent mutations. The deletion
resulted in a premature termination codon 10 amino acids downstream of
the mutation.

.0005
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, IVS11, G-A, -1

Sudbrak et al. (2000) identified a G-to-A transition at the 3-prime end
of intron 11 (nucleotide position 852) of the ATP2C1 gene in a family
with Hailey-Hailey disease (169600). The effect on the cDNA was not
determined.

.0006
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, CYS490PHE

In a Japanese patient who represented a sporadic occurrence of
Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Yokota et al. (2002) reported a
cys490-to-phe (C490F) amino acid substitution that arose from a 1469G-T
transversion in exon 17 of the ATP2C1 gene.

.0007
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, 1-BP DEL, 2460G

In a Japanese patient who represented a sporadic occurrence of
Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Yokota et al. (2002) reported a
frameshift mutation in the ATP2C1 gene, 2460delG, that resulted in a
premature termination codon at exon 25.

.0008
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, LEU584PRO

In a Japanese patient who represented a sporadic occurrence of
Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Yokota et al. (2002) reported a T-to-C
transition at nucleotide 1751 in exon 19 of the ATP2C1 gene, resulting
in a leu584-to-pro (L584P) amino acid substitution.

.0009
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, IVS22, G-A, +1

In a patient with unilateral segmental exacerbations of Hailey-Hailey
disease (169600), originally reported by Vakilzadeh and Kolde (1985),
Poblete-Gutierrez et al. (2004) identified heterozygosity for a G-to-A
transition at the first base of the consensus splice donor site of exon
22 of the ATP2C1 gene. The mutation, which they designated 2146+1G-A,
resulted in the skipping of the 69-bp exon 22. Haplotype analysis of the
more severely affected segmental skin regions revealed consistent loss
of the paternal wildtype allele, confirming the authors' hypothesis that
such segmental exacerbations represent a form of mosaicism with
hemizygosity for the mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Chao, S.-C.; Tsai, Y.-M.; Yang, M.-H.: Mutation analysis of ATP2C1
gene in Taiwanese patients with Hailey-Hailey disease. Brit. J. Derm. 146:
595-600, 2002.

2. Dobson-Stone, C.; Fairclough, R.; Dunne, E.; Brown, J.; Dissanayake,
M.; Munro, C. S.; Strachan, T.; Burge, S.; Sudbrak, R.; Monaco, A.
P.; Hovnanian, A.: Hailey-Hailey disease: molecular and clinical
characterization of novel mutations in the ATP2C1 gene. J. Invest.
Derm. 118: 338-343, 2002.

3. Hu, Z.; Bonifas, J. M.; Beech, J.; Bench, G.; Shigihara, T.; Ogawa,
H.; Ikeda, S.; Mauro, T.; Epstein, E. H., Jr.: Mutations in ATP2C1,
encoding a calcium pump, cause Hailey-Hailey disease. Nature Genet. 24:
61-65, 2000.

4. Ikeda, S.; Shigihara, T.; Mayuzumi, N.; Yu, X.; Ogawa, H.: Mutations
of ATP2C1 in Japanese patients with Hailey-Hailey disease: intrafamilial
and interfamilial phenotype variations and lack of correlation with
mutation patterns. J. Invest. Derm. 117: 1654-1656, 2001.

5. Kourtis, N.; Nikoletopoulou, V.; Tavernarakis, N.: Small heat-shock
proteins protect from heat-stroke-associated neurodegeneration. Nature 490:
213-218, 2012.

6. Mukhopadhyay, S.; Linstedt, A. D.: Identification of a gain-of-function
mutation in a Golgi P-type ATPase that enhances Mn(2+) efflux and
protects against toxicity. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 108: 858-863, 2011.

7. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVI.
The complete sequences of 150 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 65-73, 2000.

8. Poblete-Gutierrez, P.; Wiederholt, T.; Konig, A.; Jugert, F. K.;
Marquardt, Y.; Rubben, A.; Merk, H. F.; Happle, R.; Frank, J.: Allelic
loss underlies type 2 segmental Hailey-Hailey disease, providing molecular
confirmation of a novel genetic concept. J. Clin. Invest. 114: 1467-1474,
2004.

9. Sudbrak, R.; Brown, J.; Dobson-Stone, C.; Carter, S.; Ramser, J.;
White, J.; Healy, E.; Dissanayake, M.; Larregue, M.; Perrussel, M.;
Lehrach, H.; Munro, C. S.; Strachan, T.; Burge, S.; Hovnanian, A.;
Monaco, A. P.: Hailey-Hailey disease is caused by mutations in ATP2C1
encoding a novel Ca2+ pump. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1131-1140, 2000.

10. Ton, V.-K.; Mandal, D.; Vahadji, C.; Rao, R.: Functional expression
in yeast of the human secretory pathway Ca(2+), Mn(2+)-ATPase defective
in Hailey-Hailey disease. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 6422-6427, 2002.

11. Vakilzadeh, F.; Kolde, G.: Relapsing linear acantholytic dermatosis. Brit.
J. Derm. 112: 349-355, 1985.

12. Van Baelen, K.; Vanoevelen, J.; Callewaert, G.; Parys, J. B.;
De Smedt, H.; Raeymaekers, L.; Rizzuto, R.; Missiaen, L.; Wuytack,
F.: The contribution of the SPCA1 Ca(2+) pump to the Ca(2+) accumulation
in the Golgi apparatus of HeLa cells assessed via RNA-mediated interference. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 306: 430-436, 2003.

13. Yokota, K.; Takizawa, Y.; Yasukawa, K.; Kimura, K.; Nishikawa,
T.; Shimizu, H.: Analysis of ATP2C1 gene mutation in 10 unrelated
Japanese families with Hailey-Hailey disease. J. Invest. Derm. 118:
550-551, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/8/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/25/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/19/2005
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 5/13/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 4/29/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 4/14/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/12/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/29/1999

EDITED mgross: 03/20/2013
terry: 3/8/2013
carol: 11/27/2012
alopez: 11/1/2012
terry: 10/25/2012
mgross: 10/13/2009
carol: 1/20/2005
terry: 1/19/2005
alopez: 5/13/2003
alopez: 4/29/2003
alopez: 4/14/2003
alopez: 8/7/2000
alopez: 5/12/2000
alopez: 12/29/1999

604128	TITLE *604128 TRANSCRIPTION ELONGATION FACTOR A, 3; TCEA3
DESCRIPTION Transcription elongation factors in the SII class release RNA polymerase
II from transcriptional arrest. TCEA1 (601425) binds to RNA polymerase
II and stimulates nuclease activity during nucleotide misincorporation.
Labhart and Morgan (1998) cloned a partial human cDNA encoding a third
TFIIS isoform, TCEA3. Northern blot analysis of Xenopus tissues
suggested that this isoform may have a restricted tissue expression.

REFERENCE 1. Labhart, P.; Morgan, G. T.: Identification of novel genes encoding
transcription elongation factor TFIIS (TCEA) in vertebrates: conservation
of three distinct TFIIS isoforms in frog, mouse, and human. Genomics 52:
278-288, 1998.

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 8/16/1999

EDITED alopez: 08/16/1999

605417	TITLE *605417 DICKKOPF, XENOPUS, HOMOLOG OF, 4; DKK4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the Dickkopf family, like DKK4, are negative regulators of
the growth-promoting Wnt (see WNT1, 164820)/beta-catenin (116806)
signaling pathway Fatima et al. (2012).

CLONING

By searching EST databases with a partial DKK3 (605416) sequence,
Krupnik et al. (1999) identified a cDNA encoding DKK4. The deduced
224-amino acid DKK4 protein, like DKK1, DKK2 (605415), and DKK3,
possesses an N-terminal signal peptide and 2 conserved cysteine-rich
domains, which are separated by a linker region and contain 10 cys
residues each. The second cys region has a putative lipid-binding
function that may facilitate WNT/DKK interactions at the plasma
membrane. The linker region contains 50 to 55 amino acids in DKK1, DKK2,
and DKK4, whereas in DKK3 it contains only 12 amino acids. All DKKs have
several potential sites for cleavage by furin-type proteases. Northern
blot analysis detected no expression of DKK4, but RT-PCR analysis
detected DKK4 expression in cerebellum, T-cell, esophagus, and lung cDNA
libraries. Western blot analysis showed that DKK4 is secreted as 40-,
30- to 32-, and 15- to 17-kD proteins; these proteins were not
significantly affected by N-glycanase treatment. N-terminal sequence
analysis of the different forms suggested that DKK4 is proteolytically
processed, possibly by intracellular furin-type proteases. Functional
analysis determined that DKK4 blocks Xenopus Wnt8, Wnt3a, and Wnt2b, but
not Dsh or Fz8, induction of a secondary axis in frog embryos,
indicating that DKKs antagonize WNT function upstream of WNT receptors.

GENE FUNCTION

Using quantitative RT-PCR, Fatima et al. (2012) found that expression of
DKK4 was significantly reduced in hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs),
particularly in HCCs that showed cytoplasmic beta-catenin accumulation.
DKK4 expression was also reduced in HCC cell lines. Ectopic expression
of DKK4 in 2 HCC cell lines reduced beta-catenin and cyclin D1 (168461)
protein levels and attenuated beta-catenin activity in reporter gene
assays. Overexpression of DKK4 in 2 stably transfected HCC cell lines
hampered cell proliferation, reduced colony formation, and retarded cell
migration in culture and reduced tumor size in mouse xenografts. DKK4
overexpression caused the activation of kinase GSK3-beta (GSK3B;
605004), resulting in phosphorylation and proteasome-mediated
degradation of cytoplasmic beta-catenin. Fatima et al. (2012) concluded
that the antitumor properties of DKK4 are a result of GSK3-beta
activation and the subsequent degradation of cytoplasmic beta-catenin.

MAPPING

By FISH, Yoshida et al. (2001) mapped the DKK4 gene to chromosome
8p11.2-p11.1.

REFERENCE 1. Fatima, S.; Lee, N. P.; Kolligs, F. T.; Ng, I. O. L.; Poon, R.
T. P.; Fan, S. T.; Luk, J. M.: Dickkopf 4 (DKK4) acts on Wnt/beta-catenin
pathway by influencing beta-catenin in hepatocellular carcinoma. Oncogene 31:
4233-4244, 2012.

2. Krupnik, V. E.; Sharp, J. D.; Jiang, C.; Robison, K.; Chickering,
T. W.; Amaravadi, L.; Brown, D. E.; Guyot, D.; Mays, G.; Leiby, K.;
Chang, B.; Duong, T.; Goodearl, A. D. J.; Gearing, D. P.; Sokol, S.
Y.; McCarthy, S. A.: Functional and structural diversity of the human
Dickkopf gene family. Gene 238: 301-313, 1999.

3. Yoshida, S.; Satoh, H.; Mitsuya, T.; Tate, G.: Assignment of the
human dickkopf (Xenopus) homolog 4 (DKK4) to chromosome 8p11.2-p11.1
by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 94:
88-89, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/11/2013
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 2/7/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/22/2000

EDITED tpirozzi: 09/11/2013
tpirozzi: 9/11/2013
terry: 2/7/2002
mgross: 11/27/2000
mgross: 11/22/2000

602839	TITLE *602839 PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL 3-KINASE, CATALYTIC, DELTA; PIK3CD
;;PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL 3-KINASE, CATALYTIC, 110-KD, DELTA;;
p110-DELTA;;
PI3K-DELTA;;
PIK3-DELTA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks) phosphorylate the 3-prime OH position
of the inositol ring of inositol lipids. See 602838. The class I PI3Ks
display a broad phosphoinositide lipid substrate specificity and include
p110-alpha (171834), p110-beta (602925), and p110-gamma (601232).
p110-alpha and p110-beta interact with SH2/SH3-domain-containing p85
adaptor proteins (see 171833) and with GTP-bound Ras.

CLONING

By RT-PCR of mRNA from a T-cell line with degenerate primers derived
from conserved regions of PI3K catalytic core domains, Vanhaesebroeck et
al. (1997) isolated a cDNA encoding a protein that they designated
p110-delta. Sequence analysis revealed that the predicted 1,044-amino
acid p110-delta protein is a PI3K that is 58% identical to p110-beta. By
Northern blot analysis of human tissues and immunolocalization in rat
tissues, Vanhaesebroeck et al. (1997) found that p110-delta is
selectively expressed in leukocytes. The p110-delta transcript is
approximately 6 kb.

Independently, Seki et al. (1997) also cloned and characterized PIK3CD.

Chantry et al. (1997) isolated mouse and human p110-delta cDNAs.
Sequence analysis revealed that the predicted proteins are 94%
identical.

GENE FUNCTION

Vanhaesebroeck et al. (1997) classified p110-delta as a class I PI3K
because it displayed broad in vitro lipid substrate specificity. Like
p110-alpha and p110-beta, p110-delta binds p85 adaptor proteins and
GTP-bound Ras. These 3 class I PI3Ks were indistinguishable at the level
of p85 adaptor protein selection or recruitment to activated receptor
complexes. However, unlike p110-alpha, p110-delta does not phosphorylate
p85, but instead has an autophosphorylation activity.

Ali et al. (2004) reported that genetic or pharmacologic inactivation of
the p110-delta isoform of PI(3)K in mast cells led to defective stem
cell factor (SCF; 184745)-mediated in vitro proliferation, adhesion, and
migration, and to impaired allergen-IgE (147180)-induced degranulation
and cytokine release. Inactivation of p110-delta protected mice against
anaphylactic allergic responses.

MAPPING

Using FISH and radiation hybrid analysis, Seki et al. (1997) mapped the
PIK3CD gene to chromosome 1p36.2, a region frequently lost in
malignancy.

ANIMAL MODEL

Okkenhaug et al. (2002) generated mice expressing a catalytically
inactive form of Pik3cd (asp910 to ala). They observed impaired
signaling and attenuated immune responses by antigen receptors of B and
T cells from these mice. The presence of Pik3ca and Pik3cb did not
compensate for Pik3cd in immune function. The mutant mice also developed
inflammatory bowel disease. Since the IBD7 susceptibility locus (605225)
maps to chromosome 1p36, the authors suggested that PIK3CD may be a
candidate susceptibility gene.

REFERENCE 1. Ali, K.; Bilancio, A.; Thomas, M.; Pearce, W.; Gilfillan, A. M.;
Tkaczyk, C.; Kuehn, N.; Gray, A.; Giddings, J.; Peskett, E.; Fox,
R.; Bruce, I.; Walker, C.; Sawyer, C.; Okkenhaug, K.; Finan, P.; Vanhaesebroeck,
B.: Essential role for the p110-delta phosphoinositide 3-kinase in
the allergic response. Nature 431: 1007-1011, 2004.

2. Chantry, D.; Vojtek, A.; Kashishian, A.; Holtzman, D. A.; Wood,
C.; Gray, P. W.; Cooper, J. A.; Hoekstra, M. F.: p110-delta, a novel
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase catalytic subunit that associates with
p85 and is expressed predominantly in leukocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 272:
19236-19241, 1997.

3. Okkenhaug, K.; Bilancio, A.; Farjot, G.; Priddle, H.; Sancho, S.;
Peskett, E.; Pearce, W.; Meek, S. E.; Salpekar, A.; Waterfield, M.
D.; Smith, A. J. H.; Vanhaesebroeck, B.: Impaired B and T cell antigen
receptor signaling in p110-delta PI 3-kinase mutant mice. Science 297:
1031-1034, 2002.

4. Seki, N.; Nimura, Y.; Ohira, M.; Saito, T.; Ichimiya, S.; Nomura,
N.; Nakagawara, A.: Identification and chromosome assignment of a
human gene encoding a novel phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase. DNA Res. 4:
355-358, 1997.

5. Vanhaesebroeck, B.; Welham, M. J.; Kotani, K.; Stein, R.; Warne,
P. H.; Zvelebil, M. J.; Higashi, K.; Volinia, S.; Downward, J.; Waterfield,
M. D.: p110-delta, a novel phosphoinositide 3-kinase in leukocytes. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 4330-4335, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/26/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/4/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/13/1998

EDITED mgross: 11/06/2013
tkritzer: 2/10/2005
terry: 1/26/2005
mgross: 9/4/2002
alopez: 8/4/1998
alopez: 7/13/1998

142100	TITLE *142100 HEMOGLOBIN--EPSILON LOCUS; HBE1
DESCRIPTION The epsilon locus determines the epsilon, or non-alpha, chain of
embryonic hemoglobin (originally known as Gower-2). No mutations
affecting the epsilon chain have yet been identified. Gower-1 is a
tetramer of epsilon chains. The epsilon locus may be linked to the
delta-beta complex. The amino acid sequence of the epsilon chain is
similar to those of the delta and beta chains. Furthermore, the
homologous chain in the mouse is linked to the beta locus (Gilman and
Smithies, 1968). Shen and Smithies (1982) determined the complete
nucleotide sequence of the 3.4-kb stretch of DNA 5-prime to the epsilon
gene where a pseudogene (psi-beta-2) was thought to reside (Fritsch et
al., 1980). They concluded that no globin-related gene exists there and
provided a possible explanation for the earlier contrary conclusion. By
studies in transgenic mice, Raich et al. (1992) demonstrated that
deletion of a 'negative element' located between -182 and -467 bp
upstream of the HBE gene cap site resulted in continuation of HBE gene
expression in the definitive erythroblasts of the fetal liver and in the
red blood cells of adult animals. The findings provided direct in vivo
evidence that cis-acting silencing elements are involved in the
developmental control of the HBE gene.

Bailey et al. (1992) used the epsilon-globin gene to examine the debate
as to whether all bats fall into a monophyletic order (Chiroptera) or
have diphyletic origins with the megabats actually being 'flying
primates.' Results of parsimony analysis supported bat monophyly.

He and Russell (2002) analyzed the anti-sickling properties of HBE both
in vitro as well as in vivo in a well-established mouse model of sickle
cell anemia (603903). These animals, expressing 100% of human Hb S
(141900.0243), display a chronic hemolytic anemia with compensatory
marrow and extramedullary erythropoiesis, abundant circulating sickled
erythrocytes, and chronic tissue damage evidenced by parallel
histopathologic and functional deficits. By comparison, related mice
that coexpress Hb S as well as HBE exhibited normal physiologic,
morphologic, histologic, and functional attributes. Subsequent in vitro
analyses substantiated results from whole-animal studies, indicating
that the polymerization of deoxygenated Hb S can be significantly slowed
by relatively small quantities of HBE. Together, the in vivo and in
vitro analyses suggested that reactivation of epsilon-globin gene
expression would be therapeutically beneficial to adults with sickle
phenotypes, and provide a rationale for detailed investigations into the
molecular basis for its developmental silencing.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Baralle et al. (1980); Gale et al. (1979); Huehns et al. (1964); Huehns
et al. (1961); Ramsay et al. (1986)
REFERENCE 1. Bailey, W. J.; Slightom, J. L.; Goodman, M.: Rejection of the
'flying primate' hypothesis by phylogenetic evidence from the epsilon-globin
gene. Science 256: 86-89, 1992. Note: Erratum: Science 260: 608
only, 1993.

2. Baralle, F. E.; Shoulders, C. C.; Proudfoot, N. J.: The primary
structure of the human epsilon-globin gene. Cell 21: 621-626, 1980.

3. Fritsch, E. F.; Lawn, R. M.; Maniatis, T.: Molecular cloning and
characterization of the human beta-like globin gene cluster. Cell 19:
959-972, 1980.

4. Gale, R. E.; Clegg, J. B.; Huehns, E. R.: Human embryonic haemoglobins
Gower 1 and Gower 2. Nature 280: 162-164, 1979.

5. Gilman, J. G.; Smithies, O.: Fetal hemoglobin variants in mice. Science 160:
885-886, 1968.

6. He, Z.; Russell, J. E.: A human embryonic hemoglobin inhibits
Hb S polymerization in vitro and restores a normal phenotype to mouse
models of sickle cell disease. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 10635-10640,
2002.

7. Huehns, E. R.; Dance, N.; Beaven, G. H.; Hecht, F.; Motulsky, A.
G.: Human embryonic hemoglobin. Nature 201: 1095-1097, 1964.

8. Huehns, E. R.; Flynn, F. V.; Butler, E. A.; Beaven, G. H.: Two
new hemoglobin variants in a very young human embryo. Nature 189:
496-497, 1961.

9. Raich, N.; Papayannopoulou, T.; Stamatoyannopoulos, G.; Enver,
T.: Demonstration of a human epsilon-globin gene silencer with studies
in transgenic mice. Blood 79: 861-864, 1992.

10. Ramsay, M.; Thomson, J. A.; Jenkins, T.: A new epsilon globin
HincII variant fragment length in a South African Negroid family. J.
Med. Genet. 23: 145-150, 1986.

11. Shen, S.-H.; Smithies, O.: Human globin psi-beta-2 is not a globin-related
sequence. Nucleic Acids Res. 10: 7809-7818, 1982.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/27/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 04/01/2013
alopez: 5/27/2004
terry: 5/21/2004
cwells: 10/1/2002
carol: 9/27/2002
alopez: 8/1/1997
mimadm: 9/24/1994
terry: 5/9/1994
carol: 8/11/1992
carol: 5/11/1992
carol: 5/1/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

602591	TITLE *602591 KINESIN HEAVY CHAIN MEMBER 2A; KIF2A
;;KIF2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

KIF2A, KIF2B (615142), and KIF2C (604538) comprise the kinesin-13 family
of microtubule motor proteins, which are characterized by the
localization of the kinesin motor domain in the middle of the
polypeptide. Kinesin-13 proteins are nonmotile and induce microtubule
depolymerization by disassembling tubulin subunits from the polymer end.
KIF2A is essential for both bipolar spindle assembly and chromosome
movement (summary by Manning et al., 2007).

For background information on kinesins, see 148760.

CLONING

By using cDNA differential display, Debernardi et al. (1997) isolated a
kinesin heavy chain gene (KIF2) as one regulated by the synthetic
retinoid HPR, a cancer chemopreventive agent and inducer of apoptotic
cell death. The KIF2 gene, which they called HK2 for 'human kinesin-2,'
was cloned from follicular B-cell lymphoma cells treated with HPR. Human
KIF2 is a predicted 679-amino acid protein that is 97% identical to
mouse KIF2 protein. On Northern blots, KIF2 was expressed as a 3.5-kb
mRNA in several tissues.

NOMENCLATURE

Lawrence et al. (2004) presented a standardized kinesin nomenclature
based on 14 family designations. Under this system, KIF2A belongs to the
kinesin-13 family.

MAPPING

Debernardi et al. (1997) mapped the KIF2 gene to chromosome 5q12-q13 by
PCR of a panel of radiation hybrid clones.

Gross (2013) mapped the KIF2A gene to chromosome 5q12.1 based on an
alignment of the KIF2A sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC031828) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

Using RNA interference in human U2OS and RPE cells, Manning et al.
(2007) found that each of the kinesin-13 family members has a distinct
role during mitosis. MCAK (KIF2C) deficiency resulted in exaggerated
astral microtubule length. KIF2A and KIF2B deficiency resulted in
similar defects, with delayed progression through mitosis, appearance of
monopolar or disorganized spindles, and increased number of binucleated
or dead cells. However, knockdown of KIF2B, but not KIF2A, reduced the
poleward kinetochore force acting on chromosomes. Knockdown of KIF2B did
not disrupt the pole localization of KIF2A or the centromere and spindle
localization of MCAK.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 2 unrelated patients with complex cortical dysplasia with other brain
malformations-3 (CDCBM3; 615411), Poirier et al. (2013) identified 2
different de novo heterozygous mutations in the KIF2A gene (H321D,
602591.0001 and S317N, 602591.0002). The first mutation was found by
whole-exome sequencing and was not present in several genomic databases,
including dbSNP, 1000 Genomes, the Exome Variant Server, and a local
Paris Descartes Bioinformatics platform database. The second mutation
was found by screening 162 individuals with various malformations of
cortical development for variants in kinesin genes. The patients had
microcephaly, early-onset epilepsy, and various malformations of
cortical development, including agyria, posterior predominant
pachygyria, subcortical band heterotopia, and thin corpus callosum. One
patient had dysmorphic basal ganglia. Both had severe developmental
delay and were bedridden with spastic paraplegia at ages 1 and 4 years,
respectively. In vitro functional expression studies showed that the
mutations caused abnormal protein folding, resulting in abnormal
cellular localization and a loss of protein function. Because KIF2A
functions as a dimer, Poirier et al. (2013) postulated a
dominant-negative effect. The findings extended the association between
microtubule-based cellular processes and proper cortical development.

ANIMAL MODEL

Homma et al. (2003) found that brains of Kif2a -/- mice showed multiple
phenotypes, including aberrant axonal branching due to overextension of
collateral branches. In Kif2a -/- growth cones,
microtubule-depolymerizing activity decreased. Moreover, many individual
microtubules showed abnormal behavior at the Kif2a -/- cell edge. The
authors concluded that KIF2A regulates microtubule dynamics at the
growth cone edge by depolymerizing microtubules and that it plays an
important role in the suppression of collateral branch extension.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CORTICAL DYSPLASIA, COMPLEX, WITH OTHER BRAIN MALFORMATIONS 3
KIF2A, HIS321ASP

In a 1-year-old child with complex cortical dysplasia with other brain
malformations-3 (CDCBM3; 615411), Poirier et al. (2013) identified a de
novo heterozygous c.961C-G transversion in the KIF2A gene, resulting in
a his321-to-asp (H321D) substitution at a conserved residue located
around the ATP nucleotide-binding pocket in the kinesin motor domain.
The mutation was found by whole-exome sequencing and was not found in
several genomic databases, including dbSNP, 1000 Genomes, the Exome
Variant Server, and a local Paris Descartes Bioinformatics platform
database. In vitro functional expression studies in E. coli showed
decreased levels of soluble mutant protein in the extract compared to
wildtype, suggesting that the mutation caused misfolding and retention
of the protein in the insoluble fraction, resulting in decreased levels
of functional protein. Overexpression of the mutant protein in COS-7
cells and human fibroblasts resulted in abnormal cellular localization
with predominant decoration of microtubules rather than diffuse
punctiform cytoplasmic and nuclear distribution as observed for wildtype
KIF2A. Because KIF2A functions as a dimer, Poirier et al. (2013)
postulated a dominant-negative effect.

.0002
CORTICAL DYSPLASIA, COMPLEX, WITH OTHER BRAIN MALFORMATIONS 3
KIF2A, SER317ASN

In a 4-year-old child with CDCBM3 (615411), Poirier et al. (2013)
identified a de novo heterozygous c.950G-A transition in the KIF2A gene,
resulting in a ser317-to-asn (S317N) substitution at a conserved residue
located around the ATP nucleotide-binding pocket in the kinesin motor
domain. In vitro functional expression studies in E. coli showed
decreased levels of soluble mutant protein in the extract compared to
wildtype, suggesting that the mutation caused misfolding and retention
of the protein in the insoluble fraction, resulting in decreased levels
of functional protein. Overexpression of the mutant protein in COS-7
cells and human fibroblasts resulted in abnormal cellular localization
with predominant decoration of microtubules rather than diffuse
punctiform cytoplasmic and nuclear distribution as observed for wildtype
KIF2A. Because KIF2A functions as a dimer, Poirier et al. (2013)
postulated a dominant-negative effect.

REFERENCE 1. Debernardi, S.; Fontanella, E.; De Gregorio, L.; Pierotti, M. A.;
Delia, D.: Identification of a novel human kinesin-related gene (HK2)
by the cDNA differential display technique. Genomics 42: 67-73,
1997.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/18/2013.

3. Homma, N.; Takei, Y.; Tanaka, Y.; Nakata, T.; Terada, S.; Kikkawa,
M.; Noda, Y.; Hirokawa, N.: Kinesin superfamily protein 2A (KIF2A)
functions in suppression of collateral branch extension. Cell 114:
229-239, 2003.

4. Lawrence, C. J.; Dawe, R. K.; Christie, K. R.; Cleveland, D. W.;
Dawson, S. C.; Endow, S. A.; Goldstein, L. S. B.; Goodson, H. V.;
Hirokawa, N.; Howard, J.; Malmberg, R. L.; McIntosh, J. R.; and 10
others: A standardized kinesin nomenclature. J. Cell Biol. 167:
19-22, 2004.

5. Manning, A. L.; Ganem, N. J.; Bakhoum, S. F.; Wagenbach, M.; Wordeman,
L.; Compton, D. A.: The kinesin-13 proteins, Kif2a, Kif2b, and Kif2c/MCAK
have distinct roles during mitosis in human cells. Molec. Biol. Cell 18:
2970-2979, 2007.

6. Poirier, K.; Lebrun, N.; Broix, L.; Tian, G.; Saillour, Y.; Boscheron,
C.; Parrini, E.; Valence, S.; Saint Pierre, B.; Oger, M.; Lacombe,
D.; Genevieve, D.; and 23 others: Mutations in TUBG1, DYNC1H1,
KIF5C and KIF2A cause malformations of cortical development and microcephaly. Nature
Genet. 45: 639-647, 2013. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 45: 962 only,
2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 09/18/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/16/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/22/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/21/2012
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 5/25/2004

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/4/1998

EDITED mgross: 09/18/2013
carol: 9/17/2013
ckniffin: 9/16/2013
alopez: 3/27/2013
terry: 3/22/2013
mgross: 6/21/2012
carol: 3/9/2009
mgross: 5/25/2004
alopez: 5/4/1998

607429	TITLE *607429 PRENYL DIPHOSPHATE SYNTHASE, SUBUNIT 1; PDSS1
;;DECAPRENYL DIPHOSPHATE SYNTHASE; DPS;;
SOLANESYL DIPHOSPHATE SYNTHASE, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; SPS;;
TRANS-PRENYLTRANSFERASE; TPT;;
POLYPRENYL PYROPHOSPHATE SYNTHETASE;;
COQ1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; COQ1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Trans-prenyltransferase is the microsomal enzyme that elongates the
prenyl side-chain of coenzyme Q, or ubiquinone, which has a role in
oxidative phosphorylation within mitochondria, in scavenging free
radicals, and in the redox control of cell signaling. For a review of
the biochemical roles of coenzyme Q, see Crane (2001).

CLONING

By searching EST databases for homologs of S. pombe Dps1, Saiki et al.
(2005) identified human PDSS1, which they called DPS1. The predicted
415-amino acid protein shares 82% identity with its mouse homolog, Sps1,
and contains the 7 conserved domains and DDxxD motifs typical of
trans-prenyl diphosphate synthases.

GENE FUNCTION

Appelkvist et al. (1994) reviewed the characterization of rat liver
trans-prenyltransferase and its role in coenzyme Q synthesis. The
optimum substrates for the rat enzyme are trans-geranyl pyrophosphate
and, to a lesser extent, all-trans geranylgeranyl-pyrophosphate. Tpt is
not dependent on the presence of detergents or cytoplasmic proteins for
activity, is Mn(2+) dependent, and has a pH optimum of 8. Tpt localizes
to the cytoplasmic surface of microsomal vesicles.

Saiki et al. (2005) found that expression of human DPS1 and DLP1 (PDSS2;
610564) in E. coli resulted in production of Q10 ubiquinone and
decaprenol, whereas expression of mouse Sps1 and Dlp1 produced Q9
ubiquinone and solanesol. Western blot analysis showed that the proteins
were expressed as a heterotetramer. Expression in E. coli of
heterologous combinations of human and mouse proteins generated both Q9
and Q10, indicating that both DPS1/Sps1 and DLP1/Dlp1 are involved in
determining the ubiquinone side chain. Although human DPS1 and mouse
Sps1 could complement S. pombe lacking Dps1, neither human DLP1 nor
mouse Dlp1 could complement S. pombe lacking Dlp1. Saiki et al. (2005)
concluded that both DPS1 and DLP1 are required for generation of
decaprenyl diphosphate synthase.

MAPPING

Saiki et al. (2005) stated that the PDSS1 (DPS1) gene maps to chromosome
10p12.1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Rotig et al. (2000) identified patients with multitissue coenzyme Q10
deficiency. The patients had very low concentrations of
decaprenyl-diphosphate within cell extracts, consistent with TPT
deficiency. However, no mutations in TPT cDNA could be identified.
Messenger RNA levels were very low in normal fibroblasts and
lymphoblastoid cell lines, precluding comparison with CoQ10-deficient
cells. Rotig et al. (2000) suggested that the disease-causing mutation
lies either elsewhere in the TPT gene or in another gene involved in the
regulation of TPT activity.

Mollet et al. (2007) reported a consanguineous Moroccan family in which
2 sibs had COQ10 deficiency-2 (COQ10D2; 614651) manifest as a
multisystem disease with early-onset deafness, optic atrophy, mild
mental retardation, peripheral neuropathy, obesity, livedo reticularis,
and cardiac valvulopathy. Enzymologic analysis showed low
quinone-dependent oxidative phosphorylation activity, and COQ10
deficiency was confirmed by restoration of oxidative phosphorylation
activity after quinone addition. Homozygosity mapping followed by
candidate gene analysis identified a homozygous mutation in the PDSS1
gene (D308E; 607429.0001). Transformation of yeast lacking Coq1 with
yeast Coq1 containing a mutation corresponding to human D308E resulted
in defective growth on respiratory medium.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COENZYME Q10 DEFICIENCY, PRIMARY, 2
PDSS1, ASP308GLU

In a consanguineous Moroccan family in which a son and daughter
presented with COQ10 deficiency-2 (COQ10D2; 614651), Mollet et al.
(2007) identified a homozygous 977T-G transversion in exon 10 of the
PDSS1 gene, resulting in an asp308-to-glu (D308E) substitution. COQ10
deficiency manifested in these patients as a multisystem disease with
early-onset deafness, mild mental retardation, optic atrophy, peripheral
neuropathy, obesity, livedo reticularis, and cardiac valvulopathy. Three
unaffected brothers were either heterozygous, like their parents, or
homozygous for the wildtype allele.

REFERENCE 1. Appelkvist, E.-L.; Aberg, F.; Guan, Z.; Parmryd, I.; Dallner, G.
: Regulation of coenzyme Q biosynthesis. Molec. Aspects Med. 15
(suppl.): S37-S46, 1994.

2. Crane, F. L.: Biochemical functions of coenzyme Q10. J. Am. Coll.
Nutr. 20: 591-598, 2001.

3. Mollet, J.; Giurgea, I.; Schlemmer, D.; Dallner, G.; Chretien,
D.; Delahodde, A.; Bacq, D.; de Lonlay, P.; Munnich, A.; Rotig, A.
: Prenyldiphosphate synthase, subunit 1 (PDSS1) and OH-benzoate polyprenyltransferase
(COQ2) mutations in ubiquinone deficiency and oxidative phosphorylation
disorders. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 765-772, 2007.

4. Rotig, A.; Appelkvist, E. L.; Geromel, V.; Chretien, D.; Kadhom,
N.; Edery, P.; Lebideau, M.; Dallner, G.; Munnich, A.; Ernster, L.;
Rustin, P.: Quinone-responsive multiple respiratory-chain dysfunction
due to widespread coenzyme Q10 deficiency. Lancet 356: 391-395,
2000.

5. Saiki, R.; Nagata, A.; Kainou, T.; Matsuda, H.; Kawamukai, M.:
Characterization of solanesyl and decaprenyl diphosphate synthases
in mice and humans. FEBS J. 272: 5606-5622, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/3/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/14/2006
Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 4/14/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/20/2002

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/18/2002

EDITED carol: 05/24/2012
ckniffin: 5/23/2012
carol: 4/12/2012
carol: 7/6/2011
mgross: 5/17/2007
terry: 5/3/2007
mgross: 11/14/2006
alopez: 4/14/2006
carol: 12/20/2002
ckniffin: 12/19/2002

194529	TITLE *194529 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 22; ZNF22
;;KOX15
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Bray et al. (1991) screened a placental genomic library at moderate
stringency with a degenerate oligodeoxynucleotide probe designed to
hybridize to the his/cys (H/C) link region between adjoining zinc
fingers. Genomic clones were cross-hybridized with a set of 30 zinc
finger-encoding cDNAs (KOX1-KOX30) isolated from a human T-cell cDNA
library. KOX15 matched one of the genomic clones.

MAPPING

Bray et al. (1991) mapped the ZNF22 gene to chromosome 10q11 by
chromosomal in situ suppression hybridization with fluorescent probe
detection. Rousseau-Merck et al. (1992) confirmed the assignment to
10q11.2 and showed that it is distal to ZNF25 (194528).

REFERENCE 1. Bray, P.; Lichter, P.; Thiesen, H.-J.; Ward, D. C.; Dawid, I. B.
: Characterization and mapping of human genes encoding zinc finger
proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 9563-9567, 1991.

2. Rousseau-Merck, M. F.; Tunnacliffe, A.; Berger, R.; Ponder, B.
A. J.; Thiesen, H. J.: A cluster of expressed zinc finger protein
genes in the pericentromeric region of human chromosome 10. Genomics 13:
845-848, 1992.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/4/1991

EDITED alopez: 07/06/2010
dkim: 6/26/1998
mark: 5/14/1996
carol: 7/21/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 12/4/1991

606563	TITLE *606563 TRANSMEMBRANE 6 SUPERFAMILY, MEMBER 2; TM6SF2
;;KIAA1926
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching an EST database using TM6SF1 (606562) as the probe,
Carim-Todd et al. (2000) obtained a cDNA encoding TM6SF2. The deduced
351-amino acid protein, which is 52% identical to TM6SF1, has 6
transmembrane domains.

By screening for cDNAs with the potential to encode large proteins in
brain, Nagase et al. (2001) identified a cDNA encoding TM6SF2, which
they termed KIAA1926. KIAA1926 encodes a predicted 412-amino acid link
protein, and the authors noted the existence of shorter isoforms. RT-PCR
analysis detected high-level expression of KIAA1926 in adult and fetal
brain, moderate expression in ovary, and low or undetectable expression
in other tissues. Within brain, expression was highest in amygdala and
thalamus, with high levels also detected in other brain regions.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Carim-Todd et al. (2000) determined that
the TM6SF2 gene contains 12 exons.

MAPPING

Carim-Todd et al. (2000) mapped the TM6SF2 gene to chromosome 19p12 by
genomic sequence analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Carim-Todd, L.; Escarceller, M.; Estivill, X.; Sumoy, L.: Cloning
of the novel gene TM6SF1 reveals conservation of clusters of paralogous
genes between human chromosomes 15q24-q26 and 19p13.3-p12. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 90: 255-260, 2000.

2. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. XXI. The complete sequences of 60 new
cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins. DNA Res. 8:
179-187, 2001.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/14/2001

EDITED mgross: 12/17/2001

601074	TITLE *601074 CUGBP- AND ELAV-LIKE FAMILY, MEMBER 1; CELF1
;;CUG TRIPLET REPEAT, RNA-BINDING PROTEIN 1; CUGBP1;;
CUG-BINDING PROTEIN; CUGBP;;
NUCLEAR POLYADENYLATED RNA-BINDING PROTEIN, 50-KD; NAB50;;
BRUNO-LIKE 2; BRUNOL2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the CELF family, such as CELF1, play various roles in
cotranscriptional and posttranscriptional RNA processing. All CELF
proteins appear to affect pre-mRNA splicing, but individual CELFs have
divergent roles in regulating mRNA stability and translation (summary by
Wagnon et al., 2012).

CLONING

An unstable CTG triplet repeat expansion in the DMPK gene (605377) is
responsible for myotonic dystrophy (DM1; 160900). To detect proteins
that bind to CTG triplet repeats, Timchenko et al. (1996) performed
bandshift analysis using as probes double-stranded DNA fragments having
CTG repeats and single-stranded oligonucleotides having CTG repeats or
RNA CUG repeats. The proteins were derived from nuclear and cytoplasmic
extracts of HeLa cells, fibroblasts, and myotubes. Proteins binding to
the double-stranded DNA repeat were inhibited by the nonlabeled repeat
but not by a nonspecific DNA fragment. Another protein binding to the
single-stranded CTG probe and the RNA CUG probe was inhibited by
nonlabeled CTG(8) and CUG(8) repeats. The protein binding only to the
RNA repeat (CUG)8 was inhibited by nonlabeled (CUG)8 but not by
nonlabeled single- or double-stranded CTG repeats. Furthermore, the
protein, designated CUG-binding protein (CUGBP) by the authors,
exhibited no binding to an RNA oligonucleotide of triplet repeats of the
same length but having a different sequence, CGG. The CUG-binding
protein was localized to the cytoplasm, whereas double-stranded DNA
binding proteins were localized to the nuclear extract. Thus, Timchenko
et al. (1996) concluded that several trinucleotide-binding proteins
exist and their specificity is determined by the triplet sequence.

CTG trinucleotide repeats encode CUG repeat regions in the corresponding
mRNAs. Timchenko et al. (1996) identified 2 proteins, termed CUGBP1 and
CUGBP2, that bind specifically to CUG repeats in RNA. They suggested
that these 2 proteins, with masses of 49 kD and 51 kD, respectively, are
isoforms encoded by the same gene. Timchenko et al. (1996) cloned a
gene, termed NAB50 by them, based on the interaction between its protein
product and the yeast Nab2 protein. The authors stated that the NAB50
gene encodes the CUGBP1 and CUGBP2 proteins because anti-Nab50
antibodies crossreacted with both CUGBP isoforms. The gene predicts a
482-amino acid protein with a calculated molecular mass of 52 kD. The
predicted protein contains 3 RNA-binding domains and is homologous to
the hnRNPs.

Good et al. (2000) identified CUGBP1 as BRUNOL2, a member of a human
gene family related to the transcriptional regulator 'Bruno' of
Drosophila. By PCR, they cloned BRUNOL2 from a brain cDNA library. The
deduced protein contains 2 N-terminal RNA recognition motifs (RRMs), a
long linker region, and a C-terminal RRM. BRUNOL2 and BRUNOL3 (CUGBP2;
602538) share 80% amino acid identity overall and more than 92% identity
in their RRMs. Good et al. (2000) determined that the BRUNOL2 cDNA and
the CUGBP1 cDNA reported by Timchenko et al. (1996) differ in their
3-prime UTRs due to alternative splicing. Good et al. (2000) also
identified a BRUNOL2 splice variant with an additional 12 bp, resulting
in a 4-amino acid insertion in the linker region. Northern blot analysis
detected variable expression of 3 major BRUNOL2 transcripts of about
9.5, 7.5, and 2.4 kb in all tissues examined.

Using RNA dot blot analysis, Ladd et al. (2004) confirmed ubiquitous
expression of CUGBP1.

GENE FUNCTION

Timchenko et al. (1996) showed that the NAB50 gene product bound the CUG
repeat region of DMPK.

Using 2 biologic systems with reduced DMPK levels, a homozygous DM
patient and DMPK knockout mice, Roberts et al. (1997) demonstrated that
the intracellular distribution of CUGBP isoforms was altered in the
absence of DMPK. DMPK phosphorylated the CUGBP protein in vitro,
suggesting regulation of nuclear CUGBP localization via phosphorylation.

Using ultraviolet light crosslinking and gel mobility shift assays, Good
et al. (2000) showed that BRUNOL2 bound RNA containing a BRUNO response
element (BRE).

Dudaronek et al. (2007) showed that Ifnb (147720) induced expression of
Lip, a truncated, dominant-negative isoform of Cebpb (189965), and
suppressed active simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) replication in
macaque macrophages. In a human monocyte cell line, IFNB induced
phosphorylation of CUGBP1 and formation of CUGBP1-CEBPB mRNA complexes.
Depletion of Cugbp1 in macaque macrophages via small interfering RNA
showed that Cugbp1 was required for Ifnb-mediated induction of Lip and
for Ifnb-mediated suppression of SIV replication. Dudaronek et al.
(2007) concluded that CUGBP1 is a downstream effector of IFNB signaling
in primary macrophages that plays an important role in innate immune
responses controlling acute human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or SIV
replication in brain.

A transgenic fly model of fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome
(FXTAS; 300623) in which the 5-prime UTR of human FMR1 (309550)
containing 90 CGG repeats is expressed specifically in the eye results
in disorganized ommatidia, depigmentation, and progressive loss of
photoreceptor neurons. Sofola et al. (2007) found that overexpression of
human CUGBP1 suppressed the neurodegenerative eye phenotype in
transgenic flies. CUGBP1 did not interact directly with the CGG repeats,
but did so via HNRNPA2B1 (600124). Expression of the A2 isoform of human
HNRNPA2B1, or the Drosophila orthologs, also suppressed the eye
phenotype of FXTAS flies. CUGBP1 did not interact with other HNRNPs
examined.

Tang et al. (2012) observed altered splicing of the calcium channel
subunit CAV1.1 (CACNA1S; 114208) in muscle of patients with DM1 and DM2
(602668) compared with normal adult muscle and muscle of patients with
facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD; see 158900). A significant
fraction of CAV1.1 transcripts in DM1 and DM2 muscle showed skipping of
exon 29, which represents a fetal splicing pattern. Forced exclusion of
exon 29 in normal mouse skeletal muscle altered channel gating
properties and increased current density and peak electrically evoked
calcium transient magnitude. Downregulation of Mbnl1 (606516) in mouse
cardiac muscle or overexpression of Cugbp1 in mouse tibialis anterior
muscle enhanced skipping of exon 29, suggesting that these splicing
factors may be involved in the CAV1.1 splicing defect in myotonic
dystrophy.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Good et al. (2000) mapped the CUGBP1 gene
to chromosome 11p11.

ANIMAL MODEL

Wang et al. (2007) generated an inducible and heart-specific mouse model
of DM1 that expressed expanded human DMPK CUG-repeat RNA and
recapitulated pathologic features of the human disorder, including
dilated cardiomyopathy, arrhythmias, and systolic and diastolic
dysfunction. The mice also showed misregulation of developmental
alternative splicing transitions, including the Tnnt2 (191045) and Fxr1
(600819) genes. All died of heart failure within 2 weeks.
Immunohistochemical studies showed increased CUGBP1 protein levels
specifically in nuclei containing foci of DMPK CUG-repeat RNA. A
time-course study showed that increased CUGBP1 cooccurred within hours
of induced expression of the CUG repeat and coincided with reversion to
embryonic splicing patterns. The results indicated that increased CUGBP1
is a specific and early event of DM1 pathogenesis and represents a
primary response to expression of DMPK CUG-repeat mutant RNA.

Koshelev et al. (2010) expressed human CUGBP1 in adult mouse heart.
Upregulation of CUGBP1 was sufficient to reproduce molecular,
histopathologic, and functional changes observed in a DM1 mouse model
that expressed expanded CUG RNA repeats (Wang et al., 2007) as well as
in individuals with DM1. The authors concluded that CUGBP1 upregulation
plays an important role in DM1 pathogenesis.

By inducing expression of human CUGBP1 in adult skeletal muscle of
transgenic mice, Ward et al. (2010) showed that the pathogenic features
of DM1 could be explained by upregulated CUGBP1 expression. Within weeks
of induction of CUGBP1 expression, transgenic mice exhibited impaired
movement, reduced muscle function, abnormal gait, and reduced total body
weight compared with uninduced controls. Histologic analysis of
transgenic muscle overexpressing CUGBP1 revealed centrally located
nuclei, myofiber degeneration with inflammatory infiltrate, and pyknotic
nuclear clumps. RT-PCR analysis revealed reversion to embryonic splicing
patterns in several genes in transgenic muscle overexpressing CUGBP1.
Ward et al. (2010) concluded that CUGBP1 has a major role in DM1
skeletal muscle pathogenesis.

REFERENCE 1. Dudaronek, J. M.; Barber, S. A.; Clements, J. E.: CUGBP1 is required
for IFN-beta-mediated induction of dominant-negative CEBP-beta and
suppression of SIV replication in macrophages. J. Immun. 179: 7262-7269,
2007.

2. Good, P. J.; Chen, Q.; Warner, S. J.; Herring, D. C.: A family
of human RNA-binding proteins related to the Drosophila Bruno transcriptional
regulator. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 28583-28592, 2000.

3. Koshelev, M.; Sarma, S.; Price, R. E.; Wehrens, X. H. T.; Cooper,
T. A.: Heart-specific overexpression of CUGBP1 reproduces functional
and molecular abnormalities of myotonic dystrophy type 1. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 19: 1066-1075, 2010.

4. Ladd, A. N.; Nguyen, N. H.; Malhotra, K.; Cooper, T. A.: CELF6,
a member of the CELF family of RNA-binding proteins, regulates muscle-specific
splicing enhancer-dependent alternative splicing. J. Biol. Chem. 279:
17756-17764, 2004.

5. Roberts, R.; Timchenko, N. A.; Miller, J. W.; Reddy, S.; Caskey,
C. T.; Swanson, M. S.; Timchenko, L. T.: Altered phosphorylation
and intracellular distribution of a (CUG)n triplet repeat RNA-binding
protein in patients with myotonic dystrophy and in myotonin protein
kinase knockout mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 13221-13226, 1997.

6. Sofola, O. A.; Jin, P.; Qin, Y.; Duan, R.; Liu, H.; de Haro, M.;
Nelson, D. L.; Botas, J.: RNA-binding proteins hnRNP A2/B1 and CUGBP1
suppress fragile X CGG premutation repeat-induced neurodegeneration
in a Drosophila model of FXTAS. Neuron 55: 565-571, 2007.

7. Tang, Z. Z.; Yarotskyy, V.; Wei, L.; Sobczak, K.; Nakamori, M.;
Eichinger, K.; Moxley, R. T.; Dirksen, R. T.; Thornton, C. A.: Muscle
weakness in myotonic dystrophy associated with misregulated splicing
and altered gating of CaV1.1 calcium channel. Hum. Molec. Genet. 21:
1312-1324, 2012.

8. Timchenko, L. T.; Miller, J. W.; Timchenko, N. A.; DeVore, D. R.;
Datar, K. V.; Lin, L.; Roberts, R.; Caskey, C. T.; Swanson, M. S.
: Identification of a (CUG)n triplet repeat RNA-binding protein and
its expression in myotonic dystrophy. Nucleic Acids Res. 24: 4407-4414,
1996.

9. Timchenko, L. T.; Timchenko, N. A.; Caskey, C. T.; Roberts, R.
: Novel proteins with binding specificity for DNA CTG repeats and
RNA CUG repeats: implications for myotonic dystrophy. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 5: 115-121, 1996.

10. Wagnon, J. L.; Briese, M.; Sun, W.; Mahaffey, C. L.; Curk, T.;
Rot, G.; Ule, J.; Frankel, W. N.: CELF4 regulates translation and
local abundance of a vast set of mRNAs, including genes associated
with regulation of synaptic function. PLoS Genet. 8: e1003067, 2012.
Note: Electronic Article.

11. Wang, G.-S.; Kearney, D. L.; De Biasi, M.; Taffet, G.; Cooper,
T. A.: Elevation of RNA-binding protein CUGBP1 is an early event
in an inducible heart-specific mouse model of myotonic dystrophy. J.
Clin. Invest. 117: 2802-2811, 2007.

12. Ward, A. J.; Rimer, M.; Killian, J. M.; Dowling, J. J.; Cooper,
T. A.: CUGBP1 overexpression in mouse skeletal muscle reproduces
features of myotonic dystrophy type 1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 3614-3622,
2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 7/26/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/17/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/26/2012
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/10/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/10/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/23/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/21/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/29/2007
Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 8/27/2001
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 9/25/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/24/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/15/1996

EDITED mgross: 07/26/2013
mgross: 7/26/2013
mgross: 7/17/2013
mgross: 5/2/2012
terry: 4/26/2012
alopez: 11/16/2011
terry: 11/10/2011
mgross: 9/17/2009
terry: 9/10/2009
mgross: 3/20/2009
terry: 2/23/2009
mgross: 12/18/2008
terry: 11/21/2008
carol: 11/5/2007
ckniffin: 10/29/2007
alopez: 8/27/2001
mgross: 8/11/1999
mgross: 2/24/1999
alopez: 9/28/1998
carol: 9/25/1998
dholmes: 4/16/1998
alopez: 2/25/1998
terry: 2/24/1998
mark: 2/15/1996

603025	TITLE *603025 PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL-BINDING CLATHRIN ASSEMBLY PROTEIN; PICALM
;;CLATHRIN ASSEMBLY LYMPHOID-MYELOID LEUKEMIA GENE; CALM;;
CLTH;;
LAP, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; LAP
PICALM/AF10 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the course of the molecular characterization of the translocation
t(10;11)(p13;q14) in the monocytic cell line U937, Dreyling et al.
(1996) identified a breakpoint on chromosome 11 involving the previously
unknown gene, CALM. CALM has a very high homology to the murine clathrin
assembly protein ap3 (Morris et al., 1993).

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Ford et al. (2001) presented the structure of the N-terminal domain of
CALM bound to phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate via a lysine-rich
motif. This motif is found in other proteins predicted to have domains
of similar structure (e.g., Huntingtin-interacting protein-1; 601767).
The structure is in part similar to the epsin (607262) N-terminal (ENTH)
domain, but epsin lacks the
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate-binding site.

Mao et al. (2001) determined the crystal structure of the N-terminal
domain (the NAP domain) of the Drosophila Lap protein, which is
homologous to human PICALM. The structure revealed a novel fold
consisting of a large double layer of sheets of 10 alpha helices and a
unique site for binding phosphoinositides.

CYTOGENETICS

- PICALM/AF10 Fusion Gene

Dreyling et al. (1996) identified a breakpoint on chromosome 11
involving the CALM gene in the translocation t(10;11)(p13;q14) in the
monocytic cell line U937. The fusion partner of the CALM gene on
chromosome 11 was the putative transcription factor AF10 (602409)
located on 10p13. Dreyling et al. (1998) found that both MLL (159555)
and CALM are fused to AF10 in morphologically distinct subsets of acute
leukemia with t(10;11). Both rearrangements were associated with a poor
prognosis.

Bohlander et al. (2000) and Carlson et al. (2000) performed molecular
analyses of the CALM/AF10 fusion in cases of leukemia. Bohlander et al.
(2000) studied a series of 3 patients with AML, 1 patient with T-ALL,
and 2 patients with precursor T lymphoblastic lymphoma. The
rearrangements were essentially identical in all. In all 6 patients the
breakpoint in CALM was at the 3-prime end of the coding region. Three
breakpoints could be identified in AF10. The findings indicated that
CALM/AF10 fusions differ only slightly with respect to the portion of
AF10 present and that there is no obvious difference between the fusions
found in AML patients compared to those found in patients with lymphoid
malignancies. Carlson et al. (2000) studied 6 patients with myeloid
leukemia and 3 with T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia. They identified 4
different CALM/AF10 fusion products in 5 patients and AF10/CALM
reciprocal message in 1. Carlson et al. (2000) concluded that the fusion
of CALM and AF10 is a recurring abnormality in both lymphoid and myeloid
leukemias of various types including AML-M5; that the breakpoints in the
2 types of leukemia do not differ; and that the CALM/AF10 fusion product
on the derivative chromosome 10 is critical to leukemogenesis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the
PICALM gene and late-onset Alzheimer disease, see 104300.

ANIMAL MODEL

Treusch et al. (2011) modeled amyloid-beta (see 104760) toxicity in
yeast by directing the peptide to the secretory pathway. A genomewide
screen for toxicity modifiers identified the yeast homolog of PICALM and
other endocytic factors connected to Alzheimer disease (104300) whose
relationship to amyloid-beta had been unknown. The factors identified in
yeast modified amyloid-beta toxicity in glutamatergic neurons of C.
elegans and in primary rat cortical neurons. In yeast, amyloid-beta
impaired the endocytic trafficking of a plasma membrane receptor, which
was ameliorated by endocytic pathway factors identified in the yeast
screen. Treusch et al. (2011) concluded that links between amyloid-beta,
endocytosis, and human Alzheimer disease risk factors can be ascertained
with yeast as a model system.

NOMENCLATURE

Mao et al. (2001) referred to PICALM as 'the human AP180.' However, the
true homolog of AP180 is SNAP91 (607923), a paralog of PICALM.

REFERENCE 1. Bohlander, S. K.; Muschinsky, V.; Schrader, K.; Siebert, R.; Schlegelberger,
B.; Harder, L.; Schemmel, V.; Fonatsch, C.; Ludwig, W.-D.; Hiddemann,
W.; Dreyling, M. H.: Molecular analysis of the CALM/AF10 fusion:
identical rearrangements in acute myeloid leukemia, acute lymphoblastic
leukemia and malignant lymphoma patients. Leukemia 14: 93-99, 2000.

2. Carlson, K. M.; Vignon, C.; Bohlander, S.; Martinez-Climent, J.
A.; Le Beau, M. M.; Rowley, J. D.: Identification and molecular characterization
of CALM/AF10 fusion products in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
and acute myeloid leukemia. Leukemia 14: 100-104, 2000.

3. Dreyling, M. H.; Martinez-Climent, J. A.; Zheng, M.; Mao, J.; Rowley,
J. D.; Bohlander, S. K.: The t(10;11)(p13;q14) in the U937 cell line
results in the fusion of the AF10 gene and CALM, a new member of the
AP-3 clathrin assembly protein family. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93:
4804-4809, 1996.

4. Dreyling, M. H.; Schrader, K.; Fonatsch, C.; Schlegelberger, B.;
Haase, D.; Schoch, C.; Ludwig, W.-D.; Loffler, H.; Buchner, T.; Wormann,
B.; Hiddemann, W.; Bohlander, S. K.: MLL and CALM are fused to AF10
in morphologically distinct subsets of acute leukemia with translocation
t(10;11): both rearrangements are associated with a poor prognosis. Blood 91:
4662-4667, 1998.

5. Ford, M. G. J.; Pearse, B. M. F.; Higgins, M. K.; Vallis, Y.; Owen,
D. J.; Gibson, A.; Hopkins, C. R.; Evans, P. R.; McMahon, H. T.:
Simultaneous binding of PtdIns(4,5)P(2) and clathrin by AP180 in the
nucleation of clathrin lattices on membranes. Science 291: 1051-1055,
2001.

6. Mao, Y.; Chen, J.; Maynard, J. A.; Zhang, B.; Quiocho, F. A.:
A novel all helix fold of the AP180 amino-terminal domain for phosphoinositide
binding and clathrin assembly in synaptic vesicle endocytosis. Cell 104:
433-440, 2001.

7. Morris, S. A.; Schroder, S.; Plessmann, U.; Weber, K.; Ungewickell,
E.: Clathrin assembly protein AP180: primary structure, domain organization
and identification of a clathrin binding site. EMBO J. 12: 667-675,
1993.

8. Treusch, S.; Hamamichi, S.; Goodman, J. L.; Matlack, K. E. S.;
Chung, C. Y.; Baru, V.; Shulman, J. M.; Parrado, A.; Bevis, B. J.;
Valastyan, J. S.; Han, H.; Lindhagen-Persson, M.; and 9 others:
Functional links between amyloid-beta toxicity, endocytic trafficking,
and Alzheimer's disease risk factors in yeast. Science 334: 1241-1245,
2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/4/2012
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 3/8/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/22/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/11/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/9/1998

EDITED alopez: 01/11/2012
terry: 1/4/2012
wwang: 3/30/2011
ckniffin: 3/15/2011
alopez: 5/14/2009
mgross: 6/26/2003
mgross: 9/27/2002
mgross: 4/6/2001
mgross: 3/8/2001
alopez: 2/26/2001
terry: 2/22/2001
mcapotos: 5/2/2000
mcapotos: 4/27/2000
terry: 4/11/2000
dkim: 9/15/1998
dkim: 9/10/1998
alopez: 9/9/1998

611887	TITLE *611887 UROPLAKIN 3B; UPK3B
;;UPIIIB;;
P35
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

UPK3B is a minor component of the apical plaques of mammalian urothelium
that binds and dimerizes with uroplakin-1b (UPK1B; 602380), one of the
major conserved urothelium membrane proteins. The other major conserved
integral membrane proteins of urothelial plaques are UPK1A (611557),
UPK2 (611558), and UPK3A (611559) (Deng et al., 2002).

CLONING

By screening a human bladder cDNA library using bovine Upk3b, Deng et
al. (2002) cloned UPK3B, which they called p35. They also cloned mouse
and bovine Upk3b, which both share over 90% amino acid identity with
UPK3B. Bovine Upk3b contains a signal peptide, a transmembrane domain,
an N-terminal extracellular domain containing several N-glycosylation
sites, and a short C-terminal cytoplasmic domain. The N-terminal
extracellular domain contains an 80-amino acid sequence with homology to
PMS2L11. Northern blot, Western blot, and immunohistochemical studies
detected urothelium-specific expression of Upk3b mRNA and protein in
bovine and mouse tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Using cotransfection, followed by immunoprecipitation, Deng et al.
(2002) demonstrated that UPK3B bound UPK1B but did not bind UPK1A, UPK2,
and UPK3A. UPK3B was glycosylated, and cotransfection studies showed
that the UPK3B/UPK1B complex was endoglycosidase H-resistant and able to
exit the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), suggesting that the UPK3B/UPK1B
complex forms in the ER and is exported to the cell surface.
Upk3a-deficient mice showed a 6-fold increase in both Upk3b and Upk1b
mRNAs, suggesting a coordinated regulation of Upk3b and Upk1b
expression.

GENE STRUCTURE

Deng et al. (2002) determined that the UPK3B gene contains 6 exons
spanning 5 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Deng et al. (2002) mapped the UPK3B gene
to chromosome 7q11.23 in close proximity to the PMS2L11 gene. They
suggested that PMS2L11 and UPK3B may be related by duplication of an
ancestral gene.

REFERENCE 1. Deng, F.-M.; Liang, F.-X.; Tu, L.; Resing, K. A.; Hu, P.; Supino,
M.; Hu, C.-C. A.; Zhou, G.; Ding, M.; Kreibich, G.; Sun, T.-T.: Uroplakin
IIIb, a urothelial differentiation marker, dimerizes with uroplakin
Ib as an early step of urothelial plaque assembly. J. Cell Biol. 159:
685-694, 2002.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 3/11/2008

EDITED wwang: 03/11/2008

610862	TITLE *610862 DEGENERATIVE SPERMATOCYTE, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 2; DEGS2
;;DES2, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF;;
SPHINGOLIPID DELTA-4-DESATURASE/C4-HYDROXYLASE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis, followed by RT-PCR of human epidermal keratinocyte
RNA, Mizutani et al. (2004) cloned DEGS2. The deduced 323-amino acid
protein has a predicted molecular mass of 37.2 kD and shares 86.4%
identity and 91.9% similarity with mouse Des2. DEGS2 belongs to the
desaturase/hydroxylase superfamily, characterized by 3 conserved
histidine boxes. Compared to DEGS1, DEGS2 has a fourth histidine box and
a variation in the second amino acid residue of the 3 conserved
histidine boxes. Using in vitro assays in HEK293 cells, DEGS2 exhibited
dihydroceramide hydroxylase activity. Northern blot analysis of adult
human tissues detected a 1.8-kb transcript with highest expression in
skin, moderate expression in kidney, kidney, large intestine, and small
intestine, weak expression in brain and lung, and no expression in
heart, liver, spleen, skeletal muscle, thymus, or placenta. Using RT-PCR
analysis, Mizutani et al. (2004) found that expression of DEGS2 mRNA was
regulated during in vitro keratinocyte differentiation and that DEGS2
transcription was not detected at day 0 or 3 days after differentiation,
but was found at day 6 and had increased by day 9.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the DEGS2
gene to chromosome 14 (TMAP RH47801).

REFERENCE 1. Mizutani, Y.; Kihara, A.; Igarashi, Y.: Identification of the
human sphingolipid C4-hydroxylase, hDES2, and its up-regulation during
keratinocyte differentiation. FEBS Lett. 563: 93-97, 2004.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 3/19/2007

EDITED wwang: 03/19/2007

