612159	TITLE *612159 RABPHILIN 3A; RPH3A
;;KIAA0985
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Exocytosis of neurotransmitters and hormones is fundamental to synaptic
neurotransmission and cell-cell communication. RAB3A (179390) is a small
G protein that is thought to act at late stages of exocytosis, and RPH3A
is a RAB3A effector (Lin et al., 2007).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned RPH3A, which they designated
KIAA0985. The deduced 694-amino acid protein shares 86.9% identity over
703 amino acids with rat Rph3a. RT-PCR ELISA detected highest expression
in fetal brain, followed by adult spinal cord and whole brain. Much
lower expression was detected in adult lung, testis, and spleen.
Expression was high in all specific adult brain regions tested, with
highest abundance in subthalamic nuclei and thalamus.

Inagaki et al. (1994) cloned mouse Rph3a, which encodes a deduced
681-amino acid protein with an N-terminal Rab3a-binding region and 2
C-terminal internal repeats homologous to the regulatory domain (C2
domain) of protein kinase C (see PRKCZ; 176982). Northern blot analysis
detected Rph3a highly expressed in brain and in several mammalian
endocrine and hormone-secreting cell lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Lin et al. (2007) found that direct interaction with rabphilin was
required for hydrolysis of GTP by Rab3a in stimulated rat
pheochromocytoma cells and for dissociation of Rab3a from vesicles and
exocytosis.

Smith et al. (2007) stated that the amount of Rph3a protein was reduced
in different brain regions in a transgenic mouse model of Huntington
disease (HD; 143100) and that Rph3a interacted with the SNARE synaptic
complex via Snap25 (600322). Western blot and immunohistochemical
analysis showed that levels of both SNAP25 and RPH3A were reduced in
human HD cortex. SNAP25 protein levels were lower even in HD brains with
limited neuropathology; the level of RPH3A deceased in HD brains with
higher neuropathologic grade and higher CAG repeats. The loss of SNAP25
and RPH3A was not due to general loss of synapses in HD cortex, since
the levels of other synapse-related proteins, including RAB3A, were
unaltered in the same patient samples.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1999) mapped the RPH3A gene
to chromosome 12.

REFERENCE 1. Inagaki, N.; Mizuta, M.; Seino, S.: Cloning of a mouse rabphilin-3A
expressed in hormone-secreting cells. J. Biochem. 116: 239-242,
1994.

2. Lin, C.-C.; Huang, C.-C.; Lin, K.-H.; Cheng, K.-H.; Yang, D.-M.;
Tsai, Y.-S.; Ong, R.-Y.; Huang, Y.-N.; Kao, L.-S.: Visualization
of Rab3A dissociation during exocytosis: a study by total internal
reflection microscopy. J. Cell. Physiol. 211: 316-326, 2007.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

4. Smith, R.; Klein, P.; Koc-Schmitz, Y.; Waldvogel, H. J.; Faull,
R. L. M.; Brundin, P.; Plomann, M.; Li, J.-Y.: Loss of SNAP-25 and
rabphilin 3a in sensory-motor cortex in Huntington's disease. J.
Neurochem. 103: 115-123, 2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/2/2008

EDITED wwang: 07/02/2008

