603506	TITLE *603506 LOW DENSITY LIPOPROTEIN RECEPTOR-RELATED PROTEIN 5; LRP5
;;LOW DENSITY LIPOPROTEIN RECEPTOR-RELATED PROTEIN 7; LRP7;;
LR3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Members of the low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) family are cell
surface proteins that bind and internalize ligands in the process of
receptor-mediated endocytosis. To identify candidate genes for the type
I diabetes IDDM4 (600319) locus in 11q13, Hey et al. (1998) constructed
an approximately 200-kb cosmid and BAC contig of this region. By DNA
sequencing and by searching sequence databases, they identified a novel
member of the LDLR family, which they named LDLR-related protein-5
(LRP5). The LRP5 cDNA encodes a deduced 1,615-amino acid protein
containing conserved modules characteristic of the LDLR family,
including a putative signal peptide, 4 epidermal growth factor (EGF)
repeats with associated spacer domains, 3 LDLR repeats, a single
transmembrane-spanning domain, and a cytoplasmic domain. The
extracellular domain of LRP5 contains 6 potential N-linked glycosylation
sites. Of the known family members, LRP5 is most closely related to LRP1
(107770). However, LRP5 has a unique organization of EGF and LDLR
repeats compared to other LDLR family members and likely represents a
new category in this family. Northern blot analysis detected an
approximately 5.1- to 5.6-kb LRP5 mRNA in a variety of human tissues,
with the highest level of expression in the liver.

Hey et al. (1998) cloned a mouse Lrp5 cDNA and found that the deduced
protein is 94% identical to human LRP5. Using immunohistochemistry in
Lrp5 knockout mice, Kato et al. (2002) determined that Lrp5 is expressed
in the osteoblasts lining the endosteal and trabecular bone surfaces.

Independently, Dong et al. (1998) isolated an LRP5 cDNA from a human
osteoblast cDNA library. The authors designated the encoded protein LR3
to reflect its 3 ligand-binding domains. Dot blot analysis of a variety
of human adult and fetal tissues detected highest LR3 expression in the
aorta, and Northern blot analysis detected a 5.4-kb LR3 message in all
human tissues examined except the brain. Dong et al. (1998) demonstrated
that mouse NIH 3T3 cells transfected with LRP5 show increased cell
proliferation.

In situ studies of rat tibia by Little et al. (2002) showed expression
of LRP5 in areas of bone involved in remodeling. Northern blot analysis
revealed that LRP5 was transcribed in human bone tissue as well as in
numerous other tissues.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), Hey et al. (1998) mapped a
mouse BAC clone containing the Lrp5 gene to chromosome 19, which shows
homology of synteny with human 11q13. Chen et al. (1999) mapped the
human LRP5 gene to 11q13.4 by FISH and between markers D11S24270 and
D11S1975 by radiation hybrid mapping. They mapped the mouse Lrp5 gene to
chromosome 19B by FISH.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Gong et al. (2001) determined that the
LRP5 gene contains 23 coding exons and spans more than 100 kb. Twells et
al. (2001) determined that the LRP5 gene spans 160 kb.

GENE FUNCTION

Gong et al. (2001) demonstrated LRP5 expression by osteoblasts in situ
and showed that LRP5 can transduce Wnt signaling in vitro via the
canonical pathway. They further showed that a mutant secreted form of
Lrp5 could reduce bone thickness in mouse calvarial explant cultures.
These data indicated that Wnt-mediated signaling via LRP5 affects bone
accrual during growth and is important for the establishment of peak
bone mass.

Mao et al. (2001) identified axin (603816) as a protein that interacts
with the intracellular domain of LRP5. LRP5, when expressed in
fibroblast cells, showed no effect on the canonical Wnt signaling
pathway by itself, but acted synergistically with Wnt. In contrast, LRP5
mutants lacking the extracellular domain functioned as constitutively
active forms that bound axin and that induced LEF1 (153245) activation
by destabilizing axin and stabilizing beta-catenin (116806). Addition of
Wnt caused the translocation of axin to the membrane and enhanced the
interaction between axin and LRP5. In addition, the LRP5 sequences
involved in interactions with axin were found to be required for LEF1
activation. The authors concluded that the binding of axin to LRP5 is an
important part of the Wnt signal transduction pathway. LRP5 also acts as
a target for the inhibitory effects of Dickkopf (DKK1; 605189), another
developmental protein, on Wnt signaling.

Semenov et al. (2005) found that human SOST (605740) antagonized Wnt
signaling in Xenopus embryos and mammalian cells by binding to the
extracellular domains of the Wnt coreceptors Lrp5 and Lrp6 (603507) and
disrupting Wnt-induced frizzled (see 603408)-Lrp complex formation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Twells et al. (2003) identified 95 SNPs within a 269-kb region
containing LRP5 and its 3 flanking genes in several families of white
European origin. They found a high level of recombination across LRP5,
including a hotspot region from intron 1 to intron 7, where there were
109 recombinants/Mb (4,882 meioses), in contrast to flanking regions of
14.6 recombinants/Mb.

- Osteoporosis-Pseudoglioma Syndrome

Gong et al. (2001) showed that LRP5 affects bone mass accrual during
growth and identified mutations in the LRP5 gene (e.g., 603506.0001)
that cause autosomal recessive osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome (OPPG;
259770). They found that obligate carriers of mutant LRP5 genes had
reduced bone mass when compared to age- and gender-matched controls.

Ai et al. (2005) sequenced the coding exons of LRP5 in 37 probands
suspected of having OPPG on the basis of the co-occurrence of severe
congenital or childhood-onset visual impairment with bone fragility or
osteoporosis recognized by young adulthood. They found 2 putative mutant
alleles in 26 probands, only 1 mutant allele in 4 probands, and no
mutant alleles in 7 probands. Looking for digenic inheritance, they
sequenced the genes encoding the functionally related receptor LRP6
(603507), an LRP5 coreceptor FZD4 (604579), and the LRP5 ligand norrin
(NDP; 300658), in the 4 probands with 1 mutant allele, and, looking for
locus heterogeneity, they sequenced FZD4 and NDP in the 7 probands with
no mutations; no additional mutations were found. They compared clinical
features between probands with and without LRP5 mutations and found no
difference in the severity of skeletal disease, prevalence of cognitive
impairment, or family history of consanguinity. However, 4 of the 7
probands without detectable mutations had eye pathology that differed
from pathology previously described for OPPG. Since many LRP5 mutations
are missense changes, to differentiate between a disease-causing
mutation and a benign variant Ai et al. (2005) measured the ability of
wildtype and mutant LRP5 to transduce Wnt (see 164820) and Norrin signal
ex vivo. Each of the 7 OPPG mutations tested had reduced signal
transduction compared with wildtype mutations. These results indicated
that early bilateral vitreoretinal eye pathology coupled with skeletal
fragility is a strong predictor of LRP5 mutation and that mutations in
LRP5 cause OPPG by impairing WNT and Norrin signal transduction.

Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (see EVR1; 133780) is an inherited
disorder of retinal vessel development (Benson, 1995). EVR1 is caused by
mutation in the FZD4 gene (604579) on chromosome 11q14.2 and has been
demonstrated in many of the linked families. The LRP5 gene on chromosome
11q13.4 came under suspicion as a candidate gene for FEVR because of
involvement of the eyes in some disorders, notably OPPG, which are
caused by LRP5 mutation. In affected members of 6 different families
with autosomal dominant EVR4 (601813), Toomes et al. (2004) identified 6
different heterozygous mutations in the LRP5 gene (see, e.g.,
603506.0020-603506.0021).

Jiao et al. (2004) studied 3 consanguineous families of European descent
in which autosomal recessive FEVR was diagnosed in multiple individuals.
Sequencing of LRP5 showed, in all 3 families, homozygosity for mutation
in LRP5: R570Q (603506.0022), R752G (603506.0023), and E1367K
(603506.0024). Thus, mutations in the LRP5 gene can cause autosomal
recessive as well as autosomal dominant FEVR.

Qin et al. (2005) identified 9 novel mutations in the LRP5 gene (see,
e.g., 603506.0025-602506.0028) in Japanese patients with FEVR. Four
families showed autosomal dominant inheritance, and 2 families showed
autosomal recessive inheritance. One family was found to have a
heterozygous mutation in the LRP5 gene (603506.0026) and a heterozygous
mutation in the FZD4 gene (604579.0003) on the same chromosome. Qin et
al. (2005) also found that patients with mutations in the LRP5 gene
showed reduced bone mineral density and suggested that it is a common
feature in patients with EVR4. Qin et al. (2005) proposed that OPPG and
EVR4 are part of a single phenotypic spectrum with both ocular and bone
manifestations.

Using standard PCR-based sequencing, Narumi et al. (2010) analyzed the
LRP5 gene in 4 male Japanese patients with typical skeletal and ocular
features of OPPG and identified compound heterozygosity for 1 nonsense
and 4 missense mutations in 3 of the patients (603506.0025 and
603506.0029-603506.0032). In the fourth patient, they identified only
heterozygosity for a splice site mutation (603506.0033) by sequencing;
however, using custom-designed oligonucleotide tiling array CGH targeted
to a 600-kb genomic region harboring LRP5, Narumi et al. (2010)
identified a 7.2-kb microdeletion within the LRP5 gene (603506.0034) on
the patient's second allele.

- Association with Bone Density Variation

Little et al. (2002) identified a gly171-to-val mutation in the LRP5
gene (G171V; 603506.0013) that results in an autosomal dominant high
bone mass trait (see 601884). Boyden et al. (2002) found the same LRP5
mutation in a family with autosomal dominant high bone density
associated with square jaw and torus palatinus.

Van Wesenbeeck et al. (2003) performed mutation analysis of the LRP5
gene in 10 families or isolated patients with various conditions with an
increased bone density, including endosteal hyperostosis (144750), van
Buchem disease (607636), autosomal dominant osteosclerosis, and
osteopetrosis type I. Direct sequencing of the LRP5 gene revealed 19
sequence variants, 13 of which were confirmed as polymorphisms, with the
remaining 6 novel missense mutations considered likely disease causing
(see 603506.0014-603506.0018). Like the G171V mutation (G171V;
603506.0013), which causes the high bone mass phenotype, all mutations
were located in the amino-terminal part of the gene, before the first
epidermal growth factor-like domain. These results indicated that,
despite the different diagnoses that could be made, conditions with an
increased bone density affecting mainly the cortices of the long bones
and the skull are often caused by mutations in the LRP5 gene.

Ferrari et al. (2004) tested the hypothesis that polymorphisms in the
LRP5 gene contribute to bone mass determination in the general
population. In a cross-sectional study of 889 healthy whites of both
sexes, they found significant association for a missense substitution in
exon 9 with lumbar spine bone mineral content, with bone area, and with
stature. The associations were observed mainly in adult men, in whom
LRP5 polymorphisms accounted for less than 15% of the variance of the
traits. Haplotype analysis suggested that additional genetic variation
within the region may contribute to bone mass and size determination. In
a study of 1-year gain in vertebral bone mass and size in prepubertal
children, they found a significant association in males but not females.

Mizuguchi et al. (2004) performed an association study between bone
mineral density (BMD) and 9 candidate genes in 481 healthy Japanese
women. They found that only LRP5 showed a significant association with
BMD. A follow-up case-control study of 126 women with osteoporosis (see
166710) and 131 normal controls revealed a significant difference in
allelic frequency of the LRP5 2220C-T SNP (603506.0019) (p = 0.009). The
authors suggested that LRP5 is a BMD determinant and contributes to a
risk of osteoporosis.

- Association with Obesity

Guo et al. (2006) genotyped 1,873 Caucasian individuals from 405 nuclear
families for SNPs and haplotypes of the LRP5 gene and found that the
common allele A for SNP4 (dbSNP rs4988300) and the minor allele G for
SNP6 (dbSNP rs634008) were significantly associated with obesity and
body mass index (BMI). Significant associations were also observed
between the common haplotype A-G-G-G in block 2 (intron 1) with obesity,
BMI, and fat mass (p less than 0.001, p less than 0.001, and p = 0.003,
respectively). Guo et al. (2006) concluded that intronic variants of the
LRP5 gene are markedly associated with obesity.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Using a norrin-based reporter assay to analyze the effects of
FEVR-causing mutations, Qin et al. (2008) demonstrated that a nonsense
mutation in FZD4 completely abolished signaling activity, whereas
missense mutations in FZD4 and LRP5 caused a moderate level of
reduction, and a double missense mutation in both genes caused a severe
reduction in activity, correlating roughly with clinical phenotypes.
Norrin mutants, however, showed variable effects on signal transduction,
and no correlation with clinical phenotypes was observed; norrin mutants
also showed impaired cell surface binding. Qin et al. (2008) concluded
that norrin signaling is involved in FEVR pathogenesis, but suggested
the presence of an unknown parallel pathway at the level of
receptor/ligand binding as evidenced by the moderate and variable signal
reduction lacking a clear genotype/phenotype correlation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kato et al. (2002) generated mice with a targeted disruption of Lrp5 and
showed that they develop a low bone mass phenotype. In vivo and in vitro
analyses indicated that the phenotype becomes evident postnatally, and
demonstrated that it is secondary to decreased osteoblast proliferation
and function in a Cbfa1 (600211)-independent manner. The mice also
displayed persistent embryonic eye vascularization due to a failure of
macrophage-induced endothelial cell apoptosis. DNA cotransfection and
coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed that Lrp5 binds directly to Wnt
proteins. RT-PCR experiments showed that expression of proteins in the
Wnt signaling pathway was affected by Lrp5 disruption. The phenotype of
the Lrp5-deficient mice phenotype mirrored human
osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome.

Clement-Lacroix et al. (2005) found that lithium restored bone
metabolism and bone mass to near wildtype levels in Lrp5 -/- mice.
Lithium activated canonical Wnt signaling in cultured calvarial
osteoblasts from Lrp5 -/- mice, and lithium-treated mice had increased
expression of Wnt-responsive genes in their bone marrow cells in vivo.
Clement-Lacroix et al. (2005) concluded that lithium enhances bone
anabolism, at least in part, by activating the Wnt signaling pathway
downstream of LRP5.

LRP5 plays an essential role in bone accrual and eye development. Fujino
et al. (2003) showed that LRP5 is also required for normal cholesterol
and glucose metabolism. Mice lacking Lrp5 showed increased plasma
cholesterol levels when fed a high-fat diet, because of the decreased
hepatic clearance of chylomicron remnants. In addition, when fed a
normal diet, Lrp5-deficient mice showed a markedly impaired glucose
tolerance. The experiments suggested that Wnt/LRP5 signaling contributes
to the glucose-induced insulin secretion in islets.

To study lipoprotein metabolism, Magoori et al. (2003) generated mice
lacking both apolipoprotein E (apoE; 107741) and Lrp5. On a normal diet,
the double knockout mice older than 4 months of age had 60% higher
plasma cholesterol levels than the levels observed with apoE deficiency
alone. LRP5 deficiency alone had no significant effects on the plasma
cholesterol levels. Analysis showed that the very low density
lipoprotein (VLDL) and low density lipoprotein (LDL) fractions were
markedly increased in the double knockout mice. Atherosclerotic lesions
in the double knockout mice at age 6 months were severe, with
destruction of the internal elastic lamina.

Yadav et al. (2008) identified Tph1 (191060), which encodes the
rate-limiting enzyme in serotonin synthesis, as the most highly
overexpressed gene in Lrp5 -/- mice. Tph1 expression was also elevated
in Lrp5 -/- duodenal cells, its primary site of expression. Decreasing
serotonin blood levels normalized bone formation and bone mass in Lrp5
-/- mice, and gut-specific Lrp5 inactivation decreased bone formation in
a beta-catenin-independent manner. Moreover, gut-specific activation of
Lrp5 or inactivation of Tph1 increased bone mass and prevented
ovariectomy-induced bone loss in mice. Yadav et al. (2008) showed that
serotonin determined the extent of bone formation by binding its
receptor, Htr1b (182131), on osteoblasts and limiting osteoblast
proliferation by inhibiting Creb (see 123810)-mediated cyclin D1 (CCND1;
168461) expression. Yadav et al. (2008) concluded that LRP5 inhibits
bone formation by inhibiting serotonin production.

Cui et al. (2011) generated mice with osteocyte-specific expression of
inducible Lrp5 mutations that cause high bone mass (G171V, 603506.0013;
A214V, 603506.0017) and observed increased bone mass, bone strength, and
bone formation rates in the mutant mice compared to wildtype. Similar
studies with a truncating Lrp5 mutation resulted in reduced bone mass in
the mutant mice compared to wildtype; inactivation of Lrp5 in the
intestine, however, had no significant effect on bone mass. In addition,
induction of an Lrp5 mutation in cells that form the appendicular
skeleton but not in cells that form the axial skeleton resulted in
alterations in bone properties of the limbs but not the spine. Cui et
al. (2011) concluded that their findings supported a mechanism in mice
in which Lrp5 functions via the canonical Wnt pathway in osteocytes to
regulate bone mass rather than regulating bone mass indirectly via other
tissues.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME
LRP5, TRP10TER

In a patient with osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome (259770), Gong et
al. (2001) identified a homozygous G-to-A transition at nucleotide 29 of
the LRP5 gene, resulting in a trp10-to-ter (W10X) mutation.

.0002
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME
LRP5, ARG428TER

In a patient with osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome (259770), Gong et
al. (2001) identified a homozygous C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1282
of the LRP5 gene, resulting in an arg428-to-ter (R428X) mutation.

.0003
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME
LRP5, 1-BP DEL, 1467G

In a patient with osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome (259770), Gong et
al. (2001) identified a homozygous deletion of G at nucleotide 1467 of
the LRP5 gene. This mutation produced a frameshift after asp490 (D490).

.0004
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME
LRP5, ASP718TER

In a patient with osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome (259770), Gong et
al. (2001) identified a homozygous insertion of T at nucleotide 2150 of
the LRP5 gene. This mutation produced a stop codon at asp718 (D718X).

.0005
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME
LRP5, GLN853TER

In a patient with osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome (259770), Gong et
al. (2001) identified a homozygous C-to-T transition at nucleotide 2557
of the LRP5 gene, resulting in a gln853-to-ter (Q853X) nonsense
mutation.

.0006
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME
LRP5, 1-BP DEL, 3804A

In a patient with osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome (259770), Gong et
al. (2001) identified a homozygous deletion of A at nucleotide 3804 of
the LRP5 gene. This mutation produced a frameshift after glu1270
(E1270).

.0007
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME
LRP5, ARG494GLN

In a patient with osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome (259770), Gong et
al. (2001) identified a homozygous G-to-A transition at nucleotide 1481
of the LRP5 gene, resulting in an arg494-to-gln (R494Q) mutation.

.0008
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME
LRP5, ARG570TRP

In a patient with osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome (259770), Gong et
al. (2001) identified a homozygous C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1708
of the LRP5 gene, resulting in an arg570-to-trp (R570W) mutation.

.0009
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME
LRP5, VAL667MET

In a patient with osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome (259770), Gong et
al. (2001) identified a homozygous G-to-A transition at nucleotide 1999
of the LRP5 gene, resulting in a val667-to-met (V667M) mutation.

.0010
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME
LRP5, GLU485TER

In a patient with osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome (259770), Gong et
al. (2001) identified a G-to-T transversion at nucleotide 1453 of the
LRP5 gene, resulting in a glu485-to-ter (E485X) mutation.

.0011
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME
LRP5, TRP734TER

In a patient with osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome (259770), Gong et
al. (2001) identified a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 2202 of the LRP5
gene, resulting in a trp734-to-ter (W734X) mutation.

.0012
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME
LRP5, 1-BP DEL, 2305G

In a patient with osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome (259770), Gong et
al. (2001) identified a deletion of G at nucleotide 2305 of the LRP5
gene. This mutation produced a frameshift after asp769 (D769).

.0013
HIGH BONE MASS
LRP5, GLY171VAL

In a family with high bone mass (see 601884), Little et al. (2002)
identified a heterozygous G-to-T transversion in exon 3 of the LRP5
gene, resulting in a gly171-to-val change in a predicted beta-propeller
module of the LRP5 protein. This change was not found in the DNA from
275 individuals with normal bone mineral density or from 643 randomly
chosen, ethnically diverse individuals.

Boyden et al. (2002) found the same mutation in affected members of a
kindred with high bone density, wide and deep mandible, and torus
palatinus. Affected members of this family had normal serum calcium and
phosphate levels, normal serum levels of parathyroid hormone and vitamin
D metabolites, and normal serum levels of acid phosphatase. Serum
osteocalcin, a marker of bone formation, was markedly elevated. Affected
members of the family had no cranial nerve pulses. They were
asymptomatic but noted difficulty staying afloat while swimming.

.0014
OSTEOPETROSIS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
LRP5, GLY171ARG

Van Wesenbeeck et al. (2003) found a 511G-C transversion in exon 3 of
the LRP5 gene, causing a gly171-to-arg (G171R) mutation, in a previously
described Belgian family in which at least 3 members were diagnosed with
autosomal dominant osteopetrosis type I (OPTA1; 607634). The father
suffered from severe headaches and x-rays showed very dense bones of the
skull. His daughter had a very dense cranial base and cortical
thickening of the vertebrae and long bones with normal development. His
son had dense bones, mainly of the skull. The codon involved in this
mutation is the same as that in the gain-of-function gly171-to-val
mutation (G171V; 603506.0013) described in 2 other families by Little et
al. (2002) and Boyden et al. (2002). The phenotype was different in
those 2 families; the family described by Little et al. (2002) had no
features other than very dense bones, whereas patients in the other
kindred also suffered from a wide, deep mandible and torus palatinus.
The clinical and radiologic features of the Belgian family resembled
those of the family described by Little et al. (2002), as they did not
suffer from an enlarged mandible or torus palatinus.

.0015
ENDOSTEAL HYPEROSTOSIS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
OSTEOPETROSIS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1, INCLUDED;;
VAN BUCHEM DISEASE, TYPE 2, INCLUDED
LRP5, ALA242THR

Van Wesenbeeck et al. (2003) described a 724G-A transition in exon 4 of
the LRP5 gene, resulting in an ala242-to-thr (A242T) mutation, in 2
previously described families from Portland, Oregon, in which members
were affected with autosomal dominant endosteal hyperostosis (144750).
The condition is characterized by cortical thickening of the long bones,
with no alteration in external shape, and a remarkable resistance of the
bone to fracture. The skeleton was normal in childhood; the affected
patients had a normal height, proportion, intelligence, and longevity.
Facial metamorphoses occurred in adolescence, as the forehead flattened,
the mandible became elongated, and the gonial angle decreased. Torus
palatinus developed in the hard palate, which could lead to malocclusion
or loss of teeth. The clinical and radiographic features closely
resembled those of the kindred described by Boyden et al. (2002), in
whom a gly171-to-val mutation (G171V; 603506.0013) was identified. This
A242T mutation was also present in a previously described Sardinian
family with at least 5 members affected with van Buchem disease
(607636), all of whom had osteosclerosis of the skull and enlarged
mandible. The autosomal dominant inheritance in this family was clearly
in contrast with the diagnosis of autosomal recessive van Buchem disease
(239100) that had been made by Scopelliti et al. (1999). This mutation
was also present in a French family in which an affected proband and his
brother had autosomal dominant osteopetrosis type I (607634),
osteomyelitis of the jaw, and hearing problems because of small auditory
canals. X-rays showed diffuse osteosclerosis of the trabecular and
cortical bone and osteosclerosis of the skull with enlargement of the
cranial vault.

.0016
ENDOSTEAL HYPEROSTOSIS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
LRP5, ALA214THR

In a kindred with autosomal dominant endosteal hyperostosis (144750),
Van Wesenbeeck et al. (2003) found a 640G-A transition in exon 3 of the
LRP5 gene, resulting in an ala214-to-thr (A214T) mutation. This mutation
was in the same codon, but involved a different nucleotide, as one the
authors described in another family with a different phenotype (see
603506.0017).

.0017
OSTEOSCLEROSIS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
LRP5, ALA214VAL

Van Wesenbeeck et al. (2003) identified a 641C-T transition in exon 3 of
the LRP5 gene, resulting in an ala214-to-val (A214V) mutation, in a
previously described family of English origin with autosomal dominant
osteosclerosis (144750) manifest by an enlarged mandible (present in the
20-year-old proband and her father), increased gonial angle, and
thickened cortical bone. In the father, there were no other clinical
signs and the radiographic appearance of the skull was within normal
limits.

.0018
OSTEOPETROSIS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
LRP5, THR253ILE

Van Wesenbeeck et al. (2003) identified a 758C-T transition in exon 4 of
the LRP5 gene, resulting in a thr253-to-ile (T253I) change, in 2
previously described and presumably unrelated Danish families diagnosed
with autosomal dominant osteopetrosis type I (607634). In both families,
affected members showed generalized osteosclerosis, most pronounced in
the cranial vault, not associated with an increased fracture rate.

.0019
BONE MINERAL DENSITY QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS 1
LRP5, 2220C-T

In adult Japanese women, Mizuguchi et al. (2004) found an association
between the T allele of the 2220C-T polymorphism in exon 10 of the LRP5
gene and low bone mineral density (BMND1; 601884). A case-control study
of 126 women with osteoporosis (see 166710) and 131 normal controls
revealed a significant difference in allelic frequency of the 2220C-T
SNP (p = 0.009). The authors suggested that LRP5 is a BMD determinant
and contributes to a risk of osteoporosis.

.0020
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 4, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
LRP5, IVS21DS, T-G, +2

In affected members of a family with autosomal dominant exudative
vitreoretinopathy (EVR4; 601813) reported by Price et al. (1996), Toomes
et al. (2004) identified a heterozygous substitution of the second
nucleotide of intron 21 of the LRP5 gene, changing the GT splice donor
site to GG (4488+2T-G). The mutation was predicted to lead to deletion
of exon 21, resulting in a frameshift at codon 1449 with a premature
stop codon following 52 incorrect amino acids.

.0021
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 4, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
LRP5, 1-BP INS, 4119C

In affected members of an American family with autosomal dominant
exudative vitreoretinopathy (EVR4; 601813), Toomes et al. (2004)
identified a heterozygous 1-bp insertion in exon 20 of the LRP5 gene,
4119insC, resulting in a frameshift at codon 1374 with a premature stop
codon following 175 incorrect amino acids. Two asymptomatic members
carried the mutation but had not been examined by fluorescein
angiography to exclude a very mild phenotype.

.0022
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 4, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
LRP5, ARG570GLN

In a family reported by de Crecchio et al. (1998), Jiao et al. (2004)
found that sisters with exudative vitreoretinopathy (EVR4; 601813)
carried a homozygous 1757G-A transition in 8 of the LRP5 gene, resulting
in an arg570-to-gln (R570Q) amino acid substitution. The sisters were
diagnosed at ages 5 years and 7 years and had shown typical signs of
FEVR. They required multiple procedures including photocoagulation,
cryopexy, and vitrectomy. They showed no signs of systemic disease,
including fractures, at ages 29 years and 31 years.

.0023
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 4, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
LRP5, ARG752GLY

In affected members of a family with autosomal recessive exudative
vitreoretinopathy (EVR4; 601813) reported by Shastry and Trese (1997),
Jiao et al. (2004) identified a homozygous 2302C-G transversion in exon
10 of the LRP5 gene, resulting in an arg752-to-gly (R752G) amino acid
change in the third YWTD domain of the protein. Two affected sisters
also had an affected paternal uncle; these 3 affected individuals were
the offspring of consanguineous marriages. Both sisters were diagnosed
at 3 years of age, at which time they manifested typical signs of FEVR,
including large retinal folds, peripheral traction and exudates, and an
avascular demarcation line near the equator and vitreous detachments.

.0024
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 4, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
LRP5, GLU1367LYS

In a brother and sister with familial exudative retinopathy (EVR4;
601813) reported by de Crecchio et al. (1998), Jiao et al. (2004) found
a homozygous 414G-A transition in exon 19 of the LRP5 gene, resulting in
a glu1367-to-lys (E1367K) amino acid change. The brother and sister were
diagnosed with retinal detachments at ages 6 years and 8 years,
respectively, and also showed other typical signs of FEVR. They showed
no systemic symptoms, such as fractures or traumatic injuries, by ages
12 years and 10 years, respectively. No additional family members were
known to be affected.

.0025
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 4, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME, INCLUDED
LRP5, LEU145PHE

In 3 Japanese sibs with EVR4 (601813), Qin et al. (2005) identified a
heterozygous 433C-T transition in exon 2 of the LRP5 gene, resulting in
a leu145-to-phe (L145F) substitution in a conserved residue in the
beta-propeller structure of the protein. The mother, who also carried
the mutation, had mild retinal avascularization and significantly
decreased bone mineral density (z score of -2.5).

In a 23-year-old Japanese man with pseudoglioma and multiple fractures
due to osteopenia (OPPG; 259770), Narumi et al. (2010) identified
compound heterozygosity for the L145F mutation and a 1655T-C transition
in the LRP5 gene, resulting in a thr552-to-met (T552M; 603506.0029)
substitution at a highly conserved residue in the second YWTD-EGF-like
domain. The patient, who had normal intelligence, had microphthalmia and
retinal detachment in the left eye and persistent hyperplasia of the
primary vitreous in the right eye. Radiography revealed osteopenia,
kyphoscoliosis, and platyspondyly in all vertebrae; he became
wheelchair-dependent at 11 years of age due to multiple compression
fractures. His unaffected mother was heterozygous for L145F; DNA was
unavailable from his father. Neither mutation was found in 100 controls.

.0026
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 4, DIGENIC
LRP5, ARG444CYS

In affected members of a Japanese family with EVR4 (601813), Qin et al.
(2005) identified a heterozygous 1330C-T transition in exon 6 of the
LRP5 gene, resulting in an arg444-to-cys (R444C) substitution in a
conserved residue in the beta-propeller structure of the protein.
Affected members of this family also had a heterozygous mutation in the
FZD4 gene (R417Q; 604579.0003; Kondo et al., 2003). The 2 mutations
cosegregated in the family, indicating that both mutations were located
on the same chromosomes consistent with digenic inheritance. The ocular
phenotype in this family tended to be more severe compared to that seen
in a family with the FZD4 R417Q mutation alone (Kondo et al., 2003). In
addition, the proband in the family with both mutations had reduced bone
mass (z score of -2.1), whereas the proband carrying the FZD4 mutation
alone had a normal bone mineral density. Qin et al. (2005) concluded
that the 2 mutations showed a synergistic deleterious effect in this
family.

.0027
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 4, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
LRP5, GLY610ARG

In a Japanese girl with EVR4 (601813), Qin et al. (2005) identified
compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the LRP5 gene: a 1828G-A
transition in exon 9, resulting in a gly610-to-arg (G610R) substitution,
and a 10-bp deletion (del803-812; 603506.0028) in exon 4. Each parent
was heterozygous for 1 of the mutations. Although neither parent had the
ocular phenotype, both showed decreased bone mineral densities.

.0028
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 4, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
LRP5, 10-BP DEL, NT803

See 603506.0027 and Qin et al. (2005).

.0029
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME
LRP5, THR552MET

See 603506.0025 and Narumi et al. (2010).

.0030
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME
LRP5, PRO382LEU

In an 18-year-old Japanese male and a 10-year-old Japanese boy with
osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome (OPPG; 259770), Narumi et al. (2010)
identified compound heterozygosity for a 1145C-T transition in the LRP5
gene, resulting in a pro382-to-leu (P382L) substitution at a highly
conserved residue in the second YWTD-EGF-like domain, and another LRP5
mutation. The 18-year-old also carried a 731C-T transition, resulting in
a thr244-to-met (T244M; 603506.0031) substitution at a highly conserved
residue in the first YWTD-EGF-like domain; the 10-year-old carried a
4600C-T transition, resulting in an arg1534-to-ter (R1534X; 603506.0032)
substitution in the cytoplasmic domain. In both families, the unaffected
parents were each heterozygous for 1 of the mutations, none of which was
found in 100 controls. In addition to their eye and bone findings, both
patients had moderate mental retardation. Narumi et al. (2010) noted
that the T244M and R1534X mutations had previously been reported in OPPG
patients by Ai et al. (2005) and Gong et al. (2001), respectively.

.0031
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME
LRP5, THR244MET

See 603506.0030 and Narumi et al. (2010).

.0032
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME
LRP5, ARG1534TER

See 603506.0030 and Narumi et al. (2010).

.0033
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME
LRP5, IVS7, G-A, +1

In a 7-year-old Japanese boy with osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome
(OPPG; 259770), Narumi et al. (2010) identified compound heterozygosity
for a splice site transition (1584+1G-A) in intron 7 and a 7.2-kb
microdeletion encompassing exons 22 and 23 (603506.0034) of the LRP5
gene. The unaffected parents were each heterozygous for 1 of the
mutations, neither of which was found in 100 controls. Sequencing of a
mutant RT-PCR fragment indicated that the splice site mutation caused
cryptic splice donor site utilization 63-bp downstream of the native
exon/intron junction, predicted to add an extra 21 amino acids without a
termination codon after glu528 (E528_V529ins21). The 7.2-kb
microdeletion was discovered using custom-designed oligonucleotide
tiling array CGH targeted to a 600-kb genomic region harboring LRP5;
Narumi et al. (2010) stated that this was one of the smallest deletions
identified by aCGH-based analyses.

.0034
OSTEOPOROSIS-PSEUDOGLIOMA SYNDROME
LRP5, 7.2-KB DEL, EXONS 22-23

See 603506.0033 and Narumi et al. (2010).

REFERENCE 1. Ai, M.; Heeger, S.; Bartels, C. F.; Schelling, D. K.; Osteoporosis-Pseudoglioma
Collaborative Group: Clinical and molecular findings in osteoporosis-pseudoglioma
syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 77: 741-753, 2005.

2. Benson, W. E.: Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy. Trans. Am.
Ophthal. Soc. 93: 473-521, 1995.

3. Boyden, L. M.; Mao, J.; Belsky, J.; Mitzner, L.; Farhi, A.; Mitnick,
M. A.; Wu, D.; Insogna, K.; Lifton, R. P.: High bone density due
to a mutation in LDL-receptor-related protein 5. New Eng. J. Med. 346:
1513-1521, 2002.

4. Chen, D.; Lathrop, W.; Dong, Y.: Molecular cloning of mouse Lrp7(Lr3)
cDNA and chromosomal mapping of orthologous genes in mouse and human. Genomics 55:
314-321, 1999.

5. Clement-Lacroix, P.; Ai, M.; Morvan, F.; Roman-Roman, S.; Vayssiere,
B.; Belleville, C.; Estrera, K.; Warman, M. L.; Baron, R.; Rawadi,
G.: Lrp5-independent activation of Wnt signaling by lithium chloride
increases bone formation and bone mass in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 102: 17406-17411, 2005.

6. Cui, Y.; Niziolek, P. J.; MacDonald, B. T.; Zylstra, C. R.; Alenina,
N.; Robinson, D. R.; Zhong, Z.; Matthes, S.; Jacobsen, C. M.; Conlon,
R. A.; Brommage, R.; Liu, Q.; and 11 others: Lrp5 functions in
bone to regulate bone mass. Nature Med. 17: 684-691, 2011.

7. de Crecchio, G.; Simonelli, F.; Nunziata, G.; Mazzeo, S.; Greco,
G. M.; Rinaldi, E.; Ventruto, V.; Ciccodicola, A.; Miano, M. G.; Testa,
F.; Curci, A.; D'Urso, M. M.; Rinaldi, M. M.; Cavaliere, M. L.; Castelluccio,
P.: Autosomal recessive familial exudative vitreoretinopathy: evidence
for genetic heterogeneity. Clin. Genet. 54: 315-320, 1998.

8. Dong, Y.; Lathrop, W.; Weaver, D.; Qiu, Q.; Cini, J.; Bertolini,
D.; Chen, D.: Molecular cloning and characterization of LR3, a novel
LDL receptor family protein with mitogenic activity. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 251: 784-790, 1998.

9. Ferrari, S. L.; Deutsch, S.; Choudhury, U.; Chevalley, T.; Bonjour,
J.-P.; Dermitzakis, E. T.; Rizzoli, R.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Polymorphisms
in the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5) gene
are associated with variation in vertebral bone mass, vertebral bone
size, and stature in whites. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74: 866-875, 2004.

10. Fujino, T.; Asaba, H.; Kang, M.-J.; Ikeda, Y.; Sone, H.; Takada,
S.; Kim, D.-H.; Ioka, R. X.; Ono, M.; Tomoyori, H.; Okubo, M.; Murase,
T.; and 13 others: Low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein
5 (LRP5) is essential for normal cholesterol metabolism and glucose-induced
insulin secretion. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 229-234, 2003.

11. Gong, Y.; Slee, R. B.; Fukai, N.; Rawadi, G.; Roman-Roman, S.;
Reginato, A. M.; Wang, H.; Cundy, T.; Glorieux, F. H.; Lev, D.; Zacharin,
M.; Oexle, K.; and 50 others: LDL receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5)
affects bone accrual and eye development. Cell 107: 513-523, 2001.

12. Guo, Y.; Xiong, D.; Shen, H.; Zhao, L.; Xiao, P.; Guo, Y.; Wang,
W.; Yang, T.; Recker, R. R.; Deng, H.: Polymorphisms of the low-density
lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5) gene are associated
with obesity phenotypes in a large family-based association study. J.
Med. Genet. 43: 798-803, 2006.

13. Hey, P. J.; Twells, R. C. J.; Phillips, M. S.; Nakagawa, Y.; Brown,
S. D.; Kawaguchi, Y.; Cox, R.; Xie, G.; Dugan, V.; Hammond, H.; Metzker,
M. L.; Todd, J. A.; Hess, J. F.: Cloning of a novel member of the
low-density lipoprotein receptor family. Gene 216: 103-111, 1998.

14. Jiao, X.; Ventruto, V.; Trese, M. T.; Shastry, B. S.; Hejtmancik,
J. F.: Autosomal recessive familial exudative vitreoretinopathy is
associated with mutations in LRP5. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 75: 878-884,
2004.

15. Kato, M.; Patel, M. S.; Levasseur, R., Lobov, I.; Chang, B. H.-J.;
Glass, D. A., II; Hartmann, C.; Li, L.; Hwang, T.-H.; Brayton, C.
F.; Lang, R. A.; Karsenty, G.; Chan, L.: Cbfa1-independent decrease
in osteoblast proliferation, osteopenia, and persistent embryonic
eye vascularization in mice deficient in Lrp5, a Wnt coreceptor. J.
Cell Biol. 157: 303-314, 2002.

16. Kondo, H.; Hayashi, H.; Oshima, K.; Tahira, T.; Hayashi, K.:
Frizzled 4 gene (FZD4) mutations in patients with familial exudative
vitreoretinopathy with variable expressivity. Brit. J. Ophthal. 87:
1291-1295, 2003.

17. Little, R. D.; Carulli, J. P.; Del Mastro, R. G.; Dupuis, J.;
Osborne, M.; Folz, C.; Manning, S. P.; Swain, P. M.; Zhao, S.-C.;
Eustace, B.; Lappe, M. M.; Spitzer, L.; and 23 others: A mutation
in the LDL receptor-related protein 5 gene results in the autosomal
dominant high-bone-mass trait. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 70: 11-19, 2002.

18. Magoori, K.; Kang, M.-J.; Ito, M. R.; Kakuuchi, H.; Ioka, R. X.;
Kamataki, A.; Kim, D.-H.; Asaba, H.; Iwasaki, S.; Takei, Y. A.; Sasaki,
M.; Usui, S.; Okazaki, M.; Takahashi, S.; Ono, M.; Nose, M.; Sakai,
J.; Fujino, T.; Yamamoto, T. T.: Severe hypercholesterolemia, impaired
fat tolerance, and advanced atherosclerosis in mice lacking both low
density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5 and apolipoprotein
E. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 11331-11336, 2003.

19. Mao, J.; Wang, J.; Liu, B.; Pan, W.; Farr, G. H., III; Flynn,
C.; Yuan, H.; Takada, S.; Kimelman, D.; Li, L.; Wu, D.: Low-density
lipoprotein receptor-related protein-5 binds to axin and regulates
the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. Molec. Cell 7: 801-809, 2001.

20. Mizuguchi, T.; Furuta, I.; Watanabe, Y.; Tsukamoto, K.; Tomita,
H.; Tsujihata, M.; Ohta, T.; Kishino, T.; Matsumoto, N.; Minakami,
H.; Niikawa, N.; Yoshiura, K.: LRP5, low-density-lipoprotein-receptor-related
protein 5, is a determinant for bone mineral density. J. Hum. Genet. 49:
80-86, 2004.

21. Narumi, S.; Numakura, C.; Shiihara, T.; Seiwa, C.; Nozaki, Y.;
Yamagata, T.; Momoi, M. Y.; Watanabe, Y.; Yoshino, M.; Matsuishi,
T.; Nishi, E.; Kawame, H.; Akahane, T.; Nishimura, G.; Emi, M.; Hasegawa,
T.: Various types of LRP5 mutations in four patients with osteoporosis-pseudoglioma
syndrome: identification of a 7.2-kb microdeletion using oligonucleotide
tiling microarray. Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A: 133-140, 2010.

22. Price, S. M.; Periam, N.; Humphries, A.; Woodruff, G.; Trembath,
R. C.: Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy linked to D11S533 in
a large Asian family with consanguinity. Ophthal. Genet. 17: 52-57,
1996.

23. Qin, M.; Hayashi, H.; Oshima, K.; Tahira, T.; Hayashi, K.; Kondo,
H.: Complexity of the genotype-phenotype correlation in familial
exudative vitreoretinopathy with mutations in the LRP5 and/or FZD4
genes. Hum. Mutat. 26: 104-112, 2005.

24. Qin, M.; Kondo, H.; Tahira, T.; Hayashi, K.: Moderate reduction
of Norrin signaling activity associated with the causative missense
mutations identified in patients with familial exudative vitreoretinopathy. Hum.
Genet. 122: 615-623, 2008.

25. Scopelliti, D.; Orsini, R.; Ventucci, D.; Carratelli, D.: Malattia
di Van Buchem. Minerva Stomat. 48: 227-234, 1999.

26. Semenov, M.; Tamai, K.; He, X.: SOST is a ligand for LRP5/LRP6
and a Wnt signaling inhibitor. J. Biol. Chem. 280: 26770-26775,
2005.

27. Shastry, B. S.; Trese, M. T.: Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy:
further evidence for genetic heterogeneity. (Letter) Am. J. Med.
Genet. 69: 217-218, 1997.

28. Toomes, C.; Bottomley, H. M.; Jackson, R. M.; Towns, K. V.; Scott,
S.; Mackey, D. A.; Craig, J. E.; Jiang, L.; Yang, Z.; Trembath, R.;
Woodruff, G.; Gregory-Evans, C. Y.; Gregory-Evans, K.; Parker, M.
J.; Black, G. C. M.; Downey, L. M.; Zhang, K.; Inglehearn, C. F.:
Mutations in LRP5 or FZD4 underlie the common familial exudative vitreoretinopathy
locus on chromosome 11q. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74: 721-730, 2004.

29. Twells, R. C. J.; Mein, C. A.; Phillips, M. S.; Hess, J. F.; Veijola,
R.; Gilbey, M.; Bright, M.; Metzker, M.; Lie, B. A.; Kingsnorth, A.;
Gregory, E.; Nakagawa, Y.; and 12 others: Haplotype structure,
LD blocks, and uneven recombination within the LRP5 gene. Genome
Res. 13: 845-855, 2003.

30. Twells, R. C. J.; Metzker, M. L.; Brown, S. D.; Cox, R.; Garey,
C.; Hammond, H.; Hey, P. J.; Levy, E.; Nakagawa, Y.; Philips, M. S.;
Todd, J. A.; Hess, J. F.: The sequence and gene characterization
of a 400-kb candidate region for IDDM4 on chromosome 11q13. Genomics 72:
231-242, 2001.

31. Van Wesenbeeck, L.; Cleiren, E.; Gram, J.; Beals, R. K.; Benichou,
O.; Scopelliti, D.; Key, L.; Renton, T.; Bartels, C.; Gong, Y.; Warman,
M. L.; de Vernejoul, M.-C.; Bollerslev, J.; Van Hul, W.: Six novel
missense mutations in the LDL receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5) gene
in different conditions with an increased bone density. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 72: 763-771, 2003.

32. Yadav, V. K.; Ryu, J.-H.; Suda, N.; Tanaka, K. F.; Gingrich, J.
A.; Schutz, G.; Glorieux, F. H.; Chiang, C. Y.; Zajac, J. D.; Insogna,
K. L.; Mann, J. J.; Hen, R.; Ducy, P.; Karsenty, G.: Lrp5 controls
bone formation by inhibiting serotonin synthesis in the duodenum. Cell 135:
825-837, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/13/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/8/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/20/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/12/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/2/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/23/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/1/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/12/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/14/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/9/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/14/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/1/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/21/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/27/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/8/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/15/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/28/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/29/2003
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 11/8/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/7/2002
Deborah L. Stone - updated: 1/23/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/20/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/6/2001
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 5/10/1999
Sheryl A. Jankowski - updated: 4/12/1999

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 2/9/1999

EDITED carol: 03/14/2013
terry: 3/13/2013
carol: 9/8/2011
terry: 9/8/2011
mgross: 3/20/2009
terry: 3/20/2009
wwang: 3/17/2008
terry: 3/12/2008
carol: 1/18/2008
carol: 1/2/2008
carol: 10/3/2007
carol: 7/27/2007
mgross: 3/23/2007
mgross: 3/1/2007
carol: 1/17/2007
terry: 1/12/2007
wwang: 8/23/2006
ckniffin: 8/14/2006
terry: 3/22/2006
mgross: 12/1/2005
terry: 11/9/2005
alopez: 10/17/2005
terry: 10/14/2005
mgross: 9/7/2005
terry: 9/1/2005
alopez: 10/25/2004
terry: 10/21/2004
alopez: 4/28/2004
terry: 4/27/2004
tkritzer: 4/26/2004
tkritzer: 4/16/2004
terry: 4/8/2004
tkritzer: 3/22/2004
carol: 12/9/2003
cwells: 7/17/2003
terry: 7/9/2003
cwells: 5/21/2003
ckniffin: 5/15/2003
alopez: 3/19/2003
carol: 3/10/2003
tkritzer: 3/7/2003
tkritzer: 3/6/2003
terry: 2/28/2003
tkritzer: 1/31/2003
terry: 1/29/2003
tkritzer: 1/7/2003
carol: 11/8/2002
terry: 6/7/2002
carol: 1/23/2002
mgross: 11/20/2001
mgross: 8/6/2001
psherman: 5/24/1999
psherman: 5/17/1999
psherman: 5/10/1999
psherman: 4/12/1999
psherman: 2/9/1999

603437	TITLE *603437 COLD-SHOCK DOMAIN PROTEIN A; CSDA
;;DNA-BINDING PROTEIN A; DBPA
DESCRIPTION Cold-shock domain (CSD) proteins are characterized by a highly conserved
central domain of approximately 100 amino acids that is homologous to
bacterial cold-shock proteins.

To identify cDNAs encoding DNA-binding proteins (DBPs), Sakura et al.
(1988) screened a human placenta cDNA expression library with DNA
fragments containing either the human epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR; 131550) enhancer or the human c-erbB2 (164870) promoter. They
isolated cDNAs encoding DBPA and DBPB (154030). The DBPA cDNAs consisted
of 2 forms that differ by an internal 207-bp deletion. Northern blot
analysis of HeLa cell RNA detected a major 2.5-kb DBPA transcript and a
minor 2.3-kb DBPA transcript. The deduced DBPA and DBPB proteins share a
central region in which 100 of 109 amino acids are identical between the
2 proteins.

Kudo et al. (1995) isolated full-length human cDNAs encoding DBPA and
DBPB by screening for proteins that bind to the human leukosialin
(182160) promoter. The deduced 342-amino acid DBPA protein has a
cold-shock domain and a DNA-binding domain. The authors isolated the
DBPA genomic sequence and found that it contains 10 exons spanning 24
kb; exon 6, which encodes 69 amino acids, is alternatively spliced.
Northern blot analysis of human tissues demonstrated highest levels of
DBPA transcription in skeletal muscle and heart. Immunofluorescence
detected DBPA protein expression in both the cytoplasm and nucleus of
HeLa cells.

Independently, Coles et al. (1996) isolated DBPA and DBPB cDNAs by
screening for proteins that are able to bind to the repressor element in
the human GMCSF (138960) promoter. They determined that their DBPA cDNA
has a variant sequence compared to the previously reported DBPA cDNA
sequences, resulting in a deduced 372-amino acid protein with 4 amino
acid substitutions and a 30-amino acid C-terminal extension.
Overexpression of this variant DBPA led to repression of the GMCSF
promoter.

Kudo et al. (1995) mapped the CSDA gene to 12p13.1 by in situ
hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Coles, L. S.; Diamond, P.; Occhiodoro, F.; Vadas, M. A.; Shannon,
M. F.: Cold shock domain proteins repress transcription from the
GM-CSF promoter. Nucleic Acids Res. 24: 2311-2317, 1996.

2. Kudo, S.; Mattei, M.-G.; Fukuda, M.: Characterization of the gene
for dbpA, a family member of the nucleic-acid-binding proteins containing
a cold-shock domain. Europ. J. Biochem. 231: 72-82, 1995.

3. Sakura, H.; Maekawa, T.; Imamoto, F.; Yasuda, K.; Ishii, S.: Two
human genes isolated by a novel method encode DNA-binding proteins
containing a common region of homology. Gene 73: 499-507, 1988.

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 1/15/1999

EDITED psherman: 01/21/1999

179617	TITLE *179617 RAD51, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; RAD51
;;RAD51, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF, A; RAD51A;;
RECOMBINATION PROTEIN A; RECA;;
RECA, E. COLI, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

RAD51 has a critical role in the maintenance of genomic integrity by
functioning in the repair of DNA double-strand breaks. RAD51 mediates
homologous pairing and strand exchange in recombinatory structures known
as RAD51 foci in the nucleus (summary by Park et al., 2008).

CLONING

In Escherichia coli, the RecA protein searches for homologous regions
between 2 double-stranded DNA molecules and promotes strand exchange. It
is also involved in recombinational repair of double-strand breaks
(DSBs). In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the protein encoded by rad51 is
required for repair of DSBs that occur in mitosis or meiosis. By
searching for orthologs of E. coli RecA, Shinohara et al. (1993) cloned
genes from human, mouse, and Schizosaccharomyces pombe (fission yeast)
that are homologous to rad51. Human and mouse RAD51 are identical
339-amino acid proteins and are highly homologous (83%) with the yeast
rad51 proteins. The mouse gene was transcribed at a high level in
thymus, spleen, testis, and ovary and at a lower level in brain.

By screening a testis cDNA library with a RAD51 probe, Park et al.
(2008) cloned a RAD51 splice variant lacking exon 9, which they called
RAD51-delta-ex9. The deduced 280-amino acid protein is identical to
full-length RAD51 for the first 259 amino acids, which includes an
N-terminal basic motif followed by the Walker A and B ATP-binding
motifs. The 2 proteins diverge at their C termini, but both C termini
contain basic motifs predicted to function as nuclear localization
signals. PCR analysis detected high expression of full-length RAD51 in
testis, with moderate expression detected in placenta, thymus, pancreas,
and colon, and weaker expression detected in lung, liver, skeletal
muscle, kidney, and ovary. RAD51-delta-ex9 was highly expressed in
testis, with much weaker expression only in skeletal muscle, pancreas,
thymus, and ovary. Western blot analysis of human testis detected RAD51
and RAD51-delta-ex9 at apparent molecular masses of 37 and 31 kD,
respectively. RAD51, but not RAD51-delta-ex9, was also detected at a
lower level in placenta, lung, and small intestine. Fluorescence-tagged
RAD51 and RAD51-delta-ex9 proteins both localized to the nucleus of
transfected COS-7 cells, with exclusion from nucleoli.

Using Western blot analysis, Sage et al. (2010) showed that a part of
the cytoplasmic pool of RAD51 in human cell lines fractionated with
mitochondria.

GENE FUNCTION

Solinger et al. (2002) showed that RAD54 (603615) protein dissociates
RAD51 from nucleoprotein filaments formed on double-stranded DNA
(dsDNA). Addition of RAD54 protein overcame inhibition of DNA strand
exchange by RAD51 protein bound to substrate dsDNA. Species preference
in the RAD51 dissociation and DNA strand exchange assays underlined the
importance of specific RAD54-RAD51 protein interactions. RAD51 protein
was unable to release dsDNA upon ATP hydrolysis, leaving it stuck on the
heteroduplex DNA product after DNA strand exchange. The authors
suggested that RAD54 protein is involved in the turnover of RAD51-dsDNA
filaments.

In S. cerevisiae, the Srs2 helicase negatively modulates recombination,
and later experiments have suggested that it reverses intermediate
recombination structures. Veaute et al. (2003) demonstrated that DNA
strand exchange mediated in vitro by RAD51 is inhibited by Srs2, and
that Srs2 disrupts RAD51 filaments formed on single-stranded DNA. Veaute
et al. (2003) concluded that their data provided an explanation for the
antirecombinogenic role of Srs2 in vivo and highlighted a theretofore
unknown mechanism for recombination control.

Krejci et al. (2003) clarified the role of Srs2 in recombination
modulation by purifying its encoded product and examining its
interactions with the RAD51 recombinase. Srs2 has a robust ATPase
activity that is dependent on single-stranded DNA and binds RAD51, but
the addition of a catalytic quantity of Srs2 to RAD51-mediated
recombination reactions causes severe inhibition of these reactions.
Krejci et al. (2003) showed that Srs2 acts by dislodging RAD51 from
single-stranded DNA. Thus, the attenuation of recombination efficiency
by Srs2 stems primarily from its ability to dismantle the RAD51
presynaptic filament efficiently. Krejci et al. (2003) suggested that
their findings have implications for the basis of Bloom (210900) and
Werner (277700) syndromes, which are caused by mutations in DNA
helicases and are characterized by increased frequencies of
recombination and a predisposition to cancers and accelerated aging.

Hussain et al. (2003) found that the FANCG protein (602956) colocalized
in nuclear foci with both BRCA2 (600185) and RAD51 following DNA damage
with mitomycin C. The authors concluded that BRCA2 is directly connected
to a pathway deficient in interstrand crosslink repair, and that at
least 1 other Fanconi anemia protein is closely associated with the
homologous recombination DNA repair machinery.

Dong et al. (2003) isolated a holoenzyme complex containing BRCA1
(113705), BRCA2, BARD1 (610593), and RAD51, which they called the BRCA1-
and BRCA2-containing complex (BRCC). The complex showed UBC5 (see
UBE2D1; 602961)-dependent ubiquitin E3 ligase activity. Inclusion of BRE
(610497) and BRCC3 (300617) enhanced ubiquitination by the complex, and
cancer-associated truncations in BRCA1 reduced the association of BRE
and BRCC3 with the complex. RNA interference of BRE and BRCC3 in HeLa
cells increased cell sensitivity to ionizing radiation and resulted in a
defect in G2/M checkpoint arrest. Dong et al. (2003) concluded that the
BRCC is a ubiquitin E3 ligase that enhances cellular survival following
DNA damage.

Yang et al. (2005) showed that a full-length Brca2 homolog (Brh2, from
the fungus Ustilago maydis) stimulates Rad51-mediated recombination at
substoichiometric concentrations relative to Rad51. Brh2 recruits Rad51
to DNA and facilitates the nucleation of the filament, which is then
elongated by the pool of free Rad51. Brh2 acts preferentially at a
junction between double-stranded DNA and single-stranded DNA, with
strict specificity for the 3-prime overhang polarity of a resected
double-stranded break. Yang et al. (2005) concluded that their results
established a BRCA2 function in RAD51-mediated double-stranded break
repair and explained the loss of this repair capacity in
BRCA2-associated cancers.

Enomoto et al. (2006) demonstrated that coexpression of human MND1
(611422) and HOP2 (608665) in E. coli resulted in the formation of
stable heterodimers that stimulated DMC1- and RAD51-mediated DNA strand
exchange. Chi et al. (2007) found that the Hop2 component of the mouse
recombinant Hop2-Mnd1 complex was the major DNA-binding subunit, and
that Mnd1 was the Rad51-interacting entity. Hop2-Mnd1 stabilized the
Rad51-single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) nucleoprotein filament, and enhanced
the ability of the Rad51-ssDNA nucleoprotein filament to capture duplex
DNA, which is an obligatory step in the formation of the synaptic
complex critical for DNA joint formation.

By combining optical tweezers with single-molecule fluorescence
microscopy and microfluidics, van Mameren et al. (2009) demonstrated
that disassembly of human RAD51 nucleoprotein filaments results from the
interplay between ATP hydrolysis and the release of the tension stored
in the filament. By applying external tension to the DNA, they found
that disassembly slows down and can even be stalled. The authors
quantified the fluorescence of RAD51 patches and found that disassembly
occurs in bursts interspersed by long pauses. After relaxation of a
stalled complex, pauses were suppressed resulting in a large burst. Van
Mameren et al. (2009) concluded that tension-dependent disassembly takes
place only from filament ends, after tension-independent ATP hydrolysis.

Using purified recombinant proteins, Tombline and Fishel (2002) showed
that human RAD51 had a 50-fold reduction in catalytic efficiency
compared to bacterial RecA and lacked the magnitude of ATP-induced
cooperativity that is a hallmark of RecA. Altering the ratio of
DNA/RAD51 and including salts that stimulate DNA strand exchange, such
as ammonium sulfate, were found to increase RAD51 catalytic efficiency.
RAD51 and RecA differed in the ability of ssDNA and dsDNA to induce
their ATPase activity and also showed differences in DNA site size.
RAD51 had a minimal site size of 3 nucleotides, but 6 to 8 nucleotides
of ssDNA per RAD51 monomer provoked optimal ATPase efficiency, whereas
RecA has a site size of 3 nucleotides for ssDNA.

Park et al. (2008) showed that RAD51-delta-ex9 showed approximately the
same DNA strand exchange activity as full-length RAD51 in vitro,
although it had significantly higher activity than RAD51 in homologous
DNA repair. Mutation analysis revealed that the unique C termini of
RAD51 and RAD51-delta-ex9 independently directed their nuclear
localization in transfected COS-7 cells.

Using Western blot analysis, Sage et al. (2010) found that mitochondrial
levels of RAD51, RAD51C, and XRCC3 in human cell lines increased in
response to oxidative stress and weak ionizing radiation.
Immunoprecipitation analysis showed that oxidative stress increased the
interaction of RAD51 with mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), and knockdown of
RAD51, via small interfering RNA, increased mtDNA copy number,
apparently due to general inhibition of cell cycle progression.
Oxidative stress normally increases mtDNA copy number; however,
knockdown of RAD51, RAD51C, or XRCC3 suppressed this stress response and
resulted in decreased mtDNA copy number. Sage et al. (2010) concluded
that proteins of the homologous recombination pathway are required to
maintain the mitochondrial genome.

Jensen et al. (2010) reported the purification of BRCA2 and showed that
it both binds RAD51 and potentiates recombinational DNA repair by
promoting assembly of RAD51 onto ssDNA. BRCA2 acts by targeting RAD51 to
ssDNA over dsDNA, enabling RAD51 to displace replication protein-A (RPA;
179835) from ssDNA and stabilizing RAD51 ssDNA filaments by blocking ATP
hydrolysis. BRCA2 does not anneal ssDNA complexed with RPA, implying it
does not directly function in repair processes that involve ssDNA
annealing. The findings of Jensen et al. (2010) showed that BRCA2 is a
key mediator of homologous recombination and provided a molecular basis
for understanding how this DNA repair process is disrupted by BRCA2
mutations.

For additional information on RAD51 and the BRCC protein complex that
performs DNA repair and recombination, see BRCA2 (600185).

Jirawatnotai et al. (2011) performed a series of proteomic screens for
cyclin D1 (168461) protein partners in several types of human tumors and
found that cyclin D1 directly binds RAD51 and that cyclin D1-RAD51
interaction is induced by radiation. Like RAD51, cyclin D1 is recruited
to DNA damage sites in a BRCA2-dependent fashion. Reduction of cyclin D1
levels in human cancer cells impaired recruitment of RAD51 to damaged
DNA, impeded the homologous recombination-mediated DNA repair, and
increased sensitivity of cells to radiation in vitro and in vivo. This
effect was seen in cancer cells lacking the retinoblastoma protein
(614041), which do not require D-cyclins for proliferation. Jirawatnotai
et al. (2011) concluded that their findings revealed an unexpected
function of a core cell-cycle protein in DNA repair and suggested that
targeting cyclin D1 may be beneficial also in retinoblastoma-negative
cancers, which were thought to be unaffected by cyclin D1 inhibition.

Long et al. (2011) reported that the broken sister chromatid generated
by a DNA double-strand break in Xenopus extracts is repaired via
RAD51-dependent strand invasion into the regenerated sister.
Recombination acts downstream of FANCI (611360)-FANCD2 (613984), yet
RAD51 binds interstrand crosslinks-stalled replication forks
independently of FANCI and FANC2 and before double-strand break
formation. Long et al. (2011) concluded that their results elucidated
the functional link between the Fanconi anemia pathway and the
recombination machinery during interstrand crosslink repair. In
addition, their results demonstrated the complete repair of a
double-strand break via homologous recombination in vitro.

In the developing mouse cortex, Depienne et al. (2012) found that
expression of the Rad51 gene was highest at embryonic day 12 (E12), and
was mostly detected in the cortical ventricular proliferative zone. The
Dcc gene (120470) was also expressed at this time, but in a different
location in the preplate postmitotic zone. In the cortex of newborn
mice, Rad51 was mainly present in the subplate and, in lesser amounts,
in layer V, whereas Dcc was selectively located in axons innervating the
cortex. Rad51 was also detected in a subpopulation of corticospinal
axons at the pyramidal decussation in 2-day-old mice. The subcellular
location of Rad51 also changes with development: at E12, it was mostly
detected in the nucleus of progenitor cells, whereas after birth, it was
mainly localized in the cell soma. The results suggested that Rrad51
could have several functions related to different cellular
localizations.

With use of a separation-of-function mutant form of Rad51 that retains
filament-forming but not joint molecule (JM)-forming activity in S.
cerevisiae,, Cloud et al. (2012) showed that the JM activity of Rad51 is
fully dispensable for meiotic recombination. The corresponding mutation
in Dmc1 (602721) causes a profound recombination defect, demonstrating
that Dmc1's JM activity alone is responsible for meiotic recombination.
Cloud et al. (2012) further provided biochemical evidence that Rad51
acts with Mei5-Sae3 as a Dmc1 accessory factor. Thus, Rad51 is a
multifunctional protein that catalyzes recombination directly in mitosis
and indirectly, via Dmc1, during meiosis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Park et al. (2008) determined that the RAD51 gene contains 10 exons.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Slupianek et al. (2001) demonstrated that RAD51 is important for
resistance to cisplatin and mitomycin C in cells expressing the BCR
(151410)/ABL (189980) oncogenic tyrosine kinase. BCR/ABL significantly
enhanced the expression of RAD51 and several RAD51 paralogs. RAD51
overexpression was mediated by STAT5 (601511)-dependent transcription as
well as by inhibition of caspase-3 (600636)-dependent cleavage.
Phosphorylation of the RAD51 tyr315 residue by BCR/ABL appeared
essential for enhanced DSB repair and drug resistance.

- Crystal Structure

Pellegrini et al. (2002) reported the 1.7-angstrom crystal structure of
a complex between the BRC repeat, which is an evolutionarily conserved
sequence in BRCA2, and the RecA-homology domain of RAD51. The BRC repeat
mimics a motif in RAD51 that serves as an interface for oligomerization
between individual RAD51 monomers, thus enabling BRCA2 to control the
assembly of the RAD51 nucleoprotein filament, which is essential for
strand-pairing reactions during DNA recombination. The RAD51
oligomerization motif is highly conserved among RecA-like recombinases,
highlighting a common evolutionarily origin for the mechanism of
nucleoprotein filament formation, mirrored in the BRC repeat. Pellegrini
et al. (2002) showed that cancer-associated mutations that affect the
BRC repeat disrupt its predicted interaction with RAD51, yielding
structural insight into mechanisms for cancer susceptibility.

Chen et al. (2008) solved the crystal structures of the E. coli
RecA-ssDNA and RecA heteroduplex filaments. They showed that ssDNA and
ATP bind to RecA-RecA interfaces cooperatively, explaining the ATP
dependency of DNA binding. The ATP gamma-phosphate is sensed across the
RecA-RecA interface by 2 lysine residues that also stimulate ATP
hydrolysis, providing a mechanism for DNA release. The DNA is underwound
and stretched globally, but locally it adopts a B-DNA-like conformation
that restricts the homology search to Watson-Crick-type basepairing. The
complementary strand interacts primarily through basepairing, making
heteroduplex formation strictly dependent on complementarity. The
underwound, stretched filament conformation probably evolved to
destabilize the donor duplex, freeing the complementary strand for
homology sampling.

MAPPING

Shinohara et al. (1993) mapped the RAD51 gene to chromosome 15 by
analysis of a somatic cell hybrid panel and localized the mouse gene to
chromosome 2F1 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

By FISH analysis, Takahashi et al. (1994) assigned the RAD51 gene to
chromosome 15q15.1 and the mouse gene to chromosome 2F1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Susceptibility to Breast Cancer

RAD51, a homolog of RecA of E. coli, functions in recombination and in
DNA repair. The BRCA1 and BRCA2 proteins, implicated in familial breast
cancer, form a complex with RAD51, and these genes are thought to
participate in a common DNA damage response pathway associated with the
activation of homologous recombination and DSB repair. To investigate
the possibility that the RAD51 gene may be involved in the development
of hereditary breast cancer, Kato et al. (2000) screened Japanese
patients with hereditary breast cancer for RAD51 mutations and found a
single alteration in exon 6 (179617.0001). This was determined to be
present in the germline in 2 patients with bilateral breast cancer.

- Susceptibility to Mirror Movements 2

By exome sequencing of a large French family with congenital mirror
movements-2 (MRMV2; 614508) originally reported by Depienne et al.
(2011), Depienne et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous truncating
mutation in the RAD51 gene (179617.0003). The mutation was found in 8
affected individuals and in 8 unaffected individuals, indicating
significant incomplete penetrance (50%). A second truncating mutation in
the RAD51 gene (179617.0004) was identified in a German family with the
disorder. The authors concluded that haploinsufficiency was the
pathogenic mechanism. The mechanism linking RAD1 deficiency to the
disorder was unclear: insufficient RAD51-related DNA repair during early
corticogenesis might lead to excessive apoptosis and altered central
nervous system development; however, the authors noted that RAD51 may
have a direct or indirect role in axonal guidance.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using targeted gene mutation in embryonic stem (ES) cells, Tsuzuki et
al. (1996) introduced a small deletion into an essential region of the
mouse Rad51 gene and transmitted the mutation through mouse germ-cell
lines. Mice heterozygous for the mutation were viable and fertile. The
authors identified no Rad51 -/- pups among 148 neonates examined.
However, a few Rad51 -/- embryos were identified when examined during
the early stages of embryonic development. No Rad51 -/- ES cells were
detected under selective growth conditions. Tsuzuki et al. (1996)
concluded that the Rad51 protein plays an essential role in the
proliferation of cells and that a basic molecular defect present in the
Rad51 -/- embryos interferes with cell viability, leading to
pre-implantation lethality. The homozygous Rad51 null mutation can be
characterized as a preimplantational lethal mutation that disrupts basic
molecular functions of cells.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BREAST CANCER, FAMILIAL
RAD51, ARG150GLN

In studies of 20 patients from breast cancer (114480) families and 25
patients with breast cancer that was early-onset, bilateral, or
accompanied by a history of primary cancer(s) of other organs, Kato et
al. (2000) found a missense mutation in 2 patients with familial breast
cancer: a G-to-A transition converting codon 150 from CGG (arg) to CAG
(gln). Both patients had bilateral breast cancer, one with synchronous
bilateral breast cancer and the other with synchronous bilateral
multiple breast cancer. The patients were presumed to be unrelated.

.0002
BREAST CANCER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, IN BRCA1 AND BRCA2 CARRIERS
RAD51, 135G-C

Wang et al. (1999) presented evidence that a single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) in the 5-prime untranslated region of RAD51 is
associated with increased breast cancer risk in BRCA1 (113705) and BRCA2
(600185) carriers but does not influence breast cancer risk in women who
are not BRCA1 or BRCA2 carriers. This SNP, designated 135g/c, is a
substitution of C for G at position 135 in the RAD51 cDNA. Levy-Lahad et
al. (2001) studied 257 female Ashkenazi Jewish carriers of one of the
common BRCA1 (185delAG; 113705.0003, or 5382insC; 113705.0018) or BRCA2
(6174delT; 600185.0009) mutations. They found that the 135 SNP modified
cancer risk in BRCA2 carriers but not in BRCA1 carriers. Survival
analysis in BRCA2 carriers showed that 135C increased risk of breast
and/or ovarian cancer with a hazard ratio (HR) of 4.0. This effect was
largely due to increased breast cancer risk with an HR of 3.46 for
breast cancer in BRCA2 carriers who were 135C heterozygotes. RAD51
status did not affect ovarian cancer risk.

Antoniou et al. (2007) pooled genotype data for 8,512 female carriers
from 19 studies for the RAD51 135G-C SNP. They found evidence of an
increased breast cancer risk in CC homozygotes (hazard ratio 1.92; 95%
confidence interval 1.25-2.94) but not in heterozygotes. When BRCA1 and
BRCA2 mutation carriers were analyzed separately, the increased risk was
statistically significant only among BRCA2 mutation carriers, in whom
they observed hazard ratios of 1.17 (95% confidence interval 0.91-1.51)
among heterozygotes and 3.18 (95% confidence interval 1.39-7.27) among
rare homozygotes. In addition, they determined that the 135G-C variant
affects RAD51 splicing within the 5-prime untranslated region. Thus,
135G-C may modify the risk of breast cancer in BRCA2 mutation carriers
by altering the expression of RAD51. Antoniou et al. (2007) stated that
RAD51 was the first gene to be reliably identified as a modifier of risk
among BRCA1/2 mutation carriers.

.0003
MIRROR MOVEMENTS 2, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
RAD51, ARG254TER

In 8 affected members of a large 4-generation French family with
congenital mirror movements-2 (MRMV2; 614508) (Depienne et al., 2011),
Depienne et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous 760C-T transition in
exon 8 of the RAD51 gene, resulting in an arg254-to-ter (R254X)
substitution. The mutation was not found in 644 controls, but it was
found in 8 unaffected family members, indicating striking incomplete
penetrance (50%). The mutation was found by exome sequencing. RAD51 mRNA
was significantly downregulated due to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay,
indicating haploinsufficiency as the pathogenic mechanism.

.0004
MIRROR MOVEMENTS 2
RAD51, 1-BP DUP, 855A

In a German mother and son with congenital mirror movements-2 (MRMV2;
614508) (Depienne et al., 2011), Depienne et al. (2012) identified a
heterozygous 1-bp duplication (855dupA) in exon 9 of the RAD51 gene,
resulting in a frameshift and premature termination. The mutation was
not found in 644 controls.

REFERENCE 1. Antoniou, A. C.; Sinilnikova, O. M.; Simard, J.; Leone, M.; Dumont,
M.; Neuhausen, S. L.; Struewing, J. P.; Stoppa-Lyonnet, D.; Barjhoux,
L.; Hughes, D. J.; Coupier, I.; Belotti, M.; and 71 others: RAD51
135G-C modifies breast cancer risk among BRCA2 mutation carriers:
results from a combined analysis of 19 studies. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81:
1186-1200, 2007.

2. Chen, Z.; Yang, H.; Pavletich, N. P.: Mechanism of homologous
recombination from the RecA-ssDNA/dsDNA structures. Nature 453:
489-494, 2008.

3. Chi, P.; San Filippo, J.; Sehorn, M. G.; Petukhova, G. V.; Sung,
P.: Bipartite stimulatory action of the Hop2-Mnd1 complex on the
Rad51 recombinase. Genes Dev. 21: 1747-1757, 2007.

4. Cloud, V.; Chan, Y.-L.; Grubb, J.; Budke, B.; Bishop, D. K.: Rad51
is an accessory factor for Dmc1-mediated joint molecule formation
during meiosis. Science 337: 1222-1225, 2012.

5. Depienne, C.; Bouteiller, D.; Meneret, A.; Billot, S.; Groppa,
S.; Klebe, S.; Charbonnier-Beaupel, F.; Corvol, J.-C.; Saraiva, J.-P.;
Brueggemann, N.; Bhatia, K.; Cincotta, M.; and 13 others: RAD51
haploinsufficiency causes congenital mirror movements in humans. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 90: 301-307, 2012.

6. Depienne, C.; Cincotta, M.; Billot, S.; Bouteiller, D.; Groppa,
S.; Brochard, V.; Flamand, C.; Hubsch, C.; Meunier, S.; Giovannelli,
F.; Klebe, S.; Corvol, J. C.; Vidailhet, M.; Brice, A.; Roze, E.:
A novel DCC mutation and genetic heterogeneity in congenital mirror
movements. Neurology 76: 260-264, 2011.

7. Dong, Y.; Hakimi, M.-A.; Chen, X.; Kumaraswamy, E.; Cooch, N. S.;
Godwin, A. K.; Shiekhattar, R.: Regulation of BRCC, a holoenzyme
complex containing BRCA1 and BRCA2, by a signalosome-like subunit
and its role in DNA repair. Molec. Cell 12: 1087-1099, 2003.

8. Enomoto, R.; Kinebuchi, T.; Sato, M.; Yagi, H.; Kurumizaka, H.;
Yokoyama, S.: Stimulation of DNA strand exchange by the human TBPIP/Hop2-Mnd1
complex. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 5575-5581, 2006.

9. Hussain, S.; Witt, E.; Huber, P. A. J.; Medhurst, A. L.; Ashworth,
A.; Mathew, C. G.: Direct interaction of the Fanconi anaemia protein
FANCG with BRCA2/FANCD1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 2503-2510, 2003.

10. Jensen, R. B.; Carreira, A.; Kowalczykowski, S. C.: Purified
human BRCA2 stimulates RAD51-mediated recombination. Nature 467:
678-683, 2010.

11. Jirawatnotai, S.; Hu, Y.; Michowski, W.; Elias, J. E.; Becks,
L.; Bienvenu, F.; Zagozdzon, A.; Goswami, T.; Wang, Y. E.; Clark,
A. B.; Kunkel, T. A.; van Harn, T.; Xia, B.; Correll, M.; Quackenbush,
J.; Livingston, D. M.; Gygi, S. P.; Sicinski, P.: A function for
cyclin D1 in DNA repair uncovered by protein interactome analyses
in human cancers. Nature 474: 230-234, 2011.

12. Kato, M.; Yano, K.; Matsuo, F.; Saito, H.; Katagiri, T.; Kurumizaka,
H.; Yoshimoto, M.; Kasumi, F.; Akiyama, F.; Sakamoto, G.; Nagawa,
H.; Nakamura, Y.; Miki, Y.: Identification of Rad51 alteration in
patients with bilateral breast cancer. J. Hum. Genet. 45: 133-137,
2000.

13. Krejci, L.; Van Komen, S.; Li, Y.; Villemain, J.; Reddy, M. S.;
Klein, H.; Ellenberger, T.; Sung, P.: DNA helicase Srs2 disrupts
the Rad51 presynaptic filament. Nature 423: 305-309, 2003.

14. Levy-Lahad, E.; Lahad, A.; Eisenberg, S.; Dagan, E.; Paperna,
T.; Kasinetz, L.; Catane, R.; Kaufman, B.; Beller, U.; Renbaum, P.;
Gershoni-Baruch, R.: A single nucleotide polymorphism in the RAD51
gene modifies cancer risk in BRCA2 but not BRCA1 carriers. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 3232-3236, 2001.

15. Long, D. T.; Raschle, M.; Joukov, V.; Walter, J. C.: Mechanism
of RAD51-dependent DNA interstrand cross-link repair. Science 333:
84-87, 2011.

16. Park, J.-Y.; Yoo, H.-W.; Kim, B.-R.; Park, R.; Choi, S.-Y.; Kim,
Y.: Identification of a novel human Rad51 variant that promotes DNA
strand exchange. Nucleic Acids Res. 36: 3226-3234, 2008.

17. Pellegrini, L.; Yu, D. S.; Lo, T.; Anand, S.; Lee, M.; Blundell,
T. L.; Venkitaraman, A. R.: Insights into DNA recombination from
the structure of a RAD51-BRCA2 complex. Nature 420: 287-293, 2002.

18. Sage, J. M.; Gildemeister, O. S.; Knight, K. L.: Discovery of
a novel function for human Rad51: maintenance of the mitochondrial
genome. J. Biol. Chem. 285: 18984-18990, 2010.

19. Shinohara, A.; Ogawa, H.; Matsuda, Y.; Ushio, N.; Ikeo, K.; Ogawa,
T.: Cloning of human, mouse and fission yeast recombination genes
homologous to RAD51 and RecA. Nature Genet. 4: 239-243, 1993. Note:
Erratum: Nature Genet. 5: 312 only, 1993.

20. Slupianek, A.; Schmutte, C.; Tombline, G.; Nieborowska-Skorska,
M.; Hoser, G.; Nowicki, M. O.; Pierce, A. J.; Fishel, R.; Skorski,
T.: BCR/ABL regulates mammalian RecA homologs, resulting in drug
resistance. Molec. Cell 8: 795-806, 2001.

21. Solinger, J. A.; Kiianitsa, K.; Heyer, W.-D.: Rad54, a Swi2/Snf2-like
recombinational repair protein, disassembles Rad51:dsDNA filaments. Molec.
Cell 10: 1175-1188, 2002.

22. Takahashi, E.; Matsuda, Y.; Hori, T.; Yasuda, N.; Tsuji, S.; Mori,
M.; Yoshimura, Y.; Yamamoto, A.; Morita, T.; Matsushiro, A.: Chromosome
mapping of the human (RECA) and mouse (Reca) homologs of the yeast
RAD51 and Escherichia coli RecA genes to human (15q15.1) and mouse
(2F1) chromosomes by direct R-banding fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 19:
376-378, 1994.

23. Tombline, G.; Fishel, R.: Biochemical characterization of the
human RAD51 protein: I. ATP hydrolysis. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 14417-14425,
2002.

24. Tsuzuki, T.; Fujii, Y.; Sakumi, K.; Tominaga, Y.; Nakao, K.; Sekiguchi,
M.; Matsushiro, A.; Yoshimura, Y.; Morita, T.: Targeted disruption
of the Rad51 gene leads to lethality in embryonic mice. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 93: 6236-2640, 1996.

25. van Mameren, J.; Modesti, M.; Kanaar, R.; Wyman, C.; Peterman,
E. J. G.; Wuite, G. J. L.: Counting RAD51 proteins disassembling
from nucleoprotein filaments under tension. Nature 457: 745-748,
2009.

26. Veaute, X.; Jeusset, J.; Soustelle, C.; Kowalczykowski, S. C.;
Le Cam, E.; Fabre, F.: The Srs2 helicase prevents recombination by
disrupting Rad51 nucleoprotein filaments. Nature 423: 309-312, 2003.

27. Wang, W.; Tucker, M. A.; Doody, M. M.; Tarone, R. E.; Struewing,
J. P.: A single nucleotide polymorphism in the 5-prime-UTR of RAD51
is associated with the risk of breast cancer among BRCA1/2 mutation
carriers. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65: A22 only, 1999.

28. Yang, H.; Li, Q.; Fan, J.; Holloman, W. K.; Pavletich, N. P.:
The BRCA2 homologue Brh2 nucleates RAD51 filament formation at a dsDNA-ssDNA
junction. Nature 433: 653-657, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/31/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/2/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/1/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/26/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/22/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/12/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/18/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/3/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/28/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/23/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/16/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/12/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/15/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/29/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 5/5/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/12/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/13/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/11/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/12/2000
Moyra Smith - updated: 8/30/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/28/1993

EDITED carol: 09/17/2013
alopez: 11/5/2012
terry: 10/31/2012
terry: 8/17/2012
terry: 4/12/2012
carol: 3/2/2012
terry: 3/2/2012
ckniffin: 3/1/2012
alopez: 9/6/2011
terry: 9/1/2011
alopez: 8/8/2011
terry: 7/26/2011
alopez: 10/22/2010
wwang: 9/21/2010
terry: 8/12/2010
alopez: 2/24/2009
terry: 2/18/2009
alopez: 9/24/2008
alopez: 6/4/2008
terry: 6/3/2008
alopez: 11/29/2007
terry: 11/28/2007
alopez: 9/11/2007
terry: 8/23/2007
wwang: 10/16/2006
alopez: 10/20/2005
terry: 9/12/2005
alopez: 4/22/2005
terry: 4/15/2005
alopez: 5/29/2003
terry: 5/29/2003
mgross: 5/5/2003
alopez: 12/3/2002
alopez: 11/13/2002
terry: 11/12/2002
mgross: 11/13/2001
carol: 8/23/2001
cwells: 5/2/2001
mcapotos: 4/18/2001
terry: 4/11/2001
mcapotos: 6/28/2000
mcapotos: 6/27/2000
terry: 6/12/2000
alopez: 8/6/1998
psherman: 7/30/1998
carol: 7/6/1998
psherman: 6/15/1998
terry: 11/20/1996
terry: 11/12/1996
terry: 11/1/1996
terry: 8/30/1996
carol: 2/10/1995
carol: 11/4/1993
carol: 9/28/1993

601896	TITLE *601896 TNF RECEPTOR-ASSOCIATED FACTOR 3; TRAF3
;;CD40-BINDING PROTEIN; CD40BP;;
LMP1-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; LAP1;;
CD40-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; CAP1;;
CD40 RECEPTOR-ASSOCIATED FACTOR 1; CRAF1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

CD40 (109535) is a member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR)
family. The short cytoplasmic domain of CD40 contains a region with
limited homology to the conserved cytosolic death domain of TNFR1
(191190) and FAS (134637). Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay with the
cytoplasmic domain of CD40 as bait, Hu et al. (1994) isolated B-cell
cDNAs encoding a protein that they called CD40-binding protein (CD40bp).
The predicted CD40bp protein contains a RING finger DNA-binding motif, a
cys/his-rich region, and a coiled-coil domain. Like TRAF1 (601711) and
TRAF2 (601895), both TNFR2 (75-kD TNFR; 191191)-binding proteins, CD40bp
contains a C-terminal TRAF domain. In vitro translated CD40bp has an
apparent molecular mass of 64 kD. Coimmunoprecipitation studies
indicated that CD40bp interacts with CD40 in human B cells. Hu et al.
(1994) suggested that CD40bp, along with TRAF1 and TRAF2, comprise a
family of proteins that associate with the cytoplasmic faces of the TNFR
family and have in common a TRAF domain.

Independently, Sato et al. (1995) and Cheng et al. (1995) identified
CD40bp, designating it CAP1 (CD40-associated protein-1) and CRAF1 (CD40
receptor-associated factor 1), respectively. Sato et al. (1995)
demonstrated that CAP1 binds specifically to the cytoplasmic domain of
CD40, but not to that of TNFR1, TNFR2, or FAS. The C-terminal TRAF
domain of CAP1 was sufficient to mediate binding to CD40 and
homodimerization. Cheng et al. (1995) isolated mouse and human CRAF1
cDNAs. The predicted 568-amino acid human protein is 96% identical to
mouse CRAF1. These authors divided the TRAF domain into 2 regions:
TRAF-N, the more N-terminal coiled-coil subdomain, and TRAF-C, which was
necessary and sufficient for CRAF1 to interact with CD40. Overexpression
of a truncated cDNA encoding the entire TRAF domain of CRAF1 inhibited
CD40-mediated upregulation of the CD23 (151445) gene, which suggested to
Cheng et al. (1995) that CRAF1 participates in CD40 signaling.

MAPPING

Gross (2012) mapped the TRAF3 gene to chromosome 14q32.32 based on an
alignment of the TRAF3 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC075086) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

The cytoplasmic C terminus of the Epstein-Barr virus latent infection
membrane protein-1 (LMP1) is essential for B lymphocyte growth
transformation. LMP1 is an integral membrane protein that has
transforming effects in nonlymphoid cells, and may act by constitutively
activating a common cellular growth factor receptor pathway. Mosialos et
al. (1995) found that CD40bp, which they called LAP1 (LMP1-associated
protein-1), interacted with the LMP1 C-terminal domain. Expression of
LMP1 caused LAP1 and TRAF1 (EBI6) to localize to LMP1 clusters in
lymphoblast plasma membranes, and LMP1 coimmunoprecipitated with these
proteins in cell extracts. LAP1 bound to the cytoplasmic domains of CD40
and LT-beta-R (600979) in vitro, and associated with p80 (TNFR2) in
vivo. Northern blot analysis revealed that LAP1 was expressed as a
full-length 2.8-kb mRNA and an alternatively spliced 1.8-kb mRNA in all
tissues tested. Mosialos et al. (1995) concluded that the interaction of
LAP1 with LMP1 and with the cytoplasmic domains of TNFR family members
is evidence for a central role of this protein as an effector of cell
growth or death signaling pathways.

Dadgostar et al. (2003) determined that the coiled-coil domain of mouse
T3jam (608255) interacted with the isoleucine zipper domain of Traf3.
T3jam did not associate with other Traf family members. Coexpression of
T3jam and Traf3 recruited Traf3 to the detergent-insoluble fraction, and
T3jam and Traf3 synergistically activated JNK (601158), but not nuclear
factor kappa-B (see 164011).

To dissect biochemically Toll-like receptor signaling, Hacker et al.
(2006) established a system for isolating signaling complexes assembled
by dimerized adaptors. Using MyD88 (602170) as a prototypic adaptor,
they identified TRAF3 as a new component of Toll/interleukin-1 receptor
signaling complexes that is recruited along with TRAF6 (602355). Using
myeloid cells from Traf3- and Traf6-deficient mice, Hacker et al. (2006)
demonstrated that TRAF3 is essential for the induction of type I
interferons and the antiinflammatory cytokine interleukin-10 (IL10;
124092), but is dispensable for expression of proinflammatory cytokines.
In fact, Traf3-deficient cells overproduced proinflammatory cytokines
owing to defective Il10 production. Despite their structural similarity,
the functions of TRAF3 and TRAF6 are largely distinct. TRAF3 is also
recruited to the adaptor TRIF (607601) and is required for marshalling
the protein kinase TBK1 (604834) into Toll/interleukin-1 receptor
signaling complexes, thereby explaining its unique role in activation of
the interferon response.

Oganesyan et al. (2006) demonstrated that cells lacking TRAF3 are
defective in type I interferon responses activated by several different
Toll-like receptors. Furthermore, they showed that TRAF3 associates with
the Toll-like receptor adaptors TRIF and IRAK1 (300283), as well as
downstream IRF3/7 kinases TBK1 and IKK-epsilon (605048), suggesting that
TRAF3 serves as a critical link between Toll-like receptor adaptors and
downstream regulatory kinases important for IRF activation. In addition
to TLR stimulation, Oganesyan et al. (2006) showed that TRAF3-deficient
fibroblasts are defective in their type I interferon response to direct
infection with vesicular stomatitis virus, indicating that TRAF3 is also
an important component of TLR-independent viral recognition pathways.
Oganesyan et al. (2006) concluded that TRAF3 is a major regulator of
type I interferon production and the innate antiviral response.

Production of type I interferon is a critical host defense triggered by
pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) of the innate immune system.
Kayagaki et al. (2007) demonstrated that reduction of DUBA (300713)
augmented the PRR-induced type I interferon response in transfected
HEK293 cells, whereas ectopic expression of DUBA had the converse
effect. DUBA bound TRAF3, an adaptor protein essential for type I
interferon response. TRAF3 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that preferentially
assembled lys63-linked polyubiquitin chains in cotransfection assays.
DUBA selectively cleaved the lys63-linked polyubiquitin chains on TRAF3,
resulting in its dissociation from the downstream signaling complex
containing TBK1. A discrete ubiquitin interaction motif within DUBA was
required for efficient deubiquitination of TRAF3 and optimal suppression
of type I interferon. Kayagaki et al. (2007) concluded that their data
identified DUBA as a negative regulator of innate immune responses.

Cytokine signaling is thought to require assembly of multicomponent
signaling complexes at cytoplasmic segments of membrane-embedded
receptors, in which receptor-proximal protein kinases are activated.
Matsuzawa et al. (2008) reported that, upon ligation, CD40 formed a
complex containing adaptor molecules TRAF2 and TRAF3,
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UBC13 (UBE2N; 603679), cellular inhibitor
of apoptosis protein-1 (CIAP1, or BIRC2; 601712) and -2 (CIAP2, or
BIRC3; 601721), IKK-gamma (IKBKG; 300248), and MEKK1 (MAP3K1; 600982).
TRAF2, UBC13, and IKK-gamma were required for complex assembly and
activation of MEKK1 and MAP kinase cascades. However, the kinases were
not activated unless the complex was translocated from the membrane to
the cytosol upon CIAP1/CIAP2-induced degradation of TRAF3. Matsuzawa et
al. (2008) proposed that this 2-stage signaling mechanism may apply to
other innate immune receptors and may account for spatial and temporal
separation of MAPK and IKK signaling.

Hu et al. (2013) identified the deubiquitinase OTUD7B (611748) as a
pivotal regulator of the noncanonical NF-kappa-B pathway. OTUD7B
deficiency in mice has no appreciable effect on canonical NF-kappa-B
activation but causes hyperactivation of noncanonical NF-kappa-B. In
response to noncanonical NF-kappa-B stimuli, OTUD7B binds and
deubiquitinates TRAF3, thereby inhibiting TRAF3 proteolysis and
preventing aberrant noncanonical NF-kappa-B activation. Consequently,
the OTUD7B deficiency results in B-cell hyperresponsiveness to antigens,
lymphoid follicular hyperplasia in the intestinal mucosa, and elevated
host-defense ability against an intestinal bacterial pathogen,
Citrobacter rodentium. Hu et al. (2013) concluded that their findings
established OTUD7B as a crucial regulator of signal-induced noncanonical
NF-kappa-B activation, and indicated a mechanism of immune regulation
that involves OTUD7B-mediated deubiquitination and stabilization of
TRAF3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Braggio et al. (2009) identified biallelic inactivation of TRAF3 in 3
(5.3%) of 57 Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia (WM; see 153600) samples.
TRAF3 inactivation was associated with transcriptional activation of
NF-kappa-B (NFKB1; 164011). In addition, 1 of 24 patients with a 6q
deletion had an inactivating somatic mutation in TNFAIP3 (191163),
another negative regulator of NF-kappa-B. Monoallelic deletions of
chromosome 6q23, including the TNFAIP3 gene, were identified in 38% of
patients, suggesting that haploinsufficiency can predispose to the
development of WM. The results indicated that mutational activation of
the NF-kappa-B pathway plays a role in the pathogenesis of WM.

Perez de Diego et al. (2010) investigated an 18-year-old French female
who had suffered from herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE; 614849) at age 4
years and who lacked mutations in either the UNC93B1 (608204) or TLR3
(603029) genes. They identified a heterozygous C-to-T substitution at
position 352 in exon 4 of the TRAF3 gene, resulting in a nonconservative
missense change, arg118 to trp (R118W; 601896.0001). The mutation was
not found in her parents or brothers, and none had a history of HSE.
RT-PCR analysis of the patient's cells detected normal levels of TRAF3
mRNA, but Western blot analysis showed severely reduced levels of TRAF3
protein. Responsiveness to TLR3 agonists was impaired, as indicated by
deficient NFKB activation and poor production of IFNB (147640), IFNL
(IL29; 607403), and IL6 (147620). Expression of wildtype and mutant
alleles in cell lines showed that the mutant was dominant-negative.
TRAF3-deficient fibroblasts had impaired type I and type III
IFN-dependent control of viruses and deficient responses through the
TNFR (e.g., TNFRSF5; 109535) pathways. Perez de Diego et al. (2010)
concluded that, whereas complete Traf3 deficiency is neonatal lethal in
mice, decreases in TRAF3 production and function result in
predisposition to HSE, a condition that is usually fatal if untreated.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HERPES SIMPLEX ENCEPHALITIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 3
TRAF3, ARG118TRP

Perez de Diego et al. (2010) reported a female French patient with
herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE; 614849) at age 4 years who was healthy
without prophylaxis and showed normal resistance to other infectious
diseases, including other herpesvirus family members, at age 18 years.
They identified a de novo heterozygous 352C-T transition in exon 4 of
the TRAF3 gene, resulting in an arg118-to-trp (R118W) substitution, in
this patient, whose HSE was successfully treated with acyclovir for 3
weeks.

REFERENCE 1. Braggio, E.; Keats, J. J.; Leleu, X.; Van Wier, S.; Jimenez-Zepeda,
V. H.; Valdez, R.; Schop, R. F. J.; Price-Troska, T.; Henderson, K.;
Sacco, A.; Azab, F.; Greipp, P.; and 11 others: Identification
of copy number abnormalities and inactivating mutations in two negative
regulators of nuclear factor-kappa-B signaling pathways in Waldenstrom's
macroglobulinemia. Cancer Res. 69: 3579-3588, 2009.

2. Cheng, G.; Cleary, A. M.; Ye, Z.; Hong, D. I.; Lederman, S.; Baltimore,
D.: Involvement of CRAF1, a relative of TRAF, in CD40 signaling. Science 267:
1494-1498, 1995.

3. Dadgostar, H.; Doyle, S. E.; Shahangian, A.; Garcia, D. E.; Cheng,
G.: T3JAM, a novel protein that specifically interacts with TRAF3
and promotes the activation of JNK. FEBS Lett. 553: 403-407, 2003.

4. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/5/2012.

5. Hacker, H.; Redecke, V.; Blagoev, B.; Kratchmarova, I.; Hsu, L.-C.;
Wang, G. G.; Kamps, M. P.; Raz, E.; Wagner, H.; Hacker, G.; Mann,
M.; Karin, M.: Specificity in Toll-like receptor signalling through
distinct effector functions of TRAF3 and TRAF6. Nature 439: 204-207,
2006.

6. Hu, H.; Brittain, G. C.; Chang, J.-H.; Puebla-Osorio, N.; Jin,
J.; Zal, Z.; Xiao, Y.; Cheng, X.; Chang, M.; Fu, Y.-X.; Zal, T.; Zhu,
C.; Sun, S.-C.: OTUD7B controls noncanonical NF-kappa-B activation
through deubiquitination of TRAF3. Nature 494: 371-374, 2013.

7. Hu, H. M.; O'Rourke, K.; Boguski, M. S.; Dixit, V. M.: A novel
RING finger protein interacts with the cytoplasmic domain of CD40. J.
Biol. Chem. 269: 30069-30072, 1994.

8. Kayagaki, N.; Phung, Q.; Chan, S.; Chaudhari, R.; Quan, C.; O'Rourke,
K. M.; Eby, M.; Pietras, E.; Cheng, G.; Bazan, J. F.; Zhang, Z.; Arnott,
D.; Dixit, V. M.: DUBA: a deubiquitinase that regulates type I interferon
production. Science 318: 1628-1632, 2007.

9. Matsuzawa, A.; Tseng, P.-H.; Vallabhapurapu, S.; Luo, J.-L.; Zhang,
W.; Wang, H.; Vignali, D. A. A.; Gallagher, E.; Karin, M.: Essential
cytoplasmic translocation of a cytokine receptor-assembled signaling
complex. Science 321: 663-668, 2008. Note: Erratum: Science 322:
375 only, 2008.

10. Mosialos, G.; Birkenbach, M.; Yalamanchili, R.; VanArsdale, T.;
Ware, C.; Kieff, E.: The Epstein-Barr virus transforming protein
LMP1 engages signaling proteins for the tumor necrosis factor receptor
family. Cell 80: 389-399, 1995.

11. Oganesyan, G.; Saha, S. K.; Guo, B.; He, J. Q.; Shahangian, A.;
Zarnegar, B.; Perry, A.; Cheng, G.: Critical role of TRAF3 in the
Toll-like receptor-dependent and -independent antiviral response. Nature 439:
208-211, 2006.

12. Perez de Diego, R.; Sancho-Shimizu, V.; Lorenzo, L.; Puel, A.;
Plancoulaine, S.; Picard, C.; Herman, M.; Cardon, A.; Durandy, A.;
Bustamante, J.; Vallabhapurapu, S.; Bravo, J.; and 12 others: Human
TRAF3 adaptor molecule deficiency leads to impaired Toll-like receptor
3 response and susceptibility to herpes simplex encephalitis. Immunity 33:
400-411, 2010.

13. Sato, T.; Irie, S.; Reed, J. C.: A novel member of the TRAF family
of putative signal transducing proteins binds to the cytoplasmic domain
of CD40. FEBS Lett. 358: 113-118, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/21/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/5/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/4/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/15/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/28/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/7/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/1/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/13/2003
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 6/11/1999

CREATED Lori M. Kelman: 3/20/1997

EDITED alopez: 04/02/2013
terry: 3/21/2013
joanna: 12/7/2012
mgross: 10/5/2012
terry: 10/4/2012
wwang: 1/15/2010
ckniffin: 12/22/2009
alopez: 11/18/2008
mgross: 8/28/2008
terry: 8/28/2008
alopez: 5/7/2008
wwang: 4/23/2008
alopez: 5/3/2006
terry: 5/1/2006
mgross: 11/13/2003
alopez: 6/11/1999
carol: 6/18/1998
mark: 9/9/1997
alopez: 8/1/1997
alopez: 7/23/1997

602893	TITLE *602893 KILLER CELL LECTIN-LIKE RECEPTOR, SUBFAMILY C, MEMBER 4; KLRC4
;;NKG2F
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Plougastel and Trowsdale (1997) identified a gene located 25 kb from the
3-prime end of NKG2A (161555) that they designated NKG2F. By genomic
sequencing and RT-PCR, they determined that the complete NKG2D (611817)
transcript is a splice variant of NKG2F that shares the same first 4
exons. There is a consensus splice donor site within the fourth exon. In
the long 13-exon NKG2D mRNA this donor site is spliced to exon 5. In the
shorter NKG2F cDNA, the donor site is not used, and the fourth exon
contains an additional 245 bp. Sequence analysis showed that both
transcripts could encode the same predicted 158-amino acid protein, and
that the second open reading frame spanning the last 6 exons of NKG2D is
probably not translated. The NKG2F/NKG2D protein does not contain an
extracellular lectin domain, but does have a 24-amino acid motif in the
extracellular region that is 100% identical to that of other NKG2 family
members.

Glienke et al. (1998) confirmed that, in some cases, part of the fourth
exon of NKG2F is spliced to the 5-prime end of NKG2D, which has only a
low similarity to the other NKG2 genes. They noted, however, that
additional NKG2D cDNAs have been isolated that do not encompass any
NKG2F sequences, suggesting that a functional NKG2D-specific promoter
exists.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RT-PCR and Western blot analysis, Kim et al. (2004) showed that
NKG2F was expressed intracellularly in natural killer (NK) cells.
Immunoprecipitation analysis revealed failure of NKG2F to associate with
CD94 (KLRD1; 602894), possibly explaining the lack of surface
expression. Flow cytometric analysis demonstrated association of NKG2F
with DAP12 (TYROBP; 604142), indicating activation potential. However,
phosphorylation did not occur on tyrosine in the immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based inhibitory motif (ITIM) of NKG2F, suggesting that the
motif is a mock ITIM. Kim et al. (2004) concluded that NKG2F may have
as-yet-unidentified partners and functions or that it may be a vestigial
gene product.

GENE STRUCTURE

Glienke et al. (1998) determined that the NKG2C (602891), NKG2E
(602892), and NKG2F genes are highly similar except for variability at
their 3-prime ends. The NKG2C gene contains 6 exons, whereas NKG2E has 7
exons and NKG2F has only 4 exons.

MAPPING

By analysis of a cosmid contig, Plougastel and Trowsdale (1998) found
that the NKG2F and NKG2D genes and other members of the NKG2 gene family
are clustered within 350 kb on chromosome 12p13.2-p12.3. This cluster is
located within the NK complex, a region that contains C-type lectin
genes preferentially expressed on NK cells.

REFERENCE 1. Glienke, J.; Sobanov, Y.; Brostjan, C.; Steffens, C.; Nguyen, C.;
Lehrach, H.; Hofer, E.; Francis, F.: The genomic organization of
NKG2C, E, F, and D receptor genes in the human natural killer gene
complex. Immunogenetics 48: 163-173, 1998.

2. Kim, D.-K.; Kabat, J.; Borrego, F.; Sanni, T. B.; You, C.; Coligan,
J. E.: Human NKG2F is expressed and can associate with DAP12. Molec.
Immun. 41: 53-62, 2004.

3. Plougastel, B.; Trowsdale, J.: Cloning of NKG2-F, a new member
of the NKG2 family of human natural killer cell receptor genes. Europ.
J. Immun. 27: 2835-2839, 1997.

4. Plougastel, B.; Trowsdale, J.: Sequence analysis of a 62-kb region
overlapping the human KLRC cluster of genes. Genomics 49: 193-199,
1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/5/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/20/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/25/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/3/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/2/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/10/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/10/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/21/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/22/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/20/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/16/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/15/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/11/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/31/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/4/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/8/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/28/1999

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/24/1998

EDITED mgross: 02/25/2008
terry: 2/5/2008
alopez: 8/28/2007
terry: 8/20/2007
alopez: 6/28/2007
terry: 6/14/2007
mgross: 11/3/2006
terry: 11/1/2006
mgross: 10/25/2006
mgross: 5/3/2006
mgross: 5/2/2006
mgross: 11/10/2005
alopez: 10/12/2005
terry: 10/10/2005
wwang: 6/3/2005
terry: 6/1/2005
mgross: 1/21/2005
alopez: 6/3/2003
mgross: 5/22/2003
alopez: 1/2/2003
mgross: 12/20/2002
alopez: 10/16/2002
mgross: 5/15/2002
alopez: 3/12/2002
alopez: 2/11/2002
mgross: 2/11/2002
alopez: 2/11/2002
mgross: 10/31/2001
mgross: 5/4/2001
mgross: 3/8/2001
alopez: 7/30/1999
carol: 7/28/1999
alopez: 9/3/1998
alopez: 8/20/1998
alopez: 7/24/1998

601883	TITLE *601883 DNA FRAGMENTATION FACTOR, 40-KD, BETA SUBUNIT; DFFB
;;DFF2;;
DFF40;;
DEOXYRIBONUCLEASE III, CASPASE-ACTIVATED;;
CASPASE-ACTIVATED DNase; CAD
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The DFFB protein is activated during apoptosis and mediates
cell-autonomous apoptotic DNA degradation (summary by Kawane et al.,
2003).

CLONING

By screening human cDNA libraries for sequences similar to that of mouse
caspase-activated DNase (Cad), Mukae et al. (1998) isolated a human CAD
cDNA. The overall identity of human CAD to mouse CAD was 75.9% at the
amino acid sequence level. The positions of 10 cysteine residues were
conserved between human and mouse CAD proteins The human CAD cDNA was
found to be expressed in cells that easily undergo DNA fragmentation in
response to apoptotic stimuli, but not in those that do not show
apoptotic DNA fragmentation. Introduction of a CAD expression vector
resulted in enhanced DNA fragmentation. Northern blot analysis showed
that CAD mRNA is expressed in a limited number of human tissues,
including pancreas, spleen, prostate, and ovary.

GENE FUNCTION

Apoptosis is a cell death process that removes toxic and/or useless
cells during mammalian development. The apoptotic process is accompanied
by shrinkage and fragmentation of the cells and nuclei and degradation
of the chromosomal DNA into nucleosomal units. The DNA fragmentation
factor (DFF) described by Liu et al. (1997) is a heterodimer of 40-kD
(DFFB) and 45-kD (DFFA; 601882) subunits. The authors showed that DFFA
is the substrate for caspase-3 (CASP3; 600636) and triggers DNA
fragmentation during apoptosis.

Liu et al. (1998) reported the reconstitution of a pathway that leads to
the apoptotic changes in nuclei by using recombinant DNA fragmentation
factor. Coexpression of the 40- and 45-kD subunits was required to
generate recombinant DFF, which becomes activated when DFF45 is cleaved
by caspase-3. The cleaved fragments of DFF45 dissociate from the DFF40,
the active component of DFF. Purified DFF40 exhibited an intrinsic DNase
activity that was markedly stimulated by chromatin-associated proteins
histone H1 and high mobility group proteins. DFF40 also triggered
chromatin condensation when incubated with nuclei. These data suggested
that DFF40 is sufficient to trigger both DNA fragmentation and chromatin
condensation during apoptosis.

Binding of the Fas ligand (FASL; 134638), also known as apoptosis
antigen ligand-1 (APT1LG1), a member of the tumor necrosis factor
family, to its receptor Fas (134637), also known as apoptosis antigen 1
(APT1), causes trimerization of the receptor (summary by Mukae et al.,
1998). The trimerized receptor recruits caspase-8 (CASP8; 601763), also
known as apoptosis-related cysteine protease, through the adaptor
molecule FADD (602457), which stands for 'Fas-associating protein with
death domain;' the trimerized receptor activates CASP8 at the plasma
membrane by forming the death-inducing signaling complex. Activated
CASP8 sequentially activates other members of the caspase family, such
as CASP3 and CASP6 (601532), which act downstream in the caspase
cascade. The activated caspases then cleave various cellular substrates
to cause the morphologic cellular changes observed during apoptosis. The
CAD DNase can be activated by CASP3 and is involved in the degradation
of chromosomal DNA into nucleosomal units during apoptosis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Judson et al. (2000) found that the DFFB gene contains 7 coding exons
spanning 10 kb.

MAPPING

By FISH, Mukae et al. (1998) localized the functional CAD gene to
1p36.3.

By FISH, Judson et al. (2000) showed that DFFB lies distal to DFFA. They
also mapped a processed DFFB pseudogene to chromosome 9.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Judson et al. (2000) performed exhaustive mutation screening of 41
neuroblastomas and other tumors in which a 1p36 tumor suppressor gene
had been implicated; no tumor-specific mutations were found. A coding
region polymorphism was used to demonstrate uniformly biallelic
expression in human fetal DFFB transcripts. Since the putative
neuroblastoma tumor suppressor gene in distal 1p36 is predicted to be
maternally expressed, the lack of imprinting and absence of somatic
mutations in DFFB indicate that it probably is not the neuroblastoma
tumor suppressor gene.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kawane et al. (2003) generated healthy mice deficient in Cad. Cad -/-
thymocytes did not produce DNase activity in response to Casp3, which
cleaves the Cad binding partner, Icad (DFFA), and the cells did not
undergo apoptosis. However, embryonic thymic macrophages from wildtype
mice, but not from DNase2 (126350)-deficient mice, were capable of
digesting the nuclei and degrading the DNA of both wildtype and Cad -/-
thymocytes. Kawane et al. (2003) concluded that CAD in apoptotic cells
and DNASE2 in macrophages cooperatively degrade DNA in apoptotic cells.
The thymus was much smaller and less cellular in Dnase2 -/- mice than in
Cad -/- or wildtype mice and contained many foci with undigested DNA.
Kidney defects were also noted in mice lacking Dnase2. Expression of
Ifna1 (147660) and Ifnb (147640) was not detectable in Cad-deficient
mice, but both Ifnb and Ifng (147570) were upregulated in
Dnase2-deficient mice and even more upregulated in double-knockout
animals, suggesting that undigested DNA from apoptotic cells can
activate innate immunity leading to defects in thymic development.

REFERENCE 1. Judson, H.; van Roy, N.; Strain, L.; Vandesompele, J.; Van Gele,
M.; Speleman, F.; Bonthron, D. T.: Structure and mutation analysis
of the gene encoding DNA fragmentation factor 40 (caspase-activated
nuclease), a candidate neuroblastoma tumour suppressor gene. Hum.
Genet. 106: 406-413, 2000.

2. Kawane, K.; Fukuyama, H.; Yoshida, H.; Nagase, H.; Ohsawa, Y.;
Uchiyama, Y.; Okada, K.; Iida, T.; Nagata, S.: Impaired thymic development
in mouse embryos deficient in apoptotic DNA degradation. Nature Immun. 4:
138-144, 2003.

3. Liu, X.; Li, P.; Widlak, P.; Zou, H.; Luo, X.; Garrard, W. T.;
Wang, X.: The 40-kDa subunit of DNA fragmentation factor induces
DNA fragmentation and chromatin condensation during apoptosis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 8461-8466, 1998.

4. Liu, X.; Zou, H.; Slaughter, C.; Wang, X.: DFF, a heterodimeric
protein that functions downstream of caspase-3 to trigger DNA fragmentation
during apoptosis. Cell 89: 175-184, 1997.

5. Mukae, N.; Enari, M.; Sakahira, H.; Fukuda, Y.; Inazawa, J.; Toh,
H.; Nagata, S.: Molecular cloning and characterization of human caspase-activated
DNase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 9123-9128, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/9/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/12/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/14/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/11/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/20/1997

EDITED alopez: 03/02/2012
alopez: 3/9/2010
alopez: 2/28/2003
mgross: 1/9/2003
mcapotos: 5/24/2000
mcapotos: 5/19/2000
terry: 5/12/2000
mgross: 1/19/2000
carol: 9/14/1998
carol: 8/12/1998
terry: 8/11/1998
mark: 11/5/1997
terry: 6/24/1997
alopez: 6/20/1997

609504	TITLE *609504 MICROSPHERULE PROTEIN 1; MCRS1
;;p78
MICROSPHERULE PROTEIN, 58-KD, INCLUDED; MSP58, INCLUDED;;
MICROSPHERULE PROTEIN 2, INCLUDED; MCRS2, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using the herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1 protein ICP22 as bait in a yeast
2-hybrid screen of a HeLa cell cDNA library, followed by screening a
HeLa cell cDNA library, Bruni and Roizman (1998) cloned MCRS1, which
they designated p78. The deduced 534-amino acid protein contains
potential nuclear localization signals in its N-terminal half and a
leucine zipper region in its C-terminal half. Western blot analysis
detected a major p78 doublet at about 78 kD and minor bands at about 62
and 55 kD. In vitro transcription-translation of p78 cDNA resulted in a
55-kD protein, suggesting that the bands at 78 kD represent highly
modified proteins. Western blot analysis of synchronized HeLa cells
detected p78 expression only in early S phase. It was not expressed in
nondividing HeLa cells or human foreskin fibroblasts. Immunolocalization
of p78 in HeLa cells detected the protein predominantly in nuclei.
However, in Hep-2 liver carcinoma cells, p78 localized to both nuclei
and cytoplasm, and in HSV-infected Hep-2 cells, it localized in a few
dense nuclear bodies or at the nuclear membrane.

By yeast 2-hybrid screening using NOL1 (164031) as bait, followed by PCR
of a HeLa cell cDNA library, Ren et al. (1998) cloned MSP58. The deduced
462-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 51.8 kD and
shares 96.8% amino acid identity with mouse Msp58. The N-terminal half
of MSP58 contains a serine-rich region, a nucleolar localization signal,
and a monopartite nuclear localization signal, and the C-terminal half
contains a coiled-coil region. Northern blot analysis detected a major
1.9-kb MSP58 transcript in all 8 tissues examined, with highest
expression in testis and lowest expression in colon. Western blot
analysis detected a 58-kD MSP58 protein in fractionated HeLa cell
nucleoli. Double-immunolabeling experiments found MSP58 within nucleolar
microspherules, where it colocalized with fibrillarin (FBL; 134795).

Using the telomerase-inhibitory protein LPTS (PINX1; 606505) as bait in
a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a brain cDNA library, Song et al. (2004)
cloned an MCRS1 variant that they designated MCRS2. The deduced MCRS2
protein contains 475 amino acids. Song et al. (2004) determined that the
MCRS1/p78, MSP58, and MCRS2 proteins differ only in their N termini and
are likely the products of variable spliced transcripts. All 3 isoforms
have a C-terminal forkhead-associated (FHA) domain, which mediates
protein-protein interactions and is associated with transcriptional
regulation, DNA repair, and cell-cycle progression. PCR analysis
detected MCRS1 and MCRS2 expression in brain and liver cDNA libraries. A
human hepatoma cell line expressed MCRS2 protein only in early S phase.

GENE FUNCTION

Bruni and Roizman (1998) found that p78 interacted specifically with the
HSV-1 protein ICP22 in nuclear extracts prepared from HSV-infected HeLa
cells.

Using truncation mutants in a yeast 2-hybrid assay, Ren et al. (1998)
determined that the C-terminal half of MCRS1 contains the NOL1-binding
site. Overexpression of MSP58 in COS-7 cells caused a 15-fold increase
in nucleolar volume. Inhibition of pre-rRNA transcription by actinomycin
D caused a relocalization of MSP58 from nucleolar microspherules to
'caps' containing the fibrillar centers. ELISA of sucrose density
fractions of HeLa cell nuclear extracts demonstrated comigration of
MSP58, fibrillarin, and NOL1 in nucleolar particulates.

Lin and Shih (2002) found that MSP58 interacted with DAXX (603186), an
adaptor protein associated with FAS (TNFRSF6; 134637) signaling and
caspase-independent cell death. DAXX interacted with MSP58 in vitro and
in vivo, and MSP58 overexpression correlated with sequestration of DAXX
from a diffuse nuclear distribution to the nucleolus. MSP58
overexpression relieved DAXX-mediated transcriptional repression. Lin
and Shih (2002) concluded that translocation of the MSP58-DAXX complex
to the nucleolus results in derepression of DAXX-regulated genes.

By in vitro pull-down assays, Song et al. (2004) confirmed an
interaction between MCRS2 and LPTS. The 2 proteins colocalized in
transfected cells, particularly in nucleoli and more weakly at telomere
speckles. The N-terminal 216 amino acids of MCRS2 were sufficient to
direct telomere localization. Overexpression of this MCRS2 N-terminal
region in a hepatoma cell line caused progressive shortening of
telomeres during passage, whereas control cells maintained telomere
length. Song et al. (2004) found that MCRS2 also associated with TERT
(187270) and inhibited telomerase activity in vitro in a
concentration-dependent manner.

By immunoprecipitation analysis, Shimono et al. (2005) found that MCRS1
interacted with MI2-beta (CHD4; 603277), RFP (TRIM27; 602165), and UBF
(UBTF; 600673). Yeast 2-hybrid screening showed that the central region
of MCRS1 interacted with the ATPase/helicase region of MI2-beta and the
coiled-coil region of RFP. Confocal microscopy demonstrated
colocalization of MCRS1, MI2-beta, RFP, and UBF in nucleoli. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that MCRS1, MI2-beta, and RFP
associated with rDNA and were involved in transactivation of ribosomal
gene transcription, which could be downregulated by small interfering
RNA-mediated downregulation of MCRS1, MI2-beta, and RFP. Shimono et al.
(2005) concluded that MI2-beta and RFP, which are involved in
transcriptional repression in the nucleus, associate with MCRS1 in the
nucleolus and are involved in activation of rRNA transcription.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the MCRS1
gene to chromosome 12 (TMAP RH77809).

REFERENCE 1. Bruni, R.; Roizman, B.: Herpes simplex virus 1 regulatory protein
ICP22 interacts with a new cell cycle-regulated factor and accumulates
in a cell cycle-dependent fashion in infected cells. J. Virol. 72:
8525-8531, 1998.

2. Lin, D.-Y.; Shih, H.-M.: Essential role of the 58-kDa microspherule
protein in the modulation of Daxx-dependent transcriptional repression
as revealed by nucleolar sequestration. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 25446-25456,
2002.

3. Ren, Y.; Busch, R. K.; Perlaky, L.; Busch, H.: The 58-kDa microspherule
protein (MSP58), a nucleolar protein, interacts with nucleolar protein
p120. Europ. J. Biochem. 253: 734-742, 1998.

4. Shimono, K.; Shimono, Y.; Shimokata, K.; Ishiguro, N.; Takahashi,
M.: Microspherule protein 1, Mi-2-beta, and RET finger protein associate
in the nucleolus and up-regulate ribosomal gene transcription. J.
Biol. Chem. 280: 39436-39447, 2005.

5. Song, H.; Li, Y.; Chen, G.; Xing, Z.; Zhao, J.; Yokoyama, K. K.;
Li, T.; Zhao, M.: Human MCRS2, a cell-cycle-dependent protein, associates
with LPTS/PinX1 and reduces the telomere length. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 316: 1116-1123, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/2/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/27/2005

EDITED mgross: 11/06/2006
mgross: 11/6/2006
terry: 11/2/2006
terry: 2/3/2006
mgross: 7/27/2005

605232	TITLE *605232 PROTEIN KINASE, LYSINE-DEFICIENT 1; WNK1
;;PROSTATE-DERIVED STERILE 20-LIKE KINASE; PSK;;
PRKWNK1;;
KDP;;
KIAA0344
WNK1/HSN2 ISOFORM, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Nagase et al. (1997) cloned a WNK1 cDNA, which they called KIAA0344. The
deduced protein contains 1,246 amino acids. RT-PCR detected highest
expression in kidney.

Using degenerate PCR against conserved kinase catalytic subdomains,
Moore et al. (2000) cloned human WNK1, which they called PSK. PSK
belongs to the STE20 family of serine-threonine kinases. The PSK protein
contains 1,235 amino acids and has an N-terminal kinase domain. PSK was
ubiquitously expressed in all tissues examined by Northern blot
analysis, with strongest expression in testis.

Xu et al. (2000) isolated a full-length rat cDNA encoding Wnk1 and
identified homologs in various species, including partial human
sequences. The N-terminal half of the deduced 2,126-amino acid rat
protein has a proline-rich region, followed by a serine/threonine kinase
domain and coiled-coil region, and the C-terminal half has a
proline-rich region and coiled-coil region. Wnk1 contains a cysteine
instead of the usual lysine at a key position in its active site.
Immunoblot analysis detected an endogenous 230-kD protein in rat brain
and several mammalian cell lines, including human embryonic kidney
(HEK293) cells. Most endogenous WNK1 protein was found in the
particulate fraction of HEK293 cells, suggesting that WNK1 is associated
with membranes or the cytoskeleton. Immunofluorescence analysis of
HEK293 cells transfected with rat Wnk1 revealed cytoplasmic staining.

Wilson et al. (2001) noted that the deduced human and rat WNK1 proteins
share 86% identity. By Northern blot analysis, they observed expression
of human WNK1 in most tissues, with 2 predominant isoforms: a 10-kb
transcript expressed at high levels in the kidney, and a 12-kb
transcript predominant in heart and skeletal muscle. By
immunofluorescence microscopy, Wilson et al. (2001) demonstrated that
WNK1 localizes to the distal convoluted tubule and the cortical
collecting duct, and is also abundant in the medullary collecting duct.

Choate et al. (2003) examined the distribution of WNK1 in extrarenal
tissues. Immunostaining using WNK1-specific antibodies demonstrated that
WNK1 was not present in all cell types; rather, it was predominantly
localized in polarized epithelia, including those lining the lumen of
the hepatic biliary ducts, pancreatic ducts, epididymis, sweat ducts,
colonic crypts, and gallbladder. WNK1 was also found in the basal layers
of epidermis and throughout the esophageal epithelium. Subcellular
localization of WNK1 varied among these epithelia. WNK1 was cytoplasmic
in kidney, colon, gallbladder, sweat duct, skin, and esophagus. In
contrast, it localized to the lateral membrane in bile ducts, pancreatic
ducts, and epididymis. These epithelia are all notable for their
prominent role in chloride-iron flux.

Using primer extension with human leukocyte and kidney RNA, 5-prime RACE
of human heart and kidney cDNA libraries, and RT-PCR of human heart,
skeletal muscle, and kidney RNA, Delaloy et al. (2003) characterized
several WNK1 variants resulting from tissue-specific splicing and the
use of multiple transcriptional start sites and polyadenylation sites.
Two promoters in exon 1 generate 2 ubiquitously expressed WNK1 isoforms
with complete kinase domains. A third promoter in exon 4A generates a
kidney-specific transcript that encodes an N-terminally truncated
protein that is kinase defective. Exon 4A is highly conserved between
human and rodents and encodes a cysteine-rich region. Northern blot
analysis detected a 9-kb transcript expressed predominantly in human
kidney and a 10.5-kb transcript expressed predominantly in skeletal
muscle, heart, and brain. Qualitative RT-PCR detected 10 times more
kinase-defective transcript than kinase domain-containing transcript in
human kidney mRNA. In situ hybridization of adult mouse kidney using an
exon 4A-specific probe revealed expression in kidney cortex,
predominantly in distal convoluted tubules.

- WNK1/HSN2 Isoform

Lafreniere et al. (2004) identified a novel gene, which they designated
HSN2, within the hereditary sensory neuropathy type II (HSAN2; 201300)
critical region on 12p13.33. The HSN2 gene encodes a deduced 434-amino
acid protein. Northern blot analysis of adult human tissues failed to
detect HSN2 transcripts, suggesting that the gene might be expressed at
very low levels. Lafreniere et al. (2004) suggested that the HSN2
protein may play a role in the development and/or maintenance of
peripheral sensory neurons or their supporting Schwann cells.

By Northern blot and RT-PCR analysis using mouse Wnk1, Shekarabi et al.
(2008) concluded that HSN2 is an alternatively spliced exon of WNK1 and
is part of a nervous system-specific isoform of WNK1, which they called
WNK1/HSN2. Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues showed a 10-kb
transcript exclusively expressed in nervous system tissues, including
the spinal cord, brain, and dorsal root ganglia. RT-PCR analysis
demonstrated that the Wnk1/Hsn2 isoform includes either the Hsn2 exon
alone or Hsn2 along with a novel exon 8B and lacks exons 11 and 12.
Immunohistochemical studies confirmed localization of the Wnk1/Hsn2
isoform to mouse nervous system tissues.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wilson et al. (2001) determined that the WNK1 gene contains 28 exons
that span 156 kb of genomic DNA.

Delaloy et al. (2003) identified 2 promoters in exon 1 of the WNK1 gene,
including 1 within the coding region, that generate ubiquitously
expressed WNK1 transcripts. A third promoter, located in the alternative
exon 4A within intron 4, generates a kidney-specific transcript. The
promoters lack TATA boxes, are GC-rich, and contain several
transcription factor-binding sites. A repressor element is present in
the most 5-prime promoter in exon 1. In addition, WNK1 has multiple
transcription start sites in exon 1 and 2 polyadenylation sites at its
3-prime end.

- WNK1/HSN2 Isoform

Lafreniere et al. (2004) determined that the HSN2 gene consists of a
single exon that is located within intron 8 of the WNK1 gene and
transcribed from the same strand. The authors initially concluded that
the WNK1 and HSN2 genes were differentially regulated. Subsequently,
Shekarabi et al. (2008) determined that HSN2 is a nervous-system
specific exon of the WNK1 gene, and they identified a novel exon 8B.

MAPPING

By analysis of a radiation hybrid panel, Nagase et al. (1997) mapped the
WNK1 gene to chromosome 12.

GENE FUNCTION

Moore et al. (2000) found that immunoprecipitated PSK phosphorylated
myelin basic protein (159430) and transfected PSK-stimulated MKK4
(601335) and MKK7 (603014), and activated the c-Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK) mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway (see 603014).
Microinjection of PSK into cells resulted in localization of PSK to a
vesicular compartment and caused a marked reduction in actin stress
fibers. In contrast, C-terminally truncated PSK did not localize to this
compartment or induce a decrease in stress fibers, demonstrating a
requirement for the C terminus. Kinase-defective PSK, carrying a
lys57-to-ala (K57A) mutation, was unable to reduce stress fibers.

Xu et al. (2002) expressed fragments of rat Wnk1 in bacteria and
identified an autoinhibitory region just C-terminal to the kinase
domain. The isolated autoinhibitory domain, which is conserved in all 4
human WNKs, suppressed the activity of the Wnk1 kinase domain. Mutation
of 2 conserved phenylalanines in the autoinhibitory domain (phe524 and
phe526 in rat Wnk1) attenuated its ability to inhibit Wnk1 kinase
activity, and the same mutations in a Wnk1 fragment containing the
autoinhibitory domain increased its kinase activity. Wnk1 expressed in
bacteria was autophosphorylated, and autophosphorylation of ser382 in
the activation loop was required for its activity.

Yang et al. (2003) found that mouse Wnk4 (601844) reduced the plasma
membrane association of the thiazide-sensitive sodium-chloride
cotransporter (NCC, or SLC12A3; 600968) in injected Xenopus oocytes.
They further demonstrated that Wnk1 did not affect Slc12a3-mediated
sodium uptake in oocytes, but coexpression of Wnk1 with both Wnk4 and
Slc12a3 restored sodium uptake to levels observed in oocytes expressing
Slc12a3 alone.

To investigate the mechanisms by which WNK1 and WNK4 interact to
regulate ion transport, Yang et al. (2005) performed experiments in
HEK293 cells and Xenopus oocytes which showed that the WNK4 C terminus
mediates SLC12A3 suppression, that the WNK1 kinase domain interacts with
the WNK4 kinase domain, and that WNK1 inhibition of WNK4 is dependent on
WNK1 catalytic activity and an intact WNK1 protein.

Yang et al. (2007) noted that WNK1, WNK4, and the kidney-specific WNK1
isoform interact to regulate SLC12A3 activity, suggesting that WNKs form
a signaling complex. They found that human WNK3 (300358), which is
expressed by distal tubule cells, interacted with rodent Wnk1 and Wnk4
to regulate SLC12A3 in cultured kidney cells and Xenopus oocytes.
Regulation of SLC12A3 in oocytes resulted from antagonism between WNK3
and Wnk4.

Lee et al. (2004) found that rat Wnk1 selectively bound to and
phosphorylated synaptotagmin-2 (SYT2; 600104) calcium-binding C2
domains. Endogenous Wnk1 and Syt2 coimmunoprecipitated and colocalized
on a subset of secretory granules in a rat insulinoma cell line.
Phosphorylation by Wnk1 increased the amount of Ca(2+) required for Syt2
binding to phospholipid vesicles. Lee et al. (2004) concluded that
phosphorylation of SYT2 by WNK1 can regulate Ca(2+) sensing and the
subsequent Ca(2+)-dependent interactions mediated by synaptotagmin C2
domains.

Lenertz et al. (2005) found that hypertonic stress activated rat Wnk1
when it was expressed in kidney epithelial cells and breast and colon
cancer cell lines. Hypotonic stress led to a modest increase in Wnk1
activity. Gel filtration suggested that Wnk1 exists as a tetramer, and
yeast 2-hybrid analysis revealed interaction between residues 1 to 222
of the Wnk1 N terminus and Wnk1 residues 481 to 660, which contain the
autoinhibitory domain and a coiled-coil region. Lenertz et al. (2005)
found no direct interaction between Wnk1 and Wnk4, but Wnk1
phosphorylated both Wnk2 (606249) and Wnk4, and the Wnk1 autoinhibitory
domain inhibited the catalytic activities of Wnk2 and Wnk4.

Using Xenopus oocytes and Chinese hamster ovary cells, Xu et al. (2005)
showed that WNK1 controls ion permeability by activating SGK1 (602958),
leading to activation of the epithelial sodium channel (see SCNN1A;
600228). Increased WNK1-induced channel activity depended on SGK1 and
the E3 ubiquitin ligase, NEDD4-2 (NEDD4L; 606384).

Alternative splicing of WNK1 produces a kidney-specific short form that
lacks a kinase domain, KS-WNK1, and a more ubiquitous long form, L-WNK1.
Using reconstitution studies in Xenopus oocytes, Wade et al. (2006)
found that rat L-Wnk1 inhibited the K+ channel Kir1.1 (KCNJ1; 600359) by
reducing its cell surface localization, and this inhibition required an
intact kinase domain. Ks-Wnk1 did not directly alter Kir1.1 channel
activity, but it acted as a dominant-negative inhibitor of L-Wnk1 and
released Kir1.1 from inhibition. Acute dietary potassium loading in rats
increased the relative abundance of Ks-Wnk1 to L-Wnk1 transcript and
protein in kidney, indicating that physiologic upregulation of Kir1.1
activity involves a WNK1 isoform switch.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of Jurkat human T cells and
immunoprecipitation analysis of human embryonic kidney cells and HeLa
cells, Anselmo et al. (2006) showed that OSR1 (OXSR1; 604046) and WNK1
interacted through conserved C-terminal motifs. OSR1 was phosphorylated
in a WNK1-dependent manner, and depletion of WNK1 from HeLa cells with
small interfering RNA reduced OSR1 kinase activity. Depletion of either
WNK1 or OSR1 reduced Na-K-Cl cotransporter (NKCC; see 600839) activity,
suggesting that WNK1 and OSR1 are required for NKCC function.

He et al. (2007) showed that mammalian Wnk1 and Wnk4 interacted with the
endocytic scaffold protein intersectin-1 (ITSN1; 602442) and that these
interactions were crucial for stimulation of Romk1 (KCNJ1) endocytosis.
Stimulation of Romk1 endocytosis by Wnk1 and Wnk4 required their
proline-rich motifs, but it did not require their kinase activities.
Pseudohypoaldosteronism II (145260)-causing mutations in Wnk4 enhanced
the interactions of Wnk4 with Itsn1 and Romk1, leading to increased
endocytosis of Romk1.

Yang et al. (2007) showed that coexpression of rodent Wnk1 and Wnk4 with
human CFTR (602421) suppressed CFTR-dependent chloride channel activity
in Xenopus oocytes. The effect of Wnk4 was dose dependent, independent
of Wnk4 kinase activity, and occurred, at least in part, by reducing
CFTR protein abundance at the plasma membrane. In contrast, the effect
of Wnk1 on CFTR activity required Wnk1 kinase activity. Moreover, Wnk1
and Wnk4 exhibited additive CFTR inhibition.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Pseudohypoaldosteronism Type IIC

Wilson et al. (2001) identified WNK1 as the gene mutant in one form of
pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (PHA2C; 614492), an autosomal dominant
disorder characterized by hypertension, hyperkalemia, and renal tubular
acidosis. In a 10-member kindred segregating PHAII, they identified a
41-kb deletion in intron 1 of WNK1 (605232.0001). In the family
previously described by Disse-Nicodeme et al. (2000), they identified a
22-kb deletion within intron 1 of WNK1 (605232.0002). Wilson et al.
(2001) found that affected individuals carrying the 22-kb deletion had a
5-fold increase in the level of WNK1 transcripts in leukocytes relative
to those of their unaffected relatives, thus demonstrating that the
deletion alters WNK1 expression.

- Hereditary Sensory and Autonomic Neuropathy II

Among from 5 families with HSAN2, including 2 from Newfoundland, 2 from
rural Quebec, and 2 from Nova Scotia, Lafreniere et al. (2004)
identified 3 different truncating mutations in the WNK1 gene (594delA,
605232.0003; 918insA, 605232.0004; Q315X, 605232.0005).

Roddier et al. (2005) identified 2 founder mutations in the WNK1 gene
(918insA and Q315X) that were responsible for HSAN2 in the southern part
of Quebec.

Coen et al. (2006) reported 3 unrelated patients with HSAN2 from Italy,
Austria, and Belgium, respectively. All had compound heterozygous or
homozygous truncating mutations in the WNK1 gene, resulting in complete
loss of protein function. All patients had early onset of a severe
sensory neuropathy with mutilating acropathy but without autonomic
dysfunction. Muscle strength was preserved.

- Hypokalemic Salt-Losing Renal Tubulopathy

Zhang et al. (2013) studied 44 Chinese patients with hypokalemia of
unknown cause, metabolic alkalosis, and normal to low blood pressure. In
33 patients, they identified homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for
known mutations in the CLCNKB (602023) or SLC12A3 (600968) genes,
associated with forms of Bartter syndrome (see 607364) and Gitelman
syndrome (263800), respectively. Of the 11 remaining patients, 8 were
heterozygous for a mutation in the SLC12A3 gene, whereas in 3, no
mutation was detected in either gene. Screening for mutations in the
candidate genes WNK1 and WNK4 (601844) revealed heterozygosity for 2
missense mutations in WNK1 (605232.0012 and 605232.0013, respectively)
in 2 of the 11 patients, both of whom were also heterozygous for a known
mutation in SLC12A3, each of which had previously been reported in a
patient diagnosed with Gitelman syndrome (Simon et al., 1996 and Shao et
al., 2008, respectively). No mutations were detected in WNK4. Zhang et
al. (2013) suggested that inactivating mutations in WNK1 may cause
salt-losing renal tubulopathy, which represents a phenotype that is the
converse of PHAII, caused by WNK1 gain-of-function mutations.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

In a girl with HSAN2, Shekarabi et al. (2008) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the WNK1 gene: 1 in the WNK1/HSN2
isoform (605232.0010) and 1 in the WNK1 isoform (605232.0011). She did
not have hypertension. The authors noted that all recessive mutations
associated with the HSAN2 phenotype resulted in truncations of the
WNK1/HSN2 nervous system-specific protein. Disease-causing mutations in
WNK1 resulting in PHA2C were large, heterozygous intronic deletions that
increase the gene expression. This impact on the expression level in
PHA2C patients may explain the absence of hypertension in individuals
affected with HSAN2, as the expression of the WNK1 isoform in which the
HSN2 exon is not incorporated should not be affected. The findings in
their patient suggested that 1 mutation in the HSN2 exon is sufficient
to cause the HSAN2 phenotype when combined with a mutation in WNK1 on
the other allele. Moreover, homozygous mutations disrupting WNK1
isoforms without HSN2 may be lethal, which would explain why all
loss-of-function mutations reported to date have been located in the
HSN2 exon.

ANIMAL MODEL

To accelerate the genetic determination of gene function, Zambrowicz et
al. (2003) developed a sequence-tagged gene-trap library of more than
270,000 mouse embryonic stem cell clones representing mutations in
approximately 60% of mammalian genes. Through the generation and
phenotypic analysis of knockout mice from this resource, they undertook
a functional screen to identify genes regulating physiologic parameters
such as blood pressure. As part of this screen, mice deficient for the
Wnk1 gene were generated and analyzed. Genetic studies in humans had
shown that large intronic deletions in WNK1 lead to its overexpression
and are responsible for pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (Wilson et al.,
2001), an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by hypertension,
increased renal salt reabsorption, and impaired potassium and hydrogen
excretion. Consistent with the human genetic studies, Wnk1 heterozygous
mice displayed a significant decrease in blood pressure. Mice homozygous
for the Wnk1 mutation died during embryonic development before day 13 of
gestation. Zambrowicz et al. (2003) concluded that WNK1 is a regulator
of blood pressure critical for development and illustrated the utility
of a functional screen driven by a sequence-based mutagenesis approach.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE IIC
WNK1, 41-KB DEL, IVS1

In a family with pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (PHA2C; 614492), Wilson
et al. (2001) identified a 41-kb deletion in intron 1 of the WNK1 gene.

.0002
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE IIC
WNK1, 22-KB DEL, IVS1

In a family with pseudohypoaldosteronism type II (PHA2C; 614492)
reported by Disse-Nicodeme et al. (2000), Wilson et al. (2001)
identified a 21,761-bp deletion in intron 1 of the WNK1 gene. Affected
individuals had a 5-fold increase in the level of WNK1 transcripts in
leukocytes compared to those of unaffected family members.

.0003
NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY SENSORY, TYPE II
WNK1, 1-BP DEL, 594A

In affected members of 2 Newfoundland families with hereditary sensory
neuropathy type II (201300), 1 of which was consanguineous, Lafreniere
et al. (2004) identified a homozygous 1-bp deletion in the HSN2 exon of
the WNK1 gene, 594delA, resulting in a frameshift at codon 198 with a
premature termination and a truncated 206-amino acid peptide. Numbering
of this mutation is based on the HSN exon ORF only.

.0004
NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY SENSORY, TYPE II
WNK1, 1-BP INS, 918A

In 2 sisters from Nova Scotia, born to consanguineous parents, with
hereditary sensory neuropathy type II (201300), Lafreniere et al. (2004)
found homozygosity for a 1-bp insertion in the HSN2 exon of the WNK1
gene, 918insA, resulting in a frameshift at codon 307 with a premature
termination and a truncated 318-amino acid peptide. In 2 French Canadian
sisters with HSAN2, the 918insA mutation was in compound heterozygous
state with the Q315X mutation (605232.0005). Numbering of this mutation
is based on the HSN exon ORF only.

Roddier et al. (2005) identified the 918insA mutation in 7 (58%) of 12
HSAN2 patients from the Lanaudiere region of southern Quebec, suggesting
a founder effect. One patient was homozygous, and 6 were compound
heterozygous with the Q315X mutation. Regional carrier frequency of the
918insA mutation was estimated to range from 1 in 260 to 1 in 28.

.0005
NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY SENSORY, TYPE II
WNK1, GLN315TER

In a French Canadian patient with hereditary sensory neuropathy type II
(201300), Lafreniere et al. (2004) found homozygosity for a 943C-T
transition in the HSN2 exon of the WNK1 gene, resulting in a
gln315-to-ter substitution (Q315X) predicted to truncate the protein to
314 amino acids. In 2 French Canadian sisters with HSAN2, the Q315X
mutation was found in compound heterozygous state with the 918insA
mutation (605343.0004) in the HSN2 exon. Numbering of this mutation is
based on the HSN exon ORF only.

In affected members of families with HSAN2 (201300) from the the
southern part of Quebec, Roddier et al. (2005) identified the Q315X
mutation. Nine (56%) of 16 patients were homozygous for the mutation,
and 6 (38%) of 16 patients were compound heterozygous with the 918insA
mutation. Most of the patients were from the Lanaudiere region. Regional
carrier frequency of the Q315X mutation was estimated to range from 1 in
116 to 1 in 18.

.0006
NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY SENSORY, TYPE II
WNK1, 1-BP DEL, 947C

In 4 affected members of a large consanguineous Lebanese family with
hereditary sensory neuropathy type II (201300), Riviere et al. (2004)
identified a homozygous 1-bp deletion (947delC) in the HSN2 exon of the
WNK1 gene, resulting in the loss of 117 amino acids from the protein.
Numbering of this mutation is based on the HSN exon ORF only.

.0007
NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY SENSORY, TYPE II
WNK1, ARG290TER

In a 13-year-old Canadian child of Lebanese origin with HSAN2 (201300),
Roddier et al. (2005) identified a homozygous 868C-T transition in the
HSN2 exon of the WNK1 gene, resulting in an arg290-to-ter (R290X)
substitution. The authors noted that this mutation differed from that
reported in another Lebanese family (605232.0006).

.0008
NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY SENSORY, TYPE II
WNK1, 1-BP INS, 1134T

In a 28-year-old Korean man with HSAN2 (201300), Cho et al. (2006)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the HSN2 exon of
the WNK1 gene: a 1-bp insertion (1134insT) and a 217C-T transition,
resulting in a gln73-to-ter (Q73X; 605232.0009) substitution. The
patient had childhood onset of the disorder and amputation of both lower
limbs and several fingers due to ulceration and infection. The patient's
unaffected mother was heterozygous for the 1-bp insertion, and 3
unaffected sibs were heterozygous for the Q73X mutation. The father was
deceased. Numbering of this mutation is based on the HSN exon ORF only.

Takagi et al. (2006) identified homozygosity for the 1134insT mutation
in a Japanese patient with HSAN2, born of consanguineous parents. The
insertion results in frameshift and premature termination of the protein
at residue 378. The patient noted that he felt no pain in his
extremities during his teenage years. He had recurrent skin ulcers on
his fingers and toes resulting in spontaneous or surgical amputation of
several digit tips. Physical examination at age 39 years showed no
autonomic involvement.

.0009
NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY SENSORY, TYPE II
WNK1, GLN73TER

See Cho et al. (2006) and 605232.0008.

.0010
NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY SENSORY, TYPE II
WNK1, 1-BP DEL, 639A

In an 18-year-old French girl with HSAN2 (201300), Shekarabi et al.
(2008) identified a heterozygous 1-bp deletion (639delA) in the HSN2
exon of the WNK1 gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature
termination. Numbering of this mutation is based on the HSN exon ORF
only. Her unaffected father and brother also carried the heterozygous
mutation. Screening of the rest of the WNK1/HSN2 isoform did not reveal
any mutations. However, subsequent screening of the girl in other exons
in the WNK1 gene revealed a heterozygous 2-bp deletion (1584_1585delAG;
605232.0011) in exon 6 of the WNK1 gene, which resulted in frameshift at
codon 531 and premature termination at codon 547 (asp531fsX547). This
mutation was inherited from the unaffected mother. Neither the girl nor
the mother showed signs of hypertension. The findings prompted Shekarabi
et al. (2008) to concluded that HSN2 is an alternative exon within WNK1,
rather than an independent gene.

.0011
NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY SENSORY, TYPE II
WNK1, 2-BP DEL, 1584AG

See 605232.0010 and Shekarabi et al. (2008).

.0012
VARIANT OF UNKNOWN SIGNIFICANCE
WNK1, ILE1172MET

This variant is classified as a variant of unknown significance because
its contribution to hypokalemic salt-losing renal tubulopathy (see
241150) has not been confirmed due to the presence of an additional
heterozygous mutation in the SLC12A3 gene (600968).

In a Chinese patient who presented at 10 years of age with fatigue,
numbness, enuresis, and nocturia and was found to have hypokalemia,
metabolic alkalosis, and low to normal blood pressure and to be
heterozygous for a known splice site mutation (7426del13ins12; Shao et
al., 2008) in the SLC12A3 gene, Zhang et al. (2013) identified
heterozygosity for an A-G transition in exon 16 of the WNK1 gene,
resulting in an ile1172-to-met (I1172M) substitution at an
evolutionarily conserved residue within a coiled-coil domain in the C
terminus. The I1172M mutation arose de novo, as neither parent carried
the WNK1 variant, and it was not found in 400 control alleles or
reported in dbSNP or HGMD databases. However, his unaffected mother was
heterozygous for the SLC12A3 indel splice site mutation. Functional
analysis in HEK293 cells using the corresponding rat WNK1 mutation,
I918M, showed reduced SLC12A3 protein membrane expression in vitro when
cotransfected with WNK4, due to complete abolishment of the suppressive
effect of WNK4-mediated inhibition.

.0013
VARIANT OF UNKNOWN SIGNIFICANCE
WNK1, SER2047ASN

This variant is classified as a variant of unknown significance because
its contribution to hypokalemic salt-losing renal tubulopathy (see
241150) has not been confirmed due to the presence of an additional
heterozygous mutation in the SLC12A3 gene (600968).

In a Chinese man who presented at age 26 years with fatigue and
hypotonia and was found to have hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, and
low to normal blood pressure and to be heterozygous for a known missense
mutation (D486N; Simon et al., 1996) in the SLC12A3 gene, Zhang et al.
(2013) identified heterozygosity for a G-A transition in exon 24 of the
WNK1 gene, resulting in a ser2047-to-asn (S2047N) substitution at a
highly conserved residue within a coiled-coil domain in the C terminus.
The S2047N WNK1 mutation was inherited from his father, who also
displayed hypokalemia, alkalosis, and hypotension; the WNK1 variant was
not found in 400 control alleles or reported in dbSNP or HGMD databases.
The affected father and the patient's asymptomatic 2-year-old daughter
also carried the SLC12A3 mutation, which was not found in other
asymptomatic family members.

REFERENCE 1. Anselmo, A. N.; Earnest, S.; Chen, W.; Juang, Y.-C.; Kim, S. C.;
Zhao, Y.; Cobb, M. H.: WNK1 and OSR1 regulate the Na+, K+, 2Cl- cotransporter
in HeLa cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 10883-10888, 2006.

2. Cho, H.-J.; Kim, B. J.; Suh, Y.-L.; An, J.-Y.; Ki, C.-S.: Novel
mutation in the HSN2 gene in a Korean patient with hereditary sensory
and autonomic neuropathy type 2. J. Hum. Genet. 51: 905-908, 2006.

3. Choate, K. A.; Kahle, K. T.; Wilson, F. H.; Nelson-Williams, C.;
Lifton, R. P.: WNK1, a kinase mutated in inherited hypertension with
hyperkalemia, localizes to diverse Cl(-)-transporting epithelia. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 663-668, 2003.

4. Coen, K.; Pareyson, D.; Auer-Grumbach, M.; Buyse, G.; Goemans,
N.; Claeys, K. G.; Verpoorten, N.; Laura, M.; Scaioli, V.; Salmhofer,
W.; Pieber, T. R.; Nelis, E.; De Jonghe, P.; Timmerman, V.: Novel
mutations in the HSN2 gene causing hereditary sensory and autonomic
neuropathy type II. Neurology 66: 748-751, 2006.

5. Delaloy, C.; Lu, J.; Houot, A.-M.; Disse-Nicodeme, S.; Gasc, J.-M.;
Corvol, P.; Jeunemaitre, X.: Multiple promoters in the WNK1 gene:
one controls expression of a kidney-specific kinase-defective isoform. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 23: 9208-9221, 2003.

6. Disse-Nicodeme, S.; Achard, J.-M.; Desitter, I.; Houot, A.-M.;
Fournier, A.; Corvol, P.; Jeunemaitre, X.: A new locus on chromosome
12p13.3 for pseudohypoaldosteronism type II, an autosomal dominant
form of hypertension. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 302-310, 2000.

7. He, G.; Wang, H.-R.; Huang, S.-K.; Huang, C.-L.: Intersectin links
WNK kinases to endocytosis of ROMK1. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 1078-1087,
2007.

8. Lafreniere, R. G.; MacDonald, M. L. E.; Dube, M.-P.; MacFarlane,
J.; O'Driscoll, M.; Brais, B.; Meilleur, S.; Brinkman, R. R.; Dadivas,
O.; Pape, T.; Platon, C.; Radomski, C.; and 14 others: Identification
of a novel gene (HSN2) causing hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy
type II through the study of Canadian genetic isolates. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 74: 1064-1073, 2004.

9. Lafreniere, R. G.; MacDonald, M. L. E.; Dube, M.-P.; MacFarlane,
J.; O'Driscoll, M.; Brais, B.; Meilleur, S.; Brinkman, R. R.; Dadivas,
O.; Pape, T.; Platon, C.; Radomski, C.; and 14 others: Identification
of a novel gene (HSN2) causing hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy
type II through the study of Canadian genetic isolates. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 74: 1064-1073, 2004.

10. Lee, B.-H.; Min, X.; Heise, C. J.; Xu, B.; Chen, S.; Shu, H.;
Luby-Phelps, K.; Goldsmith, E. J.; Cobb, M. H.: WNK1 phosphorylates
synaptotagmin 2 and modulates its membrane binding. Molec. Cell 15:
741-751, 2004.

11. Lenertz, L. Y.; Lee, B.-H.; Min, X.; Xu, B.; Wedin, K.; Earnest,
S.; Goldsmith, E. J.; Cobb, M. H.: Properties of WNK1 and implications
for other family members. J. Biol. Chem. 280: 26653-26658, 2005.

12. Moore, T. M.; Garg, R.; Johnson, C.; Coptcoat, M. J.; Ridley,
A. J.; Morris, J. D. H.: PSK, a novel STE20-like kinase derived from
prostatic carcinoma that activates the c-Jun N-terminal kinase mitogen-activated
protein kinase pathway and regulates actin cytoskeletal organization. J.
Biol. Chem. 275: 4311-4322, 2000.

13. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, I.; Nakajima, D.; Ohira, M.; Seki, N.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; O'Hara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which can code for large
proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4: 141-150, 1997.

14. Riviere, J.-B.; Verlaan, D. J.; Shekarabi, M.; Lafreniere, R.
G.; Benard, M.; Der Kaloustian, V. M.; Shbaklo, Z.; Rouleau, G. A.
: A mutation in the HSN2 gene causes sensory neuropathy type II in
a Lebanese family. Ann. Neurol. 56: 572-575, 2004.

15. Roddier, K.; Thomas, T.; Marleau, G.; Gagnon, A. M.; Dicaire,
M. J.; St-Denis, A.; Gosselin, I.; Sarrazin, A. M.; Larbrisseau, A.;
Lambert, M.; Vanasse, M.; Gaudet, D.; Rouleau, G. A.; Brais, B.:
Two mutations in the HSN2 gene explain the high prevalence of HSAN2
in French Canadians. Neurology 64: 1762-1767, 2005.

16. Shao, L.; Liu, L.; Miao, Z.; Ren, H.; Wang, W.; Lang, Y.; Yue,
S.; Chen, N.: A novel SLC12A3 splicing mutation skipping of two exons
and preliminary screening for alternative splice variants in human
kidney. Am. J. Nephrol. 28: 900-907, 2008.

17. Shekarabi, M.; Girard, N.; Riviere, J.-B.; Dion, P.; Houle, M.;
Toulouse, A.; Lafreniere, R. G.; Vercauteren, F.; Hince, P.; Laganiere,
J.; Rochefort, D.; Faivre, L.; Samuels, M.; Rouleau, G. A.: Mutations
in the nervous system-specific HSN2 exon of WNK1 cause hereditary
sensory neuropathy type II. J. Clin. Invest. 118: 2496-2505, 2008.

18. Simon, D. B.; Nelson-Williams, C.; Bia, M. J.; Ellison, D.; Karet,
F. E.; Molina, A. M.; Vaara, I.; Iwata, F.; Cushner, H. M.; Koolen,
M.; Gainza, F. J.; Gitelman, H. J.; Lifton, R. P.: Gitelman's variant
of Bartter's syndrome, inherited hypokalaemic alkalosis, is caused
by mutations in the thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl cotransporter. Nature
Genet. 12: 24-30, 1996.

19. Takagi, M.; Ozawa, T.; Hara, K.; Naruse, S.; Ishihara, T.; Shimbo,
J.; Igarashi, S.; Tanaka, K.; Onodera, O.; Nishizawa, M.: New HSN2
mutation in Japanese patient with hereditary sensory and autonomic
neuropathy type 2. Neurology 66: 1251-1252, 2006.

20. Wade, J. B.; Fang, L.; Liu, J.; Li, D.; Yang, C.-L.; Subramanya,
A. R.; Maouyo, D.; Mason, A.; Ellison, D. H.; Welling, P. A.: WNK1
kinase isoform switch regulates renal potassium excretion. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 8558-8563, 2006.

21. Wilson, F. H.; Disse-Nicodeme, S.; Choate, K. A.; Ishikawa, K.;
Nelson-Williams, C.; Desitter, I.; Gunel, M.; Milford, D. V.; Lipkin,
G. W.; Achard, J.-M.; Feely, M. P.; Dussol, B.; Berland, Y.; Unwin,
R. J.; Mayan, H.; Simon, D. B.; Farfel, Z.; Jeunemaitre, X.; Lifton,
R. P.: Human hypertension caused by mutations in WNK kinases. Science 293:
1107-1112, 2001.

22. Xu, B.; English, J. M.; Wilsbacher, J. L.; Stippec, S.; Goldsmith,
E. J.; Cobb, M. H.: WNK1, a novel mammalian serine/threonine protein
kinase lacking the catalytic lysine in subdomain II. J. Biol. Chem. 275:
16795-16801, 2000.

23. Xu, B.; Stippec, S.; Chu, P.-Y.; Lazrak, A.; Li, X.-J.; Lee, B.-H.;
English, J. M.; Ortega, B.; Huang, C.-L.; Cobb, M. H.: WNK1 activates
SGK1 to regulate the epithelial sodium channel. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 102: 10315-10320, 2005.

24. Xu, B. E.; Min, X.; Stippec, S.; Lee, B. H.; Goldsmith, E. J.;
Cobb, M. H.: Regulation of WNK1 by an autoinhibitory domain and autophosphorylation. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 48456-48462, 2002.

25. Yang, C.-L.; Angell, J.; Mitchell, R.; Ellison, D. H.: WNK kinases
regulate thiazide-sensitive Na-Cl cotransport. J. Clin. Invest. 111:
1039-1045, 2003.

26. Yang, C.-L.; Liu, X.; Paliege, A.; Zhu, X.; Bachmann, S.; Dawson,
D. C.; Ellison, D. H.: WNK1 and WNK4 modulate CFTR activity. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 353: 535-540, 2007.

27. Yang, C.-L.; Zhu, X.; Ellison, D. H.: The thiazide-sensitive
Na-Cl cotransporter is regulated by a WNK kinase signaling complex. J.
Clin. Invest. 117: 3403-3411, 2007.

28. Yang, C.-L.; Zhu, X.; Wang, Z.; Subramanya, A. R.; Ellison, D.
H.: Mechanisms of WNK1 and WNK4 interaction in the regulation of
thiazide-sensitive NaCl cotransport. J. Clin. Invest. 115: 1379-1387,
2005.

29. Zambrowicz, B. P.; Abuin, A.; Ramirez-Solis, R.; Richter, L. J.;
Piggott, J.; BeltrandelRio, H.; Buxton, E. C.; Edwards, J.; Finch,
R. A.; Friddle, C. J.; Gupta, A.; Hansen, G.; and 22 others: Wnk1
kinase deficiency lowers blood pressure in mice: a gene-trap screen
to identify potential targets for therapeutic intervention. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 14109-14114, 2003.

30. Zhang, C.; Zhu, Y.; Huang, F.; Jiang, G.; Chang, J.; Li, R.:
Novel missense mutations of WNK1 in patients with hypokalemic salt-losing
tubulopathies. Clin. Genet. 83: 545-552, 2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/3/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/23/2009
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 2/5/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/17/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/18/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/5/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/1/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/11/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/11/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/20/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/3/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/23/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/12/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/28/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/14/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/28/2000

EDITED carol: 09/16/2013
carol: 7/3/2013
joanna: 4/25/2013
alopez: 2/27/2012
wwang: 2/6/2009
ckniffin: 1/23/2009
mgross: 2/5/2008
terry: 1/17/2008
mgross: 10/18/2007
terry: 10/18/2007
mgross: 10/5/2006
mgross: 9/6/2006
mgross: 9/1/2006
mgross: 7/11/2006
terry: 7/11/2006
wwang: 6/16/2006
wwang: 6/15/2006
terry: 5/11/2006
carol: 5/26/2005
terry: 5/20/2005
tkritzer: 12/8/2004
tkritzer: 12/7/2004
terry: 12/3/2004
tkritzer: 4/28/2004
terry: 4/23/2004
carol: 3/17/2004
mgross: 2/21/2003
terry: 2/12/2003
alopez: 8/31/2001
terry: 8/28/2001
alopez: 8/14/2001
terry: 8/14/2001
carol: 8/28/2000

