601900	TITLE *601900 INTERFERON REGULATORY FACTOR 4; IRF4
;;LYMPHOCYTE-SPECIFIC IRF; LSIRF;;
MULTIPLE MYELOMA ONCOGENE 1; MUM1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

IRF4 is a transcription factor essential for the development of T
helper-2 (Th2) cells, IL17 (see 603149)-producing Th17 cells, and IL9
(146931)-producing Th9 cells (Staudt et al., 2010).

CLONING

Grossman et al. (1996) cloned a novel human interferon regulatory factor
(IRF) that they named LSIRF for 'lymphocyte-specific IRF.' They reported
that the gene encodes a 450-amino acid polypeptide with a predicted mass
of 51.6 kD. The gene is expressed as a single 5-kb transcript in spleen,
lymphocytes, and melanocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

Grossman et al. (1996) found that expression of LSIRF was induced in T
cells after crosslinking of the T-cell receptor (see 186880).

By fluorescence and confocal microscopy, Negishi et al. (2005)
demonstrated that IRF4 interacted with MYD88 (602170) in the cytoplasm
of human embryonic kidney cells. Mutation and coimmunoprecipitation
analysis showed that IRF4 interacted with the TIR/IL1 region of MYD88.
IRF4 inhibited interaction of MYD88 with IRF5 (607218), which interacts
with the same central region of MYD88 as IRF4, but it did not block
interaction of MYD88 with IRF7 (605047), which binds to the N terminus.
IRF5-dependent gene induction was inhibited by IRF4, and IRF4-deficient
macrophages were hyperresponsive to Toll-like receptor (TLR; see 603030)
stimuli. Negishi et al. (2005) concluded that IRF4 negatively regulates
TLR signaling by selectively competing with IRF5.

Shaffer et al. (2008) used a loss-of-function, RNA interference-based
genetic screen to demonstrate that IRF4 inhibition is toxic to myeloma
cell lines, regardless of transforming oncogenic mechanism. Gene
expression profiling and genomewide chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis uncovered an extensive network of IRF4 target genes and
identified MYC (190080) as a direct target of IRF4 in activated B cells
and myeloma. Unexpectedly, IRF4 was itself a direct target of MYC
transactivation, generating an autoregulatory circuit in myeloma cells.
Shaffer et al. (2008) suggested that although IRF4 is not genetically
altered in most myelomas, they are nonetheless addicted to an aberrant
IRF4 regulatory network that fuses the gene expression programs of
normal plasma cells and activated B cells.

Zheng et al. (2009) showed that in mouse T regulatory cells, high
amounts of IRF4, a transcription factor essential for TH2 effector cell
differentiation, is dependent on Foxp3 (300292) expression. They
proposed that IRF4 expression endows T regulatory cells with the ability
to suppress TH2 responses. Indeed, ablation of a conditional Irf4 allele
in T regulatory cells resulted in selective dysregulation of TH2
responses, IL4-dependent immunoglobulin isotype production, and tissue
lesions with pronounced plasma cell infiltration, in contrast to the
mononuclear cell-dominated pathology typical of mice lacking T
regulatory cells. Zheng et al. (2009) concluded that T regulatory cells
use components of the transcriptional machinery, promoting a particular
type of effector CD4+ T cell differentiation, to efficiently restrain
the corresponding type of the immune response.

Staudt et al. (2010) found that Cd4 (186940)-positive T cells from Irf4
-/- mice failed to differentiate into Il9-producing Th9 cells in the
presence of Tgfb (190180) and Il4 (147780). Treatment of Cd4-positive T
cells with Irf4 small interfering RNA strongly reduced Il9 production
and enhanced Ifng (147570) expression, but had no effect on Il2 (147680)
production. Reporter gene analysis demonstrated that Irf4 bound directly
to the Il9 promoter. Naive human CD4-positive T cells stimulated with
IL4 and TGFB also differentiated into Th9 cells, and this was
accompanied by strong expression of IRF4. Staudt et al. (2010) concluded
that IRF4 is essential for development of Th9 cells.

By flow cytometric analysis, Cretney et al. (2011) demonstrated that
Blimp1 (PRDM1; 603423) was expressed in a subset of mouse regulatory T
cells (Tregs) that localized mainly to mucosal sites and expressed Il10
(124092) in a Blimp1-dependent manner. Blimp1 was also required for
tissue homeostasis. Irf4, but not Tbet (TBX21; 604895), was essential
for Blimp1 expression and for differentiation of all effector Tregs.
Cretney et al. (2011) concluded that the differentiation pathway that
leads to the acquisition of Treg effector functions requires both IRF4
and BLIMP1.

Li et al. (2012) showed that in mouse CD4+ T cells and B cells IRF4
unexpectedly can cooperate with activator protein-1 (AP1; see 165160)
complexes to bind to AP1-IRF4 composite (5-prime-TGAnTCA/GAAA-3-prime)
motifs that they denoted as AP1-IRF composite elements (AICEs).
Moreover, BATF-JUN family protein complexes cooperate with IRF4 in
binding to AICEs in preactivated CD4+ T cells stimulated with IL21
(605384) and in TH17 differentiated cells. Importantly, BATF (612476)
binding was diminished in Irf4-null T cells and IRF4 binding was
diminished in Batf-null T cells, consistent with functional cooperation
between these factors. Moreover, Li et al. (2012) showed that AP1 and
IRF complexes cooperatively promote transcription of the Il10 gene,
which is expressed in TH17 cells and potently regulated by IL21. Li et
al. (2012) concluded that their findings revealed that IRF4 can signal
via complexes containing ETS or AP1 motifs depending on the cellular
context.

Using chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing in T-helper-17 (TH17)
cells, Glasmacher et al. (2012) found that IRF4 targets sequences
enriched for activated protein-1 (AP1; 165160)-IRF composite elements
(AICEs) that are cobound by BATF (612476), an AP1 factor required for
TH17, B, and dendritic cell differentiation. IRF4 and BATF bind
cooperatively to structurally divergent AICEs to promote gene activation
and TH17 differentiation. The AICE motif directs assembly of IRF4 or
IRF8 (601565) with BATF heterodimers and is also used in TH2, B, and
dendritic cells. Glasmacher et al. (2012) concluded that this genomic
regulatory element and cognate factors appear to have evolved to
integrate diverse immunomodulatory signals.

MAPPING

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, Grossman et al. (1996) mapped
the LSIRF gene to chromosome 6p25-p23.

- Association with Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia

In a genomewide association study to identify common variants
influencing the risk of developing chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL;
see 151400), Di Bernardo et al. (2008) found the strongest association
with 2 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that mapped to a 97-kb
block of linkage disequilibrium on chromosome 6p25.3 (CLLS4; 612558)
that contains the IRF4 gene. The SNP dbSNP rs872071 maps within the
3-prime untranslated region of IRF4. The overall estimate of effect
associated with dbSNP rs872071 was an odds ratio trend of 1.54 with a
95% confidence interval of 1.41 to 1.69 and a P value of 1.91 x 10(-20).
The genotype at SNP dbSNP rs872071 was sufficient to capture all of the
locus variation. Di Bernardo et al. (2008) considered IRF4 a strong
candidate gene for a CLL susceptibility a priori, being a key regulator
of lymphocyte development and proliferation. In studies using
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed lymphocytes, expression of IRF4
mRNA was significantly associated with genotype in a dose-dependent
fashion (P = 0.042), with lower expression associated with risk alleles.
Di Bernardo et al. (2008) argued that this observation is consistent
with a model in which the causal variant influences risk by arresting
transition of memory B cells through decreased IRF4 expression.

Using a set of SNP markers, Crowther-Swanepoel et al. (2010) generated a
fine-scale map of 6p25.3 and narrowed the signal for association with
CLL to an 18-kb DNA segment within the 3-prime untranslated region (UTR)
of IRF4. Resequencing this segment in European subjects identified 55
common polymorphisms, including 13 highly correlated candidate causal
variants. In a large case-control study, it was shown that all but 4
variants could be excluded with 95% confidence. These 4 SNPs mapped to a
3-kb region of the 3-prime UTR of IRF4, consistent with the causal basis
of the association being differential IRF4 expression.

CYTOGENETICS

In multiple myeloma (254500), chromosomal translocations affecting 14q32
and unidentified partner chromosomes are common, suggesting that they
may cause the activation of novel oncogenes. In multiple myeloma cell
lines, Iida et al. (1997) identified a t(6;14)(p25;q32) translocation in
2 of 11 cell lines. The translocation juxtaposes the immunoglobulin
heavy-chain (IGHG1; 147100) locus to the MUM1 (for 'multiple myeloma
oncogene 1') gene, which is also referred to as interferon regulatory
factor-4 (IRF4), a member of a gene family known to be active in the
control of B-cell proliferation and differentiation. See IRF1 (147575)
on chromosome 5 and IRF2 (147576) on chromosome 4. As a result of the
translocation, the MUM1/IRF4 gene is overexpressed, an event that may
contribute to tumorigenesis, as Iida et al. (1997) showed that MUM1/IRF4
has oncogenic activity in vitro.

ANIMAL MODEL

By knocking out exons 2 and 3 of the Irf4 gene, Mittrucker et al. (1997)
generated mice deficient in Irf4 protein. Flow cytometric analysis
indicated normal expression of bone marrow and immature B-lymphocyte
markers. After 4 to 5 weeks of age, the mutant mice began to develop
generalized lymphadenopathy with expansion of both T and B lymphocytes,
failed to develop germinal centers in B-cell follicles or plasma cells
after immunization, had poor T- and B-lymphocyte proliferative responses
after stimulation with most mitogens, lacked production of all serum Ig
subclasses after immunization with T cell-dependent or -independent
antigens, and were unable to reject mastocytoma cells. Mittrucker et al.
(1997) concluded that IRF4 is essential for mature T- and B-lymphocyte
function.

Negishi et al. (2005) found that mice lacking Irf4 displayed a more
potent and lethal inflammatory response to CpG oligonucleotides,
underscoring the role of IRF4 as a critical negative regulator of TLR
signaling.

Honma et al. (2005) showed that Irf4 -/- mice were sensitive to TLR
stimulation, such as lipopolysaccharide-induced shock. Irf4 -/-
macrophages produced high levels of Tnf (191160) and Il6 (147620) in
response to TLR ligands. Small interfering RNA against Irf4 in normal
macrophages inhibited the inflammatory response. Honma et al. (2005)
concluded that IRF4 negatively regulates TLR signaling and inhibits
proinflammatory cytokine production.

Staudt et al. (2010) found that transfer of either Th2 or Th9 cells to
Rag2 (179616)-deficient mice resulted in severe asthma symptoms. In mice
that had received Th9 cells, but not Th2 cells, these symptoms could be
relieved with anti-Il9. Mice lacking Irf4, which is essential for Th9
cell development, were resistant to development of asthma, while Irf4
+/- heterozygotes had an intermediate phenotype. Staudt et al. (2010)
concluded that Th9 cell-derived IL9 is an important inducer of asthmatic
symptoms, equivalent to that caused by Th2 cells and IL4.

REFERENCE 1. Cretney, E.; Xin, A.; Shi, W.; Minnich, M.; Masson, F.; Miasari,
M.; Belz, G. T.; Smyth, G. K.; Busslinger, M.; Nutt, S. L.; Kallies,
A.: The transcription factors Blimp-1 and IRF4 jointly control the
differentiation and function of effector regulatory T cells. Nature
Immun. 12: 304-311, 2011.

2. Crowther-Swanepoel, D.; Broderick, P.; Ma, Y.; Robertson, L.; Pittman,
A. M.; Price, A.; Twiss, P.; Vijayakrishnan, J.; Quereshi, M.; Dyer,
M. J. S.; Matutes, E.; Dearden, C.; Catovsky, D.; Houlston, R. S.
: Fine-scale mapping of the 6p25.3 chronic lymphocytic leukaemia susceptibility
locus. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 1840-1845, 2010.

3. Di Bernardo, M. C.; Crowther-Swanepoel, D.; Broderick, P.; Webb,
E.; Sellick, G.; Wild, R.; Sullivan, K.; Vijayakrishnan, J.; Wang,
Y.; Pittman, A. M.; Sunter, N. J.; Hall, A. G.; and 17 others:
A genome-wide association study identifies six susceptibility loci
for chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Nature Genet. 40: 1204-1210, 2008.

4. Glasmacher, E.; Agrawal, S.; Chang, A. B.; Murphy, T. L.; Zeng,
W.; Vander Lugt, B.; Khan, A. A.; Ciofani, M.; Spooner, C. J.; Rutz,
S.; Hackney, J.; Nurieva, R.; Escalante, C. R.; Ouyang, W.; Littman,
D. R.; Murphy, K. M.; Singh, H.: A genomic regulatory element that
directs assembly and function of immune-specific AP-1-IRF complexes. Science 338:
975-980, 2012.

5. Grossman, A.; Mittrucker, H.-W.; Nicholl, J.; Suzuki, A.; Chung,
S.; Antonio, L.; Suggs, S.; Sutherland, G. R.; Siderovski, D. P.;
Mak, T. W.: Cloning of human lymphocyte-specific interferon regulatory
factor (hLSIRF/hIRF4) and mapping of the gene to 6p23-p25. Genomics 37:
229-233, 1996.

6. Honma, K.; Udono, H.; Kohno, T.; Yamamoto, K.; Ogawa, A.; Takemori,
T.; Kumatori, A.; Suzuki, S.; Matsuyama, T.; Yui, K.: Interferon
regulatory factor 4 negatively regulates the production of proinflammatory
cytokines by macrophages in response to LPS. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102:
16001-16006, 2005.

7. Iida, S.; Rao, P. H.; Butler, M.; Corradini, P.; Boccadoro, M.;
Klein, B.; Chaganti, R. S. K.; Dalla-Favera, R.: Deregulation of
MUM1/IRF4 by chromosomal translocation in multiple myeloma. Nature
Genet. 17: 226-230, 1997.

8. Li, P.; Spolski, R.; Liao, W.; Wang, L.; Murphy, T. L.; Murphy,
K. M.; Leonard, W. J.: BATF-JUN is critical for IRF4-mediated transcription
in T cells. Nature 490: 543-546, 2012.

9. Mittrucker, H.-W.; Matsuyama, T.; Grossman, A.; Kundig, T. M.;
Potter, J.; Shahinian, A.; Wakeham, A.; Patterson, B.; Ohashi, P.
S.; Mak, T. W.: Requirement for the transcription factor LSIRF/IRF4
for mature B and T lymphocyte function. Science 275: 540-543, 1997.

10. Negishi, H.; Ohba, Y.; Yanai, H.; Takaoka, A.; Honma, K.; Yui,
K.; Matsuyama, T.; Taniguchi, T.; Honda, K.: Negative regulation
of Toll-like-receptor signaling by IRF-4. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102:
15989-15994, 2005.

11. Shaffer, A. L.; Emre, N. C. T.; Lamy, L.; Ngo, V. N.; Wright,
G.; Xiao, W.; Powell, J.; Dave, S.; Yu, X.; Zhao, H.; Zeng, Y.; Chen,
B.; Epstein, J.; Staudt, L. M.: IRF4 addiction in multiple myeloma. Nature 454:
226-231, 2008.

12. Staudt, V.; Bothur, E.; Klein, M.; Lingnau, K.; Reuter, S.; Grebe,
N.; Gerlitzki, B.; Hoffmann, M.; Ulges, A.; Taube, C.; Dehzad, N.;
Becker, M.; Stassen, M.; Steinborn, A.; Lohoff, M.; Schild, H.; Schmitt,
E.; Bopp, T.: Interferon-regulatory factor 4 is essential for the
developmental program of T helper 9 cells. Immunity 33: 192-202,
2010.

13. Zheng, Y.; Chaudhry, A.; Kas, A.; deRoos, P.; Kim, J. M.; Chu,
T.-T.; Corcoran, L.; Treuting, P.; Klein, U.; Rudensky, A. Y.: Regulatory
T-cell suppressor program co-opts transcription factor IRF4 to control
TH2 responses. Nature 458: 351-356, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/7/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/4/2012
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/1/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/11/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/24/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/2/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/16/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/8/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/6/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/23/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/6/1998

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 7/10/1997

EDITED alopez: 01/07/2013
alopez: 1/7/2013
terry: 1/7/2013
alopez: 12/6/2012
terry: 12/4/2012
alopez: 12/5/2011
terry: 12/1/2011
mgross: 11/18/2011
terry: 11/11/2011
mgross: 2/3/2011
terry: 1/24/2011
mgross: 4/30/2009
terry: 4/23/2009
alopez: 4/3/2009
terry: 4/2/2009
alopez: 1/29/2009
terry: 1/16/2009
alopez: 8/27/2008
terry: 8/8/2008
mgross: 7/11/2007
terry: 7/6/2007
mgross: 8/23/2001
psherman: 4/15/1999
alopez: 5/6/1998
alopez: 3/6/1998
alopez: 9/11/1997
alopez: 9/8/1997
terry: 7/28/1997

605604	TITLE *605604 POLYADENYLATE-BINDING PROTEIN-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2; PAIP2
;;POLY(A)-BINDING PROTEIN-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2;;
PABP-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2;;
PAIP2A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By Far Western interaction cloning using human PABP (604679) as the
probe and a placenta cDNA expression library, Khaleghpour et al. (2001)
isolated a 1.4-kb cDNA encoding PAIP2. The highly acidic (predicted pI
of 3.9), 127-amino acid protein has a predicted molecular mass of 14.5
kD and acts as a repressor of translation both in vitro and in vivo.

GENE FUNCTION

Khaleghpour et al. (2001) found that PAIP2 preferentially inhibited
translation of a poly(A)-containing mRNA but had no effect on the
translation of hepatitis C virus mRNA, which is cap and eIF4G (see
600495) independent. The authors showed that PAIP2 decreases the
affinity of PABP for poly(A) RNA and disrupts the repeating structure of
poly(A) ribonucleoprotein. Furthermore, PAIP2 was found to compete with
PAIP1 (605184) for PABP binding. Thus, Khaleghpour et al. (2001)
concluded that PAIP2 inhibits translation by interdicting PABP function.

Using the 3-prime UTR of rat Vegf to probe a human colon carcinoma cell
line cDNA expression library, Onesto et al. (2004) identified PAIP2 as a
putative regulator of VEGF (192240) expression. They demonstrated that
PAIP2 stabilized VEGF mRNA, leading to increased VEGF expression. By in
vitro protein-protein interactions and coimmunoprecipitation
experiments, Onesto et al. (2004) showed that PAIP2 interacted with
another VEGF mRNA-binding protein, HuR (ELAVL1; 603466), suggesting that
PAIP2 and ELAVL1 cooperate to stabilize VEGF mRNA.

MAPPING

Scott (2001) mapped the PAIP2 gene to chromosome 5 based on sequence
similarity between the PAIP2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF317675) and a
chromosome 5 clone (GenBank GENBANK AL136640).

REFERENCE 1. Khaleghpour, K.; Svitkin, Y. V.; Craig, A. W.; DeMaria, C. T.;
Deo, R. C.; Burley, S. K.; Sonenberg, N.: Translational repression
by a novel partner of human poly(A) binding protein, Paip2. Molec.
Cell 7: 205-216, 2001.

2. Onesto, C.; Berra, E.; Grepin, R.; Pages, G.: Poly(A)-binding
protein-interacting protein 2, a strong regulator of vascular endothelial
growth factor mRNA. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 34217-34226, 2004.

3. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/13/2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/4/2005

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 1/30/2001

EDITED mgross: 05/10/2007
mgross: 5/10/2007
mgross: 2/4/2005
mgross: 3/13/2001
mgross: 1/30/2001

164177	TITLE *164177 POU DOMAIN, CLASS 5, TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 1; POU5F1
;;OCTAMER-BINDING TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 3; OCT3; OTF3;;
OCTAMER-BINDING TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 4; OCT4; OTF4
POU5F1/EWS FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Transcription factors containing the POU homeodomain have been shown to
be important regulators of tissue-specific gene expression in lymphoid
and pituitary differentiation and in early mammalian development. To
identify members of the POU family of transcription factors that may be
involved in the tissue-specific regulation of expression of genes in
insulin-secreting cells of the pancreas, Takeda et al. (1992) used PCR
and degenerate oligonucleotide primers specific for the homeodomain to
amplify POU-related sequences in human pancreatic islet mRNA. The
sequences of 2 of the PCR products were identical to human OCT1 (164175)
and 2 others were homologous to mouse Oct3. Takeda et al. (1992) showed
that 2 forms of OCT3 mRNA are expressed in adult tissues as a result of
alternative splicing--OCT3A and OCT3B. OCT3A and OCT3B are composed of
360 and 265 amino acids, respectively, of which the 225 amino acids at
the COOH-termini are identical. The sequence of human OCT3A showed 87%
amino acid identity with mouse Oct3. Reverse transcriptase PCR showed
low level of expression in both OCT3A and OCT3B mRNA in all adult human
tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Niwa et al. (2000) used conditional expression and repression in murine
embryonic stem (ES) cells to determine requirements for Oct3/4 in the
maintenance of developmental potency. Although transcriptional
determination has usually been considered as a binary on-off control
system, they found that the precise level of Oct3/4 governs 3 distinct
fates of ES cells. A less-than-2-fold increase in expression causes
differentiation into primitive endoderm and mesoderm. In contrast,
repression of Oct3/4 induces loss of pluripotency and dedifferentiation
to trophectoderm. Thus, a critical amount of Oct3/4 is required to
sustain stem cell self-renewal, and up- or downregulation induces
divergent developmental programs. Niwa et al. (2000) suggested that
their findings established a role for Oct3/4 as a master regulator of
pluripotency that controls lineage commitment and illustrated the
sophistication of critical transcriptional regulators and the consequent
importance of quantitative analyses.

Guo et al. (2002) showed that mammalian Foxd3 (611539) and Oct4 bound
identical regulatory DNA sequences in the osteopontin (SPP1; 166490)
promoter. Oct4 interacted directly with Foxd3, and both proteins
activated the osteopontin promoter, either alone or in combination.
Foxd3 also activated the Foxa1 (602294) and Foxa2 (600288) promoters,
and coexpression of Oct4 inhibited Foxd3-mediated activation of these
promoters.

Using affinity chromatography, Xu et al. (2004) showed that mouse Wwp2
(602308), an E3 ubiquitin ligase, interacted with Oct4. Mutation
analysis showed that the WW domains of Wwp2 were required for the
interaction, and both the N- and C-terminal regions of Oct4 could
interact with Wwp2. Wwp2 ubiquitinated Oct4 in vitro and in vivo, and
this activity required the catalytic cysteine within the HECT domain of
Wwp2. Ubiquitination of Oct4 inhibited its transcriptional activity and
directed its degradation by the proteasome. Expression of both Wwp2 and
Oct4 was reduced with differentiation in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Zeineddine et al. (2006) showed that Oct3 has a role in cardiac
development in the early mouse embryo.

Wang et al. (2006) explored the protein network in which Nanog (607937)
operates in mouse ES stem cells. Using affinity purification of Nanog
under native conditions followed by mass spectrometry, Wang et al.
(2006) identified physically associated proteins. In an iterative
fashion they also identified partners of several Nanog-associated
proteins (including Oct4), validated the functional relevance of
selected newly identified components, and constructed a protein
interaction network. The network is highly enriched for nuclear factors
that are individually critical for maintenance of the ES cell state and
coregulated on differentiation. The network is linked to multiple
corepressor pathways and is composed of numerous proteins whose encoding
genes are putative direct transcriptional targets of its members. Wang
et al. (2006) concluded that this tight protein network seems to
function as a cellular module dedicated to pluripotency.

Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells can be generated from mouse
fibroblasts by retrovirus-mediated introduction of 4 transcription
factors, Oct3/4, Sox2 (184429), c-Myc (190080), and Klf4 (602253), and
subsequent selection for Fbx15 (609093) expression (Takahashi and
Yamanaka, 2006). These iPS cells, hereafter called Fbx15 iPS cells, are
similar to embryonic stem (ES) cells in morphology, proliferation, and
teratoma formation; however, they are different with regard to gene
expression and DNA methylation patterns, and fail to produce adult
chimeras. Okita et al. (2007) showed that selection for Nanog expression
results in germline-competent iPS cells with increased ES cell-like gene
expression and DNA methylation patterns compared with Fbx15 iPS cells.
The 4 transgenes were strongly silenced in Nanog iPS cells.

Wernig et al. (2007) independently demonstrated that the transcription
factors Oct4, Sox2, c-Myc, and Klf4 can induce epigenetic reprogramming
of a somatic genome to an embryonic pluripotent state. In contrast to
selection for Fbx15 activation (Takahashi and Yamanaka, 2006),
fibroblasts that had reactivated the endogenous Oct4 (Oct4-neo) or Nanog
(Nanog-neo) loci grew independently of feeder cells, expressed normal
Oct4, Nanog, and Sox2 RNA and protein levels, were epigenetically
identical to ES cells by a number of criteria, and were able to generate
viable chimeras, contribute to the germline, and generate viable
late-gestation embryos after injection into tetraploid blastocysts.
Transduction of the 4 factors generated significantly more
drug-resistant cells from Nanog-neo than from Oct4-neo fibroblasts, but
a higher fraction of Oct4-selected cells had all the characteristics of
pluripotent ES cells, suggesting that Nanog activation is a less
stringent criterion for pluripotency than Oct4 activation.

Using Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and Myc, Park et al. (2008) derived iPS cells
from fetal, neonatal, and adult human primary cells, including dermal
fibroblasts isolated from a skin biopsy of a healthy research subject.
Human iPS cells resemble embryonic stem cells in morphology and gene
expression and in the capacity to form teratomas in immune-deficient
mice. Park et al. (2008) concluded that defined factors can reprogram
human cells to pluripotency, and they established a method whereby
patient-specific cells might be established in culture.

Yu et al. (2007) showed that 4 factors, OCT4, SOX2 (184429), NANOG
(607937), and LIN28 (611043), are sufficient to reprogram human somatic
cells to pluripotent stem cells that exhibit the essential
characteristics of embryonic stem cells. These induced pluripotent human
stem cells have normal karyotypes, express telomerase activity, express
cell surface markers and genes that characterize human ES cells, and
maintain the developmental potential to differentiate into advanced
derivatives of all 3 primary germ layers.

Kim et al. (2008) showed that adult mouse neural stem cells express
higher endogenous levels of Sox2 and c-Myc than embryonic stem cells and
that exogenous Oct4 together with either Klf4 or c-Myc is sufficient to
generate iPS cells from neural stem cells. These 2-factor iPS cells are
similar to embryonic stem cells at the molecular level, contribute to
development of the germ line, and form chimeras. Kim et al. (2008)
proposed that, in inducing pluripotency, the number of reprogramming
factors can be reduced when using somatic cells that endogenously
express appropriate levels of complementing factors.

Stadtfeld et al. (2008) generated mouse iPS cells from fibroblasts and
liver cells by using nonintegrating adenoviruses transiently expressing
Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc. These adenoviral iPS cells showed DNA
demethylation characteristic of reprogrammed cells, expressed endogenous
pluripotency genes, formed teratomas, and contributed to multiple
tissues, including the germ cell line, in chimeric mice. Stadtfeld et
al. (2008) concluded that their results provided strong evidence that
insertional mutagenesis is not required for in vitro reprogramming.

Okita et al. (2008) independently reported the generation of mouse iPS
cells without viral vectors. Repeated transfection of 2 expression
plasmids, one containing the cDNAs of Oct3/4, Sox2, and Klf4 and the
other containing the c-Myc cDNA, into mouse embryonic fibroblasts
resulted in iPS cells without evidence of plasmid integration, which
produced teratomas when transplanted into mice and contributed to adult
chimeras. Okita et al. (2008) concluded that the production of
virus-free iPS cells, albeit from embryonic fibroblasts, addresses a
critical safety concern for potential use of iPS cells in regenerative
medicine.

Donohoe et al. (2009) demonstrated that OCT4 lies at the top of the X
chromosome inactivation (XCI) hierarchy, and regulates XCI by triggering
X chromosome pairing and counting. OCT4 directly binds TSIX (300181) and
XITE (300074), 2 regulatory noncoding RNA genes of the X inactivation
center, and also complexes with SCI transfactors CTCF (604167) and YY1
(600013) through protein-protein interactions. Depletion of Oct4 in
female mouse embryonic stem cells blocked homologous X-chromosome
pairing and resulted in the inactivation of both X chromosomes. Donohoe
et al. (2009) concluded that they identified the first trans-factor that
regulates counting, and ascribed new functions to OCT4 during X
chromosome reprogramming.

Kim et al. (2009) showed that Oct4 alone is sufficient to directly
reprogram adult mouse neural stem cells to iPS cells. Kim et al. (2009)
then showed that OCT4 alone could convert human fetal neural stem cells
into induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells.

Hanna et al. (2009) demonstrated that the reprogramming by Oct4, Sox2,
Klf4, and Myc transcription factors is a continuous stochastic process
where almost all mouse donor cells eventually give rise to iPS cells on
continued growth and transcription factor expression. Additional
inhibition of the p53 (191170)/p21 (116899) pathway or overexpression of
Lin28 increased the cell division rate and resulted in an accelerated
kinetics of iPS cell formation that was directly proportional to the
increase in cell proliferation. In contrast, Nanog (607937)
overexpression accelerated reprogramming in a predominantly cell
division rate-independent manner. Quantitative analyses defined distinct
cell division rate-dependent and -independent modes for accelerating the
stochastic course of reprogramming, and suggested that the number of
cell divisions is a key parameter driving epigenetic reprogramming to
pluripotency.

The generation of iPS cells is asynchronous and slow, the frequency is
low (less than 0.1%), and DNA demethylation constitutes a bottleneck. To
determine regulatory mechanisms involved in reprogramming, Bhutani et
al. (2010) generated interspecies heterokaryons (fused mouse ES cells
and human fibroblasts) that induced reprogramming synchronously,
frequently, and fast. Bhutani et al. (2010) showed that reprogramming
toward pluripotency in single heterokaryons was initiated without cell
division or DNA replication, rapidly (1 day) and efficiently (70%).
Short interfering RNA-mediated knockdown showed that AID (605257) is
required for promoter demethylation and induction of OCT4 and NANOG gene
expression. AID protein bound silent methylated OCT4 and Nanog promoters
in fibroblasts, but not active demethylated promoters in ES cells.
Bhutani et al. (2010) concluded that their data provided the first
evidence that mammalian AID is required for active DNA demethylation and
initiation of nuclear reprogramming toward pluripotency in human somatic
cells.

Using chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-Seq), Kunarso et
al. (2010) showed that genomic regions bound by CTCF were highly
conserved between undifferentiated mouse and human embryonic stem cells.
However, very little conservation was found for regions bound by OCT4
and NANOG. Most of the differences in OCT4 and NANOG binding between
species appeared to be due to species-specific insertion of transposable
elements, such as endogenous ERV1 repeats, that generated unique OCT4-
and NANOG-repeat-associated binding sites.

Chia et al. (2010) reported a genomewide RNA interference screen to
identify genes that regulate self-renewal and pluripotency properties in
human embryonic stem cells. Functionally distinct complexes involved in
transcriptional regulation and chromatin remodeling were among the
factors identified in the screen. To understand the roles of these
potential regulators of human embryonic stem cells, Chia et al. (2010)
studied transcription factor PRDM14 (611781) to gain insights into its
functional roles in the regulation of pluripotency. Chia et al. (2010)
showed that PRDM14 regulates directly the expression of key pluripotency
gene POU5F1 through its proximal enhancer. Genomewide location profiling
experiments revealed that PRDM14 colocalized extensively with other key
transcription factors such as OCT4, NANOG (607937), and SOX2 (184429),
indicating that PRDM14 is integrated into the core transcriptional
regulatory network. More importantly, in a gain-of-function assay, they
showed that PRDM14 is able to enhance the efficiency of reprogramming of
human fibroblasts in conjunction with OCT4, SOX2, and KLF4 (602253).

GENE STRUCTURE

Takeda et al. (1992) showed that the OCT3 gene spans about 7 kb and
consists of 5 exons.

MAPPING

Using pairs of sequence-specific primers and DNA from a panel of somatic
cell hybrids, Takeda et al. (1992) mapped the OCT3 gene to chromosome 6.
This localization was confirmed by linkage of a RFLP in 9 CEPH families,
indicating tight linkage to HLA-A, -B, -C, and -DR. No recombinants were
identified with any of these and lod scores ranged from 5.72 to 10.84.
By in situ hybridization, Guillaudeux et al. (1993) mapped the OTF3 gene
to 6p22-p21.3 within or close to the human MHC class I region. The
homologous mouse gene, Otf3, is located on mouse chromosome 17 between
the Q and T regions of the major histocompatibility complex. Takeda et
al. (1992) identified a related gene, symbolized OTF3C (OTF3P1), which
is a retroposon located on human chromosome 8; this gene is a
pseudogene. Guillaudeux et al. (1993) localized one OTF3-like copy
(OTF3L) to 12p13 by in situ hybridization. The functional significance
of this gene was not known. Using recombinant families, pulsed field gel
electrophoresis, and YAC mapping, Crouau-Roy et al. (1994) localized the
OTF3 gene within the MHC class I region, approximately 100 kb telomeric
to the HLA-C gene.

CYTOGENETICS

- POU5F1/EWS Fusion Gene

Yamaguchi et al. (2005) identified a t(6;22)(p21;q12) translocation in
tumor tissue derived from an undifferentiated sarcoma from the pelvic
bone of a 39-year-old woman. The translocation resulted in a POU5F1/EWS
(EWSR1; 133450) chimeric gene composed of the N-terminal domain of EWS
that functions as a transcriptional activation domain and the C-terminal
DNA-binding domain of POU5F1. Yamaguchi et al. (2005) suggested that the
tumor may be a variant of Ewing sarcoma (612219).

ANIMAL MODEL

Via homologous recombination in ES cells, Nichols et al. (1998)
generated mice with targeted disruption of the Oct4, or Oct3, gene.
Oct4-deficient embryos developed to the blastocyst stage, but the inner
cell mass cells were not pluripotent. Instead, they were restricted to
differentiation along the extraembryonic trophoblast lineage.
Furthermore, in the absence of a true inner cell mass, trophoblast
proliferation was not maintained in Oct4 -/- embryos. Expansion of
trophoblast precursors was restored, however, by an Oct4 target gene
product, fibroblast growth factor-4 (see 164980). Therefore, Oct4 also
determines paracrine growth factor signaling from stem cells to the
trophectoderm. Nichols et al. (1998) concluded that the activity of Oct4
is essential for the identity of the pluripotential founder cell
population in the mammalian embryo.

Tay et al. (2008) demonstrated the existence of many naturally occurring
miRNA targets in the amino acid coding sequences of the mouse Nanog
(607937), Oct4, and Sox2 (184429) genes. Some of the mouse targets
analyzed do not contain the miRNA seed, whereas others span exon-exon
junctions or are not conserved in the human and rhesus genomes. MiRNA134
(610164), miRNA296 (610945), and miRNA470, upregulated on retinoic
acid-induced differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells, target the
coding sequence of each transcription factor in various combinations,
leading to transcriptional and morphologic changes characteristic of
differentiating mouse embryonic stem cells, and resulting in a new
phenotype. Silent mutations at the predicted targets abolished miRNA
activity, prevented the downregulation of the corresponding genes, and
delayed the induced phenotype. Tay et al. (2008) concluded that their
findings demonstrated the abundance of coding sequence-located miRNA
targets, some of which can be species-specific, and supported an
augmented model whereby animal miRNAs exercise their control on mRNAs
through targets that can reside beyond the 3-prime untranslated region.

HISTORY

Oct3 is present in mouse oocytes before and after fertilization. Rosner
et al. (1991) reported that when fertilized oocytes were injected with
antisense Oct3 oligonucleotides or double-stranded DNA containing the
octamer motif, embryonic DNA synthesis was inhibited and the embryos
were arrested at the 1-cell stage. In vitro synthesized Oct3 mRNA
rescued the developmental block induced by antisense Oct3
oligonucleotide. Thus, maternally inherited Oct3 appeared to be required
for DNA replication and division of the 1-cell embryo. However, the
authors published a retraction: 'Recent investigations have revealed
that the experimental evidence supporting the conclusions of the paper
by Rosner et al. (Cell 64, 1103-1110, 1991) has been fabricated by one
of the authors (M.R.) without any knowledge by the others. We therefore
retract this paper in its entirety.' This seems to be scientific fraud
comparable to that perpetrated by the infamous John R. Darsee, who
confessed to fabrication of data showing linkage of HLA and familial
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600).

REFERENCE 1. Bhutani, N.; Brady, J. J.; Damian, M.; Sacco, A.; Corbel, S. Y.;
Blau, H. M.: Reprogramming towards pluripotency requires AID-dependent
DNA demethylation. Nature 463: 1042-1047, 2010.

2. Chia, N.-Y.; Chan, Y.-S.; Feng, B.; Lu, X.; Orlov, Y. L.; Moreau,
D.; Kumar, P.; Yang, L.; Jiang, J.; Lau, M.-S.; Huss, M.; Soh, B.-S.;
Kraus, P.; Li, P.; Lufkin, T.; Lim, B.; Clarke, N. D.; Bard, F.; Ng,
H.-H.: A genome-wide RNAi screen reveals determinants of human embryonic
stem cell identity. Nature 468: 316-320, 2010.

3. Crouau-Roy, B.; Amadou, C.; Bouissou, C.; Clayton, J.; Vernet,
C.; Ribouchon, M.-T.; Pontarotti, P.: Localization of the OTF3 gene
within the human MHC class I region by physical and meiotic mapping. Genomics 21:
241-243, 1994.

4. Donohoe, M. E.; Silva, S. S.; Pinter, S. F.; Xu, N.; Lee, J. T.
: The pluripotency factor Oct4 interacts with Ctcf and also controls
X-chromosome pairing and counting. Nature 460: 128-132, 2009.

5. Guillaudeux, T.; Mattei, M. G.; Depetris, D.; Le Bouteiller, P.;
Pontarotti, P.: In situ hybridization localizes the human OTF3 to
chromosome 6p21.3-p22 and OTF3L to 12p13. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 63:
212-214, 1993.

6. Guo, Y.; Costa, R.; Ramsey, H.; Starnes, T.; Vance, G.; Robertson,
K.; Kelley, M.; Reinbold, R.; Scholer, H.; Hromas, R.: The embryonic
stem cell transcription factors Oct-4 and FoxD3 interact to regulate
ectodermal-specific promoter expression. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99:
3663-3667, 2002.

7. Hanna, J.; Saha, K.; Pando, B.; van Zon, J.; Lengner, C. J.; Creyghton,
M. P.; van Oudenaarden, A.; Jaenisch, R.: Direct cell reprogramming
is a stochastic process amenable to acceleration. Nature 462: 595-601,
2009.

8. Kim, J. B.; Greber, B.; Arauzo-Bravo, M. J.; Meyer, J.; Park, K.
I.; Zaehres, H.; Scholer, H. R.: Direct reprogramming of human neural
stem cells by OCT4. Nature 461: 649-653, 2009.

9. Kim, J. B.; Sebastiano, V.; Wu, G.; Arauzo-Bravo, M. J.; Sasse,
P.; Gentile, L.; Ko, K.; Ruau, D.; Ehrich, M.; van den Boom, D.; Meyer,
J.; Hubner, K.; Bernemann, C.; Ortmeier, C.; Zenke, M.; Fleischmann,
B. K.; Zaehres, H.; Scholer, H. R.: Oct4-induced pluripotency in
adult neural stem cells. Cell 136: 411-419, 2009.

10. Kim, J. B.; Zaehres, H.; Wu, G.; Gentile, L.; Ko, K.; Sebastiano,
V.; Arauzo-Bravo, M. J.; Ruau, D.; Han, D. W.; Zenke, M.; Scholer,
H. R.: Pluripotent stem cells induced from adult neural stem cells
by reprogramming with two factors. Nature 454: 646-650, 2008.

11. Kunarso, G.; Chia, N.-Y.; Jeyakani, J.; Hwang, C.; Lu, X.; Chan,
Y.-S.; Ng, H.-H.; Bourque, G.: Transposable elements have rewired
the core regulatory network of human embryonic stem cells. Nature
Genet. 42: 631-634, 2010.

12. Nichols, J.; Zevnik, B.; Anastassiadis, K.; Niwa, H.; Klewe-Nebenius,
D.; Chambers, I.; Scholer, H.; Smith, A.: Formation of pluripotent
stem cells in the mammalian embryo depends on the POU transcription
factor Oct4. Cell 95: 379-391, 1998.

13. Niwa, H.; Miyazaki, J.; Smith, A. G.: Quantitative expression
of Oct-3/4 defines differentiation, dedifferentiation or self-renewal
of ES cells. Nature Genet. 24: 372-376, 2000.

14. Okita, K.; Ichisaka, T.; Yamanaka, S.: Generation of germline-competent
induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature 448: 313-317, 2007.

15. Okita, K.; Nakagawa, M.; Hyenjong, H.; Ichisaka, T.; Yamanaka,
S.: Generation of mouse induced pluripotent stem cells without viral
vectors. Science 322: 949-953, 2008.

16. Park, I.-H.; Zhao, R.; West, J. A.; Yabuuchi, A.; Huo, H.; Ince,
T. A.; Lerou, P. H.; Lensch, M. W.; Daley, G. Q.: Reprogramming of
human somatic cells to pluripotency with defined factors. Nature 451:
141-146, 2008.

17. Rosner, M. H.; De Santo, R. J.; Arnheiter, H.; Staudt, L. M.:
Oct-3 is a maternal factor required for the first mouse embryonic
division. Cell 64: 1103-1110, 1991. Note: Retraction: Cell 69: 724
only, 1992.

18. Stadtfeld, M.; Nagaya, M.; Utikal, J.; Weir, G.; Hochedlinger,
K.: Induced pluripotent stem cells generated without viral integration. Science 322:
945-949, 2008.

19. Takahashi, K.; Yamanaka, S.: Induction of pluripotent stem cells
from mouse embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors. Cell 126:
663-676, 2006.

20. Takeda, J.; Seino, S.; Bell, G. I.: Human Oct3 gene family: cDNA
sequences, alternative splicing, gene organization, chromosomal location,
and expression at low levels in adult tissues. Nucleic Acids Res. 20:
4613-4620, 1992.

21. Tay, Y.; Zhang, J.; Thomson, A. M.; Lim, B.; Rigoutsos, I.: MicroRNAs
to Nanog, Oct4 and Sox2 coding regions modulate embryonic stem cell
differentiation. Nature 455: 1124-1128, 2008. Note: Erratum: Nature
458: 538 only, 2009.

22. Wang, J.; Rao, S.; Chu, J.; Shen, X.; Levasseur, D. N.; Theunissen,
T. W.; Orkin, S. H.: A protein interaction network for pluripotency
of embryonic stem cells. Nature 444: 364-368, 2006.

23. Wernig, M.; Meissner, A.; Foreman, R.; Brambrink, T.; Ku, M.;
Hochedlinger, K.; Bernstein, B. E.; Jaenisch, R.: In vitro reprogramming
of fibroblasts into a pluripotent ES-cell-like state. Nature 448:
318-324, 2007.

24. Xu, H. M.; Liao, B.; Zhang, Q. J.; Wang, B. B.; Li, H.; Zhong,
X. M.; Sheng, H. Z.; Zhao, Y. X.; Zhao, Y. M.; Jin, Y.: Wwp2, an
E3 ubiquitin ligase that targets transcription factor Oct-4 for ubiquitination. J.
Biol. Chem. 279: 23495-23503, 2004.

25. Yamaguchi, S.; Yamazaki, Y.; Ishikawa, Y.; Kawaguchi, N.; Mukai,
H.; Nakamura, T.: EWSR1 is fused to POU5F1 in a bone tumor with translocation
t(6;22)(p21;q12). Genes Chromosomes Cancer 43: 217-222, 2005. Note:
Erratum: Genes Chromosomes Cancer 47: 266 only, 2008.

26. Yu, J.; Vodyanik, M. A.; Smuga-Otto, K.; Antosiewicz-Bourget,
J.; Frane, J. L.; Tian, S.; Nie, J.; Jonsdottir, G. A.; Ruotti, V.;
Stewart, R.; Slukvin, I. I.; Thomson, J. A.: Induced pluripotent
stem cell lines derived from human somatic cells. Science 318: 1917-1920,
2007.

27. Zeineddine, D.; Papadimou, E.; Chebli, K.; Gineste, M.; Liu, J.;
Grey, C.; Thurig, S.; Behfar, A.; Wallace, V. A.; Skerjanc, I. S.;
Puceat, M.: Oct-3/4 dose dependently regulates specification of embryonic
stem cells toward a cardiac lineage and early heart development. Dev.
Cell 11: 535-546, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/30/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/17/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/8/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/12/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/16/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/25/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/13/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/28/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/30/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/26/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/20/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/14/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/11/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/23/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/17/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/29/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/23/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/2/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/29/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/10/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/22/1992

EDITED terry: 04/04/2013
alopez: 12/2/2010
terry: 11/30/2010
alopez: 10/4/2010
terry: 9/29/2010
alopez: 9/17/2010
terry: 9/17/2010
alopez: 4/9/2010
terry: 4/8/2010
alopez: 1/12/2010
terry: 12/1/2009
alopez: 11/18/2009
terry: 11/16/2009
alopez: 8/27/2009
terry: 8/25/2009
mgross: 8/17/2009
terry: 8/13/2009
alopez: 5/5/2009
terry: 4/28/2009
carol: 2/3/2009
alopez: 12/31/2008
terry: 12/30/2008
alopez: 12/9/2008
terry: 11/26/2008
alopez: 10/21/2008
terry: 10/20/2008
carol: 8/20/2008
ckniffin: 8/14/2008
alopez: 2/13/2008
terry: 2/11/2008
alopez: 2/4/2008
terry: 1/23/2008
mgross: 10/17/2007
alopez: 9/7/2007
terry: 8/29/2007
alopez: 1/25/2007
terry: 1/23/2007
mgross: 1/2/2007
terry: 3/19/2004
carol: 1/15/2002
joanna: 12/5/2000
mcapotos: 6/21/2000
psherman: 6/12/2000
alopez: 3/31/2000
terry: 3/29/2000
psherman: 11/10/1998
alopez: 10/29/1998
alopez: 9/5/1997
jamie: 2/18/1997
mark: 4/25/1995
jason: 6/7/1994
carol: 4/11/1994
carol: 9/2/1993
carol: 1/29/1993
carol: 12/31/1992

611114	TITLE *611114 MICRO RNA 150; MIR150
;;miRNA150;;
MIRN150
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), such as MIRN150, are 20- to 24-nucleotide noncoding
RNAs found in animals and plants. These small RNAs regulate gene
expression at the translational level through interactions with their
target mRNAs. MIRN150 is a hematopoietic cell-specific miRNA (Zhou et
al., 2007).

CLONING

Lagos-Quintana et al. (2002) cloned mouse miRNA150. Using miRNA arrays
and quantitative RT-PCR analysis, Zhou et al. (2007) detected abundant
expression of mouse miR150 in lymph nodes. Expression was also high in
spleen, with lower levels in thymus, heart, and brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhou et al. (2007) found that expression of mouse miR150 increased
during B- and T-cell development. Overexpression of miR150 in
hematopoietic stem cells, followed by bone marrow transplantation,
impaired formation of mature B cells, but not other lymphoid and myeloid
cell populations. Premature expression of miR150 blocked transition from
pro-B to pre-B lymphocytes. Zhou et al. (2007) proposed that miR150
likely downregulates mRNAs important for pre- and pro-B cell formation
and function.

Using loss- and gain-of-function gene targeting approaches for Mir150
with conditional and partial ablation of Myb (189990) in mice, Xiao et
al. (2007) showed that Mir150 controlled Myb expression in vivo in a
dose-dependent manner over a narrow range of miRNA and Myb
concentrations, dramatically affecting lymphocyte development and the
humoral immune response. They concluded that MYB is a critical target of
MIR150.

Using microarray and Northern blot analysis, Chang et al. (2008) showed
that MIRN150 was among several miRNAs downregulated by MYC (190080) in
mouse and human B-cell lymphoma cell lines. The expression of MIRN150
strongly inhibited tumor formation by lymphoma cells following injection
into immunodeficient mice.

MAPPING

Hartz (2008) mapped the MIRN150 gene to chromosome 19q13.33 based on an
alignment of the mature MIRN150 sequence (UCUCCCAACCCUUGUACCAGUG) with
the genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Chang, T.-C.; Yu, D.; Lee, Y.-S.; Wentzel, E. A.; Arking, D. E.;
West, K. M.; Dang, C. V.; Thomas-Tikhonenko, A.; Mendell, J. T.:
Widespread microRNA repression by Myc contributes to tumorigenesis. Nature
Genet. 40: 43-50, 2008.

2. Hartz, P. H.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/22/2008.

3. Lagos-Quintana, M.; Rauhut, R.; Yalcin, A.; Meyer, J.; Lendeckel,
W.; Tuschi, T.: Identification of tissue-specific microRNAs from
mouse. Curr. Biol. 12: 735-739, 2002.

4. Xiao, C.; Calado, D. P.; Galler, G.; Thai, T.-H.; Patterson, H.
C.; Wang, J.; Rajewsky, N.; Bender, T. P.; Rajewsky, K.: MiR-150
controls B cell differentiation by targeting the transcription factor
c-Myb. Cell 131: 146-159, 2007.

5. Zhou, B.; Wang, S.; Mayr, C.; Bartel, D. P.; Lodish, H. F.: miR-150,
a microRNA expressed in mature B and T cells, blocks early B cell
development when expressed prematurely. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104:
7080-7085, 2007. Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 18070
only, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/15/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/22/2008

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/13/2007

EDITED terry: 12/20/2012
mgross: 5/18/2009
terry: 5/15/2009
carol: 5/23/2008
terry: 5/22/2008
mgross: 6/13/2007

603685	TITLE *603685 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN S28; RPS28
DESCRIPTION The mammalian ribosome is composed of 4 RNA species (see 180450) and
approximately 80 different proteins.

Chan et al. (1991) cloned and characterized a rat ribosomal protein S28
(Rps28) cDNA. They deposited the sequence of a human RPS28 cDNA in
GenBank (GENBANK L05091).

By somatic cell hybrid and radiation hybrid mapping analyses, Kenmochi
et al. (1998) mapped the human RPS28 gene to 19p13.2 (GenBank GENBANK
AB007164).

REFERENCE 1. Chan, Y.-L.; Olvera, J.; Wool, I. G.: The primary structure of
rat ribosomal protein S28. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 179: 314-318,
1991.

2. Kenmochi, N.; Kawaguchi, T.; Rozen, S.; Davis, E.; Goodman, N.;
Hudson, T. J.; Tanaka, T.; Page, D. C.: A map of 75 human ribosomal
protein genes. Genome Res. 8: 509-523, 1998.

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 3/30/1999

EDITED alopez: 06/18/1999
carol: 4/7/1999

609178	TITLE *609178 MIS12, S. POMBE, HOMOLOG OF; MIS12
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for sequences similar to yeast Mis12, followed by PCR of a
HeLa cell cDNA library, Goshima et al. (2003) cloned MIS12. The deduced
205-amino acid protein contains 2 conserved blocks in its N-terminal 100
amino acids, followed by a coiled-coil region of about 50 amino acids.
Endogenous HeLa cell MIS12 had an apparent molecular mass of about 25
kD. Immunolocalization showed MIS12 colocalized at kinetochores with
CENPA (117139) and CENPC (117141), and its position during the cell
cycle was that of a typical kinetochore protein. The level of MIS12 did
not fluctuate during the cell cycle.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RNA interference (RNAi) in HeLa cells, Goshima et al. (2003)
demonstrated that reduced MIS12 resulted in misaligned metaphase
chromosomes, abnormally extended metaphase spindle length, lagging
anaphase chromosomes, and interphase micronuclei without mitotic delay.
Spindle checkpoint protein MAD2 (601467) temporally localized at
kinetochores at early mitotic stages after MIS12 RNAi. Kinetochore
localization of MIS12 was unaffected by CENPA RNAi.

Following MIS12 overexpression in HeLa cells, Obuse et al. (2004)
immunoprecipitated MIS12 in a kinetochore-associated complex that
contained PMF1 (609176), DC8 (609174), C20ORF172 (609175), and HP1-alpha
(CBX5; 604478). ZWINT (609177) also associated with the complex at
kinetochores during mitosis. Immunoprecipitation of transfected cells
indicated that MIS12 could form stable complexes with C20ORF172 and DC8.
Much weaker interaction was detected between MIS12 and ZWINT. Exclusion
chromatography revealed 3 peaks containing MIS12 and C20ORF172, but only
the middle peak, which had a mass of 669 kD, contained HP1-alpha. MIS12
knockdown by RNAi abolished the kinetochore association of ZWINT, DC8,
and C20ORF172.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the MIS12
gene to chromosome 17 (TMAP SHGC-36031).

REFERENCE 1. Goshima, G.; Kiyomitsu, T.; Yoda, K.; Yanagida, M.: Human centromere
chromatin protein hMis12, essential for equal segregation, is independent
of CENP-A loading pathway. J. Cell Biol. 160: 25-39, 2003.

2. Obuse, C.; Iwasaki, O.; Kiyomitsu, T.; Goshima, G.; Toyoda, Y.;
Yanagida, M.: A conserved Mis12 centromere complex is linked to heterochromatic
HP1 and outer kinetochore protein Zwint-1. Nature Cell Biol. 6:
1135-1141, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/27/2005

EDITED mgross: 01/28/2005
mgross: 1/27/2005

605129	TITLE *605129 PROTEASOME ACTIVATOR SUBUNIT 3; PSME3
;;PROTEASOME ACTIVATOR 28-GAMMA; PA28G;;
PA28-GAMMA;;
REG-GAMMA;;
KI ANTIGEN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PSME3 belongs to the proteasome activator subunit (PSME) gene family.
For background information on the PSME gene family, see PSME1 (600654).

CLONING

Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE; 152700) produce
autoantibodies against a number of nuclear antigens, including SNRP70
(180740), PCNA (176740), CDR1 (302650), and Ki. By screening a human
placenta cDNA library with a probe obtained by screening a bovine retina
cDNA library with anti-Ki sera from an SLE patient, Nikaido et al.
(1990) isolated a cDNA encoding PSME3, which they called Ki. Sequence
analysis predicted that the 254-amino acid, hydrophilic PSME3 protein
contains a nuclear localization signal and has a molecular mass of
approximately 30 kD, close to the 32 kD observed by Western blot
analysis. PSME3 shares over 99% amino acid identity with the bovine
sequence. RNA blot analysis of human placenta, bovine brain, and mouse
embryos detected 3.0- and 1.5-kb PSME3 transcripts.

GENE FUNCTION

Steroid receptor coactivator-3 (SRC3, or NCOA3; 601937) is an oncogene
frequently amplified and overexpressed in breast cancer. Using
immunoprecipitation analysis, Li et al. (2006) found that endogenous
SRC3 and REG-gamma interacted in HeLa cell nuclear extracts and MCF-7
breast cancer cells. Protein pull-down assays showed the REG-gamma
interacted specifically with the HAT domain of SRC3. Knockdown of
REG-gamma via RNA interference (RNAi) in breast cancer and human
embryonic kidney cell lines resulted in a 2- to 3-fold increase in SRC3
protein levels. Conversely, REG-gamma overexpression in HeLa cells
reduced SRC3 protein levels. In vitro proteasome assays using purified
proteins showed that REG-gamma promoted degradation of SRC3 by the 20S
proteasome in a ubiquitin- and ATP-independent manner. Knockdown of
REG-gamma via RNAi increased estrogen receptor (ER; see 133430) target
gene expression and enhanced estradiol-mediated cell growth in MCF-7
cells, and these effects were secondary to the effect of REG-gamma on
SRC3.

MAPPING

By analysis of overlapping YAC contigs and by FISH, Albertsen et al.
(1994) mapped the PSME3 gene to 17q12-q21. Kandil et al. (1997) mapped
the mouse Psme3 gene to chromosome 14 using interspecific backcross
analysis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Barton et al. (2004) found that mice lacking Psme3 had normal levels of
surface class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules,
slightly reduced Cd8 (see 186910)-positive T cells, and normal responses
to infection with influenza or SV40 virus. However, the ability of Psme3
-/- mice to clear the pulmonary fungal pathogen Histoplasma capsulatum
was slower than wildtype mice. Barton et al. (2004) proposed that PSME3
functions in the MHC class I antigen-processing pathway and that it
exerts an influence on proteasome cleavage specificity.

REFERENCE 1. Albertsen, H. M.; Smith, S. A.; Mazoyer, S.; Fujimoto, E.; Stevens,
J.; Williams, B.; Rodriguez, P.; Cropp, C. S.; Slijepcevic, P.; Carlson,
M.; Robertson, M.; Bradley, P.; Lawrence, E.; Harrington, T.; Mei
Sheng, Z.; Hoopes, R.; Sternberg, N.; Brothman, A.; Callahan, R.;
Ponder, B. A. J.; White, R.: A physical map and candidate genes in
the BRCA1 region on chromosome 17q12-21. Nature Genet. 7: 472-479,
1994.

2. Barton, L. F.; Runnels, H. A.; Schell, T. D.; Cho, Y.; Gibbons,
R.; Tevethia, S. S.; Deepe, G. S., Jr.; Monaco, J. J.: Immune defects
in 28-kDa proteasome activator gamma-deficient mice. J. Immun. 172:
3948-3954, 2004.

3. Kandil, E.; Kohda, K.; Ishibashi, T.; Tanaka, K.; Kasahara, M.
: PA28 subunits of the mouse proteasome: primary structures and chromosomal
localization of the genes. Immunogenetics 46: 337-344, 1997.

4. Li, X.; Lonard, D. M.; Jung, S. Y.; Malovannaya, A.; Feng, Q.;
Qin, J.; Tsai, S. Y.; Tsai, M.-J.; O'Malley, B. W.: The SRC-3/AIB1
coactivator is degraded in a ubiquitin- and ATP-independent manner
by the REG-gamma proteasome. Cell 124: 381-392, 2006.

5. Nikaido, T.; Shimada, K.; Shibata, M.; Hata, M.; Sakamoto, M.;
Takasaki, Y.; Sato, C.; Takahashi, T.; Nishida, Y.: Cloning and nucleotide
sequence of cDNA for Ki antigen, a highly conserved nuclear protein
detected with sera from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. Clin.
Exp. Immun. 79: 209-214, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/20/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/11/2005

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/11/2000

EDITED carol: 07/12/2010
alopez: 9/30/2009
wwang: 5/28/2009
mgross: 5/20/2009
mgross: 11/14/2005
terry: 11/11/2005
joanna: 1/31/2001
mgross: 7/11/2000

611731	TITLE *611731 APC GENE; APC
;;DELETED IN POLYPOSIS 2.5; DP2.5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The APC gene encodes a multidomain protein that plays a major role in
tumor suppression by antagonizing the WNT (see WNT1; 164820) signaling
pathway. Inappropriate activation of this pathway through loss of APC
function contributes to cancer progression, as in familial adenomatous
polyposis (FAP; 175100). APC also has a role in cell migration,
adhesion, chromosome segregation, spindle assembly, apoptosis, and
neuronal differentiation (Hanson and Miller, 2005).

The APC protein is an integral part of the beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806)
signaling pathway.

CLONING

The APC gene was identified and cloned simultaneously and independently
by 2 groups: the group of Bert Vogelstein in Baltimore, in collaboration
with the group of Yusuke Nakamura in Tokyo (Kinzler et al., 1991;
Nishisho et al., 1991), and the group of Ray White in Salt Lake City
(Groden et al., 1991; Joslyn et al., 1991). The deduced 2,843-residue
protein has a molecular mass of 311.8 kD. The protein sequence does not
contain transmembrane regions or nuclear targeting signals, suggesting
cytoplasmic localization.

Kinzler et al. (1991) identified several genes within a 5.5-Mb region of
DNA linked to FAP. All were expressed in normal colonic mucosa: FER
(176942), MCC (159350), SRP19 (182175), and TB2 (REEP5; 125265), in
addition to the APC gene itself. The APC gene product was predicted to
contain coiled-coil regions and was expressed in a wide variety of
tissues.

Joslyn et al. (1991) identified 3 genes within small deleted regions on
chromosome 5q12 found in 2 unrelated patients with FAP. One of these,
termed DP2.5, was found by Groden et al. (1991) to be the APC gene. The
other 2 genes identified by Joslyn et al. (1991) were SRP19 and DP1
(REEP5). Northern blot analysis by Groden et al. (1991) identified a
10-kb APC mRNA.

Hampton et al. (1992) isolated 2 overlapping YACs containing the MCC
gene; one of the YACs also included the complete APC gene.

Lambertz and Ballhausen (1993) isolated cDNA clones representing
transcripts expressed in human fetal brain and coding for the 5-prime
end of the APC gene. Sequence analyses revealed an alternative 5-prime
untranslated region comprising at least 103 bp. This finding suggested
that 2 APC-specific promoter elements exist, giving rise to 2 different
untranslated regions. Within the alternative UTR, Lambertz and
Ballhausen (1993) identified 3 additional AUG codons, located 5-prime to
the intrinsic APC initiation site. The authors suggested that these
codons may be relevant for the translational regulation of APC gene
expression.

Horii et al. (1993) noted that transcriptional initiation of APC occurs
at 3 sites in 2 distinct nontranslated exons at the 5-prime end of the
gene. Studies of transcripts from human colorectal tumor cell lines
suggested the presence of mutations in the transcriptional control
region. Horii et al. (1993) also detected at least 5 different forms of
5-prime noncoding sequences which were generated by alternative
splicing. They stated that the splicing mechanism appeared to be
regulated in a tissue-specific fashion, and 1 transcript, expressed
exclusively in brain, contained an extra exon.

GENE STRUCTURE

Groden et al. (1991) determined that the APC gene contains 15 exons.

Sulekova and Ballhausen (1995) identified a novel coding exon of the APC
gene. To that point, the 54-bp exon (exon 10A) was the smallest coding
exon in the gene, and was located 1.6-kb downstream from exon 10. It is
alternatively spliced and inserted in-frame into mature transcripts; it
gives an APC protein with an additional 18 amino acids. APC exon 10A
flanking sequences were presented so that this exon could be included in
mutation screening procedures.

Xia et al. (1995) described an alternatively spliced APC transcript
which had not been reported previously. Within this transcript, they
found an evolutionarily conserved but previously unidentified exon
between the known exons 10 and 11. The exon contains a heptad repeat
motif.

Karagianni et al. (2005) identified an alternatively spliced Apc
transcript in mouse embryonic stem cells and colon tissue. The
transcript contains an untranslated exon, which the authors designated
exon N. Transcripts bearing exon N spliced to either exon 1 or exon 2
were detected in all mouse tissues examined. A promoter region within
exon N has features of a housekeeping gene, including high average GC
content and lack of CAAT and TATA boxes. Karagianni et al. (2005) mapped
the promoter about 40 kb upstream of the initiating methionine, and
transient transfection experiments showed strong promoter activity.

GENE FUNCTION

Hoshino et al. (1991) found that fragments of chromosome 5, including
the region containing the APC gene, suppressed tumor activity when
transferred into NIH-3T3 cells that had been transformed with Kirsten
sarcoma virus.

Rubinfeld et al. (1993) and Su et al. (1993) found that APC associated
with both beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806) and alpha-catenin (CTNNA1;
116805). Since both proteins bind to the cell adhesion molecule
E-cadherin (192090), the results suggested that APC is involved in cell
adhesion.

Peifer (1993) reviewed the role of the catenins in Drosophila and
extrapolated the likely significance of the beta-catenin-APC
interaction. One possibility is that the APC complex regulates
transmission of the contact inhibition signal into the cell. This
hypothesis would be consistent with the observation that APC mutations
are associated with the development of hyperplasia, an early event in
tumorigenesis. A second possibility is that the APC-catenin complex
regulates adhesion. Although this idea is supported by evidence that
loss of cadherin-mediated adhesion can contribute to metastasis, it
would be less consistent with the evidence that APC acts early in
tumorigenesis.

Smith et al. (1993) produced monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies to APC
for characterizing the protein in normal and tumor cells. They found
that 81% of colon tumor cell lines were totally devoid of the normal,
full-length protein, whereas 40 cell lines derived from sporadic tumors
of other organs had only full-length APC. Immunohistochemical analysis
of APC in normal colonic mucosa demonstrated cytoplasmic staining with
more intense staining in the basolateral margins of the epithelial
cells. The staining was markedly increased in the upper portions of the
crypts, suggesting an increased level of expression with maturation.

Miyashiro et al. (1995) discussed findings that suggested an important
link between the role of APC in tumor initiation and the process of
cellular adhesion. Immunohistochemical studies in normal mouse intestine
suggested that a portion of the APC protein is localized in the lateral
cytoplasm of intestinal epithelial cells and functions in cooperation
with catenins, whereas the APC protein in microvilli and in the apical
cytoplasm has other functions independent of catenins.

Matsumine et al. (1996) showed that the APC-beta-catenin complex binds
to DLG (see 601014), the human homolog of the Drosophila discs large
tumor suppressor protein. This interaction required the
carboxyl-terminal region of APC and the homology repeat region of DLG.
APC colocalized with DLG at the lateral cytoplasm in rat colon
epithelial cells and at the synapse in cultured hippocampal neurons.
Matsumine et al. (1996) suggested that the APC-DLG complex may
participate in regulation of both cell cycle progression and neuronal
function.

Rubinfeld et al. (1996) showed that when beta-catenin is present in
excess, APC binds to a human homolog of 'Armadillo,' glycogen synthase
kinase 3-beta (GSK3B; 605004), a component of the Wingless signaling
pathway in Drosophila development.

Midgley et al. (1997) developed antisera to APC N- and C-terminal
epitopes. They found that the APC protein was expressed in epithelial
and mesenchymal cells in many tissues. In epithelium of bladder, small
and large intestine, esophagus, stomach, and epidermis, APC expression
was restricted to regions where cell replication has ceased and terminal
differentiation is established. APC staining was often diffusely
cytoplasmic; however, in surface cells there was accentuated expression
in the subapical regions and along the lateral margins. Midgley et al.
(1997) concluded that this distribution is compatible with APC function
related to signaling at the adherens junction and indicates that APC
plays a role in cells committed to terminal differentiation.

In mouse epithelial cells, Roose et al. (1999) found that TCF7 (189908)
was one of the targets of the beta-catenin/TCF4 interaction. Roose et
al. (1999) suggested that TCF7 may act as a feedback repressor of
beta-catenin/TCF4 target genes, and thus may cooperate with APC to
suppress malignant transformation of epithelial cells.

Using immunofluorescence microscopy, Neufeld and White (1997) found that
full-length APC protein was present in both the nucleus and the
cytoplasm of human mammary epithelial cells. The nuclear APC protein was
concentrated in discrete subnuclear regions, including the nucleoli,
whereas the cytoplasmic APC protein concentrated at the leading edge of
migrating cells. Colocalization of APC protein with rRNA confirmed a
nucleolar localization. Cell fractionation studies demonstrated
full-length APC protein in both the membrane/cytoskeletal and the
nuclear fractions. Neufeld et al. (2000) demonstrated that nuclear
export of APC is mediated by 2 intrinsic, leucine-rich, nuclear export
signals (NESs) located near the amino terminus. Each NES was able to
induce the nuclear export of a fused carrier protein. Mutation of both
APC NESs resulted in the nuclear accumulation of the full-length APC
protein of approximately 320 kD, further establishing that the 2
intrinsic APC NESs are necessary for APC protein nuclear export.
Moreover, endogenous APC accumulated in the nucleus of cells treated
with the Crm1-specific nuclear export inhibitor leptomycin B. Together,
these data indicated that APC is a nucleocytoplasmic shuttle protein
whose predominantly cytoplasmic localization requires NES function, and
suggested that APC may be important for signaling between the nuclear
and cytoplasmic compartments of epithelial cells.

Kawasaki et al. (2000) cloned a gene, ASEF (605216), whose protein
product was shown to directly interact with APC. ASEF immunoprecipitated
with beta-catenin; however, ASEF and beta-catenin did not interact
directly, suggesting that ASEF, APC, and beta-catenin are found in the
same complex in vivo. Kawasaki et al. (2000) suggested that the APC-ASEF
complex may regulate the actin cytoskeletal network, cell morphology and
migration, and neuronal function.

Kaplan et al. (2001) showed that, during mitosis, wildtype APC localized
to the ends of microtubules embedded in kinetochores and formed a
complex with the checkpoint proteins Bub1 (602452) and Bub3 (603719). In
vitro, APC was a high-affinity substrate for Bub kinases. Cells carrying
a truncated APC gene were defective in chromosome segregation. Kaplan et
al. (2001) concluded that there is a role for APC in
kinetochore-microtubule attachment, and suggested that truncations in
APC that eliminate microtubule binding may contribute to chromosomal
instability in cancer cells.

By immunoprecipitation and pull-down assays using cells from FAP
patients, cells from nonfamilial colorectal carcinoma patients, and
normal human fetal lung fibroblasts, Homma et al. (2002) found that APC
associated with the alpha (CSNK2A1; 115440) and beta (CSNK2B; 115441)
subunits of casein kinase-2 (CK2). APC preferentially interacted with
the tetrameric CK2 holoenzyme. In synchronized cells, association of APC
with CK2 was cell cycle dependent. Full-length APC inhibited CK2
activity in vitro, and mutation analysis localized the inhibitory region
to the C terminus of APC, between residues 2086 and 2394.

In a cell migration assay using primary rat astrocytes,
Etienne-Manneville and Hall (2003) demonstrated that PAR6-PKC-zeta
(176982) interacted with and regulated GSK3-beta to promote polarization
of the centrosome and to control the direction of cell protrusion. CDC42
(116952)-dependent phosphorylation of GSK3-beta occurred specifically at
the leading edge of migrating cells, and induced the interaction of APC
protein with the plus ends of microtubules. The association of APC with
microtubules was essential for cell polarization.

Yamashita et al. (2003) found that dividing Drosophila male germline
stem cells used intracellular mechanisms involving centrosome function
and cortically localized APC protein to orient mitotic spindles
perpendicular to the niche, ensuring a reliably asymmetric outcome in
which 1 daughter cell remains in the niche and self-renews stem cell
identity, whereas the other, displaced away, initiates differentiation.

In cultured murine myocytes, Wang et al. (2003) found that agrin
(103320)-induced acetylcholine receptor (AChR) postsynaptic aggregation
required APC, which was found to colocalize and bind specifically to the
AChR beta subunit (100710). The interaction occurred downstream of MuSK
(601296) activation. Wang et al. (2003) suggested that a direct
interaction between APC and the AChR beta subunit may link AChR to the
cytoskeleton, helping to localize the receptors to the neuromuscular
junction.

Using microarray and RT-PCR analyses, Jette et al. (2004) found that
expression of 2 retinoid biosynthesis genes, RDH5 (601617) and RDHL
(DHRS9; 612131), was reduced in colon adenomas and carcinomas compared
with normal controls. Reintroduction of wildtype APC into an
APC-deficient colon carcinoma cell line increased expression of RDHL
without affecting RDH5. Induction of RDHL by APC appeared to depend on
the presence of CDX2 (600297).

Choi et al. (2004) found that APC was downregulated by the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in human 293T cells and that Wnt signaling
inhibited this process. APC was ubiquitinated directly, and axin (AXIN1;
603816), which is present in the same protein complex as APC,
facilitated APC downregulation. Furthermore, Choi et al. (2004) found
that treatment of human 293T cells with WNT3A (606359) led to
accumulation of APC and beta-catenin in nuclear lysates, providing
support for the hypothesis that APC has a role in shuttling beta-catenin
in and out of the nucleus.

Watanabe et al. (2004) found that monkey Iqgap1 (603379) and Apc
interacted directly via the armadillo repeats of Apc and the C terminus
of Iqgap1. Clip170 (179838) also immunoprecipitated with Apc and Iqgap1.
Apc and Iqgap1 localized interdependently to the leading edge in
migrating Vero cells, and transfection of cells with constitutively
active human IQGAP1 provided accumulation sites with APC in a manner
dependent on actin filaments. Watanabe et al. (2004) concluded that RAC1
(602048) and CDC42 recruit the IQGAP1/APC complex and that IQGAP1 links
APC to actin filaments for cell polarization and directional migration.

By fractionating human and canine cell lysates over glycerol gradients,
Penman et al. (2005) identified 2 distinct soluble protein pools
containing APC. One of these pools represented fully assembled
beta-catenin-targeting complexes. The second pool contained at least 2
different forms of APC: APC that was bound to partially assembled
beta-catenin-targeting complexes and APC that could bind microtubules.
Formation of fully assembled beta-catenin-targeting complexes was
reduced by inhibitors of GSK3B. Highly elevated levels of beta-catenin
in tumor cells correlated with decreased ability of endogenous APC to
bind microtubules. Furthermore, APC lacking the direct
microtubule-binding site was more effective at downregulating
beta-catenin. Penman et al. (2005) concluded that interaction of APC
with microtubules and with the beta-catenin-targeting complex are
mutually exclusive.

By examining degradation of beta-catenin in human colon cancer cell
lines with different APC truncations, Yang et al. (2006) determined that
APC regulates beta-catenin phosphorylation and ubiquitination by
distinct domains and by separate molecular mechanisms.

Migrating fibroblasts polarize to form a leading edge and a tail in a
process that involves asymmetric distribution of RNAs. Mili et al.
(2008) used a fractionation scheme combined with microarrays to analyze
protruding pseudopodia of mouse fibroblasts in response to migratory
stimuli. Mili et al. (2008) found that a diverse group of RNAs
accumulates in such pseudopodial protrusions. Through their 3-prime
untranslated regions these transcripts are anchored in granules
concentrated at the plus ends of detyrosinated microtubules. RNAs in the
granules associate with the APC tumor suppressor and FMRP (309550). APC
is required for the accumulation of transcripts in protrusions. Mili et
al. (2008) concluded that their results suggested a new type of RNA
anchoring mechanism as well as an unanticipated function for APC in
localizing RNAs.

- APC Gene Function in Disease

Unlike some other tumor suppressor genes, loss or mutation in the
wildtype gene is not essential to the development of intestinal polyps
(Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990). In a review, Kinzler and Vogelstein
(1996) noted that the APC gene serves as a gatekeeper in colonic
epithelial cells. The wildtype APC allele is lost in a great majority of
colorectal tumors of both sporadic and FAP patients, consistent with the
Knudson 2-hit model.

Powell et al. (1992) presented evidence that APC mutations occur early
during colorectal tumorigenesis. Sequence analysis of 41 colorectal
tumors revealed that most carcinomas (60%) and adenomas (63%) contained
a mutated APC gene. Mutations of the APC gene were found in the earliest
tumors that could be analyzed, including adenomas as small as 0.5 cm in
diameter, and the frequency of such mutations remained constant as
tumors progressed from benign to malignant stages. This finding provided
support for the multistage process of colorectal carcinogenesis with the
APC gene at or near the initial step (Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990).

Fearon (1997) reviewed more than 20 different hereditary cancer
syndromes that had been defined and attributed to specific germline
mutations in various inherited cancer genes. A useful diagram
illustrated how APC protein regulates beta-catenin levels in normal
cells, and how mutations in APC or CTNNB1 in cancer cell genes
deregulate cell growth via TCF4.

He et al. (1998) identified the c-myc (190080) oncogene as a target gene
in the beta-catenin signaling pathway. Expression of MYC was shown to be
repressed by wildtype APC and activated by beta-catenin, and these
effects were mediated through TCF4 binding sites in the MYC promoter.

FAP is associated with an increased risk of developing papillary thyroid
carcinomas (188550). A significant fraction of sporadic human papillary
thyroid carcinomas have RET protooncogene rearrangements that generate
chimeric transforming oncogenes designated RET/PTC (see RET; 164761).
Cetta et al. (1998) found RET/PTC1 oncogene activation in 2 of 3
papillary carcinomas from an FAP kindred, and in the papillary carcinoma
of a second FAP kindred. These findings showed that loss of function of
APC coexists with gain of function of RET in some papillary thyroid
carcinomas, suggesting that RET/PTC1 oncogene activation could be a
progression step in the development of FAP-associated thyroid tumors.

Soravia et al. (1999) described 2 FAP kindreds with thyroid cancer and
different germline APC mutations (611731.0038 and 611731.0039,
respectively). In 3 FAP patients, RET/PTC1 and RET/PTC3 were expressed
in thyroid cancers; no positivity was observed for RET/PTC2. The
findings suggested that loss of APC function and gain of RET/PTC
function is an early event in FAP-associated thyroid tumorigenesis.

Lamlum et al. (1999) assembled evidence that APC mutations may not
result in simple loss of protein function. They found that FAP patients
with germline APC mutations within a small region (codons 1194 to 1392
at most) showed mainly allelic loss in their colorectal adenomas, in
contrast to other FAP patients, whose 'second hits' tended to occur by
truncating mutations in the mutation cluster region. These results
indicated that different APC mutations provide cells with different
selective advantages, with mutations close to codon 1300 providing the
greatest advantage. Allelic loss was selected strongly in cells with 1
mutation near codon 1300. A different germline-somatic APC mutation
association existed in FAP desmoids. Lamlum et al. (1999) concluded that
APC is not, therefore, a classic tumor suppressor. Their findings
indicated a new mechanism for disease severity: if a broader spectrum of
mutations is selected in tumors, the somatic mutation rate is
effectively higher, and more tumors grow.

Dihlmann et al. (1999) provided experimental evidence for a
dominant-negative effect of APC gene products associated with severe
polyposis. Wildtype APC activity in beta-catenin/TCF-mediated
transcription was strongly inhibited by a mutant APC that is truncated
at codon 1309 (611731.0023). In contrast, mutant APC gene products that
are associated with attenuated polyposis, such as those involving codon
386 or 1465 (611731.0019), interfered only weakly with wildtype APC
activity. These results suggested a molecular explanation for the
genotype-phenotype correlation in FAP patients and supported the idea
that colorectal tumor growth might be, in part, driven by selection for
a mutation in the 'mutation cluster region' (MCR).

Lamlum et al. (1999) noted that APC seems to act as a tumor-suppressor
gene in a 'nonclassical' fashion: the site of the germline mutation
determines the type of 'second hit' in FAP tumors, and simple protein
inactivation is selected weakly, if at all. In a screening of 210
colorectal adenomas from 35 FAP patients, Lamlum et al. (1999) found
that patients with germline APC mutations around codon 1300 tended to
acquire their second hit by allelic loss and had more severe disease.
Other FAP patients tended to acquire their second hit by a truncating
mutation in the MCR region of the APC gene.

Of 40 colorectal cancer cell lines, Rowan et al. (2000) found that 32
(83%) showed evidence of APC mutation and/or allelic loss. The authors
identified several APC mutations and found a hotspot for somatic
mutation in sporadic colorectal tumors at codon 1554. The results
suggested that APC mutations occur in most colorectal cancers. When
combined with previously published data, their results showed that there
is interdependence of the 2 hits at APC in sporadic colorectal tumors as
well as in FAP. APC mutations in the MCR, especially those close to
codon 1300, were associated with allelic loss, whereas tumors with
mutations outside this region tended to harbor truncating mutations. The
causes of this phenomenon were thought to be selection for retained
N-terminal and lost C-terminal APC functions, effects on beta-catenin
levels, and APC protein stability.

Rosin-Arbesfeld et al. (2000) showed that APC contains highly conserved
nuclear export signals 3-prime adjacent to the mutation cluster region
that enable it to exit from the nucleus. Mutant APC in cancer cells lost
this ability, ultimately resulting in the nuclear accumulation of
beta-catenin. The findings suggested that the ability of APC to exit
from the nucleus is critical for its tumor suppressor function.

In 2 families from Singapore with FAP, Cao et al. (2000) identified 2
deletions in the APC gene at exons 11 and 14, respectively. By mapping
the precise breakpoints, Cao et al. (2001) confirmed that these
deletions encompassed about 2 kb and 6 kb of the genomic regions
encompassing exons 11 and 14, respectively. Detailed sequence analysis
suggested that the 2-kb exon 11 deletion was most likely generated by a
topoisomerase-I (TOP1; 126420)-mediated nonhomologous recombination and
the 6-kb exon 14 deletion by an Alu-Alu homologous recombination. In the
case of the first deletion, both 5-prime and 3-prime breakpoints had 2
topoisomerase I recognition sites and runs of pyrimidines within the
10-bp sequences in their vicinity. This was thought to be the first
report of a topoisomerase-I-mediated germline mutation in a tumor
suppressor gene. Both deletions resulted in truncated APC proteins
missing the beta-catenin and axin-binding domains, resulting in severe
polyposis and cancer.

Fearnhead et al. (2001) reviewed understanding of how mutations in the
APC gene translate into changes at the protein level, which in turn
contribute to the role of APC in tumorigenesis.

Yan et al. (2002) found that slightly lower levels of APC expression
were associated with a pronounced predisposition to hereditary
colorectal tumors. No APC mutations were identified in a family with FAP
associated with partial reduction in APC protein expression, but
neoplastic tissue showed loss of the normal allele. Yan et al. (2002)
identified a second case with no structural changes in the APC gene, but
a reduced level of expression of APC. The mutations responsible for the
reduced expression presumably resided deep within an intron or far
upstream of the gene in the affected allele. The data were consistent
with a threshold for APC product being required to suppress intestinal
tumorigenesis, and suggested that the threshold is finely balanced.

Albuquerque et al. (2002) analyzed somatic APC point mutations and LOH
in 133 colorectal adenomas from 6 FAP patients. They observed that when
germline mutations resulted in truncated proteins without any of the 7
beta-catenin downregulating 20-amino acid repeats distributed in the
central domain of APC, the majority of the corresponding somatic point
mutations retained 1 or, less frequently, of the same 20-amino acid
repeats. Conversely, when the germline mutation resulted in a truncated
protein retaining one 20-amino acid repeat, most second hits removed all
20-amino acid repeats. The latter was frequently accomplished by allelic
loss. Notably, and in contrast to previous observations, in a patient
where the germline APC mutation retained 2 such repeats, the majority of
the somatic hits were point mutations (and not LOH) located upstream,
which removed all of the 20-amino acid repeats. These results indicated
selection for APC genotypes that are likely to retain some activity in
downregulating beta-catenin (116806) signaling. The authors proposed
that this selection process is aimed at a specific degree of
beta-catenin signaling optimal for tumor formation, rather than at its
constitutive activation by deletion of all of the beta-catenin
downregulating motifs in APC.

Goss et al. (2002) demonstrated that APC alleles with 5-prime mutations
produce APC protein that downregulates beta-catenin, inhibits
beta-catenin/T-cell factor-mediated transactivation, and induces
cell-cycle arrest. Transfection studies demonstrated that
cap-independent translation is initiated internally at an AUG at codon
184 of APC. Furthermore, APC coding sequence between AAPC mutations and
AUG-184 permits internal ribosome entry in a bicistronic vector. These
data suggested that AAPC alleles in vivo may produce functional APC by
internal initiation and established a functional correlation between
5-prime APC mutations and their associated clinical phenotype.

A genetic model for colorectal cancer (Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990)
suggests that the sequential accumulation of mutations in specific
genes, i.e., APC, KRAS (KRAS2; 190070), and p53, drives the transition
from healthy colonic epithelia through increasingly dysplastic adenoma
to colorectal cancer. However, Smith et al. (2002) found that only 6.6%
of 100 colorectal cancer tumors had mutations in all 3 genes, with 38.7%
of tumors containing mutations in only 1 of the 3 genes. The most common
combination of mutations was p53 and APC (27.1%), whereas mutations in
both p53 and KRAS were extremely rare. Statistical analysis confirmed
that mutations in KRAS and p53 cooccurred less frequently than expected
by chance. The findings suggested that these mutations lie in alternate
pathways, and that there are multiple genetic pathways to colorectal
cancer.

Green and Kaplan (2003) found that conditional expression of a truncated
form of APC in HEK293 cells, which express wildtype APC, dominantly
interfered with microtubule plus-end attachments, recapitulating the
phenotype observed in APC mutant tumor cells. The authors proposed that
APC functions to modulate microtubule plus-end attachments during
mitosis, and that a mutant APC allele predisposes cells to increased
mitotic abnormalities, which may contribute to tumor progression.

Kawasaki et al. (2003) showed that overexpression of ASEF (605216)
decreased E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion and promoted the
migration of epithelial canine kidney cells. Both of these activities
were stimulated by truncated APC proteins expressed in human colorectal
tumor cells. Experiments based on RNA interference and dominant-negative
mutants showed that both ASEF and mutated APC were required for the
migration of colorectal tumor cells expressing truncated APC. Kawasaki
et al. (2003) concluded that the APC-ASEF complex functions in cell
migration as well as in E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion, and that
truncated APC present in colorectal tumor cells contributes to their
aberrant migratory properties.

Takacs et al. (2008) demonstrated that Drosophila APC homologs have an
activating role in both physiologic and ectopic Wnt/Wingless (see
164820) signaling. The Apc amino terminus is important for its
activating function, whereas the beta-catenin binding sites are
dispensable. Takacs et al. (2008) suggested that APC likely promotes
Wingless transduction through downregulation of Axin (603816), a
negative regulator of Wingless signaling. Takacs et al. (2008) suggested
that, given the evolutionary conservation of APC in Wnt signal
transduction, an activating role may also be present in vertebrates with
relevance to development and cancer.

In FAP, beta-catenin is stabilized constitutively, providing a permanent
mitogenic signal to normally resting cells. This occurs when the second
allele of APC is inactivated somatically. Kohler et al. (2009) described
an APC domain, the beta-catenin inhibitory domain (CID), that is located
between the second and third 20-amino acid beta-catenin-binding repeats
and therefore was present in many truncated APC products found in human
tumours. In truncated APC, the CID was absolutely necessary to
downregulate the transcriptional activity and the level of beta-catenin,
even when an axin/conductin binding site was present. The activity of
the CID was dramatically reduced in several colon cancer cell lines and
could be inhibited by shorter truncated APC lacking the CID. The authors
concluded that CID is a direct target of the selective pressure acting
on APC during tumorigenesis, and it explains the interdependence of both
APC mutations in colorectal, duodenal, and desmoid tumours.

Zhang et al. (2010) showed that deficiency in the APC gene and
subsequent activation of beta-catenin lead to the repression of cellular
caspase-8 inhibitor c-FLIP (603599) expression through activation of
c-Myc (190080), and that all-trans-retinyl acetate (RAc) independently
upregulates tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL; 603598) death receptors and suppresses decoy receptors. Thus,
the combination of TRAIL and RAc induces apoptosis in APC-deficient
premalignant cells without affecting normal cells in vitro. In addition,
Zhang et al. (2010) showed that short-term and noncontinuous TRAIL and
RAc treatment induced apoptosis specifically in intestinal polyps,
strongly inhibited tumor growth, and prolonged survival in 'multiple
intestinal neoplasms' (Min) mice. With their approach, Zhang et al.
(2010) further demonstrated that TRAIL and RAc induced significant cell
death in human colon polyps, providing a potentially selective approach
for colorectal cancer chemoprevention by targeting APC-deficient cells
for apoptosis.

Lane et al. (2010) found evidence of reduced APC expression in patients
with 5q- syndrome (153550) compared with healthy controls and patients
with low-risk myelodysplastic syndrome.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Germline and Somatic Mutations in the APC Gene

In 4 unrelated patients with familial adenomatous polyposis-1 (FAP1;
175100), Groden et al. (1991) identified 4 different heterozygous
inactivating mutations in the APC gene (611731.0001-611731.0004).

In the germline of 5 patients with FAP1 or Gardner syndrome, Nishisho et
al. (1991) identified 4 point mutations in the APC gene
(611731.0005-611731.00008) using both the ribonuclease (RNase)
protection assay on PCR-amplified DNA and direct sequencing of cloned
PCR products. One mutation (611731.0006) was found in 2 unrelated
patients: 1 with isolated FAP and the other with Gardner syndrome.
Nishisho et al. (1991) also identified somatic mutations in the APC gene
(see, e.g., 611731.0009) in 4 of 158 colorectal cancers isolated from
patients with sporadic disease.

Miyoshi et al. (1992) identified germline mutations in the APC gene in
53 (67%) of 79 unrelated FAP patients. Twenty-eight mutations were small
deletions and 2 were insertions of 1 or 2 bp; 19 were point mutations
resulting in stop codons, and 4 were missense point mutations. Thus, 92%
of the mutations were predicted to result in truncation of the APC
protein. More than two-thirds (68%) of the mutations were clustered in
the 5-prime half of the last exon, and nearly two-fifths of the total
mutations occurred at 1 of 5 positions. The findings suggested that the
C terminal of the protein is required for proper function.

Using denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), Fodde et al.
(1992) identified 8 different germline mutations in the APC gene (see,
e.g., 611731.0012-611731.0018) in Dutch patients with FAP. All the
mutations resulted in truncated proteins.

Seki et al. (1992) identified LOH at the APC locus in an adrenocortical
carcinoma from an FAP patient. Miyoshi et al. (1992) described loss of
heterozygosity at the APC locus in 30 (48%) of 63 colorectal adenomas or
carcinomas tumors, as well as somatic APC mutations in 43. Forty-one
(95%) of the mutations resulted in truncation of the APC protein. Over
60% of the somatic mutations were clustered within a small region of
exon 15 designated as the 'mutation cluster region' (MCR), which
accounted for less than 10% of the coding region. Mutations in the MCR
result in expression of COOH-terminally truncated proteins. Combining
all the data, more than 80% of tumors had at least one mutation in the
APC gene, of which more than 60% had 2 mutations. The results strongly
suggested that somatic mutations of the APC gene are associated with the
development of the great majority of colorectal tumors.

Using SSCP analysis, Cottrell et al. (1992) identified APC mutations in
patients with FAP and in colon cancer tissue from patients with sporadic
disease. All mutations resulted in truncated proteins. Their results
suggested that highly localized short sequences, such as runs that code
for adenine and thymine, may account for up to 20% of all observed APC
mutations. One 5-bp deletion was found in a sporadic colon tumor and in
4 unrelated APC patients. Cottrell et al. (1992) suggested that since
most mutations predict truncation of the APC protein, diagnosis might be
more conveniently detected through analysis of the APC protein.

Sen-Gupta et al. (1993) reported a somatic deletion mutation of the APC
gene in desmoid tissue in a patient reported by Hodgson et al. (1993) as
having FAP caused by a constitutional chromosome 5q22 deletion.

Nagase and Nakamura (1993) summarized the germline APC mutations in 174
FAP patients and in somatic APC mutations in 103 colorectal tumors, as
well as mutations in tumors arising in organs other than the colon and
rectum. They concluded that inactivation of both alleles at the APC
locus is required for development of most tumors in the colon and
rectum. The great majority of the known mutations would result in
truncation of the APC product. Almost all known mutations had been
located within the 5-prime half of the coding region, although somatic
mutations in colorectal tumors tended to cluster in the MCR, which
represents only 8% of the coding sequence (codons 1286-1513). It was
suggested that the location of germline mutations is correlated with the
number of colorectal polyps in FAP patients.

De Vries et al. (1996) described an on-line database of mutations in the
APC gene. Beroud and Soussi (1996) described a database of germline and
somatic mutations in the APC gene in human tumors and cell lines. The
database held 737 mutations, including 332 germline and 402 somatic.
Almost all led to truncation of the APC protein either by a nonsense
mutation (30%) or by a frameshift mutation (68%). Most of the mutations
occurred in the first half of the coding region. Germline mutations were
scattered throughout the 5-prime half of the gene, whereas somatic
mutations (60%) were concentrated in the MCR region. In germline
mutations, 2 hotspot codons were identified, one at position 1061 and
the second at position 1309. In somatic mutations, 2 hotspots occurred
at positions 1309 and 1450. The authors noted that the concentration of
mutations in the 5-prime part of the gene was believed to be involved in
a dominant effect of the N-terminus of the APC protein. This APC region
contains a dimerization domain and it has been demonstrated that
wildtype and mutant APC are associated in vivo.

Van der Luijt et al. (1997) identified 67 germline mutations, including
27 novel mutations, in the APC gene in 105 Dutch families with FAP.
Sixty-five mutations were detected using denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis (DGGE) for exons 1-14, and the protein truncation test
for the large exon 15. Most of the mutations were either frameshifts
(39/65) or single base substitutions (18/65), resulting in premature
stop codons. Splicing defects were identified in 7 cases and a
nonconservative amino acid change in 1 case. Southern blot analysis
detected APC structural rearrangements in 2 pedigrees by Southern blot
analysis.

Analyzing 2 sets of data, Marshall et al. (1997) commented on the
finding that 1- to 2-bp deletions and 1-bp insertions were much more
commonly found among somatic mutations of the APC gene than among
germline mutations of the APC gene. On the other hand, deletions of more
than 2 bp were much more frequent among the germline mutations than
among somatic mutations. Insertions of more than 1 bp were more frequent
in somatic mutations than in germline mutations. Possible explanations
for these differences were discussed.

Wallis et al. (1999) carried out mutation analysis of the APC gene in
205 families, comprised of 190 unrelated FAP and 15 non-FAP colorectal
cancer patients, using DGGE, PTT, and direct sequencing. Mutations
causing chain termination were identified only in patients in the FAP
group (105 patients). Amino acid substitutions were identified in 4
individuals, 3 of whom were in the non-FAP group.

Won et al. (1999) identified germline mutations of the APC gene in 38 of
62 (61%) unrelated Korean patients with FAP. The mutation was presumed
to be novel in 19. They found the protein truncation test to be superior
to SSCP analysis in the detection of germline mutations.

Approximately 80% of FAP patients can be shown to have truncating
mutations of the APC gene. To determine the cause of FAP in the other
20% of the patients, Laken et al. (1999) used MAMA (monoallelic mutation
analysis) to examine independently the status of each of the 2 APC
alleles. Of 9 patients analyzed, 7 were found to have significantly
reduced expression from 1 of their 2 alleles, whereas 2 patients were
found to have full-length expression from both alleles. Laken et al.
(1999) concluded that more than 95% of patients with FAP have
inactivating mutations in APC and that a combination of MAMA and
standard genetic tests will identify APC abnormalities in the vast
majority of such patients. That no APC expression from the mutant allele
is found in some FAP patients argues strongly against the requirement
for dominant-negative effects of APC mutations. The results also
suggested that there may be at least 1 additional gene besides APC that
can give rise to FAP. Laken et al. (1999) pointed out that APCL, a
homolog of APC located on 19p13.3, had been described by Nakagawa et al.
(1998) and van Es et al. (1999). This homolog, as well as the
functionally related family of axin genes (see 603816), are good
candidates for FAP causation in these kindreds.

In 4 FAP families, Su et al. (2000) identified pathogenic APC genomic
rearrangements resulting from homologous and nonhomologous
recombinations mediated by Alu elements. Two of these 4 rearrangements
were complex, involving deletion and insertion of nucleotides. These
rearrangements were initially revealed by analyzing cDNAs and could not
have been identified by using mutation detection methods that screened
each exon individually. The identification of 4 genomic rearrangements
among a total of 26 APC mutations in the study suggested that genomic
rearrangements are relatively frequent.

Lamlum et al. (2000) screened 164 unrelated patients with 'multiple'
(3-100) colorectal adenomas for germline variants throughout the APC
gene, including promoter mutations. In addition to 3 Ashkenazi patients
with I1307K (611731.0029), they found 7 patients with the E1317Q variant
(611731.0036) and 4 patients with truncating APC variants in exon 9 or
in the 3-prime part of the gene. Germline APC variants accounted for
approximately 10% of patients with multiple adenomas. The authors
recommended screening multiple adenoma patients for a restricted number
of germline APC variants, namely the missense changes E1317Q and I1307K
(if of Ashkenazi descent), and, if there is a family history of
colorectal tumors, for truncating mutations 5-prime to exon 5, in exon
9, and 3-prime to codon 1580.

In 34 of 917 unrelated FAP patients, Aretz et al. (2004) identified 26
different heterozygous mutations in the APC gene at or close to splice
sites; 6 of these occurred within exon sequences. Detailed analysis
showed that 1 variant in exon 4 and 3 variants in exon 14 resulted in
exon skipping due to aberrant splicing, likely related to disruption of
exonic splicing enhancers. Aretz et al. (2004) emphasized that the
consequences of some missense and silent mutations are manifest at the
DNA level and not the protein level. Aretz et al. (2004) found that a
common 5-bp deletion at codon 1309 (611731.0023) was overrepresented in
their group of patients with proven or suspected de novo mutations
compared with familial cases (34 of 96 vs 26 of 505, p less than 0.001),
supporting the view that the sequence around codon 1309 is a hotspot for
mutation. Using haplotype analysis, Aretz et al. (2004) traced the
parental origin of de novo mutations in 16 unrelated patients and found
that 4 were of maternal and 12 of paternal origin, suggesting a moderate
sex bias towards paternal origin. They noted that large deletions and
single-base substitutions were exclusively of paternal origin, whereas
small deletions were equally distributed.

Among tissue specimens from 174 FAP patients with known APC germline
mutations, Blaker et al. (2004) identified 8 tumors of types
infrequently seen in FAP. Second somatic APC mutations were found in 4
of the 8 tumors: a uterine adenocarcinoma, a hepatocellular adenoma, an
adrenocortical adenoma, and an epidermal cyst. These tumors showed an
elevated concentration of beta-catenin, but no mutations in the CTNNB1
gene. Blaker et al. (2004) stated that theirs was the first study
reporting second somatic APC mutations in FAP-associated uterine
adenocarcinoma and epidermal cysts, and concluded that their data
strengthened a role for impaired APC function in the pathogenesis of
adrenal and hepatic neoplasms in FAP patients.

Aretz et al. (2005) used the multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA) method to screen 174 unrelated FAP patients in whom
no point mutation in the APC gene had been uncovered by PTT or
denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC). They
identified 14 different deletions in 26 patients, ranging from single
exons to the whole gene including the promoter region. Almost all of the
deletions (22 of 26) were detected in the 46 patients with typical FAP,
whereas none were found in 93 patients with attenuated FAP. Aretz et al.
(2005) noted that a large deletion occurred in about half of the
apparently mutation-negative families with typical FAP, pointing to an
overall frequency of around 12% for large deletions in their series of
patients with typical FAP, compared to 75% for point mutations.

Charames et al. (2008) identified a large heterozygous deletion in the
APC promoter region, including promoter 1A and 5-prime untranslated
regions, in affected members of a large Canadian Mennonite kindred with
adenomatous polyposis coli and colon cancer. The authors were unable to
determined the precise limits of the large promoter deletion. The
mutation was shown to result in transcriptional silencing of the APC
allele. The findings were consistent with a founder effect in this
genetically isolated population.

- Other Cancers Caused by Somatic Mutation in the APC Gene

Oda et al. (1996) observed loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at the APC
and/or MCC loci in 4 (57%) of 7 informative hepatoblastoma (see 114550)
tissues derived from patients without FAP. Somatic mutations were
detected in 8 (61.5%) of the 13 total cases, with 9 cases (69%) showing
genetic alterations in the APC gene as LOH or somatic mutations (see,
e.g., 611731.0024). Double mutations were demonstrated in 2 cases. The
nature of the somatic mutations observed in this study was unusual
because 9 of the 10 mutations were missense, with only 1 case featuring
a frameshift mutation due to an insertion. By contrast, more than 90% of
mutations in the APC gene in colorectal tumors result in a truncated APC
protein due to either frameshift or nonsense mutations.

Among 46 medulloblastomas (see 155255) derived from patients with
sporadic disease and no FAP, Huang et al. (2000) identified 2 with
somatic mutations in the APC gene and 4 with somatic mutations in the
beta-catenin gene. This study provided the first evidence that APC
mutations are operative in a subset of sporadic medulloblastomas.

- Epigenetics

In a study of patients with stage I nonsmall cell lung cancer (see
211980) who underwent curative resection but had a recurrence compared
to matched patients who did not have a recurrence, Brock et al. (2008)
found that promoter methylation of the CDKN2A (600160), CDH13 (601364),
RASSF1A (605082), and APC genes in tumors and in histologically
tumor-negative lymph nodes was independently associated with tumor
recurrence.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

In 22 unrelated APC patients, Nagase et al. (1992) found that germline
mutations between codons 1250 and 1464 were associated with profuse
polyps (10 or more), whereas mutations in other regions of the APC gene
were associated with sparse polyps (fewer than 10).

In an analysis of 150 unrelated patients with familial adenomatous
polyposis, Nagase et al. (1992) found no indication that extracolonic
manifestations, such as osteomas and desmoid tumors, correlated with the
type or intragenic location of a particular germline mutation.

Olschwang et al. (1993) found that the extent of congenital hypertrophy
of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE) correlated with the position
of the protein-truncating mutation in APC. CHRPE lesions were almost
always absent if the mutation occurred before exon 9, but were
consistently present if it occurred after this exon. The same finding
was recorded by Bunyan et al. (1995), who also noted that a more distal
mutation site was associated with an earlier age of onset of symptoms
and a larger number of colonic polyps.

Caspari et al. (1994) and Gayther et al. (1994) found that patients with
the 5-bp deletion at codon 1309 (611731.0023) had gastrointestinal
symptoms and death from colorectal cancer that occurred about 10 years
earlier than in patients with other mutations.

Spirio et al. (1993) and Olschwang et al. (1993) found that the patients
with mutations in codons 136 to 302 of the APC gene did not develop
CHRPE, whereas those with mutations in a region beyond exon 9 and up to
codon 1387 of the gene presented with ophthalmic lesions. Only some
patients with mutations within exon 9 had CHRPE. Among 26 FAP patients,
including 18 with CHRPE, Wallis et al. (1994) reported a clear
association between CHRPE and APC mutations located at or after codon
457 in exon 9. Patients without CHRPE all had mutations proximal to exon
9. All 26 APC mutations resulted in truncated proteins, but the
mutations associated with CHRPE predicted truncated proteins larger than
50 kD. Wallis et al. (1994) suggested that larger mutant APC proteins
may exert a dominant-negative effect, resulting in decreased APC
function and expression of CHRPE.

Among 36 patients from 20 FAP families, Caspari et al. (1995) found that
patients with a mutation between codons 1445 and 1578 did not express
CHRPE, but developed severe desmoid tumors. With the exception of 3
prepubertal children, all patients with mutations in this region
developed desmoid tumors.

Davies et al. (1995) found that families with mutations 3-prime of codon
1444 had significantly more lesions on dental panoramic radiographs (p
less than 0.001) and appeared to have a higher incidence of desmoid
tumors than did families with mutations at the 5-prime end. All 7
families except one with mutations 5-prime of exon 9 did not express
CHRPE. All of 38 individuals from 16 families with mutations between
exon 9 and codon 1444 expressed CHRPE. The 11 individuals from 4
families with mutations 3-prime of codon 1444 did not express CHRPE.
These results suggested that the severity of some of the features of
Gardner syndrome may correlate with genotype in FAP.

Giardiello et al. (1997) studied 51 families in the Johns Hopkins
Polyposis Registry and detected germline APC mutations in 42. APC
mutation was associated with the extraintestinal phenotype. Mutations in
codons 542-1309 were associated with pigmented retinal lesions, while
mutations in codons 1465, 1546, and 2621 were associated with multiple
extraintestinal manifestations. Patients without extraintestinal
manifestations had either nontruncating APC mutations or had no
detectable APC mutations.

Brensinger et al. (1998) examined the colorectal and extracolonic
phenotypes in 2 FAP families from the Johns Hopkins Polyposis Registry;
1 family from the Indiana University Medical Center, Indianapolis,
Indiana; and 1 from the University of Colorado Cancer Center, Denver,
Colorado with mutations in the 3-prime end of the APC gene. The authors
found considerable intra- and interfamilial variability in colorectal
phenotype. Extracolonic manifestations also showed intra- and
interfamilial variation and did not correlate with colorectal phenotypic
expression: many of the individuals with an attenuated colorectal
phenotype had numerous skin lesions. No clear genotype-phenotype
correlation emerged from this study.

Wallis et al. (1999) studied genotype/phenotype correlations for 9
extracolonic manifestations associated with FAP. A significantly greater
proportion of individuals with mutations between codons 1395 and 1493
(group C3) exhibited osteomas, desmoids, and epidermoid cysts as
compared to those with mutations between codons 177 and 452 (group C1).
In addition, a significantly greater proportion of group C3 patients
presented with symptomatic desmoid tumors and osteomas as compared to
those with mutations between codons 457 and 1309 (group C2). Patients in
group C3 also exhibited the highest frequency of periampullary cancer
and gastric and duodenal adenomas. Although the incidence of
hepatoblastoma was too low to allow statistical analysis, Wallis et al.
(1999) noted that hepatoblastoma-associated APC mutations clustered
within the group C2 mutation region. Wallis et al. (1999) suggested that
liver imaging may be indicated in families with mutations in this
region.

Among 105 FAP patients with known pathogenic APC mutations, Bisgaard and
Bulow (2006) found that 17 reported palpable osteomas. Osteomas were
only identified in patients with mutations between codons 767 and 1513,
a gene area also associated with CHRPE and hepatoblastoma. Sebaceous
cysts were reported in 51% of 173 FAP patients, and those patients had
APC mutations evenly distributed in the gene with no particular
hotspots. Osteomas appeared most frequently in patients with sebaceous
cysts (odds ratio of 6.6).

- Attenuated APC

Spirio et al. (1993) determined the APC mutations in 7 families with
so-called 'attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli' (AAPC), i.e., FAP with
relatively few colonic polyps but still a significant risk of colon
cancer. Four distinct mutations in the APC gene were identified in 7
AAPC families (see, e.g., Y157X, 611731.0021). These mutations predicted
truncation products, similar to those identified in classic APC.
However, 4 mutated sites in AAPC were located very close to one another
and closer to the 5-prime end of the APC gene than mutations previously
discovered in patients with classic APC.

Friedl et al. (1996) reported a large family with attenuated FAP with a
frameshift mutation at codon 1597, which is beyond the beta-cadherin
binding site. The findings suggested a 5-prime border for the occurrence
of a second region of attenuated FAP that is located in the 3-prime part
of the APC gene. The authors proposed that a sufficient amount of
functional APC protein was available due to the absence of a
dominant-negative effect.

In a large Dutch family with attenuated FAP, van der Luijt et al. (1996)
identified a truncating mutation in the 3-prime region of the APC gene
(exon 15) (611731.0028). No truncated polypeptides were detected in
patient cells. Van der Luijt et al. (1996) speculated that 3-prime
mutations may be null alleles and that the attenuated phenotype is the
result of a haploinsufficiency of the normal APC protein and absence of
a truncated protein that could lead to a dominant-negative effect.

Spirio et al. (1998) suggested that specific APC alleles may be able to
modulate somatic APC chromosomal stability, including LOH. In 64
adenomas and 2 carcinomas from 8 patients with attenuated APC, there was
a decreased LOH of the APC allele compared to tumors of patients with
classic APC. In fact, no loss of the inherited normal APC allele was
observed, although sequencing showed that the inherited normal APC
allele had frequently undergone somatic point mutations and small
deletions in the tumors. These findings supported the suggestion that
attenuated APC alleles have residual gene activity and that this
activity modulates the spectrum and frequency of downstream mutations
that lead to adenoma formation.

In affected individuals from 7 of 11 AAPC kindreds, Soravia et al.
(1998) identified 5 novel germline APC mutations. The mutations were
located in 3 different regions of the APC gene: (1) at the 5-prime end
spanning exons 4 and 5, (2) within exon 9, and (3) at the 3-prime distal
end of the gene. Patients with mutations at the 5-prime end of the gene
tended to have more severe upper-gastrointestinal manifestations and a
higher number of polyps compared to the other groups. All AAPC kindreds
showed a predominance of right-sided colorectal adenomas and rectal
polyp sparing. No desmoid tumors were found in these kindreds.

Su et al. (2000) investigated the mechanism for attenuated APC in
patients carrying a mutant APC allele with a mutation in the
alternatively spliced region of exon 9, designated APC-AS9. The APC-AS9
allele was found to downregulate beta-catenin-regulated transcription,
the major tumor-suppressor function of APC, as did the wildtype APC.
Mutation analysis showed that both APC-AS9 and the wildtype APC alleles
were somatically mutated in most colorectal tumors from these patients.
Functional analysis showed that a common somatic mutation in APC-AS9 in
these tumors did not inactivate the wildtype APC. The results indicated
that carriers of APC-AS9 develop fewer colorectal tumors than do typical
patients with FAP because somatic inactivation of both APC alleles is
necessary for colorectal tumorigenesis. However, these patients do
develop colorectal tumors more frequently than does the general
population because APC-AS9 is inactivated by mutations that do not
inactivate the wildtype APC.

A further group of individuals, so-called 'multiple' adenoma patients,
have a phenotype like AAPC, with 3 to 99 polyps throughout the
colorectum, but most have no demonstrable germline APC mutations.
Routine mutation detection techniques failed to detect a pathogenic APC
germline mutation in approximately 30% of patients with classic
polyposis and 90% of those with AAPC/multiple adenomas. Sieber et al.
(2002) developed a real-time quantitative multiplex PCR assay to detect
APC exon 14 deletions. When this technique was applied to a set of 60
classic polyposis and 143 AAPC/multiple adenoma patients with no
apparent APC germline mutation, deletions were found exclusively in
individuals with classic polyposis (7 of 60, 12%). Fine mapping of the
region suggested that most (6 of 7) of these deletions encompassed the
entire APC locus, confirming that haploinsufficiency can result in a
classic polyposis phenotype.

The 3-prime 6.5 kb of the APC open reading frame is encoded by a single
exon, exon 15. Su et al. (2002) characterized 2 germline APC alterations
that deleted the entire APC exon 15 as a result of 56-kb (611731.0049)
and 73-kb (611731.0050) deletions at the APC locus. A surprising finding
was that the latter mutation resulted in a typical FAP phenotype,
whereas the former resulted in a phenotype consistent with attenuated
FAP.

Goss et al. (2002) demonstrated that attenuated APC alleles with 5-prime
mutations produce APC protein that downregulates beta-catenin, inhibits
beta-catenin/T-cell factor-mediated transactivation, and induces
cell-cycle arrest. Transfection studies demonstrated that translation
was initiated internally at an AUG at codon 184. Furthermore, APC coding
sequence between AAPC mutations and AUG-184 permitted internal ribosome
entry in a bicistronic vector. These data suggested that AAPC alleles in
vivo may produce functional APC by internal initiation. In addition, the
amino terminus of APC, which includes a homodimerization domain and
nuclear export signal, may not be critical for APC tumor-suppressor
function.

During APC mutation screening in 1,248 unrelated FAP patients, Aretz et
al. (2007) identified 75 cases with an assumed or confirmed de novo
mutation, and in 8 (11%) of the de novo cases, they confirmed the
presence of somatic mosaicism. In leukocyte DNA, the percentage of
mosaicism varied between 5.5% and 77%, whereas the proportion of the
mutation in tumor DNA from the respective patients was consistently
higher. Six of the 8 patients had an attenuated or atypical polyposis
phenotype that differed from the expected phenotype given the site of
the mutation. Aretz et al. (2007) concluded that some of the deviations
from the expected phenotype in FAP could be explained by the presence of
somatic mosaicism.

ANIMAL MODEL

- Animal Models of Disease

Lander (1991) used his microsatellite map to locate the mouse 'multiple
intestinal neoplasia' (Min) gene to mouse chromosome 18, which shows
homology of synteny to human chromosome 5. The findings suggested that
Min corresponds to APC in the human. Su et al. (1992) showed
specifically that the murine homolog of the APC gene (Apc) is tightly
linked to the phenotypically defined Min locus. In the Min mouse, the
authors identified a nonsense mutation in the Apc gene: a 2549T-A
transversion, resulting in a leu850-to-ter (L850X) substitution. Luongo
et al. (1993) showed that Min maps to proximal mouse chromosome 18.
Thus, Apc and Mcc are syntenic in both mouse and human, although the
gene order in the interval between the 2 genes is different between the
2 species.

Fodde et al. (1994) found that mice heterozygous for a truncating Apc
gene mutation progressively developed intestinal tumors in a manner
similar to that observed in patients with FAP and in mice carrying the
Min mutation. Moser et al. (1993) showed that female mice carrying the
Min mutation were also prone to develop mammary tumors. Min/+ mammary
glands were more sensitive to chemical carcinogenesis than are +/+
mammary glands. Transplantation of mammary cells from Min/+ or +/+
donors into +/+ hosts demonstrated that the propensity to develop
mammary tumors was intrinsic to the Min/+ mammary cells.

Dietrich et al. (1993) reported the genetic mapping of a locus that
strongly modified tumor number in Min/+ animals. This gene, Mom1
('modifier of Min1'; 172411), mapped to distal chromosome 4 and
controlled about 50% of genetic variation in tumor number in 2
intraspecific backcrosses. It was found to lie in the region of synteny
conservation with human chromosome 1p36-p35, a region of frequent
somatic loss of heterozygosity in a variety of human tumors, including
colon tumors.

Using homologous recombination of Apc in embryonic stem cells to
generate mice with a truncated Apc protein, Oshima et al. (1995) found
that most homozygous mice died in utero before day 8 of gestation.
Heterozygous mice developed multiple polyps throughout the intestinal
tract, mostly in the small intestine. The earliest polyps arose
multifocally during the third week after birth, and new polyps continued
to appear thereafter. Surprisingly, every nascent polyp consisted of a
microadenoma covered with a layer of normal villous epithelium. These
microadenomas originated from single crypts by forming abnormal
outpockets into the inner lacteal side of the neighboring villi.
Genotyping showed that all microadenomas had lost the wildtype Apc
allele, whereas the mutant allele remained unchanged. These results
indicated that loss of heterozygosity followed by formation of
intravillous microadenomas was responsible for polyposis in the
intestinal mucosa. A dominant-negative mechanism was considered
unlikely.

In the Min mouse, Wasan et al. (1997) observed a small but general
increase in tumor counts in both the large and the small bowel with
higher dietary fat. Increasing dietary fat also increased polyp size in
the small bowel. These changes appeared independent of total calorific
intake as assessed by body weights. Halving the crude fiber intake
together with an increase in dietary fat from 3% to 10% did not have as
marked an effect on tumor counts as did an increase of fat alone to 15%,
which also decreased survival.

Takaku et al. (1998) inactivated the mouse Dpc4 gene (SMAD4; 600993).
The homozygous mutants were embryonic lethal, whereas the heterozygotes
showed no abnormality. These investigators then introduced the Dpc4
mutation into the knockout mice for the mouse Apc-delta716 gene. Because
both Apc and Dpc4 are located on mouse chromosome 18, they constructed
compound heterozygotes carrying both mutations on the same chromosome by
meiotic recombination. In such mice, intestinal polyps developed into
more malignant tumors than those in the simple Apc-delta716
heterozygotes, showing an extensive stromal cell proliferation,
submucosal invasion, cell type heterogeneity, and in vivo
transplantability. Takaku et al. (1998) suggested that mutations in DPC4
(SMAD4) play a significant role in the malignant progression of
colorectal tumors.

Fodde et al. (2001) found that mouse embryonic stem cells with a mutant
Apc gene showed extensive chromosome and spindle aberrations, suggesting
a role for APC in chromosome segregation. Consistent with this role,
wildtype APC accumulated at the kinetochore during mitosis. Mutant Apc
cells formed mitotic spindles with an abundance of microtubules that
inefficiently connected with kinetochores. This phenotype could be
recapitulated by the induced expression of a 253-amino acid
carboxy-terminal fragment of APC in microsatellite-unstable human
colorectal cancer cells. Fodde et al. (2001) concluded that loss of APC
sequences that lie C-terminal to the beta-catenin regulatory domain
contributes to chromosomal instability in colorectal cancer.

Kielman et al. (2002) investigated the effect of different mutations in
Apc on the differentiation potential of mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells.
They provided genetic and molecular evidence that the ability and
sensitivity of ES cells to differentiate into the 3 germ layers was
inhibited by increased doses of beta-catenin (116806) by specific Apc
mutations. These ranged from a severe differentiation blockade in Apc
alleles completely deficient in beta-catenin regulation to more specific
neuroectodermal, dorsal mesodermal, and endodermal defects in more
hypomorphic alleles. Accordingly, a targeted oncogenic mutation in
Ctnnb1 (Catnb) also affected the differential potential of ES cells.
Expression profiling of wildtype and Apc-mutated teratomas supported the
differentiation defects at the molecular level and pinpointed a large
number of downstream structural and regulating genes. Chimeric
experiments showed that the effect was cell-autonomous. The results
implied that constitutive activation of the Apc/beta-catenin signaling
pathway results in differentiation defects in tissue homeostasis, and
possibly underlies tumorigenesis in the colon and other self-renewing
tissues.

The mammalian homeobox transcription factor CDX2 (600297) has key roles
in intestinal development and differentiation. Heterozygous Cdx2 mice
develop 1 or 2 benign hamartomas in the proximal colon, whereas
heterozygous Apc(del716) mice develop numerous adenomatous polyps,
mostly in the small intestine. Aoki et al. (2003) showed that the
colonic polyp number is about 6 times higher in compound mutant mice
carrying both mutations in heterozygous state. Levels of both Apc and
Cdx2 were significantly lower in the distal colon, which caused high
anaphase bridge index (ABI) associated with a higher frequency of loss
of heterozygosity at Apc. In cultured rat intestinal epithelial and
human colon cancer cell lines, suppression of Cdx2 by antisense RNA
caused marked increases in ABI and chromosomal aberrations. This was
mediated by stimulation of the mTOR (601231) pathway, causing
translational deregulation and G1-S acceleration. Similar results were
obtained in the mice with compound heterozygosity for the Apc deletion
and the Cdx knockout. Forced activation of mTOR through the upstream
regulator Akt1 (164730) also increased ABI in colon cancer cells. High
ABI in all cell lines was suppressed by mTOR inhibitors. These results
suggested that reduced expression of CDX2 is important in colon
tumorigenesis through mTOR-mediated chromosomal instability.

Functional loss of APC has been shown or proposed to have several
different mechanisms: mutation in APC, nondisjunction, homologous
somatic recombination, and epigenetic silencing. In the C57BL/6 (B6)
Apc(Min/+) mouse model of inherited intestinal cancer, loss of Apc
function can occur by loss of heterozygosity through somatic
recombination between homologs. Haigis and Dove (2003) reported that the
Robertsonian translocation referred to as Rb9 suppressed the
multiplicity of intestinal adenomas in this mouse model. As the copy
number of Rb9 increased, the association with the interphase nucleolus
of the rDNA repeats centromeric to the Apc locus on mouse chromosome 18
was increasingly disrupted. Their analysis showed that homologous
somatic recombination is the principal pathway for LOH in adenomas in B6
Apc(Min/+) mice. These studies provided additional evidence that
neoplastic growth can initiate in the complete absence of canonic
genomic instability. Rb9 was originally identified in a wild mouse
caught in the Orobian Alps near Bergamo in northern Italy. It consists
of a centric fusion between mouse chromosomes 7 and 18. In addition to
reduced fertility owing to meiotic nondisjunction, the chromosomes
involved in a Robertsonian translocation show suppressed meiotic
recombination when heterozygous. The suppression of recombination is
thought to result from mispairing of trivalents during pachytene.

Tischfield and Shao (2003) pointed to the work of Haigis and Dove (2003)
as indicating that somatic recombination rather than chromosome loss
associated with genetic instability is the primary cause of adenoma
formation in the mouse model. The authors showed that a Robertsonian
translocation, which seemingly interferes with the colocalization of
chromosome homologs in interphase nucleus, suppresses recombination and
subsequent adenoma formation in the mutant mice. Karyotypically normal
B6 mice heterozygous for the Min mutation of the Apc gene have intact
nucleolar organizing regions (NORs) near the centromeres of chromosome
18 homologs, facilitating nucleolar colocalization and the homologous
recombination that produces loss of a normal Apc allele and a high
incidence of intestinal adenomas. Apc(Min+) mice lack an NOR on the 7.18
translocation chromosome, resulting in a failure of nucleolar
colocalization of homologs, suppression of homologous recombination, and
far fewer intestinal adenomas.

Hurlstone et al. (2003) found that Apc mutant zebrafish completed
gastrulation, but their hearts failed to loop and formed excessive
endocardial cushions. Conversely, overexpression of Apc or Dickkopf-1
(DKK1; 605189), a secreted Wnt inhibitor, blocked cushion formation. In
wildtype hearts, nuclear beta-catenin accumulated only in valve-forming
cells, where it could activate a Tcf reporter. In mutant hearts, all
cells displayed nuclear beta-catenin and Tcf reporter activities, while
valve markers were markedly upregulated. Concomitantly, proliferation
and epithelial-mesenchymal transition, normally restricted to
endocardial cushions, occurred throughout the endocardium. Hurlstone et
al. (2003) concluded that Wnt/beta-catenin signaling may play a role in
determining endocardial cell fate. Apc mutant zebrafish carried a
premature termination codon corresponding to amino acid 1318 of human
APC, an allele designated apc(mcr). Heterozygous mutant zebrafish
developed normally. Homozygous mutant zebrafish embryos died between 72
and 96 hours postfertilization and displayed multiple defects including
cardiac malformations, enlarged otic vesicles, smaller eyes, and body
curvature. Further, jaw, pharynx, and inner-ear structures failed to
develop and fin buds arrested. Primordia for internal organs such as
gut, liver, and pancreas formed but developed abnormally. Hurlstone et
al. (2003) suggested that mutant embryos probably develop beyond
gastrulation owing to the presence of maternal Apc.

Rao et al. (2005) found that mice haploinsufficient for both Bub1b
(602860) and Apc developed 10 times more colonic tumors than mice
deficient in Apc alone, and the tumors were of higher grades. Compound
mutant mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) contained more beta-catenin
and proliferated at a faster rate than wildtype or Bub1b +/- MEFs.
Compound mutant MEFs also slipped through mitosis in the presence of
nocodazole and exhibited a higher rate of genomic instability than
wildtype, Bub1b +/-, or Apc +/- mice. Rao et al. (2005) concluded that
BUB1B and APC functionally interact in regulating metaphase-anaphase
transition, deregulation of which increases genomic instability and the
development and progression of colorectal cancer.

Nadauld et al. (2006) found that Apc mutant zebrafish had ocular
abnormalities similar to those in mice and humans with APC mutations.
Furthermore, they showed that Apc had a dual role in ocular
morphogenesis. APC regulation of canonical WNT/beta-catenin signaling
appeared active in the developing lens. In contrast, Apc controlled
retinoic acid production via Rdh5 in the retina and was required for
retinal differentiation.

Amos-Landgraf et al. (2007) established a nonsense mutation of the Apc
gene in an inbred rat strain and observed that Apc-mutant heterozygotes
developed multiple neoplasms with a distribution between the colon and
small intestine that closely simulated that found in human FAP patients.
Owing to the metacentric nature of the rat karyotype, the authors were
able to demonstrate that loss of the wildtype APC allele in tumors did
not involve chromosome loss. Amos-Landgraf et al. (2007) designated this
rat strain Pirc (polyposis in rat colon) and suggested that it could
address many of the gaps in modeling human colon cancer.

To elucidate the role of MYC (190080) in the intestine after APC loss,
Sansom et al. (2007) simultaneously deleted both Apc and Myc in the
adult murine small intestine. They showed that loss of Myc rescued the
phenotypes of perturbed differentiation, migration, proliferation, and
apoptosis, which occur on deletion of Apc. Remarkably, this rescue
occurred in the presence of high levels of nuclear beta-catenin. Array
analysis revealed that Myc is required for the majority of Wnt (see
164820) target gene activation following Apc loss. Sansom et al. (2007)
concluded that these data established MYC as the critical mediator of
the early stages of neoplasia following APC loss.

Shibata et al. (2007) generated several FAP mouse lines heterozygous for
a ser580-to-asp (S580D) truncation mutation in the Apc gene and found
that 1 line (line 19) showed reduced incidence of intestinal adenomas
(less than 5% compared with other lines). They identified a deletion in
the Ctnna1 gene (116805) as the cause of tumor suppression in line-19
Apc S580D/+ mice and found that suppression only occurred when the
Ctnna1 deletion was in cis configuration with the Apc S580D mutation. In
all adenomas generated in line-19 Apc S580D/+ mice, somatic
recombination between Apc and Ctnna1 retained the wildtype Ctnna1
allele. Shibata et al. (2007) concluded that simultaneous inactivation
of Ctnna1 and Apc during tumor initiation suppressed adenoma formation
in line-19 Apc S580D/+ mice, suggesting that CTNNA1 plays an essential
role in initiation of intestinal adenomas.

Lane et al. (2010) showed that young Apc(min) mice had normal
steady-state hematopoiesis. However, Apc(min) mice developed
myelodysplastic syndrome between 136 and 210 days of age, with increased
potential for spleen cells to form myeloid, granulocyte, and erythroid
colonies. Transplantation experiments revealed that Apc(min) bone marrow
had enhanced repopulation potential, suggesting intrinsic enhancement of
short- and long-term hematopoietic stem cell function. However, serial
transplantation experiments revealed impaired repopulation potential in
secondary recipients due to loss of the quiescent stem cell population
in Apc(min) bone marrow.

- Therapeutic Strategies

Westbrook et al. (1994) explored the potential for gene therapy by
studying the transient expression of the APC gene in normal rat colonic
epithelium, using liposomal gene delivery by rectal catheter infusion.
Expression of a beta-galactosidase reporter gene and of the human APC
gene under a constitutive promoter was demonstrated. Close to 100% of
epithelial cells expressed the introduced gene. Expression was transient
and did not persist beyond 4 days, consistent with the normal turnover
time of gut epithelium, but it could be maintained by repeated
treatments. Human APC was expressed for 3 weeks under these conditions
at approximately one-tenth the level of the endogenous APC gene, and no
toxicity was observed beyond that attributed to repeated rectal enemas.

Tsujii and DuBois (1995) showed that overexpression of cyclooxygenase-2
(COX2; 600262) in rat intestinal epithelial cells resulted in increased
adhesion to extracellular matrix and resistance to butyrate-induced
apoptosis. These phenotypic changes that might enhance tumorigenic
potential were reversed by sulindac sulfide, a COX inhibitor.

Mahmoud et al. (1997) found that heterozygous Min -/+ mice with an Apc
mutation resulting in a truncated Apc protein had changes in the growth
characteristics of preneoplastic tissue, including decreased apoptosis
and proliferation and decreased enterocyte migration. These findings
suggested a dominant-negative effect. The mutation was also associated
with changes in beta-catenin expression. These effects were reversed
with the chemopreventive drug sulindac sulfide. However, Mahmoud et al.
(1999) found no difference in enterocyte migration, proliferation,
apoptosis, or beta-catenin levels in another group of mutant Apc mice
with no Apc protein expression compared to wildtype littermates bearing
2 normal Apc alleles. Furthermore, administration of sulindac sulfide to
Apc1638N mice did not alter enterocyte migration. These observations
suggested that the dominant-negative effect altering cell migration was
exerted by the truncated Apc protein present in the first group of Min/+
mice.

Boolbol et al. (1996) found that histologically normal-appearing small
bowel from the Min mouse showed increased amounts of Cox2 and
prostaglandin E2 compared to +/+ littermates. Using 2 different in situ
techniques, terminal transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling and a
direct immunoperoxidase method, Min animals also demonstrated a 27%-47%
decrease in enterocyte apoptosis compared to +/+ animals. Treatment with
sulindac not only inhibited tumor formation but decreased small bowel
Cox2 and prostaglandin E2 to baseline and restored normal levels of
apoptosis.

Oshima et al. (1996) bred mice carrying an APC mutation with a mouse
with a disrupted Cox2 gene. All of the animals were heterozygous at the
Apc locus; if homozygous for wildtype COX2, they developed an average of
652 polyps at 10 weeks, while heterozygotes had 224 polyps and
homozygously deficient mice had only 93 polyps. The findings showed that
induction of Cox2 is an early, rate-limiting step for adenoma formation.
As supporting evidence, a drug that inhibited COX2 but not COX1 (176805)
also markedly reduced the number of polyps. Oshima et al. (1996) added
the Cox2 gene to the list of genes involved in colon neoplasia. The
findings suggested to Prescott and White (1996) that drugs that inhibit
COX2 should be broadly effective in chemoprevention of colon cancer.
Prescott and White (1996) reviewed the intimate connections between APC
and COX2.

Halberg et al. (2000) found that the multiplicity and invasiveness of
intestinal adenomas in Min mice was enhanced by deficiency of p53. In
addition, the occurrence of desmoid fibromas was strongly enhanced by
p53 deficiency. The genetic modifier Mom1 and the pharmacologic agents
piroxicam and difluoromethylornithine each reduced intestinal adenoma
multiplicity in the absence of p53 function. Mom1 showed no influence on
the development of desmoid fibromas, whereas the combination of
piroxicam and difluoromethylornithine exerted a moderate effect.

Lal et al. (2001) studied the effects of COX inhibitors on intestinal
adenomas and colonic aberrant crypt foci in the accelerated polyposis
mismatch-repair-deficient Min mouse model (Apc+/-Msh2-/-) as well as in
the standard Min mouse model. The mice with knockout of the Msh2 gene
(609309) have genetic features of both familial adenomatous polyposis
and hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, and rapidly develop
numerous small- and large-bowel adenomas, as well as colonic aberrant
crypt foci. Lal et al. (2001) found that a specific COX2 inhibitor was
effective in preventing small-bowel polyps in mismatch-repair-deficient
Min mice and both small- and large-bowel polyps in standard Min mice.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 2-BP DEL, EX7

In a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis coli-1 (FAP1; 175100),
Groden et al. (1991) identified a heterozygous 2-bp deletion at exon 7
of the APC gene at positions 730 and 731 in the cDNA sequence reported
by Joslyn et al. (1991). This changed the normal sequence at the splice
junction from CAGAGGTCA, of which the first CAG is an intronic sequence,
to CAGGTCA. Groden et al. (1991) noted that although this deletion is
within the 5-prime splice site, known consensus sequences suggest that
the splice site may still be maintained. The deletion would therefore
result in a frameshift and premature stop codon. Studies of both parents
showed that the mutation in the proband was de novo; however, it had
been transmitted to 2 of his 3 children.

.0002
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, ARG-TER, 904C-T

In a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis-1 (175100), Groden et
al. (1991) identified a heterozygous 904C-T transition in exon 8 of the
APC gene, resulting in an arg-to-ter substitution.

.0003
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 1-BP DEL, EX10

In a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis-1 (175100), Groden et
al. (1991) identified a heterozygous 1-bp deletion in exon 10 of the APC
gene, resulting in a frameshift and truncation of the protein within 30
bases.

.0004
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, TYR-TER, 1500T-G

In a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis-1 (175100), Groden et
al. (1991) identified a heterozygous 1500T-G substitution in exon 11 of
the APC gene, resulting in a tyr-to-ter substitution.

.0005
GARDNER SYNDROME
APC, ARG414CYS

In a 24-year-old patient with Gardner syndrome (see 175100), Nishisho et
al. (1991) identified a C-to-T transition in the APC gene, resulting in
an arg414-to-cys (R414C) substitution. The patient had adenomatous
polyposis and a mandibular osteoma.

.0006
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
GARDNER SYNDROME, INCLUDED
APC, ARG302TER

In 2 unrelated patients, a 46-year-old with FAP1 (175100) and a
27-year-old with Gardner syndrome manifest as polyposis with a desmoid
tumor, Nishisho et al. (1991) identified a C-to-T transition in the APC
gene, resulting in an arg302-to-ter (R302X) substitution. There was
cosegregation of the mutation with the disease phenotype in multiple
members of the FAP kindred. The findings suggested that the specific
mutation does not completely specify the extracolonic manifestations of
FAP, and that the phenotype is likely to be the result of other genetic
or environmental influences.

Chung et al. (2006) identified a de novo R302X mutation in a 19-year-old
woman with Gardner syndrome (see 175100) manifest as the
cribriform-morular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma, which had
been discovered 8 months before the discovery of polyposis of the colon.

.0007
GARDNER SYNDROME
APC, SER280TER

In a 39-year-old patient with Gardner syndrome (see 175100), Nishisho et
al. (1991) found a C-to-G transversion in the APC gene, resulting in a
ser280-to-ter (S280X) substitution. The patient had polyposis and a
mandibular osteoma.

.0008
GARDNER SYNDROME
APC, SER713TER

In a patient with Gardner syndrome (see 175100), Nishisho et al. (1991)
identified a heterozygous C-to-G transversion in the APC gene, resulting
in a ser713-to-ter (S713X) substitution. The patient had polyposis and a
mandibular osteoma.

.0009
COLORECTAL CANCER, SOMATIC
APC, GLN1338TER

In a colorectal cancer (see 114500) cell line, Nishisho et al. (1991)
identified a somatic C-to-T transition in the APC gene, resulting in a
gln1338-to-ter (Q1338X) substitution. Study of tissues from the patient
from whose tumor the cell line was established 28 years earlier showed
that the mutation was in the primary tumor and in metastases but not in
normal tissues.

.0010
GASTRIC CANCER, SOMATIC
APC, GLY1120GLU

In gastric cancer tumor tissue (see 613659), Horii et al. (1992)
identified a somatic G-to-A transition in the APC gene, resulting in a
gly1120-to-glu (G1120E) substitution.

.0011
GASTRIC CANCER, SOMATIC
APC, GLN1067TER

In gastric cancer tumor tissue (see 613659), Horii et al. (1992)
identified a somatic C-to-T transition in the APC gene, resulting in a
gln1067-to-ter (Q1067X) substitution.

.0012
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 4-BP DEL, CODON 169

In 2 apparently unrelated Dutch patients with FAP1 (175100), Fodde et
al. (1992) identified a 4-bp deletion (ATAG) in codons 169-171 of the
APC gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination. The
wildtype sequence suggested the presence of a head-to-tail duplication
of a tetranucleotide which offered a suitable substrate for unequal but
homologous crossover events leading to either triplication or deletion
of the 4-bp unit. Haplotype analysis performed with intragenic and
flanking polymorphic markers indicated that the 2 identical 4-bp
deletions were located on different chromosomes, suggesting that they
had arisen independently.

.0013
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 1-BP INS, ILE357

In affected members of a Dutch family with FAP1 (175100), Fodde et al.
(1992) identified a 1-bp insertion (A) at codon 357 of the APC gene,
resulting in a premature termination codon 22 bp downstream.

.0014
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
BRAIN TUMOR-POLYPOSIS SYNDROME 2, INCLUDED
APC, GLN541TER

In affected members of a Dutch family with FAP1 (175100), Fodde et al.
(1992) identified a C-to-T transition in the APC gene, resulting in a
gln541-to-ter (Q541X) substitution.

Hamilton et al. (1995) found the same mutation in an FAP family in which
1 patient also had a calcified ependymoma, indicating brain
tumor-polyposis syndrome-2.

.0015
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, ARG554TER

In a Dutch family with FAP1 (175100), Fodde et al. (1992) identified a
C-to-T transition in the APC gene, resulting in an arg554-to-ter (R554X)
substitution.

.0016
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, ARG564TER

In a Dutch family with FAP1 (175100), Fodde et al. (1992) identified a
C-to-T transition in the APC gene, resulting in an arg564-to-ter (R564X)
substitution.

.0017
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 1-BP INS, CODON 629

In a Dutch family with FAP1 (175100), Fodde et al. (1992) identified a
1-bp insertion (A) in codon 629 of the APC gene, resulting in a
premature stop codon 13 bp downstream.

.0018
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, TYR935TER

In a Dutch family with FAP1 (175100), Fodde et al. (1992) identified a
C-to-A transversion in the APC gene, resulting in a tyr935-to-ter
(Y935X) substitution.

.0019
GARDNER SYNDROME
ADENOMA, PERIAMPULLARY, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
APC, 2-BP DEL, CODON 1465

In tumor tissue from a periampullary adenoma from a patient with FAP
(175100), Bapat et al. (1993) identified a somatic 2-bp deletion (AG) at
codon 1465 of the APC gene. The patient had a germline APC mutation
(611731.0023).

Martin-Denavit et al. (2001) described the 1465delAG mutation in 2
unrelated families with Gardner syndrome who showed interfamilial
phenotypic heterogeneity. The mutation was identified by a simple
nonradioactive method using a heteroduplex analysis and specifically
characterized by sequence analysis. In both families, fibromatosis was
noted before polyposis, leading to the diagnosis of Gardner syndrome. In
the first family, progression of fibromas and osteomas was much greater,
and colonic polyposis was sparser, compared to the second family.
Prognosis was mainly based on the dramatic evolution of the desmoid
tumors before the age of 30. In contrast, desmoid manifestations
remained discrete in family 2, and the prognosis was dependent on the
development of colon cancer. The wide inter- and intrafamilial
variability of the phenotype suggested the operation of one or more
modifier genes. Since a 'second hit' is thought to be necessary for the
development of desmoid tumors, this may account for a difference between
and even within families; a modifier locus may have favored a 'second
hit' in mesenchymal cells in family 1, and in colonic epithelial cells
in family 2.

.0020
ADENOMA, PERIAMPULLARY, SOMATIC
APC, 4-BP DEL, CODON 1464

In tumor tissue of a periampullary adenoma from a patient with FAP
(175100), Bapat et al. (1993) identified a somatic 4-bp deletion (AGAG)
at codon 1464 of the APC gene. The patient had a germline APC mutation
(611731.0023).

.0021
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, ATTENUATED
APC, TRP157TER

In 1 of 7 families with what Spirio et al. (1993) referred to as an
'attenuated' form of familial polyposis (see 175100), the authors
identified a 470G-A transition in exon 4 of the APC gene, resulting in a
trp157-to-ter (W157X) substitution, predicted to generate a truncated
product of 156 amino acids. This mutation was present in all affected
family members, as well as in 3 asymptomatic individuals. Notably, one
of the latter had reached the age of 41 without developing any
clinically detectable adenomatous polyps. This mutation and 3 others
detected in other atypical families were located very close to one
another and nearer the 5-prime end of the APC gene than any base
substitution or small deletion previously discovered in patients with
classic APC.

.0022
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
BRAIN TUMOR-POLYPOSIS SYNDROME 2, INCLUDED
APC, GLN215TER

In affected members of a family with FAP1 (175100), Hamilton et al.
(1995) identified a C-to-T transition in the APC gene, resulting in a
gln215-to-ter (Q215X) substitution. One patient developed an anaplastic
astrocytoma at age 37, indicating brain tumor-polyposis syndrome-2 (see
175100).

.0023
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
GARDNER SYNDROME, INCLUDED;;
ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS COLI WITH CONGENITAL CHOLESTEATOMA, INCLUDED
APC, 5-BP DEL, CODON 1309

In 9 patients with severe FAP1 (175100), Gayther et al. (1994)
identified a 5-bp deletion at codon 1309 of the APC gene. The 5-bp
deletion extends from the last base of codon 1309 to the first base of
codon 1311; some refer to it as the 'codon 1309' APC mutation. This
mutation may account for 9% of FAP due to mutations in the APC gene. The
mutation tends to be associated with more severe and earlier onset
disease and the presence of congenital hypertrophy of the retinal
pigmented epithelium (CHRPE).

Bapat et al. (1993) identified a 5-bp deletion at codon 1309 in an FAP
patient with periampullary adenomas. Two different somatic mutations in
the APC gene (611731.0019; 611731.0020) were identified in 2 distinct
adenomas from this patient.

Distante et al. (1996) described a 5-year-old girl with the mutation who
presented with rectal bleeding from extensive polyposis of the colon;
her father had had a colectomy for FAP at the age 23.

Shaoul et al. (1999) described a 6-year-old boy with FAP and congenital
cholesteatoma (see 604183). They suggested that cholesteatoma represents
a tumor-like lesion with biologic characteristics resembling other
alimentary lesions of FAP. The patient first came to medical attention
at the age of 4 years because of intermittent painless hematochezia.
Colonoscopy at the age of 6 years showed multiple polyps of the colon.
Eye examination showed hyperpigmented retinal lesions in the temporal
retina of each eye, but radiographic studies of the mandible and maxilla
showed no changes. The cholesteatoma was detected at the age of 4 years
because of unilateral conductive hearing loss. Polyps had been detected
in the patient's mother at the age of 25 years and a subtotal colectomy
was performed. In both the mother and the child, DNA analysis identified
a 5-bp deletion (GAAAG) at codons 1309-1311 in exon 15 of the APC gene.
Shaoul et al. (1999) commented that mutations at codon 1309 have been
associated with early development of adenomatous polyps and a greater
risk of malignancies at an early age. Furthermore, the same mutations
are strongly associated with the presence of congenital hypertrophy of
the retinal pigment epithelium.

.0024
HEPATOBLASTOMA, SOMATIC
APC, SER1395CYS

In tumor tissue isolated from hepatoblastoma (see 114550) of 3 unrelated
affected Japanese boys, Oda et al. (1996) identified an A-to-T
transition in the APC gene, resulting in a ser1395-to-cys (S1395C)
substitution. Oda et al. (1996) noted that hepatoblastoma is an
extracolonic feature of FAP (175100).

.0025
DESMOID DISEASE, HEREDITARY
APC, 2-BP INS, CODON 1924

In affected members of a family with hereditary desmoid disease
(135290), Eccles et al. (1996) identified a 2-bp insertion (AA) in codon
1924 of the APC gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature protein
termination. The mutation occurred in the 3-prime end of exon 15.

.0026
DESMOID DISEASE, HEREDITARY
APC, 4-BP DEL, NT5844

Scott et al. (1996) identified a germline APC mutation in the original
kindred with hereditary desmoid disease (135290) described by Maher et
al. (1992). Direct sequencing of genomic DNA revealed a 4-bp deletion at
nucleotides 5844-5847 (codon 1962) of the APC sequence. The same
mutation occurred in 2 other apparently unrelated families with desmoid
tumors. Haplotype analysis suggested a common origin for the APC
mutation in the 3 families.

.0027
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 1-BP DEL, EX15

In affected members of a large family with FAP1 (175100), Scott et al.
(1995) identified a 1-bp deletion (5960delA) in codon 1987 of the APC
gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination 61 codons
downstream. The mutation was in the 3-prime end of exon 15 in the
3-prime region of the APC gene. Affected family members showed a highly
variable phenotype, with both severe disease with extracolonic
manifestations and mild disease.

Van der Luijt et al. (1996) did not detect a truncated APC protein in
cells from the family reported by Scott et al. (1995).

.0028
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, ATTENUATED
APC, 4-BP DEL, EX15

In a large Dutch family with attenuated FAP1 (see 175100), van der Luijt
et al. (1996) identified a 4-bp (TTCT) deletion at codons 1860 to 1862
of the APC gene, resulting in a frameshift and an immediate stop codon.
The deletion occurred in the 3-prime part of exon 15 and did not result
in a stable truncated protein; only the wildtype APC protein was
detected in an affected individual. The phenotype in this family showed
marked variability in number of polyps (ranging from 0 to more than 100)
and relatively late age at cancer onset (mean 56 years). None of the
patients had desmoid tumors. Van der Luijt et al. (1996) hypothesized
that the milder phenotype in this family was due to haploinsufficiency
of a normal APC protein and absence of a truncated APC protein with a
possible dominant-negative effect.

.0029
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
BREAST CANCER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
APC, ILE1307LYS

In a 39-year-old Ashkenazi Jewish man with colorectal adenomas and a
family history of colon cancer (175100), Laken et al. (1997) identified
a 3920T-A transversion in the APC gene, resulting in an ile1307-to-lys
(I1307K) substitution. An in vitro synthesized protein assay from this
allele showed a truncated APC protein. The T-to-A change converted an
AAATAAAA sequence to (A)8 and was postulated to result in failure of the
cellular transcriptional or translational machinery, resulting in a
truncated protein. The (A)8 tract not only was unstable in vivo, leading
to somatic mutation, but also appeared to be unstable in vitro during
the enzymatic manipulations employed in the IVSP assay. The same
mutation was identified in 28% of Ashkenazi Jews with a family history
of CRC and in the carrier state of 6% unaffected Ashkenazim from the
general population. Analysis of tumor tissue occurring in CRC patients
with the I1307K mutation revealed that nearly half contained somatic
truncating mutations closely surrounding the germline mutation; all the
somatic mutations occurred exclusively in the I1307K allele. Laken et
al. (1997) concluded that presence of the I1307K mutation results in a
2-fold increased risk for colorectal cancer, although the change in
itself does not likely contribute to the disease.

Petersen et al. (1998) addressed the increasingly important problem of
interpreting the significance of missense mutations found in
disease-causing genes, citing the APC I1307K mutation as a case in
point. Using a Bayesian approach that incorporated genetic information
on affected relatives, relationship of the relatives to the proband, the
population frequency of the mutation, and the phenocopy rate of the
disease, the authors concluded that the I1307K mutation was likely to be
disease causing. Petersen et al. (1998) also developed a simple
approximation for rare alleles and considered the case of unknown
penetrance and allele frequency.

By genotyping 5,081 Ashkenazi volunteers in a community survey, Woodage
et al. (1998) concluded that APC I1307K carriers have a modestly
elevated risk of developing cancer (less than 2-fold). Woodage et al.
(1998) emphasized that the large majority of I1307K carriers would not
develop cancer of the colon or breast, and that only a small proportion
of Jewish individuals who develop these cancers will be carriers.
Redston et al. (1998) identified a heterozygous I1307K polymorphism in
66 (10.4%) of 632 unrelated Ashkenazi Jewish women with primary invasive
breast cancer (113705). This proportion was significantly greater than
the 7.03% carrier frequency observed in the study by Woodage et al.
(1998). However, prevalence data suggested that the effect of the I1307K
allele on breast cancer risk was largely or entirely limited to those
with BRCA (see, e.g., BRCA1, 113705) founder mutations. Redston et al.
(1998) concluded that the I1307K polymorphism emerges as a candidate
low-penetrance breast cancer susceptibility allele or a genetic modifier
of risk in BRCA heterozygotes.

Frayling et al. (1998) identified the I1307K allele in 3 patients of
Ashkenazi Jewish descent with multiple colorectal adenomas and/or
carcinoma.

Yuan et al. (1998) described a French-Canadian kindred in which HNPCC
was related to a novel truncating mutation in the MLH1 gene
(120436.0009). In the same family, they found the I1307K APC
polymorphism, which had previously been identified only in individuals
of self-reported Ashkenazi Jewish origin. However, there appeared to be
no relationship between the I1307K polymorphism and the presence or
absence of cancer in the French-Canadian family.

Gryfe et al. (1999) identified the APC I1307K allele in 48 (10.1%) of
476 Ashkenazi Jewish subjects with adenomatous polyps and/or colorectal
cancer. Compared with the frequency of 2 separate population control
groups, the APC I1307K allele was associated with an estimated relative
risk of 1.5 to 1.7 for colorectal neoplasia (P equal to 0.01). Compared
with noncarriers, APC I1307K carriers had increased numbers of adenomas
and colorectal cancers per patient, as well as a younger age at
diagnosis. Gryfe et al. (1999) estimated that the APC I1307K
polymorphism directly contributes to 3 to 4% of all Ashkenazi Jewish
colorectal cancer.

In persons at average risk for colorectal cancer, Rozen et al. (1999)
identified the APC I1307K variant in 5.0% of 120 European and 1.6% of
188 non-European Jews (P = 0.08). It occurred in 15.4% of 52 Ashkenazi
Israelis with familial cancer (P = 0.02), and was not detected in 51
non-European Jews at increased cancer risk. Colorectal neoplasia
occurred individually or in the families of 13 of 20 Ashkenazi I1307K
carriers, 8 of whom also had a personal or family history of noncolonic
neoplasia.

Prior et al. (1999) did not identify the I1307K mutation among 345
non-Ashkenazim individuals with colorectal cancer, suggesting that it is
restricted to that population. Somatic mutations occurred at a lower
frequency and were more randomly distributed when the I1307K allele was
not present.

In an editorial, Gruber et al. (1999) compared the group of Prior et al.
(1999) to investigators at the scene of an accident. Prior et al. (1999)
carefully characterized the somatic mutations associated with the I1307K
polymorphism as if they were crash sites near this hypermutability oil
slick. Tumors with the wildtype allele at codon 1307 had a variety of
somatic mutations that were distributed randomly in the APC gene and
were not tightly clustered around the 1307 codon. These results
contrasted sharply with previous crash site investigations of the mutant
allele which showed characteristic mutations piling up like cars around
the oil slick. This earlier work by the Vogelstein group (Laken et al.,
1997), confirmed by Gryfe et al. (1998), showed that mutations arising
in association with the mutant allele appeared to be localized to a
29-bp region around the gene and were almost always insertions.
Furthermore, these unusual somatic mutations were restricted to the
mutant allele, never occurring in the wildtype allele in the same
patients. The reference to 'crash sites' and 'oil slick' provided useful
imagery comparable to the 'gatekeeper' and 'caretaker' roles of other
cancer-related genes--again products of the Vogelstein laboratory, as is
the designation 'landscaper,' envisioned as the basis of colorectal
cancer in juvenile polyposis.

Patael et al. (1999) found the I1307K polymorphism in 2 non-Ashkenazi
Jewish women in Israel and hypothesized that among Jewish persons it may
not be restricted to Ashkenazim, but may actually reflect a common
ancestral polymorphism. The haplotype pattern in these 2 women and in 9
Ashkenazi carrier controls was identical in all individuals regardless
of ethnic origin.

Lamlum et al. (2000) screened 164 unrelated patients with multiple
(3-100) colorectal adenomas for germline variants throughout the APC
gene, and found 3 Ashkenazi patients harboring the I1307K mutation.
Germline APC variants accounted for approximately 10% of all patients
with multiple adenomas. The authors recommended screening multiple
adenoma patients of Ashkenazi descent for the I1307K variant.

Silverberg et al. (2001) found no increased frequency of I1307K in
Ashkenazi Jewish patients with inflammatory bowel disease and concluded
that this mutation cannot account for the increased susceptibility to
colorectal cancer associated with inflammatory bowel disease.

Rozen et al. (2002) reported studies in Israel indicating that I1307K is
a low-penetrance variant with a 1.7 relative risk for neoplasia in
carriers who have familial carcinoma, clinically equivalent to obtaining
a family history of sporadic colorectal neoplasia and promoting early
screening. They concluded that I1307K is a founder variant in Jews of
different ethnic origin, mainly Ashkenazim, and it explains only
partially their higher incidence of colorectal carcinoma.

Lynch and de la Chapelle (2003) schematized the somatic mutations that
occur in carriers of the I1307K polymorphism, which results in a stretch
of 8 adenosines that is believed to increase the risk of somatic
mutations as a result of slippage during replication. Lynch and de la
Chapelle (2003) illustrated the types of somatic changes in colonic
tumors, e.g., an addition of 1 adenosine seen in the affected allele of
many carriers. The addition or loss of a nucleotide causes a frameshift
and loss of function of APC, constituting an important somatic event in
tumor initiation.

In individuals of Ashkenazi, Sephardi, and Arab descent, Niell et al.
(2003) found a common progenitor haplotype spanning across APC I1037K
from the centromeric marker D5S135 to the telomeric marker D5S346. The
ancestor of modern I1307K alleles existed 87.9 to 118 generations ago
(approximately 2,200 to 2,950 years ago). This estimate indicated that
I1307K existed at about the time of the beginning of the Jewish
diaspora, explaining its presence in non-Ashkenazi populations. The data
did not indicate that selection operated at I1307K, providing compelling
evidence that the high frequency of disease-susceptibility alleles in
the Ashkenazim is due to genetic drift, not selection.

.0030
GARDNER SYNDROME
APC, 2-BP DEL, 1538AG

In 2 previously reported patients with severe Gardner phenotype (see
175100) (Davies et al., 1995), Armstrong et al. (1997) identified a 2-bp
deletion (1538delAG) in the APC gene, resulting in a frameshift and
premature termination. The patients were of different ethnic backgrounds
and had different haplotypes, suggesting that the same mutation had
arisen in 2 separate populations.

.0031
GARDNER SYNDROME
APC, ARG499TER

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with Gardner syndrome (see
175100), Eccles et al. (1997) identified a C-to-T transition in exon 11
of the APC gene, resulting in an arg499-to-ter (R499X) substitution. The
proband was diagnosed with FAP at age 7 years and colon cancer at age 9
years. Multiple family members had FAP, colon cancer, and extracolonic
features, including CHRPE, osteomas, and sebaceous cysts.

.0032
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, TYR486TER

In affected members of a family with FAP1 (175100), Eccles et al. (1997)
identified a C-to-T transition in exon 11 of the APC gene, resulting in
a tyr486-to-ter (Y486X) substitution. The proband was diagnosed with FAP
at age 15 years and had a colectomy the same year. Three other affected
family members had colectomies at ages 9 and 15 years.

.0033
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 3-BP DEL

In affected members of a family with FAP1 (175100), Cama et al. (1994)
identified a 3-bp deletion in the APC gene: 2 adenine residues of codon
437 and the adjacent guanine residue at the consensus donor splicing
sequence of exon 9. The sequence of the 3-prime end of exon 9 was
converted from CCA A/gtat to CC/tat. The APC gene mutation abolished the
donor site of exon 9a, used in both alternatively spliced isoforms of
the exon. The phenotype was characterized by hundreds of colorectal
adenomas (320 to more than 500); a child in this family already had 460
adenomas at the age of 8 years. Analysis of the relative levels of
mutant and wildtype transcripts in unaffected colonic mucosa
demonstrated that the mutant allele was not expressed. In contrast, a
second kindred with a neighboring mutation (611731.0034) in exon 9 in
the portion of the exon that is alternatively spliced showed an
attenuated form of FAP characterized by a low number of colorectal
adenomas. The model suggested by these 2 kindreds suggested that the
type of mutation and transcript dosage effects contribute to the
heterogeneity of disease phenotypes in FAP.

.0034
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, ATTENUATED
APC, 2-BP DEL

In a family with an attenuated form of FAP1 (see 175100) characterized
by a low number of colorectal adenomas (up to 22), Curia et al. (1998)
identified a 2-bp deletion within codon 367 of exon 9 of the APC gene.
This frameshift mutation was located in the portion of exon 9 that
undergoes alternative splicing and was predicted to introduce a
premature termination signal at codon 376 in the fraction of mature
transcripts containing the alternatively spliced form of exon 9. Thus,
splicing-out of the mutation site into a fraction of mRNA molecules was
predicted, with the residual production of wildtype transcripts from the
mutant APC alleles. Curia et al. (1998) contrasted this finding with
that in a neighboring exon 9 mutation (611731.0033) that led to deletion
of exon 9 and was associated with a severe FAP phenotype characterized
by hundreds of colorectal adenomas. They suggested that, in addition to
the mutation site, the type of mutation and transcript dosage effects
contribute to the heterogeneity of disease phenotypes in FAP.

.0035
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, ATTENUATED
APC, 2-BP DEL

In a family with attenuated FAP of variable phenotype (see 175100),
Young et al. (1998) identified a 2-bp deletion in the alternatively
spliced region of exon 9 at codon 398, resulting in a frameshift and
stop signal 4 codons downstream. The clinical features ranged from
sparse right-sided polyposis and cancer in the proximal colon at the age
of 34 to pancolonic polyposis and cancer at the age of 68. Rectal
sparing was common to all affected members. Alternatively spliced
transcripts that deleted the mutation were readily amplified from normal
colonic mucosa, providing an explanation for the attenuated phenotype
seen in this family.

.0036
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, ATTENUATED
APC, GLU1317GLN

In 4 patients with multiple colorectal adenomas and/or carcinomas (see
175100), Frayling et al. (1998) identified a 3949G-C transversion in
exon 15 of the APC gene, resulting in a glu1317-to-gln (E1317Q)
substitution. One of these individuals had an unusually large number of
metaplastic polyps of the colorectum. Although 2 patients had a remote
family history of colorectal cancer and 1 had a family history of
gastric cancer, none had a family history of colonic adenomas or classic
FAP.

Lamlum et al. (2000) identified the E1317Q variant in 7 of 164 unrelated
patients with multiple (3-100) colorectal adenomas. Among the entire
group, germline APC variants accounted for approximately 10% of patients
with multiple adenomas. The authors recommended screening multiple
adenoma patients for a restricted number of germline APC variants,
including E1317Q.

.0037
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 1-BP DEL, 5960A

In a 57-year-old man with FAP1 (175100), Kartheuser et al. (1999)
identified a 1-bp deletion (5960delA) in the 3-prime end of exon 15 of
the APC gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination. The
patient had an unusual and complex phenotype with colorectal, gastric,
and periampullary adenomatous polyposis, as well as 3 bilateral
adrenocortical adenomas. His mother died of colon cancer at age 66.
Three of the patient's 4 asymptomatic children were also found to have
the mutation.

.0038
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, ATTENUATED
APC, 2-BP DEL, 937GA

In a family with an attenuated form of adenomatous polyposis coli (see
175100) and thyroid cancer, Soravia et al. (1999) identified a germline
2-bp deletion (937delGA) in exon 9 of the APC gene, resulting in a
frameshift and a premature stop codon. The thyroid tumors showed a range
of morphologic features: some exhibited typical papillary architecture
and were associated with multifocal carcinoma; in others, there were
unusual areas of cribriform morphology, and spindle-cell components with
whorled architecture. RET/PTC1 and RET/PTC3 (see 164761) were expressed
in thyroid cancers.

.0039
GARDNER SYNDROME
APC, LEU698TER

In affected members of a family with Gardner syndrome (see 175100) and
thyroid cancer, Soravia et al. (1999) identified a heterozygous 2092T-G
transversion in exon 698 of the APC gene, resulting in a leu698-to-ter
(L698X) substitution. The thyroid tumors showed a range of morphologic
features: some exhibited typical papillary architecture and were
associated with multifocal carcinoma; in others, there were unusual
areas of cribriform morphology, and spindle-cell components with whorled
architecture. Affected members showed classic FAP associated, in
addition to thyroid carcinoma, with desmoid tumor, duodenal polyposis,
osteoma, dental abnormalities, and epidermoid cysts. RET/PTC1 and
RET/PTC3 (see 164761) were expressed in thyroid cancers.

.0040
DESMOID DISEASE, HEREDITARY
APC, 337-BP INS

In affected members of an Amish family with autosomal dominant
inheritance of desmoid tumors (135290), Halling et al. (1999) identified
a 337-bp insertion in an AluI sequence at codon 1526 of the APC gene,
resulting in protein truncation. The presence of a poly(A) tail at the
3-prime end of the insertion suggested that the AluI sequence was
inserted by a retrotranspositional event.

.0041
MOVED TO 611731.0023
.0042
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, ATTENUATED
APC, DEL

Pilarski et al. (1999) reported a 39-year-old man with attenuated FAP1
(see 175100) and a cytogenetically visible interstitial 5q deletion.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis with 2 cosmid probes
specific for the 5-prime and 3-prime ends of the APC gene indicated that
the entire locus was deleted. The number of polyps (50-60) seen in this
patient was consistent with attenuated FAP. Pilarski et al. (1999)
stated that this was the first reported case of attenuated FAP
associated with a germline deletion of the entire APC gene.

.0043
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, ATTENUATED
APC, IVS3AS, G-A, -1

In 5 separately ascertained families from Newfoundland with attenuated
FAP1 (see 175100), Spirio et al. (1999) identified a G-to-A transition
in the splice acceptor site of intron 3 of the APC gene, which created a
mutant RNA without exon 4 of APC. The observation of the same APC
mutation in 5 families from the same geographic area suggested a founder
effect. The identification of this germline mutation strengthened the
correlation between the 5-prime location of an APC disease-causing
mutation and the attenuated polyposis phenotype.

.0044
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 11-BP INS, NT1060

Rozen et al. (1999) reported a large kindred in which a novel 11-bp
insertion (AAGGATGATAT) at nucleotide position 1060 (codon 353) in exon
9 of the APC gene segregated with classic FAP with or without colorectal
cancer (175100). In at least 5 mutation carriers, however, there were no
clinical, endoscopic, or histologic features of FAP at the time of the
study. The authors commented that this family highlighted the possible
contribution of low penetrance germline APC mutations to 'sporadic'
colorectal neoplasia.

.0045
DESMOID DISEASE, HEREDITARY
APC, 4-BP DEL, 7929TCTA

In affected members of a large French-Canadian kindred with hereditary
desmoid disease (135290), Couture et al. (2000) identified a
heterozygous 4-bp deletion (7929delTCTA) at codons 2643-2644 of the APC
gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination. The mutant
APC allele did not express a stable truncated protein in vivo. The
phenotype was characterized by the early onset of multiple tumors,
arising near the axial skeleton and in proximal extremities. Although
penetrance of desmoid tumors was nearly 100%, expression of the disease
was variable. Many gene carriers had cutaneous cysts. Polyposis of the
colon was rarely observed in the affected individuals and no upper
gastrointestinal polyps were documented. In a desmoid tumor from the
proband, Couture et al. (2000) identified a somatic 1-bp deletion
(3720delT; 611731.0046) in codon 1240 of the APC gene.

.0046
DESMOID TUMOR, SOMATIC
APC, 1-BP DEL, 3720T

Couture et al. (2000) identified a somatic 1-bp deletion (3720delT) in
codon 1240 of the APC gene in desmoid tumor tissue from a patient with
hereditary desmoid disease (135290) and a germline mutation in the APC
gene (611731.0045). Immunohistochemistry on the tumor tissue
demonstrated elevated levels of beta-catenin (116806).

.0047
GARDNER SYNDROME
APC, GLN208TER

In a man with Gardner syndrome (see 175100) reported by Dhaliwal et al.
(1990), Su et al. (2001) identified a gln208-to-ter (Q208X) mutation in
the APC gene. The patient's 28-year-old son was diagnosed with FAP at
age 15 and underwent proctocolectomy at the age of 23. The son also
developed multiple intraperitoneal desmoid tumors and a hepatocellular
carcinoma. In the liver tumor of the son, Su et al. (2001) showed that
the wildtype allele of the APC gene carried a somatic 1-bp deletion at
codon 568 (611731.0048). The somatic APC mutation was not found in the
surrounding normal tissue.

.0048
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
APC, 1-BP DEL

In a hepatocellular tumor (114550) of a patient with Gardner syndrome
(see 175100 and 611731.0047), Su et al. (2001) identified a somatic 1-bp
deletion at codon 568 of the APC gene. The somatic APC mutation was not
found in the surrounding normal tissue.

.0049
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, ATTENUATED
APC, 56-KB DEL, EX15DEL

In a proband who had a phenotype consistent with attenuated FAP1 (see
175100), Su et al. (2002) found a genomic rearrangement resulting in a
56-kb deletion and consequent removal of the entire exon 15 of the APC
gene. This rearrangement also resulted in a hybrid gene between APC and
U2AF1RS1 (601079).

.0050
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 73-KB DEL, EX15DEL

In a family with features of classic FAP1 (175100), Su et al. (2002)
detected a genomic rearrangement resulting in a 73-kb deletion and
consequent removal of the entire exon 15 of the APC gene.

.0051
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 5-BP DEL, NT3221

In the Spanish Balearic Islands, Gonzalez et al. (2005) found that a
5-bp deletion (3221_3225delACAAA) at codon 1061 of the APC gene was the
most common basis for FAP1 (175100). Haplotype analysis of 5 families
was consistent with a founder effect.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Barber et al. (1994); Hodgson et al. (1994); Lynch  (1996); Polakis
(1995); Powell et al. (1993); Solomon et al. (1987)
REFERENCE 1. Albuquerque, C.; Breukel, C.; van der Luijt, R.; Fidalgo, P.; Lage,
P.; Slors, F. J. M.; Leitao, C. N.; Fodde, R.; Smits, R.: The 'just-right'
signaling model: APC somatic mutations are selected based on a specific
level of activation of the beta-catenin signaling cascade. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 11: 1549-1560, 2002.

2. Amos-Landgraf, J. M.; Kwong, L. N.; Kendziorski, C. M.; Reichelderfer,
M.; Torrealba, J.; Weichert, J.; Haag, J. D.; Chen, K.-S.; Waller,
J. L.; Gould, M. N.; Dove, W. F.: A target-selected Apc-mutant rat
kindred enhances the modeling of familial human colon cancer. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 4036-4041, 2007.

3. Aoki, K.; Tamai, Y.; Horiike, S.; Oshima, M.; Taketo, M. M.: Colonic
polyposis caused by mTOR-mediated chromosomal instability in Apc(+/delta716)
Cdx2(+/-) compound mutant mice. Nature Genet. 35: 323-330, 2003.

4. Aretz, S.; Stienen, D; Uhlhaas, S.; Pagenstecher, C.; Mangold,
E.; Caspari, R.; Propping, P.; Friedl, W.: Large submicroscopic genomic
APC deletions are a common cause of typical familial adenomatous polyposis.
(Letter) J. Med. Genet. 42: 185-192, 2005.

5. Aretz, S.; Stienen, D.; Friedrichs, N.; Stemmler, S.; Uhlhaas,
S.; Rahner, N.; Propping, P.; Friedl, W.: Somatic APC mosaicism:
a frequent cause of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Hum. Mutat. 28:
985-992, 2007.

6. Aretz, S.; Uhlhaas, S.; Caspari, R.; Mangold, E.; Pagenstecher,
C.; Propping, P.; Friedl, W.: Frequency and parental origin of de
novo APC mutations in familial adenomatous polyposis. Europ. J. Hum.
Genet. 12: 52-58, 2004.

7. Aretz, S.; Uhlhaas, S.; Sun, Y.; Pagenstecher, C.; Mangold, E.;
Caspari, R.; Moslein, G.; Schulmann, K.; Propping, P.; Friedl, W.
: Familial adenomatous polyposis: aberrant splicing due to missense
or silent mutations in the APC gene. Hum. Mutat. 24: 370-380, 2004.

8. Armstrong, J. G.; Davies, D. R.; Guy, S. P.; Frayling, I. M.; Evans,
D. G. R.: APC mutations in familial adenomatous polyposis families
in the northwest of England. Hum. Mutat. 10: 376-380, 1997.

9. Bapat, B.; Odze, R.; Mitri, A.; Berk, T.; Ward, M.; Gallinger,
S.: Identification of somatic APC gene mutations in periampullary
adenomas in a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Hum.
Molec. Genet. 2: 1957-1959, 1993.

10. Barber, J. C. K.; Ellis, K. H.; Bowles, L. V.; Delhanty, J. D.
A.; Ede, R. F.; Male, B. M.; Eccles, D. M.: Adenomatous polyposis
coli and a cytogenetic deletion of chromosome 5 resulting from a maternal
intrachromosomal insertion. J. Med. Genet. 31: 312-316, 1994.

11. Beroud, C.; Soussi, T.: APC gene: database of germline and somatic
mutations in human tumors and cell lines. Nucleic Acids Res. 24:
121-124, 1996.

12. Bisgaard, M. L.; Bulow, S.: Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP):
genotype correlation to FAP phenotype with osteomas and sebaceous
cysts. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A: 200-204, 2006.

13. Blaker, H.; Sutter, C.; Kadmon, M.; Otto, H. F.; von Knebel-Doeberitz,
M.; Gebert, J.; Helmke, B. M.: Analysis of somatic APC mutations
in rare extracolonic tumors of patients with familial adenomatous
polyposis coli. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 41: 93-98, 2004.

14. Boolbol, S. K.; Dannenberg, A. J.; Chadburn, A.; Martucci, C.;
Guo, X.-J.; Ramonetti, J. T.; Abreu-Goris, M.; Newmark, H. L.; Lipkin,
M. L.; DeCosse, J. J.; Bertagnolli, M. M.: Cyclooxygenase-2 overexpression
and tumor formation are blocked by sulindac in a murine model of familial
adenomatous polyposis. Cancer Res. 56: 2556-2560, 1996.

15. Brensinger, J. D.; Laken, S. J.; Luce, M. C.; Powell, S. M.; Vance,
G. H.; Ahnen, D. J.; Petersen, G. M.; Hamilton, S. R.; Giardiello,
F. M.: Variable phenotype of familial adenomatous polyposis in pedigrees
with 3-prime mutation in the APC gene. Gut 43: 548-552, 1998.

16. Brock, M. V.; Hooker, C. M.; Ota-Machida, E.; Han, Y.; Guo, M.;
Ames, S.; Glockner, S.; Piantadosi, S.; Gabrielson, E.; Pridham, G.;
Pelosky, K.; Belinsky, S. A.; Yang, S. C.; Baylin, S. B.; Herman,
J. G.: DNA methylation markers and early recurrence in stage I lung
cancer. New Eng. J. Med. 358: 1118-1128, 2008.

17. Bunyan, D. J.; Shea-Simonds, J.; Reck, A. C.; Finnis, D.; Eccles,
D. M.: Genotype-phenotype correlations of new causative APC gene
mutations in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis. J. Med.
Genet. 32: 728-731, 1995.

18. Cama, A.; Esposito, D. L.; Palmirotta, R.; Curia, M. C.; Ranieri,
A.; Ficari, F.; Valanzano, R.; Modesti, A.; Battista, P.; Tonelli,
F.; Mariani-Costantini, R.: A novel mutation at the splice junction
of exon 9 of the APC gene in familial adenomatous polyposis. Hum.
Mutat. 3: 305-308, 1994.

19. Cao, X.; Eu, K. W.; Seow-Choen, F.; Zao, Y.; Cheah, P. Y.: APC
mutation and phenotypic spectrum of Singapore familial adenomatous
polyposis patients. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 8: 42-48, 2000.

20. Cao, X.; Eu, K. W.; Seow-Choen, F.; Zhao, Y.; Cheah, P. Y.: Topoisomerase-I-
and Alu-mediated genomic deletions of the APC gene in familial adenomatous
polyposis. Hum. Genet. 108: 436-442, 2001.

21. Caspari, R.; Friedl, W.; Mandl, M.; Moslein, G.; Kadmon, M.; Knapp,
M.; Jacobasch, K.-H.; Ecker, K.-W.; Kreissler-Haag, D.; Timmermanns,
G.; Propping, P.: Familial adenomatous polyposis: mutation at codon
1309 and early onset of colon cancer. Lancet 343: 629-632, 1994.
Note: Erratum: Lancet 343: 863 only, 1994.

22. Caspari, R.; Olschwang, S.; Friedl, W.; Mandl, M.; Boisson, C.;
Boker, T.; Augustin, A.; Kadmon, M.; Moslein, G.; Thomas, G.; Propping,
P.: Familial adenomatous polyposis: desmoid tumours and lack of ophthalmic
lesions (CHRPE) associated with APC mutations beyond codon 1444. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 4: 337-340, 1995.

23. Cetta, F.; Chiappetta, G.; Melillo, R. M.; Petracci, M.; Montalto,
G.; Santoro, M.; Fusco, A.: The ret/ptc1 oncogene is activated in
familial adenomatous polyposis-associated thyroid papillary carcinomas. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 83: 1003-1006, 1998.

24. Charames, G. S.; Ramyar, L.; Mitri, A.; Berk, T.; Cheng, H.; Jung,
J.; Bocangel, P.; Chodirker, B.; Greenberg, C.; Spriggs, E.; Bapat,
B.: A large novel deletion in the APC promoter region causes gene
silencing and leads to classical familial adenomatous polyposis in
a Manitoba Mennonite kindred. Hum. Genet. 124: 535-541, 2008.

25. Choi, J.; Park, S. Y.; Costantini, F.; Jho, E.; Joo, C.-K.: Adenomatous
polyposis coli is down-regulated by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway
in a process facilitated by Axin. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 49188-49198,
2004.

26. Chung, D. C.; Maher, M. M.; Faquin, W. C.: Case 37-2006: a 19-year-old
woman with thyroid cancer and lower gastrointestinal bleeding. New
Eng. J. Med. 355: 2349-2357, 2006.

27. Cottrell, S.; Bicknell, D.; Kaklamanis, L.; Bodmer, W. F.: Molecular
analysis of APC mutations in familial adenomatous polyposis and sporadic
colon carcinomas. Lancet 340: 626-630, 1992.

28. Couture, J.; Mitri, A.; Lagace, R.; Smits, R.; Berk, T.; Bouchard,
H.-L.; Fodde, R.; Alman, B.; Bapat, B.: A germline mutation at the
extreme 3-prime end of the APC gene results in a severe desmoid phenotype
and is associated with overexpression of beta-catenin in the desmoid
tumor. Clin. Genet. 57: 205-212, 2000.

29. Curia, M. C.; Esposito, D. L.; Aceto, G.; Palmirotta, R.; Crognale,
S.; Valanzano, R.; Ficari, F.; Tonelli, F.; Battista, P.; Mariani-Costantini,
R.; Cama, A.: Transcript dosage effect in familial adenomatous polyposis:
model offered by two kindreds with exon 9 APC gene mutations. Hum.
Mutat. 11: 197-201, 1998.

30. Davies, D. R.; Armstrong, J. G.; Thakker, N.; Horner, K.; Guy,
S. P.; Clancy, T.; Sloan, P.; Blair, V.; Dodd, C.; Warnes, T. W.;
Harris, R.; Evans, D. G. R.: Severe Gardner syndrome in families
with mutations restricted to a specific region of the APC gene. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 57: 1151-1158, 1995.

31. De Vries, E. M. G.; Ricke, D. O.; De Vries, T. N.; Hartmann, A.;
Blaszyk, H.; Liao, D.; Soussi, T.; Kovach, J. S.; Sommer, S. S.:
Database of mutations in the p53 and APC tumor suppressor genes designed
to facilitate molecular epidemiological analyses. Hum. Mutat. 7:
202-213, 1996.

32. Dhaliwal, M. K.; Hughes, J. I.; Jackson, G. L.; Pathak, S.: Multiple
polyposis coli associated with Gardner's syndrome and chromosomal
mosaicism: a family analysis. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 85: 880-883,
1990.

33. Dietrich, W. F.; Lander, E. S.; Smith, J. S.; Moser, A. R.; Gould,
K. A.; Luongo, C.; Borenstein, N.; Dove, W.: Genetic identification
of Mom-1, a major modifier locus affecting Min-induced intestinal
neoplasia in the mouse. Cell 75: 631-639, 1993.

34. Dihlmann, S.; Gebert, J.; Siermann, A.; Herfarth, C.; von Knebel
Doeberitz, M.: Dominant negative effect of the APC(1309) mutation:
a possible explanation for genotype-phenotype correlations in familial
adenomatous polyposis. Cancer Res. 59: 1857-1860, 1999.

35. Distante, S.; Nasioulas, S.; Somers, G. R.; Cameron, D. J. S.;
Young, M. A.; Forrest, S. M.; Gardner, R. J. M.: Familial adenomatous
polyposis in a 5 year old child: a clinical, pathological, and molecular
genetic study. J. Med. Genet. 33: 157-160, 1996.

36. Eccles, D. M.; Lunt, P. W.; Wallis, Y.; Griffiths, M.; Sandhu,
B.; McKay, S.; Morton, D.; Shea-Simonds, J.; Macdonald, F.: An unusually
severe phenotype for familial adenomatous polyposis. Arch. Dis. Child. 77:
431-435, 1997.

37. Eccles, D. M.; van der Luijt, R.; Breukel, C.; Bullman, H.; Bunyan,
D.; Fisher, A.; Barber, J.; du Boulay, C.; Primrose, J.; Burn, J.;
Fodde, R.: Hereditary desmoid disease due to a frameshift mutation
at codon 1924 of the APC gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 59: 1193-1201,
1996.

38. Etienne-Manneville, S.; Hall, A.: Cdc42 regulates GSK-3-beta
and adenomatous polyposis coli to control cell polarity. Nature 421:
753-756, 2003.

39. Fearnhead, N. S.; Britton, M. P.; Bodmer, W. F.: The ABC of APC. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 10: 721-733, 2001.

40. Fearon, E. R.: Human cancer syndromes: clues to the origin and
nature of cancer. Science 278: 1043-1050, 1997.

41. Fearon, E. R.; Vogelstein, B.: A genetic model for colorectal
tumorigenesis. Cell 61: 759-767, 1990.

42. Fodde, R.; Edelmann, W.; Yang, K.; van Leeuwen, C.; Carlson, C.;
Renault, B.; Breukel, C.; Alt, E.; Lipkin, M.; Meera Khan, P.; Kucherlapati,
R.: A targeted chain-termination mutation in the mouse Apc gene results
in multiple intestinal tumors. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 8969-8973,
1994.

43. Fodde, R.; Kuipers, J.; Rosenberg, C.; Smits, R.; Kielman, M.;
Gaspar, C.; van Es, J. H.; Breukel, C.; Wiegant, J.; Giles, R. H.;
Clevers, H.: Mutations in the APC tumour suppressor gene cause chromosomal
instability. Nature Cell Biol. 3: 433-438, 2001.

44. Fodde, R.; van der Luijt, R.; Wijnen, J.; Tops, C.; van der Klift,
H.; van Leeuwen-Cornelisse, I.; Griffioen, G.; Vasen, H.; Meera Khan,
P.: Eight novel inactivating germ line mutations at the APC gene
identified by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Genomics 13:
1162-1168, 1992.

45. Frayling, I. M.; Beck, N. E.; Ilyas, M.; Dove-Edwin, I.; Goodman,
P.; Pack, K.; Bell, J. A.; Williams, C. B.; Hodgson, S. V.; Thomas,
H. J. W.; Talbot, I. C.; Bodmer, W. F.; Tomlinson, I. P. M.: The
APC variants I1307K and E1317Q are associated with colorectal tumors,
but not always with a family history. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95:
10722-10727, 1998.

46. Friedl, W.; Meuschel, S.; Caspari, R.; Lamberti, C.; Krieger,
S.; Sengteller, M.; Propping, P.: Attenuated familial adenomatous
polyposis due to a mutation in the 3-prime part of the APC gene: a
clue for understanding the function of the APC protein. Hum. Genet. 97:
579-584, 1996.

47. Gayther, S. A.; Wells, D.; SenGupta, S. B.; Chapman, P.; Neale,
K.; Tsioupra, K.; Delhanty, J. D. A.: Regionally clustered APC mutations
are associated with a severe phenotype and occur at a high frequency
in new mutation cases of adenomatous polyposis coli. Hum. Mol. Genet. 3:
53-56, 1994.

48. Giardiello, F. M.; Petersen, G. M.; Piantadosi, S.; Gruber, S.
B.; Traboulsi, E. I.; Offerhaus, G. J. A.; Muro, K.; Krush, A. J.;
Booker, S. V.; Luce, M. C.; Laken, S. J.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein,
B.; Hamilton, S. R.: APC gene mutations and extraintestinal phenotype
of familial adenomatous polyposis. Gut 40: 521-525, 1997.

49. Gonzalez, S.; Blanco, I.; Campos, O.; Julia, M.; Reyes, J.; Llompart,
A.; Cabeza, E.; Germa, J. R.; Obrador, A.; Capella, G.: Founder mutation
in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) in the Balearic Islands. Cancer
Genet. Cytogenet. 158: 70-74, 2005.

50. Goss, K. H.; Trzepacz, C.; Tuohy, T. M. F.; Groden, J.: Attenuated
APC alleles produce functional protein from internal translation initiation. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 8161-8166, 2002.

51. Green, R. A.; Kaplan, K. B.: Chromosome instability in colorectal
tumor cells is associated with defects in microtubule plus-end attachments
caused by a dominant mutation in APC. J. Cell Biol. 163: 949-961,
2003.

52. Groden, J.; Thliveris, A.; Samowitz, W.; Carlson, M.; Gelbert,
L.; Albertsen, H.; Joslyn, G.; Stevens, J.; Spirio, L.; Robertson,
M.; Sargeant, L.; Krapcho, K.; Wolff, E.; Burt, R.; Hughes, J. P.;
Warrington, J.; McPherson, J.; Wasmuth, J.; Le Paslier, D.; Abderrahim,
H.; Cohen, D.; Leppert, M.; White, R.: Identification and characterization
of the familial adenomatous polyposis coli gene. Cell 66: 589-600,
1991.

53. Gruber, S. B.; Petersen, G. M.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.
: Cancer, crash sites, and the new genetics of neoplasia. (Editorial) Gastroenterology 116:
210-212, 1999.

54. Gryfe, R.; Di Nicola, N.; Gallinger, S.; Redston, M.: Somatic
instability of the APC I1307K allele in colorectal neoplasia. Cancer
Res. 58: 4040-4043, 1998.

55. Gryfe, R.; Di Nicola, N.; Lal, G.; Gallinger, S.; Redston, M.
: Inherited colorectal polyposis and cancer risk of the APC I1307K
polymorphism. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64: 378-384, 1999.

56. Haigis, K. M.; Dove, W. F.: A Robertsonian translocation suppresses
a somatic recombination pathway to loss of heterozygosity. Nature
Genet. 33: 33-39, 2003.

57. Halberg, R. B.; Katzung, D. S.; Hoff, P. D.; Moser, A. R.; Cole,
C. E.; Lubet, R. A.; Donehower, L. A.; Jacoby, R. F.; Dove, W. F.
: Tumorigenesis in the multiple intestinal neoplasia mouse: redundancy
of negative regulators and specificity of modifiers. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 97: 3461-3466, 2000.

58. Halling, K. C.; Lazzaro, C. R.; Honchel, R.; Bufill, J. A.; Powell,
S. M.; Arndt, C. A. S.; Lindor, N. M.: Hereditary desmoid disease
in a family with a germline AluI repeat mutation of the APC gene. Hum.
Hered. 49: 97-102, 1999.

59. Hamilton, S. R.; Liu, B.; Parsons, R. E.; Papadopoulos, N.; Jen,
J.; Powell, S. M.; Krush, A. J.; Berk, T.; Cohen, Z.; Tetu, B.; Burger,
P. C.; Wood, P. A.; Taqi, F.; Booker, S. V.; Petersen, G. M.; Offerhaus,
G. J. A.; Tersmette, A. C.; Giardiello, F. M.; Vogelstein, B.; Kinzler,
K. W.: The molecular basis of Turcot's syndrome. New Eng. J. Med. 332:
839-847, 1995.

60. Hampton, G. M.; Ward, J. R. T. J.; Cottrell, S.; Howe, K.; Thomas,
H. J. W.; Ballhausen, W. G.; Jones, T.; Sheer, D.; Solomon, E.; Frischauf,
A.-M.; Bodmer, W. F.: Yeast artificial chromosomes for the molecular
analysis of the familial polyposis APC gene region. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 89: 8249-8253, 1992.

61. Hanson, C. A.; Miller, J. R.: Non-traditional roles for the adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor protein. Gene 361: 1-12, 2005.

62. He, T.-C.; Sparks, A. B.; Rago, C.; Hermeking, H.; Zawel, L.;
da Costa, L. T.; Morin, P. J.; Vogelstein, B.; Kinzler, K. W.: Identification
of c-MYC as a target of the APC pathway. Science 281: 1509-1512,
1998.

63. Hodgson, S. V.; Coonar, A. S.; Hanson, P. J. V.; Cottrell, S.;
Scriven, P. N.; Jones, T.; Hawley, P. R.; Wilkinson, M. L.: Two cases
of 5q deletions in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis: possible
link with Caroli's disease. J. Med. Genet. 30: 369-375, 1993.

64. Hodgson, S. V.; Fagg, N. L. K.; Talbot, I. C.; Wilkinson, M.:
Deletions of the entire APC gene are associated with sessile colonic
adenomas. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 31: 426 only, 1994.

65. Homma, M. K.; Li, D.; Krebs, E. G.; Yuasa, Y.; Homma, Y.: Association
and regulation of casein kinase 2 activity by adenomatous polyposis
coli protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 5959-5964, 2002.

66. Horii, A.; Nakatsuru, S.; Ichii, S.; Nagase, H.; Nakamura, Y.
: Multiple forms of the APC gene transcripts and their tissue-specific
expression. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 283-287, 1993.

67. Horii, A.; Nakatsuru, S.; Miyoshi, Y.; Ichii, S.; Nagase, H.;
Kato, Y.; Yanagisawa, A.; Nakamura, Y.: The APC gene, responsible
for familial adenomatous polyposis, is mutated in human gastric cancer. Cancer
Res. 52: 3231-3233, 1992.

68. Hoshino, Y.; Horikawa, I.; Oshimura, M.; Yuasa, Y.: Normal human
chromosome 5, on which a familial adenomatous polyposis gene is located,
has tumor suppressive activity. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 174:
298-304, 1991.

69. Huang, H.; Mahler-Araujo, B. M.; Sankila, A.; Chimelli, L.; Yonekawa,
Y.; Kleihues, P.; Ohgaki, H.: APC mutations in sporadic medulloblastomas. Am.
J. Path. 156: 433-437, 2000.

70. Hurlstone, A. F. L.; Haramis, A.-P. G.; Wienholds, E.; Begthel,
H.; Korving, J.; van Eeden, F.; Cuppen, E.; Zivkovic, D.; Plasterk,
R. H. A.; Clevers, H.: The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway regulates cardiac
valve formation. Nature 425: 633-637, 2003.

71. Jette, C.; Peterson, P. W.; Sandoval, I. T.; Manos, E. J.; Hadley,
E.; Ireland, C. M.; Jones, D. A.: The tumor suppressor adenomatous
polyposis coli and caudal related homeodomain protein regulate expression
of retinol dehydrogenase L. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 34397-34405, 2004.

72. Joslyn, G.; Carlson, M.; Thliveris, A.; Albertsen, H.; Gelbert,
L.; Samowitz, W.; Groden, J.; Stevens, J.; Spirio, L.; Robertson,
M.; Sargeant, L.; Krapcho, K.; Wolff, E.; Burt, R.; Hughes, J. P.;
Warrington, J.; McPherson, J.; Wasmuth, J.; Le Paslier, D.; Abderrahim,
H.; Cohen, D.; Leppert, M.; White, R.: Identification of deletion
mutations and three new genes at the familial polyposis locus. Cell 66:
601-613, 1991.

73. Kaplan, K. B.; Burds, A. A.; Swedlow, J. R.; Bekir, S. S.; Sorger,
P. K.; Nathke, I. S.: A role for the adenomatous polyposis coli protein
in chromosome segregation. Nature Cell Biol. 3: 429-432, 2001.

74. Karagianni, N.; Ly, M.-C.; Psarras, S.; Chlichlia, K.; Schirrmacher,
V.; Gounari, F.; Khazaie, K.: Novel adenomatous polyposis coli gene
promoter is located 40 kb upstream of the initiating methionine. Genomics 85:
231-237, 2005.

75. Kartheuser, A.; Walon, C.; West, S.; Breukel, C.; Detry, R.; Gribomont,
A.-C.; Hamzehloei, T.; Hoang, P.; Maiter, D.; Pringot, J.; Rahier,
J.; Khan, P. M.; Curtis, A.; Burn, J.; Fodde, R.; Verellen-Dumoulin,
C.: Familial adenomatous polyposis associated with multiple adrenal
adenomas in a patient with a rare 3-prime APC mutation. J. Med. Genet. 36:
65-67, 1999.

76. Kawasaki, Y.; Sato, R.; Akiyama, T.: Mutated APC and Asef are
involved in the migration of colorectal tumour cells. Nature Cell
Biol. 5: 211-215, 2003.

77. Kawasaki, Y.; Senda, T.; Ishidata, T.; Koyama, R.; Morishita,
T.; Iwayama, Y.; Higuchi, O.; Akiyama, T.: Asef, a link between the
tumor suppressor APC and G-protein signaling. Science 289: 1194-1197,
2000.

78. Kielman, M. F.; Ridanpaa, M.; Gaspar, C.; van Poppel, N.; Breukel,
C.; van Leeuwen, S.; Taketo, M. M.; Roberts, S.; Smits, R.; Fodde,
R.: Apc modulates embryonic stem-cell differentiation by controlling
the dosage of beta-catenin signaling. Nature Genet. 32: 594-605,
2002. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 33: 107 only, 2003.

79. Kinzler, K. W.; Nilbert, M. C.; Su, L.-K.; Vogelstein, B.; Bryan,
T. M.; Levy, D. B.; Smith, K. J.; Preisinger, A. C.; Hedge, P.; McKechnie,
D.; Finniear, R.; Markham, A.; Groffen, J.; Boguski, M. S.; Altschul,
S. F.; Horii, A.; Ando, H.; Miyoshi, Y.; Miki, Y.; Nishisho, I.; Nakamura,
Y.: Identification of FAP locus genes from chromosome 5q21. Science 253:
661-665, 1991.

80. Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.: Lessons from hereditary colorectal
cancer. Cell 87: 159-170, 1996.

81. Kohler, E. M.; Chandra, S. H. V.; Behrens, J.; Schneikert, J.
: Beta-catenin degradation mediated by the CID domain of APC provides
a model for the selection of APC mutations in colorectal, desmoid
and duodenal tumours. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 213-226, 2009.

82. Laken, S. J.; Papadopoulos, N.; Petersen, G. M.; Gruber, S. B.;
Hamilton, S. R.; Giardiello, F. M.; Brensinger, J. D.; Vogelstein,
B.; Kinzler, K. W.: Analysis of masked mutations in familial adenomatous
polyposis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 2322-2326, 1999.

83. Laken, S. J.; Petersen, G. M.; Gruber, S. B.; Oddoux, C.; Ostrer,
H.; Giardiello, F. M.; Hamilton, S. R.; Hampel, H.; Markowitz, A.;
Klimstra, D.; Jhanwar, S.; Winawer, S.; Offit, K.; Luce, M. C.; Kinzler,
K. W.; Vogelstein, B.: Familial colorectal cancer in Ashkenazim due
to a hypermutable tract in APC. Nature Genet. 17: 79-83, 1997.

84. Lal, G.; Ash, C.; Hay, K.; Redston, M.; Kwong, E.; Hancock, B.;
Mak, T.; Kargman, S.; Evans, J. F.; Gallinger, S.: Suppression of
intestinal polyps in Msh2-deficient and non-Msh2-deficient multiple
intestinal neoplasia mice by a specific cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor
and by a dual cyclooxygenase-1/2 inhibitor. Cancer Res. 61: 6131-6136,
2001.

85. Lambertz, S.; Ballhausen, W. G.: Identification of an alternative
5-prime untranslated region of the adenomatous polyposis coli gene. Hum.
Genet. 90: 650-652, 1993.

86. Lamlum, H.; Al Tassan, N.; Jaeger, E.; Frayling, I.; Sieber, O.;
Bin Reza, F.; Eckert, M.; Rowan, A.; Barclay, E.; Atkin, W.; Williams,
C.; Gilbert, J.; Cheadle, J.; Bell, J.; Houlston, R.; Bodmer, W.;
Sampson, J.; Tomlinson, I.: Germline APC variants in patients with
multiple colorectal adenomas, with evidence for the particular importance
of E1317Q. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 2215-2221, 2000.

87. Lamlum, H.; Ilyas, M.; Rowan, A.; Clark, S.; Johnson, V.; Bell,
J.; Frayling, I.; Efstathiou, J.; Pack, K.; Payne, S.; Roylance, R.;
Gorman, P.; Sheer, D.; Neale, K.; Phillips, R.; Talbot, I.; Bodmer,
W.; Tomlinson, I.: The type of somatic mutation at APC in familial
adenomatous polyposis is determined by the site of the germline mutation:
a new facet of Knudson's 'two-hit' hypothesis. Nature Med. 5: 1071-1075,
1999.

88. Lander, E.: Personal Communication. Cambridge, Mass.  10/1991.

89. Lane, S. W.; Sykes, S. M.; Al-Shahrour, F.; Shterental, S.; Paktinat,
M.; Celso, C. L.; Jesneck, J. L.; Ebert, B. L.; Williams, D. A.; Gilliland,
D. G.: The Apc(min) mouse has altered hematopoietic stem cell function
and provides a model for MPD/MDS. Blood 115: 3489-3497, 2010.

90. Luongo, C.; Gould, K. A.; Su, L.-K.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein,
B.; Dietrich, W.; Lander, E. S.; Moser, A. R.: Mapping of multiple
intestinal neoplasia (Min) to proximal chromosome 18 of the mouse. Genomics 15:
3-8, 1993.

91. Lynch, H. T.: Desmoid tumors: genotype-phenotype differences
in familial adenomatous polyposis: a nosological dilemma. (Editorial) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 59: 1184-1185, 1996.

92. Lynch, H. T.; de la Chapelle, A.: Hereditary colorectal cancer. New
Eng. J. Med. 348: 919-932, 2003.

93. Maher, E. R.; Morson, B.; Beach, R.; Hodgson, S. V.: Phenotypic
variation in hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer syndrome: association
with infiltrative fibromatosis (desmoid tumor). Cancer 69: 2049-2051,
1992.

94. Mahmoud, N. N.; Bilinski, R. T.; Churchill, M. R.; Edelmann, W.;
Kucherlapati, R.; Bertagnolli, M. M.: Genotype-phenotype correlation
in murine Apc mutation: differences in enterocyte migration and response
to sulindac. Cancer Res. 59: 353-359, 1999.

95. Mahmoud, N. N.; Boolbol, S. K.; Bilinski, R. T.; Martucci, C.
M.; Chadburn, A.; Bertagnolli, M. M.: Apc gene mutation is associated
with a dominant-negative effect upon intestinal cell migration. Cancer
Res. 57: 5045-5050, 1997.

96. Marshall, B.; Isidro, G.; Carvalhas, R.; Boavida, M. G.: Germline
versus somatic mutations of the APC gene: evidence for mechanistic
differences. (Letter) Hum. Mutat. 9: 286-288, 1997.

97. Martin-Denavit, T.; Duthel, S.; Giraud, S.; Olschwang, S.; Saurin,
J. C.; Plauchu, H.: Phenotype variability of two FAP families with
an identical APC germline mutation at codon 1465: a potential modifier
effect? Clin. Genet. 60: 125-131, 2001.

98. Matsumine, A.; Ogai, A.; Senda, T.; Okumura, N.; Satoh, K.; Baeg,
G.-H.; Kawahara, T.; Kobayashi, S.; Okada, M.; Toyoshima, K.; Akiyama,
T.: Binding of APC to the human homolog of the Drosophila discs large
tumor suppressor protein. Science 272: 1020-1023, 1996.

99. Midgley, C. A.; White, S.; Howitt, R.; Save, V.; Dunlop, M. G.;
Hall, P. A.; Lane, D. P.; Wyllie, A. H.; Bubb, V. J.: APC expression
in normal human tissues. J. Path. 181: 426-433, 1997.

100. Mili, S.; Moissoglu, K.; Macara, I. G.: Genome-wide screen reveals
APC-associated RNAs enriched in cell protrusions. Nature 453: 115-119,
2008.

101. Miyashiro, I.; Senda, T.; Matsumine, A.; Baeg, G.-H.; Kuroda,
T.; Shimano, T.; Miura, S.; Noda, T.; Kobayashi, S.; Monden, M.; Toyoshima,
K.; Akiyama, T.: Subcellular localization of the APC protein: immunoelectron
microscopic study of the association of the APC protein with catenin. Oncogene 11:
89-96, 1995.

102. Miyoshi, Y.; Ando, H.; Nagase, H.; Nishisho, I.; Horii, A.; Miki,
Y.; Mori, T.; Utsunomiya, J.; Baba, S.; Petersen, G.; Hamilton, S.
R.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.; Nakamura, Y.: Germ-line mutations
of the APC gene in 53 familial adenomatous polyposis patients. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 4452-4456, 1992.

103. Miyoshi, Y.; Nagase, H.; Ando, H.; Horii, A.; Ichii, S.; Nakatsuru,
S.; Aoki, T.; Miki, Y.; Mori, T.; Nakamura, Y.: Somatic mutations
of the APC gene in colorectal tumors: mutation cluster region in the
APC gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 1: 229-233, 1992.

104. Moser, A. R.; Mattes, E. M.; Dove, W. F.; Lindstrom, M. J.; Haag,
J. D.; Gould, M. N.: Apc(Min), a mutation in the murine Apc gene,
predisposes to mammary carcinomas and focal alveolar hyperplasias. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 8977-8981, 1993.

105. Nadauld, L. D.; Chidester, S.; Shelton, D. N.; Rai, K.; Broadbent,
T.; Sandoval, I. T.; Peterson, P. W.; Manos, E. J.; Ireland, C. M.;
Yost, H. J.; Jones, D. A.: Dual roles for adenomatous polyposis coli
in regulating retinoic acid biosynthesis and Wnt during ocular development. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 13409-13414, 2006.

106. Nagase, H.; Miyoshi, Y.; Horii, A.; Aoki, T.; Ogawa, M.; Utsunomiya,
J.; Baba, S.; Sasazuki, T.; Nakamura, Y.: Correlation between the
location of germ-line mutations in the APC gene and the number of
colorectal polyps in familial adenomatous polyposis patients. Cancer
Res. 52: 4055-4057, 1992.

107. Nagase, H.; Miyoshi, Y.; Horii, A.; Aoki, T.; Petersen, G. M.;
Vogelstein, B.; Maher, E.; Ogawa, M.; Maruyama, M.; Utsunomiya, J.;
Baba, S.; Nakamura, Y.: Screening for germ-line mutations in familial
adenomatous polyposis patients: 61 new patients and a summary of 150
unrelated patients. Hum. Mutat. 1: 467-473, 1992.

108. Nagase, H.; Nakamura, Y.: Mutations of the APC (adenomatous
polyposis coli) gene. Hum. Mutat. 2: 425-434, 1993.

109. Nakagawa, H.; Murata, Y.; Koyama, K.; Fujiyama, A.; Miyoshi,
Y.; Monden, M.; Akiyama, T.; Nakamura, Y.: Identification of a brain-specific
APC homologue, APCL, and its interaction with beta-catenin. Cancer
Res. 58: 5176-5181, 1998.

110. Neufeld, K. L.; Nix, D. A.; Bogerd, H.; Kang, Y.; Beckerle, M.
C.; Cullen, B. R.; White, R. L.: Adenomatous polyposis coli protein
contains two nuclear export signals and shuttles between the nucleus
and cytoplasm. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 12085-12090, 2000.

111. Neufeld, K. L.; White, R. L.: Nuclear and cytoplasmic localizations
of the adenomatous polyposis coli protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94:
3034-3039, 1997.

112. Niell, B. L.; Long, J. C.; Rennert, G.; Gruber, S. B.: Genetic
anthropology of the colorectal cancer-susceptibility allele APC I1307K:
evidence of genetic drift within the Ashkenazim. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 73:
1250-1260, 2003.

113. Nishisho, I.; Nakamura, Y.; Miyoshi, Y.; Miki, Y.; Ando, H.;
Horii, A.; Koyama, K.; Utsunomiya, J.; Baba, S.; Hedge, P.; Markham,
A.; Krush, A. J.; Petersen, G.; Hamilton, S. R.; Nilbert, M. C.; Levy,
D. B.; Bryan, T. M.; Preisinger, A. C.; Smith, K. J.; Su, L.-K.; Kinzler,
K. W.; Vogelstein, B.: Mutations of chromosome 5q21 genes in FAP
and colorectal cancer patients. Science 253: 665-669, 1991.

114. Oda, H.; Imai, Y.; Nakatsuru, Y.; Hata, J.; Ishikawa, T.: Somatic
mutations of the APC gene in sporadic hepatoblastomas. Cancer Res. 56:
3320-3323, 1996.

115. Olschwang, S.; Tiret, A.; Laurent-Puig, P.; Muleris, M.; Parc,
R.; Thomas, G.: Restriction of ocular fundus lesions to a specific
subgroup of APC mutations in adenomatous polyposis coli patients. Cell 75:
959-968, 1993.

116. Oshima, M.; Dinchuk, J. E.; Kargman, S. L.; Oshima, H.; Hancock,
B.; Kwong, E.; Trzaskos, J. M.; Evans, J. F.; Taketo, M. M.: Suppression
of intestinal polyposis in Apc(delta-716) knockout mice by inhibition
of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2). Cell 87: 803-809, 1996.

117. Oshima, M.; Oshima, H.; Kitagawa, K.; Kobayashi, M.; Itakura,
C.; Taketo, M.: Loss of Apc heterozygosity and abnormal tissue building
in nascent intestinal polyps in mice carrying a truncated Apc gene. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 4482-4486, 1995.

118. Patael, Y.; Figer, A.; Gershoni-Baruch, R.; Papa, M. Z.; Risel,
S.; Shtoyerman-Chen, R.; Karasik, A.; Theodor, L.; Friedman, E.:
Common origin of the I1307K APC polymorphism in Ashkenazi and non-Ashkenazi
Jews. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 7: 555-559, 1999.

119. Peifer, M.: Cancer, catenins, and cuticle pattern: a complex
connection. Science 262: 1667-1668, 1993.

120. Penman, G. A.; Leung, L.; Nathke, I. S.: The adenomatous polyposis
coli protein (APC) exists in two distinct soluble complexes with different
functions. J. Cell Sci. 118: 4741-4750, 2005.

121. Petersen, G. M.; Parmigiani, G.; Thomas, D.: Missense mutations
in disease genes: a Bayesian approach to evaluate causality. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 62: 1516-1524, 1998.

122. Pilarski, R. T.; Brothman, A. R.; Benn, P.; Rosengren, S. S.
: Attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis in a man with an interstitial
deletion of chromosome arm 5q. Am. J. Med. Genet. 86: 321-324, 1999.

123. Polakis, P.: Mutations in the APC gene and their implications
for protein structure and function. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 5: 66-71,
1995.

124. Powell, S. M.; Petersen, G. M.; Krush, A. J.; Booker, S.; Jen,
J.; Giardiello, F. M.; Hamilton, S. R.; Vogelstein, B.; Kinzler, K.
W.: Molecular diagnosis of familial adenomatous polyposis. New Eng.
J. Med. 329: 1982-1987, 1993.

125. Powell, S. M.; Zilz, N.; Beazer-Barclay, Y.; Bryan, T. M.; Hamilton,
S. R.; Thibodeau, S. N.; Vogelstein, B.; Kinzler, K. W.: APC mutations
occur early during colorectal tumorigenesis. Nature 359: 235-237,
1992.

126. Prescott, S. M.; White, R. L.: Self-promotion? Intimate connections
between APC and prostaglandin H synthase-2. Cell 87: 783-786, 1996.

127. Prior, T. W.; Chadwick, R. B.; Papp, A. C.; Arcot, A. N.; Isa,
A. M.; Pearl, D. K.; Stemmermann, G.; Percesepe, A.; Loukola, A.;
Aaltonen, L. A.; de la Chapelle, A.: The I1307K polymorphism of the
APC gene in colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology 116: 58-63, 1999.

128. Rao, C. V.; Yang, Y.-M.; Swamy, M. V.; Liu, T.; Fang, Y.; Mahmood,
R.; Jhanwar-Uniyal, M.; Dai, W.: Colonic tumorigenesis in BubR1 +/-
Apc Min/+ compound mutant mice is linked to premature separation of
sister chromatids and enhanced genomic instability. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 102: 4365-4370, 2005.

129. Redston, M.; Nathanson, K. L.; Yuan, Z. Q.; Neuhausen, S. L.;
Satagopan, J.; Wong, N.; Yang, D.; Nafa, D.; Abrahamson, J.; Ozcelik,
H.; Antin-Ozerkis, D.; Andrulis, I.; and 13 others: The APC I1307K
allele and breast cancer risk. Nature Genet. 20: 13-14, 1998.

130. Roose, J.; Huls, G.; van Beest, M.; Moerer, P.; van der Horn,
K.; Goldschmeding, R.; Logtenberg, T.; Clevers, H.: Synergy between
tumor suppressor APC and the beta-catenin-Tcf4 target Tcf1. Science 285:
1923-1926, 1999.

131. Rosin-Arbesfeld, R.; Townsley, F.; Bienz, M.: The APC tumour
suppressor has a nuclear export function. Nature 406: 1009-1012,
2000.

132. Rowan, A. J.; Lamlum, H.; Ilyas, M.; Wheeler, J.; Straub, J.;
Papadopoulou, A.; Bicknell, D.; Bodmer, W. F.; Tomlinson, I. P. M.
: APC mutations in sporadic colorectal tumors: a mutational 'hotspot'
and interdependence of the 'two hits.' Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97:
3352-3357, 2000.

133. Rozen, P.; Naiman, T.; Strul, H.; Taussky, P.; Karminsky, N.;
Shomrat, R.; Samuel, Z.; Yaron, Y.; Orr-Urtreger, A.: Clinical and
screening implications of the I1307K adenomatous polyposis coli gene
variant in Israeli Ashkenazi Jews with familial colorectal neoplasia:
evidence for a founder effect. Cancer 94: 2561-2568, 2002.

134. Rozen, P.; Samuel, Z.; Shomrat, R.; Legum, C.: Notable intrafamilial
phenotypic variability in a kindred with familial adenomatous polyposis
and an APC mutation in exon 9. Gut 45: 829-833, 1999.

135. Rozen, P.; Shomrat, R.; Strul, H.; Naiman, T.; Karminsky, N.;
Legum, C.; Orr-Urtreger, A.: Prevalence of the I1307K APC gene variant
in Israeli Jews of differing ethnic origin and risk for colorectal
cancer. Gastroenterology 116: 54-57, 1999.

136. Rubinfeld, B.; Albert, I.; Porfiri, E.; Fiol, C.; Munemitsu,
S.; Polakis, P.: Binding of GSK3-beta to the APC-beta-catenin complex
and regulation of complex assembly. Science 272: 1023-1026, 1996.

137. Rubinfeld, B.; Souza, B.; Albert, I.; Muller, O.; Chamberlain,
S. H.; Masiarz, F. R.; Munemitsu, S.; Polakis, P.: Association of
the APC gene product with beta-catenin. Science 262: 1731-1734,
1993.

138. Sansom, O. J.; Meniel, V. S.; Muncan, V.; Phesse, T. J.; Wilkins,
J. A.; Reed, K. R.; Vass, J. K.; Athineos, D.; Clevers, H.; Clarke,
A. R.: Myc deletion rescues Apc deficiency in the small intestine. Nature 446:
676-679, 2007.

139. Scott, R. J.; Froggart, N. J.; Trembath, R. C.; Evans, D. G.
R.; Hodgson, S. V.; Maher, E. R.: Familial infiltrative fibromatosis
(desmoid tumours) (MIM135290) caused by a recurrent 3-prime APC gene
mutation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5: 1921-1924, 1996.

140. Scott, R. J.; van der Luijt, R.; Spycher, M.; Mary, J.-L.; Muller,
A.; Hoppeler, T.; Haner, M.; Muller, H.; Martinoli, S.; Brazzola,
P.-L.; Meera Khan, P.: Novel germline APC gene mutation in a large
familial adenomatous polyposis kindred displaying variable phenotypes. Gut 36:
731-736, 1995. Note: Erratum: Gut 38: 794 only, 1996.

141. Seki, M.; Tanaka, K.; Kikuchi-Yanoshita, R.; Konishi, M.; Fukunari,
H.; Iwama, T.; Miyaki, M.: Loss of normal allele of the APC gene
in an adrenocortical carcinoma from a patient with familial adenomatous
polyposis. Hum. Genet. 89: 298-300, 1992.

142. Sen-Gupta, S.; Van der Luijt, R. B.; Bowles, L. V.; Meera Khan,
P.; Delhanty, J. D. A.: Somatic mutation of APC gene in desmoid tumour
in familial adenomatous polyposis. (Letter) Lancet 342: 552-553,
1993.

143. Shaoul, R.; Papsin, B.; Cutz, E.; Durie, P.: Congenital cholesteatoma
in a child carrying a gene mutation for adenomatous polyposis coli. J.
Pediat. Gastroent. Nutr. 28: 100-103, 1999.

144. Shibata, H.; Takano, H.; Ito, M.; Shioya, H.; Hirota, M.; Matsumoto,
H.; Kakudo, Y.; Ishioka, C.; Akiyama, T.; Kanegae, Y.; Saito, I.;
Noda, T.: Alpha-catenin is essential in intestinal adenoma formation. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 18199-18204, 2007.

145. Sieber, O. M.; Lamlum, H.; Crabtree, M. D.; Rowan, A. J.; Barclay,
E.; Lipton, L.; Hodgson, S.; Thomas, H. J. W.; Neale, K.; Phillips,
R. K. S.; Farrington, S. M.; Dunlop, M. G.; and 9 others: Whole-gene
APC deletions cause classical familial adenomatous polyposis, but
not attenuated polyposis or 'multiple' colorectal adenomas. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 2954-2958, 2002.

146. Silverberg, M. S.; Clelland, C.; Murphy, J. E.; Steinhart, A.
H.; McLeod, R. S.; Greenberg, G. R.; Cohen, Z.; Siminovitch, K. A.
: Carrier rate of APC I1307K is not increased in inflammatory bowel
disease patients of Ashkenazi Jewish origin. Hum. Genet. 108: 205-210,
2001.

147. Smith, G.; Carey, F. A.; Beattie, J.; Wilkie, M. J. V.; Lightfoot,
T. J.; Coxhead, J.; Garner, R. C.; Steele, R. J. C.; Wolf, C. R.:
Mutations in APC, Kirsten-ras, and p53--alternative genetic pathways
to colorectal cancer. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 9433-9438, 2002.

148. Smith, K. J.; Johnson, K. A.; Bryan, T. M.; Hill, D. E.; Markowitz,
S.; Willson, J. K. V.; Paraskeva, C.; Petersen, G. M.; Hamilton, S.
R.; Vogelstein, B.; Kinzler, K. W.: The APC gene product in normal
and tumor cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 2846-2850, 1993.

149. Solomon, E.; Voss, R.; Hall, V.; Bodmer, W. F.; Jass, J. R.;
Jeffreys, A. J.; Lucibello, F. C.; Patel, I.; Rider, S. H.: Chromosome
5 allele loss in human colorectal carcinomas. Nature 328: 616-619,
1987.

150. Soravia, C.; Berk, T.; Madlensky, L.; Mitri, A.; Cheng, H.; Gallinger,
S.; Cohen, Z.; Bapat, B.: Genotype-phenotype correlations in attenuated
adenomatous polyposis coli. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62: 1290-1301, 1998.

151. Soravia, C.; Sugg, S. L.; Berk, T.; Mitri, A.; Cheng, H.; Gallinger,
S.; Cohen, Z.; Asa, S. L.; Bapat, B. V.: Familial adenomatous polyposis-associated
thyroid cancer: a clinical, pathological, and molecular genetics study. Am.
J. Path. 154: 127-135, 1999.

152. Spirio, L.; Green, J.; Robertson, J.; Robertson, M.; Otterud,
B.; Sheldon, J.; Howse, E.; Green, R.; Groden, J.; White, R.; Leppert,
M.: The identical 5-prime splice-site acceptor mutation in five attenuated
APC families from Newfoundland demonstrates a founder effect. Hum.
Genet. 105: 388-398, 1999. Note: Erratum: Hum. Genet. 107: 294 only,
2000.

153. Spirio, L.; Olschwang, S.; Groden, J.; Robertson, M.; Samowitz,
W.; Joslyn, G.; Gelbert, L.; Thliveris, A.; Carlson, M.; Otterud,
B.; Lynch, H.; Watson, P.; Lynch, P.; Laurent-Puig, P.; Burt, R.;
Hughes, J. P.; Thomas, G.; Leppert, M.; White, R.: Alleles of the
APC gene: an attenuated form of familial polyposis. Cell 75: 951-957,
1993.

154. Spirio, L. N.; Samowitz, W.; Robertson, J.; Robertson, M.; Burt,
R. W.; Leppert, M.; White, R.: Alleles of APC modulate the frequency
and classes of mutations that lead to colon polyps. Nature Genet. 20:
385-388, 1998.

155. Su, L.-K.; Abdalla, E. K.; Law, C. H. L.; Kohlmann, W.; Rashid,
A.; Vauthey, J.-N.: Biallelic inactivation of the APC gene is associated
with hepatocellular carcinoma in familial adenomatous polyposis coli. Cancer 92:
332-339, 2001.

156. Su, L.-K.; Barnes, C. J.; Yao, W.; Qi, Y.; Lynch, P. M.; Steinbach,
G.: Inactivation of germline mutant APC alleles by attenuated somatic
mutations: a molecular genetic mosaicism for attenuated familial adenomatous
polyposis. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 582-590, 2000. Note: Erratum:
Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 1045 only, 2000.

157. Su, L.-K.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.; Preisinger, A. C.;
Moser, A. R.; Luongo, C.; Gould, K. A.; Dove, W. F.: Multiple intestinal
neoplasia caused by a mutation in the murine homolog of the APC gene. Science 256:
668-670, 1992. Note: Erratum: Science 256: 1114 only, 1992.

158. Su, L.-K.; Kohlmann, W.; Ward, P. A.; Lynch, P. M.: Different
familial adenomatous polyposis phenotypes resulting from deletions
of the entire APC exon 15. Hum. Genet. 111: 88-95, 2002.

159. Su, L.-K.; Steinbach, G.; Sawyer, J. C.; Hindi, M.; Ward, P.
A.; Lynch, P. M.: Genomic rearrangements of the APC tumor-suppressor
gene in familial adenomatous polyposis. Hum. Genet. 106: 101-107,
2000.

160. Su, L.-K.; Vogelstein, B.; Kinzler, K. W.: Association of the
APC tumor suppressor protein with catenins. Science 262: 1734-1737,
1993.

161. Sulekova, Z.; Ballhausen, W. G.: A novel coding exon of the
human adenomatous polyposis coli gene. Hum. Genet. 96: 469-471,
1995.

162. Takacs, C. M.; Baird, J. R.; Hughes, E. G.; Kent, S. S.; Benchabane,
H.; Paik, R.; Ahmed, Y.: Dual positive and negative regulation of
Wingless signaling by adenomatous polyposis coli. Science 319: 333-336,
2008.

163. Takaku, K.; Oshima, M.; Miyoshi, H.; Matsui, M.; Seldin, M. F.;
Taketo, M. M.: Intestinal tumorigenesis in compound mutant mice of
both Dpc4 (Smad4) and Apc genes. Cell 92: 645-656, 1998.

164. Tischfield, J. A.; Shao, C.: Somatic recombination redux. Nature
Genet. 33: 5-6, 2003.

165. Tsujii, M.; DuBois, R. N.: Alterations in cellular adhesion
and apoptosis in epithelial cells overexpressing prostaglandin endoperoxide
synthase 2. Cell 83: 493-501, 1995.

166. van der Luijt, R. B.; Khan, P. M.; Vasen, H. F. A.; Breukel,
C.; Tops, C. M. J.; Scott, R. J.; Fodde, R.: Germline mutations in
the 3-prime part of APC exon 15 do not result in truncated proteins
and are associated with attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli. Hum.
Genet. 98: 727-734, 1996.

167. van der Luijt, R. B.; Khan, P. M.; Vasen, H. F. A.; Tops, C.
M. J.; van Leeuwen-Cornelisse, I. S. J.; Wijnen, J. T.; van der Klift,
H. M.; Plug, R. J.; Griffioen, G.; Fodde, R.: Molecular analysis
of the APC gene in 105 Dutch kindreds with familial adenomatous polyposis:
67 germline mutations identified by DGGE, PTT, and Southern analysis. Hum.
Mutat. 9: 7-16, 1997.

168. van Es, J.; Kirkpatrick, C.; van de Wetering, M.; Molenaar, M.;
Miles, A.; Kuipers, J.; Destree, O.; Peifer, M.; Clevers, H.: Identification
of APC2, a homologue of the adenomatous polyposis coli tumour suppressor. Curr.
Biol. 9: 105-108, 1999.

169. Wallis, Y. L.; Macdonald, F.; Hulten, M.; Morton, J. E. V.; McKeown,
C. M.; Neoptolemos, J. P.; Keighley, M.; Morton, D. G.: Genotype-phenotype
correlation between position of constitutional APC gene mutation and
CHRPE expression in familial adenomatous polyposis. Hum. Genet. 94:
543-548, 1994.

170. Wallis, Y. L.; Morton, D. G.; McKeown, C. M.; Macdonald, F.:
Molecular analysis of the APC gene in 205 families: extended genotype-phenotype
correlations in FAP and evidence for the role of APC amino acid changes
in colorectal cancer predisposition. J. Med. Genet. 36: 14-20, 1999.

171. Wang, J.; Jing, Z.; Zhang, L.; Zhou, G.; Braun, J.; Yao, Y.;
Wang, Z.-Z.: Regulation of acetylcholine receptor clustering by the
tumor suppressor APC. Nature Neurosci. 6: 1017-1018, 2003.

172. Wasan, H. S.; Novelli, M.; Bee, J.; Bodmer, W. F.: Dietary fat
influences on polyp phenotype in multiple intestinal neoplasia mice. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 3308-3313, 1997.

173. Watanabe, T.; Wang, S.; Noritake, J.; Sato, K.; Fukata, M.; Takefuji,
M.; Nakagawa, M.; Izumi, N.; Akiyama, T.; Kaibuchi, K.: Interaction
with IQGAP1 links APC to Rac1, Cdc42, and actin filaments during cell
polarization and migration. Dev. Cell 7: 871-883, 2004.

174. Westbrook, C. A.; Chmura, S. J.; Arenas, R. B.; Kim, S. Y.; Otto,
G.: Human APC gene expression in rodent colonic epithelium in vivo
using liposomal gene delivery. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 2005-2010,
1994.

175. Won, Y.-J.; Park, K. J.; Kwon, H.-J.; Lee, J.-H.; Kim, J.-H.;
Kim, Y. J.; Chun, S. H.; Han, H.-J.; Park, J.-G.: Germline mutations
of the APC gene in Korean familial adenomatous polyposis patients. J.
Hum. Genet. 44: 103-108, 1999.

176. Woodage, T.; King, S. M.; Wacholder, S.; Hartge, P.; Struewing,
J. P.; McAdams, M.; Laken, S. J.; Tucker, M. A.; Brody, L. C.: The
APC I1307K allele and cancer risk in a community-based study of Ashkenazi
Jews. Nature Genet. 20: 62-65, 1998.

177. Xia, L.; St. Denis, K. A.; Bapat, B.: Evidence for a novel exon
in the coding region of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Genomics 28:
589-591, 1995.

178. Yamashita, Y. M.; Jones, D. L.; Fuller, M. T.: Orientation of
asymmetric stem cell division by the APC tumor suppressor and centrosome. Science 301:
1547-1550, 2003.

179. Yan, H.; Dobbie, Z.; Gruber, S. B.; Markowitz, S.; Romans, K.;
Giardiello, F. M.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.: Small changes
in expression affect predisposition to tumorigenesis. Nature Genet. 30:
25-26, 2002.

180. Yang, J.; Zhang, W.; Evans, P. M.; Chen, X.; He, X.; Liu, C.
: Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) differentially regulates beta-catenin
phosphorylation and ubiquitination in colon cancer cells. J. Biol.
Chem. 281: 17751-17757, 2006.

181. Young, J.; Simms, L. A.; Tarish, J.; Buttenshaw, R.; Knight,
N.; Anderson, G. J.; Bell, A.; Leggett, B.: A family with attenuated
familial adenomatous polyposis due to a mutation in the alternatively
spliced region of APC exon 9. Hum. Mutat. 11: 450-455, 1998.

182. Yuan, Z. Q.; Kasprzak, L.; Gordon, P. H.; Pinsky, L.; Foulkes,
W. D.: I1307K APC and hMLH1 mutations in a non-Jewish family with
hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer. Clin. Genet. 54: 368-370,
1998.

183. Zhang, L.; Ren, X.; Alt, E.; Bai, X.; Huang, S.; Xu, Z.; Lynch,
P. M.; Moyer, M. P.; Wen, X.-F.; Wu, X.: Chemoprevention of colorectal
cancer by targeting APC-deficient cells for apoptosis. Nature 464:
1058-1061, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/10/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/10/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/22/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/30/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/12/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/11/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/4/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/24/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/28/2008

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 1/17/2008

EDITED carol: 09/12/2013
terry: 4/4/2013
terry: 3/14/2013
carol: 3/8/2013
terry: 12/20/2012
terry: 8/31/2012
terry: 8/8/2012
terry: 1/17/2012
carol: 10/13/2011
terry: 10/11/2011
ckniffin: 10/5/2011
mgross: 5/18/2011
terry: 5/10/2011
alopez: 5/10/2010
mgross: 3/24/2010
terry: 1/21/2010
alopez: 4/22/2009
wwang: 1/15/2009
ckniffin: 12/30/2008
mgross: 6/25/2008
alopez: 6/18/2008
terry: 6/12/2008
mgross: 4/11/2008
alopez: 4/8/2008
terry: 4/4/2008
wwang: 3/25/2008
terry: 3/24/2008
carol: 2/5/2008
ckniffin: 2/4/2008
ckniffin: 1/28/2008

