614479	TITLE *614479 MALONYL CoA:ACP ACYLTRANSFERASE, MITOCHONDRIAL; MCAT
;;MITOCHONDRIAL MALONYLTRANSFERASE;;
MT, MITOCHONDRIAL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MCAT (EC 2.3.1.39) is the catalytic subunit of the type II
malonyl-CoA-dependent system for biosynthesis of fatty acids in
mitochondria (Zhang et al., 2003).

CLONING

Zhang et al. (2003) cloned human MCAT, which they called mitochondrial
MT. The deduced 390-amino acid protein has an N-terminal cleavable
mitochondrial targeting signal, a GxSxG serine esterase active-site
motif, and conserved arg and his residues required for activity.
Fluorescence-tagged MCAT colocalized with a mitochondrial marker
following expression in HeLa cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhang et al. (2003) found that human mitochondrial MT expressed in
insect cells had a narrower substrate specificity than cytosolic MT
(FASN; 600212) and transferred a malonyl moiety to the mitochondrial
malonyl acceptor ACP (NDUFAB1; 603836) only.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhang et al. (2003) determined that the MCAT gene contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Zhang et al. (2003) mapped the MCAT gene
to chromosome 22q13.31.

REFERENCE 1. Zhang, L.; Joshi, A. K.; Smith, S.: Cloning, expression, characterization,
and interaction of two components of a human mitochondrial fatty acid
synthase: malonyltransferase and acyl carrier protein. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
40067-40074, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/13/2012

EDITED joanna: 08/30/2012
mgross: 2/13/2012

607074	TITLE *607074 PROTEIN KINASE D2; PRKD2
;;PKD2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By EST database searching with the conserved C-terminal sequence of
serine kinases and screening of a human ductal pancreatic cDNA library,
Sturany et al. (2001) cloned a novel serine/threonine protein kinase,
which they called PKD2. The deduced 878-amino acid protein, which has a
predicted molecular mass of 97 kD, contains an N-terminal hydrophobic
area predicted to be a transmembrane region, 2 cysteine-rich motifs that
form zinc finger-like repeats, a pleckstrin homology domain, and a
putative kinase domain containing the ATP-binding consensus sequence. An
invariant aspartate essential for kinase activity is located within a
motif conserved in serine/threonine kinases. The first zinc finger-like
domain shares 88% identity to the corresponding domains in PKD/PKC-mu
(PRKCM; 605435) and PKC-nu (PRKCN; 607077). Northern blot analysis
detected constitutive low expression of a 4-kb transcript; higher levels
were observed in pancreas, heart, lung, smooth muscle, and brain, and
lower levels kidney and liver. SDS-PAGE revealed a protein with a
molecular mass of 105 kD, as did Western blot analysis of endogenous
PRKD2 or protein expressed following transfection.

GENE FUNCTION

Sturany et al. (2001) demonstrated phorbol ester binding to the duplex
zinc finger-like motif of PRKD2 as well as autophosphorylation following
phorbol ester stimulation. The addition of phosphatidyl-L-serine caused
synergistic stimulation. Phorbol ester-activated PRKD2 migrated more
slowly than inactive PRKD2 by SDS-PAGE, suggesting hyperphosphorylation
upon activation.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PRKD2
gene to chromosome 19 (TMAP R67403).

REFERENCE 1. Sturany, S.; Van Lint, J.; Muller, F.; Wilda, M.; Hameister, H.;
Hocker, M.; Brey, A.; Gern, U.; Vandenheede, J.; Gress, T.; Adler,
G.; Seufferlein, T.: Molecular cloning and characterization of the
human protein kinase D2: a novel member of the protein kinase D family
of serine threonine kinases. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 3310-3318, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/26/2002

EDITED alopez: 04/20/2011
carol: 6/27/2002

608842	TITLE *608842 COILED-COIL-HELIX-COILED-COIL-HELIX DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; CHCHD1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching a placental bed cDNA library enriched for first-trimester
extravillous trophoblasts to identify genes specific to early placenta
development, Westerman et al. (2004) cloned CHCHD1, which they
designated C2360. CHCHD1 contains a central
coiled-coil-helix-coiled-coil-helix (CHCH) domain. Each helix contains 2
cysteines separated by 9 amino acids. Human and mouse CHCHD1 share 85%
amino acid identity in the conserved domain. RT-PCR detected strongest
expression in first-trimester placental bed and in a choriocarcinoma
cell line. Weak expression was detected in developing tissues, such as
embryonic brain, chorionic villus fibroblasts, and full-term placenta.
No expression was detected in adult tissues. In situ hybridization
showed that expression in the first-trimester placental bed was
restricted to proliferative cytotrophoblasts at the proximal zone of
placental anchoring villi. Transfected choriocarcinoma cells expressed
fluorescence-labeled CHCHD1 in the nucleus, and mutation analysis
indicated that the nuclear localization domain is in the N terminus.

GENE STRUCTURE

Westerman et al. (2004) determined that the CHCHD1 gene contains 3
exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Westerman et al. (2004) mapped the CHCHD1
gene to chromosome 10q22.

REFERENCE 1. Westerman, B. A.; Poutsma, A.; Steegers, E. A. P.; Oudejans, C.
B. M.: C2360, a nuclear protein expressed in human proliferative
cytotrophoblasts, is a representative member of a novel protein family
with a conserved coiled coil-helix-coiled coil-helix domain. Genomics 83:
1094-1104, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/16/2004

EDITED mgross: 08/16/2004

606696	TITLE *606696 KATANIN, p60 SUBUNIT, A1; KATNA1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Microtubules are dynamic polymers of alpha-tubulin (e.g., TUBA3; 602529)
and beta-tubulin (TUBB; 191130) that are used to organize membranous
organelles during interphase and to segregate chromosomes during
mitosis. Microtubule-severing proteins generate internal breaks within
microtubules during metaphase but not during interphase. Katanin is an
ATP-dependent microtubule-severing protein composed of p60 and p80
subunits. Katanin p80 (KATNB1; 602703) is concentrated at centrosomes
during interphase.

CLONING

By searching an EST database for homologs of sea urchin p60 katanin,
followed by 3-prime RACE with fibroblast cDNA, McNally and Thomas (1998)
isolated a cDNA encoding KATNA1. Sequence analysis predicted that the
491-amino acid KATNA1 protein contains a central consensus cyclin B
(CCNB1; 123836)/CDC2 (116940) phosphorylation site (TPLK). The
N-terminal 80 residues of KATNA1 and sea urchin p60 katanin are 50%
identical, and the C-terminal 318-residue AAA (for 'ATPase associated
with a variety of cellular activities') ATPase domain of KATNA1 and sea
urchin p60 katanin are 75% identical. Immunoblot analysis revealed wide
expression of a 55- to 60-kD protein that was coexpressed with p80
katanin in frog eggs. Anti-KATNA1 antibody inhibited
microtubule-severing activity in Xenopus eggs. Immunofluorescence
microscopy demonstrated diffuse expression and focal colocalization with
gamma-tubulin (TUBG; 191135) in interphase fibroblast microtubule
asters, as is also seen with KATNB1. McNally and Thomas (1998) observed
that the area occupied by KATNA1 is twice that occupied by TUBG during
metaphase. McNally and Thomas (1998) proposed that CCNB1/CDC2 activates
KATNA1 microtubule-severing activity near centrosomes during mitosis.

Using in situ hybridization and immunohistochemical analysis, Karabay et
al. (2004) showed that Katna1 localizes along the length of axons at
early stages of neuronal development in the rat and mouse, with
expression generally higher in and near growth cones of extending axons
and in distal regions. Katna1 expression declined upon neuronal
maturation.

GENE FUNCTION

Toyo-Oka et al. (2005) identified KATNA1 as a molecular target of NDEL1
(607538). Phosphorylation of Ndel1 by Cdk5 (123831) facilitated
interaction between NDEL1 and KATNA1, suggesting that phosphorylated
NDEL1 may regulate the distribution of KATNA1. Abnormal accumulation of
Katna1 in the nucleus of Ndel1-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts
supported an essential role for NDEL1 in KATNA1 regulation. Complete
loss of Ndel1 or expression of dominant-negative Katna1 mutants in
migrating neurons resulted in defective migration and elongation of
nuclear-centrosomal distance. Toyo-Oka et al. (2005) suggested that
NDEL1 may be essential for mitotic cell division and neuronal migration,
not only via regulation of cytoplasmic dynein function, but also by
modulation of KATNA1 localization and function.

Postmitotic neurons require microtubules for dynamic scaffolding within
axons, dendrites, and growth cones. Microtubules are nucleated
exclusively at centrosomes and must be severed from the centrosome for
transport into the axon; shorter microtubules are transported along
axons more quickly than long microtubules. Using overexpression and
knockdown studies with cultured rodent neurons, Karabay et al. (2004)
showed that Katna1 is an active microtubule-severing enzyme with a
critical role in neuronal microtubule dynamics. Katna1 expression
dropped when axons were presented with target cells that caused them to
stop growing.

Iwaya et al. (2010) showed that the N-terminal microtubule interacting
and trafficking (MIT) domains of mouse and human KATNA1 bound
unpolymerized, but not polymerized, tubulin. The isolated MIT domain of
KATNA1 formed an antiparallel 3-stranded helix, with a hydrophobic core
of partly conserved alanine residues. Mutagenesis experiments revealed
that positively charged arg49 and lys67 of helix 3 are required for
tubulin binding. A coiled-coil region that follows the MIT domain
mediates dimer formation and when included in the protein fragment
interfered with binding of the MIT domain to tubulin.

Using cDNA constructs based on mouse p60 and p80 (602703), Iwaya et al.
(2012) showed that the N-terminal MIT domain of p60 interacted with the
C-terminal domain (CTD) of p80. Binding of either microtubules or the
p80-CTD to the p60 MIT domain stimulated the ATPase and
microtubule-severing activity of p60. Ca(2+) bound to a separate region
of the MIT domain of p60 and negatively regulated microtubule- or
p80-enhanced p60 activity. Ca(2+) did not inhibit the basal ATPase
activity of p60 or the binding of p60 to microtubules.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the KATNA1
gene to chromosome 6 (TMAP EST392905).

Hartz (2012) mapped the KATNA1 gene to chromosome 6q25.1 based on the
alignment of the KATNA1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF056022) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/3/2012.

2. Iwaya, N.; Akiyama, K.; Goda, N.; Tenno, T.; Fujiwara, Y.; Hamada,
D.; Ikura, T.; Shirakawa, M.; Hiroaki, H.: Effect of Ca(2+) on the
microtubule-severing enzyme p60-katanin: insight into the substrate-dependent
activation mechanism. FEBS J. 279: 1339-1352, 2012.

3. Iwaya, N.; Kuwahara, Y.; Fujiwara, Y.; Goda, N.; Tenno, T.; Akiyama,
K.; Mase, S.; Tochio, H.; Ikegami, T.; Shirakawa, M.; Hiroaki, H.
: A common substrate recognition mode conserved between katanin p60
and VPS4 governs microtubule severing and membrane skeleton reorganization. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 16822-16829, 2010.

4. Karabay, A.; Yu, W.; Solowska, J. M.; Baird, D. H.; Baas, P. W.
: Axonal growth is sensitive to the levels of katanin, a protein that
severs microtubules. J. Neurosci. 24: 5778-5788, 2004.

5. McNally, F. J.; Thomas, S.: Katanin is responsible for the M-phase
microtubule-severing activity in Xenopus eggs. Molec. Biol. Cell 9:
1847-1861, 1998.

6. Toyo-Oka, K.; Sasaki, S.; Yano, Y.; Mori, D.; Kobayashi, T.; Toyoshima,
Y. Y.; Tokuoka, S. M.; Ishii, S.; Shimizu, T.; Muramatsu, M.; Hiraiwa,
N.; Yoshiki, A.; Wynshaw-Boris, A.; Hirotsune, S.: Recruitment of
katanin p60 by phosphorylated NDEL1, an LIS1 interacting protein,
is essential for mitotic cell division and neuronal migration. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 3113-3128, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/3/2012
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/21/2009

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/18/2002

EDITED alopez: 08/21/2012
terry: 8/3/2012
wwang: 8/6/2009
terry: 7/21/2009
mgross: 2/18/2002

602516	TITLE *602516 REGULATOR OF G PROTEIN SIGNALING 4; RGS4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) proteins have been shown to
accelerate the GTPase activities of G protein alpha-subunits, thus
driving G proteins into their inactive GDP-bound forms. See 602189 for
further background information.

CLONING

By searching for homologs of the yeast SST2 gene product, which
regulates G protein signaling, Druey et al. (1996) cloned RGS4 cDNAs
from rat and human brain cDNA libraries. The human RGS4 cDNA encodes a
predicted 205-amino acid protein that is 97% identical to rat Rgs4.
Northern blot analysis detected a single human RGS4 transcript that was
expressed exclusively in brain. RGS4 partially complemented a yeast SST2
mutation, but it required the G protein alpha-subunit to function. Druey
et al. (1996) suggested that RGS4, and presumably other RGSs, negatively
regulate signaling upstream or at the level of the heterotrimeric G
protein.

Koelle and Horvitz (1996) cloned a human RGS4 cDNA by searching for
homologs of the C. elegans egl-10 gene (see 602517).

Using RT-PCR, Ruiz de Azua et al. (2010) found that Rgs4 was highly
expressed in the MIN6 murine insulinoma cell line and in mouse
pancreatic islets.

GENE FUNCTION

Ruiz de Azua et al. (2010) showed that knockdown of Rgs4 in MIN6 cells
caused a concentration-dependent increase in intracellular calcium,
increased basal insulin release, and enhanced glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion. Rgs4 coimmunoprecipitated with M3 muscarinic receptor (M3R,
or CHRM3; 118494) from transfected COS-7 cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sierra et al. (2002) determined that RGS4 contains 5 exons and spans 5.5
kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Sierra et al. (2002) mapped the RGS4 gene
to chromosome 1q23.3. They mapped the mouse Rgs4 gene to chromosome 1 by
interspecific backcross mapping.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the RGS4
gene and schizophrenia, see 181500.

ANIMAL MODEL

Ruiz de Azua et al. (2010) found that Rgs4 deficiency in mice enhanced
M3r-mediated insulin secretion. Pancreatic beta cell-specific Rgs4
knockout did not alter basal glucose levels, but it increased plasma
insulin levels and increased insulin release after administration of a
muscarinic agonist. Ruiz de Azua et al. (2010) concluded that RGS4 acts
as a negative regulator of M3R signaling in pancreatic beta cells.

REFERENCE 1. Druey, K. M.; Blumer, K. J.; Kang, V. H.; Kehrl, J. H.: Inhibition
of G-protein-mediated MAP kinase activation by a new mammalian gene
family. Nature 379: 742-746, 1996.

2. Koelle, M. R.; Horvitz, H. R.: EGL-10 regulates G protein signaling
in the C. elegans nervous system and shares a conserved domain with
many mammalian proteins. Cell 84: 115-125, 1996.

3. Ruiz de Azua, I.; Scarselli, M.; Rosemond, E.; Gautam, D.; Jou,
W.; Gavrilova, O.; Ebert, P. J.; Levitt, P.; Wess, J.: RGS4 is a
negative regulator of insulin release from pancreatic beta-cells in
vitro and in vivo. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 107: 7999-8004, 2010.

4. Sierra, D. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Householder, D.; Grishin, N. V.;
Yu, K.; Ukidwe, P.; Barker, S. A.; He, W.; Wensel, T. G.; Otero, G.;
Brown, G.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Wilkie, T. M.: Evolution
of the regulators of G-protein signaling multigene family in mouse
and human. Genomics 79: 177-185, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/12/2011
John Logan Black, III - updated: 5/15/2006
John Logan Black, III - updated: 4/6/2006
John Logan Black, III - updated: 8/9/2005
John Logan Black, III - updated: 4/4/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/12/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 4/14/1998

EDITED mgross: 05/17/2011
mgross: 5/17/2011
terry: 5/12/2011
carol: 2/1/2010
carol: 5/15/2006
carol: 5/12/2006
terry: 4/6/2006
carol: 8/16/2005
terry: 8/9/2005
terry: 7/11/2005
mgross: 4/4/2005
mgross: 9/12/2002
psherman: 4/15/1998
psherman: 4/14/1998

603940	TITLE *603940 POTASSIUM CHANNEL, SUBFAMILY K, MEMBER 7; KCNK7
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Members of the tandem pore domain potassium (K2P) channel family, such
as TWIK1 (601745) and TREK (603219), contain 4 transmembrane domains and
2 pore-forming (P) domains. See KCNK6 (603939). By searching an EST
database for sequences related to mouse Kcnk6, Salinas et al. (1999)
isolated a human cDNA encoding a novel potassium channel, which they
designated KCNK7. RT-PCR revealed that exon skipping gives rise to 5
mRNA species encoding 3 protein forms, KCNK7-A, -B, and -C. The
predicted 307-amino acid KCNK7A form is the longest; KCNK7B and KCNK7C
have truncated cytoplasmic C termini. Sequence analysis revealed that
the KCNK7 protein contains 4 potential transmembrane segments and 2 P
domains. The P2 domain contains a very unconventional GLE motif instead
of the GLG found in TWIK1 and KCNK6 or the GFG found in other K2P
channels. The core region spanning the 4 transmembrane domains of KCNK7A
shares 80% and 42% protein sequence identity with those of Kcnk6 and
TWIK1, respectively. As with Kcnk6, none of the KCNK7 protein forms were
able to generate channel activity when expressed in mammalian cells.

MAPPING

By analysis of radiation hybrids, Salinas et al. (1999) mapped the KCNK7
gene to 11q13.

REFERENCE 1. Salinas, M.; Reyes, R.; Lesage, F.; Fosset, M.; Heurteaux, C.;
Romey, G.; Lazdunski, M.: Cloning of a new mouse two-P domain channel
subunit and a human homologue with a unique pore structure. J. Biol.
Chem. 274: 11751-11760, 1999.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/29/1999

EDITED alopez: 12/02/2010
joanna: 6/6/2000
mgross: 6/30/1999
mgross: 6/29/1999

124030	TITLE *124030 CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY IID, POLYPEPTIDE 6; CYP2D6
;;CPD6;;
P450DB1;;
DEBRISOQUINE 4-HYDROXYLASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The hepatic cytochrome P450 system is responsible for the first phase in
the metabolism and elimination of numerous endogenous and exogenous
molecules and ingested chemicals. P450 enzymes convert these substances
into electrophilic intermediates which are then conjugated by phase II
enzymes (e.g., UDP glucuronosyltransferases, see 191740;
N-acetyltransferases, see 108345) to hydrophilic derivatives that can be
excreted (Nebert, 1997).

The P450II superfamily comprises at least 11 subfamilies designated by
letter according to the system of nomenclature recommended by an
international committee (Nelson et al., 1996; Nebert et al., 1987;
Nelson et al., 2004). Although humans probably have approximately 60
unique P450 genes within 14 subfamilies (Nelson et al., 1996), only a
subset are responsible for metabolism of the vast majority of prescribed
and over-the-counter drugs (see, e.g., CYP1A2, 124060; CYP2A6, 122720;
CYP2C19, 124020; CYP2D6; CYP2E1, 124040; CYP3A4, 124010; and CYP4A11,
601310).

CLONING

Gonzalez et al. (1988) used rat anti-db1 (Gonzalez et al., 1987) to
isolate the human P450 DB1 gene from a human liver cDNA library. The
deduced 497-amino acid protein shares 73% sequence identity with the rat
protein.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kimura et al. (1989) determined that the CYP2D6 gene contains 9 exons.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybridization, Gonzalez et al. (1988) mapped the P450DB1
gene to chromosome 22. By somatic cell hybridization, in situ
hybridization, and linkage analysis, Gough et al. (1993) mapped the
CYP2D6 gene to 22q13.1.

Gonzalez et al. (1987) mapped the mouse db1 gene to chromosome 15.

- Pseudogenes

Kimura et al. (1989) identified 3 genes that compose the CYP2D gene
cluster located distal to IGLC (147220) on chromosome 22 (q11.2-qter).
One of these, CYP2D8P, was found to be a pseudogene, while the CYP2D7
gene contained a single reading frame-disrupting insertion in its first
exon.

GENE FUNCTION

Distlerath and Guengerich (1984) found that antibodies to a cytochrome
P450 shown to be responsible for debrisoquine 4-hydroxylation in rats
inhibited the oxidation of debrisoquine and sparteine, encainide, and
propranolol in human liver microsomes. All 4 of the drugs had been
associated with the poor metabolizer (PM) phenotype (608902) in humans.
The antibodies did not inhibit the oxidation of 7 other cytochrome P450
substrates.

Guengerich et al. (1986) stated that 9 forms of cytochrome P450 had been
purified to electrophoretic homogeneity from human liver microsomes.
These included the enzymes involved in debrisoquine 4-hydroxylation,
phenacetin O-deethylation (124060), and mephenytoin 4-hydroxylation
(124020), 3 reactions characterized by genetic polymorphism in humans.
Different forms of P450 are involved in the 3 reactions. Guengerich et
al. (1986) presented evidence that the P450 nifedipine oxidase is
separate from these others (see 124010). Nifedipine is a calcium-channel
blocker which about 17% of the population cannot metabolize rapidly as
judged by in vivo studies (Kleinbloesem et al., 1984).

Harmer et al. (1986) found no correlation between the acetylator (see
243400) and the sparteine hydroxylation phenotypes. The findings were
consistent with the fact that the N-acetyltransferase enzyme is
cytosolic in liver and jejunal mucosa, whereas the polymorphic enzyme
that governs hydroxylation of sparteine, debrisoquine, and other drugs
is a liver P450.

Occurrence of a lupus-like syndrome in patients treated with
procainamide (see 152700) has limited the clinical use of this
antiarrhythmic drug. Lessard et al. (1997) demonstrated that CYP2D6 is
the major isozyme involved in the formation of N-hydroxyprocainamide, a
metabolite potentially involved in the drug-induced lupus syndrome
observed with procainamide. By studying the in vivo oxidation of
procainamide in man, Lessard et al. (1999) suggested that CYP2D6 is
involved in the in vivo aliphatic amine deethylation and N-oxidation of
procainamide at its arylamine function.

Thum and Borlak (2000) investigated the gene expression of major human
cytochrome P450 genes in various regions of 2 normal hearts and
explanted hearts from 6 patients with dilated cardiomyopathy and 1 with
transposition of the arterial trunk. CYP2D6 mRNA was predominantly
expressed in the right ventricle; a strong correlation between
tissue-specific gene expression and enzyme activity was found. Thum and
Borlak (2000) noted that the unilateral expression of the CYP2D6 gene in
right ventricular tissue was important because of the enzyme's key role
in the metabolism of beta-blockers.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Drug Metabolism

Gonzalez et al. (1988) identified 3 variant DB1 mRNAs in liver samples
from several poor metabolizers (PMs) of debrisoquine (608902). The
variant mRNAs were products of a mutant gene producing incorrectly
spliced pre-mRNA, thus providing a molecular explanation for the defect.
The authors noted that the frequency of mutant alleles is approximately
35 to 43%. Skoda et al. (1988) identified restriction fragment length
polymorphisms associated with the P450DB1 locus that were observed more
frequently in individuals with the PM phenotype. A different, 29-kb XbaI
fragment was present in all individuals with the wildtype extensive
metabolizer (EM) phenotype. The authors proposed that these
polymorphisms identified 2 independent mutant alleles of the P450DB1
gene. Eight additional RFLPs associated with this gene were also
reported.

In 20 individuals with poor metabolism of debrisoquine, Gough et al.
(1990) identified a splice site mutation in the CYP2D6 gene
(124030.0001), yielding a protein with no functional activity. This
allele has been termed CYP2D6*4.

Mura et al. (1993) noted that wildtype extensive metabolizers exhibit
highly variable metabolic activity. In a study of French-Canadian
families, they found that a subgroup of EM individuals were heterozygous
for a mutant allele, and that a second level of heterogeneity was
detected among individuals not carrying mutations but who had a
polymorphic BamHI-defined DNA haplotype. Different combinations of
haplotypes were associated with differences in CYP2D6 metabolic
activity. Mura et al. (1993) suggested that genetic and phenotypic
heterogeneity with EMs may underly conflicting data on the relation
between CYP2D6 activity and susceptibility to cancer.

Bertilsson et al. (1993) and Johansson et al. (1993) showed that the
genetic basis of the ultrarapid metabolizer phenotype (see 608902) is
gene duplication or amplification of functionally active CYP2D6 genes,
resulting in higher levels of enzyme being expressed. In 5 individuals
from 2 families who had metabolic ratios (MRs) of less than 0.1
(ultrarapid phenotype), Johansson et al. (1993) found 12 extra copies of
the CYP2D6 gene associated with a variant, termed CYP2D6L (124030.0007).
Other individuals with multiduplicated CYP2D6 genes in 3, 4, or 5 copies
on 1 allele have been seen (Dahl et al., 1995; Akullu et al., 1996).

Tyndale et al. (1997) noted that oral opiates (i.e., codeine, oxycodone,
and hydrocodone) are metabolized by CYP2D6 to metabolites of increased
activity (i.e., morphine, oxymorphone, and hydromorphone). Among a group
of 83 individuals who were oral opiate-dependent, Tyndale et al. (1997)
found none who were PMs, either phenotypically or genotypically
(homozygous for the deficient CYP2D6*3 or CYP2D6*4 alleles); 4% of 276
individuals who were never drug-dependent were PMs. The authors
suggested that the PM genotype was a protection factor for oral opiate
dependence (odds ratio greater than 7). This conclusion was challenged
by Mikus et al. (1998). Tyndale et al. (1998) defended their stand.

Gasche et al. (2004) described life-threatening opioid intoxication in a
patient given small doses of codeine for the treatment of a cough
associated with bilateral pneumonia. Codeine is bioactivated by CYP2D6
into morphine, which then undergoes further glucuronidation. CYP2D6
genotyping showed that the patient had 3 or more functional alleles
(124030.0008), a finding consistent with ultrarapid metabolism of
codeine. Gasche et al. (2004) attributed the toxicity to this genotype,
in combination with inhibition of CYP3A4 activity by other medications
and a transient reduction in renal function.

Liou et al. (2006) investigated the frequencies of the poor and
ultrarapid metabolizer-associated alleles of 5 cytochrome P450 genes in
180 Han Chinese volunteers in Taiwan and found that more than 50% of the
CYP2C19 (124020) and CYP2D6 genotypes were associated with the
intermediate metabolizer phenotype. Liou et al. (2006) suggested that
this might explain why drug dosages used in clinical trials with East
Asian participants are usually lower than those used in trials with
Western participants.

In a group of 115 white patients with Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300)
taking donepezil, Pilotto et al. (2009) found that nonresponders had a
significantly higher frequency of the -1584G allele (dbSNP rs1080985) in
the CYP2D6 gene compared to responders (58.7% vs 34.8%, p = 0.013), with
an odds ratio of 3.43 for poor response. The -1584G allele is associated
with higher enzymatic activity and more rapid drug metabolism. The
findings suggested that the dbSNP rs1080985 SNP in the CYP2D6 gene may
influence the clinical efficacy of donepezil in AD patients.

Schroth et al. (2009) performed a retrospective analysis of German and
U.S. cohorts of women with tamoxifen-treated hormone receptor-positive
breast cancer (114480) to determine whether CYP2D6 variation is
associated with clinical outcome. The median follow-up of the 1,325
patients was 6.3 years. At 9 years of follow-up, the recurrence rates
for breast cancer were 14.9% for extensive metabolizers, 20.9% for
heterozygous extensive/intermediate metabolizers, and 29.0% for poor
metabolizers, and all-cause mortality rates were 16.7%, 18.0%, and
22.8%, respectively. Schroth et al. (2009) concluded that there was an
association between CYP2D6 variation and clinical outcomes, such that
the presence of 2 functional CYP2D6 alleles was associated with better
clinical outcomes and the presence of nonfunctional or reduced-function
alleles with worse outcomes in tamoxifen-treated breast cancer.

- Association with Parkinson Disease

In a study of over 500 patients with Parkinson disease (PD; 168600) and
matched controls, Payami et al. (2001) found no association between the
CYP2D6*4 allele (124030.0001) underlying a poor metabolizer phenotype
and the age of onset of PD. Instead, the frequency of the *4 allele
appeared to increase with age in the general population, a finding that
suggested a selective advantage of the allele over the wildtype. Their
results also suggested that the *4 allele may be protective against
cancer.

In a study of 247 patients with PD, Elbaz et al. (2004) found an
interaction between the CYP2D6*4 allele and exposure to pesticides with
regard to development of the disease. Although there was no association
between carriers of the CYP2D6*4 allele and development of PD in those
with no exposure to pesticides, there was an association among those
with the PM allele and exposure to pesticides. Individuals homozygous
for the CYP2D6*4 allele who had professional exposure to pesticides had
a significantly increased risk of PD compared to those without the
allele and without exposure (odds ratio of 4.74); homozygous PM
individuals with moderate 'gardening' exposure to pesticides showed a
similar trend toward development of PD (odds ratio of 2.75). Deng et al.
(2004) examined 3 PM alleles, CYP2D6*4, CYP2D6*3, and CYP2D6*5, in a
group of 393 PD patients. At the most extreme, patients who were
homozygous for the PM alleles and had weekly exposure to pesticides
showed a significant increased risk for the disease (odds ratio of
8.41). Heterozygotes with weekly exposure had an odds ratio of 3.27. The
authors suggested an interaction between pesticide exposure and CYP2D6
polymorphism in the development of PD.

- Other Disease Associations

Brown et al. (2000) performed a linkage study of chromosome 22 in 200
families with ankylosing spondylitis (AS; 106300)-affected sib pairs.
While homozygosity for PM alleles was found to be associated with AS,
heterozygosity for the most frequent PM allele (CYP2D6*4) was not
associated with increased susceptibility to AS. Significant
within-family association of CYP2D6*4 alleles and AS was demonstrated.
Weak linkage was also demonstrated between CYP2D6 and AS. The authors
hypothesized that altered metabolism of a natural toxin or antigen by
the CYP2D6 gene may increase susceptibility to AS.

POPULATION GENETICS

Sachse et al. (1997) determined CYP2D6 allele frequencies in 589
unrelated German volunteers and correlated enzyme activity measure by
phenotyping with dextromethorphan or debrisoquine. The frequency of the
CYP2D6*1 wildtype allele coding for the extensive metabolizer phenotype
was 0.364. The alleles coding for slightly (CYP2D6*2) or moderately (*9
and *10) reduced activity (intermediate metabolizer phenotype, IM)
showed frequencies of 0.324, 0.018, and 0.015, respectively. Frequencies
of alleles with complete deficiency (poor metabolizer phenotype) were
0.207 (CYP2D6*4; 124030.0001), 0.020 (CYP2D6*3; 124030.0006 and
CYP2D6*5; 124030.0002), 0.009 (CYP2D6*6; 124030.0003), and 0.001 (*7,
*15, and *16). The defective CYP2D6 alleles *8, *11, *12, *13, and *14
were not found. CYP2D6 gene duplication alleles, associated with
ultrafast metabolizers, were found with frequencies of 0.005 (*1x2),
0.013 (*2x2), and 0.001 (*4x2).

Among 672 unrelated Europeans, Marez et al. (1997) identified 48 point
mutations in the CYP2D6 gene, of which 29 were novel. Within the poor
metabolizer group, the frequencies of the CYP2D6*4, CYP2D6*6, and
CYP2D6*3 alleles were 65.8%, 6.2%, and 4.8%, respectively. The majority
of the alleles occurred with a frequency of 0.1 to 2.7%.

The mean value of metabolic ratio for debrisoquine metabolism in an
extensive metabolizer population was reported to be slightly higher in
Orientals than in Caucasians. This interethnic difference was assumed to
be caused by the higher frequency of the CYP2D6*10 allele (124030.0005)
in Orientals (Johansson et al., 1994; Tateishi et al., 1999).

The occurrence of CYP2D6 gene duplication varies between populations.
Among 217 white healthy Spaniards, Agundez et al. (1995) determined that
the prevalence of multiple CYP2D6 copies was 7%. Akullu et al. (1996)
reported that 29% of Ethiopians carried extra CYP2D6 genes, whereas 1 to
2% of Swedish, German, Chinese, and black Zimbabwean populations had
multiple copies. McLellan et al. (1997) found duplication of the CYP2D6
gene in 21 of 101 (21%) Saudi Arabians studied. In contrast, only 2
individuals were heterozygous for a deletion of the whole gene. The
allele frequency of CYP2D6*4, the most common defective allele causing
poor metabolism among Caucasians, was only 3.5% in the Saudi population.
These findings were in agreement with earlier Saudi Arabian phenotyping
studies that reported a low frequency (1 to 2%) of poor metabolizers for
CYP2D6-probe drugs.

Among 60 Dutch individuals who were ultrarapid metabolizers of sparteine
(metabolic ratio less than 0.15), Bathum et al. (1998) identified 9 with
a duplicated CYP2D6 gene. The authors estimated a frequency of 0.8% for
individuals with CYP2D6 duplication in the Danish population, which is
comparable to the frequency in the Swedish and the German populations,
but considerably lower than that in Spanish or African populations.
Bathum et al. (1998) concluded that the long PCR assay is simple and
reliable for detection of duplications of the CYP2D6 gene.

EVOLUTION

Based on their identification and characterization of a nonfunctional
CYP2D7 gene and a CYP2D8 pseudogene, Kimura et al. (1989) suggested that
gene duplication events gave rise to CYP2D6 and CYP2D7, and that gene
conversion events occurred later to form CYP2D8. Kimura et al. (1989)
suggested that these enzymes evolved to metabolize plant toxins; since
current human diets rely almost totally on cultivation, while early man
was a hunter-gatherer, the genes may now be in the process of being
lost. Gene conversion events involving the closely linked and similar
CYP2D7 and CYP2D8P genes may hasten this process.

Hanioka et al. (1990) isolated and completely sequenced a defective
CYP2D7 gene and provided evidence that gene conversions have occurred
between CYP2D6 and CYP2D7.

Heim and Meyer (1992) analyzed the arrangement and sequence of the CYP2D
gene cluster variant (haplotype) containing a common allele of CYP2D6
found in poor metabolizers and associated with an XbaI 44-kb restriction
fragment. This haplotype was found to contain the CYP2D6*4 variant
(124030.0001) and 3 pseudogenes. Heim and Meyer (1992) postulated that a
gene duplication of a CYP2D6-like gene occurred about 18 million years
ago, generating a functional CYP2D8 gene that later became a pseudogene.
About 9 million years ago, a similar duplication event yielded the
CYP2D7 gene. About 1 to 2 million years ago, unequal crossover events
and gene conversion events may have yielded the CYP2D6*4 mutation, which
is found in the majority of mutant alleles. Since poor metabolizers have
no reproductive advantage, the CYP2D6 gene may also eventually become a
pseudogene. Heim and Meyer (1992) noted that the ancestors of these drug
metabolizing enzymes were developed in animals who ingested plants and
plant toxins. The plants defended themselves by developing new toxins,
and the animals developed new P450s able to detoxify these new toxins.

Nebert (1997) reviewed the field of drug-metabolizing enzymes (DMEs) and
DME-receptor research and how DMEs have evolved through animal-plant
interactions.

Steen et al. (1995) identified a 2.8-kb repeated region (CYP-REP) that
flanks the active CYP2D6 gene and may have played a role in deletion
(124030.0002) and amplification of CYP2D6.

Lundqvist et al. (1999) presented evidence that CYP2D6 gene duplications
occurred through unequal crossover at a breakpoint in the 3-prime
flanking region of the CYP2D6*2B allele with a specific repetitive
sequence. Alleles with 13 copies of the gene were likely formed by
unequal segregation and extrachromosomal replication of acentric DNA.
Lundqvist et al. (1999) suggested that the high frequencies of
multiduplicated genes in Saudi Arabian and Ethiopian populations
indicated that a dietary selective pressure existed in those regions in
the past. These variants may have been introduced into the Spanish
population during the Muslim migration.

NOMENCLATURE

Based on recommendations for human genome nomenclature, Daly et al.
(1996) proposed that alleles at this locus be designated by CYP2D6
followed by an asterisk and a combination of roman letters and arabic
numerals distinct for each allele, with the number specifying the key
mutation and, where appropriate, a letter specifying additional
mutations. See also nomenclature recommendations presented by Nelson et
al. (1996), Nebert et al. (1987), and Nelson et al. (2004).

ANIMAL MODEL

Matsunaga et al. (1989) studied the DA rat, which has impaired ability
to metabolize debrisoquine and therefore may be useful as a model of the
human genetic defect in debrisoquine metabolism.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DEBRISOQUINE, POOR METABOLISM OF
CYP2D6, IVSDS3, G-A, +1

This allelic variant is also known as CYP2D6*4 or CYP2D6(B).

In 20 individuals with poor metabolism of debrisoquine (608902), Gough
et al. (1990) identified a G-to-A transition at the first nucleotide of
exon 4 in the CYP2D6 gene, resulting in a shift of the splice site and
introduction of a premature termination codon. The mutant protein had no
residual activity. Gough et al. (1990) presented preliminary data
suggesting a reduction in the proportion of poor metabolizers among
patients with lung or bladder cancer.

In leukocyte DNA of an individual who was deficient in debrisoquine
metabolism, Hanioka et al. (1990) identified a 1934G-A transition at the
junction of the third intron and fourth exon, resulting in an aberrant
3-prime splice recognition site and an mRNA with a single basepair
deletion. The disrupted mRNA leads to a truncated protein without
functional activity. The patient studied was a compound heterozygote:
the allele with the 1934G-A mutation was identified by a 44-kb XbaI
restriction fragment; the second allele was a complete deletion of the
CYP2D6 gene (124030.0002). The dextromethorphan urinary metabolite ratio
in this patient was 9.7, which is operationally defined as a poor
metabolizer of debrisoquine.

Kagimoto et al. (1990) likewise concluded that the mutation at the
3-prime splice site of intron 3 is a common cause of the poor
metabolizer phenotype.

Chen et al. (1995) found that Alzheimer disease (104300) patients who
were either heterozygous or homozygous for the CYP2D6*4 allele had a
smaller decline of the synaptic markers choline acetyltransferase
(118490) and synaptophysin (313475) in the frontal cortex than those who
did not. Senile plaques neurofibrillary tangles were not significantly
affected. The authors had earlier shown an association of the CYP2D6*4
mutant allele with Lewy body formation (127750). The findings suggested
different mechanisms of neurodegeneration in the 2 disorders.

.0002
DEBRISOQUINE, POOR METABOLISM OF
CYP2D6, DEL

This allelic variant is also known as CYP2D6*5 and CYP2D6(D).

In 1 of 42 poor metabolizer individuals (608902), Gough et al. (1990)
found homozygous deletion of the CYP2D locus. In a poor metabolizer,
Gaedigk et al. (1991) identified a homozygous 11.5-kb deletion
associated with deletion of the entire CYP2D6 gene and total absence of
P4502D6 protein in the liver.

Steen et al. (1995) identified a 2.8-kb repeated region (CYP-REP) that
flanks the active CYP2D6 gene and contains the breakpoints involved in
the generation of CYP2D6*5. Steen et al. (1995) proposed that the
deletion mechanism involved unequal recombination between 2 homologous
but nonallelic sequences, either by chromosome misalignment followed by
unequal crossover or by the formation of a loop structure on a single
chromosome. The deleted region spans 12.1 kb.

Idle et al. (2000) pointed out that the copy of chromosome 22 sequenced
by the Human Genome Project has the CYP2D6*5 deletion allele, i.e., does
not contain the CYP2D6 gene. The CYP2D6*5 allele, a deletion that
includes the entire CYP2D6 gene, is the second most common inactivating
allele in the U.K. population. Nelson et al. (2004) reported that the
frequency of the CYP2D6*5 allele was 0.04 in Caucasian populations. Idle
et al. (2000) suggested that other genes of medical import may be missed
by the Human Genome Project because 'nature has chosen to delete them on
one of our pair of chromosomes, as was the case with CYP2D6.'

.0003
DEBRISOQUINE, POOR METABOLISM OF
CYP2D6, 1-BP DEL, 1795T

This allelic variant is also known as CYP2D6*6 or CYP2D6(T).

In individuals with the PM phenotype (608902), Saxena et al. (1994)
identified a single base deletion in exon 3 of the CYP2D6 gene, removing
thymine-1795 and resulting in a premature stop codon. They designated
the allele CYP2D6(T). Among Caucasian controls, the frequency of the
2D6(T) allele was 1.8% (4/220 chromosomes).

.0004
DEBRISOQUINE, POOR METABOLISM OF
CYP2D6, GLY169TER

In a Caucasian patient with deficiency of the CYP2D6 enzyme and poor
metabolism (608902), Broly et al. (1995) identified a gly169-to-ter
(G169X) mutation in exon 3 of the CYP2D6 gene.

.0005
DEBRISOQUINE, POOR METABOLISM OF
CYP2D6, PRO34SER

This allelic variant is also known as CYP2D6*10 or CYP2D6(J) or
CYP2D6(Ch1, Ch2).

Kagimoto et al. (1990) identified a 188C-T transition in exon 1 of the
CYP2D6 gene, resulting in a pro34-to-ser (P34S) substitution as a cause
of the debrisoquine poor metabolizer phenotype (608902). Nakamura et al.
(2002) presented data strongly suggesting that catalytic activity as
well thermal stability of the enzyme is affected by the P34S
polymorphism. They proposed that thermal instability together with
reduced intrinsic clearance of CYP2D6*10 is one reason for the finding
of lower metabolic activities for drugs metabolized by CYP2D6 in
Orientals, who have a high frequency of CYP2D6*10, compared with
Caucasians.

.0006
DEBRISOQUINE, POOR METABOLISM OF
CYP2D6, 1-BP DEL, 2637A

This allelic variant is also known as CYP2D6*3 or CYP2D6(A).

Marez et al. (1997) identified a 1-bp deletion (2637A) in exon 5 of the
CYP2D6 gene in a group of individuals with the poor metabolizer
phenotype (608902).

.0007
DEBRISOQUINE, ULTRARAPID METABOLISM OF
CYP2D6, ARG296CYS AND SER486THR

This allelic variant is also known as CYP2D6*2 or CYP2D6L.

In a family in which 2 sibs and their father had MRs of less that 0.02
(ultrarapid phenotype, see 608902), Johansson et al. (1993) found 12
extra copies of the CYP2D6 gene inherited in an autosomal dominant
pattern; in a second family in which 2 sibs had MRs of less than 0.1,
the authors found 2 extra copies of the CYP2D6 gene. All affected
individuals had a variant CYP2D6 gene, termed CYP2D6L, which contained 2
amino acid substitutions: a 2938C-T transition in exon 6, resulting in
an arg296-to-cys (R296C), and a 4268G-to-C transversion in exon 9,
resulting in a resulting in a ser486-to-thr (S486T) substitution. The MR
of individuals with 1 copy of the CYP2D6L gene did not differ from those
with the wildtype gene, but there was a correlation between decreased MR
and increased copies of the CYP2D6L gene.

Panserat et al. (1994) identified the R296C and S486T changes as 2 major
CYP2D6 allozymes in extensive metabolizers (wildtype). Residue 296 falls
within a presumed substrate recognition site, and residue 486 lies in
the vicinity of the heme binding site.

.0008
CODEINE, ULTRARAPID METABOLISM OF
CYP2D6, DUP

Gasche et al. (2004) described a patient who had developed
life-threatening opioid intoxication after he was given small doses of
codeine for the treatment of cough associated with bilateral pneumonia.
CYP2D6 genotyping showed 3 or more functioning alleles, as a result of
gene duplication, resulting in high levels of morphine and morphine-6
glucuronide. Reduction in CYP3A4 (124010) activity by other medications
and acute renal failure causing glucuronide accumulation were also
factors in the codeine toxicity. Codeine is ineffective at usual doses
in 7 to 10% of the white population because of homozygosity for
nonfunctional mutant CYP2D6 alleles (Desmeules et al., 1991). The
concentration of O-demethylated metabolites can be as much as 45 times
as high in persons with ultrarapid CYP2D6 metabolism (see 608902) as it
is in those with poor metabolism (Yue et al., 1997).

Koren et al. (2006) reported an infant boy who showed intermittent
periods of difficulty in breastfeeding and lethargy beginning at day 7,
and later was noted to have gray skin. He died on day 13. The mother had
been taking codeine for episiotomy pain, and the infant was found to
have high serum levels of morphine. Genotype analysis showed that the
mother carried the CYP2D6 duplication and was an ultrarapid metabolizer
of codeine, resulting in increased formation of morphine from codeine.
The morphine was transferred to the baby through breast milk, resulting
in opioid toxicity and neonatal death. Koren et al. (2006) concluded
that maternal codeine use should not be considered safe for all infants
during breastfeeding.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Eichelbaum et al. (1987); Eichelbaum et al. (2001); Eichelbaum et
al. (1986); Eichelbaum and Woolhouse (1985); Heim and Meyer (1990);
Tucker et al. (1977)
REFERENCE 1. Agundez, J. A. G.; Ledesma, M. C.; Ladero, J. M.; Benitez, J.:
Prevalence of CYP2D6 gene duplication and its repercussion on the
oxidative phenotype in a white population. Clin. Pharm. Ther. 57:
265-269, 1995.

2. Akullu, E.; Persson, I.; Bertilsson, L.; Johansson, I.; Rodrigues,
F.; Ingelman-Sundberg, M.: Frequent distribution of ultrarapid metabolizers
of debrisoquine in an Ethiopian population carrying duplicated and
multiduplicated functional CYP2D6 alleles. J. Pharm. Exp. Ther. 278:
441-446, 1996.

3. Bathum, L.; Johansson, I.; Ingelman-Sundberg, M.; Horder, M.; Brosen,
K.: Ultrarapid metabolism of sparteine: frequency of alleles with
duplicated CYP2D6 genes in a Danish population as determined by restriction
fragment length polymorphism and long polymerase chain reaction. Pharmacogenetics 8:
119-123, 1998.

4. Bertilsson, L.; Dahl, M.-L.; Sjoqvist, F.; Aberg-Wistedt, A.; Humble,
M.; Johansson, I.; Lundqvist, E.; Ingelman-Sundberg, M.: Molecular
basis for rational megaprescribing in ultrarapid hydroxylators of
debrisoquine. (Letter) Lancet 341: 63 only, 1993.

5. Broly, F.; Marez, D.; Lo Guidice, J.-M.; Sabbagh, N.; Legrand,
M.; Boone, P.; Meyer, U. A.: A nonsense mutation in the cytochrome
P450 CYP2D6 gene identified in a Caucasian with an enzyme deficiency. Hum.
Genet. 96: 601-603, 1995.

6. Brown, M. A.; Edwards, S.; Hoyle, E.; Campbell, S.; Laval, S.;
Daly, A. K.; Pile, K. D.; Calin, A.; Ebringer, A.; Weeks, D. E.; Wordsworth,
B. P.: Polymorphisms of the CYP2D6 gene increase susceptibility to
ankylosing spondylitis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1563-1566, 2000.

7. Chen, X.; Xia, Y.; Alford, M.; DeTeresa, R.; Hansen, L.; Klauber,
M. R.; Katzman, R.; Thal, L.; Masliah, E.; Saitoh, T.: The CYP2D6B
allele is associated with a milder synaptic pathology in Alzheimer's
disease. Ann. Neurol. 38: 653-658, 1995.

8. Dahl, M.-L.; Johansson, I.; Bertilsson, L.; Ingelman-Sundberg,
M.; Sjoqvist, F.: Ultrarapid hydroxylation of debrisoquine in a Swedish
population: analysis of the molecular genetic basis. J. Pharm. Exp.
Ther. 274: 516-520, 1995.

9. Daly, A. K.; Brockmoller, J.; Broly, F.; Eichelbaum, M.; Evans,
W. E.; Gonzalez, E.-J.; Huang, J.-D.; Idle, J. R.; Ingelman-Sundberg,
M.; Ishizaki, T.; Jacqz-Aigrain, E.; Meyer, U. A.; Nebert, D. W.;
Steen, V. M.; Wolf, C. R.; Zanger, U. M.: Nomenclature for human
CYP2D6 alleles. Pharmacogenetics 6: 193-201, 1996.

10. Deng, Y.; Newman, B.; Dunne, M. P.; Silburn, P. A.; Mellick, G.
D.: Further evidence that interactions between CYP2D6 and pesticide
exposure increase risk for Parkinson's disease. (Letter) Ann. Neurol. 55:
897 only, 2004.

11. Desmeules, J.; Gascon, M. P.; Dayer, P.; Magistris, M.: Impact
of environmental and genetic factors on codeine analgesia. Europ.
J. Clin. Pharm. 41: 23-26, 1991.

12. Distlerath, L. M.; Guengerich, F. P.: Characterization of a human
liver cytochrome P-450 involved in the oxidation of debrisoquine and
other drugs by using antibodies raised to the analogous rat enzyme. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 81: 7348-7352, 1984.

13. Eichelbaum, M.; Baur, M. P.; Dengler, H. J.; Osikowska-Evers,
B. O.; Tieves, G.; Zekorn, C.; Rittner, C.: Chromosomal assignment
of human cytochrome P-450 (debrisoquine/sparteine type) to chromosome
22. Brit. J. Clin. Pharm. 23: 455-458, 1987.

14. Eichelbaum, M.; Evans, W.; Yamazoe, Y.: A tribute to Frank Gonzalez.
(Editorial) Pharmacogenetics 11: 371 only, 2001.

15. Eichelbaum, M.; Reetz, K. P.; Schmidt, E. K.; Zekorn, C.: The
genetic polymorphism of sparteine metabolism. Xenobiotica 16: 465-481,
1986.

16. Eichelbaum, M.; Woolhouse, N. M.: Inter-ethnic difference in
sparteine oxidation among Ghanaians and Germans. Europ. J. Clin.
Pharm. 28: 79-83, 1985.

17. Elbaz, A.; Levecque, C.; Clavel, J.; Vidal, J.-S.; Richard, F.;
Amouyel, P.; Alperovitch, A.; Chartier-Harlin, M.-C.; Tzourio, C.
: CYP2D6 polymorphism, pesticide exposure, and Parkinson's disease. Ann.
Neurol. 55: 430-434, 2004.

18. Gaedigk, A.; Blum, M.; Gaedigk, R.; Eichelbaum, M.; Meyer, U.
A.: Deletion of the entire cytochrome P450 CYP2D6 gene as a cause
of impaired drug metabolism in poor metabolizers of the debrisoquine/sparteine
polymorphism. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 48: 943-950, 1991.

19. Gasche, Y.; Daali, Y.; Fathi, M.; Chiappe, A.; Cottini, S.; Dayer,
P.; Desmeules, J.: Codeine intoxication associated with ultrarapid
CYP2D6 metabolism. New Eng. J. Med. 351: 2827-2831, 2004. Note:
Erratum: New Eng. J. Med. 352: 638 only, 2005.

20. Gonzalez, F. J.; Matsunaga, T.; Nagata, K.; Meyer, U. A.; Nebert,
D. W.; Pastewka, J.; Kozak, C. A.; Gillette, J.; Gelboin, H. V.; Hardwick,
J. P.: Debrisoquine 4-hydroxylase: characterization of a new P450
gene subfamily, regulation, chromosomal mapping, and molecular analysis
of the DA rat polymorphism. DNA 6: 149-161, 1987.

21. Gonzalez, F. J.; Skoda, R. C.; Kimura, S.; Umeno, M.; Zanger,
U. M.; Nebert, D. W.; Gelboin, H. V.; Hardwick, J. P.; Meyer, U. A.
: Characterization of the common genetic defect in humans deficient
in debrisoquine metabolism. Nature 331: 442-446, 1988.

22. Gonzalez, F. J.; Vilbois, F.; Hardwick, J. P.; McBride, O. W.;
Nebert, D. W.; Gelboin, H. V.; Meyer, U. A.: Human debrisoquine 4-hydroxylase
(P450IID1) cDNA and deduced amino acid sequence and assignment of
the CYP2D locus to chromosome 22. Genomics 2: 174-179, 1988.

23. Gough, A. C.; Miles, J. S.; Spurr, N. K.; Moss, J. E.; Gaedigk,
A.; Eichelbaum, M.; Wolf, C. R.: Identification of the primary gene
defect at the cytochrome P(450) CYP2D locus. Nature 347: 773-776,
1990.

24. Gough, A. C.; Smith, C. A. D.; Howell, S. M.; Wolf, C. R.; Bryant,
S. P.; Spurr, N. K.: Localization of the CYP2D gene locus to human
chromosome 22q13.1 by polymerase chain reaction, in situ hybridization,
and linkage analysis. Genomics 15: 430-432, 1993.

25. Guengerich, F. P.; Distlerath, L. M.; Reilly, P. E. B.; Wolff,
T.; Shimada, T.; Umbenhauer, D. R.; Martin, M. V.: Human-liver cytochromes
P-450 involved in polymorphisms of drug oxidation. Xenobiotica 16:
367-378, 1986.

26. Hanioka, N.; Kimura, S.; Meyer, U. A.; Gonzalez, F. J.: The human
CYP2D locus associated with a common genetic defect in drug oxidation:
a G(1934)-to-A base change in intron 3 of a mutant CYP2D6 allele results
in an aberrant 3-prime splice recognition site. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 47:
994-1001, 1990.

27. Harmer, D.; Evans, D. A. P.; Eze, L. C.; Jolly, M.; Whibley, E.
J.: The relationship between the acetylator and the sparteine hydroxylation
polymorphisms. J. Med. Genet. 23: 155-156, 1986.

28. Heim, M.; Meyer, U. A.: Genotyping of poor metabolisers of debrisoquine
by allele-specific PCR amplification. Lancet 336: 529-532, 1990.

29. Heim, M. H.; Meyer, U. A.: Evolution of a highly polymorphic
human cytochrome P450 gene cluster: CYP2D6. Genomics 14: 49-58,
1992.

30. Idle, J. R.; Corchero, J.; Gonzalez, F. J.: Medical implications
of HGP's sequence of chromosome 22. (Letter) Lancet 355: 319 only,
2000.

31. Johansson, I.; Lundqvist, E.; Bertilsson, L.; Dahl, M.-L.; Sjoqvist,
F.; Ingelman-Sundberg, M.: Inherited amplification of an active gene
in the cytochrome P450 CYP2D locus as a cause of ultrarapid metabolism
of debrisoquine. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 11825-11829, 1993.

32. Johansson, I.; Oscarson, M.; Yue, Q.-Y.; Bertilsson, L.; Sjoqvist,
F.; Ingelman-Sundberg, M.: Genetic analysis of the Chinese cytochrome
P4502D locus: characterization of variant CYP2D6 genes present in
subjects with diminished capacity for debrisoquine hydroxylation. Molec.
Pharm. 46: 452-459, 1994.

33. Kagimoto, M.; Heim, M.; Kagimoto, K.; Zeugin, T.; Meyer, U. A.
: Multiple mutations of the human cytochrome P450IID6 gene (CYP2D6)
in poor metabolizers of debrisoquine: study of the functional significance
of individual mutations by expression of chimeric genes. J. Biol.
Chem. 265: 17209-17214, 1990.

34. Kimura, S.; Umeno, M.; Skoda, R. C.; Meyer, U. A.; Gonzalez, F.
J.: The human debrisoquine 4-hydroxylase (CYP2D) locus: sequence
and identification of the polymorphic CYP2D6 gene, a related gene,
and a pseudogene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 45: 889-904, 1989.

35. Kleinbloesem, C. H.; van Brummelen, P.; Faber, H.; Danhof, M.;
Vermeulen, N. P. E.; Breimer, D. D.: Variability in nifedipine pharmacokinetics
and dynamics: a new oxidation polymorphism in man. Biochem. Pharm. 33:
3721-3724, 1984.

36. Koren, G.; Cairns, J.; Chitayat, D.; Gaedigk, A.; Leeder, S. J.
: Pharmacogenetics of morphine poisoning in a breastfed neonate of
a codeine-prescribed mother. Lancet 368: 704 only, 2006.

37. Lessard, E.; Fortin, A.; Belanger, P. M.; Beaune, P.; Hamelin,
B. A.; Turegon, J.: Role of CYP2D6 in the N-hydroxylation of procainamide. Pharmacogenetics 7:
381-390, 1997.

38. Lessard, E.; Hamelin, B. A.; Labbe, L.; O'Hara, G.; Belanger,
P. M.; Turgeon, J.: Involvement of CYP2D6 activity in the N-oxidation
of procainamide in man. Pharmacogenetics 9: 683-696, 1999.

39. Liou, Y.-H.; Lin, C.-T.; Wu, Y.-J.; Wu L. S.-H.: The high prevalence
of the poor and ultrarapid metabolite alleles in CYP2D6, CYP2C9, CYP2C19,
CYP3A4, and CYP3A5 in Taiwanese population. J. Hum. Genet. 51: 857-863,
2006.

40. Lundqvist, E.; Johansson, I.; Ingelman-Sundberg, M.: Genetic
mechanisms for duplication and multiduplication of the human CYP2D6
gene and methods for detection of duplicated CYP2D6 genes. Gene 226:
327-338, 1999.

41. Marez, D.; Legrand, M.; Sabbagh, N.; Lo Guidice, J.-M.; Spire,
C.; Lafitte, J.-J.; Meyer, U. A.; Broly, F.: Polymorphism of the
cytochrome P450 CYP2D6 gene in a European population: characterization
of 48 mutations and 53 alleles, their frequencies and evolution. Pharmacogenetics 7:
193-202, 1997.

42. Matsunaga, E.; Zanger, U. M.; Hardwick, J. P.; Gelboin, H. V.;
Meyer, U. A.; Gonzalez, F. J.: The CYP2D gene subfamily: analysis
of the molecular basis of the debrisoquine 4-hydroxylase deficiency
in DA rats. Biochemistry 28: 7349-7355, 1989.

43. McLellan, R. A.; Oscarson, M.; Seidegard, J.; Price Evans, D.
A.; Ingelman-Sundberg, M.: Frequent occurrence of CYP2D6 gene duplication
in Saudi Arabians. Pharmacogenetics 7: 187-191, 1997.

44. Mikus, G.; Morike, K.; Griese, E.-U.; Klotz, U.: Relevance of
deficient CYP2D6 in opiate dependence. (Letter) Pharmacogenetics 8:
565-566, 1998.

45. Mura, C.; Panserat, S.; Vincent-Viry, M.; Galteau, M. M.; Jacqz-Aigrain,
E.; Krishnamoorthy, R.: DNA haplotype dependency of debrisoquine-4-hydroxylase
(CYP2D6) expression among extensive metabolisers. Hum. Genet. 92:
367-372, 1993.

46. Nakamura, K.; Ariyoshi, N.; Yokoi, T.; Ohgiya, S.; Chida, M.;
Nagashima, K.; Inoue, K.; Kodama, T.; Shimada, N.; Kamataki, T.:
CYP2D6.10 present in human liver microsomes shows low catalytic activity
and thermal stability. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 293: 969-973,
2002.

47. Nebert, D. W.: Polymorphisms in drug-metabolizing enzymes: what
is their clinical relevance and why do they exist? (Editorial) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 60: 265-271, 1997.

48. Nebert, D. W.; Adesnik, M.; Coon, M. J.; Estabrook, R. W.; Gonzalez,
F. J.; Guengerich, F. P.; Gunsalus, I. C.; Johnson, E. F.; Kemper,
B.; Levin, W.; Phillips, I. R.; Sato, R.; Waterman, M. R.: The P450
gene superfamily: recommended nomenclature. DNA 6: 1-11, 1987.

49. Nelson, D. R.; Koymans, L.; Kamataki, T.; Stegeman, J. J.; Feyereisen,
R.; Waxman, D. J.; Waterman, M. R.; Gotoh, O.; Coon, M. J.; Estabrook,
R. W.; Gunsalas, I. C.; Nebert, D. W.: Cytochrome P450 superfamily:
update on new sequences, gene mapping, accession numbers, and nomenclature. Pharmacogenetics 6:
1-42, 1996.

50. Nelson, D. R.; Zeldin, D. C.; Hoffman, S. M. G.; Maltais, L. J.;
Wain, H. M.; Nebert, D. W.: Comparison of cytochrome P450 (CYP) genes
from the mouse and human genomes, including nomenclature recommendations
for genes, pseudogenes and alternative-splice variants. Pharmacogenetics 14:
1-18, 2004.

51. Panserat, S.; Mura, C.; Gerard, N.; Vincent-Viry, M.; Galteau,
M. M.; Jacqz-Aigrain, E.; Krishnamoorthy, R.: DNA haplotype-dependent
differences in the amino acid sequence of debrisoquine 4-hydroxylase
(CYP2D6): evidence for two major allozymes in extensive metabolisers. Hum.
Genet. 94: 401-406, 1994.

52. Payami, H.; Lee, N.; Zareparsi, S.; McNeal, M. G.; Camicioli,
R.; Bird, T. D.; Sexton, G.; Gancher, S.; Kaye, J.; Calhoun, D.; Swanson,
P. D.; Nutt, J.: Parkinson's disease, CYP2D6 polymorphism, and age. Neurology 56:
1363-1370, 2001.

53. Pilotto, A.; Franceschi, M.; D'Onofrio, G.; Bizzarro, A.; Mangialasche,
F.; Cascavilla, L.; Paris, F.; Matera, M. G.; Pilotto, A.; Daniele,
A.; Mecocci, P.; Masullo, C.; Dallapiccola, B.; Seripa, D.: Effect
of a CYP2D6 polymorphism on the efficacy of donepezil in patients
with Alzheimer disease. Neurology 73: 761-767, 2009.

54. Sachse, C.; Brockmoller, J.; Bauer, S.; Roots, I.: Cytochrome
P450 2D6 variants in a Caucasian population: allele frequencies and
phenotypic consequences. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 60: 284-295, 1997.

55. Saxena, R.; Shaw, G. L.; Relling, M. V.; Frame, J. N.; Moir, D.
T.; Evans, W. E.; Caporaso, N.; Weiffenbach, B.: Identification of
a new variant CYP2D6 allele with a single base deletion in exon 3
and its association with the poor metabolizer phenotype. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 3: 923-926, 1994.

56. Schroth, W.; Goetz, M. P.; Hamann, U.; Fasching, P. A.; Schmidt,
M.; Winter, S.; Fritz, P.; Simon, W.; Suman, V. J.; Ames, M. M.; Safgren,
S. L.; Kuffel, M. J.; and 10 others: Association between CYP2D6
polymorphisms and outcomes among women with early stage breast cancer
treated with tamoxifen. JAMA 302: 1429-1436, 2009.

57. Skoda, R. C.; Gonzalez, F. J.; Demierre, A.; Meyer, U. A.: Two
mutant alleles of the human cytochrome P-450db1 gene (P450C2D1) associated
with genetically deficient metabolism of debrisoquine and other drugs. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 5240-5243, 1988.

58. Steen, V. M.; Molven, A.; Aarskog, N. K.; Gulbrandsen, A.-K.:
Homologous unequal cross-over involving a 2.8 kb direct repeat as
a mechanism for the generation of allelic variants of the human cytochrome
P450 CYP2D6 gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 2251-2257, 1995.

59. Tateishi, T.; Chida, M.; Ariyoshi, N.; Mizorogi, Y.; Kamataki,
T.; Kobayashi, S.: Analysis of the CYP2D6 gene in relation to dextromethorphan
O-demyelination capacity in a Japanese population. Clin. Pharm. Ther. 65:
570-575, 1999.

60. Thum, T.; Borlak, J.: Gene expression in distinct regions of
the heart. Lancet 355: 979-983, 2000.

61. Tucker, G. T.; Silas, J. H.; Iyun, A. O.; Lennard, M. S.; Smith,
A. J.: Polymorphic hydroxylation of debrisoquine. (Letter) Lancet 310:
718 only, 1977. Note: Originally Volume II.

62. Tyndale, R. F.; Droll, K. P.; Sellers, E. M.: Relevance of deficient
CYP2D6 in opiate dependence. (Letter) Pharmacogenetics 8: 567-568,
1998.

63. Tyndale, R. F.; Droll, K. P.; Sellers, E. M.: Genetically deficient
CYP2D6 metabolism provides protection against oral opiate dependence. Pharmacogenetics 7:
375-379, 1997.

64. Yue, Q. Y.; Alm, C.; Svensson, J. O.; Sawe, J.: Quantification
of the O- and N-demethylated and the glucuronidated metabolites of
codeine relative to the debrisoquine metabolic ratio in urine in ultrarapid,
rapid, and poor debrisoquine hydroxylators. Ther. Drug Monit. 19:
539-542, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/7/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/15/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/16/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/2/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/11/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 9/21/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/15/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/5/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/6/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/10/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/10/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/13/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/19/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/1/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/4/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/17/2000
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 8/25/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/4/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/19/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/25/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/17/1997
Orest Hurko - updated: 2/22/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/16/1986

EDITED terry: 06/07/2012
alopez: 9/8/2011
terry: 9/7/2011
terry: 4/28/2011
wwang: 3/30/2011
ckniffin: 3/15/2011
terry: 1/12/2009
wwang: 4/23/2008
ckniffin: 4/16/2008
wwang: 1/2/2007
terry: 3/22/2006
mgross: 8/18/2005
tkritzer: 1/18/2005
terry: 1/11/2005
carol: 9/21/2004
ckniffin: 9/15/2004
carol: 3/17/2004
terry: 7/24/2003
ckniffin: 7/8/2003
carol: 3/19/2003
tkritzer: 3/11/2003
terry: 3/5/2003
tkritzer: 11/19/2002
carol: 9/10/2002
ckniffin: 9/6/2002
alopez: 5/28/2002
terry: 5/10/2002
alopez: 9/14/2001
terry: 9/10/2001
alopez: 9/13/2000
alopez: 6/19/2000
mcapotos: 5/25/2000
terry: 5/1/2000
alopez: 4/7/2000
terry: 4/4/2000
mcapotos: 3/6/2000
mcapotos: 3/3/2000
mcapotos: 3/1/2000
terry: 2/17/2000
carol: 11/8/1999
carol: 8/25/1999
alopez: 11/30/1998
carol: 11/12/1998
terry: 11/4/1998
dholmes: 10/1/1997
mark: 9/23/1997
terry: 9/19/1997
terry: 8/6/1997
alopez: 7/7/1997
alopez: 7/3/1997
jenny: 7/1/1997
terry: 6/25/1997
carol: 6/20/1997
mark: 2/17/1997
terry: 2/10/1997
mark: 8/15/1996
terry: 5/24/1996
terry: 4/15/1996
mark: 2/22/1996
terry: 2/9/1996
mark: 1/28/1996
terry: 1/23/1996
John: 11/14/1995
pfoster: 4/3/1995
jason: 7/25/1994
terry: 5/4/1994
warfield: 4/8/1994
carol: 1/19/1994

603024	TITLE *603024 AT-RICH INTERACTION DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1A; ARID1A
;;ARID-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1A;;
SWI/SNF-RELATED, MATRIX-ASSOCIATED, ACTIN-DEPENDENT REGULATOR OF CHROMATIN,
SUBFAMILY F, MEMBER 1; SMARCF1;;
BRG1-ASSOCIATED FACTOR, 250-KD, A; BAF250A;;
CHROMOSOME 1 OPEN READING FRAME 4; C1ORF4;;
B120 GENE; B120;;
p270
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ARID1A is a unique component of the BRG1 (SMARCA4; 603254)-associated
factor (BAF) chromatin remodeling complex that facilitates gene
activation by assisting transcription machinery to gain access to gene
targets (Nie et al., 2000).

CLONING

Takeuchi et al. (1997) reported a novel human cDNA encoding ARID1A,
which they designated B120. B120 contains many repeat units, loosely
identified as YXQQP, present in several human RNA-binding proteins. The
B120 gene product is a 120-kD cytoplasmic protein expressed in various
tissues including skeletal muscle, brain, and spleen. B120 has a CAG
repeat length polymorphism, usually 7 repeats, encoding polyglutamine
amino acids.

Using antibody against human p270 to screen a HeLa cell expression cDNA
library, followed by screening a second HeLa cell library and 5-prime
RACE of a WI-38 human fibroblast library, Dallas et al. (2000) obtained
a partial cDNA encoding about 95% of the ARID1A protein, which they
called p270. The deduced protein, which is N-terminally truncated, has a
glutamine (Q)-rich N-terminal region, followed by an ARID domain, a
second Q-rich region, and multiple copies of an LxxLL motif near the C
terminus. Northern blot analysis revealed variable expression of an
approximately 8.0-kb transcript in all tissues examined.

By sequencing peptides immunoaffinity purified with BRG1 from human cell
line nuclear extracts, followed by EST database analysis and screening a
Jurkat T-cell cDNA library, Nie et al. (2000) cloned full-length ARID1A,
which they called BAF250. They noted that the B120 cDNA reported by
Takeuchi et al. (1997) contains an unspliced intron at its 5-prime end
and a sequencing error, resulting in a frameshift at its 3-prime end.
The deduced 2,285-amino acid full-length BAF250 protein is rich in
glutamine, proline, and alanine, and it shares 3 regions of conservation
with its yeast and fly orthologs, including the ARID domain and 2
C-terminal regions containing LxxLL motifs. Swi1 is the closest ortholog
of BAF250 in yeast. Northern blot analysis revealed wide expression of a
9.5-kb BAF250 transcript.

GENE FUNCTION

To examine the function of B120, Takeuchi et al. (1998) introduced B120
cDNA with an expression vector into various cell lines, including COS-1,
C3H/10T1/2, and NIH 3T3 cells. These transfected cells exhibited small
cytoplasmic spherical bodies. The cytoplasmic bodies appeared to be fat
droplets on electron microscopy and histochemical staining. These
findings suggested that B120 gene expression is associated with lipid
metabolism and that overexpression of B120 may result in lipid
deposition in various cells, including those of fibroblastic cell lines.

Dallas et al. (2000) showed that in vitro-translated human p270 bound
immobilized native DNA. Deletion and mutation analysis revealed that DNA
binding was confined to the ARID region and required conserved trp and
tyr residues. Cloning and sequencing of DNA oligomers bound by the ARID
region of p270 revealed no common motifs or sequence preferences.

By sequencing peptides that immunopurified with BAF and PBAF (see PBRM1;
606083) chromatin remodeling complexes, Nie et al. (2000) identified
BAF250 as a component of the BAF complex only. The BAF complex possessed
ATP-dependent mononucleosome disruption activity against a 176-bp
fragment of 5S ribosomal DNA containing a nucleosome-positioning
sequence. The intact BAF complex or a chimeric protein that included
only the ARID domain of BAF250 bound a fragment containing the
pyrimidine-rich element of the delta-globin (HBD;142000) gene. BAF250
also enhanced glucocorticoid receptor (GR, or GCCR; 138040)-mediated
transcriptional activation following transfection of BAF250 into
BAF250-negative human T47D breast cancer cells. The amount of BAF250
that associated with GR increased in the presence of glucocorticoid.
Deletion of the conserved C-terminal region of BAF250 decreased its
GR-dependent activation about 70%, and deletion of the ARID domain of
BAF250 had a lesser effect.

By gel filtration, mass spectrometry, and Western blot analysis of human
cell lines, Nie et al. (2003) identified unique low-abundance SWI/SWF
complexes that contained ENL (MLLT1; 159556), several common SWI/SNF
subunits, and either BAF250A or BAF250B (ARID1B; 614556). Both BAF250A-
and BAF250B-containing complexes displayed ATP-dependent mononucleosome
disruption activity in vitro.

To explore the genetic origin of ovarian clear-cell carcinoma (167000),
Jones et al. (2010) determined the exomic sequences of 8 tumors after
immunoaffinity purification of cancer cells. Through comparative
analyses of normal cells from the same patients, Jones et al. (2010)
identified 4 genes that were mutated in at least 2 tumors. Two of these
genes, ARID1A and PPP2R1A (605983), which encodes a regulatory subunit
of serine/threonine phosphatase-2, were not known to be involved in
ovarian clear-cell carcinoma. The other 2 genes, previously implicated
in ovarian clear-cell carcinoma, were PIK3CA (171834) and KRAS (190070).
The nature and pattern of the mutations suggest that PPP2R1A functions
as an oncogene and ARID1A as a tumor-suppressor gene. In a total of 42
ovarian clear-cell carcinomas, 7% had mutations in PPP2R1A and 57% had
mutations in ARID1A. Jones et al. (2010) concluded that their results
suggested that aberrant chromatin remodeling contributes to the
pathogenesis of ovarian clear-cell carcinoma.

Dykhuizen et al. (2013) showed that BAF complexes decatenate newly
replicated sister chromatids, a requirement for proper chromosome
segregation during mitosis. Dykhuizen et al. (2013) found that deletion
of Brg1 (603254) in mouse cells, as well as the expression of BRG1 point
mutations identified in human tumors, leads to anaphase bridge formation
(in which sister chromatids are linked by catenated strands of DNA) and
a G2/M-phase block characteristic of the decatenation checkpoint.
Endogenous BAF complexes interact directly with endogenous topoisomerase
II-alpha (TOP2A; 126430) through BAF250a and are required for the
binding of TOP2A to approximately 12,000 sites across the genome.
Dykhuizen et al. (2013) concluded that TOP2A chromatin binding is
dependent on the ATPase activity of BRG1, which is compromised in
oncogenic BRG1 mutants. They further concluded that the ability of TOP2A
to prevent DNA entanglement at mitosis requires BAF complexes and
suggested that this activity contributes to the role of BAF subunits as
tumor suppressors.

MAPPING

Takeuchi et al. (1998) mapped the ARID1A gene to chromosome 1p36.1-p35
by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Several human disorders,
including Schnyder crystalline corneal dystrophy (121800), map to the
1p36.1-p35 region by genetic linkage. Since the cornea is composed of
fibroblastic cells, Takeuchi et al. (1998) suggested that overfunction
of ARID1A may be related to the pathogenesis of Schnyder crystalline
corneal dystrophy.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Somatic ARID1A Mutations in Cancer

Wiegand et al. (2010) sequenced the whole transcriptomes of 18 ovarian
clear-cell carcinomas and 1 ovarian clear-cell carcinoma cell line and
found somatic mutations in ARID1A in 6 of the samples. ARID1A encodes
BAF250a, a key component of the SWI-SNF chromatin remodeling complex.
Wiegand et al. (2010) then sequenced ARID1A in an additional 210 ovarian
carcinomas and a second ovarian clear-cell carcinoma cell line and
measured BAF250a expression by means of immunohistochemical analysis in
an additional 455 ovarian carcinomas. ARID1A mutations were seen in 55
of 119 ovarian clear-cell carcinomas (46%), 10 of 33 endometrioid
carcinomas (30%), and none of the 76 high-grade serous ovarian
carcinomas. Seventeen of the carcinomas had 2 somatic mutations each.
Loss of the BAF250a protein correlated strongly with the ovarian
clear-cell carcinoma and endometrioid carcinoma subtypes and the
presence of ARID1A mutations. In 2 patients, ARIDIA mutations and loss
of BAF250a expression were evident in the tumor and contiguous atypical
endometriosis but not in distal endometriotic lesions. Wiegand et al.
(2010) concluded that these data implicated ARID1A in as a tumor
suppressor gene frequently disrupted in ovarian clear-cell and
endometrioid carcinoma. Since ARID1A mutation and loss of BAF250a can be
seen in preneoplastic lesions, Wiegand et al. (2010) speculated that
mutation of ARID1A is an early event in the transformation of
endometriosis into cancer.

The finding of frequent ARID1A mutations in ovarian clear-cell and
endometrioid carcinomas by Wiegand et al. (2010) suggested to
Nissenblatt (2011) that such tumors may be of mullerian rather than
coelomic derivation. Nissenblatt (2011) noted that the 3 most common
types of ovarian carcinoma, i.e., serous, endometrioid, and mucinous,
are histologically identical to tumors of the fallopian tube,
endometrium, and endocervix, tumors known to arise from the embryonic
mullerian duct. In a reply to the comments of Nissenblatt (2011),
Huntsman et al. (2011) suggested that endometrioid carcinomas of the
ovary and clear-cell carcinomas should be included with similar uterine
cancers in clinical trials.

Birnbaum et al. (2011) profiled pancreatic carcinoma samples from 39
patients and 8 cell lines using high-resolution array comparative
genomic hybridization and found a heterozygous deletion of the 1p35
chromosomal region in 56.4% of tumors and 5 cell lines. This region,
which is commonly deleted in human cancers, includes ARID1A, which is
involved in chromatin remodeling and is suspected to be a tumor
suppressor gene. Sequencing of ARID1A exons detected 2 acquired
heterozygous mutations (1 nonsense and 1 missense) in tumors. These
mutations were different from those reported in ovarian cancer. Birnbaum
et al. (2011) concluded that their results suggested a potential role of
ARID1A and aberrant chromatin remodeling in pancreatic carcinoma and
showed that the spectrum of ARID1A alterations, including deletions, may
be large. Huntsman et al. (2011) stated that the findings of Birnbaum et
al. (2011) added to a body of evidence implicating abnormalities in
chromatin-remodeling complexes, and in particular the BAF250a-containing
SWI/SNF nucleosome remodeling complex, as key events in many cancers.

Le Gallo et al. (2012) used whole-exome sequencing to comprehensively
search for somatic mutations in 13 primary serous endometrial tumors
(see 608089), and subsequently resequenced 18 genes that were mutated in
more than 1 tumor and/or were components of an enriched functional
grouping from 40 additional serous tumors. Le Gallo et al. (2012)
identified a high frequency of somatic mutation (6%) in the ARID1A gene.

- Autosomal Dominant Mental Retardation 14

In 3 individuals with a syndromic form of mental retardation (MRD14;
614607) that had been classified as Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS; 135900),
Tsurusaki et al. (2012) identified 3 mutations in ARID1A. One was a
frameshift and the other 2 premature termination.

ANIMAL MODEL

Krosl et al. (2010) generated a mutant mouse strain harboring a Baf250a
allele lacking exons 2 and 3. Transcripts from this allele were
expressed at normal levels and encoded a Baf250 protein lacking 150
amino acids within the N-terminal region. Heterozygous mutant mice were
healthy for over 12 months, but no homozygous mutant offspring were
obtained. Krosl et al. (2010) examined hemopoiesis in homozygous mutant
fetal liver and found that Baf250a was not required for hemopoietic stem
cell specification, onset of definitive hemopoiesis, or differentiation
of blood cells. However, stromal cell layers established from homozygous
mutant fetal liver cells were more efficient than wildtype fetal liver
cells in in vitro maintenance and expansion of primitive hemopoietic
cells. This advantage was associated with enhanced expression of
transcripts encoding soluble factors associated with hematopoietic stem
cell growth and reduced expression of transcripts associated with cell
senescence or oxidative stress-induced apoptosis. Krosl et al. (2010)
hypothesized that BAF250A controls the size of the fetal liver
hematopoietic stem cell pool through regulation of the fetal liver
microenvironment.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 14
ARID1A, 31_56DEL

In Patient 3 with a syndromic form of mental retardation (MRD14;
614607), Tsurusaki et al. (2012) detected a heterozygous 26-bp deletion
in the ARID1A gene (31_56del) resulting in frameshift and premature
termination 91 amino acids downstream (ser11alafs*91). The phenotype of
this patient was characterized as Coffin-Siris syndrome (135900), and
the patient presented with hepatoblastoma as well as multiple congenital
anomalies. This mutation was not identified in 330 control chromosomes
or in the SNP database dbSNP132, the 1000 Genomes database, or the
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Grand Opportunity (NHLBI GO)
exome sequencing project database. The parents were unavailable for
testing.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 14
ARID1A, GLN920TER

In Patient 6 with a syndromic form of mental retardation (MRD14;
614607), Tsurusaki et al. (2012) detected a heterozygous C-to-T
transition at nucleotide 2758 of the ARID1A gene that resulted in a
glu-to-ter substitution at codon 920 (Q920X). The phenotype of this
patient was characterized as Coffin-Siris syndrome (135900). This
mutation was not identified in 376 control chromosomes or in the SNP
database dbSNP132, the 1000 Genomes database, or the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute Grand Opportunity (NHLBI GO) exome sequencing
project database. The parents were unavailable for testing.

.0003
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 14
ARID1A, ARG1335TER

In Patient 8 with a syndromic form of mental retardation (MRD14;
614607), Tsurusaki et al. (2012) detected a heterozygous C-to-T
transition at nucleotide 4003 of the ARID1A gene, resulting in an
arg-to-ter substitution at codon 1335 (R1335X). The phenotype of this
patient was characterized as Coffin-Siris syndrome (135900). The
mutation occurred as a de novo event.

REFERENCE 1. Birnbaum, D. J.; Birnbaum, D.; Bertucci, F.: Endometriosis-associated
ovarian carcinomas. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 364: 483-484, 2011.

2. Dallas, P. B.; Pacchione, S.; Wilsker, D.; Bowrin, V.; Kobayashi,
R.; Moran, E.: The human SWI-SNF complex protein p270 is an ARID
family member with non-sequence-specific DNA binding activity. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 20: 3137-3146, 2000.

3. Dykhuizen, E. C.; Hargreaves, D. C.; Miller, E. L.; Cui, K.; Korshunov,
A.; Kool, M.; Pfister, S.; Cho, Y.-J.; Zhao, K.; Crabtree, G. R.:
BAF complexes facilitate decatenation of DNA by topoisomerase II-alpha. Nature 497:
624-627, 2013.

4. Huntsman, D.; Wiegand, K. C.; Gilks, B.: Reply to Nissenblatt
and Birnbaum et al. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 364: 484-485, 2011.

5. Jones, S.; Wang, T.-L.; Shih, I.-M.; Mao, T.-L.; Nakayama, K.;
Roden, R.; Glas, R.; Slamon, D.; Diaz, L. A., Jr.; Vogelstein, B.;
Kinzler, K. W.; Velculescu, V. E.; Papadopoulos, N.: Frequent mutations
of chromatin remodeling gene ARID1A in ovarian clear cell carcinoma. Science 330:
228-231, 2010.

6. Krosl, J.; Mamo, A.; Chagraoui, J.; Wilhelm, B. T.; Girard, S.;
Louis, I.; Lessard, J.; Perreault, C.; Sauvageau, G.: A mutant allele
of the Swi/Snf member BAF250a determines the pool size of fetal liver
hemopoietic stem cell populations. Blood 116: 1678-1684, 2010.

7. Le Gallo, M.; O'Hara, A. J.; Rudd, M. L.; Urick, M. E.; Hansen,
N. F.; O'Neil, N. J.; Price, J. C.; Zhang, S.; England, B. M.; Godwin,
A. K.; Sgroi, D. C.; NIH Intramural Sequencing Center (NISC) Comparative
Sequencing Program; Hieter, P.; Mullikan, J. C.; Merino, M. J.; Bell,
D. W.: Exome sequencing of serous endometrial tumors identifies recurrent
somatic mutations in chromatin-remodeling and ubiquitin ligase complex
genes. Nature Genet. 44: 1310-1315, 2012.

8. Nie, Z.; Xue, Y.; Yang, D.; Zhou, S.; Deroo, B. J.; Archer, T.
K.; Wang, W.: A specificity and targeting subunit of a human SWI/SNF
family-related chromatin-remodeling complex. Molec. Cell. Biol. 20:
8879-8888, 2000.

9. Nie, Z.; Yan, Z.; Chen, E. H.; Sechi, S.; Ling, C.; Zhou, S.; Xue,
Y.; Yang, D.; Murray, D.; Kanakubo, E.; Cleary, M. L.; Wang, W.:
Novel SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complexes contain a mixed-lineage
leukemia chromosomal translocation partner. Molec. Cell. Biol. 23:
2942-2952, 2003.

10. Nissenblatt, M.: Endometriosis-associated ovarian carcinomas.
(Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 364: 482-483, 2011.

11. Takeuchi, T.; Chen, B. K.; Qiu, Y.; Sonobe, H.; Ohtsuki, Y.:
Molecular cloning and expression of a novel human cDNA containing
CAG repeats. Gene 204: 71-77, 1997.

12. Takeuchi, T.; Furihata, M.; Heng, H. H. Q.; Sonobe, H.; Ohtsuki,
Y.: Chromosomal mapping and expression of the human B120 gene. Gene 213:
189-193, 1998.

13. Tsurusaki, Y.; Okamoto, N.; Ohashi, H.; Kosho, T.; Imai, Y.; Hibi-Ko,
Y.; Kaname, T.; Naritomi, K.; Kawame, H.; Wakui, K.; Fukushima, Y.;
Homma, T.; and 19 others: Mutations affecting components of the
SWI/SNF complex cause Coffin-Siris syndrome. Nature Genet. 44: 376-378,
2012.

14. Wiegand, K. C.; Shah, S. P.; Al-Agha, O. M.; Zhao, Y.; Tse, K.;
Zeng, T.; Senz, J.; McConechy, M. K.; Anglesio, M. S.; Kalloger, S.
E.; Yang, W.; Heravi-Moussavi, A. and 32 others: ARID1A mutations
in endometriosis-associated ovarian carcinomas. New Eng. J. Med. 363:
1532-1543, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 07/01/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/7/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/30/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/23/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/14/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/15/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/4/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/26/2010

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/9/1998

EDITED alopez: 07/01/2013
alopez: 2/7/2013
alopez: 5/2/2012
alopez: 5/1/2012
terry: 4/30/2012
mgross: 3/27/2012
terry: 3/23/2012
mgross: 7/18/2011
terry: 7/14/2011
alopez: 2/17/2011
terry: 2/15/2011
carol: 2/2/2011
alopez: 11/11/2010
terry: 11/4/2010
alopez: 10/27/2010
alopez: 10/26/2010
mgross: 11/3/2005
alopez: 6/21/2000
alopez: 7/19/1999
dkim: 9/10/1998
carol: 9/9/1998

601387	TITLE *601387 TUMOR SUSCEPTIBILITY GENE 101; TSG101
;;VACUOLAR PROTEIN SORTING 23, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF; VPS23
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a strategy that enabled the isolation of previously unknown genes
encoding selectable recessive phenotypes, Li and Cohen (1996) identified
in the mouse a gene whose homozygous functional disruption by
insertional mutagenesis and antisense RNA synthesis produced cell
transformation. In their strategy, expression of a selectable marker in
mouse 3T3 cells was dependent upon insertion of a gene search vector
downstream of the promoter of randomly targeted chromosomal genes.
Transactivation of a promoter on the noncoding strand of the search
vector resulted in expression of antisense RNA that was complementary to
the coding strand of the targeted allele, resulting in functional
inactivation of the other allele. They subsequently selected for clonal
colonies that gained the ability to grow in 0.5% agar and formed
metastatic tumors in nude mice. Li and Cohen (1996) isolated such a
clonal colony and designated the inactivated gene Tsg101. Removal of the
transactivator required for antisense RNA expression restored normal
growth, presumably because of subsequent loss of expression of the
antisense transcripts complementary to Tsg101. The protein encoded by
the Tsg101 cDNA contains a coiled-coil domain that interacts with
stathmin (151442), a cytosolic phosphoprotein implicated in
tumorigenesis. Li and Cohen (1996) observed that overexpression of
Tsg101 antisense transcripts in NIH 3T3 cells resulted in cell
transformation and increased stathmin-specific mRNA.

Li et al. (1997) determined that the human TSG101 gene encodes a
381-amino acid polypeptide of 42.8 kD which is 94% identical to the
mouse protein.

By database searching and comparison of the TSG101 proteins of yeast and
other organisms, Koonin and Abagyan (1997) concluded that TSG101 may
belong to a group of apparently inactive homologs of
ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes.

Wagner et al. (2003) stated that many of the TSG101 transcripts
associated with human malignancies are actually alternatively spliced
forms generated by exon skipping.

GENE FUNCTION

Like other enveloped viruses, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 uses
cellular machinery to bud from infected cells. Garrus et al. (2001)
showed that TSG101, which functions in vacuolar protein sorting (VPS),
is required for HIV-1 budding. The ubiquitin enzyme-2 variant (UEV)
domain of TSG101 binds to an essential tetrapeptide (PTAP) motif within
the p6 domain of the structural Gag protein of HIV-1 and also to
ubiquitin. Depletion of cellular TSG101 by small interfering RNA
arrested HIV-1 budding at a late stage, and budding was rescued by
reintroduction of TSG101. Dominant-negative mutant VPS4 proteins that
inhibit vacuolar protein sorting also arrested HIV-1 and MLV (murine
leukemia virus) budding. These observations suggested that retroviruses
bud by appropriating cellular machinery normally used in the VPS pathway
to form multivesicular bodies.

Amit et al. (2004) showed that LRSAM1 (610933) binds the TSG101 SB
(steadiness box) and UEV regions. LRSAM1 ubiquitylates TSG101 both in
HEK293T cells and in vitro, and multiple monomeric ubiquitylation of
TSG101 results in inactivation of TSG101 sorting function. Studies of
receptor endocytosis and virus budding suggested that LRSAM1 enables
recycling of TSG101-containing sorting complexes and cargo reloading.

In Drosophila cells, Moberg et al. (2005) showed that Tsg101 mutations
activated Notch (see NOTCH1; 190198) signaling and caused overproduction
of a secreted Drosophila mitogen. The authors concluded that alterations
in trafficking through the endocytic pathway can trigger the secretion
of growth factors and cause overproliferation of neighboring cells.

Carlton and Martin-Serrano (2007) found that 2 proteins involved in
HIV-1 budding--TSG101, a subunit of the endosomal sorting complex
required for transport-1 (ESCRT-1), and ALIX (608074), an
ESCRT-associated protein--were recruited to the midbody during
cytokinesis by interaction with centrosome protein 55 (CEP55; 610000), a
centrosome and midbody protein essential for abscission. TSG101, ALIX,
and possibly other components of ESCRT-1 were required for the
completion of cytokinesis. Carlton and Martin-Serrano (2007) concluded
that thus, HIV-1 budding and cytokinesis use a similar subset of
cellular components to carry out topologically similar membrane fission
events.

Using coimmunoprecipitation and crosslinking analysis, Bishop and
Woodman (2001) found that human VPS28 (601387) interacted with the
coiled-coil C-terminal portion of TSG101. Expression of ATPase-defective
VPS4 (609983) shifted a portion of TSG101 and VPS28 from the cytosol to
endosomal vacuoles. Bishop and Woodman (2001) concluded that TSG101 and
VPS28 are directly involved in endosomal sorting.

Philips et al. (2008) showed that the avirulent Mycobacterium smegmatis
species could multiply in Drosophila S2 cells or murine macrophages in
which small interfering RNA had disrupted ESCRT components, including
Tsg101 and Vps28, by modulating the phagosome induced by mycobacteria.
Immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy showed that Tsg101- or
Vps28-depleted cells harbored mycobacteria in a heavily ubiquitinated
vacuolar location. Philips et al. (2008) concluded that ESCRT machinery
is critical for containment of mycobacterial proliferation.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Lee et al. (2008) solved the crystal structure of the ESCRT- and ALIX
(608074)-binding region (EABR) of CEP55 (610000) bound to an ALIX
peptide at a resolution of 2.0 angstroms. The structure showed that EABR
forms an aberrant dimeric parallel coiled coil. Bulky and charged
residues at the interface of the 2 central heptad repeats create
asymmetry and a single binding site for an ALIX or TSG101 peptide. Both
ALIX and ESCRT-1 are required for cytokinesis, which suggested that
multiple CEP55 dimers are required for function.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization and by analysis of a radiation
hybrid mapping panel, Li et al. (1997) demonstrated that the human
TSG101 gene maps to 11p15.2-p15.1. This region of chromosome 11 has been
found to show loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in a variety of human
malignancies, primarily breast cancers.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Li et al. (1997) analyzed transcripts from 15 uncultured primary human
breast carcinomas and matched normal breast tissue from the same
patients by RT-PCR, Southern blot analysis, and direct DNA sequencing.
They found that 7 breast cancers had intragenic TSG101 deletions that
physically or functionally disrupted sequences encoding the coiled-coil
domain of the protein. Analysis of genomic DNA, which was available from
6 of the 7 patients showing mutations in TSG101 transcripts, confirmed
the presence of abnormalities at the TSG101 genomic locus in all 6
cancers. Mutations in 2 TSG101 alleles were identified by both genomic
DNA analysis and cDNA analysis in 3 breast cancers and by cDNA analysis
in a fourth tumor (see 601387.0001). No TSG101 abnormalities were
observed in transcripts or genomic DNA of matched normal breast tissue
from these breast cancer patients. The findings of Li et al. (1997)
suggested that TSG101 is mutated at high frequency in human breast
cancer and further suggested that defects in TSG101 occur during breast
cancer tumorigenesis and/or progression. The wildtype gene has the
characteristics of a typical tumor suppressor gene.

The report by Li et al. (1997) of TSG101 intragenic deletions in 7 of 15
primary human breast carcinomas attracted particular interest because
BRCA1 (113705) and BRCA2 (600185), which are involved in familial breast
cancer, had not been found to be associated with a significant number of
sporadic mammary carcinomas, in contrast to the behavior of most
tumor-suppressor genes. Steiner et al. (1997) failed, however, to find
deletions in the TSG101 gene in breast cancer cases and called into
question the assignment of TSG101 to the class of tumor-suppressor
genes. Haber and Harlow (1997) pointed out the increasing vagueness in
the use of the term tumor suppressor gene. They suggested that the
simplest, most inclusive, and cleanest genetic definition should be
used, namely, 'genes that sustain loss-of-function mutations in the
development of cancer.' At the simplest level, mutations associated with
cancer can be informatively split into gain-of-function and
loss-of-function mutations. The definition complements the
well-established and universally recognized gain-of-function mutations
that are used to define the protooncogene-to-oncogene conversion.

ANIMAL MODEL

Wagner et al. (2003) produced mice with a conditional deletion of the
Tsg101 gene. They determined that Tsg101 is essential for cell growth,
cell survival, and normal function of embryonic and adult tissues.
Tsg101-deficient mammary epithelial cells exhibited a defect in cell
cycle regulation and underwent increased cell death. Tsg101 knockout did
not result in accelerated cell growth or cause neoplastic
transformation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BREAST CANCER
TSG101, VAL-ALA, 1162T-C

In a breast cancer, Li et al. (1997) identified a T-to-C transition at
nucleotide 1162 in the nondeleted allele of the TSG101 gene. Deletion of
the other allele had been identified by LOH. The mutation eliminates a
BbsI restriction site and generates a val-to-ala substitution at one of
the putative protein kinase C (176960) phosphorylation sites of the
TSG101 protein.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Bishop and Woodman (2001); Philips et al. (2008)
REFERENCE 1. Amit, I.; Yakir, L.; Katz, M.; Zwang, Y.; Marmor, M. D.; Citri,
A.; Shtiegman, K.; Alroy, I.; Tuvia, S.; Reiss, Y.; Roubini, E.; Cohen,
M.; Wides, R.; Bacharach, E.; Schubert, U.; Yarden, Y.: Tal, a Tsg101-specific
E3 ubiquitin ligase, regulates receptor endocytosis and retrovirus
budding. Genes Dev. 18: 1737-1752, 2004.

2. Bishop, N.; Woodman, P.: TSG101/mammalian VPS23 and mammalian
VPS28 interact directly and are recruited to VPS4-induced endosomes. J.
Biol. Chem. 276: 11735-11742, 2001.

3. Bishop, N.; Woodman, P.: TSG101/mammalian VPS23 and mammalian
VPS28 interact directly and are recruited to VPS4-induced endosomes. J.
Biol. Chem. 276: 11735-11742, 2001.

4. Carlton, J. G.; Martin-Serrano, J.: Parallels between cytokinesis
and retroviral budding: a role for the ESCRT machinery. Science 316:
1908-1912, 2007.

5. Garrus, J. E.; von Schwedler, U. K.; Pornillos, O. W.; Morham,
S. G.; Zavitz, K. H.; Wang, H. E.; Wettstein, D. A.; Stray, K. M.;
Cote, M.; Rich, R. L.; Myszka, D. G.; Sundquist, W. I.: Tsg101 and
vacuolar protein sorting pathway are essential for HIV-1 budding. Cell 107:
55-65, 2001.

6. Haber, D.; Harlow, E.: Tumour-suppressor genes: evolving definitions
in the genomic age. Nature Genet. 16: 320-322, 1997.

7. Koonin, E. V.; Abagyan, R. A.: TSG101 may be the prototype of
a class of dominant negative ubiquitin regulators. (Letter) Nature
Genet. 16: 330-331, 1997.

8. Lee, H. H.; Elia, N.; Ghirlando, R.; Lippincott-Schwartz, J.; Hurley,
J. H.: Midbody targeting of the ESCRT machinery by a noncanonical
coiled coil in CEP55. Science 322: 576-580, 2008.

9. Li, L.; Cohen, S. N.: tsg101: a novel tumor susceptibility gene
isolated by controlled homozygous functional knockout of allelic loci
in mammalian cells. Cell 85: 319-329, 1996.

10. Li, L.; Li, X.; Francke, U.; Cohen, S. N.: The TSG101 tumor susceptibility
gene is located in chromosome 11 band p15 and is mutated in human
breast cancer. Cell 88: 143-154, 1997.

11. Moberg, K. H.; Schelble, S.; Burdick, S. K.; Hariharan, I. K.
: Mutations in erupted, the Drosophila ortholog of mammalian tumor
susceptibility gene 101, elicit non-cell-autonomous overgrowth. Dev.
Cell 9: 699-710, 2005.

12. Philips, J. A.; Porto, M. C.; Wang, H.; Rubin, E. J.; Perrimon,
N.: ESCRT factors restrict mycobacterial growth. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 105: 3070-3075, 2008.

13. Philips, J. A.; Porto, M. C.; Wang, H.; Rubin, E. J.; Perrimon,
N.: ESCRT factors restrict mycobacterial growth. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 105: 3070-3075, 2008.

14. Steiner, P.; Barnes, D. M.; Harris, W. H.; Weinberg, R. A.: Absence
of rearrangements in the tumour susceptibility gene TSG101 in human
breast cancer. (Letter) Nature Genet. 16: 332-333, 1997.

15. Wagner, K.-U.; Krempler, A.; Qi, Y.; Park, K.; Henry, M. D.; Triplett,
A. A.; Riedlinger, G.; Rucker, E. B., III; Hennighausen, L.: Tsg101
is essential for cell growth, proliferation, and cell survival of
embryonic and adult tissues. Molec. Cell. Biol. 23: 150-162, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/12/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/9/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/20/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/10/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/30/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/31/1997
Harry C. Dietz - edited: 4/4/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/7/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/19/1996

EDITED alopez: 11/18/2008
terry: 11/12/2008
mgross: 4/14/2008
terry: 4/9/2008
alopez: 7/25/2007
terry: 7/24/2007
wwang: 4/16/2007
mgross: 4/10/2006
wwang: 12/20/2005
mgross: 3/13/2003
terry: 3/10/2003
mgross: 10/30/2001
carol: 7/20/2001
carol: 6/27/2001
terry: 8/4/1997
terry: 7/31/1997
terry: 4/14/1997
mark: 4/4/1997
mark: 4/1/1997
mark: 2/7/1997
terry: 2/4/1997
mark: 8/20/1996
terry: 8/19/1996
mark: 8/19/1996

605325	TITLE *605325 CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY IIIA, POLYPEPTIDE 5; CYP3A5
;;P450PCN3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CYP3A enzymes are the most abundantly expressed cytochrome P450 enzymes
in liver and are responsible for the metabolism of over 50% of all
clinically used drugs (Paulussen et al., 2000).

CLONING

By screening a liver cDNA library with CYP3A4 (124010) as probe, Aoyama
et al. (1989) isolated a cDNA encoding CYP3A5, which they termed PCN3.
Immunoblot analysis of liver microsomes showed that CYP3A5 is expressed
as a 52.5-kD protein, whereas CYP3A4 migrates as a 52.0-kD protein. The
deduced 502-amino acid CYP3A5 protein shares 85% sequence similarity
with CYP3A4. Analysis of enzymatic activity established that CYP3A4 and
CYP3A5 have overlapping substrate specificity with minor differences in
the metabolism of steroids and cyclosporine, suggesting that CYP3A4 may
bind these drugs at more than 1 site.

MAPPING

Jounaidi et al. (1994) isolated the 5-prime flanking region of CYP3A5
from a genomic clone on chromosome 7. Promoter analysis determined that
CYP3A5 uses a CATAA, rather than a TATA, box at positions -23 to -28 and
has a basic transcription element from -35 to -50. Jounaidi et al.
(1994) stated that CYP3A5 and CYP3A7 appear to be tandemly associated
and transcribed in the same direction.

Gellner et al. (2001) found that a 231-kb region on chromosome 7q21.1
contains 3 CYP3A genes: CYP3A4 (124010), CYP3A5, and CYP3A7 (605340), as
well as 3 pseudogenes and a novel CYP3A gene, which they termed CYP3A43
(606534).

GENE FUNCTION

Yamakoshi et al. (1999) isolated a cDNA clone for CYP3A5 from a prostate
library and determined that it has a unique 5-prime untranslated
sequence, suggesting that CYP3A5 is differentially regulated in liver
and prostate. Enzymatic analysis showed that the prostate form of the
enzyme can metabolize sex hormones.

Kuehl et al. (2001) stated that variation in the CYP3A enzymes
influences circulating steroid levels and responses to half of all
oxidatively metabolized drugs. CYP3A activity is the sum activity of the
family of CYP3A genes, including CYP3A5, which is polymorphically
expressed at high levels in a minority of Caucasians. Only individuals
with at least one CYP3A5*1 (wildtype) allele express large amounts of
CYP3A5. Kuehl et al. (2001) demonstrated that SNPs in CYP3A5*3 (6986A-G;
605235.0001) and CYP3A5*6 (a G-to-A transition in exon 7 resulting in
deletion of that exon), which cause alternative splicing and protein
truncation, result in the absence of CYP3A5 from tissues of some people.
CYP3A5 was more frequently expressed in livers of African Americans
(60%) than in those of Caucasians (33%). Because CYP3A5 represents at
least 50% of the total hepatic CYP3A content in people polymorphically
expressing CYP3A5, CYP3A5 may be the most important genetic contributor
to interindividual and interracial differences in CYP3A-dependent drug
clearance and in responses to many medicines. There are substantial
interindividual differences in CYP3A expression, exceeding 30-fold in
some populations. The polymorphic distribution of the wildtype CYP3A5*1
allele indicates that relatively high levels of metabolically active
CYP3A5 are expressed by an estimated 30% of Caucasians, 30% of Japanese,
30% of Mexicans, 40% of Chinese, and more than 50% of African Americans,
Southeast Asians, Pacific Islanders, and Southwestern American Indians.
The higher prevalence of CYP3A5 expression indicates that these
non-Caucasians are more likely to experience higher clearance of drugs
principally inactivated by CYP3A; are less likely to experience
dose-limiting toxicities; and have different risks of diseases that are
associated with the CYP3A5 expressor phenotype.

Kuehl et al. (2001) proposed that the expressor allele confers a
selective advantage in equatorial populations that may experience water
shortages. Thompson et al. (2004) genotyped the CYP3A5*1/*3
polymorphism, which is likely to influence salt and water retention and
risk for salt-sensitive hypertension (145500), in more than 1,000
individuals from 52 worldwide population samples. The results revealed
an unusual geographic pattern whereby the CYP3A5*3 frequency showed
extreme variation across populations and was significantly correlated
with distance from the equator. Furthermore, an unlinked variant, a
met235-to-thr SNP in the AGT gene (M235T; 106150.0001), previously
implicated in hypertension and preeclampsia, exhibited a similar
geographic distribution and had a significantly correlated frequency
with CYP3A5*1/*3. Thompson et al. (2004) concluded that variants that
influence salt homeostasis are the targets of a shared selective
pressure that results from an environmental variable correlated with
latitude.

Lee et al. (2003) identified 4 novel SNPs in the CYP3A5 gene producing
coding changes in different ethnic groups. R28C occurred in African
populations (allelic frequency, 4%), A337T occurred in Asians (allelic
frequency, 2%), L82R occurred in a racially unidentified group, and
F446S occurred in Caucasians (allelic frequency, 2%). These SNPs were on
an allele containing the CYP3A5*3 SNP. The newly identified allelic
proteins were constructed by site-directed mutagenesis, expressed in E.
coli, and purified. CYP3A5*1 exhibited the highest maximal clearance for
testosterone, followed by A337T, which was greater than R28C; R28C was
much greater than F446S. F446S exhibited a more than 95% decrease in the
intrinsic clearance for both testosterone and nifedipine oxidation, and
was predicted to be more catalytically defective than the splice change
alone.

The cholesterol lowering agents lovastatin, simvastatin, and
atorvastatin are metabolized primarily by CYP3A4; however, the
polymorphic CYP3A5 also contributes to the biotransformation of these
statins. Individuals carrying at least 1 copy of the wildtype CYP3A5*1
allele express CYP3A5 protein in the liver and some extrahepatic tissues
such as the small intestine, whereas CYP3A5*3 homozygotes are designated
CYP3A5 nonexpressors. Kivisto et al. (2004) studied whether expression
of CYP3A5 is associated with an impaired lipid-lowering response to
statins in 69 Caucasian patients. They found that lovastatin,
simvastatin, and atorvastatin were significantly less effective in
CYP3A5 expressors than in nonexpressors. No association between
hypolipidemic efficacy and CYP3A5 polymorphism was observed among 23
subjects taking statins that are not dependent on CYP3A5 (viz.,
fluvastatin or pravastatin).

HISTORY

Paulussen et al. (2000) analyzed what was thought to be the 5-prime
flanking region of the CYP3A5 gene and reported 2 linked polymorphisms,
-369T/G and -45A/G, located in transcriptional regulatory elements that
were associated with increased expression and activity of the gene.
Kuehl et al. (2001) noted, however, that sequencing of the CYP3A locus
revealed that these SNPs were actually in the promoter of the pseudogene
CYP3AP1, and thus could not be the basis for polymorphic CYP3A5
expression.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPERTENSION, SALT-SENSITIVE ESSENTIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
CYP3A5, 6986A-G

In many populations, total adult CYP3A protein content of tissues
remains constant and consists largely of CYP3A4, whereas CYP3A5
expression has extreme interpopulation variability. This variation is
largely due to a 6986A-G substitution in intron 3 of CYP3A5 (the
CYP3A5*3 allele; SV1-CYP3A5) that results in improperly spliced mRNA and
a nonfunctional protein truncated at amino acid 102 (Kuehl et al., 2001;
Lin et al., 2002). The CYP3A5*3 allele is reported to have a frequency
of approximately 27 to 50% among African Americans, 85 to 95% among
whites (Hustert et al., 2001; Kuehl et al., 2001), and 60 to 73% among
Asians (Hustert et al., 2001).

Givens et al. (2003) found that, among renal microsomes from 21 organ
donors, those from *1/*3 individuals had at least 8-fold higher mean
kidney microsomal CYP3A5 content and 18-fold higher mean CYP3A catalytic
activity than did those from *3/*3 individuals (p = 0.0001 and p =
0.0137, respectively). They also found significant associations between
the 6986A-G polymorphism and systolic blood pressure (p = 0.0007), mean
arterial pressure (p = 0.0075), and creatinine clearance (p = 0.0035)
among 25 healthy African American adults. The associations remained
significant when sex, age, and body mass index were considered. The mean
systolic blood pressure of homozygous CYP3A5 expressors (*1/*1) exceeded
that of homozygous nonexpressors (*3/*3) by 19.3 mm Hg. Givens et al.
(2003) speculated that a high CYPA5 expressor allele frequency among
African Americans may contribute to a high prevalence of salt-sensitive
hypertension (145500) in this population.

Thompson et al. (2004) found that the CYP3A5*3 allele is significantly
correlated with distance from the equator. They noted that a
met235-to-thr SNP in the AGT gene (M235T; 106150.0001), previously
implicated in hypertension and preeclampsia, exhibited a similar
geographic distribution and had a significantly correlated frequency
with CYP3A5*1/*3. Thompson et al. (2004) concluded that variants that
influence salt homeostasis are the targets of a shared selective
pressure that results from an environmental variable correlated with
latitude.

REFERENCE 1. Aoyama, T.; Yamano, S.; Waxman, D. J.; Lapenson, D. P.; Meyer,
U. A.; Fischer, V.; Tyndale, R.; Inaba, T.; Kalow, W.; Gelboin, H.
V.; Gonzalez, F. J.: Cytochrome P-450 hPCN3, a novel cytochrome P-450
IIIA product that is differentially expressed in adult human liver:
cDNA and deduced amino acid sequence and distinct specificities of
cDNA-expressed hPCN1 and hPCN3 for the metabolism of steroid hormones
and cyclosporine. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 10388-10395, 1989.

2. Gellner, K.; Eiselt, R.; Hustert, E.; Arnold, H.; Koch, I.; Haberl,
M.; Deglmann, C. J.; Burk, O.; Buntefuss, D.; Escher, S.; Bishop,
C.; Koebe, H.-G.; Brinkmann, U.; Klenk, H.-P.; Kleine, K.; Meyer,
U. A.; Wojnowski, L.: Genomic organization of the human CYP3A locus:
identification of a new, inducible CYP3A gene. Pharmacogenetics 11:
111-121, 2001.

3. Givens, R. C.; Lin, Y. S.; Dowling, A. L. S.; Thummel, K. E.; Lamba,
J. K.; Schuetz, E. G.; Stewart, P. W.; Watkins, P. B.: CYP3A5 genotype
predicts renal CYP3A activity and blood pressure in healthy adults. J.
Appl. Physiol. 95: 1297-1300, 2003.

4. Hustert, E.; Haberl, M.; Burk, O.; Wolbold, R.; He, Y.-Q.; Klein,
K.; Nuessler, A. C.; Neuhaus, P.; Klattig, J.; Eiselt, R.; Koch, I.;
Zibat, A.; Brockmoller, J.; Halpert, J. R.; Zanger, U. M.; Wojnowski,
L.: The genetic determinants of the CYP3A5 polymorphism. Pharmacogenetics 11:
773-779, 2001.

5. Jounaidi, Y.; Guzelian, P. S.; Maurel, P.; Vilarem, M.-J.: Sequence
of the 5-prime-flanking region of CYP3A5: comparative analysis with
CYP3A4 and CYP3A7. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 205: 1741-1747,
1994.

6. Kivisto, K. T.; Niemi, M.; Schaeffeler, E.; Pitkala, K.; Tilvis,
R.; Fromm, M. F.; Schwab, M.; Eichelbaum, M.; Strandberg, T.: Lipid-lowering
response to statins is affected by CYP3A5 polymorphism. Pharmacogenetics 14:
523-525, 2004.

7. Kuehl, P.; Zhang, J.; Lin, Y.; Lamba, J.; Assem, M.; Schuetz, J.;
Watkins, P. B.; Daly, A.; Wrighton, S. A.; Hall, S. D.; Maurel, P.;
Relling, M.; Brimer, C.; Yasuda, K.; Venkataramanan, R.; Strom, S.;
Thummel, K.; Boguski, M. S.; Schuetz, E.: Sequence diversity in CYP3A
promoters and characterization of the genetic basis of polymorphic
CYP3A5 expression. Nature Genet. 27: 383-391, 2001.

8. Lee, S.-J.; Usmani, K. A.; Chanas, B.; Ghanayem, B.; Xi, T.; Hodgson,
E.; Mohrenweiser, H. W.; Goldstein, J. A.: Genetic findings and functional
studies of human CYP3A5 single nucleotide polymorphisms in different
ethnic groups. Pharmacogenetics 13: 461-472, 2003.

9. Lin, Y. S.; Dowling, A. L. S.; Quigley, S. D.; Farin, F. M.; Zhang,
J.; Lamba, J.; Schuetz, E. G.; Thummel, K. E.: Co-regulation of CYP3A4
and CYP3A5 and contribution to hepatic and intestinal midazolam metabolism. Molec.
Pharm. 62: 162-172, 2002.

10. Paulussen, A.; Lavrijsen, K.; Bohets, H.; Hendrickx, J.; Verhasselt,
P.; Luyten, W.; Konings, F.; Armstrong, M.: Two linked mutations
in transcriptional regulatory elements of the CYP3A5 gene constitute
the major genetic determinant of polymorphic activity in humans. Pharmacogenetics 10:
415-424, 2000.

11. Thompson, E. E.; Kuttab-Boulos, H.; Witonsky, D.; Yang, L.; Roe,
B. A.; Di Rienzo, A.: CYP3A variation and the evolution of salt-sensitivity
variants. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 75: 1059-1069, 2004.

12. Yamakoshi, Y.; Kishimoto, T.; Sugimura, K.; Kawashima, H.: Human
prostate CYP3A5: identification of a unique 5-prime-untranslated sequence
and characterization of purified recombinant protein. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 260: 676-681, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/9/2004
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 11/16/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/12/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/28/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/10/2000

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/10/2000

EDITED terry: 03/04/2009
tkritzer: 12/16/2004
terry: 12/9/2004
tkritzer: 11/17/2004
carol: 11/16/2004
tkritzer: 11/15/2004
terry: 11/12/2004
tkritzer: 12/4/2003
terry: 11/26/2003
carol: 8/22/2003
terry: 5/18/2001
alopez: 3/29/2001
terry: 3/28/2001
carol: 10/16/2000
carol: 10/10/2000

185880	TITLE *185880 VESICLE-ASSOCIATED MEMBRANE PROTEIN 1; VAMP1
;;SYNAPTOBREVIN 1; SYB1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Synaptobrevins 1 and 2 (185881) are small integral membrane proteins
specific for synaptic vesicles in neurons.

CLONING

Archer et al. (1990) isolated and characterized cosmid clones containing
the human genes encoding synaptobrevins 1 and 2. Their coding regions
are highly homologous, being interrupted at identical positions by
introns of different size and sequence.

GENE STRUCTURE

The genes encoding synaptobrevins 1 and 2 have 5 exons whose boundaries
correspond to those of the protein domains (Archer et al., 1990). Exon 1
contains part of the initiator methionine codon, whereas exon 2 encodes
the variable and immunogenic amino-terminal domain. The third exon
comprises the highly conserved central domain, exon 4 encodes most of
the transmembrane region, and exon 5 contains the last residues of the
transmembrane region and the small intravesicular carboxyl terminus.

GENE FUNCTION

Neuronal exocytosis is triggered by calcium and requires 3 SNARE
proteins: synaptobrevin on the synaptic vesicle, and syntaxin (e.g.,
186590) and SNAP25 (600322) on the plasma membrane. Neuronal SNARE
proteins form a parallel 4-helix bundle that is thought to drive the
fusion of opposing membranes. Hu et al. (2002) demonstrated that whereas
syntaxin and SNAP25 in target membranes are freely available for SNARE
complex formation, availability of synaptobrevin on synaptic vesicles is
very limited. Calcium at micromolar concentrations triggers SNARE
complex formation and fusion between synaptic vesicles and reconstituted
target membranes. Although calcium does promote interaction of SNARE
proteins between opposing membranes, it does not act by releasing
synaptobrevin from synaptic vesicle restriction. Hu et al. (2002)
concluded that their data suggests a mechanism in which
calcium-triggered membrane apposition enables syntaxin and SNAP25 to
engage synaptobrevin, leading to membrane fusion.

Tucker et al. (2004) investigated the effect of synaptotagmin 1 (SYT1;
185605) on membrane fusion mediated by neuronal SNARE proteins SNAP25,
syntaxin, and synaptobrevin, which were reconstituted into vesicles. In
the presence of calcium, the cytoplasmic domain of SYT1 strongly
stimulated membrane fusion when synaptobrevin densities were similar to
those found in native synaptic vesicles. The calcium dependence of
SYT1-stimulated fusion was modulated by changes in lipid composition of
the vesicles and by a truncation that mimics cleavage of SNAP25 by
botulinum neurotoxin A. Stimulation of fusion was abolished by
disrupting the calcium-binding activity, or by severing the tandem C2
domains, of SYT1. Thus, SYT1 and SNAREs are likely to represent the
minimal protein complement for calcium-triggered exocytosis.

By use of the large calyx of Held presynaptic terminal from rats, Sakaba
et al. (2005) demonstrated that cleavage of different SNARE proteins by
clostridial neurotoxins caused distinct kinetic changes in
neurotransmitter release. When elevating calcium ion concentration
directly at the presynaptic terminal with the use of caged calcium,
cleavage of SNAP25 by botulinum toxin A produced a strong reduction in
the calcium sensitivity for release, whereas cleavage of syntaxin using
botulinum toxin C1 and synaptobrevin using tetanus toxin produced an all
or nothing block without changing the kinetics of remaining vesicles.
When stimulating release by calcium influx through channels, a
difference between botulinum toxin C1 and tetanus toxin emerged, which
suggests that cleavage of synaptobrevin modifies the coupling between
channels and release-competent vesicles.

MAPPING

By Southern analysis of rodent-human somatic cell hybrids, Archer et al.
(1990) assigned the SYB1 gene to 12p; by analysis of DNA from Chinese
hamster-mouse somatic cell hybrids, they mapped the Syb1 gene to mouse
chromosome 6.

ANIMAL MODEL

The 'lethal-wasting' (lew) mouse is a spontaneous autosomal recessive
mutant that manifests as a neurologic phenotype characterized by
generalized lack of movement, wasting and prewean death by age 15 days.
By positional cloning, Nystuen et al. (2007) determined that the lew
phenotype results from a 190G-T transversion in the coding region of the
Vamp1 gene, predicted to result in truncation of nearly half of the
protein. Western blot analysis showed no detectable Vamp1 protein in
mutant mice. The authors noted that the phenotype was milder than that
of Vamp2 (185881)-null mice, which die at birth. By immunostudies of
normal mice, Nystuen et al. (2007) showed that Vamp1 is expressed
primarily in certain neuronal tissues, including the retina and areas of
the diencephalon and midbrain such as the zona incerta (subthalamus) and
rostral periolivary region. The findings suggested that Vamp1 has a
vital role in a subset of central nervous system tissues.

REFERENCE 1. Archer, B. T., III; Ozcelik, T.; Jahn, R.; Francke, U.; Sudhof,
T. C.: Structures and chromosomal localizations of two human genes
encoding synaptobrevins 1 and 2. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 17267-17273,
1990.

2. Hu, K.; Carroll, J.; Fedorovich, S.; Rickman, C.; Sukhodub, A.;
Davietov, B.: Vesicular restriction of synaptobrevin suggests a role
for calcium in membrane fusion. Nature 415: 646-650, 2002.

3. Nystuen, A. M.; Schwendinger, J. K.; Sachs, A. J.; Yang, A. W.;
Haider, N. B.: A null mutation in VAMP1/synaptobrevin is associated
with neurological defects and prewean mortality in the lethal-wasting
mouse mutant. Neurogenetics 8: 1-10, 2007.

4. Sakaba, T.; Stein, A.; Jahn, R.; Neher, E.: Distinct kinetic changes
in neurotransmitter release after SNARE protein cleavage. Science 309:
491-494, 2005.

5. Tucker, W. C.; Weber, T.; Chapman, E. R.: Reconstitution of Ca(2+)-regulated
membrane fusion by synaptotagmin and SNAREs. Science 304: 435-438,
2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/27/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/15/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/29/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/4/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/7/1990

EDITED wwang: 03/02/2007
ckniffin: 2/27/2007
carol: 8/16/2005
terry: 8/15/2005
alopez: 5/4/2004
terry: 4/29/2004
alopez: 2/7/2002
terry: 2/4/2002
alopez: 11/15/2001
psherman: 11/30/1998
psherman: 10/22/1998
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 11/30/1990
carol: 11/7/1990

608071	TITLE *608071 F-BOX AND WD40 DOMAIN PROTEIN 4; FBXW4
;;FBW4; FBWD4;;
DACTYLIN;;
DACTYLAPLASIA, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF;;
DAC, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF;;
SHFM3 GENE, FORMERLY; SHFM3, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Sidow et al. (1999) reported the positional cloning of the gene
disrupted in the mouse mutant dactylaplasia (Dac). The Dac gene belongs
to the F-box/WD40 gene family, which encodes adaptors that target
specific proteins for destruction by presenting them to the
ubiquitination machinery. In connection with biochemical studies, this
report demonstrated the importance of this gene family in vertebrate
embryonic development. Sidow et al. (1999) designated the Dac protein
product dactylin. Two different alleles of Dac were found to be due to
insertions, a common mechanism of mutation in the mouse (see ANIMAL
MODEL).

By positional cloning in the critical region for the split-hand/foot
malformation-3 locus (SHFM3; 246560) on chromosome 10q24, EST database
searching, and RT-PCR, Ianakiev et al. (1999) generated a cDNA encoding
human dactylin. Sequence analysis predicted that the 412-amino acid
putative cytoplasmic protein contains an N-terminal F box and 4
C-terminal WD40 domains. Northern blot analysis revealed ubiquitous
expression of a 2.8-kb transcript that is strongest in fetal brain,
followed by kidney, lung, and liver. In situ hybridization of a
5.5-week-old mouse embryo confirmed the expression of dactylin in the
central nervous system and liver as well as at low levels in the
mesoderm and ectoderm of the developing limb. The data suggested to
Ianakiev et al. (1999) that dactylin is likely to be involved in
signaling pathways crucial for normal limb development and that it is a
candidate gene for SHFM3.

Ilyin et al. (2000) independently cloned human dactylin, which they
termed FBWD4.

By sequence and computational analyses, Salzman et al. (2012) identified
hundreds of transcripts that showed noncanonical ordering of exons in
pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia samples and normal human
leukocytes. The most abundant transcripts with scrambled exons
originated from the FBXW4, CAMSAP1 (613774), and ZKSCAN1 (601260) genes.
RT-PCR of human cells confirmed the findings. Transcripts with scrambled
exons appeared to be circular, as they showed lack of polyadenylation
and resistance to 5-prime exoribonuclease activity. Endogenous circular
and linear FBXW4 and CAMSAP1 transcripts were detected in both the
cytoplasm and nucleus of fractionated HeLa cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ianakiev et al. (1999) determined that the DAC gene contains 9 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Ianakiev et al. (1999) identified the
human DAC gene in the critical region for the SHFM3 locus on chromosome
10q24. Using FISH, Ianakiev et al. (1999) mapped the DAC gene to
chromosome 10q24.3. They identified a pseudogene at the breakpoint
cluster region on chromosome 22q11.2 that shares greater than 93%
nucleotide identity with the DAC gene.

Jin et al. (2004) reported that the mouse Fbxw4 gene maps to chromosome
19C3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

De Mollerat et al. (2003) conducted mutation analysis of the dactylin
gene in 7 patients with split-hand/foot malformation (SHFM) and found no
point mutations. However, Southern blot, pulsed field gel
electrophoresis, and dosage analyses demonstrated a complex
rearrangement associated with a 0.5-Mb tandem duplication in all the
patients. The distal and proximal breakpoints were within 80- and 130-kb
regions, respectively; the smallest duplicated region common to all
patients was 444 kb and contained a disrupted extra copy of the dactylin
gene from exon 9 to exon 6, as well as the entire LBX1 (604255), BTRC
(603482), and POLL (606343) genes.

Because structural alterations of the gene encoding dactylin lead to
reduced levels of transcript in the mouse mutant Dac, which resembles
human SHFM, Basel et al. (2003) studied several individuals with SHFM
and reported a significant decrease of dactylin transcript. This
observation supported a central role for dactylin in the pathogenesis of
SHFM3.

Kano et al. (2005) screened 28 Japanese families with nonsyndromic SHFM
for tandem genomic duplication of chromosome 10q24 by Southern blot and
sequence analysis of the dactylin gene. No mutations were found in
coding regions and flanking intronic sequences of the dactylin gene, but
2 families had genomic rearrangements. One was a 511.6-kb tandem
duplication, and the other was a 447.3-kb duplication containing the
LBX1, BTRC, POLL, and DPCD genes and a disrupted extra copy of the
dactylin gene. Kano et al. (2005) noted that the smaller duplicated
region was almost identical to that described by de Mollerat et al.
(2003).

ANIMAL MODEL

Dactylaplasia, a mouse model of SHFM3, is an inherited limb malformation
that depends on 2 loci. The first locus, Dac, is an insertional mutation
around the dactylin gene that is inherited as a semidominant trait. Two
independent, spontaneous Dac alleles, Dac(1J) and Dac(2J), have been
identified. The second locus, Mdac, is a modifier on chromosome 13 that
is polymorphic in inbred strains. The dominant Mdac allele suppresses
the dactylaplasia phenotype in Dac mice, whereas the recessive Mdac
allele does not. Thus, dactylaplasia is observed only in mice homozygous
for the recessive Mdac allele. Kano et al. (2007) showed that the Dac
insertion is an LTR retrotransposon caused by the type D mouse
endogenous provirus element (MusD), which contains intact ORFs for the
viral gag, pro, and pol genes. In Dac(2J), MusD is inserted in intron 5
of the dactylin gene and no dactylin transcripts are expressed. In
Dac(1J), MusD is inserted in the upstream region of dactylin and neither
the size nor the amount of dactylin transcripts are affected. Kano et
al. (2007) refined the Mdac locus to a 9.4-Mb region on chromosome 13.
Dac mutants homozygous for the recessive Mdac allele had unmethylated
CpGs and active chromatin at the LTR of the MusD insertion, as well
ectopic expression of MusD elements. In contrast, Dac mutants carrying
the dominant Mdac allele had heavily methylated CpGs and inactive
chromatin at the LTR of the insertion, correlating with inhibition of
the dactylaplasia phenotype. Ectopic expression of MusD was not observed
in mice carrying the dominant Mdac allele. Kano et al. (2007) concluded
that ectopic expression of the MusD insertion, rather than lack of
dactylin expression, correlates with the dactylaplasia phenotype. They
proposed the Mdac acts a defensive factor to protect the host genome
from pathogenic MusD insertions.

REFERENCE 1. Basel, D.; DePaepe, A.; Kilpatrick, M. W.; Tsipouras, P.: Split
hand foot malformation is associated with a reduced level of dactylin
gene expression. Clin. Genet. 64: 350-354, 2003.

2. de Mollerat, X. J.; Gurrieri, F.; Morgan, C. T.; Sangiorgi, E.;
Everman, D. B.; Gaspari, P.; Amiel, J.; Bamshad, M. J.; Lyle, R.;
Blouin, J.-L.; Allanson, J. E.; Le Marec, B.; and 11 others: A
genomic rearrangement resulting in a tandem duplication is associated
with split hand-split foot malformation 3 (SHFM3) at 10q24. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12: 1959-1971, 2003.

3. Ianakiev, P.; Kilpatrick, M. W.; Dealy, C.; Kosher, R.; Korenberg,
J. R.; Chen, X.-N.; Tsipouras, P.: A novel human gene encoding an
F-box/WD40 containing protein maps in the SHFM3 critical region on
10q24. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 261: 64-70, 1999.

4. Ilyin, G. P.; Rialland, M.; Pigeon, C.; Guguen-Guillouzo, C.:
cDNA cloning and expression analysis of new members of the mammalian
F-box protein family. Genomics 67: 40-47, 2000.

5. Jin, J.; Cardozo, T.; Lovering, R. C.; Elledge, S. J.; Pagano,
M.; Harper, J. W.: Systematic analysis and nomenclature of mammalian
F-box proteins. Genes Dev. 18: 2573-2580, 2004.

6. Kano, H.; Kurahashi, H.; Toda, T.: Genetically regulated epigenetic
transcriptional activation of retrotransposon insertion confers mouse
dactylaplasia phenotype. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 19034-19039,
2007.

7. Kano, H.; Kurosawa, K.; Horii, E.; Ikegawa, S.; Yoshikawa, H.;
Kurahashi, H.; Toda, T.: Genomic rearrangement at 10q24 in non-syndromic
split-hand/split-foot malformation. Hum. Genet. 118: 477-483, 2005.

8. Salzman, J.; Gawad, C.; Wang, P. L.; Lacayo, N.; Brown, P. O.:
Circular RNAs are the predominant transcript isoform from hundreds
of human genes in diverse cell types. PLoS One 7: e30733, 2012.
Note: Electronic Article.

9. Sidow, A.; Bulotsky, M. S.; Kerrebrock, A. W.; Birren, B. W.; Altshuler,
D; Jaenisch, R.; Johnson, K. R.; Lander, E. S.: A novel member of
the F-box/WD40 gene family, encoding dactylin, is disrupted in the
mouse dactylaplasia mutant. Nature Genet. 23: 104-107, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 05/16/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/5/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/3/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/13/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/23/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/10/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/4/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/25/2003

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 9/2/2003

EDITED mgross: 05/16/2013
wwang: 8/30/2010
carol: 10/15/2008
mgross: 6/5/2008
terry: 6/3/2008
wwang: 4/20/2007
terry: 4/13/2007
carol: 4/4/2007
wwang: 2/23/2006
mgross: 12/10/2004
tkritzer: 11/6/2003
terry: 11/4/2003
cwells: 9/25/2003
carol: 9/11/2003
ckniffin: 9/2/2003

601540	TITLE *601540 BROMODOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; BRD2
;;FEMALE STERILE HOMEOTIC-RELATED GENE 1, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; FSRG1;;
RING3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

BRD2 is a putative nuclear transcriptional regulator and a member of a
family of genes that are expressed during development.

CLONING

In a search for novel genes in the human major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class II region on chromosome 6p21.3, Okamoto et al.
(1991) and Beck et al. (1992) identified a gene that they termed RING3.
('RING' is an acronym for 'really interesting new gene.') Based on
mapping and genomic sequencing, RING3 was located in the middle of the
class II region between the genes HLA-DNA (142930) and HLA-DMA (142855).
In contrast to all the other genes encoded in the class II region, RING3
appeared to have no obvious function associated with the immune system
based on sequence comparisons. The striking sequence similarity to the
female sterile homeotic (fsh) gene in Drosophila, however, suggested a
conserved biologic function for RING3.

Denis and Green (1996) discovered that the RING3 product is, in fact, a
mitogen-activated nuclear kinase involved in signal transduction and
that it is upregulated in certain types of leukemia.

With the aim of learning more about the phylogeny of RING3, Thorpe et
al. (1996) identified further homologs in different species and
determined their gene structures. The functional analysis of RING3 had
been further complicated by the finding of a second, non-MHC-linked copy
of RING3 in humans by Nomura et al. (1994). This was referred to by them
as ORFX (601541).

GENE FUNCTION

Dawson et al. (2011) demonstrated that I-BET151, a novel small molecule
inhibitor of the BET family, of which BRD2 is a member, has profound
efficacy against human and murine MLL-fusion leukemia cell lines through
the induction of early cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. I-BET151
treatment in 2 human leukemia cell lines with different MLL fusions
altered the expression of a common set of genes whose function may
account for these phenotypic changes. The mode of action of I-BET151 is,
at least in part, due to the inhibition of transcription at key genes
BCL2 (151430), C-MYC (190080), and CDK6 (603368) through the
displacement of BRD3/4, PAFc, and SEC components from chromatin. In vivo
studies indicated that I-BET151 has significant therapeutic value,
providing survival benefit in 2 distinct mouse models of murine MLL-AF9
and human MLL-AF4 leukemia.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the BRD2
gene and juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, see EJM3 (608816).

REFERENCE 1. Beck, S.; Hanson, I.; Kelly, A.; Pappin, D. J.; Trowsdale, J.:
A homologue of the Drosophila female sterile homeotic (fsh) gene in
the class II region of the human MHC. DNA Sequence 2: 203-210, 1992.

2. Dawson, M. A.; Prinjha, R. K.; Dittmann, A.; Giotopoulos, G.; Bantscheff,
M.; Chan, W.-I.; Robson, S. C.; Chung, C.; Hopf, C.; Savitski, M.
M.; Huthmacher, C.; Gudgin, E.; and 15 others: Inhibition of BET
recruitment to chromatin as an effective treatment for MLL-fusion
leukaemia. Nature 478: 529-533, 2011.

3. Denis, G. V.; Green, M. R.: A novel, mitogen-activated nuclear
kinase is related to a Drosophila developmental regulator. Genes
Dev. 10: 261-271, 1996.

4. Nomura, N.; Nagase, T.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Sato,
S.; Seki, N.; Kawarabayasi, Y.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. II. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0041-KIAA0080) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 1: 223-229, 1994.

5. Okamoto, N.; Ando, A.; Kawai, J.; Yoshiwara, T.; Tsuji, K.; Inoko,
H.: Orientation of HLA-DNA gene and identification of a CpG island-associated
gene adjacent to DNA in human major histocompatibility complex class
II region. Hum. Immun. 32: 221-228, 1991.

6. Thorpe, K. L.; Abdulla, S.; Kaufman, J.; Trowsdale, J.; Beck, S.
: Phylogeny and structure of the RING3 gene. Immunogenetics 44:
391-396, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/4/2012
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/8/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/27/1996

EDITED alopez: 01/06/2012
terry: 1/4/2012
ckniffin: 10/2/2009
tkritzer: 8/14/2003
tkritzer: 8/13/2003
terry: 8/8/2003
mgross: 7/24/2000
psherman: 12/30/1999
alopez: 6/21/1999
carol: 6/2/1998
terry: 4/23/1998
alopez: 6/27/1997
jenny: 12/5/1996
mark: 11/27/1996

610497	TITLE *610497 BRAIN AND REPRODUCTIVE ORGAN-EXPRESSED PROTEIN; BRE
;;BRCC4;;
BRCC45
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Li et al. (1995) cloned BRE from a placenta cDNA library. The deduced
protein contains 383 amino acids. Northern blot analysis of normal human
fibroblasts detected a single BRE mRNA at 1.7 to 1.9 kb. Northern blot
analysis of several rat tissues detected highest expression in testis
and intermediate expression in brain and ovary. Using the juxtamembrane
domain of the p55 TNF receptor (TNFRSF1A; 191190) as bait in a yeast
2-hybrid screen, Gu et al. (1998) cloned Bre from a mouse cerebellum
cDNA library.

GENE FUNCTION

Li et al. (1995) found that the expression of BRE decreased following
DNA damage in normal human fibroblasts caused by UV irradiation or
4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide (4NQO) exposure. Similar decreased BRE
expression was observed in retinoic acid-treated human brain glioma
cells and promyelocytic cells. BRE expression was unchanged in cells
following growth inhibition.

Using protein-binding assays and immunoprecipitation analysis in HEK293
cells, Gu et al. (1998) confirmed the interaction between mouse Bre and
Tnfrsf1a. Bre specifically interacted with Tnfrsf1a but not with other
TNF family members. Overexpression of Bre inhibited TNF-induced
NF-kappa-B activation.

Dong et al. (2003) demonstrated that in human cell lines BRE and BRCC3
(300617) are components of a holoenzyme complex containing BRCA1
(113705), BRCA2 (600185), BARD1 (601593), and RAD51 (179617), which they
called the BRCA1- and BRCA2-containing complex (BRCC). The complex
showed UBC5 (see UBE2D1; 602961)-dependent ubiquitin E3 ligase activity.
Inclusion of BRE and BRCC3 enhanced ubiquitination by the complex, and
cancer-associated truncations in BRCA1 reduced the association of BRE
and BRCC3 with the complex. RNA interference of BRE and BRCC3 in HeLa
cells increased cell sensitivity to ionizing radiation and resulted in a
defect in G2/M checkpoint arrest. Dong et al. (2003) concluded that the
BRCC is a ubiquitin E3 ligase that enhances cellular survival following
DNA damage.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the BRE
gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP RH66226).

REFERENCE 1. Dong, Y.; Hakimi, M.-A.; Chen, X.; Kumaraswamy, E.; Cooch, N. S.;
Godwin, A. K.; Shiekhattar, R.: Regulation of BRCC, a holoenzyme
complex containing BRCA1 and BRCA2, by a signalosome-like subunit
and its role in DNA repair. Molec. Cell 12: 1087-1099, 2003.

2. Gu, C.; Castellino, A.; Chan, J. Y.-H.; Chao, M. V.: BRE: a modulator
of TNF-alpha action. FASEB J. 12: 1101-1108, 1998.

3. Li, L.; Yoo, H.; Becker, F. F.; Ali-Osman, F.; Chan, J. Y. H.:
Identification of a brain- and reproductive-organs-specific gene responsive
to DNA damage and retinoic acid. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 206:
764-774, 1995.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/16/2006

EDITED wwang: 10/16/2006

430000	TITLE *430000 INTERLEUKIN 3 RECEPTOR, Y-CHROMOSOMAL; IL3RA
;;IL3RY;;
IL3RAY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The receptor for interleukin-3 (IL3; 147740) is a heterodimer that
shares a beta chain (CSF2RB; 138981) in common with the receptors for
IL5 (IL5R; 147851) and GMCSF (CSF2R; 306250), and, like these other
cytokine receptors, has a ligand-specific alpha chain (IL3RA).

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Kremer et al. (1993) demonstrated
that the IL3RY gene is located in the pseudoautosomal region of the X
and Y chromosomes. See 308385.

REFERENCE 1. Kremer, E.; Baker, E.; D'Andrea, R. J.; Slim, R.; Phillips, H.;
Moretti, P. A. B.; Lopez, A. F.; Petit, C.; Vadas, M. A.; Sutherland,
G. R.; Goodall, G. J.: A cytokine receptor gene cluster in the X-Y
pseudoautosomal region? Blood 82: 22-28, 1993.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/1/1993

EDITED terry: 08/26/2008
mgross: 9/6/2006
dkim: 7/2/1998
mark: 7/26/1995
mimadm: 3/11/1994
carol: 10/1/1993

609667	TITLE *609667 T-CELL ACTIVATION GTPase-ACTIVATING PROTEIN; TAGAP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By microarray analysis to identify genes coregulated with interleukin-2
(IL2; 147680) in a combination of experiments involving T-cell
activation and other conditions, followed by RT-PCR, Mao et al. (2004)
cloned TAGAP. The 731-amino acid protein contains a RHOGAP domain (see
602732). Real-time PCR analysis indicated that TAGAP expression peaked
approximately 4 to 6 hours after T-cell activation.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the TAGAP
gene to chromosome 6 (TMAP RH66776).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the TAGAP
gene and celiac disease, see CELIAC12 (612010).

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the TAGAP
gene and type 1 diabetes, see IDDM21 (612521).

REFERENCE 1. Mao, M.; Biery, M. C.; Kobayashi, S. V.; Ward, T.; Schimmack, G.;
Burchard, J.; Schelter, J. M.; Dai, H.; He, Y. D.; Linsley, P. S.
: T lymphocyte activation gene identification by coregulated expression
on DNA microarrays. Genomics 83: 989-999, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 01/07/2009

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/20/2005

EDITED carol: 01/07/2009
mgross: 10/20/2005

300564	TITLE *300564 TSPY-LIKE 2; TSPYL2
;;CELL DIVISION AUTOANTIGEN 1; CDA1;;
DIFFERENTIALLY EXPRESSED NUCLEOLAR TGFB1 TARGET; DENTT;;
CASK-INTERACTING NUCLEOSOME ASSEMBLY PROTEIN; CINAP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening a testis cDNA expression library with autoimmune serum from
a patient with discoid lupus erythematosus, followed by 5-prime RACE of
HeLa cell mRNA, Chai et al. (2001) cloned TSPYL2, which they called
CDA1. The deduced 693-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass
of 79.4 kD. CDA1 has a proline-rich N-terminal domain, a central basic
domain, and a C-terminal bipartite acidic domain. It has 4 putative
nuclear localization signals and several phosphorylation sites. Regions
within the CDA1 basic and acidic domains share significant similarity
with SET (600960), and the same region within the CDA1 basic domain
shares similarity with TSPY (480100). Northern blot analysis detected a
2.8-kb CDA1 transcript in HeLa cells and testis. Immunohistochemical
analysis detected endogenous CDA1 in the nuclear fraction of HeLa cells,
and transfected CDA1 localized to nuclei and nucleoli of HeLa cells.
CDA1 migrated at an apparent molecular mass of 120 kD by SDS-PAGE.

By differential display of genes upregulated by TGFB1 (190180) in a
nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell line, followed by screening a
brain cDNA library, 5-prime RACE, and genome walking, Ozbun et al.
(2001) cloned TSPYL2, which they designated DENTT. The deduced 633-amino
acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 72.8 kD. Northern blot
analysis detected a 2.7-kb DENTT transcript. Expression was high in
brain and testis, moderate in lung, mammary gland, adrenal gland, ovary,
and prostate, low in trachea, fetal brain, and fetal liver, and very low
in liver and pancreas. Expression was also detected in normal bronchial
epithelial cells and in several lung carcinomas.

GENE FUNCTION

Chai et al. (2001) demonstrated that CDA1 was phosphorylated by CDK4
(123829), CDK2 (116953), and CDK1 (CDC2; 116940) in vitro, and mutation
analysis showed that CDA1 was phosphorylated on ser20 and thr340 by CDK2
in HeLa cells. CDA1 levels were low in serum-starved HeLa cells and
increased dramatically with serum stimulation. Expression of full-length
CDA1, but not its N terminus, arrested HeLa cell growth, colony number,
cell density, and bromodeoxyuridine uptake in a dose-dependent manner.
The ability of CDA1 to arrest cell growth was abolished by mutation of
the 2 CDK consensus phosphorylation sites. Chai et al. (2001) concluded
that CDA1 is a negative regulator of cell growth whose activity is
regulated by its expression level and phosphorylation.

Wang et al. (2004) found that murine Tspyl2, which they called Cinap,
possessed nucleosome assembly activity and formed a complex with Cask
(300172) and Tbr1 (604616). Through its interaction with Cask, Cinap
regulated genes under the control of Tbr1, such as NMDA receptor
subunit-2B (NR2B; 138252) and reelin (RELN; 600514), perhaps via change
of chromatin structure. Glutamate stimulation and a proteolytic pathway
in rat hippocampal neurons regulated Cinap protein levels. Wang et al.
(2004) concluded that CINAP, CASK, and TBR1 form a transcriptional
complex and contribute to gene regulation in response to neuronal
synaptic activity.

Ozbun et al. (2001) determined that TGFB1 induced DENTT expression about
3-fold only in NSCLCs in which TGFB1 expression was also induced. DENTT
induction correlated with induction of extracellular matrix genes and
inhibition of colony formation in soft agar.

Ozbun et al. (2005) found that TGFB1 and retinoic acid individually
upregulated DENTT expression in a monkey normal lung bronchial cell line
and a human lung cancer cell line. TGFB1 together with retinoic acid
further increased DENTT expression.

Eyler et al. (2011) found that highly tumorigenic human glioma stem
cells (GSCs), but not normal neural progenitor cells, produced elevated
NO via upregulated NOS2 (NOS2A; 163730) expression. Microarray analysis
of NOS2-knockdown GSCs revealed upregulation of several genes, including
CDA1. Transfection of NOS2 in HEK293 cells inhibited CDA1 mRNA and
protein expression, and RT-PCR of several glioma xenografts confirmed an
inverse relationship between NOS2 and CDA1 expression.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the TSPYL2
gene to chromosome X (TMAP DXS1008E).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Le Gallo et al. (2012) used whole-exome sequencing to comprehensively
search for somatic mutations in 13 primary serous endometrial tumors
(see 608089), and subsequently resequenced 18 genes that were mutated in
more than 1 tumor and/or were components of an enriched functional
grouping from 40 additional serous tumors. Le Gallo et al. (2012)
identified a high frequency of somatic mutation (6%) in the TSPYL2 gene.

REFERENCE 1. Chai, Z.; Sarcevic, B.; Mawson, A.; Toh, B.-H.: SET-related cell
division autoantigen-1 (CDA1) arrests cell growth. J. Biol. Chem. 276:
33665-33674, 2001.

2. Eyler, C. E.; Wu, Q.; Yan, K.; MacSwords, J. M.; Chandler-Militello,
D.; Misuraca, K. L.; Lathia, J. D.; Forrester, M. T.; Lee, J.; Stamler,
J. S.; Goldman, S. A.; Bredel, M.; McLendon, R. E.; Sloan, A. E.;
Hjelmeland, A. B.; Rich, J. N.: Glioma stem cell proliferation and
tumor growth are promoted by nitric oxide synthase-2. Cell 146:
53-66, 2011.

3. Le Gallo, M.; O'Hara, A. J.; Rudd, M. L.; Urick, M. E.; Hansen,
N. F.; O'Neil, N. J.; Price, J. C.; Zhang, S.; England, B. M.; Godwin,
A. K.; Sgroi, D. C.; NIH Intramural Sequencing Center (NISC) Comparative
Sequencing Program; Hieter, P.; Mullikan, J. C.; Merino, M. J.; Bell,
D. W.: Exome sequencing of serous endometrial tumors identifies recurrent
somatic mutations in chromatin-remodeling and ubiquitin ligase complex
genes. Nature Genet. 44: 1310-1315, 2012.

4. Ozbun, L. L.; Martinez, A.; Jakowlew, S. B.: Differentially expressed
nucleolar TGF-beta-1 target (DENTT) shows tissue-specific nuclear
and cytoplasmic localization and increases TGF-beta-1-responsive transcription
in primates. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1728: 163-180, 2005.

5. Ozbun, L. L.; You, L.; Kiang, S.; Angdisen, J.; Martinez, A.; Jakowlew,
S. B.: Identification of differentially expressed nucleolar TGF-beta-1
target (DENTT) in human lung cancer cells that is a new member of
the TSPY/SET/NAP-1 superfamily. Genomics 73: 179-193, 2001.

6. Wang, G.-S.; Hong, C.-J.; Yen, T.-Y.; Huang, H.-Y.; Ou, Y.; Huang,
T.-N.; Jung, W.-G.; Kuo, T.-Y.; Sheng, M.; Wang, T.-F.; Hsueh, Y.-P.
: Transcriptional modification by a CASK-interacting nucleosome assembly
protein. Neuron 42: 113-128, 2004. Note: Erratum: Neuron 43: 437
only, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/7/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/9/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/11/2005

EDITED alopez: 02/07/2013
alopez: 2/7/2013
mgross: 3/12/2012
terry: 3/9/2012
mgross: 11/11/2005

603571	TITLE *603571 VANIN 2; VNN2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Mouse vanin-1 (see VNN1; 603570) is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol
(GPI)-anchored cell surface molecule that is involved in the thymus
homing of bone marrow cells. By screening cDNA libraries with a mouse
vanin-1 cDNA, Galland et al. (1998) identified a partial human cDNA
encoding vanin-2 (VNN2), a vanin-like protein. Using RACE PCR to isolate
additional cDNAs, they determined the entire VNN2 coding sequence. The
deduced VNN2 protein shares 64% sequence identity with mouse vanin-1 and
VNN1, the human homolog of mouse vanin-1. Like VNN1, VNN2 contains a
C-terminal GPI cleavage motif; however, it lacks a leader peptide. VNN2
translated in vitro migrated as a 53-kD protein. Northern blot analysis
revealed that the 2.3-kb VNN2 mRNA is expressed in spleen, thymus,
peripheral blood lymphocytes, and kidney.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization and analysis of somatic cell
hybrids, Galland et al. (1998) mapped the VNN2 gene to 6q23-q24. They
identified a YAC clone from 6q23-q24 that contained both the VNN1 and
VNN2 genes.

REFERENCE 1. Galland, F.; Malergue, F.; Bazin, H.; Mattei, M. G.; Aurrand-Lions,
M.; Theillet, C.; Naquet, P.: Two human genes related to murine vanin-1
are located on the long arm of human chromosome 6. Genomics 53:
203-213, 1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/22/1999

EDITED mgross: 10/06/2006
terry: 10/4/2006
psherman: 2/22/1999

164175	TITLE *164175 POU DOMAIN, CLASS 2, TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 1; POU2F1
;;OTF, LYMPHOID-SPECIFIC, 1; OTF1;;
OCTAMER-BINDING TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 1; OCT1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The OCT1 transcription factor was among the first identified members of
the POU transcription factor family. Members of this family contain the
POU domain, a 160-amino acid region necessary for DNA binding to the
octameric sequence ATGCAAAT (summary by Sturm et al., 1993).

CLONING

Sturm et al. (1993) obtained an OTF1 cDNA clone whose open reading frame
encoded 766 amino acids.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sturm et al. (1993) demonstrated that the OTF1 gene contains 16 exons
spanning over 150 kb.

GENE FUNCTION

POU domain proteins contain a bipartite DNA-binding domain divided by a
flexible linker that enables them to adopt various monomer
configurations on DNA. The versatility of POU protein operation is
additionally conferred at the dimerization level. Tomilin et al. (2000)
found that the POU dimer from the OCT1 gene formed on the palindromic
OCT factor recognition element, or PORE (ATTTGAAATGCAAAT), could recruit
the transcriptional coactivator OBF1 (601206), whereas POU dimers formed
on the consensus MORE (more PORE) (ATGCATATGCAT) or on MOREs from
immunoglobulin heavy chain promoters (AT[G/A][C/A]ATATGCAA) failed to
interact. An interaction with OBF1 was precluded since the same OCT1
residues that form the MORE dimerization interface are also used for
OBF1/OCT1 interactions on the PORE. These findings provided a paradigm
of how specific POU dimer assemblies can differentially recruit a
coregulatory activity with distinct transcriptional readouts.

MAPPING

Hsieh et al. (1989, 1990) used a panel of somatic cell hybrids,
including a set of hybrids containing partially overlapping regions of
chromosome 1, to assign the OCT1 gene to human chromosome 1cen-q32. In
the course of constructing a physical map of human 1q23-q25, Oakey et
al. (1992) demonstrated that OTF1 is in the midportion of this segment,
not far from CD3Z (186780).

By studies of an interspecific backcross and recombinant inbred strains,
Siracusa et al. (1991) mapped Otf-1 to mouse chromosome 1.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Sturm et al. (1995) concluded
that the OTF1 gene is located on 1q22-q23. The physical linkage of the
CD3Z gene to OTF1 means that the CD3Z gene is also located on 1q22-q23.

REFERENCE 1. Hsieh, C.-L.; Sturm, R.; Herr, W.; Francke, U.: The gene for the
ubiquitous octamer-binding protein Oct-1 is on human chromosome 1,
region cen-q32, and near Ly-22 and Ltw-4 on mouse chromosome 1. Genomics 6:
666-672, 1990.

2. Hsieh, C. L.; Sturm, R.; Herr, W.; Francke, U.: The gene for the
ubiquitous octamer-binding protein Oct-1 is on human chromosome 1,
region cen-q32, and on mouse chromosome 1. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 51: 1016 only, 1989.

3. Oakey, R. J.; Watson, M. L.; Seldin, M. F.: Construction of a
physical map on mouse and human chromosome 1: comparison of 13 Mb
of mouse and 11 Mb of human DNA. Hum. Molec. Genet. 1: 613-620,
1992.

4. Siracusa, L. D.; Rosner, M. H.; Vigano, M. A.; Gilbert, D. J.;
Staudt, L. M.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.: Chromosomal location
of the octamer transcription factors, Otf-1, Otf-2, and Otf-3, defines
multiple Otf-3-related sequences dispersed in the mouse genome. Genomics 10:
313-326, 1991.

5. Sturm, R. A.; Cassady, J. L.; Das, G.; Romo, A.; Evans, G. A.:
Chromosomal structure and expression of the human OTF1 locus encoding
the Oct-1 protein. Genomics 16: 333-341, 1993.

6. Sturm, R. A.; Eyre, H. J.; Baker, E.; Sutherland, G. R.: The human
OTF1 locus which overlaps the CD3Z gene is located at 1q22-q23. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 68: 231-232, 1995.

7. Tomilin, A.; Remenyi, A.; Lins, K.; Bak, H.; Leidel, S.; Vriend,
G.; Wilmanns, M.; Scholer, H. R.: Synergism with the coactivator
OBF-1 (OCA-B, BOB-1) is mediated by a specific POU dimer configuration. Cell 103:
853-864, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 12/18/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/22/1992

EDITED alopez: 03/07/2012
alopez: 3/5/2012
alopez: 7/14/2010
mgross: 12/18/2000
alopez: 9/5/1997
mark: 4/25/1995
carol: 5/25/1993
carol: 2/9/1993
carol: 12/22/1992

614966	TITLE *614966 SECERNIN 2; SCRN2
;;SES2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis to identify sequences similar to mouse Scrn1
(614965), Way et al. (2002) identified 2 splice variants of human SCRN2.
The deduced SCRN2 proteins contain 425 and 378 amino acids.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Way et al. (2002) mapped the SCRN2 gene to
chromosome 17q21.3.

REFERENCE 1. Way, G.; Morrice, N.; Smythe, C.; O'Sullivan, A. J.: Purification
and identification of secernin, a novel cytosolic protein that regulates
exocytosis in mast cells. Molec. Biol. Cell 13: 3344-3354, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/3/2012

EDITED mgross: 12/03/2012

613890	TITLE *613890 3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE 2; HSD3B2
;;3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE/DELTA-ISOMERASE, TYPE II;;
3-@BETA-HSD, ADRENAL AND GONADAL TYPE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

3-Beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase catalyzes the oxidation and
isomerization of delta-5-3-beta-hydroxysteroid precursors into
delta-4-ketosteroids, thus leading to the formation of all classes of
steroid hormones. The enzyme also catalyzes the interconversion of
3-beta-hydroxy- and 3-keto-5-alpha-androstane steroids. HSD3B2 is
expressed almost exclusively in adrenals and gonads, whereas HSD3B1
(109715) is expressed predominantly in placenta and skin (summary by
Rheaume et al., 1991).

CLONING

Rheaume et al. (1991) isolated and characterized a 3-beta-HSD type II
(HSD3B2) cDNA from a human adrenal cDNA library. The deduced 371-amino
acid protein shares 93.5% sequence homology with HSD3B1 (109715).

Doi et al. (2010) found that human HSD3B1 and HSD3B2 have 93.6% sequence
identity, including the 5-prime and 3-prime untranslated regions. HSD3B
subtype-specific quantitative RT-PCR analysis of mouse adrenal gland
tissues revealed that expression of mouse Hsd3b6, which is the
functional counterpart of HSD3B1, was considerably enriched in zona
glomerulosa cells of the adrenal gland, whereas expression of mouse
Hsd3b1, which is the functional counterpart of HSD3B2, was predominantly
expressed in zona fasciculata cells.

Bain et al. (1993) pointed out that 4 isoforms of the enzyme, and
presumably 4 genes, have been identified in the mouse. The possibility
of additional genes in the human was suggested.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lachance et al. (1991) determined that the HSD3B2 gene contains 4 exons.

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunohistochemistry, Goto et al. (2006) analyzed sections of
adrenal cortex from 121 human fetuses and demonstrated synthesis of
cortisol much earlier than previously documented, associated with
transient expression of the nuclear receptor NGFIB (NR4A1; 139139) and
its regulatory target, HSD3B2. Cortisol synthesis was maximal at 8 to 9
weeks postconception under the regulation of ACTH; negative feedback was
apparent at the anterior pituitary corticotrophs. ACTH also stimulated
the adrenal gland to secrete androstenedione and testosterone. Goto et
al. (2006) concluded that this represents a distinctive mechanism for
normal human development in which cortisol production, determined by
transient NGFIB and HSD3B2 expression, provides feedback at the anterior
pituitary to modulate androgen biosynthesis and safeguard normal female
sexual differentiation.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Berube et al. (1989, 1989) demonstrated that
the gene for 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/isomerase is located on
the 1p13 band. By in situ hybridization, Morrison et al. (1991, 1991)
refined the localization to 1p13.1.

Rheaume et al. (1992) demonstrated cosegregation of the BglII RFLP A1
allele of the type I 3-beta-HSD gene (HSD3B1) (Rheaume et al., 1991)
with a point mutation in the type II gene (613890.0001); thus, the 2
HSD3B genes are probably closely linked in the 1p13-p11 band.

Bain et al. (1993) demonstrated that the genes encoding the gonadal and
nongonadal forms of 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase are encoded by
closely linked genes on mouse chromosome 3. They are located within a
segment that is conserved on human chromosome 1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 3 patients with classic 3-beta-HSD deficiency from 2 apparently
unrelated pedigrees, Rheaume et al. (1992) described the nucleotide
sequence of 2 highly homologous genes encoding 3-beta-HSD isoenzymes,
types I (HSD3B1; 109715) and II (HSD3B2). No mutation was detected in
the HSD3B1 gene, which is expressed mainly in the placenta and
peripheral tissues. Both nonsense and frameshift mutations were found,
however, in the HSD3B2 gene.

Simard et al. (1996) provided a comprehensive review of the molecular
biology and genetics of this gene family.

HISTORY

Cravioto et al. (1986) suggested the existence of at least 2 3-beta-HSD
isoenzymes under separate genetic determination. Stalvey et al. (1987)
found that thermostability of 3-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase-isomerase in testes and adrenal glands from several inbred
lines of mice and feral mice was correlated in the 2 tissues. They
suggested that the testicular and adrenal forms are encoded by the same
structural gene, but that expression of enzyme activity is independently
controlled in the 2 glands since there was no correlation of
quantitative variation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, TRP171TER

In classic cases of 3-beta-HSD deficiency (201810) in 2 related families
from the same village in eastern Switzerland, Rheaume et al. (1992)
identified a G-to-A transition in exon 4 of both alleles, converting
codon 171 (TGG) encoding trp into a TAG-stop codon (W171X). Mutation was
predicted to result in a truncated protein of 169 amino acids (excluding
the first met) instead of the normal 371 amino acids of the type II
3-beta-HSD protein. One of these families, extensively described by
Zachmann et al. (1979), had severe salt-wasting. There was no
virilization in the proposita. Her older brother died at the age of 4
weeks with clinical signs of a salt-losing crisis. He was incompletely
masculinized and was found to have marked enlargement of the adrenals at
autopsy. At puberty the proposita showed lack of spontaneous breast
development and absence of a rise in serum estradiol following
administration of human menopausal gonadotropin, thus suggesting that
the defect was also present in the ovaries.

.0002
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, 1-BP INS

In a 34-year-old American male with 3-beta-HSD deficiency (201810),
Rheaume et al. (1992) found compound heterozygosity for the W171X
mutation (613890.0001) and another frameshift mutation resulting from
insertion of 1 bp, a C, between codons 186 and 187. They referred to the
mutation as 186/insC/187. The parents were not consanguineous. One male
sib with ambiguous genitalia and enlarged adrenal glands died of
respiratory distress at 2 days of age. A female paternal first cousin
with mildly ambiguous external genitalia died of diarrhea and vomiting
at the age of 2 months. The autopsy showed hyperpigmented skin and
markedly enlarged adrenal glands. Spermatogenesis was adequate in the
index case since he had fathered 2 children; one died from congenital
malformations and the other was found to be heterozygous for the
186/insC/187 mutation. The patient had marked loss of salt as well as
hypospadias and gynecomastia at puberty. Hypospadias had been noted at
the age of 1 month when the patient was found in a critically dehydrated
condition. During the first 13 years of life until replacement therapy
was initiated, the patient was admitted to hospital on 12 occasions with
adrenal insufficiency with electrolyte imbalance.

.0003
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, VAL248ASN

In a male pseudohermaphrodite with salt-wasting classic 3-beta-HSD
deficiency congenital adrenal hyperplasia (201810), Chang et al. (1993)
found in exon 4 of the HSD3B2 gene a missense mutation at codon 248, GTC
(val) was converted to AAC (asn), followed by a frameshift mutation at
codon 249 in which CGA (arg) was changed to TA, resulting in the stop
codon TAG (613890.0004). The patient, a Mexican Hispanic, was thought to
be homozygous for this unusual mutation, the genesis of which was not
understood.

.0004
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, ARG249TER

See 613890.0003 and Chang et al. (1993).

.0005
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, ALA10GLU

Alos et al. (2000) described 2 French-Canadian patients from 2 unrelated
families who presented with severe salt-wasting HSD3B deficiency
(201810) in infancy. Although the diagnosis was considered clinically,
plasma steroid profiles were confusing. Alos et al. (2000) directly
sequenced DNA fragments generated by PCR amplification of the 4 exons,
exon-intron boundaries, and the 5-prime-flanking regions of the HSD3B2
gene. Sequencing of exon 2 revealed a C-to-A transversion in both
alleles of both cases, resulting in an ala10-to-glu substitution (GCA to
GAA). This ala is highly conserved in the vertebrate HSD3B gene family
and is located in the putative NAD-binding domain of the enzyme. The
mutant HSD3B2 enzyme exhibited no detectable activity in intact
transfected Ad293 cells. Both homozygous patients shared the same
haplotype, spanning approximately 3.3 cM surrounding the HSD3B2 gene,
consistent with a founder effect for this missense mutation. The 46,XY
patient presented with ambiguous genitalia at birth and underwent normal
masculinization at puberty, but was azoospermic at 18.5 years of age.
The 46,XX patient presented progressive breast development, menarche,
and evidence of progesterone secretion.

.0006
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, TER373CYS

In a child with nonclassic presentation of 3-beta-HSD deficiency
(201810) causing premature sexual hair growth and mild growth
acceleration in childhood, Pang et al. (2002) found compound
heterozygosity for an A-to-C transversion at nucleotide 7468 in exon 4
of the HSD3B2 gene resulting in a non-stop mutation (ter373 to cys,
X373C) on the maternal allele, and a glu142-to-lys mutation on the
paternal allele (613890.0007). The X373C mutation resulted in an open
reading frame and an HSD3B2 protein containing 467 amino acid residues,
compared with the 372 amino acid residues of wildtype protein. Enzyme
activity in intact cells was decreased to 27% of wildtype by the X373C
mutant enzyme. LH (see 152780) response to an LHRH (152760) analog
stimulation in the pubertal female with the X373C/E142K genotype was
comparable to that of control females.

.0007
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, GLU142LYS

In a patient with mild 3-beta-HSD deficiency (201810), Pang et al.
(2002) detected compound heterozygosity for an X373C mutation
(613890.0006) on one allele, and a glu142-to-lys (E142K) mutation on the
other, which resulted from a C-to-A transversion in exon 4 of the HSD3B2
gene. The patient carried this mutation on the maternal allele.

.0008
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, PRO222THR

In a patient with salt-wasting 3-beta-HSD (201810) from Eastern European
Jewish parents with no family history of consanguinity, Pang et al.
(2002) found a homozygous single-nucleotide substitution at nucleotide
7031 in exon 4 of the HSD3B2 gene, which resulted in a pro-to-thr amino
acid substitution at codon 222 (P222T). In cells transfected with the
mutant protein, no enzyme activity was detected.

.0009
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, THR259MET

In 2 French sibs with salt-wasting 3-beta-HSD deficiency (201810),
Moisan et al. (1999) found a heterozygous C-to-T transition in exon 4 of
the HSD3B2 gene that converted codon 259 from thr to met (T259M). A
frameshift mutation was found on the other allele (613890.0010). The
elder sib was a male with perineal hypospadias with palpable testes in a
bifid scrotum. The younger sib, a female, had normal external genitalia
at birth.

Zhang et al. (2000) found this mutation in homozygosity in a male
pseudohermaphrodite with labial scrotal folds, microphallus, chordee,
and fourth degree hypospadias. The patient was the child of
nonconsanguineous Taiwanese parents.

.0010
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, 1-BP DEL, 867G

Moisan et al. (1999) found a frameshift mutation in the HSD3B2 gene,
867delG, in 2 French sibs with salt-wasting 3-beta-HSD deficiency
(201810). The mutation was predicted to result in a truncated protein of
299 amino acids, including the first methionine. This mutation was found
in compound heterozygosity with a missense mutation (613890.0009).

.0011
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, PRO341LEU

In a study of the functional consequences of C-terminal mutations in the
3-beta-HSD protein, Welzel et al. (2008) described a 1022C-T transition
resulting in a pro341-to-leu substitution (P341L) in a boy with
classical 3-beta-HSD deficiency (201810), born to consanguineous
Lebanese parents. At birth he presented with microphallus, broad
urogenital sinus, and palpable gonads in the groin. Steroid analysis
yielded a highly elevated basal level of 17-hydroxypregnenolone as well
as impaired cortisol synthesis. The P341L mutation showed a residual
DHEA conversion of 6% of wildtype activity. Additional analysis of
P341L, including 3-dimensional protein modeling, revealed that the
mutant's inactivity predominantly originated from a putative structural
alteration of the 3-beta-HSD protein and was further aggravated by
increased protein degradation.

REFERENCE 1. Alos, N.; Moisan, A.-M.; Ward, L.; Desrochers, M.; Legault, L.;
Leboeuf, G.; Van Vliet, G.; Simard, J.: A novel A10E homozygous mutation
in the HSD3B2 gene causing severe salt-wasting 3-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase deficiency in 46,XX and 46,XY French-Canadians: evaluation
of gonadal function after puberty. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 1968-1974,
2000.

2. Bain, P. A.; Meisler, M. H.; Taylor, B. A.; Payne, A. H.: The
genes encoding gonadal and nongonadal forms of 3-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase/delta-5-delta-4 isomerase are closely linked on mouse
chromosome 3. Genomics 16: 219-223, 1993.

3. Berube, D.; Luu The, V.; Lachance, Y.; Gagne, R.; Labrie, F.:
The gene encoding human 3-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/isomerase
mapped to the p13 band of chromosome 1. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 51: 962 only, 1989.

4. Berube, D.; Luu The, V.; Lachance, Y.; Gagne, R.; Labrie, F.:
Assignment of the human 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase gene (HSDB3)
to the p13 band of chromosome 1. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 52: 199-200,
1989.

5. Chang, Y. T.; Kappy, M. S.; Iwamoto, K.; Wang, J.; Yang, X.; Pang,
S.: Mutations in the type II 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
gene in a patient with classic salt-wasting 3-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase deficiency congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Pediat.
Res. 34: 698-700, 1993.

6. Cravioto, M. D.; Ulloa-Aguirre, A.; Bermudez, J. A.; Herrera, J.;
Lisker, R.; Mendez, J. P.; Perez-Palacios, G.: A new inherited variant
of the 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-isomerase deficiency syndrome:
evidence for the existence of two isoenzymes. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 63:
360-367, 1986.

7. Doi, M.; Takahashi, Y.; Komatsu, R.; Yamazaki, F.; Yamada, H.;
Haraguchi, S.; Emoto, N.; Okuno, Y.; Tsujimoto, G.; Kanematsu, A.;
Ogawa, O.; Todo, T.; Tsutsui, K.; van der Horst, G. T. J.; Okamura,
H.: Salt-sensitive hypertension in circadian clock-deficient Cry-null
mice involves dysregulated adrenal Hsd3b6. Nature Med. 16: 67-74,
2010.

8. Goto, M.; Hanley, K. P.; Marcos, J.; Wood, P. J.; Wright, S.; Postle,
A. D.; Cameron, I. T.; Mason, J. I.; Wilson, D. I.; Hanley, N. A.
: In humans, early cortisol biosynthesis provides a mechanism to safeguard
female sexual development. J. Clin. Invest. 116: 953-960, 2006.

9. Lachance, Y.; Luu-The, V.; Verreault, H.; Dumont, M.; Rheaume,
E.; Leblanc, G.; Labrie, F.: Structure of the human type II 3 beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase/delta 5-delta 4 isomerase (3 beta-HSD) gene: adrenal
and gonadal specificity. DNA Cell Biol. 10: 701-711, 1991.

10. Moisan, A. M.; Ricketts, M. L.; Tardy, V.; Desrochers, M.; Mebarki,
F.; Chaussain, J.-L.; Cabrol, S.; Raux-Demay, M. C.; Forest, M. G.;
Sippell, W. G.; Peter, M.; Morel, Y.; Simard, J.: New insight into
the molecular basis of 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency:
identification of eight mutations in the HSD3B2 gene in eleven patients
from seven new families and comparison of the functional properties
of twenty-five mutant enzymes. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 4410-4425,
1999.

11. Morrison, N.; Nickson, D. A.; McBride, M.; Mueller, U. W.; Boyd,
E.; Sutcliffe, R. G.: Regional chromosomal assignment of the human
3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/delta 5-4 isomerase (HSDB3) to
1p13.1. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 58: 1860 only, 1991.

12. Morrison, N.; Nickson, D. A.; McBride, M. W.; Mueller, U. W.;
Boyd, E.; Sutcliffe, R. G.: Regional chromosomal assignment of human
3-beta-hydroxy-5-ene steroid dehydrogenase to 1p13.1 by non-isotopic
in situ hybridisation. Hum. Genet. 87: 223-225, 1991.

13. Pang, S.; Wang, W.; Rich, B.; David, R.; Chang, Y. T.; Carbunaru,
G.; Myers, S. E.; Howie, A. F.; Smillie, K. J.; Mason, J. I.: A novel
nonstop mutation in the stop codon and a novel missense mutation in
the type II 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3-beta-HSD) gene
causing, respectively, nonclassic and classic 3-beta-HSD deficiency
congenital adrenal hyperplasia. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 2556-2563,
2002.

14. Rheaume, E.; Lachance, Y.; Zhao, H. F.; Breton, N.; Dumont, M.;
de Launoit, Y.; Trudel, C.; Luu-The, V.; Simard, J.; Labrie, F.:
Structure and expression of a new complementary DNA encoding the almost
exclusive 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/delta 5-delta 4-isomerase
in human adrenals and gonads. Molec. Endocr. 5: 1147-1157, 1991.

15. Rheaume, E.; Leblanc, J. F.; Lachance, Y.; Labrie, F.; Simard,
J.: Detection of frequent BglII polymorphism by polymerase chain
reaction and TaqI restriction fragment length polymorphism for 3-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase/delta-5-delta-4 isomerase at the human HSD-beta-3 locus
(1p11-p13). Hum. Genet. 87: 753-754, 1991.

16. Rheaume, E.; Simard, J.; Morel, Y.; Mebarki, F.; Zachmann, M.;
Forest, M. G.; New, M. I.; Labrie, F.: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
due to point mutations in the type II 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
gene. Nature Genet. 1: 239-245, 1992.

17. Simard, J.; Durocher, F.; Mebarki, F.; Turgeon, C.; Sanchez, R.;
Labrie, Y.; Couet, J.; Trudel, C.; Rheaume, E.; Morel, Y.; Luu-The,
V.; Labrie, F.: Molecular biology and genetics of the 3-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase/delta-5-delta-4 isomerase gene family. J. Endocr. 150:
S189-S207, 1996.

18. Stalvey, J. R. D.; Meisler, M. H.; Payne, A. H.: Evidence that
the same structural gene encodes testicular and adrenal 3-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase-isomerase. Biochem. Genet. 25: 181-190, 1987.

19. Welzel, M.; Wustemann, N.; Simic-Schleicher, G.; Dorr, H. G.;
Schulze, E.; Shaikh, G.; Clayton, P.; Grotzinger, J.; Holterhus, P.-M.;
Riepe, F. G.: Carboxyl-terminal mutations in 3-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type II cause severe salt-wasting congenital adrenal
hyperplasia. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 93: 1418-1425, 2008.

20. Zachmann, M.; Forest, M. G.; De Peretti, E.: 3 beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase deficiency: follow-up study in a girl with pubertal
bone age. Hormone Res. 11: 292-302, 1979.

21. Zhang, L.; Mason, J. I.; Naiki, Y.; Copeland, K. C.; Castro-Magana,
M.; Gordon-Walker, T. T.; Chang, Y. T.; Pang, S.: Characterization
of two novel homozygous missense mutations involving codon 6 and 259
of type II 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3-beta-HSD) gene causing,
respectively, nonsalt-wasting and salt-wasting 3-beta-HSD deficiency
disorder. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 1678-1685, 2000.

CREATED Anne M. Stumpf: 4/11/2011

EDITED terry: 05/11/2011
carol: 4/21/2011
alopez: 4/12/2011

606343	TITLE *606343 POLYMERASE, DNA, LAMBDA; POLL
DESCRIPTION DNA polymerases can participate in both replication of the genome and
DNA repair processes. The human genome contains multiple DNA polymerase
genes.

CLONING

By searching sequence databases to identify new members of the polX
family, Aoufouchi et al. (2000) identified EST clones representing 2 DNA
polymerases, POLM (606344) and POLL, which they called pol mu and pol
lambda, respectively. By screening bone marrow and lymph node cDNA
libraries, they isolated a full-length POLL cDNA. POLL encodes a deduced
575-amino acid protein predicted to contain a polX domain, a BRCA-1
C-terminal (BRCT) domain, and 2 helix-hairpin-helix (HHH) DNA-binding
motifs. POLL structurally resembles terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase
(TDT; 187410). It shares 34% amino acid identity with DNA polymerase
beta (POLB; 174760) and 82% identity with mouse Poll. Aoufouchi et al.
(2000) found that POLL has template-dependent DNA polymerase activity in
vitro. Northern blot analysis detected a 2.7-kb POLL transcript with
highest expression in testis and fetal liver and very weak expression in
many other tissues. They identified POLL splice variants which they
considered to be nonfunctional. Using semiquantitative RT-PCR
amplification, Aoufouchi et al. (2000) concluded that POLL mRNA
expression is downregulated in a dose- and time-dependent manner upon
cell exposure to DNA damaging agents.

Aoufouchi et al. (2000) provided a phylogenetic comparison of yeast and
human proteins of the polX family.

GENE STRUCTURE

Aoufouchi et al. (2000) determined that POLL is encoded by 8 exons and
spans approximately 9 kb of genomic DNA.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the POLL
gene to human chromosome 10 (TMAP sts-W69567).

REFERENCE 1. Aoufouchi, S.; Flatter, E.; Dahan, A.; Faili, A.; Bertocci, B.;
Storck, S.; Delbos, F.; Cocea, L.; Gupta, N.; Weill, J.-C.; Reynaud,
C.-A.: Two novel human and mouse DNA polymerases of the polX family. Nucleic
Acids Res. 28: 3684-3693, 2000.

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 10/1/2001

EDITED carol: 10/02/2001

613941	TITLE *613941 SERINE PROTEASE INHIBITOR, KUNITZ-TYPE, 3; SPINT3
DESCRIPTION 
MAPPING

By analysis of a BAC/YAC contig, genomic sequence analysis, and database
analysis, Fossey et al. (2001) mapped the SPINT3 gene to chromosome
20q12-q13.1.

REFERENCE 1. Fossey, S. C.; Mychaleckyj, J. C.; Pendleton, J. K.; Snyder, J.
R.; Bensen, J. T.; Hirakawa, S.; Rich, S. S.; Freedman, B. I.; Bowden,
D. W.: A high-resolution 6.0-megabase transcript map of the type
2 diabetes susceptibility region on human chromosome 20. Genomics 76:
45-57, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/27/2011

EDITED mgross: 04/27/2011

