142709	TITLE *142709 HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H1 HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER A; HIST1H1A
;;HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H1A;;
HIST1 CLUSTER, H1A;;
H1A;;
H1.1;;
H1 HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER 1, FORMERLY; H1F1, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The nucleosome is the fundamental repeat unit of eukaryotic chromatin.
The nucleosome core particle consists of an octamer formed by 2 each of
the core histones H2A (see 613499), H2B (see 609904), H3 (see 602810),
and H4 (see 602822), around which DNA is wrapped. A fifth histone, the
linker H1 histone, completes the nucleosome by interacting with DNA
entering and exiting the nucleosome core particle. H1 histones, such as
HIST1H1A, are involved in the formation of higher order chromatin
structures, and they modulate the accessibility of regulatory proteins,
chromatin-remodeling factors, and histone modification enzymes to their
target sites (reviewed by Izzo et al. (2008) and Happel and Doenecke
(2009)).

For additional background information on histones, histone gene
clusters, and the H1 histone family, see GENE FAMILY below.

GENE FAMILY

The H1 histone family is the most divergent class of histones, with at
least 11 different H1 histones present in humans. H1 histones have a
tripartite structure that consists of a short N-terminal domain enriched
in basic amino acids, a central conserved globular domain involved in
DNA binding, and a long C-terminal tail enriched in lysine, serine, and
proline. Like other histones, H1 histones can be subgrouped according to
their temporal expression. Replication-dependent histones, such as H1.1
through H1.5 (HIST1HB; 142711) and H1T (HIST1H1T; 142712), are mainly
expressed during S phase. In contrast, replication-independent histones,
or replacement histones, such as H1.0 (H1F0; 142708), H1T2 (H1FNT), H1OO
(H1FOO), H1X (H1FX; 602785), and HILS1 (608101), are expressed
throughout the cell cycle. All replication-dependent H1 histone genes,
as well as other core histone genes, are located within histone gene
cluster-1 (HIST1) on chromosome 6p22-p21. Two other histone gene
clusters, HIST2 and HIST3, are located on chromosomes 1q21 and 1q42,
respectively, but they are devoid of H1 genes. In mouse, the Hist1,
Hist2, and Hist3 gene clusters are located on chromosomes 13A2-A3,
3F1-F2, and 11B2, respectively. All replication-dependent histone genes
are intronless, and they encode mRNAs that lack a poly(A) tail, ending
instead in a conserved stem-loop sequence. Unlike replication-dependent
histone genes, replication-independent histone genes are solitary genes
that are located on chromosomes apart from any other H1 or core histone
genes. Some replication-independent histone genes contain introns and
encode mRNAs with poly(A) tails. H1 histones, as well as core histones,
can also be subgrouped based on their spatial expression. Somatic H1
histones (H1.1 through H1.5 and H1X) are expressed ubiquitously, whereas
other H1 histones are expressed mainly in terminally differentiated
cells (H1.0) or in germ cells (H1T, H1T2, H1OO, and HILS1) (summary by
Marzluff et al. (2002), Izzo et al. (2008), and Happel and Doenecke
(2009)).

CLONING

Eick et al. (1989) cloned the genes encoding H1.1 and H1.2 (HIST1H1C;
142710).

Using Northern blot analysis, Burfeind et al. (1994) found that the H1.1
gene was expressed in testis and thymus, but not in other human tissues.
In testis, it was restricted to early round spermatids that belonged to
the fraction of postmeiotic sperm cells. Burfeind et al. (1994) found
that the H1.1 gene is highly conserved in higher primates, whereas no
cross-hybridization could be detected with DNA from other mammalian
species, such as mouse, rat, hamster, and bull.

GENE FUNCTION

Histone H1 functions in the compaction of chromatin into higher order
structures derived from the repeating 'beads-on-a-string' nucleosome
polymer. Modulation of H1 binding activity is thought to be an important
step in the potentiation/depotentiation of chromatin structure for
transcription. It is generally accepted that H1 binds less tightly than
other histones to DNA in chromatin and can readily exchange in living
cells. Fusion proteins of histone H1 and green fluorescent protein (GFP)
have been shown to associate with chromatin in an apparently identical
fashion to native histone H1, providing a means by which to study
histone H1-chromatin interactions in living cells. Lever et al. (2000)
used human cells with a stably integrated H1.1-GFP fusion protein to
monitor histone H1 movement directly by fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching in living cells. They found that exchange is rapid in
both condensed and decondensed chromatin, occurs throughout the cell
cycle, and does not require fiber-fiber interactions. Treatment with
drugs that alter protein phosphorylation significantly reduced exchange
rates. Lever et al. (2000) concluded that histone H1 exchange in vivo is
rapid, occurs through a soluble intermediate, and is modulated by the
phosphorylation of a protein or proteins as yet to be determined.

Using techniques similar to those of Lever et al. (2000), Misteli et al.
(2000) showed that almost the entire population of H1-GFP is bound to
chromatin at any 1 time; however, H1-GFP is exchanged continuously
between chromatin regions. The residence time of H1-GFP on chromatin
between exchange events is several minutes in both euchromatin and
heterochromatin. In addition to the mobile fraction, Misteli et al.
(2000) detected a kinetically distinct, less mobile fraction. After
hyperacetylation of core histones, the residence time of H1-GFP was
reduced, suggesting a higher rate of exchange upon chromatin remodeling.
Misteli et al. (2000) concluded that their results support a model in
which linker histones bind dynamically to chromatin in a stop-and-go
mode.

Hizume et al. (2005) noted that addition of histone H1 to reconstituted
nucleosomes represses transcriptional activity and prevents sliding of
core histones along DNA. They used nucleosome core particles and histone
H1 purified from HeLa cells for in vitro nucleosome reconstitution
assays. Under optimal salt concentrations, nucleosome core particles
alone formed beads-on-a-string chromatin fibers on plasmid DNA. However,
addition of purified histone H1 induced higher order folding in a
concentration-dependent manner. Hizume et al. (2005) proposed a model of
chromatin fiber formation where fiber compaction is dependent on both
the local salt environment and histone H1 availability.

Krishnakumar et al. (2008) used genomic and gene-specific approaches to
show that 2 factors, histone H1 and PARP1 (173870), exhibit a reciprocal
pattern of chromatin binding at many RNA polymerase II-transcribed
promoters. PARP1 was enriched and H1 was depleted at these promoters.
This pattern of binding was associated with actively transcribed genes.
Furthermore, Krishnakumar et al. (2008) showed that PARP1 acts to
exclude H1 from a subset of PARP1-stimulated promoters, suggesting a
functional interplay between PARP1 and H1 at the level of nucleosome
binding. Krishnakumar et al. (2008) concluded that although H1 and PARP1
have similar nucleosome-binding properties and effects on chromatin
structure in vitro, they have distinct roles in determining gene
expression in vivo.

- Reviews

Doenecke et al. (1994) reviewed the organization and expression of H1
histone and H1 replacement histone genes.

Izzo et al. (2008) reviewed the H1 histone family and discussed specific
roles of H1 proteins that challenged the concept of H1 being a mere
structural component of chromatin and a general repressor of
transcription.

Happel and Doenecke (2009) reviewed the structural and functional
aspects of H1 histones, with an emphasis on the structural role and
impact of H1 histones on the functional state of chromatin.

MAPPING

By PCR analysis of chromosomal DNA from a panel of human/rodent somatic
cell hybrids, Albig et al. (1993) found that 5 human H1 histone genes,
H1.1 through H1.5, and the gene encoding the testis-specific H1T subtype
are located on chromosome 6. They found that the H1.0 subtype, which is
not neighbored by core histone genes, maps to chromosome 22. By
fluorescence in situ hybridization with human metaphase chromosomes and
PCR analysis of somatic cell hybrid DNAs carrying only fragments of
chromosome 6, they demonstrated that the histone genes are clustered in
the 6p22.2-p21.1 region.

By PCR analysis of human/rodent cell hybrid DNAs, Burfeind et al. (1994)
confirmed the localization of histone H1.1 to chromosome 6 and by
radioactive in situ hybridization regionalized the locus to 6p21.3.

Through detailed localization of the H1 histone genes with radiation
hybrids and long range pulsed field gel electrophoresis, Volz et al.
(1997) found that the histone genes on the short arm of chromosome 6 are
organized into 2 clusters. The major cluster at 6p22-p21.3 contains 32
histone genes, including the H1 genes H1.1, H1.2, H1.3 (HIST1H1D;
142210), H1.4 (HIST1H1E; 142220), and H1T, numerous core histone genes,
and the HFE gene (613609).

By analysis of a YAC contig, Albig et al. (1997) mapped the H1.1 gene to
chromosome 6p21.3 within a cluster of 35 histone genes, including H1.1
to H1.4 and H1T. They found that the H1.5 gene is located in a second
cluster on 6p about 2 Mb centromeric of the major cluster. In a contig
of the histone gene-containing cosmids from this second cluster on
chromosome 6p, Albig and Doenecke (1997) found 1 H1 gene (H1.5), 5 H2A
genes, 4 H2B genes, 1 H2B pseudogene, 3 H3 genes, 3 H4 genes, and 1 H4
pseudogene. The cluster extends about 80 kb with a nonordered
arrangement of the histone genes. The dinucleotide repeat polymorphic
marker D6S105 was localized at the telomeric end of this histone gene
cluster. Almost all human histone genes isolated to that time had been
localized within the 2 clusters on 6p or in a small group of histone
genes on chromosome 1.

Albig and Doenecke (1997) reviewed the organization of histone genes in
mouse. Both the human and mouse histone gene clusters are found on 2
chromosomes and have nearly the same composition and number of genes.
The 2 histone gene clusters on human chromosome 6p correspond to 2
clusters located on mouse chromosome 13. The relative localization of
the histone H1 and H3 genes appears to be highly conserved. The 2
clusters are 0.6 Mb apart in mouse and 2 Mb apart in human. A third
cluster of mouse histone genes on chromosome 3 corresponds to the group
of human genes located on chromosome 1. The authors stated that, to that
time, a total of 55 clustered histone genes had been identified in
mouse. Albig and Doenecke (1997) gave a pictorial representation of the
mapping of the other histone genes as well as a tabular summary of human
histone gene sequences deposited in the EMBL nucleotide sequence
database.

By genomic sequence analysis, Marzluff et al. (2002) determined that the
HIST1 cluster on chromosome 6p22-p21 contains 55 histone genes,
including all 6 replication-dependent H1 genes. The HIST1 cluster spans
over 2 Mb and includes 2 large gaps (over 250 kb each) where there are
no histone genes, but many other genes. The organization of histone
genes in the mouse Hist1 cluster on chromosome 13A2-A3 is essentially
identical to that in human HIST1. The HIST2 cluster on chromosome 1q21
contains 6 histone genes, and the HIST3 cluster on chromosome 1q42
contains 3 histone genes. Hist2 and Hist3 are located on mouse
chromosomes 3F1-F2 and 11B2, respectively.

NOMENCLATURE

Marzluff et al. (2002) provided a nomenclature for replication-dependent
histone genes located within the HIST1, HIST2, and HIST3 clusters. The
symbols for these genes all begin with HIST1, HIST2, or HIST3 according
to which cluster they are located in. The H1 genes, all of which are
located within HIST1, were named according to their mouse homologs.
Thus, HIST1H1A is homologous to mouse H1a, HIST1H1B is homologous to
mouse H1b, and so on. In contrast, the H2A, H2B, H3, and H4 genes were
named systematically according to their location within the HIST1,
HIST2, and HIST3 clusters. For example, HIST1H4A (602822) is the most
telomeric H4 gene within HIST1, and HIST1H4L (602831) is the most
centromeric.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Hardin and Thomas (1983)
REFERENCE 1. Albig, W.; Doenecke, D.: The human histone gene cluster at the
D6S105 locus. Hum. Genet. 101: 284-294, 1997.

2. Albig, W.; Drabent, B.; Kunz, J.; Kalff-Suske, M.; Grzeschik, K.-H.;
Doenecke, D.: All known human H1 histone genes except the H1(0) gene
are clustered on chromosome 6. Genomics 16: 649-654, 1993.

3. Albig, W.; Kioschis, P.; Poustka, A.; Meergans, K.; Doenecke, D.
: Human histone gene organization: nonregular arrangement within a
large cluster. Genomics 40: 314-322, 1997.

4. Burfeind, P.; Hoyer-Fender, S.; Doenecke, D.; Hochhuth, C.; Engel,
W.: Expression and chromosomal mapping of the gene encoding the human
histone H1.1. Hum. Genet. 94: 633-639, 1994.

5. Doenecke, D.; Albig, W.; Bouterfa, H.; Drabent, B.: Organization
and expression of H1 histone and H1 replacement histone genes. J.
Cell. Biochem. 54: 423-431, 1994.

6. Eick, S.; Nicolai, M.; Mumberg, D.; Doenecke, D.: Human H1 histones:
conserved and varied sequence elements in two H1 subtype genes. Europ.
J. Cell Biol. 49: 110-115, 1989.

7. Happel, N.; Doenecke, D.: Histone H1 and its isoforms: contribution
to chromatin structure and function. Gene 431: 1-12, 2009.

8. Hardin, J. A.; Thomas, J. O.: Antibodies to histones in systemic
lupus erythematosus: localization of prominent autoantigens on histones
H1 and H2B. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 7410-7414, 1983.

9. Hizume, K.; Yoshimura, S. H.; Takeyasu, K.: Linker histone H1
per se can induce three-dimensional folding of chromatin fiber. Biochemistry 44:
12978-12989, 2005.

10. Izzo, A.; Kamieniarz, K.; Schneider, R.: The histone H1 family:
specific members, specific functions? Biol. Chem. 389: 333-343,
2008.

11. Krishnakumar, R.; Gamble, M. J.; Frizzell, K. M.; Berrocal, J.
G.; Kininis, M.; Kraus, W. L.: Reciprocal binding of PARP-1 and histone
H1 at promoters specifies transcriptional outcomes. Science 319:
819-821, 2008.

12. Lever, M. A.; Th'ng, J. P. H.; Sun, X.; Hendzel, M. J.: Rapid
exchange of histone H1.1 on chromatin in living human cells. Nature 408:
873-876, 2000.

13. Marzluff, W. F.; Gongidi, P.; Woods, K. R.; Jin, J.; Maltais,
L. J.: The human and mouse replication-dependent histone genes. Genomics 80:
487-498, 2002.

14. Misteli, T.; Gunjan, A.; Hock, R.; Bustin, M.; Brown, D. T.:
Dynamic binding of histone H1 to chromatin in living cells. Nature 408:
877-881, 2000.

15. Volz, A.; Albig, W.; Doenecke, D.; Ziegler, A.: Physical mapping
of the region around the large histone gene cluster on human chromosome
6p22.2. DNA Seq. 8: 173-180, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/23/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/26/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/21/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 7/8/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/28/1993

EDITED mgross: 02/08/2013
mgross: 1/11/2013
carol: 10/21/2010
mgross: 6/24/2010
mgross: 6/23/2010
mgross: 5/26/2010
tkritzer: 3/31/2003
carol: 12/23/2000
terry: 12/21/2000
alopez: 8/26/1998
alopez: 7/14/1998
alopez: 7/8/1998
alopez: 2/11/1998
mark: 9/22/1996
carol: 1/12/1995
carol: 6/28/1993

607402	TITLE *607402 INTERFERON, LAMBDA-3; IFNL3
;;INTERLEUKIN 28B; IL28B
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

IL28B is a class II cytokine receptor (e.g., IFNAR1; 107450) ligand
related to type I interferons (e.g., IFNA2; 147562). These ligands play
a critical role in response to microbial challenge and activate the JAK
(e.g., JAK1; 147795)/STAT (e.g., STAT1; 600555) signaling system
(Sheppard et al., 2003).

CLONING

By genomic sequence analysis, Sheppard et al. (2003) identified genes
encoding IL28A (607401), IL28B, and IL29 (607403). The deduced 200-amino
acid IL28B protein is 96% identical to IL28A and 81% identical to IL29,
but it shares only low homology with IL10 (124092), IFNA2, and IL22
(605330). IL28B has a conserved cysteine pattern and amphipathic profile
similar to other helical cytokine family members.

GENE FUNCTION

By RT-PCR analysis, Sheppard et al. (2003) determined that treatment of
mononuclear cells and other cell types with double-stranded RNA or viral
infection induced transcription of IL28 and IL29. Addition of IL28,
IL29, or IFNA2 also induced protection from virus challenge infection,
but IL28 and IL29 did not display antiproliferative activity. Luciferase
reporter analysis indicated that IL28 and IL29 signal through
IFN-stimulated response elements. However, IL28 and IL29 did not bind to
IFNAR1, but instead bound to and signaled through a novel receptor,
IL28RA (607404), partnered with IL10RB (123889). Sheppard et al. (2003)
proposed that IL28 and IL29 represent an evolutionary link between type
I IFNs and the IL10 family and may serve as an alternative therapeutic
choice to type I IFNs.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Sheppard et al. (2003) determined that the
IL28B gene contains 6 exons, in contrast to the related type I IFNs,
which are encoded by a single exon. Analysis of 5-prime regulatory
regions suggested the presence of DNA-binding elements involved in type
I IFN regulation.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Sheppard et al. (2003) mapped the IL28A,
IL28B, and IL29 genes to chromosome 19q13.13, a localization distinct
from that of the related type I IFNs, which are colocalized on
chromosome 9.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Association with Hepatitis C Virus Treatment Response

Chronic infection with hepatitis C virus (HCV; see 609532) affects 170
million people worldwide and is the leading cause of cirrhosis in North
America. The recommended treatment for chronic HCV infection involves a
48-week course of pegylated interferon-alpha-2b or -alpha-2a combined
with ribavirin (RBV). However, many patients are not cured by treatment,
and patients of European ancestry have a significantly higher
probability of being cured than patients of African ancestry. Ge et al.
(2009) performed a genomewide association study on more than 1,600
individuals chronically infected with HCV who were participating in a
clinical treatment trial. They identified a SNP 3 kb upstream of the
IL28B gene, dbSNP rs12979860, that was strongly associated with
sustained virologic response (SVR), defined as the absence of detectable
virus at the end of follow-up evaluation. The CC genotype of dbSNP
rs12979860 was associated with an approximately 2-fold greater rate of
SVR compared with the TT genotype, both among patients of European
ancestry (P of 1.06 x 10(-25)) and African Americans (P of 2.06 x
10(-3)). Because the CC genotype was substantially more frequent in
European than African populations, Ge et al. (2009) estimated that dbSNP
rs12979860 could explain approximately half of the difference in SVR
between African Americans and patients of European ancestry. They
sequenced the IL28B gene in 96 individuals and identified 2 variants
that were highly associated with dbSNP rs12979860: a G-C SNP 37 bp
upstream of the translation initiation codon (dbSNP rs28416183), and a
nonsynonymous coding SNP that produces a lys70-to-arg (K70R)
substitution (dbSNP rs8103142). Ge et al. (2009) could not resolve
which, if any, of these 3 SNPs was uniquely responsible for the
association with SVR and suggested that functional studies were needed.

To address the role of dbSNP rs12979860 in HCV clearance, Thomas et al.
(2009) genotyped 1,008 people from 6 independent HCV cohorts. The
frequency of the C allele was greater in individuals of European than
those of African ancestry in both HCV clearance (P of 3 x 10(-10)) and
persistence (P of 1 x 10(-21)) groups. However, the frequency of the C
allele versus the T allele was much greater in the clearance group in
both ethnic groups, with frequencies of 80.3% versus 66.7%,
respectively, in individuals of European ancestry (P of 7 x 10(-8)) and
56.2% versus 37%, respectively, in individuals of African ancestry (P of
1 x 10(-5)). Patients with the CC genotype were 3 times more likely to
clear HCV relative to patients with CT and TT genotypes combined (OR =
0.33, P = 10(-12) for combined ethnic groups), and the protective effect
of the C allele seemed to be recessive. The protective effect of the C
allele was independent of human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis B
virus surface antigen status, route of HCV acquisition, and other known
host genetic factors. Genotyping of populations worldwide showed that
the C allele was nearly fixed throughout east Asia, had an intermediate
frequency in Europe, and was a minor allele in Africa. The frequencies
in Central and South America were also intermediate, suggesting
selective pressure since migration from Asia. Thomas et al. (2009) noted
that dbSNP rs12979860 is in strong linkage disequilibrium with a
nonsynonymous coding SNP, dbSNP rs8103142, that could alter the function
of IL28B and explain the association, but that tests for functional
differences were needed to define the biologic mechanism. Thomas et al.
(2009) concluded that dbSNP rs12979860 is associated with both HCV
treatment response and with natural clearance of HCV.

To identify genetic variants associated with HCV treatment response,
Suppiah et al. (2009) conducted a genomewide association study of SVR to
PEG-IFN-alpha/RBV combination therapy in 293 Australian individuals with
genotype 1 chronic hepatitis C, with validation in an independent
replication cohort consisting of 555 individuals. They reported an
association to SVR with the SNP dbSNP rs8099917 (combined P = 9.25 x
10(-9), OR = 1.98, 95% CI = 1.57-2.52), within the gene region encoding
IL28B. IL28B contributes to viral resistance and is known to be
upregulated by interferons and by RNA virus infection. Suppiah et al.
(2009) concluded that their data suggested that host genetics may be
useful for the prediction of drug response, and also supported the
investigation of the role of IL28B in the treatment of HCV and in other
diseases treated with IFNA.

Tanaka et al. (2009) reported a genomewide association study to null
virologic response (NVR) in the treatment of patients with hepatitis C
virus genotype 1 within a Japanese population. Tanaka et al. (2009)
found 2 SNPs near the gene IL28B on chromosome 19 to be strongly
associated with NVR (dbSNP rs12980275, P = 1.93 x 10(-13), and dbSNP
rs8099917, P = 3.11 x 10(-15)). Tanaka et al. (2009) replicated these
associations in an independent cohort (combined P values, 2.84 x 10(-27)
(OR = 17.7; 95% CI = 10.0-31.3) and 2.68 x 10(-32) (OR = 27.1; 95% CI =
14.6-50.3), respectively). These SNPs were also associated with SVR
(dbSNP rs12980275, P = 3.99 x 10(-24), and dbSNP rs8099917, P = 1.11 x
10(-27)). In further fine mapping of the region, 7 SNPs located in the
IL28B region showed the most significant associations (P = 5.52 x
10(-28) to 2.68 x 10(-32); OR = 22.3-27.1). Real-time quantitative PCR
assays in peripheral blood mononuclear cells showed lower IL28B
expression levels in individuals carrying the minor alleles (P = 0.015).

REFERENCE 1. Ge, D.; Fellay, J.; Thompson, A. J.; Simon, J. S.; Shianna, K.
V.; Urban, T. J.; Heinzen, E. L.; Qiu, P.; Bertelsen, A. H.; Muir,
A. J.; Sulkowski, M.; McHutchison, J. G.; Goldstein, D. B.: Genetic
variation in IL28B predicts hepatitis C treatment-induced viral clearance. Nature 461:
399-401, 2009.

2. Sheppard, P.; Kindsvogel, W.; Xu, W.; Henderson, K.; Schlutsmeyer,
S.; Whitmore, T. E.; Kuestner, R.; Garrigues, U.; Birks, C.; Roraback,
J.; Ostrander, C.; Dong, D.; and 14 others: IL-28, IL-29 and their
class II cytokine receptor IL-28R. Nature Immun. 4: 63-68, 2003.

3. Suppiah, V.; Moldovan, M.; Ahlenstiel, G.; Berg, T.; Weltman, M.;
Abate, M. L.; Bassendine, M.; Spengler, U.; Dore, G. J.; Powell, E.;
Riordan, S.; Sheridan, D.; Smedile, A.; Fragomeli, V.; Muller, T.;
Bahlo, M.; Stewart, G. J.; Booth, D. R.; George, J.: IL28B is associated
with response to chronic hepatitis C interferon-alpha and ribavirin
therapy. Nature Genet. 41: 1100-1104, 2009.

4. Tanaka, Y.; Nishida, N.; Sugiyama, M.; Kurosaki, M.; Matsuura,
K.; Sakamoto, N.; Nakagawa, M.; Korenaga, M.; Hino, K.; Hige, S.;
Ito, Y.; Mita, E.; and 17 others: Genome-wide association of IL28B
with response to pegylated interferon-alpha and ribavirin therapy
for chronic hepatitis C. Nature Genet. 41: 1105-1109, 2009.

5. Thomas, D. L.; Thio, C. L.; Martin, M. P.; Qi, Y.; Ge, D.; O'hUigin,
C.; Kidd, J.; Kidd, K.; Khakoo, S. I.; Alexander, G.; Goedert, J.
J.; Kirk, G. D.; Donfield, S. M.; Rosen, H. R.; Tobler, L. H.; Busch,
M. P.; McHutchison, J. G.; Goldstein, D. B.; Carrington, M.: Genetic
variation in IL28B and spontaneous clearance of hepatitis C virus. Nature 461:
798-801, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/12/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/15/2009

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/5/2002

EDITED mgross: 02/12/2013
alopez: 2/22/2010
alopez: 1/14/2010
terry: 1/12/2010
mgross: 10/15/2009
mgross: 1/9/2003
alopez: 1/9/2003
mgross: 12/5/2002

608726	TITLE *608726 PHOSPHATASE AND ACTIN REGULATOR 4; PHACTR4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching databases for sequences similar to rat Phactr1 (608723),
Allen et al. (2004) identified a family of 4 PHACTR genes in mouse and
human, including PHACTR4. The PHACTR proteins share highest similarity
in sequences surrounding the N- and C-terminal RPEL repeats and in the
C-terminal actin- and protein phosphatase-1 (PP1; see 176875)-binding
domains. In situ hybridization of rat brain showed Phactr4 highly
expressed in periventricular regions, cerebellum, and hippocampus.

GENE FUNCTION

Allen et al. (2004) determined that mouse Phactr4 coprecipitated with
both PP1 and actin following expression in human embryonic kidney cells.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PHACTR4
gene to chromosome 1 (TMAP SHGC-74491).

ANIMAL MODEL

Using N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea mutagenesis screens, Kim et al. (2007)
isolated the 'humpty dumpty' (humdy) mutant mouse line, which showed
failure to close the neural tube and optic fissure, causing exencephaly
and retinal coloboma. Homozygous humdy embryos exhibited complete
exencephaly, and most died by embryonic day 14.5, although a few
survived to birth and died shortly thereafter. About 8% of heterozygous
embryos displayed a midbrain-specific exencephaly, indicating an
incompletely penetrant dominant effect. Humdy was due to a missense
mutation in the Pp1-binding domain of Phactr4 that specifically
disrupted binding of Pp1 to Phactr4, leading to increased inhibitory
phosphorylation of thr320 on Pp1 in the ventral neural tube and eye and
disruption of Pp1 activity toward its target, Rb (RB1; 614041).
Consequently, Rb became hyperphosphorylated and inactivated, leading to
derepression of E2f (see E2F1; 189971) target genes. Loss of Phactr4
function resulted in shortening of the cell cycle, an increase in
proliferating neural progenitors, and ectopic cell division and/or cell
cycle exit defects in differentiating cells of the humdy neural tube and
retina. Loss of a single E2f1 allele rescued the exencephaly, coloboma,
and proliferation/differentiation defects of humdy mice, indicating that
the critical target of Phactr4 is the cell cycle regulator E2f1.

REFERENCE 1. Allen, P. B.; Greenfield, A. T.; Svenningsson, P.; Haspeslagh,
D. C.; Greengard, P.: Phactrs 1-4: a family of protein phosphatase
1 and actin regulatory proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 7187-7192,
2004.

2. Kim, T.-H.; Goodman, J.; Anderson, K. V.; Niswander, L.: Phactr4
regulates neural tube and optic fissure closure by controlling PP1-,
Rb-, and E2F1-regulated cell-cycle progression. Dev. Cell 13: 87-102,
2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/23/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/10/2004

EDITED alopez: 06/17/2011
mgross: 8/31/2007
terry: 8/23/2007
mgross: 6/10/2004

602635	TITLE *602635 DEAF1, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; DEAF1
;;SUPPRESSIN; SPN;;
ZINC FINGER MYND DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 5; ZMYND5
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Suppressin is a 63-kD inhibitor of cell proliferation. LeBoeuf et al.
(1998) cloned the cDNA encoding rat suppressin. The deduced amino acid
sequence contains 2 domains with significant homology to a transcription
factor in Drosophila called 'deformed epidermal autoregulatory factor-1'
(DEAF1). By RT-PCR, Le Boeuf et al. (1998) found that suppressin was
expressed in all rat tissues tested.

LeBoeuf et al. (1998) also cloned the human suppressin cDNA sequence,
(GenBank GENBANK AF007165), which encodes a predicted 497-amino acid
polypeptide.

REFERENCE 1. LeBoeuf, R. D.; Ban, E. M. H.; Green, M. M.; Stone, A. S.; Propst,
S. M.; Blalock, J. E.; Tauber, J. D.: Molecular cloning, sequence
analysis, expression, and tissue distribution of suppressin, a novel
suppressor of cell cycle entry. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 361-368, 1998.

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 5/18/1998

EDITED mgross: 05/19/2004
carol: 6/22/1998
dholmes: 6/16/1998

194521	TITLE *194521 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 33A; ZNF33A
;;ZINC FINGER AND ZAK-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN WITH KRAB DOMAIN; ZZAPK;;
KIAA0065;;
ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 11A; ZNF11A;;
ZNF11;;
KOX2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated immature myeloid
cell line cDNA library, Nomura et al. (1994) cloned ZNF33A, which they
designated KIAA0065. The transcript has an Alu element in its 3-prime
UTR. The deduced 848-amino acid protein contains a C2H2-type zinc finger
domain and shares 93.1% identity with ZNF11B (ZNF33B; 194522) over 374
amino acids. Northern blot analysis detected ZNF33A expression in all
tissues examined, with highest expression in skeletal muscle, and lowest
expression in testis and colon.

Using ZAK (609479) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a heart cDNA
library, followed by screening a placenta cDNA library and 5-prime RACE,
Yang (2003) cloned ZNF33A, which they designated ZZAPK. The deduced
810-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 94.3 kD. ZZAPK
contains an N-terminal KRAB domain, followed by a 256-amino acid linker
region and 16 tandemly repeated Kruppel-type zinc fingers at its C
terminus. Northern blot analysis detected variable expression of a major
5.5-kb transcript in all tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

By immunoprecipitation of cotransfected human embryonic kidney (HEK293)
cells, Yang (2003) confirmed direct interaction between epitope-tagged
ZZAPK and ZAK. Mutation analysis indicated that the SAM domain of ZAK
was required to bind ZZAPK. By coexpression in a rat fibroblast cell
line, Yang (2003) determined that ZZAPK countered the effect of ZAK on
G2/M cell cycle arrest. When expressed alone, ZZAPK increased entry of
cells into S phase. ZZAPK increased expression of cyclin E (CCNE1;
123837) in rat fibroblasts and HEK293 cells. ZZAPK also increased
expression of transcription factor E2F (see 189971) and the activity of
an E2F-dependent reporter gene.

MAPPING

By a combination of in situ chromosomal hybridization and somatic cell
hybrid analysis, Rousseau-Merck et al. (1992) concluded that there are
sequences hybridizing to the KOX2 probe at 2 loci, which they called
ZNF11A (ZNF33A) and ZNF11B (ZNF33B), that map proximal and distal to a
10q11.2 breakpoint, respectively. They suggested that the 2 ZNF11 loci
represent related sequences. Rousseau-Merck et al. (1992) suggested that
this cluster of zinc finger protein genes (ZNF11, ZNF22 (194529), and
ZNF25 (194528)) is of particular interest since the loci for MEN2A and
MEN2B map to this region.

Tunnacliffe et al. (1993) identified 2 related zinc finger gene clusters
mapping to the pericentromeric region of chromosome 10. Cluster A
contains ZNF11A (ZNF33A) and ZNF37A and maps to chromosome 10p11.2.
Cluster B contains ZNF11B (ZNF33B) and ZNF37B and maps to chromosome
10q11.2. Southern blot analysis indicated that the 2 clusters evolved by
duplication of an ancestral gene cluster before the divergence of the
human and great ape lineages.

REFERENCE 1. Nomura, N.; Nagase, T.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Sato,
S.; Seki, N.; Kawarabayasi, Y.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. II. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0041-KIAA0080) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 1: 223-229, 1994.

2. Rousseau-Merck, M. F.; Tunnacliffe, A.; Berger, R.; Ponder, B.
A. J.; Thiesen, H. J.: A cluster of expressed zinc finger protein
genes in the pericentromeric region of human chromosome 10. Genomics 13:
845-848, 1992.

3. Tunnacliffe, A.; Liu, L.; Moore, J. K.; Leversha, M. A.; Jackson,
M. S.; Papi, L.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.; Thiesen, H.-J.; Ponder, B.
A. J.: Duplicated KOX zinc finger gene clusters flank the centromere
of human chromosome 10: evidence for a pericentric inversion during
primate evolution. Nucleic Acids Res. 21: 1409-1417, 1993.

4. Yang, J.-J.: A novel zinc finger protein, ZZaPK, interacts with
ZAK and stimulates the ZAK-expressing cells re-entering the cell cycle. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 301: 71-77, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/13/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/21/1992

EDITED carol: 03/13/2007
mgross: 7/19/2005
terry: 6/13/2005
dkim: 6/25/1998
mark: 5/14/1996
carol: 7/21/1992

603054	TITLE *603054 GREMLIN 1 HOMOLOG, CYSTINE KNOT SUPERFAMILY; GREM1
;;GREMLIN;;
CYSTINE KNOT SUPERFAMILY 1, BMP ANTAGONIST 1; CKTSF1B1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a Xenopus expression-cloning screen, Hsu et al. (1998) isolated
GREM1, an antagonist of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP; see 112264)
signaling that is expressed in the neural crest. Gremlin-1 belongs to a
novel gene family that includes the head-inducing factor cerberus (CER1;
603777) and the tumor suppressor DAN (600613). Hsu et al. (1998) showed
that all family members are secreted proteins and that they act as BMP
antagonists in embryonic explants. They also provided support for the
model that gremlin, cerberus, and DAN block BMP signaling by binding
BMPs, preventing them from interacting with their receptors. They
proposed that gremlin, cerberus, and DAN control diverse processes in
growth and development by selectively antagonizing the activities of
different subsets of the transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta ligands.
By homology searches, Hsu et al. (1998) cloned the human homolog of
Xenopus gremlin. The human gremlin cDNA encodes a predicted 184-amino
acid protein.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid and radiation hybrid analyses, Topol et al.
(2000) mapped the GREM1 gene to human chromosome 15q13-q15.

GENE FUNCTION

Zuniga et al. (1999) reported that the secreted BMP antagonist gremlin
relays the Sonic hedgehog (SHH; 600725) signal from the polarizing
region to the apical ectodermal ridge. Mesenchymal gremlin expression is
lost in limb buds of mouse embryos homozygous for the 'limb deformity'
(ld) mutation, which disrupts establishment of the Shh/Fgf4 (164980)
feedback loop. Grafting gremlin-expressing cells into ld mutant limb
buds rescued Fgf4 expression and restored the Shh/Fgf4 feedback loop.
Analysis of Shh-null mutant embryos revealed that Shh signaling is
required for maintenance of gremlin and formin (FMN1; 136535), the gene
disrupted by the ld mutations. In contrast, formin, gremlin, and Fgf4
activation were independent of Shh signaling. Zuniga et al. (1999)
concluded that the study uncovered the cascade by which the SHH signal
is relayed from the posterior mesenchyme to the apical ectodermal ridge
and established that formin-dependent activation of the BMP antagonist
gremlin is sufficient to induce Fgf4 and establish the SHH/Fgf4 feedback
loop.

Vertebrate limb outgrowth is driven by a positive feedback loop
involving SHH, gremlin, and FGF4. By overexpressing individual
components of the loop at a time after these genes are normally
downregulated in chicken embryos, Scherz et al. (2004) found that Shh no
longer maintains gremlin in the posterior limb. Shh-expressing cells and
their descendants cannot express gremlin. The proliferation of these
descendants forms a barrier separating the Shh signal from
gremlin-expressing cells, which breaks down the Shh-Fgf4 loop and
thereby affects limb size and provides a mechanism explaining regulative
properties of the limb bud.

Developmentally regulated programmed cell death sculpts the limbs and
other embryonic organs in vertebrates. In chickens and mice, Bmps
trigger apoptosis of the interdigital mesenchyme, leading to freed
digits, whereas in ducks, Bmp antagonists inhibit the apoptotic program,
resulting in webbed feet. Weatherbee et al. (2006) found the bat C.
perspicillata utilizes a unique combination of high Fgf8 (600483) and
gremlin expression to maintain interdigit tissue in the forelimb,
resulting in simultaneously elevated Fgf signaling and inhibited Bmp
signaling.

Wordinger et al. (2007) studied the effects of altered BMP signaling on
intraocular pressure (IOP) in primary open angle glaucoma (POAG; see
137760). They found that the human trabecular meshwork (TM) synthesized
and secreted BMP4 (112262) as well as expressed the BMP receptor
subtypes BMPR1 (see 601299) and BMPR2 (600799). TM cells responded to
exogenous BMP4 by phosphorylating SMAD signaling proteins (see 601595).
Cultured human TM cells treated with TGFB2 (190220) significantly
increased fibronectin (FN; 135600) levels, and BMP4 blocked this FN
induction. There was significant elevation of mRNA and protein levels of
the BMP antagonist gremlin in glaucomatous TM cells. In addition,
gremlin was present in human aqueous humor. Gremlin blocked the negative
effect of BMP4 on TGFB2 induction of FN. Addition of recombinant gremlin
to the medium of ex vivo perfusion-cultured human eye anterior segments
caused the glaucoma phenotype of elevated IOP. Wordinger et al. (2007)
concluded that these results were consistent with the hypothesis that,
in POAG, elevated expression of gremlin by TM cells inhibited BMP4
antagonism of TGFB2 and led to increased extracellular matrix deposition
and elevated IOP.

Limb development is regulated by epithelial-mesenchymal feedback loops
between SHH and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling involving the
bone morphogenetic protein antagonist gremlin-1. By combining mouse
molecular genetics with mathematical modeling, Benazet et al. (2009)
showed that BMP4 first initiates and SHH then propagates
epithelial-mesenchymal feedback signaling through differential
transcriptional regulation of Grem1 to control digit specification. This
switch occurs by linking a fast BMP4/GREM1 module to the slower
SHH/GREM1/FGF epithelial-mesenchymal feedback loop. This self-regulatory
signaling network results in robust regulation of distal limb
development that is able to compensate for variations by
interconnectivity among the 3 signaling pathways.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 8 Ashkenazi Jewish families segregating autosomal
dominant hereditary mixed polyposis syndrome mapping to chromosome
15q13.3 (HMPS1; 601228), Jaeger et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity
for an approximately 40-kb duplication centered on chr. 15:30.77 Mb that
was not found in 188 unselected Ashkenazi controls or in 935 controls
from the Colorectal Tumour Gene Identification (CORGI) study. PCR
amplification across the duplication breakpoints mapped it to chr.
15:30,752,231-30,792,051 (NCBI36), and the change was found to be a
simple tandem tail-head duplication with insertion of a 30-bp sequence
of unknown origin that had no homology to known sequences between the
duplicons. The duplication extended from intron 2 of the SCG5 gene to a
site just upstream of the GREM1 CpG island; however, only the normal
SCG5 mRNA species was found, and there were no significant differences
in SCG5 expression compared to controls. In contrast, markedly increased
GREM1 transcript levels were detected in the normal epithelium of HMPS
patients compared to controls, and allele-specific expression analysis
showed significantly increased expression of the duplicated allele in
HMPS crypts. In normal colorectal crypts of controls and unaffected
relatives, GREM1 expression was restricted to intestinal subepithelial
myofibroblasts (ISEMFs) at the crypt base, whereas in normal colorectal
crypts of HMPS patients, GREM1 was expressed not only in basal ISEMFs
but also at very high levels in epithelial cells, predominantly
colonocytes, with expression extending most of the way up the sides of
the crypts. Increased GREM1 expression was also seen in HMPS polyps, but
to a lesser extent than in normal epithelium. Jaeger et al. (2012)
demonstrated that a 3-kb region within the duplication (chr.
15:30,779,000-30,782,000, NCBI36) enhanced GREM1 expression 4-fold in
the SW948 CRC cell line and that the region interacts directly with the
GREM1 promoter. Increased GREM1 expression was predicted to cause
reduced BMP (see 112264) pathway activity, a mechanism that also
underlies tumorigenesis in juvenile polyposis of the large bowel
(174900).

ANIMAL MODEL

During limb outgrowth, signaling by BMPs must be moderated to maintain
the signaling loop between the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA) and the
apical ectodermal ridge (AER). Gremlin, an extracellular BMP antagonist,
has been proposed to fulfill this function and therefore be important in
limb patterning. Khokha et al. (2003) tested this model directly by
mutating the mouse gene encoding gremlin. In the mutant limb, the
feedback loop between the ZPA and the AER was interrupted, resulting in
abnormal skeletal pattern. The phenotype is apparently identical to that
of ld, which results from a mutation in the Fmn1 gene (136535). The
relationship between Grem1 and Fmn1 is interesting because of their
proximity in the mouse genome. The Fmn1 transcript comprises a large
number of exons with the most 3-prime exon located approximately 40 kb
from the gremlin open reading frame. Given the apparently identical
phenotype of ld mice to gremlin mutant mice and the proximity of Fmn1 to
Grem1, Khokha et al. (2003) tested whether gremlin would complement ld.
They found that gremlin fails to complement ld and thus identified
another ld allele. Although a complex interaction between Fmn1 and
gremlin is possible, Khokha et al. (2003) favored the idea that the ld
mutations affect gremlin expression directly and that they lie in
cis-regulatory elements for gremlin expression.

Limb bud outgrowth is driven by signals in a positive feedback loop
involving fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) genes, Sonic hedgehog (Shh;
600725), and Grem1. Precise termination of these signals is essential to
restrict limb bud size. That the sequence in mouse limb buds is
different from that in chick limb buds drove Verheyden and Sun (2008) to
explore alternative mechanisms. By analyzing compound mouse mutants
defective in genes comprising the positive loop, Verheyden and Sun
(2008) provided genetic evidence that Fgf signaling can repress Grem1
expression, revealing a novel Fgf/Grem1 inhibitory loop. The repression
occurs in both mouse and chick limb buds and is dependent on high Fgf
activity. These data supported a mechanism where the positive Fgf/Shh
loop drives outgrowth and an increase in Fgf signaling, which triggers
the Fgf/Grem1 inhibitory loop. The inhibitory loop then operates to
terminate outgrowth signals in the order observed in either mouse or
chick limb buds. Verheyden and Sun (2008) concluded that their study
unveils the concept of a self-promoting and self-terminating circuit
that may be used to attain proper tissue size in a broad spectrum of
developmental and regenerative settings. Verheyden and Sun (2008)
demonstrated that Fgf8 (600483) repression of Fgf4 (164980) expression
is dependent on Grem1 but not Shh.

REFERENCE 1. Benazet, J.-D.; Bischofberger, M.; Tiecke, E.; Goncalves, A.; Martin,
J. F.; Zuniga, A.; Naef, F.; Zeller, R.: A self-regulatory system
of interlinked signaling feedback loops controls mouse limb patterning. Science 323:
1050-1053, 2009.

2. Hsu, D. R.; Economides, A. N.; Wang, X,; Eimon, P. M.; Harland,
R. M.: The Xenopus dorsalizing factor gremlin identifies a novel
family of secreted proteins that antagonize BMP activities. Molec.
Cell 1: 673-683, 1998.

3. Jaeger, E.; Leedham, S.; Lewis, A.; Segditsas, S.; Becker, M.;
Cuadrado, P. R.; Davis, H.; Kaur, K.; Heinimann, K.; Howarth, K.;
East, J.; Taylor, J.; Thomas, H.; Tomlinson, I.: Hereditary mixed
polyposis syndrome is caused by a 40-kb upstream duplication that
leads to increased and ectopic expression of the BMP antagonist GREM1. Nature
Genet. 44: 699-703, 2012.

4. Khokha, M. K.; Hsu, D.; Brunet, L. J.; Dionne, M. S.; Harland,
R. M.: Gremlin is the BMP antagonist required for maintenance of
Shh and Fgf signals during limb patterning. Nature Genet. 34: 303-307,
2003.

5. Scherz, P. J.; Harfe, B. D.; McMahon, A. P.; Tabin, C. J.: The
limb bud Shh-Fgf feedback loop is terminated by expansion of former
ZPA cells. Science 305: 396-399, 2004.

6. Topol, L. Z.; Modi, W. S.; Koochekpour, S.; Blair, D. G.: DRM-Gremlin
(CKTSF1B1) maps to human chromosome 15 and is highly expressed in
adult and fetal brain. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 89: 79-84, 2000.

7. Verheyden, J. M.; Sun, X.: An Fgf/Gremlin inhibitory feedback
loop triggers termination of limb bud outgrowth. Nature 454: 638-641,
2008.

8. Weatherbee, S. D.; Behringer, R. R.; Rasweiler, J. J., IV; Niswander,
L. A.: Interdigital webbing retention in bat wings illustrates genetic
changes underlying amniote limb diversification. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 103: 15103-15107, 2006.

9. Wordinger, R. J.; Fleenor, D. L.; Hellberg, P. E.; Pang, I.-H.;
Tovar, T. O.; Zode, G. S.; Fuller, J. A.; Clark, A. F.: Effects of
TGF-beta-2, BMP-4, and gremlin in the trabecular meshwork: implications
for glaucoma. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 48: 1191-1200, 2007.

10. Zuniga, A.; Haramis, A.-P. G.; McMahon, A. P.; Zeller, R.: Signal
relay by BMP antagonism controls the SHH/FGF4 feedback loop in vertebrate
limb buds. Nature 401: 598-602, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/14/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/17/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/20/2008
Jane Kelly - updated: 11/28/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/1/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/30/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/17/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/10/2000

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 9/23/1998

EDITED alopez: 06/18/2012
alopez: 6/15/2012
terry: 6/14/2012
wwang: 4/2/2010
alopez: 3/23/2009
terry: 3/17/2009
alopez: 10/21/2008
terry: 10/20/2008
terry: 10/8/2008
carol: 11/28/2007
terry: 7/27/2007
wwang: 12/1/2006
alopez: 9/1/2004
terry: 8/30/2004
carol: 8/4/2004
alopez: 7/29/2003
alopez: 6/18/2003
terry: 6/17/2003
carol: 1/12/2001
alopez: 5/9/2000
carol: 3/30/2000
alopez: 2/10/2000
carol: 9/23/1998

609768	TITLE *609768 BIOGENESIS OF LYSOSOME-RELATED ORGANELLES COMPLEX 1, SUBUNIT 2; BLOC1S2
;;BLOC1, SUBUNIT 2; BLOS2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

BLOC1S2 is a component of the ubiquitously expressed BLOC1 multisubunit
protein complex. BLOC1 is required for normal biogenesis of specialized
organelles of the endosomal-lysosomal system, such as melanosomes and
platelet dense granules (Starcevic and Dell'Angelica, 2004).

CLONING

Using the BLOC1 subunit pallidin (PLDN; 604310) as bait in a yeast
2-hybrid screen of a HeLa cell cDNA library, Starcevic and Dell'Angelica
(2004) cloned BLOC1S2, which they called BLOS2. The deduced BLOS2
protein contains coiled-coil regions and has a calculated molecular mass
of 16 kD. Western blot analysis detected endogenous HeLa cell BLOS2 at
an apparent molecular mass of 18 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

By mass spectrometry of BLOC1 proteins purified from bovine liver, mouse
liver, and HeLa cells, Starcevic and Dell'Angelica (2004) identified
BLOS2 as a subunit of BLOC1. Other BLOC1 subunits identified were
pallidin, muted (607289), dysbindin (DTNBP1; 607145), cappuccino
(605695), snapin (SNAPAP; 607007), BLOC1S1 (601444), and BLOC1S3
(609762). Coimmunoprecipitation and yeast 2-hybrid analyses confirmed
that these proteins interact within the BLOC1 complex.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the BLOC1S2
gene to chromosome 10 (TMAP RH47426).

REFERENCE 1. Starcevic, M.; Dell'Angelica, E. C.: Identification of Snapin
and three novel proteins (BLOS1, BLOS2, and BLOS3/reduced pigmentation)
as subunits of biogenesis of lysosome-related organelles complex-1
(BLOC-1). J. Biol. Chem. 279: 28393-28401, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/9/2005

EDITED mgross: 12/09/2005

608794	TITLE *608794 PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL TRANSFER PROTEIN, MEMBRANE-ASSOCIATED, 1; PITPNM1
;;DRES9;;
PYK2 N-TERMINAL DOMAIN-INTERACTING RECEPTOR 2; NIR2;;
RETINAL DEGENERATION GENE B, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, ALPHA; RDGBA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PITPNM1 belongs to a family of membrane-associated phosphatidylinositol
transfer domain-containing proteins that share homology with the
Drosophila retinal degeneration B (rdgB) protein (Ocaka et al., 2005).

CLONING

The Drosophila rdgB gene encodes a 116-kD transmembrane protein
expressed in the eye and central nervous system (CNS). Mutations in rdgB
cause light-induced retinal degeneration (Vihtelic et al., 1991). By
screening an EST database for homologs of Drosophila rdgB, followed by
probing a teratocarcinoma/neuron cDNA library, Rubboli et al. (1997)
obtained a full-length cDNA encoding human PITPNM1, which they called
DRES9. The predicted 1,242-amino acid PITPNM1 protein shares 96% and 66%
amino acid identity with mouse Pitpnm1 and Drosophila rdgB,
respectively. Northern blot analysis showed ubiquitous expression of a
4.4-kb PITPNM1 transcript, with highest levels in brain, skeletal
muscle, kidney, and heart. In situ hybridization analysis of murine
embryo tissues at various developmental stages revealed high Pitpnm1
expression in the neural retina and in the CNS.

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to bovine rdgB, Chang
et al. (1997) identified partial human PITPNM1 sequences, which they
used to obtain genomic clones. The deduced 1,059-amino acid protein
shares 92% identity with mouse Pitpnm1, with highest similarity in the
N- and C-terminal regions. Northern blot analysis indicated that bovine
and mouse Pitpnm1 were expressed strongly in retina and more weakly in
brain, but not in any other tissue examined. In situ hybridization of
mouse retina detected Pitpnm1 mRNA in photoreceptors and the inner
nuclear layer. Immunocytochemistry detected Pitpnm1 in photoreceptors,
particularly in the inner segments and the outer plexiform layer, the
inner plexiform layer, and possibly the ganglion cell layer.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a brain cDNA library, Lev et al. (1999)
cloned PITPNM1, which they called NIR2, as one of a family of proteins
that interact with the tyrosine kinase PYK2 (PTK2B; 601212). The deduced
1,244-amino acid PITPNM1 protein shares structural domains with other
family members, including an N-terminal phosphatidylinositol (PI)
transfer domain, an acidic calcium-binding region, 6 transmembrane
domains, and a conserved C-terminal domain. Northern blot analysis
detected ubiquitous expression of PITPNM1, with highest levels in brain,
heart, thymus, and peripheral blood leukocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

Chang et al. (1997) demonstrated the mouse Pitpnm1 fully rescued the
rdgB-dependent retinal degeneration and abnormal electroretinogram in
flies.

Lev et al. (1999) determined that the C terminus of PITPNM1 bound PYK2.
Analysis of PITPNM1 or PYK2 immunoprecipitates of cells coexpressing
PITPNM1 and PYK2 demonstrated that both proteins were tyrosine
phosphorylated. Agonists known to induce tyrosine phosphorylation of
PYK2 also induced strong phosphorylation of PITPNM1, and both proteins
were associated in a stable complex. Chang et al. (1997) concluded that
PITPNM1 is a direct or indirect substrate for PYK2 tyrosine
phosphorylation.

Tian et al. (2002) showed that PITPNM1 contains a novel N-terminal Rho
(see RhoA; 165390)-inhibitory domain (RID) that binds to GDP-bound Rho.
Ectopic expression of the PITPNM1 RID domain caused loss of F-actin
staining and inhibited Rho-mediated stress fiber formation and
lysophosphatidic acid-induced RhoA activation. Expression of the RID
domain along with the PI transfer domain removed these effects. Blocking
of PITPNM1 function by PITPNM1 antibody injection reduced neurite
extension in neuronal cells, while PITPNM1 overexpression reduced
Rho-mediated neurite retraction.

Litvak et al. (2002) showed that PITPNM1 is essential for cytokinesis.
PITPNM1 localized to the cleavage furrow during cytokinesis, and
blocking of PITPNM1 function by PITPNM1 antibody injection caused
multinucleate cell formation. Overexpression of a deletion construct
lacking the N-terminal RID and PI domains caused specific blockage of
cytokinesis. Overexpression of the RID domain of PITPNM1 caused abnormal
cytokinesis, resulting in formation of a long bridge-like structure
between putative daughter cells. Coimmunoprecipitation showed that
PITPNM1 bound to RhoA in mitotic cells, and confocal microscopy showed
the 2 proteins localized together at the cleavage furrow during cell
division.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chang et al. (1997) determined that the PITPNM1 gene contains 21 exons
and spans about 12 kb. Ocaka et al. (2005) determined that the PITPNM1
gene contains 23 exons and spans approximately 13 kb.

MAPPING

By FISH, Chang et al. (1997) mapped the PITPNM1 gene to chromosome
11q13.1. They mapped the mouse Pitpnm1 gene to a proximal region of
chromosome 19 that shows homology of synteny to human chromosome
11q13.1.

REFERENCE 1. Chang, J. T.; Milligan, S.; Li, Y.; Chew, C. E.; Wiggs, J.; Copeland,
N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Campochiaro, P. A.; Hyde, D. R.; Zack, D. J.
: Mammalian homolog of Drosophila retinal degeneration B rescues the
mutant fly phenotype. J. Neurosci. 17: 5881-5890, 1997.

2. Lev, S.; Hernandez, J.; Martinez, R.; Chen, A.; Plowman, G.; Schlessinger,
J.: Identification of a novel family of targets of PYK2 related to
Drosophila retinal degeneration B (rdgB) protein. Molec. Cell. Biol. 19:
2278-2288, 1999.

3. Litvak, V.; Tian, D.; Carmon, S.; Lev, S.: Nir2, a human homolog
of Drosophila melanogaster retinal degeneration B protein, is essential
for cytokinesis. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22: 5064-5075, 2002.

4. Ocaka, L.; Spalluto, C.; Wilson, D. I.; Hunt, D. M.; Halford, S.
: Chromosomal localization, genomic organization and evolution of
the genes encoding human phosphatidylinositol transfer protein membrane-associated
(PITPNM) 1,2 and 3. Cytogenet. Genome Res. 108: 293-302, 2005.

5. Rubboli, F.; Bulfone, A.; Bogni, S.; Marchitiello, A.; Zollo, M.;
Borsani, G.; Ballabio, A.; Banfi, S.: A mammalian homologue of the
Drosophila retinal degeneration B gene: implications for the evolution
of phototransduction mechanisms. Genes Function 1: 205-213, 1997.

6. Tian, D.; Litvak, V.; Toledo-Rodriguez, M.; Carmon, S.; Lev, S.
: Nir2, a novel regulator of cell morphogenesis. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22:
2650-2662, 2002.

7. Vihtelic, T. S.; Hyde, D. R.; O'Tousa, J. E.: Isolation and characterization
of the Drosophila retinal degeneration B (rdgB) gene. Genetics 127:
761-768, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/12/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/14/2004

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 7/12/2004

EDITED mgross: 02/13/2008
terry: 2/12/2008
mgross: 9/14/2004
mgross: 7/12/2004

611127	TITLE *611127 UBIQUITIN-LIKE 4B; UBL4B
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By yeast 2-hybrid screen using Tex15 (605795) as bait, Yang et al.
(2007) cloned mouse Ubl4b. The deduced 188-amino acid protein contains a
72-amino acid ubiquitin domain. RT-PCR and Western blot analysis
detected Ubl4b mRNA and protein only in mouse testis. Immunofluorescence
analysis revealed Ubl4b in the cytoplasm of elongated spermatids, but
not in spermatocytes, round spermatids, Leydig cells, or Sertoli cells,
suggesting Ubl4b functions in late spermiogenesis. By database analysis,
Yang et al. (2007) identified human UBL4B and several mammalian
orthologs.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yang et al. (2007) determined that the mouse Ubl4b gene contains no
introns.

MAPPING

Yang et al. (2007) stated that the mouse Ubl4b gene maps to chromosome 3
and that the human UBL4B gene is in a syntenic region where it is
flanked by ALX3 (606014) and SLC6A17 (610299) on chromosome 1p13.3.

EVOLUTION

Yang et al. (2007) presented evidence that Ubl4b arose by retroposition
of the 4-exon Ubl4a gene (312070) at least 170 million years ago, prior
to the radiation of therian mammals.

REFERENCE 1. Yang, F.; Skaletsky, H.; Wang, P. J.: Ubl4b, an X-derived retrogene,
is specifically expressed in post-meiotic germ cells in mammals. Gene
Expr. Patterns 7: 131-136, 2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/20/2007

EDITED wwang: 06/20/2007

614316	TITLE *614316 VTI1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF, A; VTI1A
;;VTI1RP2
VTI1A/TCF7L2 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

VTI1A is a soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive fusion protein attachment
protein (SNAP; see 603215) receptor (SNARE) that functions in the
transport of vesicles between the Golgi apparatus and the plasma
membrane (Flowerdew and Burgoyne, 2009).

CLONING

Xu et al. (1998) cloned mouse Vti1a, which they called Vti1rp2. The
deduced 217-amino acid protein has 4 putative coiled-coil regions and a
C-terminal transmembrane domain. The final coiled-coil region includes
an ATP/GTP-binding motif A (P loop). Northern blot analysis detected a
2.6-kb transcript in all mouse tissues examined except testis, which
expressed a 1.5-kb Vti1a transcript. Western blot analysis and
differential extraction of fractionated rat liver membranes revealed
that Vti1a was an integral Golgi membrane protein.

By immunohistochemical analysis of HeLa cells, Flowerdew and Burgoyne
(2009) found that human VTI1A showed a punctate vesicular distribution.

GENE FUNCTION

Using protein pull-down assays, Xu et al. (1998) showed that mouse Vti1a
interacted with alpha-SNAP (NAPA; 603215). Coimmunoprecipitation
analysis revealed that Vti1a interacted with 2 distinct SNARE complexes
that contained either syntaxin-5 (STX5; 603189) or syntaxin-6 (STX6;
603944). Immunodepletion of Vti1a from Vero monkey kidney cells
interfered with plasma membrane trafficking of vesicular-stomatitis
virus G protein (VSVG), resulting in accumulation of VSVG in the Golgi
apparatus.

Flowerdew and Burgoyne (2009) showed that potassium channel-interacting
protein-1 (KCHIP1, or KCNIP1; 604660) interacted with the
channel-forming Kv4.2 potassium channel subunit (KCND2; 605410) and was
required for Kv4.2 trafficking to the plasma membrane. Using HeLa and
mouse Neuro2A neuroblastoma cells, they found that KCHIP1 and Kv4.2 used
an intracellular vesicle trafficking pathway that included VTI1A and
VAMP7 (300053) and required the GTPase RAB1 (179508), which is shared
with more conventional vesicle-trafficking pathways. Knockdown of VTI1A
or VAMP7 inhibited transport of Kv4.2 and KCHIP1 to the plasma membrane,
but it had no effect on membrane transport of VSVG.

CYTOGENETICS

- VTI1A/TCF7L2 Fusion Gene

Bass et al. (2011) reported whole-genome sequencing from 9 individuals
with colorectal cancer (114500), including primary colorectal tumors and
matched adjacent nontumor tissues, at an average of 30.7x and 31.9x
coverage, respectively. They identified an average of 75 somatic
rearrangements per tumor, including complex networks of translocations
between pairs of chromosomes. Eleven rearrangements encode predicted
in-frame fusion proteins, including a fusion of VTI1A and TCF7L2
(602278) found in 3 out of 97 colorectal cancers. Although TCF7L2
encodes TCF4, which cooperates with beta-catenin (116806) in colorectal
carcinogenesis, the fusion lacks the TCF4 beta-catenin-binding domain.
Bass et al. (2011) found a colorectal carcinoma cell line harboring the
fusion gene to be dependent on VTI1A-TCF7L2 for anchorage-independent
growth using RNA interference-mediated knockdown.

MAPPING

Hartz (2011) mapped the VTI1A gene to chromosome 10q25.2 based on an
alignment of the VTI1A sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC017052) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Bass, A. J.; Lawrence, M. S.; Brace, L. E.; Ramos, A. H.; Drier,
Y.; Cibulskis, K.; Sougnez, C.; Voet, D.; Saksena, G.; Sivachenko,
A.; Jing, R.; Parkin, M.; and 28 others: Genomic sequencing of
colorectal adenocarcinomas identifies a recurrent VTI1A-TCF7L2 fusion. Nature
Genet. 43: 964-968, 2011.

2. Flowerdew, S. E.; Burgoyne, R. D.: A VAMP7/Vti1a SNARE complex
distinguishes a non-conventional traffic route to the cell surface
used by KChIP1 and Kv4 potassium channels. Biochem. J. 418: 529-540,
2009.

3. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/27/2011.

4. Xu, Y.; Wong, S. H.; Tang, B. L.; Subramaniam, V. N.; Zhang, T.;
Hong, W.: A 29-kilodalton Golgi soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive
factor attachment protein receptor (Vti1-rp2) implicated in protein
trafficking in the secretory pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 21783-21789,
1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/26/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/28/2011

EDITED alopez: 06/26/2012
alopez: 6/26/2012
terry: 6/26/2012
mgross: 10/28/2011

613768	TITLE *613768 RING FINGER PROTEIN 213; RNF213
;;ALK LYMPHOMA OLIGOMERIZATION PARTNER ON CHROMOSOME 17; ALO17;;
KIAA1618
RNF213/ALK FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The RNF213 gene encodes a protein that possesses both ubiquitin ligase
activity and ATPase activity (Liu et al., 2011).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned partial RNF213, which they
designated KIAA1618. The transcript contains a repetitive element in its
3-prime end, and the deduced protein contains 1,415 amino acids. RT-PCR
ELISA detected moderate RNF213 expression in all adult and fetal tissues
and adult brain regions examined except skeletal muscle, where RNF213
expression was low.

By database analysis and 5-prime RACE of the immature human myeloid
leukemia cell line K562, Cools et al. (2002) cloned 2 splice variants of
RNF213, which they called ALO17. The deduced proteins contain 1,599 and
1,550 amino acids. Both proteins contain a potential N-terminal zinc
finger motif, but they differ in the presence or absence of a sequence
near the N terminus.

Kamada et al. (2011) noted that full-length RNF213 contains 5,256 amino
acids and contains a RING finger domain, suggesting E3 ubiquitin ligase
function, as well as an HMG-CoA reductase degradation domain and an AAA
ATPase domain. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis detected strong RNF213
expression in adult human spleen and leukocytes, followed by placenta
and lymph node. Strong expression was detected in human fetal leukocytes
and thymus, with low expression in both adult and fetal human brain.
RNF213 expression was detected in both polymorphonuclear and mononuclear
cell fractions and in B and T cell fractions. There was low but
significant expression of RNF213 in human umbilical vein endothelial
cells and human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells. Cellular
expression of mouse Rnf213 was detected in the white pulp of the spleen,
primary lymph node follicles, and thymocytes in the medulla of the
thymus.

Liu et al. (2011) cloned RNF213 and found that their sequence included a
2,500-bp longer 3-prime untranslated region (UTR) compared to a
previously registered sequence and also lacked exon 4. Two splicing
variants differing by exclusion or inclusion of exon 4 were detected in
cDNAs isolated from various tissues. The short isoform, which skips exon
4, was the major variant and was detected in all tissues examined.

MAPPING

By PCR of a human-rodent hybrid panel, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the
RNF213 gene to chromosome 17. Cools et al. (2002) mapped the RNF213 gene
to chromosome 17q25 by genomic sequence analysis.

GENE FUNCTION

Liu et al. (2011) found that transfection of RNF213 into HeLa cells
resulted in expression of the protein throughout the cytosol with
partial association with the intracellular membrane and cytoskeleton.
The E3 activity of the RING finger domain was confirmed by
self-ubiquitination after transfecting full-length RNF213 cDNA into
HEK293 cells. In addition, ATPase activity was detected in vitro by free
phosphate releasing analysis using a recombinant RNF213 fragment
including the Walker motif. Thus, RNF213 is a protein that possesses
both ubiquitin ligase activity and ATPase activity.

CYTOGENETICS

In a patient with ALK (105590)-positive anaplastic large-cell lymphoma,
Cools et al. (2002) identified a t(2;17)(p23;q25) rearrangement that
resulted in splicing of exons of the ALO17 gene from chromosome 17q25 to
exons of the ALK gene from chromosome 2p23. The predicted fusion protein
contains 1,172 N-terminal amino acids of ALO17 fused to 562 amino acids
of ALK, including the ALK kinase domain. FISH analysis confirmed the
presence of 2 copies of the AOL17-ALK fusion in the neoplastic cells.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By linkage analysis and genomewide association analysis of 63 Japanese
patients with moyamoya disease (MYMY2; 607151) and 45 controls, Kamada
et al. (2011) found a significant association between disease and a
variant in the RNF213 gene (R4859K; 613768.0001).

In affected members of 41 Japanese families and 1 Korean family with
moyamoya disease, Liu et al. (2011) identified an R4810K substitution
(dbSNP ss179362673) in the RNF213 gene (613768.0002). The variant
segregated with the disorder, although some carriers of the variant did
not have moyamoya disease, indicating incomplete penetrance. The
mutation was initially found by linkage analysis followed by exome
sequencing in eight 3-generation families. Haplotype analysis indicated
a founder effect. A case-control study of 251 East Asian patients and
707 controls showed a significant association between R4810K and the
disorder (odds ratio of 111.8, p = 10 x 10(-119)). In vitro functional
expression studies in HEK293 cells showed that the R4810K protein was
expressed and localized normally within the cell, and had normal
ubiquitin activity. Direct sequencing identified 5 additional RNF213
variants in 7 of 64 East Asian cases, and 4 variants in 4 (8%) of 50
Caucasian cases (see, e.g., 613768.0003). Although these variants were
not found in controls, pathogenicity was difficult to prove. Liu et al.
(2011) postulated that variation in the RNF213 gene acts with
environmental factors to result in moyamoya disease.

ANIMAL MODEL

Liu et al. (2011) demonstrated that knockout of the RNF213 homologs in
zebrafish caused abnormal vascular development, including abnormal
sprouting vessels particularly in the head region.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MOYAMOYA DISEASE 2, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
RNF213, ARG4859LYS

In Japanese patients with moyamoya disease (607151), Kamada et al.
(2011) found a significant association between disease and a 14576G-A
transition in exon 60 of the RNF213 gene, resulting in an arg4859-to-lys
(R4859K) substitution. In 19 of 20 families, heterozygosity for the
variant was found in 39 (92.9%) of 41 patients with the disorder and in
13 (46.4%) of 28 family members without the disorder. Three (7.1%)
patients had the variant in the homozygous state. The overall p value
among familial cases was 4.2 x 10(-7). None of 15 family members without
the variant developed the disease. The variant was also present in
heterozygosity and homozygosity in 45 (71.4%) and 1 (1.6%) of 63
Japanese patients with sporadic disease, respectively, and in 6 (1.4%)
of 429 controls. There was no phenotypic difference between homozygous
and heterozygous carriers. Overall, carrying the variant conferred an
odds ratio of 190.8 for development of the disorder (p = 1.2 x 10(-43)).
The R4859K variant was not found in 400 Caucasian controls.

Miyatake et al. (2012) found the 14576G-A transition in 39 (95.1%) of 41
Japanese patients with familial moyamoya disease, in 129 (79.2%) of 163
Japanese patients with sporadic moyamoya disease, and in 5 (1.8%) of 283
Japanese control individuals. Fifteen of the 168 patients with the
variant carried it in the homozygous state, whereas all 5 controls
carried it in the heterozygous state. Most patients inherited the allele
from either or both unaffected parents; all parents were heterozygous
for the variant. Miyatake et al. (2012) concluded that heterozygosity
for the 14576G-A variant confers an odds ratio of 236 for development of
the disorder. Patients with the 14576G-A variant had an earlier age at
onset (as early as age 4 years) and tended to have a higher frequency of
infarcts, posterior cerebral artery involvement, bilateral involvement,
seizures, and intellectual impairment compared to patients without the
variant. However, heterozygosity for the variant was also found in adult
patients. Comparisons of clinical features between 5 parent-offspring
pairs who were heterozygous for the variant showed anticipation.

Miyatake et al. (2012) reported a Japanese brother and sister who were
heterozygous and homozygous for the 14576G-A mutation, respectively. The
homozygous brother had onset of recurrent strokes in early childhood,
with deterioration in cognitive function and residual symptoms,
including paresis, headache, and visual loss, whereas the heterozygous
sister had only 1 stroke at age 17 years and no residual symptoms. Brain
imaging showed more severe vascular occlusion in the homozygous brother.
The findings suggested a dosage effect for this variant.

.0002
MOYAMOYA DISEASE 2, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
RNF213, ARG4810LYS

In affected members of 41 Japanese families and 1 Korean family with
moyamoya disease (607151), Liu et al. (2011) identified a G-to-A
transition in the RNF213 gene, resulting in an arg4810-to-lys (R4810K)
substitution (dbSNP ss179362673) in a conserved residue. The variant
segregated with the disorder, although some carriers of the variant did
not have moyamoya disease, indicating incomplete penetrance. The
mutation was initially found by linkage analysis followed by exome
sequencing in eight 3-generation families. Haplotype analysis indicated
a founder effect. A case-control study of 251 East Asian patients and
707 controls showed a significant association between R4810K and the
disorder (odds ratio of 111.8, p = 10 x 10(-19)). The variant was found
in about 1% of controls in East Asian populations, and some Japanese
controls were homozygous for the variant, arguing against a gene dosage
effect. Although R4810K was identified in 3 populations, the population
attributable risks in the Japanese (145/161; 90%) and Korean (30/38;
79%) populations were larger than that in the Chinese population (12/52;
23%). In addition, R4810K was not present among Caucasian cases or
controls. In vitro functional expression studies in HEK293 cells showed
that the R4810K protein was expressed and localized normally within the
cell; the variant protein also had normal ubiquitin activity. Knockout
of the homologs in zebrafish caused abnormal vascular development,
including abnormal sprouting vessels particularly in the head region.
Liu et al. (2011) postulated that variation in the RNF213 gene acts with
environmental factors to result in moyamoya disease.

.0003
MOYAMOYA DISEASE 2, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
RNF213, ASP4013ASN

In an affected Caucasian father of Czech descent and 3 of his children
with moyamoya disease (607151), Liu et al. (2011) identified a G-to-A
transition in the RNF213 gene, resulting in an asp4013-to-asn (D4013N)
substitution. The variant was not found in 384 Caucasian controls. The
father had a mild ischemic stroke at age 30 years, and his mother had
died of ischemic stroke at age 35. The 3 children developed moyamoya
disease at ages 5, 9, and 3 years. One had involuntary movements and
another had signs of ischemic stroke. Diagnosis of the disorder was
confirmed by brain MRI. The variant was relatively highly conserved,
especially in mammals. In vitro functional expression studies in HEK293
cells showed that the D4013N protein had normal ubiquitin activity.

REFERENCE 1. Cools, J.; Wlodarska, I.; Somers, R.; Mentens, N.; Pedeutour, F.;
Maes, B.; De Wolf-Peeters, C.; Pauwels, P.; Hagemeijer, A.; Marynen,
P.: Identification of novel fusion partners of ALK, the anaplastic
lymphoma kinase, in anaplastic large-cell lymphoma and inflammatory
myofibroblastic tumor. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 34: 354-362, 2002.

2. Kamada, F.; Aoki, Y.; Narisawa, A.; Abe, Y.; Komatsuzaki, S.; Kikuchi,
A.; Kanno, J.; Niihori, T.; Ono, M.; Ishii, N.; Owada, Y.; Fujimura,
M.; Mashimo, Y.; Suzuki, Y.; Hata, A.; Tsuchiya, S.; Tominaga, T.;
Matsubara, Y.; Kure, S.: A genome-wide association study identifies
RNF213 as the first Moyamoya disease gene. J. Hum. Genet. 56: 34-40,
2011.

3. Liu, W.; Morito, D.; Takashima, S.; Mineharu, Y.; Kobayashi, H.;
Hitomi, T.; Hashikata, H.; Matsuura, N.; Yamazaki, S.; Toyoda, A.;
Kikuta, K.; Takagi, Y.; and 11 others: Identification of RNF213
as a susceptibility gene for moyamoya disease and its possible role
in vascular development. PLoS One 6: e22542, 2011. Note: Electronic
Article.

4. Miyatake, S.; Miyake, N.; Touho, H.; Nishimura-Tadaki, A.; Kondo,
Y.; Okada, I.; Tsurusaki, Y.; Doi, H.; Sakai, H.; Saitsu, H.; Shimojima,
K.; Yamamoto, T.; and 13 others: Homozygous c.14576G-A variant
of RNF213 predicts early-onset and severe form of moyamoya disease. Neurology 78:
803-810, 2012.

5. Miyatake, S.; Touho, H.; Miyake, N.; Ohba, C.; Doi, H.; Saitsu,
H.; Taguri, M.; Morita, S.; Matsumoto, N.: Sibling cases of moyamoya
disease having homozygous and heterozygous c.14576G-A variant in RNF213
showed varying clinical course and severity. J. Hum. Genet. 57:
804-806, 2012.

6. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Nakayama, M.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVIII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 273-281, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/12/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/22/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/19/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/23/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/23/2011

EDITED carol: 02/26/2013
ckniffin: 2/12/2013
carol: 10/24/2012
ckniffin: 10/22/2012
carol: 10/18/2012
terry: 3/19/2012
ckniffin: 3/19/2012
wwang: 3/3/2011
ckniffin: 2/23/2011
mgross: 2/23/2011

185640	TITLE *185640 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L7a; RPL7A
;;SURFEIT 3; SURF3
DESCRIPTION The mammalian ribosome is composed of 4 RNA species (see 180450) and
approximately 80 different proteins (see 180466).

CLONING

Giallongo et al. (1989) demonstrated that the SURF3 gene encodes the L7a
ribosomal protein. The first 2 exons of the human SURF3 gene have been
found to be capable of activating the TRK oncogene (see 191315). The
SURF3 gene appears to be the only intron-containing member of the
surfeit family cluster on chromosome 9q34 (see SURF1, 185620).

GENE STRUCTURE

Angiolillo et al. (2002) determined that transcription start sites of
the MED22 (185641) and RPL7A genes are separated by a 110-bp region that
shows bidirectional promoter activity. This promoter region lacks a TATA
box but is characterized by a CpG island that extends through the first
exon into the first intron of both genes.

MAPPING

Yon et al. (1993) mapped the RPLA7 gene to chromosome 9q34.1. Kenmochi
et al. (1998) confirmed the mapping assignment.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Mor et al. (1996) described a common polymorphism in the surfeit gene
cluster that was of interest because it occurs in the TSC1 (191100)
region of chromosome 9q34. By database analysis, Smith (1997) found that
the polymorphism reported by Mor et al. (1996) is due to mutation in the
SURF3 gene.

REFERENCE 1. Angiolillo, A.; Russo, G.; Procellini, A.; Smaldone, S.; D'Alessandro,
F.; Pietropaolo, C.: The human homologue of the mouse Surf5 gene
encodes multiple alternatively spliced transcripts. Gene 284: 169-178,
2002.

2. Giallongo, A.; Yon, J.; Fried, M.: The ribosomal protein L7a is
encoded by a gene (Surf-3) within the tightly clustered mouse surfeit
locus. Molec. Cell. Biol. 9: 224-231, 1989.

3. Kenmochi, N.; Kawaguchi, T.; Rozen, S.; Davis, E.; Goodman, N.;
Hudson, T. J.; Tanaka, T.; Page, D. C.: A map of 75 human ribosomal
protein genes. Genome Res. 8: 509-523, 1998.

4. Mor, O.; Duhig, T.; Fried, M.: A high frequency polymorphism in
the candidate region for tuberous sclerosis 1 (TSC1) at 9q34. Ann.
Hum. Genet. 60: 259-260, 1996.

5. Smith, M.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/2/1997.

6. Yon, J.; Jones, T.; Garson, K.; Sheer, D.; Fried, M.: The organization
and conservation of the human Surfeit gene cluster and its localization
telomeric to the c-abl and can proto-oncogenes at chromosome band
9q34.1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 237-240, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/30/2008
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 9/21/2000
Moyra Smith - updated: 1/2/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/29/1989

EDITED wwang: 10/30/2008
terry: 10/30/2008
carol: 8/20/2008
carol: 2/24/2004
psherman: 9/21/2000
psherman: 9/10/1999
psherman: 2/2/1999
terry: 8/12/1998
mark: 1/2/1997
carol: 9/13/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
carol: 12/15/1989
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 8/29/1989

612778	TITLE *612778 SET DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; SETD2
;;SET2;;
HUNTINGTIN-INTERACTING PROTEIN B; HYPB;;
HUNTINGTIN-BINDING PROTEIN, 231-KD; HBP231;;
KIAA1732
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Huntington disease (143100) is caused by expansion of a CAG
trinucleotide repeat encoding an N-terminal polyglutamine region in
huntingtin (HTT; 613004) to more than 34 units. Using N-terminal domains
of HTT containing 58 or 62 glutamines in a yeast 2-hybrid assay of a
fetal brain cDNA library, followed by database analysis and screening
brain and testis cDNA libraries, Faber et al. (1998) obtained a partial
SETD2 clone, which they called HYPB. The deduced protein has a WW
domain. Northern blot analysis detected a transcript of about 9.0 kb
that was variably expressed in all tissues examined.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned SETD2, which they designated
KIAA1732. The deduced protein contains 1,325 amino acids. RT-PCR
detected low SETD2 expression in all adult and fetal tissues and
specific adult brain regions examined.

Using a yeast 1-hybrid screen of a HeLa cell cDNA library to identify
proteins that could bind transcriptional start site-2 (TS2) of the
adenovirus E1A gene, followed by RT-PCR of normal human foreskin
fibroblasts, Rega et al. (2001) cloned full-length SETD2, which they
called HBP231. The deduced 2,061-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of about 231 kD. It has a putative N-terminal tyrosine
phosphorylation site, a central SET domain, and a C-terminal WW/WWP
domain that is followed by a putative nuclear localization signal. The
C-terminal region of HBP231 corresponds to the HYPB sequence. Northern
blot analysis detected a 7.5-kb transcript expressed at variable levels
in all tissues examined. Western blot analysis of HeLa cells showed that
HBP231 had an apparent molecular mass of 231 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay, Faber et al. (1998) showed that HYPB
interacted with normal and mutant huntingtin in extracts of Huntington
disease lymphoblastoid cells. The interaction was mediated by the WW
domain region of HYPB and by the N-terminal proline-rich region in
huntingtin, and it was enhanced by lengthening the adjacent glutamine
tract.

Using electrophoretic mobility shift analysis with nuclear extracts of
HeLa cells, Rega et al. (2001) confirmed that endogenous HBP231 bound
the TS2 motif of the adenovirus E1A promoter in a sequence-specific
manner. HBP231 expression was elevated in human embryonic kidney cells
expressing E1A, suggesting that the observed autoactivation of E1A may
be achieved by induced HBP231 expression.

Sun et al. (2005) showed that the SET domain and flanking AWS and
postSET domains of human HBP231 mediated histone H3 (see 602810)
lys36-specific histone methyltransferase activity. The isolated
low-charged region of HBP231 immediately following the WW domain showed
transcriptional activity, although a longer construct did not. A
C-terminal fragment of HBP231 containing the AWS, SET, and postSET
domains, the low-charged region, and the WW domain associated with
hyperphosphorylated RNA polymerase II (see 180660), but not with the
unphosphorylated form. Domain analysis revealed that the region
C-terminal to the WW domain mediated the interaction of HBP231 with
phosphorylated RNA polymerase II. Sun et al. (2005) concluded that
HBP231 may coordinate histone methylation and transcriptional
regulation.

The yeast histone deacetylase Rpd3 is recruited to promoters and
represses transcription initiation. Carrozza et al. (2005) and Keogh et
al. (2005) independently showed that the yeast SETD2 ortholog, Set2, is
a histone H3 lys36 (K36) methyltransferase associated with a small Rpd3
complex that signals deacetylation of ORFs by Rpd3 and suppresses
transcription initiation.

MAPPING

By FISH and genomic sequence analysis, Rega et al. (2001) mapped the
SETD2 gene to chromosome 3p21.3-p21.2.

REFERENCE 1. Carrozza, M. J.; Li, B.; Florens, L.; Suganuma, T.; Swanson, S.
K.; Lee, K. K.; Shia, W.-J.; Anderson, S.; Yates, J.; Washburn, M.
P.; Workman, J. L.: Histone H3 methylation by Set2 directs deacetylation
of coding regions by Rpd3S to suppress spurious intragenic transcription. Cell 123:
581-592, 2005.

2. Faber, P. W.; Barnes, G. T.; Srinidhi, J.; Chen, J.; Gusella, J.
F.; MacDonald, M. E.: Huntingtin interacts with a family of WW domain
proteins. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7: 1463-1474, 1998.

3. Keogh, M.-C.; Kurdistani, S. K.; Morris, S. A.; Ahn, S. H.; Podolny,
V.; Collins, S. R.; Schuldiner, M.; Chin, K.; Punna, T.; Thompson,
N. J.; Boone, C.; Emili, A.; Weissman, J. S.; Hughes, T. R.; Strahl,
B. D.; Grunstein, M.; Greenblatt, J. F.; Buratowski, S.; Krogan, N.
J.: Cotranscriptional Set2 methylation of histone H3 lysine 36 recruits
a repressive Rpd3 complex. Cell 123: 593-605, 2005.

4. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Hattori, A.; Kondo, Y.; Okumura, K.; Ohara,
O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes,
XIX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which
code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 347-355, 2000.

5. Rega, S.; Stiewe, T.; Chang, D.-I.; Pollmeier, B.; Esche, H.; Bardenheuer,
W.; Marquitan, G.; Putzer, B. M.: Identification of full-length huntingtin-interacting
protein p231HBP/HYPB as a DNA-binding factor. Molec. Cell. Neurosci. 18:
68-79, 2001.

6. Sun, X.-J.; Wei, J.; Wu, X.-Y.; Hu, M.; Wang, L.; Wang, H.-H.;
Zhang, Q.-H.; Chen, S.-J.; Huang, Q.-H.; Chen, Z.: Identification
and characterization of a novel human histone H3 lysine 36-specific
methyltransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 280: 35261-35271, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/6/2009

EDITED mgross: 02/05/2013
alopez: 3/11/2010
carol: 9/15/2009
mgross: 5/6/2009

600306	TITLE *600306 PROTEASOME SUBUNIT, BETA-TYPE, 5; PSMB5
;;PROTEASOME SUBUNIT X;;
PSX LARGE MULTIFUNCTIONAL PROTEASE X; LMPX;;
PROTEASOME SUBUNIT BETA-5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Proteasomes are the proteolytic complex responsible for major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I-restricted antigen presentation
(Akiyama et al., 1994).

See PSMB2 (602175) for further discussion of beta-type proteasome
subunits.

CLONING

Akiyama et al. (1994) cloned the full-length cDNA and showed that PSMB5
has high amino acid similarity to PSMB8 (177046).

GENE FUNCTION

Akiyama et al. (1994) showed that treatment with interferon-gamma (IFNG;
147570) increased expression of MHC-encoded LMP2 (PSMB9; 177045) and
LMP7 (PSMB8; 177046) subunits of the proteasome and decreased expression
of 2 proteasomal subunits PSMB5 and PSMB6, which altered the proteolytic
specificity of proteasomes. IFNG may induce subunit replacements of
PSMB5 and PSMB6, producing proteasomes that may be more appropriate for
the immunologic processing of endogenous antigens.

Bortezomib, a reversible proteasome inhibitor used in the treatment of
refractory multiple myeloma (see 254500), targets primarily the
chymotrypsin-like activity of PSMB5. To study the molecular basis of
bortezomib resistance, Oerlemans et al. (2008) generated high levels of
acquired resistance in human myelomonocytic THP1 cells by exposure to
stepwise increasing concentrations of bortezomib. Analysis of resistant
cells revealed that those with higher levels of resistance were
homozygous for a missense mutation in the highly conserved
substrate/inhibitory binding domain of PSMB5. In addition, there was
dramatic overexpression of PSM5B protein, but not of other proteasome
subunits. RNAi-mediated silencing of PSMB5 expression resulted in
restoration of bortezomib sensitivity in resistant cells. Oerlemans et
al. (2008) concluded that bortezomib resistance is associated with
selective overexpression of a mutant PSMB5 protein.

MAPPING

The PSMB5 gene was mapped to chromosome 14q11.2 by Belich et al. (1994).
McCusker et al. (1997) demonstrated that the PSMB5 gene is located on
14q11.2 within 1 Mb of the genes encoding the alpha (600654) and beta
(602161) subunits of the PA28 complex.

REFERENCE 1. Akiyama, K.; Yokota, K.; Kagawa, S.; Shimbara, N.; Tamura, T.;
Akioka, H.; Nothwang, H. G.; Noda, C.; Tanaka, K.; Ichihara, A.:
cDNA cloning and interferon gamma down-regulation of proteasomal subunits
X and Y. Science 265: 1231-1234, 1994.

2. Belich, M. P.; Glynne, R. J.; Senger, G.; Sheer, D.; Trowsdale,
J.: Proteasome components with reciprocal expression to that of the
MHC-encoded LMP proteins. Curr. Biol. 4: 769-776, 1994.

3. McCusker, D.; Jones, T.; Sheer, D.; Trowsdale, J.: Genetic relationships
of the genes encoding the human proteasome beta subunits and the proteasome
PA28 complex. Genomics 45: 362-367, 1997.

4. Oerlemans, R.; Franke, N. E.; Assaraf, Y. G.; Cloos, J.; van Zantwijk,
I.; Berkers, C. R.; Scheffer, G. L.; Debipersad, K.; Vojtekova, K.;
Lemos, C.; van der Heijden, J. W.; Ylstra, B.; Peters, G. J.; Kaspers,
G. L.; Dijkmans, B. A. C.; Scheper, R. J.; Jansen, G.: Molecular
basis of bortezomib resistance: proteasome subunit beta-5 (PSMB5)
gene mutation and overexpression of PSMB5 protein. Blood 112: 2489-2499,
2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/8/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/8/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/11/1995

EDITED carol: 04/06/2011
wwang: 6/24/2009
terry: 6/8/2009
mgross: 6/25/2007
dkim: 7/23/1998
mark: 12/12/1997
terry: 12/8/1997
jamie: 1/29/1997
mark: 6/13/1995
carol: 1/11/1995

600026	TITLE *600026 SYNTROPHIN, BETA-1; SNTB1
;;SNT2B1;;
DYSTROPHIN-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN, BASIC A1; A1B;;
DAPA1B
DESCRIPTION Dystrophin-associated protein A1 is a heterogeneous group of
phosphorylated proteins consisting of distinct acidic and basic
components, designated alpha-A1 and beta-A1, respectively. From the
partial peptide sequence of A1 complex purified from rabbit muscle, Ahn
et al. (1994) designed oligonucleotide probes that were used to isolate
a cDNA for 1 human isoform of A1. This cDNA was found to encode a basic
A1 isoform that was distinct from the previously described syntrophins
in Torpedo and mouse and was expressed in many tissues with at least 5
distinct mRNA species. Comparison of the human cDNA sequence with the
GenBank expressed sequence tag (EST) database identified a sequence
related to human skeletal muscle EST25263, which was thought to be a
human homolog of mouse syntrophin-2 (see 600027). By study of a panel of
rodent/human somatic cell hybrids followed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Ahn et al. (1994) mapped the A1B gene to 8q23-q24.

Yang et al. (1994) reviewed the heterogeneity of the 59-kD DAP which is
an intracellular protein triplet component of the
dystrophin-glycoprotein complex of muscle.

Any of the dystrophin-associated proteins are candidates for the site of
mutation in neuromuscular disease. The map location of the A1B gene
appears to exclude it as the basis of any of the human neuromuscular
diseases with known map location. However, due to the wide tissue
distribution of the A1 transcript, it is possible that a defect of this
gene would result in a nonmuscular disorder.

REFERENCE 1. Ahn, A. H.; Yoshida, M.; Anderson, M. S.; Feener, C. A.; Selig,
S.; Hagiwara, Y.; Ozawa, E.; Kunkel, L. M.: Cloning of human basic
A1, a distinct 59-kDa dystrophin-associated protein encoded on chromosome
8q23-24. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 4446-4450, 1994.

2. Yang, B.; Ibraghimov-Beskrovnaya, O.; Moomaw, C. R.; Slaughter,
C. A.; Campbell, K. P.: Heterogeneity of the 59-kDa dystrophin-associated
protein revealed by cDNA cloning and expression. J. Biol. Chem. 269:
6040-6044, 1994.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/13/1994

EDITED carol: 11/08/2000
carol: 10/24/2000
carol: 10/13/2000
mcapotos: 10/12/2000
dkim: 7/16/1998
mark: 1/28/1996
terry: 1/23/1996
mark: 4/24/1995
carol: 1/13/1995
carol: 9/16/1994
mimadm: 7/30/1994

600207	TITLE *600207 HIPPOCALCIN-LIKE 1; HPCAL1
DESCRIPTION Hippocalcin-like-1 is a member of a family of neuron-specific
Ca(2+)-binding proteins found in the retina and brain.

CLONING

Using rat hippocalcin (142622) cDNA as a probe in the screening of a
human hippocampus cDNA library under low stringency conditions,
Kobayashi et al. (1994) isolated a clone that encoded a novel
calcium-binding protein structurally related to hippocalcin. They showed
that this hippocalcin-like protein has a primary structure of 193 amino
acids and contains 3 EF-hand structures and a possible NH2-terminal
myristoylation site. A single transcript of 1.7 kb was detected only in
the brain.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids, Kobayashi et al. (1994) mapped the
HPCAL1 gene to chromosome 2.

REFERENCE 1. Kobayashi, M.; Takamatsu, K.; Fujishiro, M.; Saitoh, S.; Noguchi,
T.: Molecular cloning of a novel calcium-binding protein structurally
related to hippocalcin from human brain and chromosomal mapping of
its gene. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1222: 515-518, 1994.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/23/1994

EDITED carol: 02/27/2002
carol: 11/23/1994

137170	TITLE *137170 GAMMA-GLUTAMYL CYCLOTRANSFERASE; GGCT
;;GLUTAMYLCYCLOTRANSFERASE, GAMMA; GCTG;;
CHROMOSOME 7 OPEN READING FRAME 24; C7ORF24;;
CYTOCHROME c-RELEASING FACTOR, 21-KD; CRF21
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

GGCT (EC 2.3.2.4) catalyzes the formation of 5-oxoproline (pyroglutamic
acid) from gamma-glutamyl dipeptides and may play a significant role in
glutathione homeostasis (Oakley et al., 2008).

CLONING

By mass spectrometric analysis of peptides obtained from an
apoptosis-inducing protein, followed by database analysis and RT-PCR of
total RNA from a human leukemia cell line, Masuda et al. (2006) cloned
GGCT, which they called CRF21. SDS-PAGE detected purified CRF21 at an
apparent molecular mass of 21 kD.

Using tryptic peptides obtained from GGCT partially purified from
expired human red blood cells for database analysis, Oakley et al.
(2008) obtained a full-length GGCT cDNA. The deduced 188-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of 21 kD. EST database analysis
revealed moderate GGCT expression in a wide range of human tissues, with
highest levels in bladder and salivary gland. Database analysis
identified GGCT orthologs in a range of species from C. elegans to
mammals, but not in plants.

GENE FUNCTION

Geranylgeraniol (GGO) induces apoptosis in human tumor cell lines
through a mitochondria-dependent pathway that includes cytochrome c
release. Masuda et al. (2006) found that GGO was unable to induce
cytochrome c release from isolated human mitochondria directly, and they
identified CRF21 as a cytosolic cytochrome c-releasing factor involved
in GGO-induced apoptosis. Overexpression of CRF21 in HeLa cells induced
cytochrome c release and apoptosis. Masuda et al. (2006) noted that
GGO-induced apoptosis was inhibited by a dominant-negative mutation of
JNK (MAPK8; 601158) that impeded JNK signaling, suggesting involvement
of JNK and CRF21 in GGO-induced apoptosis.

Oakley et al. (2008) confirmed that recombinant human GGCT used
gamma-glutamyl-L-alanine as its substrate. The enzymatic kinetics were
similar to those of GGCT purified from human erythrocytes.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Oakley et al. (2008) determined the crystal structure of recombinant
human GGCT to 2.4-angstrom resolution. GGCT adopted a mixed alpha/beta
topology with 6 beta stands, 5 alpha helices, and 4 short 3(10) helices,
and it assumed a unique structural fold that the authors termed a GGCT
fold. GGCT formed dimers, and each monomer featured an invagination that
Oakley et al. (2008) proposed was the active site. The site was lined
with hydrophilic and amphipathic residues, including a conserved glu98
that appeared to function as a general acid/base in the reaction.
Mutation of glu98 to ala or gln did not alter the structural fold, but
it completely inactivated the enzyme. Mutation analysis showed that
gly23 and tyr105 also contributed to substrate binding interactions.

GENE STRUCTURE

Oakley et al. (2008) determined that the GGCT gene contains 5 exons and
spans 8 kb.

MAPPING

Bissbort et al. (1984) assigned the GGCT gene to chromosome 7pter-p14 by
somatic cell hybrid studies.

By genomic sequence analysis, Oakley et al. (2008) mapped the GGCT gene
to chromosome 7p15-p14. They identified putative GGCT pseudogenes on
chromosomes 5 and 20. Oakley et al. (2008) noted that the mouse Ggct
gene maps to a region of chromosome 6 that shares homology of synteny
with human chromosome 7p15-p14.

REFERENCE 1. Bissbort, S.; Bender, K.; Grzeschik, K. H.: Assignment of the
human gene for gamma-glutamyl-cyclo-transferase (GCTG) to chromosome
7p. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 37: 442 only, 1984.

2. Masuda, Y.; Maeda, S.; Watanabe, A.; Sano, Y.; Aiuchi, T.; Nakajo,
S.; Itabe, H.; Nakaya, K.: A novel 21-kDa cytochrome c-releasing
factor is generated upon treatment of human leukemia U937 cells with
geranylgeraniol. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 346: 454-460, 2006.

3. Oakley, A. J.; Yamada, T.; Liu, D.; Coggan, M.; Clark, A. G.; Board,
P. G.: The identification and structural characterization of C7orf24
as gamma-glutamyl cyclotransferase: an essential enzyme in the gamma-glutamyl
cycle. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 22031-22042, 2008. Note: Erratum: J.
Biol. Chem. 283: 32152 only, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/8/2008

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED terry: 08/09/2012
joanna: 12/24/2008
mgross: 12/9/2008
terry: 12/8/2008
mgross: 9/19/2008
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/26/1989
marie: 3/25/1988
reenie: 6/4/1986

148040	TITLE *148040 KERATIN 5; KRT5
;;K5
DESCRIPTION For background information on keratins, see KRT15 (148030).

CLONING

Lersch and Fuchs (1988) reported the cDNA and amino acid sequences of a
human 58-kD type II keratin, K5, which is coexpressed with a 50-kD type
I keratin, K14 (148040), in stratified squamous epithelia.

Eckert and Rorke (1988) cloned full-length KRT5 from a cultured
keratinocyte cDNA library. The deduced 590-amino acid protein contains a
central alpha-helical core region of about 310 amino acids with a
7-amino acid repeat found in coiled-coil structures. The N and C termini
are serine rich and contain gly-gly-gly-x motifs.

Mischke et al. (1990) showed that 2 electrophoretic variants for each of
the human keratins K4 and K5 that are expressed in squamous
nonkeratinizing epithelia lining the upper digestive tract could be
distinguished by SDS-PAGE. K5 appears to have 2 codominant alleles, a
and b. On the basis of a population sample, they concluded that the
alleles are in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Trask et al. (1990) showed that normal mammary epithelial cells in
culture produce keratins K5, K6 (see 148041), K7 (148059), K14, and K17
(148069), whereas tumor cells produced mainly keratins K8 (148060), K18
(148070), and K19 (148020).

GENE STRUCTURE

Eckert and Rorke (1988) determined that the 5-prime region of the KRT5
gene contains a TATA box and a potential CAAT box. The 3-prime region
contains a single polyadenylation signal.

GENE FUNCTION

Knox et al. (2010) hypothesized that parasympathetic innervation is
required for epithelial progenitor cell function during organogenesis.
Removal of the parasympathetic ganglion in mouse explant organ culture
decreased the number and morphogenesis of keratin 5-positive epithelial
progenitor cells. These effects were rescued with an acetylcholine
analog. Knox et al. (2010) demonstrated that acetylcholine signaling,
via the muscarinic M1 receptor (118510) and epidermal growth factor
receptor (131550), increased epithelial morphogenesis and proliferation
of the keratin 5-positive progenitor cells. Parasympathetic innervation
maintained the epithelial progenitor cell population in an
undifferentiated state, which was required for organogenesis.

MAPPING

Rosenberg et al. (1991) assigned the type II epidermal keratin gene KRT5
to chromosome 12 by use of Southern blot analysis of somatic cell
hybrids. Bonifas et al. (1991) reported that a K5-specific human cosmid
was localized to a position on chromosome 12 (12q11-q13) nearly
indistinguishable from the location of D12S14 and D12S17 by 2-color
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Inasmuch as epidermolysis bullosa
simplex was found to be linked to D12S14 in 1 family, the very close
localization of the KRT5 gene to D12S14 by multicolor fluorescence in
situ hybridization supported KRT5 as a candidate gene (Bonifas et al.,
1992).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Epidermolysis Bullosa Simplex

In affected members of a large family with Dowling-Meara epidermolysis
bullosa simplex (EBS) (131760), Lane et al. (1992) identified a
heterozygous mutation in the KRT5 gene (E475G; 148040.0001).

In the large Finnish family with the generalized (Koebner) type of EBS
(131900), Dong et al. (1993) identified a heterozygous mutation in the
KRT5 gene (L462P; 148040.0002).

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with localized epidermolysis
bullosa simplex (131800), Chan et al. (1993) identified a heterozygous
mutation in the KRT5 gene (I161S; 148040.0003). Ehrlich et al. (1995)
identified the I161S mutation in 6 of 13 cases of the localized type of
EB simplex. The high frequency of this mutation suggested either a
hotspot or founder effect.

Humphries et al. (1996) concluded that the M327T (148040.0004) and N193K
(148040.0007) mutations in KRT5 account for most cases of dominant
localized epidermolysis bullosa simplex in Ireland.

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with epidermolysis bullosa
simplex with mottled pigmentation (EBS-MP; 131960), Uttam et al. (1996)
identified a heterozygous mutation in the KRT5 gene (P24L; 148040.0009).
Irvine et al. (1997) identified the P24L mutation in the sporadic case
of a 6-year-old boy who showed acral blistering, mottled pigmentation of
the limbs, and punctate hyperkeratoses primarily affecting the soles.
The authors speculated that recurrence of this mutation may be related
to the fact that it occurred in a CpG site. Although the mutation might
explain the epidermolysis, the cause of the mottled pigmentation
remained obscure.

In a Japanese girl with epidermolysis bullosa simplex with migratory
circinate erythema (609352) and affected members of an unrelated Korean
family, Gu et al. (2003) identified heterozygosity for a 1-bp deletion
(148040.0017) in the KRT5 gene. The patients had a phenotype that was
less severe than that of EBS Dowling-Meara, with an unusual migratory
circinate erythema and multiple vesicles on the erythematous area.

Yasukawa et al. (2002) reported an unusual Japanese family with both
autosomal recessive and dominant inheritance of EBS resulting in
phenotypic variability. The proband was a man with classic generalized
autosomal recessive EBS (EBSB1; 601001) who was compound heterozygous
for the E170K (148040.0020) and E418K (148040.0021) mutations in the
KRT5 gene. His paternal uncle, who had blisters restricted to the palms
and soles consistent with localized EBS (131800), was heterozygous for
the E170K mutation. The proband's deceased father and paternal
grandmother, who were putatively heterozygous for the E170K mutation,
also reportedly had localized blistering of the hands and feet. In
contrast, 2 unaffected family members were heterozygous for the E418K
substitution, implying that it is not pathogenic in isolation. In vitro
functional expression studies showed that cells transfected with either
mutation developed small ball-like filament aggregates, indicating a
disruption of the keratin network, although the effect was more
pronounced for the E170K mutation. Expression of both mutant proteins
exacerbated the clumping and resulted in significantly more disruption
than either alone. These findings were consistent with the marked
phenotypic and genotypic variability observed in this family.

- Dowling-Degos Disease 1

Dowling-Degos disease-1 (DDD1; 179850) is an autosomal dominant
genodermatosis characterized by progressive and disfiguring reticulate
hyperpigmentation of the flexures. Betz et al. (2006) performed a
genomewide linkage analysis of 2 German families and mapped DDD1 to
chromosome 12q, with a total lod score of 4.42 (theta = 0.0) for marker
D12S368. This region included the keratin gene cluster, which they
screened for mutations. They identified loss-of-function mutations in
the KRT5 gene (see, e.g., 148040.0018; 148040.0019) in all affected
family members and in 6 unrelated patients with DDD1. This represented
the first identified mutations that led to haploinsufficiency in a
keratin gene. The identification of loss-of-function mutations, along
with the results from additional functional studies, suggested a crucial
role for keratin in the organization of cell adhesion, melanosome
uptake, organelle transport, and nuclear anchorage.

- Susceptibility to Basal Cell Carcinoma

For a discussion of a possible association between the KRT5 gene and
susceptibility to basal cell carcinoma, see BCC4 (613061).

ANIMAL MODEL

Peters et al. (2001) found that Krt5-null mice died shortly after birth,
lacked keratin filaments in the basal epidermis, and were more severely
affected than Krt14 (148066)-null mice. In contrast to the Krt14-null
mice, Krt5-null mice showed a strong induction of the wound-healing
Krt6a (148041) in the suprabasal epidermis of cytolyzed areas. Krt5-null
and Krt14-null mice also differed with respect to tongue lesions. In the
absence of Krt5, residual Krt14 and Krt15 (148030) aggregated along
hemidesmosomes, demonstrating that individual keratins without a partner
can be stable in vivo. The data also indicated that Krt5 may be the
natural partner of Krt15 and Krt17 (148069). The findings suggested that
KRT5 null mutations may be lethal in human epidermolysis bullosa simplex
patients.

Roth et al. (2009) found that skin from Krt5-null mice showed increased
levels of the inflammatory cytokines MCP1 (CCL2; 158105), CCL19
(602227), and CCL20 (601960), all of which are regulated by NFKB
(164011) and involved in the recruitment, maturation, and migration of
Langerhans cells in the epidermis. These changes were not observed in
Krt14-null mice. The number of Langerhans cells were increased 2-fold in
epidermis of neonatal Krt5-null mice. In contrast, TNFA (191160) was not
changed, demonstrating the specificity of that process. The basal
epidermis from Krt5-null mice also showed decreased p120-catenin
(CTNND1; 601045). Enhanced Langerhans cell recruitment within the
epidermis was found in 5 human patients with various forms of EBS due to
KRT5 mutations, but not in EBS patients with KRT14 gene mutations. These
data provided an first explanation for distinct, keratin-type-specific
genotype-phenotype correlations in EBS, and suggested that the
pathophysiology of EBS involves more than mutant keratins.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, DOWLING-MEARA TYPE
KRT5, GLU475GLY

In affected members of a large family with Dowling-Meara EBS (131760),
Lane et al. (1992) identified a heterozygous A-to-G transition in the
KRT5 gene, resulting in a glu475-to-gly (E475G) substitution in a highly
conserved position 3 residues before the end of the rod domain, in a
sequence known as the helix termination peptide.

.0002
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, GENERALIZED
KRT5, LEU462PRO

In the large Finnish family with the generalized (Koebner) type of EBS
(131900) in which Ryynanen et al. (1991) found linkage to the type II
keratin cluster on 12q, Dong et al. (1993) found a heterozygous mutation
in KRT5. The disorder was associated with a T-to-C transition (CTG to
CCG) within exon 7, resulting in substitution of leucine by proline at
codon 462 (L462P). The substituted leucine is one that is invariant
among 8 different human keratins in a highly conserved segment at the
carboxy-terminal region of the keratin 5 polypeptide.

.0003
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, LOCALIZED
KRT5, ILE161SER

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with localized EBS (131800),
Chan et al. (1993) found a heterozygous T-to-G transversion in the
second base position of codon 161 of 1 of the 2 K5 alleles, leading to a
substitution of serine for isoleucine (I161S). Linkage analysis mapped
the defect to 12q11-q13. Ehrlich et al. (1995) identified the same
mutation in 6 of 13 cases of the Weber-Cockayne type of EB simplex. The
high frequency of this mutation suggested either a hotspot or founder
effect.

Pfendner et al. (2005) identified a heterozygous I161S mutation in a
patient with blistering of the hands and feet. The patient's affected
mother carried the same mutation.

.0004
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, LOCALIZED
KRT5, MET327THR

localized EBS (131800), Chan et al. (1994) identified a heterozygous
met327-to-thr (M327T) mutation in KRT5. The mutation cosegregated with
the disease, was located in the nonhelical linker segment L1-2, and
perturbed the ability of keratin 5 to assemble with its partner into
10-nm filaments.

Humphries et al. (1996) identified a heterozygous M327T mutation in
affected members of a large Irish family with localized EBS.

.0005
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, LOCALIZED
KRT5, ASN329LYS

Chan et al. (1994) found a heterozygous N329K mutation in the KRT5 gene
as the cause of localized EBS (131800) in a family with affected members
in 2 generations. Like the M327T mutation (148040.0004), it was located
in the nonhelical linker segment L1-2 of keratin 5 and perturbed the
ability of keratin 5 to assemble with its partner into 10-nm filaments.

.0006
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, GENERALIZED
KRT5, LYS173ASN

In a family with autosomal dominant generalized EBS (131900), Stephens
et al. (1995) demonstrated a mutation predicted to result in the
substitution of an evolutionarily conserved lysine by an asparagine
residue (K173N). Unlike previous heterozygous mutations located within
the initial segment of domain 1A of keratins, K173N heterozygosity did
not result in severe disease or clumping of keratin filaments. One
family member was homozygous for the K173N allele, having inherited it
from each of her affected first-cousin parents. Despite a lack of normal
keratin-5 molecules and an effective doubling of abnormal molecules
available for heterodimerization with keratin-14 during formation of
intermediate filaments (IFs), there were no significant differences in
either the clinical severity or the ultrastructural organization of the
homozygous individual's keratin IF cytoskeleton. These data demonstrated
that the K173N mutation behaves as a fully dominant allele. The findings
indicated also that a limited number of abnormal keratin molecules are
sufficient to impair cytoskeletal function and elicit epidermal
fragility and blistering.

.0007
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, LOCALIZED
KRT5, ASN193LYS

In affected members of a large Irish family with localized EBS (131800),
Humphries et al. (1996) identified a heterozygous mutation in the KRT5
gene, resulting in an asn193-to-lys (N193K) substitution.

.0008
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, DOWLING-MEARA TYPE
KRT5, LEU174PHE

In a Japanese patient with epidermolysis bullosa simplex Dowling-Meara
type (131760), Nomura et al. (1996) identified a heterozygous C-to-T
transition in the KRT5 gene, resulting in a leu174-to-phe (L174F)
substitution in the highly conserved 1A region within the helix
initiation peptide.

.0009
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX WITH MOTTLED PIGMENTATION
KRT5, PRO25LEU

In 2 unrelated families with epidermolysis bullosa simplex with mottled
pigmentation (EBS-MP; 131960), Uttam et al. (1996) found a heterozygous
C-to-T transition at base position 71 of the KRT5 gene, causing a P24L
substitution. The mutation occurred in the V1 domain of keratin 5;
previous mutations of K5 or K14 (148066) reported in EBS had been
located in the central helical rod domains, with a tendency to aggregate
at the highly conserved helix boundary peptides or at the nonhelical L12
linker domain. Irvine et al. (1997) identified the same mutation in the
sporadic case of a 6-year-old boy who showed acral blistering, mottled
pigmentation of the limbs, and punctate hyperkeratoses primarily
affecting the soles. The authors speculated that recurrence of this
mutation may be related to the fact that it occurred in a CpG site.
Although the mutation might explain the epidermolysis, the cause of the
mottled pigmentation remained obscure.

Until 1999, the P24L mutation of the KRT5 gene was the only mutation
identified in patients with EBS-MP. Moog et al. (1999) described a
sporadic patient and a family with an affected 6-year-old girl, her
mother, and maternal aunt; all of them had the P24L mutation. The
6-year-old girl showed erythema with telangiectasia on the cheeks and
above the upper lip at birth. From 6 months of age, blisters arose daily
after minor trauma, predominantly on the distal extremities. The lesions
healed without scarring. Over time, the tendency to blistering decreased
considerably. However, her skin remained fragile on sites where adhesive
tape was used. Hyperpigmented spots that were not preceded by blistering
developed from infancy. The mother had mild blistering (always confined
to the feet) and mottled pigmentation from infancy.

Irvine et al. (2001) reported a KRT5 pro25-to-leu mutation in 2
additional families, increasing the total number of EBS-MP kindreds with
this mutation to 7. This mutation was previously reported as PRO24LEU
based on the numbering suggested by Lersch et al. (1989), which ignores
the initial methionine. All other KRT5 mutations are numbered according
to GenBank GENBANK M21389, which includes methionine. Irvine et al.
(2001) suggested that the P25L designation be used in future reports.

Glasz-Bona et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous P25L mutation in
affected members of a 4-generation Hungarian pedigree with EBS-MP. There
were 10 affected members, 5 of whom were deceased. All had localized
blistering and skin fragility in childhood, followed by the development
of brownish, lentigo-like mottled pigmentation and hypopigmentation on
the trunk and/or extremities in adolescence and adulthood. Two patients
also had nail dystrophy. In this family, the P25L mutation segregated
with a gly138-to-glu (G138E) polymorphism.

.0010
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, GENERALIZED
KRT5, VAL7ALA

In a family with the autosomal dominant generalized variant of
epidermolysis bullosa simplex (131900), Galligan et al. (1998) found a
heterozygous T-to-C transition in codon 323 of KRT5 in affected
individuals, resulting in a valine to alanine substitution of the
seventh residue within the L12 linker domain. The valine at this
position is absolutely conserved in all type II keratins, and in other
intermediate filament subunits as well, which suggests that this residue
makes an important contribution to filament integrity. Secondary
structure analysis revealed that alanine at this position markedly
reduces both the hydrophobicity and the beta-sheet nature of the L12
domain.

.0011
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, DOWLING-MEARA TYPE
KRT5, IVS1DS, G-A, +1

In affected members of a large French family with Dowling-Meara EBS
(131760), Rugg et al. (1999) identified a heterozygous G-to-A transition
at the +1 position of the consensus GT donor splice site of intron 1 of
KRT5. This mutation leads to the use of an exonic GT cryptic donor
splice site located 66 nucleotides upstream from the normal donor splice
site. The corresponding peptide deletion includes the last 5 amino acids
of the H1 head domain and the first 17 amino acids of the conserved
N-terminal end of the 1A rod domain, including the first 2 heptad
repeats and the helix initiation peptide. Owing to the functional
importance of the removed region, the data strongly suggested that
shortened keratin polypeptide can impair keratin filament assembly in a
dominant manner and cause the Dowling-Meara type of EBS.

.0012
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, DOWLING-MEARA TYPE
KRT5, SER181PRO

In an infant with no family history of skin disease who presented within
hours of birth with extensive blistering of the skin and oral mucosa and
subsequently developed hoarse cries, Shemanko et al. (2000) detected a
T-to-C transition at the second nucleotide position of codon 181,
resulting in a ser-to-pro amino acid change (ser181 to pro; S181P). The
serine at position 181 in the helix initiation motif of keratin 5 is a
highly conserved amino acid across keratins and other intermediate
filament proteins. Although hoarseness is not a well documented feature
of Dowling-Meara epidermolysis bullosa simplex (131760), this patient
and another (see 148066.0003) demonstrated that hoarseness does not
necessarily indicate a poor prognosis.

.0013
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, LOCALIZED
KRT5, 1-BP DEL, 1635G

Sprecher et al. (2003) reported a 25-year-old male of Ashkenazi Jewish
origin whose initial clinical presentation, structural abnormalities of
lesional skin, and course of disease were consistent with a very mild
localized form of EBS (131800). DNA sequence analysis of the complete
coding sequence of the K5 gene disclosed in exon 9 a heterozygous
guanine deletion at position 1635 downstream of the ATG start codon of
K5 (1635delG). This mutation introduced a frameshift and delayed stop
codon 80 amino acids downstream of the mutation site. The deletion was
predicted to lead to the translation of an aberrant K5 protein carrying
an elongated tail domain.

.0014
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, GENERALIZED
KRT5, VAL186LEU

In a family with severe generalized EBS (131900), Liovic et al. (2001)
found a novel K5 mutation, val186 to leu (V186L), that produced a
conservative amino acid change at position 18 of the 1A helix. The
phenotype was unexpectedly severe for the location of the mutation,
which lies outside the consensus helix initiation motif mutation
hotspot, and other mutations at this position have been associated with
Weber-Cockayne (mild) epidermolysis bullosa simplex (131800) only. De
novo K5/K14 (148066) (mutant and wildtype) filament assembly in cultured
cells was studied to determine the effect of this mutation on filament
polymerization and stability. To visualize the structural impact of this
mutation and to compare it with an analogous mutation causing mild
disease, Liovic et al. (2001) generated a computer model of the 1A
region of the K5/K14 coiled-coil. The results showed a high level of
concordance between genetic, cell culture, and molecular modeling data,
suggesting that even a conservative substitution can cause severe
dysfunction in a structural protein, depending on the size and structure
of the amino acid involved.

.0015
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, DOWLING-MEARA TYPE, WITH SEVERE PALMOPLANTAR
KERATODERMA
KRT5, GLU477TER

In a German patient with epidermolysis bullosa simplex, Dowling-Meara
type (131760) with severe palmoplantar keratoderma, Muller et al. (1999)
found a 1429G-T transversion in the KRT5 gene that predicted a
glu477-to-ter (E477X) substitution at the last glutamate residue of the
KLLEGE motif. As a child, the patient developed severe palmoplantar
hyperkeratoses before she began to walk.

.0016
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, GENERALIZED, WITH SEVERE PALMOPLANTAR
KERATOSIS
KRT5, LYS472TER

Livingston et al. (2001) reported an epidermolysis bullosa simplex
patient with severe palmoplantar keratosis, underlying erythema in a
'glove and moccasin' distribution, and limited range of motion in the
fingers. Clinical, histologic, and ultrastructural features were
consistent with a diagnosis of generalized EBS (Koebner subtype;
131900). The patient had a novel single-base substitution, 1414A-T, in
the KRT5 gene that changed the lysine residue at amino acid 472 to a
nonsense codon (K472X). This change predicted the synthesis of a
truncated keratin-5, missing 119 amino acids, including the entire tail
domain and the highly conserved KLLEGE motif at the carboxy terminus of
the 2B domain of the central rod. Expression of an altered keratin-5, of
predicted mass and pI for the product of the K472X allele, was
documented by 1- and 2-dimensional Western blots of protein extracts
from patient skin. Ultrastructural analysis of the patient's
nonhyperkeratotic skin was remarkable for basal keratinocytes with dense
and irregular keratin filaments proximal to the basement membrane.
Keratinocytes, transfected with a cDNA carrying the K472X nonsense
mutation, overexpressed a truncated keratin-5, and showed a disorganized
and collapsed keratin filament cytoskeleton. This was the second
epidermolysis bullosa simplex patient reported with a premature
termination mutation in the KLLEGE motif (see 148040.0015). The
occurrence of severe palmoplantar hyperkeratosis in both patients
suggested that the keratin-5 tail domain may have important functions in
palmoplantar tissues.

.0017
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX WITH MIGRATORY CIRCINATE ERYTHEMA
KRT5, 1-BP DEL, 1649G

In a Japanese girl with epidermolysis bullosa simplex with migratory
circinate erythema (609352) and affected members of an unrelated Korean
family, Gu et al. (2003) identified heterozygosity for a deletion
mutation (1649delG) in exon 9 of the KRT5 gene, involving the V2 domain
and predicted to cause a frameshift that would delay the termination
codon and result in a protein 35 amino acids longer than the wildtype.
The patients had a phenotype that was less severe than that of EBS
Dowling-Meara, with an unusual migratory circinate erythema and multiple
vesicles on the erythematous area. The mutation was assumed to have
arisen de novo in the Japanese girl, as there were no other affected
family members, and the mutation was not found in the DNA of blood
samples from her parents.

When a younger sister with EBS was born into the Japanese family
previously reported by Gu et al. (2003) and was found to have the same
1649delG mutation as her older sib, Nagao-Watanabe et al. (2004)
reinvestigated the familial segregation of the mutation and identified
heterozygosity for the deletion in the mother's DNA from hair bulb and
buccal cell samples. Closer scrutiny of the mother's history revealed
that she had migratory circinate pigmentation of the skin in childhood,
and Nagao-Watanabe et al. (2004) concluded that this represented
maternal somatic and germline mosaicism.

.0018
DOWLING-DEGOS DISEASE 1
KRT5, 1-BP DUP, 418A

In 2 German pedigrees with Dowling-Degos disease (179850) described by
Biltz and Kiessling (1988) and Milde et al. (1994), Betz et al. (2006)
demonstrated a single adenine base insertion in the KRT5 gene (418dupA).
The mutation was predicted to lead to frameshift and premature
termination of translation at codon 178 (Ile140AsnfsTer39). Haplotype
and SNP analyses revealed that the mutation arose on the same genetic
background in the 2 families, suggesting a common ancestor. Betz et al.
(2006) also performed mutation analysis on the KRT5 gene in 8 patients
not belonging to the original pedigrees. In 5 of the 8 screened
patients, the frameshift mutation was also identified. Genotyping of
additional markers around the mutation showed a result compatible with
the existence of a common ancestor for all affected individuals. Milde
et al. (1994) described the disorder in the family they reported as
Dowling-Degos-Kitamura disease.

.0019
DOWLING-DEGOS DISEASE 1
KRT5, SER5TER

In a patient with Dowling-Degos disease (179850) reported by Braun-Falco
and Ring (2003), Betz et al. (2006) found a heterozygous nonsense
mutation resulting in a premature stop codon (14C-A; S5X).

.0020
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, LOCALIZED, INCLUDED
KRT5, GLU170LYS

In an unusual Japanese patient with autosomal recessive inheritance of
generalized EBS (EBSB1; 601001), Yasukawa et al. (2002) identified
compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the KRT5 gene: a G-to-A
transition in exon 1, resulting in a glu170-to-lys (E170K) substitution
in the highly conserved helix initiation peptide sequence of the 1A rod
domain, and a G-to-A transition in exon 7, resulting in a glu418-to-lys
(E418K; 148040.0021) substitution in the 2B domain, which is the
so-called 'stutter' region, an interruption in the heptad repeat
substructure. He had the classic phenotype, with blistering of the trunk
and extremities, improvement with age, and cytolysis within basal
keratinocytes on biopsy. His paternal uncle, who had blisters restricted
to the palms and soles consistent with localized EBS (131800), was
heterozygous for the E170K mutation. The proband's deceased father and
paternal grandmother, who were putatively heterozygous for the E170K
mutation, also reportedly had localized blistering of the hands and
feet. In contrast, 2 unaffected family members were heterozygous for the
E418K substitution, implying that it is not pathogenic in isolation.
Neither mutation was identified in 100 control alleles. In vitro
functional expression studies showed that cells transfected with either
mutation developed small ball-like filament aggregates, indicating a
disruption of the keratin network, although the effect was more
pronounced for the E170K mutation. Expression of both mutant proteins
exacerbated the clumping and resulted in significantly more disruption
than either alone. These findings were consistent with the marked
phenotypic and genotypic variability observed in this family.

.0021
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA SIMPLEX, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
KRT5, GLU418LYS

See 148040.0020 and Yasukawa et al. (2002).

REFERENCE 1. Betz, R. C.; Planko, L.; Eigelshoven, S.; Hanneken, S.; Pasternack,
S. M.; Bussow, H.; Van Den Bogaert, K.; Wenzel, J.; Braun-Falco, M.;
Rutten, A.; Rogers, M. A.; Ruzicka, T.; Nothen, M. M.; Magin, T. M.;
Kruse, R.: Loss-of-function mutations in the keratin 5 gene lead
to Dowling-Degos disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 78: 510-519, 2006.

2. Biltz, H.; Kiessling, M.: Dowling-Degos disease--an autosomally
dominant genodermatosis. Zeitsch. Hautk. 63: 642-644, 1988.

3. Bonifas, J. M.; Bare, J. W.; Lynch, E. D.; Lebo, R. V.; Epstein,
E. H., Jr.: Regional assignment of the human keratin 5 (KRT5) gene
to chromosome 12q near D12S14 by PCR analysis of somatic cell hybrids
and multicolor in situ hybridization. Genomics 13: 452-454, 1992.

4. Bonifas, J. M.; Rothman, A. L.; Epstein, E. H., Jr.: Epidermolysis
bullosa simplex: evidence in two families for keratin gene abnormalities. Science 254:
1202-1205, 1991.

5. Braun-Falco, M.; Ring, J.: Enhanced cytoplasmic expression of
desmocollin 3 in epidermal rete ridges of Dowling-Degos syndrome. Brit.
J. Derm. 149: 1293-1296, 2003.

6. Chan, Y.; Yu, Q.-C.; LeBlanc-Straceski, J.; Christiano, A.; Pulkkinen,
L.; Kucherlapati, R. S.; Uitto, J.; Fuchs, E.: Mutations in the non-helical
linker segment L1-2 of keratin 5 in patients with Weber-Cockayne epidermolysis
bullosa simplex. J. Cell Sci. 107: 765-774, 1994.

7. Chan, Y.-M.; Yu, Q.-C.; Fine, J.-D.; Fuchs, E.: The genetic basis
of Weber-Cockayne epidermolysis bullosa simplex. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 90: 7414-7418, 1993.

8. Dong, W.; Ryynanen, M.; Uitto, J.: Identification of a leucine-to-proline
mutation in the keratin 5 gene in a family with the generalized Koebner
type of epidermolysis bullosa simplex. Hum. Mutat. 2: 94-102, 1993.

9. Eckert, R. L.; Rorke, E. A.: The sequence of the human epidermal
58-kD (#5) type II keratin reveals an absence of 5-prime upstream
sequence conservation between coexpressed epidermal keratins. DNA 7:
337-345, 1988.

10. Ehrlich, P.; Sybert, V. P.; Spencer, A.; Stephens, K.: A common
keratin 5 gene mutation in epidermolysis bullosa simplex: Weber-Cockayne. J.
Invest. Derm. 104: 877-879, 1995.

11. Galligan, P.; Listwan, P.; Siller, G. M.; Rothnagel, J. A.: A
novel mutation in the L12 domain of keratin 5 in the Koebner variant
of epidermolysis bullosa simplex. J. Invest. Derm. 111: 524-527,
1998.

12. Glasz-Bona, A.; Medvecz, M.; Viragh, Z.; Hatvani, Z.; Blazsek,
A.; Karpati, S.: Epidermolysis bullosa simplex with mottled pigmentation--mutation
analysis proved the diagnosis in a four-generation pedigree. Europ.
J. Derm. 20: 698-700, 2010.

13. Gu, L.-H.; Kim, S.-C.; Ichiki, Y.; Park, J.; Nagai, M.; Kitajima,
Y.: A usual frameshift and delayed termination codon mutation in
keratin 5 causes a novel type of epidermolysis bullosa simplex with
migratory circinate erythema. J. Invest. Derm. 121: 482-485, 2003.

14. Humphries, M. M.; Mansergh, F. C.; Kiang, A.-S.; Jordan, S. A.;
Sheils, D. M.; Martin, M. J.; Farrar, G. J.; Kenna, P. F.; Young,
M. M.; Humphries, P.: Three keratin gene mutations account for the
majority of dominant simplex epidermolysis bullosa cases within the
population of Ireland. Hum. Mutat. 8: 57-63, 1996.

15. Irvine, A. D.; McKenna, K. E.; Jenkinson, H.; Hughes, A. E.:
A mutation in the V1 domain of keratin 5 causes epidermolysis bullosa
simplex with mottled pigmentation. J. Invest. Derm. 108: 809-810,
1997.

16. Irvine, A. D.; Rugg, E. L.; Lane, E. B.; Hoare, S.; Peret, C.;
Hughes, A. E.; Heagerty, A. H.: Molecular confirmation of the unique
phenotype of epidermolysis bullosa simplex with mottled pigmentation. Brit.
J. Derm. 144: 40-45, 2001.

17. Knox, S. M.; Lombaert, I. M. A.; Reed, X.; Vitale-Cross, L.; Gutkind,
J. S.; Hoffman, M. P.: Parasympathetic innervation maintains epithelial
progenitor cells during salivary organogenesis. Science 329: 1645-1647,
2010.

18. Lane, E. B.; Rugg, E. L.; Navsaria, H.; Leigh, I. M.; Heagerty,
A. H. M.; Ishida-Yamamoto, A.; Eady, R. A. J.: A mutation in the
conserved helix termination peptide of keratin 5 in hereditary skin
blistering. Nature 356: 244-246, 1992.

19. Lersch, R.; Fuchs, E.: Sequence and expression of a type II keratin,
K5, in human epidermal cells. Molec. Cell. Biol. 8: 486-493, 1988.

20. Lersch, R.; Stellmach, V.; Stocks, C.; Giudice, G.; Fuchs, E.
: Isolation, sequence, and expression of a human keratin K5 gene:
transcriptional regulation of keratins and insights into pairwise
control. Molec. Cell. Biol. 9: 3685-3697, 1989.

21. Liovic, M.; Stojan, J.; Bowden, P. E.; Gibbs, D.; Vahlquist, A.;
Lane, E. B.; Komel, R.: A novel keratin 5 mutation (K5V186L) in a
family with EBS-K: a conservative substitution can lead to development
of different disease phenotypes. J. Inves. Derm. 116: 964-969, 2001.

22. Livingston, R. J.; Sybert, V. P.; Smith, L. T.; Dale, B. A.; Presland,
R. B.; Stephens, K.: Expression of a truncated keratin 5 may contribute
to severe palmar-plantar hyperkeratosis in epidermolysis bullosa simplex
patients. J. Invest. Derm. 116: 970-974, 2001.

23. Milde, P.; Suss, R.; Megahed, M.; Goerz, G.: Morbus Dowling-Degos-Kitamura. Z.
Hautkr. 69: 282-283, 1994.

24. Mischke, D.; Wille, G.; Wild, A. G.: Allele frequencies and segregation
of human polymorphic keratins K4 and K5. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 46:
548-552, 1990.

25. Moog, U.; de Die-Smulders, C. E. M.; Scheffer, H.; van der Vlies,
P.; Henquet, C. J. M.; Jonkman, M. F.: Epidermolysis bullosa simplex
with mottled pigmentation: clinical aspects and confirmation of the
P24L mutation in the KRT5 gene in further patients. Am. J. Med. Genet. 86:
376-379, 1999.

26. Muller, F. B.; Anton-Lamprecht, I.; Kuster, W.; Korge, B. P.:
A premature stop codon mutation in the 2B helix termination peptide
of keratin 5 in a German epidermolysis bullosa simplex Dowling-Meara
case. J. Invest. Derm. 112: 988-990, 1999.

27. Nagao-Watanabe, M.; Fukao, T.; Matsui, E.; Kaneko, H.; Inoue,
R.; Kawamoto, N.; Kasahara, K.; Nagai, M.; Ichiki, Y.; Kitajima, Y.;
Kondo, N.: Identification of somatic and germline mosaicism for a
keratin 5 mutation in epidermolysis bullosa simplex in a family of
which the proband was previously regarded as a sporadic case. Clin.
Genet. 66: 236-238, 2004.

28. Nomura, K.; Shimizu, H.; Meng, X.; Umeki, K.; Tamai, K.; Sawamura,
D.; Nagao, K.; Kawakami, T.; Nishikawa, T.; Hashimoto, I.: A novel
keratin K5 mutation in Dowling-Meara epidermolysis bullosa simplex. J.
Invest. Derm. 107: 253-254, 1996.

29. Peters, B.; Kirfel, J.; Bussow, H.; Vidal, M.; Magin, T. M.:
Complete cytolysis and neonatal lethality in keratin 5 knockout mice
reveal its fundamental role in skin integrity and in epidermolysis
bullosa simplex. Molec. Biol. Cell 12: 1775-1789, 2001.

30. Pfendner, E. G.; Sadowski, S. G.; Uitto, J.: Epidermolysis bullosa
simplex: recurrent and de novo mutations in the KRT5 and KRT14 genes,
phenotype/genotype correlations, and implications for genetic counseling
and prenatal diagnosis. J. Invest. Derm. 125: 239-243, 2005.

31. Rosenberg, M.; Fuchs, E.; Le Beau, M. M.; Eddy, R. L.; Shows,
T. B.: Three epidermal and one simple epithelial type II keratin
genes map to human chromosome 12. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 57: 33-38,
1991.

32. Roth, W.; Reuter, U.; Wohlenberg, C.; Bruckner-Tuderman, L.; Magin,
T. M.: Cytokines as genetic modifiers in K5-/- mice and in human
epidermolysis bullosa simplex. Hum. Mutat. 30: 832-841, 2009.

33. Rugg, E. L.; Rachet-Prehu, M.-O.; Rochat, A.; Barrandon, Y.; Goossens,
M.; Lane, E. B.; Hovnanian, A.: Donor splice site mutation in keratin
5 causes in-frame removal of 22 amino acids of H1 and 1A rod domains
in Dowling-Meara epidermolysis bullosa simplex. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 7:
293-300, 1999.

34. Ryynanen, M.; Knowlton, R. G.; Uitto, J.: Mapping of epidermolysis
bullosa simplex mutation to chromosome 12. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 49:
978-984, 1991.

35. Shemanko, C. S.; Horn, H. M.; Keohane, S. G.; Hepburn, N.; Kerr,
A. I. G.; Atherton, D. J.; Tidman, M. J.; Lane, E. B.: Laryngeal
involvement in the Dowling-Meara variant of epidermolysis bullosa
simplex with keratin mutations of severely disruptive potential. Brit.
J. Derm. 142: 315-320, 2000.

36. Sprecher, E.; Yosipovitch, G.; Bergman, R.; Ciubutaro, D.; Indelman,
M.; Pfendner, E.; Goh, L. C.; Miller, C. J.; Uitto, J.; Richard, G.
: Epidermolytic hyperkeratosis and epidermolysis bullosa simplex caused
by frameshift mutations altering the V2 tail domains of keratin 1
and keratin 5. J. Invest. Derm. 120: 623-626, 2003.

37. Stephens, K.; Zlotogorski, A.; Smith, L.; Ehrlich, P.; Wijsman,
E.; Livingston, R. J.; Sybert, V. P.: Epidermolysis bullosa simplex:
a keratin 5 mutation is a fully dominant allele in epidermal cytoskeleton
function. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 56: 577-585, 1995.

38. Trask, D. K.; Band, V.; Zajchowski, D. A.; Yaswen, P.; Suh, T.;
Sager, R.: Keratins as markers that distinguish normal and tumor-derived
mammary epithelial cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 2319-2323, 1990.

39. Uttam, J.; Hutton, E.; Coulombe, P. A.; Anton-Lamprecht, I.; Yu,
Q.-C.; Gedde-Dahl, T., Jr.; Fine, J.-D.; Fuchs, E.: The genetic basis
of epidermolysis bullosa simplex with mottled pigmentation. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 9079-9084, 1996.

40. Yasukawa, K.; Sawamura, D.; McMillan, J. R.; Nakamura, H.; Shimizu,
H.: Dominant and recessive compound heterozygous mutations in epidermolysis
bullosa simplex demonstrate the role of the stutter region in keratin
intermediate filament assembly. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 23670-23674,
2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/23/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/26/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/10/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/3/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/25/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/27/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/29/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/12/2004
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 4/28/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 4/25/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 4/10/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 4/9/2001
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 6/13/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/28/1999
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 9/9/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/3/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/21/1997
Cynthia K. Ewing - updated: 11/22/1996
Moyra Smith - updated: 8/29/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED carol: 11/04/2013
carol: 9/30/2013
ckniffin: 9/24/2013
carol: 7/23/2013
alopez: 3/29/2012
terry: 3/28/2012
ckniffin: 3/26/2012
ckniffin: 11/19/2010
alopez: 11/15/2010
terry: 11/10/2010
wwang: 11/19/2009
ckniffin: 11/3/2009
alopez: 10/2/2009
carol: 9/14/2009
ckniffin: 8/25/2009
wwang: 9/21/2006
alopez: 3/1/2006
alopez: 2/28/2006
terry: 2/27/2006
wwang: 5/5/2005
wwang: 5/2/2005
terry: 4/29/2005
mgross: 11/12/2004
alopez: 4/28/2003
alopez: 4/25/2003
alopez: 4/10/2003
mgross: 2/22/2002
alopez: 4/9/2001
alopez: 6/13/2000
carol: 11/3/1999
terry: 10/28/1999
carol: 9/9/1999
carol: 2/7/1999
terry: 2/3/1999
alopez: 5/14/1998
terry: 6/24/1997
alopez: 6/23/1997
terry: 6/21/1997
alopez: 6/2/1997
mark: 11/22/1996
mark: 8/29/1996
terry: 8/28/1996
terry: 8/22/1996
mark: 8/18/1995
jason: 7/1/1994
carol: 10/4/1993
carol: 6/30/1993
carol: 4/6/1993
carol: 7/6/1992

602731	TITLE *602731 FYN-BINDING PROTEIN; FYB
;;SLAP130;;
p120/130;;
ADHESION AND DEGRANULATION ADAPTOR PROTEIN; ADAP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

T-cell receptor signaling involves activation of the src
protein-tyrosine kinases LCK (153390) and FYN (137025), leading to the
phosphorylation of various substrates including SLP76 (LCP2; 601603). Da
Silva et al. (1993) identified FYB (called p120/130 by them), a 120- and
130-kD protein doublet that associates with the SH2 domain of FYN.
T-cell receptor ligation led to increased tyrosine phosphorylation of
FYB. Da Silva et al. (1997) showed that the 120- and 130-kD doublet is
composed of 2 related isoforms of FYB. In T cells from FYN mutant mice,
the phosphorylation of FYB was reduced, but not abolished, suggesting to
da Silva et al. (1997) that FYB could be phosphorylated by another
kinase. By screening a Jurkat T-cell line expression library with
antibodies against FYB, da Silva et al. (1997) identified FYB cDNAs.
Northern blot analysis revealed that the 4.5-kb FYB mRNA is expressed
only in myeloid and T cells. Expression of FYB in mammalian cells
yielded a protein that migrated at 120 kD on SDS-PAGE. By Western
blotting, da Silva et al. (1997B) showed that FYB coimmunoprecipitated
with FYN and with SLP76 in mammalian cell lysates. They concluded that
FYB acts as a component of the FYN and SLP76 signaling cascades in T
cells.

Musci et al. (1997) cloned cDNAs encoding SLAP130, a 130-kD
phosphoprotein that is associated with SLP76. Da Silva et al. (1997)
stated that SLAP130 is identical to FYB except for 2 conservative and 1
nonconservative amino acid substitutions. Musci et al. (1997) attributed
the difference between the calculated mass of SLAP130 (86 kD) and the
observed mass by SDS-PAGE (130 kD) to posttranslational modifications or
the abundance of charged amino acids.

Da Silva et al. (1997) used the human FYB cDNA to clone the mouse
homolog. The sequence of the predicted 783-amino acid human FYB protein
shares 77% identity with that of mouse FYB.

GENE FUNCTION

By immunoblot analysis, Geng et al. (2001) showed that FCER1A (147140)
aggregation induces rapid FYB tyrosine phosphorylation in rat basophilic
leukemia mast cells and the release of beta hexosaminidase (see 606873).
Confocal microscopy demonstrated that FYB colocalizes with actin (see
ACTA1; 102610) in membrane ruffles. FYB overexpression enhanced mast
cell adhesion to fibronectin (FN1; 135600) and SH3 domain-mediated
release of beta hexosaminidase, implying increased histamine release as
well. Mast cell adhesion had no effect on FYB phosphorylation but
enhanced beta hexosaminidase release.

Medeiros et al. (2007) presented evidence for a previously unrecognized
function for ADAP in regulating T-cell receptor (TCR)-mediated
activation of the transcription factor NF-kappa-B (see 164011).
Stimulation of ADAP-deficient mouse T cells with antibodies to CD3 (see
186740) and CD28 (186760) resulted in impaired nuclear translocation of
NF-kappa-B, a reduced DNA binding, and delayed degradation and decreased
phosphorylation of I-kappa-B (see 164008). TCR-stimulated assembly of
the CARMA1 (607210)-BCL10 (603517)-MALT1 (604860) complex was
substantially impaired in the absence of ADAP. Medeiros et al. (2007)
further identified a region of ADAP that is required for association
with the CARMA1 adaptor and NF-kappa-B activation but is not required
for ADAP-dependent regulation of adhesion.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using gene targeting strategies, Griffiths et al. (2001) and Peterson et
al. (2001) each generated mice lacking Fyb expression in mature T
lymphocytes. Although lymphocyte development was normal in these mice,
splenic CD4 (186940)-positive and CD8 (see 186910)-positive T-cell
numbers were reduced, suggesting that Fyb may be required for peripheral
T-cell homeostasis. T-cell proliferation in response to phorbol ester
was normal in Fyb-deficient cells, but responses to anti-CD3E (186830),
with or without anti-CD28 (186760), were reduced, as were cytokine
production and activation marker upregulation. These results
demonstrated that Fyb acts as a positive regulator of T-cell activation.
Fyb-deficient mice also had reduced antibody production to T-dependent
antigens in vivo. Although downstream signaling pathways and antigen
receptor clustering were normal, clustering of the integrin LFA1 (see
153370 and 600065) was not. Flow chamber analysis demonstrated that
anti-CD3E-stimulated but not phorbol ester-stimulated Fyb-deficient T
cells were defective in adhering to mouse Icam1 (147840), to human ICAM2
(146630), and to other substrates mediated by integrins, although
integrin expression was not reduced. Using confocal microscopy, Peterson
et al. (2001) showed that Fyb-deficient T cells had normal clustering of
actin but no polarization of LFA1, whereas LFA1 clustering was markedly
increased in wildtype T cells. Griffiths et al. (2001) concluded that
the T-cell receptor-induced adhesion defect in integrin activation was
due to a block in 'inside-out' signaling between the T-cell receptor and
integrins. Peterson et al. (2001) and Griffiths et al. (2001) proposed
that on the basis of these findings and studies by Geng et al. (2001),
which implicated FYB in vasoactive mediator release, that FYB be
redesignated 'adhesion and degranulation adaptor protein,' or ADAP.

REFERENCE 1. da Silva, A. J.; Janssen, O.; Rudd, C. E.: T cell receptor zeta/CD3-p59fyn(T)-associated
p120/130 binds to the SH2 domain of p59fyn(T). J. Exp. Med. 178:
2107-2113, 1993.

2. da Silva, A. J.; Li, Z.; De Vera, C.; Canto, E.; Findell, P.; Rudd,
C. E.: Cloning of a novel T-cell protein FYB that binds FYN and SH2-domain-containing
leukocyte protein 76 and modulates interleukin 2 production. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 7493-7498, 1997.

3. da Silva, A. J.; Rosenfield, J. M.; Mueller, I.; Bouton, A.; Hirai,
H.; Rudd, C. E.: Biochemical analysis of p120/130; a protein-tyrosine
kinase substrate restricted to T and myeloid cells. J. Immun. 158:
2007-2016, 1997.

4. Geng, L.; Pfister, S.; Kraeft, S.-K.; Rudd, C. E.: Adaptor FYB
(Fyn-binding protein) regulates integrin-mediated adhesion and mediator
release: differential involvement of the FYB SH3 domain. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 98: 11527-11532, 2001.

5. Griffiths, E. K.; Krawczyk, C.; Kong, Y.-Y.; Raab, M.; Hyduk, S.
J.; Bouchard, D.; Chan, V. S.; Kozieradzki, I.; Oliveira-dos-Santos,
A. J.; Wakeham, A.; Ohashi, P. S.; Cybulsky, M. I.; Rudd, C. E.; Penninger,
J. M.: Positive regulation of T cell activation and integrin adhesion
by the adapter Fyb/Slap. Science 293: 2260-2263, 2001.

6. Medeiros, R. B.; Burbach, B. J.; Mueller, K. L.; Srivastava, R.;
Moon, J. J.; Highfill, S.; Peterson, E. J.; Shimizu, Y.: Regulation
of NF-kappa-B activation in T cells via association of the adapter
proteins ADAP and CARMA1. Science 316: 754-758, 2007.

7. Musci, M. A.; Hendricks-Taylor, L. R.; Motto, D. G.; Paskind, M.;
Kamens, J.; Turck, C. W.; Koretzky, G. A.: Molecular cloning of SLAP-130,
and SLP-76-associated substrate of the T cell antigen receptor-stimulated
protein tyrosine kinases. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 11674-11677, 1997.

8. Peterson, E. J.; Woods, M. L.; Dmowski, S. A.; Derimanov, G.; Jordan,
M. S.; Wu, J. N.; Myung, P. S.; Liu, Q.-H.; Pribila, J. T.; Freedman,
B. D.; Shimizu, Y.; Koretzky, G. A.: Coupling of the TCR to integrin
activation by SLAP-130/Fyb. Science 293: 2263-2265, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/30/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/4/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/25/2001

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/18/1998

EDITED wwang: 04/20/2009
wwang: 7/16/2008
alopez: 5/30/2007
terry: 5/30/2007
carol: 5/16/2007
ckniffin: 5/7/2002
mgross: 10/4/2001
mgross: 9/25/2001
alopez: 7/29/1998
alopez: 6/18/1998

611545	TITLE *611545 CYTOCHROME P450, FAMILY 4, SUBFAMILY F, POLYPEPTIDE 8; CYP4F8
;;CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY IVF, POLYPEPTIDE 8
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By RT-PCR of human seminal vesicles using degenerate CYP4 primers as
probe, Bylund et al. (1999) cloned CYP4F8. The deduced 520-amino acid
protein has a heme-binding region and conserved heme ligand cys468.
CYP4F8 shares 81.2% and 76.7% amino acid identity with CYP4F2 (604426)
and CYP4F3 (601270), respectively. Northern blot analysis of human
seminal vesicles detected 2.1-kb and 2.3-kb transcripts.

By immunohistochemical and Western blot analysis of a wide range of
tissues, Stark et al. (2003) localized CYP4F8 to human seminal vesicle
epithelium, epidermis, corneal epithelium, and proximal renal tubules.
Staining in healthy epidermis extended from the basal cell to granular
cell layers. Northern blot analysis of human tissues detected 2.1-,
2.5-, and 5.8-kb transcripts in kidney and liver, and 2.1- and 2.5-kb
transcripts in seminal vesicles. RT-PCR analysis confirmed CYP4F8
expression in scalp hair roots. RT-PCR and immunohistochemical studies
showed increased CYP4F8 mRNA and protein expression in psoriatic lesions
compared to unaffected epidermis in 4 patients with psoriasis (see
177900).

By RT-PCR, immunohistochemical analysis, and in situ hybridization,
Stark et al. (2005) detected CYP4F8 expression in epithelial linings of
seminal vesicles and the ampulla of the vas deferens and in transitional
epithelium of the ureter and bladder. Immunofluorescence studies
colocalized CYP4F8 protein with PTGS2 (600262) in distal vas deferens
epithelium.

GENE FUNCTION

Using CYP4F8 expressed in yeast, Bylund et al. (2000) demonstrated that
CYP4F8 catalyzed omega-2-hydroxylation of prostaglandin H1 (PGH1) and
prostaglandin H2 (PGH2). CYP4F8 showed little activity against
prostaglandins D2, E1, E2, F2-alpha, and leukotriene B4. Stark et al.
(2005) showed that CYP4F8 metabolized prostaglandin I2 (PGI2) and a
stable analog of PGI2 to 19-hydroxyl compounds.

Stark et al. (2005) characterized CYP4F8 enzyme activity against
polyunsaturated long chain fatty acids. CYP4F8 catalyzed epioxidation of
docosahexaenoic acid (22:6n-3) and docosapentaenoic acid (22:5n-3) and
omega-3-hydroxylation of 22:5n-6, the latter forming 20-hydroxy-22:5n-6
as the main product. Single amino acid substitutions in substrate
recognition site-1 (SRS1) and SRS4 of CYP4F8 affected oxygenation of
arachidonic acid but did not affect oxygenation of PGH2 analogs.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bylund et al. (1999) determined that the CYP4F8 gene contains 13 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Bylund et al. (1999) mapped the CYP4F8
gene to chromosome 19p13.1.

REFERENCE 1. Bylund, J.; Finnstrom, N.; Oliw, E. H.: Gene expression of a novel
cytochrome P450 of the CYP4F subfamily in human seminal vesicles. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 261: 169-174, 1999.

2. Bylund, J.; Hidestrand, M.; Ingelman-Sundberg, M.; Oliw, E. H.
: Identification of CYP4F8 in human seminal vesicles as a prominent
19-hydroxylase of prostaglandin endoperoxides. J. Biol. Chem. 275:
21844-21849, 2000.

3. Stark, K.; Bylund, J.; Torma, H.; Sahlen, G.; Oliw, E. H.: On
the mechanism of biosynthesis of 19-hydroxyprostaglandins of human
seminal fluid and expression of cyclooxygenase-2, PGH 19-hydroxylase
(CYP4F8) and microsomal PGE synthase-1 in seminal vesicles and vas
deferens. Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat. 75: 47-64, 2005.

4. Stark, K.; Torma, H.; Cristea, M.; Oliw, E. H.: Expression of
CYP4F8 (prostaglandin H 19-hydroxylase) in human epithelia and prominent
induction in epidermis of psoriatic lesions. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 409:
188-196, 2003.

5. Stark, K.; Wongsud, B.; Burman, R.; Oliw, E. H.: Oxygenation of
polyunsaturated long chain fatty acids by recombinant CYP4F8 and CYP4F12
and catalytic importance of Tyr-125 and Gly-328 of CYP4F8. Arch.
Biochem. Biophys. 441: 174-181, 2005.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 10/22/2007

EDITED wwang: 10/22/2007

605370	TITLE *605370 RHO GTPase-ACTIVATING PROTEIN 26; ARHGAP26
;;GTPase REGULATOR ASSOCIATED WITH FOCAL ADHESION KINASE; GRAF;;
KIAA0621
GRAF/MLL FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Borkhardt et al. (2000) stated that mutual translocations involving
11q23 in acute leukemias had been demonstrated to show fusion between
the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL; 159555) gene and a variety of different
partner genes to a total of 23. The detection of a unique
t(5;11)(q31;q23) in an infant with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia
(JMML; 607785) and an MLL gene rearrangement provided an opportunity to
clone another MLL fusion partner gene. By cloning the breakpoints in
this translocation, Borkhardt et al. (2000) recovered a member of the
GTPase-activating protein (GAP) family, which they identified as the
human homolog of the avian GRAF gene (Hildebrand et al., 1996).

Ishikawa et al. (1998) cloned a GRAF cDNA, which they designated
KIAA0621, from a human brain cDNA library and found that it encodes a
deduced 753-amino acid protein with a molecular mass of 87 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Hildebrand et al. (1996) determined that the GRAF gene is highly
homologous to the BCR gene (151410), which is also involved in a
leukemia-associated translocation. The avian GRAF protein binds to the
C-terminal domain of pp125(FAK), one of the tyrosine kinases predicted
to be a critical component of the integrin signaling transduction
pathway, in an SH3 domain-dependent manner and stimulates the GTPase
activity of the GTP-binding protein RhoA. Thus, GRAF acts as a negative
regulator of RhoA.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, in vitro binding assays, and
immunoprecipitation analysis, Shibata et al. (2001) showed that PKN-beta
(PKN3; 610714) interacted with GRAF and GRAF2 (ARHGAP10; 609746). A
constitutively active form of PKN-beta phosphorylated recombinant GRAF
and GRAF2. Mutation analysis showed that the linker region of PKN-beta
bound to the SH3 domains of GRAF and GRAF2.

MAPPING

Ishikawa et al. (1998) mapped the GRAF gene to chromosome 5. Borkhardt
et al. (2000) found that the GRAF gene maps outside the 5q31 region that
is commonly deleted in hematologic malignancies; however, inactivation
of both alleles in at least some cases suggests that deletions and
mutations of the GRAF gene may be instrumental in the development and
progression of hematologic disorders with a del(5q). By FISH, Borkhardt
et al. (2000) confirmed the assignment of GRAF to 5q31.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Borkhardt et al. (2000) sequenced several cDNA clones from 13 cases of
hematologic malignancy in which 1 allele of GRAF was deleted. In 1
patient with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML; 607785), they found
a point mutation within the GAP domain of the second GRAF allele
(605370.0001). In 2 additional patients, they found an insertion of 52
or 74 bp within the GRAF cDNA, which generated a reading frameshift
followed by a premature stop codon (605370.0002-605370.0003). The
mutations were apparently somatic events.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LEUKEMIA, JUVENILE MYELOMONOCYTIC, SOMATIC
ARHGAP26, ASN417SER

In a leukemic cells derived from a patient with juvenile myelomonocytic
leukemia (JMML; 607785) and a fusion between the MLL gene on 11q and the
GRAF gene on 5q, Borkhardt et al. (2000) identified in the other GRAF
allele an A-to-G transition at nucleotide 1255 that resulted in the
substitution of a serine for an asparagine at amino acid 417. This was
thought to be a second hit in a leukemogenic process.

.0002
LEUKEMIA, JUVENILE MYELOMONOCYTIC, SOMATIC
ARHGAP26, 52-BP INS

In leukemic cells from a patient with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia
(JMML; 607785) and a reciprocal translocation t(5;11)(q31;q23) involving
the GRAF and MLL genes, Borkhardt et al. (2000) found that the other
allele of the GRAF gene carried a 52-bp insertion at the splice junction
of exons 12 and 13. The exon/intron boundary was located at nucleotides
1290/91. The insertion led to a reading frameshift that generated a stop
codon. The predicted truncated GRAF protein lacked almost the entire GAP
domain and therefore was most likely not functional. The 52-bp insertion
(nucleotides 32560-32611) originated from a 524-bp long sequence located
upstream of the 3-prime splice site of the adjacent nearly 13-kb long
intron. Because the insertion is imbedded in perfect splice donor and
acceptor sites, it was thought to be the result of aberrant splicing.

.0003
LEUKEMIA, JUVENILE MYELOMONOCYTIC, SOMATIC
ARHGAP26, 74-BP INS

In leukemic cells from a patient with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia
(JMML; 607785) and a t(5;11)(q31;q23) involving the N-terminal part of
MLL and the C-terminal part of the GRAF gene, Borkhardt et al. (2000)
found that the GRAF allele on the other chromosome 5 carried a 74-bp
insertion located in the 60-kb long intron between exons 15 and 16. The
insertion presumably generated a stop codon. The predicted protein
lacked the SH3 domain of GRAF that was shown to be necessary for the
interaction with the focal adhesion kinase.

REFERENCE 1. Borkhardt, A.; Bojesen, S.; Haas, O. A.; Fuchs, U.; Bartelheimer,
D.; Loncarevic, I. F.; Bohle, R. M.; Harbott, J.; Repp, R.; Jaeger,
U.; Viehmann, S.; Henn, T.; Korth, P.; Scharr, D.; Lampert, F.: The
human GRAF gene is fused to MLL in a unique t(5;11)(q31;q23) and both
alleles are disrupted in three cases of myelodysplastic syndrome/acute
myeloid leukemia with a deletion 5q. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 9168-9173,
2000.

2. Hildebrand, J. D.; Taylor, J. M.; Parsons, T. J.: An SH3 domain-containing
GTPase-activating protein for Rho and Cdc42 associates with focal
adhesion kinase. Molec. Cell. Biol. 16: 3169-3178, 1996.

3. Ishikawa, K.; Nagase, T.; Suyama, M.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.;
Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. X. The complete sequences of 100 new
cDNA clones from brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA
Res. 5: 169-176, 1998.

4. Shibata, H.; Oishi, K.; Yamagiwa, A.; Matsumoto, M.; Mukai, H.;
Ono, Y.: PKN-beta interacts with the SH3 domains of Graf and a novel
Graf related protein, Graf2, which are GTPase activating proteins
for Rho family. J. Biochem. 130: 23-31, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/23/2007
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 10/26/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/26/2000

EDITED wwang: 05/19/2011
ckniffin: 5/3/2011
mgross: 1/23/2007
carol: 10/16/2006
alopez: 5/14/2003
tkritzer: 3/27/2003
carol: 11/17/2000
terry: 10/26/2000
carol: 10/26/2000

603413	TITLE *603413 TIA1 CYTOTOXIC GRANULE-ASSOCIATED RNA-BINDING PROTEIN-LIKE 1; TIAL1
;;TIA1-RELATED PROTEIN; TIAR;;
T CLUSTER-BINDING PROTEIN; TCBP
DESCRIPTION Cytotoxic lymphocytes can induce target cells to activate apoptosis.
Central to this autolytic pathway is the activation of an endogenous
endonuclease that degrades target cell DNA. By screening a human
phytohemagglutinin-activated T-cell cDNA library with a TIA1 (603518)
cDNA, Kawakami et al. (1992) cloned a cDNA encoding TIA1-related protein
(TIAR). Both TIAR and TIA1 are members of a family of RNA-binding
proteins containing 3 RNA-binding domains and a C-terminal auxiliary
domain. Like TIA1, TIAR possesses a lysosome-targeting motif in its
C-terminal auxiliary domain, suggesting that TIAR is also a cytotoxic
granule-associated protein. The authors demonstrated that TIAR binds
specifically to poly(A) homopolymers, fragments DNA in permeabilized
target cells, and is expressed in a wide variety of hematopoietic and
nonhematopoietic cell types.

Using a Southwestern approach to identify proteins capable of binding to
the T cluster of the platelet factor-4 (PF4; 173460) promoter, Doi et
al. (1997) isolated a human erythroleukemia (HEL) cell cDNA encoding an
isoform of TIAL1, which they called TCBP. This deduced 265-amino acid
isoform differs from the isoform identified by Kawakami et al. (1992) at
the C terminus, where a hydrophobic sequence replaces the
lysosome-targeting motif. Doi et al. (1997) demonstrated that TCBP
specifically binds to the T cluster and the proximal T-rich region of
the PF4 promoter in vitro and that TCBP reduces gene expression from the
PF4 promoter. TCBP mRNA expression was reduced when HEL cells were
induced to differentiate to megakaryocytes.

By hybridization to YACs and radiation hybrid mapping, Doi et al. (1997)
localized the TIAL1 gene to 10q, 4.92 cR distal to WI-5255.

REFERENCE 1. Doi, T.; Minami, T.; Itoh, M.; Aburatani, H.; Kawabe, Y.; Kodama,
T.; Kondo, N.; Satoh, Y.; Asayama, T.; Imanishi, T.: An alternative
form of nucleolysin binds to a T-cluster DNA in the silencer element
of platelet factor 4 gene. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 235: 625-630,
1997.

2. Kawakami, A.; Tian, Q.; Duan, X.; Streuli, M.; Schlossman, S. F.;
Anderson, P.: Identification and functional characterization of a
TIA-1-related nucleolysin. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 8681-8685,
1992.

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 1/11/1999

EDITED psherman: 02/11/1999
psherman: 1/11/1999

