610284	TITLE *610284 LIPOYLTRANSFERASE 1; LIPT1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

In mammals, lipoyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.181) catalyzes the second of 2
steps in the covalent attachment of lipoic acid to lipoate-dependent
proteins, including the glycine cleavage system H protein (GCSH; 238330)
and the dihydrolipoamide acyltransferase (E2) subunits of the pyruvate
dehydrogenase complex (DLAT; 608770), the 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase
complex (DLST; 126063), and the branched-chain 2-oxo acid dehydrogenase
complex (DBT; 248610) (Fujiwara et al., 1999).

CLONING

Using a bovine lipoyltransferase cDNA fragment as probe, Fujiwara et al.
(1999) cloned human LIPT1 from a liver cDNA library. The deduced
373-amino acid precursor protein shares 88% and 31% sequence identity
with bovine lipoyltransferase II and E. coli lipoate-protein ligase A,
respectively. By alignment of LIPT1 with the bovine lipoyltransferase
amino acid sequence, Fujiwara et al. (1999) predicted that the
N-terminal 26 amino acids comprise a mitochondrial targeting sequence,
with the threonine-27 corresponding to the first residue of the mature
enzyme. Thus, the deduced mature LIPT1 enzyme contains 347 amino acids
with a calculated molecular mass of 39.539 kD. Northern blot analysis
detected a major 1.5-kb transcript in all tissues examined, with highest
expression in skeletal muscle and heart, followed by liver, brain,
placenta, and lung.

GENE STRUCTURE

Fujiwara et al. (1999) determined that the LIPT1 gene contains 4 exons
and spans 8 kb of genomic DNA. They found evidence of several LIPT1
transcripts resulting from alternative splicing in the 5-prime
untranslated region.

MAPPING

By FISH, Fujiwara et al. (1999) mapped the LIPT1 gene to chromosome
2q11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Fujiwara, K.; Suzuki, M.; Okumachi, Y.; Okamura-Ikeda, K.; Fujiwara,
T.; Takahashi, E.; Motokawa, Y.: Molecular cloning, structural characterization
and chromosomal localization of human lipoyltransferase gene. Europ.
J. Biochem. 260: 761-767, 1999.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 7/28/2006

EDITED carol: 07/28/2006
carol: 7/28/2006

611698	TITLE *611698 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 22, MEMBER 24; SLC22A24
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SLC22A24 belongs to a large family of transmembrane proteins that
function as uniporters, symporters, and antiporters to transport organic
ions across cell membranes (Jacobsson et al., 2007).

CLONING

By searching a human database for SLC22 family members, Jacobsson et al.
(2007) identified SLC22A24. The deduced 322-amino acid protein has 12
putative transmembrane domains. Quantitative real-time PCR detected high
expression of rat Slc22a24 in liver and skeletal muscle and in coronal
sections taken from the olfactory bulb and forebrain. Expression was
weaker in other cortical sections, and none was detected in other
specific brain regions or in peripheral tissues.

GENE STRUCTURE

Jacobsson et al. (2007) determined that the SLC22A24 gene contains 4
exons.

MAPPING

Jacobsson et al. (2007) stated that the SLC22A24 gene maps to chromosome
11q12.3; the mouse Slc22a24 gene maps to chromosome 19qA.

REFERENCE 1. Jacobsson, J. A.; Haitina, T.; Lindblom, J.; Fredriksson, R.:
Identification of six putative human transporters with structural
similarity to the drug transporter SLC22 family. Genomics 90: 595-609,
2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/21/2007

EDITED carol: 08/15/2008
carol: 12/21/2007

139240	TITLE *139240 GROWTH HORMONE 2; GH2
;;GROWTH HORMONE, VARIANT; GHV;;
GROWTH HORMONE, PLACENTAL; GH2;;
GROWTH HORMONE-LIKE; GHL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Lewis et al. (1978) described a structural variant of human growth
hormone (GH1; 139250), which they called growth hormone-2, or GH2. Its
molecular mass was estimated to be about 20 kD, whereas GH1 has a
molecular mass of about 22 kD. The variant had several amino acid
differences and reacted poorly with antibody to human growth hormone.
Seeburg (1982) studied the structure of the GH2 gene, which they
referred to as the GHV gene, and Pavlakis et al. (1981) studied the
protein resulting from its in vitro expression. Frankenne et al. (1987)
showed that a placental variant of growth hormone, which appears in
maternal serum in midpregnancy and rises in concentration thereafter to
term, is the product of the GHV gene. The GHV gene is not expressed in
the pituitary. Liebhaber et al. (1989) showed that the GHV gene is
expressed in the term placenta, specifically in the
syncytiotrophoblastic epithelium. The similarity in developmental and
tissue-specific expression to that of the related CSA (150200) and CSB
(118820) genes suggested that these genes may share common regulatory
elements.

GENE STRUCTURE

The GH2 gene differs from the GH1 gene by the presence of a GT-to-AT
transition at the 5-prime donor splice site of intron 2 (Chen et al.,
1989). A cryptic site develops at nucleotide +19.

Boguszewski et al. (1998) noted that the GHN (GH1) and GHV (GH2) genes
consist of 5 exons. They examined alternative splicing of GHV
transcripts. The coding region of the GHV gene was amplified by RT-PCR
using placental cDNA as template. DNA sequencing of several clones
revealed 2 novel transcripts. One transcript isoform had a 45-bp
deletion caused by the use of an alternative 3-prime splice site in exon
3, similar to that in the GH1 gene, and is predicted to encode a 20-kD
GHV protein isoform. The other transcript isoform arose by the use of an
alternative 5-prime splice site which caused a 4-bp deletion in the end
of exon 4 and is predicted to encode a 24-kD protein with 219 amino
acids, which the authors referred to as GHV3. The carboxy-terminal
sequence of GHV3 differs from those of 22-kD GHV and GHV2, the 2
previously reported transcripts of the GHV gene, and does not contain a
predicted transmembrane domain as described for GHV2. The authors
concluded that the GHV transcript undergoes alternative splicing
pathways that can generate at least 4 different mRNA isoforms,
predicting the expression of different GH protein products, including 2
with a complete sequence divergence in the carboxy terminus.

GENE FUNCTION

Chellakooty et al. (2004) evaluated the association of maternal serum
levels of placental GH and IGF1 (147440) with fetal growth in a
prospective longitudinal study of 89 normal pregnant women. Placental GH
levels were detectable in all samples from as early as 5 weeks'
gestation and increased significantly throughout pregnancy until
approximately 37 weeks' gestation, when peak levels of 22 ng/ml were
reached. Subsequently, placental GH levels decreased until birth. The
change in placental GH during 24.5 to 37.5 weeks' gestation was
positively associated with fetal growth rate (P = 0.027) and birth
weight (P = 0.027). Gestational age at peak placental GH values (P =
0.007) was associated with pregnancy length. A positive association
between the change in placental GH and the change in IGF1 levels
throughout gestation was found in a multivariate analysis (r(2) = 0.42;
P less than 0.001).

MAPPING

By combination of restriction mapping with somatic cell hybridization,
Owerbach et al. (1980) localized the GH2 gene, which they called 'growth
hormone-like' (GHL), to chromosome 17.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

MacLeod et al. (1991) found abnormally large GHV mRNAs in 1 of 20
placentas. Sequence analysis demonstrated retention of the first 12
bases of intron 2, resulting from both a base substitution at the intron
2 splice-donor dinucleotide (GT to AT) and activation of a cryptic
splice-donor site 12 bases downstream. Survey of a total of 60
additional chromosomes failed to reveal other instances of this
mutation. While the importance of GHV to fetal and maternal physiology
remained to be defined, MacLeod et al. (1991) demonstrated by bioassays
that it has a strong somatogen activity. MacLeod et al. (1991) found no
direct evidence to suggest that the splice site mutation in the
heterozygous state has a significant adverse effect on the physiology of
pregnancy, labor, delivery, or fetal development.

REFERENCE 1. Boguszewski, C. L.; Svensson, P.-A.; Jansson, T.; Clark, R.; Carlsson,
L. M. S.; Carlsson, B.: Cloning of two novel growth hormone transcripts
expressed in human placenta. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 83: 2878-2885,
1998.

2. Chellakooty, M.; Vangsgaard, K.; Larsen, T.; Scheike, T.; Falck-Larsen,
J.; Legarth, J.; Andersson, A. M.; Main, K. M.; Skakkebaek, N. E.;
Juul, A.: A longitudinal study of intrauterine growth and the placental
growth hormone (GH)-insulin-like growth factor I axis in maternal
circulation: association between placental GH and fetal growth. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 384-391, 2004.

3. Chen, E. Y.; Liao, Y.-C.; Smith, D. H.; Barrera-Saldana, H. A.;
Gelinas, R. E.; Seeburg, P. H.: The human growth hormone locus: nucleotide
sequence, biology, and evolution. Genomics 4: 479-497, 1989.

4. Frankenne, F.; Rentier-Delrue, F.; Scippo, M.-L.; Martial, J.;
Hennen, G.: Expression of the growth hormone variant gene in human
placenta. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 64: 635-637, 1987.

5. Lewis, U. J.; Dunn, J. T.; Bonewald, L. F.; Seavey, B. K.; VanderLaan,
W. P.: A naturally occurring structural variant of human growth hormone. J.
Biol. Chem. 253: 2679-2687, 1978.

6. Liebhaber, S. A.; Urbanek, M.; Ray, J.; Tuan, R. S.; Cooke, N.
E.: Characterization and histologic localization of human growth
hormone-variant gene expression in the placenta. J. Clin. Invest. 83:
1985-1991, 1989.

7. MacLeod, J. N.; Liebhaber, S. A.; MacGillivray, M. H.; Cooke, N.
E.: Identification of a splice-site mutation in the human growth
hormone-variant gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 48: 1168-1174, 1991.

8. MacLeod, J. N.; Worsley, I.; Ray, J.; Friesen, H. G.; Liebhaber,
S. A.; Cooke, N. E.: Human growth hormone variant is a biologically
active somatogen and lactogen. Endocrinology 128: 1298-1302, 1991.

9. Owerbach, D.; Rutter, W. J.; Martial, J. A.; Baxter, J. D.; Shows,
T. B.: Genes for growth hormone, chorionic somatomammotropin and
growth hormone-like genes on chromosome 17 in humans. Science 209:
289-292, 1980.

10. Pavlakis, G. N.; Hizuka, N.; Gorden, P.; Seeburg, P. H.; Hamber,
D. H.: Expression of two human growth hormone genes in monkey cells
infected by simian virus 40 recombinants. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 78:
7398-7402, 1981.

11. Seeburg, P. H.: The human growth hormone gene family: nucleotide
sequences show recent divergence and predict a new polypeptide hormone. DNA 1:
239-249, 1982.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 03/25/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/18/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED alopez: 03/25/2009
carol: 5/27/2005
mgross: 3/23/1999
mgross: 3/18/1999
alopez: 10/28/1997
carol: 6/2/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/26/1992
carol: 1/22/1992
carol: 6/21/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990

613515	TITLE *613515 AUTOPHAGY 14, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; ATG14
;;YEAST ATG14-LIKE; ATG14L;;
KIAA0831;;
BECN1-INTERACTING PROTEIN;;
BECN1-ASSOCIATED AUTOPHAGY-RELATED KEY REGULATOR; BARKOR
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1998) cloned ATG14, which they designated
KIAA0831. The transcript contains several repetitive elements in both
its 3- and 5-prime ends, and the deduced protein contains 379 amino
acids. RT-PCR ELISA detected highest ATG14 expression in brain, lower
expression in kidney and ovary, and little to no expression in other
human tissues examined.

Using mass spectrometry to identify proteins that immunoprecipitated
with beclin-1 (BECN1; 604378) from a human breast epithelial cell line,
followed by database analysis and RT-PCR of human embryonic kidney
cells, Matsunaga et al. (2009) cloned ATG14, which they called ATG14L.
The deduced 492-amino acid protein contains 3 coiled-coil domains in its
N-terminal half. Database analysis revealed close orthologs in
vertebrates only. Immunofluorescence analysis and immunoelectron
microscopy showed that ATG14L localized to autophagosomes, isolation
membranes of forming autophagosomes, endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and a
punctate structure. ATG14L had an apparent molecular mass of 55.3 kD by
SDS-PAGE.

Zhong et al. (2009) cloned mouse Atg14. The deduced 492-amino acid
protein has a conserved structural maintenance of chromosomes motif that
includes 2 coiled-coil domains. Western blot analysis showed that Atg14
had an apparent molecular mass of about 60 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Using epitope-tagged human beclin-1 for affinity purification, followed
by mass spectroscopy, Matsunaga et al. (2009) showed that beclin-1
interacted with ATG14L, UVRAG (602493), Rubicon (KIAA0226; 613516),
VPS34 (PIK3C3; 602609), and VPS15 (PIK3R4; 602610) in MCF7 breast cancer
cells. Using antibodies directed to individual proteins, they found that
beclin-1, VPS34, and VPS15 were present within 3 distinct complexes: a
complex containing ATG14L, a complex containing UVRAG, and a complex
containing both UVRAG and Rubicon. Yeast 2-hybrid and deletion analyses
revealed that the coiled-coil regions of ATG14L and UVRAG interacted
directly with the coiled-coil region of beclin-1 in a mutually exclusive
manner. Knockdown of ATG14L via short hairpin RNA interfered with
starvation-induced formation of autophagosomes in human A549 lung
epithelia cells. Knockout of Atg14l in mouse embryonic stem cells
resulted in defective basal autophagy and starvation-induced autophagy.
Matsunaga et al. (2009) concluded that ATG14L is essential for the
initiation of autophagosome formation.

Zhong et al. (2009) found that mouse Atg14 coimmunoprecipitated with
endogenous beclin-1 and Vps34, which are essential components of a
protein complex that regulates autophagy. Mutation analysis revealed
that both coiled-coil domains of Atg14 were required for the interaction
of Atg14 with beclin-1 and Vps34. Gel filtration experiments revealed
that endogenous Vps34, beclin-1, Atg14, and Rubicon coeluted in a
complex of over 700 kD. However, immunoprecipitation analysis showed
that Atg14 and Rubicon did not always coimmunoprecipitate in the same
complex. Knockdown of Atg14 or beclin-1 via small interfering RNA
impaired autophagy-mediated clearance of a test substrate. Knockdown of
Atg14 in mouse fibroblasts resulted in accumulation of large puncta
representing ubiquitinated protein inclusions and reduced the number of
autophagosomes. Atg14 also stimulated Vps34 kinase activity, but only
when coexpressed with beclin-1.

Hamasaki et al. (2013) demonstrated that autophagosomes form at the
ER-mitochondria contact site in mammalian cells. Imaging data revealed
that the preautophagosome/autophagosome marker ATG14 relocalizes to the
ER-mitochondria contact site after starvation, and the
autophagosome-formation marker ATG5 (604261) also localizes at the site
until formation is complete. Subcellular fractionation showed that ATG14
cofractionates in the mitochondria-associated ER membrane fraction under
starvation conditions. Disruption of the ER-mitochondria contact site
prevents the formation of ATG14 puncta. The ER-resident SNARE protein
syntaxin-17 (STX17; 604204) binds ATG14 and recruits it to the
ER-mitochondria contact site. Hamasaki et al. (2013) concluded that
their results provided insight into organelle biogenesis by
demonstrating that the ER-mitochondria contact site is important in
autophagosome formation.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the ATG14 gene
to chromosome 14.

REFERENCE 1. Hamasaki, M.; Furuta, N.; Matsuda, A.; Nezu, A.; Yamamoto, A.;
Fujita, N.; Oomori, H.; Noda, T.; Haraguchi, T.; Hiraoka, Y.; Amano,
A.; Yoshimori, T.: Autophagosomes form at ER-mitochondria contact
sites. Nature 495: 389-393, 2013.

2. Matsunaga, K.; Saitoh, T.; Tabata, K.; Omori, H.; Satoh, T.; Kurotori,
N.; Maejima, I.; Shirahama-Noda, K.; Ichimura, T.; Isobe, T.; Akira,
S.; Noda, T.; Yoshimori, T.: Two Beclin 1-binding proteins, Atg14L
and Rubicon, reciprocally regulate autophagy at different stages. Nature
Cell Biol. 11: 385-396, 2009.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Oharo, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 355-364, 1998.

4. Zhong, Y.; Wang, Q. J.; Li, X.; Yan, Y.; Backer, J. M.; Chait,
B. T.; Heintz, N.; Yue, Z.: Distinct regulation of autophagic activity
by Atg14L and Rubicon associated with beclin 1-phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase
complex. Nature Cell Biol. 11: 468-476, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/15/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/12/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/29/2010

EDITED alopez: 07/16/2013
alopez: 7/15/2013
mgross: 8/18/2010
terry: 8/12/2010
wwang: 7/29/2010

601621	TITLE *601621 T-BOX 3; TBX3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the course of studying the 12q24.1 region where linkage studies
indicated that the Holt-Oram syndrome (142900) is located, Li et al.
(1997) and Basson et al. (1997) identified the genes TBX3 and TBX5
(601620). The latter gene was found to be the site of mutations
responsible for Holt-Oram syndrome.

The cloning of new TBX3 cDNAs allowed Bamshad et al. (1999) to complete
the characterization of the TBX3 gene and to identify alternatively
transcribed TBX3 transcripts, including 1 that interrupts the T-box. The
complete open reading frame of the TBX3 gene encodes a predicted
723-amino acid protein, of which 255 amino acids are encoded by newly
identified exons. Comparison of other T-box genes to TBX3 indicated
regions of substantial homology outside the DNA-binding domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Sowden et al. (2001) examined the role of Drosophila 'optomotor blind'
(omb)-related T-box genes in the development of human and mouse retina.
Murine Tbx2 (600747), Tbx3, and Tbx5 and human TBX2 cDNAs were isolated
from retina cDNA libraries by hybridization to the Drosophila omb gene.
Human and mouse TBX2, TBX3, and TBX5 were expressed asymmetrically
across the embryonic neural retina, with highest levels of mRNA within
dorsal and peripheral retina. The dorsoventral gradient of TBX2
expression disappeared before the ganglion cell layer (GCL) formed. Its
expression became restricted to the inner neuroblastic retina and later
to the GCL and inner nuclear layer (INL). The dorsal expression domains
of TBX5 and TBX3 were maintained during formation of the GCL. As the
retina matured, TBX3 expression was restricted to the INL, and TBX5 was
expressed within the GCL. The authors concluded that the expression
patterns of TBX2, TBX3, and TBX5 within the developing retina support
the idea that the encoded transcription factors play a role in providing
positional information important for topographic mapping in
differentiation of distinct cell types across the laminar axis of the
retina.

Hoogaars et al. (2007) found that the sinoatrial node of mouse heart was
formed by proliferation of Tbx3-positive precursor cells and not from
bordering atrial cells. Tbx3 deficiency resulted in expansion of atrial
gene expression into the sinoatrial node domain and partial loss of
sinoatrial node-specific gene expression. Ectopic expression of Tbx3 in
mice repressed the atrial phenotype and imposed the pacemaker phenotype
on the atria, resulting in development of functional ectopic pacemakers.

Niwa et al. (2009) showed that 2 LIF (159540) signaling pathways are
each connected to the core circuitry required to maintain pluripotency
via different transcription factors. In mouse embryonic stem cells, Klf4
(602253) is mainly activated by the Jak-Stat3 pathway and preferentially
activates Sox2 (184429), whereas Tbx3 is preferentially regulated by the
phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase-Akt and mitogen-activated protein
kinase pathways and predominantly stimulates Nanog (607937). In the
absence of Lif, artificial expression of Klf4 or Tbx3 was sufficient to
maintain pluripotency while maintaining the expression of Oct3/4
(164177). Notably, overexpression of Nanog supported Lif-independent
self-renewal of mouse embryonic stem cells in the absence of Klf4 and
Tbx3 activity. Therefore, Niwa et al. (2009) concluded that KLF4 and
TBX3 are involved in mediating LIF signaling to the core circuitry but
are not directly associated with the maintenance of pluripotency,
because embryonic stem cells keep pluripotency without their expression
in the particular context.

Using genetic lineage analysis, knockout studies, and explant assays,
Wiese et al. (2009) found that Tbx18 (604613) was required to establish
the large head structure of the mouse sinoatrial node from mesenchymal
precursors. Subsequently, Tbx3 induced expression of pacemaker genes for
pacemaker function.

Han et al. (2010) showed that the transcription factor Tbx3
significantly improves the quality of induced pluripotent stem (iPS)
cells. iPS cells generated with Klf4 and Tbx3 were superior in both germ
cell contribution to the gonads and germline transmission frequency.
However, global gene expression profiling could not distinguish between
the 2 groups of iPS cells. Genomewide chromatin immunoprecipitation
sequencing analysis of Tbx3-binding sites in embryonic stem cells
suggested that Tbx3 regulates pluripotency-associated and reprogramming
factors, in addition to sharing many common downstream regulatory
targets with Oct4, Sox2, Nanog, and Smad1 (601595). Han et al. (2010)
concluded that their study underscored the intrinsic qualitative
differences between iPS cells generated by different methods, and
highlighted the need to rigorously characterize iPS cells beyond in
vitro studies.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yi et al. (2000) determined that the TBX3 gene contains at least 6 exons
and spans more than 9.0 kb.

MAPPING

The human TBX3 and TBX5 genes map to chromosome 12q24.1, and the murine
homologs, Tbx3 and Tbx5, map to chromosome 5 (Li et al., 1997; Basson et
al., 1997).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Li et al. (1997) pointed out that TBX3 may be a candidate gene for
Noonan syndrome (163950) and ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS; 181450). The
latter possibility indeed proved to be the case; Bamshad et al. (1997)
demonstrated mutations in TBX3 in 2 families with ulnar-mammary
syndrome. Each mutation was predicted to cause haploinsufficiency of
TBX3, implying that critical levels of this transcription factor are
required for morphogenesis of several organs. Limb abnormalities of
ulnar-mammary syndrome involve posterior elements. Mutations in TBX5
cause anterior limb abnormalities in Holt-Oram syndrome. Because of
similarities in structure and function of TBX3 and TBX5 and because of
close linkage, Bamshad et al. (1997) proposed that these genes
originated from a common ancestral gene, each having acquired specific
complementary roles in patterning the mammalian upper limb.

Bamshad et al. (1999) identified novel mutations in the TBX3 gene in all
of 8 newly reported families with UMS, including 5 mutations downstream
of the region encoding the T-box. This suggested that a domain (or
domains) outside the T-box was highly conserved and important for the
function of TBX3. Bamshad et al. (1999) found no obvious phenotypic
differences between those who had missense mutations and those who had
deletions or frameshifts.

To determine how C-terminal mutations may affect transcription, Carlson
et al. (2001) created a series of fusion proteins to map regions that
conferred transcriptional activity, nuclear localization, and
DNA-binding properties of Tbx3. Tbx3 binds the canonic brachyury binding
site as a monomer and represses transcription. A key repression domain
(RD1) resides in the Tbx3 C terminus that can function as a portable
repression domain. Most UMS-associated C-terminal mutants lack the RD1
and exhibit decreased or loss of transcriptional repression activity. A
cluster of basic amino acids at residues 292-297 serves as a nuclear
localization signal. Two C-terminal truncation mutants exhibited
increased rates of protein decay. The RD1 repression domain of Tbx3 was
also shown to be capable of immortalizing primary embryo fibroblasts.

Borozdin et al. (2006) reported a Czech mother and 2 daughters who were
diagnosed with Holt-Oram syndrome, in whom they identified a 2.19 to
2.27-Mb contiguous deletion encompassing the TBX5 and TBX3 genes.
Clinical reexamination confirmed the presence of features of
ulnar-mammary syndrome that were previously unrecognized. Borozdin et
al. (2006) noted that the contiguous deletion also included the RBM19
gene, but commented that it was unlikely to contribute to or modify the
phenotype since all the anomalies present in the affected individuals
could be explained by either TBX5 or TBX3 haploinsufficiency.

Klopocki et al. (2006) sequenced the TBX3 gene in a 3.5-year-old girl
with an ulnar-mammary-like phenotype, dysmorphic facies, and mental
retardation, but did not detect any mutation. Microarray CGH revealed
heterozygosity for an interstitial 1.28-Mb deletion on chromosome
12q24.21, encompassing the TBX3 gene. The deletion and TBX3
haploinsufficiency were confirmed by FISH. Neither parent carried the
deletion. Klopocki et al. (2006) stated that this was the first
description of TBX3 haploinsufficiency caused by a genomic deletion in a
patient with ulnar-mammary syndrome and suggested that the facial
changes and mental retardation observed in this patient might be due to
involvement of neighboring genes.

In a boy and his mother with ulnar-mammary syndrome, Linden et al.
(2009) identified heterozygosity for a nonsense mutation in the TBX3
gene (601621.0005).

ANIMAL MODEL

Using the development of the 4-digit chick leg as a model system, Suzuki
et al. (2004) studied the role of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in specifying digit
identities along the anterior-posterior axis. Misexpression of Tbx2 and
Tbx3 induced posterior homeotic transformation of digit III to digit IV
and digit II to digit III, respectively. Conversely, misexpression of
constitutively active mutants induced anterior transformation. In both
cases, alterations in the expression of several markers, including Bmp2
(112261), Shh (600725), and HoxD genes (see 142987), were observed. In
addition, Tbx2 and Tbx3 rescued Noggin (602991)-mediated inhibition of
interdigital BMP signaling, which was pivotal in establishing digit
identities. Suzuki et al. (2004) concluded that, in the developing
chick, Tbx3 specifies digit III and the combination of Tbx2 and Tbx3
specifies digit IV, acting together with the interdigital BMP signaling
cascade.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ULNAR-MAMMARY SYNDROME
TBX3, 1-BP DEL, 227T

In a mother and son with ulnar-mammary syndrome (181450), Bamshad et al.
(1997) found that the TBX3 gene had deletion of nucleotide 227, a
thymidine, resulting in shift of the reading frame and a premature
termination codon after 11 novel amino acids. A hand x-ray in the mother
showed complete absence of the fourth digit (metacarpal and phalanges)
and fusion of the capitate and hamate bones on the right. The mutated
protein in this family was predicted to encode a markedly truncated
protein containing only 86 amino acids and lacking the entire T-box
domain. This mutant protein should be incapable of binding DNA. Affected
members of this family demonstrated limb and apocrine anomalies.

.0002
ULNAR-MAMMARY SYNDROME
TBX3, IVS2DS, G-C, +1

In a mother and daughter with ulnar-mammary syndrome (181450), Bamshad
et al. (1997) demonstrated heterozygosity for a G-to-C transversion in
the first nucleotide of intron 2. This substitution altered the
consensus splice donor site and was predicted to alter gene splicing.
This family exhibited limb, apocrine, and genital anomalies.

.0003
ULNAR-MAMMARY SYNDROME
TBX3, LYS273TER

In a Japanese mother and her 2 sons with ulnar-mammary syndrome
(181450), Sasaki et al. (2002) found a heterozygous 817A-T mutation in
exon 4 of the TBX3 gene, leading to a lys273-to-ter substitution. The
mutation is expected to impair the DNA-binding capacity of the TBX3
protein.

.0004
ULNAR-MAMMARY SYNDROME
TBX3, 1-BP INS, 88A

Wollnik et al. (2002) reported a large Turkish family in which 10
members spanning 3 generations had autosomal dominant ulnar-mammary
syndrome (181450). The phenotypic expression of the disease was highly
variable among the affected family members showing posterior (ulnar or
postaxial) limb deficiencies and/or duplications, mammary gland
hypoplasia, apocrine dysfunction, and dental and genital abnormalities.
Mutation analysis identified a 1-bp insertion (88insA) in the TBX3 gene.
The truncated protein lacked almost all functionally important parts of
TBX3 and probably had complete loss of function.

.0005
ULNAR-MAMMARY SYNDROME
TBX3, GLN331TER

In a boy and his mother with ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS; 181450),
Linden et al. (2009) identified heterozygosity for a 991C-T transition
in exon 5 of the TBX3 gene, resulting in a gln331-to-ter (Q331X)
substitution. The boy had phenotypic features not theretofore described
in UMS, including hypoplastic anterior pituitary and ectopic posterior
pituitary gland, ventricular septal defect, and cardiac conduction
defects consistent with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (see 194200). In
addition, the boy's mother did not show the classic features of UMS,
supporting the variable expressivity of UMS within the same family.

REFERENCE 1. Bamshad, M.; Le, T.; Watkins, W. S.; Dixon, M. E.; Kramer, B. E.;
Roeder, A. D.; Carey, J. C.; Root, S.; Schinzel, A.; Van Maldergem,
L.; Gardner, R. J. M.; Lin, R. C.; Seidman, C. E.; Seidman, J. G.;
Wallerstein, R.; Moran, E.; Sutphen, R.; Campbell, C. E.; Jorde, L.
B.: The spectrum of mutations in TBX3: genotype/phenotype relationship
in ulnar-mammary syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64: 1550-1562, 1999.

2. Bamshad, M.; Lin, R. C.; Law, D. J.; Watkins, W. S.; Krakowiak,
P. A.; Moore, M. E.; Franceschini, P.; Lala, R.; Holmes, L. B.; Gebuhr,
T. C.; Bruneau, B. G.; Schinzel, A.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C. E.;
Jorde, L. B.: Mutations in human TBX3 alter limb, apocrine and genital
development in ulnar-mammary syndrome. Nature Genet. 16: 311-315,
1997. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 19: 102 only, 1998.

3. Basson, C. T.; Bachinsky, D. R.; Lin, R. C.; Levi, T.; Elkins,
J. A.; Soults, J.; Grayzel, D.; Kroumpouzou, E.; Traill, T. A.; Leblanc-Straceski,
J.; Renault, B.; Kucherlapati, R.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C. E.
: Mutations in human TBX5 cause limb and cardiac malformation in Holt-Oram
syndrome. Nature Genet. 15: 30-35, 1997. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet.
15: 411 only, 1997.

4. Borozdin, W.; Bravo-Ferrer Acosta, A. M.; Seemanova, E.; Leipoldt,
M.; Bamshad, M. J.; Unger, S.; Kohlhase, J.: Contiguous hemizygous
deletion of TBX5, TBX3, and RBM19 resulting in a combined phenotype
of Holt-Oram and ulnar-mammary syndromes. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A:
1880-1886, 2006.

5. Carlson, H.; Ota, S.; Campbell, C. E.; Hurlin, P. J.: A dominant
repression domain in Tbx3 mediates transcriptional repression and
cell immortalization: relevance to mutations in Tbx3 that cause ulnar-mammary
syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 2403-2413, 2001.

6. Han, J.; Yuan, P.; Yang, H.; Zhang, J.; Soh, B. S.; Li, P.; Lim,
S. L.; Cao, S.; Tay, J.; Orlov, Y. L.; Lufkin, T. Hg, H.-H.; Tam,
W.-L.; Lim, B.: Tbx3 improves the germ-line competency of induced
pluripotent stem cells. Nature 463: 1096-1100, 2010.

7. Hoogaars, W. M. H.; Engel, A.; Brons, J. F.; Verkerk, A. O.; de
Lange, F. J.; Wong, L. Y. E.; Bakker, M. L.; Clout, D. E.; Wakker,
V.; Barnett, P.; Ravesloot, J. H.; Moorman, A. F. M.; Verheijck, E.
E.; Christoffels, V. M.: Tbx3 controls the sinoatrial node gene program
and imposes pacemaker function on the atria. Genes Dev. 21: 1098-1112,
2007.

8. Klopocki, E.; Neumann, L. M.; Tonnies, H.; Ropers, H.-H.; Mundlos,
S.; Ullmann, R.: Ulnar-mammary syndrome with dysmorphic facies and
mental retardation caused by a novel 1.28 Mb deletion encompassing
the TBX3 gene. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 14: 1274-1279, 2006.

9. Li, Q. Y.; Newbury-Ecob, R. A.; Terrett, J. A.; Wilson, D. I.;
Curtis, A. R. J.; Yi, C. H.; Gebuhr, T.; Bullen, P. J.; Robson, S.
C.; Strachan, T.; Bonnet, D.; Lyonnet, S.; Young, I. D.; Raeburn,
J. A.; Buckler, A. J.; Law, D. J.; Brook, J. D.: Holt-Oram syndrome
is caused by mutations in TBX5, a member of the Brachyury (T) gene
family. Nature Genet. 15: 21-29, 1997.

10. Linden, H.; Williams, R.; King, J.; Blair, E.; Kini, U.: Ulnar
mammary syndrome and TBX3: expanding the phenotype. Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A:
2809-2812, 2009.

11. Niwa, H.; Ogawa, K.; Shimosato, D.; Adachi, K.: A parallel circuit
of LIF signalling pathways maintains pluripotency of mouse ES cells. Nature 460:
118-122, 2009.

12. Sasaki, G.; Ogata, T.; Ishii, T.; Hasegawa, T.; Sato, S.; Matsuo,
N.: Novel mutation of TBX3 in a Japanese family with ulnar-mammary
syndrome: implication for impaired sex development. Am. J. Med. Genet. 110:
365-369, 2002.

13. Sowden, J. C.; Holt, J. K. L.; Meins, M.; Smith, H. K.; Bhattacharya,
S. S.: Expression of Drosophila omb-related T-box genes in the developing
human and mouse neural retina. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 42: 3095-3102,
2001.

14. Suzuki, T.; Takeuchi, J.; Koshiba-Takeuchi, K.; Ogura, T.: Tbx
genes specify posterior digit identity through Shh and BMP signaling. Dev.
Cell 6: 43-53, 2004. Note: Erratum: Dev. Cell 8: 971-972, 2005.

15. Wiese, C.; Grieskamp, T.; Airik, R.; Mommersteeg, M. T. M.; Gardiwal,
A.; de Gier-de Vries, C.; Schuster-Gossler, K.; Moorman, A. F. M.;
Kispert, A.; Christoffels, V. M.: Formation of the sinus node head
and differentiation of sinus node myocardium are independently regulated
by Tbx18 and Tbx3. Circ. Res. 104: 388-397, 2009.

16. Wollnik, B.; Kayserili, H.; Uyguner, O.; Tukel, T.; Yuksel-Apak,
M.: Haploinsufficiency of TBX3 causes ulnar-mammary syndrome in a
large Turkish family. Ann. Genet. 45: 213-217, 2002.

17. Yi, C.-H.; Russ, A.; Brook, J. D.: Virtual cloning and physical
mapping of a human T-box gene, TBX4. Genomics 67: 92-95, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/13/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/8/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/8/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/25/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/6/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/2/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/20/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/7/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/21/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/23/2004
Deborah L. Stone - updated: 10/4/2002
Jane Kelly - updated: 7/8/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/3/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/27/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/3/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/25/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/10/1997

EDITED terry: 11/29/2012
mgross: 9/13/2012
alopez: 6/14/2012
terry: 6/13/2012
terry: 5/10/2012
alopez: 4/9/2010
terry: 4/8/2010
mgross: 12/11/2009
terry: 12/8/2009
alopez: 8/27/2009
terry: 8/25/2009
mgross: 7/24/2007
terry: 7/6/2007
wwang: 3/8/2007
terry: 3/2/2007
wwang: 10/20/2006
mgross: 5/7/2004
mgross: 4/21/2004
tkritzer: 1/29/2004
terry: 1/23/2004
carol: 10/4/2002
mgross: 7/8/2002
cwells: 5/14/2002
cwells: 5/3/2002
mgross: 6/3/1999
terry: 5/27/1999
carol: 2/17/1999
mark: 7/7/1997
terry: 7/3/1997
mark: 6/17/1997
mark: 2/25/1997
terry: 2/24/1997
jenny: 1/14/1997
mark: 1/10/1997

603580	TITLE *603580 PROTOCADHERIN 8; PCDH8
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The protocadherins are a subfamily of calcium-dependent cell adhesion
and recognition proteins of the cadherin superfamily. See 602988.
Protocadherin-8 belongs to a subclass of protocadherins that share a
highly conserved 17-amino acid cytoplasmic motif (Wolverton and Lalande,
2001).

CLONING

During a screen for genes in the 13q14.3-q21.1 region, Strehl et al.
(1998) identified an exonic region encoding a cadherin-related protein.
The full-length PCDH8 sequence encodes a 936-amino acid polypeptide with
a single putative transmembrane domain and 6 cadherin repeats. Genomic
analysis demonstrated that PCDH8 is encoded by 3 exons spanning 5 kb of
genomic DNA. Northern blot analysis revealed that PCDH8 is expressed as
a 4-kb mRNA exclusively in fetal and adult brain.

MAPPING

By inclusion in a PAC/BAC contig on human chromosome 13, Strehl et al.
(1997) determined that the PCDH8 gene maps to the band boundary region
between 13q14.3 and 13q21.1, about 1 Mb distal to the ATP7B gene
(606882), which is mutated in Wilson disease (277900). Strehl et al.
(1998) localized the mouse Pcdh8 and Pcdh9 (603581) genes to the distal
part of chromosome 14, in a region of known homology of synteny with
human 13q14.3.

REFERENCE 1. Strehl, S.; Glatt, K.; Liu, Q. M.; Glatt, H.; Lalande, M.: Characterization
of two novel protocadherins (PCDH8 and PCDH9) localized on human chromosome
13 and mouse chromosome 14. Genomics 53: 81-89, 1998.

2. Strehl, S.; LaSalle, J. M.; Lalande, M.: High-resolution analysis
of DNA replication domain organization across an R/G-band boundary. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 17: 6157-6166, 1997.

3. Wolverton, T.; Lalande, M.: Identification and characterization
of three members of a novel subclass of protocadherins. Genomics 76:
66-72, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 11/26/2003

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 2/23/1999

EDITED carol: 11/26/2003
carol: 4/29/2002
alopez: 2/24/1999
alopez: 2/23/1999

605971	TITLE *605971 RET FINGER PROTEIN-LIKE 3, ANTISENSE; RFPL3S
;;RFP-LIKE 3, ANTISENSE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Natural antisense RNAs (NARs) such as RFPL3S affect diverse activities
in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. For example, NARs regulate
basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF2; 134920) negatively in frog and
human oocytes (summary by Seroussi et al., 1999).

CLONING

By analysis of a cosmid genomic clone from 22q12-q13 and by PCR,
Seroussi et al. (1999) obtained cDNAs encoding RET finger protein (RFP;
602165)-like-1 (RFPL1; 605968), RFPL2 (605969), and RFPL3 (605970), as
well as antisense RFPL1S (605972) and RFPL3S. Northern blot analysis
revealed expression of a 1.2-kb RFPL3S transcript that was strongly
expressed in testis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Seroussi et al. (1999) determined that the antisense RFPL3S transcript
contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

Seroussi et al. (1999) mapped the RFPL3S gene to chromosome 22q12-q13 by
analysis of a mapped cosmid genomic clone.

REFERENCE 1. Seroussi, E.; Kedra, D.; Pan, H.-Q.; Peyrad, M.; Schwartz, C.;
Scambler, P.; Donnai, D.; Roe, B. A.; Dumanski, J. P.: Duplications
on human chromosome 22 reveal a novel Ret finger protein-like gene
family with sense and endogenous antisense transcripts. Genome Res. 9:
803-814, 1999.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/25/2001

EDITED alopez: 03/27/2012
alopez: 3/26/2012
mgross: 6/6/2001
mgross: 5/25/2001

605708	TITLE *605708 RHO GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE FACTOR 11; ARHGEF11
;;PDZ-RHOGEF;;
GLUTAMATE TRANSPORTER EAAT4-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 48; GTRAP48;;
KIAA0380
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1997) cloned ARHGEF11, which they designated
KIAA0380. The deduced 1,522-amino acid protein shares significant
similarity with mouse Arhgef1 (601855), suggesting it has a role in cell
signaling and communication. RT-PCR detected weak ARHGEF11 expression in
all tissues examined.

Rumenapp et al. (1999) stated that the full-length KIAA0380 protein
contains 1,522 amino acids and has a calculated molecular mass of 168.6
kD. It has an N-terminal PDZ domain, followed by a regulator of G
protein signaling (RGS) homology domain and tandem Dbl (MCF2; 311030)
homology (DH) and pleckstrin (PLEK; 173570) homology (PH) domains.
KIAA0380 also has proline-rich regions in its N- and C-terminal halves.

To identify proteins that interact with the C terminus of the EAAT4
(600637) protein, Jackson et al. (2001) used the last 77 amino acids of
EAAT4 as bait to screen a rat brain cDNA library. Jackson et al. (2001)
isolated 2 independent cDNA clones and called them Gtrap41 (SPTBN2;
604985) and Gtrap48. The largest ORF identified for Gtrap48 encodes a
protein of 1,527 amino acids with a predicted relative molecular mass of
168,698 Da. Gtrap48 shares 90% amino acid identity with human KIAA0380,
as well as significant homology with ARHGEF1. Gtrap48 possesses a PDZ
domain, an RGS sequence, tandem DH and PH domains characteristic of
guanine nucleotide exchange factors for the Rho family of G proteins,
and 2 proline-rich sequences. Northern blot analysis detected a 7.5-kb
Gtrap48 mRNA in brain tissue. Longer exposure revealed a low level of
expression in liver and kidney. Gtrap48 was expressed predominantly in
rat cerebellum, with low level immunoreactivity in striatum,
hippocampus, and thalamus.

GENE FUNCTION

Using transfected human embryonic kidney cells, Rumenapp et al. (1999)
showed that N-terminally truncated forms of KIAA0380 containing the DH
and PH domains bound RhoA (165390) and exhibited guanine nucleotide
exchange factor activity for RhoA. They did not bind or activate RAC1
(602048) or CDC42 (116952). When expressed in a human bladder carcinoma
cell line, N-terminally truncated forms of KIAA0380 containing the DH
and PH domains induced actin stress fiber formation, a cellular response
known to be controlled by RhoA. Expression of the isolated RGS homology
domain of KIAA0380 prevented stress fiber formation induced by the G
protein-coupled lysophosphatidic acid receptor (see LPAR1; 602282).

By immunofluorescence microscopy, Jackson et al. (2001) found that rat
Eaat4, Gtrap41, and Gtrap48 were all expressed in cerebellar Purkinje
cell soma and dendrites, with little axonal staining. Gtrap48 was found
to activate Rho. Expression of Gtrap48 induced reorganization of the
actin cytoskeleton. When Gtrap41 and Gtrap48 were coexpressed, Gtrap41
colocalized with actin in structures that resembled actin stress fibers.
Overexpression of Gtrap48 also induced formation of membrane ruffling
and filopodia. Jackson et al. (2001) measured the sodium-dependent
glutamate transport activity of HEK-Eaat4 cells that had been
transfected with 1 or both of the interacting proteins. Gtrap41 and
Gtrap48 produced respective 2-fold and 4-fold increases in glutamate
transport, and their coexpression resulted in a further increase in
glutamate uptake. Kinetic analysis indicated that Gtrap41 and Gtrap48
produced an increase in the V(max) of glutamate transport activity. The
authors suggested Gtrap41 and Gtrap48 may therefore enhance glutamate
transport either through an increase in the catalytic rate of the
transporter or through an increase in cell surface availability. Gtrap41
and Gtrap48 stabilized Eaat4 at the plasma membrane. The Eaat4/Gtrap48
interaction was important in modulating Eaat4 uptake activity. Jackson
et al. (2001) concluded that, in the modulation of EAAT4 glutamate
transport, their findings implicate a role for G protein signaling, a
pathway that may involve Rho activation, and anchoring to the actin
cytoskeleton. These proteins may also modulate the perisynaptic
distribution of EAAT4 at glutamatergic synapses.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Longhurst et al. (2006) showed that rat
PDZ-RhoGEF interacted with light chain-2 (LC2) of microtubule-associated
protein-1 (MAP1A; 600178), and they confirmed the interaction through
protein pull-down and coimmunoprecipitation assays. Mutation analysis
revealed that the carboxylate-binding loop of the PDZ domain of
PDZ-RhoGEF was required for the interaction. PDZ-RhoGEF proteins with
mutations in the carboxylate-binding loop induced changes in cell
morphology and actin organization. These mutants altered the activation
of Rho GTPases, and coexpression of dominant-negative Rho GTPases
prevented the morphologic changes. In cells expressing wildtype rat
PDZ-RhoGEF, drug-induced microtubule depolymerization produced changes
in cell morphology similar to those induced by PDZ-RhoGEF mutants.
Longhurst et al. (2006) concluded that modulation of the guanine
nucleotide exchange activity of PDZ-RhoGEF through interaction with
microtubule-associated protein light chains may coordinate microtubule
integrity and reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton.

MAPPING

Using radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1997) mapped the
ARGHEF11 gene to chromosome 1.

By sequence similarity between the KIAA0380 sequence and a genomic
contig (GenBank GENBANK NT_004327), Scott (2001) mapped the human
ARHGEF11 gene to chromosome 1q21.

REFERENCE 1. Jackson, M.; Song, W.; Liu, M.-Y.; Jin, L.; Dykes-Hoberg, M.; Lin,
C. G.; Bowers, W. J.; Federoff, H. J.; Sternweis, P. C.; Rothstein,
J. D.: Modulation of the neuronal glutamate transporter EAAT4 by
two interacting proteins. Nature 410: 89-93, 2001.

2. Longhurst, D. M.; Watanabe, M.; Rothstein, J. D.; Jackson, M.:
Interaction of PDZRhoGEF with microtubule-associated protein 1 light
chains: link between microtubules, actin cytoskeleton, and neuronal
polarity. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 12030-12040, 2006.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Nakajima, D.; Ohira, M.; Seki, N.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which can code for large
proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4: 141-150, 1997.

4. Rumenapp, U.; Blomquist, A.; Schworer, G.; Schablowski, H.; Psoma,
A.; Jakobs, K. H.: Rho-specific binding and guanine nucleotide exchange
catalysis by KIAA0380, a Dbl family member. FEBS Lett. 459: 313-318,
1999. Note: Erratum: FEBS Lett. 467: 134-135, 2000.

5. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/14/2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/31/2008

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 2/28/2001

EDITED carol: 04/12/2013
mgross: 1/5/2009
terry: 12/31/2008
carol: 8/9/2007
wwang: 12/19/2005
alopez: 3/14/2001
alopez: 3/1/2001
alopez: 2/28/2001

608177	TITLE *608177 EXOSTOSIN GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE 1; EXT1
;;EXOSTOSIN 1;;
EXT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

EXT1 and EXT2 (608210) form a heterooligomeric complex that catalyzes
the polymerization of heparan sulfate. This complex is an essential
factor in a signal transduction cascade for regulation of chondrocyte
differentiation, ossification, and apoptosis (summary by Heinritz et
al., 2009).

CLONING

By screening a human chondrocyte cDNA library with cosmids that spanned
breakpoints on chromosome 8q identified in patients with multiple
exostoses type I (133700) (see Ludecke et al., 1995), Ahn et al. (1995)
identified a cDNA encoding a putative 746-amino acid protein with a
molecular mass of 86.3 kD. Northern blot analysis detected expression of
a 3.4-kb transcript in all tissues tested, with highest levels in liver.
The authors noted that the breakpoint region in the EXT1 gene contains 2
identical polypyrimidine tracts (CCCCCCT) that are known to be deletion
hotspots, similar to the retinoblastoma gene (RB1; 614041) (Lohmann et
al., 1994).

Lin and Wells (1997) cloned and sequenced a mouse cDNA that is
homologous to the human EXT1 gene. Lohmann et al. (1997) showed that the
murine Ext1 gene has a high level of sequence similarity with its human
homolog.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ludecke et al. (1997) reported that the EXT1 gene contains 11 exons.

MAPPING

Ahn et al. (1995) identified the EXT1 gene within the breakpoint regions
of chromosome 8q identified in patients with multiple exostoses type I.
Lohmann et al. (1997) found that the murine Ext1 gene is part of a
conserved linkage group on mouse chromosome 15.

GENE FUNCTION

Ahn et al. (1995) suggested that EXT1 may act as a tumor suppressor
gene. Hecht et al. (1995) and Raskind et al. (1995) presented evidence
suggesting that the EXT1 gene on chromosome 8 and the EXT2 gene (608210)
on chromosome 11 have tumor suppressor function. They found loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) for markers linked to these 2 genes in
chondrosarcomas originating in individuals with multiple exostoses (see
133700) as well as in sporadic chondrosarcomas. The proteins encoded by
the EXT1 and EXT2 genes play a role in the expression of proteoglycans
on the cell surface and in the extracellular matrix. To explain the fact
that normal bone growth occurs concurrently with abnormal exostosis
tumor growth, Hecht et al. (1995) and Raskind et al. (1995) proposed a
2-hit tumor formation model according to the Knudson hypothesis
(Knudson, 1971). In this model, a single germline mutation results in
the predisposition for disease and a second somatic mutational hit,
usually LOH, allows for aberrant growth. Hecht et al. (1997) noted that
although the EXT1 protein is ubiquitously expressed in many tissues, the
only known effect of mutated or inactivated EXT1 appears to be specific
to actively growing bone, allowing inappropriate bone growth to be
juxtaposed to the growth plate; as the bone continues to grow, the
exostoses appear to migrate toward the diaphysis. At puberty, with
growth plate fusion, linear growth ceases and no new exostoses develop.

McCormick et al. (1998) showed that EXT1 is an endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-resident type II transmembrane glycoprotein whose expression in
cells results in the alteration of the synthesis and display of cell
surface heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). Two EXT1 variants
containing missense mutations related to multiple exostoses failed to
alter cell surface glycosaminoglycans, despite retaining their ER
localization. By testing a cell line with a specific defect in EXT1 in
in vivo and in vitro assays, McCormick et al. (2000) showed that EXT2
does not harbor significant glycosyltransferase activity in the absence
of EXT1. Instead, it appears that EXT1 and EXT2 form a heterooligomeric
complex in vivo that leads to the accumulation of both proteins in the
Golgi apparatus. Remarkably, the Golgi-localized EXT1/EXT2 complex
possesses substantially higher glycosyltransferase activity than EXT1 or
EXT2 alone, suggesting that the complex represents the biologically
relevant form of the enzyme(s). These findings provided a rationale for
the causation of hereditary multiple exostoses by loss of activity in
either of the 2 EXT genes.

Bovee et al. (1999) conducted studies to determine whether inactivation
of both alleles of an EXT gene, according to the tumor suppressor model,
is required for osteochondroma development, or whether a single EXT
germline mutation acts in a single dominant-negative way. They studied
LOH and DNA ploidy in 8 sporadic and 6 hereditary osteochondromas. EXT1
and EXT2 mutation analysis was performed in a total of 34 sporadic and
hereditary osteochondromas and secondary peripheral chondrosarcomas.
They demonstrated that osteochondroma is a true neoplasm, since
aneuploidy was found in 4 of 10 osteochondromas. Furthermore, LOH was
almost exclusively found at the EXT1 locus in 5 of 14 osteochondromas.
Four novel constitutional cDNA alterations were detected in exon 1 of
EXT1. The 2 patients with multiple osteochondromas demonstrated a
germline mutation combined with the loss of the remaining wildtype
allele in 3 osteochondromas, indicating that, in cartilaginous cells of
the growth plate, inactivation of both copies of the EXT1 gene was
required for osteochondroma formation in hereditary cases. In contrast,
no somatic EXT1 cDNA alterations were found in sporadic osteochondromas.
No mutations in the EXT2 gene were found in any of these cases.

Ropero et al. (2004) reported that EXT1 function was abrogated in human
cancer cells by transcriptional silencing associated with CpG island
promoter hypermethylation. Epigenetic inactivation of EXT1 led to loss
of heparan sulfate (HS) synthesis that was reversed by a DNA
demethylating agent. Reintroduction of EXT1 into EXT1
methylation-deficient cancer cells induced tumor suppressor-like
features, including reduced colony formation density and tumor growth in
nude mouse xenograft models. By screening 79 human cancer cell lines and
454 primary tumors from different cell types, the authors found that
EXT1 CpG island hypermethylation was common in leukemia, especially
acute promyelocytic leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and
nonmelanoma skin cancer. Ropero et al. (2004) concluded that EXT1
epigenetic inactivation, leading to abrogation of HS biosynthesis, is an
important step in the processes of tumor onset and progression.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Multiple Exostoses Type I

In 2 of 23 unrelated families with multiple exostoses type I, Ahn et al.
(1995) identified a 1-bp deletion in the EXT1 gene (608177.0001) that
segregated with the disease. In 4 of 6 EXT families demonstrating
linkage to the EXT1 locus on chromosome 8, Hecht et al. (1997)
identified 3 germline mutations in the EXT1 gene that segregated with
the disease phenotype in each family (608177.0002-608177.0004).

In 7 of 17 families (41%) with EXT, Philippe et al. (1997) identified
mutations in the EXT1 gene, including 5 novel mutations (see, e.g.,
608177.0007 and 608177.0009). Five of the families (29%) had mutations
in the EXT2 gene. Wells et al. (1997) identified 6 mutations in the EXT1
gene in 6 unrelated EXT families showing linkage to chromosome 8. One of
the mutations was the same 1-bp deletion in exon 6 that was previously
reported in 2 independent EXT families (608177.0001). The other 5
mutations were novel. In each case, the mutation was predicted to result
in a truncated or nonfunctional EXT1 protein.

Wuyts et al. (1998) analyzed the EXT1 and EXT2 genes in 26 EXT families
originating from 9 countries. Of the 26 families, 10 had an EXT1
mutation and 10 had an EXT2 mutation. Twelve of these mutations had not
previously been described. From a review of these and previously
reported mutations, Wuyts et al. (1998) concluded that mutations in
either the EXT1 or the EXT2 gene are responsible for most cases of
multiple exostoses. Most of the mutations in these 2 genes cause
premature termination of the EXT proteins, whereas missense mutations
are rare. The authors concluded that the development of exostoses is
mainly due to loss of function of EXT genes, consistent with the
hypothesis that the EXT genes have a tumor suppressor function.

Among 11 isolated cases of exostoses and 20 families with EXT, Raskind
et al. (1998) identified 12 novel EXT1 mutations, including 5 frameshift
deletions or insertions, 1 codon deletion, and 6 single basepair
substitutions, distributed across 8 of the exons. Only 2 of the
mutations were identified in more than 1 family. Three mutations
affected sites in which alterations were previously reported.
Nonchain-terminating missense mutations were identified in codons 280
and 340, both coding for conserved arginine residues. Raskind et al.
(1998) suggested that these residues may be crucial to the function of
this protein. One of the mutations (608177.0008) was identified in a
Chamorro native on Guam, where EXT is unusually frequent. They concluded
that 45% of the isolated cases and 77% of the familial cases could be
attributed to abnormalities in EXT1.

In 23 of 43 Japanese families with hereditary multiple exostoses, Seki
et al. (2001) found 21 mutations, of which 18 were novel. Seventeen
(40%) of the 23 families had a mutation in the EXT1 gene and 6 (14%) had
a mutation in the EXT2 gene. Of the 17 families with EXT1 mutations, 13
had those causing premature termination of the EXT1 protein, and 4
showed missense mutations. All 4 EXT1 missense mutations occurred in the
arginine residue at codon 340 (R340L; 608177.0004). R340 is known as a
critical site for expression of heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans,
suggesting that the region encompassing the arginine residue may play an
important role in the function of the EXT1 protein. In contrast to the
findings of Seki et al. (2001), Xu et al. (1999) detected more mutations
in EXT2 than in EXT1 in Chinese patients (33% and 14%, respectively). An
excess of EXT1 mutations was found in Caucasian patients, however, by
Philippe et al. (1997) and Wuyts et al. (1998). In both Caucasian
patients, as studied by Raskind et al. (1998), and Japanese patients,
more EXT1 mutations were identified in familial cases than in sporadic
cases.

In a study of 82 Japanese patients with hereditary multiple exostoses by
Seki et al. (2001), 4 patients developed malignancy and their mutations
(3 in EXT1 and 1 in EXT2) were all different, suggesting that malignant
transformation is not directly related to a particular mutation in EXT1
or EXT2, but more likely involves other genetic factors. Loss of
heterozygosity has been detected in chondrosarcoma not only at the EXT
loci but also at others such as 10q (RET; 164761) and 3q.

Wuyts and Van Hul (2000) stated that 49 different EXT1 and 25 different
EXT2 mutations had been identified in patients with multiple exostoses
and that mutations in these 2 genes were responsible for over 70% of the
EXT cases. Most of the mutations cause loss of function, which is
consistent with the presumed tumor suppressor function of the EXT genes.

McCormick et al. (1998) showed that the missense mutations G339D
(608177.0007) and R340C (608177.0009) abrogate the ability of
exostosin-1 to synthesize heparan sulfate (HS). Cheung et al. (2001)
used a functional assay that detects HS expression on the cell surface
of an EXT1-deficient cell line to test other missense mutant exostosin
proteins for their ability to rescue HS biosynthesis in vivo. Their
results showed that EXT1 mutants bearing 6 of these missense mutations
are also defective in HS expression, but surprisingly, 4 missense
mutations that had been considered etiologic were phenotypically
indistinguishable from wildtype EXT1. Three of these 4 'active'
mutations affect amino acids that are not conserved among vertebrates
and invertebrates, whereas all of the HS-biosynthesis null mutations
affect only conserved amino acids. Further, substitution or deletion of
each of these 4 residues does not abrogate HS biosynthesis. Taken
together, these results indicated that several of the reported etiologic
mutant EXT forms retain the ability to synthesize and express HS on the
cell surface. Cheung et al. (2001) suggested that these mutations may
represent rare genetic polymorphisms in the EXT1 gene or may interfere
with functions of EXT1 that are involved in the pathogenesis of
hereditary multiple exostoses.

Hall et al. (2002) reported the direct sequencing and LOH analysis of 12
exostoses in 10 hereditary multiple exostoses families, 4 solitary
exostoses, and their corresponding constitutional DNA. Of the 16
exostoses screened, there was only 1 isolated case in which 2 somatic
mutations, a deletion and an LOH, were present. Hall et al. (2002)
developed alternative models of pathogenesis, including a second
mutational event in genes other than EXT1 and EXT2, such as the EXTL1
(601738), EXTL2 (602411), and EXTL3 (605744) genes. Xu et al. (1999)
found no germline mutations in the EXTL1 and EXTL2 genes of patients
with hereditary multiple exostoses.

In 11 of 23 German patients with multiple exostoses, Heinritz et al.
(2009) identified 11 different novel mutations in the EXT1 gene (see,
e.g., 608177.0012). Eleven patients had mutations in the EXT2 gene, and
1 patient had no detectable mutations.

- Chondrosarcoma

In a patient with chondrosarcoma, Hecht et al. (1997) identified an EXT1
mutation in the constitutional DNA (608177.0005), but the tumor tissue
had retained the wildtype allele. In a patient with sporadic
chondrosarcoma, Hecht et al. (1997) identified a mutation in the tumor
tissue (608177.0006) which was not present in the constitutional DNA.
LOH analysis of chondrosarcomas and chondroblastomas revealed multiple
LOH events at loci on chromosomes 3q, 8q, 10q, and 19q. The authors
reported that a sporadic chondrosarcoma demonstrated LOH for EXT1 and
EXT3, whereas a second chondrosarcoma underwent LOH for EXT2 and
chromosome 10.

- Trichorhinophalangeal Syndrome Type II

Exostoses in the contiguous gene syndrome trichorhinophalangeal syndrome
type II (150230) are caused by loss of functional copies of the EXT1
gene (Ludecke et al., 1995).

ANIMAL MODEL

To define the developmental role of heparan sulfate in mammalian
species, Inatani et al. (2003) conditionally disrupted the heparan
sulfate polymerizing enzyme Ext1 in the embryonic mouse brain. The
Ext1-null brain exhibited patterning defects that were composites of
those caused by mutations of multiple heparan sulfate-binding
morphogens. Furthermore, the Ext1-null brain displayed severe guidance
errors in major commissural tracts, revealing a pivotal role of heparan
sulfate in midline axon guidance. Inatani et al. (2003) concluded that
heparan sulfate is essential for mammalian brain development.

By introducing a hypomorphic mutation in the Ext1 gene, Koziel et al.
(2004) developed mice producing significantly reduced levels of heparan
sulfate. Homozygous mutant embryos survived until embryonic day 14.5 at
a nonmendelian ratio of 14%. Only 4% were recovered at embryonic day
16.5. Mutant embryos were small and edematous. They had heart defects,
reduced skeleton size with fused vertebrae, shortened fore- and
hindlimbs, fused elbow and knee joints, and occasionally syndactylies of
digits. Homozygous mutant mice showed an extended distribution of Ihh
(600726) signaling during embryonic chondrocyte differentiation, and
ectopic heparan sulfate restricted Ihh signaling. The authors concluded
that heparan sulfate binds hedgehog in the extracellular space and
negatively regulates the range of hedgehog signaling in a dose-dependent
manner.

Matsumoto et al. (2010) created a line of mice with random deletion of
Ext1 in a small fraction of chondrocytes. Mutant mice developed
osteochondromas of the wrist, fibula, shoulder, and rib. A high
proportion of mutant animals also showed bowing deformity of the radius,
subluxation/dislocation of the radial head, scoliosis, and mild
abnormalities in the growth plate and joint cartilage. Genotyping showed
that osteochondromas contained a high proportion of wildtype
chondrocytes, in addition to Est1-null chondrocytes. The pattern of gene
expression in osteochondromas more resembled that of ectopic growth
plates than of neoplasms. Matsumoto et al. (2010) hypothesized that
Est1-null chondrocytes are required for initiation of osteochondromas,
but the subsequent growth of osteochondromas is not directly due to
upregulated proliferation of mutant cells.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, 1-BP DEL, 2120T

In 2 of 23 unrelated families with multiple exostoses type I (133700),
Ahn et al. (1995) identified a 1-bp deletion (2120T) in the EXT1 gene,
resulting in a premature stop codon. The mutation cosegregated with the
disease in the families over 2 and 3 generations, respectively.

.0002
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, 1-BP DEL, 1364C

In 2 unrelated families with multiple exostoses type I (133700), Hecht
et al. (1997) identified a 1-bp deletion (1364delC) in exon 1 of the
EXT1 gene, resulting in a premature stop codon at nucleotide 1403.

.0003
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, 4-BP INS, NT1035

In a family with multiple exostoses type I (133700), Hecht et al. (1997)
identified a 4-bp insertion (1035ins4) in exon 1 of the EXT1 gene,
resulting in a premature stop codon at nucleotide 1213.

.0004
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, ARG340LEU

In a family with multiple exostoses type I (133700), Hecht et al. (1997)
identified a 1635G-T transversion in exon 2 of the EXT1 gene, resulting
in an arg339-to-leu (R339L) substitution. It was subsequently discovered
that the mutation was a 1670G-T transversion that resulted in an
arg340-to-leu (R340L) substitution (Hogue, 1998).

.0005
CHONDROSARCOMA, SPORADIC
EXT1, 1-BP INS, 2077C

In a patient with sporadic chondrosarcoma, Hecht et al. (1997)
identified a 1-bp insertion (2077-2082insC) in the EXT1 gene in the
patient's constitutional DNA, resulting in a frameshift and a premature
stop codon at nucleotide 2208 in exon 6. Interestingly, the tumor tissue
retained the wildtype allele, but had LOH for chromosome 3q.

.0006
CHONDROSARCOMA, SOMATIC
EXT1, 8-BP DEL, NT1178

In the tumor tissue of a patient with sporadic chondrosarcoma, Hecht et
al. (1997) identified an 8-bp deletion (1178del8) in the EXT1 gene,
resulting in a premature stop codon at nucleotide 1213. This mutation
did not appear in the patient's constitutional DNA, suggesting somatic
origin.

.0007
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, GLY339ASP

In a family with multiple exostoses type I (133700), Philippe et al.
(1997) identified a gly339-to-asp (G339D) missense mutation in exon 2 of
the EXT1 gene.

McCormick et al. (1998) showed that the G339D missense mutation
abrogates HS biosynthesis.

.0008
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, TYR119TER

In a Chamorro native on Guam, Raskind et al. (1998) demonstrated that
multiple exostoses were associated with a 108C-A transversion in exon 1
of the EXT1 gene, leading to a stop codon, tyr119-to-ter (Y119X).
Raskind et al. (1998) suggested that identification of the Chamorro
mutation could allow investigation of a possible founder effect in this
population, which has an unusually high frequency of EXT.

.0009
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, ARG340CYS

Philippe et al. (1997) screened 17 probands with hereditary multiple
exostoses for alterations in the EXT1 or EXT2 (133701) genes. In a
family with multiple exostoses type I (133700), Philippe et al. (1997)
identified an arg340-to-cys (R340C) mutation in exon 2 of the EXT1 gene.

McCormick et al. (1998) showed that the R340C missense mutation
abrogates heparan sulfate biosynthesis.

.0010
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, IVS1DS, G-C

In affected members of a large consanguineous Pakistani family with
multiple exostoses type I (133700), Faiyaz-Ul-Haque et al. (2004)
identified a G-to-C transversion at the conserved splice donor site in
intron 1 of the EXT1 gene, predicted to result in a null allele. All
affected individuals, and no unaffected individuals, had bilateral
overriding of the fourth toe. This feature was present at birth,
allowing earlier diagnosis of the disorder.

.0011
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, 1-BP INS, 1664A

In affected members of a large consanguineous Pakistani family with
multiple exostoses type I (133700), Faiyaz-Ul-Haque et al. (2004)
identified a 1-bp insertion (1664insA) in exon 8 of the EXT1 gene,
predicted to produce a frameshift at codon 555 resulting in a premature
termination 10 codons downstream. Bilateral overriding of the second or
third toes was observed in all affected individuals except for 1
asymptomatic female and 1 mildly affected female. No unaffected
individuals had this feature, which was present at birth and allowed
earlier diagnosis of the disorder.

.0012
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, IVS1DS, 4-BP DEL

In a German patient with multiple exostoses type I (113700), Heinritz et
al. (2009) identified a heterozygous 4-bp deletion (962+1-962+4del4) in
the 5-prime splice donor site of intron 1 of the EXT1 gene. The mutation
results in the skipping of exon 2 and a frameshift with premature
termination.

REFERENCE 1. Ahn, J.; Ludecke, H.-J.; Lindow, S.; Horton, W. A.; Lee, B.; Wagner,
M. J.; Horsthemke, B.; Wells, D. E.: Cloning of the putative tumour
suppressor gene for hereditary multiple exostoses (EXT1). Nature
Genet. 11: 137-143, 1995.

2. Bovee, J. V. M. G.; Cleton-Jansen, A.-M.; Wuyts, W.; Caethoven,
G.; Taminiau, A. H. M.; Bakker, E.; Van Hul, W.; Cornelisse, C. J.;
Hogendoorn, P. C. W.: EXT-mutation analysis and loss of heterozygosity
in sporadic and hereditary osteochondromas and secondary chondrosarcomas. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 65: 689-698, 1999.

3. Cheung, P. K.; McCormick, C.; Crawford, B. E.; Esko, J. D.; Tufaro,
F.; Duncan, G.: Etiological point mutations in the hereditary multiple
exostoses gene EXT1: a functional analysis of heparan sulfate polymerase
activity. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 69: 55-66, 2001.

4. Faiyaz-Ul-Haque, M.; Ahmad, W.; Zaidi, S. H. E.; Hussain, S.; Haque,
S.; Ahmad, M.; Cohn, D. H.; Tsui, L.-C.: Novel mutations in the EXT1
gene in two consanguineous families affected with multiple hereditary
exostoses (familial osteochondromatosis). Clin. Genet. 66: 144-151,
2004.

5. Hall, C. R.; Cole, W. G.; Haynes, R.; Hecht, J. T.: Reevaluation
of a genetic model for the development of exostosis in hereditary
multiple exostosis. Am. J. Med. Genet. 112: 1-5, 2002.

6. Hecht, J. T.; Hogue, D.; Strong, L. C.; Hansen, M. F.; Blanton,
S. H.; Wagner, M.: Hereditary multiple exostosis and chondrosarcoma:
linkage to chromosome 11 and loss of heterozygosity for EXT-linked
markers on chromosomes 11 and 8. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 56: 1125-1131,
1995.

7. Hecht, J. T.; Hogue, D.; Wang, Y.; Blanton, S. H.; Wagner, M.;
Strong, L. C.; Raskind, W.; Hansen, M. F.; Wells, D.: Hereditary
multiple exostoses (EXT): mutational studies of familial EXT1 cases
and EXT-associated malignancies. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 60: 80-86, 1997.

8. Heinritz, W.; Huffmeier, U.; Strenge, S.; Miterski, B.; Zweier,
C.; Leinung, S.; Bohring, A.; Mitulla, B.; Peters, U.; Froster, U.
G.: New mutations of EXT1 and EXT2 genes in German patients with
multiple osteochondromas. Ann. Hum. Genet. 73: 283-291, 2009.

9. Hogue, D: Personal Communication. Houston, Tex  2/6/1998.

10. Inatani, M.; Irie, F.; Plump, A. S.; Tessier-Lavigne, M.; Yamaguchi,
Y.: Mammalian brain morphogenesis and midline axon guidance require
heparan sulfate. Science 302: 1044-1046, 2003.

11. Knudson, A. G., Jr.: Mutation and cancer: statistical study of
retinoblastoma. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 68: 820-823, 1971.

12. Koziel, L.; Kunath, M.; Kelly, O. G.; Vortkamp, A.: Ext1-dependent
heparan sulfate regulates the range of Ihh signaling during endochondral
ossification. Dev. Cell 6: 801-813, 2004.

13. Lin, X.; Wells, D.: Isolation of the mouse cDNA homologous to
the human EXT1 gene responsible for hereditary multiple exostoses. DNA
Seq. 7: 199-202, 1997.

14. Lohmann, D. R.; Brandt, B.; Hopping, W.; Passarge, E.; Horsthemke,
B.: Spectrum of small length germline mutations in the RB1 gene. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 3: 2187-2193, 1994.

15. Lohmann, D. R.; Buiting, K.; Ludecke, H.-J.; Horsthemke, B.:
The murine Ext1 gene shows a high level of sequence similarity with
its human homologue and is part of a conserved linkage group on chromosome
15. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 76: 164-166, 1997.

16. Ludecke, H.-J.; Ahn, J.; Lin, X.; Hill, A.; Wagner, M. J.; Schomburg,
L.; Horsthemke, B.; Wells, D. E.: Genomic organization and promoter
structure of the human EXT1 gene. Genomics 40: 351-354, 1997.

17. Ludecke, H.-J.; Wagner, M. J.; Nardmann, J.; La Pillo, B.; Parrish,
J. E.; Willems, P. J.; Haan, E. A.; Frydman, M.; Hamers, G. J. H.;
Wells, D. E.; Horsthemke, B.: Molecular dissection of a contiguous
gene syndrome: localization of the genes involved in the Langer-Giedion
syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 31-36, 1995.

18. Matsumoto, K.; Irie, F.; Mackem, S.; Yamaguchi, Y.: A mouse model
of chondrocyte-specific somatic mutation reveals a role for Ext1 loss
of heterozygosity in multiple hereditary exostoses. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 107: 10932-10937, 2010.

19. McCormick, C.; Duncan, G.; Goutsos, K. T.; Tufaro, F.: The putative
tumor suppressors EXT1 and EXT2 form a stable complex that accumulates
in the Golgi apparatus and catalyzes the synthesis of heparan sulfate. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 668-673, 2000.

20. McCormick, C.; Leduc, Y.; Martindale, D.; Mattison, K.; Esford,
L. E.; Dyer, A. P.; Tufaro, F.: The putative tumour suppressor EXT1
alters the expression of cell-surface heparan sulfate. Nature Genet. 19:
158-161, 1998.

21. Philippe, C.; Porter, D. E.; Emerton, M. E.; Wells, D. E.; Simpson,
A. H. R. W.; Monaco, A. P.: Mutation screening of the EXT1 and EXT2
genes in patients with hereditary multiple exostoses. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 61: 520-528, 1997.

22. Raskind, W. H.; Conrad, E. U.; Chansky, H.; Matsushita, M.: Loss
of heterozygosity in chondrosarcomas for markers linked to hereditary
multiple exostoses loci on chromosomes 8 and 11. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 56:
1132-1139, 1995.

23. Raskind, W. H.; Conrad, E. U., III; Matsushita, M.; Wijsman, E.
M.; Wells, D. E.; Chapman, N.; Sandell, L. J.; Wagner, M.; Houck,
J.: Evaluation of locus heterogeneity and EXT1 mutations in 34 families
with hereditary multiple exostoses. Hum. Mutat. 11: 231-239, 1998.

24. Ropero, S.; Setien, F.; Espada, J.; Fraga, M. F.; Herranz, M.;
Asp, J.; Benassi, M. S.; Franchi, A.; Patino, A.; Ward, L. S.; Bovee,
J.; Cigudosa, J. C.; Wim, W.; Esteller, M.: Epigenetic loss of the
familial tumor-suppressor gene exostosin-1 (EXT1) disrupts heparan
sulfate synthesis in cancer cells. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 2753-2765,
2004.

25. Seki, H.; Kubota, T.; Ikegawa, S.; Haga, N.; Fujioka, F.; Ohzeki,
S.; Wakui, K.; Yoshikawa, H.; Takaoka, K.; Fukushima, Y.: Mutation
frequencies of EXT1 and EXT2 in 43 Japanese families with hereditary
multiple exostoses. Am. J. Med. Genet. 99: 59-62, 2001.

26. Wells, D. E.; Hill, A.; Lin, X.; Ahn, J.; Brown, N.; Wagner, M.
J.: Identification of novel mutations in the human EXT1 tumor suppressor
gene. Hum. Genet. 99: 612-615, 1997.

27. Wuyts, W.; Van Hul, W.: Molecular basis of multiple exostoses:
mutations in the EXT1 and EXT2 genes. Hum. Mutat. 15: 220-227, 2000.

28. Wuyts, W.; Van Hul, W.; De Boulle, K.; Hendrickx, J.; Bakker,
E.; Vanhoenacker, F.; Mollica, F.; Ludecke, H.-J.; Sayli, B. S.; Pazzaglia,
U. E.; Mortier, G.; Hamel, B.; Conrad, E. U.; Matsushita, M.; Raskind,
W. H.; Willems, P. J.: Mutations in the EXT1 and EXT2 genes in hereditary
multiple exostoses. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62: 346-354, 1998.

29. Xu, L.; Xia, J.; Jiang, H.; Zhou, J.; Li, H.; Wang, D.; Pan, Q.;
Long, Z.; Fan, C.; Deng, H.-X.: Mutation analysis of hereditary multiple
exostoses in the Chinese. Hum. Genet. 105: 45-50, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/13/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/10/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/22/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/20/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/9/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/3/2003

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 10/17/2003

EDITED carol: 10/11/2013
carol: 9/19/2013
mgross: 11/13/2012
terry: 11/13/2012
alopez: 6/17/2011
alopez: 1/10/2011
wwang: 12/8/2009
ckniffin: 11/10/2009
wwang: 5/30/2007
terry: 5/22/2007
carol: 2/8/2007
carol: 8/1/2006
mgross: 3/16/2006
wwang: 4/28/2005
wwang: 4/25/2005
terry: 4/20/2005
mgross: 8/10/2004
terry: 8/9/2004
alopez: 12/9/2003
terry: 12/3/2003
tkritzer: 11/21/2003
carol: 10/30/2003
ckniffin: 10/29/2003

602963	TITLE *602963 UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME E2D 3; UBE2D3
;;UBC4/5, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;;
UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME UBCH5C; UBCH5C
DESCRIPTION See UBE2D1 (602961) for general information about ubiquitination and the
UBC4/5 subfamily of E2 enzymes.

CLONING

By PCR using oligonucleotides based on UBCH5B (UBE2D2; 602962), Jensen
et al. (1995) identified a human peripheral blood lymphocyte cDNA
encoding UBCH5C, or UBE2D3. The predicted 147-amino acid UBCH5C and
UBCH5B proteins differ by only 4 amino acids, with 3 of the differences
conservative changes; the nucleotide sequences of their cDNAs are 87%
identical within the coding region and 23% conserved within the 3-prime
untranslated region. The UBCH5C protein has 94% sequence identity with
the Drosophila UbcD1 protein, 92% identity with C. elegans ubc2, 88%
identity with human UBCH5A (UBE2D1), and 79% identity with S. cerevisiae
UBC4 and UBC5, and Arabidopsis thaliana UBC8 and UBC9. Recombinant
UBCH5C expressed in E. coli had a molecular mass of 16 kD by SDS-PAGE.
Quantitative PCR showed that UBCH5C was expressed in all human tissues
examined and at higher levels than UBCH5A and UBCH5B.

GENE FUNCTION

Jensen et al. (1995) demonstrated that UBCH5C could conjugate ubiquitin
to target proteins in an E6AP (UBE3A; 601623)-dependent manner.

All-trans retinoic acid (RA) is used in differentiation therapy to
achieve remission of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) because it
causes APL cell cycle arrest and differentiation. Using a short hairpin
RNA screen, Hattori et al. (2007) identified UBE2D3 among 26 proteins
that were essential for RA-induced differentiation and growth arrest in
NB4 human promyelocytic cells. UBE2D3 was upregulated following RA
treatment of NB4 cells. UBE2D3 physically associated with cyclin D1
(CCND1; 168461) and mediated RA-induced cyclin D1 degradation. Knockdown
of UBE2D3 by RNA interference blocked RA-induced cyclin D1 degradation
and cell cycle arrest. Hattori et al. (2007) concluded that
ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis is involved in RA-induced cell cycle
arrest.

Shembade et al. (2010) showed that A20 (191163) inhibits the E3 ligase
activities of TRAF6 (602355), TRAF2 (601895), and cIAP1 (601712) by
antagonizing interactions with E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes UBC13
(603679) and UBCH5C. A20, together with the regulatory molecule TAX1BP1
(605326), interacted with UBC13 and UBCH5C and triggered their
ubiquitination and proteasome-dependent degradation. These findings
suggested a mechanism of A20 action in the inhibition of inflammatory
signaling pathways.

Okiyoneda et al. (2010) identified the components of the peripheral
protein quality control network that removes unfolded CFTR containing
the F508del mutation (602421.0001) from the plasma membrane. Based on
their results and proteostatic mechanisms at different subcellular
locations, Okiyoneda et al. (2010) proposed a model in which the
recognition of unfolded cytoplasmic regions of CFTR is mediated by HSC70
(600816) in concert with DNAJA1 (602837) and possibly by the HSP90
machinery (140571). Prolonged interaction with the chaperone-cochaperone
complex recruits CHIP (607207)-UBCH5C and leads to ubiquitination of
conformationally damaged CFTR. This ubiquitination is probably
influenced by other E3 ligases and deubiquitinating enzyme activities,
culminating in accelerated endocytosis and lysosomal delivery mediated
by Ub-binding clathrin adaptors and the endosomal sorting complex
required for transport (ESCRT) machinery, respectively. In an
accompanying perspective, Hutt and Balch (2010) commented that the
'yin-yang' balance maintained by the proteostasis network is critical
for normal cellular, tissue, and organismal physiology.

REFERENCE 1. Hattori, H.; Zhang, X.; Jia, Y.; Subramanian, K. K.; Jo, H.; Loison,
F.; Newburger, P. E.; Luo, H. R.: RNAi screen identifies UBE2D3 as
a mediator of all-trans retinoic acid-induced cell growth arrest in
human acute promyelocytic NB4 cells. Blood 110: 640-650, 2007.

2. Hutt, D.; Balch, W. E.: The proteome in balance. Science 329:
766-767, 2010.

3. Jensen, J. P.; Bates, P. W.; Yang, M.; Vierstra, R. A.; Weissman,
A. M.: Identification of a family of closely related human ubiquitin
conjugating enzymes. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 30408-30414, 1995.

4. Okiyoneda, T.; Barriere, H.; Bagdany, M.; Rabeh, W. M.; Du, K.;
Hohfeld, J.; Young, J. C.; Lukacs, G. L.: Peripheral protein quality
control removes unfolded CFTR from the plasma membrane. Science 329:
805-810, 2010.

5. Shembade, N.; Ma, A.; Harhaj, E. W.: Inhibition of NF-kappa-B
signaling by A20 through disruption of ubiquitin enzyme complexes. Science 327:
1135-1139, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/31/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/11/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/27/2008

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 8/12/1998

EDITED alopez: 09/03/2010
terry: 8/31/2010
alopez: 3/11/2010
mgross: 6/24/2008
terry: 5/27/2008
psherman: 9/4/1998
alopez: 9/3/1998
psherman: 8/13/1998

608753	TITLE *608753 tRNA SPLICING ENDONUCLEASE 2, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; TSEN2
;;SEN2, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF; SEN2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

tRNA splicing is a fundamental process required for cell growth and
division. SEN2 is a subunit of the tRNA splicing endonuclease, which
catalyzes the removal of introns, the first step in tRNA splicing
(Paushkin et al., 2004).

CLONING

By searching sequence databases using yeast Sen2 as probe, followed by
PCR of human cDNA libraries, Paushkin et al. (2004) isolated a
full-length SEN2 cDNA and a splice variant lacking exon 8. Full-length
SEN2 contains 465 amino acids and has a calculated molecular mass of 51
kD. It shares a high degree of similarity with yeast Sen2 only in the
active site domain. The SEN2 variant lacking exon 8 contains 448 amino
acids. Northern blot analysis detected low expression of both SEN2
transcripts in all tissues examined. Immunofluorescence microscopy of
transfected HeLa cells localized both SEN2 isoforms to the nucleus. The
variant lacking exon 8 was frequently found in nucleoli in dot-like
structures.

GENE FUNCTION

Paushkin et al. (2004) identified and characterized the human tRNA
splicing endonuclease. This enzyme consists of SEN2, SEN34 (608754),
SEN15 (608756), and SEN54 (608755), homologs of the yeast tRNA
endonuclease subunits. Additionally, the SEN2 variant lacking exon 8 is
part of a complex with unique RNA endonuclease activity. Paushkin et al.
(2004) found that both human endonuclease complexes are associated with
pre-mRNA 3-prime end processing factors, including CLP1 (608757). Small
interfering RNA-mediated depletion of SEN2 led to defects in maturation
of both pre-tRNA and pre-mRNA. These findings demonstrated a link
between pre-tRNA splicing and pre-mRNA 3-prime end formation, suggesting
that the endonuclease subunits function in multiple RNA processing
events.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the TSEN2
gene to chromosome 3 (TMAP RH103927).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Budde et al. (2008) identified a homozygous missense mutation in a
patient of consanguineous Pakistani descent, resulting in
pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 2 (277470).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PONTOCEREBELLAR HYPOPLASIA, TYPE 2B
TSEN2, TYR309CYS

In a Pakistani male, the product of a consanguineous union, with
pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 2 (PCH2B; 612389) in whom no mutations
in TSEN54 (608755) were identified, Budde et al. (2008) identified a
homozygous A-to-G transition at nucleotide 926 of the TSEN2 gene,
resulting in a tyrosine-to-cysteine substitution at codon 309 (Y309C).
Each parent was heterozygous for the mutation, which was not identified
in 188 healthy Pakistani controls nor in 92 Dutch, 45 Chinese, or 28
Palestinian controls. The tyrosine at position 309 is strictly conserved
(tyrosine or phenylalanine) within eukaryotic organisms.

REFERENCE 1. Budde, B. S.; Namavar, Y.; Barth, P. G.; Poll-The, B. T.; Nurnberg,
G.; Becker, C.; van Ruissen, F.; Weterman, M. A. J.; Fluiter, K.;
te Beek, E. T.; Aronica, E.; van der Knaap, M. S.; and 26 others
: tRNA splicing endonuclease mutations cause pontocerebellar hypoplasia. Nature
Genet. 40: 1113-1118, 2008.

2. Paushkin, S. V.; Patel, M.; Furia, B. S.; Peltz, S. W.; Trotta,
C. R.: Identification of a human endonuclease complex reveals a link
between tRNA splicing and pre-mRNA 3-prime end formation. Cell 117:
311-321, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/22/2008

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 6/21/2004

EDITED terry: 04/22/2011
alopez: 11/5/2008
terry: 10/22/2008
mgross: 6/21/2004

604084	TITLE *604084 ZINC FINGER- AND BTB DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 17; ZBTB17
;;ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 151; ZNF151;;
MYC-INTERACTING ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 1; MIZ1
DESCRIPTION See ZNF91 (603971) for general information on zinc finger proteins.

CLONING

Transcriptional regulatory proteins containing tandemly repeated zinc
finger domains are thought to be involved in both normal and abnormal
cellular proliferation and differentiation. One abundant class of such
transcriptional regulators resembles the Drosophila Kruppel segmentation
gene product due to the presence of repeated cys2-his2 (C2H2) zinc
finger domains that are connected by conserved sequences, called H/C
links. By screening a human insulinoma cDNA library with a degenerate
oligonucleotide corresponding to the H/C linker sequence, Tommerup et
al. (1993) isolated cDNAs potentially encoding zinc finger proteins.
Tommerup and Vissing (1995) performed sequence analysis on a number of
these cDNAs and identified several novel zinc finger protein genes,
including ZNF151. The ZNF151 cDNA predicts a protein belonging to the
Kruppel family of zinc finger proteins.

The MYC (190080) protein activates transcription as part of a
heteromeric complex with MAX (154950). However, cells transformed by MYC
are characterized by the loss of expression of numerous genes,
suggesting that MYC may also repress gene expression. To search for
proteins that may mediate gene repression by MYC, Peukert et al. (1997)
used the yeast 2-hybrid system with the basic region and
helix-loop-helix (HLH)/leucine zipper domain of MYC as bait. They
identified a HeLa cell cDNA encoding ZNF151, which they called MIZ1 for
'MYC-interacting zinc finger protein-1.' The full-length MIZ1 cDNA
sequence predicts an 803-amino acid protein containing an N-terminal POZ
(poxvirus and zinc finger) domain and 13 zinc finger domains, 12 of
which are clustered. The deduced human MIZ1 protein shares 92% sequence
identity with the closely related mouse protein Z13. Peukert et al.
(1997) noted that high MIZ1 expression was observed in brain and muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Peukert et al. (1997) found that human MIZ1 had a potent growth arrest
function; HeLa cells expressing recombinant MIZ1 progressed into S phase
but not into mitosis. MIZ1 could bind to and transactivate the
adenovirus major late and cyclin D1 (CCND1; 168461) promoters. The
authors suggested that growth arrest by MIZ1 occurs via the
transcriptional activation of a set of growth inhibitory genes. The POZ
domain of several transcription factors has been shown to target the
proteins to discrete subnuclear foci, to render the proteins insoluble
upon extraction, and to inhibit both DNA binding of the attached zinc
fingers and transcriptional activation in vivo. Thus, the POZ domain
appears to act as a negative regulatory domain for transcription factor
function. In contrast to other POZ domain proteins, MIZ1 was soluble and
was predominantly located in the cytosol. MIZ1 interacted specifically
with MYC and NMYC (164840). Interaction with MYC inhibited MIZ1
transactivation, overcame MIZ1-induced growth arrest, induced MIZ1
nuclear sequestration, and rendered MIZ1 insoluble in vivo. These
effects depended on the integrity of the POZ domain of MIZ1. Peukert et
al. (1997) suggested that MYC inhibits gene transcription by activating
the latent inhibitory functions of the MIZ1 POZ domain.

Ziegelbauer et al. (2001) found that MIZ1 associates with microtubules,
can bind directly to the low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR; 606945)
promoter, and can activate LDLR transcription. MIZ1 also binds to the
promoter and activates transcription of other T113242 (a synthetic
drug)-induced genes such as alpha-2 integrin (192974). Soft x-ray,
indirect immunofluorescence, and green fluorescent protein time-lapse
microscopy revealed that MIZ1 is largely cytoplasmic but accumulates in
the nuclei of HepG2 cells upon treatment with T113242. Thus, MIZ1
appears to be regulated by association with microtubules and may
activate gene transcription in response to changes in the cytoskeleton.

Herold et al. (2002) showed that transactivation by MIZ1 is negatively
regulated by association with topoisomerase II-binding protein (TOPBP1;
607760). Ultraviolet (UV) irradiation downregulated expression of TOPBP1
and released MIZ1. MIZ1 bound to the p21CIP1 (116899) core promoter in
vivo and was required for upregulation of p21CIP1 upon UV irradiation.
Using both Myc -/- cells and a point mutant of MYC that is deficient in
MIZ1-dependent repression, Herold et al. (2002) showed that MYC
negatively regulates transcription of p21CIP1 upon UV irradiation and
facilitates recovery from UV-induced cell cycle arrest through binding
to MIZ1.

MAPPING

By FISH, Tommerup and Vissing (1995) mapped the ZNF151 gene to
chromosome 1p36.2-p36.1.

ANIMAL MODEL

Adhikary et al. (2003) found that Miz1-null mouse embryos were not
viable. They did not undergo normal gastrulation and succumbed to
massive apoptosis of ectodermal cells around embryonic day 7.5.
Expression of p57(Kip2) (CDKN1C; 600856), a Miz1 target gene, was absent
in Miz1-null embryos.

REFERENCE 1. Adhikary, S.; Peukert, K.; Karsunky, H.; Beuger, V.; Lutz, W.;
Elsasser, H.-P.; Moroy, T.; Eilers, M.: Miz1 is required for early
embryonic development during gastrulation. Molec. Cell. Biol. 23:
7648-7657, 2003.

2. Herold, S.; Wanzel, M.; Beuger, V.; Frohme, C.; Beul, D.; Hillukkala,
T.; Syvaoja, J.; Saluz, H.-P.; Haenel, F.; Eilers, M.: Negative regulation
of the mammalian UV response by Myc through association with Miz-1. Molec.
Cell 10: 509-521, 2002.

3. Peukert, K.; Staller, P.; Schneider, A.; Carmichael, G.; Hanel,
F.; Eilers, M.: An alternative pathway for gene regulation by Myc. EMBO
J. 16: 5672-5686, 1997.

4. Tommerup, N.; Aagaard, L.; Lund, C. L.; Boel, E.; Baxendale, S.;
Bates, G. P.; Lehrach, H.; Vissing, H.: A zinc-finger gene ZNF141
mapping at 4p16.3/D4S90 is a candidate gene for the Wolf-Hirschhorn
(4p-) syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 1571-1575, 1993.

5. Tommerup, N.; Vissing, H.: Isolation and fine mapping of 16 novel
human zinc finger-encoding cDNAs identify putative candidate genes
for developmental and malignant disorders. Genomics 27: 259-264,
1995.

6. Ziegelbauer, J.; Shan, B.; Yager, D.; Larabell, C.; Hoffmann, B.;
Tjian, R.: Transcription factor MIZ-1 is regulated via microtubule
association. Molec. Cell 8: 339-349, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/29/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/29/2001
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 8/31/1999

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 7/28/1999

EDITED mgross: 10/03/2011
mgross: 5/7/2003
mgross: 5/1/2003
terry: 4/29/2003
ckniffin: 6/5/2002
mgross: 10/29/2001
mgross: 9/1/1999
psherman: 8/31/1999
mgross: 7/30/1999
psherman: 7/28/1999

612072	TITLE *612072 MIF4G DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN; MIF4GD
;;SLBP-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1; SLIP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen, Cakmakci et al. (2008) identified a
protein, which they designated SLIP1, that binds to a 15-amino acid
N-terminal region of stem-loop binding protein (SLBP; 602422). This
region of SLBP binds to the 3-prime end of histone mRNA. Cakmakci et al.
(2008) identified 5 conserved residues in this region of SLBP that are
required for histone translation and found that mutations in any of
these residues reduced SLIP1 binding. Coexpression of SLIP1 and SLBP in
Xenopus oocytes stimulated translation of a reporter mRNA with a
stem-loop, as in histone mRNAs, but not of a reporter with a poly(A)
tail. Expression of SLIP1 in HeLa cells also stimulated expression of a
GFP reporter mRNA ending in a stem-loop. Downregulation of endogenous
SLIP1 by siRNA reduced the rate of translation of endogenous histone
mRNA as well as cell viability. Cakmakci et al. (2008) proposed that
SLIP1 stimulates histone mRNA translation by bridging between SLBP and
the 5-prime end of histone mRNA.

MAPPING

Scott (2008) mapped the SLIP1 gene to chromosome 17q25.1 based on an
alignment of the SLIP1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AC022211) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.3).

REFERENCE 1. Cakmakci, N. G.; Lerner, R. S.; Wagner, E. J.; Zheng. L.; Marzluff,
W. F.: SLIP1, a factor required for activation of histone mRNA translation
by the stem-loop binding protein. Molec. Cell. Biol. 28: 1182-1194,
2008.

2. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/19/2008.

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 5/21/2008

EDITED wwang: 05/21/2008
carol: 5/21/2008

603863	TITLE *603863 RING FINGER PROTEIN 7; RNF7
;;REGULATOR OF CULLINS 2; ROC2;;
RBX2;;
SENSITIVE TO APOPTOSIS GENE; SAG
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Reactive oxygen species (ROS), a group of very reactive, short-lived
chemicals produced during normal respiratory processes or after
oxidative insults, may mediate apoptosis. Metal chelators and metal ions
are redox-sensitive agents that can mediate ROS generation. The metal
chelator 1,10-phenanthroline (OP) induces or suppresses apoptosis in a
cell line-dependent manner. Using differential display, Duan et al.
(1999) isolated mouse cDNAs associated with OP-induced apoptosis. One
cDNA encoded Gss (601002), and the other encoded a novel protein
produced by a gene that they designated Sag. The authors used the mouse
Sag cDNA to identify a HeLa cell cDNA corresponding to human SAG. The
predicted 113-amino acid human SAG protein is 97% identical to mouse
Sag. The C-terminal half of SAG consists of a zinc RING finger domain.
Northern blot analysis revealed that SAG was ubiquitously expressed,
with the highest levels in heart, skeletal muscle, and testis.
Immunofluorescent staining indicated that SAG localized in both the
cytoplasm and nuclei of mammalian cells.

By searching databases for homologs of ROC1 (RBX1; 603814), followed by
PCR of a HeLa cell cDNA library, Ohta et al. (1999) cloned RNF7, which
they called ROC2. The deduced 85-amino acid ROC2 protein shares 51%
identity with ROC1 and 35% identity with human APC11 (ANAPC11; 614534),
a subunit of the anaphase-promoting complex. Both ROC proteins are
highly evolutionarily conserved. ROC1 and ROC2 both contain a RING
finger domain and are rich in tryptophan.

GENE FUNCTION

Duan et al. (1999) found that, in vitro, recombinant human SAG bound to
zinc and copper metal ions and prevented lipid peroxidation induced by
copper or a free radical generator. When overexpressed in human cell
lines, SAG protected cells from apoptosis induced by redox agents such
as OP. Duan et al. (1999) concluded that SAG is a cellular protective
molecule that appears to act as an antioxidant to inhibit apoptosis
induced by metal ions and ROS.

By yeast 2-hybrid and immunoprecipitation analyses, Ohta et al. (1999)
found that human ROC1 and ROC2 commonly interacted with all cullins (see
603134). They concluded that combinations of ROC/APC11 and cullin
proteins potentially constitute a wide variety of ubiquitin ligases.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Duan et al. (1999) mapped the SAG
gene to chromosome 3q22-q24.

REFERENCE 1. Duan, H.; Wang, Y.; Aviram, M.; Swaroop, M.; Loo, J. A.; Bian,
J.; Tian, Y.; Mueller, T.; Bisgaier, C. L.; Sun, Y.: SAG, a novel
zinc RING finger protein that protects cells from apoptosis induced
by redox agents. Molec. Cell. Biol. 19: 3145-3155, 1999.

2. Ohta, T.; Michel, J. J.; Schottelius, A. J.; Xiong, Y.: ROC1,
a homolog of APC11, represents a family of cullin partners with an
associated ubiquitin ligase activity. Molec. Cell 3: 535-541, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 3/16/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/10/2012
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 6/22/1999

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 6/2/1999

EDITED mgross: 01/30/2013
mgross: 3/16/2012
mgross: 3/15/2012
terry: 2/10/2012
jlewis: 6/22/1999
jlewis: 6/21/1999
mgross: 6/3/1999
mgross: 6/2/1999

118661	TITLE *118661 VERSICAN; VCAN
;;CHONDROITIN SULFATE PROTEOGLYCAN 2; CSPG2;;
CHONDROITIN SULFATE PROTEOGLYCAN CORE PROTEIN, CARTILAGE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Large chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans were first identified in hyaline
cartilage, where they specifically interact with hyaluronan and form
large supramolecular complexes. Together with other matrix
glycoproteins, they provide mechanical support and a fixed negative
charge. Such molecules exist also in a variety of soft tissues where
they may play additional physiologic roles (Kjellen and Lindahl, 1991).

CLONING

Zimmermann and Ruoslahti (1989) cloned and sequenced the cDNA of the
core protein of fibroblast chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan. They
designated it versican in recognition of its versatile modular
structure. Decorin (125255) and biglycan (301870) are 2 other soft
tissue proteoglycans.

Naso et al. (1995) reported that the mouse versican protein is 89%
identical to human versican and is highly expressed in mouse embryos at
days 13, 14, and 18.

Dours-Zimmermann and Zimmermann (1994) provided evidence for the
existence of 3 versican splice variants, designated V0, V1, and V2,
which differ in the length of their glycosaminoglycan attachment portion
inserted between the globular modules at the N- and C-terminal ends of
the core proteins. Versican V1 and V2 include either the GAG-alpha or
the GAG-beta domain providing attachment sites for about 5 to 8 or 12 to
15 glycosaminoglycan chains, respectively. In the V0 variant, both
GAG-alpha and GAG-beta are present. Zako et al. (1995) demonstrated the
existence of another splice variant, designated V3, which lacks a
chondroitin sulfate attachment region, the most distinctive portion of a
proteoglycan molecule.

Bode-Lesniewska et al. (1996) studied the distribution of versican by
using affinity-purified polyclonal antibodies that recognize the core
protein of the prominent versican splice variants V0 and V1. Versican
was present in the loose connective tissues of various organs and was
often associated with the elastic fiber network. It was localized in
most smooth muscle tissues and in fibrous and elastic cartilage.
Versican staining was noted in the central and peripheral nervous
system, in the basal layer of the epidermis, and on the luminal surface
of some glandular epithelia. In blood vessels, versican was present in
all 3 wall layers of veins and elastic arteries. In muscular arteries
the immunoreactivity was normally restricted to the tunica adventitia.
However, it appeared in the media and the split elastica interna of
atherosclerotically transformed vessel walls.

GENE STRUCTURE

Naso et al. (1994) showed that the human versican gene contains 15 exons
spanning more than 90 kb. One of these, exon 7, is used in an
alternative splice variant. The authors sequenced the 5-prime
promoter-containing region of the gene and found that it contained
numerous binding sites for transactivators such as AP2 (107580) and Sp1
(189906). They used transient transfection studies to show that the
promoter functioned well in both mesenchymal and epithelial cells. The
authors used deletion studies to show that this 5-prime region (to
approximately -630) contains both strong enhancer and strong negative
regulatory elements.

MAPPING

The distinctness of CSPG1 (AGC1; 155760) and CSPG2 was uncertain until
both genes had been mapped. Whereas CSPG1 is located on chromosome 15,
Iozzo et al. (1992) demonstrated that the CSPG2 gene is located on
chromosome 5. They used a combination of human/rodent somatic cell
hybrids including a panel of hybrids containing partial deletions of
chromosome 5 and narrowed the assignment to 5q12-q14, with the precise
site likely to be 5q13.2, by in situ hybridization.

Using interspecific backcross analysis, Naso et al. (1995) assigned the
Cspg2 gene to mouse chromosome 13 in a region that is syntenic with 5q.

GENE FUNCTION

To determine whether TP53 (191170) gene dosage affects transcriptional
regulation of target genes, Yoon et al. (2002) performed oligonucleotide
array gene expression analysis by using human cells with wildtype p53 or
with 1 or both TP53 alleles disrupted by homologous recombination. They
identified 35 genes, including CSPG2, whose expression was significantly
correlated to the dosage of TP53. Motif search analysis revealed that
CSPG2 contains a p53 consensus binding site in its first intron. In
vitro and in vivo assays demonstrated that CSPG2 is directly
transactivated by p53.

To understand how cancer cells infect the inflammatory microenvironment,
Kim et al. (2009) conducted a biochemical screen for
macrophage-activating factors secreted by metastatic carcinomas. They
demonstrated that, among the cell lines screened, Lewis lung carcinoma
(LLC) were the most potent macrophage activators leading to production
of interleukin-6 (IL6; 147620) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha; 119160) through activation of the Toll-like receptor family
members TLR2 (603028) and TLR6 (605403). Both TNF-alpha and TLR2 were
found to be required for LLC metastasis. Biochemical purification of
LLC-conditioned medium led to identification of the extracellular matrix
proteoglycan versican, which is upregulated in many human tumors
including lung cancer, as a macrophage activator that acts through TLR2
and its coreceptors TLR6 and CD14 (158120). By activating TLR2:TLR6
complexes and inducing TNF-alpha secretion by myeloid cells, versican
strongly enhances LLC metastatic growth. Kim et al. (2009) concluded
that their results explained how advanced cancer cells usurp components
of the host innate immune system, including bone marrow-derived myeloid
progenitors, to generate an inflammatory microenvironment hospitable for
metastatic growth.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Wagner vitreoretinopathy (WGVRP; 143200) is an autosomal dominant
vitreoretinopathy. Miyamoto et al. (2005) demonstrated a heterozygous
A-to-G transversion at the second base of the 3-prime acceptor splice
site of intron 7 of the CSPG2 gene that cosegregated with the disease in
a Japanese family (118661.0001).

In the large 5-generation Swiss family with vitreoretinopathy originally
described by Wagner (1938), Kloeckener-Gruissem et al. (2006) identified
a heterozygous splice site mutation in intron 8 of the VCAN gene
(118661.0002) that segregated fully with disease.

In affected members of 7 Dutch families with vitreoretinopathy,
Mukhopadhyay et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for 3 splice site
mutations in intron 7 of the VCAN gene (118661.0003-118661.0005).
Quantitative PCR using RNA from patient blood samples revealed a highly
significant (p less than 0.0001) and consistent increase in the V2 and
V3 splice variants (more than 38-fold and more than 12-fold,
respectively) in all patients with intron 7 nucleotide changes, as well
as in a Chinese family with vitreoretinopathy in which a causal variant
was not identified. Mukhopadhyay et al. (2006) suggested that Wagner
vitreoretinopathy is caused by an imbalance of versican isoforms,
mediated by intronic variants.

In a 4-generation French family with a severe vitreoretinal disorder
mapping to 5q13-q14, Brezin et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous
splice site mutation in intron 7 of the VCAN gene (118661.0006) that
segregated with disease and was not found 100 French controls.

In a British family and a French family with Wagner vitreoretinopathy,
Kloeckener-Gruissem et al. (2013) sequenced the VCAN gene and identified
2 heterozygous splice site mutations, in intron 8 and intron 7 of the
VCAN gene, respectively, that segregated with disease in each family
(118661.0007 and 118661.0008). The levels of splice variants V2 and V3
were significantly increased in all patient fibroblast and blood samples
from these families as well as samples from the Swiss family with
vitreoretinopathy originally described by Wagner (1938), although the
magnitude of the increase varied between tissues and mutations. There
were no statistically significant differences in V0 and V1 levels in
fibroblasts or blood between patients and controls.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
WAGNER VITREORETINOPATHY
VCAN, IVS7AS, A-G, -2

In a Japanese family with Wagner syndrome (143200) in which members of 4
generations, to a total of 13 with 11 living at the time of study, were
affected, Miyamoto et al. (2005) described a heterozygous splice
acceptor site mutation in the CSPG2 gene: 4004-2 A-G. Results of RT-PCR
analysis indicated that the mutation activated a cryptic splice site
located 39 bp downstream from the authentic 3-prime splice acceptor
site.

.0002
WAGNER VITREORETINOPATHY
VCAN, IVS8DS, G-A, +1

In a large 5-generation Swiss family with vitreoretinopathy (143200),
originally described by Wagner (1938), Kloeckener-Gruissem et al. (2006)
identified a heterozygous transition (9265+1G-A) at the highly conserved
splice donor sequence in intron 8 of the VCAN gene, which segregated
with the phenotype in 21 affected and 26 unaffected family members and
was not found in 104 control alleles. RT-PCR analysis using patient RNA
from venous blood revealed 2 aberrant CSPG2 transcripts, 1 lacking the
entire exon 8 and the other missing only the last 21 bp of exon 8.

Kloeckener-Gruissem et al. (2013) analyzed fibroblasts from a member of
the Swiss family with vitreoretinopathy originally described by Wagner
(1938) and found a 700-fold and a 150-fold increase in versican isoforms
V2 and V3, respectively, compared to controls. In patient blood samples,
amounts of V2 and V3 were increased 48-fold and 32-fold, respectively.

.0003
WAGNER VITREORETINOPATHY
VCAN, IVS7AS, T-C, -5

In all affected individuals from 5 Dutch families with vitreoretinopathy
(143200), including 4 families diagnosed with Wagner syndrome and 1 with
erosive vitreoretinopathy, Mukhopadhyay et al. (2006) identified
heterozygosity for a transition in intron 7 (4004-5T-C) of the VCAN
gene. The mutation was not found in unaffected individuals from any of
the 5 families, or in 250 Dutch controls. The 5 families shared a common
haplotype on chromosome 5q14, suggesting a founder mutation.
Quantitative PCR using RNA from patient blood samples revealed a highly
significant (p less than 0.0001) and consistent increase in the V2 and
V3 splice variants (more than 38-fold and more than 12-fold,
respectively) compared to controls.

.0004
WAGNER VITREORETINOPATHY
VCAN, IVS7AS, T-A, -5

In affected members of a Dutch family with Wagner vitreoretinopathy
(143200), Mukhopadhyay et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for a
transition in intron 7 (4004-5T-A) of the VCAN gene. The mutation was
not found in unaffected members of the family, or in 250 Dutch controls.
RT-PCR analysis of mutant versican transcripts showed activation of a
cryptic splice site resulting in a 39-nucleotide in-frame deletion of
exon 8 in splice variant V0. Quantitative PCR using RNA from patient
blood samples revealed a highly significant (p less than 0.0001) and
consistent increase in the V2 and V3 splice variants (more than 45-fold
and more than 13-fold, respectively) compared to controls.

.0005
WAGNER VITREORETINOPATHY
VCAN, IVS7AS, G-A, -1

In affected members of a Dutch family with Wagner vitreoretinopathy
(143200), Mukhopadhyay et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for a
transition in intron 7 (4004-1G-A) of the VCAN gene. The mutation was
not found in unaffected members of the family, or in 250 Dutch controls.
RT-PCR analysis of mutant versican transcripts showed activation of a
cryptic splice site resulting in a 39-nucleotide in-frame deletion of
exon 8 in splice variant V0. Quantitative PCR using RNA from patient
blood samples revealed a highly significant (p less than 0.0001) and
consistent increase in the V2 and V3 splice variants (more than 137-fold
and more than 22-fold, respectively) compared to controls.

.0006
WAGNER VITREORETINOPATHY
VCAN, IVS7AS, A-T, -2

In 10 affected members of a 4-generation French family with severe
vitreoretinopathy (1432300), Brezin et al. (2011) identified
heterozygosity for a transversion within the highly conserved acceptor
splice site of intron 7 (4004-2A-T) of the VCAN gene. The mutation was
not found in 6 unaffected family members or in 100 French controls.
Patients in this kindred had a highly variable phenotype, including
exudative vascular abnormalities, and exhibited severe visual
impairment. RT-PCR analysis of patient lymphoblastoid cell RNA indicated
that the mutation activates a cryptic acceptor splice site within exon
8, located 39 bp downstream from the authentic 3-prime splice acceptor
site. Direct sequencing of a shortened RNA fragment showed loss of the
first 39 bp of exon 8, predicted to cause in-frame deletion of 13 amino
acid residues from the beginning of the GAG-beta domain of mature
versican. RT-PCR also indicated aberrant expression of a versican mRNA
lacking the entire exon 8.

.0007
WAGNER VITREORETINOPATHY
VCAN, IVS7, T-A, +2

In 3 affected members of a 4-generation British family with Wagner
vitreoretinopathy (143200), previously studied by Fryer et al. (1990),
Kloeckener-Gruissem et al. (2013) identified heterozygosity for a
transition within the conserved splice donor site of intron 8
(9265+2T-A) of the VCAN gene. The mutation was not found in 300 control
alleles. In patient blood samples, there was a 230-fold and a 143-fold
increase in versican isoforms V2 and V3, respectively, compared to
controls.

.0008
WAGNER VITREORETINOPATHY
VCAN, IVS7, G-C, -1

In 19 affected members of a 4-generation French family with Wagner
vitreoretinopathy (143200), originally reported by Zech et al. (1999),
Kloeckener-Gruissem et al. (2013) identified heterozygosity for a
transversion within the conserved splice acceptor site of intron 7
(4004-1G-C) of the VCAN gene. The mutation was not found in 19
unaffected family members or in 300 control alleles. In patient
fibroblasts, there was an 80-fold and a 150-fold increase in versican
isoforms V2 and V3, respectively, compared to controls, whereas in
patient blood samples, amounts of V2 and V3 increased 64-fold and
6-fold, respectively.

REFERENCE 1. Bode-Lesniewska, B.; Dours-Zimmermann, M. T.; Odermatt, B. F.;
Briner, J.; Heitz, P. U.; Zimmermann, D. R.: Distribution of the
large aggregating proteoglycan versican in adult human tissues. J.
Histochem. Cytochem. 44: 303-312, 1996.

2. Brezin, A. P.; Nedelec, B.; Barjol, A.; Rothschild, P.-R.; Delpech,
M.; Valleix, S.: A new VCAN/versican splice acceptor site mutation
in a French Wagner family associated with vascular and inflammatory
ocular features. Molec. Vis. 17: 1669-1678, 2011.

3. Dours-Zimmermann, M. T.; Zimmermann, D. R.: A novel glycosaminoglycan
attachment domain identified in two alternative splice variants of
human versican. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 32992-32998, 1994.

4. Fryer, A. E.; Upadhyaya, M.; Littler, M.; Bacon, P.; Watkins, D.;
Tsipouras, P.; Harper, P. S.: Exclusion of COL2A1 as a candidate
gene in a family with Wagner-Stickler syndrome. J. Med. Genet. 27:
91-93, 1990.

5. Iozzo, R. V.; Naso, M. F.; Cannizzaro, L. A.; Wasmuth, J. J.; McPherson,
J. D.: Mapping of the versican proteoglycan gene (CSPG2) to the long
arm of human chromosome 5 (5q12-5q14). Genomics 14: 845-851, 1992.

6. Kim, S.; Takahashi, H.; Lin, W.-W.; Descargues, P.; Grivennikov,
S.; Kim, Y.; Luo, J.-L.; Karin, M.: Carcinoma-produced factors activate
myeloid cells through TLR2 to stimulate metastasis. Nature 457:
102-106, 2009.

7. Kjellen, L.; Lindahl, U.: Proteoglycans: structures and interactions. Annu.
Rev. Biochem. 60: 443-475, 1991. Note: Erratum: Annu. Rev. Biochem.
61: following viii, 1992.

8. Kloeckener-Gruissem, B.; Bartholdi, D.; Abdou, M.-T.; Zimmermann,
D. R.; Berger, W.: Identification of the genetic defect in the original
Wagner syndrome family. Molec. Vis. 12: 350-355, 2006.

9. Kloeckener-Gruissem, B.; Neidhardt, J.; Magyar, I.; Plauchu, H.;
Zech, J.-C.; Morle, L.; Palmer-Smith, S. M.; MacDonald, M. J.; Nas,
V.; Fry, A. E.; Berger, W.: Novel VCAN mutations and evidence for
unbalanced alternative splicing in the pathogenesis of Wagner syndrome. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 21: 352-356, 2013.

10. Miyamoto, T.; Inoue, H.; Sakamoto, Y.; Kudo, E.; Naito, T.; Mikawa,
T.; Mikawa, Y.; Isashiki, Y.; Osabe, D.; Shinohara, S.; Shiota, H.;
Itakura, M.: Identification of a novel splice site mutation of the
CSPG2 gene in a Japanese family with Wagner syndrome. Invest. Ophthal.
Vis. Sci. 46: 2726-2735, 2005.

11. Mukhopadhyay, A.; Nikopoulos, K.; Maugeri, A.; de Brouwer, A.
P. M.; van Nouhuys, C. E.; Boon, C. J. F.; Perveen, R.; Zegers, H.
A. A.; Wittebol-Post, D.; van den Biesen, P. R.; van der Velde-Visser,
S. D.; Brunner, H. G.; Black, G. C. M.; Hoyng, C. B.; Cremers, F.
P. M.: Erosive vitreoretinopathy and Wagner disease are caused by
intronic mutations in CSPG2/versican that result in an imbalance of
splice variants. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 47: 3565-3572, 2006.

12. Naso, M. F.; Morgan, J. L.; Buchberg, A. M.; Siracusa, L. D.;
Iozzo, R. V.: Expression pattern and mapping of the murine versican
gene (Cspg2) to chromosome 13. Genomics 29: 297-300, 1995.

13. Naso, M. F.; Zimmermann, D. R.; Iozzo, R. V.: Characterization
of the complete genomic structure of the human versican gene and functional
analysis of its promoter. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 32999-33008, 1994.

14. Wagner, H.: Ein bisher unbekanntes Erbleiden des Auges (degeneratio
hyaloideo-retinalis hereditaria), beobachtet im Kanton Zurich. Klin.
Monatsbl. Augenheilkd. 100: 840-858, 1938.

15. Yoon, H.; Liyanarachchi, S.; Wright, F. A.; Davuluri, R.; Lockman,
J. C.; de la Chapelle, A.; Pellegata, N. S.: Gene expression profiling
of isogenic cells with different TP53 gene dosage reveals numerous
genes that are affected by TP53 dosage and identifies CSPG2 as a direct
target of p53. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 15632-15637, 2002.

16. Zako, M.; Shinomura, T.; Ujita, M.; Ito, K.; Kimata, K.: Expression
of PG-M(V3), an alternatively spliced form of PG-M without a chondroitin
sulfate attachment region in mouse and human tissues. J. Biol. Chem. 270:
3914-3918, 1995.

17. Zech, J.-C.; Morle, L.; Vincent, P.; Alloisio, N.; Bozon, M.;
Gonnet, C.; Milazzo, S.; Grange, J.-D.; Trepsat, C.; Godet, J.; Plauchu,
H.: Wagner vitreoretinal degeneration with genetic linkage refinement
on chromosome 5q13-q14. Graefe Arch. Clin. Exp. Ophthal. 237: 387-393,
1999.

18. Zimmermann, D. R.; Ruoslahti, E.: Multiple domains of the large
fibroblast proteoglycan, versican. EMBO J. 8: 2975-2981, 1989.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 04/08/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/27/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/29/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/26/2003
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 2/13/2001
Alan F. Scott - updated: 3/27/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/13/1991

EDITED carol: 04/08/2013
terry: 8/31/2012
terry: 11/17/2010
carol: 7/16/2010
alopez: 1/29/2009
terry: 1/27/2009
alopez: 10/16/2006
terry: 9/29/2006
carol: 4/2/2003
tkritzer: 3/28/2003
terry: 3/26/2003
mcapotos: 2/13/2001
carol: 2/13/2001
carol: 2/12/2001
alopez: 2/15/2000
terry: 4/17/1996
mark: 3/27/1996
mark: 10/3/1995
warfield: 3/21/1994
carol: 10/21/1993
carol: 4/16/1993
carol: 1/14/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992

611859	TITLE *611859 MITOCHONDRIAL RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L55; MRPL55
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mitochondria have their own translation system for production of 13
inner membrane proteins essential for oxidative phosphorylation. MRPL55
is a component of the large subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome that
is encoded by the nuclear genome (Koc et al., 2001).

CLONING

By searching databases using bovine Mrpl55 as query, Koc et al. (2001)
identified human MRPL55. They also identified MRPL55 homologs in mouse,
Drosophila, and C. elegans, but not in yeast, E. coli, or Arabidopsis.
Mouse and human MRPL55 share 71.7% amino acid identity.

MAPPING

Hartz (2008) mapped the MRPL55 gene to chromosome 1q42.13 based on an
alignment of the MRPL55 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AY358771) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/5/2008.

2. Koc, E. C.; Burkhart, W.; Blackburn, K.; Moyer, M. B.; Schlatzer,
D. M.; Moseley, A.; Spremulli, L. L.: The large subunit of the mammalian
mitochondrial ribosome: analysis of the complement of ribosomal proteins
present. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 43958-43969, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/26/2008

EDITED mgross: 03/05/2008

300598	TITLE *300598 G ANTIGEN 5; GAGE5
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Human melanoma cells express several distinct antigens that are
recognized by autologous cytolytic T lymphocytes (CTLs). One class of
these antigens is encoded by genes, such as MAGE1 (MAGEA1; 300016),
MAGE3 (MAGEA3; 300174), and BAGE (605167), that are expressed in a large
fraction of tumors of various histologic types but are silent in normal
adult tissues, except for testis. Van den Eynde et al. (1995) identified
GAGE1 (300594) as a gene encoding an antigen that is present on melanoma
MZ2-MEL cells and is recognized by autologous CTLs. By screening a
melanoma MZ2-MEL cDNA library with a GAGE1 cDNA, they isolated cDNAs
representing 5 genes with sequence similarity to GAGE1. They named the
genes GAGE2 (GAGE2C; 300595), GAGE3 (300596), GAGE4 (300597), GAGE5, and
GAGE6 (300599). The GAGE2 to -6 cDNAs differ mainly by single nucleotide
substitutions that are scattered throughout the sequence. The deduced
GAGE5 protein has 117 amino acids. RT-PCR using primers common to GAGE1
to -6 found expression of these genes in various tumors but no
expression in any normal adult tissue tested except testis.

MAPPING

Chen et al. (2006) determined that GAGE5 is 1 of several copies of a
GAGE gene repeated on chromosome Xp11.23.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, Y.-T.; Iseli, C.; Venditti, C. A.; Old, L. J.; Simpson, A.
J. G.; Jongeneel, C. V.: Identification of a new cancer/testis gene
family, CT47, among expressed multicopy genes on the human X chromosome. Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 45: 392-400, 2006.

2. Van den Eynde, B.; Peeters, O.; De Backer, O.; Gaugler, B.; Lucas,
S.; Boon, T.: A new family of genes coding for an antigen recognized
by autologous cytolytic T lymphocytes on a human melanoma. J. Exp.
Med. 182: 689-698, 1995.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/18/2006

EDITED wwang: 08/06/2008
mgross: 5/18/2006

604472	TITLE *604472 TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR LIGAND SUPERFAMILY, MEMBER 13; TNFSF13
;;APRIL;;
TNF- AND APOL-RELATED LEUKOCYTE EXPRESSED LIGAND 2; TALL2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Members of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) family of ligands play
important roles in various physiologic and pathologic processes,
including cell proliferation, differentiation, and death, and modulation
of immune responses. By screening EST databases, Hahne et al. (1998)
cloned a novel TNF cDNA, TNFSF13, which they called APRIL, for 'a
proliferation-inducing ligand.' The full-length cDNA TNFSF13 clone
encodes a 250-amino acid protein with a predicted 28-amino acid
cytoplasmic domain, a hydrophobic transmembrane region, and an
extracellular domain of 201 amino acids with no signal peptide. There is
only 1 N-linked glycosylation site. The sequence of the extracellular
domain shows 21% homology with TNFSF6 (134638) and 20% homology with
TNFA (191160). Northern blot analysis revealed weak expression
restricted to a few tissues: transcripts of 2.1 and 2.4 kb in prostate
and a transcript of 1.8 kb in peripheral blood leukocytes. All tumor
cell lines, however, strongly expressed the TNFSF13 2.1-kb transcript,
and expression of extracellular or full-length TNFSF13 led to increased
proliferation of various cell lines.

Shu et al. (1999) identified the same gene, which they designated TALL2.
TALL2 shares about 35% sequence identity with TALL1 (BLYS, or TNFSF13B;
603969) in the C terminus.

By RACE, RT-PCR, and screening of a T-cell cDNA library, Pradet-Balade
et al. (2002) isolated a hybrid transcript formed by intergenic splicing
of exons 1 through 6 of TWEAK (TNFSF12; 602695) to exons 2 through 6 of
APRIL. See 602695 for further information on the protein encoded by the
TWEAK/APRIL transcript, which Pradet-Balade et al. (2002) called
TWEPRIL.

Using Northern blot analysis, Pradet-Balade et al. (2002) found that
relative expression of the 1.9-kb APRIL transcript was about 6-fold
higher than that of the 2.5-kb TWEPRIL transcript in resting T cells.
However, in activated T cells, both transcripts were expressed at
similar levels. A similar expression pattern for APRIL and TWEPRIL was
detected in CD4 (186940)-positive and CD8 (see 186910)-positive T-cell
subpopulations. TWEAK expression was similar between resting and
activated T cells. TWEAK was found predominantly in ribosome-free
fractions in both resting and activated T cells, whereas APRIL and
TWEPRIL increased their association with polyribosomes following T-cell
activation, suggesting that translational efficiency of APRIL and
TWEPRIL increases upon T-cell activation.

GENE FUNCTION

Seyler et al. (2005) analyzed synovial tissue specimens from 72 patients
with rheumatoid arthritis (180300) for TNFSF13 and TNFSF13B production
and TNFSF13/TNFSF13B receptor expression. Synovitis with ectopic
germinal centers present had the highest levels of TNFSF13, produced
exclusively by CD83 (604534)-positive dendritic cells; TNFSF13B was
present in similar levels in all types of synovitis (with or without
germinal centers or T cell-B cell aggregates) and was produced
exclusively from CD68 (153634)-positive macrophages. In synovitis with
germinal centers, inhibiting TNFSF13 and TNFSF13B with a TACI
(TNFRSF13B; 604907):Fc fusion protein resulted in destruction of the
germinal centers and marked inhibition of IFN-gamma (147570) and Ig
transcription, whereas similar inhibition in the aggregate and diffuse
types of synovitis enhanced IFN-gamma production and did not affect Ig
levels. These differential immunomodulatory effects correlated with the
presence of TACI-positive T cells in aggregate and diffuse synovitis and
their absence in synovitis with germinal centers. Seyler et al. (2005)
proposed that TNFSF13 and TNFSF13B regulate B-cell as well as T-cell
function and have both pro- and antiinflammatory effects in rheumatoid
arthritis.

Both BLYS and APRIL have been described as homotrimeric molecules, a
feature common to many members of the TNF superfamily. Using ELISA
analysis, Roschke et al. (2002) found that patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus (152700), rheumatoid arthritis, Reiter syndrome, psoriatic
arthritis (see 607507), polymyositis (see 160750), and ankylosing
spondylitis (106300) had significantly higher levels of BLYS/APRIL
heterotrimers than did controls. Roschke et al. (2002) proposed that
BLYS/APRIL heterotrimers may play a role in rheumatic and other
autoimmune diseases, and that other members of the TNF ligand
superfamily may also form active soluble heterotrimers.

Using cell-based, biochemical, and structural studies, Hymowitz et al.
(2005) characterized interactions between APRIL and TACI. They found
that the short isoform of human TACI, which lacks cysteine-rich domain-1
(CRD1), was still functional for signaling and that CRD2 of TACI was
sufficient for high-affinity binding to either murine April or human
BAFF (TNFSF13B). The solution structure of CRD2 of TACI revealed a
compact domain and additional ligand-binding determinants. Cocrystal
structures of murine April bound to CRD2 of human TACI or to human BCMA
(TNFRSF17; 109545) showed large interfaces and revealed key differences
that likely influence ligand-binding affinity and specificity.

Ingold et al. (2005) showed that the TNF homology domain of mouse and
human APRIL bound BCMA and TACI, whereas a basic sequence (QKQKKQ) close
to the N terminus of the mature protein bound negatively charged
sulfated glycosaminoglycan side chains of proteoglycans. Although T-cell
lines bound little APRIL, ectopic expression of glycosaminoglycan-rich
syndecans (see SDC1; 186355) or glypicans (see GPC1; 600395) conferred
on these cells a high binding capacity that was completely dependent on
the N-terminal basic sequence of APRIL. Moreover, SDC1-positive plasma
cells and proteoglycan-rich nonhematopoietic cells displayed high
specific, heparin-sensitive binding to APRIL. Inhibition of BAFF and
APRIL, but not BAFF alone, prevented survival and/or migration of newly
formed plasma cells to bone marrow. In addition, costimulation of B-cell
proliferation by APRIL was only effective upon APRIL oligomerization.
Ingold et al. (2005) proposed that APRIL binding to the extracellular
matrix or to proteoglycan-positive cells induces APRIL oligomerization,
which is the prerequisite for triggering TACI- and/or BCMA-mediated
activation, migration, and survival signals.

Using flow cytometry, fluorescence microscopy, and immunohistochemical
analysis, Huard et al. (2008) found that APRIL was expressed on
recruited neutrophils and accumulated on subepithelial heparan sulfate
proteoglycans in upper (e.g., tonsils) and lower (e.g., lamina propria)
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) and contributed to survival of
plasma cells. Mice lacking April had less-persistent mucosal humoral
immunity. Huard et al. (2008) proposed that inflammation-recruited
neutrophils may create plasma cell niches in MALT to sustain local
antibody production.

GENE STRUCTURE

Pradet-Balade et al. (2002) determined that the TNFSF13 gene contains 6
exons.

MAPPING

Pradet-Balade et al. (2002) determined that the transcriptional start
site of the TNFSF13 gene lies 878 bp downstream of the TNFSF12 gene on
chromosome 17p13.1.

ANIMAL MODEL

By treating mice with TACI-Ig, Gross et al. (2001) determined that BLYS
and APRIL are required for the development of both transitional (T2) and
mature B lymphocytes. TACI-Ig-treated mice also had less circulating
immunoglobulin and produced less collagen-specific antibody. TACI-Ig
treatment inhibited the development of collagen-induced rheumatoid
arthritis. Gross et al. (2001) proposed that TACI-Ig may have a role in
both the prevention and treatment of autoimmune disease mediated by
pathogenic autoantibodies.

Stein et al. (2002) created mice expressing human APRIL as a transgene
in T cells. These mice appeared normal. Transgenic T cells showed
enhanced survival in vitro and enhanced survival of staphylococcal
enterotoxin B-reactive Cd4-positive T cells in vivo, and both of these
responses correlated with elevated Bcl2 levels. Analysis of humoral
responses to T cell-dependent antigens in the transgenic mice indicated
that APRIL affected IgM responses, but not IgG responses. In contrast, T
cell-independent type-2 (TI-2) humoral responses were enhanced in APRIL
transgenic mice. As TACI had been reported to be indispensable for TI-2
antibody formation, Stein et al. (2002) concluded that APRIL-TACI
interactions have a role in generating the TI-2 response and that APRIL
is involved in the induction and/or maintenance of T- and B-cell
responses.

To investigate the role of APRIL in immunity, Castigli et al. (2004)
generated April-deficient mice. April -/- mice had normal T and B
lymphocyte development, normal T and B cell proliferation in vitro, but
increased numbers of CD4+ effector/memory T cells and increased IgG
responses to T-dependent antigens. Serum IgA levels were significantly
decreased, and serum IgA antibody responses to mucosal immunization with
T-dependent antigens and to type 1 T-independent antigens were impaired
in April -/- mice. The results suggested that APRIL downregulates T
cell-dependent antibody responses and promotes IgA class switching.

REFERENCE 1. Castigli, E.; Scott, S.; Dedeoglu, F.; Bryce, P.; Jabara, H.; Bhan,
A. K.; Mizoguchi, E.; Geha, R. S.: Impaired IgA class switching in
APRIL-deficient mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 3903-3908, 2004.

2. Gross, J. A.; Dillon, S. R.; Mudri, S.; Johnston, J.; Littau, A.;
Roque, R.; Rixon, M.; Schou, O.; Foley, K. P.; Haugen, H.; McMillen,
S.; Waggie, K.; Schreckhise, R. W.; Shoemaker, K.; Vu, T.; Moore,
M.; Grossman, A.; Clegg, C. H.: TACI-Ig neutralizes molecules critical
for B cell development and autoimmune disease: impaired B cell maturation
in mice lacking BLyS. Immunity 15: 289-302, 2001.

3. Hahne, M.; Kataoka, T.; Schroter, M.; Hofmann, K.; Irmler, M.;
Bodmer, J.-L.; Schneider, P.; Bornand, T.; Holler, N.; French, L.
E.; Sordat, B.; Rimoldi, D.; Tschopp, J.: APRIL, a new ligand of
the tumor necrosis factor family, stimulates tumor cell growth. J.
Exp. Med. 188: 1185-1190, 1998.

4. Huard, B.; McKee, T.; Bosshard, C.; Durual, S.; Matthes, T.; Myit,
S.; Donze, O.; Frossard, C.; Chizzolini, C.; Favre, C.; Zubler, R.;
Guyot, J. P.; Schneider, P.; Roosnek, E.: APRIL secreted by neutrophils
binds to heparan sulfate proteoglycans to create plasma cell niches
in human mucosa. J. Clin. Invest. 118: 2887-2895, 2008. Note: Erratum:
J. Clin. Invest. 120: 1362 only, 2010.

5. Hymowitz, S. G.; Patel, D. R.; Wallweber, H. J. A.; Runyon, S.;
Yan, M.; Yin, J.; Shriver, S. K.; Gordon, N. C.; Pan, B.; Skelton,
N. J.; Kelley, R. F.; Starovasnik, M. A.: Structures of APRIL-receptor
complexes: like BCMA, TACI employs only a single cysteine-rich domain
for high affinity ligand binding. J. Biol. Chem. 280: 7218-7227,
2005.

6. Ingold, K.; Zumsteg, A.; Tardivel, A.; Huard, B.; Steiner, Q.-G.;
Cachero, T. G.; Qiang, F.; Gorelik, L.; Kalled, S. L.; Acha-Orbea,
H.; Rennert, P. D.; Tschopp, J.; Schneider, P.: Identification of
proteoglycans as the APRIL-specific binding partners. J. Exp. Med. 201:
1375-1383, 2005.

7. Pradet-Balade, B.; Medema, J. P.; Lopez-Fraga, M.; Lozano, J. C.;
Kolfschoten, G. M.; Picard, A.; Martinez-A., C.; Garcia-Sanz, J. A.;
Hahne, M.: An endogenous hybrid mRNA encodes TWE-PRIL, a functional
cell surface TWEAK-APRIL fusion protein. EMBO J. 21: 5711-5720,
2002.

8. Roschke, V.; Sosnovtseva, S.; Ward, C. D.; Hong, J. S.; Smith,
R.; Albert, V.; Stohl, W.; Baker, K. P.; Ullrich, S.; Nardelli, B.;
Hilbert, D. M.; Migone, T.-S.: BLyS and APRIL form biologically active
heterotrimers that are expressed in patients with systemic immune-based
rheumatic diseases. J. Immun. 169: 4314-4321, 2002.

9. Seyler, T. M.; Park, Y. W.; Takemura, S.; Bram, R. J.; Kurtin,
P. J.; Goronzy, J. J.; Weyand, C. M.: BLyS and APRIL in rheumatoid
arthritis. J. Clin. Invest. 115: 3083-3092, 2005.

10. Shu, H.-B.; Hu, W. H.; Johnson, H.: TALL-1 is a novel member
of the TNF family that is down-regulated by mitogens. J. Leukoc.
Biol. 65: 680-683, 1999.

11. Stein, J. V.; Lopez-Fraga, M.; Elustondo, F. A.; Carvalho-Pinto,
C. E.; Rodriguez, D.; Gomez-Caro, R.; de Jong, J.; Martinez-A, C.;
Medema, J. P.; Hahne, M.: APRIL modulates B and T cell immunity. J.
Clin. Invest. 109: 1587-1598, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/20/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/3/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/3/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/15/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/9/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/7/2001

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/28/2000

EDITED terry: 09/14/2012
mgross: 3/24/2009
terry: 3/20/2009
mgross: 10/17/2006
terry: 10/3/2006
mgross: 1/3/2006
wwang: 12/15/2005
tkritzer: 4/14/2004
terry: 4/9/2004
mgross: 9/7/2001
carol: 1/28/2000

601873	TITLE *601873 BETA-1,4-N-ACETYLGALACTOSAMINYLTRANSFERASE 1; B4GALNT1
;;BETA-1,4-N-ACETYLGALACTOSAMINYLTRANSFERASE; GALGT;;
GalNAcT;;
GM2/GD2 SYNTHASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The B4GALNT1 gene encodes beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyl transferase-1
(EC 2.4.1.92), an enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of complex
gangliosides (G), which are mono- (M), di- (D), and tri- (T) sialic
acid-containing glycosphingolipids generated by sequential
glycosylations. Gangliosides are part of the larger family of
glycosphingolipids and are components of the synaptic plasma membrane
involved in synaptic plasticity, signal transduction, and endocytosis
and then are critical for central nervous system development. B4GALNT1
catalyzes the transfer of N-acetylgalactosamine into GM3, GD3, and
globotriaosylceramide by a beta-1,4 linkage (summary by Boukhris et al.,
2013).

CLONING

Nagata et al. (1992) used expression cloning to isolate the cDNA for
beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase (GalNAcT), or G(M2)/G(D2)
synthase. The cDNA encodes a 561-amino acid polypeptide. Northern blot
analysis revealed that the gene is expressed as 2 differently sized
transcripts in all cells tested that expressed G(MS), G(D2), or both.
These findings indicate that the cDNAs catalyze the transfer of GalNAc
into G(M3) and G(D3) by a beta-1,4 linkage, resulting in the synthesis
of G(M2) and G(D2), respectively.

GENE STRUCTURE

Furukawa et al. (1996) examined the genomic structure of the human
GalNAcT gene and found that it contains more than 11 exons spanning over
8 kb of genomic DNA. They reported that the gene has at least 3 distinct
transcription initiation sites that may be involved in cell
type-specific gene expression.

MAPPING

By FISH, Furukawa et al. (1996) mapped the GALGT gene to 12q13.3. Hamlin
et al. (1998) mapped the GALGT and KIF5A (602821) genes to 12q13 by
FISH. They found that these genes are contained within the same
approximately 200-kb YAC insert as the GLI (165220) and DDIT3 (126337)
genes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By exome sequencing of 5 families with autosomal recessive spastic
paraplegia-26 (SPG26; 609195), Boukhris et al. (2013) identified 5
different homozygous mutations in the B4GALNT1 gene. The mutations
segregated with the disorder in the families and were not found in large
control databases. Subsequent analysis of this gene identified
pathogenic mutations in 2 of 65 additional probands with a similar
disorder. All mutations were truncating, except for 2 missense mutations
that occurred at highly conserved residues (see, e.g.,
601873.0001-601873.0005). No functional studies were performed. The
phenotype was characterized by onset in the first 2 decades of life of
gait abnormalities due to lower limb spasticity and muscle weakness.
Some patients had upper limb involvement. Additional features included
intellectual disability, peripheral neuropathy, dysarthria, cerebellar
signs, extrapyramidal signs, and cortical atrophy. The disorder was
slowly progressive.

ANIMAL MODEL

Takamiya et al. (1996) found that mice with a disrupted B4galnt1 gene
lacked all complex gangliosides, but did did not show any major
histologic defects in their nervous systems or in gross behavior.
Electrophysiologic studies showed a slight reduction in the neural
conduction velocity from the tibial nerve to the somatosensory cortex,
but not to the lumbar spine. The findings suggested that complex
gangliosides are required in neuronal functions, such as synaptic
transmission, but not in the morphogenesis and organogenesis of the
brain. Higher levels of GM3 and GD3 expressed in the brains of these
mutant mice may have been able to compensate for the lack of complex
gangliosides.

Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC; 257220) is a progressive
neurodegenerative disorder caused by mutations in the NPC1 gene (607623)
and characterized by intracellular accumulation of cholesterol and
sphingolipids. To determine the relative contribution of ganglioside
accumulation in the neuropathogenesis of Niemann-Pick C disease, Liu et
al. (2000) bred NPC model mice with mice carrying a targeted mutation in
GalNAcT. Unlike the NPC model mice, the double mutant mice did not
exhibit central nervous system accumulation of gangliosides GM2 or of
glycolipids GA1 and GA2. Histologic analysis revealed that the
characteristic neuronal storage pathology of NPC disease was
substantially reduced in the double mutant mice. By contrast, visceral
pathology was similar in the NPC and double mutant mice. Most notably,
the clinical phenotype of the double mutant mice, in the absence of CNS
ganglioside accumulation and associated neuronal pathology, did not
improve. The authors concluded that complex ganglioside storage, while
responsible for much of the neuronal pathology, did not significantly
influence the clinical phenotype of the NPC model.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, 1-BP DEL, 395C

In 3 Spanish sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with autosomal
recessive spastic paraplegia-26 (SPG26; 609195), Boukhris et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous 1-bp deletion (c.395delC) in the B4GALNT1 gene,
resulting in a frameshift and premature termination (Pro132GlnfsTer7).
The mutation, which was found by exome sequencing, segregated with the
disorder in the family and was not present in several large control
databases.

.0002
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, ARG228TER

In 2 Brazilian sibs with SPG26 (609195), Boukhris et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous c.682C-T transition in the B4GALNT1 gene,
resulting in an arg228-to-ter (R228X) substitution. The mutation, which
was found by exome sequencing, was not present in several large control
databases or in 2 unaffected sibs. Three additional sibs were reportedly
affected.

.0003
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, 1-BP DUP, 263G

In an Algerian patient, born of consanguineous parents, with SPG26
(609195), Boukhris et al. (2013) identified a homozygous 1-bp
duplication (c.263dupG), resulting in a frameshift and premature
termination (Leu89ProfsTer13). No other family members were available
for study.

.0004
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, GLN120TER

In 4 members of a Portuguese family with SPG26 (609195), Boukhris et al.
(2013) identified a homozygous c.358C-T transition in the B4GALNT1 gene,
resulting in a gln120-to-ter (Q120X) substitution. The mutation, which
was found by exome sequencing and was not present in several large
control databases, segregated with the disorder in the family.

.0005
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, ASP433ALA

In 3 German sibs with SPG26 (609195), Boukhris et al. (2013) identified
a homozygous c.1298A-C transversion in the B4GALNT1 gene, resulting in
an asp433-to-ala (D433A) substitution at a highly conserved residue. The
mutation, which was found by exome sequencing, was not found in several
large control databases and segregated with the disorder.

REFERENCE 1. Boukhris, A.; Schule, R.; Loureiro, J. L.; Lourenco, C. M.; Mundwiller,
E.; Gonzalez, M. A.; Charles, P.; Gauthier, J.; Rekik, I.; Acosta
Lebrigio, R. F.; Gaussen, M.; Speziani, F.; and 21 others: Alteration
of ganglioside biosynthesis responsible for complex hereditary spastic
paraplegia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 93: 118-123, 2013.

2. Furukawa, K.; Soejima, H.; Niikawa, N.; Shiku, H.; Furukawa, K.
: Genomic organization and chromosomal assignment of the human beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase
gene. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 20836-20844, 1996.

3. Hamlin, P. J.; Jones, P. F.; Leek, J. P.; Bransfield, K.; Lench,
N. J.; Aldersley, M. A.; Howdle, P. D.; Markham, A. F.; Robinson,
P. A.: Assignment of GALGT encoding beta-1,4N-acetylgalactosaminyl-transferase
(GalNAc-T) and KIF5A encoding neuronal kinesin (D12S1889) to human
chromosome band 12q13 by assignment to ICI YAC 26EG10 and in situ
hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 82: 267-268, 1998.

4. Liu, Y.; Wu, Y.-P.; Wada, R.; Neufeld, E. B.; Mullin, K. A.; Howard,
A. C.; Pentchev, P. G.; Vanier, M. T.; Suzuki, K.; Proia, R. L.:
Alleviation of neuronal ganglioside storage does not improve the clinical
course of the Niemann-Pick C disease mouse. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9:
1087-1092, 2000.

5. Nagata, Y.; Yamashiro, S.; Yodoi, J.; Lloyd, K. O.; Shiku, H.;
Furukawa, K.: Expression cloning of beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase
cDNAs that determine the expression of G(M2) and G(D2) gangliosides. J.
Biol. Chem. 267: 12082-12089, 1992. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem.
269: 7045 only, 1994.

6. Takamiya, K.; Yamamoto, A.; Furukawa, K.; Yamashiro, S.; Shin,
M.; Okada, M.; Fukumoto, S.; Haraguchi, M.; Takeda, N.; Fujimura,
K.; Sakae, M.; Kishikawa, M.; Shiku, H.; Furukawa, K.; Aizawa, S.
: Mice with disrupted GM2/GD2 synthase gene lack complex gangliosides
but exhibit only subtle defects in their nervous system. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 93: 10662-10667, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/1/2013
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/12/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 2/18/2000

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 4/10/1997

EDITED carol: 09/09/2013
carol: 8/6/2013
carol: 8/5/2013
ckniffin: 8/1/2013
carol: 4/3/2013
carol: 6/16/2006
carol: 11/14/2003
carol: 3/13/2003
alopez: 5/12/2000
mgross: 2/25/2000
psherman: 2/18/2000
carol: 6/16/1998
alopez: 1/28/1998

607865	TITLE *607865 SET DOMAIN PROTEIN, BIFURCATED, 2; SETDB2
;;CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA DELETION REGION GENE 8; CLLD8
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Proteins that contain a SET domain, such as SETDB2, modulate gene
expression epigenetically through histone H3 (see 602810) methylation.
SETDB2 is likely a histone H3 methyltransferase, as it contains both the
active site and flanking cysteine residues required for catalytic
activity (Zhang et al., 2003).

CLONING

Mabuchi et al. (2001) assembled a high-resolution physical map spanning
the critical region deleted in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(109543) on chromosome 13q14 and identified SETDB2, which they
designated CLLD8. The deduced 719-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of about 82 kD. SETDB2 contains a methyl-CpG-binding
domain, a preSET domain, and a SET domain that is bifurcated by a
218-amino acid insertion. SETDB2 shares 45% identity with SETDB1
(604396). Northern blot analysis detected a 3.3-kb transcript in nearly
all tissues and tumor cell lines examined, with highest expression in
heart, testis, and ovary.

Using a positional cloning approach, Zhang et al. (2003) cloned SETDB2
from a quantitative trait locus on chromosome 13q14 that influences
immunoglobulin E levels and asthma (147050). Northern blot analysis
detected a 4.0-kb transcript in all tissues examined. Higher molecular
mass bands were also detected at lower levels.

- SETDB2/PHF11 Fusion Transcripts

Using primers designed from exons utilized by SETDB2 and PHF11 (607796),
Zhang et al. (2003) amplified PCR products that spanned both and
represented 3 alternatively spliced fusion transcripts. Expression of
each transcript was tissue specific and was detected in nearly all
tissues examined.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mabuchi et al. (2001) determined that the SETDB2 gene contains 15 exons
and spans 49 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Mabuchi et al. (2001) mapped the SETDB2
gene to chromosome 13q14. It is centromeric to and transcribed in the
same direction as the PHF11 gene.

REFERENCE 1. Mabuchi, H.; Fujii, H.; Calin, G.; Alder, H.; Negrini, M.; Rassenti,
L.; Kipps, T. J.; Bullrich, F.; Croce, C. M.: Cloning and characterization
of CLLD6, CLLD7, CLLD8, novel candidate genes for leukemogenesis at
chromosome 13q14, a region commonly deleted in B-cell chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Cancer Res. 61: 2870-2877, 2001.

2. Zhang, Y.; Leaves, N. I.; Anderson, G. G.; Ponting, C. P.; Broxholme,
J.; Holt, R.; Edser, P.; Bhattacharyya, S.; Dunham, A.; Adcock, I.
M.; Pulleyn, L.; Barnes, P. J.; and 11 others: Positional cloning
of a quantitative trait locus on chromosome 13q14 that influences
immunoglobulin E levels and asthma. Nature Genet. 34: 181-186, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/9/2003

EDITED mgross: 02/05/2013
mgross: 6/9/2003

603916	TITLE *603916 EUKARYOTIC TRANSLATION INITIATION FACTOR 3, SUBUNIT C; EIF3C
;;EIF3-p110;;
EUKARYOTIC TRANSLATION INITIATION FACTOR 3, SUBUNIT 8, FORMERLY; EIF3S8,
FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Eukaryotic initiation factor-3 (eIF3) is the largest of the eIFs and
consists of at least 10 nonidentical subunits, including EIF2C (Asano et
al., 1997).

CLONING

Asano et al. (1997) demonstrated that the 115-kD component of HeLa cell
eIF3 is actually composed of 2 proteins, p116 (PRT1; 603917) and p110.
By screening a HeLa cell expression library with antibodies against the
115-kD band, these authors identified cDNAs encoding p110. The predicted
913-amino acid p110 protein has a pI of 5.8 and is unrelated to p116.
p110 shares 31% identity to the S. cerevisiae Nip1 protein, which is
thought to be involved in nuclear import and the initiation phase of
protein synthesis. Asano et al. (1997) found that the p116, p110, and
p36 (603911) subunits localize on 40S ribosomes in cells active in
translation and coimmunoprecipitate with p170 (602039), indicating that
these proteins are integral components of eIF3. Northern blot analysis
revealed that p110 is expressed as a 3-kb mRNA.

GENE FUNCTION

By reciprocal yeast 2-hybrid and coimmunoprecipitation analyses of the
human STS26T malignant schwannoma cell line, Scoles et al. (2006) showed
that isoforms 1 and 2 of schwannomin (NF2; 607379) interacted with
EIF3C. Mutation analysis revealed that the FERM domain of schwannomin
interacted with the C-terminal half of EIF3C. Immunofluorescence
microscopy of STS26T cells showed that the 2 proteins partly colocalized
at punctate perinuclear structures and at some membranous structures.
Overexpression of EIF3C in STS26T cells elevated cell proliferation, and
schwannomin countered this effect. Western blot analysis revealed an
inverse abundance of schwannomin and EIF3C in human meningiomas.

MAPPING

Gross (2011) mapped the EIF3C gene to chromosome 16p11.2 based on an
alignment of the EIF3C sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC000533) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37). A nearly identical copy of EIF3C, designated
EIF3CL, also maps to chromosome 16p11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Asano, K.; Kinzy, T. G.; Merrick, W. C.; Hershey, J. W. B.: Conservation
and diversity of eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF3. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 1101-1109, 1997.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/20/2011.

3. Scoles, D. R.; Yong, W. H.; Qin, Y.; Wawrowsky, K.; Pulst, S. M.
: Schwannomin inhibits tumorigenesis through direct interaction with
the eukaryotic initiation factor subunit c (elF3c). Hum. Molec. Genet. 15:
1059-1070, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 05/20/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/28/2011

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/16/1999

EDITED mgross: 05/20/2011
mgross: 5/19/2011
terry: 4/28/2011
mgross: 10/2/2007
cwells: 9/17/2003
alopez: 6/17/1999

