194558	TITLE *194558 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 83; ZNF83
DESCRIPTION 
MAPPING

Marine et al. (1994) assigned the ZNF83 gene (also known as HPF1) to
chromosome 19 by screening a human/rodent hybrid panel and localized the
gene further to 19q13.3-q13.4 by fluorescence in situ hybridization and
digital imaging microscopy.

HISTORY

Conserved structural motifs define large families of nucleic acid
binding proteins in eukaryotes. The C2H2-type zinc finger motif,
conferring both specific RNA and DNA binding activities, was first
detected within the amino acid sequence of the Xenopus transcription
factor IIIA (Miller et al., 1985). Thereafter, vertebrate genomes were
shown to encode hundreds of so-called zinc finger proteins (ZFPs).
Subfamilies were defined on the basis of conserved sequence elements
outside the finger repeat, such as the KRAB domain. Several members of
these subfamilies were found to have a clustered genomic organization.

REFERENCE 1. Marine, J.-C.; Bellefroid, E. J.; Bourguignon, C.; Riviere, M.;
Lecoq, P. J.; Poncelet, D. A.; Szpirer, J.; Martial, J. A.; Szpirer,
C.: Assignment of the human ZNF83 (HPF1) zinc finger gene to chromosome
19q13.3-q13.4. Genomics 21: 285-286, 1994.

2. Miller, J.; McLachlan, A. D.; Klug, A.: Repetitive zinc-binding
domains in the protein transcription factor IIIA from Xenopus oocytes. EMBO
J. 4: 1609-1614, 1985.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/17/1994

EDITED alopez: 07/07/2010
dkim: 6/26/1998
jason: 6/17/1994

605353	TITLE *605353 GHRELIN; GHRL
;;GROWTH HORMONE SECRETAGOGUE RECEPTOR LIGAND;;
MOTILIN-RELATED PEPTIDE
OBESTATIN, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ghrelin is an endogenous ligand for the growth hormone secretagogue
receptor (GHSR; 601898) and is involved in regulating growth hormone
(GH; 139250) release. Ghrelin is derived from a preprohormone called
preproghrelin, which also generates a second peptide called obestatin
(Zhang et al., 2005). Obestatin is an endogenous ligand for the orphan G
protein-coupled receptor GPR39 (602886) and is involved in satiety and
decreased food intake.

CLONING

Small synthetic molecules called growth hormone secretagogues (GHSs)
stimulate the release of growth hormone from the pituitary. They act
through the growth hormone secretagogue receptor, a G protein-coupled
receptor. Kojima et al. (1999) reported the purification and
identification in rat stomach of an endogenous ligand specific for GHSR.
The purified ligand is a peptide of 28 amino acids in which the serine-3
residue is n-octanoylated. The acylated peptide specifically releases GH
both in vivo and in vitro, and O-n-octanoylation at serine-3 is
essential for the activity. Kojima et al. (1999) designated the
GH-releasing peptide 'ghrelin' ('ghre' is the Proto-Indo-European root
of the word 'grow'). Human ghrelin is homologous to rat ghrelin apart
from 2 amino acids. The occurrence of ghrelin in both rat and human
indicates that GH release from the pituitary may be regulated not only
by hypothalamic growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH; 139190), but
also by ghrelin. Human preproghrelin, isolated from a stomach cDNA
library, consists of 117 amino acids. Rat and human preproghrelins are
82.9% identical. Northern blot analysis of rat tissues showed that
preproghrelin mRNA of 0.62 kb occurs in stomach. In situ hybridization
indicated that ghrelin mRNA is found in the region from the neck to the
base of the oxyntic gland. Ghrelin-immunoreactive cells in the stomach
have the same distribution as that found using in situ hybridization.
The distribution pattern and morphologic features of the labeled and
immunostained cells showed that ghrelin cells are endocrine cells.

Kojima et al. (1999) detected a ghrelin transcript in brain by RT-PCR
amplification but not by Northern blot analysis. Immunohistochemical
analyses performed after colchicine treatment revealed that
ghrelin-immunoreactive neurons were localized in the hypothalamic
arcuate nucleus.

Tanaka et al. (2001) cloned a splice variant of mouse ghrelin, which
they called ghrelin gene-derived transcript (GGDT), from adult mouse
testis. The variant encodes a deduced 54-amino acid peptide generated by
alternative exon 1 usage and alternative splicing. Northern blot
analysis showed that GGDT expression is limited to the mouse testis and
is developmentally regulated, being absent in testis at 2 weeks of age
and increasing to reach adult expression levels at 4 weeks of age.
Tanaka et al. (2001) found no significant change in the abundance of
full-length ghrelin mRNA in the stomach from 2 to 8 weeks of age.

- Obestatin

Zhang et al. (2005) searched for orthologs of the human ghrelin gene and
compared preproghrelin sequences from 11 mammalian species. In addition
to the known ghrelin mature peptide, which immediately follows the
signal peptide, they identified another conserved region that was
flanked by potential convertase cleavage sites. This region encoded a
putative 23-amino acid peptide with a flanking conserved glycine residue
at the C terminus, suggesting that it might be amidated. Zhang et al.
(2005) named this ghrelin-associated peptide obestatin, from the Latin
'obedere,' to devour, and 'statin,' denoting suppression.

GENE FUNCTION

Kojima et al. (1999) found that ghrelin circulates in healthy human
blood at a considerable plasma concentration (117.2 +/- 37.2
fmol/ml(-1); n = 6); this, together with the finding that ghrelin, when
injected intravenously, induces GH release, suggested to the authors
that this molecule is produced in and secreted from the stomach,
circulating in the bloodstream to act on the pituitary.

Takaya et al. (2000) studied GH-releasing activity and other effects
generated by ghrelin in 4 normal men aged 28 to 37 years. They
demonstrated that ghrelin strongly stimulates GH release in humans in a
dose-dependent manner. Per mol, ghrelin is more potent for GH release
than GHRH. The lowest dose of ghrelin used (0.2 microg/kg) led to
massive GH release (43.3 +/- 6.0 ng/mL), with minimum effects on ACTH or
PRL (176760). Ghrelin administration did not change serum LH (see
118850), FSH (136530), or TSH (188540) levels.

Kluge et al. (2007) investigated the effect of pulsatile ghrelin
administration on the nocturnal secretion patterns of LH and
testosterone in 10 healthy young men. They found that ghrelin caused
both a delay and suppression of the amplitude of LH pulses. They
concluded that, as in nonhuman mammals, ghrelin may affect the
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis predominantly by suppressing
secretion of LH.

Tschop et al. (2000) showed that peripheral daily administration of
ghrelin caused weight gain by reducing fat utilization in mice and rats.
Intracerebroventricular administration of ghrelin generated a
dose-dependent increase in food intake and body weight. Rat serum
ghrelin concentrations were increased by fasting and were reduced by
refeeding or oral glucose administration, but not by water ingestion.
Tschop et al. (2000) proposed that ghrelin, in addition to its role in
regulating GH secretion, signals the hypothalamus when an increase in
metabolic efficiency is necessary.

Nakazato et al. (2001) demonstrated that ghrelin is involved in the
hypothalamic regulation of energy homeostasis. Intracerebroventricular
injections of ghrelin strongly stimulated feeding in rats and increased
body weight gain. Ghrelin also increased feeding in rats that were
genetically deficient in growth hormone. Antighrelin immunoglobulin G
robustly suppressed feeding. After intracerebroventricular ghrelin
administration, FOS protein (164810), a marker of neuronal activation,
was found in regions of primary importance in the regulation of feeding,
including neuropeptide Y (NPY; 162640) neurons and agouti-related
protein (AGRP; 602311) neurons. Antibodies and antagonists of NPY and
AGRP abolished ghrelin-induced feeding. Ghrelin augmented NPY gene
expression and blocked leptin (LEP; 164160)-induced feeding reduction,
implying that there is a competitive interaction between ghrelin and
leptin in feeding regulation. Nakazato et al. (2001) concluded that
ghrelin is a physiologic mediator of feeding and probably has a function
in growth regulation by stimulating feeding and release of growth
hormone.

Date et al. (2001) demonstrated a role for ghrelin in the central
regulation of gastric function. Specifically, intracerebroventricular
administration of ghrelin stimulated gastric acid secretion in a
dose-dependent and atropine-sensitive manner. Vagotomy abolished gastric
acid secretion. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated the induction of Fos
expression in the nucleus of the solitary tract and dorsomotor nucleus
of the rat vagus nerve.

Cummings et al. (2002) investigated plasma ghrelin levels after weight
loss induced by diet or by gastric bypass surgery. They reasoned that if
circulating ghrelin participates in the adaptive response to weight
loss, its levels should rise with dieting. Because ghrelin is produced
primarily in the stomach, weight loss after gastric bypass surgery might
be accompanied by impaired ghrelin secretion. They found an increase in
the plasma ghrelin level with diet-induced weight loss. Gastric bypass
was associated with markedly suppressed ghrelin levels, possibly
contributing to the weight-reducing effect of the procedure.

Leonetti et al. (2003) observed a significant difference in plasma
ghrelin levels between laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (LRYGBP)
and laparoscopic adjustable silicone gastric banding (LASGB), suggesting
that each procedure could induce weight loss by a different mechanism in
which ghrelin could be involved.

Kojima et al. (2001) reviewed the role of ghrelin. This peptide is found
in the secretory granules of X/A-like cells, a distinct endocrine cell
type found in the submucosal layer of the stomach (Date et al., 2000).
These cells contain round, compact, electron-dense granules and are
filled with ghrelin. Ghrelin immunoreactive cells are also found in the
small and large intestines.

Cowley et al. (2003) discovered expression of ghrelin in a theretofore
uncharacterized group of neurons adjacent to the third ventricle between
the dorsal, ventral, paraventricular, and arcuate hypothalamic nuclei.
These neurons send efferents onto key hypothalamic circuits, including
those producing NPY, AGRP, proopiomelanocortin (POMC; 176830) products,
and corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH; 122560). Within the
hypothalamus, ghrelin bound mostly on presynaptic terminals of NPY
neurons. Using electrophysiologic recordings, Cowley et al. (2003) found
that ghrelin stimulated the activity of arcuate NPY neurons and mimicked
the effect of NPY in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus.
Cowley et al. (2003) proposed that at these sites, release of ghrelin
may stimulate the release of orexigenic peptides and neurotransmitters,
thus representing a novel regulatory circuit controlling energy
homeostasis.

Abizaid et al. (2006) demonstrated that ghrelin bound to neurons of the
ventral tegmental area (VTA) in mice and rats, where it triggered
increased dopamine neuronal activity, synapse formation, and dopamine
turnover in the nucleus accumbens in a Ghsr-dependent manner. Direct VTA
administration of ghrelin triggered feeding, while intra-VTA delivery of
a selective Ghsr antagonist blocked the orexigenic effect of circulating
ghrelin and blunted rebound feeding following fasting. In addition,
ghrelin- and Ghsr-deficient mice showed attenuated feeding responses to
restricted feeding schedules.

Dixit et al. (2004) demonstrated that ghrelin and its receptor, GHSR,
are expressed in human T lymphocytes and monocytes, where ghrelin acts
via GHSR to inhibit specifically the expression of proinflammatory
anorectic cytokines such as IL1-beta (147720), IL6 (147620), and
TNF-alpha (191160). Ghrelin led to a dose-dependent inhibition of
leptin-induced cytokine expression, whereas leptin upregulated GHSR
expression on human T lymphocytes. Dixit et al. (2004) proposed the
existence of a reciprocal regulatory network by which ghrelin and leptin
control immune cell activation and inflammation. In a murine model of
endotoxemia, Dixit et al. (2004) also showed that ghrelin has potent
antiinflammatory effects and attenuates endotoxin-induced anorexia.

Pagotto et al. (2003) investigated circulating ghrelin levels in a group
of hypogonadal men before and after therapeutic intervention aiming at
normalization of low testosterone concentrations. After the 6-month
replacement testosterone therapy, ghrelin levels of hypogonadal patients
increased and did not differ significantly in comparison with both
control groups. The positive correlation between ghrelin and androgens
still persisted after testosterone replacement therapy, after adjusting
for confounding variables. The authors concluded that androgens modulate
circulating ghrelin concentrations in humans.

Farquhar et al. (2003) measured ghrelin in neonates who were small
(SGA), appropriate (AGA), or large (LGA) for gestational age and
observed that ghrelin concentration was 40% higher in SGA neonates
compared with AGA and LGA neonates. There was a positive correlation
between ghrelin and gestational age in AGA/LGA and a negative
correlation in SGA neonates. The authors suggested that ghrelin may play
a physiologic role in fetal adaptation to intrauterine malnutrition.

To determine whether ghrelin releases GH by a pituitary or a
hypothalamic action, Popovic et al. (2003) compared a group of patients
with organic lesions mainly in the hypothalamic area with matched
controls. Patients showed a severe GH deficiency after hypothalamic
stimulation by insulin tolerance test, but partial response after GHRH
(139190) administration. The authors concluded that when hypothalamic
structures are not operative, ghrelin, either alone or in combination
with GHRH, is not able to significantly release GH. The authors
postulated a hypothalamic point of action for ghrelin-induced GH
secretion.

The studies of Corbetta et al. (2003) suggested that carcinoids and
pancreatic tumors rarely cause ghrelin hypersecretion. However, in this
series, 1 pancreatic ghrelinoma not associated with clinical features of
acromegaly was identified.

After administration of ghrelin, Doi et al. (2006) observed increases in
Ia2-beta (PTPRN2; 601698) in mouse brain, pancreas, and insulinoma cell
lines, but not Ia2 (PTPRN; 601773). Administration of ghrelin or
overexpression of Ia2-beta inhibited glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion in insulinoma cells, and inhibition of Ia2-beta overexpression
by RNA interference ameliorated ghrelin's inhibitory effects on
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Doi et al. (2006) suggested that
the inhibitory effects of ghrelin on glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion are at least partly due to increased expression of Ia2-beta
induced by ghrelin.

Leidy et al. (2004) studied the effects of a 3-month energy
deficit-imposing diet and exercise intervention on circulating ghrelin
in healthy women of normal weight. Ghrelin significantly increased over
time in the weight-loss group compared with the controls and the
weight-stable group (P less than 0.05). Changes in ghrelin were
negatively correlated with changes in body weight (r = -0.61; P less
than 0.05). Body fat, body weight, and resting metabolic rate
significantly decreased in the weight-loss group before the increase in
ghrelin. The authors concluded that ghrelin responds in a compensatory
manner to changes in energy homeostasis in healthy young women, and that
ghrelin exhibits particular sensitivity to changes in body weight.

Yang et al. (2008) found that mouse Goat (MBOAT4; 611940) octanoylated
ghrelin following cotransfection of Goat and preproghrelin in cultured
endocrine cell lines. Mutation analysis showed that Goat octanoylated
ghrelin on ser3, a modification required for its endocrine effects.

Checchi et al. (2007) studied the diagnostic use of the measurement of
serum ghrelin compared with other markers of gastric damage in
predicting the presence of atrophic body gastritis (ABG) in patients
with autoimmune gastritis. All 233 patients with autoimmune gastritis
and 211 control subjects were screened for circulating parietal cell
antibodies (PCAs) and were tested for serum ghrelin, gastrin (137250),
pepsinogen I (see 169700) and II (169740), and anti-Helicobacter pylori
antibody levels. A total of 52 patients and 28 control subjects
underwent a gastric endoscopy. In PCA/positive patients, mean serum
ghrelin levels were significantly lower, and mean serum gastrin levels
were significantly higher with respect to PCA/negative patients. Checchi
et al. (2007) concluded that ghrelin secretion is negatively affected by
autoimmune gastritis, and its serum level represents the most sensitive
and specific noninvasive marker for selecting patients at high risk for
ABG.

Andrews et al. (2008) showed that ghrelin initiates robust changes in
hypothalamic mitochondrial respiration in mice that are dependent on
uncoupling protein-2 (UCP2; 601693). Activation of this mitochondrial
mechanism is critical for ghrelin-induced mitochondrial proliferation
and electric activation of NPY (162640)/AgRP (602311) neurons, for
ghrelin-triggered synaptic plasticity of proopiomelanocortin (POMC;
176830)-expressing neurons, and for ghrelin-induced food intake. The
UCP2-dependent action of ghrelin on NPY/AgRP neurons is driven by a
hypothalamic fatty acid oxidation pathway involving AMPK (see 602739),
CPT1 (600528), and free radicals that are scavenged by UCP2. Andrews et
al. (2008) concluded that their results revealed a signaling modality
connecting mitochondria-mediated effects of G protein-coupled receptors
on neuronal function and associated behavior.

In studies in mice lacking Mboat4 and mice overexpressing Mboat4,
Kirchner et al. (2009) demonstrated that Mboat4 is regulated by nutrient
availability, depends on specific dietary lipids as acylation
substrates, and links ingested lipids to energy expenditure and body fat
mass. Kirchner et al. (2009) concluded that ghrelin acylation and the
secretion of acylated ghrelin probably represent 2 independent
processes, and that the ghrelin-MBOAT4 system is a signaling pathway
that alerts the central nervous system to the presence of dietary
calories, rather than to their absence, as had been commonly accepted.

- Role in Prader-Willi Syndrome

To determine whether ghrelin is elevated in Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS;
176270), Delparigi et al. (2002) measured fasting plasma ghrelin
concentration, body composition, and subjective ratings of hunger in 7
subjects with PWS and 30 healthy subjects who had fasted overnight. The
mean plasma ghrelin concentration was higher in PWS than in the
reference population and this difference remained significant after
adjustment for percentage of body fat. A positive correlation was found
between plasma ghrelin and subjective ratings of hunger. The authors
concluded that ghrelin is elevated in subjects with PWS. They also
suggested that ghrelin may be responsible, at least in part, for the
hyperphagia observed in PWS.

Haqq et al. (2003) measured fasting serum ghrelin levels in children
with PWS with an average age of 9.5 years and body mass index (BMI) of
31.3 kilograms per square meter. The PWS group was compared with 4
control groups: normal weight controls, obese children, and children
with melanocortin-4 receptor mutations and leptin deficiency. Ghrelin
levels in children with PWS were significantly elevated (3-4 fold)
compared with BMI-matched obese controls. The authors concluded that
elevation of serum ghrelin levels to the degree documented in this study
may play a role as an orexigenic factor driving the insatiable appetite
and obesity found in PWS.

Feigerlova et al. (2008) studied total plasma ghrelin levels in 40
children with PWS and 84 controls from 2 months to 17 years. Plasma
ghrelin levels were higher in children with PWS than controls, both in
the youngest children below 3 years who were not receiving GH (139250)
(771 vs 233 pg/ml, P less than 0.0001) and in the children older than 3
years, all of whom were treated with GH (428 vs 159 pg/ml, P less than
0.0001). The authors concluded that plasma ghrelin levels in children
with PWS are elevated at any age, including during the first years of
life, thus preceding the development of obesity.

- Obestatin

In addition to ghrelin, the preproghrelin peptide also produces
obestatin. Contrary to the appetite-stimulating effects of ghrelin,
Zhang et al. (2005) demonstrated that treatment of rats with obestatin
suppressed food intake, inhibited jejunal contraction, and decreased
body weight gain. Intraperitoneal injection of amidated human obestatin
in adult male mice resulted in suppressed food intake in a time- and
dose-dependent manner. Intracerebroventricular treatment with obestatin
also decreased food intake, similar to the anorexigenic effect of the
synthetic melanocortin (176830) agonist MTII (melanotan-II). In
contrast, treatment with the nonamidated obestatin was less effective.

Chartrel et al. (2007) were unable to reproduce the finding of Zhang et
al. (2005) that obestatin bound to the orphan G protein-coupled receptor
GPR39 (602886). In response to the comments by Chartrel et al. (2007),
Zhang et al. (2007) stated that they also could not reproduce this
finding. However, Zhang et al. (2007) stated that they could reproduce
their original findings on the in vivo effects of obestatin in mice
(decrease in food intake, gastric emptying responses, and body weight
gain) under precise experimental conditions.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Korbonits et al. (2002) studied the ghrelin gene in a group of 70 tall
and obese children. They found 10 SNPs. One common polymorphism of the
ghrelin gene, leu72 to met (L72M; 605353.0002), corresponding to an
amino acid change in the tail of the preproghrelin molecule, was
significantly associated with children with a higher BMI (P = 0.001),
and with lower insulin secretion during the first part of an oral
glucose tolerance test (P = 0.05), although no difference in glucose
levels was noted. The authors concluded that variations in the ghrelin
gene contribute to obesity in children and may modulate glucose-induced
insulin secretion.

Ukkola et al. (2001) reported an arg51-to-gln polymorphism (R51Q;
605353.0001) in the ghrelin gene associated with obesity.

Hinney et al. (2002) screened the ghrelin coding region in 215 extremely
obese German children and adolescents (study group 1) and 93
normal-weight students (study group 2) by single-strand conformation
polymorphism analysis (SSCP). They found 2 previously described SNPs,
R51Q (605353.0001) and L72M (605353.0002), in similar frequencies in
study groups 1 and 2. Hence, they could not confirm the previous
finding. Additionally, 2 novel variants were identified within the
coding region. They detected a nonconservative amino acid change from
gln to leu at codon 90 (605353.0003). They also detected a frameshift
mutation (605353.0004) in 1 healthy normal-weight individual. The
authors concluded that none of the variants seem to influence weight
regulation.

To determine whether mutations in GHRL influence eating behavior and
risk for metabolic syndrome (see 605552), obesity, diabetes, and related
traits, Steinle et al. (2005) genotyped 856 Amish samples for 3 missense
polymorphisms in GHRL, R51Q (605363.0001), L72M (605363.0002) (dbSNP
rs696217), and Q90L (605363.0003) (dbSNP rs4684677) and performed
association analyses with eating behavior traits and metabolic syndrome.
The prevalence of metabolic syndrome was lower among those carrying the
51Q allele (3.8 vs 15.8%; age- and sex-adjusted odds ratio = 0.22; P =
0.031). The L72M variant was also associated with increased prevalence
of metabolic syndrome (23.2 vs 13.4%; age- and sex-adjusted odds ratio =
2.57; P = 0.02) as well as higher fasting glucose, lower high density
lipoprotein, and higher triglyceride levels (P = 0.02, P = 0.007, and P
= 0.04, respectively). The 2 variants were not in linkage disequilibrium
with each other, suggesting independent effects. The authors concluded
that mutations in GHRL may confer risk for the metabolic syndrome.

MAPPING

Scott (2000) mapped the human gene encoding ghrelin to 3p26-p25 based on
sequence similarity between the ghrelin precursor (GenBank GENBANK
AB029434) and a BAC (GenBank GENBANK AC008116) mapped to 3p26-p25.

ANIMAL MODEL

Wortley et al. (2004) generated ghrelin-null mice which were viable and
exhibited normal growth rates as well as normal spontaneous food intake
patterns, normal basal levels of hypothalamic orexigenic and
anorexigenic neuropeptides, and no impairment of reflexive hyperphagia
after fasting. Wortley et al. (2004) concluded that endogenous ghrelin
is not an essential regulator of food intake. Analyses of the
ghrelin-null mice demonstrated increased use of fat as a fuel source
when placed on a high-fat diet, indicating that endogenous ghrelin plays
a prominent role in determining the type of metabolic substrate (e.g.,
fat vs carbohydrate) that is used for maintenance of energy balance,
particularly under conditions of high fat intake.

Wortley et al. (2005) demonstrated that male Ghrl-null mice are
protected from the rapid weight gain induced by early exposure to a
high-fat diet; the reduced weight gain was associated with decreased
adiposity and increased energy expenditure and locomotor activity as the
animals aged. Despite the absence of ghrelin, these Ghrl-null mice
showed a paradoxical preservation of the GH/IGF1 (147440) axis. Wortley
et al. (2005) suggested that endogenous ghrelin plays an important role
in the metabolic adaptation to nutrient availability.

Zigman et al. (2005) generated Ghsr (601898)-null mice and observed that
ghrelin administration failed to acutely stimulate food intake or
activate arcuate nucleus neurons. When fed a high-fat diet, both female
and male Ghsr-null mice ate less food, stored less of their consumed
calories, preferentially utilized fat as an energy substrate, and
accumulated less body weight and adiposity than control mice. Ghsr-null
mice also demonstrated statistically significant reductions in both
respiratory quotient and locomotor activity compared to wildtype, and
their blood glucose levels were significantly lower than wildtype mice
of similar weight and body composition. Zigman et al. (2005) concluded
that ghrelin-responsive pathways are an important component of
coordinated body weight control, and suggested that ghrelin signaling is
required for development of the full phenotype of diet-induced obesity.

In rats undergoing chronic intracerebroventricular infusion of ghrelin,
Theander-Carrillo et al. (2006) observed increases in the glucose
utilization rate of white and brown adipose tissue with no effect on
skeletal muscle. In white adipocytes, mRNA expression of various fat
storage-promoting enzymes was markedly increased, whereas mRNA
expression of CPT1A (600528), which controls the rate-limiting step in
fat oxidation, was decreased. In brown adipocytes, central ghrelin
infusion resulted in lowered expression of the thermogenesis-related
mitochondrial UCP1 (113730) and UCP3 (602044). These ghrelin effects
were dose-dependent, occurred independently of ghrelin-induced
hyperphagia, and seemed to be mediated by the sympathetic nervous
system; none of the effects on adipocyte metabolism were observed
following peripheral administration of equal amounts of ghrelin.
Theander-Carrillo et al. (2006) concluded that central ghrelin is of
physiologic relevance in the control of cell metabolism in adipose
tissue.

Dixit et al. (2007) reported that ghrelin and ghrelin receptor
expression within the thymus diminished with progressive aging. Infusion
of ghrelin into 14-month-old mice significantly improved age-associated
changes in thymic architecture and thymocyte numbers, increasing recent
thymic emigrants and improving T cell receptor diversity of peripheral T
cell subsets. Ghrelin-induced thymopoiesis during aging was associated
with enhanced early thymocyte progenitors and bone marrow-derived
hematopoietic stem cells, while Ghrl/Ghsr-deficient mice displayed
accelerated age-associated thymic involution. Leptin (164160) also
enhanced thymopoiesis in aged but not young mice.

Jerlhag et al. (2009) provided evidence that the central ghrelin
signaling system is required for alcohol reward. In mice, central
ghrelin administration to brain ventricles, or to tegmental areas
involved in reward, increased voluntary alcohol intake. Central or
peripheral administration of ghrelin receptor antagonists suppressed
alcohol intake. In addition, suppression of central ghrelin signaling
resulted in blunting of alcohol-induced locomotor stimulation, decreased
dopamine release, and impaired conditioned place preference. These
findings indicated that central ghrelin signaling not only stimulates
the reward system, but is also required for stimulation of that system
by alcohol.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
OBESITY, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
METABOLIC SYNDROME, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
GHRL, ARG51GLN

In 6 of 96 obese (601665) subjects, Ukkola et al. (2001) found a
substitution of gln for arg at codon 51 of preproghrelin (R51Q). This
mutation was caused by a G-to-A transition at codon 346 of the ghrelin
gene, leading to a replacement of arg by gln at the last codon of the
mature ghrelin product, codon 28. This mutation was not found among 96
control subjects. Hinney et al. (2002) found this mutation in similar
frequency among obese and control subjects, however.

In a study examining the relationship between GHRL variants and eating
behavior and risk for metabolic syndrome (see 605552), obesity,
diabetes, and related traits involving 856 Amish participants, Steinle
et al. (2005) found that the prevalence of metabolic syndrome was lower
among those carrying the 51Q allele (3.8 vs 15.8%; age- and sex-adjusted
odds ratio = 0.22; P = 0.031).

.0002
OBESITY, AGE AT ONSET OF
METABOLIC SYNDROME, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
GHRL, LEU72MET

Ukkola et al. (2001) found this mutation, a nucleotide 408C-A
transversion resulting in a leu72-to-met (L72M) amino acid change, in 15
obese (601665) (12 heter- and 3 homozygotes) and 12 control subjects.
Among the obese carriers, 12 were heterozygous and 3 homozygous for the
substitution; among the control carriers, all were heterozygotes. This
mutation is outside the coding region for mature ghrelin. The age at
onset of self-reported weight problems tended to be lower among carrier
obese subjects than among those without the polymorphism.

Korbonits et al. (2002) found this SNP (dbSNP rs696217), which they
referred to as SNP247, in heterozygosity in 14 subjects. They noted that
children carrying this polymorphism had a significantly higher Z BMI
compared to those carrying only the wildtype allele, and that the age at
onset of obesity for those carrying this SNP was slightly earlier
(median SNP247 group 2.0 years, wildtype group 3.5 years; P = 0.036).

Hinney et al. (2002) identified this variant in both extremely obese
children and adolescents and normal-weight students.

In a study examining the relationship between GHRL variants and eating
behavior and risk for metabolic syndrome (see 605552), obesity,
diabetes, and related traits involving 856 Amish participants, Steinle
et al. (2005) found that the L72M variant was associated with increased
prevalence of metabolic syndrome (23.2 vs 13.4%; age- and sex-adjusted
odds ratio = 2.57; P = 0.02) as well as higher fasting glucose, lower
high density lipoprotein, and higher triglyceride levels (P = 0.02, P =
0.007, and P = 0.04, respectively).

.0003
OBESITY, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
GHRL, GLN90LEU

Hinney et al. (2002) identified a novel variant in the ghrelin gene, an
A-to-T transversion that led to a nonconservative amino acid change from
gln to leu at codon 90 (Q90L; dbSNP rs4684677). The frequency of the
leu90 allele was significantly higher in the extremely obese (601665)
children and adolescents than in the normal-weight students.
Additionally, they genotyped 134 underweight students and 44
normal-weight adults for this SNP. Genotype frequencies were similar in
extremely obese children and adolescents, underweight students, and
normal-weight adults.

.0004
GHRELIN POLYMORPHISM
GHRL, 2-BP DEL, CODON 34

In a healthy normal-weight individual, Hinney et al. (2002) identified a
2-bp deletion at codon 34 of ghrelin leading to the insertion of 36
aberrant amino acids and a stop codon at position 71. This variant
affects the coding region of mature ghrelin; presumably, this individual
is haploinsufficient for ghrelin.

REFERENCE 1. Abizaid, A.; Liu, Z.-W.; Andrews, Z. B.; Shanabrough, M.; Borok,
E.; Elsworth, J. D.; Roth, R. H.; Sleeman, M. W.; Picciotto, M. R.;
Tschop, M. H.; Gao, X.-B.; Horvath, T. L.: Ghrelin modulates the
activity and synaptic input organization of midbrain dopamine neurons
while promoting appetite. J. Clin. Invest. 116: 3229-3239, 2006.

2. Andrews, Z. B.; Liu, Z.-W.; Wallingford, N.; Erion, D. M.; Borok,
E.; Friedman, J. M.; Tschop, M. H.; Shanabrough, M.; Cline, G.; Shulman,
G. I.; Coppola, A.; Gao, X.-B.; Horvath, T. L.; Diano, S.: UCP2 mediates
ghrelin's action on NPY/AgRP neurons by lowering free radicals. Nature 454:
846-851, 2008. Note: Erratum: Nature 459: 736 only, 2009.

3. Chartrel, N.; Alvear-Perez, R.; Leprince, J.; Iturrioz, X.; Reaux-Le
Goazigo, A.; Audinot, V.; Chomarat, P.; Coge, F.; Nosjean, O.; Rodriguez,
M.; Galizzi, J. P.; Boutin, J. A.; Vaudry, H.; Llorens-Cortes, C.
: Comment on 'Obestatin, a peptide encoded by the ghrelin gene, opposes
ghrelin's effects on food intake.' Science 315: 766 only, 2007.

4. Checchi, S.; Montanaro, A.; Pasqui, L.; Ciuoli, C.; Cevenini, G.;
Sestini, F.; Fioravanti, C.; Pacini, F.: Serum ghrelin as a marker
of atrophic body gastritis in patients with parietal cell antibodies. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 4346-4351, 2007.

5. Corbetta, S.; Peracchi, M.; Cappiello, V.; Lania, A.; Lauri, E.;
Vago, L.; Beck-Peccoz, P.; Spada, A.: Circulating ghrelin levels
in patients with pancreatic and gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors:
identification of one pancreatic ghrelinoma. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88:
3117-3120, 2003.

6. Cowley, M. A.; Smith, R. G.; Diano, S.; Tschop, M.; Pronchuk, N.;
Grove, K. L.; Strasburger, C. J.; Bidlingmaier, M.; Esterman, M.;
Heiman, M. L.; Garcia-Segura, L. M.; Nillni, E. A.; and 9 others
: The distribution and mechanism of action of ghrelin in the CNS demonstrates
a novel hypothalamic circuit regulating energy homeostasis. Neuron 37:
649-661, 2003.

7. Cummings, D. E.; Weigle, D. S.; Frayo, R. S.; Breen, P. A.; Ma,
M. K.; Dellinger, E. P.; Purnell, J. Q.: Plasma ghrelin levels after
diet-induced weight loss or gastric bypass surgery. New Eng. J. Med. 346:
1623-1630, 2002.

8. Date, Y.; Kojima, M.; Hosoda, H.; Sawaguchi, A.; Mondal, M. S.;
Suganuma, T.; Matsukura, S.; Kangawa, K.; Nakazato, M.: Ghrelin,
a novel growth hormone-releasing acylated peptide, is synthesized
in a distinct endocrine cell type in the gastrointestinal tracts of
rats and humans. Endocrinology 141: 4255-4261, 2000.

9. Date, Y.; Nakazato, M.; Murakami, N.; Kojima, M.; Kangawa, K.;
Matsukura, S.: Ghrelin acts in the central nervous system to stimulate
gastric acid secretion. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 280: 904-907,
2001.

10. Delparigi, A.; Tschop, M.; Heiman, M. L.; Salbe, A. D.; Vozarova,
B.; Sell, S. M.; Bunt, J. C.; Tataranni, P. A.: High circulating
ghrelin: a potential cause for hyperphagia and obesity in Prader-Willi
syndrome. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 5461-5464, 2002.

11. Dixit, V. D.; Schaffer, E. M.; Pyle, R. S.; Collins, G. D.; Sakthivel,
S. K.; Palaniappan, R.; Lillard, J. W., Jr.; Taub, D. D.: Ghrelin
inhibits leptin- and activation-induced proinflammatory cytokine expression
by human monocytes and T cells. J. Clin. Invest. 114: 57-66, 2004.

12. Dixit, V. D.; Yang, H.; Sun, Y.; Weeraratna, A. T.; Youm, Y.-H.;
Smith, R. G.; Taub, D. D.: Ghrelin promotes thymopoiesis during aging. J.
Clin. Invest. 117: 2778-2790, 2007.

13. Doi, A.; Shono, T.; Nishi, M.; Furuta, H.; Sasaki, H.; Nanjo,
K.: IA-2-beta, but not IA-2, is induced by ghrelin and inhibits glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 885-890, 2006.

14. Farquhar, J.; Heiman, M.; Wong, A. C. K.; Wach, R.; Chessex, P.;
Chanoine, J.-P.: Elevated umbilical cord ghrelin concentrations in
small for gestational age neonates. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88:
4324-4327, 2003.

15. Feigerlova, E.; Diene, G.; Conte-Auriol, F.; Molinas, C.; Gennero,
I.; Salles, J.-P.; Arnaud, C.; Tauber, M.: Hyperghrelinemia precedes
obesity in Prader-Willi syndrome. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 93: 2800-2805,
2008.

16. Haqq, A. M.; Farooqi, I. S.; O'Rahilly, S.; Stadler, D. D.; Rosenfeld,
R. G.; Pratt, K. L.; LaFranchi, S. H.; Purnell, J. Q.: Serum ghrelin
levels are inversely correlated with body mass index, age, and insulin
concentrations in normal children and are markedly increased in Prader-Willi
syndrome. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 174-178, 2003.

17. Hinney, A.; Hoch, A.; Geller, F.; Schafer, H.; Siegfried, W.;
Goldschmidt, H.; Remschmidt, H.; Hebebrand, J.: Ghrelin gene: identification
of missense variants and a frameshift mutation in extremely obese
children and adolescents and healthy normal weight students. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 87: 2716-2719, 2002.

18. Jerlhag, E.; Egecioglu, E.; Landgren, S.; Salome, N.; Heilig,
M.; Moechars, D.; Datta, R.; Perrissoud, D.; Dickson, S. L.; Engel,
J. A.: Requirement of central ghrelin signaling for alcohol reward. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 106: 11318-11323, 2009.

19. Kirchner, H.; Gutierrez, J. A.; Solenberg, P. J.; Pfluger, P.
T.; Czyzyk, T. A.; Willency, J. A.; Schurmann, A.; Joost, H.-G.; Jandacek,
R. J.; Hale, J. E.; Heiman, M. L.; Tschop, M. H.: GOAT links dietary
lipids with the endocrine control of energy balance. Nature Med. 15:
741-745, 2009. Note: Erratum: Nature Med. 15: 1093 only, 2009.

20. Kluge, M.; Schussler, P.; Uhr, M.; Yassouridis, A.; Steiger, A.
: Ghrelin suppresses secretion of luteinizing hormone in humans. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 3202-3205, 2007.

21. Kojima, M.; Hosoda, H.; Date, Y.; Nakazato, M.; Matsuo, H.; Kangawa,
K.: Ghrelin is a growth-hormone-releasing acylated peptide from stomach. Nature 402:
656-660, 1999.

22. Kojima, M.; Hosoda, H.; Matsuo, H.; Kangawa, K.: Ghrelin: discovery
of the natural endogenous ligand for the growth hormone secretagogue
receptor. Trends Endocr. Metab. 12: 118-126, 2001.

23. Korbonits, M.; Gueorguiev, M.; O'Grady, E.; Lecoeur, C.; Swan,
D. C.; Mein, C. A.; Weill, J.; Grossman, A. B.; Froguel, P.: A variation
in the ghrelin gene increases weight and decreases insulin secretion
in tall, obese children. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 4005-4008,
2002.

24. Leidy, H. J.; Gardner, J. K.; Frye, B. R.; Snook, M. L.; Schuchert,
M. K.; Richard, E. L.; Williams, N. I.: Circulating ghrelin is sensitive
to changes in body weight during a diet and exercise program in normal-weight
young women. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 2659-2664, 2004.

25. Leonetti, F.; Silecchia, G.; Iacobellis, G.; Ribaudo, M. C.; Zappaterreno,
A.; Tiberti, C.; Iannucci, C. V.; Perrotta, N.; Bacci, V.; Basso,
M. S.; Basso, N.; Di Mario, U.: Different plasma ghrelin levels after
laparoscopic gastric bypass and adjustable gastric banding in morbid
obese subjects. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 4227-4231, 2003.

26. Nakazato, M.; Murakami, N.; Date, Y.; Kojima, M.; Matsuo, H.;
Kangawa, K.; Matsukura, S.: A role for ghrelin in the central regulation
of feeding. Nature 409: 194-198, 2001.

27. Pagotto, U.; Gambineri, A.; Pelusi, C.; Genghini, S.; Cacciari,
M.; Otto, B.; Castaneda, T.; Tschop, M.; Pasquali, R.: Testosterone
replacement therapy restores normal ghrelin in hypogonadal men. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 4139-4143, 2003.

28. Popovic, V.; Miljic, D.; Micic, D.; Damjanovic, S.; Arvat, E.;
Ghigo, E.; Dieguez, C.; Casanueva, F. F.: Ghrelin main action on
the regulation of growth hormone release is exerted at hypothalamic
level. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 3450-3453, 2003.

29. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/24/2000.

30. Steinle, N. I.; Pollin, T. I.; O'Connell, J. R.; Mitchell, B.
D.; Shuldiner, A. R.: Variants in the ghrelin gene are associated
with metabolic syndrome in the old order Amish. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 90: 6672-6677, 2005.

31. Takaya, K.; Ariyasu, H.; Kanamoto, N.; Iwakura, H.; Yoshimoto,
A.; Harada, M.; Mori, K.; Komatsu, Y.; Usui, T.; Shimatsu, A.; Ogawa,
Y.; Hosoda, K.; Akamizu, T.; Kojima, M.; Kangawa, K.; Nakao, K.:
Ghrelin strongly stimulates growth hormone (GH) release in humans. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 4908-4911, 2000.

32. Tanaka, M.; Hayashida, Y.; Nakao, N.; Nakai, N.; Nakashima, K.
: Testis-specific and developmentally induced expression of a ghrelin
gene-derived transcript that encodes a novel polypeptide in the mouse. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1522: 62-65, 2001.

33. Theander-Carrillo, C.; Wiedmer, P.; Cettour-Rose, P.; Nogueiras,
R.; Perez-Tilve, D.; Pfluger, P.; Castaneda, T. R.; Muzzin, P.; Schurmann,
A.; Szanto, I.; Tschop, M. H.; Rohner-Jeanrenaud, F.: Ghrelin action
in the brain controls adipocyte metabolism. J. Clin. Invest. 116:
1983-1993, 2006.

34. Tschop, M.; Smiley, D. L.; Heiman, M. L.: Ghrelin induces adiposity
in rodents. Nature 407: 908-913, 2000.

35. Ukkola, O.; Ravussin, E.; Jacobson, P.; Snyder, E. E.; Chagnon,
M.; Sjostrom, L.; Bouchard, C.: Mutations in the preproghrelin/ghrelin
gene associated with obesity in humans. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86:
3996-3999, 2001.

36. Wortley, K. E.; Anderson, K. D.; Garcia, K.; Murray, J. D.; Malinova,
L.; Liu, R.; Moncrieffe, M.; Thabet, K.; Cox, H. J.; Yancopoulos,
G. D.; Wiegand, S. J.; Sleeman, M. W.: Genetic deletion of ghrelin
does not decrease food intake but influences metabolic fuel preference. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 8227-8232, 2004.

37. Wortley, K. E.; del Rincon, J.-P.; Murray, J. D.; Garcia, K.;
Iida, K.; Thorner, M. O.; Sleeman, M. W.: Absence of ghrelin protects
against early-onset obesity. J. Clin. Invest. 115: 3573-3578, 2005.

38. Yang, J.; Brown, M. S.; Liang, G.; Grishin, N. V.; Goldstein,
J. L.: Identification of the acyltransferase that octanoylates ghrelin,
an appetite-stimulating peptide hormone. Cell 132: 387-396, 2008.

39. Zhang, J. V.; Klein, C.; Ren, P.-G.; Kass, S.; Ver Donck, L.;
Moechars, D.; Hsueh, A. J. W.: Response to comment on "Obestatin,
a peptide encoded by the ghrelin gene, opposes ghrelin's effects on
food intake.' Science 315: 766 only, 2007.

40. Zhang, J. V.; Ren, P.-G.; Avsian-Kretchmer, O.; Luo, C.-W.; Rauch,
R.; Klein, C.; Hsueh, A. J. W.: Obestatin, a peptide encoded by the
ghrelin gene, opposes ghrelin's effects on food intake. Science 310:
996-999, 2005.

41. Zigman, J. M.; Nakano, Y.; Coppari, R.; Balthasar, N.; Marcus,
J. N.; Lee, C. E.; Jones, J. E.; Deysher, A. E.; Waxman, A. R.; White,
R. D.; Williams, T. D.; Lachey, J. L.; Seeley, R. J.; Lowell, B. B.;
Elmquist, J. K.: Mice lacking ghrelin receptors resist the development
of diet-induced obesity. J. Clin. Invest. 115: 3564-3572, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 12/16/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/22/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/20/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/16/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/19/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/3/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 6/23/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/9/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 2/20/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/5/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/22/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/5/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/25/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/16/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/11/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/16/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/5/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/12/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/19/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/15/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/5/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 6/29/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/27/2004
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/16/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 2/6/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/24/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/29/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/12/2002
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/25/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/2/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/9/2001
Alan F. Scott - updated: 10/24/2000

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 10/18/2000

EDITED carol: 10/01/2013
carol: 4/19/2013
alopez: 12/16/2010
wwang: 1/14/2010
ckniffin: 12/22/2009
alopez: 11/11/2009
wwang: 9/8/2009
terry: 8/20/2009
alopez: 7/16/2009
terry: 6/16/2009
wwang: 12/30/2008
terry: 12/19/2008
alopez: 9/12/2008
terry: 9/3/2008
alopez: 6/23/2008
mgross: 4/9/2008
carol: 2/20/2008
wwang: 11/14/2007
terry: 11/5/2007
alopez: 3/22/2007
alopez: 3/6/2007
terry: 3/5/2007
mgross: 1/25/2007
wwang: 11/17/2006
terry: 11/16/2006
alopez: 4/11/2006
wwang: 3/22/2006
terry: 3/16/2006
wwang: 1/11/2006
terry: 1/5/2006
alopez: 1/5/2006
terry: 12/12/2005
wwang: 9/19/2005
terry: 9/19/2005
alopez: 7/15/2005
alopez: 7/5/2005
alopez: 6/29/2005
carol: 2/23/2005
carol: 9/28/2004
tkritzer: 9/27/2004
alopez: 8/16/2004
tkritzer: 12/26/2003
alopez: 7/9/2003
terry: 7/8/2003
terry: 2/26/2003
cwells: 2/6/2003
alopez: 1/24/2003
alopez: 10/29/2002
cwells: 6/24/2002
terry: 6/12/2002
carol: 3/26/2002
terry: 3/25/2002
carol: 3/21/2002
alopez: 7/2/2001
mgross: 5/11/2001
mcapotos: 5/11/2001
mgross: 1/10/2001
terry: 1/9/2001
alopez: 10/24/2000
alopez: 10/18/2000

603637	TITLE *603637 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L27a; RPL27A
DESCRIPTION The mammalian ribosome is a macromolecular assembly of 4 RNA species
(see 180450) and approximately 80 different proteins.

By searching sequence databases with the partial sequences of randomly
selected cDNAs from a human colorectal cDNA library, Frigerio et al.
(1995) identified cDNAs encoding homologs of rat ribosomal proteins S5
(RPS5; 603630), S9 (RPS9; 603631), S10 (RPS10; 603632), S29 (RPS29;
603633), L5 (RPL5; 603634), L21 (RPL21; 603636), L27a (RPL27A), and L28
(RPL28; 603638). Frigerio et al. (1995) completed the cDNA sequences of
these human ribosomal proteins. The deduced 148-amino acid human RPL27A
differs from rat Rpl27a by 3 amino acids. Northern blot analysis
suggested variable expression of RPL27A in colorectal cancers compared
to adjacent normal tissues, although no correlation between the level of
expression and the severity of the disease was found.

By somatic cell hybrid and radiation hybrid mapping analyses, Kenmochi
et al. (1998) mapped the human RPL27A gene to 11p15. By FISH, Kusuda et
al. (1999) mapped the mouse Rpl27a gene to chromosome 7E2-F1, a region
that shows homology of synteny to human 11p15.

REFERENCE 1. Frigerio, J.-M.; Berthezene, P.; Garrido, P.; Ortiz, E.; Barthellemy,
S.; Vasseur, S.; Sastre, B.; Seleznieff, I.; Dagorn, J.  C.; Iovanna,
J. L.: Analysis of 2166 clones from a human colorectal cancer cDNA
library by partial sequencing. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 37-43, 1995.

2. Frigerio, J.-M.; Dagorn, J.-C.; Iovanna, J. L.: Cloning, sequencing
and expression of the L5, L21, L27a, L28, S5, S9, S10 and S29 human
ribosomal protein mRNAs. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1262: 64-68, 1995.

3. Kenmochi, N.; Kawaguchi, T.; Rozen, S.; Davis, E.; Goodman, N.;
Hudson, T. J.; Tanaka, T.; Page, D. C.: A map of 75 human ribosomal
protein genes. Genome Res. 8: 509-523, 1998.

4. Kusuda, J.; Hirai, M.; Tanuma, R.; Hirata, M.; Hashimoto, K.:
Genomic structure and chromosome location of RPL27A/Rpl27a, the genes
encoding human and mouse ribosomal protein L27A. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 85: 248-251, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 10/01/1999

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 3/12/1999

EDITED carol: 10/01/1999
carol: 3/19/1999

610211	TITLE *610211 SRA STEM LOOP-INTERACTING RNA-BINDING PROTEIN; SLIRP
;;CHROMOSOME 14 OPEN READING FRAME 156; C14ORF156
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Steroid receptor RNA activator (SRA, or SRA1; 603819) is a complex RNA
molecule containing multiple stable stem-loop structures that functions
in coactivation of nuclear receptors. SLIRP interacts with stem-loop
structure-7 of SRA (STR7) and modulates nuclear receptor transactivation
(Hatchell et al., 2006).

CLONING

Using STR7 as bait in a yeast 3-hybrid screen of a primary breast cancer
cDNA library, Hatchell et al. (2006) cloned SLIRP. The deduced 109-amino
acid protein contains a putative N-terminal mitochondrial localization
sequence and a central RNA recognition domain with RNP1 and RNP2
submotifs. It has putative sites for N-myristoylation and
phosphorylation. Northern blot analysis detected variable expression of
SLIRP in all tissues examined, with highest levels in heart, liver,
skeletal muscle, and testis. Western blot analysis detected SLIRP at an
apparent molecular mass of 12.7 kD in several human cell lines.
Immunohistochemical analysis of primary breast cancer tissue showed high
SLIRP expression in a punctate cytoplasmic distribution. Expression was
lower in normal ductal tissue, and no expression was detected in the
surrounding stroma. SLIRP colocalized with a mitochondrial marker
protein.

GENE FUNCTION

By immunoprecipitation RT-PCR, Hatchell et al. (2006) found that SRA
copurified with SLIRP in several human cell lines. SLIRP repressed
transactivation by nuclear receptors in an SRA-dependent manner, and
SLIRP function required an intact RRM domain. SLIRP was recruited to
endogenous promoters, augmented the estrogen antagonistic effects of
tamoxifen, modulated association of SRC1 (NCOA1; 602691) with SRA, and
reduced SKIP (SKIIP; 603055)-potentiated nuclear receptor signaling.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Hatchell et al. (2006) mapped the SLIRP
gene to chromosome 14q24.3.

REFERENCE 1. Hatchell, E. C.; Colley, S. M.; Beveridge, D. J.; Epis, M. R.;
Stuart, L. M.; Giles, K. M.; Redfern, A. D.; Miles, L. E. C.; Barker,
A.; MacDonald, L. M.; Arthur, P. G.; Lui, J. C. K.; Golding, J. L.;
McCulloch, R. K.; Metcalf, C. B.; Wilce, J. A.; Wilce, M. C. J.; Lanz,
R. B.; O'Malley, B. W.; Leedman, P. J.: SLIRP, a small SRA binding
protein, is a nuclear receptor corepressor. Molec. Cell 22: 657-668,
2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/26/2006

EDITED alopez: 08/05/2013
alopez: 8/5/2013
mgross: 6/26/2006

604672	TITLE *604672 CD209 ANTIGEN; CD209
;;DENDRITIC CELL-SPECIFIC ICAM3-GRABBING NONINTEGRIN; DCSIGN;;
HIV GP120-BINDING PROTEIN;;
C-TYPE LECTIN DOMAIN FAMILY 4, MEMBER L; CLEC4L
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The C-type lectin receptors are involved in the primary interface
between host and pathogens. Two prototypic members of the C-type
lectin-receptor family act as both cell-adhesion receptors and
pathogen-recognition receptors: CD209 and its close relative CD209L
(CLEC4M; 605872) (review by Barreiro et al., 2005).

CLONING

The binding of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) envelope
glycoprotein gp120 to the cell surface receptor CD4 (186940) had been
considered a primary determinant of viral tropism (see 609423). A number
of cell types, however, can be infected by the virus, or bind gp120, in
the absence of CD4 expression. Human placenta had been identified as a
tissue that binds gp120 in a CD4-independent manner. By expression
cloning, Curtis et al. (1992) screened a placenta cDNA library and
isolated a cDNA (clone 11) encoding a gp120-binding protein unrelated to
CD4. The 1.3-kb cDNA predicts a 404-amino acid protein with a calculated
molecular mass of 45,775 Da. The gp120-binding protein is organized into
3 domains: an N-terminal cytoplasmic and hydrophobic region, a set of
tandem repeats (7 complete and 1 incomplete), and a C-terminal domain
with homology to C-type (calcium-dependent) lectins. A type II membrane
orientation (N-terminal cytoplasmic) was predicted both by the cDNA
sequence and by the reactivity of C-terminal peptide-specific antiserum
with the surface of clone 11-transfected cells. Native and recombinant
gp120 and whole virus bound transfected cells. Gp120 binding was high
affinity (Kd, 1.3 to 1.6 nM) and was inhibited by mannan, D-mannose, and
L-fucose; once bound, gp120 was internalized rapidly. These data
demonstrated that the gp120-binding protein is a membrane-associated
mannose-binding lectin. Curtis et al. (1992) suggested that proteins of
this type may play an important role in the CD4-independent association
of HIV with cells.

Contact between dendritic cells (DCs) and resting T cells is essential
to initiate a primary immune response. Geijtenbeek et al. (2000)
demonstrated that intercellular adhesion molecule-3 (ICAM3; 146631)
expressed by resting T cells is important in this first contact with
DCs. They discovered that instead of the common ICAM3 receptors LFA1
(see 153370) and alpha-D-beta-2, a novel DC-specific C-type lectin,
which they called DCSIGN (DC-specific ICAM3-grabbing nonintegrin), binds
ICAM3 with high affinity. DCSIGN is a type II transmembrane protein
consisting of 404 amino acids with 3 distinct domains. The 40-amino acid
N-terminal cytoplasmic domain is separated by a hydrophobic stretch of
15 amino acids from a region consisting of 1 incomplete and 7 complete
tandem repeats of nearly identical sequence. The extracellular
C-terminal region (cys253 to ala404) shows homology to C-type lectins.
Sequence analysis revealed that DCSIGN is identical to the HIV-1
gp120-binding protein described by Curtis et al. (1992). DCSIGN, which
is abundantly expressed by DCs both in vitro and in vivo, mediates
transient adhesion with T cells. Since antibodies against DCSIGN
inhibited DC-induced proliferation of resting T cells, these findings
predicted that DCSIGN enables T-cell receptor engagement by
stabilization of the DC/T-cell contact zone.

Soilleux et al. (2000) also cloned CD209. They noted that CD209 has
dileucine and YXXL internalization motifs in its cytoplasmic tail. It
also contains extracellular carbohydrate recognition domains, which are
involved in calcium-dependent mannose binding, that are encoded by 3
separate exons, a structure also found in CD23 (151445). RT-PCR analysis
detected CD209 expression in placenta and, at lower levels, in
endometrium and a DC line.

GENE FUNCTION

DCs capture microorganisms that enter peripheral mucosal tissues, and
then migrate to secondary lymphoid organs, where they present these in
antigenic form to resting T cells, thus initiating adaptive immune
responses. Geijtenbeek et al. (2000) described the properties of DCSIGN,
which is highly expressed on DCs present in mucosal tissues and binds to
the HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein gp120. DCSIGN does not function as a
receptor for viral entry into DCs but instead promotes efficient
infection in trans of cells that express CD4 and chemokine receptors.
Geijtenbeek et al. (2000) proposed that DCSIGN efficiently captures
HIV-1 in the periphery and facilitates its transport to secondary
lymphoid organs rich in T cells, to enhance infection in trans of these
target cells.

Dengue virus (DV) is a mosquito-borne flavivirus that primarily targets
DCs and causes hemorrhagic fever in humans (see 614371). Navarro-Sanchez
et al. (2003) found that anti-DCSIGN and the soluble tetrameric
ectodomain of DCSIGN inhibited DV infection. The data indicated that
DCSIGN functions as a DV-binding lectin that interacts as an attachment
factor with the DV envelope glycoprotein.

Using primary DCs naturally expressing DCSIGN and cell lines transfected
with DCSIGN or its liver/lymph node-specific homolog, LSIGN (CD209L;
605872), Tassaneetrithep et al. (2003) showed that extensive infection
by all 4 DV serotypes was dependent on expression of these lectins.
Fluorescence microscopy indicated that DV infection could be blocked by
antibody to DCSIGN but not by antibodies to other molecules expressed on
DCs. Mutation analysis indicated that the cytoplasmic domain of DCSIGN
enhanced but was not essential for infection. Because of the wide array
of pathogens whose infectivity is DCSIGN-dependent, Tassaneetrithep et
al. (2003) proposed that DCSIGN recognizes pathogen-associated microbial
patterns, or PAMPs.

Geijtenbeek et al. (2003) found that DCSIGN captured and internalized
intact Mycobacterium bovis BCG or avirulent M. tuberculosis (see 607948)
through the glycolipid mycobacterial cell wall component ManLAM. Both
bacilli and ManLAM were targeted to lysosomes and colocalized with LAMP1
(153330) in immature DCs. Antibodies against DCSIGN blocked BCG
infection of DCs. Binding of secreted ManLAM to DCSIGN prevented
mycobacteria- or LPS-induced DC maturation and induced IL10 (124092)
production, suggesting that DCSIGN-ManLAM interaction may interfere with
TLR-mediated signaling and development of an antiinflammatory response.
Geijtenbeek et al. (2003) proposed that M. tuberculosis may target
DCSIGN both to infect DCs and to downregulate DC-mediated immune
responses.

Tailleux et al. (2003) showed that M. tuberculosis entered DCs after
binding to DCSIGN, whereas the major macrophage receptors for M.
tuberculosis, CR3 (see ITGAM; 120980) and MRC1 (153618), played only a
minor role in DC infection. Flow cytometric and histopathologic analyses
showed expression of DCSIGN on lung DCs from uninfected patients and on
lymph node granuloma cells infected with M. tuberculosis.

Using flow cytometric analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage cells from
tuberculosis (TB), asthma, and sarcoidosis patients and control
individuals, Tailleux et al. (2005) found that most alveolar macrophages
from TB patients expressed DCSIGN, whereas the lectin was barely
detected in cells from the other subjects. FACS, RT-PCR, and ELISA
analyses indicated that M. tuberculosis infection induced DCSIGN
expression by a mechanism independent of TLR4 (603030), IL4 (147780),
and IL13 (147683). Immunohistochemical analysis showed bacillary
concentration in lung regions enriched in DCSIGN-expressing alveolar
macrophages. Binding experiments revealed that DCSIGN-expressing
alveolar macrophages were preferential targets for M. tuberculosis
compared with DCSIGN-negative cells. Tailleux et al. (2005) did not
detect IL10 in bronchoalveolar lavage or induction of IL10 in infected
cells.

The 2 lectin-coding genes CD209 and CD209L resulted from a duplication
of an ancestral gene (Bashirova et al., 2003; Soilleux, 2003). An
additional characteristic of both CD209 and CD209L is the presence of a
neck region, primarily made up of 7 highly conserved 23-amino acid
repeats, that separates the carbohydrate-recognition domain involved in
pathogen binding from the transmembrane domain. This neck region
presents high nucleotide identity between repeats, both within each
molecule and between CD209 and CD209L. This region plays a crucial role
in the oligomerization and support of the carbohydrate-recognition
domain; therefore, it influences the pathogen-binding properties of
these 2 receptors (Barreiro et al., 2005). CD209 is expressed primarily
on phagocytic cells such as dendritic cells and macrophages, whereas
CD209L expression is restricted to endothelial cells in liver and lymph
nodes.

By challenging DCs with different phleboviruses, including Rift Valley
fever and Uukuniemi viruses, in the presence or absence of antibody to
DCSIGN, Lozach et al. (2011) demonstrated that DCSIGN was required for
DC infection. Cells lacking DCSIGN resisted phlebovirus challenge, but
they became susceptible when transfected with DCSIGN. Binding by DCSIGN,
which was followed by virus internalization and infection, occurred via
interactions with high-mannose N-glycans on viral glycoproteins.
Mutation of DCSIGN to ablate endocytosis prevented infection. Lozach et
al. (2011) concluded that DCSIGN is a phlebovirus entry receptor.

Lefevre et al. (2013) observed increased mRNA and protein expression for
the C-lectin receptors dectin-1 (CLEC7A; 606264), Mr (MRC1), and Signr3,
a mouse homolog of CD209, in mice infected with Leishmania infantum (Li)
(see 608207). Mice lacking dectin-1 or Mr, but not those lacking Signr3,
had higher parasite levels in blood and spleen. Peritoneal macrophages
from dectin-1 -/- or Mrc1 -/- mice, but not Signr3 -/- mice, permitted
Li growth and exhibited poor production of reactive oxygen species
(ROS). ROS production required dectin-1-Syk (600085)-p47-phox (NCF1;
608512) phosphorylation and Mr-arachidonic acid-Nadph oxidase (NOX1;
300225) membrane translocation. Dectin-1 and Mr facilitated release of
Il1b (147720) induced by Casp1 (147678) in response to Li infection,
whereas Il1b was downregulated by Signr3 through Lta4h (151570). In
human macrophages, small interfering RNA-mediated inactivation of CLEC7A
and MRC1, but not CD209, resulted in responses to Li similar to those
observed in mice. Lefevre et al. (2013) concluded that
Leishmania-macrophage interaction is influenced by the stage of
macrophage polarization (i.e., by cytokine and stimulatory milieu) and
by members of the C-lectin receptor family. They proposed that
alteration of these cellular and molecular factors may benefit patient
responses.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Feinberg et al. (2001) generated crystal structures of DCSIGN and
DCSIGNR and showed that the carbohydrate-recognition domains (CRDs) of
both are specific for high-mannose N-linked oligosaccharides, such as
those present on the envelope of HIV-1. One monomer of the DCSIGN pair
of CRDs interacts with the terminal N-acetylglucosamine of GlcNAc1,
while the partner monomer of DCSIGNR is bound to Ca+. Feinberg et al.
(2001) proposed that the mechanistic basis of DCSIGN- and
DCSIGNR-oligosaccharide interaction provides a starting point to the
design of both therapeutic and prophylactic attacks on HIV-1 infection.

Using cryoelectron microscopy, Pokidysheva et al. (2006) determined the
structure of DV serotype-2 (DV2) in complex with the CRD of human DCSIGN
at 25-angstrom resolution. The structure showed that 1 CRD monomer binds
to 2 glycosylation sites at asn67 of 2 neighboring DV envelope
glycoproteins in each icosahedral asymmetric unit. The vacancy at the
third asn67 site leaves space for primary DV receptor binding to domain
III of the envelope protein. Pokidysheva et al. (2006) suggested that
the use of carbohydrate moieties for receptor binding sites may be a
mechanism for avoiding immune surveillance.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Soilleux et al. (2000) determined that the
CD209 gene contains 7 exons.

MAPPING

Soilleux et al. (2000) mapped the CD209 gene to 19p13.3, in a cluster
with the CD209L (605872) and CD23 genes, by radiation hybrid analysis.

The lectin-coding genes CD209 and CD209L, which resulted from a
duplication of an ancestral gene, are located within a segment of
approximately 26 kb (Barreiro et al., 2005).

EVOLUTION

The innate immunity system constitutes the first line of host defense
against pathogens. Two closely related innate immunity genes, CD209 and
CD209L, directly recognize a cluster of pathogens, including bacteria,
viruses, and parasites. To explore the extent to which pathogens have
exerted selective pressure on these innate immunity genes, Barreiro et
al. (2005) resequenced them in a group of samples from sub-Saharan
Africa, Europe, and East Asia. Moreover, variation in the number of
repeats in the neck region was defined in the entire Human Genome
Diversity Panel for both genes. The results, which were based on
diversity levels, neutrality tests, population genetic distances, and
neck-region length variation, provided genetic evidence that CD209 has
been under a strong selective constraint that prevents accumulation of
any amino acid changes, whereas CD209L variability has most likely been
shaped by the action of balancing selection in non-African populations.
In addition, the data pointed to the neck region as the functional
target of such selective pressures: CD209 presented a constant size in
the neck region populationwide, whereas CD209L presented an excess of
length variation, particularly in non-African populations. An additional
interesting observation came from the coalescent-based CD209 gene tree,
whose binary typology and time depth (approximately 2.8 million years
ago) were compatible with an ancestral population structure in Africa.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Martin et al. (2004) found that European Americans at risk for
parenteral HIV infection were more likely to carry the -336C SNP than
the -336T SNP (604672.0001) in the promoter of DCSIGN. This association
was not observed in those at risk for mucosally acquired infection.
Although the -336C SNP was common in African Americans, no significant
association with risk of infection was observed in this group.

Sakuntabhai et al. (2005) found that the same CD209 promoter
polymorphism reported by Martin et al. (2004), which Sakuntabhai et al.
(2005) called -336A-G, was associated with severity of dengue disease
(614371). Specifically, the G allele of the variant was associated with
strong protection against dengue fever as opposed to dengue hemorrhagic
fever. These results indicated that CD209 has a crucial role in dengue
pathogenesis, which discriminates between severe dengue fever and dengue
hemorrhagic fever.

Barreiro et al. (2006) examined CD209 polymorphisms in 351 TB patients
and 360 healthy controls from a South African Coloured population
(historically derived from Khoisan, Malaysian, Bantu, and European
descent populations) living in communities with some of the highest
reported incidence rates of TB in the world. They identified 2 CD209
promoter variants, -871A (604672.0002) and -336G, that were associated
with increased risk of TB. One haplotype of 8 SNPs, including -871G and
-336A, showed a highly significant association with the control group.
Further analysis of sub-Saharan African, European, and Asian populations
showed that the protective -336A and -871G alleles were present at
higher frequencies in Eurasians than in Africans. Barreiro et al. (2006)
suggested that the longer and more intense duration of TB exposure in
Europe may have exerted stronger selective pressures in this population
and may have had an impact on susceptibility to infection by other
pathogens, such as HIV and dengue.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using a mouse model of food allergy, Zhou et al. (2010) found that mice
pretreated with bovine serum albumin (BSA) with 51 molecules of
mannoside (Man51-BSA) plus cholera toxin via oral delivery exhibited
reduced BSA-induced anaphylaxis compared with mice pretreated with BSA
plus cholera toxin. Man51-BSA selectively targeted lamina propria DCs
(LPDCs) expressing Signr1, a mouse homolog of CD209 and CLEC4M, and
induced Il10, but not Il6 (147620) or Il12 p70 (see 161560). Man51-BSA
induced the same effects in Il10-GFP knockin (tiger) mice. Interaction
of Man51-BSA with Signr1 resulted in the generation of Cd4-positive
type-1 regulatory-like (Tr1-like) cells that expressed Il10 and Ifng
(147570) in a Signr1- and Il10-dependent manner, but not
Cd4-positive/Cd25 (IL2RA; 147730)-positive/Foxp3 (300292)-positive
regulatory T cells. Tolerance could be transferred by the Tr1-like
cells. Zhou et al. (2010) proposed that sugar-modified antigens may be
useful in inducing tolerance by targeting Signr1 homologs and LPDCs.

To characterize the immunologic response associated with intravenous
immunoglobulin administration, Anthony et al. (2011) generated humanized
DCSIGN mice (hDCSIGN), and demonstrated that the antiinflammatory
activity of intravenous immunoglobulin can be recapitulated by transfer
into naive recipients of bone marrow-derived DCSIGN+ macrophages or
dendritic cells treated with IgG crystallizable fragments (Fc) that
contain glycans terminating in alpha-2,6 sialic acids (sFc).
Furthermore, sFc administration resulted in the production of IL33
(608678), which, in turn, induced expansion of IL4 (147780)-producing
basophils that promote increased expression of the inhibitory Fc
receptor Fc-gamma-RIIB (604590) on effector macrophages. Systemic
administration of the TH2 cytokines IL33 or IL4 upregulated
Fc-gamma-RIIB on macrophages and suppressed serum-induced arthritis.
Consistent with these results, transfer of IL33-treated basophils
suppressed induced arthritic inflammation. Anthony et al. (2011)
suggested that this novel DCSIGN-TH2 pathway initiated by an endogenous
ligand, sFc, provides an intrinsic mechanism for maintaining immune
homeostasis that could be manipulated to provide therapeutic benefit in
autoimmune diseases.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS TYPE 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
DENGUE FEVER, PROTECTION AGAINST, INCLUDED;;
MYCOBACTERIUM TUBERCULOSIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
CD209, -336A-G

Martin et al. (2004) found that European Americans at risk for
parenteral HIV infection (see 609423) were more likely to carry the
-336C SNP than the -336T SNP in the promoter of DCSIGN. This association
was not observed in those at risk for mucosally acquired infection.
Although the -336C SNP was common in African Americans, no significant
association with risk of infection was observed in this group.

Sakuntabhai et al. (2005) reported strong association between the
-336A-G polymorphism in the promoter of CD209, which they called
DCSIGN1-336, and risk of dengue fever (614371). The G allele of the
variant was associated with strong protection against dengue fever in 3
independent cohorts from Thailand, with a carrier frequency of 4.7% in
individuals with dengue fever compared with 22.4% in individuals with
dengue hemorrhagic fever (odds ratio for risk of dengue hemorrhagic
fever vs dengue fever = 5.84) and 19.5% in controls (odds ratio for
protection = 4.90). This variant affects an Sp1-like binding site and
transcriptional activity in vitro. Carrington (2006) confirmed that the
-336T-C SNP reported by Martin et al. (2004) and the -336A-G SNP
reported by Sakuntabhai et al. (2005) are the same variant.

Barreiro et al. (2006) found an association between susceptibility to
tuberculosis (607948) and -336G in a South African Coloured population.

.0002
MYCOBACTERIUM TUBERCULOSIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
CD209, -871G-A

Barreiro et al. (2006) found an association between susceptibility to
tuberculosis (607948) and -871A in a South African Coloured population.
The putative protective -871G allele was absent in a sample of
sub-Saharan Africans, but was present in 12%, 21%, and 38% of South
African Coloured, Asian, and European populations, respectively.

REFERENCE 1. Anthony, R. M.; Kobayashi, T.; Wermeling, F.; Ravetch, J. V.:
Intravenous gammaglobulin suppresses inflammation through a novel
TH2 pathway. Nature 475: 110-113, 2011.

2. Barreiro, L. B.; Neyrolles, O.; Babb, C. L.; Tailleux, L.; Quach,
H.; McElreavey, K.; van Helden, P. D.; Hoal, E. G.; Gicquel, B.; Quintana-Murci,
L.: Promoter variation in the DC-SIGN-encoding gene CD209 is associated
with tuberculosis. PLoS Med. 3: e20, 2006. Note: Electronic Article.

3. Barreiro, L. B.; Patin, E.; Neyrolles, O.; Cann, H. M.; Gicquel,
B.; Quintana-Murci, L.: The heritage of pathogen pressures and ancient
demography in the human innate-immunity CD209/CD209L region. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 77: 869-886, 2005.

4. Bashirova, A. A.; Wu, L.; Cheng, J.; Martin, T. D.; Martin, M.
P.; Benveniste, R. E.; Lifson, J. D.; KewalRamani, V. N.; Hughes,
A.; Carrington, M.: Novel member of the CD209 (DC-SIGN) gene family
in primates. J. Virol. 77: 217-227, 2003.

5. Carrington, M.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/9/2006.

6. Curtis, B. M.; Scharnowske, S.; Watson, A. J.: Sequence and expression
of a membrane-associated C-type lectin that exhibits CD4-independent
binding of human immunodeficiency virus envelope glycoprotein gp120. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 8356-8360, 1992.

7. Feinberg, H.; Mitchell, D. A.; Drickamer, K.; Weis, W. I.: Structural
basis for selective recognition of oligosaccharides by DC-SIGN and
DC-SIGNR. Science 294: 2163-2166, 2001.

8. Geijtenbeek, T. B. H.; Kwon, D. S.; Torensma, R.; van Vliet, S.
J.; van Duijnhoven, G. C. F.; Middel, J.; Cornelissen, I. L. M. H.
A.; Nottet, H. S. L. M.; KewalRamani, V. N.; Littman, D. R.; Figdor,
C. G.; van Kooyk, Y.: DC-SIGN, a dendritic cell-specific HIV-1-binding
protein that enhances trans-infection of T cells. Cell 100: 587-597,
2000.

9. Geijtenbeek, T. B. H.; Torensma, R.; van Vliet, S. J.; van Duijnhoven,
G. C. F.; Adema, G. J.; van Kooyk, Y.; Figdor, C. G.: Identification
of DC-SIGN, a novel dendritic cell-specific ICAM-3 receptor that supports
primary immune responses. Cell 100: 575-585, 2000.

10. Geijtenbeek, T. B. H.; van Vliet, S. J.; Koppel, E. A.; Sanchez-Hernandez,
M.; Vandenbroucke-Grauls, C. M. J. E.; Appelmelk, B.; van Kooyk, Y.
: Mycobacteria target DC-SIGN to suppress dendritic cell function. J.
Exp. Med. 197: 7-17, 2003.

11. Lefevre, L.; Lugo-Villarino, G.; Meunier, E.; Valentin, A.; Olagnier,
D.; Authier, H.; Duval, C.; Dardenne, C.; Bernad, J.; Lemesre, J.
L.; Auwerx, J.; Neyrolles, O.; Pipy, B.; Coste, A.: The C-type lectin
receptors Dectin-1, MR, and SIGNR3 contribute both positively and
negatively to the macrophage response to Leishmania infantum. Immunity 38:
1038-1049, 2013.

12. Lozach, P.-Y.; Kuhbacher, A.; Meier, R.; Mancini, R.; Bitto, D.;
Bouloy, M.; Helenius, A.: DC-SIGN as a receptor for phleboviruses. Cell
Host Microbe 10: 75-88, 2011.

13. Martin, M. P.; Lederman, M. M.; Hutcheson, H. B.; Goedert, J.
J.; Nelson, G. W.; van Kooyk, Y.; Detels, R.; Buchbinder, S.; Hoots,
K.; Vlahov, D.; O'Brien, S. J.; Carrington, M.: Association of DC-SIGN
promoter polymorphism with increased risk for parenteral, but not
mucosal, acquisition of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection. J.
Virol. 78: 14053-14056, 2004.

14. Navarro-Sanchez, E.; Altmeyer, R.; Amara, A.; Schwartz, O.; Fieschi,
F.; Virelizier, J.-L.; Arenzana-Seisdedos, F.; Despres, P.: Dendritic-cell-specific
ICAM3-grabbing non-integrin is essential for the productive infection
of human dendritic cells by mosquito-cell-derived dengue viruses. EMBO
Rep. 4: 723-728, 2003.

15. Pokidysheva, E.; Zhang, Y.; Battisti, A. J.; Bator-Kelly, C. M.;
Chipman, P. R.; Xiao, C.; Gregorio, G. G.; Hendrickson, W. A.; Kuhn,
R. J.; Rossmann, M. G.: Cryo-EM reconstruction of Dengue virus in
complex with the carbohydrate recognition domain of DC-SIGN. Cell 1224:
485-493, 2006.

16. Sakuntabhai, A.; Turbpaiboon, C.; Casademont, I.; Chuansumrit,
A.; Lowhnoo, T.; Kajaste-Rudnitski, A.; Kalayanarooj, S. M.; Tangnararatchakit,
K.; Tangthawornchaikul, N.; Vasanawathana, S.; Chaiyaratana, W.; Yenchitsomanus,
P.; Suriyaphol, P.; Avirutnan, P.; Chokephaibulkit, K.; Matsuda, F.;
Yoksan, S.; Jacob, Y.; Lathrop, G. M.; Malasit, P.; Despres, P.; Julier,
C.: A variant in the CD209 promoter is associated with severity of
dengue disease. Nature Genet. 37: 507-513, 2005.

17. Soilleux, E. J.: DC-SIGN (dendritic cell-specific ICAM-grabbing
non-integrin) and DC-SIGN-related (DC-SIGNR): friend or foe? Clin.
Sci. 104: 437-446, 2003.

18. Soilleux, E. J.; Barten, R.; Trowsdale, J.: Cutting edge: DC-SIGN;
a related gene, DC-SIGNR; and CD23 form a cluster on 19p13. J. Immun. 165:
2937-2942, 2000.

19. Tailleux, L.; Pham-Thi, N.; Bergeron-Lafaurie, A.; Herrmann, J.-L.;
Charles, P.; Schwartz, O.; Scheinmann, P.; Lagrange, P. H.; de Blic,
J.; Tazi, A.; Gicquel, B.; Neyrolles, O.: DC-SIGN induction in alveolar
macrophages defines privileged target host cells for mycobacteria
in patients with tuberculosis. PLoS Med. 2: e381, 2005. Note: Electronic
Article.

20. Tailleux, L.; Schwartz, O.; Herrmann, J.-L.; Pivert, E.; Jackson,
M.; Amara, A.; Legres, L.; Dreher, D.; Nicod, L. P.; Gluckman, J.
C.; Lagrange, P. H.; Gicquel, B.; Neyrolles, O.: DC-SIGN is the major
Mycobacterium tuberculosis receptor on human dendritic cells. J.
Exp. Med. 197: 121-127, 2003.

21. Tassaneetrithep, B.; Burgess, T. H.; Granelli-Piperno, A.; Trumpfheller,
C.; Finke, J.; Sun, W.; Eller, M. A.; Pattanapanyasat, K.; Sarasombath,
S.; Birx, D. L.; Steinman, R. M.; Schlesinger, S.; Marovich, M. A.
: DC-SIGN (CD209) mediates dengue virus infection of human dendritic
cells. J. Exp. Med. 197: 823-829, 2003.

22. Zhou, Y.; Kawasaki, H.; Hsu, S.-C.; Lee, R. T.; Yao, X.; Plunkett,
B.; Fu, J.; Yang, K.; Lee, Y. C.; Huang, S.-K.: Oral tolerance to
food-induced systemic anaphylaxis mediated by the C-type lectin SIGNR1. Nature
Med. 16: 1128-1133, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 09/16/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/8/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/6/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/1/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/28/2009
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/20/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/25/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/5/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/17/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/14/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/3/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/13/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/24/2001

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 3/10/2000

EDITED mgross: 09/16/2013
mgross: 3/9/2012
terry: 3/8/2012
mgross: 12/1/2011
alopez: 9/8/2011
terry: 9/6/2011
mgross: 12/2/2010
terry: 12/1/2010
carol: 2/17/2010
wwang: 5/28/2009
mgross: 5/28/2009
mgross: 5/20/2009
carol: 12/29/2008
wwang: 10/27/2006
mgross: 3/16/2006
mgross: 1/25/2006
mgross: 1/10/2006
mgross: 1/5/2006
mgross: 10/17/2005
alopez: 10/17/2005
terry: 10/14/2005
carol: 5/17/2005
joanna: 5/3/2005
tkritzer: 5/3/2005
mgross: 12/13/2001
mgross: 4/24/2001
mgross: 7/17/2000
mgross: 3/10/2000

610059	TITLE *610059 MITOCHONDRIAL RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L33; MRPL33
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing cDNAs obtained from umbilical cord blood CD34
(142230)-positive hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells, Mao et al. (1998)
identified MRPL33, a homolog of E. coli ribosomal protein L33. The
deduced protein contains 65 amino acids.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Mao et al. (1998) mapped the MRPL33 gene
to chromosome 2p22.

REFERENCE 1. Mao, M.; Fu, G.; Wu, J.-S.; Zhang, Q.-H.; Zhou, J.; Kan, L.-X.;
Huang, Q.-H.; He, K.-L.; Gu, B.-W.; Han, Z.-G.; Shen, Y.; Gu, J.;
Yu, Y.-P.; Xu, S.-H.; Wang, Y.-X.; Chen, S.-J.; Chen, Z.: Identification
of genes expressed in human CD34+ hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells
by expressed sequence tags and efficient full-length cDNA cloning. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 8175-8180, 1998.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/18/2006

EDITED mgross: 04/18/2006

158120	TITLE *158120 MONOCYTE DIFFERENTIATION ANTIGEN CD14; CD14
;;MYELOID CELL-SPECIFIC LEUCINE-RICH GLYCOPROTEIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CD14 is a single-copy gene encoding 2 protein forms: a 50- to 55-kD
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored membrane protein (mCD14) and a
monocyte or liver-derived soluble serum protein (sCD14) that lacks the
anchor. Both molecules are critical for lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-dependent signal transduction, and sCD14 confers LPS sensitivity
to cells lacking mCD14. Increased sCD14 levels are associated with
inflammatory infectious diseases and high mortality in gram-negative
shock (LeVan et al., 2001).

CLONING

Differentiation of myelomonocytic cells from pluripotent stem cells to
mature functioning monocytes/macrophages and granulocytes is accompanied
by a variety of changes, including the expression of new cell surface
antigens. One of these antigens, CD14, a 55-kD glycoprotein, is
preferentially expressed on the surface of mature cells of the monocytic
lineage. Goyert et al. (1988) isolated a cDNA clone encoding CD14 and
isolated the CD14 gene.

Ferrero et al. (1990) demonstrated that, as in man, the expression of
murine CD14 is limited to the myeloid lineage. In both mouse and man,
the CD14 protein contains leucine-rich motif that is repeated 10 times.

GENE FUNCTION

The expression profile of CD14, as well as its inclusion in the family
of leucine-rich proteins and the chromosomal location of other receptor
genes, supports the hypothesis that CD14 functions as a receptor. Its
receptor function was indeed demonstrated by Wright (1990) who showed
that it is a receptor for the lipopolysaccharide-binding
protein:lipopolysaccharide complex (LBP; 151990:LPS); also see Wright et
al. (1990). Gupta et al. (1996) transfected mouse 70Z/3 cells with human
CD14 and showed that these cells were responsive to peptidoglycan (PGN),
a polymer of alternating GlcNAc and MurNAc cross-linked by short
peptides, that is present in the cell walls of all bacteria, but is
particularly abundant in gram-positive bacteria. They concluded that
CD14 serves as a cell-activating receptor not only for LPS but also for
PGN.

Cells undergoing programmed cell death (apoptosis) are cleared rapidly
in vivo by phagocytes without inducing inflammation. Devitt et al.
(1998) showed that the glycoprotein CD14 on the surface of human
macrophages is important for the recognition and clearance of apoptotic
cells. CD14 can also act as a receptor that binds bacterial LPS,
triggering inflammatory responses. Overstimulation of CD14 by LPS can
cause the often fatal toxic-shock syndrome. Devitt et al. (1998) showed
that apoptotic cells interact with CD14, triggering phagocytosis of the
apoptotic cells. This interaction depends on a region of CD14 that is
identical to, or at least closely associated with, a region known to
bind LPS. However, apoptotic cells, unlike LPS, do not provoke the
release of proinflammatory cytokines from macrophages. These results
indicated that clearance of apoptotic cells is mediated by a receptor
whose interactions with 'nonself' components (LPS) and 'self' components
(apoptotic cells) produce distinct macrophage responses.

Savill (1998) summarized understanding of how ced-5 (see DOCK1; 601403)
and CD14 together with other molecules function in the engulfment of
cell corpses by macrophages in the process of programmed cell death. The
model incorporated the newly proposed functions of ced-5 and CD14.

LPS interacts with LBP and CD14 to present LPS to TLR4 (603030), which
activates inflammatory gene expression through NF-kappa-B (see 164011)
and MAPK signaling. Bochkov et al. (2002) demonstrated that oxidized
phospholipids inhibit LPS-induced but not TNF-alpha (191160)-induced or
interleukin-1-beta (147720)-induced NF-kappa-B-mediated upregulation of
inflammatory genes, by blocking the interaction of LPS with LBP and
CD14. Moreover, in LPS-injected mice, oxidized phospholipids inhibited
inflammation and protected mice from lethal endotoxin shock. Thus, in
severe gram-negative bacterial infection, endogenously formed oxidized
phospholipids may function as a negative feedback to blunt innate immune
responses. Furthermore, Bochkov et al. (2002) identified chemical
structures capable of inhibiting the effects of endotoxins such as LPS
that could be used for the development of new drugs for treatment of
sepsis.

Children of farmers are at decreased risk of developing allergies.
Results of epidemiologic studies suggested that increased exposure to
microbial compounds might be responsible for this reduced risk.
Alterations in adaptive immune response were thought to be the
underlying mechanism. Lauener et al. (2002) measured the expression of
receptors for microbial compounds known to trigger the innate immune
response. They showed that blood cells from farmers' children expressed
significantly higher amounts of CD14 and Toll-like receptor-2 (TLR2;
603028) than those from non-farmers' children. They proposed that the
innate immune system responds to the microbial burden in the environment
and modulates the development of allergic disease.

Zanoni et al. (2009) found that stimulation of murine bone
marrow-derived dendritic cells (DCs) with LPS induced Src (190090)
kinase and Plcg2 (600220) activation, Ca(2+) influx, and calcineurin
(see 114105)-dependent nuclear Nfat (see 600490) translocation.
Induction of this pathway was Tlr4 independent and entirely dependent on
Cd14. Nfat activation was necessary for apoptotic death of terminally
differentiated DCs, allowing for maintenance of self-tolerance and
prevention of autoimmunity. Blocking this pathway in vivo resulted in
prolonged DC survival and an increase in T-cell priming capability.
Zanoni et al. (2009) concluded that CD14 is involved, through NFAT
activation, in regulation of the DC life cycle.

By coimmunoprecipitation and confocal microscopic analysis, Baumann et
al. (2010) showed that CD14 interacted with TLR7 (300365) and TLR9
(605474) in mouse and human cells and was required for TLR7- and
TLR9-dependent induction of proinflammatory cytokines. Cd14 was required
for Tlr9-dependent immune responses in mice and for optimal nucleic acid
uptake in mouse macrophages. Cd14 was dispensable for viral uptake in
mice, but it was required for triggering of TLR-dependent cytokine
responses. Baumann et al. (2010) concluded that CD14 has a dual role in
nucleic acid-mediated TLR activation by promoting selective uptake of
nucleic acids and acting as a coreceptor for endosomal TLR activation.

Using flow cytometry and confocal microscopy in mouse cells, Zanoni et
al. (2011) demonstrated that Cd14 chaperoned LPS to Tlr4, leading to Syk
(600085)-dependent internalization of Tlr4 and signaling through Trif
(607601). Zanoni et al. (2011) concluded that pathogen recognition
receptors induce both membrane transport and signal transduction.

Shirey et al. (2013) reported that CD14 and TLR2 are required for
protection against influenza-induced lethality in mice mediated by
Eritoran (also known as E5564), a potent, well-tolerated, synthetic TLR4
antagonist. Therapeutic administration of Eritoran blocked
influenza-induced lethality in mice, as well as lung pathology, clinical
symptoms, cytokine and oxidized phospholipid expression, and decreased
viral titers. CD14 directly binds Eritoran and inhibits ligand binding
to MD2 (605243). Shirey et al. (2013) concluded that Eritoran blockade
of TLR signaling represents a novel therapeutic approach for
inflammation associated with influenza, and possibly other infections.

MAPPING

Goyert et al. (1988) demonstrated by in situ hybridization and study of
somatic cell hybrid DNA that the gene is located at bands 5q23-q31.
Thus, CD14 is located in a region of chromosome 5 that contains a
cluster of genes that encode several myeloid-specific growth factors
(IL3; 147740) and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(CSF2; 138960) or growth factor receptors (FMS receptor for CFS1;
164770), as well as other growth factor and receptor genes
(platelet-derived growth factor receptor, 173410, beta-2-adrenergic
receptor, 109690, and endothelial cell growth factor, 131220). This is a
region that is deleted in patients with certain forms of myeloid
leukemia.

Ferrero et al. (1990) mapped the CD14 gene to mouse chromosome 18.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization studies of deleted chromosome 5
homologs in a series of 135 patients with malignant myeloid diseases, Le
Beau et al. (1993) mapped the CD14 gene and neighboring genes to 5q31.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Baldini et al. (1999) identified a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
in the proximal CD14 promoter at position -159 from the transcription
start site, resulting in a C-to-T transition. TT homozygotes had
significantly higher levels of sCD14 than did either CC or CT genotype
carriers, and they also had lower levels of IgE. Unkelbach et al.
(1999), Hubacek et al. (1999), and Shimada et al. (2000) reported an
increased risk of myocardial infarction in individuals carrying the T
allele. (Shimada et al. (2000) and Hubacek et al. (1999) reported the
C/T polymorphism as occurring at position -260 from the translation
start site.)

Some patients with Kawasaki disease (KD), an acute febrile vasculitis of
childhood, develop coronary artery lesions after the acute phase.
Nishimura et al. (2003) found no difference in genomic and allele
frequencies of the T allele at the CD14/-159 promoter region in 67
patients with KD compared to controls. However, the KD patients with TT
genotypes had more coronary artery complications than those with CT or
CC genotypes, and the frequency of the T allele was significantly higher
than that of the C allele in KD patients. Nishimura et al. (2003)
concluded that the T allele and the TT genotype are risk factors for the
coronary artery complications in patients with KD, implicating a
possible relationship to the magnitude of the CD14 toll-like receptor
response.

Using EMSA analysis, LeVan et al. (2001) showed that the T allele at
position -159 in the proximal CD14 promoter has a decreased affinity for
DNA/protein interactions at a GC box containing a binding site for SP1
(189906), SP2 (601801), and SP3 (601804) transcription factors. Reporter
analysis demonstrated that monocytic cells with low levels of SP3, which
inhibits activating by SP1 and SP2, have increased transcriptional
activity of the T allele. In contrast, both the C and T alleles are
transcribed equivalently in SP3-rich hepatocytes. LeVan et al. (2001)
proposed that the interplay between CD14 promoter affinity and the
SP3:SP1-plus-SP2 ratio plays a critical mechanistic role in regulating
CD14 transcription and in determining the differential activity of the 2
variants of the CD14 promoter.

In a study of 216 Korean patients with IgA nephropathy (161950) who were
followed for 86 months, Yoon et al. (2003) found that an excess of the
-159C genotype occurred in patients with progressive disease (p = 0.03)
and the risk of disease progression increased as the number of C alleles
increased (p for trend = 0.002). The hazard ratio for progression in
patients with the CC genotype was 3.2 (p = 0.025) compared to patients
with the TT genotype. After lipopolysaccharide stimulation, soluble CD14
was released more abundantly from the peripheral blood mononuclear cells
of TT patients than from those of CC patients (p = 0.006), although
there was no difference in membrane-bound CD14 expression. TT patients
released less IL6 (147620) than CC patients after stimulation (p =
0.0003). Yoon et al. (2003) suggested that the CD14 -159 polymorphism is
an important marker for the progression of IgA nephropathy and may
modulate the level of the inflammatory response.

ANIMAL MODEL

Haziot et al. (1996) reported that Cd14-deficient mice were resistant to
LPS-induced shock.

Kurt-Jones et al. (2000) determined that proinflammatory cytokine
responses to respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) F protein were absent or
diminished in mice with deletions of either Cd14 or Tlr4 (603030),
respectively. Importantly, Tlr4 -/- mice had higher levels of infectious
virus in their lungs and were either unable to clear the virus or
cleared the virus several days later than wildtype mice. The authors
concluded that TLR4 and CD14 appear to be important not only in
recognizing bacterial structures such as lipopolysaccharide, but are
important in innate immune responses to viruses as well.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Setoguchi et al. (1989)
REFERENCE 1. Baldini, M.; Lohman, I. C.; Halonen, M.; Erickson, R. P.; Holt,
P. G.; Martinez, F. D.: A polymorphism in the 5-prime flanking region
of the CD14 gene is associated with circulating soluble CD14 levels
and with total serum immunoglobulin E. Am. J. Resp. Cell Molec. Biol. 20:
976-983, 1999.

2. Baumann, C. L.; Aspalter, I. M.; Sharif, O.; Pichlmair, A.; Bluml,
S.; Grebien, F.; Bruckner, M.; Pasierbek, P.; Aumayr, K.; Planyavsky,
M.; Bennett, K. L.; Colinge, J.; Knapp, S.; Superti-Furga, G.: CD14
is a coreceptor of Toll-like receptors 7 and 9. J. Exp. Med. 207:
2689-2701, 2010.

3. Bochkov, V. N.; Kadl, A.; Huber, J.; Gruber, F.; Binder, B. R.;
Leitinger, N.: Protective role of phospholipid oxidation products
in endotoxin-induced tissue damage. Nature 419: 77-81, 2002.

4. Devitt, A.; Moffatt, O. D.; Raykundalia, C.; Capra, J. D.; Simmons,
D. L.; Gregory, C. D.: Human CD14 mediates recognition and phagocytosis
of apoptotic cells. Nature 392: 505-509, 1998.

5. Ferrero, E.; Hsieh, C.-L.; Francke, U.; Goyert, S. M.: CD14 is
a member of the family of leucine-rich proteins and is encoded by
a gene syntenic with multiple receptor genes. J. Immun. 145: 331-336,
1990.

6. Goyert, S. M.; Ferrero, E.; Rettig, W. J.; Yenamandra, A. K.; Obata,
F.; Le Beau, M. M.: The CD14 monocyte differentiation antigen maps
to a region encoding growth factors and receptors. Science 239:
497-500, 1988.

7. Gupta, D.; Kirkland, T. N.; Viriyakosol, S.; Dziarski, R.: CD14
is a cell-activating receptor for bacterial peptidoglycan. J. Biol.
Chem. 271: 23310-23316, 1996.

8. Haziot, A.; Ferrero, E.; Kontgen, F.; Hijiya, N.; Yamamoto, S.;
Silver, J.; Stewart, C. L.; Goyert, S. M.: Resistance to endotoxin
shock and reduced dissemination of gram-negative bacteria in CD14-deficient
mice. Immunity 4: 407-414, 1996.

9. Hubacek, J. A.; Rothe, G.; Pit'ha, J.; Skodova, Z.; Stanek, V.;
Poledne, R.; Schmitz, G.: C(-260)-to-T polymorphism in the promoter
of the CD14 monocyte receptor gene as a risk factor for myocardial
infarction. Circulation 99: 3218-3220, 1999. Note: Erratum: Circulation
100: 2550 only, 1999.

10. Kurt-Jones, E. A.; Popova, L.; Kwinn, L.; Haynes, L. M.; Jones,
L. P.; Tripp, R. A.; Walsh, E. E.; Freeman, M. W.; Golenbock, D. T.;
Anderson, L. J.; Finberg, R. W.: Pattern recognition receptors TLR4
and CD14 mediate response to respiratory syncytial virus. Nature
Immun. 1: 398-401, 2000.

11. Lauener, R. P.; Birchler, T.; Adamski, J.; Braun-Fahrlander, C.;
Bufe, A.; Herz, U.; von Mutius, E.; Nowak, D.; Riedler, J.; Waser,
M.; Sennhauser, F. H.; ALEX study group: Expression of CD14 and
Toll-like receptor 2 in farmers' and non-farmers' children. Lancet 360:
465-466, 2002.

12. Le Beau, M. M.; Espinosa, R., III; Neuman, W. L.; Stock, W.; Roulston,
D.; Larson, R. A.; Keinanen, M.; Westbrook, C. A.: Cytogenetic and
molecular delineation of the smallest commonly deleted region of chromosome
5 in malignant myeloid diseases. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 5484-5488,
1993.

13. LeVan, T. D.; Bloom, J. W.; Bailey, T. J.; Karp, C. L.; Halonen,
M.; Martinez, F. D.; Vercelli, D.: A common single nucleotide polymorphism
in the CD14 promoter decreases the affinity of Sp protein binding
and enhances transcriptional activity. J. Immun. 167: 5838-5844,
2001.

14. Nishimura, S.; Zaitsu, M.; Hara, M.; Yokota, G.; Watanabe, M.;
Ueda, Y.; Imayoshi, M.; Ishii, E.; Tasaki, H.; Hamasaki, Y.: A polymorphism
in the promoter of the CD14 gene (CD14/-159) is associated with the
development of coronary artery lesions in patients with Kawasaki disease. J.
Pediat. 143: 357-362, 2003.

15. Savill, J.: Phagocytic docking without shocking. Nature 392:
442-443, 1998.

16. Setoguchi, M.; Nasu, N.; Yoshida, S.; Higuchi, Y.; Akizuki, S.;
Yamamoto, S.: Mouse and human CD14 (myeloid cell-specific leucine-rich
glycoprotein) primary structure deduced from cDNA clones. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1008: 213-222, 1989.

17. Shimada, K.; Watanabe, Y.; Mokuno, H.; Iwama, Y.; Daida, H.; Yamaguchi,
H.: Common polymorphism in the promoter of the CD14 monocyte receptor
gene is associated with acute myocardial infarction in Japanese men. Am.
J. Cardiol. 86: 682-684, 2000.

18. Shirey, K. A.; Lai, W.; Scott, A. J.; Lipsky, M.; Mistry, P.;
Pletneva, L. M.; Karp, C. L.; McAlees, J.; Gioannini, T. L.; Weiss,
J.; Chen, W. H.; Ernst, R. K.; Rossignol, D. P.; Gusovsky, F.; Blanco,
J. C. G.; Vogel, S. N.: The TLR4 antagonist Eritoran protects mice
from lethal influenza infection. Nature 497: 498-502, 2013.

19. Unkelbach, K.; Gardemann, A.; Kostrzewa, M.; Philipp, M.; Tillmanns,
H.; Haberbosch, W.: A new promoter polymorphism in the gene of lipopolysaccharide
receptor CD14 is associated with expired myocardial infarction in
patients with low atherosclerotic risk profile. Arterioscler. Thromb.
Vasc. Biol. 19: 932-938, 1999.

20. Wright, S. D.: CD14: a leukocyte membrane protein that functions
in the response to endotoxin. (Abstract) FASEB J. 4: A1848 only,
1990.

21. Wright, S. D.; Ramos, R. A.; Tobias, P. S.; Ulevitch, R. J.; Mathison,
J. C.: CD14, a receptor for complexes of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
and LPS binding protein. Science 249: 1431-1433, 1990.

22. Yoon, H.-J.; Shin, J. H.; Yang, S. H.; Chae, D.-W.; Kim, H.; Lee,
D.-S.; Kim, H. L.; Kim, S.; Lee, J. S.: Association of the CD14 gene
-159C polymorphism with progression of IgA nephropathy. J. Med. Genet. 40:
104-108, 2003.

23. Zanoni, I.; Ostuni, R.; Capuano, G.; Collini, M.; Caccia, M.;
Ronchi, A. E.; Rocchetti, M.; Mingozzi, F.; Foti, M.; Chirico, G.;
Costa, B.; Zaza, A.; Ricciardi-Castagnoli, P.; Granucci, F.: CD14
regulates the dendritic cell life cycle after LPS exposure through
NFAT activation. Nature 460: 264-268, 2009.

24. Zanoni, I.; Ostuni, R.; Marek, L. R.; Barresi, S.; Barbalat, R.;
Barton, G. M.; Granucci, F.; Kagan, J. C.: CD14 controls the LPS-induced
endocytosis of Toll-like receptor 4. Cell 147: 868-880, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 07/11/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/26/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/29/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/16/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/28/2004
Natalie E. Krasikov - updated: 3/12/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/15/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/11/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/15/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/21/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/9/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/9/1987

EDITED alopez: 07/11/2013
mgross: 11/19/2012
terry: 10/26/2012
terry: 8/31/2012
mgross: 5/11/2011
terry: 4/29/2011
mgross: 7/16/2009
terry: 7/16/2009
alopez: 12/6/2006
carol: 12/28/2004
carol: 3/17/2004
terry: 3/12/2004
terry: 1/2/2003
cwells: 10/22/2002
terry: 10/15/2002
alopez: 9/12/2002
cwells: 9/11/2002
mgross: 2/15/2002
mgross: 11/21/2000
alopez: 9/10/1998
terry: 9/9/1998
jenny: 3/7/1997
warfield: 3/3/1994
carol: 7/1/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 12/4/1991
carol: 10/24/1990
carol: 10/1/1990

102578	TITLE *102578 ACUTE PROMYELOCYTIC LEUKEMIA, INDUCER OF; PML
;;MYL
PML/RARA FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The PML tumor suppressor protein is essential for the formation of a
dynamic macromolecular nuclear structure called the PML-nuclear body
(PML-NB). PML-NBs have also been referred to as nuclear domains-10,
Kremer bodies, and PML oncogenic domains. Unlike more specialized
subnuclear structures, PML-NBs are involved in diverse cellular
functions, including sequestration and release of proteins, mediation of
posttranslational modifications, and promotion of nuclear events in
response to various cellular stresses. The PML gene is involved in the
t(15;17) translocation of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL; 612376),
which generates the oncogenic fusion protein PML-retinoic acid
receptor-alpha (RARA; 180240). PML-NBs are disrupted in APL and are thus
implicated in APL pathogenesis (Bernardi and Pandolfi, 2007; Salomoni et
al., 2008).

CLONING

In the process of analyzing the RARA gene in the t(15;17)(q22;q11.2-q12)
translocation specifically associated with APL, de The et al. (1990)
identified a novel gene on chromosome 15 involved with the RARA gene in
formation of a fusion product. This gene, which they called MYL for
'myelocytic leukemia,' was transcribed in the same direction as RARA on
the translocated chromosome. De The et al. (1990) identified a 144-bp
region, flanked by canonical splice acceptor and donor sequences, that
had a high probability of being an exon and showed no significant
similarity to any sequence in a protein data bank, thus suggesting that
MYL is a previously undescribed gene. In a later report, de The et al.
(1991) changed the name of the gene from MYL to PML. They reported,
furthermore, that the gene product contains a novel zinc finger motif
common to several DNA-binding proteins.

Goddard et al. (1991) demonstrated that PML is a putative zinc finger
protein and potential transcription factor that is commonly expressed,
with at least 3 major transcription products.

Goddard et al. (1995) cloned the murine Pml gene. The predicted amino
acid sequence of mouse Pml, a ring-finger protein, shows 80% similarity
to that of the human homolog, with greater than 90% similarity in the
proposed functional domains.

MAPPING

The PML gene maps to chromosome 15q22 (de The et al., 1990).

Goddard et al. (1995) mapped the mouse Pml gene to a region of
chromosome 9 with known homology of synteny to the region of 15q where
PML is located.

GENE FUNCTION

While PML does not colocalize with proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA; 176740) or spliceosomes, Dyck et al. (1994) showed that it is
part of a macromolecular structure, composed of at least 4 nuclear
proteins, that is adhered to the nuclear matrix. This structure shows a
labeling pattern resembling spheres that vary in both size and number
among individual cells of a given cell line. PML-RAR expression appears
to disrupt the integrity of these structures (referred to by Dyck et al.
(1994) as PML oncogenic domains, or PODs) and thus appears to be the
possible cause of their altered morphology. Retinoid treatment leads to
a striking reassembly of the POD, which in turn is linked to
differentiation of the leukemic cells. These results identified a novel
macromolecular nuclear structure and suggested that it may serve as a
target of cellular transformation.

From their analysis of the phosphoamino acids of the PML protein, Chang
et al. (1995) concluded that both tyrosine and serine residues are
phosphorylated. To investigate whether expression of the PML protein is
cell cycle related, HeLa cells synchronized at various phases of the
cell cycle were analyzed by immunofluorescence staining and confocal
microscopy. They found that PML was expressed at a lower level in S, G2,
and M phases and at a significantly higher level in G1 phase. Other
studies showed that PML is a phosphoprotein and is associated with the
nuclear matrix. Chang et al. (1995) noted that PML shares many
properties with tumor suppressors such as RB (614041).

Fusion of PML and TIF1A (603406) to RARA and BRAF (164757),
respectively, results in the production of PML-RAR-alpha and
TIF1-alpha-B-RAF (T18) oncoproteins. Zhong et al. (1999) showed that
PML, TIF1-alpha, and RXR-alpha (180245)/RAR-alpha function together in a
retinoic acid-dependent transcription complex. Zhong et al. (1999) found
that PML acts as a ligand-dependent coactivator of RXR-alpha/RARA-alpha.
PML interacts with TIF1-alpha and CREB-binding protein (CBP; 600140). In
PML -/- cells, the retinoic acid-dependent induction of genes such as
RARB2, and the ability of TIF1-alpha and CBP to act as transcriptional
coactivators on retinoic acid, are impaired. Zhong et al. (1999) showed
that both PML and TIF1-alpha are growth suppressors required for the
growth-inhibitory activity of retinoic acid. T18, similar to
PML-RAR-alpha, disrupts the retinoic acid-dependent activity of this
complex in a dominant-negative manner, resulting in a growth advantage.
PML-RAR-alpha was the first example of an oncoprotein generated by the
fusion of 2 molecules participating in the same pathway, specifically
the fusion of a transcription factor to one of its own cofactors. Since
the PML and RAR-alpha pathways converge at the transcriptional level,
there is no need for a double-dominant-negative product to explain the
pathogenesis of APL.

Pearson et al. (2000) reported that the tumor suppressor PML regulates
the p53 response to oncogenic signals. Pearson et al. (2000) found that
oncogenic RAS (190020) upregulates PML expression, and that
overexpression of PML induces senescence in a p53-dependent manner. p53
is acetylated at lysine-382 upon RAS expression, an event that is
essential for its biologic function. RAS induces relocalization of p53
and the CBP acetyltransferase within the PML nuclear bodies and induces
the formation of a trimeric p53-PML-CBP complex. Lastly, RAS-induced p53
acetylation, p53-CBP complex stabilization, and senescence are lost in
PML -/- fibroblasts. Pearson et al. (2000) concluded that their data
established a link between PML and p53 and indicated that integrity of
the PML bodies is required for p53 acetylation and senescence upon
oncogene expression.

Khan et al. (2001) showed that PML interacts with multiple corepressors
(SKI (164780), NCOR, and Sin3A (607776)) and histone deacetylase-1
(HDAC1; 601241), and that this interaction is required for
transcriptional repression mediated by the tumor suppressor MAD
(600021). PML-RARA has the 2 corepressor-interacting sites and inhibits
MAD-mediated repression, suggesting that aberrant binding of PML-RARA to
the corepressor complexes may lead to abrogation of the corepressor
function. The authors suggested that these mechanisms may contribute to
events leading to leukemogenesis.

Turelli et al. (2001) showed that incoming retroviral preintegration
complexes trigger the exportin (602559)-mediated cytoplasmic export of
the SWI/SNF component INI1 (601607) and of the nuclear body constituent
PML. They further showed that the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
genome associates with these proteins before nuclear migration. In the
presence of arsenic, PML was sequestered in the nucleus, and the
efficiency of HIV-mediated transduction was markedly increased. These
results unveiled an unsuspected cellular response that interferes with
the early steps of HIV replication.

Yang et al. (2002) determined that PML and checkpoint kinase-2 (CHEK2;
604373) mediated p53 (191170)-independent apoptosis following gamma
irradiation of several human cell lines. Endogenous CHEK2 bound PML
within PML nuclear bodies. Following gamma irradiation, CHEK2
phosphorylated PML on ser117, causing dissociation of the 2 proteins.
Apoptosis through this mechanism also required ATM (208900). Yang et al.
(2002) concluded that this pathway to gamma irradiation-induced
apoptosis utilizes ATM, CHEK2, and PML. Overexpression of PML alone
caused apoptosis in U937 myeloid cells.

Lin et al. (2004) demonstrated that cytoplasmic PML is an essential
modulator of TGF-beta signaling. Primary cells from Pml-null mice are
resistant to TGF-beta-dependent growth arrest, induction of cellular
senescence, and apoptosis. These cells also have impaired
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of the TGF-beta signaling
proteins Smad2 (601366) and Smad3 (603109), as well as impaired
induction of TGF-beta target genes. Expression of cytoplasmic Pml is
induced by TGF-beta. Furthermore, cytoplasmic Pml physically interacts
with Smad2, Smad3, and SMAD anchor for receptor activation (SARA;
603755), and is required for association of Smad2 and Smad3 with Sara
and for the accumulation of Sara and TGF-beta receptor (see 190181) in
the early endosome. The PML-RAR-alpha oncoprotein of acute promyelocytic
leukemia can antagonize cytoplasmic PML function, and acute
promyelocytic leukemia cells have defects in TGF-beta signaling similar
to those observed in Pml-null cells. Lin et al. (2004) concluded that
their findings identified cytoplasmic PML as a critical TGF-beta
receptor and further implicated deregulated TGF-beta signaling in cancer
pathogenesis.

Trotman et al. (2006) demonstrated that the PML tumor suppressor
prevents cancer by inactivating phosphorylated AKT (164730) inside the
nucleus. They found in a mouse model that Pml loss markedly accelerated
tumor onset, incidence, and progression in Pten (601728) heterozygous
mutants, and led to female sterility with features that recapitulate the
phenotype of Foxo3a knockout mice. Trotman et al. (2006) showed that PML
deficiency on its own leads to tumorigenesis in the prostate, a tissue
that is exquisitely sensitive to phosphorylated AKT levels, and
demonstrated that PML specifically recruits the AKT phosphatase PP2a
(see 603113) as well phosphorylated AKT into PML nuclear bodies.
Notably, Trotman et al. (2006) found that PML-null cells are impaired in
PP2a phosphatase activity towards AKT, and thus accumulate nuclear
phosphorylated AKT. As a consequence, the progressive reduction in PML
dose leads to inactivation of FOXO3A-mediated transcription of
proapoptotic BIM (603827) and the cell cycle inhibitor p27(KIP1)
(600778). Trotman et al. (2006) concluded that their results demonstrate
that PML orchestrates a nuclear tumor suppressor network for
inactivation of nuclear phosphorylated AKT, and thus highlight the
importance of AKT compartmentalization in human cancer pathogenesis and
treatment.

Bernardi et al. (2006) identified PML as a critical inhibitor of
neoangiogenesis (the formation of new blood vessels) in vivo, in both
ischemic and neoplastic conditions, through the control of protein
translation. Bernardi et al. (2006) demonstrated that in hypoxic
conditions PML acts as a negative regulator of the synthesis rate of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha (HIF1A; 603348) by repressing MTOR
(601231). PML physically interacts with MTOR and negatively regulates
its association with the small GTPase RHEB (601293) by favoring MTOR
nuclear accumulation. Notably, PML-null cells and tumors display higher
sensitivity both in vitro and in vivo to growth inhibition by rapamycin,
and lack of PML inversely correlates with phosphorylation of ribosomal
protein S6 (180460) and tumor angiogenesis in mouse and human tumors.
Thus, Bernardi et al. (2006) concluded that their findings identified
PML as a novel suppressor of mTOR and neoangiogenesis.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a human fetal brain cDNA library, followed
by coimmunoprecipitation analysis, Kunapuli et al. (2006) found that
ZNF198 (ZMYM2; 602221) was covalently modified by SUMO1 (601912).
Confocal microscopy showed that a proportion of ZNF198 colocalized with
SUMO1 and PML in PML nuclear bodies, and coimmunoprecipitation analysis
revealed that all 3 proteins resided in a protein complex. Mutation of
the SUMO1-binding site of ZNF198 resulted in degradation of ZNF198,
nuclear dispersal of PML, and loss of punctate PML nuclear bodies.
Kunapuli et al. (2006) found that the MDA-MB-157 breast cancer cell
line, which has a deletion in chromosome 13q11 encompassing the ZNF198
gene, lacked PML nuclear bodies, although PML protein levels appeared
normal. The fusion protein ZNF198/FGFR1 (136350), which occurs in
atypical myeloproliferative disease (613523) and lacks the SUMO1-binding
site of ZNF198, could dimerize with wildtype ZNF198 and disrupt its
function. Expression of ZNF198/FGFR1 disrupted PML sumoylation and
nuclear body formation and resulted in cytoplasmic localization of
SUMO1. Kunapuli et al. (2006) concluded that sumoylation of ZNF198 is
required for PML nuclear body formation.

Ito et al. (2008) showed that PML is critical in the maintenance of
quiescent leukemia-initiating cells and normal hematopoietic stem cells.
They suggested that targeting PML may be an effective treatment for
prevention of relapse in CML (608232).

Song et al. (2008) found that PTEN was aberrantly localized in APL in
which PML function was disrupted by the PML-RARA fusion oncoprotein.
Treatment with drugs that triggered PML-RARA degradation restored
nuclear PTEN. PML opposed the activity of HAUSP (USP7; 602519) towards
PTEN through a mechanism involving DAXX (603186). Confocal microscopy
and immunohistochemistry demonstrated that HAUSP was overexpressed in
prostate cancer and that levels of HAUSP directly correlated with tumor
aggressiveness and with PTEN nuclear exclusion. Song et al. (2008)
concluded that a PML-HAUSP network controls PTEN deubiquitinylation and
subcellular localization, which is perturbed in human cancers.

Arsenic, an ancient drug used in traditional Chinese medicine, has
attracted worldwide interest because it shows substantial anticancer
activity in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Arsenic
trioxide exerts its therapeutic effect by promoting degradation of
PML-RARA. PML and PML-RARA degradation is triggered by their
sumoylation, but the mechanism by which arsenic trioxide induces this
posttranslational modification was unclear. Zhang et al. (2010) showed
that arsenic binds directly to cysteine residues in zinc fingers located
within the RBCC domain of PML-RARA and PML. Arsenic binding induces PML
oligomerization, which increases its interaction with the small
ubiquitin-like protein modifier (SUMO)-conjugating enzyme UBC9 (601661),
resulting in enhanced sumoylation and degradation. Zhang et al. (2010)
concluded that the identification of PML as a direct target of arsenic
trioxide provides insights into the drug's mechanism of action and its
specificity for APL.

In mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Giorgi et al. (2010) found that
extranuclear Pml was specifically enriched at the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) and at the mitochondria-associated membranes, signaling domains
involved in ER-to-mitochondria calcium ion transport and in induction of
apoptosis. They found Pml in complexes of large molecular size with the
inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor (IP3R; 147265), protein kinase Akt
(164730), and protein phosphatase 2a (176915). Pml was essential for
Akt- and PP2a-dependent modulation of Ip3r phosphorylation and in turn
for Ip3r-mediated calcium ion release from the endoplasmic reticulum.
Giorgi et al. (2010) concluded that their findings provided a
mechanistic explanation for the pleiotropic role of Pml in apoptosis.

- Reviews of PML Function

Bernardi and Pandolfi (2007) reviewed the structure, dynamics, and
functions of PML-NBs.

Salomoni et al. (2008) reviewed the role of PML in tumor suppression.

- PML/RARA Fusion Protein

For information on the generation of PML/RARA fusion genes through
translocations associated with APL, see CYTOGENETICS.

Grignani et al. (1993) expressed the PML-RARA protein in U937 myeloid
precursor cells and showed that they lost the capacity to differentiate
under the action of stimuli such as vitamin D3 and transforming growth
factor beta-1 (TGFB1; 190180), acquired enhanced sensitivity to retinoic
acid, and exhibited a higher growth rate consequent to diminished
apoptotic cell death. These results provided evidence of biologic
activity of the fusion protein and recapitulated critical features of
the promyelocytic leukemia phenotype.

Lin et al. (1998) reported that the association of PLZF-RAR-alpha (see
176797) and PML-RAR-alpha with the histone deacetylase complex (see
605164) helps to determine both the development of APL and the ability
of patients to respond to retinoids. Consistent with these observations,
inhibitors of histone deacetylase dramatically potentiate
retinoid-induced differentiation of retinoic acid-sensitive, and restore
retinoid responses of retinoic acid-resistant, APL cell lines. Lin et
al. (1998) concluded that oncogenic retinoic acid receptors mediate
leukemogenesis through aberrant chromatin acetylation, and that
pharmacologic manipulation of nuclear receptor cofactors may be a useful
approach in the treatment of human disease.

Grignani et al. (1998) demonstrated that both PML-RAR-alpha and
PLZF-RAR-alpha fusion proteins recruit the nuclear corepressor (NCOR;
see 600849)-histone deacetylase complex through the RAR-alpha CoR box.
PLZF-RAR-alpha contains a second, retinoic acid-resistant binding site
in the PLZF amino-terminal region. High doses of retinoic acid release
histone deacetylase activity from PML-RAR-alpha, but not from
PLZF-RAR-alpha. Mutation of the NCOR binding site abolishes the ability
of PML-RAR-alpha to block differentiation, whereas inhibition of histone
deacetylase activity switches the transcriptional and biologic effects
of PLZF-RAR-alpha from being an inhibitor to an activator of the
retinoic acid signaling pathway. Therefore, Grignani et al. (1998)
concluded that recruitment of histone deacetylase is crucial to the
transforming potential of APL fusion proteins, and the different effects
of retinoic acid on the stability of the PML-RAR-alpha and
PLZF-RAR-alpha corepressor complexes determines the differential
response of APLs to retinoic acid.

RAR and acute myeloid leukemia-1 (AML1; 151385) transcription factors
are found in leukemias as fusion proteins with PML and ETO (CBFA2T1;
133435), respectively. Association of PML-RAR and AML1-ETO with the
NCOR-histone deacetylase complex is required to block hematopoietic
differentiation. Minucci et al. (2000) showed that PML-RAR and AML1-ETO
exist in vivo within high molecular weight nuclear complexes, reflecting
their oligomeric state. Oligomerization requires PML or ETO coiled-coil
regions and is responsible for abnormal recruitment of NCOR,
transcriptional repression, and impaired differentiation of primary
hematopoietic precursors. Fusion of RAR to a heterologous
oligomerization domain recapitulated the properties of PML-RAR,
indicating that oligomerization per se is sufficient to achieve
transforming potential. These results showed that oligomerization of a
transcription factor, imposing an altered interaction with
transcriptional coregulators, represents a novel mechanism of oncogenic
activation.

The recruitment of the nuclear receptor corepressor SMRT (NCOR2; 600848)
and subsequent repression of retinoid target genes is critical for the
oncogenic function of PML-RARA. Lin and Evans (2000) showed that the
ability of PML-RARA to form homodimers is both necessary and sufficient
for its increased binding efficiency to corepressor and its inhibitory
effects on hormonal responses in myeloid differentiation. Furthermore,
the authors found that altered stoichiometric interaction of SMRT with
PML-RARA homodimers may underlie these processes. An RXR mutant lacking
transactivation function AF2 recapitulated many biochemical and
functional properties of PML-RARA. Taken together, these results
indicated that altered dimerization of a transcription factor can be
directly linked to cellular transformation, and they implicated
dimerization interfaces of oncogenes as potential drug targets.

Pandolfi (2001) reviewed the roles of the RARA and PML genes in the
pathogenesis of APL and discussed the multiple oncogenic activities of
PML-RARA.

Di Croce et al. (2002) demonstrated that PML-RARA fusion protein induces
gene hypermethylation and silencing by recruiting DNA methyltransferases
to target promoters and that hypermethylation contributes to its
leukemogenic potential. Retinoic acid treatment induces promoter
demethylation, gene reexpression, and reversion of the transformed
phenotype. Di Croce et al. (2002) concluded that their results establish
a mechanistic link between genetic and epigenetic changes during
transformation and suggest that hypermethylation contributes to the
early steps of carcinogenesis.

The fusion protein PML-RARA initiates APL when expressed in the early
myeloid compartment of transgenic mice. Lane and Ley (2003) found that
PML-RARA was cleaved in several positions by a neutral serine protease
in a human myeloid cell line; purification revealed that the protease
was neutrophil elastase (ELA2; 130130). Immunofluorescence localization
studies suggested that cleavage of PML-RARA must have occurred within
the cell, perhaps within the nucleus. The functional importance of ELA2
for APL development was assessed in Ela2-deficient mice. More than 90%
of bone marrow PML-RARA-cleaving activity was lost in the absence of
Ela2, and Ela2-deficient animals, but not cathepsin G (116830)-deficient
animals, were protected from APL development. The authors determined
that primary mouse and human APL cells also contained ELA2-dependent
PML-RARA-cleaving activity. Lane and Ley (2003) concluded that, since
ELA2 is maximally produced in promyelocytes, it may play a role in APL
pathogenesis by facilitating the leukemogenic potential of PML-RARA.

Villa et al. (2006) found that MBD1 (156535) cooperated with PML-RARA in
transcriptional repression and cellular transformation in human cell
lines. PML-RARA recruited MBD1 to its target promoter through an HDAC3
(605166)-mediated mechanism. Binding of HDAC3 and MBD1 was not confined
to the target promoter, but was instead spread over the locus. Knockdown
of HDAC3 expression by RNA interference in acute promyelocytic leukemia
cells alleviated PML-RARA-induced promoter silencing. Furthermore,
retroviral expression of dominant-negative mutants of MBD1 in human
hematopoietic precursors interfered with PML-RARA-induced repression and
restored cell differentiation. Villa et al. (2006) concluded that
PML-RARA recruits an HDAC3-MBD1 complex to target promoters to establish
and maintain chromatin silencing.

CYTOGENETICS

- PML/RARA Fusion Gene

In the process of analyzing the RARA gene in the t(15;17)(q22;q11.2-q12)
translocation specifically associated with acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL), de The et al. (1990) identified a novel gene on chromosome 15
involved with the RARA gene in formation of a fusion product. This gene,
which they called MYL, was transcribed in the same direction as RARA on
the translocated chromosome. In the chimeric gene, the promoter and
first exon of the RARA gene were replaced by part of the MYL gene. De
The et al. (1990) established that the translocation chromosome
generates an MYL-RARA chimeric transcript. The findings strongly
implicated RARA in leukemogenesis. The possibility was raised that the
altered retinoic acid receptor behaves as a dominant-negative mutant
that blocks the expression of retinoic acid target genes involved in
granulocytic differentiation. In a later report, de The et al. (1991)
changed the name of the gene from MYL to PML. The PML-RARA mRNA encoded
a predicted 106-kD chimeric protein containing most of the PML sequences
fused to a large part of the RARA gene, including its DNA- and
hormone-binding domains.

Goddard et al. (1991) determined that the PML breakpoints were clustered
in 2 regions on either side of an alternatively spliced exon. Although
leukemic cells with translocations characteristically expressed only 1
fusion product, both PML-RARA (on the 15q+ derivative chromosome) and
RARA-PML (on the 17q- derivative) were transcribed. The contribution of
PML to the oncogenicity of the fusion products was demonstrated by the
following: no mutations affecting RARA alone were observed in 20 APLs
analyzed; 2 APLs cytogenetically lacking t(15;17) chromosomes were found
to have rearrangements of both PML and RARA; and PML but not RARA was
molecularly rearranged in a variant APL translocation in which
chromosome 15 had been translocated to another chromosome with no
visible involvement of chromosome 17.

Tong et al. (1992) found that in 20 of 22 patients with a detectable MYL
rearrangement the breakpoints were clustered within a 4.4-kb segment,
which they designated MYL(bcr). The 2 remaining patients exhibited a
more 5-prime rearrangement at about 10-kb upstream of the MYL(bcr)
region, indicating the lack of at least one MYL gene exon in the
resulting MYL-RARA fusion gene.

Cleary (1991) pointed out that detection of the PML-RARA fusion links a
specific molecular defect in neoplasia with a characteristic biologic
and clinical response to pharmacologic therapy. It is a useful marker
for the diagnosis of APL and for the identification of patients who may
benefit from retinoid treatment.

PML, the gene involved in the breakpoint on chromosome 15, is a putative
transcription factor: it contains a cysteine-rich motif that resembles a
zinc finger DNA-binding domain common to several classes of
transcriptional factors. Two fusion genes, PML-RARA and RARA-PML, are
formed as a result of the characteristic translocation in APL.
Heterogeneity of the chromosome 15 breakpoints accounts for the diverse
architecture of the PML-RARA mRNAs isolated from different APL patients,
and alternative splicing of PML exons gives rise to multiple isoforms of
the PML-RARA mRNAs even within a single patient. Alcalay et al. (1992)
investigated the organization and expression pattern of the RARA/PML
gene in a series of APL patients. A RARA-PML transcript was present in
most but not all APL patients. Among 70 patients with APL, Diverio et
al. (1992) found an abnormality in intron 2 of the RARA gene in all
cases, with clustering of rearrangements within the 20-kb intronic
region separating exons 2 and 3. A curious difference was found in the
location of breakpoints in males and females: breakpoints at the 5-prime
end of intron 2 of the RARA gene occurred in females and 3-prime
breakpoints predominated in males.

Stock et al. (2000) pointed out that breakpoints in chromosomes 15 and
17 leading to the translocation associated with APL had been described
as located between 15q22 and 15q26, and between 17q11 and 17q25. Most
studies using FISH had indicated the chromosome 15 breakpoint to be in
15q22. Stock et al. (2000) used a combination of G-banding, FISH, and
chromosome microdissection/reverse in situ hybridization to map the
breakpoints precisely to 15q24 and 17q21.1.

Zaccaria et al. (2002) studied a rare example of cryptic translocation
causing APL. Conventional cytogenetics showed a normal karyotype; PCR
showed a typical PML-RARA rearrangement in exon 1. FISH analysis
revealed that a submicroscopic part of chromosome 15 had been inserted
into 17q. Zaccaria et al. (2002) reviewed other cases of cryptic
translocation; their report appeared to be the first in which both pairs
of chromosomes 15 and 17 were cytogenetically normal and a PML-RARA
fusion gene, discovered after FISH analysis, was located on chromosome
17. A poor response to ATRA therapy was postulated to have a
relationship to the atypical translocation.

Abreu e Lima et al. (2005) described a 47-year-old woman with acute
myeloid leukemia who had simultaneous expression of the PML/RARA and the
AML1/ETO (133435) fusion genes. Despite prolonged use of therapeutic
doses of ATRA plus chemotherapy, the patient did not achieve remission,
in contrast to the experience of most patients with such fusion genes.
Conventional cytogenetics in this case showed the presence of only the
t(8;21) translocation. In previous reports of coexpression of these 2
fusion genes there was evidence of the presence of 2 or 3 distinct
leukemic clones harboring either or both chromosomal translocations.

ANIMAL MODEL

Brown et al. (1997) established a transgenic mouse model that documented
the ability of the chimeric PML-RARA gene to initiate leukemogenesis.
The mice developed 2 currently unrelated abnormalities. The first was a
severe papillomatosis of the skin; the second was a disturbance of
hematopoiesis that presented as a partial block of differentiation in
the neutrophil lineage of the transgenic mice and then progressed at low
frequency to overt APL. The leukemia appeared to be a faithful
reproduction of the human disease, including a therapeutic response to
retinoic acid that reflected differentiation of the leukemic cells. Both
the preleukemic state and the overt leukemia could be transplanted into
nontransgenic hosts. Brown et al. (1997) commented that the model should
be useful for exploring the pathogenesis and treatment of APL.

From studies in mice with disruption of the Pml gene, Wang et al. (1998)
demonstrated that normally, PML regulates hemopoietic differentiation
and controls cell growth and tumorigenesis. PML function is essential
for the tumor-growth-suppressive activity of retinoic acid (RA) and for
its ability to induce terminal myeloid differentiation of precursor
cells. PML was needed for the RA-dependent transactivation of the
p21(Waf1/Cip1) gene (116899), which regulates cell cycle progression and
cellular differentiation. These results provided a framework for
understanding the molecular pathogenesis of APL. Whereas APL might
result from the functional interference of PML/RARA with 2 independent
pathways, PML and RXR/RAR, Wang et al. (1998) showed that these proteins
act, at least in part, in the same pathway. Thus, by simultaneously
interacting with RXR and PML, the fusion gene product may inactivate
this pathway at multiple levels, leading to the proliferative advantage
and the block of hemopoietic differentiation that characterize APL.

David et al. (1997) generated an inducible line of transgenic mice in
which the expression of PML-RARA is driven by the metallothionein
promoter. After 5 days zinc stimulation, 27 of 54 mice developed hepatic
preneoplasia and neoplasia including foci of basophilic hepatocytes,
dysplasia, and carcinoma, with a significantly higher incidence of
lesions in females than in males. The rapid onset of liver pathologies
was dependent on overexpression of the transgene, since it was not
detected in noninduced transgenic animals of the same age. The PML-RARA
protein was always present in altered tissues at much higher levels than
in the surrounding normal liver tissues. In addition, overexpression of
PML-RARA resulted in a strong proliferative response in the hepatocytes.
David et al. (1997) concluded that overexpression of PML-RARA
deregulates subproliferation and can induce tumorigenic changes in vivo.

In an animal model of acute promyelocytic leukemia, Padua et al. (2003)
developed a DNA-based vaccine by fusing the human PML-RARA oncogene to
tetanus fragment C (FrC) sequences. Padua et al. (2003) showed for the
first time that a DNA vaccine specifically targeted to an oncoprotein
can have a pronounced effect on survival, both alone and in combination
with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). The survival advantage was
concomitant with time-dependent antibody production and an increase in
interferon-gamma (IFNG; 147570). Padua et al. (2003) also showed that
ATRA therapy on its own triggered an immune response in this model. When
DNA vaccination and conventional ATRA therapy were combined, they
induced protective immune responses against leukemia progression in
mice. Padua et al. (2003) concluded that this may provide a new approach
to improve clinical outcome in human leukemia.

REFERENCE 1. Abreu e Lima, R. S.; Baruffi, M. R.; de Lima, A. S. G.; de Oliveira,
F. M.; de Figueiredo-Pontes, L. L.; Tone, L. G.; Rogatto, S. R.; Falcao,
R. P.; Ferrari Chauffaille, M. de L. L.; Rego, E. M.: The co-expression
of PML/RAR-alpha and AML1/ETO fusion genes is associated with ATRA
resistance. Brit. J. Haemat. 128: 405-409, 2005.

2. Alcalay, M.; Zangrilli, D.; Fagioli, M.; Pandolfi, P. P.; Mencarelli,
A.; Lo Coco, F.; Biondi, A.; Grignani, F.; Pelicci, P. G.: Expression
pattern of the RAR-alpha-PML fusion gene in acute promyelocytic leukemia. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 4840-4844, 1992.

3. Bernardi, R.; Guernah, I.; Jin, D.; Grisendi, S.; Alimonti, A.;
Teruya-Feldstein, J.; Cordon-Cardo, C.; Simon, M. C.; Rafii, S.; Pandolfi,
P. P.: PML inhibits HIF-1-alpha translation and neoangiogenesis through
repression of mTOR. Nature 442: 779-785, 2006.

4. Bernardi, R.; Pandolfi, P. P.: Structure, dynamics and functions
of promyelocytic leukaemia nuclear bodies. Nature Rev. Molec. Cell
Biol. 8: 1006-1016, 2007.

5. Brown, D.; Kogan, S.; Lagasse, E.; Weissman, I.; Alcalay, M.; Pelicci,
P. G.; Atwater, S.; Bishop, J. M.: A PMLRAR-alpha transgene initiates
murine acute promyelocytic leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 2551-2556,
1997.

6. Chang, K.-S.; Fan, Y.-H.; Andreeff, M.; Liu, J.; Mu, Z.-M.: The
PML gene encodes a phosphoprotein associated with the nuclear matrix. Blood 85:
3646-3653, 1995.

7. Cleary, M. L.: Oncogenic conversion of transcription factors by
chromosomal translocations. Cell 66: 619-622, 1991.

8. David, G.; Terris, B.; Marchio, A.; Lavau, C.; Dejean, A.: The
acute promyelocytic leukemia PML-RAR-alpha protein induces hepatic
preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions in transgenic mice. Oncogene 14:
1547-1554, 1997.

9. de The, H.; Chomienne, C.; Lanotte, M.; Degos, L.; Dejean, A.:
The t(15;17) translocation of acute promyelocytic leukaemia fuses
the retinoic acid receptor alpha gene to a novel transcribed locus. Nature 347:
558-561, 1990.

10. de The, H.; Lavau, C.; Marchio, A.; Chomienne, C.; Degos, L.;
Dejean, A.: The PML-RAR-alpha fusion mRNA generated by the t(15;17)
translocation in acute promyelocytic leukemia encodes a functionally
altered RAR. Cell 66: 675-684, 1991.

11. Di Croce, L.; Raker, V. A.; Corsaro, M.; Fazi, F.; Fanelli, M.;
Faretta, M.; Fuks, F.; Lo Coco, F.; Kouzarides, T.; Nervi, C.; Minucci,
S.; Pelicci, P. G.: Methyltransferase recruitment and DNA hypermethylation
of target promoters by an oncogenic transcription factor. Science 295:
1079-1082, 2002.

12. Diverio, D.; Lo Coco, F.; D'Adamo, F.; Biondi, A.; Fagioli, M.;
Grignani, F.; Rambaldi, A.; Rossi, V.; Avvisati, G.; Petti, M. C.;
Testi, A. M.; Liso, V.; Specchia, G.; Fioritoni, G.; Recchia, A.;
Frassoni, F.; Ciolli, S.; Pelicci, P. G.: Identification of DNA rearrangements
at the retinoic acid receptor-alpha (RAR-alpha) locus in all patients
with acute promyelocytic leukemia and mapping of APL breakpoints within
the RAR-alpha second intron. Blood 79: 3331-3336, 1992.

13. Dyck, J. A.; Maul, G. G.; Miller, W. H., Jr.; Chen, J. D.; Kakizuka,
A.; Evans, R. M.: A novel macromolecular structure is a target of
the promyelocyte-retinoic acid receptor oncoprotein. Cell 76: 333-343,
1994.

14. Giorgi, C.; Ito, K.; Lin, H.-K.; Santangelo, C.; Wieckowski, M.
R.; Lebiedzinska, M.; Bononi, A.; Bonora, M.; Duszynski, J.; Bernardi,
R.; Rizzuto, R.; Tacchetti, C.; Pinton, P.; Pandolfi, P. P.: PML
regulates apoptosis at endoplasmic reticulum by modulating calcium
release. Science 330: 1247-1251, 2010.

15. Goddard, A. D.; Borrow, J.; Freemont, P. S.; Solomon, E.: Characterization
of a zinc finger gene disrupted by the t(15;17) in acute promyelocytic
leukemia. Science 254: 1371-1374, 1991.

16. Goddard, A. D.; Yuan, J. Q.; Fairbairn, L.; Dexter, M.; Borrow,
J.; Kozak, C.; Solomon, E.: Cloning of the murine homolog of the
leukemia-associated PML gene. Mammalian Genome 6: 732-737, 1995.

17. Grignani, F.; De Matteis, S.; Nervi, C.; Tomassoni, L.; Gelmetti,
V.; Cioce, M.; Fanelli, M.; Ruthardt, M.; Ferrara, F. F.; Zamir, I.;
Seiser, C.; Grignani, F.; Lazar, M. A.; Minucci, S.; Pelicci, P. G.
: Fusion proteins of the retinoic acid receptor-alpha recruit histone
deacetylase in promyelocytic leukaemia. Nature 391: 815-818, 1998.

18. Grignani, F.; Ferrucci, P. F.; Testa, U.; Talamo, G.; Fagioli,
M.; Alcalay, M.; Mencarelli, A.; Grignani, F.; Peschle, C.; Nicoletti,
I.; Pelicci, P. G.: The acute promyelocytic leukemia-specific PML-RAR-alpha
fusion protein inhibits differentiation and promotes survival of myeloid
precursor cells. Cell 74: 423-431, 1993.

19. Ito, K.; Bernardi, R.; Morotti, A.; Matsuoka, S.; Saglio, G.;
Ikeda, Y.; Rosenblatt, J.; Avigan, D. E.; Teruya-Feldstein, J.; Pandolfi,
P. P.: PML targeting eradicates quiescent leukaemia-initiating cells. Nature 453:
1072-1078, 2008.

20. Khan, M. M.; Nomura, T.; Kim, H.; Kaul, S. C.; Wadhwa, R.; Shinagawa,
T.; Ichikawa-Iwata, E.; Zhong, S.; Pandolfi, P. P.; Ishii, S.: Role
of PML and PML-RAR-alpha in Mad-mediated transcriptional repression. Molec.
Cell 7: 1233-1243, 2001.

21. Kunapuli, P.; Kasyapa, C. S.; Chin, S.-F.; Caldas, C.; Cowell,
J. K.: ZNF198, a zinc finger protein rearranged in myeloproliferative
disease, localizes to the PML nuclear bodies and interacts with SUMO-1
and PML. Exp. Cell Res. 312: 3739-3751, 2006.

22. Lane, A. A.; Ley, T. J.: Neutrophil elastase cleaves PML-RAR-alpha
and is important for the development of acute promyelocytic leukemia
in mice. Cell 115: 305-318, 2003.

23. Lin, H.-K.; Bergmann, S.; Pandolfi, P. P.: Cytoplasmic PML function
in TGF-beta signalling. Nature 431: 205-211, 2004.

24. Lin, R. J.; Evans, R. M.: Acquisition of oncogenic potential
by RAR chimeras in acute promyelocytic leukemia through formation
of homodimers. Molec. Cell 5: 821-830, 2000.

25. Lin, R. J.; Nagy, L.; Inoue, S.; Shao, W.; Miller, W. H., Jr.;
Evans, R. M.: Role of the histone deacetylase complex in acute promyelocytic
leukaemia. Nature 391: 811-814, 1998.

26. Minucci, S.; Maccarana, M.; Cioce, M.; De Luca, P.; Gelmetti,
V.; Segalla, S.; Di Croce, L.; Giavara, S.; Matteucci, C.; Gobbi,
A.; Bianchini, A.; Colombo, E.; Schiavoni, I.; Badaracco, G.; Hu,
X.; Lazar, M. A.; Landsberger, N.; Nervi, C.; Pelicci, P. G.: Oligomerization
of RAR and AML1 transcription factors as a novel mechanism of oncogenic
activation. Molec. Cell 5: 811-820, 2000.

27. Padua, R. A.; Larghero, J.; Robin, M.; le Pogam, C.; Schlageter,
M.-H.; Muszlak, S.; Fric, J.; West, R.; Rousselot, P.; Phan, T. H.;
Mudde, L.; Teisserenc, H.; Carpentier, A. F.; Kogan, S.; Degos, L.;
Pla, M.; Bishop, J. M.; Stevenson, F.; Charron, D.; Chomienne, C.
: PML-RARA-targeted DNA vaccine induces protective immunity in a mouse
model of leukemia. Nature Med. 9: 1413-1417, 2003.

28. Pandolfi, P. P.: Oncogenes and tumor suppressors in the molecular
pathogenesis of acute promyelocytic leukemia. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10:
769-775, 2001.

29. Pearson, M.; Carbone, R.; Sebastiani, C.; Cioce, M.; Fagioli,
M.; Saito, S.; Higashimoto, Y.; Appella, E.; Minucci, S.; Pandolfi,
P. P.; Pelicci, P. G.: PML regulates p53 acetylation and premature
senescence induced by oncogenic Ras. Nature 406: 207-210, 2000.

30. Salomoni, P.; Ferguson, B. J.; Wyllie, A. H.; Rich, T.: New insights
into the role of PML in tumour suppression. Cell Res. 18: 622-640,
2008.

31. Song, M. S.; Salmena, L.; Carracedo, A.; Egia, A.; Lo-Coco, F.;
Teruya-Feldstein, J.; Pandolfi, P. P.: The deubiquitinylation and
localization of PTEN are regulated by a HAUSP-PML network. Nature 455:
813-817, 2008.

32. Stock, A. D.; Dennis, T. R.; Spallone, P. A.: Precise localization
by microdissection/reverse ISH and FISH of the t(15;17)(q24;q21.1)
chromosomal breakpoints associated with acute promyelocytic leukemia. Cancer
Genet. Cytogenet. 119: 15-17, 2000.

33. Tong, J.-H.; Dong, S.; Geng, J.-P.; Huang, W.; Wang, Z.-Y.; Sun,
G.-L.; Chen, S.-J.; Chen, Z.; Larsen, C.-J.; Berger, R.: Molecular
rearrangements of the MYL gene in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL,
M3) define a breakpoint cluster region as well as some molecular variants. Oncogene 7:
311-316, 1992.

34. Trotman, L. C.; Alimonti, A.; Scaglioni, P. P.; Koutcher, J. A.;
Cordon-Cardo, C.; Pandolfi, P. P.: Identification of a tumour suppressor
network opposing nuclear Akt function. Nature 441: 523-536, 2006.

35. Turelli, P.; Doucas, V.; Craig, E.; Mangeat, B.; Klages, N.; Evans,
R.; Kalpana, G.; Trono, D.: Cytoplasmic recruitment of INI1 and PML
on incoming HIV preintegration complexes: interference with early
steps of viral replication. Molec. Cell 7: 1245-1254, 2001.

36. Villa, R.; Morey, L.; Raker, V. A.; Buschbeck, M.; Gutierrez,
A.; De Santis, F.; Corsaro, M.; Varas, F.; Bossi, D.; Minucci, S.;
Pelicci, P. G.; Di Croce, L.: The methyl-CpG binding protein MBD1
is required for PML-RAR-alpha function. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103:
1400-1405, 2006.

37. Wang, Z. G.; Delva, L.; Gaboli, M.; Rivi, R.; Giorgio, M.; Cordon-Cardo,
C.; Grosveld, F.; Pandolfi, P. P.: Role of PML in cell growth and
the retinoic acid pathway. Science 279: 1547-1551, 1998.

38. Yang, S.; Kuo, C.; Bisi, J. E.; Kim, M. K.: PML-dependent apoptosis
after DNA damage is regulated by the checkpoint kinase hCds1/Chk2. Nature
Cell Biol. 4: 865-870, 2002.

39. Zaccaria, A.; Valenti, A.; Toschi, M.; Salvucci, M.; Cipriani,
R.; Ottaviani, E.; Martinelli, G.: Cryptic translocation of PML/RARA
on 17q. A rare event in acute promyelocytic leukemia. Cancer Genet.
Cytogenet. 138: 169-173, 2002.

40. Zhang, X.-W.; Yan, X.-J.; Zhou, Z.-R.; Yang, F.-F.; Wu, Z.-Y.;
Sun, H.-B.; Liang, W.-X.; Song, A.-X.; Lallemand-Breitenbach, V.;
Jeanne, M.; Zhang, Q.-Y.; Yang, H.-Y.; and 9 others: Arsenic trioxide
controls the fate of the PML-RAR-alpha oncoprotein by directly binding
PML. Science 328: 240-243, 2010. Note: Erratum: Science 328: 974
only, 2010.

41. Zhong, S.; Delva, L.; Rachez, C.; Cenciarelli, C.; Gandini, D.;
Zhang, H.; Kalantry, S.; Freedman, L. P.; Pandolfi, P. P.: A RA-dependent,
tumour-growth suppressive transcription complex is the target of the
PML-RAR-alpha and T18 oncoproteins. Nature Genet. 23: 287-295, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/31/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/19/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/25/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/19/2008
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/14/2008
Matthew B. Gross - reorganized: 10/13/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/9/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/8/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/29/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/21/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/25/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/29/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/8/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/19/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/14/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/3/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/12/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/3/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/19/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/1/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/30/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/12/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 6/21/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/29/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/2/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/15/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/1/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/2/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/21/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/30/1990

EDITED terry: 03/14/2013
carol: 6/17/2011
alopez: 2/4/2011
terry: 1/31/2011
wwang: 11/22/2010
mgross: 10/19/2010
alopez: 5/26/2010
terry: 5/25/2010
mgross: 11/19/2008
mgross: 10/28/2008
mgross: 10/14/2008
mgross: 10/13/2008
wwang: 7/17/2008
terry: 7/9/2008
alopez: 9/19/2006
terry: 9/8/2006
alopez: 7/27/2006
terry: 7/24/2006
mgross: 3/29/2006
carol: 4/4/2005
wwang: 3/30/2005
wwang: 3/23/2005
terry: 3/21/2005
tkritzer: 3/17/2005
terry: 1/25/2005
tkritzer: 10/1/2004
terry: 9/29/2004
tkritzer: 1/12/2004
terry: 1/8/2004
mgross: 11/19/2003
mgross: 5/12/2003
mgross: 3/18/2003
terry: 3/14/2003
tkritzer: 3/10/2003
terry: 3/3/2003
alopez: 2/12/2002
terry: 2/12/2002
terry: 11/15/2001
mgross: 7/3/2001
cwells: 6/20/2001
cwells: 6/19/2001
alopez: 5/1/2001
alopez: 4/30/2001
alopez: 7/12/2000
mgross: 6/21/2000
alopez: 6/2/2000
terry: 5/29/2000
alopez: 11/3/1999
alopez: 11/2/1999
mgross: 9/23/1999
terry: 9/15/1999
carol: 10/6/1998
terry: 10/1/1998
dkim: 9/11/1998
alopez: 3/6/1998
terry: 3/2/1998
alopez: 7/9/1997
carol: 6/20/1997
jenny: 4/21/1997
terry: 4/12/1997
mark: 11/30/1995
mark: 10/5/1995
carol: 8/13/1992
carol: 6/16/1992
carol: 5/28/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

615063	TITLE *615063 SECRETOGLOBIN, FAMILY 2B, MEMBER 2; SCGB2B2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the secretoglobin family, such as SCGB2B2, are secreted
proteins of about 10 kD that are found in high concentrations in fluids
of lung, lacrimal gland, salivary gland, prostate, uterus, and other
tissues. Secretoglobins form stable dimers prior to secretion (summary
by Jackson et al., 2011).

MAPPING

Hartz (2013) mapped the SCGB2B2 gene to chromosome 19q13.11 based on an
alignment of the SCGB2B2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK093495) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/30/2013.

2. Jackson, B. C.; Thompson, D. C.; Wright, M. W.; McAndrews, M.;
Bernard, A.; Nebert, D. W.: Update of the human secretoglobin (SCGB)
gene superfamily and an example of 'evolutionary bloom' of androgen-binding
protein genes within the mouse Scgb gene superfamily. Hum. Genomics 5:
691-702, 2011.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/31/2013

EDITED mgross: 01/31/2013

194558	TITLE *194558 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 83; ZNF83
DESCRIPTION 
MAPPING

Marine et al. (1994) assigned the ZNF83 gene (also known as HPF1) to
chromosome 19 by screening a human/rodent hybrid panel and localized the
gene further to 19q13.3-q13.4 by fluorescence in situ hybridization and
digital imaging microscopy.

HISTORY

Conserved structural motifs define large families of nucleic acid
binding proteins in eukaryotes. The C2H2-type zinc finger motif,
conferring both specific RNA and DNA binding activities, was first
detected within the amino acid sequence of the Xenopus transcription
factor IIIA (Miller et al., 1985). Thereafter, vertebrate genomes were
shown to encode hundreds of so-called zinc finger proteins (ZFPs).
Subfamilies were defined on the basis of conserved sequence elements
outside the finger repeat, such as the KRAB domain. Several members of
these subfamilies were found to have a clustered genomic organization.

REFERENCE 1. Marine, J.-C.; Bellefroid, E. J.; Bourguignon, C.; Riviere, M.;
Lecoq, P. J.; Poncelet, D. A.; Szpirer, J.; Martial, J. A.; Szpirer,
C.: Assignment of the human ZNF83 (HPF1) zinc finger gene to chromosome
19q13.3-q13.4. Genomics 21: 285-286, 1994.

2. Miller, J.; McLachlan, A. D.; Klug, A.: Repetitive zinc-binding
domains in the protein transcription factor IIIA from Xenopus oocytes. EMBO
J. 4: 1609-1614, 1985.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/17/1994

EDITED alopez: 07/07/2010
dkim: 6/26/1998
jason: 6/17/1994

142975	TITLE *142975 HOMEOBOX C12; HOXC12
;;HOMEOBOX 3F; HOX3F
DESCRIPTION See 142970.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/22/1990
EDITED mgross: 08/30/2007
terry: 3/18/2004
dkim: 6/26/1998
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 8/22/1990
602322	TITLE *602322 TELOMERASE RNA COMPONENT; TERC
;;TELOMERASE RNA CANDIDATE 3; TRC3;;
TR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Eukaryotic chromosomes are capped with repetitive telomere sequences
that protect the ends from damage and rearrangements. Telomere repeats
are synthesized by telomerase, an enzyme that has both a catalytic
(TERT; 187270) and an RNA component. The RNA component acts as a
template for the addition of telomeric repeat sequences (Feng et al.,
1995).

CLONING

Feng et al. (1995) cloned the 451-nucleotide gene for the telomerase RNA
component, which they designated TRC3. TRC3 copurified with telomerase.
TRC3 was highly expressed in the germline and in tumor cell lines, which
had high telomerase activity, and at lower levels in kidney, prostate,
and liver, which had no detectable telomerase activity.

MAPPING

Soder et al. (1997) mapped the mouse Terc gene to chromosome 3 and,
based on syntenic homology with human chromosomes, suggested that the
human TERC gene is located on 3q21-q28.

GENE FUNCTION

Feng et al. (1995) found that HeLa cells transfected with antisense TRC3
lost telomeric DNA and began to die after 23 to 26 divisions, showing
that telomerase is critical for the long-term proliferation of tumor
cells.

Inhibition or activation of the reverse transcriptase telomerase can
profoundly affect the proliferative capacity of normal cells and
cancers. Mitchell and Collins (2000) elucidated structural requirements
for function of the essential RNA component of human telomerase, TR. Two
motifs within the independently stable H/ACA domain of TR are required
for accumulation of the mature RNA in vivo. However, these motifs can be
substituted by a heterologous H/ACA family RNA. Two additional TR
elements are required both in vivo and in vitro for telomerase catalytic
activity. Surprisingly, these elements independently bind the telomerase
reverse transcriptase. The results established fundamental differences
between vertebrate and ciliate telomerase ribonucleoprotein
architectures.

Mitchell et al. (1999) demonstrated that dyskerin (300126) is associated
not only with H/ACA small nucleolar RNAs but also with human telomerase
RNA, which contains an H/ACA RNA motif. They found that primary
fibroblasts and lymphoblasts from dyskeratosis congenita (DKC;
305000)-affected males were not detectably deficient in conventional
H/ACA small nucleolar RNA accumulation or function. However, DKC cells
had a lower level of telomerase RNA, produced lower levels of telomerase
activity than matched normal cells, and had shorter telomeres. Mitchell
et al. (1999) concluded that the pathology of DKC is consistent with
compromised telomerase function leading to a defect in telomere
maintenance, which may limit the proliferative capacity of human somatic
cells in epithelia and blood.

De Lange and Jacks (1999) provided a comprehensive review of the status
of knowledge concerning the biologic importance of TERC.

Okuda et al. (2002) found no evidence for gender effect on telomere
length at birth and suggested that the longer length of telomeres in
women is due to a slower rate of telomere shortening.

Cohen et al. (2007) purified human telomerase 10(8)-fold, with the final
elution dependent on the enzyme's ability to catalyze nucleotide
addition onto a DNA oligonucleotide of telomeric sequence, thereby
providing specificity for catalytically active telomerase. Mass
spectrometric sequencing of the protein components and molecular size
determination indicated an enzyme composition of 2 molecules each of
telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT; 187270) and TERC.

Cristofari et al. (2007) stated that telomerase accumulates in Cajal
bodies (CBs) and that this localization relies on a CAB box motif (UGAG)
within the loop of a stem-loop structure of TERC. They found that
mutations of the CAB box of human TERC that impaired accumulation of
telomerase in CBs did not affect telomerase catalytic activity in vivo,
but they decreased association of telomerase with telomeres and impaired
telomere extension in human cells. Cristofari et al. (2007) concluded
that localization of telomerase within CBs is required to maintain
telomere length.

Box et al. (2008) showed that in Schizosaccharomyces pombe telomerase
RNA transcripts must be processed to generate functional telomerase.
Characterization of the maturation pathway uncovered an unexpected role
for the spliceosome, which normally catalyzes splicing of pre-messenger
RNA. The first spliceosomal cleavage reaction generates the mature
3-prime end of telomerase RNA (TER1, the functional RNA encoded by the
ter1+ gene), releasing the active form of the RNA without exon ligation.
Blocking the first step or permitting completion of splicing generates
inactive forms of TER1 and causes progressive telomere shortening. Box
et al. (2008) established that 3-prime end processing of TER1 is
critical for telomerase function and described a theretofore unknown
mechanism for RNA maturation that uses the ability of the spliceosome to
mediate site-specific cleavage.

Venteicher et al. (2009) found that TCAB1 (612661) associates with TERT,
established telomerase components dyskerin (300126) and TERC, and small
Cajal body RNAs (scaRNAs), which are involved in modifying splicing
RNAs. Depletion of TCAB1 by using RNA interference prevented TERC from
associating with Cajal bodies, disrupted telomerase-telomere
association, and abrogated telomere synthesis in telomerase. Thus,
Venteicher et al. (2009) concluded that TCAB1 controls telomerase
trafficking and is required for telomere synthesis in human cancer
cells.

A cardinal feature of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS) is
acquisition of indefinite self-renewal capacity, which is accompanied by
induction of the telomerase reverse transcriptase gene TERT. Agarwal et
al. (2010) investigated whether defects in telomerase function would
limit derivation maintenance of iPS cells from patients with
dyskeratosis congenita (DKC; see 127550). The authors showed that
reprogrammed dendritic congenita cells overcome a critical limitation in
TERC levels to restore telomere maintenance and self-renewal. Agarwal et
al. (2010) discovered that TERC upregulation is a feature of the
pluripotent state, that several telomerase components are targeted by
pluripotency-associated transcription factors, and that in autosomal
dominant DKC, transcriptional silencing accompanies a 3-prime deletion
at the TERC locus. Agarwal et al. (2010) concluded that their results
demonstrated that reprogramming restores telomere elongation in DKC
cells despite genetic lesions affecting telomerase, and showed that
strategies to increase TERC expression may be therapeutically beneficial
in DKC.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Autosomal Dominant Dyskeratosis Congenita 1

Vulliamy et al. (2001) identified 3 different mutations in TERC in 3
families segregating autosomal dominant dyskeratosis congenita-1 (DKCA1;
127550). The first mutation (602322.0001) resulted in an 821-bp deletion
including the 74 3-prime basepairs of the coding region. The deleted
region is flanked by a 4-bp direct repeat, AGGA. Lymphocyte cell lines
derived from affected individuals in this family were examined by
Northern blot analysis. No difference was found between cell lines from
affected and unaffected individuals; however, RT-PCR using a
mutant-specific 3-prime primer abutting the point of the deletion showed
that the mutant transcript is barely detectable. Telomere length in
affected family members was significantly shorter than in normal
patients, even in young children with manifestation of disease. The
second mutation was a single-basepair substitution at nucleotide 408
(602322.0002). This mutation did not affect transcript levels, but is
predicted to destabilize the stem structure in the CR7 domain. A third
family had a 2-bp substitution at nucleotides 107 to 108 (602322.0003).
This mutation also did not affect transcript levels but appears to
destabilize a hairpin stem region in the pseudoknot region of the
proposed secondary structure of TERC. This region is essential for
telomerase activity and seems to be involved in interaction with
telomere reverse transcriptase (TERT; 187270).

Theimer et al. (2003) demonstrated that mutations in the TERC gene that
result in autosomal dominant dyskeratosis congenita cause changes in the
structural equilibrium of RNA polymerase. They reported structural and
thermodynamic studies of wildtype and mutant human telomerase subdomains
that provided 3D structural insight into the molecular basis of the
disease. The work revealed the presence of a phylogenetically conserved
hairpin in equilibrium with a pseudoknot in the telomerase pseudoknot
domain, which is stabilized by a unique uridine helix. Theimer et al.
(2003) proposed that interconversion between the hairpin and pseudoknot
conformations is functionally important, and that pseudoknot mutations
in dyskeratosis congenita affect this interconversion.

Vulliamy et al. (2004) demonstrated that anticipation occurs in
autosomal dominant dyskeratosis congenita and that the molecular basis
resides in progressive telomere shortening in successive generations. In
8 families, the disease became more severe in succeeding generations. Of
affected parents, 7 of 12 were asymptomatic, ranging in age from 36 to
61 years. In these cases, dyskeratosis congenita was diagnosed only by
the identification of a TERC mutation; subtle signs of the disease were
often detected subsequently. For the 5 remaining affected parents, the
median age at which disease features were first identified was 37 years.
Of the affected children, only 5 of 15 remained asymptomatic; they were
aged 3, 7, 11, 14, and 20 years and were diagnosed only through mutation
analysis. For the remaining 10 affected children, symptoms presented at
a median age of 14.5 years. Vulliamy et al. (2004) also observed a
number of individuals who had a bimodal distribution of telomere length.
A bimodal distribution had previously been observed in human fibroblast
cell lines where the short and long telomeres were linked to maternal
and paternal alleles. The difference in telomere length between the 2
alleles seemed to be maintained from the zygote throughout development
(Baird et al., 2003). Thus, another mechanism was added to the
phenomenon of disease anticipation. The only convincing mechanism
theretofore described involved expansion of triplet repeats as observed
in several neurodegenerative disorders. There are clear analogies here
with Terc knockout mice: parental mice have very long telomeres, and in
the first generation, Terc -/- mice are asymptomatic. Features of
telomere shortening, which overlap the clinical features seen in
dyskeratosis congenita, develop only in the fourth generation. By the
sixth generation, these mice become infertile.

Goldman et al. (2005) studied telomere dynamics over 3 generations in a
32-member extended family with autosomal dominant dyskeratosis congenita
due to TERC gene deletion. They found that in gene deletion carriers,
paternal and maternal telomeres were similarly short and similar in
length to those of the affected parent. In children of affected parents
who had normal TERC genes, parental telomeres were again similar in
length, but 2 generations appeared to be necessary to fully restore
normal telomere length. Goldman et al. (2005) concluded that these
results were consistent with a model in which telomerase preferentially
acts on the shortest telomeres. When TERC is limiting, this preference
leads to the accelerated shortening of longer telomeres.

Jongmans et al. (2012) observed somatic reversion of the mutant TERC
allele in blood cells of 2 affected members of a family with variable
manifestations of DKCA1 due to a heterozygous germline TERC mutation
(602322.0011). In both cases, the reversion occurred by acquired
uniparental disomy of chromosome 3q, including TERC, during mitotic
recombination. Four additional cases of a mosaic-reversion pattern in
blood cells were found among a cohort of 17 patients with germline TERC
mutations. None of the patients with somatic mosaic reversion had bone
marrow failure, and all had a small deletion in the TERC gene. The
findings indicated that revertant somatic mosaicism is a recurrent event
in DKCA1, which has important implications for diagnostic testing, often
performed on blood cells, and may help explain the variable phenotype of
the disorder.

- Telomere-Related Pulmonary Fibrosis and/or Bone Marrow Failure
2

Bone marrow failure in X-linked dyskeratosis congenita is caused by
mutations in the nucleolar protein dyskerin. This protein binds to a
particular class of small nucleolar RNAs called H/ACA as well as to
telomerase RNA. As discussed above, the very rare autosomal dominant
form of dyskeratosis congenita is caused by mutations in the RNA
component of telomerase, encoded by the TERC gene, and such patients
consequently have very short telomeres (Vulliamy et al., 2001). Patients
with idiopathic aplastic anemia and bone marrow failure (614743) also
have shorter telomeres than normal controls (Ball et al., 1998). This
prompted Vulliamy et al. (2002) to perform mutation screens of the TERC
gene in patients with aplastic anemia. They identified TERC mutations in
2 of 17 patients with idiopathic aplastic anemia, in 3 of 27 patients
with constitutional aplastic anemia, and in none of 214 normal controls.
Furthermore, patients with TERC mutations had significantly shorter
telomeres than age-matched controls. These data indicated that in a
subset of patients with aplastic anemia, the disorder may be associated
with a genetic lesion in the telomere maintenance pathway. Mutations
were heterozygous in each case. The 58G-A mutation (602322.0004) was
found in 3 of the patients, 2 of whom were categorized as having
idiopathic aplastic anemia and 1 as having constitutional aplastic
anemia (associated with short stature and phimosis). The age at first
clinical presentation in these 3 patients varied from 5 to 53 years.
This variability in the severity and age of onset in patients with the
same mutation highlighted the role of other genetic or environmental
factors in the clinical phenotype. Vulliamy et al. (2002) observed that
in X-linked dyskeratosis congenita, which is also characterized by
aplastic anemia, the recurrent mutation 1058C-T (300126.0006) is
associated with a wide variation in the age at onset of aplastic anemia
from 1 to 22 years. The constitutional nature of aplastic anemia can
sometimes be overlooked. In the patient of Vulliamy et al. (2002) with
the 72C-G mutation (602322.0005), the presence of pronounced
osteoporosis, discovered because of a bone fracture, led to the
categorization of constitutional rather than idiopathic disease.
Similarly, another patient with a 4-bp deletion in TERC (602322.0006)
had aplastic anemia alone; he would have been classified as idiopathic
if it were not for his sister who also had aplastic anemia.

In 2 families in which an adult was initially diagnosed with acquired
aplastic anemia, Fogarty et al. (2003) detected novel point mutations in
the TERC gene in affected members of both families: a heterozygous
116C-T transition (602322.0007) in 1 family, and a heterozygous 204C-G
transversion (602322.0008) in the other. Affected members of both
families had no physical signs of dyskeratosis congenita and nearly
normal blood counts, but all had severely shortened telomeres, reduced
hematopoietic function, and elevated serum erythropoietin and
thrombopoietin.

Mutations causing autosomal dominant dyskeratosis congenita and aplastic
anemia include base changes in a highly conserved putative telomerase
RNA pseudoknot. Comolli et al. (2002) described functional, structural,
and energetic properties of this structure. They demonstrated that the
pseudoknot domain exists in 2 alternative states of nearly equal
stability in solution: a structured P2b loop domain and the pseudoknot
formed by its pairing with P3. They showed that a 2-base mutation,
107GC-108AG (602322.0003), in 1 gene copy in a family with dyskeratosis
congenita abrogated telomerase activity. This mutation hyperstabilizes
the P2b intraloop structure, blocking pseudoknot formation. Conversely,
when the P3 pseudoknot pairing is hyperstabilized by deleting a
conserved bulge in P3, telomerase activity also decreases. Comolli et
al. (2002) proposed that the P2b/P3 pseudoknot domain acts as a
molecular switch, and interconversion between its 2 states is important
for telomerase function. Phylogenetic covariation in the P2b and P3
sequences of 35 species provided a compelling set of 'natural'
compensatory basepairing changes supporting the existence of the crucial
molecular switch.

Armanios et al. (2007) screened 73 probands with familial idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis (614743) for mutations in the TERT or TERC genes and
identified 5 mutations in TERT (see, e.g., 187270.0010) and 1 in TERC
(602322.0009) in 6 probands, respectively. Average telomere length was
significantly less in probands and asymptomatic mutation carriers than
in relatives who did not carry the mutation (p = 0.006), suggesting that
asymptomatic carriers may also be at risk for the disease.

Alder et al. (2008) screened 100 consecutive patients with sporadic
idiopathic interstitial pneumonia, the majority of whom had been
diagnosed with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, for mutations in the TERT
and TERC genes and identified a mutation in 1 patient (602322.0010) that
was associated with short telomeres, led to a loss of activity, and was
not found in 194 healthy controls.

- Other Associations

For a discussion of a possible association between mean leukocyte
telomere length and genetic variation near the TERC locus, see 609113.

ANIMAL MODEL

Lee et al. (1998) investigated the role of the enzyme telomerase in
highly proliferative organs in successive generations of mice lacking
telomerase RNA. Late-generation animals exhibited defective
spermatogenesis, with increased programmed cell death (apoptosis) and
decreased proliferation in the testis. Proliferative capacity of
hematopoietic cells in the bone marrow and spleen was also compromised.
These progressively adverse effects coincided with substantial erosion
of telomeres and fusion and loss of chromosomes. These findings
indicated an essential role for telomerase, and hence telomeres, in the
maintenance of genomic integrity and in the long-term viability of
high-renewal organ systems.

To examine the role of telomerase in normal and neoplastic growth,
Blasco et al. (1997) deleted the telomerase RNA component from the mouse
germline. Terc -/- mice lacked detectable telomerase activity yet were
viable for the 6 generations analyzed. Telomerase-deficient cells could
be immortalized in culture and transformed by viral oncogenes, and
generated tumors in nude mice following transformation. Telomeres were
shown to shorten at a rate of 4.8 +/- 2.4 kb per Terc -/- generation.
Cells from the fourth Terc -/- generation onward possessed chromosome
ends lacking detectable telomere repeats, aneuploidy, and chromosomal
abnormalities, including end-to-end fusions. These results indicated
that telomerase is essential for telomere length maintenance but is not
required for establishment of cell lines, oncogenic transformation, or
tumor formation in mice.

To examine the role of telomerase in telomere maintenance and cellular
viability, Niida et al. (1998) established Terc-deficient embryonic stem
(ES) cells. It had been known that telomerase activity is absent in
cells from Terc knockout mice. Although telomere shortening had been
observed in the Terc-deficient cells from first to sixth generation
animals, whether telomerase-dependent telomere maintenance was essential
for cellular viability remained to be elucidated. Niida et al. (1998)
examined Terc-deficient ES cells under long-term culture conditions.
During their continual telomere shortening, the growth rate of
Terc-deficient ES cells was gradually reduced after more than 300
divisions. An impaired growth rate was maintained to approximately 450
divisions, and then cell growth virtually stopped.

Rudolph et al. (1999) studied a variety of physiologic processes in an
aging cohort of Terc -/- mice. Loss of telomere function did not elicit
a full spectrum of classic pathophysiologic symptoms of aging.
Age-dependent telomere shortening and accompanying genetic instability
were, however, associated with shortened life span, as well as a reduced
capacity to respond to stresses such as wound healing and hematopoietic
ablation. In addition, the authors found an increased incidence of
spontaneous malignancies. These findings demonstrated a critical role
for telomere length in the overall fitness, reserve, and well being of
the aging organism.

Artandi et al. (2000) monitored the cancer phenotype and cytogenetics of
large cohorts of telomerase-deficient p53 (191170) mutant mice. Mice
lacking the RNA component of telomerase (mTERC) exhibit progressive
telomere shortening and ultimately chromosomal instability (end-to-end
fusions) as a function of age and of successive generational matings. In
generation 1 and 2 mTERC -/- p53 -/- mice that lacked telomerase but
retained normal telomere function, median tumor incidence was similar to
that of mTERC +/+ p53 -/- and mTERC +/- p53 -/- controls. In contrast,
in later generations the progressive decline in telomere function
correlated with decreasing tumor latency. Similarly, in p53 +/- cohorts,
median tumor latency decreased progressively as telomeres became short
and dysfunctional. Telomere attrition in aging telomerase-deficient p53
mutant mice promotes the development of epithelial cancers by a process
of fusion-bridge breakage that leads to the formation of complex
nonreciprocal translocations - a classic cytogenetic feature of human
carcinomas. Artandi et al. (2000) concluded that their data suggest a
model in which telomere dysfunction brought about by continual
epithelial renewal during life generates the massive ploidy changes
associated with the development of epithelial cancers.

Wong et al. (2000) used the telomerase-deficient mouse, null for the
telomerase RNA gene, Terc, to assess the role of telomerase and telomere
function in the cellular and organismal response to ionizing radiation.
Although the loss of telomerase activity per se had no discernible
impact on the response to ionizing radiation, the emergence of telomere
dysfunction in late-generation Terc -/- mice imparted a radiosensitivity
syndrome associated with accelerated mortality. On the cellular level,
the gastrointestinal crypt stem cells and primary thymocytes showed
increased rates of apoptosis, and mouse embryonic fibroblasts showed
diminished dose-dependent clonogenic survival. The radiosensitivity of
telomere dysfunctional cells correlated with delayed DNA break repair
kinetics, persistent chromosomal breaks, and cytogenetic profiles
characterized by complex chromosomal aberrations and massive
fragmentation.

Inhibition of telomerase has been proposed to limit the growth of cancer
cells by triggering telomere shortening and cell death. Telomere
maintenance by telomerase is sufficient, in some cell types, to allow
immortal growth. Telomerase has been shown to cooperate with oncogenes
in transforming cultured primary human cells into neoplastic cells,
suggesting that telomerase activation contributes to malignant
transformation. Moreover, telomerase inhibition in human tumor cell
lines using dominant-negative versions of TERT leads to telomere
shortening and cell death. These findings have led to the proposition
that telomerase inhibition may result in cessation of tumor growth. The
absence of telomerase from most normal cells supports the potential
efficacy of anti-telomerase drugs for tumor therapy, as its inhibition
is unlikely to have toxic effects. Gonzalez-Suarez et al. (2000) showed
that late-generation Terc -/- mice, which have short telomeres and are
telomerase-deficient, are resistant to tumor development in multistage
skin carcinogenesis.

To investigate the processes that trigger cellular responses to telomere
dysfunction, Hemann et al. (2001) crossed Tr -/- generation-6 mice that
had short telomeres with mice heterozygous for telomerase (Tr +/-) that
had long telomeres. The phenotype of the telomerase null offspring was
similar to that of the late-generation parent, although only half of the
chromosomes were short. Spectral karyotyping analysis revealed that loss
of telomere function occurred preferentially on chromosomes with
critically short telomeres. These data indicated that it is not the
average but rather the shortest telomeres that constitute telomere
dysfunction and limit cellular survival in the absence of telomerase.

Wong et al. (2003) examined the impact of Atm deficiency as a function
of progressive telomere attrition at both the cellular and
whole-organism level in mice doubly null for Atm and Terc. These
compound mutants showed increased telomere erosion and genomic
instability, yet they experienced a substantial elimination of T-cell
lymphomas associated with Atm deficiency. A generalized proliferation
defect was evident in all cell types and tissues examined, and this
defect extended to tissue stem/progenitor cell compartments, thereby
providing a basis for progressive multiorgan system compromise,
accelerated aging, and premature death. Wong et al. (2003) showed that
Atm deficiency and telomere dysfunction act together to impair cellular
and whole-organism viability, thus supporting the view that aspects of
ataxia-telangiectasia (208900) pathophysiology are linked to the
functional state of telomeres and its adverse effects on stem/progenitor
cell reserves.

Goldman et al. (2005) noted that there are important differences in
telomere maintenance between mouse and human. Compared with humans,
laboratory mice have long telomeres. In addition, telomerase is
constitutively active in most murine tissues, whereas in humans
telomerase activity is greatly diminished in most somatic cells with the
exception of stem cells, their immediate progeny, and activated
lymphocytes and monocytes.

Hockemeyer et al. (2008) noted that mice lacking components of
telomerase fail to show phenotypes typical of DC. They developed a mouse
model in which key characteristics of DC were induced by enhanced
telomere degradation. Mice lacking the shelterin component Pot1b
(606478) (Pot1b -/-) and also deficient in Terc (Terc +/-) developed
progressive bone marrow failure, hyperpigmentation, and nail
abnormalities. Bone marrow failure was fatal between 4 and 5 months of
age in Pot1b -/- Terc +/- mice.

Begus-Nahrmann et al. (2009) analyzed the functional consequences of
conditional deletion of p53 (191170) in late-generation telomerase
knockout mice (Terc-null). Intestinal deletion of p53 shortened the life
span of telomere-dysfunctional mice without inducing tumor formation. In
contrast to deletion of p21 (116899), which elongates life span of
telomere-dysfunctional mice, the deletion of p53 impaired the depletion
of chromosomal-instable intestinal stem cells in aging
telomere-dysfunctional mice. These instable stem cells contributed to
epithelial regeneration leading to an accumulation of chromosomal
instability, increased apoptosis, altered epithelial cell
differentiation, and premature intestinal failure. Begus-Nahrmann et al.
(2009) concluded that their results provided the first experimental
evidence for an organ system in which p53-dependent mechanisms prevent
tissue destruction in response to telomere dysfunction by depleting
genetically instable stem cells.

Armanios et al. (2009) generated wildtype mice with short telomeres. In
these mice, Armanios et al. (2009) identified hematopoietic and immune
defects that resembled those present in patients with dyskeratosis
congenita (see 305000). Patients with dyskeratosis congenita have a
premature aging syndrome that can be caused by mutations in the RNA or
catalytic component of telomerase (TERC or TERT, 187270). When mice with
short telomeres were interbred, telomere length was only incrementally
restored, and even several generations later, wildtype mice with short
telomeres still displayed degenerative defects. Armanios et al. (2009)
concluded that their findings implicated telomere length as a unique
heritable trait and demonstrated that short telomeres are sufficient to
mediate the degenerative defects of aging.

Sahin et al. (2011) used transcriptomic network analyses in mice null
for either Tert or Terc, which exhibit telomere dysfunction, to identify
common mechanisms operative in hematopoietic stem cells, heart, and
liver. Their studies revealed profound repression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARG; 601487), coactivator-1
alpha and beta (PCG1-alpha, 604517 and PGC1-beta, 608886), and the
downstream network. Consistent with PGCs as master regulators of
mitochondrial physiology and metabolism, telomere dysfunction was
associated with impaired mitochondrial biogenesis and function,
decreased gluconeogenesis, cardiomyopathy, and increased reactive oxygen
species. In the setting of telomere dysfunction, enforced Tert or
PGC1-alpha expression or germline deletion of p53 substantially restored
PGC network expression, mitochondrial respiration, cardiac function, and
gluconeogenesis. Sahin et al. (2011) demonstrated that telomere
dysfunction activates p53 which in turn binds and represses PGC1-alpha
and PGC1-beta promoters, thereby forging a direct link between telomere
and mitochondrial biology. Sahin et al. (2011) proposed that this
telomere-p53-PGC axis contributes to organ and metabolic failure and to
diminishing organismal fitness in the setting of telomere dysfunction.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT, 1
TERC, 821-BP DEL

In a large family with autosomal dominant dyskeratosis congenita-1
(DKCA1; 127550), Vulliamy et al. (2001) identified an 821-bp deletion on
chromosome 3q that removes the 3-prime 74 basepairs of TERC. This
mutation was identified in all affected family members in the
heterozygous state and was not identified in any unaffected family
members, nor in a panel of 50 unrelated individuals.

.0002
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT, 1
TERC, 408C-G

In a large family with autosomal dominant dyskeratosis congenita-1
(127550), Vulliamy et al. (2001) identified a C-to-G substitution at
nucleotide 408 of the TERC gene. In this family the father had only mild
hematologic abnormalities, whereas his children, ages 10 and 12 years,
had severe bone marrow failure in association with other somatic
abnormalities. This mutation was associated with a wildtype level of
transcript, and was not identified in a panel of 50 unrelated
individuals tested.

.0003
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT, 1
TERC, 107/8GC-AG

In a large family with autosomal dominant dyskeratosis congenita-1
(127550), Vulliamy et al. (2001) identified a GC-to-AG substitution at
nucleotides 107 to 108 of the TERC gene. This mutation was present in
all affected family members and was not identified in unaffected family
members; it was also not identified in a panel of 50 unrelated
individuals tested. The transcript was present at wildtype levels.

.0004
BONE MARROW FAILURE, TELOMERE-RELATED, 2
TERC, 58G-A

Vulliamy et al. (2002) found a 58G-A transition in the TERC gene in a
22-year-old man with telomere-related bone marrow failure-2 (614743),
short stature, and phimosis with negative family history; and in 2
unrelated patients, a 5-year-old boy and a 53-year-old woman with
nonsevere aplastic anemia and no indications of constitutional
involvement.

.0005
BONE MARROW FAILURE, TELOMERE-RELATED, 2
TERC, 72C-G

Vulliamy et al. (2002) found a 72C-G transversion in the TERC gene in a
33-year-old man with telomere-related bone marrow failure-2 (614743) and
severe osteoporosis.

.0006
BONE MARROW FAILURE, TELOMERE-RELATED, 2
TERC, 4-BP DEL, 110GACT

In a 26-year-old man and his sister with telomere-related bone marrow
failure-2 (614743), Vulliamy et al. (2002) found a 4-bp deletion
(110-113GACT) in the TERC gene.

.0007
BONE MARROW FAILURE, TELOMERE-RELATED, 2
TERC, 116C-T

In 2 families with autosomal dominant dyskeratosis congenita-1 (127550),
in which an adult was initially diagnosed with acquired aplastic anemia,
Fogarty et al. (2003) identified heterozygous point mutations in the
TERC gene in affected members of both families: a 116C-T transition in
the pseudoknot domain (CR2/CR3) in 1 family, and a 204C-G transversion
(602322.0008) in the other. Affected members of both families had no
physical signs of dyskeratosis congenita and nearly normal blood counts,
but all had severely shortened telomeres, reduced hematopoietic
function, and elevated serum erythropoietin and thrombopoietin. Neither
mutation was found in 194 phenotypically normal individuals.

.0008
PULMONARY FIBROSIS AND/OR BONE MARROW FAILURE, TELOMERE-RELATED, 2
TERC, 204C-G

See 602322.0007 and Fogarty et al. (2003).

Parry et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous 204C-G transversion in the
TERC gene in 3 members of a family with telomere-related pulmonary
fibrosis and/or bone marrow failure-2 (614743). The telomere length in
mutation carriers was less than 1% of control, and the mutation was
demonstrated to result in compromised telomerase activity.

.0009
PULMONARY FIBROSIS AND BONE MARROW FAILURE, TELOMERE-RELATED, 2
TERC, 98G-A

In a female nonsmoker with telomere-related pulmonary fibrosis-2
(614743) who was diagnosed at 60 years of age and who died at age 66
years, Armanios et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for a 98G-A
transition at a highly conserved site in the TERC gene, predicted to
impair base pairing in a helix of the essential pseudoknot domain.
Reconstitution of telomerase with the mutant 98A allele revealed severe
impairment of activity. The mutation was not found in 194 healthy
controls. Six family members had died of pulmonary fibrosis, including
the proband's mother; 3 died from aplastic anemia, and 1 individual died
from acute myeloid leukemia, probably in the setting of aplastic anemia.

.0010
PULMONARY FIBROSIS, TELOMERE-RELATED, 2
TERC, 325G-T

In a patient with telomere-related pulmonary fibrosis-2 (614743), Alder
et al. (2008) identified heterozygosity for a 325G-T transversion in the
TERC gene, predicted to disrupt the conserved P5 helix. Younger
asymptomatic sibs of the proband also carried the mutation, which was
associated with short telomeres and led to a loss of activity as
quantitated by the direct telomerase activity assay. The mutation was
not found in 194 healthy controls.

.0011
DYSKERATOSIS CONGENITA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT, 1
TERC, 4-BP DEL, NT54

In 7 members of a Dutch family with autosomal dominant dyskeratosis
congenita (127550), Jongmans et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous
4-bp deletion (54_57del) in the TERC gene. The proband was a 26-year-old
man with multiple features of the disorder, including dystrophic nails,
reticular pigmentation of the neck and chest, gray lock of hair,
aplastic anemia, pulmonary fibrosis, liver disease, and avascular
necrosis of the hip. The family history was positive for pulmonary
fibrosis, cirrhosis, and aplastic anemia. Although the mutation
segregated with the disease, the mutation load was decreased in blood of
the proband's father and the father's brother, both of whom had disease
limited to pulmonary fibrosis. The findings suggested somatic reversion
of the mutated allele to a normal state. SNP analysis of the blood from
the father and uncle showed that both had an acquired uniparental disomy
of chromosome 3q, including the TERC gene. Detailed blood analysis of 1
of the brothers showed 2 different mosaic reversion patterns in B cells,
granulocytes, and monocytes. T cells showed heterozygous levels of the
mutant allele, consistent with the longer lifespan of these cells. Thus,
mitotic recombination explained the reversion and phenotypic variability
in the brothers.

.0012
PULMONARY FIBROSIS AND/OR BONE MARROW FAILURE, TELOMERE-RELATED, 2
TERC, 143G-A

In 3 members of a family spanning 3 generations with telomere-related
pulmonary fibrosis and/or bone marrow failure-2 (614743), Parry et al.
(2011) identified a heterozygous 143G-A transition in the TERC gene. One
patient had pulmonary fibrosis, 1 had pulmonary fibrosis and liver
disease, and 1 had bone marrow failure.

.0013
BONE MARROW FAILURE, TELOMERE-RELATED, 2
TERC, 212C-G

In a father and son with telomere-related bone marrow failure-2
(614743), Kirwan et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous 212C-G
transversion in the TERC gene. The son had severe aplastic anemia,
whereas the father presented with myelodysplastic syndrome at age 45
years. In vitro studies showed less than 1% telomerase activity, and
telomeres in the father were very short. The findings suggested that
constitutional TERC mutations are associated with the development of
myelodysplastic syndrome.

REFERENCE 1. Agarwal, S.; Loh, Y.-H.; McLoughlin, E. M.; Huang, J.; Park, I-H.;
Miller, J. D.; Huo, H.; Okuka, M.; dos Reis, R. M.; Loewer, S.; Hg,
H.-H.; Keefe, D. L.; Goldman, F. D.; Klingelhutz, A. J.; Liu, L.;
Daley, G. Q.: Telomere elongation in induced pluripotent stem cells
from dyskeratosis congenita patients. Nature 464: 292-296, 2010.

2. Alder, J. K.; Chen, J. J.-L.; Lancaster, L.; Danoff, S.; Su, S.;
Cogan, J. D.; Vulto, I.; Xie, M.; Qi, X.; Tuder, R. M.; Phillips,
J. A., III; Lansdorp, P. M.; Loyd, J. E.; Armanios, M. Y.: Short
telomeres are a risk factor for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 13051-13056, 2008.

3. Armanios, M.; Alder, J. K.; Parry, E. M.; Karim, B.; Strong, M.
A.; Greider, C. W.: Short telomeres are sufficient to cause the degenerative
defects associated with aging. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 85: 823-832, 2009.

4. Armanios, M. Y.; Chen, J. J.-L.; Cogan, J. D.; Alder, J. K.; Ingersoll,
R. G.; Markin, C.; Lawson, W. E.; Xie, M.; Vulto, I.; Phillips, J.
A., III; Lansdorp, P. M.; Greider, C. W.; Loyd, J. E.: Telomerase
mutations in families with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. New Eng.
J. Med. 356: 1317-1326, 2007.

5. Artandi, S. E.; Chang, S.; Lee, S.-L.; Alson, S.; Gottlieb, G.
J.; Chin, L.; DePinho, R. A.: Telomere dysfunction promotes non-reciprocal
translocations and epithelial cancers in mice. Nature 406: 641-645,
2000.

6. Baird, D. M.; Rowson, J.; Wynford-Thomas, D.; Kipling, D.: Extensive
allelic variation and ultrashort telomeres in senescent human cells. Nature
Genet. 33: 203-207, 2003.

7. Ball, S. E.; Gibson, F. M.; Rizzo, S.; Tooze, J. A.; Marsh, J.
C. W.; Gordon-Smith, E. C.: Progressive telomere shortening in aplastic
anemia. Blood 91: 3582-3592, 1998.

8. Begus-Nahrmann, Y.; Lechel, A.; Obenauf, A. C.; Nalapareddy, K.;
Peit, E.; Hoffmann, E.; Schlaudraff, F.; Liss, B.; Schirmacher, P.;
Kestler, H.; Danenberg, E.; Barker, N.; Clevers, H.; Speicher, M.
R.; Rudolph, K. L.: p53 deletion impairs clearance of chromosomal-instable
stem cells in aging telomere-dysfunctional mice. Nature Genet. 41:
1138-1143, 2009.

9. Blasco, M. A.; Lee, H.-W.; Hande, M. P.; Samper, E.; Lansdorp,
P. M.; DePinho, R. A.; Greider, C. W.: Telomere shortening and tumor
formation by mouse cells lacking telomerase RNA. Cell 91: 25-34,
1997.

10. Box, J. A.; Bunch, J. T.; Tang, W.; Baumann, P.: Spliceosomal
cleavage generates the 3-prime end of telomerase RNA. Nature 456:
910-914, 2008.

11. Cohen, S. B.; Graham, M. E.; Lovrecz, G. O.; Bache, N.; Robinson,
P. J.; Reddel, R. R.: Protein composition of catalytically active
human telomerase from immortal cells. Science 315: 1850-1853, 2007.

12. Comolli, L. R.; Smirnov, I.; Xu, L.; Blackburn, E. H.; James,
T. L.: A molecular switch underlies a human telomerase disease. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 16998-17003, 2002.

13. Cristofari, G.; Adolf, E.; Reichenbach, P.; Sikora, K.; Terns,
R. M.; Terns, M. P.; Lingner, J.: Human telomerase RNA accumulation
in Cajal bodies facilitates telomerase recruitment to telomeres and
telomere elongation. Molec. Cell 27: 882-889, 2007.

14. de Lange, T.; Jacks, T.: For better or worse? Telomerase inhibition
and cancer. Cell 98: 273-275, 1999.

15. Feng, J.; Funk, W. D.; Wang, S.-S.; Weinrich, S. L.; Avilion,
A. A.; Chiu, C.-P.; Adams, R. R.; Chang, E.; Allsopp, R. C.; Yu, J.;
Le, S.; West, M. D.; Harley, C. B.; Andrews, W. H.; Greider, C. W.;
Villeponteau, B.: The RNA component of human telomerase. Science 269:
1236-1241, 1995.

16. Fogarty, P. F.; Yamaguchi, H.; Wiestner, A.; Baerlocher, G. M.;
Sloand, E.; Zeng, W. S.; Read, E. J.; Lansdorp, P. M.; Young, N. S.
: Late presentation of dyskeratosis congenita as apparently acquired
aplastic anaemia due to mutations in telomerase RNA. Lancet 362:
1628-1630, 2003.

17. Goldman, F.; Bouarich, R.; Kulkarni, S.; Freeman, S.; Du, H.-Y.;
Harrington, L.; Mason, P. J.; Londono-Vallejo, A.; Bessler, M.: The
effect of TERC haploinsufficiency on the inheritance of telomere length. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 17119-17124, 2005.

18. Gonzalez-Suarez, E.; Samper, E.; Flores, J. M.; Blasco, M. A.
: Telomerase-deficient mice with short telomeres are resistant to
skin tumorigenesis. Nature Genet. 26: 114-117, 2000.

19. Hemann, M. T.; Strong, M. A.; Hao, L.-Y.; Greider, C. W.: The
shortest telomere, not average telomere length, is critical for cell
viability and chromosome stability. Cell 107: 67-77, 2001.

20. Hockemeyer, D.; Palm, W.; Wang, R. C.; Couto, S. S.; de Lange,
T.: Engineered telomere degradation models dyskeratosis congenita. Genes
Dev. 22: 1773-1785, 2008.

21. Jongmans, M. C. J.; Verwiel, E. T. P.; Heijdra, Y.; Vulliamy,
T.; Kamping, E. J.; Hehir-Kwa, J. Y.; Bongers, E. M. H. F.; Pfundt,
R.; van Emst, L.; van Leeuwen, F. N.; van Gassen, K. L. I.; Geurts
van Kessel, A.; Dokal, I.; Hoogerbrugge, N.; Ligtenberg, M. J. L.;
Kuiper, R. P.: Revertant somatic mosaicism by mitotic recombination
in dyskeratosis congenita. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90: 426-433, 2012.

22. Kirwan, M.; Vulliamy, T.; Marrone, A.; Walne, A. J.; Beswick,
R.; Hillmen, B.; Kelly, R.; Stewart, A.; Bowen, D.; Schonland, S.
O.; Whittle, A. M.; McVerry, A.; Gilleece, M.; Dokal, I.: Defining
the pathogenic role of telomerase mutations in myelodysplastic syndrome
and acute myeloid leukemia. Hum. Mutat. 30: 1567-1573, 2009.

23. Lee, H.-W.; Blasco, M. A.; Gottlieb, G. J.; Horner, J. W., II;
Greider, C. W.; DePinho, R. A.: Essential role of mouse telomerase
in highly proliferative organs. Nature 392: 569-574, 1998.

24. Mitchell, J. R.; Collins, K.: Human telomerase activation requires
two independent interactions between telomerase RNA and telomerase
reverse transcriptase. Molec. Cell 6: 361-371, 2000.

25. Mitchell, J. R.; Wood, E.; Collins, K.: A telomerase component
is defective in the human disease dyskeratosis congenita. Nature 402:
551-555, 1999.

26. Niida, H.; Matsumoto, T.; Satoh, H.; Shiwa, M.; Tokutake, Y.;
Furuichi, Y.; Shinkai, Y.: Severe growth defect in mouse cells lacking
the telomerase RNA component. Nature Genet. 19: 203-206, 1998.

27. Okuda, K.; Bardeguez, A.; Gardner, J. P.; Rodriguez, P.; Ganesh,
V.; Kimura, M.; Skurnick, J.; Awad, G.; Aviv, A.: Telomere length
in the newborn. Pediat. Res. 52: 377-381, 2002.

28. Parry, E. M.; Alder, J. K.; Qi, X.; Chen, J. J.-L.; Armanios,
M.: Syndrome complex of bone marrow failure and pulmonary fibrosis
predicts germline defects in telomerase. Blood 117: 5607-5611, 2011.

29. Rudolph, K. L.; Chang, S.; Lee, H.-W.; Blasco, M.; Gottlieb, G.
J.; Greider, C.; DePinho, R. A.: Longevity, stress response, and
cancer in aging telomerase-deficient mice. Cell 96: 701-712, 1999.

30. Sahin, E.; Colla, S.; Liesa, M.; Moslehi, J.; Muller, F. L.; Guo,
M.; Cooper, M.; Kotton, D.; Fabian, A. J.; Walkey, C.; Maser, R. S.;
Tonon, G.; and 18 others: Telomere dysfunction induces metabolic
and mitochondrial compromise. Nature 470: 359-365, 2011. Note: Erratum:
Nature 475: 254 only, 2011.

31. Soder, A. I.; Hoare, S. F.; Muire, S.; Balmain, A.; Parkinson,
E. K.; Keith, W. N.: Mapping of the gene for the mouse telomerase
RNA component, Terc, to chromosome 3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization
and mouse chromosome painting. Genomics 41: 293-294, 1997.

32. Theimer, C. A.; Finger, L. D.; Trantirek, L.; Feigon, J.: Mutations
linked to dyskeratosis congenita cause changes in the structural equilibrium
in telomerase RNA. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 449-454, 2003.

33. Venteicher, A. S.; Abreu, E. B.; Meng, Z.; McCann, K. E.; Terns,
R. M.; Veenstra, T. D.; Terns, M. P.; Artandi, S. E.: A human telomerase
holoenzyme protein required for Cajal body localization and telomere
synthesis. Science 323: 644-648, 2009.

34. Vulliamy, T.; Marrone, A.; Dokal, I.; Mason, P. J.: Association
between aplastic anaemia and mutations in telomerase RNA. Lancet 359:
2168-2170, 2002.

35. Vulliamy, T.; Marrone, A.; Goldman, F.; Dearlove, A.; Bessler,
M.; Mason, P. J.; Dokal, I.: The RNA component of telomerase is mutated
in autosomal dominant dyskeratosis congenita. Nature 413: 432-435,
2001.

36. Vulliamy, T.; Marrone, A.; Szydlo, R.; Walne, A.; Mason, P. J.;
Dokal, I.: Disease anticipation is associated with progressive telomere
shortening in families with dyskeratosis congenita due to mutations
in TERC. Nature Genet. 36: 447-449, 2004.

37. Wong, K.-K.; Chang, S.; Weiler, S. R.; Ganesan, S.; Chaudhuri,
J.; Zhu, C.; Artandi, S. E.; Rudolph, K. L.; Gottlieb, G. J.; Chin,
L.; Alt, F. W.; DePinho, R. A.: Telomere dysfunction impairs DNA
repair and enhances sensitivity to ionizing radiation. Nature Genet. 26:
85-88, 2000.

38. Wong, K.-K.; Maser, R. S.; Bachoo, R. M.; Menon, J.; Carrasco,
D. R.; Gu, Y.; Alt, F. W.; DePinho, R. A.: Telomere dysfunction and
Atm deficiency compromises organ homeostasis and accelerates ageing. Nature 421:
643-648, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/2/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/27/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/29/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/18/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/22/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/18/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/12/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/18/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/10/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/18/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/25/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/18/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/12/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/2/2007
Natalie E. Krasikov - updated: 8/10/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/26/2004
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/2/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/20/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/11/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/3/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/3/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/30/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/26/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/8/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/28/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/1/1999
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/31/1999
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 3/25/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/27/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/22/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/7/1998

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/9/1998

EDITED carol: 08/06/2012
ckniffin: 8/2/2012
carol: 4/2/2012
ckniffin: 3/27/2012
alopez: 8/25/2011
alopez: 7/5/2011
terry: 6/29/2011
carol: 5/26/2011
ckniffin: 5/25/2011
alopez: 6/29/2010
terry: 6/18/2010
alopez: 4/26/2010
terry: 4/22/2010
alopez: 3/18/2010
wwang: 1/21/2010
alopez: 1/14/2010
terry: 1/12/2010
mgross: 10/6/2009
wwang: 3/23/2009
terry: 3/18/2009
alopez: 3/13/2009
terry: 3/10/2009
alopez: 2/20/2009
terry: 2/18/2009
terry: 9/10/2008
mgross: 8/26/2008
terry: 8/25/2008
mgross: 10/23/2007
terry: 10/18/2007
wwang: 7/9/2007
ckniffin: 6/12/2007
alopez: 4/13/2007
terry: 4/12/2007
mgross: 3/9/2007
terry: 3/2/2007
mgross: 11/17/2006
carol: 8/16/2005
carol: 1/5/2005
carol: 1/4/2005
carol: 8/10/2004
terry: 8/10/2004
terry: 6/18/2004
alopez: 5/3/2004
alopez: 4/27/2004
terry: 4/26/2004
joanna: 3/17/2004
carol: 2/2/2004
tkritzer: 5/7/2003
alopez: 2/28/2003
tkritzer: 2/20/2003
mgross: 2/14/2003
terry: 2/11/2003
alopez: 2/4/2003
terry: 2/3/2003
carol: 2/6/2002
mgross: 10/30/2001
alopez: 9/26/2001
terry: 9/26/2001
mgross: 9/8/2000
alopez: 8/29/2000
terry: 8/28/2000
alopez: 12/1/1999
mgross: 8/31/1999
mgross: 3/31/1999
mgross: 3/26/1999
terry: 3/25/1999
alopez: 6/1/1998
terry: 5/27/1998
alopez: 4/22/1998
terry: 4/7/1998
alopez: 4/2/1998
alopez: 2/9/1998

614364	TITLE *614364 ACETOACETYL-CoA SYNTHETASE; AACS
;;ACYL-CoA SYNTHETASE FAMILY, MEMBER 1; ACSF1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

AACS (EC 6.2.1.16) is a cytosolic ligase that specifically activates the
ketone body acetoacetate to form acetoacetyl-coenzyme A (CoA) for the
synthesis of cholesterol and fatty acids (Ohgami et al., 2003).

CLONING

By PCR of a HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cell line cDNA library using
primers based on rat Aacs, Ohgami et al. (2003) cloned human AACS. The
deduced 672-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 75.1
kD. Northern blot analysis detected AACS in all human tissues examined,
with highest expression in kidney, followed by heart and brain. AACS was
expressed in all specific brain regions examined, with highest
expression in hippocampus, followed by amygdala and thalamus.

Using Northern blot analysis, Ohnuki et al. (2005) detected Aacs in all
rat brain regions examined, with highest expression in midbrain,
pons/medulla, and cerebral cortex. In situ hybridization confirmed these
findings.

By searching databases for sequences containing acyl-CoA synthetase
motifs 1 and 2, Watkins et al. (2007) identified human AACS, which they
called ACSF1. The deduced 672-amino acid protein contains acyl-CoA
synthetase motifs 1, 2, and 5, but it lacks motifs 3 and 4. Phylogenetic
analysis revealed that ACSF1 belongs to a small group of acyl-CoA
synthetases that differ significantly from all other clades of acyl-CoA
synthetases and from each other.

GENE STRUCTURE

Watkins et al. (2007) determined that the AACS gene contains 18 exons.

MAPPING

Watkins et al. (2007) mapped the AACS gene to the plus strand of
chromosome 12q24.31.

REFERENCE 1. Ohgami, M.; Takahashi, N.; Yamasaki, M.; Fukui, T.: Expression
of acetoacetyl-CoA synthetase, a novel cytosolic ketone body-utilizing
enzyme, in human brain. Biochem. Pharmacol. 65: 989-994, 2003.

2. Ohnuki, M.; Takahashi, N.; Yamasaki, M.; Fukui, T.: Different
localization in rat brain of the novel cytosolic ketone body-utilizing
enzyme, acetoacetyl-CoA synthetase, as compared to succinyl-CoA:3-oxoacid
CoA-transferase. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1729: 147-153, 2005.

3. Watkins, P. A.; Maiguel, D.; Jia, Z.; Pevsner, J.: Evidence for
26 distinct acyl-coenzyme A synthetase genes in the human genome. J.
Lipid Res. 48: 2736-2750, 2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/28/2011

EDITED mgross: 11/28/2011

603646	TITLE *603646 CYTOCHROME c OXIDASE ASSEMBLY PROTEIN COX15; COX15
;;COX15, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cytochrome c oxidase (COX; EC 1.9.3.1), the terminal component of the
mitochondrial respiratory chain, is a multiheteromeric enzyme embedded
in the mitochondrial inner membrane. COX consists of a protein backbone
bound to 2 copper-containing prosthetic groups, the cytochromes a and
a-3. See 123864. The S. cerevisiae cox15 protein is a constituent of the
inner mitochondrial membrane and may be involved in the assembly of the
COX protein backbone (Petruzzella et al., 1998).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences related to cox15, Petruzzella
et al. (1998) identified cDNAs encoding human COX15. The cDNAs encoded 2
COX15 isoforms, COX15.1 and COX15.2, with different C termini. The amino
acid sequences of both isoforms are 42% identical to that of yeast
cox15. Sequence analysis indicated that COX15 contains a mitochondrial
leader peptide and 5 transmembrane domains. Using in vitro mitochondrial
import and trypsin-protection assays, the authors demonstrated that the
COX15 protein is targeted to mitochondria. Northern blot analysis
revealed that COX15 is expressed as 1.5-, 1.8-, and 3-kb mRNAs
predominantly in tissues characterized by high rates of oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS), including muscle, heart, and brain.

MAPPING

Based on sequence similarity to ESTs, Petruzzella et al. (1998)
tentatively mapped the COX15 gene to 10q24.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Deficiencies in the activity of COX are a frequent cause of autosomal
recessive mitochondrial disease in infants (220110). These patients are
clinically and genetically heterogeneous. The defects identified in this
group have mostly involved genes coding for accessory proteins that play
important roles in the assembly of the COX holoenzyme complex. Antonicka
et al. (2003) used a panel of retroviral vectors expressing COX assembly
factors in these patients to identify the molecular basis of the COX
deficiency by functional complementation. They showed that
overexpression of COX15, a protein involved in the synthesis of heme A,
the heme prosthetic group for COX, could functionally complement the
isolated COX deficiency in fibroblasts from a patient with fatal
infantile who had predominantly cardiac involvement and relative sparing
of skeletal muscle (CEMCOX2; 615119).

Mutation analysis of COX15 in the patient identified an arg217-to-trp
(R217W; 603646.0001) mutation in 1 allele and a splice site mutation in
intron 3 on the other allele (C447-3G), resulting in deletion of exon 4
(603646.0002). In the patient, mitochondrial heme A content was reduced
in heart and fibroblast mitochondria, and levels of heme O were
increased in heart. COX activity and the total amount of fully assembled
enzyme were reduced by 50 to 70% in fibroblasts. Expression of COX15
increased heme A content and rescued COX activity. Thus, it appeared
that reduced availability of heme A stalls the assembly of COX. This
study established COX15 as an additional cause, along with SCO2, of
fatal infantile hypertrophic cardiomyopathy associated with isolated COX
deficiency.

Oquendo et al. (2004) reported a patient with Leigh syndrome (256000)
due to cytochrome c oxidase deficiency who was homozygous for the R217W
mutation in the COX15 gene.

Bugiani et al. (2005) reported a 16-year-old Italian boy with Leigh
syndrome who was compound heterozygous for a nonsense mutation (S151X;
603646.0003) and a missense mutation (S344P; 603646.0004) in the COX15
gene. The authors noted that defects in the COX15 gene appear to be
associated with considerable clinical and biochemical heterogeneity.

In an infant girl with isolated complex IV deficiency that was more
marked in cardiac than skeletal muscle, who died at day 9 of life with
encephalopathy, respiratory depression, and marked cardiac hypertrophy
of all walls, Alfadhel et al. (2011) analyzed 6 candidate genes and
identified compound heterozygosity for the R217W missense mutation and a
nonsense mutation (S151X; 603646.0003) in the COX15 gene.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CARDIOENCEPHALOMYOPATHY, FATAL INFANTILE, DUE TO CYTOCHROME c OXIDASE
DEFICIENCY 2
LEIGH SYNDROME DUE TO MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX IV DEFICIENCY, INCLUDED
COX15, ARG217TRP

In a female infant who had fatal infantile cytochrome c oxidase
deficiency with predominantly cardiac involvement and relative sparing
of skeletal muscle (CEMCOX2; 615119), originally reported by Kennaway et
al. (1990), Antonicka et al. (2003) identified compound heterozygosity
for a 700C-T transition on 1 allele, resulting in an arg217-to-trp
(R217W) substitution, and a splice site mutation in intron 3 on the
other allele (C447-3G), resulting in deletion of exon 4 (603646.0002).
The splicing error introduced a frameshift and a premature stop codon,
resulting in an unstable mRNA and, likely, a null allele.

In an infant girl with isolated complex IV deficiency that was more
marked in cardiac than skeletal muscle, who died at day 9 of life with
encephalopathy, respiratory depression, and marked cardiac hypertrophy,
Alfadhel et al. (2011) identified compound heterozygosity for the R217W
missense mutation and a nonsense mutation (S151X; 603646.0003) in the
COX15 gene.

In a patient with Leigh syndrome due to cytochrome c oxidase deficiency
(256000), Oquendo et al. (2004) identified homozygosity for the R217W
mutation. Both parents were heterozygous for the mutation. The authors
noted the phenotypic variation associated with this mutation.

.0002
CARDIOENCEPHALOMYOPATHY, FATAL INFANTILE, DUE TO CYTOCHROME c OXIDASE
DEFICIENCY 2
COX15, IVS3, C-G, -3

See 603646.0001 and Antonicka et al. (2003).

.0003
LEIGH SYNDROME DUE TO MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX IV DEFICIENCY
COX15, SER151TER

In a 16-year-old Italian boy with Leigh syndrome (256000), Bugiani et
al. (2005) identified compound heterozygosity for a 452C-G transversion
in exon 4 of the COX15 gene, resulting in a ser151-to-ter (S151X)
substitution, and a 1030T-C transition in exon 8, resulting in a
ser344-to-pro (S344P; 603646.0004) substitution at a conserved residue
in the C-terminal end of the fifth predicted transmembrane domain. The
patient failed to thrive in infancy, with poor sucking and feeding
difficulties, and was noted to have severe psychomotor delay at 4 months
of age, with diffuse hypotonia and muscle wasting and weakness. MRI at
18 months of age showed symmetric signal changes in the posterior part
of the putamina and bilateral cerebellar white matter abnormalities.
Plasma lactate and pyruvate levels were markedly elevated. Symptoms
worsened thereafter with virtual arrest of body growth, progressive loss
of postural control, and onset of dystonic postures in the upper limbs,
whereas cognitive functions remained relatively better preserved.
Clinical features remained grossly unchanged thereafter, and apart from
central nervous system and skeletal muscle, the patient showed no
abnormality in other tissues or organs, including the heart,
gastrointestinal tract, liver, kidneys, or hematopoietic system.

See 603646.0001 and Alfadhel et al. (2011).

.0004
LEIGH SYNDROME DUE TO MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX IV DEFICIENCY
COX15, SER344PRO

See 603646.0003 and Bugiani et al. (2005).

REFERENCE 1. Alfadhel, M.; Lillquist, Y. P.; Waters, P. J.; Sinclair, G.; Struys,
E.; McFadden, D.; Hendson, G.; Hyams, L.; Shoffner, J.; Vallance,
H. D.: Infantile cardioencephalopathy due to a COX15 gene defect:
report and review. Am. J. Med. Genet. 155A: 840-844, 2011.

2. Antonicka, H.; Mattman, A.; Carlson, C. G.; Glerum, D. M.; Hoffbuhr,
K. C.; Leary, S. C.; Kennaway, N. G.; Shoubridge, E. A.: Mutations
in COX15 produce a defect in the mitochondrial heme biosynthetic pathway,
causing early-onset fatal hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 72: 101-114, 2003.

3. Bugiani, M.; Tiranti, V.; Farina, L.; Uziel, G.; Zeviani, M.:
Novel mutations in COX15 in a long surviving Leigh syndrome patient
with cytochrome c oxidase deficiency. J. Med. Genet. 42: e28, 2005.
Note: Electronic Article. Erratum published online.

4. Kennaway, N. G.; Carrero-Valenzuela, R. D.; Ewart, G.; Balan, V.
K.; Lightowlers, R.; Zhang, Y. Z.; Powell, B. R.; Capaldi, R. A.;
Buist, N. R.: Isoforms of mammalian cytochrome c oxidase: correlation
with human cytochrome c oxidase deficiency. Pediat. Res. 28: 529-535,
1990.

5. Oquendo, C. E.; Antonicka, H.; Shoubridge, E. A.; Reardon, W.;
Brown, G. K.: Functional and genetic studies demonstrate that mutation
in the COX15 gene can cause Leigh syndrome. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 41:
540-544, 2004.

6. Petruzzella, V.; Tiranti, V.; Fernandez, P.; Ianna, P.; Carrozzo,
R.; Zeviani, M.: Identification and characterization of human cDNAs
specific to BCS1, PET112, SCO1, COX15, and COX11, five genes involved
in the formation and function of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Genomics 54:
494-504, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/12/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/12/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/22/2003

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 3/15/1999

EDITED carol: 08/05/2013
carol: 3/13/2013
terry: 3/12/2013
alopez: 8/25/2009
wwang: 11/14/2008
terry: 11/12/2008
carol: 9/2/2004
ckniffin: 9/2/2004
ckniffin: 7/26/2004
terry: 6/3/2004
tkritzer: 1/31/2003
tkritzer: 1/23/2003
terry: 1/22/2003
psherman: 4/10/2000
alopez: 3/15/1999

182175	TITLE *182175 SIGNAL RECOGNITION PARTICLE, 19-KD; SRP19
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The signal recognition particle (SRP) is a ribonucleoprotein complex
that mediates the targeting of proteins to the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER). The complex consists of a 7S (or 7SL) RNA and 6 different
proteins, SRP9 (600707), SRP14 (600708), SRP19, SRP54 (604857), SRP68
(604858), and SRP72 (602122). The proteins are bound to the 7S RNA as
monomers (SRP19 and SRP54) or heterodimers (SRP9/SRP14 and SRP68/SRP72).
SRP9 and SRP14 bind to the Alu domain of the SRP, whereas the other 4
proteins belong to the S domain. SRP has at least 3 distinct functions
that can be associated with the protein subunits: signal recognition,
translational arrest, and ER membrane targeting by interaction with the
docking protein.

For information on a signal recognition particle database, see Larsen et
al. (1998).

By screening a liver cDNA library with an anti-SRP19 probe, Lingelbach
et al. (1988) isolated a human SRP19 cDNA encoding a 144-amino acid
protein. Sequence analysis showed that SRP19 contains a very basic
C-terminal domain of 7 lysine residues interrupted by 2 glycine
residues. Northern blot analysis revealed expression of a 0.9 kb
transcript in HeLa cells. SDS-PAGE analysis showed that SRP19 is
expressed as a 19-kD protein, identical in size to canine SRP19.
Functional analysis determined that the SRP19 protein binds to 7SL RNA
in canine pancreas.

GENE STRUCTURE

Groden et al. (1991) determined that the SRP19 gene consists of 5 exons.

GENE FUNCTION

In 2 small nested deletions of 100 to 260 kb identified by Joslyn et al.
(1991) in patients with adenomatous polyposis coli (APC; 175100), Groden
et al. (1991) identified 3 genes in a span of about 100 kb on chromosome
5. One of these was DP1 (125265); a second was the gene that is mutant
in APC, called by them DP2.5 (611731). The third was a gene which was
found to have the same sequence as that of SRP19. Horii et al. (1993)
discussed the occurrence of alternative splicing not only within the APC
gene but also between the APC gene and the neighboring SRP19 gene.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Wild et al. (2001) reported the 1.8-angstrom resolution crystal
structure of human SRP19 in complex with its primary binding site on
helix 6 of SRP RNA, which consists of a stem-loop structure closed by an
unusual GGAG tetraloop. Protein-RNA interactions are mediated by the
specific recognition of a widened major groove and the tetraloop without
any direct protein-base contacts and include a complex network of highly
ordered water molecules. Wild et al. (2001) proposed a model of the
assembly of the SRP core comprising SRP19, SRP54, and SRP RNA based on
crystallographic and biochemical data.

Halic et al. (2004) presented the structure of a targeting complex
consisting of mammalian SRP bound to an active 80S ribosome carrying a
signal sequence. This structure, determined to 12-angstrom resolution by
cryoelectron microscopy, enabled Halic et al. (2004) to generate a
molecular model of SRP in its functional conformation. The model showed
how the S domain of SRP contacts the large ribosomal subunit at the
nascent chain exit site to bind the signal sequence, and that the Alu
domain reaches into the elongation factor-binding site of the ribosome,
explaining its elongation arrest activity.

MAPPING

The SRP19 gene maps to chromosome 5q21-q22, between the DP1 (125265) and
APC (611731) genes (Groden et al., 1991).

REFERENCE 1. Groden, J.; Thliveris, A.; Samowitz, W.; Carlson, M.; Gelbert,
L.; Albertsen, H.; Joslyn, G.; Stevens, J.; Spirio, L.; Robertson,
M.; Sargeant, L.; Krapcho, K.; Wolff, E.; Burt, R.; Hughes, J. P.;
Warrington, J.; McPherson, J.; Wasmuth, J.; Le Paslier, D.; Abderrahim,
H.; Cohen, D.; Leppert, M.; White, R.: Identification and characterization
of the familial adenomatous polyposis coli gene. Cell 66: 589-600,
1991.

2. Halic, M.; Becker, T.; Pool, M. R.; Spahn, C. M. T.; Grassucci,
R. A.; Frank, J.; Beckmann, R.: Structure of the signal recognition
particle interacting with the elongation-arrested ribosome. Nature 427:
808-814, 2004.

3. Horii, A.; Nakatsuru, S.; Ichii, S.; Nagase, H.; Nakamura, Y.:
Multiple forms of the APC gene transcripts and their tissue-specific
expression. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 283-287, 1993.

4. Joslyn, G.; Carlson, M.; Thliveris, A.; Albertsen, H.; Gelbert,
L.; Samowitz, W.; Groden, J.; Stevens, J.; Spirio, L.; Robertson,
M.; Sargeant, L.; Krapcho, K.; Wolff, E.; Burt, R.; Hughes, J. P.;
Warrington, J.; McPherson, J.; Wasmuth, J.; Le Paslier, D.; Abderrahim,
H.; Cohen, D.; Leppert, M.; White, R.: Identification of deletion
mutations and three new genes at the familial polyposis locus. Cell 66:
601-613, 1991.

5. Larsen, N.; Samuelsson, T.; Swieb, C.: The Signal Recognition
Particle Database (SRPDB). Nucleic Acids Res. 26: 177-178, 1998.

6. Lingelbach, K.; Zweib, C.; Webb, J.; Marshallsay, C.; Hoben, P.;
Walter, P.; Dobberstein, B.: Isolation and characterization of a
cDNA clone encoding the 19 kDa protein of signal recognition particle
(SRP): expression and binding to 7SL RNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 16:
9431-9442, 1988.

7. Wild, K.; Sinning, I.; Cusack, S.: Crystal structure of an early
protein-RNA assembly complex of the signal recognition particle. Science 294:
598-601, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/8/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/23/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/20/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/30/1991

EDITED alopez: 07/03/2008
ckniffin: 2/5/2008
tkritzer: 3/9/2004
terry: 3/8/2004
carol: 10/23/2001
terry: 10/23/2001
carol: 4/21/2000
carol: 4/20/2000
terry: 6/1/1998
carol: 4/26/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 9/30/1991

607888	TITLE *607888 CKLF-LIKE MARVEL TRANSMEMBRANE DOMAIN-CONTAINING 5; CMTM5
;;CHEMOKINE-LIKE FACTOR SUPERFAMILY, MEMBER 5; CKLFSF5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the chemokine-like factor superfamily, including CKLFSF5,
share similarity with both the chemokine (see 604852) and the
transmembrane 4 (see 300191) superfamilies of signaling molecules.

CLONING

By screening databases for sequences that share homology with
chemokine-like factor (CKLF), followed by RT-PCR of a brain cDNA
library, Han et al. (2003) cloned CKLFSF5. They also identified
alternatively spliced variants. One isoform encodes a 156-amino acid
protein with 4 transmembrane segments. CKLFSF5 shares about 40% sequence
identity with CKLFSF3 (607886). Northern blot analysis detected a
1.22-kb transcript and several minor transcripts expressed at high
levels in brain. Han et al. (2003) also cloned mouse Cklfsf5, which
shares about 90% sequence similarity with CKLFSF5.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Han et al. (2003) mapped the CKLFSF5 gene
to chromosome 14. They also mapped the mouse Cklfsf5 gene to chromosome
14.

REFERENCE 1. Han, W.; Ding, P.; Xu, M.; Wang, L.; Rui, M.; Shi, S.; Liu, Y.;
Zheng, Y.; Chen, Y.; Yang, T.; Ma, D.: Identification of eight genes
encoding chemokine-like factor superfamily members 1-8 (CKLFSF1-8)
by in silico cloning and experimental validation. Genomics 81: 609-617,
2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/16/2003

EDITED carol: 11/30/2011
mgross: 6/16/2003

601974	TITLE *601974 SPHINGOSINE 1-PHOSPHATE RECEPTOR 1; S1PR1
;;ENDOTHELIAL DIFFERENTIATION GENE 1;;
EDG1 S1P RECEPTOR 1; S1P1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The S1PR1 gene encodes a receptor for the lysosphingolipid sphingosine
1-phosphate (S1P). There are 5 known S1P receptors with distinct but
overlapping regulatory functions in normal physiology and disease
processes, particularly involving the immune, central nervous, and
cardiovascular systems. S1P1 is expressed on lymphocytes, in various
cells of the central nervous system, and in cardiomyocytes, vascular
smooth muscle cells, and endothelial cells of cardiac vessels (summary
by Hla and Brinkmann, 2011).

NOMENCLATURE

S1P and the structurally related lysolipid mediator lysophosphatidic
acid (LPA) signal cells through a set of G protein-coupled receptors.
Chun et al. (2002) proposed a nomenclature scheme for the LPA and S1P
receptors that is consistent with the International Union of
Pharmacology (IUP) guidelines. According to these guidelines, a receptor
is to be named with the abbreviation of the natural agonist with the
highest potency, followed by a subscripted arabic number. Thus they
suggested that the designation EDG1 should be changed to S1P1.

CLONING

The tumor promoter phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) inhibits the
growth of human endothelial cells and induces differentiation into
capillary-like, tubular structures. Hla and Maciag (1990) cloned and
sequenced a gene from human umbilical vein endothelial cells which they
designated EDG1 for 'endothelial differentiation gene-1.' The 3-kb EDG1
transcript is rapidly induced when endothelial cells are treated with
PMA and superinduced in the presence of cycloheximide. The deduced
380-amino acid protein contains 7 putative transmembrane domains, making
it structurally similar to G protein-coupled receptors. Since GPRs are
involved in diverse biologic processes such as signal transduction, cell
proliferation, and differentiation, Hla and Maciag (1990) considered the
characterization of human EDG1 as a highly inducible and abundant
endothelial cell GPR to suggest that it may be involved in the processes
that regulate the differentiation of endothelial cells.

By RT-PCR, Liu and Hla (1997) detected significant expression of EDG1 in
brain, lung, heart, spleen, placenta, muscle, liver, uterus, and kidney,
with extremely low levels in testis and thymus. Northern blot analysis
of mouse tissues showed highest expression of Edg1 in brain, spleen, and
heart. In situ hybridization of embryonic mice revealed abundant
expression of Edg1 in skeletal structures undergoing ossification, such
as the vertebral column, basioccipital, basisphenoid, mandibular, and
maxillary bones. Abundant expression was also localized in liver, lung,
and the pulmonary trunk. In adult mouse brain, significant expression
occurred throughout the cerebellum, with localized abundant expression
in the Purkinje cell layer. In the hippocampal region in newborn mouse,
the polymorphic cell layer and dentate gyrus expressed Edg1 in a
localized fashion.

GENE FUNCTION

Sphingosine-1-phosphate is generated intracellularly from sphingomyelin
in a wide variety of cells. It is then moved from the intracellular to
the extracellular space, where it circulates for delivery to cell
surface receptors. S1PR1 is expressed on lymphocytes, in cells of the
central nervous system, and in cardiomyocytes, vascular smooth muscle
cells, and endothelial cells of cardiac vessels. The activation of S1PR1
on lymphocytes promotes egress of lymphocytes from lymph nodes (review
by Hla and Brinkmann, 2011).

Lee et al. (1998) demonstrated that S1P activates the heterotrimeric
orphan receptor EDG1. EDG1 bound S1P with high affinity and high
specificity. Overexpression of EDG1 induced exaggerated cell-cell
aggregation and enhanced expression of cadherins and formation of
well-developed adherens junctions in a manner dependent on S1P and the
small guanine nucleotide-binding protein Rho.

EDG1 is a heterotrimeric guanine nucleotide-binding protein-coupled
receptor for sphingosine-1-phosphate. Hobson et al. (2001) demonstrated
that cell migration toward platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF;
190040), which stimulates sphingosine kinase and increases intracellular
SPP, was dependent on expression of EDG1. Deletion of EDG1 or inhibition
of sphingosine kinase suppressed chemotaxis toward PDGF and also
activation of the small guanosine triphosphatase RAC (602048), which is
essential for protrusion of lamellipodia and forward movement. Moreover,
PDGF activated EDG1, as measured by translocation of beta-arrestin
(107940) and phosphorylation of EDG1. Hobson et al. (2001) concluded
that their results reveal a role for receptor cross-communication in
which activation of a G protein-coupled receptor by a receptor tyrosine
kinase is critical for cell motility.

The immunosuppressive drug FTY720 is derived from ISP-1 (myriocin), a
fungal metabolite that is an eternal youth nostrum in traditional
Chinese herbal medicine. Brinkmann et al. (2002) showed that FTY720
binds and activates the S1P receptors EDG1, EDG3 (601965), EDG6
(603751), and EDG8 (605146), but not EDG5.

Ishii et al. (2009) reported that S1P, a lipid mediator enriched in
blood, induces chemotaxis and regulates the migration of osteoclast
precursors not only in culture but also in vivo, contributing to the
dynamic control of bone mineral homeostasis. Cells with the properties
of osteoclast precursors express functional S1P receptors (SIPR1 and
S1PR2, 605111) and exhibit positive chemotaxis along an S1P gradient in
vitro. Intravital 2-photon imaging of bone tissues showed that a potent
S1P agonist stimulated motility of osteoclast precursor-containing
monocytoid populations in vivo. Osteoclast/monocyte lineage-specific
conditional S1P knockout mice showed osteoporotic changes due to
increased osteoclast attachment to the bone surface. Furthermore,
treatment with the S1P agonist FTY720 relieved ovariectomy-induced
osteoporosis in mice by reducing the number of mature osteoclasts
attached to the bone surface. Ishii et al. (2009) concluded that their
data provided evidence that S1P controls the migratory behavior of
osteoclast precursors, dynamically regulating bone mineral homeostasis.

Zachariah and Cyster (2010) showed that transgenic expression of S1P1 in
immature thymocytes leads to their perivascular accumulation and
premature release into circulation. Using an intravascular procedure to
label emigrating cells, they found that mature thymocytes exit via blood
vessels at the corticomedullary junction. By deleting sphingosine
kinases SPHK1 (603730) and SPHK2 (607092) in neural crest-derived
pericytes, Zachariah and Cyster (2010) provided evidence that these
specialized vessel-ensheathing cells contribute to the S1P that promotes
thymic egress. Lymphatic endothelial cell-derived S1P was not required.
These studies identified the major thymic egress route and suggested a
role for pericytes in promoting reverse transmigration of cells across
blood vessel endothelium.

Hla and Brinkmann (2011) and Soliven et al. (2011) provided reviews of
the neurobiology of S1P signaling in the CNS via the S1P receptors
(S1PRs) and discussed the benefit of the S1PR modulator, fingolimod
(FTY720), in the treatment of multiple sclerosis (MS; 126200). FTY720
was approved in 2010 as the first oral treatment for relapsing MS in the
U.S. One effect of FTY720 is to downmodulate S1PR1 to retain circulating
naive and central memory T and B lymphocytes in lymph nodes, while
sparing effector memory T cells. The result is to reduce the
infiltration of autoreactive lymphocytes into the CNS, causing a slowing
of the disease process (Hla and Brinkmann, 2011). In addition, S1PR1 is
expressed in oligodendrocytes, astrocytes, neurons, and microglia, where
it may modulate cell survival, process dynamics, migration,
differentiation, activation, and crosstalk. The presence of S1PRs on
multiple cell lines in the CNS may represent a mechanism by which FTY720
may contribute to observed neurologic benefit in patients with MS via
neuroprotective and regenerative effects (Soliven et al., 2011).

Lymphocytes egress from lymphoid organs in response to S1P; minutes
later they migrate from blood into tissue against the S1P gradient.
Arnon et al. (2011) showed that heterotrimeric guanine
nucleotide-binding protein-coupled receptor kinase-2 (GRK2; 109635)
functions in downregulation of S1PR1 on blood-exposed lymphocytes. T-
and B-cell movement from blood into lymph nodes was reduced in the
absence of GRK2 but was restored in S1P-deficient mice. In the spleen,
B-cell movement between the blood-rich marginal zone and follicles was
disrupted by GRK2 deficiency and by mutation of an S1PR1 desensitization
motif. Moreover, Arnon et al. (2011) found that delivery of systemic
antigen into follicles was impaired. Thus, GRK2-dependent S1PR1
desensitization allows lymphocytes to escape circulatory fluids and
migrate into lymphoid tissues.

Arnon et al. (2013) developed a 2-photon microscopy procedure to study
marginal zone and follicular B-cell movement in the live mouse spleen
and showed that marginal zone B cells are highly motile and exhibit long
membrane extensions. Marginal zone B cells shuttle between the marginal
zone and follicles with at least one-fifth of the cells exchanging
between compartments per hour, a behavior that explains their ability to
deliver antigens rapidly from the open blood circulation to the secluded
follicles. Follicular B cells also transit from follicles to the
marginal zone, but unlike marginal zone B cells, they fail to undergo
integrin-mediated adhesion, become caught in fluid flow, and are carried
into the red pulp. Follicular B-cell egress via the marginal zone is
S1PR1-dependent. Arnon et al. (2013) concluded that their study showed
that marginal zone B cells migrate continually between marginal zone and
follicles, and established the marginal zone as a site of
S1PR1-dependent B-cell exit from follicles. Arnon et al. (2013)
suggested that their results also showed how adhesive differences of
similar cells critically influence their behavior in the same
microenvironment.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Lee et al. (2001) showed that S1P-induced endothelial cell migration
requires the AKT (164730)-mediated phosphorylation of EDG1. Activated
AKT binds to EDG1 and phosphorylates the third intracellular loop at the
thr236 residue. Transactivation of EDG1 by AKT is not required for
Gi-dependent signaling but is indispensable for RAC activation, cortical
actin assembly, and chemotaxis. Indeed, a thr236-to-ala EDG1 mutant
sequestered AKT and acted as a dominant-negative GPCR to inhibit
S1P-induced RAC activation, chemotaxis, and angiogenesis.
Transactivation of GPCRs by AKT may constitute a specificity switch to
integrate rapid G protein-dependent signals into long-term cellular
phenomena such as cell migration.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using Edg1-null mice, Liu et al. (2000) demonstrated that S1P signaling
through Edg1 is essential for blood vessel formation. Edg1-null mice
exhibited embryonic hemorrhage leading to intrauterine death between
embryonic days 12.5 and 14.5. Vasculogenesis and angiogenesis appeared
normal in the mutant embryos. However, vascular maturation was
incomplete due to a deficiency of vascular smooth muscle
cells/pericytes. The defect was not a generalized defect in smooth
muscle, as the muscular layers of the gastrointestinal tract and the
bronchial tree were well developed. Using wildtype and Edge1-null
fibroblasts in culture, the authors showed that Edg1 mediated an
S1P-induced migration response that was defective in mutant cells.
Mutant cells were also unable to activate Rac in response to S1P
stimulation.

Matloubian et al. (2004) generated fetal liver chimeras by transplanting
lethally irradiated wild-type mice with day 12.5 fetal liver cells from
S1p1 (Edg1) knockout donors, and found that, compared to mice
reconstituted with Edg1+/+ cells, the Edg1 -/- chimeras had an almost
complete absence of CD4- and CD8-positive T cells and reduced numbers of
B lymphocytes in peripheral blood and lymphoid organs. In contrast, the
thymus contained normal numbers of immature CD4 and CD8 double-positive
thymocytes but increased numbers of single-positive CD4 and CD8 cells
expressing L-selectin (SELL; 153240), as also seen in animals treated
with FTY720, which inhibits emigration of cells from the thymus.
Matloubian et al. (2004) showed that FTY720 treatment downregulates
S1P1, creating a temporary pharmacologic S1P1-null state in lymphocytes
and inducing lymphocyte sequestration. They concluded that S1P1 is
essential for lymphocyte recirculation and regulates egress from both
thymus and peripheral lymphoid organs.

Using S1p1-deficient mice, Cinamon et al. (2004) showed that S1p1, but
not S1p3, was required for B cell localization to the marginal zone. In
the absence of Cxcl13 (605149), marginal zone B cells from S1p1 -/- mice
reacquired a marginal zone distribution. On exposure to
lipopolysaccharide, marginal zone B cells downregulated S1p1 and S1p3
and migrated to splenic white pulp. Cinamon et al. (2004) concluded that
marginal zone B cell localization depends on responsiveness to the blood
lysophospholipid S1P and that S1P1 signaling overcomes the recruiting
activity of CXCL13.

Lymphocytes require S1P1 to exit lymphoid organs. By using mice in which
the 2 kinases that generate S1P, SPHK1 (603730) and SPHK2 (607092), were
conditionally ablated, Pappu et al. (2007) found that plasma S1P is
mainly hematopoietic in origin, with erythrocytes as a major
contributor, whereas lymph S1P is from a distinct radiation-resistant
source. Lymphocyte egress from thymus and secondary lymphoid organs was
markedly reduced in kinase-deficient mice. Restoration of S1P to plasma
rescued egress to blood but not lymph, and the rescue required
lymphocyte expression of S1P1. Thus, Pappu et al. (2007) concluded that
separate sources provide S1P to plasma and lymph to help lymphocytes
exit the low-S1P environment of lymphoid organs. Pappu et al. (2007)
proposed that disruption of compartmentalized S1P signaling is a
plausible mechanism by which S1P1 agonists function as
immunosuppressives.

Camerer et al. (2009) found that mice selectively lacking S1P in plasma
(Pappu et al., 2007) exhibited increased vascular leak and impaired
survival after anaphylaxis, administration of platelet activating factor
(PAF; see 173393) or histamine, or exposure to related inflammatory
challenges. Increased leak was associated with increased
interendothelial cell gaps in venules and could be reversed by
transfusion with wildtype erythrocytes, which restored plasma S1P
levels, or by acute treatment with an S1pr1 agonist. S1pr1 agonist did
not protect wildtype mice from PAF-induced leak. However, an agonist for
Par2 (F2RL1; 600933) protected wildtype mice from PAF-induced leak, and
this protection was lost after systemic treatment with pertussis toxin.
Camerer et al. (2009) suggested that blood communicates with blood
vessels via plasma S1P to maintain vascular integrity.

REFERENCE 1. Arnon, T. I.; Horton, R. M.; Grigorova, I. L.; Cyster, J. G.:
Visualization of splenic marginal zone B-cell shuttling and follicular
B-cell egress. Nature 493: 684-688, 2013.

2. Arnon, T. I.; Xu, Y.; Lo, C.; Pham, T.; An, J.; Coughlin, S.; Dorn,
G. W.; Cyster, J. G.: GRK2-dependent S1PR1 desensitization is required
for lymphocytes to overcome their attraction to blood. Science 333:
1898-1903, 2011.

3. Brinkmann, V.; Davis, M. D.; Heise, C. E.; Albert, R.; Cottens,
S.; Hof, R.; Bruns, C.; Prieschl, E.; Baumruker, T.; Hiestand, P.;
Foster, C. A.; Zollinger, M.; Lynch, K. R.: The immune modulator
FTY720 targets sphingosine 1-phosphate receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
21453-21457, 2002.

4. Camerer, E.; Regard, J. B.; Cornelissen, I.; Srinivasan, Y.; Duong,
D. N.; Palmer, D.; Pham, T. H.; Wong, J. S.; Pappu, R.; Coughlin,
S. R.: Sphingosine-1-phosphate in the plasma compartment regulates
basal and inflammation-induced vascular leak in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 119:
1871-1879, 2009.

5. Chun, J.; Goetzl, E. J.; Hla, T.; Igarashi, Y.; Lynch, K. R.; Moolenaar,
W.; Pyne, S.; Tigyi, G.: International Union of Pharmacology. XXXIV.
Lysophospholipid receptor nomenclature. Pharm. Rev. 54: 265-269,
2002.

6. Cinamon, G.; Matloubian, M.; Lesneski, M. J.; Xu, Y.; Low, C.;
Lu, T.; Proia, R. L.; Cyster, J. G.: Sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor
1 promotes B cell localization in the splenic marginal zone. Nature
Immun. 5: 713-720, 2004.

7. Hla, T.; Brinkmann, V.: Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P): physiology
and the effects of S1P receptor modulation. Neurology 76 (supp.
3) S3-S8, 2011.

8. Hla, T.; Maciag, T.: An abundant transcript induced in differentiating
human endothelial cells encodes a polypeptide with structural similarities
to G-protein-coupled receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 9308-9313, 1990.

9. Hobson, J. P.; Rosenfeldt, H. M.; Barak, L. S.; Olivera, A.; Poulton,
S.; Caron, M. G.; Milstien, S.; Spiegel, S.: Role of the sphingosine-1-phosphate
receptor EDG-1 in PDGF-induced cell motility. Science 291: 1800-1803,
2001.

10. Ishii, M.; Egen, J. G.; Klauschen, F.; Meier-Schellersheim, M.;
Saeki, Y.; Vacher, J.; Proia, R. L.; Germain, R. N.: Sphingosine-1-phosphate
mobilizes osteoclast precursors and regulates bone homeostasis. Nature 458:
524-528, 2009. Note: Erratum: Nature 465: 966 only, 2010.

11. Lee, M.-J.; Thangada, S.; Paik, J.-H.; Sapkota, G. P.; Ancellin,
N.; Chae, S.-S.; Wu, M.; Morales-Ruiz, M.; Sessa, W. C.; Alessi, D.
R.; Hla, T.: Akt-mediated phosphorylation of the G protein-coupled
receptor EDG-1 is required for endothelial cell chemotaxis. Molec.
Cell 8: 693-704, 2001.

12. Lee, M.-J.; Van Brocklyn, J. R.; Thangada, S.; Liu, C. H.; Hand,
A. R.; Menzeleev, R.; Spiegel, S.; Hla, T.: Sphingosine-1-phosphate
as a ligand for the G protein-coupled receptor EDG-1. Science 279:
1552-1555, 1998.

13. Liu, C. H.; Hla, T.: The mouse gene for the inducible G-protein-coupled
receptor edg-1. Genomics 43: 15-24, 1997.

14. Liu, Y.; Wada, R.; Yamashita, T.; Mi, Y.; Deng, C.-X.; Hobson,
J. P.; Rosenfeldt, H. M.; Nava, V. E.; Chae, S.-S.; Lee, M.-J.; Liu,
C. H.; Hla, T.; Spiegel, S.; Proia, R. L.: Edg-1, the G protein-coupled
receptor for sphingosine-1-phosphate, is essential for vascular maturation. J.
Clin. Invest. 106: 951-961, 2000.

15. Matloubian, M.; Lo, C. G.; Cinamon, G.; Lesneski, M. J.; Xu, Y.;
Brinkmann, V.; Allende, M. L.; Proia, R. L.; Cyster, J. G.: Lymphocyte
egress from thymus and peripheral lymphoid organs is dependent on
S1P receptor 1. Nature 427: 355-360, 2004.

16. Pappu, R.; Schwab, S. R.; Cornelissen, I.; Pereira, J. P.; Regard,
J. B.; Xu, Y.; Camerer, E.; Zheng, Y.-W.; Huang, Y.; Cyster, J. G.;
Coughlin, S. R.: Promotion of lymphocyte egress into blood and lymph
by distinct sources of sphingosine-1-phosphate. Science 316: 295-298,
2007.

17. Soliven, B.; Miron, V.; Chun, J.: The neurobiology of sphingosine
1-phosphate signaling and sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor modulators. Neurology 76
(supp. 3): S9-S14, 2011.

18. Zachariah, M. A.; Cyster, J. G.: Neural crest-derived pericytes
promote egress of mature thymocytes at the corticomedullary junction. Science 328:
1129-1135, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/21/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/22/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/18/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/10/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/14/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/28/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/4/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/27/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/21/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/4/2002
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/10/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/6/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/12/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/10/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/2/1998

CREATED Lori M. Kelman: 9/4/1997

EDITED alopez: 03/26/2013
terry: 3/21/2013
alopez: 11/28/2011
terry: 11/22/2011
wwang: 4/22/2011
ckniffin: 4/18/2011
mgross: 9/14/2010
terry: 9/10/2010
alopez: 7/2/2010
alopez: 6/18/2010
terry: 6/14/2010
wwang: 8/17/2009
alopez: 5/5/2009
terry: 4/28/2009
joanna: 4/14/2009
wwang: 9/25/2008
carol: 2/29/2008
alopez: 6/18/2007
terry: 6/4/2007
mgross: 11/7/2005
terry: 10/27/2005
terry: 4/5/2005
alopez: 1/21/2004
mgross: 10/4/2002
mgross: 7/10/2002
mgross: 11/6/2001
alopez: 3/20/2001
terry: 3/12/2001
alopez: 7/13/2000
mgross: 7/10/2000
mgross: 7/6/2000
carol: 3/29/2000
alopez: 5/26/1998
alopez: 3/6/1998
terry: 3/2/1998
terry: 1/7/1998
dholmes: 9/12/1997
dholmes: 9/4/1997

300090	TITLE *300090 SIGNAL SEQUENCE RECEPTOR, DELTA; SSR4
;;TRANSLOCON-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN, DELTA SUBUNIT; TRAPD
DESCRIPTION Brenner et al. (1997) described 2 novel genes that are located in the
Xq28 region, are driven by a bidirectional promoter located between
them, and encode proteins involved in unrelated biochemical pathways
located in different compartments of the cell. Translocon-associated
protein (TRAP)-delta subunit is assumed to be involved in the secretion
of proteins. The highest concentration of TRAP-delta transcripts was
observed in pancreas, where large quantities of lipases, nucleases, and
proteases are synthesized and secreted. The second gene, IDH3G (300089),
encodes the gamma subunit of the NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate
dehydrogenase, which is involved in the energy metabolism of the cell.
Correspondingly, the highest expression levels are in tissues with
increased energy turnover, like heart, skeletal muscle, and brain. IDH3G
and TRAP-delta were found to be arranged in a compact head-to-head
manner. The nontranscribed intergenic region represents only 133 bp and
is embedded in a CpG island. Brenner et al. (1997) concluded that the
CpG island functions as a bidirectional promoter to initiate the
transcription of both functionally unrelated genes with quite distinct
expression patterns. The authors showed that in rat and mouse this area
is similarly compact, representing less than 249 bp in rat and not more
than 164 bp in mouse. In both species, this intergenic region is
embedded in a CpG island and is highly conserved, with nucleotide
identity values ranging from 70.1% between human and rat to 92.6%
between mouse and rat.

REFERENCE 1. Brenner, V.; Nyakatura, G.; Rosenthal, A.; Platzer, M.: Genomic
organization of two novel genes on human Xq28: compact head to head
arrangement of IDH-gamma and TRAP-delta is conserved in rat and mouse. Genomics 44:
8-14, 1997.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/26/1997

EDITED mark: 11/04/1997
mark: 9/26/1997

150000	TITLE *150000 LACTATE DEHYDROGENASE A; LDHA
;;LDH, SUBUNIT M
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The LDHA gene encodes the A subunit of lactate dehydrogenase (EC
1.1.1.27), an enzyme that catalyzes the interconversion of lactate and
pyruvate. The A subunit is expressed in skeletal muscle. Other isoforms
include LDHB (150100), expressed in cardiac muscle, and LDHC (150150),
expressed in testes (Tsujibo et al., 1985; Chung et al., 1985).

CLONING

Tsujibo et al. (1985) isolated cDNA clones corresponding to the human
LDHA gene from a human fibroblast cDNA library. The predicted 332-amino
acid sequence had a molecular mass of 36.7 kD and showed 92% homology to
the porcine Ldha polypeptide. A nonfunctional pseudogene was also
isolated.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chung et al. (1985) determined that the LDHA gene contains 7 exons and
spans about 12 kb.

MAPPING

Studies using human-mouse somatic cell hybrids indicated that the LDHA
and LDHB loci are not linked (Nabholz et al., 1969). By study of cell
hybrids, LDHA was assigned to the short arm of chromosome 11 by Francke
and Busby (1975).

By the study of cells from 4 persons with different interstitial
deletions of 11p, Francke et al. (1977) assigned the LDHA locus to
11p1203-11p1208. At HGM8, controversy arose over the mapping of LDHA
(see Grzeschik and Kazazian, 1985). HGM8 reported the location as
11p14-p12. Lebo et al. (1985) and Lewis et al. (1985) placed the locus
at a more distal position.

Yang-Feng et al. (1986) did in situ hybridization studies in cell lines
from 2 persons with apparently balanced translocations involving 11p13.
Their findings excluded LDHA from any region proximal to 11p13 and
localized the gene to 11p15-p14.

Scrable et al. (1990) demonstrated that LDHA is located in band 11p15.4.

GENE FUNCTION

Centrosomal proteins (e.g., 117139, 117140, 117141, 117143) have been
studied mainly with anticentrosome serum. Using a spontaneously arising
rabbit anticentrosome serum with strong human specificity, Gosti et al.
(1987) identified specific antigens in isolated centrosomes which
reacted with several noncentrosomal proteins, notably, lactate
dehydrogenase.

Anderson and Kovacik (1981) identified an unusual isozyme of lactate
dehydrogenase, which they designated lactate dehydrogenase K (LDHK), in
cells transformed by the Kirsten murine sarcoma virus. They examined 16
different human carcinomas and found that 11 had LDHK activity 10- to
500-fold over the level in adjoining nontumor tissue. Li et al. (1988)
determined that this cancer-associated lactate dehydrogenase is a
tyrosylphosphorylated form of LDHA. The protein was found to be
complexed with 21-kD, 30-kD, and 56-kD proteins.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Nance et al. (1963) observed a genetically determined variant LDH in the
red cells of 4 members of 2 generations of a Brazilian family. The
mutation involved the A subunit. This was the first instance in which
practical considerations permitted demonstration of the variant in
multiple relatives. Unlike the findings of Shaw and Barto (1963) in
Peromyscus and of Boyer et al. (1963) in man, the findings in the
Brazilian family did not suggest random association between the products
of the mutant and wildtype alleles.

LDH variants, involving either the A or the B subunit, seem to be
unusually frequent in India (Das et al., 1970).

- Glycogen Storage Disease XI

In a patient with LDHA deficiency, or glycogen storage disease XI
(GSD11; 612933), reported by Maekawa et al. (1986), Maekawa et al.
(1990) found homozygosity for a 20-bp deletion in exon 6 of the LDHA
gene (150000.0001). Maekawa et al. (1991) demonstrated the same mutation
in 18 persons from the 4 known affected families in Japan.

EVOLUTION

Markert et al. (1975) suggested that the ancestral vertebrate LDH was an
A4-like enzyme since lampreys have only the A4 isozyme. Sidell and
Beland (1980) presented evidence supporting this view: the hagfish has a
B4 enzyme but it diverges less from A4 enzyme than does the B4 of other
fishes and higher vertebrates. A close phylogenic relative of the
lamprey, the Atlantic hagfish lives under sustained hypoxic conditions
that may have favored evolution of a B4 enzyme. A4 is the muscle
isozyme, B4 is the heart isozyme, and C4 is the testicular isozyme.

Morizot (1984) collated linkage data from lower vertebrates and several
mammalian species. The lower vertebrates included poeciliid fishes
(Xiphophorus and Poeciliopsis), salmonid fishes (trout), and frogs
(Rana). He postulated a 12-locus ancestral synteny group consisting of
isocitrate dehydrogenase (on human 2 and 15), 3 LDH loci (on human 11
and 12), HEXA (on human 15), nucleoside phosphorylase (on human 14),
pyruvate kinase (on human 15), MPI (on human 15), PEPB (on human 12),
citrate synthase (on human 12), TPI (on human 12), and
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (on human 12). If the 3 LDH
loci are part of the primordial synteny group, LDH genes may have
originated by intrachromosomal duplication rather than by
polyploidization as has been thought.

ANIMAL MODEL

In trout, the loci coding for LDH subunits A and B are linked (Morrison
and Wright, 1966). In the mouse, Chang et al. (1979) found that the A
and B subunits are more similar to each other in amino acid sequence
than to the C subunit.

In the mouse, Merkle et al. (1992) found that homozygosity for absent
LDHA subunit led to early postimplantation death. Merkle et al. (1992)
suggested that the fact that human subjects with a complete absence of
LDHA subunits are fully viable may be due to the fact that, in contrast
with the situation in the mouse, LDHB predominates in the human fetus.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE XI
LDHA, 20-BP DEL, EX6

In a patient with lactate dehydrogenase A deficiency, or glycogen
storage disease XI (612933), reported by Maekawa et al. (1986), Maekawa
et al. (1990) found a 20-bp deletion in exon 6 of the LDHA gene,
resulting in a frameshift, premature termination, and complete lack of
the alpha subunits of LDH. The predicted incomplete LDHA subunit
contained only 259 instead of 331 amino acids and appeared to be
degraded rapidly, since no protein was detected immunologically. Maekawa
et al. (1990) stated that 'this female patient with the LDHA deficiency
frequently complained of uterine stiffness during her pregnancy. Uterine
stiffness was a problem in the early stage of delivery and, thus, she
required a Caesarean section.'

In a fragment of the LDHA gene amplified by PCR using 2 primers specific
for the gene, Maekawa et al. (1991) demonstrated the same mutation in 18
persons from the 4 known affected families in Japan.

Miyajima et al. (1993) identified the exon 6 deletion in 2 adult
Japanese sisters that had muscle stiffness following strenuous exercise
since the teens and age 9, respectively. Both had had cesarean sections
because the 'uterus was too stiff in the early stage of delivery.'

.0002
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE XI
LDHA, GLU328TER

Maekawa et al. (1991) used the ratio of LDHB to LDHA subunits in
erythrocytes as a means of identifying individuals heterozygous for LDHA
deficiency (GSD11; 612933). In one such individual, they identified a
G-to-T transversion in the LDHA gene, resulting in a glu328-to-ter
(E328X) substitution. There were no manifestations in this heterozygous
subject; however, homozygotes would presumably be affected.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Blake et al. (1969); Boone et al. (1972); Davidson et al. (1965);
Maekawa et al. (1984); Shows  (1972); Van Someren et al. (1972); Vesell
(1965); Vyas et al. (1977)
REFERENCE 1. Anderson, G. R.; Kovacik, W. P., Jr.: LDH(k), an unusual oxygen-sensitive
lactate dehydrogenase expressed in human cancer. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 78: 3209-3213, 1981.

2. Blake, N. M.; Kirk, R. L.; Pryke, E.; Sinnett, P.: Lactate dehydrogenase
electrophoretic variant in a New Guinea highland population. Science 163:
701-702, 1969.

3. Boone, C. M.; Chen, T. R.; Ruddle, F. H.: Assignment of three
human genes to chromosomes (LDH-A to 11, TK to 17, and IDH to 20)
and evidence for translocation between human and mouse chromosomes
in somatic cell hybrids. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 69: 510-514, 1972.

4. Boyer, S. H.; Fainer, D. C.; Watson-Williams, E. J.: Lactate dehydrogenase
variant from human blood: evidence for molecular subunits. Science 141:
642-643, 1963.

5. Chang, S.-M. T.; Lee, C.-Y.; Li, S. S.-L.: Structural relatedness
of mouse lactate dehydrogenase isozymes, A4 (muscle), B4 (heart),
and C4 (testis). Biochem. Genet. 17: 715-729, 1979.

6. Chung, F.-Z.; Tsujibo, H.; Bhattacharyya, U.; Sharief, F. S.; Li,
S. S.-L: Genomic organization of human lactate dehydrogenase-A gene. Biochem.
J. 231: 537-541, 1985.

7. Das, S. R.; Mukherjee, B. N.; Das, S. K.; Ananthakrishnan, R.;
Blake, N. M.; Kirk, R. L.: LDH variants in India. Humangenetik 9:
107-109, 1970.

8. Davidson, R. G.; Fildes, R. A.; Glen-Bott, A. M.; Harris, H.; Robson,
E. B.; Cleghorn, T. E.: Genetical studies on a variant of human lactate
dehydrogenase (subunit A). Ann. Hum. Genet. 29: 5-17, 1965.

9. Francke, U.; Busby, N.: Assignments of the human genes for lactate
dehydrogenase-A and thymidine kinase to specific chromosomal regions. Birth
Defects Orig. Art. Ser. XI(3): 143-149, 1975. Note: Alternate: Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 14: 313-319, 1975.

10. Francke, U.; George, D. L.; Brown, M. G.; Riccardi, V. M.: Gene
dose effect: intraband mapping of LDHA locus using cells from four
individuals with different interstitial deletions of 11p. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 19: 197-207, 1977.

11. Gosti, F.; Marty, M.-C.; Courvalin, J. C.; Maunoury, R.; Bornens,
M.: Centrosomal proteins and lactate dehydrogenase possess a common
epitope in human cell lines. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 1000-1004,
1987.

12. Grzeschik, K.-H.; Kazazian, H. H.: Report of the committee on
the genetic constitution of chromosomes 10, 11, and 12. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 40: 177-205, 1985.

13. Lebo, R. V.; Cheung, M. C.; Bruce, B. D.; Riccardi, V. M.; Kao,
F. T.; Kan, Y. W.: Mapping parathyroid hormone, beta-globin, insulin,
and LDH-A genes within the human chromosome 11 short arm by spot blotting
sorted chromosomes. Hum. Genet. 69: 316-320, 1985.

14. Lewis, W. H.; Goguen, J. M.; Powers, V. E.; Willard, H. F.; Michaloparilan,
E. E.: Gene order on the short arm of human chromosome 11: regional
assignment of LDHA distal to catalase. Hum. Genet. 71: 249-253,
1985.

15. Li, S. S.-L.; Pan, Y.-C. E.; Sharief, F. S.; Evans, M. J.; Lin,
M.-F.; Clinton, G. M.; Holbrook, J. J.: Cancer-associated lactate
dehydrogenase is a tyrosylphosphorylated form of human LDH-A, skeletal
muscle isoenzyme. Cancer Invest. 6: 93-101, 1988.

16. Maekawa, M.; Kanda, S.; Sudo, K.; Kanno, T.: Estimation of the
gene frequency of lactate dehydrogenase subunit deficiencies. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 36: 1204-1214, 1984.

17. Maekawa, M.; Sudo, K.; Kanno, T.: Immunochemical studies on lactate
dehydrogenase A subunit deficiencies. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 39: 232-238,
1986.

18. Maekawa, M.; Sudo, K.; Kanno, T.; Li, S. S.-L.: Molecular characterization
of genetic mutation in human lactate dehydrogenase-A (M) deficiency. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 168: 677-682, 1990.

19. Maekawa, M.; Sudo, K.; Li, S. S.-L.; Kanno, T.: Analysis of genetic
mutations in human lactate dehydrogenase-A(M) deficiency using DNA
conformation polymorphism in combination with polyacrylamide gradient
gel and silver staining. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 180: 1083-1090,
1991.

20. Maekawa, M.; Sudo, K.; Li, S. S.-L.; Kanno, T.: Genotypic analysis
of families with lactate dehydrogenase A(M) deficiency by selective
DNA amplification. Hum. Genet. 88: 34-38, 1991.

21. Markert, C. L.; Shaklee, J. B.; Whitt, G. S.: Evolution of a
gene: multiple genes for LDH isozymes provide a model of the evolution
of gene structure, function, and regulation. Science 189: 102-114,
1975.

22. Merkle, S.; Favor, J.; Graw, J.; Hornhardt, S.; Pretsch, W.:
Hereditary lactate dehydrogenase A-subunit deficiency as cause of
early postimplantation death of homozygotes in Mus musculus. Genetics 131:
413-421, 1992.

23. Miyajima, H.; Takahashi, Y.; Suzuki, M.; Shimizu, T.; Kaneko,
E.: Molecular characterization of gene expression in human lactate
dehydrogenase-A deficiency. Neurology 43: 1414-1419, 1993.

24. Morizot, D. C.: Tracing linkage groups from fishes to mammals.
(Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 37: 543 only, 1984.

25. Morrison, W. J.; Wright, J. E.: Genetic analysis of three lactate
dehydrogenase isozyme systems in trout: evidence for linkage of genes
coding subunits A and B. J. Exp. Zool. 163: 259-270, 1966.

26. Nabholz, M.; Miggiano, V.; Bodmer, W. F.: Genetic analysis with
human-mouse somatic cell hybrids. Nature 223: 358-363, 1969.

27. Nance, W. E.; Claflin, A.; Smithies, O.: Lactic dehydrogenase:
genetic control in man. Science 142: 1075-1077, 1963.

28. Scrable, H. J.; Johnson, D. K.; Rinchik, E. M.; Cavenee, W. K.
: Rhabdomyosarcoma-associated locus and MYOD1 are syntenic but separate
loci on the short arm of human chromosome 11. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87:
2182-2186, 1990.

29. Shaw, C. R.; Barto, E.: Genetic evidence for the subunit structure
of lactate dehydrogenase isozymes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 50: 211-214,
1963.

30. Shows, T. B.: Genetics of human-mouse somatic cell hybrids: linkage
of human genes for lactate dehydrogenase-A and esterase-A4. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 69: 348-352, 1972.

31. Sidell, B. D.; Beland, K. F.: Lactate dehydrogenases of Atlantic
hagfish: physiological and evolutionary implications of a primitive
heart isozyme. Science 207: 769-770, 1980.

32. Tsujibo, H.; Tiano, H. F.; Li, S. S.-L.: Nucleotide sequences
of the cDNA and an intronless pseudogene for human lactate dehydrogenase-A
isozyme. Europ. J. Biochem. 147: 9-15, 1985.

33. Van Someren, H.; Meera Khan, P.; Westerveld, A.; Bootsma, D.:
Two new linkage groups carrying different loci for LDH and glutamic-pyruvic
transaminase found. Nature 240: 221-222, 1972.

34. Vesell, E. S.: Genetic control of isozyme patterns in human tissue. Prog.
Med. Genet. 4: 128-175, 1965.

35. Vyas, G. N.; Peterson, D. L.; Townsend, R. M.: Hepatitis B 'e'
antigens: an apparent association with lactate dehydrogenase isozyme-5. Science 198:
1068-1070, 1977.

36. Yang-Feng, T. L.; Bruns, G. A. P.; Carroll, A. J.; Simola, K.
O. J.; Francke, U.: Localization of the LDHA gene to 11p14-11p15
by in situ hybridization of an LDHA cDNA probe to two translocations
with breakpoints in 11p13. Hum. Genet. 74: 331-334, 1986.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 7/27/2011

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED terry: 08/01/2011
carol: 7/27/2011
terry: 8/3/2010
carol: 7/31/2009
carol: 7/30/2009
ckniffin: 7/28/2009
mgross: 3/17/2004
mcapotos: 12/15/1999
mark: 1/12/1998
alopez: 6/2/1997
terry: 7/15/1994
davew: 7/13/1994
warfield: 4/21/1994
pfoster: 4/5/1994
carol: 3/14/1994
carol: 7/23/1992

604769	TITLE *604769 PEROXIREDOXIN 3; PRDX3
;;PRX3;;
ANTIOXIDANT PROTEIN 1; AOP1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Peroxiredoxins inactivate H2O2 by oxidizing a key cysteine residue in
their catalytic center, which is subsequently reduced by thioredoxins
(see 187700). The thioredoxins are subsequently reduced by electrons
from NADPH via thioredoxin reductases (see TXNRD1; 601112). PRDX3 is
localized exclusively in mitochondria (summary by Chiribau et al.,
2008).

CLONING

The mouse Aop1 protein, also called Mer5, may promote early events in
the differentiation of murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells (Nemoto et
al., 1990). Tsuji et al. (1995) found that mouse Aop1 shares 38% amino
acid sequence identity with the C22 subunit of Salmonella typhimurium
alkylhydroperoxide reductase.

By screening a human leukemia cell line cDNA library with a mouse Aop1
cDNA, Tsuji et al. (1995) isolated a cDNA encoding human AOP1. The
deduced 256-amino acid human AOP1 protein shares 86% amino acid sequence
similarity with mouse Aop1, and significant similarity with both the
human proliferation-associated gene A product (PAGA; 176763) and the
mouse stress-induced peritoneal macrophage protein Msp23. AOP1 also
shows sequence similarity to the S. cerevisiae thiol-specific
antioxidant protein TSA; a surface antigen of Entamoeba histolytica,
which is a pathogenic protozoan that causes diarrhea and organ abscess
formation; and a protein of H. pylori, which is a causative agent in
gastritis, ulcers, and gastric adenocarcinoma.

GENE FUNCTION

Tsuji et al. (1995) demonstrated that recombinant mouse Aop1 could
complement an alkylhydroperoxide reductase mutation in E. coli,
suggesting that Aop1 functions as an antioxidant protein.

Shih et al. (2001) determined that AOP1 interacts with Abrin A-chain
(ABRA), which inhibits protein synthesis and can induce apoptosis. By
immunolocalization studies, they determined that both AOP1 and ABRA
colocalize within the mitochondria. By assays of thiol-dependent
antioxidant activity, they determined that ABRA can attenuate AOP1
activity in a dose-dependent manner. Ectopic expression of AOP1 also
blocked the release of cytochrome c from mitochondria and inhibited
apoptosis in ABRA-treated cells.

Deregulated expression of the MYC transcription factor (190080) is found
in a wide variety of human tumors. The primary transforming activity of
MYC is thought to arise through transcriptional regulation of numerous
target genes. Wonsey et al. (2002) showed that PRDX3, which encodes a
mitochondrial protein of the peroxiredoxin gene family, is such a
target. Expression of PRDX3 is induced by MYC and is reduced in c-myc
-/- cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis spanning the entire
PRDX3 genomic sequence revealed that MYC binds preferentially to a
930-bp region surrounding exon 1. Wonsey et al. (2002) showed that PRDX3
is required for MYC-mediated proliferation, transformation, and
apoptosis after glucose withdrawal. Results using mitochondria-specific
fluorescent probes demonstrated that PRDX3 is essential for maintaining
mitochondrial mass and membrane potential in transformed rat and human
cells. These data provided evidence that PRDX3 is a MYC target gene that
is required to maintain normal mitochondrial function.

Chiribau et al. (2008) found that the forkhead box transcription factor
FOXO3A (602681) was required for basal expression of PRX3 in human
cardiac fibroblasts. They identified 2 FOXO regulatory sequences in the
promoter region of PRX3 and showed that binding of FOXO3A to both
regulatory sequences was required for FOXO3A-mediated activation of a
PRX3 reporter plasmid. Chiribau et al. (2008) concluded that FOXO3A
mediates PRX3 expression and suggested that this regulation may play a
critical role in the resistance to oxidative stress in cardiac
fibroblasts.

MAPPING

By FISH, Tsuji et al. (1995) mapped the human AOP1 gene, also known as
PRDX3, to 10q25-q26. They mapped the mouse Aop1 gene to the distal
region of chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Chiribau, C. B.; Cheng, L.; Cucoranu, I. C.; Yu, Y.-S.; Clempus,
R. E.; Sorescu, D.: FOXO3A regulates peroxiredoxin III expression
in human cardiac fibroblasts. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 8211-8217, 2008.

2. Nemoto, Y.; Yamamoto, T.; Takada, S.; Matsui, Y.; Obinata, M.:
Antisense RNA of the latent period gene (MER5) inhibits the differentiation
of murine erythroleukemia cells. Gene 91: 261-265, 1990.

3. Shih, S.-F.; Wu, Y.-H.; Hung, C.-H.; Yang, H.-Y.; Lin, J.-Y.:
Abrin triggers cell death by inactivating a thiol-specific antioxidant
protein. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 21870-21877, 2001.

4. Tsuji, K.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Obinata, M.: Mammalian
antioxidant protein complements alkylhydroperoxide reductase (ahpC)
mutation in Escherichia coli. Biochem. J. 307: 377-381, 1995.

5. Wonsey, D. R.; Zeller, K. I.; Dang, C. V.: The c-Myc target gene
PRDX3 is required for mitochondrial homeostasis and neoplastic transformation. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 6649-6654, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/29/2010
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/14/2002
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/13/2002

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 3/30/2000

EDITED mgross: 02/02/2010
mgross: 2/2/2010
terry: 1/29/2010
cwells: 7/1/2002
cwells: 6/27/2002
terry: 6/14/2002
carol: 5/13/2002
alopez: 8/1/2000
mcapotos: 4/12/2000
psherman: 3/30/2000

