608221	TITLE *608221 MICROTUBULE-ASSOCIATED SERINE/THREONINE KINASE-LIKE; MASTL
;;FLJ14813;;
GREATWALL; GWL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Gandhi et al. (2003) identified MASTL, which they called FLJ14813,
within the region of chromosome 10p where Drachman et al. (2000) had
mapped autosomal dominant thrombocytopenia, also known as
thrombocytopenia-2 (THC2; 188000), by linkage analysis. The protein
product of the MASTL gene is a putative kinase that contains 2 highly
conserved kinase domains. Gandhi et al. (2003) noted that a similar
gene, 'greatwall,' had been described in Drosophila. EMS-induced
mutations in the greatwall gene cause a metaphase-arrest phenotype and
problems in chromosome condensation.

GENE FUNCTION

A particular form of protein phosphatase-2A (PP2A; see 176915)
containing a B55-delta subunit (PPP2R2D; 613992) is the major protein
phosphatase that acts on model CDK substrates in Xenopus egg extracts
and has antimitotic activity. The activity of PP2A-B55-delta is high in
interphase and low in mitosis, exactly the opposite of CDK1 (116940).
Mochida et al. (2010) reported that inhibition of PP2A-B55-delta results
from a small protein known as alpha-endosulfine (ENSA; 603061), that is
phosphorylated in mitosis by the protein kinase Greatwall (Gwl, also
known as MASTL). This converts Ensa into a potent and specific inhibitor
of PP2A-B55-delta. Mochida et al. (2010) concluded that this pathway
represents a previously unknown element in the control of mitosis.
Mochida et al. (2010) also showed that Arpp19 (605487) is a substrate of
Gwl.

Initiation and maintenance of mitosis require the inhibition of PP2A,
which dephosphorylates mitotic substrates. The protein kinase Greatwall
is required to maintain mitosis through PP2A inhibition. Gharbi-Ayachi
et al. (2010) described how Gwl activation results in PP2A inhibition.
They identified Arpp19 and Ensa as 2 substrates of Gwl that, when
phosphorylated by this kinase, associate with and inhibit PP2A, thus
promoting mitotic entry. Conversely, in the absence of Gwl activity,
Arpp19 and Ensa are dephosphorylated and lose their capacity to bind and
inhibit PP2A. Gharbi-Ayachi et al. (2010) stated that although both
proteins can inhibit PP2A, endogenous Arpp19, but not Ensa, is
responsible for PP2A inhibition and mitotic entry in Xenopus egg
extracts.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By extensive sequencing of multiple genes located in the critical
segment on 10p, Gandhi et al. (2003) demonstrated a missense mutation in
the MASTL gene (608221.0001) in a family with thrombocytopenia-2 (THC2;
188000) mapping to this region.

However, Pippucci et al. (2011) found no mutations in the MASTL gene in
4 families with autosomal dominant thrombocytopenia mapping to
chromosome 10p. Instead, Pippucci et al. (2011) identified 6 different
heterozygous mutations in the 5-prime promoter region of the ANKRD26
gene (see, e.g., 610855.0001-610855.0003), which maps to the THC2 locus
on chromosome 10p12-p11.2, in 9 of 20 unrelated families with autosomal
dominant nonsyndromic thrombocytopenia-2.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
THROMBOCYTOPENIA 2
MASTL, GLU167ASP

By sequencing multiple genes in the critical region of autosomal
dominant thrombocytopenia (188000), also known as thrombocytopenia-2
(Drachman et al., 2000), Gandhi et al. (2003) found a missense mutation
in the MASTL gene: a 565G-C transversion predicted to result in a
glu167-to-asp (E167D) amino acid substitution.

REFERENCE 1. Drachman, J. G.; Jarvik, G. P.; Mehaffey, M. G.: Autosomal dominant
thrombocytopenia: incomplete megakaryocyte differentiation and linkage
to human chromosome 10. Blood 96: 118-125, 2000.

2. Gandhi, M. J.; Cummings, C. L.; Drachman, J. G.: FLJ14813 missense
mutation: a candidate for autosomal dominant thrombocytopenia on human
chromosome 10. Hum. Hered. 55: 66-70, 2003.

3. Gharbi-Ayachi, A.; Labbe, J.-C.; Burgess, A.; Vigneron, S.; Strub,
J.-M.; Brioudes, E.; Van-Dorsselaer, A.; Castro, A.; Lorca, T.: The
substrate of Greatwall kinase, Arpp19, controls mitosis by inhibiting
protein phosphatase 2A. Science 330: 1673-1677, 2010.

4. Mochida, S.; Maslen, S. L.; Skehel, M.; Hunt, T.: Greatwall phosphorylates
an inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2A that is essential for mitosis. Science 330:
1670-1673, 2010.

5. Pippucci, T.; Savoia, A.; Perrotta, S.; Pujol-Moix, N.; Noris,
P.; Castegnaro, G.; Pecci, A.; Gnan, C.; Punzo, F.; Marconi, C.; Gherardi,
S.; Loffredo, G.; and 11 others: Mutations in the 5-prime UTR of
ANKRD26, the ankirin repeat domain 26 gene, cause an autosomal-dominant
form of inherited thrombocytopenia, THC2. Am. J. Hum.  Genet. 88:
115-120, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/2/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/28/2011

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/31/2003

EDITED mgross: 05/23/2011
wwang: 2/24/2011
ckniffin: 2/2/2011
alopez: 2/1/2011
terry: 1/28/2011
alopez: 4/23/2008
wwang: 10/6/2006
alopez: 10/31/2003

610754	TITLE *610754 WINGS APART-LIKE PROTEIN, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; WAPAL
;;KIAA0261;;
WAPL;;
FRIEND OF EBNA2; FOE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from an immature myeloid leukemia cell
line cDNA library, Nagase et al. (1996) cloned WAPAL, which they
designated KIAA0261. The WAPAL protein contains 1,287 amino acids. By
Northern blot analysis, moderate expression was detected in placenta,
lung, liver, thymus, prostate, skeletal muscle, kidney, pancreas,
spleen, testis, ovary, small intestine, and peripheral blood leukocytes
with weak expression in heart, brain, and colon.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) nuclear
antigen-2 (EBNA2) sequence as bait to screen an EBV-immortalized B cell
cDNA library, followed by PCR, Kwiatkowski et al. (2004) cloned WAPAL,
which they called FOE. The deduced 1227-amino acid protein has a
predicted molecular mass of 137 kD. WAPAL contains an N-terminal
arginine-rich motif (ARM), a bipartite nuclear localization sequence, 3
highly acidic domains, 4 predicted coiled-coil domains, and a C-terminal
nuclear export signal. WAPAL shares shares 38% amino acid identity over
the C-terminal region with the parallel sister chromatid product (PASC)
of the Drosophila wapl gene. Northern blot analysis detected 6.5- and
4.4-kb transcripts in all human tissues examined. Multiple tissue
expression array confirmed ubiquitous expression in 72 human tissues
with highest expression in testis and lowest in ovary. Western blot
analysis of hematopoietic and epithelial cell lines detected WAPAL at
approximately 140 kD. Immunofluorescence studies localized WAPAL
throughout the nucleus in HeLa cells with exclusion from regions
adjacent to nucleoli. In mitotic cells, WAPAL was concentrated around
condensed chromosomes in metaphase and in later stages around separating
chromosomes in anaphase. Using subcellular fractionation as well as
immunohistochemical studies, Kwiatkowski et al. (2004) colocalized WAPAL
and EBNA2 to the nuclear matrix and showed partial colocalization of
both WAPAL and EBNA2 in a diffuse granular nuclear-staining pattern
excluded from nucleoli.

Oikawa et al. (2004) independently cloned WAPAL from human testis cDNA
library by PCR using primers derived from the Drosophila wapl sequence.
The deduced protein contains 1,190 amino acids. Northern blot analysis
and quantitative real-time PCR of human cancers and normal tissues
detected significantly higher expression in cervical tumors compared to
normal cervix and normal and tumor tissue from uterine body, ovary,
breast, lung, stomach, kidney, and colon. Immunohistochemistry showed
nuclear localization of WAPAL in all samples.

GENE FUNCTION

Oikawa et al. (2004) showed that WAPL localized to the basal and
parabasal cell layers in benign squamous epithelia but displayed
increased expression and localization extending to more superficial cell
layers in cervical dysplasia and invasive carcinoma, suggesting a role
for WAPL in cervical carcinogenesis and tumor progression. Oikawa et al.
(2004) showed that RNAi of WAPL in cervical carcinoma-derived cell lines
resulted in repressed cell growth and induced cell death. Flow cytometry
of siRNA-transfected cells showed an increase in the number of cells
exhibiting S phase DNA content, which may also be apoptotic cells at
G2-M phase, and an increase in apoptotic cells displaying sub-G1 DNA
content. Oikawa et al. (2004) suggested that malfunction of the WAPL
pathway may activate an S phase checkpoint or other apoptotic pathway
leading to cell death.

Using immunohistochemical analysis in mouse testis, Kuroda et al. (2005)
showed that Wapl localized to large pachytene spermatocytes, with no
staining in condensing forms of sperm. Mouse Wapl localized to the
synaptonemal complex and partially synapsed X and Y chromosomes in early
zygotene and pachytene stage spermatocytes. Kuroda et al. (2005)
suggested that Wapl may play a role in spermatogenesis, possibly in
homologous recombination and DNA recombination.

Kueng et al. (2006) showed that human WAPL interacted with cohesin
throughout the cell cycle in HeLa cells via cohesin's SCC1 (RAD21;
606462) and SA1 (STAG1; 604358)/SA2 (STAG2; 300826) subunits. WAPL also
formed a subcomplex with PDS5A (613200). Like cohesin, WAPL associated
with chromatin from telophase until prophase of the next mitosis.
Depletion of WAPL by RNA interference inhibited dissociation of cohesin
from chromosomes during prophase, prometaphase, and metaphase.
Resolution of chromosome arms was severely impaired in WAPL-depleted
cells until anaphase, which occurred after a delay, implying that
separase (ESPL1; 604143) was activated in the absence of WAPL. Depletion
of WAPL also resulted in increased levels of cohesin on chromatin in
interphase, and cohesin remained bound to chromatin longer in the
absence of WAPL. Kueng et al. (2006) concluded that WAPL is required for
release of cohesin from both interphase chromatin and mitotic
chromosomes.

Rolef Ben-Shahar et al. (2008) identified spontaneous suppressors of the
thermosensitive eco1-1 allele (see 609674) in budding yeast. An
acetylation-mimicking mutation of a conserved lysine in cohesin's Smc3
(606062) subunit makes Eco1 dispensable for cell growth, and Rolef
Ben-Shahar et al. (2008) showed that Smc3 is acetylated in an
Eco1-dependent manner during DNA replication to promote sister chromatid
cohesion. A second set of eco1-1 suppressors inactivate the budding
yeast ortholog of the cohesin destabilizer Wapl. Rolef Ben-Shahar et al.
(2008) concluded that Eco1 modifies cohesin to stabilize sister
chromatid cohesion in parallel with a cohesion establishment reaction
that is in principle Eco1-independent.

Through single-molecule analysis, Terret et al. (2009) demonstrated that
a replication complex, the RFC-CTF18 clamp loader, controls the velocity
spacing and restart activity of replication forks in human cells and is
required for robust acetylation of cohesin's SMC3 subunit and sister
chromatid cohesion. Unexpectedly, Terret et al. (2009) discovered that
cohesin acetylation itself is a central determinant of fork
processivity, as slow-moving replication forks were found in cells
lacking the Eco1-related acetyltransferases ESCO1 or ESCO2 (609353)
(including those derived from Roberts syndrome (268300) patients, in
whom ESCO2 is biallelically mutated), and in cells expressing a form of
SMC3 that cannot be acetylated. This defect was a consequence of
cohesin's hyperstable interaction with 2 regulatory cofactors, WAPL and
PDS5A (613200); removal of either cofactor allowed forks to progress
rapidly without ESCO1, ESCO2, or RFC-CTF18. Terret et al. (2009)
concluded that their results showed a novel mechanism for clamp
loader-dependent fork progression, mediated by the posttranslational
modification and structural remodeling of the cohesin ring. Loss of this
regulatory mechanism leads to the spontaneous accrual of DNA damage and
may contribute to the abnormalities of the Roberts syndrome
cohesinopathy.

Using HeLa cells and Xenopus oocytes, Nishiyama et al. (2010) showed
that the function of WAPL in destabilizing chromosome cohesion was
countered by sororin (CDCA5; 609374), which functioned to maintain
sister chromatid cohesion. Immunoprecipitation studies showed that
sororin interacted with PDS5 and displaced WAPL from its interaction
with PDS5. Nishiyama et al. (2010) concluded that sororin maintains
sister chromatid cohesion by inhibiting WAPL-induced dissociation of
cohesin from DNA.

Using conditional mutagenesis in the mouse, Tedeschi et al. (2013)
demonstrated that depletion of the cohesin-associated protein Wapl
stably locks cohesin on DNA, leads to clustering of cohesin in axial
structures, and causes chromatin condensation in interphase chromosomes.
The findings revealed that the stability of cohesin-DNA interactions is
an important determinant of chromatin structure and indicated that
cohesin has an architectural role in interphase chromosome territories.
Tedeschi et al. (2013) also showed that regulation of cohesin-DNA
interactions by Wapl is important for embryonic development, expression
of genes such as c-myc, and cell cycle progression. In mitosis,
Wapl-mediated release of cohensin from DNA is essential for proper
chromosome segregation and protects cohesin from cleavage by the
protease separase, thus enabling mitotic exit in the presence of
functional cohesin complexes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kwiatkowski et al. (2004) determined that the WAPAL gene contains 21
exons and spans 90 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1996) mapped the WAPAL gene
to chromosome 10. By genomic sequence analysis, Kwiatkowski et al.
(2004) mapped the WAPAL gene to chromosome 10q23.2.

ANIMAL MODEL

Oikawa et al. (2004) showed that WAPL-transfected NIH3T3 cells induced
tumors in nude mice and concluded that WAPL has oncogenic
characteristics. Oikawa et al. (2004) stated that Wapl-deficient mice
displayed embryonic lethality.

Kuroda et al. (2005) showed that the dioxin TCDD induced Wapl expression
in Ahr (600253) -/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Higher levels of TCDD
decreased Wapl levels in Ahr +/+ cells, but further increased Wapl
levels in Ahr -/- cells. Following a single peritoneal injection of TCDD
into male C57/BL6 mice, the authors analyzed testes samples and found
decreased levels of Wapl expression, suggesting that Wapl may be a
target gene mediating the reproductive toxicity of TCDD.

REFERENCE 1. Kueng, S.; Hegemann, B.; Peters, B. H.; Lipp, J. J.; Schleiffer,
A.; Mechtler, K.; Peters, J.-M.: Wapl controls the dynamic association
of cohesin with chromatin. Cell 127: 955-967, 2006.

2. Kuroda, M.; Oikawa, K.; Ohbayashi, T.; Yoshida, K.; Yamada, K.;
Mimura, J.; Matsuda, Y.; Fujii-Kuriyama, Y.; Mukai, K.: A dioxin
sensitive gene, mammalian WAPL, is implicated in spermatogenesis. FEBS
Lett. 579: 167-172, 2005.

3. Kwiatkowski, B. A.; Ragoczy, T.; Ehly, J.; Schubach, W. H.: Identification
of cloning of a novel chromatin-associated protein partner of Epstein-Barr
nuclear protein 2. Exp. Cell Res. 300: 223-233, 2004.

4. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Ohira, M.; Kawarabayasi, Y.;
Ohara, O.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Miyajima, N.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VI. The coding
sequences of 80 new genes (KIAA0201-KIAA0280) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from cell line KG-1 and brain. DNA Res. 3: 321-329,
1996.

5. Nishiyama, T.; Ladurner, R.; Schmitz, J.; Kreidl, E.; Schleiffer,
A.; Bhaskara, V.; Bando, M.; Shirahige, K.; Hyman, A. A.; Mechtler,
K.; Peters, J.-M.: Sororin mediates sister chromatid cohesion by
antagonizing Wapl. Cell 143: 737-749, 2010.

6. Oikawa, K.; Ohbayashi, T.; Kiyono, T.; Nishi, H.; Isaka, K.; Umezawa,
A.; Kuroda, M.; Mukai, K.: Expression of a novel human gene, human
wings apart-like (hWAPL), is associated with cervical carcinogenesis
and tumor progression. Cancer Res. 64: 3545-3549, 2004.

7. Rolef Ben-Shahar, T.; Heeger, S.; Lehane, C.; East, P.; Flynn,
H.; Skehel, M.; Uhlmann, F.: Eco1-dependent cohesin acetylation during
establishment of sister chromatid cohesion. Science 321: 563-566,
2008.

8. Tedeschi, A.; Wutz, G.; Huet, S.; Jaritz, M.; Wuensche, A.; Schirghuber,
E.; Davidson, I. F.; Tang, W.; Cisneros, D. A.; Bhaskara, V.; Nishiyama,
T.; Vaziri, A.; Wutz, A.; Ellenberg, J.; Peters, J.-M.: Wapl is an
essential regulator of chromatin structure and chromosome segregation. Nature 501:
564-568, 2013.

9. Terret, M.-E.; Sherwood, R.; Rahman, S.; Qin, J.; Jallepalli, P.
V.: Cohesin acetylation speeds the replication fork. Nature 462:
231-234, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/28/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/11/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/6/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/29/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/30/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/27/2008

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 2/12/2007

EDITED alopez: 10/28/2013
mgross: 4/5/2011
terry: 2/11/2011
carol: 11/8/2010
alopez: 1/6/2010
wwang: 12/30/2009
terry: 12/29/2009
mgross: 5/4/2009
terry: 4/30/2009
alopez: 8/27/2008
terry: 8/27/2008
wwang: 2/12/2007

