180664	TITLE *180664 POLYMERASE II, RNA, SUBUNIT E; POLR2E
;;RPB5, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;;
RNA POLYMERASE II, 25-KD SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION The eukaryotic DNA-dependent RNA polymerase II (or B) is composed of 10
to 14 polypeptides ranging from 220 to 10 kD. For general information on
the structure and function of RNA polymerase II, see 180660.

CLONING

Acker et al. (1994) isolated cDNAs of 5 subunits of RNA polymerase II.

MAPPING

Using in situ hybridization, Acker et al. (1994) showed that the POLR2E
gene, encoding the 25-kD subunit, maps to 19p13.3. A second site of
hybridization to 11q23.1 was thought to represent a pseudogene, most
likely a retroposon, since no remnants of introns could be identified in
the study of genomic DNA.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Cramer et al. (2000) derived a backbone model of a 10-subunit yeast RNA
polymerase II using x-ray diffraction data extending to 3-angstrom
resolution. All 10 subunits exhibited a high degree of identity with the
corresponding human proteins, and 9 of the 10 subunits are conserved
among the 3 eukaryotic RNA polymerases I, II, and III. Notable features
of the model include a pair of jaws, formed by subunits Rpb1 (180660),
Rpb5 (homologous to human POLR2E), and Rpb9 (180662), that appear to
grip DNA downstream of the active center. A clamp on the DNA nearer the
active center, formed by Rpb1, Rpb2 (180661), and Rpb6 (604414), may be
locked in the closed position by RNA, accounting for the great stability
of transcribing complexes. A pore in the protein complex beneath the
active center may allow entry of substrates for polymerization and exit
of the transcript during proofreading and passage through pause sites in
the DNA.

REFERENCE 1. Acker, J.; Mattei, M.-G.; Wintzerith, M.; Roeckel, N.; Depetris,
D.; Vigneron, M.; Kedinger, C.: Chromosomal localization of human
RNA polymerase II subunit genes. Genomics 20: 496-499, 1994.

2. Cramer, P.; Bushnell, D. A.; Fu, J.; Gnatt, A. L.; Maier-Davis,
B.; Thompson, N. E.; Burgess, R. R.; Edwards, A. M.; David, P. R.;
Kornberg, R. D.: Architecture of RNA polymerase II and implications
for the transcription mechanism. Science 288: 640-648, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/2/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/18/1994

EDITED alopez: 06/21/2001
alopez: 6/19/2001
carol: 6/15/2001
alopez: 5/2/2000
psherman: 9/2/1999
alopez: 2/5/1999
terry: 8/24/1998
joanna: 4/4/1996
carol: 4/18/1994

608537	TITLE *608537 VHL GENE; VHL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The evolutionarily conserved VHL gene encodes 2 protein products, a
30-kD full-length form (p30) and a 19-kD form (p19). The protein
products of the VHL gene play a role in the oxygen-sensing pathway, in
microtubule stability and orientation, tumor suppression, cilia
formation, regulation of senescence, cytokine signaling, collagen IV
(see 120130) regulation, and assembly of a normal extracellular
fibronectin matrix (summary by Nordstrom-O'Brien et al., 2010).

CLONING

By positional cloning, Latif et al. (1993) identified the VHL tumor
suppressor gene. The gene encodes a 213-amino acid protein with a
predicted acidic repeat domain found in the procyclic surface membrane
glycoprotein of Trypanosoma brucei. The authors identified 2 widely
expressed mRNA transcripts of approximately 6 and 6.5 kb.

Iliopoulos et al. (1995) demonstrated that the product of the VHL gene
is an approximately 30-kD protein.

By screening a rat liver cDNA library, Duan et al. (1995) isolated the
rat VHL gene, which is predicted to encode a 185-amino acid protein. The
rat protein is 88% identical to the aligned 213-amino acid human VHL
gene product. The human and rat proteins had molecular masses of 28 and
21 kD, respectively.

Richards et al. (1996) used in situ hybridization to investigate the
principal sites of VHL expression during embryogenesis. They also
analyzed a variety of fetal tissues for levels of the 2 VHL isoforms,
isoform I, which contains all 3 exons, and isoform II, which contains
only exons 1 and 3. Although VHL expression was found to be ubiquitous,
particularly high levels of expression were detected in the urogenital
system, brain, spinal cord, sensory ganglia, eyes, and bronchial
epithelium. Richards et al. (1996) noted that this expression pattern
correlated to some extent with the pattern of organ involvement in VHL
syndrome but that there were significant differences. Both isoforms of
VHL were detected in all tissues, and the ratio of isoforms was similar
between tissues.

Schoenfeld et al. (1998) identified a second native VHL gene product.
They showed that this 18-kD protein is initiated from the second
translation start site at codon 54, which contains a more conserved
Kozak consensus sequence and thus may serve as a second, internal,
translation initiation site. The significance of a second translation
start site is underscored by the lack of mutations found between the
first and second methionine codons of the VHL gene in both sporadic and
VHL-associated renal carcinomas. This observation suggested that
mutation in this region may not lead to VHL inactivation if translation
could be initiated at the second methionine codon, producing a
functional VHL protein. Furthermore, both the rat and mouse contain only
19 of the 53 amino acids present in this region in the human VHL ORF.
Schoenfeld et al. (1998) concluded that the 18-kD protein contains the
biologic activity of the VHL gene.

Iliopoulos et al. (1998) also demonstrated that in addition to the
213-amino acid VHL protein with an apparent molecular mass of 30 kD
(VHL30), a second VHL protein (VHL19) resulted from internal translation
from the second methionine within the VHL ORF. VHL30 resides primarily
in the cytosol, with lower amounts found in the nucleus or associated
with cell membranes. In contrast, VHL19 is equally distributed between
the nucleus and cytosol and is not found in association with membranes.
VHL19, like VHL30, can bind to elongin B (600787), elongin C (600788),
and Hs-Cul2 in coimmunoprecipitation assays and can inhibit the
production of hypoxia-inducing proteins such as VEGF (192240) and GLUT1
(138140) when reintroduced into renal carcinoma cells that lack a
wildtype VHL allele. Thus, cells contain 2 biologically active VHL gene
products.

GENE STRUCTURE

Latif et al. (1993) determined that the VHL gene contains at least 3
exons.

Zatyka et al. (2002) analyzed the promoter region of the VHL gene and
found 4 regions of conservation between human, primate, and rodent
sequences. In silico analysis identified binding sites for numerous
transcription factors within the conserved regions, and deletion
analysis of the promoter in a reporter assay in 293 and HeLa cells
identified 1 negative and 2 positive regulatory elements. The promoter
contains a functional SP1 (189906) site and overlapping SP1/AP2 (107580)
sites.

GENE FUNCTION

- Role in Tumor Suppression

Maher et al. (1990) compared age incidence curves for sporadic
cerebellar hemangioblastoma and sporadic renal cell carcinoma to those
for familial forms of these tumors that occur as part of von
Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300). The curves for tumors in VHL syndrome
were compatible with a single mutation model, whereas the age incidence
curves for sporadic tumors suggested a 2-stage mutation process. On the
whole, the findings suggested that the VHL gene functions as a recessive
tumor suppressor gene.

Crossey et al. (1994) presented convincing evidence that the VHL
syndrome gene functions as a recessive tumor suppressor gene and that
inactivation of both alleles of the VHL gene is a critical event in the
pathogenesis of VHL neoplasms. Studies of loss of heterozygosity (LOH)
showed that in 7 tumors from 7 familial cases in which the parental
origin of the 3p26-p25 allele loss could be determined, the allele had
been lost from the chromosome inherited from the unaffected parent. In 4
VHL tumors, LOH on other chromosomes (5q21, 13q, 17q) was found,
indicating that homozygous VHL gene mutations may be required but not
sufficient for tumorigenesis in von Hippel-Lindau syndrome.

When expressed in COS-7 cells, Duan et al. (1995) found that both the
human and the rat VHL proteins showed predominant nuclear, nuclear and
cytosolic, or predominant cytosolic VHL staining by immunofluorescence.
A complicated pattern of cellular proteins was seen that could be
specifically coimmunoprecipitated with the introduced VHL protein. A
complex containing VHL and proteins with apparent molecular masses of 16
and 9 kD was the most consistently observed. Certain naturally occurring
VHL missense mutations demonstrated either complete or partial loss of
the p16-p9 complex. Duan et al. (1995) concluded that the VHL tumor
suppressor gene product is a nuclear protein, perhaps capable of
specifically translocating between the nucleus and the cytosol. They
suggested that VHL may execute its function via formation of specific
multiprotein complexes.

Vogelstein (1995) referred to the VHL gene as a gatekeeper gene for
cancers such as those of the kidney. Rubenstein and Yaari (1994)
suggested that the VHL gene may serve that role in relation to
astrocytoma. They presented the pedigree of a Puerto Rican family in
which at least 9 members had von Hippel-Lindau syndrome and 2 of these
had astrocytoma.

To elucidate the biochemical mechanisms underlying tumor suppression by
the VHL protein, Duan et al. (1995) and Kibel et al. (1995) searched for
cellular proteins that bind to wildtype VHL protein but not to
tumor-derived VHL protein mutants. They found that 2 transcriptional
elongation factors, elongin B (600787) and elongin C (600788), bind in
vitro and in vivo to a short, colinear region of the VHL protein that is
frequently mutated in human tumors. Kibel et al. (1995) showed that a
peptide replica of this region inhibited binding of VHL protein to
elongin B and elongin C, whereas a point-mutant derivative,
corresponding to a naturally occurring VHL missense mutation, had no
effect. Duan et al. (1995) showed that recombinant VHL competes with
elongin A (600786) for elongin B and C binding in vitro. The results
were interpreted as indicating that the normal tumor suppression
function of VHL protein involves the inhibition of transcription
elongation by its binding to elongin B and elongin C.

In a review article, Tyers and Willems (1999) stated that the VHL
protein is part of a complex that includes elongin B, elongin C, and
cullin-2 (CUL2; 603135), proteins that are associated with
transcriptional elongation and ubiquitination. Components of the VCB
(VHL/elongin C/elongin B) complex share sequence similarities with the
E3 ubiquitin ligase complexes SCF (SKP1, (601434); CUL1, (603134); F-box
protein) and APC (anaphase promoting complex; see 603462). Thus, elongin
B is ubiquitin-like, and elongin C and CUL2 are similar to the SKP1 and
CUL1 components of SCF, respectively. Substrate recognition by E3
enzymes such as SCF and APC is crucial because protein degradation must
be highly selective. Both SCF and APC interact with a set of adaptor
proteins that recruit different binding partners through specific
protein-protein interaction domains. SOCS-box-containing proteins (see
603597) may act as adaptors for the VCB complex.

Feldman et al. (1999) demonstrated that the folding and assembly of VHL
into a complex with its partner proteins, elongin B and elongin C, is
directly mediated by the chaperonin TRiC, also called CCT (see 600114).
Association of VHL with TRiC is required for formation of the
VHL-elongin B-elongin C complex. A 55-amino acid domain of VHL (amino
acids 100 to 155) is both necessary and sufficient for binding to TRiC.
Mutation or deletion of this domain is associated with VHL syndrome, and
2 mutations that disrupt the normal interaction with TRiC and impair VHL
folding were identified. These results defined a novel role for TRiC in
mediating oligomerization and suggested that inactivating mutations can
impair polypeptide function by interfering with chaperone-mediated
folding.

Lee et al. (1996) demonstrated that there is a tightly regulated,
cell-density-dependent transport of the VHL protein into and/or out of
the nucleus. In densely grown cells, it is predominantly in the
cytoplasm, whereas in sparse cultures, most of the protein can be
detected in the nucleus. They identified a putative nuclear localization
signal in the first 60 and first 28 amino acids of the human and rat VHL
protein, respectively. Sequences in the C-terminal region of VHL protein
may also be required for localization to the cytosol. The findings
indicated a novel cell-density-dependent pathway responsible for the
regulation of VHL cellular localization.

Iliopoulos et al. (1995) showed that the renal cell carcinoma cell line
786-O, which is known to harbor a VHL mutation, fails to produce a
wildtype VHL protein. Reintroduction of wildtype, but not mutant, VHL
into these cells had no demonstrable effect on their growth in vitro but
inhibited their ability to form tumors in nude mice. Like many cancer
cells, the 786-0 RCC fails to exit the cell cycle upon serum withdrawal.
Pause et al. (1998) showed that reintroduction of the wildtype VHL gene
restores the ability of VHL-negative RCC cells to exit the cell cycle
and enter G0/quiescence in low serum. The cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p27 (CDKN1B; 600778) accumulates upon serum withdrawal, only
in the presence of VHL, as a result of an increase in protein stability.
Pause et al. (1998) proposed that loss of the wildtype VHL gene results
in a specific cellular defect in serum-dependent growth control, which
may initiate tumor formation. Thus, VHL appears to be the first tumor
suppressor involved in the regulation of cell cycle exit, which is
consistent with its gatekeeper function in the kidney.

To discover genes involved in VHL-mediated carcinogenesis, Ivanov et al.
(1998) used renal cell carcinoma cell lines stably transfected with
wildtype VHL-expressing transgenes. Large-scale RNA differential display
technology applied to these cell lines identified several differentially
expressed genes, including an alpha carbonic anhydrase gene, termed CA12
(603263). The deduced protein sequence was classified as a one-pass
transmembrane carbonic anhydrase possessing an apparently intact
catalytic domain in the extracellular CA module. Reintroduced wildtype
VHL strongly inhibited the overexpression of the CA12 gene in the
parental renal cell carcinoma cell lines. Similar results were obtained
with CA9 (603179) which encodes another transmembrane carbonic anhydrase
with an intact catalytic domain. Although both domains of the VHL
protein contributed to regulation of CA12 expression, the elongin
binding domain alone could effectively regulate CA9 expression. By
fluorescence in situ hybridization, Ivanov et al. (1998) mapped CA12 and
CA9 to chromosome bands 15q22 and 17q21.2, respectively, regions prone
to amplification in some human cancers. Ivanov et al. (1998) stated that
additional experiments were necessary to define the role of CA IX and CA
XII enzymes in the regulation of pH in the extracellular
microenvironment and its potential impact on cancer cell growth.

Roe et al. (2006) found that VHL directly associated with and stabilized
p53 (TP53; 191170) by suppressing MDM2 (164785)-mediated ubiquitination
and nuclear export of p53. Moreover, upon genotoxic stress, VHL invoked
an interaction between p53 and p300 (EP300; 602700) and the acetylation
of p53, which led to an increase in p53 transcriptional activity and
cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Roe et al. (2006) concluded that VHL
has a function in upregulating p53.

Yang et al. (2007) noted that VHL-defective renal carcinoma cells
exhibit increased NF-kappa-B (see 164011) activity, which can promote
resistance to chemotherapy or cytokines. They showed that VHL
downregulates NF-kappa-B activity by acting as an adaptor to promote
casein kinase-2 (see 115440)-mediated inhibitory phosphorylation of
CARD9 (607212), an NF-kappa-B agonist.

- Role in Oxygen-Related Gene Expression

The highly vascular tumors associated with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome
overproduce angiogenic peptides such as vascular endothelial growth
factor/vascular permeability factor (VEGF/VPF; 192240). Iliopoulos et
al. (1996) found that renal carcinoma cells lacking wildtype VHL protein
produce mRNAs encoding VEGF/VPF, the glucose transporter GLUT1 (SLC2A1;
138140), and the platelet-derived growth factor B chain (190040) under
both normoxic and hypoxic conditions. Reintroduction of wildtype, but
not mutant, VHL protein into these cells specifically inhibited
production of these mRNAs under normoxic conditions, thus restoring
their previously described hypoxia-inducible profile. Iliopoulos et al.
(1996) concluded that the VHL protein appears to play a critical role in
the transduction of signals generated by changes in ambient oxygen
tension.

VEGF mRNA is upregulated in von Hippel-Lindau syndrome-associated
tumors. Mukhopadhyay et al. (1997) assessed the effect of the VHL gene
product on VEGF expression. Using a VEGF promoter-luciferase construct
for cotransfection with a wildtype VHL vector in embryonic kidney and
renal cell carcinoma cell lines, they showed that wildtype VHL protein
inhibited VEGF promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner up to 5- to
10-fold. Deletion analysis defined a 144-bp region of the VEGF promoter
necessary for VHL repression. This VHL-responsive element is GC rich and
specifically bound the transcription factor Sp1 (189906) in crude
nuclear extracts. They further demonstrated that VHL and Sp1 directly
interact with an inhibitory effect on Sp1, suggesting that loss of Sp1
inhibition may be important in the pathogenesis of von Hippel-Lindau
syndrome and renal cell carcinoma.

Maxwell et al. (1999) studied the involvement of VHL in oxygen-regulated
gene expression using ribonuclease protection analysis of 2
VHL-deficient renal carcinoma cell lines, RCC4 and 786-O. Eleven genes
encoding products involved in glucose transport, glycolysis, high energy
phosphate metabolism, and angiogenesis were examined; 9 were induced by
hypoxia in other mammalian cells and 2 were repressed by hypoxia. None
of these responses were seen in the VHL-defective cell lines. Responses
to hypoxia were restored by stable transfection of a wildtype VHL gene,
with effects ranging from a modest action of hypoxia to substantial
regulation. These results indicated that the previously described
upregulation of hypoxia-inducible mRNAs in VHL-defective cells extend to
a broad range of oxygen-regulated genes and involves a constitutive
'hypoxia pattern' for both positively and negatively regulated genes.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF1; 603348) has a key role in cellular
response to hypoxia, including the regulation of genes involved in
energy metabolism, angiogenesis, and apoptosis. The alpha subunits of
HIF are rapidly degraded by the proteasome under normal conditions but
are stabilized by hypoxia. Cobaltous ions or iron chelators mimic
hypoxia, indicating that the stimuli may interact through effects on a
ferroprotein oxygen sensor. Maxwell et al. (1999) demonstrated a
critical role for the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene product
VHL in HIF1 regulation. In VHL-defective cells, HIF-alpha subunits were
constitutively stabilized and HIF1 was activated. Reexpression of VHL
restored oxygen-dependent instability. VHL and HIF-alpha subunits
coimmunoprecipitated, and VHL was present in the hypoxic HIF1
DNA-binding complex. In cells exposed to iron chelation or cobaltous
ions, HIF1 is dissociated from VHL. These findings indicated that the
interaction between HIF1 and VHL is iron dependent and that it is
necessary for the oxygen-dependent degradation of HIF-alpha subunits.
Maxwell et al. (1999) suggested that constitutive HIF1 activation may
underlie the angiogenic phenotype of VHL-associated tumors.

In the presence of oxygen, HIF is targeted for destruction by an E3
ubiquitin ligase containing the VHL tumor suppressor protein. Ivan et
al. (2001) found that human VHL protein binds to a short HIF-derived
peptide when a conserved proline residue at the core of this peptide is
hydroxylated. Because proline hydroxylation requires molecular oxygen
and iron, this protein modification may play a key role in mammalian
oxygen sensing. Jaakkola et al. (2001) also demonstrated that the
interaction between VHL protein and a specific domain of the HIF1-alpha
subunit is regulated through hydroxylation of a proline residue
(HIF1-alpha P564) by an enzyme which they termed HIF-alpha
prolyl-hydroxylase (HIF-PH). An absolute requirement for dioxygen as a
cosubstrate and iron as a cofactor suggests that HIF-PH functions
directly as a cellular oxygen sensor.

Mahon et al. (2001) showed that the N-terminal 155 residues of VHL
interact with HIF1AN (606615). They found that VHL functions as a
transcriptional corepressor inhibiting HIF1A transactivation by
recruiting HDAC1 (601241), HDAC2 (605164), and HDAC3 (605166). Epstein
et al. (2001) defined a conserved HIF-VHL-prolyl hydroxylase pathway in
C. elegans and identified Egl9 as a dioxygenase that regulates HIF by
prolyl hydroxylation. In mammalian cells, they showed that the
HIF-prolyl hydroxylases are represented by 3 proteins, PHD1 (606424),
PHD2 (606425), and PHD3 (606426), with a conserved
2-histidine-1-carboxylate iron coordination motif at the catalytic site.
Direct modulation of recombinant enzyme activity by graded hypoxia, iron
chelation, and cobaltous ions mirrored the characteristics of HIF
induction in vivo, fulfilling requirements for these enzymes being
oxygen sensors that regulate HIF.

Hoffman et al. (2001) reported that the products of 4 different type 2C
VHL alleles retain the ability to downregulate HIF but are defective for
promotion of fibronectin (135600) matrix assembly. Furthermore, leu188
to val (L188V; 608537.0014), a well-studied type 2C mutation, retained
the ability to suppress renal carcinoma growth in vivo.

Clifford et al. (2001) investigated in detail the effect of 13 naturally
occurring VHL mutations (11 missense), representing each phenotypic
subclass, on HIF-alpha subunit regulation. Mutations associated with the
PHE-only phenotype (type 2C) promoted HIF-alpha ubiquitylation in vitro
and demonstrated wildtype binding patterns with VHL interacting
proteins, suggesting that loss of other VHL functions are necessary for
PHE susceptibility. Mutations causing HAB susceptibility (types 1, 2A,
and 2B) demonstrated variable effects on HIF-alpha subunit and elongin
binding, but all resulted in defective HIF-alpha regulation and loss of
fibronectin binding. All RCC-associated mutations caused complete
HIF-alpha dysregulation and loss of fibronectin binding. These studies
strengthened the notion that HIF deregulation plays a causal role in
hemangioblastoma and renal carcinoma, and raised the possibility that
abnormal fibronectin matrix assembly contributes to pheochromocytoma
pathogenesis in the setting of VHL syndrome.

Hemangioblastomas of the central nervous system and retina in VHL
patients overexpress vascular endothelial growth factor, which
represents a potential target for anti-angiogenic drugs. In 3 VHL
patients with CNS or retinal hemangioblastomas treated by the anti-VEGF
receptor SU5416, Richard et al. (2002) observed, after 3 to 4 months of
treatment, a secondary paradoxical polycythemia. Hematocrit was normal
before the beginning of the trial, and no progression of
hemangioblastomas was observed. Polycythemia had never been reported in
SU5416 trials for advanced malignancies. In the studies of Richard et
al. (2002), the polycythemia may have represented a specific action on
red blood cell precursors occurring only in the absence of a functional
VHL gene.

Staller et al. (2003) demonstrated that the VHL tumor suppressor protein
negatively regulates CXCR4 (162643) expression owing to its capacity to
target HIF1A (603348) for degradation under normoxic conditions. This
process is suppressed under hypoxic conditions, resulting in
HIF-dependent CXCR4 activation. An analysis of clear cell renal
carcinoma that manifests mutations in the VHL gene in most cases
revealed an association of strong CXCR4 expression with poor
tumor-specific survival. Staller et al. (2003) concluded that their
results suggest a mechanism for CXCR4 activation during tumor cell
evolution and imply that VHL inactivation acquired by incipient tumor
cells early in tumorigenesis confers not only a selective survival
advantage but also the tendency to home to selected organs.

Corn et al. (2003) established that the VHL protein binds to Tat-binding
protein-1 (TBP1; 186852). TBP1 associates with the beta-domain of VHL
and complexes with VHL and HIF1A in vivo. Overexpression of TBP1
promotes degradation of HIF1A in a VHL-dependent manner that requires
the ATPase domain of TBP1. Several distinct mutations in exon 2 of the
VHL gene disrupt binding of VHL to TBP1. A VHL protein mutant containing
an exon 2 missense substitution coimmunoprecipitated with HIF1A, but not
TBP1, and did not promote degradation of HIF1A. Thus, the ability of the
VHL protein to degrade HIF1A depends in part on its interaction with
TBP1 and suggests a new mechanism for HIF1A stabilization in some
VHL-deficient tumors.

To identify novel target genes of the VHL protein, Zatyka et al. (2002)
investigated the effect of wildtype VHL protein on the expression of 588
cancer-related genes in 2 VHL-defective renal cell carcinoma cell lines.
Expression array analysis identified 9 genes that demonstrated a greater
than 2-fold decrease in expression in both RCC cell lines after
restoration of wildtype VHL protein. Three of the 9 genes, VEGF, PAI1
(173360), and LRP1 (107770), had previously been reported as targets of
the VHL protein and are hypoxia-inducible. In addition, 6 novel targets
were detected, including cyclin D1 (CCND1; 168461). No evidence was
found that CCND1 expression was influenced by hypoxia, suggesting that
VHL protein downregulates these targets by an HIF-independent mechanism.

Homozygous disruption of the Vhl gene in mice results in embryonic
lethality from lack of placental vasculogenesis (Gnarra et al., 1997).
To investigate Vhl function in the adult, Haase et al. (2001) generated
a conditional Vhl-null allele (2-lox allele) and a null allele (1-lox
allele) by Cre-mediated recombination in embryonic stem cells. They
showed that mice heterozygous for the 1-lox allele developed cavernous
hemangiomas of the liver, a rare manifestation in the human disease.
Histologically, these tumors were associated with hepatocellular
steatosis and focal proliferations of small vessels. To study the
cellular origin of these lesions, Haase et al. (2001) inactivated VHL
tissue specifically in hepatocytes. Deletion of VHL in the liver
resulted in severe steatosis, many blood-filled vascular cavities, and
foci of increased vascularization within the hepatic parenchyma. These
histopathologic changes were similar to those seen in livers from mice
heterozygous for the 1-lox allele. Hypoxia-inducible mRNAs encoding
vascular endothelial growth factor, glucose transporter-1, and
erythropoietin (EPO; 133170) were upregulated. Thus, targeted
inactivation of mouse Vhl replicated clinical features of the human
disease and underscored the importance of the VHL gene product in the
regulation of hypoxia-responsive genes in vivo.

Wang et al. (2007) showed that mice overexpressing Hif1a in osteoblasts
through selective deletion of Vhl expressed high levels of Vegf (192240)
and developed extremely dense, heavily vascularized long bones. In
contrast, mice lacking Hif1a in osteoblasts had long bones that were
significantly thinner and less vascularized than those of controls. Loss
of Vhl in osteoblasts increased endothelial sprouting from the embryonic
metatarsals in vitro but had little effect on osteoblast function in the
absence of blood vessels. Wang et al. (2007) concluded that activation
of the HIF1A pathway in osteoblasts during bone development couples
angiogenesis to osteogenesis.

Endocytosis plays a major role in the deactivation of receptors
localized to the plasma membrane, and early endocytic events require the
small GTPase RAB5 (179512) and its effector rabaptin-5 (RABEP1; 603616).
Wang et al. (2009) found that hypoxia, via the VHL-HIF2A (603349)
signaling pathway, downregulated rabaptin-5 expression, leading to
decelerated endocytosis and prolonged activation of ligand-bound EGFR
(131550). Primary kidney and breast tumors with strong hypoxic
signatures showed significantly lower expression of rabaptin-5 RNA and
protein. Wang et al. (2009) identified a conserved hypoxia-responsive
element (HRE) in the rabaptin-5 promoter that bound in vitro-translated
HIF1A and HIF2A, leading to displacement of RNA polymerase II and
attenuating rabaptin-5 transcription.

Mehta et al. (2009) reported that in C. elegans the loss of VHL1
significantly increased life span and enhanced resistance to
polyglutamine and beta-amyloid toxicity. Deletion of HIF1 (603348) was
epistatic to VHL1, indicating that HIF1 acts downstream of VHL1 to
modulate aging and proteotoxicity. VHL1 and HIF1 control longevity by a
mechanism distinct from both dietary restriction and insulin-like
signaling. Mehta et al. (2009) concluded that their findings define VHL1
and the hypoxic response as an alternative longevity and protein
homeostasis pathway.

Russell et al. (2011) demonstrated that VHL binds to SOCS1 (603597) and
promotes degradation of phosphorylated JAK2 (147796) via
ubiquitin-mediated destruction.

- Role in Protein Assembly

Ohh et al. (1998) showed that fibronectin coimmunoprecipitated with
normal VHL protein but not tumor-derived VHL mutants. Immunofluorescence
and biochemical fractionation experiments showed that fibronectin
colocalized with a fraction of VHL associated with the endoplasmic
reticulum, and cold competition experiments suggested that complexes
between fibronectin and VHL protein exist in intact cells. Assembly of
an extracellular fibronectin matrix by VHL -/- renal carcinoma cells, as
determined by immunofluorescence and ELISA assays, was grossly defective
compared with VHL +/+ renal carcinoma cells. Reintroduction of wildtype,
but not mutant, VHL protein into VHL -/- renal carcinoma cells partially
corrected this defect. Extracellular fibronectin matrix assembly by VHL
-/- mouse embryos and mouse embryo fibroblasts, unlike their VHL +/+
counterparts, was grossly impaired. Ohh et al. (1998) concluded that VHL
protein is important in fibronectin matrix assembly.

Hergovich et al. (2003) found that VHL is a microtubule-associated
protein that can protect microtubules from depolymerization in several
cell lines. Both the microtubule binding and stabilization functions
depended on amino acids 95-123, a hotspot for mutations in VHL syndrome.
They found that the syndrome-associated mutations Y98H (608537.0009) and
Y112H (608537.0012) disrupted the microtubule-stabilizing function of
the protein.

- Role in Ciliary Maintenance

Using immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy, Lolkema et al. (2008)
showed that Vhl localized to cilia extending from basal bodies stained
with gamma-tubulin (TUBG1; 191135) in primary mouse kidney cells. Cilia
were absent in renal cell carcinoma cells derived from a VHL patient,
but reintroduction of VHL into these cells resulted in rapid cilia
assembly. The cilia function of VHL required residues 1 to 53, which
constitute an acidic domain, and residues 95 to 123, which were
previously implicated in microtubule binding and tumor suppression.

- Role in Central Nervous System Development

Kanno et al. (2000) investigated the role of the VHL gene in CNS
development using rodent CNS progenitor cells. They showed that
expression of the VHL protein is correlated with neuronal
differentiation but not with glial differentiation in CNS progenitor
cells, and also that VHL gene transduction induces neuronal
differentiation. Furthermore, a VHL mRNA antisense oligonucleotide
inhibited differentiation of CNS progenitor cells and upregulated their
cell cycle.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

The ubiquitination of HIF by VHL plays a central role in the cellular
response to changes in oxygen availability. VHL protein binds to HIF
only when a conserved proline in HIF is hydroxylated, a modification
that is oxygen-dependent. Min et al. (2002) determined the 1.85-angstrom
structure of a 20-residue HIF1A-VHL protein-elongin B-elongin C complex
that shows that HIF1A binds to VHL protein in an extended beta
strand-like conformation. The hydroxyproline inserts into a gap in the
VHL hydrophobic core, at a site that is a hotspot for tumorigenic
mutations, with its 4-hydroxyl group recognized by buried serine and
histidine residues. Although the beta sheet-like interactions contribute
to the stability of the complex, the hydroxyproline contacts are central
to the strict specificity characteristic of signaling.

Hon et al. (2002) determined the crystal structure of a hydroxylated
HIF1A peptide bound to the VHL protein, elongin C, and elongin B and
performed solution binding assays, which revealed a single, conserved
hydroxyproline-binding pocket in the VHL protein. They found that
optimized hydrogen bonding to the buried hydroxyprolyl group confers
precise discrimination between hydroxylated and unmodified prolyl
residues. Hon et al. (2002) concluded that this mechanism provides a new
focus for development of therapeutic agents to modulate cellular
responses to hypoxia.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Nordstrom-O'Brien et al. (2010) provided a review of the molecular
genetics of the VHL gene, including the mutational spectrum and
associated phenotypes.

- Von Hippel-Lindau Syndrome

Using restriction fragment analysis, Latif et al. (1993) identified
rearrangements of the VHL gene in 28 of 221 kindreds with von
Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300). Eighteen of these rearrangements were
due to deletion in the candidate gene. Using pulsed field gel
electrophoresis and cosmid mapping, Latif et al. (1993) established a
physical map of the VHL gene region and identified 3 large
nonoverlapping constitutional deletions in 3 unrelated VHL patients; 1
of these was an in-frame 3-nucleotide deletion at nucleotide 434,
predicted to remove ile146 in the gene product (608537.0001).

Using single-strand conformation polymorphism and heteroduplex analysis
to investigate 94 VHL patients without large deletions, Crossey et al.
(1994) identified 40 different mutations in the VHL gene in 55 unrelated
kindreds: 19 missense mutations, 6 nonsense mutations, 12 frameshift
deletions or insertions, 2 in-frame deletions, and 1 splice donor site
mutation. The 2 most frequent mutations were arg238-to-gln (608537.0005)
and arg238-to-trp (608537.0003), which were detected in 5 and 4
unrelated kindreds, respectively.

Olschwang et al. (1998) screened 92 unrelated patients with VHL syndrome
for point mutations and found 61 DNA variants. In addition, a search for
EcoRI rearrangements revealed germline anomalies in 5 patients. The 61
variants could be subdivided into 20 mutations predicted to alter the
open reading frame and 43 DNA sequence variants that on a priori grounds
were of unknown biologic consequence. The 3-prime end of the coding
sequence of the VHL gene, which encodes the elongin (see 600787)-binding
domain, was the site of 5 of 20 truncating mutations (25%) and 18 of 41
DNA variants (44%) of uncertain functional significance. A similar
screening in 18 patients with sporadic hemangioblastoma revealed 2
missense DNA variants.

Wait et al. (2004) performed genetic analysis of 5 CNS hemangioblastomas
excised from 3 related VHL patients with the same germline VHL gene
deletion. All of the tumors showed distinct 'second-hit' point mutations
on the wildtype allele, even those tumors originating in the same
patient. Moreover, the same types of tumors from the same locations also
showed different point mutations. Wait et al. (2004) concluded that the
somatic mutations were random, and that there is a unique mechanism
underlying tumorigenesis in patients with germline deletion mutations.

Using markers specific for chromosome 3, Glasker et al. (2006) mapped
the deletion size of the 'second-hit' in 16 tumor tissue specimens from
a single patient with VHL syndrome who had a germline heterozygous
partial deletion in the VHL gene. The tumors consisted of 3 central
nervous system hemangioblastomas, 7 renal cell carcinomas, 3 cystic
renal structures, 2 pancreatic tumors, and 1 pancreatic cyst. Deletion
size was highly variable, ranging from short deletions around the VHL
gene to complete deletion of chromosome 3. However, there was no
correlation between deletion size and site of the germline mutation,
affected organ, or type or biological behavior of the tumor. Glasker et
al. (2006) concluded that loss of VHL gene function alone is not
immediately causative for neoplastic growth and suggested that further
molecular events may be required for tumor formation.

(For genotype/phenotype correlations in VHL syndrome, see 193300.)

- Cancer

The Knudson model predicts that sporadic cancers should be associated
with mutations in the same locus affected in the corresponding
hereditary cancer. Using SSCP and RT-PCR techniques, Latif et al. (1993)
identified aberrant patterns in the VHL gene in 5 renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) lines. In 4 of them, the pattern was due to small, 1- to
10-nucleotide deletions that created frameshift mutations and,
presumably, truncated proteins. In the fifth RCC line, the change was a
nonsense mutation, resulting from a 761C-A transversion.

Eng et al. (1995) identified mutations in the VHL gene in 4 of 48
sporadic pheochromocytomas (171300). Two mutations were somatic and 2
were germline. In a mother and 2 sons with pheochromocytoma, Crossey et
al. (1995) identified a VHL mutation (R238W; 6085327.0003) mutation.
None of them had evidence of VHL syndrome.

In 30 (11%) of 271 unrelated patients with sporadic pheochromocytoma,
Neumann et al. (2002) identified 22 different germline mutations in the
VHL gene (see, e.g., 608537.0014 and 608537.0026).

Zhuang et al. (1996) analyzed VHL gene alterations in sporadic human
colon carcinomas and adenomas using techniques that allowed for
procurement and analysis of selected subpopulations of cells from
paraffin embedded and frozen human tumor specimens. Allelic loss of the
VHL gene was detected in 7 of 11 (64%) of informative patients with
sporadic colon carcinoma. No allelic loss was shown in colon adenomas
from 8 informative patients. The authors suggested that VHL gene loss
may represent a relatively late event in colonic neoplasia progression.

Oberstrass et al. (1996) found abnormalities of the VHL gene in 10 of 20
capillary hemangioblastomas of the CNS. Seven tumors had a frameshift
mutation due either to deletion of 1 or more basepairs (6 cases) or to
insertion of 1 basepair (1 case). The remaining 3 tumors had either
point mutations with intron splice site sequences (2 cases) or a point
mutation resulting in an amino acid substitution (1 case). Evidence for
germline alterations of the VHL gene was found in 2 patients who showed
identical mutations in both tumors and corresponding leukocyte DNA.
Oberstrass et al. (1996) noted that it is significant that one of the 2
tumors with a germline mutation was in an 18-year-old male, and the
other in a 40-year-old female. The non-germline mutations included
tumors from individuals 70, 62, 60, 55, and 52 years old.

Kenck et al. (1996) investigated 91 different parenchymal tumors of the
kidney for mutation in the VHL gene by SSCP and/or heteroduplex
techniques. Evidence of mutation of the VHL gene was associated
exclusively with nonpapillary renal cell carcinoma.

Fearon (1997) reviewed more than 20 different hereditary cancer
syndromes that had been defined and attributed to specific germline
mutations in various inherited cancer genes. In a useful diagram, he
illustrated the roles of allelic variation ('1 gene - different
syndromes') and genetic heterogeneity ('different genes - 1 syndrome')
in inherited cancer syndromes. VHL mutations were used as an example of
the former: inactivating mutations, such as nonsense mutations or
deletions, predisposed to clear-cell renal carcinoma, retinal angioma,
and cerebellar and spinal hemangioblastoma; missense mutations, e.g., in
codon 167, predisposed to these tumors and pheochromocytoma in addition.

Van der Harst et al. (1998) screened the VHL gene for germline mutations
in 68 patients who were operated on for pheochromocytoma. This was
undertaken to follow up on the work of Neumann et al. (1993), who
reported that, according to clinical criteria, approximately 23% of the
apparently sporadic pheochromocytomas may in fact be related to a
familial disorder; these disorders are, in addition to von Hippel-Lindau
syndrome, neurofibromatosis-1 (NF1; 162200) and multiple endocrine
neoplasia types IIA (MEN2A; 171400) and IIB (MEN2B; 162300). They found
mutations in the VHL gene in 8 patients; 2 patients were an uncle and
nephew who had the same missense mutation, R64P (608537.0015). In 4
other patients, missense mutations, P25L, L63P (608537.0016), G144Q, and
I147T, were identified. Three of these mutations (P25L, L63P, and R64P)
were located closer to the N terminus of the VHL protein than any
previously reported VHL mutation. In 2 other cases, the mutations were
located not in the coding region but in the intronic sequence (but not
within splice sites), adjacent to the exon, so that they were probably
not related to the syndrome. The results suggested that 8.8% of patients
(6 of 68) with apparently sporadic pheochromocytomas may carry germline
mutations in the VHL gene. This is a relatively high proportion,
although not as high as the 23% reported earlier.

Gallou et al. (1999) investigated the nature of somatic VHL mutations in
173 primary sporadic human renal cell carcinomas using PCR and SSCP
analysis. They detected an abnormal SSCP pattern in 73 samples. After
sequencing, they identified microdeletions in 58% of cases,
microinsertions in 17%, nonsense mutations in 8%, and missense mutations
in 17%. VHL mutations were found only in the nonpapillary renal cell
carcinoma subtype, as previously reported. To compare somatic and
germline mutations, they used the VHL database, which included 507
mutations. The study of mutational events revealed a significant
difference between somatic and germline mutations. Mutations leading to
truncated proteins were observed in 78% of somatic mutations but in only
37% of germline mutations (P less than 0.001). The authors postulated
that a specific pattern of VHL mutations is associated with sporadic
RCC. This pattern corresponds to mutations leading to truncated
proteins, with few specific missense mutations.

Bender et al. (2000) studied 36 VHL-related pheochromocytomas for
somatic VHL and RET gene alterations and LOH of markers on chromosome
arms 1p, 3p, and 22q. For comparison, they performed the same analyses
in 17 sporadic pheochromocytomas. They found significantly different LOH
frequencies at 3 loci between sporadic and VHL tumors; the more than 91%
LOH of markers on 3p and the relatively low frequencies of LOH at 1p and
22q (15% and 21%, respectively) in VHL pheochromocytomas argue for the
importance of VHL gene dysregulation and dysfunction in the pathogenesis
of almost all VHL pheochromocytomas. In contrast, the relatively low
frequency of 3p LOH (24%) and the lack of intragenic VHL alterations
compared with the high frequency of 1p LOH (71%) and the moderate
frequency of 22q LOH (53%) in sporadic pheochromocytomas argue for genes
other than VHL, especially on 1p, that are significant for sporadic
tumorigenesis and suggest that the genetic pathways involved in sporadic
versus VHL pheochromocytoma genesis are distinct.

Renal cell carcinomas occur frequently in patients treated with
long-term dialysis, especially in cases of end-stage renal disease
(ESRD)/acquired cystic disease of the kidney (ACDK). In patients
receiving dialysis, Yoshida et al. (2002) examined 14 RCCs (7 clear-cell
and 7 papillary carcinomas) for somatic mutations of the VHL gene as
well as of the tyrosine kinase domain of the MET oncogene (164860) to
address the molecular pathogenesis of ESRD/ACDK-associated RCCs. They
found that 3 tumors had VHL frameshifts; 1 showed additional LOH at the
VHL gene locus. All 3 tumors were clear-cell RCCs occurring in ESRD with
55, 106, and 156 months of dialysis, respectively. No mutations were
found in the tyrosine kinase domain of the MET oncogene, where mutations
had previously been found in cases of papillary RCCs.

Maranchie et al. (2004) observed a paradoxically lower prevalence of RCC
in patients with complete germline deletion of VHL. They retrospectively
evaluated 123 patients from 55 families with large germline VHL
deletions, including 42 intragenic partial deletions and 13 complete VHL
deletions. An age-adjusted comparison demonstrated a higher prevalence
of RCC in patients with partial germline VHL deletions relative to
complete deletions (48.9% vs 22.6%, p = 0.007). This striking phenotypic
dichotomy was not seen for cystic renal lesions or for CNS (p = 0.22),
pancreas (p = 0.72), or pheochromocytoma (p = 0.34). Deletion mapping
demonstrated that development of RCC had an even greater correlation
with retention of HSPC300 (C3ORF10; 611183), located within the 30-kb
region of 3p, immediately telomeric to VHL (52.3% vs 18.9%, p less than
0.001), suggesting the presence of a neighboring gene or genes critical
to the development and maintenance of RCC.

Gallou et al. (2004) studied the renal phenotype in 274 individuals from
126 unrelated VHL families in whom 92 different VHL mutations were
identified. The incidence of renal involvement was increased in families
with mutations leading to protein truncation or large rearrangement, as
compared to families with missense mutations (81% vs 63%, respectively;
p = 0.03). In the group with missense mutations, Gallou et al. (2004)
identified 2 mutation cluster regions (MCRs) associated with a high risk
of harboring renal lesions: MCR-1 (codons 74-90) and MCR-2 (codons
130-136). In addition, the incidence of RCCs was higher in families with
mutations leading to protein truncation than in families with missense
mutations (75% vs 57%, respectively; p = 0.04). Furthermore, missense
mutations within MCR-1, but not MCR-2, conferred genetic susceptibility
to RCC.

- Autosomal Recessive Familial Erythrocytosis 2

Inheritance of germline mutations in both VHL alleles was found by Ang
et al. (2002) and by others (Pastore et al., 2003; Percy et al., 2002)
as the cause of autosomal recessive familial erythrocytosis (ECYT2,
263400; see 608537.0019). The VHL protein plays an important role in
hypoxia sensing. It binds to hydroxylated HIF1-alpha and serves as a
recognition component of an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex. In hypoxia or
secondary to a mutated VHL gene, the nondegraded HIF1-alpha forms a
heterodimer with HIF1-beta and leads to increased transcription of
hypoxia-inducible genes, including EPO. Pastore et al. (2003) reported 7
erythrocytosis patients with VHL mutations in both alleles
(608537.0021-608537.0024). Two Danish sibs and an American boy were
homozygous for the R200W mutation (608537.0019). Three unrelated white
Americans were compound heterozygous for R200W and another VHL mutation:
L188V (608537.0014) in 2 and P192A (608537.0023) in the third.
Additionally, a Croatian boy was homozygous for an H191D mutation
(608537.0024). Pastore et al. (2003) stated that they had not observed
VHL syndrome-associated tumors in subjects with erythrocytosis or their
heterozygous relatives. They found that up to half of the consecutive
patients with apparent congenital erythrocytosis and increased serum EPO
(133170) whom they had examined had mutations of both VHL alleles. They
concluded that VHL mutations are the most frequent cause of recessive
congenital erythrocytosis and define a class of disorders due to
augmented hypoxia sensing.

ANIMAL MODEL

Gemmill et al. (2002) isolated the Drosophila homolog of TRC8 (603046)
and studied its function by genetic manipulations and a yeast 2-hybrid
screen. Human and Drosophila TRC8 proteins localize to the endoplasmic
reticulum. Loss of either Drosophila Trc8 or Vhl resulted in an
identical ventral midline defect. Direct interaction between Trc8 and
Vhl in Drosophila was confirmed by GST-pull-down and
coimmunoprecipitation experiments. Gemmill et al. (2002) found that in
Drosophila, overexpression of Trc8 inhibited growth consistent with its
presumed role as a tumor suppressor gene. Human JAB1 (604850)
localization was dependent on VHL mutant status. Thus, the VHL, TRC8,
and JAB1 proteins appear to be linked both physically and functionally,
and all 3 may participate in the development of kidney cancer.

Ding et al. (2006) used the Cre-loxP system to delete the Vhl gene from
podocytes in the glomerular basement membrane of mice. At about 4 weeks
of age, the mice developed rapidly progressive renal disease with
hematuria, proteinuria, and renal failure with crescentic
glomerulonephritis with prominent segmental fibrin deposition and
fibrinoid necrosis. No immune deposits were present; the phenotype was
similar to human 'pauci-immune' rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
(RPGN). Gene expression profiling showed increased expression of the HIF
target gene Cxcr4 (162643) in glomeruli from both mice and humans with
RPGN. Treatment of the mice with a Cxcr4 antibody resulted in clinical
improvement, and isolated overexpression of Cxcr4 was sufficient to
cause glomerular disease. Ding et al. (2006) hypothesized that
upregulation of Cxcr4 allowed terminally differentiated podocytes to
reenter the cell cycle, proliferate, and form cellular crescents.

Hickey et al. (2007) found that mice homozygous for the Chuvash
polycythemia-associated VHL mutation (R200W; 608537.0019) developed
polycythemia similar to the human disease. Although bone marrow
cellularity and morphology was similar to controls, spleens from the
mutant mice showed increased numbers of erythroid progenitors and
megakaryocytes, as well as erythroid differentiation of splenic cells in
vitro. Further analysis showed upregulation of HIF2A (603349) and of key
target genes, including EPO, VEGF (192240), GLUT1 (138140), and PAI1
(173360), that contribute to polycythemia.

Using immunofluorescence microscopy, Zehetner et al. (2008) found that
Vhl was expressed in mouse insulin-producing pancreatic beta cells.
Conditional inactivation of Vhl in beta cells promoted a diversion of
glucose away from mitochondria into lactate production, causing cells to
produce high levels of glycolytically derived ATP and to secrete
elevated levels of insulin at low glucose concentrations. Vhl-deficient
mice exhibited diminished glucose-stimulated changes in cytoplasmic
Ca(2+) concentration, electrical activity, and insulin secretion, which
culminated in impaired systemic glucose tolerance. Vhl deletion was
associated with upregulation of Hif1a and the glucose transporter Glut1,
an Hif1a target gene. Combined deletion of Vhl and Hif1a rescued the
defects due to Vhl deletion alone, implying that they resulted from
Hif1a activation.

Lee et al. (2009) generated transgenic mouse embryonic stem cells with
the homozygous VHL type 2B mutation R167Q (608537.0005). Mutant cells
had preserved regulation of both HIF-alpha factors with slightly greater
normotoxic dysregulation of HIF2-alpha. R167Q-derived teratomas had a
growth advantage and showed hemangioma formation. Homozygous mice were
embryonic lethal due to placental failure, and heterozygous mice
developed renal cysts and were predisposed to the carcinogen-promoted
renal carcinoma.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, 3-BP DEL, ILE75DEL

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ILE146DEL mutation has been renumbered as ILE75DEL.

In a patient with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300), Latif et al.
(1993) identified an in-frame 3-nucleotide deletion at nucleotide 434 of
the VHL gene, predicted to remove isoleucine-146 in the gene product.

.0002
RENAL CELL CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
VHL, SER183TER

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the SER254TER mutation has been renumbered as SER183TER (S183X).

In a cell line from a sporadic case of renal cell carcinoma (144700),
Latif et al. (1993) identified a 761C-A transversion in the VHL gene,
predicted to result in a ser254-to-ter (S254X) substitution.

.0003
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA, INCLUDED
VHL, ARG167TRP

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ARG238TRP mutation has been renumbered as ARG167TRP (R167W).

In a study of 94 VHL (193300) patients without large deletions, Crossey
et al. (1994) found that the 2 most frequent mutations were missense
mutations at codon 238: 4 kindreds had a 712C-T transition, resulting in
an arg238-to-trp (R238W) change, and 5 kindreds had a 713G-A transition,
leading to an arg238-to-gln (R238Q; 608537.0005) substitution. Another
mutation 712C-G transversion, resulting in an arg238-to-gly (R238G)
substitution (608537.0004). All 3 mutations at codon 238 occurred at a
CpG dinucleotide. The authors noted that although pheochromocytoma
occurs in only about 7% of patients with VHL, a codon 238 mutation
carried a high risk (62%) of pheochromocytoma.

The R238W mutation was found by Garcia et al. (1997) in a Spanish family
in which VHL was manifested predominantly as familial pheochromocytoma
in 2 generations, consistent with VHL syndrome type 2C.

In a mother and 2 sons with pheochromocytoma (171300), consistent with
VHL syndrome type 2C, Crossey et al. (1995) identified the R238W
mutation.

Zbar et al. (1996) confirmed previous observations that germline codon
167 mutations of the VHL gene (R167W and R167Q; 608537.0005) convey a
high risk for the development of pheochromocytoma and renal cell
carcinoma. In 21 of 33 families with mutations at codon 167,
pheochromocytoma occurred, compared to 15 of 223 families without a
mutation at codon 167. The association between codon 167 mutations and
pheochromocytoma was detected in all nationalities tested. Two of 4
Japanese VHL pheochromocytoma families had mutations at codon 167; and 3
of 10 French VHL pheochromocytoma families had mutations at codon 167.

Neumann et al. (2002) identified the R167Q substitution in the germline
of a patient with sporadic pheochromocytoma (171300).

In the germlines of 6 unrelated patients with sporadic pheochromocytoma
(171300), Neumann et al. (2002) identified the R167W substitution. The
mutation was not identified in 600 control chromosomes.

.0004
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, ARG167GLY

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ARG238GLY mutation has been renumbered as ARG167GLY (R167G).

See 608537.0003 and Crossey et al. (1994).

.0005
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, ARG167GLN

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ARG238GLN mutation has been renumbered as ARG167GLN (R167Q).

See 608537.0003 and Crossey et al. (1994).

.0006
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, ARG161TER

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ARG232TER mutation has been renumbered as ARG161TER (R161X).

In a patient with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300), Loeb et al.
(1994) identified a 694C-T transition in exon 3 of the VHL gene,
resulting in an amber stop codon arg232-to-ter (R232X).

Gilcrease et al. (1995) found the identical 694C-T transition as a
somatic mutation in a clear cell papillary cystadenoma of the epididymis
in a patient who showed no evidence of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome and in
whom somatic cells did not contain this mutation.

.0007
HEMANGIOBLASTOMA, SPORADIC CEREBELLAR
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME, INCLUDED
VHL, TRP88SER

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the TRP159SER mutation has been renumbered as TRP88SER (W88S).

In 13 sporadic cases of cerebellar hemangioblastoma, Kanno et al. (1994)
sought somatic mutations in the VHL gene with single-strand conformation
polymorphism analyses of the tumor DNAs. An abnormal SSCP pattern was
detected in 7, and in 3 of these the mutation was successfully
characterized by direct sequencing. The somatic mutations were 2
missense mutations and 1 deletion of a single base. One of the missense
mutations was a 476G-C transversion, resulting in a trp-to-ser change.
The codon number was not noted.

In a Japanese patient with VHL (193300), the Clinical Research Group for
VHL in Japan (1995) identified the 476G-C transversion, which resulted
in a trp159-to-ser (W159S) substitution.

.0008
HEMANGIOBLASTOMA, SPORADIC CEREBELLAR
VHL, LEU135PHE

In a sporadic case of cerebellar hemangioblastoma, Kanno et al. (1994)
identified a missense mutation in exon 2 of the VHL gene: a 618A-C
transversion, resulting in a leu135-to-phe substitution.

.0009
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, TYR98HIS

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the TYR169HIS mutation has been renumbered as TYR98HIS (Y98H), resulting
from a 292T-C transition.

In 14 apparently unrelated von Hippel-Lindau syndrome type 2A (193300)
families from the Black Forest region of Germany, Brauch et al. (1995)
found a 505T-C transition in the VHL gene, resulting in a tyr169-to-his
(Y169H) substitution. Brauch et al. (1995) suggested that more than 75
VHL germline mutations had been identified in VHL patients to that date.
The same mutation, associated with pheochromocytoma, had been identified
by Chen et al. (1995) in 2 VHL 2A families in Pennsylvania. All affected
individuals in the 16 families shared the same VHL haplotype, indicating
a founder effect. In at least one of the Pennsylvania families, the
Y169H mutation probably derived from their Pfalz ancestors, who were
among Germans who migrated to Pennsylvania.

In a patient with the Y169H mutation as the cause of VHL, Schimke et al.
(1998) found a functioning carotid paraganglioma.

Allen et al. (2001) performed a longitudinal clinical study and DNA
analysis of 24 family members, 16 of whom exhibited a 505T-C change in
exon 1 of the VHL gene. Two of the 16 were asymptomatic carriers of the
505T-C mutation. Twelve of 16 (75%) of the gene carriers had 1 or more
ocular angiomas. The mean number of ocular angiomas per gene carrier was
3.3. Six eyes had optic disc angiomas. Five gene carriers (31%) lost
vision because of ocular angiomatosis. Four patients (25%) had
cerebellar hemangioblastomas and 11 patients (69%) had
pheochromocytomas. No patient had renal cell carcinoma, consistent with
the clinical diagnosis of VHL syndrome type 2A. The authors stated that
recognition of the VHL syndrome 2A phenotype suggested the presence of a
specific mutation (505T-C) in the VHL gene. They suggested that
confirmation of this genotype would increase a clinician's ability to
provide favorable prognostic information to affected family members.

Bender et al. (2001) studied 125 individuals in southern Germany
carrying the 505T-C mutation. Forty-seven percent had pheochromocytoma;
36% had retinal angioma; 36%, hemangioblastoma of the spine; and 16% had
hemangioblastoma of the brain. Forty-seven percent of patients were
symptomatic; 30% were asymptomatic despite the presence of at least 1
VHL-related tumor; and 23% of the carriers had no detectable VHL lesion.
Of the 19 patients who died, 10 died of symptomatic VHL lesions. Overall
penetrance by cumulative incidence was estimated at 48% by 35 years and
88% by 70 years. Bender et al. (2001) suggested that the mortality rate
for those carrying this mutation was much lower than in unselected VHL
mutations and was comparable to that of the general population of
Germany.

.0010
MOVED TO 608537.0003
.0011
MOVED TO 608537.0003
.0012
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, TYR112HIS

In a large VHL (193300) family with pheochromocytoma without renal
carcinoma (VHL type 2A) studied by Tisherman et al. (1962, 1993), Zbar
et al. (1996) identified a tyr112-to-his (Y112H) mutation in the VHL
gene. Of 22 affected family members, 19 were affected with
pheochromocytoma; no affected family member had renal cell carcinoma. In
the original report (Tisherman et al., 1962), at least 7 persons had
pheochromocytoma. One or more cafe-au-lait spots (in 22 persons),
extensive hemangiomas (in 2 persons), and angiomatosis retinae (in 2
persons) were discovered in the family.

.0013
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, VAL166PHE

In a family with VHL (193300), Gross et al. (1996) identified a
val166-to-phe (V166F) mutation in the VHL gene. Seven members had
pheochromocytoma, all without renal carcinoma.

.0014
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2, INCLUDED;;
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA, INCLUDED
VHL, LEU188VAL

In a family with VHL (193300), Neumann et al. (1995) identified a
leu188-to-val (L188V) mutation in the VHL gene. Nine patients had
pheochromocytoma without renal carcinoma (Zbar et al., 1996).

In 6 members of the same German family identified by Neumann et al.
(1995) with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome type 2C, Weirich et al. (2002)
found a P81S mutation in the VHL gene (608537.0020) which cosegregated
with the L188V mutation. Weirich et al. (2002) discussed the possible
impact of these mutations on protein function and phenotype.

In 2 unrelated white American children, a 15-year-old male and a
13-year-old female, who presented at 5 years of age with familial
erythrocytosis (ECYT2; 263400), Pastore et al. (2003) identified a
562C-G transversion in the VHL gene, resulting in the L188V mutation. In
both patients the mutation was in compound heterozygous state with the
common R200W mutation (608537.0019).

Neumann et al. (2002) identified the L188V mutation in the germline of a
patient with sporadic pheochromocytoma (171300). The mutation was not
identified in 600 control chromosomes.

.0015
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
VHL, ARG64PRO

In an uncle and his nephew with apparently isolated pheochromocytoma
(171300), van der Harst et al. (1998) found an arg64-to-pro (R64P)
mutation in the VHL gene. This mutation was 1 of 3 missense mutations
identified by van der Harst et al. (1998) that were located closer to
the N terminus of the VHL protein than any previously reported VHL
mutation (see also 608537.0016).

.0016
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
VHL, LEU63PRO

In a patient with apparently sporadic pheochromocytoma (171300), van der
Harst et al. (1998) found a leu63-to-pro (L63P) mutation in the VHL
gene. This mutation was 1 of 3 missense mutations identified by van der
Harst et al. (1998) that were located closer to the N terminus of the
VHL protein than any previously reported VHL mutation (see also
608537.0015).

.0017
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, TYR112ASN

In a family with VHL (193300), Bradley et al. (1999) identified a 547T-A
transversion in exon 1 of the VHL gene, resulting in a tyr112-to-asn
(Y112N) substitution. Of 13 affected individuals, 7 had renal cell
carcinoma and 1 had pheochromocytoma. The authors contrasted this family
to 2 families reported by Chen et al. (1996) that had a mutation at the
same position but causing a different amino acid change (tyr112 to his;
608537.0012). In these families, 19 of 22 affected individuals had
pheochromocytoma and none had renal cell carcinoma. Bradley et al.
(1999) concluded that different amino acid changes at the same position
can cause very distinct clinical phenotypes.

.0018
RENAL CELL CARCINOMA WITH PARANEOPLASTIC ERYTHROCYTOSIS
VHL, LEU163PRO

Wiesener et al. (2002) described a 50-year-old man, admitted to hospital
for acute myocardial infarction, who was found to have marked
erythrocytosis. Serum erythropoietin (EPO; 133170) was increased, and
ultrasonography demonstrated a mass at the upper pole of the left
kidney. Following nephrectomy, which confirmed the diagnosis of renal
cell carcinoma (144700), EPO serum concentration decreased within 7 days
and hemoglobin levels returned to normal. The patient was well 9 months
later with normal EPO serum concentration. In this patient, Wiesener et
al. (2002) reported that EPO mRNA was not detectable in normal kidney
tissue but markedly upregulated in the tumor. Hypoxia-inducible genes,
including VEGF (192240), GLUT1 (138140), carbonic anhydrase-9 (603179),
lactate dehydrogenase-A (150000), and aldolase A (103850), were also
strongly induced in the tumor. Immunoblots showed significant
overexpression of the HIF1A (603348) and HIF2A (603349) subunits in the
tumor, and immunohistochemistry performed for HIF1A showed nuclear
accumulation of the transcription factor in virtually every tumor cell.
A mutation analysis of the VHL gene in tumor cells revealed a
leu163-to-pro (L163P) missense mutation due to a 701T-C transition in
exon 3. This mutation had previously been identified in another RCC. The
mutation was not present in other tissues of the patient. In this case,
there was a clear indication that the pronounced erythrocytosis was a
precipitating factor in the coronary thrombosis.

.0019
POLYCYTHEMIA, CHUVASH TYPE
VHL, ARG200TRP

Chuvash polycythemia, familial erythrocytosis-2 (263400) caused by this
specific mutation, is an autosomal recessive disorder of erythrocytosis
that is endemic to the mid-Volga River region. Ang et al. (2002) studied
5 multiplex Chuvash families and confirmed that polycythemia was
associated with significant elevations of serum erythropoietin (EPO;
133170) levels and ruled out a location of the gene on chromosome 11 as
had been reported previously by Vasserman et al. (1999). They also ruled
out mutation in the HIF1A gene (603348), which is located in 14q. Using
a genomewide screen, they identified a region on 3p with a lod score
greater than 2 and identified a 598C-T transition in the VHL gene,
resulting in an arg200-to-trp (R200W) mutation in all cases. Ang et al.
(2002) concluded that the R200W substitution impairs the interaction of
VHL with HIF1-alpha, reducing the rate of degradation of HIF1-alpha and
resulting in increased expression of downstream target genes including
EPO, SLC2A1 (138140), transferrin (TF; 190000), transferrin receptor
(TFRC; 190010), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF; 192240).
Mutations in VHL had been associated with pheochromocytoma,
hemangioblastoma, and renal cell carcinoma, none of which were observed
in individuals with Chuvash polycythemia or obligate carriers of the
R200W mutation. Ang et al. (2002) stated that more than 700 mutations
had been reported in VHL (Beroud et al., 1998), but that no individual
had been found to be homozygous or compound heterozygous for germline
mutations.

Pastore et al. (2003) evaluated the role of the VHL gene in 8 children
with a history of polycythemia and an elevated serum EPO level and
identified 3 different germline VHL mutations in 4 of them. One child
was homozygous for the R200W mutation, and another was compound
heterozygous for the R200W mutation and a val130-to-leu mutation (V130L;
608537.0021). Of 2 sibs who were heterozygous for an asp126-to-tyr
mutation (D126Y; 608537.0022), 1 fulfilled some criteria of VHL syndrome
(193300); a pulmonary angioma was discovered at 10 years of age and
treated by coil embolization without effect on the polycythemia, and at
15 years of age nephrectomy was performed for a subcapsular hemangioma.

Percy et al. (2002) observed homozygosity for the R200W mutation in 3
Bangladeshi families with Chuvash-type congenital polycythemia living in
the United Kingdom.

By haplotype analysis of 101 ethnically diverse individuals with the
common R200W mutation, including 72 Chuvash individuals, Liu et al.
(2004) determined that the R200W mutation is due to a founder effect
that originated from 14,000 to 62,000 years ago.

In a matched cohort study, Gordeuk et al. (2004) found that homozygosity
for the 598C-T transition in the VHL gene was associated with vertebral
hemangiomas, varicose veins, lower blood pressures, and elevated serum
VEGF concentrations (p less than 0.0005), as well as premature mortality
related to cerebral vascular events and peripheral thrombosis.
Spinocerebellar hemangioblastomas, renal carcinomas, and
pheochromocytomas typical of classic VHL syndrome were not found,
suggesting that overexpression of HIF1-alpha and VEGF is not sufficient
for tumorigenesis. Although hemoglobin-adjusted serum erythropoietin
concentrations were approximately 10-fold higher in 598C-T homozygotes
than in controls, erythropoietin response to hypoxia was identical.
Gordeuk et al. (2004) concluded that Chuvash polycythemia is a distinct
VHL syndrome manifested by thrombosis, vascular abnormalities, and
intact hypoxic regulation despite increased basal expression of
hypoxia-regulated genes.

Cario et al. (2005) reported a Turkish patient who was homozygous for
the R200W mutation. Haplotype analysis showed a different haplotype than
that associated with the Chuvash population, indicating that the
mutation arose independently and is not geographically restricted.

Perrotta et al. (2006) found that the R200W missense mutation (598C-T)
causing Chuvash polycythemia is more frequent on the island of Ischia in
the Bay of Naples (0.070) than it is in Chuvashia (0.057). The haplotype
of all patients in Ischia matched that identified in the Chuvash
cluster, thus supporting the single founder hypothesis. Perrotta et al.
(2006) also found that unaffected heterozygotes had increased HIF1-alpha
activity, which might confer a biochemical advantage for mutation
maintenance. They suggested that this form of familial polycythemia may
be endemic in other regions of the world, a hypothesis supported by the
reports of Percy et al. (2002, 2003).

Russell et al. (2011) presented evidence suggesting 2 main molecular
mechanisms by which the R200W and H191D (608537.0024) VHL mutations
result in polycythemia. In vitro studies showed that the R200W mutation
attenuated formation of the E3 ubiquitin ligase and attenuated binding
of HIF1 (603348). In patients, this would lead to overproduction of the
HIF-target erythropoietin (EPO; 133170) and thus secondary polycythemia.
In addition, VHL mutations result in conformational changes causing
increased binding to SOCS1 (603597), which inhibits binding and
degradation of phosphorylated JAK2 (147796). The resulting pJAK2
stabilization promotes hyperactivation of the JAK2-STAT5 (601511)
pathway in erythroid progenitors, causing hypersensitivity to
erythropoietin and thereby to primary polycythemia. Treatment of
R200W/R200W transgenic mice with a JAK2 inhibitor resulted in decreased
hematocrit, smaller spleen, and decreased sensitivity to EPO compared to
untreated transgenic mice.

.0020
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, PRO81SER

In 6 members of a German family in which the L188V mutation in the VHL
gene (608537.0014) had previously been identified in association with
von Hippel-Lindau syndrome type 2C (193300), Weirich et al. (2002)
identified a 454C-T transition in exon 1 of the VHL gene, resulting in a
pro81-to-ser (P81S) mutation. The concurrent P81S mutation was
identified by novel screening approaches, including denaturing
high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and sequencing. The 2
mutations cosegregated with the syndrome. Weirich et al. (2002)
discussed the possible impact of the mutations on protein function and
phenotype.

.0021
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2
VHL, VAL130LEU

See 608537.0019 and Pastore et al. (2003).

.0022
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2
VHL, ASP126TYR

See 608537.0019 and Pastore et al. (2003).

.0023
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2
VHL, PRO192SER

In a 10-year-old white American boy who presented at age 9 years with
familial erythrocytosis (263400), Pastore et al. (2003) identified
compound heterozygosity for a 574C-T transition in the VHL gene,
resulting in a pro192-to-ser (P192S) change, and the common R200W
mutation (608537.0019).

.0024
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2
VHL, HIS191ASP

In a 17-year-old Croatian boy who presented at age 1 year with familial
erythrocytosis (263400), Pastore et al. (2003) identified homozygosity
for a 571C-G transversion in the VHL gene, resulting in a his191-to-asp
(H191D) change.

Russell et al. (2011) presented evidence suggesting 2 main molecular
mechanisms by which the H191D and R200W (608537.0019) VHL mutations
result in polycythemia. In vitro studies showed that the H191D mutation
attenuated formation of the E3 ubiquitin ligase and attenuated binding
of HIF1 (603348). In patients, this would lead to overproduction of the
HIF-target erythropoietin (EPO; 133170) and thus secondary polycythemia.
In addition, VHL mutations result in conformational changes causing
increased binding to SOCS1 (603597), which inhibits binding and
degradation of phosphorylated JAK2 (147796). The resulting pJAK2
stabilization promotes hyperactivation of the JAK2-STAT5 (601511)
pathway in erythroid progenitors, causing hypersensitivity to
erythropoietin and thereby to primary polycythemia. Treatment of
R200W/R200W transgenic mice with a JAK2 inhibitor resulted in decreased
hematocrit, smaller spleen, and decreased sensitivity to EPO compared to
untreated transgenic mice.

.0025
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, VAL84LEU

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the VAL155LEU (V155L) mutation has been renumbered as V84L.

In 2 sibs from Wales with bilateral pheochromocytoma without other
features of VHL syndrome, consistent with VHL type 2C (193300), Crossey
et al. (1995) identified a heterozygous 463G-T transversion in exon 1 of
the VHL gene, resulting in a val155-to-leu (V155L) substitution.

Abbott et al. (2006) identified the V84L substitution in affected
individuals from 3 unrelated families with early-onset isolated
pheochromocytoma consistent with VHL syndrome type 2C. Although no other
signs of VHL syndrome were present in 7 patients, 1 patient was
suspected to have a spinal hemangioblastoma based on imaging studies.

.0026
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
VHL, GLY93SER

In the germlines of 2 unrelated patients with sporadic pheochromocytoma
(171300), Neumann et al. (2002) identified a 490G-A transition in exon 1
of the VHL gene, resulting in a gly93-to-ser (G93S) substitution. The
mutation was not identified in 600 control chromosomes.

.0027
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, GLN164ARG

In a 2.5-year-old girl who presented with a pheochromocytoma but no
other manifestations of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300), Sovinz et
al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 491A-G transition in exon 3 of the
VHL gene, resulting in an gln164-to-arg (Q164R) substitution in a
protein surface residue. Genotyping of the family indicated that she
inherited the mutation from her father, in whom it occurred de novo.
Although he was in good health and asymptomatic, detailed physical
examination found a retinal angioma, an adrenal adenoma, and bilateral
pheochromocytoma, consistent with VHL syndrome. Sovinz et al. (2010)
noted that Ong et al. (2007) had identified the Q164R mutation in a
family in which a patient developed pheochromocytoma at age 10 years and
retinal angioma at age 23 years, suggesting that this mutation may be
associated with early onset of symptoms.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Herman et al. (1994); Neumann and Wiestler (1991)
REFERENCE 1. Abbott, M.-A.; Nathanson, K. L.; Nightingale, S.; Maher, E. R.;
Greenstein, R. M.: The von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) germline mutation
V84L manifests as early-onset bilateral pheochromocytoma. Am. J.
Med. Genet. 140A: 685-690, 2006.

2. Allen, R. C.; Webster, A. R.; Sui, R.; Brown, J.; Taylor, C. M.;
Stone, E. M.: Molecular characterization and ophthalmic investigation
of a large family with type 2A von Hippel-Lindau disease. Arch. Ophthal. 119:
1659-1665, 2001.

3. Ang, S. O.; Chen, H.; Gordeuk, V. R.; Sergueeva, A. I.; Polyakova,
L. A.; Miasnikova, G. Y.; Kralovics, R.; Stockton, D. W.; Prchal,
J. T.: Endemic polycythemia in Russia: mutation in the VHL gene. Blood
Cell Molec. Dis. 28: 57-62, 2002.

4. Ang, S. O.; Chen, H.; Hirota, K.; Gordeuk, V. R.; Jelinek, J.;
Guan, Y.; Liu, E.; Sergueeva, A. I.; Miasnikova, G. Y.; Mole, D.;
Maxwell, P. H.; Stockton, D. W.; Semenza, G. L.; Prchal, J. T.: Disruption
of oxygen homeostasis underlies congenital Chuvash polycythemia. Nature
Genet. 32: 614-621, 2002.

5. Bender, B. U.; Eng, C.; Olschewski, M.; Berger, D. P.; Laubenberger,
J.; Altehofer, C.; Kirste, G.; Orszagh, M.; van Velthoven, V.; Miosczka,
H.; Schmidt, D.; Neumann, H. P. H.: VHL c.505 T-C mutation confers
a high age related penetrance but no increased overall mortality. J.
Med. Genet. 38: 508-514, 2001.

6. Bender, B. U.; Gutsche, M.; Glasker, S.; Muller, B.; Kirste, G.;
Eng, C.; Neumann, H. P. H.: Differential genetic alterations in von
Hippel-Lindau syndrome-associated and sporadic pheochromocytomas. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 4568-4574, 2000.

7. Beroud, C.; Joly, D.; Gallou, C.; Staroz, F.; Orfanelli, M. T.;
Junien, C.: Software and database for the analysis of mutations in
the VHL gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 26: 256-258, 1998.

8. Bradley, J. F.; Collins, D. L.; Schimke, R. N.; Parrott, H. N.;
Rothberg, P. G.: Two distinct phenotypes caused by two different
missense mutations in the same codon of the VHL gene. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 87: 163-167, 1999.

9. Brauch, H.; Kishida, T.; Glavac, D.; Chen, F.; Pausch, F.; Hofler,
H.; Latif, F.; Lerman, M. I.; Zbar, B.; Neumann, H. P. H.: Von Hippel-Lindau
(VHL) disease with pheochromocytoma in the Black Forest region of
Germany: evidence for a founder effect. Hum. Genet. 95: 551-556,
1995.

10. Cario, H.; Schwarz, K.; Jorch, N.; Kyank, U.; Petrides, P. E.;
Schneider, D. T.; Uhle, R.; Debatin, K.-M.; Kohne, E.: Mutations
in the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene and VHL-haplotype
analysis in patients with presumable congenital erythrocytosis. Haematologica 90:
19-24, 2005.

11. Chen, F.; Kishida, T.; Yao, M.; Hustad, T.; Glavac, D.; Dean,
M.; Gnarra, J. R.; Orcutt, M. L.; Duh, F. M.; Glenn, G.; Green, J.;
Hsia, Y. E.; Lamiell, J.; Li, H.; Wei, M. H.; Schmidt, L.; Tory, K.;
Kuzman, I.; Stackhouse, T.; Latif, F.; Linehan, W. M.; Lerman, M.;
Zbar, B.: Germline mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor
suppressor gene: correlations with phenotype. Hum. Mutat. 5: 66-75,
1995.

12. Chen, F.; Slife, L.; Kishida, T.; Mulvihill, J.; Tisherman, S.
E.; Zbar, B.: Genotype-phenotype correlation in von Hippel-Lindau
disease: identification of a mutation associated with VHL type 2A. J.
Med. Genet. 33: 716-717, 1996.

13. Clifford, S. C.; Cockman, M. E.; Smallwood, A. C.; Mole, D. R.;
Woodward, E. R.; Maxwell, P. H.; Ratcliffe, P. J.; Maher, E. R.:
Contrasting effects on HIF-1-alpha regulation by disease-causing pVHL
mutations correlate with patterns of tumourigenesis in von Hippel-Lindau
disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 1029-1038, 2001.

14. Clinical Research Group for VHL in Japan: Germline mutations
in the von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) gene in Japanese VHL. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 4: 2233-2237, 1995.

15. Corn, P. G.; McDonald, E. R., III; Herman, J. G.; El-Deiry, W.
S.: Tat-binding protein-1, a component of the 26S proteasome, contributes
to the E3 ubiquitin ligase function of the von Hippel-Lindau protein. Nature
Genet. 35: 229-237, 2003.

16. Crossey, P. A.; Eng, C.; Ginalska-Malinowska, M.; Lennard, T.
W. J.; Wheeler, D. C.; Ponder, B. A. J.; Maher, E. R.: Molecular
genetic diagnosis of von Hippel-Lindau disease in familial phaeochromocytoma. J.
Med. Genet. 32: 885-886, 1995.

17. Crossey, P. A.; Foster, K.; Richards, F. M.; Phipps, M. E.; Latif,
F.; Tory, K.; Jones, M. H.; Bentley, E.; Kumar, R.; Lerman, M. I.;
Zbar, B.; Affara, N. A.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.; Maher, E. R.: Molecular
genetic investigations of the mechanism of tumourigenesis in von Hippel-Lindau
disease: analysis of allele loss in VHL tumours. Hum. Genet. 93:
53-58, 1994.

18. Crossey, P. A.; Richards, F. M.; Foster, K.; Green, J. S.; Prowse,
A.; Latif, F.; Lerman, M. I.; Zbar, B.; Affara, N. A.; Ferguson-Smith,
M. A.; Maher, E. R.: Identification of intragenic mutations in the
von Hippel-Lindau disease tumour suppressor gene and correlation with
disease phenotype. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 1303-1308, 1994.

19. Ding, M.; Cui, S.; Li, C.; Jothy, S.; Haase, V.; Steer, B. M.;
Marsden, P. A.; Pippin, J.; Shankland, S.; Rastaldi, M. P.; Cohen,
C. D.; Kretzler, M.; Quaggin, S. E.: Loss of the tumor suppressor
Vhlh leads to upregulation of Cxcr4 and rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
in mice. Nature Med. 12: 1081-1087, 2006.

20. Duan, D. R.; Humphrey, J. S.; Chen, D. Y. T.; Weng, Y.; Sukegawa,
J.; Lee, S.; Gnarra, J. R.; Linehan, W. M.; Klausner, R. D.: Characterization
of the VHL tumor suppressor gene product: localization, complex formation,
and the effect of natural inactivating mutations. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 92: 6459-6463, 1995.

21. Duan, D. R.; Pause, A.; Burgess, W. H.; Aso, T.; Chen, D. Y. T.;
Garrett, K. P.; Conaway, R. C.; Conaway, J. W.; Linehan, W. M.; Klausner,
R. D.: Inhibition of transcription elongation by the VHL tumor suppressor
protein. Science 269: 1402-1406, 1995.

22. Eng, C.; Crossey, P. A.; Mulligan, L. M.; Healey, C. S.; Houghton,
C.; Prowse, A.; Chew, S. L.; Dahia, P. L. M.; O'Riordan, J. L. H.;
Toledo, S. P. A.; Smith, D. P.; Maher, E. R.; Ponder, B. A. J.: Mutations
in the RET proto-oncogene and the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumour
suppressor gene in sporadic and syndromic phaeochromocytomas. J.
Clin. Genet. 32: 934-937, 1995.

23. Epstein, A. C. R.; Gleadle, J. M.; McNeill, L. A.; Hewitson, K.
S.; O'Rourke, J.; Mole, D. R.; Mukherji, M.; Metzen, E.; Wilson, M.
I.; Dhanda, A.; Tian, Y.-M.; Masson, N.; Hamilton, D. L.; Jaakkola,
P.; Barstead, R.; Hodgkin, J.; Maxwell, P. H.; Pugh, C. W.; Schofield,
C. J.; Ratcliffe, P. J.: C. elegans EGL-9 and mammalian homologs
define a family of dioxygenases that regulate HIF by prolyl hydroxylation. Cell
107: 43-54, 2001.

24. Fearon, E. R.: Human cancer syndromes: clues to the origin and
nature of cancer. Science 278: 1043-1050, 1997.

25. Feldman, D. E.; Thulasiraman, V.; Ferreyra, R. G.; Frydman, J.
: Formation of the VHL-elongin BC tumor suppressor complex is mediated
by the chaperonin TRiC. Molec. Cell 1051-1061, 1999.

26. Gallou, C.; Chauveau, D.; Richard, S.; Joly, D.; Giraud, S.; Olschwang,
S.; Martin, N.; Saquet, C.; Chretien, Y.; Mejean, A.; Correas, J.-M.;
Benoit, G.; Colombeau, P.; Grunfeld, J.-P.; Junien, C.; Beroud, C.
: Genotype-phenotype correlation in von Hippel-Lindau families with
renal lesions. Hum. Mutat. 24: 215-224, 2004. Note: Erratum: Hum.
Mutat. 24: 435-436, 2004.

27. Gallou, C.; Joly, D.; Mejean, A.; Staroz, F.; Martin, N.; Tarlet,
G.; Orfanelli, M. T.; Bouvier, R.; Droz, D.; Chretien, Y.; Marechal,
J. M.; Richard, S.; Junien, C.; Beroud, C.: Mutations of the VHL
gene in sporadic renal cell carcinoma: definition of a risk factor
for VHL patients to develop an RCC. Hum. Mutat. 13: 464-475, 1999.

28. Garcia, A.; Matias-Guiu, X.; Cabezas, R.; Chico, A.; Prat, J.;
Baiget, M.; De Leiva, A.: Molecular diagnosis of von Hippel-Lindau
disease in a kindred with a predominance of familial phaeochromocytoma. Clin.
Endocr. 46: 359-363, 1997.

29. Gemmill, R. M.; Bemis, L. T.; Lee, J. P.; Sozen, M. A.; Baron,
A.; Zeng, C.; Erickson, P. F.; Hooper, J. E.; Drabkin, H. A.: The
TRC8 hereditary kidney cancer gene suppresses growth and functions
with VHL in a common pathway. Oncogene 21: 3507-3516, 2002.

30. Gilcrease, M. Z.; Schmidt, L.; Zbar, B.; Truong, L.; Rutledge,
M.; Wheeler, T. M.: Somatic von Hippel-Lindau mutation in clear cell
papillary cystadenoma of the epididymis. Hum. Path. 26: 1341-1346,
1995.

31. Glasker, S.; Sohn, T.-S.; Okamoto, H.; Li, J.; Lonser, R. R.;
Oldfield, E. H.; Vortmeyer, A. O.; Zhuang, Z.: Second hit deletion
size in von Hippel-Lindau disease. Ann. Neurol. 59: 105-110, 2006.

32. Gnarra, J. R.; Ward, J. M.; Porter, F. D.; Wagner, J. R.; Devor,
D. E.; Grinberg, A.; Emmert-Buck, M. R.; Westphal, H.; Klausner, R.
D.; Marston Linehan, W.: Defective placental vasculogenesis causes
embryonic lethality in VHL-deficient mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94:
9102-9107, 1997.

33. Gordeuk, V. R.; Sergueeva, A. I.; Miasnikova, G. Y.; Okhotin,
D.; Voloshin, Y.; Choyke, P. L.; Butman, J. A.; Jedlickova, K.; Prchal,
J. T.; Polyakova, L. A.: Congenital disorder of oxygen sensing: association
of the homozygous Chuvash polycythemia VHL mutation with thrombosis
and vascular abnormalities but not tumors. Blood 103: 3924-3932,
2004.

34. Gross, D. J.; Avishai, N.; Meiner, V.; Filon, D.; Zbar, B.; Abeliovich,
D.: Familial pheochromocytoma associated with a novel mutation in
the von Hippel-Lindau gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 81: 147-149,
1996.

35. Haase, V. H.; Glickman, J. N.; Socolovsky, M.; Jaenisch, R.:
Vascular tumors in livers with targeted inactivation of the von Hippel-Lindau
tumor suppressor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 1583-1588, 2001.

36. Hergovich, A.; Lisztwan, J.; Barry, R.; Ballschmieter, P.; Krek,
W.: Regulation of microtubule stability by the von Hippel-Lindau
tumour suppressor protein pVHL. Nature Cell Biol. 5: 64-70, 2003.

37. Herman, J. G.; Latif, F.; Weng, Y.; Lerman, M. I.; Zbar, B.; Liu,
S.; Samid, D.; Duan, D.-S. R.; Guarra, J. R.; Linehan, W. M.; Baylin,
S. B.: Silencing of the VHL tumor-suppressor gene by DNA methylation
in renal carcinomas. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 9700-9704, 1994.

38. Hickey, M. M.; Lam, J. C.; Bezman, N. A.; Rathmell, W. K.; Simon,
M. C.: von Hippel-Lindau mutation in mice recapitulates Chuvash polycythemia
via hypoxia-inducible factor-2-alpha signaling and splenic erythropoiesis. J.
Clin. Invest. 117: 3879-3889, 2007.

39. Hoffman, M. A.; Ohh, M.; Yang, H.; Kico, J. M.; Ivan, M.; Kaelin,
W. G., Jr.: von Hippel-Lindau, protein mutants linked to type 2C
VHL disease preserve the ability to downregulated HIF. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 10: 1019-1027, 2001.

40. Hon, W.-C.; Wilson, M. I.; Harlos, K.; Claridge, T. D. W.; Schofield,
C. J.; Pugh, C. W.; Maxwell, P. H.; Ratcliffe, P. J.; Stuart, D. I.;
Jones, E. Y.: Structural basis for the recognition of hydroxyproline
in HIF-1-alpha by pVHL. Nature 417: 975-978, 2002.

41. Iliopoulos, O.; Kibel, A.; Gray, S.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.: Tumour
suppression by the human von Hippel-Lindau gene product. Nature Med. 1:
822-826, 1995.

42. Iliopoulos, O.; Levy, A. P.; Jiang, C.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.; Goldberg,
M. A.: Negative regulation of hypoxia-inducible genes by the von
Hippel-Lindau protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 10595-10599, 1996.

43. Iliopoulos, O.; Ohh, M.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.: pVHL(19) is a biologically
active product of the von Hippel-Lindau gene arising from internal
translation initiation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 11661-11666, 1998.

44. Ivan, M.; Kondo, K.; Yang, H.; Kim, W.; Valiando, J.; Ohh, M.;
Salic, A.; Asara, J. M.; Lane, W. S.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.: HIF-alpha
targeted for VHL-mediated destruction by proline hydroxylation: implications
for O(2) sensing. Science 292: 464-468, 2001.

45. Ivanov, S. V.; Kuzmin, I.; Wei, M.-H.; Pack, S.; Geil, L.; Johnson,
B. E.; Stanbridge, E. J.; Lerman, M. I.: Down-regulation of transmembrane
carbonic anhydrases in renal cell carcinoma cell lines by wild-type
von Hippel-Lindau transgenes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 12596-12601,
1998.

46. Jaakkola, P.; Mole, D. R.; Tian, Y.-M.; Wilson, M. I.; Gielbert,
J.; Gaskell, S. J.; von Kriegsheim, A.; Hebestreit, H. F.; Mukherji,
M.; Schofield, C. J.; Maxwell, P. H.; Pugh, C. W.; Ratcliffe, P. J.
: Targeting of HIF-alpha to the von Hippel-Lindau ubiquitylation complex
by O(2)-regulated prolyl hydroxylation. Science 292: 468-472, 2001.

47. Kanno, H.; Kondo, K.; Ito, S.; Yamamoto, I.; Fujii, S.; Torigoe,
S.; Sakai, N.; Hosaka, M.; Shuin, T.; Yao, M.: Somatic mutations
of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene in sporadic central
nervous system hemangioblastomas. Cancer Res. 54: 4845-4847, 1994.

48. Kanno, H.; Saljooque, F.; Yamamoto, I.; Hattori, S.; Yao, M.;
Shuin, T.; U, H.-S.: Role of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor
protein during neuronal differentiation. Cancer Res. 60: 2820-2824,
2000.

49. Kenck, C.; Wilhelm, M.; Bugert, P.; Staehler, G.; Kovacs, G.:
Mutation of the VHL gene is associated exclusively with the development
of non-papillary renal cell carcinomas. J. Path. 179: 157-161, 1996.

50. Kibel, A.; Iliopoulos, O.; DeCaprio, J. A.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.
: Binding of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor protein to elongin
B and C. Science 269: 1444-1446, 1995.

51. Kuzmin, I.; Duh, F.-M.; Latif, F.; Geil, L.; Zbar, B.; Lerman,
M. I.: Identification of the promoter of the human von Hippel-Landau
disease tumor suppressor gene. Oncogene 10: 2185-2194, 1995.

52. Latif, F.; Tory, K.; Gnarra, J.; Yao, M.; Duh, F.-M.; Orcutt,
M. L.; Stackhouse, T.; Kuzmin, I.; Modi, W.; Geil, L.; Schmidt, L.;
Zhou, F.; Li, H.; Wei, M. H.; Chen, F.; Glenn, G.; Choyke, P.; Walther,
M. M.; Weng, Y.; Duan, D.-S. R.; Dean, M.; Glavac, D.; Richards, F.
M.; Crossey, P. A.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.; Le Paslier, D.; Chumakov,
I.; Cohen, D.; Chinault, A. C.; Maher, E. R.; Linehan, W. M.; Zbar,
B.; Lerman, M. I.: Identification of the von Hippel-Lindau disease
tumor suppressor gene. Science 260: 1317-1320, 1993.

53. Lee, C. M.; Hickey, M. M.; Sanford, C. A.; McGuire, C. G.; Cowey,
C. L.; Simon, M. C.; Rathmell, W. K.: VHL type 2B gene mutation moderates
HIF dosage in vitro and in vivo. Oncogene 28: 1694-1705, 2009.

54. Lee, S.; Chen, D. Y. T.; Humphrey, J. S.; Gnarra, J. R.; Linehan,
W. M.; Klausner, R. D.: Nuclear/cytoplasmic localization of the von
Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene product is determined by cell
density. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 1770-1775, 1996.

55. Liu, E.; Percy, M. J.; Amos, C. I.; Guan, Y.; Shete, S.; Stockton,
D. W.; McMullin, M. F.; Polyakova, L. A.; Ang, S. O.; Pastore, Y.
D.; Jedlickova, K.; Lappin, T. R. J.; Gordeuk, V.; Prchal, J. T.:
The worldwide distribution of the VHL 598C-T mutation indicates a
single founder effect. Blood 103: 1937-1940, 2004.

56. Loeb, D. B.; Pericak-Vance, M. A.; Stajich, J. M.; Vance, J. M.
: A novel mutation in the von Hippel-Lindau gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3:
1423-1424, 1994.

57. Lolkema, M. P.; Mans, D. A.; Ulfman, L. H.; Volpi, S.; Voest,
E. E.; Giles, R. H.: Allele-specific regulation of primary cilia
function by the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor. Europ. J. Hum.
Genet. 16: 73-78, 2008.

58. Maher, E. R.; Yates, J. R. W.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.: Statistical
analysis of the two stage mutation model in von Hippel-Lindau disease,
and in sporadic cerebellar haemangioblastoma and renal cell carcinoma. J.
Med. Genet. 27: 311-314, 1990.

59. Mahon, P. C.; Hirota, K.; Semenza, G. L.: FIH-1: a novel protein
that interacts with HIF-1-alpha and VHL to mediate repression of HIF-1
transcriptional activity. Genes Dev. 15: 2675-2686, 2001.

60. Maranchie, J. K.; Afonso, A.; Albert, P. S.; Kalyandrug, S.; Phillips,
J. L.; Zhou, S.; Peterson, J.; Ghadimi, B. M.; Hurley, K.; Riss, J.;
Vasselli, J. R.; Ried, T.; Zbar, B.; Choyke, P.; Walther, M. M.; Klausner,
R. D.; Linehan, W. M.: Solid renal tumor severity in von Hippel Lindau
disease is related to germline deletion length and location. Hum.
Mutat. 23: 40-46, 2004.

61. Maxwell, P. H.; Wiesener, M. S.; Chang, G.-W.; Clifford, S. C.;
Vaux, E. C.; Cockman, M. E.; Wykoff, C. C.; Pugh, C. W.; Maher, E.
R.; Ratcliffe, P. J.: The tumour suppressor protein VHL targets hypoxia-inducible
factors for oxygen-dependent proteolysis. Nature 399: 271-275, 1999.

62. Mehta, R.; Steinkraus, K. A.; Sutphin, G. L.; Ramos, F. J.; Shamieh,
L. S.; Huh, A.; Davis, C.; Chandler-Brown, D.; Kaeberlein, M.: Proteasomal
regulation of the hypoxic response modulates aging in C. elegans. Science 324:
1196-1198, 2009.

63. Min, J.-H.; Yang, H.; Ivan, M.; Gertler, F.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.;
Pavletich, N. P.: Structure of an HIF-1-alpha-pVHL complex: hydroxyproline
recognition in signaling. Science 296: 1886-1889, 2002.

64. Mukhopadhyay, D.; Knebelmann, B.; Cohen, H. T.; Ananth, S.; Sukhatme,
V. P.: The von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene product interacts
with Sp1 to repress vascular endothelial growth factor promoter activity. Molec
. Cell. Biol. 17: 5629-5639, 1997.

65. Neumann, H. P. H.; Bausch, B.; McWhinney, S. R.; Bender, B. U.;
Gimm, O.; Franke, G.; Schipper, J.; Klisch, J.; Altehoefer, C.; Zerres,
K.; Januszewicz, A.; Eng, C.: Germ-line mutations in nonsyndromic
pheochromocytoma. New Eng. J. Med. 346: 1459-1466, 2002.

66. Neumann, H. P. H.; Berger, D. P.; Sigmund, G.; Blum, U.; Schmidt,
D.; Parmer, R. J.; Volk, B.; Kirste, G.: Pheochromocytomas, multiple
endocrine neoplasia type 2, and von Hippel-Lindau disease. New Eng.
J. Med. 329: 1531-1538, 1993. Note: Erratum: New Eng. J. Med. 331:
1535 only, 1994.

67. Neumann, H. P. H.; Eng, C.; Mulligan, L. M.; Glavac, D.; Zauner,
I.; Ponder, B. A. J.; Crossey, P. A.; Maher, E. R.; Brauch, H.: Consequences
of direct genetic testing for germline mutations in the clinical management
of families with multiple endocrine neoplasia, type II. JAMA 274:
1149-1151, 1995.

68. Neumann, H. P. H.; Wiestler, O. D.: Clustering of features of
von Hippel-Lindau syndrome: evidence for a complex genetic locus. Lancet 337:
1052-1054, 1991.

69. Nordstrom-O'Brien, M.; van der Luijt, R. B.; van Rooijen, E.;
van den Ouweland, A. M.; Majoor-Krakauer, D. F.; Lolkema, M. P.; van
Brussel, A.; Voest, E. E.; Giles, R. H.: Genetic analysis of von
Hippel-Lindau disease. Hum. Mutat. 31: 521-537, 2010.

70. Oberstrass, J.; Reifenberger, G.; Reifenberger, J.; Wechsler,
W.; Collins, V. P.: Mutation of the von Hippel-Lindau tumour suppressor
gene in capillary haemangioblastomas of the central nervous system. J.
Path. 179: 151-156, 1996.

71. Ohh, M.; Yauch, R. L.; Lonergan, K. M.; Whaley, J. M.; Stemmer-Rachamimov,
A. O.; Louis, D. N.; Gavin, B. J.; Kley, N.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.; Iliopoulos,
O.: The von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor protein is required for
proper assembly of an extracellular fibronectin matrix. Molec. Cell 1:
959-968, 1998.

72. Olschwang, S.; Richard, S.; Boisson, C.; Giraud, S.; Laurent-Puig,
P.; Resche, F.; Thomas, G.: Germline mutation profile of the VHL
gene in von Hippel-Lindau disease and in sporadic hemangioblastoma. Hum.
Mutat. 12: 424-430, 1998.

73. Ong, K. R.; Woodward, E. R.; Killick, P.; Lim, C.; Macdonald,
F.; Maher, E. R.: Genotype-phenotype correlations in von Hippel-Lindau
disease. Hum. Mutat. 28: 143-149, 2007.

74. Pastore, Y.; Jedlickova, K.; Guan, Y.; Liu, E.; Fahner, J.; Hasle,
H.; Prchal, J. F.; Prchal, J. T.: Mutations of von Hippel-Lindau
tumor-suppressor gene and congenital polycythemia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 73:
412-419, 2003. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74: 598 only, 2004.

75. Pastore, Y. D.; Jelinek, J.; Ang, S.; Guan, Y.; Liu, E.; Jedlickova,
K.; Krishnamurti, L.; Prchal, J. T.: Mutations in the VHL gene in
sporadic apparently congenital polycythemia. Blood 101: 1591-1595,
2003.

76. Pause, A.; Lee, S.; Lonergan, K. M.; Klausner, R. D.: The von
Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene is required for cell cycle exit
upon serum withdrawal. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 993-998, 1998.

77. Percy, M. J.; McMullin, M. F.; Jowitt, S. N.; Potter, M.; Treacy,
M.; Watson, W. H.; Lappin, T. R. J.: Chuvash-type congenital polycythemia
in 4 families of Asian and Western European ancestry. Blood 102:
1097-1099, 2003.

78. Percy, M. J.; McMullin, M. F.; Treacy, M.; Potter, M.; Watson,
W. H.; Jowitt, S. N.; Lappin, T. R. J.: Identification of the Chuvash-type
congenital polycythemia in patients of Asian and Western European
ancestry. Blood 100: 660 only, 2002.

79. Perrotta, S.; Nobili, B.; Ferraro, M.; Migliaccio, C.; Borriello,
A.; Cucciolla, V.; Martinelli, V.; Rossi, F.; Punzo, F.; Cirillo,
P.; Parisi, G.; Zappia, V.; Rotoli, B.; Ragione, F. D.: Von Hippel-Lindau-dependent
polycythemia is endemic on the island of Ischia: identification of
a novel cluster. Blood 107: 514-519, 2006.

80. Richard, S.; Croisille, L.; Yvart, J.; Casadeval, N.; Eschwege,
P.; Aghakhani, N.; David, P.; Gaudric, A.; Scigalla, P.; Hermine,
O.: Paradoxical secondary polycythemia in von Hippel-Lindau patients
treated with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor receptor therapy. Blood 99:
3851-3853, 2002.

81. Richards, F. M.; Schofield, P. N.; Fleming, S.; Maher, E. R.:
Expression of the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumour suppressor gene
during human embryogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5: 639-644, 1996.

82. Roe, J.-S.; Kim, H.; Lee, S.-M.; Kim, S.-T.; Cho, E.-J.; Youn,
H.-D.: p53 stabilization and transactivation by a von Hippel-Lindau
protein. Molec. Cell 22: 395-405, 2006.

83. Rubenstein, J. L.; Yaari, H.: von Hippel-Lindau and the genetics
of astrocytoma. J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 86: 142-143, 1994.

84. Russell, R. C.; Sufan, R. I.; Zhou, B.; Heir, P.; Bunda, S.; Sybingco,
S. S.; Greer, S. N.; Roche, O.; Heathcote, S. A.; Chow, V. W. K.;
Boba, L. M.; Richmond, T. D.; Hickey, M. M.; Barber, D. L.; Cheresh,
D. A.; Simon, M. C.; Irwin, M. S.; Kim, W. Y.; Ohh, M.: Loss of JAK2
regulation via a heterodimeric VHL-SOCS1 E3 ubiquitin ligase underlies
Chuvash polycythemia. Nature Med. 17: 845-853, 2011.

85. Schimke, R. N.; Collins, D. L.; Rothberg, P. G.: Functioning
carotid paraganglioma in the von Hippel-Lindau syndrome. (Letter) Am.
J. Med. Genet. 80: 533-534, 1998.

86. Schoenfeld, A.; Davidowitz, E. J.; Burk, R. D.: A second major
native von Hippel-Lindau gene product, initiated from an internal
translation start site, functions as a tumor suppressor. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 95: 8817-8822, 1998.

87. Sovinz, P.; Urban, C.; Uhrig, S.; Stepan, V.; Lackner, H.; Schwinger,
W.; Benesch, M.; Moser, A.; Spuller, E.; Speicher, M. R.: Pheochromocytoma
in a 2.75-year-old-girl with a germline von Hippel-Lindau mutation
Q164R. Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A: 1752-1755, 2010.

88. Staller, P.; Sulitkova, J.; Lisztwan, J.; Moch, H.; Oakeley, E.
J.; Krek, W.: Chemokine receptor CXCR4 downregulated by von Hippel-Lindau
tumor suppressor pVHL. Nature 425: 307-311, 2003.

89. Tisherman, S. E.; Gregg, F. J.; Danowski, T. S.: Familial pheochromocytoma. JAMA 182:
152-156, 1962.

90. Tisherman, S. E.; Tisherman, B. G.; Tisherman, S. A.; Dunmire,
S.; Levey, G. S.; Mulvihill, J. J.: Three-decade investigation of
familial pheochromocytoma: an allele of von Hippel-Lindau disease? Arch.
Int. Med. 153: 2550-2556, 1993.

91. Tyers, M.; Willems, A. R.: One ring to rule a superfamily of
E3 ubiquitin ligases. Science 284: 602-604, 1999.

92. van der Harst, E.; de Krijger, R. R.; Dinjens, W. N. M.; Weeks,
L. E.; Bonjer, H. J.; Bruining, H. A.; Lamberts, S. W. J.; Koper,
J. W.: Germline mutations in the vhl gene in patients presenting
with phaeochromocytomas. Int. J. Cancer. 77: 337-340, 1998.

93. Vasserman, N. N.; Karzakova, L. M.; Tverskaya, S. M.; Saperov,
V. N.; Muchukova, O. M.; Pavlova, G. P.; Efimova, N. K.; Vankina,
N. N.; Evgrafov, O. V.: Localization of the gene responsible for
familial benign polycythemia to chromosome 11q23. Hum. Hered. 49:
129-132, 1999.

94. Vogelstein, B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/6/1995.

95. Wait, S. D.; Vortmeyer, A. O.; Lonser, R. R.; Chang, D. T.; Finn,
M. A.; Bhowmick, D. A.; Pack, S. D.; Oldfield, E. H.; Zhuang, Z.:
Somatic mutations in VHL germline deletion kindred correlate with
mild phenotype. Ann. Neurol. 55: 236-240, 2004.

96. Wang, Y.; Roche, O.; Yan, M. S.; Finak, G.; Evans, A. J.; Metcalf,
J. L.; Hast, B. E.; Hanna, S. C.; Wondergem, B.; Furge, K. A.; Irwin,
M. S.; Kim, W. Y.; Teh, B. T.; Grinstein, S.; Park, M.; Marsden, P.
A.; Ohh, M.: Regulation of endocytosis via the oxygen-sensing pathway. Nature
Med. 15: 319-324, 2009.

97. Wang, Y.; Wan, C.; Deng, L.; Liu, X.; Cao, X.; Gilbert, S. R.;
Bouxsein, M. L.; Faugere, M.-C.; Guldberg, R. E.; Gerstenfeld, L.
C.; Haase, V. H.; Johnson, R. S.; Schipani, E.; Clemens, T. L.: The
hypoxia-inducible factor alpha pathway couples angiogenesis to osteogenesis
during skeletal development. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 1616-1626, 2007.

98. Weirich, G.; Klein, B.; Wohl, T.; Engelhardt, D.; Brauch, H.:
VHL2C phenotype in a German von Hippel-Lindau family with concurrent
VHL germline mutations P81S and L188V. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87:
5241-5246, 2002.

99. Wiesener, M. S.; Seyfarth, M.; Warnecke, C.; Jurgensen, J. S.;
Rosenberger, C.; Morgan, N. V.; Maher, E. R.; Frei, U.; Eckardt, K.-U.
: Paraneoplastic erythrocytosis associated with an inactivating point
mutation of the von Hippel-Lindau gene in a renal cell carcinoma. Blood 99:
3562-3565, 2002.

100. Yang, H.; Minamishima, Y. A.; Yan, Q.; Schlisio, S.; Ebert, B.
L.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, L.; Kim, W. Y.; Olumi, A. F.; Kaelin, W. G.,
Jr.: pVHL acts as an adaptor to promote the inhibitory phosphorylation
of the NF-kappa-B agonist Card9 by CK2. Molec. Cell 28: 15-27, 2007.

101. Yoshida, M.; Yao, M.; Ishikawa, I.; Kishida, T.; Nagashima, Y.;
Kondo, K.; Nakaigawa, N.; Hosaka, M.: Somatic von Hippel-Lindau disease
gene mutation in clear-cell renal carcinomas associated with end-stage
renal disease/acquired cystic disease of the kidney. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 35: 359-364, 2002.

102. Zatyka, M.; da Silva, N. F.; Clifford, S. C.; Morris, M. R.;
Wiesener, M. S.; Eckardt, K.-U.; Houlston, R. S.; Richards, F. M.;
Latif, F.; Maher, E. R.: Identification of cyclin D1 and other novel
targets for the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene by expression
array analysis and investigation of cyclin D1 genotype as a modifier
in von Hippel-Lindau disease. Cancer Res. 62: 3803-3811, 2002.

103. Zatyka, M.; Morrissey, C.; Kuzmin, I.; Lerman, M. I.; Latif,
F.; Richards, F. M.; Maher, E. R.: Genetic and functional analysis
of the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumour suppressor gene promoter. J.
Med. Genet. 39: 463-472, 2002.

104. Zbar, B.; Kishida, T.; Chen, F.; Schmidt, L.; Maher, E. R.; Richards,
F. M.; Crossey, P. A.; Webster, A. R.; Affara, N. A.; Ferguson-Smith,
M. A.; Brauch, H.; Glavac, D.; and 14 others: Germline mutations
in the Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) gene in families from North
America, Europe, and Japan. Hum. Mutat. 8: 348-357, 1996.

105. Zehetner, J.; Danzer, C.; Collins, S.; Eckhardt, K.; Gerber,
P. A.; Ballschmieter, P.; Galvanovskis, J.; Shimomura, K.; Ashcroft,
F. M.; Thorens, B.; Rorsman, P.; Krek, W.: pVHL is a regulator of
glucose metabolism and insulin secretion in pancreatic beta cells. Genes
Dev. 22: 3135-3146, 2008.

106. Zhuang, Z.; Emmert-Buck, M. R.; Roth, M. J.; Gnarra, J.; Linehan,
W. M.; Liotta, L. A.; Lubensky, I. A.: Von Hippel-Lindau disease
gene deletion detected in microdissected sporadic human colon carcinoma
specimens. Hum. Path. 27: 152-156, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/3/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/28/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/30/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/15/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/16/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/8/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/1/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/28/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/13/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/14/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/1/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/1/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/14/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/13/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/23/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/17/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/28/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/6/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/30/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/24/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/2/2004

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 3/17/2004

EDITED carol: 04/22/2013
terry: 4/4/2013
carol: 8/5/2011
wwang: 8/5/2011
ckniffin: 8/3/2011
alopez: 1/10/2011
wwang: 11/10/2010
ckniffin: 10/28/2010
wwang: 9/3/2010
ckniffin: 8/30/2010
alopez: 4/14/2010
carol: 12/23/2009
ckniffin: 12/15/2009
wwang: 9/29/2009
alopez: 6/22/2009
terry: 6/16/2009
wwang: 6/11/2009
terry: 6/8/2009
terry: 6/3/2009
mgross: 4/3/2009
terry: 4/1/2009
carol: 9/23/2008
terry: 9/10/2008
terry: 6/6/2008
mgross: 5/29/2008
terry: 5/28/2008
wwang: 5/16/2008
ckniffin: 3/13/2008
mgross: 2/28/2008
terry: 1/14/2008
wwang: 8/13/2007
terry: 8/9/2007
terry: 8/1/2007
wwang: 7/12/2007
wwang: 11/13/2006
terry: 11/3/2006
ckniffin: 11/1/2006
wwang: 8/21/2006
wwang: 8/18/2006
ckniffin: 8/14/2006
mgross: 6/14/2006
terry: 6/13/2006
carol: 5/24/2006
ckniffin: 5/23/2006
wwang: 4/24/2006
ckniffin: 4/17/2006
alopez: 3/29/2006
terry: 3/28/2006
terry: 2/3/2006
carol: 1/12/2006
ckniffin: 1/6/2006
tkritzer: 10/6/2004
terry: 9/30/2004
tkritzer: 9/2/2004
terry: 8/24/2004
tkritzer: 6/3/2004
ckniffin: 6/2/2004
carol: 3/23/2004
ckniffin: 3/23/2004
ckniffin: 3/19/2004

120290	TITLE *120290 COLLAGEN, TYPE XI, ALPHA-2; COL11A2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Type XI collagen, a fibril-forming collagen found mainly in the
cartilage extracellular matrix, is important for the integrity and
development of the skeleton (summary by Lui et al., 1996).

CLONING

Kimura et al. (1989) cloned human COL11A2, which encodes a deduced
protein with high sequence similarity to COL11A1 (120280). By Northern
blot analysis, Kimura et al. (1989) showed that COL11A2 is expressed in
cartilage but not in adult liver, skin, and tendon.

MAPPING

Law et al. (1989, 1990) used a cosmid clone containing the COL11A2 gene
as a probe in the Southern blot analysis of DNA from a panel of
human/hamster somatic cell hybrids containing different numbers and
combinations of human chromosomes. They concluded that the gene is
located on chromosome 6, and study of a cell hybrid containing only 6q
indicated that the COL11A2 gene is on 6p.

By a combination of somatic cell hybrid mapping and in situ
hybridization, Hanson et al. (1989, 1989) localized the COL11A2 gene to
6p21.3. By physical mapping of the class II HLA region using pulsed
field gel electrophoresis, Hanson et al. (1991) demonstrated that the
COL11A2 gene is about 45 kb centromeric to HLA-DPA1 (142880) and is
transcribed in the opposite (i.e., telomeric) direction.

Kimura et al. (1989) assigned the COL11A2 gene to 6p21.2 by in situ
hybridization. The nucleotide sequence showed that although type XI
collagen belongs to the fibril-forming class of collagens, there are
substantial differences in exon sizes at the 3-prime end of the gene
when comparing the COL11A2 gene with the genes for types I, II, and III
collagens. It is thought that the alpha-3 chain of type XI collagen is a
posttranslational variant of the type II, or cartilage, collagen
subunit, i.e., is encoded by the COL2A1 gene (120140).

Stubbs et al. (1993) showed that the homologous gene in the mouse is
also 'embedded' within the major histocompatibility complex on
chromosome 17.

GENE STRUCTURE

Vuoristo et al. (1995) analyzed the COL11A2 gene from 2 overlapping
cosmid clones that had previously been isolated in the course of
searching the human major histocompatibility region. Nucleotide sequence
defined over 28,000 bp of the gene. It was shown to contain 66 exons. As
with most genes for fibrillar collagens, the first intron was among the
largest, and the introns at the 5-prime end of the gene were in general
larger than the introns at the 3-prime end. Analysis of the exons coding
for the major triple helical domain indicated that the gene structure
had not evolved with the genes for the major fibrillar collagen and that
there were marked differences in the number of exons, the exon sizes,
and codon usage. The gene was located close to the gene for the retinoid
X receptor beta (180246) in a head-to-tail arrangement similar to that
previously seen with the 2 mouse genes. Also, there was marked
interspecies homology in the intergenic sequences.

Lui et al. (1996) showed that COL11A2 contains at least 62 exons
spanning 30.5 kb. The gene differs from other collagens in that the
amino propeptide is encoded by 14 exons rather than the usual 5 to 8.
The promoter is GC-rich and lacks a TATA box. The authors believed that
the gene is likely to undergo alternative splicing. The gene lies within
the MHC region and is only 1.1-kb from the retinoid X receptor-beta
(180246) and about 40 kb from DPB2 (142880).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Melkoniemi et al. (2000) stated that in spite of partial overlap between
the Stickler (see 108300), Marshall (154780), Weissenbacher-Zweymuller
(277610), and otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED; 215150)
phenotypes caused by mutations in the COL2A1 (120140), COL11A1 (120280),
and COL11A2 genes, absence of eye involvement in patients carrying
COL11A2 mutations is noteworthy. This was best explained by the finding
that the COL11A2 gene is not expressed in the vitreous body and that the
COL5A2 (120190) chain replaces the COL11A2 chain in the ocular vitreous
(Mayne et al., 1993).

- Stickler Syndrome, Type III

Type II collagen is closely associated with both type IX collagen
(120210) and type XI collagen in thin collagen fibrils of hyaline
cartilage. This prompted Brunner et al. (1994) to study linkage of a
Stickler syndrome phenotype (STL3; 184840) to polymorphic markers within
or near genes encoding these cartilage collagens. In a large Dutch
kindred, Stickler syndrome was found to be linked to the 6p22-p21.3
region where COL11A2 maps. Unlike the usual cases of Stickler syndrome
which show high myopia, vitreoretinal degeneration, and retinal
detachment, ocular features were lacking in all affected individuals in
the Dutch family. This may be explained by absence of the alpha-2 chain
of type XI collagen in the vitreous. The skeletal and otologic
manifestations of the Stickler syndrome were present in the family,
however. Vikkula et al. (1995) established that the affected members of
the Dutch kindred with Stickler syndrome reported by Brunner et al.
(1994) had a mutation in the COL11A2 gene (120290.0001).

Sirko-Osadsa et al. (1998) described a family with Stickler syndrome in
which there was no eye involvement and demonstrated that the phenotype
was due to heterozygosity for a 27-bp deletion in the COL11A2 gene
(120290.0003). The affected members of the family had sensorineural
hearing loss, cleft palate/uvula, micrognathia, malar flattening, joint
pains, and multiple hereditary exostoses.

- Weissenbacher-Zweymuller Syndrome

Pihlajamaa et al. (1998) demonstrated that the original patient
described by Weissenbacher and Zweymuller (1964) as a 'combination of a
Pierre Robin syndrome with a fetal chondrodysplasia' (WZS; 277610) had a
heterozygous mutation in the COL11A2 gene (120290.0004).

- Otospondylomegaepiphyseal Dysplasia

Vikkula et al. (1995) studied a Dutch kindred in which 3 sibs of a
consanguineous mating had a severe degenerative joint disease resembling
osteoarthritis that presented in early adulthood and affected
predominantly the hips, knees, elbows, and shoulders (OSMED; 215150).
Vikkula et al. (1995) found that the mutation in these sibs was a
gly175-to-arg mutation of the COL11A2 gene (120290.0002). van Steensel
et al. (1997) described the clinical and radiographic features of
otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia in these sibs.

Melkoniemi et al. (2000) reported 7 families with OSMED. All affected
individuals had a remarkably similar phenotype: profound sensorineural
hearing loss, skeletal dysplasia with limb shortening and large
epiphyses, cleft palate, very flat face, hypoplasia of the mandible, a
short nose with anteverted nares, and a flat nasal bridge. A different
mutation of the COL11A2 gene was identified in each family. In 4
families, including 3 with consanguineous parents, the mutations were
homozygous. Individuals in 3 other families, in which parents were
nonconsanguineous, were compound heterozygous. Of the 10 identified
mutations, 9 were predicted to cause premature termination of
translation, and 1 was predicted to cause an in-frame deletion.

In an Egyptian brother and sister with OSMED, Temtamy et al. (2006)
identified homozygosity for a 1-bp deletion in the COL11A2 gene
(120290.0011). The first-cousin parents were heterozygous for the
deletion; a younger brother was unaffected.

- Deafness, Autosomal Dominant 13

In 2 families, 1 American and 1 Dutch, with autosomal dominant,
nonsyndromic hearing loss (DFNA13; 601868) previously been mapped to 6p,
McGuirt et al. (1999) identified heterozygous mutations in the COL11A2
gene (120290.0005-120290.0006) that were predicted to affect the
triple-helix domain of the collagen protein. McGuirt et al. (1999) found
that mice with a targeted disruption of Col11a2 also showed hearing
loss. Electron microscopy of the tectorial membrane of these mice
revealed loss of organization of the collagen fibrils. The findings
revealed a unique ultrastructural malformation of the inner ear
architecture associated with nonsyndromic hearing loss, and suggested
that tectorial membrane abnormalities may be one etiology of
sensorineural hearing loss primarily affecting the mid-frequencies.

- Deafness, Autosomal Recessive 53

In 5 affected members of 2 sibships of a consanguineous Iranian family
with nonsyndromic hearing loss (DFNB53; 609706), Chen et al. (2005)
identified homozygosity for a missense mutation in the COL11A2 gene
(P621T; 120290.0008). The 4 parents and 1 sib were heterozygous for the
mutation.

- Fibrochondrogenesis 2

In a deceased infant with fibrochondrogenesis (FBCG2; 614524), born of
consanguineous parents, Tompson et al. (2012) identified homozygosity
for a splice site mutation in the COL11A2 gene (120290.0012). In another
deceased infant with fibrochondrogenesis, who was born of healthy
nonconsanguineous parents, they identified heterozygosity for a 9-bp
deletion (120290.0013).

- Associations Pending Confirmation

Among Japanese, ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament of
the spine (OPLL; 602475) is a leading cause of myelopathy, showing
ectopic bone formation in the paravertebral ligament. Maeda et al.
(2001) provided genetic evidence that the COL11A2 locus constitutes
susceptibility for OPLL. Five distinct SNPs identified in COL11A2 were
combined to construct haplotypes. A male-specific association with a
COL11A2 haplotype was found with OPLL. In a case-control study of 711
Japanese individuals with OPLL and 896 controls, Horikoshi et al. (2006)
found no association between 2 SNPs in the COL11A2 gene and OPLL.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE III
COL11A2, IVS, G-A, +1

In a large Dutch kindred with Stickler syndrome (184840), which was
found by Brunner et al. (1994) to map to the same region of 6p as the
COL11A2 gene, Vikkula et al. (1995) found heterozygosity for a 1-bp
change at the exon-intron boundary such that the intronic donor-site
sequence, GTGAG, was replaced by ATGAG. This change created a novel
NlaIII restriction site in the genomic sequence. The G-to-A transition
resulted in a 54-bp in-frame deletion, which represented deletion of the
exon 5-prime of the mutation. This exon sequence was located 108
nucleotides upstream of the junction between sequences encoding the
triple-helical and C-propeptide domains of the alpha-2(XI) chain.

.0002
OTOSPONDYLOMEGAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA
COL11A2, GLY175ARG

Vikkula et al. (1995) studied a Dutch kindred in which 3 sibs had a
severe degenerative joint disease resembling osteoarthritis that
presented in early adulthood and affected predominantly the hips, knees,
elbows, and shoulders (215150). The spine was less severely affected,
and adult height was only slightly below that of the unaffected sibs.
There was increased lumbar lordosis and prominent interphalangeal
joints. Short fifth metacarpals were found in all 3 sibs. The patients
had distinctive facial features with midface hypoplasia with a short
upturned nose, prominent eyes, depressed nasal bridge, and prominent
supraorbital ridges. Sensorineural hearing loss was present from birth
and required the use of hearing aids in all 3 affected sibs. None of the
3 had myopia or vitreoretinal degeneration. The parents were fourth
cousins. The affected sibs were found to be homozygous for an extended
haplotype of 7 CA dinucleotide repeat polymorphisms from 6p21 near the
COL11A2 locus. Using conservative estimates of 0.002 for the frequency
of the abnormal allele and 0.005 for the frequency of the marker
haplotype, Vikkula et al. (1995) obtained a lod score of 3.09 at theta =
0.0 for linkage of the disease phenotype to 6p21. To find the mutation
causing the autosomal recessive disorder, they used RT-PCR with total
RNA extracted from EBV-transformed lymphoblasts, and the complete coding
sequence of the COL11A2 gene was determined for 1 individual. This
identified a G-to-A transition, converting a glycyl to an arginyl codon,
within the triple-helical domain of the alpha-2(XI) chain. The change in
sequence eliminated an MspI restriction site. Affected children were
homozygous for the arginyl codon, while unaffected children were
homozygous for the glycyl codon; both parents were heterozygous for the
sequence change. The mutation occurred in a Gly-X-Y triplet. The
clinical findings in the 3 sibs with the gly175-to-arg missense mutation
were described by van Steensel et al. (1997).

.0003
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE III
COL11A2, 27-BP DEL

In a family with type III Stickler syndrome (184840), Sirko-Osadsa et
al. (1998) identified a 27-bp deletion within exon 39 of the COL11A2
gene.

.0004
WEISSENBACHER-ZWEYMULLER SYNDROME
OTOSPONDYLOMEGAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, HETEROZYGOUS, INCLUDED
COL11A2, GLY955GLU

Weissenbacher and Zweymuller (1964) described a newborn boy of normal
size who presented with a 'combination of a Pierre Robin syndrome with a
fetal chondrodysplasia' (277610). The child had a markedly snub nose,
cleft palate, micrognathia, glossoptosis, rhizomelic shortness of the
limbs with dumbbell-shaped femora, and coronal vertebral clefts. A
follow-up report when the original WZS patient was 18 years old (Giedion
et al., 1982) indicated that he had developed sensorineural deafness at
about 5 years of age, and a spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with enlarged
epiphyses of the long bones, radiologically most pronounced at the age
of 13.5 years. At age 18, he was normal in height (164 cm) and in
appearance except for slightly shorter limbs and lower segment. Also, he
had no ocular signs or symptoms. His parents were healthy and
nonconsanguineous. A brother was unaffected. Giedion et al. (1982)
reported 3 additional patients with the same condition and suggested
that they should be classified as otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia
(OSMED; 215150); common findings in patients of the OSMED group were
midface hypoplasia, cleft palate, micrognathia, sensorineural deafness,
normal eyes, and spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with large epiphyses.
Pihlajamaa et al. (1998) analyzed the original WZS patient for mutations
in 2 collagen genes expressed in cartilage, COL2A1 and COL11A2. No
mutations were found in the COL2A1 gene but the COL11A2 gene contained a
G-to-A transition that converted codon 955 from an obligate glycine
(GGG) in the major triple helix of the protein to a codon for glutamate
(GAG). The mutation was present in heterozygous state.

.0005
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 13
COL11A2, ARG549CYS

In affected members of an American family with autosomal dominant
nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss (DFNA13; 601868), McGuirt et al.
(1999) identified a heterozygous C-to-T missense mutation in exon 42
that predicted an arg549-to-cys amino acid substitution.

.0006
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 13
COL11A2, GLY323GLU

In affected members of a Dutch family with autosomal dominant
nonsyndromic sensorineural deafness (DFNA13; 601868), McGuirt et al.
(1999) found a heterozygous G-to-A transition in exon 31 that predicted
a gly323-to-glu amino acid substitution.

.0007
OTOSPONDYLOMEGAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA
COL11A2, SER345TER

In a family from Morocco with consanguineous parents, Melkoniemi et al.
(2000) found that 3 children with OSMED (215150) were homozygous for a
C-to-A transversion at nucleotide 2492 in exon 33 of the COL11A2 gene,
resulting in a ser345-to-ter substitution. One of the children was
described as having normal body length at birth, but short limbs with
enlarged joints and stiff interphalangeal joints were noted. The
radiologic features included vertebral coronal clefts, square iliac
wings and a thick ischium, large metaphyses of the long bones, and
enlarged epiphyses of the elbows and knees. At age 7 years, she was of
nearly normal height, but disproportionate, and her palate was extremely
narrow, with a double row of teeth. Eye examination revealed slight
myopia.

.0008
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE III
COL11A2, ARG893TER

In affected members of a 3-generation family with type III Stickler
syndrome (184840), Vuoristo et al. (2004) identified a heterozygous
C-to-T transition in exon 57 of the COL11A2 gene, resulting in an
arg893-to-ter (R893X) substitution. The mutation induced skipping of
exon 57 in 1 allele, resulting in an in-frame deletion of 18 amino
acids. Sensorineural hearing loss was present in all 3 generations. The
propositus was a 4-year-old boy who had Robin sequence at birth. Both
the propositus and his father had a flat malar area and nasal bridge,
and the nose was upturned. The father had symptoms and radiologic
findings of osteoarthritis from the age of 29 years. At age 73 years,
the affected grandmother showed extensive osteoarthritic changes in the
spine. Her father had undergone hip replacement in midadulthood.

.0009
WEISSENBACHER-ZWEYMULLER SYNDROME, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL11A2, ARG845TER

In 5 individuals from a consanguineous Israeli Bedouin family with
autosomal recessive Weissenbacher-Zweymuller syndrome (277610), Harel et
al. (2005) identified homozygosity for a 3991C-T transition in exon 56
of the COL11A2 gene, resulting in an arg845-to-ter (R845X) substitution.
The R845X mutation was initially reported by Melkoniemi et al. (2000) in
compound heterozygous state in the offspring of nonconsanguineous
parents of northern European descent. The major differentiation between
WZS and otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED; 215150) had been
proposed to be the 'catch-up growth' associated with the former, with a
definite diagnosis established also after follow-up. Given that
homozygous COL11A2 mutations causing OSMED have been identified
throughout the COL11A2 gene (Melkoniemi et al., 2000), it seems
improbable that one could define a specific region in the gene that,
when mutated, might cause WZS rather than OSMED. The R845X premature
translation termination mutation is in accordance with the mutations of
COL11A2 that are associated with OSMED, which are almost exclusively
frameshift or nonsense mutations that lead to the production of
truncated alpha-2 (XI) chains, unlikely to be incorporated into type XI
collagen molecules. Alternatively, these mutations may trigger
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, and thus would be expected to be
functional nulls. Harel et al. (2005) concluded that autosomal recessive
WZS and OSMED are a single entity.

.0010
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 53
COL11A2, PRO621THR

In 5 affected members of 2 sibships of a consanguineous Iranian family
with nonsyndromic hearing loss (DFNB53; 609706), Chen et al. (2005)
identified homozygosity for an 1861C-A transversion in exon 21 of the
COL11A2 gene, resulting in a pro621-to-thr (P621T) substitution near the
N terminus of the triple helical region. The 4 parents and 1 sib were
heterozygous for the mutation.

.0011
OTOSPONDYLOMEGAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA
COL11A2, 1-BP DEL, 3962G

In an Egyptian brother and sister with OSMED (215150), Temtamy et al.
(2006) identified homozygosity for a 1-bp deletion (3962delG) in exon 55
of the COL11A2 gene, resulting in a termination codon in exon 56. The
first-cousin parents were heterozygous for the deletion; a younger
brother was unaffected.

.0012
FIBROCHONDROGENESIS 2
COL11A2, IVS18, 1-BP INS, +3

In a deceased infant with fibrochondrogenesis-2 (FBCG2; 614524), born of
consanguineous parents, Tompson et al. (2012) identified homozygosity
for a 1-bp insertion in intron 18 (+3insG) of the COL11A2 gene,
predicted to result in aberrant mRNA processing. The unaffected parents
were heterozygous for the mutation, as was an unaffected sib. An exon
trapping splicing assay in COS-7 cells demonstrated skipping of exon 18
in RNA from the mutant construct but not from the control.

.0013
FIBROCHONDROGENESIS 2
COL11A2, 9-BP DEL, NT2899

In a deceased infant with fibrochondrogenesis-2 (FBCG2; 614524), born of
healthy nonconsanguineous parents, Tompson et al. (2012) identified
heterozygosity for a de novo 9-bp deletion (2899_2907del9), predicted to
delete 3 amino acids within the triple helical domain. The mutation was
not present in the unaffected parents.

REFERENCE 1. Brunner, H. G.; van Beersum, S. E. C.; Warman, M. L.; Olsen, B.
R.; Ropers, H.-H.; Mariman, E. C. M.: A Stickler syndrome gene is
linked to chromosome 6 near the COL11A2 gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3:
1561-1564, 1994.

2. Chen, W.; Kahrizi, K.; Meyer, N. C.; Riazalhosseini, Y.; Van Camp,
G.; Najmabadi, H.; Smith, R. J. H.: Mutation of COL11A2 causes autosomal
recessive non-syndromic hearing loss at the DFNB53 locus. J. Med.
Genet. 42: e61, 2005. Note: Electronic Article.

3. Giedion, A.; Brandner, M.; Lecannellier, J.; Muhar, U.; Prader,
A.; Sulzer, J.; Zweymuller, E.: Oto-spondylo-megaepiphyseal dysplasia
(OSMED). Helv. Pediat. Acta 37: 361-380, 1982.

4. Hanson, I. M.; Cheah, K. S. E.; Gorman, P. A.; Solomon, E.; Trowsdale,
J.: The pro-alpha2(XI) collagen gene, COL11A2, maps to the centromeric
border of the major histocompatibility complex. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 51: 1010-1011, 1989.

5. Hanson, I. M.; Gorman, P.; Lui, V. C. H.; Cheah, K. S. E.; Solomon,
E.; Trowsdale, J.: The human alpha-2(XI) collagen gene (COL11A2)
maps to the centromeric border of the major histocompatibility complex
on chromosome 6. Genomics 5: 925-931, 1989.

6. Hanson, I. M.; Poustka, A.; Trowsdale, J.: New genes in the class
II region of the human major histocompatibility complex. Genomics 10:
417-424, 1991.

7. Harel, T.; Rabinowitz, R.; Hendler, N.; Galil, A.; Flusser, H.;
Chemke, J.; Gradstein, L.; Lifshitz, T.; Ofir, R.; Elbedour, K.; Birk,
O. S.: COL11A2 mutation associated with autosomal recessive Weissenbacher-Zweymuller
syndrome: molecular and clinical overlap with otospondylomegaepiphyseal
dysplasia (OSMED). Am. J. Med. Genet. 132A: 33-35, 2005.

8. Horikoshi, T.; Maeda, K.; Kawaguchi, Y.; Chiba, K.; Mori, K.; Koshizuka,
Y.; Hirabayashi, S.; Sugimori, K.; Matsumoto, M.; Kawaguchi, H.; Takahashi,
M.; Inoue, H.; Kimura, T.; Matsusue, Y.; Inoue, I.; Baba, H.; Nakamura,
K.; Ikegawa, S.: A large-scale genetic association study of ossification
of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine. Hum. Genet. 119:
611-616, 2006.

9. Kimura, T.; Cheah, K. S. E.; Chan, S. D. H.; Lui, V. C. H.; Mattei,
M.-G.; van der Rest, M.; Ono, K.; Solomon, E.; Ninomiya, Y.; Olsen,
B. R.: The human alpha-2(XI) collagen (COL11A2) chain: molecular
cloning of cDNA and genomic DNA reveals characteristics of a fibrillar
collagen with differences in genomic organization. J. Biol. Chem. 264:
13910-13916, 1989.

10. Law, M. L.; Chan, S. D. H.; Berger, R.; Jones, C.; Kao, F. T.;
Solomon, E.; Cheah, K. S. E.: The gene for the alpha-2 chain of the
human fibrillar collagen type XI (COL11A2) assigned to the short arm
of chromosome 6. Ann. Hum. Genet. 54: 23-29, 1990.

11. Law, M. L.; Chan, S. D. H.; Berger, R.; Jones, C. A.; Kao, F.
T.; Solomon, E.; Cheah, K. S. E.: The gene for the alpha2 chain of
the human fibrillar collagen, type XI (COL11A2) is on the short arm
of chromosome 6. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51: 1029-1030,
1989.

12. Lui, V. C. H.; Ng, L. J.; Sat, E. W. Y.; Cheah, K. S. E.: The
human alpha-2(XI) collagen gene (COL11A2): completion of coding information,
identification of the promoter sequence, and precise localization
within the major histocompatibility complex reveal overlap with the
KE5 gene. Genomics 32: 401-412, 1996.

13. Maeda, S.; Koga, H.; Matsunaga, S.; Numasawa, T.; Ikari, K.; Furushima,
K.; Harata, S.; Takeda, J.; Sakou, T.; Komiya, S.; Inoue, I.: Gender-specific
haplotype association of collagen alpha-2 (XI) gene in ossification
of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine. J. Hum. Genet. 46:
1-4, 2001.

14. Mayne, R.; Brewton, R. G.; Mayne, P. M.; Baker, J. R.: Isolation
and characterization of the chains of type V/type XI collagen present
in bovine vitreous. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 9381-9386, 1993.

15. McGuirt, W. T.; Prasad, S. D.; Griffith, A. J.; Kunst, H. P. M.;
Green, G. E.; Shpargel, K. B.; Runge, C.; Huybrechts, C.; Mueller,
R. F.; Lynch, E.; King, M.-C.; Brunner, H. G.; Cremers, C. W. R. J.;
Takanosu, M.; Li, S.-W.; Arita, M.; Mayne, R.; Prockop, D. J.; Van
Camp, G.; Smith, R. J. H.: Mutations in COL11A2 cause non-syndromic
hearing loss (DFNA13). Nature Genet. 23: 413-419, 1999.

16. Melkoniemi, M.; Brunner, H. G.; Manouvrier, S.; Hennekam, R.;
Superti-Furga, A.; Kaariainen, H.; Pauli, R. M.; van Essen, T.; Warman,
M. L.; Bonaventure, J.; Miny, P.; Ala-Kokko, L.: Autosomal recessive
disorder otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia is associated with loss-of-function
mutations in the COL11A2 gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 66: 368-377, 2000.

17. Pihlajamaa, T.; Prockop, D. J.; Faber, J.; Winterpacht, A.; Zabel,
B.; Giedion, A.; Wiesbauer, P.; Spranger, J.; Ala-Kokko, L.: Heterozygous
glycine substitution in the COL11A2 gene in the original patient with
the Weissenbacher-Zweymuller syndrome demonstrates its identity with
heterozygous OSMED (nonocular Stickler syndrome). Am. J. Med. Genet. 80:
115-120, 1998.

18. Sirko-Osadsa, D. A.; Murray, M. A.; Scott, J. A.; Lavery, M. A.;
Warman, M. L.; Robin, N. H.: Stickler syndrome without eye involvement
is caused by mutations in COL11A2, the gene encoding the alpha-2(XI)
chain of type XI collagen. J. Pediat. 132: 368-371, 1998.

19. Stubbs, L.; Lui, V. C. H.; Ng, L. J.; Cheah, K. S. E.: The alpha-2(XI)
collagen gene lies within 8 kb of Pb in the proximal portion of the
murine major histocompatibility complex. Mammalian Genome 4: 95-103,
1993.

20. Temtamy, S. A.; Mannikko, M.; Abdel-Salam, G. M. H.; Hassan, N.
A.; Ala-Kokko, L.; Afifi, H. H.: Oto-spondylo-megaepiphyseal dysplasia
(OSMED): clinical and radiological findings in sibs homozygous for
premature stop codon mutation in the COL11A2 gene. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A:
1189-1195, 2006.

21. Tompson, S. W.; Faqeih, E. A.; Ala-Kokko, L.; Hecht, J. T.; Miki,
R.; Funari, T.; Funari, V. A.; Nevarez, L.; Krakow, D.; Cohn, D. H.
: Dominant and recessive forms of fibrochondrogenesis resulting from
mutations at a second locus, COL11A2. Am. J. Med. Genet. 158A: 309-314,
2012.

22. van Steensel, M. A. M.; Buma, P.; de Waal Malefijt, M. C.; van
den Hoogen, F. H. J.; Brunner, H. G.: Oto-spondylo-megaepiphyseal
dysplasia (OSMED): clinical description of three patients homozygous
for a missense mutation in the COL11A2 gene. Am. J. Med. Genet. 70:
315-323, 1997.

23. Vikkula, M.; Mariman, E. C. M.; Lui, V. C. H.; Zhidkova, N. I.;
Tiller, G. E.; Goldring, M. B.; van Beersum, S. E. C.; de Waal Malefijt,
M. C.; van den Hoogen, F. H. J.; Ropers, H.-H.; Mayne, R.; Cheah,
K. S. E.; Olsen, B. R.; Warman, M. L.; Brunner, H. G.: Autosomal
dominant and recessive osteochondrodysplasias associated with the
COL11A2 locus. Cell 80: 431-437, 1995.

24. Vuoristo, M. M.; Pappas, J. G.; Jansen, V.; Ala-Kokko, L.: A
stop codon mutation in COL11A2 induces exon skipping and leads to
non-ocular Stickler syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 130A: 160-164,
2004.

25. Vuoristo, M. M.; Pihlajamaa, T.; Vandenberg, P.; Prockop, D. J.;
Ala-Kokko, L.: The human COL11A2 gene structure indicates that the
gene has not evolved with the genes for the major fibrillar collagens. J.
Biol. Chem. 270: 22873-22881, 1995.

26. Weissenbacher, G.; Zweymuller, E.: Gleichzeitiges Vorkommen eines
Syndroms von Pierre Robin und einer fetalen Chondrodysplasie. Mschr.
Kinderheilk. 112: 315-317, 1964.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/8/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/11/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/28/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/10/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/17/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/23/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/29/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/31/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/30/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/15/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/3/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/1/1998
Alan F. Scott - updated: 4/12/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/29/1987

EDITED carol: 03/09/2012
terry: 3/8/2012
carol: 8/4/2011
terry: 12/2/2008
wwang: 12/1/2006
wwang: 10/12/2006
terry: 10/11/2006
wwang: 9/5/2006
ckniffin: 8/28/2006
wwang: 11/10/2005
wwang: 8/24/2005
terry: 8/17/2005
tkritzer: 11/30/2004
terry: 11/23/2004
mcapotos: 2/6/2001
terry: 1/29/2001
carol: 12/21/2000
carol: 6/16/2000
mgross: 4/11/2000
terry: 3/31/2000
alopez: 11/30/1999
terry: 11/30/1999
carol: 2/16/1999
terry: 2/15/1999
carol: 12/10/1998
terry: 12/7/1998
terry: 12/3/1998
terry: 6/1/1998
carol: 5/9/1998
terry: 5/1/1998
mark: 10/18/1996
mark: 4/12/1996
terry: 4/11/1996
mark: 4/10/1996
joanna: 4/4/1996
mark: 2/19/1996
terry: 2/16/1996
carol: 2/24/1995
terry: 11/16/1994
carol: 2/25/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 6/11/1991
carol: 5/22/1991

611056	TITLE *611056 SELENOCYSTEINE LYASE; SCLY
;;SCL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Selenocysteine lyase (SCLY; EC 4.4.1.16) catalyzes the pyridoxal 5-prime
phosphate-dependent conversion of L-selenocysteine to L-alanine and
elemental selenium (Mihara et al., 2000).

CLONING

By database analysis using porcine Scly as probe, followed by screening
a mouse liver cDNA library and human EST libraries, Mihara et al. (2000)
cloned a full-length mouse Scly cDNA and identified a partial human SCLY
cDNA sequence. The deduced mouse protein has 432 amino acids. RT-PCR
detected Scly expression in mouse brain, heart, lung, stomach, liver,
kidney, spleen, and testis. Western blot analysis detected expression in
all mouse tissues examined, with the highest expression in liver,
kidney, and testis. Mouse Scly localized to the cytosolic fraction in
mouse liver and formed homodimers.

GENE FUNCTION

Mihara et al. (2000) showed that mouse Scly catalyzed the conversion of
L-selenocysteine to L-alanine. Scly activity required pyridoxal 5-prime
phosphate, was specific to L-selenocysteine, and showed maximum
reactivity at pH 9.0.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the human
SCLY gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP SHGC-81267).

REFERENCE 1. Mihara, H.; Kurihara, T.; Watanabe, T.; Yoshimura, T.; Esaki, N.
: cDNA cloning, purification, and characterization of mouse liver
selenocysteine lyase: candidate for selenium delivery protein in selenoprotein
synthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 6195-6200, 2000.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 5/23/2007

EDITED wwang: 05/23/2007
wwang: 5/23/2007

601832	TITLE *601832 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L29; RPL29
;;HP/HS-INTERACTING PROTEIN; HIP;;
HEPARIN/HEPARAN SULFATE-BINDING PROTEIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Liu et al. (1996) used RT-PCR to identify transcripts encoding cell
surface heparin/heparan sulfate- (HP/HS-) binding peptides. One clone
isolated in this manner had a predicted peptide sequence with features
of an HP/HS-binding motif; the authors termed this transcript HIP, for
'HP/HS interacting protein.' Liu et al. (1996) cloned the corresponding
cDNA from a HeLa cell cDNA library and found that it encodes a 159-amino
acid polypeptide 80% similar to the rodent ribosomal protein L29.
Transfection of HIP cDNA demonstrated cell surface expression, and the
sequence encodes neither a membrane-spanning region nor a glycosylation
site. Northern blot analysis revealed that HIP is expressed as a 1.3-kb
message in a variety of human cell lines and tissues.

Mammalian ribosome proteins are members of multigene families that are
composed predominantly of multiple processed pseudogenes and 1
functional-containing gene, although some, such as human ribosomal
protein L37a, are present as single-copy genes. During a large-scale
partial sequencing of human heart cDNA clones, Law et al. (1996) found a
novel clone that was very similar to the rat ribosomal protein L29 in
both DNA and amino acid sequences. The cDNA encodes a protein that shows
80.4% homology to protein L29 from the large ribosomal subunit of rat.
The putative protein has a large excess of basic residues over acidic
residues, with a unique lysine-rich tandem repeat structure that
suggested a binding function. Liu et al. (1996) showed that RPL29 had
the same nucleotide sequence as does cell surface heparin/heparan
sulfate-binding protein, also designated HB/HS interacting protein.

GENE FUNCTION

Rohde et al. (1996) demonstrated direct binding between heparin and HIP.
They showed that HIP is expressed on the surfaces of intact RL95 uterine
epithelial cells and that RL95 cell suspensions form aggregates when
incubated with antibodies directed against HIP. Using
immunofluorescence, Rohde et al. (1996) demonstrated that HIP is
expressed in both luminal and glandular epithelium of normal human
endometrium.

MAPPING

Garcia-Barcelo et al. (1997) used a PCR-based strategy to distinguish
the functional intron-containing gene RPL29 from multiple pseudogenes.
By somatic cell hybrid analysis, radiation hybrid mapping, and
fluorescence in situ hybridization, they localized RPL29 to the
telomeric region of 3q, where it was the most distal marker identified
to that time. The gene is close to RPL35A (180468), which maps to
3q29-qter.

Kirn-Safran et al. (2000) mapped the single-copy mouse Rpl29 gene to
distal chromosome 9. Promoter analysis indicated the presence of binding
motifs for ubiquitously expressed transcription factors and for nuclear
factor kappa-B (NFKB; see 164011), as well as the lack of a TATA box.

REFERENCE 1. Garcia-Barcelo, M.; Law, P. T. W.; Tsui, S. K. W.; Fung, K. P.;
Lee, C. Y.; Waye, M. M. Y.: Mapping of the human ribosomal large
subunit protein gene RPL29 to human chromosome 3q29-qter. Genomics 46:
148-151, 1997.

2. Kirn-Safran, C. B.; Dayal, S.; Martin-DeLeon, P. A.; Carson, D.
D.: Cloning, expression, and chromosome mapping of the murine Hip/Rpl29
gene. Genomics 68: 210-219, 2000.

3. Law, P. T. W.; Tsui, S. K. W.; Lam, W. Y.; Luk, S. C. W.; Hwaang,
D. M.; Liew, C. C.; Lee, C. Y.; Fung, K. P.; Waye, M. M. Y.: A novel
cDNA encoding a human homologue of ribosomal protein L29. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1305: 105-108, 1996.

4. Liu, S.; Smith, S. E.; Julian, J.; Rohde, L. H.; Karin, N. J.;
Carson, D. D.: cDNA cloning and expression of HIP, a novel cell surface
heparan sulfate/heparin-binding protein of human uterine epithelial
cells and cell lines. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 11817-11823, 1996.

5. Rohde, L. H.; Julian, J.; Babaknia, A.; Carson, D. D.: Cell surface
expression of HIP, a novel heparin/heparan sulfate-binding protein,
of human uterine epithelial cells and cell lines. J. Biol. Chem. 271:
11824-11830, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/31/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/19/1997

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 3/26/1997

EDITED terry: 07/26/2006
alopez: 11/21/2001
mgross: 10/31/2000
carol: 2/11/2000
alopez: 10/23/1998
dholmes: 12/31/1997
mark: 12/22/1997
terry: 12/19/1997
alopez: 10/2/1997
jenny: 9/5/1997
alopez: 6/27/1997
alopez: 6/9/1997

603483	TITLE *603483 EUKARYOTIC TRANSLATION INITIATION FACTOR 4E-BINDING PROTEIN 3; EIF4EBP3
;;4EBP3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Eukaryotic initiation factor 4F (EIF4F), which recognizes the cap
structure mediating translation initiation, consists of 3 polypeptides,
including EIF4E (133440), the cap-binding protein subunit. EIF4E
activity is regulated in part by 2 translational repressors, EIF4EBP1
(602223) and EIF4EBP2 (602224), which bind to it and prevent its
assembly into EIF4F. Poulin et al. (1998) isolated a prostate carcinoma
cell line cDNA encoding EIF4EBP3, which they designated 4EBP3, a new
member of the EIF4EBP family. The deduced 100-amino acid protein shares
57% and 59% identity with EIF4EBP1 and EIF4EBP2, respectively. Northern
blot analysis detected a major 800-bp transcript in almost every tissue
examined, although at varying levels. The authors demonstrated that the
14.6-kD EIF4EBP3 phosphoprotein is heat stable and binds to EIF4E in
vitro as well as in vivo. EIF4EBP3 overexpression specifically reduced
EIF4E-dependent translation.

By real-time quantitative RT-PCR of several mouse tissues, Poulin et al.
(2003) found 4Ebp3 highly expressed in liver, at a level 10-fold higher
than that in kidney. Other tissues expressed variable and significantly
lower levels of 4Ebp3 mRNA.

- MASK-BP3 Intergenic Splice Variant

Poulin et al. (2003) identified an mRNA of about 8.5 kb that hybridized
with a 4EBP3 probe in Northern blots and included exons 1 through 33 of
the MASK gene (ANKHD1; 610500) spliced to an intermediate exon 0,
followed by 4EBP3 exons B and C. The transcript lacked MASK exon 34 and
4EBP3 exon A.

GENE FUNCTION

By Western blot analysis, Kleijn et al. (2002) found 4EBP3 in the
cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions of normal human primary T cells and of
HEK293 and HeLa cells. 4EBP3 was associated with EIF4E in both cell
compartments. The association of cytoplasmic 4EBP3 and EIF4E in HEK293
and HeLa cells was reduced by serum or interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680)
starvation. In primary T cells, the interaction was reduced by cell
activation.

Dowling et al. (2010) inhibited the mTORC1 (601231) pathway in cells
lacking EIF4EBP1, EIF4EBP2, and EIF4EBP3 and analyzed the effects on
cell size, cell proliferation, and cell cycle progression. Although the
EIF4EBPs had no effect on cell size, they inhibited cell proliferation
by selectively inhibiting the translation of mRNAs that encode
proliferation-promoting proteins and proteins involved in cell cycle
progression. Thus, Dowling et al. (2010) concluded that control of cell
size and cell cycle progression appear to be independent in mammalian
cells, whereas in lower eukaryotes, EIF4E binding proteins influence
both cell growth and proliferation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Poulin et al. (2003) determined that the EIF4EBP3 gene contains 3 exons
and spans 1.9 kb. The last exon is noncoding.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Poulin et al. (2003) mapped the EIF4EBP3
gene to chromosome 5q31.3, where it lies downstream of the ANKHD1 gene.
Southern blot analysis demonstrated that EIF4EBP3 is present in single
copy. Poulin et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Eif4ebp3 gene to a region of
chromosome 18 that shares homology of synteny with human chromosome
5q31.

REFERENCE 1. Dowling, R. J. O.; Topisirovic, I.; Alain, T.; Bidinosti, M.; Fonseca,
B. D.; Petroulakis, E.; Wang, X.; Larsson, O.; Selvaraj, A.; Liu,
Y.; Kozma, S. C.; Thomas, G.; Sonenberg, N.: mTORC1-mediated cell
proliferation, but not cell growth, controlled by the 4E-BPs. Science 328:
1172-1176, 2010.

2. Kleijn, M.; Scheper, G. C.; Wilson, M. L.; Tee, A. R.; Proud, C.
G.: Localisation and regulation of the eIF4E-binding protein 4E-BP3. FEBS
Lett. 532: 319-323, 2002.

3. Poulin, F.; Brueschke, A.; Sonenberg, N.: Gene fusion and overlapping
reading frames in the mammalian genes for 4E-BP3 and MASK. J. Biol.
Chem. 278: 52290-52297, 2003.

4. Poulin, F.; Gingras, A.-C.; Olsen, H.; Chevalier, S.; Sonenberg,
N.: 4E-BP3, a new member of the eukaryotic initiation factor 4E-binding
protein family. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 14002-14007, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/14/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/25/2006

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 2/3/1999

EDITED alopez: 09/24/2012
terry: 9/20/2012
alopez: 6/18/2010
terry: 6/14/2010
alopez: 10/17/2006
terry: 8/25/2006
psherman: 2/3/1999

601555	TITLE *601555 RHO FAMILY GTPase 2; RND2
;;RAS HOMOLOG GENE FAMILY, MEMBER N; RHON;;
ARHN;;
GTP-BINDING PROTEIN RHO7; RHO7
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the course of a complete genomic sequence analysis of 117 kb from
chromosome 17 containing the BRCA1 gene (113705) located on 17q21, Smith
et al. (1996) identified just centromeric to the BRCA1 gene a novel gene
they designated RHO7. RHO7 was identified initially as a homolog to the
RHO family (see 165370) of GTP-binding proteins (Chardin, 1991) by a
database search using deduced amino acid sequences from predicted exons.
The gene was found to be highly similar to the mouse EST homolog, with
more than 90% identity between the 2 nucleotide sequences.

By screening a human fetal brain cDNA library using bovine Rnd1 (609038)
as probe, Nobes et al. (1998) cloned RND2. The deduced protein contains
227 amino acids and has a calculated molecular mass of 25.3 kD. It has 3
guanine-binding motifs, 2 loops and a threonine involved in phosphate
binding, and 3 major residues that coordinate magnesium in the GTP-bound
state. However, RND2 lacks the residues important for the intrinsic
GTPase activity of RAS (see 190020). RND2 ends with a CAAX box motif and
a terminal methionine residue, suggesting that RND2 is farnesylated.
Northern blot analysis detected high expression of a 1.5-kb RND2
transcript only in testis, with little to no expression in all other
adult and fetal tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Heng et al. (2008) demonstrated that the proneural protein neurogenin-2
(Neurog2; 606624), which controls neurogenesis in the embryonic cortex,
directly induces the expression of the small GTP-binding protein Rnd2 in
newly generated mouse cortical neurons before they initiate migration.
Rnd2 silencing leads to a defect in radial migration of cortical neurons
similar to that observed when the Neurog2 gene is deleted. Remarkably,
restoring Rnd2 expression in Neurog2-mutant neurons is sufficient to
rescue their ability to migrate. Heng et al. (2008) concluded that their
results identified Rnd2 as a novel essential regulator of neuronal
migration in the cerebral cortex and demonstrated that Rnd2 is a major
effector of Neurog2 function in the promotion of migration. Thus, a
proneural protein controls the complex cellular behavior of cell
migration through a remarkably direct pathway involving the
transcriptional activation of a small GTP-binding protein.

MAPPING

By FISH, Nobes et al. (1998) mapped the RND2 gene to chromosome 17q21.

REFERENCE 1. Chardin, P.: Small GTP-binding proteins of the ras family: a conserved
functional mechanism? Cancer Cells 3: 117-126, 1991.

2. Heng, J. I.-T.; Nguyen, L.; Castro, D. S.; Zimmer, C.; Wildner,
H.; Armant, O.; Skowronska-Krawczyk, D.; Bedogni, F.; Matter, J.-M.;
Hevner, R.; Guillemot, F.: Neurogenin 2 controls cortical neuron
migration through regulation of Rnd2. Nature 455: 114-118, 2008.

3. Nobes, C. D.; Lauritzen, I.; Mattei, M.-G.; Paris, S.; Hall, A.;
Chardin, P.: A new member of the Rho family, Rnd1, promotes disassembly
of actin filament structures and loss of cell adhesion. J. Cell Biol. 141:
187-197, 1998.

4. Smith, T. M.; Lee, M. K.; Szabo, C. I.; Jerome, N.; McEuen, M.;
Taylor, M.; Hood, L.; King, M.-C.: Complete genomic sequence and
analysis of 117 kb of human DNA containing the gene BRCA1. Genomic
Res. 6: 1029-1049, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/24/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/29/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/4/1996

EDITED alopez: 09/25/2008
terry: 9/24/2008
alopez: 4/4/2007
mgross: 11/29/2004
mgross: 11/23/2004
carol: 9/13/2002
mark: 1/6/1997

173410	TITLE *173410 PLATELET-DERIVED GROWTH FACTOR RECEPTOR, BETA; PDGFRB
;;PDGFR;;
PDGFR1
PDGFRB/ETV6 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
PDGFRB/D10S170 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
PDGFRB/RABPT5 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
PDGFRB/HIP1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
PDGFRB/MYO18A FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The PDGFRB gene encodes platelet-derived growth factor receptor-beta, a
cell surface tyrosine kinase receptor for members of the
platelet-derived growth factor family (see, e.g., PDFGB, 190040).
Activation of the receptor leads to activation of downstream signaling
pathways, inducing cellular proliferation, differentiation, survival,
and migration (summary by Nicolas et al., 2013).

See also PDGFRA (173490).

CLONING

Stimulation of cell proliferation of the receptor for PDGF (190040) has
been implicated in atherogenesis and in cell transformation by the SIS
oncogene. Escobedo et al. (1986) sequenced the receptor and cloned its
gene.

Gronwald et al. (1988) cloned a cDNA coding for human PDGFR and studied
its expression. The cDNA contained an open reading frame that coded for
a protein of 1,106 amino acids. In transfectants, Gronwald et al. (1988)
found that the PDGFR clone expressed a high affinity receptor specific
for the BB isoform of PDGF, i.e., PDGF dimers composed of 2 B chains.
There may be a separate class of PDGF receptor that binds both the
homodimers and the heterodimer.

Claesson-Welsh et al. (1988) determined the structure of the human PDGF
receptor as deduced from a full-length cDNA clone. The receptor
expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells was found to bind specifically
to B-chain-containing PDGF molecules (190040). With the description of a
second PDGF receptor (173490), it is necessary to use the symbol PDGFR1.
Matsui et al. (1989) designated the second type of PDGFR as type alpha
because PDGF binding was blocked by AA as well as BB isoforms of the
ligand; the product of the earlier cloned PDGF receptor was termed type
beta.

The PDFGRB gene is expressed in pericytes in the developing vascular
walls of mouse brain (Lindahl et al., 1997). It is expressed
particularly in the basal ganglia and dentate nucleus of the cerebellum
(summary by Nicolas et al., 2013).

GENE FUNCTION

Di Pasquale et al. (2003) characterized 43 cell lines as permissive or
nonpermissive for adeno-associated virus type 5 (AAV-5) transduction and
compared the gene expression profiles derived from cDNA microarray
analyses of those cell lines. A statistically significant correlation
was observed between expression of PDGFR-alpha (173490) and AAV-5
transduction. Subsequent experiments confirmed the role of PDGFR-alpha
and PDGFR-beta as receptors for AAV-5.

Gilbertson and Clifford (2003) presented data confirming that PDGFRB is
preferentially expressed in metastatic medulloblastoma (155255) and
suggested that it may prove useful as a prognostic marker and as a
therapeutic target for the disease.

Svegliati Baroni et al. (2006) presented evidence showing that
stimulatory autoantibodies to PDGFR are a specific hallmark of
scleroderma (181750). These antibodies appeared to trigger an
intracellular loop that involves Ras (190020), ERK1 (601795)/ERK2
(176948), and reactive oxygen species (ROS) and that leads to increased
type I collagen (120150) expression. The authors suggested that the
biologic activity of PDGFR antibodies on fibroblasts has a causal role
in the pathogenesis of the disease. Tan (2006) suggested that the
profibrotic phenotype of fibroblasts in patients with scleroderma is
maintained by at least 3 mechanisms involving TGFB1 (190180), PDGFR, and
the Ras-ERK1/ERK2-ROS cascade.

Greenberg et al. (2008) defined a role for VEGF (192240) as an inhibitor
of neovascularization on the basis of its capacity to disrupt vascular
smooth muscle cell function. Specifically, under conditions of
PDGF-mediated angiogenesis, VEGF ablates pericyte coverage of nascent
vascular sprouts, leading to vessel destabilization. At the molecular
level, VEGF-mediated activation of VEGFR2 (191306) suppresses PDGFRB
signaling in vascular smooth muscle cells through the assembly of a
receptor complex consisting of PDGFRB and VEGFR2. Inhibition of VEGFR2
not only prevents assembly of this receptor complex but also restores
angiogenesis in tissues exposed to both VEGF and PDGF. Finally, genetic
deletion of tumor cell VEGF disrupts PDGFRB/VEGFR2 complex formation and
increases tumor vessel maturation. Greenberg et al. (2008) concluded
that their findings underscored the importance of vascular smooth muscle
cells/pericytes in neovascularization and revealed a dichotomous role
for VEGF and VEGFR2 signaling as both a promoter of endothelial cell
function and a negative regulator of vascular smooth muscle cells and
vessel maturation.

Nazarian et al. (2010) showed that acquired resistance of BRAF(V600E)
(164757.0001)-positive melanomas to PLX4032, a novel class I
RAF-selective inhibitor, develops by mutually exclusive PDGFRB
upregulation or NRAS (164790) mutations but not through secondary
mutations in BRAF(V600E). Nazarian et al. (2010) used PLX4032-resistant
sublines artificially derived from BRAF(V600E)-positive melanoma cell
lines and validated key findings in PLX4032-resistant tumors and
tumor-matched, short-term cultures from clinical trial patients.
Induction of PDGFRB RNA, protein, and tyrosine phosphorylation emerged
as a dominant feature of acquired PLX4032 resistance in a subset of
melanoma sublines, patient-derived biopsies, and short-term cultures.
PDGFRB-upregulated tumor cells had low activated RAS levels and, when
treated with PLX4032, did not reactivate the MAPK (see 176872) pathway
significantly. In another subset, high levels of activated NRAS
resulting from mutations led to significant MAPK pathway reactivation
upon PLX4032 treatment. Knockdown of PDGFRB or NRAS reduced growth of
the respective PLX4032-resistant subsets. Overexpression of PDGFRB or
mutated NRAS conferred PLX4032 resistance to PLX4032-sensitive parental
cell lines. Importantly, Nazarian et al. (2010) showed that MAPK
reactivation predicts MEK inhibitor sensitivity. Thus, Nazarian et al.
(2010) concluded that melanomas escape BRAF(V600E) targeting not through
secondary BRAF(V600E) mutations but via receptor tyrosine kinase
(RTK)-mediated activation of alternative survival pathway(s) or
activated RAS-mediated reactivation of the MAPK pathway, suggesting
additional therapeutic strategies.

MAPPING

By Southern blotting of DNA from somatic cell hybrids and by in situ
hybridization, Francke et al. (1986) mapped the gene for PDGFR to
5q31-q32. The gene is flanked proximally by GMCSF (138960) and distally
by FMS (164770). All 3 loci may be implicated in the 5q- syndrome
(153550). See also Yarden et al. (1986). Buchberg et al. (1989) cited
unpublished observations indicating that Pdgfr is located on mouse
chromosome 18.

The Treacher Collins Syndrome Collaborative Group (1996) determined that
the PDGFRB gene is located within approximately 900 kb proximal of the
TCOF1 gene (606847).

The PDGFRB gene and the CSF1R gene (164770) encode proteins that belong
to the same subfamily of receptor tyrosine kinases (Yarden and Ullrich,
1988). Both genes are located on 5q and are linked physically in a
head-to-tail array with less than 500 bp between the polyadenylation
signal of the PDGFRB gene and the transcription start point of the CSF1R
gene (Roberts et al., 1988). (This finding is inconsistent with the
conclusion that the PDGFRB gene is located at 5q31-q32 and the presumed
assignment of CSF1R to 5q33.2-q33.3. One of the assignments must be in
error.) Close linkage of the 2 genes has been demonstrated also in the
mouse and How et al. (1996) demonstrated that in the pufferfish (Fugu
rubripes) the 2 genes are linked tandemly in a head-to-tail array with
2.2 kb of intragenic sequence.

Gross (2013) mapped the PDGFRB gene to chromosome 5q32 based on an
alignment of the PDGFRB sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC032224) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

CYTOGENETICS

- PDGFRB Fusion Genes

Abe et al. (1997) reported that in a patient with acute myelogenous
leukemia (AML; 601626), the TRIP11 gene (604505), which they called
CEV14, was fused to the PDGFRB gene as a result of a t(5;14)(q33;q32)
translocation. On initial diagnosis, this patient had exhibited a sole
t(7;11) translocation, but the t(5;14)(q33;q32) translocation appeared
during the relapse phase. The CEV14-PDGFRB chimeric gene consisted of
the 5-prime region of CEV14 fused to the 3-prime region of PDGFRB.

Apperley et al. (2002) noted that a small proportion of patients with
chronic myeloproliferative disorders have constitutive activation of the
PDGFRB gene, resulting in many cases from a chromosome translocation
such as t(5;12), which creates a fusion gene with ETV6 (600618). Fusions
between PDGFRB and H4/D10S170 (601985), rabaptin-5 (RABPT5; 603616), and
huntingtin-interacting protein-1 (HIP1; 601767) have also been reported
in cases of chronic myeloproliferative disorders. The protein tyrosine
kinase activity of PDGFRB, like that of ABL1 (189980) and KIT (164920),
is inhibited by imatinib mesylate. The compound has been shown to be
effective in the treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia (151410) and
gastrointestinal stromal tumors (606764), which are caused by
abnormalities in the ABL1 and KIT genes, respectively. Apperley et al.
(2002) demonstrated that imatinib mesylate was also effective in the
treatment of chronic myeloproliferative disorders with rearrangements of
the PDGFRB gene. Three of 4 patients presented with leukocytosis and
eosinophilia (see 131440), and their leukemia cells carried the
ETV6-PDGFRB fusion gene.

Steer and Cross (2002) reviewed the acquired reciprocal chromosomal
translocations that involve 5q31-q33 and are associated with a
significant minority of patients with BCR-ABL-negative chronic myeloid
leukemias. The most common of these fuses the ETV6 gene to the PDGFRB
gene, but at the time of the review 4 additional partner genes were
known: H4 (D10S170), HIP1, CEV14 (TRIP11), and rabaptin-5. Clinically,
most patients present with a myeloproliferative disorder with
eosinophilia, eosinophilic leukemia, or chronic myelomonocytic leukemia
and thus fall into the broad category of myeloproliferative
disorders/myelodysplastic syndromes (MPD/MDS). With the advent of
targeted signal transduction therapy, patients with rearrangement of
PDGFRB might be better classified as a distinct subgroup of MPD/MDS.

In 9 patients with BCR-ABL-negative chronic myeloproliferative disorders
or MPD/MDS, Baxter et al. (2003) described translocations involving
chromosome bands 5q31 or 5q33, resulting in fusion of the PDGFRB gene
with other genes. They commented that several PDGFRB partner genes
remained to be characterized.

Pierce et al. (2008) showed that expression of TEL/PDGFRB in murine
myeloid FDCP-Mix cells prevented cell differentiation, increased cell
survival, increased the level of phosphatidylinositol
3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdInsP3), and increased the expression and
phosphorylation of Thoc5 (612733). Elevated Thoc5 expression also led to
increased cell survival and PtdInsP3 levels, suggesting that the effects
associated with TEL/PDGFRB expression were due, at least in part, to
Thoc5 upregulation.

Walz et al. (2009) reported a 51-year-old male with imatinib-responsive
eosinophilia associated with atypical myeloproliferative neoplasm who
presented with a t(5;17)(q33-34;q11.2). The translocation resulted in
the fusion of MYO18A (610067) intron 40 to PDGFRB intron 9, and RT-PCR
confirmed in-frame fusion between MYO18A exon 40 and PDGFRB exon 10. The
predicted 2,661-amino acid chimeric protein contains almost all of the
MYO18A sequence fused to the PDGFRB transmembrane, WW-like, and kinase
domains. RT-PCR also detected the reciprocal PDGFRB-MYO18A transcript,
with PDGFRB exon 9 fused to MYO18A exon 41.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Idiopathic Basal Ganglia Calcification 4

In affected members of a large 3-generation family with idiopathic basal
ganglia calcification-4 (IBGC4; 615007), Nicolas et al. (2013)
identified a heterozygous mutation in the PDGFRB gene (L658P;
173410.0001). The mutation, which was identified by exome sequencing of
2 affected individuals and confirmed by Sanger sequencing, segregated
with the disorder in this family and was not found in several large
exome databases. Many mutation carriers were asymptomatic, but 1 had
late-onset parkinsonism and dementia, and several had depression or
migraine. Nicolas et al. (2013) noted that animal models have shown a
key role for Pdgfrb in the development of pericytes in vessels within
the brain, and that pericytes have a key role in maintaining the
integrity of the blood-brain barrier, which is hypothesized to be
impaired in IBGC. In addition, the PDGFB-PDGFRB pathway appears to be
involved in phosphate-induced calcifications in vascular smooth muscle
cells by modulating expression of the phosphate transporter SLC20A1
(137570) (Villa-Bellosta et al., 2009); IGBC3 (614540) is caused by
mutation in a related phosphate transporter SLC20A2 (158378). These
findings suggest that cerebral phosphate homeostasis may play a role in
vascular calcifications.

- Infantile Myofibromatosis 1

In affected members of 4 unrelated families with infantile
myofibromatosis-1 (IMF1; 228550), Cheung et al. (2013) identified the
same heterozygous missense mutation in the PDGFRB gene (R561C;
173410.0003). The families were of Chinese, European, French Canadian,
and French origin, respectively. The mutation, which was identified by
exome sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing in the first 2
families, segregated with the phenotype in all families and was not
found in several large control databases. In addition, tumor tissue from
1 of the patients who carried a germline R561C mutation harbored an
additional somatic PDGFRB mutation (N666K) that was predicted to be
damaging. Structural modeling indicated that the R561C mutation occurs
in the cytoplasmic juxtamembrane (JM) region between the helical
transmembrane segment and the kinase domain, and was predicted to
compromise the autoinhibitory role of the JM domain, leading to
increased kinase firing and promoting the formation of myofibromas in
tissues with high PDGFRB signaling activity. Modeling also predicted
that the N666K mutation would favor an active kinase formation. In vitro
functional studies were not performed. Sequencing the PDGFRB gene in 5
individuals with nonfamilial IMF did not identify any causative
mutations.

Martignetti et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous R561C mutation in
the PDGFRB gene in affected members from 7 unrelated families with
autosomal dominant infantile myofibromatosis. The mutation, which was
identified by exome sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing,
segregated with the disorder and was not found in several large control
databases. Another family with the disorder carried a different
heterozygous mutation in the PDGFRB gene (P660T; 173410.0004).

ANIMAL MODEL

Klinghoffer et al. (2001) created 2 complementary lines of knockin mice
in which the intracellular signaling domains of one PDGFR had been
removed and replaced by those of the other PDGFR. While both lines
demonstrated substantial rescue of normal development, substitution of
the Pdgfrb signaling domains with those of Pdgfra resulted in varying
degrees of vascular disease.

Armulik et al. (2010) demonstrated a direct role of pericytes at the
blood-brain barrier in vivo. Using a set of adult viable
pericyte-deficient mouse mutants, they showed that pericyte deficiency
increases the permeability of the blood-brain barrier to water and a
range of low molecular mass and high molecular mass tracers. The
increased permeability occurs by endothelial transcytosis, a process
that is rapidly arrested by the drug imatinib. Furthermore, Armulik et
al. (2010) showed that pericytes function at the blood-brain barrier in
at least 2 ways: by regulating blood-brain barrier-specific gene
expression patterns in endothelial cells, and by inducing polarization
of astrocyte end-feet surrounding central nervous system (CNS) blood
vessels. Armulik et al. (2010) concluded that their results indicated a
novel and critical role for pericytes in the integration of endothelial
and astrocyte functions at the neurovascular unit, and in the regulation
of the blood-brain barrier.

Daneman et al. (2010) independently showed that the blood-brain barrier
is formed during embryogenesis as endothelial cells invade the CNS and
pericytes are recruited to the nascent vessels, over a week before
astrocyte generation. Analyzing mice with null and hypomorphic alleles
of Pdgfrb, which have defects in pericyte generation, they demonstrated
that pericytes are necessary for the formation of the blood-brain
barrier, and that absolute pericyte coverage determines relative
vascular permeability. Daneman et al. (2010) demonstrated that pericytes
regulate functional aspects of the blood-brain barrier, including the
formation of tight junctions and vesicle trafficking in CNS endothelial
cells. Pericytes do not induce blood-brain barrier-specific gene
expression in CNS endothelial cells, but inhibit the expression of
molecules that increase vascular permeability and CNS immune cell
infiltration. Daneman et al. (2010) concluded that pericyte-endothelial
cell interactions are critical to regulate the blood-brain barrier
during development, and that disruption of these interactions may lead
to blood-brain barrier dysfunction and neuroinflammation during CNS
injury and disease.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BASAL GANGLIA CALCIFICATION, IDIOPATHIC, 4
PDGFRB, LEU658PRO

In affected members of a large 3-generation family with idiopathic basal
ganglia calcification-4 (IBGC4; 615007), Nicolas et al. (2013)
identified a heterozygous 1973T-C transition in the PDGFRB gene,
resulting in a leu658-to-pro (L658P) substitution at a highly conserved
residue within the tyrosine kinase domain. The mutation, which was
identified by exome sequencing of 2 affected individuals and confirmed
by Sanger sequencing, segregated with the disorder in this family and
was not found in several large exome databases. No functional studies
were performed. Many mutation carriers were asymptomatic, but 1 had
late-onset parkinsonism and dementia, and several had depression or
migraine.

.0002
BASAL GANGLIA CALCIFICATION, IDIOPATHIC, 4
PDGFRB, ARG987TRP

In a 66-year-old woman with sporadic occurrence of IBGC4 (615007),
Nicolas et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous 2959C-T transition in
the PDGFRB gene, resulting in an arg987-to-trp (R987W) substitution at a
highly conserved residue. The mutation was not found in multiple exome
databases. No functional studies were performed. The patient presented
with a mild cognitive dysexecutive syndrome and bradykinesia and
pyramidal signs.

.0003
MYOFIBROMATOSIS, INFANTILE, 1
PDGFRB, ARG561CYS

In affected members of 4 unrelated families with infantile
myofibromatosis-1 (IMF1; 228550), Cheung et al. (2013) identified a
heterozygous c.1681C-T transition in the PDGFRB gene, resulting in an
arg561-to-cys (R561C) substitution at a highly conserved residue. The
families were of Chinese, European, French Canadian, and French origin,
respectively. The mutation, which was identified by exome sequencing and
confirmed by Sanger sequencing in the first 2 families, segregated with
the phenotype in all families and was not found in several large control
databases. Structural modeling indicated that the R561C mutation occurs
in the cytoplasmic juxtamembrane (JM) region between the helical
transmembrane segment and the kinase domain, and was predicted to
compromise the autoinhibitory role of the JM domain, leading to
increased kinase firing and promoting the formation of myofibromas in
tissues with high PDGFRB signaling activity. In vitro functional studies
were not performed.

Martignetti et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous R561C mutation in
the PDGFRB gene in affected members from 7 unrelated families with
autosomal dominant infantile myofibromatosis. The mutation, which was
identified by exome sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing,
segregated with the disorder and was not found in several large control
databases.

.0004
MYOFIBROMATOSIS, INFANTILE, 1
PDGFRB, PRO660THR (dbSNP rs144050370)

In affected members of a family with autosomal dominant infantile
myofibromatosis-1 (228550) originally reported by Zand et al. (2004),
Martignetti et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous c.1978C-A
transversion in exon 14 of the PDGFRB gene, resulting in a pro660-to-thr
(P660T) substitution at a highly conserved residue in the tyrosine
kinase domain. The mutation, which was identified by exome sequencing
and confirmed by Sanger sequencing, segregated with the disorder and was
found at very low frequency (0.000077) in control databases (dbSNP
rs144050370). In vitro functional studies were not performed.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Golub et al. (1994); Kulkarni et al. (2000); Leal et al. (1985); Magnusson
et al. (2001); Ross et al. (1998)
REFERENCE 1. Abe, A.; Emi, N.; Tanimoto, M.; Terasaki, H.; Marunouchi, T.; Saito,
H.: Fusion of the platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta to
a novel gene CEV14 in acute myelogenous leukemia after clonal evolution. Blood 90:
4271-4277, 1997.

2. Apperley, J. F.; Gardembas, M.; Melo, J. V.; Russell-Jones, R.;
Bain, B. J.; Baxter, E. J.; Chase, A.; Chessells, J. M.; Colombat,
M.; Dearden, C. E.; Dimitrijevic, S.; Mahon, F.-X.; Marin, D.; Nikolova,
Z.; Olavarria, E.; Silberman, S.; Schultheis, B.; Cross, N. C. P.;
Goldman, J. M.: Response to imatinib mesylate in patients with chronic
myeloproliferative diseases with rearrangements of the platelet-derived
growth factor receptor beta. New Eng. J. Med. 347: 481-487, 2002.

3. Armulik, A.; Genove, G.; Mae, M.; Nisancioglu, M. H.; Wallgard,
E.; Niaudet, C.; He, L.; Norlin, J.; Lindblom, P.; Strittmatter, K.;
Johansson, B. R.; Betsholtz, C.: Pericytes regulate the blood-brain
barrier. Nature 468: 557-561, 2010.

4. Baxter, E. J.; Kulkarni, S.; Vizmanos, J.-L.; Jaju, R.; Martinelli,
G.; Testoni, N.; Hughes, G.; Salamanchuk, Z.; Calasanz, M. J.; Lahortiga,
I.; Pocock, C. F.; Dang, R.; Fidler, C.; Wainscoat, J. S.; Boultwood,
J.; Cross, N. C. P.: Novel translocations that disrupt the platelet-derived
growth factor receptor beta (PDGFRB) gene in BCR-ABL-negative chronic
myeloproliferative disorders. Brit. J. Haemat. 120: 251-256, 2003.

5. Buchberg, A. M.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland, N. G.: Localization
of the murine macrophage colony-stimulating factor gene to chromosome
3 using interspecific backcross analysis. Genomics 5: 363-367, 1989.

6. Cheung, Y. H.; Gayden, T.; Campeau, P. M.; LeDuc, C. A.; Russo,
D.; Nguyen, V.-H.; Guo, J.; Qi, M.; Guan, Y.; Albrecht, S.; Moroz,
B.; Eldin, K. W.; and 13 others: A recurrent PDGFRB mutation causes
familial infantile myofibromatosis. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 92: 996-1000,
2013.

7. Claesson-Welsh, L.; Eriksson, A.; Moren, A.; Severinsson, L.; Ek,
B.; Ostman, A.; Betsholtz, C.; Heldin, C.-H.: cDNA cloning and expression
of a human platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) receptor specific
for B-chain-containing PDGF molecules. Molec. Cell. Biol. 8: 3476-3486,
1988.

8. Daneman, R.; Zhou, L.; Kebede, A. A.; Barres, B. A.: Pericytes
are required for blood-brain barrier integrity during embryogenesis. Nature 468:
562-566, 2010.

9. Di Pasquale, G.; Davidson, B. L.; Stein, C. S.; Martins, I.; Scudiero,
D.; Monks, A.; Chiorini, J. A.: Identification of PDGFR as a receptor
for AAV-5 transduction. Nature Med. 9: 1306-1312, 2003.

10. Escobedo, J. A.; Fried, V. A.; Daniel, T. O.; Williams, L. T.
: Primary structure of the platelet-derived growth factor. (Abstract) Clin.
Res. 34: 544A, 1986.

11. Francke, U.; Yang-Feng, T. L.; Brissenden, J. E.; Ullrich, A.
: Chromosomal mapping of genes involved in growth control. Cold Spring
Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 51: 855-866, 1986.

12. Gilbertson, R. J.; Clifford, S. C.: PDGFRB is overexpressed in
metastatic medulloblastoma. (Letter) Nature Genet. 35: 197-198,
2003.

13. Golub, T. R.; Barker, G. F.; Lovett, M.; Gilliland, D. G.: Fusion
of PDGF receptor beta to a novel ets-like gene, tel, in chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia with t(5;12) chromosomal translocation. Cell 77: 307-316,
1994.

14. Greenberg, J. I.; Shields, D. J.; Barillas, S. G.; Acevedo, L.
M.; Murphy, E.; Huang, J.; Scheppke, L.; Stockmann, C.; Johnson, R.
S.; Angle, N.; Cheresh, D. A.: A role for VEGF as a negative regulator
of pericyte function and vessel maturation. Nature 456: 809-813,
2008. Note: Erratum: Nature 457: 1168 only, 2009.

15. Gronwald, R. G. K.; Grant, F. J.; Haldeman, B. A.; Hart, C. E.;
O'Hara, P. J.; Hagen, F. S.; Ross, R.; Bowen-Pope, D. F.; Murray,
M. J.: Cloning and expression of a cDNA coding for the human platelet-derived
growth factor receptor: evidence for more than one receptor class. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 3435-3439, 1988.

16. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/8/2013.

17. How, G.-F.; Venkatesh, B.; Brenner, S.: Conserved linkage between
the puffer fish (Fugu rubripes) and human genes for platelet-derived
growth factor receptor and macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor. Genome
Res. 6: 1185-1191, 1996.

18. Klinghoffer, R. A.; Mueting-Nelsen, P. F.; Faerman, A.; Shani,
M.; Soriano, P.: The two PDGF receptors maintain conserved signaling
in vivo despite divergent embryological functions. Molec. Cell 7:
343-354, 2001.

19. Kulkarni, S.; Heath, C.; Parker, S.; Chase, A.; Iqbal, S.; Pocock,
C. F.; Kaeda, J.; Cwynarski, K.; Goldman, J. M.; Cross, N. C. P.:
Fusion of H4/D10S170 to the platelet-derived growth factor receptor
beta in BCR-ABL-negative myeloproliferative disorders with a t(5;10)(q33;q21). Cancer
Res. 60: 3592-3598, 2000.

20. Leal, F.; Williams, L. T.; Robbins, K. C.; Aaronson, S. A.: Evidence
that the v-sis gene product transforms by interaction with the receptor
for platelet-derived growth factor. Science 230: 327-330, 1985.

21. Lindahl, P.; Johansson, B. R.; Leveen, P.; Betsholtz, C.: Pericyte
loss and microaneurysm formation in PDGF-B-deficient mice. Science 277:
242-245, 1997.

22. Magnusson, M. K.; Meade, K. E.; Brown, K. E.; Arthur, D. C.; Krueger,
L. A.; Barrett, A. J.; Dunbar, C. E.: Rabaptin-5 is a novel fusion
partner to platelet-derived growth factor beta receptor in chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia. Blood 98: 2518-2525, 2001.

23. Martignetti, J. A.; Tian, L.; Li, D.; Ramirez, M. C. M.; Camacho-Vanegas,
O.; Camacho, S. C.; Guo, Y.; Zand, D. J.; Bernstein, A. M.; Masur,
S. K.; Kim, C. E.; Otieno, F. G.; and 16 others  Mutations in
PDGFRB cause autosomal-dominant infantile myofibromatosis. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 92: 1001-1007, 2013.

24. Matsui, T.; Heidaran, M.; Miki, T.; Popescu, N.; La Rochelle,
W.; Kraus, M.; Pierce, J.; Aaronson, S.: Isolation of a novel receptor
cDNA establishes the existence of two PDGF receptor genes. Science 243:
800-804, 1989.

25. Nazarian, R.; Shi, H.; Wang, Q.; Kong, X.; Koya, R. C.; Lee, H.;
Chen, Z.; Lee, M.-K.; Attar, N.; Sazegar, H.; Chodon, T.; Nelson,
S. F.; McArthur, G.; Sosman, J. A.; Ribas, A.; Lo, R. S.: Melanomas
acquire resistance to B-RAF(V600E) inhibition by RTK or N-RAS upregulation. Nature 468:
973-977, 2010.

26. Nicolas, G.; Pottier, C.; Maltete, D.; Coutant, S.; Rovelet-Lecrux,
A.; Legallic, S.; Rousseau, S.; Vaschalde, Y.; Guyant-Marechal, L.;
Augustin, J.; Martinaud, O.; Defebvre, L.; and 10 others: Mutation
of the PDGFRB gene as a cause of idiopathic basal ganglia calcification. Neurology 80:
181-187, 2013.

27. Pierce, A.; Carney, L.; Hamza, H. G.; Griffiths, J. R.; Zhang,
L.; Whetton, B. A.; Gonzalez Sanchez, M. B.; Tamura, T.; Sternberg,
D.; Whetton, A. D.: THOC5 spliceosome protein: a target for leukaemogenic
tyrosine kinases that affects inositol lipid turnover. Brit. J. Haemat. 141:
641-650, 2008.

28. Roberts, W. M.; Look, A. T.; Roussel, M. F.; Sherr, C. J.: Tandem
linkage of human CSF-1 receptor (c-fms) and PDGF receptor genes. Cell 55:
655-661, 1988.

29. Ross, T. S.; Bernard, O. A.; Berger, R.; Gilliland, D. G.: Fusion
of Huntingtin interacting protein 1 to platelet-derived growth factor-beta
receptor (PDGF-beta-R) in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia with t(5;7)(q33;q11.2). Blood 91:
4419-4426, 1998.

30. Steer, E. J.; Cross, N. C. P.: Myeloproliferative disorders with
translocations of chromosome 5q31-35: role of the platelet-derived
growth factor receptor beta. Acta Haemat. 107: 113-122, 2002.

31. Svegliati Baroni, S.; Santillo, M.; Bevilacqua, F.; Luchetti,
M.; Spadoni, T.; Mancini, M.; Fraticelli, P.; Sambo, P.; Funaro, A.;
Kazlauskas, A.; Avvedimento, E. V.; Gabrielli, A.: Stimulatory autoantibodies
to the PDGF receptor in systemic sclerosis. New Eng. J. Med. 354:
2667-2676, 2006.

32. Tan, F. K.: Autoantibodies against PDGF receptor in scleroderma.
(Editorial) New Eng. J. Med. 354: 2709-2711, 2006.

33. Treacher Collins Syndrome Collaborative Group: Positional cloning
of a gene involved in the pathogenesis of Treacher Collins syndrome. Nature
Genet. 12: 130-136, 1996.

34. Villa-Bellosta, R.; Levi, M.; Sorribas, V.: Vascular smooth muscle
cell calcification and SLC20 inorganic phosphate transporters: effects
of PDGF, TNF-alpha, and Pi. Pflugers Arch. 458: 1151-1161, 2009.

35. Walz, C.; Haferlach, C.; Hanel, A.; Metzgeroth, G.; Erben, P.;
Gosenca, D.; Hochhaus, A.; Cross, N. C. P.; Reiter, A.: Identification
of a MYO18A-PDGFRB fusion gene in an eosinophilia-associated atypical
myeloproliferative neoplasm with a t(5;17)(q33-34;q11.2). Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 48: 179-183, 2009.

36. Yarden, Y.; Escobedo, J. A.; Kuang, W.-J.; Yang-Feng, T. L.; Daniel,
T. O.; Tremble, P. M.; Chen, E. Y.; Ando, M. E.; Harkins, R. N.; Francke,
U.; Fried, V. A.; Ullrich, A.; Williams, L. T.: Structure of the
receptor for platelet-derived growth factor helps define a family
of closely related growth factor receptors. Nature 323: 226-232,
1986.

37. Yarden, Y.; Ullrich, A.: Growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases. Ann.
Rev. Biochem. 57: 443-478, 1988.

38. Zand, D. J.; Huff, D.; Everman, D.; Russell, K.; Saitta, S.; McDonald-M
cGinn, D.; Zackai, E. H.: Autosomal dominant inheritance of infantile
myofibromatosis. Am. J. Med. Genet. 126A: 261-266, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/27/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 1/8/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/8/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/3/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/21/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/12/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/10/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/16/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/29/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/26/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/19/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/23/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/16/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/27/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/16/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 3/12/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/4/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/25/1986

EDITED tpirozzi: 07/08/2013
tpirozzi: 7/5/2013
tpirozzi: 7/3/2013
ckniffin: 6/27/2013
carol: 4/25/2013
mgross: 1/8/2013
carol: 1/8/2013
ckniffin: 1/8/2013
alopez: 2/7/2011
terry: 2/3/2011
alopez: 1/24/2011
terry: 1/21/2011
mgross: 3/15/2010
terry: 3/12/2010
wwang: 6/15/2009
wwang: 6/12/2009
terry: 6/10/2009
mgross: 4/16/2009
alopez: 3/11/2009
alopez: 2/6/2009
terry: 1/29/2009
wwang: 6/27/2006
terry: 6/26/2006
tkritzer: 11/19/2003
cwells: 11/18/2003
alopez: 10/16/2003
alopez: 9/23/2003
tkritzer: 5/29/2003
terry: 5/16/2003
carol: 9/27/2002
alopez: 9/27/2002
tkritzer: 9/25/2002
tkritzer: 9/16/2002
carol: 7/1/2002
carol: 4/19/2002
mgross: 3/12/2001
mark: 7/16/1997
jenny: 7/9/1997
jamie: 3/4/1997
jenny: 3/4/1997
terry: 2/24/1997
mark: 1/29/1996
terry: 1/29/1996
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 3/2/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 8/3/1989
root: 4/5/1989

609787	TITLE *609787 UBIQUITIN-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; UBAP1
;;UBAP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening the expression patterns of ESTs located in a region at
9p22-p21 undergoing loss of heterozygosity in nasopharyngeal carcinoma
(NPC), Yang et al. (1999) identified an EST that is downregulated in
NPC. Using the clone for this EST and 5-prime RACE, Qian et al. (2001)
identified the full-length cDNA sequence, which they designated UBAP1.
The deduced 502-amino acid protein has a predicted molecular mass of 55
kD and contains 2 putative tandem UBA domains at the C terminus, a
coiled-coil domain, 2 possible N-glycosylation sites, 5 PKC
phosphorylation sites, 7 casein kinase II phosphorylation sites, and 3
N-myristoylation sites. Qian et al. (2001) also identified mouse Ubap1.
The human and mouse proteins share 90% sequence identity. Northern blot
analysis of human tissues detected ubiquitous expression of a 2.7-kb
transcript, with highest expression in heart, skeletal muscle, and
liver. RT-PCR of mouse tissues also revealed ubiquitous expression.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using RT-PCR and direct sequencing, Qian et al. (2001) screened the NPC
cell line HNE1 and 10 primary NPCs for mutations in the UBAP1 gene. They
found no sequence alterations.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Qian et al. (2001) mapped the UBAP1 gene to
chromosome 9p22-p21.

REFERENCE 1. Qian, J.; Yang, J.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, B.; Wang, J.; Zhou, M.; Tang,
K.; Li, W.; Zeng, Z.; Zhao, X.; Shen, S.; Li, G.: Isolation and characterization
of a novel cDNA, UBAP1, derived from the tumor suppressor locus in
human chromosome 9p21-22. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 127: 613-618,
2001.

2. Yang, J. B.; Tang, X. N.; Deng, L. W.: Detailed deletion mapping
of chromosome 9p21-22 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Chin. J. Oncol. 21:
419-421, 1999. Note: Article in Chinese.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 12/13/2005

EDITED terry: 04/12/2012
carol: 12/13/2005

606289	TITLE *606289 PROTOCADHERIN-GAMMA, SUBFAMILY A, MEMBER 2; PCDHGA2
;;PCDH-GAMMA-A2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cadherins are calcium-dependent cell-cell adhesion molecules that
mediate neural cell-cell interactions. Protocadherins constitute a
subfamily of nonclassic cadherins. PCDHGA2 is a member of subfamily A of
the gamma cluster of protocadherin genes on 5q31. For specific
information on the PCDHG genes, see 604968.

CLONING

By PCR of a brain cDNA library, Wu and Maniatis (1999) cloned
full-length PCDHGA2.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Wu et al. (2001) mapped the PCDHGA2 gene
to 5q31, between the PCDHGA1 gene (606288) and the PCDHGA3 (606290)
gene. They localized the mouse PCDHG genes to chromosome 18c.

REFERENCE 1. Wu, Q.; Maniatis, T.: A striking organization of a large family
of human neural cadherin-like cell adhesion genes. Cell 97: 779-790,
1999.

2. Wu, Q.; Zhang, T.; Cheng, J.-F.; Kim, Y.; Grimwood, J.; Schmutz,
J.; Dickson, M.; Noonan, J. P.; Zhang, M. Q.; Myers, R. M.; Maniatis,
T.: Comparative DNA sequence analysis of mouse and human protocadherin
gene clusters. Genome Res. 11: 389-404, 2001.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 9/27/2001

EDITED alopez: 04/05/2012
alopez: 4/5/2012
mgross: 9/27/2001

246530	TITLE *246530 LEUKOTRIENE C4 SYNTHASE; LTC4S
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Leukotriene C4 synthetase (LTC4S) catalyzes the synthesis of leukotriene
C4 (LTC4) through conjugation of LTA4 with reduced glutathione (GSH),
which is synthesized by glutathione synthetase (GSS; 601002).
Leukotriene C4 and its receptor-binding metabolites LTD4 and LTE4 are
cysteinyl leukotrienes that are potent lipid mediators of tissue
inflammation. In general, leukotrienes are potent proinflammatory
mediators synthesized from membrane-derived arachidonic acid after
activation of certain granulocytes (Kanaoka et al., 2001).

The cysteinyl leukotrienes have been implicated in bronchial asthma.
CYSLTR1 (300201) and CYSLTR2 (605666) are receptors for LTC4 and its
metabolites. CYSLTR-selective pharmacologic antagonists are important in
the treatment of asthma (Martinez Molina et al., 2007).

CLONING

Penrose et al. (1992) purified LTC4 synthase and characterized it as an
18-kD protein. Lam et al. (1994) cloned the LTC4S gene and showed that
its open reading frame encodes a 150-residue protein with a molecular
mass of 16.5-kD and a pI of 11.05. The deduced sequence contains 2
consensus protein kinase C phosphorylation sites and a potential
N-linked glycosylation site as well as 3 putative membrane-spanning
regions. The deduced amino acid sequence of LTC4S showed no significant
homology to GSH S-transferases but shared 31% overall sequence identity
with 5-lipoxygenase activating protein (FLAP; 603700). Peptide
structural analysis of the deduced LTC4 synthase predicted the presence
of 3 transmembrane domains nearly superimposable on those of FLAP. LTC4
synthase was inhibitable by a FLAP inhibitor, MK-886.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic cloning from a P1 library, Penrose et al. (1996) found that
the LTC4S gene is 2.52 kb long and contains 5 exons. The investigators
noted that although the intron-exon junctions of LTC4S and the human
FLAP gene are identical, the size of FLAP reported by Kennedy et al.
(1991) is over 31 kb. Penrose et al. (1996) found multiple transcription
initiation sites in the 5-prime flanking region of the LTC4S gene.

MAPPING

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, Penrose et al. (1996) mapped
the LTC4S gene to chromosome 5q35.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Ago et al. (2007) showed the atomic structure of human LTC4S in complex
with glutathione at 3.3 angstrom resolution by x-ray crystallography and
provided insights into the high substrate specificity for a glutathione
and LTA4 that distinguishes LTC4S from other microsomal glutathione
S-transferases. The LTC4S monomer has 4 transmembrane alpha-helices and
forms a 3-fold symmetric trimer as a unit with functional domains across
each interface. Glutathione resides in a U-shaped conformation within an
interface between adjacent monomers, and this binding is stabilized by a
loop structure at the top of the interface. LTA4 would fit into the
interface so that arg104 of one monomer activates glutathione to provide
the thiolate anion that attacks C6 of LTA4 to form a thioether bond, and
arg31 in the neighboring monomer donates a proton to form a hydroxyl
group at C5, resulting in
5(S)-hydroxy-6(R)-S-glutathionyl-7,9-trans-11,14-cis-eicosatetranoic
acid (LTC4).

Martinez Molina et al. (2007) independently presented the crystal
structure of human LTC4S in its apo and glutathione-complexed forms to
2.0 and 2.15 angstrom resolution, respectively. The structure revealed a
homotrimer, where each monomer is comprised of 4 transmembrane segments.
The structure of the enzyme in complex with substrate revealed that the
active site enforces a horseshoe-shaped conformation on glutathione and
effectively positions the thiol group for activation by a nearby
arginine at the membrane-enzyme interface. In addition, the structure
provides a model for how the omega end of the lipophilic cosubstrate is
pinned at one end of a hydrophobic cleft, providing a molecular 'ruler'
to align the reactive epoxide at the thiol of glutathione.

GENE FUNCTION

Pace-Asciak et al. (1986) demonstrated that the leukotriene precursor,
LTA4, is transformed by human platelets into LTC4 by a
glutathione-dependent pathway.

Pace-Asciak et al. (1986) found that LTC4 synthesis was severely
impaired in 2 sibs with glutathione synthetase deficiency (266130).
Platelets from the patients had approximately 30% of normal glutathione
levels, reflecting a decrease of glutathione synthetase activity. The
findings in these patients suggested that cellular glutathione levels
may regulate the production of LTC4 synthetase.

The formation of leukotriene C4 from membrane-derived arachidonic acid
is catalyzed by 3 successive enzymatic steps after transmembrane
activation of eosinophils, basophils, mast cells, and
monocytes/macrophages. Arachidonic acid is released from cell membranes
by the action of phospholipase A2 (see 600522). 5-Lipoxygenase is
activated independently via a 5-lipoxygenase-associated protein and
Ca(2+) and catalyzes 2 sequential enzymatic reactions to form LTA4.
Leukotriene C4 synthase catalyzes the conjugation of LTA4 with reduced
glutathione to form LTC4 (Penrose et al., 1992).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Asthma and Aspirin-Intolerant Asthma

Aspirin-intolerant asthma (AIA; 208550) is a distinct clinical syndrome
characterized by adverse respiratory reactions to aspirin and other
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Aspirin causes
bronchoconstriction in AIA patients by triggering cysteinyl-leukotriene
production, probably by removing PGE(2)-dependent inhibition. Sampson et
al. (1997) and Cowburn et al. (1998) found increased LTC4S expression in
bronchial biopsies from patients with AIA. The study by Cowburn et al.
(1998) reported that LTC4S expression in AIA patients was increased
5-fold and 18-fold compared to aspirin-tolerant asthmatics and
nonasthmatic controls, respectively. The authors postulated that AIA
patients may have a polymorphism involved in the regulation of LTC4S
expression that results in overproduction of cysteinyl-leukotrienes
leading to bronchoconstriction.

Sanak et al. (1997) identified a promoter polymorphism in the LTC4S
gene, -444A-C, that was overrepresented among patients with
aspirin-intolerant asthma. Six of 11 AIA patients were homozygous for
the -444C allele, compared to only 1 individual in the aspirin-tolerant
asthmatic and control groups. The frequency of the -444C allele was
nearly doubled in AIA (0.436) compared to aspirin-tolerant asthmatics
(0.227) and nonasthmatic controls (0.226), yielding a relative risk of
3.89 for the -444C allele.

Sanak et al. (2000) found that peripheral blood eosinophils from
patients with AIA had increased LTC4S mRNA. An inhaled aspirin
provocation test led to increased urinary output of LTC4, which reached
significance only in carriers of the -444C allele. Nuclear-protein
interaction studies on HeLa cells showed that the -444C allele created
an additional binding site for the transcriptional signal of histone H4
transcription factor-2 (H4FN; 142750), and in vitro studies demonstrated
that the -444C allele resulted in increased reporter gene expression.
Sanak et al. (2000) concluded that overexpression of LTC4S may
predispose to AIA.

Using in vitro transfection of promoter-reporter constructs, Sayers et
al. (2003) showed that dexamethasone increased transcription of LTC4S by
more than 50% for the -1072G/-444A, A-C, and G-C haplotype constructs (p
less than 0.02), but had no effect on the A-A haplotype (p = 0.27).
Sayers et al. (2003) concluded that the 9% of the Caucasian asthmatic
population with the A-A haplotype may have genetically predetermined
lower cysteinyl-leukotriene levels in the presence of corticosteroids
compared to other patients, which has potential implications in the
evaluation of combined corticosteroid and antileukotriene therapy in
asthma.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kanaoka et al. (2001) found that Ltc4s-null mice developed normally and
were fertile. Bone marrow-derived cells from these mice provided no Ltc4
in response to IgE-dependent activation. In addition, zymosan-induced
peritoneal vascular permeability and IgE-mediated passive cutaneous
anaphylaxis were significantly diminished in these mice. The findings
indicated that Ltc4s is the major Ltc4-producing enzyme in tissues, and
that Ltc4 plays a role in vascular permeability in innate and adaptive
immune host inflammatory responses.

REFERENCE 1. Ago, H.; Kanaoka, Y.; Irikura, D.; Lam, B. K.; Shimamura, T.; Austen,
K. F.; Miyano, M.: Crystal structure of a human membrane protein
involved in cysteinyl leukotriene biosynthesis. Nature 448: 609-612,
2007.

2. Cowburn, A. S.; Sladek, K.; Soja, J.; Adamek, L.; Nizankowska,
E.; Szczeklik, A.; Lam, B. K.; Penrose, J. F.; Austen, K. F.; Holgate,
S. T.; Sampson, A. P.: Overexpression of leukotriene C(4) synthase
in bronchial biopsies from patients with aspirin-intolerant asthma. J.
Clin. Invest. 101: 834-846, 1998.

3. Kanaoka, Y.; Maekawa, A.; Penrose, J. F.; Austen, K. F.; Lam, B.
K.: Attenuated zymosan-induced peritoneal vascular permeability and
IgE-dependent passive cutaneous anaphylaxis in mice lacking leukotriene
C4 synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 22608-22613, 2001.

4. Kennedy, B. P.; Diehl, R. E.; Boie, Y.; Adam, M.; Dixon, R. A.
: Gene characterization and promoter analysis of the human 5-lipoxygenase-activating
protein (FLAP). J. Biol. Chem. 266: 8511-8516, 1991.

5. Lam, B. K.; Penrose, J. F.; Freeman, G. J.; Austen, K. F.: Expression
cloning of a cDNA for human leukotriene C4 synthase, an integral membrane
protein conjugating reduced glutathione to leukotriene A4. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 7663-7667, 1994.

6. Martinez Molina, D.; Wetterholm, A.; Kohl, A.; McCarthy, A. A.;
Niegowski, D.; Ohlson, E.; Hammarberg, T.; Eshaghi, S.; Haeggstrom,
J. Z.; Nordlund, P.: Structural basis for synthesis of inflammatory
mediators by human leukotriene C4 synthase. Nature 448: 613-616,
2007.

7. Pace-Asciak, C. R.; Klein, J.; Spielberg, S. P.: Human genetic
defect in leukotriene C(4) synthesis. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 140:
857-860, 1986.

8. Pace-Asciak, C. R.; Klein, J.; Spielberg, S. P.: Metabolism of
leukotriene A4 into C4 by human platelets. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 877:
68-74, 1986.

9. Penrose, J. F.; Gagnon, L.; Goppelt-Struebe, M.; Myers, P.; Lam,
B. K.; Jack, R. M.; Austen, K. F.; Soberman, R. J.: Purification
of human leukotriene C(4) synthase: organization, nucleotide sequence,
and chromosomal localization to 5q35. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89:
11603-11606, 1992.

10. Penrose, J. F.; Spector, J.; Baldasaro, M.; Xu, K.; Boyce, J.;
Arm, J. P.; Austen, K. F.; Lam, B. K.: Molecular cloning of the gene
for human leukotriene C(4) synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 11356-11361,
1996.

11. Sampson, A. P.; Cowburn, A. S.; Sladek, K.; Adamek, L.; Nizankowska,
E.; Szczeklik, A.; Lam, B. K.; Penrose, J. F.; Austen, K. F.; Holgate,
S. T.: Profound overexpression of leukotriene C4 synthase in bronchial
biopsies from aspirin-intolerant asthmatic patients. Int. Arch. Allergy
Immun. 113: 355-357, 1997.

12. Sanak, M.; Pierzchalska, M.; Bazan-Socha, S.; Szczeklik, A.:
Enhanced expression of the leukotriene C4 synthase due to overactive
transcription of an allelic variant associated with aspirin-intolerant
asthma. Am. J. Resp. Cell Molec. Biol. 23: 290-296, 2000.

13. Sanak, M.; Simon, H.-U.; Szczeklik, A.: Leukotriene C4 synthase
promoter polymorphism and risk of aspirin-induced asthma. Lancet 350:
1599-1600, 1997.

14. Sayers, I.; Sampson, A. P.; Ye, S.; Holgate, S. T.: Promoter
polymorphism influences the effect of dexamethasone on transcriptional
activation of the LTC4 synthase gene. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 11:
619-622, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 10/4/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/3/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/13/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/12/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/17/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/26/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/6/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/26/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/25/1998
Perseveranda M. Cagas - updated: 9/23/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/7/1987

EDITED carol: 06/09/2011
wwang: 6/9/2009
terry: 11/15/2007
carol: 10/4/2007
ckniffin: 10/3/2007
carol: 8/15/2007
terry: 8/13/2007
carol: 5/12/2004
terry: 5/12/2004
alopez: 3/17/2004
alopez: 7/20/2000
terry: 7/17/2000
carol: 7/26/1999
terry: 7/6/1999
alopez: 4/6/1999
carol: 1/26/1999
alopez: 3/25/1998
terry: 3/20/1998
joanna: 6/20/1997
mark: 9/24/1996
mark: 9/23/1996
terry: 5/22/1996
carol: 1/13/1995
mimadm: 2/19/1994
carol: 1/28/1993
carol: 1/8/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/29/1992

606699	TITLE *606699 HELICASE WITH ZINC FINGER DOMAIN; HELZ
;;KIAA0054;;
HUMORF5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

HELZ is a member of the superfamily I class of RNA helicases. RNA
helicases alter the conformation of RNA by unwinding double-stranded
regions, thereby altering the biologic activity of the RNA molecule and
regulating access to other proteins (Wagner et al., 1999).

CLONING

Nomura et al. (1994) isolated a full-length HELZ cDNA, which they termed
KIAA0054, from a human immature myeloid cell line cDNA library. The
deduced 1,942-amino acid protein contains an ATP/GTP-binding site motif
A (P-loop). Wagner et al. (1999) found that the protein contains several
motifs characteristic of members of the RNA helicase superfamily I,
including a putative purine nucleotide-binding site. By Northern blot
analysis, Nomura et al. (1994) demonstrated ubiquitous expression of
HELZ. Using the gene trapping method, Wagner et al. (1999) identified
the mouse homolog of HELZ and found widespread spatial and temporal
expression throughout murine embryonic development.

GENE FUNCTION

Based on the complex transcription pattern and widespread
spatial-temporal distribution of the mouse HELZ homolog, Wagner et al.
(1999) suggested that HELZ may play a role in RNA metabolism in multiple
tissues and organs within the developing embryo.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the HELZ
gene to chromosome 17 (TMAP SHGC-10970).

REFERENCE 1. Nomura, N.; Nagase, T.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Sato,
S.; Seki, N.; Kawarabayasi, Y.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. II. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0041-KIAA0080) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 1: 223-229, 1994.

2. Wagner, D. S.; Gan, L.; Klein, W. H.: Identification of a differentially
expressed RNA helicase by gene trapping. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 262:
677-684, 1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/20/2002

EDITED carol: 02/20/2002
carol: 2/20/2002

602304	TITLE *602304 NUCLEAR RECEPTOR SUBFAMILY 1, GROUP D, MEMBER 2; NR1D2
;;REV-ERBA-ALPHA-RELATED RECEPTOR; RVR;;
REV-ERBA-BETA;;
REV-ERB-BETA;;
BD73
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Dumas et al. (1994) used PCR with primers from conserved regions of
nuclear hormone receptor superfamily genes to identify a new member of
this superfamily, which they called BD73. The amino acid sequence of
BD73 is 96% identical to Rev-ErbA-alpha in the DNA-binding domain and
72% identical in the ligand-binding domain. Northern blot analysis
showed a 4.5-kb transcript present in variable amounts in a variety of
tissues and cell lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Dumas et al. (1994) showed that, in vitro, the BD73 protein has
DNA-binding activity to a specific A/T-rich sequence.

Toward a system-level understanding of the transcriptional circuitry
regulating circadian clocks, Ueda et al. (2005) identified
clock-controlled elements on 16 clock and clock-controlled genes in a
comprehensive surveillance of evolutionarily conserved cis elements and
measurement of the transcriptional dynamics. Ueda et al. (2005) found
that E boxes (CACGTG) and E-prime boxes (CACGTT) controlled the
expression of Per1 (602260), Nr1d2, Per2 (603426), Nr1d1 (602408), Dbp
(124097), Bhlhb2 (604256), and Bhlhb3 (606200) transcription following a
repressor-precedes-activator pattern, resulting in delayed
transcriptional activity. RevErbA/ROR (600825)-binding elements
regulated the transcriptional activity of Arntl (602550), Npas2
(603347), Nfil3 (605327), Clock (601851), Cry1 (601933), and Rorc
(602943) through a repressor-precedes-activator pattern as well.
DBP/E4BP4-binding elements controlled the expression of Per1, Per2, Per3
(603427), Nr1d1, Nr1d2, Rora, and Rorb (601972) through a
repressor-antiphasic-to-activator mechanism, which generates
high-amplitude transcriptional activity. Ueda et al. (2005) suggested
that regulation of E/E-prime boxes is a topologic vulnerability in
mammalian circadian clocks, a concept that had been functionally
verified using in vitro phenotype assay systems.

Solt et al. (2012) identified potent synthetic REV-ERB agonists with in
vivo activity. Administration of synthetic REV-ERB ligands alters
circadian behavior and the circadian pattern of core clock gene
expression in the hypothalami of mice. The circadian pattern of
expression of an array of metabolic genes in the liver, skeletal muscle,
and adipose tissue was also altered, resulting in increased energy
expenditure. Treatment of diet-induced obese mice with a REV-ERB agonist
decreased obesity by reducing fat mass and markedly improving
dyslipidemia and hyperglycemia.

Cho et al. (2012) determined the genomewide cis-acting targets of both
REV-ERB isoforms in murine liver, which revealed shared recognition at
over 50% of their total DNA binding sites and extensive overlap with the
master circadian regulator BMAL1. Although REV-ERB-alpha has been shown
to regulate BMAL1 expression directly, cistromic analysis revealed a
more profound connection between BMAL1 and the REV-ERB-alpha and
REV-ERB-beta genomic regulatory circuits than was previously suspected.
Genes within the intersection of the BMAL1, REV-ERB-alpha, and
REV-ERB-beta cistromes are highly enriched for both clock and metabolic
functions. As predicted by the cistromic analysis, dual depletion of
REV-ERB-alpha and REV-ERB-beta function by creating double-knockout mice
profoundly disrupted circadian expression of core circadian clock and
lipid homeostatic gene networks. As a result, double-knockout mice
showed markedly altered circadian wheel-running behavior and deregulated
lipid metabolism. Cho et al. (2012) concluded that their data united
REV-ERB-alpha and REV-ERB-beta with PER, CRY, and other components of
the principal feedback loop that drives circadian expression and
indicated a more integral mechanism for the coordination of circadian
rhythm and metabolism.

Lam et al. (2013) presented evidence that in mouse macrophages Rev-Erbs
regulate target gene expression by inhibiting the functions of distal
enhancers that are selected by macrophage lineage-determining factors,
thereby establishing a macrophage-specific program of repression. The
repressive functions of Rev-Erbs are associated with their ability to
inhibit the transcription of enhancer-derived RNAs (eRNAs). Furthermore,
targeted degradation of eRNAs at 2 enhancers subject to negative
regulation by Rev-Erbs resulted in reduced expression of nearby mRNAs,
suggesting a direct role of these eRNAs in enhancer function. By
precisely defining eRNA start sites using a modified form of global
run-on sequencing that quantifies nascent 5-prime ends, Lam et al.
(2013) showed that transfer of full enhancer activity to a target
promoter requires both the sequences mediating transcription factor
binding and the specific sequences encoding the eRNA transcript. Lam et
al. (2013) concluded that their studies provided evidence for a direct
role of eRNAs in contributing to enhancer function and suggested that
Rev-Erbs act to suppress gene expression at a distance by repressing
eRNA transcription.

MAPPING

Using YAC mapping and FISH, Koh and Moore (1999) mapped the NR1D2 gene
to chromosome 3p24.3-p24.2.

EVOLUTION

Koh and Moore (1999) noted that the THRA (190120), NR1D1 (602408), and
RARA (180240) genes are linked on chromosome 17q, and that the NR1D1
gene overlaps an exon of the THRA gene on the opposite strand. They
found that THRB (190160), NR1D2, and RARB (180220) are similarly linked
and oriented on chromosome 3p. The ancestral genes were duplicated
before the divergence of vertebrates, since at least the TRs and RARs
are also duplicated in birds and amphibians.

REFERENCE 1. Cho, H.; Zhao, X.; Hatori, M.; Yu, R. T.; Barish, G. D.; Lam, M.
T.; Chong, L.-W.; DiTacchio, L.; Atkins, A. R.; Glass, C. K.; Liddle,
C.; Auwerx, J.; Downes, M.; Panda, S.; Evans, R. M.: Regulation of
circadian behaviour and metabolism by REV-ERB-alpha and REV-ERB-beta. Nature 485:
123-127, 2012.

2. Dumas, B.; Harding, H. P.; Choi, H.-S.; Lehmann, K. A.; Chung,
M.; Lazar, M. A.; Moore, D. D.: A new orphan member of the nuclear
hormone receptor superfamily closely related to Rev-Erb. Molec. Endocr. 8:
996-1005, 1994.

3. Koh, Y.-S.; Moore, D. D.: Linkage of the nuclear hormone receptor
genes NR1D2, THRB, and RARB: evidence for an ancient, large-scale
duplication. Genomics 57: 289-292, 1999.

4. Lam, M. T. Y.; Cho, H.; Lesch, H. P.; Gosselin, D.; Heinz, S.;
Tanaka-Oishi, Y.; Benner, C.; Kaikkonen, M. U.; Kim, A. S.; Kosaka,
M.; Lee, C. Y.; Watt, A.; Grossman, T. R.; Rosenfeld, M. G.; Evans,
R. M.; Glass, C. K.: Rev-Erbs repress macrophage gene expression
by inhibiting enhancer-directed transcription. Nature 498: 511-515,
2013.

5. Solt, L. A.; Wang, Y.; Banerjee, S.; Hughes, T.; Kojetin, D. J.;
Lundasen, T.; Shin, Y.; Liu, J.; Cameron, M. D.; Noel, R.; Yoo, S.-H.;
Takahashi, J. S.; Butler, A. A.; Kamenecka, T. M.; Burris, T. P.:
Regulation of circadian behaviour and metabolism by synthetic REV-ERB
agonists. Nature 485: 62-68, 2012.

6. Ueda, H. R.; Hayashi, S.; Chen, W.; Sano, M.; Machida, M.; Shigeyoshi,
Y.; Iino, M.; Hashimoto, S.: System-level identification of transcriptional
circuits underlying mammalian circadian clocks. Nature Genet. 37:
187-192, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 09/03/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/20/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/9/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/29/2005

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 1/30/1998

EDITED alopez: 09/03/2013
joanna: 10/2/2012
alopez: 9/25/2012
terry: 9/20/2012
mgross: 3/29/2012
terry: 3/9/2012
carol: 2/28/2012
terry: 7/29/2005
alopez: 6/18/1999
alopez: 1/30/1998

605207	TITLE *605207 CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY XXVIB, POLYPEPTIDE 1; CYP26B1
;;CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY XXVIA, POLYPEPTIDE 2; CYP26A2;;
P450, RETINOIC ACID-INACTIVATING, 2; P450RAI2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Retinoids, particularly all-trans-retinoic acid (RA), are important
regulators of cell differentiation, cell proliferation, and apoptosis.
All-trans-RA plays a role during development and in the maintenance of
adult tissues. The level of all-trans-RA in cells and tissues is
regulated by the balance between its biosynthesis and its catabolism to
inactive metabolites. The cytochrome P450 enzyme P450RAI (CYP26A1;
602239), referred to by White et al. (2000) as P450RAI1, is partially
responsible for the inactivation of all-trans-RA. White et al. (2000)
identified an EST clone from a human retina cDNA library that showed
significant sequence homology to P450RAI1. Using PCR primers, they
amplified a partial cDNA, designated P450RAI2 (CYP26A2), encoding a
512-amino acid protein that is also involved in the specific
inactivation of all-trans-RA. Northern blot analysis detected a 5-kb
P450RAI2 transcript in most tissues tested, with highest expression in
human adult brain, particularly in the cerebellum and pons but also in
the cerebral cortex, medulla, occipital pole, frontal lobe, and temporal
lobe. P450RAI1, on the other hand, did not show appreciable expression
in any of the human brain tissues tested.

GENE FUNCTION

White et al. (2000) found that transiently transfected P450RAI2 was
capable of converting all-trans-RA to more polar metabolites.
Competition experiments with other retinoids suggested that all-trans-RA
is the preferred substrate.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 3 sibs and an unrelated Turkish patient with radiohumeral fusions and
other skeletal and craniofacial anomalies (614416), Laue et al. (2011)
identified homozygous missense mutations in the CYP26B1 gene (R363L,
605207.0001, and S146P, 605207.0002, respectively).

ANIMAL MODEL

Yashiro et al. (2004) found that mice express Cyp26b1 in the distal
region of the developing limb bud. Mice that lacked Cyp26b1 exhibited
severe limb malformations. The lack of Cyp26b1 resulted in spreading of
the RA signal toward the distal end of the developing limb and induced
proximodistal patterning defects characterized by expansion of proximal
identity and restriction of distal identity. Cyp26b1 deficiency also
induced pronounced apoptosis in the developing limb and delayed
chondrocyte maturation. Wildtype embryos exposed to excess RA
phenocopied the limb defects of Cyp26b1-deficient mice. Yashiro et al.
(2004) concluded that RA acts as a morphogen to determine proximodistal
identity and that CYP26B1 prevents apoptosis and promotes chondrocyte
maturation in the developing limb.

Bowles et al. (2006) found that retinoic acid, produced by mesonephroi
of both sexes, caused germ cells in the ovary to enter meiosis and
initiate oogenesis. Meiosis is retarded in the fetal testis by the
action of the retinoid-degrading enzyme CYP26B1, ultimately leading to
spermatogenesis. In testes of Cyp26b1-knockout mouse embryos, germ cells
entered meiosis precociously, as if in a normal ovary. Thus, Bowles et
al. (2006) concluded that precise regulation of retinoid levels during
fetal gonad development provides the molecular control mechanism that
specifies germ cell fate.

Laue et al. (2011) analyzed murine embryos exposed to a chemical
inhibitor of Cyp26 enzymes and zebrafish lines with mutations in cyp26b1
and suggested that the endochondral bone fusions are due to unrestricted
chondrogenesis at the presumptive sites of joint formation within
cartilaginous templates, whereas craniosynostosis is induced by a defect
in osteoblastic differentiation. Ultrastructural analysis, in situ
expression studies, and in vitro quantitative RT-PCR experiments of
cellular markers of osseous differentiation indicated that the most
likely cause for these phenomena is aberrant osteoblast-osteocyte
transitioning.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RADIOHUMERAL FUSIONS WITH OTHER SKELETAL AND CRANIOFACIAL ANOMALIES
CYP26B1, ARG363LEU

In 3 sibs, born to first-cousin parents, who exhibited combinations of
severe craniofacial malformation, occipital encephalocele, radiohumeral
fusions, oligodactyly, advanced osseous maturation, and calvarial
mineralization defects (614416), Laue et al. (2011) identified
homozygosity for a 1088G-T transversion in the CYP26B1 gene, predicting
an arg363-to-leu (R363L) substitution. Both parents were heterozygous
for the mutation, which was not found in 190 unrelated control
individuals. The mutation occurs within an EXXR motif that is highly
conserved across species and all human CYP450 proteins. Substitutions of
residues within this motif are known to ablate the catalytic properties
of these enzymes. Cellular cotransfection of CYP26B1-expression
constructs encoding the R363L substitution alongside an RA-responsive
luciferase reporter gene demonstrated a significantly attenuated ability
to metabolize exogenously applied RA in HEK293 cells (86% reduction).
The reduction of enzymatic activity noted for the mutant protein was
comparable to that conferred by a truncating mutation underlying a
zebrafish cyp26b1 null allele, indicating that the human mutation
constitutes a null allele.

.0002
RADIOHUMERAL FUSIONS WITH OTHER SKELETAL AND CRANIOFACIAL ANOMALIES
CYP26B1, SER146PRO

In a Turkish patient, born to consanguineous parents, with coronal and
lambdoid craniosynostosis, a large sagittal skull defect, limited elbow
extension, and arachnodactyly (614416), Laue et al. (2011) identified a
homozygous 436T-C transition in the CYP26B1 gene, predicting a
ser146-to-pro (S146P) substitution. Th3 mutation is predicted to disrupt
helix C, a broadly represented structural element in CYP450 enzymes.
Cellular cotransfection of CYP26B1-expression constructs encoding the
S146P substitution alongside an RA-responsive luciferase reporter gene
demonstrated a significantly attenuated ability to metabolize
exogenously applied RA in HEK293 cells (31% reduction). The retention of
activity by the S146P substitution was consistent with it constituting a
hypomorphic mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Bowles, J.; Knight, D.; Smith, C.; Wilhelm, D.; Richman, J.; Mamiya,
S.; Yashiro, K.; Chawengsaksophak, K.; Wilson, M. J.; Rossant, J.;
Hamada, H.; Koopman, P.: Retinoid signaling determines germ cell
fate in mice. Science 312: 596-600, 2006.

2. Laue, K.; Pogoda, H.-M.; Daniel, P. B.; van Haeringen, A.; Alanay,
Y.; von Ameln, S.; Rachwalski, M.; Morgan, T.; Gray, M. J.; Breuning,
M. H.; Sawyer, G. M.; Sutherland-Smith, A. J.; Nikkels, P. G.; Kubisch,
C.; Bloch, W.; Wollnik, B.; Hammerschmidt, M.; Robertson, S. P.:
Craniosynostosis and multiple skeletal anomalies in humans and zebrafish
result from a defect in the localized degradation of retinoic acid. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 89: 595-606, 2011.

3. White, J. A.; Ramshaw, H.; Taimi, M.; Stangle, W.; Zhang, A.; Everingham,
S.; Creighton, S.; Tam, S.-P.; Jones, G.; Petkovich, M.: Identification
of the human cytochrome P450, P450RAI-2, which is predominantly expressed
in the adult cerebellum and is responsible for all-trans-retinoic
acid metabolism. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 6403-6408, 2000.

4. Yashiro, K.; Zhao, X.; Uehara, M.; Yamashita, K.; Nishijima, M.;
Nishino, J.; Saijoh, Y.; Sakai, Y.; Hamada, H.: Regulation of retinoic
acid distribution is required for proximodistal patterning and outgrowth
of the developing mouse limb. Dev. Cell 6: 411-422, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Nara Sobreira - updated: 1/5/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/31/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/20/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/10/2000

EDITED carol: 04/17/2012
carol: 1/6/2012
alopez: 8/2/2006
terry: 7/31/2006
mgross: 4/20/2004
mgross: 1/27/2004
carol: 8/10/2000

123840	TITLE *123840 PEPTIDYL-PROLYL ISOMERASE A; PPIA
;;CYCLOPHILIN A; CYPA;;
CYPH
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Cyclophilin is a specific high-affinity binding protein for the
immunosuppressant agent cyclosporin A. Because of its dramatic effects
on decreasing morbidity and increasing survival rates in human
transplants, the molecular mechanism of immunosuppression by cyclosporin
A has been a matter of much interest. Liu et al. (1990) cloned human
cDNA for T-cell CYPH and constructed an expression vector under control
of the tac promoter for efficient expression in E. coli.

GENE FUNCTION

Cyclophilin A (also designated peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerase A or
PPIA) is a member of the immunophilin class of proteins that all possess
peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerase activity and, therefore, are
believed to be involved in protein folding and/or intracellular protein
transport. Luban et al. (1993) showed that cyclophilin A binds to the
Gag protein of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). This
interaction can be inhibited by the immunosuppressant cyclosporin A and
also by nonimmunosuppressive, cyclophilin A-binding cyclosporin A
derivatives, which were also shown to exhibit potent anti-HIV-1
activity. Thus, cyclophilin A may have an essential function in HIV-1
replication.

Pushkarsky et al. (2001) identified CD147 (BSG; 109480) as a receptor
for extracellular CYPA. They found that CD147 enhanced HIV-1 infection
through interaction with CYPA incorporated into virions.
Virus-associated CYPA coimmunoprecipitated with CD147 from infected
cells, and antibody to CD147 inhibited HIV-1 entry. Viruses whose
replication did not require CYPA were resistant to the inhibitory effect
of anti-CD147 antibody. Pushkarsky et al. (2001) concluded that HIV-1
entry depends on an interaction between virus-associated CYPA and CD147
on a target cell.

Towers et al. (2003) demonstrated that HIV-1 sensitivity to restriction
factors is modulated by CYPA. In certain nonhuman primate cells, the
HIV-1 capsid protein (CA)-CYPA interaction is essential for restriction:
HIV-1 infectivity is increased greater than 100-fold by cyclosporin A, a
competitive inhibitor of the interaction, or by an HIV-1 CA mutation
that disrupts CYPA binding. Conversely, disruption of CA-CYPA
interaction in human cells reveals that CYPA protects HIV-1 from the
Ref-1 restriction factor. Towers et al. (2003) concluded that their
findings suggest that HIV-1 has coopted a host cell protein to
counteract restriction factors expressed by human cells and this
adaptation can confer sensitivity to restriction in unnatural hosts.

Manel et al. (2010) showed that, when dendritic cell resistance to
infection is circumvented, HIV-1 induces dendritic cell maturation, an
antiviral type I interferon response, and activation of T cells. This
innate response is dependent on the interaction of newly synthesized
HIV-1 capsid with cellular cyclophilin A (CYPA) and the subsequent
activation of the transcription factor IRF3 (603734). Because the
peptidylprolyl isomerase CYPA also interacts with HIV-1 capsid to
promote infectivity, the results of Manel et al. (2010) indicated that
capsid conformation has evolved under opposing selective pressures for
infectivity versus furtiveness. Thus, a cell-intrinsic sensor for HIV-1
exists in dendritic cells and mediates an antiviral immune response, but
it is not typically engaged owing to the absence of dendritic cell
infection.

Using different Apoe (107741) transgenic mice, including mice with
ablation and/or inhibition of CypA, Bell et al. (2012) showed that
expression of Apoe4 and lack of murine Apoe, but not Apoe2 and Apoe3,
leads to blood brain barrier breakdown by activating a proinflammatory
CypA-Nfkb (164011)-Mmp9 (120361) pathway in pericytes. This, in turn,
leads to neuronal uptake of multiple blood-derived neurotoxic proteins,
and microvascular and cerebral blood flow reductions. Bell et al. (2012)
showed that the vascular defects in Apoe-deficient and Apoe4-expressing
mice precede neuronal dysfunction and can initiate neurodegenerative
changes. Astrocyte-secreted Apoe3, but not Apoe4, suppressed the
CypA-Nfkb-Mmp9 pathway in pericytes through a lipoprotein receptor. Bell
et al. (2012) concluded that CypA is a key target for treating
APOE4-mediated neurovascular injury and the resulting neuronal
dysfunction and degeneration.

MAPPING

Using a panel of somatic rodent/human cell hybrids and PCR technology,
Willenbrink et al. (1995) mapped the cyclophilin gene (designated PPIA)
on chromosome 7 and 4 pseudogenes (PPIP2, PPIP3, PPIP4, and PPIP6) to
chromosomes 14, 10, 18, and 3, respectively. Using chromosome 7 and
chromosome 10 deletion hybrid panels, they further localized the PPIA
coding gene to 7p13-p11.2, as confirmed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis, and a pseudogene (PPIP3) to the region
10q11.2-q23.

Braaten et al. (1996) mapped the PPIA gene to 7p13 by FISH.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Fraser et al. (2009) introduced dual strategies of ambient temperature
x-ray crystallographic data collection and automated electron density
sampling to structurally unravel interconverting substrates of the human
proline isomerase cyclophilin A. A conservative mutation outside the
active site was designed to stabilize features of the previously hidden
minor conformation. This mutation not only inverted the equilibrium
between the substrates, but also caused large, parallel reductions in
the conformational interconversion rates and the catalytic rate. Fraser
et al. (2009) concluded that their studies introduced crystallographic
approaches to define functional minor protein conformations and, in
combination with NMR analysis of the enzyme dynamics in solution, show
how collective motions directly contribute to the catalytic power of an
enzyme.

ANIMAL MODEL

Sayah et al. (2004) showed that knockdown of owl monkey CYPA by RNA
interference (RNAi) correlated with suppression of anti-HIV-1 activity.
However, reintroduction of CYPA to RNAi-treated cells did not restore
antiviral activity. A search for additional RNAi targets identified
TRIMCYP, an RNAi-responsive mRNA encoding a TRIM5 (608487)/CYPA fusion
protein. TRIMCYP accounts for post-entry restriction of HIV-1 in owl
monkeys and blocks HIV-1 infection when transferred to otherwise
infectable human or rat cells. Sayah et al. (2004) suggested that
TRIMCYP arose after the divergence of New and Old World primates when a
LINE-1 retrotransposon catalyzed the insertion of a CYPA cDNA into the
TRIM5 locus. They concluded that this was the first vertebrate example
of a chimeric gene generated by this mechanism of exon shuffling.

Colgan et al. (2005) found that mice deficient in Cypa were resistant to
immunosuppression by cyclosporine both in vitro and in vivo, as assessed
by proliferation, IL2 (147680) secretion, signal transduction, and tumor
rejection. Cypa-deficient mice remained sensitive to FK506. Colgan et
al. (2005) concluded that CYPA is the primary mediator of
immunosuppression by cyclosporine.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Takahashi et al. (1989)
REFERENCE 1. Bell, R. D.; Winkler, E. A.; Singh, I.; Sagare, A. P.; Deane, R.;
Wu, Z.; Holtzman, D. M.; Betsholtz, C.; Armulik, A.; Sallstrom, J.;
Berk, B. C.; Zlokovic, B. V.: Apolipoprotein E controls cerebrovascular
integrity via cyclophilin A. Nature 485: 512-516, 2012.

2. Braaten, D.; Wellington, S.; Warburton, D.; Luban, J.: Assignment
of cyclophilin A (PPIA) to human chromosome band 7p13 by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 74: 262 only, 1996.

3. Colgan, J.; Asmal, M.; Yu, B.; Luban, J.: Cyclophilin A-deficient
mice are resistant to immunosuppression by cyclosporine. J. Immun. 174:
6030-6038, 2005.

4. Fraser, J. S.; Clarkson, M. W.; Degnan, S. C.; Erion, R.; Kern,
D.; Alber, T.: Hidden alternative structures of proline isomerase
essential for catalysis. Nature 462: 669-673, 2009.

5. Liu, J.; Albers, M. W.; Chen, C.-M.; Schreiber, S. L.; Walsh, C.
T.: Cloning, expression, and purification of human cyclophilin in
Escherichia coli and assessment of the catalytic role of cysteines
by site-directed mutagenesis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 2304-2308,
1990.

6. Luban, J.; Bossolt, K. L.; Franke, E. K.; Kalpana, G. V.; Goff,
S. P.: Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 gag protein binds to cyclophilins
A and B. Cell 73: 1067-1078, 1993.

7. Manel, N.; Hogstad, B.; Wang, Y.; Levy, D. E.; Unutmaz, D.; Littman,
D. R.: A cryptic sensor for HIV-1 activates antiviral innate immunity
in dendritic cells. Nature 467: 214-217, 2010. Note: Erratum: Nature
470: 424 only, 2011.

8. Pushkarsky, T.; Zybarth, G.; Dubrovsky, L.; Yurchenko, V.; Tang,
H.; Guo, H.; Toole, B.; Sherry, B.; Bukrinsky, M.: CD147 facilitates
HIV-1 infection by interacting with virus-associated cyclophilin A. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 6360-6365, 2001.

9. Sayah, D. M.; Sokolskaja, E.; Berthoux, L.; Luban, J.: Cyclophilin
A retrotransposition into TRIM5 explains owl monkey resistance to
HIV-1. Nature 430: 569-573, 2004.

10. Takahashi, N.; Hayano, T.; Suzuki, M.: Peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans
isomerase is the cyclosporin A-binding protein cyclophilin. Nature 337:
473-475, 1989.

11. Towers, G. J.; Hatziioannou, T.; Cowan, S.; Goff, S. P.; Luban,
J.; Bieniasz, P. D.: Cyclophilin A modulates the sensitivity of HIV-1
to host restriction factors. Nature Med. 9: 1138-1143, 2003.

12. Willenbrink, W.; Halaschek, J.; Schuffenhauer, S.; Kunz, J.; Steinkasserer,
A.: Cyclophilin A, the major intracellular receptor for the immunosuppressant
cyclosporin A, maps to chromosome 7p11.2-p13: four pseudogenes map
to chromosomes 3, 10, 14, and 18. Genomics 28: 101-104, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/5/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/6/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/6/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/4/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/14/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/26/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/26/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/12/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/11/1990

EDITED alopez: 06/07/2012
terry: 6/5/2012
alopez: 7/6/2011
alopez: 10/7/2010
terry: 10/6/2010
alopez: 1/15/2010
terry: 1/6/2010
mgross: 8/29/2006
terry: 8/4/2006
mgross: 7/14/2005
tkritzer: 8/27/2004
terry: 8/26/2004
alopez: 9/2/2003
alopez: 8/26/2003
terry: 8/26/2003
carol: 7/10/2001
terry: 3/12/1997
terry: 3/3/1997
terry: 6/11/1996
terry: 5/24/1996
mark: 10/2/1995
terry: 9/11/1995
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 12/20/1991
carol: 12/12/1991
carol: 3/15/1991

601209	TITLE *601209 POLY(rC)-BINDING PROTEIN 1; PCBP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Leffers et al. (1995) described the cloning and characterization of 2
cDNAs for poly(rC)-binding proteins, called PCBP1 and PCBP2 (601210) by
them. The authors analyzed an EST database for sequences that were
predicted to encode a protein with K-homologous (KH) domains. The 60- to
70-amino acid KH motifs are found in several putative nucleic acid
binding proteins such as FMR1 (309550) and HNRNPK (600712) and are
thought to be involved in RNA binding. Using primers from 1 EST the
authors produced a probe that was used to screen a cDNA library of
transformed human amnion cells. The cDNA they isolated for PCBP1 encodes
a putative 356-amino acid protein that contains 3 KH domains. It is 83%
identical to PCBP2 at the DNA level and 90% homologous at the amino acid
level. The PCBP1 protein is about 85% similar to the mouse hnRNP-X/mCTBP
protein (Hahm et al., 1993).

Chkheidze and Liebhaber (2003) determined that endogenous HeLa cell
PCBP1 colocalized to nuclear speckles with SC35 (600813). They
identified a nuclear localization signal within a 9-amino acid segment
between KH2 and KH3. Deletion of this segment blocked nuclear
accumulation of PCBP1.

GENE FUNCTION

When expressed with a vaccinia virus system in transformed amnion cells,
Leffers et al. (1995) found that both PCBP1 and PCBP2 bound poly(rC)
when not phosphorylated; phosphorylated protein bound with much lower
affinity.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a human brain cDNA library, Kosturko et
al. (2006) found that mouse Hnrnpa2 (600124) interacted with human
HNRNPE1. They confirmed the interaction with in vivo and in vitro
protein interaction assays. Hnrnpe1 colocalized with Hnrnpa2 and A2RE
mRNA in granules in dendrites of rat oligodendrocytes. Overexpression of
HNRNPE1 or microinjection of exogenous HNRNPE1 in rat neural cells
inhibited translation of A2RE mRNA, but not translation of mutated A2RE
mRNA. Excess HNRNPE1 added to an in vitro translation system reduced
translation efficiency of A2RE mRNA in an Hnrnpa2-dependent manner.
Kosturko et al. (2006) hypothesized that binding of HNRNPE1 to HNRNPA2
inhibits A2RE mRNA translation during granule transport.

Shi et al. (2008) identified PCBP1 in a genetic screen to identify human
genes that, when expressed in yeast, could increase the amount of iron
loaded into ferritin (see 134790). PCBP1 bound to ferritin in vivo, and
bound iron and facilitated iron loading into ferritin in vitro.
Depletion of PCBP1 in human cells inhibited ferritin iron loading and
increased cytosolic iron pools. Thus, Shi et al. (2008) concluded that
PCBP1 can function as a cytosolic iron chaperone in the delivery of iron
to ferritin.

MAPPING

Transcripts of both PCBPs were detected in all the human tissues
analyzed. Tommerup and Leffers (1996) mapped PCBP1 to 2p13-p12 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Chkheidze, A. N.; Liebhaber, S. A.: A novel set of nuclear localization
signals determine distributions of the alpha-CP RNA-binding proteins. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 23: 8405-8415, 2003.

2. Hahm, K.; Kim, G.; Turck, C. W.; Smale, S. T.: Isolation of a
murine gene encoding a nucleic acid-binding protein with homology
to hnRNP K. Nucleic Acids Res. 21: 3894 only, 1993.

3. Kosturko, L. D.; Maggipinto, M. J.; Korza, G.; Lee, J. W.; Carson,
J. H.; Barbarese, E.: Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP)
E1 binds to hnRNP A2 and inhibits translation of A2 response element
mRNAs. Molec. Biol. Cell 17: 3521-3533, 2006.

4. Leffers, H.; Dejgaard, K.; Celis, J. E.: Characterisation of two
major cellular poly(rC)-binding human proteins, each containing three
K-homologous (KH) domains. Europ. J. Biochem. 230: 447-453, 1995.

5. Shi, H.; Bencze, K. Z.; Stemmler, T. L.; Philpott, C. C.: A cytosolic
iron chaperone that delivers iron to ferritin. Science 320: 1207-1210,
2008.

6. Tommerup, N.; Leffers, H.: Assignment of human KH-box-containing
genes by in situ hybridization: HNRNPK maps to 9q21.32-q21.33, PCBP1
to 2p12-p13, and PCBP2 to 12q13.12-q13.13, distal to FRA12A. Genomics 32:
297-298, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/10/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/10/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/11/2004

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 4/17/1996

EDITED mgross: 09/17/2009
terry: 9/10/2009
alopez: 6/12/2008
terry: 6/10/2008
cwells: 3/2/2004
terry: 2/11/2004
mark: 9/4/1996
mark: 6/7/1996
terry: 5/2/1996
mark: 4/17/1996
terry: 4/17/1996
mark: 4/17/1996

602178	TITLE *602178 CHONDROADHERIN; CHAD
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Chondroadherin (CHAD) was initially described by Larsson et al. (1991)
as a 36-kD matrix protein isolated from bovine cartilage. It was shown
to mediate chondrocyte-matrix interactions. Analysis of cDNA generated
from a bovine chondrocyte mRNA demonstrated that chondroadherin belongs
to the family of leucine-rich repeat (LRR) proteins. Of the LRR
proteins, chondroadherin is most closely related to the proteoglycans
decorin (125255), biglycan (301870), fibromodulin (600245), and lumican
(600616), and the matrix protein PRELP (601914). Each of these molecules
is present in the extracellular matrix of cartilage, each possesses 10
adjacent LRR regions flanked by disulfide-bonded domains, and each
possesses consensus motifs within the LRR regions for N-linked
glycosylation.

Grover et al. (1997) cloned a cDNA of the human CHAD gene using
PCR-based techniques. The gene encodes a protein of 359 amino acids, of
which the first 21 amino acids represent a putative signal peptide
sequence. It possesses 11 leucine-rich repeats flanked by cysteine-rich
regions. The cDNA has a 5-prime untranslated region of 149 bp, a coding
region of 1,080 bp including the stop codon, and a 3-prime untranslated
region of 561 bp terminating in a poly(A) tail. The cDNA hybridized with
a single messenger RNA of 1.9 kb, which is present in chondrocytes at
all ages.

GENE STRUCTURE

Grover et al. (1997) determined that the CHAD gene contains 3 exons.

MAPPING

Using a cosmid clone spanning the CHAD gene, Grover et al. (1997)
assigned the gene to 17q21.33 by PCR analysis of human/hamster somatic
cell hybrids and by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Grover, J.; Chen, X.-N.; Korenberg, J. R.; Roughley, P. J.: The
structure and chromosome location of the human chondroadherin gene
(CHAD). Genomics 45: 379-385, 1997.

2. Larsson, T.; Sommarin, Y.; Paulsson, M.; Antonsson, P.; Hedbom,
E.; Wendel, M.; Heinegard, D.: Cartilage matrix proteins: a basic
36-kDa protein with a restricted distribution to cartilage and bone. J.
Biol. Chem. 266: 20428-20433, 1991.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/12/1997

EDITED alopez: 05/01/2007
mark: 12/14/1997
mark: 12/12/1997

608086	TITLE *608086 GTPase, IMAP FAMILY, MEMBER 5; GIMAP5
;;IMMUNITY-ASSOCIATED NUCLEOTIDE 4-LIKE 1; IAN4L1;;
IAN4-LIKE 1;;
IMMUNITY-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 3; IMAP3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Daheron et al. (2001) cloned mouse Ian4 from a myeloid precursor cell
line. Northern blot analysis detected a 2.1-kb transcript in myeloid
cells. Cell fractionation and immunocytochemical analysis revealed
mitochondrial localization. A truncation mutant lacking the C-terminal
20 amino acids localized diffusely throughout the cytoplasm.

By searching a sequence database using IMAP1 (608084) as probe, Stamm et
al. (2002) identified IAN4L1, which they called IMAP3. The deduced
307-amino acid protein contains 5 motifs conserved in GTP-binding
proteins and a putative C-terminal transmembrane region. IAN4L1 shares
46% identity with IMAP1. Phylogenetic analysis showed that IAN4L1 is
homologous to mouse Ian4.

By Western blot and confocal microscopy analyses, Keita et al. (2007)
found that rat Gimap5 was expressed as a 35-kD protein in T lymphocytes,
but not other mononuclear cells, in a sedimentable subcellular
compartment distinct from mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum. Gimap5
did not colocalize with Bcl2 (151430).

GENE STRUCTURE

Stamm et al. (2002) determined that the IAN4L1 gene contains 3 exons.
Exon 1 is untranslated, and exon 3 contains more than 94% of the coding
sequence.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Stamm et al. (2002) mapped the IAN4L1 gene
to a 100-kb IMAP gene cluster on chromosome 7q32-q36. Within this
cluster, IMAP1 is located on the negative strand, while IMAP2 (608085),
IMAP3, and IMAP4 (608087) are on the opposite positive strand.

By interspecific backcross mapping, Daheron et al. (2001) mapped the
mouse Ian4 gene to the central region of chromosome 6.

ANIMAL MODEL

Biobreeding diabetes-prone (BBDP) rats homozygous for a frameshift
mutation in the Gimap5 gene, termed the lyp mutation, exhibit
spontaneous apoptosis of T lymphocytes, resulting in marked lymphopenia
and development of autoimmune type I diabetes (see 222100). Using flow
cytometry, Keita et al. (2007) found that T cells from lyp/lyp rats
showed loss of mitochondrial membrane potential. They proposed that
GIMAP5 regulates T-lymphocyte survival by mechanisms operating upstream
of mitochondria.

Barnes et al. (2010) identified a chemically induced recessive mutation,
which they called sphinx, in the mouse Gimap5 gene. Homozygous sphinx
mice, like Gimap5 -/- mice, were lymphopenic, showed granulocyte
accumulation, exhibited liver abnormalities, and died by age 14 weeks.
Further analysis of sphinx mice suggested that Gimap5 has cell-intrinsic
roles in lymphocyte survival, quiescence, and antigen receptor-induced
proliferation. Early morbidity of sphinx mice appeared to be due to
antibiotic-suppressible, microflora-dependent intestinal inflammation
and wasting disease. Barnes et al. (2010) proposed that GIMAP5 is a key
regulator of hematopoietic integrity and lymphocyte homeostasis.

REFERENCE 1. Barnes, M. J.; Aksoylar, H.; Krebs, P.; Bourdeau, T.; Arnold, C.
N.; Xia, Y.; Khovananth, K.; Engel, I.; Sovath, S.; Lampe, K.; Laws,
E.; Saunders, A.; Butcher, G. W.; Kronenberg, M.; Steinbrecher, K.;
Hildeman, D.; Grimes, H. L.; Beutler, B.; Hoebe, K.: Loss of T cell
and B cell quiescence precedes the onset of microbial flora-dependent
wasting disease and intestinal inflammation in Gimap5-deficient mice. J.
Immun. 184: 3743-3754, 2010.

2. Daheron, L.; Zenz, T.; Siracusa, L. D.; Brenner, C.; Calabretta,
B.: Molecular cloning of Ian4: a BCR/ABL-induced gene that encodes
an outer membrane mitochondrial protein with GTP-binding activity. Nucleic
Acids Res. 29: 1308-1316, 2001.

3. Keita, M.; Leblanc, C.; Andrews, D.; Ramanathan, S.: GIMAP5 regulates
mitochondrial integrity from a distinct subcellular compartment. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 361: 481-486, 2007.

4. Stamm, O.; Krucken, J.; Schmitt-Wrede, H.-P.; Benten, W. P. M.;
Wunderlich, F.: Human ortholog to mouse imap38 encoding an ER-localizable
G-protein belongs to a gene family clustered on chromosome 7q32-q36. Gene 282:
159-167, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/3/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/9/2003

EDITED mgross: 11/04/2010
mgross: 11/4/2010
terry: 11/3/2010
mgross: 9/9/2003

613374	TITLE *613374 COILED-COIL DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 101; CCDC101
;;STAF36
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CCDC101 is a subunit of 2 histone acetyltransferase complexes: the ADA2A
(TADA2A; 602276)-containing (ATAC) complex and the SPT3 (SUPT3H;
602947)-TAF9 (600822)-GCN5 (KAT2A; 602301)/PCAF (KAT2B; 602303)
acetylase (STAGA) complex. Both of these complexes contain either GCN5
or PCAF, which are paralogous acetyltransferases (Wang et al., 2008).

CLONING

Using mass spectrometry to identify subunits of the ATAC and STAGA
complexes in HeLa cells, Wang et al. (2008) identified CCDC101, which
they called STAF36. STAF36 had an apparent molecular mass of 36 kD by
SDS-PAGE.

MAPPING

Hartz (2010) mapped the CCDC101 gene to chromosome 16p11.2 based on an
alignment of the CCDC101 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK057008) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  4/20/2010.

2. Wang, Y.-L.; Faiola, F.; Xu, M.; Pan, S.; Martinez, E.: Human
ATAC is a GCN5/PCAF-containing acetylase complex with a novel NC2-like
histone fold module that interacts with the TATA-binding protein. J.
Biol. Chem. 283: 33808-33815, 2008.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/20/2010

EDITED mgross: 04/20/2010
mgross: 4/20/2010

606218	TITLE *606218 SELENOPHOSPHATE SYNTHETASE 2; SEPHS2
;;SPS2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening activated CD8 (see 186910)-positive T cells with mouse
Sps2, a homolog of E. coli selD, as the probe, Guimaraes et al. (1996)
isolated a cDNA encoding human SPS2. The deduced 448-amino acid SPS2
protein contains Walker A- and B-like motifs, which are characteristic
of alpha/beta nucleotide-binding folds. The SPS2 Walker A-like motif is
a gly-rich site that includes a selenocysteine (sec) residue. Northern
blot analysis revealed preferential expression of a 2.3-kb transcript in
mouse tissues that produce selenoproteins, with lower expression in
sites of blood cell development. Levels of Sps2 mRNA were upregulated
upon activation of CD4 (186940)-positive lymphocytes. Western blot
analysis showed that Sps2 levels were 20-fold higher when the 3-prime
UTR of Sps2 was included in the expression construct in transfected
cells. Southern blot analysis indicated that SPS2 is well-conserved in
mammals.

UGA (TGA) codons normally serve as translational stop signals. However,
in cDNAs with stem-loop secondary structures called selenocysteine
insertion sequence (SECIS) elements, a translational stop is avoided and
UGA directs the incorporation of the amino acid selenocysteine into the
active site of the selenoprotein enzyme. Using a computational pattern
search to identify sequences that can adopt a SECIS-like secondary
structure, Lescure et al. (1999) discovered a SECIS in the 3-prime UTR
of SPS2 cDNA.

GENE FUNCTION

A labile selenium donor compound monoselenophosphate is synthesized from
selenide and ATP by SPS. Tamura et al. (2004) cloned SPS1 (600902) and
SPS2 from a cDNA library prepared from human lung adenocarcinoma cells.
Human lung SPS1 was cloned as an open reading frame (ORF) of 1,179 bp,
identical in sequence to that of human liver SPS1. The in-frame TGA
codon of lung SPS2 was genetically altered to TGT (cys); the resulting
gene was designated SPS2cys. Expression of the recombinant plasmids
containing SPS1 or SPS2cys was highly toxic to E. coli host cells grown
aerobically. Accordingly, the human lung SPS homologs were characterized
by an in vivo complementation assay using a selD mutant strain of E.
coli. These studies suggested an apparent substrate specificity of the
SPS1 and SPS2 gene products, leading Tamura et al. (2004) to suggest
that the SPS1-encoded enzyme depends on a selenium salvage system that
recycles L-selenocysteine, whereas the SPS2 enzyme can function with a
selenite assimilation system.

MAPPING

Gross (2011) mapped the SEPHS2 gene to chromosome 16p11.2 based on an
alignment of the SEPHS2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC002381) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

Guimaraes et al. (1996) mapped the mouse Sps2 gene to the distal region
of chromosome 7 by interspecific backcross analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/28/2011.

2. Guimaraes, M. J.; Peterson, D.; Vicari, A.; Cocks, B. G.; Copeland,
N. G.; Gilbert, D. J.; Jenkins, N. A.; Ferrick, D. A.; Kastelein,
R. A.; Bazan, J. F.; Zlotnik, A.: Identification of a novel selD
homolog from eukaryotes, bacteria, and archaea: is there an autoregulatory
mechanism in selenocysteine metabolism? Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93:
15086-15091, 1996.

3. Lescure, A.; Gautheret, D.; Carbon, P.; Krol, A.: Novel selenoproteins
identified in silico and in vivo by using a conserved RNA structural
motif. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 38147-38154, 1999.

4. Tamura, T.; Yamamoto, S.; Takahata, M.; Sakaguchi, H.; Tanaka,
H.; Stadtman, T. C.; Inagaki, K.: Selenophosphate synthetase genes
from lung adenocarcinoma cells: Sps1 for recycling L-selenocysteine
and Sps2 for selenite assimilation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 16162-16167,
2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 2/28/2011
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/21/2005

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 8/21/2001

EDITED mgross: 02/28/2011
mgross: 2/28/2011
tkritzer: 1/21/2005
mgross: 8/21/2001

607647	TITLE *607647 PLASMALEMMA VESICLE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN; PLVAP
;;PLASMALEMMA VESICLE PROTEIN 1; PV1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using rat Pv1 as query, Stan et al. (2001) identified ESTs containing
mouse and human PLVAP. They characterized human PLVAP cDNAs from lung,
colon, and pancreas. The deduced 442-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of about 50 kD. PLVAP is a type II integral membrane
protein with a short N-terminal cytoplasmic tail, a single-span
transmembrane domain, and a large C-terminal extracellular domain
consisting mostly of alpha helices. It also contains 2 coiled-coil
domains predicted to contribute to dimer formation. The extracellular
domain has 4 N-glycosylation sites, a proline-rich region, and regular
spacing of cysteine residues. The deduced 439-amino acid mouse Plvap
protein contains a consensus casein kinase II (see 115440)
phosphorylation site that is not found in the human protein. Rat Plvap
contains 2 casein kinase II phosphorylation sites. Northern blot
analysis revealed a single PLVAP transcript of about 2.4 kb in pancreas,
kidney, placenta, muscle, lung, heart, and liver. No signal was detected
in brain or testis. Northern dot blot analysis revealed expression in
several other tissues, including aorta, pituitary, adrenals, mammary
gland, bladder, lymph node, bone marrow, trachea, placenta, and all
segments of the digestive tract from the esophagus to the rectum. No
expression was detected in brain, testis, ovary, leukocytes, and lung.
Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues showed an expression pattern
similar to that found in human tissues, but the quantitative
distribution varied between mouse and human.

Niemela et al. (2005) identified PLVAP as the target of the
pathologische anatomie Leiden-endothelium (PAL-E) antibody, a long used
marker for vascular endothelial cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Keuschnigg et al. (2009) found that stimulation of human umbilical vein
endothelial cells with TNF (191160) led to redistribution of PV1 to the
peripheral areas of the cells. Transcellular migrating lymphocytes were
surrounded by rings containing PV1 and CAV1 (601047).
Coimmunoprecipitation and confocal microscopy demonstrated that PV1
physically associated with vimentin (VIM; 193060). Anti-PV1 caused a
significant inhibition of lymphocyte transmigration through endothelial
cells, but rolling and adhesion were not affected. In vivo blockade of
Pv1 in mouse acute peritonitis and air pouch models resulted in a
significant decrease in the number of migrating leukocytes. Keuschnigg
et al. (2009) concluded that PV is involved in leukocyte
transendothelial cell migration.

GENE STRUCTURE

Stan et al. (2001) determined that the PLVAP gene contains 6 exons and
spans more than 26 kb. The promoter region contains a classical TATA box
and binding sites for MZF1 (194550), SP1 (189906), RXRA (180245), AP2
(107580), and 3 GATA transcription factors (see 305371).

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis and radiation hybrid analysis, Stan et al.
(2001) mapped the PLVAP gene to chromosome 19p13.2, about 25 kb
downstream from BST2 (600534). They mapped the mouse Plvap gene to
chromosome 8B3-C1, a region that shows homology of synteny to human
chromosome 19p13-p12.

REFERENCE 1. Keuschnigg, J.; Henttinen, T.; Auvinen, K.; Karikoski, M.; Salmi,
M.; Jalkanen, S.: The prototype endothelial marker PAL-E is a leukocyte
trafficking molecule. Blood 114: 478-484, 2009.

2. Niemela, H.; Elima, K.; Henttinen, T.; Irjala, H.; Salmi, M.; Jalkanen,
S.: Molecular identification of PAL-E, a widely used endothelial-cell
marker. Blood 106: 3405-3409, 2005.

3. Stan, R.-V.; Arden, K. C.; Palade, G. E.: cDNA and protein sequence,
genomic organization, and analysis of cis regulatory elements of mouse
and human PLVAP genes. Genomics 72: 304-313, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/29/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/21/2003

EDITED mgross: 02/02/2010
terry: 1/29/2010
mgross: 3/21/2003

609347	TITLE *609347 RECEPTOR EXPRESSION-ENHANCING PROTEIN 2; REEP2
;;SGC32445;;
CHROMOSOME 5 OPEN READING FRAME 19; C5ORF19
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Lai et al. (2001) identified C5ORF19, which they called SGC32445, within
a region of chromosome 5q frequently deleted in malignant myelomas. The
deduced 152-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of about
17 kD. Northern blot analysis detected a transcript of about 2.2 kb.
C5ORF19 expression was abundant in brain, heart, and skeletal muscle,
low in placenta, kidney, and pancreas, and absent in lung and liver.

Transport of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) to the cell surface
membrane is critical for receptor-ligand recognition. However, mammalian
GPCR odorant receptors (ORs), when heterologously expressed in cells,
are poorly expressed on the cell surface. By screening for genes that
induced cell surface expression of ORs expressed in human embryonic
kidney cells, Saito et al. (2004) identified mouse and human REEP1
(609139). They searched databases for homologs of REEP1 and identified
several other REEP genes, including REEP2. In situ hybridization of
mouse olfactory epithelium revealed that, unlike Reep1, Reep2 was not
expressed in olfactory neurons.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lai et al. (2001) determined that the C5ORF19 gene contains 8 exons and
spans more than 7 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lai et al. (2001) mapped the REEP2 gene to
chromosome 5q31.

REFERENCE 1. Lai, F.; Godley, L. A.; Joslin, J.; Fernald, A. A.; Liu, J.; Espinosa,
R., III; Zhao, N.; Pamintuan, L.; Till, B. G.; Larson, R. A.; Qian,
Z.; Le Beau, M. M.: Transcript map and comparative analysis of the
1.5-Mb commonly deleted segment of human 5q31 in malignant myeloid
diseases with a del(5q). Genomics 71: 235-245, 2001.

2. Saito, H.; Kubota, M.; Roberts, R. W.; Chi, Q.; Matsunami, H.:
RTP family members induce functional expression of mammalian odorant
receptors. Cell 119: 679-691, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/17/2005

CREATED Matthew B. Gross: 4/29/2005

EDITED alopez: 07/13/2006
mgross: 5/17/2005
mgross: 4/29/2005

608387	TITLE *608387 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 213; ZNF213
;;CR53
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

C2H2 zinc finger proteins, such as ZNF213, have bipartite structures in
which one domain binds DNA or RNA and the other modulates target gene
expression.

CLONING

By sequencing candidate genes within the FMF locus (249100) on
chromosome 16, PCR of fetal brain, fetal liver, and lymph node cDNA
libraries, and screening a peripheral blood leukocyte cDNA library, Chen
et al. (1999) cloned ZNF213. The deduced 424-amino acid protein contains
an N-terminal leucine-rich domain, followed by a Kruppel-associated box
and C-terminal zinc fingers. Northern blot analysis detected a 3.8-kb
transcript in all tissues examined. Highest expression was detected in
testis, followed by ovary, small intestine, prostate, spleen, thymus,
mucosal lining of colon, and peripheral blood lymphocytes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chen et al. (1999) determined that the ZNF213 gene contains 7 exons and
spans about 8.0 kb. The 5-prime untranslated region is GC rich.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Bernot et al. (1998) mapped the ZNF213
gene, which they designated CR53, to chromosome 16p13.3. The gene is
oriented with its 5-prime end toward the telomere. Chen et al. (1999)
determined that the ZNF213 gene lies within a ZNF gene cluster that
includes ZNF263 (604191) and ZNF174 (603900).

REFERENCE 1. Bernot, A.; Heilig, R.; Clepet, C.; Smaoui, N.; Da Silva, C.; Petit,
J.-L.; Devaud, C.; Chiannilkulchai, N.; Fizames, C.; Samson, D.; Cruaud,
C.; Caloustian, C.; Gyapay, G.; Delpech, M.; Weissenbach, J.: A transcriptional
map of the FMF region. Genomics 50: 147-160, 1998.

2. Chen, X.; Hamon, M.; Deng, Z.; Centola, M.; Sood, R.; Taylor, K.;
Kastner, D. L.; Fischel-Ghodsian, N.: Identification and characterization
of a zinc finger gene (ZNF213) from 16p13.3. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1444:
218-230, 1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/9/2004

EDITED mgross: 01/09/2004

606741	TITLE *606741 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 181; ZNF181
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Zinc finger proteins have been shown to interact with nucleic acids and
to have diverse functions. The zinc finger domain is a conserved amino
acid sequence motif containing 2 specifically positioned cysteines and 2
histidines that are involved in coordinating zinc. Kruppel-related
proteins form 1 family of zinc finger proteins. See 604749 for
additional information on zinc finger proteins.

CLONING

By screening a human fetal heart cDNA library with a degenerate
oligonucleotide based on the consensus sequence of the C2H2 zinc finger
domain, Wang et al. (1996) cloned 2 novel zinc finger cDNAs, designated
ZNF180 (606740) and ZNF181.

MAPPING

By FISH, Wang et al. (1996) mapped the ZNF180 and ZNF181 genes within a
cluster of zinc finger genes on chromosome 19q13.2.

REFERENCE 1. Wang, R.; Cukerman, E.; Heng, H. H. Q.; Liew, C.-C.: Identification
of a locus of zinc finger genes in human chromosome 19q13.1-q13.3
region by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Somat. Cell Molec.
Genet. 22: 245-248, 1996.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 3/1/2002

EDITED terry: 03/01/2002
carol: 3/1/2002

600912	TITLE *600912 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 19; TCF19
;;SC1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Ku et al. (1991) cloned a growth-regulated cDNA by differential
screening of a mouse 3T3 cell line library to identify transcripts
induced by serum stimulation. Transcripts of the gene, designated SC1,
were detectable beginning at about 8 hours after stimulation. The mouse
cDNA was used to clone the human SC1 cDNA. The 2.6-kb cDNA encoded a
deduced 359-amino acid polypeptide with features characteristic of
transactivating factors. The gene was mapped by in situ hybridization to
chromosome 6p21-p22. The bacterially expressed protein had the predicted
size of 39 kD.

MAPPING

Krishnan et al. (1995) mapped TCF19 with POU5F1 (164177) to a 0.2-Mb
region between HLA-C (142840) and the so-called S gene (602593) at
6p21.3. POU5F1 and TCF19 are about 130 kb telomeric of HLAC and about
600 bp from each other.

REFERENCE 1. Krishnan, B. R.; Jamry, I.; Chaplin, D. D.: Feature mapping of
the HLA class I region: localization of the POU5F1 and TCF19 genes. Genomics 30:
53-58, 1995.

2. Ku, D.-H.; Chang, C..; Koniecki, J.; Cannizzaro, L. A.; Boghosian-Sell,
L.; Alder, H.; Baserga, R.: A new growth-regulated complementary
DNA with the sequence of a putative trans-activating factor. Cell
Growth Differ. 2: 179-186, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Alan F. Scott - updated: 11/13/1995

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 11/2/1995

EDITED alopez: 06/05/2003
dkim: 10/28/1998
carol: 6/18/1998
psherman: 5/5/1998
mark: 4/7/1996
mark: 11/2/1995

606157	TITLE *606157 PANTOTHENATE KINASE 2; PANK2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Pantothenate kinase (EC 2.7.2.33) is an essential regulatory enzyme in
CoA biosynthesis, catalyzing the cytosolic phosphorylation of
pantothenate (vitamin B5), N-pantothenoylcysteine, and pantetheine. CoA
is the major acyl carrier, playing a central role in intermediary and
fatty acid metabolism. In both yeast and fly, each with only 1
pantothenate kinase gene, the null mutant is inviable (summary by Zhou
et al., 2001).

CLONING

Using linkage analysis of an extended Amish pedigree, Taylor et al.
(1996) defined an interval on 20p13 that contains the gene mutant in
Hallervorden-Spatz disease, now known as neurodegeneration with brain
iron accumulation-1 (NBIA1; 234200). Zhou et al. (2001) narrowed the
critical region for the disorder by genotyping polymorphic
microsatellite markers in affected families. Analysis of candidate genes
in this 1.4-Mb region led to the identification in the index family of a
7-bp deletion in the coding sequence of a gene with homology to murine
pantothenate kinase-1. PANK2 is a member of a family of eukaryotic genes
consisting of a group of 6 exons that encode homologous core proteins,
preceded by a series of alternate initiating exons, some of which encode
unique N-terminal peptides. By 5-prime RACE and EST analysis, Zhou et
al. (2001) found evidence for at least 5 initiating exons for PANK2, but
only 1 of these, exon 1C, has an open reading frame with potential
initiation codons that splices in-frame to exon 2. Zhou et al. (2001)
found a sequence similar to that of human PANK2 in mouse, with homology
in the derived amino acid sequence extending to the leucine codon at
nucleotide 31 but diverging 5-prime of it. There is precedence for the
use of a leucine initiating codon in humans, which is probably read by a
methionine tRNA. The leucine codon is flanked by a reasonable initiation
consensus sequence. Zhou et al. (2001) also noted the presence of a
stem-loop structure 14 nucleotides downstream from this leucine, the
location of which has been shown to enhance translation initiation at
nonconserved AUG and non-AUG initiation codons. The mouse stem-loop
sequence is nearly identical, with only 3 nucleotide changes, 2 in the
postulated loop of the stem loop and 1 that changes a GC to a GU
basepair, which implies structural conservation. Because of this strong
conservation, Zhou et al. (2001) proposed that the CUG may serve as an
alternative initiation codon for translation in addition to one of the
methionine codons downstream. There is also a 22-bp palindrome at the
junction of spliced exons 1C and 2. This sequence may form a hairpin
structure and thus explain why most PANK2 ESTs terminate just 3-prime of
the palindrome. Zhou et al. (2001) speculated that this sequence may
serve a regulatory function. PANK2 is ubiquitously expressed, including
in retina and infant basal ganglia. Zhou et al. (2001) provided evidence
for pantothenic kinase activity in PANK2 by showing that the human gene
PANK2 can rescue the temperature-sensitive E. coli pantothenate kinase
mutant.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hortnagel et al. (2003) determined the exon-intron structure of the
human PANK2 gene and identified 2 alternatively used first exons. The
resulting transcripts encode distinct isoforms of PANK2, one of which
carries an N-terminal extension with a predicted mitochondrial targeting
signal. An in vitro import assay and in vivo immunolocalization
experiments demonstrated a mitochondrial localization of this isoform.
The authors concluded that the symptoms observed in pantothenate
kinase-associated neurodegeneration (234200) may be caused by a
deficiency of the mitochondrial isoform; they further postulated the
existence of a complete intramitochondrial pathway for de novo synthesis
of coenzyme A.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Zhou et al. (2001) identified 3 nonsense mutations in exon 1C of the
PANK2 gene in affected individuals with classic Hallervorden-Spatz
disease (234200), also known as neurodegeneration with brain iron
accumulation-1 (NBIA1) or pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (PKAN), but not in controls.

In the original patient with HARP syndrome (607236) reported by Higgins
et al. (1992), Ching et al. (2002) identified homozygosity for a
mutation in the PANK2 gene (606157.0011). HARP syndrome shares many
clinical and radiographic features with PKAN, but is distinguished by a
specific lipoprotein abnormality. The mutation identified by Ching et
al. (2002) confirmed that HARP syndrome is part of the PKAN disease
spectrum.

Hayflick et al. (2003) performed clinical assessment and mutation screen
of the PANK2 gene on 123 patients from 98 families with a diagnosis of
Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome, classified on the basis of clinical
assessment as having classic disease (characterized by early onset with
rapid progression) or atypical disease (later onset with slow
progression). PANK2 mutations were found in 66 of the 98 families. Of 49
families whose members had classic disease, all had mutations in PANK2.
Of 49 families whose members had atypical disease, mutations were found
in 17 (35%). Whereas almost all mutations in patients with atypical
disease led to amino acid changes, those in patients with classic
disease more often resulted in predicted protein truncation. Patients
with atypical disease who had PANK2 mutations were more likely to have
prominent speech-related and psychiatric symptoms than patients with
classic disease or mutation-negative patients with atypical disease. In
all patients with pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration,
whether classic or atypical, T2-weighted MRI of the brain showed a
specific pattern of hyperintensity within the hypointense medial globus
pallidus. This pattern was not seen in any patients without mutations.
Predicted levels of pantothenate kinase-2 protein correlated with the
severity of the disease.

In the 66 families with mutations in the PANK2 gene studied by Hayflick
et al. (2003), 2 PANK2 mutations, both of them missense mutations,
accounted for one-third of the disease alleles, G411R (606157.0002) and
T418M (606157.0010). G411R constituted 31 disease-related alleles in 27
families. Eighty-one percent of the 27 families with the G411R mutation
were of European descent. In 6 families (4 with classic disease and 2
with atypical disease), the G411R mutation was found on one chromosome
and no mutation was identified on the other. Families with only 1
identified mutation were not distinguishable from those with 2. Some of
these mutations were undetectable with the screening method used, e.g.,
promoter mutations. Six of the 9 families with a single mutant allele
had only the allele with the G411R mutation. This observation is
striking because mutations in both alleles were detected in nearly all
families, and it suggests that G411R may be semidominant, with 1 allele
sufficient to cause disease given certain genetic backgrounds. Against
this hypothesis was the fact that no disease phenotype was observed in
G411R-heterozygous carrier parents of affected persons.

In 16 patients with PKAN, Pellecchia et al. (2005) identified 12
mutations in the PANK2 gene, including 5 novel mutations. They found no
genotype/phenotype correlations.

Hartig et al. (2006) identified homozygous or compound heterozygous
PANK2 mutations in 48 of 72 patients with PKAN. Deletions accounted for
4% of mutated alleles. There was a correlation between predicted
loss-of-function alleles and earlier age at disease onset.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kuo et al. (2005) generated a mouse knockout of the murine Pank2 gene.
Homozygous null mice gradually developed retinal degeneration with
progressive photoreceptor decline, significantly lower scotopic a- and
b-wave amplitudes, decreased cell number and disruption of the outer
segment, and reduced pupillary constriction response. Homozygous male
mutants were infertile due to azoospermia, a condition that was not
appreciated in affected humans with pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200). In contrast to the human, homozygous null
mice exhibited no basal ganglia changes or dystonia. By
immunohistochemistry, Pank2 was localized to mitochondria in both retina
and spermatozoa.

Drosophila has only 1 PANK gene, fumble (fbl), which encodes several
isoforms of pantothenate kinase, including a long isoform fblL that
localizes to mitochondria and shorter isoforms fblS1 and fblS2 that
localize to the cytosol. Wu et al. (2009) introduced various isoforms of
Drosophila fbl and human PANK2 into flies to study their in vivo
functions. Only mitochondria-targeted FblL or human PANK2 was able to
rescue a hypomorphic fbl(1) mutation, with the rescuing ability
dependent on the expression level of the transgene. Transgenic lines
with low expression of normal fbl or PANK2 displayed similar phenotypes
as PANK2-mutant transgenic flies. These PANK2 mutants all showed reduced
enzyme activity, and phenotype severity correlated with in vitro enzyme
activity. Cytosolic PANK3 (606161) and PANK4 (606162) could partially
rescue all fbl defects except male sterility. The authors concluded that
fbl is the ortholog of human PANK2, and PANK2 is functionally more
potent than PANK3 and PANK4 in vivo. Wu et al. (2009) suggested that
mitochondria-located pantothenate kinase is required to achieve the
maximal enzymatic activity to fulfill the most challenging biologic
tasks such as maintaining male fertility and optimal neuronal function,
and PKAN features are mainly due to the reduction of the total cellular
pantothenate kinase activity in the most susceptible regions.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, 7-BP DEL, NT627

In an individual with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified a homozygous
7-bp deletion in exon 2 of the PANK2 gene, resulting in a frameshift.

.0002
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, ATYPICAL, INCLUDED
PANK2, GLY411ARG

In 10 individuals with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified a homozygous
1261G-A transition in exon 6 of the PANK2 gene, resulting in a
glycine-to-arginine substitution at codon 411 (G411R). The mutation was
also seen in 7 individuals with atypical PKAN.

.0003
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, TYR80TER

In an individual with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified a C-to-G
transversion at nucleotide 270 in exon 1C of the PANK2 gene, resulting
in a tyrosine-to-termination substitution at codon 80 (Y80X). This
mutation was found in compound heterozygosity with arg154 to tyr
(606157.0004). In another affected individual, the mutation was found in
homozygosity.

.0004
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, ARG154TRP

In an individual with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) found a C-to-T transition
at nucleotide 490 of the PANK2 gene, resulting in an arg-to-trp
substitution at codon 154 (R154W). This patient was compound
heterozygous for the Y80X mutation (606157.0003).

.0005
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, ARG176CYS

In an individual with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified a C-to-T
transition at nucleotide 556 of the PANK2 gene, resulting in an
arg-to-cys substitution at codon 176 (R176C). This individual was a
compound heterozygote for the G411R mutation (606157.0002).

.0006
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, SER361ASN

In an individual with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200) who was compound heterozygous for an R145W
mutation (606157.0004) in the PANK2 gene, Zhou et al. (2001) identified
a G-to-A transition on the other allele, resulting in a ser361-to-asn
(S361N) amino acid substitution.

.0007
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, ATYPICAL
PANK2, SER240PRO

In an individual with atypical pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified a homozygous
mutation, a T-to-C transition at nucleotide 751 of the PANK2 gene,
resulting in a serine-to-proline substitution at codon 240 (S240P).

.0008
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, ATYPICAL
PANK2, THR124ALA

In an individual with atypical pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified an A-to-G
transition at nucleotide 400 of the PANK2 gene, resulting in a
threonine-to-alanine substitution at codon 124 (T124A).

.0009
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, ATYPICAL
PANK2, ARG168CYS

In an individual with atypical pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified a C-to-T
transition at nucleotide 532of the PANK2 gene, resulting in an
arg-to-cys substitution at codon 168 (R168C). This patient was compound
heterozygous for the G411R mutation (606157.0002).

.0010
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, ATYPICAL, INCLUDED
PANK2, THR418MET

In individuals with both typical and atypical pantothenate
kinase-associated neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001)
identified a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1283 of the PANK2 gene,
resulting in a threonine-to-methionine substitution at codon 418
(T418M). This mutation was found in homozygosity in 2 patients with
classical PKAN, and in compound heterozygosity with the G411R mutation
(606157.0002) in an individual with atypical PKAN.

Hayflick et al. (2003) found the T418M mutation on 10 alleles in 6 of 66
families with PANK2 mutations causing Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome.

.0011
HARP SYNDROME
PANK2, ARG371TER

In the patient originally reported by Higgins et al. (1992) with HARP
syndrome (607236), Ching et al. (2002) demonstrated homozygosity for a
C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1111 in exon 5 of the PANK2 gene. The
mutation changed an arginine codon to a stop codon at amino acid 371 and
shortened PANK2 by 89 amino acids. Ching et al. (2002) suspected that
the patient was the offspring of consanguineous parents because they
came from a village of 500 inhabitants. The patient demonstrated severe
spasticity and dystonia from early childhood. At age 10, she was shown
to have pigmentary retinopathy on funduscopic examination and the 'eye
of the tiger' sign on brain MRI. Peripheral blood smear and electron
microscopy demonstrated marked acanthocytosis that was not due to an
intrinsic erythrocyte protein defect. On high-resolution lipoprotein
electrophoresis, she demonstrated absence of the pre-beta fraction and
normal blood levels of cholesterol, triglycerides, high and low density
lipoprotein cholesterol, and apolipoproteins A, B, and E.

.0012
HARP SYNDROME
PANK2, MET327THR

In a patient with HARP syndrome (607236) initially reported by Orrell et
al. (1995), Houlden et al. (2003) identified compound heterozygosity for
mutations in the PANK2 gene: a 980T-C change in exon 4, resulting in a
met327-to-thr (M327T) substitution, and a splice site mutation
(606157.0013). Her unaffected father and 2 of his unaffected brothers
were heterozygous for the M327T mutation.

.0013
HARP SYNDROME
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, INCLUDED
PANK2, IVS4, G-T, -1

In a patient with HARP syndrome (607236) initially reported by Orrell et
al. (1995), Houlden et al. (2003) identified compound heterozygosity for
mutations in the PANK2 gene: a G-to-T transversion at the splice site of
exon 5 (IVS4-1G-T), and M327T (606157.0012). The patient's mother and
sister, both of whom had acanthocytosis and hypoprebetalipoproteinemia
without neurologic abnormalities, were heterozygous for the splice site
mutation. Houlden et al. (2003) noted that the IVS4 mutation had been
reported in 2 patients with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200) (Hayflick et al., 2003), thus confirming that
the 2 disorders are allelic.

.0014
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, 3-BP DEL, 1142GAG

In affected members from 4 Dutch families with pantothenate
kinase-associated neurodegeneration (234200), Rump et al. (2005)
identified a 3-bp deletion (1142delGAG) in the PANK2 gene. The in-frame
deletion is predicted to result in substitution of arg371 and glu372
with a glutamine in the catalytic domain of the protein. Five patients
from 3 families were homozygous for the mutation. The patient from the
fourth family was compound heterozygous for the deletion and a second
mutation (S68X; 606157.0015). Haplotype analysis suggested a founder
effect that arose in Friesland, a northern province of the Netherlands,
at the beginning of the ninth century, approximately 38 generations ago.

.0015
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, SER68TER

In a Dutch patient with pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration
(234200), Rump et al. (2005) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
mutations in the PANK2 gene: a 3-bp deletion (606157.0014) and a 233C-A
transversion, resulting in a ser68-to-ter (S68X) substitution. The
patient had a severe form of the disorder and died at age 12 years.

REFERENCE 1. Ching, K. H. L.; Westaway, S. K.; Gitschier, J.; Higgins, J. J.;
Hayflick, S. J.: HARP syndrome is allelic with pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration. Neurology 58: 1673-1674, 2002.

2. Hartig, M. B.; Hortnagel, K.; Garavaglia, B.; Zorzi, G.; Kmiec,
T.; Klopstock, T.; Rostasy, K.; Svetel, M.; Kostic, V. S.; Schuelke,
M.; Botz, E.; Weindl, A.; Novakovic, I.; Nardocci, N.; Prokisch, H.;
Meitinger, T.: Genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of PANK2 mutations
in patients with neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation. Ann.
Neurol. 59: 248-256, 2006.

3. Hayflick, S. J.; Westaway, S. K.; Levinson, B.; Zhou, B.; Johnson,
M. A.; Ching, K. H. L.; Gitschier, J.: Genetic, clinical, and radiographic
delineation of Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome. New Eng. J. Med. 348:
33-40, 2003.

4. Higgins, J. J.; Patterson, M. C.; Papadopoulos, N. M.; Brady, R.
O.; Pentchev, P. G.; Barton, N. W.: Hypoprebetalipoproteinemia, acanthocytosis,
retinitis pigmentosa, and pallidal degeneration (HARP syndrome). Neurology 42:
194-198, 1992.

5. Hortnagel, K.; Prokisch, H.; Meitinger, T.: An isoform of hPANK2,
deficient in pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration, localizes
to mitochondria. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 321-327, 2003.

6. Houlden, H.; Lincoln, S.; Farrer, M.; Cleland, P. G.; Hardy, J.;
Orrell, R. W.: Compound heterozygous PANK2 mutations confirm HARP
and Hallervorden-Spatz syndromes are allelic. Neurology 61: 1423-1426,
2003.

7. Kuo, Y.-M.; Duncan, J. L.; Westaway, S. K.; Yang, H.; Nune, G.;
Xu, E. Y.; Hayflick, S. J.; Gitschier, J.: Deficiency of pantothenate
kinase 2 (Pank2) in mice leads to retinal degeneration and azoospermia. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 49-57, 2005.

8. Orrell, R. W.; Amrolia, P. J.; Heald, A.; Cleland, P. G.; Owen,
J. S.; Morgan-Hughes, J. A.; Harding, A. E.; Marsden, C. D.: Acanthocytosis,
retinitis pigmentosa, and pallidal degeneration: a report of three
patients, including the second reported case with hypoprebetalipoproteinemia
(HARP syndrome). Neurology 45: 487-492, 1995.

9. Pellecchia, M. T.; Valente, E. M.; Cif, L.; Salvi, S.; Albanese,
A.; Scarano, V.; Bonuccelli, U.; Bentivoglio, A. R.; D'Amico, A.;
Marelli, C.; Di Giorgio, A.; Coubes, P.; Barone, P.; Dallapiccola,
B.: The diverse phenotype and genotype of pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration. Neurology 64: 1810-1812, 2005.

10. Rump, P.; Lemmink, H. H.; Verschuuren-Bemelmans, C. C.; Grootscholten,
P. M.; Fock, J. M.; Hayflick, S. J.; Westaway, S. K.; Vos, Y. J.;
van Essen, A. J.: A novel 3-bp deletion in the PANK2 gene of Dutch
patients with pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration: evidence
for a founder effect. Neurogenetics 6: 201-207, 2005.

11. Taylor, T. D.; Litt, M.; Kramer, P.; Pandolfo, M.; Angelini, L.;
Nardocci, N.; Davis, S.; Pineda, M.; Hattori, H.; Flett, P. J.; Cilio,
M. R.; Bertini, E.; Hayflick, S. J.: Homozygosity mapping of Hallervorden-Spatz
syndrome to chromosome 20p12.3-p13. Nature Genet. 14: 479-481, 1996.
Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 16: 109 only, 1997.

12. Wu, Z.; Li, C.; Lv, S.; Zhou, B.: Pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration: insights from a Drosophila model. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 18: 3659-3672, 2009.

13. Zhou, B.; Westaway, S. K.; Levinson, B.; Johnson, M. A.; Gitschier,
J.; Hayflick, S. J.: A novel pantothenate kinase gene (PANK2) is
defective in Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome. Nature Genet. 28: 345-349,
2001.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 7/8/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/31/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/11/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/2/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/16/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/3/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/3/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/24/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/3/2002

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 7/30/2001

EDITED carol: 04/16/2013
terry: 5/25/2012
wwang: 7/22/2010
terry: 7/8/2010
carol: 3/8/2010
carol: 3/1/2010
carol: 2/25/2010
alopez: 11/2/2007
terry: 10/31/2007
wwang: 4/19/2006
ckniffin: 4/11/2006
wwang: 3/14/2006
ckniffin: 3/2/2006
wwang: 8/23/2005
ckniffin: 8/16/2005
alopez: 1/3/2005
tkritzer: 2/6/2004
ckniffin: 2/3/2004
cwells: 11/18/2003
terry: 1/24/2003
alopez: 11/1/2002
carol: 9/18/2002
tkritzer: 9/17/2002
terry: 9/3/2002
alopez: 7/30/2001

142712	TITLE *142712 HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H1 HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER T; HIST1H1T
;;HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H1 HISTONE FAMILY, TESTIS-SPECIFIC MEMBER;;
HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H1T;;
HIST1 CLUSTER, H1T;;
H1T;;
H1.T;;
H1 HISTONE, TESTIS-SPECIFIC;;
H1 HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER T, FORMERLY; H1FT, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION For background information on histones, histone gene clusters, and the
H1 histone family, see HIST1H1A (142709).

CLONING

Drabent et al. (1991) studied the structure and expression of H1T, the
gene for testis-specific histone H1.

GENE FUNCTION

Deng et al. (1994) found that the rat H1t locus cosegregated with blood
pressure in an F2 population derived from a cross of the Dahl
salt-sensitive strain and the Lewis strain. Thus, H1t in rat is a
quantitative trait locus for blood pressure.

See HIST1H1A (142709) for additional functional information on H1
histones.

MAPPING

By study of somatic cell hybrids and by in situ hybridization, Albig et
al. (1993) demonstrated that the H1T gene is located in a cluster with 5
other H1 histone genes on chromosome 6p22.2-p21.1. By analysis of a YAC
contig, Albig et al. (1997) mapped the H1FT gene to chromosome 6p21.3
within a cluster of 35 histone genes, including H1.1 (HIST1H1A; 142709)
to H1.4 (HIST1H1E; 142220). The H1.5 gene (HIST1H1B; 142711) is part of
a separate subcluster within the same chromosomal region.

By genomic sequence analysis, Marzluff et al. (2002) determined that the
histone gene cluster on chromosome 6p22-p21, which they called histone
gene cluster-1 (HIST1), contains 55 histone genes, including HIST1H1T.

Deng et al. (1994) reported that the rat testis-specific H1 histone gene
maps to chromosome 17,

REFERENCE 1. Albig, W.; Drabent, B.; Kunz, J.; Kalff-Suske, M.; Grzeschik, K.-H.;
Doenecke, D.: All known human H1 histone genes except the H1(0) gene
are clustered on chromosome 6. Genomics 16: 649-654, 1993.

2. Albig, W.; Kioschis, P.; Poustka, A.; Meergans, K.; Doenecke, D.
: Human histone gene organization: nonregular arrangement within a
large cluster. Genomics 40: 314-322, 1997.

3. Deng, A. Y.; Dene, H.; Pravenec, M.; Rapp, J. P.: Genetic mapping
of two new blood pressure quantitative trait loci in the rat by genotyping
endothelin system genes. J. Clin. Invest. 93: 2701-2709, 1994.

4. Drabent, B.; Kardalinou, E.; Doenecke, D.: Structure and expression
of the human gene encoding testicular H1 histone (H1t). Gene 103:
263-268, 1991.

5. Marzluff, W. F.; Gongidi, P.; Woods, K. R.; Jin, J.; Maltais, L.
J.: The human and mouse replication-dependent histone genes. Genomics 80:
487-498, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/24/2010
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 7/8/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/28/1993

EDITED mgross: 05/17/2011
mgross: 6/24/2010
mgross: 5/26/2010
alopez: 7/8/1998
alopez: 2/12/1998
jason: 7/12/1994
carol: 7/13/1993
carol: 6/28/1993

608167	TITLE *608167 POTASSIUM CHANNEL, SUBFAMILY T, MEMBER 1; KCNT1
;;KIAA1422;;
SLACK
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The KCNT1 gene encodes a sodium-activated potassium channel that is
widely expressed in the nervous system. Its activity contributes to the
slow hyperpolarization that follows repetitive firing. The C-terminal
cytoplasmic domain interacts with a protein network, including FMRP
(30955), suggesting additional functions (summary by Barcia et al.,
2012).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned KCNT1, which they designated
KIAA1422. The deduced 1,151-amino acid protein shares 94% identity with
the rat Slack potassium channel subunit. RT-PCR detected moderate to
high expression of KCNT1 in all tissues examined. Highest expression was
detected in adult and fetal liver and brain, in spinal cord, and in most
specific brain regions examined. Lowest expression was detected in
skeletal muscle.

Barcia et al. (2012) found expression of the Kcnt1 gene in murine
embryonic neurons in the hippocampus and cortex.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the KCNT1 gene
to chromosome 9.

GENE FUNCTION

Using biochemical and electrophysiologic studies in mice, Brown et al.
(2010) found that the mRNA-binding protein FMRP (309550) binds to the C
terminus of the Kcnt1 gene to activate the channel. The findings
suggested a link between patterns of neuronal firing and changes in
protein translation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Early Infantile Epileptic Encephalopathy 14/Malignant Migrating
Partial Seizures of Infancy

In 6 (50%) of 12 unrelated patients with sporadic occurrence of early
infantile epileptic encephalopathy-14 (EIEE14; 614959) clinically
manifest as malignant migrating partial seizures of infancy (MMPSI),
Barcia et al. (2012) identified 4 different de novo heterozygous
mutations in the KCNT1 gene (608167.0001-608167.0004). The first 2
mutations were identified by exome sequencing. Expression of 2 of the
corresponding rat mutations in Xenopus oocytes resulted in
Kcnt1-generated currents that resembled wildtype in terms of voltage
dependence and kinetic behavior but had 2- to 3-fold higher amplitude
compared to wildtype, consistent with a gain of function. The mutations
were shown to cause constitutive activation of the Kcnt1 channel,
mimicking the effects of phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain by
protein kinase C (see, e.g., PRKCA; 176960) activation. All patients had
onset of refractory focal seizures and arrest of psychomotor development
in the first 6 months of life. Brain MRI of some showed delayed
myelination. EEG showed characteristic multifocal, migrating discharges.
The findings suggested that KCNT1 is a major disease-associated gene for
the MMPSI phenotype.

- Autosomal Dominant Nocturnal Frontal Lobe Epilepsy 5

In affected members of 4 unrelated families with autosomal dominant
nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy-5 (ENFL5; 615005), Heron et al. (2012)
identified 4 different heterozygous mutations in the KCNT1 gene
(608167.0005-608167.0008). The initial mutation was found after linkage
analysis and whole-exome capture and sequencing in a large family
previously reported by Derry et al. (2008). Affected individuals had
childhood onset of partial motor seizures arising during sleep. Some
developed behavioral/psychiatric manifestations and showed varying
degrees of intellectual disability.

.
ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 14
KCNT1, ARG428GLN

In 3 unrelated patients of French origin with early infantile epileptic
encephalopathy-14 (EIEE14; 614959) manifest clinically as malignant
migrating partial seizures of infancy (MMPSI), Barcia et al. (2012)
identified a de novo heterozygous 1283G-A transition in exon 13 of the
KCNT1 gene, resulting in an arg428-to-gln (R428Q) substitution at a
highly conserved residue in the cytoplasmic C-terminal domain. The
mutation was initially identified by exome sequencing and confirmed by
Sanger sequencing in 1 patient; analysis of this gene in subsequent
patients identified the same mutation in 2 other individuals with the
same disorder. The mutation was not found in 200 controls or in several
large control databases. Expression of the corresponding rat mutation,
R409Q, in Xenopus oocytes resulted in Kcnt1-generated currents that
resembled wildtype in terms of voltage dependence and kinetic behavior
but had 2- to 3-fold higher amplitude compared to wildtype, consistent
with a gain of function. The mutation was shown to cause constitutive
activation of the Kcnt1 channel, mimicking the effects of
phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain by protein kinase C (see, e.g.,
PRKCA; 176960) activation.

.0002
EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 14
KCNT1, ALA934THR

In a patient of French origin with EIEE14 (614959) manifest clinically
as MMPSI, Barcia et al. (2012) identified a de novo heterozygous 2800G-A
transition in exon 24 of the KCNT1 gene, resulting in an ala934-to-thr
(A934T) substitution at a highly conserved residue in the cytoplasmic
C-terminal domain. The mutation was identified by exome sequencing and
confirmed by Sanger sequencing; it was not found in 200 controls or in
several large control databases. Expression of the corresponding rat
mutation, A913T, in Xenopus oocytes resulted in Kcnt1-generated currents
that resembled wildtype in terms of voltage dependence and kinetic
behavior but had 2- to 3-fold higher amplitude compared to wildtype,
consistent with a gain of function. The mutation was shown to cause
constitutive activation of the Kcnt1 channel, mimicking the effects of
phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain by protein kinase C (see, e.g.,
PRKCA; 176960) activation.

.0003
EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 14
KCNT1, ARG474HIS

In a patient of French origin with EIEE14 (614959) manifest clinically
as MMPSI, Barcia et al. (2012) identified a de novo heterozygous 1421G-A
transition in exon 15 of the KCNT1 gene, resulting in an arg474-to-his
(R474H) substitution at a highly conserved residue.

.0004
EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 14
KCNT1, ILE760MET

In a patient of Ukrainian origin with EIEE14 (614959) manifest
clinically as MMPSI, Barcia et al. (2012) identified a de novo
heterozygous 2280C-G transversion in exon 20 of the KCNT1 gene,
resulting in an ile760-to-met (I760M) substitution at a highly conserved
residue.

.0005
EPILEPSY, NOCTURNAL FRONTAL LOBE, 5
KCNT1, ARG928CYS

In 6 affected members of an Australian family of British descent with
autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy-5 (ENFL5; 615005)
(family B of Derry et al., 2008), Heron et al. (2012) identified a
heterozygous 2782C-T transition in the KCNT1 gene, resulting in an
arg928-to-cys (R928C) substitution at a highly conserved residue in the
intracellular C-terminal region adjacent to an NAD(+)-binding site. The
mutation, which was identified by whole-exome capture and sequencing and
confirmed by Sanger sequencing, segregated with the phenotype in this
family and was not identified in 111 control samples or in several large
control databases. No functional studies were performed. The mean age at
seizure onset was 4.6 years, and 5 of the 6 had refractory seizures and
behavioral or psychiatric problems. Three had intellectual disability.

.0006
EPILEPSY, NOCTURNAL FRONTAL LOBE, 5
KCNT1, TYR796HIS

In 4 individuals of a 3-generation Italian family with ENFL5 (615005),
Heron et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous 2386T-C transition in the
KCNT1 gene, resulting in a tyr796-to-his (Y796H) substitution at a
highly conserved residue in the intracellular C-terminal region adjacent
to an NAD(+)-binding site. No functional studies were performed. The
mean age of seizure onset was 5.5 years. Three patients had intellectual
disability, and 2 had behavioral or psychiatric abnormalities.

.0007
EPILEPSY, NOCTURNAL FRONTAL LOBE, 5
KCNT1, ARG398GLN

In 4 affected individuals of an Israeli family with ENFL5 (615005),
Heron et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous 1193G-A transition in the
KCNT1 gene, resulting in an arg398-to-gln (R398Q) substitution. No
functional studies were performed. Two of the 4 patients had behavioral
or psychiatric abnormalities, but all were cognitively normal.

.0008
EPILEPSY, NOCTURNAL FRONTAL LOBE, 5
KCNT1, MET896ILE

In an Australian boy of British descent with ENFL5 (615005), Heron et
al. (2012) identified a de novo heterozygous 2688G-A transition in the
KCNT1 gene, resulting in a met896-to-ile (M896I) substitution at a
highly conserved residue within the NAD(+)-binding site. No functional
studies were performed. The patient had onset of refractory seizures at
age 9 years and showed a behavioral/psychiatric disorder, but had normal
intellectual function.

REFERENCE 1. Barcia, G.; Fleming, M. R.; Deligniere, A.; Gazula, V.-R.; Brown,
M. R.; Langouet, M.; Chen, H.; Kronengold, J.; Abhyankar, A.; Cilio,
R.; Nitschke, P.; Kaminska, A.; Boddaert, N.; Casanova, J.-L.; Desguerre,
I.; Munnich, A.; Dulac, O.; Kaczmarek, L. K.; Colleaux, L.; Nabbout,
R.: De novo gain-of-function KCNT1 channel mutations cause malignant
migrating partial seizures of infancy. Nature Genet. 44: 1255-1259,
2012.

2. Brown, M. R.; Kronengold, J.; Gazula, V.-R.; Chen, Y.; Strumbos,
J. G.; Sigworth, F. J.; Navaratnam, D.; Kaczmarek, L. K.: Fragile
X mental retardation protein controls gating of the sodium-activated
potassium channel Slack. Nature Neurosci. 13: 819-821, 2010.

3. Derry, C. P.; Heron, S. E.; Phillips, F.; Howell, S.; MacMahon,
J.; Phillips, H. A.; Duncan, J. S.; Mulley, J. C.; Berkovic, S. F.;
Scheffer, I.  E.: Severe autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe
epilepsy associated with psychiatric disorders and intellectual disability. Epilepsia 49:
2125-2129, 2008.

4. Heron, S. E.; Smith, K. R.; Bahlo, M.; Nobili, L.; Kahana, E.;
Licchetta, L.; Oliver, K. L.; Mazarib, A.; Afawi, Z.; Korczyn, A.;
Plazzi, G.; Petrou, S.; Berkovic, S. F.; Scheffer, I. E.; Dibbens,
L. M.: Missense mutations in the sodium-gated potassium channel gene
KCNT1 cause severe autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy. Nature
Genet. 44: 1188-1190, 2012.

5. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVI.
The complete sequences of 150 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 65-73, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/7/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/3/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/14/2003

EDITED carol: 01/08/2013
ckniffin: 1/7/2013
terry: 12/5/2012
alopez: 12/4/2012
ckniffin: 12/3/2012
alopez: 4/18/2006
mgross: 10/14/2003

614971	TITLE *614971 TAURINE-UPREGULATED GENE 1, NONCODING; TUG1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Long intergenic noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs), such as TUG1, are thought to
be involved in long-range control of chromatin structure and gene
expression (Khalil et al., 2009).

CLONING

Young et al. (2005) cloned 3 splice variants of mouse Tug1, and they
identified 4 possible splice variants of human TUG1. The human cDNAs
were 3.3, 5.9, 6.4, and 9.7 kb long. Only a single putative 51-residue
ORF within an adequate Kozak context was conserved between mouse and
human, but it was not included in all mouse and human TUG1 variants.
Northern blot analysis detected highest Tug1 expression in mouse cortex
and retina, with lower expression in heart and kidney and weak
expression in muscle and spleen. In situ hybridization revealed Tug1
expression in several areas of the mouse central nervous system at
postnatal day 0, including spinal cord, olfactory epithelium,
hippocampus, and cortex. In developing mouse retina, Tug1 expression
peaked between embryonic day 18 and postnatal day 6. EST database
analysis detected high TUG1 expression in a variety of human tissues.
Young et al. (2005) also detected weak expression of a mouse cDNA that
originated from the Tug1 opposite strand. Database analysis revealed
orthologs of TUG1 in several mammals, but not in lower vertebrates,
nematodes, or flies.

Khalil et al. (2009) developed a method of identifying lincRNAs based on
a distinctive chromatin signature that marked actively transcribed genes
and then selecting for genes that lacked protein-coding potential. Using
this method, they identified TUG1. TUG1 was ubiquitously expressed in
human and mouse tissues and cells. RNA FISH detected TUG1 localized to
nuclear and cytoplasmic foci in human fetal foot fibroblasts.

GENE FUNCTION

Young et al. (2005) showed that taurine upregulated expression of mouse
Tub1 in retina. Knockdown of Tug1 variants in mouse eyes via
electroporation of small interfering RNAs resulted in disrupted retinal
morphology, which was accompanied by signs of apoptosis and altered
retinal gene expression.

Khalil et al. (2009) showed that TUG1 coimmunoprecipitated with SUZ12
(606245), a component of polycomb repressive complex-2 (PRC2) in human
fetal lung and foot fibroblasts and HeLa cells. TUG1 also
coimmunoprecipitated with the COREST (RCOR; 607675) repressive complex.
TUG1 expression was induced by p53 (TP53; 191170) in response to DNA
damage. Depletion of TUG1 via small interfering RNA resulted in
upregulation of genes involved in cell cycle regulation in fetal lung
and foot fibroblasts. Khalil et al. (2009) concluded that TUG1 is
induced by p53 and represses gene expression via interaction with PCR2.

GENE STRUCTURE

Young et al. (2005) determined that the TUG1 gene contains 3 exons and
spans about 10 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Young et al. (2005) mapped the TUG1 gene
to chromosome 22q12.2. They mapped the mouse Tug1 gene to chromosome
11A1.

REFERENCE 1. Khalil, A. M.; Guttman, M.; Huarte, M.; Garber, M.; Raj, A.; Morales,
D. R.; Thomas, K.; Presser, A.; Bernstein, B. E.; van Oudenaarden,
A.; Regev, A.; Lander, E. S.; Rinn, J. L.: Many human large intergenic
noncoding RNAs associate with chromatin-modifying complexes and affect
gene expression. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 106: 11667-11672, 2009.

2. Young, T. L.; Matsuda, T.; Cepko, C. L.: The noncoding RNA taurine
upregulated gene 1 is required for differentiation of the murine retina. Curr.
Biol. 15: 501-512, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/5/2012

EDITED mgross: 12/05/2012

600842	TITLE *600842 GLUCOKINASE REGULATORY PROTEIN; GCKR
;;GKRP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Glucokinase (GCK; 138079) in the liver and pancreatic beta cells is
subject to inhibition by a regulatory protein, GCKR. The inhibitory
effect of GCKR depends on the presence of fructose-6-phosphate (F6P) and
is antagonized by fructose-1-phosphate (F1P). Warner et al. (1995) noted
that mutations in GCKR might be diabetogenic if they resulted in the
synthesis of proteins with increased inhibitory activity, perhaps
reflecting increased sensitivity to fructose-6-phosphate or reduced
susceptibility to antagonism by fructose-1-phosphate. Warner et al.
(1995) determined the complete sequence of human GCKR cDNA. The GCKR
cDNA encodes a protein of 625 amino acids. Given the role of glucokinase
in the causation of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) type II
(125851), GCKR had been considered a candidate gene for a form of MODY.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hayward et al. (1998) determined that the GCKR gene contains 19 exons
and spans 27 kb.

MAPPING

Warner et al. (1995) isolated YAC clones containing human GCKR and
localized them to chromosome 2p23 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.
Vaxillaire et al. (1994) had previously assigned the GCKR gene to
chromosome 2p23-p22.3.

Hayward et al. (1996) demonstrated that the GCKR gene lies within 500 kb
of the gene encoding ketohexokinase (229800). By high-resolution
fluorescence in situ hybridization, they refined the localization of the
GCKR gene to chromosome 2p23.3-p23.2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

A common GCKR variant (P446L; dbSNP rs1260326; 600842.0001) is
associated with triglyceride and fasting plasma glucose levels (FGQTL5;
613463) in the general population. In a series of transfection
experiments using wildtype and P446L-GKRP, Beer et al. (2009) reported
reduced regulation by physiologic concentrations of F6P in the presence
of P446L-GKRP, resulting indirectly in increased GCK activity. Assays
matched for GKRP activity demonstrated no difference in dose-dependent
inhibition of GCK activity or F1P-mediated regulation. Quantitative
RT-PCR analysis showed that GCKR is highly expressed relative to GCK in
human liver and has very low expression in human pancreatic islets
relative to GCK. The authors noted that altered GCK regulation in liver
is predicted to enhance glycolytic flux, promoting hepatic glucose
metabolism and elevating concentrations of malonyl-CoA (a substrate for
de novo lipogenesis). Beer et al. (2009) proposed this as a mutational
mechanism for the association of the leu446 allele with raised
triglycerides and lower glucose levels.

Suhre et al. (2011) reported a comprehensive analysis of
genotype-dependent metabolic phenotypes using a GWAS with nontargeted
metabolomics. They identified 37 genetic loci associated with blood
metabolite concentrations, of which 25 showed effect sizes that were
unusually high for GWAS and accounted for 10 to 60% differences in
metabolite levels per allele copy. These associations provided new
functional insights for many disease-related associations that had been
reported in previous studies, including those for cardiovascular and
kidney disorders, type 2 diabetes, cancer, gout, venous thromboembolism,
and Crohn disease. Suhre et al. (2011) identified dbSNP rs780094 in the
GCKR gene as associated with glucose/mannose ratio with a p value value
of 5.5 x 10(-53).

ANIMAL MODEL

To further understand the role of glucokinase regulatory protein, which
they symbolized GKRP, Farrelly et al. (1999) inactivated the mouse
homolog. With the knockout of the mouse gene, there was a parallel loss
of glucokinase protein and activity in mutant mouse liver. The loss was
primarily because of posttranscriptional regulation of glucokinase,
indicating a positive regulatory role for GKRP in maintaining
glucokinase levels and activity. As in rat hepatocytes, both glucokinase
and GKRP were localized in the nuclei of mouse hepatocytes cultured in
low glucose-containing medium. In the presence of fructose or high
concentrations of glucose, conditions known to relieve glucokinase
inhibition by GKRP in vitro, only glucokinase was translocated into the
cytoplasm. In the GKRP-mutant hepatocytes, glucokinase was not found in
the nucleus under any tested conditions. Farrelly et al. (1999) proposed
that GKRP functions as an anchor to sequester and inhibit glucokinase in
the hepatocyte nucleus, where it is protected from degradation. This
ensures that glucose phosphorylation is minimal when the liver is in the
fasting, glucose-producing phase. This also enables the hepatocytes
rapidly to mobilize glucokinase into the cytoplasm to phosphorylate and
store or metabolize glucose after the ingestion of dietary glucose. In
GKRP-mutant mice, the disruption of this regulation and the subsequent
decrease in GK activity led to altered glucose metabolism and impaired
glycemic control.

Grimsby et al. (2000) found that wildtype and Gckr-null mice had
comparable glucokinase activity at physiologic glucose concentrations.
However, following a glucose tolerance test, the homozygous knockout
mice showed impaired glucose clearance, indicating that they could not
recruit sufficient glucokinase due to the absence of a nuclear reserve.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
FASTING PLASMA GLUCOSE LEVEL QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS 5
GCKR, PRO446LEU (dbSNP rs1260326)

Beer et al. (2009) noted that the 1403C-T transition (dbSNP rs1260326)
in the GCKR gene results in a pro446-to-leu (P446L) substitution at a
conserved residue in the glucokinase regulatory protein. Residue 446
lies between 2 motifs thought to be directly involved in binding of
phosphate esters.

By genomewide association studies, Orho-Melander et al. (2008) showed
that the intronic dbSNP rs780094 variant of the GCKR gene was associated
with higher plasma triglyceride levels (p = 3 x 10(-56)) but lower
fasting plasma glucose levels (p = 1 x 10(-13)) (FGQTL5; 613463).
Fine-mapping by genotyping and imputing SNPs across the GCKR locus
identified a common 1403C-T transition, resulting in a pro446-to-leu
(P446L; dbSNP rs1260326) substitution, as the strongest signal for
association with triglycerides. The dbSNP rs1260326 SNP shows strong
linkage disequilibrium (r(2) = 0.93) with dbSNP rs780094 and has a minor
allele frequency of 0.34.

In 4,833 middle-aged French individuals, Vaxillaire et al. (2008) found
that the minor T allele of the P446L (dbSNP rs1260326) SNP was strongly
associated with lower fasting glucose levels and fasting insulin levels,
and conversely, higher triglyceride levels.

Dupuis et al. (2010) performed metaanalyses of 21 genomewide association
studies informative for fasting glucose, fasting insulin, and indices of
beta-cell function (HOMA-B) and insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) in up to
46,186 nondiabetic participants. Follow-up of 25 loci in up to 76,558
additional subjects identified 16 loci associated with fasting glucose
and HOMA-B and 2 loci associated with fasting insulin and HOMA-IR.
Dupuis et al. (2010) identified association of elevation of fasting
blood glucose (p = 5.6 x 10(-38)) and decreased triglyceride levels (p =
9.6 x 10(-17)) with the C allele of the intronic C-T SNP (dbSNP
rs780094) in the GCKR gene on chromosome 2p23.3-p23.2. This variant was
also associated with fasting insulin levels (3.0 x 10(-24)).

In a series of transfection experiments using wildtype and P446L-GKRP,
Beer et al. (2009) reported reduced regulation by physiologic
concentrations of F6P in the presence of P446L-GKRP, resulting
indirectly in increased GCK activity. Assays matched for GKRP activity
demonstrated no difference in dose-dependent inhibition of GCK activity
or F1P-mediated regulation. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed that
GCKR is highly expressed relative to GCK in human liver and has very low
expression in human pancreatic islets relative to GCK. The authors noted
that altered GCK regulation in liver is predicted to enhance glycolytic
flux, promoting hepatic glucose metabolism and elevating concentrations
of malonyl-CoA (a substrate for de novo lipogenesis). Beer et al. (2009)
proposed this as a mutational mechanism for the association of the
leu446 allele with raised triglycerides and lower glucose levels.

REFERENCE 1. Beer, N. L.; Tribble, N. D.; McCulloch, L. J.; Roos, C.; Johnson,
P. R. V.; Orho-Melander, M.; Gloyn, A. L.: The P446L variant in GCKR
associated with fasting plasma glucose and triglyceride levels exerts
its effect through increased glucokinase activity in liver. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 18: 4081-4088, 2009.

2. Dupuis, J.; Langenberg, C.; Prokopenko, I.; Saxena, R.; Soranzo,
N.; Jackson, A. U.; Wheeler, E.; Glazer, N. L.; Bouatia-Naji, N.;
Gloyn, A. L.; Lindgren, C. M.; Magi, R.; and 295 others: New genetic
loci implicated in fasting glucose homeostasis and their impact on
type 2 diabetes risk. Nature Genet. 42: 105-116, 2010. Note: Erratum:
Nature Genet. 42: 464 only, 2010.

3. Farrelly, D.; Brown, K. S.; Tieman, A.; Ren, J.; Lira, S. A.; Hagan,
D.; Gregg, R.; Mookhtiar, K. A.; Hariharan, N.: Mice mutant for glucokinase
regulatory protein exhibit decreased liver glucokinase: a sequestration
mechanism in metabolic regulation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 14511-14516,
1999.

4. Grimsby, J.; Coffey, J. W.; Dvorozniak, M. T.; Magram, J.; Li,
G.; Matschinsky, F. M.; Shiota, C.; Kaur, S.; Magnuson, M. A.; Grippo,
J. F.: Characterization of glucokinase regulatory protein-deficient
mice. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 7826-7831, 2000.

5. Hayward, B. E.; Dunlop, N.; Intody, S.; Leek, J. P.; Markham, A.
F.; Warner, J. P.; Bonthron, D. T.: Organization of the human glucokinase
regulator gene GCKR. Genomics 49: 137-142, 1998.

6. Hayward, B. E.; Fantes, J. A.; Warner, J. P.; Intody, S.; Leek,
J. P.; Markham, A. F.; Bonthron, D. T.: Co-localization of the ketohexokinase
and glucokinase regulator genes to a 500-kb region of chromosome 2p23. Mammalian
Genome 7: 454-458, 1996.

7. Orho-Melander, M.; Melander, O.; Guiducci, C.; Perez-Martinez,
P.; Corella, D.; Roos, C.; Tewhey, R.; Rieder, M. J.; Hall, J.; Abecasis,
G.; Tai, E. S.; Welch, C.; and 29 others: Common missense variant
in the glucokinase regulatory protein gene is associated with increased
plasma triglyceride and C-reactive protein but lower fasting glucose
concentrations. Diabetes 57: 3112-3121, 2008.

8. Suhre, K.; Shin, S.-Y.; Petersen, A.-K.; Mohney, R. P.; Meredith,
D.; Wagele, B.; Altmaier, E.; CARDIoGRAM; Deloukas, P.; Erdmann,
J.; Grundberg, E.; Hammond, C. J.; and 22 others: Human metabolic
individuality in biomedical and pharmaceutical research. Nature 477:
54-60, 2011.

9. Vaxillaire, M.; Cavalcanti-Proenca, C.; Dechaume, A.; Tichet, J.;
Marre, M.; Balkau, B.; Forguel, P.; DESIR Study Group: The common
P446L polymorphism in GCKR inversely modulates fasting glucose and
triglyceride levels and reduces type 2 diabetes risk in the DESIR
prospective general French population. Diabetes 57: 2253-2257, 2008.

10. Vaxillaire, M.; Vionnet, N.; Vigouroux, C.; Sun, F.; Espinosa,
R., III; LeBeau, M. M.; Stoffel, M.; Lehto, M.; Beckmann, J. S.; Detheux,
M.; Passa, P.; Cohen, D.; Van Schaftingen, E.; Velho, G.; Bell, G.
I.; Froguel, P.: Search for a third susceptibility gene for maturity-onset
diabetes of the young: studies with eleven candidate genes. Diabetes 43:
389-395, 1994.

11. Warner, J. P.; Leek, J. P.; Intody, S.; Markham, A. F.; Bonthron,
D. T.: Human glucokinase regulatory protein (GCKR): cDNA and genomic
cloning, complete primary structure, and chromosomal localization. Mammalian
Genome 6: 532-536, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/26/2011
William Wang - updated: 11/1/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/30/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/21/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/3/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/24/1995

EDITED alopez: 10/05/2011
terry: 9/26/2011
wwang: 11/1/2010
terry: 9/30/2010
terry: 4/5/2005
mgross: 1/21/2003
terry: 1/21/2003
alopez: 1/11/2000
terry: 1/3/2000
carol: 5/12/1999
mark: 10/11/1996
terry: 9/20/1996
mark: 10/24/1995

601012	TITLE *601012 CALCIUM CHANNEL, VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT, N TYPE, ALPHA-1B SUBUNIT; CACNA1B
;;CALCIUM CHANNEL, L TYPE, ALPHA-1 POLYPEPTIDE, ISOFORM 5; CACNL1A5;;
CaV2.2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Voltage-dependent Ca(2+) channels are multisubunit complexes found in
the membrane of many excitable cells that regulate calcium entry (see
601011). N-type calcium channels, which control neurotransmitter release
from neurons, are dihydropyridine-insensitive and
omega-conotoxin-sensitive. The alpha-1 subunit forms the pore through
which calcium enters the cell, and is encoded by a family of at least 5
genes.

CLONING

Williams et al. (1992) cloned the neuronal alpha-1B subunit by probing
brain cDNA libraries with a rabbit probe. RT-PCR revealed 2
alternatively spliced isoforms, encoding predicted products of 2,339
(alpha-1B-1) and 2,237 (alpha-1B-2) amino acids, with 64% and 73%
identity to the rabbit gene product, respectively. Both isoforms are
transcribed only in central nervous system tissue.

MAPPING

Diriong et al. (1995) and Kim et al. (1997) mapped the CACNA1B gene to
chromosome 9q34 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

GENE FUNCTION

Williams et al. (1992) used transient expression studies in HEK293 cells
to demonstrate that CACNA1B had N-type calcium channel activity.

Using binding and immunoprecipitation assays on adult rat cortical
tissue, Maeno-Hikichi et al. (2003) showed that the enigma-like LIM
domain protein (ENH; 605904) interacts specifically with protein kinase
C-epsilon (PRKCE; 176975) and the C terminus of CACNA1B to form a
macromolecular complex. Functional studies in Xenopus oocytes indicated
that expression of ENH resulted in increased rapid and specific
modulation of N-type calcium channels by PKCE. The authors concluded
that through interactions with a common adaptor protein, the formation
of a kinase-substrate complex is the molecular basis for the specificity
and efficiency of cellular signaling.

The CaV2.2 calcium channel interacts with and is modulated by CRMP2
(602463). Overexpression of CRMP2 leads to increased surface expression
of CaV2.2 on neurons, enhanced calcium currents, and an increase in
stimulated release of the neuropeptide calcitonin gene-related peptide
(CGRP; 114130) from dorsal root ganglia (summary by Brittain et al.,
2011).

ANIMAL MODEL

Kim et al. (2001) found that CaV2.2-null mice were viable and fertile
and showed normal motor coordination. CaV2.2-null mice exhibited reduced
responses to certain pain stimuli, suggesting that CaV2.2 plays a role
in pain perception at the spinal level, but not at the supraspinal
level.

Kim et al. (2009) observed elevated aggression in CaV2.2-null mice.
CaV2.2 is highly expressed in the dorsal raphe nucleus of adult rats,
and injection of an N-type Ca(2+) channel blocker into the dorsal raphe
nucleus of wildtype mice resulted in increased aggressive behavior. Kim
et al. (2009) concluded that N-type Ca(2+) channels in the dorsal raphe
nucleus have a role in the control of aggression.

In rats, Brittain et al. (2011) demonstrated that inflammatory and
neuropathic hypersensitivity can be suppressed by a synthetic 15-mer
peptide (CBD3) that uncouples Crmp2 and CaV2.2 calcium channels in
neurons. Studies in cultured neurons and spinal cord slices showed that
CBD3 peptide bound CaV2.2, interfered with the interaction of Crmp2 and
CaV2.2, and reduced channel function, as evidenced by decreased CGRP
neuropeptide release from sensory neurons and decreased excitatory
synaptic transmission in dorsal horn neurons. In rats, treatment with
CBD3 also reduced meningeal blood flow and reduced nocifensive behavior
induced by peripheral formalin injection or corneal capsaicin
application, as well as reversed neuropathic hypersensitivity produced
by an antiretroviral drug. The peptide was mildly anxiolytic without
affecting memory retrieval, sensorimotor function or depression.

REFERENCE 1. Brittain, J. M.; Duarte, D. B.; Wilson, S. M.; Zhu, W.; Ballard,
C.; Johnson, P. L.; Liu, N.; Xiong, W.; Ripsch, M. S.; Wang, Y.; Fehrenbacher,
J. C.; Fitz, S. D.; and 20 others: Suppression of inflammatory
and neuropathic pain by uncoupling CRMP-2 from the presynaptic Ca(2+)
channel complex. Nature Med. 17: 822-829, 2011.

2. Diriong, S.; Lory, P.; Williams, M. E.; Ellis, S. B.; Harpold,
M. M.; Taviaux, S.: Chromosomal localization of the human genes for
alpha-1A, alpha-1B, and alpha-1E voltage-dependent Ca(2+) channel
subunits. Genomics 30: 605-609, 1995.

3. Kim, C.; Jeon, D.; Kim, Y.-H.; Lee, C. J.; Kim, H.; Shin, H.-S.
: Deletion of N-type Ca(2+) channel Ca(V)2.2 results in hyperaggressive
behaviors in mice. J. Biol. Chem. 284: 2738-2745, 2009.

4. Kim, C.; Jun, K.; Lee, T.; Kim, S.-S.; McEnery, M. W.; Chin, H.;
Kim, H.-L.; Park, J. M.; Kim, D. K.; Jung, S. J.; Kim, J.; Shin, H.-S.
: Altered nociceptive response in mice deficient in the alpha-1B subunit
of the voltage-dependent calcium channel. Molec. Cell. Neurosci. 18:
235-245, 2001.

5. Kim, D. S.; Jung, H.-H.; Park, S.-H.; Chin, H.: Isolation and
characterization of the 5-prime-upstream region of the human N-type
calcium channel alpha-1B subunit gene: chromosomal localization and
promoter analysis. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 5098-5104, 1997.

6. Maeno-Hikichi, Y.; Chang, S.; Matsumura, K.; Lai, M.; Lin, H.;
Nakagawa, N.; Kuroda, S.; Zhang, J.: A PKC-epsilon-ENH-channel complex
specifically modulates N-type Ca2+ channels. Nature Neurosci. 6:
468-475, 2003.

7. Williams, M. E.; Brust, P. F.; Feldman, D. H.; Patthi, S.; Simerson,
S.; Maroufi, A.; McCue, A. F.; Velicelebi, G.; Ellis, S. B.; Harpold,
M. M.: Structure and functional expression of an omega-conotoxin-sensitive
human N-type calcium channel. Science 257: 389-395, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/3/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/14/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/22/2003
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 2/13/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/23/1996

EDITED wwang: 08/05/2011
ckniffin: 8/3/2011
mgross: 7/15/2009
terry: 7/14/2009
cwells: 5/27/2003
ckniffin: 5/22/2003
carol: 2/13/1998
mark: 6/12/1997
mark: 1/23/1996

614758	TITLE *614758 DYNACTIN 4; DCTN4
;;DYN4;;
DYNACTIN, 62-KD SUBUNIT;;
p62
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DCTN4 is a subunit of the 20S dynactin complex. The dynactin complex is
involved in microtubule-dependent vesicular transport, spindle assembly,
and cell division (summary by Karki et al., 2000).

CLONING

By gene dosage analysis and sequencing candidate genes in a YAC contig
covering the critical region of the 5q deletion syndrome (153550),
followed by database analysis, Boultwood et al. (2000) identified a
DCTN4 clone designated 605d01. Northern blot analysis detected a 7.5-kb
DCTN4 transcript in all 15 human tissues examined.

By mass spectrometric analysis of the 62-kD protein that affinity
purified with human dynactin, followed by EST database analysis and PCR
of an NT2 human teratocarcinoma cDNA library, Karki et al. (2000) cloned
DCTN4, which they called p62. The deduced 460-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 52.3 kD. It has an N-terminal domain with
11 cysteines, the last 8 of which fit the consensus sequence for a RING
domain predicted to bind 2 Zn(2+) atoms. Northern blot analysis detected
variable expression of an approximately 4.2-kb transcript in all tissues
examined, with highest expression in heart and skeletal muscle.
Immunocytochemical analysis revealed that p62 had a punctate cytoplasmic
distribution as well as a centrosomal distribution typical of dynactin.

By immunohistochemical analysis, Ayalon et al. (2008) showed that Dyn4
colocalized with other dynactin subunits in adult mouse muscle fibers.
Dyn4 localized in a punctate distribution along costamere lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Karki et al. (2000) stated that p62 is present in the dynactin complex
at a stoichiometry of 1 copy per complex and that it localizes at 1 end
of the central ARP1 (ACTR1A; 605143) polymeric filament. Using
biochemical and immunoprecipitation analyses, they showed that p62
associated with the rat 20S dynactin complex. Recombinant human p62
bound immobilized in vitro-translated human ARP1. Overexpression of p62
in PtK2 porcine kidney cells did not disrupt microtubule organization or
the integrity of the Golgi, but it resulted in some p62 nuclear
localization.

ATP7B (606882) localizes to the trans-Golgi network, where it transports
copper to apoceruloplasmin (CP; 117700). When copper levels are in
excess, ATP7B redistributes to a vesicular compartment near the biliary
canalicular membranes, where excess copper is eliminated into bile.
Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human liver cDNA library, Lim et al.
(2006) found that the N-terminal domain of ATP7B, which contains 6
N-terminal metal-binding sites, interacted with the C-terminal domain of
p62. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis revealed that ATP7B, but not ATP7A
(300011), interacted with endogenous p62 in a human fibroblast line.
Depletion of copper reduced interaction of ATP7B with p62. Mutation
analysis revealed that the metal-binding CxxC motifs of ATP7B were
required for its interaction with p62, predominantly CxxC motifs 4
through 6. Lim et al. (2006) concluded that ATP7B is transported along
liver cell microtubules in a copper-dependent manner via interaction
with p62.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a mouse heart cDNA library, Ayalon et al.
(2008) found that Ankb (ANK2; 106410) interacted with Dyn4. Protein
pull-down assays confirmed the interaction. Depletion of Ankb in adult
mouse skeletal muscle fibers disrupted costamere-associated
microtubules, concomitant with loss of costamere-associated Dyn4
expression.

MAPPING

By database and YAC contig analyses, Boultwood et al. (2000) mapped the
DCTN4 gene to chromosome 5q31-q32.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Emond et al. (2012) used exome sequencing and an extreme phenotype study
design to discover genetic variants influencing Pseudomonas aeruginosa
infection in cystic fibrosis. Forty-three individuals with early age of
onset of chronic P. aeruginosa infection (all below the tenth percentile
of age at onset), and the 48 oldest individuals who had not reached
chronic P. aeruginosa infection (all past the mean age of onset) were
sequenced. After Bonferroni adjustment, a single gene, DCTN4, was
significantly associated with time to chronic P. aeruginosa infection
(naive P = 2.2 x 10(-6); adjusted P = 0.025). Twelve of the 43
individuals in the early extreme sample carried a missense variant in
DCTN4, 9 a phe349-to-leu substitution (F349L; dbSNP rs11954652) and 3 a
tyr270-to-cys substitution (Y270C; dbSNP rs35772018). None of the 48
individuals in the late P. aeruginosa extreme sample had either missense
variant. Subsequently, 696 individuals with varied CFTR genotypes were
studied. Seventy-eight participants were heterozygous and 9 were
homozygous for the F349L (614758.0001) mutation; 15 were heterozygous
for the Y270C (614758.0002) mutation; 1 individual was heterozygous for
both mutations. The presence of at least 1 DCTN4 missense variant was
significantly associated with both early age of first P.
aeruginosa-positive culture (p = 0.01, hazard ratio = 1.4) and with
early age of onset of chronic P. aeruginosa infection (p = 0.004, hazard
ratio = 1.9). The risk was highest in individuals with less selective
bias toward a P. aeruginosa-negative history, i.e., children enrolled
before 1.5 years of age and 103 enrollees who participated in the study
despite a history of P. aeruginosa-positive cultures. No significant
interaction was found between CFTR genotypes and DCTN4 mutations,
although power to detect such an interaction was low.

REFERENCE 1. Ayalon, G.; Davis, J. Q.; Scotland, P. B.; Bennett, V.: An ankyrin-based
mechanism for functional organization of dystrophin and dystroglycan. Cell 135:
1189-1200, 2008.

2. Boultwood, J.; Fidler, C.; Strickson, A. J.; Watkins, F.; Kostrzewa,
M.; Jaju, R. J.; Muller, U.; Wainscoat, J. S.: Transcription mapping
of the 5q- syndrome critical region: cloning of two novel genes and
sequencing, expression, and mapping of a further six novel cDNAs. Genomics 66:
26-34, 2000.

3. Emond, M. J.; Louie, T.; Emerson, J.; Zhao, W.; Mathias, R. A.;
Knowles, M. R.; Wright, F. A.; Rieder, M. J.; Tabor, H. K.; Nickerson,
D. A.; Barnes, K. C.; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI)
GO Exome Sequencing Project; Lung GO; Gibson, R. L.; Bamshad, M.
J.: Exome sequencing of extreme phenotypes identifies DCTN4 as a
modifier of chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in cystic fibrosis. Nature
Genet. 44: 886-889, 2012.

4. Karki, S.; Tokito, M. K.; Holzbaur, E. L. F.: A dynactin subunit
with a highly conserved cysteine-rich motif interacts directly with
Arp1. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 4834-4839, 2000.

5. Lim, C. M.; Cater, M. A.; Mercer, J. F. B.; La Fontaine, S.: Copper-dependent
interaction of dynactin subunit p62 with the N terminus of ATP7B but
not ATP7A. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 14006-14014, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/26/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/10/2012

EDITED alopez: 03/04/2013
terry: 2/26/2013
mgross: 8/10/2012

180246	TITLE *180246 RETINOID X RECEPTOR, BETA; RXRB
DESCRIPTION The retinoic acid receptors, alpha (RARA; 180240), beta (RARB; 180220),
and gamma (RARG; 180190), require coregulators to bind effectively to
response elements and target genes. By a strategy of sequential
screening of expression libraries with a retinoic acid response element
and RAR, Yu et al. (1991) identified a cDNA encoding a coregulator
highly related to RXR-alpha (180245). This protein, termed RXR-beta,
formed heterodimers with RAR, preferentially increasing its DNA binding
and transcriptional activity on promoters containing retinoic acid, but
not thyroid hormone or vitamin D, response elements. Remarkably,
RXR-beta also heterodimerized with thyroid hormone and vitamin D
receptors, increasing both DNA binding and transcriptional function on
their respective response elements. RXR-alpha also formed heterodimers
with these receptors. These observations suggested that retinoid X
receptors meet the criteria for biochemically characterized cellular
coregulators and serve to target selectively the high affinity binding
of retinoic acid, thyroid hormone, and vitamin D receptors to their
cognate DNA response elements.

RARB, RARG, RXRB, and RXRG (180247) are expressed in the striatum. To
study the effect of these genes on locomotion, Kreczel et al. (1998)
developed single and double knockout mice and analyzed their locomotor
skills by open field and rotarod testing. RARB-RXRB, RARB-RXRG, and
RXRB-RXRG double-null mutant mice, but not the corresponding single-null
mutants, exhibited reductions in forward locomotion when compared with
wildtype littermates. Forty percent of the RARB-RXRB-null mutants showed
backward locomotion. Rotarod test performance was impaired for RARB,
RARB-RXRB, RARB-RXRG, and RXRB-RXRG mice. In contrast, RARA, RARG,
RARA-RXRG, and RARG-RXRG-null mice showed no defects in locomotion, even
though both RARA and RARG are also expressed in the striatum. The
morphology, development, and function of skeletal muscle, peripheral
nerves, and spinal cord were normal in all single and double-null
mutants, as were balance reflexes. These results suggested to Kreczel et
al. (1998) that RARB, RXRB, and RXRG are involved specifically in the
control of locomotor behaviors, and that heterodimers of RARB with
either RXRB or RXRG are the functional receptor units, such that RXRB
and RXRG are functionally redundant. Kreczel et al. (1998) studied the
expression of D1 and D2 dopamine receptors (D1R; 126449 and D2R;
126450), the most abundant dopamine receptors in the striatum, in these
mutant mice. RARB-RXRB, RARB-RXRG, and RXRB-RXRG double-null mutants,
but not RARB or RXRG single mutants, exhibited 40% and 30% reduction in
whole-striatal D1R and D2R transcripts, respectively, when compared with
wildtype controls. The reduction was mostly in the medioventral regions
of the striatum, including the shell and core of the nucleus accumbens,
and the mediodorsal part of the caudate putamen. The reduction was not
due to loss of D2R-expressing neurons; no increase in apoptosis was
noted. The histology of the striatum was normal. The characterization of
a retinoic acid response element in the D2R promoter by Samad et al.
(1997) led Kreczel et al. (1998) to suggest that the reduction in D2R
and D2R expression occurs on a transcriptional level. The RARB-RXRB,
RARB-RXRG, and RXRB-RXRG double-null mutants did not exhibit the normal
increase in locomotion induced by cocaine, mimicking the phenotype of
D1R-null mice. Taken together, these results indicated to Kreczel et al.
(1998) that retinoids are involved in controlling the function of the
dopaminergic mesolimbic pathway and suggested that defects in retinoic
acid signaling may contribute to disorders such as Parkinson disease and
schizophrenia.

Using RFLVs in interspecific backcross mice, Hoopes et al. (1992) mapped
the Rxrb gene to the H-2 region of chromosome 17. By homology, it is
likely that the RXRB gene in the human is located on 6p. Fleischhauer et
al. (1993) demonstrated that this is indeed the case. They showed that
the RXRB gene is located in the 6pter-q13 region by Southern
hybridization of genomic DNA from human/rodent cell hybrids with the
mouse gene as a probe. In addition, a full-length cDNA clone encoding a
human RXRB was isolated by nucleic acid screening of a human cDNA
library with a fragment of the mouse gene as a probe. Comparison of
human and murine RXRB showed 97.6% identity on the amino acid level and
91.6% on the nucleotide level. With the relatively crude mapping methods
used, Fleischhauer et al. (1993) could not map RXRB more precisely than
to the short arm of chromosome 6 and/or the proximal part of the long
arm; however, the findings are at least consistent with location in the
HLA region, as suggested by homology. Fitzgibbon et al. (1993) mapped
the RXRB gene to 6p21.3-p21.1 by PCR amplification of 5-prime
untranslated sequence in panels of rodent-human somatic cell hybrids and
to 6p21.3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. By pairwise
hybridization of an RXRB cosmid and reference markers in fluorescence in
situ hybridization, Almasan et al. (1994) likewise mapped the RXRB gene
to 6p21.3. Using cosmid clones that cover the major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) region, Nagata et al. (1995) determined the precise
physical map positions of the RXRB gene relative to the MHC genes in
mouse and human. Conservation of gene organization was observed between
the 2 species at the HLA-DP (142880) region.

In an elegant series of experiments designed to understand the effect of
RXR activation on cholesterol balance, Repa et al. (2000) treated
animals with the rexinoid LG268. Animals treated with rexinoid exhibited
marked changes in cholesterol balance, including inhibition of
cholesterol absorption and repressed bile acid synthesis. Studies with
receptor-selective agonists revealed that oxysterol receptors (LXRs, see
602423 and 600380) and the bile acid receptor, FXR (603826), are the RXR
heterodimeric partners that mediate these effects by regulating
expression of the reverse-cholesterol transporter, ABC1 (600046), and
the rate-limiting enzyme of bile acid synthesis, CYP7A1 (118455),
respectively. These RXR heterodimers serve as key regulators in
cholesterol homeostasis by governing reverse cholesterol transport from
peripheral tissues, bile acid synthesis in liver, and cholesterol
absorption in intestine. Activation of RXR/LXR heterodimers inhibits
cholesterol absorption by upregulation of ABC1 expression in the small
intestine. Activation of RXR/FXR heterodimers represses CYP7A1
expression and bile acid production, leading to a failure to solubilize
and absorb cholesterol. Studies have shown that RXR/FXR-mediated
repression of CYP7A1 is dominant over RXR/LXR-mediated induction of
CYP7A1, which explains why the rexinoid represses rather than activates
CYP7A1 (Lu et al., 2000). Activation of the LXR signaling pathway
results in the upregulation of ABC1 in peripheral cells, including
macrophages, to efflux free cholesterol for transport back to the liver
through high density lipoprotein, where it is converted to bile acids by
the LXR-mediated increase in CYP7A1 expression. Secretion of biliary
cholesterol in the presence of increased bile acid pools normally
results in enhanced reabsorption of cholesterol; however, with the
increased expression of ABC1 and efflux of cholesterol back into the
lumen, there is a reduction in cholesterol absorption and net excretion
of cholesterol and bile acid. Rexinoids therefore offer a novel class of
agents for treating elevated cholesterol.

REFERENCE 1. Almasan, A.; Mangelsdorf, D. J.; Ong, E. S.; Wahl, G. M.; Evans,
R. M.: Chromosomal localization of the human retinoid X receptors. Genomics 20:
397-403, 1994.

2. Fitzgibbon, J.; Gillett, G. T.; Woodward, K. J.; Boyle, J. M.;
Wolfe, J.; Povey, S.: Mapping of RXRB to human chromosome 6p21.3. Ann.
Hum. Genet. 57: 203-209, 1993.

3. Fleischhauer, K.; McBride, O. W.; DiSanto, J. P.; Ozato, K.; Yang,
S. Y.: Cloning and chromosome mapping of human retinoid X receptor
beta: selective amino acid sequence conservation of a nuclear hormone
receptor in mammals. Hum. Genet. 90: 505-510, 1993.

4. Hoopes, C. W.; Taketo, M.; Ozato, K.; Liu, Q.; Howard, T. A.; Linney,
E.; Seldin, M. F.: Mapping the mouse Rxr loci encoding nuclear retinoid
X receptors Rxr-alpha, Rxr-beta, and Rxr-gamma. Genomics 14: 611-617,
1992.

5. Kreczel, W.; Ghyselinck, N.; Samad, T. A.; Dupe, V.; Kastner, P.;
Borrelli, E.; Chambon, P.: Impaired locomotion and dopamine signaling
in retinoid receptor mutant mice. Science 279: 863-867, 1998.

6. Lu, T. T.; Makishima, M.; Repa, J. J.; Schoonjans, K.; Kerr, T.
A.; Auwerx, J.; Mangelsdorf, D. J.: Molecular basis for feedback
regulation of bile acid synthesis by nuclear receptors. Molec. Cell 6:
507-515, 2000.

7. Nagata, T.; Weiss, E. H.; Abe, K.; Kitagawa, K.; Ando, A.; Yara-Kikuti,
Y.; Seldin, M. F.; Ozato, K.; Inoko, H.; Taketo, M.: Physical mapping
of the retinoid X receptor B gene in mouse and human. Immunogenetics 41:
83-90, 1995.

8. Repa, J. J.; Turley, S. D.; Lobaccaro, J.-M. A.; Medina, J.; Li,
L.; Lustig, K.; Shan, B.; Heyman, R. A.; Dletschy, J. M.; Mangelsdorf,
D. J.: Regulation of absorption and ABC1-mediated efflux of cholesterol
by RXR heterodimers. Science 289: 1524-1529, 2000.

9. Samad, A.; Kreczel, W.; Chambon, P.; Borrelli, E.: Regulation
of dopaminergic pathways by retinoids: activation of the D2 receptor
promoter by members of the retinoic acid receptor-retinoid X receptor
family. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 14349-14354, 1997.

10. Yu, V. C.; Delsert, C.; Andersen, B.; Holloway, J. M.; Devary,
O. V.; Naar, A. M.; Kim, S. Y.; Boutin, J.-M.; Glass, C. K.; Rosenfeld,
M. G.: RXR-beta: a coregulator that enhances binding of retinoic
acid, thyroid hormone, and vitamin D receptors to their cognate response
elements. Cell 67: 1251-1266, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/31/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/5/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/4/1992

EDITED terry: 03/16/2005
mgross: 10/1/2002
mgross: 10/10/2000
mgross: 8/31/2000
dkim: 10/12/1998
terry: 8/24/1998
alopez: 5/5/1998
carol: 3/7/1995
carol: 12/13/1993
carol: 4/2/1993
carol: 11/12/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/4/1992

612969	TITLE *612969 TIGGER TRANSPOSABLE ELEMENT-DERIVED GENE 7; TIGD7
;;SANCHO
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DNA transposons, such as Tiggers, are repetitive elements that move in
the genome by excision and reintegration without an RNA intermediate.
TIGD7 belongs to a family of genes derived from Tiggers (Smit and Riggs,
1996; Dou et al., 2004). For further information on Tiggers, see TIGD1
(612972).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a fetal brain cDNA library, Dou et
al. (2004) cloned full-length TIGD7. The deduced 511-amino acid protein
has a calculated molecular mass of 55.6 kD. Like other Tigger subfamily
proteins, TIGD7 contains a DDE domain, which is involved in catalysis of
DNA cleavage and the subsequent strand transfer reaction, and CENPBN and
CENPB domains, which are involved in DNA binding. PCR analysis detected
TIGD7 in all tissues examined, with highest expression in testis and
ovary. Database analysis suggested the existence of TIGD7 splice
variants.

GENE STRUCTURE

Dou et al. (2004) determined that the TIGD7 gene contains 2 exons and
spans 11.2 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Dou et al. (2004) mapped the TIGD7 gene to
chromosome 16p13.

REFERENCE 1. Dou, T.; Gu, S.; Zhou, Z.; Ji, C.; Zeng, L.; Ye, X.; Xu, J.; Ying,
K.; Xie, Y.; Mao, Y.: Isolation and characterization of a Jerky and
JRK/JH8 like gene, Tigger transposable element derived 7, TIGD7. Biochem.
Genet. 42: 279-285, 2004.

2. Smit, A. F. A.; Riggs, A. D.: Tiggers and other DNA transposon
fossils in the human genome. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 1443-1448,
1996.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/19/2009

EDITED mgross: 08/20/2009
mgross: 8/19/2009

613904	TITLE *613904 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 569; ZNF569
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ZNF569 belongs to a large family of transcription factors characterized
by an N-terminal Kruppel-associated box (KRAB) domain and tandem
C-terminal C2H2-type zinc fingers (Huang et al., 2006).

CLONING

Using the KRAB domain consensus sequence to search EST databases,
followed by PCR of an early embryonic human heart cDNA library, Huang et
al. (2006) cloned ZNF569. The deduced 686-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 79.6 kD. It has a classical N-terminal
KRAB-A domain, followed by 18 tandem Kruppel C2H2-type zinc fingers
extending to the C terminus. Northern blot analysis detected high
expression of a 2.06-kb ZNF569 transcript in adult heart, skeletal
muscle, and liver and in fetal heart, skeletal muscle, and brain. It was
also expressed more weakly in adult and fetal pancreas and placenta,
with little to no expression detected in other tissues.
Fluorescence-tagged ZNF569 localized predominantly to nuclei of
transfected COS-7 cells.

GENE FUNCTION

By cotransfecting COS-7 cells with ZNF569 and a reporter gene system,
Huang et al. (2006) showed that ZNF569 suppressed the endogenous
transcriptional activities of the serum response element (SRE) and AP1
(165160). Domain analysis revealed that both the KRAB domain and the
zinc finger motifs of ZNF569 suppressed transcriptional activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Huang et al. (2006) determined that the ZNF569 gene contains 6 exons and
spans approximately 56.3 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Huang et al. (2006) mapped the ZNF569 gene
to chromosome 19q13.12.

REFERENCE 1. Huang, X.; Yuan, W.; Huang, W.; Bai, Y.; Deng, Y.; Zhu, C.; Liang,
P.; Li, Y.; Du, X.; Liu, M.; Wang, Y.; Wu, X.: ZNF569, a novel KRAB-containing
zinc finger protein, suppresses MAPK signaling pathway. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 346: 621-628, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/15/2011

EDITED mgross: 04/18/2011
mgross: 4/15/2011

613903	TITLE *613903 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 540; ZNF540
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ZNF540 belongs to a large family of transcription factors characterized
by an N-terminal Kruppel-associated box (KRAB) domain and tandem
C-terminal C2H2-type zinc fingers (Qi et al., 2006).

CLONING

Using degenerate primers based on conserved sequences of KRAB
domain-containing zinc finger proteins to screen a 20-week-old embryonic
human heart cDNA library, followed by EST database analysis and 5-prime
and 3-prime RACE, Xiang et al. (2006) cloned ZNF540. The deduced
660-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 77.1 kD. It
has an N-terminal KRAB-A domain, followed by 17 tandem Kruppel C2H2-type
zinc fingers. Northern blot analysis detected variable ZNF540 expression
in all fetal tissues examined. Fluorescence-tagged ZNF540 localized to
both cytoplasm and nuclei of transfected COS-7 cells.

GENE FUNCTION

By cotransfecting COS-7 cells with ZNF540 and a reporter gene system,
Xiang et al. (2006) showed that ZNF540 repressed serum response element
(SRE)- and ELK1 (311040)-mediated transcriptional activation, suggesting
that it functions in the MAP kinase (see 176948) signal transduction
pathway. Deletion analysis identified the KRAB-A domain of ZNF540 as the
main repressive domain. Small interfering RNA directed against ZNF540
reduced the transcriptional repression by ZNF540.

GENE STRUCTURE

Xiang et al. (2006) determined that the ZNF540 gene contains 5 exons and
spans approximately 62.8 kb.

MAPPING

Xiang et al. (2006) mapped the ZNF540 gene to chromosome 19q13.13 by
genomic sequence analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Qi, X.; Li, Y.; Xiao, J.; Yuan, W.; Yan, Y.; Wang, Y.; Liang, S.;
Zhu, C.; Chen, Y.; Liu, M.; Wu, X.: Activation of transcriptional
activities of AP-1 and SRE by a new zinc-finger protein ZNF641. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 339: 1155-1164, 2006.

2. Xiang, Z.; Yuan, W.; Luo, N.; Wang, Y.; Tan, K.; Deng, Y.; Zhou,
X.; Zhu, C.; Li, Y.; Liu, M.; Wu, X.; Li, Y.: A novel human zinc
finger protein ZNF540 interacts with MVP and inhibits transcriptional
activities of the ERK signal pathway. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 347:
288-296, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/15/2011

EDITED mgross: 04/18/2011
mgross: 4/15/2011

611239	TITLE *611239 G PROTEIN-REGULATED INDUCER OF NEURITE OUTGROWTH 1; GPRIN1
;;GRIN1;;
KIAA1893
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Chen et al. (1999) cloned mouse Gprin1, which they called Grin1. By
database analysis, they identified human GPRIN1. Northern blot analysis
of human brain regions showed wide distribution in brain tissue and the
central nervous system with highest expression in the spinal cord.
Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues detected expression in brain
only, and Western analysis detected protein in mouse neuroblastoma and
rat pheochromocytoma cells. Using immunofluorescence studies and Western
analysis of cell fractions, the authors found that both GPRIN1 and GNAO1
(139311) are membrane-bound proteins that are enriched in the growth
cones of neurites.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2001) cloned GPRIN1, which they designated
KIAA1893. The deduced 800-amino acid protein shares 46% amino acid
identity with its mouse homolog. RT-PCR ELISA of human tissues detected
moderate expression in brain, with low expression in lung and spleen.
RT-PCR ELISA of specific brain regions detected high expression in
cerebellum, followed by amygdala, hippocampus, substantia nigra, caudate
nucleus, subthalamic nucleus, thalamus, and spinal cord, with low
expression in corpus callosum.

Iida and Kozasa, 2004 noted that the deduced 856-amino acid GPRIN1
sequence shares high homology with GPRIN2 (611240) and GPRIN3 (611241)
over the C-terminal region.

GENE FUNCTION

Using purified recombinant GPRIN1 and GPRIN2 expressed in insect cells,
as well as immunoprecipitation studies from transfected COS cells, Chen
et al. (1999) showed that both GPRIN1 and GPRIN2 interacted specifically
with G-alpha-o and G-alpha-z (GNAZ; 139160) bound to GTP-gamma-S or
GDP-AlF4(-), but did not interact with GDP-bound forms of either G
protein subunit. Chen et al. (1999) showed that coexpression of GPRIN1
or GPRIN2 with activated G-alpha-o caused formation and extension of
neurite-like processes in mouse neuroblastoma cells.

MAPPING

By database analysis, Nagase et al. (2001) mapped the GPRIN1 gene to
chromosome 5.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, L. T.; Gilman, A. G.; Kozasa, T.: A candidate target for
G protein action in brain. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 26931-26938, 1999.

2. Iida, N.; Kozasa, T.: Identification and biochemical analysis
of GRIN1 and GRIN2. Methods Enzymol. 390: 475-483, 2004.

3. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. XXI. The complete sequences of 60 new
cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins. DNA Res. 8:
179-187, 2001.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 7/23/2007

EDITED wwang: 07/23/2007

314310	TITLE *314310 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR FOR IMMUNOGLOBULIN HEAVY-CHAIN ENHANCER 3; TFE3
TFE3/ASPSCR1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
TFE3/PRCC FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
TFE3/SFPQ FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
TFE3/CLTC FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TFE3, a member of the helix-loop-helix family of transcription factors,
binds to the mu-E3 motif of the immunoglobulin heavy-chain enhancer and
is expressed in many cell types (Henthorn et al., 1991).

CLONING

Macchi et al. (1995) cloned the TFE3 gene. They corrected the earlier
cDNA sequence and showed that the predicted protein is 371 amino acids
long and more similar to the mouse protein of 326 amino acids than had
been previously reported.

GENE STRUCTURE

Macchi et al. (1995) showed that the TFE3 gene consists of 7 exons. The
activation domain is in exon 2, the leucine zipper in exon 6, and the
basic helix-loop-helix motif occurs from exons 4 to 6.

MAPPING

Henthorn et al. (1991) localized the TFE3 gene to the proximal short arm
of the X chromosome using a somatic cell hybrid panel. A frequent RsaI
RFLP detected by the TFE3 cDNA was found and used to confirm this
location by linkage analysis, which placed TFE3 near markers in Xp11.22.
In the course of high-resolution comparative mapping of the proximal
region of the mouse X chromosome, Blair et al. (1995) mapped the Tfe3
gene to the same region as the Gata1 gene (305371).

GENE FUNCTION

Using an expression cloning strategy, Nakagawa et al. (2006) identified
TFE3 as a transactivator of metabolic genes that are regulated through
an E box in their promoters. Adenovirus-mediated expression of TFE3 in
hepatocytes in culture and in vivo strongly activated expression of
insulin receptor substrate-2 (IRS2; 600797) and AKT (164730) and
enhanced phosphorylation of insulin-signaling kinases such as AKT,
glycogen synthase kinase-3-beta (605004), and p70S6 kinase (see 608939).
TFE3 also induced hexokinase II (HK2; 601125) and insulin-induced gene-1
(INSIG1; 602055). These changes led to metabolic consequences such as
activation of glycogen and protein synthesis, but not lipogenesis, in
liver. Collectively, plasma glucose levels were markedly reduced both in
normal mice and in different mouse models of diabetes. Activation of
insulin signals in both insulin depletion and resistance suggested that
TFE3 could be a therapeutic target for diabetes.

CYTOGENETICS

Translocations involving Xp11.2 have been found in synovial sarcoma and
in a subgroup of renal adenocarcinomas, namely, papillary renal cell
carcinoma (RCCX1; 300854) (Meloni et al., 1993). Of particular interest
is the similar localization of the breakpoints within Xp11 despite the
distinct histologic origin. Sinke et al. (1993) undertook to define the
precise location of the translocations in the 2 cases, making use of
tumor-derived interspecies somatic cell hybrids in conjunction with
Southern blot analysis. The resulting mapping data made it possible to
distinguish between the 2 translocations, to review the physical map of
the proximal Xp region, and to provide a basis for the eventual
isolation of the breakpoints and the genes involved in the development
of these 2 types of solid tumors. The chromosomal break in papillary
renal cell carcinoma was found to lie between PFC (300383), OATL1
(311240), TIMP (305370), SYP (313475), and TFE3, distally; and OATL2
(258870), together with a number of DNA markers (DXS226, DXS146, DXS255,
DXS14), proximally.

Shipley et al. (1995) studied 2 RCCP cell lines carrying a
t(X;1)(p11.2;q21.2) translocation; one was derived from the first female
case to be reported. By fluorescence in situ hybridization used to
position YACs along contigs in the Xp11.2 region relative to the
breakpoint and by correlation with mapping information from the region,
they concluded that the breakpoint is situated centromeric to SYP
(131475) and telomeric to DXS255 and CLCN5 (300008).

- Fusion Genes

The specific translocation reported by Meloni et al. (1993) was between
the X chromosome and chromosome 1: t(X;1)(p11;q21). Sidhar et al. (1996)
showed that in papillary renal cell carcinoma associated with the
translocation t(X;1)(p11.2;q21.2), the TFE3 gene is fused with the PRCC
gene (179755). They noted that a frequent theme for translocations in
sarcomas is the fusion of a transcription factor activation domain to a
transcription factor DNA-binding domain.

Clark et al. (1997) identified cases of papillary renal cell carcinoma
in which the splicing factor gene SFPQ (605199) was partnered with the
TFE3 gene as a result of a translocation, t(X;1)(p11.2;p34).

Cytogenetic studies identified a recurrent der(17) due to a
nonreciprocal t(X;17)(p11.2;q25) in cases of alveolar soft part sarcoma
(ASPS) (Joyama et al., 1999). By Southern blot analysis using a TFE3
probe, Ladanyi et al. (2001) identified nongermline bands in several
ASPS cases, consistent with rearrangement and possible fusion of TFE3
with a gene on 17q25. By amplification of the 5-prime portion of cDNAs
containing the 3-prime portion of TFE3 in 2 ASPS cases, they identified
a novel sequence, ASPSCR1 (606236), fused in-frame to TFE3 exon 4 or
exon 3. RT-PCR analysis detected an ASPSCR1/TFE3 fusion transcript in
all 12 ASPS cases studied. The ASPSCR1/TFE3 fusion replaces the
N-terminal portion of TFE3 by the fused ASPSCR1 sequences, while
retaining the TFE3 DNA-binding domain, implicating transcriptional
deregulation in the pathogenesis of ASPS.

Heimann et al. (2001) identified the ASPSCR1 gene, which they called
RCC17, partnered with TFE3 in two 5-year-old Belgian girls of African
origin in whom papillary renal cell carcinomas carried the translocation
t(X;17)(p11.2;q25). In both patients, the t(X;17) fused the N terminal
region of RCC17 to the C-terminal region of TFE3 including the bHLH
DNA-binding domain and the leucine zipper dimerization domain. The
reciprocal fusion transcript TFE3/RCC17 was also expressed.

Argani et al. (2003) reported a case of renal cell carcinoma in which
the 3-prime exons of the TFE3 gene were fused with the 5-prime exons of
the CLTC gene (118955) as a result of a translocation,
t(X;17)(p11.2;q23). The patient was a 14-year-old boy who presented with
gross hematuria and was found by CT to have a finely calcified left
renal mass.

REFERENCE 1. Argani, P.; Lui, M. Y.; Couturier, J.; Bouvier, R.; Fournet, J.-C.;
Ladanyi, M.: A novel CLTC-TFE3 gene fusion in pediatric renal adenocarcinoma
with t(X;17)(p11.2;q23). Oncogene 22: 5374-5378, 2003.

2. Blair, H. J.; Ho, M.; Monaco, A. P.; Fisher, S.; Craig, I. W.;
Boyd, Y.: High-resolution comparative mapping of the proximal region
of the mouse X chromosome. Genomics 28: 305-310, 1995.

3. Clark, J.; Lu, Y. J.; Sidhar, S. K.; Parker, C.; Gill, S.; Smedley,
D.; Hamoudi, R.; Linehan, W.; Shipley, J.; Cooper, C.: Fusion of
splicing factor genes PSF and NonO (p54nrb) to the TFE3 gene in papillary
renal cell carcinoma. Oncogene 15: 2233-2239, 1997.

4. Heimann, P.; El Housni, H.; Ogur, G.; Weterman, M. A. J.; Petty,
E. M.; Vassart, G.: Fusion of a novel gene, RCC17, to the TFE3 gene
in t(X;17)(p11.2;q25.3)-bearing papillary renal cell carcinomas. Cancer
Res. 61: 4130-4135, 2001.

5. Henthorn, P. S.; Stewart, C. C.; Kadesch, T.; Puck, J. M.: The
gene encoding human TFE3, a transcription factor that binds the immunoglobulin
heavy-chain enhancer, maps to Xp11.22. Genomics 11: 374-378, 1991.

6. Joyama, S.; Ueda, T.; Shimizu, K.; Kudawara, I.; Mano, M.; Funai,
H.; Takemura, K.; Yoshikawa, H.: Chromosome rearrangement at 17q25
and Xp11.2 in alveolar soft-part sarcoma: a case report and review
of the literature. Cancer 86: 1246-1250, 1999.

7. Ladanyi, M.; Lui, M. Y.; Antonescu, C. R.; Krause-Boehm, A.; Meindl,
A.; Argani, P.; Healey, J. H.; Ueda, T.; Yoshikawa, H.; Meloni-Ehrig,
A.; Sorensen, P. H. B.; Mertens, F.; Mandahl, N.; van den Berghe,
H.; Sciot, R.; Dal Cin, P.; Bridge, J.: The der(17)t(X;17)(p11;q25)
of human alveolar soft part sarcoma fuses the TFE3 transcription factor
gene to ASPL, a novel gene at 17q25. Oncogene 20: 48-57, 2001.

8. Macchi, P.; Notarangelo, L.; Giliani, S.; Strina, D.; Repetto,
M.; Sacco, M. G.; Vezzoni, P.; Villa, A.: The genomic organization
of the human transcription factor 3 (TFE3) gene. Genomics 28: 491-494,
1995.

9. Meloni, A. M.; Dobbs, R. M.; Pontes, J. E.; Sandberg, A. A.: Translocation
(X;1) in papillary renal cell carcinoma: a new cytogenetic subtype. Cancer
Genet. Cytogenet. 65: 1-6, 1993.

10. Nakagawa, Y.; Shimano, H.; Yoshikawa, T.; Ide, T.; Tamura, M.;
Furusawa, M.; Yamamoto, T.; Inoue, N.; Matsuzaka, T.; Takahashi, A.;
Hasty, A. H.; Suzuki, H.; Sone, H.; Toyoshima, H.; Yahagi, N.; Yamada,
N.: TFE3 transcriptionally activates hepatic IRS-2, participates
in insulin signaling and ameliorates diabetes. Nature Med. 12: 107-113,
2006.

11. Shipley, J. M.; Birdsall, S.; Clark, J.; Crew, J.; Gill, S.; Linehan,
M.; Gnarra, J.; Gisher, S.; Craig, I. W.; Cooper, C. S.: Mapping
the X chromosome breakpoint in two papillary renal cell carcinoma
cell lines with a t(X;1)(p11.2;q21.2) and the first report of a female
case. Cytogenet. Cell. Genet. 71: 280-284, 1995.

12. Sidhar, S. K.; Clark. J.; Gill, S.; Hamoudi, R.; Crew, A. J.;
Gwilliam, R.; Ross, M.; Linehan, W. M.; Birdsall, S.; Shipley, J.;
Cooper, C. S.: The t(X;1)(p11.2;q21.2) translocation in papillary
renal cell carcinoma fuses a novel gene PRCC to the TFE3 transcription
factor gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5: 1333-1338, 1996.

13. Sinke, R. J.; de Leeuw, B.; Janssen, H. A. P.; Olde Weghuis, D.;
Suijkerbuijk, R. F.; Meloni, A. M.; Gilgenkrantz, S.; Berger, W.;
Ropers, H. H.; Sandberg, A. A.; Geurts van Kessel, A.: Localization
of X chromosome short arm markers relative to synovial sarcoma- and
renal adenocarcinoma-associated translocation breakpoints. Hum. Genet. 92:
305-308, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/16/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/31/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/30/2001
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 8/30/2001
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 10/17/1996
Alan F. Scott - updated: 9/26/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/1/1991

EDITED carol: 11/28/2011
carol: 9/15/2011
ckniffin: 9/13/2011
terry: 9/7/2010
alopez: 3/10/2006
terry: 2/16/2006
carol: 10/31/2003
carol: 8/30/2001
carol: 7/20/2000
terry: 8/24/1998
mark: 10/17/1996
mark: 8/25/1995
mimadm: 2/28/1994
supermim: 3/17/1992
carol: 10/1/1991

601540	TITLE *601540 BROMODOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; BRD2
;;FEMALE STERILE HOMEOTIC-RELATED GENE 1, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; FSRG1;;
RING3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

BRD2 is a putative nuclear transcriptional regulator and a member of a
family of genes that are expressed during development.

CLONING

In a search for novel genes in the human major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class II region on chromosome 6p21.3, Okamoto et al.
(1991) and Beck et al. (1992) identified a gene that they termed RING3.
('RING' is an acronym for 'really interesting new gene.') Based on
mapping and genomic sequencing, RING3 was located in the middle of the
class II region between the genes HLA-DNA (142930) and HLA-DMA (142855).
In contrast to all the other genes encoded in the class II region, RING3
appeared to have no obvious function associated with the immune system
based on sequence comparisons. The striking sequence similarity to the
female sterile homeotic (fsh) gene in Drosophila, however, suggested a
conserved biologic function for RING3.

Denis and Green (1996) discovered that the RING3 product is, in fact, a
mitogen-activated nuclear kinase involved in signal transduction and
that it is upregulated in certain types of leukemia.

With the aim of learning more about the phylogeny of RING3, Thorpe et
al. (1996) identified further homologs in different species and
determined their gene structures. The functional analysis of RING3 had
been further complicated by the finding of a second, non-MHC-linked copy
of RING3 in humans by Nomura et al. (1994). This was referred to by them
as ORFX (601541).

GENE FUNCTION

Dawson et al. (2011) demonstrated that I-BET151, a novel small molecule
inhibitor of the BET family, of which BRD2 is a member, has profound
efficacy against human and murine MLL-fusion leukemia cell lines through
the induction of early cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. I-BET151
treatment in 2 human leukemia cell lines with different MLL fusions
altered the expression of a common set of genes whose function may
account for these phenotypic changes. The mode of action of I-BET151 is,
at least in part, due to the inhibition of transcription at key genes
BCL2 (151430), C-MYC (190080), and CDK6 (603368) through the
displacement of BRD3/4, PAFc, and SEC components from chromatin. In vivo
studies indicated that I-BET151 has significant therapeutic value,
providing survival benefit in 2 distinct mouse models of murine MLL-AF9
and human MLL-AF4 leukemia.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the BRD2
gene and juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, see EJM3 (608816).

REFERENCE 1. Beck, S.; Hanson, I.; Kelly, A.; Pappin, D. J.; Trowsdale, J.:
A homologue of the Drosophila female sterile homeotic (fsh) gene in
the class II region of the human MHC. DNA Sequence 2: 203-210, 1992.

2. Dawson, M. A.; Prinjha, R. K.; Dittmann, A.; Giotopoulos, G.; Bantscheff,
M.; Chan, W.-I.; Robson, S. C.; Chung, C.; Hopf, C.; Savitski, M.
M.; Huthmacher, C.; Gudgin, E.; and 15 others: Inhibition of BET
recruitment to chromatin as an effective treatment for MLL-fusion
leukaemia. Nature 478: 529-533, 2011.

3. Denis, G. V.; Green, M. R.: A novel, mitogen-activated nuclear
kinase is related to a Drosophila developmental regulator. Genes
Dev. 10: 261-271, 1996.

4. Nomura, N.; Nagase, T.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Sato,
S.; Seki, N.; Kawarabayasi, Y.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. II. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0041-KIAA0080) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 1: 223-229, 1994.

5. Okamoto, N.; Ando, A.; Kawai, J.; Yoshiwara, T.; Tsuji, K.; Inoko,
H.: Orientation of HLA-DNA gene and identification of a CpG island-associated
gene adjacent to DNA in human major histocompatibility complex class
II region. Hum. Immun. 32: 221-228, 1991.

6. Thorpe, K. L.; Abdulla, S.; Kaufman, J.; Trowsdale, J.; Beck, S.
: Phylogeny and structure of the RING3 gene. Immunogenetics 44:
391-396, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/4/2012
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/8/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/27/1996

EDITED alopez: 01/06/2012
terry: 1/4/2012
ckniffin: 10/2/2009
tkritzer: 8/14/2003
tkritzer: 8/13/2003
terry: 8/8/2003
mgross: 7/24/2000
psherman: 12/30/1999
alopez: 6/21/1999
carol: 6/2/1998
terry: 4/23/1998
alopez: 6/27/1997
jenny: 12/5/1996
mark: 11/27/1996

603157	TITLE *603157 PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL 3-KINASE, REGULATORY SUBUNIT 2; PIK3R2
;;PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL 3-KINASE, REGULATORY SUBUNIT, 85-KD, BETA;;
p85-BETA
PIK3R2/UPS8 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) is a lipid kinase that
phosphorylates the inositol ring of phosphatidylinositol and related
compounds at the 3-prime position. The products of these reactions serve
as second messengers in growth signaling pathways. The kinase itself is
made up of a catalytic subunit of molecular mass 110 kD (PIK3CA; 171834)
and a regulatory subunit of either 85 kD, 55 kD, or 50 kD. Otsu et al.
(1991) showed that the bovine PI3K p85 subunit consists of 2 closely
related proteins, p85-alpha (171833) and p85-beta. They cloned cDNAs
encoding both p85 subunits, each of which is 724 amino acids long. The
subunits share 62% amino acid identity across their entire length. Both
sequences contain an N-terminal SH3 region, 2 SH2 regions, and a region
of homology to BCR (151410).

Janssen et al. (1998) determined the human p85-beta cDNA sequence.

GENE FUNCTION

Functional expression studies by Otsu et al. (1991) showed that both
bovine p85 subunits bound tyrosine kinase receptors.

Hale et al. (2006) generated a laryngeal carcinoma cell line
constitutively expressing influenza A virus NS1 protein and found that
NS1 bound specifically to p85-beta. The NS1 protein from various
influenza strains also bound p85-beta, but not p85-alpha. Expression of
NS1 led to induction of PI3K signaling, including phosphorylation of AKT
(164730) at ser473. Binding of p85-beta and activation of PI3K required
tyr89 of NS1, and mutant viruses expressing NS1 with a tyr89-to-phe
substitution grew more slowly in cell culture than wildtype viruses.
Hale et al. (2006) proposed that activation of PI3K signaling in
influenza A virus-infected cells is important for efficient virus
replication.

Using mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Park et al. (2010) showed that, in
addition to regulating PI3K function, p85-alpha and p85-beta regulated
the function of Xbp1s (XBP1; 194355), a transcription factor that
orchestrates the unfolded protein response (UPR) following endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. Both p85-alpha and p85-beta bound Xbp1s and
increased its nuclear translocation, and it appeared that the p110 PI3K
catalytic subunit and Xbp1s competed for binding of these regulatory
subunits. p85-alpha and p85-beta formed an inactive dimer that was
disrupted by insulin in a time-dependent manner, which promoted their
association with Xbp1s. Refeeding of wildtype mice after fasting induced
ER stress that was quickly resolved, as measured by Xbp1s levels. In
contrast, obese and insulin-resistant ob/ob (LEP; 164160) mice could not
resolve the ER stress induced during refeeding, and nuclear
translocation of Xbp1s was absent in ob/ob mice. Overexpression of
p85-alpha or p85-beta in livers of ob/ob mice increased glucose
tolerance and reduced blood glucose concentrations.

To assess the impact of the AKT3 (611223), PIK3R2, and PIK3CA mutations
in individuals with megalencephaly-capillary malformation-polymicrogyria
syndrome (MCAP; 602501) and megalencephaly polymicrogyria-polydactyly
hydrocephalus syndrome (MPPH; 603387) on PI3K activity, Riviere et al.
(2012) used immunostaining to compare PIP3 amounts in lymphoblastoid
cell lines derived from 4 mutation carriers with megalencephaly to those
in control and PTEN (601728)-mutant cells. Consistent with elevated PI3K
activity, and similar to what is seen with PTEN loss, all 3 lines with
PIK3R2 or PIK3CA mutations showed significantly more PIP3 staining than
control cells, as well as greater localization of active
phosphoinositide-dependent kinase-1 (PDPK1; 605213) to the cell
membrane. Treatment with the PI3K inhibitor PI-103 resulted in less PIP3
in the PIK3R2 G373R (603157.0001) and PIK3CA E453del (171834.0014)
mutant lines, confirming that these results are PI3K-dependent. Riviere
et al. (2012) found no evidence for increased PI3K activity in the
AKT3-mutant line, consistent with a mutation affecting a downstream
effector of PI3K. Protein blot analysis showed higher amounts of
phosphorylated S6 protein and 4E-BP1 in all mutant cell lines compared
to controls. Although PI-103 treatment reduced S6 phosphorylation in
control and mutant lines, the latter showed relative resistance to PI3K
inhibition, consistent with elevated signaling through the pathway.
Riviere et al. (2012) concluded that the megalencephaly-associated
mutations result in higher PI3K activity and PI3K-mTOR signaling.

MAPPING

Volinia et al. (1992) used in situ hybridization to map the PIK3R2 gene
to human chromosome 19q13.2-q13.4.

CYTOGENETICS

Janssen et al. (1998) analyzed DNA from a patient with chronic
myeloproliferative disorder. They identified an oncogenic fusion of the
5-prime end of p85-beta and the 3-prime end of HUMORF8 (USP8; 603158).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Riviere et al. (2012) performed exome sequencing in the oldest of 3
affected sibs with MPPH and identified a heterozygous mutation in the
PIK3R2 gene (G373R; 603157.0001). Sanger sequencing confirmed the
presence of the mutation in all 3 affected sibs and its absence in the
saliva and blood of both parents and the unaffected sister, showing
germline mosaicism in 1 parent. Sequencing of the PIK3R2 gene in 40
individuals with megalencephaly identified the same nucleotide change in
10 additional subjects with MPPH, and this mutation was shown to be de
novo in all subjects for whom parental DNA was available. The mutation
occurred at a CpG dinucleotide, which might explain its recurrence.

ANIMAL MODEL

Oak et al. (2006) crossed mice with a floxed Pik3r1 allele and a null
Pik3r2 allele with Lck (153390)-Cre transgenic mice to generate a strain
in which class IA Pi3k expression and function were essentially
abrogated in T cells beginning at the double-negative stage.
Histopathologic analysis of these mice showed development of
organ-specific autoimmunity resembling Sjogren syndrome (SS; 270150). By
3 to 8 months of age, mutant mice developed corneal opacity and eye
lesions due to irritation and constant scratching. Mutant mice showed
marked lymphocytic infiltration of lacrimal glands and serum antinuclear
and anti-Ssa (SSA1; 109092) antibodies, but no kidney pathology.
Cd4-positive T cells, which were the predominant infiltrating cells in
lacrimal glands of mutant mice, exhibited aberrant differentiation in
vitro. Oak et al. (2006) concluded that impaired class IA PI3K signaling
in T cells can lead to organ-specific autoimmunity, and they proposed
that class IA Pi3k-deficient mice manifest the cardinal features of
human primary SS.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MEGALENCEPHALY-POLYMICROGYRIA-POLYDACTYLY-HYDROCEPHALUS SYNDROME
PIK3R2, GLY373ARG

In 13 individuals with
megalencephaly-polymicrogyria-polydactyly-hydrocephalus syndrome (MPPH;
603387) from 11 unrelated families, Riviere et al. (2012) identified a
heterozygous 1117G-A transition in the PIK3R2 gene, resulting in a
gly373-to-arg (G373R) substitution in the PIK3R2 gene. This mutation was
shown to be de novo in all subjects for whom parental DNA was available.
The mutation occurred at a CpG dinucleotide, which might explain its
recurrence.

REFERENCE 1. Hale, B. G.; Jackson, D.; Chen, Y.-H.; Lamb, R. A.; Randall, R.
E.: Influenza A virus NS1 protein binds p85-beta and activates phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase
signaling. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 14194-14199, 2006.

2. Janssen, J. W. G.; Schleithoff, L.; Bartram, C. R.; Schulz, A.
S.: An oncogenic fusion product of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
p85-beta subunit and HUMORF8, a putative deubiquitinating enzyme. Oncogene 16:
1767-1772, 1998.

3. Oak, J. S.; Deane, J. A.; Kharas, M. G.; Luo, J.; Lane, T. E.;
Cantley, L. C.; Fruman, D. A.: Sjogren's syndrome-like disease in
mice with T cells lacking class 1A phosphoinositide-3-kinase. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 16882-16887, 2006. Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 106: 10871 only, 2009.

4. Otsu, M.; Hiles, I.; Gout, I.; Fry, M. J.; Ruiz-Larrea, F.; Panayotou,
G.; Thompson, A.; Dhand, R.; Hsuan, J.; Totty, N.; Smith, A. D.; Morgan,
S. J.; Courtneidge, S. A.; Parker, P. J.; Waterfield, M. D.: Characterization
of two 85 kd proteins that associate with receptor tyrosine kinases,
middle-T/pp60(c-src) complexes, and PI3-kinase. Cell 65: 91-104,
1991.

5. Park, S. W.; Zhou, Y.; Lee, J.; Lu, A.; Sun, C.; Chung, J.; Ueki,
K.; Ozcan, U.: The regulatory subunits of PI3K, p85-alpha and p85-beta,
interact with XBP-1 and increase its nuclear translocation. Nature
Med. 16: 429-437, 2010.

6. Riviere, J.-B.; Mirzaa, G. M.; O'Roak, B. J.; Beddaoui, M.; Alcantara,
D.; Conway, R. L.; St-Onge, J.; Schwartzentruber, J. A.; Gripp, K.
W.; Nikkel, S. M.; Worthylake, T.; Sullivan, C. T.; and 29 others
: De novo germline and postzygotic mutations in AKT3, PIK3R2 and PIK3CA
cause a spectrum of related megalencephaly syndromes. Nature Genet. 44:
934-940, 2012.

7. Volinia, S.; Patracchini, P.; Otsu, M.; Hiles, I.; Gout, I.; Calzolari,
E.; Bernardi, F.; Rooke, L.; Waterfield, M. D.: Chromosomal localization
of human p85-alpha, a subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, and
its homologue p85-beta. Oncogene 7: 789-793, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Nara Sobreira - updated: 11/20/2012
Nara Sobreira - updated: 11/14/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/7/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/5/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/16/2007

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 10/19/1998

EDITED carol: 11/20/2012
terry: 11/14/2012
terry: 6/6/2012
mgross: 6/10/2010
terry: 6/7/2010
mgross: 8/13/2007
mgross: 2/5/2007
mgross: 1/16/2007
carol: 4/23/2003
alopez: 10/19/1998

605301	TITLE *605301 TRANSFORMING, ACIDIC, COILED-COIL-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; TACC1
TACC1/FGFR1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Amplification of various chromosomal regions in human breast carcinomas
has lead to the identification of protooncogenes involved in
tumorigenesis. For example, MYC (190080) in 8q24, CCND1 (168461) in
11q13, and ERBB2 (164870) in 17q12 are each observed in 20% of all
breast tumors. Still et al. (1999) noted that 8p11 is amplified in 10 to
15% of breast tumor samples but the only gene assigned to this region,
FGFR1 (136350), is typically expressed at the same levels in normal and
tumor breast tissue. By PCR analysis with primers obtained from an EST
database, generation of a BAC contig spanning 380 kb of the 8p11 breast
cancer amplicon-1, and probing fetal tissue libraries, Still et al.
(1999) isolated a cDNA encoding TACC1. The predicted 805-amino acid
TACC1 protein is rich in serine, proline, and acidic residues, has a
20-amino acid N terminus rich in tryptophan, contains 2 nuclear
localization signals but no DNA- or RNA-binding domains, and has a
200-residue C terminus with extensive alpha-helical segments expected to
adopt a coiled-coil structure. Northern blot analysis detected a major
8.0-kb TACC1 transcript in all tissues tested, with relatively weak
expression in liver and lung.

GENE FUNCTION

Still et al. (1999) found that introduction of TACC1 into stable cell
lines resulted in morphologic changes consistent with a transformed
phenotype and in anchorage-independent growth.

By yeast 2-hybrid and coimmunoprecipitation analyses, Lauffart et al.
(2002) showed that TACC1 interacted with C-terminal regions of CHTOG
(CKAP5; 611142) and GAS41 (YEATS4; 602116).

During neurogenesis, the nuclei of progenitor cells of the proliferative
ventricular zone oscillate in a cell cycle-dependent manner called
interkinetic nuclear migration (INM). In most cell types, the nucleus
closely follows the centrosome during migration; however, in neural
progenitors, centrosomes remain near the ventricular zone during INM.
Xie et al. (2007) showed that INM in mice was dependent on the
regulation of centrosome-associated microtubules by Cep120 (613446) and
Taccs. Cep120 and Taccs regulated the integrity of microtubules coupling
the centrosome and the nucleus. Cep120 interacted with Taccs and
regulated the localization of Tacc3 (605303) to the centrosome. Both
Cep120 and Taccs were essential for maintaining the neural progenitor
pool during mouse neocortical development.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Singh et al. (2012) reported that a small subset of glioblastoma
multiforme tumors (GBMs; 137800) (3.1%; 3 of 97 tumors examined) harbors
oncogenic chromosomal translocations that fuse in-frame the tyrosine
kinase coding domains of fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) genes
FGFR1 (136350) or FGFR3 (134934) to the transforming acidic coiled-coil
(TACC) coding domains of TACC1 or TACC3 (605303), respectively. The
FGFR-TACC fusion protein displayed oncogenic activity when introduced
into astrocytes or stereotactically transduced in the mouse brain. The
fusion protein, which localizes to mitotic spindle poles, has
constitutive kinase activity and induces mitotic and chromosomal
segregation defects and triggers aneuploidy. Inhibition of FGFR kinase
corrected the aneuploidy, and oral administration of an FGFR inhibitor
prolonged survival of mice harboring intracranial FGFR3-TACC3-initiated
glioma. Singh et al. (2012) concluded that FGFR-TACC fusions could
potentially identify a subset of GBM patients who would benefit from
targeted FGFR kinase inhibition.

REFERENCE 1. Lauffart, B.; Howell, S. J.; Tasch, J. E.; Cowell, J. K.; Still,
I. H.: Interaction of the transforming acidic coiled-coil 1 (TACC1)
protein with ch-TOG and GAS41/NuBI1 suggests multiple TACC1-containing
protein complexes in human cells. Biochem. J. 363: 195-200, 2002.

2. Singh, D.; Chan, J. M.; Zoppoli, P.; Niola, F.; Sullivan, R.; Castano,
A.; Liu, E. M.; Reichel, J.; Porrati, P.; Pellegatta, S.; Qiu, K.;
Gao, Z.; and 12 others: Transforming fusions of FGFR and TACC genes
in human glioblastoma. Science 337: 1231-1235, 2012.

3. Still, I. H.; Hamilton, M.; Vince, P.; Wolfman, A.; Cowell, J.
K.: Cloning of TACC1, an embryonically expressed, potentially transforming
coiled coil containing gene, from the 8p11 breast cancer amplicon. Oncogene 18:
4032-4038, 1999.

4. Xie, Z.; Moy, L. Y.; Sanada, K.; Zhou, Y.; Buchman, J. J.; Tsai,
L.-H.: Cep120 and TACCs control interkinetic nuclear migration and
the neural progenitor pool. Neuron 56: 79-93, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/31/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/11/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/25/2007

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 9/28/2000

EDITED alopez: 11/05/2012
terry: 10/31/2012
mgross: 6/16/2010
terry: 6/11/2010
mgross: 6/27/2007
terry: 6/25/2007
mgross: 9/28/2000

611589	TITLE *611589 PATATIN-LIKE PHOSPHOLIPASE DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 5; PNPLA5
;;GS2-LIKE PROTEIN; GS2L
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Human patatin-like phospholipases, such as PNPLA5, have been implicated
in regulation of adipocyte differentiation and have been induced by
metabolic stimuli (Wilson et al., 2006).

CLONING

By database analysis, followed by screening of human EST databases,
Wilson et al. (2006) identified PNPLA5, which encodes a 429-amino acid
protein containing a patatin-like domain and 2 glycosaminoglycan sites.
Structural analysis determined that the patatin-like domain was composed
of a beta-sheet sandwiched by alpha-helices in approximately 3 layers.
Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed that PNPLA5 was expressed at
moderate levels in brain and at very low levels in liver.

GENE FUNCTION

Gao and Simon (2007) measured retinol transacylation activity and found
that PNPLA5 appeared to inhibit transacylation catalyzed by endogenous
enzymes, but it had measurable retinylester hydrolysis activity.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PNPLA5
gene to chromosome 22 (TMAP G65439).

REFERENCE 1. Gao, J. G.; Simon, M.: A comparative study of human GS2, its paralogues,
and its rat orthologue. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 360: 501-506,
2007.

2. Wilson, P. A.; Gardner, S. D.; Lambie, N. M.; Commans, S. A.; Crowther,
D. J.: Characterization of the human patatin-like phospholipase family. J.
Lipid Res. 47: 1940-1949, 2006.

CREATED Stefanie A. Nelson: 11/7/2007

EDITED wwang: 06/23/2008
wwang: 11/8/2007

609516	TITLE *609516 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 382; ZNF382
;;KRAB/ZINC FINGER SUPPRESSOR PROTEIN 1, RAT, HOMOLOG OF; KS1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the C2H2 zinc finger transcription factor family, such as
ZNF382, play key roles in the regulation of cell proliferation,
differentiation, and apoptosis in response to a variety of stimuli
(Gebelein et al., 1998).

CLONING

Gebelein et al. (1998) cloned rat Znf382, which they called Ks1.
Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of Ks1, with
highest levels in lung, kidney, and testis. Immunofluorescence
localization detected epitope-tagged Ks1 in the nucleus following
transfection of a human pancreatic cell line.

By screening a fetal heart cDNA library using PCR primers designed to
amplify KRAB domain-encoding sequences, followed by EST database
analysis and RACE of fetal heart RNA, Luo et al. (2002) cloned ZNF382.
The deduced 548-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of
about 64 kD. ZNF382 contains N-terminal KRAB A and KRAB B domains,
followed by a vestigial zinc finger, a nuclear localization signal, and
9 tandemly repeated Kruppel-type C2H2-zinc finger domains at its C
terminus. ZNF382 shares 91% and 83% amino acid identity with rat Ks1 in
the KRAB and zinc finger domains, respectively. Northern blot analysis
detected a 2.9-kb transcript abundantly expressed in heart. Weaker
expression was detected in skeletal muscle, but no expression was
detected in 6 other tissues examined. Expression of ZNF382 was more
widespread in human fetal tissues. Whole 34- and 40-day embryos showed
high ZNF382 expression. At later developmental stages, ZNF382 was
detected predominantly in cerebellum, kidney, and cerebrum, and to a
lesser extent in lung, heart, skeletal muscle, tongue, and adrenal
gland.

GENE FUNCTION

By biochemical analysis, Gebelein et al. (1998) determined that rat Ks1
contains 2 transcriptional repressor domains, R1 and R2. R1 corresponds
to the KRAB A motif, and R2 is located immediately after the KRAB B
motif. Expression of rat Ks1 in a mouse fibroblast line suppressed
neoplastic transformation mediated by Hras (190020) and other potent
oncogenes. Deletion analysis indicated that R2 was required to suppress
transformation.

Using a random oligonucleotide-binding assay, Gebelein and Urrutia
(2001) identified a 27-bp rat Ks1-binding element (KBE). Deletion and
site-directed mutagenesis revealed that the 9 C-terminal zinc fingers
and the KRAB domain of Ks1 were required for transcriptional repression
through the KBE site. The KRAB domain of Ks1 interacted with the KAP1
(TRIM28; 601742) corepressor, and mutations that abolished this
interaction alleviated Ks1-mediated transcriptional repression.

GENE STRUCTURE

Luo et al. (2002) determined that the ZNF382 gene contains 5 exons and
spans about 23 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Luo et al. (2002) mapped the ZNF382 gene
to chromosome 19q13.13.

REFERENCE 1. Gebelein, B.; Fernandez-Zapico, M.; Imoto, M.; Urrutia, R.: KRAB-independent
suppression of neoplastic cell growth by the novel zinc finger transcription
factor KS1. J. Clin. Invest. 102: 1911-1919, 1998.

2. Gebelein, B.; Urrutia, R.: Sequence-specific transcriptional repression
by KS1, a multiple-zinc-finger-Kruppel-associated box protein. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 21: 928-939, 2001.

3. Luo, K.; Yuan, W.; Zhu, C.; Li, Y.; Wang, Y.; Zeng, W.; Jiao, W.;
Liu, M.; Wu, X.: Expression of a novel Krupple-like zinc-finger gene,
ZNF382, in human heart. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 299: 606-612,
2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/4/2005

EDITED mgross: 08/04/2005

603647	TITLE *603647 BCS1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG-LIKE; BCS1L
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The human BCS1L gene encodes a homolog of S. cerevisiae bcs1 protein
involved in the assembly of complex III of the mitochondrial respiratory
chain.

CLONING

The S. cerevisiae bcs1 protein is a constituent of the inner
mitochondrial membrane and is required for the expression of functional
ubiquinol-cytochrome-c reductase (bc1) complex (see 191328). The bcs1
protein shares sequence similarity with members of the AAA (ATPases
associated with various cellular activities) superfamily (see 601681).
By searching an EST database for sequences related to bcs1, Petruzzella
et al. (1998) identified a cDNA encoding human BCS1L (BCS1-like). The
predicted 420-amino acid human protein is 50% identical to yeast bcs1
and, like bcs1, contains 2 conserved nucleotide-binding motifs. Although
BCS1L does not contain an N-terminal mitochondrial targeting sequence,
in vitro mitochondrial import and trypsin-protection assays demonstrated
that it is imported into mitochondria. Northern blot analysis revealed
that BCS1L is expressed ubiquitously as a 1.4-kb mRNA. The authors also
detected a 4.5-kb transcript that they considered to be either an
alternative BCS1L mRNA or an mRNA derived from a related gene.

GENE FUNCTION

Found within the inner mitochondrial membrane, BCS1L is presumed to
facilitate insertion of Rieske Fe/S protein into precursors to complex
III during assembly of the respiratory chain (Cruciat et al., 1999).
Complex III then becomes assembled with complexes IV and I into a
respirasome supercomplex that facilitates the electron transfer required
for the synthesis of ATP.

MAPPING

Based on sequence similarity to ESTs, Petruzzella et al. (1998)
tentatively mapped the BCS1L gene to 2q33.

GENE STRUCTURE

De Lonlay et al. (2001) showed that the BCS1L gene consists of 7 exons.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Mitochondrial Complex III Deficiency, Nuclear Type 1

De Lonlay et al. (2001) found 4 biallelic mutations in the BCS1L gene in
6 patients from 4 families with mitochondrial complex III deficiency
nuclear type 1 (MC3DN1; 124000) characterized by neonatal proximal
tubulopathy, hepatic involvement, and encephalopathy. Complementation
studies in yeast confirmed the deleterious effect of these missense
mutations. De Lonlay et al. (2001) suggested that mutation of BCS1L is a
frequent cause of complex III deficiency, as one-third of their Turkish
patients had mutations in the BSC1L gene. De Lonlay et al. (2001)
reported that they had not been able to detect BCS1L mutations in
complex III-deficient patients with clinical presentations other than
neonatal tubulopathy with hepatic involvement and encephalopathy.

- GRACILE Syndrome

The GRACILE (growth retardation, amino aciduria, cholestasis, iron
overload, lactic acidosis, and early death) syndrome (603358) belongs to
the disease heritage of Finland. All affected families carry the same
ancestral haplotype on 2q33-q37, indicating 1 founder mutation (Visapaa
et al., 1998). Visapaa et al. (2002) identified a homozygous
ser78-to-gly mutation (S78G; 603358.0005) in the BCS1L gene in all
Finnish patients with GRACILE syndrome studied. In addition, they
identified 5 different mutations in the BCS1L gene in 3 British infants,
previously reported by Morris et al. (1995), whose symptoms resembled
those in GRACILE syndrome but who also had complex III deficiency and
neurologic symptoms. The phenotype of the Turkish patients in whom de
Lonlay et al. (2001) demonstrated mutations in the BCS1L gene was
distinctly different from that of the Finnish patients. Whereas the
Turkish patients had complex III deficiency, the Finnish patients had
complex III activity within the normal range. The Finnish patients had
no neurologic problems, but had marked hepatic iron overload, associated
with abnormal levels of proteins involved in iron transfer and storage,
and free plasma iron. These findings implied that BCS1L has another
cellular function that is uncharacterized but essential, and that it is
putatively involved in iron metabolism.

- Bjornstad Syndrome

Bjornstad syndrome (262000) is an autosomal recessive condition
characterized by sensorineural hearing loss and pili torti. Lubianca
Neto et al. (1998) mapped the Bjornstad syndrome locus to 2q34-q36.
Hinson et al. (2007) refined the map location of the disorder to 2q35
and demonstrated mutations in the BCS1L gene (e.g., 603647.0001).

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

To understand how BCS2L mutations cause such widely different clinical
phenotypes, Hinson et al. (2007) considered the locations of defects on
the BCS1L protein structure and compared the function of mutant BCS1L in
yeast and in human lymphocytes. Their studies showed that all BCS1L
mutations disrupted the assembly of mitochondrial respirasomes (the
basic unit of respiration in human mitochondria), but the clinical
severity of the mutations was correlated with the production of reactive
oxygen species. The data indicated that in addition to mitochondrial
heteroplasmy and variable energy requirements of tissues,
tissue-specific sensitivities to reactive oxygen species contribute to
the variability of the manifestations of mitochondrial defects.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 1
BCS1L, SER277ASN

In 2 affected sibs and 1 fetus in a consanguineous family with
mitochondrial complex III deficiency nuclear type 1 (MC3DN1; 124000)
characterized by neonatal tubulopathy, encephalopathy, and liver
failure, de Lonlay et al. (2001) identified a homozygous 830G-A
transition in the BCS1L gene, resulting in a ser277-to-asp (S277N)
substitution.

.0002
LEIGH SYNDROME DUE TO MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY
BCS1L, PRO99LEU

In 2 patients with complex III deficiency (124000), a boy and a girl,
born to unrelated consanguineous families, de Lonlay et al. (2001)
identified the same homozygous C-to-T transition at nucleotide 296 in
exon 1 of the BCS1L gene, causing the substitution of a leucine for a
highly conserved proline at codon 99 (P99L). The patients had metabolic
acidosis, hepatic involvement, neurologic deterioration, and brainstem
and basal ganglia lesions consistent with a diagnosis of Leigh syndrome
(256000). One patient had abnormal ventilation patterns and proximal
renal tubulopathy.

.0003
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 1
BCS1L, ARG155PRO

In a boy of Turkish origin with complex III deficiency (124000) born to
nonconsanguineous parents, de Lonlay et al. (2001) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the BCS1L gene: a 464C-G transversion
in exon 3 of the BCS1L gene, resulting in an arg155-to-pro (R155P)
substitution, and a 1057G-A transition in exon 7, resulting in a
val353-to-met (V353M; 603647.0004) substitution.

.0004
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 1
BCS1L, VAL353MET

See 603647.0003 and de Lonlay et al. (2001).

.0005
GRACILE SYNDROME
BCS1L, SER78GLY

Visapaa et al. (2002) reported that all GRACILE syndrome (603358)
patients in Finland were homozygous for a 232A-G mutation in exon 2 of
the BCS1L gene, resulting in a ser78-to-gly (S78G) substitution. Unlike
the Turkish patients reported by de Lonlay et al. (2001), the Finnish
patients had normal complex III activity and no neurologic problems, but
did have marked iron overload.

.0006
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 1
BCS1L, ARG45CYS

In 2 Spanish sibs with fatal infantile complex III deficiency (124000),
De Meirleir et al. (2003) identified compound heterozygosity for
mutation in the BCS1L gene: a 246C-T transition in exon 1, resulting in
an arg45-to-cys (R45C) substitution, and a 279C-T transition in exon 1,
resulting in an arg56-to-ter (R56X; 603647.0007) substitution. The R45C
substitution occurs in a crucial targeting signal of the gene and is
predicted to interfere with proper protein functioning. Each parent was
heterozygous for 1 of the mutations. Both patients had severe metabolic
acidosis noted shortly after birth, as well as severe liver dysfunction
and a renal tubulopathy. One died at age 3 weeks of lactic acidosis. The
second infant also had obvious neurologic involvement, with delayed
myelination, axial hypotonia, and developmental delay. He died at age 3
months. Postmortem liver examination of both infants showed liver
fibrosis, severe cholestasis, and hepatosiderosis with accumulation of
iron in aggregates of macrophages and in Kupffer cells. Mitochondria
appeared enlarged with few or no cristae and a fluffy matrix. De
Meirleir et al. (2003) suggested that the iron accumulation could be
explained by the lack of incorporation of iron in the iron-sulfur
cluster of complex III.

Ramos-Arroyo et al. (2009) reported another Spanish infant with the R45C
and R56X mutations. She presented with neonatal severe hypotonia, food
intolerance, and vomiting. She soon developed a proximal renal
tubulopathy with glucosuria, phosphaturia, and aminoaciduria, metabolic
lactic acidosis, and hepatic involvement. Bilateral cataracts were also
noted. At age 4 months, she showed nystagmus, hypertonia, microcephaly,
developmental delay, and failure to thrive. Her neurologic condition and
metabolic acidosis worsened rapidly, and she died at 6 months of age.
Biochemical studies of muscle tissue showed impaired activity of
mitochondrial complex III. Ramos-Arroyo et al. (2009) noted that this
child did not have evidence of altered iron metabolism, as had been
observed in the patients reported by De Meirleir et al. (2003), and as
has been observed in patients with the allelic disorder GRACILE syndrome
(603358). Ramos-Arroyo et al. (2009) postulated that phenotypic
variability even in individuals with the same BCS1L genotype may reflect
tissue-specific expression of the mutant gene.

.0007
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 1
BCS1L, ARG56TER

See 603647.0006 and De Meirleir et al. (2003).

.0008
BJORNSTAD SYNDROME
BCS1L, ARG183HIS

In affected members of the family with Bjornstad syndrome (262000) in
which Lubianca Neto et al. (1998) demonstrated linkage to 2q, Hinson et
al. (2007) identified homozygosity for a C-to-T transition in the BCS1L
gene, resulting in an arg183-to-his (R183H) substitution. Eight
individuals in 2 sibships related as first cousins once removed were
affected; the parents in each case were consanguineous.

.0009
BJORNSTAD SYNDROME WITH MILD MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 1, INCLUDED
BCS1L, ARG184CYS

In a sporadic case of Bjornstad syndrome (262000) with mild
mitochondrial complex III deficiency (124000), Hinson et al. (2007)
found compound heterozygosity for 2 missense mutations in the BCS1L
gene: arg184 to cys (R184C) and gly35 to arg (G35R; 603647.0010).

In a Moroccan girl with mitochondrial complex III deficiency (124000),
Fernandez-Vizarra et al. (2007) identified compound heterozygosity for
the R184C mutation and a 547C-T transition in exon 3 of the BCS1L gene,
resulting in an arg183-to-cys (R183C; 603647.0012) substitution. She
presented at age 9 months with acute psychomotor regression, hypotonia,
and failure to thrive, which progressed to spastic quadriparesis and
mental retardation associated with abnormal signal intensities in the
thalami, basal ganglia, and periventricular white matter, consistent
with an encephalopathy. Heart, liver, and kidneys were apparently
unaffected, but she was also noted to have brittle hair. Studies in
yeast showed that both mutations significantly reduced mitochondrial
cytochrome content and respiratory activity, as well as caused a
decreased incorporation of the Rieske iron-sulfur protein (UQCRFS1;
191327) into complex III. Further studies showed decreased levels of
fully assembled complex III. The findings suggested that BCS1L is
necessary for proper complex III assembly.

.0010
BJORNSTAD SYNDROME WITH MILD MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY
BCS1L, GLY35ARG

See 603647.0009 and Hinson et al. (2007).

.0011
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 1
BCS1L, THR50ALA

In a 4-year-old Spanish boy with isolated mitochondrial complex III
deficiency (124000), Blazquez et al. (2009) identified a homozygous
148A-G transition in exon 1 of the BCS1L gene, resulting in a
thr50-to-ala (T50A) substitution in the mitochondrial sorting sequence.
He presented at 6 months of age with psychomotor retardation, failure to
thrive, hypotonia, lactic acidosis, and hepatic dysfunction. Physical
examination showed unstable head support, poor eye fixation, coarse
facies, and epicanthus. There was hypertrichosis of the frontal head
zone and limbs, and excessive fat distribution in the upper back, neck,
hands and feet, with almost no fat on the limbs. Respiratory chain
activity in muscle and fibroblasts showed an isolated complex III defect
(58% of normal in muscle, 93% in fibroblasts). At age 4 years, he still
showed psychomotor retardation, had developed mild sensorineural hearing
loss, and persistent lactic acidemia, but renal function, hair, and iron
metabolism were normal. Brain MRI was normal. The mutation was not found
in 400 control alleles, and each unaffected parent was heterozygous for
the mutation.

.0012
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 1
BCS1L, ARG183CYS

See 603647.0009 and Fernandez-Vizarra et al. (2007).

REFERENCE 1. Blazquez, A.; Gil-Borlado, M. C.; Moran, M.; Verdu, A.; Cazorla-Calleja,
M. R.; Martin, M. A.; Arenas, J.; Ugalde, C.: Infantile mitochondrial
encephalomyopathy with unusual phenotype caused by a novel BCS1L mutation
in an isolated complex III-deficient patient. Neuromusc. Disord. 19:
143-146, 2009.

2. Cruciat, C. M.; Hell, K.; Folsch, H.; Neupert, W.; Stuart, R. A.
: Bsc1p, an AAA-family member, is a chaperone for the assembly of
the cytochrome bc(1) complex. EMBO J. 18: 5226-5233, 1999.

3. de Lonlay, P.; Valnot, I.; Barrientos, A.; Gorbatyuk, M.; Tzagoloff,
A.; Taanman, J.-W.; Benayoun, E.; Chretien, D.; Kadhom, N.; Lombes,
A.; Ogier de Baulny, H.; Niaudet, P.; Munnich, A.; Rustin, P.; Rotig,
A.: A mutant mitochondrial respiratory chain assembly protein causes
complex III deficiency in patients with tubulopathy, encephalopathy
and liver failure. Nature Genet. 29: 57-60, 2001.

4. De Meirleir, L.; Seneca, S.; Damis, E.; Sepulchre, B.; Hoorens,
A.; Gerlo, E.; Garcia Silva, M. T.; Hernandez, E. M.; Lissens, W.;
Van Coster, R.: Clinical and diagnostic characteristics of complex
III deficiency due to mutations in the BCS1L gene. Am. J. Med. Genet. 121A:
126-131, 2003.

5. Fernandez-Vizarra, E.; Bugiani, M.; Goffrini, P.; Carrara, F.;
Farina, L.; Procopio, E.; Donati, A.; Uziel, G.; Ferrero, I.; Zeviani,
M.: Impaired complex III assembly associated with BCS1L gene mutations
in isolated mitochondrial encephalopathy. Hum. Molec. Genet. 16:
1241-1252, 2007.

6. Hinson, J. T.; Fantin, V. R.; Schonberger, J.; Breivik, N.; Siem,
G.; McDonough, B.; Sharma, P.; Keogh, I.; Godinho, R.; Santos, F.;
Esparza, A.; Nicolau, Y.; Selvaag, E.; Cohen, B. H.; Hoppel, C. L.;
Tranebjaerg, L.; Eavey, R. D.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C. E.: Missense
mutations in the BCS1L gene as a cause of the Bjornstad syndrome. New
Eng. J. Med. 356: 809-819, 2007.

7. Lubianca Neto, J. F.; Lu, L.; Eavey, R. D.; Macias Flores, M. A.;
Martinez Caldera, R.; Sangwatanaroj, S.; Schott, J. J.; McDonough,
B.; Santos, J. I.; Seidman, C. E.; Seidman, J. G.: The Bjornstad
syndrome (sensorineural hearing loss and pili torti) disease gene
maps to chromosome 2q34-36. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62: 1107-1112, 1998.

8. Morris, A. A. M.; Taylor, R. W.; Birch-Machin, M. A.; Jackson,
M. J.; Coulthard, M. G.; Bindoff, L. A.; Welch, J. R.; Howell, N.;
Turnbull, D. M.: Neonatal Fanconi syndrome due to deficiency of complex
III of the respiratory chain. Pediat. Nephrol. 9: 407-411, 1995.

9. Petruzzella, V.; Tiranti, V.; Fernandez, P.; Ianna, P.; Carrozzo,
R.; Zeviani, M.: Identification and characterization of human cDNAs
specific to BCS1, PET112, SCO1, COX15, and COX11, five genes involved
in the formation and function of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Genomics 54:
494-504, 1998.

10. Ramos-Arroyo, M. A.; Hualde, J.; Ayechu, A.; De Meirleir, L.;
Seneca, S.; Nadal, N.; Briones, P.: Clinical and biochemical spectrum
of mitochondrial complex III deficiency caused by mutations in the
BCS1L gene. (Letter) Clin. Genet. 75: 585-587, 2009.

11. Visapaa, I.; Fellman, V.; Varilo, T.; Palotie, A.; Raivio, K.
O.; Peltonen, L.: Assignment of the locus for a new lethal neonatal
metabolic syndrome to 2q33-37. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63: 1396-1403,
1998.

12. Visapaa, I.; Fellman, V.; Vesa, J.; Dasvarma, A.; Hutton, J. L.;
Kumar, V.; Payne, G. S.; Makarow, M.; Van Coster, R.; Taylor, R. W.;
Turnbull, D. M.; Suomalainen, A.; Peltonen, L.: GRACILE syndrome,
a lethal metabolic disorder with iron overload, is caused by a point
mutation in BCS1L. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 71: 863-876, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/1/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/9/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/4/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/21/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/27/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/5/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/29/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/22/2001

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 3/15/1999

EDITED carol: 04/08/2013
ckniffin: 4/8/2013
wwang: 6/4/2010
ckniffin: 6/1/2010
wwang: 3/24/2010
ckniffin: 3/9/2010
wwang: 11/20/2009
wwang: 11/18/2009
ckniffin: 11/4/2009
carol: 3/21/2007
terry: 2/27/2007
wwang: 10/12/2005
ckniffin: 10/5/2005
carol: 9/21/2005
ckniffin: 8/29/2005
terry: 4/21/2005
terry: 3/3/2005
carol: 7/10/2003
ckniffin: 7/9/2003
carol: 11/1/2002
tkritzer: 10/30/2002
terry: 10/29/2002
alopez: 9/4/2001
terry: 8/22/2001
alopez: 3/15/1999

614757	TITLE *614757 INTERFERON-INDUCED TRANSMEMBRANE PROTEIN 5; IFITM5
;;FRAGILIS 4, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Lange et al. (2003) cloned mouse Ifitm5, which they called fragilis-4,
and they identified human IFITM5 by database analysis. The deduced human
protein contains 132 amino acids and is predicted to have 2
transmembrane domains. The mouse and human proteins share highest
conservation in a central region that includes the first transmembrane
domain and the beginning of the second transmembrane domain. This
central region also shares highest similarity among IFITM family
members. Lange et al. (2003) determined that IFITM5 is 1 of only 2 IFITM
genes conserved from mouse to human (see EVOLUTION).

GENE STRUCTURE

Lange et al. (2003) determined that the IFITM5 gene contains 2 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lange et al. (2003) mapped the IFITM5 gene
to an IFITM gene cluster on chromosome 11p15.5. The order of the genes,
from telomere to centromere, is IFITM5, IFITM2 (605578), IFITM1
(604456), and IFITM3 (605579), and the cluster spans about 26.5 kb.
Lange et al. (2003) stated that IFITM2 maps to the plus strand and that
all other IFITM genes map to the minus strand. However, Gross (2012)
determined that, in addition to IFITM2, the IFITM1 gene maps to the plus
strand based on an alignment of the IFITM1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK
BC000897) with the genomic sequence (GRCh37).

Lange et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Ifitm gene cluster to a region of
chromosome 7F5 that shares homology of synteny with human chromosome
11p15.5. The mouse Ifitm gene cluster contains 5 genes, whereas the
human cluster contains only 4 genes.

EVOLUTION

By phylogenetic analysis, Lange et al. (2003) found that only 2 mouse
fragilis genes, fragilis-4 (Ifitm5) and either fragilis (Ifitm3),
fragilis-2 (Ifitm1), or fragilis-3 (Ifitm2), have been conserved from
mouse to human. They suggested that subsequent gene duplications may
have occurred independently in both species.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

After mapping the locus for osteogenesis imperfecta type V (OI5; 610967)
in a Korean family to a region of chromosome 11 containing the IFITM5
gene, Cho et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous mutation in the
5-prime untranslated region of this gene (-14C-T; 614757.0001) in 19
affected Korean individuals (13 from 3 families and 6 simplex
individuals). The mutation was not found in unaffected family members or
in 200 unrelated control chromosomes from the same ethnic group.

Sempler et al. (2012) independently identified heterozygosity for the
-14C-T mutation in 2 unrelated patients with OI type V. The mutation
occurred de novo in both.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
OSTEOGENESIS IMPERFECTA, TYPE V
IFITM5, -14C-T

In 19 Korean individuals (13 from 3 families and 6 simplex individuals)
with osteogenesis imperfecta type V (OI5; 610967), Cho et al. (2012)
identified a C-T transition 5-prime UTR of the IFITM5 gene (-14C-T).
Sempler et al. (2012) identified the same mutation in 2 unrelated
individuals with OI5. The mutation was predicted to generate an in-frame
translation start codon that would add 5 amino acids
(Met-Ala-Leu-Glu-Pro) to the N terminus of IFITM5, which was confirmed
in transfection experiments.

REFERENCE 1. Cho, T.-J.; Lee, K.-E.; Lee, S.-K.; Song, S. J.; Kim, K. J.; Jeon,
D.; Lee, G.; Kim, H.-N.; Lee, H. R.; Eom, H.-H.; Lee, Z. H.; Kim,
O.-H.; Park, W.-Y.; Park, S. S.; Ikegawa, S.; Yoo, W. J.; Choi, I.
H.; Kim, J.-W.: A single recurrent mutation in the 5-prime UTR of
IFITM5 causes osteogenesis imperfecta type V. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 91:
343-348, 2012.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/9/2012.

3. Lange, U. C.; Saitou, M.; Western, P. S.; Barton, S. C.; Surani,
M. A.: The fragilis interferon-inducible gene family of transmembrane
proteins is associated with germ cell specification in mice. BMC
Dev. Biol. 3: 1, 2003. Note: Electronic Article.

4. Sempler, O.; Garbes, L.; Keupp, K.; Swan, D.; Zimmermann, K.; Becker,
J.; Iden, S.; Wirth, B.; Eysel, P.; Koerber, F.; Schoenau, E.; Bohlander,
S. K.; Wollnik, B.; Netzer, C.: A mutation in the 5-prime UTR of
IFITM5 creates an in-frame start codon and causes autosomal-dominant
osteogenesis imperfecta type V with hyperplastic callus. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 91: 349-357, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Nara Sobreira - updated: 09/20/2012
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 8/9/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/9/2012

EDITED carol: 09/20/2012
mgross: 8/10/2012
mgross: 8/9/2012

602306	TITLE *602306 RAL GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE DISSOCIATION STIMULATOR-LIKE 2; RGL2
;;RAS-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN RAB2L; RAB2L
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The Ras gene family of low molecular weight GTPases plays a central role
in membrane trafficking and is regulated in part by guanine nucleotide
dissociation stimulators (GDSs) such as RALGDS (601619). Isomura et al.
(1996) identified a fetal brain cDNA, designated RAB2L, that encodes a
predicted 122-amino acid protein with 39.5% homology to the C-terminal
(Ras-binding) region of RALGDS. However, since RAB2L has no apparent
homology to the GDS-activity domain of RALGDS, its function is likely to
be different from that of GDS proteins. By Northern blot analysis, RAB2L
was expressed as a 900-bp transcript in all tissues examined; a 3.2-kb
transcript was specifically expressed in heart and skeletal muscle.

GENE STRUCTURE

Herberg et al. (1998) determined that the RGL2 gene contains 18 exons
and spans about 7.3 kb.

MAPPING

Isomura et al. (1996) mapped the RAB2L gene to 6p21.3 by fluorescence in
situ hybridization. By Southern hybridization analysis, Ando et al.
(1999) mapped the RAB2L gene, which they termed HKE1.5, approximately 5
kb centromeric of the HKE2 gene (605660). They mapped the mouse gene to
the proximal end of the H2 region.

REFERENCE 1. Ando, A.; Kikuti, Y. Y.; Abe, K.; Shigenari, A.; Kawata, H.; Ikemura,
T.; Kimura, M.; Inoko, H.: cDNA cloning, northern hybridization,
and mapping analysis of a putative GDS-related protein gene at the
centromeric ends of the human and mouse MHC regions. Immunogenetics 49:
354-356, 1999.

2. Herberg, J. A.; Beck, S.; Trowsdale, J.: TAPASIN, DAXX, RGL2,
HKE2, and four new genes (BING 1, 3 to 5) form a dense cluster at
the centromeric end of the MHC. J. Molec. Biol. 277: 839-857, 1998.

3. Isomura, M.; Okui, K.; Fujiwara, T.; Shin, S.; Nakamura, Y.: Isolation
and mapping of RAB2L, a human cDNA that encodes a protein homologous
to RalGDS. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 74: 263-265, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 08/22/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/25/2001

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 1/30/1998

EDITED terry: 08/22/2007
mgross: 6/25/2001
kayiaros: 7/13/1999
carol: 2/4/1998

186745	TITLE *186745 TALIN 1; TLN1
;;TALIN; TLN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Talin serves a function of linking vinculin (193065) to the integrins,
and, thus, the cytoskeleton to extracellular matrix (ECM) receptors. It
has a mass of 270 kD and shares 23% N-terminal identity with ezrin
(123900), which has similar functions.

GENE FUNCTION

DiPaolo et al. (2002) and Ling et al. (2002) presented evidence that
talin, through its FERM domain, interacts with the C-terminal tail of
the 90-kD PIP5K1C (606102) isoform. The authors showed that this
interaction induces clustering of PIP5D1C and talin at focal adhesions
and increases the local production of
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate.

Mechanical forces on matrix-integrin-cytoskeleton linkages are crucial
for cell viability, morphology, and organ function. The production of
force depends on the molecular connections from ECM-integrin complexes
to the cytoskeleton. The minimal matrix complex causing
integrin-cytoskeleton connections is a trimer of fibronectin's (135600)
integrin-binding domain FNIII7-10. Jiang et al. (2003) reported a
specific molecular slip bond that was repeatedly broken by a force of 2
pN at the cellular loading rate of 60 nm/second; this occurred with
single trimer beads but not with the monomer. Talin-1, which binds to
integrins and actin filaments in vitro, is required for the 2-pN slip
bond and rapid cytoskeleton binding. Furthermore, Jiang et al. (2003)
showed that inhibition of fibronectin binding to alpha-v-beta-3 integrin
(193210 and 173470) and deletion of beta-3 markedly decreased the 2-pN
force peak. They suggested that talin-1 initially forms a molecular slip
bond between closely packed fibronectin-integrin complexes and the actin
cytoskeleton, which can apply a low level of force to fibronectin until
many bonds form or a signal is received to activate a force response.

Tadokoro et al. (2003) reported that specific binding of the
cytoskeletal protein talin to integrin beta subunit (135630) cytoplasmic
tails leads to the conformational rearrangements of integrin
extracellular domains that increase their affinity. They found that
regulated binding of talin to integrin beta tails is a final common
element of cellular signaling cascades that control integrin activation.

Hu et al. (2007) developed correlational fluorescent speckle microscopy
to measure the coupling of focal adhesion proteins to actin filaments
(see 102610). Different classes of focal adhesion structural and
regulatory molecules exhibited varying degrees of correlated motions
with actin filaments, indicating hierarchical transmission of actin
motion through focal adhesions. Interactions between vinculin (193065),
talin, and actin filaments appear to constitute a slippage interface
between the cytoskeleton and integrins, generating a molecular clutch
that is regulated during the morphodynamic transitions of cell
migration.

Kanchanawong et al. (2010) used 3-dimensional super-resolution
fluorescence microscopy to map nanoscale protein organization in focal
adhesions. Their results revealed that integrins and actin are
vertically separated by an approximately 40-nm focal adhesion core
region consisting of multiple protein-specific strata: a
membrane-apposed integrin signaling layer containing integrin
cytoplasmic tails (see 193210), focal adhesion kinase (600758), and
paxillin (602505); an intermediate force-transduction layer containing
talin and vinculin; and an uppermost actin-regulatory layer containing
zyxin (602002), vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (601703), and
alpha-actinin (102575). By localizing amino- and carboxy-terminally
tagged talins, Kanchanawong et al. (2010) revealed talin's polarized
orientation, indicative of a role in organizing the focal adhesion
strata. Kanchanawong et al. (2010) concluded that their composite
multilaminar protein architecture provided a molecular blueprint for
understanding focal adhesion functions.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Using magnetic tweezers, total internal reflection fluorescence, and
atomic force microscopy, del Rio et al. (2009) investigated the effect
of force on the interaction between talin, a protein that links liganded
membrane integrins to the cytoskeleton, and vinculin, a focal adhesion
protein that is activated by talin binding, leading to reorganization of
the cytoskeleton. Application of physiologically relevant forces caused
stretching of single talin rods that exposed cryptic binding sites for
vinculin. Thus in the talin-vinculin system, molecular
mechanotransduction can occur by protein binding after exposure of
buried binding sites in the talin-vinculin system.

MAPPING

Using PCR amplification and DNA from a panel of human/rodent somatic
cell hybrids, Gilmore et al. (1995) assigned the TLN gene to 9p.
Deletions in 9p have been implicated in a variety of cancers. That a
cytoskeletal protein associated with the cell adhesion apparatus, such
as talin, might behave as a tumor suppressor gene has been proposed. For
example, the APC tumor suppressor gene (APC; 611731) encodes a protein
that associates with beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806), a component of a
complex of proteins linked to the cytoplasmic face of the cadherin
family of cell-cell adhesion molecules. Similarly, talin is a component
of a complex of proteins linked to the cytoplasmic face of integrins in
cell-ECM junctions (Luna and Hitt, 1992).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Rees et al. (1990)
REFERENCE 1. del Rio, A.; Perez-Jimenez, R.; Liu, R.; Roca-Cusachs, P.; Fernandez,
J. M.; Sheetz, M. P.: Stretching single talin rod molecules activates
vinculin binding. Science 323: 638-641, 2009.

2. Di Paolo, G.; Pellegrini, L.; Letinic, K.; Cestra, G.; Zoncu, R.;
Voronov, S.; Chang, S.; Guo, J.; Wenk, M. R.; De Camill, P.: Recruitment
and regulation of phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase type I-gamma
by the FERM domain of talin. Nature 420: 85-89, 2002.

3. Gilmore, A. P.; Ohanian, V.; Spurr, N. K.; Critchley, D. R.: Localisation
of the human gene encoding the cytoskeletal protein talin to chromosome
9p. Hum. Genet. 96: 221-224, 1995.

4. Hu, K.; Ji, L.; Applegate, K. T.; Danuser, G.; Waterman-Storer,
C. M.: Differential transmission of actin motion within focal adhesions. Science 315:
111-115, 2007.

5. Jiang, G.; Giannone, G.; Critchley, D. R.; Fukumoto, E.; Sheetz,
M. P.: Two-piconewton slip bond between fibronectin and the cytoskeleton
depends on talin. Nature 424: 334-337, 2003.

6. Kanchanawong, P.; Shtengel, G.; Pasapera, A. M.; Ramko, E. B.;
Davidson, M. W.; Hess, H. F.; Waterman, C. M.: Nanoscale architecture
of integrin-based cell adhesions. Nature 468: 580-584, 2010.

7. Ling, K.; Doughman, R. L.; Firestone, A. J.; Bunce, M. W.; Anderson,
R. A.: Type I-gamma phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase targets
and regulates focal adhesions. Nature 420: 89-93, 2002.

8. Luna, E. J.; Hitt, A. L.: Cytoskeleton-plasma membrane interactions. Science 258:
955-964, 1992.

9. Rees, D. J. G.; Ades, S. E.; Singer, S. J.; Hynes, R. O.: Sequence
and domain structure of talin. Nature 347: 685-689, 1990.

10. Tadokoro, S.; Shattil, S. J.; Eto, K.; Tai, V.; Liddington, R.
C.; de Pereda, J. M.; Ginsberg, M. H.; Calderwood, D. A.: Talin binding
to integrin beta tails: a final common step in integrin activation. Science 302:
103-106, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/2/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/10/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/20/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/29/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/7/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/10/1992

EDITED alopez: 02/07/2011
terry: 2/2/2011
alopez: 3/12/2009
terry: 3/10/2009
ckniffin: 2/5/2008
alopez: 2/21/2007
terry: 2/20/2007
alopez: 10/29/2003
terry: 10/29/2003
tkritzer: 7/25/2003
terry: 7/24/2003
mgross: 11/14/2002
mgross: 11/7/2002
mark: 8/22/1995
carol: 4/27/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/10/1992

610270	TITLE *610270 MONOACYLGLYCEROL O-ACYLTRANSFERASE 2; MOGAT2
;;ACYL-CoA:MONOACYLGLYCEROL ACYLTRANSFERASE 2;;
MGAT2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Dietary fat absorption from the small intestine is facilitated by
acyl-CoA:monoacylglycerol transferase (MOGAT; EC 2.3.1.22) and
acyl-CoA:diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DGAT; see 604900) activities.
MOGAT catalyzes the joining of monoacylglycerol and fatty acyl-CoAs to
form diacylglycerol (Yen and Farese, 2003).

CLONING

By database analysis with the sequence of mouse Mogat1 (610268) as
query, Cao et al. (2003) identified and cloned mouse Mogat2 by PCR
amplification. Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues showed strong
expression in small intestine, kidney, and adipose tissue, moderate
expression in stomach, and weak expression in liver, skeletal muscle,
and spleen.

Yen and Farese (2003) identified and cloned mouse and human MOGAT2 based
on their homology with DGAT2 (606983). MOGAT2 encodes a 334-amino acid
protein with a predicted molecular mass of 38.2 kD. Yen and Farese
(2003) also identified a 284-amino acid splice variant, in which an
unspliced intron introduces 67 different C-terminal residues and a
premature stop codon. MOGAT2 contains a phosphate acyltransferase-like
domain and 2 predicted N-linked glycosylation sites. Northern blot
analysis revealed expression of 7.2-, 3.0-, and 1.3-kb transcripts in
liver, stomach, and small intestine, with lower expression in colon and
kidney. A probe specific to the truncated splice variant hybridized
mainly to the 1.3-kb transcript in stomach. Immunofluorescence analysis
of transiently transfected COS-7 cells showed that MGAT2 displayed a
pattern consistent with localization in the endoplasmic reticulum.

GENE FUNCTION

Using transient transfection of mouse Mogat2 in AV-12, COS-7, and Caco-2
cells, Cao et al. (2003) showed that Mogat activity was significantly
higher than in untransfected/mock-transfected cells. These assays also
showed that Mogat2 possesses weak Dgat activity. Kinetics analysis of
Mogat2-transfected COS-7 cells demonstrated that Mogat2 activity is
time-, Mogat2 protein concentration-, and substrate
concentration-dependent.

Using transfections of insect and mammalian cells with MOGAT2, Yen and
Farese (2003) showed that MOGAT activity is increased in cell membranes.
This MOGAT activity is proportional to the level of MOGAT2 protein
expressed and dependent on substrate concentration. Transfection assays
also showed that MOGAT2 exhibits minor DGAT activity. Substrate
specificity assays of MOGAT2 demonstrated that MOGAT2 can catalyze the
acylation of rac-1- and sn-2-monooleoylglycerols. MOGAT2 uses a broad
range of fatty acyl-CoAs but prefers monoacylglycerols containing
unsaturated fatty acids.

Cao et al. (2003) performed a variety of in vitro analyses on mouse
Mogat2 expressed in mammalian and bacterial cells, which showed that
Mogat2 activity is stimulated by phosphatidylcholine,
phosphatidylserine, and phosphatidic acid. Mogat2 activity is inhibited
by nonionic and zwitterionic detergents, in contrast to DGAT1, which is
activated by these detergents. Assays on bacterially expressed Mogat2
confirmed the DGAT activity of Mogat2.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yen and Farese (2003) stated that the MOGAT2 gene contains 6 exons.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the MOGAT2
gene to chromosome 11 (TMAP SHGC-32865). Yen and Farese (2003) stated
that the MOGAT2 gene maps to chromosome 11q13.5 and the mouse homolog to
chromosome 7.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yen et al. (2009) found that Mgat2 -/- mice were born at the expected
mendelian frequency and were indistinguishable from wildtype animals
when fed a low-fat diet. However, they had 50% reduced intestinal MGAT
activity compared with wildtype mice, and when fed a high-fat diet, they
were protected against development of obesity, glucose intolerance,
hypercholesterolemia, and fatty liver. Caloric intake was normal in
Mgat2 -/- mice, and dietary fat was absorbed fully, but the entry of
dietary fat into the circulation occurred at a reduced rate. This
altered kinetics of fat absorption appeared to result in elevated
partitioning of dietary fat toward energy dissipation rather than toward
storage in white adipose tissue. Yen et al. (2009) concluded that MGAT2
has a crucial role in the assimilation of dietary fat and accretion of
body fat.

REFERENCE 1. Cao, J.; Burn, P.; Shi, Y.: Properties of the mouse intestinal
acyl-CoA:monoacylglycerol acyltransferase, MGAT2. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
25657-25663, 2003.

2. Cao, J.; Lockwood, J.; Burn, P.; Shi, Y.: Cloning and functional
characterization of a mouse intestinal acyl-CoA:monoacylglycerol acyltransferase,
MGAT2. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 13860-13866, 2003.

3. Yen, C.-L. E.; Cheong, M.-L.; Grueter, C.; Zhou, P.; Moriwaki,
J.; Wong, J. S.; Hubbard, B.; Marmor, S.; Farese, R. V., Jr.: Deficiency
of the intestinal enzyme acyl CoA:monoacylglycerol acyltransferase-2
protects mice from metabolic disorders induced by high-fat feeding. Nature
Med. 15: 442-446, 2009.

4. Yen, C.-L. E.; Farese, R. V., Jr.: MGAT2, a monoacylglycerol acyltransferase
expressed in the small intestine. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 18532-18537,
2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/24/2009

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 7/22/2006

EDITED mgross: 04/29/2009
terry: 4/24/2009
carol: 7/22/2006

601833	TITLE *601833 ALLOGRAFT INFLAMMATORY FACTOR 1; AIF1
;;INTERFERON RESPONSE TRANSCRIPT 1; IRT1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Autieri (1996) cloned a full-length cDNA of AIF1 (for allograft
inflammatory factor-1) from a human peripheral blood lymphocyte cDNA
library. The corresponding rat gene had been shown by differential
display PCR to undergo increased expression in response to vascular
injury incurred during balloon angioplasty. Sequence analysis revealed
that AIF1 encodes a 143-amino acid polypeptide 4 amino acids shorter
than that of rat Aif1; differences in this respect reside primarily at
the C terminus. Amino acid motif analysis of AIF1 revealed a consensus
EF-hand helix loop domain that is a conserved feature of calcium-binding
proteins. Autieri (1996) showed that Aif1 expression is elevated 8- to
9-fold in the 3 days following balloon angioplasty. The author also
demonstrated that the constitutive level of AIF1 mRNA in peripheral
blood lymphocytes can be augmented by the mitogen phytohemagglutinin A
(PHA). The author concluded that AIF1 represents a cytokine-inducible,
tissue-specific, and highly conserved transcript transiently expressed
in response to vascular trauma. Northern blot analysis revealed that
AIF1 is expressed in a variety of human tissues, with highest expression
in tissues of lymphoid origin, in particular, spleen, blood lymphocytes,
and thymus.

GENE FUNCTION

Autieri and Agrawal (1998) identified IRT1 by stimulating vascular
smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) with various cytokines. Northern blot
analysis revealed wide but variable constitutive expression of a 1.3-kb
IRT1 transcript in human tissues and in VSMCs stimulated with
gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570) but not with other cytokines or growth
factors. IRT1 expression was downregulated in proliferating T cells.
Expression of IRT1 was stimulated by balloon angioplasty in rat carotid
arteries, possibly due to the presence of Ifng-producing T lymphocytes
at the injury site. The predicted protein contains a leucine zipper
motif, a hydrophobic region, a nuclear localization sequence, and 2
potential phosphorylation sites. Overexpression of IRT1 in VMSCs
resulted in altered morphology and inhibition of cell growth.

Using in vitro binding and coimmunoprecipitation assays, Autieri et al.
(2003) determined that AIF1 interacts with actin. In unstimulated VSMCs,
AIF1 colocalized with F-actin, but translocated to lamellipodia upon
PDGF (see 190040) stimulation. VSMCs stably transduced with AIF1
retrovirus migrated 2.6-fold more rapidly in response to PDGF than
control cells. AIF1 colocalized with RAC1 (602048), and AIF1-transduced
VSMCs showed a constitutive and enhanced activation of RAC1. Autieri et
al. (2003) concluded that AIF1 binds and polymerizes F-actin and
regulates RAC1 activity and VSMC migration.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the AIF1
gene to chromosome 6 (TMAP SHGC-132025).

The AIF1 gene resides in the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) cluster of
genes located in the region represented by the human major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) on 6p21.3 (Allcock et al., 2004).

REFERENCE 1. Allcock, R. J. N.; Windsor, L.; Gut, I. G.; Kucharzak, R.; Sobre,
L.; Lechner, D.; Garnier, J.-G.; Baltic, S.; Christiansen, F. T.;
Price, P.: High-density SNP genotyping defines 17 distinct haplotypes
of the TNF block in the Caucasian population: implications for haplotype
tagging. Hum. Mutat. 24: 517-525, 2004.

2. Autieri, M. V.: cDNA cloning of human allograft inflammatory factor-1:
tissue distribution, cytokine induction, and mRNA expression in injured
rat carotid arteries. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 228: 29-37,
1996.

3. Autieri, M. V.; Agrawal, N.: IRT-1, a novel interferon-gamma-responsive
transcript encoding a growth-suppressing basic leucine zipper protein. J.
Biol. Chem. 273: 14731-14737, 1998.

4. Autieri, M. V.; Kelemen, S. E.; Wendt, K. W.: AIF-1 is an actin-polymerizing
and Rac1-activating protein that promotes vascular smooth muscle cell
migration. Circ. Res. 92: 1107-1114, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/10/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/18/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/6/2002

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 5/28/1997

EDITED alopez: 02/15/2005
wwang: 1/25/2005
terry: 1/10/2005
cwells: 2/26/2004
terry: 2/18/2004
mgross: 5/6/2002
alopez: 6/27/1997
alopez: 6/5/1997
alopez: 5/28/1997

608073	TITLE *608073 NUCLEOPHOSMIN/NUCLEOPLASMIN FAMILY, MEMBER 2; NPM2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Burns et al. (2003) cloned mouse Npm2 and identified human NPM2. The
deduced human protein contains 214 amino acids and shares 61% identity
with mouse Npm2. NPM2 has a conserved bipartite nuclear localization
signal followed by a stretch of negatively charged glutamic acid and
aspartic acid residues implicated in protamine and histone binding. It
also has several putative serine and threonine phosphorylation sites.
Northern blot analysis of several mouse tissues detected a 1.0-kb
transcript only in ovary, and in situ hybridization revealed expression
limited to growing oocytes. Immunofluorescent localization detected Npm2
within the oocyte nucleus before nuclear membrane breakdown, after which
Npm2 redistributed to the cytoplasm. Following fertilization, Npm2
localized to pronuclei and nuclei of early cleavage embryos through the
8-cell stage. Npm2 was barely detectable in blastocysts.

GENE STRUCTURE

Burns et al. (2003) determined that the mouse Npm2 gene contains 9 exons
and spans about 5.8 kb.

MAPPING

Burns et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Npm2 gene to chromosome 14.

ANIMAL MODEL

Burns et al. (2003) found that female Npm2-null mice showed defects in
preimplantation embryo development, with abnormalities in oocyte and
early embryonic nuclei. Defects included the absence of coalesced
nucleolar structures and the loss of heterochromatin and deacetylated
histone H3 (see 602810), which normally circumscribe nucleoli in oocytes
and early embryos, respectively. In male mice, sperm DNA decondensation
proceeded in the absence of Npm2.

REFERENCE 1. Burns, K. H.; Viveiros, M. M.; Ren, Y.; Wang, P.; DeMayo, F. J.;
Frail, D. E.; Eppig, J. J.; Matzuk, M. M.: Roles of NPM2 in chromatin
and nucleolar organization in oocytes and embryos. Science 300:
633-636, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/3/2003

EDITED mgross: 02/05/2013
terry: 4/6/2005
mgross: 9/3/2003

600798	TITLE *600798 POLIOVIRUS RECEPTOR-LIKE 2; PVRL2
;;HERPESVIRUS ENTRY MEDIATOR B; HVEB;;
POLIOVIRUS RECEPTOR-RELATED 2; PVRR2; PRR2;;
CD112 ANTIGEN; CD112;;
NECTIN 2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Entry of the poliovirus into permissive cells is dependent on the
expression of a specific receptor, the poliovirus receptor (PVR;
173850), which is an integral membrane glycoprotein. Its extracellular
region exhibits 3 immunoglobulin-like domains. Two integral forms,
PVR-alpha and PVR-delta, and 2 soluble forms, PVR-beta and PVR-gamma,
are lacking a transmembrane region generated by alternative splicing of
mRNA. The normal cellular function of PVR is unknown. The identification
of human PVR prompted study of its counterpart in other species. In the
monkey, 2 genes located at 2 separate genetic loci, AGM1 and AGM2, have
been cloned. AGM1 encodes 2 membrane-bound splice variant forms
homologous to PVR-alpha and PVR-delta. AGM2 encodes a membrane-bound
form, PVR-alpha-2. Morrison and Racaniello (1992) described a murine
gene, Mph, as a structural homolog of human PVR. Two Mph molecules,
Mph-alpha and Mph-beta, are thought to be generated by alternative
splicing from a primary transcript.

Following the discovery of the human PVR-related gene (PVRR1; 600644),
other PVR-related molecules were sought. Using degenerate
oligonucleotides in a PCR-based methodology, Eberle et al. (1995)
identified a second PVR-related cDNA, which they called PRR2.
Furthermore, they presented evidence that PRR2, and not PVR, is the
homolog of Mph, and questioned the existence of a true murine homolog of
PVR. The PRR2 gene encodes 2 glycoproteins, PRR2-alpha (short form) and
PRR2-delta (long form), which have 69% and 73% identity within Mph-alpha
and Mph-beta, respectively. In contrast, the human PVR protein exhibits
only 51% identity which is, moreover, restricted to the 3 immunoglobulin
domains of the murine protein. Northern blot analysis showed that 2 mRNA
isoforms of 3.0 kb (PRR2-alpha) and 4.4 kb (PRR2-delta) are ubiquitously
found in various normal human tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Bottino et al. (2003) immunized mice with natural killer
(NK)-susceptible human target cells and obtained antibodies to PVR and
PVRL2. Binding analysis and flow cytometry demonstrated that both
molecules bound strongly with DNAM1 (CD226; 605397), but not with other
activating NK receptors, including NKp46 (NCR1; 604530) and NKp30 (NCR3;
611550). Expression of PVR or PVRL2 rendered cells susceptible to
enhanced lysis in a DNAM1-dependent manner that was nearly abrogated in
the presence of antibody to PVR, PVRL2, or DNAM1.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Liu et al. (2012) generated the crystal structure of the nectin-2
Ig-like V-set domain at 1.85-angstrom resolution. The structure bound to
both the soluble ectodomain of DNAM1 and cell surface-expressed
full-length DNAM1. Mutational analysis revealed that disruption of the
homodimeric interface of nectin-2 led to failure of homodimer formation
and loss of binding to DNAM1.

MAPPING

By isotopic hybridization, Eberle et al. (1995) mapped the PRR2 gene to
19q13.2-q13.4 in the same chromosomal region as PVR. By genomic sequence
analysis, Freitas et al. (1998) mapped the PRR2 gene to chromosome
19q13.2, where it lies centromeric to the TOMM40 gene (608061) and the
APOE (107741)-APOC2 (608083) gene cluster.

REFERENCE 1. Bottino, C.; Castriconi, R.; Pende, D.; Rivera, P.; Nanni, M.;
Carnemolla, B.; Cantoni, C.; Grassi, J.; Marcenaro, S.; Reymond, N.;
Vitale, M.; Moretta, L.; Lopez, M.; Moretta, A.: Identification of
PVR (CD155) and nectin-2 (CD112) as cell surface ligands for the human
DNAM-1 (CD226) activating molecule. J. Exp. Med. 198: 557-567, 2003.

2. Eberle, F.; Dubreuil, P.; Mattei, M.-G.; Devilard, E.; Lopez, M.
: The human PRR2 gene, related to the human poliovirus receptor gene
(PVR), is the true homolog of the murine Mph gene. Gene 159: 267-272,
1995.

3. Freitas, E. M.; Zhang, W. J.; Lalonde, J.-P.; Tay, G. K.; Gaudieri,
S.; Ashworth, L. K.; van Bockxmeer, F. M.; Dawkins, R. L.: Sequencing
of 42kb of the APO E-C2 gene cluster reveals a new gene: PEREC1. DNA
Seq. 9: 89-101, 1998.

4. Liu, J.; Qian, X.; Chen, Z.; Xu, X.; Gao, F.; Zhang, S.; Zhang,
R.; Qi, J.; Gao, G. F.; Yan, J.: Crystal structure of cell adhesion
molecule nectin-2/CD112 and its binding to immune receptor DNAM-1/CD226. J
Immun. 188: 5511-5520, 2012.

5. Morrison, M. E.; Racaniello, V. R.: Molecular cloning and expression
of a murine homolog of the human poliovirus receptor gene. J. Virol. 66:
2807-2813, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 05/03/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/14/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/27/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/27/1995

EDITED mgross: 05/03/2013
carol: 4/6/2011
mgross: 10/24/2007
mgross: 4/5/2006
terry: 4/3/2006
mgross: 11/14/2005
terry: 11/14/2005
wwang: 9/28/2005
ckniffin: 9/24/2003
mgross: 8/27/2003
carol: 11/10/1999
carol: 8/12/1998
alopez: 6/8/1998
mark: 9/27/1995

139313	TITLE *139313 GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE-BINDING PROTEIN, ALPHA-11; GNA11
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Strathmann and Simon (1991) described the Gna11 gene in the mouse. The
human gene was cloned by Jiang et al. (1991) and found to be 359 amino
acids long. Mouse Gna11 and Gna15 (139314) are tandemly duplicated in a
head-to-tail array. Davignon et al. (1996) showed that the upstream
gene, Gna11, is ubiquitously expressed, whereas expression of the
downstream gene, Gna15, is restricted to hematopoietic cells. There was
no evidence for alternative splicing within the coding sequence of
either gene.

GENE FUNCTION

Using mice lacking G-alpha subunits specifically in smooth muscle cells,
Wirth et al. (2008) found that G-alpha-q (GNAQ; 600998) and G-alpha-11
were required for maintenance of basal blood pressure and for
development of salt-induced hypertension. In contrast, lack of
G-alpha-12 (GNA12; 604394) and G-alpha-13 (GNA13; 604406) and their
effector, Larg (ARHGEF12; 604763), did not alter normal blood pressure
regulation, but blocked development of salt-induced hypertension.

GENE STRUCTURE

Strathmann and Simon (1991) found that mouse Gna11 and Gna15 (139314)
are tandemly duplicated in a head-to-tail array, spanning approximately
43 kb. Davignon et al., 1996 further studied the genomic structure of
mouse Gna11 and Gna15. Gna11 and Gna15 each contain 7 exons interposed
by 6 introns. Gna11 is upstream of Gna15, and the region separating the
2 genes is 6 kb long. Phylogenetic trees revealed an approximately
6-fold higher rate of change in Gna15 than in Gna11.

MAPPING

Wilkie et al. (1992) demonstrated that the GNA11 gene is located on
mouse chromosome 10 (by the study of RFLVs in an interspecific
backcross) and on human 19p13 (by in situ hybridization).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In the proband from a 4-generation kindred with hypocalciuric
hypercalcemia mapping to chromosome 19p13 (HHC2; 145981) and an
unrelated proband with HHC, Nesbit et al. (2013) identified
heterozygosity for a 3-bp in-frame deletion and a missense mutation,
respectively (139313.0001-139313.0002). In addition, 2 unrelated
patients with hypocalcemia (HYPOC2; 615361) were found to be
heterozygous for missense mutations in GNA11 (139313.0003 and
139313.0004). All 4 GNA11 mutations predicted disrupted protein
structures, and functional analysis in HEK293 cells showed that family
hypocalciuric hypercalcemia type II-associated mutations decrease the
sensitivity of cells expressing calcium-sensing receptors to changes in
extracellular calcium concentrations, whereas autosomal dominant
hypocalcemia 2-associated mutations increase cell sensitivity.

In affected members of 2 unrelated 4-generation families segregating
autosomal dominant hypocalcemia, Mannstadt et al. (2013) identified
heterozygous missense mutations (139313.0005 and 139313.0006) that
segregated with disease in each family.

- Somatic Mutations

By gene sequencing of exon 5 of the GNA11 gene, Van Raamsdonk et al.
(2010) identified somatic mutations affecting residue Q209 in 7% of blue
nevi (603670), 32% of primary uveal melanomas (155720), and 57% of uveal
melanoma metastases. Mutations in the same codon (Q209) of the paralogue
gene GNAQ (600998) were found in 55% of blue nevi, 45% of primary uveal
melanomas, and 22% of uveal melanoma metastases. The sample group
included a total of 713 melanocytic neoplasms. Sequencing of exon 4 of
these genes, affecting residue R183, in 453 melanocytic neoplasms showed
a lower prevalence of mutations: 2.1% of blue nevi and 4.9% of primary
uveal melanomas. The mutations were mutually exclusive, except for a
single tumor that carried mutations at both Q209 and R183 in GNA11. In
total, 83% of all uveal melanomas examined had oncogenic mutations in
either GNAQ or GNA11. Mice injected with cells transduced with the GNA11
Q209L mutation developed rapidly growing tumors and metastases, whereas
injection with GNA11 R183C-transduced cells showed lesser potency.
Western blot analysis of melanocytes transduced with Q209L showed
constitutive activation of the MAPK pathway. Although GNA11 mutations
appeared to have a more potent effect on melanocytes than did GNAQ
mutations, there was no difference in patient survival among those with
GNA11 mutations compared to those with GNAQ mutations.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using gene targeting, Offermanns et al. (1998) generated Gna11-deficient
mice that were viable and fertile with no apparent behavioral or
morphologic defects. They bred Gnaq-deficient mice with Gna11-deficient
mice and observed gene dosage effects between Gnaq and Gna11. Embryos
completely lacking both genes died in utero with heart malformations.
Mice inheriting a single copy of either gene died within hours of birth
with craniofacial and/or cardiac defects. Offermanns et al. (1998)
concluded that at least 2 active alleles of these genes are required for
extrauterine life. Genetic, morphologic, and pharmacologic analyses of
intercross offspring inheriting different combinations of these 2
mutations indicated that Gnaq and Gna11 have overlapping functions in
embryonic cardiomyocyte proliferation and craniofacial development.

A new class of dominant 'dark skin' (Dsk) mutations was discovered in a
screen of approximately 30,000 mice in a large-scale mutagenesis study.
These result from increased dermal melanin. Van Raamsdonk et al. (2004)
identified 3 of 4 such mutations as hypermorphic alleles of Gnaq and
Gna11, which encode widely expressed G-alpha-q subunits, act in an
additive and quantitative manner, and require endothelin receptor, type
B (EDNRB; 131244). Interaction between Gq and Kit receptor tyrosine
kinase (164920) signaling can mediate coordinate or independent control
of skin and hair color. The results provided a mechanism that can
explain several aspects of human pigmentary variation and show how
polymorphism of essential proteins and signaling pathways can affect a
single physiologic system.

Kero et al. (2007) generated mice with thyrocyte-specific Gna11/Gnaq
deficiency and observed severely reduced iodine organification and
thyroid hormone secretion in response to TSH, with many of the mice
developing hypothyroidism within months after birth. In addition, these
mice lacked the normal proliferative thyroid response to TSH or
goitrogenic diet. Kero et al. (2007) concluded that the GNA11/GNAQ
pathway has an essential role in the adaptive growth of the thyroid
gland.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPOCALCIURIC HYPERCALCEMIA, FAMILIAL, TYPE II
GNA11, 3-BP DEL, 598ATC

In affected members of a 4-generation family segregating autosomal
dominant hypocalciuric hypercalcemia (HHC2; 145981), originally studied
by Heath et al. (1992) (kindred 11675), Nesbit et al. (2013) identified
heterozygosity for a 3-bp deletion (c.598_600delATC) in the GNA11 gene,
resulting in an in-frame deletion of the highly conserved ile200 residue
(ile200del). The mutation was not found in 55 controls or in 5,400
exomes from the NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project. Functional analysis in
HEK293 cells stably expressing calcium-sensing receptors demonstrated
that the GNA11 ile200del mutant induces a decrease in sensitivity to
changes in extracellular calcium concentrations.

.0002
HYPOCALCIURIC HYPERCALCEMIA, FAMILIAL, TYPE II
GNA11, LEU135GLN

In a man who presented at 54 years of age with hypocalciuric
hypercalcemia (HHC2; 145981), Nesbit et al. (2013) identified
heterozygosity for a c.404T-A transversion in the GNA11 gene, resulting
in a leu135-to-gln (L135Q) substitution at a highly conserved residue in
the helical domain. The mutation was not found in 55 controls or in
5,400 exomes from the NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project. Functional
analysis in HEK293 cells stably expressing calcium-sensing receptors
demonstrated that the GNA11 L135Q mutant induces a decrease in
sensitivity to changes in extracellular calcium concentrations.

.0003
HYPOCALCEMIA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 2
GNA11, ARG181GLN

In a woman who was diagnosed at 52 years of age with hypocalcemia
(HYPOC2; 615361), Nesbit et al. (2013) identified heterozygosity for a
c.542G-A transition in the GNA11 gene, resulting in an arg181-to-gln
(R181Q) substitution at a highly conserved residue in the alpha-F helix
of the helical domain. The mutation was not found in 55 controls or in
5,400 exomes from the NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project. Functional
analysis in HEK293 cells stably expressing calcium-sensing receptors
demonstrated that the GNA11 R181Q mutant induces an increase in
sensitivity to changes in extracellular calcium concentrations. The
patient was asymptomatic, but was ascertained after another family
member was diagnosed with hypocalcemia.

.0004
HYPOCALCEMIA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 2
GNA11, PHE341LEU

In a woman who presented at 39 years of age with hypocalcemia (HYPOC2;
615361), Nesbit et al. (2013) identified heterozygosity for a c.1023C-G
transversion in the GNA11 gene, resulting in a phe341-to-leu (F341L)
substitution at a highly conserved residue in the GTPase domain. The
mutation was not found in 55 controls or in 5,400 exomes from the NHLBI
Exome Sequencing Project. Functional analysis in HEK293 cells stably
expressing calcium-sensing receptors demonstrated that the GNA11 F341L
mutant induces an increase in sensitivity to changes in extracellular
calcium concentrations. The patient reported a 10-year history of
occasional paresthesias, muscle cramps, and carpopedal spasm.

.0005
HYPOCALCEMIA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 2
GNA11, ARG60CYS

In 6 affected members of a 4-generation family segregating autosomal
dominant hypocalcemia (HYPOC2; 615361), Mannstadt et al. (2013)
identified heterozygosity for a c.178C-T transition in exon 2 of the
GNA11 gene, resulting in an arg60-to-cys (R60C) substitution at a highly
conserved residue. The mutation was not found in unaffected family
members.

.0006
HYPOCALCEMIA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 2
GNA11, SER211TRP

In 9 affected members of a 4-generation family segregating autosomal
dominant hypocalcemia (HYPOC2; 615361), Mannstadt et al. (2013)
identified heterozygosity for a c.632C-G transversion in exon 5 of the
GNA11 gene, resulting in a ser211-to-trp (S211W) substitution at a
highly conserved residue. The mutation was not found in unaffected
family members.

REFERENCE 1. Davignon, I.; Barnard, M.; Gavrilova, O.; Sweet, K.; Wilkie, T.
M.: Gene structure of murine Gna11 and Gna15: tandemly duplicated
Gq class G protein alpha subunit genes. Genomics 31: 359-366, 1996.

2. Heath, H., III; Leppert, M. F.; Lifton, R. P.; Penniston, J. T.
: Genetic linkage analysis in familial benign hypercalcemia using
a candidate gene strategy. I: Studies in four families. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 75: 846-851, 1992.

3. Jiang, M.; Pandey, S.; Tran, V. T.; Fong, H. K.: Guanine nucleotide-binding
regulatory proteins in retinal pigment epithelial cells. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 88: 3907-3911, 1991.

4. Kero, J.; Ahmed, K.; Wettschureck, N.; Tunaru, S.; Wintermantel,
T.; Greiner, E.; Schutz, G.; Offermanns, S.: Thyrocyte-specific Gq/G11
deficiency impairs thyroid function and prevents goiter development. J.
Clin. Invest. 117: 2399-2407, 2007.

5. Mannstadt, M.; Harris, M.; Bravenboer, B.; Chitturi, S.; Dreijerink,
K. M. A.; Lambright, D. G.; Lim, E. T.; Daly, M. J.; Gabriel, S.;
Juppner, H.: Germline mutations affecting G-alpha-11 in hypoparathyroidism.
(Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 368: 2352-2354, 2013.

6. Nesbit, M. A.; Hannan, F. M.; Howles, S. A.; Babinsky, V. N.; Head,
R. A.; Cranston, T.; Rust, N.; Hobbs, M. R.; Heath, H., III; Thakker,
R. V.: Mutations affecting G-protein subunit alpha-11 in hypercalcemia
and hypocalcemia. New Eng. J. Med. 368: 2476-2486, 2013.

7. Offermanns, S.; Zhao, L.-P.; Gohla, A.; Sarosi, I.; Simon, M. I.;
Wilkie, T. M.: Embryonic cardiomyocyte hypoplasia and craniofacial
defects in G-alpha-q/G-alpha-11-mutant mice. EMBO J. 17: 4304-4312,
1998.

8. Strathmann, M. P.; Simon, M. I.: G-alpha-12 and G-alpha-13 subunits
define a fourth class of G protein alpha subunits. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 88: 5582-5586, 1991.

9. Van Raamsdonk, C. D.; Fitch, K. R.; Fuchs, H.; Hrabe de Angelis,
M.; Barsh, G. S.: Effects of G-protein mutations on skin color. Nature
Genet. 36: 961-968, 2004.

10. Van Raamsdonk, C. D.; Griewank, K. G.; Crosby, M. B.; Garrido,
M. C.; Vemula, S.; Wiesner, T.; Obenauf, A. C.; Wackernagel, W.; Green,
G.; Bouvier, N.; Sozen, M. M.; Baimukanova, G.; Roy, R.; Heguy, A.;
Dolgalev, I.; Khanin, R.; Busam, K.; Speicher, M. R.; O'Brien, J.;
Bastian, B. C.: Mutations in GNA11 in uveal melanoma. New Eng. J.
Med. 363: 2191-2199, 2010.

11. Wilkie, T. M.; Gilbert, D. J.; Olsen, A. S.; Chen, X.-N.; Amatruda,
T. T.; Korenberg, J. R.; Trask, B. J.; de Jong, P.; Reed, R. R.; Simon,
M. I.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland, N. G.: Evolution of the mammalian
G protein alpha subunit multigene family. Nature Genet. 1: 85-91,
1992.

12. Wirth, A.; Benyo, Z.; Lukasova, M.; Leutgeb, B.; Wettschureck,
N.; Gorbey, S.; Orsy, P.; Horvath, B.; Maser-Gluth, C.; Greiner, E.;
Lemmer, B.; Schutz, G.; Gutkind, J. S.; Offermanns, S.: G-12-G-13-LARG-mediated
signaling in vascular smooth muscle is required for salt-induced hypertension. Nature
Med. 14: 64-68, 2008. Note: Erratum: Nature Med. 14: 222 only, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 08/12/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/20/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/6/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/6/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/30/2004
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 7/11/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/12/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/19/1992

EDITED carol: 08/12/2013
terry: 8/6/2012
wwang: 12/27/2010
ckniffin: 12/20/2010
mgross: 3/6/2008
wwang: 11/12/2007
terry: 11/6/2007
alopez: 9/30/2004
mgross: 7/11/2002
alopez: 7/9/2001
carol: 6/28/1999
alopez: 5/12/1998
jamie: 1/8/1997
jamie: 1/7/1997
mark: 3/20/1996
terry: 3/11/1996
carol: 7/1/1992
carol: 5/19/1992

610440	TITLE *610440 SMALL G PROTEIN SIGNALING MODULATOR 3; SGSM3
;;RUN AND TBC1 DOMAINS-CONTAINING PROTEIN 3; RUTBC3;;
MERLIN-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN; MAP;;
MERLIN-BINDING PROTEIN;;
RUSC3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using full-length merlin (NF2; 607379) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid
screen of a brain cDNA library, followed by RACE-PCR of placenta cDNA,
Lee et al. (2004) cloned RUTBC3, which they called MAP. The deduced
749-amino acid protein has a predicted molecular mass of 84.5 kD,
confirmed by in vitro translation. RUTBC3 contains an N-terminal TBC
domain, a central SH3 domain, and a C-terminal RUN domain. Northern blot
analysis detected 2.8- and 3.6-kb transcripts in most human tissues
examined, with highest expression in skeletal muscle and heart, followed
by spleen, thymus, liver, kidney, and placenta. Immunoblot analysis
detected RUTBC3 expression in neuroblastoma, lung carcinoma, mammary
adenocarcinoma, and NIH3T3 cell lines.

By database searching with the sequence of small G protein signaling
modulator-1 (SGSM1; 610440) as query, Yang et al. (2007) identified and
subsequently cloned RUTBC3, which they called SGSM3, from a human brain
cDNA library. The deduced protein shares a RAP (see RAP1A,
179520)-interacting domain (RAPID) (amino acids 301-350), containing 5
conserved blocks of sequence following the RUN domain, with SGSM1 and
SGSM2 (611418). Northern blot analysis detected variable expression of
3.4- and 4.0-kb SGSM3 transcripts in several human tissues. Mouse
tissues showed a similar Sgsm3 expression profile.

GENE FUNCTION

Using in vitro and in vivo assays, Lee et al. (2004) showed that RUTBC3
binds merlin and that the interaction is mediated by the RUTBC3 RUN
domain and the C-terminal region of merlin. By confocal microscopy of
RUTBC3 and merlin expressed in NIH3T3 cells, the authors found that
RUTBC3 localized to perinuclear and membrane regions and merlin
localized to the cytoplasmic membrane. When RUTBC3 was coexpressed with
merlin, RUTBC3 and merlin colocalized to the cytoplasmic membrane. In
NIH3T3 cells, RUTBC3 increased merlin-mediated repression of
AP1-dependent promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner. Expression
of either RUTBC3 or merlin alone reduced colony formation to between 50
and 60% of the control level, and coexpression further inhibited colony
formation to 10% of the control level. Lee et al. (2004) concluded that
RUTBC3 acts in cooperation with merlin to enhance suppression of cell
growth.

Using immunoprecipitation and Western blot analyses of proteins
expressed by transfected human embryonic kidney cells, Yang et al.
(2007) showed that SGSM1, SGSM2, and SGSM3 coimmunoprecipitated with all
RAP proteins examined, including RAP1A, RAP1B (179530), RAP2A (179540),
and RAP2B (179541). Yang et al. (2007) also found that endogenous Rab4
(179511) and Rab11 (see RAB11A, 605570) interacted with all SGSM
proteins in the mouse neuroblastoma cell line; however, Rab3 (see RAB3A,
179490), Rab5 (see RAB5A, 179512), and Rab8 (see RAB8A, 165040)
interacted only with SGSM1 and SGSM3.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yang et al. (2007) determined that the SGSM3 gene contains 22 exons.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SGSM3
gene to chromosome 22 (TMAP NIB2041). By genomic sequence analysis, Yang
et al. (2007) localized the gene to 22q13.1.

REFERENCE 1. Lee, I. K.; Kim, K.-S.; Kim, H.; Lee, J. Y.; Ryu, C. H.; Chun,
H. J.; Lee, K.-U.; Lim, Y.; Kim, Y. H.; Huh, P.-W.; Lee, K.-H.; Han,
S.-I.; Jun T.-Y.; Rha, H. K.: MAP, a protein interacting with a tumor
suppressor, merlin, through the run domain. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 325: 774-783, 2004.

2. Yang, H.; Sasaki, T.; Minoshima, S.; Shimizu, N.: Identification
of three novel proteins (SGSM1, 2, 3) which modulate small G protein
(RAP and RAB)-mediated signaling pathway. Genomics 90: 249-260,
2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/10/2007

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 9/26/2006

EDITED carol: 09/10/2007
carol: 9/10/2007
wwang: 9/26/2006

134690	TITLE *134690 FAU GENE; FAU
;;FBR-MuSV ASSOCIATED UBIQUITOUSLY EXPRESSED GENE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The FAU gene is the cellular homolog of the fox sequence in the
Finkel-Biskis-Reilly murine sarcoma virus (FBR-MuSV) (summary by Kas et
al., 1992).

CLONING

Kas et al. (1992) cloned and sequenced the human FAU gene. Its name is
derived from 'FBR-MuSV associated ubiquitously expressed gene.' FAU
encodes a fusion protein consisting of 133 amino acids. The 59 amino
acids at the carboxy terminus encode the ribosomal protein S30, part of
the small ribosomal subunit. The amino-terminal part of FAU (74 amino
acids) shows strong homology to ubiquitin, a 76-amino acid
multifunctional cellular protein.

MAPPING

Kas et al. (1993) used a cosmid clone containing the human FAU gene for
fluorescence in situ hybridization to localize the gene to 11q13. The
localization was confirmed by hybridization against a panel of somatic
cell hybrids containing different parts of chromosome 11 on a hamster
background. FAU was then further mapped, both on a panel of
radiation-reduced somatic cell hybrids designed to carry different parts
of the 11q13 region and by pulsed field gel electrophoresis. This fine
mapping placed FAU close to the PYGM gene (608455) in a region that
contains oncogenes as well as the putative tumor suppressor genes MEN1
(613733) and ST3 (191181).

By linkage mapping, Casteels et al. (1995) assigned the Fau gene to
mouse chromosome 19.

Courseaux et al. (1996) used a combination of methods to refine maps of
the approximately 5-Mb region of 11q13 that includes MEN1 (613733). They
proposed the following gene order:
cen--PGA--FTH1--UGB--AHNAK--ROM1--MDU1--CHRM1--COX8--EMK1--FKBP2--PLCB3--[PYGM,
ZFM1]--FAU--CAPN1--[MLK3, RELA]--FOSL1--SEA--CFL1--tel.

OTHER FEATURES

Kapranov et al. (2010) demonstrated that human cells contain a novel
type of short RNA (sRNA) with a nongenomically encoded 5-prime poly(U)
tail. They proposed that the presence of these RNAs at the termini of
genes, specifically at the very 3-prime ends of known mRNAs, such as
that for FAU, strongly argues for the presence of a yet uncharacterized
endogenous biochemical pathway in cells that can copy RNA. Kapranov et
al. (2010) showed that this pathway can operate on multiple genes, with
specific enrichment toward transcript-encoding components of the
translational machinery. They also showed that genes are also flanked by
sense, 3-prime polyadenylated sRNAs that are likely to be capped.

REFERENCE 1. Casteels, D.; Poirier, C.; Guenet, J.-L.; Merregaert, J.: The
mouse Fau gene: genomic structure, chromosomal localization, and characterization
of two retropseudogenes. Genomics 25: 291-294, 1995.

2. Courseaux, A.; Grosgeorge, J.; Gaudray, P.; Pannett, A. A. J.;
Forbes, S. A.; Williamson, C.; Bassett, D.; Thakker, R. V.; Teh, B.
T.; Farnebo, F.; Shepherd, J.; Skogseid, B.; Larsson, C.; Giraud,
S.; Zhang, C. X.; Salandre, J.; Calender, A.: Definition of the minimal
MEN1 candidate area based on a 5-Mb integrated map of proximal 11q13. Genomics 37:
354-365, 1996.

3. Kapranov, P.; Ozsolak, F.; Kim, S. W.; Foissac, S.; Lipson, D.;
Hart, C.; Roels, S.; Borel, C.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Monaghan, A. P.;
John, B.; Milos, P. M.: New class of gene-termini-associated human
RNAs suggests a novel RNA copying mechanism. Nature 466: 642-646,
2010.

4. Kas, K.; Michiels, L.; Merregaert, J.: Genomic structure and expression
of the human fau gene: encoding the ribosomal protein S30 fused to
a ubiquitin-like protein. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 187: 927-933,
1992.

5. Kas, K.; Schoenmakers, E.; van de Ven, W.; Weber, G.; Nordenskjold,
M.; Michiels, L.; Merregaert, J.; Larsson, C.: Assignment of the
human FAU gene to a subregion of chromosome 11q13. Genomics 17:
387-392, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/24/2010
Alan F. Scott - updated: 8/5/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/23/1993

EDITED alopez: 03/05/2012
carol: 2/9/2011
mgross: 8/24/2010
terry: 8/24/2010
alopez: 7/9/2010
carol: 3/9/2004
joanna: 8/6/1997
terry: 8/5/1997
terry: 2/10/1995
carol: 3/11/1994
carol: 8/30/1993
carol: 8/23/1993

607290	TITLE *607290 SHISA, XENOPUS, HOMOLOG OF, 5; SHISA5
;;SCOTIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Zhang et al. (2000) cloned a cDNA encoding Scotin, which they called
HSPC217, from CD34 (142230)-positive hematopoietic stem/progenitor
cells. The deduced 170-amino acid protein contains an MYB (189990)
DNA-binding domain repeat signature. Microarray analysis of 5
hematopoietic cell lines detected low-level expression of Scotin in NB4
and Jurkat cells, but no expression was detected in HL60, K562, and U937
cells.

Bourdon et al. (2002) identified mouse Scotin by differential display of
spleen and thymus of normal and p53 (191170) null mice after gamma
irradiation of whole animals. The induced 1.85-kb transcript encodes a
deduced 235-amino acid protein. By searching an EST database using the
mouse sequence as probe, followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE, Bourdon
et al. (2002) cloned a full-length cDNA encoding Scotin from a placenta
cDNA library. The deduced 240-amino acid human protein shares 70%
identity with mouse Scotin. Both the human and the mouse proteins
contain an N-terminal signal sequence, a central transmembrane domain
composed of 18 hydrophobic amino acids, and a proline/tyrosine domain,
and both show an apparent molecular mass of 25 kD by Western blot
analysis. Immunolocalization of exogenously expressed Scotin revealed
colocalization with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) markers. By mutation
analysis, Bourdon et al. (2002) determined that the proline-rich domain
is required for ER localization.

GENE FUNCTION

Bourdon et al. (2002) noted that mouse thymus and spleen cells underwent
massive p53-dependent apoptosis following ultraviolet irradiation or
exposure to actinomycin D. They found that Scotin mRNA was induced
coincident with apoptosis and was expressed only in spleen and thymus of
irradiated wildtype mice and not in the spleen or thymus of irradiated
p53 null mice. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, they
confirmed direct binding between p53 and Scotin, and using a luciferase
reporter plasmid driven by the mouse Scotin promoter, they confirmed
dose-dependent p53 transactiviation. Furthermore, Bourdon et al. (2002)
showed that the apoptosis induced by the p53/Scotin pathway is caspase
dependent.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Bourdon et al. (2002) determined that the
human Scotin gene contains 6 exons. They identified a p53-responsive
element of 9 decamers within the mouse Scotin promoter.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Zhang et al. (2000) mapped the human
Scotin gene to chromosome 3. By genomic sequence analysis, Bourdon et
al. (2002) mapped the Scotin gene to chromosome 3p21.3. They also
identified a Scotin pseudogene on chromosome Xq13.1-q13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Bourdon, J.-C.; Renzing, J.; Robertson, P. L.; Fernandes, K. N.;
Lane, D. P.: Scotin, a novel p53-inducible proapoptotic protein located
in the ER and the nuclear membrane. J. Cell Biol. 158: 235-246,
2002.

2. Zhang, Q.-H.; Ye, M.; Wu, X.-Y.; Ren, S.-X.; Zhao, M.; Zhao, C.-J.;
Fu, G.; Shen, Y.; Fan, H.-Y.; Lu, G.; Zhong, M.; Xu, X.-R.; and 9
others: Cloning and functional analysis of cDNAs with open reading
frames for 300 previously undefined genes expressed in CD34+ hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells. Genome Res. 10: 1546-1560, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/10/2002

EDITED mgross: 04/07/2010
mgross: 10/10/2002

614240	TITLE *614240 FAMILY WITH SEQUENCE SIMILARITY 109, MEMBER B; FAM109B
;;SESQUIPEDALIAN, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 2; SES2;;
INOSITOL POLYPHOSPHATE PHOSPHATASE-INTERACTING PROTEIN, 27-KD, B;
IPIP27B
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

FAM109A (614239) and FAM109B regulate endosomal trafficking and link
OCRL (300535) to the recycling of receptors at sorting and recycling
endosomes (Noakes et al., 2011).

CLONING

By scanning the literature, Swan et al. (2010) identified a Drosophila
protein as a candidate interactor of Ocrl. They named the Drosophila
protein Ses, short for sesquipedalian, meaning an unnecessarily long
description of a simple thing. Database analysis revealed conservation
of Ses from invertebrates to humans. In the same way that the
invertebrate Ocrl gene is duplicated in vertebrates to produce OCRL and
INPP5B (147264), the single Ses gene in invertebrates is duplicated in
vertebrates to produce FAM109A and FAM109B, which Swan et al. (2010)
called SES1 and SES2, respectively. The N-terminal portion of SES1 and
SES2 contains a pleckstrin (PLEK; 173570) homology (PH) domain followed
by a coiled-coil domain. The less conserved C-terminal portion of SES1
and SES2 is primarily unfolded and contains multiple SRC (190090)
homology-3 (SH3) domain-binding PxxP motifs. Immunofluorescence
microscopy of transfected COS-7 cells demonstrated colocalization of
human SES1 and SES2 with human OCRL in endosomes and in larger vesicles
expressing EEA1 (605070) and WDFY2 (610418).

Noakes et al. (2011) reported that the human FAM109B protein, which they
called IPIP27B, contains 259 amino acids. Immunofluorescence microscopy
of transfected human TERT-RPE1 cells demonstrated localization of
IPIP27B and IPIP27A (FAM109A) to recycling endosomes and to the
trans-Golgi network (TGN).

GENE FUNCTION

Using coimmunoprecipitation and pull-down experiments in COS-7 cells and
rat brain extracts, Swan et al. (2010) found that the C termini of human
SES1 and SES2 interacted with the ASH-RhoGAP-like domains of OCRL and
INPP5B. Mutation analysis showed that SES proteins interacted with OCRL
via a conserved C-terminal motif similar to that of another OCRL-binding
protein, APPL1 (604299). Swan et al. (2010) termed this motif the F&H
motif and found that a conserved phenylalanine was critical for OCRL
binding. Pull-down experiments in mouse brain extracts and transfected
COS-7 cells showed that missense mutations in OPRL that disrupted
binding to APPL1 in patients with Lowe syndrome (309000) or Dent
disease-2 (300555) also abolished binding of OCRL to SES1 and SES2. In
addition, APPL1 and the SES proteins could not simultaneously bind to
OCRL. Confocal microscopy suggested that APPL1 and the SES proteins
associated sequentially with endosomes and that the SES proteins
localized to phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate-positive vesicles. Swan et
al. (2010) proposed that Lowe syndrome and Dent disease-2 result from
perturbations at multiples sites within the endocytic pathway.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, pull-down assays, and native
coimmunoprecipitation experiments in HeLa cells, Noakes et al. (2011)
confirmed that the C termini of IPIP27A and IPIP27B bound the C-terminal
ASH and RhoGAP-like domains of OCRL1 and INPP5B. IPIP27A and IPIP27B
also formed homo- and heterodimers. Similar to the results of Swan et
al. (2010), Noakes et al. (2011) found that mutations in OCRL1
associated with Lowe syndrome abolished interaction with IPIP27A and
IPIP27B. Depletion of IPIP27A and/or IPIP27B via RNA interference in
HeLa cells caused enlargement of early endosomes, disrupted recycling of
transferrin receptor (TFRC; 190010), impaired the transfer of CIMPR
(IGF2R; 147280) from endosomes to the TGN, and caused missorting of
lysosomal hydrolases. Noakes et al. (2011) proposed that IPIP27A and
IPIP27B are key players in endocytic trafficking and that defects in
this process are responsible for the pathology of Lowe syndrome and Dent
disease-2.

MAPPING

Gross (2011) mapped the FAM109B gene to chromosome 22q13.2 based on an
alignment of the FAM109B sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC104176) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/21/2011.

2. Noakes, C. J.; Lee, G.; Lowe, M.: The PH domain proteins IPIP27A
and B link OCRL1 to receptor recycling in the endocytic pathway. Molec.
Biol. Cell 22: 606-623, 2011.

3. Swan, L. E.; Tomasini, L.; Pirruccello, M.; Lunardi, J.; De Camilli,
P.: Two closely related endocytic proteins that share a common OCRL-binding
motif with APPL1. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 107: 3511-3516, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 09/21/2011

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 9/21/2011

EDITED mgross: 09/21/2011

600169	TITLE *600169 MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX CLASS I CHAIN-RELATED GENE A; MICA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I genes typically encode
polymorphic peptide-binding chains that are ubiquitously expressed and
mediate the recognition of intracellular antigens by cytotoxic T cells.
Motivated by the association of HLA-B27 with rheumatoid and inflammatory
diseases, Bahram et al. (1994) found a family of sequences in the human
MHC that are highly divergent from all of the known MHC class I genes
and were presumably derived early in the evolution of mammalian class I
genes. These MIC genes (for MHC class I chain-related genes) evolved in
parallel with the human class I genes and with those of most, if not
all, mammalian orders. Bahram et al. (1994) cloned the MICA gene in this
family and stated that it was by far the most divergent mammalian MHC
class I gene known. The MICA gene encodes a 383-amino acid polypeptide
with a predicted mass of 43 kD. It is further distinguished by its
unusual exon-intron organization and preferential expression in
fibroblasts and epithelial cells. However, the presence of distinctive
residues in the MICA amino acid sequence translated from cDNA suggested
that the putative MICA chain folds similarly to typical class I chains
and may have the capacity to bind peptide or other short ligands. Thus,
a second lineage of evolutionarily conserved MHC class I genes was
defined by these results. MICA and other members of this family may have
been selected for specialized functions that are either ancient or
derived from those of typical MHC class I genes, in analogy to some of
the nonclassic mouse H-2 genes.

MAPPING

Bahram et al. (1994) demonstrated that the MICA gene is located near
HLA-B (142830) on chromosome 6. Nalabolu et al. (1996) showed that the
MICA and MICB (602436) genes occur in a 200-kb region spanning the TNFA
(191160) and TNFB (153440) cluster at chromosome 6p21.3.

GENE FUNCTION

T cells with variable region V-delta-1 gamma/delta T-cell receptors (see
TCRG, 186970, and TCRD, 186810) are distributed throughout the human
intestinal epithelium and may function as sentinels that respond to self
antigens. The expression of MICA matches this localization. Groh et al.
(1998) found that MICA and the closely related MICB were recognized by
intestinal epithelial T cells expressing diverse V-delta-1 gamma/delta
TCRs. These interactions involved the alpha-1/alpha-2 domains of MICA
and MICB but were independent of antigen processing. With intestinal
epithelial cell lines, the expression and recognition of MICA and MICB
could be stress induced. Thus, these molecules may broadly regulate
protective responses by the V-delta-1 gamma/delta T cells in the
epithelium of the intestinal tract.

Bauer et al. (1999) found that MICA binds NKG2D (KLRK1; 611817) on
gamma/delta T cells, CD8+ alpha/beta T cells, and natural killer (NK)
cells. Engagement of NKG2D activated cytolytic responses of gamma/delta
T cells and NK cells against transfectants and epithelial tumor cells
expressing MICA. These results defined an activating immunoreceptor-MHC
ligand interaction that may promote antitumor NK- and T-cell responses.

MIC engagement of NKG2D stimulates NK-cell and T-cell effector
functions. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection induces the expression of
stress proteins such as HSP70 (140550). By flow cytometric analysis,
Groh et al. (2001) showed that CMV infection also induces MIC expression
and a concurrent downregulation of MHC class I molecules on fibroblasts
and endothelial cells. Immunohistochemical analysis of lung sections
from patients with CMV interstitial pneumonitis confirmed that induction
of MIC expression also occurs in vivo. Functional analysis of T-cell
cytotoxicity against CMV-infected fibroblasts showed that early after
infection when MIC expression was low, antibodies to MHC class I, but
not to MIC or NKG2D, could block T cell-mediated cytolysis. As MIC
expression increased, antibody masking of MIC or NKG2D reduced target
cell lysis; anti-MHC class I antibodies further reduced cytolysis. The
presence of MICA on stimulator cells also substantially enhanced
cytokine release by T-cell clones, and anti-MIC antibody abrogated this
production, suggesting that the MIC-NKG2D interaction provides an
important costimulatory activity.

Groh et al. (2002) showed that NKG2D binding of MIC induces endocytosis
and degradation of NKG2D. In cancer patients, NKG2D expression was
markedly reduced in both CD8+ tumor-infiltrating T cells and in
peripheral blood T cells, associated with circulating tumor-derived
soluble MICA. The downregulation of NKG2D causes a severe impairment of
tumor antigen-specific effector T cells. Groh et al. (2002) proposed
that this mode of T cell silencing through MIC shedding may promote
tumor immune evasion and inferred that it could also compromise host
resistance to infections.

Using immunohistopathologic and flow cytometric analyses, Hue et al.
(2004) found increased expression of MICA at epithelial cell surfaces in
celiac disease (CD; 212750) patients exposed to gliadin. Patient biopsy
specimens exposed to an IL15 (600554)-inducing gliadin fragment did not
express MICA in the presence of anti-IL15. Cytotoxicity assays showed
that NKG2D played primarily a costimulatory role on intraepithelial
lymphocytes (IELs), with a TCR-mediated signal required for complete
activation. However, in refractory celiac sprue patients, NKG2D mediated
a direct activating signal. ELISA detected soluble MICA in serum in half
of untreated CD patients, but in few patients on gluten-free diets; the
presence of soluble MICA was independent of MICA genotype. Hue et al.
(2004) proposed that villous atrophy in CD may be ascribed to
IEL-mediated damage to enterocytes involving NKG2D-MICA interaction
after gliadin-induced expression of MICA on gut epithelium.

Kriegeskorte et al. (2005) showed that the NKG2D ligands H60 and MICA
could mediate strong suppressive effects on T-cell proliferation. The
suppression did not occur in Il10 (124092)-deficient mice and involved a
receptor other than NKG2D. Kriegeskorte et al. (2005) concluded that
NKG2D ligands can induce strong inhibitory effects in addition to
stimulatory effects

Kaiser et al. (2007) showed that on the surface of tumor cells, MICA
associates with endoplasmic reticulum protein-5 (ERP5; 611099), which,
similar to protein disulfide isomerase (176790), usually assists in the
folding of nascent proteins inside cells. Pharmacologic inhibition of
thioreductase activity and ERP5 gene silencing revealed that
cell-surface ERP5 function is required for MICA shedding. ERP5 and
membrane-anchored MICA formed transitory mixed disulfide complexes from
which soluble MICA was released after proteolytic cleavage near the cell
membrane. Kaiser et al. (2007) suggested that reduction of the seemingly
inaccessible disulfide bond in the membrane-proximal alpha-3 domain of
MICA must involve a large conformational change that enables proteolytic
cleavage. They concluded that their results uncovered a molecular
mechanism whereby domain-specific deconstruction regulates MICA protein
shedding, thereby promoting tumor immune evasion, and identified surface
ERP5 as a strategic target for therapeutic intervention.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Using multiwavelength-anomalous dispersion phases at a resolution of 2.7
angstroms, Li et al. (2001) determined the crystal structure of MICA and
NKG2D. They showed that NKG2D forms a homodimer that interacts with a
MICA monomer.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The predicted amino acid sequence of the MICA chain suggests that it
folds similarly to typical class I chains and may have the capacity to
bind peptides or other short ligands (Bahram et al., 1994). Therefore,
MICA was predicted to have a specialized function in antigen
presentation or T cell recognition. During nucleotide sequence analyses
of the MICA genomic clone, Mizuki et al. (1997) found a triplet repeat
microsatellite polymorphism (GCT/AGC)n in the transmembrane region of
the MICA gene. In 68 HLA homozygous B cell lines, 5 distinct alleles of
this microsatellite sequence were detected. One of them contained an
additional 1-bp insertion that created a frameshift resulting in a
premature termination codon in the transmembrane region. This particular
allele was thought to encode a soluble, secreted form of the MICA
molecule. Mizuki et al. (1997) also investigated this microsatellite
polymorphism in 77 Japanese patients with Behcet disease (109650), which
had previously been known to be associated with HLA-B51. The
microsatellite allele consisting of 6 repetitions of GCT/AGC was present
at significantly higher frequency in the patient population (Pc =
0.00055) than in a control population. Furthermore, the (GCT/AGC)6
allele was present in all B51 positive patients and in an additional 13
B51 negative patients. These results suggested the possibility of a
primary association of Behcet disease with MICA rather than HLA-B.

Wallace et al. (1999) investigated the association of the 16 previously
described external domain alleles and the transmembrane triplet repeats
of the MICA gene with Behcet disease in a Middle Eastern population. The
results showed an increase of MICA*009 in the Behcet disease patient
group (44 of 95; 46%) compared with controls (24 of 102; 24%), giving an
odds ratio (OR) of 2.8. The A6 form of a MICA transmembrane triplet
repeat was found to be significantly raised in the patients (80 of 95;
84%) compared with controls (58 of 102; 57%), giving an OR of 4. The
most significant association was that between Behcet disease and
HLA-B51. Wallace et al. (1999) interpreted the data as indicating that
since both MICA*009 and A6 are in strong linkage disequilibrium with
HLA-B51, they are unlikely to be the susceptibility genes for Behcet
disease but may be markers for additional risk factors.

Mizuki et al. (2000) studied the localization of the pathogenic gene of
Behcet disease using microsatellite analysis of 3 different populations:
Japanese, Greek, and Italian. In genotypic differentiation between
patients and controls, the authors found that only HLA-B51 was
significantly associated with BD in all 3 populations. These results
suggested that the pathogenic gene of BD is HLA-B51 itself and not other
genes located in the vicinity of HLA-B.

The MICA and MICB genes are polymorphic, displaying an unusual
distribution of a number of variant amino acids in their extracellular
alpha-1, alpha-2, and alpha-3 domains. To further define the
polymorphism of MICA, Petersdorf et al. (1999) examined its alleles
among 275 individuals with common and rare HLA genotypes. Of 16
previously defined alleles, 12 were confirmed, and 5 new alleles were
identified. A 2-by-2 analysis of MICA and HLA-B alleles uncovered a
number of significant associations. These results confirmed and extended
previous knowledge on the polymorphism of MICA. Petersdorf et al. (1999)
suggested that a strong positive linkage of certain MICA and HLA-B
alleles may have implications for studies related to MHC-associated
diseases and transplantation.

Komatsu-Wakui et al. (1999) studied polymorphisms in the MICA gene in
Japanese. They observed 8 MICA alleles in Japanese individuals, among
which 1, tentatively named MIC-AMW, had not previously been reported.
There was a strong linkage disequilibrium between MICA and HLA-B loci;
each MICA allele showed strong association with a particular HLA-B
group. Komatsu-Wakui et al. (1999) also identified a MICA-MICB null
haplotype, which was associated with HLAB*4801. In this haplotype, they
found large-scale deletion (of approximately 100 kb), including the
entire MICA gene, and a MICB gene that possessed a stop codon.

To summarize, the MICA gene has a microsatellite repeat, GCT(n), within
exon 5, encoding for a variable number of alanines (Ala = A).
Perez-Rodriguez et al. (2000) described a novel MICA allele with 10 GCT
repeats (A10); 4 different repeats of this microsatellite had been
previously reported: A4, A5, A6, and A9. An association of Behcet
disease with the A9 repeat had been reported by Mizuki et al. (1997).

Gambelunghe et al. (2001) concluded the existence of distinct genetic
markers for childhood/young-onset IDDM (222100) and for adult-onset
IDDM, namely the MICA5 and MICA5.1 alleles, respectively.

Mei et al. (2009) analyzed the relationship between Chlamydia
trachomatis, tubal pathology, and MICA allele polymorphisms in 214
infertile Chinese women. They found no association between MICA alleles
and the presence or absence of tubal pathology in infertile women with
antibodies to C. trachomatis. However, an association was found between
the MICA*008 allele and infertile women without antibodies to C.
trachomatis. Mei et al. (2009) concluded that MICA may modify host
susceptibility to C. trachomatis infection.

Aquino-Galvez et al. (2009) analyzed the MICA gene in 80 sporadic
patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF; 178500) and 201
controls and found a significant increase of MICA*001 allele in the IPF
cohort (odds ratio, 2.91; corrected p = 0.03). In addition, the MICA
*001/*00201 genotype was significantly increased in patients with IPF
compared with healthy controls (odds ratio, 4.72; corrected p = 0.01).
Strong immunoreactive MICA staining was localized in alveolar epithelial
cells and fibroblasts from IPF lungs, whereas control lungs were
negative. Soluble MICA was detected in 35% of IPF patients compared to
12% of control subjects (p = 0.0007). The expression of the MICA
receptor NKG2D (KLRK1; 611817) was significantly decreased in
gamma/delta T cells and natural killer cells obtained from IPF lungs.
Aquino-Galvez et al. (2009) concluded that MICA polymorphisms and
abnormal expression of NKG2D might contribute to IPF susceptibility.

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the MICA
region and progression from chronic hepatitis C to hepatocellular
carcinoma, see 114550.

ANIMAL MODEL

The MICA/MICB locus is not conserved in mice; however, mice do have
counterpart NKG2D ligands, Rae1-beta and H60. Diefenbach et al. (2001)
demonstrated that ectopic expression of these ligands in tumor cell
lines resulted not only in potent rejection mediated by either NK cells
or CD8-positive T cells, but that mice subsequently challenged with
tumor cell lines not expressing the ligands were also immune to the
tumors. Girardi et al. (2001) determined that immunity to cutaneous
malignancies could be mediated by NKG2D-expressing intraepithelial
gamma/delta T cells. Girardi et al. (2001) proposed that the diverse
expression of NKG2D on cytolytic cell types may allow attacks on tumor
cells in different anatomical compartments and that gamma/delta T cells
may be particularly important in skin and gut.

REFERENCE 1. Aquino-Galvez, A.; Perez-Rodriguez, M.; Camarena, A.; Falfan-Valencia,
R.; Ruiz, V.; Montano, M.; Barrera, L.; Sada-Ovalle, I.; Ramirez,
R.; Granados, J.; Pardo, A.; Selman, M.: MICA polymorphisms and decreased
expression of the MICA receptor NKG2D contribute to idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis susceptibility. Hum. Genet. 125: 639-648, 2009.

2. Bahram, S.; Bresnahan, M.; Geraghty, D. E.; Spies, T.: A second
lineage of mammalian major histocompatibility complex class I genes. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 6259-6263, 1994.

3. Bauer, S.; Groh, V.; Wu, J.; Steinle, A.; Phillips, J. H.; Lanier,
L. L.; Spies, T.: Activation of NK cells and T cells by NKG2D, a
receptor for stress-inducible MICA. Science 285: 727-729, 1999.

4. Diefenbach, A.; Jensen, E. R.; Jamieson, A. M.; Raulet, D. H.:
Rae1 and H60 ligands of the NKG2D receptor stimulate tumour immunity. Nature 413:
165-171, 2001.

5. Gambelunghe, G.; Ghaderi, M.; Tortoioli, C.; Falorni, A.; Santeusanio,
F.; Brunetti, P.; Sanjeevi, C. B.; Falorni, A. on behalf of the Umbria
Type 1 Diabetes Registry: Two distinct MICA gene markers discriminate
major autoimmune diabetes types. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86: 3754-3760,
2001.

6. Girardi, M.; Oppenheim, D. E.; Steele, C. R.; Lewis, J. M.; Glusac,
E.; Filler, R.; Hobby, P.; Sutton, B.; Tigelaar, R. E.; Hayday, A.
C.: Regulation of cutaneous malignancy by gamma-delta T cells. Science 294:
605-609, 2001.

7. Groh, V.; Rhinehart, R.; Randolph-Habecker, J.; Topp, M. S.; Riddell,
S. R.; Spies, T.: Costimulation of CD8-alpha-beta T cells by NKG2D
via engagement by MIC induced on virus-infected cells. Nature Immun. 2:
255-260, 2001.

8. Groh, V.; Steinle, A.; Bauer, S.; Spies, T.: Recognition of stress-induced
MHC molecules by intestinal epithelial gamma-delta T cells. Science 279:
1737-1740, 1998.

9. Groh, V.; Wu, J.; Yee, C.; Spies, T.: Tumour-derived soluble MIC
ligands impair expression of NKG2D and T-cell activation. Nature 419:
734-738, 2002.

10. Hue, S.; Mention, J.-J.; Monteiro, R. C.; Zhang, S.; Cellier,
C.; Schmitz, J.; Verkarre, V.; Fodil, N.; Bahram, S.; Cerf-Bensussan,
N.; Caillat-Zucman, S.: A direct role for NKG2D/MICA interaction
in villous atrophy during Celiac disease. Immunity 21: 367-377,
2004.

11. Kaiser, B. K.; Yim, D.; Chow, I.-T.; Gonzalez, S.; Dai, Z.; Mann,
H. H.; Strong, R. K.; Groh, V.; Spies, T.: Disulphide-isomerase-enabled
structure of tumour-associated NKG2D ligands. Nature 447: 482-486,
2007.

12. Komatsu-Wakui, M.; Tokunaga, K.; Ishikawa, Y.; Kashiwase, K.;
Moriyama, S.; Tsuchiya, N.; Ando, H.; Shiina, T.; Geraghty, D. E.;
Inoko, H.; Juji, T.: MIC-A polymorphism in Japanese and a MIC-A-MIC-B
null haplotype. Immunogenetics 49: 620-628, 1999.

13. Kriegeskorte, A. K.; Gebhardt, F. E.; Porcellini, S.; Schiemann,
M.; Stemberger, C.; Franz, T. J.; Huster, K. M.; Carayannopoulos,
L. N.; Yokoyama, W. M.; Colonna, M.; Siccardi, A. G.; Bauer, S.; Busch,
D. H.: NKG2D-independent suppression of T cell proliferation by H60
and MICA. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 11805-11810, 2005.

14. Li, P.; Morris, D. L.; Willcox, B. E.; Steinle, A.; Spies, T.;
Strong, R. K.: Complex structure of the activating immunoreceptor
NKG2D and its MHC class I-like ligand MICA. Nature Immun. 2: 443-451,
2001.

15. Mei, B.; Luo, Q.; Du, K.; Huo, Z.; Wang, F.; Yu, P.: Association
of MICA gene polymorphisms with Chlamydia trachomatis infection and
related tubal pathology in infertile women. Hum. Reprod. 24: 3090-3095,
2009.

16. Mizuki, N.; Ota, M.; Kimura, M.; Ohno, S.; Ando, H.; Katsuyama,
Y.; Yamazaki, M.; Watanabe, K.; Goto, K.; Nakamura, S.; Bahram, S.;
Inoko, H.: Triplet repeat polymorphism in the transmembrane region
of the MICA gene: a strong association of six GCT repetitions with
Behcet disease. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 1298-1303, 1997.

17. Mizuki, N.; Ota, M.; Yabuki, K.; Katsuyama, Y.; Ando, H.; Palimeris,
G. D.; Kaklamani, E.; Accorinti, M.; Pivetti-Pezzi, P.; Ohno, S.;
Inoko, H.: Localization of the pathogenic gene of Behcet's disease
by microsatellite analysis of three different populations. Invest.
Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 41: 3702-3708, 2000.

18. Nalabolu, S. R.; Shukla, H.; Nallur, G.; Parimoo, S.; Weissman,
S. M.: Genes in a 220-kb region spanning the TNF cluster in human
MHC. Genomics 31: 215-222, 1996.

19. Perez-Rodriguez, M.; Corell, A.; Arguello, J. R.; Cox, S. T.;
McWhinnie, A.; Marsh, S. G. E.; Madrigal, J. A.: A new MICA allele
with ten alanine residues in the exon 5 microsatellite. Tissue Antigens 55:
162-165, 2000.

20. Petersdorf, E. W.; Shuler, K. B.; Longton, G. M.; Spies, T.; Hansen,
J. A.: Population study of allelic diversity in the human MHC class
I-related MIC-A gene. Immunogenetics 49: 605-612, 1999.

21. Wallace, G. R.; Verity, D. H.; Delamaine, L. J.; Ohno, S.; Inoko,
H.; Ota, M.; Mizuki, N.; Yabuki, K.; Kondiatis, E.; Stephens, H. A.
F.; Madanat, W.; Kanawati, C. A.; Stanford, M. R.; Vaughan, R. W.
: MIC-A allele profiles and HLA class I associations in Behcet's disease. Immunogenetics 49:
613-617, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/28/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/2/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/14/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/3/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/11/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/16/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/14/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/31/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/4/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/8/2001
Jane Kelly - updated: 1/18/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/13/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/29/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/28/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/11/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/3/1997
Alan F. Scott - updated: 4/9/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/31/1994

EDITED mgross: 10/07/2013
alopez: 9/14/2011
wwang: 7/28/2010
terry: 7/28/2010
mgross: 3/2/2010
terry: 3/2/2010
alopez: 6/28/2007
terry: 6/14/2007
mgross: 11/3/2006
mgross: 5/3/2006
terry: 4/11/2006
alopez: 10/16/2002
alopez: 3/14/2002
mgross: 10/31/2001
mgross: 5/4/2001
mgross: 3/8/2001
carol: 1/18/2001
terry: 1/18/2001
alopez: 7/20/2000
terry: 7/13/2000
mgross: 10/12/1999
terry: 9/29/1999
alopez: 7/30/1999
carol: 7/28/1999
alopez: 3/12/1998
terry: 3/11/1998
mark: 3/3/1997
terry: 2/28/1997
mark: 4/9/1996
terry: 4/9/1996
mark: 4/8/1996
terry: 10/31/1994

606887	TITLE *606887 SULFITE OXIDASE; SUOX
DESCRIPTION Sulfite oxidase (EC 1.8.3.1) is the terminal enzyme in the oxidative
degradation pathway of sulfur-containing amino acids.

CLONING

Garrett et al. (1995) isolated a 2.4-kb cDNA clone of human sulfite
oxidase from a human liver cDNA library. The deduced 488-amino acid
protein has a molecular mass of approximately 52 kD and shows 88%
homology to the rat protein and 67% homology to the chicken protein.
Comparison of 3 sulfite oxidase sequences to several plant and fungal
nitrate reductase sequences revealed a single conserved cysteine with
highly conserved flanking sequences. Garrett et al. (1995) postulated
that the conserved cysteine is a ligand of molybdenum in sulfite oxidase
and nitrate reductase.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Kisker et al. (1997) determined the crystal structure of chicken liver
sulfite oxidase, which is homologous to the human protein, at
1.9-angstrom resolution. They found that each monomer of the dimeric
enzyme consists of 3 domains. At the active site, the Mo is
penta-coordinated by 3 sulfur ligands, 1 oxo group, and 1 water/hydroxo.
A sulfate molecule adjacent to the Mo identifies the substrate binding
pocket.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the sulfite
oxidase gene to chromosome 12 (TMAP sts-AA026389).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Kisker et al. (1997) characterized 4 missense mutations in the SUOX gene
(606887.0001-606887.0004) in cell lines from patients with isolated
sulfite oxidase deficiency (272300). The crystallographic results
predicted that 2 of these mutations (arg160 to gln, 606887.0001 and
ala208 to asp, 606887.0002) are near the sulfate-binding site, whereas
the other mutations (ser370 to tyr, 606887.0003 and gly473 to asp,
606887.0004) occur within the domain mediating dimerization.

Johnson et al. (2002) identified 12 novel mutations in the SUOX gene in
patients with isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency. These included 2
frameshift mutations, 2 homozygous nonsense mutations, and 8 missense
mutations.

Seidahmed et al. (2005) identified a 1-bp deletion in the SUOX gene
(606887.0005) in a male infant with isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SULFITE OXIDASE DEFICIENCY, ISOLATED
SUOX, ARG160GLN

In a cell line from a patient with isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency
(272300), Kisker et al. (1997) found a G-to-A substitution at nucleotide
479 of the cDNA of liver sulfite oxidase, resulting in an arg-to-gln
substitution at amino acid residue 160 (R160Q).

The R160Q mutation was identified by Garrett et al. (1998) in a
5-year-old girl with sulfite oxidase deficiency born of first-cousin
parents of Dutch descent. Recombinant protein containing the R160Q
mutation, expressed in Escherichia coli, contained its full complement
of molybdenum and heme, but exhibited 2% of native activity under
standard assay conditions. Absorption spectroscopy of the isolated
molybdenum domains of native sulfite oxidase and of the R160Q mutant
showed significant differences in the 480- and 350-nm absorption bands,
suggestive of altered geometry at the molybdenum center. Other studies
led to the proposal that under normal circumstances arg160 attracts the
anionic substrate sulfite to the binding site near the molybdenum.

.0002
SULFITE OXIDASE DEFICIENCY, ISOLATED
SUOX, ALA208ASP

In a cell line from a patient with isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency
(272300), Kisker et al. (1997) found a C-to-A substitution at nucleotide
623 of the cDNA of liver sulfite oxidase, resulting in an ala-to-asp
substitution at amino acid 208.

.0003
SULFITE OXIDASE DEFICIENCY, ISOLATED
SUOX, SER370TYR

In a cell line from a patient with isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency
(272300), Kisker et al. (1997) found a G-to-A substitution at nucleotide
1109 of the cDNA of liver sulfite oxidase, resulting in a ser-to-tyr
substitution at amino acid 370.

.0004
SULFITE OXIDASE DEFICIENCY, ISOLATED
SUOX, GLY473ASP

In a cell line from a patient with isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency
(272300), Kisker et al. (1997) found a G-to-A substitution at nucleotide
1418 of the cDNA of liver sulfite oxidase, resulting in a gly-to-asp
substitution at amino acid 473.

.0005
SULFITE OXIDASE DEFICIENCY, ISOLATED
SUOX, 1-BP DEL, 1244G

In a male infant with isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency (272300) from
a consanguineous Arab family, Seidahmed et al. (2005) identified
homozygosity for a 1-bp deletion (1244delG) in the SUOX gene, predicting
a frameshift at amino acid 117 and resulting in a mutant protein of only
128 amino acids with total truncation of the molybdopterin and
dimerizing domains. The parents and 1 unaffected sib were heterozygous
for the deletion.

REFERENCE 1. Garrett, R. M.; Bellissimo, D. B.; Rajagopalan, K. V.: Molecular
cloning of human liver sulfite oxidase. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1262:
147-149, 1995.

2. Garrett, R. M.; Johnson, J. L.; Graf, T. N.; Feigenbaum, A.; Rajagopalan,
K. V.: Human sulfite oxidase R160Q: identification of the mutation
in a sulfite oxidase-deficient patient and expression and characterization
of the mutant enzyme. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 6394-6398, 1998.

3. Johnson, J. L.; Coyne, K. E.; Garrett, R. M.; Zabot, M.-T.; Dorche,
C.; Kisker, C.; Rajagopalan, K. V.: Isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency:
identification of 12 novel SUOX mutations in 10 patients.(Abstract) Hum.
Mutat. 20: 74 only, 2002.

4. Kisker, C.; Schindelin, H.; Pacheco, A.; Wehbi, W. A.; Garrett,
R. M.; Rajagopalan, K. V.; Enemark, J. H.; Rees, D. C.: Molecular
basis of sulfite oxidase deficiency from the structure of sulfite
oxidase. Cell 91: 973-983, 1997.

5. Seidahmed, M. Z.; Alyamani, E. A.; Rashed, M. S.; Saadallah, A.
A.; Abdelbasit, O. B.; Shaheed, M. M.; Rasheed, A.; Hamid, F. A.;
Sabry, M. A.: Total truncation of the molybdopterin/dimerization
domains of SUOX protein in an Arab family with isolated sulfite oxidase
deficiency. Am. J. Med. Genet. 136A: 205-209, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/28/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/27/2002

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 4/26/2002

EDITED wwang: 01/03/2006
terry: 12/28/2005
tkritzer: 9/10/2002
tkritzer: 8/29/2002
terry: 8/27/2002
carol: 5/8/2002
ckniffin: 5/8/2002

136515	TITLE *136515 FOS-LIKE ANTIGEN 1; FOSL1
;;FOS-RELATED ANTIGEN 1; FRA1
DESCRIPTION 
GENE FUNCTION

Osteoclasts are bone-resorbing cells derived from hematopoietic
precursors of the monocyte-macrophage lineage. Mice lacking Fos (164810)
develop osteopetrosis (see 166600) due to an early differentiation block
in the osteoclast lineage. Matsuo et al. (2000) investigated the
mechanism by which Fos exerts its specific function in osteoclast
differentiation. They showed by retroviral-gene transfer that all 4 Fos
proteins--Fos, FosB (164772), Fosl1, and Fosl2 (601575)--but not the Jun
proteins (e.g., 165160), rescued the differentiation block in vitro.
Structure-function analysis demonstrated that the major carboxy-terminal
transactivation domains of Fos and FosB are dispensable and that Fosl1,
which lacks transactivation domains, has the highest rescue activity.
Moreover, a transgene expressing Fosl1 rescued the osteopetrosis of Fos
mutant mice in vivo. The osteoclast differentiation factor Rankl
(602642) induced transcription of Fosl1 in a Fos-dependent manner,
thereby establishing a link between Rank signaling and the expression of
Ap1 proteins in osteoclast differentiation.

Kustikova et al. (1998) found a correlation between Fra1 expression and
mesenchymal characteristics in cell lines of epithelial tumor origin.
Exogenous expression of Fra1 in epithelioid cells resulted in
morphologic changes that resembled fibroblastoid conversion, with cells
acquiring elongated shape and increased motility and invasiveness in
vitro. The morphologic alterations were accompanied by transcriptional
activation of genes whose expression is often induced at late stages of
tumor progression.

MAPPING

Sinke et al. (1993) applied the designation 'reverse mapping' to the
identification of a previously known gene within a cosmid for which the
localization was already known. For the identification of sequence
tagged sites (STSs) within cosmid clones derived from the 11q13 region,
they subcloned a number of single-copy BamHI fragments. In one of the
subclones, they found a sequence that matched perfectly with the 5-prime
end of the cDNA sequence for human FRA1. The FRA1 fragment was contained
within a clone previously mapped to region V of a long-range contig map
of 11q13. The localization to chromosome 11 was cross-checked by
hybridization to a panel of somatic cell hybrids. Thus another oncogene
was assigned to the region implicated in a number of different forms of
malignancy.

ANIMAL MODEL

Eferl et al. (2004) noted that Fra1 knockout in mice results in
embryonic death in utero, likely due to placental defects. Using
conditional deletion, they deleted Fra1 throughout mouse embryos, but
not in extraembryonic tissues, such as placenta. Homozygous mutant mice
were viable, but they developed osteopenia due to reduced bone
formation. The numbers of osteoblasts and osteoclasts were unchanged,
although in vitro and in vivo analysis revealed severely reduced
bone-forming activity of osteoblasts. Eferl et al. (2004) concluded that
the defect was likely due to reduced expression of the bone matrix genes
osteocalcin (112260), collagen-1A2 (120160), and matrix Gla protein
(154870).

REFERENCE 1. Eferl, R.; Hoebertz, A.; Schilling, A. F.; Rath, M.; Karreth, F.;
Kenner, L.; Amling, M.; Wagner, E. F.: The Fos-related antigen Fra-1
is an activator of bone matrix formation. EMBO J. 23: 2789-2799,
2004.

2. Kustikova, O.; Kramerov, D.; Grigorian, M.; Berezin, V.; Bock,
E.; Lukanidin, E.; Tulchinsky, E.: Fra-1 induces morphological transformation
and increases in vitro invasiveness and motility of epithelioid adenocarcinoma
cells. Molec. Cell. Biol. 18: 7095-7105, 1998.

3. Matsuo, K.; Owens, J. M.; Tonko, M.; Elliott, C.; Chambers, T.
J.; Wagner, E. F.: Fosl1 is a transcriptional target of c-Fos during
osteoclast differentiation. Nature Genet. 24: 184-187, 2000.

4. Sinke, R. J.; Tanigami, A.; Nakamura, Y.; Geurts van Kessel, A.
: Reverse mapping of the gene encoding the human fos-related antigen-1
(fra-1) within chromosome band 11q13. Genomics 18: 165 only, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/6/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/28/2000
Alan F. Scott - updated: 8/5/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/15/1993

EDITED carol: 02/09/2011
mgross: 1/10/2005
terry: 1/6/2005
alopez: 1/31/2000
terry: 1/28/2000
mgross: 4/8/1999
terry: 8/5/1997
mark: 12/16/1996
carol: 10/15/1993

612611	TITLE *612611 LATE CORNIFIED ENVELOPE PROTEIN 2C; LCE2C
;;LATE ENVELOPE PROTEIN 11; LEP11
DESCRIPTION For background information on the LCE gene cluster, see 612603.

CLONING

By database analysis to identify human orthologs of mouse genes encoding
late envelope proteins (LEPs), Marshall et al. (2001) identified LCE2C,
which they called LEP11. RT-PCR detected high LEP11 expression in skin
and esophagus, but not in heart.

Using real-time PCR, Jackson et al. (2005) detected low LCE2C expression
in human fetal, arm, penal, and abdominal skin, and little to no
expression in vulva, tongue, and esophagus.

GENE FUNCTION

Jackson et al. (2005) showed that expression of LCE2 genes, including
LCE2C, was upregulated in cultured normal human keratinocytes by both
ultraviolet irradiation and calcium.

GENE STRUCTURE

Jackson et al. (2005) determined that the LCE2C gene contains 2 exons.
Exon 1 is noncoding.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Marshall et al. (2001) mapped the LCE2C
gene within the LCE gene cluster on chromosome 1q21. Jackson et al.
(2005) stated that the mouse Lce2c gene maps to a syntenic LCE gene
cluster on chromosome 3F1.

REFERENCE 1. Jackson, B.; Tilli, C. M. L. J.; Hardman, M. J.; Avilion, A. A.;
MacLeod, M. C.; Ashcroft, G. S.; Byrne, C.: Late cornified envelope
family in differentiating epithelia--response to calcium and ultraviolet
irradiation. J. Invest. Derm. 124: 1062-1070, 2005.

2. Marshall, D.; Hardman, M. J.; Nield, K. M.; Byrne, C.: Differentially
expressed late constituents of the epidermal cornified envelope. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 13031-13036, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/11/2009

EDITED mgross: 02/12/2009

137167	TITLE *137167 GAMMA-GLUTAMYL CARBOXYLASE; GGCX
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Gamma-glutamyl carboxylase accomplishes the posttranslational
modification required for the activity of all of the vitamin K-dependent
proteins (Wu et al., 1991). These include some of the blood coagulation
and anticoagulation proteins as well as bone gamma-carboxyglutamic acid
(Gla) protein (BGLAP; 112260) and bone matrix protein (MGP; 154870).

CLONING

Wu et al. (1991) cloned a cDNA corresponding to GGCX and showed that
expression resulted in an increase in carboxylase activity in microsomes
of transfected cells. The GGCX gene encodes a 758-residue integral
membrane protein with 3 transmembrane domains near its amino terminus.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wu et al. (1997) found that the GGCX gene spans about 13 kb and contains
about 15 exons.

GENE FUNCTION

Vitamin K is a necessary cofactor for the hepatic carboxylation of
glutamic acid residues in a number of proteins, including the
procoagulants factors II, VII, IX, and X; the anticoagulants protein C
and protein S; and other proteins such as osteocalcin and matrix Gla
protein (Brenner et al., 1990). This carboxylation is required for
normal hemostasis, because it enables calcium binding and attachment of
the procoagulants and anticoagulants to phospholipids. Gamma-glutamyl
carboxylase is an integral membrane microsomal enzyme located in the
rough endoplasmic reticulum. It carboxylates glutamate residues located
in the Gla domain of vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors. The
carboxylation reaction is dependent on reduced vitamin K, which is
converted to vitamin K epoxide during carboxylation, and must be
regenerated by the vitamin K epoxide reductase (EPHX1; 132810) for
carboxylation to continue.

MAPPING

Kuo et al. (1995) mapped the GGCX gene to chromosome 2 using
human/rodent somatic cell hybrid DNAs and localized it to 2p12 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Combined Deficiency of Vitamin K-Dependent Clotting Factors-1

Brenner et al. (1990) described an offspring of a consanguineous
marriage with hereditary combined deficiency of vitamin K-dependent
procoagulants (VKCFD1; 277450). Epoxide reductase function was found to
be normal. Impairment of Gla-dependent calcium reduction binding was
suggested by cross-immunoelectrophoresis studies of prothrombin. They
therefore suggested that the abnormality in the kindred resulted from
GGCX deficiency, with autosomal recessive inheritance. Brenner et al.
(1998) identified a homozygous T-to-G transversion at codon 394 of the
GGCX gene that resulted in substitution of arginine for leucine (R394L;
137167.0001). The mutation was identified in all 4 children with
clinical and analytical findings of hereditary deficiency of all vitamin
K-dependent coagulation factors. This was the first reported mutation in
the GGCX gene.

Rost et al. (2004) reported what they stated to be the third case of
hereditary combined deficiency of the vitamin K-dependent coagulation
factors (VKCFD1) caused by mutation in the GGCX gene
(137167.0003-137167.0004).

- PXE-like Disorder with Multiple Coagulation Factor Deficiency

Vanakker et al. (2007) described a pseudoxanthoma elasticum-like
phenotype with associated multiple coagulation factor deficiency
(610842). They found mutations in the GGCX gene in 6 of 7 patients with
this phenotype and compared the findings in these 6 patients with the 4
previously described in the literature. None of the patients had
mutations in the ABCC6 gene (603234), which is the site of mutations in
pseudoxanthoma elasticum (264800), and none had mutations in the VKORC1
gene (608547), which is the site of mutations causing type 2 combined
deficiency of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors (607473). Marked
laxity of skin which extended over the trunk was a feature in these
patients. Changes in the eye consisted of limited angioid streaks or
peau d'orange with no progression and no impairment of vision. Elastic
fibers in the dermis showed fragmentation and calcification as in PXE,
although by electron microscopy it was suggested that the changes could
be differentiated from those of PXE. Mutation analysis indicated that
PXE-like disorder with multiple coagulation factor deficiency is
inherited as a recessive. Vanakker et al. (2007) found homozygosity for
a missense mutation in 1 case (137167.0007), and compound heterozygosity
in 3 other cases (e.g., 137167.0005). In 2 other cases, only 1 mutant
allele was characterized (137167.0010, 137167.0011).

In 2 sisters with PXE-like disorder and multiple coagulation factor
deficiency, Li et al. (2009) identified compound heterozygosity for the
V255M (137167.0012) and S300F (137167.0013) mutations in the GGCX gene.
Skin biopsies from the patients showed undercarboxylated matrix gla
proteins (MGP; 154870) in the areas of abnormal mineralization. The
family was unusual in that the sisters' mother and maternal aunt had
PXE-like skin changes, but no coagulopathy. Genetic analysis showed
compound heterozygosity for the V255M mutation and a common mutation in
the ABCC6 gene (R1141X; 603234.0001), which can cause classic PXE
(264800) when present with another ABCC6 mutation, but not in isolation.
The findings suggested that the mother and aunt had digenic inheritance
of PXE. In contrast, the unaffected father and brother, who were
compound heterozygous for S300F and the ABCC6 R1141X mutation had no
signs of either disorder. However, plasma levels of total
undercarboxylated MGP in the father and son were at the lower end of
normal. Although the reasons for the lack of clinical findings in the
father and son remained unclear, Li et al. (2009) concluded that
undercarboxylation of MGP plays a critical role in aberrant
mineralization of tissues in PXE.

ANIMAL MODEL

Congenital deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent blood coagulation
factors due to a defective vitamin K-dependent carboxylase was studied
in Devon Rex cats by Soute et al. (1992).

Zhu et al. (2007) found that Ggcx +/-mice developed normally, exhibited
normal survival and fertility, and showed normal plasma levels of
vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors and prothrombin. However, only
50% of Ggcx -/- offspring survived to term, and those that were born
succumbed to massive intraabdominal hemorrhage shortly after birth.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VITAMIN K-DEPENDENT CLOTTING FACTORS, COMBINED DEFICIENCY OF, 1
GGCX, LEU394ARG

Brenner et al. (1998) described a homozygous leu394-to-arg (L394R)
missense mutation in exon 9 of the GGCX gene in all 4 affected members
of an inbred kindred with deficiency of vitamin K-dependent blood
coagulation factors (277450). The first case, reported by Brenner et al.
(1990), was presented shortly after birth with multiple ecchymoses and
bleeding from puncture sites. An older sib had died at birth from
uncontrollable umbilical bleeding. The second patient presented at 5
months of age with knee hemarthrosis. The third and fourth affected
members were examined shortly after birth and were found to have
deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent procoagulants and anticoagulants.
Thus, chronic weekly administration of vitamin K resulted in a stable
increase of procoagulant and anticoagulant levels and successfully
prevented bleeding during a follow-up period of 30 patient years.

By Western blot analysis, Mutucumarana et al. (2000) showed that both
wildtype and L394R are expressed as 95-kD proteins. They found that the
variant appears to have a defect in its glutamate-binding site. In
addition, they identified a striking defect in the catalytic efficiency
of the carboxylase towards a phe-leu-glu-glu-leu (FLEEL) substrate.

.0002
VITAMIN K-DEPENDENT CLOTTING FACTORS, COMBINED DEFICIENCY OF, 1
GGCX, TRP501SER

Spronk et al. (2000) described a Lebanese boy, with consanguineous
parents, who suffered from combined congenital deficiency of all vitamin
K-dependent coagulation factors (277450). He was found to be homozygous
for a point mutation in exon 11 of the gamma-glutamyl carboxylase gene,
converting codon 501 from TGG to TCG and resulting in a trp501-to-ser
(W501S) mutation. Oral vitamin K1 administration resulted in resolution
of the clinical symptoms. Ten asymptomatic relatives were heterozygous
for the mutation.

.0003
VITAMIN K-DEPENDENT CLOTTING FACTORS, COMBINED DEFICIENCY OF, 1
GGCX, ARG485PRO

In a patient with combined deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent blood
coagulation factors (277450), Rost et al. (2004) identified compound
heterozygosity for mutations in the GGCX gene: a G-to-C transversion in
exon 11, resulting in an arg485-to-pro (R485P) substitution, and a
G-to-T transversion in the 3-prime splice site of intron 2, resulting in
loss of exon 3 (137167.0004).

.0004
VITAMIN K-DEPENDENT CLOTTING FACTORS, COMBINED DEFICIENCY OF, 1
GGCX, IVS2AS, G-T

See 137167.0003 and Rost et al. (2004).

.0005
PXE-LIKE DISORDER WITH MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GGCX, PHE299SER

In a patient reported by Le Corvaisier-Pieto et al. (1996) with a
PXE-like disorder with multiple coagulation factor deficiency (610842),
Vanakker et al. (2007) found compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in
the GGCX gene: 924T-C (phe299 to ser; F299S) in exon 8 and 1700G-A
(gly558 to arg; G558R) in exon 12. The patient was a male, aged 40, with
onset of skin symptoms at age 16, generalized skin folds with laxity,
and positive calcium staining of elastic fibers.

.0006
PXE-LIKE DISORDER WITH MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GGCX, GLY558ARG

See 137167.0005 and Vanakker et al. (2007).

.0007
PXE-LIKE DISORDER WITH MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GGCX, TRP493SER

In a 46-year-old woman with a PXE-like disorder with multiple
coagulation factor deficiency (610842), Vanakker et al. (2007)
identified homozygosity for a missense mutation in exon 12 of the GGCX
gene, a 1506G-C transversion that resulted in a trp493 to ser (W493S)
amino acid substitution. The patient had onset of skin symptoms at age
18 years and showed generalized skin folds with laxity. Limited angioid
streaks with no visual defect were present in the eyes. Calcium stain
was positive and deficiency of multiple vitamin K-dependent coagulation
factors was present. Cerebral aneurysms discovered at ages 36 and 46
years were successfully treated.

.0008
PXE-LIKE DISORDER WITH MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GGCX, GLN374TER

In a 46-year-old woman and 44-year-old man with PXE-like disorder with
multiple coagulation factor deficiency (610842), Vanakker et al. (2007)
found compound heterozygosity for the same 2 mutations in the GGCX gene:
1149C-T in exon 8 (gln374 to ter; Q374X) and 1339G-T in exon 12 (gly537
to tyr; G537Y).

.0009
PXE-LIKE DISORDER WITH MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GGCX, GLY537TYR

See 137167.0008 and Vanakker et al. (2007).

.0010
PXE-LIKE DISORDER WITH MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GGCX, ARG476CYS

In a 67-year-old woman with PXE-like disorder with multiple coagulation
factor deficiency (610842), Vanakker et al. (2007) found a missense
mutation in exon 10 of the GGCX gene, a 1454C-T transition that resulted
in an arg476-to-cys substitution (R476). No mutation was identified on
the other allele.

.0011
PXE-LIKE DISORDER WITH MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GGCX, ARG476HIS

In a 32-year-old woman with PXE-like disorder with multiple coagulation
factor deficiency (610842), Vanakker et al. (2007) found a missense
mutation in exon 10 of the GGCX gene, a 1455G-A transition that resulted
in an arg476-to-his amino acid substitution (R476H). No mutation was
identified on the other allele.

.0012
PXE-LIKE DISORDER WITH MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GGCX, VAL255MET

In 2 sisters with PXE-like disorder and multiple coagulation factor
deficiency (610842), Li et al. (2009) identified compound heterozygosity
for a 791G-A transition in exon 7 of the GGCX gene, resulting in a
val255-to-met (V255M) substitution, and a 927C-T transition in exon 8 of
the GGCX gene, resulting in a ser300-to-phe (S300F; 137167.0013)
substitution. Neither mutation was identified in 100 control alleles.
Val255 was highly conserved, whereas ser300 was less well conserved. The
sisters showed milder coagulation factor defects than previously
reported patients, suggesting some residual GGCX activity. In vitro
functional expression studies using a small peptide showed that the
V255M mutant had about 5% residual GGCX activity and the S300F variant
had essentially no activity. However, when present with a factor X
propeptide, the V255M mutant showed GGCX activity similar to wildtype,
whereas the S300F mutant activity remained low at 3% of wildtype. Skin
biopsies from the patients showed undercarboxylated matrix gla proteins
(MGP; 154870) in the areas of abnormal mineralization. The family was
unusual in that the sisters' mother and maternal aunt had mild PXE-like
skin changes, but no coagulopathy. Skin biopsies in the mother and aunt
showed undercarboxylated MGP in the areas of abnormal mineralization.
Genetic analysis showed compound heterozygosity for the V255M mutation
and a common mutation in the ABCC6 gene (R1141X; 603234.0001), which can
cause classic PXE (264800) when present with another ABCC6 mutation, but
not in isolation. The findings suggested that the mother and aunt had
digenic inheritance of a 'forme fruste' of PXE (177850). In contrast,
the unaffected father and brother, who were compound heterozygous for
the S300F mutation and the ABCC6 R1141X mutation had no signs of either
disorder on clinical exam but refused to participate in further clinical
testing. Plasma levels of total undercarboxylated MGP in the father and
son were at the lower end of normal. Although the reasons for the lack
of clinical findings in the father and son remained unclear, Li et al.
(2009) concluded that undercarboxylation of MGP plays a critical role in
aberrant mineralization of tissues in PXE.

.0013
PXE-LIKE DISORDER WITH MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY
GGCX, SER300PHE

See 137167.0012 and Li et al. (2009).

REFERENCE 1. Brenner, B.; Sanchez-Vega, B.; Wu, S.-M.; Lanir, N.; Stafford,
D. W.; Solera, J.: A missense mutation in a gamma-glutamyl carboxylase
gene causes combined deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent blood coagulation
factors. Blood 92: 4554-4559, 1998.

2. Brenner, B.; Tavori, S.; Zivelin, A.; Keller, C. B.; Suttie, J.
W.; Tatarsky, I.; Seligsohn, U.: Hereditary deficiency of all vitamin
K-dependent procoagulants and anticoagulants. Brit. J. Haemat. 75:
537-542, 1990.

3. Kuo, W.-L.; Stafford, D. W.; Cruces, J.; Gray, J.; Solera, J.:
Chromosomal localization of the gamma-glutamyl carboxylase gene at
2p12. Genomics 25: 746-748, 1995.

4. Le Corvaisier-Pieto, C.; Joly, P.; Thomine, E.; Lair, G.; Lauret,
P.: Generalized pseudoxanthoma elasticum combined with vitamin K
dependent clotting factors deficiency. Ann. Derm. Venerol. 123:
555-558, 1996.

5. Li, Q.; Grange, D. K.; Armstrong, N. L.; Whelan, A. J.; Hurley,
M. Y.; Rishavy, M. A.; Hallgren, K. W.; Berkner, K. L.; Schurgers,
L. J.; Jiang, Q.; Uitto, J.: Mutations in the GGCX and ABCC6 genes
in a family with pseudoxanthoma elasticum-like phenotypes. J. Invest.
Derm. 129: 553-563, 2009.

6. Mutucumarana, V. P.; Stafford, D. W.; Stanley, T. B.; Jin, D.-Y.;
Solera, J.; Brenner, B.; Azerad, R.; Wu, S.-M.: Expression and characterization
of the naturally occurring mutation L394R in human gamma-glutamyl
carboxylase. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 32572-32577, 2000.

7. Rost, S.; Fregin, A.; Koch, D.; Compes, M.; Muller, C. R.; Oldenburg,
J.: Compound heterozygous mutations in the gamma-glutamyl carboxylase
gene cause combined deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent blood coagulation
factors. Brit. J. Haemat. 126: 546-549, 2004.

8. Soute, B. A. M.; Ulrich, M. M. W.; Watson, A. D. J.; Maddison,
J. E.; Ebberink, R. H. M.; Vermmer, C.: Congenital deficiency of
all vitamin K-dependent blood coagulation factors due to a defective
vitamin K-dependent carboxylase in Devon Rex cats. Thromb. Haemost. 68:
521-525, 1992.

9. Spronk, H. M. H.; Farah, R. A.; Buchanan, G. R.; Vermeer, C.; Soute,
B. A. M.: Novel mutation in the gamma-glutamyl carboxylase gene resulting
in congenital combined deficiency of all vitamin K-dependent blood
coagulation factors. Blood 96: 3650-3652, 2000.

10. Vanakker, O. M.; Martin, L.; Gheduzzi, D.; Leroy, B. P.; Loeys,
B. L.; Guerci, V. I.; Matthys, D.; Terry, S. F.; Coucke, P. J.; Pasquali-Ronchetti,
I.; De Paepe, A.: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum-like phenotype with cutis
laxa and multiple coagulation factor deficiency represents a separate
genetic entity. J. Invest. Derm. 127: 581-587, 2007.

11. Wu, S.-M.; Cheung, W.-F.; Frazier, D.; Stafford, D. W.: Cloning
and expression of the cDNA for human gamma-glutamyl carboxylase. Science 254:
1634-1636, 1991.

12. Wu, S. M.; Stafford, D. W.; Frazier, L. D.; Fu, Y. Y.; High, K.
A.; Chu, K.; Sanchez-Vega, B.; Solera, J.: Genomic sequence and transcription
start site for the human gamma-glutamyl carboxylase. Blood 89: 4058-4062,
1997.

13. Zhu, A.; Sun, H.; Raymond, R. M., Jr.; Furie, B. C.; Furie, B.;
Bronstein, M.; Kaufman, R. J.; Westrick, R.; Ginsburg, D.: Fatal
hemorrhage in mice lacking gamma-glutamyl carboxylase. Blood 109:
5270-5275, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/14/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/30/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/6/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/20/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/5/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/1/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/2/1992

EDITED carol: 11/02/2010
carol: 4/15/2010
ckniffin: 11/3/2009
wwang: 10/30/2009
ckniffin: 10/14/2009
mgross: 11/30/2007
terry: 11/30/2007
alopez: 3/12/2007
terry: 3/6/2007
tkritzer: 10/22/2004
terry: 10/20/2004
mcapotos: 1/17/2001
mcapotos: 1/11/2001
terry: 1/5/2001
mgross: 12/12/2000
terry: 12/11/2000
mgross: 3/16/1999
carol: 2/15/1999
terry: 2/1/1999
terry: 5/3/1995
mark: 4/19/1995
jason: 7/28/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/2/1992

605701	TITLE *605701 TRIPARTITE MOTIF-CONTAINING PROTEIN 10; TRIM10
;;RFB30;;
HEMATOPOIETIC RING FINGER 1; HERF1;;
RING FINGER PROTEIN 9, FORMERLY; RNF9, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening a human chromosome 6-specific library with a B30.2
domain-encoding exon that had been mapped to 6p21.3 as the probe, Henry
et al. (1997) obtained a cDNA encoding RFB30. Sequence analysis
predicted that the 481-amino acid protein contains a RING finger-B box
domain encoded by exon 1, a coiled-coil domain encoded by exons 2
through 6, and a B30.2 domain encoded by exon 7.

Harada et al. (1999) isolated a cDNA encoding mouse Herf1. Northern blot
analysis of mouse tissue detected a 2.3-kb transcript only in spleen and
bone marrow erythroid cells. In embryonic mice, expression was detected
on day 11.5 at the beginning of erythropoiesis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Henry et al. (1997) determined that the TRIM10 gene contains at least 7
exons.

MAPPING

Henry et al. (1997) mapped the TRIM10 gene to chromosome 6p21.3.

REFERENCE 1. Harada, H.; Harada, Y.; O'Brien, D. P.; Rice, D. S.; Naeve, C.
W.; Downing, J. R.: HERF1, a novel hematopoiesis-specific RING finger
protein, is required for terminal differentiation of erythroid cells. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 19: 3808-3815, 1999.

2. Henry, J.; Ribouchon, M.-T.; Depetris, D.; Mattei, M.-G.; Offer,
C.; Tazi-Ahnini, R.; Pontarotti, P.: Cloning, structural analysis,
and mapping of the B30 and B7 multigenic families to the major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) and other chromosomal regions. Immunogenetics 46:
383-395, 1997.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/27/2001

EDITED mgross: 04/19/2005
mgross: 2/27/2001

615263	TITLE *615263 FAMILY WITH SEQUENCE SIMILARITY 86, MEMBER A; FAM86A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Methyltransferases catalyze the transfer of a methyl group from a donor,
generally S-adenosyl-L-methionine (AdoMet), to acceptor molecules,
including proteins, DNA, RNA, lipids, and small metabolites. FAM86A
belongs to a family of protein lysine methyltransferases that methylate
nonhistone proteins (Cloutier et al., 2013).

CLONING

By searching databases for sequences similar to METTL22 (615261),
Cloutier et al. (2013) identified FAM86A. The deduced protein is made up
predominantly of a Rossmann fold of alternating beta strands and alpha
helices, with a conserved AdoMet-binding site near the N terminus.
Epitope-tagged FAM86A was predominantly expressed in a diffuse
cytoplasmic distribution in transfected HeLa cells.

GENE FUNCTION

By affinity purification, SDS-PAGE, and mass spectrometry, Cloutier et
al. (2013) found that FAM86A expressed in HEK293 cells interacted with
FAM86B and FAM86C.

MAPPING

Hartz (2013) mapped the FAM86A gene to chromosome 16p13.3 based on an
alignment of the FAM86A sequence (GenBank GENBANK AY037162) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Cloutier, P.; Lavallee-Adam, M.; Faubert, D.; Blanchette, M.; Coulombe,
B.: A newly uncovered group of distantly related lysine methyltransferases
preferentially interact with molecular chaperones to regulate their
activity. PLoS Genet. 9: e1003210, 2013. Note: Electronic Article.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/29/2013.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/29/2013

EDITED mgross: 05/31/2013

177046	TITLE *177046 PROTEASOME SUBUNIT, BETA-TYPE, 8; PSMB8
;;LARGE MULTIFUNCTIONAL PROTEASE 7; LMP7;;
PROTEASOME-RELATED GENE 7;;
RING10;;
PROTEASOME SUBUNIT BETA-5I
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The immunoproteasome, a distinct class of proteasome found predominantly
in monocytes and lymphocytes, shapes the antigenic repertoire presented
on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules. PSMB8
encodes the chymotrypsin-like catalytic subunit of the immunoproteasome
(Muchamuel et al., 2009).

GENE STRUCTURE

Agarwal et al. (2010) noted that the PSMB8 gene contains 6 exons with
alternative splicing of exons 1A and 1B.

MAPPING

Antigen processing involves the generation of peptides from cytosolic
proteins and their transport into the endoplasmic reticulum, where they
associate with MHC class I molecules. Two genes have been identified in
the MHC class II region, TAP1 (170260) and TAP2 (170261), that are
thought to encode the peptide transport proteins. Glynne et al. (1991)
reported a proteasome-related sequence, RING10, mapping between the
transporter genes on chromosome 6p21.3.

GENE FUNCTION

Muchamuel et al. (2009) showed that PR-957, a selective inhibitor of
LMP7, blocked presentation of MHC class I-restricted antigens in vitro
and in vivo. PR-957 also blocked production of IL23 (see 605580) by
activated monocytes and IL2 (147680) and IFNG (147570) by T cells. In
mouse models, PR-957 reversed signs of rheumatoid arthritis (RA; 180300)
and cellular infiltration, cytokine production, and autoantibody levels.
Muchamuel et al. (2009) concluded that LMP7 has a role in controlling
pathogenic immune responses and may be a target in autoimmune disorders.

Incorporation of the proteasome beta subunits into the maturing
proteasome frequently requires proteolytic removal of a prosequence by
proteolytically active subunits. By following the incorporation of
mutant human LMP7 into the 20S proteasome, Witt et al. (2000) showed
that the LMP7 prosequence was not essential for incorporation of LMP7
into the maturing proteasome, but it increased the efficiency of LMP7
incorporation and proteasome maturation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Deng et al. (1995) found evidence suggesting that LMP genes have effects
on susceptibility to insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM; 222100),
independent of HLA-DR and HLA-DQ. A genomic polymorphism of LMP7 was
found to be strongly associated with IDDM, and the arg/his-60
polymorphism in LMP2 (309060) was found to be associated with IDDM in
subjects containing an HLA-DR4-DQB1*0302 haplotype.

By genomewide homozygosity mapping followed by candidate gene sequencing
of the 3 patients with autoinflammatory, lipodystrophy, and dermatosis
syndrome (ALDD; 256040) reported by Garg et al. (2010), Agarwal et al.
(2010) identified the same homozygous mutation in the PSMB8 gene (T75M;
177046.0001).

Kitamura et al. (2011) identified a homozygous PSMB8 mutation (G197V;
177046.0002) in 3 Japanese patients from 2 consanguineous families with
the Nakajo-Nishimura autoinflammatory syndrome. One of the families had
previously been reported by Tanaka et al. (1993). The mutation increased
assembly intermediates of immunoproteasomes, resulting in decreased
proteasome function and ubiquitin-coupled protein accumulation in
patient tissues. In addition, IL6 (147620) was highly expressed and
there was reduced expression of PSMB8. In vitro studies showed that
downregulation of PSMB8 inhibited the differentiation of murine and
human adipocytes in vitro, and injection of siRNA against Psmb8 in mouse
skin reduced adipocyte tissue volume. The findings identified PSMB8 as
an essential component and regulator of inflammation and of adipocyte
differentiation, suggesting that immunoproteasomes have pleiotropic
functions in maintaining the homeostasis of a variety of cell types.

In 5 patients with an autoinflammatory disorder previously designated
CANDLE syndrome for 'chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with
lipodystrophy and elevated temperature' (Torrelo et al., 2010), Liu et
al. (2012) identified homozygous mutations in the PSMB8 gene
(177046.0001 and 177046.0004). Two additional patients were heterozygous
for a PSMB8 mutation, but a second pathogenic mutation could not be
found. The patients had high levels of gamma-interferon-induced
protein-10 (CXCL10; 147310), as well as other inflammatory markers.
Microarray profiling suggested dysregulation of the interferon signaling
pathway, particularly gamma-interferon.

ANIMAL MODEL

Fehling et al. (1994) found that mice with a targeted deletion of the
Lmp7 gene had reduced levels of MHC class I cell-surface expression and
presented an endogenous antigen inefficiently.

NOMENCLATURE

The original designation for this gene, RING10, is an acronym for
'really interesting new gene.' The 'D number' of this expressed sequence
was D6S216E.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
AUTOINFLAMMATION, LIPODYSTROPHY, AND DERMATOSIS SYNDROME
PSMB8, THR75MET

In 3 affected members from 2 unrelated families with an autoinflammatory
disorder termed 'joint contractures, muscle atrophy, microcytic anemia,
and panniculitis-induced lipodystrophy' (256040), Agarwal et al. (2010)
identified a homozygous 224C-T transition in exon 2 of the PSMB8 gene,
resulting in a thr75-to-met (T75M) substitution in a highly conserved
residue. The mutation was not found in 275 controls but was present in
heterozygosity in available parents and unaffected sibs. The patients
had previously been reported by Garg et al. (2010) and were of
Portuguese and Mexican origin, respectively. The parents of the
Portuguese patients were consanguineous, whereas consanguinity was
suspected in the parents of the Mexican patients. Haplotype analysis
indicated identity by descent, but the mutation appeared to be ancient.
Molecular dynamics simulation indicated that the mutation relaxed the
protein structure by 1.2 angstrom, and may affect the proteolytic
processing of peptides. Studies of patient lymphocytes showed that the
mutant protein had markedly decreased chymotrypsin-like activity
compared to wildtype, consistent with a decrease in proteasomal activity
and loss of function. Laboratory studies of the 2 Mexican sibs performed
by Agarwal et al. (2010) showed that both had significantly increased
levels of serum IL6 (147620) and gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570), and 1
had increased IL8 (146930). Other cytokines were not elevated,
suggesting a particular biomarker signature. The disorder is
characterized by childhood onset of joint stiffness and severe
contractures of the hands and feet, erythematous skin lesions with
subsequent development of severe lipodystrophy, and laboratory evidence
of immune dysregulation. Accompanying features include muscle weakness
and atrophy, hepatosplenomegaly, and microcytic anemia. The findings
indicated that dysfunction of the immunoproteasome can result in an
autoinflammatory disease.

Liu et al. (2012) identified a homozygous T75M mutation in 4 unrelated
patients with an autoinflammatory disorder previously designated CANDLE
syndrome for 'chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with
lipodystrophy and elevated temperature' (Torrelo et al., 2010). The
clinical features were similar to those reported by Garg et al. (2010).
Two patients reported by Liu et al. (2012) were of Hispanic origin and 2
were of Spanish origin. However, only 2 patients shared the same
haplotype, suggesting that this is a mutational hotspot. Two additional
patients reported by Liu et al. (2012) were heterozygous for the T75M
mutation, but a second mutation was not detected.

.0002
AUTOINFLAMMATION, LIPODYSTROPHY, AND DERMATOSIS SYNDROME
PSMB8, GLY197VAL

In 3 Japanese patients from 2 consanguineous families with an
autoinflammatory disorder termed 'Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome' (256040),
Kitamura et al. (2011) identified a homozygous G-to-T transversion in
the PSMB8 gene, resulting in a gly197-to-val (G197V) substitution in a
conserved surface-exposed position in a beta-hairpin turn; the affected
residue is G201V in the other isoform of the protein. The mutation was
not found in 624 control alleles. Patient B cells showed decreased
levels of the mature protein and increased proportion of
immunoproteasome intermediates, as well as decreased proteasome
activity, and patient skin cells showed accumulated ubiquitinated
proteins. IL6 (147620) expression was increased in patient tissues. One
of the families had previously been reported by Tanaka et al. (1993).

.0003
AUTOINFLAMMATION, LIPODYSTROPHY, AND DERMATOSIS SYNDROME
PSMB8, GLY201VAL

In 5 unrelated Japanese patients with an autoinflammatory disorder
termed 'Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome' (256040), Arima et al. (2011)
identified a homozygous 602G-T transversion in exon 5 of the PSMB8 gene,
resulting in a gly201-to-val (G201V) substitution in a highly conserved
residue. Haplotype analysis indicated a founder effect. The mutation is
located at the edge of the S8 beta-sheet of the protein, close to the
catalytic residue thr73, and was predicted to cause conformational
changes of catalytic residues thr73 and lys105 as well as affecting the
interface of the protein with other proteasome subunits. Patient-derived
lymphoblastoid cell lines showed markedly decreased chymotrypsin-like
activity compared to controls. Trypsin-like and caspase-like activity
were also decreased. Western blot analysis showed reduced levels of the
20S proteasome, consistent with an assembly defect. Patient cells showed
decreased proteolytic activity with an accumulation of ubiquitinated and
oxidized proteins, and patient skin biopsies showed activation of an
inflammatory response. Patient sera showed increased IL6 (147620) and
IL10 (124092) associated with increased intracellular phosphorylated p38
(MAPK14; 600289), which may be related to increased inflammation. The
findings suggested that decreased proteasome activity can affect signal
transduction and promote inflammation.

.0004
AUTOINFLAMMATION, LIPODYSTROPHY, AND DERMATOSIS SYNDROME
PSMB8, CYS135TER

In a 12.5-year-old Ashkenazi Jewish boy with an autoinflammatory
disorder characterized by chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with
lipodystrophy and elevated temperature (256040), Liu et al. (2012)
identified a homozygous 405C-A transversion in exon 3 of the PSMB8 gene,
resulting in a cys135-to-ter (C135X) substitution, leading to a large
deletion of the terminal 141 residues. The mutant protein was predicted
to interfere with proper assembly of the proteasome. The patient
presented at 1 month of age with fever and skin lesions. He later
developed annular plaques, recurrent fevers, lipodystrophy,
hepatomegaly, arthritis/arthralgia, violaceous eyelids, microcytic
anemia, and elevated liver enzymes.

REFERENCE 1. Agarwal, A. K.; Xing, C.; DeMartino, G. N.; Mizrachi, D.; Hernandez,
M. D.; Sousa, A. B.; Martinez de Villarreal, L.; dos Santos, H. G.;
Garg, A.: PSMB8 encoding the beta-5i proteasome subunit is mutated
in joint contractures, muscle atrophy, microcytic anemia, and panniculitis-induced
lipodystrophy syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 87: 866-872, 2010.

2. Arima, K.; Kinoshita, A.; Mishima, H.; Kanazawa, N.; Kaneko, T.;
Mizushima, T.; Ichinose, K.; Nakamura, H.; Tsujino, A.; Kawakami,
A.; Matsunaka, M.; Kasagi, S.; and 18 others: Proteasome assembly
defect due to a proteasome subunit beta type 8 (PSMB8) mutation causes
the autoinflammatory disorder, Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 108: 14914-14919, 2011.

3. Deng, G. Y.; Muir, A.; Maclaren, N. K.; She, J.-X.: Association
of LMP2 and LMP7 genes within the major histocompatibility complex
with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus: population and family studies. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 56: 528-534, 1995.

4. Fehling, H. J.; Swat, W.; Laplace, C.; Kuhn, R.; Rajewsky, K.;
Muller, U.; von Boehmer, H.: MHC class I expression in mice lacking
the proteasome subunit LMP-7. Science 265: 1234-1237, 1994.

5. Garg, A.; Hernandez, M. D.; Sousa, A. B.; Subramanyam, L.; Martinez
de Villarreal, L.; dos Santos, H. G.; Barboza, O.: An autosomal recessive
syndrome of joint contractures, muscular atrophy, microcytic anemia,
and panniculitis-associated lipodystrophy. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 95:
E58-63, 2010. Note: Electronic Article.

6. Glynne, R.; Powis, S. H.; Beck, S.; Kelly, A.; Kerr, L. A.; Trowsdale,
J.: A proteasome-related gene between the two ABC transporter loci
in the class II region of the human MHC. Nature 353: 357-360, 1991.

7. Kitamura, A.; Maekawa, Y.; Uehara, H.; Izumi, K.; Kawachi, I.;
Nishizawa, M.; Toyoshima, Y.; Takahashi, H.; Standley, D. M.; Tanaka,
K.; Hamazaki, J.; Murata, S.; Obara, K.; Toyoshima, I.; Yasutomo,
K.: A mutation in the immunoproteasome subunit PSMB8 causes autoinflammation
and lipodystrophy in humans. J. Clin. Invest. 121: 4150-4160, 2011.

8. Liu, Y.; Ramot, Y.; Torrelo, A.; Paller, A. S.; Si, N.; Babay,
S.; Kim, P. W.; Sheikh, A.; Lee, C.-C. R.; Chen, Y.; Vera, A.; Zhang,
X.; Goldbach-Mansky, R.; Zlotogorski, A.: Mutations in proteasome
subunit beta type 8 cause chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis
with lipodystrophy and elevated temperature with evidence of genetic
and phenotypic heterogeneity. Arthritis Rheum. 64: 895-907, 2012.

9. Muchamuel, T.; Basler, M.; Aujay, M. A.; Suzuki, E.; Kalim, K.
W.; Lauer, C.; Sylvain, C.; Ring, E. R.; Shields, J.; Jiang, J.; Shwonek,
P.; Parlati, F.; Demo, S. D.; Bennett, M. K.; Kirk, C. J.; Groettrup,
M.: A selective inhibitor of the immunoproteasome subunit LMP7 blocks
cytokine production and attenuates progression of experimental arthritis. Nature
Med. 15: 781-787, 2009. Note: Erratum: Nature Med. 15: 1333 only,
2009.

10. Tanaka, M.; Miyatani, N.; Yamada, S.; Miyashita, K.; Toyoshima,
I.; Sakuma, K.; Tanaka, K.; Yuasa, T.; Miyatake, T.; Tsubaki, T.:
Hereditary lipo-muscular atrophy with joint contracture, skin eruptions
and hyper-gamma-globulinemia: a new syndrome. Intern. Med. 32: 42-45,
1993.

11. Torrelo, A.; Patel, S.; Colmenero, I.; Gurbindo, D.; Lendinez,
F.; Hernandez, A.; Lopez-Robledillo, J. C.; Dadban, A.; Requena, L.;
Paller, A. S.: Chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with lipodystrophy
and elevated temperature (CANDLE) syndrome. J. Am. Acad. Derm. 62:
489-495, 2010.

12. Witt, E.; Zantopf, D.; Schmidt, M.; Kraft, R.; Kloetzel, P.-M.;
Kruger, E.: Characterisation of the newly identified human Ump1 homologue
POMP and analysis of LMP7(beta-5i) incorporation into 20 S proteasomes. J.
Molec. Biol 301: 1-9, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/11/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/26/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/30/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 9/9/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/20/2009

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/1/1993

EDITED carol: 10/10/2012
carol: 4/13/2012
terry: 4/13/2012
ckniffin: 4/11/2012
alopez: 10/24/2011
carol: 9/30/2011
ckniffin: 9/26/2011
wwang: 2/9/2011
ckniffin: 2/7/2011
mgross: 4/30/2010
terry: 4/30/2010
wwang: 12/7/2009
mgross: 9/9/2009
terry: 8/20/2009
mgross: 6/25/2007
carol: 8/16/2001
dkim: 7/23/1998
mark: 6/9/1996
carol: 2/27/1995
carol: 10/18/1993
carol: 2/1/1993

611059	TITLE *611059 WD REPEAT-CONTAINING PROTEIN 82; WDR82
;;TRANSMEMBRANE PROTEIN 113; TMEM113
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

WDR82 is a regulatory component of the mammalian SET1A (611052) and
SET1B (611055) histone H3 (see 602810) lys4 methyltransferase complexes
(Lee and Skalnik, 2005; Lee et al., 2007). WDR82 additionally associates
with multiple protein complexes, including a chaperonin-containing TCP1
(186980) complex and a protein phosphatase-1 (PP1; see 176875) complex
(Lee et al., 2010).

CLONING

In their Figure 3, Lee et al. (2010) showed that the WDR82 protein
contains 7 WD40 domains distributed throughout the molecule.

GENE FUNCTION

By mass spectrometric analysis of nuclear proteins that
immunoprecipitated with WDR82 from HEK293 cell nuclear extracts, Lee et
al. (2010) identified WDR82 as a component of several protein complexes,
including 4 distinct histone H3 lys4 methyltransferase complexes, a
chaperonin-containing TCP1 complex, and a PP1 complex. They
characterized the PP1 complex further and found that it contained PNUTS
(PPP1R10; 603771), TOX4 (614032), WDR82, and any 1 of the 3 catalytic
subunits of PP1, PP1-alpha (PPP1CA; 176875), PP1-beta (PPP1CB; 600590),
or PP1-gamma (PPP1CC; 176914). The complex, which they called PTW/PP1,
had an apparent molecular mass of about 200 kD, suggesting that it
contains 1 molecule of each subunit. Mutation analysis revealed that
human WDR82 interacted with a central domain of mouse Pnuts. WDR82 did
not interact directly with any other human PTW/PP1 subunit. The PTW/PP1
complex efficiently dephosphorylated the isolated C-terminal domain of
the large subunit of mouse RNA polymerase II (POLR2A; 180660) in vitro.
The PTW/PP1 complex was stable throughout the cell cycle in HEK293
cells, but its association with chromatin was regulated. PTW/PP1
associated with chromatin during interphase, was excluded from condensed
chromosomes during early mitosis, and was reloaded onto chromosomes at
late telophase.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the TMEM113
gene to chromosome 3 (TMAP SHGC-77002). Scott (2007) mapped the TMEM113
gene to chromosome 3p21.1 based on an alignment of the TMEM113 sequence
(GenBank GENBANK AC092045) with the genomic sequence (build 36.2).

REFERENCE 1. Lee, J.-H.; Skalnik, D. G.: CpG-binding protein (CXXC finger protein
1) is a component of the mammalian Set1 histone H3-Lys4 methyltransferase
complex, the analogue of the yeast Set1/COMPASS complex. J. Biol.
Chem. 280: 41725-41731, 2005.

2. Lee, J.-H.; You, J.; Dobrota, E.; Skalnik, D. G.: Identification
and characterization of a novel human PP1 phosphatase complex. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 24466-24476, 2010.

3. Lee, J. H.; Tate, C. M.; You, J. S.; Skalnik, D. G.: Identification
and characterization of the human Set1B histone H3-Lys4 methyltransferase
complex. J. Biol. Chem. 282: 13419-13428, 2007.

4. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/9/2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/11/2011

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 5/23/2007

EDITED mgross: 02/04/2013
mgross: 6/8/2011
terry: 4/11/2011
carol: 7/1/2010
carol: 5/23/2007

613503	TITLE *613503 MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX, CLASS II, DQ ALPHA-2; HLA-DQA2
;;MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX, CLASS II, DX ALPHA; HLA-DXA;;
DX-ALPHA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

HLA class II molecules are heterodimers encoded by alpha and beta genes
located in 3 subregions of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC).
HLA-DQA2 and HLA-DQB2 (615161) are 1 of 2 pairs of genes in the HLA-DQ
subregion of the MHC. HLA-DQA2 and HLA-DQB2 are well conserved and,
unlike most HLA class II genes, exhibit little or no polymorphism
(Berdoz et al., 1989). HLA-DQA2 and HLA-DQB2 appear to be specifically
expressed in Langerhans cells (Lenormand et al., 2012).

CLONING

Using various methods, Berdoz et al. (1989) detected only low-level
polymorphism in the HLA-DQA2 gene that was restricted to noncoding
regions.

Rudy and Lew (1997) stated that HLA-DQA2 differs from HLA-DQA1 (146880)
only at the penultimate amino acid, where HLA-DQA2 has leu231 and
HLA-DQA1 has pro231. By Western blot analysis of B-lymphoblastoid cell
lines, Rudy and Lew (1997) detected variable expression of HLA-DQA2 in
all MHC class II haplotypes examined. HLA-DQA2 expression was
consistently 3-fold less than that of HLA-DQA1. Immunoprecipitation
analysis showed expression of HLA-DQA2 on the cell surface.

Using RT-PCR, Lenormand et al. (2012) cloned 2 HLA-DQA2 variants from
human Langerhans cell RNA. One variant was full length, with the
potential to encode a transmembrane HLA alpha chain. The other variant
lacked exon 4, which encodes the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains,
and thus had the potential to encode a soluble protein. Additional
RT-PCR experiments confirmed that HLA-DQA2 was specifically expressed in
epidermal Langerhans cells, and not in monocyte-derived dendritic cells,
blood CD1C (188340)-positive dendritic cells, or plasmacytoid dendritic
cells.

GENE FUNCTION

By immunoprecipitation analysis of B-lymphoblastoid cells, Rudy and Lew
(1997) found that, despite its expression at the cell surface, HLA-DQA2
did not dimerize with HLA-DQB1 (604305) or with any other MHC class II
beta chain examined. Furthermore, HLA-DQA2 did not dimerize with a
selected HLA-DQB1 chain in a transfection system. Rudy and Lew (1997)
found no evidence for expression of an HLA-DQB2 beta chain. HLA-DQA2
did, however, coprecipitate with the invariant chain, Ii (CD74; 142790),
from a B-lymphoblastoid cell lysate.

Using immunoprecipitation, Western blot, and immunofluorescence
analyses, Lenormand et al. (2012) found that human HLA-DQA2 and HLA-DQB2
formed heterodimers that required association with the invariant chain
for transport to early endosomes. Flow cytometry showed that
HLA-DQA2/HLA-DQB2 heterodimers were expressed at the cell surface and
mediated staphylococcal superantigen stimulation of T cells. Lenormand
et al. (2012) proposed that the poorly polymorphic and well-conserved
HLA-DQA2 and HLA-DQB2 genes are of immunologic importance and may
influence the complexity of the repertoire of antigens presented by
Langerhans cells.

MAPPING

Rudy and Lew (1997) stated that HLA-DQA2 is the more centromeric of the
2 HLA-DQA genes within the MHC class II complex on chromosome 6p21.3.

REFERENCE 1. Berdoz, J.; Tiercy, J.-M.; Rollini, P.; Mach, B.; Gorski, J.:
Remarkable sequence conservation of the HLA-DQB2 locus (DX-beta) within
the highly polymorphic DQ subregion of the human MHC. Immunogenetics 29:
241-248, 1989.

2. Lenormand, C.; Bausinger, H.; Gross, F.; Signorino-Gelo, F.; Koch,
S.; Peressin, M.; Fricker, D.; Cazenave, J.-P.; Bieber, T.; Hanau,
D.; de la Salle, H.; Tourne, S.: HLA-DQA2 and HLA-DQB2 genes are
specifically expressed in human Langerhans cells and encode a new
HLA class II molecule. J. Immun. 188: 3903-3911, 2012.

3. Rudy, G. B.; Lew, A. M.: The nonpolymorphic MHC class II isotype,
HLA-DQA2, is expressed on the surface of B lymphoblastoid cells. J.
Immun. 158: 2116-2125, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 04/04/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/4/2013

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/26/2010

EDITED mgross: 04/04/2013
mgross: 4/4/2013
mgross: 7/26/2010

185880	TITLE *185880 VESICLE-ASSOCIATED MEMBRANE PROTEIN 1; VAMP1
;;SYNAPTOBREVIN 1; SYB1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Synaptobrevins 1 and 2 (185881) are small integral membrane proteins
specific for synaptic vesicles in neurons.

CLONING

Archer et al. (1990) isolated and characterized cosmid clones containing
the human genes encoding synaptobrevins 1 and 2. Their coding regions
are highly homologous, being interrupted at identical positions by
introns of different size and sequence.

GENE STRUCTURE

The genes encoding synaptobrevins 1 and 2 have 5 exons whose boundaries
correspond to those of the protein domains (Archer et al., 1990). Exon 1
contains part of the initiator methionine codon, whereas exon 2 encodes
the variable and immunogenic amino-terminal domain. The third exon
comprises the highly conserved central domain, exon 4 encodes most of
the transmembrane region, and exon 5 contains the last residues of the
transmembrane region and the small intravesicular carboxyl terminus.

GENE FUNCTION

Neuronal exocytosis is triggered by calcium and requires 3 SNARE
proteins: synaptobrevin on the synaptic vesicle, and syntaxin (e.g.,
186590) and SNAP25 (600322) on the plasma membrane. Neuronal SNARE
proteins form a parallel 4-helix bundle that is thought to drive the
fusion of opposing membranes. Hu et al. (2002) demonstrated that whereas
syntaxin and SNAP25 in target membranes are freely available for SNARE
complex formation, availability of synaptobrevin on synaptic vesicles is
very limited. Calcium at micromolar concentrations triggers SNARE
complex formation and fusion between synaptic vesicles and reconstituted
target membranes. Although calcium does promote interaction of SNARE
proteins between opposing membranes, it does not act by releasing
synaptobrevin from synaptic vesicle restriction. Hu et al. (2002)
concluded that their data suggests a mechanism in which
calcium-triggered membrane apposition enables syntaxin and SNAP25 to
engage synaptobrevin, leading to membrane fusion.

Tucker et al. (2004) investigated the effect of synaptotagmin 1 (SYT1;
185605) on membrane fusion mediated by neuronal SNARE proteins SNAP25,
syntaxin, and synaptobrevin, which were reconstituted into vesicles. In
the presence of calcium, the cytoplasmic domain of SYT1 strongly
stimulated membrane fusion when synaptobrevin densities were similar to
those found in native synaptic vesicles. The calcium dependence of
SYT1-stimulated fusion was modulated by changes in lipid composition of
the vesicles and by a truncation that mimics cleavage of SNAP25 by
botulinum neurotoxin A. Stimulation of fusion was abolished by
disrupting the calcium-binding activity, or by severing the tandem C2
domains, of SYT1. Thus, SYT1 and SNAREs are likely to represent the
minimal protein complement for calcium-triggered exocytosis.

By use of the large calyx of Held presynaptic terminal from rats, Sakaba
et al. (2005) demonstrated that cleavage of different SNARE proteins by
clostridial neurotoxins caused distinct kinetic changes in
neurotransmitter release. When elevating calcium ion concentration
directly at the presynaptic terminal with the use of caged calcium,
cleavage of SNAP25 by botulinum toxin A produced a strong reduction in
the calcium sensitivity for release, whereas cleavage of syntaxin using
botulinum toxin C1 and synaptobrevin using tetanus toxin produced an all
or nothing block without changing the kinetics of remaining vesicles.
When stimulating release by calcium influx through channels, a
difference between botulinum toxin C1 and tetanus toxin emerged, which
suggests that cleavage of synaptobrevin modifies the coupling between
channels and release-competent vesicles.

MAPPING

By Southern analysis of rodent-human somatic cell hybrids, Archer et al.
(1990) assigned the SYB1 gene to 12p; by analysis of DNA from Chinese
hamster-mouse somatic cell hybrids, they mapped the Syb1 gene to mouse
chromosome 6.

ANIMAL MODEL

The 'lethal-wasting' (lew) mouse is a spontaneous autosomal recessive
mutant that manifests as a neurologic phenotype characterized by
generalized lack of movement, wasting and prewean death by age 15 days.
By positional cloning, Nystuen et al. (2007) determined that the lew
phenotype results from a 190G-T transversion in the coding region of the
Vamp1 gene, predicted to result in truncation of nearly half of the
protein. Western blot analysis showed no detectable Vamp1 protein in
mutant mice. The authors noted that the phenotype was milder than that
of Vamp2 (185881)-null mice, which die at birth. By immunostudies of
normal mice, Nystuen et al. (2007) showed that Vamp1 is expressed
primarily in certain neuronal tissues, including the retina and areas of
the diencephalon and midbrain such as the zona incerta (subthalamus) and
rostral periolivary region. The findings suggested that Vamp1 has a
vital role in a subset of central nervous system tissues.

REFERENCE 1. Archer, B. T., III; Ozcelik, T.; Jahn, R.; Francke, U.; Sudhof,
T. C.: Structures and chromosomal localizations of two human genes
encoding synaptobrevins 1 and 2. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 17267-17273,
1990.

2. Hu, K.; Carroll, J.; Fedorovich, S.; Rickman, C.; Sukhodub, A.;
Davietov, B.: Vesicular restriction of synaptobrevin suggests a role
for calcium in membrane fusion. Nature 415: 646-650, 2002.

3. Nystuen, A. M.; Schwendinger, J. K.; Sachs, A. J.; Yang, A. W.;
Haider, N. B.: A null mutation in VAMP1/synaptobrevin is associated
with neurological defects and prewean mortality in the lethal-wasting
mouse mutant. Neurogenetics 8: 1-10, 2007.

4. Sakaba, T.; Stein, A.; Jahn, R.; Neher, E.: Distinct kinetic changes
in neurotransmitter release after SNARE protein cleavage. Science 309:
491-494, 2005.

5. Tucker, W. C.; Weber, T.; Chapman, E. R.: Reconstitution of Ca(2+)-regulated
membrane fusion by synaptotagmin and SNAREs. Science 304: 435-438,
2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/27/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/15/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/29/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/4/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/7/1990

EDITED wwang: 03/02/2007
ckniffin: 2/27/2007
carol: 8/16/2005
terry: 8/15/2005
alopez: 5/4/2004
terry: 4/29/2004
alopez: 2/7/2002
terry: 2/4/2002
alopez: 11/15/2001
psherman: 11/30/1998
psherman: 10/22/1998
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 11/30/1990
carol: 11/7/1990

604720	TITLE *604720 TRANSFERRIN RECEPTOR 2; TFR2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

While attempting to isolate genes encoding new transcriptional factors
from a TF-1 (erythroid leukemia) cell cDNA library, Kawabata et al.
(1999) cloned an 831-bp human cDNA fragment that had significant amino
acid homology to the middle portion of the classic transferrin receptor
protein (TFRC; 190010). Using 5-prime/3-prime RACE, they cloned a
full-length, 2.9-kb cDNA, which they designated TFR2. They identified 2
transcripts: a 2.9-kb transcript, called alpha, and an approximately
2.5-kb transcript, called beta, which was cloned from an HL60 (myeloid
leukemia) cell cDNA library. The alpha form predicts an 801-amino acid
type II membrane protein that shares 45% identity and 66% similarity in
its extracellular domain with TFRC. The beta form, which may be an
alternative product of splicing or promoter usage, lacks the
amino-terminal portion of TFR2-alpha, including the putative
transmembrane domain. Northern blot analysis showed that the alpha form
is predominantly expressed in the liver and also in the K562
erythromegakaryocytic cell line; no expression of the beta form was
found. By RT-PCR analysis, TFR2-alpha was expressed in the liver,
spleen, lung, muscle, prostate, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells,
whereas expression of TFR-beta was found in all tissues tested.
Expression of human TFR2 conferred binding of holotransferrin and uptake
of transferrin-bound iron to a Chinese hamster ovary cell line lacking
endogenous TFRC. Kawabata et al. (1999) concluded that TFR2-alpha may be
a second transferrin receptor that can mediate cellular iron transport.

GENE FUNCTION

The majority of hepatic iron uptake under normal circumstances is
transferrin-mediated. However, expression of TFRC in hepatocytes, as in
other nonreticuloendothelial cell types, is downregulated in response to
increased intracellular iron. As a consequence, TFRC expression in liver
is undetectable in hereditary hemochromatosis (235200) patients with
hepatic iron loading. Nonetheless, hepatic iron loading in
hemochromatosis patients is progressive. Fleming et al. (2000) provided
support for a mechanism that involves the uptake of transferrin-bound
iron by TFR2. By screening a murine EST database for Tfrc sequences,
they identified a cDNA encoding a protein homologous to murine Tfrc.
They characterized the murine TFR2 ortholog and compared expression of
murine Tfrc and Tfr2 in normal mice, mice with iron deficiency, and mice
with iron overload. Unlike Tfrc, the Tfr2 transcript was highly
expressed in hepatocytes, was not regulated by tissue iron status, and
was not downregulated in a murine model of hereditary hemochromatosis.
From these observations, Fleming et al. (2000) proposed that TFR2
continues to mediate uptake of transferrin-bound iron by the liver after
TFRC is downregulated by iron overload, and thus may explain increased
susceptibility of the liver to iron loading in hereditary
hemochromatosis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kawabata et al. (1999) determined the genomic structure of the TFR2
gene. The alpha transcript contains 18 exons. The beta transcript lacks
exons 1 through 3 and has an additional 142 bases at the 5-prime end of
exon 4.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Kawabata et al. (1999) mapped the TFR2
gene to chromosome 7q22.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Camaschella et al. (2000) identified a premature termination mutation at
codon 250 in the TFR2 gene in homozygosity in a Sicilian family
segregating hemochromatosis type 3 (HFE3; 604250). The Y250X mutation
(604720.0001) identified by Camaschella et al. (2000) is located in a
region shared by both the alpha and beta transcripts of TFR2. A
phenotype of iron overload associated with the absence of the functional
gene suggested TFR2 is more likely involved in iron regulation rather
than iron uptake. Although TFR2 is highly expressed in an erythroid cell
line, none of the HFE3 patients that they studied showed erythrocyte
abnormalities. Rather, the patients tolerated long-term phlebotomies
without developing anemia. Thus, Camaschella et al. (2000) concluded
that TFR2, in contrast to TFRC, is not essential during erythroid
maturation.

Feder et al. (1996) found that about 15% of heriditary hemochromatosis
patients of northern European descent do not carry the C282Y mutation of
the HFE gene (613609.0001). Mattman et al. (2002) studied a group of
non-C282Y hemochromatosis patients and identified several sequence
variants, including a homozygous missense mutation in exon 17 of the
TFR2 gene, which resulted in a gln690-to-pro amino acid change
(604720.0005).

Hofmann et al. (2002) performed mutation analysis of the TFR2 gene in
patients with atypical hemochromatosis. They also questioned whether
differences in penetrance of the HFE C282Y mutation (613609.0001) were
associated with mutations in the TFR2 gene. They studied sib pairs
homozygous for cys282-to-tyr with a discordant phenotype. The most
common discordance between homozygous sibs was in serum transferrin
concentration. Many of these patients, however, also exhibited
significant differences in liver fibrosis and liver enzyme levels. They
also studied individuals who were not homozygous for C282Y with evidence
of iron excess, and other atypical groups. In a pair of brothers
homozygous for the C282Y mutation, they found an arg455-to-gln mutation
in TFR2 (604720.0004) only in the brother with liver fibrosis,
suggesting that TFR2 functions as a modifier for penetrance of the
hemochromatosis phenotype when present with homozygosity for C282Y.
Unlike TFR1 expression, TFR2 expression is not downregulated in the
liver of iron-loaded mice (Fleming et al., 2000). The screening for
mutations in all 18 exons indicated that mutations of the TFR2 gene are
rare.

ANIMAL MODEL

To characterize the role of TFR2 in iron homeostasis, Fleming et al.
(2002) generated a premature stop codon (Y245X), which was introduced by
targeted mutagenesis in the murine Tfr2 coding sequence. Codon 245 is
the mouse ortholog of codon 250, which is involved in the C250Y mutation
(604720.0001) of TFR2 in human hemochromatosis, and is located in a
region that is conserved between the mouse and human genomes. Fleming et
al. (2002) observed that by 4 weeks of age, mice homozygous for the
Y245X mutation developed periportal hepatic iron loading, splenic iron
sparing, and elevated serum transferrin saturations. Thus, the mutant
mice seemed to provide a faithful model for the abnormalities in iron
homeostasis observed in patients with loss of TFR2. Heterozygous mice
did not differ in any measured parameter from wildtype mice.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, TYPE 3
TFR2, TYR250TER

In 2 families from Sicily who met diagnostic criteria for
hemochromatosis (604250) but were not linked to HFE, one of which was
consanguineous, Camaschella et al. (2000) identified a C-to-G
transversion in exon 6 at position 750 of the TFR2 cDNA sequence,
resulting in a tyrosine (TAC)-to-stop (TAG) substitution at residue 250
(Y250X). This substitution created a MaeI site. All affected members of
the consanguineous family were homozygous for Y250X, whereas obligate
carriers were heterozygous. One patient in the nonconsanguineous family
was homozygous for this mutation. Camaschella et al. (2000) did not find
the Y250X mutation in 100 normal chromosomes or in 12 hemochromatosis
patients who did not have mutations in HFE.

.0002
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, TYPE 3
TFR2, 1-BP INS, 84C

In all affected members of a large inbred family in Campania in southern
Italy segregating hemochromatosis (604250), Roetto et al. (2001) found a
1-bp insertion of a cytosine residue in homozygous state in exon 2 in a
polyC tract (84-88 insC). The mutation resulted in a frameshift followed
by a premature stop codon, a glu60-to-ter (E60X) substitution. Because
of consanguinity, a pseudodominant pedigree pattern was observed in an
affected father and his 3 affected children in one branch of the family.
Heterozygosity was not associated with iron overload, even in
individuals also heterozygous for H63D (613609.0002) at the HFE locus or
for the beta-thalassemia trait.

.0003
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, TYPE 3
TFR2, MET172LYS

In a family in which the proband had severe hemochromatosis (604250),
Roetto et al. (2001) found homozygosity for a T-to-A transversion
(515T-A) in exon 4 of TFR2 cDNA, resulting in a met172-to-lys (M172K)
substitution of the protein. The proband had cirrhosis, hypogonadism,
and cardiac disease. He had inherited beta-thalassemia in heterozygous
state from his mother.

.0004
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, TYPE 1, MODIFIER OF
TFR2, ARG455GLN

Hofmann et al. (2002) studied 2 brothers who were homozygous for the
common hemochromatosis-causing mutation of the HFE gene, cys282 to tyr
(613609.0001). Direct nucleotide sequencing found a G-to-A transversion
at nucleotide 1391, resulting in an arg455-to-gln (R455Q) amino acid
change in the TFR2 gene. The R455Q mutation was present in only 1 of the
brothers homozygous for C282Y; that brother had evidence of liver
fibrosis, whereas the other brother did not.

.0005
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, TYPE 3
TFR2, GLN690PRO

In a Portuguese man with severe hemochromatosis (604250) and in 2 family
members, Mattman et al. (2002) found a gln690-to-pro (Q690P) mutation in
the TFR2 gene. The patient presented at 29 years of age with fatigue,
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, hyperpigmentation, mild elevation of
liver transaminases, and idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. He had
markedly elevated serum iron indices and had had more than 12 g of iron
removed via phlebotomy in the previous 4 years. Additional hematologic
abnormalities included mild normocytic anemia and lymphopenia. He was
heterozygous for the H63D mutation in the HFE gene (613609.0002).
Mattman et al. (2002) stated that this patient was the only one of 89
non-C282Y hereditary chromatosis patients of predominately mixed
European descent in whom mutation of the TFR2 gene had been found.

REFERENCE 1. Camaschella, C.; Roetto, A.; Cali, A.; De Gobbi, M.; Garozzo, G.;
Carella, M.; Majorano, N.; Totaro, A.; Gasparini, P.: The gene TFR2
is mutated in a new type of haemochromatosis mapping to 7q22. Nature
Genet. 25: 14-15, 2000.

2. Feder, J. N.; Gnirke, A.; Thomas, W.; Tsuchihashi, Z.; Ruddy, D.
A.; Basava, A.; Dormishian, F.; Domingo, R., Jr.; Ellis, M. C.; Fullan,
A.; Hinton, L. M.; Jones, N. L.; and 21 others: A novel MHC class
I-like gene is mutated in patients with hereditary haemochromatosis. Nature
Genet. 13: 399-408, 1996.

3. Fleming, R. E.; Ahmann, J. R.; Migas, M. C.; Waheed, A.; Koeffler,
H. P.; Kawabata, H.; Britton, R. S.; Bacon, B. R.; Sly, W. S.: Targeted
mutagenesis of the murine transferrin receptor-2 gene produces hemochromatosis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 10653-10658, 2002.

4. Fleming, R. E.; Migas, M. C.; Holden, C. C.; Waheed, A.; Britton,
R. S.; Tomatsu, S.; Bacon, B. R.; Sly, W. S.: Transferrin receptor
2: continued expression in mouse liver in the face of iron overload
and in hereditary hemochromatosis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 2214-2219,
2000.

5. Hofmann, W.-K.; Tong, X.-J.; Ajioka, R. S.; Kushner, J. P.; Koeffler,
H. P.: Mutation analysis of transferrin-receptor 2 in patients with
atypical hemochromatosis. (Letter) Blood 100: 1099-1100, 2002.

6. Kawabata, H.; Yang, R.; Hirama, T.; Vuong, P. T.; Kawano, S.; Gombart,
A. F.; Koeffler, H. P.: Molecular cloning of transferrin receptor
2: a new member of the transferrin receptor-like family. J. Biol.
Chem. 274: 20826-20832, 1999.

7. Mattman, A.; Huntsman, D.; Lockitch, G.; Langlois, S.; Buskard,
N.; Ralston, D.; Butterfield, Y.; Rodrigues, P.; Jones, S.; Porto,
G.; Marra, M.; De Sousa, M.; Vatcher, G.: Transferrin receptor 2
(TfR2) and HFE mutational analysis in non-C282Y iron overload: identification
of a novel TfR2 mutation. Blood 100: 1075-1077, 2002.

8. Roetto, A.; Totaro, A.; Piperno, A.; Piga, A.; Longo, F.; Garozzo,
G.; Cali, A.; De Gobbi, M.; Gasparini, P.; Camaschella, C.: New mutations
inactivating transferrin receptor 2 in hemochromatosis type 3. Blood 97:
2555-2560, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/6/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/4/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/27/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/17/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/27/2000
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 4/4/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/23/2000

EDITED carol: 10/21/2010
carol: 3/17/2006
terry: 9/8/2003
cwells: 3/6/2003
terry: 3/4/2003
cwells: 10/1/2002
carol: 9/27/2002
mcapotos: 8/7/2001
mcapotos: 7/26/2001
terry: 7/17/2001
alopez: 7/9/2001
carol: 7/6/2000
alopez: 4/28/2000
terry: 4/27/2000
carol: 4/6/2000
carol: 4/4/2000
mgross: 3/24/2000
mgross: 3/23/2000

604470	TITLE *604470 CD2 ANTIGEN-BINDING PROTEIN 2; CD2BP2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Human CD2 (186990) facilitates both adhesion and activation of T
lymphocytes on binding to its ligand CD58 (LFA3; 153420). This binding
augments interleukin-12 (IL12; see 161560)-driven T-cell responsiveness.
By use of interaction trap cloning with the yeast 2-hybrid system and
5-prime RACE PCR, Nishizawa et al. (1998) identified a T-cell line cDNA
encoding a 341-amino acid protein, termed CD2BP2, that interacts with
the cytoplasmic tail of CD2. The authors noted that a segment near the C
terminus contains a consensus site for tyrosine phosphorylation. RNA
blot analysis indicated that CD2BP2 is expressed in a wide variety of
organs as approximately 1.35- and 4-kb transcripts. Immunoprecipitation
experiments showed that CD2BP2 expressed in J77 Jurkat and COS-7 cells
associates specifically with CD2. Mutation analysis suggested that a
21-amino acid motif is critical for CD2 binding and that 2 PPPGHR
sequences within the CD2 cytoplasmic tail mediate the binding to CD2BP2.
Additional transfection studies showed that CD2BP2 expression
selectively enhances IL2 (147680) production on crosslinking of CD2.

REFERENCE 1. Nishizawa, K.; Freund, C.; Li, J.; Wagner, G.; Reinherz, E. L.
: Identification of a proline binding motif regulating CD2-triggered
T lymphocyte activation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 14897-14902,
1998.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/27/2000

EDITED alopez: 07/09/2010
carol: 1/27/2000

606195	TITLE *606195 IROQUOIS HOMEOBOX PROTEIN 5; IRX5
;;IRXB2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

IRX5 is a member of the Iroquois homeobox gene family. Members of this
family appear to play multiple roles during pattern formation of
vertebrate embryos.

CLONING

Members of the Iroquois complex in Drosophila, including the highly
homologous homeobox genes caupolican, araucan, and mirror, act as
prepattern molecules in neurogenesis. Bosse et al. (1997) identified 3
members of the Iroquois homeobox gene family in mouse and showed that
they are involved in several embryonic developmental processes including
anterior/posterior and dorsal/ventral patterning of specific regions of
the central nervous system, and regionalization of the otic vesicle,
branchial epithelium, and limbs.

By EST database searching, Lewis et al. (1999) identified a human
breast-derived partial cDNA clone containing a novel homeobox. Using
oligonucleotide primers designed to this clone for RACE/PCR, they
obtained the full-length cDNA, which they designated IRX2 but which was
later designated IRX5, as well as fragments of transcripts derived from
4 additional IRX genes. The human IRX homeodomains are about 90%
identical to the homeodomains of the Drosophila Iroquois complex
proteins and about 93% identical to each other. Each of the IRX proteins
contains a hexapeptide-like motif. Lewis et al. (1999) found that the
deduced 417-amino acid IRX5 protein also contains acidic and polyproline
regions and an IRO box. Northern blot analysis detected 2 main
transcripts of 2.6 and 3.9 kb, but the larger transcript did not appear
to contain a closely related homeobox. IRX5 expression is not
breast-specific, as it was found to be weakly expressed in adult human
lung, uterus, salivary gland, and kidney. In situ hybridization
demonstrated that IRX5 is differentially expressed in major mammary
epithelial cell lineages and that its expression is further regulated
during both the proliferative and cyclical phases of human breast
development. IRX5 expression is maintained in human mammary neoplasias.

GENE FUNCTION

Through in vivo modeling in Xenopus laevis embryos, Bonnard et al.
(2012) demonstrated that Irx5 modulates the migration of progenitor cell
populations in branchial arches and gonads by repressing Sdf1 (CXCL12;
600835). They also found that transcriptional control by Irx5 is
modulated by direct protein-protein interaction with GATA3 (131320) and
TRPS1 (604386). Bonnard et al. (2012) suggested that IRX proteins
integrate combinatorial transcriptional inputs to regulate key signaling
molecules involved in the ontogeny of multiple organs during
embryogenesis and homeostasis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 5 affected individuals from 2 consanguineous families with an
autosomal recessive craniofacial syndrome mapping to chromosome
16q12.2-q21 (611174), Bonnard et al. (2012) screened 73 candidate genes
and identified 2 homozygous missense mutations in the IRX5 gene
(606195.0001 and 606195.0002) that segregated with disease in each
family. Irx5 knockdown by morpholino injection in X. laevis embryos
recapitulated the blood, heart, germ cell, and craniofacial anomalies
seen in patients with IRX5 mutations. In addition, Bonnard et al. (2012)
found that IRX5 has direct protein-protein interactions with GATA3 and
TRPS1, and noted that disruption of the latter proteins causes syndromes
with overlapping features (see hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural
deafness, and renal disease, 131320, and trichorhinophalangeal syndrome,
190350, respectively).

MAPPING

By screening of a human genomic library with chicken IRX2 cDNA and EST
database searching, Ogura et al. (2001) cloned 4 human IRX genes. By
fluorescence in situ hybridization, they mapped the IRX5 and IRX7
(606196) genes to chromosome 16q11.2-q13 and the IRX1 (606197) and IRX2
(606198) genes to chromosome 5p15.3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Costantini et al. (2005) found that homozygous Ire5-knockout mice were
viable and fertile but had a defect in the differentiation of retinal
cone bipolar cells and were slightly smaller than wildtype.
Electrocardiograms revealed a significantly decreased signal amplitude
during ventricular repolarization. Lack of the cardiac repolarization
gradient was due to increased Kv4.2 (KCND2; 605410) in endocardial
myocardium, resulting in a selective increase of the transient outward
current, which is the major cardiac repolarization current, and in an
increased susceptibility to arrhythmias. Myocardial Irx5 was expressed
in a gradient opposite that of Kcnd2, and Irx5 repressed Kcnd2
expression by recruiting Bop (SMYD1; 606846), a cardiac transcriptional
repressor. Costantini et al. (2005) concluded that an IRX5 repressor
gradient negatively regulates potassium channel gene expression in the
heart and ensures coordinated cardiac repolarization.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HAMAMY SYNDROME
IRX5, ASN166LYS

In 3 sibs from a consanguineous Jordanian family, originally described
by Hamamy et al. (2007), with severe hypertelorism, midface prominence,
myopia, mental retardation, and bone fragility (611174), Bonnard et al.
(2012) identified homozygosity for a 498C-A transversion in the IRX5
gene, resulting in an asn166-to-lys (N166K) substitution at a
phylogenetically invariant residue in the third helix of the
homeodomain. Functional analysis demonstrated altered protein stability
and DNA binding activity, suggesting that the N166K mutation may act as
a hypomorphic rather than null allele.

.0002
HAMAMY SYNDROME
IRX5, ALA150PRO

In 2 brothers from a consanguineous Turkish family with severe
hypertelorism, midface prominence, myopia, mental retardation, and bone
fragility (611174), Bonnard et al. (2012) identified homozygosity for a
448G-C transition in the IRX5 gene, resulting in an ala150-to-pro
(A150P) substitution at a phylogenetically invariant residue in the
second helix of the homeodomain. The mutation segregated with disease in
the family. X. laevis embryos with Irx5 knockdown showed defective
cranial neural crest cell migration that could be rescued with wildtype
mouse Irx5 DNA but not A150P Irx5 DNA. The A150P variant was also
unstable in X. laevis embryos compared to wildtype or N166K
(606195.0001); Bonnard et al. (2012) suggested that the A150P mutation
may act as a hypomorphic rather than null allele.

REFERENCE 1. Bonnard, C.; Strobl, A. C.; Shboul, M.; Lee, H.; Merriman, B.;
Nelson, S. F.; Ababneh, O. H.; Uz, E.; Guran, T.; Kayserili, H.; Hamamy,
H.; Reversade, B.: Mutations in IRX5 impair craniofacial development
and germ cell migration via SDF1. Nature Genet. 44: 709-713, 2012.

2. Bosse, A.; Zulch, A.; Becker, M.-B.; Torres, M.; Gomez-Skarmeta,
J. L.; Modolell, J.; Gruss, P.: Identification of the vertebrate
Iroquois homeobox gene family with overlapping expression during early
development of the nervous system. Mech. Dev. 69: 169-181, 1997.

3. Costantini, D. L.; Arruda, E. P.; Agarwal, P.; Kim, K.-H.; Zhu,
Y.; Zhu, W.; Lebel, M.; Cheng, C. W.; Park, C. Y.; Pierce, S. A.;
Guerchicoff, A.; Pollevick, G. D.; and 10 others: The homeodomain
transcription factor Irx5 establishes the mouse cardiac ventricular
repolarization gradient. Cell 123: 347-358, 2005.

4. Hamamy, H. A.; Teebi, A. S.; Oudjhane, K.; Shegem, N. N.; Ajlouni,
K. M.: Severe hypertelorism, midface prominence, prominent/simple
ears, severe myopia, borderline intelligence, and bone fragility in
two brothers: new syndrome? Am. J. Med. Genet. 143A: 229-234, 2007.

5. Lewis, M. T.; Ross, S.; Strickland, P. A.; Snyder, C. J.; Daniel,
C. W.: Regulated expression patterns of IRX-2, an Iroquois-class
homeobox gene, in the human breast. Cell Tissue Res. 296: 549-554,
1999.

6. Ogura, K.; Matsumoto, K.; Kuroiwa, A.; Isobe, T.; Otoguro, T.;
Jurecic, V.; Baldini, A.; Matsuda, Y.; Ogura, T.: Cloning and chromosome
mapping of human and chicken Iroquois (IRX) genes. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 92: 320-325, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/14/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/10/2007

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 8/14/2001

EDITED alopez: 06/15/2012
terry: 6/14/2012
wwang: 8/17/2007
terry: 8/10/2007
mgross: 10/25/2006
terry: 3/18/2004
mcapotos: 8/15/2001
mcapotos: 8/14/2001
carol: 8/14/2001

134350	TITLE *134350 COMPLEMENT FACTOR D; CFD
;;FACTOR D; DF;;
ADIPSIN; ADN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The CFD gene encodes complement factor D, a serine protease that acts in
the alternative complement pathway to complete the formation of the C3
convertase enzyme by cleaving factor B (CFB; 138470) bound to C3b
(120700), yielding C3bBb. Factor D is the initial obligatory and
rate-limiting catalytic component in the alternative complement pathway
(summary by White et al., 1992 and Biesma et al., 2001).

CLONING

White et al. (1992) isolated clones corresponding to the human CFD gene
from a human glioma cDNA library. The deduced mature protein contains
228 amino acids and was determined to be the same as the adipsin protein
identified in mice (Rosen et al., 1989). Northern blot analysis detected
a 1.1-kb mRNA transcript in adipocytes, monocytes, and macrophages. The
recombinant protein showed enzymatic activity of complement factor D,
cleaving factor B only when B was complexed with activated component
C3b. The findings suggested that adipose tissue may have a role in
immune system biology.

GENE FUNCTION

White et al. (1992) found that adipose cells are the main source of
factor D. There is a gradient in the concentration of factor D in the
fat cells of the body; more is present in the upper than in the lower
half of the body (Mathieson and Peters, 1997). In a review of the
complement system, Walport (2001) noted that the C3 nephritic
autoantibody can be associated with acquired partial lipodystrophy
(613913). The C3 nephritic autoantibody stabilizes the C3bBb C3
convertase that forms in the immediate vicinity of adipocytes. The
abnormally stabilized enzyme may then cleave enough C3 to allow assembly
of the membrane-attack complex, which lyses adipocytes. The pattern of
fat loss, which involves the upper half of the body, may reflect the
content of factor D.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Forneris et al. (2010) presented crystal structures of the proconvertase
C3bB at 4-angstrom resolution and its complex with factor D at
3.5-angstrom resolution. Their data showed how factor B (138470) binding
to C3b forms an open 'activation' state of C3bB. Factor D specifically
binds the open conformation of factor B through a site distant from the
catalytic center and is activated by the substrate, which displaces
factor D's self-inhibitory loop. This concerted proteolytic mechanism,
which if cofactor-dependent and substrate-induced, restricts complement
amplification to C3b-tagged target cells.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Factor D is unusual among serum proteins in having a single-banded
pattern in isoelectric focusing. Hobart and Lachmann (1976) found a
variant in 3 persons of West African parentage (2 Nigerians and a West
Indian) among 120 tested. No variants were found among 115 British and
26 Asian Indians. The presence of the variant band was associated with
weakening of the normal band. Both bands were of equal strength (Martin
et al., 1976).

- Complement Factor D Deficiency

In a Dutch family with factor D deficiency (CFDD; 613912), Biesma et al.
(2001) identified a homozygous mutation in the CFD gene (134350.0001).
The proband was a 23-year-old woman who presented with septic shock due
to Neisseria meningitidis in blood and cerebrospinal fluid. A deceased
family member had a history of recurrent bacterial meningitis.
Laboratory studies showed absence of factor D activity in the proband.
However, 3 other family members who did not have a history of recurrent
infections also showed absence of factor D activity.

Sprong et al. (2006) described the clinical course of meningococcal
disease in 2 children of a Turkish family with a novel factor D gene
mutation (134350.0002) leading to undetectable factor D plasma
concentrations.

ANIMAL MODEL

Adipsin is a serine protease that is secreted by adipocytes into the
bloodstream. It is deficient in several animal models of obesity. Rosen
et al. (1989) purified recombinant mouse adipsin and studied its
biochemical and enzymatic properties. Activated adipsin had little or no
proteolytic activity toward most substrates but had the same activity as
human complement factor D.

To assess the contribution of the alternative pathway in complement
activation and host defense and its possible role in the regulation of
systemic energy balance in vivo, Xu et al. (2001) generated factor
D-deficient mice by gene targeting. Mutant mice had no apparent
abnormality in development and their body weights were similar to those
of factor D-sufficient littermates. Complement activation could not be
initiated in the serum of deficient mice by alternative pathway
activators, namely, rabbit erythrocytes and zymosan. Injection of cobra
venom factor caused a profound and reproducible reduction in serum C3
levels, whereas, as expected, there was no C3 reduction in factor
B-deficient mice treated similarly. Studies of C3 and factor B
activation in vitro by cobra venom factor demonstrated that in factor
D-deficient serum the alpha chain of C3 was cleaved gradually over a
period of 60 minutes without detectable cleavage of factor B. Kinetics
of opsonization of Streptococcus pneumoniae by C3 fragments was much
slower in factor D-deficient serum, suggesting a significant
contribution of the alternative pathway to antibacterial host defense
early after infection.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COMPLEMENT FACTOR D DEFICIENCY
CFD, SER42TER

In 5 affected members of a consanguineous Dutch family with complement
factor D deficiency (613912), Biesma et al. (2001) identified a
homozygous C-to-A transversion in the CFD gene, resulting in a
ser42-to-ter (S42X) substitution. The proband was a 23-year-old woman
who presented with septic shock due to Neisseria meningitidis in blood
and CSF. A deceased family member had a history of recurrent bacterial
meningitis. Laboratory studies showed absence of factor D activity in
the proband. However, 3 other family members who did not have a history
of recurrent infections also showed absence of factor D activity.

.0002
COMPLEMENT FACTOR D DEFICIENCY
CFD, VAL213GLY AND CYS214ARG

In a sister and brother, born of consanguineous parents, with invasive
meningococcal disease due to complement factor D deficiency (613912)
Sprong et al. (2006) identified homozygosity for a mutant allele
containing 2 missense mutations in cis in the CFD gene: a 638T-G
transversion, resulting in a val213-to-gly (V213G) substitution, and a
640T-C transition, resulting in a cys214-to-arg (C214R) substitution.
These mutations both occurred in conserved residues, and the C214R
change destroyed an internal disulfide bond between 2 conserved
cysteines. The unaffected parents and an unaffected sib were
heterozygous for the complex allele. The 19-month-old girl developed N.
meningitis and died in refractory shock about 47 hours after hospital
admission. Four years later, the 13-month-old brother was admitted to
the same hospital because of sudden onset of fever and a petechial rash.
At the age of 4 months, he had been hospitalized for a respiratory
syncytial virus infection complicated by bacterial superinfection. Blood
cultures grew N. meningitidis. Immunologic studies indicated that factor
D was undetectable. Because of this deficiency, the boy was put on
antibiotic prophylaxis and was vaccinated for N. meningitidis.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Volanakis et al. (1977)
REFERENCE 1. Biesma, D. H.; Hannema, A. J.; van Velzen-Blad, H.; Mulder, L.;
van Zwieten, R.; Kluijt, I.; Roos, D.: A family with complement factor
D deficiency. J. Clin. Invest. 108: 233-240, 2001.

2. Forneris, F.; Ricklin, D.; Wu, J.; Tzekou, A.; Wallace, R. S.;
Lambris, J. D.; Gros, P.: Structures of C3b in complex with factors
B and D give insight into complement convertase formation. Science 330:
1816-1820, 2010.

3. Hobart, M. J.; Lachmann, P. J.: Allotypes of complement components
in man. Transplant. Rev. 32: 26-42, 1976.

4. Martin, A.; Lachmann, P. J.; Halbwachs, L.; Hobart, M. J.: Haemolytic
diffusion plate assays for factors B and D of the alternative pathway
of complement activation. Immunochemistry 13: 317-324, 1976.

5. Mathieson, P. W.; Peters, D. K.: Lipodystrophy in MCGN type II:
the clue to links between the adipocyte and the complement system. Nephrol.
Dial. Transplant 12: 1804-1806, 1997.

6. Rosen, B. S.; Cook, K. S.; Yaglom, J.; Groves, D. L.; Volanakis,
J. E.; Damm, D.; White, T.; Spiegelman, B. M.: Adipsin and complement
factor D activity: an immune-related defect in obesity. Science 244:
1483-1487, 1989.

7. Sprong, T.; Roos, D.; Weemaes, C.; Neeleman, C.; Geesing, C. L.
M.; Mollnes, T. E.; van Deuren, M.: Deficient alternative complement
pathway activation due to factor D deficiency by 2 novel mutations
in the complement factor D gene in a family with meningococcal infections. Blood 107:
4865-4870, 2006.

8. Volanakis, J. E.; Schrohenloher, R. E.; Stroud, R. M.: Human factor
D of the alternative complement pathway: purification and characterization. J.
Immun. 119: 337-342, 1977.

9. Walport, M. J.: Complement (first of two parts). New Eng. J.
Med. 344: 1058-1066, 2001.

10. White, R. T.; Damm, D.; Hancock, N.; Rosen, B. S.; Lowell, B.
B.; Usher, P.; Flier, J. S.; Spiegelman, B. M.: Human adipsin is
identical to complement factor D and is expressed at high levels in
adipose tissue. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 9210-9213, 1992.

11. Xu, Y.; Ma, M.; Ippolito, G. C.; Schroeder, H. W., Jr.; Carroll,
M. C.; Volanakis, J. E.: Complement activation in factor D-deficient
mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 14577-14582, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/28/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/2/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/28/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/27/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/25/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 12/12/2011
carol: 4/20/2011
ckniffin: 4/20/2011
alopez: 2/3/2011
terry: 1/28/2011
joanna: 5/8/2009
carol: 10/2/2006
ckniffin: 10/2/2006
carol: 10/2/2006
terry: 9/28/2006
carol: 1/20/2002
mcapotos: 1/17/2002
terry: 12/27/2001
carol: 4/30/2001
mcapotos: 4/26/2001
terry: 4/25/2001
mark: 4/14/1995
mimadm: 9/24/1994
warfield: 4/8/1994
carol: 4/27/1993
carol: 9/9/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

