613963	TITLE *613963 TASTE RECEPTOR, TYPE 2, MEMBER 30; TAS2R30
;;T2R30;;
T2R47
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TAS2R30 belongs to a family of intronless genes that encode highly
related bitter taste receptors (TAS2Rs). TAS2Rs are G protein-coupled
receptors, which are characterized by 7 transmembrane domains (summary
by Fischer et al., 2005). For further information on the TAS2R gene
family, see 604791.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Fischer et al. (2005) mapped the TAS2R30
gene, which they called T2R47, to a small TAS2R gene cluster on
chromosome 1. However, Hartz (2011) mapped the TAS2R30 gene to
chromosome 12p13.2 based on an alignment of the TAS2R30 sequence
(GenBank GENBANK AY724940) with the genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Fischer, A.; Gilad, Y.; Man, O.; Paabo, S.: Evolution of bitter
taste receptors in humans and apes. Molec. Biol. Evol. 22: 432-436,
2005. Note: Erratum: Molec. Biol. Evol. 22: 1157 only, 2005.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  4/12/2011.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/11/2011

EDITED terry: 06/08/2012
mgross: 5/12/2011

103020	TITLE *103020 ADENYLATE KINASE 2; AK2
;;ADENYLATE KINASE, MITOCHONDRIAL MYOKINASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Nucleoside monophosphate kinases, including adenylate kinases, catalyze
the reversible phosphorylation between nucleoside triphosphates and
monophosphates.

CLONING

Bruns and Regina (1977) analyzed the subcellular compartmentalization of
adenylate kinase-2 (EC 2.7.4.3) in HeLa cells, mouse RAG cells, and
RAG-human hybrids expressing human AK2. The results indicated that AK2
is a mitochondrial enzyme.

Noma et al. (1998) isolated cDNAs encoding human adenylate kinase-2 from
a HeLa cell cDNA library, using bovine AK2 cDNA as probe. Two
transcripts were identified: one, designated AK2A, encodes a deduced
239-amino acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of 26.5 kD, and
the other, designated AK2B, encodes a deduced 232-amino acid protein
with a predicted molecular mass of 25.6 kD. Northern blot analysis
demonstrated 3 strong hybridizing signals of 0.9 (AK2A), 1.7 (AK2B), and
3.5 kb, with high expression in liver, heart, skeletal muscle, and
pancreas, moderate expression in kidney, placenta, and brain, and weak
expression in lung. However, Western blot analysis showed high levels of
AK2 protein in liver, heart, and kidney, low levels in lung, and
undetectable levels in brain and skeletal muscle.

MAPPING

The existence of a second adenylate kinase locus linked to PGM1 and
peptidase C, i.e., on chromosome 1, was suggested by cell hybridization
studies by Van Cong et al. (1972). The Goss-Harris method of mapping
combines features of recombinational study in families and synteny tests
in hybrid cells. As applied to chromosome 1, the method shows that AK2
and UMPK are distal to PGM1 and that the order of the loci is PGM1:
UMPK: (AK2, alpha-FUC): ENO1 (Goss and Harris, 1977). Carritt et al.
(1982) presented evidence that AK2 is in 1p34.

GENE FUNCTION

Lee et al. (2007) showed that intrinsic apoptosis in human cells that
was induced by the chemotherapeutic agent etoposide or the antibiotic
staurosporine, but not by FAS ligand (TNFSF6; 134638) or TRAIL (TNFSF10;
603598), caused translocation of AK2 from mitochondria to the cytoplasm,
followed by formation of a complex between AK2, FADD (602457), and
CASP10 (601762). Yeast 2-hybrid analysis, protein pull-down assays, and
immunoprecipitation analysis showed that the N- and C-terminal domains
of AK2, which include nucleoside- and substrate-binding domains,
respectively, bound the C-terminal death domain of FADD. AK2 binding
promoted association of CASP10 with FADD, and addition of purified AK2
protein to cell extracts induced activation of CASP10 via FADD, leading
to subsequent activation of CASP9 (602234) and CASP3 (600636). Apoptosis
through the AK2 complex did not correlate with the adenylate kinase
activity of AK2, did not require CASP8 (601763)-mediated apoptotic
responses, and did not involve mitochondrial cytochrome c release.
Immunodepletion or knockdown of AK2, FADD, or CASP10 abrogated
etoposide-induced apoptosis, and AK2 complexes were not observed in
several etoposide-resistant human tumor cell lines that were deficient
in expression of FADD, CASP10, or CASP3. In contrast to the findings in
human cells, etoposide-induced apoptosis was observed in mouse embryonic
fibroblasts that lacked Fadd expression. Since mice also lack Casp10,
Lee et al. (2007) concluded that mice lack an apoptotic pathway
comparable to the AK2-FADD-CASP10 pathway in humans.

Pannicke et al. (2009) showed that knockdown of zebrafish ak2 also leads
to aberrant leukocyte development, demonstrating the evolutionarily
conserved role of AK2. They concluded that their results provide in vivo
evidence for AK2 selectivity in leukocyte differentiation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 6 affected individuals from 5 families segregating reticular
dysgenesis (267500), Pannicke et al. (2009) identified 6 causative
mutations in homozygous or compound heterozygous state
(103020.0001-103020.0006).

Lagresle-Peyrou et al. (2009) identified biallelic mutations in AK2
(103020.0007-103020.0013) in 7 individuals with reticular dysgenesis.
These mutations resulted in absent or strongly decreased protein
expression. The authors then demonstrated that restoration of AK2
expression in the bone marrow cells of individuals with reticular
dysgenesis overcomes the neutrophil differentiation arrest, underlining
its specific requirement in the development of a restricted set of
hematopoietic lineages. Finally, Lagresle-Peyrou et al. (2009)
established that AK2 is specifically expressed in the stria vascularis
region of the inner ear, which provides an explanation for the
sensorineural deafness in these individuals. Lagresle-Peyrou et al.
(2009) concluded that their results identified a previously unknown
mechanism involved in regulation of hematopoietic cell differentiation
in one of the most severe human immunodeficiency syndromes.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, 5,038-BP DEL

In a German male with reticular dysgenesis (267500), Pannicke et al.
(2009) identified a homozygous 5,038-bp deletion encompassing parts of
exon 6, all of intron 6 and parts of exon 7 reaching into the 3-prime
UTR of the AK2 gene. The mutation led to a complete loss of detectable
AK2 protein in fibroblasts and in bone marrow mononuclear cells. The
parents were heterozygous for the mutation, which was not found in 112
German or 50 Turkish healthy subjects.

.0002
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, 1-BP DEL, 118T

In a German male with reticular dysgenesis (267500), Pannicke et al.
(2009) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the AK2
gene: a 1-bp deletion (118delT) leading to a frameshift and early
truncation of the protein, and a 1A-G transition leading to a
met1-to-val (M1V) substitution (103020.0003). The mutation led to a
complete loss of detectable AK2 protein in fibroblasts and in bone
marrow mononuclear cells. Each parent was heterozygous for one of the
mutations. The mutations were not found in 112 German or 50 Turkish
healthy subjects.

.0003
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, MET1VAL

See 103020.0002 and Pannicke et al. (2009).

.0004
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, 331, G-A, -1

In a German male with reticular dysgenesis (267500), the offspring of
consanguineous parents, Pannicke et al. (2009) identified homozygosity
for a splicing mutation, 331-1G-A, in the AK2 gene. The mutation led to
a complete loss of detectable AK2 protein in fibroblasts and in bone
marrow mononuclear cells. The parents were heterozygous for the
mutation, which was not found in 112 German or 50 Turkish healthy
subjects.

.0005
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, 1-BP DEL, 453C

In male and female Turkish sibs with reticular dysgenesis (267500), the
offspring of consanguineous parents, Pannicke et al. (2009) identified
homozygosity for a 1-bp deletion (453delC) in the AK2 gene, leading to a
frameshift and early truncation of the protein. The mutation led to a
complete loss of detectable AK2 protein in fibroblasts and in bone
marrow mononuclear cells. The parents were heterozygous for the
mutation, which was not found in 112 German or 50 Turkish healthy
subjects.

.0006
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, 498, G-A, +1

In a Turkish female with reticular dysgenesis (267500), the offspring of
consanguineous parents, Pannicke et al. (2009) identified homozygosity
for a splicing mutation, 498+1G-A, in the AK2 gene. The mutation led to
a complete loss of detectable AK2 protein in fibroblasts and in bone
marrow mononuclear cells. The parents were heterozygous for the
mutation, which was not found in 112 German or 50 Turkish healthy
subjects.

.0007
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, ASP165GLY

In 2 separate pedigrees with reticular dysgenesis (267500), each of whom
was consanguineous, Lagresle-Peyrou et al. (2009) identified
homozygosity for an A-to-G transition at nucleotide 546 in exon 5 of the
AK2 gene, resulting in an asp-to-gly substitution in codon 165 (D165G)
within the LID domain. This mutation changed a highly conserved amino
acid. The parents were found to be carriers, and unaffected sibs were
heterozygous or homozygous for the wildtype allele.

.0008
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, LEU183TER

In a female from a consanguineous family affected with reticular
dysgenesis (267500), Lagresle-Peyrou et al. (2009) identified a 1-bp
deletion of C at nucleotide 523 in exon 6 of the AK2 gene (523delC),
resulting in a substitution of a termination codon for a leucine at
codon 183 (L183X). This mutation was not detected in her sister and each
parent was found to be a carrier.

.0009
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, ARG186CYS

In a female with reticular dysgenesis (267500), Lagresle-Peyrou et al.
(2009) found compound heterozygosity for mutations in the AK2 gene: a
C-to-T transition at nucleotide 556 in exon 6, resulting in an
arg-to-cys substitution at codon 186 (R186C), and an exon 2 deletion
(see 103020.0010).

.0010
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, EX2 DEL

In a female with reticular dysgenesis (267500) from a nonconsanguineous
family, Lagresle-Peyrou et al. (2009) identified compound heterozygosity
for deletion of exon 2 of the AK2 gene and an arg186-to-cys substitution
(103020.0009). Each parent was a carrier of one of the mutations.

.0011
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, ARG103TRP

In a female with reticular dysgenesis (267500), Lagresle-Peyrou et al.
(2009) identified a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 307 in exon 3 of the
AK2 gene, resulting in an arg-to-trp substitution at codon 103 (R103W).
Each of her parents was a carrier for this mutation, which occurs in a
highly conserved amino acid residue.

.0012
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, LYS233TER

In a female with reticular dysgenesis (267500), Lagresle-Peyrou et al.
(2009) identified a 5-kb deletion following nucleotide 633 (633del5kb),
resulting in a lys-to-ter substitution at codon 233 (K233X). The patient
was homozygous for this mutation. Two of her 3 unaffected sibs, and each
of her unaffected parents, were carriers.

.0013
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, GLU9TER

In a female with reticular dysgenesis (267500), Lagresle-Peyrou et al.
(2009) identified homozygosity for a G-to-T transversion at nucleotide
25 in exon 1 of the AK2 gene, resulting in a glu-to-ter codon
substitution at amino acid 9 (E9X). The child was homozygous for this
mutation. Each of her parents was a carrier.

REFERENCE 1. Bruns, G. A. P.; Regina, V. M.: Adenylate kinase-2, a mitochondrial
enzyme. Biochem. Genet. 15: 477-486, 1977.

2. Carritt, B.; King, J.; Welch, H. M.: Gene order and localization
of enzyme loci on the short arm of chromosome 1. Ann. Hum. Genet. 46:
329-335, 1982.

3. Goss, S. J.; Harris, H.: Gene transfer by means of cell fusion.
II. The mapping of 8 loci on human chromosome 1 by statistical analysis
of gene assortment in somatic cell hybrids. J. Cell Sci. 25: 39-57,
1977.

4. Lagresle-Peyrou, C.; Six, E. M.; Picard, C.; Rieux-Laucat, F.;
Michel, V.; Ditadi, A.; Chappedelaine, C. D.; Morillon, E.; Valensi,
F.; Simon-Stoos, K. L.; Mullikin, J. C.; Noroski, L. M.; and 10 others
: Human adenylate kinase 2 deficiency causes a profound hematopoietic
defect associated with sensorineural deafness. Nature Genet. 41:
106-111, 2009.

5. Lee, H.-J.; Pyo, J.-O.; Oh, Y.; Kim, H.-J.; Hong, S.; Jeon, Y.-J.;
Kim, H.; Cho, D.-H.; Woo, H.-N.; Song, S.; Nam, J.-H.; Kim, H. J.;
Kim, K.-S.; Jung, Y.-K.: AK2 activates a novel apoptotic pathway
through formation of a complex with FADD and caspase-10. Nature Cell
Biol. 9: 1303-1310, 2007.

6. Noma, T.; Song, S.; Yoon, Y.-S.; Tanaka, S.; Nakazawa, A.: cDNA
cloning and tissue-specific expression of the gene encoding human
adenylate kinase isozyme 2. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1395: 34-39,
1998.

7. Pannicke, U.; Honig, M.; Hess, I.; Friesen, C.; Holzmann, K.; Rump,
E.-M.; Barth, T. F.; Rojewski, M. T.; Schulz, A.; Boehm, T.; Friedrich,
W.; Schwarz, K.: Reticular dysgenesis (aleukocytosis) is caused by
mutations in the gene encoding mitochondrial adenylate kinase 2. Nature
Genet. 41: 101-105, 2009.

8. Van Cong, N.; Billardon, C.; Rebourcet, R.; Kaouel, C. L.-B.; Picard,
J. Y.; Weil, D.; Frezal, J.: The existence of a second adenylate
kinase locus linked to PGM-1 and peptidase-C. Ann. Genet. 15: 213-218,
1972.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/15/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/4/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/28/2008
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 8/6/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED terry: 06/11/2012
alopez: 1/26/2010
terry: 1/15/2010
terry: 8/13/2009
carol: 8/12/2009
terry: 8/4/2009
mgross: 10/28/2008
ckniffin: 6/1/2004
tkritzer: 8/8/2003
carol: 8/6/2003
psherman: 4/15/1998
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/26/1989
marie: 3/25/1988
reenie: 2/9/1987
marie: 1/7/1987

602949	TITLE *602949 SIN3-ASSOCIATED POLYPEPTIDE, 18-KD; SAP18
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

An important event in gene expression is the modification of histone
proteins. Hyperacetylation of core histones has been correlated with
gene activation, and hypoacetylation with gene repression. SIN3 (see
607776)-mediated repression of transcription involves the modification
of histone polypeptides. Zhang et al. (1997) purified a SIN3-containing
complex from HeLa cells and found that SIN3 was associated with SAP18,
SAP30 (603378), RBBP4 (602923), RBBP7 (300825), and the histone
deacetylases HDAC1 (601241) and HDAC2 (605164). By searching sequence
databases with SAP18 peptide sequences, the authors identified several
human SAP18 expressed sequence tags from which they constructed a
full-length hybrid SAP18 cDNA. The predicted 153-amino acid SAP18
protein is 49% identical to a C. elegans SAP18 homolog. SAP18 has a
molecular mass of 18 kD by SDS-PAGE. SAP18 was expressed in all tissues
analyzed.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhang et al. (1997) demonstrated that SAP18 directly interacts with SIN3
and enhances SIN3-mediated transcriptional repression. They observed
that SAP18 directs the formation of a repressive complex when tethered
to the promoter.

REFERENCE 1. Zhang, Y.; Iratni, R.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Tempst, P.; Reinberg,
D.: Histone deacetylases and SAP18, a novel polypeptide, are components
of a human Sin3 complex. Cell 89: 357-364, 1997.

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 8/6/1998

EDITED carol: 06/18/2012
mgross: 11/3/2010
mgross: 5/12/2003
alopez: 7/24/2000
psherman: 9/21/1998
carol: 8/12/1998

607391	TITLE *607391 SINGLE-STRANDED DNA-BINDING PROTEIN 4; SSBP4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By EST database searching with the SSBP2 (607389) sequence as probe,
Castro et al. (2002) identified 2 additional members of the SSBP gene
family, SSBP3 (607390) and SSBP4. All 3 SSBP genes share homology with
the chicken gene CSDP, which encodes a protein that binds
single-stranded pyrimidine-rich mirror-repeat elements with high
specificity. The deduced 364-amino acid SSBP4 protein shares 73% and 72%
sequence identity with human SSBP2 and SSBP3, respectively. SSBP family
members share a highly conserved N terminus followed by a glycine- and
proline-rich domain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Castro et al. (2002) determined that the SSBP2, SSBP3, and SSBP4 genes
all contain 17 exons and have identical intron/exon boundaries,
suggesting duplication from a common ancestral gene. They also
identified alternative splicing and additional internal exons for all 3
genes, suggesting the existence of multiple isoforms for each protein.
The SSBP4 gene spans less than 25 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Castro et al. (2002) mapped the SSBP4 gene
to chromosome 19p13.1, between markers D19S899 and D19S407.

REFERENCE 1. Castro, P.; Liang, H.; Liang, J. C.; Nagarajan, L.: A novel, evolutionarily
conserved gene family with putative sequence-specific single-stranded
DNA-binding activity. Genomics 80: 78-85, 2002.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 11/26/2002

EDITED mgross: 12/03/2002
carol: 12/2/2002

610862	TITLE *610862 DEGENERATIVE SPERMATOCYTE, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 2; DEGS2
;;DES2, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF;;
SPHINGOLIPID DELTA-4-DESATURASE/C4-HYDROXYLASE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis, followed by RT-PCR of human epidermal keratinocyte
RNA, Mizutani et al. (2004) cloned DEGS2. The deduced 323-amino acid
protein has a predicted molecular mass of 37.2 kD and shares 86.4%
identity and 91.9% similarity with mouse Des2. DEGS2 belongs to the
desaturase/hydroxylase superfamily, characterized by 3 conserved
histidine boxes. Compared to DEGS1, DEGS2 has a fourth histidine box and
a variation in the second amino acid residue of the 3 conserved
histidine boxes. Using in vitro assays in HEK293 cells, DEGS2 exhibited
dihydroceramide hydroxylase activity. Northern blot analysis of adult
human tissues detected a 1.8-kb transcript with highest expression in
skin, moderate expression in kidney, kidney, large intestine, and small
intestine, weak expression in brain and lung, and no expression in
heart, liver, spleen, skeletal muscle, thymus, or placenta. Using RT-PCR
analysis, Mizutani et al. (2004) found that expression of DEGS2 mRNA was
regulated during in vitro keratinocyte differentiation and that DEGS2
transcription was not detected at day 0 or 3 days after differentiation,
but was found at day 6 and had increased by day 9.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the DEGS2
gene to chromosome 14 (TMAP RH47801).

REFERENCE 1. Mizutani, Y.; Kihara, A.; Igarashi, Y.: Identification of the
human sphingolipid C4-hydroxylase, hDES2, and its up-regulation during
keratinocyte differentiation. FEBS Lett. 563: 93-97, 2004.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 3/19/2007

EDITED wwang: 03/19/2007

605566	TITLE *605566 RETICULON 4 RECEPTOR; RTN4R
;;NOGO RECEPTOR; NGR
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

NOGO (604475) has been identified as a component of the central nervous
system myelin that prevents axonal regeneration in the adult vertebrate
central nervous system. Analysis of NogoA (amino-Nogo) has shown that an
axon-inhibiting domain of 66 amino acids is expressed at the
extracellular surface and at the endoplasmic reticulum lumen of
transfected cells and oligodendrocytes. The acidic amino terminus of
NogoA is detected at the cytosolic face of cellular membranes and may
contribute to inhibition of axon regeneration at sites of
oligodendrocyte injury. Fournier et al. (2001) showed that the
extracellular domain of Nogo (Nogo-66) inhibits axonal extension but
does not alter nonneuronal cell morphology. In contrast, a multivalent
form of the N terminus of NogoA affects the morphology of both neurons
and other cell types. Fournier et al. (2001) identified a
brain-specific, leucine-rich-repeat protein with high affinity for
soluble Nogo-66. Cleavage of the Nogo-66 receptor and other
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-linked proteins from axonal surfaces
renders neurons insensitive to Nogo-66. Nogo-66 receptor expression is
sufficient to impart Nogo-66 axonal inhibition to unresponsive neurons.
Disruption of the interaction between Nogo-66 and its receptor provides
the potential for enhanced recovery after human central nervous system
(CNS) injury. The Nogo-66 receptor gene encodes a protein of 473 amino
acids. The predicted protein contains a signal sequence followed by 8
leucine-rich-repeat (LRR) domains, a flanking LRR C-terminal domain that
is cysteine rich, a unique region, and a GPI anchorage site.
Subsequently, both Barton et al. (2003) and Pignot et al. (2003) showed
that there is an N-terminal LRR domain preceding the 8 LRR domains. By
Northern blot analysis Fournier et al. (2001) showed that expression of
the Nogo-66 receptor is widespread in the brain; the areas richest in
gray matter express the highest levels. Nogo-66 receptor mRNA is not
detectable in white matter, where NogoA is expressed by
oligodendrocytes. Northern blot analysis in mouse showed a single band
of 2.3 kb in the adult brain, indicating that the isolated NgR clone is
full length. Low levels of this mRNA are observed in heart and kidney
but not in other peripheral tissues.

Fournier et al. (2001) used oligonucleotide primers based on the
predicted NOGO receptor cDNA from the genomic sequence to amplify the
human receptor from an adult brain cDNA library. The deduced protein
shares 89% sequence identity with the mouse protein. The exons of the
human NOGO receptor gene are separated by nearly 30 kb.

By Northern blot analysis, Pignot et al. (2003) found a 2.4-kb NGR
transcript highly expressed in brain, moderately expressed in spleen and
liver, and weakly expressed in skeletal muscle, lung, kidney, and
placenta. A brain multitissue array revealed highest NGR expression in
cerebellum, followed by several cortical areas, amygdala, hippocampus,
and accumbens nucleus. Much weaker expression was detected in other
brain regions examined. By digestion of NGR with phospholipase C, Pignot
et al. (2003) confirmed that NGR has a GPI anchor, and sucrose density
fractionation of transfected Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells
demonstrated the association of human NGR with lipid rafts.

GENE FUNCTION

GrandPre et al. (2002) identified competitive antagonists of the NOGO
receptor derived from amino-terminal peptide fragments of NOGO-66. The
NOGO-66(1-40) antagonist peptide blocks NOGO-66 or CNS myelin inhibition
of axonal outgrowth in vitro, demonstrating that the NOGO receptor
mediates a significant portion of axonal outgrowth inhibition by myelin.
Intrathecal administration of the amino-terminal antagonist peptide to
rats with midthoracic spinal cord hemisection resulted in significant
axon outgrowth of the corticospinal tract, and improved functional
recovery. Thus, GrandPre et al. (2002) concluded that NOGO-66 and the
NOGO receptor have central roles in limiting axonal regeneration after
CNS injury.

Wang et al. (2002) demonstrated that a GPI-anchored central nervous
system myelin protein, oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein (OMG;
164345), is a potent inhibitor of neurite outgrowth in cultured neurons.
Like NOGOA (604475), OMGP contributes significantly to the inhibitory
activity associated with CNS myelin. To further elucidate the mechanisms
that mediate this inhibitory activity, Wang et al. (2002) screened an
expression library and identified the NOGO receptor as a high affinity
OMGP-binding protein. Cleavage of NOGO receptor and other GPI-linked
proteins from the cell surface renders axons of dorsal root ganglia
insensitive to OMGP. Introduction of exogenous NOGO receptor confers
OMGP responsiveness to otherwise insensitive neurons. Thus, OMGP is an
important inhibitor of neurite outgrowth that acts through the NOGO
receptor and its associated receptor complex. Wang et al. (2002)
suggested that interfering with the OMGP/NOGO receptor pathway may allow
lesioned axons to regenerate after injury in vivo.

Axonal regeneration in the adult CNS is limited by 2 proteins in myelin,
Nogo and myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG; 159640). The NOGO receptor
(NgR) had been identified as an axonal GPI-anchored protein, whereas the
MAG receptor had remained elusive. Liu et al. (2002) demonstrated that
MAG binds directly, with high affinity, to NgR. Cleavage of GPI-linked
proteins from axons protects growth cones from MAG-induced collapse, and
dominant-negative NgR eliminates MAG inhibition of neurite outgrowth.
MAG-resistant embryonic neurons were rendered MAG-sensitive by
expression of NgR. MAG and Nogo-66 activate NgR independently and serve
as redundant NgR ligands that may limit axonal regeneration after CNS
injury.

Domeniconi et al. (2002) showed that MAG inhibits axonal regeneration
through interaction with NgR. They demonstrated that MAG binds
specifically to an NgR-expressing cell line in a GPI-dependent and
sialic acid-independent manner. Consistent with a direct interaction of
MAG and NgR, Domeniconi et al. (2002) observed that MAG precipitates NgR
from NgR-expressing cells, dorsal root ganglia, and cerebellar neurons.
Experiments blocking NgR from interacting with MAG prevented inhibition
of neurite outgrowth by MAG. Using NgR-expressing cell cultures, the
authors found that MAG and NOGO-66 compete directly for binding to NgR.

In inhibiting neurite outgrowth, several myelin components, including
the extracellular domain of NOGOA, OMGP, and MAG, exert their effects
through the same NOGO receptor. The GPI-anchored nature of the NOGO
receptor indicates the requirement for an additional transmembrane
protein to transduce the inhibitory signals into the interior of
responding neurons. Wang et al. (2002) demonstrated that p75 (NGFR;
162010), a transmembrane protein known to be a receptor for the
neurotrophin family of growth factors, specifically interacts with the
NOGO receptor. p75 is required for NOGO receptor-mediated signaling, as
neurons from p75 knockout mice were no longer responsive to myelin or to
any of the known NOGO receptor ligands. Blocking the p75-NOGO receptor
interaction also reduced the activities of these inhibitors. Moreover, a
truncated p75 protein lacking the intracellular domain, when
overexpressed in primary neurons, attenuated the same set of inhibitory
activities, suggesting that p75 is a signal transducer of the Nogo
receptor-p75 receptor complex. Wang et al. (2002) suggested that
interfering with p75 and its downstream signaling pathways may allow
lesioned axons to overcome most of the inhibitory activities associated
with central nervous system myelin.

Wong et al. (2002) reported that p75(NTR) is a coreceptor for the NOGO
receptor for MAG (159460) signaling. In cultured human embryonic kidney
(HEK) cells expressing the NOGO receptor, p75(NTR) was required for
MAG-induced intracellular calcium elevation. Coimmunoprecipitation
showed an association of the NOGO receptor with p75(NTR) that could be
disrupted by an antibody against p75(NTR), and extensive coexpression
was observed in the developing rat nervous system. Furthermore, a
p75(NTR) antibody abolished MAG-induced repulsive turning of Xenopus
axonal growth cones and calcium elevation, both in neurons and in the
NOGO receptor/p75(NTR)-expressing HEK cells.

Yu et al. (2004) observed that Ngr and p75 were colocalized in
low-density membrane raft fractions of rat forebrain and cerebellum and
in cultured cerebellar granule cells. Disruption of lipid rafts by a
cholesterol-binding reagent reduced Nogo-66 signaling in the cultured
cells. Yu et al. (2004) concluded that lipid rafts facilitate the
interaction between Nogo receptor components.

By deletion analysis, Barton et al. (2003) showed that the binding of
soluble fragments of NOGO, MAG, and NGR itself to cell-surface NGR
required the entire LRR region (the N-terminal LRR, the 8 central LRRs,
and the C-terminal LRR) of NGR, but not other portions of the protein.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

He et al. (2003) reported the 1.5-angstrom crystal structure of NGR.
They found that NGR adopts a leucine-rich repeat (LRR) module whose
concave exterior surface contains a broad region of evolutionarily
conserved patches of aromatic residues. A deep cleft at the C-terminal
base of the LRR may play a role in the association of NGR with the p75
coreceptor.

Barton et al. (2003) reported the NGR structure to 2.3-angstrom
resolution. They found that NGR has an elongated banana-like shape with
approximate dimensions of 80 by 35 by 35 angstroms. It has low secondary
structure content, consisting mostly of short beta strands that generate
a long parallel beta sheet spanning the concave surface of the molecule.

MAPPING

Fournier et al. (2001) identified human sequence corresponding to the
mouse NogoA receptor within a genomic cosmid sequence (GenBank GENBANK
AC007663) on chromosome 22q11.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Schizophrenia (181500) or schizoaffective disorders are rather common
features in patients with DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome (DGS
188400/VCFS 192430) as a result of 22q11.2 haploinsufficiency. Sinibaldi
et al. (2004) evaluated the RTN4R gene, which maps within the DGS/VCFS
critical region, as a potential candidate for schizophrenia
susceptibility. They screened 120 unrelated Italian patients with
schizophrenia for mutations in RTN4R using denaturing high performance
liquid chromatography. Three mutant alleles were detected, including 2
missense changes (R119W, 605566.0001; R196H, 605566.0002) and 1
synonymous codon variant. The 2 schizophrenia patients with missense
changes were strongly resistant to neuroleptic treatment at any dosage.
Both missense changes were absent in 300 control subjects. Molecular
modeling revealed that both changes lead to putative structural
alterations of the native protein.

ANIMAL MODEL

McGee et al. (2005) found that mutations in NgR affect cessation of
ocular dominance plasticity. In NgR -/- mice, plasticity during the
critical period was normal, but it continued abnormally such that ocular
dominance at 45 or 120 days postnatal was subject to the same plasticity
as at juvenile ages. Thus, physiologic Ngr signaling from myelin-derived
Nogo, Mag, and Omgp (164345) consolidated the neural circuitry
established during experience-dependent plasticity. McGee et al. (2005)
concluded that after pathologic trauma, similar NgR signaling limits
functional recovery and axonal regeneration.

In vitro, Zheng et al. (2005) found that neurite outgrowth from NgR-null
mouse dorsal root ganglion or cerebellar granule neurons were inhibited
by myelin or by a Nogo-66 substrate, similar to wildtype. Ngfr-deficient
dorsal root ganglion neurons, but not cerebellar neurons, demonstrated
somewhat less inhibition to myelin, suggesting that Ngfr works through a
mechanism separate from NgR. In vivo, NgR-null and Ngfr-deficient mice
did not show enhanced regeneration of corticospinal tract axons after
spinal hemisection compared to wildtype. Zheng et al. (2005) concluded
that NgR is not essential for mediating inhibitory signals from CNS
myelin and does not play a central role in inhibition of axonal growth.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SCHIZOPHRENIA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
RTN4R, ARG119TRP

In an Italian patient with schizophrenia (181500), Sinibaldi et al.
(2004) identified a 355C-T transition in the RTN4R gene that resulted in
an arg119-to-trp (R119W) amino acid substitution. This patient was
strongly resistant to neuroleptic treatment at any dosage. Molecular
modeling revealed that this change led to putative structural
alterations of the native protein.

.0002
SCHIZOPHRENIA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
RTN4R, ARG196HIS

In an Italian patient with schizophrenia (181500), Sinibaldi et al.
(2004) identified a 587G-A transition in the RTN4R gene that resulted in
an arg196-to-his (R196H) amino acid substitution. This patient was
strongly resistant to neuroleptic treatment at any dosage. Molecular
modeling revealed that this change led to putative structural
alterations of the native protein.

REFERENCE 1. Barton, W. A.; Liu, B. P.; Tzvetkova, D.; Jeffrey, P. D.; Fournier,
A. E.; Sah, D.; Cate, R.; Strittmatter, S. M.; Nikolov, D. B.: Structure
and axon outgrowth inhibitor binding of the Nogo-66 receptor and related
proteins. EMBO J. 22: 3291-3302, 2003.

2. Domeniconi, M.; Cao, Z.; Spencer, T.; Sivasankaran, R.; Wang, K.
C.; Nikulina, E.; Kimura, N.; Cai, H.; Deng, K.; Gao, Y.; He, Z.;
Filbin, M. T.: Myelin-associated glycoprotein interacts with the
Nogo66 receptor to inhibit neurite outgrowth. Neuron 35: 283-290,
2002.

3. Fournier, A. E.; GrandPre, T.; Strittmatter, S. M.: Identification
of a receptor mediating Nogo-66 inhibition of axonal regeneration. Nature 409:
341-346, 2001.

4. GrandPre, T.; Li, S.; Strittmatter, S. M.: Nogo-66 receptor antagonist
peptide promotes axonal regeneration. Nature 417: 547-551, 2002.

5. He, X. L.; Bazan, J. F.; McDermott, G.; Park, J. B.; Wang, K.;
Tessier-Lavigne, M.; He, Z.; Garcia, K. C.: Structure of the Nogo
receptor ectodomain: a recognition module implicated in myelin inhibition. Neuron 38:
177-185, 2003.

6. Liu, B. P.; Fournier, A.; GrandPre, T.; Strittmatter, S. M.: Myelin-associated
glycoprotein as a functional ligand for the Nogo-66 receptor. Science 297:
1190-1193, 2002.

7. McGee, A. W.; Yang, Y.; Fischer, Q. S.; Daw, N. W.; Strittmatter,
S. M.: Experience-driven plasticity of visual cortex limited by myelin
and Nogo receptor. Science 309: 2222-2226, 2005.

8. Pignot, V.; Hein, A. E.; Barske, C.; Wiessner, C.; Walmsley, A.
R.; Kaupmann, K.; Mayeur, H.; Sommer, B.; Mir, A. K.; Frentzel, S.
: Characterization of two novel proteins, NgRH1 and NgRH2, structurally
and biochemically homologous to the Nogo-66 receptor. J. Neurochem. 85:
717-728, 2003.

9. Sinibaldi, L.; De Luca, A.; Bellacchio, E.; Conti, E.; Pasini,
A.; Paloscia, C.; Spalletta, G.; Caltagirone, C.; Pizzuti, A.; Dallapiccola,
B.: Mutations of the Nogo-66 receptor (RTN4R) gene in schizophrenia.
(Abstract) Hum. Mutat. 24: 534-535, 2004. Note: Full article online.

10. Wang, K. C.; Kim, J. A.; Sivasankaran, R.; Segal, R.; He, Z.:
p75 interacts with the Nogo receptor as a co-receptor for Nogo, MAG
and OMgp. Nature 420: 74-78, 2002.

11. Wang, K. C.; Koprivica, V.; Kim, J. A.; Sivasankaran, R.; Guo,
Y.; Neve, R. L.; He, Z.: Oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein in a
Nogo receptor ligand that inhibits neurite outgrowth. Nature 417:
941-944, 2002.

12. Wong, S. T.; Henley, J. R.; Kanning, K. C.; Huang, K.; Bothwell,
M.; Poo, M.: A p75(NTR) and Nogo receptor complex mediates repulsive
signaling by myelin-associated glycoprotein. Nature Neurosci. 5:
1302-1308, 2002.

13. Yu, W.; Guo, W.; Feng, L.: Segregation of Nogo66 receptors into
lipid rafts in rat brain and inhibition of Nogo66 signaling by cholesterol
depletion. FEBS Lett. 577: 87-92, 2004.

14. Zheng, B.; Atwal, J.; Ho, C.; Case, L.; He, X.; Garcia, K. C.;
Steward, O.; Tessier-Lavigne, M.: Genetic deletion of the Nogo receptor
does not reduce neurite inhibition in vitro or promote corticospinal
tract regeneration in vivo. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 1205-1210,
2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/29/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/24/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/10/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/26/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/10/2005
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 11/27/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/14/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/18/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/12/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/28/2002

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 1/19/2001

EDITED wwang: 10/06/2006
wwang: 10/5/2006
terry: 9/29/2006
wwang: 5/10/2006
ckniffin: 4/24/2006
alopez: 10/11/2005
terry: 10/10/2005
carol: 8/8/2005
carol: 7/21/2005
wwang: 6/7/2005
terry: 5/26/2005
alopez: 2/15/2005
wwang: 1/25/2005
terry: 1/10/2005
alopez: 12/19/2002
carol: 12/6/2002
tkritzer: 11/27/2002
alopez: 11/20/2002
terry: 11/18/2002
alopez: 11/14/2002
terry: 11/12/2002
alopez: 9/20/2002
tkritzer: 9/18/2002
alopez: 7/16/2002
terry: 7/12/2002
alopez: 5/29/2002
terry: 5/28/2002
carol: 1/19/2001

142100	TITLE *142100 HEMOGLOBIN--EPSILON LOCUS; HBE1
DESCRIPTION The epsilon locus determines the epsilon, or non-alpha, chain of
embryonic hemoglobin (originally known as Gower-2). No mutations
affecting the epsilon chain have yet been identified. Gower-1 is a
tetramer of epsilon chains. The epsilon locus may be linked to the
delta-beta complex. The amino acid sequence of the epsilon chain is
similar to those of the delta and beta chains. Furthermore, the
homologous chain in the mouse is linked to the beta locus (Gilman and
Smithies, 1968). Shen and Smithies (1982) determined the complete
nucleotide sequence of the 3.4-kb stretch of DNA 5-prime to the epsilon
gene where a pseudogene (psi-beta-2) was thought to reside (Fritsch et
al., 1980). They concluded that no globin-related gene exists there and
provided a possible explanation for the earlier contrary conclusion. By
studies in transgenic mice, Raich et al. (1992) demonstrated that
deletion of a 'negative element' located between -182 and -467 bp
upstream of the HBE gene cap site resulted in continuation of HBE gene
expression in the definitive erythroblasts of the fetal liver and in the
red blood cells of adult animals. The findings provided direct in vivo
evidence that cis-acting silencing elements are involved in the
developmental control of the HBE gene.

Bailey et al. (1992) used the epsilon-globin gene to examine the debate
as to whether all bats fall into a monophyletic order (Chiroptera) or
have diphyletic origins with the megabats actually being 'flying
primates.' Results of parsimony analysis supported bat monophyly.

He and Russell (2002) analyzed the anti-sickling properties of HBE both
in vitro as well as in vivo in a well-established mouse model of sickle
cell anemia (603903). These animals, expressing 100% of human Hb S
(141900.0243), display a chronic hemolytic anemia with compensatory
marrow and extramedullary erythropoiesis, abundant circulating sickled
erythrocytes, and chronic tissue damage evidenced by parallel
histopathologic and functional deficits. By comparison, related mice
that coexpress Hb S as well as HBE exhibited normal physiologic,
morphologic, histologic, and functional attributes. Subsequent in vitro
analyses substantiated results from whole-animal studies, indicating
that the polymerization of deoxygenated Hb S can be significantly slowed
by relatively small quantities of HBE. Together, the in vivo and in
vitro analyses suggested that reactivation of epsilon-globin gene
expression would be therapeutically beneficial to adults with sickle
phenotypes, and provide a rationale for detailed investigations into the
molecular basis for its developmental silencing.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Baralle et al. (1980); Gale et al. (1979); Huehns et al. (1964); Huehns
et al. (1961); Ramsay et al. (1986)
REFERENCE 1. Bailey, W. J.; Slightom, J. L.; Goodman, M.: Rejection of the
'flying primate' hypothesis by phylogenetic evidence from the epsilon-globin
gene. Science 256: 86-89, 1992. Note: Erratum: Science 260: 608
only, 1993.

2. Baralle, F. E.; Shoulders, C. C.; Proudfoot, N. J.: The primary
structure of the human epsilon-globin gene. Cell 21: 621-626, 1980.

3. Fritsch, E. F.; Lawn, R. M.; Maniatis, T.: Molecular cloning and
characterization of the human beta-like globin gene cluster. Cell 19:
959-972, 1980.

4. Gale, R. E.; Clegg, J. B.; Huehns, E. R.: Human embryonic haemoglobins
Gower 1 and Gower 2. Nature 280: 162-164, 1979.

5. Gilman, J. G.; Smithies, O.: Fetal hemoglobin variants in mice. Science 160:
885-886, 1968.

6. He, Z.; Russell, J. E.: A human embryonic hemoglobin inhibits
Hb S polymerization in vitro and restores a normal phenotype to mouse
models of sickle cell disease. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 10635-10640,
2002.

7. Huehns, E. R.; Dance, N.; Beaven, G. H.; Hecht, F.; Motulsky, A.
G.: Human embryonic hemoglobin. Nature 201: 1095-1097, 1964.

8. Huehns, E. R.; Flynn, F. V.; Butler, E. A.; Beaven, G. H.: Two
new hemoglobin variants in a very young human embryo. Nature 189:
496-497, 1961.

9. Raich, N.; Papayannopoulou, T.; Stamatoyannopoulos, G.; Enver,
T.: Demonstration of a human epsilon-globin gene silencer with studies
in transgenic mice. Blood 79: 861-864, 1992.

10. Ramsay, M.; Thomson, J. A.; Jenkins, T.: A new epsilon globin
HincII variant fragment length in a South African Negroid family. J.
Med. Genet. 23: 145-150, 1986.

11. Shen, S.-H.; Smithies, O.: Human globin psi-beta-2 is not a globin-related
sequence. Nucleic Acids Res. 10: 7809-7818, 1982.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/27/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 04/01/2013
alopez: 5/27/2004
terry: 5/21/2004
cwells: 10/1/2002
carol: 9/27/2002
alopez: 8/1/1997
mimadm: 9/24/1994
terry: 5/9/1994
carol: 8/11/1992
carol: 5/11/1992
carol: 5/1/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

612647	TITLE *612647 RADIAL SPOKE HEAD 4, CHLAMYDOMONAS, HOMOLOG OF, A; RSPH4A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Radial spokes are regularly spaced along cilia, sperm, and flagella
axonemes and have a multisubunit 'stalk' and 'head' that form a signal
transduction scaffold between the central microtubule pair and dynein
(see 603297) arms. RSPH4A is predicted to be a component of the radial
spoke head based on homology with proteins in the biflagellate alga
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and other ciliates (Castleman et al., 2009).

CLONING

By genomewide linkage analysis and positional candidate gene analysis in
5 families with primary ciliary dyskinesia linked to chromosome 6q22
(CILD11; 612649) and central microtubule pair abnormalities, Castleman
et al. (2009) identified the RSPH4A and RSPH9 genes (612648). The
deduced RSPH4A protein contains 716 amino acids and shares about 30%
identity with the Chlamydomonas radial spoke head proteins Rsp4 and
Rsp6.

GENE STRUCTURE

Castleman et al. (2009) determined that the RSPH4A gene contains 6
exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Castleman et al. (2009) mapped the RSPH4A
gene to chromosome 6q22.1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 4 Pakistani families with CILD11, Castleman et
al. (2009) identified a homozygous mutation in the RSPH4A gene
(612647.0001). In affected members of a family of northern European
descent with CILD11, they identified compound heterozygosity for 2
mutations in the RSPH4A gene (612647.0001; 612647.0002). The patients
had classic respiratory features of CILD, but no situs abnormalities.
Electron microscopic studies showed complete absence of the central
microtubule pair of the ciliary axoneme. These findings suggested that
radial spoke proteins are not essential for embryonic nodal ciliary
function, which is important in the determination of left-right axis
development.

Kott et al. (2013) identified pathogenic mutations in the RSPH4A gene
(see, e.g., 612647.0004-612647.0005) in 7 (14%) of 48 families with with
a specific CILD phenotype characterized by ciliary central complex and
radial spoke defects. None of the patients had situs inversus.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 11, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
RSPH4A, GLN154TER

In all 10 affected members of 4 Pakistani families with primary ciliary
dyskinesia-11 (612649), Castleman et al. (2009) identified a homozygous
460C-T transition in exon 1 of the RSPH4A gene, resulting in a
gln154-to-ter (Q154X) substitution. The patients had classic respiratory
features of CILD, but no situs abnormalities. Electron microscopic
studies showed complete absence of the central microtubule pair of the
ciliary axoneme.

.0002
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 11, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
RSPH4A, GLN109TER

In affected individuals in a family of northern European descent with
CILD11 (612649), Castleman et al. (2009) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the RSPH4A gene: a 325C-T transition
in exon 1 resulting in a gln109-to-ter (Q109X) substitution, and a
1468C-T transition in exon 3 resulting in an arg490-to-ter (R490X;
612647.0003) substitution. The patients had classic respiratory features
of CILD, but no situs abnormalities. Electron microscopic studies showed
complete absence of the central microtubule pair of the ciliary axoneme.

.0003
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 11, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
RSPH4A, ARG490TER

See Castleman et al. (2009) and 612647.0002.

.0004
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 11, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
RSPH4A, 1-BP DEL, 667A

In a family with primary CILD11 (612649) without situs inversus, Kott et
al. (2013) identified compound heterozygous mutations in the RSPH4A
gene: a 1-bp deletion (667delA), resulting in premature termination
(Ser223AlafsTer15), and a 1-bp deletion (c.1720delA; 612647.0005),
resulting premature termination (Thr424GlnfsTer19). Transmission
electron microscopy showed that a variable proportion of cilia on
respiratory epithelial cells had central complex defects. Radial spokes
were absent in cilia with no central microtubule complex.

.0005
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 11, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
RSPH4A, 1-BP DEL, 1720A

See 612647.0004 and Kott et al. (2013).

REFERENCE 1. Castleman, V. H.; Romio, L.; Chodhari, R.; Hirst, R. A.; de Castro,
S. C. P.; Parker, K. A.; Ybot-Gonzalez, P.; Emes, R. D.; Wilson, S.
W.; Wallis, C.; Johnson, C. A.; Herrera, R. J.; and 12 others:
Mutations in radial spoke head protein genes RSPH9 and RSPH4A cause
primary ciliary dyskinesia with central-microtubular-pair abnormalities. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 84: 197-209, 2009.

2. Kott, E.; Legendre, M.; Copin, B.; Papon, J.-F.; Dastot-Le Moal,
F.; Montantin, G.; Duquesnoy, P.; Piterboth, W.; Amram, D.; Bassinet,
L.; Beucher, J.; Beydon, N.; and 18 others: Loss-of-function mutations
in RSPH1 cause primary ciliary dyskinesia with central-complex and
radial-spoke defects. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 93: 561-570, 2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/16/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/5/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/5/2009

EDITED carol: 11/05/2013
carol: 10/17/2013
ckniffin: 10/16/2013
carol: 3/9/2009
ckniffin: 3/5/2009
mgross: 3/5/2009

602284	TITLE *602284 BONE MORPHOGENETIC PROTEIN 8B; BMP8B
;;BMP8;;
OSTEOGENIC PROTEIN 2; OP2
DESCRIPTION The bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are a family of secreted
signaling molecules that can induce ectopic bone growth. Many BMPs,
including BMP8B, are part of the transforming growth factor-beta (TGFB)
superfamily (see 190180) (Ozkaynak et al., 1992).

CLONING

Using a mouse Op2 probe, Ozkaynak et al. (1992) isolated a novel BMP
cDNA, which they designated OP2, from a human hippocampus library. The
predicted 402-amino acid OP2 protein is processed into a 139-amino acid
mature form. In the TGFB domain, OP2 shows 74% amino acid sequence
identity to OP1 (BMP7; 112267), and 55 to 74% identity to other BMPs. In
mice, Northern blot analysis revealed high levels of Op2 mRNA as 3- and
5-kb transcripts in early embryos, but no detectable levels in any
organs studied.

Using quantitative RT-PCR, Whittle et al. (2012) detected variable Bmp8b
expression in all mouse tissues examined, with high expression in testis
and brown adipose tissue, much lower expression in brain and
subcutaneous white adipose tissue, and very low expression in gonadal
white adipose tissue, liver, kidney, heart, and skeletal muscle.

MAPPING

By interspecific backcross analysis, DiLeone et al. (1997) mapped the
mouse Bmp8 gene to chromosome 4. Based on homology of synteny, they
mapped the human gene to 1p35-p32.

Hartz (2012) mapped the BMP8B gene to chromosome 1p34.2 based on an
alignment of the BMP8B sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC023526) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

Whittle et al. (2012) found that expression of Bmp8b in mice was
upregulated by refeeding after fasting and by activation of thermogenic
responses. Reporter gene assays revealed that the Bmp8b promoter could
be induced by thermogenic thyroid hormone receptor beta-1 (THRB; 190160)
and by PPAR-alpha (PPARA; 170998) or PPAR-gamma (PPARG; 601487).
Treatment of mouse brown adipocytes with recombinant human BMP8B
increased Smad (see 601595) phosphorylation and activation of
hormone-sensitive lipase (LIPE; 151750) and AMPK (see 602739). BMP8B
increased the lipolytic response to norepinephrine, and inhibition of
Alk7 (ACVR1C; 608981) antagonized this effect.

ANIMAL MODEL

Whittle et al. (2012) reported that Bmp8b -/- mice were viable and
healthy but infertile due to defective primordial germ cell formation. A
significant number of Bmp8b -/- pups suffered early death, but survival
increased in a warm environment. Bmp8b -/- mice were prone to weight
gain, particularly on a high fat diet, and they showed reduced core body
temperature and impaired adrenergic-dependent thermogenic capacity.
Intracerebroventricular treatment of Bmp8b -/- mice with recombinant
human BMP8B resulted in marked weight loss and increased core body
temperature. The central thermogenic action of BMP8B was dependent upon
activation levels of hypothalamic Ampk. Whittle et al. (2012) concluded
that BMP8B has a fundamental role in energy balance regulation in both
the hypothalamus and brown adipose tissue.

REFERENCE 1. DiLeone, R. J.; King, J. A.; Storm, E. E.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins,
N. A.; Kingsley, D. M.: The Bmp8 gene is expressed in developing
skeletal tissue and maps near the achondroplasia locus on mouse chromosome
4. Genomics 40: 196-198, 1997.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/19/2012.

3. Ozkaynak, E.; Schnegelsberg, P. N. J.; Jin, D. F.; Clifford, G.
M.; Warren, F. D.; Drier, E. A.; Oppermann, H.: Osteogenic protein-2:
a new member of the transforming growth factor-beta superfamily expressed
in early embryogenesis. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 25220-25227, 1992.

4. Whittle, A. J.; Carobbio, S.; Martins, L.; Slawik, M.; Hondares,
E.; Vazquez, M. J.; Morgan, D.; Csikasz, R. I.; Gallego, R.; Rodriguez-Cuenca,
S.; Dale, M.; Virtue, S.; Villarroya, F.; Cannon, B.; Rahmouni, K.;
Lopez, M.; Vidal-Puig, A.: BMP8B increases brown adipose tissue thermogenesis
through both central and peripheral actions. Cell 149: 871-885,
2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/19/2012

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 1/27/1998

EDITED mgross: 11/13/2012
mgross: 11/8/2012
terry: 10/19/2012
alopez: 3/4/1998
carol: 1/30/1998
carol: 1/28/1998

123857	TITLE *123857 CYSTATIN 4; CST4
;;CYSTATIN S
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

See CST1 (123855) and CST5 (123858) for general information about
cystatins, inhibitors of cysteine proteinases. Saitoh et al. (1991)
cloned the CST4 gene by screening a genomic library with the CST1 gene.
The CST4 gene encodes the 141-amino acid precursor form of cystatin S.
(The cystatin D gene was originally called CST4 but later renamed CST5.)

By RNase protection assay of 23 human tissues, Dickinson et al. (2002)
found that the level of CST4 was highest in submandibular gland,
intermediate in parotid gland, lacrimal gland, and gallbladder, lower in
kidney and seminal vesicles, and lowest in prostate.

GENE STRUCTURE

Saitoh et al. (1991) determined that the CST4 gene is composed of 3
exons spanning less than 4 kb.

MAPPING

Dickinson et al. (1994) mapped the CST4 gene to 20p11.2 by fluorescence
in situ hybridization. CST4 is clustered with other family II cystatins
in a region that spans less than 905 kb.

REFERENCE 1. Dickinson, D. P.; Thiesse, M.; Hicks, M. J.: Expression of type
2 cystatin genes CST1-CST5 in adult human tissues and the developing
submandibular gland. DNA Cell Biol. 21: 47-65, 2002.

2. Dickinson, D. P.; Zhao, Y.; Thiesse, M.; Siciliano, M. J.: Direct
mapping of seven genes encoding human type 2 cystatins to a single
site located at 20p11.2. Genomics 24: 172-175, 1994.

3. Saitoh, E.; Isemura, S.; Sanada, K.; Ohnishi, K.: The human cystatin
gene family: cloning of three members and evolutionary relationship
between cystatins and Bowman-Birk type proteinase inhibitors. Biomed.
Biochim. Acta 50: 599-605, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/30/2006
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 4/10/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/6/1991

EDITED alopez: 09/18/2012
wwang: 9/6/2006
terry: 8/30/2006
psherman: 4/10/1998
mark: 3/31/1997
carol: 1/26/1995
carol: 6/4/1993
carol: 3/9/1993
carol: 3/31/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/21/1992

605978	TITLE *605978 VACUOLAR PROTEIN SORTING 13, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF, A; VPS13A
;;CHAC GENE; CHAC;;
CHOREIN;;
KIAA0986
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the choreoacanthocytosis (200150) critical region on chromosome 9q,
Rampoldi et al. (2001) identified the VPS13A gene, which they called
CHAC. They identified 2 splice variants: transcript A, which contains
exons 1 to 68 and 70 to 73 and encodes a 3,174-amino acid protein, and
transcript B, which contains exons 1 to 69 and encodes a 3,095-amino
acid protein. Northern blot analysis detected 2 bands of high molecular
mass corresponding to the 2 splice variants in all tissues analyzed.
Additionally, RT-PCR detected expression in the erythrocyte precursor
cell line K562. Rampoldi et al. (2001) showed that the CHAC gene encodes
an evolutionarily conserved protein, which may be involved in protein
sorting.

Independently, Ueno et al. (2001) identified the VPS13A gene and found
that it encodes a 3,096-amino acid protein, which they termed chorein.
Northern blot analysis detected a 10-kb transcript in brain, heart,
skeletal muscle, and kidney.

By EST database analysis and RT-PCR of lymphoid cell line and brain RNA,
Velayos-Baeza et al. (2004) identified several additional splice
variants of VPS13A generated by exon skipping or utilization of
alternative internal exons. Northern blot analysis and RT-PCR detected
VPS13A expression at variable levels in all tissues examined, and
transcript encoding the 3,174-amino acid protein was the major variant.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rampoldi et al. (2001) determined that the VPS13A gene contains 73 exons
and spans 250 kb. Velayos-Baeza et al. (2004) identified 5 additional
alternative exons in the VPS13A gene, exons 7b, 31b, 34b, 68b, and 69b,
but 3 of these, exons 31b, 34b, and 69b, have stop codons in all 3
reading frames.

MAPPING

Rampoldi et al. (2001) mapped the VPS13A gene to chromosome 9q21-q22.
Velayos-Baeza et al. (2004) mapped the mouse Vps13a gene to chromosome
19A.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 11 families with choreoacanthocytosis, Rampoldi
et al. (2001) identified 16 different mutations in the VPS13A gene (see,
e.g., 605978.0001).

In 4 affected patients from 3 Japanese pedigrees with
choreoacanthocytosis, Ueno et al. (2001) identified a homozygous
deletion in the coding region of the VPS13A gene (605978.0003).

Among 43 patients with choreoacanthocytosis, Dobson-Stone et al. (2002)
identified 57 different mutations distributed throughout the CHAC gene
(see, e.g., 605978.0004). In 7 patients, only 1 heterozygous mutation
was found; in 4 patients, no disease mutations were found. The authors
noted that small gene deletions or rearrangements may not have been
detected in these patients.

Dobson-Stone et al. (2005) stated that 75 different mutations in the
VPS13A gene had been identified in 58 probands with
choreoacanthocytosis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, ILE90LYS

In a patient with choreoacanthocytosis (200150), Rampoldi et al. (2001)
found compound heterozygosity for a 269T-A transversion in exon 4 of the
VPS13A gene and an insertion of a T between nucleotides 6404 and 6405 in
exon 48. The mutations resulted in an ile90-to-lys (I90K) amino acid
change and a frameshift, respectively.

.0002
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, 1-BP INS, 6404T

See 605978.0001 and Rampoldi et al. (2001).

.0003
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, 260-BP DEL

In affected members of 3 Japanese families with choreoacanthocytosis
(200150), Ueno et al. (2001) identified a homozygous 260-bp deletion in
the VPS13A gene, leading to a truncated protein. The families originated
from a small area in Japan, and haplotype analysis indicated a founder
effect. Some of the patients' parents, who were heterozygous for the
mutation, showed a slight degree of acanthocytosis in peripheral blood
but no distinct neurologic abnormalities except for cryptogenic abducens
palsy in 1 parent.

.0004
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, ARG208TER

In 3 patients with choreoacanthocytosis, Dobson-Stone et al. (2002)
identified a 622C-T change in exon 9 of the CHAC gene, resulting in an
arg208-to-ter nonsense substitution (R208X). One patient was homozygous
for the mutation and 2 others were compound heterozygous for R208X and
another CHAC mutation. The R208X mutation had previously been reported
by Rampoldi et al. (2001) in a family with choreoacanthocytosis.

.0005
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, 8035G-A

In 2 affected sibs from a Japanese family with choreoacanthocytosis
(200150) with apparent autosomal dominant inheritance, Saiki et al.
(2003) identified a heterozygous G-to-A transversion at the last
nucleotide of exon 57 of the CHAC gene, predicted to induce skipping of
exon 57 and premature termination of the protein. The mutation was not
detected in their unaffected mother. Family history revealed that 3
other living family members were affected and 2 deceased members were
believed to be affected. All 5 living affected members showed
acanthocytosis (approximately 15-20%) and involuntary movements. In an
erratum, the authors stated that an error in sequencing had occurred and
the inheritance pattern should have been reported as autosomal recessive
(pseudodominant). Tomiyasu et al. (2011) identified the 2 mutations in
the VPS13A gene in this family: an 8035G-A transition in exon 57,
causing a frameshift and premature termination (Ile2652HisfsTer12), and
a 1305G-A transition in exon 15, resulting in a trp435-to-ter (W435X;
605978.0010) substitution; the latter mutation was also identified in
the unaffected mother.

.0006
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, 1-BP DEL, 6059C

In 2 unrelated males of Ashkenazi Jewish descent with
choreoacanthocytosis (200150), Lossos et al. (2005) identified a
homozygous 1-bp deletion (6059delC) in exon 46 of the VPS13A gene,
predicted to result in premature termination of the protein.

.0007
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, 7-KB DEL

In an Iraqi Jewish woman with choreoacanthocytosis (200150), Lossos et
al. (2005) identified a homozygous 7-kb deletion spanning exon 23 of the
VPS13A gene. She had trichotillomania and anxiety but little
neuromuscular involvement.

.0008
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, 37-KB DEL

In affected members of 3 French Canadian families with
choreoacanthocytosis (200150), Dobson-Stone et al. (2005) identified a
homozygous 37-kb deletion in the VPS13A gene, resulting in the deletion
of exons 70 through 73. The deletion also encompassed the 2 terminal
exons of the neighboring GNA14 gene (604397). Haplotype analysis
indicated a founder effect.

.0009
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, 2-BP DUP, 3556AC

In 2 Mexican mestizo sisters, born of consanguineous parents, with
choreoacanthocytosis (200150), Ruiz-Sandoval et al. (2007) identified a
homozygous 2-bp duplication (3556dupAC) in exon 33 of the VPS13A gene,
resulting in a frameshift and premature termination. The proband had
onset at age 32 years and showed severe progression of the disorder; at
age 42, she was emaciated, anarthric, and reactive only to simple
commands. In contrast, her sister had onset at age 45 years and
primarily showed motor and verbal tics, paranoid behavior, and
depression.

.0010
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, TRP435TER

See 605978.0005 and Tomiyasu et al. (2011).

REFERENCE 1. Dobson-Stone, C.; Danek, A.; Rampoldi, L.; Hardie, R. J.; Chalmers,
R. M.; Wood, N. W.; Bohlega, S.; Dotti, M. T.; Federico, A.; Shizuka,
M.; Tanaka, M.; Watanabe, M.; and 32 others: Mutational spectrum
of the CHAC gene in patients with chorea-acanthocytosis. Europ. J.
Hum. Genet. 10: 773-781, 2002.

2. Dobson-Stone, C.; Velayos-Baeza, A.; Jansen, A.; Andermann, F.;
Dubeau, F.; Robert, F.; Summers, A.; Lang, A. E.; Chouinard, S.; Danek,
A.; Andermann, E.; Monaco, A. P.: Identification of a VPS13A founder
mutation in French Canadian families with chorea-acanthocytosis. Neurogenetics 6:
151-158, 2005.

3. Lossos, A.; Dobson-Stone, C.; Monaco, A. P.; Soffer, D.; Rahamim,
E.; Newman, J. P.; Mohiddin, S.; Fananapazir, L.; Lerer, I.; Linetsky,
E.; Reches, A.; Argov, Z.; Abramsky, O.; Gadoth, N.; Sadeh, M.; Gomori,
J. M.; Boher, M.; Meiner, V.: Early clinical heterogeneity in choreoacanthocytosis. Arch.
Neurol. 62: 611-614, 2005.

4. Rampoldi, L.; Dobson-Stone, C.; Rubio, J. P.; Danek, A.; Chalmers,
R. M.; Wood, N. W.; Verellen, C.; Ferrer, X.; Malandrini, A.; Fabrizi,
G. M.; Brown, R.; Vance, J.; Pericak-Vance, M.; Rudolf, G.; Carre,
S.; Alonso, E.; Manfredi, M.; Nemeth, A. H.; Monaco, A. P.: A conserved
sorting-associated protein is mutant in chorea-acanthocytosis. Nature
Genet. 28: 119-120, 2001.

5. Ruiz-Sandoval, J. L.; Garcia-Navarro, V.; Chiquete, E.; Dobson-Stone,
C.; Monaco, A. P.; Alvarez-Palazuelos, L. E.; Padilla-Martinez, J.
J.; Barrera-Chairez, E.; Rodriguez-Figueroa, E. I.; Perez-Garcia,
G.: Choreoacanthocytosis in a Mexican family. Arch. Neurol. 64:
1661-1664, 2007.

6. Saiki, S.; Sakai, K.; Kitagawa, Y.; Saiki, M.; Kataoka, S.; Hirose,
G.: Mutation in the CHAC gene in a family of autosomal dominant chorea-acanthocytosis. Neurology 61:
1614-1616, 2003. Note: Erratum: Neurology 77: 701 only, 2011.

7. Tomiyasu, A.; Nakamura, M.; Ichiba, M.; Ueno, S.; Saiki, S.; Morimoto,
M.; Kobal, J.; Kageyama, Y.; Inui, T.; Wakabayashi, K.; Yamada, T.;
Kanemori, Y.; and 22 others: Novel pathogenic mutations and copy
number variations in the VPS13A gene in patients with chorea-acanthocytosis. Am.
J. Med. Genet. (Neuropsychiat. Genet.) 156B: 620-631, 2011.

8. Ueno, S.; Maruki, Y.; Nakamura, M.; Tomemori, Y.; Kamae, K.; Tanabe,
H.; Yamashita, Y.; Matsuda, S.; Kaneko, S.; Sano, A.: The gene encoding
a newly discovered protein, chorein, is mutated in chorea-acanthocytosis. Nature
Genet. 28: 121-122, 2001.

9. Velayos-Baeza, A.; Vettori, A.; Copley, R. R.; Dobson-Stone, C.;
Monaco, A. P.: Analysis of the human VPS13 gene family. Genomics 84:
536-549, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 10/1/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/10/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/9/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/18/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/26/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/2/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/29/2001

EDITED carol: 09/06/2013
terry: 10/2/2012
terry: 10/1/2012
carol: 10/1/2012
carol: 1/6/2012
wwang: 4/16/2008
ckniffin: 4/10/2008
wwang: 11/22/2005
ckniffin: 11/9/2005
wwang: 8/19/2005
ckniffin: 8/18/2005
mgross: 8/27/2004
terry: 8/26/2004
mgross: 3/25/2004
carol: 3/2/2004
ckniffin: 3/2/2004
carol: 2/25/2004
ckniffin: 2/3/2004
alopez: 5/29/2001

