609030	TITLE *609030 DIGEORGE SYNDROME CRITICAL REGION GENE 8; DGCR8
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for genes within the DiGeorge syndrome (188400) critical
region of chromosome 22, followed by PCR of a brain cDNA library and
screening a fetal heart cDNA library, Shiohama et al. (2003) cloned
DGCR8. The deduced 773-amino acid protein contains a WW motif in its
N-terminal half and 2 double-stranded RNA-binding motifs in its
C-terminal half. Northern blot analysis of human tissues detected a
major transcript of 4.5 kb that was ubiquitously expressed and minor
transcripts of 3.5 and 1.5 kb that were found only in testis. In situ
hybridization of mouse embryos revealed Dgcr8 expression in
neuroepithelium of primary brain, limb bud, vessels, thymus, and palate
during various developmental stages.

GENE FUNCTION

RNase III proteins play key roles in microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis. The
nuclear RNase III Drosha (608828) cleaves primary miRNAs (pri-miRNAs) to
release hairpin-shaped pre-miRNAs that are subsequently cut to generate
mature miRNAs. By immunoprecipitation of human embryonic kidney cell
nuclear extracts, Han et al. (2004) found that DGCR8 interacted directly
with Drosha, and the 2 proteins were present within a complex of about
650 kD. Both DGCR8 and Drosha could homodimerize in the absence of
single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) in addition to interacting with each other.
Depletion of DGCR8 from HeLa cells with small interfering RNA led to
accumulation of pri-miRNA and loss of pre-miRNA and mature miRNA. Han et
al. (2004) concluded that DGCR8 is critical for the processing of
pri-miRNA into pre-miRNA.

Gregory et al. (2004) demonstrated that human Drosha is a component of 2
multiprotein complexes. The larger complex contains multiple classes of
RNA-associated proteins including RNA helicases, proteins that bind
double-stranded RNA, novel heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins, and
the Ewing sarcoma family of proteins. The smaller complex is composed of
Drosha and the double-stranded-RNA-binding protein DGCR8, the product of
a gene deleted in DiGeorge syndrome. In vivo knockdown and in vitro
reconstitution studies revealed that both components of this smaller
complex, termed Microprocessor, are necessary and sufficient in
mediating the genesis of miRNAs from the primary miRNA transcript.

Han et al. (2006) used computational and biochemical analyses to
elucidate the molecular basis for pri-miRNA processing by Drosha-DGCR8.
A typical metazoan pri-miRNA consists of an approximately 33-bp stem,
with a terminal loop and basal ssRNA segments. Han et al. (2006) found
that the basal ssRNA segments were essential for processing, whereas the
terminal loop was dispensable. The cleavage site was determined mainly
by the distance (about 11 bp) from the stem-ssRNA junction. DGCR8, but
not Drosha, interacted with pri-miRNAs directly and specifically, and
the basal ssRNA segments were critical for this interaction. Han et al.
(2006) proposed that DGCR8 may function as the molecular anchor that
measures the distance from the stem-ssRNA junction.

Wang et al. (2007) studied the role of miRNAs in embryonic stem (ES)
cell differentiation by generating a Dgcr8 knockout model. Analysis of
mouse knockout ES cells showed that DGCR8 is essential for biogenesis of
miRNAs. Dgcr8-deficient mouse ES cells proliferated slowly and
accumulated in G1 phase of the cell cycle. On the induction of
differentiation, Dgcr8-deficient ES cells did not fully downregulate
pluripotency markers and retained the ability to produce ES cell
colonies; however, they did express some markers of differentiation.
This phenotype differed from that reported for Dicer1 (606241) knockout
cells, suggesting that Dicer has miRNA-independent roles in ES cell
function. Wang et al. (2007) concluded that miRNAs function in the
silencing of ES cell self-renewal that normally occurs with the
induction of differentiation.

By screening mouse miRNAs for those that could rescue the growth defect
in Dgcr8-knockout mouse ES cells, Wang et al. (2008) identified a group
of ES cell-specific miRNAs with a shared seed sequence (AAGUGC),
including several members of the miR290 cluster. Complementary target
sequences were found in the 3-prime UTR of the Cdkn1a (116899)
transcript. All 5 ES cell-specific miRNAs tested (miR291a-3p,
miR291b-3p, miR294, miR295, and miR302d) directly targeted the 3-prime
UTR of Cdkn1a and inhibited reporter gene expression. Target sites were
also identified in the 3-prime UTRs of other inhibitors of the cyclin E
(see CCNE1; 123837)-CDK2 (116953) pathway, including Rb1 (614041), Rbl1
(116957), Rbl2 (180203), and Lats2 (604861). Quantitative RT-PCR
confirmed increased expression of these genes in Dgcr8-knockout mouse ES
cells. Wang et al. (2008) concluded that ES cell-specific miRNAs have
central roles in expediting the G1-S transition and promoting cellular
proliferation.

In the absence of Dgcr8, a protein required for microRNA biogenesis,
mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells are unable to suppress self-renewal.
Melton et al. (2010) showed that the introduction of let7 (605386)
microRNAs, a family of microRNAs highly expressed in somatic cells, can
suppress self-renewal in Dgcr8-null but not wildtype ES cells.
Introduction of ES cell cell-cycle-regulating (ESCC) microRNAs into the
Dgcr8-null ES cells blocked the capacity of let7 to suppress
self-renewal. Profiling and bioinformatic analyses showed that let7
inhibits, whereas ESCC microRNAs indirectly activate, numerous
self-renewal genes. Furthermore, inhibition of the let7 family promoted
dedifferentiation of somatic cells to induced pluripotent stem cells.
Melton et al. (2010) concluded that ESCC and LET7 microRNAs act through
common pathways to alternatively stabilize the self-renewing versus
differentiated cell fates.

GENE STRUCTURE

Shiohama et al. (2003) determined that the DGCR8 gene contains 14 exons
and spans more than 35 kb. The region just upstream of exon 1 shows a
high GC and CpG content. The mouse Dgcr8 gene has the same gene
structure and size as the human gene.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Shiohama et al. (2003) mapped the DGCR8
gene to chromosome 22q11.2. They mapped the mouse Dgcr8 gene to a region
of chromosome 16q that shows homology of synteny to human chromosome
22q11.2. However, the chromosomal segment is flipped in mouse as
compared with human, so that the orientation of the human and mouse
genes is opposite.

ANIMAL MODEL

Individuals with 22q11.2 microdeletions show behavioral and cognitive
deficits and are at high risk of developing schizophrenia. Stark et al.
(2008) engineered a mouse strain carrying a hemizygous 1.3-Mb
chromosomal deficiency spanning a segment syntenic to the human 22q11.2
locus. The hemizygous microdeletion, called Df(16)A +/-, encompassed 27
genes and represented most of the functional genes in the human segment.
Behaviorally, Df(16)A +/- mice were hyperactive compared to wildtype
littermates and showed deficits in the PPI task. Males, but not females,
appeared fearful of exploring their environment. Stark et al. (2008)
found that Df(16)A +/- mice had abnormal brain microarchitecture,
although no gross brain abnormalities were present. In the hippocampus,
Df(16)A +/- mice had reduced number and size of dendritic spines and
decreased dendritic complexity of CA1 pyramidal neurons. Analysis of
heterozygous Dgcr8-deficient mice revealed that altered miRNA
biogenesis, dendritic complexity, and PPI performance in Df(16)A +/-
mice was due to Dgcr8 haploinsufficiency. Stark et al. (2008) concluded
that abnormal miRNA processing contributes to the behavioral and
neuronal deficits associated with the human 22q11.2 deletion.

REFERENCE 1. Gregory, R. I.; Yan, K.; Amuthan, G.; Chendrimada, T.; Doratotaj,
B.; Cooch, N.; Shiekhattar, R.: The Microprocessor complex mediates
the genesis of microRNAs. Nature 432: 235-240, 2004.

2. Han, J.; Lee, Y.; Yeom, K.-H.; Kim, Y.-K.; Jin, H.; Kim, V. N.
: The Drosha-DGCR8 complex in primary microRNA processing. Genes
Dev. 18: 3016-3027, 2004.

3. Han, J.; Lee, Y.; Yeom, K.-H.; Nam, J.-W.; Heo, I.; Rhee, J.-K.;
Sohn, S. Y.; Cho, Y.; Zhang, B.-T.; Kim, V. N.: Molecular basis for
the recognition of primary microRNAs by the Drosha-DGCR8 complex. Cell 125:
887-901, 2006.

4. Melton, C.; Judson, R. L.; Blelloch, R.: Opposing microRNA families
regulate self-renewal in mouse embryonic stem cells. Nature 463:
621-626, 2010. Note: Erratum: Nature 464: 126 only, 2010.

5. Shiohama, A.; Sasaki, T.; Noda, S.; Minoshima, S.; Shimizu, N.
: Molecular cloning and expression analysis of a novel gene DGCR8
located in the DiGeorge syndrome chromosomal region. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 304: 184-190, 2003.

6. Stark, K. L.; Xu, B.; Bagchi, A.; Lai, W.-S.; Liu, H.; Hsu, R.;
Wan, X.; Pavlidis, P.; Mills, A. A.; Karayiorgou, M.; Gogos, J. A.
: Altered brain microRNA biogenesis contributes to phenotypic deficits
in a 22q11-deletion mouse model. Nature Genet. 40: 751-760, 2008.

7. Wang, Y.; Baskerville, S.; Shenoy, A.; Babiarz, J. E.; Baehner,
L.; Blelloch, R.: Embryonic stem cell-specific microRNAs regulate
the G1-S transition and promote rapid proliferation. Nature Genet. 40:
1478-1483, 2008.

8. Wang, Y.; Medvid, R.; Melton, C.; Jaenisch, R.; Blelloch, R.:
DGCR8 is essential for microRNA biogenesis and silencing of embryonic
stem cell self-renewal. Nature Genet. 39: 380-385, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/11/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 4/12/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/11/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/16/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/27/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/4/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/23/2005

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/18/2004

EDITED terry: 09/14/2012
alopez: 6/17/2011
alopez: 6/14/2010
terry: 6/11/2010
wwang: 4/16/2010
mgross: 4/12/2010
mgross: 2/16/2009
terry: 2/11/2009
carol: 12/1/2008
alopez: 7/16/2008
alopez: 7/5/2007
terry: 6/27/2007
alopez: 4/10/2007
terry: 4/4/2007
mgross: 3/23/2005
mgross: 11/18/2004

608527	TITLE *608527 NEURAMINIDASE 4; NEU4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Neuraminidases, or sialidases (EC 3.2.1.18), such as NEU4, constitute a
large family of glycohydrolytic enzymes that cleave terminal sialic acid
residues from various sialo derivatives, such as sialo-oligosaccharides,
sialoglycoproteins, and gangliosides.

CLONING

Comelli et al. (2003) cloned mouse Neu4 from a brain cDNA library. The
deduced 501-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of about
55 kD.

Monti et al. (2004) cloned human NEU4 by searching a database for
sequences similar to NEU2 (605528), followed by screening a PAC library
and RT-PCR of total RNA extracted from COS-7 cells transfected with a
NEU4 PAC clone. The NEU4 sequence has a high GC content (70%). The
deduced 484-amino acid NEU4 protein has a calculated molecular mass of
51.6 kD. It contains 2 putative transmembrane regions, an N-terminal
sialidase motif, 2 classical asp blocks, and a stretch of 79 amino acids
that appear unique among sialidases. NEU4 also has 3 potential
O-glycosylation sites and several potential phosphorylation sites. The
authors predicted that the N and C termini of NEU4 are extracellular.
NEU4 shares significant similarity with a 478-amino acid variant of
mouse Neu4, with complete conservation of residues likely to be within
the active site. RNA dot blot analysis detected at least minimal
expression of NEU4 in all 50 adult and fetal tissues examined. Highest
expression was in liver, and much lower expression was detected in
colon, small intestine, kidney, whole brain, and all central nervous
system areas examined. Immunofluorescence and confocal analysis of
transfected COS-7 cells showed extensive intracellular
membrane-associated labeling for NEU4. The labeled membranous network
was spread throughout the cytoplasm, and labeling did not colocalize
with a lysosome marker.

By Northern blot analysis, Seyrantepe et al. (2004) found variable
expression of a 5.6-kb NEU4 transcript in all human tissues examined,
with highest expression in skeletal muscle, heart, liver, and placenta.
Epitope-tagged NEU4 expressed in COS-7 cells colocalized with lysosomal
markers and fractionated with the supernatant following sonication,
suggesting that NEU4 is a soluble lysosomal hydrolase. Glycosylated
human NEU4 had an apparent molecular mass of 60 kD by SDS-PAGE.

Bigi et al. (2010) stated that there are long and short isoforms of
human NEU4 that differ in the presence or absence of a 12-amino acid
N-terminal sequence. In contrast with the findings of Seyrantepe et al.
(2004), Bigi et al. (2010) found that both isoforms were extrinsic
membrane proteins. The long NEU4 isoform localized to the outer
mitochondrial membrane, whereas the short isoform localized to several
intracellular membranes, including the endoplasmic reticulum.

GENE FUNCTION

Comelli et al. (2003) showed that mouse Neu4 had sialidase activity at
pH 5.5 against the synthetic substrate
2-prime-(4-methylumbelliferyl)-alpha-D-N-acetylneuraminic acid
(4MU-NeuAc).

Monti et al. (2004) confirmed that human NEU4 has sialidase activity
using 4MU-NeuAc as substrate; the pH optimum was 3.2. NEU4 did not
remove sialic acid residues from alpha-2,3-sialyllactose, gangliosides
GD1a and GM3, or any human and bovine glycoproteins used as substrate.
Nearly 80% of the activity was recovered in a high-speed pellet of
transfected COS-7 cells.

Seyrantepe et al. (2004) found that human NEU4 expressed in COS-7 cells
showed broad substrate specificity, being almost equally active on
glycoproteins, oligosaccharides, sialylated glycolipids, and 4MU-NeuAc.
With 4MU-NeuAc, NEU4 showed a pH optimum of 3.5. NEU4 was secreted from
transfected mucolipidosis II (252500) fibroblasts rather than being
targeted to lysosomes, suggesting that correct localization of NEU4 in
lysosomes is dependent on mannose 6-phosphate receptor (see 154540).
Expression of either NEU4 or NEU1 in sialidosis (256550) or
galactosialidosis (256540) fibroblasts reduced the lysosomal storage
phenotype, suggesting that NEU4 is active on undigested substrates
containing neuraminic acid.

The addition of polysialic acid, a homopolymer of alpha-2,8-linked
sialic acid, is an important modification of neural cell adhesion
molecule (NCAM, or NCAM1; 116930) and is implicated in neurite
extension. Takahashi et al. (2012) found that the short isoform of mouse
Neu4, which they called Neu4b, degraded polysialic acid on NCAM, whereas
other neuraminidases, including the long isoform of Neu4, did not. Neu4b
had activity with polysialic acid at acidic and near neutral pH.
Overexpression of Neu4b in mouse embryonic hippocampal neurons inhibited
neurite outgrowth in culture. Conversely, knockdown of Neu4 via small
interfering RNA enhanced neurite outgrowth. Neu4b mainly localized to
neuronal soma, predominantly at the ER, but it also partially
colocalized with polysialic acid at growth cones. Takahashi et al.
(2012) concluded that Neu4b is involved in regulation of neurite
outgrowth by degrading the polysialic acid modification of NCAM.

GENE STRUCTURE

Monti et al. (2004) determined that the human NEU4 gene contains 4 exons
and spans about 6.7 kb. Exon 1 is untranslated. Comelli et al. (2003)
found that the mouse Neu4 gene contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Monti et al. (2004) mapped the NEU4 gene
to chromosome 2q37.3, where it is flanked on the telomeric side by the
GP3ST gene (608237) and on the centromeric side by the DTYMK gene
(188345). Comelli et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Neu4 gene to chromosome
1.

REFERENCE 1. Bigi, A.; Morosi, L.; Pozzi, C.; Forcella, M.; Tettamanti, G.;
Venerando, B.; Monti, E.; Fusi, P.: Human sialidase NEU4 long and
short are extrinsic proteins bound to outer mitochondrial membrane
and the endoplasmic reticulum, respectively. Glycobiology 20: 148-157,
2010.

2. Comelli, E. M.; Amado, M.; Lustig, S. R.; Paulson, J. C.: Identification
and expression of Neu4, a novel murine sialidase. Gene 321: 155-161,
2003.

3. Monti, E.; Bassi, M. T.; Bresciani, R.; Civini, S.; Croci, G. L.;
Papini, N.; Riboni, M.; Zanchetti, G.; Ballabio, A.; Preti, A.; Tettamanti,
G.; Venerando, B.; Borsani, G.: Molecular cloning and characterization
of NEU4, the fourth member of the human sialidase gene family. Genomics 83:
445-453, 2004.

4. Seyrantepe, V.; Landry, K.; Trudel, S.; Hassan, J. A.; Morales,
C. R.; Pshezhetsky, A. V.: Neu4, a novel human lysosomal lumen sialidase,
confers normal phenotype to sialidosis and galactosialidosis cells. J.
Biol. Chem. 279: 37021-37029, 2004.

5. Takahashi, K.; Mitoma, J.; Hosono, M.; Shiozaki, K.; Sato, C.;
Yamaguchi, K.; Kitajima, K.; Higashi, H.; Nitta, K.; Shima, H.; Miyagi,
T.: Sialidase NEU4 hydrolyzes polysialic acids of neural cell adhesion
molecules and negatively regulates neurite formation by hippocampal
neurons. J. Biol. Chem. 287: 14816-14826, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/14/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/15/2004

EDITED mgross: 03/14/2013
terry: 3/14/2013
mgross: 3/15/2004

