601517	TITLE *601517 ATAXIN 2; ATXN2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ataxin-2, the protein encoded by the ATXN2 gene, contains a
polyglutamine tract, long expansions (greater than 33 repeats) of which
result in spinocerebellar ataxia-2 (SCA2; 183090), an autosomal dominant
form of olivopontocerebellar atrophy. Intermediate-length expansions
(27-33 glutamines) contribute to susceptibility to amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS13; see 183090).

CLONING

Using a monoclonal antibody that recognizes expanded polyglutamine
stretches in TATA box-binding protein (600075), mutant huntingtin
(613004), mutant ataxin-1 (164400), and glutamine expanded proteins in
patients with SCA3 (109150), Trottier et al. (1995) used Western
blotting to detect a 150-kD protein in a patient with SCA2, but not his
normal relative. By analogy to other disorders associated with
anticipation in expanded triplet repeats, they suggested that this may
be the protein encoded by the mutant gene responsible for this disorder.

Pulst et al. (1996) isolated the ATXN2 gene through a positional cloning
approach. They assembled a 1.1-Mb contig in the 12q24.1 region where the
disease SCA2 had been mapped, and then identified a genomic clone that
contained CAG repeats. By screening human adult and human fetal brain
libraries, Pulst et al. (1996) identified a cDNA clone with a 3,936-kb
open reading frame (ORF) that encodes a 1,312-amino acid polypeptide
with a molecular mass of 140 kD. The (CAG)n repeat (601517.0001) is
located in the 5-prime end of the coding region of the ATXN2 gene, which
they also referred to as the ataxin-2 gene. The ataxin-2 gene showed no
homology with genes of known function. ATXN2 did, however, show homology
with cDNAs in an EST database, and Pulst et al. (1996) cloned a related
human cDNA they called ataxin-2-related protein (A2RP; GenBank U70671)
and a cDNA for a mouse gene homologous to ATXN2. These 2 genes, however,
lacked the polyglutamine repeat region.

Sanpei et al. (1996) devised a novel strategy for identification of
triplet-repeat expansion genes referred to by them as DIRECT (direct
identification of repeat expansion and cloning technique). This
technique involved preparation of a probe with high specific
radioactivity by PCR internal labeling, preparation of single-stranded
probe, and detection of disease-specific expanded repeats by Southern
blot hybridization under stringent conditions, followed by cloning of
the genomic segment containing the pathologically expanded repeat.
Sanpei et al. (1996) applied this technique to the identification of
expanded repeats in patients with SCA2. Southern blots of genomic DNA
digested with TspEI revealed a 2.5-kb fragment which was absent from
normal individuals. A genomic clone containing the expanded (CAG)n
repeat was isolated and sequenced, and was predicted to encode a
1,313-amino acid polypeptide with a molecular mass of 140 kD, referred
to as ataxin-2. Northern blot analysis with ataxin-2 gene sequences
revealed a 4.7-kb transcript which was expressed in brain, heart, liver,
muscle, pancreas, and placenta. Sanpei et al. (1996) noted that there
was another ATG codon 120 codons downstream of the first ATG codon and
that if this was a functional initiation site, the smaller transcript
would result in a predicted 124-kD polypeptide.

The gene encoding the protein that is mutant in SCA2 was also cloned by
Imbert et al. (1996), who screened cDNA expression libraries with an
antibody specific for polyglutamine repeats. They identified 6
unreported (CAG)n repeat expansion-containing genes and designed primers
from the DNA region flanking the gene associated with SCA2 patients. One
genomic clone they isolated (DAN1), which corresponded to ATXN2, was
fully sequenced and was found to contain a 2,745-bp ORF, a 243-bp
untranslated region, and a GC-rich upstream sequence. They found a
putative internal poly(A) site and presented amino acid sequences from 2
reading frames of the 2,745-bp ORF that may be related by ribosomal
frameshifting. A 2.5-kb fragment of the DAN1 clone was used to probe
Northern blots, from which they detected ubiquitous expression in brain,
heart, skeletal muscle, and placenta. They also summarized their
findings on the (CAG)n and (CAA)n repeats identified in both normal and
affected individuals (see 601517.0001). From zoo blot analysis they
found that the gene was highly conserved in 5 different mammalian
species and in chicken. Imbert et al. (1996) reported that ATXN2 mutant
protein is cytoplasmic in location and has an apparent molecular weight
of 150 kD.

Nechiporuk et al. (1998) isolated and characterized the mouse homolog of
the ATXN2 gene. Sequence and amino acid analyses revealed 89% and 91%
identity at the nucleotide and amino acid level, respectively. However,
there was no extended polyglutamine tract in the mouse Sca2 cDNA,
suggesting that the normal function of ATXN2 is not dependent on this
domain. Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues indicated that the mouse
gene is expressed in most tissues, but at varying levels. Alternative
splicing seen in human ATXN2 was conserved in the mouse. By Northern
blot analysis, ATXN2 was found to be expressed during embryogenesis as
early as day 8 of gestation. Immunohistochemical staining using
affinity-purified antibodies demonstrated that ataxin-2 is expressed in
the cytoplasm of Purkinje cells as well as in other neurons of the CNS.

By RT-PCR of human peripheral blood lymphocyte total RNA, Affaitati et
al. (2001) cloned an ATXN21 splice variant lacking exon 21. In this
variant, which the authors called ATXN2 type IV, exon 20 is spliced
in-frame to exon 22, resulting in a deduced protein of 1,294 amino
acids. RT-PCR detected both full-length ATXN2 and ATXN2 type IV in human
brain, spinal cord, cerebellum, heart, and placenta. Both variants were
also detected in mouse brain, heart, and liver, as well as in all stages
of mouse development examined.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Sahba et al. (1998) determined that the
ATXN2 gene contains 25 exons and spans approximately 130 kb. Exon sizes
range from 37 to 890 bp. The CAG repeat is in exon 1. Sahba et al.
(1998) also identified an isoform resulting from alternative splicing in
exon 10, predicted to encode a protein truncated by 70 amino acids.

GENE FUNCTION

Sanpei et al. (1996) reported that ataxin-2 contained a consensus
cleavage site (amino acids DXXD) for apopain (600636) at amino acid
residues 397-400. They noted that apopain is the human counterpart of
the nematode cysteine protease death-gene product CED3 and that apopain
may be involved in the processing of huntingtin (613004). Furthermore,
Goldberg et al. (1996) reported that the rate of cleavage increases with
the length of the polyglutamine repeat and suggested that the truncated
protein products may be toxic to neuronal cells.

Huynh et al. (1999) used antibodies to study the distribution of
ataxin-2 in normal individuals and patients with SCA2. The staining was
cytoplasmic. Highest levels were observed in the ependyma and choroid
plexus. High levels were present in cerebellar Purkinje cells, large
neurons of the substantia nigra, and the trochlear nuclei. Moderate
staining was observed in apical cytoplasm of hippocampal and cortical
pyramidal neurons, olivary nuclei, inferior colliculus, globus pallidus,
and amygdala. Glial cells in the superficial molecular area of the
cerebral cortex, granule cells in cortical layer II, and large neurons
in the putamen were weakly labeled. The level of ataxin-2 in Purkinje
cells of normal individuals increased with age. Staining was more
intense in individuals with SCA2.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid system, Shibata et al. (2000) identified a novel
protein, A2BP1 (ataxin-2-binding protein-1; 605104), which binds to the
C terminus of ataxin-2. In sections from 3 SCA2 brains, neuronal
labeling for A2BP1 as well as for ataxin-2 appeared to be enhanced and
was more diffusely distributed.

Using yeast 2-hybrid screens, coaffinity purification analysis of
transfected HEK293 cells, and bioinformatic analysis, Lim et al. (2006)
developed an interaction network for 54 human proteins involved in 23
inherited ataxias. By database analysis, they expanded the core network
to include more distantly related interacting proteins that could
function as genetic modifiers. A majority (18 of 23) of ataxia-causing
proteins interacted either directly or indirectly. A strong direct
interaction was detected between ATXN1 and ATXN2.

Ralser et al. (2005) demonstrated that ataxin-2 interacted with
endophilin-A1 (SH3GL2; 604465) and endophilin-A3 (SH3GL3; 603362). In a
yeast model system, expression of ataxin-2 as well as both endophilin
proteins was toxic for yeast lacking Sac6, which encodes fimbrin (PLS3;
300131) a protein involved in actin filament organization and
endocytotic processes. Expression of huntingtin (613004), another
polyglutamine protein interacting with endophilin-A3, was also toxic in
Sac6-null yeast. These effects could be suppressed by simultaneous
expression of 1 of the 2 human fimbrin orthologs, L-plastin (LCP1;
153430) or T-plastin (PLS3). Ataxin-2 associated with L- and T-plastin,
and overexpression of ataxin-2 led to accumulation of T-plastin in
mammalian cells. Ralser et al. (2005) suggested an interplay between
ataxin-2, endophilin proteins, and huntingtin in plastin-associated
cellular pathways.

Elden et al. (2010) showed that the polyglutamine repeat protein
ataxin-2 is a potent modifier of TDP43 (605078) toxicity in animal and
cellular models of ALS (105400). ATXN2 and TDP43 associate in a complex
that depends on RNA. In spinal cord neurons of ALS patients, ATXN2 is
abnormally localized; likewise, TDP43 shows mislocalization in
spinocerebellar ataxia-2.

Lim and Allada (2013) found that Atx2 is a translational activator of
the rate-limiting clock component Period (PER; 602260) in Drosophila.
Atx2 specifically interacted with 'Twenty-four' (Tyf), an activator of
Per translation. RNA interference-mediated depletion of Atx2 or the
expression of a mutant Atx2 protein that does not associate with
polyadenylate-binding protein (PABP; 604679) suppressed behavioral
rhythms and decreased abundance of Per. Although Atx2 can repress
translation, depletion of Atx2 from Drosophila S2 cells inhibited
translational activation by RNA-tethered Tyf and disrupted the
association between Tyf and Pabp. Thus, Lim and Allada (2013) concluded
that ATX2 coordinates an active translation complex important for PER
expression and circadian rhythms in Drosophila.

Zhang et al. (2013) independently found that the Drosophila homolog of
ATXN2 was required for circadian locomotor behavior. Atx2 was necessary
for Per accumulation in circadian pacemaker neurons and thus determined
period length of circadian behavior. Atx2 was required for the function
of Tyf, a crucial activator of Per translation. Atx2 formed a complex
with Tyf and promoted its interaction with Pabp. Zhang et al. (2013)
concluded that their work uncovered a role for ATX2 in circadian timing
and revealed that this protein functions as an activator of PER
translation in circadian neurons.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Spinocerebellar Ataxia 2

In patients with spinocerebellar ataxia-2 (183090), Pulst et al. (1996)
identified a (CAG)n repeat located in the 5-prime end of the coding
region of the ATXN2 gene (601517.0001). Cancel et al. (1997) screened
184 index patients with autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia type I for
the CAG repeat in the ataxin-2 gene. They found the mutation in 109
patients from 30 families of different geographic origins (15%) and in 2
isolated cases with no known family histories (2%). The SCA2 chromosomes
contained from 34 to 57 repeats and consisted of a pure stretch of CAG,
whereas all tested normal chromosomes (14 to 31 repeats), except 1 with
14 repeats, were interrupted by 1 to 3 repeats of CAA. As in other
diseases caused by unstable mutations, a strong negative correlation was
observed between the age at onset and the size of the CAG repeat.
Frequency of several clinical signs such as myoclonus, dystonia, and
myokymia increased with the number of CAG repeats, whereas the frequency
of others was related to disease duration. The CAG repeat was highly
unstable during transmission with variations ranging from -8 to +12, and
a mean increase of +2.2, but there was no significant difference
according to the parental sex. This instability was confirmed by the
high degree of gonadal mosaicism observed in sperm DNA of 1 patient.

Choudhry et al. (2001) identified 2 novel single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in exon 1 of the ATXN2 gene and genotyped 215
normal and 64 expanded chromosomes. The 2 biallelic SNPs distinguished 2
haplotypes, GT and CC, each of which formed a predominant haplotype
associated with normal and expanded ATXN2 alleles. All the expanded
alleles segregated with CC haplotype, which otherwise was associated
with only 29.3% of the normal chromosomes. CAA interspersion analysis
revealed that a majority of the normal alleles with CC haplotype were
either pure or lacked the most proximal 5-prime CAA interruption. The
repeat length variation at the ATXN2 locus also appeared to be polar,
with changes occurring mostly at the 5-prime end of the repeat. The
authors concluded that CAA interruptions may play an important role in
conferring stability to ATXN2 repeats and that their absence may
predispose alleles towards instability and pathologic expansion.

Although repeat length and age at disease onset are inversely related,
approximately 50% of the age at onset variance in SCA2 remains
unexplained. Other familial factors have been proposed to account for at
least part of the remaining variance in the polyglutamine disorders. The
ability of polyglutamine tracts to interact with each other, as well as
the presence of intranuclear inclusions in other polyglutamine
disorders, led Hayes et al. (2000) to hypothesize that other
CAG-containing proteins may interact with expanded ataxin-2 and affect
the rate of protein accumulation, and thus influence age at onset. To
test this hypothesis, they used step-wise multiple linear regression to
examine 10 CAG-containing genes for possible influences on SCA2 age at
onset. One locus, RAI1 (607642), contributed an additional 4.1% of the
variance in SCA2 age at onset after accounting for the effect of the
ATXN2 expanded repeat. SCA3 (109150) age at onset, on the other hand,
showed no effect from the RAI1 locus.

Huynh et al. (2003) confirmed that ataxin-2 is predominantly located in
the Golgi apparatus. Deletion of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) exit and
trans-Golgi signals in ataxin-2 resulted in an altered subcellular
distribution. Expression of full-length ataxin-2 with an expanded repeat
disrupted the normal morphology of the Golgi complex and colocalization
with Golgi markers was lost. Intranuclear inclusions were only seen when
the polyQ repeat was expanded to 104 glutamines, and even then were only
observed in a small minority of cells. Expression of ataxin-2 with
expanded repeats in PC12 and COS-1 cells increased cell death compared
with normal ataxin-2 and elevated the levels of activated caspase-3
(600636) and TdT-mediated dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL)-positive cells.
These results suggested a link between cell death mediated by mutant
ataxin-2 and the stability of the Golgi complex. Huynh et al. (2003)
concluded that formation of intranuclear aggregates is not necessary for
in vitro cell death caused by expression of full-length mutant ataxin-2.

- Susceptibility to Late-Onset Parkinson Disease

Gwinn-Hardy et al. (2000) described 4 patients from a Chinese kindred
with parkinsonian features (168600) and CAG expansions at the SCA2
locus. The youngest patient had findings typical for the SCA2 ataxic
phenotype, but also had parkinsonian features. His SCA2 CAG repeat
length was 43. Three patients from earlier generations had mildly
elevated CAG repeat lengths of 33 to 36 with varying phenotypes, but all
predominantly parkinsonian features, including masked facies, diminished
blink rate, and bradykinesia in addition to mild cerebellar findings
such as broad-based gait. Two benefited from carbidopa-levodopa therapy.
None of the patients had cognitive disturbance or resting tremor. The
authors suggested that some cases of familial parkinsonism may be due to
SCA2 mutations.

Among 23 Chinese patients with familial parkinsonism, Shan et al. (2001)
identified 2 patients who had expanded trinucleotide repeats (mildly
elevated at 36 and 37 repeats) in the ATXN2 gene. Both patients had
onset of leg tremor at age 50 years, followed by gait difficulty,
rigidity, and slow, hypometric saccades. L-dopa produced marked
improvement in symptoms in both patients. In addition, PET scan showed
reduced dopamine distribution in the caudate and putamen in both
patients. Shan et al. (2001) noted that these 2 patients represented
approximately one-tenth of their population with familial parkinsonism.

Charles et al. (2007) found that 3 (2%) of 164 French families with
autosomal dominant parkinsonism (168600) had SCA2 expansions ranging in
size from 37 to 39 repeats that were interrupted by CAA triplets. These
interrupted expansions were stable in transmission. All 9 patients had
levodopa-responsive parkinsonism without cerebellar signs and had less
rigidity and more symmetric signs compared to patients with other causes
of PD. Two sisters with both the SCA2 expansion and the LRRK2 mutation
G2019S (609007.0006) had earlier onset that their mother who had only
the SCA2 expansion, suggesting an additive pathogenic effect in the
sisters. As a phenotypic comparison, 53 SCA2 patients with
similar-sized, uninterrupted SCA2 repeats showed predominant cerebellar
ataxia with rare signs of parkinsonism. The findings suggested that the
configuration of SCA2 repeat expansions plays an important role in
phenotypic variability.

Ross et al. (2011) found no association between intermediate ATXN2 CAG
repeat expansions (greater than 30 units; 601517.0002) and PD in a study
of 702 patients with Parkinson disease and 4,877 controls. Expansions
were found in 2 (0.3%) patients and 9 (0.2%) controls.

- Susceptibility to Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 13

The genetic, biochemical, and neuropathologic interactions between TDP43
and ATXN2 raised the possibility to Elden et al. (2010) that mutations
in ATXN2 could have a causative role in ALS (see ALS13, 183090). The
ATXN2 polyQ tract length, although variable, is most frequently 22-23,
with expansions of greater than 34 causing SCA2. However, the variable
nature of the polyQ repeat indicated a mechanism by which such mutations
in ATXN2 could be linked to ALS: Elden et al. (2010) proposed that
intermediate-length expansions greater than 23 but below the threshold
for SCA2 may be associated with ALS. They studied the frequency of
intermediate-length ATXN2 polyglutamine repeats in ALS, comparing 915
subjects with ALS with 980 neurologically normal subjects. Among those
with ALS, 4.7% had repeat lengths of 27 to 33, whereas only 1.4% of
neurologically normal subjects had glutamine expansions. The P value for
this difference was 3.6 x 10(-5) with an odds ratio of 2.80.

In a case-control study of 556 ALS patients and 471 controls of French
or French Canadian origin, Daoud et al. (2011) found that 7.2% of
patients and 5.1% of controls had 1 intermediate repeat allele (24-33
repeats), which was not significantly different. However, receiver
operating characteristic curve analysis yielded a significant
association between ALS and high-length ATXN2 repeat alleles (more than
29 CAG repeats). CAG repeats of 29 or higher were found in only 4
controls (0.8%), whereas they were found in 25 patients (4.5%) (OR, 5.5;
p = 2.4 x 10(-4)). The association was even stronger for familial cases
when stratified by familial versus sporadic cases (OR for familial
cases, 9.29; p = 5.2 x 10(-5)). There was no correlation between size of
repeat and age of onset. In addition, 2 familial and 9 sporadic ALS
cases carried SCA2-sized pathogenic alleles (greater than 32 repeats),
and none of them had features of SCA2 such as cerebellar or brainstem
atrophy.

Among 1,845 sporadic and 103 familial ALS cases and 2,002 controls from
Belgium and the Netherlands, Van Damme et al. (2011) found an
association between ALS and an expanded CAG repeat of 29 or greater in
the ATXN2 gene (OR, 1.92; p = 0.036). In controls, the repeat length
ranged from 16 to 31, with 22 being the most abundant. Repeat sizes of
31 or less were not significantly different between patients and
controls. However, receiver operating characteristic analysis showed
that the greatest sensitivity and specificity of discriminating ALS from
control was using a cutoff of 29 repeats: 1.5% of patients had 29 or
more repeats compared to 0.8% of controls (OR, 1.92; p = 0.036). There
was no correlation between repeat length and disease parameters. When
combined in a metaanalysis with the data of Elden et al. (2010), the
association was highly significant (OR, 2.93; p less than 0.0001). Ten
patients (0.05%) with sporadic ALS had repeat sizes of 32 or more, and
none of these patients had signs of SCA2. Two of 91 families with ALS
(2.2%) had expanded repeats: 1 with 31 repeats and the other with 33
repeats. In the 33-repeat family, which was consanguineous, 2 affected
individuals had repeat expansions on both alleles, 33:33 and 33:31,
respectively, although the phenotype was not significantly different
from classic ALS, except for some sensory abnormalities. Two sibs from a
third family with a heterozygous repeat length of 34 and 35,
respectively, had classic SCA2 with no signs of upper motor neuron
involvement. The findings indicated a genetic overlap between SCA2 and
ALS13.

Among 3,919 patients with various neurodegenerative diseases, including
532 with ALS, 641 with frontotemporal dementia (FTD; 600274), 1,530 with
Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300), 702 with Parkinson disease (PD; 168600),
and 514 with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP; 601104), and 4,877
healthy controls, Ross et al. (2011) found that ATXN2 repeat lengths
greater than 30 units were significantly associated with ALS (odds ratio
of 5.57; p = 0.001) and with PSP (OR of 5.83; p = 0.004). Significant
associations between repeats greater than 30 were not observed in
patients with FTD, AD, or PD. Importantly, expanded repeat alleles (31
to 33) were also observed in 9 (0.2%) control individuals, indicating
that caution should be taken when attributing specific disease
phenotypes to these repeat lengths. However, 6 of the controls with
expanded repeats were under the mean onset age of all patient groups
except PD. The findings confirmed the role of ATXN2 as an important risk
factor for ALS and suggested that expanded ATXN2 repeats may predispose
to other neurodegenerative diseases, including progressive supranuclear
palsy.

Mutations in FUS (137070) cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-6 (ALS6;
608030). Farg et al. (2013) found that ataxin-2 with an intermediate
glutamine expansion (Q31) interacted with wildtype FUS and, more
strongly, with FUS containing the arg521-to-cys (R521C; 137070.0004) or
arg521-to-his (R521H; 137070.0005) mutations. The interactions were
independent of RNA. Ataxin-2 colocalized with FUS in sporadic and
FUS-linked familial ALS patient motor neurons, coprecipitated with FUS
in ALS spinal cord lysates, and colocalized with FUS in the ER and Golgi
compartments in a mouse neuronal cell line. Ataxin-2 Q31 exacerbated the
cellular phenotype of mutant FUS, increasing translocation of FUS from
the nucleus to the cytoplasm, markers of ER stress, and Golgi
fragmentation. Neither FUS with the R521H mutation nor ataxin-2 Q31
alone induced apoptosis in transfected mouse neuronal cells, but
coexpression of both induced markers of early apoptosis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kiehl et al. (2006) found that Atxn2 -/- mice appeared normal and were
fertile, but there was a significant reduction in the number of female
Atxn2 +/- and Atxn2 -/- mice born. Histopathologic examination of the
central nervous system and other organs demonstrated no morphologic
abnormalities in Atxn2 -/- mice except in liver, which showed micro- and
macrovesicular steatosis at 1 year of age. At this age, Atxn2 -/- mice
were also susceptible to adult-onset obesity when placed on a moderately
fat-enriched diet, but not when placed on a low-fat diet. Atxn2 -/- mice
showed a slight deficit in motor performance in the rotarod test
compared with wildtype controls.

Lastres-Becker et al. (2008) found that Atxn2 -/- mice showed reduced
fertility, locomotor hyperactivity, and abdominal obesity and
hepatosteatosis by age 6 months. Insulin levels were increased in
pancreas and blood, consistent with insulin resistance, and the mice
demonstrated increased serum cholesterol levels. These changes were
associated with reduced insulin receptor (INSR; 147670) expression in
liver and cerebellum, although the mRNA levels were increased,
suggesting a posttranscriptional effect on the insulin receptor status.
Thus, loss of Atxn2 may affect cellular endocytosis machinery. Analysis
of brain lipids in Atxn2 -/- mice showed increased gangliosides and
decreased sphingomyelin in the cerebellum, and there was evidence for
altered cholesterol homeostasis. Lastres-Becker et al. (2008) postulated
that these lipid changes may alter neuronal membrane signaling and
excitability.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 2
PARKINSON DISEASE, LATE-ONSET, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
ATXN2, (CAG)n EXPANSION, LONG

In patients with spinocerebellar ataxia-2 (183090), Pulst et al. (1996)
identified a (CAG)n repeat located in the 5-prime end of the coding
region of the ATXN2 gene. They detected expansions of 36 to 52 repeats
in affected individuals the most common allele contained 37 repeats.
They noted that the ATXN2 repeat is unusual in that only 2 alleles were
demonstrated in the normal population. A common allele with 22 repeats
was found in people of European descent. Using RT-PCR, Pulst et al.
(1996) determined that the ATXN2 (CAG)n repeat is transcribed in
lymphoblastoid cell lines and that the cells could be used to express
the expanded repeat genes from patients with SCA2.

Sanpei et al. (1996) analyzed 286 normal chromosomes and found that the
(CAG)n repeats ranged in size from 15 to 24, with a unit of 22 repeats
accounting for 94% of the alleles. In contrast, SCA2 patient chromosomes
contained expanded repeats ranging in size from 35 to 59 units. Sanpei
et al. (1996) reported that there was a strong inverse correlation
between the size of the repeat and the onset of symptoms. Imbert et al.
(1996) reported that normal ATXN2 alleles contained 17 to 29 (CAG)n
repeats and 1 to 3 (CAA)n repeats (also glutamine-encoding). Mutated
alleles contained 37 to 50 repeats and appeared to be particularly
unstable in maternal and paternal transmissions. Sequence analysis of
expanded repeats from 3 individuals revealed pure CAG stretches. Imbert
et al. (1996) reported that there was a steep inverse correlation
between the age of onset of disease and (CAG)n repeat number.

Susceptibility to Late-Onset Parkinson Disease

Gwinn-Hardy et al. (2000) described 4 patients from a Chinese kindred
with parkinsonian features (168600) and CAG expansions at the SCA2
locus. The youngest patient had findings typical for the SCA2 ataxic
phenotype, but also had parkinsonian features. His SCA2 CAG repeat
length was 43. Three patients from earlier generations had mildly
elevated CAG repeat lengths of 33 to 36 with varying phenotypes, but all
predominantly parkinsonian features, including masked facies, diminished
blink rate, and bradykinesia in addition to mild cerebellar findings
such as broad-based gait. Two benefited from carbidopa-levodopa therapy.
None of the patients had cognitive disturbance or resting tremor. The
authors suggested that some cases of familial parkinsonism may be due to
SCA2 mutations.

Charles et al. (2007) found that 3 (2%) of 164 French families with
autosomal dominant parkinsonism (168600) had SCA2 expansions ranging in
size from 37 to 39 repeats that were interrupted by CAA triplets. These
interrupted expansions were stable in transmission. All 9 patients had
levodopa-responsive parkinsonism without cerebellar signs and had less
rigidity and more symmetric signs compared to patients with other causes
of PD. Two sisters with both the SCA2 expansion and the LRRK2 mutation
G2019S (609007.0006) had earlier onset that their mother who had only
the SCA2 expansion, suggesting an additive pathogenic effect in the
sisters. As a phenotypic comparison, 53 SCA2 patients with
similar-sized, uninterrupted SCA2 repeats showed predominant cerebellar
ataxia with rare signs of parkinsonism. The findings suggested that the
configuration of SCA2 repeat expansions plays an important role in
phenotypic variability.

.0002
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 13
ATXN2, (CAG)n EXPANSION, INTERMEDIATE

Among 915 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Elden et al.
(2010) identified 43 (4.7%) with expansions of the ATXN2 polyQ repeat of
intermediate length, 27 through 33 repeats (ALS13; 183090). Among a
neurologically normal control cohort of 980 individuals, similar
expansions were detected in only 14 (1.4%) individuals (p = 3.6 x
10(-5), odds ratio, 2.80, 95% CI, 1.54-5.12). Elden et al. (2010)
analyzed ATXN2 protein levels in patient-derived lymphoblastoid cells
from ALS cases harboring intermediate-length polyQ expansions, ALS cases
with normal-range repeat lengths, and controls. These studies showed
that whereas the steady state levels of ATXN2 were comparable,
cycloheximide treatment, which blocks new protein synthesis, revealed an
increase in stability (or decreased degradation) of ATXN2 in cells with
intermediate-length polyQ repeats. Elden et al. (2010) then found that
polyQ expansions in ATXN2 enhance its interaction with TDP43 (605078).
Both ATXN2 and TDP43 relocalize to stress granules, sites of RNA
processing, under various stress situations such as heat shock and
oxidative stress. Under normal conditions TDP43 localized to the nucleus
and ATXN2 to the cytoplasm in both control cells and cells harboring
polyQ repeat expansions. Elden et al. (2010) proposed that
intermediate-length ATXN2 polyQ repeats might confer genetic risk for
ALS by making TDP43 more prone to mislocalize from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm under situations of stress.

The findings of Elden et al. (2010) were replicated in 2 independent
studies by Daoud et al. (2011) and Van Damme et al. (2011), who studied
French, French Canadian, and Belgian populations. Each study identified
an association between development of ALS and high-length ATXN2 repeat
alleles (29 or more repeats), using receiver operating characteristic
curve analysis of patients and controls. Neither study found a
correlation between size of repeat and disease parameters. Moreover,
each study found ALS patients with expansion sizes in the range of SCA2
(greater than 32 repeats), and none had features of SCA2 such as
cerebellar or brainstem atrophy. The findings indicated a genetic
overlap between SCA2 and ALS13.

Corrado et al. (2011) identified intermediate expansion of the CAG
repeat (greater than 30 repeats) in exon 1 of the ATXN2 gene in 7 (3.0%)
of 232 Italian patients with ALS. None of 395 controls had an allele
larger than 30 repeats. Four of the 7 patients had an allele in the
intermediate-fully pathologic range: 1 with 32 repeats, 2 with 33
repeats, and 1 with 37 repeats, accounting for 1.7% of the ALS cohort.
Sequencing of these fully expanded alleles showed that they were all
interrupted with at least one CAA triplet. The phenotype of the patients
was typical of ALS with no signs or symptoms of ataxia or parkinsonism.

Among 3,919 patients with various neurodegenerative diseases, including
532 with ALS, 641 with frontotemporal dementia (FTD; 600274), 1,530 with
Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300), 702 with Parkinson disease (PD; 168600),
and 514 with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP; see 601104), and 4,877
healthy controls, Ross et al. (2011) found that ATXN2 repeat lengths
greater than 30 units were significantly associated with ALS (odds ratio
of 5.57; p = 0.001) and with PSP (OR of 5.83; p = 0.004). Repeat
expansions were found in 8 (1.5%) ALS patients, 4 (0.8%) PSP patients,
and 9 (0.2%) controls. Significant associations between repeats greater
than 30 were not observed in patients with FTD, AD, or PD. The findings
of expanded repeat alleles (31 to 33) in control individuals indicated
that caution should be taken when attributing specific disease
phenotypes to these repeat lengths. However, 6 of the controls with
expanded repeats were under the mean onset age of all patient groups
except PD. The findings confirmed the role of ATXN2 as an important risk
factor for ALS and suggested that expanded ATXN2 repeats may predispose
to other neurodegenerative diseases, including progressive supranuclear
palsy.

REFERENCE 1. Affaitati, A.; de Cristofaro, T.; Feliciello, A.; Varrone, S.:
Identification of alternative splicing of spinocerebellar ataxia type
2 gene. Gene 267: 89-93, 2001.

2. Cancel, G.; Durr, A.; Didierjean, O.; Imbert, G.; Burk, K.; Lezin,
A.; Belal, S.; Benomar, A.; Abada-Bendib, M.; Vial, C.; Guimaraes,
J.; Chneiweiss, H.; and 12 others: Molecular and clinical correlations
in spinocerebellar ataxia 2: a study of 32 families. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 6: 709-715, 1997.

3. Charles, P.; Camuzat, A.; Benammar, N.; Sellal, F.; Destee, A.;
Bonnet, A.-M.; Lesage, S.; Le Ber, I.; Stevanin, G.; Durr, A.; Brice,
A.; French Parkinson's Disease Genetic Study Group: Are interrupted
SCA2 CAG repeat expansions responsible for parkinsonism? Neurology 69:
1970-1975, 2007.

4. Choudhry, S.; Mukerji, M.; Srivastava, A. K.; Jain, S.; Brahmachari,
S. K.: CAG repeat instability at SCA2 locus: anchoring CAA interruptions
and linked single nucleotide polymorphisms. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10:
2437-2446, 2001.

5. Corrado, L.; Mazzini, L.; Oggioni, G. D.; Luciano, B.; Godi, M.;
Brusco, A.; D'Alfonso, S.: ATXN-2 CAG repeat expansions are interrupted
in ALS patients. Hum. Genet. 130: 575-580, 2011.

6. Daoud, H.; Belzil, V.; Martins, S.; Sabbagh, M.; Provencher, P.;
Lacomblez, L.; Meininger, V.; Camu, W.; Dupre, N.; Dion, P. A.; Rouleau,
G. A.: Association of long ATXN2 CAG repeat sizes with increased
risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Arch. Neurol. 68: 739-742,
2011.

7. Elden, A. C.; Kim, H.-J.; Hart, M. P.; Chen-Plotkin, A. S.; Johnson,
B. S.; Fang, X.; Armakola, M.; Geser, F.; Greene, R.; Lu, M. M.; Padmanabhan,
A.; Clay-Falcone, D.; and 11 others: Ataxin-2 intermediate-length
polyglutamine expansions are associated with increased risk for ALS. Nature 466:
1069-1075, 2010.

8. Farg, M. A.; Soo, K. Y.; Warraich, S. T.; Sundaramoorthy, V.; Blair,
I. P.; Atkin, J. D.: Ataxin-2 interacts with FUS and intermediate-length
polyglutamine expansions enhance FUS-related pathology in amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 22: 717-728, 2013.

9. Goldberg, Y. P.; Nicholson, D. W.; Rasper, D. M.; Kalchman, M.
A.; Koide, H. B.; Graham, R. K.; Bromm, M.; Kazemi-Esfarjani, P.;
Thornberry, N. A.; Vaillancourt, J. P.; Hayden, M. R.: Cleavage of
huntingtin by apopain, a proapoptotic cysteine protease, is modulated
by the polyglutamine tract. Nature Genet. 13: 442-449, 1996.

10. Gwinn-Hardy, K.; Chen, J. Y.; Liu, H.-C.; Liu, T. Y.; Boss, M.;
Seltzer, W.; Adam, A.; Singleton, A.; Koroshetz, W.; Waters, C.; Hardy,
J.; Farrer, M.: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 with parkinsonism in
ethnic Chinese. Neurology 55: 800-805, 2000.

11. Hayes, S.; Turecki, G.; Brisebois, K.; Lopes-Cendes, I.; Gaspar,
C.; Riess, O.; Ranum, L. P. W.; Pulst, S.-M.; Rouleau, G. A.: CAG
repeat length in RAI1 is associated with age at onset variability
in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2). Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1753-1758,
2000.

12. Huynh, D. P.; Del Bigio, M. R.; Ho, D. H.; Pulst, S. M.: Expression
of ataxin-2 in brains from normal individuals and patients with Alzheimer's
disease and spinocerebellar ataxia 2. Ann. Neurol. 45: 232-241,
1999.

13. Huynh, D. P.; Yang, H.-T.; Vakharia, H.; Nguyen, D.; Pulst, S.
M.: Expansion of the polyQ repeat in ataxin-2 alters its Golgi localization,
disrupts the Golgi complex and causes cell death. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12:
1485-1496, 2003.

14. Imbert, G.; Saudou, F.; Yvert, G.; Devys, D.; Trottier, Y.; Garnier,
J.-M.; Weber, C.; Mandel, J.-L.; Cancel, G.; Abbas, N.; Durr, A.;
Didierjean, O.; Stevanin, G.; Agid, Y.; Brice, A.: Cloning of the
gene for spinocerebellar ataxia 2 reveals a locus with high sensitivity
to expanded CAG/glutamine repeats. Nature Genet. 14: 285-291, 1996.

15. Kiehl, T.-R.; Nechiporuk, A.; Figueroa, K. P.; Keating, M. T.;
Huynh, D. P.; Pulst, S.-M.: Generation and characterization of Sca2
(ataxin-2) knockout mice. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 339: 17-24,
2006.

16. Lastres-Becker, I.; Brodesser, S.; Lutjohann, D.; Azizov, M.;
Buchmann, J.; Hintermann, E.; Sandhoff, K.; Schurmann, A.; Nowock,
J.; Auburger, G.: Insulin receptor and lipid metabolism pathology
in ataxin-2 knock-out mice. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17: 1465-1481, 2008.

17. Lim, C.; Allada, R.: ATAXIN-2 activates PERIOD translation to
sustain circadian rhythms in Drosophila. Science 340: 875-879, 2013.

18. Lim, J.; Hao, T.; Shaw, C.; Patel, A. J.; Szabo, G.; Rual, J.-F.;
Fisk, C. J.; Li, N.; Smolyar, A.; Hill, D. E.; Barabasi, A.-L.; Vidal,
M.; Zoghbi, H. Y.: A protein-protein interaction network for human
inherited ataxias and disorders of Purkinje cell degeneration. Cell 125:
801-814, 2006.

19. Nechiporuk, T.; Huynh, D. P.; Figueroa, K.; Sahba, S.; Nechiporuk,
A.; Pulst, S.-M.: The mouse SCA2 gene: cDNA sequence, alternative
splicing and protein expression. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7: 1301-1309,
1998.

20. Pulst, S.-M.; Nechiporuk, A.; Nechiporuk, T.; Gispert, S.; Chen,
X.-N.; Lopes-Cendes, I.; Pearlman, S.; Starkman, S.; Orozco-Diaz,
G.; Lunkes, A.; DeJong, P.; Rouleau, G. A.; Auburger, G.; Korenberg,
J. R.; Figueroa, C.; Sahba, S.: Moderate expansion of a normally
biallelic trinucleotide repeat in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2. Nature
Genet. 14: 269-276, 1996.

21. Ralser, M.; Nonhoff, U.; Albrecht, M.; Lengauer, T.; Wanker, E.
E.; Lehrach, H.; Krobitsch, S.: Ataxin-2 and huntingtin interact
with endophilin-A complexes to function in plastin-associated pathways. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 2893-2909, 2005.

22. Ross, O. A.; Rutherford, N. J.; Baker, M.; Soto-Ortolaza, A. I.;
Carrasquillo, M. M.; DeJesus-Hernandez, M.; Adamson, J.; Li, M.; Volkening,
K.; Finger, E.; Seeley, W. W.; Hatanpaa, K. J.; and 21 others:
Ataxin-2 repeat-length variation and neurodegeneration. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 20: 3207-3212, 2011.

23. Sahba, S.; Nechiporuk, A.; Figueroa, K. P.; Nechiporuk, T.; Pulst,
S.-M.: Genomic structure of the human gene for spinocerebellar ataxia
type 2 (SCA2) on chromosome 12q24.1. Genomics 47: 359-364, 1998.

24. Sanpei, K.; Takano, H.; Igarashi, S.; Sato, T.; Oyake, M.; Sasaki,
H.; Wakisaka, A.; Tashiro, K.; Ishida, Y.; Ikeuchi, T.; Koide, R.;
Saito, M.; Sato, A.; Tanaka, T.; Hanyu, S.; Takiyama, Y.; Nishizawa,
M.; Shimizu, N.; Nomura, Y.; Segawa, M.; Iwabuchi, K.; Eguchi, I.;
Tanaka, H.; Takahashi, H.; Tsuji, S.: Identification of the spinocerebellar
ataxia type 2 gene using a direct identification of repeat expansion
and cloning technique, DIRECT. Nature Genet. 14: 277-284, 1996.

25. Shan, D.-E.; Soong, B.-W.; Sun, C.-M.; Lee, S.-J.; Liao, K.-K.;
Liu, R.-S.: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 presenting as familial
levodopa-responsive parkinsonism. Ann. Neurol. 50: 812-815, 2001.

26. Shibata, H.; Huynh, D. P.; Pulst, S.-M.: A novel protein with
RNA-binding motifs interacts with ataxin-2. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9:
1303-1313, 2000. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1903 only, 2000.

27. Trottier, Y.; Lutz, Y.; Stevanin, G.; Imbert, G.; Devys, D.; Cancel,
G.; Saudou, F.; Weber, C.; David, G.; Tora, L.; Agid, Y.; Brice, A.;
Mandel, J.-L.: Polyglutamine expansion as a pathological epitope
in Huntington's disease and four dominant cerebellar ataxias. Nature 378:
403-406, 1995.

28. Van Damme, P.; Veldink, J. H.; van Blitterswijk, M.; Corveleyn,
A.; van Vught, P. W. J.; Thijs, V.; Dubois, B.; Matthijs, G.; van
den Berg, L. H.; Robberecht, W.: Expanded ATXN2 CAG repeat size in
ALS identifies genetic overlap between ALS and SCA2. Neurology 76:
2066-2072, 2011.

29. Zhang, Y.; Ling, J.; Yuan, C.; Dubruille, R.; Emery, P.: A role
for Drosophila ATX2 in activation of PER translation and circadian
behavior. Science 340: 879-882, 2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/17/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/24/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/30/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/7/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/6/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/14/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/29/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/22/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/15/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/22/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/21/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 9/13/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/3/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/28/2000
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/30/2000
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/7/2000
Orest Hurko - updated: 3/22/1999
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/8/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/23/1997

CREATED Moyra Smith: 11/19/1996

EDITED carol: 10/25/2013
mgross: 7/17/2013
alopez: 6/24/2013
terry: 11/28/2012
terry: 6/1/2012
carol: 5/31/2012
ckniffin: 5/30/2012
carol: 12/5/2011
carol: 11/9/2011
ckniffin: 11/7/2011
carol: 10/13/2011
terry: 10/12/2011
ckniffin: 10/6/2011
ckniffin: 11/16/2010
alopez: 9/21/2010
terry: 9/14/2010
wwang: 8/6/2010
ckniffin: 7/29/2010
carol: 9/15/2009
wwang: 5/7/2009
terry: 4/22/2009
mgross: 1/15/2009
tkritzer: 4/22/2005
tkritzer: 11/8/2004
alopez: 3/21/2003
terry: 3/21/2003
carol: 9/13/2002
ckniffin: 9/13/2002
ckniffin: 9/11/2002
ckniffin: 8/28/2002
cwells: 5/14/2002
cwells: 5/3/2002
alopez: 8/28/2000
terry: 8/28/2000
alopez: 6/30/2000
carol: 6/8/2000
carol: 6/7/2000
mgross: 9/22/1999
terry: 9/15/1999
carol: 3/22/1999
carol: 10/8/1998
carol: 7/22/1998
carol: 5/19/1998
carol: 5/12/1998
terry: 7/28/1997
terry: 7/8/1997
joanna: 7/7/1997
terry: 6/23/1997
terry: 6/18/1997
terry: 12/4/1996
mark: 11/20/1996
terry: 11/20/1996
mark: 11/19/1996

142230	TITLE *142230 HEMATOPOIETIC PROGENITOR CELL ANTIGEN CD34; CD34
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CD34 is a monomeric cell surface antigen with a molecular mass of
approximately 110 kD that is selectively expressed on human
hematopoietic progenitor cells.

CLONING

In the hands of Sutherland et al. (1988), partial amino acid analysis of
highly purified CD34 antigen revealed no significant sequence similarity
with any previously described structures. Sequential immunoprecipitation
and Western blot analysis indicated that this antigen is not a member of
the leukosialin/sialophorin family, despite the fact that these
molecules share several structural similarities.

Simmons et al. (1992) isolated a cDNA clone for CD34. They stated that
the gene is expressed by small vessel endothelial cells in addition to
hematopoietic progenitor cells and is a sialomucin of as-yet-unknown
function.

Study of the CD34 cDNA permitted He et al. (1992) to demonstrate that it
encodes a type I transmembrane protein with no obvious homology to other
known proteins.

OTHER FEATURES

Sutherland et al. (1993) provided a review, including potential clinical
applications in selecting for hematopoietic stem cell progenitors from
tumor-contaminated marrow in preparation for transplantation and for
genetic manipulation in gene therapy.

GENE STRUCTURE

Satterthwaite et al. (1992) reported that the CD34 gene spans 26 kb and
has 8 exons. Using RNase protection, they demonstrated that the start
site of CD34 transcription is 258 bp upstream of the translational start
site. He et al. (1992) showed that the upstream regulatory sequences of
CD34 contain no TATA or CAAT box sequences, but MYB, MYC, and ETS-like
binding motifs were identified.

GENE FUNCTION

Continuous turnover of epithelia is ensured by the extensive
self-renewal capacity of tissue-specific stem cells. Similarly,
epithelial tumor maintenance relies on cancer stem cells, which co-opt
stem cell properties. In murine skin, follicular morphogenesis is driven
by bulge stem cells that specifically express CD34. Malanchi et al.
(2008) identified a population of cells in early epidermal tumors
characterized by phenotype and functional similarities to normal bulge
skin stem cells. This population contains cancer stem cells, which are
the only cells with tumor initiation properties. Transplants derived
from these cancer stem cells preserve the hierarchical organization of
the primary tumor. Malanchi et al. (2008) described beta-catenin
(116806) signaling as being essential in sustaining the cancer stem cell
phenotype. Ablation of the beta-catenin gene results in the loss of
cancer stem cells and complete tumor regression. In addition, Malanchi
et al. (2008) provided evidence for the involvement of increased
beta-catenin signaling in malignant human squamous cell carcinomas.
Malanchi et al. (2008) concluded that because Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
is not essential for normal epidermal homeostasis, such a mechanistic
difference may thus be targeted to eliminate cancer stem cells and
consequently eradicate squamous cell carcinomas.

MAPPING

By Southern blot analysis of DNA from a panel of human/mouse somatic
cell hybrids using a CD34 cDNA probe, Tenen et al. (1990) demonstrated
that the gene for CD34 is located on 1q12-qter. By means of in situ
hybridization, Howell et al. (1991) narrowed the assignment to 1q32. By
fluorescence in situ hybridization, Satterthwaite et al. (1992) mapped
the gene to 1q32.

ANIMAL MODEL

To analyze the involvement of CD34 in hematopoiesis, Cheng et al. (1996)
produced both embryonic stem (ES) cells in mice null for the expression
of this mucin. Analysis of yolk sac-like hematopoietic development in
embryoid bodies derived from CD34-null ES cells showed a significant
delay in both erythroid and myeloid differentiation that could be
reversed by transfection of the mutant ES cells with CD34 constructs
expressing either a complete or truncated cytoplasmic domain. In spite
of these diminished embryonic hematopoietic progenitor numbers, the
CD34-null mice developed normally, and the hematopoietic profile of
adult blood appeared typical. However, the colony-forming activity of
hematopoietic progenitors derived from both bone marrow and spleen was
significantly reduced in adult CD34-deficient animals.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) give rise to all blood cells. CD34 is a
sialomucin-like adhesion molecule that is expressed on a few percent of
primitive bone marrow cells. In human bone marrow, virtually all
colony-forming unit activity resides in the population expressing human
CD34. In primates, CD34-positive cells, but not CD34-negative cells,
repopulate lethally irradiated baboons. On the other hand, in murine
hematopoiesis, HSCs are found almost exclusively in the CD34-negative to
-low fraction. Okuno et al. (2002) made transgenic mouse strains with
human genomic P1 artificial chromosome clones spanning the entire CD34
genomic locus. In all transgenic mouse strains, a vast majority of
phenotypic and functional HSC populations including mouse CD34-negative
or -low cells expressed the human CD34 transgene. These data strongly
supported the notion that CD34-positive human bone marrow cells contain
long-term HSCs that can maintain hematopoiesis throughout life.

Using fluorescence intravital microscopy (IVM) with homing assays,
Hidalgo et al. (2002) examined the repopulation of bone marrow of
sublethally irradiated nonobese diabetic (NOD)/severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID) mice, which have multiple defects in innate and
adaptive immunologic functions, with human CD34-positive hematopoietic
progenitor cells obtained either from cord blood or from adult bone
marrow or peripheral blood. Human hematopoietic progenitor cells rolled
and arrested in NOD/SCID bone marrow microvessels, and the rolling
capacity of neonatal cord blood cells was much lower than that of adult
cells. Rolling and retention were nearly abolished in NOD/SCID Selp
(173610) -/- Sele (131210) -/- mice and in NOD/SCID Sele -/- mice. Flow
cytometric and IVM analyses suggested that the neonatal defect resulted
from expression of a nonfunctional form of SELPLG (600738) on cord blood
CD34-positive cells that were unable to bind Selp. This subset of cells
was enriched in CD34-positive/CD38 (107270)-low/negative progenitors.
Hidalgo et al. (2002) proposed that manipulation of expression of
selectins and their ligands may improve homing of cord blood
CD34-positive cells to bone marrow.

REFERENCE 1. Cheng, J.; Baumhueter, S.; Cacalano, G.; Carver-Moore, K.; Thibodeaux,
H.; Thomas, R.; Broxmeyer, H. E.; Cooper, S.; Hague, N.; Moore, M.;
Lasky, L. A.: Hematopoietic defects in mice lacking the sialomucin
CD34. Blood 87: 479-490, 1996.

2. He, X.-Y.; Antao, V. P.; Basila, D.; Marx, J. C.; Davis, B. R.
: Isolation and molecular characterization of the human CD34 gene. Blood 79:
2296-2302, 1992.

3. Hidalgo, A.; Weiss, L. A.; Frenette, P. S.: Functional selectin
ligands mediating human CD34+ cell interactions with bone marrow endothelium
are enhanced postnatally. J. Clin. Invest. 110: 559-569, 2002.

4. Howell, S. M.; Molgaard, H. V.; Greaves, M. F.; Spurr, N. K.:
Localisation of the gene coding for the haemopoietic stem cell antigen
CD34 to chromosome 1q32. Hum. Genet. 87: 625-627, 1991.

5. Malanchi, I.; Peinado, H.; Kassen, D.; Hussenet, T.; Metzger, D.;
Chambon, P.; Huber, M.; Hohl, D.; Cano, A.; Birchmeier, W.; Huelsken,
J.: Cutaneous cancer stem cell maintenance is dependent on beta-catenin
signalling. Nature 452: 650-653, 2008.

6. Okuno, Y.; Iwasaki, H.; Huettner, C. S.; Radomska, H. S.; Gonzalez,
D. A.; Tenen, D. G.; Akashi, K.: Differential regulation of the human
and murine CD34 genes in hematopoietic stem cells. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 99: 6246-6251, 2002.

7. Satterthwaite, A. B.; Burn, T. C.; Le Beau, M. M.; Tenen, D. G.
: Structure of the gene encoding CD34, a human hematopoietic stem
cell antigen. Genomics 12: 788-794, 1992.

8. Simmons, D. L.; Satterthwaite, A. B.; Tenen, D. G.; Seed, B.:
Molecular cloning of a cDNA encoding CD34, a sialomucin of human hematopoietic
stem cells. J. Immun. 148: 267-271, 1992.

9. Sutherland, D. R.; Stewart, A. K.; Keating, A.: CD34 antigen:
molecular features and potential clinical applications. Stem Cells 11
(suppl. 3): 50-57, 1993.

10. Sutherland, D. R.; Watt, S. M.; Dowden, G.; Karhi, K.; Baker,
M. A.; Greaves, M. F.; Smart, J. E.: Structural and partial amino
acid sequence analysis of the human hemopoietic progenitor cell antigen
CD34. Leukemia 2: 793-803, 1988.

11. Tenen, D. G.; Satterthwaite, A. B.; Borson, R.; Simmons, D.; Eddy,
R. L.; Shows, T. B.: Chromosome 1 localization of the gene for CD34,
a surface antigen of human stem cells. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 53:
55-57, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/16/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/12/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/6/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/27/1989

EDITED alopez: 09/08/2011
alopez: 5/13/2008
terry: 4/16/2008
carol: 8/15/2006
mgross: 1/12/2006
mgross: 6/11/2002
terry: 6/6/2002
carol: 12/13/1998
mark: 3/21/1996
terry: 3/8/1996
carol: 12/15/1993
carol: 4/7/1993
carol: 7/23/1992
carol: 6/9/1992
carol: 6/2/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

605566	TITLE *605566 RETICULON 4 RECEPTOR; RTN4R
;;NOGO RECEPTOR; NGR
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

NOGO (604475) has been identified as a component of the central nervous
system myelin that prevents axonal regeneration in the adult vertebrate
central nervous system. Analysis of NogoA (amino-Nogo) has shown that an
axon-inhibiting domain of 66 amino acids is expressed at the
extracellular surface and at the endoplasmic reticulum lumen of
transfected cells and oligodendrocytes. The acidic amino terminus of
NogoA is detected at the cytosolic face of cellular membranes and may
contribute to inhibition of axon regeneration at sites of
oligodendrocyte injury. Fournier et al. (2001) showed that the
extracellular domain of Nogo (Nogo-66) inhibits axonal extension but
does not alter nonneuronal cell morphology. In contrast, a multivalent
form of the N terminus of NogoA affects the morphology of both neurons
and other cell types. Fournier et al. (2001) identified a
brain-specific, leucine-rich-repeat protein with high affinity for
soluble Nogo-66. Cleavage of the Nogo-66 receptor and other
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-linked proteins from axonal surfaces
renders neurons insensitive to Nogo-66. Nogo-66 receptor expression is
sufficient to impart Nogo-66 axonal inhibition to unresponsive neurons.
Disruption of the interaction between Nogo-66 and its receptor provides
the potential for enhanced recovery after human central nervous system
(CNS) injury. The Nogo-66 receptor gene encodes a protein of 473 amino
acids. The predicted protein contains a signal sequence followed by 8
leucine-rich-repeat (LRR) domains, a flanking LRR C-terminal domain that
is cysteine rich, a unique region, and a GPI anchorage site.
Subsequently, both Barton et al. (2003) and Pignot et al. (2003) showed
that there is an N-terminal LRR domain preceding the 8 LRR domains. By
Northern blot analysis Fournier et al. (2001) showed that expression of
the Nogo-66 receptor is widespread in the brain; the areas richest in
gray matter express the highest levels. Nogo-66 receptor mRNA is not
detectable in white matter, where NogoA is expressed by
oligodendrocytes. Northern blot analysis in mouse showed a single band
of 2.3 kb in the adult brain, indicating that the isolated NgR clone is
full length. Low levels of this mRNA are observed in heart and kidney
but not in other peripheral tissues.

Fournier et al. (2001) used oligonucleotide primers based on the
predicted NOGO receptor cDNA from the genomic sequence to amplify the
human receptor from an adult brain cDNA library. The deduced protein
shares 89% sequence identity with the mouse protein. The exons of the
human NOGO receptor gene are separated by nearly 30 kb.

By Northern blot analysis, Pignot et al. (2003) found a 2.4-kb NGR
transcript highly expressed in brain, moderately expressed in spleen and
liver, and weakly expressed in skeletal muscle, lung, kidney, and
placenta. A brain multitissue array revealed highest NGR expression in
cerebellum, followed by several cortical areas, amygdala, hippocampus,
and accumbens nucleus. Much weaker expression was detected in other
brain regions examined. By digestion of NGR with phospholipase C, Pignot
et al. (2003) confirmed that NGR has a GPI anchor, and sucrose density
fractionation of transfected Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells
demonstrated the association of human NGR with lipid rafts.

GENE FUNCTION

GrandPre et al. (2002) identified competitive antagonists of the NOGO
receptor derived from amino-terminal peptide fragments of NOGO-66. The
NOGO-66(1-40) antagonist peptide blocks NOGO-66 or CNS myelin inhibition
of axonal outgrowth in vitro, demonstrating that the NOGO receptor
mediates a significant portion of axonal outgrowth inhibition by myelin.
Intrathecal administration of the amino-terminal antagonist peptide to
rats with midthoracic spinal cord hemisection resulted in significant
axon outgrowth of the corticospinal tract, and improved functional
recovery. Thus, GrandPre et al. (2002) concluded that NOGO-66 and the
NOGO receptor have central roles in limiting axonal regeneration after
CNS injury.

Wang et al. (2002) demonstrated that a GPI-anchored central nervous
system myelin protein, oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein (OMG;
164345), is a potent inhibitor of neurite outgrowth in cultured neurons.
Like NOGOA (604475), OMGP contributes significantly to the inhibitory
activity associated with CNS myelin. To further elucidate the mechanisms
that mediate this inhibitory activity, Wang et al. (2002) screened an
expression library and identified the NOGO receptor as a high affinity
OMGP-binding protein. Cleavage of NOGO receptor and other GPI-linked
proteins from the cell surface renders axons of dorsal root ganglia
insensitive to OMGP. Introduction of exogenous NOGO receptor confers
OMGP responsiveness to otherwise insensitive neurons. Thus, OMGP is an
important inhibitor of neurite outgrowth that acts through the NOGO
receptor and its associated receptor complex. Wang et al. (2002)
suggested that interfering with the OMGP/NOGO receptor pathway may allow
lesioned axons to regenerate after injury in vivo.

Axonal regeneration in the adult CNS is limited by 2 proteins in myelin,
Nogo and myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG; 159640). The NOGO receptor
(NgR) had been identified as an axonal GPI-anchored protein, whereas the
MAG receptor had remained elusive. Liu et al. (2002) demonstrated that
MAG binds directly, with high affinity, to NgR. Cleavage of GPI-linked
proteins from axons protects growth cones from MAG-induced collapse, and
dominant-negative NgR eliminates MAG inhibition of neurite outgrowth.
MAG-resistant embryonic neurons were rendered MAG-sensitive by
expression of NgR. MAG and Nogo-66 activate NgR independently and serve
as redundant NgR ligands that may limit axonal regeneration after CNS
injury.

Domeniconi et al. (2002) showed that MAG inhibits axonal regeneration
through interaction with NgR. They demonstrated that MAG binds
specifically to an NgR-expressing cell line in a GPI-dependent and
sialic acid-independent manner. Consistent with a direct interaction of
MAG and NgR, Domeniconi et al. (2002) observed that MAG precipitates NgR
from NgR-expressing cells, dorsal root ganglia, and cerebellar neurons.
Experiments blocking NgR from interacting with MAG prevented inhibition
of neurite outgrowth by MAG. Using NgR-expressing cell cultures, the
authors found that MAG and NOGO-66 compete directly for binding to NgR.

In inhibiting neurite outgrowth, several myelin components, including
the extracellular domain of NOGOA, OMGP, and MAG, exert their effects
through the same NOGO receptor. The GPI-anchored nature of the NOGO
receptor indicates the requirement for an additional transmembrane
protein to transduce the inhibitory signals into the interior of
responding neurons. Wang et al. (2002) demonstrated that p75 (NGFR;
162010), a transmembrane protein known to be a receptor for the
neurotrophin family of growth factors, specifically interacts with the
NOGO receptor. p75 is required for NOGO receptor-mediated signaling, as
neurons from p75 knockout mice were no longer responsive to myelin or to
any of the known NOGO receptor ligands. Blocking the p75-NOGO receptor
interaction also reduced the activities of these inhibitors. Moreover, a
truncated p75 protein lacking the intracellular domain, when
overexpressed in primary neurons, attenuated the same set of inhibitory
activities, suggesting that p75 is a signal transducer of the Nogo
receptor-p75 receptor complex. Wang et al. (2002) suggested that
interfering with p75 and its downstream signaling pathways may allow
lesioned axons to overcome most of the inhibitory activities associated
with central nervous system myelin.

Wong et al. (2002) reported that p75(NTR) is a coreceptor for the NOGO
receptor for MAG (159460) signaling. In cultured human embryonic kidney
(HEK) cells expressing the NOGO receptor, p75(NTR) was required for
MAG-induced intracellular calcium elevation. Coimmunoprecipitation
showed an association of the NOGO receptor with p75(NTR) that could be
disrupted by an antibody against p75(NTR), and extensive coexpression
was observed in the developing rat nervous system. Furthermore, a
p75(NTR) antibody abolished MAG-induced repulsive turning of Xenopus
axonal growth cones and calcium elevation, both in neurons and in the
NOGO receptor/p75(NTR)-expressing HEK cells.

Yu et al. (2004) observed that Ngr and p75 were colocalized in
low-density membrane raft fractions of rat forebrain and cerebellum and
in cultured cerebellar granule cells. Disruption of lipid rafts by a
cholesterol-binding reagent reduced Nogo-66 signaling in the cultured
cells. Yu et al. (2004) concluded that lipid rafts facilitate the
interaction between Nogo receptor components.

By deletion analysis, Barton et al. (2003) showed that the binding of
soluble fragments of NOGO, MAG, and NGR itself to cell-surface NGR
required the entire LRR region (the N-terminal LRR, the 8 central LRRs,
and the C-terminal LRR) of NGR, but not other portions of the protein.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

He et al. (2003) reported the 1.5-angstrom crystal structure of NGR.
They found that NGR adopts a leucine-rich repeat (LRR) module whose
concave exterior surface contains a broad region of evolutionarily
conserved patches of aromatic residues. A deep cleft at the C-terminal
base of the LRR may play a role in the association of NGR with the p75
coreceptor.

Barton et al. (2003) reported the NGR structure to 2.3-angstrom
resolution. They found that NGR has an elongated banana-like shape with
approximate dimensions of 80 by 35 by 35 angstroms. It has low secondary
structure content, consisting mostly of short beta strands that generate
a long parallel beta sheet spanning the concave surface of the molecule.

MAPPING

Fournier et al. (2001) identified human sequence corresponding to the
mouse NogoA receptor within a genomic cosmid sequence (GenBank GENBANK
AC007663) on chromosome 22q11.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Schizophrenia (181500) or schizoaffective disorders are rather common
features in patients with DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome (DGS
188400/VCFS 192430) as a result of 22q11.2 haploinsufficiency. Sinibaldi
et al. (2004) evaluated the RTN4R gene, which maps within the DGS/VCFS
critical region, as a potential candidate for schizophrenia
susceptibility. They screened 120 unrelated Italian patients with
schizophrenia for mutations in RTN4R using denaturing high performance
liquid chromatography. Three mutant alleles were detected, including 2
missense changes (R119W, 605566.0001; R196H, 605566.0002) and 1
synonymous codon variant. The 2 schizophrenia patients with missense
changes were strongly resistant to neuroleptic treatment at any dosage.
Both missense changes were absent in 300 control subjects. Molecular
modeling revealed that both changes lead to putative structural
alterations of the native protein.

ANIMAL MODEL

McGee et al. (2005) found that mutations in NgR affect cessation of
ocular dominance plasticity. In NgR -/- mice, plasticity during the
critical period was normal, but it continued abnormally such that ocular
dominance at 45 or 120 days postnatal was subject to the same plasticity
as at juvenile ages. Thus, physiologic Ngr signaling from myelin-derived
Nogo, Mag, and Omgp (164345) consolidated the neural circuitry
established during experience-dependent plasticity. McGee et al. (2005)
concluded that after pathologic trauma, similar NgR signaling limits
functional recovery and axonal regeneration.

In vitro, Zheng et al. (2005) found that neurite outgrowth from NgR-null
mouse dorsal root ganglion or cerebellar granule neurons were inhibited
by myelin or by a Nogo-66 substrate, similar to wildtype. Ngfr-deficient
dorsal root ganglion neurons, but not cerebellar neurons, demonstrated
somewhat less inhibition to myelin, suggesting that Ngfr works through a
mechanism separate from NgR. In vivo, NgR-null and Ngfr-deficient mice
did not show enhanced regeneration of corticospinal tract axons after
spinal hemisection compared to wildtype. Zheng et al. (2005) concluded
that NgR is not essential for mediating inhibitory signals from CNS
myelin and does not play a central role in inhibition of axonal growth.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SCHIZOPHRENIA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
RTN4R, ARG119TRP

In an Italian patient with schizophrenia (181500), Sinibaldi et al.
(2004) identified a 355C-T transition in the RTN4R gene that resulted in
an arg119-to-trp (R119W) amino acid substitution. This patient was
strongly resistant to neuroleptic treatment at any dosage. Molecular
modeling revealed that this change led to putative structural
alterations of the native protein.

.0002
SCHIZOPHRENIA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
RTN4R, ARG196HIS

In an Italian patient with schizophrenia (181500), Sinibaldi et al.
(2004) identified a 587G-A transition in the RTN4R gene that resulted in
an arg196-to-his (R196H) amino acid substitution. This patient was
strongly resistant to neuroleptic treatment at any dosage. Molecular
modeling revealed that this change led to putative structural
alterations of the native protein.

REFERENCE 1. Barton, W. A.; Liu, B. P.; Tzvetkova, D.; Jeffrey, P. D.; Fournier,
A. E.; Sah, D.; Cate, R.; Strittmatter, S. M.; Nikolov, D. B.: Structure
and axon outgrowth inhibitor binding of the Nogo-66 receptor and related
proteins. EMBO J. 22: 3291-3302, 2003.

2. Domeniconi, M.; Cao, Z.; Spencer, T.; Sivasankaran, R.; Wang, K.
C.; Nikulina, E.; Kimura, N.; Cai, H.; Deng, K.; Gao, Y.; He, Z.;
Filbin, M. T.: Myelin-associated glycoprotein interacts with the
Nogo66 receptor to inhibit neurite outgrowth. Neuron 35: 283-290,
2002.

3. Fournier, A. E.; GrandPre, T.; Strittmatter, S. M.: Identification
of a receptor mediating Nogo-66 inhibition of axonal regeneration. Nature 409:
341-346, 2001.

4. GrandPre, T.; Li, S.; Strittmatter, S. M.: Nogo-66 receptor antagonist
peptide promotes axonal regeneration. Nature 417: 547-551, 2002.

5. He, X. L.; Bazan, J. F.; McDermott, G.; Park, J. B.; Wang, K.;
Tessier-Lavigne, M.; He, Z.; Garcia, K. C.: Structure of the Nogo
receptor ectodomain: a recognition module implicated in myelin inhibition. Neuron 38:
177-185, 2003.

6. Liu, B. P.; Fournier, A.; GrandPre, T.; Strittmatter, S. M.: Myelin-associated
glycoprotein as a functional ligand for the Nogo-66 receptor. Science 297:
1190-1193, 2002.

7. McGee, A. W.; Yang, Y.; Fischer, Q. S.; Daw, N. W.; Strittmatter,
S. M.: Experience-driven plasticity of visual cortex limited by myelin
and Nogo receptor. Science 309: 2222-2226, 2005.

8. Pignot, V.; Hein, A. E.; Barske, C.; Wiessner, C.; Walmsley, A.
R.; Kaupmann, K.; Mayeur, H.; Sommer, B.; Mir, A. K.; Frentzel, S.
: Characterization of two novel proteins, NgRH1 and NgRH2, structurally
and biochemically homologous to the Nogo-66 receptor. J. Neurochem. 85:
717-728, 2003.

9. Sinibaldi, L.; De Luca, A.; Bellacchio, E.; Conti, E.; Pasini,
A.; Paloscia, C.; Spalletta, G.; Caltagirone, C.; Pizzuti, A.; Dallapiccola,
B.: Mutations of the Nogo-66 receptor (RTN4R) gene in schizophrenia.
(Abstract) Hum. Mutat. 24: 534-535, 2004. Note: Full article online.

10. Wang, K. C.; Kim, J. A.; Sivasankaran, R.; Segal, R.; He, Z.:
p75 interacts with the Nogo receptor as a co-receptor for Nogo, MAG
and OMgp. Nature 420: 74-78, 2002.

11. Wang, K. C.; Koprivica, V.; Kim, J. A.; Sivasankaran, R.; Guo,
Y.; Neve, R. L.; He, Z.: Oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein in a
Nogo receptor ligand that inhibits neurite outgrowth. Nature 417:
941-944, 2002.

12. Wong, S. T.; Henley, J. R.; Kanning, K. C.; Huang, K.; Bothwell,
M.; Poo, M.: A p75(NTR) and Nogo receptor complex mediates repulsive
signaling by myelin-associated glycoprotein. Nature Neurosci. 5:
1302-1308, 2002.

13. Yu, W.; Guo, W.; Feng, L.: Segregation of Nogo66 receptors into
lipid rafts in rat brain and inhibition of Nogo66 signaling by cholesterol
depletion. FEBS Lett. 577: 87-92, 2004.

14. Zheng, B.; Atwal, J.; Ho, C.; Case, L.; He, X.; Garcia, K. C.;
Steward, O.; Tessier-Lavigne, M.: Genetic deletion of the Nogo receptor
does not reduce neurite inhibition in vitro or promote corticospinal
tract regeneration in vivo. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 1205-1210,
2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/29/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/24/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/10/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/26/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/10/2005
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 11/27/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/14/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/18/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/12/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/28/2002

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 1/19/2001

EDITED wwang: 10/06/2006
wwang: 10/5/2006
terry: 9/29/2006
wwang: 5/10/2006
ckniffin: 4/24/2006
alopez: 10/11/2005
terry: 10/10/2005
carol: 8/8/2005
carol: 7/21/2005
wwang: 6/7/2005
terry: 5/26/2005
alopez: 2/15/2005
wwang: 1/25/2005
terry: 1/10/2005
alopez: 12/19/2002
carol: 12/6/2002
tkritzer: 11/27/2002
alopez: 11/20/2002
terry: 11/18/2002
alopez: 11/14/2002
terry: 11/12/2002
alopez: 9/20/2002
tkritzer: 9/18/2002
alopez: 7/16/2002
terry: 7/12/2002
alopez: 5/29/2002
terry: 5/28/2002
carol: 1/19/2001

143010	TITLE *143010 MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX, CLASS I, E; HLA-E
;;HLAE;;
HLA-E HISTOCOMPATIBILITY TYPE;;
HLA-6.2;;
QA1, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; QA1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

As assessed by Southern blotting, the HLA class I gene family contains
15 to 20 members, many more than can be accounted for by the HLA-A, -B,
and -C genes (Orr, 1988). The HLA-E gene belongs to class I and is
situated about 650 kb from HLA-C (Carroll et al., 1987).

GENE FUNCTION

The protein HLA-E is a nonclassical MHC molecule of limited sequence
variability. Its expression on the cell surface is regulated by the
binding of peptides derived from the signal sequence of some other MHC
class I molecules. Braud et al. (1998) reported the identification of
ligands for HLA-E. Braud et al. (1998) constructed tetramers in which
recombinant HLA-E and beta-2 microglobulin (B2M; 109700) were refolded
with an MHC leader-sequence peptide, biotinylated, and conjugated to
Extravidin. This HLA-E tetramer bound to natural killer (NK) cells and a
small subset of T cells from peripheral blood. On transfectants, the
tetramer bound to the CD94/NKG2A (161555), CD94/NKG2B, and CD94/NKG2C
(602891) NK cell receptors, but did not bind to the immunoglobulin
family of NK cell receptors (KIRs; see 604936). Surface expression of
HLA-E was enough to protect target cells from lysis by CD94/NKG2A+ NK
cell clones. A subset of HLA class I alleles had been shown to inhibit
killing by CD94/NKG2A+ NK cell clones. Only the HLA alleles that possess
a leader peptide capable of upregulating HLA-E surface expression confer
resistance to NK cell-mediated lysis, implying that their action is
mediated by HLA-E, the predominant ligand for the NK cell inhibitory
receptor CD94/NKG2A.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

O'Callaghan et al. (1998) determined the crystal structure of human
HLA-E in complex with a prototypic ligand, the nonamer peptide
(VMAPRTVLL), derived from the highly conserved residues 3-11 of the
human MHC class Ia leader sequence. The mode of peptide binding retained
some of the standard features observed in MHC class Ia complexes, but
novel features implied that HLA-E has evolved to mediate specific
binding to a tightly defined set of almost identical hydrophobic
peptides from the highly conserved class I leader sequences. These
molecular adaptations make HLA-E a rigorous checkpoint at the cell
surface, reporting on the integrity of the antigen processing pathway to
CD94/NKG2 receptor-bearing natural killer cells.

MAPPING

The HLA-E gene maps to chromosome 6p21.3 (Carroll et al., 1987).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Ohya et al. (1990) studied polymorphism of HLA-E. The amino acid
sequence of the HLA-E molecule, especially the alpha-2 domain, is the
most divergent among HLA class I molecules. Ohya et al. (1990) found
little RFLP polymorphism in Japanese.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hu et al. (2004) generated a deletion in the 7-exon mouse Qa1 gene, the
homolog of human HLA-E, by replacing exons 1, 2, and 3 with positive and
negative selection markers. Infection with herpes simplex virus induced
keratitis associated with upregulated Ifng (147570) production by CD4 T
cells in mutant mice but not in the wildtype resistant background
strain. Mutant mice could not be protected from development of
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by preimmunization with
complete Freund adjuvant (CFA) before challenge with CFA containing
pertussis toxin. Qa1-deficient mice also had enhanced responses to
proteolipid protein self peptide that were associated with resistance of
CD4 T cells to Qa1-restricted CD8 T-suppressor cell activity. Hu et al.
(2004) concluded that a Qa1-dependent T cell-T cell inhibitory
interaction prevents the pathogenic expansion of autoreactive CD4 T-cell
populations and consequent autoimmune disease.

REFERENCE 1. Braud, V. M.; Allan, D. S. J.; O'Callaghan, C. A.; Soderstrom,
K.; D'Andrea, A.; Ogg, G. S.; Lazetic, S.; Young, N. T.; Bell, J.
I.; Phillips, J. H.; Lanier, L. L.; McMichael, A. J.: HLA-E binds
to natural killer cell receptors CD94/NKG2A, B and C. Nature 391:
795-799, 1998.

2. Carroll, M. C.; Katzman, P.; Alicot, E. M.; Koller, B. H.; Geraghty,
D. E.; Orr, H. T.; Strominger, J. L.; Spies, T.: Linkage map of the
human major histocompatibility complex including the tumor necrosis
factor genes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 8535-8539, 1987.

3. Hu, D.; Ikizawa, K.; Lu, L.; Sanchirico, M. E.; Shinohara, M. L.;
Cantor, H.: Analysis of regulatory CD8 T cells in Qa-1-deficient
mice. Nature Immun. 5: 516-523, 2004.

4. O'Callaghan, C. A.; Tormo, J.; Willcox, B. E.; Braud, V. M.; Jakobsen,
B. K.; Stuart, D. I.; McMichael, A. J.; Bell, J. I.; Jones, E. Y.
: Structural features impose tight peptide binding specificity in
the nonclassical MHC molecule HLA-E. Molec. Cell 1: 531-541, 1998.

5. Ohya, K.; Kondo, K.; Mizuno, S.: Polymorphism in the human class
I MHC locus HLA-E in Japanese. Immunogenetics 32: 205-209, 1990.

6. Orr, H. T.: Personal Communication. Minneapolis, Minn.  1/30/1988.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 05/05/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/30/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/20/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/3/1988

EDITED mgross: 05/05/2004
alopez: 4/30/2001
carol: 1/20/1999
warfield: 4/8/1994
supermim: 3/19/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 11/15/1991
carol: 7/2/1991
carol: 3/8/1991

613367	TITLE *613367 LIN54, C. ELEGANS, HOMOLOG OF; LIN54
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

LIN54 is a component of the LIN, or DREAM, complex, an essential
regulator of cell cycle genes (Schmit et al., 2009).

CLONING

Using mass spectrometry to identify proteins associated with the LIN
complex isolated from MOLT-4 human T cells, followed by database
analysis, Schmit et al. (2007) identified LIN54. The deduced 749-amino
acid protein contains 2 cysteine-rich C-terminal CxC domains separated
by a short spacer. SDS-PAGE of MOLT-4 cells and Western blot analysis of
HeLa cells detected LIN54 at an apparent molecular mass of 110 kD.

Schmit et al. (2009) identified a helix-coil-helix region at the extreme
C terminus of the LIN54 protein.

GENE FUNCTION

By gel filtration of MOLT-4 cells, Schmit et al. (2007) identified LIN54
as a subunit of the over 669-kD LIN complex. Other stable LIN complex
components included LIN9 (609375), LIN37, BMYB (MYBL2; 601415), and
RBAP48 (RBBP4; 602923). All endogenous or epitope-tagged LIN complex
subunits coimmunoprecipitated with one another, and all were efficiently
codepleted together with antibodies directed to LIN9. The LIN complex
associated with E2F (see 189971)-regulated promoters in the T98G human
glioblastoma cell line and was required for activation of G2/M genes.
Depletion of LIN complex subunits had no significant effect on
expression of G1/S genes.

Using small hairpin RNA, Schmit et al. (2009) showed that depletion of
LIN54 significantly slowed the proliferation of BJ human fibroblasts.
Domain analysis revealed that the C-terminal helix-coil-helix region of
LIN54 was essential for its binding to p130 (RBL2; 180203) and BMYB. The
CxC domain of LIN54 was identified as a DNA-binding domain that could
bind the promoter region of the CDC2 (116940) gene in a
sequence-specific manner. LIN54 bound 2 regions in the CDC2 promoter, 1
of which overlaps with the cell cycle homology region at the
transcription start site. In quiescent cells, LIN54 binding at the cell
cycle homology region was stabilized by E2F4 (600659) bound to the
adjacent cell cycle-dependent element.

MAPPING

Hartz (2010) mapped the LIN54 gene to chromosome 4q21.22 based on an
alignment of the LIN54 gene (GenBank GENBANK AB111889) with the genomic
sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  4/16/2010.

2. Schmit, F.; Cremer, S.; Gaubatz, S.: LIN54 is an essential core
subunit of the DREAM/LINC complex that binds to the cdc2 promoter
in a sequence-specific manner. FEBS J. 276: 5703-5716, 2009.

3. Schmit, F.; Korenjak, M.; Mannefeld, M.; Schmitt, K.; Franke, C.;
von Eyss, B.; Gagrica, S.; Hanel, F.; Brehm,A.; Gaubatz, S.: LINC,
a human complex that is related to pRB-containing complexes in invertebrates
regulates the expression of G2/M genes. Cell Cycle 6: 1903-19113,
2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/16/2010

EDITED terry: 12/02/2010
mgross: 4/16/2010

610577	TITLE *610577 RHO GTPase-ACTIVATING PROTEIN 12; ARHGAP12
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

RHO GTPases (see ARHA, 165390) that participate in a wide variety of
cellular processes are active in their GTP-bound form and inactive in
their GDP-bound form. The hydrolysis of GTP and the inactivation of
these GTPases are regulated by GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs), such
as ARHGAP12 (Zhang et al., 2002).

CLONING

During the large-scale sequencing of a fetal brain cDNA library, Zhang
et al. (2002) cloned 2 splice variants of ARHGAP12, which they called
ARHGAP12a and ARHGAP12b. ARHGAP12a encodes a deduced 816-amino acid
protein, and ARHGAP12b encodes a deduced 846-amino acid protein. Both
proteins have an N-terminal SH3 domain, followed by 2 WW domains, a
pleckstrin homology (PH) domain, and a C-terminal RHO GAP domain.
ARHGAP12b contains an insert between the second WW domain and the PH
domain that is not found in ARHGAP12a. Transcripts encoding both
variants utilize alternate polyadenylation signals. Northern blot
analysis detected a double band of about 4 kb in all 8 tumor cell lines
examined. RT-PCR detected both ARHGAP12 transcripts in lung, kidney,
liver, brain, and pancreas, with higher levels of ARHGAP12a than
ARHGAP12b in kidney, liver, brain, and pancreas. Only ARHGAP12a was
detected in heart. By phylogenetic analysis, Peck et al. (2002)
determined that the GAP domain of ARHGAP12 is most closely related to
the GAP domain of ARHGAP9 (610576).

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhang et al. (2002) determined that the ARHGAP12 gene contains 20 exons.
The first 2 exons are noncoding, and exon 20 contains 2 alternate
polyadenylation signals.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Peck et al. (2002) mapped the ARHGAP12
gene to chromosome 10p12.

REFERENCE 1. Peck, J.; Douglas, G., IV; Wu, C. H.; Burbelo, P. D.: Human RhoGAP
domain-containing proteins: structure, function and evolutionary relationships. FEBS
Lett. 528: 27-34, 2002.

2. Zhang, Z.; Wu, C.; Wang, S.; Huang, W.; Zhou, Z.; Ying, K.; Xie,
Y.; Mao, Y.: Cloning and characterization of ARHGAP12, a novel human
rhoGAP gene. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 34: 325-331, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/16/2006

EDITED wwang: 11/16/2006

607429	TITLE *607429 PRENYL DIPHOSPHATE SYNTHASE, SUBUNIT 1; PDSS1
;;DECAPRENYL DIPHOSPHATE SYNTHASE; DPS;;
SOLANESYL DIPHOSPHATE SYNTHASE, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; SPS;;
TRANS-PRENYLTRANSFERASE; TPT;;
POLYPRENYL PYROPHOSPHATE SYNTHETASE;;
COQ1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; COQ1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Trans-prenyltransferase is the microsomal enzyme that elongates the
prenyl side-chain of coenzyme Q, or ubiquinone, which has a role in
oxidative phosphorylation within mitochondria, in scavenging free
radicals, and in the redox control of cell signaling. For a review of
the biochemical roles of coenzyme Q, see Crane (2001).

CLONING

By searching EST databases for homologs of S. pombe Dps1, Saiki et al.
(2005) identified human PDSS1, which they called DPS1. The predicted
415-amino acid protein shares 82% identity with its mouse homolog, Sps1,
and contains the 7 conserved domains and DDxxD motifs typical of
trans-prenyl diphosphate synthases.

GENE FUNCTION

Appelkvist et al. (1994) reviewed the characterization of rat liver
trans-prenyltransferase and its role in coenzyme Q synthesis. The
optimum substrates for the rat enzyme are trans-geranyl pyrophosphate
and, to a lesser extent, all-trans geranylgeranyl-pyrophosphate. Tpt is
not dependent on the presence of detergents or cytoplasmic proteins for
activity, is Mn(2+) dependent, and has a pH optimum of 8. Tpt localizes
to the cytoplasmic surface of microsomal vesicles.

Saiki et al. (2005) found that expression of human DPS1 and DLP1 (PDSS2;
610564) in E. coli resulted in production of Q10 ubiquinone and
decaprenol, whereas expression of mouse Sps1 and Dlp1 produced Q9
ubiquinone and solanesol. Western blot analysis showed that the proteins
were expressed as a heterotetramer. Expression in E. coli of
heterologous combinations of human and mouse proteins generated both Q9
and Q10, indicating that both DPS1/Sps1 and DLP1/Dlp1 are involved in
determining the ubiquinone side chain. Although human DPS1 and mouse
Sps1 could complement S. pombe lacking Dps1, neither human DLP1 nor
mouse Dlp1 could complement S. pombe lacking Dlp1. Saiki et al. (2005)
concluded that both DPS1 and DLP1 are required for generation of
decaprenyl diphosphate synthase.

MAPPING

Saiki et al. (2005) stated that the PDSS1 (DPS1) gene maps to chromosome
10p12.1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Rotig et al. (2000) identified patients with multitissue coenzyme Q10
deficiency. The patients had very low concentrations of
decaprenyl-diphosphate within cell extracts, consistent with TPT
deficiency. However, no mutations in TPT cDNA could be identified.
Messenger RNA levels were very low in normal fibroblasts and
lymphoblastoid cell lines, precluding comparison with CoQ10-deficient
cells. Rotig et al. (2000) suggested that the disease-causing mutation
lies either elsewhere in the TPT gene or in another gene involved in the
regulation of TPT activity.

Mollet et al. (2007) reported a consanguineous Moroccan family in which
2 sibs had COQ10 deficiency-2 (COQ10D2; 614651) manifest as a
multisystem disease with early-onset deafness, optic atrophy, mild
mental retardation, peripheral neuropathy, obesity, livedo reticularis,
and cardiac valvulopathy. Enzymologic analysis showed low
quinone-dependent oxidative phosphorylation activity, and COQ10
deficiency was confirmed by restoration of oxidative phosphorylation
activity after quinone addition. Homozygosity mapping followed by
candidate gene analysis identified a homozygous mutation in the PDSS1
gene (D308E; 607429.0001). Transformation of yeast lacking Coq1 with
yeast Coq1 containing a mutation corresponding to human D308E resulted
in defective growth on respiratory medium.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COENZYME Q10 DEFICIENCY, PRIMARY, 2
PDSS1, ASP308GLU

In a consanguineous Moroccan family in which a son and daughter
presented with COQ10 deficiency-2 (COQ10D2; 614651), Mollet et al.
(2007) identified a homozygous 977T-G transversion in exon 10 of the
PDSS1 gene, resulting in an asp308-to-glu (D308E) substitution. COQ10
deficiency manifested in these patients as a multisystem disease with
early-onset deafness, mild mental retardation, optic atrophy, peripheral
neuropathy, obesity, livedo reticularis, and cardiac valvulopathy. Three
unaffected brothers were either heterozygous, like their parents, or
homozygous for the wildtype allele.

REFERENCE 1. Appelkvist, E.-L.; Aberg, F.; Guan, Z.; Parmryd, I.; Dallner, G.
: Regulation of coenzyme Q biosynthesis. Molec. Aspects Med. 15
(suppl.): S37-S46, 1994.

2. Crane, F. L.: Biochemical functions of coenzyme Q10. J. Am. Coll.
Nutr. 20: 591-598, 2001.

3. Mollet, J.; Giurgea, I.; Schlemmer, D.; Dallner, G.; Chretien,
D.; Delahodde, A.; Bacq, D.; de Lonlay, P.; Munnich, A.; Rotig, A.
: Prenyldiphosphate synthase, subunit 1 (PDSS1) and OH-benzoate polyprenyltransferase
(COQ2) mutations in ubiquinone deficiency and oxidative phosphorylation
disorders. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 765-772, 2007.

4. Rotig, A.; Appelkvist, E. L.; Geromel, V.; Chretien, D.; Kadhom,
N.; Edery, P.; Lebideau, M.; Dallner, G.; Munnich, A.; Ernster, L.;
Rustin, P.: Quinone-responsive multiple respiratory-chain dysfunction
due to widespread coenzyme Q10 deficiency. Lancet 356: 391-395,
2000.

5. Saiki, R.; Nagata, A.; Kainou, T.; Matsuda, H.; Kawamukai, M.:
Characterization of solanesyl and decaprenyl diphosphate synthases
in mice and humans. FEBS J. 272: 5606-5622, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/3/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/14/2006
Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 4/14/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/20/2002

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/18/2002

EDITED carol: 05/24/2012
ckniffin: 5/23/2012
carol: 4/12/2012
carol: 7/6/2011
mgross: 5/17/2007
terry: 5/3/2007
mgross: 11/14/2006
alopez: 4/14/2006
carol: 12/20/2002
ckniffin: 12/19/2002

194529	TITLE *194529 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 22; ZNF22
;;KOX15
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Bray et al. (1991) screened a placental genomic library at moderate
stringency with a degenerate oligodeoxynucleotide probe designed to
hybridize to the his/cys (H/C) link region between adjoining zinc
fingers. Genomic clones were cross-hybridized with a set of 30 zinc
finger-encoding cDNAs (KOX1-KOX30) isolated from a human T-cell cDNA
library. KOX15 matched one of the genomic clones.

MAPPING

Bray et al. (1991) mapped the ZNF22 gene to chromosome 10q11 by
chromosomal in situ suppression hybridization with fluorescent probe
detection. Rousseau-Merck et al. (1992) confirmed the assignment to
10q11.2 and showed that it is distal to ZNF25 (194528).

REFERENCE 1. Bray, P.; Lichter, P.; Thiesen, H.-J.; Ward, D. C.; Dawid, I. B.
: Characterization and mapping of human genes encoding zinc finger
proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 9563-9567, 1991.

2. Rousseau-Merck, M. F.; Tunnacliffe, A.; Berger, R.; Ponder, B.
A. J.; Thiesen, H. J.: A cluster of expressed zinc finger protein
genes in the pericentromeric region of human chromosome 10. Genomics 13:
845-848, 1992.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/4/1991

EDITED alopez: 07/06/2010
dkim: 6/26/1998
mark: 5/14/1996
carol: 7/21/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 12/4/1991

607444	TITLE *607444 SBDS GENE; SBDS
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Boocock et al. (2003) screened 18 positional candidate genes in the
critical region on chromosome 7q11 identified by linkage analysis for
the Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS; 260400), an autosomal recessive
disorder with clinical features that include pancreatic exocrine
insufficiency, hematologic dysfunction, and skeletal abnormalities. They
discovered mutations associated with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (260400)
in an uncharacterized gene represented by the 1.6-kb cDNA clone FLJ10917
(GenBank GENBANK AK001779). They designated the gene SBDS for
'Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond syndrome.' SBDS is a member of a highly
conserved protein family, with orthologs in species ranging from archaea
to vertebrates and plants. Indirect lines of evidence suggested that the
orthologs may function in RNA metabolism. The predicted protein is 28.8
kD with a pI of 8.9.

GENE STRUCTURE

Boocock et al. (2003) determined that the SBDS gene is composed of 5
exons spanning 7.9 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Boocock et al. (2003) mapped the SBDS gene
to chromosome 7q11. SBDS and an adjacent gene reside in a block of 305
kb that is locally duplicated. The paralogous duplicon is located 5.8 Mb
distally and contains an unprocessed pseudogene copy of SBDS designated
SBDSP. The pseudogene transcript is 97% identical to SBDS and contains
deletions and nucleotide changes that disrupt coding potential.

GENE FUNCTION

Austin et al. (2005) found that SBDS protein was present in both the
nucleus and the cytoplasm of normal control fibroblasts, but was
particularly concentrated within the nucleolus. SBDS localization was
cell cycle-dependent, with nucleolar localization during G1 and G2 and
diffuse nuclear localization during S phase. The intranucleolar
localization of SBDS provided further supportive evidence for its
postulated role in the processing of ribosomal RNA (rRNA).

Ganapathi et al. (2007) presented in vitro evidence indicating that the
SBDS gene is involved with ribosomal RNA. Nucleolar localization of SBDS
was dependent on active ribosomal RNA transcription. Lymphoblast cell
lines derived from SDS patients showed hypersensitivity to actinomycin
D, which inhibits RNA polymerase I, indicating an underlying impairment
of ribosome biogenesis. SBDS migrated with the 60S ribosomal precursor
protein, and associated with the 28S subunit (see 180450) and
nucleophosmin (see 164040). SBDS knockdown markedly decreased production
of newly synthesized rRNA, although an imbalance of ribosomal subunits
could not be detected.

Menne et al. (2007) identified the function of the yeast SBDS ortholog
Sdo1, showing that it is critical for the release and recycling of the
nucleolar shuttling factor Tif6 from pre-60S ribosomes, a key step in
60S maturation and translational activation of ribosomes. Using
genome-wide synthetic genetic array mapping, they identified multiple
TIF6 gain-of-function alleles that suppressed the pre-60S nuclear export
defects and cytoplasmic mislocalization of Tif6 observed in sdo1-delta
cells. Sdo1 appears to function within a pathway containing elongation
factor-like 1, and together they control translational activation of
ribosomes. The data of Menne et al. (2007) linked defective 60S
ribosomal subunit maturation to an inherited bone marrow failure
syndrome associated with leukemia predisposition.

Austin et al. (2008) found that SBDS colocalized with mitotic spindles
and bound to purified microtubules, thus preventing genomic instability,
in wildtype human bone marrow stromal cells, lymphoblasts, and skin
fibroblasts. Primary bone marrow stromal cells and lymphoblasts from SDS
patients exhibited an increased incidence of abnormal mitoses. Depletion
of the SBDS gene using siRNA in normal skin fibroblasts resulted in
increased mitotic abnormalities and aneuploidy that accumulated over
time. Treatment of primary cells from SDS patients with nocodazole, a
microtubule destabilizing agent, led to increased mitotic arrest and
apoptosis compared to treated wildtype cells. In addition, SDS patient
cells were resistant to taxol, a microtubule stabilizing agent. These
findings suggested that spindle instability in SDS contributes to bone
marrow failure and leukemogenesis.

Vitiello et al. (2010) demonstrated that CLN3 (607042) interacts with
SBDS. The protein-protein interaction was conserved between Btn1 and
Sdo1, the respective S. cerevisiae orthologs of CLN3 and SBDS. It had
been shown that deletion of Btn1 resulted in alterations in vacuolar pH
and vacuolar (H+)-ATPase (V-ATPase)-dependent H+ transport and ATP
hydrolysis. Vitiello et al. (2010) found that an Sdo1 deletion strain
had decreased vacuolar pH and V-ATPase-dependent H+ transport and ATP
hydrolysis; the alterations resulted from decreased V-ATPase subunit
expression. Overexpression of Btn1 or the presence of ionophore carbonyl
cyanide chlorophenil hydrazone (CCCP) caused decreased growth in yeast
lacking Sdo1. In normal cells, overexpression of Btn1 mirrored the
effect of CCCP, with both resulting in increased vacuolar pH due to
alterations in the coupling of V-ATPase-dependent H+ transport and ATP
hydrolysis. Vitiello et al. (2010) proposed that Sdo1 and SBDS work to
regulate Btn1 and CLN3, respectively.

Raaijmakers et al. (2010) demonstrated that deletion of Dicer1 (606241)
specifically in mouse osteoprogenitors, but not in mature osteoblasts,
disrupts the integrity of hematopoiesis. Myelodysplasia resulted and
acute myelogenous leukemia emerged that had acquired several genetic
abnormalities while having intact Dicer1. Examining gene expression
altered in osteoprogenitors as a result of Dicer1 deletion showed
reduced expression of Sbds, the gene mutated in Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond
syndrome, a human bone marrow failure and leukemia predisposition
condition. Deletion of Sbds in mouse osteoprogenitors induced bone
marrow dysfunction with myelodysplasia. Therefore, Raaijmakers et al.
(2010) concluded that perturbation of specific mesenchymal subsets of
stromal cells can disorder differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis
of heterologous cells, and disrupt tissue homeostasis. Furthermore,
Raaijmakers et al. (2010) concluded that primary stromal dysfunction can
result in secondary neoplastic disease, supporting the concept of
niche-induced oncogenesis.

Using affinity capture and mass spectrometry, Ball et al. (2009)
developed an SBDS interactome and reported SBDS binding partners with
diverse molecular functions, notably components of the large ribosomal
subunit and proteins involved in DNA metabolism. Reciprocal
coimmunoprecipitation confirmed the interaction of SBDS with the large
ribosomal subunit protein RPL4 (180479) and with DNA-PK (PRKDC; 600899)
and RPA70 (RPA1; 179835), 2 proteins with critical roles in DNA repair.
SBDS-depleted HEK293 cells were hypersensitive to multiple types of DNA
damage as well as chemically induced endoplasmic reticulum stress,
suggesting a role for SBDS in response to cellular stress.
SBDS-dependent hypersensitivity of HEK293 cells to UV irradiation could
be distinguished from a role of SBDS in translation.

Finch et al. (2011) showed that GTP and recombinant human SBDS and
elongation factor-like-1 (EFL1, or EFTUD1) cooperated to trigger release
of human EIF6 (602912) from pre60S ribosomes isolated from
Sbds-deficient mouse livers. EFL1 and SBDS independently and
noncooperatively bound to the 60S subunit in vitro. The 60S subunit
activated the GTPase activity of EFL1, but SBDS was required to
stimulate EIF6 release. Two SBDS mutants with different SDS-associated
missense mutations varied in their ability to enhance 60S-dependent
GTPase activity of EFL1, but neither triggered EIF6 release. Finch et
al. (2011) concluded that SBDS and EFL1 catalyze translational
activation and proposed that SDS is a ribosomopathy caused by uncoupling
GTP hydrolysis from EIF6 release.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Independently, Savchenko et al. (2005) and Shammas et al. (2005)
determined the crystal structure of the Archaeglobus fulgidus ortholog
of SBDS. They found that A. fulgidus Sbds assumes a highly conserved
3-domain structure consisting of an N-terminal domain with a novel
3-dimensional fold structure, a central domain containing a winged
helix-turn-helix motif, and a C-terminal domain that shares structural
homology with RNA-binding proteins.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Boocock et al. (2003) reported mutations identified in affected
individuals from 158 families. Gene conversion mutations accounted for
74.4% of alleles associated with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (235 of
316). Observations indicated that gene conversion due to recombination
between SBDS and its pseudogene had occurred. Conversion mutations were
found in 89% of individuals with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (141 of
158). Boocock et al. (2003) suggested that the conversion events are
confined to a short segment spanning approximately 240 bp in exon 2. In
a study of Japanese patients with SDS, Nakashima et al. (2004) likewise
found mutations in the SBDS gene caused by gene conversion. The sites of
the gene conversion events varied, extending from intron 1 to exon 3.

Abnormalities in chromosome 7 have been reported in association with
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome, especially an isochromosome i(7)(q10). In a
25-year-old patient with SDS who suffered from mild aplastic anemia but
showed no signs of either myelodysplasia or leukemic transformation,
Mellink et al. (2004) identified an isochromosome i(7)(q10) in the bone
marrow and also identified 2 different mutations in the SBDS gene: a
183-184TA-CT mutation (607444.0001) was present in 1 allele and the
splice site mutation 258+2T-C (IVS2DS+2T-C; 607444.0002) was present in
the other. The 2 mutations were the most commonly found in the study of
Boocock et al. (2003). Mellink et al. (2004) concluded that the
isochromosome 7q phenomenon may have a very indirect association with
the pathogenesis of malignant transformation in SDS patients. It may be
the first presentation of chromosome instability that could eventually
result in more significant additional chromosomal aberrations involved
in the clinical manifestation of acute myeloid leukemia and
myelodysplasia syndrome.

Austin et al. (2005) characterized the SBDS protein expression and
intracellular localization in 7 patients with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome
and healthy controls. As predicted by gene mutation, 4 patients with SDS
exhibited no detectable full-length SBDS protein. One patient, who was
homozygous for the IVS2DS+2T-C mutation, expressed scant levels of SBDS
protein. A second patient expressed low levels of SBDS protein harboring
a missense mutation. A third patient who carried no detectable gene
mutations expressed wildtype levels of SBDS protein, adding further
support to the growing body of evidence for additional genes that might
contribute to the pathogenesis of the disease phenotype.

Calado et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for the IVS2DS+2T-C
mutation in 4 of 91 unrelated patients with aplastic anemia (609135).
These patients were younger on average (5 to 19 years) compared to other
patients with aplastic anemia. Two mothers tested were carriers of the
mutation; these 2 and another mother who was not tested had histories of
subclinical mild anemia. Heterozygous mutation carriers had partial loss
of SBDS protein expression, indicating haploinsufficiency. Although
telomere shortening was observed in patients' granulocytes, lymphocytes
had normal telomere length. None of the patients with aplastic anemia
had pancreatic exocrine failure or skeletal anomalies as seen in SDS.
One of the 4 probands was also heterozygous for a presumed pathogenic
variant in the TERT gene (187270). The outcome of these patients was
poor, with 2 deaths. Calado et al. (2007) concluded that SBDS deficiency
predisposes to marrow failure by causing telomere shortening, thus
indicating a role for SBDS in the maintenance of telomere length.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Kuijpers et al. (2005) sequenced the SBDS gene in 20 unrelated patients
with clinical SDS and identified mutations in 15 (75%), with identical
compound heterozygosity in 11 patients (see 607444.0001 and
607444.0002). The authors examined hematologic parameters over 5 years
of follow-up and observed persistent neutropenia in 43% in the absence
of apoptosis and unrelated to chemotaxis defects or infection rate.
Irrespective of the absolute neutrophil count in vivo, abnormal
granulocyte-monocyte colony formation was observed in all patients with
SDS tested (14 of 14), whereas erythroid and myeloid colony formation
was less often affected (9 of 14). Cytogenetic aberrations occurred in 5
of 19 patients in the absence of myelodysplasia. Kuijpers et al. (2005)
concluded that in patients with genetically proven SDS, a
genotype/phenotype relationship does not exist in clinical and
hematologic terms.

ANIMAL MODEL

Zhang et al. (2006) reported that loss of the Sbds gene resulted in
early lethality in mice prior to embryonic day 6.5. Heterozygous mutant
mice had a normal phenotype and were indistinguishable from wildtype
littermates.

Finch et al. (2011) also found that Sbds deletion in mice was embryonic
lethal. Sbds -/- mice showed prominent histologic abnormalities in
liver, with disordered architecture between the portal triads and
central veins, degenerative hepatocyte appearance, and scattered
subcapsular areas of hepatocyte necrosis with an associated acute
inflammatory reaction. Sbds-deleted liver extracts showed accumulation
of free cytoplasmic 40S and 60S subunits and 43S initiation complexes
that were stalled at the AUG start codon awaiting binding of 60S
subunits, suggesting a ribosomal subunit-joining defect.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SHWACHMAN-DIAMOND SYNDROME
SBDS, LYS62TER

In 79 of 141 families with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS; 260400) with
conversion mutations, Boocock et al. (2003) found that affected
individuals were compound heterozygous for 2 mutations in exon 2 of the
SBDS gene: 183-184TA-CT and 258+2T-C (IVS2DS+2T-C; 607444.0002). The
dinucleotide alteration 183-184TA-CT introduced an in-frame stop codon
(lys62 to ter; K62X). The 258+2T-C mutation was predicted to disrupt the
donor splice site of intron 2; it resulted in an 8-bp deletion
consistent with use of an upstream cryptic splice donor site at position
251-252. The 258+2T-C and the resultant 8-bp deletion caused premature
termination of the encoded protein by frameshift. In 44 families there
was compound heterozygosity of 258+2T-C with another allele. In 7
families there was homozygosity for 258+2T-C. No incidence of
homozygosity for 183-184TA-CT was observed. In 8 alleles of the SBDS
gene found by Boocock et al. (2003) in patients with SDS, both the
183-184TA-CT and the 258+2T-C change were on the same allele.

In 11 patients with SDS, Kuijpers et al. (2005) identified compound
heterozygosity for the K62X and 258+2T-C mutations in the SBDS gene.

.0002
SHWACHMAN-DIAMOND SYNDROME
APLASTIC ANEMIA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
SBDS, IVS2DS, T-C, +2

See 607444.0001. Boocock et al. (2003) referred to this mutation as
258+2T-C. Nakashima et al. (2004) identified this mutation in affected
members of 4 Japanese families, making it the most prevalent mutation.
Recurrent gene conversion was considered the most likely explanation for
the recurrence, rather than founder effect.

See 607444.0001 and Kuijpers et al. (2005).

Calado et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for the IVS2DS+2T-C
mutation in 4 of 91 unrelated patients with aplastic anemia (609135).
These patients were younger on average (5 to 19 years) compared to other
patients with aplastic anemia. Two mothers tested were carriers of the
mutation; these 2 and another mother who was not tested had histories of
subclinical mild anemia. Heterozygous mutation carriers had partial loss
of SBDS protein expression, indicating haploinsufficiency. Although
telomere shortening was observed in patients' granulocytes, lymphocytes
had normal telomere length. None of the patients with aplastic anemia
had pancreatic exocrine failure or skeletal anomalies as seen in SDS.
One of the 4 probands was also heterozygous for a presumed pathogenic
variant in the TERT gene (187270).

.0003
SHWACHMAN-DIAMOND SYNDROME
SBDS, ASN8LYS

In 1 allele from individuals with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (260400),
Boocock et al. (2003) found a 24C-A transversion in the SBDS gene,
predicted to result in an asn8-to-lys (N8K) amino acid change.

.0004
SHWACHMAN-DIAMOND SYNDROME
SBDS, 1-BP INS, 96A

In affected members of 4 Japanese families with Shwachman-Diamond
syndrome (260400), Nakashima et al. (2004) found compound heterozygosity
for 2 recurrent mutations in the SBDS gene: IVS2DS+2T-C (607444.0002)
and a 1-bp insertion (96insA) in exon 1.

REFERENCE 1. Austin, K. M.; Gupta, M. L., Jr.; Coats, S. A.; Tulpule, A.; Mostoslavsky,
G.; Balazs, A. B.; Mulligan, R. C.; Daley, G.; Pellman, D.; Shimamura,
A.: Mitotic spindle destabilization and genomic instability in Shwachman-Diamond
syndrome. J. Clin. Invest. 118: 1511-1518, 2008.

2. Austin, K. M.; Leary, R. J.; Shimamura, A.: The Shwachman-Diamond
SBDS protein localizes to the nucleolus. Blood 106: 1253-1258, 2005.

3. Ball, H. L.; Zhang, B.; Riches, J. J.; Gandhi, R.; Li, J.; Rommens,
J. M.; Myers, J. S.: Shwachman-Bodian Diamond syndrome is a multi-functional
protein implicated in cellular stress responses. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18:
3684-3695, 2009.

4. Boocock, G. R. B.; Morrison, J. A.; Popovic, M.; Richards, N.;
Ellis, L.; Durie, P. R.; Rommens, J. M.: Mutations in SBDS are associated
with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. Nature Genet. 33: 97-101, 2003.

5. Calado, R. T.; Graf, S. A.; Wilkerson, K. L.; Kajigaya, S.; Ancliff,
P. J.; Dror, Y.; Chanock, S. J.; Lansdorp, P. M.; Young, N. S.: Mutations
in the SBDS gene in acquired aplastic anemia. Blood 110: 1141-1146,
2007.

6. Finch, A. J.; Hilcenko, C.; Basse, N.; Drynan, L. F.; Goyenechea,
B.; Menne, T. F.; Gonzalez Fernandez, A.; Simpson, P.; D'Santos, C.
S.; Arends, M. J.; Donadieu, J.; Bellanne-Chantelot, C.; Costanzo,
M.; Boone, C.; McKenzie, A. N.; Freund, S. M. V.; Warren, A. J.:
Uncoupling of GTP hydrolysis from eIF6 release on the ribosome causes
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. Genes Dev. 25: 917-929, 2011.

7. Ganapathi, K. A.; Austin, K. M.; Lee, C.-S.; Dias, A.; Malsch,
M. M.; Reed, R.; Shimamura, A.: The human Shwachman-Diamond syndrome
protein, SBDS, associates with ribosomal RNA. Blood 110: 1458-1465,
2007.

8. Kuijpers, T. W.; Alders, M.; Tool, A. T. J.; Mellink, C.; Roos,
D.; Hennekam, R. C. M.: Hematologic abnormalities in Shwachman Diamond
syndrome: lack of genotype-phenotype relationship. Blood 106: 356-361,
2005.

9. Mellink, C. H. M.; Alders, M.; van der Lelie, H.; Hennekam, R.
H. C.; Kuijpers, T. W.: SBDS mutations and isochromosome 7q in a
patient with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome: no predisposition to malignant
transformation? Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 154: 144-149, 2004.

10. Menne, T. F.; Goyenechea, B.; Sanchez-Puig, N.; Wong, C. C.; Tonkin,
L. M.; Ancliff, P. J.; Brost, R. L.; Costanzo, M.; Boone, C.; Warren,
A. J.: The Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond syndrome protein mediates translational
activation of ribosomes in yeast. Nature Genet. 39: 486-495, 2007.

11. Nakashima, E.; Mabuchi, A.; Makita, Y.; Masuno, M.; Ohashi, H.;
Nishimura, G.; Ikegawa, S.: Novel SBDS mutations caused by gene conversion
in Japanese patients with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. Hum. Genet. 114:
345-348, 2004.

12. Raaijmakers, M. H. G. P.; Mukherjee, S.; Guo, S.; Zhang, S.; Kobayashi,
T.; Schoonmaker, J. A.; Ebert, B. L.; Al-Shahrour, F.; Hasserjian,
R. P.; Scadden, E. O.; Aung, Z.; Matza, M.; Merkenschlager, M.; Lin,
C.; Rommens, J. M.; Scadden, D. T.: Bone progenitor dysfunction induces
myelodysplasia and secondary leukaemia. Nature 464: 852-857, 2010.

13. Savchenko, A.; Krogan, N.; Cort, J. R.; Evdokimova, E.; Lew, J.
M.; Yee, A. A.; Sanchez-Pulido, L.; Andrade, M. A.; Bochkarev, A.;
Watson, J. D.; Kennedy, M. A.; Greenblatt, J.; Hughes, T.; Arrowsmith,
C. H.; Rommens, J. M.; Edwards, A. M.: The Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond
syndrome protein family is involved in RNA metabolism. J. Biol. Chem. 280:
19213-19220, 2005.

14. Shammas, C.; Menne, T. F.; Hilcenko, C.; Michell, S. R.; Goyenechea,
B.; Boocock, G. R. B.; Durie, P. R.; Rommens, J. M.; Warren, A. J.
: Structural and mutational analysis of the SBDS protein family: insight
into the leukemia-associated Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. J. Biol.
Chem. 280: 19221-19229, 2005.

15. Vitiello, S. P.; Benedict, J. W.; Padilla-Lopez, S.; Pearce, D.
A.: Interaction between Sdo1p and Btn1p in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae
model for Batten disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 931-942, 2010.

16. Zhang, S.; Shi, M.; Hui, C.; Rommens, J. M.: Loss of the mouse
ortholog of the Shwachman-Diamond syndrome gene (Sbds) results in
early embryonic lethality. Molec. Cell Biol. 26: 6656-6663, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 11/8/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/16/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/8/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/26/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/14/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/25/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/26/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/12/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/5/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/31/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/2/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/23/2002

EDITED carol: 09/19/2013
alopez: 11/15/2011
terry: 11/8/2011
mgross: 6/10/2011
terry: 5/16/2011
wwang: 7/22/2010
terry: 7/8/2010
alopez: 5/27/2010
terry: 5/26/2010
wwang: 7/16/2008
ckniffin: 7/14/2008
terry: 6/6/2008
wwang: 3/5/2008
ckniffin: 2/25/2008
alopez: 4/30/2007
terry: 4/26/2007
carol: 1/30/2007
wwang: 12/12/2005
alopez: 12/7/2005
terry: 12/5/2005
tkritzer: 2/4/2005
terry: 1/31/2005
tkritzer: 12/13/2004
carol: 8/11/2004
tkritzer: 4/7/2004
terry: 4/2/2004
joanna: 2/26/2004
alopez: 12/23/2002

601233	TITLE *601233 INHIBIN, BETA C; INHBC
DESCRIPTION Activins are homo- or heterodimers of related beta subunits (see 147290)
while inhibins are dimers composed of an alpha subunit (147380) and an
activin beta subunit. These proteins belong to the TGF-beta superfamily
(see 190180), the members of which have important roles in cell
determination, differentiation, and growth (summary by Schmitt et al.,
1996). Members of the inhibin/activin subgroup were originally
identified by their opposing roles in the control of
follicle-stimulating hormone (118850) release by cultured pituitary
cells (Ling et al., 1986).

CLONING

Hotten et al. (1995) isolated a cDNA related to the inhibin/activin
subgroup which they designated activin beta-C. The authors used
degenerate PCR to isolate a cDNA from a human liver cDNA library. The
predicted 352-amino acid prepropeptide has a hydrophobic region at the
amino terminus which may serve as a signal peptide. The 116-amino acid
mature protein derives from the C-terminus of the prepropeptide and
shows 53% amino acid identity to activin beta-B (147390) and 51%
identity to activin beta-A (147290). Hotten et al. (1995) noted that,
because beta-A and beta-B show 64% identity to one another, the beta-C
gene must be a more distant member of the group.

Schmitt et al. (1996) cloned a cDNA for the mouse inhibin/activin beta-C
gene. The mouse gene encodes a predicted 352-amino acid prepropeptide
and a 116-amino acid mature protein which is 94% identical to the human
sequence. Ribonuclease protein assays showed that mouse Inhbc is mainly
expressed in adult liver.

GENE STRUCTURE

Schmitt et al. (1996) characterized the mouse Inhbc gene, which contains
2 exons and spans approximately 14 kb.

GENE FUNCTION

Activin ligands act as growth and differentiation factors in many cells
and tissues. Mellor et al. (2000) examined the localization of and
dimerization among activin subunits. The results demonstrated that
activin beta-C can form dimers with activin beta-A and beta-B in vitro,
but not with the inhibin alpha subunit. Using a specific antibody,
activin beta-C protein was localized to human liver and prostate and
colocalized with beta-A and beta-B subunits to specific cell types in
benign and malignant prostate tissues. The capacity to form novel
activin heterodimers (but not inhibin C) appears to reside in the human
liver and prostate. The authors concluded that formation of activin AC
or BC heterodimers may have significant implications in the regulation
of levels and/or biologic activity of other activins in these tissues.

MAPPING

Schmitt et al. (1996) used fluorescence in situ hybridization with a
human cDNA probe to map the INHBC gene to 12q13.1. Schmitt et al. (1996)
used interspecific backcross analysis to map the Inhbc gene to mouse
chromosome 10, a region with homology of synteny to human 12q13.1.

REFERENCE 1. Hotten, G.; Neidhardt, H.; Schneider, C.; Pohl, J.: Cloning of
a new member of the TGF-beta family: a putative new activin betaC
chain. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 206: 608-613, 1995.

2. Ling, N.; Ying, S. Y.; Ueno, N.; Shimasaki, S.; Esch, F.; Hotta,
M.; Guillemin, R.: Pituitary FSH is released by a heterodimer of
the beta-subunits from the two forms of inhibin. Nature 321: 779-782,
1986.

3. Mellor, S. L.; Cranfield, M.; Ries, R.; Pedersen, J.; Cancilla,
B.; de Kretser, D.; Groome, N. P.; Mason, A. J.; Risbridger, G. P.
: Localization of activin beta(A)-, beta(B)-, and beta(C)-subunits
in human prostate and evidence for formation of new activin heterodimers
of beta(C)-subunit. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 4851-4858, 2000.

4. Schmitt, J.; Hotten, G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Copeland,
N. G.; Pohl, J.; Schrewe, H.: Structure, chromosomal localization,
and expression analysis of the mouse inhibin/activin betaC (Inhbc)
gene. Genomics 32: 358-366, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/9/2001

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 4/29/1996

EDITED alopez: 03/08/2012
alopez: 7/9/2001
jamie: 6/3/1997
mark: 4/29/1996
terry: 4/29/1996
mark: 4/29/1996

610386	TITLE *610386 BTB/POZ DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 7; BTBD7
;;FUP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By cDNA/EST microarray analysis, Pan et al. (2001) identified BTBD7,
which they called FUP1 (function unknown protein-1), as a gene expressed
preferentially in hepatocellular carcinoma compared to normal liver. The
deduced protein contains a predicted nucleus-targeting motif. Transient
transfection of FLAG-tagged FUP1 in NIH3T3 cells confirmed the nuclear
localization. Northern blot analysis detected highest expression of FUP1
in heart, with low expression in all other tissues tested.

GENE FUNCTION

By MTT assay, Pan et al. (2001) found that FUP1-transfected NIH3T3 cells
displayed increased cellular proliferation, whereas antisense
FUP1-transfected hepatoma cells displayed decreased proliferation. In
addition, injection of FUP1-transfected NIH3T3 cells into nude mice
induced tumor formation. Pan et al. (2001) concluded that FUP1
stimulates cell proliferation and tumor formation.

Using mouse submandibular salivary gland, a classical model for
analyzing mechanisms of branching morphogenesis, Onodera et al. (2010)
identified Btbd7 as a dynamic regulator of branching morphogenesis.
Btbd7 provided a mechanistic link between the extracellular matrix and
cleft propagation through its highly focal expression leading to local
regulation of Snail2 (SNAI2; 602150), E-cadherin (CDH1; 192090), and
epithelial cell motility. Inhibition experiments showed that Btbd7 was
required for branching of embryonic mammalian salivary glands and lungs.
Onodera et al. (2010) concluded that BTBD7 is a regulatory gene that
promotes epithelial tissue remodeling and formation of branched organs.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the BTBD7
gene to chromosome 14 (TMAP RH44522).

REFERENCE 1. Onodera, T.; Sakai, T.; Hsu, J. C.; Matsumoto, K.; Chiorini, J.
A.; Yamada, K. M.: Btbd7 regulates epithelial cell dynamics and branching
morphogenesis. Science 329: 562-565, 2010.

2. Pan, W.; Xi, Q.-S.; Xia, S.-L.; Zhao, M.-J.; Gan, R.-B.; Li, Z.-P.
: Cloning and characterization of Fup1, a gene highly expressed in
hepatocellular carcinoma. Acta Biochim. Biophys. Sin. 33: 173-178,
2001.

3. Pan, W.; Zhang, Q.; Xi, Q.-S.; Gan, R.-B.; Li, T.-P.: FUP1, a
gene associated with hepatocellular carcinoma, stimulates NIH3T3 cell
proliferation and tumor formation in nude mice. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 286: 1033-1038, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/24/2010

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 9/7/2006

EDITED mgross: 08/24/2010
terry: 8/24/2010
terry: 11/21/2008
wwang: 12/28/2006
carol: 9/26/2006
carol: 9/7/2006

179710	TITLE *179710 REGULATOR OF CHROMOSOME CONDENSATION 1; RCC1
;;CHROMOSOME CONDENSATION 1; CHC1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Mitotic cells possess chromosome-condensing factor(s), the presence of
which is shown by fusing mitotic and interphase cells. Upon fusion, the
chromatin is condensed and exhibits various forms of prematurely
condensed chromosomes (PCCs), depending on the phase of the cell. The
condensation process is essential for the even distribution of genetic
material into daughter cells. On the other hand, transcription cannot
occur from the mitotically condensed chromosomes. Cells obviously must
have regulatory mechanisms that allow condensation of the chromatin to
occur at a precisely correct time in the cell cycle. In the normal cell
cycle, the chromosome-condensing factor(s) appears in the early G2 phase
and accumulates toward the mitotic phase. Mutations associated with this
step in the cell cycle have to be isolated as temperature-sensitive
mutants (Kai et al., 1986). Ohtsubo et al. (1987) cloned the human RCC1
gene after DNA-mediated gene transfer into a temperature-sensitive
mutant which shows premature chromosome condensation at nonpermissive
temperatures (39.5-40 degrees C). This gene codes for a 2.5-kb
polyadenylated RNA that is well conserved in hamsters and humans.
Ohtsubo et al. (1987) found 2 cDNA clones in a human library that
complemented the temperature-sensitive mutation with an efficiency
comparable to that of the genomic DNA clone. The clones appeared to
encode a protein of 421 amino acids with a calculated molecular weight
of 44,847.

GENE STRUCTURE

Furuno et al. (1991) isolated total genomic DNA for the human RCC1 gene
from HeLa cells and determined its complete nucleotide sequence (34,641
bp) by the shotgun sequencing method. The gene was found to have 14
exons, 8 of which (starting from the seventh one) coded the 7 repeated
sequences of RCC1 protein. A single exon corresponded roughly to each
repeat of the RCC1 protein except for the middle one, indicating that
the RCC1 gene was generated through amplification of a primordial exon.
Primer extension analysis demonstrated the presence of an internal
promoter.

MAPPING

By hybridization to DNA from sorted chromosomes, Ohtsubo et al. (1987)
concluded that the gene, which they symbolized RCC1, is located on
chromosome 1. By fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using a
suppression FISH method for elimination of repetitive sequences in the
genomic clone, Nishimoto et al. (1994) mapped the CHC1 gene to 1p36.1.
They reported work of others indicating that the mouse counterpart maps
to the distal region of chromosome 4.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Makde et al. (2010) determined the crystal structure of a complex of
Drosophila RCC1 and the nucleosome core particle at 2.9-angstrom
resolution, providing an atomic view of how a chromatin protein
interacts with the histone and DNA components of the nucleosome. Their
structure also suggested that the Widom 601 DNA positioning sequence
present in the nucleosomes forms a 145-bp nucleosome core particle, not
the expected canonical 147-bp particle.

GENE FUNCTION

Bischoff et al. (1990) demonstrated that RCC1 protein is homologous to a
47-kD nuclear protein recognized by antikinetochore autoimmune sera from
patients with CREST syndrome (181750).

Hayashi et al. (1995) showed that, both in mammalian cells and in yeast,
RANBP1 (601180) acts as a negative regulator of RCC1 by inhibiting
RCC1-stimulated guanine nucleotide release from RAN (601179). See also
601181.

Ohba et al. (1999) demonstrated that the nucleotide exchange activity of
RCC1, the only known nucleotide exchange factor for RAN, was required
for microtubule aster formation with or without demembranated sperm in
Xenopus egg extracts arrested in meiosis II. In the RCC1-depleted egg
extracts, RanGTP (see 602362), but not RanGDP, induced self-organization
of microtubule asters, and the process required the activity of dynein
(see 603297). Thus, RAN was shown to regulate formation of the
microtubule network.

Adding chromatin beads to Xenopus egg extracts causes nucleation of
microtubules, which eventually reorganize into a bipolar spindle. Using
this assay, Carazo-Salas et al. (1999) demonstrated that the activity of
chromosome-associated RCC1 protein is required for spindle formation.
When in the GTP-bound state (RanGTP), RAN itself induces microtubule
nucleation and spindle-like structures in M-phase extract. Carazo-Salas
et al. (1999) proposed that RCC1 generates a high local concentration of
RanGTP around chromatin which, in turn, induces the local nucleation of
microtubules.

The Ran GTPase (601179) controls nucleocytoplasmic transport, mitotic
spindle formation, and nuclear envelope assembly. These functions rely
on the association of the Ran-specific exchange factor, RCC1, with
chromatin. Nemergut et al. (2001) found that RCC1 binds directly to
mononucleosomes and to histones H2A and H2B (142711). RCC1 utilizes
these histones to bind Xenopus sperm chromatin, and the binding of RCC1
to nucleosomes or histones stimulates the catalytic activity of RCC1.
Nemergut et al. (2001) proposed that the docking of RCC1 to H2A/H2B
establishes the polarity of the Ran-GTP gradient that drives nuclear
envelope assembly, nuclear transport, and other nuclear events.

Li and Zheng (2004) provided evidence that CDC2 (116940) coordinates
spindle assembly with the cell cycle during mitosis through
phosphorylation of RCC1. CDC2 phosphorylates RCC1 on serines located in
or near its nuclear localization signal. This phosphorylation activates
RCC1 to generate RanGTP on mitotic chromosomes, which is required for
spindle assembly and chromosome segregation.

At the time of the report of Schaner Tooley et al. (2010), the RAN
guanine nucleotide exchange factor RCC1 was the only protein for which
any biologic function of alpha-N-methylation had been identified.
Methylation-defective mutants of RCC1 have reduced affinity for DNA (Hao
and Macara, 2008) and cause mitotic defects (Chen et al., 2007), but
further characterization of this modification had been hindered by
ignorance of the responsible methyltransferase. Schaner Tooley et al.
(2010) reported the discovery of the first alpha-N-methyltransferase,
which they named N-terminal RCC1 methyltransferase (NRMT; 613560).
Substrate docking and mutational analysis of RCC1 defined the NRMT
recognition sequence and enabled the identification of numerous
methylation targets, including SET (600960) and RB1 (614041). Knockdown
of NRMT recapitulated the multispindle phenotype seen with
methylation-defective RCC1 mutants, demonstrating the importance of
alpha-N-methylation for normal bipolar spindle formation and chromosome
segregation.

NOMENCLATURE

RCC1 was used by HGM workshops for the primary renal cell carcinoma
locus on 3p (144700). CHC1 is another symbol for this locus (McAlpine,
1988).

REFERENCE 1. Bischoff, F. R.; Maier, G.; Tilz, G.; Ponstingl, H.: A 47-kDa
human nuclear protein recognized by antikinetochore autoimmune sera
is homologous with the protein encoded by RCC1, a gene implicated
in onset of chromosome condensation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 8617-8621,
1990.

2. Carazo-Salas, R. E.; Guarguaglini, G.; Gruss, O. J.; Segref, A.;
Karsenti, E.; Mattaj, I. W.: Generation of GTP-bound Ran by RCC1
is required for chromatin-induced mitotic spindle formation. Nature 400:
178-181, 1999.

3. Chen, T.; Muratore, T. L.; Schaner-Tooley, C. E.; Shabanowitz,
J.; Hunt, D. F.; Macara, I. G.: N-terminal alpha-methylation of RCC1
is necessary for stable chromatin association and normal mitosis. Nature
Cell Biol. 9: 596-603, 2007.

4. Furuno, N.; Nakagawa, K.; Eguchi, U.; Ohtsubo, M.; Nishimoto, T.;
Soeda, E.: Complete nucleotide sequence of the human RCC1 gene involved
in coupling between DNA replication and mitosis. Genomics 11: 459-461,
1991. Note: Erratum: Genomics 12: 181 only, 1992.

5. Hao, Y.; Macara, I. G.: Regulation of chromatin binding by a conformational
switch in the tail of the Ran exchange factor RCC1. J. Cell. Biol. 182:
827-836, 2008.

6. Hayashi, N.; Yokoyama, N.; Seki, T.; Azuma, Y.; Ohba, T.; Nishimoto,
T.: RanBP1, a Ras-like nuclear G protein binding to Ran/TC4, inhibits
RCC1 via Ran/TC4. Molec. Gen. Genet. 247: 661-669, 1995.

7. Kai, R.; Ohtsubo, M.; Sekiguchi, M.; Nishimoto, T.: Molecular
cloning of a human gene that regulates chromosome condensation and
is essential for cell proliferation. Molec. Cell. Biol. 6: 2027-2032,
1986.

8. Li, H.-Y.; Zheng, Y.: Phosphorylation of RCC1 in mitosis is essential
for producing a high RanGTP concentration on chromosomes and for spindle
assembly in mammalian cells. Genes Dev. 18: 512-527, 2004.

9. Makde, R. D.; England, J. R.; Yennawar, H. P.; Tan, S.: Structure
of RCC1 chromatin factor bound to the nucleosome core particle. Nature 467:
562-566, 2010.

10. McAlpine, P. J.: Personal Communication. Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada  6/22/1988.

11. Nemergut, M. E.; Mizzen, C. A.; Stukenberg, T.; Allis, C. D.;
Macara, I. G.: Chromatin docking and exchange activity enhancement
of RCC1 by histones H2A and H2B. Science 292: 1540-1543, 2001.

12. Nishimoto, T.; Seino, H.; Seki, N.; Hori, T.-A.: The human CHC1
gene encoding RCC1 (regulator of chromosome condensation) (CHC1) is
localized to human chromosome 1p36.1. Genomics 23: 719-721, 1994.

13. Ohba, T.; Nakamura, M.; Nishitani, H.; Nishimoto, T.: Self-organization
of microtubule asters induced in Xenopus egg extracts by GTP-bound
Ran. Science 284: 1356-1358, 1999.

14. Ohtsubo, M.; Kai, R.; Furuno, N.; Sekiguchi, T.; Sekiguchi, M.;
Hayashida, H.; Kuma, K.; Miyata, T.; Fukushige, S.; Murotsu, T.; Matsubara,
K.; Nishimoto, T.: Isolation and characterization of the active cDNA
of the human cell cycle gene (RCC1) involved in the regulation of
onset of chromosome condensation. Genes Dev. 1: 585-593, 1987.

15. Schaner Tooley, C. E.; Petkowski, J. J.; Muratore-Schroeder, T.
L.; Balsbaugh, J. L.; Shabanowitz, J.; Sabat, M.; Minor, W.; Hunt,
D. F.; Macara, I. G.: NRMT is an alpha-N-methyltransferase that methylates
RCC1 and retinoblastoma protein. Nature 466: 1125-1128, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/12/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/17/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/11/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/12/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/7/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/25/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/20/1999
Alan F. Scott - edited: 4/5/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/3/1987

EDITED tpirozzi: 10/01/2013
alopez: 3/8/2013
carol: 6/17/2011
alopez: 10/12/2010
terry: 10/12/2010
alopez: 9/17/2010
mgross: 9/16/2005
mgross: 5/11/2004
alopez: 4/15/2002
terry: 4/12/2002
cwells: 6/12/2001
cwells: 6/11/2001
terry: 6/7/2001
alopez: 8/25/1999
alopez: 5/20/1999
terry: 5/20/1999
dkim: 7/24/1998
dkim: 6/30/1998
mark: 2/3/1998
carol: 4/29/1996
terry: 4/17/1996
mark: 4/5/1996
mark: 4/4/1996
carol: 12/13/1994
mimadm: 4/29/1994
warfield: 4/14/1994
carol: 3/26/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 10/1/1991

604110	TITLE *604110 G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR 56; GPR56
;;7-@TRANSMEMBRANE PROTEIN WITH NO EGF-LIKE N-TERMINAL DOMAINS 1; TM7XN1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

G protein-coupled receptors (GPRs), including GPR56, are characterized
by the presence of 7 transmembrane domains and are divided into several
classes based on sequence characteristics. Class B GPRs, or the
secretin-like receptors, include the secretin receptor (182098) and the
calcitonin receptor (114131). The orphan receptors HE6 (300572), CD97
(601211), EMR1 (600493), and BAI1 (602682) share significant homology
with class B GPRs across the 7-transmembrane region, but have a distinct
N-terminal region containing a characteristic cysteine box, which
precedes the first membrane-spanning domain, and a mucin-like domain
(summary by Liu et al., 1999).

CLONING

By PCR of human cDNAs with degenerate primers based on conserved regions
from secretin-like receptors, Liu et al. (1999) isolated a cDNA encoding
a novel receptor, which they designated GPR56. The predicted 693-amino
acid GPR56 protein shares 26 to 32% sequence identity with the 4 class
B-like orphan receptors. Like these receptors, GPR56 contains 7
transmembrane domains as well as a mucin-like domain and cysteine box in
the N-terminal region. Northern blot analysis revealed that the GPR56
gene was expressed as a 3-kb mRNA in a wide range of tissues, with the
highest levels in thyroid. Using in situ hybridization, Liu et al.
(1999) determined that the GPR56 gene was expressed selectively within
the monolayer of cuboidal epithelial cells of the smaller, more actively
secreting follicles of human thyroid.

Using differential display, Zendman et al. (1999) identified a GPR56
cDNA as a transcript that was differentially expressed in melanoma cell
lines with different metastatic potential. They designated the gene
TM7XN1 (7-transmembrane protein with no EGF-like N-terminal domains-1)
because the protein lacks the EGF-like domains found in the related GPRs
CD97 and EMR1. Zendman et al. (1999) reported that the TM7XN1 protein
contains 687 amino acids. RT-PCR and Northern blot analyses indicated
that TM7XN1 gene expression was inversely correlated with metastatic
potential in melanoma cell lines.

GENE STRUCTURE

Piao et al. (2004) stated that the GPR56 gene contains 14 exons covering
15 kb and has a 3-kb open reading frame.

MAPPING

By FISH, analysis of a radiation hybrid panel, and its inclusion within
mapped clones, Liu et al. (1999) mapped the GPR56 gene to chromosome
16q13. Using interspecific backcross analysis, they mapped the mouse
Gpr56 gene to the distal region of chromosome 8, in a segment sharing
homology of synteny with human 16q13.

GENE FUNCTION

Piao et al. (2004) found that GPR56 is preferentially expressed in
neuronal progenitor cells of the cerebral cortical ventricular, and
subventricular zones during periods of neurogenesis, but not in the
cortical plate or intermediate zone. In mice, they observed expression
in proliferative regions of the medial and lateral ganglionic eminence
at embryonic days 12, 14, and 16, where up to one-third of cerebral
cortical neurons, predominantly interneurons, are formed and
subsequently migrate nonradially into the cerebral cortex as well as
several other brain areas. In the adult mouse brain, Gpr56 expression
was limited to scattered cells more common in white matter than in gray
matter. On the other hand, more intense Gpr56 expression was observed in
regions of adult brain that show postnatal neurogenesis, such as the
dentate gyrus and the subventricular zone of the rostral migratory
stream leading to the olfactory bulb. Human GPR56 expression has been
shown in a wide range of different tissues including heart, kidney,
testis, pancreas, thyroid gland, and skeletal muscle (Liu et al., 1999).
The pattern of GPR56 expression and the anatomy of bilateral
frontoparietal polymicrogyria (BFPP; 606854) imply that GPR56 most
likely regulates cortical patterning. The most severely affected
cortical regions in BFPP are strikingly thin, and many forms of
polymicrogyria show cortical alterations with reduction of the normal 6
cortical layers to 4, suggesting possible roles in cell fate control
that would be consistent with the expression of GPR56 in progenitor
cells.

Xu et al. (2006) found that GPR56 was downregulated in tumors derived
from highly metastatic human melanoma cell lines. Overexpression of
GPR56 suppressed tumor growth and metastasis, whereas reduced GPR56
expression enhanced tumor progression. GPR56 bound specifically to
tissue transglutaminase (TGM2; 190196) in the extracellular space, which
was previously implicated as an inhibitor of tumor progression. Mutation
analysis indicated that the N terminus of GPR56 interacted with the C
terminus of TGM2. Xu et al. (2006) concluded that an interaction between
GPR56 and TGM2 could suppress tumor growth and metastasis.

In the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), GPR56 undergoes autoproteolysis via
the GPCR proteolysis site (GPS) to split the protein into an N-terminal
adhesion ectodomain (ECD) fragment, called the alpha-subunit, and a
C-terminal signaling 7-pass transmembrane (7TM) moiety, called the
beta-subunit. The alpha- and beta-subunits associate noncovalently on
the cell surface. This autoproteolysis is essential for proper
subcellular trafficking and function of GPR56. Chiang et al. (2011)
showed that the alpha-subunit contains many predicted N- and O-linked
glycosylation sites and was shed from the membrane via a second cleavage
event. However, membrane-bound alpha-subunit also interacted with a
ligand to promote cell adhesion. Membrane localization of each subunit
differed somewhat: the alpha-subunit localized to the nonraft fraction,
whereas the beta-subunit localized to both the lipid raft and nonraft
fractions. Western blot analysis showed that the alpha-subunit of GPR56
did not bind to human TGM2 but did bind to murine Tgm2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 12 families with autosomal recessive inheritance of bilateral
frontoparietal polymicrogyria (BFPP; 606854) of various ethnic origins,
Piao et al. (2004) identified 8 different homozygous splice site,
frameshift, and missense mutations in the GPR56 gene
(604110.0001-604110.0008). All missense mutations affected regions of
the protein predicted to represent the extracellular portion of GPR56; 4
mutations affected the extracellular N terminus of the protein, and 1
the extracellular loop between transmembrane domains 4 and 5.

Using in vitro studies, Chiang et al. (2011) demonstrated that
BFPP-associated missense mutations cause the disorder via different
mechanisms, including reduced surface receptor expression, loss of
autoproteolysis, reduced receptor shedding, inability to interact with
ligands, and differential distribution of the 7TM beta-subunit in
membrane lipid rafts. The R38W (604110.0004), Y88C (604110.0008), C91S
(604110.0007), R565W (604110.0006), and L640R mutations did not affect
autoproteolysis, although there was less abundance of both the
N-terminal alpha-subunit and C-terminal 7TM beta-subunit. There was much
weaker expression of the beta-subunit for the R565W mutation compared to
the other mutants. In contrast, the C346S (605110.0005) and W349S
mutations abolished GPS autoproteolysis. Flow cytometric analysis of all
the mutants showed markedly decreased cell surface expression of the
GPR56 receptor, and the mutant proteins were found to be retained in the
ER. Mutants C346S and W349S showed lack of shedding of the
alpha-subunit. The 3 N-terminal missense mutations R38W, Y88C, and C91S
impaired binding of GPR56 to its ligand and thus reduced cell adhesion
activity. The beta-subunits of the R565W and L640R mutants were heavily
aggregated and localized mostly to the nonraft fractions with only
minimum normal distribution to lipid rafts, suggesting that they induced
conformational changes to the beta-subunit, leading to differential
distribution of the membrane subdomains and impaired intracellular
signaling.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
POLYMICROGYRIA, BILATERAL FRONTOPARIETAL
GPR56, IVS9, G-C, +3

In a consanguineous Palestinian family with 3 children with bilateral
frontoparietal polymicrogyria (606854), Piao et al. (2004) identified a
splicing mutation at the +3 position of intron 9 of the GPR56 gene,
changing G to C. This mutation was also found in a second family from
the same village with first-cousin parents and 2 affected children.

.0002
POLYMICROGYRIA, BILATERAL FRONTOPARIETAL
GPR56, EX5, G-C, -1

In a nonconsanguineous family from Pakistan with bilateral
frontoparietal polymicrogyria (606854), Piao et al. (2004) identified a
homozygous splice site mutation at the -1 position of exon 5 of the
GPR56 gene, where a G-to-C transversion occurred.

.0003
POLYMICROGYRIA, BILATERAL FRONTOPARIETAL
GPR56, 7-BP DEL, NT739

In a nonconsanguineous family from the Gujarat region of India with 2
children with bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria (606854), Piao et
al. (2004) identified homozygosity for a 7-bp deletion of nucleotides
739 through 746 of the GPR56 gene (739_746delCAGGACC). This mutation was
also identified in a consanguineous Pakistani family and a
consanguineous Pashtun Afghan family. SNP analysis suggested a common
founder mutation since all patients shared alleles for 6 SNP markers
within the GPR56 locus. Gujarat and Afghanistan both border Pakistan,
and many tribes in Afghanistan are originally from India. Therefore, the
common ancestral mutations in these 3 pedigrees is plausible but
suggests a founder mutation maintained through a substantial population
(greater than 200 million people) and history.

.0004
POLYMICROGYRIA, BILATERAL FRONTOPARIETAL
GPR56, ARG38TRP

In a consanguineous Qatari family with 2 children with bilateral
frontoparietal polymicrogyria (606854), Piao et al. (2004) identified a
C-to-T transition at nucleotide 112 of the GPR56 gene, resulting in an
arg-to-trp substitution at codon 38 (R38W).

.0005
POLYMICROGYRIA, BILATERAL FRONTOPARIETAL
GPR56, CYS346SER

In 2 independent consanguineous Palestinian families with bilateral
frontoparietal polymicrogyria (606854), Piao et al. (2004) identified a
T-to-A transversion at nucleotide 1036 of the GPR56 gene, resulting in a
cysteine-to-serine substitution at codon 346 (C346S). One family had 2
affected children and the other had 1 affected child. In all cases,
affected individuals were homozygous for the missense mutation.

.0006
POLYMICROGYRIA, BILATERAL FRONTOPARIETAL
GPR56, ARG565TRP

In a large consanguineous Bedouin family with bilateral frontoparietal
polymicrogyria (606854), Piao et al. (2004) identified a C-to-T
transition at nucleotide 1693 of the GPR56 gene, resulting in an
arginine-to-tryptophan substitution at codon 565 (R565W). This pedigree
consisted of 2 nuclear families that were distant related to one
another; the 2 affected individuals from the first family had
first-cousin parents, and the 1 affected individual from the second
family had consanguineous parents whose exact relationship was unknown.

.0007
POLYMICROGYRIA, BILATERAL FRONTOPARIETAL
GPR56, CYS91SER

In a consanguineous Arabian family with 1 child with bilateral
frontoparietal polymicrogyria (606854), Piao et al. (2004) identified
homozygosity for a G-to-C transversion at nucleotide 272 of the GPR56
gene, resulting in a cysteine-to-serine substitution at codon 91 (C91S).
The parents were first cousins.

.0008
POLYMICROGYRIA, BILATERAL FRONTOPARIETAL
GPR56, TYR88CYS

In a nonconsanguineous French Canadian family with 2 children with
bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria (606854), Piao et al. (2004)
identified an A-to-G transition at nucleotide 263 of the GPR56 gene,
resulting in a tyrosine-to-cysteine substitution at codon 88 (Y88C).

REFERENCE 1. Chiang, N.-Y.; Hsiao, C.-C.; Huang, Y.-S.; Chen, H.-Y.; Hsieh,
I.-J.; Chang, G.-W.; Lin, H.-H.: Disease-associated GPR56 mutations
cause bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria via multiple mechanisms. J.
Biol. Chem. 286: 14215-14225, 2011.

2. Liu, M.; Parker, R. M. C.; Darby, K.; Eyre, H. J.; Copeland, N.
G.; Crawford, J.; Gilbert, D. J.; Sutherland, G. R.; Jenkins, N. A.;
Herzog, H.: GPR56, a novel secretin-like human G-protein-coupled
receptor gene. Genomics 55: 296-305, 1999.

3. Piao, X.; Hill, R. S.; Bodell, A.; Chang, B. S.; Basel-Vanagaite,
L.; Straussberg, R.; Dobyns, W. B.; Qasrawi, B.; Winter, R. M.; Innes,
A. M.; Voit, T.; Ross, M. E.; Michaud, J. L.; Descarie, J.-C.; Barkovich,
A. J.; Walsh, C. A.: G protein-coupled receptor-dependent development
of human frontal cortex. Science 303: 2033-2036, 2004.

4. Xu, L.; Begum, S.; Hearn, J. D.; Hynes, R. O.: GPR56, an atypical
G protein-coupled receptor, binds tissue transglutaminase, TG2, and
inhibits melanoma tumor growth and metastasis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103:
9023-9028, 2006.

5. Zendman, A. J. W.; Cornelissen, I. M. H. A.; Weidle, U. H.; Ruiter,
D. J.; van Muijen, G. N. P.: TM7XN1, a novel human EGF-TM7-like cDNA,
detected with mRNA differential display using human melanoma cell
lines with different metastatic potential. FEBS Lett. 446: 292-298,
1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/11/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/28/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/30/2004

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 8/10/1999

EDITED terry: 11/15/2012
wwang: 5/25/2011
ckniffin: 5/11/2011
wwang: 8/4/2006
terry: 7/28/2006
mgross: 2/3/2006
alopez: 3/31/2004
terry: 3/30/2004
mgross: 8/10/1999

609585	TITLE *609585 COMPLEXIN 3; CPLX3
;;CPX III
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching genomic databases for CPX-like sequences, followed by PCR
of a brain cDNA library, Reim et al. (2005) cloned CPLX3, which they
designated CPX III. The deduced 158-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 17.6 kD. CPX III contains a C-terminal CAAX box motif
for posttranslational prenylation. CPX III shares more than 91% amino
acid identity with mouse Cpx III. Northern blot analysis of several
mouse and rat tissues detected Cpx III only in retina. EST database
analysis indicated mouse Cpx III is expressed in brain and eye. In situ
hybridization of mouse brain sections detected Cpx III in pyramidal
cells of the hippocampus, granule cells of dentate gyrus and cerebellum,
and Purkinje cells of cerebellum. Western blot analysis detected Cpx III
in several rat brain regions. Cpx III associated with cytosolic and
membrane synaptic fractions of fractionated rat cortex.
Immunohistochemical analysis of mouse retina detected Cpx III in ribbon
and conventional synapses of rods and cones.

GENE FUNCTION

Reim et al. (2005) found that recombinant mouse Cpx III bound syntaxin-1
(STX1A; 186590), Snap25 (600322), and synaptobrevin (see VAMP1; 185880)
in rat brain synaptosomes, and it bound syntaxin-3 (STX3A; 600876) in
rat retinal extracts. Farnesylation of Cpx III at the C-terminal CAAX
motif was required to target Cpx III to membranes of transfected cells.
Cpx III was a positive regulator of neurotransmitter release in mouse
hippocampal neurons, but farnesylation of Cpx III had little impact on
its function.

REFERENCE 1. Reim, K.; Wegmeyer, H.; Brandstatter, J. H.; Xue, M.; Rosenmund,
C.; Drebach, T.; Hofmann, K.; Brose, N.: Structurally and functionally
unique complexins at retinal ribbon synapses. J. Cell Biol. 169:
669-680, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/16/2005

EDITED mgross: 09/16/2005

605417	TITLE *605417 DICKKOPF, XENOPUS, HOMOLOG OF, 4; DKK4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the Dickkopf family, like DKK4, are negative regulators of
the growth-promoting Wnt (see WNT1, 164820)/beta-catenin (116806)
signaling pathway Fatima et al. (2012).

CLONING

By searching EST databases with a partial DKK3 (605416) sequence,
Krupnik et al. (1999) identified a cDNA encoding DKK4. The deduced
224-amino acid DKK4 protein, like DKK1, DKK2 (605415), and DKK3,
possesses an N-terminal signal peptide and 2 conserved cysteine-rich
domains, which are separated by a linker region and contain 10 cys
residues each. The second cys region has a putative lipid-binding
function that may facilitate WNT/DKK interactions at the plasma
membrane. The linker region contains 50 to 55 amino acids in DKK1, DKK2,
and DKK4, whereas in DKK3 it contains only 12 amino acids. All DKKs have
several potential sites for cleavage by furin-type proteases. Northern
blot analysis detected no expression of DKK4, but RT-PCR analysis
detected DKK4 expression in cerebellum, T-cell, esophagus, and lung cDNA
libraries. Western blot analysis showed that DKK4 is secreted as 40-,
30- to 32-, and 15- to 17-kD proteins; these proteins were not
significantly affected by N-glycanase treatment. N-terminal sequence
analysis of the different forms suggested that DKK4 is proteolytically
processed, possibly by intracellular furin-type proteases. Functional
analysis determined that DKK4 blocks Xenopus Wnt8, Wnt3a, and Wnt2b, but
not Dsh or Fz8, induction of a secondary axis in frog embryos,
indicating that DKKs antagonize WNT function upstream of WNT receptors.

GENE FUNCTION

Using quantitative RT-PCR, Fatima et al. (2012) found that expression of
DKK4 was significantly reduced in hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs),
particularly in HCCs that showed cytoplasmic beta-catenin accumulation.
DKK4 expression was also reduced in HCC cell lines. Ectopic expression
of DKK4 in 2 HCC cell lines reduced beta-catenin and cyclin D1 (168461)
protein levels and attenuated beta-catenin activity in reporter gene
assays. Overexpression of DKK4 in 2 stably transfected HCC cell lines
hampered cell proliferation, reduced colony formation, and retarded cell
migration in culture and reduced tumor size in mouse xenografts. DKK4
overexpression caused the activation of kinase GSK3-beta (GSK3B;
605004), resulting in phosphorylation and proteasome-mediated
degradation of cytoplasmic beta-catenin. Fatima et al. (2012) concluded
that the antitumor properties of DKK4 are a result of GSK3-beta
activation and the subsequent degradation of cytoplasmic beta-catenin.

MAPPING

By FISH, Yoshida et al. (2001) mapped the DKK4 gene to chromosome
8p11.2-p11.1.

REFERENCE 1. Fatima, S.; Lee, N. P.; Kolligs, F. T.; Ng, I. O. L.; Poon, R.
T. P.; Fan, S. T.; Luk, J. M.: Dickkopf 4 (DKK4) acts on Wnt/beta-catenin
pathway by influencing beta-catenin in hepatocellular carcinoma. Oncogene 31:
4233-4244, 2012.

2. Krupnik, V. E.; Sharp, J. D.; Jiang, C.; Robison, K.; Chickering,
T. W.; Amaravadi, L.; Brown, D. E.; Guyot, D.; Mays, G.; Leiby, K.;
Chang, B.; Duong, T.; Goodearl, A. D. J.; Gearing, D. P.; Sokol, S.
Y.; McCarthy, S. A.: Functional and structural diversity of the human
Dickkopf gene family. Gene 238: 301-313, 1999.

3. Yoshida, S.; Satoh, H.; Mitsuya, T.; Tate, G.: Assignment of the
human dickkopf (Xenopus) homolog 4 (DKK4) to chromosome 8p11.2-p11.1
by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 94:
88-89, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/11/2013
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 2/7/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/22/2000

EDITED tpirozzi: 09/11/2013
tpirozzi: 9/11/2013
terry: 2/7/2002
mgross: 11/27/2000
mgross: 11/22/2000

606563	TITLE *606563 TRANSMEMBRANE 6 SUPERFAMILY, MEMBER 2; TM6SF2
;;KIAA1926
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching an EST database using TM6SF1 (606562) as the probe,
Carim-Todd et al. (2000) obtained a cDNA encoding TM6SF2. The deduced
351-amino acid protein, which is 52% identical to TM6SF1, has 6
transmembrane domains.

By screening for cDNAs with the potential to encode large proteins in
brain, Nagase et al. (2001) identified a cDNA encoding TM6SF2, which
they termed KIAA1926. KIAA1926 encodes a predicted 412-amino acid link
protein, and the authors noted the existence of shorter isoforms. RT-PCR
analysis detected high-level expression of KIAA1926 in adult and fetal
brain, moderate expression in ovary, and low or undetectable expression
in other tissues. Within brain, expression was highest in amygdala and
thalamus, with high levels also detected in other brain regions.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Carim-Todd et al. (2000) determined that
the TM6SF2 gene contains 12 exons.

MAPPING

Carim-Todd et al. (2000) mapped the TM6SF2 gene to chromosome 19p12 by
genomic sequence analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Carim-Todd, L.; Escarceller, M.; Estivill, X.; Sumoy, L.: Cloning
of the novel gene TM6SF1 reveals conservation of clusters of paralogous
genes between human chromosomes 15q24-q26 and 19p13.3-p12. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 90: 255-260, 2000.

2. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. XXI. The complete sequences of 60 new
cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins. DNA Res. 8:
179-187, 2001.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/14/2001

EDITED mgross: 12/17/2001

606140	TITLE *606140 EXPORTIN 7; XPO7
;;RAN-BINDING PROTEIN 16; RANBP16
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The transport of protein and large RNAs through the nuclear pore
complexes (NPC) is an energy-dependent and regulated process. The import
of proteins with a nuclear localization signal (NLS) is accomplished by
recognition of one or more clusters of basic amino acids by the
importin-alpha/beta complex; see 600685 and 602738. The small GTPase RAN
(601179) plays a key role in NLS-dependent protein import. RAN-binding
protein-16 is a member of the importin-beta superfamily of nuclear
transport receptors.

CLONING

By screening human brain cDNAs for those encoding proteins larger than
50 kD, Nagase et al. (1998) identified KIAA0745, a cDNA encoding a
deduced 909-amino acid RANBP16 protein. RT-PCR ELISA demonstrated very
high expression of RANBP16 in brain, moderate expression in heart, lung,
and ovary, and low expression in liver, skeletal muscle, pancreas,
testis, and spleen.

In the course of cloning genes at the breakpoint of
t(5;14)(q33-q34;q11), a recurring translocation in acute lymphoblastic
leukemia, Koch et al. (2000) isolated and characterized 2 novel members
of the importin-beta superfamily of nuclear transport receptors: RANBP16
and RANBP17 (606141). They also cloned the mouse Ranbp16 and Ranbp17
homologs. The human RANBP16 and RANBP17 proteins share 66% sequence
identity. Human and mouse RANBP16 cDNAs encode 1,087-amino acid proteins
containing an importin-beta N-terminal domain which is important for the
binding of Ran protein. Northern blot analysis demonstrated restricted
expression of RANBP17, but ubiquitous expression RANBP16. A major,
approximately 4.8-kb RANBP16 transcript was strongly expressed in
testis, thyroid, and bone marrow, moderately expressed in many other
tissues, and weakly expressed in lung, liver, and small intestine, but
not expressed in thymus. Two other transcripts of approximately 3.5 and
2.5 kb were strongly expressed in bone marrow and the 3.5-kb transcript
was also strongly expressed in testis. The mouse Ranbp16 gene was also
ubiquitously expressed. Both RANBP16 and RANBP17 were found to be
predominantly nuclear proteins.

Kutay et al. (2000) independently cloned RANBP16 and RANBP17. They
identified RANBP16 by use of affinity chromatography on immobilized
RanGTP. Based on the RANBP16 sequence, they identified RANBP17 by
database searches. Kutay et al. (2000) determined that RANBP16 binds
RanGTP directly. It can interact directly with the nuclear pore complex
and is able to enter the nucleus independent of energy and additional
nuclear transport receptors.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the RANBP16
gene to chromosome 8.

REFERENCE 1. Koch, P.; Bohlmann, I.; Schafer, M.; Hansen-Hagge, T. E.; Kiyoi,
H.; Wilda, M.; Hameister, H.; Bartram, C. R.; Janssen, J. W. G.:
Identification of a novel putative Ran-binding protein and its close
homologue. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 278: 241-249, 2000.

2. Kutay, U.; Hartmann, E.; Treichel, N.; Calado, A.; Carmo-Fonseca,
M.; Prehn, S.; Kraft, R.; Gorlich, D.; Bischoff, F. R.: Identification
of two novel RanGTP-binding proteins belonging to the importin-beta
superfamily. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 40163-40168, 2000.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Miyajima, N.;
Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the
coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XI. The complete sequences
of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in
vitro. DNA Res. 5: 277-286, 1998.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 7/23/2001

EDITED carol: 03/13/2003
mcapotos: 7/23/2001

603451	TITLE *603451 LIM DOMAIN-BINDING 1; LDB1
;;CARBOXYL-TERMINAL LIM DOMAIN PROTEIN 2; CLIM2;;
NUCLEAR LIM DOMAIN INTERACTOR; NLI
DESCRIPTION For general information on LIM domain-binding factors, see CLIM1
(603450).

CLONING

Semina et al. (1998) isolated 2 human genes encoding LIM domain-binding
factors, CLIM1 and CLIM2. The 2 genes have a very high level of identity
to each other and to the homologs in other species. CLIM2 encodes a
375-amino acid protein.

Using FACS analysis of adult mouse bone marrow and fetal liver cells, Li
et al. (2010) showed that Ldb1 was expressed in hematopoietic stem
cells, with lower levels in myeloid and megakaryocyte progenitor cells.
Ldb1 was expressed at all stages of erythroid development.

GENE FUNCTION

Sum et al. (2002) found that LDB1 associated with a complex containing
LMO4 (603129), CTIP (604124), and BRCA1 (113705) in transfected human
embryonic kidney cells.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, protein pull-down assays, and
coimmunoprecipitation assays, Han et al. (2005) found that human LMO2
(180385) interacted with human BEX2 (300691). Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays showed that BEX2 and LMO2 were part of a DNA-binding
complex that recognized the E-box element. Other components of this
complex included NSCL2 (NHLH2; 162361) and LDB1.

Abrahams et al. (2007) used 2 sets of microarray analyses followed by
selective in situ hybridization to identify differentially expressed
genes in the superior temporal gyrus and cerebral cortex in midgestation
human fetal brains. LDB1 was consistently enriched in the superior
temporal gyrus posterior temporal cortex, and perisylvian cortex.
Abrahams et al. (2007) suggested that LDB1 may be involved in asymmetric
patterning of the developing human cortex.

MAPPING

By PCR analysis of a Genebridge 4 radiation hybrid panel, Semina et al.
(1998) mapped the CLIM2 gene to 10q24-q25. Yamashita et al. (1998)
mapped the mouse Lbd1 gene to a region of conserved homology in distal
chromosome 19.

ANIMAL MODEL

Li et al. (2010) reported that Ldb1 -/- mice died between embryonic days
9 and 10. They found that Ldb1 -/- embryonic stem cells generated
myeloid, but not erythroid, lineage cells. Conditional deletion of Ldb1
showed that it was required for fetal and adult erythropoiesis, as well
as for megakaryopoiesis.

REFERENCE 1. Abrahams, B. S.; Tentler, D.; Perederiy, J. V.; Oldham, M. C.;
Coppola, G.; Geschwind, D. H.: Genome-wide analyses of human perisylvian
cerebral cortical patterning. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 17849-17854,
2007.

2. Han, C.; Liu, H.; Liu, J.; Yin, K.; Xie, Y.; Shen, X.; Wang, Y.;
Yuan, J.; Qiang, B.; Liu, Y.-J.; Peng, X.: Human Bex2 interacts with
LMO2 and regulates the transcriptional activity of a novel DNA-binding
complex. Nucleic Acids Res. 33: 6555-6565, 2005.

3. Li, L.; Lee, J. Y.; Gross, J.; Song, S.-H.; Dean, A.; Love, P.
E.: A requirement for Lim domain binding protein 1 in erythropoiesis. J.
Exp. Med. 207: 2543-2550, 2010.

4. Semina, E. V.; Altherr, M. R.; Murray, J. C.: Cloning and chromosomal
localization of two novel human genes encoding LIM-domain binding
factors CLIM1 and CLIM2/LDB1/NL1. Mammalian Genome 9: 921-924, 1998.

5. Sum, E. Y. M.; Peng, B.; Yu, X.; Chen, J.; Byrne, J.; Lindeman,
G. J.; Visvader, J. E.: The LIM domain protein LMO4 interacts with
the cofactor CtIP and the tumor suppressor BRCA1 and inhibits BRCA1
activity. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 7849-7856, 2002.

6. Yamashita, T.; Agulnick, A. D.; Copeland, N. G.; Gilbert, D. J.;
Jenkins, N. A.; Westphal, H.: Genomic structure and chromosomal localization
of the mouse LIM domain-binding protein 1 gene, Ldb1. Genomics 48:
87-92, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/5/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/16/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/29/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/14/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/20/1999

EDITED mgross: 05/06/2011
terry: 5/5/2011
mgross: 12/16/2008
wwang: 2/21/2008
ckniffin: 1/29/2008
mgross: 7/14/2005
carol: 2/4/1999
carol: 1/20/1999

609398	TITLE *609398 ATPase, H+ TRANSPORTING, LYSOSOMAL, 34-KD, V1 SUBUNIT D; ATP6V1D
;;ATP6M
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Vacuolar H(+)-ATPases (V-ATPases) acidify endosomes, lysosomes, Golgi,
and secretory vesicles and transport protons across the plasma membrane
into the extracellular space. The structure of the multiprotein V-ATPase
complex comprises a globular head attached to the membrane by a stalk;
subunit D proteins are contained in the stalk. ATP6V1D was originally
named ATP6M but was renamed to conform to the revised nomenclature for
mammalian vacuolar-type proton pump ATPases (Smith et al., 2003).

CLONING

Using RT-PCR, Kennell et al. (2001) cloned murine Atp6v1d from spleen.
Human and mouse ATP6V1D share 98% amino acid identity, with most of the
variation occurring in the C terminus.

GENE FUNCTION

Using phylogenetic and evolutionary analysis, Kennell et al. (2001)
showed that the ATP6V1D gene has been under strong negative selection
during evolution and is highly conserved among mammals, flies, worms,
yeast, plants, and bacteria.

Using a library of endoribonuclease-prepared short interfering RNAs
(esiRNAs), Kittler et al. (2004) identified 37 genes required for cell
division, one of which was ATP6V1D. These 37 genes included several
splicing factors for which knockdown generates mitotic spindle defects.
In addition, a putative nuclear-export terminator was found to speed up
cell proliferation and mitotic progression after knockdown.

GENE STRUCTURE

By sequence alignment, Kennell et al. (2001) showed that the ATP6V1D
gene contains at least 9 exons.

MAPPING

Kennell et al. (2001) mapped the human ATP6V1D gene by BLAST analysis to
chromosome 14q24, in a region that exhibits conserved synteny with mouse
chromosome 12.

REFERENCE 1. Kennell, J. A.; Richards, N. W.; Schaner, P. E.; Gumucio, D. L.
: cDNA cloning, chromosomal localization and evolutionary analysis
of mouse vacuolar ATPase subunit D, Atp6m. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 92:
337-341, 2001.

2. Kittler, R.; Putz, G.; Pelletier, L.; Poser, I.; Heninger, A.-K.;
Drechsel, D.; Fischer, S.; Konstantinova, I.; Habermann, B.; Grabner,
H.; Yaspo, M.-L.; Himmelbauer, H.; Korn, B.; Neugebauer, K.; Pisabarro,
M. T.; Buchholz, F.: An endoribonuclease-prepared siRNA screen in
human cells identifies genes essential for cell division. Nature 432:
1036-1040, 2004.

3. Smith, A. N.; Lovering, R. C.; Futai, M.; Takeda, J.; Brown, D.;
Karet, F. E.: Revised nomenclature for mammalian vacuolar-type H+-ATPase
subunit genes. Molec. Cell 12: 801-803, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 06/03/2005

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 5/31/2005

EDITED alopez: 06/03/2005
alopez: 5/31/2005

605984	TITLE *605984 EMBRYONIC ECTODERM DEVELOPMENT PROTEIN, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; EED
;;EED, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF;;
WD PROTEIN ASSOCIATING WITH INTEGRIN CYTOPLASMIC TAILS 1; WAIT1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In Drosophila, the Polycomb-group (PcG) and trithorax-group (trxG) genes
are part of a cellular memory system responsible for the stable
inheritance of gene activity. PcG and trxG genes are repressors and
activators, respectively, of Drosophila homeotic gene expression. ENX1
(EZH2; 601573) is a mammalian homolog of the Drosophila 'enhancer of
zeste' gene and has domains with sequence homology to both PcG and trxG
genes. Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen with ENX1 as bait, followed by
screening a fetal brain cDNA library, Sewalt et al. (1998) isolated a
cDNA encoding EED. EED is the human homolog of Eed, a murine PcG gene
homologous to the Drosophila homeotic gene, 'extra sex combs.' The
predicted 535-amino acid human EED protein is 100% identical to the
murine protein. The N-terminal region of EED contains a putative PEST
sequence, which is implicated in protein degradation, and there are 5
WD40 domains throughout the EED protein. WD40 domains are involved in
protein-protein interactions, and Sewalt et al. (1998) showed that all 5
are necessary for the ENX1-EED interaction to occur. Northern blot
analysis detected 1.5- and 2.0-kb EED transcripts in all tissues and
cell lines tested; larger transcripts were detected in normal human
tissues only, but at much lower levels. Highest expression was found in
testis, spleen, prostate, ovary, and small intestine, as well as in
colorectal adenocarcinoma, chronic myeloid leukemia, and osteosarcoma
cell lines, with lower levels in thymus, colon, and peripheral blood
leukocytes.

Beta-7 integrins (ITGB7; 147559) are involved in the development and/or
progression of diseases such as colitis, diabetic insulitis, and
lymphoid malignancies, and they play an important role for physiologic
functions and pathologic alterations of the immune system. Using a yeast
2-hybrid screen on a Jurkat cell cDNA library with the cytoplasmic tail
of ITGB7 as bait, Rietzler et al. (1998) isolated a cDNA encoding EED,
which they designated WAIT1. The deduced 441-amino acid protein has a
region homologous to a repeat motif in the RCC1 protein (179710) and a
region homologous to a repeat motif from the beta subunit of
heterotrimeric G proteins (see 139380).

GENE FUNCTION

Sewalt et al. (1998) found that ENX1 and EED coimmunoprecipitate,
indicating that they also interact in vivo. They do not, however,
interact with other PcG proteins, such as PC2 (603079) and BMI1
(164831). Furthermore, ENX1 and EED do not colocalize with HPC2 or BMI1
in nuclear domains of U-2 OS osteosarcoma cells.

Rietzler et al. (1998) demonstrated that EED interacts with the ITGB7
cytoplasmic tail, which regulates receptor avidity and signaling, by
coprecipitation from transiently transfected 293 cells. Tyr735 of ITGB7
was critical for the interaction. EED also interacts with the
cytoplasmic domains of ITGA4 (192975) and ITGAE (604682), but not with
those of ITGB1 (135630), ITGB2 (600065), and ITGAL (153370). The authors
concluded that EED may act as a specific regulator of integrin function.

Peytavi et al. (1999) isolated cDNAs encoding EED using the yeast
2-hybrid system on an activated lymphocyte cDNA library with the human
immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) matrix (MA) protein as bait. EED was
found to bind MA in vitro and in vivo in yeast cells. The MA and EED
proteins colocalized within the nucleus of cotransfected human cells.
This and the failure of EED to bind to uncleaved GAG precursor suggested
a role for EED at the early stages of virus infection, rather than late
in the virus life cycle.

In marsupials and the extraembryonic region of the mouse, X inactivation
is imprinted: the paternal X chromosome is preferentially inactivated
whereas the maternal X is always active. Having more than 1 active X
chromosome is deleterious to extraembryonic development in the mouse.
Wang et al. (2001) showed that the eed gene is required for primary and
secondary trophoblast giant cell development in female embryos. Results
from mice carrying a paternally inherited X-linked GFP transgene
implicated eed in the stable maintenance of imprinted X inactivation in
extraembryonic tissues. Based on the recent finding that the EED protein
interacts with histone deacetylases, Wang et al. (2001) suggested that
this maintenance activity involves hypoacetylation of the inactivated
paternal X chromosome in the extraembryonic tissues.

Cao et al. (2002) reported the purification and characterization of an
EED-EZH2 complex, the human counterpart of the Drosophila ESC-E(Z)
complex. Cao et al. (2002) demonstrated that the complex specifically
methylates nucleosomal histone H3 (see 602812) at lysine-27 (H3-K27).
Using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, Cao et al. (2002) showed
that H3-K27 methylation colocalizes with, and is dependent on, E(Z)
binding at an 'Ultrabithorax' (Ubx) Polycomb response element, and that
this methylation correlates with Ubx expression. Methylation on H3-K27
facilitates binding of Polycomb, a component of the Polycomb repressive
complex 1 (PRC1 complex), to the histone H3 N-terminal tail. Thus, Cao
et al. (2002) concluded that their studies established a link between
histone methylation and Polycomb group-mediated gene silencing. The
complex responsible for histone methyltransferase activity includes EZH2
(601573), SUZ12 (606245), and EED. EZH2 contains a SET domain, a
signature motif for all known histone lysine methyltransferases except
the H3-K79 methyltransferase DOT1, and is therefore likely to be the
catalytic subunit.

Plath et al. (2003) demonstrated that transient recruitment of the
EED-EZH2 complex to the inactive X chromosome occurs during initiation
of X inactivation in both extraembryonic and embryonic cells and is
accompanied by H3-K27 methylation. Recruitment of the complex and
methylation on the inactive X depend on Xist (314670) RNA but are
independent of its silencing function. Plath et al. (2003) concluded
that taken together, their results suggest a role for EED-EZH2-mediated
H3-K27 methylation during initiation of both imprinted and random X
inactivation and demonstrate that H3-K27 methylation is not sufficient
for silencing of the inactive X.

To gain insight into the role of Polycomb group (PcG) proteins in
embryonic stem (ES) cells, Boyer et al. (2006) identified the genes
occupied by PcG proteins in murine ES cells by performing genomewide
location analysis using antibodies against core components of PRC1
(Phc1, 602978 and Rnf2, 608985) and PRC2 (Suz12 and Eed). Boyer et al.
(2006) found that the Polycomb repressive complexes PRC1 and PRC2
co-occupied 512 genes, many of which encode transcription factors with
important roles in development. All of the co-occupied genes contained
modified nucleosomes (trimethylated lys27 on histone H3; see 602810).
Consistent with a causal role in gene silencing in ES cells, PcG target
genes were derepressed in cells deficient for the PRC2 component Eed,
and were preferentially activated on induction of differentiation. Boyer
et al. (2006) concluded that dynamic repression of developmental
pathways by Polycomb complexes may be required for maintaining ES cell
pluripotency and plasticity during embryonic development.

By mass spectrometric analysis, Higa et al. (2006) identified over 20
WD40 repeat-containing (WDR) proteins that interacted with the CUL4 (see
603137)-DDB1 (600045)-ROC1 (RBX1; 603814) complex, including EED.
Sequence alignment revealed that most of the interacting WDR proteins
had a centrally positioned WDxR/K submotif. Knockdown studies suggested
that the WDR proteins functioned as substrate-specific adaptors. For
example, inactivation of L2DTL (DTL; 610617), but not other WDR
proteins, prevented CUL4-DDB1-dependent proteolysis of CDT1 (605525)
following gamma irradiation. Inactivation of WDR5 (609012) or EED, but
not other WDR proteins, altered the pattern of CUL4-DDB1-dependent
histone H3 methylation.

The gene silencing activity of the Polycomb repressive complex-2 (PRC2;
see 601674) depends on its ability to trimethylate lys27 of histone 3
(H3K27) by the catalytic SET domain of the EZH2 (601573) subunit and at
least 2 other subunits of the complex: SUZ12 (606245) and EED. Margueron
et al. (2009) showed that the carboxy-terminal domain of EED
specifically binds to histone tails carrying trimethyl-lysine residues
associated with repressive chromatin marks, and that this leads to the
allosteric activation of the methyltransferase activity of PRC2.
Mutations in EED that prevent it from recognizing repressive
trimethyl-lysine marks abolished the activation of PRC2 in vitro and, in
Drosophila, reduced global methylation and disrupted development.
Margueron et al. (2009) concluded that their findings suggested a model
for the propagation of the H3K27 methyl-3 mark that accounts for the
maintenance of repressive chromatin domains and for the transmission of
a histone modification from mother to daughter cells.

MAPPING

By FISH, Schumacher et al. (1998) mapped the EED gene to 11q14.2-q22.3.

REFERENCE 1. Boyer, L. A.; Plath, K.; Zeitlinger, J.; Brambrink, T.; Medeiros,
L. A.; Lee, T. I.; Levine, S. S.; Wernig, M.; Tajonar, A.; Ray, M.
K.; Bell, G. W.; Otte, A. P.; Vidal, M.; Gifford, D. K.; Young, R.
A.; Jaenisch, R.: Polycomb complexes repress developmental regulators
in murine embryonic stem cells. Nature 441: 349-353, 2006.

2. Cao, R.; Wang, L.; Wang, H.; Xia, L.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Tempst,
P.; Jones, R. S.; Zhang, Y.: Role of histone H3 lysine 27 methylation
in polycomb-group silencing. Science 298: 1039-1043, 2002.

3. Higa, L. A.; Wu, M.; Ye, T.; Kobayashi, R.; Sun, H.; Zhang, H.
: CUL4-DDB1 ubiquitin ligase interacts with multiple WD40-repeat proteins
and regulates histone methylation. Nature Cell Biol. 8: 1277-1283,
2006.

4. Margueron, R.; Justin, N.; Ohno, K.; Sharpe, M. L.; Son, J.; Drury,
W. J., III; Voigt, P.; Martin, S. R.; Taylor, W. R.; De Marco, V.;
Pirrotta, V.; Reinberg, D.; Gamblin, S. J.: Role of the polycomb
protein EED in the propagation of repressive histone marks. Nature 461:
762-767, 2009.

5. Peytavi, R.; Hong, S. S.; Gay, B.; d'Angeac, A. D.; Selig, L.;
Benichou, S.; Benarous, R.; Boulanger, P.: HEED, the product of the
human homolog of the murine eed gene, binds to the matrix protein
of HIV-1. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 1635-1645, 1999.

6. Plath, K.; Fang, J.; Mlynarczyk-Evans, S. K.; Cao, R.; Worringer,
K. A.; Wang, H.; de la Cruz, C. C.; Otte, A. P.; Panning, B.; Zhang,
Y.: Role of histone H3 lysine 27 methylation in X inactivation. Science 300:
131-135, 2003.

7. Rietzler, M.; Bittner, M.; Kolanus, W.; Schuster, A.; Holzmann,
B.: The human WD repeat protein WAIT-1 specifically interacts with
the cytoplasmic tails of beta-7-integrins. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 27459-27466,
1998.

8. Schumacher, A.; Lichtarge, O.; Schwartz, S.; Magnuson, T.: The
murine Polycomb-group gene eed and its human orthologue: functional
implications of evolutionary conservation. Genomics 54: 79-88, 1998.

9. Sewalt, R. G. A. B.; van der Vlag, J.; Gunster, M. J.; Hamer, K.
M.; den Blaauwen, J. L.; Satijn, D. P. E.; Hendrix, T.; van Driel,
R.; Otte, A. P.: Characterization of interactions between the mammalian
Polycomb-group proteins Enx1/EZH2 and EED suggests the existence of
different mammalian Polycomb-group protein complexes. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 18: 3586-3595, 1998.

10. Wang, J.; Mager, J.; Chen, Y.; Schneider, E.; Cross, J. C.; Nagy,
A.; Magnuson, T.: Imprinted X inactivation maintained by a mouse
Polycomb group gene. Nature Genet. 28: 371-375, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 03/05/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/5/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/1/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/15/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/13/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/26/2001

CREATED Ethylin Wang Jabs: 5/13/1999

EDITED mgross: 03/05/2013
mgross: 2/5/2013
alopez: 11/9/2009
terry: 11/5/2009
alopez: 6/2/2006
terry: 6/1/2006
alopez: 4/17/2003
terry: 4/15/2003
alopez: 11/14/2002
terry: 11/13/2002
alopez: 7/31/2001
terry: 7/26/2001
mgross: 6/4/2001
mgross: 6/1/2001

604697	TITLE *604697 CHEMOKINE, CC MOTIF, LIGAND 26; CCL26
;;SMALL INDUCIBLE CYTOKINE SUBFAMILY A, MEMBER 26; SCYA26;;
EOTAXIN 3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Chemokines, such as CCL26, play pivotal roles in health and disease by
controlling migration and tissue localization of specific types of cells
expressing their cognate receptors. Humans have at least 45 chemokines,
which are grouped into 4 subfamilies (CXC, CC, C, and CX3C) based on the
structural motif of their N-terminal conserved cysteine residues. CCL26
is abundantly produced by IL4 (147780)- and IL13 (147683)-stimulated
vascular endothelial cells and is a functional ligand for CCR3 (601268)
and CX3CR1 (601470). In addition, CCL26 functions as a natural
antagonist for CCR1 (601159), CCR2 (601267), and CCR5 (601373) (summary
by Nakayama et al., 2010).

CLONING

By carrying out an exon search in the vicinity of eotaxin-2 (CCL24;
602495) on chromosome 7, followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE, Kitaura
et al. (1999) obtained a human lung cDNA encoding a CC chemokine, CCL26,
which they called eotaxin-3. The deduced 94-amino acid CCL26 protein
contains a 23-amino acid signal peptide and no N-glycosylation sites.
Although CCL26 shares only 33% amino acid identity with eotaxin-2,
phylogenetic tree and receptor usage analyses showed that CCL26 shares
characteristics with eotaxin-2. Northern blot analysis detected a 0.8-kb
CCL26 transcript at low levels in heart and ovary; however, RT-PCR
analysis detected ubiquitous expression of CCL26.

By searching an EST database, Guo et al. (1999) identified a fetal heart
cDNA encoding CCL26. Northern blot analysis detected a 1.8-kb CCL26
transcript at high levels in heart and liver, and at lower levels in
skeletal muscle and kidney; a 0.6-kb transcript was detected at low
levels in heart, liver, skeletal muscle, and kidney.

MAPPING

Using FISH, Guo et al. (1999) mapped the CCL26 gene to chromosome
7q11.2, where the majority of CC chemokine genes are found.

GENE FUNCTION

Kitaura et al. (1999) found that CCL26 induced migration of eosinophils
and basophils only at a 10-fold higher concentration than eotaxin
(CCL11; 601156).

Using chemotaxis and cellular assays, as well as flow cytometry and
RT-PCR analysis, Nakayama et al. (2010) demonstrated that CCL26 is a
functional ligand of both CCR3 and CX3CR1, a receptor for CX3CL1
(601880). At relatively high concentrations, human CCL26 induced calcium
flux and chemotaxis in mouse cells expressing human CX3CR1, but not
mouse Cx3cr1, and competed with CX3CL1 for CX3CR1 binding. Like CX3CL1,
CCL26 attracted eosinophils, natural killer (NK) cells, terminally
differentiated CD8 (see 186910)-positive cytotoxic T lymphocytes, and
homeostatic monocytes. Intraperitoneal injection of CCL26 resulted in
rapid recruitment of mouse eosinophils and intravenously injected human
NK cells to the peritoneal cavity. IL4-stimulated human umbilical vein
endothelial cells produced CCL26 and induced adhesion of
CX3CR1-expressing cells. Psoriasis (see 177900) and atopic dermatitis
(see 603165) lesions both expressed CX3CR1 mRNA, but CX3CL1 was
expressed in the former and only sometimes in the latter. In contrast,
CCL26 was always expressed in atopic dermatitis lesions. Nakayama et al.
(2010) suggested that CCL26 may be partly responsible for the
recruitment of cells expressing CX3CR1 in atopic dermatitis lesions when
CX3CL1 expression is low. They concluded that CCL26 is another agonist
for CX3CR1 and may act in allergic diseases by attracting eosinophils
via CCR3 and killer lymphocytes and resident monocytes via CX3CR1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the CCL26
gene and eosinophilic esophagitis, see 610247.

REFERENCE 1. Guo, R.-F.; Ward, P. A.; Hu, S.-M.; McDuffie, J. E.; Huber-Lang,
M.; Shi, M. M.: Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel
human CC chemokine, SCYA26. Genomics 58: 313-317, 1999.

2. Kitaura, M.; Suzuki, N.; Imai, T.; Takagi, S.; Suzuki, R.; Nakajima,
T.; Hirai, K.; Nomiyama, H.; Yoshie, O.: Molecular cloning of a novel
human CC chemokine (eotaxin-3) that is a functional ligand of CC chemokine
receptor 3. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 27975-27980, 1999.

3. Nakayama, T.; Watanabe, Y.; Oiso, N.; Higuchi, T.; Shigeta, A.;
Mizuguchi, N.; Katou, F.; Hashimoto, K.; Kawada, A.; Yoshie, O.:
Eotaxin-3/CC chemokine ligand 26 is a functional ligand for CX3CR1. J.
Immun. 185: 6472-6479, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 02/11/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/11/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/10/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 3/20/2000

EDITED mgross: 02/11/2011
terry: 2/11/2011
carol: 6/29/2009
wwang: 7/12/2006
terry: 7/10/2006
mgross: 7/20/2005
mgross: 9/26/2002
mgross: 3/20/2000

180990	TITLE *180990 PROLINE-RICH PROTEIN, BstNI SUBFAMILY, 4; PRB4
;;BASIC SALIVARY PROLINE-RICH PROTEIN, BstNI TYPE, 4
SALIVARY PROTEIN Po, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION For background information on salivary proline-rich proteins, see PRB1
(180989).

Azen and Yu (1984) defined another polymorphism in the proteins of
parotid saliva. Called Po, it was typed on immunoblots after transfer
from SDS gels to nitrocellulose. The Po+ allele had a frequency of 0.75
in whites and 0.77 in blacks. Po is probably linked to the salivary
protein complex (SPC); Po versus CON2 showed a maximum lod score of 2.35
at theta = 0.0.

Azen and Yu (1984) demonstrated 2 genetically polymorphic parotid
salivary proteins, CON1 and CON2, by reaction with concanavalin A after
electrophoresis in SDS polyacrylamide gels and transfer to
nitrocellulose. Linkage of CON1 to Ps (168810) was found (lod = 6.77 at
theta 0.0), and of CON2 to PmF (lod = 5.93 at theta = 0.0). PmF is the
same as Pm (180989). PmS is perhaps a separate locus which encodes a
protein that shows a close association with PmF. CON2 is linked (Azen
and Yu, 1984) to G1 (lod = 3.91 at theta = 0.0).

By molecular genetic studies, Azen et al. (1996) demonstrated that the
CON1 glycoprotein is encoded in exon 3 of a PRB2 allele (168810) with a
potential N-linked glycosylation site. On the other hand, the CON2
glycoprotein is encoded in exon 3 of the PRB1 allele (180989) with a
potential glycosylation site. The Po protein and a glycoprotein (II-1)
are indeed encoded in the PRB4 gene. The authors noted that
concanavalin-A binding proteins are of special biologic interest, since
they, like other proline-rich proteins of the saliva, might bind to
specific oral bacteria and modulate intraoral disease susceptibility.

Chan and Bennick (2001) showed that in vitro translated PRB4S, a
proprotein encoded by a small allele of the PRB4 gene, was cleaved by
furin (FUR; 136950) at a consensus cleavage site (RSARS) to produce
II-1, a glycosylated PRP, and IB-5, a basic PRP. A human submandibular
cell line transfected with PRB4S secreted II-1 and IB-5, and the degree
of cleavage was enhanced by coexpression of furin with PRB4S. Cleavage
occurred before exit of the proteins from the trans-Golgi network. Cells
lacking furin also cleaved PRB4S in culture, indicating that other
convertases can cleave PRB4S.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Azen and Yu (1984); Azen and Yu (1984); Azen and Yu (1984)
REFERENCE 1. Azen, E. A.; Amberger, E.; Fisher, S.; Prakobphol, A.; Niece, R.
L.: PRB1, PRB2, and PRB4 coded polymorphisms among human salivary
concanavalin-A binding, II-1, and Po proline-rich proteins. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 58: 143-153, 1996.

2. Azen, E. A.; Yu, P.-L.: Two new SPC markers: CON1 and CON2. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 37: 405-406, 1984.

3. Azen, E. A.; Yu, P.-L.: Genetic polymorphism of CON1 and CON2
salivary proteins detected by immunologic and concanavalin A reactions
on nitrocellulose with linkage of CON1 and CON2 genes to the SPC (salivary
protein gene complex). Biochem. Genet. 22: 1-19, 1984.

4. Azen, E. A.; Yu, P. L.: Genetic polymorphism of Pe and Po salivary
proteins with probable linkage of their genes to the SPC (salivary
protein complex). Biochem. Genet. 22: 1065-1081, 1984.

5. Azen, E. A.; Yu, P. L.: Two new saliva markers, Pe and Po, probably
linked in the SPC. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 36: 5S, 1984.

6. Chan, M.; Bennick, A.: Proteolytic processing of a human salivary
proline-rich protein precursor by proprotein convertases. Europ.
J. Biochem. 268: 3423-3431, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/31/2007

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED alopez: 11/19/2008
mgross: 10/31/2007
terry: 7/24/1998
terry: 11/10/1997
mark: 1/25/1996
terry: 1/22/1996
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 7/6/1990
carol: 6/25/1990
carol: 6/4/1990
supermim: 3/28/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990

603894	TITLE *603894 REGULATOR OF G PROTEIN SIGNALING 6; RGS6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the RGS (regulator of G protein signaling) family, such as
RGS6, modulate G protein function by activating the intrinsic GTPase
activity of the alpha (guanine nucleotide-binding) subunits (Seki et
al., 1999).

CLONING

By EST database analysis and PCR of a brain cDNA library, Posner et al.
(1999) obtained a full-length cDNA encoding RGS6. The predicted
472-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 54.4 kD. It
contains an N-terminal dishevelled (see 601365)/egl10/pleckstrin
(173570) (DEP) domain, a central G protein gamma subunit (see GNG2;
606981)-like (GGL) domain, and an RGS domain near the C terminus.

Using RT-PCR, Seki et al. (1999) showed that RGS6 was expressed in
various tissues.

By PCR of a brain cDNA library, Chatterjee et al. (2003) identified 36
RGS6 splice variants resulting from the use of 2 alternative
transcription sites and complex alternative splicing. The variants
encode proteins with long or short N-terminal domains, complete or
incomplete GGL domains, 7 distinct C-terminal domains, and a common
internal domain that includes the RGS domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Posner et al. (1999) expressed RGS6 in insect cells and found that it
formed a cytosolic heterodimer via its GGL domain with the G protein
beta-5 (GNB5; 604447) subunit, but not with other G protein beta
subunits tested. The RGS6/GNB5 complex acted as a GTPase-activating
protein, but it did not form heterotrimeric complexes with G-alpha-o
(GNAO1; 139311)-GDP or G-alpha-q (GNAQ; 600998)-GDP, it did not alter
activity of adenyl cyclase types I, II, or V, and it did not activate
phospholipase C-beta-1 (PLCB1; 607120) or PLCB2 (604114). However, the
RGS6/GNB5 complex inhibited GNB1/GNG2-mediated activation of PLCB2.

Chatterjee et al. (2003) found that RGS6 isoforms with complete GGL
domains interacted with GNB5, irrespective of their N-terminal domain,
following expression in COS-7 cells. In contrast, RGS6 isoforms lacking
a complete GGL domain did not interact with GNB5. Subcellular
distribution patterns for RGS6 isoforms ranged from exclusively
cytoplasmic to exclusively nuclear/nucleolar, and coexpression of GNB5
promoted nuclear localization of RGS6 isoforms.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sierra et al. (2002) determined that the RGS6 gene contains 17 exons.
Chatterjee et al. (2003) determined that the RGS6 gene contains 20 exons
and spans 630 kb.

MAPPING

By somatic cell and radiation hybrid analysis, Seki et al. (1999) mapped
the RGS6 gene to chromosome 14q24.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In an epidemiologic study of 477 bladder cancer patients and 446 matched
controls, Berman et al. (2004) identified 3 noncoding SNPs in RGS2
(600861) and RGS6 that were each associated with a significantly reduced
risk of bladder cancer. When analyzed separately, a C-to-T SNP in the
3-prime UTR of RGS6, dbSNP rs2074647, conferred the greatest overall
reduction in bladder cancer risk, with a significant odds ratio of 0.66.
The reduction of risk was more pronounced in those who had ever smoked.
Expression of dbSNP rs2074647 increased the activity of a luciferase-RGS
fusion protein nearly 3-fold. PCR analysis confirmed that RGS6 splice
variants were expressed in bladder cancer tissue and cell lines. Berman
et al. (2004) proposed that RGS proteins may be important modulators of
cancer risk.

REFERENCE 1. Berman, D. M.; Wang, Y.; Liu, Z.; Dong, Q.; Burke, L.-A.; Liotta,
L. A.; Fisher, R.; Wu, X.: A functional polymorphism in RGS6 modulates
the risk of bladder cancer. Cancer Res. 64: 6820-6826, 2004.

2. Chatterjee, T. K.; Liu, Z.; Fisher, R. A.: Human RGS6 gene structure,
complex alternative splicing, and role of N terminus and G protein
gamma-subunit-like (GGL) domain in subcellular localization of RGS6
splice variants. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 30261-30271, 2003.

3. Posner, B. A.; Gilman, A. G.; Harris, B. A.: Regulators of G protein
signaling 6 and 7: purification of complexes with G-beta-5 and assessment
of their effects on G protein-mediated signaling pathways. J. Biol.
Chem. 274: 31087-31093, 1999.

4. Seki, N.; Hattori, A.; Hayashi, A.; Kozuma, S.; Hori, T.; Saito,
T.: The human regulator of G-protein signaling protein 6 gene (RGS6)
maps between markers WI-5202 and D14S277 on chromosome 14q24.3. J.
Hum. Genet. 44: 138-140, 1999.

5. Sierra, D. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Householder, D.; Grishin, N. V.;
Yu, K.; Ukidwe, P.; Barker, S. A.; He, W.; Wensel, T. G.; Otero, G.;
Brown, G.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Wilkie, T. M.: Evolution
of the regulators of G-protein signaling multigene family in mouse
and human. Genomics 79: 177-185, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/22/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/12/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/11/1999

EDITED mgross: 10/22/2008
mgross: 9/12/2002
jlewis: 6/14/1999
jlewis: 6/11/1999

600618	TITLE *600618 ETS VARIANT GENE 6; ETV6
;;TRANSLOCATION, ETS, LEUKEMIA; TEL;;
TEL1 ONCOGENE
ETV6/PDGFRB FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
ETV6/MN1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
ETV6/AML1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
ETV6/ARNT FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
ETV6/MDS2 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
ETV6/ABL2 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
ETV6/PER1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
ETV6/NTRK3 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
ETV6/ACS2 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
ETV6/BTL FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
ETV6/JAK2 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
ETV6/RUNX1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ETV6 gene encodes an Ets family transcription factor and is
frequently rearranged or fused with other genes in human leukemias of
myeloid or lymphoid origins (Wang et al., 1997).

CLONING

Golub et al. (1994) identified the ETV6 gene as part of a fusion
transcript resulting from a somatic t(5;12)(q33;p13) translocation in
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (see 607785) cancer cells. The
translocation was found to consist of a novel gene on chromosome 12p13
and the PDGFRB (173410) gene on 5q33. Golub et al. (1994) isolated
clones corresponding to the coding sequence from a chromosome 12 cDNA
library. Portions of the gene showed homology to the ETS family of
transcription factors, and it was designated 'TEL' for translocation,
ETS, leukemia. Northern blot analysis detected 3 transcripts of 6.5 kb,
4.5 kb, and 2.4 kb in all tissues examined.

Baens et al. (1996) developed contigs containing the complete coding
sequence and the 5-prime and 3-prime UTRs of the ETV6 gene. The
helix-loop-helix (HLH) motif is coded by exons 3 and 4, whereas exons 6
to 8 encode for the ETS DNA-binding domain. The ETV6 gene is flanked at
its 5-prime and 3-prime ends by markers D12S1697 and D12S98,
respectively.

GENE STRUCTURE

Baens et al. (1996) determined that the ETV6 gene contains 8 exons
spanning 240 kb. They identified an alternative exon 1B located within
intron 2.

MAPPING

Stegmaier et al. (1995) mapped the ETV6 gene to chromosome 12p13.

GENE FUNCTION

Stegmaier et al. (1995) presented evidence that the TEL gene may act as
a tumor suppressor gene. They noted noted that 5% of children with acute
lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) have 12p13-p12 deletions. Using markers
flanking the TEL gene, Stegmaier et al. (1995) found that 15% of 81
informative children with ALL had TEL loss of heterozygosity that was
not evident on cytogenetic analysis. Detailed examination showed that
the critically deleted region included 2 candidate suppressor genes: TEL
and KIP (600778), the gene encoding the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p27.

- ETV6/PDGFRB Fusion Gene

In bone marrow cells from a 17-year-old male with chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia, Golub et al. (1994) identified a somatic t(5;12)(q33;p13)
translocation consisting of the 154 N terminal residues of ETV6 linked
to the transmembrane and tyrosine kinase domains of the PDGFRB on
chromosome 5q33. The entire ligand-binding domain of PDGFRB and the
putative DNA-binding domain of ETV6 were both excluded from the fusion
transcript. This same rearrangement was detected in 3 additional
patients with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. The index patient
subsequently developed acute myelogenous leukemia (AML; 601626)
associated with other genetic alterations, suggesting that the
t(5;12)(q33;p13) translocation was an early step in a multistep
progression to full AML.

Apperley et al. (2002) reported successful response to therapy with the
tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib mesylate in 3 patients with chronic
myeloproliferative disorder (131440) and a t(5;12) translocation. The
patients' leukemic cells carried the ETV6/PDGFRB fusion gene.

Pierce et al. (2008) showed that expression of TEL/PDGFRB in murine
myeloid FDCP-Mix cells prevented cell differentiation, increased cell
survival, increased the level of phosphatidylinositol
3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdInsP3), and increased the expression and
phosphorylation of Thoc5 (612733). Elevated Thoc5 expression also led to
increased cell survival and PtdInsP3 levels, suggesting that the effects
associated with TEL/PDGFRB expression were due, at least in part, to
Thoc5 upregulation.

- ETV6/AML1 Fusion Gene

Golub et al. (1995) documented fusion of TEL to the AML1 gene (151385)
on chromosome 21 in 2 pediatric patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia
with t(12;21) translocations. The findings implicated TEL in the
pathogenesis of leukemia through its fusion to either a receptor
tyrosine kinase, such as PDGFRB, or a transcription factor, such as
AML1.

Using RT-PCR, Romana et al. (1995) identified the TEL/AML1 fusion gene
in 8 (16%) of 46 childhood B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia cells, only 1
of which showed a 12p abnormality by classic cytogenetic techniques. The
authors concluded that t(12;21) is the most frequent translocation in
childhood B-lineage ALL.

Ford et al. (1998) reported the extraordinary case of monozygotic twins
in whom common acute lymphoblastic leukemia was diagnosed at ages 3.5
years and 4 years. The twins' leukemic DNA shared the same unique (or
clonotypic) but nonconstitutive TEL/AML1 fusion sequence. The most
plausible explanation for this finding was thought to be a single cell
origin of the TEL/AML fusion in 1 fetus in utero, probably as a
leukemia-initiating mutation, followed by intraplacental metastasis of
clonal progeny to the other twin. Clonal identity was further supported
by the finding that the leukemic cells in the twins shared an identical
rearranged IGH allele. These data had implications for the etiology and
natural history of childhood leukemia.

- ETV6/MN1 Fusion Gene

Buijs et al. (1995) showed that the MN1 gene (156100) on 22q11 is fused
to the TEL gene in the t(12;22)(p13;q11) translocation that is observed
in different myeloid malignancies.

- ETV6/JAK2 Fusion Gene

Peeters et al. (1997) identified a t(9;12)(p24;p13) translocation in a
patient with early pre-B acute lymphoid leukemia and a
t(9;15;12)(p24;q15;p13) translocation in a patient with atypical chronic
myelogenous leukemia (CML; 608232) in transformation. Both changes
involved the ETV6 gene at 12p13 and the JAK2 gene (147796) at 9p24. In
each case different fusion mRNAs were found, with only 1 resulting in a
chimeric protein consisting of the oligomerization domain of ETV6 and
the protein tyrosine kinase domain of JAK2.

Lacronique et al. (1997) observed a t(9;12)(p24;p13) translocation in
leukemic cells from a 4-year-old boy with T-cell ALL. The 3-prime
portion of the JAK2 gene was fused to the 5-prime portion of the ETV6
gene, resulting in a protein containing the catalytic domain of JAK2 and
the oligomerization domain of ETV6. The resultant protein had
constitutive tyrosine kinase activity and conferred cytokine-independent
proliferation to a murine cell line.

- ETV6/NTRK3 Fusion Gene

Knezevich et al. (1998) detected a recurrent t(12;15)(p13;q25)
translocation consisting of fusion of the ETV6 gene with the NTRK3 gene
(191316) on 15q25 in 3 congenital fibrosarcomas analyzed. Congenital (or
infantile) fibrosarcoma (CFS) is a malignant tumor of fibroblasts that
occurs in patients aged 2 or younger. CFS is unique among human sarcomas
in that it has an excellent prognosis and very low metastatic rate. CFS
is histologically identical to adult-type fibrosarcoma (ATFS); however,
ATFS is an aggressive malignancy of adults and older children that has a
poor prognosis. The same translocation was not identified in ATFS or
infantile fibromatosis (228550), a histologically similar but benign
fibroblastic proliferation occurring in the same age group as CFS.
ETV6/NTRK3 fusion transcripts encoded the HLH protein dimerization
domain of ETV6 fused to the protein tyrosine kinase (PTK) domain of
NTRK3. Presumably, the chimeric protein tyrosine kinase contributed to
oncogenesis by dysregulation of NTRK3 signal transduction pathways.

- ETV6/ACS2 Fusion Gene

Yagasaki et al. (1999) identified a recurrent t(5;12)(q31;p13)
translocation, resulting in an ETV6/ACS2 (604443) fusion gene in a
patient with refractory anemia with excess blasts with basophilia, a
patient with AML with eosinophilia, and a patient with acute
eosinophilic leukemia (AEL). The ETV6/ACS2 fusion transcripts showed an
out-frame fusion of exon 1 of ETV6 to exon 1 of ACS2 in the patient with
AEL, an out-frame fusion of exon 1 of ETV6 to exon 11 of ACS2 in the
patient with AML, and a short in-frame fusion of exon 1 of ETV6 to the
3-prime untranslated region of ACS2 in the patient with refractory
anemia. Reciprocal ACS2/ETV6 transcripts were identified in 2 of the
cases. FISH with ETV6 cosmids on 12p13, and BACs and PIs on 5q31,
demonstrated that the 5q31 breakpoints of the AML and AEL cases involved
the 5-prime portion of the ACS2 gene, and that the 5q31 breakpoint of
the refractory anemia case involved the 3-prime portion of the ACS2
gene. None of the resulting chimeric transcripts except for the
ACS2/ETV6 transcript in the refractory anemia case led to a fusion
protein.

- ETV6/ABL2 Fusion Gene

Cazzaniga et al. (1999) identified a t(1;12)(q25;p13) translocation
involving the ETV6 gene and the ABL2 (164690) gene in a patient with
acute myeloid leukemia M4 with eosinophilia. The novel transcript
resulted in a chimeric protein consisting of the helix-loop-helix
oligomerization domain of ETV6 and the SH2, SH3, and protein tyrosine
kinase domains of ABL2. The reciprocal transcript ABL2/ETV6 was also
detected in the patient's RNA by RT-PCR, although at a lower expression
level.

- ETV6/BTL Fusion Gene

Cools et al. (1999) reported 4 cases of acute myeloid leukemia with very
immature myeloblasts and a t(4;12)(q11-q12;p13) translocation in which
ETV6 was linked with the BTL gene (604332). RT-PCR experiments indicated
that expression of the BTL/ETV6 transcript, but not of the reciprocal
ETV6/BTL transcript, was a common finding in these leukemias. In
contrast to most of the other ETV6 fusions, both the complete
helix-loop-helix and ETS DNA-binding domains of ETV6 were present in the
predicted BTL/ETV6 fusion protein, and a chimeric gene was transcribed
from the BTL promoter.

- ETV6/ARNT Fusion Gene

Salomon-Nguyen et al. (2000) determined that a t(1;12)(q21;p13)
translocation observed in a case of acute myeloblastic leukemia (AML-M2)
resulted in a fusion protein containing the amino-terminal of TEL and
essentially all of the ARNT gene (126110). The involvement of ARNT in
human leukemogenesis had not previously been described.

- ETV6/MDS2 Fusion Gene

Odero et al. (2002) identified a t(1;12)(p36.1;p13) translocation in an
MDS patient that resulted in the fusion of exons 1 and 2 of ETV6 to
exons 6 and 7 of MDS2 (607305). The predicted protein is out of frame
and contains the first 54 amino acids of ETV6 followed by 4 novel amino
acids from the MDS2 sequence. The truncated ETV6 protein lacks critical
functional domains.

- ETV6/PER1 Fusion Gene

Penas et al. (2003) cloned a novel cryptic translocation,
t(12;17)(p13;p12-p13), occurring in a patient with acute myeloid
leukemia evolving from a chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. They
identified a fusion transcript between exon 1 of the ETV6 gene and the
antisense strand of PER1 (602260). The ETV6/PER1 fusion transcript did
not produce a fusion protein, and no other fusion transcripts could be
detected. Penas et al. (2003) hypothesized that in the absence of a
fusion protein, the inactivation of PER1 or deregulation of a gene in
the neighborhood of PER1 may contribute to the pathogenesis of leukemia
with this translocation.

- ETV6/RUNX1 Fusion Gene

Anderson et al. (2011) examined the genetic architecture of cancer at
the subclonal and single-cell level and in cells responsible for cancer
clone maintenance and propagation in childhood acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (see 613065) in which the ETV6/RUNX1 (151385) gene fusion is an
early or initiating genetic lesion followed by a modest number of
recurrent or driver copy number alterations. By multiplexing
fluorescence in situ hybridization probes for these mutations, up to 8
genetic abnormalities could be detected in single cells, a genetic
signature of subclones identified, and a composite picture of subclonal
architecture and putative ancestral trees assembled. Anderson et al.
(2011) observed that subclones in acute lymphoblastic leukemia have
variegated genetics and complex nonlinear or branching evolutionary
histories. Copy number alterations are independently and reiteratively
acquired in subclones of individual patients, and in no preferential
order. Clonal architecture is dynamic and is subject to change in the
lead-up to a diagnosis and in relapse. Leukemia-propagating cells,
assayed by serial transplantation in nonobese diabetic/severe combined
immunodeficiency (NOD/SCID) IL2R-gamma (308380)-null mice, are also
genetically variegated, mirroring subclonal patterns, and vary in
competitive regenerative capacity in vivo.

CYTOGENETICS

Cytogenetic abnormalities involving the short arm of chromosome 12 have
been documented in a wide variety of hematopoietic malignancies,
including acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), acute myeloblastic
leukemia, and myelodysplastic syndromes. Among 20 patients with 12q
deletions or translocations, Kobayashi et al. (1994) showed that most
changes were clustered within a 1.39-Mb region, suggesting that a single
gene on 12p13 was affected in these leukemias.

Raynaud et al. (1996) reported 5 patients with an identical reciprocal
translocation between 3q26 and 12p13. This nonrandom cytogenetic change
was observed in 4 patients with myelodysplastic syndrome rapidly
progressing to acute myeloid leukemia and was found at blast crisis of 1
patient with Philadelphia chromosome-positive CML. The abnormality was
associated with a very poor prognosis. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization with 3q26 and 12p13 probes was performed on metaphases
from these 5 patients. The results were consistent with scattering of
the breakpoints previously described in 3q26 rearrangements. Breakpoints
at 12p13 involved the ETV6 gene in 3 myelodysplastic syndrome cases.

Berger et al. (1997) described 3 novel translocations involving the
TEL/ETV6 gene on chromosome 12: t(X;12)(q28;p13), t(1;12)(q21;p13), and
t(9;12)(p23-24;p13).

Cave et al. (1997) demonstrated that ETV6 is a target of chromosome 12p
deletions in t(12;21) childhood acute lymphocytic leukemia.

Odero et al. (2001) stated that 35 different chromosome bands had been
involved in ETV6 translocations, of which 13 had been cloned. Adding
further data, they concluded that ETV6 is involved in 41 translocations.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Barjesteh van Waalwijk van Doorn-Khosrovani et al. (2005) analyzed 300
patients newly diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia (AML; 601626) for
mutations in the coding region of the ETV6 gene and identified 5 somatic
heterozygous mutations affecting either the homodimerization or the
DNA-binding domain (e.g., 600618.0001 and 600618.0002). These ETV6
mutant proteins were unable to repress transcription and showed
dominant-negative effects. The authors also examined ETV6 protein
expression in 77 patients with AML and found that 24 (31%) lacked the
wildtype 57- and 50-kD proteins; there was no correlation between ETV6
mRNA transcript levels and the loss of ETV6 protein, suggesting
posttranscriptional regulation of ETV6.

HISTORY

- ETV6/ABL1 Fusion Gene

Papadopoulos et al. (1995) identified a case of ALL with a previously
undescribed fusion between the TEL gene and the ABL gene (189980) on
chromosome 9q. The fusion protein showed elevated tyrosine kinase
activity. However, Janssen et al. (1995) did not identify any TEL/ABL
fusion products using RT-PCR to screen 186 adult ALL and 30 childhood
ALL patients. Nilsson et al. (1998) also found no instance of ETV6/ABL
fusion. in a study of a group of 67 cases of chronic myeloid disorders.

ANIMAL MODEL

By gene targeting in mice, Wang et al. (1997) showed that TEL function
is required for viability of the developing mouse. The TEL -/- mice
suffered a yolk sac angiogenic defect; TEL also appeared essential for
the survival of selected neural and mesenchymal populations within the
embryo proper. Wang et al. (1998) generated mouse chimeras with TEL -/-
embryonic stem cells to examine a possible requirement in adult
hematopoiesis. They found that although TEL function is not required for
the intrinsic proliferation and/or differentiation of adult-type
hematopoietic lineages in the yolk sac and fetal liver, it is essential
for the establishment of hematopoiesis of all lineages in the bone
marrow. These findings established TEL as the first transcription factor
required specifically for hematopoiesis within the bone marrow, as
opposed to other sites of hematopoietic activity during development.

STAT5 (see STAT5A, 601511; STAT5B, 604260) is activated in a broad
spectrum of human hematologic malignancies. Using a genetic approach,
Schwaller et al. (2000) addressed whether activation of STAT5 is
necessary for the myelo- and lymphoproliferative disease induced by the
TEL/JAK2 (147796) fusion gene. Whereas mice transplanted with bone
marrow transduced with retrovirus expressing TEL/JAK2 developed a
rapidly fatal myelo- and lymphoproliferative syndrome, reconstitution
with bone marrow derived from Stat5a/b-deficient mice expressing
TEL/JAK2 did not induce disease. Disease induction in the
Stat5a/b-deficient background was rescued with a bicistronic retrovirus
encoding TEL/JAK2 and Stat5a. Furthermore, myeloproliferative disease
was induced by reconstitution with bone marrow cells expressing a
constitutively active mutant, Stat5a, or a single Stat5a target, murine
oncostatin M (OSM; 165095). These data defined a critical role for
STAT5A/B and OSM in the pathogenesis of TEL/JAK2 disease.

Montpetit and Sinnett (2001) reported a comparative analysis of the ETV6
gene in vertebrate genomes. They cloned the homolog of ETV6 from the
compact genome of the pufferfish Fugu rubripes. In that organism the
gene, composed of 8 exons, spans about 15 kb and is 16 times smaller
than its human counterpart, mainly because of reduced intron size. Three
of the 7 introns were unusually large (more than 2 kb). As expected, the
PNT and ETS domains were highly conserved from Fugu to human. There were
also conserved putative regulatory elements in the promoter as well as
in the large intron 2 of Fugu ETV6.

Creation of the TEL/AML1 fusion disrupts 1 copy of the TEL gene and 1
copy of the AML1 gene; loss of 1 or the other is associated with cases
of acute leukemia without the presence of the TEL/AML1 fusion gene. To
determine if TEL/AML1 can contribute to leukemogenesis, Bernardin et al.
(2002) transduced marrow from C57BL/6 mice with a retroviral vector
expressing TEL/AML1 or with a control vector. Two of the 9 TEL/AML1 mice
developed ALL, whereas none of the 20 control mice developed leukemia.
Bernardin et al. (2002) also used the TEL/AML1 vector to transduce
marrow from C57BL/6 mice lacking the overlapping p16(INK4a)p19(ARF)
genes (600160) and transplanted the cells into wildtype recipients. No
control mice died, but 6 of 8 TEL/AML1/p16p19 mice died with leukemia.
These findings indicated that TEL/AML1 contributes to leukemogenesis and
may cooperate with loss of p16p19 to transform lymphoid progenitors.

Tsuzuki et al. (2004) analyzed hemopoiesis in mice syngeneically
transplanted with TEL/AML1-transduced bone marrow stem cells. TEL/AML1
expression was associated with an accumulation/expansion of primitive
Kit (164920)-positive multipotent progenitors and a modest increase in
myeloid colony-forming cells. TEL/AML1 expression was, however,
permissive for myeloid differentiation. Analysis of B lymphopoiesis
revealed an increase in early pro-B cells but a differentiation deficit
beyond that stage, which resulted in lower B-cell production in the
marrow. TEL/AML1-positive B-cell progenitors exhibited reduced
expression of genes crucial for the pro-B to pre-B cell transition.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LEUKEMIA, ACUTE MYELOID, SOMATIC
ETV6, GLU76TER

In leukemic blast cells of a patient with acute myeloid leukemia
(601626), Barjesteh van Waalwijk van Doorn-Khosrovani et al. (2005)
identified a somatic heterozygous 500G-T transversion in the ETV6 gene,
resulting in a glu76-to-ter (E76X) substitution in the N-terminal
pointed (PNT) homodimerization domain. The mutant protein was unable to
repress transcription and showed dominant-negative effects. The mutation
was not found in nonhematopoietic tissue from this patient.

.0002
LEUKEMIA, ACUTE MYELOID, SOMATIC
ETV6, 3-BP INS, 1307GGG

In leukemic blast cells of a patient with acute myeloid leukemia
(601626), Barjesteh van Waalwijk van Doorn-Khosrovani et al. (2005)
identified a somatic heterozygous 3-bp insertion (1307insGGG) in the
ETV6 gene, resulting in the insertion of a glycine between codons 344
and 345 in the DNA binding domain. The mutant protein was unable to
repress transcription and showed dominant-negative effects.

REFERENCE 1. Anderson, K.; Lutz, C.; van Delft, F. W.; Bateman, C. M.; Guo,
Y.; Colman, S. M.; Kempski, H.; Moorman, A. V.; Titley, I.; Swansbury,
J.; Kearney, L.; Enver, T.; Greaves, M.: Genetic variegation of clonal
architecture and propagating cells in leukaemia. Nature 469: 356-361,
2011.

2. Apperley, J. F.; Gardembas, M.; Melo, J. V.; Russell-Jones, R.;
Bain, B. J.; Baxter, E. J.; Chase, A.; Chessells, J. M.; Colombat,
M.; Dearden, C. E.; Dimitrijevic, S.; Mahon, F.-X.; Marin, D.; Nikolova,
Z.; Olavarria, E.; Silberman, S.; Schultheis, B.; Cross, N. C. P.;
Goldman, J. M.: Response to imatinib mesylate in patients with chronic
myeloproliferative diseases with rearrangements of the platelet-derived
growth factor receptor beta. New Eng. J. Med. 347: 481-487, 2002.

3. Baens, M.; Peeters, P.; Guo, C.; Aerssens, J.; Marynen, P.: Genomic
organization of TEL: the human ETS-variant gene 6. Genome Res. 6:
404-413, 1996.

4. Barjesteh van Waalwijk van Doorn-Khosrovani, S.; Spensberger, D.;
de Knegt, Y.; Tang, M.; Lowenberg, B.; Delwel, R.: Somatic heterozygous
mutations in ETV6 (TEL) and frequent absence of ETV6 protein in acute
myeloid leukemia. Oncogene 24: 4129-4137, 2005.

5. Berger, R.; Le Coniat, M.; Lacronique, V.; Daniel, M.-T.; Lessard,
M.; Berthou, C.; Marynen, P.; Bernard, O.: Chromosome abnormalities
of the short arm of chromosome 12 in hematopoietic malignancies: a
report including three novel translocations involving the TEL/ETV6
gene. Leukemia 11: 1400-1403, 1997.

6. Bernardin, F.; Yang, Y.; Cleaves, R.; Zahurak, M.; Cheng, L.; Civin,
C. I.; Friedman, A. D.: TEL-AML1, expressed from t(12;21) in human
acute lymphocytic leukemia, induces acute leukemia in mice. Cancer
Res. 62: 3904-3908, 2002.

7. Buijs, A.; Sherr, S.; van Baal, S.; van Bezouw, S.; van der Plas,
D.; Geurts van Kessel, A.; Riegman, P.; Lekanne Deprez, R.; Zwarthoff,
E.; Hagemeijer, A.; Grosveld, G.: Translocation (12;22)(p13;q11)
in myeloproliferative disorders results in fusion of the ETS-like
TEL gene on 12q13 to the MN1 gene on 22q11. Oncogene 10: 1511-1519,
1995. Note: Erratum: Oncogene 11: 809 only, 1995.

8. Cave, H.; Cacheux, V.; Raynaud, S.; Brunie, G.; Bakkus, M.; Cochaux,
P.; Preudhomme, C.; Lai, J. L.; Vilmer, E.; Grandchamp, B.: ETV6
is the target of chromosome 12p deletions in t(12;21) childhood acute
lymphocytic leukemia. Leukemia 11: 1459-1464, 1997.

9. Cazzaniga, G.; Tosi, S.; Aloisi, A.; Giudici, G.; Daniotti, M.;
Pioltelli, P.; Kearney, L.; Biondi, A.: The tyrosine kinase Abl-related
gene ARG is fused to ETV6 in an AML-M4Eo patient with a t(1;12)(q25;p13):
molecular cloning of both reciprocal transcripts. Blood 94: 4370-4373,
1999.

10. Cools, J.; Bilhou-Nabera, C.; Wlodarska, I.; Cabrol, C.; Talmant,
P.; Bernard, P.; Hagemeijer, A.; Marynen, P.: Fusion of a novel gene,
BTL, to ETV6 in acute myeloid leukemias with a t(4;12)(q11-q12;p13). Blood 94:
1820-1824, 1999.

11. Ford, A. M.; Bennett, C. A.; Price, C. M.; Bruin, M. C. A.; Van
Wering, E. R.; Greaves, M.: Fetal origins of the TEL-AML1 fusion
gene in identical twins with leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95:
4584-4588, 1998.

12. Golub, T. R.; Barker, G. F.; Bohlander, S. K.; Hiebert, S. W.;
Ward, D. C.; Bray-Ward, P.; Morgan, E.; Raimondi, S. C.; Rowley, J.
D.; Gilliland, D. G.: Fusion of the TEL gene on 12p13 to the AML1
gene on 21q22 in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92:
4917-4921, 1995.

13. Golub, T. R.; Barker, G. F.; Lovett, M.; Gilliland, D. G.: Fusion
of PDGF receptor beta to a novel ets-like gene, tel, in chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia with t(5;12) chromosomal translocation. Cell 77: 307-316,
1994.

14. Janssen, J. W. G.; Ridge, S. A.; Papadopoulos, P.; Cotter, F.;
Ludwig, W.-D.; Fonatsch, C.; Rieder, H.; Ostertag, W.; Bartram, C.
R.; Wiedemann, L. M.: The fusion of TEL and ABL in human acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia is a rare event. Brit. J. Haemat. 90: 222-224, 1995.

15. Knezevich, S. R.; McFadden, D. E.; Tao, W.; Lim, J. F.; Sorensen,
P. H. B.: A novel ETV6-NTRK3 gene fusion in congenital fibrosarcoma. Nature
Genet. 18: 184-187, 1998.

16. Kobayashi, H.; Montgomery, K. T.; Bohlander, S. K.; Adra, C. N.;
Lim, B. L.; Kucherlapati, R. S.; Donis-Keller, H.; Holt, M. S.; Le
Beau, M. M.; Rowley, J. D.: Fluorescence in situ hybridization mapping
of translocations and deletions involving the short arm of human chromosome
12 in malignant hematologic diseases. Blood 84: 3473-3482, 1994.

17. Lacronique, V.; Boureux, A.; Della Valle, V.; Poirel, H.; Quang,
C. T.; Mauchauffe, M.; Berthou, C.; Lessard, M.; Berger, R.; Ghysdael,
J.; Bernard, O. A.: A TEL-JAK2 fusion protein with constitutive kinase
activity in human leukemia. Science 278: 1309-1312, 1997.

18. Montpetit, A.; Sinnett, D.: Comparative analysis of the ETV6
gene in vertebrate genomes from pufferfish to human. Oncogene 20:
3437-3442, 2001.

19. Nilsson, T.; Andreasson, P.; Hoglund, M.; Fioretos, T.; Billstrom,
R.; Garwicz, S.; Mitelman, F.; Johansson, B.: ETV6/ABL fusion is
rare in Ph-negative chronic myeloid disorders. Leukemia 12: 1167-1168,
1998.

20. Odero, M. D.; Carlson, K.; Calasanz, M. J.; Lahortiga, I.; Chinwalla,
V.; Rowley, J. D.: Identification of new translocations involving
ETV6 in hematologic malignancies by fluorescence in situ hybridization
and spectral karyotyping. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 31: 134-142,
2001.

21. Odero, M. D.; Vizmanos, J. L.; Roman, J. P.; Lahortiga, I.; Panizo,
C.; Calasanz, M. J.; Zeleznik-Le, N. J.; Rowley, J. D.; Novo, F. J.
: A novel gene, MDS2, is fused to ETV6/TEL in a t(1;12)(p36.1;p13)
in a patient with myelodysplastic syndrome. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 35:
11-19, 2002.

22. Papadopoulos, P.; Ridge, S. A.; Boucher, C. A.; Stocking, C.;
Wiedemann, L. M.: The novel activation of ABL by fusion to an ets-related
gene, TEL. Cancer Res. 55: 34-38, 1995.

23. Peeters, P.; Raynaud, S. D.; Cools, J.; Wlodarska, I.; Grosgeorge,
J.; Philip, P.; Monpoux, F.; Van Rompaey, L.; Baens, M.; Van den Berghe,
H.; Marynen, P.: Fusion of TEL, the ETS-variant gene 6 (ETV6), to
the receptor-associated kinase JAK2 as a result of t(9;12) in a lymphoid
and t(9;15;12) in a myeloid leukemia. Blood 90: 2535-2540, 1997.

24. Penas, E. M. M.; Cools, J.; Algenstaedt, P.; Hinz, K.; Seeger,
D.; Schafhausen, P.; Schilling, G.; Marynen, P.; Hossfeld, D. K.;
Dierlamm, J.: A novel cryptic translocation t(12;17)(p13;p12-p13)
in a secondary acute myeloid leukemia results in a fusion of the ETV6
gene and the antisense strand of the PER1 gene. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 37: 79-83, 2003.

25. Pierce, A.; Carney, L.; Hamza, H. G.; Griffiths, J. R.; Zhang,
L.; Whetton, B. A.; Gonzalez Sanchez, M. B.; Tamura, T.; Sternberg,
D.; Whetton, A. D.: THOC5 spliceosome protein: a target for leukaemogenic
tyrosine kinases that affects inositol lipid turnover. Brit. J. Haemat. 141:
641-650, 2008.

26. Raynaud, S. D.; Baens, M.; Grosgeorge, J.; Rodgers, K.; Reid,
C. D. L.; Dainton, M.; Dyer, M.; Fuzibet, J. G.; Gratecos, N.; Taillan,
B.; Ayraud, N.; Marynen, P.: Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis
of t(3;12)(q26;p13): a recurring chromosomal abnormality involving
the TEL gene (ETV6) in myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood 88: 682-689,
1996.

27. Romana, S. P.; Poirel, H.; Leconiat, M.; Flexor, M.-A.; Mauchauffe,
M.; Jonveaux, P.; Macintyre, E. A.; Berger, R.; Bernard, O. A.: High
frequency of t(12;21) in childhood B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 86:
4263-4269, 1995.

28. Salomon-Nguyen, F.; Della-Valle, V.; Mauchauffe, M.; Busson-Le
Coniat, M.; Ghysdael, J.; Berger, R.; Bernard, O. A.: The t(1;12)(q21;p13)
translocation of human acute myeloblastic leukemia results in a TEL-ARNT
fusion. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 6757-6762, 2000.

29. Schwaller, J.; Parganas, E.; Wang, D.; Cain, D.; Aster, J. C.;
Williams, I. R.; Lee, C.-K.; Gerthner, R.; Kitamura, T.; Frantsve,
J.; Anastasiadou, E.; Loh, M. L.; Levy, D. E.; Ihle, J. N.; Gilliland,
D. G.: Stat5 is essential for the myelo- and lymphoproliferative
disease induced by TEL/JAK2. Molec. Cell 6: 693-704, 2000.

30. Stegmaier, K.; Pendse, S.; Barker, G. F.; Bray-Ward, P.; Ward,
D. C.; Montgomery, K. T.; Krauter, K. S.; Reynolds, C.; Sklar, J.;
Donnelly, M.; Bohlander, S. K.; Rowley, J. D.; Sallan, S. E.; Gilliland,
D. G.; Golub, T. R.: Frequent loss of heterozygosity at the TEL gene
locus in acute lymphoblastic leukemia of childhood. Blood 86: 38-44,
1995.

31. Tsuzuki, S.; Seto, M.; Greaves, M.; Enver, T.: Modeling first-hit
functions of the t(12;21) TEL-AML1 translocation in mice. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 101: 8443-8448, 2004.

32. Wang, L. C.; Kuo, F.; Fujiwara, Y.; Gilliland, D. G.; Golub, T.
R.; Orkin, S. H.: Yolk sac angiogenic defect and intra-embryonic
apoptosis in mice lacking the Ets-related factor TEL. EMBO J. 16:
4374-4383, 1997.

33. Wang, L. C.; Swat, W.; Fujiwara, Y.; Davdison, L.; Visvader, J.;
Kuo, F.; Alt, F. W.; Gilliland, D. G.; Golub, T. R.; Orkin, S. H.
: The TEL/ETV6 gene is required specifically for hematopoiesis in
the bone marrow. Genes Dev. 12: 2392-2401, 1998.

34. Yagasaki, F.; Jinnai, I.; Yoshida, S.; Yokoyama, Y.; Matsuda,
A.; Kusumoto, S.; Kobayashi, H.; Terasaki, H.; Ohyashiki, K.; Asou,
N.; Murohashi, I.; Bessho, M.; Hirashima, K.: Fusion of TEL/ETV6
to a novel ACS2 in myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myelogenous
leukemia with t(5;12)(q31;p13). Genes Chromosomes Cancer 26: 192-202,
1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/10/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/10/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/16/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/5/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/12/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/2/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/18/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/17/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/14/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/16/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/7/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/21/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/11/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/5/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/6/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/4/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/2/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/21/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/26/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/5/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/18/1995

EDITED terry: 11/29/2012
alopez: 6/20/2011
terry: 6/10/2011
wwang: 6/12/2009
terry: 6/10/2009
mgross: 4/16/2009
wwang: 12/16/2008
ckniffin: 12/5/2008
wwang: 4/12/2006
terry: 4/12/2006
wwang: 6/17/2005
wwang: 6/8/2005
terry: 6/7/2005
mgross: 7/14/2004
terry: 7/2/2004
mgross: 2/3/2004
tkritzer: 7/30/2003
terry: 7/18/2003
carol: 6/23/2003
mgross: 5/30/2003
mgross: 10/17/2002
tkritzer: 10/14/2002
carol: 10/3/2002
ckniffin: 10/3/2002
tkritzer: 9/25/2002
tkritzer: 9/16/2002
mcapotos: 8/10/2001
mcapotos: 8/9/2001
terry: 8/7/2001
terry: 6/21/2001
carol: 1/26/2001
terry: 1/25/2001
mgross: 10/11/2000
carol: 8/30/2000
mcapotos: 8/28/2000
mcapotos: 8/9/2000
mgross: 5/5/2000
mcapotos: 4/25/2000
mgross: 1/19/2000
terry: 1/6/2000
carol: 11/12/1998
terry: 11/4/1998
alopez: 9/2/1998
terry: 6/16/1998
terry: 5/21/1998
mark: 1/26/1998
terry: 1/26/1998
terry: 11/5/1997
jamie: 5/29/1997
jenny: 12/23/1996
terry: 12/17/1996
mark: 10/3/1996
terry: 9/9/1996
mark: 4/1/1996
mimadm: 11/3/1995
mark: 9/18/1995

605864	TITLE *605864 BETA-1,3-N-ACETYLGLUCOSAMINYLTRANSFERASE 4; B3GNT4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Beta-1,3-galactosyltransferases (B3GALTs; see 603018) catalyze the
formation of type I oligosaccharides. By searching EST databases for
sequences similar to B3GALTs, Shiraishi et al. (2001) isolated cDNAs
encoding B3GNT4, TMEM3 (605863), which they designated B3GNT3, and
B3GNT2 (605581). Sequence analysis predicted that B3GNT4 is a 378-amino
acid type II transmembrane protein that contains an N-terminal
cytoplasmic domain of either 29 or 4 residues due to the presence of 2
initiation codons; a 20-residue transmembrane segment; and a 329-residue
stem region and catalytic domain with 3 potential N-linked glycosylation
sites. Western blot analysis indicated that FLAG-fused B3GNT4 was
expressed as an approximately 38- to 40-kD glycoprotein. Functional
analysis showed that B3GNT4 is a beta-1,3-N
acetylglucosaminyltransferase with a preferred substrate of
lacto-N-neotetraose, and that it is involved in the biosynthesis of
poly-N-acetyllactosamine sugar chains. RT-PCR analysis detected
expression mainly in brain, including hippocampus, amygdala, cerebellum,
and caudate nucleus, as well as in colon, esophagus, and kidney;
expression was not detected in colon cancer, lymphoma, or promyelocytic
leukemia cell lines.

MAPPING

Using ESTs, Shiraishi et al. (2001) mapped the B3GNT4 gene to chromosome
12.

REFERENCE 1. Shiraishi, N.; Natsume, A.; Togayachi, A.; Endo, T.; Akashima,
T.; Yamada, Y.; Imai, N.; Nakagawa, S.; Koizumi, S.; Sekine, S.; Narimatsu,
H.; Sasaki, K.: Identification and characterization of three novel
beta-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferases structurally related to
the beta-1,3-galactosyltransferase family. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 3498-3507,
2001.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 4/20/2001

EDITED alopez: 06/28/2013
joanna: 5/10/2001
mgross: 4/20/2001

603701	TITLE *603701 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN S26; RPS26
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The eukaryotic ribosome is composed of 4 RNA species (see 180450) and
approximately 80 different proteins. The ribosomal protein genes appear
to be members of multigene families, most of which contain multiple
processed pseudogenes and 1 intron-containing functional gene.

CLONING

Vincent et al. (1993) isolated a HeLa cell cDNA encoding ribosomal
protein S26 (RPS26). Northern blot analysis demonstrated that the 600-
to 700-bp RPS26 transcript is expressed at high and comparable levels in
various human adult tissues. The deduced RPS26 protein has 115 amino
acids (SWISS-PROT SWISSPROT Q06722).

GENE STRUCTURE

Filipenko et al. (1998) isolated the genomic sequence of the functional
RPS26 gene using PCR. The RPS26 gene has 4 exons which span 2,027 bp and
result in an mRNA of 438 bp, plus the poly(A) tail. Like other
vertebrate ribosomal protein genes, the RPS26 gene has a transcription
start site that is located within a polypyrimidine tract, and a short
5-prime untranslated region.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids, Filipenko et al. (1998) mapped the
intron-containing RPS26 gene to chromosome 12. Kenmochi et al. (1998)
mapped the RPS26 gene to 12q using somatic cell hybrid and radiation
hybrid mapping analyses.

GENE FUNCTION

Using siRNA knockdown in HeLa cells to analyze the role of RPS26 in
pre-rRNA processing, Doherty et al. (2010) found that depletion of RPS26
led to decreased levels of 18S rRNA, indicating that RPS26 is necessary
for production of the small subunit. RNA blot analysis showed
accumulation of 43S, 26S, and 18S-E pre-rRNAs, consistent with defects
in cleavage at both ends of the 18S rRNA.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Doherty et al. (2010) sequenced 35 ribosomal protein genes in a cohort
of 117 patients with Diamond-Blackfan anemia (see DBA10, 613309) and
identified 9 different mutations in the RPS26 gene in 12 patients (see,
e.g., 603701.0001-603701.0005). None of the mutations were found in at
least 520 chromosomes from a control population of similar, largely
European origin. Six probands had a mutation in the first codon,
changing met to leu, val, or arg, suggesting that the translation
initiation codon may be a hotspot in RPS26. Doherty et al. (2010) noted
that 1 of the mutation-positive patients (603701.0002) had cleft lip and
palate, making RPS26 the third DBA gene in which mutation is associated
with clefting in DBA.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DIAMOND-BLACKFAN ANEMIA 10
RPS26, MET1VAL

In 6 patients with Diamond-Blackfan anemia-10 (613309) from 4 families,
Doherty et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for a 1A-G transition in
exon 1 of the RPS26 gene, causing a met1-to-val (M1V) substitution that
eliminates the start codon and is predicted to result in an untranslated
protein. The mutation was not found in the unaffected parents of 2 of
the probands or in at least 520 control chromosomes. Of the 6 patients
with the M1V mutation, 3 were responsive to initial steroid therapy and
3 were unresponsive; in 1 father-daughter pair, the father was
responsive and the daughter was unresponsive. Three of the patients were
receiving red blood cell transfusions, 2 were on steroid therapy, and 1
required no therapy. One of the male patients, who was diagnosed at 7
weeks of age, also had duplicated pelvis and calyx of the right kidney.

.0002
DIAMOND-BLACKFAN ANEMIA 10
RPS26, MET1LEU

In a male patient with Diamond-Blackfan anemia-10 (613309), Doherty et
al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for a 1A-T transition in exon 1 of
the RPS26 gene, causing a met1-to-leu (M1L) substitution that eliminates
the start codon and is predicted to result in an untranslated protein.
The mutation was not found in his unaffected parents and sister or in at
least 520 control chromosomes. The patient, who was responsive to
steroid therapy, also had cleft lip and palate.

.0003
DIAMOND-BLACKFAN ANEMIA 10
RPS26, ASP33ASN

In a male patient who was diagnosed at 8 months of age with
Diamond-Blackfan anemia (613309), Doherty et al. (2010) identified
heterozygosity for a 97G-A transition in exon 2 of the RPS26 gene,
resulting in an asp33-to-asn (D33N) substitution. The mutation was not
found in his unaffected parents or sister, or in at least 520 control
chromosomes. Other features in this patient included inguinal hernia,
unilaterally absent vas deferens, abnormal epididymis, and pronounced
bony prominence of a cervical spinous process.

.0004
DIAMOND-BLACKFAN ANEMIA 10
RPS26, 1-BP INS, 31G

In a female patient with Diamond-Blackfan anemia-10 (613309), Doherty et
al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for a 1-bp insertion (31insG) in
exon 2 of the RPS26 gene, causing a frameshift and resulting in a
termination sequence at codon 25. The mutation was not found in at least
520 control chromosomes. The patient, who had no associated
malformations, had been unresponsive to initial steroid therapy and was
deceased.

.0005
DIAMOND-BLACKFAN ANEMIA 10
RPS26, IVS1, G-A, +1

In a male patient with Diamond-Blackfan anemia-10 (613309), Doherty et
al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for a splice site mutation (+1G-A)
in intron 1 of the RPS26 gene. The de novo mutation was not found in
either of his parents or an unaffected sister and brother, or in at
least 520 control chromosomes. The patient, who had been unresponsive to
initial steroid therapy, was deceased.

REFERENCE 1. Doherty, L.; Sheen, M. R.; Vlachos, A.; Choesmel, V.; O'Donohue,
M.-F.; Clinton, C.; Schneider, H. E.; Sieff, C. A.; Newburger, P.
E.; Ball, S. E.; Niewiadomska, E.; Matysiak, M.; Glader, B.; Arceci,
R. J.; Farrar, J. E.; Atsidaftos, E.; Lipton, J. M.; Gleizes, P.-E.;
Gazda, H. T.: Ribosomal protein genes RPS10 and RPS26 are commonly
mutated in Diamond-Blackfan anemia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 86: 222-228,
2010. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet 86: 655-656, 2010.

2. Filipenko, M. L.; Vinichenko, N. A.; Karpova, G. G.; Mertvetsov,
N. P.; Amaldi, F.: Isolation, structural analysis and mapping of
the functional gene of human ribosomal protein S26. Gene 211: 287-292,
1998.

3. Kenmochi, N.; Kawaguchi, T.; Rozen, S.; Davis, E.; Goodman, N.;
Hudson, T. J.; Tanaka, T.; Page, D. C.: A map of 75 human ribosomal
protein genes. Genome Res. 8: 509-523, 1998.

4. Vincent, S.; Marty, L.; Fort, P.: S26 ribosomal protein RNA: an
invariant control for gene regulation experiments in eucaryotic cells
and tissues. Nucleic Acids Res. 21: 1498 only, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/18/2010

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 4/6/1999

EDITED alopez: 06/18/2010
alopez: 6/18/2010
wwang: 5/12/2010
carol: 3/18/2010
psherman: 4/20/1999
carol: 4/16/1999

605579	TITLE *605579 INTERFERON-INDUCED TRANSMEMBRANE PROTEIN 3; IFITM3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The 1-8 gene family, which includes IFITM1 (604456), IFITM2 (605578),
and IFITM3, is highly inducible by both type I (IFNA; (147660)/IFNB;
(147640)) and type II (IFNG; 147570) interferons (summary by Lewin et
al., 1991).

CLONING

By screening a lymphoid cell cosmid library with a probe corresponding
to the 3-prime untranslated region of IFITM1, Lewin et al. (1991)
isolated a cosmid containing the IFITM1, IFITM2, and IFITM3 genes, which
they termed 9-27, 1-8D, and 1-8U, respectively, within a single 18-kb
fragment. The predicted 133-amino acid IFITM3 protein is approximately
90% identical to IFITM2, has an N-terminal signal sequence, 3 potential
phosphorylation sites, and a C-terminal leucine zipper. Sequence
variability is greatest at the C terminus. Immunoblot analysis showed
that in response to IFNA, all 3 IFITMs were expressed as 14-kD proteins
that could be further resolved by isoelectric focusing.

Everitt et al. (2012) reported that the IFITM3 gene encodes 2 splice
variants that differ by the presence or absence of the N-terminal 21
amino acids.

By whole-mount in situ hybridization, Lange et al. (2003) found that
expression of mouse fragilis, fragilis-2, and fragilis-3 was restricted
to the epiblast at embryonic days 5.5 and 6.5. By embryonic day 7.5, all
3 transcripts showed variable expression in a cluster of founder
premordial germ cells, and at embryonic days 11.5 and 12.5, all 3
transcripts were detected in gonadal germ cells. The 3 transcripts
showed unique patterns of expression in other tissues during mouse
development.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lewin et al. (1991) determined that the IFITM1, IFITM2, and IFITM3 genes
each contain 2 exons, with interferon-stimulated response elements
(ISREs) in the immediately 5-prime flanking sequence of the
promoter/enhancer region. Unlike IFITM1, which has an ISRE and 2 CCAAT
boxes but lacks a TATA box, IFITM2 and IFITM3 have 2 ISREs and no TATA
or CCAAT boxes.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lange et al. (2003) mapped the IFITM3 gene
to an IFITM gene cluster on chromosome 11p15.5. The order of the genes,
from telomere to centromere, is IFITM5 (614757), IFITM2, IFITM1, and
IFITM3, and the cluster spans about 26.5 kb. Lange et al. (2003) stated
that IFITM2 maps to the plus strand and that all other IFITM genes map
to the minus strand. However, Gross (2012) determined that, in addition
to IFITM2, the IFITM1 gene maps to the plus strand based on an alignment
of the IFITM1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC000897) with the genomic
sequence (GRCh37).

Lange et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Ifitm gene cluster to a region of
chromosome 7F5 that shares homology of synteny with human chromosome
11p15.5. The mouse Ifitm gene cluster contains 5 genes, whereas the
human cluster contains only 4 genes.

GENE FUNCTION

By Northern blot analysis of cells expressing IFITM genes, Lewin et al.
(1991) showed that IFITM2 was not as responsive to IFNA treatment as
IFITM3 or IFITM1.

Tanaka et al. (2005) determined that mouse Ifitm1 and Ifitm3 are
expressed on the cell surface of primordial germ cells in a
developmentally-regulated manner and that they appear to modulate cell
adhesion and influence cell differentiation. Ifitm1 activity was
required for primordial germ cell transit, and Ifitm1 acted as a
repulsive molecule, repelling non-Ifitm1-expressing primordial germ
cells from the mesoderm into the endoderm. In contrast, Ifitm3 was
expressed in migratory primordial germ cells and behaved as a homing
signal, enabling the cells to respond to environmental cues that guided
their localization. The guidance activities of Ifitm1 and Ifitm3 were
mediated by their unique N-terminal domains.

To test the role of IFITM3 in human influenza virus infection, Everitt
et al. (2012) assessed the IFITM3 alleles of individuals hospitalized
with seasonal or pandemic influenza H1N1/09 viruses. Everitt et al.
(2012) found that a statistically significant number of hospitalized
subjects showed enrichment for a minor IFITM3 allele (SNP dbSNP rs12252)
that alters a splice acceptor site, and functional assays showed that
IFITM3 carrying the minor CC genotype had reduced influenza virus
restriction in vitro (see 605579.0001). Everitt et al. (2012) concluded
that, taken together, their data revealed that the action of a single
intrinsic immune effector, IFITM3, profoundly alters the course of
influenza virus infection in mouse and humans.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

At the time of the report by Everitt et al. (2012), 13 nonsynonymous, 13
synonymous, 1 in-frame stop, and 1 splice site acceptor-altering SNPs
had been reported in the IFITM3 sequence.

EVOLUTION

By phylogenetic analysis, Lange et al. (2003) found that only 2 mouse
fragilis genes, fragilis-4 (Ifitm5) and either fragilis (Ifitm3),
fragilis-2 (Ifitm1), or fragilis-3 (Ifitm2), have been conserved from
mouse to human. They suggested that subsequent gene duplications may
have occurred independently in both species.

ANIMAL MODEL

Everitt et al. (2012) used a knockout mouse model developed by Lange et
al. (2008) to test whether the IFITM proteins are critical for intrinsic
resistance to influenza virus. Everitt et al. (2012) observed that mice
lacking Ifitm3 displayed fulminant viral pneumonia when challenged with
a normally low-pathogenicity influenza virus, mirroring the destruction
inflicted by the highly pathogenic 1918 'Spanish' influenza. Similar
increased viral replication was seen in vitro, with protection rescued
by the reintroduction of Ifitm3.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
INFLUENZA, SEVERE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
IFITM3, 42T-C

In 53 individuals with severe influenza infection (614680) who required
hospitalization as a result of pandemic HIN1/09 or seasonal influenza
virus infection in 2009-2010, Everitt et al. (2012) found enrichment of
a SNP in the IFITM3 gene, the C allele of SNP dbSNP rs12252. Presence of
the C allele results in a synonymous change but alters the first splice
acceptor site and may be associated with an IFITM3 splice variant that
encodes an IFITM3 protein lacking the first 21 amino acids due to the
use of an alternative start codon. When lymphoblastoid cell lines from
CC homozygotes were challenged with influenza A virus, they were far
more susceptible to infection than those of TT homozygotes, and this
vulnerability correlated with lower levels of IFITM3 protein expression
compared to the majority TT variant cells. Everitt et al. (2012) also
found that cells expressing the 21-amino acid deletion protein failed to
restrict viral replication when compared to wildtype IFITM3, consistent
with data showing that the amino-terminal 21 amino acids of IFITM3 are
required for attenuation of vesicular stomatitis virus replication in
vitro (Weidner et al., 2010).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Gross  (2012)
REFERENCE 1. Everitt, A. R.; Clare, S.; Pertel, T.; John, S. P.; Wash, R. S.;
Smith, S. E.; Chin, C. R.; Feeley, E. M.; Sims, J. S.; Adams, D. J.;
Wise, H. M.; Kane, L.; and 19 others: IFITM3 restricts the morbidity
and mortality associated with influenza. Nature 484: 519-523, 2012.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/9/2012.

3. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/9/2012.

4. Lange, U. C.; Adams, D. J.; Lee, C.; Barton, S.; Schneider, R.;
Bradley, A.; Surani, M. A.: Normal germ line establishment in mice
carrying a deletion of the Ifitm/Fragilis gene family cluster. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 28: 4688-4696, 2008.

5. Lange, U. C.; Saitou, M.; Western, P. S.; Barton, S. C.; Surani,
M. A.: The fragilis interferon-inducible gene family of transmembrane
proteins is associated with germ cell specification in mice. BMC
Dev. Biol. 3: 1, 2003. Note: Electronic Article.

6. Lewin, A. R.; Reid, L. E.; McMahon, M.; Stark, G. R.; Kerr, I.
M.: Molecular analysis of a human interferon-inducible gene family. Europ.
J. Biochem. 199: 417-423, 1991.

7. Tanaka, S. S.; Yamaguchi, Y. L.; Tsoi, B.; Lickert, H.; Tam, P.
P. L.: IFITM/Mil/Fragilis family proteins IFITM1 and IFITM3 play
distinct roles in mouse primordial germ cell homing and repulsion. Dev.
Cell 9: 745-756, 2005.

8. Weidner, J. M.; Jiang, D.; Pan, X.-B.; Chang, J.; Block, T. M.;
Guo, J.-T.: Interferon-induced cell membrane proteins, IFITM3 and
tetherin, inhibit vesicular stomatitis virus infection via distinct
mechanisms. J. Virol. 84: 12646-12657, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 8/10/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/9/2012
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/9/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/4/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/17/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/24/2001

EDITED mgross: 08/10/2012
mgross: 8/10/2012
terry: 8/9/2012
alopez: 6/11/2012
joanna: 5/30/2012
terry: 5/16/2012
mgross: 5/9/2012
alopez: 5/7/2012
terry: 5/4/2012
alopez: 2/16/2006
terry: 1/17/2006
cwells: 7/25/2002
terry: 7/24/2002
mgross: 1/25/2001
mgross: 1/24/2001

605542	TITLE *605542 INTERLEUKIN 36, GAMMA; IL36G
;;INTERLEUKIN 1 FAMILY, MEMBER 9; IL1F9;;
INTERLEUKIN 1 HOMOLOG 1; IL1H1;;
INTERLEUKIN 1-RELATED PROTEIN 2; IL1RP2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the IL1 (see IL1A; 147760) family, such as IL1F9, are
structurally related cytokines and cell surface receptors that mediate
inflammation. IL1F9 is part of an IL1 signaling system in epithelia and
has proinflammatory properties (summary by Johnston et al., 2011).

CLONING

By searching EST databases for IL1 homologs, Kumar et al. (2000)
identified a cDNA encoding IL1H1. The deduced 169-amino acid protein,
which shares 19 to 32% sequence similarity with other IL1 family
members, lacks a hydrophobic leader peptide and a prodomain. Biophysical
analyses indicated that IL1H1 has 12 beta strands, similar to other IL1
family members. Northern blot analysis detected no expression of IL1H1
in a multiple tissue blot. PCR analysis detected low levels of
expression in lungs and macrophages. RT-PCR and Western blot analyses
showed that cytokine-induced keratinocytes expressed readily detectable
IL1H1. In situ hybridization analysis demonstrated IL1H1 expression in
keratinocytes in a mouse model of contact hypersensitivity or herpes
simplex virus infection.

By sequencing a BAC clone containing the IL1B gene (147720) and
searching EST databases for IL1-like ligands, Busfield et al. (2000)
identified IL1H1, which they designated IL1RP2. SDS-PAGE analysis showed
that IL1H1 is expressed as a 20-kD protein. Northern blot analysis
detected a 1.8-kb IL1H1 transcript in the squamous cell epithelium of
the esophagus. In situ hybridization analysis revealed expression in the
middle layers of epithelium. In vitro, IL1H1 message was rapidly induced
following stimulation of keratinocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RT-PCR and immunohistochemical analysis, Johnston et al. (2011)
demonstrated increased expression of IL1F5 (605507), IL1F6 (605509),
IL1F8 (605508), and IL1F9 in psoriasis (177900) plaque compared with
uninvolved skin from psoriasis patients. Analysis of 2 mouse psoriasis
models produced similar results. IL1A and TNF (191160) induced
expression of the IL1F transcripts in normal human keratinocytes.
Microarray analysis showed that IL1F cytokines, particularly IL1F8,
increased mRNA expression of human beta-defensins and secretion of HBD2
(DEFB4; 602215) and HBD3 (DEFB103A; 606611). Johnston et al. (2011)
concluded that IL1F cytokines have important roles in inflammatory skin
diseases and may be targets for antipsoriatic therapies.

GENE STRUCTURE

Busfield et al. (2000) determined that the IL1H1 gene contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

Kumar et al. (2000) stated that the IL1H1 gene maps to chromosome
2q12-q21, near other IL1 family members. By radiation hybrid analysis,
Busfield et al. (2000) mapped the IL1H1 gene to chromosome 2q12.1.

Nicklin et al. (2002) determined that the gene order within the IL1 gene
cluster on chromosome 2, from centromere to telomere, is IL1A-IL1B-IL1F7
(IL37; 605510)-IL1F9-IL1F6-IL1F8-IL1F5-IL1F10 (615296)-IL1RN (147679).
Of these, only IL1A, IL1B, and IL36B are transcribed toward the
centromere.

Gross (2011) mapped the IL1F9 gene to chromosome 2q13 based on an
alignment of the IL1F9 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC096721) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Busfield, S. J.; Comrack, C. A.; Yu, G.; Chickering, T. W.; Smutko,
J. S.; Zhou, H.; Leiby, K. R.; Holmgren, L. M.; Gearing, D. P.; Pan,
Y.: Identification and gene organization of three novel members of
the IL-1 family on human chromosome 2. Genomics 66: 213-216, 2000.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/11/2011.

3. Johnston, A.; Xing, X.; Guzman, A. M.; Riblett, M.; Loyd, C. M.;
Ward, N. L.; Wohn, C.; Prens, E. P.; Wang, F.; Maier, L. E.; Kang,
S.; Voorhees, J. J.; Elder, J. T.; Gudjonsson, J. E.: IL-1F5, -F6,
-F8, and -F9: a novel IL-1 family signaling system that is active
in psoriasis and promotes keratinocyte antimicrobial peptide expression. J.
Immun. 186: 2613-2622, 2011.

4. Kumar, S.; McDonnell, P. C.; Lehr, R.; Tierney, L.; Tzimas, M.
N.; Griswold, D. E.; Capper, E. A.; Tal-Singer, R.; Wells, G. I.;
Doyle, M. L.; Young, P. R.: Identification and initial characterization
of four novel members of the interleukin-1 family. J. Biol. Chem. 275:
10308-10314, 2000.

5. Nicklin, M. J. H.; Barton, J. L.; Nguyen, M.; FitzGerald, M. G.;
Duff, G. W.; Kornman, K.: A sequence-based map of the nine genes
of the human interleukin-1 cluster. Genomics 79: 718-725, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 07/08/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/11/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/5/2011

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/9/2001

EDITED mgross: 07/08/2013
carol: 9/1/2011
mgross: 5/11/2011
terry: 5/5/2011
mgross: 2/18/2009
mgross: 8/29/2002
mgross: 1/9/2001

158120	TITLE *158120 MONOCYTE DIFFERENTIATION ANTIGEN CD14; CD14
;;MYELOID CELL-SPECIFIC LEUCINE-RICH GLYCOPROTEIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CD14 is a single-copy gene encoding 2 protein forms: a 50- to 55-kD
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored membrane protein (mCD14) and a
monocyte or liver-derived soluble serum protein (sCD14) that lacks the
anchor. Both molecules are critical for lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-dependent signal transduction, and sCD14 confers LPS sensitivity
to cells lacking mCD14. Increased sCD14 levels are associated with
inflammatory infectious diseases and high mortality in gram-negative
shock (LeVan et al., 2001).

CLONING

Differentiation of myelomonocytic cells from pluripotent stem cells to
mature functioning monocytes/macrophages and granulocytes is accompanied
by a variety of changes, including the expression of new cell surface
antigens. One of these antigens, CD14, a 55-kD glycoprotein, is
preferentially expressed on the surface of mature cells of the monocytic
lineage. Goyert et al. (1988) isolated a cDNA clone encoding CD14 and
isolated the CD14 gene.

Ferrero et al. (1990) demonstrated that, as in man, the expression of
murine CD14 is limited to the myeloid lineage. In both mouse and man,
the CD14 protein contains leucine-rich motif that is repeated 10 times.

GENE FUNCTION

The expression profile of CD14, as well as its inclusion in the family
of leucine-rich proteins and the chromosomal location of other receptor
genes, supports the hypothesis that CD14 functions as a receptor. Its
receptor function was indeed demonstrated by Wright (1990) who showed
that it is a receptor for the lipopolysaccharide-binding
protein:lipopolysaccharide complex (LBP; 151990:LPS); also see Wright et
al. (1990). Gupta et al. (1996) transfected mouse 70Z/3 cells with human
CD14 and showed that these cells were responsive to peptidoglycan (PGN),
a polymer of alternating GlcNAc and MurNAc cross-linked by short
peptides, that is present in the cell walls of all bacteria, but is
particularly abundant in gram-positive bacteria. They concluded that
CD14 serves as a cell-activating receptor not only for LPS but also for
PGN.

Cells undergoing programmed cell death (apoptosis) are cleared rapidly
in vivo by phagocytes without inducing inflammation. Devitt et al.
(1998) showed that the glycoprotein CD14 on the surface of human
macrophages is important for the recognition and clearance of apoptotic
cells. CD14 can also act as a receptor that binds bacterial LPS,
triggering inflammatory responses. Overstimulation of CD14 by LPS can
cause the often fatal toxic-shock syndrome. Devitt et al. (1998) showed
that apoptotic cells interact with CD14, triggering phagocytosis of the
apoptotic cells. This interaction depends on a region of CD14 that is
identical to, or at least closely associated with, a region known to
bind LPS. However, apoptotic cells, unlike LPS, do not provoke the
release of proinflammatory cytokines from macrophages. These results
indicated that clearance of apoptotic cells is mediated by a receptor
whose interactions with 'nonself' components (LPS) and 'self' components
(apoptotic cells) produce distinct macrophage responses.

Savill (1998) summarized understanding of how ced-5 (see DOCK1; 601403)
and CD14 together with other molecules function in the engulfment of
cell corpses by macrophages in the process of programmed cell death. The
model incorporated the newly proposed functions of ced-5 and CD14.

LPS interacts with LBP and CD14 to present LPS to TLR4 (603030), which
activates inflammatory gene expression through NF-kappa-B (see 164011)
and MAPK signaling. Bochkov et al. (2002) demonstrated that oxidized
phospholipids inhibit LPS-induced but not TNF-alpha (191160)-induced or
interleukin-1-beta (147720)-induced NF-kappa-B-mediated upregulation of
inflammatory genes, by blocking the interaction of LPS with LBP and
CD14. Moreover, in LPS-injected mice, oxidized phospholipids inhibited
inflammation and protected mice from lethal endotoxin shock. Thus, in
severe gram-negative bacterial infection, endogenously formed oxidized
phospholipids may function as a negative feedback to blunt innate immune
responses. Furthermore, Bochkov et al. (2002) identified chemical
structures capable of inhibiting the effects of endotoxins such as LPS
that could be used for the development of new drugs for treatment of
sepsis.

Children of farmers are at decreased risk of developing allergies.
Results of epidemiologic studies suggested that increased exposure to
microbial compounds might be responsible for this reduced risk.
Alterations in adaptive immune response were thought to be the
underlying mechanism. Lauener et al. (2002) measured the expression of
receptors for microbial compounds known to trigger the innate immune
response. They showed that blood cells from farmers' children expressed
significantly higher amounts of CD14 and Toll-like receptor-2 (TLR2;
603028) than those from non-farmers' children. They proposed that the
innate immune system responds to the microbial burden in the environment
and modulates the development of allergic disease.

Zanoni et al. (2009) found that stimulation of murine bone
marrow-derived dendritic cells (DCs) with LPS induced Src (190090)
kinase and Plcg2 (600220) activation, Ca(2+) influx, and calcineurin
(see 114105)-dependent nuclear Nfat (see 600490) translocation.
Induction of this pathway was Tlr4 independent and entirely dependent on
Cd14. Nfat activation was necessary for apoptotic death of terminally
differentiated DCs, allowing for maintenance of self-tolerance and
prevention of autoimmunity. Blocking this pathway in vivo resulted in
prolonged DC survival and an increase in T-cell priming capability.
Zanoni et al. (2009) concluded that CD14 is involved, through NFAT
activation, in regulation of the DC life cycle.

By coimmunoprecipitation and confocal microscopic analysis, Baumann et
al. (2010) showed that CD14 interacted with TLR7 (300365) and TLR9
(605474) in mouse and human cells and was required for TLR7- and
TLR9-dependent induction of proinflammatory cytokines. Cd14 was required
for Tlr9-dependent immune responses in mice and for optimal nucleic acid
uptake in mouse macrophages. Cd14 was dispensable for viral uptake in
mice, but it was required for triggering of TLR-dependent cytokine
responses. Baumann et al. (2010) concluded that CD14 has a dual role in
nucleic acid-mediated TLR activation by promoting selective uptake of
nucleic acids and acting as a coreceptor for endosomal TLR activation.

Using flow cytometry and confocal microscopy in mouse cells, Zanoni et
al. (2011) demonstrated that Cd14 chaperoned LPS to Tlr4, leading to Syk
(600085)-dependent internalization of Tlr4 and signaling through Trif
(607601). Zanoni et al. (2011) concluded that pathogen recognition
receptors induce both membrane transport and signal transduction.

Shirey et al. (2013) reported that CD14 and TLR2 are required for
protection against influenza-induced lethality in mice mediated by
Eritoran (also known as E5564), a potent, well-tolerated, synthetic TLR4
antagonist. Therapeutic administration of Eritoran blocked
influenza-induced lethality in mice, as well as lung pathology, clinical
symptoms, cytokine and oxidized phospholipid expression, and decreased
viral titers. CD14 directly binds Eritoran and inhibits ligand binding
to MD2 (605243). Shirey et al. (2013) concluded that Eritoran blockade
of TLR signaling represents a novel therapeutic approach for
inflammation associated with influenza, and possibly other infections.

MAPPING

Goyert et al. (1988) demonstrated by in situ hybridization and study of
somatic cell hybrid DNA that the gene is located at bands 5q23-q31.
Thus, CD14 is located in a region of chromosome 5 that contains a
cluster of genes that encode several myeloid-specific growth factors
(IL3; 147740) and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(CSF2; 138960) or growth factor receptors (FMS receptor for CFS1;
164770), as well as other growth factor and receptor genes
(platelet-derived growth factor receptor, 173410, beta-2-adrenergic
receptor, 109690, and endothelial cell growth factor, 131220). This is a
region that is deleted in patients with certain forms of myeloid
leukemia.

Ferrero et al. (1990) mapped the CD14 gene to mouse chromosome 18.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization studies of deleted chromosome 5
homologs in a series of 135 patients with malignant myeloid diseases, Le
Beau et al. (1993) mapped the CD14 gene and neighboring genes to 5q31.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Baldini et al. (1999) identified a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
in the proximal CD14 promoter at position -159 from the transcription
start site, resulting in a C-to-T transition. TT homozygotes had
significantly higher levels of sCD14 than did either CC or CT genotype
carriers, and they also had lower levels of IgE. Unkelbach et al.
(1999), Hubacek et al. (1999), and Shimada et al. (2000) reported an
increased risk of myocardial infarction in individuals carrying the T
allele. (Shimada et al. (2000) and Hubacek et al. (1999) reported the
C/T polymorphism as occurring at position -260 from the translation
start site.)

Some patients with Kawasaki disease (KD), an acute febrile vasculitis of
childhood, develop coronary artery lesions after the acute phase.
Nishimura et al. (2003) found no difference in genomic and allele
frequencies of the T allele at the CD14/-159 promoter region in 67
patients with KD compared to controls. However, the KD patients with TT
genotypes had more coronary artery complications than those with CT or
CC genotypes, and the frequency of the T allele was significantly higher
than that of the C allele in KD patients. Nishimura et al. (2003)
concluded that the T allele and the TT genotype are risk factors for the
coronary artery complications in patients with KD, implicating a
possible relationship to the magnitude of the CD14 toll-like receptor
response.

Using EMSA analysis, LeVan et al. (2001) showed that the T allele at
position -159 in the proximal CD14 promoter has a decreased affinity for
DNA/protein interactions at a GC box containing a binding site for SP1
(189906), SP2 (601801), and SP3 (601804) transcription factors. Reporter
analysis demonstrated that monocytic cells with low levels of SP3, which
inhibits activating by SP1 and SP2, have increased transcriptional
activity of the T allele. In contrast, both the C and T alleles are
transcribed equivalently in SP3-rich hepatocytes. LeVan et al. (2001)
proposed that the interplay between CD14 promoter affinity and the
SP3:SP1-plus-SP2 ratio plays a critical mechanistic role in regulating
CD14 transcription and in determining the differential activity of the 2
variants of the CD14 promoter.

In a study of 216 Korean patients with IgA nephropathy (161950) who were
followed for 86 months, Yoon et al. (2003) found that an excess of the
-159C genotype occurred in patients with progressive disease (p = 0.03)
and the risk of disease progression increased as the number of C alleles
increased (p for trend = 0.002). The hazard ratio for progression in
patients with the CC genotype was 3.2 (p = 0.025) compared to patients
with the TT genotype. After lipopolysaccharide stimulation, soluble CD14
was released more abundantly from the peripheral blood mononuclear cells
of TT patients than from those of CC patients (p = 0.006), although
there was no difference in membrane-bound CD14 expression. TT patients
released less IL6 (147620) than CC patients after stimulation (p =
0.0003). Yoon et al. (2003) suggested that the CD14 -159 polymorphism is
an important marker for the progression of IgA nephropathy and may
modulate the level of the inflammatory response.

ANIMAL MODEL

Haziot et al. (1996) reported that Cd14-deficient mice were resistant to
LPS-induced shock.

Kurt-Jones et al. (2000) determined that proinflammatory cytokine
responses to respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) F protein were absent or
diminished in mice with deletions of either Cd14 or Tlr4 (603030),
respectively. Importantly, Tlr4 -/- mice had higher levels of infectious
virus in their lungs and were either unable to clear the virus or
cleared the virus several days later than wildtype mice. The authors
concluded that TLR4 and CD14 appear to be important not only in
recognizing bacterial structures such as lipopolysaccharide, but are
important in innate immune responses to viruses as well.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Setoguchi et al. (1989)
REFERENCE 1. Baldini, M.; Lohman, I. C.; Halonen, M.; Erickson, R. P.; Holt,
P. G.; Martinez, F. D.: A polymorphism in the 5-prime flanking region
of the CD14 gene is associated with circulating soluble CD14 levels
and with total serum immunoglobulin E. Am. J. Resp. Cell Molec. Biol. 20:
976-983, 1999.

2. Baumann, C. L.; Aspalter, I. M.; Sharif, O.; Pichlmair, A.; Bluml,
S.; Grebien, F.; Bruckner, M.; Pasierbek, P.; Aumayr, K.; Planyavsky,
M.; Bennett, K. L.; Colinge, J.; Knapp, S.; Superti-Furga, G.: CD14
is a coreceptor of Toll-like receptors 7 and 9. J. Exp. Med. 207:
2689-2701, 2010.

3. Bochkov, V. N.; Kadl, A.; Huber, J.; Gruber, F.; Binder, B. R.;
Leitinger, N.: Protective role of phospholipid oxidation products
in endotoxin-induced tissue damage. Nature 419: 77-81, 2002.

4. Devitt, A.; Moffatt, O. D.; Raykundalia, C.; Capra, J. D.; Simmons,
D. L.; Gregory, C. D.: Human CD14 mediates recognition and phagocytosis
of apoptotic cells. Nature 392: 505-509, 1998.

5. Ferrero, E.; Hsieh, C.-L.; Francke, U.; Goyert, S. M.: CD14 is
a member of the family of leucine-rich proteins and is encoded by
a gene syntenic with multiple receptor genes. J. Immun. 145: 331-336,
1990.

6. Goyert, S. M.; Ferrero, E.; Rettig, W. J.; Yenamandra, A. K.; Obata,
F.; Le Beau, M. M.: The CD14 monocyte differentiation antigen maps
to a region encoding growth factors and receptors. Science 239:
497-500, 1988.

7. Gupta, D.; Kirkland, T. N.; Viriyakosol, S.; Dziarski, R.: CD14
is a cell-activating receptor for bacterial peptidoglycan. J. Biol.
Chem. 271: 23310-23316, 1996.

8. Haziot, A.; Ferrero, E.; Kontgen, F.; Hijiya, N.; Yamamoto, S.;
Silver, J.; Stewart, C. L.; Goyert, S. M.: Resistance to endotoxin
shock and reduced dissemination of gram-negative bacteria in CD14-deficient
mice. Immunity 4: 407-414, 1996.

9. Hubacek, J. A.; Rothe, G.; Pit'ha, J.; Skodova, Z.; Stanek, V.;
Poledne, R.; Schmitz, G.: C(-260)-to-T polymorphism in the promoter
of the CD14 monocyte receptor gene as a risk factor for myocardial
infarction. Circulation 99: 3218-3220, 1999. Note: Erratum: Circulation
100: 2550 only, 1999.

10. Kurt-Jones, E. A.; Popova, L.; Kwinn, L.; Haynes, L. M.; Jones,
L. P.; Tripp, R. A.; Walsh, E. E.; Freeman, M. W.; Golenbock, D. T.;
Anderson, L. J.; Finberg, R. W.: Pattern recognition receptors TLR4
and CD14 mediate response to respiratory syncytial virus. Nature
Immun. 1: 398-401, 2000.

11. Lauener, R. P.; Birchler, T.; Adamski, J.; Braun-Fahrlander, C.;
Bufe, A.; Herz, U.; von Mutius, E.; Nowak, D.; Riedler, J.; Waser,
M.; Sennhauser, F. H.; ALEX study group: Expression of CD14 and
Toll-like receptor 2 in farmers' and non-farmers' children. Lancet 360:
465-466, 2002.

12. Le Beau, M. M.; Espinosa, R., III; Neuman, W. L.; Stock, W.; Roulston,
D.; Larson, R. A.; Keinanen, M.; Westbrook, C. A.: Cytogenetic and
molecular delineation of the smallest commonly deleted region of chromosome
5 in malignant myeloid diseases. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 5484-5488,
1993.

13. LeVan, T. D.; Bloom, J. W.; Bailey, T. J.; Karp, C. L.; Halonen,
M.; Martinez, F. D.; Vercelli, D.: A common single nucleotide polymorphism
in the CD14 promoter decreases the affinity of Sp protein binding
and enhances transcriptional activity. J. Immun. 167: 5838-5844,
2001.

14. Nishimura, S.; Zaitsu, M.; Hara, M.; Yokota, G.; Watanabe, M.;
Ueda, Y.; Imayoshi, M.; Ishii, E.; Tasaki, H.; Hamasaki, Y.: A polymorphism
in the promoter of the CD14 gene (CD14/-159) is associated with the
development of coronary artery lesions in patients with Kawasaki disease. J.
Pediat. 143: 357-362, 2003.

15. Savill, J.: Phagocytic docking without shocking. Nature 392:
442-443, 1998.

16. Setoguchi, M.; Nasu, N.; Yoshida, S.; Higuchi, Y.; Akizuki, S.;
Yamamoto, S.: Mouse and human CD14 (myeloid cell-specific leucine-rich
glycoprotein) primary structure deduced from cDNA clones. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1008: 213-222, 1989.

17. Shimada, K.; Watanabe, Y.; Mokuno, H.; Iwama, Y.; Daida, H.; Yamaguchi,
H.: Common polymorphism in the promoter of the CD14 monocyte receptor
gene is associated with acute myocardial infarction in Japanese men. Am.
J. Cardiol. 86: 682-684, 2000.

18. Shirey, K. A.; Lai, W.; Scott, A. J.; Lipsky, M.; Mistry, P.;
Pletneva, L. M.; Karp, C. L.; McAlees, J.; Gioannini, T. L.; Weiss,
J.; Chen, W. H.; Ernst, R. K.; Rossignol, D. P.; Gusovsky, F.; Blanco,
J. C. G.; Vogel, S. N.: The TLR4 antagonist Eritoran protects mice
from lethal influenza infection. Nature 497: 498-502, 2013.

19. Unkelbach, K.; Gardemann, A.; Kostrzewa, M.; Philipp, M.; Tillmanns,
H.; Haberbosch, W.: A new promoter polymorphism in the gene of lipopolysaccharide
receptor CD14 is associated with expired myocardial infarction in
patients with low atherosclerotic risk profile. Arterioscler. Thromb.
Vasc. Biol. 19: 932-938, 1999.

20. Wright, S. D.: CD14: a leukocyte membrane protein that functions
in the response to endotoxin. (Abstract) FASEB J. 4: A1848 only,
1990.

21. Wright, S. D.; Ramos, R. A.; Tobias, P. S.; Ulevitch, R. J.; Mathison,
J. C.: CD14, a receptor for complexes of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
and LPS binding protein. Science 249: 1431-1433, 1990.

22. Yoon, H.-J.; Shin, J. H.; Yang, S. H.; Chae, D.-W.; Kim, H.; Lee,
D.-S.; Kim, H. L.; Kim, S.; Lee, J. S.: Association of the CD14 gene
-159C polymorphism with progression of IgA nephropathy. J. Med. Genet. 40:
104-108, 2003.

23. Zanoni, I.; Ostuni, R.; Capuano, G.; Collini, M.; Caccia, M.;
Ronchi, A. E.; Rocchetti, M.; Mingozzi, F.; Foti, M.; Chirico, G.;
Costa, B.; Zaza, A.; Ricciardi-Castagnoli, P.; Granucci, F.: CD14
regulates the dendritic cell life cycle after LPS exposure through
NFAT activation. Nature 460: 264-268, 2009.

24. Zanoni, I.; Ostuni, R.; Marek, L. R.; Barresi, S.; Barbalat, R.;
Barton, G. M.; Granucci, F.; Kagan, J. C.: CD14 controls the LPS-induced
endocytosis of Toll-like receptor 4. Cell 147: 868-880, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 07/11/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/26/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/29/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/16/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/28/2004
Natalie E. Krasikov - updated: 3/12/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/15/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/11/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/15/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/21/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/9/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/9/1987

EDITED alopez: 07/11/2013
mgross: 11/19/2012
terry: 10/26/2012
terry: 8/31/2012
mgross: 5/11/2011
terry: 4/29/2011
mgross: 7/16/2009
terry: 7/16/2009
alopez: 12/6/2006
carol: 12/28/2004
carol: 3/17/2004
terry: 3/12/2004
terry: 1/2/2003
cwells: 10/22/2002
terry: 10/15/2002
alopez: 9/12/2002
cwells: 9/11/2002
mgross: 2/15/2002
mgross: 11/21/2000
alopez: 9/10/1998
terry: 9/9/1998
jenny: 3/7/1997
warfield: 3/3/1994
carol: 7/1/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 12/4/1991
carol: 10/24/1990
carol: 10/1/1990

139240	TITLE *139240 GROWTH HORMONE 2; GH2
;;GROWTH HORMONE, VARIANT; GHV;;
GROWTH HORMONE, PLACENTAL; GH2;;
GROWTH HORMONE-LIKE; GHL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Lewis et al. (1978) described a structural variant of human growth
hormone (GH1; 139250), which they called growth hormone-2, or GH2. Its
molecular mass was estimated to be about 20 kD, whereas GH1 has a
molecular mass of about 22 kD. The variant had several amino acid
differences and reacted poorly with antibody to human growth hormone.
Seeburg (1982) studied the structure of the GH2 gene, which they
referred to as the GHV gene, and Pavlakis et al. (1981) studied the
protein resulting from its in vitro expression. Frankenne et al. (1987)
showed that a placental variant of growth hormone, which appears in
maternal serum in midpregnancy and rises in concentration thereafter to
term, is the product of the GHV gene. The GHV gene is not expressed in
the pituitary. Liebhaber et al. (1989) showed that the GHV gene is
expressed in the term placenta, specifically in the
syncytiotrophoblastic epithelium. The similarity in developmental and
tissue-specific expression to that of the related CSA (150200) and CSB
(118820) genes suggested that these genes may share common regulatory
elements.

GENE STRUCTURE

The GH2 gene differs from the GH1 gene by the presence of a GT-to-AT
transition at the 5-prime donor splice site of intron 2 (Chen et al.,
1989). A cryptic site develops at nucleotide +19.

Boguszewski et al. (1998) noted that the GHN (GH1) and GHV (GH2) genes
consist of 5 exons. They examined alternative splicing of GHV
transcripts. The coding region of the GHV gene was amplified by RT-PCR
using placental cDNA as template. DNA sequencing of several clones
revealed 2 novel transcripts. One transcript isoform had a 45-bp
deletion caused by the use of an alternative 3-prime splice site in exon
3, similar to that in the GH1 gene, and is predicted to encode a 20-kD
GHV protein isoform. The other transcript isoform arose by the use of an
alternative 5-prime splice site which caused a 4-bp deletion in the end
of exon 4 and is predicted to encode a 24-kD protein with 219 amino
acids, which the authors referred to as GHV3. The carboxy-terminal
sequence of GHV3 differs from those of 22-kD GHV and GHV2, the 2
previously reported transcripts of the GHV gene, and does not contain a
predicted transmembrane domain as described for GHV2. The authors
concluded that the GHV transcript undergoes alternative splicing
pathways that can generate at least 4 different mRNA isoforms,
predicting the expression of different GH protein products, including 2
with a complete sequence divergence in the carboxy terminus.

GENE FUNCTION

Chellakooty et al. (2004) evaluated the association of maternal serum
levels of placental GH and IGF1 (147440) with fetal growth in a
prospective longitudinal study of 89 normal pregnant women. Placental GH
levels were detectable in all samples from as early as 5 weeks'
gestation and increased significantly throughout pregnancy until
approximately 37 weeks' gestation, when peak levels of 22 ng/ml were
reached. Subsequently, placental GH levels decreased until birth. The
change in placental GH during 24.5 to 37.5 weeks' gestation was
positively associated with fetal growth rate (P = 0.027) and birth
weight (P = 0.027). Gestational age at peak placental GH values (P =
0.007) was associated with pregnancy length. A positive association
between the change in placental GH and the change in IGF1 levels
throughout gestation was found in a multivariate analysis (r(2) = 0.42;
P less than 0.001).

MAPPING

By combination of restriction mapping with somatic cell hybridization,
Owerbach et al. (1980) localized the GH2 gene, which they called 'growth
hormone-like' (GHL), to chromosome 17.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

MacLeod et al. (1991) found abnormally large GHV mRNAs in 1 of 20
placentas. Sequence analysis demonstrated retention of the first 12
bases of intron 2, resulting from both a base substitution at the intron
2 splice-donor dinucleotide (GT to AT) and activation of a cryptic
splice-donor site 12 bases downstream. Survey of a total of 60
additional chromosomes failed to reveal other instances of this
mutation. While the importance of GHV to fetal and maternal physiology
remained to be defined, MacLeod et al. (1991) demonstrated by bioassays
that it has a strong somatogen activity. MacLeod et al. (1991) found no
direct evidence to suggest that the splice site mutation in the
heterozygous state has a significant adverse effect on the physiology of
pregnancy, labor, delivery, or fetal development.

REFERENCE 1. Boguszewski, C. L.; Svensson, P.-A.; Jansson, T.; Clark, R.; Carlsson,
L. M. S.; Carlsson, B.: Cloning of two novel growth hormone transcripts
expressed in human placenta. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 83: 2878-2885,
1998.

2. Chellakooty, M.; Vangsgaard, K.; Larsen, T.; Scheike, T.; Falck-Larsen,
J.; Legarth, J.; Andersson, A. M.; Main, K. M.; Skakkebaek, N. E.;
Juul, A.: A longitudinal study of intrauterine growth and the placental
growth hormone (GH)-insulin-like growth factor I axis in maternal
circulation: association between placental GH and fetal growth. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 384-391, 2004.

3. Chen, E. Y.; Liao, Y.-C.; Smith, D. H.; Barrera-Saldana, H. A.;
Gelinas, R. E.; Seeburg, P. H.: The human growth hormone locus: nucleotide
sequence, biology, and evolution. Genomics 4: 479-497, 1989.

4. Frankenne, F.; Rentier-Delrue, F.; Scippo, M.-L.; Martial, J.;
Hennen, G.: Expression of the growth hormone variant gene in human
placenta. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 64: 635-637, 1987.

5. Lewis, U. J.; Dunn, J. T.; Bonewald, L. F.; Seavey, B. K.; VanderLaan,
W. P.: A naturally occurring structural variant of human growth hormone. J.
Biol. Chem. 253: 2679-2687, 1978.

6. Liebhaber, S. A.; Urbanek, M.; Ray, J.; Tuan, R. S.; Cooke, N.
E.: Characterization and histologic localization of human growth
hormone-variant gene expression in the placenta. J. Clin. Invest. 83:
1985-1991, 1989.

7. MacLeod, J. N.; Liebhaber, S. A.; MacGillivray, M. H.; Cooke, N.
E.: Identification of a splice-site mutation in the human growth
hormone-variant gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 48: 1168-1174, 1991.

8. MacLeod, J. N.; Worsley, I.; Ray, J.; Friesen, H. G.; Liebhaber,
S. A.; Cooke, N. E.: Human growth hormone variant is a biologically
active somatogen and lactogen. Endocrinology 128: 1298-1302, 1991.

9. Owerbach, D.; Rutter, W. J.; Martial, J. A.; Baxter, J. D.; Shows,
T. B.: Genes for growth hormone, chorionic somatomammotropin and
growth hormone-like genes on chromosome 17 in humans. Science 209:
289-292, 1980.

10. Pavlakis, G. N.; Hizuka, N.; Gorden, P.; Seeburg, P. H.; Hamber,
D. H.: Expression of two human growth hormone genes in monkey cells
infected by simian virus 40 recombinants. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 78:
7398-7402, 1981.

11. Seeburg, P. H.: The human growth hormone gene family: nucleotide
sequences show recent divergence and predict a new polypeptide hormone. DNA 1:
239-249, 1982.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 03/25/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/18/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED alopez: 03/25/2009
carol: 5/27/2005
mgross: 3/23/1999
mgross: 3/18/1999
alopez: 10/28/1997
carol: 6/2/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/26/1992
carol: 1/22/1992
carol: 6/21/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990

182115	TITLE *182115 CYTOHESIN 1; CYTH1
;;PLECKSTRIN HOMOLOGY, SEC7, AND COILED-COIL DOMAINS PROTEIN 1; PSCD1;;
SEC7, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF; SEC7;;
D17S811E
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

One of the major mediators of the inborn or 'natural' immune system is
the natural killer (NK) cell. Dixon et al. (1993) prepared a subtractive
cDNA library from human NK cells and characterized 13 unique clones. A
clone named B2-1 was highly expressed in both NK and T cells, but was
very weakly expressed or absent in several other cell lines. The deduced
protein was highly homologous to the yeast protein SEC7, which is
located in the Golgi apparatus and is thought to be involved in
transporting proteins through the Golgi complex. B2-1 was the only known
human protein with significant homology to SEC7 and may be one of the
human equivalents of the yeast secretory proteins.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a T-cell leukemia cell line with the
intracellular portion of CD18 (ITGB2; 600065) as bait, Kolanus et al.
(1996) isolated a cDNA encoding cytohesin-1 (PSCD1) and a partial cDNA
encoding PSCD2L (602488), which they designated cts18.1. PSCD1 is 88%
identical to the PSCD2L fragment. The predicted 398-amino acid PSCD1
protein contains a central 200-residue SEC7 domain and a C-terminal
pleckstrin homology (PH) domain. Western blot analysis showed expression
of a 47-kD protein, particularly, but not exclusively, in lymphoid
cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Kolanus et al. (1996) found that overexpression of a full-length PSCD1
protein or of the SEC7 domain only induced CD18-dependent binding to
ICAM1 (147840), whereas the PSCD1 PH domain specifically inhibited
adhesion. Binding analysis indicated that the SEC7 domain, but not the
PH domain, interacts with the cytoplasmic domain of CD18 but not with
other cell surface receptors or protein-tyrosine kinases tested. Kolanus
et al. (1996) concluded that PSCD1 specifically regulates the adhesive
function of beta-2 integrins in lymphocytes.

The induction of a transformed cellular phenotype by viruses requires
the modulation of signaling pathways through viral proteins. Kliche et
al. (2001) showed that the phenotypic changes induced by the kaposin A
protein of human herpesvirus-8 are mediated through its direct
interaction with cytohesin-1, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF)
for ARF GTPases (e.g., ARF1; 103180) and regulator of integrin-mediated
cell adhesion. Focus formation, stress fiber dissolution, and activation
of the ERK1 (601795)/ERK2 (176948) mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) signal cascade were reverted by a cytohesin-1 glu157-to-lys
mutant, which is deficient in catalyzing guanine nucleotide exchange.
Furthermore, liposome-embedded kaposin A was found to specifically
stimulate cytohesin-1-dependent GTP binding of myristoylated ARF1 in
vitro.

Hafner et al. (2006) used an aptamer displacement screen to identify
SecinH3, a small Sec7 domain-specific molecular antagonist of
cytohesins. The cytohesins are a class of BFA-resistant small GEFs for
ADP-ribosylation factors (ARFs), which regulate cytoskeletal
organization, integrin activation, or integrin signaling. The
application of SecinH3 in human liver cells showed that insulin receptor
complex-associated cytohesins are required for insulin signaling.
SecinH3-treated mice showed increased expression of gluconeogenic genes,
reduced expression of glycolytic, fatty acid, and ketone body metabolism
genes in the liver, reduced liver glycogen stores, and a compensatory
increase in plasma insulin. Thus, Hafner et al. (2006) concluded that
cytohesin inhibition results in hepatic insulin resistance.

Vitale et al. (2000) found that cytohesin-1 interacted with ARF domain
protein-1 (ARD1, or TRIM23; 601747) in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a
human liver cDNA library. ARD1-GDP interacted well with cytohesin-1 but
poorly with cytohesin-2 (PSCD2; 602488), and cytohesin-1 accelerated
binding of a nonhydrolyzable GTP analog to ARD1. Mutation analysis
showed that the effector region of the ARF domain of ARD1 interacted
with the Sec7 domain of cytohesin-1. Physical association between these
domains was highly dependent on experimental conditions, and a free
Mg(2+) concentration that favored nucleotide release from ARD1 and
accumulation of the nucleotide-free ARD1 form also favored interaction
between ARD1 and cytohesin-1. In transfected COS-7 cells, cytohesin-1
was distributed throughout the cell and was also present in the nucleus.
ARD1 associated with vesicular structures concentrated around the
nucleus and scattered throughout the cytoplasm, corresponding to Golgi
and lysosomes, respectively. A constitutively GDP-bound form of ARD1
showed a similar distribution, whereas a constitutively GTP-bound form
of ARD1 was concentrated close to the nucleus in a Golgi-like
distribution only. When ARD1 or its GDP- and GTP-bound forms were
coexpressed with cytohesin-1, only the GDP-bound form showed any change
in distribution or colocalization with cytohesin-1. In 90% of cells
coexpressing the proteins, the GDP-bound form of ARD1 was distributed
throughout the cell, except for the nucleus, and largely colocalized
with cytohesin-1. In less than 10% of cells coexpressing the proteins,
the GDP-bound form of ARD1 and cytohesin-1 colocalized in lysosomes.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Ogasawara et al. (2000) determined that
the PSCD1 gene contains at least 14 exons, including a 3-bp exon 10 also
present in PSCD2 and PSCD3 (605081) but not in PSCD4 (606514) that
results in the insertion of a single glycine into the variable loop
between the first and second beta sheets in the pleckstrin homology
domain.

MAPPING

Dixon et al. (1993) showed by PCR analysis of a human/rodent hybrid
panel that the B2-1 gene is located on chromosome 17. Fluorescence in
situ hybridization localized the gene to 17q25.

REFERENCE 1. Dixon, B.; Mansour, M.; Pohajdak, B.: Assignment of human B2-1
gene (D17S811E) to chromosome 17qter by PCR analysis of somatic cell
hybrids and fluorescence in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 63:
42-44, 1993.

2. Hafner, M.; Schmitz, A.; Grune, I.; Srivatsan, S. G.; Paul, B.;
Kolanus, W.; Quast, T.; Kremmer, E.; Bauer, I.; Famulok, M.: Inhibition
of cytohesins by SecinH3 leads to hepatic insulin resistance. Nature 444:
941-944, 2006.

3. Kliche, S.; Nagel, W.; Kremmer, E.; Atzler, C.; Ege, A.; Knorr,
T.; Koszinowski, U.; Kolanus, W.; Haas, J.: Signaling by human herpesvirus
8 kaposin A through direct membrane recruitment of cytohesin-1. Molec.
Cell 7: 833-843, 2001.

4. Kolanus, W.; Nagel, W.; Schiller, B.; Zeitlmann, L.; Godar, S.;
Stockinger, H.; Seed, B.: Alpha-L-beta-2 integrin/LFA-1 binding to
ICAM-1 induced by cytohesin-1, a cytoplasmic regulatory molecule. Cell 86:
233-242, 1996.

5. Ogasawara, M.; Kim, S.-C.; Adamik, R.; Togawa, A.; Ferrans, V.
J.; Takeda, K.; Kirby, M.; Moss, J.; Vaughan, M.: Similarities in
function and gene structure of cytohesin-4 and cytohesin-1, guanine
nucleotide-exchange proteins for ADP-ribosylation factors. J. Biol.
Chem. 275: 3221-3230, 2000.

6. Vitale, N.; Pacheco-Rodriguez, G.; Ferrans, V. J.; Riemenschneider,
W.; Moss, J.; Vaughan, M.: Specific functional interaction of human
cytohesin-1 and ADP-ribosylation factor domain protein (ARD1). J.
Biol. Chem. 275: 21331-21339, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/15/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/1/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/20/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/27/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/7/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/27/1993

EDITED alopez: 02/06/2013
terry: 1/29/2013
terry: 9/7/2010
mgross: 10/1/2009
mgross: 3/15/2007
alopez: 2/5/2007
terry: 2/1/2007
alopez: 12/31/2003
terry: 12/30/2003
mgross: 2/20/2002
alopez: 11/27/2001
mgross: 8/7/2001
mgross: 1/20/2000
carol: 5/4/1999
carol: 5/27/1993

171740	TITLE *171740 ALKALINE PHOSPHATASE, INTESTINAL; ALPI
;;IAP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Lehmann (1980) provided biochemical corroboration of the genetic
distinctness of 3 alkaline phosphatases: intestinal, placental (171800),
and liver/bone/kidney (171760). The existence of at least 1 gene coding
for the intestinal forms (adult and fetal), independent of the other
forms, is inescapable (Goldstein et al., 1980). Gogolin et al. (1982)
found a monoclonal antibody raised against purified human placental
alkaline phosphatase that crossreacted with the adult and fetal forms of
intestinal alkaline phosphatase, despite the fact that the placental and
intestinal enzymes are nonallelic. Berger et al. (1987) used alkaline
phosphatase cDNA as a probe to clone intestinal alkaline phosphatase
cDNA, since partial protein sequence data indicated a high degree of
homology between intestinal alkaline phosphatase and the reported
sequence of the placental isoenzyme. Intestinal alkaline phosphatase
cDNA, which is 3.1 kb, is somewhat larger than the cDNA for the
placental isoenzyme, which is 2.8 kb. Differences and similarities were
pointed out.

Henthorn et al. (1987) isolated and sequenced a cDNA that encodes the
alkaline phosphatase expressed in adult human intestine and compared the
sequence with those previously determined for the placental and
liver/bone/kidney cDNAs. The deduced polypeptide showed 86.5% amino acid
identity to placental ALP and 56.6% amino acid identity to
liver/bone/kidney ALP. Thus, the immunologic cross-reactivity of ALPI
and ALPP is perhaps explained.

GENE FUNCTION

Humans (Langman et al., 1966) and rodents (Gould, 1944) fed a diet with
a high fat content had elevated levels of circulating alkaline
phosphatase, the source of which was the intestinal isozyme.

Using wildtype and Iap-knockout mice and in vitro assays with human and
rat intestinal cell lines, Goldberg et al. (2008) showed that IAP could
detoxify lipopolysaccharide and prevent bacterial invasion across the
gut mucosal barrier. Iap expression and function in mice were lost with
starvation and maintained by enteral feeding. Goldberg et al. (2008)
concluded that IAP silencing that occurs during starvation is a key
component of the gut mucosal barrier dysfunction seen in critically ill
patients.

GENE STRUCTURE

Henthorn et al. (1988) isolated and sequenced the ALPI gene in its
entirety. The gene is composed of 11 exons. Introns in intestinal,
placental, and liver/bone/kidney ALP genes occur at analogous positions,
confirming that these genes arose from a single ancestral gene.

MAPPING

Henthorn et al. (1987) stated that the placental and intestinal ALP
genes map to the same region of chromosome 2. Griffin et al. (1987)
mapped both the placental and the intestinal alkaline phosphatase genes
to 2q34-q37 by chromosomal in situ hybridization and hybridization to
the DNA of somatic cell hybrids. By fluorescence in situ hybridization,
Wu et al. (1993) mapped ALPI to 2q36.3-q37.1. Pasteris et al. (1993)
concluded from a molecular analysis of a chromosome 2 deletion mapping
panel that the ALPI gene is on the telomeric side of both PAX3 (606597)
and COL4A3 (120070) and close to CHRND (100720).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Harris et al. (1974) found no genetic variants of ALPI by
electrophoretic means.

REFERENCE 1. Berger, J.; Garattini, E.; Hua, J.-C.; Udenfriend, S.: Cloning
and sequencing of human intestinal alkaline phosphatase cDNA. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 695-698, 1987.

2. Gogolin, K. J.; Wray, L. K.; Slaughter, C. A.; Harris, H.: A monoclonal
antibody that reacts with nonallelic enzyme glycoproteins. Science 216:
59-61, 1982.

3. Goldberg, R. F.; Austen, W. G., Jr.; Zhang, X.; Munene, G.; Mostafa,
G.; Biswas, S.; McCormack, M.; Eberlin, K. R.; Nguyen, J. T.; Tatlidede,
H. S.; Warren, H. S.; Narisawa, S.; Millan, J. L.; Hodin, R. A.:
Intestinal alkaline phosphatase is a gut mucosal defense factor maintained
by enteral nutrition. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 3551-3556, 2008.

4. Goldstein, D. J.; Rogers, C. E.; Harris, H.: Expression of alkaline
phosphatase loci in mammalian tissues. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 77:
2857-2860, 1980.

5. Gould, B. S.: Studies on the source of serum phosphatase: the
nature of the increased serum phosphatase in rats after fat feeding. Arch.
Biochem. 4: 175-181, 1944.

6. Griffin, C. A.; Smith, M.; Henthorn, P. S.; Harris, H.; Weiss,
M. J.; Raducha, M.; Emanuel, B. S.: Human placental and intestinal
alkaline phosphatase genes map to 2q34-q37. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 41:
1025-1034, 1987.

7. Harris, H.; Hopkinson, D. A.; Robson, E. B.: The incidence of
rare alleles determining electrophoretic variants: data on 43 enzyme
loci in man. Ann. Hum. Genet. 37: 237-253, 1974.

8. Henthorn, P. S.; Raducha, M.; Edwards, Y. H.; Weiss, M. J.; Slaughter,
C.; Lafferty, M. A.; Harris, H.: Nucleotide and amino acid sequences
of human intestinal alkaline phosphatase: close homology to placental
alkaline phosphatase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 1234-1238, 1987.
Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 4088 only, 1987.

9. Henthorn, P. S.; Raducha, M.; Kadesch, T.; Weiss, M. J.; Harris,
H.: Sequence and characterization of the human intestinal alkaline
phosphatase gene. J. Biol. Chem. 263: 12011-12019, 1988.

10. Langman, M. J. S.; Leuthold, E.; Robson, E. B.; Harris, J.; Luffman,
J. E.; Harris, H.: Influence of diet on the 'intestinal' component
of serum alkaline phosphatase in people of different ABO blood groups
and secretor status. Nature 212: 41-43, 1966.

11. Lehmann, F.-G.: Human alkaline phosphatases: evidence of three
isoenzymes (placental, intestinal and liver-bone-kidney-type) by lectin-binding
affinity and immunological specificity. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 616:
41-59, 1980.

12. Pasteris, N. G.; Trask, B. J.; Sheldon, S.; Gorski, J. L.: Discordant
phenotype of two overlapping deletions involving the PAX3 gene in
chromosome 2q35. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 953-959, 1993.

13. Wu, B.-L.; Milunsky, A.; Wyandt, H.; Hoth, C.; Baldwin, C.; Skare,
J.: In situ hybridization applied to Waardenburg syndrome. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 63: 29-32, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/21/2008

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED carol: 10/01/2013
tpirozzi: 10/1/2013
mgross: 5/21/2008
carol: 1/8/2002
carol: 8/3/1999
carol: 9/29/1998
terry: 9/11/1995
mark: 8/31/1995
carol: 8/18/1993
carol: 5/26/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990

602307	TITLE *602307 WW DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; WWP1
;;WW DOMAIN-CONTAINING E3 UBIQUITIN PROTEIN LIGASE 1;;
TGIF-INTERACTING UBIQUITIN LIGASE 1; TIUL1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

WWP1 belongs to the NEDD4 (602278) protein family. NEDD4 family proteins
function as E3 ubiquitin ligases and are involved in protein
trafficking, particularly in the targeting of proteins to proteosomes
and lysosomes (Flasza et al., 2002).

CLONING

The WW domain is a 35- to 40-amino acid protein-protein interaction
motif characterized by 4 conserved aromatic residues, 2 of which are
tryptophan. Using COLT (cloning of ligand targets), Pirozzi et al.
(1997) screened human bone marrow and brain cDNA expression libraries
with putative WW domain peptide ligand sequences and recovered 3
distinct proteins, WWP1, WWP2 (602308), and WWP3 (602625). WWP1 contains
4 tandem WW domains and a partial HECT (homologous to the E6-associated
protein carboxyl terminus) domain, which is associated with
ubiquitin-protein ligase activity. Pirozzi et al. (1997) noted the
similarities between WWP1 and NEDD4 and suggested that WWP1 and WWP2
belong to a family of NEDD4-like proteins.

By Northern blot analysis, Wood et al. (1998) detected a 4.5-kb WWP1
transcript, which they called AIP5, in heart, brain, placenta, lung,
liver, muscle, kidney, and pancreas. Expression was particularly high in
heart and skeletal muscle.

By RT-PCR of the T47D mammary carcinoma cell line, Flasza et al. (2002)
cloned full-length WWP1 and 5 splice variants. The full-length 922-amino
acid WWP1 isoform has an N-terminal C2 domain, which is a membrane lipid
interaction motif, followed by the WW domains and C-terminal HECT
domain. Three of the WWP1 splice variants encode isoforms with deletions
of either the entire C2 domain or the C-terminal end of the C2 domain.
The other 2 variants encode short isoforms that are truncated within or
before the C2 domain. RT-PCR detected WWP1 expression in all adult and
fetal tissues examined. Expression of full-length WWP1 and the 3 WWP1
variants encoding isoforms with C2 deletions appeared to be regulated in
a tissue-specific fashion. The 2 WWP1 variants encoding truncated
peptides were not detected in any normal human tissues examined.

Using immunofluorescence analysis, Seo et al. (2004) detected Wwp1,
which they called Tiul1, in both the nucleus and cytoplasm of canine and
mink epithelial cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Using in vitro assays, Pirozzi et al. (1997) showed that individual WW
domains of WWP1, WWP2, and WWP3 could selectively bind particular
peptide ligands.

Seo et al. (2004) detected an interaction between mouse Smad7 (602932)
and human TIUL1 in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a placenta cDNA library,
and they confirmed the interaction using canine, mink, monkey, and human
epithelial cell lines. Endogenous Smad7 and Tiul1 interacted independent
of TGF-beta (TGFB1; 190180) signaling, and the interaction led to
efficient ubiquitination of activated TGF-beta receptor-1 (TGFBR1;
190181), with subsequent receptor degradation. Endogenous TIUL1 also
interacted with SMAD2 (601366)/SMAD3 (603109) and the nuclear
corepressor TGIF (602630) following TGF-beta treatment of human
embryonic kidney cells, and this interaction led to ubiquitination and
degradation of SMAD2. Overexpression of human TIUL1 in canine kidney
cells suppressed TGF-beta-induced growth arrest, and this suppression
required the catalytic cysteine (cys890) in the HECT domain of TIUL1.
Conversely, knockdown of endogenous Tiul1 expression by small
interfering RNA increased the sensitivity of cells to TGF-beta. Seo et
al. (2004) concluded that TIUL1 negatively regulates TGF-beta signaling
by directing the degradation of active components of the TGF-beta
network.

Carrano et al. (2009) identified Wwp1 as a positive regulator of life
span in C. elegans in response to dietary restriction. Overexpression of
Wwp1 in worms extended life span by up to 20% under conditions of ad
libitum feeding. Conversely, reduction of Wwp1 completely suppressed the
extended longevity of diet-restricted animals. The E2
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme Ubc18, which is homologous to human UBE2L3
(603721), interacted with Wwp1 and was required for Wwp1 ubiquitin
ligase activity and the extended longevity of worms overexpressing Wwp1.
Carrano et al. (2009) concluded that Wwp1 and Ubc18 function to
ubiquitinate substrates that regulate longevity induced by diet
restriction.

MAPPING

Using FISH, Flasza et al. (2002) mapped the WWP1 gene to chromosome
8q21. They identified a WWP1 pseudogene on chromosome 3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Muscular dystrophy in chickens is transmitted codominantly by a single
gene, but the phenotype is modified by other background genes. Matsumoto
et al. (2008) identified a mutation in the Wwp1 gene that led to an
arg441-to-glu (R441Q) substitution in dystrophic chickens. Full-length
chicken Wwp1 shares 83% amino acid identity with human WWP1 and contains
a C2 domain, followed by 3 WW domains and a C-terminal HECT domain. The
R441Q substitution occurred between WW domains 1 and 2 within a region
highly conserved among tetrapods and snakes, including 100% conservation
of the 20 amino acids immediately surrounding R441.

REFERENCE 1. Carrano, A. C.; Liu, Z.; Dillin, A.; Hunter, T.: A conserved ubiquitination
pathway determines longevity in response to diet restriction. Nature 460:
396-399, 2009.

2. Flasza, M.; Gorman, P.; Roylance, R.; Canfield, A. E.; Baron, M.
: Alternative splicing determines the domain structure of WWP1, a
Nedd4 family protein. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 290: 431-437,
2002.

3. Matsumoto, H.; Maruse, H.; Inaba, Y.; Yoshizawa, K.; Sasazaki,
S.; Fujiwara, A.; Nishibori, M.; Nakamura, A.; Takeda, S.; Ichihara,
N.; Kikuchi, T.; Mukai, F.; Mannen, H.: The ubiquitin ligase gene
(WWP1) is responsible for the chicken muscular dystrophy. FEBS Lett. 2212-2218,
2008.

4. Pirozzi, G.; McConnell, S. J.; Uveges, A. J.; Carter, J. M.; Sparks,
A. B.; Kay, B. K.; Fowlkes, D. M.: Identification of novel human
WW domain-containing proteins by cloning of ligand targets. J. Biol.
Chem. 272: 14611-14616, 1997.

5. Seo, S. R.; Lallemand, F.; Ferrand, N.; Pessah, M.; L'Hoste, S.;
Camonis, J.; Atfi, A.: The novel E3 ubiquitin ligase Tiul1 associates
with TGIF to target Smad2 for degradation. EMBO J. 23: 3780-3792,
2004.

6. Wood, J. D.; Yuan, J.; Margolis, R. L.; Colomer, V.; Duan, K.;
Kushi, J.; Kaminsky, Z.; Kleiderlein, J. J., Jr.; Sharp, A. H.; Ross,
C. A.: Atrophin-1, the DRPLA gene product, interacts with two families
of WW domain-containing proteins. Molec. Cell. Neurosci. 11: 149-160,
1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/13/2009
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 10/11/2001

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 1/31/1998

EDITED wwang: 09/01/2009
mgross: 8/17/2009
terry: 8/13/2009
alopez: 9/22/2008
carol: 10/11/2001
psherman: 5/14/1998
alopez: 2/6/1998

602362	TITLE *602362 GTPase-ACTIVATING PROTEIN, RAN, 1; RANGAP1
;;RAN GTPase-ACTIVATING PROTEIN 1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

RAS-related small GTP-binding proteins (GTPBPs), such as RAN (601179),
participate in various intracellular signal transduction pathways. The
GTP-bound form usually represents the active signaling form of the
protein. Hydrolysis of GTP to GDP and phosphate occurs upon activation
of a latent GTPase activity in the GTPBP and returns it to its inactive,
GDP-bound state. This latent GTPase activity is induced upon interaction
of GTP-bound GTPBPs with GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs). Bischoff et
al. (1994) purified a GAP from a HeLa cell extract. The protein,
designated RanGAP1, is a homodimeric 65-kD polypeptide. RanGAP1
specifically induced the GTPase activity of RAN, but not of RAS
(190020), by over 1,000-fold. Bischoff et al. (1994) believed RanGAP1 to
be the immediate antagonist of RCC1 (179710), a regulator molecule that
keeps RAN in the active, GTP-bound state.

Bischoff et al. (1995) purified the 65-kD RanGAP1 protein from human
HeLa cells. Using PCR with degenerate primers based on RanGAP1 peptide
sequences, they cloned the corresponding cDNA from a HeLa cell library.
The RANGAP1 gene encodes a 587-amino acid polypeptide. The sequence is
unrelated to that of GTPase activators for other RAS-related proteins,
but is 88% identical to Fug1, the murine homolog of yeast Rna1p.
Bischoff et al. (1995) proposed that RanGAP1 and RCC1 control
RAN-dependent transport between the nucleus and cytoplasm.

GENE FUNCTION

RAN is a nuclear RAS-like GTPase that is required for the bidirectional
transport of proteins and ribonucleoproteins across the nuclear pore
complex (NPC). RanGAP1 is a key regulator of the RAN GTP/GDP cycle.
Matunis et al. (1996) reported the identification and localization of a
novel form of RanGAP1. They showed that the 70-kD unmodified form of
RanGAP1 is exclusively cytoplasmic, whereas the 90-kD modified form is
associated with the cytoplasmic fibers of the NPC. The modified form
also appeared to associate with the mitotic spindle apparatus during
mitosis. These findings had specific implications for RAN function and
broad implications for protein regulation by ubiquitin-like
modifications.

RANGAP1 is modified by the conjugation of SUMO1 (601912), and this
modification is required for association of RANGAP1 with the nuclear
pore complex. Okuma et al. (1999) showed that human SUA1 (SAE1; 613294),
UBA2 (613295), and UBC9 (UBE2I; 601661) catalyzed in vitro sumoylation
of RANGAP1 in a 2-step reaction.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Seewald et al. (2002) presented the 3-dimensional structure of a
Ran-RanBP1-RanGAP ternary complex in the ground state and in a
transition-state mimic. The structure and biochemical experiments showed
that RanGAP does not act through an arginine finger, that the basic
machinery for fast GTP hydrolysis is provided exclusively by Ran, and
that correct positioning of the catalytic glutamine is essential for
catalysis.

Bernier-Villamor et al. (2002) performed crystallographic analysis of a
complex between mammalian UBC9 and a C-terminal domain of RANGAP1 at 2.5
angstroms. These experiments revealed structural determinants for
recognition of consensus SUMO modification sequences found within
SUMO-conjugated proteins. Structure-based mutagenesis and biochemical
analysis of UBC9 and RANGAP1 revealed distinct motifs required for
substrate binding and SUMO modification of p53 (191170), NFKBIA
(164008), and RANGAP1.

Reverter and Lima (2005) described the 3.0-angstrom crystal structure of
a 4-protein complex of UBC9, a NUP358/RANBP2 (601181) E3 ligase domain
(IR1-M), and SUMO1 conjugated to the carboxy-terminal domain of RANGAP1.
Structural insights, combined with biochemical and kinetic data obtained
with additional substrates, supported a model in which NUP358/RANBP2
acts as an E3 by binding both SUMO and UBC9 to position the
SUMO-E2-thioester in an optimal orientation to enhance conjugation.

REFERENCE 1. Bernier-Villamor, V.; Sampson, D. A.; Matunis, M. J.; Lima, C.
D.: Structural basis for E2-mediated SUMO conjugation revealed by
a complex between ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme Ubc9 and RanGAP1. Cell 108:
345-356, 2002.

2. Bischoff, F. R.; Klebe, C.; Kretschmer, J.; Wittinghofer, A.; Ponstingl,
H.: RanGAP1 induces GTPase activity of nuclear Ras-related Ran. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 2587-2591, 1994.

3. Bischoff, F. R.; Krebber, H.; Kempf, T.; Hermes, I.; Ponstingl,
H.: Human RanGTPase-activating protein RanGAP1 is a homologue of
yeast Rna1p involved in mRNA processing and transport. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 92: 1749-1753, 1995.

4. Matunis, M. J.; Coutavas, E.; Blobel, G.: A novel ubiquitin-like
modification modulates the partitioning of the Ran-GTPase-activating
protein RanGAP1 between the cytosol and the nuclear pore complex. J.
Cell Biol. 135: 1457-1470, 1996.

5. Okuma, T.; Honda, R.; Ichikawa, G.; Tsumagari, N.; Yasuda, H.:
In vitro SUMO-1 modification requires two enzymatic steps, E1 and
E2. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 254: 693-698, 1999.

6. Reverter, D.; Lima, C. D.: Insights into E3 ligase activity revealed
by a SUMO-RanGAP1-Ubc9-Nup358 complex. (Letter) Nature 435: 687-692,
2005.

7. Seewald, M. J.; Korner, C.; Wittinghofer, A.; Vetter, I. R.: RanGAP
mediates GTP hydrolysis without an arginine finger. Nature 415:
662-666, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/4/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/15/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 3/22/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/4/2002
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 7/12/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/16/1999

CREATED Mark H. Paalman: 2/17/1998

EDITED mgross: 03/04/2010
terry: 3/4/2010
alopez: 6/16/2005
terry: 6/15/2005
mgross: 3/22/2002
alopez: 2/7/2002
terry: 2/4/2002
alopez: 7/12/1999
mgross: 2/22/1999
mgross: 2/18/1999
terry: 2/16/1999
psherman: 6/3/1998
alopez: 2/17/1998

610564	TITLE *610564 PRENYL DIPHOSPHATE SYNTHASE, SUBUNIT 2; PDSS2
;;DECAPRENYL DIPHOSPHATE SYNTHASE, SUBUNIT 2;;
D-LESS POLYPRENYL PYROPHOSPHATE SYNTHASE 1; DLP1;;
CHROMOSOME 6 OPEN READING FRAME 210; C6ORF210
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The isoprenoid chain of ubiquinone (coenzyme Q) varies in length between
species and is determined by trans-polyprenyl diphosphate synthase.
Humans possess a heterotetrameric decaprenyl diphosphate synthase
composed of DPS1 (PDSS1; 607429) and DLP1 (PDSS2) that produces coenzyme
Q10 ubiquinone (Saiki et al., 2005).

CLONING

By searching EST databases for homologs of S. pombe Dlp1, Saiki et al.
(2005) identified human PDSS2, which they called DLP1. The predicted
399-amino acid protein shares 88% identity with its mouse homolog. DLP1
contains the 7 conserved domains typically found in trans-prenyl
diphosphate synthases, but it lacks DDxxD motifs. Saiki et al. (2005)
also identified a DLP1 splice variant, which they called DLP2, that
encodes a 240-amino acid protein with a unique C-terminal end.

GENE FUNCTION

Saiki et al. (2005) found that expression of human DPS1 and DLP1 in E.
coli resulted in production of Q10 ubiquinone and decaprenol, whereas
expression of mouse Sps1 and Dlp1 produced Q9 ubiquinone and solanesol.
Western blot analysis showed that the proteins were expressed as a
heterotetramer. Expression in E. coli of heterologous combinations of
human and mouse proteins generated both Q9 and Q10, indicating that both
DPS1/Sps1 and DLP1/Dlp1 are involved in determining the ubiquinone side
chain. Expression of the DLP2 splice variant with DPS1 did not result in
Q10 production. Although human DPS1 and mouse Sps1 could complement S.
pombe lacking Dps1, neither human DLP1 nor mouse Dlp1 could complement
S. pombe lacking Dlp1. Saiki et al. (2005) concluded that both DPS1 and
DLP1 are required for generation of decaprenyl diphosphate synthase.

GENE STRUCTURE

Saiki et al. (2005) determined that the DLP1 gene contains 8 exons.

MAPPING

Saiki et al. (2005) stated that the DLP1 gene maps to chromosome 6q21.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In an infant with fatal encephalomyopathy and nephrotic syndrome due to
coenzyme Q10 deficiency-3 (COQ10D3; 614652), Lopez et al. (2006)
identified compound heterozygous mutations in the PDSS2 gene
(610564.0001 and 610564.0002). Biochemical assays with radiolabeled
substrates indicated a severe defect in decaprenyl diphosphate synthase
in the patient's fibroblasts. Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) is a vital lipophilic
molecule that transfers electrons from mitochondrial respiratory chain
complexes I and II to complex III, and the PDSS2 gene encodes a subunit
of the first enzyme in the coenzyme Q10 biosynthetic pathway.

ANIMAL MODEL

Peng et al. (2008) found that Pdss2 knockout in mice was embryonically
lethal, with no homozygous embryos surviving beyond embryonic day 10.5.
Pdss2 knockout targeted to renal glomerular podocytes resulted in
nephrotic syndrome but did not alter coenzyme Q levels in whole kidney
homogenates, likely due to the small number of kidney cells affected.
Pdss2 knockout targeted to hepatocytes caused coenzyme Q depletion in
whole liver homogenates, impairment of mitochondrial respiratory chain
function, and disturbance of basic metabolic processes.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COENZYME Q10 DEFICIENCY, PRIMARY, 3
PDSS2, GLN322TER

In an infant with primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency-3 (COQ10D3; 614652)
resulting in fatal encephalomyopathy and nephrotic syndrome, Lopez et
al. (2006) found compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the PDSS2
gene: a 964C-T transition resulting in a gln322-to-ter (Q322X)
substitution inherited from the unaffected father, and a 1145C-T
transition resulting in a ser382-to-leu (S382L; 610564.0002)
substitution in the seventh conserved domain inherited from the
unaffected mother. Neither mutation was found in 210 control
chromosomes.

Quinzii et al. (2010) studied fibroblasts derived from the patient
reported by Lopez et al. (2006). CoQ10 levels were decreased to 22.4% of
normal, and the cells showed reduced ATP levels, but no increase in
reactive oxygen species or oxidative stress-induced cell death. Quinzii
et al. (2010) concluded that the pathology caused by these mutations was
related to the marked bioenergetic defect, but not to oxidative stress.
The authors suggested that very low mitochondrial respiratory activity
may even confer some resistance to stress-induced apoptosis.

.0002
COENZYME Q10 DEFICIENCY, PRIMARY, 3
PDSS2, SER382LEU

See Lopez et al. (2006) and 610564.0001.

.0003
REMOVED FROM DATABASE
REFERENCE 1. Lopez, L. C.; Schuelke, M.; Quinzii, C. M.; Kanki, T.; Rodenburg,
R. J. T.; Naini, A.; DiMauro, S.; Hirano, M.: Leigh syndrome with
nephropathy and CoQ10 deficiency due to decaprenyl diphosphate synthase
subunit 2 (PDSS2) mutations. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 79: 1125-1129, 2006.

2. Peng, M.; Falk, M. J.; Haase, V. H.; King, R.; Polyak, E.; Selak,
M.; Yudkoff, M.; Hancock, W. W.; Meade, R.; Saiki, R.; Lunceford,
A. L.; Clarke, C. F.; Gasser, D. L.: Primary coenzyme Q deficiency
in Pdss2 mutant mice causes isolated renal disease. PLoS Genet. 4:
e1000061, 2008. Note: Electronic Article.

3. Quinzii, C. M.; Lopez, L. C.; Gilkerson, R. W.; Dorado, B.; Coku,
J.; Naini, A. B.; Lagier-Tourenne, C.; Schuelke, M.; Salviati, L.;
Carrozzo, R.; Santorelli, F.; Rahman, S.; Tazir, M.; Koenig, M.; DiMauro,
S.; Hirano, M.: Reactive oxygen species, oxidative stress, and cell
death correlate with level of CoQ10 deficiency. FASEB J. 24: 3733-3743,
2010.

4. Saiki, R.; Nagata, A.; Kainou, T.; Matsuda, H.; Kawamukai, M.:
Characterization of solanesyl and decaprenyl diphosphate synthases
in mice and humans. FEBS J. 272: 5606-5622, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/13/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/23/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/30/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/11/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/28/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/14/2006

EDITED alopez: 03/15/2013
ckniffin: 3/13/2013
carol: 5/24/2012
terry: 5/24/2012
ckniffin: 5/23/2012
alopez: 7/7/2009
terry: 6/30/2009
alopez: 11/19/2007
terry: 9/20/2007
alopez: 6/15/2007
terry: 6/11/2007
alopez: 12/5/2006
terry: 11/28/2006
mgross: 11/14/2006

604405	TITLE *604405 SIALIC ACID-BINDING IMMUNOGLOBULIN-LIKE LECTIN 6; SIGLEC6
;;CD33 ANTIGEN-LIKE; CD33L;;
CD33 ANTIGEN-LIKE 1; CD33L1;;
OB-BINDING PROTEIN 1; OBBP1
SIALIC ACID-BINDING IMMUNOGLOBULIN-LIKE LECTIN 6, MEMBRANE-BOUND,
INCLUDED;;
CD33 ANTIGEN-LIKE, MEMBRANE-BOUND, INCLUDED;;
SIALIC ACID-BINDING IMMUNOGLOBULIN-LIKE LECTIN 6, SOLUBLE, INCLUDED;;
CD33 ANTIGEN-LIKE, SOLUBLE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION Molecules belonging to the immunoglobulin (Ig) superfamily function as
mediators of cell-cell interactions. The sialoadhesin family, a group of
sialic acid-binding proteins, is a subgroup of the Ig superfamily.
Members of the sialoadhesin family include myeloid antigen CD33
(159590). By sequencing cDNAs randomly selected from a human placenta
cDNA library, Takei et al. (1997) identified a partial cDNA with high
sequence similarity to CD33. Using the partial cDNA, they isolated
full-length placenta cDNAs. Since the predicted protein had significant
similarity to CD33, they called the corresponding gene 'CD33
antigen-like' (CD33L). The deduced 442-amino acid CD33L protein contains
a signal peptide, an N-terminal Ig-like V-domain, and 2 adjacent Ig
C2-like domains, followed by a transmembrane region and a cytoplasmic
tail. Based on its predicted structure, the authors stated that CD33L
belongs to the Ig superfamily and is likely a novel member of the
sialoadhesin subfamily. Takei et al. (1997) also isolated a cDNA likely
representing an alternatively spliced CD33L transcript; they called this
transcript CD33L2 and the aforementioned transcript CD33L1. Compared to
the original cDNA, this cDNA contains a 176-bp deletion in the coding
sequence, resulting in a predicted 342-amino acid protein lacking the
transmembrane and cytoplasmic regions. By RT-PCR of placenta RNA, the
authors detected both transcripts, although the transcript encoding the
membrane-bound isoform, CD33L1, was considerably more abundant. Northern
blot analysis of 16 adult tissues and 4 fetal tissues detected CD33L
expression only in the placenta; transcripts of 4 distinct sizes were
found, including 1 that was differentially polyadenylated.

Using an expression cloning strategy to identify molecules that bind to
leptin (164160), Patel et al. (1999) isolated a human erythroleukemic
cell line cDNA encoding OBBP1. They stated that OBBP1 is identical to
CD33L (Takei et al., 1997). The deduced 441-amino acid OBBP1 protein
shares 63% and 59% sequence identity with CD33 and OBBP2 (SIGLEC5;
604200), respectively. All 3 of these proteins have a cytoplasmic domain
containing putative sites of tyrosine phosphorylation, including an
immunoreceptor tyrosine kinase inhibitory motif and a motif found in
SLAM (603492) and SLAM-like proteins. In vitro studies with sialylated
ligands indicated that OBBP1 selectively bound to
Neu5Ac(alpha)2-6GalNAc(alpha), or sialyl-Tn, allowing its formal
designation as a SIGLEC (sialic acid-binding Ig-like lectin).
Recombinant OBBP1 exhibited tight and specific binding to leptin,
whereas OBBP2 and CD33 bound weakly to leptin. Northern blot analysis
detected high expression of OBBP1 mRNA in placenta, with moderate
expression in peripheral blood leukocytes, spleen, and small intestine.
Immunohistochemical analysis showed that OBBP1 is highly expressed in
the cyto- and syncytiotrophoblasts of the placenta. Flow cytometric
analysis on peripheral blood leukocytes found that OBBP1 is almost
exclusively expressed on B cells.

By FISH, Takei et al. (1997) mapped the SIGLEC6 gene to 19q13.3, which
is where the CD33 gene is located.

Nomenclature: The alternatively spliced transcript referred to as CD33L2
by Takei et al. (1997) is distinct from the CD33L2 gene (SIGLEC5;
604200).

REFERENCE 1. Patel, N.; Brinkman-Van der Linden, E. C. M.; Altmann, S. W.; Gish,
K.; Balasubramanian, S.; Timans, J. C.; Peterson, D.; Bell, M. P.;
Bazan, J. F.; Varki, A.; Kastelein, R. A.: OB-BP1/Siglec-6: a leptin-
and sialic acid-binding protein of the immunoglobulin superfamily. J.
Biol. Chem. 274: 22729-22738, 1999. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem.
274: 28058 only, 1999.

2. Takei, Y.; Sasaki, S.; Fujiwara, T.; Takahashi, E.; Muto, T.; Nakamura,
Y.: Molecular cloning of a novel gene similar to myeloid antigen
CD33 and its specific expression in placenta. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 78:
295-300, 1997.

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 1/5/2000

EDITED psherman: 02/04/2000
psherman: 2/3/2000
mgross: 1/31/2000
mgross: 1/28/2000
mgross: 1/13/2000
psherman: 1/10/2000

604128	TITLE *604128 TRANSCRIPTION ELONGATION FACTOR A, 3; TCEA3
DESCRIPTION Transcription elongation factors in the SII class release RNA polymerase
II from transcriptional arrest. TCEA1 (601425) binds to RNA polymerase
II and stimulates nuclease activity during nucleotide misincorporation.
Labhart and Morgan (1998) cloned a partial human cDNA encoding a third
TFIIS isoform, TCEA3. Northern blot analysis of Xenopus tissues
suggested that this isoform may have a restricted tissue expression.

REFERENCE 1. Labhart, P.; Morgan, G. T.: Identification of novel genes encoding
transcription elongation factor TFIIS (TCEA) in vertebrates: conservation
of three distinct TFIIS isoforms in frog, mouse, and human. Genomics 52:
278-288, 1998.

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 8/16/1999

EDITED alopez: 08/16/1999

606600	TITLE *606600 RAS PROTEIN-SPECIFIC GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE-RELEASING FACTOR 1; RASGRF1
;;GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE-RELEASING FACTOR, 55-KD; GRF55
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The activation of cellular RAS (190020) requires the release of bound
GDP. In yeast, the Cdc25 gene product enhances GDP release. Using PCR
with degenerate primers based on a mouse homolog of yeast Cdc25 and
screening a human brain cDNA library, Schweighoffer et al. (1993)
obtained a cDNA encoding RASGRF1, which they termed GRF55. Sequence
analysis predicted that the 488-amino acid RASGRF1 protein is most
homologous to rat and mouse Rasgrf1, particularly at the C terminus,
where the guanine nucleotide exchange activity is associated. Northern
blot analysis revealed expression of a 5.5-kb RASGRF1 transcript
restricted to brain. Western blot analysis showed expression of a major
55-kD protein in brain. Functional analysis indicated that the
C-terminal 281 amino acids of RASGRF1 stimulate the dissociation of GDP
from RAS but not from RAP1A (179520) or RAB5 (179512). RASGRF1 was found
to complement Cdc25 in yeast.

ANIMAL MODEL

By generating mice that lacked a repeated sequence localized 3-prime of
a differentially methylated domain (DMD) located 30 kb 5-prime of the
Rasgrf1 promoter, Yoon et al. (2002) showed that this region regulates
the establishment of DNA methylation in the male germ line at Rasgrf1.
Methylation of the DMD was found to be required for imprinted Rasgrf1
expression.

MAPPING

Schweighoffer et al. (1993) mapped the RASGRF1 gene to chromosome 15q24
by FISH. Pearsall et al. (1998) mapped the paternally expressed
imprinted Rasgrf1 gene in mouse to chromosome 9 by haplotype analysis of
a backcross panel.

REFERENCE 1. Pearsall, R. S.; Imai, K.; Shibata, H.; Hayashizaki, Y.; Chapman,
V. M.; Held, W. A.; Plass, C.: The Rasgrf1-repeat sequence (D9Ncvs53)
maps between Mod1 and Rbp1 on mouse chromosome 9 and may define a
putative imprinted region. Mammalian Genome 9: 261-262, 1998.

2. Schweighoffer, F.; Faure, M.; Fath, I.; Chevallier-Multon, M.-C.;
Apiou, F.; Dutrillaux, B.; Sturani, E.; Jacquet, M.; Tocque, B.:
Identification of a human guanine nucleotide-releasing factor (H-GRF55)
specific for Ras proteins. Oncogene 8: 1477-1485, 1993.

3. Yoon, B. J.; Herman, H.; Sikora, A.; Smith, L. T.; Plass, C.; Soloway,
P. D.: Regulation of DNA methylation of Rasgrf1. Nature Genet. 30:
92-96, 2002.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/9/2002

EDITED mgross: 01/09/2002

601218	TITLE *601218 ADENOSINE DEAMINASE, RNA-SPECIFIC, B1; ADARB1
;;ADENOSINE DEAMINASE, RNA-SPECIFIC, 2; ADAR2;;
RNA-EDITING ENZYME 1, RAT, HOMOLOG OF; RED1;;
RNA EDITASE 1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

RNA editing involves the deamination of adenosines at specific sites,
the result of which can be a change in the amino acid sequence of the
protein so that it differs from that predicted by the sequence of the
DNA. Editing of the glutamate receptor B (GluRB; 138247) pre-mRNA has
been shown to alter a codon (referred to as the Q/R site) for a channel
determinant that controls the calcium permeability of the AMPA glutamate
receptors. Melcher et al. (1996) tested the candidate dsRNA adenosine
deaminase DRADA (ADAR; 146920) and showed that when coexpressed with a
GluR-B minigene in HEK 293 cells, DRADA produced low-level editing at
the GluR-B Q/R site. The authors then screened a rat brain cDNA library
with the predicted catalytic domain of rat DRADA to identify other
potential editing enzymes. A cDNA encoding a predicted 711-amino acid
protein was isolated that gave about 90% of the expected activity in
their editing assay. Melcher et al. (1996) designated this novel
mammalian RNA editing protein RNA-editing enzyme-1 (RED1). Rat RED1 and
DRADA share about 31% overall identity primarily due to their
conservation in the C-terminal catalytic domain. Northern blots showed
highest expression of RED1 in rat brain. Melcher et al. (1996) further
observed that while RED1 was more efficient at deaminating some sites,
DRADA had stronger activity at others. They speculated that a
combination of these and perhaps other editing enzymes may be involved
in determining the overall editing process for a given transcript.

Mittaz et al. (1997) also cloned a human gene homologous to rat RED1.
The human gene, ADARB1, comprises 741 amino acids and contains 2
double-stranded RNA-binding domains in its N-terminal region. The
authors detected 2 transcripts of 8.8 and 4.2 kb that were strongly
expressed in brain and in many human adult and fetal tissues.

By searching for expressed sequence tags (ESTs) related to DRADA, Lai et
al. (1997) also isolated human cDNAs encoding ADARB1, which they
designated DRADA2. The DRADA2 gene is expressed ubiquitously in human
adult and fetal tissues. It has a complex transcription pattern, with 1
major 8.6-kb mRNA and several minor shorter mRNAs, some of which show
tissue specificity. Four DRADA2 isoforms, ranging in predicted size from
674 to 741 amino acids, result from alternative splicing. The isoforms
differ in their RNA editing capabilities in vitro.

GENE FUNCTION

The glutamate receptor subunit B pre-mRNA is edited at 2 adenosine
residues, resulting in amino acid changes that alter the
electrophysiologic properties of the glutamate receptor. These amino
acid changes are due to adenosine-to-inosine conversions in 2 codons
resulting from adenosine deamination. Yang et al. (1997) described the
purification and characterization of a human RNA adenosine deaminase
from HeLa cells that efficiently and accurately edits glutamate receptor
subunit B pre-mRNA at both of these sites. They concluded that the
activity reflects the human homolog of the RED1 protein, a member of the
family of double-stranded RNA-dependent deaminase proteins. O'Connell et
al. (1997) described the purification of a 90-kD protein identified as
human RED1. They showed that it edits the glutamine codon at position
586 in the pre-mRNA of the glutamate receptor B subunit.

GENE STRUCTURE

Villard et al. (1997) found that the ADARB1 gene spans approximately 25
kb and comprises 10 exons of coding sequence. The 2 RNA binding domains
are located within the 935-bp exon 2. An alternatively processed exon 6
potentially interrupts the catalytic domain. A survey of expression
patterns revealed differential processing of the 5- and 8.5-kb
transcripts in all sources examined. The difference in transcript size
appeared to result from alternative processing in the 3-prime
untranslated portion.

MAPPING

Mittaz et al. (1997) mapped the ADARB1 gene to 21q22.3 by YAC contig
analysis. See also ADARB2 (602065).

Using a cDNA fragment containing sequences homologous to the rat RED1
RNA editase gene, Villard et al. (1997) localized the human ADARB1 gene
to chromosome 21 by hybridization to a panel of somatic cell hybrids
containing subregions of 21q. This confirmed the location of RED1 in
distal 21q22.3.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Macbeth et al. (2005) reported the crystal structure of human ADAR2 at
1.7-angstrom resolution. The structure revealed a zinc ion in the active
site and suggested how the substrate adenosine is recognized.
Unexpectedly, inositol hexakisphosphate (IP6) is buried within the
enzyme core, contributing to the protein fold. Although there are no
reports that adenosine deaminases that act on RNA (ADARs) require a
cofactor, Macbeth et al. (2005) showed that IP6 is required for
activity. Amino acids that coordinate IP6 in the crystal structure are
conserved in some adenosine deaminases that act on transfer RNA,
(ADATs), related enzymes that edit tRNA. Macbeth et al. (2005) showed
that IP6 is also essential for in vivo and in vitro deamination of
adenosine-37 of tRNA(alanine) (601431) by ADAT1 (604230).

ANIMAL MODEL

Higuchi et al. (2000) studied ADAR2-mediated RNA editing by generating
mice that were homozygous for a targeted functional null allele. Editing
in Adar2 -/- mice was substantially reduced at most of 25 positions in
diverse transcripts; the mutant mice became prone to seizures and died
young. The impaired phenotype appeared to result entirely from a single
underedited position, since it reverted to normal when both alleles for
the underedited transcript were substituted with alleles encoding the
edited version exonically. The critical position specifies an ion
channel determinant, the Q/R site, in AMPA receptor GluRB premessenger
RNA. Higuchi et al. (2000) concluded that this transcript is
physiologically the most important substrate of ADAR2.

REFERENCE 1. Higuchi, M.; Maas, S.; Single, F. N.; Hartner, J.; Rozov, A.; Burnashev,
N.; Feldmeyer, D.; Sprengel, R.; Seeburg, P. H.: Point mutation in
an AMPA receptor gene rescues lethality in mice deficient in the RNA-editing
enzyme ADAR2. Nature 406: 78-81, 2000.

2. Lai, F.; Chen, C.-X.; Carter, K. C.; Nishikura, K.: Editing of
glutamate receptor B subunit ion channel RNAs by four alternatively
spliced DRADA2 double-stranded RNA adenosine deaminases. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 17: 2413-2424, 1997.

3. Macbeth, M. R.; Schubert, H. L.; VanDemark, A. P.; Lingam, A. T.;
Hill, C. P.; Bass, B. L.: Inositol hexakisphosphate is bound in the
ADAR2 core and required for RNA editing. Science 309: 1534-1539,
2005.

4. Melcher, T.; Maas, S.; Herb, A.; Sprengel, R.; Seeburg, P. H.;
Higuchi, M.: A mammalian RNA editing enzyme. Nature 379: 460-463,
1996.

5. Mittaz, L.; Scott, H. S.; Rossier, C.; Seeburg, P. H.; Higuchi,
M.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Cloning of a human RNA editing deaminase
(ADARB1) of glutamate receptors that maps to chromosome 21q22.3. Genomics 41:
210-217, 1997.

6. O'Connell, M. A.; Gerber, A.; Keller, W.: Purification of human
double-stranded RNA-specific editase 1 (hRED1) involved in editing
of brain glutamate receptor B pre-mRNA. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 473-478,
1997.

7. Villard, L.; Tassone, F.; Haymowicz, M.; Welborn, R.; Gardiner,
K.: Map location, genomic organization and expression patterns of
the human RED1 RNA editase. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 23: 135-145,
1997.

8. Yang, J.-H.; Sklar, P.; Axel, R.; Maniatis, T.: Purification and
characterization of a human RNA adenosine deaminase for glutamate
receptor B pre-mRNA editing. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 4354-4359,
1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/27/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/5/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 4/29/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/13/1998
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 12/3/1997
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 11/5/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/18/1997

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 4/22/1996

EDITED alopez: 04/13/2009
carol: 1/2/2008
alopez: 9/28/2005
terry: 9/27/2005
mgross: 7/5/2000
terry: 7/5/2000
terry: 11/18/1998
psherman: 4/29/1998
mark: 2/23/1998
terry: 2/13/1998
alopez: 12/22/1997
alopez: 12/11/1997
alopez: 11/5/1997
mark: 11/5/1997
terry: 11/5/1997
mark: 6/23/1997
alopez: 6/18/1997
mark: 1/15/1997
terry: 4/22/1996
mark: 4/22/1996

604554	TITLE *604554 HEAT-SHOCK TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 2-BINDING PROTEIN; HSF2BP
DESCRIPTION Heat-shock transcription factors (HSFs) bind to heat-shock elements
(HSE) that are promoter sites for heat-shock proteins (HSPs; see
140560). Unlike HSF1 (140580) and HSF3, HSF2 (140581) is not activated
by environmental stresses such as heat; instead, it is thought to be
important in differentiation and development. Furthermore, its
HSE-binding activity and HSP expression do not clearly correlate. Using
a yeast 2-hybrid system to screen a human testis cDNA library with
transcriptionally active and inactive HSF2 mutants as bait, Yoshima et
al. (1998) isolated a full-length cDNA, designated HSF2-binding protein
(HSF2BP). HSF2BP encodes a deduced 344-amino acid protein with an
N-terminal hydrophilic region predicted to form an alpha-helical
structure containing 2 leucine zipper motifs. The C-terminal region is
largely hydrophobic and forms beta sheets. Northern blot analysis
revealed that a 1.9-kb transcript of HSF2BP is expressed in testis only.
In vitro, HSF2BP bound to both HSF2 and HSF1 in a GST pull-down assay.
In vivo, it bound to HSF2 but not HSF1 in K572 cells expressing these
proteins.

By nucleotide sequence database searching, Yoshima et al. (1998) mapped
the HSF2BP gene to chromosome 21q22.3.

REFERENCE 1. Yoshima, T.; Yura, T.; Yanagi, H.: Novel testis-specific protein
that interacts with heat shock factor 2. Gene 214: 139-146, 1998.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/16/2000

EDITED carol: 12/26/2002
carol: 2/16/2000

604118	TITLE *604118 RAS PROTEIN ACTIVATOR-LIKE 1; RASAL1
;;RAS-GTPase-ACTIVATING PROTEIN-LIKE; RASAL;;
RASGAP1-LIKE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The Ras superfamily of small GTPases plays an essential role in the
regulation of a wide variety of cellular signaling pathways. The GTPase
activity of these small GTPases is stimulated by GTPase-activating
proteins (GAPs), which results in the conversion of the GTPase from its
active GTP-bound form to its inactive GDP-bound form. By screening a
human frontal cortex cDNA library with a probe containing a GAP
consensus sequence, Allen et al. (1998) isolated cDNAs encoding a novel
RasGAP, which they called RASAL. The predicted 804-amino acid RASAL
protein is 87% identical to mouse Rasal, whose cDNAs were also isolated
by Allen et al. (1998). RASAL contains 2 N-terminal C2 domains, which
show similarity to the C2 regulatory region of protein kinase C (e.g.,
600448), a central conserved GAP-related domain, and a C-terminal
pleckstrin homology domain, all of which are characteristic of the GAP1
subfamily of RasGAP proteins. Northern blot analysis showed that human
RASAL is expressed as a 3- to 3.3-kb transcript in a limited number of
tissues, with the highest expression in adult brain, thyroid gland, and
adrenal gland. In situ hybridization detected mouse Rasal mRNA in the
follicular cells of the thyroid and within the medulla and zona
glomerulus of the adrenal gland.

Using RT-PCR, Jin et al. (2007) found that RASAL was expressed at
variable levels in almost all normal tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Jin et al. (2007) stated that RASAL is a Ca(2+)-regulated GAP. By
examining gene expression databases, they found that RASAL expression
was downregulated in tumors of different origins, including brain, skin,
bladder, head, and neck. RT-PCR analysis showed significantly reduced
RASAL expression in multiple tumor cell lines, and methylation-specific
PCR revealed that RASAL downregulation was due to CpG methylation.
Expression of a catalytically active RASAL led to growth inhibition of
tumor cells by RAS inactivation.

Fibroblast activation during wound repair is spontaneously reversible,
whereas fibroblast activation associated with fibrosis is pathologically
perpetuated. Bechtel et al. (2010) found that the demethylating agent
5-prime azacytidine inhibited progressive fibrosis and kidney failure in
experimental kidney fibrosis in mice. In fibrotic human kidney
fibroblasts, in vitro 5-prime azacytidine normalized proliferation and
expression of type I collagen (see COL1A1; 120150) and alpha-smooth
muscle actin (ACTA2; 102620). A genomewide methylation screen identified
RASAL1 among 12 genes that were methylated in fibrotic primary human
fibroblasts and not in normal primary human fibroblasts. Bechtel et al.
(2010) noted that the promoter region of mouse Rasal1 has a CpG island
similar to that in the promoter region of human RASAL1. Using mouse
models of renal fibrosis, they showed that methylation of Rasal1 was
associated with repression of Rasal1 expression, and Rasal1 expression
inversely correlated with Ras hyperactivity. Inhibition of Ras activity
largely ameliorated renal fibrosis in the mouse model, as did
haploinsufficiency for DNA methyltransferase-1 (Dnmt1; 126375) in Dnmt1
+/- mice. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed that Dnmt1
bound Rasal1 DNA in fibrotic mouse kidneys, but not in normal control
kidneys. Bechtel et al. (2010) concluded that silencing of RASAL1
expression via promoter methylation contributes to renal fibrosis by
permitting RAS hyperactivation.

MAPPING

Allen et al. (1998) localized the RASAL1 gene to chromosome 12q23-q24 by
radiation hybrid mapping.

REFERENCE 1. Allen, M.; Chu, S.; Brill, S.; Stotler, C.; Buckler, A.: Restricted
tissue expression pattern of a novel human rasGAP-related gene and
its murine ortholog. Gene 218: 17-25, 1998.

2. Bechtel, W.; McGoohan, S.; Zeisberg, E. M.; Muller, G. A.; Kalbacher,
H.; Salant, D. J.; Muller, C. A.; Kalluri, R.; Zeisberg, M.: Methylation
determines fibroblast activation and fibrogenesis in the kidney. Nature
Med. 16: 544-550, 2010.

3. Jin, H.; Wang, X.; Ying, J.; Wong, A. H. Y.; Cui, Y.; Srivastava,
G.; Shen, Z.-Y.; Li, E.-M.; Zhang, Q.; Jin, J.; Kupzig, S.; Chan,
A. T. C.; Cullen, P. J.; Tao, Q.: Epigenetic silencing of a Ca(2+)-regulated
Ras GTPase-activating protein RASAL defines a new mechanism of Ras
activation in human cancers. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 12353-12358,
2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/8/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/18/2007

CREATED Barbara J. Biery: 8/11/1999

EDITED mgross: 06/11/2010
mgross: 6/11/2010
terry: 6/8/2010
mgross: 10/25/2007
terry: 9/18/2007
carol: 8/2/2001
psherman: 8/12/1999

601863	TITLE *601863 REGULATORY FACTOR X, 5; RFX5
DESCRIPTION Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecules are
heterodimeric transmembrane glycoproteins consisting of alpha and beta
chains. In man, there are 3 MHC class II isotypes: HLA-DR, -DP, and -DQ.
MHC class II molecules play a key role in the immune system. They
present exogenous antigenic peptides to the receptor of CD4+ T-helper
lymphocytes, thereby triggering the antigen-specific T-cell activation
events required for the initiation and sustenance of immune responses.
Durand et al. (1997) noted that the crucial role in the control of the
immune response is exemplified by the finding that ectopic or aberrantly
high levels of MHC class II expression is associated with autoimmune
diseases, while a lack of MHC class II expression results in a severe
immunodeficiency syndrome called MHC class II deficiency, or the bare
lymphocyte syndrome type II (BLS; 209920). At least 4 complementation
groups have been identified in B-cell lines established from patients
with BLS. The molecular defect responsible for complementation group A
resides in the gene encoding CIITA (MHC2TA; 600005). CIITA is a
non-DNA-binding transactivator that functions as a molecular switch
controlling both cell-type-specific and inducible MHC class II gene
transcription. In contrast, the defects in complementation groups B, C,
and D all lead to a deficiency in RFX, a nuclear protein complex that
binds to the X box of MHC class II promoters (see RFX2; 142765). The
lack of RFX binding activity in complementation group C results from
mutations in the gene encoding the 75-kD subunit of RFX (Steimle et al.,
1995). This gene was called RFX5 because it is the fifth member of the
growing family of DNA-binding proteins sharing a novel and highly
characteristic DNA-binding domain called the RFX motif.

Two of the genes defective in the 5 complementation groups identified in
class II-negative bare lymphocyte syndrome or in corresponding
laboratory mutants have been cloned (Mach et al., 1996). One gene
encodes RFX5; the other, MHC2TA (CIITA), encodes a large protein with a
defined acidic transcriptional activation domain. The latter protein
does not interact with DNA. Scholl et al. (1997) demonstrated that RFX5
can activate transcription only in cooperation with CIITA. RFX5 and
CIITA associate to form a complex capable of activating transcription
from class II MHC promoters. In this complex, promoter specificity is
determined by the DNA binding domain of RFX5 and the general
transcription apparatus is recruited by the acidic activation domain of
CIITA.

Nekrep et al. (2000) demonstrated a direct interaction between the C
terminus of RFXAP (601861) and RFXANK (603200); mutant RFXAP or RFXANK
proteins failed to bind. The authors found that RFX5 binds only to the
RFXANK-RFXAP scaffold and not to either protein alone. However, neither
the scaffold nor RFX5 alone can bind DNA. Nekrep et al. (2000) concluded
that the binding of the RFXANK-RFXAP scaffold to RFX5 leads to a
conformational change in the latter that exposes the DNA-binding domain
of RFX5. The DNA-binding domain of RFX5 anchors the RFX complex to MHC
class II X and S promoter boxes. Another part of the RFX5 protein
interacts with MHC2TA. The authors pointed out that mutation of either
protein in complementation group B or group D of BLS patients prevents
its binding to the other protein, explaining why MHC class II promoters
are bare in the bare lymphocyte syndrome.

Emery et al. (1996) reviewed RFX1, RFX5, and other members of the RFX
family of DNA-binding proteins.

Villard et al. (1997) mapped the RFX5 gene to chromosome 1q21 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Villard et al. (1997) characterized the mutations in 4 patients with MHC
class II deficiency known to harbor a defect in the RFX5 gene.

Hosts and pathogens evolve various responses for controlling infection
and evading destruction, respectively. Using column chromatography,
Zhong et al. (2001) identified a factor in Chlamydia trachomatis, the
causative organism of trachoma and chronic urogenital infection, that
degrades the transcription factors RFX5 and USF1 (191523). The
degradation of these host factors correlates with the suppression of MHC
class I and class II antigen expression in infected cells, thereby
suppressing the host immune response.

Nekrep et al. (2002) identified an arg149-to-gln mutation (R149Q;
601863.0005) in the DNA-binding domain of RFX5 (residues 92 to 168) in
cell lines (termed 'Ker' cell lines) derived from the histoidentical
twins lacking MHC class II transcription reported by Wolf et al. (1995)
and Douhan et al. (1996). Functional and structural modeling analyses
indicated that the mutant protein was incapable of binding the X box of
the HLA-DRA (142860) promoter, whereas expression of wildtype RFX5 in
the Ker cell lines rescued MHC class II expression.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BARE LYMPHOCYTE SYNDROME, TYPE II, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP C
RFX5, IVS2DS, G-A, +5

In 2 sibs, identified as THF and EDF, with bare lymphocyte syndrome type
II, complementation group C (209920), Villard et al. (1997) demonstrated
a 10-nucleotide deletion involving nucleotides 259-268 in the RFX5 gene
upstream of the DNA-binding domain region. The deletion led to a
frameshift followed by an out-of-frame stop codon situated 66
nucleotides downstream. Only the deleted form of RFX5 mRNA was present
in these sibs. Studies of genomic DNA demonstrated that the
10-nucleotide deletion resulted from a point mutation in a splice donor
site. The primary mutation was the G-to-A transition at position +5 in
the splice donor site situated 3-prime of exon 2. This resulted in the
use of a cryptic splice donor site situated 10 nucleotides upstream in
exon 2 and hence in the excision of the last 10 nucleotides of exon 2
from the mRNA. Both parents were heterozygous for the mutation.

.0002
BARE LYMPHOCYTE SYNDROME, TYPE II, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP C
RFX5, 1032C-T

In a patient identified as Ro, with bare lymphocyte syndrome type II,
complementation group C (209920), Steimle et al. (1995) demonstrated and
Villard et al. (1997) confirmed the presence of a point mutation at
nucleotide 1032 converting an arginine codon (CGA) to a premature stop
codon (TGA). Villard et al. (1997) demonstrated that the patient was
homozygous for the mutated allele, whereas both parents were
heterozygous.

.0003
BARE LYMPHOCYTE SYNDROME, TYPE II, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP C
RFX5, IVS4AS, G-A, -1

In a patient identified as SJO, with bare lymphocyte syndrome type II,
complementation group C (209920), Villard et al. (1997) identified
compound heterozygosity of the RFX5 gene, one allele containing a G-to-A
transition at position -1 resulting in the use of a cryptic splice
acceptor site situated 5 nucleotides downstream in exon 5 and deletion
of the first 5 nucleotides (386-390) of exon 5 from the mRNA. The
precise mutation affecting the second RFX5 allele in SJO had not been
defined; however, no intact mRNA derived from that allele was detectable
in SJO (Steimle et al., 1995).

.0004
BARE LYMPHOCYTE SYNDROME, TYPE II, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP C
RFX5, 4-BP DEL, IVS-AS, G-A, -1

Peijnenburg et al. (1999) fused fibroblasts of a patient with bare
lymphocyte syndrome type II, complementation group C (209920), with
fibroblasts derived from patients representative of each of the 4
complementation groups. Transient heterokaryon analysis indicated that
the patient belonged to complementation group C. Furthermore,
transfection of wildtype RFX5 cDNA into the patient's fibroblasts
resulted in correction of the defect. Mutation analysis revealed that
the RFX5 mRNA lacked 4 nucleotides and that this deletion was a
consequence of a G-to-A transition in a splice acceptor site. The
patient was found to be homozygous for the splice site mutation. The
nucleotides deleted were CAAG at positions 312-315 of the RFX5 cDNA. The
deletion led to a frameshift and an out of frame stop codon located at
nucleotides 403-405 of the wildtype RFX5 cDNA sequence. As a result, the
mutated RFX5 mRNA encoded a truncated protein of 82 amino acids which
lacked the DNA binding domain (DBD). The presence of the G-to-A point
mutation and the use of a cryptic splice acceptor site (aCAAG)
apparently resulted in an RFX5 mRNA from which 4 nucleotides of the
particular exon were spliced out. Both parents were heterozygous for the
mutation.

.0005
BARE LYMPHOCYTE SYNDROME, TYPE II, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP E
RFX5, ARG149GLN

In cell lines derived from histochemical twins with the putative fifth
bare lymphocyte syndrome complementation group (209920), Nekrep et al.
(2002) identified a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 446 of the RFX5
gene, resulting in an arg149-to-gln (R149Q) mutation in the DNA-binding
domain.

REFERENCE 1. Douhan, J., III; Hauber, I.; Eibl, M. M.; Glimcher, L. H.: Genetic
evidence for a new type of major histocompatibility complex class
II combined immunodeficiency characterized by a dyscoordinate regulation
of HLA-D alpha and beta chains. J. Exp. Med. 183: 1063-1069, 1996.

2. Durand, B.; Sperisen, P.; Emery, P.; Barras, E.; Zufferey, M.;
Mach, B.; Reith, W.: RFXAP, a novel subunit of the RFX DNA binding
complex is mutated in MHC class II deficiency. EMBO J. 16: 1045-1055,
1997.

3. Emery, P.; Durand, B.; Mach, B.; Reith, W.: RFX proteins, a novel
family of DNA binding proteins conserved in the eukaryotic kingdom. Nucleic
Acids Res. 24: 803-807, 1996.

4. Mach, B.; Steimle, V.; Martinez-Soria, E.; Reith, W.: Regulation
of MHC class II genes: lessons from a disease. Annu. Rev. Immun. 14:
301-331, 1996.

5. Nekrep, N.; Jabrane-Ferrat, N.; Peterlin, B. M.: Mutations in
the bare lymphocyte syndrome define critical steps in the assembly
of the regulatory factor X complex. Molec. Cell Biol. 20: 4455-4461,
2000.

6. Nekrep, N.; Jabrane-Ferrat, N.; Wolf, H. M.; Eibl, M. M.; Geyer,
M.; Peterlin, B. M.: Mutation in a winged-helix DNA-binding motif
causes atypical bare lymphocyte syndrome. Nature Immun. 3: 1075-1081,
2002.

7. Peijnenburg, A.; Van Eggermond, M. C. J. A.; Van den Berg, R.;
Sanal, O.; Vossen, J. M. J. J.; Van den Elsen, P. J.: Molecular analysis
of an MHC class II deficiency patient reveals a novel mutation in
the RFX5 gene. Immunogenetics 49: 338-345, 1999.

8. Scholl, T.; Mahanta, S. K.; Strominger, J. L.: Specific complex
formation between the type II bare lymphocyte syndrome-associated
transactivators CIITA and RFX5. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 6330-6334,
1997.

9. Steimle, V.; Durand, B.; Barras, E.; Zuffrey, M.; Hadam, M. R.;
Mach, B.; Reith, W.: A novel DNA binding regulatory factor is mutated
in primary MHC class II deficiency (bare lymphocyte syndrome). Genes
Dev. 9: 1021-1032, 1995.

10. Villard, J.; Reith, W.; Barras, E.; Gos, A.; Morris, M. A.; Antonarakis,
S. E.; Van den Elsen, P. J.; Mach, B.: Analysis of mutations and
chromosomal localisation of the gene encoding RFX5, a novel transcription
factor affected in major histocompatibility complex class II deficiency. Hum.
Mutat. 10: 430-435, 1997.

11. Wolf, H. M.; Hauber, I.; Gulle, H.; Thon, V.; Eggenbauer, H.;
Fischer, M. B.; Fiala, S.; Eibl, M. M.: Brief report: Twin boys with
major histocompatibility complex class II deficiency but inducible
immune responses. New Eng. J. Med. 332: 86-90, 1995.

12. Zhong, G.; Fan, P.; Ji, H.; Dong, F.; Huang, Y.: Identification
of a chlamydial protease-like activity factor responsible for the
degradation of host transcription factors. J. Exp. Med. 193: 935-942,
2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/17/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/4/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/3/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/5/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/19/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/12/1997

EDITED alopez: 11/07/2002
mgross: 10/17/2002
mgross: 10/4/2001
mgross: 7/3/2000
carol: 2/28/2000
carol: 2/18/2000
mgross: 7/1/1999
carol: 5/10/1999
terry: 5/5/1999
alopez: 10/26/1998
carol: 6/26/1998
alopez: 1/12/1998
dholmes: 1/6/1998
mark: 9/22/1997
terry: 9/19/1997
mark: 6/12/1997

611658	TITLE *611658 SPRY DOMAIN- AND SOCS BOX-CONTAINING 2; SPSB2
;;SPRY DOMAIN-CONTAINING SOCS BOX PROTEIN 2; SSB2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis, followed by PCR of a human kidney cDNA library,
Wang et al. (2005) cloned SPSB2, which they called SSB2. The deduced
263-amino acid protein shares 50% amino acid identity with SPSB1
(611657). SPSB2 contains a central SPRY domain and a C-terminal SOCS
box. Coimmunoprecipitation studies showed that SPSB2 interacted with MET
(164860).

REFERENCE 1. Wang, D.; Li, Z.; Messing, E. M.; Wu, G.: The SPRY domain-containing
SOCS box protein 1 (SSB-1) interacts with MET and enhances the hepatocyte
growth factor-induced Erk-Elk-1-serum response element pathway. J.
Biol. Chem. 280: 16393-16401, 2005.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 12/11/2007

EDITED wwang: 12/11/2007

608190	TITLE *608190 N-ACETYLTRANSFERASE 8B; NAT8B
;;CAMELLO, XENOPUS, HOMOLOG OF, 2; CML2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to the Xenopus
camello protein, Popsueva et al. (2001) identified CML2. The deduced
227-amino acid protein shares significant similarity with other camello
proteins, including a conserved N-terminal hydrophobic domain and
C-terminal consensus motifs of GCN5 (see 602301)-related
N-acetyltransferases.

By genomic sequence analysis, EST database analysis, and sequencing
genomic DNA from 24 individuals, Veiga-da-Cunha et al. (2010) found that
NAT8B contains a stop codon at codon 16. The only NAT8B sequence lacking
the stop codon at codon 16 was that reported by Popsueva et al. (2001),
which has a ser16 codon. Veiga-da-Cunha et al. (2010) suggested that
ser16 results from an extremely rare mutation or a sequencing error.
Translation of NAT8B was predicted to begin at the next in-frame
methionine, met25. This N-terminally truncated protein lacks a number of
conserved residues found in NAT8 (606716) and NAT8L (610647) homologs,
suggesting that NAT8B is inactive.

GENE FUNCTION

Veiga-da-Cunha et al. (2010) found that truncated NAT8B and NAT8
proteins beginning at met25 were inactive against a good NAT8 substrate.
They concluded that NAT8B is inactive in humans.

GENE STRUCTURE

Veiga-da-Cunha et al. (2010) determined that exon 2 of the NAT8B gene
contains the complete reading frame.

MAPPING

Veiga-da-Cunha et al. (2010) stated that the NAT8B gene is a tandem
duplication of the NAT8 gene on chromosome 2p13.1-p12.

REFERENCE 1. Popsueva, A. E.; Luchinskaya, N. N.; Ludwig, A. V.; Zinovjeva,
O. Y.; Poteryaev, D. A.; Feigelman, M. M.; Ponomarev, M. B.; Berekelya,
L.; Belyavsky, A. V.: Overexpression of camello, a member of a novel
protein family, reduces blastomere adhesion and inhibits gastrulation
in Xenopus laevis. Dev. Biol. 234: 483-496, 2001.

2. Veiga-da-Cunha, M.; Tyteca, D.; Stroobant, V.; Courtoy, P. J.;
Opperdoes, F. R.; Van Schaftingen, E.: Molecular identification of
NAT8 as the enzyme that acetylates cysteine S-conjugates to mercapturic
acids. J. Biol. Chem. 285: 18888-18898, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 05/22/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/8/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/23/2003

EDITED mgross: 05/22/2013
wwang: 4/27/2009
mgross: 12/12/2006
terry: 12/8/2006
mgross: 10/23/2003

613170	TITLE *613170 TETRASPANIN 1; TSPAN1
;;NEW EST TETRASPAN 1; NET1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TSPAN1 belongs to the large family of tetraspanins, so named because
they contain 4 transmembrane domains. Tetraspanins are frequently
expressed at the cell surface in association with each other and with
other molecules, such as integrins (see ITGB1; 135630), and they
function to regulate cell adhesion, migration, proliferation, and
differentiation (summary by Todd et al., 1998).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences containing a tetraspanin
consensus sequence, Todd et al. (1998) identified human TSPAN1. The
deduced 242-amino acid protein contains 4 transmembrane domains and
other features characteristic of tetraspanins, including conservation of
charged residues in or near the transmembrane domains, similar to ion
channels, and of 4 cysteines in the second extracellular domain. EST
database analysis suggested that TSPAN2 is expressed in colon,
endometrium, pancreas, normal and neoplastic prostate, and pregnant
uterus.

Serru et al. (2000) independently identified TSPAN1, which they called
NET1. The predicted protein contains 241 amino acids. RT-PCR of a cell
line panel detected NET1 expression only in epithelial carcinoma cell
lines.

MAPPING

Serru et al. (2000) stated that the TSPAN1 gene maps to chromosome 1,
between markers D1S2843 and D1S417.

REFERENCE 1. Serru, V.; Dessen, P.; Boucheix, C.; Rubinstein, E.: Sequence
and expression of seven new tetraspans. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1478:
159-163, 2000.

2. Todd, S. C.; Doctor, V. S.; Levy, S.: Sequences and expression
of six new members of the tetraspanin/TM4SF family. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1399: 101-104, 1998.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/8/2009

EDITED mgross: 12/08/2009

608205	TITLE *608205 MITOCHONDRIAL TRANS-2-ENOYL-CoA REDUCTASE; MECR
;;TRANS-2-ENOYL-CoA REDUCTASE, MITOCHONDRIAL;;
2-@ENOYL THIOESTER REDUCTASE;;
NUCLEAR RECEPTOR-BINDING FACTOR 1; NRBF1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to S. cerevisiae
trans-2-enoyl thioesterase, followed by PCR amplification, Miinalainen
et al. (2003) cloned NRBF1. The deduced 373-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 37 kD. Homologous proteins were identified
in mammalian, nematode, and yeast databases. The mammalian proteins
contain a putative N-terminal mitochondrial targeting signal, and all
contain a tyrosine residue critical for catalysis in the yeast enzyme.
Northern blot analysis detected a 1.4-kb NRBF1 transcript expressed at
highest levels in skeletal and heart muscle. Expression was weaker in
brain, placenta, liver, kidney, and pancreas, and no expression was
detected in lung. SDS-PAGE showed that purified recombinant NRBF1 had an
apparent molecular mass of about 37 kD. Size exclusion chromatography
estimated a native mass of 65 kD, indicating that NRBF1 forms
homodimers.

GENE FUNCTION

Miinalainen et al. (2003) demonstrated that recombinant NRBF1 reduced
trans-2-enoyl-CoA to acyl-CoA with chain lengths from C6 to C16 in an
NADPH-dependent manner, with preference for medium chain-length
substrates. Furthermore, expression of human NRBF1 in a yeast strain
deficient in 2-enoyl thioester reductase restored mitochondrial
respiratory function and allowed growth on glycerol.

GENE STRUCTURE

Miinalainen et al. (2003) determined that the NRBF1 gene contains 10
exons and spans more than 37 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Miinalainen et al. (2003) mapped the NRBF1
gene to chromosome 1p22.3.

REFERENCE 1. Miinalainen, I. J.; Chen, Z.-J.; Torkko, J. M.; Pirila, P. L.;
Sormunen, R. T.; Bergmann, U.; Qin, Y.-M.; Hiltunen, J. K.: Characterization
of 2-enoyl thioester reductase from mammals: an ortholog of Ybr026p/Mrf1'p
of the yeast mitochondrial fatty acid synthesis type II. J. Biol.
Chem. 278: 20154-20161, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/24/2003

EDITED mgross: 03/22/2007
mgross: 10/24/2003

600867	TITLE *600867 SIGNAL SEQUENCE RECEPTOR, BETA; SSR2
;;TRANSLOCON-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN, BETA;;
TRAP-BETA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

In order to translocate membrane or secretory proteins across the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane, the signal sequence of a nascent
peptide is recognized by a signal recognition particle (SRP), by which
the nascent peptide associated with a ribosome can bind to the ER
membrane receptor (or docking protein). The SRP is released from both
the ribosome and the signal sequence; the latter lies near an integral,
glycosylated ER membrane protein referred to as the signal sequence
receptor (SSR). The SSR consists of 2 subunits: a 34-kD glycoprotein,
alpha-SSR (SSR1; 600868), and a 22-kD glycoprotein, beta-SSR (SSR2)
(summary by Chinen et al., 1995).

CLONING

Chinen et al. (1995) isolated a human cDNA clone homologous to the
canine beta-SSR gene. Northern blot analysis revealed ubiquitous
expression of beta-SSR in all organs examined.

MAPPING

By FISH, Chinen et al. (1995) mapped the SSR2 gene to chromosome
1q21-q23.

REFERENCE 1. Chinen, K.; Sudo, K.; Takahashi, E.; Nakamura, Y.: Isolation and
mapping of the human beta-signal sequence receptor gene (SSR2). Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 70: 215-217, 1995.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/16/1995

EDITED mgross: 06/20/2012
mgross: 10/27/2008
mark: 10/16/1995

606975	TITLE *606975 COMPONENT OF OLIGOMERIC GOLGI COMPLEX 3; COG3
;;SEC34, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; SEC34
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Multiprotein complexes are key determinants of Golgi apparatus structure
and its capacity for intracellular transport and glycoprotein
modification. Several complexes have been identified, including the
Golgi transport complex (GTC), the LDLC complex, which is involved in
glycosylation reactions, and the SEC34 complex, which is involved in
vesicular transport. These 3 complexes are identical and have been
termed the conserved oligomeric Golgi (COG) complex, which includes COG3
(Ungar et al., 2002).

CLONING

By database searching for homologs of the yeast Sec34 protein, followed
by 5-prime RACE and PCR of a fetal brain cDNA library, Suvorova et al.
(2001) isolated a cDNA encoding COG3, which they termed SEC34. The
deduced 828-amino acid protein, which is 41% similar to the yeast
protein, contains a conserved N-terminal coiled-coil domain and a
putative leucine zipper motif but no transmembrane sequence. Northern
blot analysis revealed abundant and ubiquitous expression of a 4.5-kb
transcript, with the highest level in pancreas and testis and the lowest
level in lung. Immunoblot analysis showed expression of a 94-kD Golgi
membrane protein, the same size as predicted from the primary sequence.
Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated colocalization with the Golgi
SNAP receptor, membrin (GOSR2; 604027). Further analysis showed partial
nocodazole-sensitive colocalization in the same juxtanuclear membranes
as p115 (603344) and TGN38 (603062). The cis/medial Golgi association of
COG3 was found to be brefeldin-A sensitive, and COG3 was not associated
with COPB (600959).

By SDS-PAGE analysis of bovine brain cytosol, Ungar et al. (2002)
identified the 8 subunits of the COG complex. Immunofluorescence
microscopy demonstrated that COG1 (LDLB; 606973) colocalizes with COG7
(606978), as well as with COG3 and COG5 (606821), with a Golgi marker in
a perinuclear distribution. Immunoprecipitation analysis showed that all
COG subunits interact with COG2 (LDLC; 606974). Ungar et al. (2002)
concluded that the COG complex is critical for the structure and
function of the Golgi apparatus and can influence intracellular membrane
trafficking.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Suvorova et al. (2001) mapped the COG3
gene to chromosome 13.

REFERENCE 1. Suvorova, E. S.; Kurten, R. C.; Lupashin, V. V.: Identification
of a human orthologue of Sec34p as a component of the cis-Golgi vesicle
tethering machinery. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 22810-22818, 2001.

2. Ungar, D.; Oka, T.; Brittle, E. E.; Vasile, E.; Lupashin, V. V.;
Chatterton, J. E.; Heuser, J. E.; Krieger, M.; Waters, M. G.: Characterization
of a mammalian Golgi-localized protein complex, COG, that is required
for normal Golgi morphology and function. J. Cell Biol. 157: 405-415,
2002.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/23/2002

EDITED mgross: 05/23/2002

142100	TITLE *142100 HEMOGLOBIN--EPSILON LOCUS; HBE1
DESCRIPTION The epsilon locus determines the epsilon, or non-alpha, chain of
embryonic hemoglobin (originally known as Gower-2). No mutations
affecting the epsilon chain have yet been identified. Gower-1 is a
tetramer of epsilon chains. The epsilon locus may be linked to the
delta-beta complex. The amino acid sequence of the epsilon chain is
similar to those of the delta and beta chains. Furthermore, the
homologous chain in the mouse is linked to the beta locus (Gilman and
Smithies, 1968). Shen and Smithies (1982) determined the complete
nucleotide sequence of the 3.4-kb stretch of DNA 5-prime to the epsilon
gene where a pseudogene (psi-beta-2) was thought to reside (Fritsch et
al., 1980). They concluded that no globin-related gene exists there and
provided a possible explanation for the earlier contrary conclusion. By
studies in transgenic mice, Raich et al. (1992) demonstrated that
deletion of a 'negative element' located between -182 and -467 bp
upstream of the HBE gene cap site resulted in continuation of HBE gene
expression in the definitive erythroblasts of the fetal liver and in the
red blood cells of adult animals. The findings provided direct in vivo
evidence that cis-acting silencing elements are involved in the
developmental control of the HBE gene.

Bailey et al. (1992) used the epsilon-globin gene to examine the debate
as to whether all bats fall into a monophyletic order (Chiroptera) or
have diphyletic origins with the megabats actually being 'flying
primates.' Results of parsimony analysis supported bat monophyly.

He and Russell (2002) analyzed the anti-sickling properties of HBE both
in vitro as well as in vivo in a well-established mouse model of sickle
cell anemia (603903). These animals, expressing 100% of human Hb S
(141900.0243), display a chronic hemolytic anemia with compensatory
marrow and extramedullary erythropoiesis, abundant circulating sickled
erythrocytes, and chronic tissue damage evidenced by parallel
histopathologic and functional deficits. By comparison, related mice
that coexpress Hb S as well as HBE exhibited normal physiologic,
morphologic, histologic, and functional attributes. Subsequent in vitro
analyses substantiated results from whole-animal studies, indicating
that the polymerization of deoxygenated Hb S can be significantly slowed
by relatively small quantities of HBE. Together, the in vivo and in
vitro analyses suggested that reactivation of epsilon-globin gene
expression would be therapeutically beneficial to adults with sickle
phenotypes, and provide a rationale for detailed investigations into the
molecular basis for its developmental silencing.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Baralle et al. (1980); Gale et al. (1979); Huehns et al. (1964); Huehns
et al. (1961); Ramsay et al. (1986)
REFERENCE 1. Bailey, W. J.; Slightom, J. L.; Goodman, M.: Rejection of the
'flying primate' hypothesis by phylogenetic evidence from the epsilon-globin
gene. Science 256: 86-89, 1992. Note: Erratum: Science 260: 608
only, 1993.

2. Baralle, F. E.; Shoulders, C. C.; Proudfoot, N. J.: The primary
structure of the human epsilon-globin gene. Cell 21: 621-626, 1980.

3. Fritsch, E. F.; Lawn, R. M.; Maniatis, T.: Molecular cloning and
characterization of the human beta-like globin gene cluster. Cell 19:
959-972, 1980.

4. Gale, R. E.; Clegg, J. B.; Huehns, E. R.: Human embryonic haemoglobins
Gower 1 and Gower 2. Nature 280: 162-164, 1979.

5. Gilman, J. G.; Smithies, O.: Fetal hemoglobin variants in mice. Science 160:
885-886, 1968.

6. He, Z.; Russell, J. E.: A human embryonic hemoglobin inhibits
Hb S polymerization in vitro and restores a normal phenotype to mouse
models of sickle cell disease. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 10635-10640,
2002.

7. Huehns, E. R.; Dance, N.; Beaven, G. H.; Hecht, F.; Motulsky, A.
G.: Human embryonic hemoglobin. Nature 201: 1095-1097, 1964.

8. Huehns, E. R.; Flynn, F. V.; Butler, E. A.; Beaven, G. H.: Two
new hemoglobin variants in a very young human embryo. Nature 189:
496-497, 1961.

9. Raich, N.; Papayannopoulou, T.; Stamatoyannopoulos, G.; Enver,
T.: Demonstration of a human epsilon-globin gene silencer with studies
in transgenic mice. Blood 79: 861-864, 1992.

10. Ramsay, M.; Thomson, J. A.; Jenkins, T.: A new epsilon globin
HincII variant fragment length in a South African Negroid family. J.
Med. Genet. 23: 145-150, 1986.

11. Shen, S.-H.; Smithies, O.: Human globin psi-beta-2 is not a globin-related
sequence. Nucleic Acids Res. 10: 7809-7818, 1982.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/27/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 04/01/2013
alopez: 5/27/2004
terry: 5/21/2004
cwells: 10/1/2002
carol: 9/27/2002
alopez: 8/1/1997
mimadm: 9/24/1994
terry: 5/9/1994
carol: 8/11/1992
carol: 5/11/1992
carol: 5/1/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

612189	TITLE *612189 PHENAZINE BIOSYNTHESIS-LIKE PROTEIN DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN; PBLD
;;MAWD-BINDING PROTEIN; MAWBP;;
MAWDBP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By yeast 2-hybrid screening of a human liver cDNA library using the WD40
repeat region of MAWD (STRAP; 605986) as bait, Iriyama et al. (2001)
obtained a full-length cDNA encoding PBLD, which they called MAWBP. The
deduced protein contains 255 amino acids and is highly conserved from
single-cell to higher eukaryotes. It shares 37% amino acid identity with
the Arabidopsis enzyme Phzf, which catalyzes hydroxylation of
phenazine-1-carboxylic acid to 2-hydroxy-phenazine-1-carboxylic acid.
RT-PCR detected variable expression of MAWBP in all human tissues
examined except skeletal muscle.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid and radiation hybrid analyses, Iriyama et al.
(2001) mapped the PBLD gene to chromosome 10q21.1.

REFERENCE 1. Iriyama, C.; Matsuda, S.; Katsumata, R.; Hamaguchi, M.: Cloning
and sequencing of a novel human gene which encodes a putative hydroxylase. J.
Hum. Genet. 46: 289-292, 2001.

CREATED Matthew B. Gross: 7/22/2008

EDITED wwang: 06/25/2009
wwang: 7/22/2008
mgross: 7/22/2008

605006	TITLE *605006 FREQUENTLY REARRANGED IN ADVANCED T-CELL LYMPHOMAS 2; FRAT2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Dorsal accumulation of beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806) in early Xenopus
embryos is required for body axis formation. Beta-catenin is dorsally
stabilized by the localized inhibition of the kinase GSK3 (see GSK3B;
605004). Using a yeast 2-hybrid system to identify a cytoplasmic
regulator of Xenopus GSK3, Yost et al. (1998) isolated an oocyte cDNA
encoding a 169-amino acid protein that they termed GSK3-binding protein,
or GBP. By searching sequence databases, Yost et al. (1998) identified 2
homologous human sequences, FRAT1 (602503) and FRAT2, a partial sequence
that shares 59% amino acid identity with FRAT1. Sequence analysis
predicted that GBP and the FRAT proteins contain 3 well-conserved
regions.

By screening a fetal lung cDNA library with an FT2S probe obtained from
a gastric cancer cell line that corresponds to an FRAT2 EST, Saitoh et
al. (2001) isolated a full-length cDNA encoding FRAT2. The deduced
233-amino acid protein, which is 77% identical to FRAT1, contains an
N-terminal acidic domain followed by a proline-rich domain and a
GSK3B-binding domain near the C terminus, which is highly divergent from
that of FRAT1. Northern blot analysis detected a 2.4-kb transcript, with
highest expression in pancreas, heart, spleen, placenta, skeletal
muscle, liver, peripheral blood leukocytes, and fetal kidney. Expression
was higher in gastric cancer, cervical cancer, and chronic myelogenous
leukemia cell lines than in other cancer cell lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Binding and functional analyses by Yost et al. (1998) revealed that the
GSK3-binding and -inhibitory activities of GBP and FRAT2 reside in the
C-terminal conserved domain III sequence. The authors proposed that GBP,
FRAT1, and FRAT2 form a family of GSK3-binding proteins that inhibit the
phosphorylation of beta-catenin, preventing its degradation by the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

By functional analysis in the Xenopus axis duplication assay, Saitoh et
al. (2001) showed that FRAT2 is a positive regulator of the WNT (see
164975) signaling pathway. Saitoh et al. (2001) suggested that
upregulation of FRAT2 in human cancer may be implicated in
carcinogenesis through activation of the WNT signaling pathway.

MAPPING

By in silico analysis, Saitoh et al. (2001) mapped the FRAT2 gene to
10q24.1.

ANIMAL MODEL

Inhibition of GSK3 by FRAT was thought to be important for Wnt signal
transduction through beta-catenin. To test this hypothesis, van
Amerongen et al. (2005) developed triple-knockout mice lacking Frat1,
Frat2, and Frat3. They found that Frat-null mice were viable, healthy,
and fertile. In addition, in vitro assays of primary Frat-deficient
cells showed that Wnt signaling through beta-catenin was unaffected. Van
Amerongen et al. (2005) concluded that Wnt signaling in higher
vertebrates is not dependent on Frat.

REFERENCE 1. Saitoh, T.; Moriwaki, J.; Koike, J.; Takagi, A.; Miwa, T.; Shiokawa,
K.; Katoh, M.: Molecular cloning and characterization of FRAT2, encoding
a positive regulator of the WNT signaling pathway. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 281: 815-820, 2001.

2. van Amerongen, R.; Nawijn, M.; Franca-Koh, J.; Zevenhoven, J.;
van der Gulden, H.; Jonkers, J.; Berns, A.: Frat is dispensable for
canonical Wnt signaling in mammals. Genes Dev. 19: 425-430, 2005.

3. Yost, C.; Farr, G. H., III; Pierce, S. B.; Ferkey, D. M.; Chen,
M. M.; Kimelman, D.: GBP, an inhibitor of GSK-3, is implicated in
Xenopus development and oncogenesis. Cell 93: 1031-1041, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 03/08/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/10/2001

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/25/2000

EDITED mgross: 03/08/2005
mgross: 4/10/2001
mgross: 5/26/2000
mgross: 5/25/2000

610405	TITLE *610405 CHONDROITIN POLYMERIZING FACTOR; CHPF
;;CHONDROITIN SULFATE SYNTHASE 2; CSS2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database searching with the sequence of CHSY1 (608183) as probe,
Kitagawa et al. (2003) isolated CHPF. The deduced 775-amino acid protein
has a predicted molecular mass of approximately 85 kD and contains 3
potential N-glycosylation sites. CHPF has a prominent N-terminal
hydrophobic segment and is predicted to be a type II transmembrane
protein. CHPF shares 57% and 23% sequence identity with chondroitin
sulfate glucuronyltransferase (CSGlcAT; 608037) and CHSY1, respectively.
Northern blot analysis detected a 3.4-kb CHPF transcript in all tissues
examined except peripheral blood leukocytes; CHPF expression was
detected at high levels in placenta and heart and at moderate levels in
brain, skeletal muscle, kidney, and liver.

Yada et al. (2003) independently isolated CHPF, which they called CSS2,
by database searching with the sequence of CSGlcAT as probe. Although
Kitagawa et al. (2003) stated that CHPF lacks the conserved DXD motif
found in most glycosyltransferases, Yada et al. (2003) identified a DXD
motif and another motif conserved in beta-1,3-glycosyltransferases in
the N terminus of the protein. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis
detected CHPF expression in all tissues examined, with highest
expression in pancreas, ovary, placenta, small intestine, and stomach.

GENE FUNCTION

Kitagawa et al. (2003) found that the expression of a soluble
recombinant form of CHPF in COS-1 cells produced a protein with little
glucuronyltransferase (GlcAT-II) or N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase
(GalNAcT-II) activities responsible for the biosynthesis of repeating
disaccharide units of chondroitin sulfate. However, coexpression of CHPF
and CHSY1 yielded markedly augmented glycosyltransferase activity,
whereas simple mixing of the 2 separately expressed proteins did not.
When both GlcUA and GalNAc were used as sugar donors, chondroitin
polymerization was demonstrated on the so-called
glycosaminoglycan-protein linkage region tetrasaccharide sequence of
alpha-thrombomodulin. Kitagawa et al. (2003) concluded that the
chondroitin polymerizing activity requires concomitant expression of
CHPF with CHSY1.

In experiments with a soluble recombinant form of CHPF in COS-7 cells,
Yada et al. (2003) found that CHPF displayed dual GlcAT-II and
GalNAcT-II glycosyltransferase activities. They concluded that CHPF
plays a role in chondroitin sulfate chain synthesis.

GENE STRUCTURE

The CHPF gene contains at least 4 exons and spans over 5 kb (Kitagawa et
al., 2003; Yada et al., 2003).

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Kitagawa et al. (2003) mapped the CHPF gene to
chromosome 2q35-q36. By the same method, Yada et al. (2003) mapped the
gene to 2q36.1.

REFERENCE 1. Kitagawa, H.; Izumikawa, T.; Uyama, T.; Sugahara, K.: Molecular
cloning of a chondroitin polymerizing factor that cooperates with
chondroitin synthase for chondroitin polymerization. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
23666-23671, 2003.

2. Yada, T.; Gotoh, M.; Sato, T.; Shionyu, M.; Go, M.; Kaseyama, H.;
Iwasaki, H.; Kikuchi, N.; Kwon, Y.-D.; Togayachi, A.; Kudo, T.; Watanabe,
H.; Narimatsu, H.; Kimata, K.: Chondroitin sulfate synthase-2: molecular
cloning and characterization of a novel human glycosyltransferase
homologous to chondroitin sulfate glucuronyltransferase, which has
dual enzymatic activities. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 30235-30247, 2003.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 9/14/2006

EDITED carol: 03/25/2010
carol: 9/14/2006

600075	TITLE *600075 TATA BOX-BINDING PROTEIN; TBP
;;SCA17 GENE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The RNA polymerase II transcription factor D (TFIID; see 313650) is a
multisubunit complex essential for the expression of most, if not all,
protein-encoding genes. The DNA-binding subunit of TFIID is the TATA
box-binding protein (TBP).

GENE FUNCTION

The TBP C-terminal domain of 180 amino acids is well conserved, and this
domain is both necessary and sufficient for interaction with DNA and for
assembly of the basal transcription apparatus (Peterson et al., 1990).
Contrary to the previously hypothesized existence of a family of genes
coding for DNA-binding proteins highly related to TBP, Purrello et al.
(1994) showed that the segment coding for the evolutionarily conserved
C-terminal DNA-binding domain is unique. When bound to the TATA box, it
has a saddle-like shape, with the concave face contacting DNA and the
convex interacting with the other subunits of TFIID, which are called
TBP-associated factors (TAFs; see 600475), with TFIIA (600519, 600520)
and TFIIB (189963), with the A form of RNA polymerase II CTD, and with
positive and negative modulators of basal and activated transcription of
class II genes (reviewed by Nikolov et al., 1992). The N terminus of TBP
modulates the DNA-binding activity of the C terminus of the protein. It
contains a long string of glutamine codons, which represents a common
motif among other proteins involved in transcription, such as SP1
(189906) and some homeobox proteins (Purrello et al., 1994).

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Juo et al. (2003) reported a 2.95-angstrom resolution crystal structure
of the ternary complex containing BRF1 (604902) homology domain II, the
conserved region of TBP, and 19 basepairs of U6 (180692) promoter DNA.
The structure revealed the core interface for assembly of transcription
factor IIIB and demonstrated how the loosely packed BRF1 domain achieves
remarkable binding specificity with the convex and lateral surfaces of
TBP.

MAPPING

Using a somatic cell hybrid panel, Polymeropoulos et al. (1991)
tentatively assigned the TBP gene to chromosome 6. By multipoint linkage
analysis in CEPH families, Imbert et al. (1994) mapped the TBP gene to
6q27 by linkage to DNA markers. Saito et al. (1994) demonstrated a
polymorphic (CAG)n repeat in the N-terminal region of the TBP gene. They
reported the localization of the gene to 6q27.05-qter by fluorescence in
situ hybridization, using the cDNA clone with or without the (CAG)n
repeat as a probe. Using a 3-prime C-terminal domain cDNA probe,
Purrello et al. (1994) performed in situ hybridization to localize the
TBP locus at 6q27. Segregation analysis with the same probe in a large
series of mouse/human somatic cell hybrids confirmed that the TBP locus
is a single copy and is localized at chromosome 6q21-ter. Rosen et al.
(1995) used oligonucleotide primers flanking a polymorphic stretch of 38
glutamine codons in the 5-prime coding region of the TBP gene to map the
TBP gene to 6qter.

Trachtulec and Forejt (2001) reported that in human, mouse, and snake,
the PDCD2 (600866) and TBP genes are adjacent tail to tail. These 2
genes are linked also in Drosophila and are likewise syntenic in C.
elegans and S. pombe.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

TBP is an important general transcription initiation factor (Kao et al.,
1990; Peterson et al., 1990; Gostout et al., 1993). It contains a long
polymorphic imperfect CAG repeat corresponding to the polyglutamine
region. In a large population study, alleles corresponding to a range of
25 to 42 glutamine residues were detected, with the most common alleles
encoding stretches of 32 to 39 glutamines. A gln42 allele was found only
once in 2,003 chromosomes (Gostout et al., 1993).

Imbert et al. (1994) raised the question of a possible role of an
expanded CAG repeat region of the TBP gene in some late-onset neurologic
disorders.

Several genes for transcription factors, such as TBP and POU-domain
transcription factor (POU1F1; 173110), contain CAG trinucleotide repeats
encoding polyglutamine structures. CAG repeat expansion is known to be
the basis of at least 8 hereditary neurodegenerative disorders,
including Huntington disease (143100), spinocerebellar ataxia-1
(164400), and Machado-Joseph disease (109150). Since the TBP gene
contains particularly long and polymorphic CAG repeats, ranging from 25
to 42, the TBP gene was investigated intensively as a candidate for
psychiatric disorders (Imbert et al., 1994; Rubinsztein et al., 1996;
Jones et al., 1997), but no expansion of the CAG repeat was identified.

- Spinocerebellar Ataxia 17

In a 14-year-old Japanese girl with spinocerebellar ataxia 17 (SCA17;
607136), Koide et al. (1999) identified a de novo expansion of the CAG
repeat of the TBP gene (600075.0001). The mutated TBP, which had an
expanded polyglutamine stretch of 63 glutamines, was expressed in
lymphoblastoid cell lines at a level comparable with that of wildtype
TBP. The CAG repeat of the TBP gene consisted of impure CAG repeat, and
the de novo expansion involved partial duplication of the CAG repeat.
The patient was noted at age 6 to have gait disturbance and intellectual
deterioration. By age 9, she showed truncal ataxia, spasticity, and
muscle weakness. She was confined to a wheelchair at age 13. The
mutation had occurred on the chromosome inherited from her father. She
was identified from a larger group of 118 patients with various forms of
neurologic disease.

Zuhlke et al. (2001) confirmed the report of a polyglutamine disease due
to (CAG)n repeat expansion in the TBP gene. They investigated 604
patients (469 sporadic and 135 familial cases) with ataxia and gait
disturbances in whom repeat expansions of previously identified genes
had been excluded and found repeat expansion in the TBP gene in 2
families of northern German origin with autosomal dominant inheritance
of ataxia, dystonia, and intellectual decline. A marked intra- and
interfamilial phenotypic variability was observed. Elongated
polyglutamine stretches between 50 and 55 residues were demonstrated,
whereas 15 different normal alleles contained 27 to a maximum of 44
triplets.

In patients with a Huntington disease-like phenotype (HDL4; 607136),
Stevanin et al. (2003), Bauer et al. (2004), and Toyoshima et al. (2004)
identified repeat expansions in the TBP gene.

Shatunov et al. (2004) described a 20-year-old North American patient
who developed rapidly progressive cognitive decline and pronounced
ataxia who had a 129M/M PRNP genotype (176640.0005) and was originally
thought to have variant Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease (vCJD; see 123400).
Further studies, however, showed that the patient had an expanded allele
with 55 CAG/CAA repeats in the TBP gene. The patient's unaffected
parents and sibs showed normal-sized TBP alleles with 37 to 38 repeats.
Haplotype and nucleotide sequence analyses indicated that the mutation
had occurred de novo on a chromosome inherited from the father. Shatunov
et al. (2004) suggested that variant CJD should be added to the list of
disorders tested for the TBP trinucleotide expansion.

Tomiuk et al. (2007) analyzed the microsatellite region of the TBP gene
in 10 unrelated German SCA17 patients, 30 unaffected members of 10 SCA17
families, 15 controls, and 10 previously published SCA17 families, as
well as the homologous regions in 10 primate species. They showed that
the characteristic CAA-CAG-CAA interruption pattern was conserved and
likely to result from selection for stabilizing the microsatellite.
Comparison of the microsatellite region across primate species showed
that SCA17 is likely to be a human trait, with the most common 37-repeat
allele acting as a repository for expanded, pathogenic alleles. Tomiuk
et al. (2007) concluded that the cassette-like structure of 5 out of 17
expanded alleles can be attributed to unequal crossing over, thus
explaining the rare and sporadic de novo generation of SCA17 alleles.

Gao et al. (2008) used small pool PCR to compared somatic instability of
expanded CAG repeats in 1 Mexican, 4 Japanese, and 2 German SCA17
families. CAG repeats had 2 distinct configurations: complex or group I
consisting of (CAG)3 (CAA)3 (CAG)n1 CAA-CAG-CAA (CAG)n2 CAA-CAG ('n1'
from 7 to 11 and 'n2' from 9 to 21) and simple or group II consisting of
(CAG)3 (CAA)3 (CAG)n1 CAA-CAG ('n1' from 42 to 47). Both CAG and CAA in
these repeat tracts code for glutamine. Group I mutations were prone to
contraction, whereas group II mutations were prone to continuing
expansion. Analysis of individual alleles showed a correlation between
mutation frequency and the number of CAG/CAA repeats (0.76), but the
difference between the 2 groups was no significant. However, there was a
strong correlation between the configuration of the CAG/CAA repeat and
instability: those with more CAA interruptions showed more stability,
whereas those with less or no CAA interruptions showed more instability.
These changes also correlated with intergenerational instability and
anticipation in regard to age at onset. Of note, the pure CAG repeats
showed both expansion and contraction, while the interrupted repeats
exhibited mostly contraction at a significantly lower frequency. Gao et
al. (2008) suggested that repeat configuration is a critical determinant
for instability, and that CAA interruptions (i.e., CAA-CAG-CAA or domain
3) might serve as a limiting element for further expansion of CAG
repeats at the SCA17 locus.

- Susceptibility to Parkinson Disease

In a patient with Parkinson disease (168600) from Taiwan, Wu et al.
(2004) detected an abnormal trinucleotide repeat expansion (46 repeats)
in the SCA17 gene. The patient presented with typical features of
idiopathic PD: late onset of disease, resting tremor in the limbs,
rigidity, bradykinesia, and a good response to levodopa. The authors
noted that this was the first report describing PD in association with
an expanded allele in the TBP gene.

ANIMAL MODEL

Veenstra et al. (2000) tested the role of Tbp during the onset of
embryonic transcription in Xenopus by antisense oligonucleotide-mediated
turnover of maternal Tbp mRNA. Embryos without detectable Tbp initiated
gastrulation but died before completing gastrulation. The expression of
many genes transcribed by RNA polymerase II and III was reduced;
however, some genes were transcribed with an efficiency identical to
that of Tbp-containing embryos. Using a similar antisense strategy,
Veenstra et al. (2000) found that the TBP-like factor Tlf/Trf2 (TBPL1;
605521) was essential for development past the midblastula stage.
Because TBP and a TLF factor were found to play complementary roles in
embryonic development, Veenstra et al. (2000) concluded that their
results indicate that although similar mechanistic roles exist in
common, TBP and TLF function differentially to control transcription of
specific genes.

Mammalian TBP consists of a 180-amino acid core that is common to all
eukaryotes fused to a vertebrate-specific N-terminal domain. Hobbs et
al. (2002) generated mice with a modified Tbp allele, designated Tbp
delta-N, that produced a version of Tbp lacking 111 of the 135
vertebrate-specific amino acids. More than 90% of Tbp delta-N/delta-N
fetuses died in midgestation from an apparent defect in the placenta.
Tbp delta-N/delta-N fetuses could be rescued by supplying them with a
wildtype tetraploid placenta. Mutants also could be rescued by rearing
them in immunocompromised mothers. In immune-competent mothers, survival
of Tbp delta-N/delta-N fetuses increased when fetal/placental
beta-2-microglobulin (B2M; 109700) expression was genetically disrupted.
These results suggested that the TBP N terminus functions in
transcriptional regulation of a placental B2M-dependent process that
favors maternal immunotolerance of pregnancy.

Martianov et al. (2002) inactivated the murine Tbp gene by targeted
disruption. Tbp +/- mice were born in the expected mendelian frequency
and were of normal size and weight, displayed no obvious abnormalities,
and were fertile. Crossing TBP heterozygote mice failed to generate
viable newborn homozygous mutant mice. However, at 3.5 days postcoitum
(E3.5), an approximately mendelian ratio of Tbp -/- mice could be
detected with PCR. When examined by immunofluorescence for expression of
the Tbp protein, blastocysts were detected that were totally negative
for Tbp labeling. TBP was absent in explanted blastocysts grown for 1
day in vitro. Strongly reduced Tbp levels were also detected at E2.5 in
8 cell-stage embryos, which indicates that the maternal Tbp pool was
significantly depleted at this stage and was undetectable by the
blastocyst stage. Blastocysts from Tbp heterozygote crosses were
explanted at E3.5 and cultivated in vitro. Approximately 25% of the
blastocysts rapidly ceased growth and died, whereas the others hatched
from the zona pellucida and continued to develop. After 2 days,
extensive apoptosis was observed in the growth-arrested Tbp homozygous
mutant embryos. Embryos staining negatively for Tbp were also recovered
at E4.5. These embryos typically comprised 30 to 40 cells, fewer than
normally seen in wildtype E3.5 blastocysts, indicating that growth
arrest occurred before E3.5, just as Tbp levels became undetectable.
Martianov et al. (2002) found that after loss of Tbp, RNA polymerase II
(pol II; see 180660) remained in a transcriptionally active
phosphorylation state, and in situ run-off experiments showed high
levels of pol II transcription compared to those of wildtype cells. In
contrast, pol I and pol III transcription was arrested. Martianov et al.
(2002) concluded that their results show a differential dependency of
the RNA polymerases on TBP and provide evidence for TBP-independent pol
II transcriptional mechanisms that allow reinitiation and maintenance of
gene transcription in vivo.

Shah et al. (2009) characterized cellular and mouse models expressing
polyQ-expanded TBP. The rat PC12 cellular model exhibited characteristic
features of neuronal dysfunction, including decreased cell viability and
defective neurite outgrowth. The high-affinity nerve growth factor
receptor, Trka (NTRK1; 191315), was downregulated by mutant TBP in PC12
cells. Downregulation of Trka also occurred in the cerebellum of SCA17
transgenic mice prior to Purkinje cell degeneration. Mutant TBP bound
more Sp1 (189906), reduced its occupancy of the Trka promoter and
inhibited the activity of the Trka promoter. Shah et al. (2009)
suggested that the transcriptional downregulation of TRKA by mutant TBP
may contribute to SCA17 pathogenesis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 17
PARKINSON DISEASE, LATE-ONSET, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
TBP, (CAG)n EXPANSION

Koide et al. (1999) described a sporadic case of a complex neurologic
disorder with cerebellar ataxia, pyramidal signs, and severe
intellectual impairment (SCA17; 607136) associated with expansion of the
CAG repeat of the TBP gene. The gene encoded 63 glutamines, far
exceeding the range in normal individuals (25 to 42 in Caucasians; 31 to
42 in Japanese).

Zuhlke et al. (2001) described 2 German families with an autosomal
dominant degenerative multisystem disorder with predominant ataxia and
intellectual impairment but also involvement of the pyramidal,
extrapyramidal, and possibly autonomic system (607136). Expanded (CAG)n
alleles of the TBP gene ranged between 50 and 55 residues in affected
individuals. In 1 family, 2 affected sisters differed by 1 trinucleotide
repeat, and upon transmission from one of the sisters to her daughter
the repeat was elongated by 2 units. This expansion may have contributed
to the earlier age of onset in the daughter. In the other family, the
(CAG)n element was combined with CAA interruptions, which had not been
described for CAG expansions in other genes.

Nakamura et al. (2001) identified a form of spinocerebellar ataxia- 17
in 4 Japanese pedigrees which was caused by an abnormal (CAG)n expansion
in TBP to a range of 47 to 55 repeats. Age at onset ranged from 19 to 48
years, and symptoms included ataxia, bradykinesia, and dementia.
Postmortem brain tissue from 1 patient exhibited shrinkage and moderate
loss of small neurons with gliosis predominantly in the caudate nucleus
and putamen, with similar but moderate changes in the thalamus, frontal
cortex, and temporal cortex. Moderate Purkinje cell loss and an increase
of Bergmann glia were seen in the cerebellum. Immunocytochemical
analysis performed with anti-ubiquitin (191339) and anti-TBP antibodies
showed neuronal intranuclear inclusion bodies, and most neuronal nuclei
were diffusely stained with 1C2 antibody, which recognizes expanded
polyglutamine tracts.

In a total of 12 patients with a Huntington disease-like phenotype
(607136), Stevanin et al. (2003), Bauer et al. (2004), and Toyoshima et
al. (2004) identified expanded trinucleotide repeats, ranging from 44 to
52 repeats, in the TBP gene. Clinical features were indistinguishable
from Huntington disease, including behavioral changes progressing to
dementia, chorea, cerebellar gait, lower limb hyperreflexia, and
pontocerebellar atrophy.

Shatunov et al. (2004) described a 20-year-old patient who developed
rapidly progressive cognitive decline and pronounced ataxia, a phenotype
compatible with prion disease. No mutation was found in the PRNP gene
(176640), and the patient was found to have a de novo increase of the
trinucleotide repeat number in the coding region of the TBP gene.

Susceptibility to Parkinson Disease

In a patient with Parkinson disease (168600) from Taiwan, Wu et al.
(2004) detected an abnormal trinucleotide repeat expansion (46 repeats)
in the SCA17 gene. The patient presented with typical features of
idiopathic PD: late onset of disease, resting tremor in the limbs,
rigidity, bradykinesia, and a good response to levodopa. The authors
noted that this was the first report describing PD in association with
an expanded allele in the TBP gene.

REFERENCE 1. Bauer, P.; Laccone, F.; Rolfs, A.; Wullner, U.; Bosch, S.; Peters,
H.; Liebscher, S.; Scheible, M.; Epplen, J. T.; Weber, B. H. F.; Holinski-Feder,
E.; Weirich-Schwaiger, H.; Morris-Rosendahl, D. J.; Andrich, J.; Riess,
O.: Trinucleotide repeat expansion in SCA17/TBP in white patients
with Huntington's disease-like phenotype. J. Med. Genet. 41: 230-232,
2004.

2. Gao, R.; Matsuura, T.; Coolbaugh, M.; Zuhlke, C.; Nakamura, K.;
Rasmussen, A.; Siciliano, M. J.; Ashizawa, T.; Lin, X.: Instability
of expanded CAG/CAA repeats in spinocerebellar ataxia type 17. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 16: 215-222, 2008.

3. Gostout, B.; Liu, Q.; Sommer, S. S.: 'Cryptic' repeating triplets
of purines and pyrimidines (cRRY(i)) are frequent and polymorphic:
analysis of coding cRRY(i) in the proopiomelanocortin (POMC) and TATA-binding
protein (TBP) genes. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 52: 1182-1190, 1993.

4. Hobbs, N. K.; Bondareva, A. A.; Barnett, S.; Capecchi, M. R.; Schmidt,
E. E.: Removing the vertebrate-specific TBP N terminus disrupts placental
beta-2M-dependent interactions with the maternal immune system. Cell 110:
43-54, 2002.

5. Imbert, G.; Trottier, Y.; Beckmann, J.; Mandel, J. L.: The gene
for the TATA binding protein (TBP) that contains a highly polymorphic
protein coding CAG repeat maps to 6q27. Genomics 21: 667-668, 1994.

6. Jones, A. L.; Middle, F.; Guy, C.; Spurlock, G.; Cairns, N. J.;
McGuffin, P.; Craddock, N.; Owen, M.; O'Donovan, M. C.: No evidence
for expanded polyglutamine sequences in bipolar disorder and schizophrenia. Molec.
Psychiat. 2: 478-482, 1997.

7. Juo, Z. S.; Kassavetis, G. A.; Wang, J.; Geiduschek, E. P.; Sigler,
P. B.: Crystal structure of a transcription factor IIIB core interface
ternary complex. Nature 422: 534-539, 2003.

8. Kao, C. C.; Lieberman, P. M.; Schmidt, M. C.; Zhou, Q.; Pei, R.;
Berk, A. J.: Cloning of a transcriptionally active human TATA binding
factor. Science 248: 1646-1650, 1990.

9. Koide, R.; Kobayashi, S.; Shimohata, T.; Ikeuchi, T.; Maruyama,
M.; Saito, M.; Yamada, M.; Takahashi, H.; Tsuji, S.: A neurological
disease caused by an expanded CAG trinucleotide repeat in the TATA-binding
protein gene: a new polyglutamine disease? Hum. Molec. Genet. 8:
2047-2053, 1999.

10. Martianov, I.; Viville, S.; Davidson, I.: RNA polymerase II transcription
in murine cells lacking the TATA binding protein. Science 298: 1036-1039,
2002.

11. Nakamura, K.; Jeong, S.-Y.; Uchihara, T.; Anno, M.; Nagashima,
K.; Nagashima, T.; Ikeda, S.; Tsuji, S.; Kanazawa, I.: SCA17, a novel
autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia caused by an expanded polyglutamine
in TATA-binding protein. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 1441-1448, 2001.

12. Nikolov, D. B.; Hu, S.-H.; Lin, J.; Gasch, A.; Hoffmann, A.; Horikoshi,
M.; Chua, N.-H.; Roeder, R. G.; Burley, S. K.: Crystal structure
of TFIID TATA-box binding protein. Nature 360: 40-46, 1992.

13. Peterson, M. G.; Tanese, N.; Pugh, B. F.; Tjian, R.: Functional
domains and upstream activation properties of cloned human TATA binding
protein. Science 248: 1625-1630, 1990. Note: Erratum: Science 249:
844 only, 1990.

14. Polymeropoulos, M. H.; Rath, D. S.; Xiao, H.; Merril, C. R.:
Trinucleotide repeat polymorphism at the human transcription factor
IID gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 19: 4307 only, 1991.

15. Purrello, M.; Pietro, C. D.; Mirabile, E.; Rapisarda, A.; Rimini,
R.; Tine, A.; Pavone, L.; Motta, S.; Grzeschik, K.-H.; Sichel, G.
: Physical mapping at 6q27 of the locus for the TATA box-binding protein,
the DNA-binding subunit of TFIID and a component of SL1 and TFIIIB,
strongly suggests that it is single copy in the human genome. Genomics 22:
94-100, 1994.

16. Rosen, D. R.; Trofatter, J. A.; Brown, R. H., Jr.: Mapping of
the human TATA-binding protein gene (TBP) to chromosome 6qter. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 69: 279-280, 1995.

17. Rubinsztein, D. C.; Leggo, J.; Crow, T. J.; DeLisi, L. E.; Walsh,
C.; Jain, S.; Paykel, E. S.: Analysis of polyglutamine-coding repeats
in the TATA-binding protein in different human populations and in
patients with schizophrenia and bipolar affective disorder. Am. J.
Med. Genet. 67: 495-498, 1996.

18. Saito, F.; Yamamoto, T.; Horikoshi, M.; Ikeuchi, T.: Direct mapping
of the human TATA box-binding protein (TBP) gene to 6q27 by fluorescence
in situ hybridization. Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 39: 421-425, 1994.

19. Shah, A. G.; Friedman, M. J.; Huang, S.; Roberts, M.; Li, X.-J.;
Li, S.: Transcriptional dysregulation of TrkA associates with neurodegeneration
in spinocerebellar ataxia type 17. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 4141-4152,
2009.

20. Shatunov, A.; Fridman, E. A.; Pagan, F. L.; Leib, J.; Singleton,
A.; Hallett, M.; Goldfarb, L. G.: Small de novo duplication in the
repeat region of the TATA-box-binding protein gene manifest with a
phenotype similar to variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Clin. Genet. 66:
496-501, 2004.

21. Stevanin, G.; Fujigasaki, H.; Lebre, A.-S.; Camuzat, A.; Jeannequin,
C.; Dode, C.; Takahashi, J.; San, C.; Bellance, R.; Brice, A.; Durr,
A.: Huntington's disease-like phenotype due to trinucleotide repeat
expansions in the TBP and JPH3 genes. Brain 126: 1599-1603, 2003.

22. Tomiuk, J.; Bachmann, L.; Bauer, C.; Rolfs, A.; Schols, L.; Roos,
C.; Zischler, H.; Schuler, M. M.; Bruntner, S.; Riess, O.; Bauer,
P.: Repeat expansion in spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 alleles of
the TATA-box binding protein gene: an evolutionary approach. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 15: 81-87, 2007. Note: Erratum: Europ. J. Hum. Genet.
16: 661 only, 2008.

23. Toyoshima, Y.; Yamada, M.; Onodera, O.; Shimohata, M.; Inenaga,
C.; Fujita, N.; Morita, M.; Tsuji, S.; Takahashi, H.: SCA17 homozygote
showing Huntington's disease-like phenotype. Ann. Neurol. 55: 281-286,
2004.

24. Trachtulec, Z.; Forejt, J.: Synteny of orthologous genes conserved
in mammals, snake, fly, nematode, and fission yeast. Mammalian Genome 12:
227-231, 2001.

25. Veenstra, G. J. C.; Weeks, D. L.; Wolffe, A. P.: Distinct roles
for TBP and TBP-like factor in early embryonic gene transcription
in Xenopus. Science 290: 2312-2314, 2000.

26. Wu, Y. R.; Lin, H. Y.; Chen, C. M.; Gwinn-Hardy, K.; Ro, L. S.;
Wang, Y. C.; Li, S. H.; Hwang, J. C.; Fang, K.; Hsieh-Li, H. M.; Li,
M. L.; Tung, L. C.; Su, M. T.; Lu, K. T.; Lee-Chen, G. J.: Genetic
testing in spinocerebellar ataxia in Taiwan: expansions of trinucleotide
repeats in SCA8 and SCA17 are associated with typical Parkinson's
disease. Clin. Genet. 65: 209-214, 2004.

27. Zuhlke, C.; Hellenbroich, Y.; Dalski, A.; Kononowa, N.; Hagenah,
J.; Vieregge, P.; Riess, O.; Klein, C.; Schwinger, E.: Different
types of repeat expansion in the TATA-binding protein gene are associated
with a new form of inherited ataxia. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 9: 160-164,
2001.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 9/30/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/5/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/1/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/31/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/19/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/25/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/2/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/13/2002
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 8/12/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/29/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/6/2001
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 8/23/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/4/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/5/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/25/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/5/1994

EDITED terry: 12/21/2012
ckniffin: 11/16/2010
wwang: 10/15/2010
terry: 9/30/2010
wwang: 2/5/2010
wwang: 12/16/2008
wwang: 2/4/2008
terry: 2/1/2008
carol: 2/27/2007
carol: 4/4/2005
wwang: 3/31/2005
terry: 3/31/2005
joanna: 7/15/2004
tkritzer: 6/1/2004
ckniffin: 5/20/2004
ckniffin: 5/19/2004
carol: 5/12/2004
terry: 3/18/2004
tkritzer: 3/1/2004
terry: 2/25/2004
alopez: 4/4/2003
terry: 4/2/2003
alopez: 11/14/2002
terry: 11/13/2002
carol: 8/12/2002
ckniffin: 8/12/2002
mgross: 7/29/2002
cwells: 12/18/2001
cwells: 12/13/2001
cwells: 12/6/2001
joanna: 9/25/2001
cwells: 8/23/2001
cwells: 8/20/2001
mcapotos: 6/5/2001
terry: 6/4/2001
mgross: 1/5/2001
carol: 12/14/1999
mgross: 11/4/1999
terry: 10/25/1999
psherman: 8/10/1998
mark: 6/22/1995
mark: 5/8/1995
mark: 4/3/1995
carol: 11/3/1994
carol: 9/2/1994

108330	TITLE *108330 CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY I, POLYPEPTIDE 1; CYP1A1
;;CYTOCHROME P450, AROMATIC COMPOUND-INDUCIBLE;;
ARYL HYDROCARBON HYDROXYLASE; AHH;;
FLAVOPROTEIN-LINKED MONOOXYGENASE;;
CYTOCHROME P1-450, DIOXIN-INDUCIBLE;;
CYTOCHROME P1-450, INDUCIBLE BY 2,3,7,8-TETRACHLORODIBENZO-P-DIOXIN;;
TCDD-INDUCIBLE CYTOCHROME P1-450; P450DX;;
POLYCYCLIC AROMATIC COMPOUND-INDUCIBLE P450
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Cytochrome P1-450 is the form of P-450 most closely associated with
polycyclic-hydrocarbon-induced aryl hydrocarbon hydrolase (AHH)
activity. Chen et al. (1983) cloned a portion of the genomic gene. The
compound 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is a potent inducer
of many proteins including drug-metabolizing enzymes such as the
cytochrome P-450 proteins. The P1-450 that is induced by TCDD is the
same as AHH. Jaiswal et al. (1985) used a human cell line in which
treatment with TCDD resulted in high levels of AHH (P1-450) activity and
of human P1-450. Jaiswal et al. (1986) presented the complete amino acid
sequence of cytochrome P1-450, consisting of 515 residues.

Quattrochi et al. (1985) cloned human P450DX genes and concluded that
there are at least 2 in humans.

Jaiswal et al. (1985) and Kawajiri et al. (1986) isolated and analyzed
the complete nucleotide sequence of a human genomic clone highly
homologous to the rat cytochrome P-450 that is induced by
methylcholanthrene and TCDD.

Kawajiri et al. (1986) constructed a fusion gene by ligating the 5-prime
flanking region of the P-450c gene to the structural gene for
prokaryotic chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT), expressed the CAT
activity in mouse cells in response to administered methylcholanthrene.
Thus, the isolated human gene was indeed one for methylcholanthrene
inducibility.

EVOLUTION

Jaiswal et al. (1985) estimated that the TCDD-inducible P-450 gene
family diverged from the phenobarbital-inducible P-450 gene family (see
122720) more than 200 million years ago. Nebert and Gonzalez (1987)
estimated that this divergence occurred more than 750 million years ago.

GENE STRUCTURE

By analysis of the common 5-prime flanking region shared by CYP1A1 and
CYP1A2, Corchero et al. (2001) demonstrated the presence of xenobiotic
response elements (XREs) previously reported for CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 and
several additional consensus sequences for putative XREs. The presence
of all the XREs upstream of both genes suggested that some of the
regulatory elements known to control CYP1A1 gene expression could also
control CYP1A2 gene expression.

GENE FUNCTION

Jaiswal et al. (1987) inserted various lengths of DNA upstream from the
human P1-450 gene into the promoterless pSVO-CAT prokaryotic expression
vector and compared with mouse P1-450 upstream sequences similarly
treated. The results were consistent with the presence of several
functional regulatory regions within the upstream DNA: a promoter
region, a region that is negatively autoregulated, and a region further
upstream that activates transcription and is dependent upon a functional
aromatic hydrocarbon receptor. Compared with 1,604 basepairs of human
P1-450 upstream sequences, 1,646 basepairs of mouse P1-450 upstream
sequences exhibited an increased sensitivity to TCDD; this effect was
found to require both trans-acting protein factors and cis-acting DNA
elements.

Thum and Borlak (2000) investigated the gene expression of major human
cytochrome P450 genes in various regions of explanted hearts from 6
patients with dilated cardiomyopathy and 1 with transposition of the
arterial trunk and 2 samples of normal heart. mRNA for cytochrome 1A1
was predominantly expressed in the right ventricle. A strong correlation
between tissue-specific gene expression and enzyme activity was found.
Thum and Borlak (2000) concluded that their findings showed that
expression of genes for cytochrome P450 monooxgenases and verapamil
metabolism are found predominantly in the right side of the heart, and
suggested that this observation may explain the lack of efficacy of
certain cardioselective drugs.

MAPPING

Hildebrand et al. (1985) used a full-length cDNA for human
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)-inducible cytochrome P1-450
to study DNA from somatic hybrid cells. They assigned the gene to
chromosome 15. Jaiswal and Nebert (1986) indicated that this locus is in
the 15q22-qter segment, near MPI (154550). The P3-450 gene (CYP1A2) has
also been located on chromosome 15; see 124060. See also CYP1B1
(601771).

Corchero et al. (2001) found that the CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 genes are
separated by a 23-kb segment that contains no other open reading frames.
They are in opposite orientation, revealing that they share a common
5-prime flanking region.

Hildebrand et al. (1985) showed that in the mouse, which has 2
dioxin-inducible P-450 genes, P1-450 and P3-450, the 2 genes are
situated in the middle portion of chromosome 9 near the Mpi-1 locus,
between Thy-1 and Pk-3. Treatment of mice with polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons results in induction of P1-450 and P3-450. The mouse P1-450
and P3-450 genes have been cloned and shown to be coordinately regulated
by the cytosolic receptor which is coded by the Ah locus and
specifically binds the inducing chemicals.

By Southern blot analysis of DNA from hamster-mouse somatic cell
hybrids, Tukey et al. (1984) demonstrated that the genes for P1-450 and
P3-450 map to chromosome 9 in the mouse. The major regulatory gene
controlling P1-450 induction in the mouse is located in the centromeric
region of chromosome 12. Mouse chromosome 9 shows other homology of
synteny with human 15.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Kouri et al. (1982) reported that individuals with the high-inducibility
phenotype (present in approximately 10% of the human population) might
be at greater risk than low-inducibility individuals for cigarette
smoke-induced bronchogenic carcinoma. In a 3-generation family of 15
individuals, Petersen et al. (1991) showed that the
high-CYP1A1-inducibility phenotype segregated concordantly with an
infrequent polymorphic site located 450 bases downstream from the CYP1A1
gene. These findings were consistent with those of Kawajiri et al.
(1986, 1990), who demonstrated an association between this polymorphism
and an increased incidence of squamous cell lung cancer. Polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) generated from the combustion of fossil
fuels, and aromatic amines, which are present in cigarette smoke and
other environmental media, present 2 classic environmental carcinogens.

Perera (1997) reviewed evidence on variation in susceptibility to the
effects of carcinogens. CYP1A1 encodes a phase I cytochrome P450 enzyme
that metabolizes PAHs such as benzo[a]pyrene (BP). About 10% of
Caucasians have a highly inducible form of the enzyme that is associated
with an increased risk of lung cancer in smokers. Although not all
studies have been positive, in Japanese and certain Caucasian
populations, increased lung cancer risk was correlated with 1 or both
CYP1A1 polymorphisms: the so-called MSPI polymorphism and the
closely-linked exon 7 (isoleucine-valine) polymorphism (Kawajiri et al.,
1996; Nakachi et al., 1991; Xu et al., 1996). The greatest incremental
lung cancer risk from the 'susceptible' CYP1A1 genotype was seen in
light smokers (7 times the risk of light smokers without the genotype),
whereas heavy smokers with this genotype had less than twice the risk of
heavy smokers without the genotype. The proposed mechanism for the
increased risk is higher CYP1A1 inducibility or enhanced catalytic
activity of the valine-type CYP1A1 enzyme. Consistent with these
mechanisms, Mooney et al. (1997) found that U. S. smoking volunteers
with the exon 7 mutation had more PAH-DNA adducts in their white blood
cells than did smokers without the variant. Perera (1997) stated that
PAH-DNA adducts were also elevated in cord blood and placenta of
newborns with the CYP1A1 MSP1 polymorphism, which suggested that the
genetic polymorphism may increase risk from transplacental PAH exposure.
In lung tissue of adults, adduct concentration correlated with CYP1A1
expression or enzyme activity. Perera (1997) noted that lung tumors of
Japanese smokers were found to be significantly more likely to have p53
(191170) mutations if they had the susceptible CYP1A1 genotype. A
failure to demonstrate genetic susceptibility through CYP1A1
polymorphism when exposure to the environmental carcinogen is heavy is
observed with some other polymorphisms and carcinogenic exposures. It is
possible that at higher exposures, the effects of the genetic traits are
overwhelmed by the environmental insults.

Numerous studies have shown that maternal cigarette smoking during
pregnancy is associated with reduced birth weight and increased risk of
low birth weight, defined as weight less than 2,500 g. Maternal
cigarette smoking has thus been identified as the single largest
modifiable risk factor for intrauterine growth restriction in developed
countries. However, not all women who smoke cigarettes during pregnancy
have low-birth weight infants. Wang et al. (2002) studied whether the
association between maternal cigarette smoking and infant birth weight
differs by polymorphisms of 2 maternal metabolic genes: CYP1A1 and GSTT1
(600436). The CYP1A1 polymorphism was the Msp1 polymorphism (AA vs Aa
and aa); the GSTT1 polymorphism was present versus absent. Wang et al.
(2002) found that regardless of genotype, continuous maternal smoking
during pregnancy was associated with a mean reduction of 377 g in birth
weight. They found that for the CYP1A1 genotype, the estimated reduction
in birth weight was 252 g for the AA genotype group, but was 520 g for
the Aa/aa genotype group. For the GSTT1 genotype, they found the
estimated reduction in birth weight was 285 g and 642 g for the present
and absent genotype groups, respectively. When both CYP1A1 and GSTT1
genotypes were considered, Wang et al. (2002) found the greatest
reduction in birth weight among smoking mothers with the CYP1A1 Aa/aa
and GSTT1 absent genotypes. Among mothers who had not smoked during
their pregnancy or during the 3 months prior to their pregnancy,
genotype did not independently confer an adverse effect.

The CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 genes are oriented head-to-head on human
chromosome 15; the 23.3-kb spacer region might contain distinct
regulatory regions for one or the other of these genes, or the
regulatory regions for the 2 genes may overlap one another. From 24
unrelated subjects of 5 major, geographically isolated subgroups, Jiang
et al. (2005) resequenced both genes (all exons and all introns) plus
some 3-prime flanking sequences and the entire spacer region (39.6 kb
total). They identified 85 SNPs, 49 of which were not in the NCBI
database. SNP typing in 94 Africans, 96 Asians, and 83 Caucasians
demonstrated striking ethnic differences in SNP frequencies and
haplotype evolution. To demonstrate functionality, they generated a
'humanized' BAC transgenic mouse line, having an absence of the mouse
orthologous Cyp1a1 or Cyp1a2 genes, that expressed human CYP1A1 and
CYP1A2 mRNA, protein, and enzyme activity in a tissue-specific manner
similar to that of the mouse.

ANIMAL MODEL

Jones et al. (1991) coupled a DNA fragment containing the murine Cyp1a-1
enhancer elements and promoter region to the chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter gene and used it to create transgenic
mice. Treatment with 3-methylcholanthrene increased hepatic expression
levels by as much as 10,000-fold. Differences in the response to
induction between male and female mice suggested that Cyp1a-1 expression
may be governed in a gender-related manner.

Paolini et al. (1999) found significant increases in the
carcinogen-metabolizing enzymes CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP3A (124010), CYP2B
(123930), and CYP2A in the lungs of rats supplemented with high doses of
beta-carotene. The authors suggested that correspondingly high levels of
CYPs in humans would predispose an individual to cancer risk from the
widely bioactivated tobacco-smoke procarcinogens, thus explaining the
cocarcinogenic effect of beta-carotene in smokers.

NOMENCLATURE

The nomenclature and symbolization of the P450 enzymes and their genes
have gone through many changes. The currently preferred system (Nebert,
1988) uses the symbol CYP followed by a number for family and a letter
for subfamily. CYP1 is the designation of the family of P450 genes
located on human chromosome 15 and mouse chromosome 9. (CYP1 was
previously used for a P450 gene on chromosome 19 (122720), which is now
called CYP2.) The number assigned to the family is sometimes arbitrary
or selected for reasons of historical priority; in other cases it has
specific significance, e.g., in the case of CYP21 on 6p and CYP17 on 10,
which are genes for the enzymes of classes designated P450XXI (steroid
21-hydroxylase) and P450XVII (steroid 17-alpha-hydroxylase),
respectively.

HISTORY

From study of mouse-human hybrid cells, Brown et al. (1976) concluded
that a structural gene for AHH is on chromosome 2 and that possibly a
regulatory gene is there also. Ocraft et al. (1985) localized the gene
to 2q31-2pter. According to McBride (1985), the gene mapped to
chromosome 2 by expression assays is almost certainly not the structural
locus; the structural locus is that assigned to chromosome 15:
dioxin-inducible P1-450. Nebert (1988) recommended that the AHH locus
held to be on chromosome 2 be removed from that listing. The assignment
was based on measurements of AHH inducibility in tissue culture, and
effects of dibutyryl cAMP or other factor on the enzyme activity might
have been observed. Neither the Ah receptor nor the P(1)450 or P(3)450
genes that it regulates map to chromosome 2 or to its mouse or hamster
homolog.

The chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) assay system for monitoring
gene expression was reported by Gorman et al. (1983). Gorman (1993)
described the circumstances surrounding the development of the method.
The initial report was turned down by the journal Nature, whose
editorial staff charged that the work was not of wide enough interest
for publication there.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Wiebel et al. (1981)
REFERENCE 1. Brown, S.; Wiebel, F. J.; Gelboin, H. V.; Minna, J. D.: Assignment
of a locus required for flavoprotein-linked monooxygenase expression
to human chromosome 2. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 73: 4628-4632, 1976.

2. Chen, Y. T.; Tukey, R. H.; Swan, D. C.; Negishi, N.; Nebert, D.
W.: Characterization of the human P1-450 genomic gene. (Abstract) Clin.
Res. 31: 456A, 1983.

3. Corchero, J.; Pimprale, S.; Kimura, S.; Gonzalez, F. J.: Organization
of the CYP1A cluster on human chromosome 15: implications for gene
regulation. Pharmacogenetics 11: 1-6, 2001.

4. Gorman, C.; Padmanabhan, R.; Howard, B. H.: High efficiency DNA-mediated
transformation of primate cells. Science 221: 551-553, 1983.

5. Gorman, C. M.: CAT: an easy assay for gene expression (citation
classic). Current Contents (Life Sciences) 36(22): 8, 1993.

6. Hildebrand, C. E.; Gonzalez, F. J.; Kozak, C. A.; Nebert, D. W.
: Regional linkage analysis of the dioxin-inducible P-450 gene family
on mouse chromosome 9. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 130: 396-406,
1985.

7. Hildebrand, C. E.; Gonzalez, F. J.; McBride, O. W.; Nebert, D.
W.: Assignment of the human 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin-inducible
cytochrome P1-450 gene to chromosome 15. Nucleic Acids Res. 13:
2009-2016, 1985.

8. Jaiswal, A. K.; Gonzalez, F. J.; Nebert, D. W.: Comparison of
human mouse P(1)450 upstream regulatory sequences in liver- and nonliver-derived
cell lines. Molec. Endocr. 1: 312-320, 1987.

9. Jaiswal, A. K.; Gonzalez, F. J.; Nebert, D. W.: Human P(1)-450
gene sequence and correlation of mRNA with genetic differences in
benzo(a)pyrene metabolism. Nucleic Acids Res. 13: 4503-4520, 1985.

10. Jaiswal, A. K.; Gonzalez, F. J.; Nebert, D. W.: Human dioxin-inducible
cytochrome P1-450: complementary DNA and amino acid sequence. Science 228:
80-83, 1985.

11. Jaiswal, A. K.; Nebert, D. W.: Two RFLPs associated with the
human P(1)450 gene linked to the MPI locus on chromosome 15 (HGM8
D15S8). Nucleic Acids Res. 14: 4376, 1986.

12. Jaiswal, A. K.; Nebert, D. W.; Gonzalez, F. J.: Human P(3)450:
cDNA and complete amino acid sequence. Nucleic Acids Res. 14: 6773-6774,
1986.

13. Jiang, Z.; Dalton, T. P.; Jin, L.; Wang, B.; Tsuneoka, Y.; Shertzer,
H. G.; Deka, R.; Nebert, D. W.: Toward the evaluation of function
in genetic variability: characterizing human SNP frequencies and establishing
BAC-transgenic mice carrying the human CYP1A1_CYP1A2 locus. Hum.
Mutat. 25: 196-206, 2005.

14. Jones, S. N.; Jones, P. G.; Ibarguen, H.; Caskey, C. T.; Craigen,
W. J.: Induction of the Cyp1a-1 dioxin-responsive enhancer in transgenic
mice. Nucleic Acids Res. 19: 6547-6551, 1991.

15. Kawajiri, K.; Eguchi, H.; Nakachi, K.; Sekiya, T.; Yamamoto, M.
: Association of CYP1A1 germ line polymorphisms with mutations of
the p53 gene in lung cancer. Cancer Res. 56: 72-76, 1996.

16. Kawajiri, K.; Nakachi, K.; Imai, K.; Yoshii, A.; Shinoda, N.;
Watanabe, J.: Identification of genetically high risk individuals
to lung cancer by DNA polymorphisms of the cytochrome P450IA1 gene. FEBS
Lett. 263: 131-133, 1990.

17. Kawajiri, K.; Watanabe, J.; Gotoh, O.; Tagashira, Y.; Sogawa,
K.; Fujii-Kuriyama, Y.: Structure and drug inducibility of the human
cytochrome P-450c gene. Europ. J. Biochem. 159: 219-225, 1986.

18. Kouri, R. E.; McKinney, C. E.; Slomiany, D. J.; Snodgrass, D.
R.; Wray, N. P.; McLemore, T. L.: Positive correlation between high
aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase activity and primary lung cancer as analyzed
in cryopreserved lymphocytes. Cancer Res. 42: 5030-5037, 1982.

19. McBride, O. W.: Personal Communication. Bethesda, Md.  9/16/1985.

20. Mooney, L. A.; Bell, D. A.; Santella, R. M.; Van Bennekum, A.
M.; Ottman, R.; Paik, M.; Blaner, W. S.; Lucier, G. W.; Covey, L.;
Young, T. L.; Cooper, T. B.; Glassman, A. H.; Perera, F. P.: Contribution
of genetic and nutritional factors to DNA damage in heavy smokers. Carcinogenesis 18:
503-509, 1997.

21. Nakachi, K.; Imai, K.; Hayashi, S.; Watanabe, J.; Kawajiri, K.
: Genetic susceptibility to squamous cell carcinoma of the lung in
relation to cigarette smoking dose. Cancer Res. 51: 5177-5180, 1991.

22. Nebert, D. W.: Personal Communication. Bethesda, Md.  2/1/1988.

23. Nebert, D. W.; Gonzalez, F. J.: P450 genes: structure, evolution,
and regulation. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 56: 945-993, 1987.

24. Ocraft, K. P.; Muskett, J. M.; Brown, S.: Localization of the
human arylhydrocarbon hydroxylase gene to the 2q31-2pter region of
chromosome 2. Ann. Hum. Genet. 49: 237-239, 1985.

25. Paolini, M.; Cantelli-Forti, G.; Perocco, P.; Pedulli, G. F.;
Abdel-Rahman, S. Z.; Legator, M. S.: Co-carcinogenic effect of beta-carotene.
(Letter) Nature 398: 760-761, 1999.

26. Perera, F. P.: Environment and cancer: who are susceptible? Science 278:
1068-1073, 1997.

27. Petersen, D. D.; McKinney, C. E.; Ikeya, K.; Smith, H. H.; Bale,
A. E.; McBride, O. W.; Nebert, D. W.: Human CYP1A1 gene: cosegregation
of the enzyme inducibility phenotype and an RFLP. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 48:
720-725, 1991.

28. Quattrochi, L. C.; Okino, S. T.; Pendurthi, U. R.; Tukey, R. H.
: Cloning and isolation of human cytochrome P-450 cDNAs homologous
to dioxin-inducible rabbit mRNAs encoding P-450 4 and P-450 6. DNA 4:
395-400, 1985.

29. Thum, T.; Borlak, J.: Gene expression in distinct regions of
the heart. Lancet 355: 979-983, 2000.

30. Tukey, R. H.; Lalley, P. A.; Nebert, D. W.: Localization of cytochrome
P1-450 and P3-450 genes to mouse chromosome 9. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 81:
3163-3166, 1984.

31. Wang, X.; Zuckerman, B.; Pearson, C.; Kaufman, G.; Chen, C.; Wang,
G.; Niu, T.; Wise, P. H.; Bauchner, H.; Xu, X.: Maternal cigarette
smoking, metabolic gene polymorphism, and infant birth weight. JAMA 287:
195-202, 2002.

32. Wiebel, F. J.; Hlavica, P.; Grzeschik, K. H.: Expression of aromatic
polycyclic hydrocarbon-induced monooxygenase (aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase)
in man-mouse hybrids is associated with human chromosome 2. Hum.
Genet. 59: 277-280, 1981.

33. Xu, X.; Kelsey, K. T.; Wiencke, J. K.; Wain, J. C.; Christiani,
D. C.: Cytochrome P450 CYP1A1 MspI polymorphism and lung cancer susceptibility. Cancer
Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 5: 687-692, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/7/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/9/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/9/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/15/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/6/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/13/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED tpirozzi: 07/11/2013
alopez: 7/17/2012
terry: 11/5/2010
terry: 5/19/2010
terry: 6/3/2009
tkritzer: 3/14/2005
terry: 3/7/2005
mgross: 8/20/2003
tkritzer: 8/16/2002
tkritzer: 8/14/2002
terry: 8/9/2002
mcapotos: 4/11/2001
mcapotos: 4/9/2001
terry: 4/9/2001
alopez: 6/15/2000
alopez: 4/14/2000
alopez: 5/6/1999
alopez: 1/21/1998
alopez: 1/13/1998
dholmes: 1/8/1998
mark: 4/29/1997
terry: 5/24/1996
terry: 5/12/1994
mimadm: 4/9/1994
warfield: 4/7/1994
pfoster: 3/31/1994
carol: 10/19/1993
carol: 6/11/1993

614787	TITLE *614787 POGO TRANSPOSABLE ELEMENT WITH ZNF DOMAIN; POGZ
;;KIAA0461
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Seki et al. (1997) cloned POGZ, which they designated KIAA0461.
The deduced protein contains 1,355 amino acids.

Using the N-terminal activation domains of the transcription factor SP1
(189906) to screen a cDNA library originating from SW613-S human colon
carcinoma cells, Gunther et al. (2000) cloned a splice variant of
KIAA0461 that included an insertion of an additional 53 amino acids near
the N terminus. The deduced 1,411-amino acid full-length protein has 9
putative zinc fingers of the C2H2 type and 2 proline-rich regions in a
central domain, and small acidic stretches at both the N- and C-termini.

Nozawa et al. (2010) found that full-length 1,410-amino acid POGZ
contains an irregular zinc finger motif following the central cluster of
9 C2H2-type zinc fingers and that the C-terminal domain contains a
centromere protein B (CENPB; 117140)-like DNA-binding domain and a DDE
domain that originated from a transposase encoded by a pogo-like DNA
transposon.

GENE FUNCTION

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Gunther et al. (2000) found that the
N-terminal half of KIAA0461 interacted with the N-terminal
transactivation domains of SP1.

HP1-alpha (CBX5; 604478) has an essential role in heterochromatin
formation and mitotic progression through interaction of its PxVxL motif
with several cell cycle proteins. Nozawa et al. (2010) found that POGZ
bound HP1-alpha, but via an atypical zinc finger, called the HP1-binding
zinc finger-like (HPZ) domain, rather than the canonical PxVxL motif.
POGZ bound HP1-alpha in a competitive manner with PxVxL motif-binding
proteins such as TIF1-beta (TRIM28; 601742) and INCENP (604411).
Knockdown of POGZ in human cell lines caused mitotic defects, with
accelerated mitosis, abnormal chromosome segregation, nuclear
fragmentation, and disrupted mitotic HP1-alpha localization and Aurora
kinase B (AURKB; 604970) activity. The defects were similar to those
caused by knockdown of Aurora kinase B. Expression of the HPZ domain
alone corrected the mitotic defects in POGZ knockdown cells. Nozawa et
al. (2010) concluded that the HP1-chromatin interaction is destabilized
by binding of POGZ, permitting Aurora kinase B activation and mitotic
progression.

MAPPING

Hartz (2012) mapped the POGZ gene to chromosome 1q21.3 based on an
alignment of the POGZ sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB007930) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Gunther, M.; Laithier, M.; Brison, O.: A set of proteins interacting
with transcription factor Sp1 identified in a two-hybrid screening. Molec.
Cell. Biochem. 210: 131-142, 2000.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/27/2012.

3. Nozawa, R.-S.; Nagao, K.; Masuda, H.-T.; Iwasaki, O.; Hirota, T.;
Nozaki, N.; Kimura, H.; Obuse, C.: Human POGZ modulates dissociation
of HP1-alpha from mitotic chromosome arms through Aurora B activation. Nature
Cell Biol. 12: 719-727, 2010.

4. Seki, N.; Ohira, M.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Miyajima, N.; Nakajima,
D.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Characterization of cDNA clones in size-fractionated
cDNA libraries from human brain. DNA Res. 4: 345-349, 1997.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/28/2012

EDITED carol: 08/28/2012
carol: 8/28/2012

615242	TITLE *615242 SMALL INTEGRAL MEMBRANE PROTEIN 1; SMIM1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using microarrays for SNP profiling of 20 individuals with the
Vel-negative blood group phenotype, followed by transcriptional network
modeling, Storry et al. (2013) identified SMIM1 as a candidate for the
gene underlying Vel antigen expression. By 5-prime and 3-prime RACE of
Vel-positive blood mRNA, they cloned SMIM1. The deduced 78-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 8.7 kD. SMIM1 was
predicted to be a type I transmembrane protein with an approximately
50-amino acid extracellular domain containing several potential sites
for O-glycosylation. The transmembrane domain contains a potential GxxxG
helix-helix dimerization motif. Analysis of human microarray profiles
revealed highest SMIM1 expression in CD34 (142230)-positive erythroid
cultures and in bone marrow, followed by salivary gland and testis. Much
lower expression was detected in several other tissues, including brain.
Western blot analysis of Vel-positive blood and glycophorin A (GPA;
111300)-positive bone marrow detected SMIM1 as a monomer with an
apparent molecular mass of 9 to 10 kD and as reduction-resistant
homodimers of about 20 kD, consistent with the presence of the
transmembrane dimerization motif. Orthologs of SMIM1 were detected in 45
other species from primates to sea squirt. Flow cytometry detected cell
surface expression of SMIM1 in transfected K562 erythroleukemia cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Storry et al. (2013) determined that the SMIM1 gene contains 4 exons.
Exons 1 and 2 are noncoding, and intron 2 contains a GATA motif
conserved in primates and rodents, but not in dog, bovine, or elephant.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Storry et al. (2013) mapped the SMIM1 gene
to chromosome 1p36.

GENE FUNCTION

Ballif et al. (2013) identified SMIM1 as the Vel antigen on red blood
cells. A purified anti-Vel antibody detected a band of about 32 kD in
red blood cell membranes extracted from Vel-positive individuals.
Electrophoresis studies showed that the Vel antigen migrated at about 18
kD under reducing conditions, suggesting that it forms a molecular
homodimer via disulfide bonds. Mass spectrometry, peptide sequencing,
and BLAST analysis suggested that the SMIM1 encodes the Vel antigen.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Vel Blood Group System

By SNP mapping followed by candidate gene sequencing of 20 individuals
with the Vel-negative blood group phenotype (615264), Storry et al.
(2013) identified a homozygous 17-bp deletion in the SMIM1 gene
(615242.0001) in all individuals. The findings were confirmed in 15
additional Vel-negative individuals, predominantly of European descent.
Direct genotyping identified 30 heterozygous deletion carriers among 520
Swedish blood donors. The deletion was not found in the 1000 Genomes
Project data, but was found in the National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute (NHLBI) Exome Sequencing Project (ESP) database: in 57 of
5,763 European Americans and 6 of 3,198 in African Americans, yielding
heterozygote frequencies of about 1 in 50 and 1 in 267, respectively.

By exome sequencing of 5 individuals negative for the Vel antigen,
Cvejic et al. (2013) found that 4 were homozygous and 1 was heterozygous
for a 17-bp frameshift deletion in the SMIM1 gene. Combined with a
follow-up study of additional Vel-negative individuals, a total of 63 of
69 Vel-negative individuals were found to be homozygous for the
deletion. Five individuals classified as Vel-negative were heterozygous
for the deletion and 1 was heterozygous for a missense mutation (M51R)
only. Heterozygosity for the null allele in these individuals was most
likely explained by misclassification of extremely weak Vel expression
as Vel-negative. In addition, 19 of 20 individuals with weak Vel
expression were heterozygous for the deletion. One individual with weak
expression was heterozygous for a missense mutation (M51K). The 2
missense mutations may lead to inability of the SMIM1 protein to
incorporate in the membrane, or may modify the epitope, leading to
decreased binding of the antibody. Functional studies were not performed
on the M51R or M51K variants. Expression of the Vel antigen on
SMIM1-transfected HEK293T cells confirmed that SMIM1 is the gene
underlying the Vel blood group. All 24 Vel-negative individuals or those
with weak Vel expression who were heterozygous for the deletion were
homozygous for the major A allele of SNP dbSNP rs1175550, which is
present in intron 2 of the STIM1 gene and is associated with decreased
SMIM1 transcript levels. The findings suggested that this SNP
contributes to variable expression of the Vel antigen.

Ballif et al. (2013) also found that all 4 Vel-negative individuals
studied carried the same homozygous 17-bp deletion in exon 3 of the
SMIM1 gene. Subsequent screening identified the homozygous 17-bp
deletion in 68 of 70 Vel-negative individuals. Two individuals carried
the 17-bp deletion in the heterozygous state, and 1 was confirmed to
have weak Vel-positivity. The other was an elderly individual who may
have no longer expressed even weak antigen. In addition, 7 of 9
individuals with weak Vel-positivity were found to be heterozygous for
the deletion. Exogenous expression of SMIM1 in erythroleukemia cells
resulted in Vel expression at the cell surface, confirming that SMIM1
encodes the Vel antigen.

- Other Associations

Cvejic et al. (2013) found that the major A allele of SNP dbSNP
rs1175550 in the SMIM1 gene, which is associated with lower expression
of SMIM1, was associated with decreased mean hemoglobin concentration in
red blood cells (p = 8.6 x 10(-15)) and nominally associated with
correlated parameters, such as mean red blood cell volume and count.
These findings suggested a possible biologic role for SMIM1.

ANIMAL MODEL

Cvejic et al. (2013) found that morpholino-mediated knockdown of Smim1
caused a mild reduction in the total number of mature primitive
erythrocytes in zebrafish.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VEL BLOOD GROUP SYSTEM, VEL-NULL PHENOTYPE
SMIM1, 17-BP DEL, NT64

In 20 individuals with the Vel-negative blood group phenotype (615264),
mostly of Swedish origin, Storry et al. (2013) identified a homozygous
17-bp deletion (64_80del17) in exon 3 of the SMIM1 gene, resulting in a
frameshift at residue ser22 and premature termination 5-prime to the
encoded transmembrane domain. The mutation was found by SNP mapping
followed by candidate gene sequencing. The findings were confirmed in 15
additional Vel-negative individuals, mostly of European origin.
Haplotype analysis indicated a founder effect. Genotype screening
estimated that about 1 in 17 Swedish blood donors is a heterozygous
deletion carrier and 1 in 1,200 is a homozygous deletion knockout. Blood
from a Vel-negative individual showed no capped and polyadenylated SMIM1
mRNA, suggesting that it is subject to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and
consistent with a null allele. The phenotype is significant in that
antibodies to Vel are associated with severe hemolytic transfusion
reactions.

Cvejic et al. (2013) and Ballif et al. (2013) independently and
simultaneously identified the homozygous 17-bp deletion in the SMIM1
gene as the genetic basis for the Vel-negative blood group.
Heterozygosity for the deletion was associated with weak Vel expression,
consistent with a dosage effect. A common origin for the deletion was
apparent.

REFERENCE 1. Ballif, B. A.; Helias, V.; Peyrard, T.; Menanteau, C.; Saison,
C.; Lucien, N.; Bourgouin, S.; Le Gall, M.; Cartron, J.-P.; Arnaud,
L.: Disruption of SMIM1 causes the Vel- blood type. EMBO Molec.
Med. 5: 751-761, 2013.

2. Cvejic, A.; Haer-Wigman, L.; Stephens, J. C.; Kostadima, M.; Smethurst,
P. A.; Frontini, M.; van den Akker, E.; Bertone, P.; Bielczyk-Maczynska,
E.; Farrow, S.; Fehrmann, R. S. N.; Gray, A.; and 30 others: SMIM1
underlies the Vel blood group and influences red blood cell traits. Nature
Genet. 45: 542-545, 2013.

3. Storry, J. R.; Joud, M.; Christophersen, M. K.; Thuresson, B.;
Akerstrom, B.; Sojka, B. N.; Nilsson, B.; Olsson, M. L.: Homozygosity
for a null allele of SMIM1 defines the Vel-negative blood group phenotype. Nature
Genet. 45: 537-541, 2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/3/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/21/2013

EDITED carol: 08/28/2013
carol: 6/4/2013
ckniffin: 6/3/2013
mgross: 5/21/2013

602243	TITLE *602243 CD151 ANTIGEN; CD151
;;PLATELET-ENDOTHELIAL CELL TETRASPANIN ANTIGEN 3; PETA3;;
SFA1;;
RED BLOOD CELL ANTIGEN MER 2; MER2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Transmembrane 4 (4TM) superfamily proteins are membrane proteins with 4
conserved transmembrane domains. Fitter et al. (1995) showed that the
platelet surface glycoprotein gp27 identified by Ashman et al. (1991) is
a member of this group. Fitter et al. (1995) cloned the gp27 gene,
designated PETA3 by them, by sequencing purified protein and using the
resulting probes in RT-PCR to obtain a cDNA from megakaryoblastic cells.
Fitter et al. (1995) assigned this 253-amino acid protein to the 4TM
group because it has 4 predicted hydrophobic regions and 30% homology to
other members of the group. Northern blot analysis showed that PETA3 is
expressed in most tissues, but not in brain. Hasegawa et al. (1996)
cloned the same gene, which they named SFA1, during a screen for genes
induced by HTLV-1 transformation in T cells. The 62-bp difference
between the 5-prime untranslated regions of the PETA3 and SFA1 cDNAs was
ascribed to alternative splicing in an erratum to Hasegawa et al.
(1996).

Bill et al. (1987) cloned the MER2 (179620) gene using a strategy that
involved cotransfection of resistance to an antibiotic.

GENE FUNCTION

Hemidesmosomes are specialized junctional complexes that function as
cell-attachment sites for binding to basement membranes. They appear as
electron-dense structures, resembling half a desmosome. Alpha-6 (ITGA6;
147556)/beta-4 (ITGB4; 147557) integrin is a major component of
hemidesmosomes. In addition to ITGA6/ITGB4, classic type I
hemidesmosomes contain BP180 (COL17A1; 113811) and BP230 (BPAG1;
113810), while type II hemidesmosomes, which are found in cylindrical
epithelia, contain plectin (601282). Using immunohistochemistry and
immunoelectron microscopy, Sterk et al. (2000) identified CD151, but not
the tetraspanins CD9 (143030) or CD81 (186845), codistributed with
ITGA6/ITGB4 in hemidesmosomes but not desmosomes at the basolateral
surfaces of basal keratinocytes. Immunoprecipitation and immunoblot
analysis showed that CD151 associates with ITGA6/ITGB4 and with ITGA3
(605025)/ITGB1 (135630), but not with ITGA5 (135620)/ITGB1. In pyloric
atresia-junctional epidermolysis bullosa (PA-JEB; 226730) cells lacking
ITGB4 (thus lacking hemidesmosomes), CD151 colocalized with ITGA3/ITGB1.
Expression of ITGB4 in PA-JEB cells induced surface expression of
ITGA6/ITGB4 in hemidesmosomes together with CD151 and the apparent
replacement of ITGA3/ITGB1. Fluorescent microscopy showed that CD151 is
a component of both type I and type II hemidesmosomes. The authors
demonstrated that recruitment of CD151 requires the heterodimerization
of ITGB4 with ITGA6, with which CD151 is associated.

The 4-transmembrane domain superfamily (the tetraspanins) are integral
cell membrane proteins comprising at least 28 members in mammals.
Tetraspanins are widely distributed on animal cells, and several are
known to be expressed on human hematopoietic cells, including CD151.
Tetraspanin CD151 forms very stable laminin-binding complexes with
integrins alpha-3-beta-1 (605025; 135630) and alpha-6-beta-1 (147556;
135630) in kidney and alpha-3-beta-1 and alpha-6-beta-4 (147558; 147557)
in skin. Karamatic Crew et al. (2004) demonstrated that CD151 expresses
the MER2 blood group antigen and is located on erythrocytes.

CD151 is highly expressed in megakaryocytes and, to a lesser extent, in
platelets. Using Cd151-deficient mice, Lau et al. (2004) provided the
first direct evidence that CD151 is essential for normal platelet
function and that disruption of CD151 induces a moderate outside-in
integrin alpha-IIb-beta-3 (see 607759, 173470) signaling defect.

GENE STRUCTURE

By PCR and genomic sequence analyses, Whittock and McLean (2001)
determined that the CD151 gene contains 8 exons spanning 4.3 kb, with
exons 2 to 8 encoding the CD151 protein. They also described a PCR-based
mutation-detection strategy to facilitate identification of pathogenic
mutations in patients with fragile skin and mucous membranes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Karamatic Crew et al. (2004) studied the CD151 gene in 3 patients who
were negative for the blood group antigen MER2 (179620), which is
expressed by the CD151 tetraspanin. The patients were of Indian Jewish
origin and had end-stage kidney disease. In addition to hereditary
nephritis, the sibs had sensorineural deafness, pretibial epidermolysis
bullosa, and beta-thalassemia minor. All 3 patients were homozygous for
a single-nucleotide insertion in exon 5 of CD151, causing a frameshift
and premature stop signal at codon 140 (602243.0001). The resultant
truncated protein would lack its integrin-binding domain. Karamatic Crew
et al. (2004) concluded that CD151 is essential for the proper assembly
of the glomerular and tubular basement membrane in kidney, has
functional significance in the skin, is probably a component of the
inner ear, and could play a role in erythropoiesis, as suggested by the
presence of beta-thalassemia minor.

MAPPING

Hasegawa et al. (1997) mapped the PETA3 gene to 11p15.5 by fluorescence
in situ hybridization. Whittock and McLean (2001) confirmed that the
CD151 gene maps to 11p15.5 by radiation hybrid analysis.

Daniels et al. (1987) assigned the MER2 locus to 11p15 by study of
somatic cell hybrids.

ANIMAL MODEL

Wright et al. (2004) generated mice with a homozygous deletion of all 6
coding exons of the Cd151 gene. The Cd151 -/- mice were viable, fertile,
and healthy, with normal blood and marrow cell counts and normal tissue
morphology and integrin expression in skin. However, the mice had a
minor abnormality in hemostasis, with longer bleeding times, greater
blood loss, and increased incidence of spontaneous tail vein rebleeding.
Cd151 -/- keratinocytes migrated poorly in skin explant cultures, and
mutant lymphocytes were hyperproliferative after mitogen stimulation in
vitro. Wright et al. (2004) noted that other tetraspanin deletion
mutants produce mild phenotypes and suggested that this may be due to
complementation by other tetraspanins or that these proteins function as
modifiers rather than as essential components of the molecular complexes
in which they participate.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NEPHROPATHY WITH PRETIBIAL EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA AND DEAFNESS
CD151, 1-BP INS, G383

In 3 MER2-negative patients of Indian Jewish origin with end-stage
kidney disease (609057), Karamatic Crew et al. (2004) found homozygosity
for a single-nucleotide insertion (G383) in exon 5 of the CD151 gene,
causing a frameshift and premature stop signal in codon 140. The
resultant truncated protein would lack its integrin-binding domain. The
findings suggested that CD151 is essential for the proper assembly of
the glomerular and tubular basement membrane in kidney, as well as
having functional significance in skin and probably the inner ear.

REFERENCE 1. Ashman, L. K.; Aylett, G. W.; Mehrabani, P. A.; Bendall, L. J.;
Niutta, S.; Cambareri, A. C.; Cole, S. R.; Berndt, M. C.: The murine
monoclonal antibody, 14A2.H1, identifies a novel platelet surface
antigen. Brit. J. Haemat. 79: 263-270, 1991.

2. Bill, J.; Palmer, E.; Jones, C.: Molecular cloning of MER-2, a
human chromosome-11-encoded red blood cell antigen, using linkage
of cotransfected markers. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 13: 553-561,
1987.

3. Daniels, G. L.; Tippett, P.; Palmer, D. K.; Miller, Y. E.; Geyer,
D.; Jones, C.: MER2: a red cell polymorphism defined by monoclonal
antibodies. Vox Sang. 52: 107-110, 1987.

4. Fitter, S.; Tetaz, T. J.; Berndt, M. C.; Ashman, L. K.: Molecular
cloning of cDNA encoding a novel platelet-endothelial cell tetra-span
antigen, PETA-3. Blood 86: 1348-1355, 1995.

5. Hasegawa, H.; Kishimoto, K.; Yanagisawa, K.; Terasaki, H.; Shimadzu,
M.; Fujita, S.: Assignment of SFA-1 (PETA-3), a member of the transmembrane
4 superfamily, to human chromosome 11p15.5 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. Genomics 40: 193-196, 1997.

6. Hasegawa, H.; Utsunomiya, Y.; Kishimoto, K.; Yanagisawa, K.; Fujita,
S.: SFA-1, a novel cellular gene induced by human T-cell leukemia
virus type 1, is a member of the transmembrane 4 superfamily. J.
Virol. 70: 3258-3263, 1996. Notes: Erratum: J. Virol. 71: 1737, 1997.

7. Karamatic Crew, V.; Burton, N.; Kagan, A.; Green, C. A.; Levene,
C.; Flinter, F.; Brady, R. L.; Daniels, G.; Anstee, D. J.: CD151,
the first member of the tetraspanin (TM4) superfamily detected on
erythrocytes, is essential for the correct assembly of human basement
membranes in kidney and skin. Blood 104: 2217-2223, 2004.

8. Lau, L.-M.; Wee, J. L.; Wright, M. D.; Moseley, G. W.; Hogarth,
P. M.; Ashman, L. K.; Jackson, D. E.: The tetraspanin superfamily
member CD151 regulates outside-in integrin alpha(IIb)-beta(3) signaling
and platelet function. Blood 104: 2368-2375, 2004. Note: Erratum:
Blood 105: 1395 only, 2005.

9. Sterk, L. M. Th.; Geuijen, C. A. W.; Oomen, L. C. J. M.; Calafat,
J.; Janssen, H.; Sonnenberg, A.: The tetraspan molecule CD151, a
novel constituent of hemidesmosomes, associates with the integrin
alpha-6/beta-4 and may regulate the spatial organization of hemidesmosomes. J.
Cell Biol. 149: 969-982, 2000.

10. Whittock, N. V.; McLean, W. H. I.: Genomic organization, amplification,
fine mapping, and intragenic polymorphisms of the human hemidesmosomal
tetraspanin CD151 gene. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 281: 425-430,
2001.

11. Wright, M. D.; Geary, S. M.; Fitter, S.; Moseley, G. W.; Lau,
L.-M.; Sheng, K.-C.; Apostolopoulos, V.; Stanley, E. G.; Jackson,
D. E.; Ashman, L. K.: Characterization of mice lacking the tetraspanin
superfamily member CD151. Molec. Cell. Biol. 24: 5978-5988, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/11/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/3/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/15/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/9/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/15/2000

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 1/8/1998

EDITED terry: 12/21/2012
tkritzer: 1/21/2005
terry: 1/11/2005
mgross: 12/3/2004
alopez: 11/30/2004
terry: 11/15/2004
joanna: 11/8/2004
mgross: 4/9/2001
mgross: 8/15/2000
psherman: 6/6/1998
alopez: 1/16/1998
alopez: 1/9/1998

603795	TITLE *603795 LIPOPOLYSACCHARIDE-INDUCED TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR-ALPHA FACTOR; LITAF
;;LPS-INDUCED TNF-ALPHA FACTOR;;
SMALL INTEGRAL MEMBRANE PROTEIN OF LYSOSOME/LATE ENDOSOME; SIMPLE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The LITAF gene encodes a transcription factor, first identified as a
regulator of TNF-alpha (TNF; 191160) gene expression (Takashiba et al.,
1995). The LITAF gene product is an early endosomal membrane protein
enriched in the peripheral nerves and Schwann cells (summary by Lee et
al., 2011).

CLONING

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is a potent stimulator of monocytes and
macrophages, causing secretion of tumor necrosis factor-alpha and other
inflammatory mediators. Given the deleterious effects to the host of
TNF-alpha, it is likely that TNF gene expression is tightly regulated.
In studies pertaining to macrophage response to LPS, Takashiba et al.
(1995) identified a novel DNA-binding domain that contains
transcriptional activity located from -550 to -487 in the human TNF
promoter. Sequence analysis of this fragment revealed the absence of any
known binding sites for nuclear factor kappa-B (see 164011). Myokai et
al. (1999) used this DNA fragment to isolate and purify a 60-kD protein
binding to the fragment. They obtained its N-terminal sequence, which
was used to design degenerate probes to screen a THP-1 cell cDNA
library. A novel 1.8-kb cDNA clone was isolated and fully sequenced.
Characterization of this cDNA clone revealed that its induction was
dependent on LPS activation of the THP-1 cells; hence the name
LPS-induced TNF-alpha factor (LITAF). Myokai et al. (1999) stated that
the open reading frame of LITAF encodes a 228-amino acid protein.
Inhibition of LITAF mRNA expression in THP-1 cells resulted in a
reduction of TNF-alpha transcripts. Northern blot analysis detected a
high level of LITAF mRNA expression predominantly in the placenta,
peripheral blood leukocytes, lymph nodes, and spleen.

Street et al. (2003) stated that SIMPLE/LITAF is a widely expressed gene
encoding a 161-amino acid protein.

By immunohistochemistry, Bennett et al. (2004) detected LITAF in the
cytoplasm of sciatic nerve Schwann cells, as well as in adipocytes, mast
cells, endothelial cells, and vascular smooth muscle cells.

Although 2 transcripts encoding different proteins (SIMPLE and LITAF)
had been reported from the same gene, Saifi et al. (2005) could not
confirm the existence of LITAF as originally identified by Myokai et al.
(1999) and showed that the longer LITAF transcript appears to have
resulted from a DNA sequencing error.

Lee et al. (2011) determined that the LITAF protein has a transmembrane
domain embedded within the cysteine-rich region that anchors the protein
to the membrane, suggesting that it is inserted into the membrane
posttranslationally. In the mouse, Litaf was highly expressed in Schwann
cells in peripheral nerves, with lower expression in brain and muscle.
It showed a punctate pattern in the cytoplasm of primary Schwann cells.
Endogenous Litaf localized to early endosomes, but not to late endosomes
or lysosomes.

In adult mouse and rat sciatic nerve, Lee et al. (2013) found that Litaf
localized in myelinating Schwann cells, but was not a structural
component of the myelin sheath or axon. Litaf was enriched in the
cytoplasmic regions at Schmidt-Lanterman incisures and paranodal
domains. There was colocalization with the early endosome marker Rab5
(179512).

GENE FUNCTION

Studies of Polyak et al. (1997) in a human colorectal cell line
indicated that LITAF expression was increased 10-fold in the presence of
the tumor suppressor p53, which is known to regulate pathways leading to
cellular growth arrest or apoptosis.

Street et al. (2003) suggested that LITAF may play a role in protein
degradation pathways.

GENE STRUCTURE

The LITAF gene contains 4 exons (Bennett et al., 2004).

MAPPING

By FISH, Myokai et al. (1999) mapped the LITAF gene to 16p13.3-p12.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Street et al. (2003) investigated the LITAF gene as the cause of
Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 1C (CMT1C; 601098), which Street et al. (2002)
had mapped in 2 affected pedigrees to a 9-cM interval on 16p that
included the LITAF gene. They identified 3 missense mutations in the
gene encoding a 161-amino acid protein, each in a separate CMT1C
pedigree. The mutations were found to cluster and occurred at conserved
residues, defining a domain of the LITAF protein having a critical role
in peripheral nerve function. Western blot analysis suggested that 2 of
the mutations, T115N (603795.0002) and W116G (603795.0003), do not alter
the level of LITAF protein in peripheral blood lymphocytes. The LITAF
transcript was found to be expressed in rat sciatic nerve, but its level
of expression was not altered during development or in response to nerve
injury. Street et al. (2003) noted that this finding was in sharp
contrast to that seen for other known genes that cause CMT1.

Although 2 transcripts encoding different proteins (SIMPLE and LITAF)
had been reported from the same gene, Saifi et al. (2005) could not
confirm the existence of LITAF and showed that the LITAF transcript
appears to have resulted from a DNA sequencing error.

Saifi et al. (2005) screened the SIMPLE gene for mutations in a cohort
of 192 patients with CMT or related neuropathies, each of whom tested
negative for other known genetic causes of CMT. In 16 unrelated CMT
families, they identified 9 different nucleotide variations in SIMPLE
(see 603795.0001, 603795.0004) that were not detected in control
chromosomes. Saifi et al. (2005) concluded that SIMPLE mutations can
occur de novo, associated with sporadic CMT1, and may convey both
demyelinating and axonal forms.

Lee et al. (2011) found that CMT1C-associated LITAF mutations clustered
within or around the transmembrane domain and caused mislocalization of
the protein from the early endosomal membrane to the cytosol. Mutant
proteins were less stable and more prone to aggregation compared to the
wildtype protein. Aggregated proteins were degraded by both the
proteasome and aggresome-autophagy pathways.

ANIMAL MODEL

Tang et al. (2006) generated mice lacking Litaf in macrophages. They
found that cytokine induction in Litaf-deficient macrophages was reduced
compared with wildtype macrophages, and that mice lacking Litaf in
macrophages were more resistant to LPS-induced lethality. By studying
mouse macrophages lacking various Toll-like receptors (TLRs), Tang et
al. (2006) found that expression of Litaf could be induced by LPS
engagement of either Tlr2 (603028) or Tlr4 (603030), both of which
required Myd88 (602170). In response to LPS, the Myd88-dependent Litaf
pathway was independent of the Nfkb (see 164011) pathway, and p38-alpha
(MAPK14; 600289) was required for Litaf phosphorylation and
translocation to the nucleus.

Lee et al. (2013) found that transgenic mice carrying a homozygous Litaf
mutation (W116G; 603795.0003) developed progressive motor and sensory
impairment associated with decreased motor and sensory nerve conduction
velocities similar to that observed in CMT1C. Peripheral nerves of
mutant mice showed dysmyelination with reduced axon caliber and focal
myelin infoldings near the paranodal and internodal regions. Myelin
infolding was often linked to constricted axons with signs of impaired
axonal transport and to paranodal defects and abnormal organization of
the node of Ranvier. The W116G mutant protein was partially mislocalized
to the cytosol from the membrane. The findings suggested that the W116G
Litaf mutation disrupts myelin homeostasis and causes peripheral
neuropathy via a combination of toxic gain-of-function and
dominant-negative mechanisms. Myelin infolding and paranodal damage
appeared to represent pathogenic precursors preceding demyelination and
axonal degeneration in this disorder.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, TYPE 1C
LITAF, GLY112SER

In a family (K1551) segregating CMT1C (601098), Street et al. (2003)
identified a 334G-A transition in exon 3 of the LITAF gene, resulting in
a gly112-to-ser (G112S) substitution. The family had previously been
reported by Chance et al. (1990, 1992).

In affected members of a family with CMT1C and a patient with sporadic
CMT1C, Saifi et al. (2005) identified the G112S mutation.

In a 2-year-old boy with severe demyelinating CMT, Meggouh et al. (2005)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations: the G112S mutation
in LITAF and a PMP22 duplication (601097.0001), which is the most common
cause of CMT1A (118220). Each parent was heterozygous for 1 of the
mutations, and each had pes cavus and reduced nerve conduction
velocities consistent with mild CMT. Meggouh et al. (2005) concluded
that the cooccurrence of both mutations resulted in the more severe
phenotype in the proband.

.0002
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, TYPE 1C
LITAF, THR115ASN

In a family (K1550) segregating CMT1C (601098), Street et al. (2003)
identified a 344C-A transversion in the LITAF gene, resulting in a
thr115-to-asn (T115N) substitution. The family had previously been
reported by Chance et al. (1990, 1992).

.0003
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, TYPE 1C
LITAF, TRP116GLY

In a family segregating CMT1C (601098), Street et al. (2003) identified
a 346T-G transversion in the LITAF gene, resulting in a trp116-to-gly
(W116G) substitution.

.0004
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, TYPE 1C
LITAF, LEU122VAL

In a sporadic case of CMT1C (601098), Saifi et al. (2005) identified a
de novo heterozygous 364C-G transversion in exon 3 of the SIMPLE gene,
resulting in a leu122-to-val (L122V) substitution.

.0005
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, TYPE 1C
LITAF, VAL144MET

In a German mother and son with CMT1C (601098), Gerding et al. (2009)
identified a heterozygous 430G-A transition in exon 4 of the LITAF gene,
resulting in a val144-to-met (V144M) substitution. The mutation was not
observed in 400 control chromosomes. Both had typical demyelinating
sensorimotor neuropathy, but the son showed initial symptom onset at age
10, whereas the mother had onset of clinical symptoms in her late
fifties.

REFERENCE 1. Bennett, C. L.; Shirk, A. J.; Huynh, H. M.; Street, V. A.; Nelis,
E.; Van Maldergem, L.; De Jonghe, P.; Jordanova, A.; Guergueltcheva,
V.; Tournev, I.; Van den Bergh, P.; Seeman, P.; Mazanec, R.; Prochazka,
T.; Kremensky, I.; Haberlova, J.; Weiss, M. D.; Timmerman, V.; Bird,
T. D.; Chance, P. F.: SIMPLE mutation in demyelinating neuropathy
and distribution in sciatic nerve. Ann. Neurol. 55: 713-720, 2004.

2. Chance, P. F.; Bird, T. D.; O'Connell, P.; Lipe, H.; Lalouel, J.-M.;
Leppert, M.: Genetic linkage and heterogeneity in type I Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease (hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy type I). Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 47: 915-925, 1990.

3. Chance, P. F.; Matsunami, N.; Lensch, W.; Smith, B.; Bird, T. D.
: Analysis of the DNA duplication 17p11.2 in Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy
type 1 pedigrees: additional evidence for a third autosomal CMT1 locus. Neurology 42:
2037-2041, 1992.

4. Gerding, W. M.; Koetting, J.; Epplen, J. T.; Neusch, C.: Hereditary
and sensory neuropathy caused by a novel mutation in LITAF. Neuromusc.
Disord. 19: 701-703, 2009.

5. Lee, S. M.; Olzmann, J. A.; Chin, L. S.; Li, L.: Mutations associated
with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease cause SIMPLE protein mislocalization
and degradation by the proteasome and aggresome-autophagy pathways. J.
Cell Sci. 124: 3319-3331, 2011.

6. Lee, S. M.; Sha, D.; Mohammed, A. A.; Asress, S.; Glass, J. D.;
Chin, L.-S.; Li, L.: Motor and sensory neuropathy due to myelin infolding
and paranodal damage in a transgenic mouse model of Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease type 1C. Hum. Molec. Genet. 22: 1755-1770, 2013.

7. Meggouh, F.; de Visser, M.; Arts, W. F. M.; De Coo, R. I. F. M.;
van Schaik, I. N.; Baas, F.: Early onset neuropathy in a compound
form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Ann. Neurol. 57: 589-591, 2005.

8. Myokai, F.; Takashiba, S.; Lebo, R.; Amar, S.: A novel lipopolysaccharide-induced
transcription factor regulating tumor necrosis factor alpha gene expression:
molecular cloning, sequencing, characterization, and chromosomal assignment. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 4518-4523, 1999.

9. Polyak, K.; Xia, Y.; Zweier, J. L.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein,
B.: A model for p53-induced apoptosis. Nature 389: 300-305, 1997.

10. Saifi, G. M.; Szigeti, K.; Wiszniewski, W.; Shy, M. E.; Krajewski,
K.; Hausmanowa-Petrusewicz, I.; Kochanski, A.; Reeser, S.; Mancias,
P.; Butler, I.; Lupski, J. R.: SIMPLE mutations in Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease and the potential role of its protein product in protein degradation. Hum.
Mutat. 25: 372-383, 2005.

11. Street, V. A.; Bennett, C. L.; Goldy, J. D.; Shirk, A. J.; Kleopa,
K. A.; Tempel, B. L.; Lipe, H. P.; Scherer, S. S.; Bird, T. D.; Chance,
P. F.: Mutation of a putative protein degradation gene LITAF/SIMPLE
in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease 1C. Neurology 60: 22-26, 2003.

12. Street, V. A.; Goldy, J. D.; Golden, A. S.; Tempel, B. L.; Bird,
T. D.; Chance, P. F.: Mapping of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type
1C to chromosome 16p identifies a novel locus for demyelinating neuropathies. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 70: 244-250, 2002.

13. Takashiba, S.; Van Dyke, T. E.; Shapira, L.; Amar, S.: Lipopolysaccharide-inducible
and salicylate-sensitive nuclear factor(s) on human tumor necrosis
factor alpha promoter. Infect. Immun. 63: 1529-1534, 1995.

14. Tang, X.; Metzger, D.; Leeman, S.; Amar, S.: LPS-induced TNA-alpha
factor (LITAF)-deficient mice express reduced LPS-induced cytokine:
evidence for LITAF-dependent LPS signaling pathways. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 103: 13777-13782, 2006. Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
104: 3015 only, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/10/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/16/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/17/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/12/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/28/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/4/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/7/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/10/1999

EDITED carol: 07/11/2013
ckniffin: 7/10/2013
terry: 8/6/2012
wwang: 11/12/2009
ckniffin: 10/16/2009
mgross: 10/19/2006
terry: 10/17/2006
carol: 8/3/2005
wwang: 7/26/2005
ckniffin: 7/12/2005
tkritzer: 5/12/2005
terry: 4/28/2005
tkritzer: 8/9/2004
ckniffin: 8/4/2004
ckniffin: 4/28/2003
tkritzer: 3/24/2003
carol: 3/21/2003
terry: 3/7/2003
mgross: 5/11/1999

402500	TITLE *402500 ACETYLSEROTONIN METHYLTRANSFERASE, Y-CHROMOSOMAL; ASMT
;;ASMTY;;
HYDROXYINDOLE-O-METHYLTRANSFERASE, Y-CHROMOSOMAL; HIOMTY
DESCRIPTION Donohue et al. (1993) isolated a clone with sequence homology to bovine
HIOMT from a human pineal cDNA library. Yi et al. (1993) determined that
the gene is located in the pseudoautosomal region (Ypter-p11.2) close to
DXYS17. See 300015 for a discussion of the X-linked copy of this gene.

REFERENCE 1. Donohue, S. J.; Roseboom, P. H.; Illnerova, H.; Weller, J. L.;
Klein, D. C.: Human hydroxyindole-O-methyltransferase: presence of
LINE-1 fragment in a cDNA clone and pineal mRNA. DNA Cell Biol. 12:
715-727, 1993.

2. Yi, H.; Donohue, S. J.; Klein, D. C.; McBride, O. W.: Localization
of the hydroxyindole-O-methyltransferase gene to the pseudoautosomal
region: implications for mapping of psychiatric disorders. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 2: 127-131, 1993.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/1/1993

EDITED joanna: 09/05/2001
alopez: 11/19/1998
mimadm: 3/11/1994
carol: 10/4/1993
carol: 10/1/1993

610781	TITLE *610781 GUANOSINE MONOPHOSPHATE REDUCTASE 2; GMPR2
;;GMP REDUCTASE 2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database searching with the sequence of GMPR1 (GMPR; 139265) as
query, Deng et al. (2002) identified and subsequently cloned GMPR2 from
a human fetal brain cDNA library. The deduced 348-amino acid protein has
a calculated molecular mass of 37.9 kD and shares 90% sequence identity
with GMPR1 and 69% identity with E. coli GMPR. Northern blot analysis
detected relatively high levels of both GMPR1 and GMPR2 in heart,
skeletal muscle, and kidney, and relatively low levels of both in colon,
thymus, and peripheral blood leukocyte. Strong signals of GMPR2 were
detected in brain, liver, and placenta, whereas weak signals of GMPR1
were observed in these tissues. The apparent Km of GMPR2 for NADPH and
GMP are 26.6 and 17.4 microM, respectively.

Zhang et al. (2003) cloned GMPR2 from a human dendritic cell cDNA
library. Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of an
approximately 2.2-kb transcript, with high expression in testis, ovary,
prostate, heart, liver, spleen, skeletal muscle, and kidney. An
additional transcript of about 1.3 kb was detected in placenta.
Expression was also detected in most cancer cell lines studied.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhang et al. (2003) showed that recombinant GMPR2 protein was able to
reduce GMP. Transfection experiments demonstrated that overexpression of
GMPR2 promoted the monocytic differentiation of HL-60 leukemia cells.

EVOLUTION

Deng et al. (2002) presented evidence that the 2 types of GMP reductase
are derived from duplication of an ancient gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

Deng et al. (2002) determined that the GMPR2 gene contains 10 exons and
spans more than 6.6 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Deng et al. (2002) mapped the GMPR2 gene
to chromosome 14p11.2-p11.1. By the same method, Zhang et al. (2003)
mapped the gene to chromosome 14q11-q21.

REFERENCE 1. Deng, Y.; Wang, Z.; Ying, K.; Gu, S.; Ji, C.; Huang, Y.; Gu, X.;
Wang, Y.; Xu, Y.; Li, Y.; Xie, Y.; Mao, Y.: NADPH-dependent GMP reductase
isoenzyme of human (GMPR2): expression, purification, and kinetic
properties. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 34: 1035-1050, 2002.

2. Zhang, J.; Zhang, W.; Zou, D.; Chen, G.; Wan, T.; Zhang, M.; Cao,
X.: Cloning and functional characterization of GMPR2, a novel human
guanosine monophosphate reductase, which promotes the monocytic differentiation
of HL-60 leukemia cells. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 129: 76-83,
2003.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 2/21/2007

EDITED carol: 02/21/2007
carol: 2/21/2007

603199	TITLE *603199 INAD-LIKE; INADL
;;INAD, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF;;
PALS1-ASSOCIATED TIGHT JUNCTION PROTEIN; PATJ
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Phototransduction is the process that uses the energy of light to
generate an internal messenger, which subsequently leads to a transient
change of membrane potential in photoreceptor cells. Shieh and Niemeyer
(1995) found that the Drosophila melanogaster InaD (inactivation no
afterpotential D) protein is critically involved in regulation and
deactivation of the visual cascade. InaD contains 2 PDZ domains (see
PDZK1; 603831). One PDZ domain interacts with the TRP calcium channel,
which contributes to capacitative calcium entry into Drosophila
photoreceptor cells. By searching an EST database, Philipp and Flockerzi
(1997) identified a cDNA encoding a human homolog of InaD. The predicted
1,524-amino acid human protein, which the authors called INADL, shares
27% sequence identity with InaD. INADL contains 5 PDZ domains. Philipp
and Flockerzi (1997) also isolated cDNAs encoding truncated versions of
INADL that lack 2 or 3 PDZ domains. Northern blot analysis revealed that
INADL is expressed as a 5.4-kb mRNA in human brain; additional, less
abundant transcripts were also detected.

Roh et al. (2002) obtained a full-length cDNA encoding INADL, which they
termed PATJ. The protein contains 10 PDZ domains and is associated in
tight junctions with MPP5 (606958) and CRB1 (604210).

By database analysis, Lemmers et al. (2002) identified at least 6 human
INDAL cDNAs with alternative splicing or different translation
initiation sites. Northern blot analysis detected a major 7-kb
transcript in bladder, testis, ovary, small intestine, colon, heart,
skeletal muscle, and pancreas. A 4.1-kb transcript was also detected in
testis. Caco-2 human colon carcinoma cells expressed transcripts of 7,
4.1, and 3 kb, and RT-PCR revealed many alternative spliced forms.
Western blot analysis detected several INDAL proteins of 135 to 230 kD
in membrane fractions of human colon and transfected Caco-2 cells. A
75-kD protein was present in both membrane and cytosolic fractions of
Caco-2 cells. Immunoelectron microscopy localized INDAL near tight
junctions in human colon and Caco-2 cells, often on the apical side, and
also beneath the apical plasma membrane and in microvilli.

GENE FUNCTION

Vaccaro et al. (2001) determined the consensus ligand for each of 7
isolated PDZ domains of human INDAL by screening a random peptide
library displayed on lambda phage. Each PDZ domain had a unique peptide
binding preference.

Lemmers et al. (2002) found that overexpression of human INADL in canine
kidney cells disrupted localization of ZO1 (TJP1; 601009) and ZO3 (TJP3;
612689) to tight junctions. The N-terminal domain of INADL interacted
with the C-terminal region of CRB3 (609737), a putative tight junction
protein. Lemmers et al. (2002) concluded that INADL may be involved in
regulating the integrity of tight junctions.

Roh et al. (2002) determined that Tjp3 interacted with PATJ and that
both proteins colocalized to tight junctions in vivo. In vitro studies
showed that the sixth and eighth PDZ domains of PATJ mediated
interaction with the Tjp3 C-terminal domain and with Cldn1 (603718),
respectively. Roh et al. (2002) suggested that the TJP3-PATJ interaction
plays a role in recruiting PATJ and its associated proteins CRB1
(609737) and MPP5 (606958) to tight junctions.

Using RNA interference, Shin et al. (2005) showed that Patj knockdown in
canine kidney cells delayed tight junction formation and led to defects
in cell polarization. These effects were reversed by reintroduction of
Patj.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the INADL
gene to chromosome 1 (TMAP RH94138).

REFERENCE 1. Lemmers, C.; Medina, E.; Delgrossi, M.-H.; Michel, D.; Arsanto,
J.-P.; Le Bivic, A.: hINAD1/PATJ, a homolog of discs lost, interacts
with crumbs and localizes to tight junctions in human epithelial cells. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 25408-25415, 2002.

2. Philipp, S.; Flockerzi, V.: Molecular characterization of a novel
human PDZ domain protein with homology to INAD from Drosophila melanogaster. FEBS
Lett. 413: 243-248, 1997.

3. Roh, M. H.; Liu, C.-J.; Laurinec, S.; Margolis, B.: The carboxyl
terminus of zona occludens-3 binds and recruits a mammalian homologue
of discs lost to tight junctions. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 27501-27509,
2002.

4. Roh, M. H.; Makarova, O.; Liu, C.-J.; Shin, K.; Lee, S.; Laurinec,
S.; Goyal, M.; Wiggins, R.; Margolis, B.: The Maguk protein, Pals1,
functions as an adapter, linking mammalian homologues of Crumbs and
Discs Lost. J. Cell Biol. 157: 161-172, 2002.

5. Shieh, B.-H.; Niemeyer, B.: A novel protein encoded by the InaD
gene regulates recovery of visual transduction in Drosophila. Neuron 14:
201-210, 1995.

6. Shin, K.; Straight, S.; Margolis, B.: PATJ regulates tight junction
formation and polarity in mammalian epithelial cells. J. Cell Biol. 168:
705-711, 2005.

7. Vaccaro, P.; Brannetti, B.; Montecchi-Palazzi, L.; Philipp, S.;
Citterich, M. H.; Cesareni, G.; Dente, L.: Distinct binding specificity
of the multiple PDZ domains of INADL, a human protein with homology
to INAD from Drosophila melanogaster. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 42122-42130,
2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Dorothy S. Reilly - updated: 03/23/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/7/2008
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 1/17/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/22/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/16/1999

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 10/26/1998

EDITED wwang: 03/23/2009
mgross: 2/20/2008
terry: 2/7/2008
carol: 1/17/2008
mgross: 5/22/2002
carol: 4/19/1999
terry: 4/16/1999
psherman: 10/26/1998

102772	TITLE *102772 ADENOSINE MONOPHOSPHATE DEAMINASE 3; AMPD3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Adenosine monophosphate deaminase-3 (EC 3.5.4.6) catalyzes the
deamination of AMP to IMP in red cells and plays an important role in
the purine nucleotide cycle. The AMPD3 gene encodes 2 erythrocyte
isoforms, E1 and E2. An inherited defect in AMPD3 results in combined
deficiency of these isoforms.

Also see AMPD1 (102770) and AMPD2 (102771), which encode the L (liver)
and M (muscle) isoforms of AMP deaminase, respectively.

CLONING

Mahnke-Zizelman and Sabina (1992) isolated several AMPD3 cDNAs from
different human nonskeletal muscle cDNA libraries. The cDNAs differed in
their 5-prime terminal sequences.

Yamada et al. (1992) also cloned a human AMPD3 cDNA. The 3.7-kb cDNA
contains an open reading frame of 2,301 bp that encodes a deduced
767-amino acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of 89 kD.

Mahnke-Zizelman et al. (1996) reported that the AMPD3 gene is widely
expressed in human tissues and cells and that its expression is subject
to transcriptional control by 3 tandem promoters. The AMPD3 transcripts
encode the E isoforms of AMP deaminase.

Mahnke-Zizelman et al. (1997) demonstrated that rat isoform C and human
isoform E are homologous cross-species AMPD3 proteins.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mahnke-Zizelman et al. (1996) demonstrated that the AMPD3 gene contains
17 exons spanning approximately 60 kb. They identified multiple
promoters in proximal flanking sequence 5-prime to exons 1a, 1b, and 1c
that regulate the production of alternative AMPD3 transcripts.
Alternative splicing occurs in exon 1c.

MAPPING

Whereas both the AMPD1 and AMPD2 genes are situated in the 1p21-p13
region of chromosome 1, Eddy et al. (1993) demonstrated that the AMPD3
gene is located on chromosome 11 in the region pter-p13.

Sermsuvitayawong et al. (1997) demonstrated that the Ampd3 gene is
located on mouse chromosome 7 in a region of conserved linkage homology
with human 11p. The mouse homolog, however, has a different gene
structure in the 5-prime region, the gene products are reported to be
immunologically distinct, and Sermsuvitayawong et al. (1997) referred to
the Ampd3 gene as the heart-type AMPD.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 2 of the Japanese individuals with erythrocyte AMP deficiency
(612874) reported by Ogasawara et al. (1987), Yamada et al. (1994)
identified a mutation in the AMPD3 gene (102772.0001).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ERYTHROCYTE AMP DEAMINASE DEFICIENCY
AMPD3, ARG573CYS

In 2 individuals with complete deficiency of erythrocyte AMP deaminase
(612874), Yamada et al. (1994) identified homozygosity for a 1717C-T
transition in the AMPD3 gene, resulting in an amino acid change of arg
to cys at codon 573 (R573C). Two individuals with partial deficiency of
the enzyme were found to be heterozygous for the mutation. The mutation
resulted in a catalytically inactive enzyme.

Among 45 Japanese individuals with partial erythrocyte AMP deaminase
deficiency, Yamada et al. (1994) found that all but 16 were heterozygous
for the R573C mutation; 2 individuals with complete deficiency were
homozygous for the mutation. They concluded that this mutation accounts
for 75% of erythrocyte AMP deaminase deficiency in Japan.

REFERENCE 1. Eddy, R. L.; Mahnke-Zizelman, D. K.; Bausch-Jurken, M. T.; Sabina,
R. L.; Shows, T. B.: Distribution of the AMP deaminase multigene
family within the human genome: assignment of the AMPD2 to chromosome
1p21-p34 and AMPD3 to chromosome 11p13-pter. (Abstract) Human Genome
Mapping Workshop 93 24 only, 1993.

2. Mahnke-Zizelman, D. K.; D'Cunha, J.; Wojnar J. M.; Brogley, M.
A.; Sabina, R. L.: Regulation of rat AMP deaminase 3 (isoform C)
by by development and skeletal muscle fibre type. Biochem. J. 326:
521-529, 1997.

3. Mahnke-Zizelman, D. K.; Eddy, R.; Shows, T. B.; Sabina, R. L.:
Characterization of the human AMPD3 gene reveals that 5-prime exon
useage is subject to transcriptional control by three tandem promoters
and alternative splicing. Biochem. Biophys. Acta 1306: 75-92, 1996.

4. Mahnke-Zizelman, D. K.; Sabina, R. L.: Cloning of human AMP deaminase
isoform E cDNAs: evidence for a third AMPD gene exhibiting alternatively
spliced 5-prime exons. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 20866-20877, 1992.

5. Ogasawara, N.; Goto, H.; Yamada, Y.; Nishigaki, I.; Itoh, T.; Hasegawa,
I.; Park, K. S.: Deficiency of AMP deaminase in erythrocytes. Hum.
Genet. 75: 15-18, 1987.

6. Sermsuvitayawong, K.; Wang, X.; Nagabukuro, A.; Matsuda, Y.; Morisaki,
H.; Toyama, K.; Mukai, T.; Morisaki, T.: Genomic organization of
Ampd3, heart-type AMPD gene, located in mouse chromosome 7. Mammalian
Genome 8: 767-769, 1997.

7. Yamada, Y.; Goto, H.; Murase, T.; Ogasawara, N.: Molecular basis
for human erythrocyte AMP deaminase deficiency: screening for the
major point mutation and identification of other mutations. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 3: 2243-2245, 1994.

8. Yamada, Y.; Goto, H.; Ogasawara, N.: Cloning and nucleotide sequence
of the cDNA encoding human erythrocyte-specific AMP deaminase. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1171: 125-128, 1992.

9. Yamada, Y.; Goto, H.; Ogasawara, N.: A point mutation responsible
for human erythrocyte AMP deaminase deficiency. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3:
331-334, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/14/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/6/1993

EDITED terry: 06/23/2009
carol: 6/23/2009
carol: 12/30/2008
mgross: 3/17/2004
terry: 11/19/1998
dkim: 6/26/1998
mark: 10/17/1997
terry: 10/14/1997
alopez: 7/10/1997
carol: 4/13/1994
carol: 12/6/1993

612786	TITLE *612786 CYCLIN Y; CCNY
;;CYCLIN-FOLD PROTEIN 1; CFP1;;
CYCLIN X; CCNX;;
CHROMOSOME 10 OPEN READING FRAME 9; C10ORF9
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cyclins, such as CCNY, control cell division cycles and regulate
cyclin-dependent kinases (e.g., CDC2; 116940) (Li et al., 2009).

CLONING

Using mass spectrometry to identify proteins upregulated in metastatic
versus nonmetastatic human colorectal adenocarcinoma cell lines,
followed by database analysis, Zhang et al. (2005) identified an isoform
of CCNY that they called CFP1 variant A. The deduced protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 36.9 kD.

By database analysis and PCR of a testis cDNA library, Li et al. (2009)
cloned CCNY, which they designated CCNX. The deduced 287-amino acid
protein has a central cyclin box and shares highest similarity with
cyclin B3 (CCNB3; 300456). RT-PCR detected highest expression in testis
and lower expression in all other tissues examined except brain and
kidney. Fluorescence-tagged CCNX was expressed predominantly in the
nucleus in a human nonsmall lung cancer cell line.

GENE STRUCTURE

Li et al. (2009) determined that the CCNY gene contains 12 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Deloukas et al. (2004) mapped the CCNY
gene to chromosome 10p11.2, where it lies between the CREM (123812) and
FZD8 (606146) genes.

GENE FUNCTION

Using the promoter regions of several cell cycle regulators and
transcription factors, Li et al. (2009) showed that CCNX specifically
activated transcription from the MYC (190080) promoter.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the CCNY
gene and inflammatory bowel disease, see IBD1 (266600).

REFERENCE 1. Deloukas, P.; Earthrowl, M. E.; Grafham, D. V.; Rubenfield, M.;
French, L.; Steward, C. A.; Sims, S. K.; Jones, M. C.; Searle, S.;
Scott, C.; Howe, K.; Hunt, S. E.; and 124 others: The DNA sequence
and comparative analysis of human chromosome 10. Nature 429: 151-157,
2004.

2. Li, X.; Wang, X.; Liu, G.; Li, R.; Yu, L.: Identification and
characterization of cyclin X which activates transcriptional activities
of c-Myc. Molec. Biol. Rep. 36: 97-103, 2009.

3. Zhang, Y.-T.; Geng, Y.-P.; Si, L.-S.; Wang, Y.-L.: Proteomic analysis
of differentially expressed proteins between metastatic and non-metastatic
human colorectal carcinoma cell lines. Europ. J. Gastroent. Hepatol. 17:
725-732, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/10/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/15/2009

EDITED terry: 12/10/2009
mgross: 5/15/2009

168450	TITLE *168450 PARATHYROID HORMONE; PTH
;;PARATHYRIN;;
PARATHORMONE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The sequences of parathyrin and of proparathyrin have been determined,
as well as the nucleotide sequence of the PTH gene (Baxter et al., 1977;
Reis et al., 1990).

GENE STRUCTURE

The human PTH gene consists of 3 exons (Goswami et al., 2004). Exon 1 is
untranslated, exon 2 encodes a 25-amino acid signal peptide and part of
the prohormone, and exon 3 encodes the remaining part of the prohormone
(6 amino acids) and the whole PTH molecule (84 amino acids). In humans,
the terminal region of exon 3 consisting of 351 nucleotides remains
untranslated (Vasicek et al., 1983; Reis et al., 1990).

MAPPING

Using a cDNA probe of the parathyroid hormone gene, Antonarakis et al.
(1983) found a common PstI RFLP 3-prime to the PTH gene in all ethnic
groups studied. Family linkage studies were then performed with this
RFLP and with RFLPs related to the hemoglobin-beta (HBB; 141900) and
insulin (INS; 176730) loci. They found that PTH and HBB are closely
linked (recombination fraction, 0.07; confidence limits, 0.05-0.10; lod
score, 4.63). Furthermore, HBB lies between PTH and INS. They estimated
the interval between HBB and INS as 11 cM and the length of 11p as about
50 cM.

By in situ hybridization of meiotic pachytene bivalents, Chaganti et al.
(1985) arrived at the following localizations: PTH (not previously
assigned regionally), 11p11.21; HBB, 11p11.22; HRAS (190020), 11p14.1
and INS, 11p14.1.

By use of RFLPs that map to 11p, Raizis et al. (1985) detected mitotic
recombination as the mechanism of homozygosity in a Wilms tumor. Their
findings showed that insulin and beta-globin had come to homozygosity in
the tumor but PTH remained heterozygous. Thus, PTH must be proximal to
11p13, the cytologically determined site of the Wilms tumor 'gene.'
Using RFLP markers, Holm et al. (1985) concluded that PTH and CALC1
(114130) are very closely linked. No recombination was found in a large
number of opportunities. A lod score of 27.3 was obtained with a maximum
likelihood recombination fraction of 0.002.

By in situ hybridization Zabel et al. (1985) assigned PTH to 11p15 along
with INS, HRAS, and HBB. Their result was inconsistent with earlier
localizations. In most parts of 11p, male recombination is greater than
female recombination, contrary to the usual finding.

Tonoki et al. (1991) concluded from studies using RFLPs and gene dosage
in a patient with the Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (130650) accompanied
with a chromosome abnormality that PTH is located proximal to 11p15.4 in
the region 11p15.3-p15.1, most likely near the border of bands 11p15.4
and 11p15.3.

Lalley et al. (1987) mapped the gene for parathyroid hormone to mouse
chromosome 7.

GENE FUNCTION

By transfection of C-terminal deletion mutant preproPTH in COS-7 cells,
Lim et al. (1992) showed that the C terminus of PTH was necessary for
transport, efficient prosequence cleavage, and secretion.

Hendy et al. (1995) stated that the mRNA for PTH, in addition to
encoding the 84 amino acids of the mature peptide, encodes a 'pre'
sequence of 25 amino acids and a basic 'pro' hexapeptide. They reported
experiments indicating that furin (PACE; 136950) is the most effective
convertase in processing proPTH to PTH. Northern blot analysis and in
situ hybridization showed that furin and preproPTH mRNA are coexpressed
in the parathyroid gland, whereas other prohormone convertases PC1
(162150), PC2 (162151), and PC5 (600488) are not and PACE4 (167405) is
expressed only at very low levels. Hendy et al. (1995) concluded that
furin is the enzyme responsible for the physiologic processing of proPTH
to PTH.

Adams et al. (1998) used a photoaffinity crosslinking approach to
elucidate the nature of the bimolecular interaction of PTH with human
PTHR1. They found arg186 to be of critical importance to the interaction
of PTHR1 with the PTH 125I-K13 contact domain (Zhou et al., 1997):
modification of arg186 to either lysine or alanine does not modify
receptor avidity or signal transduction by the receptor, but eliminates
crosslinking to 125I-K13.

PTH stimulates bone formation to increase bone mass and strength in rats
and humans. Brommage et al. (1999) studied the skeletal effects of
recombinant human PTH-(1-34)(rhPTH-(1-34)) in monkeys, as monkey bone
remodeling and structure are similar to those in human bone. Recombinant
human PTH-(1-34) treatment did not influence serum ionized Ca levels or
urinary Ca excretion, but depressed endogenous PTH while increasing
serum calcitriol levels. Compared to that in the ovariectomized group,
the higher dose of rhPTH-(1-34) increased spine bone mineral density by
14.3%, whole body bone mineral content by 8.6%, and proximal tibia bone
mineral density by 10.8%. Subregion analyses suggested that the anabolic
effect of rhPTH-(1-34) on the proximal tibia was primarily in cancellous
bone. Similar but less dramatic effects on bone mineral density were
observed with the lower dose of rhPTH-(1-34). Daily subcutaneous
rhPTH-(1-34) treatment for 1 year increased bone mineral density in
ovariectomized monkeys without inducing sustained hypercalcemia or
hypercalciuria.

Purroy and Spurr (2002) reviewed the cell biology and molecular genetics
of calcium sensing in bone cells.

CYTOGENETICS

Parathyroid adenomas are benign clonal neoplastic growths, some of which
have been shown to have tumor-specific restriction fragment
abnormalities involving the PTH locus (Arnold et al., 1988). In a case
of parathyroid adenoma bearing restriction fragment abnormalities,
Arnold et al. (1989) showed that a DNA rearrangement had occurred in the
PTH locus; that the rearrangement separated the 5-prime flanking region
of the PTH gene from its coding exons, conceivably placing a newly
adjacent gene under the influence of PTH regulatory elements; that the
DNA that recombined with PTH normally maps to 11q13, the chromosomal
location of several oncogenes and the gene for MEN I (131100); and that
the rearrangement was a reciprocal, conservative recombination of the
locus on 11q13 (designated D11S287) with PTH (on 11p15). Nussbaum et al.
(1990) demonstrated that the ovarian carcinoma in a patient with
hypercalcemia and ectopic secretion of PTH had both DNA amplification
and rearrangement in the upstream regulatory region of the PTH gene.

Cui et al. (1989) estimated the frequency of recombination between the
PTH locus and the G-gamma-globin locus (HBG2; 142250) by typing more
than 700 single-sperm samples from 2 males. The typing technique
involved PCR and allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization. They
arrived at a maximum likelihood recombination frequency of 0.16 (95%
confidence interval, 0.13-0.19). They suggested that with current
technology and a sample size of 1,000 sperm, recombination fractions
down to about 0.009 can be estimated with statistical reliability; with
a sample size of 5,000 sperm, this value dropped to about 0.004.
Reasonable technologic improvements could be expected to result in
detection of recombination frequencies less than 0.001.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a patient from a family with autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism
(146200), Arnold et al. (1990) identified heterozygosity for a missense
mutation in the PTH gene (168450.0001). Functional studied demonstrated
inefficient processing of the mutant protein.

In 3 sibs from a consanguineous family with isolated hypoparathyroidism,
Parkinson and Thakker (1992) identified homozygosity for a splice site
mutation in the PTH gene (168450.0002).

Mullersman et al. (1992) described 2 new RFLPs within the PTH locus.
Both were detectable by a PCR-based assay.

In affected members of a consanguineous kindred who presented with
neonatal hypocalcemic seizures and were found to have isolated
hypoparathyroidism, Sunthornthepvarakul et al. (1999) identified
homozygosity for a missense mutation (168450.0003) in the PTH gene.

Goswami et al. (2004) sought PTH mutations in 51 patients with sporadic
idiopathic hypoparathyroidism. No mutations were observed in the segment
of the PTH gene coding for the signal peptide, prohormone, or the
3-prime untranslated region region. However, 3 previously described
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were observed. There was no
significant difference in the frequency of occurrence of these SNPs
between the patient and the control groups. The authors concluded that
in patients with sporadic idiopathic hypoparathyroidism, neither the
clinical manifestations nor the biochemical indexes of the disease are
related to the occurrence of mutations or SNPs in the PTH gene.

Au et al. (2008) reported the case of a parathyroid adenoma in which
there was loss of heterozygosity for the normal allele and secretion of
a biologically active N-terminal PTH fragment, which was truncated due
to a nonsense mutation in the PTH gene (168450.0004).

ANIMAL MODEL

Miao et al. (2002) compared the skeletal development of newborn mice
lacking either Pth, Pth-related peptide (PTHLH; 168470), or both
peptides. Pth-deficient mice were dysmorphic but viable. They
demonstrated diminished cartilage matrix mineralization, decreased
neovascularization with reduced expression of angiopoietin-1 (601667),
and reduced metaphyseal osteoblasts and trabecular bone. Mice lacking
Pthlh died at birth with dyschondroplasia. Compound mutants displayed
the combined cartilaginous and osseous defects of both single mutants,
indicating that both hormones are required to achieve normal fetal
skeletal morphogenesis, and they demonstrated an essential function of
Pth at the cartilage-bone interface.

Healy et al. (2005) administered human PTH over 48 hours to wildtype
mice and observed a 15% reduction in renal vitamin D receptor (VDR;
601769) levels (p less than 0.03). When the authors similarly
administered PTH to Cyp27b1 (609506)-null mice, which are incapable of
endogenously producing vitamin D hormone, they observed a 29% reduction
in VDR levels (p less than 0.001). Healy et al. (2005) concluded that
PTH is a potent downregulator of VDR expression in vivo.

Xue et al. (2005) compared mice with targeted disruption of the Pth or
25-hydroxyvitamin D3-1-alpha-hydroxylase (CYP27B1; 609506) genes to the
double-null mutants. Although Pth-null and Cyp27b1-null mice displayed
only moderate hypocalcemia, Pth/Cyp27b1 double-null mice died of tetany
with severe hypocalcemia by 3 weeks of age. At 2 weeks, Pth-null mice
exhibited only minimal dysmorphic changes, whereas Cyp27b1-null mice
showed epiphyseal dysgenesis, and Pth/Cyp27b1 double-mutants showed
severe epiphyseal dysgenesis. Although reduced osteoblastic bone
formation was seen in both mutants, Pth deficiency caused only a slight
reduction in long bone length but a marked reduction in trabecular bone
volume, whereas Cyp27b1 ablation caused a smaller reduction in
trabecular bone volume but a significant decrease in bone length. The
authors concluded that PTH plays a predominant role in appositional bone
growth, whereas 1,25(OH)2D3 acts predominantly on endochondral bone
formation. Although PTH and 1,25(OH)2D3 independently, but not
additively, regulate osteoclastic bone resorption, they do affect the
renal calcium transport pathway cooperatively. Consequently, PTH and
1,25(OH)2D3 exhibited discrete and collaborative roles in modulating
skeletal and calcium homeostasis, and Xue et al. (2005) hypothesized
that loss of the renal component of calcium conservation may be the
major factor contributing to the lethal hypocalcemia in double mutants.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPOPARATHYROIDISM, FAMILIAL ISOLATED
PTH, CYS18ARG

In a patient from a family (family D) with autosomal dominant
hypoparathyroidism (146200), earlier reported by Ahn et al. (1986),
Arnold et al. (1990) identified heterozygosity for a T-to-C transition
in exon 2 of the PTH gene, resulting in a cys18-to-arg (C18R)
substitution in the 31-amino acid prepro-sequence of parathyroid
hormone, disrupting the hydrophobic core of the signal sequence. The
patient's father, who was clinically unaffected but had a subnormal PTH
and urinary cAMP responses upon induction of hypocalcemia, was also
heterozygous for the mutation, which was not found in unaffected family
members. Because the hydrophobic core is required by secreted proteins
for efficient translocation across the endoplasmic reticulum, the mutant
protein would be expected to show inefficient processing, which indeed
Arnold et al. (1990) demonstrated.

In HEK293 cells transfected with C18R-mutant preproPTH cDNA, Datta et
al. (2007) demonstrated that the expressed mutant hormone was trapped
intracellularly, predominantly in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER),
resulting in apoptosis. The C18R-expressing cells also showed marked
upregulation of the ER stress-responsive hormones BIP (HSPA5; 138120)
and PERK (EIF2AK3; 604032) and the proapoptotic transcription factor
CHOP (DDIT3; 126337). When C18R-mutant PTH was expressed in the presence
of the pharmacologic chaperone 4-phenylbutyric acid, intracellular
accumulation was reduced and normal secretion was restored. Datta et al.
(2007) suggested that ER stress-induced cell death is the underlying
mechanism for autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism.

.0002
HYPOPARATHYROIDISM, FAMILIAL ISOLATED
PTH, IVS2DS, G-C, +1, EX2DEL

In 2 sisters and a brother with isolated hypoparathyroidism (146200),
the offspring of a first-cousin marriage, Parkinson and Thakker (1992)
identified homozygosity for a G-to-C transversion at the first
nucleotide of intron 2 of the parathyroid hormone gene. The mutation was
detected by restriction enzyme cleavage with DdeI. Both parents were
heterozygous and unrelated normal individuals were homozygous for the
wildtype allele. Defects in mRNA splicing were investigated by the
detection of illegitimate transcription of the PTH gene in
lymphoblastoid cells. The mutation resulted in exon skipping with loss
of exon 2, which encodes the initiation codon and the signal peptide,
thereby causing parathyroid hormone deficiency.

.0003
HYPOPARATHYROIDISM, FAMILIAL ISOLATED
PTH, SER23PRO

In a patient with neonatal hypocalcemic seizures (see 146200), whose
parents were consanguineous, Sunthornthepvarakul et al. (1999)
identified a T-to-C transition in exon 2 of the PTH gene, resulting in a
ser23-to-pro (S23P) substitution in the 25-amino acid prepro-PTH signal
peptide. Serum calcium was 1.5 mmol/L (normal, 2.0-2.5); phosphate was
3.6 mmol/L (normal, 0.9-1.5). A few years later, 2 younger sisters and
her niece presented with neonatal hypocalcemic seizures. Their intact
PTH levels were undetectable during severe hypocalcemia. Genomic DNA
from the proposita was sequenced in all exons of the prepro-PTH gene.
Genotyping of family members was carried out by identification of a new
MspI site created by the mutation. Only affected family members were
homozygous for the mutant allele, whereas the parents were heterozygous,
supporting autosomal recessive inheritance. As this mutation is at the
-3 position in the signal peptide of the prepro-PTH gene, the authors
hypothesized that the prepro-PTH mutant might not be cleaved by signal
peptidase at the normal position, and it might be degraded in rough
endoplasmic reticulum.

.0004
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM, PRIMARY
PTH, ARG83TER

In the parathyroid adenoma (see 145000) of a 59-year-old woman with
hypercalcemia but undetectable serum PTH levels, in which microarray
analysis showed upregulated PTH expression despite negative
immunohistochemistry for PTH, Au et al. (2008) identified a 247C-T
transition in the PTH gene, resulting in an arg83-to-ter (R83X)
substitution and predicting premature termination after 52 amino acids
in the secreted PTH peptide. No wildtype sequence was detected in tumor
DNA, although analysis of peripheral blood leukocyte DNA revealed
heterozygosity for the mutation; loss of heterozygosity analysis showed
that the wildtype PTH allele had been deleted in the tumor. The authors
confirmed that an N-terminal PTH fragment was produced by tumor cells
cultured ex vivo. Noting that Lim et al. (1992) had previously studied
the R83X mutation in vitro and demonstrated impairment of translocation
across the ER, cleavage of pro-PTH, and secretion of PTH, Au et al.
(2008) stated that this case provides evidence that an endogenously
produced N-terminal PTH fragment can be biologically active.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Habener et al. (1978); Kronenberg et al. (1979); Lebo et al. (1985);
Mayer et al. (1983); Schmidtke et al. (1984)
REFERENCE 1. Adams, A. E.; Bisello, A.; Chorev, M.; Rosenblatt, M.; Suva, L.
J.: Arginine 186 in the extracellular N-terminal region of the human
parathyroid hormone 1 receptor is essential for contact with position
13 of the hormone. Molec. Endocr. 12: 1673-1683, 1998.

2. Ahn, T. G.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Kronenberg, H. M.; Igarashi, T.;
Levine, M. A.: Familial isolated hypoparathyroidism: a molecular
genetic analysis of 8 families with 23 affected persons. Medicine 65:
73-81, 1986.

3. Antonarakis, S. E.; Phillips, J. A., III; Mallonee, R. L.; Kazazian,
H. H., Jr.; Fearon, E. R.; Waber, P. G.; Kronenberg, H. M.; Ullrich,
A.; Meyers, D. A.: Beta-globin locus is linked to the parathyroid
hormone (PTH) locus and lies between the insulin and PTH loci in man. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 6615-6619, 1983.

4. Arnold, A.; Horst, S. A.; Gardella, T. J.; Baba, H.; Levine, M.
A.; Kronenberg, H. M.: Mutation of the signal peptide-encoding region
of the preproparathyroid hormone gene in familial isolated hypoparathyroidism. J.
Clin. Invest. 86: 1084-1087, 1990.

5. Arnold, A.; Kim, H. G.; Gaz, R. D.; Eddy, R. L.; Fukushima, Y.;
Byers, M. G.; Shows, T. B.; Kronenberg, H. M.: Molecular cloning
and chromosomal mapping of DNA rearranged with the parathyroid hormone
gene in a parathyroid adenoma. J. Clin. Invest. 83: 2034-2040, 1989.

6. Arnold, A.; Staunton, C. E.; Kim, H. G.; Gaz, R. D.; Kronenberg,
H. M.: Monoclonality and abnormal parathyroid hormone genes in parathyroid
adenomas. New Eng. J. Med. 318: 658-662, 1988.

7. Au, A. Y. M.; McDonald, K.; Gill, A.; Sywak, M.; Diamond, T.; Conigrave,
A. D.; Clifton-Bligh, R. J.: PTH mutation with primary hyperparathyroidism
and undetectable intact PTH. New Eng. J. Med. 359: 1184-1186, 2008.

8. Baxter, J. D.; Seeburg, P. H.; Shine, J.; Martial, J. A.; Goodman,
H. M.: DNA sequence of a human gene coding for a polypeptide hormone.
(Abstract) Clin. Res. 25: 514A only, 1977.

9. Brommage, R.; Hotchkiss, C. E.; Lees, C. J.; Stancill, M. W.; Hock,
J. M.; Jerome, C. P.: Daily treatment with human recombinant parathyroid
hormone-(1-34), LY333334, for 1 year increases bone mass in ovariectomized
monkeys. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 3757-3763, 1999.

10. Chaganti, R. S. K.; Jhanwar, S. C.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Hayward,
W. S.: Germ-line chromosomal localization of genes in chromosome
11p linkage: parathyroid hormone, beta-globin, c-Ha-ras-1, and insulin. Somat.
Cell Molec. Genet. 11: 197-202, 1985.

11. Cui, X. F.; Li, H. H.; Goradia, T. M.; Lange, K.; Kazazian, H.
H., Jr.; Galas, D.; Arnheim, N.: Single-sperm typing: determination
of genetic distance between the G-gamma-globin and parathyroid hormone
loci by using the polymerase chain reaction and allele-specific oligomers. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 86: 9389-9393, 1989.

12. Datta, R.; Waheed, A.; Shah, G. N.; Sly, W. S.: Signal sequence
mutation in autosomal dominant form of hypoparathyroidism induces
apoptosis that is corrected by a chemical chaperone. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 104: 19989-19994, 2007.

13. Goswami, R.; Mohapatra, T.; Gupta, N.; Rani, R.; Tomar, N.; Dikshit,
A.; Sharma, R. K.: Parathyroid hormone gene polymorphism and sporadic
idiopathic hypoparathyroidism. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 4840-4845,
2004.

14. Habener, J. F.; Rosenblatt, M.; Kemper, B.; Kronenberg, H. M.;
Rich, A.; Potts, J. T., Jr.: Pre-proparathyroid hormone: amino acid
sequence, chemical synthesis, and some biological studies of the precursor
region. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 75: 2616-2620, 1978.

15. Healy, K. D.; Vanhooke, J. L.; Prahl, J. M.; DeLuca, H. F.: Parathyroid
hormone decreases renal vitamin D receptor expression in vivo. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 4724-4728, 2005.

16. Hendy, G. N.; Bennett, H. P. J.; Gibbs, B. F.; Lazure, C.; Day,
R.; Seidah, N. G.: Proparathyroid hormone is preferentially cleaved
to parathyroid hormone by the prohormone convertase furin: a mass
spectrometric study. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 9517-9525, 1995.

17. Holm, T.; O'Connell, P.; Leppert, M.; Callahan, P.; White, R.
: Parathyroid hormone and calcitonin are tightly linked and have been
placed on the genetic map of chromosome 11p. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 37: A156 only, 1985.

18. Kronenberg, H. M.; McDevitt, B. E.; Majzoub, J. A.; Nathans, J.;
Sharp, P. A.; Potts, J. T., Jr.; Rich, A.: Cloning and nucleotide
sequence of DNA coding for bovine preproparathyroid hormone. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 76: 4981-4985, 1979.

19. Lalley, P. A.; Sakaguchi, A. Y.; Eddy, R. L.; Honey, N. H.; Bell,
G. I.; Shen, L.-P.; Rutter, W. J.; Jacobs, J. W.; Heinrich, G.; Chin,
W. W.; Naylor, S. L.: Mapping polypeptide hormone genes in the mouse:
somatostatin, glucagon, calcitonin, and parathyroid hormone. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 44: 92-97, 1987.

20. Lebo, R. V.; Cheung, M.-C.; Bruce, B. D.; Riccardi, V. M.; Kao,
F.-T.; Kan, Y. W.: Mapping parathyroid hormone, beta-globin, insulin,
and LDH-A genes within the human chromosome 11 short arm by spot blotting
sorted chromosomes. Hum. Genet. 69: 316-320, 1985.

21. Lim, S. K.; Gardella, T. J.; Baba, H.; Nussbaum, S. R.; Kronenberg,
H. M.: The carboxy-terminus of parathyroid hormone is essential for
hormone processing and secretion. Endocrinology 131: 2325-2330,
1992.

22. Mayer, H.; Breyel, E.; Bostock, C.; Schmidtke, J.: Assignment
of the human parathyroid hormone gene to chromosome 11. Hum. Genet. 64:
283-285, 1983.

23. Miao, D.; He, B.; Karaplis, A. C.; Goltzman, D.: Parathyroid
hormone is essential for normal fetal bone formation. J. Clin. Invest. 109:
1173-1182, 2002.

24. Mullersman, J. E.; Shields, J. J.; Saha, B. K.: Characterization
of two novel polymorphisms at the human parathyroid hormone gene locus. Hum.
Genet. 88: 589-592, 1992.

25. Nussbaum, S. R.; Gaz, R. D.; Arnold, A.: Hypercalcemia and ectopic
secretion of parathyroid hormone by an ovarian carcinoma with rearrangement
of the gene for parathyroid hormone. New Eng. J. Med. 323: 1324-1328,
1990.

26. Parkinson, D. B.; Thakker, R. V.: A donor splice site mutation
in the parathyroid hormone gene is associated with autosomal recessive
hypoparathyroidism. Nature Genet. 1: 149-152, 1992.

27. Purroy, J.; Spurr, N. K.: Molecular genetics of calcium sensing
in bone cells. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 2377-2384, 2002.

28. Raizis, A. M.; Becroft, D. M.; Shaw, R. L.; Reeve, A. E.: A mitotic
recombination in Wilms tumor occurs between the parathyroid hormone
locus and 11p13. Hum. Genet. 70: 344-346, 1985.

29. Reis, A.; Hecht, W.; Groger, R.; Bohm, I.; Cooper, D. N.; Lindenmaier,
W.; Mayer, H.; Schmidtke, J.: Cloning and sequence analysis of the
human parathyroid hormone gene region. Hum. Genet. 84: 119-124,
1990.

30. Schmidtke, J.; Pape, B.; Krengel, U.; Langenbeck, U.; Cooper,
D. N.; Breyel, E.; Mayer, H.: Restriction fragment length polymorphisms
at the human parathyroid hormone gene locus. Hum. Genet. 67: 428-431,
1984.

31. Sunthornthepvarakul, T.; Churesigaew, S.; Ngowngarmratana, S.
: A novel mutation of the signal peptide of the preproparathyroid
hormone gene associated with autosomal recessive familial isolated
hypoparathyroidism. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 3792-3796, 1999.

32. Tonoki, H.; Narahara, K.; Matsumoto, T.; Niikawa, N.: Regional
mapping of the parathyroid hormone gene (PTH) by cytogenetic and molecular
studies. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 56: 103-104, 1991.

33. Vasicek, T. J.; McDevitt, B. E.; Freeman, M. W.; Fennick, B. J.;
Hendy, G. N.; Potts, J. T., Jr.; Rich, A.; Kronenberg, H. M.: Nucleotide
sequence of the human parathyroid hormone gene. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 80: 2127-2131, 1983.

34. Xue, Y.; Karaplis, A. C.; Hendy, G. N.; Goltzman, D.; Miao, D.
: Genetic models show that parathyroid hormone and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D(3) play distinct and synergistic roles in postnatal mineral ion
homeostasis and skeletal development. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 1515-1528,
2005.

35. Zabel, B. U.; Kronenberg, H. M.; Bell, G. I.; Shows, T. B.: Chromosome
mapping of genes on the short arm of human chromosome 11: parathyroid
hormone gene is at 11p15 together with the genes for insulin, c-Harvey-ras
1, and beta-hemoglobin. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 39: 200-205, 1985.

36. Zhou, A. T.; Bessalle, R.; Bisello, A.; Nakamoto, C.; Rosenblatt,
M.; Suva, L. J.; Chorev, M.: Direct mapping of an agonist-binding
domain within the parathyroid hormone/parathyroid hormone-related
protein receptor by photoaffinity crosslinking. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 94: 3644-3649, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/17/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/5/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/29/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/17/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/3/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/10/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/11/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/2/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/7/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/2/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/3/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED carol: 09/17/2013
carol: 2/9/2011
terry: 11/19/2008
wwang: 9/17/2008
wwang: 6/11/2008
terry: 6/5/2008
wwang: 2/11/2008
terry: 1/29/2008
wwang: 10/18/2006
terry: 10/17/2006
carol: 6/1/2006
alopez: 4/3/2006
wwang: 1/11/2005
wwang: 1/10/2005
carol: 11/11/2004
mgross: 12/2/2003
mgross: 10/7/2002
cwells: 7/3/2001
cwells: 7/2/2001
alopez: 6/5/2000
terry: 4/3/2000
dkim: 9/11/1998
mark: 9/18/1997
mark: 9/11/1997
mark: 6/13/1995
mimadm: 1/14/1995
jason: 7/20/1994
warfield: 4/12/1994
carol: 6/3/1992
carol: 5/22/1992

608117	TITLE *608117 PHOSPHODIESTERASE 4D-INTERACTING PROTEIN; PDE4DIP
;;MYOMEGALIN, RAT, HOMOLOG OF;;
MYOMEGALIN-LIKE PROTEIN; MMGL;;
KIAA0454;;
KIAA0477
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen to identify proteins that interact with
rat Pde4d (600129), Verde et al. (2001) cloned rat Pde4dip, which they
called myomegalin. Rat myomegalin is a 2,324-amino acid protein composed
mostly of alpha-helical and coiled-coil structures. It contains domains
that share similarity with microtubule-associated proteins, as well as a
leucine zipper identical to that found in Drosophila centrosomin (see
602039). Northern blot analysis detected a 7.5- to 8.0-kb transcript in
most rat tissues examined; testis-, heart-, and skeletal muscle-specific
variants were also detected. Western blot analysis detected myomegalin
at about 62 kD in testis and at 230 to 250 kD in heart and skeletal
muscle. Immunocytochemistry and transfection studies demonstrated
colocalization of myomegalin with Pde4d in the Golgi/centrosomal area of
cultured cells and in sarcomeric structures of skeletal muscle.

By analyzing ESTs for cardiac muscle-specific transcripts, followed by
screening heart cDNA libraries and 5-prime RACE, Soejima et al. (2001)
cloned 4 splice variants of PDE4DIP, which they called MMGL. The
variant-1 transcript has a long 3-prime untranslated region containing 9
possible polyadenylation signals, and it encodes a deduced 174-amino
acid protein. Variants 2, 3, and 4 encode proteins of 174, 173, and 240
amino acids, respectively. Northern blot analysis detected high
expression of a 1.0- to 1.3-kb band and lower expression of 4.4- and
8.5-kb bands in adult and fetal heart, skeletal muscle, and all specific
heart regions examined. Only the 4.4-kb transcript was detected in
aorta. Fluorescence-tagged variants 1 and 4 were expressed in both the
cytoplasm and nucleus of transfected mouse myocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis and coimmunoprecipitation studies of
myomegalin expressed in COS-7 cells, Verde et al. (2001) found that rat
myomegalin associated with variant 3 of Pde4d and that they were
sequestered in particulate structures.

GENE STRUCTURE

Soejima et al. (2001) determined that the PDE4DIP gene contains 8 exons
and spans at least 70 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Soejima et al. (2001) mapped the PDE4DIP
gene to chromosome 1q1, but by FISH they mapped it to chromosomes 1q1
and 1p1. They determined that chromosome 1q1 is the correct location of
the PDE4DIP gene.

Wilkinson et al. (2003) reported the molecular cloning of a novel
translocation t(1;5)(q23;q33). They showed that it resulted in fusion of
the PDGFRB gene (173410) on 5q33 with the PDE4DIP gene, which by this
evidence is located on 1q23. They found that the translocation
t(1;5)(q23;q33) resulted in a myeloproliferative disorder associated
with eosinophilia.

REFERENCE 1. Soejima, H.; Kawamoto, S.; Akai, J.; Miyoshi, O.; Arai, Y.; Morohka,
T.; Matsuo, S.; Niikawa, N.; Kimura, A.; Okubo, K.; Mukai, T.: Isolation
of novel heart-specific genes using the BodyMap database. Genomics 74:
115-120, 2001.

2. Verde, I.; Pahlke, G.; Salanova, M.; Zhang, G.; Wang, S.; Coletti,
D.; Onuffer, J.; Jin, S.-L. C.; Conti, M.: Myomegalin is a novel
protein of the Golgi/centrosome that interacts with a cyclic nucleotide
phosphodiesterase. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 11189-11198, 2001.

3. Wilkinson, K.; Velloso, E. R. P.; Lopes, L. F.; Lee, C.; Aster,
J. C.; Shipp, M. A.; Aguiar, R. C. T.: Cloning of the t(1;5)(q23;q33)
in a myeloproliferative disorder associated with eosinophilia: involvement
of PDGFRB and response to imatinib. Blood 102: 4187-4190, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/7/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/25/2003

EDITED alopez: 07/12/2004
terry: 7/7/2004
mgross: 9/25/2003

607696	TITLE *607696 USH1G GENE; USH1G
;;SCAFFOLD PROTEIN CONTAINING ANKYRIN REPEATS AND SAM DOMAIN; SANS
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By positional cloning, Kikkawa et al. (2003) identified a novel gene
within the 72-kb region on mouse chromosome 11 containing the Jackson
shaker (js) locus. Kikkawa et al. (2003) named the gene Sans because it
was found to encode a scaffold protein containing ankyrin repeats and a
SAM (sterile alpha motif) domain. Kikkawa et al. (2003) determined that
the mouse protein is expressed in the cochlea (including inner and outer
hair cells), cerebellum, eye, and testis.

Weil et al. (2003) cloned the human homolog of the mouse Sans gene in
silico by database mining. The deduced 460-amino acid protein contains 3
ankyrin-like domains near the N terminus, a central region, and a SAM
domain and a PDZ-binding motif at the C terminus. The human protein
shares 96% sequence identity with the mouse protein.

GENE FUNCTION

Weil et al. (2003) found by cotransfection experiments that SANS
interacts with harmonin (USH1C; 605242), which is mutant in Usher
syndrome type IC (276904). The authors proposed that SANS is an integral
part of the protein complex linking cadherin (CDH23; 605516) stereocilia
laterally to the stereocilia microfilaments. CDH23 is mutant in Usher
syndrome type ID (USH1D; 601067)

By using cotransfection and immunolocalization techniques, Adato et al.
(2005) documented the interaction between SANS and harmonin, and also
determined that SANS binds to myosin VIIa (MYO7A; 276903). The authors
noted that SANS formed homomeric structures. SANS was localized to the
apical region of cochlear and vestibular hair cell bodies underneath the
cuticular plate. In contrast to the other 4 known USH1 proteins, no SANS
labeling was detected within the stereocilia. Adato et al. (2005)
proposed that via its binding to myosin VIIa and/or harmonin, SANS
controls the hair bundle cohesion and proper development by regulating
the traffic of USH1 proteins en route to the stereocilia.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Maerker et al. (2008) found that the C
terminus of human SANS interacted with the N-terminal region of whirlin
(WHRN; 607928) in a bovine retina cDNA library. In mouse retina, both
proteins colocalized at synapses in the outer plexiform layer and in the
outer limiting membrane, the inner segment, and the ciliary region of
photoreceptor cells. Within the ciliary region, high resolution analysis
revealed that Sans and whirlin colocalized in the connecting cilium and
basal body complex. Maerker et al. (2008) showed that Sans provided a
link to the microtubule transport machinery, whereas whirlin appeared to
anchor 2 retinal transmembrane proteins, Ush2a (608400) isoform b and
Vlgr1b (GPR98; 602851), to specific membrane domains. Maerker et al.
(2008) concluded that this network of proteins may cooperate to regulate
cargo transfer from inner segment transport carriers to the ciliary
transport system of photoreceptors.

GENE STRUCTURE

Weil et al. (2003) determined that the human SANS gene spans over 7.2 kb
and contains 3 exons, 2 of which are coding.

MAPPING

Kikkawa et al. (2003) identified the Sans gene within the critical
region of the Jackson shaker mouse mutation on chromosome 10. This
region shows syntenic homology with a region of human chromosome 17 to
which the Usher syndrome type IG (USH1G; 606943) locus had been mapped
(17q24-q25). By sequence analysis, Weil et al. (2003) identified the
SANS gene on chromosome 17 between markers D17S1807 and D17S1839.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Wu et al. (2011) reported the crystal structure of the MyTH4-FERM
domains of MYO7A in complex with the central domain (CEN) of SANS at
2.8-angstrom resolution. The MyTH4 and FERM domains form an integral
structural and functional supramodule binding to 2 highly conserved
segments (CEN1 and 2) of SANS. Wu et al. (2011) concluded that the
MyTH4-FERM/CEN complex structure provides mechanistic explanations for
known deafness-causing mutations in MYO7A MyTH4-FERM.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of a large Tunisian family segregating Usher
syndrome type IG (606943), Weil et al. (2003) identified a mutation in
the SANS gene (607696.0004). They identified different mutations in the
SANS gene in affected members of German and Jordanian families (see
607696.0001-607696.0003).

ANIMAL MODEL

The Jackson shaker mouse carries a recessive mutation causing the
phenotype of deafness, abnormal behavior (circling and/or head tossing)
and degeneration of inner ear neuroepithelia (Kitamura et al., 1992).
Kikkawa et al. (2003) noted that 2 alleles had been identified, the
original js and jsseal. They determined that the Sans gene contains
insertion mutations in both js and jsseal mutant alleles. Both mutations
are predicted to inactivate the Sans protein by creating frameshift
mutations, resulting in a truncated protein lacking the C-terminal SAM
domain. Cochlear hair cells in the js mutants showed disorganized
stereocilia bundles. Sans was shown by in situ hybridization to be
highly expressed in both inner and outer hair cells of cochlea. Kikkawa
et al. (2003) suggested that the existence of major motifs, ankyrin
repeats and a SAM domain, supported an important role for Sans in the
development and maintenance of the stereocilia bundles, possibly via
protein-protein interactions.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
USHER SYNDROME, TYPE IG
USH1G, LEU48PRO

In 2 German brothers with Usher syndrome type IG (606943), Weil et al.
(2003) identified compound heterozygosity for mutations in the SANS
gene. One mutation was a 142C-T transition in exon 1, predicting a
substitution of proline for a relatively conserved leucine at position
48 (L48P) in the first ankyrin domain. The other mutation was a
dinucleotide deletion in exon 2, 186delCA, predicted to produce a
truncated 132 amino acid protein containing 70 missense C-terminal
residues.

.0002
USHER SYNDROME, TYPE IG
USH1G, 2-BP DEL, 186CA

See 607696.0001 and Weil et al. (2003).

.0003
USHER SYNDROME, TYPE IG
USH1G, 20-BP DEL, NT829

In affected members of a consanguineous Jordanian family segregating
Usher syndrome type IG (606943), Weil et al. (2003) identified
homozygosity for a 20-bp deletion (nucleotides 829-848) in exon 2 of the
SANS gene, predicting a truncated 326-amino acid protein containing 70
missense C-terminal residues and lacking the SAM domain.

.0004
USHER SYNDROME, TYPE IG
USH1G, 1-BP INS, 393G

In affected members of a consanguineous Tunisian family segregating
Usher syndrome type IG (606943), Weil et al. (2003) identified
homozygosity for a 393G insertion in exon 2 of the SANS gene, predicting
a truncated 133-amino acid protein lacking the central region and the
C-terminal SAM domain.

.0005
USHER SYNDROME, TYPE IG
USH1G, TRP38TER

In a mutation screen of Usher syndrome type I (606943) patients from the
U.S. and the U.K., Ouyang et al. (2005) found homozygosity for a 113G-A
transition in the USH1G gene, resulting in a trp38-to-ter (W38X)
substitution in the first ankyrin domain of the SANS protein. The
mutation would result in a truncated protein lacking approximately 90%
of the predicted coding sequence. Ouyang et al. (2005) found the
mutation in 2 of 59 (3.4%) probands from the U.S.

.0006
USHER SYNDROME, TYPE IG, MILD
USH1G, 15-BP DEL, NT163

In 4 affected members of a consanguineous Pakistani family with Usher
syndrome type IG (606943), Bashir et al. (2010) identified a homozygous
15-bp deletion (163_164+13del15) involving nucleotides in the first exon
and intron of the USH1G gene. The mutation was not found in 200 control
chromosomes. Investigation of the effect of the mutation was hampered
because RNA from patient blood did not show sufficient expression of
SANS. In silico analysis predicted that retention of the first intron in
the RNA resulting from the mutation would introduce a frameshift and
premature termination, which could result in nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay. However, if the mRNA is processed, the frameshift would result in
a truncated nonfunctional protein of 58 amino acids. The patients had an
atypical form of Usher syndrome, with moderate to severe hearing loss,
normal vestibular function, and lack of eyesight problems. However,
funduscopy showed mild symptoms of retinitis pigmentosa and pale optic
discs in 3 of the older affected patients at ages 13, 15, and 22 years,
respectively. The findings indicated that even a truncating mutation in
the USH1G gene can result in a relatively mild phenotype.

REFERENCE 1. Adato, A.; Michel, V.; Kikkawa, Y.; Reiners, J.; Alagramam, K.
N.; Weil, D.; Yonekawa, H.; Wolfrum, U.; El-Amraoui, A.; Petit, C.
: Interactions in the network of Usher syndrome type 1 proteins. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 347-356, 2005.

2. Bashir, R.; Fatima, A.; Naz, S.: A frameshift mutation in SANS
results in atypical Usher syndrome. (Letter) Clin. Genet. 78: 601-603,
2010.

3. Kikkawa, Y.; Shitara, H.; Wakana, S.; Kohara, Y.; Takada, T.; Okamoto,
M.; Taya, C.; Kamiya, K.; Yoshikawa, Y.; Tokano, H.; Kitamura, K.;
Shimizu, K.; Wakabayashi, Y.; Shiroishi, T.; Kominami, R.; Yonekawa,
H.: Mutations in a new scaffold protein Sans cause deafness in Jackson
shaker mice. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 453-461, 2003.

4. Kitamura, K.; Kakoi, H.; Yoshikawa, Y.; Ochikubo, F.: Ultrastructural
findings in the inner ear of Jackson shaker mice. Acta Otolaryng. 112:
622-627, 1992.

5. Maerker, T.; van Wijk, E.; Overlack, N.; Kersten, F. F. J.; McGee,
J.; Goldmann, T.; Sehn, E.; Roepman, R.; Walsh, E. J.; Kremer, H.;
Wolfrum, U.: A novel Usher protein network at the periciliary reloading
point between molecular transport machineries in vertebrate photoreceptor
cells. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17: 71-86, 2008.

6. Ouyang, X. M.; Yan, D.; Du, L. L.; Hejtmancik, J. F.; Jacobson,
S. G.; Nance, W. E.; Li, A. R.; Angeli, S.; Kaiser, M.; Newton, V.;
Brown, S. D. M.; Balkany, T.; Liu, X. Z.: Characterization of Usher
syndrome type I gene mutations in an Usher syndrome patient population. Hum.
Genet. 116: 292-299, 2005.

7. Weil, D.; El-Amraoui, A.; Masmoudi, S.; Mustapha, M.; Kikkawa,
Y.; Laine, S.; Delmaghani, S.; Adato, A.; Nadifi, S.; Ben Zina, Z.;
Hamel, C.; Gal, A.; Ayadi, H.; Yonekawa, H.; Petit, C.: Usher syndrome
type IG (USH1G) is caused by mutations in the gene encoding SANS,
a protein that associates with the USH1C protein, harmonin. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12: 463-471, 2003.

8. Wu, L.; Pan, L.; Wei, Z.; Zhang, M.: Structure of MyTH4-FERM domains
in myosin VIIa tail bound to cargo. Science 331: 757-760, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/17/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/6/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/21/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/12/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/31/2005

CREATED George E. Tiller: 4/18/2003

EDITED carol: 09/19/2013
carol: 5/17/2012
ckniffin: 5/17/2012
alopez: 5/10/2011
terry: 5/6/2011
mgross: 10/2/2009
terry: 9/21/2009
wwang: 12/28/2007
terry: 12/12/2007
wwang: 4/7/2005
wwang: 4/4/2005
terry: 3/31/2005
carol: 4/18/2003

607030	TITLE *607030 GRANCALCIN; GCA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By probing with antibody to the purified protein, Boyhan et al. (1992)
cloned GCA, which they called grancalcin, from a promyocytic cell line
expression library. The deduced 217-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 24 kD. The sequence contains an EF-hand
calcium-binding region, a potential phosphorylation site, and 2
potential N-glycosylation sites. GCA shares 58% identity over 192 amino
acids with sorcin (182520), and about 30% identity over the
calcium-binding domains of calpains (see 114220). Northern blot analysis
revealed abundant expression of a 1.65-kb transcript in bone marrow and
weaker expression in neutrophils, myeloid leukemic cells, and 2
Epstein-Barr virus-transformed B-cell lines. By Western blot analysis, a
28-kD protein was observed in B and T cells at low concentrations, and
at higher levels in neutrophils and macrophages. Subcellular
fractionation showed localization to be dependent upon Ca(2+) and
Mg(2+). In the absence of divalent cation, grancalcin localized to the
cytosolic fraction; with Mg(2+) alone, it partitioned with the granule
fraction; and in the presence of Mg(2+) and Ca(2+), it associated with
both the granule and membrane fractions.

Teahan et al. (1992) purified grancalcin from leukopheresis samples of
patients with chronic granulocytic leukemia. The purified protein
migrated as a 28-kD protein by SDS-PAGE and formed homodimers of 55 kD
upon gel filtration that was independent of reducing agents. No
biochemical evidence was found for phosphorylation or glycosylation.
Calcium binding was suggested by the difference in migration on SDS/PAGE
between calcium-loaded and calcium-depleted preparations, and was
confirmed by the binding of Ca(2+) to slot blots of the native protein.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the GCA
gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP stSG15301).

REFERENCE 1. Boyhan, A.; Casimir, C. M.; French, J. K.; Teahan, C. G.; Segal,
A. W.: Molecular cloning and characterization of grancalcin, a novel
EF-hand calcium-binding protein abundant in neutrophils and monocytes. J.
Biol. Chem. 267: 2928-2933, 1992.

2. Teahan, C. G.; Totty, N. F.; Segal, A. W.: Isolation and characterization
of grancalcin, a novel 28 kDa EF-hand calcium-binding protein from
human neutrophils. Biochem. J. 286: 549-554, 1992.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/11/2002

EDITED carol: 06/13/2002

605267	TITLE *605267 JUNCTOPHILIN 2; JPH2
;;JP2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Junctional complexes between the plasma membrane (PM) and
endoplasmic/sarcoplasmic reticulum (ER/SR) are a common feature of all
excitable cell types and mediate cross talk between cell surface and
intracellular ion channels. Takeshima et al. (2000) identified the
junctophilins (JPs), a conserved family of proteins that are components
of the junctional complexes. JPs are composed of a C-terminal
hydrophobic segment spanning the ER/SR membrane and a remaining
cytoplasmic domain that shows specific affinity for the PM. In mouse,
there are at least 3 JP subtypes: Jp1, Jp2, and Jp3.

CLONING

By screening genomic DNA libraries, Nishi et al. (2000) isolated the
human JP1 (JPH1; 605266) and JP2 genes, and by screening a brain cDNA
library, they isolated a cDNA encoding human JP3 (JPH3; 605268). The JP2
gene encodes a deduced 696-amino acid protein. The human JPs share an
overall sequence identity of 39%, and they share characteristic
structural features with their rabbit and mouse counterparts. RNA blot
hybridization indicated that the tissue-specific expression patterns of
the JP genes in human are essentially the same as those in mouse; JP1
was expressed as a 4.5-kb transcript in skeletal muscle and at low
levels in heart, JP2 was expressed as a 4.1-kb transcript in heart and
skeletal muscle, and JP3 was expressed as a 4.6-kb transcript in brain.

Matsushita et al. (2007) noted that the JPH2 protein is composed of 6
predicted domains: MORN (membrane occupation and recognition nexus)
motif region I (MORN1), joining region, MORN2 motif, putative
alpha-helical region, divergent region, and membrane-spanning region.

GENE STRUCTURE

Nishi et al. (2000) determined that the JPH2 gene contains 5 exons,
similar to JPH1 and JPH3.

MAPPING

By FISH, Nishi et al. (2000) mapped the JPH2 gene to chromosome 20q12
and determined that the JPH genes do not cluster on the human genome.

GENE FUNCTION

Takeshima et al. (2000) showed that Jp2 is abundantly expressed in mouse
heart, and mutant mice lacking Jp2 exhibited embryonic lethality.
Cardiac myocytes from the mutant mice showed deficiency of the
junctional membrane complexes and abnormal calcium transients. These
results suggested that JPs are important components of junctional
membrane complexes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 223 unrelated patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (see CMH17,
613873), who were negative for mutation in 8 myofilament-associated
genes and 5 Z disc-associated genes, Landstrom et al. (2007) analyzed
the candidate gene JPH2 and identified heterozygosity for 3 different
missense mutations in 3 probands (605267.0001-605267.0003,
respectively). Functional analysis demonstrated that the mutations
caused protein reorganization of JPH2, perturbations in intracellular
calcium signaling, and marked cardiomyocyte hyperplasia.

Matsushita et al. (2007) analyzed the candidate gene JPH2 in 148
Japanese probands with CMH and 48 affected family members, as well as 32
patients with dilated cardiomyopathy (CMD; see 115200) and 8 patients
with restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM; see 115210) and identified a
heterozygous missense mutation (605267.0004) in 4 CMH probands that was
not found in CMD or RCM patients or in 236 Japanese controls. Subsequent
analysis of 15 known CMH genes in the probands revealed that 1 patient
also carried 2 mutations in the MYH7 gene (see, e.g., 160760.0016).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC 17
JPH2, SER101ARG

In a 40-year-old man who was diagnosed at age 27 years with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (CMH17; 613873), Landstrom et al. (2007) identified
heterozygosity for a mutation in exon 1 of the JPH2 gene, resulting in a
ser101-to-arg (S101R) substitution in the conserved MORN motif. The
mutation was not identified in 1,000 Caucasian reference alleles.
Studies in transfected H9c2 cardiomyocytes showed an altered
localization pattern with respect to the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR).
Analysis of transfected HL-1 cardiomyocytes indicated decreased
spontaneous calcium release from the SR, suggesting that
excitation-contraction process was disrupted in cells expressing S101R.
The patient, who had dyspnea and had undergone placement of an
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, had a family history of CMH,
with 3 first-degree affected relatives and 1 second-degree relative, all
of whom declined to participate in the study.

.0002
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC 17
JPH2, TYR141HIS

In a 33-year-old man who was diagnosed at age 24 years with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (CMH17; 613873), Landstrom et al. (2007) identified
heterozygosity for a mutation in exon 2 of the JPH2 gene, resulting in a
tyr141-to-his (Y141H) substitution at a conserved residue. The mutation
was not identified in 1,000 Caucasian reference alleles. Studies in
transfected H9c2 cardiomyocytes showed an altered localization pattern
with respect to the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) and significant
hypertrophy (2- to 3-fold) compared to wildtype. Analysis of transfected
HL-1 cardiomyocytes indicated decreased spontaneous calcium release from
the SR, suggesting that excitation-contraction process was disrupted in
cells expressing Y141H. At presentation, the patient had dyspnea,
palpitations, angina, and a non-Q-wave myocardial infarction; he
underwent placement of a pacemaker and an implantable
cardioverter-defibrillator. There was no family history of CMH or sudden
cardiac death.

.0003
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC 17
JPH2, SER165PHE

In a 58-year-old female who was diagnosed at 30 years of age with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (CMH17; 613873), Landstrom et al. (2007)
identified heterozygosity for a mutation in exon 2 of the JPH2 gene,
resulting in a ser165-to-phe (S165F) substitution at a conserved
residue. The mutation was not identified in 1,000 Caucasian reference
alleles. Studies in transfected H9c2 cardiomyocytes showed an altered
localization pattern with respect to the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) and
significant hypertrophy (2- to 3-fold) compared to wildtype. Analysis of
transfected HL-1 cardiomyocytes indicated decreased spontaneous calcium
release from the SR, suggesting that excitation-contraction process was
disrupted in cells expressing S165F. At presentation, the patient had
dyspnea and subacute bacterial endocarditis; she underwent surgical
myectomy. There was no family history of CMH or sudden cardiac death.

.0004
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC 17
JPH2, GLY505SER

In 4 Japanese probands with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (CMH17; 613873),
Matsushita et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for a 1306C-T
transition in exon 4 of the JPH2 gene, resulting in a gly505-to-ser
(G505S) substitution in the divergent region. One of the patients, who
was diagnosed with CMH at 14 years of age, had a mother who was
diagnosed at 40 years of age and also carried the G505S mutation. His
healthy father did not carry the mutation, and a younger sister who had
died suddenly at 3 years of age could not be examined. Another proband,
who was diagnosed with CMH at 33 years of age, had a family history of
CMH involving her grandfather, father, and the father's sibs, who were
not available for genetic analysis. Analysis of 15 known CMH-associated
genes in the 4 probands carrying the G505S mutation in JPH2 revealed
that the female proband also carried 2 missense mutations in the MYH7
gene (see, e.g., 160760.0016). Her newborn son, who had no signs of CMH
on echocardiography at 1 day of age, carried both the JPH2 G505S
mutation and 1 of the MYH7 mutations. Matsushita et al. (2007) suggested
that mutations in both JPH2 and MYH7 could be associated with the
pathogenesis of CMH in this proband.

REFERENCE 1. Landstrom, A. P.; Weisleder, N.; Batalden, K. B.; Bos, J. M.; Tester,
D. J.; Ommen, S. R.; Wehrens, X. H. T.; Claycomb, W. C.; Ko, J.-K.;
Hwang, M.; Pan, Z.; Ma, J.; Ackerman, M. J.: Mutations in JPH2-encoded
junctophilin-2 associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in humans. J.
Molec. Cell. Cardiol. 42: 1026-1035, 2007.

2. Matsushita, Y.; Furukawa, T.; Kasanuki, H.; Nishibatake, M.; Kurihara,
Y.; Ikeda, A.; Kamatani, N.; Takeshima, H.; Matsuoka, R.: Mutation
of junctophilin type 2 associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J.
Hum. Genet. 52: 543-548, 2007.

3. Nishi, M.; Mizushima, A.; Nakagawara, K.; Takeshima, H.: Characterization
of human junctophilin subtype genes. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 273:
920-927, 2000.

4. Takeshima, H.; Komazaki, S.; Nishi, M.; Iino, M.; Kangawa, K.:
Junctophilins: a novel family of junctional membrane complex proteins. Molec.
Cell 6: 11-22, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/7/2011

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 9/14/2000

EDITED alopez: 02/03/2012
wwang: 4/8/2011
terry: 4/7/2011
joanna: 12/8/2000
mgross: 9/14/2000

606626	TITLE *606626 DISHEVELLED-ASSOCIATED ACTIVATOR OF MORPHOGENESIS 1; DAAM1
;;KIAA0666
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening size-fractionated brain cDNA libraries for cDNAs with the
potential to encode proteins larger than 50 kD, Ishikawa et al. (1998)
identified a cDNA which they designated KIAA0666. KIAA0666 encodes a
1,085-amino acid protein predicted to function in cell division. It is
68% identical to the KIAA0381 protein (DAAM2; 606627). RT-PCR analysis
detected expression of KIAA0666 in all tissues tested.

Habas et al. (2001) identified a novel formin (see FMN1; 136535)
homology (FH) protein that they named DAAM1. DAAM1 is a widely expressed
protein that contains 1,078 amino acids and is identical to the KIAA0666
protein. Like other FH proteins, DAAM1 contains a central proline-rich
FH1 domain and a more C-terminal FH2 domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Wnt (see 164975) signaling via the frizzled receptor (Fz; see 600667)
controls cell polarity and movement during development. Habas et al.
(2001) reported that in human cells and during Xenopus embryogenesis,
Wnt/Fz signaling activated the small GTPase Rho (165390), a key
regulator of cytoskeleton architecture. Wnt/Fz activation of Rho
required the cytoplasmic protein dishevelled (DVL; see 601365) and
DAAM1. DAAM1 bound to both DVL and Rho and mediated Wnt-induced DVL-Rho
complex formation. Inhibition or depletion of DAAM1 prevented Wnt/Fz
activation of Rho and of Xenopus gastrulation, but did not prevent
activation of beta-catenin (116806) signaling.

Liu et al. (2008) showed that human DAAM1 was autoinhibited by an
intramolecular interaction between its N-terminal GTPase domain, which
includes an autoinhibitory domain, and its C-terminal autoregulatory
domain. Interaction of DAAM1 with DVL disrupted this autoinhibitory
interaction, resulting in DAAM1 activation. Mutations within or removal
of the autoregulatory domain converted DAAM1 into an active protein that
could induce Rho activation. Liu et al. (2008) also demonstrated that
Dvl synergized with Daam1 to regulate gastrulation during Xenopus
embryogenesis.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Ishikawa et al. (1998) mapped the DAAM1
gene to chromosome 14.

REFERENCE 1. Habas, R.; Kato, Y.; He, X.: Wnt/Frizzled activation of Rho regulates
vertebrate gastrulation and requires a novel Formin homology protein
Daam1. Cell 107: 843-854, 2001.

2. Ishikawa, K.; Nagase, T.; Suyama, M.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.;
Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. X. The complete sequences of 100 new
cDNA clones from brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA
Res. 5: 169-176, 1998.

3. Liu, W.; Sato, A.; Khadka, D.; Bharti, R.; Diaz, H.; Runnels, L.
W.; Habas, R.: Mechanism of activation of the Formin protein Daam1. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 210-215, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/18/2008
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 1/23/2002

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 1/23/2002

EDITED wwang: 04/02/2010
alopez: 10/2/2008
mgross: 4/18/2008
terry: 4/18/2008
mgross: 1/23/2002
carol: 1/23/2002
mgross: 1/23/2002

190070	TITLE *190070 V-KI-RAS2 KIRSTEN RAT SARCOMA VIRAL ONCOGENE HOMOLOG; KRAS
;;ONCOGENE KRAS2; KRAS2;;
KIRSTEN MURINE SARCOMA VIRUS 2; RASK2;;
C-KRAS
V-KI-RAS1 PSEUDOGENE, INCLUDED; KRAS1P, INCLUDED;;
ONCOGENE KRAS1, INCLUDED; KRAS1, INCLUDED;;
KIRSTEN RAS1, INCLUDED; RASK1, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The KRAS gene encodes the human cellular homolog of a transforming gene
isolated from the Kirsten rat sarcoma virus. The RAS proteins are
GDP/GTP-binding proteins that act as intracellular signal transducers.
The most well-studied members of the RAS (derived from 'RAt Sarcoma'
virus) gene family include KRAS, HRAS (190020), and NRAS (164790). These
genes encode immunologically related proteins with a molecular mass of
21 kD and are homologs of rodent sarcoma virus genes that have
transforming abilities. While these wildtype cellular proteins in humans
play a vital role in normal tissue signaling, including proliferation,
differentiation, and senescence, mutated genes are potent oncogenes that
play a role in many human cancers (Weinberg, 1982; Kranenburg, 2005).

CLONING

Der et al. (1982) identified a new human DNA sequence homologous to the
transforming oncogene of the Kirsten (ras-K) murine sarcoma virus within
mouse 3T3 fibroblast cells transformed by DNA from an undifferentiated
human lung cancer cell line (LX-1). The findings showed that KRAS could
act as an oncogene in human cancer.

Chang et al. (1982) isolated clones corresponding to the human cellular
KRAS gene from human placental and embryonic cDNA libraries. Two
isoforms were identified, designated KRAS1 and KRAS2. KRAS1 contained
0.9 kb homologous to viral Kras and had 1 intervening sequence, and
KRAS2 contained 0.3 kb homologous to viral Kras. McCoy et al. (1983)
characterized the KRAS gene isolated from a human colon adenocarcinoma
cell line (SW840) and determined that it corresponded to KRAS2 as
identified by Chang et al. (1982). The KRAS2 oncogene was amplified in
several tumor cell lines.

McGrath et al. (1983) cloned the KRAS1 and KRAS2 genes and determined
that the KRAS1 gene is a pseudogene. The KRAS2 gene encodes a
188-residue protein with a molecular mass of 21.66 kD. It showed only 6
amino acid differences from the viral gene. Comparison of the 2 KRAS
genes showed that KRAS1 is lacking several intervening sequences,
consistent with it being a pseudogene derived from a processed KRAS2
mRNA. The major KRAS2 mRNA transcript is 5.5 kb. Alternative splicing
results in 2 variants, isoforms A and B, that differ in the C-terminal
region.

Alternative splicing of exon 5 results in the KRASA and KRASB isoforms.
Exon 6 contains the C-terminal region in KRASB, whereas it encodes the
3-prime untranslated region in KRASA. The differing C-terminal regions
of these isoforms are subjected to posttranslational modifications. The
differential posttranslational processing has profound functional
effects leading to alternative trafficking pathways and protein
localization (Carta et al., 2006).

GENE STRUCTURE

McGrath et al. (1983) first reported that the KRAS2 gene spans 38 kb and
contains 4 exons. Detailed sequence analysis showed that exon 4 has 2
forms, which the authors designated 4A and 4B.

The KRAS2 gene has been shown to have a total of 6 exons. Exons 2, 3,
and 4 are invariant coding exons, whereas exon 5 undergoes alternative
splicing. KRASB results from exon 5 skipping. In KRASA mRNA, exon 6
encodes the 3-prime untranslated region. In KRASB mRNA, exon 6 encodes
the C-terminal region (Carta et al., 2006).

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Popescu et al. (1985) mapped the KRAS2 gene to
chromosome 12p12.1-p11.1. By linkage with RFLPs, O'Connell et al. (1985)
confirmed the approximate location of KRAS2 on 12p12.1.

- Pseudogene

The KRAS1 gene is a KRAS2 pseudogene and has been assigned to chromosome
6 (O'Brien et al., 1983; McBride et al., 1983). By in situ
hybridization, Popescu et al. (1985) assigned the KRAS1 gene to
6p12-p11. Because KRAS1 was found to be a pseudogene, its official
symbol was changed to KRAS1P.

GENE FUNCTION

Johnson et al. (2005) found that the 3 human RAS genes, HRAS, KRAS, and
NRAS, contain multiple let-7 (605386) complementary sites in their
3-prime UTRs that allow let-7 miRNA to regulate their expression. Let-7
expression was lower in lung tumors than in normal lung tissue, whereas
expression of the RAS proteins was significantly higher in lung tumors,
suggesting a possible mechanism for let-7 in cancer.

Bivona et al. (2006) found that the subcellular localization and
function of Kras in mammalian cells was modulated by Pkc (see 176960).
Phosphorylation of Kras by Pkc agonists induced rapid translocation of
Kras from the plasma membrane to several intracellular membranes,
including the outer mitochondrial membrane, where Kras associated with
Bclxl (BCL2L1; 600039). Phosphorylated Kras required Bclxl for induction
of apoptosis.

Yeung et al. (2006) devised genetically encoded probes to assess surface
potential in intact cells. These probes revealed marked, localized
alterations in the change of the inner surface of the plasma membrane of
macrophages during the course of phagocytosis. Hydrolysis of
phosphoinositides and displacement of phosphatidylserine accounted for
the change in surface potential at the phagosomal cup. Signaling
molecules such as KRAS, RAC1 (602048), and c-SRC (190090) that are
targeted to the membrane by electrostatic interactions were rapidly
released from membrane subdomains where the surface charge was altered
by lipid remodeling during phagocytosis.

Heo et al. (2006) surveyed plasma membrane targeting mechanisms by
imaging the subcellular localization of 125 fluorescent
protein-conjugated Ras, Rab, Arf, and Rho proteins. Of 48 proteins that
were localized to the plasma membrane, 37 contained clusters of
positively charged amino acids. To test whether these polybasic clusters
bind negatively charged phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate lipids,
Heo et al. (2006) developed a chemical phosphatase activation method to
deplete plasma membrane phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate.
Unexpectedly, proteins with polybasic clusters dissociated from the
plasma membrane only when both phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate and
phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate were depleted, arguing that
both lipid second messengers jointly regulate plasma membrane targeting.

Gazin et al. (2007) performed a genomewide RNA interference (RNAi)
screen in KRAS-transformed NIH 3T3 cells and identified 28 genes
required for RAS-mediated epigenetic silencing of the proapoptotic FAS
gene (TNFRSF6; 134637). At least 9 of these RAS epigenetic silencing
effectors (RESEs), including the DNA methyltransferase DNMT1 (126375),
were directly associated with specific regions of the FAS promoter in
KRAS-transformed NIH 3T3 cells but not in untransformed NIH 3T3 cells.
RNAi-mediated knockdown of any of the 28 RESEs resulted in failure to
recruit DNMT1 to the FAS promoter, loss of FAS promoter
hypermethylation, and derepression of FAS expression. Analysis of 5
other epigenetically repressed genes indicated that RAS directs the
silencing of multiple unrelated genes through a largely common pathway.
Finally, Gazin et al. (2007) showed that 9 RESEs are required for
anchorage-independent growth and tumorigenicity of KRAS-transformed NIH
3T3 cells; these 9 genes had not previously been implicated in
transformation by RAS. Gazin et al. (2007) concluded that RAS-mediated
epigenetic silencing occurs through a specific, complex pathway
involving components that are required for maintenance of a fully
transformed phenotype.

Haigis et al. (2008) used genetically engineered mice to determine
whether and how the related oncogenes Kras and Nras (164790) regulate
homeostasis and tumorigenesis in the colon. Expression of Kras(G12D) in
the colonic epithelium stimulated hyperproliferation in a Mek (see
176872)-dependent manner. Nras(G12D) did not alter the growth properties
of the epithelium, but was able to confer resistance to apoptosis. In
the context of an Apc (611731)-mutant colonic tumor, activation of Kras
led to defects in terminal differentiation and expansion of putative
stem cells within the tumor epithelium. This Kras tumor phenotype was
associated with attenuated signaling through the MAPK pathway, and human
colon cancer cells expressing mutant Kras were hypersensitive to
inhibition of Raf (see 164760) but not Mek. Haigis et al. (2008)
concluded that their studies demonstrated clear phenotypic differences
between mutant Kras and Nras, and suggested that the oncogenic phenotype
of mutant Kras might be mediated by noncanonical signaling through Ras
effector pathways.

By studying the transcriptomes of paired colorectal cancer cell lines
that differed only in the mutational status of their KRAS or BRAF
(164757) genes, Yun et al. (2009) found that GLUT1 (138140), encoding
glucose transporter-1, was 1 of 3 genes consistently upregulated in
cells with KRAS or BRAF mutations. The mutant cells exhibited enhanced
glucose uptake and glycolysis and survived in low-glucose conditions,
phenotypes that all required GLUT1 expression. In contrast, when cells
with wildtype KRAS alleles were subjected to a low-glucose environment,
very few cells survived. Most surviving cells expressed high levels of
GLUT1, and 4% of these survivors had acquired KRAS mutations not present
in their parents. The glycolysis inhibitor 3-bromopyruvate
preferentially suppressed the growth of cells with KRAS or BRAF
mutations. Yun et al. (2009) concluded that, taken together, these data
suggested that glucose deprivation can drive the acquisition of KRAS
pathway mutations in human tumors.

Meylan et al. (2009) showed that the NF-kappa-B (see 164011) pathway is
required for the development of tumors in a mouse model of lung
adenocarcinoma. Concomitant loss of p53 (191170) and expression of
oncogenic Kras containing the G12D mutation resulted in NF-kappa-B
activation in primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Conversely, in lung
tumor cell lines expressing Kras(G12D) and lacking p53, p53 restoration
led to NF-kappa-B inhibition. Furthermore, the inhibition of NF-kappa-B
signaling induced apoptosis in p53-null lung cancer cell lines.
Inhibition of the pathway in lung tumors in vivo, from the time of tumor
initiation or after tumor progression, resulted in significantly reduced
tumor development. Meylan et al. (2009) concluded that, together, their
results indicated a critical function for NF-kappa-B signaling in lung
tumor development and, further, that this requirement depends on p53
status.

Barbie et al. (2009) used systematic RNA interference to detect
synthetic lethal partners of oncogenic KRAS and found that the
noncanonical I-kappa-B kinase TBK1 (604834) was selectively essential in
cells that contain mutant KRAS. Suppression of TBK1 induced apoptosis
specifically in human cancer cell lines that depend on oncogenic KRAS
expression. In these cells, TBK1 activated NF-kappa-B antiapoptotic
signals involving c-REL (164910) and BCLXL (BCL2L1; 600039) that were
essential for survival, providing mechanistic insights into this
synthetic lethal interaction. Barbie et al. (2009) concluded that TBK1
and NF-kappa-B signaling are essential in KRAS mutant tumors, and
establish a general approach for the rational identification of
codependent pathways in cancer.

In Drosophila eye-antennal discs, cooperation between Ras(V12), an
oncogenic form of the Ras85D protein, and loss-of-function mutations in
the conserved tumor suppressor 'scribble' (607733) gives rise to
metastatic tumors that display many characteristics observed in human
cancers (summary by Wu et al., 2010). Wu et al. (2010) showed that
clones of cells bearing different mutations can cooperate to promote
tumor growth and invasion in Drosophila. The authors found that the
Ras(V12) and scrib-null mutations can also cause tumors when they affect
different adjacent epithelial cells. Wu et al. (2010) showed that this
interaction between Ras(V12) and scrib-null clones involves JNK
signaling propagation and JNK-induced upregulation of
JAK/STAT-activating cytokines (see 604260), a compensatory growth
mechanism for tissue homeostasis. The development of Ras(V12) tumors can
also be triggered by tissue damage, a stress condition that activates
JNK signaling. The authors suggested that similar cooperative mechanisms
could have a role in the development of human cancers.

Correct localization and signaling by farnesylated KRAS is regulated by
the prenyl-binding protein PDE-delta (PDED; 602676), which sustains the
spatial organization of KRAS by facilitating its diffusion in the
cytoplasm (Chandra et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2004). Zimmerman et al.
(2013) reported that interfering with the binding of mammalian PDED to
KRAS by means of small molecules provided a novel opportunity to
suppress oncogenic RAS signaling by altering its localization to
endomembranes. Biochemical screening and subsequent structure-based hit
optimization yielded inhibitors of the KRAS-PDED interaction that
selectively bound to the prenyl-binding pocket of PDED with nanomolar
affinity, inhibited oncogenic RAS signaling, and suppressed in vitro and
in vivo proliferation of human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cells
that are dependent on oncogenic KRAS.

- Regulation of KRAS Expression by KRAS1P Transcript Levels

Following their finding that PTENP1 (613531), a pseudogene of the PTEN
(601728) tumor suppressor gene, can derepress PTEN by acting as a decoy
for PTEN-targeting miRNAS, Poliseno et al. (2010) extended their
analysis to the oncogene KRAS and its pseudogene KRAS1. KRAS1P 3-prime
UTR overexpression in DU145 prostate cancer cells resulted in increased
KRAS mRNA abundance and accelerated cell growth. They also found that
KRAS and KRAS1P transcript levels were positively correlated in prostate
cancer. Notably, the KRAS1P locus 6p12-p11 is amplified in different
human tumors, including neuroblastoma, retinoblastoma, and
hepatocellular carcinoma. Poliseno et al. (2010) concluded that their
findings together pointed to a putative protooncogenic role for KRAS1P,
and supported the notion that pseudogene functions mirror the functions
of their cognate genes as explained by a miRNA decoy mechanism.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Role in Solid Tumors

KRAS is said to be one of the most activated oncogenes, with 17 to 25%
of all human tumors harboring an activating KRAS mutation (Kranenburg,
2005). Critical regions of the KRAS gene for oncogenic activation
include codons 12, 13, 59, 61, and 63 (Grimmond et al., 1992). These
activating mutations cause Ras to accumulate in the active GTP-bound
state by impairing intrinsic GTPase activity and conferring resistance
to GTPase activating proteins (Zenker et al., 2007).

In a study of 96 human tumors or tumor cell lines in the NIH 3T3
transforming system, Pulciani et al. (1982) found a mutated HRAS locus
only in a single cancer cell line, whereas transforming KRAS genes were
identified in 8 different carcinomas and sarcomas. KRAS appeared to be
involved in malignancy much more often than HRAS. In a serous
cystadenocarcinoma of the ovary (167000), Feig et al. (1984) showed the
presence of an activated KRAS oncogene that was not activated in normal
cells of the same patient. The transforming gene product displayed an
electrophoretic mobility pattern that differed from that of KRAS
transforming proteins in other tumors, suggesting a novel somatic KRAS
mutation in this tumor.

In a cell line of human lung cancer (211980), Nakano et al. (1984)
identified a mutation in the KRAS2 gene (190070.0001), resulting in gene
activation with transforming ability of the mutant protein.

Rodenhuis et al. (1987) used a novel, highly sensitive assay based on
oligonucleotide hybridization following in vitro amplification to
examine DNA from 39 lung tumor specimens. The KRAS gene was found to be
activated by point mutations in codon 12 in 5 of 10 adenocarcinomas. Two
of these tumors were less than 2 cm in size and had not metastasized. No
HRAS, KRAS, or NRAS mutations were observed in 15 squamous cell
carcinomas, 10 large cell carcinomas, 1 carcinoid tumor, 2 metastatic
adenocarcinomas from primary tumors outside the lung, and 1 small cell
carcinoma. An approximately 20-fold amplification of the unmutated KRAS
gene was observed in a tumor that proved to be a solitary lung
metastasis of a rectal carcinoma.

Yanez et al. (1987) found mutations in codon 12 of the KRAS gene in 4 of
16 colon cancers (114500), 2 of 27 lung cancers, and 1 of 8 breast
cancers (114480); no mutations were found at codon position 61.

The highest observed frequency of KRAS2 point mutations occurs in
pancreatic carcinomas (260350), with 90% of the patients having at least
1 KRAS2 mutation (Almoguera et al., 1988; Smit et al., 1988). Most of
these mutations are in codon 12 (see, e.g., G12D, 190070.0005 and G12V,
190070.0006) (Hruban et al., 1993).

Burmer and Loeb (1989) identified KRAS2 mutations in both diploid and
aneuploid cells in colon adenomas and carcinomas. Twenty-six of 40 colon
carcinomas contained mutations at codon 12, and 9 of the 12 adenomas
studied contained similar mutations.

Sidransky et al. (1992) found that KRAS mutations were detectable in DNA
purified from stool in 8 of 9 patients with colorectal tumors that
contained KRAS mutations. Takeda et al. (1993) used a
mutant-allele-specific amplification (MASA) method to detect KRAS
mutations in cells obtained from the sputum of patients with lung
cancer. A mutation was found in 1 of 5 patients studied. The authors
suggested that the MASA system could be applied to an examination of
metastatic lung carcinomas, particularly from adenocarcinomas of the
colon and pancreas in which KRAS mutations are frequently detected, and
to mass screening for colorectal tumors, using DNA isolated from feces
as a template.

Lee et al. (1995) identified mutations in codon 12 of the KRAS gene in
11 (7.9%) of 140 gastric cancers (137215). Seven cases had a G12S
mutation (190070.0007) and 2 had a G12D mutation (190070.0005). Tumors
located in the upper third of the stomach had a significantly higher
frequency of KRAS codon 12 mutations (3 of 8; 37.5%) compared with
tumors located in the middle (4 of 29; 13.8%) or lower (3 of 99; 3%)
thirds of the stomach (P = 0.001). Among 8 patients with stomach cancer
located in the upper part of the stomach, death occurred in 4 of 5
patients with tumors without KRAS gene mutations, but in none of the 3
patients with KRAS gene-mutated tumors.

Otori et al. (1997) examined tissue sections from 19 hyperplastic
colorectal polyps for mutations in exons 12 and 13 of the KRAS gene.
KRAS mutations were detected in 9 (47%) of 19 polyps, suggesting that
some hyperplastic colorectal polyps may be true premalignant lesions.

KRAS activation has been recognized in microdissected foci of pancreatic
intraepithelial neoplasia (Cubilla and Fitzgerald, 1976; Hruban et al.,
2000; Hruban et al., 2000), the candidate precursor lesion of pancreatic
cancer previously known as ductal cell hyperplasia. Laghi et al. (2002)
found that KRAS codon 12 was mutated in 34 of 41 (83%) pancreatic
cancers and in 11 of 13 (85%) biliary cancers. Multiple distinct KRAS
mutations were found in 16 pancreatic cancers and in 8 biliary cancers.
Multiple KRAS mutations were more frequent in cancers with detectable
pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia than in those without, and
individual precursor lesions of the same neoplastic pancreas harbored
distinct mutations. The results indicated that clonally distinct
precursor lesions of pancreatic cancer may variably contribute to tumor
development.

Nikiforova et al. (2003) analyzed a series of 88 conventional follicular
(188470) and Hurthle cell (607464) thyroid tumors for HRAS, NRAS, or
KRAS mutations and PAX8 (167415)-PPARG (601487) rearrangements.
Forty-nine percent of conventional follicular carcinomas had RAS
mutations, 36% had PAX8-PPARG rearrangement, and only 1 (3%) had both.
Of follicular adenomas, 48% had RAS mutations, 4% had PAX8-PPARG
rearrangement, and 48% had neither. Hurthle cell tumors infrequently had
PAX8-PPARG rearrangement or RAS mutations.

Rajagopalan et al. (2002) systematically evaluated mutations in the BRAF
(164757) and KRAS genes in 330 colorectal tumors. There were 32
mutations in BRAF and 169 mutations in KRAS; no tumor exhibited
mutations in both BRAF and KRAS. Rajagopalan et al. (2002) concluded
that BRAF and KRAS mutations are equivalent in their tumorigenic effects
and are mutated at a similar phase of tumorigenesis, after initiation
but before malignant conversion. Kim et al. (2003) found 7 KRAS missense
mutations in 66 gastric cancers and 16 gastric cancer cell lines. No
BRAF mutations were found.

Oliveira et al. (2004) investigated KRAS in 158 hereditary nonpolyposis
colorectal cancer (HNPCC2; 609310) tumors from patients with germline
MLH1 (120436), MSH2 (609309) or MSH6 (600678) mutations, 166
microsatellite-unstable (MSI-H), and 688 microsatellite-stable (MSS)
sporadic carcinomas. All tumors were characterized for MSI and 81 of 166
sporadic MSI-H colorectal cancers were analyzed for MLH1 promoter
hypermethylation. KRAS mutations were observed in 40% of HNPCC tumors,
and the mutation frequency varied upon the mismatch repair gene
affected: 48% (29/61) in MSH2, 32% (29/91) in MLH1, and 83% (5/6) in
MSH6 (P = 0.01). KRAS mutation frequency was different between HNPCC,
MSS, and MSI-H colorectal cancers (P = 0.002), and MSI-H with MLH1
hypermethylation (P = 0.005). Furthermore, HNPCC colorectal cancers had
more G13D (190070.0003) mutations than MSS (P less than 0.0001), MSI-H
(P = 0.02) or MSI-H tumors with MLH1 hypermethylation (P = 0.03). HNPCC
colorectal and sporadic MSI-H tumors without MLH1 hypermethylation
shared similar KRAS mutation frequency, in particular G13D. The authors
concluded that depending on the genetic/epigenetic mechanism leading to
MSI-H, the outcome in terms of oncogenic activation may be different,
reinforcing the idea that HNPCC, sporadic MSI-H (depending on the MLH1
status) and MSS colorectal cancers may target distinct kinases within
the RAS/RAF/MAPK pathway.

Sommerer et al. (2005) analyzed the KRAS gene in 30 seminomas and 32
nonseminomatous GCTs (see 273300) with a mixture of embryonal carcinoma,
yolk sac tumor, choriocarcinoma, and mature teratoma. KRAS mutations,
all involving codon 12, were identified in 2 (7%) of 30 seminomas and 3
(9%) of 32 nonseminomas.

Groesser et al. (2012) identified somatic mutations in the KRAS gene
(G12D, 190070.0005 and G12V, 190070.0006) in 3 (5%) of 65 nevus
sebaceous tumors (see 162900). The G12D mutation was also found in
somatic mosaic state in a patient with Schimmelpenning-Feuerstein-Mims
syndrome (163200). The authors postulated that the mosaic mutation
likely extends to extracutaneous tissues in the latter disorder, which
could explain the phenotypic pleiotropy.

- Hematologic Malignancies

The myelodysplastic syndrome is a preleukemic hematologic disorder
characterized by low blood counts, bone marrow cells of abnormal
appearance, and progression to acute leukemia in as many as 30% of
patients. Liu et al. (1987) identified a transforming allele in the KRAS
gene in 2 of 4 patients with preleukemia and in 1 who progressed to
acute leukemia from myelodysplastic syndrome. In 1 preleukemic patient,
they detected a novel mutation in codon 13 of KRAS in bone marrow cells
harvested 1.5 years before the acute leukemia developed. The findings
provided evidence that RAS mutations may be involved in the early stages
of human leukemia.

In the bone marrow of a 4-year-old child with acute myeloid leukemia
(AML; 601626), Bollag et al. (1996) identified an in-frame 3-bp
insertion in the KRAS gene (190070.0008).

Bezieau et al. (2001) used ARMS (allele-specific amplification method)
to evaluate the incidence of NRAS- and KRAS2-activating mutations in
patients with multiple myeloma (254500) and related disorders. Mutations
were more frequent in KRAS2 than in NRAS. The authors concluded that
early mutations in these 2 oncogenes may play a major role in the
oncogenesis of multiple myeloma and primary plasma cell leukemia.

The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network (2013) analyzed the genomes of
200 clinically annotated adult cases of de novo AML, using either
whole-genome sequencing (50 cases) or whole-exome sequencing (150
cases), along with RNA and microRNA sequencing and DNA methylation
analysis. The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network (2013) identified
recurrent mutations in the NRAS (164790) or KRAS genes in 23/200 (12%)
samples.

- Cardiofaciocutaneous Syndrome, Noonan Syndrome 3, and Costello
Syndrome

Cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC) syndrome (see 115150) is characterized by
distinctive facial appearance, heart defects, and mental retardation.
CFC shows phenotypic overlap with Noonan syndrome (see 163950) and
Costello syndrome (218040). Approximately 40% of individuals with
clinically diagnosed Noonan syndrome have gain-of-function mutations in
protein-tyrosine phosphatase SHP2 (PTPN11; 176876). Aoki et al. (2005)
identified mutations in the HRAS gene in 12 of 13 individuals with
Costello syndrome, suggesting that the activation of the RAS-MAPK
pathway is the common underlying mechanism of Noonan syndrome, Costello
syndrome, and possibly CFC syndrome. In 2 of 43 unrelated individuals
with CFC syndrome (CFC2; 615278), Niihori et al. (2006) identified 2
different heterozygous KRAS mutations, G60R (190070.0009) and D153V
(190070.0010). Neither mutation had been previously identified in
individuals with cancer. In the same study, Niihori et al. (2006) found
8 different mutations in the BRAF gene (164757), an isoform in the RAF
protooncogene family, in 16 of 40 individuals with CFC syndrome.

Schubbert et al. (2006) identified 3 de novo germline KRAS mutations
(190070.0010-190070.0012) in 5 individuals with Noonan syndrome 3 (NS3;
609942).

In 2 individuals exhibiting a severe Noonan syndrome-3 phenotype with
features overlapping those of CFC and Costello syndromes, Carta et al.
(2006) identified 2 different heterozygous KRAS mutations (190070.0014
and 190070.0015). Both mutations were de novo and affected exon 6, which
encodes the C-terminal portion of KRAS isoform B but does not contribute
to KRAS isoform A. Structural analysis indicated that both substitutions
perturb the conformation of the guanine ring-binding pocket of the
protein, predicting an increase in the guanine diphosphate/guanine
triphosphate (GTP) dissociation rate that would favor GTP binding to the
KRASB isoform and bypass the requirement for a guanine nucleotide
exchange factor.

Zenker et al. (2007) identified 11 different germline mutations in the
KRAS gene, including 8 novel mutations, in a total of 12 patients with a
clinical diagnosis of CFC (2), Noonan syndrome-3 (7), CFC/Noonan
syndrome overlap (1), or Costello syndrome (2). All patients showed mild
to moderate mental retardation. The 2 unrelated infants with Costello
syndrome had 2 different heterozygous mutations
(190070.0017-190070.0018). Both patients had coarse facies, loose and
redundant skin with deep palmar creases, heart defects, failure to
thrive, and moderate mental retardation. Zenker et al. (2007) noted that
these patients may later develop features of CFC syndrome, but
emphasized that the findings underscored the central role of Ras in the
pathogenesis of these diverse but phenotypically related disorders.

In a 20-year-old woman with clinical features typical of Costello
syndrome and additional findings seen in Noonan syndrome, who was
negative for mutations in the PTPN11 and HRAS genes, Bertola et al.
(2007) identified a mutation in the KRAS gene (K5E; 190070.0019). The
authors noted that this mutation was in the same codon as that of 1 of
the patients reported by Zenker et al. (2007) (K5N; 190070.0017).

Schulz et al. (2008) identified mutations in the KRAS gene in 3 (5.9%)
of 51 CFC patients.

- Development of Resistance to Chemotherapeutic Agents

Misale et al. (2012) showed that molecular alterations (in most
instances point mutations) of KRAS are causally associated with the
onset of acquired resistance to anti-EGFR (131550) treatment in
colorectal cancers. Expression of mutant KRAS under the control of its
endogenous gene promoter was sufficient to confer cetuximab resistance,
but resistant cells remained sensitive to combinatorial inhibition of
EGFR and mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK). Analysis of
metastases from patients who developed resistance to cetuximab or
panitumumab showed the emergence of KRAS amplification in one sample and
acquisition of secondary KRAS mutations in 60% (6 out of 10) of the
cases. KRAS mutant alleles were detectable in the blood of
cetuximab-treated patients as early as 10 months before radiographic
documentation of disease progression. Misale et al. (2012) concluded
that their results identified KRAS mutations as frequent drivers of
acquired resistance to cetuximab in colorectal cancers, indicated that
the emergence of KRAS mutant clones can be detected noninvasively months
before radiographic progression, and suggested early initiation of a MEK
inhibitor as a rational strategy for delaying or reversing drug
resistance.

Diaz et al. (2012) determined whether mutant KRAS DNA could be detected
in the circulation of 28 patients receiving monotherapy with
panitumumab, a therapeutic anti-EGFR antibody. They found that 9 out of
24 (38%) patients whose tumors were initially KRAS wildtype developed
detectable mutations in KRAS in their sera, 3 of which developed
multiple different KRAS mutations. The appearance of these mutations was
very consistent, generally occurring between 5 and 6 months following
treatment. Mathematical modeling indicated that the mutations were
present in expanded subclones before the initiation of panitumumab
treatment. Diaz et al. (2012) suggested that the emergence of KRAS
mutations is a mediator of acquired resistance to EGFR blockade and that
these mutations can be detected in a noninvasive manner. The results
also explained why solid tumors develop resistance to targeted therapies
in a highly reproducible fashion.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Andreyev et al. (1997) used PCR amplification and DNA sequencing to
investigate KRAS exon 1 mutations (codons 12 and 13) in histologic
sections of colorectal adenocarcinomas. They examined samples from 98
patients with Dukes stage A or B fully resected colorectal cancers.
Fourteen of these patients had subsequently relapsed. The presence of a
KRAS mutation was not associated with tumor stage or histologic grade;
neither was there any association with those patients who relapsed. The
authors concluded that detection of KRAS mutation in early colorectal
adenocarcinomas was of no prognostic value.

Porta et al. (1999) found that serum concentrations of organochlorine
compounds were significantly higher in patients with exocrine pancreatic
cancer with a codon 12 KRAS2 mutation compared to cases without a
mutation, with an odds ratio of 8.7 for one organochlorine and 5.3 for
another organochlorine. These estimates held after adjusting for total
lipids, other covariates, and total polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). A
specific association was observed between the G12V (190070.0006)
mutation and both organochlorine concentrations, with an odds ratio of
15.9 and 24.1 for each of the compounds. A similar pattern was shown for
the major diorthochlorinated PCBs.

Vasko et al. (2003) performed a pooled analysis of 269 mutations in
HRAS, KRAS, and NRAS garnered from 39 previous studies of thyroid
tumors. Mutations in codon 61 of NRAS were significantly more frequent
in follicular tumors (19%) than in papillary tumors (188550) (5%) and
significantly more frequent in malignant (25%) than in benign (14%)
tumors. HRAS mutations in codons 12/13 were found in 2 to 3% of all
types of tumors, but HRAS mutations in codon 61 were observed in only
1.4% of tumors, and almost all of them were malignant. KRAS mutations in
exon 1 were found more often in papillary than follicular cancers (2.7%
vs 1.6%) and were sometimes correlated with special epidemiologic
circumstances. The second part of the study by Vasko et al. (2003)
involved analysis of 80 follicular tumors from patients living in
Marseille (France) and Kiev (Ukraine). HRAS mutations in codons 12/13
were found in 12.5% of common adenomas and in 1 follicular carcinoma
(2.9%). Mutations in codon 61 of NRAS occurred in 23.3% and 17.6% of
atypical adenomas and follicular carcinomas, respectively.

POPULATION GENETICS

Although several studies confirmed that approximately 40% of primary
colorectal adenocarcinomas in humans contain a mutated form of the KRAS2
gene, the patterns of mutation at codons 12, 13, and 61 are not the same
in different populations. Hayashi et al. (1996) used the MASA method to
analyze the frequency and type of point mutations in these 3 codons in
319 colorectal cancer tissues collected from patients in Japan. They
then compared these results with those from other sources to examine
whether different geographic locations and environmental influences
might impose distinct patterns on the spectrum of KRAS mutations.
Comparing findings in the U.S., France, and Yugoslavia with those in
Japan, a number of significant differences were found. A possible
explanation put forth by Hayashi et al. (1996) was that an environmental
carcinogen prevailing in a geographic region combines with the
susceptibility of a particular tissue to dictate which type of DNA
lesion will predominate. The predominance of G-to-A mutations among
American and Japanese colorectal cancer patients could be attributable
to alkylating agents or to the absence of direct interaction with any
carcinogens. The prevalence of G-to-T mutations among Yugoslav and
French patients might be ascribed to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
and heterocyclic amines.

ANIMAL MODEL

Muller et al. (1983) found transcription of KRAS and the McDonough
strain of feline sarcoma virus (FMS) gene (see 164770) during mouse
development. Furthermore, the differences in transcription in different
tissues suggested a specific role for each: FMS was expressed in
extraembryonic structures or in transport in these tissues, whereas KRAS
was expressed ubiquitously.

Holland et al. (2000) transferred, in a tissue-specific manner, genes
encoding activated forms of Ras and Akt (164730) to astrocytes and
neural progenitors in mice. Although neither activated Ras nor Akt alone
was sufficient to induce glioblastoma multiforme (GBM; 137800)
formation, the combination of activated Ras and Akt induced high-grade
gliomas with the histologic features of human GBMs. These tumors
appeared to arise after gene transfer to neural progenitors, but not
after transfer to differentiated astrocytes. Increased activity of RAS
is found in many human GBMs, and Holland et al. (2000) demonstrated that
AKT activity is increased in most of these tumors, implying that
combined activation of these 2 pathways accurately models the biology of
this disease.

Johnson et al. (2001) used a variation of 'hit-and-run' gene targeting
to create mouse strains carrying oncogenic alleles of Kras capable of
activation only on a spontaneous recombination event in the whole
animal. They demonstrated that mice carrying these mutations were highly
predisposed to a range of tumor types, predominantly early-onset lung
cancer. This model was further characterized by examining the effects of
germline mutations in the p53 gene (191170), which is known to be
mutated along with KRAS in human tumors. Johnson et al. (2001) concluded
that their approach had several advantages over traditional transgenic
strategies, including that it more closely recapitulates spontaneous
oncogene activation as seen in human cancers.

Zhang et al. (2001) presented evidence of a tumor suppressor role of
wildtype KRAS2 in lung tumorigenesis. They found that heterozygous
Kras2-deficient mice were highly susceptible to the chemical induction
of lung tumors compared to wildtype mice. Activating Kras2 mutations
were detected in all chemically induced lung tumors obtained from both
wildtype and heterozygous Kras2-deficient mice. Furthermore, wildtype
Kras2 inhibited colony formation and tumor development by transformed
NIH/3T3 cells. Allelic loss of wildtype Kras2 was found in 67 to 100% of
chemically induced mouse lung adenocarcinomas that harbored a mutant
Kras2 allele. These and other data strongly suggested that wildtype
Kras2 has tumor suppressor activity and is frequently lost during lung
tumor progression. Pfeifer (2001) commented on these findings as
representing 'a new verdict for an old convict.' He quoted evidence that
the HRAS1 gene may also function as a tumor suppressor. Pfeifer (2001)
noted an interesting parallel to the p53 tumor suppressor, which was
initially described as an oncogene, carrying point mutations in tumors.
Later it was discovered that it is, in fact, the wildtype copy of the
gene that functions as a tumor suppressor gene and is capable of
reducing cell proliferation.

Costa et al. (2002) crossed Nf1 (613113) heterozygote mice with mice
heterozygous for a null mutation in the Kras gene. Double heterozygotes
with decreased Ras function had improved learning relative to Nf1
heterozygote mice. Costa et al. (2002) also showed that the Nf1 +/- mice
have increased GABA-mediated inhibition and specific deficits in
long-term potentiation, both of which can be reversed by decreasing Ras
function. Costa et al. (2002) concluded that learning deficits
associated with Nf1 may be caused by excessive Ras activity, which leads
to impairments in long-term potentiation caused by increased
GABA-mediated inhibition.

An S17N substitution in any of the RAS proteins produces
dominant-inhibitory proteins with higher affinities for exchange factors
than normal RAS. These mutants cannot interact with downstream effectors
and therefore form unproductive complexes, preventing activation of
endogenous RAS. Using experiments in COS-7 cells, mouse fibroblasts, and
canine kidney cells, Matallanas et al. (2003) found that the Hras, Kras,
and Nras S17N mutants exhibited distinct inhibitory effects that
appeared to be due largely to their specific membrane localizations. The
authors demonstrated that Hras is present in caveolae, lipid rafts, and
bulk disordered membranes, whereas Kras and Nras are present primarily
in disordered membranes and lipid rafts, respectively. Thus, the Hras
S17N mutant inhibited activation of all 3 wildtype RAS isoforms, the
Kras S17N mutant inhibited wildtype Kras and the portion of Hras in
disordered membranes, and the Nras S17N mutant inhibited wildtype Nras
and the portion of Hras in lipid rafts.

By delivering a recombinant adenoviral vector expressing Cre recombinase
to the bursal cavity that encloses the ovary, Dinulescu et al. (2005)
expressed an oncogenic Kras allele within the ovarian surface epithelium
and observed benign epithelial lesions with a typical endometrioid
glandular morphology that did not progress to ovarian carcinoma
(167000); 7 of 15 mice (47%) also developed peritoneal endometriosis
(131200). When the Kras mutation was combined with conditional deletion
of Pten (601728), all mice developed invasive endometrioid ovarian
adenocarcinomas. Dinulescu et al. (2005) stated that these were the
first mouse models of endometriosis and endometrioid adenocarcinoma of
the ovary.

Collado et al. (2005) used a mouse model for cancer initiation in
humans: the animals had a conditional oncogenic K-rasV12 (190070.0006)
allele that is activated only by the enzyme Cre recombinase, causing
them to develop multiple lung adenomas (premalignant tumors) and a few
lung adenocarcinomas (malignant tumors). Senescence markers previously
identified in cultured cells were used to detect oncogene-induced
senescence in lung sections from control mice (expressing Cre) and from
K-rasV12-expressing mice (expressing Cre and activated K-rasV12).
Collado et al. (2005) analyzed p16(INK4a) (600160), an effector of in
vitro oncogene-induced senescence, and de novo markers that were
identified by using DNA microarray analysis of in vitro oncogene-induced
senescence. These de novo markers are p15(INK4b), also known as CDKN2B
(600431), DEC1 (BHLHB2; 604256), and DCR2 (TNFRSF10D; 603614). Staining
with antibodies against p16(INK4a), p15(INK4b), DEC1, and DCR2 revealed
abundant positive cells in adenomas, whereas adenocarcinomas were
essentially negative. By contrast, the proliferation marker Ki-67
revealed a weak proliferative index in adenomas compared with
adenocarcinomas. Collado et al. (2005) concluded that oncogene-induced
senescence may help to restrict tumor progression. They concluded that a
substantial number of cells in premalignant tumors undergo
oncogene-induced senescence, but that cells in malignant tumors are
unable to do this owing to the loss of oncogene-induced senescence
effectors such as p16(INK4a) or p53.

Using an Hras (190020) knockin mouse model, To et al. (2008)
demonstrated that specificity for Kras mutations in lung and Hras
mutations in skin tumors is determined by local regulatory elements in
the target Ras genes. Although the Kras 4A isoform is dispensable for
mouse development, it is the most important isoform for lung
carcinogenesis in vivo and for the inhibitory effect of wildtype Kras on
the mutant allele. Kras 4A expression is detected in a subpopulation of
normal lung epithelial cells, but at very low levels in lung tumors,
suggesting that it may not be required for tumor progression. The 2 Kras
isoforms undergo different posttranslational modifications. To et al.
(2008) concluded that their findings may have implications for the
design of therapeutic strategies for inhibiting oncogenic Kras activity
in human cancers.

Junttila et al. (2010) modeled the probable therapeutic impact of p53
(191170) restoration in a spontaneously evolving mouse model of nonsmall
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) initiated by sporadic oncogenic activation of
endogenous KRAS developed by Jackson et al. (2001). Surprisingly, p53
restoration failed to induce significant regression of established
tumors, although it did result in a significant decrease in the relative
proportion of high-grade tumors. This was due to selective activation of
p53 only in the more aggressive tumor cells within each tumor. Such
selective activation of p53 correlates with marked upregulation in Ras
signal intensity and induction of the oncogenic signaling sensor
p19(ARF) (600160). Junttila et al. (2010) concluded that p53-mediated
tumor suppression is triggered only when oncogenic Ras signal flux
exceeds a critical threshold. Importantly, the failure of low-level
oncogenic Kras to engage p53 reveals inherent limits in the capacity of
p53 to restrain early tumor evolution and in the efficacy of therapeutic
p53 restoration to eradicate cancers.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LUNG CANCER, SOMATIC
KRAS, GLY12CYS

In a cell line of human lung cancer (211980), Nakano et al. (1984)
identified a 34G-T transversion in exon 1 of the KRAS2 gene, resulting
in a gly12-to-cys (G12C) substitution. Studies of the mutant protein
showed that it had transforming abilities consistent with activation of
the gene.

In a study of 106 prospectively enrolled patients with primary
adenocarcinoma of the lung, Ahrendt et al. (2001) found that 92 (87%)
were smokers. KRAS2 mutations were detected in 40 of 106 tumors (38%)
and were significantly more common in smokers compared with nonsmokers
(43% vs 0%; P = 0.001). Thirty-nine of the 40 tumors with KRAS2
mutations had 1 of 4 changes in codon 12, the most common being G12C,
which was present in 25 tumors.

.0002
LUNG CANCER, SQUAMOUS CELL, SOMATIC
BLADDER CANCER, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
KRAS, GLY12ARG

In a squamous cell lung carcinoma (211980) from a 66-year-old man,
Santos et al. (1984) identified a G-to-C transversion in exon 1 of the
KRAS2 gene, resulting in a gly12-to-arg (G12R) substitution. The
mutation was not identified in the patient's normal bronchial and
pulmonary parenchymal tissues or blood lymphocytes. This mutation had
previously been identified in a bladder cancer (109800) and a lung
cancer.

.0003
BREAST ADENOCARCINOMA, SOMATIC
KRAS, GLY13ASP

In a cell line from a human breast adenocarcinoma (114480), Kozma et al.
(1987) identified a heterozygous G-to-A transition in exon 1 of the
KRAS2 gene, resulting in a gly13-to-asp (G13D) substitution and
activation of the protein.

.0004
BLADDER CANCER, TRANSITIONAL CELL, SOMATIC
KRAS, ALA59THR

In a human transitional cell bladder carcinoma cell line (109800),
Grimmond et al. (1992) identified a heterozygous G-to-A transition in
the KRAS2 gene, resulting in an ala59-to-thr (A59T) substitution. The
mutation was present in paraffin-embedded tissue from the primary tumor
of the patient.

.0005
PANCREATIC CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
GASTRIC CANCER, SOMATIC, INCLUDED;;
EPIDERMAL NEVUS, SOMATIC, INCLUDED;;
NEVUS SEBACEOUS, SOMATIC, INCLUDED;;
SCHIMMELPENNING-FEUERSTEIN-MIMS SYNDROME, SOMATIC MOSAIC, INCLUDED
KRAS, GLY12ASP

Motojima et al. (1993) identified mutations in KRAS codon 12 in 46 of 53
pancreatic carcinomas (260350). In 2 of these 46 tumors, the mutations
were gly12-to-asp (G12D) and gly12-to-val (G12V; 190070.0006),
respectively.

Lee et al. (1995) found mutations in codon 12 of the KRAS gene in 9 of
140 cases of gastric cancer (137215); 2 cases had G12D.

Bourdeaut et al. (2010) found somatic mosaicism for the G12D mutation in
a female infant with an epidermal nevus (162900) who developed a
uterovaginal rhabdomyosarcoma at age 6 months. There was also an
incidental finding of micropolycystic kidneys without impaired renal
function. Both the epidermal nevus and the rhabdomyosarcoma carried the
G12D mutation, which was not found in normal dermal tissue, bone, cheek
swap, or lymphocytes. No renal tissue was available for study. The
phenotype was consistent with broad activation of the KRAS pathway.

Groesser et al. (2012) identified a somatic G12D mutation in 2 of 65
(3%) nevus sebaceous tumors (see 162900). One of the tumors also carried
a somatic mutation in the HRAS gene (G13R; 190020.0017). The KRAS G12D
mutation was also found in somatic mosaic state in a patient with
Schimmelpenning-Feuerstein-Mims syndrome (163200) who was originally
reported by Rijntjes-Jacobs et al. (2010). Groesser et al. (2012)
postulated that the mosaic mutation likely extends to extracutaneous
tissues in that disorder, which could explain the phenotypic pleiotropy.

Hafner et al. (2012) identified a somatic G12D mutation in 1 of 72
keratinocytic epidermal nevi.

.0006
PANCREATIC CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
NEVUS SEBACEOUS, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
KRAS, GLY12VAL

See 190070.0005 and Motojima et al. (1993).

Groesser et al. (2012) identified a somatic G12V mutation in 1 (2%) of
65 nevus sebaceous tumors (see 162900). The tumor also carried a somatic
mutation in the HRAS gene (G13R; 190020.0017).

.0007
GASTRIC CANCER, SOMATIC
KRAS, GLY12SER

Lee et al. (1995) found mutations in codon 12 of the KRAS2 gene in 9 of
140 cases of gastric cancer (137215); 7 cases had a G-to-A transition,
resulting in a gly12-to-ser (G12S) substitution.

.0008
LEUKEMIA, ACUTE MYELOGENOUS
KRAS, 3-BP INS, GLY11INS

In the bone marrow of a 4-year-old child with acute myeloid leukemia
(AML; 601626), Bollag et al. (1996) identified an in-frame 3-bp
insertion in exon 1 of the KRAS2 gene, resulting in an insertion of
gly11. Expression of the mutant protein in NIH 3T3 cells caused cellular
transformation, and expression in COS cells activated the
RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway. RAS-GTP levels
measured in COS cells established that this novel mutant accumulates up
to 90% in the GTP state, considerably higher than a residue 12 mutant.
This mutation was the first dominant RAS mutation found in human cancer
that did not involve residues 12, 13, or 61.

.0009
CARDIOFACIOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME 2
KRAS, GLY60ARG

In an individual with CFC syndrome (CFC2; 615278), Niihori et al. (2006)
identified a heterozygous 178G-C transversion in exon 2 of the KRAS2
gene, predicting a gly60-to-arg (G60R) amino acid change.

.0010
CARDIOFACIOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME 2
NOONAN SYNDROME 3, INCLUDED
KRAS, ASP153VAL

In 2 unrelated individuals with CFC syndrome (CFC2; 615278), Niihori et
al. (2006) identified a heterozygous 458A-T transversion in exon 4b of
the KRAS2 gene, predicting an asp153-to-val (D153V) amino acid change.
The D153V mutation was identified in DNA extracted from both blood and
buccal cells of 1 of the individuals. This heterozygous mutation and
G60R (190070.0009) were not found in 100 control chromosomes and were
not found in any parent. The results suggested that these germline
mutations occurred de novo.

Schubbert et al. (2006) found the D153V mutation in a patient who had
been diagnosed with Noonan syndrome-3 (609942). The 18-year-old male had
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, dysplastic mitral valve with prolapse,
Noonan-like features, short stature, mild pectus carinatum, unilateral
cryptorchidism, mild developmental delay, and grand mal seizures.

.0011
NOONAN SYNDROME 3
KRAS, THR58ILE

In a 3-month-old female with Noonan syndrome-3 (609942), Schubbert et
al. (2006) identified a heterozygous 173C-T transition in the KRAS2
gene, resulting in a thr58-to-ile (T58I) substitution. The child had a
severe clinical phenotype and presented with a myeloproliferative
disorder of the juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML; 607785) type.
The mutation was present in the patient's buccal cells but was absent in
parental DNA. Clinical features included atrial septal defect,
ventricular septal defect, valvular pulmonary stenosis, dysmorphic
facial features, short stature, webbed neck, severe developmental delay,
macrocephaly, and sagittal suture synostosis.

Kratz et al. (2009) identified a de novo heterozygous T58I mutation in a
patient with Noonan syndrome who also had craniosynostosis, suggesting a
genotype/phenotype correlation. The findings indicated that dysregulated
RAS signaling may lead to abnormal growth or premature calvarian
closure.

.0012
NOONAN SYNDROME 3
KRAS, VAL14ILE

In 3 of 124 unrelated individuals with Noonan syndrome-3 (609942)
without mutations in PTPN11 (176876), Schubbert et al. (2006) identified
a heterozygous 40G-A transition in the KRAS2 gene, resulting in a
val14-to-ile (V14I) substitution. Each individual showed a mild clinical
phenotype, and none had a history of myeloproliferative disorder or
cancer.

.0013
CARDIOFACIOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME 2
KRAS, PRO34ARG

In a 13-year-old female with the diagnosis of cardiofaciocutaneous
syndrome (CFC2; 615278), Schubbert et al. (2006) found a heterozygous
pro34-to-arg (P34R) mutation in the KRAS2 gene. The patient had pulmonic
stenosis, left ventricular hypertrophy, Noonan-like facial features,
short stature, short neck, broad thorax, lymphedema, chylothorax, left
ptosis, severe developmental delay, and agenesis of the corpus callosum.

.0014
NOONAN SYNDROME 3
KRAS, VAL152GLY

In a 1-year-old girl with the diagnosis of Noonan syndrome-3 (609942),
Carta et al. (2006) identified a 455T-G transversion in the KRAS2 gene,
resulting in a val152-to-gly (V152G) substitution. The patient had
macrocephaly with high and broad forehead, curly and sparse hair,
hypertelorism, strabismus, epicanthic folds, downslanting palpebral
fissures, hypoplastic nasal bridge with bulbous tip of the nose, high
palate and macroglossia, low-set and posteriorly rotated ears, short
neck with redundant skin, wide-set nipples, and umbilical hernia. She
had been born at 32 weeks' gestation by cesarean section after a
pregnancy complicated by a cystic hygroma detected at 12 weeks and
polyhydramnios at 30 weeks. At birth she showed edema of the lower
limbs. The phenotype showed features overlapping Costello syndrome
(218040) (polyhydramnios, neonatal macrosomia, and macrocephaly, loose
skin, and severe failure to thrive) and, to a lesser extent, CFC
syndrome (115150) (macrocephaly and sparse hair).

.0015
NOONAN SYNDROME 3
KRAS, ASP153VAL

In a 14-year-old girl with Noonan syndrome-3 (609942) and some features
of CFC syndrome (115150), Carta et al. (2006) identified a 458A-T
transversion in the KRAS2 gene, resulting in an asp153-to-val (D153V)
substitution. The girl had short stature and growth retardation and
delayed bone age, cardiac defects (moderate ventricular hypertrophy,
mild pulmonic stenosis, and atrial septal defect), dysmorphic features
(hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral fissures, strabismus, low-set and
thick ears, relative macrocephaly with high forehead, and a depressed
nasal bridge), short and mildly webbed neck, wide-set nipples, and
developmental delay. There was hyperpigmentation of the skin and a large
cafe-au-lait spot on the face. Gestation was complicated by
polyhydramnios.

.0016
PILOCYTIC ASTROCYTOMA, SOMATIC
KRAS, GLY13ARG

In 1 of 21 sporadic pilocytic astrocytoma (PA) (see 137800) samples,
Sharma et al. (2005) identified a G-to-C transversion in the KRAS2 gene,
resulting in a gly13-to-arg (G13R) substitution. The tumor arose in the
cortex of an 11-year-old boy; the mutation was not identified in the
germline of the patient. Immunohistochemical studies showed increased
phospho-AKT (see 164730) activity compared to controls in all 21 PA
samples, indicating increased activation of the Ras pathway. No
mutations in the KRAS gene were observed in the other tumors, and none
of the 21 tumors showed mutations in the HRAS (190020) or NRAS (164790)
genes. Of note, the G13R substitution occurs in the same codon as
another KRAS mutation (G13D; 190070.0003) identified in a breast
carcinoma cell line.

.0017
CARDIOFACIOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME 2
KRAS, LYS5ASN

In a 7.5-month-old male infant with a clinical diagnosis of Costello
syndrome (218040), Zenker et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous 15A-T
transversion in exon 1 of the KRAS2 gene, resulting in a lys5-to-asn
(K5N) substitution. The patient had hypertelorism, downslanting
palpebral fissures, coarse facies, pectus carinatum, sparse hair,
redundant skin, and moderate mental retardation. Zenker et al. (2007)
noted that the patient may later develop features of CFC (CFC2; 615278),
which is commonly associated with KRAS mutations, but emphasized that
the findings underscored the central role of Ras in the pathogenesis of
these phenotypically related disorders.

Kerr et al. (2008) commented that the diagnosis of Costello syndrome
should be used only to refer to patients with mutations in the HRAS gene
(190020).

.0018
CARDIOFACIOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME 2
KRAS, PHE156LEU

In a male infant with a clinical diagnosis of Costello syndrome (218040)
who died suddenly at age 14 months, Zenker et al. (2007) identified a
heterozygous 468C-G transversion in the KRAS2 gene, resulting in a
phe156-to-leu (F156L) substitution. The patient had coarse facies,
cardiac defects, sparse hair, loose and redundant skin, developmental
delay, and moderate mental retardation. Zenker et al. (2007) noted that
the patient may later develop features of CFC (CFC2; 615278), which is
commonly associated with KRAS mutations, but emphasized that the
findings underscored the central role of Ras in the pathogenesis of
these phenotypically related disorders.

Kerr et al. (2008) commented that the diagnosis of Costello syndrome
should be used only to refer to patients with mutations in the HRAS gene
(190020).

.0019
NOONAN SYNDROME 3
KRAS, LYS5GLU

In a 20-year-old woman with clinical features typical of Costello
syndrome (218040) and additional findings seen in Noonan syndrome
(609942), Bertola et al. (2007) identified a 194A-G transition in exon 2
of the KRAS gene, resulting in a lys5-to-glu (K5E) substitution. The
mutation was not found in her unaffected mother or brother or in 100
controls.

Kerr et al. (2008) commented that the diagnosis of Costello syndrome
should be used only to refer to patients with mutations in the HRAS gene
(190020).

Bertola et al. (2012) reported a patient with a germline K5E mutation
and dysmorphic features who developed multiple diffuse schwannomas.

.0020
NOONAN SYNDROME 3
KRAS, GLY60SER

In a patient with Noonan syndrome-3 (609942) and craniosynostosis, Kratz
et al. (2009) identified a de novo heterozygous 178G-A transition in the
KRAS gene, resulting in a gly60-to-ser (G60S) substitution. The findings
indicated that dysregulated RAS signaling may lead to abnormal growth or
premature calvarian closure.

A mutation in this same codon (G60R; 190070.0009) has been found in a
patient with cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome (115150).

.0021
CARDIOFACIOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME 2
KRAS, TYR71HIS

In a mother and son with variable features of cardiofaciocutaneous
syndrome (CFC2; 615278), Stark et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous
211T-C transition in exon 3 of the KRAS gene, resulting in a
tyr71-to-his (Y71H) substitution in a highly conserved residue close to
a region that is important for effector and regulator binding. The
mutation was not found in 500 control individuals and was shown by in
vitro studies to increase effector affinity. The son had delayed
psychomotor development and a distinctive appearance, including curly
hair, absent eyebrows, and broad forehead. Echocardiogram was normal at
age 3 years. His mother had a similar physical appearance and also had
high-arched palate, myopia, and mitral valve prolapse. She had attended
a school for children with special needs. Both patients showed signs of
a peripheral sensorimotor axonal neuropathy, more severe in the mother,
who developed Charcot arthropathy of the feet. PMP22 (601097) testing in
the mother was negative, but an additional cause of the neuropathy could
not be excluded. The authors stated that this was the first documented
vertically transmitted KRAS mutation.

.0022
CARDIOFACIOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME 2
KRAS, LYS147GLU

In a girl with variable features of CFC (CFC2; 615278), Stark et al.
(2012) identified a de novo heterozygous 439A-G transition in exon 4 of
the KRAS gene, resulting in a lys147-to-glu (K147E) substitution in a
highly conserved residue close to known mutations. Lys147 is part of a
motif involved in the binding network for guanine nucleotides, which
determine the activation state of RAS proteins. In vitro studies
demonstrated that the K147E mutant protein predominates in the active
GTP-bound form, probably due to facilitated uncatalyzed GDP/GTP
exchange. The patient was 1 of a female dizygotic twin pair; the other
twin was unaffected. The patient had a high birth weight, macrocephaly,
and abnormal craniofacial features, including proptosis, hypertelorism,
downslanting palpebral fissures, low-set ears, and short neck,
suggestive of Noonan syndrome. Reexamination at age 3.5 years showed
coarser facial features more consistent with CFC. She also had
hypertrophy of the interventricular myocardial septum, myocardial
hypertrophy, and pulmonic stenosis. She had mildly delayed development.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Capon et al. (1983); Der and Cooper (1983); Sakaguchi et al. (1984);
Shimizu et al. (1983)
REFERENCE 1. Ahrendt, S. A.; Decker, P. A.; Alawi, E. A.; Zhu, Y.; Sanchez-Cespedes,
M.; Yang, S. C.; Haasler, G. B.; Kajdacsy-Balla, A.; Demeure, M. J.;
Sidransky, D.: Cigarette smoking is strongly associated with mutation
of the K-ras gene in patients with primary adenocarcinoma of the lung. Cancer 92:
1525-1530, 2001.

2. Almoguera, C.; Shibata, D.; Forrester, K.; Martin, J.; Arnheim,
N.; Perucho, M.: Most human carcinomas of the exocrine pancreas contain
mutant c-K-ras genes. Cell 53: 549-554, 1988.

3. Andreyev, H. J. N.; Tilsed, J. V. T.; Cunningham, D.; Sampson,
S. A.; Norman, A. R.; Schneider, H. J.; Clarke, P. A.: K-ras mutations
in patients with early colorectal cancers. Gut 41: 323-329, 1997.

4. Aoki, Y.; Niihori, T.; Kawame, H.; Kurosawa, K.; Ohashi, H.; Tanaka,
Y.; Filocamo, M.; Kato, K.; Suzuki, Y.; Kure, S.; Matsubara, Y.:
Germline mutations in HRAS proto-oncogene cause Costello syndrome. Nature
Genet. 37: 1038-1040, 2005.

5. Barbie, D. A.; Tamayo, P.; Boehm, J. S.; Kim, S. Y.; Moody, S.
E.; Dunn, I. F.; Schinzel, A. C.; Sandy, P.; Meylan, E.; Scholl, C.;
Frohling, S.; Chan, E. M.; and 23 others: Systematic RNA interference
reveals that oncogenic KRAS-driven cancers require TBK1. Nature 462:
108-112, 2009.

6. Bertola, D. R.; Pereira, A. C.; Brasil, A. S.; Albano, L. M. J.;
Kim, C. A.; Krieger, J. E.: Further evidence of genetic heterogeneity
in Costello syndrome: involvement of the KRAS gene. J. Hum. Genet. 52:
521-526, 2007.

7. Bertola, D. R.; Pereira, A. C.; Brasil, A. S.; Suzuki, L.; Leite,
C.; Falzoni, R.; Tannuri, U.; Poplawski, A. B.; Janowski, K. M.; Kim,
C. A.; Messiaen, L. M.: Multiple, diffuse schwannomas in a RASopathy
phenotype patient with germline KRAS mutation: a causal relationship?
(Letter) Clin. Genet. 81: 595-597, 2012.

8. Bezieau, S.; Devilder, M.-C.; Avet-Loiseau, H.; Mellerin, M.-P.;
Puthier, D.; Pennarun, E.; Rapp, M.-J.; Harousseau, J.-L.; Moisan,
J.-P.; Bataille, R.: High incidence of N and K-Ras activating mutations
in multiple myeloma and primary plasma cell leukemia at diagnosis. Hum.
Mutat. 18: 212-224, 2001.

9. Bivona, T. G.; Quatela, S. E.; Bodemann, B. O.; Ahearn, I. M.;
Soskis, M. J.; Mor, A.; Miura, J.; Wiener, H. H.; Wright, L.; Saba,
S. G.; Yim, D.; Fein, A.; Perez de Castro, I.; Li, C.; Thompson, C.
B.; Cox, A. D.; Philips, M. R.: PKC regulates a farnesyl-electrostatic
switch on K-Ras that promotes its association with Bcl-X(L) on mitochondria
and induces apoptosis. Molec. Cell 21: 481-493, 2006.

10. Bollag, G.; Adler, F.; elMasry, N.; McCabe, P. C.; Connor, E.,
Jr.; Thompson, P.; McCormick, F.; Shannon, K.: Biochemical characterization
of a novel KRAS insertion mutation from a human leukemia. J. Biol.
Chem. 271: 32491-32494, 1996.

11. Bourdeaut, F.; Herault, A.; Gentien, D.; Pierron, G.; Ballet,
S.; Reynaud, S.; Paris, R.; Schleiermacher, G.; Baumann, C.; Philippe-Chomette,
P.; Gauthier-Villars, M.; Peuchmaur, M.; Radvanyi, F.; Delattre, O.
: Mosaicism for oncogenic G12D KRAS mutation associated with epidermal
nevus, polycystic kidneys and rhabdomyosarcoma. J. Med. Genet. 47:
859-862, 2010.

12. Burmer, G. C.; Loeb, L. A.: Mutations in the KRAS2 oncogene during
progressive stages of human colon carcinoma. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 86:
2403-2407, 1989.

13. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network: Genomic and epigenomic
landscapes of adult de novo acute myeloid leukemia. New Eng. J. Med. 368:
2059-2074, 2013. Note: Erratum: New Eng. J. Med. 369: 98 only, 2013.

14. Capon, D. J.; Seeburg, P. H.; McGrath, J. P.; Hayflick, J. S.;
Edman, U.; Levinson, A. D.; Goeddel, D. V.: Activation of Ki-ras2
gene in human colon and lung carcinomas by two different point mutations. Nature 304:
507-513, 1983.

15. Carta, C.; Pantaleoni, F.; Bocchinfuso, G.; Stella, L.; Vasta,
I.; Sarkozy, A.; Digilio, C.; Palleschi, A.; Pizzuti, A.; Grammatico,
P.; Zampino, G.; Dallapiccola, B.; Gelb, B. D.; Tartaglia, M.: Germline
missense mutations affecting KRAS isoform B are associated with a
severe Noonan syndrome phenotype. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 79: 129-135,
2006.

16. Chandra, A.; Grecco, H. E.; Pisupati, V.; Perera, D.; Cassidy,
L.; Skoulidis, F.; Ismail, S. A.; Hedberg, C.; Hanzal-Bayer, M.; Venkitaraman,
A. R.; Wittinghofer, A.; Bastiaens, P. I. H.: The GDI-like solubilizing
factor PDE-delta sustains the spatial organization and signalling
of Ras family proteins. Nature Cell Biol. 14: 148-158, 2012. Note:
Erratum: Nature Cell Biol. 14: 329 only, 2012.

17. Chang, E. H.; Gonda, M. A.; Ellis, R. W.; Scolnick, E. M.; Lowy,
D. R.: Human genome contains four genes homologous to transforming
genes of Harvey and Kirsten murine sarcoma viruses. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 79: 4848-4852, 1982.

18. Collado, M.; Gil, J.; Efeyan, A.; Guerra, C.; Schuhmacher, A.
J.; Barradas, M.; Benguria, A.; Zaballos, A.; Flores, J. M.; Barbacid,
M.; Beach, D.; Serrano, M.: Senescence in premalignant tumours. (Letter) Nature 436:
642 only, 2005.

19. Costa, R. M.; Federov, N. B.; Kogan, J. H.; Murphy, G. G.; Stern,
J.; Ohno, M.; Kucherlapati, R.; Jacks, T.; Silva, A. J.: Mechanism
for the learning deficits in a mouse model of neurofibromatosis type
1. Nature 415: 526-530, 2002.

20. Cubilla, A. L.; Fitzgerald, P. J.: Morphological lesions associated
with human primary invasive nonendocrine pancreas cancer. Cancer
Res. 36: 2690-2698, 1976.

21. Der, C. J.; Cooper, G. M.: Altered gene products are associated
with activation of cellular ras-k genes in human lung and colon carcinomas. Cell 32:
201-208, 1983.

22. Der, C. J.; Krontiris, T. G.; Cooper, G. M.: Transforming genes
of human bladder and lung carcinoma cell lines are homologous to the
ras genes of Harvey and Kirsten sarcoma viruses. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 79: 3637-3640, 1982.

23. Diaz, L. A., Jr.; Williams, R. T.; Wu, J.; Kinde, I.; Hecht, J.
R.; Berlin, J.; Allen, B.; Bozic, I.; Reiter, J. G.; Nowak, M. A.;
Kinzler, K. W.; Oliner, K. S.; Vogelstein, B.: The molecular evolution
of acquired resistance to targeted EGFR blockade in colorectal cancers. Nature 486:
537-540, 2012.

24. Dinulescu, D. M.; Ince, T. A.; Quade, B. J.; Shafer, S. A.; Crowley,
D.; Jacks, T.: Role of K-ras and Pten in the development of mouse
models of endometriosis and endometrioid ovarian cancer. Nature Med. 11:
63-70, 2005.

25. Feig, L. A.; Bast, R. C., Jr.; Knapp, R. C.; Cooper, G. M.: Somatic
activation of ras-K gene in a human ovarian carcinoma. Science 223:
698-701, 1984.

26. Gazin, C.; Wajapeyee, N.; Gobeil, S.; Virbasius, C.-M.; Green,
M. R.: An elaborate pathway required for Ras-mediated epigenetic
silencing. Nature 449: 1073-1077, 2007.

27. Grimmond, S. M.; Raghavan, D.; Russell, P. J.: Detection of a
rare point mutation in Ki-ras of a human bladder cancer xenograft
by polymerase chain reaction and direct sequencing. Urol. Res. 20:
121-126, 1992.

28. Groesser, L.; Herschberger, E.; Ruetten, A.; Ruivenkamp, C.; Lopriore,
E.; Zutt, M.; Langmann, T.; Singer, S.; Klingseisen, L.; Schneider-Brachert,
W.; Toll, A.; Real, F. X.; Landthaler, M.; Hafner, C.: Postzygotic
HRAS and KRAS mutations cause nevus sebaceous and Schimmelpenning
syndrome. Nature Genet. 44: 783-787, 2012.

29. Hafner, C.; Toll, A.; Gantner, S.; Mauerer, A.; Lurkin, I.; Acquadro,
F.; Fernandez-Casado, A.; Zwarthoff, E. C.; Dietmaier, W.; Baselga,
E.; Parera, E.; Vicente, A.; Casanova, A.; Cigudosa, J.; Mentzel,
T.; Pujol, R.  M.; Landthaler, M.; Real, F. X.: Keratinocytic epidermal
nevi are associated with mosaic RAS mutations. J. Med. Genet. 49:
249-253, 2012.

30. Haigis, K. M.; Kendall, K. R.; Wang, Y.; Cheung, A.; Haigis, M.
C.; Glickman, J. N.; Niwa-Kawakita, M.; Sweet-Cordero, A.; Sebolt-Leopold,
J.; Shannon, K. M.; Settleman, J.; Giovannini, M.; Jacks, T.: Differential
effects of oncogenic K-Ras and N-Ras on proliferation, differentiation
and tumor progression in the colon. Nature Genet. 40: 600-608, 2008.

31. Hayashi, N.; Sugai, S.; Ito, I.; Nakamori, S.; Ogawa, M.; Nakamura,
Y.: Ethnic difference in the pattern of K-ras oncogene mutations
in human colorectal cancers. Hum. Mutat. 8: 258-261, 1996.

32. Heo, W. D.; Inoue, T.; Park, W. S.; Kim, M. L.; Park, B. O.; Wandless,
T. J.; Meyer, T.: PI(3,4,5)P(3) and PI(4,5)P(2) lipids target proteins
with polybasic clusters to the plasma membrane. Science 314: 1458-1461,
2006.

33. Holland, E. C.; Celestino, J.; Dai, C.; Schaefer, L.; Sawaya,
R. E.; Fuller, G. N.: Combined activation of Ras and Akt in neural
progenitors induces glioblastoma formation in mice. Nature Genet. 25:
55-57, 2000.

34. Hruban, R. H.; Goggins, M.; Parsons, J.; Kern, S. E.: Genetic
progression in the pancreatic ducts. (Commentary) Clin. Cancer Res. 6:
2969-2972, 2000.

35. Hruban, R. H.; van Mansfield, A. D. M.; Offerhaus, G. J. A.; van
Weering, D. H. J.; Allison, D. C.; Goodman, S. N.; Kensler, T. W.;
Bose, K. K.; Cameron, J. L.; Bos, J. L.: K-ras oncogene activation
in adenocarcinoma of the human pancreas: a study of 82 carcinomas
using a combination of mutant-enriched polymerase chain reaction analysis
and allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization. Am. J. Path. 143:
545-554, 1993.

36. Hruban, R. H.; Wilentz, R. E.; Kern, S. E.: Genetic progression
in the pancreatic ducts. Am. J. Path. 156: 1821-1825, 2000.

37. Jackson, E. L.; Willis, N.; Mercer, K.; Bronson, R. T.; Crowley,
D.; Montoya, R.; Jacks, T.; Tuveson, D. A.: Analysis of lung tumor
initiation and progression using conditional expression of oncogenic
K-ras. Genes Dev. 15: 3243-3248, 2001.

38. Johnson, L.; Mercer, K.; Greenbaum, D.; Bronson, R. T.; Crowley,
D.; Tuveson, D. A.; Jacks, T.: Somatic activation of the K-ras oncogene
causes early onset lung cancer in mice. Nature 410: 1111-1116, 2001.

39. Johnson, S. M.; Grosshans, H.; Shingara, J.; Byrom, M.; Jarvis,
R.; Cheng, A.; Labourier, E.; Reinert, K. L.; Brown, D.; Slack, F.
J.: RAS is regulated by the let-7 microRNA family. Cell 120: 635-647,
2005.

40. Junttila, M. R.; Karnezis, A. N.; Garcia, D.; Madriles, F.; Kortlever,
R. M.; Rostker, F.; Swigart, L. B.; Pham, D. M.; Seo, Y.; Evan, G.
I.; Martins, C. P.: Selective activation of p53-mediated tumour suppression
in high-grade tumours. Nature 468: 567-571, 2010.

41. Kerr, B.; Allanson, J.; Delrue, M. A.; Gripp, K. W.; Lacombe,
D.; Lin, A. E.; Rauen, K. A.: The diagnosis of Costello syndrome:
nomenclature in Ras/MAPK pathway disorders. (Letter) Am. J. Med.
Genet. 146A: 1218-1220, 2008.

42. Kim, I.-J.; Park, J.-H.; Kang, H. C.; Shin, Y.; Park, H.-W.; Park,
H.-R.; Ku, J.-L.; Lim, S.-B.; Park, J.-G.: Mutational analysis of
BRAF and K-ras in gastric cancers: absence of BRAF mutations in gastric
cancers. Hum. Genet. 114: 118-120, 2003.

43. Kozma, S. C.; Bogaard, M. E.; Buser, K.; Saurer, S. M.; Bos, J.
L.; Groner, B.; Hynes, N. E.: The human c-Kirsten ras gene is activated
by a novel mutation in codon 13 in the breast carcinoma cell line
MDA-MB231. Nucleic Acids Res. 15: 5963-5971, 1987.

44. Kranenburg, O.: The KRAS oncogene: past, present, and future. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1756: 81-82, 2005.

45. Kratz, C. P.; Zampino, G.; Kriek, M.; Kant, S. G.; Leoni, C.;
Pantaleoni, F.; Oudesluys-Murphy, A. M.; Di Rocco, C.; Kloska, S.
P.; Tartaglia, M.; Zenker, M.: Craniosynostosis in patients with
Noonan syndrome caused by germline KRAS mutations. Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A:
1036-1040, 2009.

46. Laghi, L.; Orbetegli, O.; Bianchi, P.; Zerbi, A.; Di Carlo, V.;
Boland, C. R.; Malesci, A.: Common occurrence of multiple K-RAS mutations
in pancreatic cancers with associated precursor lesions and in biliary
cancers. Oncogene 21: 4301-4306, 2002.

47. Lee, K.-H.; Lee, J.-S.; Suh, C.; Kim, S.-W.; Kim, S.-B.; Lee,
J.-H.; Lee, M.-S.; Park, M.-Y.; Sun, H.-S.; Kim, S.-H.: Clinicopathologic
significance of the K-ras gene codon 12 point mutation in stomach
cancer: an analysis of 140 cases. Cancer 75: 2794-2801, 1995.

48. Liu, E.; Hjelle, B.; Morgan, R.; Hecht, F.; Bishop, J. M.: Mutations
of the Kirsten-ras proto-oncogene in human preleukaemia. Nature 330:
186-188, 1987.

49. Matallanas, D.; Arozarena, I.; Berciano, M. T.; Aaronson, D. S.;
Pellicer, A.; Lafarga, M.; Crespo, P.: Differences on the inhibitory
specificities of H-Ras, K-Ras, and N-Ras (N17) dominant negative mutants
are related to their membrane microlocalization. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
4572-4581, 2003.

50. McBride, O. W.; Swand, D. C.; Tronick, S. R.; Gol, R.; Klimanis,
D.; Moore, D. E.; Aaronson, S. A.: Regional chromosomal localization
of N-ras, K-ras-1, K-ras-2 and myb oncogenes in human cells. Nucleic
Acids Res. 11: 8221-8236, 1983.

51. McCoy, M. S.; Toole, J. J.; Cunningham, J. M.; Chang, E. H.; Lowy,
D. R.; Weinberg, R. A.: Characterization of a human colon/lung carcinoma
oncogene. Nature 302: 79-81, 1983.

52. McGrath, J. P.; Capon, D. J.; Smith, D. H.; Chen, E. Y.; Seeburg,
P. H.; Goeddel, D. V.; Levinson, A. D.: Structure and organization
of the human Ki-ras proto-oncogene and a related processed pseudogene. Nature 304:
501-506, 1983.

53. Meylan, E.; Dooley, A. L.; Feldser, D. M.; Shen, L.; Turk, E.;
Ouyang, C.; Jacks, T.: Requirement for NF-kappa-B signalling in a
mouse model of lung adenocarcinoma. Nature 462: 104-107, 2009.

54. Misale, S.; Yaeger, R.; Hobor, S.; Scala, E.; Janakiraman, M.;
Liska, D.; Valtorta, E.; Schiavo, R.; Buscarino, M.; Siravegna, G.;
Bencardino, K.; Cercek, A.; and 14 others: Emergence of KRAS mutations
and acquired resistance to anti-EGFR therapy in colorectal cancer. Nature 486:
532-536, 2012.

55. Motojima, K.; Urano, T.; Nagata, Y.; Shiku, H.; Tsurifune, T.;
Kanematsu, T.: Detection of point mutations in the Kirsten-ras oncogene
provides evidence for the multicentricity of pancreatic carcinoma. Ann.
Surg. 217: 138-143, 1993.

56. Muller, R.; Slamon, D. J.; Adamson, E. D.; Tremblay, J. M.; Muller,
D.; Cline, M. J.; Verma, I. M.: Transcription of c-onc genes c-ras(Ki)
and c-fms during mouse development. Molec. Cell. Biol. 3: 1062-1069,
1983.

57. Nakano, H.; Yamamoto, F.; Neville, C.; Evans, D.; Mizuno, T.;
Perucho, M.: Isolation of transforming sequences of two human lung
carcinomas: structural and functional analysis of the activated c-K-ras
oncogenes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 81: 71-75, 1984.

58. Niihori, T.; Aoki, Y.; Narumi, Y.; Neri, G.; Cave, H.; Verloes,
A.; Okamoto, N.; Hennekam, R. C. M.; Gillessen-Kaesbach, G.; Wieczorek,
D.; Kavamura, M.I.; Kurosawa, K.; and 12 others: Germline KRAS
and BRAF mutations in cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome. Nature Genet. 38:
294-296, 2006.

59. Nikiforova, M. N.; Lynch, R. A.; Biddinger, P. W.; Alexander,
E. K.; Dorn, G. W., II; Tallini, G.; Kroll, T. G.; Nikiforov, Y. E.
: RAS point mutations and PAX8-PPAR-gamma rearrangement in thyroid
tumors: evidence for distinct molecular pathways in thyroid follicular
carcinoma. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 2318-2326, 2003.

60. O'Brien, S. J.; Nash, W. G.; Goodwin, J. L.; Lowry, D. R.; Chang,
E. H.: Dispersion of the ras family of transforming genes to four
different chromosomes in man. Nature 302: 839-842, 1983.

61. O'Connell, P.; Leppert, M.; Hoff, M.; Kumlin, E.; Thomas, W.;
Cai, G.; Law, M.; White, R.: A linkage map for human chromosome 12.
(Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 37: A169 only, 1985.

62. Oliveira, C.; Westra, J. L.; Arango, D.; Ollikainen, M.; Domingo,
E.; Ferreira, A.; Velho, S.; Niessen, R.; Lagerstedt, K.; Alhopuro,
P.; Laiho, P.; Veiga, I.; and 16 others: Distinct patterns of KRAS
mutations in colorectal carcinomas according to germline mismatch
repair defects and hMLH1 methylation status. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13:
2303-2311, 2004.

63. Otori, K.; Oda, Y.; Sugiyama, K.; Hasebe, T.; Mukai, K.; Fujii,
T.; Tajiri, H.; Yoshida, S.; Fukushima, S.; Esumi, H.: High frequency
of K-ras mutations in human colorectal hyperplastic polyps. Gut 40:
660-663, 1997.

64. Pfeifer, G. P.: A new verdict for an old convict. Nature Genet. 29:
3-4, 2001.

65. Poliseno, L.; Salmena, L.; Zhang, J.; Carver, B.; Haveman, W.
J.; Pandolfi, P. P.: A coding-independent function of gene and pseudogene
mRNAs regulates tumour biology. Nature 465: 1033-1038, 2010.

66. Popescu, N. C.; Amsbaugh, S. C.; DiPaolo, J. A.; Tronick, S. R.;
Aaronson, S. A.; Swan, D. C.: Chromosomal localization of three human
ras genes by in situ molecular hybridization. Somat. Cell Molec.
Genet. 11: 149-155, 1985.

67. Porta, M.; Malats, N.; Jariod, M.; Grimalt, J. O.; Rifa, J.; Carrato,
A.; Guarner, L.; Salas, A.; Santiago-Silva, M.; Corominas, J. M.;
Andreu, M.; Real, F. X.: Serum concentrations of organochlorine compounds
and K-ras mutations in exocrine pancreatic cancer. Lancet 354: 2125-2129,
1999.

68. Pulciani, S.; Santos, E.; Lauver, A. V.; Long, L. K.; Aaronson,
S. A.; Barbacid, M.: Oncogene in solid human tumors. Nature 300:
539-542, 1982.

69. Rajagopalan, H.; Bardelli, A.; Lengauer, C.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein,
B.; Velculescu, V. E.: RAF/RAS oncogenes and mismatch-repair status.
(Letter) Nature 418: 934 only, 2002.

70. Rijntjes-Jacobs, E. G. J.; Lopriore, E.; Steggerda, S. J.; Kant,
S. G.: Walther, F. J.: Discordance for Schimmelpenning-Feuerstein-Mims
syndrome in monochorionic twins supports the concept of a postzygotic
mutation. Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A: 2816-2819, 2010.

71. Rodenhuis, S.; van de Wetering, M. L.; Mooi, W. J.; Evers, S.
G.; van Zandwijk, N.; Bos, J. L.: Mutational activation of the K-RAS
oncogene: a possible pathogenetic factor in adenocarcinoma of the
lung. New Eng. J. Med. 317: 929-935, 1987.

72. Sakaguchi, A. Y.; Zabel, B. U.; Grzeschik, K. H.; Law, M. L.;
Ellis, R. W.; Skolnick, E. M.; Naylor, S. L.: Regional localization
of two human cellular Kirsten ras genes on chromosomes 6 and 12. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 4: 989-993, 1984.

73. Santos, E.; Martin-Zanca, D.; Reddy, E. P.; Pierotti, M. A.; Della
Porta, G.; Barbacid, M.: Malignant activation of a K-ras oncogene
in lung carcinoma but not in normal tissue of the same patient. Science 223:
661-664, 1984.

74. Schubbert, S.; Zenker, M.; Rowe, S. L.; Boll, S.; Klein, C.; Bollag,
G.; van der Burgt, I.; Musante, L.; Kalscheuer, V.; Wehner, L.-E.;
Nguyen, H.; West, B.; Zhang, K. Y. J.; Sistermans, E.; Rauch, A.;
Niemeyer, C. M.; Shannon, K.; Kratz, C. P.: Germline KRAS mutations
cause Noonan syndrome. Nature Genet. 38: 331-336, 2006. Note: Erratum:
Nature Genet. 38: 598 only, 2006.

75. Schulz, A. L.; Albrecht, B.; Arici, C.; van der Burgt, I.; Buske,
A.; Gillessen-Kaesbach, G.; Heller, R.; Horn, D.; Hubner, C. A.; Korenke,
G. C.; Konig, R.; Kress, W.; and 15 others: Mutation and phenotypic
spectrum in patients with cardio-facio-cutaneous and Costello syndrome Clin.
Genet. 73: 62-70, 2008.

76. Sharma, M. K.; Zehnbauer, B. A.; Watson, M. A.; Gutmann, D. H.
: RAS pathway activation and an oncogenic RAS mutation in sporadic
pilocytic astrocytoma. Neurology 65: 1335-1336, 2005.

77. Shimizu, K.; Birnbaum, D.; Ruley, M. A.; Fasano, O.; Suard, Y.;
Edlund, L.; Taparowsky, E.; Goldfarb, M.; Wigler, M.: Structure of
the Ki-ras gene of the human lung carcinoma cell line Calu-1. Nature 304:
497-500, 1983.

78. Sidransky, D.; Tokino, T.; Hamilton, S. R.; Kinzler, K. W.; Levin,
B.; Frost, P.; Vogelstein, B.: Identification of RAS oncogene mutations
in the stool of patients with curable colorectal tumors. Science 256:
102-105, 1992.

79. Smit, V. T. H. B. M.; Boot, A. J. M.; Smits, A. M. M.; Fleuren,
G. J.; Cornelisse, C. J.; Bos, J. L.: KRAS codon 12 mutations occur
very frequently in pancreatic adenocarcinomas. Nucleic Acids Res. 16:
7773-7782, 1988.

80. Sommerer, F.; Hengge, U. R.; Markwarth, A.; Vomschloss, S.; Stolzenburg,
J.-U.; Wittekind, C.; Tannapfel, A.: Mutations of BRAF and RAS are
rare events in germ cell tumours. Int. J. Cancer 113: 329-335, 2005.

81. Stark, Z.; Gillessen-Kaesbach, G.; Ryan, M. M.; Cirstea, I. C.;
Gremer, L.; Ahmadian, M. R.; Savarirayan, R.; Zenker, M.: Two novel
germline KRAS mutations: expanding the molecular and clinical phenotype. Clin.
Genet. 81: 590-594, 2012.

82. Takeda, S.; Ichii, S.; Nakamura, Y.: Detection of K-ras mutation
in sputum by mutant-allele-specific amplification (MASA). Hum. Mutat. 2:
112-117, 1993.

83. To, M. D.; Wong, C. E.; Karnezis, A. N.; Del Rosario, R.; Di Lauro,
R.; Balmain, A.: Kras regulatory elements and exon 4A determine mutation
specificity in lung cancer. Nature Genet. 40: 1240-1244, 2008.

84. Vasko, V.; Ferrand, M.; Di Cristofaro, J.; Carayon, P.; Henry,
J. F.; De Micco, C.: Specific pattern of RAS oncogene mutations in
follicular thyroid tumors. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 2745-2752,
2003.

85. Weinberg, R. A.: Fewer and fewer oncogenes. Cell 30: 3-4, 1982.

86. Wu, M.; Pastor-Pareja, J. C.; Xu, T.: Interaction between Ras(V12)
and scribbled clones induces tumour growth and invasion. Nature 463:
545-548, 2010.

87. Yanez, L.; Groffen, J.; Valenzuela, D. M.: c-K-ras mutations
in human carcinomas occur preferentially in codon 12. Oncogene 1:
315-318, 1987.

88. Yeung, T.; Terebiznik, M.; Yu, L.; Silvius, J.; Abidi, W. M.;
Philips, M.; Levine, T.; Kapus, A.; Grinstein, S.: Receptor activation
alters inner surface potential during phagocytosis. Science 313:
347-351, 2006.

89. Yun, J.; Rago, C.; Cheong, I.; Pagliarini, R.; Angenendt, P.;
Rajagopalan, H.; Schmidt, K.; Willson, J. K. V.; Markowitz, S.; Zhou,
S.; Diaz, L. A., Jr.; Velculescu, V. E.; Lengauer, C.; Kinzler, K.
W.; Vogelstein, B.; Papadopoulos, N.: Glucose deprivation contributes
to the development of KRAS pathway mutations in tumor cells. Science 325:
1555-1559, 2009.

90. Zenker, M.; Lehmann, K.; Schulz, A. L.; Barth, H.; Hansmann, D.;
Koenig, R.; Korinthenberg, R.; Kreiss-Nachtsheim, M.; Meinecke, P.;
Morlot, S.; Mundlos, S.; Quante, A. S.; Raskin, S.; Schnabel, D.;
Wehner, L.-E.; Kratz, C. P.; Horn, D.; Kutsche, K.: Expansion of
the genotypic and phenotypic spectrum in patients with KRAS germline
mutations. J. Med. Genet. 44: 131-135, 2007.

91. Zhang, H.; Liu, X.; Zhang, K.; Chen, C.-K.; Frederick, J. M.;
Prestwich, G. D.; Baehr, W.: Photoreceptor cGMP phosphodiesterase
delta subunit (PDE-delta) functions as a prenyl-binding protein. J.
Biol. Chem. 279: 407-413, 2004.

92. Zhang, Z.; Wang, Y.; Vikis, H. G.; Johnson, L.; Liu, G.; Li, J.;
Anderson, M. W.; Sills, R. C.; Hong, H. L.; Devereux, T. R.; Jacks,
T.; Guan, K.-L.; You, M.: Wildtype Kras2 can inhibit lung carcinogenesis
in mice. Nature Genet. 29: 25-33, 2001.

93. Zimmerman, G.; Papke, B.; Ismail, S.; Vartak, N.; Chandra, A.;
Hoffmann, M.; Hahn, S. A.; Triola, G.; Wittinghofer, A.; Bastiaens,
P. I. H.; Waldmann, H.: Small molecule inhibition of the KRAS-PDE-delta
interaction impairs oncogenic KRAS signalling. Nature 497: 638-642,
2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/9/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/30/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/25/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/17/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/28/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/29/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/21/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/3/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/17/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/9/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/29/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/27/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/13/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/1/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/3/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/20/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/29/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/17/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/12/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/5/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 3/8/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/2/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/15/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/8/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/28/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/13/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/10/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/28/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/24/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/7/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 3/28/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/22/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/16/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 9/2/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/17/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/15/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/13/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/26/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/4/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/24/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/23/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/28/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/11/2000
Paul Brennan - updated: 7/31/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/27/1998
Paul Brennan - updated: 11/14/1997
Victor A. McKusick - edited: 3/3/1997
Mark H. Paalman - edited: 1/10/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED alopez: 07/09/2013
alopez: 7/9/2013
alopez: 7/8/2013
alopez: 6/20/2013
alopez: 2/6/2013
ckniffin: 1/30/2013
carol: 7/26/2012
carol: 7/25/2012
ckniffin: 7/25/2012
alopez: 7/19/2012
terry: 7/17/2012
terry: 7/3/2012
carol: 7/2/2012
ckniffin: 6/28/2012
terry: 4/9/2012
alopez: 3/7/2012
carol: 12/8/2011
carol: 11/29/2011
terry: 3/10/2011
wwang: 3/1/2011
ckniffin: 2/21/2011
alopez: 2/7/2011
terry: 2/3/2011
terry: 11/3/2010
alopez: 8/20/2010
terry: 8/17/2010
alopez: 3/9/2010
terry: 3/9/2010
alopez: 1/6/2010
terry: 12/29/2009
carol: 11/23/2009
wwang: 11/6/2009
ckniffin: 10/27/2009
alopez: 10/23/2009
terry: 10/13/2009
joanna: 9/14/2009
wwang: 6/3/2009
terry: 6/1/2009
wwang: 3/5/2009
ckniffin: 3/3/2009
alopez: 2/6/2009
carol: 2/6/2009
terry: 1/20/2009
alopez: 7/31/2008
terry: 7/29/2008
wwang: 3/19/2008
ckniffin: 3/17/2008
alopez: 11/14/2007
terry: 11/12/2007
carol: 9/10/2007
carol: 9/6/2007
alopez: 4/13/2007
terry: 4/5/2007
carol: 3/8/2007
ckniffin: 3/8/2007
ckniffin: 3/2/2007
wwang: 2/19/2007
ckniffin: 2/15/2007
alopez: 2/8/2007
terry: 2/1/2007
alopez: 12/7/2006
terry: 11/28/2006
alopez: 6/16/2006
terry: 6/13/2006
mgross: 4/14/2006
terry: 4/10/2006
wwang: 3/30/2006
terry: 3/28/2006
alopez: 3/3/2006
terry: 2/24/2006
alopez: 9/14/2005
terry: 9/7/2005
alopez: 7/14/2005
carol: 5/27/2005
mgross: 3/28/2005
tkritzer: 3/22/2005
tkritzer: 12/16/2003
cwells: 11/6/2003
alopez: 9/2/2003
terry: 1/2/2003
terry: 11/22/2002
alopez: 9/17/2002
tkritzer: 8/21/2002
tkritzer: 8/19/2002
terry: 8/15/2002
terry: 3/5/2002
alopez: 2/5/2002
alopez: 1/22/2002
carol: 1/3/2002
mcapotos: 12/19/2001
terry: 12/13/2001
carol: 10/4/2001
mcapotos: 10/3/2001
terry: 9/26/2001
alopez: 9/4/2001
alopez: 8/27/2001
terry: 8/24/2001
alopez: 4/25/2001
terry: 4/23/2001
alopez: 5/1/2000
terry: 4/28/2000
alopez: 2/15/2000
terry: 2/11/2000
mgross: 6/22/1999
alopez: 9/22/1998
terry: 7/24/1998
dkim: 7/23/1998
psherman: 3/27/1998
dholmes: 3/6/1998
alopez: 11/26/1997
alopez: 11/17/1997
alopez: 11/14/1997
mark: 3/3/1997
mark: 1/10/1997
terry: 11/6/1996
terry: 10/31/1996
mark: 8/10/1995
mimadm: 6/7/1995
carol: 11/1/1993
carol: 6/30/1993
carol: 6/22/1993
carol: 6/7/1993

611338	TITLE *611338 AUTOPHAGY 4, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF, B; ATG4B
;;APG4, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF, B; APG4B;;
AUTOPHAGIN 1;;
AUTL1;;
KIAA0943
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Autophagy is the biologic process leading to intracellular destruction
of endogenous proteins and removal of damaged organelles. ATG4B is a
homolog of yeast Apg4, a cysteine protease involved in autophagy (Marino
et al., 2003).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned ATG4B, which they designated
KIAA0943. The transcript contains a repetitive element in its 3-prime
UTR. RT-PCR ELISA detected moderate expression in all adult and fetal
tissues and specific brain regions examined.

By searching for sequences similar to yeast Apg4, followed by PCR of
human cDNA libraries, Marino et al. (2003) cloned ATG4B, which they
called autophagin-1. The deduced 393-amino acid protein contains a
putative active-site cysteine at position 74. ATG4B shares significant
similarity with yeast Apg4, except for divergence at its N- and
C-terminal ends. The absence of an N-terminal signal sequence suggests
that ATG4B is a cytoplasmic enzyme. Northern blot analysis detected a
4.5-kb transcript that was highly expressed in skeletal muscle, with
lower expression in heart, liver, and pancreas. No expression was
detected in fetal tissues. ATG4B was widely expressed in tumor cell
lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Marino et al. (2003) showed that autophagin-1 could complement Apg4
deficiency in yeast, restoring the phenotypic and biochemical
characteristics of autophagic cells.

Apg8 is a ubiquitin-like protein involved in autophagy in yeast, and
there are at least 4 mammalian Apg8 homologs: GATE16 (GABARAPL2;
607452), GABARAP (605125), MAP1LC3 (see 601242), and APG8L (GABARAPL1;
607420). Hemelaar et al. (2003) found that mouse Atg4b acted on the C
termini of these 4 Atg8 homologs, and that the reaction required the
active-site cysteine of Atg4b. Although the amino acid sequences of
these Apg8 homologs differ from one another by as much as 71%, their
affinities for Atg4b were roughly comparable in competition experiments.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Sugawara et al. (2005) reported the crystal structure of human ATG4B at
1.9-angstrom resolution. The ATG4B structure showed a classical papain
(see CTSF; 603539)-like fold and a small alpha/beta-fold domain, similar
to those of ubiquitin-specific proteases, that may be the binding site
for Atg8 homologs. The active-site cleft of ATG4B, which contains the
catalytic triad of cys74, asp278, and his280, is masked by a loop,
implying that a conformational change occurs upon substrate binding.
Mutation of cys74, asp278, or his280 resulted in complete loss of
protease activity.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Marino et al. (2003) mapped the ATG4B gene
to chromosome 2q37.

REFERENCE 1. Hemelaar, J.; Lelyveld, V. S.; Kessler, B. M.; Ploegh, H. L.:
A single protease, Apg4B, is specific for the autophagy-related ubiquitin-like
proteins GATE-16, MAP1-LC3, GABARAP, and Apg8L. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
51841-51850, 2003.

2. Marino, G.; Uria, J. A.; Puente, X. S.; Quesada, V.; Bordallo,
J.; Lopez-Otin, C.: Human autophagins, a family of cysteine proteinases
potentially implicated in cell degradation by autophagy. J. Biol.
Chem. 278: 3671-3678, 2003.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

4. Sugawara, K.; Suzuki, N. N.; Fujioka, Y.; Mizushima, N.; Ohsumi,
Y.; Inagaki, F.: Structural basis for the specificity and catalysis
of human Atg4B responsible for the mammalian autophagy. J. Biol.
Chem. 280: 40058-40065, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/16/2007

EDITED mgross: 08/16/2007

608130	TITLE *608130 NUAK FAMILY, SNF1-LIKE KINASE, 1; NUAK1
;;AMPK-RELATED PROTEIN KINASE 5; ARK5;;
KIAA0537
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1998) cloned KIAA0537. The deduced 661-amino
acid protein shares about 52% identity over 252 amino acids with plant
SNF1-related protein kinase (605705). The KIAA0537 protein had an
apparent molecular mass of about 75 kD by SDS-PAGE. RT-PCR detected
highest expression in heart and brain, followed by skeletal muscle,
kidney, ovary, placenta, lung, and liver. Little to no expression was
detected in other tissues examined.

Suzuki et al. (2003) found that an antibody directed against SNARK
(608131) cross-reacted with a 74-kD protein that they called ARK5. By
screening databases, they determined that KIAA0537 and ARK5 are
identical. Overall, SNARK and ARK5 share 55% amino acid homology,
including 84% similarity within the N-terminal catalytic domains. ARK5
also shares significant homology with several other AMP-activated
protein kinases, including AMPK-alpha-1 (PRKAA1; 602739), AMPK-alpha-2
(PRKAA2; 600497), and MELK (607025).

GENE FUNCTION

By in vitro assay of ARK5 expressed by transfected HepG2 colon cancer
cells, Suzuki et al. (2003) demonstrated phosphorylation of a synthetic
test peptide. The phosphorylation was stimulated by AMP and did not
require accessory binding proteins. Transfection of ARK5 also increased
the survival of HepG2 cells exposed to glucose starvation and reduced
oxygen tension. Increased cell survival was accompanied by
phosphorylation of ARK5 on ser600 by AKT (see 164730), which activated
ARK5 kinase activity. Activated ARK5 phosphorylated ATM (607585), which
led to phosphorylation of p53 (191170). The authors proposed that ARK5
is a tumor cell survival factor that is activated by AKT and acts as an
ATM kinase under conditions of nutrient starvation.

Liu et al. (2012) showed in human and murine cell lines that oncogenic
levels of MYC (190080) establish a dependence on ARK5 for maintaining
metabolic homeostasis and for cell survival. ARK5 is an upstream
regulator of AMPK and limits protein synthesis via the mTOR complex-1
(see 601231) signaling pathway. ARK5 also maintains expression of
mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes and respiratory capacity,
which is required for efficient glutamine metabolism. Inhibition of ARK5
leads to a collapse of cellular ATP levels in cells expressing
deregulated MYC, inducing multiple proapoptotic responses as a secondary
consequence. Depletion of ARK5 prolonged survival in MYC-driven mouse
models of hepatocellular carcinoma, demonstrating that targeting
cellular energy homeostasis is a valid therapeutic strategy to eliminate
tumor cells that express deregulated MYC.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the NUAK1 gene
to chromosome 12.

REFERENCE 1. Liu, L.; Ulbrich, J.; Muller, J.; Wustefeld, T.; Aeberhard, L.;
Kress, T. R.; Muthalagu, N.; Rycak, L.; Rudalska, R.; Mull, R.; Kempa
S.; Zender, L.; Eilers, M.; Murphy, D. J.: Deregulated MYC expression
induces dependence upon AMPK-related kinase 5. Nature 483: 608-612,
2012.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.;
Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified
human genes. IX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from
brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 31-39,
1998.

3. Suzuki, A.; Kusakai, G.; Kishimoto, A.; Lu, J.; Ogura, T.; Lavin,
M. F.; Esumi, H.: Identification of a novel protein kinase mediating
Akt survival signaling to the ATM protein. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 48-53,
2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/15/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/29/2003

EDITED alopez: 05/16/2012
alopez: 5/15/2012
terry: 5/15/2012
mgross: 9/29/2003

190182	TITLE *190182 TRANSFORMING GROWTH FACTOR-BETA RECEPTOR, TYPE II; TGFBR2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening a human hepatoma cell cDNA library with a porcine TGFBR2
cDNA as probe, Lin et al. (1992) isolated a TGFBR2 cDNA encoding a
deduced 567-amino acid protein. The protein contains a predicted
cysteine-rich extracellular domain, a single hydrophobic transmembrane
domain, and a cytoplasmic serine/threonine kinase domain. The human and
porcine proteins share 88% sequence identity.

GENE FUNCTION

Growth factor-induced protein phosphorylation plays a key role in the
signal transduction that leads to mitogenic responses. Most growth
factor receptors are transmembrane tyrosine kinases or are associated
with cytoplasmic tyrosine kinases. However, another class of
transmembrane receptors is predicted to function as serine-threonine
kinases. The type II activin receptor (102581) and the types I (190181)
and II TGF-beta receptors (Lin et al., 1992) belong to the
serine-threonine kinase family. The many activities of TGF-beta (TGFB1;
190180) in regulating cell proliferation and differentiation and
extracellular matrix production are mediated through these receptors.
With the use of cells overexpressing truncated type II receptors as
dominant-negative mutants to block type II receptor signaling
selectively, Chen et al. (1993) demonstrated the existence of 2 receptor
pathways. The type II receptors, possibly in conjunction with type I
receptors, mediate the induction of growth inhibition and
hypophosphorylation of the retinoblastoma gene product. The type I
receptors are responsible for effects on extracellular matrix, such as
the induction of fibronectin and plasminogen activator inhibitor I, and
for increased JUNB (165161) expression. Selective inactivation of the
type II receptors alters the response to TGF-beta in a manner similar to
the functional inactivation of the RB protein (614041), suggesting a
role for RB in the type II, but not the type I, receptor pathway.

Expression of the TGFBR2 gene, a putative tumor suppressor gene, is
regulated by ETS transcription factors, of which FLI1 (193067) is one.
Hahm et al. (1999) performed experiments to test the hypothesis that
TGFBR2 may be a target of the EWS-FLI1 fusion protein found in Ewing
sarcoma and related peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors (see
612219). Their experiments led them to conclude that indeed TGFBR2 is a
direct target of EWS-FLI1.

Ozdamar et al. (2005) demonstrated that PAR6 (607484), a regulator of
epithelial cell polarity and tight-junction assembly, interacts with
TGF-beta receptors and is a substrate of TGFBR2. Phosphorylation of PAR6
is required for TGF-beta-dependent epithelial-mesenchymal transition in
mammary gland epithelial cells and controls the interaction of PAR6 with
the E3 ubiquitin ligase Smurf1 (605568). Smurf1, in turn, targets the
guanosine triphosphatase RhoA (165390) for degradation, leading to a
loss of tight junctions. Ozdamar et al. (2005) concluded that an
extracellular cue signals to the polarity machinery to control
epithelial cell morphology.

Tesseur et al. (2006) found significantly decreased levels of TGFBR2 in
human brain extracts from patients with Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300)
brain compared to controls; the decrease was correlated with pathologic
hallmarks of the disease. Similar decreases were not seen in brain
extracts from patients with other forms of dementia. In a mouse model of
AD, reduced neuronal TGFBR2 signaling resulted in accelerated
age-dependent neurodegeneration and promoted beta-amyloid accumulation
and dendritic loss. Reduced TGFBR2 signaling in neuroblastoma cell
cultures resulted in increased levels of secreted beta-amyloid and
soluble APP (104760). The findings suggested a role for TGFB1 signaling
in the pathogenesis of AD.

GENE STRUCTURE

Takenoshita et al. (1996) determined that the TGFBR2 gene comprises 7
coding exons.

MAPPING

Using a full-length cDNA and a genomic probe in Southern blot analysis
of a human/rodent somatic cell hybrid panel and by direct fluorescence
in situ hybridization to normal metaphase chromosomes, Mathew et al.
(1994) showed that the TGFBR2 gene maps to 3p22. Bonyadi et al. (1996)
mapped the mouse Tgfbr2 gene to distal mouse chromosome 9 within a
region of synteny with human 3p22-p21. The mapping was done by linkage
studies.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Role in Carcinogenesis

Germline (190182.0002) and somatic (e.g., 190182.0001) mutations in the
TGFBR2 gene can result in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer-6
(HNPCC6; 614331).

Markowitz et al. (1995) stated that transforming growth factor-beta
(TGFB; 190180) inhibits the growth of multiple epithelial cell types,
and loss of this negative regulation is thought to contribute to tumor
development. The TGFB growth inhibitory signal is transduced through 2
receptors, type I (TGFBR1) and type II (TGFBR2), which function as a
heteromeric complex. Markowitz et al. (1995) investigated whether
inactivation of TGF-beta receptors is a mechanism by which human colon
cancer cells lose responsiveness to TGF-beta. They found that the TGFBR2
gene was inactivated in a subset of colon cancer cell lines (referred to
as RER(+), for 'replication errors') exhibiting microsatellite
instability, but not in RER(-) cells. Eight such examples, due to 3
different mutations, were identified. The mutations (e.g., 190182.0001)
were clustered within small repeated sequences in the TGFBR2 gene and
were accompanied by the absence of cell surface receptors. Markowitz et
al. (1995) stated that TGFBR2 mutation, by inducing the escape of cells
from TGF-beta-mediated growth control, links DNA repair defects (120435)
with a specific pathway of tumor progression. The small repeat sequences
in the TGFBR2 gene make it a favorable target for RER(+)-associated
mutator mechanisms. Once generated, the proliferative advantage of cells
with inactivated type II receptor would drive colon tumor progression.
This pathway may also be operative in other human malignancies in which
the RER(+) phenotype has been detected (reviewed by Eshleman and
Markowitz, 1995).

Whereas TGFB inhibits the growth of many epithelial cell types including
nontransformed colon epithelial cells, colon and many other cancer cell
lines are resistant to suppression of growth by TGFB. Parsons et al.
(1995) confirmed the presence of TGFBR2 mutations in 100 of 111 cases of
RER+ colon cancers. As in the report of Markowitz et al. (1995), in each
of these cases, a frameshift mutation was detected within a small
adenine mononucleotide repeat at nucleotides 709-718 of the TGFBR2 cDNA.
Insertions or deletions of adenines within this repeat produce -1, -2,
or +1 frameshift mutations, resulting in predicted synthesis of
truncated receptor proteins of 161, 129, or 130 amino acids,
respectively. Myeroff et al. (1995) demonstrated that TGFBR2 gene
mutations are also commonly present in RER+ gastric cancers. In
contrast, they found that mutations in this gene are distinctly uncommon
in RER+ endometrial cancers.

Souza et al. (1996) analyzed microsatellite instability within the
coding regions of the TGFBR2 and IGF2R (147280) genes. They noted an
anticorrespondence of IGF2R and TGFBR2 mutations. Of 31 gastrointestinal
lesions studied with IGF2R or TGFBR2 mutations, 90% (28) contained
mutations in one or the other, but not both, of these genes. They
suggested that IGF2R and TGFBR2 genes comprise serial points in the same
tumorigenesis pathway.

Tannergard et al. (1997) studied colorectal tumorigenesis in patients
with HNPCC. Tumors from members of 29 HNPCC families known to have
germline mutations of the MLH1 gene (120436) were studied. By using
intragenic markers, inactivation of the wildtype allele of MLH1 was
shown to have occurred through loss of heterozygosity and not through a
somatic point mutation. Microsatellite instability was very common and
occurred early in almost all colorectal tumors from HNPCC patients.
Mutations in the TGFBR2 gene occurred at a high frequency in these
tumors. Of colorectal cancers from HNPCC families, 63% had frameshift
mutations in TGFBR2, compared with 10% of sporadic colorectal cancers.
Mutations in APC (611731) and KRAS2 (190070) appeared to be as frequent
in the HNPCC tumors as in the sporadic counterpart.

Lu et al. (1998) identified a germline mutation in TGFBR2 in an 80-year
old patient with colorectal cancer (HNPCC6; 614331). The patient and her
2 brothers had had colorectal cancers complying with the clinical
criteria of HNPCC, except that the onset of cancer was beyond 50 years
of age in all cases. Constitutional DNA was heterozygous for a
thr315-to-met (T315M; 190182.0002) mutation, whereas loss of the
wildtype allele was observed in tumor DNA. The same mutation was present
in 2 of the patient's 6 children, but they had not developed cancer.

Adjuvant chemotherapy improves survival among certain patients with
stage III colon cancer. Watanabe et al. (2001) studied molecular
predictors of outcome and found that retention of 18q alleles in
microsatellite-stable cancers and mutation of the TGFBR2 gene in cancers
with high levels of microsatellite instability pointed to a favorable
outcome after adjuvant chemotherapy with fluorouracil-based regimens.

- Loeys-Dietz Syndrome

Identification of a 3p24.1 chromosomal breakpoint disrupting the TGFBR2
gene in a Japanese individual with a diagnosis of Marfan syndrome
(154700) led Mizuguchi et al. (2004) to consider TGFBR2 as a gene
underlying a phenotype referred to as Marfan syndrome type 2 (see LDS2B,
610380) which mapped to a locus on chromosome 3p. They identified the
mutation 1524G-A in TGFBR2 (causing the synonymous amino acid
substitution Q508Q and resulting in abnormal splicing; 190182.0004) to
segregate with the phenotype in the French family described by Boileau
et al. (1993). In 4 unrelated probands, they identified 3 other missense
mutations in TGFBR2 that led to loss of function of TGF-beta signaling
activity on extracellular matrix formation. These results showed that
heterozygous mutations in TGFBR2, a putative tumor suppressor gene
implicated in several malignancies, are also associated with inherited
connective tissue disorders. Fbn1 (143797)-deficient mice have excessive
TGF-beta activity that probably underlies their tendency to develop
emphysema and could explain other manifestations of Marfan syndrome
(Neptune et al., 2003). Domain-specific germline mutations of TGFB1
(190180) have been described in Camurati-Engelmann syndrome (131300) and
affected individuals usually have Marfanoid habitus, i.e., long slender
limbs and vertebral deformation. The findings of TGFBR2 mutations
provides further evidence that perturbation of TGF-beta signaling
contributes to the pathogenesis of extracellular matrix disorders.

Among the 10 French probands with a diagnosis of Marfan syndrome
examined by Mizuguchi et al. (2004), only 4 had mutations in TGFBR2.
These 4 individuals shared a common clinical description: prominent
aortic, skeletal, and skin/integument anomalies; mild ocular anomalies
(except for one individual in the original family who had ectopia
lentis); infrequent dural ectasia; and pulmonary abnormalities.

In 10 families with a disorder characterized by widespread perturbations
in cardiovascular, craniofacial, neurocognitive, and skeletal
development (see LDS1A, 609192), Loeys et al. (2005) reported
heterozygous mutations in the genes encoding either TGFBR1 (190181) or
TGFBR2. Loeys et al. (2005) considered TGFBR2 as a candidate gene
because TGF-beta signaling has a prominent role in vascular and
craniofacial development in mouse models (Sanford et al., 1997; Azhar et
al., 2003) and because conditional knockout of TGFBR2 in neural crest
cells causes cleft palate and defects of the calvaria (Ito et al.,
2003). Loeys et al. (2005) sequenced all exons of TGFBR2 and identified
heterozygous mutations in 6 of 10 families (see LDS1B, 610168). The
other 4 families were found to have mutations in the TGFBR1 gene
(190181). Despite evidence that receptors derived from selected mutated
alleles cannot support TGF-beta signal propagation (Mizuguchi et al.,
2004), cells derived from individuals heterozygous with respect to these
mutations did not show altered kinetics of the acute phase response to
administered ligand. Furthermore, tissues derived from affected
individuals showed increased expression of both collagen (see 120150)
and connective tissue growth factor (121009), as well as nuclear
enrichment of phosphorylated SMAD2 (601366), indicative of increased
TGF-beta signaling. The data were interpreted as indicating that
perturbation of TGF-beta signaling is involved in many common human
phenotypes, including craniosynostosis, cleft palate, arterial
aneurysms, congenital heart disease, and mental retardation.

Loeys et al. (2005) reported that histologic analysis in patients with
mutations in TGFBR2 showed loss of elastin (130160) content and
disarrayed elastic fibers in the aortic media similar to that in
patients with classic Marfan syndrome. Structural analysis showed loss
of intimate spatial association between elastin deposits and vascular
smooth muscle cells. These characteristics were observed in young
children and in the absence of inflammation, suggestive of a severe
defect in elastogenesis rather than secondary elastic fiber destruction.
In addition, they had previously observed a marked excess of aortic wall
collagen in individuals with MFS compared with age-matched controls;
this collagen excess was accentuated in individuals with mutations in
TGFBR2. As multiple collagens normally expressed in the aorta are
derived from early-induced target genes of TGF-beta (including COL1A1
and COL3A1), these data were considered consistent with increased
(rather than decreased) TGF-beta signaling.

Disabella et al. (2006) identified 3 different mutations in the TGFBR2
gene (e.g., 190182.0015) in 3 unrelated patients with a phenotype that
they identified as Marfan syndrome. None of the patients had major
ocular signs.

In a Japanese boy with clinical findings reported as Shprintzen-Goldberg
syndrome (SGS; 182212) but consistent with Loeys-Dietz syndrome, Kosaki
et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for a splice site mutation in
the TGFBR2 gene (190182.0016). Because the patient had a bifid uvula and
sigmoid configuration of the brachycephalic, left common carotid, and
left subclavian arteries, Robinson et al. (2006) suggested that the
diagnosis of Loeys-Dietz syndrome would also be appropriate for this
patient.

Singh et al. (2006) searched for TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 mutations in 41
unrelated patients fulfilling the diagnostic criteria for Marfan
syndrome of the Ghent nosology (De Paepe et al., 1996) or with the
tentative diagnosis of Marfan syndrome, in whom mutations in the FBN1
coding region were not identified. In TGFBR1, 2 mutations and 2
polymorphisms were detected. In TGFBR2, 5 mutations and 6 polymorphisms
were identified. Reexamination of patients with a TGFBR1 or TGFBR2
mutation revealed extensive clinical overlap between patients diagnosed
with Marfan syndrome type 1 (MFS1; 154700), Marfan syndrome type 2, and
Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS2B; 610380).

In 2 male patients with LDS1B who had a significant history of low bone
mineral density and multiple low-impact fractures, Kirmani et al. (2010)
identified 2 different heterozygous mutations in the TGFBR2 gene,
respectively (see, e.g., 190182.0005).

- Susceptibility To Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the
TGFBR2 gene and susceptibility to abdominal aortic aneurysm, see AAA
(100070).

ANIMAL MODEL

Han et al. (2005) found that human skin cancers frequently overexpress
TGFB1 (190180) but exhibit decreased expression of TGFBR2. In transgenic
mouse models in which Tgfb1 expression could be induced at specific
stages of skin carcinogenesis in tumor epithelia expressing a
dominant-negative Tgfbr2, they observed that late-stage Tgfb1
overexpression in chemically induced skin papillomas did not exert a
tumor-suppressive effect and that dominant-negative Tgfbr2 expression
selectively blocked Tgfb1-mediated epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
but cooperated with Tgfb1 for tumor invasion. Han et al. (2005)
concluded that TGFB1 induces epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and
invasion via distinct mechanisms: TGFB1-mediated
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition requires functional TGFBR2, whereas
TGFB1-mediated tumor invasion cooperates with reduced TGFBR2 signaling
in tumor epithelia.

Li et al. (2006) found that mice lacking Tgfbr2 specifically in T cells
had lethal inflammation associated with T-cell activation and
differentiation. Maturation of Cd8 (see 186910)-positive T cells and
development of natural killer T cells were inhibited in thymus.
Peripheral Foxp3 (300292)-positive regulatory T cell numbers were
reduced, and Cd4 (186940)-positive T-cell survival depended on Tgfb
signaling. Li et al. (2006) concluded that TGFB has pleiotropic
functions in T cells in terms of T-cell development, tolerance, and
homeostasis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COLON CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 6, SOMATIC
TGFBR2, 2-BP INS, 1931GT

The mutations identified by Markowitz et al. (1995) included (in the
VACO481 cell line) a GT insertion into a 6-bp GTGTGT repeat at
nucleotides 1931 to 1936. The resulting frameshift was predicted to
substitute a highly basic, 29-amino acid C terminus for the slightly
acidic 33-amino acid wildtype C terminus. The same frameshift mutation
was detected in the primary colon tumor from which the VACO481 cell line
was established, but not in normal colon tissue from the same patient,
indicating that the mutation was somatic and that it occurred before
cell culture.

.0002
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 6
TGFBR2, THR315MET

Lu et al. (1998) described a heterozygous germline thr315-to-met (T315M)
mutation in an 80-year-old patient with colorectal cancer (HNPCC6;
614331). The other allele was wildtype in the constitutional DNA and
showed deletion in tumor tissue. Unlike patients with typical HNPCC, the
affected members of this family lacked multiple synchronous,
metachronous colorectal cancers and extracolonic cancers. Notably, there
was no microsatellite instability in this case. The patient's 2 brothers
had developed colon cancer at the ages of 65 and 60. The T315M mutation
was found in 2 of the patient's 6 children, neither of whom had
developed cancer. Tissue samples could not be obtained from the brothers
of the patient.

.0003
ESOPHAGEAL CANCER, SOMATIC
TGFBR2, GLU526GLN

Tanaka et al. (2000) identified a missense mutation, glu526 to gln
(E526Q), in the serine/threonine kinase domain of TGF-beta receptor II
in an esophageal carcinoma (133239) tissue sample. The mutant protein
could completely inhibit TGF-beta induction of nuclear translocation of
SMAD4 protein (600993) in esophageal carcinoma cells. This mutation was
not associated with microsatellite instability.

.0004
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 2B
TGFBR2, GLN508GLN

In a large French family in which a Marfan syndrome-like phenotype
mapped to 3p25-p24.2 (LDS2B; 610380; Boileau et al., 1993), Mizuguchi et
al. (2004) identified the mutation 1524G-A in TGFBR2 segregating with
the phenotype. The mutation caused the synonymous amino acid
substitution gln508-to-gln (Q508Q) and resulted in abnormal splicing.

.0005
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 2B
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 1B, INCLUDED
TGFBR2, LEU308PRO

Mizuguchi et al. (2004) identified the mutation 923T-C in the TGFBR2
gene, resulting in the amino acid substitution leu308-to-pro (L308P),
associated with a phenotype identified as Marfan syndrome type 2 (LDS2B;
610380).

In a 17-year-old male patient with Loeys-Dietz syndrome type 1B
(610168), who had a significant history of low bone mineral density and
multiple low-impact fractures, Kirmani et al. (2010) identified
heterozygosity for the L308P mutation in the TGFBR2 gene.

.0006
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 2B
TGFBR2, SER449PHE

Mizuguchi et al. (2004) identified the heterozygous mutation 1346C-T in
the TGFBR2 gene, resulting in the ser449-to-phe (S449F) amino acid
substitution, in association with a phenotype identified as Marfan
syndrome type 2 (LDS2B; 610380).

.0007
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 2B
TGFBR2, ARG537CYS

Mizuguchi et al. (2004) found the mutation 1609C-T in the TGFBR2 gene,
resulting in the amino acid substitution arg537-to-cys (R537C), in
association with a phenotype identified as Marfan syndrome type 2
(LDS2B; 610380).

.0008
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 1B
TGFBR2, TYR336ASN

In their family 6 in which a father and 2 daughters had Loeys-Dietz
syndrome (LDS1B; 610168), Loeys et al. (2005) found a heterozygous
mutation in the TGFBR2 gene segregating with the disorder, a 1006T-A
transversion in exon 4 that resulted in a tyr336-to-asn (Y336N)
substitution in the kinase domain of the protein.

.0009
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 1B
TGFBR2, ALA355PRO

In a family in which members of 3 generations had the Loeys-Dietz
syndrome (LDS1B; 610168), Loeys et al. (2005) found heterozygosity in
affected individuals for a 1063G-C transversion in exon 4 of the TGFBR2
gene, resulting in an ala355-to-pro (A355P) substitution in the kinase
domain of the protein.

.0010
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 1B
TGFBR2, GLY357TRP

In their family 4, Loeys et al. (2005) found that the single patient
with Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS1B; 610168) was heterozygous for a 1069G-T
transversion in exon 4 of the TGFBR2 gene, resulting in a gly357-to-trp
(G357W) amino acid substitution.

.0011
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 1B
COLON CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 6, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
TGFBR2, ARG528HIS

In their family 2, Loeys et al. (2005) demonstrated that the single case
of Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS1B; 610168) was heterozygous for a 1583G-A
transition in exon 7 of the TGFBR2 gene that resulted in an
arg528-to-his (R528H) amino acid substitution. R528H had been reported
as a somatic event in colon cancer and shown to cause loss of function
in a transient transfection assay (Grady et al., 1999).

.0012
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 1B
TGFBR2, ARG528CYS

In their family 3 with a isolated case of Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS1B;
610168), Loeys et al. (2005) found a 1582C-T transition in exon 7 of the
TGFBR2 gene, resulting in an arg528-to-cys (R528C) amino acid
substitution.

.0013
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 1B
TGFBR2, IVS1, A-G, -2

In a single individual with Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS1B; 610168) in
their family 5, Loeys et al. (2005) found an A-to-G transition in the
splice acceptor sequence, -2 position, in intron 1 of the TGFBR2 gene
(95-2A-G). This mutation induced use of a cryptic splice acceptor in
exon 2 that resulted in the in-frame skipping of nucleotides 95-112 and
deletion of residues 32-37 in the extracellular domain of the TGFBR2
protein.

.0014
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 2B
TGFBR2, ARG460CYS

In 2 families with thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection mapping to
chromosome 3p25-p24 (LDS2B; 610380), Pannu et al. (2005) detected a
1378C-T transition in exon 5 of the TGFBR2 gene that resulted in the
substitution of cysteine for arginine at amino acid 460 (R460C). The
clinical features of one of these families had been reported by Hasham
et al. (2003). The proband of the second family, a 4-generation family
with autosomal dominant thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection,
presented at 41 years of age with an aneurysm of the ascending aorta and
mitral valve prolapse. Affected members of the family presented
primarily with type A dissections.

.0015
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 2B
TGFBR2, ARG460HIS

In 2 large kindreds with autosomal dominant thoracic aortic aneurysm and
dissection (LDS2B; 610380), Pannu et al. (2005) found a mutation in exon
5 of the TGFBR2 gene, 1379G-A, changing arginine-460 to histidine
(R460H). The proband of 1 family presented with type B aortic dissection
at the age of 43 years. Some affected individuals in this family also
had carotid and cerebral aneurysms and dissections, as well as pulmonary
artery enlargement. The proband of the second family presented at age 42
years with a type A aortic dissection that was surgically repaired. In
the first family, affected individuals presented with aneurysms of both
the ascending and descending thoracic aorta; in the second family, the
majority of individuals presented with aneurysm of the ascending
thoracic aorta.

Disabella et al. (2006) identified a heterozygous R460H mutation in a
24-year-old woman with a phenotype they identified as Marfan syndrome.
An affected father and aunt died of aortic root dissection at age 37 and
45 years, respectively.

Law et al. (2006) described the clinical findings and natural history of
22 carriers of the R460H mutation in TGFBR2 gene in a 5-generation
kindred ascertained by familial aortic dissection. There had been 8
sudden deaths; the cause of death was aortic dissection in all 6 cases
in which a postmortem examination was performed. Three individuals had
undergone aortic replacement surgery. Dissection had occurred throughout
the aorta, and in 1 case in the absence of aortic root dilatation.
Subarachnoid hemorrhage due to a ruptured berry aneurysm had occurred in
2 individuals. Four gene carriers and 1 deceased family member who were
investigated had tortuous cerebral blood vessels. One had tortuous
vertebral arteries, 2 had tortuous carotid arteries, and 1 had tortuous
abdominal aorta. Two individuals were found to have a brachiocephalic
artery aneurysm and a subclavian artery aneurysm, respectively. Despite
the predisposition to aortic dilatation and dissection, members of the
family did not frequently manifest the skeletal features of Marfan
syndrome, with the exception of joint hypermobility. None had ocular
lens dislocation. Striae and hernias were common. There was some overlap
with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type IV (130050), with soft translucent skin
that was easily bruised.

.0016
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 1B
TGFBR2, IVS5AS, -2A-G

In a Japanese boy with clinical findings reported as Shprintzen-Goldberg
syndrome (182212) but consistent with Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS1B;
610168), Kosaki et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for a -2A-G
transition at the splice acceptor site in intron 5 of the TGFBR2 gene.
Because the patient had a bifid uvula and sigmoid configuration of the
brachycephalic, left common carotid and left subclavian arteries,
Robinson et al. (2006) suggested that the diagnosis of Loeys-Dietz
syndrome would also be appropriate for this patient.

.0017
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 2B
TGFBR2, MET425VAL

In a man with a diagnosis of Marfan syndrome type 2 (LDS2B; 610380),
Disabella et al. (2006) identified a heterozygous mutation in the TGFBR2
gene, resulting in a met425-to-val (M425V) substitution in the
serine/threonine kinase domain of the protein. The mutation was not
identified in 192 healthy controls. The patient's affected father died
at age 40 years from aortic dissection.

.0018
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 2B
TGFBR2, PRO427LEU

In a patient with Loeys-Dietz syndrome type 2 (610380) , Loeys et al.
(2006) detected a missense mutation, pro427 to leu (P427L), in the
TGFBR2 gene. The female patient had aortic root aneurysm with dissection
and other arterial aneurysms, arterial tortuosity, vascular rapture
during pregnancy, uterine rupture, and splenic rupture. Easy bruising,
velvety skin, and joint laxity were also present.

.0019
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 1B
TGFBR2, ARG495TER

Loeys et al. (2006) pictured a patient with type 1 Loeys-Dietz syndrome
(610168) who carried a heterozygous nonsense mutation, arg495 to stop
(R495X), in the TGFBR2 gene. The man showed hypertelorism and bifid
uvula. Immunostaining of aortic tissue revealed increased nuclear
accumulation of phosphorylated Smad2 (601366) and levels of expression
of connective-tissue growth factor (CTGF; 121009), both indicative of
increased TGF-beta signaling.

REFERENCE 1. Azhar, M.; Schultz, J. E. J.; Grupp, I.; Dorn, G. W., II; Meneton,
P.; Molin, D. G. M.; Gittenberger-de Groot, A. C.; Doetschman, T.
: Transforming growth factor beta in cardiovascular development and
function. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 14: 391-407, 2003.

2. Boileau, C.; Jondeau, G.; Babron, M.-C.; Coulon, M.; Alexandre,
J.-A.; Sakai, L.; Melki, J.; Delorme, G.; Dubourg, O.; Bonaiti-Pellie,
C.; Bourdarias, J.-P.; Junien, C.: Autosomal dominant Marfan-like
connective-tissue disorder with aortic dilation and skeletal anomalies
not linked to the fibrillin gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 53: 46-54,
1993.

3. Bonyadi, M.; Cui, W.; Nagase, H.; Akhurst, R. J.: The TGF-beta
type II receptor, Tgfbr2, maps to distal mouse chromosome 9. Genomics 33:
328-329, 1996.

4. Chen, R.-H.; Ebner, R.; Derynck, R.: Inactivation of the type
II receptor reveals two receptor pathways for the diverse TGF-beta
activities. Science 260: 1335-1338, 1993.

5. De Paepe, A.; Devereux, R. B.; Dietz, H. C.; Hennekam, R. C. M.;
Pyeritz, R. E.: Revised diagnostic criteria for the Marfan syndrome. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 62: 417-426, 1996.

6. Disabella, E.; Grasso, M.; Marziliano, N.; Ansaldi, S.; Lucchelli,
C.; Porcu, E.; Tagliani, M.; Pilotto, A.; Diegoli, M.; Lanzarini,
L.; Malattia, C.; Pelliccia, A.; Ficcadenti, A.; Gabrielli, O.; Arbustini,
E.: Two novel and one known mutation of the TGFBR2 gene in Marfan
syndrome not associated with FBN1 gene defects. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 14:
34-38, 2006.

7. Eshleman, J. R.; Markowitz, S. D.: Microsatellite instability
in inherited and sporadic neoplasms. Curr. Opin. Oncol. 7: 83-89,
1995.

8. Grady, W. M.; Myeroff, L. L.; Swinler, S. E.; Rajput, A.; Thiagalingam,
S.; Lutterbaugh, J. D.; Neumann, A.; Brattain, M. G.; Chang, J.; Kim,
S.-J.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.; Willson, J. K. V.; Markowitz,
S.: Mutational inactivation of transforming growth factor beta receptor
type II in microsatellite stable colon cancers. Cancer Res. 59:
320-324, 1999.

9. Hahm, K.-B.; Cho, K.; Lee, C.; Im, Y.-H.; Chang, J.; Choi, S.-G.;
Sorensen, P. H. B.; Thiele, C. J.; Kim, S.-J.: Repression of the
gene encoding the TGF-beta type II receptor is a major target of the
EWS-FLI1 oncoprotein. Nature Genet. 23: 222-227, 1999. Note: Erratum:
Nature Genet. 23: 481 only, 1999.

10. Han, G.; Lu, S.-L; Li, A. G.; He, W.; Corless, C. L.; Kulesz-Martin,
M.; Wang, X.-J.: Distinct mechanisms of TGF-beta-1-mediated epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition and metastasis during skin carcinogenesis. J. Clin. Invest. 115:
1714-1723, 2005.

11. Hasham, S. N.; Willing, M. C.; Guo, D.; Muilenburg, A.; He, R.;
Tran, V. T.; Scherer, S. E.; Shete, S. S.; Milewicz, D. M.: Mapping
a locus for familial thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections (TAAD2)
to 3p24-25. Circulation 107: 3184-3190, 2003.

12. Ito, Y.; Yeo, J. Y.; Chytil, A.; Han, J.; Bringas, P., Jr.; Nakajima,
A.; Shuler, C. F.; Moses, H. L.; Chai, Y.: Conditional inactivation
of Tgfbr2 in cranial neural crest causes cleft palate and calvaria
defects. Development 130: 5269-5280, 2003.

13. Kirmani, S.; Tebben, P. J.; Lteif, A. N.; Gordon, D.; Clarke,
B. L.; Hefferan, T. E.; Yaszemski, M. J.; McGrann, P. S.; Lindor,
N. M.; Ellison, J. W.: Germline TGF-beta receptor mutations and skeletal
fragility: a report on two patients with Loeys-Dietz syndrome. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 152A: 1016-1019, 2010.

14. Kosaki, K.; Takahashi, D.; Udaka, T.; Kosaki, R.; Matsumoto, M.;
Ibe, S.; Isobe, T.; Tanaka, Y.; Takahashi, T.: Molecular pathology
of Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome. (Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A:
104-108, 2006.

15. Law, C.; Bunyan, D.; Castle, B.; Day, L.; Simpson, I.; Westwood,
G.; Keeton, B.: Clinical features in a family with an R460H mutation
in transforming growth factor beta receptor 2 gene. J. Med. Genet. 43:
908-916, 2006.

16. Li, M. O.; Sanjabi, S.; Flavell, R. A.: Transforming growth factor-beta
controls development, homeostasis, and tolerance of T cells by regulatory
T cell-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Immunity 25: 455-471,
2006.

17. Lin, H. Y.; Wang, X.-F.; Ng-Eaton, E.; Weinberg, R. A.; Lodish,
H. F.: Expression cloning of the TGF-beta type II receptor, a functional
transmembrane serine/threonine kinase. Cell 68: 775-785, 1992. Note:
Erratum: Cell 70: 1069 only, 1992.

18. Loeys, B. L.; Chen, J.; Neptune, E. R.; Judge, D. P.; Podowski,
M.; Holm, T.; Meyers, J.; Leitch, C. C.; Katsanis, N.; Sharifi, N.;
Xu, F. L.; Myers, L. A.; and 12 others: A syndrome of altered cardiovascular,
craniofacial, neurocognitive and skeletal development caused by mutations
in TGFBR1 or TGFBR2. Nature Genet. 37: 275-281, 2005.

19. Loeys, B. L.; Schwarze, U.; Holm, T.; Callewaert, B. L.; Thomas,
G. H.; Pannu, H.; De Backer, J. F.; Oswald, G. L.; Symoens, S.; Manouvrier,
S.; Roberts, A. E.; Faravelli, F.; and 9 others: Aneurysm syndromes
caused by mutations in the TGF-beta receptor. New Eng. J. Med. 355:
788-798, 2006.

20. Lu, S.-L.; Kawabata, M.; Imamura, T.; Akiyama, Y.; Nomizu, T.;
Miyazono, K.; Yuasa, Y.: HNPCC associated with germline mutation
in the TGF-beta type II receptor gene. (Letter) Nature Genet. 19:
17-18, 1998.

21. Markowitz, S.; Wang, J.; Myeroff, L.; Parsons, R.; Sun, L.; Lutterbaugh,
J.; Fan, R. S.; Zborowska, E.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.; Brattain,
M.; Willson, J. K. V.: Inactivation of the type II TGF-beta receptor
in colon cancer cells with microsatellite instability. Science 268:
1336-1338, 1995.

22. Mathew, S.; Murty, V. V. V. S.; Cheifetz, S.; George, D.; Massague,
J.; Chaganti, R. S. K.: Transforming growth factor receptor gene
TGFBR2 maps to human chromosome band 3p22. Genomics 20: 114-115,
1994.

23. Mizuguchi, T.; Collod-Beroud, G.; Akiyama, T.; Abifadel, M.; Harada,
N.; Morisaki, T.; Allard, D.; Varret, M.; Claustres, M.; Morisaki,
H.; Ihara, M.; Kinoshita, A.; and 11 others: Heterozygous TGFBR2
mutations in Marfan syndrome. Nature Genet. 36: 855-860, 2004.

24. Myeroff, L. L.; Parsons, R.; Kim, S.-J.; Hedrick, L.; Cho, K.
R.; Orth, K.; Mathis, M.; Kinzler, K. W.; Lutterbaugh, J.; Park, K.;
Bang, Y.-J.; Lee, H. Y.; Park, J.-G.; Lynch, H. T.; Roberts, A. B.;
Vogelstein, B.; Markowitz, S. D.: A transforming growth factor beta
receptor type II gene mutation common in colon and gastric but rare
in endometrial cancers with microsatellite instability. Cancer Res. 55:
5545-5547, 1995.

25. Neptune, E. R.; Frischmeyer, P. A.; Arking, D. E.; Myers, L.;
Bunton, T. E.; Gayraud, B.; Ramirez, F.; Sakai, L. Y.; Dietz, H. C.
: Dysregulation of TGF-beta activation contributes to pathogenesis
in Marfan syndrome. Nature Genet. 33: 407-411, 2003.

26. Ozdamar, B.; Bose, R.; Barrios-Rodiles, M.; Wang, H.-R.; Zhang,
Y.; Wrana, J. L.: Regulation of the polarity protein Par6 by TGF-beta
receptors controls epithelial cell plasticity. Science 307: 1603-1609,
2005.

27. Pannu, H.; Fadulu, V. T.; Chang, J.; Lafont, A.; Hasham, S. N.;
Sparks, E.; Giampietro, P. F.; Zaleski, C.; Estrera, A. L.; Safi,
H. J.; Shete, S.; Willing, M. C.; Raman, C. S.; Milewicz, D. M.:
Mutations in transforming growth factor-beta receptor type II cause
familial thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections. Circulation 112:
513-520, 2005.

28. Parsons, R.; Myeroff, L. L.; Liu, B.; Willson, J. K. V.; Markowitz,
S. D.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.: Microsatellite instability
and mutations of the transforming growth factor beta type II receptor
gene in colorectal cancer. Cancer Res. 55: 5548-5550, 1995.

29. Robinson, P. N.; Neumann, L. M.; Tinschert, S.: Response to Kosaki
et al. (Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A: 109-110, 2006.

30. Sanford, L. P.; Ormsby, I.; Gittenberger-de Groot, A. C.; Sariola,
H.; Friedman, R.; Boivin, G. P.; Cardell, E. L.; Doetschman, T.:
TGF-beta-2 knockout mice have multiple developmental defects that
are non-overlapping with other TGF-beta knockout phenotypes. Development 124:
2659-2670, 1997.

31. Singh, K. K.; Rommel, K.; Mishra, A.; Karck, M.; Haverich, A.;
Schmidtke, J.; Arslan-Kirchner, M.: TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 mutations in
patients with features of Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome. Hum.
Mutat. 27: 770-777, 2006.

32. Souza, R. F.; Appel, R.; Yin, J.; Wang, S.; Smolinski, K. N.;
Abraham, J. M.; Zou, T.-T.; Shi, Y.-Q.; Lei, J.; Cottrell, J.; Cymes,
K.; Biden, K.; Simms, L.; Leggett, B.; Lynch, P. M.; Frazier, M.;
Powell, S. M.; Harpaz, N.; Sugimura, H.; Young, J.; Meltzer, S. J.
: Microsatellite instability in the insulin-like growth factor II
receptor gene in gastrointestinal tumours. (Letter) Nature Genet. 14:
255-257, 1996. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 14: 488 only, 1996.

33. Takenoshita, S.; Hagiwara, K.; Nagashima, M.; Gemma, A.; Bennett,
W. P.; Harris, C. C.: The genomic structure of the gene encoding
the human transforming growth factor beta type II receptor (TGF-beta
RII). Genomics 36: 341-344, 1996.

34. Tanaka, S.; Mori, M.; Mafune, K.; Ohno, S.; Sugimachi, K.: A
dominant negative mutation of transforming growth factor-beta receptor
type II gene in microsatellite stable oesophageal carcinoma. Brit.
J. Cancer 82: 1557-1560, 2000.

35. Tannergard, P.; Liu, T.; Weger, A.; Nordenskjold, M.; Lindbloom,
A.: Tumorigenesis in colorectal tumors from patients with hereditary
non-polyposis colorectal cancer. Hum. Genet. 101: 51-55, 1997.

36. Tesseur, I.; Zou, K.; Esposito, L.; Bard, F.; Berber, E.; Van
Can, J.; Lin, A. H.; Crews, L.; Tremblay, P.; Mathews, P.; Mucke,
L.; Masliah, E.; Wyss-Coray, T.: Deficiency in neuronal TGF-beta
signaling promotes neurodegeneration and Alzheimer's pathology. J.
Clin. Invest. 116: 3060-3069, 2006.

37. Watanabe, T.; Wu, T.-T.; Catalano, P. J.; Ueki, T.; Satriano,
R.; Haller, D. G.; Benson, A. B., III; Hamilton, S. R.: Molecular
predictors of survival after adjuvant chemotherapy for colon cancer. New
Eng. J. Med. 344: 1196-1206, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/1/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/25/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/31/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/8/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/20/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/24/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/8/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/7/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/13/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/28/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/1/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/4/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/2/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/10/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/4/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/29/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/27/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/14/1997
Victor A. McKusick - edited: 2/14/1997
Moyra Smith - updated: 11/7/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/10/1993

EDITED terry: 03/14/2013
carol: 3/11/2013
alopez: 3/11/2013
carol: 11/7/2012
alopez: 1/11/2012
alopez: 11/8/2011
terry: 6/21/2011
wwang: 12/2/2010
terry: 12/1/2010
carol: 9/2/2010
alopez: 4/3/2009
carol: 9/11/2008
carol: 8/5/2008
alopez: 3/31/2008
alopez: 3/7/2008
ckniffin: 2/5/2008
mgross: 10/25/2007
terry: 10/25/2007
alopez: 6/4/2007
terry: 5/31/2007
wwang: 12/11/2006
ckniffin: 12/8/2006
alopez: 10/11/2006
terry: 9/20/2006
terry: 8/24/2006
carol: 4/13/2006
wwang: 3/14/2006
ckniffin: 3/8/2006
wwang: 3/7/2006
alopez: 2/24/2006
terry: 12/13/2005
alopez: 8/10/2005
terry: 7/28/2005
joanna: 6/16/2005
wwang: 6/1/2005
terry: 6/1/2005
alopez: 4/27/2005
mgross: 4/15/2005
alopez: 3/2/2005
alopez: 2/7/2005
terry: 2/4/2005
alopez: 8/4/2004
terry: 8/2/2004
carol: 3/17/2004
carol: 7/11/2001
cwells: 5/18/2001
terry: 5/10/2001
mcapotos: 12/19/2000
mcapotos: 12/14/2000
terry: 12/4/2000
carol: 5/9/2000
alopez: 9/30/1999
terry: 9/29/1999
dkim: 9/11/1998
alopez: 4/27/1998
terry: 4/27/1998
jenny: 10/21/1997
terry: 10/14/1997
mark: 2/14/1997
terry: 2/13/1997
mark: 11/7/1996
terry: 5/7/1996
terry: 4/30/1996
terry: 4/5/1996
mark: 2/19/1996
terry: 2/15/1996
terry: 7/28/1995
mark: 7/11/1995
carol: 4/5/1994
carol: 7/13/1993
carol: 7/9/1993
carol: 6/23/1993

603051	TITLE *603051 ALKYLGLYCERONE-PHOSPHATE SYNTHASE; AGPS
;;ALKYLDIHYDROXYACETONEPHOSPHATE SYNTHASE; ADHAPS;;
ALKYL-DHAP SYNTHASE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The first 2 steps of ether lipid biosynthesis, which occurs in
peroxisomes, are the acylation of dihydroxyacetonephosphate (DHAP),
followed by the introduction of the ether linkage by alkyl-DHAP synthase
(EC 2.5.1.26), which exchanges the acyl chain for a long-chain fatty
alcohol. The importance of peroxisomes in mammalian ether lipid
synthesis is demonstrated by human genetic diseases in which peroxisome
biogenesis is disturbed and the patients are ether lipid-deficient (see
600121). To begin understanding alkyl-DHAP synthase and its role in
human peroxisomal disorders, de Vet et al. (1997) cloned cDNAs encoding
alkyl-DHAP synthase from a human liver cDNA library using the guinea pig
alkyl-DHAP synthase cDNA sequence as a starting point. The deduced human
alkyl-DHAP synthase protein has 658 amino acids. Human and guinea pig
alkyl-DHAP synthase have 92% amino acid identity, with completely
identical peroxisomal targeting signal 2 (PTS2) sequences in their
respective N-terminal presequences. The authors reported homology
between human alkyl-DHAP synthase, S. cerevisiae D-lactate dehydrogenase
(cytochrome C) precursor, and E. coli glycolate oxidase subunit D.

De Vet et al. (1998) isolated a C. elegans cDNA encoding a homolog of
mammalian alkyl-DHAP synthase. The deduced 597-amino acid C. elegans
protein is 52% identical to the mammalian enzymes in the overlapping
regions. However, the C. elegans protein carries a consensus peroxisomal
targeting signal-1 (PTS1) at its C terminus.

GENE STRUCTURE

Thai et al. (2001) determined that the AGPS gene contains 16 exons and
spans 30 kb.

MAPPING

De Vet et al. (1998) mapped the human alkyl-DHAP synthase gene to 2q31
by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Thai et al. (2001) mapped the
AGPS gene to human chromosome 2q33 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

Liegel et al. (2011) mapped the mouse Agps gene to chromosome 2.

GENE FUNCTION

Using fluorescence-activated cytotoxicity selection followed by colony
autoradiographic screening of the surviving population, Nagan et al.
(1997) isolated a unique plasmalogen-deficient Chinese hamster ovary
cell line. The mutant showed a 90% reduction in the rate of biosynthesis
and levels of plasmalogens. Further studies showed that the mutant is
defective in a single step in the biosynthetic pathway for plasmalogens,
namely the step catalyzed by DHAP synthase. Unlike previously described
plasmalogen-deficient mutants, this mutant contained peroxisomes, as
confirmed by immunofluorescence microscopy and catalase release by
digitonin. Peroxisomal functions, including the breakdown of very
long-chain fatty acids, phytanic acid oxidation, and the acylation of
DHAP, were normal. Cell fusion studies revealed that the mutation is
recessive and belongs to a new complementation group.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using polyclonal antiserum against alkyl-DHAP synthase, de Vet et al.
(1998) examined levels of this enzyme in fibroblasts derived from
patients with peroxisomal disorders. They found strongly reduced levels
of alkyl-DHAP synthase in both Zellweger syndrome (see 214100) and
rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (see 215100) patients. A neonatal
adrenoleukodystrophy (NALD; see 601539) patient with an isolated PTS1
import deficiency and a patient with an isolated deficiency in
alkyl-DHAP synthase activity (Wanders et al., 1994; see 600121) had
normal alkyl-DHAP synthase levels. De Vet et al. (1998) analyzed the
cDNA sequence encoding alkyl-DHAP synthase from the latter patient and
found a missense mutation in codon 419, resulting in an arg-to-his
substitution (603051.0001). The authors expressed the recombinant mutant
protein in E. coli and did not detect alkyl-DHAP synthase activity. They
concluded that the arg419-to-his substitution is responsible for the
inactivity of the enzyme in this patient and that arg419 is critical for
alkyl-DHAP synthase enzymatic activity. The arginine-modifying agent
phenylglyoxal efficiently inhibited alkyl-DHAP synthase activity, while
the substrate palmitoyl-DHAP protected the enzyme against
phenylglyoxal-mediated inactivation.

Thai et al. (2001) identified 2 missense mutations in an
ADHAPS-deficient patient: thr309 to ile (603051.0002) and leu469 to pro
(603051.0003). As a consequence of plasmalogen deficiency, structural
alterations of caveolae, clathrin-coated pits, endoplasmic reticulum,
and Golgi cisternae were observed, as well as a reduced rate of
transferrin receptor cycling. The authors hypothesized that
plasmalogens, analogous to cholesterol, are essential for correct
membrane functioning, and their deficiency results in impaired membrane
trafficking.

Itzkovitz et al. (2012) studied 6 new patients with RCDP, 3 with RCDP2
(222765) and 3 with RCDP3, and identified homozygosity or compound
heterozygosity for mutations in the GNPAT gene (see, e.g.,
603744.0007-603744.0009) or AGPS gene (see, e.g., 603051.0004).
Comparison of phenotypic severity and GNPAT and AGPS protein levels
indicated that milder RCDP phenotypes are likely to be associated with
residual protein function. In RCDP2 patient cell lines, GNPAT protein
was undetectable, although AGPS amounts were normal, indicating that the
absence of GNPAT does not affect levels of AGPS at steady state. In
contrast, in RCDP3 patient cell lines, GNPAT protein levels correlated
generally with the amount of AGPS protein present; Itzkovitz et al.
(2012) concluded that at steady state, the amount of wildtype GNPAT was
highly dependent on the presence of AGPS.

ANIMAL MODEL

Blind sterile-2 (bs2) is a spontaneous autosomal recessive mouse
mutation characterized by cataracts and male sterility. Histologic
evaluation revealed that cataracts in bs2 mice were caused by severely
disrupted lens fiber cells. Sterility in bs2 mice was caused by lack of
mature sperm associated with large multinucleate cells within the lumens
of seminiferous tubules. Liegel et al. (2011) identified the bs2
mutation as a G-to-A transition at the +5 position of Agps intron 14.
The mutation resulted in 2 abundantly expressed, aberrantly spliced Agps
transcripts that lacked either exon 14 or both exons 13 and 14. About 7%
of all Agps transcripts were spliced normally. Both aberrantly spliced
transcripts resulted in a frameshift, premature stop, and putative
proteins lacking the enzymatic FAD domain. Mass spectrometry of bs2
showed reduced content of ether-phosphatidylethanolamine and
ether-phosphatidylcholine and increased content of
phosphatidylethanolamine, the precursor for
ether-phosphatidylethanolamine. Elevated phosphatidylcholine was not
observed.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RHIZOMELIC CHONDRODYSPLASIA PUNCTATA, TYPE 3
AGPS, ARG419HIS

In a patient with rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata and isolated
alkyl-DHAP synthase deficiency (RCDP3; 600121), originally described by
Wanders et al. (1994), de Vet et al. (1998) detected a 1256G-A
transition in the AGPS gene, resulting in an arg419-to-his (R419H)
substitution.

.0002
RHIZOMELIC CHONDRODYSPLASIA PUNCTATA, TYPE 3
AGPS, THR309ILE

In a girl with rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata and isolated
alkyl-DHAP synthase deficiency (600121), Thai et al. (2001) detected a
C926T transition, resulting in a thr309-to-ile substitution. The other
mutant allele carried a T1406C transition, resulting in a leu469-to-pro
substitution (603051.0003). The patient was admitted to the hospital at
11 months of age with a phenotype similar to that of her brother who had
died at 2 years of age: short proximal arms, bilateral cataracts,
developmental delay, failure to thrive, gastroesophageal efflux,
microcephaly, and epiphyseal stippling in humeral and femoral bones.

.0003
RHIZOMELIC CHONDRODYSPLASIA PUNCTATA, TYPE 3
AGPS, LEU469PRO

See 603051.0002 and Thai et al. (2001).

.0004
RHIZOMELIC CHONDRODYSPLASIA PUNCTATA, TYPE 3
AGPS, THR568MET

In a 7-year-old Brazilian girl with rhizomelic chondroplasia punctata
and residual GNPAT (602744) activity (RCDP3; 600121), born to parents
without known consanguinity but from close villages, Itzkovitz et al.
(2012) identified homozygosity for a 1703C-T transition in exon 18 of
the AGPS gene, resulting in a thr568-to-met (T568M) substitution at a
highly conserved residue. The mutation was not present as a polymorphism
in dbSNP (build 133). In a cell line from the patient, GNPAT and AGPS
protein levels were normal. At birth, the patient had a wide anterior
fontanel, simple ears, anteverted nares, long philtrum, and thin upper
lip. She had bilateral cataracts, limb contractures with mild pterygium,
slender fingers that were radially deviated, and clubfeet. X-rays showed
short humeri and femurs, stippling at the knees, elbows, scapulae, and
hips, and vertebral coronal clefts. Her general health was good except
for febrile seizures. She smiled responsively at 6 months, and when last
examined at 27 months of age, she had no head support, could not roll
over or hold objects, and had no speech.

REFERENCE 1. de Vet, E. C. J. M.; IJlst, L.; Oostheim, W.; Wanders, R. J. A.;
van den Bosch, H.: Alkyl-dihydroxyacetonephosphate synthase: fate
in peroxisome biogenesis disorders and identification of the point
mutation underlying a single enzyme deficiency. J. Biol. Chem. 273:
10296-10301, 1998.

2. de Vet, E. C. J. M.; Prinsen, H. C. M. T.; van den Bosch, H.:
Nucleotide sequence of a cDNA clone encoding a Caenorhabditis elegans
homolog of mammalian alkyl-dihydroxyacetonephosphate synthase: evolutionary
switching of peroxisomal targeting signals. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 242: 277-281, 1998.

3. de Vet, E. C. J. M.; van den Broek, B. T. E.; van den Bosch, H.
: Nucleotide sequence of human alkyl-dihydroxyacetonephosphate synthase
cDNA reveals the presence of a peroxisomal targeting signal 2. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1346: 25-29, 1997.

4. Itzkovitz, B.; Jiralerspong, S.; Nimmo, G.; Loscalzo, M.; Horovitz,
D. D. G.; Snowden, A.; Moser, A.; Steinberg, S.; Braverman, N.: Functional
characterization of novel mutations in GNPAT and AGPS, causing rhizomelic
chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP) types 2 and 3. Hum. Mutat. 33:
189-197, 2012.

5. Liegel, R.; Chang, B.; Dubielzig, R.; Sidjanin, D. J.: Blind sterile
2 (bs2), a hypomorphic mutation in Agps, results in cataracts and
male sterility in mice. Molec. Genet. Metab. 103: 51-59, 2011.

6. Nagan, N.; Hajra, A. K.; Das, A. K.; Moser, H. W.; Moser, A.; Lazarow,
P.; Purdue, P. E.; Zoeller, R. A.: A fibroblast cell line defective
in alkyl-dihydroxyacetone phosphate synthase: a novel defect in plasmalogen
biosynthesis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 4475-4480, 1997.

7. Thai, T.-P.; Rodemer, C.; Jauch, A.; Hunziker, A.; Moser, A.; Gorgas,
K.; Just, W. W.: Impaired membrane traffic in defective ether lipid
biosynthesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 127-136, 2001.

8. Wanders, R. J. A.; Dekker, C.; Hovarth, V. A. P.; Schutgens, R.
B. H.; Tager, J. M.; van Laer, P.; Lecoutere, D.: Human alkyldihydroxyacetone
phosphate synthase deficiency: a new peroxisomal disorder. J. Inherit.
Metab. Dis. 17: 315-318, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 05/22/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/10/2012
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/13/2001

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 9/22/1998

EDITED mgross: 05/22/2013
alopez: 10/25/2012
carol: 7/10/2012
cwells: 3/27/2001
cwells: 3/13/2001
terry: 6/8/1999
psherman: 10/14/1998
psherman: 9/23/1998
psherman: 9/22/1998

604748	TITLE *604748 SRY-BOX 13; SOX13
;;SRY-RELATED HMG-BOX GENE 12;;
ISLET CELL ANTIBODY 12; ICA12
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The testis-determining gene SRY (480000) encodes a transcription factor
characterized by a DNA-binding motif known as the HMG (high mobility
group) box. The SOX gene family consists of genes related to SRY, with a
sequence identity of more than 60% to the SRY HMG box. See 600898.

CLONING

Kido et al. (1998) cloned Sox13 cDNA from a mouse 8.5-day embryo cDNA
library and found that expression in the adult mouse is restricted to
kidney and ovary. Roose et al. (1998) independently cloned a full-length
mouse Sox13 cDNA and found that high expression of Sox13 is restricted
to arteries during late embryogenesis. They also found that Sox13 binds
to the consensus HMG-box motif, AACAAAG, but does not transactivate
transcription from multimeric sites.

By screening a human fetal kidney cDNA library with mouse Sox13 cDNA as
a probe, Roose et al. (1999) isolated a human SOX13 cDNA. The deduced
SOX13 protein has 890 amino acids with a centrally located HMG box and
an N-terminal leucine zipper motif with a neighboring glutamine stretch
called a Q box. The protein shares 75% homology with mouse Sox13.
Sequence homology with other SOX proteins indicates that SOX13 is a
member of subfamily D. Northern blot analysis applied to human fetal
tissue samples revealed high expression of SOX13 in kidney, lung, and
liver and low expression in thymus, brain, spleen, and muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Using sera from patients with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM)
to screen a human islet cDNA library, Rabin et al. (1992) determined
that the SOX13 protein, which they termed ICA12, is an IDDM-specific
human autoantigen.

Melichar et al. (2007) identified Sox13 as a gamma-delta-specific gene
in the immune system. Using Sox13 transgenic mice, Melichar et al.
(2007) showed that this transcription factor promotes gamma-delta T cell
development while opposing alpha-beta T cell differentiation.
Conversely, mice deficient in Sox13 expression exhibited impaired
development of gamma-delta T cells but not alpha-beta T cells. One
mechanism of SOX13 function is the inhibition of signaling by the
developmentally important for Wnt/T cell factor (TCF) pathway. Melichar
et al. (2007) concluded that their data revealed a dominant pathway
regulating the developmental fate of these 2 lineages of T lymphocytes.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Roose et al. (1999) mapped the
SOX13 gene to chromosome 1q32.

REFERENCE 1. Kido, S.; Hiraoka, Y.; Ogawa, M.; Sakai, Y.; Yoshimura, Y.; Aiso,
S.: Cloning and characterization of mouse mSox13 cDNA. Gene 208:
201-206, 1998.

2. Melichar, H. J.; Narayan, K.; Der, S. D.; Hiraoka, Y.; Gardiol,
N.; Jeannet, G.; Held, W.; Chambers, C. A.; Kang, J.: Regulation
of gamma-delta versus alpha-beta T lymphocyte differentiation by the
transcription factor SOX13. Science 315: 230-233, 2007.

3. Rabin, D. U.; Pleasic, S. M.; Palmer-Crocker, R.; Shapiro, J. A.
: Cloning and expression of IDDM-specific human autoantigens. Diabetes 41:
183-186, 1992.

4. Roose, J.; Korver, W.; de Boer, R.; Kuipers, J.; Hurenkamp, J.;
Clevers, H.: The Sox-13 gene: structure, promoter characterization,
and chromosomal localization. Genomics 57: 301-305, 1999.

5. Roose, J.; Korver, W.; Oving, E.; Wilson, A.; Wagenaar, G.; Markman,
M.; Lamers, W.; Clevers, H.: High expression of the HMG box factor
Sox-13 in arterial walls during embryonic development. Nucleic Acids
Res. 26: 469-476, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/20/2007

CREATED Yen-Pei C. Chang: 3/27/2000

EDITED alopez: 02/21/2007
terry: 2/20/2007
carol: 2/18/2002
carol: 5/18/2000
carol: 4/7/2000

607199	TITLE *607199 INTERFERON REGULATORY FACTOR 6; IRF6
DESCRIPTION 
GENE FAMILY

Interferon regulatory factor-6 (IRF6) belongs to a family of 9
transcription factors that share a highly-conserved helix-turn-helix
DNA-binding domain and a less conserved protein-binding domain. This
domain, called SMIR (for SMAD (see 601366)-IRF-binding domain), is also
found in IRF3 (603734) and IRF7 (605047). Other interferon regulatory
factors include IRF1 (147575) on 5q, IRF2 (147576) on 4q, IRF3 on 19q,
and IRF4 (601900) on 6p. Most IRFs regulate the expression of
interferon-alpha (see 147660) and -beta (see 147640) after viral
infection.

CLONING

Kondo et al. (2002) cloned human IRF6. The deduced protein contains an
N-terminal winged-helix DNA-binding domain and a C-terminal SMIR
(Smad-interferon regulatory factor-binding) domain. RT-PCR analysis
showed that Irf6 is broadly expressed in embryonic and adult mouse
tissues. A similar expression pattern was seen in human fetal and adult
tissues. In situ hybridization of mouse embryos demonstrated that Irf6
is highly expressed in the medial edges of the paired palatal shelves
immediately before, and during, their fusion. High Irf6 expression was
also detected in hair follicles, palatal rugae, tooth germ and
thyroglossal duct, external genitalia, and in skin throughout the body.

Ben et al. (2005) determined that the human IRF6 protein contains 517
amino acids.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kondo et al. (2002) determined that the IRF6 gene contains 10 exons.
Exons 1, 2, and 10 are noncoding.

Ben et al. (2005) found strong structural conservation among human,
mouse, zebrafish and Fugu Irf6 orthologs, especially in the 7 coding
exons.

MAPPING

Kondo et al. (2002) identified the IRF6 gene within the VWS critical
region at 1q32-q41.

GENE FUNCTION

Mutation in the IRF6 gene can cause van der Woude syndrome (VWS1;
119300) and popliteal pterygium syndrome (PPS; 119500). VWS is an
autosomal dominant form of cleft lip and palate associated with lip
pits, and is the most common syndromic form of cleft lip or palate. PPS
is a disorder with a similar orofacial phenotype that also includes skin
and genital anomalies. Phenotypic overlap and linkage data had suggested
that these 2 disorders are allelic. To correlate the expression of IRF6
with the phenotypes of VWS and PPS, Kondo et al. (2002) conducted
expression analyses in mice. Studies showed high levels of Irf6 mRNA
along the medial edge of the fusing palate, tooth buds, hair follicles,
genitalia, and skin. Their observations demonstrated that
haploinsufficiency of IRF6 disrupts orofacial development and were
consistent with dominant-negative mutations disturbing development of
the skin and genitalia.

Little et al. (2009) determined the DNA sequence to which IRF6 binds and
used this sequence to analyze the effect of VWS- and PPS-associated
missense mutations (see, e.g., 607199.0004) in the DNA-binding domain of
IRF6. They showed that IRF6 functions as a cooperative transcriptional
activator and that mutations in the protein interaction domain (residues
226 to 467) of IRF6 disrupt this activity.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Van der Woude Syndrome

To identify the locus associated with van der Woude syndrome (119300),
Kondo et al. (2002) did a direct sequence analysis of genes and
presumptive transcripts in the 350-kb critical region on 1q identified
by linkage mapping. This approach was confounded by SNPs that occurred
about once every 1,900 basepairs. To distinguish between putative
disease-causing mutations and SNPs, they studied a pair of monozygotic
twins who were discordant for the VWS phenotype and had unaffected
parents. Monozygotic status was confirmed by showing complete
concordance of genotype at 20 microsatellite loci. The authors concluded
that the only sequence difference between the twins resulted from a
somatic mutation in the affected twin. Kondo et al. (2002) found a
nonsense mutation in IRF6 in the affected twin (607199.0001).
Subsequently, they identified mutations in IRF6 in 45 additional
unrelated families affected with VWS.

Ghassibe et al. (2004) screened the IRF6 gene in 6 families with VWS and
identified 6 heterozygous missense mutations, respectively, all
affecting either the DNA-binding or the protein-binding domain. In a
4-generation VWS family in which affected individuals carried an L22P
mutation (607199.0014), 2 of the patients displayed additional features:
1 had finger syndactyly, and the other had toe syndactyly and oral
synechiae. Ghassibe et al. (2004) stated that because syndactyly and
synechiae are major signs for PPS, these 2 patients were considered to
have PPS, whereas the 6 other affected family members were classified as
VWS, thus demonstrating that a single mutation could be responsible for
both syndromes.

In a 16-year-old girl with a heart-shaped mass on her inner lower lip
but no pits, Yeetong et al. (2009) identified heterozygosity for a
nonsense mutation in the IRF6 gene (Q49X; 607199.0017).

- Popliteal Pterygium Syndrome

In affected members of 5 unrelated families with popliteal pterygium
syndrome (PPS; 119500), Kondo et al. (2002) identified heterozygosity
for an arg84-to-cys (R84C; 607199.0004) mutation in the IRF6 gene. In 2
other PPS families, they identified an arg84-to-his (R84H; 607199.0005)
substitution.

Matsuzawa et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous R84L mutation
(607199.0015) in a Japanese family with variable expression of
popliteal-pterygium syndrome. Mutations in the same codon, R84C and
R84H, have been reported in other patients with PPS (Kondo et al.,
2002), suggesting a hotspot for recurrent mutations.

- Van der Woude Syndrome-Popliteal Pterygium Syndrome Spectrum

De Medeiros et al. (2008) described a patient, conceived by in vitro
fertilization, with unilateral cleft lip and palate, ankyloblepharon,
paramedian lip pits, unilateral renal aplasia, and a coronal
hypospadias, with a novel heterozygous mutation (607199.0013) in the
IRF6 gene. The authors considered the patient to have a VWS-PPS spectrum
disorder. They were uncertain whether renal aplasia was related to the
mutation or the method of fertilization.

- Orofacial Cleft 6

Zucchero et al. (2004) found overtransmission of the ancestral allele of
the V274I polymorphism (dbSNP rs2235371), originally identified by Kondo
et al. (2002), to patients with nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate (OFC6;
608864) who were Asian but did not find it in groups of European
descent. Zucchero et al. (2004) noted that their findings suggested that
the V allele itself was not causal.

Rahimov et al. (2008) used multispecies sequence comparison to identify
a common SNP (dbSNP rs642961, G-A) in an IRF6 enhancer located in the
intergenic region between the start sites of the oppositely transcribed
IRF6 and C1ORF107 genes (genome coordinate 208,055,893; build 36.3) They
found that the A allele was significantly overtransmitted (p = 1 x
10(-11)) in families with nonsyndromic cleft lip/palate (OFC6; 608864),
particularly in those with cleft lip only. EMSA and CHIP assays
demonstrated that the risk allele disrupts the binding site of
transcription factor AP-2-alpha (TFAP2A; 107580), and expression
analysis in the mouse localized the enhancer activity to craniofacial
and limb structures. In luciferase reported assays in a human foreskin
keratinocyte cell line, the risk haplotype consistently increased the
luciferase expression more than the nonassociated haplotypes did, but
the difference did not reach statistical significance. Rahimov et al.
(2008) concluded that IRF6 and TFAP2A are in the same developmental
pathway and that this high frequency variant in a regulatory element
contributes substantially to a common, complex disorder.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Clefts of the lip with or without cleft palate and isolated cleft palate
are developmentally and genetically distinct (see 119520 and 119540,
respectively), yet VWS is a single-gene disorder that encompasses both
clefting phenotypes. To verify this point, Kondo et al. (2002) analyzed
22 pedigrees that had a single mutation in IRF6 and individuals with
both phenotypes. Genotype analysis of 1 family demonstrated that
affected individuals, regardless of their phenotype, shared the 18-bp
deletion (607199.0002) that occurred in the proband. They observed
similar results in the other families and concluded that a single
mutation in IRF6 can cause both types of clefting. Protein-truncation
mutations were significantly more common in VWS than in PPS (P = 0.004).
The lone exception was a nonsense mutation present in 1 family, glu393
to ter (607199.0003), which may be a dominant-negative mutation.

Kondo et al. (2002) found that missense mutations that cause VWS were
almost evenly divided between the DNA-binding domain and the
protein-binding domain, whereas most missense mutations that cause PPS
were found in the DNA-binding domain. Comparison of the positions of PPS
mutations with the crystal structure of the IRF1 DNA-binding domain
showed that every amino acid residue that was mutant in individuals with
PPS directly contacts the DNA, whereas only 1 of 7 of the residues
mutant in individuals with VWS contacts the DNA. Most notably, Kondo et
al. (2002) observed missense mutations involving the arg84 codon in 7
unrelated PPS families. The arg84 residue is comparable to the arg82
residue of IRF1. Variation in the phenotypic effects of mutations in the
IRF6 gene causing VWS and PPS suggested the operation of stochastic
factors or modifier genes influencing IRF6 function. Three sorts of
variation were observed. Thirty-two families had multiple combinations
of orofacial anomalies, 22 families had mixed clefting phenotypes
(individuals with cleft lip and individuals with cleft palate only in
the same family), and 4 families affected with PPS included individuals
who exhibited orofacial (VWS) features exclusively. Kondo et al. (2002)
identified a sequence variant, val274 to ile, occurring within an
absolutely conserved residue within the SMIR domain. This variant is
common in unaffected populations (3% in European-descended and 22% in
Asian populations) and was considered by them an attractive candidate
for a modifier of VWS, PPS, and other orofacial clefting disorders.

ANIMAL MODEL

The epidermis is a highly organized structure, the integrity of which is
central to the protection of an organism. Development and subsequent
maintenance of this tissue depends critically on the intricate balance
between proliferation and differentiation of a resident stem cell
population. Richardson et al. (2006) undertook a study of the signals
controlling the proliferation-differentiation switch in vivo. They
showed that mice carrying a homozygous missense mutation in Irf6, the
homolog of the gene mutated in the human congenital disorders van der
Woude syndrome and popliteal pterygium syndrome, have a
hyperproliferative epidermis that fails to undergo terminal
differentiation, resulting in soft tissue fusions. They further
demonstrated that mice compound heterozygous for mutations in Irf6 and
the gene encoding the cell cycle regulator protein stratifin (SFN;
601290) show similar defects of keratinizing epithelia. The results
indicated that Irf6 is a key determinant of the keratinocyte
proliferation-differentiation switch and that Irf6 and Sfn interact
genetically in this process.

Ingraham et al. (2006) obtained Irf6-null mice at the expected mendelian
ratio. At embryonic day 17.5, Irf6-null mice had taut, shiny skin,
lacked external ears, and had snouts and jaws shorter and more rounded
than their wildtype littermates. Irf6-null embryos also had short
forelimbs that lacked visible digits and a single caudal projection that
lacked visible hindlimbs and tail. Histologic and gene expression
analyses showed that the primary defect was in keratinocyte
differentiation and proliferation. Ingraham et al. (2006) found that
abnormalities of epithelial differentiation that resulted in cleft
palate were a consequence of adhesion between the palatal shelves and
the tongue in both Irf6-null and homozygous missense mice.

Richardson et al. (2009) showed that Irf6/Jag2 (602570) doubly
heterozygous mice displayed a fully penetrant intraoral epithelial
adhesions, resulting in cleft palate. There was no evidence of direct
interaction between Irf6 and Jag2, suggesting that the mechanism
underlying the genetic interaction between Irf6 and Jag2 is the
consequence of their combined effects on periderm formation,
maintenance, and function. Notch1 (190198) and p63 (603273) expression
patterns in Irf6/Jag2 doubly heterozygous mouse embryos suggested that
Irf6 affects Jag2-Notch1 signaling during periderm maintenance.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, GLU92TER

In the affected twin of a pair of monozygotic twins who were discordant
for van der Woude syndrome (VWS1; 119300), Kondo et al. (2002) found a
nonsense mutation in exon 4 of the IRF6 gene that was absent in both
parents and the unaffected twin: glu92 to ter (E92X).

.0002
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, 18-BP DEL/1-BP INS

In affected members of a family with van der Woude syndrome (119300),
Kondo et al. (2002) identified heterozygosity for an 18-bp deletion and
insertion of a single adenine occurring after nucleotide 870 of the IRF6
gene. Some affected members had cleft of the lip with cleft palate,
others had cleft of the lip without cleft palate, and yet others had
isolated cleft plate; regardless of the phenotype, all shared the 18-bp
deletion found in the proband.

.0003
POPLITEAL PTERYGIUM SYNDROME
IRF6, GLN393TER

Kondo et al. (2002) found that protein-truncation mutations of the IRF6
gene were significantly more common in van der Woude syndrome (VWS;
119300) than in popliteal pterygium syndrome (PPS; 119500) (P = 0.004).
The lone exception to this relationship was a nonsense mutation
introducing a stop codon in place of a glutamine codon at position 393
(Q393X), which may be a dominant-negative mutation, found in affected
members of a PPS family.

.0004
POPLITEAL PTERYGIUM SYNDROME
IRF6, ARG84CYS

In affected members of 5 unrelated families with popliteal pterygium
syndrome (119500), Kondo et al. (2002) identified heterozygosity for a
250C-T transition in the IRF6 gene resulting in an arg84-to-cys (R84C)
change in the protein. In affected members of 2 other PPS families,
arg84 was changed to a different amino acid (607199.0005).

.0005
POPLITEAL PTERYGIUM SYNDROME
IRF6, ARG84HIS

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with PPS (119500), Kondo et
al. (2002) found an arg84-to-his (R84H) missense mutation in the IRF6
gene. The arg84 residue, affected in the arg84-to-cys (607199.0004) and
arg84-to-his missense mutations, is 1 of 4 residues that make critical
contacts with the core sequence, GAAA, and is essential for the DNA
binding function of IRF6.

.0006
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, ALA2VAL

Wang et al. (2003) screened 4 Chinese families with van der Woude
syndrome (119300) in 9 exons and their flanking splice junctions of the
IRF6 gene by direct sequencing. They identified 3 missense mutations,
including ala2-to-val (A2V), resulting from a 268C-T nucleotide change.
The A2V mutation had been reported previously in an American family by
Kondo et al. (2002).

.0007
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, ARG6CYS

An arg6-to-cys (R6C) substitution in the IRF6 gene (279C-T in exon 3)
was found by Wang et al. (2003) in a Chinese family with van der Woude
syndrome (119300).

.0008
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, TRP379TER

In a Chinese family with van der Woude syndrome (119300), Wang et al.
(2003) found a nonsense mutation in the IRF6 gene: a TGG-to-TGA
(1400G-A) transition at codon 379 of exon 8, introducing a premature
stop codon in place of a tryptophan residue (W379X).

.0009
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, ARG400TRP

In a Chinese family with van der Woude syndrome (119300), Wang et al.
(2003) found that affected members were carrying a missense mutation in
the IRF6 gene: a 1461C-T transition in exon 9, predicting a tryptophan
substitution for a highly conserved arginine at codon 400 (R400W).

.0010
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, 17-BP DEL

In a Japanese family with van der Woude syndrome (119300), Kayano et al.
(2003) found a 17-kb deletion in the IRF6 gene. On initial sequencing no
base change was found, but a deletion involving exons 4-9 was suggested
by multiplex PCR analysis. Further analyses revealed a heterozygous
17,162-bp deletion involving exons 4-9. Kayano et al. (2003) suggested
that since IRF6 mutations in a significant portion of VWS patients
remain undetected by conventional sequencing analysis, it may be
important to search for a large deletion in such patients.

.0011
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, ARG45GLN

In a Japanese family with van der Woude syndrome (119300), Kayano et al.
(2003) found a G-to-A substitution at nucleotide 134 in exon 3 of the
IRF6 gene that resulted in an arg45-to-gln (R45Q) amino acid change.

.0012
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, PRO396SER

In a Japanese family with van der Woude syndrome (119300), Kayano et al.
(2003) found a C-to-T substitution at nucleotide 1186 in exon 9 of the
IRF6 gene that resulted in a pro396-to-ser (P396S) amino acid change.

.0013
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
POPLITEAL PTERYGIUM SYNDROME, INCLUDED
IRF6, ARG339ILE

In a patient with overlapping features of van der Woude syndrome
(119300) and popliteal pterygium syndrome (119500) (unilateral cleft lip
and palate, ankyloblepharon, paramedian lip pits) as well as unilateral
renal aplasia and coronal hypospadias, de Medeiros et al. (2008)
identified heterozygosity for a 1016G-T transversion in the IRF6 gene,
resulting in an arg339-to-ile (R339I) substitution. The mutation was not
found in 60 unrelated control individuals. The patient and his brother,
who had hypospadias and nephrocalcinosis but no IRF6 mutation, were both
conceived by in vitro fertilization. De Medeiros et al. (2008) suggested
that the hypospadias and renal aplasia may have been due to the method
of fertilization rather than the IRF6 mutation. They noted that a lethal
PPS syndrome (263650) has renal aplasia as a feature.

.0014
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
POPLITEAL PTERYGIUM SYNDROME, INCLUDED
IRF6, LEU22PRO

In affected individuals from a 4-generation family with van der Woude
syndrome (VWS1; 119300), Ghassibe et al. (2004) identified
heterozygosity for a 65T-C transition in exon 3 of the IRF6 gene,
resulting in a leu22-to-pro (L22P) substitution in the DNA-binding
domain. In addition to lip pits and clefting, 2 of the patients also had
syndactyly and synechiae, major signs for popliteal-pterygium syndrome
(PPS; 119500). Ghassibe et al. (2004) stated that these 2 patients were
considered to have PPS, whereas the 6 other affected family members were
classified as VWS, thus demonstrating that a single mutation could be
responsible for both syndromes.

.0015
POPLITEAL PTERYGIUM SYNDROME
IRF6, ARG84LEU

In a Japanese boy with popliteal-pterygium syndrome (119500), Matsuzawa
et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 251G-T transversion in exon 4 of
the IRF6 gene, resulting in an arg84-to-leu (R84L) substitution in a
critical site for DNA binding. The boy had lip pits, bilateral cleft lip
and palate, syngnathia, syndactyly, popliteal webbing, and atrophic
testes. His father, who also carried the mutation, had bilateral cleft
lip and palate only. Family history revealed a paternal grandfather and
aunt with bifid uvula and cleft palate. Thus, variable expressivity was
clinically evident in this family. The mutation was not detected in the
mother or in 90 healthy Japanese controls. The R84C (607199.0004) and
R84H (607199.0005) mutations in the same codon were previously reported
by Kondo et al. (2002) in other patients with PPS, suggesting a hotspot
for recurrent mutations.

.0016
POPLITEAL PTERYGIUM SYNDROME
IRF6, SER424LEU

In a Japanese boy and his mother with PPS (119500), Matsuzawa et al.
(2010) identified a heterozygous 1271C-T transition in exon 9 of the
IRF6 gene, resulting in a ser424-to-leu (S424L) substitution. The
mutation was not found in 200 Japanese controls. In vitro functional
expression studies showed that the mutant protein had 6% residual
activity, consistent with a loss of function. The boy had cleft palate,
syngnathia, unclear scrotum, syndactyly, and mild popliteal webbing,
whereas his mother had cleft lip and palate, syngnathia, syndactyly, and
hypoplasia of the labia majora.

.0017
VAN DER WOUDE SYNDROME 1
IRF6, GLN49TER

In a 16-year-old girl with a heart-shaped mass on her inner lower lip
(VWS1; 119300) but no pits, oral clefts, or hypodontia, Yeetong et al.
(2009) identified heterozygosity for a 145C-T transition in exon 3 of
the IRF6 gene, resulting in a gln49-to-ter (Q49X) substitution in the
highly conserved DNA-binding domain. Her mother and other relatives were
reported to have similar findings, but were unavailable for evaluation.

REFERENCE 1. Ben, J.; Jabs, E. W.; Chong, S. S.: Genomic, cDNA and embryonic
expression analysis of zebrafish IRF6, the gene mutated in the human
oral clefting disorders Van der Woude and popliteal pterygium syndromes. Gene
Expr. Patterns 5: 629-638, 2005.

2. de Medeiros, F.; Hansen, L.; Mawlad, E.; Eiberg, H.; Asklund, C.;
Tommerup, N.; Jakobsen, L. P.: A novel mutation in IRF6 resulting
in VWS-PPS spectrum disorder with renal aplasia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 146A:
1605-1608, 2008.

3. Ghassibe, M.; Revencu, N.; Bayet, B.; Gillerot, Y.; Vanwijck, R.;
Verellen-Dumoulin, C.; Vikkula, M.: Six families with van der Woude
and/or popliteal pterygium syndrome: all with a mutation in the IRF6
gene. J. Med. Genet. 41: e15, 2004. Note: Electronic Article.

4. Ingraham, C. R.; Kinoshita, A.; Kondo, S.; Yang, B.; Sajan, S.;
Trout, K. J.; Malik, M. I.; Dunnwald, M.; Goudy, S. L.; Lovett, M.;
Murray, J. C.; Schutte, B. C.: Abnormal skin, limb and craniofacial
morphogenesis in mice deficient for interferon regulatory factor 6
(Irf6). Nature Genet. 38: 1335-1340, 2006.

5. Kayano, S.; Kure, S.; Suzuki, Y.; Kanno, K.; Aoki, Y.; Kondo, S.;
Schutte, B. C.; Murray, J. C.; Yamada, A.; Matsubara, Y.: Novel IRF6
mutations in Japanese patients with van der Woude syndrome: two missense
mutations (R45Q and P396S) and a 17-kb deletion. J. Hum. Genet. 48:
622-628, 2003.

6. Kondo, S.; Schutte, B. C.; Richardson, R. J.; Bjork, B. C.; Knight,
A. S.; Watanabe, Y.; Howard, E.; Ferreira de Lima, R. L. L.; Daack-Hirsch,
S.; Sander, A.; McDonald-McGinn, D. M.; Zackai, E. H.; and 14 others
: Mutations in IRF6 cause Van der Woude and popliteal pterygium syndromes.
(Letter) Nature Genet. 32: 285-289, 2002.

7. Little, H. J.; Rorick, N. K.; Su, L.-I.; Baldock, C.; Malhotra,
S.; Jowitt, T.; Gakhar, L.; Subramanian, R.; Schutte, B. C.; Dixon,
M. J.; Shore, P.: Missense mutations that cause Van der Woude syndrome
and popliteal pterygium syndrome affect the DNA-binding and transcriptional
activation functions of IRF6. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 535-545, 2009.
Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 1544 only, 2009.

8. Matsuzawa, N.; Kondo, S.; Shimozato, K.; Nagao, T.; Nakano, M.;
Tsuda, M.; Hirano, A.; Niikawa, N.; Yoshiura, K.: Two missense mutations
of the IRF6 gene in two Japanese families with popliteal pterygium
syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A: 2262-2267, 2010.

9. Rahimov, F.; Marazita, M. L.; Visel, A.; Cooper, M. E.; Hitchler,
M. J.; Rubini, M.; Domann, F. E.; Govil, M.; Christensen, K.; Bille,
C.; Melbye, M.; Jugessur, A.; and 11 others: Disruption of an AP-2-alpha
binding site in an IRF6 enhancer is associated with cleft lip. Nature
Genet. 40: 1341-1347, 2008.

10. Richardson, R. J.; Dixon, J.; Jiang, R.; Dixon, M. J.: Integration
of IRF6 and Jagged2 signalling is essential for controlling palatal
adhesion and fusion competence. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 2632-2642,
2009.

11. Richardson, R. J.; Dixon, J.; Malhotra, S.; Hardman, M. J.; Knowles,
L.; Boot-Handford, R. P.; Shore, P.; Whitmarsh, A.; Dixon, M. J.:
Irf6 is a key determinant of the keratinocyte proliferation-differentiation
switch. Nature Genet. 38: 1329-1334, 2006.

12. Wang, X.; Liu, J.; Zhang, H.; Xiao, M.; Li, J.; Yang, C.; Lin,
X.; Wu, Z.; Hu, L.; Kong, X.: Novel mutations in the IRF6 gene for
Van der Woude syndrome. Hum. Genet. 113: 382-386, 2003.

13. Yeetong, P.; Mahatumarat, C.; Siriwan, P.; Rojvachiranonda, N.;
Suphapeetiporn, K.; Shotelersuk, V.: Three novel mutations of the
IRF6 gene with one associated with an unusual feature in van der Woude
syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A: 2489-2492, 2009.

14. Zucchero, T. M.; Cooper, M. E.; Maher, B. S.; Daack-Hirsch, S.;
Nepomuceno, B.; Ribeiro, L.; Caprau, D.; Christensen, K.; Suzuki,
Y.; Machida, J.; Natsume, N.; Yoshiura, K.-I.; and 17 others: Interferon
regulatory factor 6 (IRF6) gene variants and the risk of isolated
cleft lip or palate. New Eng. J. Med. 351: 769-780, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/21/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/15/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/6/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/1/2010
Nara Sobreira - updated: 11/20/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/31/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/24/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/24/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/2/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/21/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/3/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/15/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/5/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/1/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/5/2002

EDITED joanna: 07/22/2013
terry: 3/14/2013
carol: 2/21/2013
carol: 7/6/2011
wwang: 6/30/2011
ckniffin: 6/15/2011
wwang: 4/19/2011
terry: 4/6/2011
wwang: 4/14/2010
terry: 4/1/2010
alopez: 1/6/2010
carol: 11/24/2009
terry: 11/20/2009
wwang: 8/14/2009
terry: 7/31/2009
alopez: 11/24/2008
mgross: 1/2/2007
alopez: 11/27/2006
terry: 11/21/2006
wwang: 10/10/2005
terry: 10/3/2005
ckniffin: 12/21/2004
alopez: 12/16/2004
terry: 12/15/2004
carol: 8/25/2004
ckniffin: 8/23/2004
alopez: 4/7/2004
terry: 4/5/2004
alopez: 10/3/2003
terry: 10/1/2003
alopez: 10/18/2002
alopez: 9/16/2002
alopez: 9/6/2002

615104	TITLE *615104 NCK-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 5-LIKE; NCKAP5L
;;NCKAP5-LIKE;;
KIAA1602
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human fetal brain
cDNA library, Nagase et al. (2000) identified a partial NCKAP5L clone,
which they designated KIAA1602. RT-PCR ELISA detected robust NCKAP5L
expression in all adult and fetal tissues examined, with highest
expression in adult brain and ovary and in most adult brain regions
examined. Expression was lower in fetal brain than in adult brain.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the NCKAP5L
gene to chromosome 12.

Hartz (2013) mapped the NCKAP5L gene to chromosome 12q13.12 based on an
alignment of the NCKAP5L sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB046822) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/27/2013.

2. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Nakayama, M.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVIII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 273-281, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/27/2013

EDITED mgross: 02/27/2013

606015	TITLE *606015 FAS APOPTOTIC INHIBITORY MOLECULE 3; FAIM3
;;TOSO;;
Fc FRAGMENT OF IgM, RECEPTOR FOR; FCMR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Fc receptors specifically bind to the Fc region of immunoglobulins (Igs)
to mediate the unique functions of each Ig class. FAIM3 encodes an Fc
receptor for IgM (see 147020) (Kubagawa et al., 2009; Shima et al.,
2010).

CLONING

Using retroviral cDNA library-based functional cloning, Hitoshi et al.
(1998) isolated a cDNA encoding a potent inhibitor of FAS
(134637)-induced apoptotic signaling that they named TOSO after a
Japanese liquor drunk on New Year's day to celebrate long life and
eternal youth. The predicted 390-amino acid type I integral membrane
protein has a signal peptide; an extracellular region homologous to
immunoglobulin (Ig) variable domains, but with 2 additional cysteines;
and a cytoplasmic region containing a basic region, an acidic region,
and a proline-rich region. RNA dot blot analysis detected strong
expression of TOSO in lymph node, lung, and kidney. Northern blot
analysis detected a major 2.0-kb TOSO transcript, as well as minor
transcripts of 2.8, 3.5, and 4.3 kb, in lymph node, spleen, peripheral
blood leukocytes, and thymus. RT-PCR analysis detected TOSO expression
in lymphoid cell lines, but not in nonhemopoietic cell lines.

By retroviral expression and functional cloning using cDNA libraries
from a chronic lymphocytic leukemia line and from a pre-B cell line,
followed by screening for IgM (see 147020) binding and flow cytometric
enrichment, Kubagawa et al. (2009) obtained a cDNA encoding FAIM3, which
they called FCMR. SDS-PAGE, RT-PCR, and FACS analyses showed that FCMR
had an apparent molecular mass of 60 kD and was predominantly expressed
on B and T lymphocytes.

By searching EST databases for molecules containing Ig domains similar
to those of FCAMR (605484) and PIGR (173880), Shima et al. (2010)
identified FAIM3, which they called FCMR, as a possible Fc receptor for
IgM. Northern blot and RT-PCR analyses revealed FCMR expression
predominantly in lymphocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

FAS engagement by FAS ligand (FASL; 134638) activates cysteine
proteases, or caspases, through an association with FADD (602457),
resulting in cell death. Newly activated T cells, however, express both
FAS and FASL, but remain resistant to apoptosis. Using Northern blot
analysis, Hitoshi et al. (1998) demonstrated that expression of TOSO,
like that of FAS and FASL, increased after T-cell activation, followed
by a decline and susceptibility to apoptosis. Functional analysis showed
that hematopoietic cells expressing TOSO resisted anti-FAS-, FADD-, and
TNF-induced apoptosis without increasing expression of the inhibitors of
apoptosis BCL2 (151430) and BCLXL (600039). RT-PCR analysis indicated
that cells expressing TOSO and activated by FAS had reduced FLICE
(CASP8; 601763) and increased FLIP (CFLAR; 603599) expression, which
inhibited CASP8 processing. Mutational analysis established that the Ig
domain and transmembrane region of TOSO, but not the cytoplasmic domain,
were required for the inhibition of FAS-induced apoptosis. Hitoshi et
al. (1998) concluded that the transient increase in TOSO expression is
responsible for temporary FAS resistance in T cells.

Through functional analysis, Kubagawa et al. (2009) confirmed that FCMR
had binding specificity for IgM, but not other immunoglobulins, and that
only under some conditions did FCMR have antiapoptotic activity.
Kubagawa et al. (2009) concluded that FCMR per se has no inhibitory
activity in FAS-mediated apoptosis, and that such inhibition can only be
achieved with anti-FAS antibodies of IgM, but not IgG (see 147100),
isotype.

Shima et al. (2010) found that transfection of FCMR into HeLa cells
allowed IgM, but not IgG, binding. They concluded that FCMR is a
receptor for IgM that may serve as an uptake receptor for IgM-opsonized
antigens by B cells.

MAPPING

Using radiation hybrid analysis, Hitoshi et al. (1998) mapped the FAIM3
gene to chromosome 1q31-q32, a region with frequent changes in
hemopoietic malignancies and solid tumors. Kubagawa et al. (2009) noted
that the FAIM3 gene is located on chromosome 1q32.2, adjacent to 2 other
genes encoding IgM-binding receptors, PIGR and FCAMR.

REFERENCE 1. Hitoshi, Y.; Lorens, J.; Kitada, S.-I.; Fisher, J.; LaBarge, M.;
Ring, H. Z.; Francke, U.; Reed, J. C.; Kinoshita, S.; Nolan, G. P.
: Toso, a cell surface, specific regulator of Fas-induced apoptosis
in T cells. Immunity 8: 461-471, 1998.

2. Kubagawa, H.; Oka, S.; Kubagawa, Y.; Torii, I.; Takayama, E.; Kang,
D.-W.; Gartland, G. L.; Bertoli, L. F.; Mori, H.; Takatsu, H.; Kitamura,
T.; Ohno, H.; Wang, J.-Y.: Identity of the elusive IgM Fc receptor
(Fc-mu-R) in humans. J. Exp. Med. 206: 2779-2793, 2009.

3. Shima, H.; Takatsu, H.; Fukuda, S.; Ohmae, M.; Hase, K.; Kubagawa,
H.; Wang, J.-Y.; Ohno, H.: Identification of TOSO/FAIM3 as an Fc
receptor for IgM. Int. Immun. 22: 149-156, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/11/2010

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/14/2001

EDITED mgross: 06/14/2010
terry: 6/11/2010
mgross: 6/14/2001

190020	TITLE *190020 V-HA-RAS HARVEY RAT SARCOMA VIRAL ONCOGENE HOMOLOG; HRAS
;;HRAS1;;
HARVEY MURINE SARCOMA VIRUS ONCOGENE; RASH1;;
p21(RAS);;
p21;;
TRANSFORMATION GENE: ONCOGENE HAMSV
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The 3 RAS oncogenes, HRAS, KRAS (190070), and NRAS (164790), encode
21-kD proteins called p21s.

Wong-Staal et al. (1981) identified human DNA sequences homologous to
cloned DNA fragments containing the oncogenic nucleic acid sequences of
a type C mammalian retrovirus, the Harvey strain of murine sarcoma virus
(HaMSV) derived from the rat. Non-onc intervening sequences were present
in the human counterpart, which is rather highly conserved in mammalian
evolution and probably plays a role in normal cell growth or
differentiation. Allelic variation in the human onc HaMSV gene was
identified. The transforming genes of retroviruses are derived from a
group of cellular genes that are highly conserved evolutionarily. The
relationship between viral transforming genes (collectively called
v-onc) and their normal cellular counterparts (collectively called
c-onc) is obviously of great scientific and medical interest. Chang et
al. (1982) studied the Harvey and Kirsten murine sarcoma viruses, 2
closely related rat-derived transforming retroviruses called v-Ha-ras
and v-Ki-ras, respectively. They concluded that the human genome
contains several copies of the c-ras gene family and that c-Ha-ras-1
(with intervening sequences) (HRAS1) has been more highly conserved than
has c-Ha-ras-2 (HRAS2; 300437).

MAPPING

By Southern blot analysis of human-rodent hybrid cell DNA, de
Martinville et al. (1983) found that the cellular homolog of the
transforming DNA sequence isolated from the bladder carcinoma line EJ is
located on the short arm of chromosome 11. The locus also contains
sequences homologous to the Harvey ras oncogene. No evidence of gene
amplification was found. These workers also found karyologically 'a
complex rearrangement of the short arm in two of the four copies of
chromosome 11 present in this heteroploid cell line' (EJ). Region 11p15
was the site of a breakpoint in a t(3;11) translocation found in tumor
cells from a patient with hereditary renal cell carcinoma (144700).

By in situ molecular hybridization studies of meiotic chromosomes
(pachytene bivalents), Jhanwar et al. (1983) found that KRAS and HRAS
probes mapped to chromomeres corresponding to bands 11p14.1, 12p12.1,
and 12q24.2 of somatic chromosomes. HRAS hybridized most avidly at
11p14.1. A weak hybridization at 3p21.3 was noted.

By somatic cell hybridization, Junien et al. (1984) found that HRAS1
maps to 11p15.5-p15.1. The HRAS1 and insulin (INS; 176730) genes appear
to be closely situated in the 11pter area; Gerhard et al. (1984) found a
maximum lod score of 4.1 at theta = 0.0 for the HRAS1 and INS linkage.
Two obligatory recombinants were found. These findings are consistent
with the observation that the HRAS gene is not deleted in cases of Wilms
tumor with deleted 11p13 (Junien et al., 1984). De Martinville and
Francke (1984) likewise mapped HRAS1 and INS, and beta-globin (HBB;
141900) as well, outside the 11p14.1-p11.2 segment.

Fisher et al. (1984) concluded that HRAS1 is distal to the INS and HBB
loci on 11p. Fearon et al. (1984) demonstrated that HRAS1 is 8 cM distal
to the HBB gene and 4 cM proximal to the INS gene. The HBB gene is about
7 cM distal to the parathyroid hormone gene (PTH; 168450). The length of
11p is estimated to be about 50 cM.

By high resolution in situ hybridization to meiotic pachytene
chromosomes, Chaganti et al. (1985) concluded that HRAS1 is located at
11p14.1, HBB at 11p11.22, PTH (not previously assigned regionally) at
11p11.21, and INS at 11p14.1.

Russell et al. (1996) constructed a contiguous physical map from the
HRAS1 gene to the 11p telomere. The contig spanned approximately 500 kb.
Three genes were placed on the contig in the following order: tel--RNH
(173320)--HRAS1--HRC (142705).

Bianchi et al. (1993) mapped the H-ras-1 gene to the beta-globin region
of mouse chromosome 7.

GENE FUNCTION

Goyette et al. (1983) found that the number of transcripts of the Harvey
ras gene increases during liver regeneration in rats. This appeared to
indicate regulated change in activity of an 'oncogene' in a physiologic
growth process.

Ishii et al. (1985) pointed out similarities between the promoter of
HRAS and that of EGF receptor (131550). This similarity is intriguing in
light of the finding of Hiwasa et al. (1988) that the preferential
degradation of EGF receptors by cathepsin L (116880) may be suppressed
by HRAS gene products (p21s).

Sears et al. (1999) showed that RAS enhances the accumulation of MYC
(190080) activity by stabilizing the MYC protein. Whereas MYC has a very
short half-life when produced in the absence of mitogenic signals, due
to degradation by the 26S proteasome, the half-life of MYC increases
markedly in growth-stimulated cells. This stabilization is dependent on
the RAS/RAF/MAPK (see 176948) pathway and is not augmented by proteasome
inhibition, suggesting that RAS inhibits the proteasome-dependent
degradation of MYC. Sears et al. (1999) proposed that one aspect of
MYC-RAS collaboration is an ability of RAS to enhance the accumulation
of transcriptionally active MYC protein.

Hahn et al. (1999) found that ectopic expression of TERT (187270) in
combination with 2 oncogenes, the simian virus 40 large-T oncoprotein
and an oncogenic allele of HRAS (HRASV12), resulted in direct
tumorigenic conversion of normal human epithelial and fibroblast cells.
These results demonstrated that disruption of the intracellular pathways
regulated by large-T, oncogenic RAS, and telomerase suffices to create a
human tumor cell.

Mochizuki et al. (2001) used fluorescent resonance energy transfer
(FRET)-based sensors to evaluate the spatiotemporal images of growth
factor-induced activation of RAS and RAP1 (179520). Epidermal growth
factor (131530) activated RAS at the peripheral plasma membrane and RAP1
at the intracellular perinuclear region of COS-1 cells. In PC12 cells,
nerve growth factor (see 162030)-induced activation of RAS was initiated
at the plasma membrane and transmitted to the whole cell body. After 3
hours, high RAS activity was observed at the extending neurites. By
using the FRAP (fluorescence recovery after photobleaching) technique,
Mochizuki et al. (2001) found that RAS at the neurites turned over
rapidly; therefore, the sustained RAS activity at neurites was due to
high GTP/GDP exchange rate and/or low GTPase activity, but not to the
retention of the active RAS. While previous biochemical analyses rarely
detected more than 40% activation of RAS upon growth factor stimulation,
Mochizuki et al. (2001) concluded that their data show that growth
factor stimulation strongly activates RAS/RAP1 in a very restricted area
within cells, and that a large population of RAS or RAP1 remains
inactive, causing an apparent low-level response in biochemical assays.

Zhu et al. (2002) examined the small GTPases RAS and RAP in the
postsynaptic signaling underlying synaptic plasticity. They showed that
RAS relays the NMDA receptor (see 138252) and
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (see 114078) signaling
that drives synaptic delivery of AMPA receptors (see 138248) during
long-term potentiation. In contrast, RAP was found to mediate the NMDA
receptor-dependent removal of synaptic AMPA receptors that occurs during
long-term depression. The authors determined that RAS and RAP exert
their effects on AMPA receptors that contain different subunit
composition. Thus, RAS and RAP, whose activities can be controlled by
postsynaptic enzymes, serve as independent regulators for potentiating
and depressing central synapses.

Oft et al. (2002) found that activation of Smad2 (601366) induced
migration of mouse squamous carcinoma cells, but that elevated levels of
H-ras were required for nuclear accumulation of Smad2. Elevated levels
of both were required for induction of spindle-cell transformation and
metastasis.

Weijzen et al. (2002) demonstrated that oncogenic Ras activates Notch
(190198) signaling and that wildtype Notch1 is necessary to maintain the
neoplastic phenotype in Ras-transformed human cells in vitro and in
vivo. Oncogenic Ras increases levels and activity of the intracellular
form of wildtype Notch1, and upregulates Notch1 ligand Delta1 (606582)
and also presenilin-1 (104311), a protein involved in Notch processing,
through a p38 (600289)-mediated pathway. Weijzen et al. (2002) concluded
that their observations placed Notch signaling among key downstream
effectors of oncogenic Ras.

Because therapeutics inhibiting RAS and NFKB (see 164011) pathways are
used to treat human cancer, experiments assessing the effects of
altering these regulators have been performed in mice. The medical
relevance of murine studies is limited, however, by differences between
mouse and human skin, and by the greater ease of transforming murine
cells. To study RAS and NFKB in a setting more relevant to human
tumorigenesis, Dajee et al. (2003) expressed the active HRAS
gly12-to-val mutation (190020.0001), NFKB p65 (164014), and a stable
NFKB repressor mutant of IKBA (164008) in human skin tissue. Primary
human keratinocytes were retrovirally transduced and used to regenerate
human skin on immune-deficient mice. Tissue expressing IKBA alone showed
mild hyperplasia, whereas expression of oncogenic RAS induced growth
arrest with graft failure. Although implicated in promoting features of
neoplasia in other settings, the coexpression of oncogenic RAS with NFKB
subunits failed to support proliferation. Coexpression of RAS and IKBA
produced large neoplasms with deep invasion through fat into underlying
muscle and fascia, similar to human squamous cell carcinomas (SCC), in 3
weeks. These tumors showed more than 10-fold increase in mitotic index,
preserved telomeres, and increased amounts of TERT (187270) protein.
Human keratinocytes lacking laminin-5 (LAMB3; 150310) and ITGB4 (147557)
failed to form tumors on coexpression with RAS and IKBA; however,
introduction of wildtype LAMB3 and ITGB4 restored tumor-forming
capacity, suggesting that these 2 proteins are required for SCC
tumorigenesis. Dajee et al. (2003) demonstrated that growth arrest
triggered by oncogenic RAS can be bypassed by IKBA-mediated blockade of
NFKB and that RAS opposed the increased susceptibility to apoptosis
caused by NFKB blockade. Thus, IKBA circumvents restraints on growth
promotion induced by oncogenic RAS and can act with RAS to induce
invasive human tissue neoplasia.

Johnson et al. (2005) found that the 3 human RAS genes, HRAS, KRAS, and
NRAS, contain multiple let-7 (605386) complementary sites in their
3-prime UTRs that allow let-7 miRNA to regulate their expression. Let-7
expression was lower in lung tumors than in normal lung tissue, whereas
expression of the RAS proteins was significantly higher in lung tumors,
suggesting a possible mechanism for let-7 in cancer.

Substitution of ser17 with asn (S17N) in any of the RAS proteins
produces dominant-inhibitory proteins with higher affinities for
exchange factors than normal RAS. These mutants cannot interact with
downstream effectors and therefore form unproductive complexes,
preventing activation of endogenous RAS. Using experiments in COS-7
cells, mouse fibroblasts, and canine kidney cells, Matallanas et al.
(2003) found that the Hras, Kras, and Nras S17N mutants exhibited
distinct inhibitory effects that appeared to be due largely to their
specific membrane localizations. The authors demonstrated that Hras is
present in caveolae, lipid rafts, and bulk disordered membranes, whereas
Kras and Nras are present primarily in disordered membranes and lipid
rafts, respectively. Thus, the Hras S17N mutant inhibited activation of
all 3 wildtype RAS isoforms, the Kras S17N mutant inhibited wildtype
Kras and the portion of Hras in disordered membranes, and the Nras S17N
mutant inhibited wildtype Nras and the portion of Hras in lipid rafts.

Rocks et al. (2005) showed that the specific subcellular distribution of
HRAS and NRAS guanosine triphosphate-binding proteins is generated by a
constitutive de/reacylation cycle that operates on palmitoylated
proteins, driving their rapid exchange between the plasma membrane and
the Golgi apparatus. Depalmitoylation redistributes farnesylated Ras in
all membranes, followed by repalmitoylation and trapping of Ras at the
Golgi, from where it is redirected to the plasma membrane via the
secretory pathway. This continuous cycle prevents Ras from nonspecific
residence on endomembranes, thereby maintaining the specific
intracellular compartmentalization. Rocks et al. (2005) found that the
de/reacylation cycle also initiates Ras activation at the Golgi by
transport of plasma membrane-localized Ras guanosine triphosphate.
Different de/repalmitoylation kinetics account for isoform-specific
activation responses to growth factors.

Ancrile et al. (2007) found that expression of an oncogenic form of HRAS
induced secretion of the cytokine IL6 (147620) in normal primary human
kidney cells, fibroblasts, myoblasts, and mammary epithelial cells.
Knockdown of IL6, genetic ablation of the Il6 gene in mice, or treatment
with IL6-neutralizing antibody retarded HRAS-driven tumorigenesis. IL6
appeared to act in a paracrine fashion to promote angiogenesis and tumor
growth.

Stites et al. (2007) developed and validated a mathematical model of Ras
signaling. The model-based predictions and associated experiments help
explain why only 1 of 2 classes of activating Ras point mutations with
in vitro transformation potential is commonly found in cancers.
Model-based analysis of these mutants uncovered a systems-level process
that contributes to total Ras activation in cells. This predicted
behavior was supported by experimental observations. Stites et al.
(2007) also used the model to identify a strategy in which a drug could
cause stronger inhibition on the cancerous Ras network than on the
wildtype network.

McMurray et al. (2008) showed that a large proportion of genes
controlled synergistically by loss-of-function p53 (TP53; 191170) and
Ras activation are critical to the malignant state of murine and human
colon cells. Notably, 14 of 24 'cooperation response genes' were found
to contribute to tumor formation in gene perturbation experiments. In
contrast, only 1 of 14 perturbations of the genes responding in a
nonsynergistic manner had a similar effect. McMurray et al. (2008)
concluded that synergistic control of gene expression by oncogenic
mutations thus emerges as an underlying key to malignancy, and provides
an attractive rationale for identifying intervention targets in gene
networks downstream of oncogenic gain- and loss-of-function mutations.

Lu et al. (2008) found that conditional activation of HRAS1(Q61L) in
embryonic stem cells in vitro induced the trophectoderm marker Cdx2
(600297) and enabled derivation of trophoblast stem cell lines that,
when injected into blastocysts, chimerized placental tissues. Erk2
(176948), the downstream effector of Ras-MAPK signaling, was
asymmetrically expressed in the apical membranes of the 8-cell-stage
embryo just before morula compaction. Inhibition of MAPK signaling in
cultured mouse embryos compromised Cdx2 expression, delayed blastocyst
development, and reduced trophectoderm outgrowth from embryo explants.
Lu et al. (2008) concluded that ectopic Ras activation can divert
embryonic stem cells toward extraembryonic trophoblastic fates and that
Ras-MAPK signaling has a role in promoting trophectoderm formation from
mouse embryos.

Gough et al. (2009) reported that malignant transformation by activated
Ras (190020.0001) is impaired without STAT3 (102582), in spite of the
inability of Ras to drive STAT3 tyrosine phosphorylation or nuclear
translocation. Moreover, STAT3 mutants that cannot be
tyrosine-phosphorylated, that are retained in the cytoplasm, or that
cannot bind DNA nonetheless supported Ras-mediated transformation.
Unexpectedly, STAT3 was detected within mitochondria, and exclusive
targeting of STAT3 to mitochondria without nuclear accumulation
facilitated Ras transformation. Mitochondrial STAT3 sustained altered
glycolytic and oxidative phosphorylation activities characteristic of
cancer cells. Thus, Gough et al. (2009) concluded that, in addition to
its nuclear transcriptional role, STAT3 regulates a metabolic function
in mitochondria, supporting Ras-dependent malignant transformation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Somatic Mutations in Tumors

Der et al. (1982) found that mouse cells transformed by high molecular
weight DNAs of a human bladder and a human lung carcinoma cell line
contained new sequences homologous, respectively, to the transforming
genes of Harvey (ras-H) and Kirsten (ras-K) sarcoma viruses. The HRAS1
oncogene differs from its normal cellular counterpart by the absence of
a restriction endonuclease site. This sequence change could be used as
the basis of a rapid screening method for this oncogene. Muschel et al.
(1983) screened DNA from 34 persons and found that all were homozygous
for the normal allele. On the other hand, DNA from a patient's bladder
tumor, as well as DNA from his normal bladder and leukocytes, was
heterozygous at that restriction endonuclease site. The change was
pinpointed to 1 of 2 nucleotides, either of which would change the
twelfth amino acid (glycine) in the normal HRAS1 gene product. Thus, the
patient appeared to be carrying an HRAS1 mutation in his germline that
predisposed him to bladder cancer. The restriction enzyme used in the
screen was HpaII or its isoschizomer MspI. However, the authors
retracted their data that purported to show an HRAS1 mutation in both
tumor tissue and normal tissue; they concluded that the original
extractions of DNA from that patient were contaminated by a plasmid DNA
containing the HRAS1 oncogene. By restriction analysis, Feinberg et al.
(1983) tested 29 human cancers for this mutation and found it in none.
Included were 10 primary bladder cancers, 9 colon cancers, and 10 lung
cancers. The point mutation altering the twelfth amino acid of the HRAS1
gene product p21, found in a bladder cancer cell line, was the only one
known to result in a human transforming gene (see 190020.0001).

Capon et al. (1983) showed that the HRAS1 gene of the T24 human bladder
carcinoma line has at least 4 exons and that only a single point
mutation in the first exon distinguished the coding region of both
alleles of the normal gene from their activated counterpart. Both
versions of the gene encode a protein which is predicted to differ from
the corresponding viral gene product at 3 amino acid residues, one of
which was previously shown to represent the major site of
phosphorylation of the viral polypeptide. Pincus et al. (1983) concluded
that the bladder oncogene peptide (product of the mutant HRAS1 gene),
with valine rather than glycine at position 12 (190020.0001), has a
3-dimensional structure markedly different from the normal. Tong et al.
(1989) determined the structural change in the HRAS gene (called RASH by
them) resulting from replacement of glycine 12 by valine.

Sekiya et al. (1984) found a point mutation in the second exon of the
HRAS1 gene in a melanoma. Transversion from adenine to thymine resulted
in the substitution of leucine for glutamine as amino acid 61 in the
predicted p21 protein.

In 2 of 38 urinary tract tumors, Fujita et al. (1985) detected HRAS
oncogenes by transfection, cloned the oncogene in biologically active
form, and showed that it contained single base changes at codon 61
leading to substitutions of arginine and leucine, respectively, for
glutamine at this position. In 1 tumor, a 40-fold amplification of KRAS
was found. In the cell lines isolated from a single colon cancer,
Greenhalgh and Kinsella (1985) found a point mutation in codon 12 of
HRAS leading to an amino acid change in the gene product. The authors
cited experience with KRAS involvement in 3 colon cancers and NRAS
involvement in 1, while some 34 other colon cancers failed to
demonstrate HRAS activation at codon 12.

Goriely et al. (2009) screened 30 spermatocytic seminomas (see 273300)
for oncogenic mutations in 17 candidate genes and identified apparent
homozygosity for 5 mutations in the HRAS gene (190020), 3 182A-G
transitions and 2 181C-A transversions, all involving the Q61 codon
(see, e.g., 190020.0002).

Yokota et al. (1986) concluded that alterations are found in oncogenes
MYC (190080), HRAS, or MYB (189990) in more than one-third of human
solid tumors. Amplification of MYC was found in advanced widespread
tumors and in aggressive primary tumors. Apparent allelic deletions of
HRAS and MYB could be correlated with progression and metastasis of
carcinomas and sarcomas.

Corell and Zoll (1988) used the restriction enzymes MspI, HpaII, BamHI,
and TaqI to analyze 426 alleles of the HRAS locus in DNA samples from 92
healthy individuals, 50 patients with breast cancer, 23 patients with
ovarian cancer, and 5 patients with lymphomas. The allelic distribution
was comparable among controls and tumor patients, indicating that a
genetic predisposition to malignancy is not conferred by unique alleles
at the HRAS locus. However, analysis of DNA isolated directly from
tumors revealed a discrepancy between the alleles in the white blood
cells and those in the tumor tissue. Six patients demonstrated alleles
in the tumor tissue which were not observed in DNA from the white blood
cells.

In a study of 118 lung cancer patients and 123 unaffected controls,
Ryberg et al. (1990) found striking differences in the distribution of
HRAS alleles. Six of 7 rare alleles were unique to the lung cancer group
and 1 rare allele for the control group; rare alleles were found in 10
of 236 chromosomes in lung cancer patients as compared to 1 of 246
chromosomes in the controls. The lung cancer group also had a
significantly lower frequency of 1 of the common alleles. The authors
emphasized the importance of control for ethnic factors and the
advantage in studying a relatively homogeneous population such as the
Norwegian one.

The HRAS1 gene is tightly linked to a minisatellite located
approximately 1 kb downstream from the gene's coding sequences and
composed of 30 to 100 units of a 28-bp consensus sequence. Thirty
alleles of 1,000 to 3,000 bp have been described. The 4 most common
alleles--A1, A2, A3, and A4--represent 94% of all alleles in whites and
have apparently served as progenitors for the remaining rare alleles.
Rare alleles appear in the genomes of patients with cancer about 3 times
as often as in controls without cancer (Krontiris et al., 1985); many
such alleles have been observed only in patients with cancer. Krontiris
et al. (1993) conducted a case-control study, typing 736 HRAS1 alleles
from patients with cancer and 652 from controls by Southern blotting of
leukocyte DNA. From analysis of the results and a meta-analysis of 22
other studies, they concluded that there was a significant association
of rare HRAS1 alleles with 4 types of cancer: carcinomas of the breast,
colorectum, and urinary bladder and acute leukemia. They considered it
unlikely that the explanation could be found in linkage disequilibrium
between these rare alleles and a pathogenetic lesion in the HRAS1 locus
or other neighboring loci. Alternatively, they pointed to observations
that new mutations of the HRAS1 minisatellite disrupt the controlled
expression of nearby genes, including HRAS1, by interacting directly
with transcriptional regulatory mechanisms. Furthermore, the
minisatellite is capable of activating and repressing transcription;
allele-specific effects have been observed.

Phelan et al. (1996) demonstrated a modifier effect of the HRAS1 locus
on the penetrance of the BRCA1 gene (113705) in causing ovarian cancer.
The polymorphism in question, a VNTR located 1 kb downstream of the
HRAS1 gene, had previously been found to show an association between
rare alleles and an increased risk of certain types of cancers,
including breast cancer. The risk for ovarian cancer was 2.11 times
greater for BRCA1 carriers harboring 1 or 2 rare HRAS1 alleles, compared
to carriers with only common alleles (P = 0.015). A magnitude of the
risk associated with a rare HRAS1 allele was not altered by adjusting
for the other known risk factors for hereditary ovarian cancer. This
study was said to have been the first to show the effect of a modifying
gene on the penetrance of an inherited cancer syndrome.

Groesser et al. (2012) analyzed tissue from 65 individuals with nevus
sebaceous (see 162900) for the presence of HRAS hotspot mutations. HRAS
mutations were present in 62 lesions (95%), with a G13R substitution
(190020.0017) accounting for 91%. Five sebaceous nevi carried 2 RAS
mutations; the other gene involved was KRAS. Nonlesional tissue from 18
patients showed a wildtype HRAS sequence. Eight individuals developed
secondary tumors within the nevus sebaceous, including 2
syringocystadenoma papilliferum, 3 trichoblastomas, and 3
trichilemmomas, and all secondary tumors carried the same mutation as
the nevi. Functional analysis of mutant cells carrying the G13R mutation
showed constitutive activation of the MAPK and PI3K (see 171834)/AKT
(164730) signaling pathways. Other somatic HRAS mutations identified
included G12S (190020.0003), G12D (190020.0013), and G12C (190020.0014).
One patient with Schimmelpenning-Feuerstein-Mims syndrome (163200) was
found by Groesser et al. (2012) to carry the G13R mutation in the
somatic mosaic state. The authors postulated that the mosaic mutation
likely extends to extracutaneous tissues in that disorder, which could
explain the phenotypic pleiotropy.

Hafner et al. (2012) found somatic activating RAS mutations in 28 (39%)
of 72 keratinocytic epidermal nevi from 72 different individuals. HRAS
was the most commonly mutated gene, found in 29% of all nevi, with G13R
(190020.0017) being the most common mutation.

- Genotype/Phenotype Correlations among Somatic HRAS, KRAS,
and NRAS Mutations

In HRAS, KRAS, and NRAS, codons 12 and 61 are 'hotspots' for mutations
that activate their malignant transforming properties. Srivastava et al.
(1985) showed that mutation at these 3 loci result in changes in
electrophoretic mobility of the p21. Changes observed are, for the HRAS
gene, gly12 to val (bladder carcinoma), gly12 to asp (mammary
carcinosarcoma), gln61 to leu (lung carcinoma), and gln61 to arg (renal
pelvic carcinoma) and for the NRAS oncogene, gln61 to arg (lung
carcinoma). They proposed that the electrophoretic changes may be a
rapid method for identification of activated RAS genes, substituting for
the inherently insensitive and time-consuming transfection assay.

Vasko et al. (2003) performed a pooled analysis of 269 mutations in
HRAS, KRAS (190070), and NRAS (164790) garnered from 39 previous
studies. Mutations proved significantly less frequent when detected with
direct sequencing than without (12.3% vs 17%). The rates of mutation
involving NRAS exon 1 and KRAS exon 2 was less than 1%. Mutations of
codon 61 of NRAS were significantly more frequent in follicular tumors
(19%) than in papillary cancers (5%) and significantly more frequent in
malignant (25%) than in benign (14%) tumors. HRAS mutations in codons
12/13 were found in 2 to 3% of all types of tumors, but HRAS mutations
in codon 61 were observed in only 1.4% of tumors, and almost all of them
were malignant. KRAS mutations in exon 1 were found more often in
papillary than follicular cancers (2.7% vs 1.6%) and were sometimes
correlated with special epidemiologic circumstances. The second part of
this study involved analysis of 80 follicular tumors from patients
living in Marseille (France) and Kiev (Ukraine). HRAS mutations in
codons 12/13 were found in 12.5% of common adenomas and 1 follicular
carcinoma (2.9%). Mutations of codon 61 of NRAS occurred in 23.3% and
17.6% of atypical adenomas and follicular carcinomas, respectively. The
authors concluded that their results confirmed the predominance of
mutations of codon 61 of NRAS in thyroid follicular tumors and their
correlation with malignancy.

Nikiforova et al. (2003) analyzed a series of 88 conventional follicular
and Hurthle cell thyroid tumors for RAS (HRAS, NRAS, and KRAS) mutations
and PAX8 (167415)-PPARG (601487) rearrangements using molecular methods
and for galectin-3 (153619) and mesothelioma antibody HBME-1 expression
by immunohistochemistry. Forty-nine percent of conventional follicular
carcinomas had RAS mutations, 36% had PAX8-PPARG rearrangement, and only
1 (3%) had both. Of follicular adenomas, 48% had RAS mutations, 4% had
PAX8-PPARG rearrangement, and 48% had neither. Follicular carcinomas
with RAS mutations most often displayed an
HBME-1-positive/galectin-3-negative immunophenotype and were either
minimally or overtly invasive. Hurthle cell tumors infrequently had
PAX8-PPARG rearrangement or RAS mutations.

- Costello Syndrome

Costello syndrome (218040), a multiple congenital anomaly and mental
retardation syndrome, overlaps phenotypically with Noonan syndrome
(163950), which is caused by mutation in the PTPN11 gene (176876) in
approximately 50% of cases. The PTPN11 gene encodes tyrosine phosphatase
SHP2; gain-of-function mutant SHP2 proteins identified in Noonan
syndrome have enhanced phosphatase activity, which results in activation
of a RAS-MAPK cascade in a cell-specific manner. Aoki et al. (2005)
hypothesized that genes mutated in Costello syndrome and in
PTPN11-negative Noonan syndrome encode molecules that function upstream
or downstream of SHP2 in signal pathways. Among these molecules, they
sequenced the entire coding region of 4 RAS genes in genomic DNA from 13
individuals with Costello syndrome and 28 individuals with
PTPN11-negative Noonan syndrome. In 12 of the 13 individuals with
Costello syndrome, they found one or another of 4 heterozygous mutations
in HRAS. These mutations had been identified somatically in various
tumors (Bos, 1989). Mutation analysis of genomic DNA from 2 different
tissues in 3 affected individuals and genomic DNA from parents in 4
families indicated that these 'oncogenic' and germline mutations
occurred de novo. No mutations in KRAS, NRAS (164790), HRAS, or ERAS
(300437) were observed in 28 individuals with Noonan syndrome or in 1
individual with Costello syndrome. Aoki et al. (2005) stated that to the
best of their knowledge, Costello syndrome was the first disorder
associated with germline mutations in the RAS family of GTPases. The
observations suggested that germline mutations in HRAS perturb human
development and increase susceptibility to tumors.

Kerr et al. (2006) analyzed the HRAS gene in 43 patients with a clinical
diagnosis of Costello syndrome and identified mutations in 37 (86%);
G12S (190020.0003) was the most common mutation, found in 30 of the 37
mutation-positive patients. The authors stated that, together with
previously published series (Aoki et al., 2005 and Gripp et al., 2006),
mutations in HRAS had been found in 82 (85%) of 96 patients with a
clinical diagnosis of Costello syndrome and that overall the frequency
of malignancy in the published mutation-positive cases was 11%.

Costello syndrome can be caused by heterozygous de novo missense
mutations affecting the codon for glycine-12 or glycine-13 of the HRAS
gene. Sol-Church et al. (2006) identified 39 Costello syndrome patients
harboring the gly12-to-ser mutation (190020.0003), the gly12-to-ala
substitution (190020.0004), and 1 patient with the gly13-to-cys
substitution (190020.0007). They conducted a search of the region
flanking the mutated sites in 42 probands and 59 parents, and used 4
polymorphic markers to trace the parental origin of the germline
mutations. One of the SNPs, dbSNP rs12628 (81T-C), was found in strong
linkage disequilibrium with a highly polymorphic hexanucleotide (GGGCCT)
repeat region. Of a total of 24 probands with polymorphic markers, 16
informative families were tested and a paternal origin of the germline
mutation was found in 14 Costello syndrome probands. This distribution
was consistent neither with an equal likelihood of mutations arising in
either parent (P = 0.0018), nor with exclusive paternal origin.

Zampino et al. (2007) identified the common G12S mutation in 8 of 9
unrelated patients with Costello syndrome; the ninth child had a
different mutation (190020.0008). All mutations were de novo, paternally
inherited, and associated with advanced paternal age. None of 36
patients with Noonan syndrome or 4 with cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome
(CFCS; 115150) had a mutation in the HRAS gene.

Lo et al. (2008) described 4 infants with an unusually severe Costello
syndrome phenotype and 3 different mutations in the HRAS gene: the
common G12S mutation (190020.0003) was seen in 1 case, 2 cases had a
G12D mutation (190020.0013), and 1 case had a G12C mutation
(190020.0014).

Gremer et al. (2010) reported 2 different 3-nucleotide duplications in
the first coding exon of the HRAS gene (exon 2) resulting in a
duplication of glutamate-37 (E37dup) associated with a phenotype
reminiscent of Costello syndrome. None of the parents carried the
mutations. The phenotype of the 2 affected individuals was remarkably
similar and characterized by severe mental retardation and pronounced
short stature in one (190020.0015) and relatively mild involvement of
the musculoskeletal system compared with the classical Costello syndrome
phenotype in the other (190020.0016). Ectopic expression of HRAS(E37dup)
in COS-7 cells resulted in enhanced growth factor-dependent stimulation
of the MEK-ERK (see MEK1, 176872) and phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K;
601232)-AKT (164730) signaling pathways. Recombinant HRAS(E37dup) was
characterized by slightly increased GTP/GDP dissociation, lower
intrinsic GTPase activity, and complete resistance to neurofibromin-1
GTPase-activating protein (NF1; 613113) stimulation due to dramatically
reduced binding. Coprecipitation of GTP-bound HRAS(E37dup) by various
effector proteins, however, was inefficient because of drastically
diminished binding affinities. Thus, although HRAS(E37dup) was
predominantly present in the active, GTP-bound state, it promoted only a
weak hyperactivation of downstream signaling pathways. The authors
proposed that the mildly enhanced signal flux through the MAPK and
PI3K-AKT cascades promoted by these disease-causing germline HRAS
alleles may result from a balancing effect between a profound GAP
insensitivity and inefficient binding to effector proteins.

- Congenital Myopathy with Excess Muscle Spindles

Van der Burgt et al. (2007) identified mutations in the HRAS gene
(190020.0001; 190020.0003; 190020.0009; 190020.0010) in patients with
congenital myopathy with excess muscle spindles, a variant of Costello
syndrome.

ANIMAL MODEL

Schuhmacher et al. (2008) generated a mouse model of Costello syndrome
by introduction of an oncogenic gly12-to-val mutation (190020.0001) in
the mouse Hras gene. Mutant mice developed hyperplasia of the mammary
gland, but tumor development was rare. The mice showed some phenotypic
features similar to those in patients with Costello syndrome, including
facial dysmorphism and cardiomyopathy. Mutant mice also developed
systemic hypertension, extensive vascular remodeling, and fibrosis in
both the heart and the kidneys resulting from abnormal upregulation of
the renin-angiotensin II system, which responded to treatment with
captopril. Histologic studies with a tagged wildtype Hras gene showed
expression in most murine embryonic tissues and several adult tissues,
including the heart, aortic vascular smooth muscle cells, kidney,
mammary glands, skin epithelium, urinary bladder, colon, and brain.

Using an Hras knockin mouse model, To et al. (2008) demonstrated that
specificity for Kras (190070) mutations in lung and Hras mutations in
skin tumors is determined by local regulatory elements in the target Ras
genes. Although the Kras 4A isoform is dispensable for mouse
development, it is the most important isoform for lung carcinogenesis in
vivo and for the inhibitory effect of wildtype Kras on the mutant
allele. Kras 4A expression is detected in a subpopulation of normal lung
epithelial cells, but at very low levels in lung tumors, suggesting that
it may not be required for tumor progression. The 2 Kras isoforms
undergo different posttranslational modifications. To et al. (2008)
concluded that their findings may have implications for the design of
therapeutic strategies for inhibiting oncogenic Kras activity in human
cancers.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BLADDER CANCER, SOMATIC
COSTELLO SYNDROME, INCLUDED;;
MYOPATHY, CONGENITAL, WITH EXCESS OF MUSCLE SPINDLES, INCLUDED;;
EPIDERMAL NEVUS, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
HRAS, GLY12VAL

Di Micco et al. (2006) showed that senescence triggered by the expansion
of an activated oncogene, HRAS V12, in normal human cells is a
consequence of the activation of a robust DNA-damage checkpoint
response. Experimental inactivation of this response abrogated
oncogene-induced senescence and promoted cell transformation. DNA damage
checkpoint response and oncogene-induced senescence were established
after a hyperreplicative phase occurring immediately after oncogene
expression. Senescent cells arrested with partly replicated DNA and with
DNA replication origins having fired multiple times. In vivo DNA
labeling and molecular DNA combing revealed that oncogene activation
leads to augmented numbers of active replicons and to alterations in DNA
replication fork progression. Di Micco et al. (2006) also showed that
oncogene expression does not trigger a DNA damage checkpoint response in
the absence of DNA replication. Last, Di Micco et al. (2006) showed that
oncogene activation was associated with DNA damage checkpoint response
activation in a mouse model in vivo. Di Micco et al. (2006) proposed
that oncogene-induced senescence results from the enforcement of a DNA
damage checkpoint response triggered by oncogene-induced DNA
hyperreplication.

Somatic Mutations

Taparowsky et al. (1982) found that the HRAS1 gene cloned from a human
bladder cancer cell line (T24) transformed NIH 3T3 cells, while the same
gene cloned from normal cellular DNA did not. Furthermore, they showed
that the change in the transforming gene was a single nucleotide
substitution that produced change of a single amino acid in the sequence
of the protein that the gene encodes. They suggested that antibodies
against Ras proteins might be diagnostic for certain forms of cancer.
The T24 gene had a change from GGC (glycine) to GTC (valine) as codon
12. Fearon et al. (1985) examined constitutional and tumor genotypes at
loci on the short arm of chromosome 11 in 12 patients with transitional
cell carcinomas of the bladder. In 5 they found loss of genes in the
tumor, resulting in homozygosity or hemizygosity of the remaining
allele. This frequency (42%) approached that seen in Wilms tumor (55%).

The G12V mutant of HRAS had the lowest GTPase activity among various
substitutions at codon 12 (Colby et al., 1986), and biologic assays by
focus formation in NIH3T3 cells or soft agar growth showed that this
substitution had the highest transformation potential among
substitutions tested at this codon (Seeburg et al., 1984, Fasano et al.,
1984). Aoki et al. (2005) noted that among codon 12 HRAS mutations found
somatically in human cancers, G12V is the predominant mutation.

Hafner et al. (2012) identified a somatic G12V mutation in 1 of 72
keratinocytic epidermal nevi (162900).

Costello Syndrome

In a Japanese patient with Costello syndrome (218040), Aoki et al.
(2005) found a germline 35GC-TT nucleotide substitution in the HRAS gene
that resulted in a gly12-to-val amino acid change (G12V). This
individual died of severe cardiomyopathy at 18 months of age.

Congenital Myopathy with Excess of Muscle Spindles

Van der Burgt et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous G12V mutation in
the HRAS gene in a patient with congenital myopathy with excess of
muscle spindles (see 218040), a variant of Costello syndrome. The
patient, originally reported by de Boode et al. (1996), died at age 3
weeks. He was a preterm infant with generalized hypotonia and
progressive hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy.

.0002
THYROID CARCINOMA, FOLLICULAR, SOMATIC
SPERMATOCYTIC SEMINOMA, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
HRAS, GLN61LYS

Nikiforova et al. (2003) found that a CAG-to-AAG change at HRAS codon
61, resulting in a gln-to-lys amino acid change (Q61K), was present in 2
follicular carcinomas (see 188470), 2 follicular adenomas, and 1 Hurthle
cell adenoma, accounting for 12%, 18%, and 100% of each tumor type
examined, respectively.

Goriely et al. (2009) screened 30 spermatocytic seminomas (see 273300)
for mutations in 17 candidate genes, and in 2 tumors they identified
apparent homozygosity for a C-A transversion in the HRAS gene that
resulted in the Q61K substitution.

.0003
COSTELLO SYNDROME
MYOPATHY, CONGENITAL, WITH EXCESS OF MUSCLE SPINDLES, INCLUDED;;
EPIDERMAL NEVUS WITH UROTHELIAL CANCER, SOMATIC, INCLUDED;;
NEVUS SEBACEOUS, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
HRAS, GLY12SER

Costello Syndrome

In 3 Japanese and in 4 Italian patients with Costello syndrome (218040),
Aoki et al. (2005) identified a germline 34G-A transition in the HRAS
gene that caused a gly12-to-ser (G12S) amino acid substitution.

Kerr et al. (2006) analyzed the HRAS gene in 43 patients with a clinical
diagnosis of Costello syndrome and identified mutations in 37 (86%);
G12S was the most common mutation, found in 30 of the 37
mutation-positive patients.

Zampino et al. (2007) identified the G12S mutation in 8 of 9 unrelated
patients with Costello syndrome. By analyzing the flanking genomic
region, the authors determined that all patients had de novo mutations
inherited from the father. There was an advanced age at conception in
affected fathers transmitting the mutation. The phenotype was
homogeneous.

In a male infant with severe Costello syndrome, Lo et al. (2008)
identified the G12S mutation in the HRAS gene. The patient had
persistent neonatal hypoglycemia, hypocalcemia, right ventricular
hypertrophy, and enlarged kidneys. He required pyloromyotomy for pyloric
stenosis and inguinal hernia repair at age 3 months. He had complex
upper and lower airway obstruction with a floppy tongue, narrow
subglottic opening, and tracheobronchomalacia, requiring a tracheostomy
with intermittent ventilatory support. Deterioration of his respiratory
function led to the discovery of a pulmonary rhabdomyosarcoma, and he
died at 2.25 years of age.

Congenital Myopathy with Excess of Muscle Spindles

Van der Burgt et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous G12S mutation in
the HRAS gene in a patient with congenital myopathy with excess of
muscle spindles (see 218040), a phenotypic variant of Costello syndrome.
The patient, originally reported by Selcen et al. (2001), died at age 14
months of cardiorespiratory failure. He had generalized muscle weakness,
areflexia, joint contractures, and clubfeet.

Epidermal Nevus and Urothelial Cancer

Hafner et al. (2011) reported a 49-year-old man who had widespread
mosaicism for a G12S mutation present in tissues derived from endoderm,
ectoderm, and mesoderm, suggesting an embryonic mutation. The patient
presented at 49 years of age with widespread congenital epidermal nevus
(162900). At 19 years of age a urothelial cell carcinoma was detected in
the bladder, and 2 new tumors were identified at 48 years of age. At age
49 a single metastatic lesion was identified in lung.

Nevus Sebaceous

Groesser et al. (2012) identified a somatic G12S mutation in 3 (5%) of
65 nevus sebaceous tumors (see 162900).

.0004
COSTELLO SYNDROME
HRAS, GLY12ALA

In 1 Japanese and 1 Italian patient with Costello syndrome (218040),
Aoki et al. (2005) found a germline 35G-C transversion in the HRAS gene
that caused a gly12-to-ala (G12A) amino acid substitution.

.0005
COSTELLO SYNDROME
HRAS, GLY13ASP

In 2 Japanese patients with Costello syndrome (218040), Aoki et al.
(2005) found a germline 38G-A transition in the HRAS gene that caused a
gly13-to-asp (G13D) amino acid substitution.

.0006
COSTELLO SYNDROME
HRAS, LYS117ARG

In a 9-year-old girl with Costello syndrome (218040), Kerr et al. (2006)
identified a de novo 350A-G transition in the HRAS gene, resulting in a
lys117-to-arg (K117R) substitution. The patient's physical phenotype was
unusual in that she had microretrognathism and both her plantar and
palmar creases were less pronounced than usually seen in Costello
syndrome. Her behavioral phenotype included autistic traits with verbal
stereotypies and hand biting. Otherwise she had classic features of
Costello syndrome with cardiac involvement (cardiomyopathy and
ventricular septal defect) but no neurologic malformation. The mutation
was not found in either of her parents.

Denayer et al. (2008) identified a de novo K117R mutation in a
6-year-old girl with typical Costello syndrome. Behavioral features
included moderate mental retardation with a friendly personality and no
autistic features. In vitro functional expression studies showed
increased levels of phosphorylated proteins consistent with constitutive
activation of the RAS/MAPK pathways. Recombinant K117R showed normal
intrinsic GTP hydrolysis and responsiveness to GTPase-activating
proteins, but the nucleotide disassociation rate was increased 80-fold.
Crystal structure data indicated an altered interaction pattern of the
side chain that was associated with unfavorable nucleotide binding
properties.

.0007
COSTELLO SYNDROME
HRAS, GLY13CYS

Sol-Church et al. (2006) found that 1 of 42 patients with Costello
syndrome (218040) and heterozygous de novo missense mutations involving
either glycine-12 or -13 of the HRAS gene carried a gly13-to-cys (G13C)
substitution (37G-A).

Piccione et al. (2009) reported a premature male infant born at 29
weeks' gestation due to fetal distress who was found to have Costello
syndrome due to the G13C mutation. The characteristic facial features
were not apparent until about 4 months of age, when he was noted to have
relative macrocephaly, coarse face with hypertelorism, downslanting
palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, prominent eyes, short nose,
low-set ears, large mouth, short neck, loose skin of hands and feet,
sparse hair, hyperpigmented skin, deep palmar creases, joint laxity,
reduced subcutaneous adipose tissue, and bilateral cryptorchidism. At 11
months of age, he had delayed motor development with central hypotonia,
but adequate mental and speech development. Papillomata were not
present. Piccione et al. (2009) noted that the distinctive features of
Costello syndrome may be absent during the first months of life,
especially in preterm infants who often have failure to thrive and
decreased subcutaneous adipose tissue. The striking facial features of
the disorder become more evident after the critical neonatal period.

Gripp et al. (2011) examined 12 individuals with Costello syndrome due
to the G13C mutation and compared the phenotype to those with the G12S
(190020.0003) mutation. Individuals with G13C had many typical findings
including polyhydramnios, failure to thrive, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, macrocephaly, posterior fossa crowding, and
developmental delay. Their facial features were less coarse and short
stature was less severe. Statistically significant differences included
the absence of several common features, including multifocal atrial
tachycardia, ulnar deviation of the wrist, and papillomata; a noteworthy
absence of malignant tumors did not reach statistical significance.
There were some novel ectodermal findings associated with the G13C
mutation, including loose anagen hair and long eyelashes requiring
trimming (termed 'dolichocilia').

.0008
COSTELLO SYNDROME
HRAS, ALA146THR

In 1 of 9 unrelated patients with Costello syndrome (218040), Zampino et
al. (2007) identified a de novo 436G-A transition in the HRAS gene,
resulting in an ala146-to-thr (A146T) substitution The mutation was of
paternal origin. The patient had unusual features, including normal
neonatal growth, microcephaly, normal ears, and thin, but not curly,
hair. Crystallographic information indicated that the A146T substitution
occurs in a hydrophobic pocket involved in binding to the purine ring of
GTP/GDP and likely destabilizes the binding of GTP and GDP. Since GTP
has a higher cytoplasmic concentration and would therefore be more
likely to bind to the protein, the A146T mutation may result in a gain
of function.

.0009
MYOPATHY, CONGENITAL, WITH EXCESS OF MUSCLE SPINDLES
HRAS, GLU63LYS

In a 7-month-old girl with congenital myopathy with excess of muscle
spindles (see 218040), a variant of Costello syndrome, van der Burgt et
al. (2007) identified a heterozygous 187G-A transition in the HRAS gene,
resulting in a glu63-to-lys (E63K) substitution. The patient, originally
reported by Stassou et al. (2005), had hypertrophic obstructive
cardiomyopathy, hypotonia, contractures, and clubfeet, and died at age 7
months of respiratory failure.

.0010
MYOPATHY, CONGENITAL, WITH EXCESS OF MUSCLE SPINDLES
HRAS, GLN22LYS

In a 13-month-old boy with congenital myopathy with excess of muscle
spindles (see 218040), a variant of Costello syndrome, van der Burgt et
al. (2007) identified a heterozygous 64C-A transversion in the HRAS
gene, resulting in a gln22-to-lys (Q22K) substitution. The patient had
mild hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, generalized hypotonia, delayed motor
development, and poor feeding.

.0011
COSTELLO SYNDROME
HRAS, THR58ILE

In a boy with Costello syndrome (218040), Gripp et al. (2008) identified
a heterozygous de novo 173C-T transition in exon 3 of the HRAS gene,
resulting in a thr58-to-ile (T58I) substitution in a highly conserved
residue in the switch II region of small GTPases. Neither parent carried
the mutation, which was present on the paternal allele. At the time of
birth, the father and mother were 45 and 34 years old, respectively. The
facial features of the patient were less coarse than typical Costello
syndrome, but he showed other typical features, including failure to
thrive, cognitive impairment, lax skin, deep palmar creases, and pyloric
stenosis.

.0012
COSTELLO SYNDROME
HRAS, ALA146VAL

In a girl with Costello syndrome (218040), Gripp et al. (2008)
identified a heterozygous 437C-T transition in exon 4 of the HRAS gene,
resulting in an ala146-to-val (A146V) substitution. The facial features
of the patient were less coarse than usually seen in Costello syndrome,
but she also showed other typical features, including hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, deep palmar creases, and delayed development. Another
HRAS mutation resulting in Costello syndrome has been reported in this
codon (A146T; 190020.0008).

.0013
COSTELLO SYNDROME, SEVERE
NEVUS SEBACEOUS, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
HRAS, GLY12ASP

In 2 infants with severe Costello syndrome (218040) including neonatal
hypoglycemia and respiratory failure, Lo et al. (2008) identified 35G-A
transition in the HRAS gene, resulting in a gly12-to-asp (G12D)
substitution. One infant had paroxysmal multifocal atrial tachycardia,
atrial septal defect, and septal hypertrophy, as well as persistent
respiratory distress with tracheobronchomalacia, recurrent pneumothorax,
pneumonia, and chylothorax, and died at age 3 months due to respiratory
failure; postmortem lung histology showed findings consistent with
lymphangiectasia and alveolar/capillary dysplasia. The other infant had
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and dysplastic pulmonary valve noted at day
1, and developed atrial fibrillation and heart failure at day 35; she
had persistent hyponatremia due to renal sodium leakage with signs of
renal failure at 6 weeks. She became ventilator dependent and died at 3
months of age from sepsis and renal failure.

Kuniba et al. (2009) reported a Japanese fetus with severe Costello
syndrome due to the G12D mutation. He was diagnosed using prenatal
3-dimensional ultrasonography at 23 weeks' gestation. Findings at that
time included polyhydramnios, severe overgrowth (+5.3 SD using a
Japanese fetal growth curve), and dysmorphic craniofacial features, such
as large head, pointed chin, wide nasal bridge, and low-set ears. In
addition, the wrists showed lateral deviation and flexion. After birth,
he developed respiratory failure, severe hypoglycemia, cardiac
hypertrophy, and renal failure, and died soon after birth. The phenotype
was similar to that reported by Lo et al. (2008) in 2 infants with the
G12D mutation, suggesting that this mutation is associated with a severe
clinical outcome and death in early infancy.

Groesser et al. (2012) identified a somatic G12D mutation in 1 (2%) of
65 nevus sebaceous tumors (see 162900).

.0014
COSTELLO SYNDROME
NEVUS SEBACEOUS, SOMATIC, INCLUDED;;
EPIDERMAL NEVUS, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
HRAS, GLY12CYS

In a male infant with severe Costello syndrome (218040), Lo et al.
(2008) identified a 34G-T transversion in the HRAS gene, resulting in a
gly12-to-cys (G12C) substitution. The patient developed respiratory
distress after delivery and required intubation and ventilatory support
secondary to small lungs and upper airway obstruction. He had an atrial
tachyarrhythmia with apparent thickening of the myocardial wall and
redundant mitral valve tissue on echocardiogram, and had echogenic
kidneys with thick-walled pelvises on ultrasound. He died at 3 months of
age due to respiratory failure.

Groesser et al. (2012) identified a somatic G12C mutation in 1 (2%) of
65 nevus sebaceous tumors (see 162900).

Hafner et al. (2012) identified a somatic G12C mutation in 1 of 72
keratinocytic epidermal nevi (162900).

.0015
COSTELLO SYNDROME
HRAS, 3-BP DUP, 110AGG

In a 5-year-old Kurdish male with a phenotype reminiscent of Costello
syndrome (218040), Gremer et al. (2010) detected a heterozygous 3-bp
duplication in exon 2 of the HRAS gene that resulted in duplication of
glutamic acid at position 37 (110_111+1dupAGG, glu37dup). The child had
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, global developmental delay, growth
retardation, coarse facial features, and sparse hair. Mental retardation
was severe, with no speech development. Neither parent carried the
mutation. The authors also identified another patient with a similar
phenotype who also carried a duplication of glu37 caused by a different
3-nucleotide duplication (190020.0016).

.0016
COSTELLO SYNDROME
HRAS, 3-BP DUP, 108AGA

In a 6-year-old Italian boy with a phenotype reminiscent of Costello
syndrome (218040), Gremer et al. (2010) detected a heterozygous 3-bp
duplication in exon 2 of the HRAS gene that resulted in duplication of
glutamic acid at position 37 (108_110dupAGA, glu37dup). The patient had
global developmental delay, growth retardation, coarse facial features,
sparse hair, and a thickened ventricular septum. Language was absent.
Neither of his parents carried the mutation. Another duplication of
glu37 was identified in another patient (190020.0015).

.0017
NEVUS SEBACEOUS, SOMATIC
SCHIMMELPENNING-FEUERSTEIN-MIMS SYNDROME, SOMATIC MOSAIC, INCLUDED;;
EPIDERMAL NEVUS, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
HRAS, GLY13ARG

In 59 (91%) of 65 different nevus sebaceous (see 162900) tumors,
Groesser et al. (2012) identified a somatic 37G-C transversion in the
HRAS gene, resulting in a gly13-to-arg (G13R) substitution. Two of the
tumors also carried a somatic mutation in the KRAS gene (190070.0005 and
190070.0006, respectively), and 1 tumor had 2 HRAS mutations: G13R and
G12S (190020.0003). Nonlesional tissue from 18 individuals with the G13R
mutation showed the wildtype HRAS allele. Eight individuals developed
secondary tumors within the nevus sebaceous, including 2
syringocystadenoma papilliferum, 3 trichoblastomas, and 3
trichilemmomas, and all secondary tumors carried the same mutation as
the nevi, suggesting that they arose from cells of the nevus sebaceous.
Functional analysis of mutant cells carrying the G13R mutation showed
constitutive activation of the MAPK and PI3K-AKT signaling pathways.

Hafner et al. (2012) identified a somatic G13R mutation in 21 of 24
HRAS-mutant keratinocytic epidermal nevi (162900), making it the most
common mutation among a larger series of 72 nevi.

One patient with Schimmelpenning-Feuerstein-Mims syndrome (163200) was
found by Groesser et al. (2012) to carry the G13R mutation in somatic
mosaic state. This patient had originally been reported by Zutt et al.
(2003). She was a 52-year-old woman who was noted at birth to have a
large, right-sided nevus sebaceous extending to her head, neck, arm, and
trunk. The scalp was also involved, resulting in alopecia. The patient
developed recurrent syringocystadenoma papilliferum and basal cell
carcinoma within the nevus. Other features included generalized growth
retardation, hypophosphatemic rickets, and precocious puberty.
Intelligence was normal. There was no family history of a similar
disorder.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES de Martinville and Francke (1983); Eccles et al. (1984); Fujita et
al. (1984); Gibbs et al. (1984); Huerre et al. (1983); Newbold and
Overell (1983); Popescu et al. (1985); Stallings et al. (1986)
REFERENCE 1. Ancrile, B.; Lim, K.-H.; Counter, C. M.: Oncogenic Ras-induced
secretion of IL6 is required for tumorigenesis. Genes Dev. 21: 1714-1719,
2007.

2. Aoki, Y.; Niihori, T.; Kawame, H.; Kurosawa, K.; Ohashi, H.; Tanaka,
Y.; Filocamo, M.; Kato, K.; Suzuki, Y.; Kure, S.; Matsubara, Y.:
Germline mutations in HRAS proto-oncogene cause Costello syndrome. Nature
Genet. 37: 1038-1040, 2005.

3. Bianchi, A. B.; Rinchik, E. M.; Conti, C. J.: Reassignment of
the H-ras-1 gene to the Hbb-terminus region of mouse chromosome 7. Mammalian
Genome 4: 220-222, 1993.

4. Bos, J. L.: ras oncogenes in human cancer: a review. Cancer Res. 49:
4682-4689, 1989. Note: Erratum: Cancer Res. 50: 1352 only, 1990.

5. Capon, D. J.; Chen, E. Y.; Levinson, A. D.; Seeburg, P. H.; Goeddel,
D. V.: Complete nucleotide sequences of the T24 human bladder carcinoma
oncogene and its normal homologue. Nature 302: 33-37, 1983.

6. Chaganti, R. S. K.; Jhanwar, S. C.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Hayward,
W. S.: Germ-line chromosomal localization of genes in chromosome
11p linkage: parathyroid hormone, beta-globin, c-Ha-ras-1, and insulin. Somat.
Cell Molec. Genet. 11: 197-202, 1985.

7. Chang, E. H.; Gonda, M. A.; Ellis, R. W.; Scolnick, E. M.; Lowy,
D. R.: Human genome contains four genes homologous to transforming
genes of Harvey and Kirsten murine sarcoma viruses. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 79: 4848-4852, 1982.

8. Colby, W. W.; Hayflick, J. S.; Clark, S. G.; Levinson, A. D.:
Biochemical characterization of polypeptides encoded by mutated human
Ha-ras1 genes. Molec. Cell. Biol. 6: 730-734, 1986.

9. Corell, B.; Zoll, B.: Comparison between the allelic frequency
distribution of the Ha-ras-1 locus in normal individuals and patients
with lymphoma, breast, and ovarian cancer. Hum. Genet. 79: 255-259,
1988.

10. Dajee, M.; Lazarov, M.; Zhang, J. Y.; Cai, T.; Green, C. L.; Russell,
A. J.; Marinkovich, M. P.; Tao, S.; Lin, Q.; Kubo, Y.; Khavari, P.
A.: NF-kappa-B blockade and oncogenic Ras trigger invasive human
epidermal neoplasia. Nature 421: 639-643, 2003.

11. de Boode, W. P.; Semmekrot, B. A.; ter Laak, H. J.; van der Burgt,
C. J. A. M; Draaisma, J. M. T.; Lommen, E. J. P; Sengers, R. C. A.;
van Wijk-Hoek, J. M.: Myopathology in patients with a Noonan phenotype. Acta
Neuropath. 92: 597-602, 1996.

12. de Martinville, B.; Francke, U.: HRAS1, insulin, and beta-globin
map outside of 11p11.2-11p14.1. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 37:
530, 1984.

13. de Martinville, B.; Francke, U.: The c-Ha-ras1, insulin and beta-globin
loci map outside the deletion associated with aniridia-Wilms' tumour. Nature 305:
641-643, 1983.

14. de Martinville, B.; Giacalone, J.; Shih, C.; Weinberg, R. A.;
Francke, U.: Oncogene from human EJ bladder carcinoma is located
on the short arm of chromosome 11. Science 219: 498-501, 1983.

15. Denayer, E.; Parret, A.; Chmara, M.; Schubbert, S.; Vogels, A.;
Devriendt, K.; Frijns, J.-P.; Rybin, V.; de Ravel, T. J.; Shannon,
K.; Cools, J.; Scheffzek, K.; Legius, E.: Mutation analysis in Costello
syndrome: functional and structural characterization of the HRAS p.lys117arg
mutation. Hum. Mutat. 29: 232-239, 2008.

16. Der, C. J.; Krontiris, T. G.; Cooper, G. M.: Transforming genes
of human bladder and lung carcinoma cell lines are homologous to the
ras genes of Harvey and Kirsten sarcoma viruses. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 79: 3637-3640, 1982.

17. Di Micco, R.; Fumagalli, M.; Cicalese, A.; Piccinin, S.; Gasparini,
P.; Luise, C.; Schurra, C.; Garre, M.; Nuciforo, P. G.; Bensimon,
A.; Maestro, R.; Pelicci, P. G.; d'Adda di Fagagna, F.: Oncogene-induced
senescence is a DNA damage response triggered by DNA hyper-replication. Nature 444:
638-642, 2006.

18. Eccles, M. R.; Millow, L. J.; Wilkins, R. J.; Reeve, A. E.: Harvey-ras
allele deletion detected by in situ hybridization to Wilms' tumor
chromosomes. Hum. Genet. 67: 190-192, 1984.

19. Fasano, O.; Aldrich, T.; Tamanoi, F.; Taparowsky, E.; Furth, M.;
Wigler, M.: Analysis of the transforming potential of the human H-ras
gene by random mutagenesis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 81: 4008-4012,
1984.

20. Fearon, E. R.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Meyers, D. A.; Levine, M. A.
: c-Ha-ras-1 oncogene lies between beta-globin and insulin loci on
human chromosome 11p. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 36: 329-337, 1984.

21. Fearon, E. R.; Feinberg, A. P.; Hamilton, S. H.; Vogelstein, B.
: Loss of genes on the short arm of chromosome 11 in bladder cancer. Nature 318:
377-380, 1985.

22. Feinberg, A. P.; Vogelstein, B.; Droller, M. J.; Baylin, S. B.;
Nelkin, B. D.: Mutation affecting the 12th amino acid of the C-Ha-ras
oncogene product occurs infrequently in human cancer. Science 220:
1175-1177, 1983.

23. Fisher, J. H.; Miller, Y. E.; Sparkes, R. S.; Bateman, J. B.;
Kimmel, K. A.; Carey, T. E.; Rodell, T.; Shoemaker, S. A.; Scoggin,
C. H.: Wilms' tumor-aniridia association: segregation of affected
chromosome in somatic cell hybrids, identification of cell surface
antigen associated with deleted area, and regional mapping of c-Ha-ras-1
oncogene, insulin gene, and beta-globin gene. Somat. Cell Molec.
Genet. 10: 455-464, 1984.

24. Fujita, J.; Srivastava, S. K.; Kraus, M. H.; Rhim, J. S.; Tronick,
S. R.; Aaronson, S. A.: Frequency of molecular alterations affecting
ras protooncogenes in human urinary tract tumors. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 82: 3849-3853, 1985.

25. Fujita, J.; Yoshida, O.; Yuasa, Y.; Rhim, J. S.; Hatanaka, M.;
Aaronson, S. A.: Ha-ras oncogenes are activated by somatic alterations
in human urinary tract tumours. Nature 309: 464-466, 1984.

26. Gerhard, D. S.; Kidd, K. K.; Housman, D.; Gusella, J. F.; Kidd,
J. R.: Data on the genetic map of the short arm of chromosome 11
(11p). (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 37: 478, 1984.

27. Gibbs, J. B.; Ellis, R. W.; Scolnick, E. M.: Autophosphorylation
of v-Ha-ras p21 is modulated by amino acid residue 12. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 81: 2674-2678, 1984.

28. Goriely, A.; Hansen, R. M. S.; Taylor, I. B.; Olesen, I. A.; Jacobsen,
G. K.; McGowan, S. J.; Pfeifer, S. P.; McVean, G. A. T.; Rajpert-De
Meyts, E.; Wilkie, A. O. M.: Activating mutations in FGFR3 and HRAS
reveal a shared genetic origin for congenital disorders and testicular
tumors. Nature Genet. 41: 1247-1252, 2009.

29. Gough, D. J.; Corlett, A.; Schlessinger, K.; Wegrzyn, J.; Larner,
A. C.; Levy, D. E.: Mitochondrial STAT3 supports Ras-dependent oncogenic
transformation. Science 324: 1713-1716, 2009.

30. Goyette, M.; Petropoulos, C. J.; Shank, P. R.; Fausto, N.: Expression
of a cellular oncogene during liver regeneration. Science 219: 510-512,
1983.

31. Greenhalgh, D. A.; Kinsella, A. R.: c-Ha-ras not c-Ki-ras activation
in three colon tumour cell lines. Carcinogenesis 6: 1533-1535, 1985.

32. Gremer, L.; De Luca, A.; Merbitz-Zahradnik, T.; Dallapiccola,
B.; Morlot, S.; Tartaglia, M.; Kutsche, K.; Ahmadian, M. R.; Rosenberger,
G.: Duplication of Glu37 in the switch I region of HRAS impairs effector/GAP
binding and underlies Costello syndrome by promoting enhanced growth
factor-dependent MAPK and AKT activation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19:
790-802, 2010.

33. Gripp, K. W.; Hopkins, E.; Sol-Church, K.; Stabley, D. L.; Axelrad,
M. E.; Doyle, D.; Dobyns, W. B.; Hudson, C.; Johnson, J.; Tenconi,
R.; Graham, G. E.; Sousa, A. B.; Heller, R.; Piccione, M.; Corsello,
G.; Herman, G. E.; Tartaglia, M.; Lin, A. E.: Phenotypic analysis
of individuals with Costello syndrome due to HRAS p.G13C. Am. J.
Med. Genet. 155A: 706-716, 2011.

34. Gripp, K. W.; Innes, A. M.; Axelrad, M. E.; Gillan, T. L.; Parboosingh,
J. S.; Davies, C.; Leonard, N. J.; Lapointe, M.; Doyle, D.; Catalano,
S.; Nicholson, L.; Stabley, D. L.; Sol-Church, K.: Costello syndrome
associated with novel germline HRAS mutations: an attenuated phenotype? Am.
J. Med. Genet. 146A: 683-690, 2008.

35. Gripp, K. W.; Lin, A. E.; Stabley, D. L.; Nicholson, L.; Scott,
C. I., Jr.; Doyle, D.; Aoki, Y.; Matsubara, Y.; Zackai, E. H.; Lapunzina,
P.; Gonzalez-Meneses, A.; Holbrook, J.; Agresta, C. A.; Gonzalez,
I. L.; Sol-Church, K.: HRAS mutation analysis in Costello syndrome:
genotype and phenotype correlation. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A: 1-7,
2006.

36. Groesser, L.; Herschberger, E.; Ruetten, A.; Ruivenkamp, C.; Lopriore,
E.; Zutt, M.; Langmann, T.; Singer, S.; Klingseisen, L.; Schneider-Brachert,
W.; Toll, A.; Real, F. X.; Landthaler, M.; Hafner, C.: Postzygotic
HRAS and KRAS mutations cause nevus sebaceous and Schimmelpenning
syndrome. Nature Genet. 44: 783-787, 2012.

37. Hafner, C.; Toll, A.; Gantner, S.; Mauerer, A.; Lurkin, I.; Acquadro,
F.; Fernandez-Casado, A.; Zwarthoff, E. C.; Dietmaier, W.; Baselga,
E.; Parera, E.; Vicente, A.; Casanova, A.; Cigudosa, J.; Mentzel,
T.; Pujol, R.  M.; Landthaler, M.; Real, F. X.: Keratinocytic epidermal
nevi are associated with mosaic RAS mutations. J. Med. Genet. 49:
249-253, 2012.

38. Hafner, C.; Toll, A.; Real, F. X.: HRAS mutation mosaicism causing
urothelial cancer and epidermal nevus. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 365:
1940-1942, 2011.

39. Hahn, W. C.; Counter, C. M.; Lundberg, A. S.; Beijersbergen, R.
L.; Brooks, M. W.; Weinberg, R. A.: Creation of human tumour cells
with defined genetic elements. Nature 400: 464-468, 1999.

40. Hiwasa, T.; Sakiyama, S.; Yokoyama, S.; Ha, J.-M.; Fujita, J.;
Noguchi, S.; Bando, Y.; Kominami, E.; Katunuma, N.: Inhibition of
cathepsin L-induced degradation of epidermal growth factor receptors
by c-Ha-ras gene products. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 151: 78-85,
1988.

41. Huerre, C.; Despoisse, S.; Gilgenkrantz, S.; Lenoir, G. M.; Junien,
C.: c-Ha-ras1 is not deleted in aniridia-Wilms' tumour association. Nature 305:
638-641, 1983.

42. Ishii, S.; Merlino, G. T.; Pastan, I.: Promoter region of the
human Harvey ras proto-oncogene: similarity to the EGF receptor proto-oncogene
promoter. Science 230: 1378-1381, 1985.

43. Jhanwar, S. C.; Neel, B. G.; Hayward, W. S.; Chaganti, R. S. K.
: Localization of c-ras oncogene family on human germ-line chromosomes. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 4794-4797, 1983.

44. Johnson, S. M.; Grosshans, H.; Shingara, J.; Byrom, M.; Jarvis,
R.; Cheng, A.; Labourier, E.; Reinert, K. L.; Brown, D.; Slack, F.
J.: RAS is regulated by the let-7 microRNA family. Cell 120: 635-647,
2005.

45. Junien, C.; Huerre, C.; Despoisse, S.; Gilgenkrantz, S.; Lenoir,
G. M.: c-Ha-ras1 is not deleted in del(11p13) Wilms' tumor (WAGR)
and maps to 11p15.1-11p15.5. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 37:
503, 1984.

46. Kerr, B.; Delrue, M.-A.; Sigaudy, S.; Perveen, R.; Marche, M.;
Burgelin, I.; Stef, M.; Tang, B.; Eden, O. B.; O'Sullivan, J.; De
Sandre-Giovannoli, A.; Reardon, W.; and 14 others: Genotype-phenotype
correlation in Costello syndrome: HRAS mutation analysis in 43 cases. J.
Med. Genet. 43: 401-405, 2006.

47. Krontiris, T. G.; Devlin, B.; Karp, D. D.; Robert, N. J.; Risch,
N.: An association between the risk of cancer and mutations in the
HRAS1 minisatellite locus. New Eng. J. Med. 329: 517-523, 1993.

48. Krontiris, T. G.; DiMartino, N. A.; Colb, M.; Parkinson, D. R.
: Unique allelic restriction fragments of the human Ha-ras locus in
leukocyte and tumour DNAs of cancer patients. Nature 313: 369-374,
1985.

49. Kuniba, H.; Pooh, R. K.; Sasaki, K.; Shimokawa, O.; Harada, N.;
Kondoh, T.; Egashira, M.; Moriuchi, H.; Yoshiura, K.; Niikawa, N.
: Prenatal diagnosis of Costello syndrome using 3D ultrasonography
amniocentesis confirmation of the rare HRAS mutation G12D. (Letter) Am.
J. Med. Genet. 149A: 785-787, 2009.

50. Lo, I. F. M.; Brewer, C.; Shannon, N.; Shorto, J.; Tang, B.; Black,
G.; Soo, M. T.; Ng, D. K. K.; Lam, S. T. S.; Kerr, B.: Severe neonatal
manifestations of Costello syndrome. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 45:
167-171, 2008.

51. Lu, C.-W.; Yabuuchi, A.; Chen, L.; Viswanathan, S.; Kim, K.; Daley,
G. Q.: Ras-MAPK signaling promotes trophectoderm formation from embryonic
stem cells and mouse embryos. Nature Genet. 40: 921-926, 2008.

52. Matallanas, D.; Arozarena, I.; Berciano, M. T.; Aaronson, D. S.;
Pellicer, A.; Lafarga, M.; Crespo, P.: Differences on the inhibitory
specificities of H-Ras, K-Ras, and N-Ras (N17) dominant negative mutants
are related to their membrane microlocalization. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
4572-4581, 2003.

53. McMurray, H. R.; Sampson, E. R.; Compitello, G.; Kinsey, C.; Newman,
L.; Smith, B.; Chen, S.-R.; Klebanov, L.; Salzman, P.; Yakovlev, A.;
Land, H.: Synergistic response to oncogenic mutations defines gene
class critical to cancer phenotype. Nature 453: 1112-1116, 2008.

54. Mochizuki, N.; Yamashita, S.; Kurokawa, K.; Ohba, Y.; Nagai, T.;
Miyawaki, A.; Matsuda, M.: Spatio-temporal images of growth-factor-induced
activation of Ras and Rap1. Nature 411: 1065-1068, 2001.

55. Muschel, R. J.; Khoury, G.; Lebowitz, P.; Koller, R.; Dhar, R.
: The human c-ras1(H) oncogene: a mutation in normal and neoplastic
tissue from the same patient. Science 219: 853-856, 1983. Note:
Retraction: Science 220: 336 only, 1983.

56. Newbold, R. F.; Overell, R. W.: Fibroblast immortality is a prerequisite
for transformation by EJ c-Ha-ras oncogene. Nature 304: 648-651,
1983.

57. Nikiforova, M. N.; Lynch, R. A.; Biddinger, P. W.; Alexander,
E. K.; Dorn, G. W., II; Tallini, G.; Kroll, T. G.; Nikiforov, Y. E.
: RAS point mutations and PAX8-PPAR-gamma rearrangement in thyroid
tumors: evidence for distinct molecular pathways in thyroid follicular
carcinoma. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 2318-2326, 2003.

58. Oft, M.; Akhurst, R. J.; Balmain, A.: Metastasis is driven by
sequential elevation of H-ras and Smad2 levels. Nature Cell Biol. 4:
487-494, 2002.

59. Phelan, C. M.; Rebbeck, T. R.; Weber, B. L.; Devilee, P.; Ruttledge,
M. H.; Lynch, H. T.; Lenoir, G. M.; Stratton, M. R.; Easton, D. F.;
Ponder, B. A. J.; Cannon-Albright, L.; Larsson, C.; Goldgar, D. E.;
Narod, S. A.: Ovarian cancer risk in BRCA1 carriers is modified by
the HRAS1 variable number of tandem repeat (VNTR) locus. Nature Genet. 12:
309-311, 1996.

60. Piccione, M.; Piro, E.; Pomponi, M. G.; Matina, F.; Pietrobono,
R.; Candela, E.; Gabriele, B.; Neri, G.; Corsello, G.: A premature
infant with Costello syndrome due to a rare G13C HRAS mutation. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 149A: 487-489, 2009.

61. Pincus, M. R.; van Renswoude, J.; Harford, J. B.; Chang, E. H.;
Carty, R. P.; Klausner, R. D.: Prediction of the three-dimensional
structure of the transforming region of the EJ/T24 human bladder oncogene
product and its normal cellular homologue. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80:
5253-5257, 1983.

62. Popescu, N. C.; Amsbaugh, S. C.; DiPaolo, J. A.; Tronick, S. R.;
Aaronson, S. A.; Swan, D. C.: Chromosomal localization of three human
ras genes by in situ molecular hybridization. Somat. Cell Molec.
Genet. 11: 149-155, 1985.

63. Rocks, O.; Peyker, A.; Kahms, M.; Verveer, P. J.; Koerner, C.;
Lumbierres, M.; Kuhlmann, J.; Waldmann, H.; Wittinghofer, A.; Bastiaens,
P. I. H.: An acylation cycle regulates localization and activity
of palmitoylated Ras isoforms. Science 307: 1746-1752, 2005.

64. Russell, M. W.; Munroe, D. J.; Bric, E.; Housman, D. E.; Dietz-Band,
J.; Riethman, H. C.; Collins, F. S.; Brody, L. C.: A 500-kb physical
map and contig from the Harvey ras-1 gene to the 11p telomere. Genomics 35:
353-360, 1996.

65. Ryberg, D.; Tefre, T.; Ovrebo, S.; Skaug, V.; Stangeland, L.;
Naalsund, A.; Baera, R.; Borresen, A.-L.; Haugen, A.: Ha-ras-1 alleles
in Norwegian lung cancer patients. Hum. Genet. 86: 40-44, 1990.

66. Schuhmacher, A. J.; Guerra, C.; Sauzeau, V.; Canamero, M.; Bustelo,
X. R.; Barbacid, M.: A mouse model for Costello syndrome reveals
an Ang II-mediated hypertensive condition. J. Clin. Invest. 118:
2169-2179, 2008.

67. Sears, R.; Leone, G.; DeGregori, J.; Nevins, J. R.: Ras enhances
Myc protein stability. Molec. Cell 3: 169-179, 1999.

68. Seeburg, P. H.; Colby, W. W.; Capon, D. J.; Goeddel, D. V.; Levinson,
A. D.: Biological properties of human c-Ha-ras1 genes mutated at
codon 12. Nature 312: 71-75, 1984.

69. Sekiya, T.; Fushimi, M.; Hori, H.; Hirohashi, S.; Nishimura, S.;
Sugimura, T.: Molecular cloning and the total nucleotide sequence
of the human c-Ha-ras-1 gene activated in a melanoma from a Japanese
patient. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 81: 4771-4775, 1984.

70. Selcen, D.; Kupsky, W. J.; Benjamins, D.; Nigro, M. A.: Myopathy
with muscle spindle excess: a new congenital neuromuscular syndrome? Muscle
Nerve 24: 138-143, 2001. Note: Erratum: Muscle Nerve 24: 445 only,
2001.

71. Sol-Church, K.; Stabley, D. L.; Nicholson, L.; Gonzalez, I. L.;
Gripp, K. W.: Paternal bias in parental origin of HRAS mutations
in Costello syndrome. Hum. Mutat. 27: 736-741, 2006.

72. Srivastava, S. K.; Yuasa, Y.; Reynolds, S. H.; Aaronson, S. A.
: Effects of two major activating lesions on the structure and conformation
of human ras oncogene products. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 38-42,
1985.

73. Stallings, R. L.; Crawford, B. D.; Black, R. J.; Chang, E. H.
: Assignment of RAS proto-oncogenes in Chinese hamsters: implications
for mammalian gene linkage conservation and neoplasia. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 43: 2-5, 1986.

74. Stassou, S.; Nadroo, A.; Schubert, R.; Chin, S.; Gudavalli, M.
: A new syndrome of myopathy with muscle spindle excess. J. Perinat.
Med. 33: 179-182, 2005.

75. Stites, E. C.; Trampont, P. C.; Ma, Z.; Ravichandran, K. S.:
Network analysis of oncogenic Ras activation in cancer. Science 318:
463-467, 2007.

76. Taparowsky, E.; Suard, Y.; Fasano, O.; Shimizu, K.; Goldfarb,
M.; Wigler, M.: Activation of the T24 bladder carcinoma transforming
gene is linked to a single amino acid change. Nature 300: 762-765,
1982.

77. To, M. D.; Wong, C. E.; Karnezis, A. N.; Del Rosario, R.; Di Lauro,
R.; Balmain, A.: Kras regulatory elements and exon 4A determine mutation
specificity in lung cancer. Nature Genet. 40: 1240-1244, 2008.

78. Tong, L.; de Vos, A. M.; Milburn, M. V.; Jancarik, J.; Noguchi,
S.; Nishimura, S.; Miura, K.; Ohtsuka, E.; Kim, S.-H.: Structural
differences between a RAS oncogene protein and the normal protein. Nature 337:
90-93, 1989.

79. van der Burgt, I.; Kupsky, W.; Stassou, S.; Nadroo, A.; Barroso,
C.; Diem, A.; Kratz, C. P.; Dvorsky, R.; Ahmadian, M. R.; Zenker,
M.: Myopathy caused by HRAS germline mutations: implications for
disturbed myogenic differentiation in the presence of constitutive
HRas activation. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 44: 459-462, 2007.

80. Vasko, V.; Ferrand, M.; Di Cristofaro, J.; Carayon, P.; Henry,
J. F.; De Micco, C.: Specific pattern of RAS oncogene mutations in
follicular thyroid tumors. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 2745-2752,
2003.

81. Weijzen, S.; Rizzo, P.; Braid, M.; Vaishnav, R.; Jonkheer, S.
M.; Zlobin, A.; Osborne, B. A.; Gottipati, S.; Aster, J. C.; Hahn,
W. C.; Rudolf, M.; Siziopikou, K.; Kast, W. M.; Miele, L.: Activation
of Notch-1 signaling maintains the neoplastic phenotype in human Ras-transformed
cells. Nature Med. 8: 979-986, 2002.

82. Wong-Staal, F.; Dalla-Favera, R.; Franchini, G.; Gelmann, E. P.;
Gallo, R. C.: Three distinct genes in human DNA related to the transforming
genes of mammalian sarcoma retroviruses. Science 213: 226-228, 1981.

83. Yokota, J.; Tsunetsugu-Yokota, Y.; Battifora, H.; Le Fevre, C.;
Cline, M. J.: Alterations of myc, myb, and ras(Ha) proto-oncogenes
in cancers are frequent and show clinical correlation. Science 231:
261-265, 1986.

84. Zampino, G.; Pantaleoni, F.; Carta, C.; Cobellis, G.; Vasta, I.;
Neri, C.; Pogna, E. A.; De Feo, E.; Delogu, A.; Sarkozy, A.; Atzeri,
F.; Selicorni, A.; Rauen, K. A.; Cytrynbaum, C. S.; Weksberg, R.;
Dallapiccola, B.; Ballabio, A.; Gelb, B. D.; Neri, G.; Tartaglia,
M.: Diversity, parental germline origin, and phenotypic spectrum
of de novo HRAS missense changes in Costello syndrome. Hum. Mutat. 28:
265-272, 2007.

85. Zhu, J. J.; Qin, Y.; Zhao, M.; Van Aelst, L.; Malinow, R.: Ras
and Rap control AMPA receptor trafficking during synaptic plasticity. Cell 110:
443-455, 2002.

86. Zutt, M.; Strutz, F.; Happle, R.; Habenicht, E. M.; Emmert, S.;
Haenssle, H. A.; Kretschmer, L.; Neumann, C.: Schimmelpenning-Feuerstein-Mims
syndrome with hypophosphatemic rickets. Dermatology 207: 72-76,
2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/13/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/30/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/25/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/29/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/29/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/7/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/16/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/16/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/9/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/20/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/12/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/9/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/18/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/25/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/24/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/6/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/26/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/11/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/28/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/29/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/16/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/8/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/24/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/20/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/10/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/21/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 3/28/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 9/11/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 9/2/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/4/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/30/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/9/2002
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/5/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/27/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/28/1999
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 3/18/1999
Victor A. McKusick - edited: 3/10/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED carol: 03/14/2013
ckniffin: 3/13/2013
alopez: 2/6/2013
ckniffin: 1/30/2013
carol: 7/26/2012
carol: 7/25/2012
ckniffin: 7/25/2012
carol: 1/27/2012
alopez: 12/2/2011
carol: 11/29/2011
terry: 11/29/2011
alopez: 11/10/2011
terry: 11/7/2011
alopez: 9/2/2011
terry: 5/25/2011
wwang: 5/12/2011
mgross: 5/10/2011
terry: 11/3/2010
wwang: 4/30/2010
ckniffin: 4/16/2010
carol: 2/23/2010
wwang: 2/18/2010
ckniffin: 2/16/2010
alopez: 7/16/2009
terry: 7/9/2009
alopez: 2/6/2009
terry: 1/20/2009
wwang: 11/14/2008
terry: 11/12/2008
alopez: 9/9/2008
carol: 8/22/2008
wwang: 7/18/2008
ckniffin: 6/25/2008
wwang: 4/3/2008
ckniffin: 3/24/2008
wwang: 3/12/2008
ckniffin: 3/6/2008
alopez: 11/29/2007
terry: 11/26/2007
mgross: 10/11/2007
ckniffin: 9/12/2007
carol: 9/6/2007
ckniffin: 8/28/2007
alopez: 7/2/2007
terry: 6/29/2007
wwang: 5/22/2007
ckniffin: 5/16/2007
alopez: 2/8/2007
wwang: 12/20/2006
alopez: 9/5/2006
terry: 8/24/2006
wwang: 6/20/2006
terry: 6/20/2006
mgross: 4/14/2006
terry: 4/10/2006
terry: 12/14/2005
alopez: 10/14/2005
joanna: 9/28/2005
alopez: 9/23/2005
terry: 9/21/2005
mgross: 3/28/2005
terry: 7/19/2004
alopez: 9/11/2003
alopez: 9/2/2003
mgross: 5/30/2003
alopez: 2/5/2003
terry: 2/4/2003
alopez: 10/1/2002
tkritzer: 9/30/2002
alopez: 9/16/2002
mgross: 9/9/2002
carol: 8/5/2002
mgross: 6/27/2001
terry: 6/27/2001
alopez: 7/30/1999
carol: 7/28/1999
carol: 3/18/1999
dkim: 12/15/1998
carol: 8/5/1998
alopez: 5/15/1998
alopez: 7/28/1997
terry: 7/8/1997
alopez: 6/27/1997
mark: 3/10/1997
jamie: 2/18/1997
terry: 9/6/1996
terry: 9/5/1996
terry: 8/6/1996
mark: 2/29/1996
terry: 2/26/1996
mimadm: 5/10/1995
warfield: 4/14/1994
carol: 9/21/1993
carol: 9/15/1993
carol: 5/28/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992

602839	TITLE *602839 PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL 3-KINASE, CATALYTIC, DELTA; PIK3CD
;;PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL 3-KINASE, CATALYTIC, 110-KD, DELTA;;
p110-DELTA;;
PI3K-DELTA;;
PIK3-DELTA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks) phosphorylate the 3-prime OH position
of the inositol ring of inositol lipids. See 602838. The class I PI3Ks
display a broad phosphoinositide lipid substrate specificity and include
p110-alpha (171834), p110-beta (602925), and p110-gamma (601232).
p110-alpha and p110-beta interact with SH2/SH3-domain-containing p85
adaptor proteins (see 171833) and with GTP-bound Ras.

CLONING

By RT-PCR of mRNA from a T-cell line with degenerate primers derived
from conserved regions of PI3K catalytic core domains, Vanhaesebroeck et
al. (1997) isolated a cDNA encoding a protein that they designated
p110-delta. Sequence analysis revealed that the predicted 1,044-amino
acid p110-delta protein is a PI3K that is 58% identical to p110-beta. By
Northern blot analysis of human tissues and immunolocalization in rat
tissues, Vanhaesebroeck et al. (1997) found that p110-delta is
selectively expressed in leukocytes. The p110-delta transcript is
approximately 6 kb.

Independently, Seki et al. (1997) also cloned and characterized PIK3CD.

Chantry et al. (1997) isolated mouse and human p110-delta cDNAs.
Sequence analysis revealed that the predicted proteins are 94%
identical.

GENE FUNCTION

Vanhaesebroeck et al. (1997) classified p110-delta as a class I PI3K
because it displayed broad in vitro lipid substrate specificity. Like
p110-alpha and p110-beta, p110-delta binds p85 adaptor proteins and
GTP-bound Ras. These 3 class I PI3Ks were indistinguishable at the level
of p85 adaptor protein selection or recruitment to activated receptor
complexes. However, unlike p110-alpha, p110-delta does not phosphorylate
p85, but instead has an autophosphorylation activity.

Ali et al. (2004) reported that genetic or pharmacologic inactivation of
the p110-delta isoform of PI(3)K in mast cells led to defective stem
cell factor (SCF; 184745)-mediated in vitro proliferation, adhesion, and
migration, and to impaired allergen-IgE (147180)-induced degranulation
and cytokine release. Inactivation of p110-delta protected mice against
anaphylactic allergic responses.

MAPPING

Using FISH and radiation hybrid analysis, Seki et al. (1997) mapped the
PIK3CD gene to chromosome 1p36.2, a region frequently lost in
malignancy.

ANIMAL MODEL

Okkenhaug et al. (2002) generated mice expressing a catalytically
inactive form of Pik3cd (asp910 to ala). They observed impaired
signaling and attenuated immune responses by antigen receptors of B and
T cells from these mice. The presence of Pik3ca and Pik3cb did not
compensate for Pik3cd in immune function. The mutant mice also developed
inflammatory bowel disease. Since the IBD7 susceptibility locus (605225)
maps to chromosome 1p36, the authors suggested that PIK3CD may be a
candidate susceptibility gene.

REFERENCE 1. Ali, K.; Bilancio, A.; Thomas, M.; Pearce, W.; Gilfillan, A. M.;
Tkaczyk, C.; Kuehn, N.; Gray, A.; Giddings, J.; Peskett, E.; Fox,
R.; Bruce, I.; Walker, C.; Sawyer, C.; Okkenhaug, K.; Finan, P.; Vanhaesebroeck,
B.: Essential role for the p110-delta phosphoinositide 3-kinase in
the allergic response. Nature 431: 1007-1011, 2004.

2. Chantry, D.; Vojtek, A.; Kashishian, A.; Holtzman, D. A.; Wood,
C.; Gray, P. W.; Cooper, J. A.; Hoekstra, M. F.: p110-delta, a novel
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase catalytic subunit that associates with
p85 and is expressed predominantly in leukocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 272:
19236-19241, 1997.

3. Okkenhaug, K.; Bilancio, A.; Farjot, G.; Priddle, H.; Sancho, S.;
Peskett, E.; Pearce, W.; Meek, S. E.; Salpekar, A.; Waterfield, M.
D.; Smith, A. J. H.; Vanhaesebroeck, B.: Impaired B and T cell antigen
receptor signaling in p110-delta PI 3-kinase mutant mice. Science 297:
1031-1034, 2002.

4. Seki, N.; Nimura, Y.; Ohira, M.; Saito, T.; Ichimiya, S.; Nomura,
N.; Nakagawara, A.: Identification and chromosome assignment of a
human gene encoding a novel phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase. DNA Res. 4:
355-358, 1997.

5. Vanhaesebroeck, B.; Welham, M. J.; Kotani, K.; Stein, R.; Warne,
P. H.; Zvelebil, M. J.; Higashi, K.; Volinia, S.; Downward, J.; Waterfield,
M. D.: p110-delta, a novel phosphoinositide 3-kinase in leukocytes. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 4330-4335, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/26/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/4/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/13/1998

EDITED mgross: 11/06/2013
tkritzer: 2/10/2005
terry: 1/26/2005
mgross: 9/4/2002
alopez: 8/4/1998
alopez: 7/13/1998

610862	TITLE *610862 DEGENERATIVE SPERMATOCYTE, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 2; DEGS2
;;DES2, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF;;
SPHINGOLIPID DELTA-4-DESATURASE/C4-HYDROXYLASE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis, followed by RT-PCR of human epidermal keratinocyte
RNA, Mizutani et al. (2004) cloned DEGS2. The deduced 323-amino acid
protein has a predicted molecular mass of 37.2 kD and shares 86.4%
identity and 91.9% similarity with mouse Des2. DEGS2 belongs to the
desaturase/hydroxylase superfamily, characterized by 3 conserved
histidine boxes. Compared to DEGS1, DEGS2 has a fourth histidine box and
a variation in the second amino acid residue of the 3 conserved
histidine boxes. Using in vitro assays in HEK293 cells, DEGS2 exhibited
dihydroceramide hydroxylase activity. Northern blot analysis of adult
human tissues detected a 1.8-kb transcript with highest expression in
skin, moderate expression in kidney, kidney, large intestine, and small
intestine, weak expression in brain and lung, and no expression in
heart, liver, spleen, skeletal muscle, thymus, or placenta. Using RT-PCR
analysis, Mizutani et al. (2004) found that expression of DEGS2 mRNA was
regulated during in vitro keratinocyte differentiation and that DEGS2
transcription was not detected at day 0 or 3 days after differentiation,
but was found at day 6 and had increased by day 9.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the DEGS2
gene to chromosome 14 (TMAP RH47801).

REFERENCE 1. Mizutani, Y.; Kihara, A.; Igarashi, Y.: Identification of the
human sphingolipid C4-hydroxylase, hDES2, and its up-regulation during
keratinocyte differentiation. FEBS Lett. 563: 93-97, 2004.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 3/19/2007

EDITED wwang: 03/19/2007

194538	TITLE *194538 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 10; ZNF10
;;KOX1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using the zinc finger region of mouse Mkr1 (Zfp1) to screen a human
T-cell line cDNA library, Thiesen (1990) cloned ZNF10, which he called
KOX1. The deduced 462-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass
of at least 50 kD. It has 11 consecutive zinc fingers containing
conserved cys/his residues, with variations in fingers 1 and 11.
Northern blot analysis showed variable KOX1 expression in several human
cell lines, with highest expression in the U937 myelomonocytic cell
line. Several KOX1 transcripts were detected, suggesting it may be
alternatively spliced.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a zinc blot, Thiesen (1990) demonstrated that KOX1 specifically
bound zinc.

MAPPING

In the course of mapping 27 nonoverlapping zinc finger cDNAs from human
T cells by analysis of somatic cell hybrids, Huebner et al. (1991)
mapped ZNF10 to chromosome 12q13-qter, probably clustered with ZNF26
(194537). Rousseau-Merck et al. (1993) also mapped the ZNF10 gene to
chromosome 12q24.33 and demonstrated that it and ZNF26 are located
within a pulsed field gel electrophoresis fragment less than 300 kb
long. The mapping was done by a combination of somatic cell
hybridization and in situ hybridization. Since ZNF26 has been mapped to
12q24.33 by in situ hybridization, this also must be the localization of
ZNF10.

REFERENCE 1. Huebner, K.; Druck, T.; Croce, C. M.; Thiesen, H. J.: Twenty-seven
nonoverlapping zinc finger cDNAs from human T cells map to nine different
chromosomes with apparent clustering. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 48: 726-740,
1991.

2. Rousseau-Merck, M.-F.; Hillion, J.; Jonveaux, P.; Couillin, P.;
Seite, P.; Thiesen, H.-J.; Berger, R.: Chromosomal localization of
9 KOX zinc finger genes: physical linkages suggest clustering of KOX
genes on chromosomes 12, 16, and 19. Hum. Genet. 92: 583-587, 1993.

3. Thiesen, H.-J.: Multiple genes encoding zinc finger domains are
expressed in human T cells. New Biologist 2: 363-374, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/8/2007

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/7/1992

EDITED mgross: 08/13/2007
terry: 8/8/2007
dkim: 6/25/1998
mark: 5/14/1996
carol: 2/24/1994
carol: 7/7/1992

600392	TITLE *600392 RAD52, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF; RAD52
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ionizing radiation causes different types of DNA damage. Misrepair or
nonrepair of this damage may cause cell death, mutation, and neoplastic
transformation. Distinctive pathways of DNA repair respond to different
DNA damage. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, 3 epistasis groups of DNA
damage-repair genes have been identified. The RAD52 epistasis group,
which is mainly responsible for DNA double-strand break repair, contains
8 genes: RAD50 through RAD57. One of these, RAD51 (179617), has been
cloned and found to have homology in yeast, chicken, mouse, and human to
the bacterial Rec-A (RECA) protein, which is required for homologous
recombination. See also RAD54L (603615). The RAD52 gene of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae is involved in DNA double-strand break repair and
mitotic/meiotic recombination. The N-terminal amino acid sequence is
highly conserved across species.

CLONING

Using the technology of mixed oligonucleotide primed amplification of
cDNA (MOPAC), Shen et al. (1995) amplified and sequenced 2 mouse RAD52
homologous cDNA fragments. Subsequently, they cloned cDNA of the human
and mouse homologs of the yeast RAD52 gene by screening cDNA libraries
using the identified mouse cDNA fragments.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

The human RAD52 protein forms a heptameric ring that catalyzes
homologous pairing. The N-terminal half of RAD52 is the catalytic domain
for homologous pairing, and the ring formed by the domain fragment was
reported to be approximately decameric. Splicing variants of RAD52 and a
yeast homolog, Rad59, are composed mostly of this domain. Kagawa et al.
(2002) determined the crystal structure of the homologous-pairing domain
of human RAD52 and found that the domain forms an undecameric ring. Each
monomer has a beta-beta-beta-alpha fold, which consists of highly
conserved amino acid residues among RAD52 homologs. A mutational
analysis revealed that the amino acid residues located between the
beta-beta-beta-alpha fold and the characteristic hairpin loop are
essential for single-stranded DNA and double-stranded DNA binding.

MAPPING

By DNA analysis of somatic cell hybrids and by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Shen et al. (1995) assigned the human RAD52 gene to
12p13-p12.2.

REFERENCE 1. Kagawa, W.; Kurumizaka, H.; Ishitani, R.; Fukai, S.; Nureki, O.;
Shibata, T.; Yokoyama, S.: Crystal structure of the homologous-pairing
domain from the human Rad52 recombinase in the undecameric form. Molec.
Cell 10: 359-371, 2002.

2. Shen, Z.; Denison, K.; Lobb, R.; Gatewood, J. M.; Chen, D. J.:
The human and mouse homologs of the yeast RAD52 gene: cDNA cloning,
sequence analysis, assignment to human chromosome 12p12.2-p13, and
mRNA expression in mouse tissues. Genomics 25: 199-206, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 09/11/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/10/1995

EDITED mgross: 09/11/2002
alopez: 12/22/1999
alopez: 3/8/1999
carol: 7/6/1998
mark: 3/12/1996
carol: 2/10/1995

607035	TITLE *607035 SUPPRESSOR OF FUSED, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; SUFU
;;SUFUH
SUFUXL, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SUFU encodes a component of the Sonic hedgehog (SHH; 600725)/Patched
(PTCH; 601309) signaling pathway. Mutations in genes encoding components
of this pathway are deleterious for normal development and are
associated with cancer-predisposing syndromes (e.g., HPE3, 142945; BCNS,
109400; and GCPS, 175700).

CLONING

By EST database searching for homologs of Drosophila suppressor of fused
(Sufu), followed by RACE, Kogerman et al. (1999) obtained a cDNA
encoding human SUFU. The deduced 484-amino acid protein is 40% identical
to the fly protein. Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous
expression of a minor 2.8-kb and a major 5.5-kb transcript. Whole-mount
in situ hybridization analysis detected expression throughout
midgestation in the neural tube and, later, in the neural tube's brain
and spinal cord derivatives, overlapping with expression of Ptch and
Gli1 (165220), Gli2 (165230), and Gli3 (165240). Similar analysis in a
12-week human embryo showed marked expression in perichondrial
osteoblasts, cells that also receive a hedgehog signal.

Stone et al. (1999) independently cloned and characterized SUFU and
identified shorter splice variants, truncated by 52 and 3 amino acids.
The full-length protein, which is 97% identical to the mouse protein,
contains a PEST sequence and multiple potential phosphorylation sites.
In addition to the same transcripts identified by Kogerman et al.
(1999), they detected smaller 2.0- and 1.0-kb transcripts in testis. By
semiquantitative PCR, they determined that the full-length isoform is
more abundant in all tissues.

Grimm et al. (2001) identified a low abundance isoform, SUFU-XL, of 485
amino acids as well as shorter isoforms restricted to leukocytes and
testis. They detected expression of normal SUFU and SUFU-XL in a panel
of tumor cDNA libraries. Immunoprecipitation analysis showed that
neither of the shorter isoforms is able to bind GLI1.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Grimm et al. (2001) determined that the
mouse and human SUFU genes contain 12 exons.

MAPPING

By FISH, Stone et al. (1999) mapped the SUFU gene to chromosome
10q24-q25. Grimm et al. (2001) confirmed the localization by radiation
hybrid analysis. By FISH, Taylor et al. (2002) mapped the SUFU gene to
10q24.3 distal to the PTEN gene (601728), which maps to 10q23.31 and is
approximately 1 Mb telomeric to BTRC.

GENE FUNCTION

By luciferase reporter analysis, Kogerman et al. (1999) showed that SUFU
inhibits the transcriptional activity of GLI1 and osteogenic
differentiation in response to SHH signaling. Immunoprecipitation
analysis determined that SUFU and GLI1 are associated in an
intracellular complex. Confocal microscopy demonstrated both cytoplasmic
and nuclear expression of SUFU; however, colocalization with GLI1, due
to a central leucine-rich CRM1 (XPO1; 602559)-dependent nuclear-export
signal, was restricted to cytoplasm. Inhibition of CRM1 resulted in
nuclear expression of GLI1 in the absence of full-length SUFU that has
an intact C terminus necessary for GLI1-induced transcriptional
activation. Truncated GLI1 bound to DNA also interacted with SUFU.

By GST pull-down and yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Stone et al. (1999)
demonstrated that SUFU interacts with GLI2 and GLI3 through its extreme
C-terminal end, as well as with GLI1 and SLIMB (BTRC; 603482). Reporter
analysis indicated that BTRC containing an F-box domain potentiates the
inhibitory effect of SUFU on GLI activity. Stone et al. (1999) concluded
that SUFU is a direct negative regulator of GLI and that this regulation
may occur at multiple levels, possibly depending on the relative
intracellular concentrations of different signaling components.

In Drosophila, Cos2 is a major inhibitor of Shh signaling, and Sufu is a
minor inhibitor. Varjosalo et al. (2006) found the opposite was true in
mouse cells; RNA interference studies indicated Sufu was a major Shh
repressor and the mammalian orthologs of Cos2, Kif7 and Kif27, had no
effect.

Lee et al. (2007) found that expression of miR378 (MIRN378; 611957)
enhanced cell survival and reduced caspase-3 (CASP3; 600636) activity in
human glioma cells. Injection of miR378-expressing glioma cells into
nude mice showed that miR378 promoted tumor growth and angiogenesis. Lee
et al. (2007) identified miR378 target sequences in the 3-prime UTRs of
SUFU and FUS1 (TUSC2; 607052) transcripts, and they found that miR378
downregulated expression of both transcripts. Transfection and
overexpression of either SUFU or FUS1 overcame the growth-promoting
effects of miR378. Expression of miR378 repressed expression of reporter
gene constructs harboring the miR378 target sites of SUFU or FUS1.
RT-PCR and Western blot analysis showed that repression of SUFU occurred
posttranscriptionally, and the levels of SUFU protein and miR378 were
inversely correlated in a human cell lines.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Split Hand/Foot Malformation 3

Grimm et al. (2001) found no mutations in the SUFU gene in patients with
split-hand/foot malformation type 3 (SHFM3; 246560).

Lyle et al. (2006) used FISH and quantitative PCR to narrow the SHFM3
locus to a minimal 325-kb duplication containing only the BTRC (603482)
and POLL (606343) genes. Expression analysis of 13 candidate genes
within and flanking the duplicated region showed that BTRC and SUFU,
present in 3 copies and 2 copies, respectively, were overexpressed in
SHFM3 patients compared to controls. Lyle et al. (2006) suggested that
SHFM3 may be caused by overexpression of BTRC and SUFU, both of which
are involved in beta-catenin signaling.

- Medulloblastoma

Bayani et al. (2000) showed that loss of heterozygosity (LOH) on 10q24
is frequent in medulloblastomas (155255), suggesting that this region
contains 1 or more tumor suppressor genes. Taylor et al. (2002) reported
children with medulloblastoma who carried germline and somatic mutations
in SUFU in the SHH pathway, accompanied by LOH of the wildtype allele
(see, e.g., 607035.0001-607035.0006). Several of these mutations encoded
truncated proteins that are unable to export the GLI transcription
factor (165220) from nucleus to cytoplasm, resulting in the activation
of SHH signaling. Thus, SUFU is a tumor suppressor gene that predisposes
individuals to medulloblastoma by modulating the SHH signaling pathway
through a newly identified mechanism.

Taylor et al. (2002) noted that all 4 medulloblastomas with SUFU
truncating mutations were of the desmoplastic subtype. Desmoplastic
tumors make up about 20 to 30% of medulloblastomas, have a more nodular
architecture than 'classical' medulloblastoma, and may have a better
prognosis. Activation of the SHH pathway is particularly high in
desmoplastic medulloblastomas, as shown by increased expression of the
SHH target genes GLI, SMOH (601500), and PTCH (601309).

Brugieres et al. (2010) identified germline truncating SUFU mutations in
2 unrelated families with several children under 3 years of age
diagnosed with medulloblastoma (607035.0005 and 607035.0006,
respectively). Among the 25 mutation carriers in the 2 families, 7
developed medulloblastomas; of the 5 tumors for which histology was
reviewed, 3 were classified as medulloblastoma with extensive nodularity
(MBEN) and 2 were typical desmoplastic/nodular medulloblastoma. No
obvious physical stigmata of nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome was
found among 21 mutation carriers from both families who were examined,
including 11 patients who underwent brain MRI. SUFU sequence analysis of
1 tumor from each family confirmed that only the mutant allele was
detected in the tumor DNA, thus demonstrating the loss of the wildtype
allele and supporting a tumor suppressor role for SUFU.

- Susceptibility to Familial Meningioma

In affected members of a Finnish family with multiple adult-onset
meningiomas (607174), Aavikko et al. (2012) identified a germline
heterozygous mutation in the SUFU gene (R123C; 607035.0007). The
mutation was identified by genomewide linkage analysis combined with
exome sequencing. Tumor tissue from 7 meningiomas showed loss of
heterozygosity at the SUFU locus, consistent with a 2-hit model for
tumor suppressor genes. In vitro functional expression studies in human
rhabdomyosarcoma cells showed that the R123C mutant protein had a
significantly decreased ability to suppress GLI1 activity compared to
wildtype SUFU, resulting in aberrant activation of the hedgehog
signaling pathway.

- Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome

In affected members of a family exhibiting atypical signs and symptoms
of Gorlin syndrome (basal cell nevus syndrome; 109400), who were known
to be negative for mutation in the PTCH1 gene, Pastorino et al. (2009)
identified a splice site mutation (607035.0003) that had previously been
found in a desmoplastic medulloblastoma by Taylor et al. (2002).

ANIMAL MODEL

Svard et al. (2006) found that ablation of the mouse Sufu gene led to
lethality at about embryonic day 9.5 with cephalic and neural tube
defects. Fibroblasts derived from Sufu-null embryos showed high
Gli-mediated Shh pathway activity that was unaffected by either Smo
agonists or antagonists, but was partially sensitive to Pka (see 176911)
inhibition. Despite robust constitutive activity of Sufu-null
fibroblasts, Gli1 localization remained cytoplasmic. Mice heterozygous
for Sufu deletion appeared normal and were fertile; however, they
developed a skin phenotype with basaloid changes and jaw keratocysts,
characteristic features of BCNS. Svard et al. (2006) concluded that, in
contrast to Drosophila, mammalian SUFU has a central role in SHH
signaling, and its loss of function leads to potent ligand-independent
activation of the SHH pathway.

Pospisilik et al. (2010) found that hedgehog signaling was an important
determinant of adipose cell fate in Drosophila. They targeted Sufu
deletion to adipose tissue in mice and found that the mutant mice, which
they called aP2-SufuKO, were born healthy and at mendelian ratios.
Mutant mice displayed an immediate and obvious lean phenotype with
reduced white, but not brown, adipose tissue. Adipocyte size and total
numbers were reduced in mutant animals, and this was associated with
elevated hedgehog signaling and dysregulation of early adipogenic
factors. Lack of cutaneous and subcutaneous adipose stores in mutant
mice also resulted in cold stress at normal room temperature, but not at
elevated temperature. The mutant mice showed normal glucose tolerance
and insulin sensitivity.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MEDULLOBLASTOMA, SOMATIC
SUFU, PRO15LEU

In a medulloblastoma tumor (155255), Taylor et al. (2002) observed a
nonconservative missense mutation, pro15 to leu (P15L), near the N
terminus of SUFU. The mutation was accompanied by LOH in the wildtype
allele. The amino acid change was caused by a 44C-T transition. The
morphology of the tumor was not known.

.0002
MEDULLOBLASTOMA, DESMOPLASTIC
SUFU, 1-BP INS, 143A

In a patient with medulloblastoma of desmoplastic type (155255), Taylor
et al. (2002) found a 1-bp insertion, 143insA, in exon 1 of the SUFU
gene. The mutation caused frameshift followed by termination codon 69 bp
3-prime to the mutation.

.0003
MEDULLOBLASTOMA, DESMOPLASTIC, SOMATIC
BASAL CELL NEVUS SYNDROME, INCLUDED
SUFU, IVS8, G-A, +1

In a desmoplastic medulloblastoma (155255), Taylor et al. (2002) found
an IVS8+1G-A splice donor site mutation in the SUFU gene. The mutation
resulted in a frameshift at the 5-prime end and termination at the
3-prime end of exon 9. This was the second hit in this tumor, the first
hit being a germline 2.5-Mb deletion (deletion encompassing SUFU;
607035.0004). The patient had some features suggesting basal cell nevus
syndrome (109400). In addition to severe cognitive impairment and global
developmental delay, facial features included frontal bossing, prominent
jaw, and hypertelorism. Additional FISH experiments using contiguous BAC
clones showed that the deletion was 2.5-2.8 Mb in size and included at
least 28 genes. The most centromeric gene studied, BTRC (603482), was
not included in the deletion. The deletion was not present in either
parent.

In a father and son exhibiting atypical signs and symptoms of basal cell
nevus syndrome (109400), Pastorino et al. (2009) identified the known
1022+1G-A splice site transition in the SUFU gene. The mutation was not
detected in the clinically unaffected paternal grandparents, suggesting
that it arose de novo in the father; the mutation was also not found in
200 control alleles.

.0004
MEDULLOBLASTOMA, DESMOPLASTIC
SUFU, 2.5-Mb DEL

See 607035.0003 and Taylor et al. (2002).

.0005
MEDULLOBLASTOMA, WITH EXTENSIVE NODULARITY
SUFU, 1-BP DEL, 71C

In 2 brothers who were diagnosed with medulloblastoma with extensive
nodularity (MBEN; see 155255) within the first 3 months of life,
Brugieres et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for a 1-bp deletion
(71delC) in exon 1 of the SUFU gene, resulting in a frameshift and
premature stop codon. The deletion was also identified in the unaffected
mother, as well as the maternal grandfather, who had leiomyosarcoma, and
2 other unaffected relatives. The deletion was not found in 70 controls.

.0006
MEDULLOBLASTOMA, DESMOPLASTIC
MEDULLOBLASTOMA WITH EXTENSIVE NODULARITY, INCLUDED
SUFU, 1-BP INS, 71C

In 3 female cousins diagnosed with medulloblastoma (155255) before 3
years of age, 2 of whom had the desmoplastic type and 1 with
medulloblastoma with extensive nodularity (MBEN), Brugieres et al.
(2010) identified heterozygosity for a 1-bp insertion (71insC) in exon 1
of the SUFU gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature stop codon.
The maternal aunt of 1 of the cousins also died of medulloblastoma in
childhood, and the sister of another of the cousins died suddenly at 18
months of age with postmortem radiologic findings that were consistent
with medulloblastoma. The insertion was present in 17 of 33 family
members, 1 of whom had breast cancer and another meningioma, but not
found in 70 controls.

.0007
MENINGIOMA, FAMILIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
SUFU, ARG123CYS (dbSNP rs202247756)

In affected members of a Finnish family with multiple adult-onset
meningiomas (607174), Aavikko et al. (2012) identified a germline
heterozygous 367C-T transition in the SUFU gene, resulting in an
arg123-to-cys (R123C) substitution (dbSNP rs202247756) in the core of
the N-terminal subdomain, which is central for the loop structure of the
protein. The mutation, which was identified by genomewide linkage
analysis combined with exome sequencing, was not found in 180 controls.
Tumor tissue from 7 meningiomas showed loss of heterozygosity at the
SUFU locus. In vitro functional expression studies in human
rhabdomyosarcoma cells showed that the R123C mutant protein had a
significantly decreased ability to suppress GLI1 (165220) activity
compared to wildtype SUFU, resulting in aberrant activation of the
hedgehog signaling pathway. Compared to the wildtype protein, the mutant
protein was expressed at lower levels and also bound to GLI1 less well.
Mutant SUFU was also unable to relocalize GLI1 into the cytoplasm. These
studies all indicated that the R123C mutation results in a partial loss
of SUFU function. Mutations in the SUFU gene were not found in 162
additional Finnish patients with meningiomas.

REFERENCE 1. Aavikko, M.; Li, S.-P.; Saarinen, S.; Alhopuro, P.; Kaasinen, E.;
Morgunova, E.; Li, Y.; Vesanen, K.; Smith, M. J.; Evans, D. G. R.;
Poyhonen, M.; Kiuru, A.; Auvinen, A.; Aaltonen, L. A.; Taipale, J.;
Vahteristo, P.: Loss of SUFU function in familial multiple meningioma. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 91: 520-526, 2012.

2. Bayani, J.; Zielenska, M.; Marrano, P.; Ng, Y. K.; Taylor, M. D.;
Jay, V.; Rutka, J. T.; Squire, J. A.: Molecular cytogenetic analysis
of medulloblastomas and supratentorial primitive neuroectodermal tumors
by using conventional banding, comparative genomic hybridization,
and spectral karyotyping. J. Neurosurg. 93: 437-448, 2000.

3. Brugieres, L.; Pierron, G.; Chompret, A.; Bressac-de Paillerets,
B.; Di Rocco, F.; Varlet, P.; Pierre-Kahn, A.; Caron, O.; Grill, J.;
Delattre, O.: Incomplete penetrance of the predisposition to medulloblastoma
associated with germ-line SUFU mutations. J. Med. Genet. 47: 142-144,
2010.

4. Grimm, T.; Teglund, S.; Tackels, D.; Sangiorgi, E.; Gurrieri, F.;
Schwartz, C.; Toftgard, R.: Genomic organization and embryonic expression
of Suppressor of Fused, a candidate gene for the split-hand/split-foot
malformation type 3. FEBS Lett. 505: 13-17, 2001.

5. Kogerman, P.; Grimm, T.; Kogerman, L.; Krause, D.; Unden, A. B.;
Sandstedt, B.; Toftgard, R.; Zaphiropoulos, P. G.: Mammalian suppressor-of-fused
modulates nuclear-cytoplasmic shuttling of Gli-1. Nature Cell Biol. 1:
312-319, 1999.

6. Lee, D. Y.; Deng, Z.; Wang, C.-H.; Yang, B. B.: MicroRNA-378 promotes
cell survival, tumor growth, and angiogenesis by targeting SuFu and
Fus-1 expression. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 20350-20355, 2007.

7. Lyle, R.; Radhakrishna, U.; Blouin, J.-L.; Gagos, S.; Everman,
D. B.; Gehrig, C.; Delozier-Blanchet, C.; Solanki, J. V.; Patel, U.
C.; Nath, S. K.; Gurrieri, F.; Neri, G.; Schwartz, C. E.; Antonarakis,
S. E.: Split-hand/split-foot malformation 3 (SHFM3) at 10q24, development
of rapid diagnostic methods and gene expression from the region. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 140A: 1384-1395, 2006.

8. Pastorino, L.; Ghiorzo, P.; Nasti, S.; Battistuzzi, L.; Cusano,
R.; Marzocchi, C.; Garre, M. L.; Clementi, M.; Bianchi Scarra, G.
: Identification of a SUFU germline mutation in a family with Gorlin
syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A: 1539-1543, 2009.

9. Pospisilik, J. A.; Schramek, D.; Schnidar, H.; Cronin, S. J. F.;
Nehme, N. T.; Zhang, X.; Knauf, C.; Cani, P. D.; Aumayr, K.; Todoric,
J.; Bayer, M.; Haschemi, A.; and 14 others: Drosophila genome-wide
obesity screen reveals hedgehog as a determinant of brown versus white
adipose cell fate. Cell 140: 148-160, 2010.

10. Stone, D. M.; Murone, M.; Luoh, S.-M.; Ye, W.; Armanini, M. P.;
Gurney, A.; Phillips, H.; Brush, J.; Goddard, A.; de Sauvage, F. J.;
Rosenthal, A.: Characterization of the human suppressor of fused,
a negative regulator of the zinc-finger transcription factor Gli. J.
Cell Sci. 112: 4437-4448, 1999.

11. Svard, J.; Heby-Henricson, K.; Persson-Lek, M.; Rozell, B.; Lauth,
M.; Bergstrom, A.; Ericson, J.; Toftgard, R.; Teglund, S.: Genetic
elimination of suppressor of fused reveals an essential repressor
function in the mammalian hedgehog signaling pathway. Dev. Cell 10:
187-197, 2006. Note: Erratum: Dev. Cell 10: 409 only, 2006.

12. Taylor, M. D.; Liu, L.; Raffel, C.; Hui, C.; Mainprize, T. G.;
Zhang, X.; Agatep, R.; Chiappa, S.; Gao, L.; Lowrance, A.; Hao, A.;
Goldstein, A. M.; Stavrou, T.; Scherer, S. W.; Dura, W. T.; Wainwright,
B.; Squire, J. A.; Rutka, J. T.; Hogg, D.: Mutations in SUFU predispose
to medulloblastoma. Nature Genet. 31: 306-310, 2002.

13. Varjosalo, M.; Li, S.-P.; Taipale, J.: Divergence of hedgehog
signal transduction mechanism between Drosophila and mammals. Dev.
Cell 10: 177-186, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/24/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/25/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/27/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/4/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/16/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/13/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/28/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/18/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/13/2002

EDITED terry: 12/19/2012
terry: 9/26/2012
carol: 9/26/2012
ckniffin: 9/24/2012
wwang: 6/13/2011
wwang: 8/30/2010
terry: 8/25/2010
mgross: 1/28/2010
terry: 1/27/2010
carol: 12/23/2009
terry: 12/4/2009
terry: 10/8/2008
mgross: 9/30/2008
mgross: 4/16/2008
wwang: 5/2/2007
wwang: 4/20/2007
terry: 4/13/2007
wwang: 4/24/2006
wwang: 4/3/2006
terry: 3/28/2006
tkritzer: 11/19/2002
alopez: 7/26/2002
joanna: 6/24/2002
alopez: 6/20/2002
terry: 6/18/2002
carol: 6/13/2002

601763	TITLE *601763 CASPASE 8, APOPTOSIS-RELATED CYSTEINE PROTEASE; CASP8
;;MORT1-ASSOCIATED CED3 HOMOLOG; MACH;;
FADD-HOMOLOGOUS ICE/CED3-LIKE PROTEASE;;
FADD-LIKE ICE; FLICE;;
MCH5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

A cascade of protease reactions is believed to be responsible for the
apoptotic changes observed in mammalian cells undergoing programmed cell
death. This cascade involves members of the aspartate-specific cysteine
proteases of the ICE/CED3 (147678) family, also known as the caspase
family.

CLONING

Fernandes-Alnemri et al. (1996) identified the novel gene MCH5 when they
found a human EST sequence with significant homology to the newly
identified cysteine protease MCH4 (601762). They used PCR to clone a
cDNA of the MCH5 gene from a Jurkat T-cell cDNA library. Sequence
analysis revealed that it encodes a polypeptide of 496 amino acids with
greatest homology to MCH4. The authors found that MCH4 and MCH5 both
contain the active site pentapeptide QACQG instead of the QACRG present
in all other known members of the family. Furthermore, the authors found
that the sequences of MCH4 and MCH5 contain Fas-associating protein with
death domain (FADD)-like domains, suggesting possible interaction with
FADD. Fernandes-Alnemri et al. (1996) stated that MCH5, like other
members of the ICE/CED3 family, forms an active protease only after
cleavage of its proenzyme into 2 subunits which dimerize to form the
active enzyme.

Using MORT1 (FADD; 602457) in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a B-cell cDNA
library, Boldin et al. (1996) cloned several splice variants of CASP8,
which they called MACH. The isoforms could be divided into 2 main
subgroups. All isoforms share a common 182-amino acid N-terminal region,
including 2 MORT modules (i.e., death effector domains, or DEDs), but
they have different C termini. Subgroup alpha isoforms have C termini
containing a CED3/ICE homology domain that contains the catalytic site
and the substrate-binding pocket, while subgroup beta isoforms are
truncated and lack the CED3/ICE homology domain. The longest isoform,
MACH-alpha-1, encodes a deduced 479-amino acid protein. The CED3/ICE
domain of MACH-alpha-1 shares 41% and 34% identity with the homologous
regions in CPP32 (CASP3; 600636) and C. elegans CED3, respectively.
Northern blot analysis detected MACH transcripts ranging in size between
2.85 and 3.5 kb in all tissues examined, with highest levels in resting
peripheral blood mononuclear leukocytes and lowest levels in testis and
skeletal muscle.

Eckhart et al. (2001) identified several CASP8 splice variants that
preferentially use a distant splice donor site at the 3-prime end of
exon 8. Use of this distant site, which they called exon 8b, results in
mRNAs with truncated open reading frames. RT-PCR indicated equal
expression of both mRNA species in tonsil, spleen, bone marrow, thymus,
and lymph nodes. Peripheral blood leukocytes, heart, and epidermis
predominantly expressed mRNA containing exon 8b, as did a promyelocytic
cell line and a T-cell line. Liver and nearly all immortalized cell
lines, as well as primary endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and
keratinocytes, expressed mRNA lacking the 8b extension.

GENE FUNCTION

Using fluorogenic peptide substrates corresponding to a sequence within
the nuclear protein PARP (173870), Boldin et al. (1996) confirmed that
MACH-alpha-1 is a thiol protease. By site-directed mutagenesis, they
identified cys360 as the catalytic cysteine. Using mutation analysis,
Boldin et al. (1996) determined that MACH binds to the N terminus of
MORT1. They also found that it self-associates, but it does not interact
directly with FAS/APO1 (TNRFSF6; 134637). Transfection of human
embryonic kidney cells and breast carcinoma cells with MACH-alpha-1 or
MACH-alpha-2 resulted in massive cell death.

Muzio et al. (1996) determined that CASP8, which they called FLICE,
interacts with wildtype FADD but not with FADD lacking the DED. They
also determined that granzyme B (GZMB; 123910) can remove the prodomain
and generate the active p20/p10 dimeric cysteine protease. Cleavage of
PARP by CASP8 resulted in the appearance of signature apoptotic
fragments. Transfection and overexpression of CASP8 in transfected
breast cancer cells resulted in apoptosis.

Expression of cDNAs that encode truncated polypeptides containing mostly
expanded polyglutamine repeats, but not of those that encode the
corresponding full-length proteins, has been shown to induce cell death
by apoptosis. Such truncated proteins have been shown to form aggregates
or inclusions (Ikeda et al., 1996). Sanchez et al. (1999) studied the
role of caspases in polyglutamine-induced cell death in established
cultures of primary cortical, striatal, and cerebellar neurons from
embryonic day 17 rat embryos, transfected with an expression construct
encoding truncated ataxin-3 that contained 79 glutamine (Q79) residues.
The authors showed that the apoptosis inhibitors Bcl2, CrmA, and a
truncated Fas/APO1-associated death domain protein (FADD DN) inhibited
polyglutamine repeat-induced neuronal cell death. A mutant Jurkat cell
line specifically lacking caspase-8 was resistant to
polyglutamine-induced cell death. Cells transfected with Q79 showed
insoluble inclusions. Caspase-8 was recruited and activated by these Q79
inclusions. Western blot analysis revealed the presence of activated
caspase-8 in the insoluble fraction of affected brain regions from
Huntington disease (143100) patients but not in those from controls. The
authors suggested that caspase-8 has an essential role in
Huntington-related neurodegenerative diseases.

Eckhart et al. (2001) found that different CASP8 isoforms were expressed
in resting and activated lymphocytes. Activation of lymphocytes shifted
the expression from mRNA species containing an exon 8b extension to
mRNAs that lack it. Differentiation in a promyelocytic cell line was
associated with the opposite shift, from mRNAs containing the shorter
exon 8 to mRNAs that include the exon 8b extension.

Gervais et al. (2002) found that HIP1 (601767) binds to the HIP1 protein
interactor (HIPPI; 606621), which has partial sequence homology to HIP1
and similar tissue and subcellular distribution. The availability of
free HIP1 is modulated by polyglutamine length within huntingtin
(613004), with disease-associated polyglutamine expansion favoring the
formation of proapoptotic HIPPI-HIP1 heterodimers. This heterodimer can
recruit procaspase-8 into a complex of HIPPI, HIP1, and procaspase-8,
and launch apoptosis through components of the extrinsic cell death
pathway. Gervais et al. (2002) proposed that huntingtin polyglutamine
expansion liberates HIP1 so that it can form a caspase-8 recruitment
complex with HIPPI, possibly contributing to neuronal death in
Huntington disease.

Yu et al. (2004) defined a novel molecular pathway in which activation
of the receptor-interacting protein (RIP; 603453), a serine-threonine
kinase, and Jun amino-terminal kinase (601158) induced cell death with
the morphology of autophagy. Autophagic death required the genes ATG7
(GSA7; 608760) and beclin-1 (604378) and was induced by caspase-8
inhibition. Yu et al. (2004) cautioned that clinical therapies involving
caspase inhibitors may arrest apoptosis but also have the unanticipated
effect of promoting autophagic cell death.

Poulaki et al. (2005) found that human retinoblastoma (RB1; 614041) cell
lines were resistant to death receptor (see DR5; 603612)-mediated
apoptosis because of a deficiency of CASP8 expression secondary to
epigenetic gene silencing by overmethylation. Treatment with a
demethylating agent restored CASP8 expression and sensitivity to
apoptosis.

Su et al. (2005) showed that caspase-8 deficiency (607271) in humans and
mice specifically abolishes activation of the transcription factor NF
kappa-B (164011) after stimulation through antigen receptors, Fc
receptors, or Toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4; 603030) in T, B, and natural
killer cells. Caspase-8 also causes the alpha-beta complex of the
inhibitor of NF-kappa-B kinase (IKK; 600644 and 300248, respectively) to
associate with the upstream BCL10 (603517)-MALT1 (604860) adaptor
complex. Recruitment of the IKK-alpha,beta complex, its activation, and
the nuclear translocation of NF-kappa-B require enzyme activity of
full-length caspase-8. Su et al. (2005) concluded that their findings
explained the paradoxical association of defective apoptosis and
combined immunodeficiency in human caspase-8 deficiency.

Stupack et al. (2006) showed that suppression of caspase-8 expression
occurs during the establishment of neuroblastoma (256700) metastases in
vivo, and that reconstitution of caspase-8 expression in deficient
neuroblastoma cells suppressed their metastases. Caspase-8 status was
not a predictor of primary tumor growth; rather, caspase-8 selectively
potentiated apoptosis in neuroblastoma cells invading the collagenous
stroma at the tumor margin. Apoptosis was initiated by unligated
integrins (see 605025) by means of a process known as integrin-mediated
death. Loss of caspase-8 or integrin rendered the cells refractory to
integrin-mediated death, allowed cellular survival in the stromal
microenvironment, and promoted metastases. Stupack et al. (2006)
concluded that these findings define caspase-8 as a metastasis
suppressor gene that, together with integrins, regulates the survival
and invasive capacity of neuroblastoma cells.

Oberst et al. (2011) showed that development of caspase-8-deficient mice
is completely rescued by ablation of receptor-interacting protein
kinase-3 (RIPK3; 605817). Adult animals lacking both caspase-8 and Ripk3
displayed a progressive lymphoaccumulative disease resembling that seen
with defects in Cd95 (FAS; 134637) or Cd95 ligand (FASL; 134638), and
resisted the lethal effects of Cd95 ligation in vivo. Oberst et al.
(2011) found that caspase-8 prevents RIPK3-dependent necrosis without
inducing apoptosis by functioning in a proteolytically active complex
with CFLAR (603599) and that this complex is required for the protective
function.

Kaiser et al. (2011) found that Ripk3 is responsible for the
midgestational death of Casp8-deficient embryos. Remarkably,
Casp8-null/Rip3-null-double mutant mice were viable and matured into
fertile adults with a full immune complement of myeloid and lymphoid
cell types. These mice seemed immunocompetent but developed
lymphadenopathy by 4 months of age marked by accumulation of abnormal T
cells in the periphery, a phenotype reminiscent of mice with Fas
deficiency. Thus, Kaiser et al. (2011) concluded that Casp8 contributes
to homeostatic control in the adult immune system; however, RIPK3 and
CASP8 are together completely dispensable for mammalian development.

Burguillos et al. (2011) showed that the orderly activation of caspase-8
and caspase-3/7 (600636/601761), known executioners of apoptotic cell
death, regulate microglia activation through a protein kinase C-delta
(PPKCD; 176977)-dependent pathway. Burguillos et al. (2011) found that
stimulation of microglia with various inflammogens activates caspase-8
and caspase-3/7 in microglia without triggering cell death in vitro and
in vivo. Knockdown or chemical inhibition of each of these caspases
hindered microglia activation and consequently reduced neurotoxicity.
The authors observed that these caspases are activated in microglia in
the ventral mesencephalon of Parkinson disease (168600) and the frontal
cortex of individuals with Alzheimer disease (104300). Burguillos et al.
(2011) concluded that caspase-8 and caspase-3/7 are involved in
regulating microglia activation, and suggested that inhibition of these
caspases could be neuroprotective by targeting the microglia rather than
the neurons themselves.

Gunther et al. (2011) demonstrated a critical role for caspase-8 in
regulating necroptosis of intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) and
terminal ileitis. Mice with a conditional deletion of caspase-8 in the
intestinal epithelium (Casp8-delta-IEC) spontaneously developed
inflammatory lesions in the terminal ileum were highly susceptible to
colitis. These mice lacked Paneth cells and showed reduced numbers of
goblet cells, indicating dysregulated antimicrobial immune cell
functions of the intestinal epithelium. Casp8-delta-IEC mice showed
increased cell death in the Paneth cell area of small intestinal crypts.
Epithelial cell death was induced by tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFA;
191160), was associated with increased expression of
receptor-interacting protein-3 (RIP3; 605817) and could be inhibited on
blockade of necroptosis. Lastly, Gunther et al. (2011) identified high
levels of RIP3 in human Paneth cells and increased necroptosis in the
terminal ileum of patients with Crohn disease, suggesting a potential
role of necroptosis in the pathogenesis of this disease. Gunther et al.
(2011) concluded that their data demonstrated a critical function of
caspase-8 in regulating intestinal homeostasis and in protecting IECs
from TNFA-induced necroptotic cell death.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Varfolomeev et al. (1998) determined that
the CASP8 gene contains 8 exons. Hadano et al. (2001) determined that
the CASP8 gene contains 13 exons and spans 51.2 kb.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), Kischkel et al. (1998)
mapped the CASP8 gene to human chromosome 2q33-q34 and mouse chromosome
1B-proximal C. This mapping further extended the known homology of
synteny between these regions of human chromosome 2 and mouse chromosome
1. By FISH, Grenet et al. (1999) also mapped the CASP8 gene to 2q33-q34.
They noted that CASP10 (601762), whose product is closely related to
that of CASP8, has been mapped to the same location, indicating that the
2 genes have evolved by tandem duplication.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Liu et al. (2002) identified a naturally occurring deletion of leu62
within the first DED of CASP8 in A431 human vulva squamous carcinoma
cells. This deletion resulted in defective CASP8-dependent apoptosis.
Unlike wildtype CASP8, CASP8 lacking leu62 failed to form oligomers with
wildtype CASP8 and failed to interact with FADD. The mutation did not
effect proteolytic activation by granzyme B, nor did it effect catalytic
activity against PARP.

In 2 affected sibs from a consanguineous family with caspase-8
deficiency (607271), Chun et al. (2002) identified a homozygous mutation
in the CASP8 gene (601763.0001). The patients had defects in the
activation of T and B lymphocytes and natural killer cells, which led to
immunodeficiency.

Soung et al. (2005) analyzed the entire coding region of the CASP8 gene
in 69 hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC; 114550), 2 with low-grade
dysplastic nodule (LGDN), 2 with high-grade dysplastic nodule (HGDN),
and 65 without dysplastic nodules, and detected a total of 9 somatic
mutations (13%). All 9 mutations were an identical 2-bp deletion
(nucleotides 1225-1226; 601763.0002), which was predicted to result in
frameshift and premature termination of amino acid synthesis in the p10
protease subunit. The change was detected both in HCC and in LGDN
lesions, suggesting that CASP8 mutation may be involved in the early
stage of HCC carcinogenesis. Soung et al. (2005) found that expression
of the tumor-derived caspase-8 mutant in cells abolished cell death
activity of caspase-8.

Cox et al. (2007) reported the findings of the Breast Cancer Association
Consortium (BCAC), which had been established to conduct combined
case-control analyses with augmented statistical power to try to confirm
putative genetic associations with breast cancer. They genotyped 9 SNPs
for which there was some prior evidence of an association with breast
cancer (114480). They included data from 9 to 15 studies, comprising
11,391 to 18,290 cases and 14,753 to 22,670 controls. They found
evidence of a protective association with breast cancer for a D302H
polymorphism in CASP8 (601763.0003), and weaker evidence for an L10P SNP
in the TGFB1 gene (190180.0007). These results demonstrated that common
breast cancer susceptibility alleles with small effects on risk can be
identified, given sufficiently powerful studies.

Caspases are important in the life and death of immune cells and
therefore influence immune surveillance of malignancies. Sun et al.
(2007) tested whether genetic variants in CASP8, CASP10, (601762), and
CFLAR (603599), 3 genes important for death receptor-induced cell
killing residing in tandem order on chromosome 2q33, are associated with
cancer susceptibility. Using a haplotype-tagging SNP approach, they
identified a 6-nucleotide deletion (-652 6N del) variant in the CASP8
promoter (601763.0004) associated with decreased risk of lung cancer.
The deletion destroyed a binding site for stimulatory protein-1 (SP1;
189906) and decreased transcription. Biochemical analyses showed that T
lymphocytes with the deletion variant had lower caspase-8 activity and
activation-induced cell death upon stimulation with cancer cell
antigens. Case-control analyses of 4,995 individuals with cancer and
4,972 controls in a Chinese population showed that this genetic variant
is associated with reduced susceptibility to multiple cancers, including
lung, esophageal, gastric, colorectal, cervical, and breast cancers,
acting in an allele dose-dependent manner. The results supported the
hypothesis that genetic variants influencing immune status modify cancer
susceptibility. Haiman et al. (2008) did not find an association between
this SNP and breast (114480), colorectal (114500), or prostate (176807)
cancer among 2,098, 1,139, and 2,825 patients, respectively. The study
included patients in Hawaii and California of various ethnic groups.

ANIMAL MODEL

Varfolomeev et al. (1998) generated mice deficient in Casp8 by
disrupting exons 1 and 2, which encode the N-terminal death effector
domains (DEDs) that interact with MORT1/FADD. Whereas wildtype and
heterozygous mice appeared normal, no homozygous mutant mice survived
beyond approximately embryonic day 13.5. Histopathologic analysis
revealed marked abdominal hyperemia with erythrocytosis in the liver,
major blood vessels, capillaries, and other organs. Cardiac ventricular
musculature was thin and similar to early mesenchyme. Colony forming
assays showed that hemopoietic precursor cells were markedly reduced in
the mutant mice. Immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis indicated
that fibroblasts from mutant mice responded normally to the noncytocidal
effects of tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR; 191190) and death
receptor-3 (DR3, or TNFRSF12; 603366) stimulation, whereas wildtype
fibroblasts were killed by TNF (191160) treatment or FAS cross-linking.
Agents such as ultraviolet irradiation and protein kinase inhibitors
were lethal for mutant and normal fibroblasts. Varfolomeev et al. (1998)
concluded that CASP8 is necessary for death induction by receptors of
the TNF/nerve growth factor (see NGFR; 162010) family and is vital in
embryonal development.

Zender et al. (2003) evaluated the efficacy of small interfering RNA
(siRNA) in vivo in different mouse models with acute liver failure. They
directed 21-nucleotide siRNAs against caspase-8, which is a key enzyme
in death receptor-mediated apoptosis. Systemic administration of
caspase-8 siRNA resulted in inhibition of caspase-8 gene expression in
the liver, therefore preventing CD95-mediated apoptosis. Protection of
hepatocytes by caspase-8 siRNA significantly attenuated acute liver
damage induced by CD95 antibody or by adenovirus expressing FAS ligand.
In a clinical situation, siRNAs would most likely be administered after
the onset of acute liver failure. Therefore, Zender et al. (2003)
injected caspase-8 siRNA at a time during experimentally-induced liver
failure with already elevated liver transaminases. Improvement of
survival due to RNA interference was significant even when caspase-8
siRNA was applied during ongoing acute liver failure.

Salmena and Hakem (2005) used the Cre/lox recombinase system to generate
mice lacking Casp8 only in T cells (Tcasp8 -/- mice). Tcasp8 -/- mice
developed an age-dependent lethal lymphoproliferative and
lymphoinfiltrative immune disorder characterized by lymphoadenopathy,
splenomegaly, and T-cell infiltrates in lung, liver, and kidney.
Although there was lymphopenia in young Tcasp8 -/- mice, peripheral T
cells in old Tcasp8 -/- mice proliferated in the absence of infection or
stimulation. Salmena and Hakem (2005) proposed that Tcasp8 -/- mice may
serve as a model of human CASP8 deficiency and that CASP8 in T cells is
required for lymphocyte homeostasis.

To define the contribution of reduced caspase-8 to a wound healing
response, Lee et al. (2009) generated an epidermal knockout of
caspase-8. By postnatal day 10 the conditional knockout mouse had flaky
skin throughout its body, was slightly runted, and its epidermis was
dramatically thickened. Lee et al. (2009) found that even though
caspase-8 is normally expressed in the granular layer, it was the basal
and spinous layers that were markedly expanded in the knockout
epidermis. Lee et al. (2009) demonstrated that the loss of epidermal
caspase-8, an important mediator of apoptosis, recapitulated several
phases of a wound healing response in the mouse. The epidermal
hyperplasia in the caspase-8 null skin is the culmination of signals
exchanged between epidermal keratinocytes, dermal fibroblasts, and
leukocytic cells. This reciprocal interaction is initiated by the
paracrine signaling of interleukin 1-alpha (IL1-alpha; 147760), which
activates both skin stem cell proliferation and cutaneous inflammation.
The noncanonical secretion of IL1-alpha is induced by a p38-MAPK
(600289)-mediated upregulation of NALP3 (606416), leading to
inflammasome assembly and caspase-1 activation. Notably, the increased
proliferation of basal keratinocytes is counterbalanced by the growth
arrest of suprabasal keratinocytes in the stratified epidermis by
IL1-alpha-dependent NF-kappa-B (see 164011) signaling. Lee et al. (2009)
concluded that their findings illustrated how the loss of caspase-8 can
affect more than programmed cell death to alter the local
microenvironment and elicit processes common to wound repair and many
neoplastic skin disorders.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CASPASE 8 DEFICIENCY
CASP8, ARG248TRP

In 2 affected sibs from a consanguineous family with caspase-8
deficiency (607271), Chun et al. (2002) identified a homozygous C-to-T
transition in the CASP8 gene, resulting in an arg248-to-trp (R248W)
substitution within the p18 protease subunit of the protein. The
asymptomatic mother, father, and sister were heterozygous carriers of
the mutation. In 13 extended family members, Chun et al. (2002)
identified 7 asymptomatic heterozygous carriers but found no additional
homozygous or immunodeficient individuals.

.0002
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
CASP8, 2-BP DEL, 1225TG

In 9 unrelated patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (114550) and HBV
infection, Soung et al. (2005) identified the same somatic mutation, a
2-bp deletion (1225_1226delTG) in exon 7 that was predicted to result in
frameshift and premature termination of amino acid synthesis in the p10
protease subunit.

.0003
BREAST CANCER, PROTECTION AGAINST
CASP8, ASP302HIS

MacPherson et al. (2004) and Frank et al. (2005) found evidence that the
presence of a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the CASP8 gene
resulting in an asp302-to-his (D302H) substitution (dbSNP rs1045485)
could reduce susceptibility to breast cancer (114480) in British and
German cohorts, respectively. Cox et al. (2007) found evidence for a
protective effect of the D302H polymorphism in an allele dose-dependent
manner in 16,423 cases and 17,109 controls from 14 studies that
contributed data to the Breast Cancer Association Consortium (BCAC). The
study achieved odds ratios of 0.89 and 0.74 for heterozygotes and rare
homozygotes, respectively, compared with common homozygotes. This site
was not found to be polymorphic in Korean, Han Chinese, or Japanese
women. Cox et al. (2007) noted that the functional consequences of the
aspartic acid-to-histidine substitution were not known, and further
experiments were required to establish whether D302H itself or another
variant in strong linkage disequilibrium with it is causative.

.0004
LUNG CANCER, PROTECTION AGAINST
CASP8, 6-BP DEL, NT-652

Sun et al. (2007) identified a 6-nucleotide insertion/deletion
polymorphism in the CASP8 promoter, -652 AGTAAG ins/del (dbSNP
rs3834129), the deletion variant of which was associated with decreased
risk of developing lung cancer (211980) in a population of Han Chinese
subjects. The -652 6N deletion was also associated with decreased risk
of cancer of various other forms including esophageal, gastric,
colorectal, cervical, and breast, acting in an allele dose-dependent
manner. The frequency of the -652 6N deletion was significantly lower in
individuals with lung cancer (P = 4.1 x 10(-5)).

Haiman et al. (2008) did not find an association between this SNP and
breast (114480), colorectal (114500), or prostate (176807) cancer among
2,098, 1,139, and 2,825 patients, respectively. The study included
patients in Hawaii and California of various ethnic groups.

REFERENCE 1. Boldin, M. P.; Goncharov, T. M.; Goltsev, Y. V.; Wallach, D.:
Involvement of MACH, a novel MORT1/FADD-interacting protease, in Fas/APO-1-
and TNF receptor-induced cell death. Cell 85: 803-815, 1996.

2. Burguillos, M. A.; Deierborg, T.; Kavanagh, E.; Persson, A.; Hajji,
N.; Garcia-Quintanilla, A.; Cano, J.; Brundin, P.; Englund, E.; Venero,
J. L.; Joseph, B.: Caspase signalling controls microglia activation
and neurotoxicity. Nature 472: 319-324, 2011.

3. Chun, H. J.; Zheng, L.; Ahmad, M.; Wang, J.; Speirs, C. K.; Siegel,
R. M.; Dale, J. K.; Puck, J.; Davis, J.; Hall, C. G.; Skoda-Smith,
S.; Atkinson, T. P.; Straus, S. E.; Lenardo, M. J.: Pleiotropic defects
in lymphocyte activation caused by caspase-8 mutations lead to human
immunodeficiency. Nature 419: 395-399, 2002.

4. Cox, A.; Dunning, A. M.; Garcia-Closas, M.; Balasubramanian, S.;
Reed, M. W. R.; Pooley, K. A.; Scollen, S.; Baynes, C.; Ponder, B.
A. J.; Chanock, S.; Lissowska, J.; Brinton, L.; and 67 others:
A common coding variant in CASP8 is associated with breast cancer
risk. Nature Genet. 39: 352-358, 2007. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet.
39: 688 only, 2007.

5. Eckhart, L.; Henry, M.; Santos-Beneit, A. M.; Schmitz, I.; Krueger,
A.; Fischer, H.; Bach, J.; Ban, J.; Kirchhoff, S.; Krammer, P. H.;
Mollinedo, F.; Tschachler, E.: Alternative splicing of caspase-8
mRNA during differentiation of human leukocytes. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 289: 777-781, 2001.

6. Fernandes-Alnemri, T.; Armstrong, R. C.; Krebs, J.; Srinivasula,
S. M.; Wang, L.; Bullrich, F.; Fritz, L. C.; Trapani, J. A.; Tomaselli,
K. J.; Litwack, G.; Alnemri, E. S.: In vitro activation of CPP32
and Mch3 by Mch4, a novel human apoptotic cysteine protease containing
two FADD-like domains. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 7464-7469, 1996.

7. Frank, B.; Bermejo, J. L.; Hemminki, K.; Klaes, R.; Bugert, P.;
Wappenschmidt, B.; Schmutzler, R. K.; Burwinkel, B.: Re: association
of a common variant of the CASP8 gene with reduced risk of breast
cancer. J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 97: 1012 only, 2005.

8. Gervais, F. G.; Singaraja, R.; Xanthoudakis, S.; Gutekunst, C.-A.;
Leavitt, B. R.; Metzler, M.; Hackam, A. S.; Tam, J.; Vaillancourt,
J. P.; Houtzager, V.; Rasper, D. M.; Roy, S.; Hayden, M. R.; Nicholson,
D. W.: Recruitment and activation of caspase-8 by the huntingtin-interacting
protein Hip-1 and a novel partner Hippi. Nature Cell Biol. 4: 95-105,
2002.

9. Grenet, J.; Teitz, T.; Wei, T.; Valentine, V.; Kidd, V. J.: Structure
and chromosome localization of the human CASP8 gene. Gene 226: 225-232,
1999.

10. Gunther, C.; Martini, E.; Wittkopf, N.; Amann, K.; Weigmann, B.;
Neumann, H.; Waldner, M. J.; Hedrick, S. M.; Tenzer, S.; Neurath,
M. F.; Becker, C.: Caspase-8 regulates TNF-alpha-induced epithelial
necroptosis and terminal ileitis. Nature 477: 335-339, 2011.

11. Hadano, S.; Yanagisawa, Y.; Skaug, J.; Fichter, K.; Nasir, J.;
Martindale, D.; Koop, B. F.; Scherer, S. W.; Nicholson, D. W.; Rouleau,
G. A.; Ikeda, J.-E.; Hayden, M. R.: Cloning and characterization
of three novel genes, ALS2CR1, ALS2CR2, and ALS2CR3, in the juvenile
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS2) critical region at chromosome
2q33-q34: candidate genes for ALS2. Genomics 71: 200-213, 2001.

12. Haiman, C. A.; Garcia, R. R.; Kolonel, L. N.; Henderson, B. E.;
Wu, A. H.; Le Marchand, L.: A promoter polymorphism in the CASP8
gene is not associated with cancer risk. (Letter) Nat. Genet. 40:
259-260, 2008.

13. Ikeda, H.; Yamaguchi, M.; Sugai, S.; Aze, Y.; Narumiya, S.; Kakizuka,
A.: Expanded polyglutamine in the Machado-Joseph disease protein
induces cell death in vitro and in vivo. Nature Genet. 13: 196-202,
1996.

14. Kaiser, W. J.; Upton, J. W.; Long, A. B.; Livingston-Rosanoff,
D.; Daley-Bauer, L. P.; Hakem, R.; Caspary, T.; Mocarski, E. S.:
RIP3 mediates the embryonic lethality of caspase-8-deficient mice. Nature 471:
368-372, 2011.

15. Kischkel, F. C.; Kioschis, P.; Weitz, S.; Poustka, A.; Lichter,
P.; Krammer, P. H.: Assignment of CASP8 to human chromosome band
2q33-q34 and Casp8 to the murine syntenic region on chromosome 1B-proximal
C by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 82: 95-96, 1998.

16. Lee, P.; Lee, D.-J.; Chan, C.; Chen, S.-W.; Ch'en, I.; Jamora,
C.: Dynamic expression of epidermal caspase 8 simulates a wound healing
response. Nature 458: 519-523, 2009.

17. Liu, B.; Peng, D.; Lu, Y.; Jin, W.; Fan, Z.: A novel single amino
acid deletion caspase-8 mutation in cancer cells that lost proapoptotic
activity. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 30159-30164, 2002.

18. MacPherson, G.; Healey, C. S.; Teare, M. D.; Balasubramanian,
S. P.; Reed, M. W. R.; Pharoah, P. D. P.; Ponder, B. A. J.; Meuth,
M.; Bhattacharyya, N. P.; Cox, A.: Association of a common variant
of the CASP8 gene with reduced risk of breast cancer. J. Nat. Cancer
Inst. 96: 1866-1869, 2004.

19. Muzio, M.; Chinnaiyan, A. M.; Kischkel, F. C.; O'Rourke, K.; Shevchenko,
A.; Ni, J.; Scaffidi, C.; Bretz, J. D.; Zhang, M.; Gentz, R.; Mann,
M.; Krammer, P. H.; Peter, M. E.; Dixit, V. M.: FLICE, a novel FADD-homologous
ICE/CED-3-like protease, is recruited to the CD95 (Fas/APO-1) death-inducing
signaling complex. Cell 85: 817-827, 1996.

20. Oberst, A.; Dillon, C. P.; Weinlich, R.; McCormick, L. L.; Fitzgerald,
P.; Pop, C.; Hakem, R.; Salvesen, G. S.; Green, D. R.: Catalytic
activity of the caspase-8-FLIP(L) complex inhibits RIPK3-dependent
necrosis. Nature 471: 363-367, 2011.

21. Poulaki, V.; Mitsiades, C. S.; McMullan, C.; Fanourakis, G.; Negri,
J.; Goudopoulou, A.; Halikias, I. X.; Voutsinas, G.; Tseleni-Balafouta,
S.; Miller, J. W.; Mitsiades, N.: Human retinoblastoma cells are
resistant to apoptosis induced by death receptors: role of caspase-8
gene silencing. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 46: 358-366, 2005.

22. Salmena, L.; Hakem, R.: Caspase-8 deficiency in T cells leads
to a lethal lymphoinfiltrative immune disorder. J. Exp. Med. 202:
727-732, 2005.

23. Sanchez, I.; Xu, C.-J.; Juo, P.; Kakizaka, A.; Blenis, J.; Yuan,
J.: Caspase-8 is required for cell death induced by expanded polyglutamine
repeats. Neuron 22: 623-633, 1999.

24. Soung, Y. H.; Lee, J. W.; Kim, S. Y.; Sung, Y. J.; Park, W. S.;
Nam, S. W.; Kim, S. H.; Lee, J. Y.; Yoo, N. J.; Lee, S. H.: Caspase-8
gene is frequently inactivated by the frameshift somatic mutation
1225_1226delTG in hepatocellular carcinomas. Oncogene 24: 141-147,
2005.

25. Stupack, D. G.; Teitz, T.; Potter, M. D.; Mikolon, D.; Houghton,
P. J.; Kidd, V. J.; Lahti, J. M.; Cheresh, D. A.: Potentiation of
neuroblastoma metastasis by loss of caspase-8. Nature 439: 95-99,
2006.

26. Su, H.; Bidere, N.; Zheng, L.; Cubre, A.; Sakai, K.; Dale, J.;
Salmena, L.; Hakem, R.; Straus, S.; Lenardo, M.: Requirement for
caspase-8 in NF-kappa-B activation by antigen receptor. Science 307:
1465-1468, 2005.

27. Sun, T.; Gao, Y.; Tan, W.; Ma, S.; Shi, Y.; Yao, J.; Guo, Y.;
Yang, M.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, Q.; Zeng, C.; Lin, D.: A six-nucleotide
insertion-deletion polymorphism in the CASP8 promoter is associated
with susceptibility to multiple cancers. Nature Genet. 39: 605-613,
2007.

28. Varfolomeev, E. E.; Schuchmann, M.; Luria, V.; Chiannilkulchai,
N.; Beckmann, J. S.; Mett, I. L.; Rebrikov, D.; Brodianski, V. M.;
Kemper, O. C.; Kollet, O.; Lapidot, T.; Soffer, D.; Sobe, T.; Avraham,
K. B.; Goncharov, T.; Holtmann, H.; Lonai, P.; Wallach, D.: Targeted
disruption of the mouse Caspase 8 gene ablates cell death induction
by the TNF receptors, Fas/Apo1, and DR3 and is lethal prenatally. Immunity 9:
267-276, 1998.

29. Yu, L.; Alva, A.; Su, H.; Dutt, P.; Freundt, E.; Welsh, S.; Baehrecke,
E. H.; Lenardo, M. J.: Regulation of an ATG7-beclin 1 program of
autophagic cell death by caspase-8. Science 304: 1500-1502, 2004.

30. Zender, L.; Hutker, S.; Liedtke, C.; Tillmann, H. L.; Zender,
S.; Mundt, B.; Waltemathe, M.; Gosling, T.; Flemming, P.; Malek, N.
P.; Trautwein, C.; Manns, M. P.; Kuhnel, F.; Kubicka, S.: Caspase
8 small interfering RNA prevents acute liver failure in mice. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 7797-7802, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/22/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/7/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/28/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/19/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/24/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/4/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/1/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/3/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/8/2005
Jane Kelly - updated: 3/25/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/15/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/22/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/22/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/16/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/11/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/1/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/25/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/16/2002
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 4/5/2000
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 3/24/1999
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 11/17/1998

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 4/18/1997

EDITED carol: 02/06/2012
carol: 2/6/2012
alopez: 11/30/2011
terry: 11/22/2011
alopez: 7/12/2011
terry: 7/8/2011
alopez: 6/17/2011
alopez: 6/14/2011
terry: 6/7/2011
carol: 9/15/2009
alopez: 5/4/2009
terry: 4/28/2009
wwang: 5/19/2008
ckniffin: 5/19/2008
alopez: 6/6/2007
terry: 5/24/2007
alopez: 4/10/2007
terry: 4/4/2007
alopez: 5/3/2006
terry: 5/1/2006
mgross: 4/3/2006
carol: 1/20/2006
tkritzer: 4/8/2005
carol: 4/1/2005
wwang: 3/25/2005
wwang: 3/22/2005
wwang: 3/21/2005
wwang: 3/18/2005
terry: 3/15/2005
carol: 11/18/2004
ckniffin: 11/3/2004
tkritzer: 11/2/2004
terry: 10/22/2004
alopez: 6/22/2004
terry: 6/22/2004
cwells: 7/22/2003
terry: 7/16/2003
mgross: 11/11/2002
alopez: 10/2/2002
cwells: 10/1/2002
mgross: 4/25/2002
alopez: 2/5/2002
alopez: 1/17/2002
terry: 1/16/2002
carol: 6/15/2000
terry: 4/5/2000
terry: 3/25/1999
carol: 3/24/1999
alopez: 12/21/1998
terry: 11/17/1998
carol: 11/16/1998
alopez: 6/5/1997
alopez: 5/30/1997

610190	TITLE *610190 CARBOHYDRATE SULFOTRANSFERASE 8; CHST8
;;N-ACETYLGALACTOSAMINE-4-O-SULFOTRANSFERASE 1;;
GalNAc4 SULFOTRANSFERASE 1; GalNAc4ST1;;
GalNAc4ST
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Sulfate groups in carbohydrates confer highly specific functions on
glycoproteins, glycolipids, and proteoglycans and are critical for
cell-cell interaction, signal transduction, and embryonic development.
Sulfotransferases, such as CHST8, carry out sulfation of carbohydrates
(Hiraoka et al., 2001).

CLONING

By searching for sequences similar to the C-terminal region of rat
Hnk1st (CHST10; 606376), followed by RACE of a fetal brain cDNA library,
Xia et al. (2000) cloned CHST8, which they designated GalNAc4ST1. The
deduced 424-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 48.8
kD. It has an N-terminal transmembrane domain, followed by putative
5-prime-phosphosulfonate- and 3-prime-phosphate-binding sites and 3
additional regions conserved in other sulfotransferases. GalNAc4ST1 has
4 potential N-glycosylation sites. Xia et al. (2000) also identified a
GalNAc4ST1 isoform beginning with met119 that lacks the transmembrane
domain. A second soluble GalNAc4ST1 form, derived by proteolytic
cleavage of the transmembrane region, was secreted by transfected
Chinese hamster ovary cells. Northern blot analysis showed a prominent
2.4-kb transcript in brain. Lower expression was detected in liver,
heart, and pancreas, and very low expression was detected in skeletal
muscle. RNA dot blot analysis confirmed high expression of GalNAc4ST1 in
the central nervous system, particularly in pituitary gland, cerebellum,
pons, medulla oblongata, thalamus, and spinal cord. Fetal brain also
showed high expression.

Okuda et al. (2000) and Hiraoka et al. (2001) independently cloned human
CHST8 from fetal brain and pituitary gland cDNA libraries, respectively.
By Northern blot analysis, Hiraoka et al. (2001) detected a transcript
of 2.4 kb expressed at high levels in fetal and adult brain and in
spinal cord. Moderate expression was detected in adult liver, kidney,
and heart. Skeletal muscle expressed a transcript of 1.0 kb. RT-PCR
detected high expression in pituitary gland.

GENE FUNCTION

Xia et al. (2000) assayed GalNAc4ST1 sulfotransferase activity in
lysates of transfected Chinese hamster ovary cells. Membrane-bound
GalNAc4ST1 transferred sulfate to the C4 hydroxyl of terminal
beta-1,4-linked GalNAc residues in GalNAc-beta-1,4-GlcNAc-beta-R. It
sulfated bovine parotid carbonic anhydrase VI (CA6; 114780) and bovine
luteinizing hormone (LH; see 152780), but not chondroitin. In contrast,
the 2 truncated soluble forms of GalNAc4ST1 sulfated both
GalNAc-beta-1,4-GlcNAc-beta-R and chondroitin. The results suggested
that the first 118 amino acids of GalNAc4ST1 determine substrate
specificity.

Okuda et al. (2000) found that human GalNAc4ST expressed by COS-7 cells
sulfated carbonic anhydrase VI and synthetic p-nitrophenyl GalNAc, but
not chondroitin or desulfated dermatan sulfate.

Hiraoka et al. (2001) confirmed that GalNAc4ST1 transferred sulfate to
C4 of GalNAc in the context of GalNAc-beta-1,4-GlcNAc-beta-1-R in both
N- and O-glycans; products were monosulfated.

GENE STRUCTURE

Xia et al. (2000) determined that the CHST8 gene contains 4 exons and
spans about 88 kb. Exon 1 is noncoding.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Xia et al. (2000) mapped the CHST8 gene to
chromosome 19q13.1.

ANIMAL MODEL

Luteinizing hormone (LH) bears a unique N-linked N-acetylgalactosamine
that mediates the clearance of LH from blood, and GalNAc4ST1 is
responsible for sulfate addition to GalNAc on LH. Mi et al. (2008) found
that Chst8 -/- mice exhibited increased levels of circulating LH. Mutant
male mice had elevated levels of testosterone and precocious maturation
of testis and seminal vesicles. Mutant female mice had elevated estrogen
levels, precocious sexual maturation, increased fecundity, and remained
in estrus for prolonged periods and produced almost 50% more litters
than wildtype mice over the same period of time. Mi et al. (2008)
concluded that sulfate modification of LH by GalNAc4ST1 plays a central
role in regulating the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonad axis.

REFERENCE 1. Hiraoka, N.; Misra, A.; Belot, F.; Hindsgaul, O.; Fukuda, M.:
Molecular cloning and expression of two distinct human N-acetylgalactosamine
4-O-sulfotransferases that transfer sulfate to GalNAc-beta-1-4-GlcNAc-beta-1-R
in both N- and O-glycans. Glycobiology 11: 495-504, 2001.

2. Mi, Y.; Fiete, D.; Baenziger, J. U.: Ablation of GalNAc-4-sulfotransferase-1
enhances reproduction by altering the carbohydrate structures of luteinizing
hormone in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 118: 1815-1824, 2008.

3. Okuda, T.; Mita, S.; Yamauchi, S.; Fukuta, M.; Nakano, H.; Sawada,
T.; Habuchi, O.: Molecular cloning and characterization of GalNAc
4-sulfotransferase expressed in human pituitary gland. J. Biol. Chem. 275:
40605-40613, 2000.

4. Xia, G.; Evers, M. R.; Kang, H.-G.; Schachner, M.; Baenziger, J.
U.: Molecular cloning and expression of the pituitary glycoprotein
hormone N-acetylgalactosamine-4-O-sulfotransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 275:
38402-38409, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/28/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/14/2006

EDITED wwang: 05/28/2008
terry: 5/28/2008
mgross: 6/15/2006
mgross: 6/14/2006

607391	TITLE *607391 SINGLE-STRANDED DNA-BINDING PROTEIN 4; SSBP4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By EST database searching with the SSBP2 (607389) sequence as probe,
Castro et al. (2002) identified 2 additional members of the SSBP gene
family, SSBP3 (607390) and SSBP4. All 3 SSBP genes share homology with
the chicken gene CSDP, which encodes a protein that binds
single-stranded pyrimidine-rich mirror-repeat elements with high
specificity. The deduced 364-amino acid SSBP4 protein shares 73% and 72%
sequence identity with human SSBP2 and SSBP3, respectively. SSBP family
members share a highly conserved N terminus followed by a glycine- and
proline-rich domain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Castro et al. (2002) determined that the SSBP2, SSBP3, and SSBP4 genes
all contain 17 exons and have identical intron/exon boundaries,
suggesting duplication from a common ancestral gene. They also
identified alternative splicing and additional internal exons for all 3
genes, suggesting the existence of multiple isoforms for each protein.
The SSBP4 gene spans less than 25 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Castro et al. (2002) mapped the SSBP4 gene
to chromosome 19p13.1, between markers D19S899 and D19S407.

REFERENCE 1. Castro, P.; Liang, H.; Liang, J. C.; Nagarajan, L.: A novel, evolutionarily
conserved gene family with putative sequence-specific single-stranded
DNA-binding activity. Genomics 80: 78-85, 2002.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 11/26/2002

EDITED mgross: 12/03/2002
carol: 12/2/2002

606735	TITLE *606735 OXYSTEROL-BINDING PROTEIN-LIKE PROTEIN 7; OSBPL7
;;OSBP-RELATED PROTEIN 7; ORP7
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

OSBPL7 is a member of the OSBP family of intracellular lipid receptors.
For background information on OSBPs, see OSBP2 (606729).

CLONING

Lehto et al. (2001) used RT-PCR analysis with specific primers to
isolate a full-length cDNA encoding OSBPL7, which they called ORP7.
Sequence analysis predicted that the 842-amino acid protein contains a
C-terminal sterol-binding (SB) domain of approximately 400 residues that
includes the OSBP motif (EQVSHHPP). It has a pleckstrin homology (PH)
domain in its N terminus. OSBPL7 is approximately 76% identical to
OSBPL3 (606732) and OSBPL6 (606734) in the SB domain and 62% and 69%
identical, respectively, in the PH domain. Dot blot analysis revealed
wide expression that was strongest in small intestine and colon,
followed by thymus, spleen, and peripheral blood leukocytes.

Jaworski et al. (2001) cloned multiple OSBPs, including OSBPL7. RT-PCR
analysis detected preferential expression in retina and pineal tissues.

GENE STRUCTURE

By sequence analysis, Lehto et al. (2001) determined that the OSBPL7
gene contains 23 exons. Jaworski et al. (2001) found that it contains 24
exons.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Lehto et al. (2001) mapped the OSBPL7 gene to
chromosome 17. Jaworski et al. (2001) localized the gene to 17q21.2 or
17pter-p13.1.

REFERENCE 1. Jaworski, C. J.; Moreira, E.; Li, A.; Lee, R.; Rodriguez, I. R.
: A family of 12 human genes containing oxysterol-binding domains. Genomics 78:
185-196, 2001.

2. Lehto, M.; Laitinen, S.; Chinetti, G.; Johansson, M.; Ehnholm,
C.; Staels, B.; Ikonen, E.; Olkkonen, V. M.: The OSBP-related protein
family in humans. J. Lipid Res. 42: 1203-1213, 2001.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/28/2002

EDITED mgross: 02/28/2002

194533	TITLE *194533 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 35; ZNF35
;;ZINC FINGER PROTEIN HF.10; HF10
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Zinc fingers are protein DNA-binding domains that consist of tandemly
repeated units of 28 to 30 amino acids containing 2 cysteine and 2
histidine residues at invariant positions. The finger motif has been
identified in several eukaryotic transcriptional regulatory proteins and
members of the finger-gene family are implicated in both proliferation
and differentiation of normal cells. By means of hybridization with a
finger motif-containing DNA probe, Donti et al. (1990) identified
several human finger genes, one of which, HF.10, is expressed at low
levels in a variety of human tissues and is downregulated during the in
vitro terminal differentiation of human leukemic myeloid cell lines.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lanfrancone et al. (1992) reported that the ZNF35 gene spans about 13 kb
and is interrupted by 3 introns. All 11 zinc finger DNA-binding domains
are contiguously encoded within the last 3-prime exon.

MAPPING

Using in situ hybridization, Lanfrancone et al. (1992) showed that both
the functional ZNF35 locus and a processed pseudogene map to chromosome
3p22-p21, a region that is frequently deleted in small cell lung cancer
and renal carcinoma. Both the functional gene and the pseudogene were
deleted in a case of small cell lung carcinoma with 3p deletion.

By in situ hybridization and by analysis of interspecific somatic cell
hybrids, Donti et al. (1990) mapped the HF10 gene to 3p22-p21, a
chromosome region frequently involved in karyotypic changes associated
with lung and renal cancer. Hoovers et al. (1992) also assigned zinc
finger protein genes to 3p.

Calabro et al. (1995) isolated 3 new genes encoding zinc finger proteins
from a YAC contig of 3p22-p21 by using a cDNA hybridization selection.
They took this to indicate a clustering of zinc finger protein genes in
3p21.

REFERENCE 1. Calabro, V.; Pengue, G.; Bartoli, P. C.; Pagliuca, A.; Featherstone,
T.; Lania, L.: Positional cloning of cDNAs from the human chromosome
3p21-22 region identifies a clustered organization of zinc-finger
genes. Hum. Genet. 95: 18-21, 1995.

2. Donti, E.; Lanfrancone, L.; Huebner, K.; Pascucci, A.; Venti, G.;
Pengue, G.; Grignani, F.; Croce, C. M.; Lania, L.; Pelicci, P. G.
: Localization of the human HF.10 finger gene on a chromosome region
(3p21-p22) frequently deleted in human cancers. Hum. Genet. 84:
391-395, 1990.

3. Hoovers, J. M. N.; Mannens, M.; John, R.; Bliek, J.; van Heyningen,
V.; Porteous, D. J.; Leschot, N. J.; Westerveld, A.; Little, P. F.
R.: High-resolution localization of 69 potential human zinc finger
protein genes: a number are clustered. Genomics 12: 254-263, 1992.

4. Lanfrancone, L.; Pengue, G.; Pandolfi, P.-P.; Salcini, A. E.; Giacomucci,
A.; Longo, L.; Donti, E.; De Luca, P.; La Mantia, G.; Pelicci, P.-G.;
Lania, L.: Structural and functional organization of the HF.10 human
zinc finger gene (ZNF35) located on chromosome 3p21-p22. Genomics 12:
720-728, 1992.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/6/1990

EDITED alopez: 07/06/2010
dkim: 6/26/1998
mimadm: 6/7/1995
terry: 1/27/1995
carol: 4/1/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/1/1992
carol: 12/4/1991

607265	TITLE *607265 CLATHRIN INTERACTOR 1; CLINT1
;;EPSIN 4; EPN4;;
EPSIN-RELATED PROTEIN; EPNR;;
ENTHOPROTIN;;
KIAA0171
DESCRIPTION For background information on epsins, see EPN1 (607262).

CLONING

Nagase et al. (1996) isolated a cDNA encoding EPN4, which they
designated KIAA0171, from the immature myeloid cell line KG-1. The
deduced protein contains 625 amino acids. Northern blot analysis
revealed moderate expression in all tissues tested, with highest
expression in skeletal muscle.

Wasiak et al. (2002) identified rat Epn4, which they called enthoprotin,
by subcellular proteomics of clathrin-coated vesicles (CCVs). Epn4 was
highly enriched on CCVs isolated from rat brain and liver extracts. By
sequence analysis of tryptic peptides, they identified an epsin
N-terminal homology (ENTH) domain and a consensus type-2 clathrin box in
the C-terminal domain. The predicted molecular mass is about 68 kD, and
Epn4 expressed by transfected COS-7 cells showed an apparent molecular
mass of about 80 kD. Endogenous Epn4 localized in COS-7 cells in a
punctate pattern that was enriched in a perinuclear pool that
colocalized with clathrin (118955) and with the clathrin adaptor protein
complex AP1 (see 607291).

GENE FUNCTION

Using pull-down assays, Wasiak et al. (2002) found that rat Epn4
interacts with AP1, AP2, clathrin, and GGA2 (606005). They determined
that, through its C-terminal domain, Epn4 binds to the terminal domain
of the clathrin heavy chain and stimulates clathrin assembly.

Saint-Pol et al. (2004) found that HeLa cell EPN4 was involved in
retrograde transport of endogenous cargo proteins and bacterial Shiga
toxin from early and recycling endosomes to the trans-Golgi network.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1996) mapped the EPN4 gene
to chromosome 5.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Pimm et al. (2005) investigated 450 unrelated white English, Irish,
Welsh, and Scottish research subjects with schizophrenia and 450
ancestrally matched supernormal controls. Four adjacent markers at the
5-prime end of the EPN4 gene showed significant evidence of linkage
disequilibrium with schizophrenia. These included included 2
microsatellite markers and 2 SNPs within the EPN4 gene. A series of
different 2- and 3-marker haplotypes were also significantly associated
with schizophrenia. Since the EPN4 gene encodes enthoprotin, which has a
role in transport and stability of neurotransmitter vesicles at the
synapses and within neurons, they considered it likely that a
genetically determined abnormality in the structure, function, or
expression of this protein is responsible for genetic susceptibility to
a subtype of schizophrenia on 5q33.3 (SCZD1; 181510).

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Miller et al. (2007) characterized the molecular details governing the
sorting of a SNARE into clathrin-coated vesicles, namely, the direct
recognition of the 3-helical bundle H(abc) domain of the mouse SNARE
Vti1b (603207) by the human clathrin adaptor epsinR (EPNR, also known as
CLINT1). Structures of each domain and of their complex showed that this
interaction (dissociation constant 22 microM) is mediated by surface
patches composed of approximately 15 residues each, the topographies of
which are dependent on each domain's overall fold. Disruption of the
interface with point mutations abolished the interaction in vitro and
caused Vti1b to become relocalized to late endosomes and lysosomes.
Miller et al. (2007) stated that this new class of highly specific,
surface-surface interaction between the clathrin coat component and the
cargo is distinct from the widely observed binding of short, linear
cargo motifs by the assembly polypeptide (AP) complex and GGA adaptors
and is therefore not vulnerable to competition from standard
motif-containing cargoes for incorporation into clathrin-coated
vesicles. Miller et al. (2007) proposed that conceptually similar but
mechanistically different interactions direct the post-Golgi trafficking
of many SNAREs.

REFERENCE 1. Miller, S. E.; Collins, B. M.; McCoy, A. J.; Robinson, M. S.; Owen,
D. J.: A SNARE-adaptor interaction is a new mode of cargo recognition
in clathrin-coated vesicles. Nature 450: 570-574, 2007.

2. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Tanaka, A.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. V. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0161-KIAA0200) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 3: 17-24, 1996.

3. Pimm, J.; McQuillin, A.; Thirumalai, S.; Lawrence, J.; Quested,
D.; Bass, N.; Lamb, G.; Moorey, H.; Datta, S. R.; Kalsi, G.; Badacsonyi,
A.; Kelly, K.; Morgan, J.; Punukollu, B.; Curtis, D.; Gurling, H.
: The epsin 4 gene on chromosome 5q, which encodes the clathrin-associated
protein enthoprotin, is involved in the genetic susceptibility to
schizophrenia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 76: 902-907, 2005.

4. Saint-Pol, A.; Yelamos, B.; Amessou, M.; Mills, I. G.; Dugast,
M.; Tenza, D.; Schu, P.; Antony, C.; McMahon, H. T.; Lamaze, C.; Johannes,
L.: Clathrin adaptor epsinR is required for retrograde sorting on
early endosomal membranes. Dev. Cell 6: 525-538, 2004.

5. Wasiak, S.; Legendre-Guillemin, V.; Puertollano, R.; Blondeau,
F.; Girard, M.; de Heuvel, E.; Boismenu, D.; Bell, A. W.; Bonifacino,
J. S.; McPherson, P. S.: Enthoprotin: a novel clathrin-associated
protein identified through subcellular proteomics. J. Cell Biol. 158:
855-862, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/22/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/13/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/13/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/29/2002

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/27/2002

EDITED alopez: 05/14/2008
terry: 4/22/2008
alopez: 3/26/2007
terry: 2/3/2006
alopez: 4/15/2005
terry: 4/13/2005
terry: 7/19/2004
mgross: 5/13/2004
terry: 5/13/2004
mgross: 10/29/2002
mgross: 9/27/2002

611989	TITLE *611989 MITOCHONDRIAL RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN S27; MRPS27
;;KIAA0264
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mitochondria have their own translation system for production of 13
inner membrane proteins essential for oxidative phosphorylation. MRPS27
is a component of the small subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome that
is encoded by the nuclear genome (Koc et al., 2001).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated immature myeloid
cell line cDNA library, Nagase et al. (1996) cloned MRPS27, which they
designated KIAA0264. The cDNA contains an Alu sequence, and the deduced
protein contains 415 amino acids. Northern blot analysis detected
expression in all tissues and cell lines examined, with highest levels
in heart and skeletal muscle.

By proteolytic digestion of whole bovine 28S subunits, followed by
peptide analysis and EST database analysis, Koc et al. (2001) identified
full-length human MRPS27. The deduced 414-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 47.7 kD. Removal of a predicted 36-amino
acid N-terminal mitochondrial localization signal results in a mature
43.8-kD protein. Koc et al. (2001) identified MRPS27 orthologs in mouse,
Drosophila, and C. elegans, but not in yeast or E. coli. Mouse and human
MRPS27 share 77.1% amino acid identity.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1996) mapped the MRPS27
gene to chromosome 5.

REFERENCE 1. Koc, E. C.; Burkhart, W.; Blackburn, K.; Moseley, A.; Spremulli,
L. L.: The small subunit of the mammalian mitochondrial ribosome:
identification of the full complement of ribosomal proteins present. J.
Biol. Chem. 276: 19363-19374, 2001.

2. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Ohira, M.; Kawarabayasi, Y.;
Ohara, O.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Miyajima, N.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VI. The coding
sequences of 80 new genes (KIAA0201-KIAA0280) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from cell line KG-1 and brain. DNA Res. 3: 321-329,
1996.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/21/2008

EDITED mgross: 04/23/2008

612454	TITLE *612454 MULTIPLE EPIDERMAL GROWTH FACTOR-LIKE DOMAINS 11; MEGF11
;;KIAA1781
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2001) obtained a partial MEGF11 clone, which
they called KIAA1781. The transcript contains a repetitive element in
its 3-prime end, and the deduced protein contains over 970 amino acids.
MEGF11 has 17 EGF (131530)-like repeats and a transmembrane domain, and
it shares significant similarity with rat Megf6 (604266) and human
MEGF10 (612453). RT-PCR ELISA detected high expression in adult and
fetal brain and adult spinal cord, moderate expression in adult kidney
and ovary, low expression in heart, and little to no expression in other
tissues examined. MEGF11 was expressed in all adult brain regions
examined, with the highest level in cerebellum.

By examining mouse and human sequence databases, followed by RT-PCR of
human brain mRNA, Suzuki and Nakayama (2007) cloned full-length MEGF11.
The deduced 1,044-amino acid protein contains an N-terminal signal
sequence, followed by an emilin (see 130660)-like domain, 17 EGF-like
repeats, a transmembrane domain, and a C-terminal YxxL motif.

GENE FUNCTION

Suzuki and Nakayama (2007) found that fluorescence-tagged MEGF11 was
expressed in an irregular, mosaic-like pattern in transfected HEK293
cells, similar to that observed with MEGF10. However, unlike MEGF10,
MEGF11 localized to lamellipodia in addition to the basal membrane of
transfected cells.

Kay et al. (2012) demonstrated in mouse that 2 related transmembrane
proteins, MEGF10 and MEGF11, have critical roles in the formation of
mosaics by 2 retinal interneuron subtypes, starburst amacrine cells and
horizontal cells. MEGF10 and MEGF11 and their invertebrate relatives C.
elegans CED1 and Drosophila Draper had hitherto been studied primarily
as receptors necessary for engulfment of debris following apoptosis or
axonal injury. Kay et al. (2012) argued that their results demonstrated
that members of this gene family can also serve as subtype-specific
ligands that pattern neuronal arrays.

MAPPING

Hartz (2008) mapped the MEGF11 gene to chromosome 15q22.31 based on an
alignment of the MEGF11 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB058677) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  12/4/2008.

2. Kay, J. N.; Chu, M. W.; Sanes, J. R.: MEGF10 and MEGF11 mediate
homotypic interactions required for mosaic spacing of retinal neurons. Nature 483:
465-469, 2012.

3. Nagase, T.; Nakayama, M.; Nakajima, D.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XX.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 8: 85-95, 2001.

4. Suzuki, E.; Nakayama, M.: The mammalian Ced-1 ortholog MEGF10/KIAA1780
displays a novel adhesion pattern. Exp. Cell Res. 313: 2451-2464,
2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/17/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/4/2008

EDITED alopez: 07/18/2012
terry: 7/17/2012
mgross: 12/5/2008
mgross: 12/4/2008

607462	TITLE *607462 ATROPHIN 1; ATN1
;;DRPLA GENE; DRPLA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the search for a candidate gene for dentatorubral-pallidoluysian
atrophy (DRPLA; 125370), an inherited neurodegenerative disorder that
demonstrates genetic anticipation characteristic of unstable expansion
of trinucleotide repeats, Koide et al. (1994) searched a catalog of
genes expressed in human brain identified by Li et al. (1993) that
contained trinucleotide repeats. One of these, B37, which was known to
map to chromosome 12, was examined and found to show CAG repeat
expansion (607462.0001) in 22 individuals with DRPLA. By screening adult
human occipital cortex and fetal human brain cDNA libraries, Onodera et
al. (1995) isolated a full-length DRPLA cDNA encoding a deduced
1,185-amino acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of 125 kD. The
(CAG)n repeat that is expanded in patients with DRPLA is located at
position 1462 and is predicted to code for a polyglutamine tract. There
was high heterozygosity of the length of the polyglutamine tract,
ranging from 8 to 35 repeat units in 140 normal chromosomes. Northern
blot analysis revealed a 4.7-kb transcript that is widely expressed in
various tissues, including heart, lung, kidney, placenta, skeletal
muscle, and brain.

Using antibodies against a synthetic peptide corresponding to the
sequence of the C-terminus of the DRPLA gene product, Yazawa et al.
(1995) identified the DRPLA gene product in normal human brains as a
protein of approximately 190 kD. They also found a larger protein of
approximately 205 kD specifically in DRPLA brains.
Immunohistochemically, the DRPLA gene product was observed mainly in
neuronal cytoplasm. These results demonstrated the existence of the
expanded CAG repeat gene product and supported the possibility that the
expanded CAG-encoded polyglutamine stretch may participate in the
pathologic process of similar trinucleotide repeat diseases.

Schmitt et al. (1995) isolated the complete coding sequence of the rat
DRPLA gene and investigated its expression in different developmental
stages of rodent tissues. In rat, the length of the (CAG)n repeat is 7
to 34 repeats with an average of 15, which is mildly reduced in
comparison with the human repeats. Northern blot analysis demonstrated
that in rodents the gene is already expressed during embryonic
development. In addition, the transcript is predominantly represented in
neuronal tissues throughout all developmental stages investigated. Oyake
et al. (1997) cloned a mouse Drpla cDNA and found that the encoded
protein is 92% identical to human DRPLA.

MAPPING

Takano et al. (1996) assigned the DRPLA gene to chromosome 12p13.31 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Oyake et al. (1997) mapped the mouse Drpla gene to chromosome 6 by
interspecific backcross analysis.

GENE FUNCTION

Burke et al. (1996) demonstrated that synthetic polyglutamine peptides,
DRPLA protein and huntingtin (613004) from unaffected individuals with
normal-sized polyglutamine tracts bind to glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (138400). The authors postulated that diseases
characterized by the presence of an expanded CAG repeat may share a
common metabolic pathogenesis involving GAPD as a functional component.
Roses (1996) and Barinaga (1996) reviewed the findings.

Using the yeast 2-hybrid system, Wood et al. (1998) identified 5
atrophin-1 interacting proteins that bind to atrophin-1 in the vicinity
of the polyglutamine tract. Four of the interactions were confirmed
using in vitro binding assays. These interactors were found to be
similar to huntingtin-interacting proteins, suggesting possible
commonality of function between the 2 proteins responsible for the very
similar diseases, Huntington disease (HD; 143100) and DRPLA.

Zhang et al. (2002) characterized a Drosophila gene encoding an atrophin
family protein. Analysis of mutant phenotypes indicated that Drosophila
atrophin is required in diverse developmental processes, including early
embryonic patterning. Drosophila atrophin genetically interacts with the
transcription repressor 'even-skipped' (see 142991) and is required for
its repressive function in vivo. Drosophila atrophin directly binds to
even-skipped in vitro. Furthermore, both human atrophin-1 and Drosophila
atrophin repress transcription in vivo when tethered to DNA, and poly-Q
expansion in atrophin-1 reduces this repressive activity.

Okamura-Oho et al. (2003) determined that the DRPLA protein is a
phosphoprotein and that c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK; see 601158) is
one of the major factors involved in its phosphorylation.
Phosphorylation was demonstrated in a recombinant JNK activation system
in vitro and also in overexpressing cells by transfection after JNK
activation with osmotic pressure. Phosphorylation of serine-734 in the
DRPLA protein was confirmed by a specific antibody raised against the
phosphopeptide. Kinetic studies in the JNK recombinant system showed
that expanded polyQ slightly reduced the affinity of JNK to the protein.

Using yeast 2-hybrid screens, coaffinity purification analysis of
transfected HEK293 cells, and bioinformatic analysis, Lim et al. (2006)
developed an interaction network for 54 human proteins involved in 23
inherited ataxias. By database analysis, they expanded the core network
to include more distantly related interacting proteins that could
function as genetic modifiers. RBPMS (601558) was a main hub in the
network and interacted with many proteins, including the cerebellar
ataxia-associated proteins ATN1 and QK1 (609590).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 22 patients with dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (125370), Koide
et al. (1994) identified unstable expansion of a CAG unit in the ATN1
gene (607462.0001), which they termed B37 after a cDNA clone previously
identified by Li et al. (1993). Each patient was a heterozygote with 1
allele in the normal range (8-25 repeat units) and a second expanded
allele with the range of 54-68 repeat units. There were no overlaps in
the number of CAG repeat units between control chromosomes and DRPLA
chromosomes. In 33 patients with DRPLA from 12 families, Nagafuchi et
al. (1994) identified an expanded CAG repeat in the B37 clone. The
repeat size varied from 7-23 in normal individuals and 1 allele was
expanded to between 49-75 repeats in affected individuals.

Burke et al. (1994, 1994) demonstrated that affected members of the
large African American family with Haw River syndrome had the same
trinucleotide repeat expansion (607462.0001) in the ATN1 gene as that
found in DRPLA.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Martins et al. (2003) stated that DRPLA is prevalent in Japan, but
several families of non-Japanese ancestry had been published. To
identify the origin of expanded alleles in 4 Portuguese families with
DRPLA, they studied 2 intragenic SNPs in introns 1 and 3, in addition to
the CAG repeat, of the DRPLA gene. The results showed that all 4
families shared the same haplotype, which was the same as that reported
for Japanese DRPLA chromosomes. This haplotype is also the most frequent
in Japanese normal alleles, whereas it was rare in Portuguese control
chromosomes. The findings supported the suggestion that a founder DRPLA
haplotype of Asian origin was introduced in Portugal and is responsible
for the frequency of the disease in that country.

- Genetic Anticipation

Koide et al. (1994) found a good correlation between the size of the
(CAG)n repeat expansion and the age of onset. Patients with earlier
onset tended to have a phenotype of progressive myoclonic epilepsy and
larger expansions. They proposed that the wide variety of clinical
manifestations of DRPLA can be explained by the variable unstable
expansion of the CAG repeat. Although only 5 cases of paternal
transmission and 2 cases of maternal transmission were analyzed, the
length of the repeat unit was altered in all cases: the average change
in repeat length for paternal transmission was an increase of 4.2
repeats, while that of maternal transmission was a decrease of 1.0
repeat.

Nagafuchi et al. (1994) also found that repeat size correlated closely
with age of onset of symptoms and with disease severity. Expansion was
usually associated with paternal transmission. Komure et al. (1995)
analyzed CAG trinucleotide repeats in 71 individuals from 12 Japanese
DRPLA pedigrees that included 38 affected individuals. Normal alleles
varied from 7 to 23 repeats, whereas affected individuals had from 53 to
88 repeats. Like Koide et al. (1994) and Nagafuchi et al. (1994), they
found a significant negative correlation between CAG repeat length and
age of onset. In 80% of the paternal transmissions, there was an
increase of more than 5 repeats, whereas all the maternal transmissions
showed either a decrease or an increase of fewer than 5 repeats.

Aoki et al. (1994) demonstrated that anticipation with expansion of the
CAG repeat can occur through mothers as well as through fathers. They
investigated 2 families in which offspring showed progressive myoclonic
epilepsy with onset in childhood. In 1 family, patients of the first
generation showed mild cerebellar ataxia with onset at 52 to 60 years. A
patient of the second generation, the mother, showed severe ataxia with
onset in the early thirties. The offspring in the third generation
showed mental retardation, convulsions and myoclonus beginning at age 8.
Sano et al. (1994) studied 4 families and also demonstrated
anticipation. Older-onset patients suffered from cerebellar ataxia with
or without dementia, whereas younger-onset patients presented as
progressive myoclonus epilepsy syndrome, consisting of mental
retardation, dementia, and cerebellar ataxia as well as epilepsy and
myoclonus. Anticipation with paternal transmission was significantly
greater than with maternal transmission.

Sato et al. (1995) reported homozygosity for a modest (57-repeat)
triplet repeat in a man with early onset of DRPLA at age 17. His parents
were first cousins and were neurologically normal at ages 73 and 71, in
spite of having 57 CAG repeats in heterozygous state. Four of the
proband's sibs died at age 12 with the phenotype of progressive
myoclonic epilepsy. These findings supported the hypothesis that the
clinical features of DRPLA, like those of Machado-Joseph disease, are
influenced by the dosage of expansion of triplet repeats, unlike
Huntington disease, in which the homozygous state does not appear to be
different clinically from the heterozygous state.

Norremolle et al. (1995) described a Danish family in which affected
persons in at least 3 generations had been thought to be suffering from
Huntington disease. Because analysis of the huntingtin gene revealed
normal alleles and because some of the patients had seizures, they
analyzed the B37 gene and found significantly elongated CAG repeats, as
had been reported in cases of DRPLA. Norremolle et al. (1995) reported
that affected persons with almost identical repeat lengths presented
very different symptoms. Both expansion and contraction in paternal
transmission was observed.

Ikeuchi et al. (1996) analyzed the segregation patterns of 411
transmissions of 24 DRPLA pedigrees and 80 transmissions in 7
Machado-Joseph disease (MJD; 109150) pedigrees, with the diagnoses
confirmed by molecular testing. Significant distortions in favor of
transmission of the mutant alleles were found in male meiosis, where the
mutant alleles were transmitted to 62% of all offspring in DRPLA (P less
than 0.01) and 73% in MJD (P less than 0.01). The results were
considered consistent with meiotic drive in both disorders. The authors
commented that since more prominent meiotic instability of the length of
the CAG trinucleotide repeats is observed in male meiosis than in female
meiosis and since meiotic drive is observed only in male meiosis, these
results raised the possibility that a common molecular mechanism
underlies the meiotic drive and the meiotic instability in male meiosis.

On the basis of studies in an extensively affected Tennessee family,
Potter (1996) emphasized the intrafamilial variability and lack of close
correlation between age of onset and (CAG)n repeat number in this
disease. The studies were done on DNA derived from leukocytes;
tissue-specific instability (somatic mosaicism) has been reported in
DRPLA.

Takiyama et al. (1999) determined the CAG repeat size in 427 single
sperm from 2 men with DRPLA. The mean variance of the change in the CAG
repeat size in sperm from the DRPLA patients (288.0) was larger than any
variances of the CAG repeat size in sperm from patients with
Machado-Joseph disease (38.5), Huntington disease (69.0), and spinal and
bulbar muscular atrophy (16.3; 313200), which is consistent with the
clinical observation that the genetic anticipation on the paternal
transmission of DRPLA is the most prominent among CAG repeat diseases.
The variance was different in the 2 patients (51.0 vs 524.9, P greater
than 0.0001). The segregation ratio of normal to expanded allele sperm
was 1:1.

ANIMAL MODEL

To investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying CAG repeat
instability, Sato et al. (1999) established 3 transgenic lines, each
harboring a single copy of a full-length human mutant DRPLA gene
carrying a CAG repeat expansion. These transgenic mice exhibited an
age-dependent increase (+0.31 per year) in male transmission and an
age-dependent contraction (-1.21 per year) in female transmission.
Similar tendencies in intergenerational instabilities were also observed
in human DRPLA parent-offspring pairs. The intergenerational
instabilities of the CAG repeats may be interpreted as being derived
from the instability occurring during continuous cell division of
spermatogonia in the male, and that occurring during the period of
meiotic arrest in the female. The transgenic mice also exhibited an
age-dependent increase in the degree of somatic mosaicism that occurred
in a cell lineage-dependent manner, with the size range of CAG repeats
being smaller in the cerebellum than in other tissues, including the
cerebrum, which was consistent with observations in autopsied tissues of
DRPLA patients. Thus, the transgenic mice described by Sato et al.
(1999) exhibited age-dependent intergenerational and somatic
instabilities of expanded CAG repeats comparable with those observed in
human DRPLA patients, and should therefore serve as good models for
investigating the molecular mechanisms of instabilities of CAG repeats.

In comparing transgenic mice bearing either full-length atrophin-1 or
partial huntingtin trans-proteins to wildtype, Luthi-Carter et al.
(2002) reported that there was considerable overlap in the alteration of
gene expression between the 2 models, at least in the cerebellum. The
authors concluded that polyglutamine-induced changes may be independent
of their protein context.

Sato et al. (2009) generated a DRPLA Q129 mouse resulting from en masse
expansion of the 76 CAG repeat in a Q76 mouse breeding program. Only the
Q129 mice exhibited devastating progressive neurologic phenotypes
similar to those of juvenile-onset DRPLA patients. Electrophysiologic
studies demonstrated age-dependent and region-specific presynaptic
dysfunction in the globus pallidus and cerebellum. Progressive shrinkage
of distal dendrites of Purkinje cells and decreased currents through
AMPA receptors (see 138248) and GABA-A (see 137160) receptors in CA1
neurons were also observed. The Q129 mice developed progressive brain
atrophy but no obvious neuronal loss, associated with massive neuronal
intranuclear accumulation (NIA) of mutant proteins with expanded polyQ
stretches starting on postnatal day 4, whereas NIA in the Q76 mice
appeared later with regional specificity to the vulnerable regions of
DRPLA. Expression profile analysis demonstrated age-dependent
downregulation of genes, including those relevant to synaptic functions
and CREB (123810)-dependent genes. Sato et al. (2009) suggested that
neuronal dysfunction without neuronal death is the essential
pathophysiologic process and that the age-dependent NIA is associated
with nuclear dysfunction including transcriptional dysregulations.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DENTATORUBRAL-PALLIDOLUYSIAN ATROPHY
ATN1, (CAG)n EXPANSION

In 22 patients with dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA;
125370), Koide et al. (1994) identified unstable expansion of a CAG unit
in the DRPLA gene, which they termed B37 after a cDNA clone previously
identified by Li et al. (1993). Each patient was a heterozygote with 1
allele in the normal range (8-25 repeat units) and a second expanded
allele with the range of 54-68 repeat units. There were no overlaps in
the number of CAG repeat units between control chromosomes and DRPLA
chromosomes.

Burke et al. (1994, 1994) demonstrated that affected members of the
large African American family with Haw River syndrome had a
trinucleotide repeat expansion in the ATN1 gene that was identical to
that found in DRPLA, a frequent disorder in Japanese but rare in
Europeans. In addition to the difference in racial frequency, the
clinical expression and pathology of Haw River syndrome differed from
that of the disease as observed in the Japanese: seizures were a
consistent feature, there was no myoclonus, basal ganglion calcification
was common, and neuronal loss was prominent in the globus pallidus.
Burke et al. (1994, 1994) suggested that the difference in racial
frequency is probably due to differences in the repeat size. The
frequency of the repeat allele of intermediate size was very low in
Europeans, somewhat higher in African Americans, and relatively high
(5-10%) in Japanese.

REFERENCE 1. Aoki, M.; Abe, K.; Kameya, T.; Watanabe, M.; Itoyama, Y.: Maternal
anticipation of DRPLA. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 1197-1198, 1994.

2. Barinaga, M.: An intriguing new lead on Huntington's disease. Science 271:
1233-1234, 1996.

3. Burke, J. R.; Enghild, J. J.; Martin, M. E.; Jou, Y.-S.; Myers,
R. M.; Roses, A. D.; Vance, J. M.; Strittmatter, W. J.: Huntingtin
and DRPLA proteins selectively interact with the enzyme GAPDH. Nature
Med. 2: 347-350, 1996.

4. Burke, J. R.; Ikeuchi, T.; Koide, R.; Tsuji, S.; Yamada, M.; Pericak-Vance,
M. A.; Vance, J. M.: Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy and Haw
River syndrome. (Letter) Lancet 344: 1711-1712, 1994.

5. Burke, J. R.; Pericak-Vance, M. A.; Vance, J. M.: Haw River syndrome
(HRS) and dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA): disorders with
an identical trinucleotide repeat expansion but differences in clinical
expression and racial frequency. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 55
(suppl.): A17 only, 1994.

6. Burke, J. R.; Wingfield, M. S.; Lewis, K. E.; Roses, A. D.; Lee,
J. E.; Hulette, C.; Pericak-Vance, M. A.; Vance, J. M.: The Haw River
syndrome: dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA) in an African-American
family. Nature Genet. 7: 521-524, 1994.

7. Ikeuchi, T.; Igarashi, S.; Takiyama, Y.; Onodera, O.; Oyake, M.;
Takano, H.; Koide, R.; Tanaka, H.; Tsuji, S.: Non-mendelian transmission
in dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy and Machado-Joseph disease:
the mutant allele is preferentially transmitted in male meiosis. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 58: 730-733, 1996.

8. Koide, R.; Ikeuchi, T.; Onodera, O.; Tanaka, H.; Igarashi, S.;
Endo, K.; Takahashi, H.; Kondo, R.; Ishikawa, A.; Hayashi, T.; Saito,
M.; Tomoda, A.; Miike, T.; Naito, H.; Ikuta, F.; Tsuji, S.: Unstable
expansion of CAG repeat in hereditary dentatorubral-pallidoluysian
atrophy (DRPLA). Nature Genet. 6: 9-13, 1994.

9. Komure, O.; Sano, A.; Nishino, N.; Yamauchi, N.; Ueno, S.; Kondoh,
K.; Sano, N.; Takahashi, M.; Murayama, N.; Kondo, I.; Nagafuchi, S.;
Yamada, M.; Kanazawa, I.: DNA analysis in hereditary dentatorubral-pallidoluysian
atrophy: correlation between CAG repeat length and phenotypic variation
and the molecular basis of anticipation. Neurology 45: 143-149,
1995.

10. Li, S.-H.; McInnis, M. G.; Margolis, R. L.; Antonarakis, S. E.;
Ross, C. A.: Novel triplet repeat containing genes in human brain:
cloning, expression, and length polymorphisms. Genomics 16: 572-579,
1993.

11. Lim, J.; Hao, T.; Shaw, C.; Patel, A. J.; Szabo, G.; Rual, J.-F.;
Fisk, C. J.; Li, N.; Smolyar, A.; Hill, D. E.; Barabasi, A.-L.; Vidal,
M.; Zoghbi, H. Y.: A protein-protein interaction network for human
inherited ataxias and disorders of Purkinje cell degeneration. Cell 125:
801-814, 2006.

12. Luthi-Carter, R.; Strand, A. D.; Hanson, S. A.; Kooperberg, C.;
Schilling, G.; La Spada, A. R.; Merry, D. E.; Young, A. B.; Ross,
C. A.; Borchelt, D. R.; Olson, J. M.: Polyglutamine and transcription:
gene expression changes shared by DRPLA and Huntington's disease mouse
models reveal context-independent effects. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11:
1927-1937, 2002.

13. Martins, S.; Matama, T.; Guimaraes, L.; Vale, J.; Guimaraes, J.;
Ramos, L.; Coutinho, P.; Sequeiros, J.; Silveira, I.: Portuguese
families with dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA) share a common
haplotype of Asian origin. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 11: 808-811, 2003.

14. Nagafuchi, S.; Yanagisawa, H.; Sato, K.; Shirayama, T.; Ohsaki,
E.; Bundo, M.; Takeda, T.; Tadokoro, K.; Kondo, I.; Murayama, N.;
Tanaka, Y.; Kikushima, H.; Umino, K.; Kurosawa, H.; Furukawa, T.;
Nihei, K.; Inoue, T.; Sano, A.; Komure, O.; Takahashi, M.; Yoshizawa,
T.; Kanazawa, I.; Yamada, M.: Dentatorubral and pallidoluysian atrophy
expansion of an unstable CAG trinucleotide on chromosome 12p. Nature
Genet. 6: 14-18, 1994.

15. Norremolle, A.; Nielsen, J. E.; Sorensen, S. A.; Hasholt, L.:
Elongated CAG repeats of the B37 gene in a Danish family with dentato-rubro-pallido-luysian
atrophy. Hum. Genet. 95: 313-318, 1995.

16. Okamura-Oho, Y.; Miyashita, T.; Nagao, K.; Shima, S.; Ogata, Y.;
Katada, T.; Nishina, H.; Yamada, M.: Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian
atrophy protein is phosphorylated by c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12: 1535-1542, 2003.

17. Onodera, O.; Oyake, M.; Takano, H.; Ikeuchi, T.; Igarashi, S.;
Tsuji, S.: Molecular cloning of a full-length cDNA for dentatorubral-pallidoluysian
atrophy and regional expressions of the expanded alleles in the CNS. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 57: 1050-1060, 1995.

18. Oyake, M.; Onodera, O.; Shiroishi, T.; Takano, H.; Takahashi,
Y.; Kominami, R.; Moriwaki, K.; Ikeuchi, T.; Igarashi, S.; Tanaka,
H.; Tsuji, S.: Molecular cloning of murine homologue dentatorubral-pallidoluysian
atrophy (DRPLA) cDNA: strong conservation of a polymorphic CAG repeat
in the murine gene. Genomics 40: 205-207, 1997.

19. Potter, N. T.: The relationship between (CAG)n repeat number
and age of onset in a family with dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy
(DRPLA): diagnostic implications of confirmatory and predictive testing. J.
Med. Genet. 33: 168-170, 1996.

20. Roses, A. D.: From genes to mechanisms to therapies: lessons
to be learned from neurological disorders. Nature Med. 2: 267-269,
1996.

21. Sano, A.; Yamauchi, N.; Kakimoto, Y.; Komure, O.; Kawai, J.; Hazama,
F.; Kuzume, K.; Sano, N.; Kondo, I.: Anticipation in hereditary dentatorubral-pallidoluysian
atrophy. Hum. Genet. 93: 699-702, 1994.

22. Sato, K.; Kashihara, K.; Okada, S.; Ikeuchi, T.; Tsuji, S.; Shomori,
T.; Morimoto, K.; Hayabara, T.: Does homozygosity advance the onset
of dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy? Neurology 45: 1934-1936,
1995.

23. Sato, T.; Miura, M.; Yamada, M.; Yoshida, T.; Wood, J. D.; Yazawa,
I.; Masuda, M.; Suzuki, T.; Shin, R.-M.; Yau, H.-J.; Liu, F.-C.; Shimohata,
T.; Onodera, O.; Ross, C. A.; Katsuki, M.; Takahashi, H.; Kano, M.;
Aosaki, T.; Tsuji, S.: Severe neurological phenotypes of Q129 DRPLA
transgenic mice serendipitously created by en masse expansion of CAG
repeats in Q76 DRPLA mice. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 723-736, 2009.

24. Sato, T.; Oyake, M.; Nakamura, K.; Nakao, K.; Fukusima, Y.; Onodera,
O.; Igarashi, S.; Takano, H.; Kikugawa, K.; Ishida, Y.; Shimohata,
T.; Koide, R.; and 15 others: Transgenic mice harboring a full-length
human mutant DRPLA gene exhibit age-dependent intergenerational and
somatic instabilities of CAG repeats comparable with those in DRPLA
patients. Hum. Molec. Genet. 8: 99-106, 1999.

25. Schmitt, I.; Epplen, J. T.; Riess, O.: Predominant neuronal expression
of the gene responsible for dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA)
in rat. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 1619-1624, 1995.

26. Takano, T.; Yamanouchi, Y.; Nagafuchi, S.; Yamada, M.: Assignment
of the dentatorubral and pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA) gene to 12p13.31
by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 32: 171-172, 1996.

27. Takiyama, Y.; Sakoe, K.; Amaike, M.; Soutome, M.; Ogawa, T.; Nakano,
I.; Nishizawa, M.: Single sperm analysis of the CAG repeats in the
gene for dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA): the instability
of the CAG repeats in the DRPLA gene is prominent among the CAG repeat
diseases. Hum. Molec. Genet. 8: 453-457, 1999.

28. Wood, J. D.; Yuan, J.; Margolis, R. L.; Colomer, V.; Duan, K.;
Kushi, J.; Kaminsky, Z.; Kleiderlein, J. J., Jr.; Sharp, A. H.; Ross,
C. A.: Atrophin-1, the DRPLA gene product, interacts with two families
of WW domain-containing proteins. Molec. Cell. Neurosci. 11: 149-160,
1998.

29. Yazawa, I.; Nukina, N.; Hashida, H.; Goto, J.; Yamada, M.; Kanazawa,
I.: Abnormal gene product identified in hereditary dentatorubral-pallidoluysian
atrophy (DRPLA) brain. Nature Genet. 10: 99-103, 1995.

30. Zhang, S.; Xu, L.; Lee, J.; Xu, T.: Drosophila Atrophin homolog
functions as a transcriptional corepressor in multiple developmental
processes. Cell 108: 45-56, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 8/10/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/15/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/25/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/13/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/9/2003

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 1/6/2003

EDITED terry: 05/11/2010
carol: 9/15/2009
wwang: 8/21/2009
terry: 8/10/2009
carol: 2/9/2009
carol: 2/5/2009
carol: 1/29/2009
mgross: 1/15/2009
tkritzer: 4/25/2005
tkritzer: 11/19/2003
terry: 11/13/2003
cwells: 7/9/2003
carol: 1/24/2003
ckniffin: 1/7/2003

609348	TITLE *609348 RECEPTOR EXPRESSION-ENHANCING PROTEIN 3; REEP3
;;CHROMOSOME 10 OPEN READING FRAME 74; C10ORF74
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Transport of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) to the cell surface
membrane is critical for receptor-ligand recognition. However, mammalian
GPCR odorant receptors (ORs), when heterologously expressed in cells,
are poorly expressed on the cell surface. By screening for genes that
induced cell surface expression of ORs expressed in human embryonic
kidney cells, Saito et al. (2004) identified mouse and human REEP1
(609139). They searched databases for homologs of REEP1 and identified
several other REEP genes, including REEP3. In situ hybridization of
mouse olfactory epithelium revealed that, unlike Reep1, Reep3 was not
expressed in olfactory neurons.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the REEP3
gene to chromosome 10 (TMAP RH69842).

REFERENCE 1. Saito, H.; Kubota, M.; Roberts, R. W.; Chi, Q.; Matsunami, H.:
RTP family members induce functional expression of mammalian odorant
receptors. Cell 119: 679-691, 2004.

CREATED Matthew B. Gross: 4/29/2005

EDITED alopez: 07/13/2006
mgross: 4/29/2005

605571	TITLE *605571 PIWI-LIKE 1; PIWIL1
;;HIWI;;
MIWI, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; MIWI
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Self-renewing asymmetric division of germline stem cells (GSCs) in
Drosophila is controlled both by an intracellular mechanism and by
cell-cell interactions. Cox et al. (1998) cloned and characterized the
Drosophila piwi gene and showed that it is essential for GSC maintenance
in both males and females. Mutation in piwi causes differentiation of
GSCs without self-renewing divisions immediately following the
initiation of oogenesis. The piwi protein is highly basic, especially in
the C-terminal 100 amino acid residues, and is well conserved in
evolution. Cox et al. (1998) cloned 2 piwi-like genes in C. elegans that
are required for GSC renewal and also found sequence similarity with 2
Arabidopsis thaliana proteins required for meristem cell division. By
use of an EST with sequence similarity to the Drosophila piwi gene to
screen a human testis cDNA library, they cloned the human homolog,
PIWIL1. The deduced PIWIL1 protein shares 47.1% overall sequence
identity, and 58.7% identity within the C terminus, with the Drosophila
protein. Cox et al. (1998) found no piwi-related genes in the bacteria
and yeast genomes, suggesting that piwi has a stem cell-related function
only in multicellular organisms. Piwi and piwi-related proteins differ
in the N terminus but show high homology in the C terminus where they
all contain a conserved 43-amino acid domain, which the authors
designated the PIWI box. Cox et al. (1998) suggested that piwi-related
genes represent a novel class of genes required for GSC division in
diverse multicellular organisms.

By PCR of CD34 (142230)-positive hematopoietic cells, followed by
5-prime RACE of a testis cDNA library, Sharma et al. (2001) cloned
PIWIL1, which they called HIWI. PCR analysis of adult and fetal tissues
detected highest HIWI expression in adult testis, followed by adult and
fetal kidney. Weaker expression was detected in all other fetal tissues
examined and in adult prostate, ovary, small intestine, heart, brain,
liver, skeletal muscle, kidney, and pancreas. Semiquantitative RT-PCR
revealed HIWI expression in CD34-positive hematopoietic cells, and HIWI
expression diminished during differentiation. HIWI was not expressed in
C34-negative cells.

By 5-prime RACE of testis mRNA, Qiao et al. (2002) obtained a
full-length HIWI cDNA. The deduced 861-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 98.5 kD and contains a central PAZ motif
and a C-terminal PIWI motif. Northern blot analysis detected a 3.6-kb
HIWI transcript in testis only. RT-PCR detected low HIWI expression in
testis from a 7-year-old boy. In situ hybridization and
immunofluorescence labeling of adult testis revealed HIWI mRNA and
protein only in a subset of spermatogenic cells in transverse sections
of tubules. HIWI was not detected in basal germ cells of seminiferous
epithelium or in Sertoli cells. Expression of HIWI appeared to be
limited to specific stages of the seminiferous epithelial cycle.
Northern blot analysis showed upregulated HIWI expression in 12 of 19
seminomas. In contrast, HIWI expression was not increased in 10
nonseminomas and 4 spermatocyte seminomas.

Deng and Lin (2002) cloned a mouse Piwil1 cDNA, which they called Miwi.
Northern blot analysis revealed a major and a minor Miwi transcript in
adult testis, but not in any other adult or embryonic tissues examined.
In adult testis, Miwi RNA was detected in a small number of germ cells
at the basal layer of the seminiferous tubule, presumably in zygotene
stage spermatocytes, and expression was abundant in primary
spermatocytes. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed Miwi in pachytene
stage spermatocytes, and expression increased until the early round
spermatid stage, after which its abundance decreased. Western blot
analysis detected Miwi at an apparent molecular mass of 100 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Sharma et al. (2001) found that transient expression of HIWI in a human
leukemia cell line resulted in a dramatic reduction in cellular
proliferation. Overexpression of HIWI led to programmed cell death.

Deng and Lin (2002) found that mouse Miwi complexed with mRNAs of Act
(605126) and Crem (123812) target genes.

Girard et al. (2006) showed that mouse Miwi bound a novel class of
approximately 29- to 30-nucleotide RNAs that were highly abundant in
testis. They named these RNAs 'Piwi-interacting RNAs,' or piRNAs, and
identified 52,934 candidate piRNAs. The distribution of piRNAs among
chromosomes did not correlate either with gene density or repeat
density. Nearly 84% of piRNAs mapped uniquely in the genome, and 17%
mapped to repeats, including SINES, LINES, and LTR retrotransposons.
piRNAs were predominantly grouped into 20- to 90-kb clusters, with long
stretches of small RNAs derived from only 1 strand. Similar piRNAs were
identified in human and rat, with major clusters occurring in syntenic
locations. Girard et al. (2006) proposed that the abundance of piRNAs in
germline cells and the male sterility of Miwi mutants suggests a role
for piRNAs in gametogenesis.

Grivna et al. (2006) found that Miwi associated with both piRNAs and
mRNAs in cytosolic ribonucleoprotein and polysome fractions of mouse
testicular extract. As polysomes increased in early spermiogenesis, Miwi
levels increased in polysome fractions. Moreover, Miwi associated with
the mRNA cap-binding complex. Examination of Miwi -/- testis revealed
that Miwi was required for expression of piRNAs and testis-associated
miRNAs. Immunoprecipitation of Miwi from mouse testicular extracts
coprecipitated Dicer (606241), but Miwi was not required for Dicer
expression or stability. Grivna et al. (2006) concluded that Miwi has a
role in small RNA-mediated processes during spermatogenesis.

Canalization, or developmental robustness, is an organism's ability to
produce the same phenotype despite genotypic variations and
environmental influences. Expression of a gain-of-function allele of
Drosophila Kruppel results in misregulation of genes in the fly eye disc
and generation of eye outgrowths, which are normally repressed via
canalization. Using a fly eye outgrowth assay, Gangaraju et al. (2011)
showed that a protein complex made up of Piwi, Hsp83 (HSP90; see
140571), and Hop (STIP1; 605063) was involved in canalization. The
results suggested that canalization may involve Hsp83-mediated
phosphorylation of Piwi. Gangaraju et al. (2011) concluded that the eye
outgrowth phenotype is a defect in epigenetic silencing of a normally
suppressed genotype.

Reuter et al. (2011) showed that Miwi is a small RNA-guided RNase
(slicer) that requires extensive complementarity for target cleavage in
vitro. Disruption of its catalytic activity in mice by a single point
mutation caused male infertility, and mutant germ cells showed increased
accumulation of LINE-1 retrotransposon transcripts. Reuter et al. (2011)
provided evidence for Miwi slicer activity directly cleaving transposon
mRNAs, offering an explanation for the continued maintenance of
repeat-derived piRNAs long after transposon silencing is established in
germline stem cells. Furthermore, Reuter et al. (2011) concluded that
their study supported a slicer-dependent silencing mechanism that
functions without piRNA amplification. Thus, Piwi proteins seem to act
in a 2-pronged mammalian transposon silencing strategy: one promotes
transcriptional repression in the embryo, the other reinforces silencing
at the posttranscriptional level after birth.

GENE STRUCTURE

Deng and Lin (2002) determined that the mouse Piwil1 gene contains 22
exons and spans 19.2 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis and FISH, Sharma et al. (2001) mapped the
PIWIL1 gene to chromosome 12q24.2-q24.32. Qiao et al. (2002) mapped the
PIWIL1 gene to chromosome 12q24.33 by radiation hybrid analysis and
FISH. By genomic sequence analysis, Sasaki et al. (2003) mapped the
PIWIL1 gene to chromosome 12q23.

Deng and Lin (2002) mapped the mouse Piwil1 gene to a region of
chromosome 5 that shows homology of synteny to human chromosome 12.

ANIMAL MODEL

Deng and Lin (2002) found that Miwi-null mice were born at the expected
mendelian ratio and developed normally. Mutant males were sterile,
whereas mutant females were fertile. No sperm was found in the
epididymis of Miwi-null males, and spermatogenesis was uniformly
arrested at the round spermatid stage following the first wave of
spermatogenesis. Miwi-null testis showed increased numbers of apoptotic
cells from the basal layer to the luminal layer of the seminiferous
epithelium, suggesting that survival of spermatocytes, spermatids, and
possibly spermatogonia was compromised. Expression of Crem and Trf2
(TERF2; 602027) target genes was reduced in Miwi-null testis.

REFERENCE 1. Cox, D. N.; Chao, A.; Baker, J.; Chang, L.; Qiao, D.; Lin, H.:
A novel class of evolutionarily conserved genes defined by piwi are
essential for stem cell self-renewal. Genes Dev. 12: 3715-3727,
1998.

2. Deng, W.; Lin, H.: miwi, a murine homolog of piwi, encodes a cytoplasmic
protein essential for spermatogenesis. Dev. Cell 2: 819-830, 2002.

3. Gangaraju, V. K.; Yin, H.; Weiner, M. M.; Wang, J.; Huang, X. A.;
Lin, H.: Drosophila Piwi functions in Hsp90-mediated suppression
of phenotypic variation. Nature Genet. 43: 153-158, 2011.

4. Girard, A.; Sachidanandam, R.; Hannon, G. J.; Carmell, M. A.:
A germline-specific class of small RNAs binds mammalian Piwi proteins. Nature 442:
199-202, 2006.

5. Grivna, S. T.; Pyhtila, B.; Lin, H.: MIWI associates with translational
machinery and PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) in regulating spermatogenesis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 13415-13420, 2006.

6. Qiao, D.; Zeeman, A.-M.; Deng, W.; Looijenga, L. H. J.; Lin, H.
: Molecular characterization of hiwi, a human member of the piwi gene
family whose overexpression is correlated to seminomas. Oncogene 21:
3988-3999, 2002.

7. Reuter, M.; Berninger, P.; Chuma, S.; Shah, H.; Hosokawa, M.; Funaya,
C.; Antony, C.; Sachidanandam, R.; Pillai, R. S.: Miwi catalysis
is required for piRNA amplification-independent LINE1 transposon silencing. Nature 480:
264-267, 2011.

8. Sasaki, T.; Shiohama, A.; Minoshima, S.; Shimizu, N.: Identification
of eight members of the Argonaute family in the human genome. Genomics 82:
323-330, 2003.

9. Sharma, A. K.; Nelson, M. C.; Brandt, J. E.; Wessman, M.; Mahmud,
N.; Weller, K. P.; Hoffman, R.: Human CD34+ stem cells express the
hiwi gene, a human homologue of the Drosophila gene piwi. Blood 97:
426-434, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/15/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/5/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/6/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/14/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/11/2006

CREATED Yen-Pei C. Chang: 1/22/2001

EDITED alopez: 05/17/2012
terry: 5/15/2012
mgross: 5/5/2011
terry: 5/5/2011
mgross: 10/6/2006
mgross: 8/14/2006
mgross: 8/11/2006
terry: 8/11/2006
carol: 12/19/2001
carol: 1/23/2001
cwells: 1/23/2001
carol: 1/23/2001
cwells: 1/23/2001

610980	TITLE *610980 KCNQ1 DOWNSTREAM NEIGHBOR; KCNQ1DN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Imprinting is a phenomenon in which epigenetic modifications lead to
expression or suppression of alleles of some genes based on their
parental origin. Wilms tumor-2 (WT2; 194071) is defined by
maternal-specific loss of heterozygosity of a critical region on
chromosome 11p15.5 that includes several imprinted genes. KCNQ1DN is an
imprinted gene located within the WT2 critical region that is expressed
from the maternal allele (Xin et al., 2000).

CLONING

By sequence analysis of the WT2 critical region, followed by database
analysis and screening a testis cDNA library, Xin et al. (2000) cloned
KCNQ1DN. KCNQ1DN has a small ORF encoding 68 amino acids, but it lacks a
Kozak consensus sequence around the initiator ATG, suggesting it is not
translated. Scott (2007) failed to identify sequences related to the
predicted 68-amino acid protein in other species through database
analysis, providing further evidence that KCNQ1DN is not translated.
Using RT-PCR, Xin et al. (2000) detected expression of KCNQ1DN in adult
brain, heart, kidney, testis, and placenta. KCNQ1DN expression was
present in fetal kidney between 82 and 103 days of gestation. RT-PCR
showed monoallelic expression of KCNQ1DN in fetal kidney and maternal
expression of KCNQ1DN in placenta.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RT-PCR, Xin et al. (2000) found that KCNQ1DN expression was absent
in 7 of 18 Wilms tumors. In contrast, other nearby maternally expressed
genes, including CDKN1C (600856), IMPT1 (SLC22A18; 602631), and IPL
(PHLDA2; 602131), were normally expressed. Xin et al. (2000) concluded
that KCNQ1DN may be involved in Wilms tumorigenesis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Xin et al. (2000) determined that the KCNQ1DN gene contains at least 2
exons, and they identified an upstream CpG island.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Xin et al. (2000) mapped the KCNQ1DN gene
within the WT2 critical region on chromosome 11p15.5, between the CDKN1C
gene and the KCNQ1 gene (607542).

REFERENCE 1. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  4/25/2007.

2. Xin, Z.; Soejima, H.; Higashimoto, K.; Yatsuki, H.; Zhu, X.; Satoh,
Y.; Masaki, Z.; Kaneko, Y.; Jinno, Y.; Fukuzawa, R.; Hata, J.; Mukai,
T.: A novel imprinted gene, KCNQ1DN, within the WT2 critical region
of human chromosome 11p15.5 and its reduced expression in Wilms' tumors. J.
Biochem. 128: 847-853, 2000.

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 4/25/2007

EDITED mgross: 04/25/2007

138971	TITLE *138971 COLONY-STIMULATING FACTOR 3 RECEPTOR, GRANULOCYTE; CSF3R
;;GRANULOCYTE COLONY-STIMULATING FACTOR RECEPTOR; GCSFR
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor or CSF3 (138970), is a
glycoprotein of MW 20,000-25,000 that is produced by macrophages
stimulated with endotoxin. It plays an important role in granulopoiesis
during the inflammatory process. CSF3 exerts its biologic effects
through interaction with specific cell-surface receptors. Binding
studies with radiolabeled CSF3 indicated that CSF3 receptor is expressed
not only by progenitor and mature neutrophilic granulocytes, but also by
nonhematopoietic cells such as placental cells, endothelial cells, and
various carcinoma cell lines. Fukunaga et al. (1990) cloned and
characterized cDNAs for human CSF3 receptor. They found that it is
abundantly expressed in the human placenta. The receptor contains 813
amino acids and shows marked homology (62.5%) with its murine
counterpart. It was found to consist of extracellular, transmembrane,
and cytoplasmic domains. Two other classes of the human CSF3 receptor
were identified, one of which had a deletion of the transmembrane domain
and seemed to represent a secreted, soluble receptor. The third class
contained a 27-amino acid insertion in the cytoplasmic domain and was
highly expressed in the placenta.

Seto et al. (1992) found that CSF3R is subdivided into several regions:
an Ig-like domain, a cytokine receptor homologous domain, 3 fibronectin
type III domains, a transmembrane domain, and a cytoplasmic region. No
canonical 'TATA' box was found upstream of the cap site. About 110 bp
upstream of the transcription initiation site, an 18-bp element was
found that is homologous to sequences found in the promoter of human
myeloperoxidase (606989) and neutrophil elastase (130120) genes.

GENE FUNCTION

Dong et al. (2001) reported that the C terminus of CSF3R is required for
SHP1 (176883) downregulation of CSF3-induced STAT activation. The
authors proposed that this mechanism inhibits cell proliferation and
survival in response to CSF3.

GENE STRUCTURE

Seto et al. (1992) found that the CSF3R gene consists of 17 exons.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization using human CSF3R cDNA as a probe, Inazawa et
al. (1991) localized the gene to 1p35-p34.3. The localization on
chromosome 1 was confirmed by 2 further methods: the use of
oligonucleotides specific for human CSF3R for PCR amplification of DNA
from mouse A9 cells that contained chromosome 1 as the only human
chromosome; and spot-blot hybridization of sorted human chromosomes.
Tweardy et al. (1992) assigned the gene to the distal short arm of human
chromosome 1 by Southern blot analysis of its segregation pattern in a
panel of rodent-human hybrid DNAs. By chromosomal in situ hybridization,
they refined the localization to 1p34-p32 and concluded that the gene is
located telomeric to the CSF1 (120420), JUN (165160), and TCL5 (187040)
genes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Dong et al. (1994) identified a somatic point mutation in the GCSFR gene
as the cause of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in a patient with severe
congenital neutropenia (202700). Dong et al. (1995) described somatic
mutations in the GCSFR gene in 2 males with acute myeloid leukemia
preceded by severe congenital neutropenia. In 1 patient, the mutation
was also found in the neutropenic stage, before the progression to acute
myeloid leukemia. Transfection of the cDNA encoding the mutant GCSF
receptor into mouse cells resulted in abnormally high proliferative
responses but failure to mature when cultured in GCSF. The mutant
receptors also interfered with terminal maturation mediated by the
wildtype GCSF receptor and the murine cells that coexpressed the
wildtype and mutant receptors, an apparent dominant-negative effect.

Tidow et al. (1997) investigated the frequency of these specific
mutations in patients with congenital neutropenia undergoing treatment
with recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
(Filgrastim). The critical region (nucleotides 2384-2429) from the
intracellular domain of the GCSFR gene was studied in both genomic DNA
and cDNA from neutrophils and mononuclear cells from 28 patients with
severe congenital neutropenia. In 4 of the patients, a point mutation in
the tested cytoplasmic region of the GCSFR gene was found. The point
mutations replaced a glutamine codon by a stop codon. Among these 4
congenital neutropenia patients with a mutated GCSFR gene, 2 developed
AML. All 4 patients were investigated regularly and no correlation
between occurrence of GCSFR mutation and time or dose of Filgrastim was
found. No point mutations in the GCSFR critical domain could be detected
in cells from the other 24 congenital neutropenia patients. Furthermore,
Tidow et al. (1997) tested 6 family members of the 2 patients with AML,
including mothers and fathers, 1 sister, and 1 brother who also suffered
from congenital neutropenia. All family members had a normal GCSFR gene.
After the acquisition of the GCSFR mutations, the congenital neutropenia
patients continued to respond to G-CSFR therapy with an increase in
absolute neutrophils in the peripheral blood. Tidow et al. (1997)
concluded that the point mutations in the critical region of the
intracellular part of the G-CSF receptor occur spontaneously and are not
inherited. They suggested, furthermore, that the described point
mutations do not alter the response to treatment and are not the cause
of severe congenital neutropenia.

Dale et al. (2000) quoted prevalence data suggesting that a minority of
patients with congenital neutropenia show mutations in GCSFR. On the
other hand, mutations in the neutrophil elastase gene (ELA2; 130130)
have been identified in a majority of these patients. Dale et al. (2000)
suggested that it is much more likely that mutations in the ELA2 gene
compromise myeloid differentiation and create a risk for development of
acute myeloid leukemia.

In a 3-generation family segregating autosomal dominant neutrophilia
(162830), Plo et al. (2009) sequenced the CSF3R gene and identified a
heterozygous mutation (T617N; 138971.0001) in all 12 affected
individuals that was not found in the 4 unaffected family members. The
mutation disappeared after remission and was not detected at relapse,
indicating that the T617N mutation was a secondary event in the leukemic
process. The T617N mutation had previously been reported as an acquired
activating mutation in 2 of 555 patients with acute myeloid leukemia by
Forbes et al. (2002).

Maxson et al. (2013) identified activating mutations in the CSF3R gene
in 16 of 27 patients (59%) with chronic neutrophilic leukemia (CNL) or
atypical (BCR-ABL1-negative; see 608232) chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).
These mutations segregated within 2 distinct regions of CSF3R and led to
preferential downstream kinase signaling through SRC family (see
190090)-TNK2 (606994) or JAK kinases and differential sensitivity to
kinase inhibitors. A patient with CNL carrying a JAK-activating CSF3R
mutation had marked clinical improvement after the administration of the
JAK1/2 (see 147795) inhibitor ruxolitinib.

ANIMAL MODEL

Despite the demonstration of mutations in CSF3R, their role in the
pathogenesis of SCN and the subsequent development of acute myeloid
leukemia remained controversial. McLemore et al. (1998) generated mice
carrying a targeted mutation in their Csf3r gene that reproduced a
mutation found in a patient with SCN and AML reported by Dong et al.
(1995). They found that the mutant Csf3r allele was expressed in a
myeloid-specific fashion at levels comparable to the wildtype allele.
Mice heterozygous or homozygous for this mutation had normal levels of
circulating neutrophils and no evidence for a block in myeloid
maturation, indicating that resting granulopoiesis was normal. However,
in response to GCSF treatment, these mice demonstrated a significantly
greater increase in the level of circulating neutrophils. This effect
appeared to be due to increased neutrophil production. Furthermore, the
in vitro survival and GCSF-dependent suppression of apoptosis of mutant
neutrophils were normal. Despite this evidence for a hyperproliferative
response to GCSF, no cases of AML were detected. McLemore et al. (1998)
interpreted the results as providing strong evidence that mutations in
the CSF3R gene are not responsible for the impaired granulopoiesis
present in patients with SCN.

Schweizerhof et al. (2009) presented evidence that GCSF and GMCSF (CSF2;
138960) mediate bone cancer pain and tumor-nerve interactions. Increased
levels of both factors were detected in bone marrow lysates and
adjoining connective tissue in a mouse sarcoma model of bone
tumor-induced pain compared to controls. The functional receptors GCSFR
and GMCSFR (CSF2RA; 306250) were expressed on peripheral nerves in the
bone matrix and in dorsal root ganglia. GMCSF sensitized nerves to
mechanical stimuli in vitro and in vivo, potentiated CGRP (114130)
release, and caused sprouting of sensory nerve endings in the skin. RNA
interference of GCSF and GMCSF signaling in mouse sarcoma model led to
reduced tumor growth and nerve remodeling, and abrogated bone cancer
pain.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NEUTROPHILIA, HEREDITARY
CSF3R, THR617ASN

In 12 affected members of a 3-generation family segregating autosomal
dominant hereditary neutrophilia (162830), Plo et al. (2009) identified
heterozygosity for a 2088C-A transversion in the CSF3R gene, resulting
in a thr617-to-asn (T617N) substitution located in the transmembrane
domain of the receptor. The mutation disappeared after remission and was
not detected at relapse, indicating that the T617N mutation was a
secondary event in the leukemic process. Computational analysis by Plo
et al. (2009) indicated that T617N strongly favors dimerization of the
receptor transmembrane domain, and studies in CD34+ cells from patients
and controls demonstrated constitutive activation of the mutant receptor
with hypersensitivity to GCSF. Mutant hematopoietic stem cells yielded a
myeloproliferative-like disorder in xenotransplantation and syngenic
mouse bone marrow engraftment assays. The T617N mutation had previously
been reported as an acquired activating mutation in 2 of 555 patients
with acute myeloid leukemia by Forbes et al. (2002).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Wong et al. (1993)
REFERENCE 1. Dale, D. C.; Person, R. E.; Bolyard, A. A.; Aprikyan, A. G.; Bos,
C.; Bonilla, M. A.; Boxer, L. A.; Kannourakis, G.; Zeidler, C.; Welte,
K.; Benson, K. F.; Horwitz, M.: Mutations in the gene encoding neutrophil
elastase in congenital and cyclic neutropenia. Blood 96: 2317-2322,
2000.

2. Dong, F.; Brynes, R. K.; Tidow, N.; Welte, K.; Lowenberg, B.; Touw,
I. P.: Mutations in the gene for the granulocyte colony-stimulating-factor
receptor in patients with acute myeloid leukemia preceded by severe
congenital neutropenia. New Eng. J. Med. 333: 487-493, 1995.

3. Dong, F.; Hoefsloot, L. H.; Schelen, A. M.; Broeders, L. C. A.
M.; Meijer, Y.; Veerman, A. J. P.; Touw, I. P.; Lowenberg, B.: Identification
of a nonsense mutation in the granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor
receptor in severe congenital neutropenia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91:
4480-4484, 1994.

4. Dong, F.; Qiu, Y.; Yi, T.; Touw, I. P.; Larner, A. C.: The carboxyl
terminus of the granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor, truncated
in patients with severe congenital neutropenia/acute myeloid leukemia,
is required for SH2-containing phosphatase-1 suppression of Stat activation. J.
Immun. 167: 6447-6452, 2001.

5. Forbes, L. V.; Gale, R. E.; Pizzey, A.; Pouwels, K.; Nathwani,
A.; Linch, D. C.: An activating mutation in the transmembrane domain
of the granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor in patients
with acute myeloid leukemia. Oncogene 21: 5981-5989, 2002.

6. Fukunaga, R.; Seto, Y.; Mizushima, S.; Nagata, S.: Three different
mRNAs encoding human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 8702-8706, 1990.

7. Inazawa, J.; Fukunaga, R.; Seto, Y.; Nakagawa, H.; Misawa, S.;
Abe, T.; Nagata, S.: Assignment of the human granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor receptor gene (CSF3R) to chromosome 1 at region p35-p34.3. Genomics 10:
1075-1078, 1991.

8. Maxson, J. E.; Gotlib, J.; Pollyea, D. A.; Fleischman, A. G.; Agarwal,
A.; Eide, C. A.; Bottomly, D.; Wilmot, B.; McWeeney, S. K.; Tognon,
C. E.; Pond, J. B.; Collins, R. H.; Goueli, B.; Oh. S. T.; Deininger,
M. W.; Chang, B. H.; Loriaux, M. M.; Druker, B. J.; Tyner, J. W.:
Oncogenic CSF3R mutations in chronic neutrophilic leukemia and atypical
CML. New Eng. J. Med. 368: 1781-1790, 2013.

9. McLemore, M. L.; Poursine-Laurent, J.; Link, D. C.: Increased
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor responsiveness but normal resting
granulopoiesis in mice carrying a targeted granulocyte colony-stimulating
factor receptor mutation derived from a patient with severe congenital
neutropenia. J. Clin. Invest. 102: 483-492, 1998.

10. Plo, I.; Zhang, Y.; Le Couedic, J.-P.; Nakatake, M.; Boulet, J.-M.;
Itaya, M.; Smith, S. O.; Debili, N.; Constantinescu, S. N.; Vainchenker,
W.; Louache, F.; de Botton, S.: An activating mutation in the CSF3R
gene induces a hereditary chronic neutrophilia. J. Exp. Med. 206:
1701-1707, 2009.

11. Schweizerhof, M.; Stosser, S.; Kurejova, M.; Njoo, C.; Gangadharan,
V.; Agarwal, N.; Schmelz, M.; Bali, K. K.; Michalski, C. W.; Brugger,
S.; Dickenson, A.; Simone, D. A.; Kuner, R.: Hematopoietic colony-stimulating
factors mediate tumor-nerve interactions and bone cancer pain. (Letter) Nature
Med. 15: 802-807, 2009.

12. Seto, Y.; Fukunaga, R.; Nagata, S.: Chromosomal gene organization
of the human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor. J. Immun. 148:
259-266, 1992.

13. Tidow, N.; Pilz, C.; Teichmann, B.; Muller-Brechlin, A.; Germeshausen,
M.; Kasper, B.; Rauprich, P.; Sykora, K.-W.; Welte, K.: Clinical
relevance of point mutations in the cytoplasmic domain of the granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor receptor gene in patients with severe congenital
neutropenia. Blood 89: 2369-2375, 1997.

14. Tweardy, D. J.; Anderson, K.; Cannizzaro, L. A.; Steinman, R.
A.; Croce, C. M.; Huebner, K.: Molecular cloning of cDNAs for the
human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor receptor from HL-60 and
mapping of the gene to chromosome region 1p32-34. Blood 79: 1148-1154,
1992.

15. Wong, W.-Y.; Williams, D.; Slovak, M. L.; Charak, B.; Mazumder,
A.; Snyder, D.; Powars, D. R.; Byrnes, R. K.: Terminal acute myelogenous
leukemia in a patient with congenital agranulocytosis. Am. J. Hemat. 43:
133-138, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 07/08/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/28/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/18/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/16/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/9/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/6/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/1/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/28/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/21/1990

EDITED alopez: 07/08/2013
wwang: 9/28/2009
wwang: 9/8/2009
ckniffin: 8/18/2009
alopez: 2/1/2007
ckniffin: 5/29/2002
mgross: 1/16/2002
mcapotos: 1/12/2001
terry: 1/9/2001
carol: 11/6/2000
carol: 10/6/1998
terry: 10/1/1998
dkim: 9/11/1998
jenny: 6/3/1997
terry: 5/28/1997
mark: 10/18/1995
jason: 6/13/1994
carol: 10/26/1993
carol: 5/5/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/16/1992

605404	TITLE *605404 BCL2-RELATED OVARIAN KILLER; BOK
;;BCL2-LIKE 9; BCL2L9
DESCRIPTION Apoptosis involves 2 essential steps: 'decision,' which involves the
interaction of pro- and antiapoptotic BCL2 (151430) family proteins, and
'execution,' which involves caspases (e.g., CASP3; 600636).

Hsu et al. (1997) determined that an antiapoptotic BCL2 family protein,
MCL1 (159552), is highly expressed in ovary, where 99% of follicles die
and only 1% can ovulate. Using rat Mcl1 as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid
screen of an ovarian fusion cDNA library, they isolated a cDNA encoding
BOK (BCL2-related ovarian killer). The deduced 213-amino acid BOK
protein contains 2 potential phosphorylation sites near the N terminus;
conserved BCL2 homology (BH)-1, -2, and -3 domains but not the
antiapoptotic BH4 domain; and a C-terminal transmembrane domain. Yeast
2-hybrid analysis determined that BOK interacts strongly with only some
antiapoptotic BCL2 proteins and not at all with proapoptotic BCL2
proteins (e.g., BAD; 603167). Morphologic and DNA fragmentation analyses
determined that BOK induces apoptosis in transfected cells, and this
apoptosis could be blocked by coexpression with the baculovirus-derived
p35 cysteine protease inhibitor. Northern blot analysis detected a
1.5-kb Bok transcript only in rat reproductive tissues. In situ
hybridization analysis detected high levels of Bok expression in the
granulosa cells of antral and preantral follicles. Southern blot
analysis showed that rat Bok hybridizes strongly with human genomic DNA.
Hsu et al. (1997) concluded that BOK is a novel proapoptotic member of
the BCL2 family of proteins.

REFERENCE 1. Hsu, S. Y.; Kaipia, A.; McGee, E.; Lomeli, M.; Hsueh, A. J. W.
: Bok is a pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 protein with restricted expression
in reproductive tissues and heterodimerizes with selective anti-apoptotic
Bcl-2 family members. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 12401-12406, 1997.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/14/2000

EDITED mgross: 11/14/2000

300595	TITLE *300595 G ANTIGEN 2C; GAGE2C
;;GAGE2
DESCRIPTION See GAGE1 (300594) for more information about the GAGE gene cluster.

CLONING

Human melanoma cells express several distinct antigens that are
recognized by autologous cytolytic T lymphocytes (CTLs). One class of
these antigens is encoded by genes, such as MAGE1 (MAGEA1; 300016),
MAGE3 (MAGEA3; 300174), and BAGE (605167), that are expressed in a large
fraction of tumors of various histologic types but are silent in normal
adult tissues, except for testis. Van den Eynde et al. (1995) identified
GAGE1 as a gene encoding an antigen that is present on melanoma MZ2-MEL
cells and is recognized by autologous CTLs. By screening a melanoma
MZ2-MEL cDNA library with a GAGE1 cDNA, they isolated cDNAs representing
5 genes with sequence similarity to GAGE1. They named the genes GAGE2,
GAGE3 (300596), GAGE4 (300597), GAGE5 (300598), and GAGE6 (300599). The
GAGE2 to -6 cDNAs differ mainly by single nucleotide substitutions that
are scattered throughout the sequence. The deduced GAGE2 protein has 116
amino acids. The authors defined the antigenic peptide encoded by GAGE1
and found that GAGE2 also encodes it. RT-PCR using primers common to
GAGE1 to -6 found no expression of these genes in any normal adult
tissue tested except testis. RT-PCR using primers specific to both GAGE1
and GAGE2 found that at least 1 of these genes was expressed in 25% of
sarcomas, 24% of melanomas, 19% of nonsmall cell lung carcinomas, 19% of
head and neck tumors, and 12% of bladder tumors; GAGE1 and GAGE2 were
not expressed in colorectal carcinomas and renal cell carcinomas.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gjerstorff and Ditzel (2008) stated that the GAGE2C gene is contained
within a 9.5-kb GAGE repeat. It contains 5 exons that span about 6.3 kb,
and it has a LINE insertion that disrupts 1 exon compared with GAGE1.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and FISH, De Backer et al. (1999) mapped
the GAGE2C gene to chromosome Xp11.4-p11.2.

By genomic sequence analysis, Gjerstorff and Ditzel (2008) mapped the
GAGE2C gene to a GAGE gene cluster on chromosome Xp11.23.

REFERENCE 1. De Backer, O.; Arden, K. C.; Boretti, M.; Vantomme, V.; De Smet,
C.; Czekav, S.; Viars, C. S.; De Plaen, E.; Brasseur, F.; Chomez,
P.; Van den Eynde, B.; Bood, T. van der Bruggen, P.: Characterization
of the GAGE genes that are expressed in various human cancers and
in normal testis. Cancer Res. 59: 3157-3165, 1999.

2. Gjerstorff, M. F.; Ditzel, H. J.: An overview of the GAGE cancer/testis
antigen family with the inclusion of newly identified members. Tissue
Antigens 71: 187-192, 2008.

3. Van den Eynde, B.; Peeters, O.; De Backer, O.; Gaugler, B.; Lucas,
S.; Boon, T.: A new family of genes coding for an antigen recognized
by autologous cytolytic T lymphocytes on a human melanoma. J. Exp.
Med. 182: 689-698, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 08/06/2008
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/18/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/18/2006

EDITED wwang: 08/06/2008
mgross: 5/18/2006

609221	TITLE *609221 N-ACETYLTRANSFERASE 10; NAT10
;;N-ACETYLTRANSFERASE-LIKE PROTEIN;;
ALP;;
KIAA1709
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for genes in a region of chromosome 11 associated with WAGR
syndrome (194072), Gawin et al. (1999) identified and cloned NAT10,
which they designated clone 193700. Northern blot analysis detected
variable expression of a 4.5-kb transcript in all human tissues
examined, with highest expression in heart, brain, placenta, and
pancreas.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned KIAA1709. The deduced protein
contains 1,028 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA detected high expression in
liver and intermediate expression in all other adult and fetal tissues
and specific adult brain regions examined.

By yeast 1-hybrid screening of a HeLa cell cDNA library using the
promoter region of the catalytic subunit of human telomerase, TERT
(187270), as bait, followed by 5-prime RACE, Lv et al. (2003) cloned
ALP. The deduced 834-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass
of 94 kD. ALP contains an N-acetyltransferase domain accompanied by an
ATP/GTP-binding motif and an ATPase domain. Western blot analysis of
HeLa cells detected ALP at an apparent molecular mass of 94 kD.
Immunocytochemical analysis detected ALP mainly in HeLa cell nuclei.

GENE FUNCTION

By in vitro electrophoretic mobility shift assay, Lv et al. (2003)
confirmed that ALP interacts with the TERT promoter. Cotransfection of
HeLa cells with a reporter construct driven by the TERT promoter and ALP
cDNA resulted in increased reporter activity. Cotransfection of the
reporter with antisense ALP cDNA resulted decreased reporter activity.
Cells overexpressing ALP showed higher telomerase activity, whereas
cells with antisense ALP showed decreased telomerase activity. In vitro
analysis showed that ALP specifically catalyzed acetylation of histones.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lv et al. (2003) determined that the ALP gene contains 24 exons and
spans about 33 kb.

MAPPING

By analyzing a PAC contig covering chromosome 11p14.1-p13, Gawin et al.
(1999) mapped the NAT10 gene to chromosome 11p13, centromeric to the
GPIAP1 gene (601178) and telomeric to the CAT gene (115500).

By genomic sequence analysis, Lv et al. (2003) mapped the ALP gene to
chromosome 11p13.

REFERENCE 1. Gawin, B.; Niederfuhr, A.; Schumacher, N.; Hummerich, H.; Little,
P. F. R.; Gessler, M.: A 7.5 Mb sequence-ready PAC contig and gene
expression map of human chromosome 11p13-p14.1. Genome Res. 9: 1074-1086,
1999.

2. Lv, J.; Liu, H.; Wang, Q.; Tang, Z.; Hou, L.; Zhang, B.: Molecular
cloning of a novel human gene encoding histone acetyltransferase-like
protein involved in transcriptional activation of hTERT. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 311: 506-513, 2003.

3. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Hattori, A.; Kondo, Y.; Okumura, K.; Ohara,
O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes.
XIX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which
code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 347-355, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/16/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/24/2005

EDITED mgross: 09/18/2008
terry: 9/16/2008
mgross: 2/24/2005

300462	TITLE *300462 A-KINASE ANCHOR PROTEIN 14; AKAP14
;;A-KINASE ANCHOR PROTEIN, 28-KD; AKAP28
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

A-kinase anchor proteins (AKAPs; see 602449) target protein kinase A
(PKA; see 176911) to discrete locations within the cell by binding the
regulatory subunit dimer of the PKA holoenzyme. AKAP28 is an axonemal
AKAP.

CLONING

Kultgen et al. (2002) identified AKAP28 as an axoneme-enriched PKA type
II regulatory subunit (RII)-binding protein by overlay analysis of
isolated cilia from well-differentiated human bronchial epithelial
(WD-HBE) cells. By screening a WD-HBE cDNA expression library using RII
as probe, followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE and database analysis,
Kultgen et al. (2002) obtained a full-length cDNA encoding AKAP28. The
deduced AKAP28 protein contains 197 amino acids and has an apparent
molecular mass of 28 kD. By database analysis, Kultgen et al. (2002)
determined that there are at least 3 AKAP28 splice variants, and RT-PCR
detected all 3 variants in trachea and testis. Northern blot analysis of
HBE cells detected upregulation of a 0.8-kb AKAP28 transcript as cells
differentiated and began to display a mucociliary phenotype. Northern
blot analysis of a multiple-tissue array showed predominant expression
of AKAP28 in trachea and testis, the only tissues examined that contain
axoneme-based organelles. Faint expression was also detected in adult
and fetal lung. Western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry localized
AKAP28 to airway cilia.

GENE FUNCTION

By mutation analysis, Kultgen et al. (2002) confirmed that amino acids
35 to 52 of AKAP28 mediate binding of RII. Coimmunoprecipitation
analysis showed that recombinant AKAP28 associated with RII and the PKA
catalytic subunit, but not with RI, in HeLa cells. When heterologously
expressed in a cervical adenocarcinoma cell line, AKAP28 preferentially
bound type II PKA and was able to copurify with the PKA catalytic
subunit. Kultgen et al. (2002) concluded that AKAP28 acts as a type II
PKA anchor within cells.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Kultgen et al. (2002) mapped the AKAP28
gene to chromosome Xq24.

REFERENCE 1. Kultgen, P. L.; Byrd, S. K.; Ostrowski, L. E.; Milgram, S. L.:
Characterization of an A-kinase anchoring protein in human ciliary
axonemes. Molec. Biol. Cell 13: 4156-4166, 2002.

CREATED Matthew B. Gross: 11/26/2003

EDITED alopez: 03/04/2005
carol: 11/29/2003
mgross: 11/26/2003

602047	TITLE *602047 PHOSPHODIESTERASE 3B, cGMP-INHIBITED; PDE3B
;;cAMP PHOSPHODIESTERASE, ADIPOCYTE, cGMP-INHIBITED;;
HcGIP1, RAT, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases (PDEs) are a superfamily of related
enzymes involved in many regulatory pathways. The PDE3 family is
characterized by high affinity for cAMP, inhibition by cGMP, sensitivity
to specific inhibitors such as cilostamide and milrinone, and by
phosphorylation and activation in response to insulin and agents that
increase cAMP. Miki et al. (1996) used a rat PDE3B cDNA to screen a
human fat cDNA library. They assembled a complete PDE3B cDNA coding
sequence by assembling partial cDNA clones, genomic clones, and PCR
products. This coding sequence predicts a protein of 1,112 amino acids
with 81% amino acid identity with rat PDE3B. Northern blot analysis
showed low levels of PDE3B expression in liver, spleen, lung, and
kidney, and abundant 5.4- and 6.4-kb transcripts in adipose tissue from
several locations. Lobbert et al. (1996) also isolated cDNAs of human
PDE3B and reported similar findings.

GENE FUNCTION

Using male Sprague-Dawley rats implanted with third
intracerebroventricular cannulae, Zhao et al. (2002) found that
cilostamide, a PDE3B inhibitor, reversed the established effects of
leptin (164160) on food intake and body weight; blocked, at the
hypothalamic level, the leptin-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of
signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3; 102582); and
blocked the DNA binding of STAT3 protein. In addition, Zhao et al.
(2002) showed that intracerebroventricular administration of leptin
increased hypothalamic phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K; see 601232)
and PDE3B activities and decreased cAMP concentration. Zhao et al.
(2002) concluded that a PI3K-PDE3B-cAMP pathway interacting with the
JAK2 (147796)-STAT3 pathway constitutes a critical component of leptin
signaling in the hypothalamus.

Regulatory CD4-positive T cells, or Tr cells, prevent self-destructive
immune responses, and their development is critically dependent on FOXP3
(300292). Gavin et al. (2007) studied mouse T cells that actively
transcribed a Foxp3-null allele, but lacked Foxp3 protein. Using flow
cytometric and microarray analyses, they found that, although Foxp3
function was required for Tr suppressor cell activity, Foxp3 largely
amplified and fixed preexisting molecular features of Tr cells.
Furthermore, Foxp3 solidified Tr-cell lineage stability by modifying
cell surface and signaling molecules, including Foxp3-dependent
repression of Pde3b. Introduction of Pde3b into Tr cells and transfer of
these cells to T-cell-deficient mice substantially reduced the number of
Tr cells. Gavin et al. (2007) proposed that reduced PDE3B expression may
be a unique marker of Tr cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Miki et al. (1996) isolated and analyzed genomic clones of human PDE3B.
They found that the PDE3B gene was encoded on 16 exons spanning 114 kb.

MAPPING

Miki et al. (1996) used fluorescence in situ hybridization to localize
the human PDE3B gene to chromosome 11p15. Lobbert et al. (1996)
sublocalized this mapping to 11p15.1-p15.2 using a PCR mapping panel.
They noted evidence suggesting that this chromosomal area harbors genes
involved in obesity and noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Miki et al. (1996) noted the existence of a G/A polymorphism in the
coding region of the PDE3B gene and polymorphic dinucleotide repeats in
2 of the introns.

ANIMAL MODEL

Choi et al. (2006) found that newborn Pde3b-knockout mice exhibited no
obvious physical defects, and their growth, development, behavior, and
fertility appeared normal. Pde3b-knockout mice were slightly heavier
than controls, and they exhibited variations in coat color from white to
yellowish brown. The weight of gonadal adipose tissue was lower in
knockout than wildtype mice, and the mean cell diameter of knockout
adipocytes was smaller than normal. Triglyceride content was
significantly increased in livers of knockout mice and was associated
with increased expression of fatty acid synthase (FASN; 600212).
Pde3b-knockout mice exhibited multiple alterations in regulation of
lipolysis, lipogenesis, and insulin secretion, as well as signs of
peripheral insulin resistance.

NOMENCLATURE

This gene has been referred to as PDE3A. However, it has been assigned
the symbol PDE3B by GDB/HUGO. The symbol PDE3A has been assigned to
myocardial cGMP-inhibited cAMP phosphodiesterase (123805).

REFERENCE 1. Choi, Y. H.; Park, S.; Hockman, S.; Zmuda-Trzebiatowska, E.; Svennelid,
F.; Haluzik, M.; Gavrilova, O.; Ahmad, F.; Pepin, L.; Napolitano,
M.; Taira, M.; Sundler, F.; Holst, L. S.; Degerman, E.; Manganiello,
V. C.: Alterations in regulation of energy homeostasis in cyclic
nucleotide phosphodiesterase 3B-null mice. J. Clin. Invest. 116:
3240-3251, 2006.

2. Gavin, M. A.; Rasmussen, J. P.; Fontenot, J. D.; Vasta, V.; Manganiello,
V. C.; Beavo, J. A.; Rudensky, A. Y.: Foxp3-dependent programme of
regulatory T-cell differentiation. Nature 445: 771-775, 2007.

3. Lobbert, R. W.; Winterpacht, A.; Seipel, B.; Zabel, B. U.: Molecular
cloning and chromosomal assignment of the human homologue of the rat
cGMP-inhibited phosphodiesterase 1 (PDE3A)--a gene involved in fat
metabolism located at 11p15.1. Genomics 37: 211-218, 1996.

4. Miki, T.; Taira, M.; Hockman, S.; Shimada, F.; Lieman, J.; Napolitano,
M.; Ward, D.; Taira, M.; Makino, H.; Manganiello, V. C.: Characterization
of the cDNA and gene encoding human PDE3B, the cGIP1 isoform of the
human cyclic GMP-inhibited cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase family. Genomics 36:
476-485, 1996.

5. Zhao, A. Z.; Huan, J.-N.; Gupta, S.; Pal, R.; Sahu, A.: A phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase-phosphodiesterase 3B-cyclic AMP pathway in hypothalamic action
of leptin on feeding. Nature Neurosci. 5: 727-728, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/14/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/25/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/30/2002

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 10/13/1997

EDITED mgross: 03/14/2007
mgross: 3/14/2007
terry: 3/14/2007
mgross: 1/25/2007
alopez: 10/1/2002
tkritzer: 9/30/2002
carol: 11/7/2001
dkim: 12/8/1998
alopez: 3/24/1998
alopez: 10/22/1997
alopez: 10/13/1997

611217	TITLE *611217 PRADER-WILLI REGION NONCODING RNA 2; PWRN2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for genes in the Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS; 176270) region
on chromosome 15, followed by database analysis and RT-PCR of testis,
Buiting et al. (2007) obtained several PWRN2 transcripts. The
transcripts differed due to alternative splicing and polyadenylation,
and all appeared to be noncoding. RT-PCR detected PWRN2 expression in
testis only.

GENE STRUCTURE

Buiting et al. (2007) determined that the PWRN2 gene contains 3 exons
and spans 7.2 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Buiting et al. (2007) mapped the PWRN2
gene to chromosome 15q11-q13. In addition to the expressed gene, this
region contains 5 partial duplications of PWRN2.

REFERENCE 1. Buiting, K.; Nazlican, H.; Galetzka, D.; Wawrzik, M.; Gross, S.;
Horsthemke, B.: C15orf2 and a novel noncoding transcript from the
Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome region show monoallelic expression
in fetal brain. Genomics 89: 588-595, 2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/17/2007

EDITED mgross: 07/17/2007

602180	TITLE *602180 SIGNAL-INDUCED PROLIFERATION-ASSOCIATED GENE 1; SIPA1
;;SPA1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Hattori et al. (1995) cloned the mouse Spa1 gene based on its inducible
expression in lymphoid cells stimulated with interleukin-2 (147680).

Kurachi et al. (1997) cloned the human SPA1 gene. The gene encodes a
1,042-amino acid polypeptide with a predicted mass of 130 kD. The
protein contains a C-terminal leucine zipper motif and an N-terminal
GTPase activating protein (GAP) domain homologous to the human RAP1GAP
(600278) protein. Human and mouse Spa1 amino acid sequences are 90%
identical, with their GAP domains 98% identical. Human SPA1 was
expressed at high levels in lymphohematopoietic tissues and at lower
levels in several other tissues. The authors noted that SPA1 and RAP1GAP
appeared to have nearly segregate expression patterns. The human SPA1
protein was localized to the perinuclear region.

GENE FUNCTION

Hattori et al. (1995) showed that mouse Spa1 hampers mitogen-induced
cell cycle progression when abnormally or prematurely expressed.

Kurachi et al. (1997) stated that SPA1 colocalized with the RAP1
(179520) and RAP2 (179540) proteins and activated these GTPases.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wada et al. (1997) cloned the mouse genomic Sipa1 gene and found that it
consists of 16 exons.

Ebrahimi et al. (1998) studied the organization of the human SIPA1 gene.

MAPPING

Wada et al. (1997) used fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to map
the human SIPA1 gene to chromosome 11q13.3. Using 2-color FISH, they
determined that the human SIPA1 locus is centromeric to the CCND1
(168461) locus.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hunter et al. (2001) identified a probable metastasis efficiency locus,
called Mtes1, on proximal mouse chromosome 19 (Hunter et al., 2001) in a
10-Mb region orthologous to human 11q12-q13. To identify potential
candidates for underlying Mtes1, Park et al. (2002) used multiple cross
and inbred strain haplotype mapping of the Mtes1 locus in 2 mouse
strains with high metastatic efficiency and 2 with low metastatic
efficiency, which reduced the number of high-priority candidate genes
from about 500 to 23, a more tractable number for further
characterization. Park et al. (2005), using a combination of
bioinformatics, sequence analysis, and in vitro and in vivo experiments,
identified the signal-induced proliferation-associated gene-1 (Sipa1) as
a strong candidate for underlying the Mtes1 locus. The gene was found to
contain a nonsynonymous amino acid polymorphism that affected its Sipa1
Rap-GAP function. Spontaneous metastasis assays using cells ectopically
expressing Sipa1 or cells with knocked-down Sipa1 expression showed that
metastatic capacity was correlated with cellular Sipa1 levels. They also
found that human expression data were consistent with the idea that
Sipa1 concentration has a role in metastasis. Park et al. (2005) stated
that, to their knowledge, this was the first demonstration of a
constitutional genetic polymorphism affecting tumor metastasis.

Ishida et al. (2006) found that Spa1 -/- mice had an age-dependent
increase in B220 (PTPRC; 151460)-expressing B1a lymphocytes producing
anti-double-stranded DNA antibody, an altered variable kappa isotype
repertoire, and lupus-like nephritis. Ishida et al. (2006) proposed that
regulated RAP1 signaling in immature B cells plays a role in modifying
the B-cell repertoire and in maintaining self-tolerance.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Lifsted et al. (1998)
REFERENCE 1. Ebrahimi, S.; Wang, E.; Udar, N.; Arnold, E.; Burbee, D.; Small,
K.; Sawicki, M. P.: Genomic organization and cloning of the human
homologue of murine Sipa-1. Gene 214: 215-221, 1998.

2. Hattori, M.; Tsukamoto, N.; Nur-E-Kamal, M. S. A.; Rubinfeld, B.;
Iwai, K.; Kubota, H.; Maruta, H.; Minato, N.: Molecular cloning of
a novel mitogen-inducible nuclear protein with a Ran GTPase-activating
domain that affects cell cycle progression. Molec. Cell. Biol. 15:
552-560, 1995.

3. Hunter, K. W.; Broman, K. W.; Le Voyer, T.; Lukes, L.; Cozma, D.;
Debies, M. T.; Rouse, J.; Welch, D. R.: Predisposition to efficient
mammary tumor metastatic progression is linked to the breast cancer
metastasis suppressor gene Brms1. Cancer Res. 61: 8866-8872, 2001.

4. Ishida, D.; Su, L.; Tamura, A.; Katayama, Y.; Kawai, Y.; Wang,
S.-F.; Taniwaki, M.; Hamazaki, Y.; Hattori, M.; Minato, N.: Rap1
signal controls B cell receptor repertoire and generation of self-reactive
B1a cells. Immunity 24: 417-427, 2006.

5. Kurachi, H.; Wada, Y.; Tsukamoto, N.; Maeda, M.; Kubota, H.; Hattori,
M.; Iwai, K.; Minato, N.: Human SPA-1 gene product selectively expressed
in lymphoid tissues is a specific GTPase-activating protein for Rap1
and Rap2: segregate expression profiles from a rap1GAP gene product. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 28081-28088, 1997.

6. Lifsted, T.; Le Voyer, T.; Williams, M.; Muller, W.; Klein-Szanto,
A.; Buetow, K. H.; Hunter, K. W.: Identification of inbred mouse
strains harboring genetic modifiers of mammary tumor age of onset
and metastatic progression. Int. J. Cancer 77: 640-644, 1998.

7. Park, Y.-G.; Zhao, X.; Lesueur, F.; Lowy, D. R.; Lancaster, M.;
Pharoah, P.; Qian, X.; Hunter, K. W.: Sipa1 is a candidate for underlying
the metastasis efficiency modifier locus Mtes1. Nature Genet. 37:
1055-1062, 2005.

8. Park, Y. G.; Lukes, L.; Yang, H.; Debies, M. T.; Samant, R. S.;
Welch, D. R.; Lee, M.; Hunter, K. W.: Comparative sequence analysis
in eight inbred strains of the metastasis modifier QTL candidate gene
Brms1. Mammalian Genome 13: 289-292, 2002.

9. Wada, Y.; Kubota, H.; Maeda, M.; Taniwaki, M.; Hattori, M.; Imamura,
S.; Iwai, K.; Minato, N.: Mitogen-inducible SIPA1 is mapped to the
conserved syntenic groups of chromosome 19 in mouse and chromosome
11q13.3 centromeric to BCL1 in human. Genomics 39: 66-73, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/9/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/13/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/16/1998

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 12/12/1997

EDITED mgross: 11/10/2006
terry: 11/9/2006
alopez: 1/24/2006
terry: 12/13/2005
alopez: 10/13/2005
terry: 10/13/2005
terry: 11/19/1998
terry: 11/16/1998
alopez: 1/5/1998
alopez: 12/23/1997
alopez: 12/22/1997

602207	TITLE *602207 RAS-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN RAB18; RAB18
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Rab proteins are members of a family of Ras-related small GTPases that
regulate membrane trafficking in organelles and transport vesicles.

CLONING

By stimulating umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) with histamine
and differential display gene expression analysis, Schafer et al. (2000)
isolated a cDNA encoding RAB18. The deduced 206-amino acid protein
shares 98%, 92%, and 85% identity with the mouse, snail, and worm
sequences, respectively. RAB18 contains totally conserved
phosphate/Mg(2+)-binding motifs and guanine-binding motifs as well as
somewhat variable organelle-targeting regions. Northern blot analysis
detected 2.5- and 1.0-kb transcripts in endothelial cells but not in
smooth muscle cells or leukocytes. RT-PCR analysis suggested ubiquitous
expression, which HPLC analysis determined to be strongest in heart,
kidney, pancreas, lung, and liver, with weak expression in brain,
placenta, and skeletal muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Schafer et al. (2000) reported that stimulation of polarized HUVEC or
nonpolarized mononuclear cells with histamine showed a significant time-
and dose-dependent increase of RAB18 transcript in both cell types,
suggesting a possible role for Rab proteins in inflammation.

MAPPING

McMurtrie et al. (1997) mapped the mouse Rab18 gene to chromosome 18.

Hartz (2009) mapped the RAB18 gene to chromosome 10p12.1 based on an
alignment of the RAB18 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AA216667) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 5 large consanguineous families, 4 Pakistani and
1 Turkish, segregating Warburg Micro syndrome (WARBM3; 614222), Bem et
al. (2011) identified homozygous loss-of-function mutations in the RAB18
gene (602207.0001 and 602207.0002, respectively). Direct sequencing for
RAB18 mutations in 58 additional families segregating Warburg Micro
syndrome detected compound heterozygous mutations
(602207.0003-602207.0004) in affected sibs of 1 family. Bem et al.
(2011) performed nucleotide-binding assays and showed that although
RAB18 bound GDP and GTP comparably to other RABs (RAB5A, 179512; RAB35,
604199), the RAB18 L24Q (602207.0001) and R93del (602207.0003) mutant
proteins did not bind detectable levels of either GDP or GTP and are
therefore functionally null. Bem et al. (2011) noted that the
pathogenicity of these mutations could be explained by their lack of
guanosine nucleotide binding because, as for other RAB proteins, this is
a prerequisite for correct subcellular localization and function.

ANIMAL MODEL

Bem et al. (2011) investigated the effect of knockdown of rab18 in
zebrafish to establish whether rab18 has a conserved role in brain and
eye development. The most common abnormalities observed at 3 days
post-fertilization in both the rab18a and rab18b morphants were
microphthalmia, microcephaly, pericardial edema, delayed jaw formation,
a reduced overall body size, and a general developmental delay. Further
characterization of the rab18b eye phenotype revealed that the rab18b
morphants had delayed retinal development and abnormal retinal
lamination, residual nucleated lens fiber cells, widely open choroid
fissure, and microphthalmia at day 3. To assess the specificity of the
rab18b phenotype, Bem et al. (2011) conducted a rescue experiment by
synthesizing rab18b mRNA. Partial rescue of the eye defects, pericardial
edema, and overall developmental delay was observed at 3 days.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
WARBURG MICRO SYNDROME 3
RAB18, LEU24GLN

In affected members of 4 large consanguineous Pakistani families
segregating Warburg Micro syndrome-3 (614222), Bem et al. (2011)
identified a homozygous founder mutation in the RAB18 gene: a 71T-A
transition resulting in a leu24-to-gln (L24Q) substitution.

.0002
WARBURG MICRO SYNDROME 3
RAB18, EX2DEL

In 2 affected sibs in a consanguineous Turkish family segregating
Warburg Micro syndrome-3 (614222), Bem et al. (2011) identified a
homozygous exon 2 deletion predicted to result in a frameshift. The
parents were heterozygous for the deletion.

.0003
WARBURG MICRO SYNDROME 3
RAB18, 3-BP DEL, NT277

In affected members of a family segregating Warburg Micro syndrome-3
(614222), Bem et al. (2011) identified compound heterozygous mutations
in the RAB18 gene: a 3-bp deletion (277_279del) resulting in deletion of
arginine-93 (R93del), and an antitermination mutation, a 619T-C
transition resulting in a ter207-to-gln (X207Q; 602207.0004)
substitution, predicted to extend RAB18 by 20 amino acids (X207QextX20)
and thus abolish C-terminal prenylation and membrane targeting.

.0004
WARBURG MICRO SYNDROME 3
RAB18, TER207GLN

See 602207.0003 and Bem et al. (2011).

REFERENCE 1. Bem, D.; Yoshimura, S.-I.; Nunes-Bastos, R.; Bond, F. C.; Kurian,
M. A.; Rahman, F.; Handley, M. T. W.; Hadzhiev, Y.; Masood, I.; Straatman-Iwanowska,
A. A.; Cullinane, A. R.; McNeill, A.; and 15 others: Loss-of-function
mutations in RAB18 cause Warburg Micro syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 88:
499-507, 2011. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 88: 678 only, 2011.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/28/2009.

3. McMurtrie, E. B.; Barbosa, M. D. F. S.; Zerial, M.; Kingsmore,
S. F.: Rab17 and Rab18, small GTPases with specificity for polarized
epithelial cells: genetic mapping in the mouse. Genomics 45: 623-625,
1997.

4. Schafer, U.; Seibold, S.; Schneider, A.; Neugebauer, E.: Isolation
and characterisation of the human rab18 gene after stimulation of
endothelial cells with histamine. FEBS Lett. 466: 148-154, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Nara Sobreira - updated: 9/12/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/16/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/18/1997

EDITED carol: 09/29/2011
terry: 9/14/2011
carol: 9/14/2011
terry: 9/12/2011
carol: 10/28/2009
carol: 10/27/2009
mgross: 1/23/2001
terry: 1/16/2001
carol: 12/14/2000
mark: 12/18/1997

602153	TITLE *602153 KERATIN 81; KRT81
;;KERATIN, HAIR, BASIC, 1; KRTHB1;;
KERATIN, HARD, TYPE II, 1; HB1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

See KRTHA1 (601077) for general information on hair keratins.

CLONING

By screening a human scalp cDNA library with a mouse Hb4 (see 602766)
cDNA, Rogers et al. (1995) isolated a cDNA encoding KRTHB1, or HB1. The
predicted 495-amino acid HB1 protein has an 88-amino acid C-terminal
domain. The amino acid sequences of human and sheep HB1 are 90%
identical. Northern blot analysis detected HB1 transcripts in human
scalp but not unhaired breast epidermis.

Rogers et al. (1997) found that the amino acid sequences of HB1, HB3
(602765), HB5 (602767), and HB6 are highly conserved, with the
similarity extending beyond the alpha-helical region into the N-terminal
and proximal C-terminal domains. HB1 is more closely related to HB3 and
HB6 than to HB5. In situ hybridization studies demonstrated that type II
keratin genes are sequentially activated in the hair follicle in the
following order: HB5--(HB1, HB3)--HB6. Both HB1 and HB3 mRNA syntheses
begin 10 to 15 cell layers above the apex of the dermal papilla and end
abruptly in the middle of the cortex.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bowden et al. (1998) determined the complete genomic sequence of HB1.
The HB1 gene has 9 exons and spans about 5.6 kb from the translational
initiation ATG codon to the poly(A) site. Its upstream regulatory
sequences contain a LEF1 (153245)-binding site, which is found is other
hair keratin genes. The HB1 gene is located about 10 kb from the HB6
(601928) gene.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Rogers et al. (1995) and Bowden
et al. (1998) mapped the HB1 gene to 12q13.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Monilethrix (158000) is a rare dominant hair disease characterized by
beaded or moniliform hair that results from the periodic thinning of the
hair shaft and shows a high propensity to excess weathering and
fracturing. Several monilethrix families have been linked to the type II
keratin gene cluster on 12q13, and causative heterozygous mutations of
highly conserved glutamic acid residues, glu413 to lys (601928.0001) and
glu413 to asp (601928.0002), in the helix termination motif of the type
II hair keratin HB6 have been identified. Winter et al. (1997)
investigated 2 unrelated monilethrix families. Whereas affected members
of 1 family and another single unrelated patient exhibited the
glu413-to-lys mutation in HB6, the second family showed a lysine
substitution of the corresponding glutamic acid residue, glu413
(602153.0001), in the type II hair keratin HB1, suggesting that this
site represents a mutation hotspot in these highly related type II hair
keratins. Both HB1 and HB6 are largely coexpressed in cortical
trichocytes of the hair shaft. Winter et al. (1997) concluded that
monilethrix is a disease of the hair cortex.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MONILETHRIX
KRT81, GLU413LYS

In both affected members of a 3-generation Canadian family with
monilethrix (158000), Winter et al. (1997) identified a G-to-A
transition in the HB1 gene product, resulting in a change of glutamic
acid to lysine at codon 413. The mutation was also detected in one
apparently unaffected individual.

This mutation was originally designated GLU403LYS because of a mistake
in the numbering of the amino acids of hair keratin HB1 between residues
305 and 325 (Rogers et al., 1995).

.0002
MONILETHRIX
KRT81, GLU402LYS

In a French family segregating monilethrix (158000), Winter et al.
(1998) found a lysine substitution of another highly conserved glutamic
acid residue, glu402, in the EIATYRRLLEGEE motif of HB1. Family members
bearing the glu402-to-lys mutation exhibited a particularly variable
disease phenotype. Affected members included 2 infants, 1 with
pronounced dystrophic alopecia, follicular keratosis, and clear-cut
moniliform hair, and 1 with no hair loss at all and moniliform hair
detectable only by electron microscopy. There was also an adult
individual without any clinically or electron microscopically detectable
signs, but with clear historical proof of the disease. Analysis of
'archival hairs' removed during childhood clearly demonstrated the
beaded hair type. Winter et al. (1998) believed that this was the first
demonstration of a moniliform hair phenotype in childhood with
improvement thereafter, becoming unidentifiable at a later age.

REFERENCE 1. Bowden, P. E.; Hainey, S. D.; Parker, G.; Jones, D. O.; Zimonjic,
D.; Popescu, N.; Hodgins, M. B.: Characterization and chromosomal
localization of human hair-specific keratin genes and comparative
expression during the hair growth cycle. J. Invest. Derm. 110: 158-164,
1998.

2. Rogers, M. A.; Langbein, L.; Praetzel, S.; Moll, I.; Krieg, T.;
Winter, H.; Schweizer, J.: Sequences and differential expression
of three novel human type-II hair keratins. Differentiation 61:
187-194, 1997.

3. Rogers, M. A.; Nischt, R.; Korge, B.; Krieg, T.; Fink, T. M.; Lichter,
P.; Winter, H.; Schweizer, J.: Sequence data and chromosomal localization
of human type I and type II hair keratin genes. Exp. Cell Res. 220:
357-362, 1995.

4. Winter, H.; Labreze, C.; Chapalain, V.; Surleve-Bazeille, J. E.;
Mercier, M.; Rogers, M. A.; Taieb, A.; Schweizer, J.: A variable
monilethrix phenotype associated with a novel mutation, glu402lys,
in the helix termination motif of the type II hair keratin hHb1. J.
Invest. Derm. 111: 169-172, 1998.

5. Winter, H.; Rogers, M. A.; Gebhardt, M.; Wollina, U.; Boxall, L.;
Chitayat, D.; Babul-Hirji, R.; Stevens, H. P.; Zlotogorski, A.; Schweizer,
J.: A new mutation in the type II hair cortex keratin hHb1 involved
in the inherited hair disorder monilethrix. Hum. Genet. 101: 165-169,
1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Patti M. Sherman - updated: 7/14/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/9/1997

EDITED carol: 03/26/2008
terry: 8/3/2005
carol: 9/1/1998
terry: 8/26/1998
carol: 7/22/1998
carol: 7/20/1998
carol: 7/14/1998
psherman: 7/8/1998
alopez: 6/23/1998
alopez: 5/21/1998
mark: 12/9/1997

125255	TITLE *125255 DECORIN; DCN
;;PROTEOGLYCAN II;;
PG II;;
PG40
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Decorin and biglycan (301870) are related but distinct small
proteoglycans found in many connective tissues. Using Northern blot
analysis or RT-PCR, Danielson et al. (1993) detected the 2 alternatively
spliced leader exons of the DCN gene in a variety of mRNAs isolated from
human cell lines and tissues. Sequences highly homologous (74-87%) to
exons Ia and Ib were found in the 5-prime untranslated region of avian
and bovine decorin, respectively. This high degree of conservation among
species suggested regulatory functions for these leader exons. In situ
hybridization studies of developing mouse embryos suggested that decorin
may play a role in epithelial/mesenchymal interactions during organ
development and shaping (Scholzen et al., 1994).

GENE STRUCTURE

Danielson et al. (1993) found that the human decorin gene spans more
than 38 kb and contains 8 exons and very large introns, 2 of which are
5.4 and more than 13.2 kb. They discovered 2 alternatively spliced
leader exons, Ia and Ib, in the 5-prime untranslated region.

MAPPING

By Southern analysis of a panel of human-rodent somatic cell hybrid DNAs
with cDNA probes, McBride et al. (1990) assigned the DCN gene to
chromosome 12. Regionalization to 12p12.1-qter was obtained by examining
hybrids containing spontaneous breaks or well-characterized
translocations involving chromosome 12. Hybridization with subfragment
cDNA probes suggested the presence of 2 copies of the DCN gene, or
related sequences, at the locus on chromosome 12, although there was no
evidence for the function of more than one DCN gene. By in situ
hybridization, Pulkkinen et al. (1992) placed the DCN gene at 12q21-q22.
Vetter et al., (1993) mapped the human decorin gene by in situ
hybridization to 12q21.3. Using a genomic clone as the labeled probe and
in situ hybridization, Danielson et al. (1993) mapped the DCN gene to
12q23. They specifically noted that there were 4 times as many grains
centered on 12q23 as on 12q21, where Pulkkinen et al. (1992) had placed
the probable site. In a study of candidate genes for Noonan syndrome
(163950), Ion et al. (2000) reassigned the map position of DCN to
12q13.2 using FISH. Scholzen et al. (1994) assigned the homologous gene
in the mouse to chromosome 10, using interspecific backcrossing.

GENE FUNCTION

Vogel and Clark (1989) found little evidence that the metabolism of
either decorin or biglycan is altered by abnormalities in the structure
or secretion of types I and III collagen. In a presumably homozygous
case of the Marfan syndrome (154700) reported by Schollin et al. (1988),
Pulkkinen et al. (1990) found markedly decreased level of mRNA for
decorin, markedly decreased decorin polypeptide in the culture medium of
fibroblasts from the infant, and deficient effect of interleukin-1-beta
(147720) on the transcription of decorin as tested in these fibroblasts.
In 3 of 12 other unrelated Marfan patients, they also found deficient
decorin expression.

Dyne et al. (1996) studied 2 patients with osteogenesis imperfecta and
the same gly415-to-ser mutation of the COL1A1 gene (120150.0044), but a
different clinical expression. They speculated that these differences
could be the result of abnormalities in other connective tissue
proteins. Since decorin is a component of connective tissue, binds to
type I collagen fibrils, and plays a role in matrix assembly, they
studied decorin production in skin fibroblasts from these 2 patients.
Cultured fibroblasts from the patient with extremely severe osteogenesis
imperfecta (classified as type II/III) were found to secrete barely
detectable amounts of decorin into culture medium. Northern blot
analysis showed decorin mRNA levels below the limit of detection. The
patient with a less severe phenotype had fibroblasts that expressed
decorin normally. Dyne et al. (1996) suggested that the different
clinical phenotypes could be due to the differing genetic backgrounds of
the patients, such that in the more severely affected patient the
absence of decorin aggravated the clinical phenotype.

When expressed ectopically, decorin is capable of suppressing the growth
of various tumor cell lines. Moscatello et al. (1998) demonstrated that
it induced a marked growth suppression in A431 squamous carcinoma cells,
when either exogenously added or endogenously produced by a transgene.
Decorin caused rapid phosphorylation of the EGF receptor (131550) and a
concurrent activation of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase signal
pathway. Thus, EGF and decorin converge functionally to regulate the
cell cycle through activation of a common pathway that ultimately leads
to growth suppression.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a family with congenital stromal corneal dystrophy (CSCD; 610048),
Bredrup et al. (2005) identified a heterozygous 1-bp deletion in the
last exon, which they erroneously labeled exon 10 (Rodahl, 2009), of the
DCN gene (125255.0001). The deletion was found in all affected family
members but not in any healthy family member or in 200 normal controls.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CORNEAL DYSTROPHY, CONGENITAL STROMAL
DCN, 1-BP DEL, 967T

In a Norwegian family originally reported by Odland (1968) with
congenital stromal corneal dystrophy (CSCD; 610048), Bredrup et al.
(2005) identified a heterozygous 1-bp deletion (967delT) in the last
exon, which they erroneously labeled exon 10 (Rodahl, 2009), of the DCN
gene. The mutation was predicted to lead to a frameshift, alteration of
4 amino acids, and loss of the C-terminal 33 amino acids (S323fsX5).
Bredrup et al. (2005) postulated that the defective interaction of
mutant decorin with collagen would disturb the regularity of corneal
collagen in affected heterozygotes.

REFERENCE 1. Bredrup, C.; Knappskog, P. M.; Majewski, J.; Rodahl, E.; Boman,
H.: Congenital stromal dystrophy of the cornea caused by a mutation
in the decorin gene. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 46: 420-426, 2005.

2. Danielson, K. G.; Fazzio, A.; Cohen, I.; Cannizzaro, L. A.; Eichstetter,
I.; Iozzo, R. V.: The human decorin gene: intron-exon organization,
discovery of two alternatively spliced exons in the 5-prime untranslated
region, and mapping of the gene to chromosome 12q23. Genomics 15:
146-160, 1993.

3. Dyne, K. M.; Valli, M.; Forlino, A.; Mottes, M.; Kresse, H.; Cetta,
G.: Deficient expression of the small proteoglycan decorin in a case
of severe/lethal osteogenesis imperfecta. Am. J. Med. Genet. 63:
161-166, 1996.

4. Ion, A.; Crosby, A. H.; Kremer, H.; Kenmochi, N.; Van Reen, M.;
Fenske, C.; Van Der Burgt, I.; Brunner, H. G.; Montgomery, K.: Detailed
mapping, mutation analysis, and intragenic polymorphism identification
in candidate Noonan syndrome genes MYL2, DCN, EPS8, and RPL6. J.
Med. Genet. 37: 884-886, 2000.

5. McBride, O. W.; Fisher, L. W.; Young, M. F.: Localization of PGI
(biglycan, BGN) and PGII (decorin, DCN, PG-40) genes on human chromosomes
Xq13-qter and 12q, respectively. Genomics 6: 219-255, 1990.

6. Moscatello, D. K.; Santra, M.; Mann, D. M.; McQuillan, D. J.; Wong,
A. J.; Iozzo, R. V.: Decorin suppresses tumor cell growth by activating
the epidermal growth factor receptor. J. Clin. Invest. 101: 406-412,
1998.

7. Odland, M.: Dystrophia corneae parenchymatosa congenita: a clinical,
morphological and histochemical examination. Acta Ophthal. 46: 477-485,
1968.

8. Pulkkinen, L.; Alitalo, T.; Krusius, T.; Peltonen, L.: Expression
of decorin in human tissues and cell lines and defined chromosomal
assignment of the gene locus (DCN). Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 60: 107-111,
1992.

9. Pulkkinen, L.; Kainulainen, K.; Krusius, T.; Makinen, P.; Schollin,
J.; Gustavsson, K.-H.; Peltonen, L.: Deficient expression of the
gene coding for decorin in a lethal form of Marfan syndrome. J. Biol.
Chem. 265: 17780-17785, 1990.

10. Rodahl, E.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/11/2009.

11. Schollin, J.; Bjarke, B.; Gustavson, K.-H.: Probable homozygotic
form of the Marfan syndrome in a newborn child. Acta Paediat. Scand. 77:
452-456, 1988.

12. Scholzen, T.; Solursh, M.; Suzuki, S.; Reiter, R.; Morgan, J.
L.; Buchberg, A. M.; Siracusa, L. D.; Iozzo, R. V.: The murine decorin:
complete cDNA cloning, genomic organization, chromosomal assignment,
and expression during organogenesis and tissue differentiation. J.
Biol. Chem. 269: 28270-28281, 1994.

13. Vetter, U.; Vogel, W.; Just, W.; Young, M. F.; Fisher, L. W.:
Human decorin gene: intron-exon junctions and chromosomal localization. Genomics 15:
161-168, 1993.

14. Vogel, K. G.; Clark, P. E.: Small proteoglycan synthesis by skin
fibroblasts cultured from elderly donors and patients with defined
defects in types I and III collagen metabolism. Europ. J. Cell Biol. 49:
236-243, 1989.

CONTRIBUTORS Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 4/13/2006
Michael J. Wright  - updated: 5/21/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/26/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/25/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/11/1990

EDITED carol: 02/06/2013
carol: 6/8/2012
joanna: 3/11/2009
alopez: 4/13/2006
alopez: 5/21/2001
carol: 1/29/1999
terry: 1/26/1999
carol: 12/29/1998
dkim: 7/24/1998
alopez: 3/25/1998
terry: 3/19/1998
terry: 1/31/1995
carol: 2/11/1993
carol: 8/14/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 12/10/1990
carol: 12/3/1990

116890	TITLE *116890 CATHEPSIN E; CTSE
;;CATE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cathepsin E, an endolysosomal aspartic proteinase predominantly
expressed in cells of the immune system, has an important role in immune
responses (Yanagawa et al., 2007).

CLONING

Taggart et al. (1989) used sets of complementary oligonucleotide probes
specific for the highly conserved active site region of aspartic
proteinases to isolate cDNA clones encoding novel enzymes of this class.
They identified 6 classes of cDNA clones in a gastric adenocarcinoma
cDNA library using a set of 18-mer probes. One of the cDNAs, designated
AGS402, was shown by DNA analysis to correspond to the predicted coding
sequence of cathepsin E. Couvreur et al. (1989, 1990) also isolated a
full-length CTSE cDNA clone from a gastric adenocarcinoma cDNA library.

Azuma et al. (1989, 1989) reported the amino acid sequence of CTSE
predicted on the basis of the cDNA sequence and compared the sequence
with that of other aspartic proteinases. Azuma et al. (1992)
demonstrated that multiple transcripts result from alternative
polyadenylation of the primary transcripts of the single CTSE gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

Azuma et al. (1992) determined that the CTSE gene contains 9 exons and
spans 17.5 kb. The size and placement of the exons are highly conserved
relative to other aspartic proteinases.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis, Taggart et al. (1989) mapped the CTSE
gene to chromosome 1. Azuma et al. (1989, 1989) also assigned the CTSE
gene to chromosome 1.

Couvreur et al. (1989, 1990) mapped the CTSE gene to chromosome
1q23-qter by analysis of human/rodent hybrid cell lines containing
different X;1 translocations. CTSE was further localized to chromosome
1q31 by in situ hybridization.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yanagawa et al. (2007) found that cathepsin E deficiency in mice
resulted in a lysosome storage disorder in macrophages that was
characterized by accumulation of major lysosomal membrane
sialoglycoproteins, including Lamp1 (153330), Lamp2 (309060), and Limp2
(SCARB2; 602257), and elevated lysosomal pH. Trafficking of soluble
lysosomal proteins to lysosomes was also partially impaired in Cate -/-
macrophages. Treatment of wildtype macrophages with a cathepsin E
inhibitor also led to accumulation of these lysosomal proteins and
elevated pH. Since vacuolar-type H(+) ATPase (see 603097) activity was
not altered in Cate -/- macrophages, Yanagawa et al. (2007) hypothesized
that the elevated lysosomal pH in Cate -/- macrophages was likely due to
the accumulation of the highly acidic lysosomal sialoglycoproteins.

REFERENCE 1. Azuma, T.; Liu, W. G.; Vander Laan, D. J.; Bowcock, A. M.; Taggart,
R. T.: Human gastric cathepsin E gene: multiple transcripts result
from alternative polyadenylation of the primary transcripts of a single
gene locus at 1q31-q32. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 1609-1614, 1992.

2. Azuma, T.; Pals, G.; Mohandas, T. K.; Couvreur, J. M.; Taggart,
R. T.: Cathepsin E: molecular cloning and characterization using
aspartyl proteinase active site probes. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 45
(suppl.): A171 only, 1989.

3. Azuma, T.; Pals, G.; Mohandas, T. K.; Couvreur, J. M.; Taggart,
R. T.: Human gastric cathepsin E: predicted sequence, localization
to chromosome 1, and sequence homology with other aspartic proteinases. J.
Biol. Chem. 264: 16748-16753, 1989.

4. Couvreur, J. M.; Azuma, T.; Miller, D. A.; Rocchi, M.; Mohandas,
T. K.; Boudi, F. A.; Taggart, R. T.: Assignment of cathepsin E (CTSE)
to human chromosome region 1q31 by in situ hybridization and analysis
of somatic cell hybrids. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 53: 137-139, 1990.

5. Couvreur, J. M.; Johnson, M. P.; Azuma, T.; Boudi, F. A.; Rocchi,
M.; Mohandas, T. K.; Miller, D. A.; Taggart, R. T.: Cathepsin E:
localization of a single gene locus to 1q31 by restriction analysis
of X;1 translocation somatic cell hybrids, and in situ hybridization.
(Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 45 (suppl.): A135 only, 1989.

6. Taggart, R. T.; Azuma, T.; Couvreur, J. M.; Mohandas, T. K.: Isolation
and mapping genes identified with probes specific for the conserved
active site of aspartic proteinases. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51:
1088 only, 1989.

7. Yanagawa, M.; Tsukuba, T.; Nishioku, T.; Okamoto, Y.; Okamoto,
K.; Takii, R.; Terada, Y.; Nakayama, K. I.; Kadowaki, T.; Yamamoto,
K.: Cathepsin E deficiency induces a novel form of lysosomal storage
disorder showing the accumulation of lysosomal membrane sialoglycoproteins
and the elevation of lysosomal pH in macrophages. J. Biol. Chem. 282:
1851-1862, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/25/2007

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1989

EDITED mgross: 10/03/2007
mgross: 10/3/2007
terry: 9/25/2007
carol: 1/13/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 9/28/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990
carol: 12/1/1989
carol: 11/10/1989

610348	TITLE *610348 FAMILY WITH SEQUENCE SIMILARITY 178, MEMBER A; FAM178A
;;CHROMOSOME 10 OPEN READING FRAME 6; C10ORF6
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Nikali et al. (2002) isolated C10ORF6 cDNA by database analysis of
expressed sequences in the chromosome 10q24 region. The deduced
1,173-amino acid protein has a predicted molecular weight of 132 kD and
contains an SH3 domain. PCR analysis detected ubiquitous expression in
human fetal tissues with highest levels in skeletal muscle, moderate
levels in lung, kidney, spleen, and thymus, and lowest levels in brain,
liver and heart. Northern blot analysis detected a 7.5-kb transcript in
all adult human tissues examined.

GENE STRUCTURE

Nikali et al. (2002) determined that the C10ORF6 gene contains 20 exons
spanning 53 kb.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Nikali et al. (2002) mapped the C10ORF6 gene to
chromosome 10q24.

REFERENCE 1. Nikali, K.; Saharinen, J.; Peltonen, L.: cDNA cloning, expression
profile, and genomic structure of a novel human transcript on chromosome
10q24, and its analyses as a candidate gene for infantile onset spinocerebellar
ataxia. Gene 299: 111-115, 2002.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 8/22/2006

EDITED mgross: 09/19/2008
wwang: 11/21/2006
wwang: 8/22/2006

609290	TITLE *609290 ADENYLATE KINASE 3; AK3
;;ADENYLATE KINASE 3-LIKE 1, FORMERLY; AK3L1, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using primers based on the conserved region of mitochondrial Ak3 cDNA
from bovine, rat, and mouse, followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE, Noma
et al. (2001) cloned human AK3 from a liver cDNA library. The deduced
227-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 25.6 kD. AK3
shares 57.4% amino acid identity with AK4 (AK3L1; 103030). It shares
75%, 90%, and 91% amino acid identity with bovine, rat, and mouse Ak3,
respectively. Northern blot analysis detected a 3.2-kb transcript in all
tissues examined. Expression was highest in heart, liver, and skeletal
muscle, moderate in kidney and pancreas, and weak in brain, placenta,
and lung. Transcripts of 5, 1.8, and 1.35 kb were detected in heart,
liver, and pancreas. Western blot analysis detected AK3 at an apparent
molecular mass of 28 kD in all tissues examined. Subcellular
fractionation of mouse liver and kidney detected Ak3 in the
mitochondrial fraction.

GENE FUNCTION

Noma et al. (2001) assayed recombinant AK3 expressed in E. coli and
showed that the enzyme had GTP:ATP phosphotransferase activity. Human
embryonic kidney cells had endogenous phosphotransferase activity, which
increased following transfection of AK3 cDNA.

MAPPING

By study of somatic cell hybrids, Povey et al. (1976) assigned the AK3
gene to chromosome 9. The smallest region of overlap for AK3 was
estimated to be 9p24-p13 (Robson and Meera Khan, 1982).

By interspecific backcross linkage analysis, Pilz et al. (1995) mapped
the Ak3 gene to mouse chromosome 4.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Cook et al. (1976); Mohandas et al. (1979); Steinbach and Benz (1983);
Wilson et al. (1976)
REFERENCE 1. Cook, P. J. L.; Buckton, K. E.; Spowart, G.: Family studies on
chromosome 9. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 16: 284-288, 1976.

2. Mohandas, T.; Sparkes, R. S.; Sparkes, M. C.; Shulkin, J. D.; Toomey,
K. E.; Funderburk, S. J.: Regional localization of human gene loci
on chromosome 9: studies of somatic cell hybrids containing human
translocation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 31: 586-600, 1979.

3. Noma, T.; Fujisawa, K.; Yamashiro, Y.; Shinohara, M.; Nakazawa,
A.; Gondo, T.; Ishihara, T.; Yoshinobu, K.: Structure and expression
of human mitochondrial adenylate kinase targeted to the mitochondrial
matrix. Biochem. J. 358: 225-232, 2001.

4. Pilz, A.; Woodward, K.; Povey, S.; Abbott, C.: Comparative mapping
of 50 human chromosome 9 loci in the laboratory mouse. Genomics 25:
139-149, 1995.

5. Povey, S.; Slaughter, C. A.; Wilson, D. E.; Gormley, I. P.; Buckton,
K. E.; Perry, P.; Bobrow, M.: Evidence for the assignment of the
loci AK 1, AK 3 and ACON to chromosome 9 in man. Ann. Hum. Genet. 39:
413-422, 1976.

6. Robson, E. B.; Meera Khan, P.: Report of the committee on the
genetic constitution of chromosomes 7, 8, and 9. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 32: 144-152, 1982.

7. Steinbach, P.; Benz, R.: Demonstration of gene dosage effects
for AK3 and GALT in fibroblasts from a fetus with 9p trisomy. Hum.
Genet. 63: 290-291, 1983.

8. Wilson, D. E., Jr.; Povey, S.; Harris, H.: Adenylate kinases in
man: evidence for a third locus. Ann. Hum. Genet. 39: 305-313, 1976.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/31/2005

EDITED mgross: 04/12/2005
mgross: 3/31/2005

613396	TITLE *613396 DOWN SYNDROME CRITICAL REGION GENE 8; DSCR8
;;MALIGNANT MELANOMA-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; MMA1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using array analysis to identify genes differentially expressed in
metastatic and nonmetastatic human melanoma cell lines, followed by EST
database analysis and PCR, de Wit et al. (2002) cloned 2 splice variants
of DSCR8, which they called MMA1A and MMA1B. The full-length 91-amino
acid MMA1A protein has a calculated molecular mass of 10 kD. It has 3
phosphorylation sites and 1 N-myristoylation site. The MMA1B transcript
lacks exon 3 and encodes a deduced 37-amino acid protein that has a
calculated molecular mass of 4 kD. MMA1B has a single phosphorylation
site. RT-PCR analysis of 20 tissues detected both MMA1 transcripts in
testis, but not in any other tissue examined. Nested PCR revealed low
levels of MMA1A and/or MMA1B in some other tissues.

Using RT-PCR, de Wit et al. (2005) identified 4 additional MMA1 splice
variants, which they designated MMA1C through MMA1F, in malignant
melanomas. These transcripts differ in the presence or absence of exon 3
and in selection of alternate splice sites in intron 2. Alternative
splicing changes the lengths of exons 2 and 3 and the reading frame. The
deduced proteins contain 41 to 97 amino acids. Nested PCR analysis
revealed MMA1C through MMA1E in testis, but not in any other normal
tissue examined. MMA1F was detected in only 1 malignant melanoma sample,
suggesting that the splice site used in MMA1F may be the result of
mutation. Database analysis revealed orthologs of MMA1 only in
chimpanzee.

Dunn et al. (2006) found that the DSCR4 (604829) and DSCR8 genes were
transcribed from a bidirectional promoter and showed a similar pattern
of expression. RT-PCR followed by Southern blot analysis detected 2
DSCR4 transcripts and 4 DSCR8 transcripts in prostate, skeletal muscle,
testis, and placenta. Robust expression of DSCR4 alone was detected in
thymus, and low levels of DSCR8 alone were detected in brain, kidney,
and bone marrow. Both DSCR4 and DSCR8 transcripts were also detected in
placenta and testicular teratoma cell lines, but not in HeLa cells. Dunn
et al. (2006) found that DSCR4 and DSCR8 appeared to evolve exclusively
in primates, although DSCR4 was not found in Old World monkeys. The
bidirectional promoter also appeared to be highly conserved in primates.

GENE FUNCTION

Using PCR analysis, de Wit et al. (2002) detected MMA1A and MMA1B
transcripts in 20% of primary melanomas and in about 30% of melanoma
metastasis, suggesting that expression emerges during malignant
progression. PCR analysis also detected MMA1 in some tumor lesions of
ileum, esophagus, and mammary gland, in several malignant melanoma cell
lines, and in tumor cell lines of lung, liver, colon, and bladder.

By examining MMA1 expression in a melanocytic tumor progression series,
de Wit et al. (2005) found that all MMA1 splice variants were preferably
expressed in the most advanced stage, malignant melanoma.

GENE STRUCTURE

De Wit et al. (2002) determined that the DSCR8 gene contains 4 exons and
spans 35 kb. Exon 1 is noncoding.

De Wit et al. (2005) determined that the promoter region of the DSCR8
gene lacks a conventional TATA box or CAAT site, but it contains
putative binding sites for several transcription factors. A CpG island
overlaps the promoter region and exon 1. Exon 3 contains an Alu element.

Dunn et al. (2006) identified a bidirectional promoter between the DSCR4
and DSCR8 genes, which are transcribed in opposite directions. Their
transcription initiation sites and first exons map within a composite
endogenous retrovirus (ERV) element, where an ERV1 long terminal repeat
(LTR) was inserted into and split an older ERV-L LTR. Both genes are
rich in repetitive sequences throughout their lengths: exon 2 of DSCR4
is derived entirely from an ERV-LTR, while DSCR8 exon 2 contains a short
MIR fragment, and DSCR8 exon 3 is entirely derived from an Alu element.
The LTR of the bidirectional promoter contains 2 putative SP1
(189906)-binding sites and a cAMP response element, and it was highly
active in functional studies, showing multiple positive and negative
regulatory elements.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, de Wit et al. (2002) mapped the DSCR8 gene
to chromosome 21q22.2.

REFERENCE 1. de Wit, N. J. W.; Cornelissen, I. M. H. A.; Diepstra, J. H. S.;
Weidle, U. H.; Ruiter, D. J.; van Muijen, G. N. P.: The MMA1 gene
family of cancer-testis antigens has multiple alternative splice variants:
characterization of their expression profile, the genomic organization,
and transcript properties. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 42: 10-21, 2005.

2. de Wit, N. J. W.; Weidle, U. H.; Ruiter, D. J.; van Muijen, G.
N. P.: Expression profiling of MMA-1A and splice variant MMA-1B:
new cancer/testis antigens identified in human melanoma. Int. J.
Cancer 98: 547-553, 2002.

3. Dunn, C. A.; Romanish, M. T.; Gutierrez, L. E.; van de Lagemaat,
L. N.; Mager, D. L.: Transcription of two human genes from a bidirectional
endogenous retrovirus promoter. Gene 366: 335-342, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/4/2010

EDITED terry: 12/06/2010
mgross: 5/4/2010

606818	TITLE *606818 DIPEPTIDYL PEPTIDASE III; DPP3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DPP3 (EC 3.4.14.4) is one of the dipeptidyl aminopeptidases that remove
N-terminal dipeptides from physiologically active peptides such as
angiotensin (see 106150) or enkephalin (131330).

CLONING

Fukasawa et al. (1999) isolated a partial DPP3 cDNA clone from a
placenta cDNA library, using antibody to the purified protein as probe.
By mass spectrometry, Abramic et al. (2000) determined that the
molecular mass of full-length DPP3 is 82.5 kD; by SDS-PAGE, the apparent
molecular mass is 81.2 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

By mutation and enzyme analysis of the rat recombinant DPP3 protein,
Fukasawa et al. (1999) found that DPP3 shows zinc-dependent
metalloprotease activity and contains a conserved HELLGH motif with
similarity to the zincin HExxH consensus motif. Abramic et al. (2000)
noted that whereas the enzymes purified from rat and human erythrocytes
show the same molecular mass, pI, and enzyme substrates, they differ
significantly in their temperature stability, pH optima, kinetic
parameters, and sensitivity to divalent cations, sulfhydryl reagents,
and microbial protease inhibitors.

MAPPING

Fukasawa et al. (2000) mapped the DPP3 gene to chromosome 11q12-q13.1 by
FISH.

REFERENCE 1. Abramic, M.; Schleuder, D.; Dolovcak, L.; Schroder, W.; Strupat,
K.; Sagi, D.; Peter-Katalini, J.; Vitale, L.: Human and rat dipeptidyl
peptidase III: biochemical and mass spectrometric arguments for similarities
and differences. Biol. Chem. 381: 1233-1243, 2000.

2. Fukasawa, K.; Fukasawa, K. M.; Iwamoto, H.; Hirose, J.; Harada,
M.: The HELLGH motif of rat liver dipeptidyl peptidase III is involved
in zinc coordination and the catalytic activity of the enzyme. Biochemistry 38:
8299-8303, 1999.

3. Fukasawa, K. M.; Fukasawa, K.; Harada, M.: Assignment of the dipeptidyl
peptidase III gene (DPP3) to human chromosome 11 band q12-q13.1 by
in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 88: 99-100, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/3/2002

EDITED wwang: 10/14/2008
carol: 4/4/2002
carol: 4/3/2002

180460	TITLE *180460 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN S6; RPS6
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Ribosomal protein S6 is the major substrate of protein kinases (e.g.,
300075) in eukaryotic ribosomes. Heinze et al. (1988) used polyclonal
antibodies directed against a synthetic octopeptide of the
phosphorylation site of the ribosomal protein S6 of rat liver to screen
a lambda-gt11 cDNA expression library of human lymphoblasts. In this way
an S6-specific clone was isolated. It consisted of the complete coding
sequence of 747 bases. The sequence of 249 amino acids deduced from the
nucleotide sequence showed a high degree of similarity to that of rat
liver S6. Southern blot analysis of human genomic DNA suggested that
multiple genes exist for the S6 protein. Independently, Lott and Mackie
(1988) cloned human RPS6 cDNAs using oligonucleotides based on the rat
Rps6 and yeast Rps10 amino acid sequences.

By Northern blot analysis using a rat Rps6 probe, Pogue-Geile et al.
(1991) found increased levels of RPS6 mRNA in 3 of 3 human colorectal
tumors and 2 of 4 human colon polyps relative to matched normal colonic
mucosa. RPS6 is expressed as an approximately 820-bp transcript.

GENE STRUCTURE

Antoine and Fried (1992) demonstrated that the RPS6 gene is 3,979 bp
long and comprises 6 exons.

MAPPING

Using a PCR product for the analysis of rodent/human somatic cell
hybrids, Feo et al. (1992) mapped the RPS6 gene to 9pter-p13. By
fluorescence in situ hybridization, Antoine and Fried (1992)
sublocalized the RPS6 gene to 9p21. Kenmochi et al. (1998) confirmed the
mapping assignment reported by Antoine and Fried (1992).

ANIMAL MODEL

Because ribosome biogenesis plays an essential role in cell
proliferation, control mechanisms may have evolved to recognize lesions
in this critical anabolic process. To test this possibility, Volarevic
et al. (2000) conditionally deleted the gene encoding 40S ribosomal
protein S6 in the liver of adult mice. Unexpectedly, livers from fasted
animals deficient in S6 grew in response to nutrients even though
biogenesis of 40S ribosomes was abolished. However, liver cells failed
to proliferate or induce cyclin E expression after partial hepatectomy,
despite formation of active cyclin D-CDK4 complexes. Volarevic et al.
(2000) concluded that their results implied that abrogation of 40S
ribosome biogenesis may induce a checkpoint control that prevents cell
cycle progression.

In order to study the relationship between ribosome biogenesis, cell
growth, and proliferation, Sulic et al. (2005) conditionally deleted 1
or 2 alleles of Rps6 in mouse thymi. Complete Rps6 deletion abrogated
T-cell development. Hemizygous Rps6 expression had no effect on T-cell
maturation in the thymus but inhibited the accumulation of T cells in
the spleen and lymph nodes as a result of their decreased survival in
peripheral lymphoid organs. Stimulation of Rps6-heterozygous T cells
induced a normal increase in size, but cell cycle progression was
impaired in a p53 (TP53; 191170)-dependent manner.

REFERENCE 1. Antoine, M.; Fried, M.: The organization of the intron-containing
human S6 ribosomal protein (rpS6) gene and determination of its location
at chromosome 9p21. Hum. Molec. Genet. 1: 565-570, 1992.

2. Feo, S.; Davies, B.; Fried, M.: The mapping of seven intron-containing
ribosomal protein genes shows they are unlinked in the human genome. Genomics 13:
201-207, 1992.

3. Heinze, H.; Arnold, H. H.; Fischer, D.; Kruppa, J.: The primary
structure of the human ribosomal protein S6 derived from a cloned
cDNA. J. Biol. Chem. 263: 4139-4144, 1988.

4. Kenmochi, N.; Kawaguchi, T.; Rozen, S.; Davis, E.; Goodman, N.;
Hudson, T. J.; Tanaka, T.; Page, D. C.: A map of 75 human ribosomal
protein genes. Genome Res. 8: 509-523, 1998.

5. Lott, J. B.; Mackie, G. A.: Isolation and characterization of
cloned cDNAs that code for human ribosomal protein S6. Gene 65:
31-39, 1988.

6. Pogue-Geile, K.; Geiser, J. R.; Shu, M.; Miller, C.; Wool, I. G.;
Meisler, A. I.; Pipas, J. M.: Ribosomal protein genes are overexpressed
in colorectal cancer: isolation of a cDNA clone encoding the human
S3 ribosomal protein. Molec. Cell. Biol. 11: 3842-3849, 1991.

7. Sulic, S.; Panic, L.; Barkic, M.; Mercep, M.; Uzelac, M.; Volarevic,
S.: Inactivation of S6 ribosomal protein gene in T lymphocytes activates
a p53-dependent checkpoint response. Genes Dev. 19: 3070-3082, 2005.

8. Volarevic, S.; Stewart, M. J.; Ledermann, B.; Zilberman, F.; Terracciano,
L.; Montini, E.; Grompe, M.; Kozma, S. C.; Thomas, G.: Proliferation,
but not growth, blocked by conditional deletion of 40S ribosomal protein
S6. Science 288: 2045-2047, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/24/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/13/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 3/18/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/16/1986

EDITED wwang: 03/02/2006
wwang: 2/10/2006
terry: 1/24/2006
alopez: 6/15/2000
terry: 6/13/2000
carol: 3/18/1999
dholmes: 4/8/1998
carol: 4/7/1993
carol: 11/30/1992
carol: 6/5/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 3/6/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990

608965	TITLE *608965 CALCIUM-BINDING PROTEIN 4; CABP4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching databases for sequences similar to CABPs, Haeseleer et al.
(2000) identified a CABP4 genomic clone. Like other CABP family members,
the deduced CABP4 protein contains 4 EF-hand motifs.

Haeseleer et al. (2004) obtained a full-length human CABP4 cDNA by PCR
of a retina cDNA library. The deduced 275-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 30.4 kD. Haeseleer et al. (2004) noted that
the second EF-hand motif of CABP4 cannot coordinate Ca(2+) because the
lysine residue in position 1 is not suitable for Ca(2+) coordination.
Human, bovine, mouse, and rat CABP4 are highly homologous in their
C-terminal regions, but are less conserved in their N-terminal regions.
Northern blot analysis of several human tissues and rat retina and brain
detected 1.6- and 3.8-kb transcripts only in retina. RT-PCR of mouse
tissues detected expression only in retina. In situ hybridization and
immunocytochemical analysis of monkey retina detected Cabp4 only in
photoreceptors. Analysis of mouse retina found Cabp4 in rod spherules
and cone pedicles, where it colocalized with synaptic vesicle proteins.

GENE FUNCTION

Haeseleer et al. (2004) found that CABP4 associated with the C-terminal
domain of Ca(V)4.1 alpha-1 (CACNA1F; 300110) and shifted the activation
of the channel to hyperpolarized voltages following cotransfection in
human embryonic kidney cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Haeseleer et al. (2000) determined that the CABP4 gene contains 6 exons.
Haeseleer et al. (2004) determined that the CABP4 gene spans about 4 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Haeseleer et al. (2004) mapped the CABP4
gene to chromosome 11q13.1. CABP4 lies in the opposite orientation and
is separated from CABP2 (607314) by 4 genes and about 60 kb.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Zeitz et al. (2006) used the candidate gene approach to search for
molecular defects in patients with incomplete congenital stationary
night blindness without mutations in the CACNA1F gene (300110). Both the
CACNA1F protein (Cav1.4-alpha) and CABP4 are members of the CABP protein
family, which are neuronal Ca(2+)-binding proteins with similarity to
calmodulin (CALM1; 114180) and modulate voltage-dependent Ca(2+)
channels. Like Cav1.4-alpha, CABP4 is specifically located in
photoreceptor synaptic terminals, where it is directly associated with
the C-terminal domain of Cav1.4-alpha and shifts the activation of
Cav1.4 to hyperpolarized voltages in transfected cells. Mice lacking
Cabp4 showed a thinner outer plexiform layer, which, in wildtype mice,
contains the synapses between the photoreceptor and secondary neurons.
Electroretinography (ERG) studies indicated a reduction in cone and rod
synaptic function (Maeda et al., 2005). Similar morphologic and
functional alterations were observed in the retinas of Cacna1f-mutant
mice (Mansergh et al., 2005). These studies prompted Zeitz et al. (2006)
to study CABP4 as a possible site of mutations in autosomal recessive
CSNB. They identified CABP4 mutations in CABP4 in 2 families with
autosomal recessive incomplete congenital stationary night blindness
(CSNB2B; 610427).

ANIMAL MODEL

Haeseleer et al. (2004) developed Cabp4-null mice. The outer plexiform
layer, which contains the photoreceptor synapses with secondary neurons,
was thinner in mutant mice than in control mice. Cabp4 -/- retinas had
ectopic synapses originating from rod bipolar and horizontal cells that
extended into the outer nuclear layer. Rod bipolars were reduced in
sensitivity about 100-fold, and electroretinograms indicated reduced
cone and rod synaptic function. The phenotype of Cabp4-null mice was
similar to that of patients with incomplete congenital stationary night
blindness (300071).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NIGHT BLINDNESS, CONGENITAL STATIONARY, TYPE 2B
CABP4, 2-BP DEL, 800AG

In 2 families with autosomal recessive incomplete congenital stationary
night blindness (CSNB2B; 610427), Zeitz et al. (2006) found a 2-bp
deletion, 800_801delAG, at the junction of intron 5 and exon 6 of the
CABP4 gene. The mutation occurred in homozygosity in 1 family and in
compound heterozygosity in the second family. The wildtype sequence of
CABP4 comprises a duplicate AG dinucleotide at the junction of intron 5
and exon 6. The 2-bp deletion removed 1 of the AG dinucleotides and,
thus, was predicted to cause a translational frameshift, or affect
transcript splicing by altering the acceptor site. A computational
search led to the conclusion that deletion of 1 of the 2 tandem AG
nucleotides may not dramatically alter splicing efficiency. RT-PCR
experiments indicated that the deletion did not cause aberrant splicing
of CABP4. Both families in whom the 2-bp deletion was demonstrated were
of Swiss extraction. The deletion mutation was located on the same
haplotype, suggesting a common origin. Family A had 2 affected sibs who
presented nystagmus and decreased visual acuity in early childhood. The
2 brothers were 39 and 45 years of age at the time of recent
examination. The index patient was the only affected member of the
second family in which the 2-bp deletion was present, in compound
heterozygosity with a missense mutation (608965.0002).

.0002
NIGHT BLINDNESS, CONGENITAL STATIONARY, TYPE 2B
CABP4, ARG124CYS

In the second family with CSNB2B (610427) studied by Zeitz et al.
(2006), heterozygosity was found for the 2-bp deletion (608965.0001) and
a 370C-T substitution in exon 2 of the CABP4 gene, which was predicted
to introduce a binding site for SRp55 (601944), influencing splicing, or
to lead to an amino acid exchange (R124C). The patient exhibited CABP4
transcript levels 30 to 40% of those found in controls.

REFERENCE 1. Haeseleer, F.; Imanishi, Y.; Maeda, T.; Possin, D. E.; Maeda, A.;
Lee, A.; Rieke, F.; Palczewski, K.: Essential role of Ca(2+)-binding
protein 4, a Ca(V)1.4 channel regulator, in photoreceptor synaptic
function. Nature Neurosci. 7: 1079-1087, 2004.

2. Haeseleer, F.; Sokal, I.; Verlinde, C. L. M. J.; Erdjument-Bromage,
H.; Tempst, P.; Pronin, A. N.; Benovic, J. L.; Fariss, R. N.; Palczewski,
K.: Five members of a novel Ca(2+)-binding protein (CABP) subfamily
with similarity to calmodulin. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 1247-1260, 2000.

3. Maeda, T.; Lem, J.; Palczewski, K.; Haeseleer, F.: A critical
role of CaBP4 in the cone synapse. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 46:
4320-4327, 2005.

4. Mansergh, F.; Orton, N. C.; Vessey, J. P.; Lalonde, M. R.; Stell,
W. K.; Tremblay, F.; Barnes, S.; Rancourt, D. E.; Bech-Hansen, N.
T.: Mutation of the calcium channel gene Cacna1f disrupts calcium
signaling, synaptic transmission and cellular organization in mouse
retina. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 3035-3046, 2005.

5. Zeitz, C.; Kloeckener-Gruissem, B.; Forster, U.; Kohl, S.; Magyar,
I.; Wissinger, B.; Matyas, G.; Borruat, F.-X.; Schorderet, D. F.;
Zrenner, E.; Munier, F. L.; Berger, W.: Mutations in CABP4, the gene
encoding the Ca(2+)-binding protein 4, cause autosomal recessive night
blindness. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 79: 657-667, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/21/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/11/2004

EDITED wwang: 11/25/2008
alopez: 9/25/2006
terry: 9/21/2006
terry: 5/10/2006
terry: 4/6/2005
alopez: 10/29/2004
mgross: 10/11/2004

604374	TITLE *604374 METALLOTHIONEIN-LIKE 5, TESTIS-SPECIFIC; MTL5
;;TESTIS-SPECIFIC METALLOTHIONEIN-LIKE PROTEIN; TESMIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By randomized RT-PCR on mRNA from mouse tissues, Sugihara et al. (1999)
isolated a testis-specific transcript, which they called TF1. By
screening a human testis cDNA library with TF1 as a probe, they cloned a
novel cDNA, which they called testis-specific metallothionein-like
protein, or tesmin. Tesmin encodes a predicted cysteine-rich, 295-amino
acid protein that is 76.3% homologous to mouse tesmin. Sequence analysis
revealed the presence of 2 metallothionein (MT)-like motifs. MT
expression has been observed to be higher in testes than in liver tissue
(Salehi-Ashtiani et al., 1993) and to be actively expressed in a
developmentally regulated fashion in mouse male germ cells (De et al.,
1991). Tesmin shows no homology to other testis-specific genes. In situ
hybridization of adult mouse testicular sections showed that expression
of tesmin is restricted to spermatocytes. RT-PCR analysis on testicular
transcripts from mice showed that expression of tesmin occurs as early
as day 8 and coincides with the entry of germ cells in meiosis.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Sugihara et al. (1999) mapped the
MTL5 gene to human chromosome 11q13.2-q13.3 and mouse chromosome 19B.

REFERENCE 1. De, S. K.; Enders, G. C.; Andrews, G. K.: High levels of metallothionein
messenger RNAs in male germ cells of the adult mouse. Molec. Endocr. 5:
628-636, 1991.

2. Salehi-Ashtiani, K.; Widrow, R. J.; Markert, C. L.; Goldberg, E.
: Testis-specific expression of a metallothionein I-driven transgene
correlates with undermethylation of the locus in testicular DNA. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 8886-8890, 1993.

3. Sugihara, T.; Wadhwa, R.; Kaul, S. C.; Mitsui, Y.: A novel testis-specific
metallothionein-like protein, tesmin, is an early marker of male germ
cell differentiation. Genomics 57: 130-136, 1999.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/27/1999

EDITED alopez: 12/03/2010
joanna: 2/2/2001
carol: 1/3/2000
carol: 12/27/1999

603084	TITLE *603084 ASPARTYL-tRNA SYNTHETASE; DARS
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The DARS gene encodes cytoplasmic aspartyl-tRNA synthetase.
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases constitute a family of enzymes catalyzing the
specific aminoacylation of cognate tRNA in the initial step of
ribosome-dependent protein biosynthesis. Mammalian synthetases differ
from those of prokaryotes and lower eukaryotes in that they associate as
multienzyme complexes (summary by Jacobo-Molina et al., 1989).

CLONING

By screening a HeLa cell cDNA library with a rat Dars cDNA cloned by
them, Jacobo-Molina et al. (1989) isolated a cDNA encoding DARS. The
predicted DARS protein has 500 amino acids and a calculated molecular
mass of 57,000 Da. The human DARS protein has 95% amino acid identity
with rat Dars and shares unevenly distributed identity with yeast
aspartyl-tRNA synthetase, with 69% identity at the C-terminal half and
46% identity at the N-terminal half. The authors discussed several
potential functional domains in the DAR protein, including a region of
conserved lysine residues which is also found in bacterial and yeast
synthetases and is likely to be the binding site for the 3-prime end of
tRNA, a nucleotide triphosphate-binding motif, an ATP-binding motif with
strong similarity to that present in E. coli alanyl-tRNA synthetase, and
a cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase phosphorylation site.
Jacobo-Molina et al. (1989) predicted a neutral amphiphilic helix at the
N-terminal end of the DARS protein and stated that this structure does
not occur in other known synthetases from bacteria, yeast, and higher
organisms.

Based on a curated set of publicly available data, Taft et al. (2013)
found that Dars is diffusely localized in the cytoplasm and broadly
expressed across tissue types, including the central nervous system. In
mice, Dars showed specific expression in neurons of the hippocampus, the
dentate gyrus, and the molecular layer of the cerebellum. DARS
expression in the developing and adult human brain showed a similar
pattern, with preferential immunostaining of neurons in the cerebellum,
cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and lateral ventricle. In addition,
staining of peripheral neurons was evident in the colon.

MAPPING

Gross (2012) mapped the DARS gene to chromosome 2q21.3 based on an
alignment of the DARS sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC000629) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 10 patients from 7 unrelated families of various origins with
hypomyelination with brainstem and spinal cord involvement and
spasticity (HBSL; 615281), Taft et al. (2013) identified homozygous or
compound heterozygous mutations in the DARS gene (see, e.g.,
603084.0001-603084.0006). The mutations, which were found by exome
sequencing, occurred in the 3-prime third of DARS, which corresponds to
the C-terminal active-site domain of the enzyme. The phenotype was
characterized by onset in the first year of life of severe spasticity,
mainly affecting the lower limbs and resulting in an inability to
achieve independent ambulation. Affected individuals showed delayed
motor development and nystagmus; 4 patients had mild mental retardation.
Brain MRI showed hypomyelination and white matter lesions in the
cerebrum, brainstem, cerebellum, and spinal cord. Taft et al. (2013)
noted the phenotypic similarities to leukoencephalopathy with brainstem
and spinal cord involvement and lactate elevation (LBSL; 611105), which
is caused by mutation in the DARS2 gene (610956).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPOMYELINATION WITH BRAINSTEM AND SPINAL CORD INVOLVEMENT AND LEG
SPASTICITY
DARS, ASP367TYR

In an Australian boy with hypomyelination with brainstem and spinal cord
involvement and leg spasticity (HBSL; 615281), Taft et al. (2013)
identified compound heterozygous mutations in the DARS gene: a c.1099G-T
transversion in exon 11, resulting in an asp367-to-tyr (D367Y)
substitution, and a c.821C-T transition in exon 10, resulting in an
ala274-to-val (A274V; dbSNP rs112205661; 603084.0002) substitution. Both
mutations occurred at conserved residues in the active-site pocket. The
mutations, which were identified by whole-genome sequencing and
confirmed by Sanger sequencing, segregated with the disorder in the
family. The D367Y mutation was not found in several large control
databases, while the A274V mutation was found at a frequency of 0.001%.

.0002
HYPOMYELINATION WITH BRAINSTEM AND SPINAL CORD INVOLVEMENT AND LEG
SPASTICITY
DARS, ALA274VAL (dbSNP rs112205661)

See 603084.0001 and Taft et al. (2013).

.0003
HYPOMYELINATION WITH BRAINSTEM AND SPINAL CORD INVOLVEMENT AND LEG
SPASTICITY
DARS, MET256LEU

In 2 sibs and 2 additional unrelated patients of Indian or Pakistani
origin with HBSL (615281), Taft et al. (2013) identified a homozygous
c.766A-C transversion in exon 9 of the DARS gene, resulting in a
met256-to-leu (M256L) substitution at a conserved residue. The mutation,
which was initially found by whole-exome sequencing, was not present in
several large databases. Molecular modeling suggested that the mutation
may alter an amino acid likely to be fundamental to chains supporting
the active site.

.0004
HYPOMYELINATION WITH BRAINSTEM AND SPINAL CORD INVOLVEMENT AND LEG
SPASTICITY
DARS, ARG487CYS

In an Indian boy with HBSL (615281), Taft et al. (2013) identified a
homozygous c.1459C-T transition in exon 16 of the DARS gene, resulting
in an arg487-to-cys (R487C) substitution at a conserved residue. The
mutation, which was found by whole-exome sequencing, was not present in
several large databases. Molecular modeling suggested that the mutation
is likely to destabilize the tRNA-protein interaction.

.0005
HYPOMYELINATION WITH BRAINSTEM AND SPINAL CORD INVOLVEMENT AND LEG
SPASTICITY
DARS, ARG460HIS

In 2 sisters from the U.S. with HBSL (615281), Taft et al. (2013)
identified compound heterozygous mutations in the DARS gene: a c.1379G-A
transition in exon 15, resulting in an arg460-to-his (R460H)
substitution at a conserved residue, and a c.1480C-T transition in exon
16, resulting in an arg494-to-gly (R494G; dbSNP rs147077598;
603084.0006) substitution at a conserved residue. Molecular modeling
suggested that the R460H mutation may alter an amino acid likely to be
fundamental to chains supporting the active site, and that the R494G
mutation is likely to destabilize the tRNA-protein interaction. The
R460H mutation was not found in several large control databases, while
the R494G mutation was found at a frequency of 0.001%.

.0006
HYPOMYELINATION WITH BRAINSTEM AND SPINAL CORD INVOLVEMENT AND LEG
SPASTICITY
DARS, ARG494GLY (dbSNP rs147077598)

See 603084.0005 and Taft et al. (2013).

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/19/2012.

2. Jacobo-Molina, A.; Peterson, R.; Yang, D. C. H.: cDNA sequence,
predicted primary structure, and evolving amphiphilic helix of human
aspartyl-tRNA synthetase. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 16608-16612, 1989.

3. Taft, R. J.; Vanderver, A.; Leventer, R. J.; Damiani, S. A.; Simons,
C.; Grimmond, S. M.; Miller, D.; Schmidt, J.; Lockhart, P. J.; Pope,
K.; Ru, K.; Crawford, J.; and 12 others: Mutations in DARS cause
hypomyelination with brain stem and spinal cord involvement and leg
spasticity. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 92: 774-780, 2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/18/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/19/2012

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 10/2/1998

EDITED carol: 06/21/2013
ckniffin: 6/18/2013
mgross: 6/19/2012
carol: 6/18/2012
carol: 6/14/2012
psherman: 10/2/1998

608015	TITLE *608015 TSUKUSHIN; TSKU
;;TSUKUSHI, CHICKEN, HOMOLOG OF; TSK;;
E2-INDUCED GENE 4; E2IG4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

To identify genes that are regulated by or associated with estrogen
action, Charpentier et al. (2000) performed serial analysis of gene
expression (SAGE) on estrogen-responsive breast cancer cells after
exposure to estrogen. Using transcript-specific PCR primers for novel
sequences that increased more than 10-fold upon treatment with 17-beta
estradiol (E2), they cloned 5 cDNAs, designated E2-induced genes (E2IG)
1-5, from a human placenta cDNA library. The E2IG4 cDNA encodes a
deduced 353-amino acid protein containing a leucine-rich repeat in the N
terminus and 8 additional leucine-rich repeats. E2IG4 demonstrates
domain and structural homology to extracellular matrix leucine-rich
proteoglycans such as decorin (125255) and biglycan (301870). It also
contains various potential phosphorylation sites. Charpentier et al.
(2000) determined that E2IG4 is likely to reside in the cell membrane or
extracellular compartments and contains a typical cleavable signal
peptide.

GENE FUNCTION

Based on the structure and likely location of E2IG4, Charpentier et al.
(2000) suggested that the protein is involved in intracellular transport
and extracellular secretion.

Ohta et al. (2004) presented evidence that Tsk is a BMP (see 112264)
inhibitor in oviparous vertebrates that forms a ternary complex with Bmp
and chordin (603475) and is involved in the regulation of primitive
streak and Hensen node.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Charpentier et al. (2000) mapped the E2IG4 gene to
chromosome 11 between markers D11S911 and D11S4172.

REFERENCE 1. Charpentier, A. H.; Bednarek, A. K.; Daniel, R. L.; Hawkins, K.
A.; Laflin, K. J.; Gaddis, S.; MacLeod, M. C.; Aldaz, C. M.: Effects
of estrogen on global gene expression: identification of novel targets
of estrogen action. Cancer Res. 60: 5977-5983, 2000.

2. Ohta, K.; Lupo, G.; Kuriyama, S.; Keynes, R.; Holt, C. E.; Harris,
W. A.; Tanaka, H.; Ohnuma, S.: Tsukushi functions as an organizer
inducer by inhibition of BMP activity in cooperation with chordin. Dev.
Cell 7: 347-358, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/7/2004

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 8/6/2003

EDITED carol: 01/12/2007
mgross: 10/7/2004
tkritzer: 8/7/2003
carol: 8/6/2003

604084	TITLE *604084 ZINC FINGER- AND BTB DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 17; ZBTB17
;;ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 151; ZNF151;;
MYC-INTERACTING ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 1; MIZ1
DESCRIPTION See ZNF91 (603971) for general information on zinc finger proteins.

CLONING

Transcriptional regulatory proteins containing tandemly repeated zinc
finger domains are thought to be involved in both normal and abnormal
cellular proliferation and differentiation. One abundant class of such
transcriptional regulators resembles the Drosophila Kruppel segmentation
gene product due to the presence of repeated cys2-his2 (C2H2) zinc
finger domains that are connected by conserved sequences, called H/C
links. By screening a human insulinoma cDNA library with a degenerate
oligonucleotide corresponding to the H/C linker sequence, Tommerup et
al. (1993) isolated cDNAs potentially encoding zinc finger proteins.
Tommerup and Vissing (1995) performed sequence analysis on a number of
these cDNAs and identified several novel zinc finger protein genes,
including ZNF151. The ZNF151 cDNA predicts a protein belonging to the
Kruppel family of zinc finger proteins.

The MYC (190080) protein activates transcription as part of a
heteromeric complex with MAX (154950). However, cells transformed by MYC
are characterized by the loss of expression of numerous genes,
suggesting that MYC may also repress gene expression. To search for
proteins that may mediate gene repression by MYC, Peukert et al. (1997)
used the yeast 2-hybrid system with the basic region and
helix-loop-helix (HLH)/leucine zipper domain of MYC as bait. They
identified a HeLa cell cDNA encoding ZNF151, which they called MIZ1 for
'MYC-interacting zinc finger protein-1.' The full-length MIZ1 cDNA
sequence predicts an 803-amino acid protein containing an N-terminal POZ
(poxvirus and zinc finger) domain and 13 zinc finger domains, 12 of
which are clustered. The deduced human MIZ1 protein shares 92% sequence
identity with the closely related mouse protein Z13. Peukert et al.
(1997) noted that high MIZ1 expression was observed in brain and muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Peukert et al. (1997) found that human MIZ1 had a potent growth arrest
function; HeLa cells expressing recombinant MIZ1 progressed into S phase
but not into mitosis. MIZ1 could bind to and transactivate the
adenovirus major late and cyclin D1 (CCND1; 168461) promoters. The
authors suggested that growth arrest by MIZ1 occurs via the
transcriptional activation of a set of growth inhibitory genes. The POZ
domain of several transcription factors has been shown to target the
proteins to discrete subnuclear foci, to render the proteins insoluble
upon extraction, and to inhibit both DNA binding of the attached zinc
fingers and transcriptional activation in vivo. Thus, the POZ domain
appears to act as a negative regulatory domain for transcription factor
function. In contrast to other POZ domain proteins, MIZ1 was soluble and
was predominantly located in the cytosol. MIZ1 interacted specifically
with MYC and NMYC (164840). Interaction with MYC inhibited MIZ1
transactivation, overcame MIZ1-induced growth arrest, induced MIZ1
nuclear sequestration, and rendered MIZ1 insoluble in vivo. These
effects depended on the integrity of the POZ domain of MIZ1. Peukert et
al. (1997) suggested that MYC inhibits gene transcription by activating
the latent inhibitory functions of the MIZ1 POZ domain.

Ziegelbauer et al. (2001) found that MIZ1 associates with microtubules,
can bind directly to the low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR; 606945)
promoter, and can activate LDLR transcription. MIZ1 also binds to the
promoter and activates transcription of other T113242 (a synthetic
drug)-induced genes such as alpha-2 integrin (192974). Soft x-ray,
indirect immunofluorescence, and green fluorescent protein time-lapse
microscopy revealed that MIZ1 is largely cytoplasmic but accumulates in
the nuclei of HepG2 cells upon treatment with T113242. Thus, MIZ1
appears to be regulated by association with microtubules and may
activate gene transcription in response to changes in the cytoskeleton.

Herold et al. (2002) showed that transactivation by MIZ1 is negatively
regulated by association with topoisomerase II-binding protein (TOPBP1;
607760). Ultraviolet (UV) irradiation downregulated expression of TOPBP1
and released MIZ1. MIZ1 bound to the p21CIP1 (116899) core promoter in
vivo and was required for upregulation of p21CIP1 upon UV irradiation.
Using both Myc -/- cells and a point mutant of MYC that is deficient in
MIZ1-dependent repression, Herold et al. (2002) showed that MYC
negatively regulates transcription of p21CIP1 upon UV irradiation and
facilitates recovery from UV-induced cell cycle arrest through binding
to MIZ1.

MAPPING

By FISH, Tommerup and Vissing (1995) mapped the ZNF151 gene to
chromosome 1p36.2-p36.1.

ANIMAL MODEL

Adhikary et al. (2003) found that Miz1-null mouse embryos were not
viable. They did not undergo normal gastrulation and succumbed to
massive apoptosis of ectodermal cells around embryonic day 7.5.
Expression of p57(Kip2) (CDKN1C; 600856), a Miz1 target gene, was absent
in Miz1-null embryos.

REFERENCE 1. Adhikary, S.; Peukert, K.; Karsunky, H.; Beuger, V.; Lutz, W.;
Elsasser, H.-P.; Moroy, T.; Eilers, M.: Miz1 is required for early
embryonic development during gastrulation. Molec. Cell. Biol. 23:
7648-7657, 2003.

2. Herold, S.; Wanzel, M.; Beuger, V.; Frohme, C.; Beul, D.; Hillukkala,
T.; Syvaoja, J.; Saluz, H.-P.; Haenel, F.; Eilers, M.: Negative regulation
of the mammalian UV response by Myc through association with Miz-1. Molec.
Cell 10: 509-521, 2002.

3. Peukert, K.; Staller, P.; Schneider, A.; Carmichael, G.; Hanel,
F.; Eilers, M.: An alternative pathway for gene regulation by Myc. EMBO
J. 16: 5672-5686, 1997.

4. Tommerup, N.; Aagaard, L.; Lund, C. L.; Boel, E.; Baxendale, S.;
Bates, G. P.; Lehrach, H.; Vissing, H.: A zinc-finger gene ZNF141
mapping at 4p16.3/D4S90 is a candidate gene for the Wolf-Hirschhorn
(4p-) syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 1571-1575, 1993.

5. Tommerup, N.; Vissing, H.: Isolation and fine mapping of 16 novel
human zinc finger-encoding cDNAs identify putative candidate genes
for developmental and malignant disorders. Genomics 27: 259-264,
1995.

6. Ziegelbauer, J.; Shan, B.; Yager, D.; Larabell, C.; Hoffmann, B.;
Tjian, R.: Transcription factor MIZ-1 is regulated via microtubule
association. Molec. Cell 8: 339-349, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/29/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/29/2001
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 8/31/1999

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 7/28/1999

EDITED mgross: 10/03/2011
mgross: 5/7/2003
mgross: 5/1/2003
terry: 4/29/2003
ckniffin: 6/5/2002
mgross: 10/29/2001
mgross: 9/1/1999
psherman: 8/31/1999
mgross: 7/30/1999
psherman: 7/28/1999

107269	TITLE *107269 CD44 ANTIGEN; CD44
;;HERMES ANTIGEN;;
Pgp1;;
MDU3;;
INLU-RELATED p80 GLYCOPROTEIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CD44 is an integral cell membrane glycoprotein with a postulated role in
matrix adhesion lymphocyte activation and lymph node homing (Aruffo et
al., 1990).

CLONING

Telen et al. (1983) used a murine monoclonal antibody (A3D8) to identify
an erythrocyte antigen inhibited by the In(Lu) gene. Telen et al. (1984)
showed that the A3D8 antigenic property resides on an 80-kD red cell
membrane protein which is present in only trace amounts in In(Lu)
Lu(a-b-) red cells (INLU; 111150). Haynes (1986) had evidence that the
A1G3 and A3D8 monoclonal antibodies bind to different epitopes on the
same 80-kD molecule. The monoclonal antibody A3D8 recognized an antigen
officially called MDU3, for 'monoclonal Duke University, 3,' or CD44.
Telen (1992) knew of no evidence that the INLU and CD44 (MDU3) genes are
the same.

By screening cDNA libraries prepared from hemopoietic cell lines,
Stamenkovic et al. (1989) isolated CD44 clones. Immunoprecipitation of
CD44 from transfected COS cells and cultured cell lines detected
cell-specific expression of an 80- to 90-kD protein and a 160-kD
protein. Several minor forms of 52 to 200 kD were variably present in
different cell types. RNA blot analysis revealed transcripts of 1.6,
2.2, and 5.0 kb in hemopoietic cell lines. RNA blot analysis of
carcinoma cell lines revealed 3 patterns of expression: the first,
exemplified by melanoma cell lines, was identical to the hemopoietic
cell pattern associated with the 80- to 90-kD isoform; the second,
exemplified by a colon carcinoma cell line, showed transcripts of 2.0,
2.6, and 5.6 kb associated with the 160-kD isoform; and the third,
exemplified by another colon carcinoma cell line, was a composite of the
first 2 patterns. All primary carcinoma specimens examined showed
prevalent CD44 transcripts of either hemopoietic or composite type. The
CD44 cDNA encodes a 361-amino acid protein with a 20-residue secretory
signal peptide, a 248-residue extracellular N-terminal domain with
multiple N- and O-linked glycosylation sites, a 21-amino acid
transmembrane domain, and a 72-residue hydrophilic cytoplasmic domain.
The mature protein has a calculated molecular mass of 37 kD. Sequence
analysis suggested homology with chicken and rat cartilage link proteins
(HAPLN1; 115435).

Stefanova et al. (1989) demonstrated that the lymphocyte homing receptor
is identical to the human leukocyte surface glycoprotein called CDw44,
on the basis of studies at the Third International Workshop on Human
Leukocyte Differentiation Antigens. It also appears to be identical to
the Pgp-1 glycoprotein of Omary et al. (1988).

GENE FAMILY

A table of all the CD antigens was provided by Schlossman et al. (1994)
with a list of the common names, the size in kilodaltons, and the nature
of the protein (adhesion, myeloid, platelet, and B cell, T cell, etc.).

GENE STRUCTURE

Screaton et al. (1992) found that the CD44 gene contains 19 exons
spanning 50 kb of genomic DNA. They identified 10 alternatively spliced
exons within the extracellular domain, including 1 exon that had not
previously been reported. In addition to the inclusion or exclusion of
whole exons, additional diversity was generated through the utilization
of internal splice donor and acceptor sites within 2 of the exons. A
variation in the cytoplasmic domain was shown to result from the
alternative splicing of 2 exons. Thus the genomic structure of CD44 is
remarkably complex, and alternative splicing is the basis of its
structural and functional diversity.

Nedvetzki et al. (2003) noted that human CD44 isoforms are generated
from 9 variant exons (v2 to v10) inserted in different combinations
between 2 constant regions consisting of 5 exons at the N terminus and 4
exons at the C terminus (constant exon 19 is noncoding). Direct splicing
of constant exon 5 to constant exon 16, thereby skipping the variant
exons, generates the standard CD44 isoform.

GENE FUNCTION

Aruffo et al. (1990) demonstrated that CD44 is the main cell surface
receptor for hyaluronate. Mature lymphocytes in the circulation migrate
selectively from the bloodstream to different lymphatic tissues through
specialized high endothelial venules (HEV). Molecules on the surface of
lymphocytes called homing receptors interact specifically with HEV and
play a central role in the migration.

Splice variants of the glycoprotein CD44 may be associated with
metastases and therefore may be useful in the early detection of
metastatic potential in surgical biopsy specimens, as well as in the
early diagnosis of cancer in screening programs, assessment of remaining
disease, and early detection of recurrence (Matsumura and Tarin, 1992).
Mayer et al. (1993) found that expression of CD44, which is not found in
normal gastric mucosa and is found in only 49% of primary tumors, was
associated with distant metastases at time of diagnosis and with tumor
recurrence and increased mortality from gastric cancer.

Weber et al. (1996) noted that the CD44 gene encodes a transmembrane
protein that is expressed as a family of molecular isoforms generated
from alternative RNA splicing and posttranslational modifications.
Certain CD44 isoforms that regulate activation and migration of
lymphocytes and macrophages may also enhance local growth and metastatic
spread of tumor cells. One ligand of CD44 is hyaluronic acid, binding of
which to the NH2-terminal domain of CD44 enhances cellular aggregation
and tumor cell growth. (Krainer et al. (1991) referred to CD44 as a
'hyaladherin' -- see 601269.) Weber et al. (1996) demonstrated that
another ligand is osteopontin (166490). Osteopontin induces cellular
chemotaxis but not homotypic aggregation of cells, whereas the inverse
is true for the interaction between CD44 and hyaluronate. The
alternative responses to CD44 ligation may be exploited by tumor cells
to allow OPN-mediated metastatic spread and hyaluronate-dependent growth
in newly colonized tissues in the process of tumor metastasis.

Sherman et al. (1998) investigated the role of CD44 proteins in early
limb development. Members of this family of transmembrane glycoproteins
are expressed by cells of the limb bud, including those of the apical
ectodermal ridge (AER). Distinct CD44 variants are generated from a
single gene by alternative RNA splicing of up to 10 variant exons and by
extensive posttranslational modifications. The amino acid sequences
encoded by these variant exons are located in the extracellular portion
of the protein near the transmembrane domain. A standard form of CD44
lacking these variant sequences is expressed by numerous cell types and
is the smallest CD44 protein. It carries no variant exon sequences.
Splice variants are expressed in only a limited number of tissues and in
certain tumors. Signals from the AER of the developing vertebrate limb,
including fibroblast growth factor-8 (600483), can maintain limb
mesenchymal cells in proliferative state. Sherman et al. (1998) reported
that a specific CD44 splice variant is crucial for the proliferation of
these mesenchymal cells. Epitopes carried by this variant colocalize
temporally and spatially with FGF8 in the AER throughout early limb
development. A splice variant containing the same sequence expressed on
model cells binds both FGF4 (164980) and FGF8 and stimulates mesenchymal
cells in vitro. Sherman et al. (1998) found that when applied to the
AER, an antibody against a specific CD44 epitope blocked FGF
presentation and inhibited limb outgrowth. Therefore, CD44 is necessary
for limb development and functions in a novel growth factor presentation
mechanism likely relevant to other physiologic and pathologic situations
in which a cell surface protein presents a signaling molecule to a
neighboring cell.

Cywes and Wessels (2001) demonstrated that CD44-dependent group A
Streptococcus binding to polarized monolayers of human keratinocytes
induced marked cytoskeletal rearrangements manifested by membrane
ruffling and disruption of intercellular junctions. Transduction of the
signal induced by group A Streptococcus binding to CD44 on the
keratinocyte surface involved Rac1 (602048) and the cytoskeleton linker
protein ezrin (123900), as well as tyrosine phosphorylation of cellular
proteins. Studies of bacterial translocation in 2 models of human skin
indicated that cell signaling triggered by interaction of the group A
Streptococcus capsule with CD44 opened intercellular junctions and
promoted tissue penetration by group A Streptococcus through a
paracellular route. Cywes and Wessels (2001) concluded that their
results support a model of host cytoskeleton manipulation and tissue
invasion by an extracellular bacterial pathogen.

Nedvetzki et al. (2003) identified a CD44 variant, designated CD44vRA,
in synovial fluid aspirated from 23 of 30 patients with rheumatoid
arthritis (RA; 180300). Sequence analysis showed that the CD44vRA
isoform contains an intron-derived CAG trinucleotide inclusion 5-prime
to constant exon 5 within the CD44v3-v10 isoform. Functional expression
studies in human cells showed that the CD44vRA variant interacted with
FGF2 (134920) via the heparan sulfate on exon v3 in a way that enhanced
binding and activation of soluble FGFR1 (136350) to a greater extent
than CD44v3-v10. Synovial fluid cells from RA patients bound soluble
FGFR1 more intensively than control cells. Nedvetzki et al. (2003)
postulated that activation of FGFR1 may play a role in the RA
inflammatory process.

In a mouse hindlimb model of arteriogenesis, van Royen et al. (2004)
found that Cd44 expression increased strongly during collateral vessel
growth in wildtype mice and that arteriogenesis was severely impaired in
Cd44 -/- mice. The defective arteriogenesis was accompanied by reduced
leukocyte trafficking to sites of collateral artery growth and reduced
expression of FGF2 and platelet-derived growth factor-B protein (PDGFB;
190040). In 14 consecutive patients with single-vessel coronary artery
disease, van Royen et al. (2004) found that the maximal expression of
CD44 on activated monocytes was reduced in patients with poor
collateralization compared to patients with good collateralization. Van
Royen et al. (2004) concluded that CD44 plays a pivotal role in
arteriogenesis.

By analyzing a human breast cancer cell line transduced with a micro RNA
(miRNA) expression library, Huang et al. (2008) found that human miR373
(611954) and miR520C stimulated cell migration and invasion in vitro and
in vivo. Using expression array analysis, they found that the migration
phenotype of miR373- and miR520C-expressing cells depended on
suppression of CD44. Upregulation of miR373 correlated inversely with
CD44 expression in breast cancer metastasis samples. The authors noted
that increased expression of the most common CD44 isoform correlates
with overall survival of breast cancer patients.

Godar et al. (2008) found that p53 (TP53; 191170) negatively regulated
CD44 expression in normal human mammary epithelial cells by binding to a
noncanonical p53-binding sequence in the CD44 promoter. Inhibition of
CD44 enabled the cells to respond to stress-induced, p53-dependent
cytostatic and apoptotic signals that would have otherwise been blocked
by CD44. In the absence of p53, CD44 promoted growth in a highly
tumorigenic mammary epithelial cell line. In both normal and tumorigenic
cell lines, p63 (TP63; 603273) positively regulated CD44 expression.

MAPPING

Francke et al. (1983) showed that the antigens defined by monoclonal
antibodies A3D8 and A1G3 are determined by genes on 11p.

The mouse monoclonal antibody Hermes-3 recognizes the 85- to 95-kD human
lymphocyte homing receptor. Using mouse-human T-lymphocyte hybrids and
hybrids of Chinese hamster ovary cells with human amniotic fibroblasts,
Ala-Kapee et al. (1989) found that Hermes-3 expression, as demonstrated
by indirect immunofluorescence and immunoprecipitation, was determined
by 11pter-p13. Forsberg et al. (1989) refined the assignment of the
lymphocyte homing receptor gene to 11pter-p13 by study of Chinese
hamster-human cell hybrids in which the human parent cells had various
deletions of human chromosome 11. Although CD44 may have function as a
lymphocyte homing receptor, the gene that maps to chromosome 11 is
distinct from the lymph node homing receptor located on chromosome 1
(153240) (Seldin, 1990). In the mouse, the corresponding gene has been
referred to as Ly-24.

Cianfriglia et al. (1992) mapped a drug-sensitivity marker, MC56, to
11pter-p13. Identity of the protein to the CD44 antigen, suggested on
other grounds, was supported by the map location.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The Indian blood group (609027) comprises 2 antigens, In(a) and In(b),
which reside on CD44. By RT-PCR analysis of cDNA extracted from
In(a+b-)-transformed B lymphocytes, Telen et al. (1996) identified the
CD44 polymorphism that causes the In(b-) phenotype. The polymorphism
results in an arg46-to-pro change (R46P; 107269.0001), removing the
basically charged amino acid at the C terminus of the hyaluronan
(HA)-binding motif of CD44. In previous studies using chimeric proteins,
arg46 was shown to be crucial for HA binding by CD44 (Yang et al.,
1994). However, Telen et al. (1996) demonstrated that the R46P change
does not reduce HA binding to CD44.

ANIMAL MODEL

Schmits et al. (1997) generated mice deficient in all known isoforms of
Cd44 by targeting exons encoding the invariant N-terminal region of the
molecule. Mice were born in mendelian ratio without any obvious
developmental or neurologic deficits. Hematologic impairment was
evidenced by altered tissue distribution of myeloid progenitors with
increased levels of colony-forming unit-granulocyte-macrophage in bone
marrow and reduced numbers in spleen. Fetal liver colony-forming
unit-spleen and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor mobilization
assays, together with reduced colony-forming unit-granulocyte-macrophage
in peripheral blood, suggested that progenitor egress from the bone
marrow was defective. Mice also developed exaggerated granuloma
responses to Cryotosporidium parvum infection. Tumor studies showed that
SV40-transformed Cd44-deficient fibroblasts were highly tumorigenic in
nude mice, whereas reintroduction of Cd44 expression into these
fibroblasts resulted in a dramatic inhibition of tumor growth.

Teder et al. (2002) studied the role of Cd44 in lung inflammation by
using the Cd44-deficient mice generated by Schmits et al. (1997). After
intratracheal administration of bleomycin, 75% of Cd44-deficient mice
died by day 14. They developed unremitting inflammation, characterized
by impaired clearance of apoptotic neutrophils, persistent accumulation
of hyaluronan fragments at the site of the tissue injury, and impaired
activation of transforming growth factor beta-1 (190180). This phenotype
was partially reversed by reconstitution with Cd44+ cells, thus
demonstrating a critical role for this receptor in resolving lung
inflammation.

Using immunohistochemistry, Leemans et al. (2003) confirmed that
Cd44-high cells accumulated in mouse lungs following intranasal
infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Cd44 -/- mice, however, had a
50% reduction in pulmonary macrophages 2 weeks after infection, although
the absolute numbers of leukocytes were unchanged. By 5 weeks after
infection, a significant reduction in Cd4 (186940)-positive lymphocyte
numbers was observed in mutant mice. At both time points, the
Cd44-deficient mice displayed disorganized granulomas containing
predominantly polymorphonuclear neutrophils rather than well-demarcated
granulomas consisting of lymphocytes and macrophages. Splenocytes were
more numerous in mice lacking Cd44, and they secreted significantly more
Ifng (147570) in response to antigen-specific stimulation than
splenocytes of wildtype mice. Flow cytometric analysis showed that human
CD44 bound to M. tuberculosis, and Cd44 -/- mouse macrophages contained
fewer bacteria than wildtype macrophages. The mutant mice allowed
greater replication of M. tuberculosis in lung and liver and had reduced
survival compared with wildtype mice. Leemans et al. (2003) proposed
that CD44 mediates resistance to mycobacterial infection by promoting
binding and phagocytosis by macrophages and by recruiting these cells to
the site of infection.

TNF (191160) is a major inducer of chronic inflammation, and its
overexpression leads to chronic inflammatory arthritis. Hayer et al.
(2005) crossed Cd44 -/- mice with mice transgenic for human TNF and
found that destruction of joints and progressive crippling was far more
severe in Cd44 -/- transgenic mice than in transgenic mice expressing
Cd44. Cd44 -/- transgenic mice exhibited increased systemic bone
resorption due to an increase in the number, size, and activity of
osteoclasts. Bone formation and osteoblast differentiation were not
affected. Cd44 -/- osteoclasts had an enhanced response to TNF that was
associated with increased activation of p38 (MAPK14; 600289). Hayer et
al. (2005) concluded that CD44 is a critical inhibitor of TNF-induced
joint destruction and inflammatory bone loss.

Krause et al. (2006) found that mice lacking Cd44 were as susceptible as
wildtype mice to murine chronic myeloid leukemia (CML; 608232) after
challenge with BCR-ABL virus. However, bone marrow cells from Cd44 -/-
mice transduced with the virus showed defective homing to recipient bone
marrow, resulting in decreased engraftment and reduced CML-like disease.
In contrast, Cd44 was dispensable for induction of B-lymphoblastic
leukemia-like disease. Krause et al. (2006) concluded that CD44 is
required for leukemic stem cells that initiate CML.

Jin et al. (2006) found that treatment with activating monoclonal
antibodies to CD44 markedly reduced leukemic repopulation in nonobese
diabetic (NOD)/severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice challenged
with human acute myeloid leukemia (AML; 601626) cells. Absence of
leukemia following serial tumor transplantation experiments in mice
demonstrated direct targeting of AML leukemic stem cells (LSCs).
Treatment of engrafted mice with anti-CD44 reduced the number of Cd34
(142230)-positive/Cd38 (107270)-negative primitive stem cells and
increased the number of Cd14 (158120)-positive monocytic cells.
Anti-CD44 treatment also diminished the homing capacity of SCID
leukemia-initiating cells to bone marrow and spleen. Jin et al. (2006)
concluded that CD44 is a key regulator of AML LSCs, which require a
niche to maintain their stem cell properties. They suggested that CD44
targeting may help eliminate quiescent AML LSCs.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
INDIAN BLOOD GROUP SYSTEM POLYMORPHISM
CD44, ARG46PRO

The Indian blood group (609027) comprises 2 antigens, In(a) and In(b),
which reside on CD44. By RT-PCR analysis of cDNA extracted from
In(a+b-)-transformed B lymphocytes, Telen et al. (1996) identified the
CD44 polymorphism that causes the In(b-) phenotype. The G-to-C change at
nucleotide 252 results in an arg46-to-pro change (R46P), removing the
basically charged amino acid at the C terminus of the hyaluronan
(HA)-binding motif of CD44. In previous studies using chimeric proteins,
arg46 was shown to be crucial for HA binding by CD44 (Yang et al.,
1994). However, Telen et al. (1996) demonstrated that the R46P change
does not reduce HA binding to CD44.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Forsberg et al. (1989)
REFERENCE 1. Ala-Kapee, M.; Forsberg, U. H.; Jalkanen, S.; Schroder, J.: Mapping
of gene for human lymphocyte homing receptor to the short arm of chromosome
11. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51: 948-949, 1989.

2. Aruffo, A.; Stamenkovic, I.; Melnick, M.; Underhill, C. B.; Seed,
B.: CD44 is the principal cell surface receptor for hyaluronate. Cell 61:
1303-1313, 1990.

3. Cianfriglia, M.; Viora, M.; Tombesi, M.; Merendino, N.; Esposito,
G.; Samoggia, P.; Forsberg, U. H.; Schroder, J.: The gene encoding
for MC56 determinant (drug-sensitivity marker) is located on the short
arm of human chromosome 11. Int. J. Cancer 52: 585-587, 1992.

4. Cywes, C.; Wessels, M. R.: Group A Streptococcus tissue invasion
by CD44-mediated cell signalling. Nature 414: 648-652, 2001.

5. Forsberg, U. H.; Ala-Kapee, M. M.; Jalkanen, S.; Andersson, L.
C.; Schroder, J.: The gene for human lymphocyte homing receptor is
located on chromosome 11. Europ. J. Immun. 19: 409-412, 1989.

6. Forsberg, U. H.; Jalkanen, S.; Schroder, J.: Assignment of the
human lymphocyte homing receptor gene to the short arm of chromosome
11. Immunogenetics 29: 405-407, 1989.

7. Francke, U.; Foellmer, B. E.; Haynes, B. F.: Chromosome mapping
of human cell surface molecules: monoclonal anti-human lymphocyte
antibodies 4F2, A3D8, and A1G3 define antigens controlled by different
regions of chromosome 11. Somat. Cell Genet. 9: 333-344, 1983.

8. Godar, S.; Ince, T. A.; Bell, G. W.; Feldser, D.; Donaher, J. L.;
Bergh, J.; Liu, A.; Miu, K.; Watnick, R. S.; Reinhardt, F.; McAllister,
S. S.; Jacks, T.; Weinberg, R. A.: Growth-inhibitory and tumor-suppressive
functions of p53 depend on its repression of CD44 expression. Cell 134:
62-73, 2008.

9. Hayer, S.; Steiner, G.; Gortz, B.; Reiter, E.; Tohidast-Akrad,
M.; Amling, M.; Hoffmann, O.; Redlich, K.; Zwerina, J.; Skriner, K.;
Hilberg, F.; Wagner, E. F.; Smolen, J. S.; Schett, G.: CD44 is a
determinant of inflammatory bone loss. J. Exp. Med. 201: 903-914,
2005.

10. Haynes, B. F.: Personal Communication. Durham, N. C.  2/28/1986.

11. Huang, Q.; Gumireddy, K.; Schrier, M.; le Sage, C.; Nagel, R.;
Nair, S.; Egan, D. A.; Li, A.; Huang, G.; Klein-Szanto, A. J.; Gimotty,
P. A.; Katsaros, D.; Coukos, G.; Zhang, L.; Pure, E.; Agami, R.:
The microRNAs miR-373 and miR-520c promote tumour invasion and metastasis. Nature
Cell Biol. 10: 202-210, 2008.

12. Jin, L.; Hope, K. J.; Zhai, Q.; Smadja-Joffe, F.; Dick, J. E.
: Targeting of CD44 eradicates human acute myeloid leukemic stem cells. Nature
Med. 12: 1167-1174, 2006.

13. Krainer, A. R.; Mayeda, A.; Kozak, D.; Binns, G.: Functional
expression of cloned human splicing factor SF2: homology to RNA-binding
proteins, U1 70K, and Drosophila splicing regulators. Cell 66: 383-394,
1991.

14. Krause, D. S.; Lazarides, K.; von Andrian, U. H.; Van Etten, R.
A.: Requirement for CD44 in homing and engraftment of BCR-ABL-expressing
leukemic stem cells. Nature Med. 12: 1175-1180, 2006.

15. Leemans, J. C.; Florquin, S.; Heikens, M.; Pals, S. T.; van der
Neut, R.; van der Poll, T.: CD44 is a macrophage binding site for
Mycobacterium tuberculosis that mediates macrophage recruitment and
protective immunity against tuberculosis. J. Clin. Invest. 111:
681-689, 2003.

16. Matsumura, Y.; Tarin, D.: Significance of CD44 gene products
for cancer diagnosis and disease evaluation. Lancet 340: 1053-1058,
1992.

17. Mayer, B.; Jauch, K. W.; Gunthert, U.; Figdor, C. G.; Schildberg,
F. W.; Funke, I.; Johnson, J. P.: De-novo expression of CD44 and
survival in gastric cancer. Lancet 342: 1019-1022, 1993.

18. Nedvetzki, S.; Golan, I.; Assayag, N.; Gonen, E.; Caspi, D.; Gladnikoff,
M.; Yayon, A.; Naor, D.: A mutation in a CD44 variant of inflammatory
cells enhances the mitogenic interaction of FGF with its receptor. J.
Clin. Invest. 111: 1211-1220, 2003.

19. Omary, M. B.; Trowbridge, I. S.; Letarte, M.; Kagnoff, M. F.;
Isacke, C. M.: Structural heterogeneity of human Pgp-1 and its relationship
with p85. Immunogenetics 27: 460-464, 1988.

20. Schlossman, S. F.; Boumsell, L.; Gilks, W.; Harlan, J. M.; Kishimoto,
T.; Morimoto, C.; Ritz, J.; Shaw, S.; Silverstein, R. L.; Springer,
T. A.; Tedder, T. F.; Todd, R. F.: CD antigens 1993. Immun. Today 15:
98-99, 1994.

21. Schmits, R.; Filmus, J.; Gerwin, N.; Senaldi, G.; Kiefer, F.;
Kundig, T.; Wakeham, A.; Shahinian, A.; Catzavelos, C.; Rak, J.; Furlonger,
C.; Zakarian, A.; Simard, J. J.; Ohashi, P. S.; Paige, C. J.; Gutierrez-Romas,
J. C.; Mak, T. W.: CD44 regulates hematopoietic progenitor distribution,
granuloma formation, and tumorigenicity. Blood 90: 2217-2233, 1997.

22. Screaton, G. R.; Bell, M. V.; Jackson, D. G.; Cornelis, F. B.;
Gerth, U.; Bell, J. I.: Genomic structure of DNA encoding the lymphocyte
homing receptor CD44 reveals at least 12 alternatively spliced exons. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 12160-12164, 1992.

23. Seldin, M. F.: Personal Communication. Durham, N. C.  9/19/1990.

24. Sherman, L.; Wainwright, D.; Ponta, H.; Herrlich, P.: A splice
variant of CD44 expressed in the apical ectodermal ridge presents
fibroblast growth factors to limb mesenchyme and is required for limb
outgrowth. Genes Dev. 12: 1058-1071, 1998.

25. Stamenkovic, I.; Amiot, M.; Pesando, J. M.; Seed, B.: A lymphocyte
molecule implicated in lymph node homing is a member of the cartilage
link protein family. Cell 56: 1057-1062, 1989.

26. Stefanova, I.; Hilgert, I.; Bazil, V.; Kristofova, H.; Horejsi,
V.: Human leucocyte surface glycoprotein CDw44 and lymphocyte homing
receptor are identical molecules. Immunogenetics 29: 402-404, 1989.

27. Teder, P.; Vandivier, R. W.; Jiang, D.; Liang, J.; Cohn, L.; Pure,
E.; Henson, P. M.; Noble, P. W.: Resolution of lung inflammation
by CD44. Science 296: 155-158, 2002.

28. Telen, M. J.: Personal Communication. Durham, N. C.  12/30/1992.

29. Telen, M. J.; Eisenbarth, G. S.; Haynes, B. F.: Human erythrocyte
antigens: regulation of expression of a novel erythrocyte surface
antigen by the inhibitor Lutheran In(Lu) gene. J. Clin. Invest. 71:
1878-1886, 1983.

30. Telen, M. J.; Palker, T. J.; Haynes, B. F.: Human erythrocyte
antigens: II. The In(Lu) gene regulates expression of an antigen on
an 80-kilodalton protein of human erythrocytes. Blood 64: 599-606,
1984.

31. Telen, M. J.; Udani, M.; Washington, M. K.; Levesque, M. C.; Lloyd,
E.; Rao, N.: A blood group-related polymorphism of CD44 abolishes
a hyaluronan-binding consensus sequence without preventing hyaluronan
binding. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 7147-7153, 1996.

32. van Royen, N.; Voskuil, M.; Hoefer, I.; Jost, M.; de Graaf, S.;
Hedwig, F.; Andert, J.-P.; Wormhoudt, T. A. M.; Hua, J.; Hartmann,
S.; Bode, C.; Buschmann, I.; Schaper, W.; van der Neut, R.; Piek,
J. J.; Pals, S. T.: CD44 regulates arteriogenesis in mice and is
differentially expressed in patients with poor and good collateralization. Circulation 109:
1647-1652, 2004.

33. Weber, G. F.; Ashkar, S.; Glimcher, M. J.; Cantor, H.: Receptor-ligand
interaction between CD44 and osteopontin (Eta-1). Science 271: 509-512,
1996.

34. Yang, B.; Yang, B. L.; Savani, R. C.; Turley, E. A.: Identification
of a common hyaluronan binding motif in the hyaluronan binding proteins
RHAMM, CD44 and link protein. EMBO J. 13: 286-296, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/5/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/28/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/26/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/27/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/26/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/31/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/25/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/15/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/9/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/9/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/25/1998
Alan F. Scott - updated: 5/21/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/25/1990

EDITED mgross: 10/14/2013
wwang: 8/17/2011
mgross: 11/7/2008
terry: 11/5/2008
mgross: 10/30/2008
terry: 10/28/2008
wwang: 12/28/2007
ckniffin: 11/26/2007
mgross: 1/29/2007
mgross: 11/17/2006
terry: 10/27/2006
mgross: 10/26/2006
wwang: 2/3/2006
terry: 1/31/2006
terry: 12/21/2005
mgross: 2/25/2005
mgross: 11/15/2004
joanna: 11/15/2004
cwells: 4/11/2002
cwells: 4/10/2002
terry: 4/9/2002
alopez: 1/10/2002
terry: 1/9/2002
dkim: 7/24/1998
carol: 4/25/1998
terry: 4/25/1998
mark: 5/21/1996
terry: 5/21/1996
mark: 5/20/1996
mark: 2/10/1996
terry: 2/7/1996
terry: 7/29/1994
carol: 4/11/1994
warfield: 4/7/1994
carol: 9/8/1993
carol: 1/14/1993
carol: 1/13/1993

614967	TITLE *614967 SECERNIN 3; SCRN3
;;SES3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis to identify sequences similar to mouse Scrn1
(614965), Way et al. (2002) identified human SCRN3. The deduced SCRN3
protein contain 243 amino acids.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Way et al. (2002) mapped the SCRN3 gene to
chromosome 2p14-q14.3.

Hartz (2012) mapped the SCRN3 gene to chromosome 2q31.1 based on an
alignment of the SCRN3 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK026795) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  11/30/2012.

2. Way, G.; Morrice, N.; Smythe, C.; O'Sullivan, A. J.: Purification
and identification of secernin, a novel cytosolic protein that regulates
exocytosis in mast cells. Molec. Biol. Cell 13: 3344-3354, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/3/2012

EDITED mgross: 12/03/2012

605684	TITLE *605684 TRIPARTITE MOTIF-CONTAINING PROTEIN 34; TRIM34
;;RING FINGER PROTEIN 21; RNF21;;
INTERFERON-RESPONSIVE FINGER PROTEIN 1; IFP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

RING finger proteins play crucial roles in differentiation, development,
oncogenesis, and apoptosis. Although RING finger domains are involved in
protein-protein interactions and typically bind zinc, they are distinct
from zinc finger domains in terms of sequence and structure. Using PCR
with degenerate primers to generate probes for novel RING finger
proteins, followed by screening placenta and ovary cDNA libraries, Orimo
et al. (2000) isolated cDNAs encoding 3 isoforms of RNF21. The deduced
842-amino acid long form contains 2 RING finger domains, 2 RING finger
B-box coiled-coil (RBCC) domains, and a C-terminal B30.2 domain. The
488-amino acid medium form has 1 of each of these domains, whereas the
270-amino acid short form has a RING finger domain and a RBCC domain but
lacks the B30.2 domain. Immunoblot analysis detected 98-, 54-, and 31-kD
proteins. RT-PCR analysis indicated that each isoform is expressed in
placenta and testis. Northern blot analysis revealed expression of a
4-kb transcript predominantly in testis and a 2.4-kb transcript that was
highly expressed in placenta, spleen, colon, and blood leukocytes. The
long form was expressed only in testis, kidney, and ovary. Expression of
the medium form was upregulated in response to alpha-interferon (see
147660) and, later, to gamma-interferon (147570).

MAPPING

By FISH, Orimo et al. (2000) mapped the RNF21 gene to 11p15.4-p15.3.

REFERENCE 1. Orimo, A.; Tominaga, N.; Yoshimura, K.; Yamauchi, Y.; Nomura, M.;
Sato, M.; Nogi, Y.; Suzuki, M.; Suzuki, H.; Ikeda, K.; Inoue, S.;
Muramatsu, M.: Molecular cloning of ring finger protein 21 (RNF21)/interferon-responsive
finger protein (ifp1), which possesses two RING-B box-coiled coil
domains in tandem. Genomics 69: 143-149, 2000.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/23/2001

EDITED carol: 10/26/2006
carol: 6/13/2003
mgross: 12/21/2001
mcapotos: 7/20/2001
mgross: 2/27/2001
mgross: 2/26/2001

606461	TITLE *606461 TRIMETHYLGUANOSINE SYNTHASE, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; TGS1
;;PRIP-INTERACTING PROTEIN WITH METHYLTRANSFERASE DOMAIN; PIMT;;
NUCLEAR RECEPTOR COACTIVATOR 6; NCOA6IP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Nuclear receptor coactivators participate in the transcriptional
activation of specific genes by nuclear receptors. Zhu et al. (2001)
isolated a nuclear receptor coactivator-interacting protein, designated
PIMT, from a human liver cDNA library by using the coactivator
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-interacting protein (PRIP;
605299) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen. The PIMT cDNA encodes an
852-amino acid protein containing a 9-amino acid methyltransferase motif
I (VVDAFCGVG) and an invariant segment (GXXGXXI) found in K-homology
motifs of many RNA-binding proteins. Northern blot analysis demonstrated
ubiquitous expression of a 3.2-kb PIMT transcript, with highest
expression in heart, skeletal muscle, kidney, liver, and placenta.
Immunofluorescence studies showed that the PIMT and PRIP proteins are
colocalized in the nucleus. PIMT binds 5-adenosyl-L-methionine, the
methyl donor for the methyltransfer reaction, and it also binds RNA,
suggesting that it is an RNA methyltransferase. Overexpression of PIMT
enhances the transcriptional activity of PPARG (601487) and RXR (see
180245), and this enhancement is further stimulated by overexpression of
PRIP, suggesting that PIMT is a component of nuclear receptor signal
transduction that acts through PRIP.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhu et al. (2001) determined that the PIMT gene contains more than 13
exons and spans more than 40 kb.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Zhu et al. (2001) mapped the PIMT gene to
chromosome 8q11.

REFERENCE 1. Zhu, Y.; Qi, C.; Cao, W.-Q.; Yeldandi, A. V.; Rao, M. S.; Reddy,
J. K.: Cloning and characterization of PIMT, a protein with a methyltransferase
domain, which interacts with and enhances nuclear receptor coactivator
PRIP function. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 10380-10385, 2001.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/15/2001

EDITED carol: 02/21/2007
carol: 2/21/2007
carol: 11/15/2001

300230	TITLE *300230 CARBONIC ANHYDRASE VB, MITOCHONDRIAL; CA5B
;;CA VB
DESCRIPTION Carbonic anhydrases (CAs) are a family of zinc metalloenzymes. For
background information on the CA family, see 114800.

By negative screening of RT-PCR-derived cDNA clones of pancreas and
salivary gland tissue with cDNA probes corresponding to CA2 (611492),
CA4 (114760), and CA6 (114780), followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE,
Fujikawa-Adachi et al. (1999) obtained a cDNA encoding a member of the
CA family, which they termed CA5B. CA5B encodes a 317-amino acid protein
that has 64% sequence similarity with CA5 (114761), a mitochondrial CA,
and contains a 33-amino-acid residue signal sequence. Western blot
analysis revealed a 36-kD protein precursor and a 32-kD mature protein.
Endoglycosidase treatment did not affect the size of the protein.
Western blot analysis with cell fractionation and confocal fluorescence
microscopy showed specific localization in mitochondria. Like CA5, CA5B
is a low activity enzyme with a sensitivity to acetazolamide. Northern
blot analysis revealed a wider tissue distribution than that for CA5,
with expression of 4 different-sized transcripts (1.3, 2.6, 4.4, and 6.0
kb) in all tissues examined except liver, with strongest expression in
heart, pancreas, kidney, placenta, lung, and skeletal muscle. By RT-PCR
analysis, CA5B was expressed in pancreas, kidney, salivary glands, and
spinal cord, but not in liver, whereas CA5 was expressed in liver only.

By FISH, Fujikawa-Adachi et al. (1999) mapped the CA5B gene to Xp22.1.

Shah et al. (2000) identified a mouse mitochondrial carbonic anhydrase,
called type VB, by homology to the previously characterized murine CA
VA. Shah et al. (2000) found that the carbonic anhydrase domain sequence
of human VB shows much higher conservation between mouse and human (95%
identity) than the CA domains of mouse and human VA (78% identity).
Analysis of phylogenetic relationships between these and other available
human and mouse CA isozyme sequences revealed that mammalian CA VB
evolved much more slowly than CA VA, accepting amino acid substitutions
at least 4.5 times more slowly since each evolved from its respective
human-mouse ancestral gene around 90 million years ago. Both the
differences in tissue distribution and the much greater evolutionary
constraints on CA VB sequences suggested that the 2 forms of
mitochondrial carbonic anhydrase evolved to assume different physiologic
roles.

REFERENCE 1. Fujikawa-Adachi, K.; Nishimori, I.; Taguchi, T.; Onishi, S.: Human
mitochondrial carbonic anhydrase VB: cDNA cloning, mRNA expression,
subcellular localization, and mapping to chromosome X. J. Biol. Chem. 274:
21228-21233, 1999.

2. Shah, G. N.; Hewett-Emmett, D.; Grubb, J. H.; Migas, M. C.; Fleming,
R. E.; Waheed, A.; Sly, W. S.: Mitochondrial carbonic anhydrase CA
VB: differences in tissue distribution and pattern of evolution from
those of CA VA suggest distinct physiological roles. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 97: 1677-1682, 2000.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/29/2000

EDITED carol: 10/10/2007
mcapotos: 3/29/2000
mcapotos: 3/27/2000
carol: 2/29/2000

602818	TITLE *602818 HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H3 HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER H; HIST1H3H
;;HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H3H;;
HIST1 CLUSTER, H3H;;
H3 HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER K; H3FK;;
H3/K
DESCRIPTION For background information on histones, histone gene clusters, and the
H3 histone family, see HIST1H3A (602810).

CLONING

By genomic sequence analysis, Marzluff et al. (2002) identified the
mouse and human HIST1H3H genes. They noted that all H3 genes in histone
gene cluster-1 (HIST1), including HIST1H3H, encode the same protein,
designated H3.1. H3.1 differs from H3.2, which is encoded by HIST2H3C
(142780), at only 1 residue, and from histone H3.3, which is encoded by
both H3F3A (601128) and H3F3B (601058), at a few residues.

MAPPING

By analysis of a YAC contig from chromosome 6p22-p21.3, Albig and
Doenecke (1997) characterized a second cluster of 16 histone genes,
including H3/k, located 2 Mb centromeric to the major histone gene
cluster.

By genomic sequence analysis, Marzluff et al. (2002) determined that the
histone gene cluster on chromosome 6p22-p21, which they called HIST1,
contains 55 histone genes, including HIST1H3H.

GENE FUNCTION

See HIST1H3A (602810) for functional information on H3.1 and the H3
histone family.

REFERENCE 1. Albig, W.; Doenecke, D.: The human histone gene cluster at the
D6S105 locus. Hum. Genet. 101: 284-294, 1997.

2. Marzluff, W. F.; Gongidi, P.; Woods, K. R.; Jin, J.; Maltais, L.
J.: The human and mouse replication-dependent histone genes. Genomics 80:
487-498, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 02/04/2013

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/9/1998

EDITED mgross: 02/04/2013
mgross: 7/22/2010
tkritzer: 3/31/2003
alopez: 8/26/1998
alopez: 7/14/1998
alopez: 7/10/1998

191050	TITLE *191050 TRYPTOPHANYL-tRNA SYNTHETASE; WARS
;;TRYPTOPHANYL-tRNA SYNTHETASE, CYTOPLASMIC
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases catalyze the first step of protein synthesis.
Human tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase (YARS; 603623) can be split into 2
fragments having distinct cytokine activities, thereby linking protein
synthesis to cytokine signaling pathways. Tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase
(WARS) is a close homolog of tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase. It catalyzes the
aminoacylation of tRNA(trp) with tryptophan, an essential function of
the cell's protein synthesis machinery.

CLONING

Frolova et al. (1991) cloned the human gene and reported its nucleotide
sequence. Shimizu et al. (1976) and Denney et al. (1978) located the
structural gene for tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase on chromosome 14.

GENE FUNCTION

In normal cells, human tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase exists in 2 forms.
The major form is the full-length protein, and the other is a truncated
form in which most of the extra-NH2-terminal domain is deleted because
of alternative splicing of the pre-mRNA (Tolstrup et al., 1995; Turpaev
et al., 1996), with met48 being deduced as the NH2-terminal residue of
the truncated form. The expression of the short form of WARS is highly
stimulated in human cells by the addition of interferon-gamma (IFNG;
147570).

Wakasugi et al. (2002) showed that the truncated form of WARS is
angiostatic in several different systems and assays, whereas the
full-length enzyme is inactive. Thus, protein synthesis may be linked to
the regulation of angiogenesis by a natural fragment of
tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase.

Otani et al. (2002) showed that a recombinant form of a COOH-terminal
fragment of tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase is a potent antagonist of
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF; 192240)-induced angiogenesis
in a mouse model and of naturally occurring retinal angiogenesis in the
neonatal mouse. Angiostatic activity was dose-dependent in both systems.
The full-length protein was inactive as an antagonist of angiogenesis.
The results suggested that fragments of tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase, as
naturally occurring and potentially nonimmunogenic anti-angiogenics, can
be used for the treatment of neovascular eye diseases.

MAPPING

Francke et al. (1977) assigned WARS to 14q21-qter. Graphodatsky et al.
(1993) confirmed the assignment to chromosome 14 and regionalized it by
isotopic in situ hybridization to 14q23-q31. The gene may be in the
14q24 band where one-third of the grains were localized.

Borglum et al. (1996) mapped a cDNA probe of the WARS gene by a
combination of somatic cell hybrid analysis, fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH), and linkage analysis. Both FISH and linkage
analysis independently supported a more distal position of WARS than had
been previously reported. FISH mapping indicated the most likely
position to be 14q32.31.

Jensen et al. (2001) found that a pseudogene of the NDUFB3 gene
(603839), designated NDUFB3P4, is positioned in intron 2 of the WARS
gene in the opposite direction.

REFERENCE 1. Borglum, A. D.; Flint, T.; Tommerup, N.; Fleckner, J.; Justesen,
J.; Kruse, T. A.: Assignment of the human tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase
gene (WARS) to chromosome 14q32.2-q32.32. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 73:
99-103, 1996.

2. Denney, R. M.; Borgaonkar, D.; Ruddle, F. H.: Order of genes for
NP and TRPRS on chromosome 14. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 22: 493-497,
1978.

3. Francke, U.; Denney, R. M.; Ruddle, F. H.: Intrachromosomal gene
mapping in man: the gene for tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase maps in
region q21-qter of chromosome 14. Somat. Cell Genet. 3: 381-389,
1977.

4. Frolova, L. Y.; Sudomoina, M. A.; Grigorieva, A. Y.; Zinovieva,
O. L.; Kisselev, L. L.: Cloning and nucleotide sequence of the structural
gene encoding for human tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase. Gene 109:
291-296, 1991.

5. Graphodatsky, A.; Frolova, L.; Biltueva, L.; Eremina, V.; Lushnikova,
T.; Sudomoina, M.; Zinovieva, O.; Kisselev, L.: Localization of the
tryptophanyl tRNA synthetase gene (WARS) on human and bovine chromosomes
by in situ hybridization. Mammalian Genome 4: 183-184, 1993.

6. Jensen, L. L.; Nielsen, M. M.; Justesen, J.; Hansen, L. L.: Assignment
of human NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1 beta subcomplex 3 (NDUFB3)
and of its four pseudogenes to human chromosomes 2q31.3, 1p13.3-p13.1,
9q32-q34.1, 14q22.3-q23.1 and 14q32.2 by radiation hybrid mapping. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 93: 147-150, 2001.

7. Otani, A.; Slike, B. M.; Dorrell, M. I.; Hood, J.; Kinder, K.;
Ewalt, K. L.; Cheresh, D.; Schimmel, P.; Friedlander, M.: A fragment
of human TrpRS as a potent antagonist of ocular angiogenesis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 178-183, 2002.

8. Shimizu, N.; Kucherlapati, R. S.; Ruddle, F. H.: Assignment of
a human gene for tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase to chromosome 14 using
human-mouse somatic cell hybrids. Somat. Cell Genet. 2: 345-357,
1976.

9. Tolstrup, A. B.; Bejder, A.; Fleckner, J.; Justesen, J.: Transcriptional
regulation of the interferon-gamma-inducible tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase
includes alternative splicing. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 397-403, 1995.

10. Turpaev, K. T.; Zakhariev, V. M.; Sokolova, I. V.; Narovlyansky,
A. N.; Amchenkova, A. M.; Justesen, J.; Frolova, L. Y.: Alternative
processing of the tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase mRNA from interferon-treated
human cells. Europ. J. Biochem. 240: 732-737, 1996.

11. Wakasugi, K.; Slike, B. M.; Hood, J.; Otani, A.; Ewalt, K. L.;
Friedlander, M.; Cheresh, D. A.; Schimmel, P.: A human aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase as a regulator of angiogenesis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99:
173-177, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/31/2002
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 8/28/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED terry: 03/08/2002
carol: 2/18/2002
mcapotos: 2/7/2002
mcapotos: 2/6/2002
terry: 1/31/2002
carol: 8/28/2001
psherman: 3/23/2000
terry: 9/18/1996
marlene: 8/15/1996
carol: 3/25/1993
carol: 4/21/1992
supermim: 3/19/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989

614460	TITLE *614460 UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE 47; USP47
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

USP47 belongs to a family of ubiquitin-specific cysteine proteases.
These enzymes catalyze the removal of ubiquitin from proteins that are
ubiquitinated and thus targeted for degradation via the proteasome
(Quesada et al., 2004).

CLONING

By searching databases for sequences similar to USP family members,
followed by PCR of human cDNA libraries, Quesada et al. (2004) cloned
USP47. The deduced protein has a catalytic domain containing a cys box,
a QQD box, and a his box, all of which are characteristic of USP
enzymes. Northern blot analysis detected high expression of a 5.5-kb
transcript in skeletal muscle, with lower expression in testis and
heart, and little to no expression in other tissues examined.

SKP1 (601434)/CUL1 (603134)/F-box protein (see 609102) (SCF) complexes
function as E3 ubiquitin ligases. By mass spectrometric analysis of
peptides that immunoprecipitated with an SCF complex containing
beta-TRCP2 (FBXW11; 603482) as its F-box protein subunit, Peschiaroli et
al. (2010) identified USP47. The deduced full-length protein contains
1,287 amino acids.

GENE FUNCTION

Peschiaroli et al. (2010) found that the F-box proteins beta-TRCP1
(BTRC; 603482) and beta-TRCP2, but not other F-box proteins, bound
USP47. Mutation analysis revealed that an N-terminal domain of USP47
interacted with the WD40 repeat domain of beta-TRCP. Knockdown of either
USP47 or beta-TRCP in several human cell lines reduced cell survival and
sensitized cells to pharmacologic induction of apoptosis. However,
beta-TRCP did not appear to use USP47 as a substrate or induce its
degradation. Conversely, knockdown of USP47 had no effect on beta-TRCP
activity.

MAPPING

Hartz (2012) mapped the USP47 gene to chromosome 11p15.3 based on an
alignment of the USP47 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK000734) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

ANIMAL MODEL

Peschiaroli et al. (2010) found that mice homozygous for a hypomorphic
Usp47 allele were viable and fertile. However, fibroblasts derived from
homozygous mutant embryos were more sensitive than wildtype to
ultraviolet radiation-induced apoptosis.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/30/2012.

2. Peschiaroli, A.; Skaar, J. R.; Pagano, M.; Melino, G.: The ubiquitin-specific
protease USP47 is a novel beta-TRCP interactor regulating cell survival. Oncogene 29:
1384-1393, 2010.

3. Quesada, V.; Diaz-Perales, A.; Gutierrez-Fernandez, A.; Garabaya,
C.; Cal, S.; Lopez-Otin, C.: Cloning and enzymatic analysis of 22
novel human ubiquitin-specific proteases. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 314: 54-62, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/31/2012

EDITED mgross: 01/31/2012

103020	TITLE *103020 ADENYLATE KINASE 2; AK2
;;ADENYLATE KINASE, MITOCHONDRIAL MYOKINASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Nucleoside monophosphate kinases, including adenylate kinases, catalyze
the reversible phosphorylation between nucleoside triphosphates and
monophosphates.

CLONING

Bruns and Regina (1977) analyzed the subcellular compartmentalization of
adenylate kinase-2 (EC 2.7.4.3) in HeLa cells, mouse RAG cells, and
RAG-human hybrids expressing human AK2. The results indicated that AK2
is a mitochondrial enzyme.

Noma et al. (1998) isolated cDNAs encoding human adenylate kinase-2 from
a HeLa cell cDNA library, using bovine AK2 cDNA as probe. Two
transcripts were identified: one, designated AK2A, encodes a deduced
239-amino acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of 26.5 kD, and
the other, designated AK2B, encodes a deduced 232-amino acid protein
with a predicted molecular mass of 25.6 kD. Northern blot analysis
demonstrated 3 strong hybridizing signals of 0.9 (AK2A), 1.7 (AK2B), and
3.5 kb, with high expression in liver, heart, skeletal muscle, and
pancreas, moderate expression in kidney, placenta, and brain, and weak
expression in lung. However, Western blot analysis showed high levels of
AK2 protein in liver, heart, and kidney, low levels in lung, and
undetectable levels in brain and skeletal muscle.

MAPPING

The existence of a second adenylate kinase locus linked to PGM1 and
peptidase C, i.e., on chromosome 1, was suggested by cell hybridization
studies by Van Cong et al. (1972). The Goss-Harris method of mapping
combines features of recombinational study in families and synteny tests
in hybrid cells. As applied to chromosome 1, the method shows that AK2
and UMPK are distal to PGM1 and that the order of the loci is PGM1:
UMPK: (AK2, alpha-FUC): ENO1 (Goss and Harris, 1977). Carritt et al.
(1982) presented evidence that AK2 is in 1p34.

GENE FUNCTION

Lee et al. (2007) showed that intrinsic apoptosis in human cells that
was induced by the chemotherapeutic agent etoposide or the antibiotic
staurosporine, but not by FAS ligand (TNFSF6; 134638) or TRAIL (TNFSF10;
603598), caused translocation of AK2 from mitochondria to the cytoplasm,
followed by formation of a complex between AK2, FADD (602457), and
CASP10 (601762). Yeast 2-hybrid analysis, protein pull-down assays, and
immunoprecipitation analysis showed that the N- and C-terminal domains
of AK2, which include nucleoside- and substrate-binding domains,
respectively, bound the C-terminal death domain of FADD. AK2 binding
promoted association of CASP10 with FADD, and addition of purified AK2
protein to cell extracts induced activation of CASP10 via FADD, leading
to subsequent activation of CASP9 (602234) and CASP3 (600636). Apoptosis
through the AK2 complex did not correlate with the adenylate kinase
activity of AK2, did not require CASP8 (601763)-mediated apoptotic
responses, and did not involve mitochondrial cytochrome c release.
Immunodepletion or knockdown of AK2, FADD, or CASP10 abrogated
etoposide-induced apoptosis, and AK2 complexes were not observed in
several etoposide-resistant human tumor cell lines that were deficient
in expression of FADD, CASP10, or CASP3. In contrast to the findings in
human cells, etoposide-induced apoptosis was observed in mouse embryonic
fibroblasts that lacked Fadd expression. Since mice also lack Casp10,
Lee et al. (2007) concluded that mice lack an apoptotic pathway
comparable to the AK2-FADD-CASP10 pathway in humans.

Pannicke et al. (2009) showed that knockdown of zebrafish ak2 also leads
to aberrant leukocyte development, demonstrating the evolutionarily
conserved role of AK2. They concluded that their results provide in vivo
evidence for AK2 selectivity in leukocyte differentiation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 6 affected individuals from 5 families segregating reticular
dysgenesis (267500), Pannicke et al. (2009) identified 6 causative
mutations in homozygous or compound heterozygous state
(103020.0001-103020.0006).

Lagresle-Peyrou et al. (2009) identified biallelic mutations in AK2
(103020.0007-103020.0013) in 7 individuals with reticular dysgenesis.
These mutations resulted in absent or strongly decreased protein
expression. The authors then demonstrated that restoration of AK2
expression in the bone marrow cells of individuals with reticular
dysgenesis overcomes the neutrophil differentiation arrest, underlining
its specific requirement in the development of a restricted set of
hematopoietic lineages. Finally, Lagresle-Peyrou et al. (2009)
established that AK2 is specifically expressed in the stria vascularis
region of the inner ear, which provides an explanation for the
sensorineural deafness in these individuals. Lagresle-Peyrou et al.
(2009) concluded that their results identified a previously unknown
mechanism involved in regulation of hematopoietic cell differentiation
in one of the most severe human immunodeficiency syndromes.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, 5,038-BP DEL

In a German male with reticular dysgenesis (267500), Pannicke et al.
(2009) identified a homozygous 5,038-bp deletion encompassing parts of
exon 6, all of intron 6 and parts of exon 7 reaching into the 3-prime
UTR of the AK2 gene. The mutation led to a complete loss of detectable
AK2 protein in fibroblasts and in bone marrow mononuclear cells. The
parents were heterozygous for the mutation, which was not found in 112
German or 50 Turkish healthy subjects.

.0002
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, 1-BP DEL, 118T

In a German male with reticular dysgenesis (267500), Pannicke et al.
(2009) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the AK2
gene: a 1-bp deletion (118delT) leading to a frameshift and early
truncation of the protein, and a 1A-G transition leading to a
met1-to-val (M1V) substitution (103020.0003). The mutation led to a
complete loss of detectable AK2 protein in fibroblasts and in bone
marrow mononuclear cells. Each parent was heterozygous for one of the
mutations. The mutations were not found in 112 German or 50 Turkish
healthy subjects.

.0003
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, MET1VAL

See 103020.0002 and Pannicke et al. (2009).

.0004
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, 331, G-A, -1

In a German male with reticular dysgenesis (267500), the offspring of
consanguineous parents, Pannicke et al. (2009) identified homozygosity
for a splicing mutation, 331-1G-A, in the AK2 gene. The mutation led to
a complete loss of detectable AK2 protein in fibroblasts and in bone
marrow mononuclear cells. The parents were heterozygous for the
mutation, which was not found in 112 German or 50 Turkish healthy
subjects.

.0005
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, 1-BP DEL, 453C

In male and female Turkish sibs with reticular dysgenesis (267500), the
offspring of consanguineous parents, Pannicke et al. (2009) identified
homozygosity for a 1-bp deletion (453delC) in the AK2 gene, leading to a
frameshift and early truncation of the protein. The mutation led to a
complete loss of detectable AK2 protein in fibroblasts and in bone
marrow mononuclear cells. The parents were heterozygous for the
mutation, which was not found in 112 German or 50 Turkish healthy
subjects.

.0006
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, 498, G-A, +1

In a Turkish female with reticular dysgenesis (267500), the offspring of
consanguineous parents, Pannicke et al. (2009) identified homozygosity
for a splicing mutation, 498+1G-A, in the AK2 gene. The mutation led to
a complete loss of detectable AK2 protein in fibroblasts and in bone
marrow mononuclear cells. The parents were heterozygous for the
mutation, which was not found in 112 German or 50 Turkish healthy
subjects.

.0007
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, ASP165GLY

In 2 separate pedigrees with reticular dysgenesis (267500), each of whom
was consanguineous, Lagresle-Peyrou et al. (2009) identified
homozygosity for an A-to-G transition at nucleotide 546 in exon 5 of the
AK2 gene, resulting in an asp-to-gly substitution in codon 165 (D165G)
within the LID domain. This mutation changed a highly conserved amino
acid. The parents were found to be carriers, and unaffected sibs were
heterozygous or homozygous for the wildtype allele.

.0008
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, LEU183TER

In a female from a consanguineous family affected with reticular
dysgenesis (267500), Lagresle-Peyrou et al. (2009) identified a 1-bp
deletion of C at nucleotide 523 in exon 6 of the AK2 gene (523delC),
resulting in a substitution of a termination codon for a leucine at
codon 183 (L183X). This mutation was not detected in her sister and each
parent was found to be a carrier.

.0009
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, ARG186CYS

In a female with reticular dysgenesis (267500), Lagresle-Peyrou et al.
(2009) found compound heterozygosity for mutations in the AK2 gene: a
C-to-T transition at nucleotide 556 in exon 6, resulting in an
arg-to-cys substitution at codon 186 (R186C), and an exon 2 deletion
(see 103020.0010).

.0010
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, EX2 DEL

In a female with reticular dysgenesis (267500) from a nonconsanguineous
family, Lagresle-Peyrou et al. (2009) identified compound heterozygosity
for deletion of exon 2 of the AK2 gene and an arg186-to-cys substitution
(103020.0009). Each parent was a carrier of one of the mutations.

.0011
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, ARG103TRP

In a female with reticular dysgenesis (267500), Lagresle-Peyrou et al.
(2009) identified a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 307 in exon 3 of the
AK2 gene, resulting in an arg-to-trp substitution at codon 103 (R103W).
Each of her parents was a carrier for this mutation, which occurs in a
highly conserved amino acid residue.

.0012
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, LYS233TER

In a female with reticular dysgenesis (267500), Lagresle-Peyrou et al.
(2009) identified a 5-kb deletion following nucleotide 633 (633del5kb),
resulting in a lys-to-ter substitution at codon 233 (K233X). The patient
was homozygous for this mutation. Two of her 3 unaffected sibs, and each
of her unaffected parents, were carriers.

.0013
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, GLU9TER

In a female with reticular dysgenesis (267500), Lagresle-Peyrou et al.
(2009) identified homozygosity for a G-to-T transversion at nucleotide
25 in exon 1 of the AK2 gene, resulting in a glu-to-ter codon
substitution at amino acid 9 (E9X). The child was homozygous for this
mutation. Each of her parents was a carrier.

REFERENCE 1. Bruns, G. A. P.; Regina, V. M.: Adenylate kinase-2, a mitochondrial
enzyme. Biochem. Genet. 15: 477-486, 1977.

2. Carritt, B.; King, J.; Welch, H. M.: Gene order and localization
of enzyme loci on the short arm of chromosome 1. Ann. Hum. Genet. 46:
329-335, 1982.

3. Goss, S. J.; Harris, H.: Gene transfer by means of cell fusion.
II. The mapping of 8 loci on human chromosome 1 by statistical analysis
of gene assortment in somatic cell hybrids. J. Cell Sci. 25: 39-57,
1977.

4. Lagresle-Peyrou, C.; Six, E. M.; Picard, C.; Rieux-Laucat, F.;
Michel, V.; Ditadi, A.; Chappedelaine, C. D.; Morillon, E.; Valensi,
F.; Simon-Stoos, K. L.; Mullikin, J. C.; Noroski, L. M.; and 10 others
: Human adenylate kinase 2 deficiency causes a profound hematopoietic
defect associated with sensorineural deafness. Nature Genet. 41:
106-111, 2009.

5. Lee, H.-J.; Pyo, J.-O.; Oh, Y.; Kim, H.-J.; Hong, S.; Jeon, Y.-J.;
Kim, H.; Cho, D.-H.; Woo, H.-N.; Song, S.; Nam, J.-H.; Kim, H. J.;
Kim, K.-S.; Jung, Y.-K.: AK2 activates a novel apoptotic pathway
through formation of a complex with FADD and caspase-10. Nature Cell
Biol. 9: 1303-1310, 2007.

6. Noma, T.; Song, S.; Yoon, Y.-S.; Tanaka, S.; Nakazawa, A.: cDNA
cloning and tissue-specific expression of the gene encoding human
adenylate kinase isozyme 2. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1395: 34-39,
1998.

7. Pannicke, U.; Honig, M.; Hess, I.; Friesen, C.; Holzmann, K.; Rump,
E.-M.; Barth, T. F.; Rojewski, M. T.; Schulz, A.; Boehm, T.; Friedrich,
W.; Schwarz, K.: Reticular dysgenesis (aleukocytosis) is caused by
mutations in the gene encoding mitochondrial adenylate kinase 2. Nature
Genet. 41: 101-105, 2009.

8. Van Cong, N.; Billardon, C.; Rebourcet, R.; Kaouel, C. L.-B.; Picard,
J. Y.; Weil, D.; Frezal, J.: The existence of a second adenylate
kinase locus linked to PGM-1 and peptidase-C. Ann. Genet. 15: 213-218,
1972.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/15/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/4/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/28/2008
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 8/6/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED terry: 06/11/2012
alopez: 1/26/2010
terry: 1/15/2010
terry: 8/13/2009
carol: 8/12/2009
terry: 8/4/2009
mgross: 10/28/2008
ckniffin: 6/1/2004
tkritzer: 8/8/2003
carol: 8/6/2003
psherman: 4/15/1998
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/26/1989
marie: 3/25/1988
reenie: 2/9/1987
marie: 1/7/1987

611695	TITLE *611695 TAU TUBULIN KINASE 2; TTBK2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Houlden et al. (2007) characterized the TTBK2 gene. TTBK2 produces a
5.6-kb transcript in which the longest open reading frame is 3,732
nucleotides, encoding a protein of 1,244 amino acids. The gene is
alternatively spliced, with ubiquitous expression in human adult and
fetal tissues. The N-terminus of TTBK2 encodes a
serine-threonine-tyrosine kinase domain, and a C-terminal region shows
homology to TTBK1. By in situ hybridization, Houlden et al. (2007)
showed that TTBK2 was expressed in all brain regions in human, rat, and
mouse tissue. There was particularly high expression in Purkinje cells
of the cerebellum, granular cell layer, hippocampus, midbrain, and
substantia nigra. Lower expression was seen in the cortex of human, rat,
and mouse brains.

GENE FUNCTION

TTBK2 encodes a member of the casein kinase (CK1) group of eukaryotic
protein kinases, as indicated by its ability to phosphorylate tau
(157140) and tubulin (see 602529) in vitro. TTBK1 has been implicated in
Alzheimer disease (104300) and in tangle formation (Sato et al., 2006).
The 2 TTBK2 phosphorylation sites in tau (ser208 and ser210) are priming
sites for the phosphorylation of tau by GSK-3-beta (605004), which
influences tau pathology.

GENE STRUCTURE

Houlden et al. (2007) determined that the TTBK2 gene comprises 16 exons.

MAPPING

Houlden et al. (2007) localized the TTBK2 to chromosome 15q15.2, within
a critical region linked to spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA11; 604432).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Spinocerebellar ataxia 11 (SCA11; 604432) is a pure progressive
cerebellar ataxia that has been linked to 15q14-q21 (Worth et al.,
1999). Houlden et al. (2007) narrowed the assignment to a 5.6-cM region
containing 134 genes. In an 8-generation English family they found a
1-base insertion in the TTBK2 gene creating a premature stop codon and a
truncation of the normal protein (611695.0001). In a second family of
Pakistani ancestry, a different mutation was found (611695.0002).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 11
TTBK2, 1-BP INS, 1329A

In an English family from Devon with SCA11 (604432) in 8 generations,
Houlden et al. (2007) identified in affected individuals a 1-base
insertion of an adenosine in exon 13 of the TTBK2 gene, at nucleotide
1329, codon 444 (1329insA). This created a premature stop site (TGA) in
the mRNA at codon 450, truncating the normal protein from 1,244 to 450
amino acids.

.0002
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 11
TTBK2, 2-BP DEL, 1284GA

In a family of Pakistani ancestry with 5 individuals over 3 generations
presenting with spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA11; 604432), Houlden et al.
(2007) identified a frameshift deletion of 2 bases (GA) in exon 13 of
TTBK2 at nucleotides 1284 and 1285 in codons 428 and 429
(1284_1285delAG). The deletion created a premature stop site (TGA) in
mRNA at codon 449.

REFERENCE 1. Houlden, H.; Johnson, J.; Gardner-Thorpe, C.; Lashley, T.; Hernandez,
D.; Worth, P.; Singleton, A. B.; Hilton, D. A.; Holton, J.; Revesz,
T.; Davis, M. B.; Giunti, P.; Wood, N. W.: Mutations in TTBK2, encoding
a kinase implicated in tau phosphorylation, segregate with spinocerebellar
ataxia type 11. Nature Genet. 39: 1434-1436, 2007. Note: Erratum:
Nature Genet. 40: 255 only, 2008.

2. Sato, S.; Cerny, R. L.; Buescher, J. L.; Ikezu, T.: Tau-tubulin
kinase 1 (TTBK1), a neuron-specific tau kinase candidate, is involved
in tau phosphorylation and aggregation. J. Neurochem. 98: 1573-1584,
2006.

3. Worth, P. F.; Giunti, P.; Gardner-Thorpe, C.; Dixon, P. H.; Davis,
M. B.; Wood, N. W.: Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia type III:
linkage in a large British family to a 7.6-cM region on chromosome
15q14-21.3. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65: 420-426, 1999.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/21/2007

EDITED carol: 05/30/2012
terry: 7/3/2008
alopez: 12/21/2007

107777	TITLE *107777 AQUAPORIN 2; AQP2
;;AQUAPORIN-CD
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The AQP2 gene encodes an aquaporin-2 water channel located in the renal
collecting tubules. Aquaporin-CHIP (AQP1; 107776) is located in the
proximal renal tubule (Fushimi et al., 1993).

CLONING

Fushimi et al. (1993) cloned the cDNA for the water channel of the
apical membrane of the kidney collecting tubule in the rat. The gene
shows 42% identity in amino acid sequence to AQP1. Expression in Xenopus
oocytes markedly increased osmotic water permeability (Pf). The
functional expression and the limited localization suggested that AQP2
is the vasopressin-regulated water channel. Fushimi et al. (1993)
referred to AQP2 as WCH-CD, for 'water channel-collecting duct.'

Sasaki et al. (1993, 1994) cloned a cDNA for human AQP2 and found that
it encodes a deduced protein with 91% amino acid identity to the rat
protein. By screening kidney cDNA in cosmid libraries with a rat AQP2
cDNA probe, Deen et al. (1994) isolated human AQP2. They found that the
predicted amino acid sequence shares 89.7% identity with the rat
protein.

GENE FUNCTION

Nielsen et al. (1995) showed that arginine vasopressin (AVP; 192340)
increases cellular water permeability by inducing exocytosis of
AQP2-laden vesicles, transferring water channels from intracellular
vesicles to the apical plasma membrane.

Using rat kidney slices and porcine kidney cells stably expressing rat
Aqp2, Bouley et al. (2000) demonstrated that AQP2 trafficking can be
stimulated by cAMP-independent pathways that utilize nitric oxide (NO).
The NO donors sodium nitroprusside (SNP) and NONOate and the NO synthase
(see 163731) substrate L-arginine mimicked the effect of vasopressin
(VP), stimulating relocation of Aqp2 from cytoplasmic vesicles to the
apical plasma membrane. SNP increased intracellular cGMP rather than
cAMP, and exogenous cGMP stimulated AQP2 membrane insertion. Atrial
natriuretic factor (108780), which signals via cGMP, also stimulated
AQP2 translocation. Both the VP and SNP effects were blocked by a kinase
inhibitor, and membrane insertion was blocked in cells expressing the
phosphorylation-deficient mutant ser256 to ala, indicating that ser256
is required for signaling.

Kanno et al. (1995) reported that aquaporin-2 is detectable in the urine
in both soluble and membrane-bound forms. In normal subjects, an
infusion of desmopressin increased the urinary excretion of aquaporin-2.
In 5 patients with central diabetes insipidus (CDI; 125700),
administration of desmopressin increased urinary excretion of
aquaporin-2; however, this response was not seen in 4 patients with
X-linked (304800) or autosomal (125800) recessive nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus. Saito et al. (1997) determined that measuring urinary
excretion of AQP2 is of value in diagnosing central diabetes insipidus.
In normal subjects under ad libitum water drinking, urinary AQP2 was
positively correlated with plasma arginine vasopressin levels, but not
with urinary osmolality. Saito et al. (1997) found that measurement of
AQP2 was also helpful when using a hypertonic saline infusion to
diagnose CDI. Saito et al. (1999) investigated whether urinary excretion
of AQP2 under ad libitum water intake was of value in the
differentiation between psychogenic polydipsia and CDI. A 30-minute
urine collection was made at 0900 hours in 3 groups: 11 patients with
CDI (22 to 68 years old), 10 patients with psychogenic polydipsia (28 to
60 years old), and 15 normal subjects (21 to 38 years old). In the
patients with CDI, the plasma arginine vasopressin level was low despite
hyperosmolality, resulting in hypotonic urine. Urinary excretion of AQP2
was 37 +/- 15 fmol/mg creatinine, a value one-fifth less than that in
the normal subjects. In the patients with psychogenic polydipsia, plasma
arginine vasopressin and urinary osmolality were as low as those in the
patients with CDI. However, urinary excretion of AQP2 of 187 +/- 45
fmol/mg creatinine was not decreased, and its excretion was equal to
that in the normal subjects. The results indicated that urinary
excretion of AQP2, under ad libitum water drinking, participates in the
differentiation of psychogenic polydipsia from CDI.

Ishikawa et al. (2001) undertook to determine whether urinary excretion
of AQP2 participates in the involvement of arginine vasopressin in
hyponatremia less than 130 mmol/L in 33 elderly subjects more than 64
years of age during the last 5-year period. Plasma AVP levels remained
relatively high despite hypoosmolality and were tightly linked with
exaggerated urinary excretion of AQP2 and antidiuresis. Plasma AVP and
urinary excretion of AQP2 were not reduced after an acute water load
test. The inappropriate secretion of AVP was evident in the patients
with the syndrome of inappropriate secretion of diuretic hormone (SIADH)
and hypopituitarism, and hydrocortisone replacement normalized urinary
excretion of AQP2 and renal water excretion in those with
hypopituitarism. The authors concluded that urinary excretion of AQP2
may be a more sensitive measure of AVP effect on renal collecting duct
cells than are plasma AVP levels, and that increased urinary excretion
of AQP2 shows exaggerated AVP-induced antidiuresis in hyponatremic
subjects in the elderly. In addition, mineralocorticoid-responsive
hyponatremia of the elderly has to be carefully differentiated from
SIADH in elderly subjects.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Sasaki et al. (1993, 1994) mapped the AQP2
gene to chromosome 12q13, very close to the site of major intrinsic
protein (MIP; 154050). The investigators suggested that a defect in the
AQP2 gene is the basis of the autosomal form of nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus (NDI; 125800).

Deen et al. (1994) used fluorescence in situ hybridization to map the
AQP2 gene to chromosome 12.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a male patient with autosomal recessive nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus (125800), Deen et al. (1994) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the AQP2 gene (R187C; 107777.0001 and
S216P; 107777.0002). Functional expression studies in Xenopus oocytes
revealed that each mutation resulted in nonfunctional water channel
proteins. Deen et al. (1995) found that expression of 3 mutant AQP2
proteins, R187C, S216P, and G64R (107777.0004), in Xenopus oocytes
resulted in nonfunctional water channels. The transcripts encoding the
missense AQPs were translated as efficiently as wildtype transcript and
were equally stable. Immunocytochemistry demonstrated that the mutant
AQP2 did not label in the plasma membrane. The authors proposed that the
inability of the AQP2 proteins to facilitate water transport was caused
by an impaired routing to the plasma membrane.

Missense mutations and a single-nucleotide deletion in the AQP2 gene
were found by van Lieburg et al. (1994) in 3 NDI patients from
consanguineous families (107777.0001; 107777.0004-107777.0005).
Expression studies in Xenopus oocytes showed that the mutated AQP2
proteins were nonfunctional. Mulders et al. (1997) reported 3 additional
NDI patients who were homozygous for mutations in the AQP2 gene.
Functional expression studies showed that 2 of the mutations
(107777.0006 and 107777.0007) resulted in functional proteins that were
apparently retained in the endoplasmic reticulum and impaired in their
routing to the plasma membrane.

In a study of a Dutch family with autosomal dominant NDI, Mulders et al.
(1998) identified a mutation (107777.0009) in the AQP2 gene that
exhibited a dominant-negative effect.

In affected members of 3 unrelated families with autosomal dominant NDI,
Kuwahara et al. (2001) identified 3 different deletion mutations in exon
4 of the AQP2 gene (see, e.g., 107777.0014), all of which resulted in an
elongated protein with a C-terminal tail of 61 amino acids. The
predicted wildtype AQP2 protein contains 271 amino acids, whereas the
predicted mutant proteins contained 330 to 333 amino acids because of
the frameshift. In Xenopus oocytes injected with mutant AQP2 cRNAs, the
osmotic water permeability was much smaller than that of oocytes with
the AQP2 wildtype (14 to 17%). The results suggested that the
trafficking of mutant AQP2 was impaired due to elongation of the
C-terminal tail. The dominant-negative effect was attributed to
oligomerization of the wildtype and mutant AQP2s. Marr et al. (2002)
reported similar findings (see 107777.0015).

Carroll et al. (2006) identified the molecular basis of NDI in Arab
families. The authors identified 2 novel missense mutations in AQP2.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yang et al. (2001) generated a mouse knockin model of NDI generated by
targeted gene replacement with the thr126-to-met mutation (T126M;
107777.0007) along with mutations to preserve the consensus sequence for
N-linked glycosylation found in human AQP2. The mutant mice died within
6 days after birth unless given supplemental fluid. Urine/serum analysis
showed a urinary concentrating defect with serum hyperosmolality and low
urine osmolality that could not be corrected by a V2 vasopressin
agonist. Northern blot analysis revealed upregulated Aqp2-T126M
transcripts identical in size to wildtype Aqp2. Immunoblot analysis
indicated complex glycosylation of wildtype Aqp2 but endoglycosidase
H-sensitive core glycosylation of the mutant, suggesting ER retention.
Immunohistologic and histologic analyses revealed kidney collecting duct
dilatation, papillary atrophy, and some plasma membrane Aqp2 expression.
Yang et al. (2001) concluded that the Aqp2-T126M mutant creates a more
severe phenotype than those observed in mice lacking water channels
Aqp1, Aqp3 (600170), or Aqp4 (600308), and establishes a mouse model of
human autosomal NDI.

Rojek et al. (2006) found that Aqp2-null mice appeared normal at birth
but failed to thrive and died within 2 weeks of age. Kidneys from
Aqp2-null pups showed papillary atrophy and signs of hydronephrosis.
Mice with Aqp2 knockout targeted to the renal collecting ducts survived
to adulthood, but they showed decreased body weight, 10-fold increased
urine production, and decreased urinary osmolality and were unable to
adapt to water deprivation. Rojek et al. (2006) concluded that AQP2
expression in kidney connecting tubules is sufficient for survival and
that AQP2 expression in collecting ducts is required to regulate body
water balance.

Congenital progressive hydronephrosis (cph) is a spontaneous recessive
mutation that causes severe hydronephrosis and obstructive nephropathy
in mice. McDill et al. (2006) found that homozygous cph mice were born
at mendelian ratios and appeared grossly normal at birth, but they grew
slowly and showed significant size and weight differences from postnatal
day 8 onward. About 90% of cph mice died between 2 and 4 weeks of age.
By 2 weeks, most had visibly enlarged abdomens and appeared lethargic.
McDill et al. (2006) identified a ser256-to-leu (S256L) mutation in the
Aqp2 gene as the cause of cph. The S256L substitution in the cytoplasmic
tail of the Aqp2 protein prevented phosphorylation at S256 and the
subsequent accumulation of Aqp2 on the apical membrane of the collecting
duct principal cells. The interference with normal trafficking of Aqp2
by the S256L mutation resulted in a severe urine concentration defect.
The NDI symptoms and the absence of developmental defects in the
pyeloureteral peristaltic machinery before the onset of hydronephrosis
suggested that the congenital obstructive nephropathy was likely the
result of the polyuria.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
AQP2, ARG187CYS

In a male patient with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (125800), Deen et
al. (1994) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the
AQP2 gene: a 559C-T transition in exon 3, resulting in an arg187-to-cys
(R187C) substitution, and a 646T-C transition in exon 4, resulting in a
ser216-to-pro (S216P; 107777.0002) substitution. The former mutation was
inherited from the father and the latter from the mother. Functional
expression studies in Xenopus oocytes showed that both mutations
resulted in a nonfunctional protein.

Van Lieburg et al. (1994) identified homozygosity for the R187C mutation
in a Dutch patient with NDI. He was born of consanguineous parents; 3
other children in the family had died of severe dehydration and
hypernatremia.

.0002
DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
AQP2, SER216PRO

See 107777.0001 and Deen et al. (1994).

.0003
REMOVED FROM DATABASE
.0004
DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
AQP2, GLY64ARG

In an Italian patient with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (125800) whose
parents were consanguineous, van Lieburg et al. (1994) identified a
homozygous 190G-A transition in exon 1 of the AQP2 gene, resulting in a
gly64-to-arg (G64R) substitution.

.0005
DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
AQP2, 1-BP DEL, 369C

In a Palestinian patient with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (125800)
whose parents were consanguineous, van Lieburg et al. (1994) identified
homozygosity for a 1-bp deletion (369delC) in the AQP2 gene, resulting
in a frameshift and premature termination after amino acid 131.

.0006
DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
AQP2, ALA147THR

In affected members of a consanguineous Austrian family with NDI
(125800), Mulders et al. (1997) identified a 533G-A transition in exon 2
of the AQP2 gene, resulting in an ala147-to-thr (A147T) substitution.
The mutant AQP2 protein was functional when expressed in Xenopus
oocytes, but was apparently impaired in its routing to the plasma
membrane.

.0007
DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
AQP2, THR126MET

In affected members of a consanguineous family from Sri Lanka with NDI
(125800), Mulders et al. (1997) identified a 471C-T transition in exon 2
of the AQP2 gene, resulting in a thr126-to-met (T126M) substitution. The
mutant AQP2 protein was functional when expressed in Xenopus oocytes,
but was apparently impaired in its routing to the plasma membrane.

.0008
DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
AQP2, ASN68SER

In affected members of a consanguineous Turkish family with nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus, (125800), Mulders et al. (1997) identified a 297A-G
transition in exon 1 of the AQP2 gene, resulting in an asn68-to-ser
(N68S) substitution. When expressed in oocytes, this mutant AQP2 was not
functional because the substituted amino acid is part of the NPA box in
loop B, which forms, together with a second NPA box in loop E, the most
conserved amino acid sequence of the MIP-family.

.0009
DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
AQP2, GLU258LYS

Mulders et al. (1998) reported the first family in which nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus segregated as an autosomal dominant trait (125800).
An affected mother and daughter had a glu258-to-lys (E258K) mutation in
the AQP2 gene. Functional expression studies showed that the mutant
protein conferred only a small increase in water permeability, as a
result of reduced expression at the plasma membrane. Coexpression of
wildtype AQP2 with the E258K mutant revealed a dominant-negative effect
on the water permeability conferred by wildtype AQP2. This effect was
not seen when the wildtype protein was coexpressed with the AQP2 R187C
mutant (107777.0001) in recessive NDI. The physiologically important
phosphorylation of ser256 by protein kinase A was not affected by the
E258K mutation. Immunoblot and microscopic analyses revealed that the
E258K mutant was retained in the Golgi compartment. Since AQPs are
thought to tetramerize, the retention of AQP2-E258K together with
wildtype AQP2 in mixed tetramers in the Golgi compartment was a likely
explanation for the dominant inheritance of NDI.

.0010
DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
AQP2, THR125MET

In Japanese female sibs with autosomal recessive nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus (125800), Goji et al. (1998) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the AQP2 gene: a 374C-T transition in
exon 2, resulting in a thr125-to-met (T125M) substitution, and a 523G-A
transition, resulting in a gly175-to-arg (G175R; 107777.0011)
substitution. The water permeability of oocytes injected with wildtype
complementary RNA increased 9.0-fold compared with the Pf of
water-injected oocytes, whereas the increases in the Pf of oocytes
injected with T125M and G175R RNA were only 1.7-fold and 1.5-fold,
respectively. Immunoblot and immunocytochemistry indicated that the
plasma membrane expressions of T125M and G175R AQP2 proteins were
comparable to that of the wildtype, suggesting that although neither the
T125M nor G175R mutation had a significant effect on plasma membrane
expression, they distorted both the structure and function of the
aqueous pore of AQP2. These results provided evidence that the NDI in
patients with T125M and G175R mutations is attributable not to the
misrouting of AQP2, but to the disrupted water channel function.

.0011
DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
AQP2, GLY175ARG

See 107777.0010 and Goji et al. (1998).

.0012
DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
AQP2, LEU22VAL

In a female patient with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (125800),
Canfield et al. (1997) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
mutations in the AQP2 gene: a leu22-to-val (L22V) substitution in exon
1, and a cys181-to-trp (C181W; 107777.0013) substitution in exon 3. The
patient had symptoms dating from infancy, and responded to large doses
of desmopressin which decreased urine volume from 10 to 4 liters per
day. Neither the parents nor the 3 sisters were polyuric. Residue cys181
in AQP2 is the site for inhibition of water permeation by mercurial
compounds and is located near the NPA motif conserved in all aquaporins.
Osmotic water permeability in Xenopus oocytes injected with cRNA
encoding the mutant C181W AQP2 protein was not increased over water
control, while expression of L22V cRNA increased the osmotic water
permeability to approximately 60% of that for wildtype AQP2. Coinjection
of the mutant cRNAs with the wildtype cRNA did not affect the function
of the wildtype AQP2. Immunolocalization of AQP2-transfected CHO cells
showed that the C181W mutant had an endoplasmic reticulum-like
intracellular distribution, whereas L22V and wildtype AQP2 showed
endosome and plasma membrane staining. Canfield et al. (1997) concluded
that AQP2 mutations can confer partially responsive nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus.

.0013
DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
AQP2, CYS181TRP

See 107777.0012 and Canfield et al. (1997).

.0014
DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
AQP2, 1-BP DEL, 721G

Kuwahara et al. (2001) identified a 1-bp deletion (721delG) in the AQP2
gene as a cause of autosomal dominant nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
(125800). The mutation resulted in a frameshift and an elongated protein
with a C-terminal tail of 61 additional amino acids. Elongation of the
C-terminal tail resulted in impaired trafficking of the mutant AQP2, and
a dominant-negative effect was observed.

.0015
DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
AQP2, 1-BP DEL, 727G

In a 3-generation family with autosomal dominant inheritance of NDI
(125800), Marr et al. (2002) identified a 1-bp deletion (727delG) in the
AQP2 gene. The predicted mutant protein had an altered and extended
C-terminal tail. When expressed in renal epithelial cells, the mutant
protein predominantly localized to the basolateral membrane and late
endosomes/lysosomes, whereas wildtype AQP2 was expressed in the apical
membrane. When coexpressed, wildtype AQP2 and AQP2-727G formed
heterooligomers that mainly colocalized to late endosomes/lysosomes. The
cells showed reduced water permeability due to reduced plasma membrane
expression of wildtype AQP2. On the basis of their own data and the data
of Kuwahara et al. (2001) (see 107777.0014), Marr et al. (2002)
hypothesized that misrouting, rather than lack of function, may be a
general mechanism for the 'loss of function' phenotype in dominant NDI.

.0016
DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
AQP2, GLN57PRO

In affected members from 2 Chinese families with NDI (125800), Lin et
al. (2002) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in exon 1
of the AQP2 gene: a 170A-C transversion, resulting in a gln57-to-pro
(Q57P) substitution, and a 299G-T transversion, resulting in a
gly100-to-val (G100V; 107777.0017) substitution. Expression of the Q57P
and G100V AQP2 proteins showed an only 1.3-fold and 1.2-fold increase,
respectively, in the water permeability in contrast to an 8.0-fold
increase in oocytes injected with wildtype cRNA. The results provided
evidence that the Q57P and G100V mutations in congenital nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus are attributable to the misrouting of AQP2. The
patients showed normal hypotensive and coagulation responses following
the administration of desamino-8-D-arginine AVP, a clinical suggestion
of normal vasopressin-2 receptors (V2R; 300538).

.0017
DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
AQP2, GLY100VAL

See 107777.0016 and Lin et al. (2002).

.0018
DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
AQP2, PRO262LEU

De Mattia et al. (2004) described 2 families with autosomal recessive
NDI (125800) in which affected individuals were compound heterozygotes
for a 785C-T transition in the AQP2 gene, resulting in a pro262-to-leu
(P262L) substitution in the C-terminal tail, and either a 568G-A
transition in the AQP2 gene, resulting in an ala190-to-thr (A190T;
107777.0019) substitution, or an R187C (107777.0001) substitution,
respectively. Upon expression in oocytes, P262L AQP2 protein properly
folded and was functional in contrast to the R187C and A190T proteins.
In polarized epithelial cells, P262L protein was retained in
intracellular vesicles and did not localize to the ER. Upon coexpression
with wildtype AQP2, P262L protein interacted with wildtype AQP2, and the
resulting heterotetramer properly localized to the apical membrane. De
Mattia et al. (2004) concluded that P262L would act as a mutant in
autosomal dominant NDI, except that its missorting is overruled by
apical sorting of wildtype AQP2.

.0019
DIABETES INSIPIDUS, NEPHROGENIC, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
AQP2, ALA190THR

See 107777.0018 and De Mattia et al. (2004).

REFERENCE 1. Bouley, R.; Breton, S.; Sun, T.; McLaughlin, M.; Nsumu, N. N.;
Lin, H. Y.; Ausiello, D. A.; Brown, D.: Nitric oxide and atrial natriuretic
factor stimulate cGMP-dependent membrane insertion of aquaporin 2
in renal epithelial cells. J. Clin. Invest. 106: 1115-1126, 2000.

2. Canfield, M. C.; Tamarappoo, B. K.; Moses, A. M.; Verkman, A. S.;
Holtzman, E. J.: Identification and characterization of aquaporin-2
water channel mutations causing nephrogenic diabetes insipidus with
partial vasopressin response. Hum. Molec. Genet. 6: 1865-1871, 1997.

3. Carroll, P.; Al-Mojalli, H.; Al-Abbad, A.; Al-Hassoun, I.; Al-Hamed,
M.; Al-Amr, R.; Butt, A. I.; Meyer, B. F.: Novel mutations underlying
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus in Arab families. Genet. Med. 8:
443-447, 2006.

4. Deen, P. M. T.; Croes, H.; van Aubel, R. A. M. H.; Ginsel, L. A.;
van Os, C. H.: Water channels encoded by mutant aquaporin-2 genes
in nephrogenic diabetes insipidus are impaired in their cellular routing. J.
Clin. Invest. 95: 2291-2296, 1995.

5. Deen, P. M. T.; Verdijk, M. A. J.; Knoers, N. V. A. M.; Wieringa,
B.; Monnens, L. A. H.; van Os, C. H.; van Oost, B. A.: Requirement
of human renal water channel aquaporin-2 for vasopressin-dependent
concentration of urine. Science 264: 92-94, 1994.

6. Deen, P. M. T.; Weghuis, D. O.; Sinke, R. J.; Geurts van Kessel,
A.; Wieringa, B.; van Os, C. H.: Assignment of the human gene for
the water channel of renal collecting duct aquaporin 2 (AQP2) to chromosome
12 region q12-q13. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 66: 260-262, 1994.

7. de Mattia, F.; Savelkoul, P. J. M.; Bichet, D. G.; Kamsteeg, E.-J.;
Konings, I. B. M.; Marr, N.; Arthus, M.-F.; Lonergan, M.; van Os,
C. H.; van der Sluijs, P.; Robertson, G.; Deen, P. M. T.: A novel
mechanism in recessive nephrogenic diabetes insipidus: wild-type aquaporin-2
rescues the apical membrane expression of intracellularly retained
AQP2-P262L. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 3045-3056, 2004.

8. Fushimi, K.; Uchida, S.; Hara, Y.; Hirata, Y.; Marumo, F.; Sasaki,
S.: Cloning and expression of apical membrane water channel of rat
kidney collecting tubule. Nature 361: 549-552, 1993.

9. Goji, K.; Kuwahara, M.; Gu, Y.; Matsuo, M.; Marumo, F.; Sasaki,
S.: Novel mutations in aquaporin-2 gene in female siblings with nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus: evidence of disrupted water channel function. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 83: 3205-3209, 1998.

10. Ishikawa, S.; Saito, T.; Fukagawa, A.; Higashiyama, M.; Nakamura,
T.; Kusaka, I.; Nagasaka, S.; Honda, K.; Saito, T.: Close association
of urinary excretion of aquaporin-2 with appropriate and inappropriate
arginine vasopressin-dependent antidiuresis in hyponatremia in elderly
subjects. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86: 1665-1671, 2001.

11. Kanno, K.; Sasaki, S.; Hirata, Y.; Ishikawa, S.; Fushimi, K.;
Nakanishi, S.; Bichet, D. G.; Marumo, F.: Urinary excretion of aquaporin-2
in patients with diabetes insipidus. New Eng. J. Med. 332: 1540-1545,
1995.

12. Kuwahara, M.; Iwai, K.; Ooeda, T.; Igarashi, T.; Ogawa, E.; Katsushima,
Y.; Shinbo, I.; Uchida, S.; Terada, Y.; Arthus, M.-F.; Lonergan, M.;
Fujiwara, T. M.; Bichet, D. G.; Marumo, F.; Sasaki, S.: Three families
with autosomal dominant nephrogenic diabetes insipidus caused by aquaporin-2
mutations in the C-terminus. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 69: 738-748, 2001.

13. Lin, S.-H.; Bichet, D.G.; Sasaki, S.; Kuwahara, M.; Arthus, M.-F.;
Lonergan, M.; Lin, Y.-F.: Two novel aquaporin-2 mutations responsible
for congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus in Chinese families. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 2694-2700, 2002.

14. Marr, N.; Bichet, D. G.; Lonergan, M.; Arthus, M.-F.; Jeck, N.;
Seyberth, H. W.; Rosenthal, W.; van Os, C. H.; Oksche, A.; Deen, P.
M. T.: Heteroligomerization of an Aquaporin-2 mutant with wild-type
Aquaporin-2 and their misrouting to late endosomes/lysosomes explains
dominant nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11:
779-789, 2002.

15. McDill, B. W.; Li, S.-Z.; Kovach, P. A.; Ding, L.; Chen, F.:
Congenital progressive hydronephrosis (cph) is caused by an S256L
mutation in aquaporin-2 that affects its phosphorylation and apical
membrane accumulation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 6952-6957, 2006.

16. Mulders, S. M.; Bichet, D. G.; Rijss, J. P. L.; Kamsteeg, E.-J.;
Arthus, M.-F.; Lonergan, M.; Fujiwara, M.; Morgan, K.; Leijendekker,
R.; van der Sluijs, P.; van Os, C. H.; Deen, P. M. T.: An aquaporin-2
water channel mutant which causes autosomal dominant nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus is retained in the Golgi complex. J. Clin. Invest. 102:
57-66, 1998.

17. Mulders, S. M.; Knoers, N. V. A. M.; van Lieburg, A. F.; Monnens,
L. A. H.; Leumann, E.; Wuhl, E.; Schober, E.; Rijss, J. P. L.; van
Os, C. H.; Deen, P. M. T.: New mutations in the AQP2 gene in nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus resulting in functional but misrouted water channels. J.
Am. Soc. Nephrol. 8: 242-248, 1997.

18. Nielsen, S.; Chou, C.-L.; Marples, D.; Christensen, E. I.; Kishore,
B. K.; Knepper, M. A.: Vasopressin increases water permeability of
kidney collecting duct by inducing translocation of aquaporin-CD water
channels to plasma membrane. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 1013-1017,
1995.

19. Rojek, A.; Fuchtbauer, E.-M.; Kwon, T.-H.; Frokiaer, J.; Nielsen,
S.: Severe urinary concentrating defect in renal collecting duct-selective
AQP2 conditional-knockout mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 6037-6042,
2006.

20. Saito, T.; Ishikawa, S.-E.; Ito, T.; Oda, H.; Ando, F.; Higashiyama,
M.; Nagasaka, S.; Hieda, M.; Saito, T.: Urinary excretion of aquaporin-2
water channel differentiates psychogenic polydipsia from central diabetes
insipidus. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 2235-2237, 1999.

21. Saito, T.; Ishikawa, S.-E.; Sasaki, S.; Nakamura, T.; Rokkaku,
K.; Kawakami, A.; Honda, K.; Marumo, F.; Saito, T.: Urinary excretion
of aquaporin-2 in the diagnosis of central diabetes insipidus. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 82: 1823-1827, 1997.

22. Sasaki, S.; Fushimi, K.; Saito, H.; Saito, F.; Uchida, S.; Ishibashi,
K.; Kuwahara, M.; Ikeuchi, T.; Inui, K.; Nakajima, K.; Watanabe, T.
X.; Marumo, F.: Cloning, characterization, and chromosomal mapping
of human aquaporin of collecting duct. J. Clin. Invest. 93: 1250-1256,
1994. Note: Erratum: J. Clin. Invest. 94: following 216, 1994.

23. Sasaki, S.; Saito, H.; Saito, F.; Fushimi, K.; Uchida, S.; Rai,
Y.; Ikeuchi, T.; Inui, K.; Marumo, F.: Cloning, expression and chromosomal
mapping of human collecting duct water channel (hWCH-CD). (Abstract) J.
Am. Soc. Nephrol. 4: 858 only, 1993.

24. van Lieburg, A. F.; Verdijk, M. A. J.; Knoers, V. V. A. M.; van
Essen, A. J.; Proesmans, W.; Mallmann, R.; Monnens, L. A. H.; van
Oost, B. A.; van Os, C. H.; Deen, P. M. T.: Patients with autosomal
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus homozygous for mutations in the aquaporin
2 water-channel gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 55: 648-652, 1994.

25. Yang, B.; Gillespie, A.; Carlson, E. J.; Epstein, C. J.; Verkman,
A. S.: Neonatal mortality in an aquaporin-2 knock-in mouse model
of recessive nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. J. Biol. Chem. 276:
2775-2779, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/25/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/21/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/14/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/2/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 8/5/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/13/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/9/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/28/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/17/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 9/20/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/9/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/14/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/7/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/2/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/3/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/5/1997
Beat Steinmann - updated: 4/28/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/5/1993

EDITED carol: 09/18/2013
carol: 9/18/2013
terry: 11/27/2012
alopez: 8/2/2007
terry: 7/25/2007
wwang: 6/1/2007
terry: 5/21/2007
mgross: 6/15/2006
terry: 6/14/2006
mgross: 6/6/2006
terry: 6/2/2006
carol: 8/24/2005
carol: 8/5/2005
ckniffin: 5/23/2005
mgross: 6/13/2003
alopez: 1/9/2003
cwells: 10/28/2002
carol: 11/5/2001
mcapotos: 10/25/2001
mcapotos: 10/24/2001
terry: 10/17/2001
cwells: 9/28/2001
cwells: 9/20/2001
mgross: 4/9/2001
alopez: 3/20/2000
alopez: 3/15/2000
terry: 3/14/2000
mgross: 3/7/2000
mgross: 3/11/1999
mgross: 3/2/1999
alopez: 9/14/1998
carol: 9/3/1998
dkim: 6/30/1998
mark: 9/1/1997
jenny: 8/5/1997
jenny: 7/9/1997
joanna: 4/28/1997
terry: 10/25/1995
mark: 8/21/1995
carol: 3/3/1995
jason: 6/28/1994
carol: 11/5/1993

603456	TITLE *603456 DPH2, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; DPH2
;;DPH2-LIKE 2; DPH2L2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Diphthamide is a unique posttranslationally modified histidine found
only in translation elongation factor-2 (EEF2; 130610). This
modification is conserved from archaebacteria to humans and serves as
the target for ADP-ribosylation and inactivation of EEF2 by diphtheria
toxin (DT) and Pseudomonas exotoxin A. DPH2 is 1 of several enzymes
involved in synthesis of diphthamide in EEF2 (Liu et al., 2004).

CLONING

Mattheakis et al. (1993) found that dph2, a S. cerevisiae diphtheria
resistance gene, encodes a protein involved in diphthamide biosynthesis.
By searching an EST database, Schultz et al. (1998) identified a human
cDNA with 63% identity to the corresponding nucleotide sequence of human
DPH2-like 1 (DPH2L1, or DPH1; 603527). Using a PCR strategy, they
recovered cDNAs corresponding to the entire coding region of the gene,
which they called DPH2L2. The predicted 489-amino acid protein shared
24% and 28% sequence identity with DPH2L1 and yeast dph2, respectively.
Northern blot analysis revealed that DPH2L2 was expressed ubiquitously
as a 2.5-kb mRNA. An additional 3-kb transcript was found in several
tissues.

Liu et al. (2004) cloned mouse Dph2. The deduced 489-amino acid protein
shares 83% identity with human DPH2.

GENE FUNCTION

Liu et al. (2004) showed that mouse Dph2 could complement the
DT-resistant phenotype of diphthamide-deficient mutant Chinese hamster
ovary cell lines. Immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that yeast and
mouse Dph1 (603527) and Dph2 interacted, suggesting that these enzymes
may function in diphthamide biosynthesis as a dimer or multimer.

Carette et al. (2009) used insertional mutagenesis to develop a
screening method to generate null alleles in a human cell line haploid
for all chromosomes except chromosome 8. Using this approach, they
identified genes encoding important elements of the biosynthetic pathway
of diphthamide, which are required for the cytotoxic effects of
diphtheria toxin and exotoxin A. Mutants of the DPH1, DPH2, and DPH5
(611075) genes, involved in diphthamide biosynthesis, were identified as
resistant to both anthrax toxin and diphtheria toxin.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Schultz et al. (1998) mapped the
DPH2L2 gene to 1p34.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Foley et al. (1995)
REFERENCE 1. Carette, J. E.; Guimaraes, C. P.; Varadarajan, M.; Park, A. S.;
Wuethrich, I.; Godarova, A.; Kotecki, M.; Cochran, B. H.; Spooner,
E.; Ploegh, H. L.; Brummelkamp, T. R.: Haploid genetic screens in
human cells identify host factors used by pathogens. Science 326:
1231-1235, 2009.

2. Foley, B. T.; Moehring, J. M.; Moehring, T. J.: Mutations in the
elongation factor 2 gene which confer resistance to diphtheria toxin
and Pseudomonas exotoxin A: genetic and biochemical analyses. J.
Biol. Chem. 270: 23218-23225, 1995.

3. Liu, S.; Milne, G. T.; Kuremsky, J. G.; Fink, G. R.; Leppla, S.
H.: Identification of the proteins required for biosynthesis of diphthamide,
the target of bacterial ADP-ribosylating toxins on translation elongation
factor 2. Molec. Cell. Biol. 24: 9487-9497, 2004.

4. Mattheakis, L. C.; Sor, F.; Collier, R. J.: Diphthamide synthesis
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae: structure of the DPH2 gene. Gene 132:
149-154, 1993.

5. Schultz, D. C.; Balasara, B. R.; Testa, J. R.; Godwin, A. K.:
Cloning and localization of a human diphthamide biosynthesis-like
protein-2 gene, DPH2L2. Genomics 52: 186-191, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/22/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/16/2007

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 1/25/1999

EDITED alopez: 01/08/2010
terry: 12/22/2009
mgross: 6/5/2007
terry: 5/16/2007
alopez: 2/12/1999
alopez: 1/25/1999

600194	TITLE *600194 KERATIN 2; KRT2
;;KERATIN 2A; KRT2A;;
KERATIN 2e; KRT2E
DESCRIPTION 
GENE FAMILY

Keratins are the major gene product of keratinocytes and form the
intermediate filament cytoskeletal network in these cells. Intermediate
filament proteins consist of a central alpha-helical rod domain flanked
by nonhelical sequences of varying size and composition. Keratin
proteins fall into 2 classes on the basis of their electrophoretic
properties and sequence similarities. One member of each class is
required to form the heterodimeric coiled-coil precursor which through
both lateral and longitudinal associations form the mature keratin
intermediate filament. The major epidermal keratins of the type I class
are KRT9 (607606), KRT10 (148080), KRT14 (148066), and KRT16 (148067);
the major epidermal keratins of the type II class are KRT1 (139350),
KRT2, KRT5 (148040), KRT6A (148041), and KRT6B (148042). The expression
of individual keratins is specific both for body site and for stage of
differentiation of the epidermal keratinocyte. Keratinocytes in the
basal layer express KRT5 and KRT14. Upon differentiation and migration
to the spinous layer, these genes are downregulated and the expression
of KRT1 and KRT10 is induced. In cells of the upper spinous layer, KRT2
and KRT9 are expressed. Although the expression of KRT9 is limited to
palmoplantar epidermis, KRT2 is expressed not only in this tissue but
also in other regions, notably the epidermis covering the knee, thigh,
and groin. It is not known whether these keratins simply replace their
respective type I or type II counterpart in the preexisting KRT1/KRT10
network or dimerize with another, as yet undiscovered keratin partner.
The other major epidermal keratins, KRT6 and KRT16, are normally
expressed in the outer root sheath of the hair follicle and in
palmoplantar epidermis.

CLONING

Keratin 2e is a protein of molecular weight 65.8 kD encoded by a 2.6-kb
mRNA species. Collin et al. (1992) determined the sequence of the KRT2e
cDNA.

GENE STRUCTURE

Smith et al. (1998) determined the genomic organization and complete
sequence of the KRT2 gene, which consists of 9 exons spanning 7,634 bp
of DNA.

MAPPING

Presumably the KRT2 gene maps to 12q11-q13, the site of the other class
II genes, such as KRT1 and KRT5. By high-resolution radiation hybrid
mapping, Smith et al. (1998) localized the gene to the interval between
microsatellite markers D12S368 and a specific CHLC marker.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Mutations in the basal cell-specific keratins KRT5 and KRT14 are found
in patients with epidermolysis bullosa simplex (e.g., 131900); mutations
in the differentiation-specific keratins KRT1 and KRT10 have been found
in patients with epidermolytic hyperkeratosis (113800); and mutations in
the palmoplantar-specific keratin KRT9 have been found in patients with
epidermolytic palmoplantar keratoderma (144200). Rothnagel et al. (1994)
and McLean et al. (1994) demonstrated mutations in the KRT2 gene in
patients with ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens (IBS; 146800). Kremer et al.
(1994) also found mutations in the KRT2 gene in patients with IBS and in
patients with a phenotypically related, if not identical, disorder,
ichthyosis exfoliativa.

Smith et al. (1998) detected several intragenic polymorphisms in the
KRT2 gene, including an 18-bp duplication in exon 1, corresponding to
the V1 domain of the K2e polypeptide. Two novel mutations, N192Y in the
1A domain and E482K in the 2B domain of K2e, were found in families with
IBS.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ICHTHYOSIS BULLOSA OF SIEMENS
KRT2, GLU493ASP

In an Asian family with ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens (146800;
originally diagnosed as epidermolytic hyperkeratosis), Rothnagel et al.
(1994) identified a G-to-T transversion at basepair 1512 of the
published sequence (Collin et al., 1992) of the KRT2 gene, resulting in
a glutamic acid to aspartic acid substitution at residue 117 in the
highly conserved C terminal of the rod domain. (According to Rothnagel
et al. (1994), the residue designated 117 corresponds to codon 493 of
the published sequence.)

.0002
ICHTHYOSIS BULLOSA OF SIEMENS
ICHTHYOSIS EXFOLIATIVA, INCLUDED
KRT2, GLU493LYS

In 4 families with autosomal dominant inheritance of ichthyosis bullosa
of Siemens (146800) and in 1 sporadic case of this disorder, Rothnagel
et al. (1994) found a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 1510 resulting in
a lysine for glutamic acid substitution at residue 117 of the KRT2
protein. Thus in a total of 6 instances, the mutation occurred in the
same codon, GAG (glu); the mutation was to GAT in 1 family and to AAG in
the 5 others. (According to Rothnagel et al. (1994), the residue
designated 117 corresponds to codon 493 of the published sequence.)

In 2 unrelated British families with ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens,
McLean et al. (1994) found a glu493-to-lys mutation in the highly
conserved LLEGEE helix termination motif, producing a change to LLEGKE.
The mutation was predicted to be highly detrimental to keratin filament
assembly and/or functional integrity. A G-to-A transition at nucleotide
1510 of the cDNA sequence occurred in a CpG dinucleotide.

Kremer et al. (1994) identified the same mutation in a family described
as having ichthyosis exfoliativa and in yet another Dutch family with
ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens.

In a large family with ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens in 8 members
spanning 3 generations, Basarab et al. (1999) identified the E493K
mutation in the KRT2 gene. The patients showed blistering, superficial
peeling of the skin, and localized lichenified hyperkeratosis, mainly
confined to the limbs. Phenotypic variation with some individuals
exhibiting unusual clinical features was also observed. The index
patient was erythrodermic at birth and subsequently developed a
widespread pustular eruption. She also had hypertrichosis of the limbs,
as did an affected female first cousin. Basarab et al. (1999) found that
E493K is by far the most frequent mutation in this disorder.

.0003
ICHTHYOSIS BULLOSA OF SIEMENS
KRT2, GLN187PRO

In a Dutch family with ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens (146800), Kremer et
al. (1994) found a heterozygous transversion of adenosine to cytosine at
nucleotide 593. This transversion led to the substitution of a proline
for a glutamine at codon 187 (numbering according to Collin et al.
(1992)) of the predicted protein sequence.

.0004
ICHTHYOSIS BULLOSA OF SIEMENS
KRT2, THR485PRO

In a 4-year-old Korean boy, Yang et al. (1997) observed a sporadic case
of ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens (146800) and demonstrated a
thr485-to-pro amino acid substitution in the highly conserved consensus
motif at the end of the 2-B rod domain segment of the keratin 2 chain.
The disease phenotype was consistent with the inappropriate substitution
of proline near the end of the rod domain, because it was situated near
the predicted molecular overlap region of coiled-coil molecules, which
is critical for the maintenance of the structural integrity of keratin
intermediate filaments. The patient had brownish, wrinkled, and
encrusted hyperkeratosis and blistering over the entirety of his trunk
and limbs, especially on flexural areas, beginning at the age of 100
days. Blistering was more pronounced during summer and could be provoked
by mild trauma. Erythroderma had never been present. Light microscopic
examination showed epidermolytic hyperkeratosis limited to the upper
part of the epidermis.

.0005
ICHTHYOSIS BULLOSA OF SIEMENS
KRT2, ASN192TYR

In a family with ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens (146800), Smith et al.
(1998) identified an asn192-to-tyr substitution in the KRT2 gene.

.0006
ICHTHYOSIS BULLOSA OF SIEMENS
KRT2, GLU482LYS

In a family with ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens (146800), Smith et al.
(1998) identified a glu482-to-lys substitution in the KRT2 gene.

.0007
ICHTHYOSIS BULLOSA OF SIEMENS
KRT2, ASN192ASP

In a family with ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens (146800), Takizawa et al.
(2000) identified an A-to-G transition at nucleotide position 607 of the
KRT2 gene, resulting in an asn192-to-asp substitution.

.0008
ICHTHYOSIS BULLOSA OF SIEMENS
KRT2, ASN192LYS

In a patient with ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens (146800), Whittock et
al. (2001) reported a heterozygous C-to-A transversion at nucleotide 576
of the KRT2 gene that resulted in an asn192-to-lys (N192K) amino acid
substitution in the conserved 1A helix initiation peptide.

REFERENCE 1. Basarab, T.; Smith, F. J. D.; Jolliffe, V. M. L.; McLean, W. H.
I.; Neill, S.; Rustin, M. H. A.; Eady, R. A. J.: Ichthyosis bullosa
of Siemens: report of a family with evidence of a keratin 2e mutation,
and a review of the literature. Brit. J. Derm. 140: 689-695, 1999.

2. Collin, C.; Moll, R.; Kubicka, S.; Ouhayoun, J.-P.; Franke, W.
W.: Characterization of human cytokeratin 2, an epidermal cytoskeletal
protein synthesized late during differentiation. Exp. Cell Res. 202:
132-141, 1992.

3. Kremer, H.; Zeeuwen, P.; McLean, W. H. I.; Mariman, E. C. M.; Lane,
E. B.; van de Kerkhof, P. C. M.; Ropers, H.-H.; Steijlen, P. M.:
Ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens is caused by mutations in the keratin
2e gene. J. Invest. Derm. 103: 286-289, 1994.

4. McLean, W. H. I.; Morley, S. M.; Lane, E. B.; Eady, R. A. J.; Griffiths,
W. A. D.; Paige, D. G.; Harper, J. I.; Higgins, C.; Leigh, I. M.:
Ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens--a disease involving keratin 2e. J.
Invest. Derm. 103: 277-281, 1994.

5. Rothnagel, J. A.; Traupe, H.; Wojcik, S.; Huber, M.; Hohl, D.;
Pittelkow, M. R.; Saeki, H.; Ishibashi, Y.; Roop, D. R.: Mutations
in the rod domain of keratin 2e in patients with ichthyosis bullosa
of Siemens. Nature Genet. 7: 485-490, 1994.

6. Smith, F. J. D.; Maingi, C.; Covello, S. P.; Higgins, C.; Schmidt,
M.; Lane, E. B.; Uitto, J.; Leigh, I. M.; McLean, W. H. I.: Genomic
organization and fine mapping of the keratin 2e gene (KRT2E): K2e
V1 domain polymorphism and novel mutations in ichthyosis bullosa of
Siemens. J. Invest. Derm. 111: 817-821, 1998.

7. Takizawa, Y.; Akiyama, M.; Nagashima, M.; Shimizu, H.: A novel
asparagine-aspartic acid mutation in the rod 1A domain in keratin
2e in a Japanese family with ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens J. Invest.
Derm. 114: 193-195, 2000.

8. Whittock, N. V.; Ashton, G. H. S.; Griffiths, W. A. D.; Eady, R.
A. J.; McGrath, J. A.: New mutations in keratin 1 that cause bullous
congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma and keratin 2e that cause ichthyosis
bullosa of Siemens. Brit. J. Derm. 145: 330-335, 2001.

9. Yang, J.-M.; Lee, S.; Bang, H.-D.; Kim, W.-S.; Lee, E.-S.; Steinert,
P. M.: A novel threonine-to-proline mutation at the end of 2B rod
domain in the keratin 2e chain in ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens. J.
Invest. Derm. 109: 116-118, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Gary A. Bellus - updated: 3/7/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 6/13/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/11/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/27/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/8/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/14/1994

EDITED carol: 03/26/2008
alopez: 3/12/2003
alopez: 3/7/2003
alopez: 6/13/2000
jlewis: 6/21/1999
jlewis: 6/17/1999
terry: 6/11/1999
carol: 2/12/1999
terry: 1/27/1999
terry: 9/8/1997
terry: 8/5/1997
mark: 6/19/1997
alopez: 6/10/1997
jamie: 1/17/1997
mark: 4/1/1996
mimadm: 9/23/1995
terry: 6/24/1995
terry: 11/29/1994
carol: 11/16/1994
carol: 11/15/1994

102579	TITLE *102579 REPLICATION FACTOR C, SUBUNIT 1; RFC1
;;ACTIVATOR 1, 140-KD SUBUNIT;;
REPLICATION FACTOR C, 140-KD SUBUNIT; RFC140;;
RFC
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Replication factor C is a multisubunit, DNA polymerase accessory protein
required for the coordinated synthesis of both DNA strands during simian
virus 40 DNA replication in vitro. It is a DNA-dependent ATPase that
binds in a structure-specific manner to the 3-prime end of a primer
hybridized to a template DNA, an activity thought intrinsic to the
140-kD component of this multisubunit complex. Bunz et al. (1993)
isolated and analyzed cDNAs encoding the 140-kD subunit. An open reading
frame of 3.4 kb was predicted to encode a 1,148-amino acid protein with
a predicted molecular mass of 130 kD. A putative ATP-binding motif was
observed that is similar to a motif in several of the smaller subunits
of RFC and in functionally homologous replication factors of bacterial
and viral origin. The predicted protein showed similarities to other
DNA-binding proteins.

Luckow et al. (1994) isolated a full-length mouse cDNA encoding a
protein that binds in a sequence-unspecific manner to DNA, is localized
exclusively in the nucleus, and represents, they concluded, the 140-kD
subunit of mouse replication factor C. They found that it showed 83%
identity to the human protein.

Human replication factor C (RFC), also called activator-1, is a
multimeric primer-recognition protein consisting of 5 distinct subunits
of 145, 40, 38, 37, and 36.5 kD. Human RFC was purified from extracts of
HeLa cells as a host factor essential for the in vitro replication of
simian virus 40 (SV40) DNA (Okumura et al., 1995). RFC, in the presence
of ATP, assembles proliferating-cell nuclear antigen (PCNA; 176740) and
DNA polymerase-delta (174761) or polymerase-epsil on (174762) on primed
DNA templates. The complex of primed DNA-RFC-PCNA-DNA polymerase, when
supplemented with dNTPs, results in the efficient elongation of DNA in
the presence of human single-stranded DNA binding protein. Studies with
the complete 5-subunit holoenzyme indicated that the large subunit binds
to DNA and the 40-kD subunit binds ATP. The other subunits may play
discrete roles in the elongation process catalyzed by polymerase. The
subunit genes are numbered in sequence of decreasing molecular weight:
RFC1, RFC2 (600404), RFC3 (600405), RFC4 (102577), and RFC5 (600407).

GENE FUNCTION

Using interaction cloning, Uchiumi et al. (1996) found that the large
subunit of RFC interacts with the DNA sequence repeats of telomeres.
They found that RFC recognizes the 5-prime-phosphate termini of
double-stranded telomeric repeats. The authors suggested that RFC may be
involved in telomere stability or turnover.

Wang et al. (2000) used immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry
analyses to identify BRCA1 (113705)-associated proteins. They found that
BRCA1 is part of a large multisubunit protein complex of tumor
suppressors, DNA damage sensors, and signal transducers. They named this
complex BASC, for 'BRCA1-associated genome surveillance complex.' Among
the DNA repair proteins identified in the complex were ATM (607585), BLM
(604610), MSH2 (609309), MSH6 (600678), MLH1 (120436), the RAD50
(604040)-MRE11 (600814)-NBS1 (602667) complex, and the RFC1-RFC2
(600404)-RFC4 (102577) complex. Wang et al. (2000) suggested that BASC
may serve as a sensor of abnormal DNA structures and/or as a regulator
of the postreplication repair process.

The RB1 protein (614041) promotes cell survival after DNA damage.
Pennaneach et al. (2001) showed that the LxCxE-binding site in RB1
mediates both cell survival and cell cycle arrest after DNA damage. RFC
complex plays an important role in DNA replication. Pennaneach et al.
(2001) described a function of RFC1 in promoting cell survival after DNA
damage. RFC1 contains an LxCxE motif, and mutation of this motif
abolished the protective effect of RFC1. The inability of wildtype RFC1
to promote cell survival in RB1 null cells was rescued by RB1 but not by
RB1 mutants defective in binding LxCxE proteins. RFC thus enhances cell
survival after DNA damage in an RB1-dependent manner.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Bowman et al. (2004) reported the crystal structure of the 5-protein
clamp loader complex (replication factor-C, RFC) of the yeast S.
cerevisiae, bound to the sliding clamp (proliferating cell nuclear
antigen, or PCNA). Tight interfacial coordination of the ATP analog
ATP-gamma-S by RFC resulted in a spiral arrangement of the ATPase
domains of the clamp loader above the PCNA ring. Placement of a model
for primed DNA within the central hole of PCNA revealed a striking
correspondence between the RFC spiral and the grooves of the DNA double
helix. Bowman et al. (2004) concluded that this model, in which the
clamp loader complex locks into primed DNA in a screwcap-like
arrangement, provides a simple explanation for the process by which the
engagement of primer-template junctions by the RFC:PCNA complex results
in ATP hydrolysis and release of the sliding clamp on DNA.

MAPPING

Luckow et al. (1994) assigned RFC1, the gene for the largest subunit of
replication factor C, to 4p14-p13 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.
They mapped the homolog in the mouse to chromosome 5. Lossie et al.
(1995) likewise mapped this gene, which they symbolized Recc1, to human
chromosome 4 by human/rodent somatic cell hybrid analysis and to mouse
chromosome 5 by haplotype analysis of an interspecific backcross.

REFERENCE 1. Bowman, G. D.; O'Donnell, M.; Kuriyan, J.: Structural analysis
of a eukaryotic sliding DNA clamp-clamp loader complex. Nature 429:
724-730, 2004.

2. Bunz, F.; Kobayashi, R.; Stillman, B.: cDNAs encoding the large
subunit of human replication factor C. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90:
11014-11018, 1993.

3. Lossie, A. C.; Haugen, B. R.; Wood, W. M.; Camper, S. A.; Gordon,
D. F.: Chromosomal localization of the large subunit of mouse replication
factor C in the mouse and human. Mammalian Genome 6: 58-59, 1995.

4. Luckow, B.; Bunz, F.; Stillman, B.; Lichter, P.; Schutz, G.: Cloning,
expression, and chromosomal localization of the 140-kilodalton subunit
of replication factor C from mice and humans. Molec. Cell. Biol. 14:
1626-1634, 1994.

5. Okumura, K.; Nogami, M.; Taguchi, H.; Dean, F. B.; Chen, M.; Pan,
Z.-Q.; Hurwitz, J.; Shiratori, A.; Murakami, Y.; Ozawa, K.; Eki, T.
: Assignment of the 36.5-kDa (RFC5), 37-kDa (RFC4), 38-kDa (RFC3),
and 40-kDa (RFC2) subunit genes of human replication factor C to chromosome
bands 12q24.2-q24.3, 3q27, 13q12.3-q13, and 7q11.23. Genomics 25:
274-278, 1995.

6. Pennaneach, V.; Salles-Passador, I.; Munshi, A.; Brickner, H.;
Regazzoni, K.; Dick, F.; Dyson, N.; Chen, T.-T.; Wang, J. Y. J.; Fotedar,
R.; Fotedar, A.: The large subunit of replication factor C promotes
cell survival after DNA damage in an LxCxE motif- and Rb-dependent
manner. Molec. Cell 7: 715-727, 2001.

7. Uchiumi, F.; Ohta, T.; Tanuma, S.: Replication factor C recognizes
5-prime-phosphate ends of telomeres. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 229:
310-315, 1996.

8. Wang, Y.; Cortez, D.; Yazdi, P.; Neff, N.; Elledge, S. J.; Qin,
J.: BASC, a super complex of BRCA1-associated proteins involved in
the recognition and repair of aberrant DNA structures. Genes Dev. 14:
927-939, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/12/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/22/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/6/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/16/2000
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 8/27/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/14/1993

EDITED carol: 06/17/2011
wwang: 1/12/2010
mgross: 4/14/2005
alopez: 6/22/2004
terry: 6/22/2004
ckniffin: 3/11/2003
terry: 11/15/2001
mgross: 8/6/2001
joanna: 1/17/2001
mgross: 11/16/2000
alopez: 9/4/1998
alopez: 10/6/1997
alopez: 7/9/1997
alopez: 6/3/1997
terry: 4/18/1995
carol: 2/20/1995
carol: 12/14/1993

610855	TITLE *610855 ANKYRIN REPEAT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 26; ANKRD26
;;KIAA1074
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Kikuno et al. (1999) cloned ANKRD26, which they designated
KIAA1074. The deduced protein contains 1,709 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA
detected moderate expression in fetal liver and in nearly all adult
tissues and specific brain regions examined. Low expression was detected
in adult pancreas and spleen and in fetal brain.

By database analysis, Hahn et al. (2006) identified ANKRD26 as a distant
homolog of the POTE family (see POTE2; 608914). The ANKRD26 protein
contains 4 N-terminal ankyrin repeats and a C-terminal coiled-coil
region. It shares 61.2% amino acid identity with mouse Ankrd26.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hahn et al. (2006) determined that the ANKRD26 gene contains 34 exons.

MAPPING

Using radiation hybrid analysis, Kikuno et al. (1999) mapped the ANKRD26
gene to chromosome 10. By genomic sequence analysis, Hahn et al. (2006)
mapped the ANKRD26 gene to chromosome 10p12.1. They mapped the mouse
Ankrd26 gene to chromosome 6F1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 9 of 20 unrelated families with autosomal dominant nonsyndromic
thrombocytopenia-2 (THC2; 188000), Pippucci et al. (2011) identified 6
different heterozygous mutations in the 5-prime promoter region of the
ANKRD26 gene (see, e.g., 610855.0001-610855.0003). All of the mutations
occurred in a highly conserved 19-nucleotide stretch. In vitro
functional expression assays in Dami human megakaryoblastic cells
indicated that the mutations resulted in increased expression,
particularly when the cells were stimulated toward maturation. The
findings suggested a gain-of-function effect. Pippucci et al. (2011)
speculated that the ANKRD26 mutations interfere with the mechanism
controlling the expression of ANKRD26, which would then affect
megakaryopoiesis and platelet production, perhaps by inducing apoptosis.
The phenotype was characterized by thrombocytopenia without any
morphologic or functional platelet defect.

ANIMAL MODEL

Bera et al. (2008) generated mice homozygous for partial inactivation of
the Ankrd26 gene and observed the development of extreme obesity,
insulin resistance, and a dramatic increase in body size. The obesity
was associated with hyperphagia with no reduction in energy expenditure
or activity. Bera et al. (2008) detected expression of Ankrd26 in the
arcuate and ventromedial nuclei within the hypothalamus and in the
ependyma and the circumventricular organs that act as an interface
between the peripheral circulation and the brain. They also found
increased phosphorylation of Akt (see AKT1; 164730) and mTOR (FRAP1;
601231) in mutant hearts compared to wildtype.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
THROMBOCYTOPENIA 2
ANKRD26, -134G-A

In 7 affected members of a large Italian family with autosomal dominant
thrombocytopenia-2 (THC2; 188000) originally reported by Savoia et al.
(1999), Pippucci et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous -134G-A
transition in the 5-prime promoter region of the ANKRD26 gene. The same
mutation was also identified in 2 members of a second Italian family
with the disorder. The mutation was not found in 500 controls. In vitro
functional expression studies of the mutant protein in K562
undifferentiated myeloid cells showed 2.7 to 4.5-fold increased
expression of a luciferase reporter. Transfection of the -134G-A
mutation in Dami human megakaryoblastic cells showed overexpression of
the reporter gene in cells that were both unstimulated and stimulated
toward megakaryocytic maturation. Punzo et al. (2010) determined that
this large Italian family, originally reported by Savoia et al. (1999),
had a pathogenic mutation in the ACBD5 gene that caused the disorder,
but the findings of Pippucci et al. (2011) suggested that the ANKRD26
mutation was responsible for the phenotype.

.0002
THROMBOCYTOPENIA 2
ANKRD26, -127A-T

In 6 affected members of a large Italian family with autosomal dominant
thrombocytopenia-2 (THC2; 188000), Pippucci et al. (2011) identified a
heterozygous -127A-T transversion in the 5-prime promoter region of the
ANKRD26 gene. The same mutation was also identified in 2 members of
family from Argentina with the disorder. The mutation was not found in
500 controls. Transfection of the -127A-T mutation in Dami human
megakaryoblastic cells showed overexpression of the reporter gene in
Dami cells that were stimulated toward megakaryocytic maturation, but
not in unstimulated cells.

.0003
THROMBOCYTOPENIA 2
ANKRD26, -128G-A

In 7 affected members of a large Italian family with autosomal dominant
thrombocytopenia-2 (THC2; 188000), Pippucci et al. (2011) identified a
heterozygous -128G-A transition in the 5-prime promoter region of the
ANKRD26 gene. The same mutation was also identified in 3 members of
another Italian family with the disorder. The mutation was not found in
500 controls. Transfection of the -128G-A mutation in Dami human
megakaryoblastic cells showed overexpression of the reporter gene in
cells that were both unstimulated and stimulated toward megakaryocytic
maturation.

REFERENCE 1. Bera, T. K.; Liu, X.-F.; Yamada, M.; Gavrilova, O.; Mezey, E.;
Tessarollo, L.; Anver, M.; Hahn, Y.; Lee, B.; Pastan, I.: A model
for obesity and gigantism due to disruption of the Ankrd26 gene. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 270-275, 2008.

2. Hahn, Y.; Bera, T. K.; Pastan, I. H.; Lee, B.: Duplication and
extensive remodeling shaped POTE family genes encoding proteins containing
ankyrin repeat and coiled coil domains. Gene 366: 238-245, 2006.

3. Kikuno, R.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Miyajima, N.;
Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the
coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIV. The complete sequences
of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in
vitro. DNA Res. 6: 197-205, 1999.

4. Pippucci, T.; Savoia, A.; Perrotta, S.; Pujol-Moix, N.; Noris,
P.; Castegnaro, G.; Pecci, A.; Gnan, C.; Punzo, F.; Marconi, C.; Gherardi,
S.; Loffredo, G.; and 11 others: Mutations in the 5-prime UTR of
ANKRD26, the ankirin repeat domain 26 gene, cause an autosomal-dominant
form of inherited thrombocytopenia, THC2. Am. J. Hum.  Genet. 88:
115-120, 2011.

5. Punzo, F.; Mientjes, E. J.; Rohe, C. F.; Scianguetta, S.; Amendola,
G.; Oostra, B. A.; Bertoli-Avella, A. M.; Perrotta, S.: A mutation
in the acyl-coenzyme A binding domain-containing protein 5 gene (ACBD5)
identified in autosomal dominant thrombocytopenia. J. Thromb. Haemost. 8:
2085-2087, 2010.

6. Savoia, A.; Del Vecchio, M.; Totaro, A.; Perrotta, S.; Amendola,
G.; Moretti, A.; Zelante, L.; Iolascon, A.: An autosomal dominant
thrombocytopenia gene maps to chromosomal region 10p. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 65: 1401-1405, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/2/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/9/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/11/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/16/2007

EDITED wwang: 02/24/2011
ckniffin: 2/2/2011
wwang: 4/9/2008
terry: 4/9/2008
mgross: 4/20/2007
terry: 4/11/2007
mgross: 3/16/2007

610855	TITLE *610855 ANKYRIN REPEAT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 26; ANKRD26
;;KIAA1074
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Kikuno et al. (1999) cloned ANKRD26, which they designated
KIAA1074. The deduced protein contains 1,709 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA
detected moderate expression in fetal liver and in nearly all adult
tissues and specific brain regions examined. Low expression was detected
in adult pancreas and spleen and in fetal brain.

By database analysis, Hahn et al. (2006) identified ANKRD26 as a distant
homolog of the POTE family (see POTE2; 608914). The ANKRD26 protein
contains 4 N-terminal ankyrin repeats and a C-terminal coiled-coil
region. It shares 61.2% amino acid identity with mouse Ankrd26.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hahn et al. (2006) determined that the ANKRD26 gene contains 34 exons.

MAPPING

Using radiation hybrid analysis, Kikuno et al. (1999) mapped the ANKRD26
gene to chromosome 10. By genomic sequence analysis, Hahn et al. (2006)
mapped the ANKRD26 gene to chromosome 10p12.1. They mapped the mouse
Ankrd26 gene to chromosome 6F1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 9 of 20 unrelated families with autosomal dominant nonsyndromic
thrombocytopenia-2 (THC2; 188000), Pippucci et al. (2011) identified 6
different heterozygous mutations in the 5-prime promoter region of the
ANKRD26 gene (see, e.g., 610855.0001-610855.0003). All of the mutations
occurred in a highly conserved 19-nucleotide stretch. In vitro
functional expression assays in Dami human megakaryoblastic cells
indicated that the mutations resulted in increased expression,
particularly when the cells were stimulated toward maturation. The
findings suggested a gain-of-function effect. Pippucci et al. (2011)
speculated that the ANKRD26 mutations interfere with the mechanism
controlling the expression of ANKRD26, which would then affect
megakaryopoiesis and platelet production, perhaps by inducing apoptosis.
The phenotype was characterized by thrombocytopenia without any
morphologic or functional platelet defect.

ANIMAL MODEL

Bera et al. (2008) generated mice homozygous for partial inactivation of
the Ankrd26 gene and observed the development of extreme obesity,
insulin resistance, and a dramatic increase in body size. The obesity
was associated with hyperphagia with no reduction in energy expenditure
or activity. Bera et al. (2008) detected expression of Ankrd26 in the
arcuate and ventromedial nuclei within the hypothalamus and in the
ependyma and the circumventricular organs that act as an interface
between the peripheral circulation and the brain. They also found
increased phosphorylation of Akt (see AKT1; 164730) and mTOR (FRAP1;
601231) in mutant hearts compared to wildtype.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
THROMBOCYTOPENIA 2
ANKRD26, -134G-A

In 7 affected members of a large Italian family with autosomal dominant
thrombocytopenia-2 (THC2; 188000) originally reported by Savoia et al.
(1999), Pippucci et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous -134G-A
transition in the 5-prime promoter region of the ANKRD26 gene. The same
mutation was also identified in 2 members of a second Italian family
with the disorder. The mutation was not found in 500 controls. In vitro
functional expression studies of the mutant protein in K562
undifferentiated myeloid cells showed 2.7 to 4.5-fold increased
expression of a luciferase reporter. Transfection of the -134G-A
mutation in Dami human megakaryoblastic cells showed overexpression of
the reporter gene in cells that were both unstimulated and stimulated
toward megakaryocytic maturation. Punzo et al. (2010) determined that
this large Italian family, originally reported by Savoia et al. (1999),
had a pathogenic mutation in the ACBD5 gene that caused the disorder,
but the findings of Pippucci et al. (2011) suggested that the ANKRD26
mutation was responsible for the phenotype.

.0002
THROMBOCYTOPENIA 2
ANKRD26, -127A-T

In 6 affected members of a large Italian family with autosomal dominant
thrombocytopenia-2 (THC2; 188000), Pippucci et al. (2011) identified a
heterozygous -127A-T transversion in the 5-prime promoter region of the
ANKRD26 gene. The same mutation was also identified in 2 members of
family from Argentina with the disorder. The mutation was not found in
500 controls. Transfection of the -127A-T mutation in Dami human
megakaryoblastic cells showed overexpression of the reporter gene in
Dami cells that were stimulated toward megakaryocytic maturation, but
not in unstimulated cells.

.0003
THROMBOCYTOPENIA 2
ANKRD26, -128G-A

In 7 affected members of a large Italian family with autosomal dominant
thrombocytopenia-2 (THC2; 188000), Pippucci et al. (2011) identified a
heterozygous -128G-A transition in the 5-prime promoter region of the
ANKRD26 gene. The same mutation was also identified in 3 members of
another Italian family with the disorder. The mutation was not found in
500 controls. Transfection of the -128G-A mutation in Dami human
megakaryoblastic cells showed overexpression of the reporter gene in
cells that were both unstimulated and stimulated toward megakaryocytic
maturation.

REFERENCE 1. Bera, T. K.; Liu, X.-F.; Yamada, M.; Gavrilova, O.; Mezey, E.;
Tessarollo, L.; Anver, M.; Hahn, Y.; Lee, B.; Pastan, I.: A model
for obesity and gigantism due to disruption of the Ankrd26 gene. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 270-275, 2008.

2. Hahn, Y.; Bera, T. K.; Pastan, I. H.; Lee, B.: Duplication and
extensive remodeling shaped POTE family genes encoding proteins containing
ankyrin repeat and coiled coil domains. Gene 366: 238-245, 2006.

3. Kikuno, R.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Miyajima, N.;
Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the
coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIV. The complete sequences
of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in
vitro. DNA Res. 6: 197-205, 1999.

4. Pippucci, T.; Savoia, A.; Perrotta, S.; Pujol-Moix, N.; Noris,
P.; Castegnaro, G.; Pecci, A.; Gnan, C.; Punzo, F.; Marconi, C.; Gherardi,
S.; Loffredo, G.; and 11 others: Mutations in the 5-prime UTR of
ANKRD26, the ankirin repeat domain 26 gene, cause an autosomal-dominant
form of inherited thrombocytopenia, THC2. Am. J. Hum.  Genet. 88:
115-120, 2011.

5. Punzo, F.; Mientjes, E. J.; Rohe, C. F.; Scianguetta, S.; Amendola,
G.; Oostra, B. A.; Bertoli-Avella, A. M.; Perrotta, S.: A mutation
in the acyl-coenzyme A binding domain-containing protein 5 gene (ACBD5)
identified in autosomal dominant thrombocytopenia. J. Thromb. Haemost. 8:
2085-2087, 2010.

6. Savoia, A.; Del Vecchio, M.; Totaro, A.; Perrotta, S.; Amendola,
G.; Moretti, A.; Zelante, L.; Iolascon, A.: An autosomal dominant
thrombocytopenia gene maps to chromosomal region 10p. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 65: 1401-1405, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/2/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/9/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/11/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/16/2007

EDITED wwang: 02/24/2011
ckniffin: 2/2/2011
wwang: 4/9/2008
terry: 4/9/2008
mgross: 4/20/2007
terry: 4/11/2007
mgross: 3/16/2007

612987	TITLE *612987 NON-SMC ELEMENT 4, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF, A; NSMCE4A
;;NSE4A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Hu et al. (2005) identified NSMCE4A, which is the human ortholog of S.
cerevisiae Nse4. The deduced 385-amino acid protein shares 22%
similarity with yeast Nse4.

GENE FUNCTION

Hu et al. (2005) showed that S. cerevisiae Nse4 mutants exhibited growth
arrest occurring after S phase and prior to mitosis in a Rad24
checkpoint-dependent manner, and displayed genome instability and
sensitivity to DNA damage agents. Hu et al. (2005) showed that Nse4 is a
non-SMC element of the Smc5 (609386)/Smc6 (609387) DNA repair complex.

REFERENCE 1. Hu, B.; Liao, C.; Millson, S. H.; Mollapour, M.; Prodromou, C.;
Pearl, L. H.; Piper, P. W.; Panaretou, B.: Qri2/Nse4, a component
of the essential Smc5/6 DNA repair complex. Molec. Microbiol. 55:
1735-1750, 2005.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 8/27/2009

EDITED wwang: 08/27/2009

608228	TITLE *608228 NANOS, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 2; NANOS2
;;NOS2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Tsuda et al. (2003) cloned mouse Nanos2. The deduced protein contains a
zinc finger motif. Nanos2 expression was restricted to male mouse germ
cells.

Using quantitative PCR, Angeles Julaton and Reijo Pera (2011) detected
highest NANOS2 expression in adult and fetal testis. Weaker NANOS2
expression was detected in other fetal tissues, particularly in brain,
kidney, liver, lung, ovary, skeletal muscle, spleen, and thymus. NANOS2
was also detected in adult ovary and spleen, with little to no
expression in other adult tissues. Western blot analysis detected NANOS2
at an apparent molecular mass of 24 kD in adult and fetal testis and
ovary.

MAPPING

Hartz (2013) mapped the NANOS2 gene to chromosome 19q13.32 based on an
alignment of the NANOS2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC042883) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

ANIMAL MODEL

Tsuda et al. (2003) found that Nanos2-null mice were viable and showed
no apparent abnormalities, but Nanos2-null testes had defects in
spermatogenesis. The weight of testes in 4-week-old mutant males was
reduced to about 30% of normal, and no germ cells were detected.
Morphologic examination revealed apoptotic germ cells after embryonic
day 15.5, and apoptosis continued until the germ cells had completely
disappeared by 4 weeks of age. In contrast, female gonads were
morphologically and functionally normal, and homozygous female mice were
fertile.

Using Nanos2-null mice, Suzuki and Saga (2008) showed that Nanos2
suppressed meiosis in male mouse germ cells by preventing Stra8 (609987)
expression, which was required for premeiotic DNA replication, after
Cyp26b1 (605207) downregulation. Forced expression of Nanos2 in female
germ cells resulted in inhibition of meiosis and induction of male-type
differentiation, indicating that Nanos2 activates a male-specific
genetic program.

REFERENCE 1. Angeles Julaton, V. T.; Reijo Pera, R. A.: NANOS3 function in
human germ cell development. Hum. Molec. Genet. 20: 2238-2250, 2011.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/20/2013.

3. Suzuki, A.; Saga, Y.: Nanos2 suppresses meiosis and promotes male
germ cell differentiation. Genes Dev. 22: 430-435, 2008.

4. Tsuda, M.; Sasaoka, Y.; Kiso, M.; Abe, K.; Haraguchi, S.; Kobayashi,
S.; Saga, Y.: Conserved role of nanos proteins in germ cell development. Science 301:
1239-1241, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/20/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/21/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/5/2003

EDITED mgross: 09/20/2013
mgross: 9/20/2013
mgross: 3/24/2008
terry: 3/21/2008
terry: 4/6/2005
mgross: 11/5/2003

614798	TITLE *614798 PELLINO, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 2; PELI2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Pellino proteins, such as PELI2, are intermediate components in the
innate immune response signaling cascades initiated by Toll-like
receptors (TLRs; see 603030) and IL1R (147810), and interact with the
Drosophila Pelle homolog IRAK1 (300283), TRAF6 (602355), and NFKB (see
164011) (summary by Jensen and Whitehead, 2003).

CLONING

By database searching, Resch et al. (2001) identified mouse and human
homologs of Drosophila Pellino. The human PELI2 gene encodes a 420-amino
acid protein.

GENE FUNCTION

By coprecipitation and Western blot analysis, Jensen and Whitehead
(2003) showed that PELI2 interacts with the proteins TRAF6 and TAK1
(MAP3K7; 602614), both downstream of IRAK1 in the TLR/IL1R cascade, but
not MYD88 (602170), an upstream protein. However, PELI2 but not PELI1
(614797) promoted the activation of JUN (165160) and ELK1 (311040)
through phosphorylation of JNK (MAPK8; 601158).

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen for proteins interacting with IRAK4
(606883), Strelow et al. (2003) identified PELI2. Immunoprecipitation
analysis showed interaction with IRAK1 and IRAK4 independently of their
kinase activities. PELI2 is phosphorylated by kinase-active IRAK1 and
IRAK4. Strelow et al. (2003) proposed that PELI2 could be a scaffolding
molecule linking Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) signaling (see
601194) to general cellular processes.

Using phage display, followed by immunoprecipitation analysis, Liu et
al. (2004) identified PELI2, as well as SOCS3 (604176), as an
interacting partner of BCL10 (603517) in response to lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) stimulation in the TLR pathway. The interaction occurs through
residues 169 through 233 of PELI2 and is blocked indirectly by SOCS3
expression.

Kim et al. (2012) showed that knockdown of PELI2, but not PELI1,
abolishes IL1 (see 147760)- and LPS-induced ubiquitination of IRAK1 at
lys63 and reduces ubiquitination through lys48. PELI2 is also required
for TAK1-dependent NFKB activation. RT-PCR analysis indicated that PELI2
knockdown reduced IL1- and LPS-induced KC (CXCL1; 155730), IL6 (147620),
and TNF (191160) expression in mouse macrophages at late time points
accompanied by decay of the inflammatory gene mRNAs. Knockdown also
attenuated JNK and ERK (MAPK3; 601795) activation. Kim et al. (2012)
concluded that PELI2 plays a critical role in TLR/IL1R-mediated
posttranscriptional control.

GENE STRUCTURE

Resch et al. (2001) determined that the PELI2 gene consists of 6 exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Resch et al. (2001) mapped the PELI2 gene
to chromosome 14q21.

REFERENCE 1. Jensen, L. E.; Whitehead, A. S.: Pellino2 activates the mitogen
activated protein kinase pathway. FEBS Lett. 545: 199-202, 2003.

2. Kim, T. W.; Yu, M.; Zhou, H.; Cui, W.; Wang, J.; DiCorleto, P.;
Fox, P.; Xiao, H.; Li, X.: Pellino 2 is critical for Toll-like receptor/interleukin-1
receptor (TLR/IL-1R)-mediated post-transcriptional control. J. Biol.
Chem. 287: 25686-25695, 2012.

3. Liu, Y.; Dong, W.; Chen, L.; Xiang, R.; Xiao, H.; De. G.; Wang,
Z.; Qi, Y.: BCL10 mediates lipopolysaccharide/Toll-like receptor-4
signaling through interaction with Pellino2. J. Biol. Chem. 279:
37436-37444, 2004.

4. Resch, K.; Jockusch, H.; Schmitt-John, T.: Assignment of homologous
genes, Peli1/PELI1 and Peli2/PELI2, for the Pelle adaptor protein
Pellino to mouse chromosomes 11 and 14 and human chromosomes 2p13.3
and 14q21, respectively, by physical and radiation hybrid mapping. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 92: 172-174, 2001.

5. Strelow, A.; Kollewe, C.; Wesche, H.: Characterization of Pellino2,
a substrate of IRAK1 and IRAK4. FEBS Lett. 547: 157-161, 2003.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 8/31/2012

EDITED alopez: 08/31/2012

613726	TITLE *613726 ANOCTAMIN 10; ANO10
;;TRANSMEMBRANE PROTEIN 16K; TMEM16K
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ANO10 belongs to a family of calcium-activated chloride channels (review
by Hartzell et al., 2009).

CLONING

Vermeer et al. (2010) stated that the deduced ANO10 protein contains 660
amino acids. Quantitative PCR detected ANO10 expression in all tissues
examined, with highest expression in whole adult brain, followed by
retina and heart. Within specific adult brain regions, highest
expression was detected in frontal and occipital cortices and in
cerebellum. Expression in fetal brain was lower than in adult whole
brain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Vermeer et al. (2010) determined that the ANO10 gene spans 2.7 kb and
contains 13 exons, 12 of which are coding.

MAPPING

Vermeer et al. (2010) stated that the ANO10 gene maps to chromosome
3p22.3-p21.32. Gross (2011) mapped the ANO10 gene to chromosome 3p22.1
based on an alignment of the ANO10 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK096302)
with the genomic sequence (GRCh37).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 3 unrelated families with autosomal recessive
spinocerebellar ataxia-10 (SCAR10; 613728), Vermeer et al. (2010)
identified homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the ANO10
gene (613726.0001-613726.0004). The neurodegenerative disorder was
characterized by onset in the teenage or young adult years of gait and
limb ataxia, dysarthria, and nystagmus associated with marked cerebellar
atrophy on brain imaging.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 10
ANO10, LEU510ARG

In affected members of a Dutch family with autosomal recessive
spinocerebellar ataxia-10 (SCAR10; 613728), Vermeer et al. (2010)
identified a homozygous 1529T-G transversion in exon 10 of the ANO10
gene, resulting in a leu510-to-arg (L510R) substitution in a highly
conserved residue in the DUF590 domain. The mutation was not found in
300 control alleles. The family was remotely consanguineous.

.0002
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 10
ANO10, 2-BP DEL, 1150TT

In 3 affected sibs of a consanguineous family of Romani origin from
Serbia with SCAR10 (613728), Vermeer et al. (2010) identified a
homozygous 2-bp deletion (1150delTT) in the ANO10 gene, predicted to
result in a frameshift and premature termination in exon 6.

.0003
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 10
ANO10, IVS9DS, G-T, +1

In 2 French sibs with SCAR10 (613728), Vermeer et al. (2010) identified
compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ANO10 gene: a G-to-T
transversion in intron 9 (1476+1G-T), predicted to result in a splice
site mutation, and a deletion at nucleotide 1604, resulting in premature
termination at codon 535 (613726.0004).

.0004
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 10
ANO10, LEU535TER

See 613726.0003 and Vermeer et al. (2010).

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/3/2011.

2. Hartzell, H. C.; Yu, K.; Xiao, Q.; Chien, L.-T.; Qu, Z.: Anoctamin/TMEM16
family members are Ca2+-activated Cl-channels. J. Physiol. 587:
2127-2139, 2009.

3. Vermeer, S.; Hoischen, A.; Meijer, R. P. P.; Gilissen, C.; Neveling,
K.; Wieskamp, N.; de Brouwer, A.; Koenig, M.; Anheim, M.; Assoum,
M.; Drouot, N.; Todorovic, S.; and 18 others: Targeted next-generation
sequencing of a 12.5 Mb homozygous region reveals ANO10 mutations
in patients with autosomal-recessive cerebellar ataxia. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 87: 813-819, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/4/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/3/2011

EDITED carol: 09/09/2013
carol: 9/16/2011
terry: 3/2/2011
wwang: 2/8/2011
ckniffin: 2/4/2011
mgross: 2/3/2011

610222	TITLE *610222 RAS AND RAB INTERACTOR 2; RIN2
;;RAB5-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2;;
RAS INHIBITOR JC265
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

RIN2 is a member of the RIN family of Ras interaction-interference
proteins, which are binding partners to the RAB5 small GTPases (see
RAB5A, 179512) (Saito et al., 2002).

CLONING

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis with GTPase-deficient mutant RAB5B
(179514) as bait, followed by database analysis and 5-prime RACE of a
human brain cDNA library, Saito et al. (2002) cloned the RIN2 gene. The
deduced 895-amino acid protein contains an SH2 domain, 2 proline-rich
domains, a RIN homology (RH) domain, a Vps9 domain, and a Ras
association domain, and has a molecular mass of 116 kD. Northern blot
analysis detected a 5.1-kb transcript in most tissues examined, with
highest expression in heart and kidney, and lowest expression in spleen
and peripheral blood cells. RIN2 mRNA expression was detected in HeLa
and astrocytoma cell lines, but not in the Jurkat or THP1 leukemic cell
lines. Using gel filtration analysis and coimmunoprecipitation of
Myc-tagged RIN2 deletion mutants, Saito et al. (2002) showed that RIN2
self-interacts as a homophilic tetramer that is formed by antiparallel
linkage of 2 parallel dimers.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Saito et al. (2002) showed that RIN2
interacted with both wildtype RAB5B and a constitutively active form of
RAB5B, but displayed weak interaction with a dominant-negative form of
RAB5B. RIN2 did not interact with wildtype HRAS (190020) or with an
active form of HRAS. RIN2 amino acids 497-784, which contain the RH and
Vps9 domains, were required for RAB5B binding. By in vitro binding
analysis of purified recombinant FLAG-tagged RIN2 and prenylated Rab5b,
Saito et al. (2002) demonstrated that RIN2 bound GTP preferentially over
GDP and accelerated GDP-GTP exchange on RAB5B. RIN2-GTP binding was slow
at physiologic concentrations of Mg(2+), and RIN2 enhancement of GDP-GTP
exchange achieved maximal levels during the first 5 minutes. Saito et
al. (2002) concluded that RIN2 acts as a guanine nucleotide exchange
factor.

Basel-Vanagaite et al. (2009) downregulated the expression of RIN2 in
normal fibroblasts by siRNA and observed the appearance of numerous
Golgi-associated vacuoles in RIN2-deficient fibroblasts. They also
showed that RIN2 deficiency was associated with paucity of dermal
microfibrils and deficiency of fibulin-5.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the RIN2
gene to chromosome 20 (TMAP RH68568).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 3 affected members of 2 related consanguineous Israeli-Arab families
with MACS syndrome (613075), Basel-Vanagaite et al. (2009) identified
homozygosity for a mutation in the RIN2 gene (610222.0001). RIN2 protein
was absent from fibroblasts from the patients, indicating a
loss-of-function effect.

In 3 Algerian sibs from a consanguineous family with MACS syndrome,
previously described by Verloes et al. (2005), Syx et al. (2010)
identified a homozygous 2-bp deletion in the RIN2 gene (610222.0002).
Ultrastructural studies of the skin revealed important abnormalities in
the collagen fibril morphology, and fibroblasts exhibited a dilated
endoplasmic reticulum and an abnormal Golgi apparatus with rarefied and
dilated cisternae.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MACROCEPHALY, ALOPECIA, CUTIS LAXA, AND SCOLIOSIS
RIN2, 1-BP DEL, 1731C

In 3 affected members of 2 related consanguineous Israeli-Arab families
with MACS syndrome (613075), Basel-Vanagaite et al. (2009) identified
homozygosity for a 1-bp deletion (1731delC) in the RIN2 gene, resulting
in a frameshift (Ile578SerfsX4). The mutation resulted in markedly
decreased RIN2 mRNA levels in RNA derived from patient skin biopsies,
suggesting that the mutation induces nonsense-mRNA decay. Immunoblotting
of protein extracts from patient-derived fibroblasts revealed absence of
the RIN2 protein. These data suggested that the mutation results in loss
of function of RIN2. The mutation was not found in 182 ethnically
matched control individuals.

.0002
MACROCEPHALY, ALOPECIA, CUTIS LAXA, AND SCOLIOSIS
RIN2, 2-BP DEL, 1914GC

In 3 affected Algerian sibs from a consanguineous family segregating an
autosomal recessive genodermatosis (613075), Syx et al. (2010)
identified a homozygous 2-bp deletion in exon 8 of the RIN2 gene
(1914_1915delGC). The variant introduces a frameshift and creates a
premature termination codon, leading to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.
The mutation was not found in 94 control individuals. The sibs, who were
originally described by Verloes et al. (2005), had progressive facial
coarsening, gingival hypertrophy, severe scoliosis, sparse hair, and
skin and joint hyperlaxity.

REFERENCE 1. Basel-Vanagaite, L.; Sarig, O.; Hershkovitz, D.; Fuchs-Telem, D.;
Rapaport, D.; Gat, A.; Isman, G.; Shirazi, I.; Shohat, M.; Enk, C.
D.; Birk, E.; Kohlhase, J.; and 9 others: RIN2 deficiency results
in macrocephaly, alopecia, cutis laxa, and scoliosis: MACS syndrome. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 85: 254-263, 2009.

2. Saito, K.; Murai, J.; Kajiho, H.; Kontani, K.; Kurosu, H.; Katada,
T.: A novel binding protein composed of homophilic tetramer exhibits
unique properties for the small GTPase Rab5. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
3412-3418, 2002.

3. Syx, D.; Malfait, F.; Van Laer, L.; Hellemans, J.; Hermanns-Le,
T.; Willaert, A.; Benmansour, A.; De Paepe, A.; Verloes, A.: The
RIN2 syndrome: a new autosomal recessive connective tissue disorder
caused by deficiency of Ras and Rab interactor 2 (RIN2). Hum. Genet. 128:
79-88, 2010.

4. Verloes, A.; Benmansour, A.; Mortier, G.; Pierard, G. E.; Le Merrer,
M.: A new recessive connective tissue disorder with fleshy swelling
of lips, lid and cheeks, macrocephaly, hyperextensible skin and severe
scoliosis. (Abstract) 55th Annual Meeting, American Society of Human
Genetics, Salt Lake City, Utah , 2005. P. 140.

CONTRIBUTORS Nara Sobreira - updated: 8/1/2012
Nara Sobreira - updated: 10/7/2009

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 6/29/2006

EDITED carol: 08/02/2012
terry: 8/1/2012
carol: 10/9/2009
carol: 10/8/2009
terry: 10/7/2009
wwang: 10/17/2006
carol: 7/7/2006
wwang: 7/7/2006
wwang: 6/29/2006

605978	TITLE *605978 VACUOLAR PROTEIN SORTING 13, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF, A; VPS13A
;;CHAC GENE; CHAC;;
CHOREIN;;
KIAA0986
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the choreoacanthocytosis (200150) critical region on chromosome 9q,
Rampoldi et al. (2001) identified the VPS13A gene, which they called
CHAC. They identified 2 splice variants: transcript A, which contains
exons 1 to 68 and 70 to 73 and encodes a 3,174-amino acid protein, and
transcript B, which contains exons 1 to 69 and encodes a 3,095-amino
acid protein. Northern blot analysis detected 2 bands of high molecular
mass corresponding to the 2 splice variants in all tissues analyzed.
Additionally, RT-PCR detected expression in the erythrocyte precursor
cell line K562. Rampoldi et al. (2001) showed that the CHAC gene encodes
an evolutionarily conserved protein, which may be involved in protein
sorting.

Independently, Ueno et al. (2001) identified the VPS13A gene and found
that it encodes a 3,096-amino acid protein, which they termed chorein.
Northern blot analysis detected a 10-kb transcript in brain, heart,
skeletal muscle, and kidney.

By EST database analysis and RT-PCR of lymphoid cell line and brain RNA,
Velayos-Baeza et al. (2004) identified several additional splice
variants of VPS13A generated by exon skipping or utilization of
alternative internal exons. Northern blot analysis and RT-PCR detected
VPS13A expression at variable levels in all tissues examined, and
transcript encoding the 3,174-amino acid protein was the major variant.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rampoldi et al. (2001) determined that the VPS13A gene contains 73 exons
and spans 250 kb. Velayos-Baeza et al. (2004) identified 5 additional
alternative exons in the VPS13A gene, exons 7b, 31b, 34b, 68b, and 69b,
but 3 of these, exons 31b, 34b, and 69b, have stop codons in all 3
reading frames.

MAPPING

Rampoldi et al. (2001) mapped the VPS13A gene to chromosome 9q21-q22.
Velayos-Baeza et al. (2004) mapped the mouse Vps13a gene to chromosome
19A.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 11 families with choreoacanthocytosis, Rampoldi
et al. (2001) identified 16 different mutations in the VPS13A gene (see,
e.g., 605978.0001).

In 4 affected patients from 3 Japanese pedigrees with
choreoacanthocytosis, Ueno et al. (2001) identified a homozygous
deletion in the coding region of the VPS13A gene (605978.0003).

Among 43 patients with choreoacanthocytosis, Dobson-Stone et al. (2002)
identified 57 different mutations distributed throughout the CHAC gene
(see, e.g., 605978.0004). In 7 patients, only 1 heterozygous mutation
was found; in 4 patients, no disease mutations were found. The authors
noted that small gene deletions or rearrangements may not have been
detected in these patients.

Dobson-Stone et al. (2005) stated that 75 different mutations in the
VPS13A gene had been identified in 58 probands with
choreoacanthocytosis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, ILE90LYS

In a patient with choreoacanthocytosis (200150), Rampoldi et al. (2001)
found compound heterozygosity for a 269T-A transversion in exon 4 of the
VPS13A gene and an insertion of a T between nucleotides 6404 and 6405 in
exon 48. The mutations resulted in an ile90-to-lys (I90K) amino acid
change and a frameshift, respectively.

.0002
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, 1-BP INS, 6404T

See 605978.0001 and Rampoldi et al. (2001).

.0003
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, 260-BP DEL

In affected members of 3 Japanese families with choreoacanthocytosis
(200150), Ueno et al. (2001) identified a homozygous 260-bp deletion in
the VPS13A gene, leading to a truncated protein. The families originated
from a small area in Japan, and haplotype analysis indicated a founder
effect. Some of the patients' parents, who were heterozygous for the
mutation, showed a slight degree of acanthocytosis in peripheral blood
but no distinct neurologic abnormalities except for cryptogenic abducens
palsy in 1 parent.

.0004
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, ARG208TER

In 3 patients with choreoacanthocytosis, Dobson-Stone et al. (2002)
identified a 622C-T change in exon 9 of the CHAC gene, resulting in an
arg208-to-ter nonsense substitution (R208X). One patient was homozygous
for the mutation and 2 others were compound heterozygous for R208X and
another CHAC mutation. The R208X mutation had previously been reported
by Rampoldi et al. (2001) in a family with choreoacanthocytosis.

.0005
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, 8035G-A

In 2 affected sibs from a Japanese family with choreoacanthocytosis
(200150) with apparent autosomal dominant inheritance, Saiki et al.
(2003) identified a heterozygous G-to-A transversion at the last
nucleotide of exon 57 of the CHAC gene, predicted to induce skipping of
exon 57 and premature termination of the protein. The mutation was not
detected in their unaffected mother. Family history revealed that 3
other living family members were affected and 2 deceased members were
believed to be affected. All 5 living affected members showed
acanthocytosis (approximately 15-20%) and involuntary movements. In an
erratum, the authors stated that an error in sequencing had occurred and
the inheritance pattern should have been reported as autosomal recessive
(pseudodominant). Tomiyasu et al. (2011) identified the 2 mutations in
the VPS13A gene in this family: an 8035G-A transition in exon 57,
causing a frameshift and premature termination (Ile2652HisfsTer12), and
a 1305G-A transition in exon 15, resulting in a trp435-to-ter (W435X;
605978.0010) substitution; the latter mutation was also identified in
the unaffected mother.

.0006
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, 1-BP DEL, 6059C

In 2 unrelated males of Ashkenazi Jewish descent with
choreoacanthocytosis (200150), Lossos et al. (2005) identified a
homozygous 1-bp deletion (6059delC) in exon 46 of the VPS13A gene,
predicted to result in premature termination of the protein.

.0007
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, 7-KB DEL

In an Iraqi Jewish woman with choreoacanthocytosis (200150), Lossos et
al. (2005) identified a homozygous 7-kb deletion spanning exon 23 of the
VPS13A gene. She had trichotillomania and anxiety but little
neuromuscular involvement.

.0008
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, 37-KB DEL

In affected members of 3 French Canadian families with
choreoacanthocytosis (200150), Dobson-Stone et al. (2005) identified a
homozygous 37-kb deletion in the VPS13A gene, resulting in the deletion
of exons 70 through 73. The deletion also encompassed the 2 terminal
exons of the neighboring GNA14 gene (604397). Haplotype analysis
indicated a founder effect.

.0009
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, 2-BP DUP, 3556AC

In 2 Mexican mestizo sisters, born of consanguineous parents, with
choreoacanthocytosis (200150), Ruiz-Sandoval et al. (2007) identified a
homozygous 2-bp duplication (3556dupAC) in exon 33 of the VPS13A gene,
resulting in a frameshift and premature termination. The proband had
onset at age 32 years and showed severe progression of the disorder; at
age 42, she was emaciated, anarthric, and reactive only to simple
commands. In contrast, her sister had onset at age 45 years and
primarily showed motor and verbal tics, paranoid behavior, and
depression.

.0010
CHOREOACANTHOCYTOSIS
VPS13A, TRP435TER

See 605978.0005 and Tomiyasu et al. (2011).

REFERENCE 1. Dobson-Stone, C.; Danek, A.; Rampoldi, L.; Hardie, R. J.; Chalmers,
R. M.; Wood, N. W.; Bohlega, S.; Dotti, M. T.; Federico, A.; Shizuka,
M.; Tanaka, M.; Watanabe, M.; and 32 others: Mutational spectrum
of the CHAC gene in patients with chorea-acanthocytosis. Europ. J.
Hum. Genet. 10: 773-781, 2002.

2. Dobson-Stone, C.; Velayos-Baeza, A.; Jansen, A.; Andermann, F.;
Dubeau, F.; Robert, F.; Summers, A.; Lang, A. E.; Chouinard, S.; Danek,
A.; Andermann, E.; Monaco, A. P.: Identification of a VPS13A founder
mutation in French Canadian families with chorea-acanthocytosis. Neurogenetics 6:
151-158, 2005.

3. Lossos, A.; Dobson-Stone, C.; Monaco, A. P.; Soffer, D.; Rahamim,
E.; Newman, J. P.; Mohiddin, S.; Fananapazir, L.; Lerer, I.; Linetsky,
E.; Reches, A.; Argov, Z.; Abramsky, O.; Gadoth, N.; Sadeh, M.; Gomori,
J. M.; Boher, M.; Meiner, V.: Early clinical heterogeneity in choreoacanthocytosis. Arch.
Neurol. 62: 611-614, 2005.

4. Rampoldi, L.; Dobson-Stone, C.; Rubio, J. P.; Danek, A.; Chalmers,
R. M.; Wood, N. W.; Verellen, C.; Ferrer, X.; Malandrini, A.; Fabrizi,
G. M.; Brown, R.; Vance, J.; Pericak-Vance, M.; Rudolf, G.; Carre,
S.; Alonso, E.; Manfredi, M.; Nemeth, A. H.; Monaco, A. P.: A conserved
sorting-associated protein is mutant in chorea-acanthocytosis. Nature
Genet. 28: 119-120, 2001.

5. Ruiz-Sandoval, J. L.; Garcia-Navarro, V.; Chiquete, E.; Dobson-Stone,
C.; Monaco, A. P.; Alvarez-Palazuelos, L. E.; Padilla-Martinez, J.
J.; Barrera-Chairez, E.; Rodriguez-Figueroa, E. I.; Perez-Garcia,
G.: Choreoacanthocytosis in a Mexican family. Arch. Neurol. 64:
1661-1664, 2007.

6. Saiki, S.; Sakai, K.; Kitagawa, Y.; Saiki, M.; Kataoka, S.; Hirose,
G.: Mutation in the CHAC gene in a family of autosomal dominant chorea-acanthocytosis. Neurology 61:
1614-1616, 2003. Note: Erratum: Neurology 77: 701 only, 2011.

7. Tomiyasu, A.; Nakamura, M.; Ichiba, M.; Ueno, S.; Saiki, S.; Morimoto,
M.; Kobal, J.; Kageyama, Y.; Inui, T.; Wakabayashi, K.; Yamada, T.;
Kanemori, Y.; and 22 others: Novel pathogenic mutations and copy
number variations in the VPS13A gene in patients with chorea-acanthocytosis. Am.
J. Med. Genet. (Neuropsychiat. Genet.) 156B: 620-631, 2011.

8. Ueno, S.; Maruki, Y.; Nakamura, M.; Tomemori, Y.; Kamae, K.; Tanabe,
H.; Yamashita, Y.; Matsuda, S.; Kaneko, S.; Sano, A.: The gene encoding
a newly discovered protein, chorein, is mutated in chorea-acanthocytosis. Nature
Genet. 28: 121-122, 2001.

9. Velayos-Baeza, A.; Vettori, A.; Copley, R. R.; Dobson-Stone, C.;
Monaco, A. P.: Analysis of the human VPS13 gene family. Genomics 84:
536-549, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 10/1/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/10/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/9/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/18/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/26/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/2/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/29/2001

EDITED carol: 09/06/2013
terry: 10/2/2012
terry: 10/1/2012
carol: 10/1/2012
carol: 1/6/2012
wwang: 4/16/2008
ckniffin: 4/10/2008
wwang: 11/22/2005
ckniffin: 11/9/2005
wwang: 8/19/2005
ckniffin: 8/18/2005
mgross: 8/27/2004
terry: 8/26/2004
mgross: 3/25/2004
carol: 3/2/2004
ckniffin: 3/2/2004
carol: 2/25/2004
ckniffin: 2/3/2004
alopez: 5/29/2001

606001	TITLE *606001 INTERLEUKIN 32; IL32
;;NATURAL KILLER CELL TRANSCRIPT 4; NK4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

IL32 stimulates monocytic cells to produce various proinflammatory
cytokines and chemokines through the NF-kappa-B (see 164011) and p38
MAPK (MAPK14; 600289) inflammatory signal pathway (Choi et al., 2008).

CLONING

Interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680) treatment of natural killer (NK) cells
results in a strong proliferative response, cytokine production,
upregulation of IL2R (e.g., 147730), and transcripts encoding the serine
proteases granzyme A (140050) and granzyme B (123910). By differential
screening of an IL2-activated human NK cell-derived cDNA library, Dahl
et al. (1992) identified a cDNA encoding NK4. The deduced 234-amino acid
protein contains a signal sequence, a tyrosine sulfation site, 3
potential N-myristoylation sites, multiple putative phosphorylation
sites, and an RGD cell-attachment sequence, but no N-glycosylation
sites. Northern blot analysis revealed expression of a 1.0-kb transcript
in activated NK and T cells, but no expression was detected in B cells
or fibroblasts. Southern blot and sequence analyses indicated variable
expression of NK4 in different individuals, suggesting that the NK4 gene
is polymorphic. SDS-PAGE analysis showed expression of a 27-kD protein,
in agreement with the predicted size.

Using Northern blot analysis, Bernot et al. (1998) detected ubiquitous
expression of NK4.

Using microarray analysis to screen an IL18 (600953)-stimulated human
lung carcinoma clone in which a stably expressed IL18RB gene (IL18RAP;
147811) had been inserted, Kim et al. (2005) identified several cytokine
genes, including IL32. Database analysis and RT-PCR of NK cells revealed
the existence of 4 IL32 splice variants: IL32-alpha, -beta, and -delta,
which are novel, and IL32-gamma, the longest variant, which is identical
to NK4. IL32 has 3 potential N-myristoylation sites and 1
N-glycosylation site, but it has no N-terminal hydrophobic signal
peptide. Northern blot analysis detected a 1.2-kb transcript in several
tissues, with more prominent expression in immune system tissues.
Western blot analysis showed IL32 in supernatants of the lung carcinoma
cell line expressing IL18RB after IL18 stimulation.
Electrochemiluminescence analysis showed that IL32-beta was more
efficiently secreted than IL32-alpha.

GENE FUNCTION

Kim et al. (2005) found that recombinant IL32 stimulated production of
large amounts of TNF (191160). NK cells stimulated with either IL12 or
IL18, or with a combination of both, induced IL32 independent of IFNG
(147570) production. Kim et al. (2005) proposed that IL32 may be
involved in inflammatory/autoimmune diseases, given that it can be
induced in lymphocytes as well as epithelial cells.

Using IL32-alpha in agarose ligand affinity chromatography analysis of
concentrated urinary proteins, Novick et al. (2006) isolated
proteinase-3 (PR3, or PRTN3; 177020). Surface plasmon resonance analysis
showed that urinary and neutrophil PR3 had similar binding affinities
for IL32-alpha, and IL32-alpha binding did not require PR3 enzymatic
activity. However, limited PR3-mediated cleavage of IL32-alpha resulted
in stronger induction of Mip2 (CXCL2; 139110) in murine macrophages and
IL8 (146930) in human mononuclear cells. Novick et al. (2006) proposed
that inhibition of PR3 activity or IL32 neutralization by inactive PR3
may reduce the consequences of IL32 activity in immune-regulated
diseases.

Using IL32-alpha in agarose ligand affinity chromatography analysis of
concentrated urinary proteins, Novick et al. (2006) isolated a 30-kd
protein, identified by mass spectrometry and confirmed by N-terminal
microsequencing as PR3 (177020). Surface plasmon resonance analysis
determined that binding affinity is comparable for urinary and
neutrophil PR3 and does not require enzymatic activity. However, limited
PR3-mediated cleavage of IL32-alpha results in stronger induction of
Mip2 from murine macrophages and IL8 in human mononuclear cells. Novick
et al. (2006) proposed that inhibition of PR3 activity, or IL32
neutralization, may reduce the consequences of IL32 activity in immune
regulated diseases.

Using immunohistochemical analysis, Joosten et al. (2006) found that
IL32 was highly expressed in synovial tissues of rheumatoid arthritis
(RA; 180300) patients, but it was absent in synovium from osteoarthritis
(165720) patients. In synovial tissues of RA patients with active
disease, IL32 levels correlated strongly with the erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, a marker of systemic inflammation, as well as with
indices of synovial inflammation and with the presence of synovial TNF,
IL1B (147720), and IL18. IL32 potently induced prostaglandin E2 release
in both mouse macrophages and human monocytes. Injection of IL32-gamma
into mouse knee joints resulted in joint swelling, influx of
inflammatory cells, and cartilage damage. These outcomes were at least
partially dependent on Tnf, because Tnf -/- mice showed only loss of
proteoglycan, but no swelling or strong inflammatory cell influx, after
IL32 injection. Joosten et al. (2006) proposed that IL32 plays a role in
RA and may be a novel target in the treatment of autoimmune disease.

Marcondes et al. (2008) found that a leukemia cell line resistant to
TNF-mediated apoptosis became sensitive to TNF-mediated apoptosis upon
coculture and contact with marrow-derived stroma cell lines expressing
high levels of IL32. Apoptosis was abrogated when stroma cells were
treated with small interfering RNA against IL32. Marrow stroma and NK
cells from patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) expressed high
levels of IL32 compared with controls, whereas marrow stroma and NK
cells from patients with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML)
expressed low levels of IL32 compared with controls. Marcondes et al.
(2008) proposed that IL32 has a role in the pathophysiology of clonal
myeloid diseases and distinguishes MDS from CMML.

Netea et al. (2008) found that IL32-gamma induced differentiation of
human blood monocytes and THP1 leukemic cells into macrophages-like
cells. IL32-alpha also induced differentiation, but at higher
concentrations. IL32-induced differentiation was augmented by bacterial
muramyl dipeptide, the ligand for NOD2 (605956). IL32-gamma also
reversed GMCSF (CSF2; 138960)/IL4 (147780)-induced differentiation of
monocytes to dendritic cells, with these cells also becoming
macrophage-like cells. Whereas IL32 induction of TNF, IL1B, and IL6
(147620) requires p38, IL32-induced monocyte-to-macrophage
differentiation required CASP3 (600636). Netea et al. (2008) concluded
that IL32 induces not only secretion of proinflammatory cytokines, but
also differentiation of monocytes to macrophages. They proposed that
IL32 may function against intracellular organisms, such as Mycobacterium
tuberculosis.

Choi et al. (2008) showed that all 4 isoforms of IL32 were active in
multiple bioassays and reacted with soluble PR3. Greatest activity was
observed for IL32-gamma.

Bai et al. (2010) found that silencing IL32 with short hairpin RNA in a
human macrophage line significantly decreased induction of the
proinflammatory cytokines TNF, IL1B, and IL8 by Myobacterium
tuberculosis infection and increased the number of cell-associated
bacteria. Stimulating the cells with recombinant IL32 enhanced apoptosis
induced by M. tuberculosis compared with cells infected with M.
tuberculosis alone. Depletion of IL32 abrogated apoptosis induced by M.
tuberculosis with a concomitant decrease in CASP3 activation. Treatment
with recombinant IL32 reduced the number of bacteria, and the reduction
was attenuated by treatment with a CASP3 inhibitor. Bai et al. (2010)
concluded that IL32 has a role in host defense against M. tuberculosis.

Zepp et al. (2011) found that recombinant IL32-gamma protected human
epithelial WISH cells from vesicular stomatitis virus-induced cell death
and reduced viral load. Silencing of IL32 showed that antiviral
responses, such as IFNA (147660) release, triggered by synthetic analogs
of single-stranded or, particularly, double-stranded RNA viruses were
weaker in both WISH cells and peripheral blood cells. IL32 also
antagonized herpes simplex virus (HSV)-2 in monkey kidney cells and in
human umbilical cord endothelial cells, as HSV-2 production increased
upon IL32 silencing. IL32 activity was mediated through the PKR
(EIF2AK2; 176871)-EIF2-alpha (EIF2S1; 603907) and MXA (MX1; 147150)
antiviral pathways. Inhibition of IFN activity reduced IL32 antiviral
activity only moderately. Zepp et al. (2011) concluded that IL32 plays a
central role in immune responses to both RNA and DNA viruses.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Bernot et al. (1998) determined that the
NK4 gene contains 6 exons.

Kim et al. (2005) determined that the IL32 gene spans approximately 5 kb
and contains 8 small exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Bernot et al. (1998) mapped the IL32 gene
to chromosome 16p13.3, near the familial Mediterranean fever (FMF;
249100) locus (see 608107).

REFERENCE 1. Bai, X.; Kim, S.-H.; Azam, T.; McGibney, M. T.; Huang, H.; Dinarello,
C. A.; Chan, E. D.: IL-32 is a host protective cytokine against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis in differentiated THP-1 human macrophages. J. Immun. 184:
3830-3840, 2010.

2. Bernot, A.; Heilig, R.; Clepet, C.; Smaoui, N.; Da Silva, C.; Petit,
J.-L.; Devaud, C.; Chiannilkulchai, N.; Fizames, C.; Samson, D.; Cruaud,
C.; Caloustian, C.; Gyapay, G.; Delpech, M.; Weissenbach, J.: A transcriptional
map of the FMF region. Genomics 50: 147-160, 1998.

3. Choi, J.-D.; Bae, S.-Y.; Hong, J.-W.; Azam, T.; Dinarello, C. A.;
Her, E.; Choi, W.-S.; Kim, B.-K.; Lee, C.-K.; Yoon, D.-Y.; Kim, S.-J.;
Kim, S.-H.: Identification of the most active interleukin-32 isoform. Immunology 126:
535-542, 2008.

4. Dahl, C. A.; Schall, R. P.; He, H. L.; Cairns, J.S.: Identification
of a novel gene expressed in activated natural killer cells and T
cells. J. Immun. 148: 597-603, 1992.

5. Joosten, L. A. B.; Netea, M. G.; Kim, S.-H.; Yoon, D.-Y.; Oppers-Walgreen,
B.; Radstake, T. R. D.; Barrera, P.; van de Loo, F. A. J.; Dinarello,
C. A.; van den Berg, W. B.: IL-32, a proinflammatory cytokine in
rheumatoid arthritis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 3298-3303, 2006.

6. Kim, S.-H.; Han, S.-Y.; Azam, T.; Yoon, D.-Y.; Dinarello, C. A.
: Interleukin-32: a cytokine and inducer of TNF-alpha. Immunity 22:
131-142, 2005.

7. Marcondes, A. M.; Mhyre, A. J.; Stirewalt, D. L.; Kim, S.-H.; Dinarello,
C. A.; Deeg, H. J.: Dysregulation of IL-32 in myelodysplastic syndrome
and chronic myelomonocytic leukemia modulates apoptosis and impairs
NK function. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 2865-2870, 2008.

8. Netea, M. G.; Lewis, E. C.; Azam, T.; Joosten, L. A. B.; Jaekal,
J.; Bae, S.-Y.; Dinarello, C. A.; Kim, S.-H.: Interleukin-32 induces
the differentiation of monocytes into macrophage-like cells. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 3515-3520, 2008.

9. Novick, D.; Rubinstein, M.; Azam, T.; Rabinkov, A.; Dinarello,
C. A.; Kim, S.-H.: Proteinase 3 is an IL-32 binding protein. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 3316-3321, 2006.

10. Zepp, J. A.; Nold-Petry, C. A.; Dinarello, C. A.; Nold, M. F.
: Protection from RNA and DNA viruses by IL-32. J. Immun. 186: 4110-4118,
2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/2/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/26/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/29/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/27/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/19/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/9/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/24/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/2/2005

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/11/2001

EDITED mgross: 04/03/2012
terry: 4/2/2012
ckniffin: 5/2/2011
mgross: 10/28/2010
terry: 10/26/2010
mgross: 10/29/2009
terry: 10/27/2009
mgross: 5/19/2008
mgross: 4/14/2008
terry: 4/9/2008
mgross: 3/29/2006
terry: 3/24/2006
mgross: 5/2/2005
ckniffin: 9/30/2003
mgross: 6/13/2001
mgross: 6/11/2001

164005	TITLE *164005 NUCLEAR FACTOR I/X; NFIX
;;NUCLEAR FACTOR I, X-TYPE;;
CCAAT-BINDING TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR;;
NF1A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Nuclear factor I is a ubiquitous 47-kD dimeric DNA-binding protein whose
recognition sequence, TGG(C/A)N(5)GCCAA, is found in the genomes of a
number of DNA viruses. The same sequence occurs frequently in the human
genome. The NFI protein stimulates initiation of adenovirus DNA
replication in vitro and is capable of stimulating the transcription of
genes in cooperation with other factors, such as the estrogen receptor
(ESR; 133430). Santoro et al. (1988) gave a detailed analysis of NFI
cDNAs isolated from the human, which, with similar analyses in other
species, indicated that it is a member of a family of related proteins.
Four known variants were referred to as CTF, X, L, and Red. These are
the products of different genes, some of which (e.g., the first, CTF,
later symbolized NFIC; 600729) are subject to differential splicing.

Seisenberger et al. (1993) isolated 2 phages containing the second exon
and flanking intron regions of the human gene for NFI/X, which has been
designated NFIX.

Qian et al. (1995) isolated partial cDNA sequences from 4 nuclear factor
I proteins: NFIA (600727), NFIB (600728), NFIC, and NFIX.

GENE STRUCTURE

Grunder et al. (2003) determined that the NFIX gene contains 11 exons.
By ortholog comparisons using protein sequences from 7 vertebrate
species, they identified 9 NFIX variants that are produced by
alternative splicing.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Seisenberger et al. (1993) mapped
the NFIX gene to 19p13. Secondary sites of hybridization were observed
at 5p15, 1q42-q44, 1p22-p21, and 20p1.3; this hybridization was
attributed to partial sequence homologies with related NFI genes.

By FISH, Qian et al. (1995) mapped the NFIA and NFIB genes to
chromosomes 1p31.3-p31.2 and 9p24.1, respectively. The NFIC and NFIX
genes were both localized to 19p13.3 in the order cen--NFIX--NFIC--tel.
Comparison of the position of NFI genes and JUN genes revealed a close
physical linkage between members of the NFI and JUN gene families; for
example, one JUN gene (165160) is on 1p32-p31, and both JUNB (165161)
and JUND (165162) are located on 19p.

Scherthan et al. (1994) used fluorescence in situ hybridization to map
the murine Nfix gene to chromosome 8C1-C2, confirming the segmental
homology between human chromosome 19p13 and mouse chromosome 8C.
Although the location of the other NFI genes in the mouse had not been
established, Qian et al. (1995) suggested that from the imperative map
between human and mouse, the Nfia could be predicted to be located on
mouse chromosome 4 where the murine c-jun is located and the Nfic locus
on mouse chromosome 8 where the murine junD and junB genes are located.
They speculated further that a genomic unit containing an ancestral NFI
gene and an ancestral JUN gene existed early in evolution, later
duplicated twice, and then underwent further changes. If this hypothesis
is correct, one can suspect the existence of a fourth member of the JUN
gene family, probably located close to the NFIB gene. The postulated
fourth JUN gene would then be predicted to map to human 9 at 9p24.1 and
murine chromosome 4.

By FISH, Grunder et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Nfix gene to the distal
region of chromosome 8C.

GENE FUNCTION

Malan et al. (2010) performed RT-PCR analysis and demonstrated
ubiquitous expression of NFIX in all human tissues and cell types
tested, including chondrocytes and osteoblasts. In situ hybridization in
normal human embryos at CS17 (gestational day 42) showed a nearly
ubiquitous expression of NFIX, with prominent expression in the central
nervous system and the peripheral nervous system. In fetal brain at 22
weeks' gestation, NFIX was expressed in the cerebral cortex, in the
hippocampus, and faintly in the thalamus. In the skeleton, NFIX
expression was first noticed at CS17 in the mandibular arch, the
cartilage primordium of the humerus, the scapula, and the vertebrae. In
the limb, NFIX expression was first observed at CS17 in the
perichondrium. At 14 weeks' gestation, NFIX was highly expressed in the
proliferating zone of the digit. The study of distal femoral growth
plates of 1- to 5-week-old mice and human fetus revealed strong NFIX
expression in bone and in prehypertrophic chondrocytes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Sotos Syndrome 2

Malan et al. (2010) used a high-resolution array CGH in 18 patients with
unexplained syndromic overgrowth and identified 2 patients with a de
novo 19p13.1 monosomy. The deletions involved a single common gene,
NFIX. Malan et al. (2010) then screened 76 patients with unexplained
syndromic overgrowth for NIFX mutations and identified a heterozygous
nonsense mutation (Q190X; 164005.0001) in 1 patient who had been
diagnosed with a 'Sotos-like syndrome' (SOTOS2; 614753). This patient
and the 2 patients with 19p13.1 monosomy had a similar phenotype
consisting of postnatal overgrowth, macrocephaly, advanced bone age,
long narrow face, high forehead, slender habitus, scoliosis, unusual
behavior characterized especially by anxiety, and mental retardation.
The variant was not observed in 300 control chromosomes.

Yoneda et al. (2012) examined NFIX by high-resolution melt analysis in
48 individuals who were suspected of having Sotos syndrome but who did
not have NSD1 (606681) abnormalities, which are found in Sotos
syndrome-1. They identified 2 heterozygous missense mutations in the
DNA-binding/dimerization domain of the NFIX protein
(164005.0011-164005.0012). Neither mutation was found in 250 healthy
Japanese controls.

- Marshall-Smith Syndrome

Based on an Nfix-deficient mouse model with a phenotype similar to that
in Marshall-Smith syndrome (MRSHSS; 602535), Malan et al. (2010)
screened 9 individuals with MRSHSS for NFIX mutations and found
heterozygosity for 7 independent frameshift mutations
(164005.0002-164005.0008) and 2 different mutations within the donor
splice site of exon 6 (164005.0009-164005.0010). All of the mutations
occurred de novo and were not found in 300 control chromosomes.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Malan et al. (2010) performed RT-PCR analysis of skin fibroblasts in 1
SOTOS2 patient and 3 MRSHSS patients with NFIX mutations. They showed
that the SOTOS2 phenotype is due to NFIX haploinsufficiency, whereas the
mutated RNAs in MRSHSS escape nonsense-mediated decay surveillance.
Malan et al. (2010) suggested that NFIX mutations causing MRSHSS
generate mutant proteins able to exert a dominant-negative effect over
the wildtype allele and result in a more severe phenotype closely
resembling the knockout mouse model phenotype.

ANIMAL MODEL

Driller et al. (2007) obtained Nfix -/- mice at a normal mendelian
ratio, but nearly all died before 1 month of age. Although Nfix -/-
newborns appeared normal, they developed a dome-shaped head, were unable
to fully open their eyes, had deformation of the spine, exhibited an
ataxic gait, and were unable to gain weight. Heterozygous mice showed a
slight weight reduction, but had no obvious anatomic or behavioral
defects. Except for reduced size, most organs of Nfix -/- mice appeared
histologically normal. However, the smaller digestive tract showed
pathologic thinning of intestinal walls and reduced blood supply, and a
general loss of muscle tissue was observed. Hydrocephalus, which
developed after birth and progressed with age, was associated with
partial agenesis of the corpus callosum in Nfix -/- and Nfix +/- mice.
Skeletal pathology, including impaired endochondral ossification and
decreased mineralization in femoral bone, also progressed with age and
was associated with reduced expression of tetranecin (TNA; 187520), a
protein involved in mineralization.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SOTOS SYNDROME 2
NFIX, GLN190TER

In a patient with Sotos syndrome-2 (614753), Malan et al. (2010)
identified a heterozygous de novo 568C-T transition within exon 3 of the
NFIX gene, predicting a gln190-to-ter (Q190X) substitution. RT-PCR
analysis of NFIX RNA in skin fibroblasts from this patient showed the
expression of a single wildtype allele, indicating nonsense-mediated
mRNA decay and haploinsufficiency.

.0002
MARSHALL-SMITH SYNDROME
NFIX, 2-BP DEL, 1011TC

In a 2-year-old patient from India with Marshall-Smith syndrome (MRSHSS;
602535), Malan et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 2-bp deletion in
the NFIX gene (1011_1012delTC), resulting in a frameshift and premature
termination. The mutation occurred de novo and was not observed in 300
control chromosomes.

.0003
MARSHALL-SMITH SYNDROME
NFIX, 1-BP INS, 1037T

In a 3-year-old patient from the Netherlands with Marshall-Smith
syndrome (602535), Malan et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 1-bp
insertion in the NFIX gene (1037_1038insT), resulting in a frameshift
and premature termination. The mutation occurred de novo and was not
observed in 300 control chromosomes.

.0004
MARSHALL-SMITH SYNDROME
NFIX, 5-BP DEL, NT1008

In a 6-year-old patient from Brazil with Marshall-Smith syndrome
(602535), Malan et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 5-bp deletion in
the NFIX gene (1008_1012delCTCTC), resulting in a frameshift and
premature termination. The mutation occurred de novo and was not
observed in 300 control chromosomes.

.0005
MARSHALL-SMITH SYNDROME
NFIX, 1-BP INS, 1048C

In a 7-year-old patient from Portugal with Marshall-Smith syndrome
(602535), Malan et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 1-bp insertion
in the NFIX gene (1048_1049insC), resulting in a frameshift and
premature termination. The mutation occurred de novo and was not
observed in 300 control chromosomes.

.0006
MARSHALL-SMITH SYNDROME
NFIX, 1-BP DEL, 1243G

In a 7-year-old French patient with Marshall-Smith syndrome (602535),
Malan et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 1-bp deletion in the NFIX
gene (1243delG), resulting in a frameshift and premature termination.
The mutation occurred de novo and was not observed in 300 control
chromosomes.

.0007
MARSHALL-SMITH SYNDROME
NFIX, 1-BP INS, 994T

In a 16-year-old British patient with Marshall-Smith syndrome (602535),
Malan et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 1-bp insertion in the NFIX
gene (994_995insT), resulting in a frameshift and premature termination.
The mutation occurred de novo and was not observed in 300 control
chromosomes.

.0008
MARSHALL-SMITH SYNDROME
NFIX, 1-BP INS, 959C

In a 21-year-old British patient with Marshall-Smith syndrome (602535),
Malan et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 1-bp insertion in the NFIX
gene (959_960insC), resulting in a frameshift and premature termination.
The mutation occurred de novo and was not observed in 300 control
chromosomes.

.0009
MARSHALL-SMITH SYNDROME
NFIX, IVS6DS, G-A, +1

In a 3-week-old patient with Marshall-Smith syndrome (602535), Malan et
al. (2010) identified a heterozygous splice site mutation (955+1G-A).
The mutation occurred de novo and was not observed in 300 control
chromosomes. Both normal and mutated alleles were found in patient
fibroblasts, suggesting that the mutation escapes nonsense-mediated
decay and has a dominant-negative effect.

.0010
MARSHALL-SMITH SYNDROME
NFIX, IVS6DS, G-T, +1

In a 6-month-old patient from Croatia with Marshall-Smith syndrome
(602535), Malan et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous splice site
mutation in the NFIX gene (955+1G-T). The mutation occurred de novo and
was not observed in 300 control chromosomes.

.0011
SOTOS SYNDROME 2
NFIX, LEU60PRO

In a 17-year-old female with a Sotos overgrowth syndrome (SOTOS2;
614753), Yoneda et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous 179T-C
transition in the NFIX gene, resulting in a leu60-to-pro (L60P)
substitution in the DNA-binding/dimerization domain. The mutation
occurred de novo and was not found in 250 healthy Japanese controls.

.0012
SOTOS SYNDROME 2
NFIX, ARG121PRO

In a 14-year-old male with a Sotos overgrowth syndrome (SOTOS2; 614753),
Yoneda et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous 362G-C transversion in
the NFIX gene, resulting in an arg121-to-pro (R121P) substitution in the
DNA-binding/dimerization domain. The mutation may have been inherited
from his mother who was not available for study. The mutation was not
found in 250 healthy Japanese controls.

REFERENCE 1. Driller, K.; Pagenstecher, A.; Uhl, M.; Omran, H.; Berlis, A.;
Grunder, A.; Sippel, A. E.: Nuclear factor I X deficiency causes
brain malformation and severe skeletal defects. Molec. Cell. Biol. 27:
3855-3867, 2007.

2. Grunder, A.; Qian, F.; Ebel, T. T.; Mincheva, A.; Lichter, P.;
Kruse, U.; Sippel, A. E.: Genomic organization, splice products and
mouse chromosomal localization of genes for transcription factor Nuclear
Factor One. Gene 304: 171-181, 2003.

3. Malan, V.; Rajan, D.; Thomas, S.; Shaw, A. C.; Louis dit Picard,
H.; Layet, V.; Till, M.; van Haeringen, A.; Mortier, G.; Nampoothiri,
S.; Puseljic, S.; Legeai-Mallet, L.; Carter, N. P.; Vekemans, M.;
Munnich, A.; Hennekam, R. C.; Colleaux, L.; Cormier-Daire, V.: Distinct
effects of allelic NFIX mutations on nonsense-mediated mRNA decay
engender either a Sotos-like or a Marshall-Smith syndrome. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 87: 189-198, 2010.

4. Qian, F.; Kruse, U.; Lichter, P.; Sippel, A. E.: Chromosomal localization
of the four genes (NFIA, B, C, and X) for the human transcription
factor nuclear factor I by FISH. Genomics 28: 66-73, 1995.

5. Santoro, C.; Mermod, N.; Andrews, P. C.; Tjian, R.: A family of
human CCAAT-box-binding proteins active in transcription and DNA replication:
cloning and expression of multiple cDNAs. Nature 334: 218-224, 1988.

6. Scherthan, H.; Seisenberger, C.; Greulich, K.; Winnacker, E.-L.
: Mapping of the murine nuclear factor I/X gene (Nfix) to mouse chromosome
8 C1-2 by FISH. Genomics 22: 247-249, 1994.

7. Seisenberger, C.; Winnacker, E.-L.; Scherthan, H.: Localisation
of the human nuclear factor I/X (NFI/X) gene to chromosome 19p13 and
detection of five other related loci at 1p21-22, 1q42-43, 5q15, 11p13
and 20q13 by FISH. Hum. Genet. 91: 535-537, 1993.

8. Yoneda, Y.; Saitsu, H.; Touyama, M.; Makita, Y.; Miyamoto, A.;
Hamada, K.; Kurotaki, N.; Tomita, H.; Nishiyama, K.; Tsurusaki, Y.;
Doi, H.; Miyake, N.; Ogata, K.; Naritomi, K.; Matsumoto, N.: Missense
mutations in the DNA-binding/dimerization domain of NFIX cause Sotos-like
features. J. Hum. Genet. 57: 207-211, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Nara Sobreira - updated: 8/7/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/29/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/1/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/14/1993

EDITED terry: 08/08/2012
carol: 8/7/2012
mgross: 11/30/2007
terry: 11/29/2007
mgross: 4/3/2003
terry: 4/1/2003
carol: 8/18/1999
terry: 11/21/1997
mark: 8/17/1995
carol: 9/30/1994
carol: 9/14/1993

611589	TITLE *611589 PATATIN-LIKE PHOSPHOLIPASE DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 5; PNPLA5
;;GS2-LIKE PROTEIN; GS2L
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Human patatin-like phospholipases, such as PNPLA5, have been implicated
in regulation of adipocyte differentiation and have been induced by
metabolic stimuli (Wilson et al., 2006).

CLONING

By database analysis, followed by screening of human EST databases,
Wilson et al. (2006) identified PNPLA5, which encodes a 429-amino acid
protein containing a patatin-like domain and 2 glycosaminoglycan sites.
Structural analysis determined that the patatin-like domain was composed
of a beta-sheet sandwiched by alpha-helices in approximately 3 layers.
Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed that PNPLA5 was expressed at
moderate levels in brain and at very low levels in liver.

GENE FUNCTION

Gao and Simon (2007) measured retinol transacylation activity and found
that PNPLA5 appeared to inhibit transacylation catalyzed by endogenous
enzymes, but it had measurable retinylester hydrolysis activity.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PNPLA5
gene to chromosome 22 (TMAP G65439).

REFERENCE 1. Gao, J. G.; Simon, M.: A comparative study of human GS2, its paralogues,
and its rat orthologue. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 360: 501-506,
2007.

2. Wilson, P. A.; Gardner, S. D.; Lambie, N. M.; Commans, S. A.; Crowther,
D. J.: Characterization of the human patatin-like phospholipase family. J.
Lipid Res. 47: 1940-1949, 2006.

CREATED Stefanie A. Nelson: 11/7/2007

EDITED wwang: 06/23/2008
wwang: 11/8/2007

613994	TITLE *613994 NEUROBLASTOMA BREAKPOINT FAMILY, MEMBER 4; NBPF4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NBPF4 is a member of the NBPF gene family, which consists of 22 genes
and pseudogenes that arose by gene duplication. NBPF genes contain
numerous low-copy repetitive elements and show high intergenic and
intragenic sequence identity in coding and noncoding regions (Vandepoele
et al., 2005).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to NBPF1 (610501),
Vandepoele et al. (2005) identified NBPF4.

GENE STRUCTURE

Vandepoele et al. (2005) determined that the NBPF4 gene contains 14
coding exons, 1 of which results from an internal duplication. NBPF4
lacks a LINE repeat insert present in other NBPF genes.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis and FISH, Vandepoele et al. (2005) mapped
the NBPF4 gene to an NBPF gene cluster on chromosome 1p12.

REFERENCE 1. Vandepoele, K.; Van Roy, N.; Staes, K.; Speleman, F.; van Roy,
F.: A novel gene family NBPF: intricate structure generated by gene
duplications during primate evolution. Molec. Biol. Evol. 22: 2265-2274,
2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/24/2011

EDITED mgross: 05/25/2011
mgross: 5/24/2011

607559	TITLE *607559 MAHOGUNIN, RING FINGER 1; MGRN1
;;MAHOGANOID, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF;;
KIAA0544
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mahogunin (MGRN1) is a C3HC4 RING-containing protein with E3 ubiquitin
ligase activity in vitro.

CLONING

'Mahoganoid' is a mouse coat color mutation whose pigmentary phenotype
and genetic interactions resemble those of 'mahogany,' which results
from mutation in attractin (ATRN; 603130). He et al. (2003) and Phan et
al. (2002) cloned the mouse mahogunin gene, mutant in mahoganoid mice.
Both groups identified the human homolog as KIAA0544 (Nagase et al.,
1998).

GENE STRUCTURE

The human MGRN1 gene contains 17 exons (Phan et al., 2002; He et al.,
2003).

MAPPING

Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the KIAA0544 cDNA, corresponding to the
MGRN1 gene, to chromosome 16 by radiation hybrid analysis. Phan et al.
(2002) and He et al. (2003) mapped the MGRN1 gene to 16p13.3; the mouse
homolog maps to chromosome 16.

GENE FUNCTION

Human and mouse mahogunin share 95% amino acid sequence identity and
exhibit a similar expression pattern across multiple tissues with
particularly high levels in brain (He et al., 2003). The RING domain
functions as an E3 ubiquitin ligase, and autoubiquitination is dependent
on ATP, E1, E2, and an intact mahogunin RING domain, with ladder
formation proportional to the amounts. In addition, mahogunin-induced
autoubiquitination exhibited specificity for E2; it occurred with UBC5,
used frequently in the stress response to unfolded proteins, but not
with UBC3, used frequently in cell cycle transitions.

He et al. (2003) determined that the MGRN1 gene encodes 4 mRNA isoforms
that contain a central C3HC4 RING domain as the only recognizable
protein motif; however, regions flanking the RING domain and the
N-terminal region of the protein are also conserved between vertebrate
and invertebrate genomes.

ANIMAL MODEL

Mahogunin is the protein mutant in 'mahoganoid,' a coat-color mutation
of mice in which pigmentation is very similar to that of 'mahogany.' The
mahogany phenotype is caused by mutation in attractin (ATRN; 603130). He
et al. (2003) found that animals carrying the original allele, md,
synthesize small amounts of yellow pigment on the flank and ventrum and
do not develop spongy degeneration up to 5 months of age. However,
animals carrying the md(nc) allele (originally known as 'nonagouti
curly') develop progressive spongiform changes, first apparent in the
hippocampus CA3 region at 2 months of age and later extending to
multiple regions of the brain. Vacuolation predominates in the gray
matter and is associated with neuronal loss but preservation of tissue
architecture; the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, thalamus, brainstem,
caudate-putamen, and cerebellum granule layer are the most consistently
affected regions. In md(nc)/md(nc) mice at 10 months of age, some
regions of the deep cortex and lateral thalamus exhibit mild
astrocytosis before the formation of microscopically visible vacuoles.
Northern hybridization to mouse brain mRNA revealed that md/md mice
expressed reduced levels of a normal-sized transcript and transcripts of
aberrant size, consistent with an intracisternal A particle insertion
into intron 11A. For the md(nc) allele, no transcript was detected by
Northern hybridization, and a thymidine-to-adenine mutation was
identified at position 2 of intron 9 of the Mgrn1 gene. Thus, partial
loss of function for this gene causes a reduction of yellow pigment in
the md allele and complete loss of function causes absence of yellow
pigment and neurodegeneration in the md(nc) allele. The brain
degeneration in md(nc) resembles prion-induced spongiform
encephalopathy. However, no accumulation of the protease-resistant PrP
isoform (PrP-Sc) was seen in these animals.

REFERENCE 1. He, L.; Lu, X.-Y.; Jolly, A. F.; Eldridge, A. G.; Watson, S. J.;
Jackson, P. K.; Barsh, G. S.; Gunn, T. M.: Spongiform degeneration
in mahoganoid mutant mice. Science 299: 710-712, 2003.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.;
Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified
human genes. IX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from
brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 31-39,
1998.

3. Phan, L. K.; Lin, F.; LeDuc, C. A.; Chung, W. K.; Leibel, R. L.
: The mouse mahoganoid coat color mutation disrupts a novel C3HC4
RING domain protein. J. Clin. Invest. 110: 1449-1459, 2002.

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 2/12/2003

EDITED terry: 03/03/2005
tkritzer: 9/9/2003
carol: 5/28/2003
alopez: 2/12/2003

601838	TITLE *601838 INOSITOL 1,3,4-TRISPHOSPHATE 5/6-KINASE; ITPK1
;;ITRPK1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Based on a bovine peptide sequence, Wilson and Majerus (1996) found a
human EST corresponding to the inositol 1,3,4-trisphosphate 5/6-kinase
gene (ITRPK1). They used this EST to clone the cDNA of ITRPK1 from a
human fetal brain cDNA library. This cDNA encodes a 414-amino acid
polypeptide. Northern blot analysis revealed that ITRPK1 was expressed
as a 3.6-kb message in all tissues tested, with the highest levels in
brain. Expression of the cDNA resulted in inositol 1,3,4-trisphosphate
5/6-kinase activity, showing that a single kinase phosphorylates
inositol in both the D5 and D6 positions.

By database searching with the ITPK1 sequence to identify an enzyme with
1-kinase activity, Yang and Shears (2000) also obtained a cDNA encoding
ITPK1 but with a serine replacing asparagine-356. Functional analysis
showed that the variant, which they called the type beta protein, as
well as the protein with asn356, which they called the type alpha
protein, phosphorylated not only the 5- and 6-hydroxy groups of
Ins(1,3,4)P3 but also the 1-hydroxy group of Ins(3,4,5,6)P4, suggesting
that the 2 inositol phosphates compete for phosphorylation in vivo. Yang
and Shears (2000) concluded that the same kinase is charged with
performing competing activities that both activate and deactivate a
signaling pathway.

REFERENCE 1. Wilson, M. P.; Majerus, P. W.: Isolation of inositol 1,3,4-trisphosphate
5/6-kinase, cDNA cloning, and expression of the recombinant enzyme. J.
Biol. Chem. 271: 11904-11910, 1996.

2. Yang, X.; Shears, S. B.: Multitasking in signal transduction by
a promiscuous human ins(3,4,5,6)P4 1-kinase/Ins(1,3,4)P3 5/6-kinase. Biochem.
J. 351: 551-555, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/28/2001

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 5/29/1997

EDITED alopez: 04/28/2010
cwells: 2/28/2001
cwells: 2/27/2001
alopez: 8/10/1999
alopez: 6/9/1997

600937	TITLE *600937 POTASSIUM CHANNEL, INWARDLY RECTIFYING, SUBFAMILY J, MEMBER 11; KCNJ11
;;POTASSIUM CHANNEL, INWARDLY RECTIFYING, BIR SUBUNIT;;
BETA-CELL INWARD RECTIFIER SUBUNIT; BIR;;
INWARDLY RECTIFYING POTASSIUM CHANNEL Kir6.2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ATP-sensitive K+ (KATP) channels couple cell metabolism to membrane
excitability in various cell types, including pancreatic beta cells,
neurons, endocrine cells, and muscle cells. The archetypal KATP channel
is an octameric complex of KCNJ11 subunits and either SUR1 (ABCC8;
600509) subunits in pancreatic beta cells and many neurons or SUR2
(ABCC9; 601439) subunits in muscle. Four KCNJ11 subunits form the
channel pore, and each is associated with a SUR subunit that contributes
to regulation of channel gating (summary by Girard et al., 2009).

CLONING

Inagaki et al. (1995) cloned a member of the inwardly rectifying
potassium channel family, which they called BIR, for 'beta-cell inward
rectifier,' or Kir6.2, in the nomenclature of Chandy and Gutman (1993).
The channel was expressed in large amounts in rat pancreatic islets and
glucose-responsive insulin-secreting cell lines. The sequence showed a
single open reading frame encoding a 390-amino acid protein with 2
putative transmembrane segments. The mouse homolog also had a single
open reading frame encoding a 390-amino acid protein with 96% amino acid
identity with human BIR.

GENE STRUCTURE

Inagaki et al. (1995) determined that KCNJ11, the gene encoding human
BIR, is intronless in the protein-coding region. Several other genes
encoding inward rectifiers lack introns.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Inagaki et al. (1995) mapped the
BIR gene to 11p15.1. The sequence obtained from 1 lambda clone at the
3-prime end of the SUR gene (ABCC8; 600509) matched a part of the gene
encoding BIR; with a sense primer near the 3-prime end of the SUR gene
and an antisense primer near the 5-prime end of the BIR gene they
PCR-amplified an approximately 4.5-kb fragment. Thus, the authors
determined that the 2 genes are clustered at 11p15.1, with the BIR gene
immediately 3-prime of the SUR gene. The SUR gene had previously been
mapped to 11p15.1 by fluorescence in situ hybridization (Thomas et al.,
1995).

GENE FUNCTION

In pancreatic beta cells, ATP-potassium channels are crucial for the
regulation of glucose-induced insulin secretion and are the target for
the sulfonylureas, oral hypoglycemic agents widely used in the treatment
of noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM; 125853), and for
diazoxide, a potassium channel opener. The sulfonylurea receptor (SUR)
is a member of the ATP-binding cassette superfamily with multiple
transmembrane-spanning domains and 2 potential nucleotide-binding folds.
Inagaki et al. (1995) demonstrated that coexpression of BIR with SUR
reconstituted an inwardly rectifying potassium conductance of 76
picosiemens that was sensitive to ATP and was inhibited by sulfonylureas
and activated by diazoxide. The data indicated to the authors that these
pancreatic beta-cell potassium channels are a complex composed of at
least 2 subunits: BIR and SUR.

Inagaki et al. (1996) cloned rat SUR2 (601439) and found that
coexpression of SUR2 and BIR in COS-1 cells reconstituted the properties
of K(ATP) channels described in cardiac and skeletal muscle. However,
they found that the SUR2/BIR channel is less sensitive than the SUR/BIR
channel both to ATP and to the sulfonylurea glibenclamide, and is
activated by the cardiac K(ATP) channel openers cromakalim and pinacidil
but not by diazoxide. The affinity of SUR2 for sulfonylureas is 500
times lower than that of SUR.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Hyperinsulinemic Hypoglycemia

Thomas et al. (1996) screened genomic DNA from members of 15 families
with hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia (HHF2; 601820) for mutations in the
KCNJ11 gene. In a male infant with profound hypoglycemia, born of
consanguineous Iranian parents, Thomas et al. (1996) identified
homozygosity for a 649T-C mutation (600937.0001). His parents were
heterozygous for the mutation.

Using SSCP and nucleotide sequence analysis, Nestorowicz et al. (1997)
screened 78 patients with hyperinsulinism for mutations in the KCNJ11
gene and identified homozygosity for a nonsense mutation (600937.0009)
in 1 patient.

De Lonlay et al. (1997) showed that in cases of the focal form, but not
those of the diffuse form, of hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia there was
specific loss of maternal alleles of the imprinted chromosome region
11p15 in cells of the hyperplastic area of the pancreas but not in
normal pancreatic cells. This somatic event was consistent with a
proliferative monoclonal lesion. It involves disruption of the balance
between monoallelic expression of several maternally and paternally
expressed genes. Thus, they provided the first molecular explanation for
the heterogeneity of sporadic forms of PHHI such that it is possible to
perform only partial pancreatectomy, limited to the focal somatic
lesion, so as to avoid iatrogenic diabetes in patients with focal
adenomatous hyperplasia. It is possible that in these cases of somatic
loss of maternal 11p15.1, there is reduction to homozygosity for a
recessive ABCC8 or KCNJ11 mutation on the paternal allele, since both
ABCC8 and KCNJ11 are located in the 11p15.1 region.

Tornovsky et al. (2004) screened 15 patients with neonatal
hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia for mutations in the ABCC8 and KCNJ11
genes and identified 12 mutations in 11 patients. Homozygosity for a
mutation in the promoter (600937.0010) and in exon 1 (600937.0011) of
the KCNJ11 gene were identified in an Israeli Bedouin and an Arab
patient, respectively.

Henwood et al. (2005) measured acute insulin responses (AIRs) to
calcium, leucine, glucose, and tolbutamide in 22 infants with recessive
ABCC8 or KCNJ11 mutations (see, e.g., 600937.0019), 8 of whom had
diffuse hyperinsulinism and 14 of whom had focal hyperinsulinism. Of the
24 total mutations, 7 showed evidence of residual K(ATP) channel
function: 2 of the patients with partial defects were homozygous and 4
heterozygous for amino acid substitutions or insertions, and 1 was a
compound heterozygote for 2 premature stop codons.

Lin et al. (2008) investigated the mechanisms by which
hyperinsulinism-associated mutations of arg301 (R301) in KCNJ11 (e.g.,
R301H; 600937.0019) lead to channel dysfunction. They found that R301
mutations in rat Kcnj11 resulted in reduced channel expression at the
cell surface in transfected cells and caused rapid, spontaneous current
decay, or inactivation. Mutagenesis studies indicated that R301 is near
the Kcnj11 subunit-subunit interface and likely stabilizes channel
activity. To evaluate the effects of channel inactivation on beta cell
function, Lin et al. (2008) expressed an alternative R301 mutation,
R301A, which induces channel inactivation without affecting channel
surface expression, in a rat insulinoma cell line. Expression of Kcnj11
with R301A resulted in more depolarized membrane potential and elevated
insulin secretion at basal glucose concentration compared with cells
expressing wildtype channels. Lin et al. (2008) concluded that mutations
at R301 may cause channel inactivation by disrupting subunit-subunit
interactions, and that this gating defect is sufficient to cause loss of
channel function and hyperinsulinism.

Pinney et al. (2008) identified 14 different dominantly inherited K(ATP)
channel mutations in 16 unrelated families, 13 with mutations in the
ABCC8 gene (see, e.g., 600509.0011) and 3 with mutations in the KCNJ11
gene (see, e.g., 600937.0020). Unlike recessive mutations, dominantly
inherited K(ATP) mutant subunits trafficked normally to the plasma
membrane when expressed in simian kidney cells; dominant mutations also
resulted in different channel-gating defects, with dominant ABCC8
mutations diminishing channel responses to magnesium adenosine
diphosphate or diazoxide and dominant KCNJ11 mutations impairing channel
opening even in the absence of nucleotides. Pinney et al. (2008)
concluded that there are distinctive features of dominant K(ATP)
hyperinsulinism compared to the more common and more severe recessive
form, including retention of normal subunit trafficking, impaired
channel activity, and a milder hypoglycemia phenotype that may escape
detection in infancy and is often responsive to diazoxide medical
therapy.

Taneja et al. (2009) reported that the Kir6.2 channel contains a
diacidic ER exit signal DXE at codons 280 to 282, which promotes
concentration of the channel into COPII-enriched ER exit sites prior to
ER export via a process that requires Sar1-GTPase (607690). They
identified an E282K mutation (600937.0022) in a Swedish patient with
HHF2 with focal adenomatous hyperplasia. The E282K mutation abrogated
the ER exit signal and prevented ER export and surface expression of the
channel. When coexpressed, the E282K-mutant subunit was able to
associate with the wildtype Kir6.2 and form functional channels, and
unlike most mutations did not cause protein misfolding. Since in focal
congenital hyperinsulinism, the maternal chromosome containing the
K(ATP) channel genes is lost, beta-cells of the patient lacked wildtype
Kir6.2 to rescue the mutant Kir6.2 subunit expressed from the paternal
chromosome. The resultant absence of functional KATP channels leads to
insulin hypersecretion. Taneja et al. (2009) concluded that surface
expression of K(ATP) channels is critically dependent on the
Sar1-GTPase-dependent ER exit mechanism, and abrogation of the diacidic
ER exit signal leads to congenital hyperinsulinism.

- Diabetes Mellitus Type II

Hani et al. (1998) identified an association between an E23K variant in
the KCNJ11 gene (600937.0014) and type II diabetes mellitus (125853) in
French families.

Hansen et al. (2005) studied the effects of the E23K polymorphism and a
PPARG P12A polymorphism (601487.0002) on the risk of type II diabetes
and found that the polymorphisms may act in an additive manner to
increase the risk of type II diabetes.

- Permanent Neonatal Diabetes

Because ATP-sensitive potassium channels mediate glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion from the pancreatic beta cells, Gloyn et al. (2004)
hypothesized that activating mutations in the KCNJ11 gene might cause
neonatal diabetes. They studied 29 patients with permanent neonatal
diabetes (PNDM; 606176) characterized by ketoacidosis or marked
hyperglycemia who were treated with insulin. The patients did not
secrete insulin in response to glucose or glucagon but did secrete
insulin in response to tolbutamide. Four of the patients also had severe
developmental delay and muscle weakness; 3 of them also had epilepsy and
mild dysmorphic features (DEND; see 606176). Gloyn et al. (2004)
sequenced the KCNJ11 gene in all 29 patients and identified 6 novel,
heterozygous missense mutations in 10. In 4 of the 10 families, the
mutation was an arg201-to-his (R201H) substitution (600937.0002). In 2
patients, the diabetes was familial. In 8 patients, the diabetes arose
from a spontaneous mutation (see, e.g., V59M; 600937.0003). When the
most common mutation, R201H, was coexpressed with SUR in Xenopus
oocytes, the ability of ATP to block mutant ATP-sensitive potassium
channels was greatly reduced. Thus, whereas inactivating mutations of
KCNJ11 lead to uncontrolled insulin secretion and congenital
hyperinsulinism, activating mutations cause neonatal diabetes. Gloyn et
al. (2004) concluded that heterozygous activating mutations of the
KCNJ11 gene are a common cause (approximately 34%) of permanent neonatal
diabetes. In a high proportion (80%) of subjects studied in their
series, the mutation occurred de novo.

Gloyn et al. (2005) identified 3 novel heterozygous mutations (see,
e.g., 600937.0017-600937.0018) in 3 of 11 probands with clinically
defined TNDM who did not have chromosome 6q24 abnormalities. The
mutations cosegregated with diabetes in 2 families and were not found in
100 controls. All 3 probands had insulin-treated diabetes diagnosed in
the first 4 months of life and went into remission by 7 to 17 months of
age. In transformed Xenopus oocytes, all 3 heterozygous mutations
resulted in a reduction in sensitivity to ATP when compared with
wildtype; however, the effect was less than that of PNDM-associated
mutations. Gloyn et al. (2005) concluded that mutations in KCNJ11 can
cause both remitting and permanent diabetes, suggesting that a fixed ion
channel abnormality may result in a fluctuating glycemic phenotype.

Yorifuji et al. (2005) found a missense mutation in the KCNJ11 gene
(600937.0012) in a 4-generation family with dominantly inherited
diabetes mellitus observed in 3 generations (see 610582). The onset and
severity of the diabetes were variable: transient neonatal diabetes,
childhood-onset diabetes, gestational diabetes, or adult-onset diabetes.

In a 20-year-old woman who had transient neonatal diabetes mellitus that
recurred at age 7 years, Colombo et al. (2005) identified heterozygosity
for a de novo R201H mutation in the KCNJ11 gene.

Proks et al. (2005) studied the MgATP sensitivity of KCNJ11-mutant
K(ATP) channels expressed in Xenopus oocytes. In contrast to wildtype
channels, Mg(2+) dramatically reduced the ATP sensitivity of
heterozygous R201C (600937.0004), R201H, V59M, and V59G (600937.0005)
channels. This effect was predominantly mediated via the
nucleotide-binding domains of SUR1 (ABCC8; 600509) and resulted from an
enhanced stimulatory action of MgATP. Proks et al. (2005) concluded that
KCNJ11 mutations increase the current magnitude of heterozygous K(ATP)
channels by increasing MgATP activation and by decreasing ATP
inhibition. The fraction of unblocked K(ATP) current at physiologic
MgATP concentrations correlated with the severity of the clinical
phenotype.

- Association with Impaired Exercise Stress Response

Reyes et al. (2009) found that the E23K polymorphism was overrepresented
in individuals with dilated cardiomyopathy (see 115200) and congestive
heart failure (CHF) compared to controls, and that the KK genotype was
associated with abnormal cardiopulmonary exercise stress testing. Reyes
et al. (2009) suggested that E23K might represent a biomarker for
impaired stress performance.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

To determine why some mutations in the KCNJ11 gene cause PNDM in
isolation whereas others cause PNDM associated with marked developmental
delay, muscle weakness, and epilepsy, Proks et al. (2004) expressed
wildtype or mutant Kir6.2/sulfonylurea receptor-1 channels in Xenopus
oocytes. All of the mutations investigated (R201C, Q52R, and V59G)
increased resting whole-cell K(ATP) currents by reducing channel
inhibition by ATP, but in the simulated heterozygous state, the mutation
causing PNDM alone (R201C) produced smaller K(ATP) currents and less
change in ATP sensitivity than mutations associated with severe disease
(Q52R and V59G). These findings suggested that increased K(ATP) currents
hyperpolarize pancreatic beta cells and impair insulin secretion,
whereas larger K(ATP) currents are required to influence extra
pancreatic cell function. Proks et al. (2004) also found that mutations
causing PNDM alone impaired ATP sensitivity directly (at the binding
site), whereas those associated with severe disease acted indirectly by
biasing the channel conformation toward the open state. The effect of
the mutation on ATP sensitivity in the heterozygous state reflected the
different contributions of a single subunit in the Kir6.2 tetramer to
ATP inhibition and to the energy of the open state. The results showed
that mutations in the slide helix of Kir6.2 (V59G) influence the channel
kinetics, providing evidence that this domain is involved in Kir channel
gating and suggesting that the efficacy of sulfonylurea therapy in PNDM
may vary with genotype.

Massa et al. (2005) screened the KCNJ11 gene in 18 Italian patients with
what they termed 'permanent diabetes mellitus of infancy' (PDMI),
including 12 patients with onset within 3 months after birth and 6 with
onset between 3 months to 1 year of age. Five different heterozygous
mutations were identified in 8 patients with diabetes diagnosed between
day 3 and day 182. Two of these mutations were novel. Four of the 8
patients also had motor and/or developmental delay. Massa et al. (2005)
concluded that KCNJ11 mutations are a common cause of PNDM either in
isolation or associated with developmental delay.

The beta-cell ATP-sensitive potassium channel is a key component of
stimulus-secretion coupling in the pancreatic beta cell. The channel
couples metabolism to membrane electrical events, bringing about insulin
secretion. Given the critical role of this channel in glucose
homeostasis, it is not surprising that mutations in the genes encoding
the 2 essential subunits of the channel, KCNJ11 and ABCC8, can result in
either hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia. Gloyn et al. (2006) reviewed the
loss-of-function mutations in KCNJ11 and ABCC8, which can cause
oversecretion of insulin and result in hyperinsulinemia of infancy. They
reviewed the management of patients in whom mutations in these genes are
found.

From a study of 49 patients with activating Kir6.2 mutations,
Slingerland and Hattersley (2006) concluded that these mutations cause a
severe reduction in fetal insulin secretion and hence fetal growth but
that this is independent of mutation severity. Postnatal catch-up
required insulin treatment but was complete, except in those with
epilepsy.

ANIMAL MODEL

Miki et al. (1997) generated transgenic mice expressing a
dominant-negative mutation within the conserved gly-tyr-gly motif of the
putative K(+)-permeable domain of Kcnj11. The gene was inserted
downstream of the human insulin promoter region for selective expression
in pancreatic beta cells. Transgenic mice developed hypoglycemia with
hyperinsulinemia as neonates and hyperglycemia with hypoinsulinemia and
decreased beta cell numbers as adults. Kcnj11 function was impaired in
the beta cells of transgenic mice with hyperglycemia, and both resting
membrane potential and basal calcium concentrations were significantly
elevated in transgenic mice. Miki et al. (1997) also observed a high
frequency of apoptotic beta cells prior to the development of
hyperglycemia, suggesting a role for Kcnj11 in cell survival as well as
in regulating insulin secretion.

Koster et al. (2000) generated transgenic mice expressing pancreatic
beta-cell K(ATP) channels with reduced ATP sensitivity. They used
transgenes with truncation of the N-terminal 30 amino acids of the
Kir6.2 subunit, and a double mutant with the 30-amino acid truncation
and a lys185-to-gln mutation. These transgenes were fused at the C
terminus with the green fluorescent protein to allow for detection under
ultraviolet illumination. Transgenic animals developed severe
hyperglycemia, hypoinsulinemia, and ketoacidosis within 2 days, and
typically died within 5 days. Nevertheless, islet morphology, insulin
localization, and alpha- and beta-cell distributions were normal (before
day 3), pointing to reduced insulin secretion as causal. The data
indicated that normal K(ATP) channel activity is critical for
maintenance of euglycemia and that overactivity can cause diabetes by
inhibiting insulin secretion.

In mice with a conditional deletion of Hnf4a (600281) in pancreatic beta
cells, Gupta et al. (2005) observed hyperinsulinemia in fasted and fed
animals but also impaired glucose tolerance. Islet perfusion and
calcium-imaging studies showed abnormal beta cell responses to
stimulation by glucose and sulfonylureas, explainable in part by a 60%
reduction in expression of the potassium channel subunit Kir6.2.
Cotransfection assays revealed that the Kir6.2 gene is a transcriptional
target of HNF4A. Gupta et al. (2005) concluded that HNF4A is required in
the pancreatic beta cell for regulation of the pathway of insulin
secretion dependent on the ATP-dependent potassium channel.

ATP-sensitive potassium channels are activated by various metabolic
stresses, including hypoxia. The substantia nigra pars reticulata, the
area with the highest expression of ATP-sensitive potassium channels in
the brain, plays a pivotal role in the control of seizures. Yamada et
al. (2001) studied mutant mice lacking the Kir6.2 subunit of
ATP-sensitive potassium channels and found that they were susceptible to
generalized seizures after brief hypoxia. In normal mice, the substantia
nigra pars reticulata neuron activity was inactivated during hypoxia by
the opening of the postsynaptic ATP-sensitive potassium channels,
whereas in knockout mice, the activity of these neurons was enhanced.
ATP-sensitive potassium channels exert a depressant effect on substantia
nigra pars reticulata neuronal activity during hypoxia and may be
involved in the nigral protection mechanism against generalized
seizures.

Girard et al. (2009) created a mouse strain conditionally expressing the
human Kir6.2 V59M mutation (600937.0003) specifically in pancreatic beta
cells. Kir6.2(V59M) mRNA was expressed at a level comparable to that of
endogenous wildtype Kir6.2 mRNA. Mutant mice (beta-V59M mice) developed
severe diabetes soon after birth, and by 5 weeks of age, blood glucose
levels were markedly increased and insulin was undetectable. Isolated
beta-V59M islets displayed a reduced percentage of beta cells, abnormal
morphology, abnormal calcium oscillations, lower insulin content, and
decreased expression of Kir6.2, Sur1, and insulin mRNA. Beta-V59M islets
secreted substantially less insulin and showed a smaller increase in
intracellular calcium in response to glucose than wildtype islets, which
was due to reduced sensitivity of Kir6.2(V69M) channels to ATP or
glucose. Current and secretion events downstream of channel closure
remained intact.

By using mice carrying the human V59M mutation in Kir6.2 (600937.0003)
targeted to either muscle or nerve, Clark et al. (2010) showed that
analogous motor impairments originate in the central nervous system
rather than in muscle or peripheral nerves. Clark et al. (2010) also
identified locomotor hyperactivity as a feature of K(ATP) channel
overactivity. Clark et al. (2010) concluded that their finding suggested
that drugs targeted against neuronal, rather than muscle, K(ATP)
channels are needed to treat the motor deficits and that such drugs
require high blood-brain barrier permeability.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPERINSULINEMIC HYPOGLYCEMIA, FAMILIAL, 2
KCNJ11, LEU147PRO

In a male infant with profound hypoglycemia (601820), born of
consanguineous Iranian parents, Thomas et al. (1996) identified
homozygosity for a 649T-C mutation in the KCNJ11 gene, resulting in a
leu147-to-pro (L147P) substitution predicted to cause disruption of the
M2 alpha-helical transmembrane domain of the protein. His parents were
heterozygous for the mutation.

.0002
DIABETES MELLITUS, PERMANENT NEONATAL
DIABETES MELLITUS, PERMANENT NEONATAL, WITH NEUROLOGIC FEATURES, INCLUDED;;
DIABETES MELLITUS, TRANSIENT NEONATAL, 3, INCLUDED
KCNJ11, ARG201HIS

In 4 unrelated patients with permanent neonatal diabetes (606176), Gloyn
et al. (2004) identified a heterozygous arg201-to-his (R201H) mutation
in the KCNJ11 gene. The arg201 residue lies close to the ATP-binding
site and was implicated in ATP sensitivity (Ribalet et al., 2003). In 1
family reported by Gloyn et al. (2004), 2 brothers and the father were
affected. Diabetes in the brothers was diagnosed under the age of 3 or 4
weeks, and in the father at the age of 12 weeks. The father was age 46
years at the time of report. In another family, mother and son were
affected. The diagnosis had been made at birth in the son and at age 6
weeks in the mother, who was 36 years old at the time of report. None of
the patients with the R201H mutation had muscle weakness, neurologic
abnormalities, or dysmorphic features. The arginine residue at position
201 of Kir6.2 lies close to the ATP-binding site and was previously
implicated in ATP sensing.

By functional expression studies in Xenopus oocytes, Proks et al. (2004)
found that mutations at the arg201 residue (see also R201C; 600937.0004)
caused a decrease in ATP sensitivity by altering the ATP-binding site.
However, the decreased sensitivity found in cells with a mutation at
arg201 was not as severe as that found in cells with a mutation at val59
(see V59M, 600937.0003 and V59G, 600937.0005).

Gloyn et al. (2006) reported 2 unrelated infants with PNDM and the R201H
mutation. The male infant also had dysmorphic facial features and
neurologic involvement, including seizures, developmental delay, and
axial hypotonia. In contrast, the other infant did not have neurologic
involvement, and her mother, who also carried the mutation, had severe
diabetes mellitus without neurologic involvement. The phenotypic
variability suggested that other modifying factors likely play a role.

In a 20-year-old woman with transient neonatal diabetes mellitus (TNDM3;
610582) in whom diabetes remitted at age 29 months and recurred at age 7
years, Colombo et al. (2005) identified heterozygosity for a de novo
602G-A (R201H) mutation in the KCNJ11 gene.

.0003
DIABETES MELLITUS, PERMANENT NEONATAL, WITH NEUROLOGIC FEATURES
DIABETES MELLITUS, PERMANENT NEONATAL, INCLUDED
KCNJ11, VAL59MET

In 2 unrelated males with permanent neonatal diabetes (606176), Gloyn et
al. (2004) found heterozygosity for a val59-to-met (V59M) mutation in
the KCNJ11 gene. One of the patients had muscle weakness, and mildly
delayed motor and mental development.

Proks et al. (2004) noted that 2 mutations in the same residue of
Kir6.2, V59M and V59G (600937.0005), are associated with a more severe
form of PNDM that may be accompanied by developmental delay, muscle
weakness, and epilepsy, compared to PNDM caused by the mutations R201H
(600937.0002) and R201C (600937.0004). They found that residue val59
lies some distance from the ATP-binding site, within the N-terminal
region of the protein; moreover, val59 lies within the 'slide helix,' a
domain postulated to be involved in the opening and closing (gating) of
Kir channels. Functional expression studies in Xenopus oocytes indicated
that the V59M and V59G mutations decreased ATP sensitivity indirectly by
favoring the open conformation of the channel.

Massa et al. (2005) found the V59M mutation in 4 unrelated Italian
patients with PNDM. Two of the patients had motor and mental
developmental delay. One of the patients was diagnosed at over 6 months
of age (182 days). Massa et al. (2005) suggested that the designation
'permanent diabetes mellitus of infancy' (PDMI) replace 'permanent
neonatal diabetes mellitus.'

Gloyn et al. (2006) reported a patient with the V59M mutation who had
PNDM and neurologic features, including mild motor developmental delay
and axial hypotonia.

.0004
DIABETES MELLITUS, PERMANENT NEONATAL
DIABETES MELLITUS, PERMANENT NEONATAL, WITH NEUROLOGIC FEATURES, INCLUDED
KCNJ11, ARG201CYS

In a patient with PNDM (606176), Gloyn et al. (2004) identified a
heterozygous arg201-to-cys (R201C) mutation in the Kir6.2 gene. The
patient was diagnosed at 4 weeks of age and had no additional neurologic
or dysmorphic features. The arg201 residue lies close to the ATP-binding
site and was implicated in ATP sensitivity (Ribalet et al., 2003).

Proks et al. (2004) stated that the 2 mutations in residue arg201, R201H
(600937.0002) and R201C, which lie in the ATP-binding site of Kir6.2,
cause milder PNDM disease without neurologic features; however, Massa et
al. (2005) identified the R201C mutation in a patient with PNDM who also
had muscle weakness and delayed motor development.

Gloyn et al. (2004) described a family in which 2 affected paternal
half-sibs were heterozygous for the R201C mutation. Direct sequencing of
leukocyte DNA showed that their clinically unaffected mothers and father
were genotypically normal. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis of the
father's leukocyte DNA detected no trace of mutant DNA. These results
were consistent with the father being mosaic for the mutation, which was
restricted to his germline. Gloyn et al. (2004) concluded that the high
percentage of permanent neonatal diabetes cases due to de novo KCNJ11
mutations (Gloyn et al., 2004) suggests that germline mosaicism may be
common.

.0005
DIABETES MELLITUS, PERMANENT NEONATAL, WITH NEUROLOGIC FEATURES
KCNJ11, VAL59GLY

In a male patient with permanent neonatal diabetes (606176), Gloyn et
al. (2004) found heterozygosity for a val59-to-gly (V59G) mutation in
the KCNJ11 gene. In addition to neonatal diabetes, the patient had
muscle weakness, marked motor and mental developmental delay, myoclonic
seizures with abnormal EEG, and dysmorphic features, including a
downturned mouth, bilateral ptosis, and contractures primarily in the
legs at birth.

Proks et al. (2004) noted that 2 mutations in the same residue of
Kir6.2, V59M (600937.0003) and V59G, are associated with a more severe
form of PNDM that may be accompanied by developmental delay, muscle
weakness, and epilepsy, compared to PNDM caused by the mutations R201H
(600937.0002) and R201C (600937.0004). Proks et al. (2004) found that
residue val59 lies some distance from the ATP-binding site, within the
N-terminal region of the protein; moreover, val59 lies within the 'slide
helix,' a domain postulated to be involved in the opening and closing
(gating) of Kir channels. Functional expression studies in Xenopus
oocytes indicated that the V59M and V59G mutations decreased ATP
sensitivity indirectly by favoring the open conformation of the channel.

.0006
DIABETES MELLITUS, PERMANENT NEONATAL
KCNJ11, ARG50PRO

In an Italian patient with PNDM, Massa et al. (2005) identified a 149G-C
transversion in the KCNJ11 gene, resulting in an arg50-to-pro (R50P)
substitution. The patient had no neurologic abnormalities.

.0007
DIABETES MELLITUS, PERMANENT NEONATAL
KCNJ11, LYS170ARG

In an Italian patient with PNDM (606176), Massa et al. (2005) identified
a 175G-A transition in the KCNJ11 gene, resulting in a lys170-to-arg
(K170R) substitution. The patient had no neurologic abnormalities.

.0008
DIABETES MELLITUS, PERMANENT NEONATAL
KCNJ11, LYS170ASN

In an Italian patient with PNDM (606176), Massa et al. (2005) identified
a 510G-C transversion in the KCNJ11 gene, resulting in a lys170-to-asn
(K170N) substitution. The patient was diagnosed at age 63 days and had
delayed mental development; however, this patient also had a brain
infarction.

.0009
HYPERINSULINEMIC HYPOGLYCEMIA, FAMILIAL, 2
KCNJ11, TYR12TER

In a Palestinian Arab boy with hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia (601820),
born of first-cousin parents, Nestorowicz et al. (1997) identified
homozygosity for a 39C-A transversion in the KCNJ11 gene, resulting in a
tyr12-to-ter (Y12X) substitution. The mutation is predicted to produce a
truncated Kir6.2 polypeptide lacking the putative K+ ion-selective pore
region as well as those domains proposed to confer the gating and inward
rectification properties of the molecule. In vitro studies in
transfected COS-1 cells confirmed the deleterious effect of the mutation
on channel activity. The authors noted that this patient was clinically
indistinguishable from patients with severe hyperinsulinism caused by
mutations in SUR1 (ABCC8; 600509; see HHF1, 600509).

.0010
HYPERINSULINEMIC HYPOGLYCEMIA, FAMILIAL, 2
KCNJ11, 88G-T, PROMOTER REGION

In an Israeli Bedouin infant with hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia
(601820), Tornovsky et al. (2004) identified homozygosity for an 88G-T
transversion 5-prime of the transcription start site in the promoter
region of the KCNJ11 gene. Functional studies using a luciferase
reporter vector revealed a 44% decrease in reporter gene expression for
the mutant variant compared to wildtype.

.0011
HYPERINSULINEMIC HYPOGLYCEMIA, FAMILIAL, 2
KCNJ11, PRO254LEU

In an Arab infant in whom a prenatal diagnosis of hyperinsulinism was
made due to a family history of hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia (601820),
Tornovsky et al. (2004) identified homozygosity for a C-T transition at
codon 254 in exon 1 of the KCNJ11 gene, resulting in a pro254-to-leu
(P254L) substitution. Photolabeling studies after transient transfection
into COSm6 cells revealed impaired trafficking of the mutant channel.

.0012
DIABETES MELLITUS, TRANSIENT NEONATAL, 3
DIABETES MELLITUS, TYPE II, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT, INCLUDED
KCNJ11, CYS42ARG

In affected members of a 4-generation Japanese family with dominantly
inherited diabetes mellitus observed in 3 generations, Yorifuji et al.
(2005) detected a T-to-C transition at nucleotide 124 of the KCNJ11 gene
that gave rise to a cys42-to-arg amino acid substitution (C24R). The
proband had transient neonatal diabetes (TNDM3; 610582), and his
paternal grandfather had childhood diabetes. The others had adult-onset
diabetes without autoantibodies or insulin resistance. Patch-clamp
experiments using the mutated KCNJ11 showed that the mutation causes
increased spontaneous open probability and reduced ATP sensitivity. The
effect, however, was partially compensated by the reduction of
functional ATP-sensitive potassium channel expression at the cell
surface, which could account for the milder phenotype of the patients.
The authors concluded that these results broadened the spectrum of
diabetes phenotypes caused by mutations of KCNJ11 and suggested that
mutations in this gene should be taken into consideration for not only
permanent neonatal diabetes but also other forms of diabetes with milder
phenotypes and later onset.

.0013
HYPERINSULINEMIC HYPOGLYCEMIA, FAMILIAL, 2
KCNJ11, HIS259ARG

In a patient with severe congenital hyperinsulinism (601820), Marthinet
et al. (2005) identified a homozygous A-to-G transition at nucleotide
776 of the KCNJ11 gene that resulted in a his-259-to-arg substitution
(H259R). The patient presented with macrosomia at birth and severe
hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. Despite medical treatment, the newborn
continued to suffer from severe hypoglycemic episodes, and at 4 months
of age subtotal pancreatectomy was performed. Coexpression of KCNJ11
H259R with ABCC8 (600509) in HEK293T cells completely abolished K(ATP)
currents in electrophysiologic recordings. Double immunofluorescence
staining revealed that mutant KCNJ11 was partly retained in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) causing decreased surface expression as
observed with total internal reflection fluorescence. Mutation of an
ER-retention signal partially rescued the trafficking defect without
restoring whole-cell currents.

.0014
DIABETES MELLITUS, NONINSULIN-DEPENDENT, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
EXERCISE STRESS RESPONSE, IMPAIRED, ASSOCIATION WITH, INCLUDED
KCNJ11, GLU23LYS

Hani et al. (1998) identified a glu23-to-lys (E23K) amino acid
substitution in the KCNJ11 gene by molecular screening using SSCP and
direct sequencing in 72 French Caucasian type II diabetic families. They
genotyped this variant in French cohorts of 191 unrelated type II
diabetic probands and 119 normoglycemic control subjects and performed
association studies. Homozygosity for lys23 (KK) was more frequent in
type II diabetic than in control subjects (27 vs 14%; p = 0.015).
Analyses in a recessive model (KK vs EK/EE) showed a stronger
association of the K allele with diabetes. In a metaanalysis of their
data for the E23K variant and data obtained from 3 other Caucasian
groups, Hani et al. (1998) found the E23K variant to be significantly
associated with type II diabetes.

Hansen et al. (2005) investigated the separate and combined effects of
the PPARG pro12-to-ala (P12A; 601487.0002) and the KCNJ11 E23K
polymorphisms on risk of type II diabetes. The combined analysis
involved 1,164 type II diabetic patients and 4,733 middle-aged,
glucose-tolerant subjects. In the separate analyses, the K allele of
KCNJ11 E23K associated with type II diabetes (odds ratio, 1.19; P =
0.0002), whereas PPARG P12A showed no significant association with type
2 diabetes. The combined analysis indicated that the 2 polymorphisms
acted in an additive manner to increase the risk of type II diabetes,
and the authors found no evidence for a synergistic interaction between
them. Together, the 2 polymorphisms conferred a population-attributable
risk for type II diabetes of 28%. The authors concluded that their
results showed no evidence of a synergistic interaction between the
KCNJ11 E23K and PPARG P12A polymorphisms, but indicated that they may
act in an additive manner to increase the risk of type II diabetes.

Laukkanen et al. (2004) found an additive effect of a high risk ABCC8
(600509) haplotype, composed of a silent polymorphism (AGG-AGA; arg1273
to arg) and 3 promoter polymorphisms, and the 23K allele of the KCNJ11
gene.

In genomewide association studies of type 2 diabetes involving genotype
data from a variety of international consortia, the Diabetes Genetics
Initiative of Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Lund University, and
Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research (2007), Zeggini et al.
(2007), and Scott et al. (2007) confirmed association of the E23K
polymorphism (dbSNP rs5219) with diabetes susceptibility. Although this
association was not strongly observed in any single scan, all-data
metaanalyses resulted in genomewide significant association (OR = 1.14,
P = 6.7 x 10(-11)).

Association with Impaired Exercise Stress Response

Reyes et al. (2009) found that the E23K polymorphism was overrepresented
in 115 individuals with dilated cardiomyopathy (see 115200) and
congestive heart failure (CHF) compared to 2,031 community-based
controls (p less than 0.001). In addition, the KK genotype, which was
present in 18% of the CHF patients, was associated with abnormal
cardiopulmonary exercise stress testing: despite similar baseline heart
rates among genotype subgroups, individuals with the KK genotype had a
significantly reduced heart rate increase at matched workload, at 75% of
maximum oxygen consumption, and at peak VO(2), compared to those with
the EE or EK genotypes. Noting that the glu23 residue is located within
the functionally relevant intracellular slide helix region, Reyes et al.
(2009) suggested that E23K might represent a biomarker for impaired
stress performance.

.0015
DIABETES MELLITUS, PERMANENT NEONATAL, WITH NEUROLOGIC FEATURES
KCNJ11, CYS166PHE

In an infant with a severe form of permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus
with neurologic features (606176), Gloyn et al. (2006) identified a
heterozygous G-to-T transversion in the KCNJ11 gene, resulting in a
cys166-to-phe (C166F) substitution. The infant had feeding problem from
birth and was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus at age 3 months. She also
had seizures with hypsarrhythmia, progressive neurologic deterioration,
diffuse hypotonia, and dysmorphic facial features. She died from
aspiration pneumonia at age 6 months. Gloyn et al. (2006) noted that the
C166F mutation is predicted to result in a channel with a marked
increase in open probability and reduced sensitivity to ATP, which would
severely alter the function of the channel in brain, muscle, and nerves,
in addition to pancreatic beta cells.

.0016
DIABETES MELLITUS, PERMANENT NEONATAL, WITH NEUROLOGIC FEATURES
KCNJ11, ILE167LEU

In an Italian boy with a severe form of permanent neonatal diabetes with
neurologic features (606176), Shimomura et al. (2007) identified a
heterozygous de novo 499A-C transversion in the KCNJ11 gene, resulting
in an ile167-to-leu (I167L) substitution at the cytoplasmic end of the
second transmembrane domain near the internal gate of the channel. In
vitro functional expression studies showed that the mutant I167L channel
had severely impaired sensitivity to ATP and markedly increased open
channel probability. Sulfonylurea treatment resulted in partial blockade
of current in the mutant channels, and the patient showed a good
response to sulfonylurea treatment, with both improved glycemic control
and neurologic improvement.

.0017
DIABETES MELLITUS, TRANSIENT NEONATAL, 3
KCNJ11, GLY53SER

In a sister and brother with TNDM3 (610582), Gloyn et al. (2005)
identified a heterozygous G-to-A transition in the KCNJ11 gene,
resulting in a gly53-to-ser (G53S) substitution. The mutation was not
identified in 100 control individuals. Both children had insulin-treated
diabetes diagnosed in the first 3 weeks of life and went into remission
by age 20 months. The affected mother was positive for the mutation but
had a milder phenotype, having been diagnosed at age 4 years and
requiring only a low dose of insulin for glycemic control. In
transformed Xenopus oocytes, the G53S mutation resulted in a reduction
in sensitivity to ATP when compared with wildtype; however, the effect
was less than that of PNDM-associated mutations.

.0018
DIABETES MELLITUS, TRANSIENT NEONATAL, 3
KCNJ11, GLY53ARG

In a male proband with TNDM3 (610582), Gloyn et al. (2005) identified a
heterozygous G-to-C transversion in the KCNJ11 gene, resulting in a
gly53-to-arg (G53R) substitution. The mutation was not identified in 100
control individuals. The proband had insulin-treated diabetes diagnosed
at age 16 weeks and went into remission by 17 months with relapse at age
28 months. The affected mother was positive for the mutation and was
diagnosed with diabetes at 11 weeks with no periods of remission. Both
mother and son had learning difficulties. In transformed Xenopus
oocytes, the G53R mutation resulted in a reduction in sensitivity to ATP
when compared with wildtype; however, the effect was less than that of
PNDM-associated mutations.

.0019
HYPERINSULINEMIC HYPOGLYCEMIA, FAMILIAL, 2
KCNJ11, ARG301HIS

In an infant with focal hyperinsulinism (HHF2; 601820), Henwood et al.
(2005) identified heterozygosity for a paternally derived 902G-A
transition in the KCNJ11 gene, resulting in an arg301-to-his (R301H)
substitution. KCNJ11 with this mutation retained partial channel
function.

.0020
HYPERINSULINEMIC HYPOGLYCEMIA, FAMILIAL, 2
KCNJ11, GLY156ARG

In a female proband with hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia (HHF2; 601820),
Pinney et al. (2008) identified heterozygosity for a gly156-to-arg
(G156R) substitution in the KCNJ11 gene. The mutation was also
identified in her 34-year-old father, who had symptoms consistent with
hypoglycemia.

.0021
DIABETES MELLITUS, PERMANENT NEONATAL, WITH NEUROLOGIC FEATURES
KCNJ11, GLY53ASP

Koster et al. (2008) reported a 27-year-old patient with intermediate
developmental delay, epilepsy, and neonatal diabetes (606176) in whom
sequencing revealed a heterozygous gly53-to-asp (G53D) mutation in the
KCNJ11 gene. Treatment was progressively transferred from insulin to the
inhibitory sulfonylureas (SUs) gliclazide and finally to glibenclamide.
The patient demonstrated improved glycemic control and motor
coordination with SU treatment, with glibenclamide more effective than
gliclazide. Reconstituted G53D channels exhibited reduced ATP
sensitivity, which was predicted to suppress electrical activity in
vivo. G53D channels coexpressed with the pancreatic and neuronal isoform
of the sulfonylurea receptor SUR1 (600509) exhibited high-affinity block
by gliclazide but were insensitive to block when coexpressed with the
skeletal muscle isoform SUR2A (601439). Koster et al. (2008) concluded
that SUs can resolve motor dysfunction in an adult with intermediate
DEND and that this improvement is due to inhibition of the neuronal but
not skeletal muscle ATP-sensitive potassium channel.

.0022
HYPERINSULINEMIC HYPOGLYCEMIA, FAMILIAL, 2
KCNJ11, GLU282LYS

In a Swedish patient with HHF2 (601820) with focal adenomatous
hyperplasia, Taneja et al. (2009) identified an 844G-A transition in the
KCNJ11 gene, resulting in a glu282-to-lys (E282K) substitution within a
diacidic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) exit signal DXE at codons 280 to
282. The paternal E282K mutation abrogated the exit signal and prevented
the ER export and surface expression of the channel. Since in focal
hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia, the maternal chromosome containing the
K(ATP) channel genes are lost, beta-cells of the patient would lack
wildtype Kir6.2 to rescue the mutant Kir6.2 subunit expressed from the
paternal chromosome.

.0023
DIABETES MELLITUS, PERMANENT NEONATAL, WITH NEUROLOGIC FEATURES
KCNJ11, PHE60TYR

In a patient with neonatal diabetes, developmental delay, and epilepsy
(606176), Mannikko et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for 2 novel
mutations on the same haplotype (cis), phe60 to tyr (F60Y) and val64 to
leu (V64L), in the slide helix of Kir6.2 (KCNJ11). Functional analysis
revealed that the F60Y mutation increased the intrinsic channel open
probability, thereby indirectly producing a marked decrease in channel
inhibition by ATP and an increase in whole-cell potassium-ATP currents.
When expressed alone, the V64L mutation caused a small reduction in
apparent ATP inhibition, by enhancing the ability of MgATP to stimulate
channel activity. The V64L mutation also ameliorated the deleterious
effects on the F60Y mutation when it was expressed on the same, but not
a different, subunit. The authors concluded that F60Y is the pathogenic
mutation and that interactions between slide helix residues may
influence KATP channel gating.

REFERENCE 1. Chandy, K. G.; Gutman, G. A.: Nomenclature for mammalian potassium
channel genes. Trends Pharm. Sci. 14: 434, 1993.

2. Clark, R. H.; McTaggart, J. S.; Webster, R.; Mannikko, R.; Iberl,
M.; Sim, X. L.; Rorsman, P.; Glitsch, M.; Beeson, D.; Ashcroft, F.
M.: Muscle dysfunction caused by a K(ATP) channel mutation in neonatal
diabetes is neuronal in origin. Science 329: 458-461, 2010.

3. Colombo, C.; Delvecchio, M.; Zecchino, C.; Faienza, M. F.; Cavallo,
L.; Barbetti, F.; Early Onset Study Group of the Italian Society
of Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology: Transient neonatal
diabetes mellitus is associated with a recurrent (R201H) KCNJ11 (KIR6.2)
mutation. (Letter) Diabetologia 48: 2439-2441, 2005.

4. de Lonlay, P.; Fournet, J.-C.; Rahier, J.; Gross-Morand, M.-S.;
Poggi-Travert, F.; Foussier, V.; Bonnefont, J.-P.; Brusset, M.-C.;
Brunelle, F.; Robert, J.-J.; Nihoul-Fekete, C.; Saudubray, J.-M.;
Junien, C.: Somatic deletion of the imprinted 11p15 region in sporadic
persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy is specific of
focal adenomatous hyperplasia and endorses partial pancreatectomy. J.
Clin. Invest. 100: 802-807, 1997.

5. Diabetes Genetics Initiative of Broad Institute of Harvard and
MIT, Lund University, and Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research
: Genome-wide association analysis identifies loci for type 2 diabetes
and triglyceride levels. Science 316: 1331-1336, 2007.

6. Girard, C. A.; Wunderlich, F. T.; Shimomura, K.; Collins, S.; Kaizik,
S.; Proks, P.; Abdulkader, F.; Clark, A.; Ball, V.; Zubcevic, L.;
Bentley, L.; Clark, R.; Church, C.; Hugill, A.; Galvanovskis, J.;
Cox, R.; Rorsman, P.; Bruning, J. C.; Ashcroft, F. M.: Expression
of an activating mutation in the gene encoding the K(ATP) channel
subunit Kir6.2 in mouse pancreatic beta cells recapitulates neonatal
diabetes. J. Clin. Invest. 119: 80-90, 2009.

7. Gloyn, A. L.; Cummings, E. A.; Edghill, E. L.; Harries, L. W.;
Scott, R.; Costa, T.; Temple, I. K.; Hattersley, A. T.; Ellard, S.
: Permanent neonatal diabetes due to paternal germline mosaicism for
an activating mutation of the KCNJ11 gene encoding the Kir6.2 subunit
of the beta-cell potassium adenosine triphosphate channel. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 89: 3932-3935, 2004.

8. Gloyn, A. L.; Diatloff-Zito, C.; Edghill, E. L.; Bellanne-Chantelot,
C.; Nivot, S.; Coutant, R.; Ellard, S.; Hattersley, A. T.; Robert,
J. J.: KCNJ11 activating mutations are associated with developmental
delay, epilepsy and neonatal diabetes syndrome and other neurological
features. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 14: 824-830, 2006.

9. Gloyn, A. L.; Pearson, E. R.; Antcliff, J. F.; Proks, P.; Bruining,
G. J.; Slingerland, A. S.; Howard, N.; Srinivasan, S.; Silva, J. M.
C. L.; Molnes, J.; Edghill, E. L.; Frayling, T. M.; and 13 others
: Activating mutations in the gene encoding the ATP-sensitive potassium-channel
subunit Kir6.2 and permanent neonatal diabetes. New Eng. J. Med. 350:
1838-1849, 2004. Note: Erratum: New Eng. J. Med. 351: 1470 only, 2004.

10. Gloyn, A. L.; Reimann, F.; Girard, C.; Edghill, E. L.; Proks,
P.; Pearson, E. R.; Temple, I. K.; Mackay, D. J. G.; Shield, J. P.
H.; Freedenberg, D.; Noyes, K.; Ellard, S.; Ashcroft, F. M.; Gribble,
F. M.; Hattersley, A. T.: Relapsing diabetes can result from moderately
activating mutations in KCNJ11. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 925-934,
2005.

11. Gloyn, A. L.; Siddiqui, J.; Ellard, S.: Mutations in the genes
encoding the pancreatic beta-cell K(ATP) channel subunits Kir6.2 (KCNJ11)
and SUR1 (ABCC8) in diabetes mellitus and hyperinsulinism. Hum. Mutat. 27:
220-231, 2006.

12. Gupta, R. K.; Vatamaniuk, M. Z.; Lee, C. S.; Flaschen, R. C.;
Fulmer, J. T.; Matschinsky, F. M.; Duncan, S. A.; Kaestner, K. H.
: The MODY1 gene HNF-4-alpha regulates selected genes involved in
insulin secretion. J. Clin. Invest. 115: 1006-1015, 2005.

13. Hani, E. H.; Boutin, P.; Durand, E.; Inoue, H.; Permutt, M. A.;
Velho, G.; Froguel, P.: Missense mutations in the pancreatic islet
beta cell inwardly rectifying K+ channel gene (KIR6.2/BIR): a meta-analysis
suggests a role in the polygenic basis of type II diabetes mellitus
in Caucasians. Diabetologia 41: 1511-1515, 1998.

14. Hansen, S. K.; Nielsen, E.-M. D.; Ek, J.; Andersen, G.; Glumer,
C.; Carstensen, B.; Mouritzen, P.; Drivsholm, T.; Borch-Johnsen, K.;
Jorgensen, T.; Hansen, T.; Pedersen, O.: Analysis of separate and
combined effects of common variation in KCNJ11 and PPARG on risk of
type 2 diabetes. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 3629-3637, 2005.

15. Henwood, M. J.; Kelly, A.; MacMullen, C.; Bhatia, P.; Ganguly,
A.; Thornton, P. S.; Stanley, C. A.: Genotype-phenotype correlations
in children with congenital hyperinsulinism due to recessive mutations
of the adenosine triphosphate-sensitive potassium channel genes. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 789-794, 2005.

16. Inagaki, N.; Gonoi, T.; Clement, J. P.; Namba, N.; Inazawa, J.;
Gonzalez, G.; Aguilar-Bryan, L.; Seino, S.; Bryan, J.: Reconstitution
of I(KATP): an inward rectifier subunit plus the sulfonylurea receptor. Science 270:
1166-1170, 1995.

17. Inagaki, N.; Gonoi, T.; Clement, J. P., IV; Wang, C.-Z.; Aguilar-Bryan,
L.; Bryan, J.; Seino, S.: A family of sulfonylurea receptors determines
the pharmacological properties of ATP-sensitive K(+) channels. Neuron 16:
1011-1017, 1996.

18. Koster, J. C.; Cadario, F.; Peruzzi, C.; Colombo, C.; Nichols,
C. G.; Barbetti, F.: The G53D mutation in Kir6.2 (KCNJ11) is associated
with neonatal diabetes and motor dysfunction in adulthood that is
improved with sulfonylurea therapy. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 93:
1054-1061, 2008.

19. Koster, J. C.; Marshall, B. A.; Ensor, N.; Corbett, J. A.; Nichols,
C. G.: Targeted overactivity of beta cell KATP channels induces profound
neonatal diabetes. Cell 100: 645-654, 2000.

20. Laukkanen, O.; Pihlajamaki, J.; Lindstrom, J.; Eriksson, J.; Valle,
T. T.; Hamalainen, H.; Ilanne-Patrikka, P.; Keinanen-Kiukaanniemi,
S.; Tuomilehto, J.; Uusitupa, M.; Laakso, M.; Finnish Diabetes Prevention
Study Group: Polymorphisms of the SUR1 (ABCC8) and Kir6.2 (KCNJ11)
genes predict the conversion from impaired glucose tolerance to type
2 diabetes: the Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 89: 6286-6290, 2004.

21. Lin, Y.-W.; Bushman, J. D.; Yan, F.-F.; Haidar, S.; MacMullen,
C.; Ganguly, A.; Stanley, C. A.; Shyng, S.-L.: Destabilization of
ATP-sensitive potassium channel activity by novel KCNJ11 mutations
identified in congenital hyperinsulinism. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 9146-9156,
2008.

22. Mannikko, R.; Jefferies, C.; Flanagan, S. E.; Hattersley, A.;
Ellard, S.; Ashcroft, F. M.: Interaction between mutations in the
slide helix of Kir6.2 associated with neonatal diabetes and neurological
symptoms. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 963-972, 2010.

23. Marthinet, E.; Bloc, A.; Oka, Y.; Tanizawa, Y.; Wehrle-Haller,
B.; Bancila, V.; Dubuis, J.-M.; Philippe, J.; Schwitzgebel, V. M.
: Severe congenital hyperinsulinism caused by a mutation in the Kir6.2
subunit of the adenosine triphosphate-sensitive potassium channel
impairing trafficking and function. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90:
5401-5406, 2005.

24. Massa, O.; Iafusco, D.; D'Amato, E.; Gloyn, A. L.; Hattersley,
A. T.; Pasquino, B.; Tonini, G.; Dammacco, F.; Zanette, G.; Meschi,
F.; Porzio, O.; Bottazzo, G.; Crino, A.; Lorini, R.; Cerutti, F.;
Vanelli, M.; Barbetti, F.: KCNJ11 activating mutations in Italian
patients with permanent neonatal diabetes. Hum. Mutat. 25: 22-27,
2005.

25. Miki, T.; Tashiro, F.; Iwanaga, T.; Nagashima, K.; Yoshitomi,
H.; Aihara, H.; Nitta, Y.; Gonoi, T.; Inagaki, N.; Miyazaki, J.; Seino,
S.: Abnormalities of pancreatic islets by targeted expression of
a dominant-negative K(ATP) channel. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 11969-11973,
1997.

26. Nestorowicz, A.; Inagaki, N.; Gonoi, T.; Schoor, K. P.; Wilson,
B. A.; Glaser, B.; Landau, H.; Stanley, C. A.; Thornton, P. S.; Seino,
S.; Permutt, M. A.: A nonsense mutation in the inward rectifier potassium
channel gene, Kir6.2, is associated with familial hyperinsulinism. Diabetes 46:
1743-1748, 1997.

27. Pinney, S. E.; MacMullen, C.; Becker, S.; Lin, Y.-W.; Hanna, C.;
Thornton, P.; Ganguly, A.; Shyng, S.-L.; Stanley, C. A.: Clinical
characteristics and biochemical mechanisms of congenital hyperinsulinism
associated with dominant K(ATP) channel mutations. J. Clin. Invest. 118:
2877-2886, 2008.

28. Proks, P.; Antcliff, J. F.; Lippiat, J.; Gloyn, A. L.; Hattersley,
A. T.; Ashcroft, F. M.: Molecular basis of Kir6.2 mutations associated
with neonatal diabetes or neonatal diabetes plus neurological features. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 17539-17544, 2004.

29. Proks, P.; Girard, C.; Ashcroft, F. M.: Functional effects of
KCNJ11 mutations causing neonatal diabetes: enhanced activation by
MgATP. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 2717-2726, 2005.

30. Reyes, S.; Park, S.; Johnson, B. D.; Terzic, A.; Olson, T. M.
: K(ATP) channel Kir6.2 E23K variant overrepresented in human heart
failure is associated with impaired exercise stress response. Hum.
Genet. 126: 779-789, 2009.

31. Ribalet, B.; John, S. A.; Weiss, J. N.: Molecular basis for Kir6.2
channel inhibition by adenine nucleotides. Biophys. J. 84: 266-276,
2003.

32. Scott, L. J.; Mohlke, K. L.; Bonnycastle, L. L.; Willer, C. J.;
Li, Y.; Duren, W. L.; Erdos, M. R.; Stringham, H. M.; Chines, P. S.;
Jackson, A. U.; Prokunina-Olsson, L.; Ding, C.-J.; and 29 others
: A genome-wide association study of type 2 diabetes in Finns detects
multiple susceptibility variants. Science 316: 1341-1345, 2007.

33. Shimomura, K.; Horster, F.; de Wet, H.; Flanagan, S. E.; Ellard,
S.; Hattersley, A. T.; Wolf, N. I.; Ashcroft, F.; Ebinger, F.: A
novel mutation causing DEND syndrome: a treatable channelopathy of
pancreas and brain. Neurology 69: 1342-1349, 2007.

34. Slingerland, A. S.; Hattersley, A. T.: Activating mutations in
the gene encoding Kir6.2 alter fetal and postnatal growth and also
cause neonatal diabetes. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 91: 2782-2788,
2006.

35. Taneja, T. K.; Mankouri, J.; Karnik, R.; Kannan, S.; Smith, A.
J.; Munsey, T.; Christesen, H. B. T.; Beech, D. J.; Sivaprasadarao,
A.: Sar1-GTPase-dependent ER exit of K(ATP) channels revealed by
a mutation causing congenital hyperinsulinism. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18:
2400-2413, 2009.

36. Thomas, P.; Ye, Y.; Lightner, E.: Mutation of the pancreatic
islet inward rectifier Kir6.2 also leads to familial persistent hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemia of infancy. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5: 1809-1812, 1996.

37. Thomas, P. M.; Cote, G. J.; Hallman, D. M.; Mathew, P. M.: Homozygosity
mapping, to chromosome 11p, of the gene for familial persistent hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemia of infancy. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 56: 416-421, 1995.

38. Tornovsky, S.; Crane, A.; Cosgrove, K. E.; Hussain, K.; Lavie,
J.; Heyman, M.; Nesher, Y.; Kuchinski, N.; Ben-Shushan, E.; Shatz,
O.; Nahari, E.; Potikha, T.; and 11 others: Hyperinsulinism of
infancy: novel ABCC8 and KCNJ11 mutations and evidence for additional
locus heterogeneity. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 6224-6234, 2004.

39. Yamada, K.; Ji, J. J.; Yuan, H.; Miki, T.; Sata, S.; Horimoto,
N.; Shimizu, T.; Seino, S.; Inagaki, N.: Protective role of ATP-sensitive
potassium channels in hypoxia-induced generalized seizure. Science 292:
1543-1546, 2001.

40. Yorifuji, T.; Nagashima, K.; Kurokawa, K.; Kawai, M.; Oishi, M.;
Akazawa, Y.; Hosokawa, M.; Yamada, Y.; Inagaki, N.; Nakahata, T.:
The C42R mutation in the Kir6.2 (KCNJ11) gene as a cause of transient
neonatal diabetes, childhood diabetes, or later-onset, apparently
type 2 diabetes mellitus. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 3174-3178,
2005.

41. Zeggini, E.; Weedon, M. N.; Lindgren, C. M.; Frayling, T. M.;
Elliott, K. S.; Lango, H.; Timpson, N. J.; Perry, J. R. B.; Rayner,
N. W.; Freathy, R. M.; Barrett, J. C.; Shields, B.; and 15 others
: Replication of genome-wide association signals in UK samples reveals
risk loci for type 2 diabetes. Science 316: 1336-1341, 2007. Note:
Erratum: Science 317: 1036 only, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 11/10/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/1/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/25/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/2/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/19/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/30/2010
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/27/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/20/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/10/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/22/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/16/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/29/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/27/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 6/20/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/2/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/20/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/28/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/6/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/21/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/16/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/22/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/8/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/2/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/27/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/6/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/11/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/8/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/21/2000
Moyra Smith - updated: 1/31/1997
Perseveranda M. Cagas - updated: 9/23/1996

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 11/13/1995

EDITED terry: 11/13/2012
alopez: 11/15/2011
terry: 11/10/2011
alopez: 9/2/2010
terry: 9/1/2010
wwang: 8/26/2010
terry: 8/25/2010
mgross: 8/10/2010
terry: 8/2/2010
terry: 4/19/2010
wwang: 4/6/2010
terry: 3/30/2010
alopez: 4/27/2009
wwang: 3/30/2009
terry: 3/20/2009
wwang: 12/10/2008
mgross: 8/25/2008
terry: 8/22/2008
carol: 5/16/2008
wwang: 5/16/2008
wwang: 5/1/2008
terry: 4/29/2008
wwang: 4/2/2008
ckniffin: 3/27/2008
alopez: 7/27/2007
terry: 7/24/2007
carol: 6/20/2007
mgross: 4/13/2007
wwang: 3/14/2007
ckniffin: 3/2/2007
carol: 1/25/2007
alopez: 11/21/2006
alopez: 11/20/2006
carol: 9/27/2006
alopez: 8/21/2006
carol: 8/11/2006
alopez: 5/2/2006
terry: 4/28/2006
wwang: 4/7/2006
terry: 4/6/2006
carol: 3/23/2006
carol: 3/22/2006
carol: 3/21/2006
carol: 3/20/2006
carol: 3/17/2006
carol: 3/16/2006
alopez: 7/22/2005
wwang: 7/14/2005
terry: 7/8/2005
wwang: 5/11/2005
wwang: 4/12/2005
carol: 2/17/2005
ckniffin: 2/14/2005
carol: 2/14/2005
terry: 2/3/2005
terry: 2/2/2005
terry: 1/27/2005
carol: 12/3/2004
tkritzer: 12/3/2004
terry: 5/6/2004
mgross: 3/14/2003
terry: 3/11/2003
cwells: 6/12/2001
cwells: 6/11/2001
terry: 6/8/2001
mgross: 4/21/2000
dkim: 12/10/1998
dkim: 12/9/1998
alopez: 10/27/1998
mark: 9/22/1997
terry: 1/31/1997
mark: 1/30/1997
mark: 9/23/1996
terry: 2/6/1996
mark: 11/16/1995

611161	TITLE *611161 KERATIN 80; KRT80
;;KERATIN B20; KB20
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Keratins, such as KRT80, are filament proteins that make up one of the
major structural fibers of epithelial cells (Rogers et al., 2005).

CLONING

Using database analysis to identify keratin genes within the type II
keratin gene domain on chromosome 12, Rogers et al. (2005) identified
KRT80, which they called KB20. The deduced 452-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 50.5 kD. Like other type II keratins, KB20
has N- and C-terminal domains and a central rod domain consisting of 4
alpha-helical regions separated by 3 nonhelical linker sequences.
Northern blot analysis detected weak expression of a 3.5-kb KB20
transcript in tongue, but not skin or in any other tissues or organs
examined.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Rogers et al. (2005) mapped the KRT80 gene
to chromosome 12q13.13.

REFERENCE 1. Rogers, M. A.; Edler, L.; Winter, H.; Langbein, L.; Beckmann, I.;
Schweizer, J.: Characterization of new members of the human type
II keratin gene family and a general evaluation of the keratin gene
domain on chromosome 12q13.13. J. Invest. Derm. 124: 536-544, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/2/2007

EDITED wwang: 07/02/2007

613022	TITLE *613022 OXOGLUTARATE DEHYDROGENASE; OGDH
;;ALPHA-KETOGLUTARATE DEHYDROGENASE; AKGDH;;
E1K
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex is a multienzyme complex
consisting of 3 protein subunits, oxoglutarate dehydrogenase, also known
as alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase or E1k (EC 1.2.4.2.), dihydrolipoyl
succinyltransferase (DLST, or E2k; 126063), and dihydrolipoyl
dehydrogenase (DLD, or E3; 238331). The complex catalyzes a key reaction
in the Krebs tricarboxylic acid cycle (summary by Szabo et al., 1994).

CLONING

Koike et al. (1992) cloned a human OGDH cDNA from a fetal liver cDNA
library. The ORF encodes a presequence of 40 amino acids and a mature
protein of 963 amino acids with a molecular mass of 108,642 daltons. It
is located in mitochondria within the inner membrane/matrix compartment.

GENE STRUCTURE

Koike (1995) found that the human OGDH gene contains 22 exons spanning
approximately 85 kb. All exon/intron splice junctions follow the GT/AG
rule. Primary extension analysis showed that the OGDH transcription
start point is a thymine residue 55 bp upstream from the ATG start
codon. The 5-prime-flanking region lacked canonical TATA or CAAT boxes.

MAPPING

Using 2 human/rodent somatic cell hybrid panels, Szabo et al. (1994)
mapped the OGDH gene to 7p13-p11.2. A second related sequence, possibly
a pseudogene, was identified and mapped to chromosome 10.

Using DNAs from human/rodent somatic cell hybrids in conjunction with
fluorescence in situ hybridization, Koike (1995) assigned the OGDH gene
to the boundary between bands 7p13 and 7p14.

GENE FUNCTION

Oxoglutarate dehydrogenase is a component of the enzyme complex that
catalyzes the conversion of 2-oxoglutarate to succinyl coenzyme A (Koike
et al., 1992).

Szabo et al. (1994) pointed to a possible significance to the finding of
a reduction in the activity of this complex in Alzheimer disease brain
and cultured skin fibroblasts from Alzheimer disease patients.

See 203740 for a discussion of alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase
deficiency.

REFERENCE 1. Koike, K.: The gene encoding human 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase:
structural organization and mapping to chromosome 7p13-p14. Gene 159:
261-266, 1995.

2. Koike, K.; Urata, Y.; Goto, S.: Cloning and nucleotide sequence
of the cDNA encoding human 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (lipoamide). Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 1963-1967, 1992.

3. Szabo, P.; Cai, X.; Ali, G.; Blass, J. P.: Localization of the
gene (OGDH) coding for the E1k component of the alpha-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase complex to chromosome 7p13-p11.2. Genomics 20: 324-326,
1994.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 9/18/2009

EDITED carol: 12/21/2011
carol: 12/8/2011
carol: 9/18/2009

190370	TITLE *190370 TRICHOHYALIN; TCHH
;;THH;;
THL;;
TRHY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Trichohyalin confers mechanical strength to the hair follicle inner root
sheath and to other toughened epithelial tissues, such as the hard
palate and filiform ridges of the tongue, by forming multiple complex
crosslinks with itself and with other structural proteins (Steinert et
al., 2003).

CLONING

Rothnagel and Rogers (1986) isolated trichohyalin protein from sheep
wool follicles. Western blot analysis detected trichohyalin in rat
vibrissae inner root sheaths and in guinea pig and human hair follicles.
Western blot analysis showed that the human protein had an apparent
molecular mass of 220 kD. In rat vibrissae, trichohyalin localized to
granular structures, but not to newly synthesized filaments.

Fietz et al. (1990) obtained a partial cDNA encoding the C-terminal
region of sheep wool follicle trichohyalin. The predicted protein
sequence consists of full and partial repeats of a 23-amino acid
sequence that could form an alpha-helical rod, followed by a C-terminal
domain. In situ hybridization of sheep wool follicles showed that
trichohyalin was expressed in both the inner root sheath and medulla
cells.

Using immunofluorescence microscopy, O'Keefe et al. (1993) found that
trichohyalin was a major component of tongue filiform papillae in humans
and several other mammalian species. It was also expressed in the
ventral matrix of human nail, with weaker staining of the nail plate,
but no staining of the nail bed. Trichohyalin partially colocalized with
filaggrin (FLG; 135940) in human tongue epithelium. Cells of the stratum
corneum in human scalp epidermis contained a proteolytically processed
form of trichohyalin that lacked the C-terminal domain.

Lee et al. (1993) cloned human TCHH, which they called TRHY. The deduced
1,898-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 248 kD. TRHY
has a high number of charged residues, as well as many glutamines. It
was predicted to consist of 9 distinct domains, with a net overall
length of 215 nm. Domain 1 includes 2 putative calcium-binding EF-hand
motifs, and the C-terminal globular domain (domain 9) terminates in 20
residues that are precisely conserved between humans and sheep. Several
other domains have repeats that were predicted to form alpha-helical rod
structures. TRHY has 3 potential phosphorylation sites. Northern blot
analysis of human foreskin epidermis detected a 6.7-kb TRHY transcript.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lee et al. (1993) determined that the TCHH gene contains 3 exons. Exon 2
contains the initiation codon, and the upstream region contains
potential TATA and CAT boxes.

MAPPING

Using a sheep trichohyalin cDNA probe in tritium-labeled in situ
hybridization, Fietz et al. (1992) mapped the human TCHH gene to
chromosome region 1q21.1-q23, probably 1q21.3. Profilaggrin, involucrin,
and loricrin (LOR; 152445) map to the same area, suggesting that the 4
proteins form a novel superfamily of epithelial structural proteins.

By analysis of human-rodent somatic cell hybrids and fluorescence in
situ hybridization, Lee et al. (1993) confirmed the mapping of TCHH to
chromosome 1q21.

GENE FUNCTION

Lee et al. (1993) showed that pig tongue Trhy bound radiolabeled calcium
in vitro as efficiently as calmodulin (CALM1; 114180).

Steinert et al. (2003) stated that trichohyalin is sequentially
subjected to postsynthetic modifications by peptidylarginine deiminases
(see 607934), which convert many of its arginines to citrullines, and by
transglutaminases (see 190195), which introduce intra- and interprotein
chain crosslinks. They characterized the proteins to which trichohyalin
became crosslinked in the inner root sheath of mouse hair follicles.
Trichohyalin initially served as an interfilamentous matrix protein by
becoming crosslinked to itself and to the head and tail domains of the
inner root sheath keratin (see 608245) intermediate filament chains. It
then served as a cross-bridging reinforcement protein of the cornified
cell envelope of the inner root sheath cells by becoming crosslinked to
several barrier proteins, such as involucrin (IVL; 147360). Finally,
trichohyalin provided mechanical strength in the mature structure by
stabilizing the linkages between keratin filaments and the cell
envelope.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the TCHH
gene and hair morphology, see HRM2 (139450).

REFERENCE 1. Fietz, M. J.; Presland, R. B.; Rogers, G. E.: The cDNA-deduced
amino acid sequence for trichohyalin, a differentiation marker in
the hair follicle, contains a 23 amino acid repeat. J. Cell Biol. 102:
1419-1429, 1990.

2. Fietz, M. J.; Rogers, G. E.; Eyre, H. J.; Baker, E.; Callen, D.
F.; Sutherland, G. R.: Mapping of the trichohyalin gene: co-localization
with the profilaggrin, involucrin, and loricrin genes. J. Invest.
Derm. 99: 542-544, 1992.

3. Lee, S.-C.; Kim, I.-G.; Marekov, L. N.; O'Keefe, E. J.; Parry,
D. A. D.; Steinert, P. M.: The structure of human trichohyalin: potential
multiple roles as a functional EF-hand-like calcium-binding protein,
a cornified cell envelope precursor, and an intermediate filament-associated
(cross-linking) protein. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 12164-12176, 1993.

4. Lee, S.-C.; Wang, M.; McBride, O. W.; O'Keefe, E. J.; Kim, I.-G.;
Steinert, P. M.: Human trichohyalin gene is clustered with the genes
for other epidermal structural proteins and calcium-binding proteins
at chromosomal locus 1q21. J. Invest. Derm. 100: 65-68, 1993.

5. O'Keefe, E. J.; Hamilton, E. H.; Lee, S.-C.; Steinert, P.: Trichohyalin:
a structural protein of hair, tongue, nail, and epidermis. J. Invest.
Derm. 101: 65S-71S, 1993.

6. Rothnagel, J. A.; Rogers, G. E.: Trichohyalin, in intermediate
filament-associated protein of the hair follicle. J. Cell Biol. 102:
1419-1429, 1986.

7. Steinert, P. M.; Parry, D. A. D.; Marekov, L. N.: Trichohyalin
mechanically strengthens the hair follicle: multiple cross-bridging
roles in the inner root sheath. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 41409-41419,
2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/6/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/8/2009

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/4/1993

EDITED wwang: 01/11/2010
terry: 1/6/2010
mgross: 12/8/2009
terry: 12/8/2009
carol: 8/17/1998
carol: 12/16/1993
carol: 3/11/1993
carol: 1/4/1993

611359	TITLE *611359 ACTIVATING MOLECULE IN BECLIN 1-REGULATED AUTOPHAGY; AMBRA1
;;DDB1- AND CUL4-ASSOCIATED FACTOR 3; DCAF3;;
KIAA1736
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated hippocampus cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned KIAA1736. RT-PCR ELISA detected
nearly uniform expression in all adult and fetal tissues examined and in
all adult brain regions examined.

Fimia et al. (2007) cloned mouse Ambra1, which encodes a deduced
1,300-amino acid protein with an N-terminal WD40 domain. By database
analysis, they identified and cloned human AMBRA1, which encodes a
deduced 1,269-amino acid protein. Ambra1 was expressed throughout
development in mice, with strong staining in the neuroepithelium.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis and coimmunoprecipitation assays, Fimia et
al. (2007) showed that a central region of human AMBRA1 bound BECN1
(604378), a component of the class III phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase
complex (VPS34, or PIK3C3; 602609) that regulates autophagosome
formation. Downregulation of AMBRA1 expression in a human fibrosarcoma
cell line decreased autophagy and the rate of cell proliferation.
Conversely, overexpression of AMBRA1 increased autophagy and the rate of
cell proliferation. AMBRA1 downregulation also significantly reduced the
ability of BECN1 to interact with VPS34.

MAPPING

The Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the AMBRA1 gene to
chromosome 11 (TMAP RH28670).

ANIMAL MODEL

Using a large-scale mutagenesis approach, Fimia et al. (2007) created
mice with a mutation in the Ambra1 gene. Homozygosity of the mutation
was embryonic lethal, with neural tube defects detected as
midbrain/hindbrain exencephaly and/or spina bifida. Defects were
associated with autophagy impairment, accumulation of ubiquitinated
proteins, unbalanced cell proliferation, and excessive apoptotic cell
death. Fimia et al. (2007) concluded that AMBRA1 is an essential element
regulating autophagy, cell growth, and cell death required for neural
development.

REFERENCE 1. Fimia, G. M.; Stoykova, A.; Romagnoli, A.; Giunta, L.; Di Bartolomeo,
S.; Nardacci, R.; Corazzari, M.; Fuoco, C.; Ucar, A.; Schwartz, P.;
Gruss, P.; Piacentini, M.; Chowdhury, K.; Cecconi, F.: Ambra1 regulates
AUTOphagy and development of the nervous system. Nature 447: 1121-1125,
2007.

2. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Hattori, A.; Kondo, Y.; Okumura, K.; Ohara,
O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes.
XIX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which
code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 347-355, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/20/2007

EDITED alopez: 03/27/2012
carol: 9/19/2011
carol: 7/8/2010
wwang: 10/26/2007
carol: 8/20/2007

176420	TITLE *176420 PREGNANCY ZONE PROTEIN; PZP
;;COMPLEMENT COMPONENT 3- AND PREGNANCY ZONE PROTEIN-LIKE ALPHA-2-MACROGLOBULIN
DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 6; CPAMD6;;
C3- AND PZP-LIKE ALPHA-2-MACROGLOBULIN DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 6
DESCRIPTION 
GENE FUNCTION

Pregnancy zone protein (PZP), one of the major pregnancy-associated
plasma proteins (see 260100 for another example), was described by
Smithies (1959), who used zone-electrophoresis in starch gels. PZP is a
prominent constituent of late-pregnancy sera. In healthy, nonpregnant
females and in males, PZP is present in trace amounts only: females,
10-30 mg/l; males, less than 10 mg/l. During pregnancy, PZP levels may
reach 1000-1400 mg/l just before term.

Sottrup-Jensen et al. (1984) showed that PZP closely resembles
alpha-2-macroglobulin (103950) in structure. Both have a quaternary
structure of 2 covalently bound 180-kD subunits which are further
noncovalently assembled into a tetramer of 720 kD. Amino acid sequence
of the 2 proteins are extensively homologous.

MAPPING

Marynen et al. (1989) used in situ hybridization and somatic cell hybrid
DNA analysis to demonstrate that PZP, alpha-2-macroglobulin, and an
alpha-2-macroglobulin pseudogene mapped to human chromosome 12p13-p12.2.

REFERENCE 1. Marynen, P.; Zhang, J.; Devriendt, K.; Cassiman, J.-J.: Alpha-2-macroglobulin,
pregnancy zone protein and an alpha-2-macroglobulin pseudogene map
to chromosome 12p12.2-13. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51:
1040 only, 1989.

2. Smithies, O.: Zone electrophoresis in starch gels and its application
to studies of serum proteins. Adv. Protein Chem. 14: 65-113, 1959.

3. Sottrup-Jensen, L.; Folkersen, J.; Kristensen, T.; Tack, B. F.
: Partial primary structure of human pregnancy zone protein: extensive
sequence homology with human alpha-2-macroglobulin. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 81: 7353-7357, 1984.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED alopez: 09/14/2010
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
carol: 12/12/1989
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 6/30/1989
root: 5/31/1989

603189	TITLE *603189 SYNTAXIN 5; STX5
;;STX5A
DESCRIPTION In eukaryotic cells, vesicle docking is thought to be regulated in part
by the specific interactions of a vesicle-associated membrane protein
(VAMP), or synaptobrevin (e.g., 185880), with the presynaptic plasma
membrane proteins syntaxin and SNAP25 (600322). By PCR using
oligonucleotides based on the sequence of rat syntaxin-5, Ravichandran
and Roche (1997) isolated a partial cDNA encoding human syntaxin-5. They
used the partial cDNA to clone a full-length human syntaxin-5 cDNA from
an EBV-transformed lymphocyte cell cDNA library. The predicted 301-amino
acid human protein is 96% identical to rat syntaxin-5. In vitro, human
syntaxin-5 bound efficiently to rat VAMP2 (see SYB2; 185881) but not to
human SNAP25.

To fuse transport vesicles with target membranes, proteins of the SNARE
complex must be located on both the vesicle and the target membrane. In
yeast, 4 integral membrane proteins, Sed5, Bos1, Sec22 (see 604029), and
Bet1 (605456) each are believed to contribute a single helix to form the
SNARE complex that is needed for transport from endoplasmic reticulum to
Golgi. This generates a 4-helix bundle, which ultimately mediates the
actual fusion event. Parlati et al. (2000) explored how the anchoring
arrangement of the 4 helices affects their ability to mediate fusion.
Parlati et al. (2000) reconstituted 2 populations of phospholipid
bilayer vesicles, with the individual SNARE proteins distributed in all
possible combinations between them. Of the 8 nonredundant permutations
of 4 subunits distributed over 2 vesicle populations, only 1 resulted in
membrane fusion. Fusion occurred only when the v-SNARE Bet1 is on 1
membrane and the syntaxin heavy chain Sed5 and its 2 light chains, Bos1
and Sec22, are on the other membrane, where they form a functional
t-SNARE. Thus, each SNARE protein is topologically restricted by design
to function either as a v-SNARE or as part of a t-SNARE complex.

Windpassinger et al. (2003) observed that Human Genome Project sequence
data indicated that the STX5A gene is located on 11q12-q14, the region
to which the locus for Silver spastic paraplegia syndrome (270685) had
been mapped. They excluded STX5A as the mutant gene, as no mutations
were found on sequence analysis of at least 2 affected individuals from
each of 4 different families and 1 healthy control.

REFERENCE 1. Parlati, F.; McNew, J. A.; Fukuda, R.; Miller, R.; Sollner, T.
H.; Rothman, J. E.: Topological restriction of SNARE-dependent membrane
fusion. Nature 407: 194-198, 2000.

2. Ravichandran, V.; Roche, P. A.: Cloning and identification of
human syntaxin 5 as a synaptobrevin/VAMP binding protein. J. Molec.
Neurosci. 8: 159-161, 1997.

3. Windpassinger, C.; Wagner, K.; Petek, E.; Fischer, R.; Auer-Grumbach,
M.: Refinement of the 'Silver syndrome locus' on chromosome 11q12-q14
in four families and exclusion of eight candidate genes. Hum. Genet. 114:
99-109, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/9/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/13/2000

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 10/22/1998

EDITED mgross: 01/03/2011
tkritzer: 12/16/2003
terry: 12/9/2003
mgross: 12/6/2000
alopez: 9/13/2000
psherman: 10/26/1998
psherman: 10/23/1998
psherman: 10/22/1998

604704	TITLE *604704 BREAST CANCER ANTIESTROGEN RESISTANCE 3; BCAR3
;;SH2 DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 3B; SH2D3B;;
NOVEL SH2-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; NSP2
DESCRIPTION In breast cancer, the antiestrogen tamoxifen has been prescribed for
both primary treatment and the treatment of advanced metastatic disease.
Although the drug induces remission in most patients with estrogen
receptor (see 133430)-positive disease, all patients eventually develop
resistance. To unravel the molecular mechanisms of antiestrogen
resistance, van Agthoven et al. (1998) applied an insertional
mutagenesis strategy to a breast cancer cell line. Infected cells were
subjected to tamoxifen selection, and the resistant clones were screened
for a common integration site linked with antiestrogen resistance. By
screening a human testis cDNA library with the integration site-specific
probe, van Agthoven et al. (1998) obtained a cDNA encoding BCAR3 (breast
cancer antiestrogen resistance-3). The deduced 825-amino acid BCAR3
protein contains a putative Src homology 2 (SH2) domain and sequences
homologous to yeast CDC48 (see 601023). Northern blot analysis detected
abundant expression of a 3.4-kb BCAR3 transcript in heart, placenta,
skeletal muscle, spleen, prostate, testis, ovary, small intestine,
colon, fetal kidney, and several cancer cell lines, but not in
nonmalignant breast tissue; a 6-kb BCAR3 transcript was also detected in
skeletal muscle and heart.

REFERENCE 1. van Agthoven, T.; van Agthoven, T. L. A.; Dekker, A.; van der Spek,
P. J.; Vreede, L.; Dorssers, L. C. J.: Identification of BCAR3 by
a random search for genes involved in antiestrogen resistance of human
breast cancer cells. EMBO J. 17: 2799-2808, 1998.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 3/20/2000

EDITED alopez: 09/14/2011
mgross: 3/23/2000
mgross: 3/21/2000
mgross: 3/20/2000

606555	TITLE *606555 TRIPARTITE MOTIF-CONTAINING PROTEIN 9; TRIM9
;;SNAP25-INTERACTING RING FINGER, RAT, HOMOLOG OF; SPRING;;
KIAA0282
DESCRIPTION TRIM proteins are composed of 3 zinc-binding domains, a RING, a B-box
type 1, and a B-box type 2, followed by a coiled-coil region. They are
involved in development and cell growth.

CLONING

By EST database searching for B-box-containing proteins, Reymond et al.
(2001) identified 37 TRIM members, including 3 isoforms of TRIM9.
Northern blot analysis revealed high expression of a 4.4-kb TRIM9
transcript in brain. Fluorescence microscopy demonstrated expression of
TRIM9 in cytoplasmic speckles. Interaction mating analysis indicated
that TRIM9 can form a homodimer.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a rat hippocampal/cortical cDNA library
with mouse SNAP25b (see 600322) as bait, Li et al. (2001) isolated a
cDNA encoding rat Spring (SNAP25-interacting ring finger protein). The
deduced 710-amino acid rat protein is 98% identical to TRIM9. Expression
array analysis showed exclusive expression and wide distribution in
fetal and adult human brain

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Reymond et al. (2001) mapped the TRIM9
gene to chromosome 14q21-q24.

REFERENCE 1. Li, Y.; Chin, L.-S.; Weigel, C.; Li, L.: Spring, a novel RING
finger protein that regulates synaptic vesicle exocytosis. J. Biol.
Chem. 276: 40824-40833, 2001.

2. Reymond, A.; Meroni, G.; Fantozzi, A.; Merla, G.; Cairo, S.; Luzi,
L.; Riganelli, D.; Zanaria, E.; Messali, S.; Cainarca, S.; Guffanti,
A.; Minucci, S.; Pelicci, P. G.; Ballabio, A.: The tripartite motif
family identifies cell compartments. EMBO J. 20: 2140-2151, 2001.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/13/2001

EDITED mgross: 12/13/2001

605904	TITLE *605904 PDZ AND LIM DOMAIN PROTEIN 5; PDLIM5
;;ENIGMA-LIKE LIM DOMAIN PROTEIN;;
ENIGMA HOMOLOG; ENH
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

LIM domains are cysteine-rich double zinc fingers composed of 50 to 60
amino acids that are involved in protein-protein interactions. LIM
domain-containing proteins are scaffolds for the formation of
multiprotein complexes. The proteins are involved in cytoskeleton
organization, cell lineage specification, organ development, and
oncogenesis. Enigma family proteins (see ENIGMA; 605900) possess a
100-amino acid PDZ domain in the N terminus and 1 to 3 LIM domains in
the C terminus.

CLONING

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a rat brain cDNA library with the
regulatory domain of rat protein kinase C-beta-1 (PRKCB1; 176970) as
bait, Kuroda et al. (1996) isolated a cDNA encoding Enh. Yeast 2-hybrid
analysis showed that the LIM domains of Enh and human ENIGMA associate
with varying protein kinase C isoforms. By PCR analysis of a fetal brain
cDNA library with primers based on a partial cDNA homologous to rat Enh,
Ueki et al. (1999) isolated a full-length cDNA encoding human ENH.
Sequence analysis predicted that the 596-amino acid protein, which is
88% identical to rat Enh, has 2 pro/ser-rich regions and 3 LIM domains.
Northern blot analysis detected a 1.9-kb transcript that was
predominantly expressed in heart and skeletal muscle and a 5.6-kb
transcript that was expressed in all tissues tested.

Maeno-Hikichi et al. (2003) found that the ENH protein was expressed in
various regions of the brain, most notably hippocampi, cortex, thalamus,
hypothalamus, amygdala, and cerebellum. In hippocampal neurons, ENH
appeared to be localized in presynaptic nerve terminals.

Niederlander et al. (2004) stated that the full-length human ENH1
isoform contains an N-terminal PDZ domain and 3 C-terminal LIM domains.
ENH2, ENH3, and ENH4 are splice variants that encode progressively
shorter proteins, with ENH4 containing 215 amino acids. All transcripts
contain exons 1 through 3, which encodes the PDZ domain, and exons 8 and
9. Northern blot analysis of several human and mouse tissues detected a
1.9-kb ENH4 transcript in skeletal and cardiac muscle only. Niederlander
et al. (2004) used a probe that did not differentiate between ENH
isoforms for Western blot analysis of human cardiac and skeletal muscle.
In skeletal muscle, they found proteins with apparent molecular masses
of 29, 33, and 40 kD, which were predicted to represent ENH4, ENH3, and
ENH2, respectively. In cardiac muscle, they detected proteins with
apparent molecular masses of 33 and 64 kD, representing ENH3 and ENH1,
respectively. Only Enh3 and Enh4 were detected in mouse cardiac and
skeletal muscle, respectively. Endogenous mouse Enh and
fluorescence-tagged human ENH4 were expressed at Z discs of mouse
striated muscle.

Cheng et al. (2010) stated that 4 splice variants of mouse Enh had been
previously identified, and they cloned 5 additional variants. RT-PCR
detected expression of the Enh2 and Enh4 variants in mouse skeletal
muscle only.

GENE STRUCTURE

Niederlander et al. (2004) determined that the PDLIM5 gene contains 16
exons and spans 210.8 kb.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis, Ueki et al. (1999) mapped the ENH gene
to 4q22.

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunocytochemistry, Nakagawa et al. (2000) demonstrated that rat
Enh colocalizes with alpha-actinin-2 (Actn2; 102573) in the Z disc
region of sarcomeres of rat neonatal cardiomyocytes. GST pull-down
assays showed that the interaction occurs through the PDZ domain of Enh.

Through binding and immunoprecipitation assays on adult rat cortical
tissue, Maeno-Hikichi et al. (2003) showed that ENH interacts
specifically with protein kinase C-epsilon (PRKCE; 176975) and the C
terminus of the N-type calcium channel alpha-1B subunit (CACNA1B;
601012) to form a macromolecular complex. Functional studies in Xenopus
oocytes indicated that expression of ENH resulted in increased rapid and
specific modulation of N-type calcium channels by PKCE. The authors
concluded that through interactions with a common adaptor protein, the
formation of a kinase-substrate complex is the molecular basis for the
specificity and efficiency of cellular signaling.

Using an in vitro protein blot overlay, Niederlander et al. (2004) found
that recombinant human ENH4 interacted with 3 major proteins from mouse
skeletal muscle. They identified 1 of these binding partners as
alpha-actinin (see 102575).

ANIMAL MODEL

Cheng et al. (2010) found that Enh-null mice were indistinguishable from
wildtype littermates. However, by 1 month of age, Enh-null hearts showed
elevated expression of fetal genes and reduced expression of the Z-line
proteins calsarcin-1 (MYOZ2; 605602) and Cypher (LDB3; 605906) short
isoform (CypherS). By 3 months of age, Enh-null mice developed
cardiomyopathy characterized by enlargement of the left ventricle,
impaired systolic and diastolic heart function, and widened Z-lines.
Cardiomyopathy in Enh-null hearts was progressive, but it did not result
in sudden cardiac death. Heart-specific Enh deletion resulted in a
similar phenotype. Myofibril isolation, sucrose fractionation, and in
vitro protein pull-down assays demonstrated that Enh localized at the
Z-line in a protein complex with CypherS and calsarcin-1. Cheng et al.
(2010) concluded that Enh has a role in maintaining the integrity of the
Z-line.

REFERENCE 1. Cheng, H.; Kimura, K.; Peter, A. K.; Cui, L.; Ouyang, K.; Shen,
T.; Liu, Y.; Gu, Y.; Dalton, N. D.; Evans, S. M.; Knowlton, K. U.;
Peterson, K. L.; Chen, J.: Loss of enigma homolog protein results
in dilated cardiomyopathy. Circ. Res. 107: 348-356, 2010.

2. Kuroda, S.; Tokunaga, C.; Kiyohara, Y.; Higuchi, O.; Konishi, H.;
Mizuno, K.; Gill, G. N.; Kikkawa, U.: Protein-protein interaction
of zinc finger LIM domains with protein kinase C. J. Biol. Chem. 271:
31029-31032, 1996.

3. Maeno-Hikichi, Y.; Chang, S.; Matsumura, K.; Lai, M.; Lin, H.;
Nakagawa, N.; Kuroda, S.; Zhang, J.: A PKC-epsilon-ENH-channel complex
specifically modulates N-type Ca2+ channels. Nature Neurosci. 6:
468-475, 2003.

4. Nakagawa, N.; Hoshijima, M.; Oyasu, M.; Saito, N.; Tanizawa, K.;
Kuroda, S.: ENH, containing PDZ and LIM domains, heart/skeletal muscle-specific
protein, associates with cytoskeletal proteins through the PDZ domain. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 272: 505-512, 2000.

5. Niederlander, N.; Fayein, N. A.; Auffray, C.; Pomies, P.: Characterization
of a new human isoform of the enigma homolog family specifically expressed
in skeletal muscle. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 325: 1304-1311,
2004.

6. Ueki, N.; Seki, N.; Yano, K.; Masuho, Y.; Saito, T.; Muramatsu,
M.: Isolation, tissue expression, and chromosomal assignment of a
human LIM protein gene, showing homology to rat Enigma homologue (ENH). J.
Hum. Genet. 44: 256-260, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/19/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/22/2003

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/3/2001

EDITED mgross: 11/09/2012
mgross: 11/9/2012
terry: 10/19/2012
terry: 7/30/2008
terry: 3/11/2005
cwells: 5/27/2003
ckniffin: 5/22/2003
mgross: 5/3/2001

610520	TITLE *610520 CD300 ANTIGEN-LIKE FAMILY, MEMBER G; CD300LG
;;TRIGGERING RECEPTOR EXPRESSED ON MYELOID CELLS 4; TREM4;;
CLM9;;
NEPMUCIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the CD300 (see 606786)-like (CD300L) family, such as CD300LG,
are widely expressed on hematopoietic cells. All CD300L proteins are
type I cell surface glycoproteins that contain a single immunoglobulin
(Ig) V-like domain (Takatsu et al., 2006).

CLONING

By searching EST databases for novel Ig domain-containing Fc receptors
for IgA (e.g., FCAMR; 605484), Takatsu et al. (2006) identified mouse
and human CD300LG. Both genes encode at least 4 isoforms. The predicted
human proteins contain 222, 233, 298, and 332 amino acids, and all 4
have a signal peptide, an Ig domain, a transmembrane domain, and
cytoplasmic tail that is shorter than that found in the mouse Cd300lg
isoforms. Northern blot analysis detected a major 3-kb CD300LG
transcript that was highly expressed in human heart, skeletal muscle,
and placenta and weakly expressed in most other tissues examined; no
expression was detected in brain. Immunohistochemical and immunoelectron
microscopy analysis demonstrated expression of mouse Cd300lg on apical
and basolateral plasma membranes of capillary endothelial cells.

Umemoto et al. (2006) cloned mouse Cd300lg, which they called nepmucin.
All 4 isoforms of mouse nepmucin contain a central mucin (see
158340)-like domain. Nepmucin protein was expressed on the luminal
surface of high endothelial venules (HEVs) in lymph nodes, but not on
HEVs of Peyer patches.

GENE FUNCTION

Using assays in canine kidney cells, Takatsu et al. (2006) demonstrated
that human CD300LG was transcytosed in a bidirectional manner.
Immunofluorescence microscopy showed that HeLa cells expressing mouse or
human CD300LG could take up human IgA2 and mouse IgM efficiently,
suggesting that IgA and IgM may be candidate CD300LG ligands.

Umemoto et al. (2006) found that the mucin-like domain of mouse nepmucin
mediated L-selectin (SELL; 153240)-dependent lymphocyte rolling under
physiologic conditions. Under static conditions, nepmucin bound
lymphocytes through its Ig domain, and it promoted shear-resistant
lymphocyte binding in combination with Icam1 (147840) under flow
conditions.

GENE STRUCTURE

Takatsu et al. (2006) determined that the CD300LG gene contains 9 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Takatsu et al. (2006) mapped the CD300LG
gene to chromosome 17q21. They mapped the mouse gene to chromosome 11D.

REFERENCE 1. Takatsu, H.; Hase, K.; Ohmae, M.; Ohshima, S.; Hashimoto, K.; Taniura,
N.; Yamamoto, A.; Ohno, H.: CD300 antigen like family member G: a
novel Ig receptor like protein exclusively expressed on capillary
endothelium. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 348: 183-191, 2006.

2. Umemoto, E.; Tanaka, T.; Kanda, H.; Jin, S.; Tohya, K.; Otani,
K.; Matsutani, T.; Matsumoto, M.; Ebisuno, Y.; Jang, M. H.; Fukuda,
M.; Hirata, T.; Miyasaka, M.: Nepmucin, a novel HEV sialomucin, mediates
L-selectin-dependent lymphocyte adhesion under flow. J. Exp. Med. 203:
1603-1614, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 02/15/2007

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/25/2006

EDITED mgross: 02/15/2007
carol: 1/19/2007
carol: 1/17/2007
mgross: 10/25/2006

615416	TITLE *615416 BASIC HELIX-LOOP-HELIX FAMILY, MEMBER A9; BHLHA9
;;BASIC HELIX-LOOP-HELIX FACTOR, CLASS F, 42; BHLHF42
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins are transcription factors that
regulate embryonic development. They are characterized by a basic domain
that binds to E-box DNA and a helix-loop-helix domain that facilitates
interactions with other protein subunits. Class F bHLH transcription
factors, such as BHLHA9, have an additional COE (collier/OLF/EBF) domain
(see EBF1, 164343) that contributes to dimerization and DNA binding
(review by Jones, 2004).

CLONING

Klopocki et al. (2012) identified BHLHA9 as the only gene within an
11.8-kb minimal critical region on chromosome 17p for microduplications
in patients with split-hand/foot malformation with long bone deficiency
(SHFLD3; 612576). In situ hybridization of embryonic mouse and zebrafish
detected Bhlha9 expression limited to the distal limb bud mesenchyme
underlying the apical ectodermal ridge, a structure that functions with
the underlying progress zone in cell signaling required for
proliferation and limb growth.

GENE STRUCTURE

Klopocki et al. (2012) determined that the BHLHA9 gene contains a single
coding exon.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Klopocki et al. (2012) mapped the BHLHA9
gene to chromosome 17p13.3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using morpholinos directed against zebrafish Bhlha9, Klopocki et al.
(2012) found that knockdown of Bhlha9 resulted in massive truncation of
pectoral fins. Bhlha9 was not required for the initial induction of
pectoral fins.

REFERENCE 1. Jones, S.: An overview of the basic helix-loop-helix proteins. Genome
Biol. 5: 226, 2004. Note: Electronic Article.

2. Klopocki, E.; Lohan, S.; Doelken, S. C.; Stricker, S.; Ockeloen,
C. W.; Thiele de Aguiar, R. S.; Lezirovitz, K.; Netto, R. C. M.; Jamsheer,
A.; Shah, H.; Kurth, I.; Habenicht, R.; and 11 others: Duplications
of BHLHA9 are associated with ectrodactyly and tibia hemimelia inherited
in non-Mendelian fashion. J. Med. Genet. 49: 119-125, 2012.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/16/2013

EDITED mgross: 09/16/2013

613890	TITLE *613890 3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE 2; HSD3B2
;;3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE/DELTA-ISOMERASE, TYPE II;;
3-@BETA-HSD, ADRENAL AND GONADAL TYPE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

3-Beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase catalyzes the oxidation and
isomerization of delta-5-3-beta-hydroxysteroid precursors into
delta-4-ketosteroids, thus leading to the formation of all classes of
steroid hormones. The enzyme also catalyzes the interconversion of
3-beta-hydroxy- and 3-keto-5-alpha-androstane steroids. HSD3B2 is
expressed almost exclusively in adrenals and gonads, whereas HSD3B1
(109715) is expressed predominantly in placenta and skin (summary by
Rheaume et al., 1991).

CLONING

Rheaume et al. (1991) isolated and characterized a 3-beta-HSD type II
(HSD3B2) cDNA from a human adrenal cDNA library. The deduced 371-amino
acid protein shares 93.5% sequence homology with HSD3B1 (109715).

Doi et al. (2010) found that human HSD3B1 and HSD3B2 have 93.6% sequence
identity, including the 5-prime and 3-prime untranslated regions. HSD3B
subtype-specific quantitative RT-PCR analysis of mouse adrenal gland
tissues revealed that expression of mouse Hsd3b6, which is the
functional counterpart of HSD3B1, was considerably enriched in zona
glomerulosa cells of the adrenal gland, whereas expression of mouse
Hsd3b1, which is the functional counterpart of HSD3B2, was predominantly
expressed in zona fasciculata cells.

Bain et al. (1993) pointed out that 4 isoforms of the enzyme, and
presumably 4 genes, have been identified in the mouse. The possibility
of additional genes in the human was suggested.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lachance et al. (1991) determined that the HSD3B2 gene contains 4 exons.

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunohistochemistry, Goto et al. (2006) analyzed sections of
adrenal cortex from 121 human fetuses and demonstrated synthesis of
cortisol much earlier than previously documented, associated with
transient expression of the nuclear receptor NGFIB (NR4A1; 139139) and
its regulatory target, HSD3B2. Cortisol synthesis was maximal at 8 to 9
weeks postconception under the regulation of ACTH; negative feedback was
apparent at the anterior pituitary corticotrophs. ACTH also stimulated
the adrenal gland to secrete androstenedione and testosterone. Goto et
al. (2006) concluded that this represents a distinctive mechanism for
normal human development in which cortisol production, determined by
transient NGFIB and HSD3B2 expression, provides feedback at the anterior
pituitary to modulate androgen biosynthesis and safeguard normal female
sexual differentiation.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Berube et al. (1989, 1989) demonstrated that
the gene for 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/isomerase is located on
the 1p13 band. By in situ hybridization, Morrison et al. (1991, 1991)
refined the localization to 1p13.1.

Rheaume et al. (1992) demonstrated cosegregation of the BglII RFLP A1
allele of the type I 3-beta-HSD gene (HSD3B1) (Rheaume et al., 1991)
with a point mutation in the type II gene (613890.0001); thus, the 2
HSD3B genes are probably closely linked in the 1p13-p11 band.

Bain et al. (1993) demonstrated that the genes encoding the gonadal and
nongonadal forms of 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase are encoded by
closely linked genes on mouse chromosome 3. They are located within a
segment that is conserved on human chromosome 1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 3 patients with classic 3-beta-HSD deficiency from 2 apparently
unrelated pedigrees, Rheaume et al. (1992) described the nucleotide
sequence of 2 highly homologous genes encoding 3-beta-HSD isoenzymes,
types I (HSD3B1; 109715) and II (HSD3B2). No mutation was detected in
the HSD3B1 gene, which is expressed mainly in the placenta and
peripheral tissues. Both nonsense and frameshift mutations were found,
however, in the HSD3B2 gene.

Simard et al. (1996) provided a comprehensive review of the molecular
biology and genetics of this gene family.

HISTORY

Cravioto et al. (1986) suggested the existence of at least 2 3-beta-HSD
isoenzymes under separate genetic determination. Stalvey et al. (1987)
found that thermostability of 3-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase-isomerase in testes and adrenal glands from several inbred
lines of mice and feral mice was correlated in the 2 tissues. They
suggested that the testicular and adrenal forms are encoded by the same
structural gene, but that expression of enzyme activity is independently
controlled in the 2 glands since there was no correlation of
quantitative variation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, TRP171TER

In classic cases of 3-beta-HSD deficiency (201810) in 2 related families
from the same village in eastern Switzerland, Rheaume et al. (1992)
identified a G-to-A transition in exon 4 of both alleles, converting
codon 171 (TGG) encoding trp into a TAG-stop codon (W171X). Mutation was
predicted to result in a truncated protein of 169 amino acids (excluding
the first met) instead of the normal 371 amino acids of the type II
3-beta-HSD protein. One of these families, extensively described by
Zachmann et al. (1979), had severe salt-wasting. There was no
virilization in the proposita. Her older brother died at the age of 4
weeks with clinical signs of a salt-losing crisis. He was incompletely
masculinized and was found to have marked enlargement of the adrenals at
autopsy. At puberty the proposita showed lack of spontaneous breast
development and absence of a rise in serum estradiol following
administration of human menopausal gonadotropin, thus suggesting that
the defect was also present in the ovaries.

.0002
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, 1-BP INS

In a 34-year-old American male with 3-beta-HSD deficiency (201810),
Rheaume et al. (1992) found compound heterozygosity for the W171X
mutation (613890.0001) and another frameshift mutation resulting from
insertion of 1 bp, a C, between codons 186 and 187. They referred to the
mutation as 186/insC/187. The parents were not consanguineous. One male
sib with ambiguous genitalia and enlarged adrenal glands died of
respiratory distress at 2 days of age. A female paternal first cousin
with mildly ambiguous external genitalia died of diarrhea and vomiting
at the age of 2 months. The autopsy showed hyperpigmented skin and
markedly enlarged adrenal glands. Spermatogenesis was adequate in the
index case since he had fathered 2 children; one died from congenital
malformations and the other was found to be heterozygous for the
186/insC/187 mutation. The patient had marked loss of salt as well as
hypospadias and gynecomastia at puberty. Hypospadias had been noted at
the age of 1 month when the patient was found in a critically dehydrated
condition. During the first 13 years of life until replacement therapy
was initiated, the patient was admitted to hospital on 12 occasions with
adrenal insufficiency with electrolyte imbalance.

.0003
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, VAL248ASN

In a male pseudohermaphrodite with salt-wasting classic 3-beta-HSD
deficiency congenital adrenal hyperplasia (201810), Chang et al. (1993)
found in exon 4 of the HSD3B2 gene a missense mutation at codon 248, GTC
(val) was converted to AAC (asn), followed by a frameshift mutation at
codon 249 in which CGA (arg) was changed to TA, resulting in the stop
codon TAG (613890.0004). The patient, a Mexican Hispanic, was thought to
be homozygous for this unusual mutation, the genesis of which was not
understood.

.0004
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, ARG249TER

See 613890.0003 and Chang et al. (1993).

.0005
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, ALA10GLU

Alos et al. (2000) described 2 French-Canadian patients from 2 unrelated
families who presented with severe salt-wasting HSD3B deficiency
(201810) in infancy. Although the diagnosis was considered clinically,
plasma steroid profiles were confusing. Alos et al. (2000) directly
sequenced DNA fragments generated by PCR amplification of the 4 exons,
exon-intron boundaries, and the 5-prime-flanking regions of the HSD3B2
gene. Sequencing of exon 2 revealed a C-to-A transversion in both
alleles of both cases, resulting in an ala10-to-glu substitution (GCA to
GAA). This ala is highly conserved in the vertebrate HSD3B gene family
and is located in the putative NAD-binding domain of the enzyme. The
mutant HSD3B2 enzyme exhibited no detectable activity in intact
transfected Ad293 cells. Both homozygous patients shared the same
haplotype, spanning approximately 3.3 cM surrounding the HSD3B2 gene,
consistent with a founder effect for this missense mutation. The 46,XY
patient presented with ambiguous genitalia at birth and underwent normal
masculinization at puberty, but was azoospermic at 18.5 years of age.
The 46,XX patient presented progressive breast development, menarche,
and evidence of progesterone secretion.

.0006
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, TER373CYS

In a child with nonclassic presentation of 3-beta-HSD deficiency
(201810) causing premature sexual hair growth and mild growth
acceleration in childhood, Pang et al. (2002) found compound
heterozygosity for an A-to-C transversion at nucleotide 7468 in exon 4
of the HSD3B2 gene resulting in a non-stop mutation (ter373 to cys,
X373C) on the maternal allele, and a glu142-to-lys mutation on the
paternal allele (613890.0007). The X373C mutation resulted in an open
reading frame and an HSD3B2 protein containing 467 amino acid residues,
compared with the 372 amino acid residues of wildtype protein. Enzyme
activity in intact cells was decreased to 27% of wildtype by the X373C
mutant enzyme. LH (see 152780) response to an LHRH (152760) analog
stimulation in the pubertal female with the X373C/E142K genotype was
comparable to that of control females.

.0007
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, GLU142LYS

In a patient with mild 3-beta-HSD deficiency (201810), Pang et al.
(2002) detected compound heterozygosity for an X373C mutation
(613890.0006) on one allele, and a glu142-to-lys (E142K) mutation on the
other, which resulted from a C-to-A transversion in exon 4 of the HSD3B2
gene. The patient carried this mutation on the maternal allele.

.0008
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, PRO222THR

In a patient with salt-wasting 3-beta-HSD (201810) from Eastern European
Jewish parents with no family history of consanguinity, Pang et al.
(2002) found a homozygous single-nucleotide substitution at nucleotide
7031 in exon 4 of the HSD3B2 gene, which resulted in a pro-to-thr amino
acid substitution at codon 222 (P222T). In cells transfected with the
mutant protein, no enzyme activity was detected.

.0009
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, THR259MET

In 2 French sibs with salt-wasting 3-beta-HSD deficiency (201810),
Moisan et al. (1999) found a heterozygous C-to-T transition in exon 4 of
the HSD3B2 gene that converted codon 259 from thr to met (T259M). A
frameshift mutation was found on the other allele (613890.0010). The
elder sib was a male with perineal hypospadias with palpable testes in a
bifid scrotum. The younger sib, a female, had normal external genitalia
at birth.

Zhang et al. (2000) found this mutation in homozygosity in a male
pseudohermaphrodite with labial scrotal folds, microphallus, chordee,
and fourth degree hypospadias. The patient was the child of
nonconsanguineous Taiwanese parents.

.0010
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, 1-BP DEL, 867G

Moisan et al. (1999) found a frameshift mutation in the HSD3B2 gene,
867delG, in 2 French sibs with salt-wasting 3-beta-HSD deficiency
(201810). The mutation was predicted to result in a truncated protein of
299 amino acids, including the first methionine. This mutation was found
in compound heterozygosity with a missense mutation (613890.0009).

.0011
3-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE, TYPE II, DEFICIENCY OF
HSD3B2, PRO341LEU

In a study of the functional consequences of C-terminal mutations in the
3-beta-HSD protein, Welzel et al. (2008) described a 1022C-T transition
resulting in a pro341-to-leu substitution (P341L) in a boy with
classical 3-beta-HSD deficiency (201810), born to consanguineous
Lebanese parents. At birth he presented with microphallus, broad
urogenital sinus, and palpable gonads in the groin. Steroid analysis
yielded a highly elevated basal level of 17-hydroxypregnenolone as well
as impaired cortisol synthesis. The P341L mutation showed a residual
DHEA conversion of 6% of wildtype activity. Additional analysis of
P341L, including 3-dimensional protein modeling, revealed that the
mutant's inactivity predominantly originated from a putative structural
alteration of the 3-beta-HSD protein and was further aggravated by
increased protein degradation.

REFERENCE 1. Alos, N.; Moisan, A.-M.; Ward, L.; Desrochers, M.; Legault, L.;
Leboeuf, G.; Van Vliet, G.; Simard, J.: A novel A10E homozygous mutation
in the HSD3B2 gene causing severe salt-wasting 3-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase deficiency in 46,XX and 46,XY French-Canadians: evaluation
of gonadal function after puberty. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 1968-1974,
2000.

2. Bain, P. A.; Meisler, M. H.; Taylor, B. A.; Payne, A. H.: The
genes encoding gonadal and nongonadal forms of 3-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase/delta-5-delta-4 isomerase are closely linked on mouse
chromosome 3. Genomics 16: 219-223, 1993.

3. Berube, D.; Luu The, V.; Lachance, Y.; Gagne, R.; Labrie, F.:
The gene encoding human 3-beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/isomerase
mapped to the p13 band of chromosome 1. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 51: 962 only, 1989.

4. Berube, D.; Luu The, V.; Lachance, Y.; Gagne, R.; Labrie, F.:
Assignment of the human 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase gene (HSDB3)
to the p13 band of chromosome 1. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 52: 199-200,
1989.

5. Chang, Y. T.; Kappy, M. S.; Iwamoto, K.; Wang, J.; Yang, X.; Pang,
S.: Mutations in the type II 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
gene in a patient with classic salt-wasting 3-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase deficiency congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Pediat.
Res. 34: 698-700, 1993.

6. Cravioto, M. D.; Ulloa-Aguirre, A.; Bermudez, J. A.; Herrera, J.;
Lisker, R.; Mendez, J. P.; Perez-Palacios, G.: A new inherited variant
of the 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-isomerase deficiency syndrome:
evidence for the existence of two isoenzymes. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 63:
360-367, 1986.

7. Doi, M.; Takahashi, Y.; Komatsu, R.; Yamazaki, F.; Yamada, H.;
Haraguchi, S.; Emoto, N.; Okuno, Y.; Tsujimoto, G.; Kanematsu, A.;
Ogawa, O.; Todo, T.; Tsutsui, K.; van der Horst, G. T. J.; Okamura,
H.: Salt-sensitive hypertension in circadian clock-deficient Cry-null
mice involves dysregulated adrenal Hsd3b6. Nature Med. 16: 67-74,
2010.

8. Goto, M.; Hanley, K. P.; Marcos, J.; Wood, P. J.; Wright, S.; Postle,
A. D.; Cameron, I. T.; Mason, J. I.; Wilson, D. I.; Hanley, N. A.
: In humans, early cortisol biosynthesis provides a mechanism to safeguard
female sexual development. J. Clin. Invest. 116: 953-960, 2006.

9. Lachance, Y.; Luu-The, V.; Verreault, H.; Dumont, M.; Rheaume,
E.; Leblanc, G.; Labrie, F.: Structure of the human type II 3 beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase/delta 5-delta 4 isomerase (3 beta-HSD) gene: adrenal
and gonadal specificity. DNA Cell Biol. 10: 701-711, 1991.

10. Moisan, A. M.; Ricketts, M. L.; Tardy, V.; Desrochers, M.; Mebarki,
F.; Chaussain, J.-L.; Cabrol, S.; Raux-Demay, M. C.; Forest, M. G.;
Sippell, W. G.; Peter, M.; Morel, Y.; Simard, J.: New insight into
the molecular basis of 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency:
identification of eight mutations in the HSD3B2 gene in eleven patients
from seven new families and comparison of the functional properties
of twenty-five mutant enzymes. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 4410-4425,
1999.

11. Morrison, N.; Nickson, D. A.; McBride, M.; Mueller, U. W.; Boyd,
E.; Sutcliffe, R. G.: Regional chromosomal assignment of the human
3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/delta 5-4 isomerase (HSDB3) to
1p13.1. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 58: 1860 only, 1991.

12. Morrison, N.; Nickson, D. A.; McBride, M. W.; Mueller, U. W.;
Boyd, E.; Sutcliffe, R. G.: Regional chromosomal assignment of human
3-beta-hydroxy-5-ene steroid dehydrogenase to 1p13.1 by non-isotopic
in situ hybridisation. Hum. Genet. 87: 223-225, 1991.

13. Pang, S.; Wang, W.; Rich, B.; David, R.; Chang, Y. T.; Carbunaru,
G.; Myers, S. E.; Howie, A. F.; Smillie, K. J.; Mason, J. I.: A novel
nonstop mutation in the stop codon and a novel missense mutation in
the type II 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3-beta-HSD) gene
causing, respectively, nonclassic and classic 3-beta-HSD deficiency
congenital adrenal hyperplasia. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 2556-2563,
2002.

14. Rheaume, E.; Lachance, Y.; Zhao, H. F.; Breton, N.; Dumont, M.;
de Launoit, Y.; Trudel, C.; Luu-The, V.; Simard, J.; Labrie, F.:
Structure and expression of a new complementary DNA encoding the almost
exclusive 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/delta 5-delta 4-isomerase
in human adrenals and gonads. Molec. Endocr. 5: 1147-1157, 1991.

15. Rheaume, E.; Leblanc, J. F.; Lachance, Y.; Labrie, F.; Simard,
J.: Detection of frequent BglII polymorphism by polymerase chain
reaction and TaqI restriction fragment length polymorphism for 3-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase/delta-5-delta-4 isomerase at the human HSD-beta-3 locus
(1p11-p13). Hum. Genet. 87: 753-754, 1991.

16. Rheaume, E.; Simard, J.; Morel, Y.; Mebarki, F.; Zachmann, M.;
Forest, M. G.; New, M. I.; Labrie, F.: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
due to point mutations in the type II 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
gene. Nature Genet. 1: 239-245, 1992.

17. Simard, J.; Durocher, F.; Mebarki, F.; Turgeon, C.; Sanchez, R.;
Labrie, Y.; Couet, J.; Trudel, C.; Rheaume, E.; Morel, Y.; Luu-The,
V.; Labrie, F.: Molecular biology and genetics of the 3-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase/delta-5-delta-4 isomerase gene family. J. Endocr. 150:
S189-S207, 1996.

18. Stalvey, J. R. D.; Meisler, M. H.; Payne, A. H.: Evidence that
the same structural gene encodes testicular and adrenal 3-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase-isomerase. Biochem. Genet. 25: 181-190, 1987.

19. Welzel, M.; Wustemann, N.; Simic-Schleicher, G.; Dorr, H. G.;
Schulze, E.; Shaikh, G.; Clayton, P.; Grotzinger, J.; Holterhus, P.-M.;
Riepe, F. G.: Carboxyl-terminal mutations in 3-beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type II cause severe salt-wasting congenital adrenal
hyperplasia. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 93: 1418-1425, 2008.

20. Zachmann, M.; Forest, M. G.; De Peretti, E.: 3 beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase deficiency: follow-up study in a girl with pubertal
bone age. Hormone Res. 11: 292-302, 1979.

21. Zhang, L.; Mason, J. I.; Naiki, Y.; Copeland, K. C.; Castro-Magana,
M.; Gordon-Walker, T. T.; Chang, Y. T.; Pang, S.: Characterization
of two novel homozygous missense mutations involving codon 6 and 259
of type II 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3-beta-HSD) gene causing,
respectively, nonsalt-wasting and salt-wasting 3-beta-HSD deficiency
disorder. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 1678-1685, 2000.

CREATED Anne M. Stumpf: 4/11/2011

EDITED terry: 05/11/2011
carol: 4/21/2011
alopez: 4/12/2011

611373	TITLE *611373 LIVER-EXPRESSED ANTIMICROBIAL PEPTIDE 2; LEAP2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

LEAP2 is a cysteine-rich cationic antimicrobial peptide (Krause et al.,
2003).

CLONING

By database analysis using partial sequence of a cysteine-rich peptide
purified from a human blood ultrafiltrate peptide library as probe,
Krause et al. (2003) identified LEAP2 genomic and cDNA sequences and
several possible splice variants. The deduced 77-amino acid precursor
protein contains an N-terminal secretory signal sequence and 4 cysteine
residues forming 2 disulfide bonds and shares 83% sequence similarity to
the mouse Leap2 precursor protein. The putative mature LEAP2 peptide
(amino acids 38-77) is identical to that of mouse. LEAP2 shares the
structural features of positively charged amino acid residues and
multiple disulfides with other antimicrobial peptides such as the
defensins (see DEFB4, 602215) and LEAP1/hepcidin (HAMP; 606464).
Northern blot analysis detected multiple LEAP2 transcripts in human
liver and kidney, with possible faint expression in other tissues.
Real-time quantitative RT-PCR specific for the major LEAP2 transcript
(LEAP2-350) and an intron-1 retaining transcript (LEAP2-550) detected
tissue-specific expression. The highest expression of LEAP2-350 was
found in liver, kidney, jejunum, and duodenum, with lower expression in
antrum, brain, bladder, testis, heart, lung, and colon, and very low
expression in other tissues examined. The highest expression of
LEAP2-550 was found in kidney, followed by brain, liver, heart, and
lung, with lower expression in prostate, trachea, and other tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Using chemically synthesized LEAP2 peptide in zone inhibition assay and
dose-response colony formation unit assays, Krause et al. (2003) showed
that LEAP2 displayed dose-dependent antimicrobial activity against
numerous Gram-positive bacteria and yeasts. The half-maximal inhibitory
activity (IC-50) of LEAP2 was -5 microM against S. cerevisiae and B.
subtilis, corresponding to the activity of other antimicrobial peptides
on a molar basis. LEAP2 had no antimicrobial activity against
Gram-negative bacteria.

GENE STRUCTURE

Krause et al. (2003) determined that the LEAP2 gene contains 3 exons,
with several possible alternatively spliced forms, including an intron-1
retaining transcript (LEAP2-550).

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis and radiation hybrid analysis, Krause et
al. (2003) mapped the LEAP2 gene to chromosome 5q31. They mapped the
mouse Leap2 gene to a region of syntenic homology on chromosome 11.

REFERENCE 1. Krause, A.; Sillard, R.; Kleemeier, B.; Kluver, E.; Maronde, E.;
Conejo-Garcia, J. R.; Forssmann, W. G.; Schulz-Knappe, P.; Nehls,
M. C.; Wattler, F.; Wattler, S.; Adermann, K.: Isolation and biochemical
characterization of LEAP-2, a novel blood peptide expressed in the
liver. Protein Sci. 12: 143-152, 2003.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 8/24/2007

EDITED carol: 08/24/2007
carol: 8/24/2007

609951	TITLE *609951 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 384; ZNF384
;;CAS-INTERACTING ZINC FINGER PROTEIN; CIZ;;
CAGH1;;
NUCLEAR MATRIX PROTEIN 4; NMP4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ZNF384 is a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling protein that localizes at
fibroblast focal adhesions, contains multiple zinc fingers, and
regulates expression of matrix metalloproteinases (e.g., MMP3; 185250)
(Thunyakitpisal et al., 2001).

CLONING

By screening adult and fetal human brain cDNA libraries for clones
containing CAG repeats, Margolis et al. (1997) isolated a partial cDNA
encoding ZNF384, which they called CAGH1.

By Far Western screening of a rat embryonic fibroblast cDNA library with
the SH3 domain of Cas (BCAR1; 602941) as probe, Nakamoto et al. (2000)
isolated several splice variants of Znf384, which they called Ciz. The
longest variant encodes a predicted 579-residue protein with an
N-terminal leucine zipper, multiple serine and proline residues, a
nuclear localization signal, 8 centrally located Kruppel-type C2H2 zinc
fingers, and C-terminal glutamine-alanine and glutamine repeat regions,
suggesting that Ciz may be a transcription factor. The shorter variants
encode proteins with only 5 or 6 zinc fingers. Northern blot analysis of
rat tissues revealed ubiquitous expression of a 3.0-kb transcript, with
highest levels in testis, heart, kidney, and brain. A 4.0-kb transcript
was also detected in brain, liver, and kidney. Immunofluorescence
microscopy showed that Ciz shuttled in and out of the nucleus and
localized at stably formed focal adhesions and in the nucleus.

Thunyakitpisal et al. (2001) independently cloned and characterized rat
Znf384, which they termed Nmp4, based on its interaction with type I
collagen alpha-1 (COL1A1; 120150). They identified several novel
variants, including one that lacks the C-terminal glutamine-alanine
repeat region.

GENE FUNCTION

Using precipitation analysis, Nakamoto et al. (2000) showed that rat Ciz
bound specifically and constitutively to the SH3 domain of Cas.
Immunoprecipitation and EMSA analysis demonstrated that Ciz bound to the
promoter of human MMP1 (120353) and upregulated transcription of human
MMP1 and MMP7 (178990) and rat Mmp3.

Thunyakitpisal et al. (2001) showed that rat Nmp4 interacted with Col1a1
and regulated its expression in osteoblasts. They concluded that NMP4
contributes to extracellular matrix turnover in bone and other tissues.

Shen et al. (2002) overexpressed Ciz in a mouse osteoblast cell line and
found that it inhibited Bmp2 (112261)-induced expression of alkaline
phosphatase (see ALPL; 171760), osteocalcin (BGLAP; 112260), type I
collagen, and Cbfa1 (RUNX2; 600211). They concluded that CIZ is an
inhibitory protein that modulates BMP2-induced differentiation of
osteoblastic cells.

MAPPING

Margolis et al. (1997) stated that the ZFN384 gene maps to chromosome
12p12. Alvarez et al. (2001) mapped the mouse Znf384 gene to chromosome
6F1, a region that shows homology of synteny to human chromosome 12p12.

ANIMAL MODEL

Morinobu et al. (2005) found that Ciz -/- mice had increased bone volume
and rates of bone formation, but no alteration in bone resorption. Ciz
-/- mice expressed higher levels of mRNA for proteins involved in
osteoblastic phenotypes, such as alkaline phosphatase and osterix (SP7;
606633). Ciz deficiency increased newly formed bone mass after femoral
bone marrow ablation, and it increased Bmp2-induced bone formation in
adult mouse calvariae. Morinobu et al. (2005) concluded that CIZ
suppresses the levels of adult bone mass through inhibition of
BMP-induced activation of osteoblasts.

REFERENCE 1. Alvarez, M. B.; Thunyakitpisal, P.; Rhodes, S. J.; Everett, E.
T.; Bidwell, J. P.: Assignment of Nmp4 to mouse chromosome 6 band
F1 flanked by D6Mit134 and D6Mit255 using radiation hybrid mapping
and fluorescence in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 94:
244-245, 2001.

2. Margolis, R. L.; Abraham, M. R.; Gatchell, S. B.; Li, S.-H.; Kidwai,
A. S.; Breschel, T. S.; Stine, O. C.; Callahan, C.; McInnis, M. G.;
Ross, C. A.: cDNAs with long CAG trinucleotide repeats from human
brain. Hum. Genet. 100: 114-122, 1997.

3. Morinobu, M.; Nakamoto, T.; Hino, K.; Tsuji, K.; Shen, Z.-J.; Nakashima,
K.; Nifuji, A.; Yamamoto, H.; Hirai, H.; Noda, M.: The nucleocytoplasmic
shuttling protein CIZ reduces adult bone mass by inhibiting bone morphogenetic
protein-induced bone formation. J. Exp. Med. 201: 961-970, 2005.

4. Nakamoto, T.; Yamagata, T.; Sakai, R.; Ogawa, S.; Honda, H.; Ueno,
H.; Hirano, N.; Yazaki, Y.; Hirai, H.: CIZ, a zinc finger protein
that interacts with p130(cas) and activates the expression of matrix
metalloproteinases. Molec. Cell. Biol. 20: 1649-1658, 2000.

5. Shen, Z.-J.; Nakamoto, T.; Tsuji, K.; Nifuji, A.; Miyazono, K.;
Komori, T.; Hirai, H.; Noda, M.: Negative regulation of bone morphogenetic
protein/Smad signaling by Cas-interacting zinc finger protein in osteoblasts. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 29840-29846, 2002.

6. Thunyakitpisal, P.; Alvarez, M.; Tokunaga, K.; Onyia, J. E.; Hock,
J.; Ohashi, N.; Feister, H.; Rhodes, S. J.; Bidwell, J. P.: Cloning
and functional analysis of a family of nuclear matrix transcription
factors (NP/NMP4) that regulate type I collagen expression in osteoblasts. J.
Bone Min. Res. 16: 10-23, 2001.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 3/13/2006

EDITED carol: 05/19/2008
mgross: 3/13/2006

606926	TITLE *606926 LYSOPHOSPHATIDIC ACID RECEPTOR 5; LPAR5
;;LPA5;;
G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR 92; GPR92;;
GPR93
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs, or GPRs) contain 7 transmembrane
domains and transduce extracellular signals through heterotrimeric G
proteins.

CLONING

Lee et al. (2001) identified GPR92, which they designated GPR93, in a
genomic database using the sequences of the cysteinyl leukotriene-2
receptor (605666) as query. GPR92 encodes a deduced 372-amino acid
protein that shares 36 to 40% sequence identity in the transmembrane
regions with the G protein-coupled purinergic receptor P2Y5 (P2RY5;
609239), GPR23 (300086), and GPR17 (603071).

MAPPING

Lee et al. (2001) mapped the GPR92 gene to chromosome 12 based on
sequence similarity between the GPR92 sequence and a BAC clone (GenBank
GENBANK AC006087) localized to chromosome 12. White et al. (2000)
identified GPR92 near the FGF23 gene on chromosome 12p13.

REFERENCE 1. Lee, D. K.; Nguyen, T.; Lynch, K. R.; Cheng, R.; Vanti, W. B.;
Arkhitko, O.; Lewis, T.; Evans, J. F.; George, S. R.; O'Dowd, B. F.
: Discovery and mapping of ten novel G protein-coupled receptor genes. Gene 275:
83-91, 2001.

2. White, K. E.; Evans, W. E.; O'Riordan, J. L. H.; Speer, M. C.;
Econs, M. J.; Lorenz-Depiereux, B.; Grabowski, M.; Meitinger, T.;
Strom, T. M.: Autosomal dominant hypophosphataemic rickets is associated
with mutations in FGF23. Nature Genet. 26: 345-348, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/9/2002

EDITED alopez: 04/22/2008
mgross: 3/4/2005
terry: 11/22/2002
carol: 5/10/2002

611994	TITLE *611994 MITOCHONDRIAL RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN S34; MRPS34
;;MRPS12
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mitochondria have their own translation system for production of 13
inner membrane proteins essential for oxidative phosphorylation. MRPS34
is a component of the small subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome that
is encoded by the nuclear genome (Koc et al., 2001).

CLONING

By proteolytic digestion of whole bovine 28S subunits, followed by
peptide analysis and EST database analysis, O'Brien et al. (2000) and
Koc et al. (2001) independently identified full-length human MRPS34,
which O'Brien et al. (2000) called MRPS12. The deduced protein contains
218 amino acids. Koc et al. (2001) determined that the MRPS34 protein
has a calculated molecular mass of 25.7 kD. Removal of a predicted
N-terminal 18-amino acid mitochondrial localization signal results in a
mature 23.6-kD protein. O'Brien et al. (2000) also identified a possible
splice variant of MRPS34. O'Brien et al. (2000) and Koc et al. (2001)
identified MRPS34 orthologs in mouse, rat, Drosophila, and C. elegans,
but not in yeast or E. coli. Koc et al. (2001) reported that mouse and
human MRPS34 share 86.5% amino acid identity.

GENE STRUCTURE

O'Brien et al. (2000) determined that the MRPS34 gene contains 4 exons
and spans approximately 1.5 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, O'Brien et al. (2000) mapped the MRPS34
gene to chromosome 16q13-q21.

REFERENCE 1. Koc, E. C.; Burkhart, W.; Blackburn, K.; Moseley, A.; Spremulli,
L. L.: The small subunit of the mammalian mitochondrial ribosome:
identification of the full complement of ribosomal proteins present. J.
Biol. Chem. 276: 19363-19374, 2001.

2. O'Brien, T. W.; Liu, J.; Sylvester, J. E.; Mougey, E. B.; Fischel-Ghodsian,
N.; Thiede, B.; Wittmann-Liebold, B.; Graack, H.-R.: Mammalian mitochondrial
ribosomal proteins (4): amino acid sequencing, characterization, and
identification of corresponding gene sequences. J. Biol. Chem. 275:
18153-18159, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/21/2008

EDITED mgross: 04/23/2008

606756	TITLE *606756 17-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE VII; HSD17B7
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

HSD17B7 encodes an enzyme that functions both as a
17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.62) in the biosynthesis
of sex steroids and as a 3-ketosteroid reductase (EC 1.1.1.270) in the
biosynthesis of cholesterol (Marijanovic et al., 2003).

CLONING

By EST database screening with mouse Hsd17b7 as the probe, followed by
PCR of an ovary cDNA library, Krazeisen et al. (1999) isolated a cDNA
encoding HSD17B7. The deduced 341-amino acid protein is approximately
75% identical to the rodent proteins. It contains a 28-residue insert
that forms a superficial loop close to the transmembrane domain. This
loop is a candidate prolactin receptor (PRLR; 176761)-binding domain.
RT-PCR detected wide and variable expression, with highest levels in
placenta and a hepatoma cell line and lowest levels in testis and
thymus. No expression was detected in leukocytes and spleen.

Marijanovic et al. (2003) showed that fluorescence-tagged HSD17B7
localized to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of transfected HeLa and
NIH3T3 cells, and that it required a C-terminal sequence for ER
localization. In situ hybridization showed that mouse Hsd17b7
colocalized with the rate-limiting enzyme in sterol biogenesis, HMG-CoA
reductase (HMGCR; 142910), in a wide range of tissues during embryonic
development. It did not colocalized with the estrogenic enzyme Hsd17b1
(109684). Orthologs of HSD17B7 were detected in all organisms capable of
de novo cholesterol biosynthesis.

By searching for orthologs of mouse 17Hsd7, followed by RT-PCR of
granulosa luteal cells, 3-prime RACE, and screening a placenta cDNA
library, Torn et al. (2003) cloned human HSD17B7, which they called
17HSD7. RNA dot blot analysis revealed abundant expression in adrenal
gland and in adult and fetal liver, lung, and thymus. Lower expression
was detected in adult pituitary gland, prostate, kidney, lymph node,
small intestine, and trachea, with very little expression in other
tissues. RT-PCR of eye ciliary epithelial cell and neuroendocrine cell
mRNA revealed a splice variant lacking exon 6. This transcript was
predicted to encode an HSD17B7 isoform lacking the putative
transmembrane region of the full-length protein. Following expression in
insect cells, full-length human HSD17B7 had an apparent molecular mass
of 35.5 kD by Western blot analysis.

By in situ hybridization, Shehu et al. (2008) found that Hsd17b7 was
expressed in embryonic mouse brain, heart, eye, and ear.
Immunohistochemical analysis of mouse placenta showed that Hsd17b7 was
expressed in ectoplacental cone, spongiotrophoblast, giant cells, and
maternal deciduas.

GENE FUNCTION

Endogenous squalene is converted to cholesterol via a multistep
multienzyme process. Based on its similarity to the yeast 3-ketosteroid
reductase Erg27, HSD17B7 was predicted to function in this pathway by
converting the cholesterol intermediate zymosterone into zymosterol.
Marijanovic et al. (2003) showed that recombinant mouse and human
HSD17B7 performed this reaction in vitro using NADPH as cofactor.
HSD17B7 also rescued yeast defective in Erg27 in complementation assays.

By assaying human HSD17B7 expressed by insect cells, Torn et al. (2003)
showed that the enzyme catalyzed only reductive reactions. It
efficiently catalyzed the conversion of estrone to estradiol and was
equally efficient in the conversion of dihydrotestosterone to the
estrogenic metabolite 5-alpha-androstane-3-beta,17-beta-diol, thus
showing the ability to reduce the keto group at both the 17 and 3
positions. HSD17B7 showed moderate inactivating 3-beta reductase
activity against progesterone and 20-hydroxyprogesterone. In contrast,
the mouse enzyme only efficiently catalyzed the conversion of estrone to
estradiol. The short isoform of human HSD17B7 was inactive in these
assays.

GENE STRUCTURE

Krazeisen et al. (1999) determined that the HSD17B7 gene contains 9
exons and spans approximately 22 kb. Promoter sequence analysis
identified lymphoid- and brain-specific transcription factor-binding
sites but no steroid-responsive elements, implying that an endocrine
regulatory effect observed on Hsd17b7 in mouse may be indirect.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Marijanovic et al. (2003) and Torn et al.
(2003) independently mapped the HSD17B7 gene to chromosome 1q23. They
identified HSD17B7 pseudogenes on chromosomes 1q44 and 10p11.2.

ANIMAL MODEL

Shehu et al. (2008) found that Hsd17b7 +/- mice appeared normal and
healthy and showed normal fertility. However, breeding of Hsd17b7 +/-
animals yielded no viable Hsd17b7 -/- offspring. Hsd17b7 -/- embryos
died by embryonic day 10.5 with severe brain malformation and heart
defects. At embryonic day 10.5, brain defects included marked
underdevelopment and reduced size and volume in the forebrain and
midbrain, and the boundaries between these regions were poorly defined
compared with wildtype. Heart defects in Hsd17b7 -/- embryos included
lack of heartbeat, lack of blood in the heart, and pericardial effusion.
Lack of vascularization was also seen in both the fetus and yolk sac.

Independently, Jokela et al. (2010) found that embryonic lethality in
Hsd17b7 -/- mice was associated with defects in the heart and central
nervous system. They reported reduced complexity of vasculature,
particularly in the head capillary plexus and branchial arches. Heart
development in Hsd17b7 -/- embryos initiated normally, but by embryonic
day 10.5 the heart was dilated, the thickness of the cardiac muscle and
pericardium was markedly reduced, the septum and atrium were abnormal,
and there was reduced number of myocardial cells.

REFERENCE 1. Jokela, H.; Rantakari, P.; Lamminen, T.; Strauss, L.; Ola, R.;
Mutka, A.-L.; Gylling, H.; Miettinen, T.; Pakarinen, P.; Sainio, K.;
Poutanen, M.: Hydroxysteroid (17-beta) dehydrogenase 7 activity is
essential for fetal de novo cholesterol synthesis and for neuroectodermal
survival and cardiovascular differentiation in early mouse embryos. Endocrinology 151:
1884-1892, 2010.

2. Krazeisen, A.; Breitling, R.; Imai, K.; Fritz, S.; Moller, G.;
Adamski, J.: Determination of cDNA, gene structure and chromosomal
localization of the novel human 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
type 7. FEBS Lett. 460: 373-379, 1999.

3. Marijanovic, Z.; Laubner, D.; Moller, G.; Gege, C.; Husen, B.;
Adamski, J.; Breitling, R.: Closing the gap: identification of human
3-ketosteroid reductase, the last unknown enzyme of mammalian cholesterol
biosynthesis. Molec. Endocr. 17: 1715-1725, 2003.

4. Shehu, A.; Mao, J.; Gibori, G. B.; Halperin, J.; Le, J.; Devi,
S.; Merrill, B.; Kiyokawa, H.; Gibori, G.: Prolactin receptor-associated
protein/17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 7 gene (Hsd17b7)
plays a crucial role in embryonic development and fetal survival. Molec.
Endocr. 22: 2268-2277, 2008. Note: Erratum: Molec. Endocr. 22: 2766
only, 2008.

5. Torn, S.; Nokelainen, P.; Kurkela, R.; Pulkka, A.; Menjivar, M.;
Ghosh, S.; Coca-Prados, M.; Peltoketo, H.; Isomaa, V.; Vihko, P.:
Production, purification, and functional analysis of recombinant human
and mouse 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 7. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 305: 37-45, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/4/2010

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 3/7/2002

EDITED terry: 07/27/2012
mgross: 5/5/2010
mgross: 5/4/2010
mgross: 3/7/2002

190080	TITLE *190080 V-MYC AVIAN MYELOCYTOMATOSIS VIRAL ONCOGENE HOMOLOG; MYC
;;ONCOGENE MYC;;
AVIAN MYELOCYTOMATOSIS VIRAL ONCOGENE HOMOLOG;;
PROTOONCOGENE HOMOLOGOUS TO MYELOCYTOMATOSIS VIRUS
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The MYC protooncogene encodes a DNA-binding factor that can activate and
repress transcription. Via this mechanism, MYC regulates expression of
numerous target genes that control key cellular functions, including
cell growth and cell cycle progression. MYC also has a critical role in
DNA replication. Deregulated MYC expression resulting from various types
of genetic alterations leads to constitutive MYC activity in a variety
of cancers and promotes oncogenesis (Dominguez-Sola et al., 2007).

CLONING

Persson and Leder (1984) showed that the product of the MYC gene has a
molecular mass of 65 kD, is located predominantly in the nucleus, and
binds to DNA.

MAPPING

Leder (1982) described in situ hybridization observations suggesting
that the MYC gene is on chromosome 8 near 8q24, the breakpoint in
Burkitt lymphoma (113970) translocations.

By the Southern blotting technique applied to somatic cell hybrids,
Dalla-Favera et al. (1982) showed that the MYC gene is on chromosome 8.
When hybrids between rodent cells and human Burkitt lymphoma (113970)
cells were analyzed, Dalla-Favera et al. (1982) could show that the MYC
gene is on the part of chromosome 8 (8q24-qter) that is translocated to
2, 14, or 22. Several MYC-related sequences may be pseudogenes. Taub et
al. (1982) also mapped the MYC gene to chromosome 8q24.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization in combination with R banding,
Takahashi et al. (1991) refined the assignment of MYC to chromosome
8q24.12-q24.13, distal to fragile site fra(8)(q24.11).

GENE FUNCTION

Cell proliferation is regulated by the induction of growth promoting
genes and the suppression of growth inhibitory genes. Malignant growth
can result from the altered balance of expression of these genes in
favor of cell proliferation. Induction of the transcription factor MYC
promotes cell proliferation and transformation by activating
growth-promoting genes, including the ornithine decarboxylase (ODC1;
165640) and CDC25A (116947) genes. Lee et al. (1997) showed that MYC
transcriptionally represses the expression of the growth arrest gene
(GAS1; 139185). A conserved MYC structure, MYC box 2, is required for
repression of GAS1 and for MYC induction of proliferation and
transformation, but not for activation of ODC1.

The MYC protein activates transcription as part of a heteromeric complex
with MAX (154950). However, cells transformed by MYC are characterized
by the loss of expression of numerous genes, suggesting that MYC may
also repress gene expression. By searching for proteins that may mediate
gene repression by MYC, Peukert et al. (1997) identified ZNF151
(604084), which they called MIZ1 for 'MYC-interacting zinc finger
protein-1.' MIZ1 interacts specifically with the helix-loop-helix domain
of MYC and NMYC. The predicted MIZ1 protein contains a POZ (poxvirus and
zinc finger) domain, which appears to act as a negative regulatory
domain for transcription factor function, and 13 zinc finger domains.
MIZ1 has a potent growth arrest function and can bind to and
transactivate the adenovirus major late and cyclin D1 (CCND1; 168461)
promoters. Interaction between MIZ1 and MYC overcomes MIZ1-induced
growth arrest, inhibits MIZ1 transactivation, induces MIZ1 nuclear
sequestration, and renders MIZ1 insoluble in vivo. These effects depend
on the integrity of the POZ domain of MIZ1. Peukert et al. (1997)
suggested that MYC inhibits gene transcription by activating the latent
inhibitory functions of the MIZ1 POZ domain.

Grandori et al. (1996) identified DDX18 (606355) as a direct in vivo
target of Myc and Max and hypothesized that Myc may exert its effects on
cell behavior through proteins that affect RNA structure and metabolism.

He et al. (1998) provided a molecular framework for understanding the
previously enigmatic overexpression of MYC in colorectal cancers.
Inactivating mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli gene (APC;
611731), found in most colorectal cancers, cause aberrant accumulation
of beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806), which then binds T-cell factor 4
(TCF4; 602228), causing increased transcriptional activation of unknown
genes. He et al. (1998) showed that the MYC oncogene is a target in this
signaling pathway. They showed that expression of MYC is repressed by
wildtype APC and activated by beta-catenin, and that effects are
mediated through TCF4 binding sites in the MYC promoter.

Wu et al. (1999) demonstrated that the MYC protein represses the
expression of ferritin-H (134770), which sequesters intracellular iron,
and stimulates the expression of iron regulatory protein-2 (IRP2;
147582), which increases the intracellular iron pool. Downregulation of
ferritin-H expression was required for cell transformation by c-myc. Wu
et al. (1999) further demonstrated that the downregulation of ferritin-H
expression was independent of c-myc-induced changes in cell cycle
activity. The authors concluded that this function for c-myc is
consistent with observations that iron chelation leads to growth arrest.

Wu et al. (1999) demonstrated direct activation of telomerase by MYC.
Telomerase is the ribonuclear protein complex expressed in proliferating
and transformed cells, in which it preserves chromosomal integrity by
maintaining telomere length. MYC activates telomerase by inducing
expression of its catalytic subunit, telomerase-reverse transcriptase
(TERT; 187270). Telomerase complex activity is dependent on TERT, a
specialized type of reverse transcriptase. Wu et al. (1999) showed that
TERT is a target of MYC activity and identified a pathway linking cell
proliferation and chromosome integrity in normal and neoplastic cells.

Wang et al. (2000) demonstrated that TERT-driven cell proliferation is
not genoprotective because it is associated with activation of the MYC
oncogene. Human mammary epithelial cells, which normally stop dividing
in culture at 55 to 60 population doublings (PDs), were infected with
human TERT retrovirus at PD40 and maintained until PD250. Wang et al.
(2000) then tested whether telomerase activity was essential for the
immortalized phenotype by excising the TERT retrovirus at PD150 using
Cre recombinase. The resulting cells were maintained for at least
another 20 population doublings, and no decline in growth rates in
either pooled cells or individual clones was observed. Ectopic
expression of MYC was found to be upregulated between 107 and 135
population doublings. Wang et al. (2000) suggested that under standard
culture conditions, extension of life span by telomerase selects for MYC
overexpression in human mammary epithelial cells.

Ma et al. (2000) analyzed the murine c-Myc promoter response to
glucocorticoid and identified a novel glucocorticoid response element
that does not conform to the consensus glucocorticoid receptor-binding
sequence. Glucocorticoids activated c-Myc/reporter constructs that
contained this element. Deletion of these sequences from the c-Myc
promoter increased basal activity of the promoter and blocked
glucocorticoid induction. Footprinting analysis suggested that a
cellular repressor also binds to this element. Ma et al. (2000)
concluded that the glucocorticoid receptor binds to the c-Myc promoter
in competition with this protein, which is a repressor of transcription.

MYC induces transcription of the E2F1 (189971), E2F2 (600426), and E2F3
(600427) genes. Using primary mouse embryo fibroblasts deleted for
individual E2f genes, Leone et al. (2001) showed that MYC-induced S
phase and apoptosis requires distinct E2F activities. The ability of Myc
to induce S phase was impaired in the absence of either E2f2 or E2f3 but
not E2f1 or E2f4 (600659). In contrast, the ability of Myc to induce
apoptosis was markedly reduced in cells deleted for E2f1 but not E2f2 or
E2f3. The authors proposed that the induction of specific E2F activities
is an essential component in the MYC pathways that control cell
proliferation and cell fate decisions.

Feng et al. (2002) showed that MYC physically interacts with SMAD2
(601366) and SMAD3 (603109), 2 specific signal transducers involved in
TGF-beta (190180) signaling. Through its direct interaction with SMADs,
MYC binds to the SP1 (189906)-SMAD complex on the promoter of the
p15(INK4B) gene (600431), thereby inhibiting the TGF-beta-induced
transcriptional activity of SP1 and SMAD/SP1-dependent transcription of
the p15(INK4B) gene. The oncogenic MYC promotes cell growth and cancer
development partly by inhibiting the growth inhibitory functions of
SMADs.

To identify target genes of MYC, Menssen and Hermeking (2002) performed
serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) after adenoviral expression of
MYC in primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Induction of 53
genes was confirmed using microarray analysis and quantitative RT-PCR.
Among these genes was MetAP2, also called p67 (601870), which encodes an
activator of translational initiation and represents a validated target
for inhibition of neovascularization. Furthermore, MYC induced 3 cell
cycle regulatory genes and 3 DNA repair genes, suggesting that MYC
couples DNA replication to processes preserving the integrity of the
genome. MNT (603039), a MAX-binding antagonist of MYC function, was
upregulated, implying a negative feedback loop. In vivo promoter
occupancy by MYC was detected by chromatin immunoprecipitation for at
least 5 genes, showing that they are direct MYC targets. The authors
suggested that the MYC-regulated genes identified by this study define a
set of bona fide MYC targets and may have potential therapeutic value
for inhibition of cancer cell proliferation, tumor vascularization, and
restenosis.

Leven (2002) discussed and diagrammed the complex web of MYC-related
pathways involved in growth, proliferation, and apoptosis.

Vafa et al. (2002) showed that brief MYC activation can induce DNA
damage prior to S phase in normal human fibroblasts. Damage correlated
with induction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) without induction of
apoptosis. Deregulated MYC partially disabled the p53 (191170)-mediated
DNA damage response, enabling cells with damaged genomes to enter the
cycle, resulting in poor clonogenic survival. An antioxidant reduced
ROS, decreased DNA damage and p53 activation, and improved survival. The
authors proposed that oncogene activation can induce DNA damage and
override damage controls, thereby accelerating tumor progression via
genetic instability.

Activation of the tumor suppressor p53 by DNA damage induces either cell
cycle arrest or apoptotic cell death. Seoane et al. (2002) demonstrated
that MYC is a principal determinant of this choice. MYC is directly
recruited to the p21(CIP1) (116899) promoter by the DNA-binding protein
MIZ1 (604084). This interaction blocks p21(CIP1) induction by p53 and
other activators. As a result MYC switches, from cytostatic to
apoptotic, the p53-dependent response of colon cancer cells to DNA
damage. MYC does not modify the ability of p53 to bind to the p21(CIP1)
or PUMA (605854) promoters, but selectively inhibits bound p53 from
activating p21(CIP1) transcription. By inhibiting p21(CIP1) expression
MYC favors the initiation of apoptosis, thereby influencing the outcome
of a p53 response in favor of cell death.

Herold et al. (2002) showed that transactivation by MIZ1 is negatively
regulated by association with topoisomerase II-binding protein (TOPBP1;
607760). Ultraviolet (UV) irradiation downregulated expression of TOPBP1
and released MIZ1. MIZ1 bound to the p21CIP1 core promoter in vivo and
was required for upregulation of p21CIP1 upon UV irradiation. Using both
Myc -/- cells and a point mutant of MYC that is deficient in
MIZ1-dependent repression, Herold et al. (2002) showed that MYC
negatively regulates transcription of p21CIP1 upon UV irradiation and
facilitates recovery from UV-induced cell cycle arrest through binding
to MIZ1.

Gomez-Roman et al. (2003) demonstrated that c-MYC binds to transcription
factor IIIB (see 604902), an RNA polymerase III (pol III)-specific
general transcription factor, and directly activates pol III
transcription. Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed that endogenous
c-MYC is present at tRNA and 5S rRNA genes in cultured mammalian cells.
Gomez-Roman et al. (2003) concluded that activation of pol III may have
a role in the ability of c-MYC to stimulate cell growth.

In mouse embryo fibroblasts, Qi et al. (2004) showed that p19(Arf)
(CDKN2A; 600160) can inhibit c-Myc by a unique and direct mechanism that
is independent of p53 (191170). When c-Myc increased, p19(Arf) bound
with c-Myc and dramatically blocked c-Myc's ability to activate
transcription and induce hyperproliferation and transformation. In
contrast, c-Myc's ability to repress transcription was unaffected by
p19(Arf), and c-Myc-mediated apoptosis was enhanced. These differential
effects of p19(Arf) on c-Myc function suggested that separate molecular
mechanisms mediate c-Myc-induced hyperproliferation and apoptosis. This
direct feedback mechanism represents a p53-independent checkpoint to
prevent c-Myc-mediated tumorigenesis.

Hemann et al. (2005) reported that 2 common mutant MYC alleles derived
from human Burkitt lymphoma (113970) uncouple proliferation from
apoptosis and, as a result, are more effective than wildtype MYC at
promoting B-cell lymphomagenesis in mice. Mutant MYC proteins retain
their ability to stimulate proliferation and activate p53, but are
defective at promoting apoptosis due to a failure to induce the BH3-only
protein BIM (603827) and effectively inhibit BCL2 (151430). Disruption
of apoptosis through enforced expression of BCL2, or loss of either BIM
or p53 function, enables wildtype MYC to produce lymphomas as
efficiently as mutant MYC. Hemann et al. (2005) concluded that their
data show how parallel apoptotic pathways act together to suppress
MYC-induced transformation, and how mutant MYC proteins, by selectively
disabling a p53-independent pathway, enable tumor cells to evade p53
action during lymphomagenesis.

He et al. (2005) compared B-cell lymphoma samples and cell lines to
normal tissues, and found that the levels of the primary or mature
microRNAs derived from the miR17-92 locus (609416) within C13ORF25
(609415) were often substantially increased in the cancers. Enforced
expression of the miR17-92 cluster acted with c-Myc expression to
accelerate tumor development in a mouse B-cell lymphoma model. Tumors
derived from hematopoietic stem cells expressing a subset of the
miR17-92 cluster and c-Myc could be distinguished by an absence of
apoptosis that was otherwise prevalent in c-Myc-induced lymphomas. He et
al. (2005) concluded that noncoding RNAs, specifically microRNAs, can
modulate tumor formation, and implicated the miR17-92 cluster as a
potential human oncogene.

O'Donnell et al. (2005) showed that c-Myc activates expression of a
cluster of 6 miRNAs on human chromosome 13 (see 609415). Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments showed that c-Myc binds directly to this
locus. The transcription factor E2F1 (189971) is an additional target of
c-Myc that promotes cell cycle progression. O'Donnell et al. (2005)
found that expression of E2F1 is negatively regulated by 2 miRNAs in
this cluster, miR17-5p (609416) and miR20a (609420). O'Donnell et al.
(2005) concluded that their findings expand the known classes of
transcripts within the c-Myc target gene network, and reveal a mechanism
through which c-Myc simultaneously activates E2F1 transcription and
limits its translation, allowing a tightly controlled proliferative
signal.

Noubissi et al. (2006) demonstrated that CRDBP (608288) is essential for
the induction of both BTRCP1 (603482) and c-Myc by beta-catenin (see
116806) signaling in colorectal cancer cells. Noubissi et al. (2006)
concluded that high levels of CRDBP that are found in primary human
colorectal tumors exhibiting active beta-catenin/Tcf signaling
implicates CRDBP induction in the upregulation of BTRCP1, in the
activation of dimeric transcription factor NF-kappa-B (see 164011), and
in the suppression of apoptosis in these cancers.

By examining gene expression profiles, Palomero et al. (2006) found that
NOTCH (190198) and MYC regulate 2 interconnected transcriptional
programs containing common target genes that regulate cell growth in
primary human T-cell lymphoblastic leukemias.

Dominguez-Sola et al. (2007) showed that c-Myc has a direct role in the
control of DNA replication. c-Myc interacts with the prereplicative
complex and localizes to early sites of DNA synthesis. Depletion of
c-Myc from mammalian (human and mouse) cells as well as from Xenopus
cell-free extracts, which are devoid of RNA transcription, demonstrated
a nontranscriptional role for c-Myc in the initiation of DNA
replication. Dominguez-Sola et al. (2007) found that overexpression of
c-Myc caused increased replication origin activity with subsequent DNA
damage and checkpoint activation.

Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells can be generated from mouse
fibroblasts by retrovirus-mediated introduction of 4 transcription
factors, Oct3/4 (164177), Sox2 (184429), c-Myc, and Klf4 (602253), and
subsequent selection for Fbx15 (609093) expression (Takahashi and
Yamanaka, 2006). These iPS cells, hereafter called Fbx15 iPS cells, are
similar to embryonic stem (ES) cells in morphology, proliferation, and
teratoma formation; however, they are different with regard to gene
expression and DNA methylation patterns, and fail to produce adult
chimeras. Okita et al. (2007) showed that selection for Nanog (607937)
expression results in germline-competent iPS cells with increased ES
cell-like gene expression and DNA methylation patterns compared with
Fbx15 iPS cells. The 4 transgenes were strongly silenced in Nanog iPS
cells. Okita et al. (2007) obtained adult chimeras from 7 Nanog iPS cell
clones, with one clone being transmitted through the germline to the
next generation. Approximately 20% of the offspring developed tumors
attributable to reactivation of the c-Myc transgene. Okita et al. (2007)
concluded that iPS cells competent for germline chimeras can be obtained
from fibroblasts, but retroviral introduction of c-Myc should be avoided
for clinical application.

Wernig et al. (2007) independently demonstrated that the transcription
factors Oct4, Sox2, c-Myc, and Klf4 can induce epigenetic reprogramming
of a somatic genome to an embryonic pluripotent state.

Using Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and Myc, Park et al. (2008) derived iPS cells
from fetal, neonatal, and adult human primary cells, including dermal
fibroblasts isolated from a skin biopsy of a healthy research subject.
Human iPS cells resemble embryonic stem cells in morphology and gene
expression and in the capacity to form teratomas in immune-deficient
mice. Park et al. (2008) concluded that defined factors can reprogram
human cells to pluripotency, and they established a method whereby
patient-specific cells might be established in culture.

Kim et al. (2008) showed that adult mouse neural stem cells express
higher endogenous levels of Sox2 and c-Myc than embryonic stem cells and
that exogenous Oct4 together with either Klf4 (602253) or c-Myc is
sufficient to generate induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells from neural
stem cells. These 2-factor iPS cells are similar to embryonic stem cells
at the molecular level, contribute to development of the germ line, and
form chimeras. Kim et al. (2008) proposed that, in inducing
pluripotency, the number of reprogramming factors can be reduced when
using somatic cells that endogenously express appropriate levels of
complementing factors.

Stadtfeld et al. (2008) generated mouse iPS cells from fibroblasts and
liver cells by using nonintegrating adenoviruses transiently expressing
Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc. These adenoviral iPS cells showed DNA
demethylation characteristic of reprogrammed cells, expressed endogenous
pluripotency genes, formed teratomas, and contributed to multiple
tissues, including the germ cell line, in chimeric mice. Stadtfeld et
al. (2008) concluded that their results provided strong evidence that
insertional mutagenesis is not required for in vitro reprogramming.

Okita et al. (2008) independently reported the generation of mouse iPS
cells without viral vectors. Repeated transfection of 2 expression
plasmids, one containing the cDNAs of Oct3/4, Sox2, and Klf4 and the
other containing the c-Myc cDNA, into mouse embryonic fibroblasts
resulted in iPS cells without evidence of plasmid integration, which
produced teratomas when transplanted into mice and contributed to adult
chimeras. Okita et al. (2008) concluded that the production of
virus-free iPS cells, albeit from embryonic fibroblasts, addresses a
critical safety concern for potential use of iPS cells in regenerative
medicine.

Hanna et al. (2009) demonstrated that the reprogramming by Oct4, Sox2,
Klf4, and Myc transcription factors is a continuous stochastic process
where almost all mouse donor cells eventually give rise to iPS cells on
continued growth and transcription factor expression. Additional
inhibition of the p53 (191170)/p21 (116899) pathway or overexpression of
Lin28 (611043) increased the cell division rate and resulted in an
accelerated kinetics of iPS cell formation that was directly
proportional to the increase in cell proliferation. In contrast, Nanog
overexpression accelerated reprogramming in a predominantly cell
division rate-independent manner. Quantitative analyses defined distinct
cell division rate-dependent and -independent modes for accelerating the
stochastic course of reprogramming, and suggested that the number of
cell divisions is a key parameter driving epigenetic reprogramming to
pluripotency.

Sotelo et al. (2010) identified a highly conserved enhancer element,
designated enhancer E, over 340 kb telomeric to the MYC gene. Reporter
gene assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that
beta-catenin/TCF4 interacted with enhancer E and activated expression of
a MYC reporter. Chromosome conformation capture assays suggested
formation of long-range DNA looping between the enhancer and the MYC
promoter.

By screening for short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) that altered the fitness of
mammary epithelial cells only in the presence of aberrant MYC, Kessler
et al. (2012) identified the SUMO-activating enzymes SAE1 (613294) and
SAE2 (UBA2; 613295) as MYC-synthetic lethal genes. Inactivation of SAE2
led to mitotic catastrophe and cell death upon MYC hyperactivation. SAE2
inhibition switched a MYC transcriptional subprogram from activated to
repressed. A subset of sumoylation-dependent MYC switchers (SMS genes),
including CASC5 (609173), BARD1 (601593), and CDC20 (603618), was
required for mitotic spindle function and to support the MYC oncogenic
program. Sae2 was required for growth of Myc-dependent tumors in mice.
Transduction of MYC-dependent breast cancer cells with inducible SAE2
shRNA suggested that SAE2 was required for growth and fitness of these
cell lines. Gene expression analysis of human breast cancers with
hyperactive MYC suggested that low expression of SAE1 and SAE2 resulted
in better metastasis-free survival. Kessler et al. (2012) proposed that
altering distinct subprograms of MYC transcription, such as by SAE2
inactivation, may be a therapeutic strategy in MYC-driven cancers.

Claveria et al. (2013) established a method for inducing functional
genetic mosiacs in the mouse. Using the system, the authors showed that
induction of a mosaic imbalance of Myc expression in the epiblast
provokes the expansion of cells with higher Myc levels through the
apoptotic elimination of cells with lower levels, without disrupting
development. In contrast, homogeneous shifts in Myc levels did not
affect epiblast cell viability, indicating that the observed competition
results from comparison of relative Myc levels between epiblast cells.
Claveria et al. (2013) found that during normal development, Myc levels
are intrinsically heterogeneous among epiblast cells, and that
endogenous cell competition refines the epiblast cell population through
the elimination of cells with low relative Myc levels. Claveria et al.
(2013) concluded that natural cell competition in the early mammalian
embryo contributes to the selection of the epiblast cell pool.

- MYC Alterations in Cancer

Collins and Groudine (1982) found that the normal human homolog of the
avian myc oncogene was present in multiple copies in the DNA of a
malignant promyelocyte cell line derived from the peripheral blood of a
patient with acute promyelocytic leukemia. Other human oncogenes were
not amplified.

Yokota et al. (1986) concluded that alterations are found in oncogenes
MYC, HRAS, or MYB in more than one-third of human solid tumors.
Amplification of MYC was found in advanced widespread tumors and in
aggressive primary tumors. Apparent allelic deletions of HRAS and MYB
could be correlated with progression and metastasis of carcinomas and
sarcomas.

Morse et al. (1988) found rearrangement of MYC in a breast carcinoma due
to insertion of a LINE-1 element.

Specific types of human papillomavirus (HPV), mostly HPV type 16 (HPV16)
and type 18 (HPV18), are associated with genital carcinomas such as
those of the cervix and their noninvasive precursors (167959, 167960).
In intraepithelial neoplasia, HPV DNA is detected most commonly as
episomal molecules, whereas it is found integrated in the cell genome in
the majority of invasive carcinomas. By chromosomal in situ
hybridization experiments, Couturier et al. (1991) determined the
localization of integrated HPV16 or HPV18 genomes in genital cancers. In
3 cancers, HPV sequences were located in band 8q24.1, which contains the
MYC gene, and in 1 cancer, HPV sequences were located in band 2p24,
which contains the NMYC gene (164840). In 3 of the 4 cases, the
protooncogene located near integrated viral sequences was found to be
structurally altered and/or overexpressed.

Ioannidis et al. (2003) found copy number gains encompassing the MYC
gene at chromosome 8q24 in 29 of 60 (48.3%) breast carcinomas examined.
A highly significant association was found between 8q24 copy number
gains and advanced tumor grade (grade I/II vs grade II, p of 0.006), and
a statistically significant association was observed with the mitotic
index score (1 or 2 vs 3, p of 0.038). Statistically significant higher
levels of MYC mRNA were observed only in samples showing 8q24 copy
number gains (p of 0.022).

Double minutes (dmin), the cytogenetic hallmark of genomic
amplification, are found in 1% of karyotypically abnormal acute myeloid
leukemias (AML; 601626) and myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). The MYC
gene is amplified in the majority of the cases and is generally assumed
to be the target gene. Storlazzi et al. (2004) studied 5 AML cases and 1
MDS case with MYC-containing dmin. Detailed FISH analyses identified a
common 4.3-Mb amplicon harboring 8 genes, including MYC and C8FW
(609461). The corresponding region was deleted in one of the chromosome
8 homologs in 5 of the 6 cases, suggesting that the dmin originated
through extra replication (or loop-formation)-excision-amplification.
Northern blot analysis revealed that MYC was not overexpressed. Instead,
the C8FW gene, encoding a phosphoprotein regulated by mitogenic
pathways, displayed increased expression. These results excluded MYC as
the target gene; the authors hypothesized that overexpression of C8FW
may be the functionally important consequence of 8q24 amplicons in AML
and MDS.

Heim and Mitelman (1987) counted a total of 83 bands that have been
found to be specifically involved in primary structural chromosome
rearrangements in human cancer. They compared the distribution of these
breakpoints with the chromosomal sites of 26 cellular oncogenes,
including MYC, which had to that time been mapped to individual bands in
the human genome. Nineteen of the 26 oncogenes were located in
cancer-associated bands. This clustering is statistically significant (p
= 0.0000012). They pointed out that cancer may be inflated by errors of
karyotype interpretation. Furthermore, it appears that only 1 of the 2
breakpoints in cancer-specific translocations is the site of an
oncogene, so that the number of cancer-associated breakpoints that are
found to contain oncogenes should theoretically approach 50% of the
total. Mitelman (1985) provided a useful catalog of chromosome
aberrations in cancer. Duesberg (1987) suggested that cellular cancer
genes, such as MYC, are not activated oncogenes but rather the result of
rare truncations and illegitimate recombinations that alter the germline
configuration of cellular genes. See review by Cole (1986).

Barna et al. (2008) intercrossed Myc transgenic mice, in which Myc is
overexpressed in the B-cell compartment (termed E(mu)-Myc/+) with L24
(RPL24; 604180) heterozygous mice, which have overall decreased protein
synthesis. By lowering the threshold of protein production in L24
heterozygote mice, the increased protein synthesis rates and cell size
in the E(mu)-Myc heterozygote cells were restored to normal levels in
the compound heterozygote mice. This effect suppressed the oncogenic
potential of Myc in this context. Barna et al. (2008) concluded that the
ability of Myc to increase protein synthesis directly augments cell size
and is sufficient to accelerate cell cycle progression independently of
known cell cycle targets transcriptionally regulated by Myc. In
addition, when protein synthesis is restored to normal levels,
Myc-overexpressing precancerous cells are more efficiently eliminated by
programmed cell death. Barna et al. (2008) suggested that their findings
revealed a mechanism that links increases in general protein synthesis
rates downstream of an oncogenic signal to a specific molecular
impairment in the modality of translation initiation used to regulate
the expression of selective mRNAs. Barna et al. (2008) showed that an
aberrant increase in cap-dependent translation downstream of Myc
hyperactivation specifically impairs the translational switch to
internal ribosomal entry site (IRES)-dependent translation that is
required for accurate mitotic progression. Failure of this translational
switch results in reduced mitotic-specific expression of the endogenous
IRES-dependent form of Cdk11 (176873), which leads to cytokinesis
defects and is associated with increased centrosome numbers and genome
instability in E(mu)-Myc/+ mice. When accurate translational control is
reestablished in E(mu)-Myc/+ mice, genome instability is suppressed.

Altered glucose metabolism in cancer cells is termed the Warburg effect,
which describes the propensity of most cancer cells to take up glucose
avidly and convert it primarily to lactate, despite available oxygen.
Cancer cells also depend on continued mitochondrial function for
metabolism, specifically glutaminolysis that catabolizes glutamine to
generate ATP and lactate. Glutamine, which is highly transported into
proliferating cells, is a major source of energy and nitrogen for
biosynthesis, and a carbon substrate for anabolic processes in cancer
cells. Gao et al. (2009) reported that the c-Myc oncogenic transcription
factor, which is known to regulate microRNAs and stimulate cell
proliferation, transcriptionally represses miR23a (607962) and miR23b
(610723), resulting in greater expression of their target protein,
mitochondrial glutaminase (GLS; 138280), in human P-493 B lymphoma cells
and PC3 prostate cancer cells. This effect leads to upregulation of
glutamine catabolism. Glutaminase converts glutamine to glutamate, which
is further catabolized through the tricarboxylic acid cycle for the
production of ATP or serves as substrate for glutathione synthesis. Gao
et al. (2009) concluded that the unique means by which Myc regulates
glutaminase uncovers a previously unsuspected link between Myc
regulation of microRNAs, glutamine metabolism, and energy and reactive
oxygen species homeostasis.

Liu et al. (2012) showed in human and murine cell lines that oncogenic
levels of MYC established a dependence on AMP-related kinase-5 (ARK5;
608130) for maintaining metabolic homeostasis and for cell survival.
ARK5 is an upstream regulator of AMPK and limits protein synthesis via
the mTOR complex-1 (see 601231) signaling pathway. ARK5 also maintains
expression of mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes and respiratory
capacity, which is required for efficient glutamine metabolism.
Inhibition of ARK5 leads to a collapse of cellular ATP levels in cells
expressing deregulated MYC, inducing multiple proapoptotic responses as
a secondary consequence. Depletion of ARK5 prolonged survival in
MYC-driven mouse models of hepatocellular carcinoma, demonstrating that
targeting cellular energy homeostasis is a valid therapeutic strategy to
eliminate tumor cells that express deregulated MYC.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Nair and Burley (2003) determined the x-ray structures of the
basic/helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper (bHLHZ) domains of MYC-MAX and MAD
(600021)-MAX heterodimers bound to their common DNA target, the enhancer
box (E box) hexanucleotide (5-prime-CACGTG-3-prime), at 1.9- and
2.0-angstrom resolution, respectively. E-box recognition by these 2
structurally similar transcription factor pairs determines whether a
cell will divide and proliferate (MYC-MAX) or differentiate and become
quiescent (MAD-MAX). Deregulation of MYC has been implicated in the
development of many human cancers, including Burkitt lymphoma (113970),
neuroblastomas, and small cell lung cancers. Both quasisymmetric
heterodimers resemble the symmetric MAX homodimer, albeit with marked
structural differences in the coiled-coil leucine zipper regions that
explain preferential homo- and heteromeric dimerization of these 3
evolutionarily related DNA-binding proteins. The MYC-MAX heterodimer,
but not its MAD-MAX counterpart, dimerizes to form a bivalent
heterotetramer, explaining how MYC can upregulate expression of genes
with promoters bearing widely separated E boxes.

CYTOGENETICS

- Translocations of MYC in Burkitt Lymphoma

Taub et al. (1982) found that in 2 Burkitt lymphoma (113970) cell lines,
MYC was translocated into a DNA restriction fragment that also encoded
the immunoglobulin mu chain gene (IGHM; 147020). In a mouse
plasmacytoma, the MYC gene was translocated into the immunoglobulin
alpha switch region.

Maguire et al. (1983) found that Burkitt and non-Burkitt lymphomas with
either an 8;14 or an 8;22 translocation expressed 2- to 5-fold more
MYC-specific RNA than B-cell lines without a translocation. Tumor cell
lines of American origin with a translocation of either type expressed
similar amounts of MYC-specific RNA. Tumor cell lines of African origin
contained slightly higher levels of MYC-specific RNA than American
lines, but the level did not correlate with absence or presence of
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). No MOS-related transcripts were found in these
tumors. In Burkitt lymphomas bearing the 8;14 translocation, the MYC
gene is translocated to a heavy chain switch recombination region (mu or
alpha). See Adams et al. (1983).

The 14q marker in Burkitt lymphoma was first found by Manolov and
Manolova (1972). Zech et al. (1976) showed that the extra chromosomal
material joined to the end of one chromosome 14 was derived from the
distal part of 8q. Bernheim et al. (1981) found either 2;8 or 8;22
translocation in about 10% of cases. The translocations separate the MYC
gene from its normal promoter and 5-prime regulatory machinery, and
place it under some regulatory element associated with the
immunoglobulin gene. By hybrid cell studies of mouse plasmacytoma cells
and Burkitt lymphoma cells, Nishikura et al. (1983) showed that cells
containing the MYC gene on a translocation chromosome expressed high
levels of human specific MYC transcripts, whereas hybrid cells
containing the untranslocated MYC gene on the normal chromosome did not
contain such MYC mRNA. Usually in t(8;14) translocations, the MYC gene
is translocated to 14q. When the break occurs between the MYC first and
second exons, both segments are transcriptionally active.

Croce et al. (1983) studied somatic cell hybrids between mouse myeloma
cells and a Burkitt lymphoma human cell line with a t(8;22) chromosome
translocation. The MYC gene was found to remain on chromosome 8q+; the
normal chromosome 8 remains transcriptionally silent. The lambda
constant region is translocated 3-prime to the MYC oncogene.

- Translocations of MYC in Other Cancers

Alitalo et al. (1983) found that the MYC gene, which is involved by
translocation in the generation of Burkitt lymphoma, was amplified,
resulting in homogeneously staining chromosomal regions (HSRs), in a
human neuroendocrine tumor cell line derived from a colon cancer. The
HSR resided on a distorted X chromosome; amplification of MYC had been
accompanied by translocation of the gene from its normal position on
chromosome 8q24.

Erikson et al. (1986) studied 2 T-cell leukemias with a t(8;14)(q24;q11)
chromosome translocation. In 1, rearrangement was detected in a region
immediately 3-prime to the MYC locus. In the second, the breakpoint in
the chromosome 14 occurred between genes for the variable and constant
regions of the T-cell receptor alpha chain (TCRA; see 186880). The
constant region locus had translocated to a region more than 38 kb
3-prime to the MYC gene, yet as was shown by the study of hybrids
between the human cells and mouse cells, only the hybrids carrying the
8q+ chromosome expressed MYC. Thus, deregulation of the MYC locus can
occur not only with translocation of the heavy chain locus or one or the
other light chain locus to chromosome 8 but also with translocation of
the TCRA locus.

Finger et al. (1986) found that in T-cell leukemias carrying a
t(8;14)(q24;q11) translocation the TCRA gene cluster was implicated with
translocation of a constant gene locus to a region 3-prime to the MYC
oncogene. Thus, in this T-cell neoplasia, a mechanism operates
comparable to that in B-cell neoplasms such as Burkitt lymphoma.

- Formation of Translocations

Roix et al. (2003) examined the question of why translocations between
chromosomes tend to recur at specific breakpoints in the genome. They
provided evidence that higher-order spatial genome organization is a
contributing factor in the formation of recurrent translocations. They
showed that MYC, BCL (168461), and immunoglobulin loci, which are
recurrently translocated in various B-cell lymphomas, are preferentially
positioned in close spatial proximity relative to each other in normal B
cells. Loci in spatial proximity are nonrandomly positioned toward the
interior of the nucleus in normal B cells. This locus proximity is the
consequence of higher-order genome structure rather than a property of
individual genes. The results suggested that the formation of specific
translocations in human lymphomas, and perhaps other tissues, is
determined in part by higher-order spatial organization of the genome.
Roix et al. (2003) first assessed the global nuclear organization of
translocation-prone genes by localizing them using fluorescence in situ
hybridization. The preferred positioning they found was statistically
distinct from a uniform random distribution. They then measured the
physical distance between MYC and its various translocation partners in
karyotypically normal cells and compared their physical proximity with
the clinically observed frequencies of translocation. They found that
MYC was separated from its 2 most frequent translocation partners, IgH
(see 147100) and IgL (147220), by 40.7% and 41.0% of the nuclear
diameter, respectively, whereas its separation from its rare
translocation partner, IgK (147200), was 47.1%. This last value was
similar to that observed for a negative control locus, TGFBR2 (190182),
which had never been reported to translocate with MYC; its mean
separation was 49.4% of the nuclear diameter.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Contrary to the previous belief that MYC is wildtype in both types of
tumors, Bhatia et al. (1993) found that 65% of 57 Burkitt lymphomas and
30% of 10 mouse plasmacytomas exhibited at least 1 amino acid
substitution (see, e.g., 190080.0001-190080.0004). These mutations were
apparently homozygous in all Burkitt lymphoma cell lines tested and in 2
tumor biopsies, implying that the mutations often occur before MYC/Ig
(see 147220) translocation. In the mouse plasmacytomas, only the mutant
myc allele was expressed, indicating a functional homozygosity with
occurrence of mutations at the translocation. Many of the observed
mutations were clustered in regions associated with transcriptional
activation and apoptosis, and in the Burkitt lymphomas, they frequently
occurred at sites of phosphorylation, suggesting that the mutations had
a pathogenetic role. Most of the mutations observed were clearly not
polymorphisms, for reasons in addition to the large number of different
mutations observed: 1) a high proportion were missense mutations; 2)
most tumors contained multiple mutations; and 3) each tumor had a unique
pattern of mutations.

In addition to immunoglobulin V genes, the 5-prime sequences of BCL6
(109565) and FAS (TNFRSF6; 134637) are mutated in normal germinal center
B lymphocytes. Genomic instability promotes tumorigenesis through
defective chromosome segregation and DNA mismatch repair inactivation.
By screening 18 loci for mutations, Pasqualucci et al. (2001) identified
changes in the germline sequences of PIM1 (164960), MYC, ARHH (602037),
and/or PAX5 (167414), in addition to BCL6, in a majority of diffuse
large-cell lymphomas (DLCLs; see 601889). No mutations in PIM1, MYC,
ARHH, and PAX5 were detected in germinal-center lymphocytes, naive B
cells, or B-cell malignancies other than DLCLs. MYC mutations, which
were found in 32% of DLCLs, were located downstream of the major P1/P2
promoters in exon 1 or downstream of the minor P3 promoter in exon 2.
FISH analysis indicated that hypermutation in these genes is not due to
chromosomal translocation, as seen in Burkitt lymphoma (113970).
Chromosomal translocation, however, may be an outcome of hypermutation.
Specific features of the hypermutation process, including the
predominance of single nucleotide substitutions with occasional
deletions or duplications, a preference for transitions over
transversions, and a specific motif targeting RGYW, were recognizable in
each of the hypermutated loci. Pasqualucci et al. (2001) proposed that
aberrant hypermutation of regulatory and coding sequences of genes that
do not represent physiologic targets may provide the basis for DLCL
pathogenesis and explain its phenotypic and clinical heterogeneity. This
hypermutation malfunction is unlikely to be due to defective DNA
mismatch repair and does not appear to involve activation-induced
deaminase (AICDA; 605257)

Sotelo et al. (2010) noted that dbSNP rs6983267, which is located within
enhancer E over 340 kb telomeric to MYC, is strongly associated with
susceptibility to colorectal cancer (CRCS2; 611469) and hereditary
prostate cancer (HPC10; 611100). The T allele of dbSNP rs6983267
consistently stimulated activity of a MYC reporter to a greater extent
than the G allele in both the presence and absence of beta-catenin/TCF4.
The effect of dbSNP rs6983267 was not large, but it was highly
reproducible, with p less than 0.0022.

EVOLUTION

Sequences of the MYC oncogene have been highly conserved throughout
evolution, from Drosophila to vertebrates (Shilo and Weinberg, 1981).

Atchley and Fitch (1995) described phylogenetic analyses for 45 MYC
protein sequences. A gene duplication early in vertebrate evolution
produced the c-myc lineage and another lineage that later gave rise to
the N- and L-myc lineages by another gene duplication. Evolutionary
divergence in the MYC gene family corresponded closely to the known
branching order of the major vertebrate groups. The closely related
dimerization partner protein MAX exhibited significantly less
variability than MYC. Atchley and Fitch (1995) suggested a reduced
variability in MAX stems from natural selection acting to preserve
dimerization capability with products of MYC and related genes.

ANIMAL MODEL

Trumpp et al. (2001) reported the generation of an allelic series of
mice in which Myc expression is incrementally reduced to zero.
Fibroblasts from these mice showed reduced proliferation, and after
complete loss of Myc function they exited the cell cycle. Trumpp et al.
(2001) showed that Myc activity is not needed for cellular growth but
does determine the percentage of activated T cells that reenter the cell
cycle. In vivo, reduction of Myc levels resulted in reduced body mass
owing to multiorgan hypoplasia, in contrast to Drosophila dmyc mutants,
which are smaller as a result of hypotrophy. Trumpp et al. (2001) found
that dmyc substitutes for Myc in fibroblasts, indicating they have
similar biologic activities. Trumpp et al. (2001) concluded that there
may be fundamental differences in the mechanisms by which mammals and
insects control body size, and proposed that in mammals MYC controls the
decision to divide or not to divide and thereby functions as a crucial
mediator of signals that determine organ and body size.

Baudino et al. (2002) stated that c-Myc-null mice die by embryonic day
10.5 with defects in growth and in cardiac and neural development. They
determined that the lethality of c Myc-null embryos is associated with
profound defects in vasculogenesis and primitive erythropoiesis, and
compromised differentiation and growth of yolk sac and embryonic stem
(ES) cells. Further, c-Myc expression was required for the expression of
Vegf 192240, angiopoietin-2 (601922), thrombospondin-1 (188060), and
angiopoietin-1 (601667), and expression of Vegf partially rescued the
lethal defects. ES cells from c-Myc-null animals were impaired in their
ability to form tumors in immune-compromised mice, and the small tumors
that sometimes developed were poorly vascularized. Baudino et al. (2002)
concluded that c-Myc is necessary for the angiogenic switch for the
progression and metastasis of tumors, and that c-Myc promotes cell
growth and transformation, as well as vascular and hematopoietic
development, by functioning as a master regulator of angiogenic factors.

To explore the role of MYC in carcinogenesis, Pelengaris et al. (2002)
developed a reversible transgenic mouse model of pancreatic beta-cell
oncogenesis using a switchable form of the MYC protein. Activation of
MYC in adult, mature beta cells induced uniform beta-cell proliferation
but was accompanied by overwhelming apoptosis that rapidly eroded
beta-cell mass. Thus, the oncogenic potential of MYC in beta cells was
masked by apoptosis. Upon suppression of MYC-induced beta-cell apoptosis
by coexpression of BCLXL (600039), MYC triggered rapid and uniform
progression into angiogenic, invasive tumors. Subsequent MYC
deactivation induced rapid regression associated with vascular
degeneration and beta-cell apoptosis. These data indicated that highly
complex neoplastic lesions can be both induced and maintained in vivo by
a simple combination of 2 interlocking molecular lesions.

Jain et al. (2002) used a conditional transgenic mouse model for
MYC-induced tumorigenesis to demonstrate that brief inactivation of MYC
results in the sustained regression of tumors and the differentiation of
osteogenic sarcoma cells into mature osteocytes. Subsequent reactivation
of MYC did not restore the cells' malignant properties but instead
induced apoptosis. Thus, Jain et al. (2002) concluded that brief MYC
inactivation appears to cause epigenetic changes in tumor cells that
render them insensitive to MYC-induced tumorigenesis. The authors raised
the possibility that transient inactivation of MYC may be an effective
therapy for certain cancers.

Langenau et al. (2003) described the induction of clonally derived T
cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia in transgenic zebrafish expressing
mouse c-Myc under the control of the zebrafish Rag2 promoter.
Visualization of leukemic cells expressing a chimeric transgene encoding
MYC fused to green fluorescent protein (GFP) revealed that leukemias
arose in the thymus, spread locally into gill arches and retroorbital
soft tissue, and then disseminated into skeletal muscle and abdominal
organs. Leukemic cells homed back to the thymus in irradiated fish
transplanted with GFP-labeled leukemic lymphoblasts. This transgenic
model provided a platform for drug screens and genetic screens aimed at
identifying mutations that suppress or enhance c-MYC-induced
carcinogenesis.

Shachaf et al. (2004) generated transgenic mice that conditionally
overexpressed Myc in liver cells. Upon Myc activation, all transgenic
mice developed liver tumors and succumbed to invasive liver cancers. Myc
inactivation induced tumor regression and the differentiation of tumor
cells into normal liver cells. Their tumorigenic potential remained
dormant as long as Myc remained inactive; Myc reactivation immediately
restored their neoplastic properties.

Ruggero et al. (2004) generated transgenic mice that overexpressed
translation initiation factor-4E (EIF4E; 133440) and observed a marked
increase in tumorigenesis in the mice compared with their wildtype
littermates. When the transgenic mice were intercrossed with a strain
overexpressing Myc, the double-transgenic offspring developed lymphoma
at a markedly accelerated rate. In the double-transgenic B cells, the
ability of Myc to induce apoptosis was markedly reduced, and eif4e's
induction of cellular senescence in vivo in splenic B cells was
completely abrogated. Ruggero et al. (2004) concluded that EIF4E and MYC
cooperate in inducing B-cell lymphomagenesis.

The normal function of MYC includes roles in the development,
proliferation, and survival of lymphocytes. Refaeli et al. (2005) found
that certain Myc transgenes elicited a murine lymphoma similar to
Burkitt lymphoma. The lymphoma required cooperation between Myc and an
autoantigenic stimulus of B cells, as well as a breach of immune
tolerance. Refaeli et al. (2005) demonstrated that overexpression of Myc
itself accounted for the breach of tolerance, which they attributed to
the ability of Myc to serve as a surrogate for cytokines. Myc
overexpression resulted in activated B cells that produced copious
amounts of autoantibody and engendered immune complex disease in the
kidney in response to a normally tolerated transgenic autoantigen.

To elucidate the role MYC has in the intestine after APC (611731) loss,
Sansom et al. (2007) simultaneously deleted both Apc and Myc in the
adult murine small intestine. They showed that loss of Myc rescued the
phenotypes of perturbed differentiation, migration, proliferation, and
apoptosis, which occur on deletion of Apc. Remarkably, this rescue
occurred in the presence of high levels of nuclear beta-catenin. Array
analysis revealed that Myc is required for the majority of Wnt (see
164820) target gene activation following Apc loss. Sansom et al. (2007)
concluded that these data established MYC as the critical mediator of
the early stages of neoplasia following APC loss.

Goga et al. (2007) examined the effects of inhibition of CDK1 (116940)
in the context of different oncogenic signals. Cells transformed with
MYC, but not cells transformed by a panel of other activated oncogenes,
rapidly underwent apoptosis when treated with small-molecule CDK1
inhibitors. The inhibitor of apoptosis protein survivin (BIRC5; 603352),
a non-CDK target, was required for the survival of cells overexpressing
MYC. Inhibition of CDK1 rapidly downregulated survivin expression and
induced MYC-dependent apoptosis. CDK1 inhibitor treatment of
MYC-dependent mouse lymphoma and hepatoblastoma tumors decreased tumor
growth and prolonged their survival.

Soucek et al. (2008) used a dominant-interfering Myc mutant to determine
both the therapeutic impact and side effects of Myc inhibition in a
preclinical mouse model of Ras (see 190020)-induced lung adenocarcinoma.
They showed that Myc inhibition triggers rapid regression of incipient
and established lung tumors, defining an unexpected role for endogenous
Myc function in the maintenance of Ras-dependent tumors in vivo.
Systemic Myc inhibition also exerts profound effects on normal
regenerating tissues. However, these effects are well tolerated over
extended periods and rapidly and completely reversible. Soucek et al.
(2008) concluded that their data demonstrated the feasibility of
targeting Myc, a common downstream conduit for many oncogenic signals,
as an effective, efficient, and tumor-specific cancer therapy.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BURKITT LYMPHOMA
MYC, PRO57SER

Bhatia et al. (1993) found homozygosity for a CCC-to-TCC transition
converting proline-57 to serine in Burkitt lymphoma-20 (DIF) (113970).

.0002
BURKITT LYMPHOMA
MYC, ASN86THR

Bhatia et al. (1993) found homozygosity for an AAC-to-ACC transition
converting asparagine-86 to threonine in Burkitt lymphoma-21 (DS179)
(113970).

.0003
BURKITT LYMPHOMA
MYC, GLU39ASP

Bhatia et al. (1993) found homozygosity for a GAG-to-GAC transversion
converting glutamic acid-39 to aspartic acid in Burkitt lymphoma-25
(JLP) (113970).

.0004
BURKITT LYMPHOMA
MYC, PRO59ALA

Bhatia et al. (1993) found homozygosity for a CCG to GCG transversion
converting proline-59 to alanine in Burkitt lymphoma-30 (WMN) (113970).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Battey et al. (1983); Beimling et al. (1985); Bernard et al. (1983);
Colby et al. (1983); Dalla-Favera et al. (1982); Dunnick et al. (1983);
Erikson et al. (1983); Hamlyn and Rabbitts (1983); Hayday et al. (1984);
Henderson et al. (1983); Magrath et al. (1983); Marcu et al. (1983);
Murphy et al. (1986); Neel et al. (1982); Persson et al. (1984); Peschle
et al. (1984); Saito et al. (1983); Sakaguchi et al. (1983); Watt
et al. (1983); Watt et al. (1983)
REFERENCE 1. Adams, J. M.; Gerondakis, S.; Webb, E.; Corcoran, L. M.; Cory,
S.: Cellular myc oncogene is altered by chromosome translocation
to an immunoglobulin locus in murine plasmacytomas and is rearranged
similarly in human Burkitt lymphomas. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80:
1982-1986, 1983.

2. Alitalo, K.; Schwab, M.; Lin, C. C.; Varmus, H. E.; Bishop, J.
M.: Homogeneously staining chromosomal regions contain amplified
copies of an abundantly expressed cellular oncogene (c-myc) in malignant
neuroendocrine cells from a human colon carcinoma. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 80: 1707-1711, 1983.

3. Atchley, W. R.; Fitch, W. M.: Myc and Max: molecular evolution
of a family of proto-oncogene products and their dimerization partner. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 10217-10221, 1995.

4. Barna, M.; Pusic, A.; Zollo, O.; Costa, M.; Kondrashov, N.; Rego,
E.; Rao, P. H.; Ruggero, D.: Suppression of Myc oncogenic activity
by ribosomal protein haploinsufficiency. Nature 456: 971-975, 2008.

5. Battey, J.; Moulding, C.; Taub, R.; Murphy, W.; Stewart, T.; Potter,
H.; Lenoir, G.; Leder, P.: The human c-myc oncogene: structural consequences
of translocation into the IgH locus in Burkitt lymphoma. Cell 34:
779-787, 1983.

6. Baudino, T. A.; McKay, C.; Pendeville-Samain, H.; Nilsson, J. A.;
Maclean, K. H.; White, E. L.; Davis, A. C.; Ihle, J. N.; Cleveland,
J. L.: cMyc is essential for vasculogenesis and angiogenesis during
development and tumor progress. Genes Dev. 16: 2530-2543, 2002.

7. Beimling, P.; Benter, T.; Sander, T.; Moelling, K.: Isolation
and characterization of the human cellular myc gene product. Biochemistry 24:
6349-6355, 1985.

8. Bernard, O.; Cory, S.; Gerondakis, S.; Webb, E.; Adams, J. M.:
Sequence of the murine and human cellular myc oncogenes and two modes
of myc transcription resulting from chromosome translocation in B
lymphoid tumours. EMBO J. 2: 2375-2383, 1983.

9. Bernheim, A.; Berger, R.; Lenoir, G.: Cytogenetic studies on African
Burkitt's lymphoma cell lines: t(8;14), t(2;8) and t(8;22) translocations. Cancer
Genet. Cytogenet. 3: 307-315, 1981.

10. Bhatia, K.; Huppi, K.; Spangler, G.; Siwarski, D.; Iyer, R.; Magrath,
I.: Point mutations in the c-Myc transactivation domain are common
in Burkitt's lymphoma and mouse plasmacytomas. Nature Genet. 5:
56-61, 1993.

11. Claveria, C.; Giovinazzo, G.; Sierra, R.; Torres, M.: Myc-driven
endogenous cell competition in the early mammalian embryo. Nature 500:
39-44, 2013.

12. Colby, W. W.; Chen, E. Y.; Smith, D. H.; Levinson, A. D.: Identification
and nucleotide sequence of a human locus homologous to the v-myc oncogene
of avian myelocytomatosis virus MC29. Nature 301: 722-725, 1983.

13. Cole, M. D.: The myc oncogene: its role in transformation and
differentiation. Annu. Rev. Genet. 20: 361-384, 1986.

14. Collins, S.; Groudine, M.: Amplification of endogenous myc-related
DNA sequences in a human myeloid leukaemia cell line. Nature 298:
679-681, 1982.

15. Couturier, J.; Sastre-Garau, X.; Schneider-Maunoury, S.; Labib,
A.; Orth, G.: Integration of papillomavirus DNA near myc genes in
genital carcinomas and its consequences for proto-oncogene expression. J.
Virol. 65: 4534-4538, 1991.

16. Croce, C. M.; Thierfelder, W.; Erikson, J.; Nishikura, K.; Finan,
J.; Lenoir, G. M.; Nowell, P. C.: Transcriptional activation of an
unrearranged and untranslocated c-myc oncogene by translocation of
a C-lambda locus in Burkitt lymphoma cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80:
6922-6926, 1983.

17. Dalla-Favera, R.; Bregni, M.; Erikson, J.; Patterson, D.; Gallo,
R. C.; Croce, C. M.: Human c-myc onc gene is located on the region
of chromosome 8 that is translocated in Burkitt lymphoma cells. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 79: 7824-7827, 1982.

18. Dalla-Favera, R.; Gelmann, E. P.; Martinotti, S.; Franchini, G.;
Papas, T. S.; Gallo, R. C.; Wong-Staal, F.: Cloning and characterization
of different human sequences related to the onc gene (v-myc) of avian
myelocytomatosis virus (MC29). Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 79: 6497-6501,
1982.

19. Dominguez-Sola, D.; Ying, C. Y.; Grandori, C.; Ruggiero, L.; Chen,
B.; Li, M.; Galloway, D. A.; Gu, W.; Gautier, J.; Dalla-Favera, R.
: Non-transcriptional control of DNA replication by c-Myc. Nature 448:
445-451, 2007.

20. Duesberg, P. H.: Cancer genes: rare recombinants instead of activated
oncogenes (a review). Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 2117-2124, 1987.

21. Dunnick, W.; Shell, B. E.; Dery, C.: DNA sequences near the site
of reciprocal recombination between a c-myc oncogene and an immunoglobulin
switch region. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 7269-7273, 1983.

22. Erikson, J.; Finger, L.; Sun, L.; ar-Rushdi, A.; Nishikura, K.;
Minowada, J.; Finan, J.; Emanuel, B. S.; Nowell, P. C.; Croce, C.
M.: Deregulation of c-myc by translocation of the alpha-locus of
the T-cell receptor in T-cell leukemias. Science 232: 884-886, 1986.

23. Erikson, J.; Nishikura, K.; ar-Rushdi, A.; Finan, J.; Emanuel,
B.; Lenoir, G.; Nowell, P. C.; Croce, C. M.: Translocation of an
immunoglobulin kappa locus to a region 3-prime of an unrearranged
c-myc oncogene enhances c-myc transcription. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80:
7581-7585, 1983.

24. Feng, X.-H.; Liang, Y.-Y.; Liang, M.; Zhai, W.; Lin, X.: Direct
interaction of c-Myc with Smad2 and Smad3 to inhibit TGF-beta-mediated
induction of the CDK inhibitor p15(Ink4B). Molec. Cell 9: 133-143,
2002.

25. Finger, L. R.; Harvey, R. C.; Moore, R. C. A.; Showe, L. C.; Croce,
C. M.: A common mechanism of chromosomal translocation in T- and
B-cell neoplasia. Science 234: 982-985, 1986.

26. Gao, P.; Tchernyshyov, I.; Chang, T.-C.; Lee, Y.-S.; Kita, K.;
Ochi, T.; Zeller, K. I.; De Marzo, A. M.; Van Eyk, J. E.; Mendell,
J. T.; Dang, C. V.: c-Myc suppression of miR-23a/b enhances mitochondrial
glutaminase expression and glutamine metabolism. Nature 458: 762-765,
2009.

27. Goga, A. Yang, D.; Tward, A. D.; Morgan, D. O.; Bishop, J. M.
: Inhibition of CDK1 as a potential therapy for tumors over-expressing
MYC. Nature Med. 13: 820-827, 2007.

28. Gomez-Roman, N.; Grandori, C.; Eisenman, R. N.; White, R. J.:
Direct activation of RNA polymerase III transcription by c-Myc. Nature 421:
290-294, 2003.

29. Grandori, C.; Mac, J.; Siebelt, F.; Ayer, D. E.; Eisenman, R.
N.: Myc-Max heterodimers activate a DEAD box gene and interact with
multiple E box-related sites in vivo. EMBO J. 15: 4344-4357, 1996.

30. Hamlyn, P. H.; Rabbitts, T. H.: Translocation joins c-myc and
immunoglobulin gamma-1 genes in a Burkitt lymphoma revealing a third
exon in the c-myc oncogene. Nature 304: 135-139, 1983.

31. Hanna, J.; Saha, K.; Pando, B.; van Zon, J.; Lengner, C. J.; Creyghton,
M. P.; van Oudenaarden, A.; Jaenisch, R.: Direct cell reprogramming
is a stochastic process amenable to acceleration. Nature 462: 595-601,
2009.

32. Hayday, A. C.; Gillies, S. D.; Saito, H.; Wood, C.; Wiman, K.;
Hayward, W. S.; Tonegawa, S.: Activation of a translocated human
c-myc gene by an enhancer in the immunoglobulin heavy-chain locus. Nature 307:
334-340, 1984.

33. He, L.; Thomson, J. M.; Hemann, M. T.; Hernando-Monge, E.; Mu,
D.; Goodson, S.; Powers, S.; Cordon-Cardo, C.; Lowe, S. W.; Hannon,
G. J.; Hammond, S. M.: A microRNA polycistron as a potential human
oncogene. Nature 435: 828-833, 2005.

34. He, T.-C.; Sparks, A. B.; Rago, C.; Hermeking, H.; Zawel, L.;
da Costa, L. T.; Morin, P. J.; Vogelstein, B.; Kinzler, K. W.: Identification
of c-MYC as a target of the APC pathway. Science 281: 1509-1512,
1998.

35. Heim, S.; Mitelman, F.: Nineteen of 26 cellular oncogenes precisely
localized in the human genome map to one of the 83 bands involved
in primary cancer-specific rearrangements. Hum. Genet. 75: 70-72,
1987.

36. Hemann, M. T.; Bric, A.; Teruya-Feldstein, J.; Herbst, A.; Nilsson,
J. A.; Cordon-Cardo, C.; Cleveland, J. L.; Tansey, W. P.; Lowe, S.
W.: Evasion of the p53 tumour surveillance network by tumour-derived
MYC mutants. Nature 436: 807-811, 2005.

37. Henderson, A.; Ripley, S.; Heller, M.; Kieff, E.: Chromosome
site for Epstein-Barr virus DNA in a Burkitt tumor cell line and in
lymphocytes growth-transformed in vitro. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80:
1987-1991, 1983.

38. Herold, S.; Wanzel, M.; Beuger, V.; Frohme, C.; Beul, D.; Hillukkala,
T.; Syvaoja, J.; Saluz, H.-P.; Haenel, F.; Eilers, M.: Negative regulation
of the mammalian UV response by Myc through association with Miz-1. Molec.
Cell 10: 509-521, 2002.

39. Ioannidis, P.; Mahaira, L.; Papadopoulou, A.; Teixeira, M. R.;
Heim, S.; Andersen, J. A.; Evangelou, E.; Dafni, U.; Pandis, N.; Trangas,
T.: 8q24 copy number gains and expression of the c-myc mRNA stabilizing
protein CRD-BP in primary breast carcinomas. Int. J. Cancer 104:
54-59, 2003.

40. Jain, M.; Arvanitis, C.; Chu, K.; Dewey, W.; Leonhardt, E.; Trinh,
M.; Sundberg, C. D.; Bishop, J. M.; Felsher, D. W.: Sustained loss
of a neoplastic phenotype by brief inactivation of MYC. Science 297:
102-104, 2002.

41. Kessler, J. D.; Kahle, K. T.; Sun, T.; Meerbrey, K. L.; Schlabach,
M. R.; Schmitt, E. M.; Skinner, S. O.; Xu, Q.; Li, M. Z.; Hartman,
Z. C.; Rao, M.; Yu, P.; and 15 others: A SUMOylation-dependent
transcriptional subprogram is required for Myc-driven tumorigenesis. Science 335:
348-353, 2012.

42. Kim, J. B.; Zaehres, H.; Wu, G.; Gentile, L.; Ko, K.; Sebastiano,
V.; Arauzo-Bravo, M. J.; Ruau, D.; Han, D. W.; Zenke, M.; Scholer,
H. R.: Pluripotent stem cells induced from adult neural stem cells
by reprogramming with two factors. Nature 454: 646-650, 2008.

43. Langenau, D. M.; Traver, D.; Ferrando, A. A.; Kutok, J. L.; Aster,
J. C.; Kanki, J. P.; Lin, S.; Prochownik, E.; Trede, N. S.; Zon, L.
I.; Look, A. T.: Myc-induced T cell leukemia in transgenic zebrafish. Science 299:
887-890, 2003.

44. Leder, P.: Personal Communication. Boston, Mass.  10/1/1982.

45. Lee, T. C.; Li, L.; Philipson, L.; Ziff, E. B.: Myc represses
transcription of the growth arrest gene gas1. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94:
12886-12891, 1997.

46. Leone, G.; Sears, R.; Huang, E.; Rempel, R.; Nuckolls, F.; Park,
C.-H.; Giangrande, P.; Wu, L.; Saavedra, H. I.; Field, S. J.; Thompson,
M. A.; Yang, H.; Fujiwara, Y.; Greenberg, M. E.; Orkin, S.; Smith,
C.; Nevins, J. R.: Myc requires distinct E2F activities to induce
S phase and apoptosis. Molec. Cell 8: 105-113, 2001.

47. Leven, D.: Disentangling the MYC web. (Commentary) Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 99: 5757-5759, 2002.

48. Liu, L.; Ulbrich, J.; Muller, J.; Wustefeld, T.; Aeberhard, L.;
Kress, T. R.; Muthalagu, N.; Rycak, L.; Rudalska, R.; Mull, R.; Kempa
S.; Zender, L.; Eilers, M.; Murphy, D. J.: Deregulated MYC expression
induces dependence upon AMPK-related kinase 5. Nature 483: 608-612,
2012.

49. Ma, T.; Copland, J. A.; Brasier, A. R.; Thompson, E. A.: A novel
glucocorticoid receptor binding element within the murine c-myc promoter. Molec.
Endocr. 14: 1377-1386, 2000.

50. Magrath, I.; Erikson, J.; Whang-Peng, J.; Sieverts, H.; Armstrong,
G.; Benjamin, D.; Triche, T.; Alabaster, O.; Croce, C. M.: Synthesis
of kappa light chains by cell lines containing an 8;22 chromosomal
translocation derived from a male homosexual with Burkitt's lymphoma. Science 222:
1094-1098, 1983.

51. Maguire, R. T.; Robins, T. S.; Thorgeirsson, S. S.; Heilman, C.
A.: Expression of cellular myc and mos genes in undifferentiated
B cell lymphomas of Burkitt and non-Burkitt types. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 80: 1947-1950, 1983.

52. Manolov, G.; Manolova, Y.: Marker band in one chromosome 14 from
Burkitt lymphomas. Nature 237: 33-34, 1972.

53. Marcu, K. B.; Harris, L. J.; Stanton, L. W.; Erikson, J.; Watt,
R.; Croce, C. M.: Transcriptionally active c-myc oncogene is contained
within NIARD, a DNA sequence associated with chromosome translocations
in B-cell neoplasia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 519-523, 1983.

54. Menssen, A.; Hermeking, H.: Characterization of the c-MYC-regulated
transcriptome by SAGE: identification and analysis of c-MYC target
genes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 6274-6279, 2002.

55. Mitelman, F.: Catalog of Chromosome Aberrations in Cancer.
New York: Alan R. Liss (pub.)  (2nd ed.): 1985.

56. Morse, B.; Rotherg, P. G.; South, V. J.; Spandorfer, J. M.; Astrin,
S. M.: Insertional mutagenesis of the myc locus by a LINE-1 sequence
in a human breast carcinoma. Nature 333: 87-90, 1988.

57. Murphy, W.; Sarid, J.; Taub, R.; Vasicek, T.; Battey, J.; Lenoir,
G.; Leder, P.: A translocated human c-myc oncogene is altered in
a conserved coding sequence. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 2939-2943,
1986.

58. Nair, S. K.; Burley, S. K.: X-ray structures of Myc-Max and Mad-Max
recognizing DNA: molecular bases of regulation by proto-oncogenic
transcription factors. Cell 112: 193-205, 2003.

59. Neel, B. G.; Jhanwar, S. C.; Chaganti, R. S. K.; Hayward, W. S.
: Two human c-onc genes are located on the long arm of chromosome
8. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 79: 7842-7846, 1982.

60. Nishikura, K.; ar-Rushdi, A.; Erikson, J.; Watt, R.; Rovera, G.;
Croce, C. M.: Differential expression of the normal and of the translocated
human c-myc oncogenes in B cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 4822-4826,
1983.

61. Noubissi, F. K.; Elcheva, I.; Bhatia, N.; Shakoori, A.; Ougolkov,
A.; Liu, J.; Minamoto, T.; Ross, J.; Fuchs, S. Y.; Spiegelman, V.
S.: CRD-BP mediates stabilization of beta-TrCP1 and c-myc mRNA in
response to beta-catenin signalling. Nature 441: 898-901, 2006.

62. O'Donnell, K. A.; Wentzel, E. A.; Zeller, K. I.; Dang, C. V.;
Mendell, J. T.: c-Myc-regulated microRNAs modulate E2F1 expression. Nature 435:
839-843, 2005.

63. Okita, K.; Ichisaka, T.; Yamanaka, S.: Generation of germline-competent
induced pluripotent stem cells. Nature 448: 313-317, 2007.

64. Okita, K.; Nakagawa, M.; Hyenjong, H.; Ichisaka, T.; Yamanaka,
S.: Generation of mouse induced pluripotent stem cells without viral
vectors. Science 322: 949-953, 2008.

65. Palomero, T.; Lim, W. K.; Odom, D. T.; Sulis, M. L.; Real, P.
J.; Margolin, A.; Barnes, K. C.; O'Neil, J.; Neuberg, D.; Weng, A.
P.; Aster, J. C.; Sigaux, F.; Soulier, J.; Look, A. T.; Young, R.
A.; Califano, A.; Ferrando, A. A.: NOTCH1 directly regulates c-MYC
and activates a feed-forward-loop transcriptional network promoting
leukemic cell growth. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 18261-18266, 2006.
Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 4240 only, 2007.

66. Park, I.-H.; Zhao, R.; West, J. A.; Yabuuchi, A.; Huo, H.; Ince,
T. A.; Lerou, P. H.; Lensch, M. W.; Daley, G. Q.: Reprogramming of
human somatic cells to pluripotency with defined factors. Nature 451:
141-146, 2008.

67. Pasqualucci, L.; Neumeister, P.; Goossens, T.; Nanjangud, G.;
Chaganti, R. S. K.; Kuppers, R.; Dalla-Favera, R.: Hypermutation
of multiple proto-oncogenes in B-cell diffuse large-cell lymphomas. Nature 412:
341-346, 2001.

68. Pelengaris, S.; Khan, M.; Evan, G. I.: Suppression of Myc-induced
apoptosis in beta cells exposes multiple oncogenic properties of Myc
and triggers carcinogenic progression. Cell 109: 321-334, 2002.

69. Persson, H.; Hennighausen, L.; Taub, R.; DeGrado, W.; Leder, P.
: Antibodies to human c-myc oncogene product: evidence of an evolutionarily
conserved protein induced during cell proliferation. Science 225:
687-693, 1984.

70. Persson, H.; Leder, P.: Nuclear localization and DNA binding
properties of a protein expressed by human c-myc oncogene. Science 225:
718-721, 1984.

71. Peschle, C.; Mavilio, F.; Sposi, N. M.; Giampaolo, A.; Care, A.;
Bottero, L.; Bruno, M.; Mastroberardino, G.; Gastaldi, R.; Testa,
M. G.; Alimena, G.; Amadori, S.; Mandelli, F.: Translocation and
rearrangement of c-myc into immunoglobulin alpha heavy chain locus
in primary cells from acute lymphocytic leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 81: 5514-5518, 1984.

72. Peukert, K.; Staller, P.; Schneider, A.; Carmichael, G.; Hanel,
F.; Eilers, M.: An alternative pathway for gene regulation by Myc. EMBO
J. 16: 5672-5686, 1997.

73. Qi, Y.; Gregory, M. A.; Li, Z.; Brousal, J. P.; West, K.; Hann,
S. R.: p19(ARF) directly and differentially controls the functions
of c-Myc independently of p53. Nature 431: 712-717, 2004.

74. Refaeli, Y.; Field, K. A.; Turner, B. C.; Trumpp, A.; Bishop,
J. M.: The protooncogene MYC can break B cell tolerance. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 102: 4097-4102, 2005.

75. Roix, J. J.; McQueen, P. G.; Munson, P. J.; Parada, L. A.; Misteli,
T.: Spatial proximity of translocation-prone gene loci in human lymphomas. Nature
Genet. 34: 287-291, 2003.

76. Ruggero, D.; Montanaro, L.; Ma, L.; Xu, W.; Londei, P.; Cordon-Cardo,
C.; Pandolfi, P. P.: The translation factor eIF-4E promotes tumor
formation and cooperates with c-Myc in lymphomagenesis. Nature Med. 10:
484-486, 2004.

77. Saito, H.; Hayday, A. C.; Wiman, K.; Hayward, W. S.; Tonegawa,
S.: Activation of the c-myc gene by translocation: a model for translational
control. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 7476-7480, 1983.

78. Sakaguchi, A. Y.; Lalley, P. A.; Naylor, S. L.: Human and mouse
cellular myc protooncogenes reside on chromosomes involved in numerical
and structural aberrations in cancer. Somat. Cell Genet. 9: 391-405,
1983.

79. Sansom, O. J.; Meniel, V. S.; Muncan, V.; Phesse, T. J.; Wilkins,
J. A.; Reed, K. R.; Vass, J. K.; Athineos, D.; Clevers, H.; Clarke,
A. R.: Myc deletion rescues Apc deficiency in the small intestine. Nature 446:
676-679, 2007.

80. Seoane, J.; Le, H.-V.; Massague, J.: Myc suppression of the p21(Cip1)
Cdk inhibitor influences the outcome of the p53 response to DNA damage. Nature 419:
729-734, 2002.

81. Shachaf, C. M.; Kopelman, A. M.; Arvanitis, C.; Karlsson, A.;
Beer, S.; Mandy, S.; Bachmann, M. H.; Borowsky, A. D.; Ruebner, B.;
Cardiff, R. D.; Yang, Q.; Bishop, J. M.; Contag, C. H.; Felsher, D.
W.: MYC inactivation uncovers pluripotent differentiation and tumour
dormancy in hepatocellular cancer. Nature 431: 1112-1117, 2004.

82. Shilo, B. Z.; Weinberg, R. A.: DNA sequences homologous to vertebrate
oncogenes are conserved in Drosophila melanogaster. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 78: 6789-6792, 1981.

83. Sotelo, J.; Esposito, D.; Duhagon, M. A.; Banfield, K.; Mehalko,
J.; Liao, H.; Stephens, R. M.; Harris, T. J. R.; Munroe, D. J.; Wu,
X.: Long-range enhancers on 8q24 regulate c-Myc. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 107: 3001-3005, 2010.

84. Soucek, L.; Whitfield, J.; Martins, C. P.; Finch, A. J.; Murphy,
D. J.; Sodir, N. M.; Karnezis, A. N.; Swigart, L. B.; Nasi, S.; Evan,
G. I.: Modelling Myc inhibition as a cancer therapy. Nature 455:
679-683, 2008.

85. Stadtfeld, M.; Nagaya, M.; Utikal, J.; Weir, G.; Hochedlinger,
K.: Induced pluripotent stem cells generated without viral integration. Science 322:
945-949, 2008.

86. Storlazzi, C. T.; Fioretos, T.; Paulsson, K.; Strombeck, B.; Lassen,
C.; Ahlgren, T.; Juliusson, G.; Mitelman, F.; Rocchi, M.; Johansson,
B.: Identification of a commonly amplified 4.3 Mb region with overexpression
of C8FW, but not MYC in MYC-containing double minutes in myeloid malignancies. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 13: 1479-1485, 2004.

87. Takahashi, E.; Hori, T.; O'Connell, P.; Leppert, M.; White, R.
: Mapping of the MYC gene to band 8q24.12-q24.13 by R-banding and
distal to fra(8)(q24.11), FRA8E, by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 57: 109-111, 1991.

88. Takahashi, K.; Yamanaka, S.: Induction of pluripotent stem cells
from mouse embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors. Cell 126:
663-676, 2006.

89. Taub, R.; Kirsch, I.; Morton, C.; Lenoir, G.; Swan, D.; Tronick,
S.; Aaronson, S.; Leder, P.: Translocation of the c-myc gene into
the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus in human Burkitt lymphoma and
murine plasmacytoma cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 79: 7837-7841,
1982.

90. Trumpp, A.; Refaeli, Y.; Oskarsson, T.; Gasser, S.; Murphy, M.;
Martin, G. R.; Bishop, J. M.: c-Myc regulates mammalian body size
by controlling cell number but not cell size. Nature 414: 768-773,
2001.

91. Vafa, O.; Wade, M.; Kern, S.; Beeche, M.; Pandita, T. K.; Hampton,
G. M.; Wahl, G. M.: c-Myc can induce DNA damage, increase reactive
oxygen species, and mitigate p53 function: a mechanism for oncogene-induced
genetic instability. Molec. Cell 9: 1031-1044, 2002.

92. Wang, J.; Hannon, G. J.; Beach, D. H.: Risky immortalization
by telomerase. (Letter) Nature 405: 755-756, 2000.

93. Watt, R.; Nishikura, K.; Sorrentino, J.; ar-Rushdi, A.; Croce,
C. M.; Rovera, G.: The structure and nucleotide sequence of the 5-prime
end of the human c-myc oncogene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 6307-6311,
1983.

94. Watt, R.; Stanton, L. W.; Marcu, K. B.; Gallo, R. C.; Croce, C.
M.; Rovera, G.: Nucleotide sequence of cloned cDNA of human c-myc
oncogene. Nature 303: 725-728, 1983.

95. Wernig, M.; Meissner, A.; Foreman, R.; Brambrink, T.; Ku, M.;
Hochedlinger, K.; Bernstein, B. E.; Jaenisch, R.: In vitro reprogramming
of fibroblasts into a pluripotent ES-cell-like state. Nature 448:
318-324, 2007.

96. Wu, K.-J.; Grandori, C.; Amacker, M.; Simon-Vermot, N.; Polack,
A.; Lingner, J.; Dalla-Favera, R.: Direct activation of TERT transcription
by c-MYC. Nature Genet. 21: 220-224, 1999.

97. Wu, K.-J.; Polack, A.; Dalla-Favera, R.: Coordinated regulation
of iron-controlling genes, H-ferritin and IRP2, by c-MYC. Science 283:
676-679, 1999.

98. Yokota, J.; Tsunetsugu-Yokota, Y.; Battifora, H.; Le Fevre, C.;
Cline, M. J.: Alterations of myc, myb, and ras(Ha) proto-oncogenes
in cancers are frequent and show clinical correlation. Science 231:
261-265, 1986.

99. Zech, L.; Haglund, U.; Nilsson, K.; Klein, G.: Characteristic
chromosomal abnormalities in biopsies and lymphoid-cell lines from
patients with Burkitt and non-Burkitt lymphomas. Int. J. Cancer 17:
47-56, 1976.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/3/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/20/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/15/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/14/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/12/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/28/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/18/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/20/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/30/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/5/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/20/2008
Matthew B. Gross - reorganized: 9/4/2008
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 9/4/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/25/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/23/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/11/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/29/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/20/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/27/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/26/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/22/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/21/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/3/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/8/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/19/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/27/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/11/2004
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/5/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/26/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/6/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/29/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/2/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/21/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 2/4/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/19/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/18/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/6/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 5/13/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/30/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/18/2001
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 10/4/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/7/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/3/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/14/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 8/31/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/29/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/29/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/2/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/24/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/23/1986

EDITED mgross: 10/04/2013
alopez: 10/3/2013
mgross: 10/16/2012
terry: 9/20/2012
terry: 6/7/2012
alopez: 5/15/2012
terry: 5/15/2012
mgross: 2/15/2012
terry: 2/14/2012
alopez: 1/12/2010
alopez: 5/6/2009
terry: 4/28/2009
alopez: 2/23/2009
terry: 2/18/2009
alopez: 1/20/2009
alopez: 12/31/2008
terry: 12/30/2008
alopez: 11/18/2008
terry: 11/5/2008
alopez: 10/21/2008
terry: 10/20/2008
mgross: 9/4/2008
alopez: 3/3/2008
terry: 2/25/2008
ckniffin: 2/5/2008
alopez: 2/4/2008
terry: 1/23/2008
carol: 12/11/2007
alopez: 9/7/2007
terry: 8/29/2007
alopez: 8/28/2007
terry: 8/20/2007
alopez: 5/10/2007
terry: 4/27/2007
wwang: 3/2/2007
mgross: 1/26/2007
alopez: 9/22/2006
alopez: 7/26/2006
terry: 7/21/2006
alopez: 2/3/2006
terry: 2/3/2006
terry: 10/12/2005
alopez: 9/9/2005
terry: 9/8/2005
mgross: 4/19/2005
wwang: 2/7/2005
wwang: 2/1/2005
terry: 1/27/2005
alopez: 10/29/2004
alopez: 10/11/2004
alopez: 5/28/2004
carol: 5/5/2004
mgross: 11/26/2003
alopez: 7/28/2003
alopez: 6/17/2003
mgross: 5/7/2003
cwells: 5/6/2003
mgross: 5/1/2003
terry: 4/29/2003
alopez: 4/3/2003
terry: 4/2/2003
tkritzer: 3/28/2003
alopez: 2/24/2003
terry: 2/21/2003
mgross: 2/4/2003
alopez: 11/19/2002
terry: 11/18/2002
mgross: 9/18/2002
cwells: 7/26/2002
terry: 7/24/2002
mgross: 6/11/2002
terry: 6/6/2002
mgross: 5/13/2002
mgross: 1/30/2002
alopez: 1/2/2002
terry: 12/18/2001
carol: 10/4/2001
mgross: 8/7/2001
mgross: 8/3/2001
alopez: 6/14/2000
mgross: 9/1/1999
psherman: 8/31/1999
alopez: 2/1/1999
alopez: 1/29/1999
terry: 1/29/1999
dkim: 12/15/1998
alopez: 9/3/1998
terry: 9/2/1998
psherman: 4/15/1998
alopez: 2/25/1998
terry: 2/24/1998
mark: 11/10/1995
mimadm: 6/7/1995
davew: 7/28/1994
warfield: 4/14/1994
carol: 9/9/1993
carol: 6/25/1993

614911	TITLE *614911 C1q- AND TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR-RELATED PROTEIN 4; C1QTNF4
;;CTRP4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a high-throughput screen to identify genes encoding proteins that
stimulated NF-kappa-B (see 164011) activity, Li et al. (2011) identified
C1QTNF4, which they called CTRP4. The deduced 329-amino acid protein has
a calculated molecular mass of 35.3 kD. It has an N-terminal signal
sequence and 2 typical C1q domains, but it lacks a collagen-like region
found in other CTRPs. RT-PCR analysis revealed low CTRP4 expression in a
wide range of tissues and cell lines. Database analysis identified
orthologs of CTRP4 in several vertebrate species, with highest
conservation in the C1q domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Li et al. (2011) showed that CTRP4 was secreted from transfected HepG2
cells and that overexpression of CTRP4 increased the expression and
activity of NF-kappa-B, IL6 (147620), and TNF-alpha (191160), as well as
phosphorylation of STAT3 (102582), in a dose-dependent manner. Mutant
oncogenic RAS (HRAS; 190020) and IL6 also upregulated CTRP4 expression,
suggesting a positive regulatory loop between CTRP4 and IL6.
Overexpression of CTRP4 protected HepG2 cells from cyclohexamide-induced
apoptosis. Li et al. (2011) hypothesized that CTRP4 is a tumor-promoting
regulator of inflammation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Li et al. (2011) determined that the C1QTNF4 gene contains 2 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Li et al. (2011) mapped the C1QTNF4 gene
to chromosome 11p11.

REFERENCE 1. Li, Q.; Wang, L.; Tan, W.; Peng, Z.; Luo, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang,
G.; Na, D.; Jin, P.; Shi, T.; Ma, D.; Wang, L.: Identification of
C1qTNF-related protein 4 as a potential cytokine that stimulates the
STAT3 and NK-kappa-B pathways and promotes cell survival in human
cancer cells. Cancer Lett. 308: 203-214, 2011.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/5/2012

EDITED mgross: 11/05/2012

605571	TITLE *605571 PIWI-LIKE 1; PIWIL1
;;HIWI;;
MIWI, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; MIWI
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Self-renewing asymmetric division of germline stem cells (GSCs) in
Drosophila is controlled both by an intracellular mechanism and by
cell-cell interactions. Cox et al. (1998) cloned and characterized the
Drosophila piwi gene and showed that it is essential for GSC maintenance
in both males and females. Mutation in piwi causes differentiation of
GSCs without self-renewing divisions immediately following the
initiation of oogenesis. The piwi protein is highly basic, especially in
the C-terminal 100 amino acid residues, and is well conserved in
evolution. Cox et al. (1998) cloned 2 piwi-like genes in C. elegans that
are required for GSC renewal and also found sequence similarity with 2
Arabidopsis thaliana proteins required for meristem cell division. By
use of an EST with sequence similarity to the Drosophila piwi gene to
screen a human testis cDNA library, they cloned the human homolog,
PIWIL1. The deduced PIWIL1 protein shares 47.1% overall sequence
identity, and 58.7% identity within the C terminus, with the Drosophila
protein. Cox et al. (1998) found no piwi-related genes in the bacteria
and yeast genomes, suggesting that piwi has a stem cell-related function
only in multicellular organisms. Piwi and piwi-related proteins differ
in the N terminus but show high homology in the C terminus where they
all contain a conserved 43-amino acid domain, which the authors
designated the PIWI box. Cox et al. (1998) suggested that piwi-related
genes represent a novel class of genes required for GSC division in
diverse multicellular organisms.

By PCR of CD34 (142230)-positive hematopoietic cells, followed by
5-prime RACE of a testis cDNA library, Sharma et al. (2001) cloned
PIWIL1, which they called HIWI. PCR analysis of adult and fetal tissues
detected highest HIWI expression in adult testis, followed by adult and
fetal kidney. Weaker expression was detected in all other fetal tissues
examined and in adult prostate, ovary, small intestine, heart, brain,
liver, skeletal muscle, kidney, and pancreas. Semiquantitative RT-PCR
revealed HIWI expression in CD34-positive hematopoietic cells, and HIWI
expression diminished during differentiation. HIWI was not expressed in
C34-negative cells.

By 5-prime RACE of testis mRNA, Qiao et al. (2002) obtained a
full-length HIWI cDNA. The deduced 861-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 98.5 kD and contains a central PAZ motif
and a C-terminal PIWI motif. Northern blot analysis detected a 3.6-kb
HIWI transcript in testis only. RT-PCR detected low HIWI expression in
testis from a 7-year-old boy. In situ hybridization and
immunofluorescence labeling of adult testis revealed HIWI mRNA and
protein only in a subset of spermatogenic cells in transverse sections
of tubules. HIWI was not detected in basal germ cells of seminiferous
epithelium or in Sertoli cells. Expression of HIWI appeared to be
limited to specific stages of the seminiferous epithelial cycle.
Northern blot analysis showed upregulated HIWI expression in 12 of 19
seminomas. In contrast, HIWI expression was not increased in 10
nonseminomas and 4 spermatocyte seminomas.

Deng and Lin (2002) cloned a mouse Piwil1 cDNA, which they called Miwi.
Northern blot analysis revealed a major and a minor Miwi transcript in
adult testis, but not in any other adult or embryonic tissues examined.
In adult testis, Miwi RNA was detected in a small number of germ cells
at the basal layer of the seminiferous tubule, presumably in zygotene
stage spermatocytes, and expression was abundant in primary
spermatocytes. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed Miwi in pachytene
stage spermatocytes, and expression increased until the early round
spermatid stage, after which its abundance decreased. Western blot
analysis detected Miwi at an apparent molecular mass of 100 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Sharma et al. (2001) found that transient expression of HIWI in a human
leukemia cell line resulted in a dramatic reduction in cellular
proliferation. Overexpression of HIWI led to programmed cell death.

Deng and Lin (2002) found that mouse Miwi complexed with mRNAs of Act
(605126) and Crem (123812) target genes.

Girard et al. (2006) showed that mouse Miwi bound a novel class of
approximately 29- to 30-nucleotide RNAs that were highly abundant in
testis. They named these RNAs 'Piwi-interacting RNAs,' or piRNAs, and
identified 52,934 candidate piRNAs. The distribution of piRNAs among
chromosomes did not correlate either with gene density or repeat
density. Nearly 84% of piRNAs mapped uniquely in the genome, and 17%
mapped to repeats, including SINES, LINES, and LTR retrotransposons.
piRNAs were predominantly grouped into 20- to 90-kb clusters, with long
stretches of small RNAs derived from only 1 strand. Similar piRNAs were
identified in human and rat, with major clusters occurring in syntenic
locations. Girard et al. (2006) proposed that the abundance of piRNAs in
germline cells and the male sterility of Miwi mutants suggests a role
for piRNAs in gametogenesis.

Grivna et al. (2006) found that Miwi associated with both piRNAs and
mRNAs in cytosolic ribonucleoprotein and polysome fractions of mouse
testicular extract. As polysomes increased in early spermiogenesis, Miwi
levels increased in polysome fractions. Moreover, Miwi associated with
the mRNA cap-binding complex. Examination of Miwi -/- testis revealed
that Miwi was required for expression of piRNAs and testis-associated
miRNAs. Immunoprecipitation of Miwi from mouse testicular extracts
coprecipitated Dicer (606241), but Miwi was not required for Dicer
expression or stability. Grivna et al. (2006) concluded that Miwi has a
role in small RNA-mediated processes during spermatogenesis.

Canalization, or developmental robustness, is an organism's ability to
produce the same phenotype despite genotypic variations and
environmental influences. Expression of a gain-of-function allele of
Drosophila Kruppel results in misregulation of genes in the fly eye disc
and generation of eye outgrowths, which are normally repressed via
canalization. Using a fly eye outgrowth assay, Gangaraju et al. (2011)
showed that a protein complex made up of Piwi, Hsp83 (HSP90; see
140571), and Hop (STIP1; 605063) was involved in canalization. The
results suggested that canalization may involve Hsp83-mediated
phosphorylation of Piwi. Gangaraju et al. (2011) concluded that the eye
outgrowth phenotype is a defect in epigenetic silencing of a normally
suppressed genotype.

Reuter et al. (2011) showed that Miwi is a small RNA-guided RNase
(slicer) that requires extensive complementarity for target cleavage in
vitro. Disruption of its catalytic activity in mice by a single point
mutation caused male infertility, and mutant germ cells showed increased
accumulation of LINE-1 retrotransposon transcripts. Reuter et al. (2011)
provided evidence for Miwi slicer activity directly cleaving transposon
mRNAs, offering an explanation for the continued maintenance of
repeat-derived piRNAs long after transposon silencing is established in
germline stem cells. Furthermore, Reuter et al. (2011) concluded that
their study supported a slicer-dependent silencing mechanism that
functions without piRNA amplification. Thus, Piwi proteins seem to act
in a 2-pronged mammalian transposon silencing strategy: one promotes
transcriptional repression in the embryo, the other reinforces silencing
at the posttranscriptional level after birth.

GENE STRUCTURE

Deng and Lin (2002) determined that the mouse Piwil1 gene contains 22
exons and spans 19.2 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis and FISH, Sharma et al. (2001) mapped the
PIWIL1 gene to chromosome 12q24.2-q24.32. Qiao et al. (2002) mapped the
PIWIL1 gene to chromosome 12q24.33 by radiation hybrid analysis and
FISH. By genomic sequence analysis, Sasaki et al. (2003) mapped the
PIWIL1 gene to chromosome 12q23.

Deng and Lin (2002) mapped the mouse Piwil1 gene to a region of
chromosome 5 that shows homology of synteny to human chromosome 12.

ANIMAL MODEL

Deng and Lin (2002) found that Miwi-null mice were born at the expected
mendelian ratio and developed normally. Mutant males were sterile,
whereas mutant females were fertile. No sperm was found in the
epididymis of Miwi-null males, and spermatogenesis was uniformly
arrested at the round spermatid stage following the first wave of
spermatogenesis. Miwi-null testis showed increased numbers of apoptotic
cells from the basal layer to the luminal layer of the seminiferous
epithelium, suggesting that survival of spermatocytes, spermatids, and
possibly spermatogonia was compromised. Expression of Crem and Trf2
(TERF2; 602027) target genes was reduced in Miwi-null testis.

REFERENCE 1. Cox, D. N.; Chao, A.; Baker, J.; Chang, L.; Qiao, D.; Lin, H.:
A novel class of evolutionarily conserved genes defined by piwi are
essential for stem cell self-renewal. Genes Dev. 12: 3715-3727,
1998.

2. Deng, W.; Lin, H.: miwi, a murine homolog of piwi, encodes a cytoplasmic
protein essential for spermatogenesis. Dev. Cell 2: 819-830, 2002.

3. Gangaraju, V. K.; Yin, H.; Weiner, M. M.; Wang, J.; Huang, X. A.;
Lin, H.: Drosophila Piwi functions in Hsp90-mediated suppression
of phenotypic variation. Nature Genet. 43: 153-158, 2011.

4. Girard, A.; Sachidanandam, R.; Hannon, G. J.; Carmell, M. A.:
A germline-specific class of small RNAs binds mammalian Piwi proteins. Nature 442:
199-202, 2006.

5. Grivna, S. T.; Pyhtila, B.; Lin, H.: MIWI associates with translational
machinery and PIWI-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) in regulating spermatogenesis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 13415-13420, 2006.

6. Qiao, D.; Zeeman, A.-M.; Deng, W.; Looijenga, L. H. J.; Lin, H.
: Molecular characterization of hiwi, a human member of the piwi gene
family whose overexpression is correlated to seminomas. Oncogene 21:
3988-3999, 2002.

7. Reuter, M.; Berninger, P.; Chuma, S.; Shah, H.; Hosokawa, M.; Funaya,
C.; Antony, C.; Sachidanandam, R.; Pillai, R. S.: Miwi catalysis
is required for piRNA amplification-independent LINE1 transposon silencing. Nature 480:
264-267, 2011.

8. Sasaki, T.; Shiohama, A.; Minoshima, S.; Shimizu, N.: Identification
of eight members of the Argonaute family in the human genome. Genomics 82:
323-330, 2003.

9. Sharma, A. K.; Nelson, M. C.; Brandt, J. E.; Wessman, M.; Mahmud,
N.; Weller, K. P.; Hoffman, R.: Human CD34+ stem cells express the
hiwi gene, a human homologue of the Drosophila gene piwi. Blood 97:
426-434, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/15/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/5/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/6/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/14/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/11/2006

CREATED Yen-Pei C. Chang: 1/22/2001

EDITED alopez: 05/17/2012
terry: 5/15/2012
mgross: 5/5/2011
terry: 5/5/2011
mgross: 10/6/2006
mgross: 8/14/2006
mgross: 8/11/2006
terry: 8/11/2006
carol: 12/19/2001
carol: 1/23/2001
cwells: 1/23/2001
carol: 1/23/2001
cwells: 1/23/2001

612055	TITLE *612055 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN S27-LIKE; RPS27L
;;RPS27-LIKE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

He and Sun (2007) identified RPS27L as a p53 (TP53; 191170)-inducible
gene by microarray profiling using a human lung cancer cell model.
RPS27L shares 96.3% amino acid identity with RPS27 (603702). Expression
of RPS27L was detected in most human tissues and human cancer cell lines
examined.

GENE FUNCTION

He and Sun (2007) observed p53-dependent induction of RPS27L in multiple
human cancer cell models. Gel retardation and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that p53 bound to a putative
p53-binding site in RPS27L intron 1. p53 activated transcription of a
reporter gene driven by the RPS27L intron 1 sequence, and etoposide, a
DNA-damaging agent that upregulates p53 expression, increased expression
of the reporter gene. RPS27L expression promoted apoptosis following
etoposide exposure, whereas small interfering RNA against RPS27L
inhibited etoposide-induced apoptosis. He and Sun (2007) concluded that
p53 induces expression of RPS27L, which in turn promotes apoptosis.

GENE STRUCTURE

He and Sun (2007) determined that the RPS27L gene contains 4 exons. The
5-prime end of intron 1 contains a consensus p53-binding site.

MAPPING

Hartz (2008) mapped the RPS27L gene to chromosome 15q22.2 based on an
alignment of the RPS27L sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK024591) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/15/2008.

2. He, H.; Sun, Y.: Ribosomal protein S27L is a direct p53 target
that regulates apoptosis. Oncogene 26: 2707-2716, 2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/15/2008

EDITED mgross: 05/15/2008

609722	TITLE *609722 PDZ AND LIM DOMAIN PROTEIN 2; PDLIM2
;;MYSTIQUE;;
STAT-INTERACTING LIM PROTEIN; SLIM
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Torrado et al. (2004) cloned rat Pdlim2 from eye total RNA. They
identified human PDLIM2 clones in retina, lens, retinal pigment
epithelium/choroid, and fetal eye cDNA libraries. Northern blot analysis
detected high expression in rat cornea and lower expression in sclera,
lung, and combined trabecular meshwork, iris, and ciliary body. No
expression was detected in retina. In situ hybridization of rat eye
tissues detected Pdlim2 in corneal epithelial cells, but not in corneal
stroma or endothelium or in other ocular tissues.

By searching a database for sequences similar to mouse Mystique,
followed by RT-PCR of breast cancer cell line mRNA, Loughran et al.
(2005) cloned 3 human Mystique variants that they called Mystique-1, -2,
and -3. The deduced proteins contain 366, 352, and 278 amino acids and
have calculated molecular masses of 39.2, 37.5, and 29.1 kD,
respectively. Mystique-1 and -2 have an N-terminal PDZ domain and a
C-terminal LIM domain separated by about 200 amino acids, but they
differ at their C termini. Mystique-3 has only the PDZ domain due to the
absence of exon 9 and introduction of a premature stop codon. RT-PCR
suggested there may be 2 additional human Mystique splice variants.
Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues showed tissue-specific
expression of 3 Mystique splice variants. Mystique-2 was the predominant
transcript in most tissues and was highly expressed in lung. Transient
expression of the 3 human cDNAs in HeLa cells showed Mystique-1 and -2
predominantly localized at the cytoskeleton and Mystique-3 localized
predominantly in the nucleus and more weakly near the cytoskeleton.
Western blot analysis detected endogenous Mystique-2 at an apparent
molecular mass of 37.5 kD in 3 of 5 human cell lines examined; other
Mystique isoforms were not detected. Mystique-2 colocalized with
alpha-actinin (see ACTN1; 102575) and beta-1-integrin (ITGB1; 135630) in
breast cancer cells.

By yeast 2-hybrid screening of a mouse Th1 clone cDNA library using the
N-terminal 133 amino acids of mouse Stat4 (600558) as bait, Tanaka et
al. (2005) isolated Pdlim2, which they called Slim. The predicted
349-amino acid mouse Slim protein has an N-terminal PDZ domain and a
C-terminal LIM domain. Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues detected
highest expression of Slim in lung, with strong expression in spleen and
thymus as well. Slim was highly expressed in primary mouse Cd4
(186940)-positive T cells, Cd8 (see 186910)-positive T cells, B cells,
macrophages, and dendritic cells. Western blot analysis showed that Slim
was present in nuclear but not cytoplasmic extracts of primary
Cd4-positive T cells both before and after stimulation with Il12 (see
161560).

GENE FUNCTION

Torrado et al. (2004) found that Pdlim2 coimmunoprecipitated with Actn1,
Actn4 (604638), filamin A (FLNA; 300017), and myosin heavy polypeptide-9
(MYH9; 160775) in rat corneal and lung extracts. Myosin VI (MYO6;
600970) coimmunoprecipitated with Pdlim2 from corneal but not lung
extracts. Alpha-actinins were the most abundant immunoprecipitated
proteins. Pull-down assays and gel overlay assays with purified proteins
confirmed direct interaction of Pdlim2 with alpha-actinins and filamin.
Pdlim2 and alpha-actinins colocalized mainly to stress fibers after
transfection into COS-7 cells, and complexes of Pdlim2 and Actn1
preferentially located along the basal aspect.

Loughran et al. (2005) found that expression of human Mystique-2 was
induced by IGF1 (147440) and cell adhesion. Overexpression of Mystique-2
in a breast cancer cell line suppressed anchorage-independent growth and
enhanced cell adhesion to collagen (see 120150) and fibronectin (FN1;
135600). Point mutation within either the PDZ and LIM domains reversed
the growth suppression, whereas mutation of the PDZ domain alone
abolished the enhancement of cell adhesion. Knockdown of Mystique-2 with
small interfering RNA abrogated both adhesion and migration in 2 breast
cancer cell lines. Loughran et al. (2005) concluded that Mystique is an
IGF1R (147370)-regulated adaptor protein located at the actin
cytoskeleton that is necessary for epithelial cell migration.

By yeast 2-hybrid, coimmunoprecipitation, and Western blot analyses,
Tanaka et al. (2005) showed that mouse Slim interacted with
tyrosine-phosphorylated Stat4. Cotransfection analysis revealed that
Slim impaired Stat-mediated gene expression and that Slim possessed
ubiquitin E3 ligase activity. Immunoblot analysis also showed that Slim
promoted degradation and dephosphorylation of Stat4. Slim -/-
Cd4-positive mouse T cells showed enhanced Ifng (147570) production, and
Slim -/- mice had an enhanced inflammatory response in liver to
heat-killed Listeria monocytogenes and higher levels of Stat1 (600555)
and Stat4 proteins compared with wildtype mice. Tanaka et al. (2005)
concluded that SLIM regulates both the level of STAT protein expression
and the extent of STAT activation, and thus the amount of IFNG produced
following CD4-positive T-cell stimulation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Loughran et al. (2005) determined that the PDLIM2 gene contains 12 exons
and spans about 20 kb. The translation start codon is in exon 2.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Loughran et al. (2005) mapped the PDLIM2
gene to chromosome 8p21.2.

ANIMAL MODEL

Tanaka et al. (2005) found that Slim -/- mice were healthy and fertile.
Slim -/- mice showed enhanced Ifng production by Cd4-positive T cells,
enhanced inflammatory response in liver to heat-killed Listeria
monocytogenes, and higher levels of Stat proteins compared with wildtype
mice.

REFERENCE 1. Loughran, G.; Healy, N. C.; Kiely, P. A.; Huigsloot, M.; Kedersha,
N. L.; O'Connor, R.: Mystique is a new insulin-like growth factor-I-regulated
PDZ-LIM domain protein that promotes cell attachment and migration
and suppresses anchorage-independent growth. Molec. Biol. Cell 16:
1811-1822, 2005.

2. Tanaka, T.; Soriano, M. A.; Grusby, M. J.: SLIM is a nuclear ubiquitin
E3 ligase that negatively regulates STAT signaling. Immunity 22:
729-736, 2005.

3. Torrado, M.; Senatorov, V. V.; Trivedi, R.; Fariss, R. N.; Tomarev,
S. I.: Pdlim2, a novel PDZ-LIM domain protein, interacts with alpha-actinins
and filamin A. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 45: 3955-3963, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/2/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/21/2005

EDITED mgross: 11/07/2006
mgross: 11/7/2006
terry: 11/2/2006
terry: 2/3/2006
mgross: 11/21/2005

603291	TITLE *603291 BCL2/ADENOVIRUS E1B 19-KD PROTEIN-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1; BNIP1
;;NIP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a yeast 2-hybrid system to identify proteins that interact with
discrete domains of the E1B 19-kD protein, which is involved in
suppression of cell death, Boyd et al. (1994) cloned human B-cell cDNAs
encoding NIP1, NIP2 (603292), and NIP3 (603293). The deduced NIP1
protein has 228 amino acids and contains a putative membrane-spanning
hydrophobic domain. Although the authors found no significant sequence
homology between NIP1 and other proteins, they identified a 59- to
83-amino acid region of NIP1 that shows 29% to 36% identity to a
conserved region within the catalytic domain of 3 mammalian
3-prime-5-prime-cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases. Boyd et al. (1994)
localized NIP1 to the nuclear envelope region and to other cytoplasmic
structures.

GENE FUNCTION

Adenovirus E1B 19-kD protein protects against cell death induced by
viral infection and certain external stimuli. Using yeast 2-hybrid
analysis, Boyd et al. (1994) showed that NIP1, NIP2, and NIP3 interacted
with the adenovirus E1B 19-kD protein and with human BCL2 (151430),
which can functionally substitute for the 19-kD protein during
adenovirus infection. The interactions occurred at bipartite sequence
motifs common to both the E1B 19-kD and BCL2 proteins.

MAPPING

Gross (2012) mapped the BNIP1 gene to chromosome 5q35.1 based on an
alignment of the BNIP1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF083956) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Boyd, J. M.; Malstrom, S.; Subramanian, T.; Venkatesh, L. K.; Schaeper,
U.; Elangovan, B.; D'Sa-Eipper, C.; Chinnadurai, G.: Adenovirus E1B
19 kDa and Bcl-2 proteins interact with a common set of cellular proteins. Cell 79:
341-351, 1994. Note: Erratum: Cell 79: 1121 only, 1994.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/29/2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/29/2012

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 11/17/1998

EDITED terry: 03/15/2013
mgross: 6/29/2012
carol: 6/21/2012
psherman: 11/17/1998

300767	TITLE *300767 REPLICATION PROTEIN A4; RPA4
;;RPA2, HOMOLOG OF;;
REPLICATION PROTEIN A COMPLEX, 34-KD SUBUNIT, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Replication protein A (RPA) is single-stranded DNA (ssDNA)-binding
complex essential for cell viability and chromosome stability. The
canonical RPA complex contains RPA1 (179835), RPA2 (179836), and RPA3
(179837). However, RPA4 can substitute for RPA2 to form an alternative
RPA complex (Mason et al., 2009).

CLONING

By yeast 2-hybrid screening of a HeLa cell library using RPA1 as bait
followed by RACE, Keshav et al. (1995) cloned RPA4. The deduced
261-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 28.9 kD. RPA4
shares 47% amino acid identity with RPA2 (179836), and both proteins
have glycine- and serine-rich N-terminal sequences. Western blot
analysis detected RPA4 as a 30-kD protein with strong expression in
human placenta and low expression in colon. RPA4 expression was also
detected in neuroblastoma, colon carcinoma, and Ewing sarcoma cell
lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Keshav et al. (1995) used immunoprecipitation, cosedimentation, and
other studies to demonstrate that RPA4 forms a trimeric complex with
RPA1 and RPA3 and that this complex binds ssDNA.

Mason et al. (2009) found that the alternative RPA complex (aRPA)
containing RPA4 instead of RPA2 bound ssDNA with an affinity comparable
to canonical RPA. However, unlike RPA, aRPA did not support replication
of simian virus 40 (SV40) in the presence of the viral protein large T
antigen (Tag). In addition, aRPA inhibited SV40 replication by RPA in a
dominant-negative manner. Domain exchange experiments between RPA2 and
RPA4 and mutation analysis revealed that a basic L34 loop within the
DNA-binding domain of RPA4 and the C-terminal winged-helix domain of
RPA4 were responsible for inhibition of SV40 DNA replication by RPA.
Mason et al. (2009) concluded that RPA4 plays a regulatory role in DNA
replication.

REFERENCE 1. Keshav, K. F.; Chen, C.; Dutta, A.: Rpa4, a homolog of the 34-kilodalton
subunit of the replication protein A complex. Molec. Cell. Biol. 15:
3119-3128, 1995.

2. Mason, A. C.; Haring, S. J.; Pryor, J. M.; Staloch, C. A.; Gan,
T. F.; Wold, M. S.: An alternative form of replication protein A
prevents viral replication in vitro. J. Biol. Chem. 284: 5324-5331,
2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/28/2009

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 3/12/2009

EDITED mgross: 09/04/2009
mgross: 9/4/2009
terry: 8/28/2009
wwang: 3/12/2009

606046	TITLE *606046 SYNTAXIN 18; STX18
DESCRIPTION In eukaryotic cells, SNARE proteins (SNAP receptors) mediate the docking
and/or fusion of transport vesicles with target membranes. See
alpha-SNAP (NAPA; 603215). V-SNARES, found on vesicles, interact with
t-SNARES (syntaxins), found on target membranes, in a specific manner.

CLONING

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen with NAPA cDNA as bait, Hatsuzawa et al.
(2000) identified a partial human cDNA encoding a novel syntaxin, which
they called syntaxin-18. They isolated a complete cDNA by screening a
human brain cDNA library. The deduced 335-amino acid protein contains
elements similar to other syntaxins, including predicted coiled-coil
regions and a putative transmembrane domain near the C terminus.
Syntaxin-18 shares 28% sequence identity with the C. elegans T10H9
predicted gene product, but low sequence similarity to other known
syntaxins. Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of a
1.8-kb STX18 transcript. Using subcellular fractionation and
immunofluorescence, Hatsuzawa et al. (2000) showed that syntaxin-18 is
principally located in the endoplasmic reticulum.

GENE FUNCTION

Based on in vivo overexpression and protein transport studies using
epitope-tagged proteins, Hatsuzawa et al. (2000) suggested that
syntaxin-18 functions in transport between the endoplasmic reticulum and
Golgi.

REFERENCE 1. Hatsuzawa, K.; Hirose, H.; Tani, K.; Yamamoto, A.; Scheller, R.
H.; Tagaya, M.: Syntaxin 18, a SNAP receptor that functions in the
endoplasmic reticulum, intermediate compartment, and cis-Golgi vesicle
trafficking. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 13713-13720, 2000.

CREATED Tara S. Marathe: 6/20/2001

EDITED alopez: 01/02/2007
carol: 3/8/2002
carol: 6/20/2001

604782	TITLE *604782 ASH2-LIKE; ASH2L
;;ASH2;;
DROSOPHILA ASH2-LIKE;;
DROSOPHILA ABSENT, SMALL, OR HOMEOTIC DISCS 2-LIKE;;
ASH2L1;;
ASH2L2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Drosophila ash2 ('absent, small, or homeotic discs-2') belongs to the
trithorax gene family (see 159555). The ash2 product positively
regulates expression of homeotic selector genes and is implicated in
early development and formation of various disc patterns in the fruit
fly. By sequence analysis of a 1.8-Mb fragment of human genomic DNA in
8p11.2, coupled with in silico gene trapping, Ikegawa et al. (1999)
identified a gene that is highly homologous to Drosophila ash2; they
named the human gene ash2-like (ASH2L). Ikegawa et al. (1999) isolated a
full-length ASH2L cDNA encoding a deduced 628-amino acid protein with
93.9% amino acid sequence identity to mouse Ash2l and 45.4% identity to
Drosophila ash2. ASH2L contains a predicted PHD zinc finger domain, a
putative bipartite nuclear localization signal, potential N-linked
glycosylation sites, and potential tyrosine kinase phosphorylation
sites. Northern blot analysis detected an approximately 2.6-kb ASH2L
transcript in human adult and fetal tissues. ASH2L was ubiquitously
expressed, but it was predominantly expressed in adult heart and testis
and fetal lung and liver, with barely detectable expression in adult
lung, liver, kidney, prostate, and peripheral leukocytes. Ikegawa et al.
(1999) suggested that ASH2L functions as a transcriptional regulator.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ikegawa et al. (1999) determined that the ASH2L gene spans more than 34
kb and contains 16 exons. Its transcription is oriented from telomere to
centromere.

GENE FUNCTION

Wysocka et al. (2003) purified proteins associated with HCF1 (300019)
and identified a human trithorax-related SET1 (611052)/ASH2 histone
methyltransferase (HMT) complex, the human homolog of S. cerevisiae
Set1. Wysocka et al. (2003) showed that, as in yeast, the
HCF1-associated human SET1/ASH2 HMT complex possesses histone H3-K4
methylation activity, which activates transcription. Furthermore, this
activity is blocked by premethylation of K9, a repressor of
transcription, indicating that there is crosstalk between K9 methylation
and K4 methylation by the SET1/ASH2 complex. The human SET1/ASH2 HMT
complex associates with the HCF1 Kelch domain, whereas Sin3 histone
deacetylase (HDAC) (see 607776 and 601241), a chromatin-associated
complex which represses transcription, associates with the basic region.
From subsequent cosedimentation and immunoprecipitation experiments,
Wysocka et al. (2003) found that the human SET1/ASH2 complex, in
mutually exclusive interactions, can associate with HCF1 bound to Sin3
HDAC or to HCF1 bound to VP16, indicating diverse transcriptional
regulatory roles.

REFERENCE 1. Ikegawa, S.; Isomura, M.; Koshizuka, Y.; Nakamura, Y.: Cloning
and characterization of ASH2L and Ash2l, human and mouse homologs
of the Drosophila ash2 gene. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 84: 167-172,
1999.

2. Wysocka, J.; Myers, M. P.; Laherty, C. D.; Eisenman, R. N.; Herr,
W.: Human Sin3 deacetylase and trithorax-related Set1/Ash2 histone
H3-K4 methyltransferase are tethered together selectively by the cell-proliferation
factor HCF-1. Genes Dev. 17: 896-911, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Jennifer L. Goldstein - updated: 05/23/2007

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 4/3/2000

EDITED carol: 05/23/2007
mcapotos: 4/18/2000
psherman: 4/5/2000

606436	TITLE *606436 SYNAPTOTAGMIN 12; SYT12
;;SYNAPTOTAGMIN-RELATED GENE 1, RAT, HOMOLOG OF; SRG1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SYT12 is a member of a family of proteins involved in the regulation of
transmitter release in the nervous system (Fernandez-Chacon et al.,
2001). The membrane-associated synaptic SYT12 protein in rat is under
thyroid hormone control during brain development (Thompson, 1996).

CLONING

Thompson (1996) used subtractive hybridization coupled with PCR
amplification to screen for thyroid hormone-responsive genes expressed
in rat cerebellum from postnatal days 10 through 15. She reported the
isolation and characterization of one such gene, Srg1, encoding a novel
protein related to synaptotagmin (see 185605). The Srg1 C-terminal
region, like those of other members of the synaptotagmin family,
consists of 2 C2 domains, which are related to the regulatory domain of
protein kinase C (see 176960). Also characteristic of synaptotagmins,
the Srg1 open reading frame lacks a signal sequence but has a
hydrophobic region near the N terminus, a putative transmembrane domain.
Srg1 shares between 26 and 37% amino acid sequence identity with other
members of the synaptotagmin family within the C-terminal region.
Thompson (1996) examined adult and neonatal rat tissues by Northern blot
analysis and detected Srg1 expression exclusively within the nervous
system. In situ hybridization demonstrated Srg1 expression in the
internal granule cell layer of the cerebellum. High levels of expression
were also found in cortex, caudate putamen, hippocampus, thalamus,
piriform cortex, and amygdala.

GENE FUNCTION

Thompson (1996) demonstrated that Syt12 is rapidly inducible by thyroid
hormone and that the timing of its expression is consistent with
regulation by thyroid hormone during development. Thompson (1996)
concluded that SYT12 is likely part of a cascade of gene activation
induced by thyroid hormone that is critical for central nervous system
organization and development. Regulation by thyroid hormone is not a
feature common to all members of the synaptotagmin family; Thompson
(1996) suggested that SYT12 may have unique functions among the
synaptotagmins.

Itoh et al. (2001) showed that Srg1 was markedly reduced in the
cerebellum of mice heterozygous for a targeted mutation in the Thra1
gene (190120).

NOMENCLATURE

Craxton (2001) referred to the human SYT11 (608741) and SYT12 genes as
SYT12 and SYT11, respectively.

The rat and mouse Syt12 genes were previously designated
synaptotagmin-related gene-1 and symbolized Srg1.

REFERENCE 1. Craxton, M.: Genomic analysis of synaptotagmin genes. Genomics 77:
43-49, 2001.

2. Fernandez-Chacon, R.; Konigstorfer, A.; Gerber, S. H.; Garcia,
J.; Matos, M. F.; Stevens, C. F.; Brose, N.; Rizo, J.; Rosenmund,
C.; Sudhof, T. C.: Synaptotagmin I functions as a calcium regulator
of release probability. Nature 410: 41-49, 2001.

3. Itoh, Y.; Esaki, T.; Kaneshige, M.; Suzuki, H.; Cook, M.; Sokoloff,
L.; Cheng, S.-Y.; Nunez, J.: Brain glucose utilization in mice with
a targeted mutation in the thyroid hormone alpha or beta receptor
gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 9913-9918, 2001.

4. Thompson, C. C.: Thyroid hormone-responsive genes in developing
cerebellum include a novel synaptotagmin and a hairless homolog. J.
Neurosci. 16: 7832-7840, 1996.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/31/2001

EDITED carol: 06/08/2010
carol: 4/30/2010
alopez: 11/1/2001
alopez: 10/31/2001

608844	TITLE *608844 ENDONUCLEASE VIII-LIKE 1; NEIL1
;;NEI1;;
FPG1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NEIL1 belongs to a class of DNA glycosylases homologous to the bacterial
Fpg/Nei family. These glycosylases initiate the first step in base
excision repair by cleaving bases damaged by reactive oxygen species and
introducing a DNA strand break via the associated lyase reaction
(Bandaru et al., 2002).

CLONING

Bandaru et al. (2002) obtained a full-length NEIL1 cDNA by searching for
sequences similar to the Arabidopsis DNA glycosylase Fpg. Bacterial
Fpg/Nei proteins contain 2 structural domains: an N-terminal 2-layered
beta sandwich and a C-terminal 4-helix bundle, which includes a
helix-2-turns-helix (H2TH) motif and a zinc finger. The deduced
390-amino acid human NEIL1 protein has conserved residues in 6 highly
conserved regions that span both structural domains of the bacterial
Fpg/Nei proteins, but it lacks the characteristic zinc finger motif.

By searching databases for sequences similar to E. coli Nei, Takao et
al. (2002) cloned NEIL1. Quantitative PCR of mouse tissues detected
Neil1 expression in all tissues examined, with highest expression in
spleen, heart, and lung, and lower expression in brain, liver, skeletal
muscle, kidney, and testis.

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to E. coli Nei and
Fpg, Morland et al. (2002) identified NEIL1. The deduced protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 43.7 kD. Northern blot analysis detected
NEIL1 transcripts of 1.8, 4.0, and 7.5 kb expressed at variable levels
in nearly all tissues examined. Fluorescence-labeled NEIL1 localized to
the nuclei of transfected HeLa cells, with protein accumulation in
nucleoli.

GENE FUNCTION

Bandaru et al. (2002) characterized the substrate specificity of
recombinant NEIL1 toward oxidative pyrimidine DNA damages. NEIL1 showed
specificity similar to E. coli Nei in that it preferred thymine glycol,
5-hydroxycytosine, and dihydrothymine to dihydrouracil and
5-hydroxyuracil. It exhibited weak activity against 8-oxoguanine
(8-oxoG). NEIL1 showed a pH optimum of 9.5 at 100 to 150 mM salt, and
addition of EDTA was inhibitory. In E. coli Nei, pro2 is responsible for
Schiff base formation, and glu3 is required for glycosylase activity.
Site-directed mutagenesis at these sites in human NEIL1 greatly reduced
or eliminated activity on thymine glycol-containing substrates.

Takao et al. (2002) demonstrated that in vitro translated mouse or human
NEIL1 could remove thymine glycol and 5-hydroxyuracil in double- and
single-stranded DNA much more efficiently than 8-oxoG. Both enzymes also
nicked the strand by an associated beta-delta apurinic/apyrimidinic
lyase activity. Mouse Neil1 showed DNA glycosylase/lyase activity toward
mismatched uracil and thymine, especially U:C and T:C mismatches.

Morland et al. (2002) found that NEIL1 cleaved abasic sites by a
beta-delta elimination mechanism independent of the base in the
complementary strand. However, removal of 8-oxoG was opposite base
dependent, with 8-oxoG:C being the preferred substrate. There was
negligible activity toward 8-oxoG:A. In this regard, Morland et al.
(2002) concluded that NEIL1 has properties similar to mammalian OGG1
(601982) in preventing mutations arising from misincorporation of A
across 8-oxoG.

Dou et al. (2003) found that NEIL1 excised 5-hydroxyuracil from a DNA
bubble and from single-stranded DNA, but it did not have strong activity
toward 8-oxoG in the bubble. Both NEIL1 and NEIL2 (608933) showed higher
affinity for the bubble structures of both damaged and undamaged DNA
relative to duplex structures than did NTH1 (602656) or OGG1. Dou et al.
(2003) concluded that NEILs are functionally distinct from OGG1 and NTH1
in vivo and may preferentially be involved in the repair of lesions in
DNA bubbles generated during transcription and/or replication.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Doublie et al. (2004) noted that sequence alignments of NEIL1 with
related DNA glycosylases had predicted that NEIL1 lacks a zinc finger
and would be expected to use a different DNA-binding motif. They
determined the crystal structure of an enzymatically active deletion
construct of NEIL1 lacking 56 C-terminal residues. The structure
revealed a motif composed of 2 antiparallel beta-strands that mimics the
antiparallel beta-hairpin zinc finger found in other Fpg/Nei family
members, but lacks the loops containing the zinc-binding residues. This
'zincless finger' was required for NEIL1 activity, since mutating a
highly conserved arginine within it reduced the glycosylase activity of
the enzyme.

GENE STRUCTURE

Takao et al. (2002) determined that the mouse and human NEIL1 genes
contain 10 protein-coding exons. Morland et al. (2002) determined that
the NEIL1 gene spans about 8.0 kb. Exons 1 and 2 are located within CpG
islands.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Bandaru et al. (2002) mapped the NEIL1
gene to chromosome 15q22-q24. Morland et al. (2002) mapped the NEIL1
gene to chromosome 15q22.33 by genomic sequence analysis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Vartanian et al. (2006) found that Neil1 knockout mice were born at
expected mendelian ratios and the phenotype of Neil1 -/- pups was normal
through the first 4 to 6 months of life. At about 7 months, however,
male Neil1 -/- mice developed severe obesity, and female Neil1 -/- mice
were modestly overweight. Mutant mice also showed dyslipidemia, fatty
liver disease, and a tendency to develop hyperinsulinemia, similar to
metabolic syndrome (605552) in humans. Histologic studies showed
significant kidney vacuolization, and mitochondrial DNA from Neil1 -/-
mice showed increased levels of steady-state DNA damage and deletions,
compared to wildtype controls.

REFERENCE 1. Bandaru, V.; Sunkara, S.; Wallace, S. S.; Bond, J. P.: A novel
human DNA glycosylase that removes oxidative DNA damage and is homologous
to Escherichia coli endonuclease VIII. DNA Repair 1: 517-529, 2002.

2. Dou, H.; Mitra, S.; Hazra, T. K.: Repair of oxidized bases in
DNA bubble structures by human DNA glycosylases NEIL1 and NEIL2. J.
Biol. Chem. 278: 49679-49684, 2003.

3. Doublie, S.; Bandaru, V.; Bond, J. P.; Wallace, S. S.: The crystal
structure of human endonuclease VIII-like 1 (NEIL1) reveals a zincless
finger motif required for glycosylase activity. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 101: 10284-10289, 2004.

4. Morland, I.; Rolseth, V.; Luna, L.; Rognes, T.; Bjoras, M.; Seeberg,
E.: Human DNA glycosylases of the bacterial Fpg/MutM superfamily:
an alternative pathway for the repair of 8-oxoguanine and other oxidation
products in DNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 30: 4926-4936, 2002.

5. Takao, M.; Kanno, S.; Kobayashi, K.; Zhang, Q.-M.; Yonei, S.; van
der Horst, G. T. J.; Yasui, A.: A back-up glycosylase in Nth1 knock-out
mice is a functional Nei (endonuclease VIII) homologue. J. Biol.
Chem. 277: 42205-42213, 2002.

6. Vartanian, V.; Lowell, B.; Minko, I. G.; Wood, T. G.; Ceci, J.
D.; George, S.; Ballinger, S. W.; Corless, C. L.; McCullough, A. K.;
Lloyd, R. S.: The metabolic syndrome resulting from a knockout of
the NEIL1 DNA glycosylase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 1864-1869,
2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/24/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/17/2004

EDITED wwang: 03/28/2006
terry: 3/24/2006
mgross: 9/21/2004
mgross: 8/17/2004

606503	TITLE *606503 SUPPRESSOR OF VARIEGATION 3-9, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 2; SUV39H2
;;SU(VAR)3-9, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

O'Carroll et al. (2000) isolated and characterized a murine gene,
Suv39h2, that encodes an H3 histone (see 602810) methyltransferase
(HMTase) with 59% identity to Suv39h1 (300254). Although both Suv39h
loci displayed overlapping expression profiles during mouse
embryogenesis, Suv39h2 transcripts remained specifically expressed in
adult testes. Immunolocalization of the Suv39h2 protein during
spermatogenesis indicated enriched distribution at the heterochromatin
from the leptotene to the round spermatid stage. Moreover, Suv39h2
specifically accumulated with chromatin of the sex chromosomes (XY
body), which undergo transcriptional silencing during the first meiotic
prophase. These data were consistent with redundant enzymatic roles for
Suv39h1 and Suv39h2 during mouse development and suggested an additional
function of the Suv39h2 HMTase in organizing meiotic heterochromatin
that may even impart an epigenetic imprint to the male germline.

GENE FUNCTION

In eukaryotes, Suv39h H3K9 trimethyltransferases are required for
pericentric heterochromatin formation and function. In early mouse
preimplantation embryos, however, paternal pericentric heterochromatin
lacks Suv39h-mediated H3K9me3 and downstream marks. Puschendorf et al.
(2008) demonstrated Ezh2 (601573)-independent targeting of maternally
provided polycomb repressive complex-1 (PRC1) components to paternal
heterochromatin. In Suv39h2 maternally deficient zygotes, PRC1 also
associated with maternal heterochromatin lacking H3K9me3, thereby
revealing hierarchy between repressive pathways. In Rnf2 (608985)
maternally deficient zygotes, the PRC1 complex was disrupted, and levels
of pericentric major satellite transcripts were increased at the
paternal but not the maternal genome. Puschendorf et al. (2008)
concluded that in early embryos, Suv39h-mediated H3K9me3 constitutes the
dominant maternal transgenerational signal for pericentric
heterochromatin formation. In the absence of this signal, PRC1 functions
as the default repressive backup mechanism. Paternal epigenetic
asymmetry, also observed along cleavage chromosomes, is resolved by the
end of the 8-cell stage--concurrent with blastomere
polarization--marking the end of the maternal-to-embryonic transition.

MAPPING

Using FISH and haplotype analysis, O'Carroll et al. (2000) mapped the
mouse Suv39h2 gene to the subcentromeric region of chromosome 2. The
International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the human
SUV39H2 gene to chromosome 10 (TMAP stSG30494).

ANIMAL MODEL

Peters et al. (2001) generated mice deficient for either Suv39h1 or
Suv39h2. These animals displayed normal viability and fertility and did
not exhibit apparent phenotypes. The authors subsequently intercrossed
Suv39h1 -/- and Suv39h2 -/- mice to generate compound Suv39h mutants
that were then used to derive Suv39h double-null mice (Suv39h1 -/- and
Suv39h2 -/-). These mice displayed severely impaired viability and
chromosomal instabilities that were associated with an increased tumor
risk and perturbed chromosome interactions during male meiosis. These
data suggested a crucial role for pericentric H3 histone-lys9 (H3-lys9)
methylation in protecting genome stability and defined the Suv39h
HMTases as important epigenetic regulators for mammalian development.

Garcia-Cao et al. (2004) reported on telomere length and function in
mice null with respect to both the histone methyltransferases Suv39h1
and Suv39h2. The 2 govern methylation of H3-lys9 in heterochromatic
regions (Peters et al., 2001). Garcia-Cao et al. (2004) showed that
primary cells derived from doubly-null mice had abnormally long
telomeres relative to wildtype controls. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis, they found that telomeres were enriched in
di- and trimethylated H3-lys9 but that telomeres of doubly-null cells
had less dimethylated and trimethylated H3-lys9 but more monomethylated
H3-lys9. Concomitant with the decrease in H3-lys9 methylation, telomeres
in doubly-null cells had reduced binding of the chromobox proteins Cbx1
(604511), Cbx3 (604477), and Cbx5 (604478), which are homologs of
heterochromatin protein-1 of Drosophila. The findings indicated
substantial changes in the state of telomeric heterochromatin in
doubly-null cells in association with abnormal telomere elongation. The
results indicated epigenetic regulation of telomere length in mammals by
Suv39h1 and Suv39h2.

REFERENCE 1. Garcia-Cao, M.; O'Sullivan, R.; Peters, A. H. F. M.; Jenuwein,
T.; Blasco, M. A.: Epigenetic regulation of telomere length in mammalian
cells by the Suv39h1 and Suv39h2 histone methyltransferases. Nature
Genet. 36: 94-99, 2004.

2. O'Carroll, D.; Scherthan, H.; Peters, A. H. F. M.; Opravil, S.;
Haynes, A. R.; Laible, G.; Rea, S.; Schmid, M.; Lebersorger, A.; Jerratsch,
M.; Sattler, L.; Mattei, M. G.; Denny, P.; Brown, S. D. M.; Schweizer,
D.; Jenuwein, T.: Isolation and characterization of Suv39h2, a second
histone H3 methyltransferase gene that displays testis-specific expression. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 20: 9423-9433, 2000.

3. Peters, A. H. F. M.; O'Carroll, D.; Scherthan, H.; Mechtler, K.;
Sauer, S.; Schofer, C.; Weipoltshammer, K.; Pagani, M.; Lachner, M.;
Kohlmaier, A.; Opravil, S.; Doyle, M.; Sibilia, M.; Jenuwein, T.:
Loss of the Suv39h histone methyltransferases impairs mammalian heterochromatin
and genome stability. Cell 107: 323-337, 2001.

4. Puschendorf, M.; Terranova, R.; Boutsma, E.; Mao, X.; Isono, K.;
Brykczynska, U.; Kolb, C.; Otte, A. P.; Koseki, H.; Orkin, S. H.;
van Lohuizen, M.; Peters, A. H. F. M.: PRC1 and Suv39h specify parental
asymmetry at constitutive heterochromatin in early mouse embryos. Nature
Genet. 40: 411-420, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/8/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/24/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/5/2004

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 11/27/2001

EDITED mgross: 02/05/2013
alopez: 5/8/2008
terry: 4/24/2008
terry: 4/6/2005
tkritzer: 1/5/2004
joanna: 12/27/2001
mgross: 11/27/2001

607526	TITLE *607526 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L27; RPL27
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By differential screening of fetal and adult kidney mRNA, Gallagher et
al. (1994) cloned RPL27 as 1 of several transcripts showing high
expression during fetal development. The deduced 135-amino acid protein
has a calculated molecular mass of about 18 kD. RPL27 shares 100% amino
acid identity with rat and chicken Rpl27, although there are several
silent base pair changes at the DNA level. Northern blot analysis
revealed expression of a 1.0-kb transcript or 2 transcripts of 1.0 and
1.25 kb in fetal kidney. The 1.0-kb transcript was present at lower
levels in adult kidney. RPL27 expression was also detected in several
other fetal tissues, including muscle, liver, lung, heart, and brain.
The 1.0-kb transcript was present in adult muscle at lower levels than
in fetal muscle. Gallagher et al. (1994) determined that RPL27 was
downregulated 20-fold in adult kidney compared with fetal kidney.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RT-PCR, Sim et al. (2010) found that a subset of genes encoding
proteins of the large ribosomal subunit was differentially expressed in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (see 607107) cell lines compared with a normal
nasopharyngeal epithelial cell line. RPL27 was 1 of 3 genes
significantly downregulated in the carcinoma cell lines.

MAPPING

By Southern blot analysis, Gallagher et al. (1994) determined that there
are multiple RPL27 copies in the genome. The International Radiation
Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the RPL27 gene to chromosome 17 (TMAP
RH26918).

REFERENCE 1. Gallagher, R. A.; McClean, P. M.; Malik, A. N.: Cloning and nucleotide
sequence of a full length cDNA encoding ribosomal protein L27 from
human fetal kidney. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1217: 329-332, 1994.

2. Sim, E. U. H.; Ang, C. H.; Ng, C. C.; Lee, C. W.; Narayanan, K.
: Differential expression of a subset of ribosomal protein genes in
cell lines derived from human nasopharyngeal epithelium. J. Hum.
Genet. 55: 118-120, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/22/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/29/2003

EDITED mgross: 03/23/2010
mgross: 3/22/2010
mgross: 1/29/2003

128260	TITLE *128260 SMALL NUCLEAR RIBONUCLEOPROTEIN POLYPEPTIDE E; SNRPE
;;E PROTEIN OF SMALL NUCLEAR RIBONUCLEOPROTEIN COMPLEXES
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SNRPE encodes a core protein of U snRNPs, the key factors of the
pre-mRNA processing spliceosome (summary by Pasternack et al., 2013).

CLONING

Many patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (152700) circulate Sm
autoantibodies directed against a broad range of small nuclear
ribonucleoprotein complexes (snRNPs). One of the proteins recognized by
some anti-Sm sera is the 11,000-Da E protein. This protein is 1 of 4
'core' proteins associated with all known snRNAs in the U family (U1,
U2, U4, U5, and U6) (Wieben et al., 1985; Stanford et al., 1987).

Stanford et al. (1988) gave the complete nucleotide sequence. The
longest open reading frame coded for a basic 92-amino acid protein that
had an amino acid sequence in perfect agreement with that obtained from
purified E protein.

After RT-PCR, Pasternack et al. (2013) performed semiquantitative PCR
and found that SNRPE is expressed ubiquitously, including in skin and
hair follicle cells. Immunohistochemistry revealed SNRPE in the nuclei
of all cells of the hair follicle, the epidermis, and the dermis. An
identical pattern of SNRPE immunoreactivity was observed in dorsal skin
of 9-day-old C57BL/6J mice.

GENE STRUCTURE

The gene for the E protein is 9 kb long and contains 5 exons. The
sequence is known for 9 closely related genes that have several features
of processed pseudogenes (Neiswanger et al., 1988).

MAPPING

Neiswanger et al. (1988, 1990) mapped the E protein gene to 1q32 by a
combination of somatic cell and in situ hybridization. Neiswanger et al.
(1990) corroborated the assignment by genetic linkage to markers in the
region of 1q32. They noted that at least one of the SNRPE pseudogenes is
linked to a signal transduction G protein gene (139380) that also maps
to chromosome 1. Two other small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP)
components--the U1 RNA 'true' multigene family (180680) and a group of
class I U1 pseudogenes--are located on chromosome 1. A U2 snRNA gene
cluster (RNU2; 180690) is located on chromosome 17, whereas chromosome
19 encodes the U1-specific 70K protein (180740).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of a 4-generation Spanish family and 2 sporadic
patients with hypotrichosis (HYPT11; 615059), Pasternack et al. (2013)
identified heterozygosity for 2 different mutations in the SNRPE gene
(128260.0001 and 128260.0002, respectively). Subcellular localization of
mutant SNRPE by immunofluorescence analyses as well as incorporation of
mutant SNRPE proteins into U snRPSs was normal, suggesting the variants
alter the function of U snRNPs in splicing rather than their biogenesis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPOTRICHOSIS 11
SNRPE, 1A-G

In affected members of a 4-generation Spanish family with hypotrichosis
(HYPT11; 615059), previously reported by Just et al., 1998), and an
unrelated 12-year-old British girl, Pasternack et al. (2013) identified
heterozygosity for a 1A-G transition in the SNRPE gene, altering the
start codon (MET1) of the gene. The mutation segregated with disease in
both families and was not found in 880 German or 598 Spanish control
chromosomes, or in the dbSNP or 1000 Genomes databases. Western blot
analyses of HEK293T cells expressing SNRPE 1A-G revealed an N-terminally
truncated protein, suggesting that the mutation might result in use of
an alternative in-frame downstream start codon.

.0002
HYPOTRICHOSIS 11
SNRPE, GLY45SER

In an 8-year-old Tunisian boy with hypotrichosis (HYPT11; 615059),
Pasternack et al. (2013) identified heterozygosity for a 133G-A
transition in the SNRPE gene, resulting in a gly45-to-ser (G45S)
substitution at a highly conserved residue in the Sm motif 1. His
parents were reported to be unaffected but were not available for
analysis. The mutation was not found in 880 German control chromosomes
or 598 Spanish control chromosomes, and was not present in the dbSNP or
the 1000 Genomes databases. Functional analysis in HEK293T cells showed
reduced incorporation of the mutant into U snRNP compared to wildtype.

REFERENCE 1. Just, M.; Ribera, M.; Fuente, M. J.; Bielsa, I.; Ferrandiz, C.
: Hereditary hypotrichosis simplex. Dermatology 196: 339-342, 1998.

2. Neiswanger, K.; Stanford, D. R.; Sparkes, R. S.; Nishimura, D.;
Mohandas, T.; Klisak, I.; Heinzmann, C.; Wieben, E. D.: Assignment
of the gene for the small nuclear ribonucleoprotein E (SNRPE) to human
chromosome 1q25-q43. Genomics 7: 503-508, 1990.

3. Neiswanger, K.; Stanford, D. R.; Wieben, E. D.; Mohandas, T.; Klisak,
I.; Heinzmann, C.; Sparkes, R. S.: Regional assignment of the gene
for the snRNP protein 'E' by in situ hybridization to human chromosome
1q2.5-q4.3. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 43: A153 only, 1988.

4. Pasternack, S. M.; Refke, M.; Paknia, E.; Hennies, H. C.; Franz,
T.; Schafer, N.; Fryer, A.; van Steensel, M.; Sweeney, E.; Just, M.;
Grimm, C.; Kruse, R.; Ferrandiz, C.; Nothen, M. M.; Fischer, U.; Betz,
R. C.: Mutations in SNRPE, which encodes a core protein of the spliceosome,
cause autosomal-dominant hypotrichosis simplex. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 92:
81-87, 2013.

5. Stanford, D. R.; Kehl, M.; Perry, C. A.; Holicky, E. L.; Harvey,
S. E.; Rohleder, A. M.; Rehder, K., Jr.; Luhrmann, R.; Wieben, E.
D.: The complete primary structure of the human snRNP E protein. Nucleic
Acids Res. 16: 10593-10605, 1988.

6. Stanford, D. R.; Rohleder, A.; Neiswanger, K.; Wieben, E. D.:
DNA sequence of a human Sm autoimmune antigen: the multigene family
contains a processed pseudogene. J. Biol. Chem. 262: 9931-9934,
1987.

7. Wieben, E. D.; Rohleder, A. M.; Nenninger, J. M.; Pederson, T.
: cDNA cloning of a human autoimmune nuclear ribonucleoprotein antigen. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 7914-7918, 1985.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/30/2013

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/7/1988

EDITED carol: 01/31/2013
terry: 1/30/2013
carol: 6/17/1998
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 8/22/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990
carol: 1/17/1990
supermim: 1/4/1990

604188	TITLE *604188 SELENIUM-BINDING PROTEIN 1; SELENBP1
;;SELENIUM-BINDING PROTEIN, 56-KD; SP56
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Selenium is an essential nutrient that exhibits potent anticarcinogenic
properties, and deficiency of selenium may cause certain neurologic
diseases. It has been proposed that the effects of selenium in
preventing cancer and neurologic diseases may be mediated by
selenium-binding proteins. By sequencing randomly selected human fetal
heart cDNAs, followed by searching sequence databases for sequence
similarities, Chang et al. (1997) identified a cDNA that has sequence
similarity to the mouse 56-kD selenium-binding protein (Sp56) gene. The
deduced 472-amino acid human SP56 (SELENBP1) has 87.3% and 86.4% amino
acid identity to mouse Sp56 and the acetaminophen metabolite-binding
protein AP56, respectively. Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues
detected the highest Sp56 expression in liver, kidney, and lung (see
also Lanfear et al., 1993).

GENE FUNCTION

Okunuki et al. (2007) identified selenium-binding protein as a candidate
retinal autoantigen in patients with Behcet disease (109650). Because
anti-SELENBP1 antibody-positive patients showed more frequent ocular
inflammation than the antibody-negative patient group, Okunuki et al.
(2007) concluded that autoimmunity against this retinal antigen might
contribute to the pathogenesis of uveitis in BD patients.

MAPPING

By FISH, Chang et al. (1997) mapped the SELENBP1 gene to 1q21-q22.

REFERENCE 1. Chang, P. W. G.; Tsui, S. K. W.; Liew, C.; Lee, C.; Waye, M. M.
Y.; Fung, K.: Isolation, characterization, and chromosomal mapping
of a novel cDNA clone encoding human selenium binding protein. J.
Cell. Biochem. 64: 217-224, 1997.

2. Lanfear, J.; Fleming, J.; Walker, M.; Harrison, P.: Different
patterns of regulation of the genes encoding the closely related 56
kDa selenium- and acetaminophen-binding proteins in normal tissues
and during carcinogenesis. Carcinogenesis 14: 335-340, 1993.

3. Okunuki, Y.; Usui, Y.; Takeuchi, M.; Kezuka, T.; Hattori, T.; Masuko,
K.; Nakamura, H.; Yudoh, K.; Usui, M.; Nishioka, K.; Kato, T.: Proteomic
surveillance of autoimmunity in Behcet's disease with uveitis: selenium
binding protein is a novel autoantigen in Behcet's disease. Exp.
Eye Res. 84: 823-831, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Jane Kelly - updated: 04/22/2008

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 9/24/1999

EDITED carol: 04/22/2008
mgross: 9/29/1999
mgross: 9/27/1999
psherman: 9/26/1999

602572	TITLE *602572 ANNEXIN A11; ANXA11
;;ANNEXIN XI; ANX11;;
AUTOANTIGEN, 56-KD
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ANXA11 is a member of the annexin family of calcium-dependent
phospholipid-binding proteins. Annexins have unique N-terminal domains
and homologous C-terminal domains containing the calcium-dependent
phospholipid-binding sites.

CLONING

To identify a 56-kD antigen recognized by sera from patients with
autoimmune diseases, Misaki et al. (1994) screened a human
teratocarcinoma cDNA expression library with the anti-56-kD antigen
autoantibodies. They isolated a cDNA predicting a 505-amino acid protein
with 60% identity to other annexins in the conserved C-terminal domain
and 92.5% identity to bovine annexin XI over the entire protein. Misaki
et al. (1994) concluded that the 56-kD autoantigen is human annexin XI,
or ANXA11.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bances et al. (2000) determined that the mouse Anxa11 gene contains 15
exons and spans 40 kB. Exon 1 is untranslated, and intron 1 spans about
20 kb. The human ANXA11 gene has the same general structure as the mouse
gene; however, EST database analysis indicated that human ANXA11
transcripts also use variably spliced exons 1b and 1c, which can
lengthen the 5-prime UTR. The intronic sequences of the mouse and human
ANXA11 genes contain several types of repetitive elements, including
retroviral long terminal repeats. The mouse promoter region contains a
remnant LINE-1 insertion not found in the human gene. The 5-prime
flanking region of the ANXA11 gene contains a CpG island and MYOD
(159970), SP1 (189906), and glucocorticoid response elements, but no
proximal TATA or CAAT boxes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the ANXA11
gene and susceptibility to sarcoidosis, see SS3 (612388).

MAPPING

Morgan et al. (1998) mapped the ANXA11 gene to 10q22.3-q23.1 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

By genomic sequence analysis, Bances et al. (2000) mapped the mouse
Anxa11 gene to chromosome 14.

REFERENCE 1. Bances, P.; Fernandez, M.-R.; Rodriguez-Garcia, M.-I.; Morgan,
R. O.; Fernandez, M.-P.: Annexin A11 (ANXA11) gene structure as the
progenitor of paralogous annexins and source of orthologous cDNA isoforms. Genomics 69:
95-103, 2000.

2. Misaki, Y.; Pruijn, G. J. M.; van der Kemp, A. W. C. M.; van Venrooij,
W. J.: The 56K autoantigen is identical to human annexin XI. J.
Biol. Chem. 269: 4240-4246, 1994.

3. Morgan, R. O.; Bell, D. W.; Testa, J. R.; Fernandez, M. P.: Genomic
locations of ANX11 and ANX13 and the evolutionary genetics of human
annexins. Genomics 48: 100-110, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/22/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/7/2005

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 4/27/1998

EDITED carol: 11/30/2009
carol: 6/16/2009
terry: 6/12/2009
terry: 10/22/2008
wwang: 6/22/2005
wwang: 6/17/2005
terry: 6/7/2005
carol: 8/4/2003
mgross: 9/17/1999
psherman: 4/27/1998

607470	TITLE *607470 BREAST CARCINOMA AMPLIFIED SEQUENCE 3; BCAS3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a cDNA microarray-based analysis of genes amplified in breast
cancer cell lines, Barlund et al. (2002) identified BCAS3. They obtained
the full-length sequence from a liver cDNA library using several cloning
techniques. The deduced 913-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 99 kD. Northern blot analysis revealed a 3.9-kb
transcript expressed in all tissues examined. Several smaller
transcripts showed tissue-specific distribution. Multiple tissue
expression array analysis indicated ubiquitous expression, with highest
levels in stomach, liver, lung, kidney, fetal kidney, prostate, testis,
thyroid gland, and adrenal gland.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a functional genomic screen, Gururaj et al. (2006) identified
BCAS3 as a chromatin target of MTA1 (603526). MTA1 stimulation of BCAS3
transcription required estrogen receptor-1 (ESR1; 133430) and involved a
functional estrogen response element half-site in BCAS3. Furthermore,
MTA1 was acetylated on lys626, and this acetylation was necessary for
productive transcriptional recruitment of RNA polymerase II complex to
the BCAS3 enhancer sequence. BCAS3 expression was elevated in mammary
tumors from MTA1 transgenic mice and in 60% of human breast tumors, and
it correlated with coexpression of MTA1 as well as with tumor grade and
proliferation of primary breast tumor cultures.

GENE STRUCTURE

Barlund et al. (2002) determined that the BCAS3 gene contains 24 exons
and spans more than 600 kb, including an intron of nearly 300 kb between
exons 22 and 23.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Barlund et al. (2002) mapped the BCAS3
gene to chromosome 17q23.

CYTOGENETICS

Barlund et al. (2002) determined that a 1.3-kb transcript overexpressed
in the MCF7 breast carcinoma cell line resulted from a fusion between
the BCAS3 gene from chromosome 17 and the BCAS4 gene (607471) from
chromosome 20. Although amplification of either or both genes was common
in the 12 other breast cancer cell lines examined, no other cell line
expressed the fusion transcript.

REFERENCE 1. Barlund, M.; Monni, O.; Weaver, J. D.; Kauraniemi, P.; Sauter,
G.; Heiskanen, M.; Kallioniemi, O.-P.; Kallioniemi, A.: Cloning of
BCAS3 (17q23) and BCAS4 (20q13) genes that undergo amplification,
overexpression, and fusion in breast cancer. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 35:
311-317, 2002.

2. Gururaj, A. E.; Singh, R. R.; Rayala, S. K.; Holm, C.; den Hollander,
P.; Zhang, H.; Balasenthil, S.; Talukder, A. H.; Landberg, G.; Kumar,
R.: MTA1, a transcriptional activator of breast cancer amplified
sequence 3. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 6670-6675, 2006. Note: Erratum:
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 110: 4147 only, 2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/14/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/10/2003

EDITED tpirozzi: 10/01/2013
mgross: 6/14/2006
mgross: 1/10/2003

176883	TITLE *176883 PROTEIN-TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE, NONRECEPTOR-TYPE, 6; PTPN6
;;PROTEIN-TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE 1C; PTP1C;;
TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE SHP1; SHP1;;
HEMATOPOIETIC CELL PHOSPHATASE; HCPH
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The growth and functional responses of hematopoietic cells are regulated
through tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins. Using a PCR approach, Yi
et al. (1991) identified 3 novel tyrosine protein phosphatases in
hematopoietic cells. One of these, expressed predominantly in
hematopoietic cells, was termed hematopoietic cell phosphatase (HCPH).
From a pre-B-cell-derived library, Matthews et al. (1992) cloned the
mouse PTPN6 cDNA, which they designated SHP (Src homology region
2-domain phosphatase). Yi et al. (1992) obtained complete cDNAs for both
the human and murine HCPH genes. The human gene was also cloned from a
breast cancer cell line and termed PTP1C by Shen et al. (1991). PTP1C
encodes a cytoplasmic protein that contains a phosphatase-catalytic
domain in the C-terminal region and 2 tandemly repeated, src-homology 2
(SH2) domains in the N-terminal region. SH2 domains were first
identified in the SRC gene family and found in a variety of proteins
involved in signal transduction. The SH2 domains may recognize
phosphorylated tyrosine residues and direct protein-protein
associations.

GENE STRUCTURE

Banville et al. (1995) demonstrated that the PTPN6 gene consists of 17
exons spanning 17 kb of DNA. Three nonhematopoietic PTPN6 transcripts
were identified in a variety of cell lines and were shown to be
transcribed from a common promoter. The hematopoietic form of the PTPN6
transcript is initiated at a downstream promoter separated by 7 kb from
the upstream promoter. This downstream promoter is active exclusively in
cells of the hematopoietic lineage.

MAPPING

Yi et al. (1992) mapped the human HCPH gene to chromosome 12p13-p12 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. By study of panels of somatic cell
hybrids and fluorescence in situ hybridization, Plutzky et al. (1992)
determined that the gene encoding the nontransmembrane protein-tyrosine
phosphatase of the nonreceptor type 6 is located in region 12p13.

Using a genomic probe in interspecific backcross analysis, Yi et al.
(1992) mapped the murine Hcph gene to chromosome 6 where it was found to
be tightly linked to the Tnfr2 and Ly4 genes.

GENE FUNCTION

Plutzky et al. (1992) suggested that since PTPN6 is expressed at high
levels in hematopoietic cells of all lineages and its expression is
induced early in hematopoietic differentiation, and since 12p13 is a
region commonly involved in leukemia-associated chromosomal
abnormalities, altered expression and/or structure of PTPN6 may play a
role in leukemogenesis.

T-cell lymphomas lose expression of SHP1 due to DNA methylation of its
promoter. Zhang et al. (2005) demonstrated that malignant T cells
expressed DNMT1 (126375) and that STAT3 (102582) could bind sites in the
SHP1 promoter in vitro. STAT3, DNMT1, and HDAC1 (601241) formed
complexes and bound to the SHP1 promoter in vivo. Antisense DNMT1 and
STAT3 small interfering RNA induced DNA demethylation in malignant T
cells and expression of SHP1. Zhang et al. (2005) concluded that STAT3
may transform cells by inducing epigenetic silencing of SHP1 in
cooperation with DNMT1 and HDAC1.

Combining computer modeling and single-cell measurements, Feinerman et
al. (2008) examined how endogenous variation in the expression levels of
signaling proteins might affect antigen responsiveness during T-cell
activation. They found that the CD8 (186910) coreceptor fine-tuned
activation thresholds, whereas SHP1 digitally regulated cell
responsiveness. Stochastic variation in expression of these proteins
generated substantial diversity of activation within a clonal population
of T cells, but coregulation of CD8 and SHP1 levels ultimately limited
this very diversity. Feinerman et al. (2008) concluded that these
findings revealed how eukaryotic cells can draw on regulated variation
in gene expression to achieve phenotypic variability in a controlled
manner.

In a cultured bovine retinal pericyte model, Geraldes et al. (2009)
demonstrated that hyperglycemia persistently activates PRKCD (176977)
and p38-alpha MAPK (MAPK14; 600289), thus increasing expression of SHP1,
and that this occurs independently of NFKB (see 164011) activation. This
signaling cascade leads to PDGF receptor-beta (PDGFRB; 173410)
dephosphorylation and a reduction in downstream signaling from this
receptor, resulting in pericyte apoptosis, the most specific vascular
histopathology associated with diabetic complications. The authors
observed increased PRKCD activity and an increase in the number of
acellular capillaries in diabetic mouse retinas, which were not
reversible with insulin treatment that achieved normoglycemia. Unlike
diabetic age-matched wildtype mice, diabetic Prkcd -/- mice did not show
activation of MAPK14 or SHP1, inhibition of PDGFB (190040) signaling in
vascular cells, or the presence of acellular capillaries. The authors
also observed PRKCD, MAPK14, and SHP1 activation in brain pericytes and
in the renal cortex of diabetic mice. Geraldes et al. (2009) concluded
that this represents a new signaling pathway by which hyperglycemia can
induce PDGFB resistance and increased vascular cell apoptosis to cause
diabetic vascular complications.

Khalil et al. (2012) showed that most proliferating germinal center B
cells do not demonstrate active B cell receptor signaling. Rather,
spontaneous and induced signaling was limited by increased phosphatase
activity. Accordingly, both SHP1 and SH2 domain-containing inositol
5-phosphatase (SHIP1; 601582) were hyperphosphorylated in germinal
center cells and remained colocalized with B cell receptors after
ligation. Furthermore, SHP1 was required for germinal cell maintenance.
Intriguingly, germinal center B cells in the cell cycle G2 period
regained responsiveness to B cell receptor stimulation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Beghini et al. (2000) examined the expression of PTPN6 in CD34+/CD117+
blasts from acute myeloid leukemia patients. They identified and cloned
novel PTPN6 mRNA species, derived from aberrant splicing within the
N-SH2 domain leading to retention of intron 3. Sequence analysis
revealed an A-to-G conversion of A7866, which represents the putative
branch site in IVS3 of PTPN6 mRNA. The level of the aberrant
intron-retaining splice variant, evaluated by semiquantitative RT-PCR,
was lower in CD117 +/- AML bone marrow mononuclear cells at remission
than at diagnosis, suggesting an involvement of posttranscriptional
PTPN6 processing in leukemogenesis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Mice with the recessive 'moth eaten' (me) or the allelic 'viable moth
eaten' mutations express a severe autoimmune and immunodeficiency
syndrome. Tsui et al. (1993) showed that the basic defect involves
lesions in the gene that encodes hematopoietic cell phosphatase. Shultz
et al. (1993) showed that 2 allelic 'motheaten' mutations result in
aberrant splicing of the Hcph transcript. Thus, 'motheaten' was the
first animal model for a specific protein-tyrosine phosphatase
deficiency, useful in determining the precise role of HCPH in
hematopoiesis.

Kamata et al. (2003) found that CD4 T cells in mice heterozygous for the
motheaten mutation express about half the normal amount of SHP1. Th2
cell differentiation and Th2 cytokine production in CD4 T cells and
specific cytokine production in mast cells were enhanced in these mice.
Eosinophilic infiltration and enhanced airway hyperresponsiveness were
also noted in OVA-sensitized heterozygous mice, but only after OVA
inhalation. Kamata et al. (2003) suggested that SHP1 may be a negative
regulator in the development of allergic responses such as allergic
asthma.

Dubois et al. (2006) demonstrated that 'viable motheaten' mice bearing a
functionally deficient SHP1 protein are markedly glucose tolerant and
insulin sensitive compared to wildtype littermates, due to enhanced
insulin receptor signaling to IRS (see 147545)-PI3K (see PIK3CA;
171834)-Akt (164730) in liver and muscle and increased phosphorylation
of CEACAM1 (109770). This metabolic phenotype was recapitulated in
normal mice through adenoviral expression of a dominant-negative
inactive form of SHP1 in the liver or hepatic knockdown of SHP1 by small
hairpin RNA-mediated gene silencing. Dubois et al. (2006) concluded that
SHP1 plays a crucial role in negatively modulating insulin action and
clearance in the liver, thereby regulating whole-body glucose
homeostasis.

Using chemical mutagenesis, Croker et al. (2008) obtained mice with a
recessive phenotype they termed 'spin,' for spontaneous inflammation.
Homozygous spin mice had chronic lesions in feet, salivary glands, and
lungs and antichromatin antibodies. Spin mice had enhanced resistance to
Listeria monocytogenes infection. Testing the suppressive effects of
mutations at other loci showed that the autoinflammatory phenotype of
spin mice required Myd88 (602170), Irak4 (606883), and Il1r1 (147810),
but not Ticam1 (607601), Stat1 (600555), or Tnf (191160). Spin mice
derived into a germ-free environment did not show either autoimmune or
autoinflammatory phenotypes. Positional cloning mapped spin to the
distal region of chromosome 6, and Croker et al. (2008) identified a
T-to-A transversion in exon 5 of the Ptpn6 gene, resulting in a
tyr208-to-asn (Y208N) substitution in the N-terminal SH2 domain of the
protein. Croker et al. (2008) concluded that the spin phenotype is due
to a viable hypomorphic allele of Ptpn6 and that spin autoimmunity is
driven by commensal microbes acting through the Tlr (e.g., TLR4; 603030)
pathway requiring Myd88, Irak4, and Il1r1.

PTPN6(spin) mice spontaneously develop a severe inflammatory syndrome
that resembles neutrophilic dermatosis in humans and is characterized by
persistent footpad swelling and suppurative inflammation. Lukens et al.
(2013) reported that receptor-interacting protein-1 (RIP1;
603453)-regulated interleukin 1-alpha (IL1A; 147760) production by
hematopoietic cells critically mediates chronic inflammatory disease in
Ptpn6(spin) mice, whereas inflammasome signaling and IL1-beta
(147720)-mediated events are dispensable. IL1A was also crucial for
exacerbated inflammatory responses and unremitting tissue damage upon
footpad microabrasion of Ptpn6(spin) mice. Notably, pharmacologic and
genetic blockade of the kinase RIP1 protected against wound-induced
inflammation and tissue damage in Ptpn6(spin) mice, whereas RIP3
(605817) deletion failed to do so. Moreover, RIP1-mediated inflammatory
cytokine production was attenuated by NF-kappa-B (see 164011) and ERK
(see 601795) inhibition. Lukens et al. (2013) concluded that
wound-induced tissue damage and chronic inflammation in Ptpn6(spin) mice
are critically dependent on RIP1-mediated IL1-alpha production, whereas
inflammasome signaling and RIP3-mediated necroptosis are dispensable.

REFERENCE 1. Banville, D.; Stocco, R.; Shen, S.-H.: Human protein tyrosine
phosphatase 1C (PTPN6) gene structure: alternate promoter usage and
exon skipping generate multiple transcripts. Genomics 27: 165-173,
1995.

2. Beghini, A.; Ripamonti, C. B.; Peterlongo, P.; Roversi, G.; Cairoli,
R.; Morra, E.; Larizza, L.: RNA hyperediting and alternative splicing
of hematopoietic cell phosphatase (PTPN6) gene in acute myeloid leukemia. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 2297-2304, 2000.

3. Croker, B. A.; Lawson, B. R.; Rutschmann, S.; Berger, M.; Eidenschenk,
C.; Blasius, A. L.; Moresco, E. M. Y.; Sovath, S.; Cengia, L.; Shultz,
L. D.; Theofilopoulos, A. N.; Pettersson, S.; Beutler, B. A.: Inflammation
and autoimmunity caused by a SHP1 mutation depend on IL-1, MyD88,
and microbial trigger. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 15028-15033, 2008.
Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 19561 only, 2008.

4. Dubois, M.-J.; Bergeron, S.; Kim, H.-J.; Dombrowski, L.; Perreault,
M.; Fournes, B.; Faure, R.; Olivier, M.; Beauchemin, N.; Shulman,
G. I.; Siminovitch, K. A.; Kim, J. K.; Marette, A.: The SHP-1 protein
tyrosine phosphatase negatively modulates glucose homeostasis. Nature
Med. 12: 549-556, 2006.

5. Feinerman, O.; Veiga, J.; Dorfman, J. R.; Germain, R. N.; Altan-Bonnet,
G.: Variability and robustness in T cell activation from regulated
heterogeneity in protein levels. Science 321: 1081-1084, 2008.

6. Geraldes, P.; Hiraoka-Yamamoto, J.; Matsumoto, M.; Clermont, A.;
Leitges, M.; Marette, A.; Aiello, L. P.; Kern, T. S.; King, G. L.
: Activation of PKC-delta and SHP-1 by hyperglycemia causes vascular
cell apoptosis and diabetic retinopathy. Nature Med. 15: 1298-1306,
2009.

7. Kamata, T.; Yamashita, M.; Kimura, M.; Murata, K.; Inami, M.; Shimizu,
C.; Sugaya, K.; Wang, C.-R.; Taniguchi, M.; Nakayama, T.: Src homology
2 domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 controls the development
of allergic airway inflammation. J. Clin. Invest. 111: 109-119,
2003.

8. Khalil, A. M.; Cambier, J. C.; Shlomchik, M. J.: B cell receptor
signal transduction in the GC is short-circuited by high phosphatase
activity. Science 336: 1178-1181, 2012.

9. Lukens, J. R.; Vogel, P.; Johnson, G. R.; Kelliher, M. A.; Iwakura,
Y.; Lamkanfi, M.; Kanneganti, T. D.: RIP1-driven autoinflammation
targets IL-1-alpha independently of inflammasomes and RIP3. Nature 498:
224-227, 2013.

10. Matthews, R. J.; Bowne, D. B.; Flores, E.; Thomas, M. L.: Characterization
of hematopoietic intracellular protein tyrosine phosphatases: description
of a phosphatase containing an SH2 domain and another enriched in
proline-, glutamic acid-, serine-, and threonine-rich sequences. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 12: 2396-2405, 1992.

11. Plutzky, J.; Neel, B. G.; Rosenberg, R. D.; Eddy, R. L.; Byers,
M. G.; Jani-Sait, S.; Shows, T. B.: Chromosomal localization of an
SH2-containing tyrosine phosphatase (PTPN6). Genomics 13: 869-872,
1992.

12. Shen, S.-H.; Bastien, L.; Posner, B. I.; Chretien, P.: A protein-tyrosine
phosphatase with sequence similarity to the SH2 domain of the protein-tyrosine
kinases. Nature 352: 736-739, 1991. Note: Erratum: Nature: 353:
868 only, 1991.

13. Shultz, L. D.; Schweitzer, P. A.; Rajan, T. V.; Yi, T.; Ihle,
J. N.; Matthews, R. J.; Thomas, M. L.; Beier, D. R.: Mutations at
the murine motheaten locus are within the hematopoietic cell protein-tyrosine
phosphatase (Hcph) gene. Cell 73: 1445-1454, 1993.

14. Tsui, H. W.; Siminovitch, K. A.; de Souza, L.; Tsui, F. W. L.
: Motheaten and viable motheaten mice have mutations in the haematopoietic
cell phosphatase gene. Nature Genet. 4: 124-129, 1993.

15. Yi, T.; Cleveland, J. L.; Ihle, J. N.: Protein tyrosine phosphatase
containing SH2 domains: characterization, preferential expression
in hematopoietic cells, and localization to human chromosome 12p12-p13. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 12: 836-846, 1992.

16. Yi, T.; Cleveland, J. L.; Ihle, J. N.: Identification of novel
protein tyrosine phosphatases of hematopoietic cells by PCR amplification. Blood 78:
2222-2228, 1991.

17. Yi, T.; Gilbert, D. J.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland, N. G.; Ihle,
J. N.: Assignment of a novel protein tyrosine phosphatase gene (Hcph)
to mouse chromosome 6. Genomics 14: 793-795, 1992.

18. Zhang, Q.; Wang, H. Y.; Marzec, M.; Raghunath, P. N.; Nagasawa,
T.; Wasik, M. A.: STAT3- and DNA methyltransferase 1-mediated epigenetic
silencing of SHP-1 tyrosine phosphatase tumor suppressor gene in malignant
T lymphocytes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 6948-6953, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/19/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/2/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/24/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/4/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/4/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/14/2006
Denise L. M. Goh - updated: 4/17/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/14/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/22/1991

EDITED carol: 10/22/2013
alopez: 7/24/2013
carol: 4/22/2013
alopez: 7/24/2012
terry: 7/19/2012
wwang: 12/7/2009
terry: 12/2/2009
mgross: 3/24/2009
terry: 3/24/2009
mgross: 2/4/2009
terry: 2/4/2009
alopez: 9/12/2008
terry: 9/4/2008
wwang: 9/18/2006
terry: 9/14/2006
carol: 4/17/2003
cwells: 1/16/2001
terry: 12/14/2000
dkim: 7/23/1998
carol: 6/22/1998
terry: 8/4/1995
mark: 6/1/1995
carol: 11/18/1994
carol: 6/21/1993
carol: 4/6/1993
carol: 12/14/1992

611900	TITLE *611900 METALLOPHOSPHOESTERASE 1; MPPE1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

While characterizing a cosmid containing the 3-prime untranslated region
(UTR) of the GNAL gene (139312), Vuoristo and Ala-Kokko (2001)
identified a transcript corresponding to several human brain ESTs. They
cloned the cDNA for this gene, which they named metallophosphoesterase-1
(MPPE1), from a human brain cDNA library by RT-PCR. Four species of
MPPE1 mRNA were detected. The most abundant form encodes a deduced
396-amino acid protein with a signal sequence, a metallophosphoesterase
domain, and a putative transmembrane domain. One of the alternative
forms encodes a truncated 340-amino acid protein. Northern blot analysis
detected a single 2.2-kb MPPE1 mRNA in brain, but not in any other
tissues tested. The 3 alternative forms were detected in brain by RT-PCR
only.

GENE STRUCTURE

Vuoristo and Ala-Kokko (2001) determined that the MPPE1 gene contains 14
exons and spans about 27 kb. They detected 4 alternatively spliced
forms: the most abundant form contains exons 1, 2, 5-12, and 14, and
another form consists of exons 1, 2, and 5-14; the 2 rare forms
correspond to these 2, but lack the sequences for exon 10.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Vuoristo and Ala-Kokko (2001) mapped the
MPPE1 gene to chromosome 18p11.2. Exons 13, 14 and the 3-prime UTR of
the MPPE1 gene overlap with the 3-prime UTR of the GNAL gene. The 2
genes are oriented in a tail-to-tail manner.

REFERENCE 1. Vuoristo, J. T.; Ala-Kokko, L.: cDNA cloning, genomic organization
and expression of the novel human metallophosphoesterase gene MPPE1
on chromosome 18p11.2. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 95: 60-63, 2001.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 3/18/2008

EDITED carol: 03/18/2008
carol: 3/18/2008

603831	TITLE *603831 PDZ DOMAIN-CONTAINING 1; PDZK1
;;PDZD1;;
C-TERMINAL LINKING AND MODULATING PROTEIN; CLAMP;;
CFTR-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN, 70-KD; CAP70
DESCRIPTION Custer et al. (1997) cloned a gene from rat kidney mRNA that encodes a
protein regulated by dietary phosphate. They designated the protein
Diphor-1 (dietary P(i)-regulated RNA-1) and found that it shares
homology with the PDZ domain-containing protein Na+/H+ exchanger
regulatory factor. Diphor-1 specifically increased Na(+)-dependent
phosphate uptake by 1.7 times when coexpressed in Xenopus laevis oocytes
with the Na(+)-P(i) cotransporter, indicating that it may play an
important role in cellular phosphate regulation. Diphor-1 mRNA
expression was upregulated several fold by a restricted phosphate diet,
highlighting the possible role of the protein in maintaining overall
phosphate homeostasis.

White et al. (1998) showed that PDZK1, a PDZ domain-containing protein
highly homologous to rat Diphor-1, is expressed in human kidney. Based
on its sequence similarity to rat Diphor-1, they considered PDZK1 a
likely candidate for autosomal dominant hypophosphatemic rickets (ADHR;
193108), which maps to 12p13. However, they found by PCR analysis of a
human/rodent somatic cell hybrid mapping panel and by radiation hybrid
analysis that the PDZK1 gene maps to 1q21, thereby excluding it as a
candidate for ADHR.

Using the yeast 2-hybrid system, Kocher et al. (1998) identified PDZK1
as a protein interacting with MAP17 (607178), a 17-kD
membrane-associated protein. By in situ hybridization, they showed that
both proteins are upregulated in human carcinomas arising in kidney,
lung, colon, and breast. Using the yeast 2-hybrid system, Kocher et al.
(1999) found that PDZK1 interacts with CMOAT (ABCC2; 601107), a
canalicular multispecific organic anion transporter involved in
multidrug resistance. The finding was considered of particular interest
because proteins containing PDZ domains are involved in the clustering
and signaling pathways of membrane-associated proteins, including ion
channels. Therefore, the protein cluster formed by the association of
CMOAT, PDZK1, and MAP17 could play an important role in the cellular
mechanisms associated with multidrug resistance, and PDZK1 may represent
a new target in cancer cells resistant to chemotherapeutic agents.

The scavenger receptor class B type I (SRBI, or CD36L1; 601040),
mediates the selective uptake of cholesteryl esters from high density
lipoprotein and cholesterol secretion into bile in the liver. Ikemoto et
al. (2000) identified an SRBI-associated protein from rat liver membrane
extracts by using an affinity chromatography technique. The 523-amino
acid protein contains 4 PDZ domains (see 603199 for a discussion of PDZ)
and associates with the C terminus of SRBI using its N-terminal first
PDZ domain. Therefore, Ikemoto et al. (2000) denoted this protein as
CLAMP (C-terminal linking and modulating protein). CLAMP was located
mostly in the sinusoidal membranes, whereas SRBI was detected in both
sinusoidal and canalicular membranes. After the solubilization of the
liver membranes with Triton X-100, SRBI was immunoprecipitated with
anti-CLAMP monoclonal antibody, suggesting the association of these
proteins in vivo. By coexpressing SRBI with CLAMP in Chinese hamster
ovary cells, Ikemoto et al. (2000) observed an increase in the
expression level of SRBI, a reduction in the deacylation rate of the
cholesteryl esters taken up from HDL, and a change in the intracellular
distribution of a fluorescent lipid taken up from HDL. Taken together,
these data suggested that CLAMP is associated with SRBI in the liver
sinusoidal plasma membranes and may modulate intracellular transport and
metabolism of cholesteryl esters taken up from HDL.

Wang et al. (2000) identified a hydrophilic CFTR (602421)-binding
protein, CAP70, which is also concentrated on the apical surfaces. CAP70
had previously been identified by Kocher et al. (1998) as PDZK1. The
protein contains 4 PDZ domains, 3 of which are capable of binding to the
CFTR C terminus. Linking at least 2 CFTR molecules via cytoplasmic
C-terminal binding by either multivalent CAP70 or a bivalent monoclonal
antibody potentiates the CFTR chloride channel activity. Thus, the CFTR
channel can be switched to a more active conducting state via a
modification of intermolecular CFTR-CFTR contact that is enhanced by an
accessory protein.

Using in vitro pull-down assays, Thomson et al. (2005) determined that
human PDZK1 interacted with the sodium-hydrogen exchanger Nhe3 (SLC9A3;
182307) and the chloride-anion exchanger Cfex (SLC26A6) in rabbit renal
brush border membrane vesicles. The interactions were mediated via the
C-terminal PDZ-binding domains of Nhe3 and Cfex. Using Pdzk1-null mice,
Thomson et al. (2005) determined that brush border expression of Nhe3
was unaffected by loss of Pdzk1, but expression of Cfex was markedly
reduced. Functional activity of Cfex was also dramatically reduced in
Pdzk1-null mice.

GENE FAMILY

PDZ domains are central organizers of protein complexes at the plasma
membrane. Fanning and Anderson (1999) reviewed general concepts
concerning their biology. These included the structural basis for
specificity of their binding interactions and ideas about how they
organize both small local protein complexes used for signal transduction
(transducisomes) and larger 2-dimensional complexes like cell junctions
and plasma membrane domains. PDZ domains were originally identified as
conserved sequence elements within the postsynaptic density protein
PSD95 (602887), the Drosophila tumor suppressor dlg-A (600723), and the
tight junction protein ZO1 (601009). PDZ is an acronym derived from
these first 3 PDZ-containing proteins: PDS95/DLG/ZO1. Fanning and
Anderson (1999) stated that these 80- to 90-amino acid sequences had
been identified in more than 75 proteins and were characteristically
expressed in multiple copies within a single protein. They have a broad
species distribution and the overwhelming majority of proteins
containing them are associated with the plasma membrane. Although PDZ
domains are found in many different structures, each PDZ protein is
generally restricted to specific subcellular domains, such as synapses;
cell-cell contacts; or the apical, basal, or lateral cell surface. This
led to the speculation that PDZ domains evolved early to play a central
role in the organization of the plasma membrane domains.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kocher et al. (2003) developed Pdzk1 null mice. Mutant mice developed
normally, had no gross phenotypic abnormalities, and were fecund. Lack
of Pdzk1 altered the expression of selective ion channels in the kidney
and increased serum cholesterol levels. No significant redistribution of
proteins known to interact with Pdzk1, such as Map17, cmoat, and the
type IIa Na/Pi cotransporter, was observed. Kocher et al. (2003)
concluded that the lack of significant phenotype in Pdzk1-deficient mice
may be due to functional compensation by other Pdz domain-containing
proteins.

REFERENCE 1. Custer, M.; Spindler, B.; Verrey, F.; Murer, H.; Biber, J.: Identification
of a new gene product (diphor-1) regulated by dietary phosphate. Am.
J. Physiol. 273: F801-F806, 1997.

2. Fanning, A. S.; Anderson, J. M.: PDZ domains: fundamental building
blocks in the organization of protein complexes at the plasma membrane. J.
Clin. Invest. 103: 767-772, 1999.

3. Ikemoto, M.; Arai, H.; Feng, D.; Tanaka, K.; Aoki, J.; Dohmae,
N.; Takio, K.; Adachi, H.; Tsujimoto, M.; Inoue, K.: Identification
of a PDZ-domain-containing protein that interacts with the scavenger
receptor class B type I. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 6538-6543, 2000.

4. Kocher, O.; Comella, N.; Gilchrist, A.; Pal, R.; Tognazzi, K.;
Brown, L. F.; Knoll, J. H. M.: PDZK1, a novel PDZ domain-containing
protein up-regulated in carcinomas and mapped to chromosome 1q21,
interacts with cMOAT (MRP2), the multidrug resistance-associated protein. Lab.
Invest. 79: 1161-1170, 1999.

5. Kocher, O.; Comella, N.; Tognazzi, K.; Brown, L. F.: Identification
and partial characterization of PDZK1: a novel protein containing
PDZ interaction domains. Lab. Invest. 78: 117-125, 1998.

6. Kocher, O.; Pal, R.; Roberts, M.; Cirovic, C.; Gilchrist, A.:
Targeted disruption of the PDZK1 gene by homologous recombination. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 23: 1175-1180, 2003.

7. Thomson, R. B.; Wang, T.; Thomson, B. R.; Tarrats, L.; Girardi,
A.; Mentone, S.; Soleimani, M.; Kocher, O.; Aronson, P. S.: Role
of PDZK1 in membrane expression of renal brush border ion exchangers. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 13331-13336, 2005.

8. Wang, S.; Yue, H.; Derin, R. B.; Guggino, W. B.; Li, M.: Accessory
protein facilitated CFTR-CFTR interaction, a molecular mechanism to
potentiate the chloride channel activity. Cell 103: 169-179, 2000.

9. White, K. E.; Biber, J.; Murer, H.; Econs, M. J.: A PDZ domain-containing
protein with homology to Diphor-1 maps to human chromosome 1q21. Ann.
Hum. Genet. 62: 287-290, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/13/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/21/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/19/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/28/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/6/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/25/1999

EDITED mgross: 02/20/2008
carol: 1/4/2007
mgross: 10/13/2005
cwells: 4/24/2003
terry: 4/21/2003
carol: 8/28/2002
mcapotos: 10/20/2000
terry: 10/19/2000
mcapotos: 8/28/2000
mgross: 1/14/2000
terry: 1/6/2000
carol: 5/25/1999

615375	TITLE *615375 INTERLEUKIN 1 RECEPTOR-ASSOCIATED KINASE 1-BINDING PROTEIN 1; IRAK1BP1
;;IRAK1-BINDING PROTEIN 1;;
SIGNALING MOLECULE THAT ASSOCIATES WITH PELLE-LIKE KINASE; SIMPL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

IRAK1BP1 is required for TNF (191160)-dependent activation of NFKB (see
164011) activity (Luo et al., 2007).

CLONING

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis to identify potential regulators and/or
substrates of mouse Irak1 (300283), Vig et al. (2001) cloned mouse
Irak1bp1, which they called Simpl. By database analysis, they identified
the human ortholog. Mouse Simpl contain 259 amino acids. Northern blot
analysis of embryonic and adult mouse tissues revealed expression of a
1.35-kb transcript and a potential 2-kb variant. Highest expression was
detected in day-10 embryonic tissue and in adult testis, brain, kidney,
liver, and heart, with lower expression in lung and skeletal muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

By immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis of human embryonic
kidney cells, Vig et al. (2001) confirmed interaction between endogenous
IRAK1 and SIMPL. Reporter gene assays showed that overexpression of
mouse Simpl resulted in IL8 (146930) and NFKB activity. Mutation
analysis demonstrated that Simpl, like NFKB, was critical for cell
survival and that Simpl was required for NFKB activity induced by human
TNF, but not by human IL1 (147720). In addition, Simpl-induced
activation was dependent on intact IKKA (600664) and IKKB (603258). Vig
et al. (2001) proposed that SIMPL regulates NFKB activity by linking
IRAK1 to IKKA/IKKB-containing complexes.

Kwon et al. (2004) identified a nuclear localization signal in SIMPL,
and mutation analysis showed that nuclear localization of mouse Simpl
was required for TNFR1 (191190)-induced NFKB activity by enhancing the
transactivating activity of p65 (RELA; 164014). Kwon et al. (2004)
concluded that TNF-dependent activation of endogenous NFKB-dependent
gene expression requires nuclear relocalization of both NFKB and SIMPL.

By 2-dimensional phosphopeptide mapping analysis, Luo et al. (2007)
identified N-terminal basal and C-terminal TNF-induced phosphopeptides
in mouse Simpl. IRAK1 was able to phosphorylate Simpl and was required
for Simpl nuclear localization.

MAPPING

Gross (2013) mapped the IRAK1BP1 gene to chromosome 6q14.1 based on an
alignment of the IRAK1BP1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC112253) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/21/2013.

2. Kwon, H.-J.; Breese, E. H.; Vig-Varga, E.; Luo, Y.; Lee, Y.; Goebl,
M. G.; Harrington, M. A.: Tumor necrosis factor alpha induction of
NF-kappa-B requires the novel coactivator SIMPL. Molec. Cell. Biol. 24:
9317-9326, 2004.

3. Luo, Y.; Kwon, H.-J.; Montano, S.; Georgiadis, M.; Goebl, M. G.;
Harrington, M. A.: Phosphorylation of SIMPL modulates RelA-associated
NF-kappa-B-dependent transcription. Am. J. Physiol. Cell Physiol. 292:
C1013-C1023, 2007.

4. Vig, E.; Green, M.; Liu, Y.; Yu, K.-Y.; Kwon, H.-J.; Tian, J.;
Goebl, M. G.; Harrington, M. A.: SIMPL is a tumor necrosis factor-specific
regulator of nuclear factor-kappa-B activity. J. Biol. Chem. 276:
7859-7866, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 8/21/2013

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 8/21/2013

EDITED mgross: 08/22/2013
mgross: 8/21/2013

601094	TITLE *601094 FORKHEAD BOX E3; FOXE3
;;FORKHEAD, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG-LIKE 12; FKHL12;;
FORKHEAD-RELATED ACTIVATOR 8; FREAC8
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The forkhead genes are transcription factors distinguished by a
characteristic 100-amino acid motif that was originally identified in
Drosophila; see 164874. Larsson et al. (1995) cloned a partial human
cDNA corresponding to a novel forkhead gene, designated FOXE3. Blixt et
al. (2000) isolated genomic clones of the mouse homolog, Foxe3, which
encodes a 288-amino acid protein. By in situ hybridization, they
detected Foxe3 expression in developing eye around embryonic day 9.5 at
the start of lens placode induction. Expression increased as the lens
placode was formed and was confined to the lens vesicle as it detached
from the surface ectoderm. As the posterior cells of the lens fiber
began to differentiate, expression was restricted to the
undifferentiated cells covering the anterior surface of the lens. Other
than lens, Blixt et al. (2000) detected Foxe3 expression only briefly in
the neural folds in the cephalic region at about the same time as
expression in the lateral head ectoderm. After closure of the anterior
neuropore, expression was found in the most caudal, dorsolateral parts
of the diencephalon. The expression peaked around embryonic days 9.5 to
10 and then disappeared.

Using RT-PCR, Wada et al. (2011) detected Foxe3 expression in adult
mouse testis and eye, but not in brain or kidney.

GENE STRUCTURE

The FOXE gene consists of a single coding exon (Valleix et al., 2006).

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization and somatic cell hybrid analysis,
Larsson et al. (1995) mapped the human FOXE3 gene to 1p32. By FISH,
Blixt et al. (2000) mapped the mouse Foxe3 gene to chromosome 4C7, which
is in agreement with the genetic mapping of the 'dysgenetic lens' (dyl)
mutant to chromosome 4, in an area showing conserved synteny with human
1p32.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Anterior Segment Mesenchymal Dysgenesis

Blixt et al. (2000) proposed human FOXE3 as a candidate for some cases
of Peters anomaly (604229).

Dysgenesis of the anterior segment of the eye is frequently associated
with cataracts and glaucoma, resulting in visual disability in
childhood. Semina et al. (2001) reported a single-nucleotide insertion
in the coding region of the FOXE3 gene in a family with anterior segment
ocular dysgenesis and cataracts (107250). The mutation caused a
frameshift that resulted in an abnormal sequence of 5 terminal amino
acids and an addition of 111 amino acids to the predicted protein. The
mutation was present in 2 affected individuals from this family and was
not identified in 180 normal control chromosomes.

In a large 4-generation Newfoundland family segregating an autosomal
dominant form of variable anterior segment dysgenesis, previously
reported by Green and Johnson (1986), Doucette et al. (2011) analyzed 9
functional candidate genes and identified a heterozygous non-stop
mutation in the FOXE3 gene (X320L; 601094.0003) that segregated with
disease in the family and was not found in 141 ethnically matched
controls.

- Congenital Primary Aphakia

Valleix et al. (2006) detected homozygosity for a nonsense mutation in
the FOXE3 gene (601094.0002) in 3 sibs with congenital primary aphakia
(610256). The authors stated that the findings indicated a possible
critical role for FOXE3 very early in the lens developmental program,
perhaps earlier than any role recognized elsewhere for this gene.

ANIMAL MODEL

Blixt et al. (2000) hypothesized that mutations in Foxe3 could be
responsible for the phenotype observed in dysgenetic lens (dyl) mutant
mice. In these mice, the lens vesicle fails to separate from the
ectoderm, causing a fusion between the lens and the cornea. Blixt et al.
(2000) identified 2 mutations within the DNA-binding domain of Foxe3 in
dyl mice: phe93-to-leu and phe98-to-ser. These 2 phenylalanine residues
are highly conserved in all forkhead proteins and Blixt et al. (2000)
predicted the mutations would obliterate DNA binding.

Blixt et al. (2000) reported that in dyl mice, the posterior of the lens
epithelium fails to divide and shows signs of premature differentiation,
whereas the most anterior cells are eliminated by apoptosis. The normal
separation of the lens vesicle from the ectoderm fails in dyl mice.
However, lens fiber differentiation appears to be normal and is thought
to be independent of Foxe3. Blixt et al. (2000) concluded that Foxe3 is
essential for closure of the lens vesicle and is a factor that promotes
survival and proliferation, while preventing differentiation, in the
lens epithelium.

In the vacuolated lens (vl) mouse model resulting from a deletion in the
mouse Gpr161 gene (612250), Matteson et al. (2008) mapped modifier
quantitative trait loci and found the pro23 allele of Foxe3, which
reduced the transcriptional activity of Foxe3, contributed to cataract
development in vl/vl mice.

The Rinshoken cataract (rct) mutation is a recessive mutation in mice
that causes mild microphthalmia and congenital cataracts with severe
degeneration of lens fibers. Wada et al. (2011) determined that rct is
caused by a 22-bp deletion within an upstream regulatory region of the
Foxe3 gene that contains major and minor lens regulatory elements. The
deletion includes a CTCTTTTCA motif that is highly conserved in
vertebrates. RT-PCR detected reduced expression of Foxe3 in lens, but
not testis, of rct mice compared with wildtype. Wada et al. (2011)
concluded that rct is caused by reduced Foxe3 expression due to a
deletion in a cis-acting regulatory element.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ANTERIOR SEGMENT MESENCHYMAL DYSGENESIS
FOXE3, 1-BP INS, 943G

In a mother and daughter with anterior segment mesenchymal dysgenesis
(107250), Semina et al. (2001) identified a single G nucleotide
insertion 15 bp upstream of the stop codon in the FOXE3 gene. The
mutation resulted in a frameshift which altered the sequence of the last
5 amino acids and added an additional 111 amino acids to the predicted
protein.

.0002
APHAKIA, CONGENITAL PRIMARY
FOXE3, CYS240TER

In 3 sibs from a consanguineous family with congenital primary aphakia
(601094), Valleix et al. (2006) found homozygosity for a C-to-A
transversion at position 720 of the FOXE3 gene that predicted the
substitution of a stop codon for cysteine at codon 240 (C240X). Each
unaffected parent was heterozygous for the mutation.

.0003
ANTERIOR SEGMENT MESENCHYMAL DYSGENESIS
FOXE3, TER320LEU

In 8 affected members of a large 4-generation Newfoundland family with
variable anterior segment dysgenesis (107250), previously reported by
Green and Johnson (1986), Doucette et al. (2011) identified
heterozygosity for a 959G-T transversion in the FOXE3 gene, resulting in
the elimination of the functional opal stop codon (ter320-to-leu; X320L)
and predicting the addition of 72 amino acid residues to the C terminus.
The mutation was not found in 17 unaffected family members or in 141
ethnically matched controls. Direct sequencing of an affected
individual's cDNA demonstrated the absence of the 959G-T mutation,
suggesting that the mRNA transcribed from the 'non-stop' allele might be
degraded before being translated, or that the mRNA might not be
transcribed at all.

REFERENCE 1. Blixt, A.; Mahlapuu, M.; Aitola, M.; Pelto-Huikko, M.; Enerback,
S.; Carlsson, P.: A forkhead gene, FoxE3, is essential for lens epithelial
proliferation and closure of the lens vesicle. Genes Dev. 14: 245-254,
2000.

2. Doucette, L.; Green, J.; Fernandez, B.; Johnson, G. J.; Parfrey,
P.; Young, T.-L.: A novel, non-stop mutation in FOXE3 causes an autosomal
dominant form of variable anterior segment dysgenesis including Peters
anomaly. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 19: 293-299, 2011.

3. Green, J. S.; Johnson, G. J.: Congenital cataract with microcornea
and Peters' anomaly as expressions of one autosomal dominant gene. Ophthalmic
Paediat. Genet. 7: 187-194, 1986.

4. Larsson, C.; Hellqvist, M.; Pierrou, S.; White, I.; Enerback, S.;
Carlsson, P.: Chromosomal localization of six human forkhead genes,
freac-1 (FKHL5), -3 (FKHL7), -4 (FKHL8), -5 (FKHL9), -6 (FKHL10),
and -8 (FKHL12). Genomics 30: 464-469, 1995.

5. Matteson, P. G.; Desai, J.; Korstanje, R.; Lazar, G.; Borsuk, T.
E.; Rollins, J.; Kadambi, S.; Joseph, J.; Rahman, T.; Wink, J.; Benayed,
R.; Paigen, B.; Millonig, J. H.: The orphan G protein-coupled receptor,
Gpr161, encodes the vacuolated lens locus and controls neurulation
and lens development. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 2088-2093, 2008.

6. Semina, E. V.; Brownell, I.; Mintz-Hittner, H. A.; Murray, J. C.;
Jamrich, M.: Mutations in the human forkhead transcription factor
FOXE3 associated with anterior segment ocular dysgenesis and cataracts. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 10: 231-236, 2001.

7. Valleix, S.; Niel, F.; Nedelec, B.; Algros, M.-P.; Schwartz, C.;
Delbosc, B.; Delpech, M.; Kantelip, B.: Homozygous nonsense mutation
in the FOXE3 gene as a cause of congenital primary aphakia in humans. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 79: 358-364, 2006.

8. Wada, K.; Maeda, Y. Y.; Watanabe, K.; Oshio, T.; Ueda, T.; Takahashi,
G.; Yokohama, M.; Saito, J.; Seki, Y.; Takahama, S.; Ishii, R.; Shitara,
H.; Taya, C.; Yonekawa, H.; Kikkawa, Y.: A deletion in a cis element
of Foxe3 causes cataracts and microphthalmia in rct mice. Mammalian
Genome 22: 693-702, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/26/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/14/2011
Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 7/13/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/18/2001
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 11/6/2000

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 2/26/1996

EDITED mgross: 11/07/2012
mgross: 11/7/2012
terry: 10/26/2012
wwang: 6/23/2011
terry: 6/14/2011
wwang: 8/22/2008
alopez: 7/13/2006
cwells: 4/26/2001
cwells: 4/18/2001
carol: 3/1/2001
terry: 11/6/2000
dkim: 10/12/1998
mark: 1/10/1998
mark: 2/26/1996

611906	TITLE *611906 FIBRONECTIN TYPE III DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 5; FNDC5
;;FRCP2
IRISIN, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database searching with the sequence of mouse Fndc4 (611905) as
query, Teufel et al. (2002) identified mouse Fndc5. The deduced
203-amino acid protein, like the Fndc4 protein, contains an N-terminal
signal peptide, a fibronectin type III domain, and a transmembrane
domain. The 2 proteins share 60% identity in the FNIII domain and 86% in
the transmembrane domain. Also by database analysis, Teufel et al.
(2002) identified human FNDC5, which shares over 95% amino acid homology
with mouse Fndc5. They found no homologs in invertebrates. Northern blot
analysis of multiple mouse tissues detected highest expression of Fndc5
in adult brain and heart, and low expression in lung, skeletal muscle,
and testis. Northern blot analysis of mouse embryonic mRNA first
detected Fndc5 expression at embryonic day 11, with strongest expression
at E15 and decreasing expression at E17. In situ hybridization
demonstrated expression of Fndc5 in the fore- and midbrain, as well as
in the brachial arches and the heart. Overexpression of a GFP-Fndc5
fusion protein in COS cells showed localization predominantly in the
endoplasmic reticulum, with small amounts in the plasma membrane.

GENE STRUCTURE

Irisin is a 22-kD cleaved fragment that comprises most of the
fibronectin-3 domain of FNDC5 and is comprised of 110 amino acids
(Bostrom et al., 2012). Mouse and human irisin are 100% identical.

GENE FUNCTION

In mouse, Bostrom et al. (2012) demonstrated that PGC1-alpha (604517)
expression in muscle stimulates an increase in expression of FNDC5, a
membrane protein that is cleaved and secreted as a novel hormone,
irisin. Irisin acts on white adipose cells in culture and in vivo to
stimulate UCP1 (113730) expression and a broad program of brown fat-like
development. Irisin is induced with exercise in mice and humans, and
mildly increased irisin levels in the blood cause an increase in energy
expenditure in mice with no changes in movement or food intake. This
results in improvements in obesity and glucose homeostasis. Bostrom et
al. (2012) postulated that irisin could be therapeutic for human
metabolic disease and other disorders that are improved with exercise.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the FNDC5
gene to chromosome 1 (TMAP SHGC-74545). Teufel et al. (2002) mapped the
mouse Fndc5 gene to chromosome 4.

REFERENCE 1. Bostrom, P.; Wu, J.; Jedrychowski, M. P.; Korde, A.; Ye, L.; Lo,
J. C.; Rasbach, K. A.; Bostrom, E. A.; Choi, J. H.; Long, J. Z.; Kajimura,
S.; Zingaretti, M. C.; Vind, B. F.; Tu, H.; Cinti, S.; Hojlund, K.;
Cygi, S. P.; Spiegelman, B. M.: A PGC1-alpha-dependent myokine that
drives brown-fat-like development of white fat and thermogenesis. Nature 481:
463-468, 2012.

2. Teufel, A.; Malik, N.; Mukhopadhyay, M.; Westphal, H.: Frcp1 and
Frcp2, two novel fibronectin type III repeat containing genes. Gene 297:
79-83, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/8/2012

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 3/19/2008

EDITED alopez: 02/10/2012
terry: 2/8/2012
carol: 3/19/2008

601416	TITLE *601416 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 39 (ZINC TRANSPORTER), MEMBER 7; SLC39A7
;;KE4, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; HKE4;;
D6S2244E
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Zinc is an essential cofactor for more than 50 classes of enzymes. It is
involved in protein, nucleic acid, carbohydrate, and lipid metabolism,
as well as in the control of gene transcription, growth, development,
and differentiation. Zinc cannot passively diffuse across cell membranes
and requires specific transporters, such as SLC39A7, to enter the
cytosol from both the extracellular environment and the intracellular
storage compartments (summary by Taylor et al., 2004).

CLONING

Among the many non-HLA genes that have been identified in the region of
the major histocompatibility complex (6p21.3) in mouse and human are the
genes symbolized Ke4 and Ke6 in the mouse. Ando et al. (1996) stated
that the function of these genes is unknown, although Ke6 may be
involved in the manifestation of polycystic kidney disease (PKD; 173900)
because of its aberrant expression in 2 different murine models of PKD
(Aziz et al., 1993; Aziz et al., 1994). Ando et al. (1996) isolated cDNA
clones corresponding to the human Ke4 and Ke6 (601417) genes (designated
HKE4 and HKE6 by them). The predicted amino acid sequences of HKE4 and
HKE6 exhibit 81.5 and 85.6% identity to the mouse homologs,
respectively. Ando et al. (1996) speculated that HKE4 may encode a
membrane protein with histidine-rich charge clusters.

Taylor et al. (2004) cloned HKE4. The deduced 469-amino acid protein has
a calculated molecular mass of 50 kD. It contains a cleavable signal
peptide, a long cytosolic N terminus, 8 transmembrane domains, and a
short C terminus. The N-terminal half contains several histidine-rich
repeats, and HKE4 has a central catalytic zinc-binding site and a
cytoplasmic dileucine motif that predicts retention in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER). Deglycosylation experiments and Western blot analysis
indicated that HKE4 is a protein of about 50 kD that contains no
N-linked glycans. Fluorescence microscopy of Chinese hamster ovary cells
transfected with HKE4 revealed staining of a perinuclear network and
colocalization with an ER marker protein. RNA dot blot analysis
indicated low but ubiquitous expression of HKE4, with highest levels in
placenta, liver, pituitary, pancreas, salivary gland, kidney, and
prostate.

GENE FUNCTION

By transient transfection in Chinese hamster ovary cells, Taylor et al.
(2004) showed that HKE4 increased intracellular free zinc in a time-,
temperature-, and concentration-dependent manner.

MAPPING

Ando et al. (1996) determined that the HKE4 and HKE6 genes are located
at the centromeric end of the HLA region on human 6p21.3.

Kikuti et al. (1997) examined YAC clone Y42, which contains the MHC
class II region of chromosome 6q21.3. This region has a relatively high
gene density. They identified the following human genes (in order from
centromere toward telomere): HSET
(603763)--HKE1.5--HKE2--HKE3--RING1--(602045)--HKE6 (601417)--HKE4--RXRB
(180246)--COL11A2 (120290)--DPB2.

REFERENCE 1. Ando, A.; Kikuti, Y. Y.; Shigenari, A.; Kawata, H.; Okamoto, N.;
Shiina, T.; Chen, L.; Ikemura, T.; Abe, K.; Kimura, M.; Inoko, H.
: cDNA cloning of the human homologues of the mouse Ke4 and Ke6 genes
at the centromeric end of the human MHC region. Genomics 35: 600-602,
1996.

2. Aziz, N.; Maxwell, M. M.; Brenner, B. M.: Coordinate regulation
of 11-beta-HSD and Ke6 gene in cpk mouse: implications for steroid
metabolic defect in PKD. Am. J. Physiol. 267: F791-F797, 1994.

3. Aziz, N.; Maxwell, M. M.; St.-Jacques, B.; Brenner, B. M.: Downregulation
of Ke 6, a novel gene encoded within the major histocompatibility
complex, in murine polycystic kidney disease. Molec. Cell. Biol. 13:
1847-1853, 1993. Note: Erratum: Molec. Cell. Biol. 13: 6614 only,
1993.

4. Kikuti, Y. Y.; Tamiya, G.; Ando, A.; Chen, L.; Kimura, M.; Ferreira,
E.; Tsuji, K.; Trowsdale, J.; Inoko, H.: Physical mapping 220 kb
centromeric of the human MHC and DNA sequence analysis of the 43-kb
segment including the RING1, HKE6, and HKE4 genes. Genomics 42:
422-435, 1997.

5. Taylor, K. M.; Morgan, H. E.; Johnson, A.; Nicholson, R. I.: Structure-function
analysis of HKE4, a member of the new LIV-1 subfamily of zinc transporters. Biochem.
J. 377: 131-139, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/18/2004
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 10/13/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/9/1996

EDITED carol: 04/12/2013
terry: 4/19/2011
alopez: 9/14/2007
mgross: 6/24/2004
terry: 6/18/2004
psherman: 7/21/2000
psherman: 6/19/2000
alopez: 4/22/1999
alopez: 10/27/1997
alopez: 10/13/1997
jamie: 10/23/1996
jamie: 10/16/1996
mark: 9/11/1996
terry: 9/10/1996
mark: 9/10/1996
mark: 9/9/1996

604597	TITLE *604597 GLUTAMATE RECEPTOR-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1; GRIP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The recruitment of signaling molecules to the plasma membrane is a
prerequisite for the functioning of various signaling cascades. Correct
localization within the plasma membrane is equally important, as the
membrane itself is highly organized into lipid domains that provide
subcompartments. These small (less than 100 nm) membrane domains, called
rafts, are enriched in sphingolipids and cholesterol and can incorporate
GPI-anchored proteins, specific transmembrane proteins, and doubly
acylated proteins like tyrosine kinases of the Src family. Rafts have
been proposed to function as platforms for the localized concentration
and activation of signaling molecules. Transmembrane ephrin B proteins
have important roles during embryonic patterning as ligands for Eph
receptor tyrosine kinases and presumably as signal-transducing
receptor-like molecules. Ephrin B1 (EFNB1; 300035) is localized in raft
microdomains. Using a yeast 2-hybrid system to identify proteins that
bind to the cytoplasmic domain of EFNB1, Bruckner et al. (1999) isolated
a partial human fetal brain cDNA encoding GRIP1. The predicted GRIP1
protein, which lacks the N-terminal region, contains a partial PDZ3
domain and intact PDZ4 through PDZ7 domains. GRIP1 binds to the C
terminus of EFNB1, which contains a PDZ-binding consensus motif. In situ
hybridization of embryonic day 17 (E17) rat embryos showed that Grip1 is
expressed relatively homogeneously and strongly throughout most regions
of the nervous system. Grip1 was expressed at very low levels in many
nonneuronal tissues of embryonic day 17 rat, with the highest levels
found in nasal cavities and major blood vessels. Coimmunoprecipitation
analysis demonstrated that Grip1 and Efnb1 interact in embryonic day 14
mouse embryos. Bruckner et al. (1999) found that GRIP1 is recruited into
rafts through association with EFNB1. In addition, a GRIP1-associated
serine/threonine kinase activity was recruited into EFNB1/GRIP1
complexes. Bruckner et al. (1999) suggested that GRIP proteins provide a
scaffold for the assembly of a multiprotein signaling complex downstream
of ephrin B ligands.

GENE FUNCTION

Setou et al. (2002) demonstrated that an AMPA receptor (AMPAR)
subunit--GluR2-interacting protein (GRIP1)--can directly interact and
steer kinesin heavy chains to dendrites as a motor for AMPARs. As would
be expected if this complex is functional, both gene targeting and
dominant-negative experiments of heavy chains of mouse kinesin showed
abnormal localization of GRIP1. Moreover, expression of the
kinesin-binding domain of GRIP1 resulted in accumulation of the
endogenous kinesin predominantly in the somatodendritic area. This
pattern was different from that generated by overexpression of the
kinesin-binding scaffold protein JSAP1 (605431), which occurred
predominantly in the somatoaxon area. Setou et al. (2002) concluded that
directly binding proteins can determine the traffic direction of a motor
protein.

Contractor et al. (2002) reported that mossy fiber long-term
potentiation was reduced by perfusion of postsynaptic neurons with
peptides and antibodies that interfere with binding of EphB receptor
tyrosine kinases to the PDZ protein GRIP1. Mossy fiber long-term
potentiation was also reduced by extracellular application of soluble
forms of beta-ephrins, which are normally membrane-anchored presynaptic
ligands for the EphB receptors. The application of soluble ligands for
presynaptic ephrins increased basal excitatory transmission and occluded
both tetanus and forskolin-induced synaptic potentiation. Contractor et
al. (2002) concluded that the PDZ interactions in postsynaptic neuron
and transsynaptic interactions between postsynaptic EphB receptors and
presynaptic beta-ephrins are necessary for the induction of mossy fiber
long-term potentiation.

At rat cerebellar parallel fiber-stellate cell synapses, Ca(2+) influx
through Glur2 (GRIA2; 138247)-lacking AMPARs drives incorporation of
Ca(2+)-impermeable Glur2-containing AMPARs, generating rapid changes in
excitatory postsynaptic current properties. Liu and Cull-Candy (2005)
found that repetitive synaptic activity triggered loss of
Ca(2+)-permeable AMPARs by disrupting their interaction with Grip. Pick
(PICK1; 605926) drove activity-dependent delivery of Ca(2+)-impermeable
receptors into the synaptic membrane. Liu and Cull-Candy (2005)
concluded that dynamic regulation of AMPARs by GRIP and PICK provides a
mechanism for controlling Ca(2+) permeability of synaptic receptors.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 2 unrelated male fetuses with typical features of Fraser syndrome
(219000), Vogel et al. (2012) identified homozygosity for a splice site
mutation in the GRIP1 gene (604597.0001). In addition, the
consanguineous parents of a third male fetus with Fraser syndrome were
found to be heterozygous for a 4-bp deletion in the GRIP1 gene
(604597.0002); no DNA was available from the presumably homozygous
fetus.

ANIMAL MODEL

Bladt et al. (2002) found that elimination of the mouse Grip1 gene
results in embryonic lethality. Null embryos developed abnormalities in
the dermo-epidermal junction, resulting in extensive skin blistering
around day 12 of embryonic life. Ultrastructural characterization of the
blisters (or bullae) revealed cleavage of the dermo-epidermal junction
below the lamina densa, an alteration reminiscent of the dystrophic form
of human epidermolysis bullosa (226600). Blisters were also observed in
the lateral ventricle of the brain and in the meninges covering the
cerebral cortex. Thus, it appears that GRIP1 scaffolding protein is
required for the formation and integrity of the dermo-epidermal junction
and that PDZ domains are important in the organization of supramolecular
structures essential for mammalian embryonic development.

Through the study of Grip1 -/- mice, Takamiya et al. (2004) found that
loss of the Grip1 protein leads to the formation of subepidermal
hemorrhagic blisters, renal agenesis, syndactyly or polydactyly, and
permanent fusion of eyelids (cryptophthalmos). Similar malformations are
characteristic of individuals with Fraser cryptophthalmos-syndactyly
syndrome (219000) and animal models of the human disorder, such as mice
carrying the 'blebbed' mutation (bl) in the Fras1 gene (607830), which
encodes an extracellular matrix protein. Grip1 can visibly interact with
Fras1 and is required for the localization of Fras1 to the basal side of
cells. In one animal model of Fraser syndrome, the 'eye-blebs' (eb)
mouse, Grip1 is disrupted by a deletion of 2 coding exons. From their
data, Takamiya et al. (2004) concluded that Grip1 is required for normal
cell-matrix interactions during early embryonic development and that
inactivation of Grip1 causes Fraser syndrome-like defects in mice.
Kiyozumi et al. (2006) showed that eb/eb mice had reduced localization
of Fras1, Frem1 (608944), and Frem2 (608945) to epidermal basement
membranes.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
FRASER SYNDROME
GRIP1, IVS17, G-C, +1

In 2 unrelated male fetuses with typical features of Fraser syndrome
(219000), Vogel et al. (2012) identified homozygosity for a +1G-C
transversion in intron 17 (2113+1G-C; based on GenBank GENBANK
NM_201150.3) of the GRIP1 gene, predicted to cause skipping of exon 17.
The unaffected consanguineous parents from both families were
heterozygous for the splice site mutation, which was not found in
multiple mutation and SNP databases or in more than 40 exomes sequenced
by the authors. Analysis of GRIP1 expression in 1 set of parents
revealed a 374-bp (wildtype) mRNA product as well as a 234-bp fragment
lacking exon 17, confirming that the splice site mutation causes a
frameshift resulting in a premature termination codon.

.0002
FRASER SYNDROME
GRIP1, 4-BP DEL, 1181AAGA

In the unaffected consanguineous parents of a male fetus with typical
features of Fraser syndrome (219000), Vogel et al. (2012) identified
heterozygosity for a 4-bp deletion (1181_1184delAAGA, based on GenBank
GENBANK NM_201150.3) in exon 10 of the GRIP1 gene, predicted to cause a
frameshift and premature termination codon. The fetus was presumed to be
homozygous for the deletion, although no DNA was available.

REFERENCE 1. Bladt, F.; Tafuri, A.; Gelkop, S.; Langille, L.; Pawson, T.: Epidermolysis
bullosa and embryonic lethality in mice lacking the multi-PDZ domain
protein GRIP1. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 6816-6821, 2002.

2. Bruckner, K.; Pablo Labrador, J.; Scheiffele, P.; Herb, A.; Seeburg,
P. H.; Klein, R.: EphrinB ligands recruit GRIP family PDZ adaptor
proteins into raft membrane microdomains. Neuron 22: 511-524, 1999.

3. Contractor, A.; Rogers, C.; Maron, C.; Henkemeyer, M.; Swanson,
G. T.; Heinemann, S. F.: Trans-synaptic Eph receptor-ephrin signaling
in hippocampal mossy fiber LTP. Science 296: 1864-1869, 2002.

4. Kiyozumi, D.; Sugimoto, N.; Sekiguchi, K.: Breakdown of the reciprocal
stabilization of QBRICK/Frem1, Fras1, and Frem2 at the basement membrane
provokes Fraser syndrome-like defects. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103:
11981-11986, 2006.

5. Liu, S. J.; Cull-Candy, S. G.: Subunit interaction with PICK and
GRIP controls Ca(2+) permeability of AMPARs at cerebellar synapses. Nature
Neurosci. 8: 768-775, 2005.

6. Setou, M.; Seog, D.-H.; Tanaka, Y.; Kanai, Y.; Takei, Y.; Kawagishi,
M.; Hirokawa, N.: Glutamate receptor-interacting protein GRIP1 directly
steers kinesin to dendrites. Nature 417: 83-87, 2002.

7. Takamiya, K.; Kostourou, V.; Adams, S.; Jadeja, S.; Chalepakis,
G.; Scambler, P. J.; Huganir, R. L.; Adams, R. H.: A direct functional
link between the multi-PDZ domain protein GRIP1 and the Fraser syndrome
protein Fras1. Nature Genet. 36: 172-177, 2004.

8. Vogel, M. J.; van Zon, P.; Brueton, L.; Gijzen, M.; van Tuil, M.
C.; Cox, P.; Schanze, D.; Kariminejad, A.; Ghaderi-Sohi, S.; Blair,
E.; Zenker, M.; Scambler, P. J.; Ploos van Amstel, H. K.; van Haelst,
M. M.: Mutations in GRIP1 cause Fraser syndrome. J. Med. Genet. 49:
303-306, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/9/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/21/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/9/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/23/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/12/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/9/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/14/2002

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 2/23/2000

EDITED carol: 08/09/2012
terry: 8/9/2012
wwang: 9/21/2006
mgross: 3/6/2006
terry: 2/9/2006
alopez: 2/18/2004
alopez: 1/29/2004
terry: 1/23/2004
alopez: 7/15/2002
terry: 7/12/2002
alopez: 7/10/2002
terry: 7/9/2002
cwells: 6/28/2002
terry: 6/14/2002
mgross: 2/25/2000
psherman: 2/24/2000

103880	TITLE *103880 ALDO-KETO REDUCTASE FAMILY 1, MEMBER B1; AKR1B1
;;ALDOSE REDUCTASE; AR;;
ALDEHYDE REDUCTASE 1; ALDR1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

See aldehyde reductase (103830). Aldose reductase (EC 1.1.1.21) is a
member of the monomeric, NADPH-dependent aldo-keto reductase family and
participates in glucose metabolism and osmoregulation. It is believed to
play a protective role against toxic aldehydes derived from lipid
peroxidation and steroidogenesis that could affect cell
growth/differentiation when accumulated (Lefrancois-Martinez et al.,
2004). It is the first enzyme of the polyol pathway of sugar metabolism,
is most abundantly expressed in adrenal gland, and has been implicated
in diabetic complications (Shah et al., 1997).

CLONING

Chung and LaMendola (1989) cloned and sequenced the aldose reductase
gene from a human placental cDNA library using antibodies against the
bovine lens aldose reductase. The deduced amino acid sequence indicated
that maturation of aldose reductase involves removal of the N-terminal
methionine. Nishimura et al. (1990) also cloned the aldose reductase
gene using synthetic oligonucleotide probes based on partial amino acid
sequences of purified human psoas muscle aldose reductase. Bohren et al.
(1989) isolated aldose reductase and aldehyde reductase cDNAs. They
reported that the 2 proteins are 51% identical. Northern blot analysis
revealed that aldose reductase was expressed as an approximately 1.4-kb
mRNA in placenta.

Graham et al. (1991) determined the sequence of the ALDR1 gene by
analysis of cDNA and genomic clones. The gene codes for a 316-amino acid
protein with a molecular mass of 35,858 Da. A major site of
transcription initiation in liver was mapped to an adenine residue 31
nucleotides upstream from the A of the ATG initiation codon.

GENE STRUCTURE

Graham et al. (1991) determined that the ALDR1 gene extends over
approximately 18 kb and consists of 10 exons, giving rise to a 1,384
nucleotide mRNA, excluding the poly(A) tail. The exons range in size
from 82 to 168 bp, whereas the introns range from 325 to about 7,160 bp.
The promoter region of the gene contains a TATA (TATTTA) box and a CCAAT
box, located 37 and 104 nucleotides upstream, respectively, from the
transcription initiation site. Graham et al. (1991) found 4 Alu elements
in the ALDR1 gene: 2 in intron 1 and 1 each in introns 4 and 9.

GENE FUNCTION

Using specific antibodies, Northern blot analysis, and enzymatic assays,
Lefrancois-Martinez et al. (2004) presented evidence that AKR1B1
detectable in 15-week-old fetal glands is regulated by cAMP in human
adrenocortical cells and thus that AKR1B1 is functionally related to the
ACTH-responsive murine akr1b7/mvdp (mouse vas deferens protein) gene
rather than to its direct ortholog, the mouse aldose reductase akr1b3
gene.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Aldose reductase catalyzes the reduction of a number of aldehydes,
including the aldehyde form of glucose, which is reduced to the
corresponding sugar alcohol, sorbitol (Chung and LaMendola, 1989).
Sorbitol is subsequently metabolized to fructose by sorbitol
dehydrogenase. Under normal conditions, this pathway plays a minor role
in glucose metabolism in most tissues. In diabetic hyperglycemia,
however, cells undergoing insulin-independent uptake of glucose produce
significant quantities of sorbitol. The sorbitol accumulates in cells
because of its poor penetration across cellular membranes and its slow
metabolism by sorbitol dehydrogenase. The resulting hyperosmotic stress
to cells may be a cause of diabetic complications such as neuropathy,
retinopathy, and cataracts.

Epidemiology studies in patients with insulin-dependent diabetes (IDDM;
222100) and noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM; 125853) are
consistent with the hypothesis that a genetic factor influences the risk
for kidney disease of diabetes mellitus (see 603933). Aldose reductase,
the rate-limiting enzyme in the polyol pathway, catalyzes the
NADPH-dependent reduction of sugar aldehydes to their corresponding
sugar polyols. Shah et al. (1997) explored the hypothesis that increased
AR gene expression is a risk factor for nephropathy associated with
IDDM. They studied the following 4 groups: normal subjects, those with
IDDM and no evidence of nephropathy, those with IDDM and nephropathy,
and nondiabetics with nephropathy. They quantitated AR mRNA from
peripheral blood mononuclear cells by RNase protection assay. The
AR/beta-actin mRNA ratio was higher in the group with diabetic
nephropathy (603933) (0.088; CI, 0.06-80.108) than in the group of
normal subjects (0.045; CI, 0.033-0.057; P less than 0.01), the group
with IDDM without nephropathy (0.045; CI, 0.030-0.060; P less than
0.01), or the group of nondiabetics with kidney disease (0.019; CI,
0.011-0.027; P less than 0.001). In contrast, among nondiabetics, the
AR/beta-actin mRNA ratios were 2-fold lower in those with kidney disease
than in the group of normal subjects (P less than 0.01). The authors
concluded that the degree of AR gene expression modulates the risk for
nephropathy in IDDM subjects.

Lefrancois-Martinez et al. (2004) studied if changes in AKR1B1
expression could be associated with adrenal disorders. Relative
abundance of AKR1B1 mRNA was decreased in adrenocortical carcinomas when
compared with adenomas. Most (7 of 8) adrenocortical carcinomas had very
low relative AKR1B1 protein levels when compared with benign tumors
(cortisol-producing adenomas, nonfunctional adenomas,
aldosterone-producing adenomas), Cushing hyperplasia (see 219080), or
normal adrenals.

MAPPING

Using PCR to amplify specifically the human AR sequence in hamster/human
hybrid DNA and also in mouse/human monochromosome hybrids, Graham et al.
(1991) assigned the gene to chromosome 7. The assignment was confirmed
and regionalized to 7q35 by in situ hybridization to human metaphase
chromosomes using a novel, rapid method.

Using a cDNA clone encoding human aldose reductase, Bateman et al.
(1993) mapped gene sequences to human chromosomes 1, 3, 7, 9, 11, 13,
14, and 18 by analysis of somatic cell hybrids. By in situ
hybridization, sequences were localized to 1q32-q42, 3p12, 7q31-q35,
9q22, 11p14-p15, and 13q14-q21. As a putative functional ALDR1 gene had
been mapped to chromosome 7 and a putative pseudogene (ALDRP1) to
chromosome 3, the sequences on the other 7 chromosomes were thought to
represent other active genes, non-aldose reductase homologous sequences,
or pseudogenes.

- PSEUDOGENES

Brown et al. (1992) identified a putative pseudogene (ALDRP1) that
contained no intronic sequences; the functional aldose reductase has 9
introns. In addition, the homology was absent in the region 5-prime to
the transcription start site for the cDNA, implying that regulatory
elements such as the promoter were missing from the pseudogene. They
mapped the pseudogene to chromosome 3 by PCR, using amplimers specific
for it to amplify DNA from somatic cell hybrids.

REFERENCE 1. Bateman, J. B.; Kojis, T.; Heinzmann, C.; Klisak, I.; Diep, A.;
Carper, D.; Nishimura, C.; Mohandas, T.; Sparkes, R. S.: Mapping
of aldose reductase gene sequences to human chromosomes 1, 3, 7, 9,
11, and 13. Genomics 17: 560-565, 1993.

2. Bohren, K. M.; Bullock, B.; Wermuth, B.; Gabbay, K. H.: The aldo-keto
reductase superfamily: cDNAs and deduced amino acid sequences of human
aldehyde and aldose reductases. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 9547-9551, 1989.

3. Brown, L.; Hedge, P. J.; Markham, A. F.; Graham, A.: A human aldehyde
dehydrogenase (aldose reductase) pseudogene: nucleotide sequence analysis
and assignment to chromosome 3. Genomics 13: 465-468, 1992.

4. Chung, S.; LaMendola, J.: Cloning and sequence determination of
human placental aldose reductase gene. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 14775-14777,
1989.

5. Graham, A.; Brown, L.; Hedge, P. J.; Gammack, A. J.; Markham, A.
F.: Structure of the human aldose reductase gene. J. Biol. Chem. 266:
6872-6877, 1991.

6. Graham, A.; Heath, P.; Morten, J. E. N.; Markham, A. F.: The human
aldose reductase gene maps to chromosome region 7q35. Hum. Genet. 86:
509-514, 1991.

7. Lefrancois-Martinez, A.-M.; Bertherat, J.; Val, P.; Tournaire,
C.; Gallo-Payet, N.; Hyndman, D.; Veyssiere, G.; Bertagna, X.; Jean,
C.; Martinez, A.: Decreased expression of cyclic adenosine monophosphate-regulated
aldose reductase (AKR1B1) is associated with malignancy in human sporadic
adrenocortical tumors. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 3010-3019, 2004.

8. Nishimura, C.; Matsuura, Y.; Kokai, Y.; Akera, T.; Carper, D.;
Morjana, N.; Lyons, C.; Flynn, T. G.: Cloning and expression of human
aldose reductase. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 9788-9792, 1990.

9. Shah, V. O.; Dorin, R. I.; Sun, Y.; Braun, M.; Zager, P. G.: Aldose
reductase gene expression is increased in diabetic nephropathy. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 82: 2294-2298, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/26/2005
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 7/20/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 07/09/2009
carol: 2/13/2009
alopez: 10/26/2005
carol: 4/30/2001
alopez: 11/15/1999
mgross: 7/20/1999
carol: 5/18/1999
alopez: 10/20/1997
alopez: 9/5/1997
mark: 11/27/1996
mark: 2/26/1996
carol: 4/6/1994
carol: 9/21/1993
carol: 12/21/1992
carol: 6/3/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 8/19/1991

602474	TITLE *602474 PROTEIN KINASE, MEMBRANE-ASSOCIATED TYROSINE/THREONINE, 1; PKMYT1
;;CDC2-INHIBITORY KINASE, MEMBRANE-ASSOCIATED TYROSINE/THREONINE, 1;
MYT1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Entry into mitosis requires the activity of CDC2 kinase (116940) coupled
with cyclin B. Phosphorylation of the CDC2 protein on residues threonine
14 and tyrosine 15 is inhibitory to CDC2 activity. Using a PCR-based
approach, Liu et al. (1997) cloned a novel kinase, which they termed
MYT1 for 'membrane-associated tyrosine- and threonine-specific
cdc2-inhibitory kinase', that phosphorylates CDC2 on both threonine 14
and tyrosine 15. Preferentially, MYT1 phosphorylates CDC2 on threonine
14 in a cyclin-dependent manner. The MYT1 cDNA encodes a predicted
499-amino acid polypeptide with a molecular mass of 55 kD. Liu et al.
(1997) found that the protein localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum and
Golgi complex in HeLa cells.

NOMENCLATURE

Although Liu et al. (1997) designated this gene MYT1, this symbol had
already been assigned to the myelin transcription factor-1 gene
(600379).

REFERENCE 1. Liu, F.; Stanton, J. J.; Wu, Z.; Piwnica-Worms, H.: The human
myt1 kinase preferentially phosphorylates cdc2 on threonine 14 and
localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi complex. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 17: 571-583, 1997.

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 3/25/1998

EDITED alopez: 05/03/2010
alopez: 1/27/1999
alopez: 8/4/1998
dholmes: 5/27/1998
dholmes: 4/16/1998

611331	TITLE *611331 SMALL NUCLEOLAR RNA, H/ACA BOX, 74B; SNORA74B
;;snoRNA, U19-2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs involved in RNA
processing. Box H/ACA snoRNAs, such as SNORA74B, direct the conversion
of uridine to pseudouridine at specific residues of ribosomal RNAs or
small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) (Gu et al., 2005).

CLONING

By RT-PCR of human blood total RNA, Gu et al. (2005) identified several
box H/ACA snoRNAs, including SNORA74B, which they called U19-2. U19-2
contains 204 nucleotides and has 3 isoforms.

GENE FUNCTION

Based on sequence complementarity, Gu et al. (2005) predicted that U19-2
directs pseudouridylation of U3731 and U3733 of 28S ribosomal RNA (see
180450).

MAPPING

Gu et al. (2005) mapped the SNORA74B gene to chromosome 5, within intron
3 of the ATP6V0E1 gene (603931).

REFERENCE 1. Gu, A.-D.; Zhou, H.; Yu, C.-H.; Qu, L.-H.: A novel experimental
approach for systematic identification of box H/ACA snoRNAs from eukaryotes. Nucleic
Acids Res. 33: e194, 2005. Note: Electronic Article.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/16/2007

EDITED wwang: 05/20/2010
mgross: 8/16/2007

610809	TITLE *610809 TBC1 DOMAIN FAMILY, MEMBER 3F; TBC1D3F
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By genomic sequence analysis, Hodzic et al. (2006) identified 8 paralogs
of the TBC1D3 gene (see 607741) on chromosome 17, including TBC1D3F,
which they called paralog E. All TBC1D3 paralogs encode a deduced
549-amino acid protein, but missense changes at 6 residues among the
paralogs result in 5 different TBC1D3 isoforms. The TBC1D3F and TBC1D3E
(610808) genes encode identical proteins. The TBC1D3 paralogs appeared
to be differentially expressed in human tissues.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Hodzic et al. (2006) identified 8 TBC1D3
paralogs, including the TBC1D3E gene, on chromosome 17q12. The paralogs
are clustered in 2 groups of 4 genes, and each cluster spans
approximately 400 kb.

REFERENCE 1. Hodzic, D.; Kong, C.; Wainszelbaum, M. J.; Charron, A. J.; Su,
X.; Stahl, P. D.: TBC1D3, a hominoid oncoprotein, is encoded by a
cluster of paralogues located on chromosome 17q12. Genomics 88:
731-736, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/27/2007

EDITED mgross: 02/27/2007

611534	TITLE *611534 NUCLEOLAR PROTEIN 8; NOL8
;;NOP132
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NOL8 is a nucleolar protein that functions in ribosome biogenesis
(Sekiguchi et al., 2006).

CLONING

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis using RRAGA (612194) as bait, followed by
database analysis and RT-PCR of HeLa RNA, Sekiguchi et al. (2004) cloned
NOL8, which they called NOP132. The deduced 1,168-amino acid protein has
a calculated molecular mass of 132 kD and shares 83.8% and 70.7% amino
acid identity with its mouse ortholog over the N-terminal and C-terminal
regions, respectively. NOL8 contains a C-terminal nuclear localization
signal and 3 predicted coiled-coil structures. Immunofluorescence and
immunocytochemical studies localized NOL8 to the nucleolus.

Using cDNA microarray analysis of 20 diffuse-type gastric cancers,
Jinawath et al. (2004) identified NOL8 as a gene upregulated
specifically in gastric cancer tissues compared to noncancerous mucosa.
NOL8 has an N-terminal RNA recognition motif (RRM) domain and a
C-terminal KOG4365 domain. Northern blot analysis detected a 4.4-kb
transcript in skeletal muscle with little-to-no expression in 22 other
tissues examined. Semiquantitative RT-PCR detected NOL8 expression in 7
gastric cancer cell lines; all cell lines showed higher NOL8 expression
than normal skeletal muscle. Immunoblot analysis with lambda-protein
phosphatase demonstrated that NOL8 is phosphorylated.

GENE FUNCTION

Sekiguchi et al. (2004) showed that NOL8 expressed in Sf9 insect cells
coimmunoprecipitated with RRAGA, RRAGC (608267), and RRAGD (608268). By
yeast 2-hybrid analysis with RRAGA mutants, they found that NOL8 bound
specifically to GTP-bound RRAGA but not to GDP-bound RRAGA. Yeast
2-hybrid analysis and GST pull-down assays demonstrated that NOL8
interacted with NIP7. In baby hamster fibroblasts, NOL8 colocalized in
the nucleus with RRAGA and NIP7, respectively. Deletion analysis and
additional interaction assays showed that the NOL8 C-terminal amino
acids 966-1116 mediated interaction with NIP7, RRAGA, and RRAGC.
Antisense oligonucleotide inhibition of NOL8 caused dose-dependent
growth suppression in HeLa cells that was accompanied by reduced DNA
synthesis.

Jinawath et al. (2004) showed that siRNA knockdown of NOL8 suppressed
growth in gastric cancer cells. FACS analysis of the NOL8-knockdown
cells showed an increase in the sub-G1 population. Jinawath et al.
(2004) concluded that suppression of NOL8 expression induced apoptosis.

Sekiguchi et al. (2006) characterized proteins that immunoprecipitated
with epitope-tagged NOP132 from human 293EBNA cells. Mass spectrometric
and database analyses revealed many proteins from the large and small
ribosomal subunits, as well as proteins previously characterized in
human pre-ribosomal nucleoprotein complexes. The putative RNA helicases
DDX18 (606355) and DDX47 (615428) were also detected in NOP132
immunoprecipitates. A similar complement of proteins immunoprecipitated
with DDX18 or DDX47. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments confirmed
association of NOP132 with DDX18 and DDX47, but not with other DDX
proteins. RNase treatment significantly decreased association of NOP132
with DDX18 and DDX47, suggesting that their interaction depends on RNA.
Similarly, RNase treatment released most of the NOP132-, DDX18-, and
DDX47-associated proteins. NOP132, DDX18, and DDX47 colocalized with the
nucleolar protein KIAA0559 (NAP1; 608865) in HeLa cells, and knockdown
of NOP132 by small interfering RNA caused mislocalization of DDX47 to
the nucleolar periphery. Mutation analysis revealed that the coiled-coil
region of NOP132 interacted with the HELICc motif of DDX47. Sekiguchi et
al. (2006) concluded that NOP132 is required for proper targeting of
DDX47 to the nucleolar organizing region during ribosome biogenesis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Jinawath et al. (2004) determined that the NOL8 gene contains 16 exons
spanning 30 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Jinawath et al. (2004) mapped the NOL8
gene to chromosome 9q22.32.

REFERENCE 1. Jinawath, N.; Furukawa, Y.; Nakamura, Y.: Identification of NOL8,
a nucleolar protein containing an RNA recognition motif (RRM), which
was overexpressed in diffuse-type gastric cancer. Cancer Sci. 95:
430-435, 2004.

2. Sekiguchi, T.; Hayano, T.; Yanagida, M.; Takahashi, N.; Nishimoto,
T.: NOP132 is required for proper nucleolus localization of DEAD-box
RNA helicase DDX47. Nucleic Acids Res. 34: 4593-4608, 2006.

3. Sekiguchi, T.; Todaka, Y.; Wang, Y.; Hirose, E.; Nakashima, N.;
Nishimoto, T.: A novel human nucleolar protein, Nop132, binds to
the G proteins, RRAG A/C/D. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 8343-8350, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 09/24/2013

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 10/15/2007

EDITED mgross: 09/24/2013
alopez: 7/23/2008
wwang: 10/16/2007

604725	TITLE *604725 UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE 2; USP2
;;UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE, 41-KD; UBP41
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ubiquitin (191339), a highly conserved protein involved in the
regulation of intracellular protein breakdown, cell cycle regulation,
and stress response, is released from degraded proteins by disassembly
of the polyubiquitin chains. The disassembly process is mediated by
ubiquitin-specific proteases (USPs). Also see USP1 (603478).

CLONING

Using a double-screening method of bacteria expressing chick skeletal
muscle cDNA, Baek et al. (1997) isolated a cDNA encoding a deduced
357-amino acid protein expressing deubiquitinating activity. Because
SDS-PAGE analysis indicated a 41-kD purified protein, the authors termed
the protein Ubp41.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the USP2
gene to chromosome 11 (TMAP SHGC-132662).

REFERENCE 1. Baek, S.; Choi, K. S.; Yoo, Y. J.; Cho, J. M.; Baker, R. T.; Tanaka,
K.; Chung, C. H.: Molecular cloning of a novel ubiquitin-specific
protease, UBP41, with isopeptidase activity in chick skeletal muscle. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 25560-25565, 1997.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 3/23/2000

EDITED carol: 05/12/2004
carol: 1/31/2003
mgross: 3/23/2000

602856	TITLE *602856 REGULATOR OF G PROTEIN SIGNALING 10; RGS10
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

RGS proteins negatively regulate signaling pathways involving
7-transmembrane receptors and heterotrimeric G proteins. See 602189 for
background.

CLONING

Using a yeast 2-hybrid system with a mutationally activated form of rat
G-alpha(i3) as the bait, Hunt et al. (1996) isolated HeLa cell cDNAs
encoding RGS10. Like all members of the RGS family, the predicted
173-amino acid RGS10 contains a 120-amino acid core domain that is
strongly conserved with the yeast Sst2 protein. Northern blot analysis
detected an approximately 900-bp RGS10 transcript in HeLa cells, human
embryonic kidney 293 cells, and mouse brain.

By microarray analysis, Yang and Li (2007) found that RGS10 was highly
expressed in human osteoclastoma. Northern blot analysis confirmed high
RGS10 expression in osteoclastoma and detected weaker expression in
brain, liver, kidney, and the Hep2 cell line; no expression was detected
in other tissues and cell lines examined. Mouse Rgs10 was highly
expressed in preosteoclasts and osteoclasts derived from RANKL (TNFSF11;
602642)-stimulated bone marrow-derived monocytes, but it was not
expressed in osteoblasts or preosteoblasts.

GENE FUNCTION

Using coimmunoprecipitation studies, Hunt et al. (1996) demonstrated
that RGS10 associates specifically with the activated forms of the 2
related G protein subunits G-alpha(i3) and G-alpha(z) but fails to
interact with the structurally and functionally distinct G-alpha(s)
subunit. In vitro assays indicated that RGS10 potently and selectively
increases the GTP hydrolytic activity of several G-alpha(i) family
members.

Using human T cells silenced for or overexpressing RGS10, Garcia-Bernal
et al. (2011) showed that RGS10 inhibited G-alpha-dependent,
chemokine-upregulated T-cell adhesion mediated by alpha-4 (ITGA4;
192975)/beta-1 (ITGB1; 135630) and alpha-L (ITGAL; 153370)/beta-2
(ITGB2; 600065) integrins. The data suggested that RGS10 opposes
activation by chemokines of the VAV1 (164875)-RAC1 (602048) pathway in T
cells, leading to repression of adhesion strengthening mediated by
alpha-4/beta-1. RGS10 also limited adhesion-independent cell chemotaxis
and activation of CDC42 (116952).

GENE STRUCTURE

Sierra et al. (2002) determined that the RGS10 gene contains 5 exons and
spans 35 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Sierra et al. (2002) mapped the RGS10 gene
to chromosome 10q26.11. They mapped the mouse Rgs10 gene to chromosome 7
by interspecific backcross mapping.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yang and Li (2007) obtained Rgs10 -/- mice at the expected mendelian
ratio, but they were smaller and had shorter limbs than their wildtype
littermates. Growth retardation became apparent during the first or
second postnatal week. Histologically, Rgs10 -/- mice exhibited severe
osteopetrosis. Disruption of Rgs10 impaired osteoclast differentiation
due to the absence of calcium current oscillations and loss of Nfatc1
(600489) expression. Ectopic expression of Rgs10 markedly enhanced
Rankl-induced osteoclast differentiation. Rgs10 competitively bound
Ca(2+)/calmodulin (see CALM1; 114180) and phosphatidylinositol
3-phosphate in a Ca(2+)-dependent manner. Yang and Li (2007) concluded
that RGS10 is a key regulator of Ca(2+) current oscillations during
osteoclast differentiation.

REFERENCE 1. Garcia-Bernal, D.; Dios-Esponera, A.; Sotillo-Mallo, E.; Garcia-Verdugo,
R.; Arellano-Sanchez, N.; Teixido, J.: RGS10 restricts upregulation
by chemokines of T cell adhesion mediated by alpha-4-beta-1 and alpha-L-beta-2
integrins. J. Immun. 187: 1264-1272, 2011.

2. Hunt, T. W.; Fields, T. A.; Casey, P. J.; Peralta, E. G.: RGS10
is a selective activator of G-alpha(i) GTPase activity. Nature 383:
175-177, 1996.

3. Sierra, D. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Householder, D.; Grishin, N. V.;
Yu, K.; Ukidwe, P.; Barker, S. A.; He, W.; Wensel, T. G.; Otero, G.;
Brown, G.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Wilkie, T. M.: Evolution
of the regulators of G-protein signaling multigene family in mouse
and human. Genomics 79: 177-185, 2002.

4. Yang, S.; Li, Y.-P.: RGS10-null mutation impairs osteoclast differentiation
resulting from the loss of [Ca2+]i oscillation regulation. Genes
Dev. 21: 1803-1816, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/6/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/23/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/12/2002

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 7/16/1998

EDITED mgross: 01/19/2012
terry: 1/6/2012
mgross: 8/31/2007
terry: 8/23/2007
mgross: 9/12/2002
carol: 7/24/1998
dkim: 7/23/1998
carol: 7/16/1998

605043	TITLE *605043 MEDIATOR COMPLEX SUBUNIT 26; MED26
;;COFACTOR REQUIRED FOR SP1 TRANSCRIPTIONAL ACTIVATION, SUBUNIT 7; CRSP7;;
CRSP, 70-KD SUBUNIT; CRSP70
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mediator complexes are evolutionarily conserved regulatory complexes
required for transcriptional activation or repression. Mediator
complexes exist in multiple functionally distinct forms that share
common core subunits. MED26 is an accessory subunit of a Mediator
complex involved in transcriptional activation and elongation (summary
by Takahashi et al., 2011).

CLONING

Transcriptional activation by enhancer-binding factors, such as SP1
(189906), requires interaction with the TFIID complex (see TAF2A;
313650). To identify other potential SP1 cofactors, Ryu et al. (1999)
developed an in vitro transcription assay consisting of TFIIA (GTF2A1;
600520), RNA polymerase II (pol II) (see POLR2A; 180660), and the basal
transcription factors GTF2B (189963), GTF2E (189962), GTF2F (189968),
and GTF2H (189972), supplemented with TFIID or TBP (600075). By
sequential chromatography, they identified a Mediator complex, which
they called CRSP (cofactor required for SP1 activation), that, along
with TFIID, was required for efficient activation by SP1. CRSP behaved
as a single complex of approximately 700 kD. Ryu et al. (1999)
tentatively identified 9 polypeptides as CRSP subunits. Using
microsequence peptide analysis, they cloned a CRSP cDNA encoding a 70-kD
protein, CRSP7, which they termed CRSP70.

GENE FUNCTION

By immunoprecipitation of human cell lines expressing Mediator subunits
with epitope tags, Takahashi et al. (2011) found that MED26
coprecipitated with TFIID and 2 ELL (600284)- and EAF (see
608315)-containing complexes: the multimeric super elongation complex
(SEC) and another complex containing KIAA0947 and NARG2 (610835). The
C-terminal domain (amino acids 421 to 600) of MED26 was sufficient for
its assembly into Mediator and interaction with pol II. The MED26
N-terminal domain (NTD), which forms a 4-helix bundle, contained
overlapping docking sites for TFIID, SEC, and the non-SEC
ELL/EAF-containing complex. The isolated MED26 NTD functioned as a
strong activator of reporter gene expression. Knockdown of MED26 in
human cell lines and mouse embryonic stem cells reduced cell
proliferation and downregulated expression of MYC (190080), HSP70 (see
140550), and SNAI2 (602150). MED26 knockdown also delayed synthesis of
HSP70 mRNA in heat-shocked 293T cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis showed that depletion of MED26 reduced phosphorylation of the
pol II C-terminal domain and reduced recruitment of pol II and the SEC
components AFF4 (604417) and CDK9 (603251) to both the promoter regions
and bodies of the MYC and HSP70 genes. Takahashi et al. (2011)
hypothesized that MED26 may function as a molecular switch that
interacts first with the pol II initiation complex through direct
interactions with TFIID, then exchanges TFIID for pol II elongation
factors to facilitate productive elongation.

MAPPING

Hartz (2012) mapped the MED26 gene to chromosome 19p13.11 based on an
alignment of the MED26 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF104253) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/26/2012.

2. Ryu, S.; Zhou, S.; Ladurner, A. G.; Tjian, R.: The transcriptional
cofactor complex CRSP is required for activity of the enhancer-binding
protein Sp1. Nature 397: 446-450, 1999.

3. Takahashi, H.; Parmely, T. J.; Sato, S.; Tomomori-Sato, C.; Banks,
C. A. S.; Kong, S. E.; Szutorisz, H.; Swanson, S. K.; Martin-Brown,
S.; Washburn, M. P.; Florens, L.; Seidel, C. W.; Lin, C.; Smith, E.
R.; Shilatifard, A.; Conaway, R. C.; Conaway, J. W.: Human Mediator
subunit MED26 functions as a docking site for transcription elongation
factors. Cell 146: 92-104, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/26/2012

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/12/2000

EDITED mgross: 03/16/2012
terry: 1/26/2012
alopez: 10/11/2010
alopez: 10/8/2010
carol: 6/12/2000

601078	TITLE *601078 KERATIN 82; KRT82
;;KERATIN, HAIR, BASIC, 2; KRTHB2;;
KERATIN, HARD, TYPE II, 2; HB2
DESCRIPTION See KRTHA1 (601077) for general information on hair keratins.

Bowden et al. (1994) isolated a human genomic clone that encodes the
alpha-helical 2B domain and the C-terminal region of HB2.

REFERENCE 1. Bowden, P. E.; Hainey, S.; Parker, G.; Hodgins, M. B.: Sequence
and expression of human hair keratin genes. J. Derm. Sci. 7 (suppl.):
S152-S163, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patti M. Sherman - updated: 7/20/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/31/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/19/1996

EDITED carol: 03/26/2008
carol: 7/20/1998
terry: 8/4/1997
terry: 7/31/1997
mark: 11/6/1996
mark: 2/19/1996

607981	TITLE *607981 NEGATIVE REGULATOR OF UBIQUITIN-LIKE PROTEINS 1; NUB1
;;NEDD8 ULTIMATE BUSTER 1;;
NY-REN-18
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NUB1 interacts with and negatively regulates NEDD8 (603171), a
ubiquitin-like protein that covalently conjugates to cullin (see 603134)
family members.

CLONING

Using NEDD8 as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen, Kito et al. (2001)
cloned NUB1. The deduced 601-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of about 69 kD. The N-terminal half of NUB1 contains 2
coiled-coil domains, and the C-terminal half contains 2
ubiquitin-associated domains, which are separated by a bipartite nuclear
localization signal, followed by a PEST sequence. Northern blot analysis
detected strong expression of a 2.3-kb transcript in testis and weak
expression of a 3.5-kb transcript in testis, ovary, heart, and skeletal
muscle. Little to no expression was detected in other tissues. Western
blot analysis detected NUB1 at an apparent molecular mass of 69 kD
expressed in all cell lines tested, with variable expression between
cell lines. In situ hybridization of whole mouse embryos found strongest
expression in day 7 embryos and weaker expression at days 11, 15, and
17. In mouse embryos, a 3.0-kb transcript was predominant, followed by
2.5- and 2.0-kb transcripts.

GENE FUNCTION

Kito et al. (2001) found that interferon-beta (see 147640) induced NUB1
protein expression in HeLa and embryonic kidney cells, but not in an
osteosarcoma cell line. Induction in HeLa cells was dose and time
dependent. Northern blot analysis detected induction of NUB1 mRNA in
HeLa cells. By yeast 2-hybrid assay, Kito et al. (2001) confirmed direct
interaction between NUB1 and NEDD8, and coexpression in COS cells
resulted in reduced expression of NEDD8 monomer and its conjugates.
Overexpression of NUB1 did not affect the level of NEDD8 message,
suggesting that NUB1 inhibits NEDD8 expression posttranscriptionally.
Overexpression of NUB1 also had a profound growth-inhibitory effect on
an osteosarcoma cell line.

Mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein-like 1
(AIPL1; 604392) gene have been found in patients with Leber congenital
amaurosis (LCA1; 204000), a severe, early-onset form of retinal
degeneration. Akey et al. (2002) performed a yeast 2-hybrid screen to
identify AIPL1-interacting proteins in the retina. One of the identified
interacting proteins corresponded to NUB1. The AIPL1-NUB1 interaction
was verified by coimmunoprecipitation studies in retinoblastoma cells,
demonstrating that this interaction occurred within cells that share a
number of features with retinal progenitor cells. In situ hybridization
studies showed that both AIPL1 and NUB1 are expressed in the developing
and adult retina. The authors hypothesized that the early-onset form of
retinal degeneration seen in LCA patients with AIPL1 mutations may be
due to a defect in NUB1 regulation of cell cycle progression during
photoreceptor maturation.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the NUB1
gene to chromosome 7 (TMAP sts-F17912).

REFERENCE 1. Akey, D. T.; Zhu, X.; Dyer, M.; Li, A.; Sorensen, A.; Blackshaw,S.;
Fukuda-Kamitani, T.; Daiger, S. P.; Craft, C. M.; Kamitani, T.; Sohocki,
M. M.: The inherited blindness associated protein AIPL1 interacts
with the cell cycle regulator protein NUB1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11:
2723-2733, 2002. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 451 only, 2003.

2. Kito, K.; Yeh, E. T. H.; Kamitani, T.: NUB1, a NEDD8-interacting
protein, is induced by interferon and down-regulates the NEDD8 expression. J.
Biol. Chem. 276: 20603-20609, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 2/12/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/24/2003

EDITED terry: 09/17/2012
alopez: 2/18/2009
cwells: 2/12/2004
mgross: 7/24/2003

614107	TITLE *614107 KARYOPHERIN ALPHA-7; KPNA7
;;IMPORTIN ALPHA-8
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Karyopherins, such as KPNA7, mediate transport of proteins between the
nucleus and cytoplasm. KPNA7 belongs to the importin-alpha family of
karyopherins. These proteins bind to the nuclear localization signals
(NLSs) of cargo proteins and to importin-beta subunits (see KPNB1;
602738), which mediate nuclear import of cargo protein/importin
complexes (summary by Kelley et al., 2010).

CLONING

By searching a database for sequences similar to KPNA2 (600685),
followed by RT-PCR of LNCaP prostate cancer cell RNA, Kelley et al.
(2010) cloned human KPNA7. The deduced 516-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 57 kD. It has an N-terminal
importin-beta-binding (IBB) domain, followed by 10 armadillo repeats.
KPNA7 is highly divergent from other importin-alpha family members, and
it shares only 54.7% amino acid identity with KPNA2, its closest
relative. Immunohistochemical analysis of HeLa cells revealed that KPNA7
was predominantly a nuclear protein, whereas KPNA2 was largely
cytoplasmic. Western blot analysis detected KPNA7 at an apparent
molecular mass of 54 kD. Database analysis identified orthologs of KPNA7
only in vertebrates.

Hu et al. (2010) cloned 2 splice variants of mouse Kpna7 from oocytes
and zygotes. The deduced full-length 520-amino acid protein contains a
flexible N-terminal IBB domain and a highly structured C-terminal domain
containing 10 tandem armadillo repeats. The armadillo repeats form a
long groove that can bind either 2 monopartite nuclear localization
signals or a single bipartite nuclear localization signal. The other
variant encodes a deduced 499-amino acid protein that is truncated
compared with full-length Kpna7. Sequencing of 20 Kpna7 clones showed
that the transcript encoding the shorter isoform predominated. RT-PCR of
8 mouse tissues detected Kpn7a expression only in oocytes. Kpna7 was
also expressed in germinal vesicle stage oocytes, metaphase II stage
oocytes, and zygotes, with reduced expression in 2-cell stage embryos.
Kpna7 was not expressed in later stage embryos. Immunohistochemical
analysis detected Kpna7 in the nucleus of germinal vesicle stage oocytes
and near the spindle in metaphase II stage oocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

Kelley et al. (2010) found that KPNA7 formed a more stable interaction
with immobilized importin-beta than with all other importin-alpha family
members. Deletion of the N-terminal IBB of KPNA7 resulted in complete
loss of its binding activity. Addition of RAN (601179)-GTP dissociated
the interaction of importin-beta with the IBB domains of either KPNA2 or
KPNA7, mimicking RAN-dependent disassembly of import complexes. However,
only 3% of preformed importin-beta-KPNA7 complexes were dissociated by
RAN-GTP, suggesting that they formed a highly stable complex. KPNA7
weakly bound the NLS of RB protein (RB1; 614041), but it failed to bind
the NLSs of SV40 and nucleoplasmin (see 164040), which were bound by
KPNA2.

Using immunoprecipitation and Western blot analyses, Hu et al. (2010)
showed that mouse Kpna7 interacted with Kpnb1.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Kelley et al. (2010) mapped the KPNA7 gene
to chromosome 7q22.1.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hu et al. (2010) found that Kpna7 -/- male mice showed normal fertility.
However, both Kpna7 +/- and Kpna7 -/- females showed reduced fertility,
with reduced litter size due to embryonic lethality. Lethality affected
predominantly female embryos and embryos of older Kpna7 -/- females.
Analysis of parthenogenic embryos revealed acceleration of the first and
second cell cycle in the absence of Kpna7, with associated
downregulation of pluripotency- and/or chromatin-associated genes,
predominantly Dppa2 (614445), Dppa4 (614125), and Piwil2 (610312), and
reduced histone methylation.

REFERENCE 1. Hu, J.; Wang, F.; Yuan, Y.; Zhu, X.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Kou,
Z.; Wang, S.; Gao, S.: Novel importin-alpha family member Kpna7 is
required for normal fertility and fecundity in the mouse. J. Biol.
Chem. 285: 33113-33122, 2010.

2. Kelley, J. B.; Talley, A. M.; Spencer, A.; Gioeli, D.; Paschal,
B. M.: Karyopherin alpha-7 (KPNA7), a divergent member of the importin-alpha
family of nuclear import receptors. BMC Cell Biol. 11: 63, 2010.
Note: Electronic Article.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/3/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/21/2011

EDITED mgross: 01/25/2012
mgross: 11/7/2011
terry: 11/3/2011
mgross: 7/21/2011

601569	TITLE *601569 UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME E2G 1; UBE2G1
;;UBE2G;;
UBC7, C. ELEGANS, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Watanabe et al. (1996) isolated UBE2G1, which they designated UBE2G,
from a human fetal brain cDNA library. The cDNA encodes a deduced
170-amino acid protein. The predicted peptide product shares 74%
sequence identity with UBC7 of C. elegans, a high degree of homology
with UBC7s of other species, and significant homologies with other
subgroups of UBCs. Northern blot analysis revealed strong expression of
transcripts of 3 sizes in skeletal muscle. Weak expression was observed
in 15 other tissues examined.

MAPPING

Watanabe (2000) confirmed the mapping of a BAC (GenBank GENBANK
AC012479) containing most exons of the UBE2G gene to chromosome 17 by
radiation hybrid mapping using 2 primer sets designed from the BAC
sequence. By screening a human monochromosomal somatic cell hybrid panel
with 3 distinct primers designed from UBE2G cDNA sequences, they further
confirmed this localization. Watanabe (2000) stated that a previous
mapping of the UBE2G gene to 1q42 was in error and may have represented
the mapping of a pseudogene.

REFERENCE 1. Watanabe, T. K.: Personal Communication. Tokushima, Japan  1/13/2000.

2. Watanabe, T. K.; Kawai, A.; Fujiwara, T.; Maekawa, H.; Hirai, Y.;
Nakamura, Y.; Takahashi, E.: Molecular cloning of UBE2G, encoding
a human skeletal muscle-specific ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme homologous
to UBC7 of C. elegans. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 74: 146-148, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 1/19/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/13/1996

EDITED carol: 12/19/2008
wwang: 9/29/2006
alopez: 1/20/2000
alopez: 1/19/2000
alopez: 10/12/1998
mark: 12/13/1996

601498	TITLE *601498 PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS FACTOR 6; PEX6
;;PEROXIN 6;;
PEROXISOMAL ASSEMBLY FACTOR 2; PAF2;;
PEROXISOMAL-TYPE ATPase 1; PXAAA1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Peroxisomal targeting signals (PTSs) are discrete amino acid sequences
capable of directing proteins to the peroxisome. Most peroxisomal matrix
proteins contain PTS1, a C-terminal tripeptide of the sequence
ser-lys-leu (SKL) or a conservative variant. In contrast, the N-terminal
PTS2 consists of approximately 10 amino acids
(arg/lys-leu-X5-gln/his-leu) and has been observed in only 3 peroxisomal
proteins. The only documented human PTS2-containing proteins are
peroxisomal thiolase (604054) and phytanic acid oxidase (266500).
Yahraus et al. (1996) stated that the only known human PTS2-containing
protein is thiolase. The most extensively studied of the factors
involved in peroxisomal protein import is the PTS1 receptor, encoded by
the peroxin-5 gene (PEX5; 600414) and defective in Zellweger syndrome.
Human PEX5 was originally identified by homology probing the human EST
database with the S. cerevisiae PAS8 protein sequence. The continued
application of this approach by Yahraus et al. (1996) led to the cloning
and characterization of a novel human gene (called PXAAA1 by them) based
on its similarity to PpPAS5, a gene required for peroxisome assembly in
the yeast Pichia pastoris. The 980-amino acid protein product belongs to
the AAA family of ATPases and appears to be a predominantly cytoplasmic
protein. Yahraus et al. (1996) found that substitution of an arginine
for the conserved lysine residue in the ATPase domain of the PXAAA1
protein abolished its biologic activity, suggesting that it is an
ATPase. Furthermore, they showed that the protein is required for
stability of the predominantly cytoplasmic PTS1 receptor. Yahraus et al.
(1996) concluded that the PXAAA1 protein plays a direct role in
peroxisomal protein import and is required for PTS1 receptor activity.

Distel et al. (1996) listed the peroxisomal assembly factor isolated in
the rat by Tsukamoto et al. (1995) as identical to PXAAA1 (or PEX6).
Tsukamoto et al. (1995) isolated rat peroxisome assembly factor-2 (PAF2)
cDNA by functional complementation of the peroxisome deficiency of a
mutant Chinese hamster ovary cell line, ZP92, using a transient
transfection assay. This cDNA encodes a 978-amino acid protein with 2
putative ATP-binding sites. The investigators stated that PAF2 is a
member of a putative ATPase family which includes 2 yeast gene products
essential for peroxisome assembly. The stable transformant of ZP92 with
the cDNA was morphologically and biochemically restored for peroxisome
biogenesis. Fibroblasts derived from patients deficient in peroxisome
biogenesis (complementation group C) were also complemented with rat
PAF2 cDNA, indicating that PAF2 is a strong candidate for the site of
the mutation in one peroxisomal complementation group. The proteins of
the ATPase family (AAA proteins) participate in a broad range of
cellular processes, as indicated by the designation AAA which comes from
'ATPases associated with diverse cellular activities.'

Fukuda et al. (1996) found that the 2,940-bp open reading frame of the
human PAF2 cDNA encodes a 980-amino acid protein that shows 87.1%
identity with rat PAF2.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhang et al. (1999) determined that the PEX6 gene consists of 17 exons
and 16 introns, spanning about 14 kb. The largest exon, exon 1, has at
least 952 nucleotides.

MAPPING

To determine the chromosomal localization of PXAAA1, Yahraus et al.
(1996) probed a panel of mouse/human hybrid cell lines with the
full-length PXAAA1 cDNA. Hybridizing fragments specific for human
genomic DNA were detected only in the cell lines containing human
chromosome 6. The human cDNA was also used to determine the map position
of the mouse ortholog by RFLP analysis of an interspecific backcross DNA
panel. The mouse gene mapped to chromosome 17 between markers that show
homology of synteny to human 6p22-p11.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Fukuda et al. (1996) mapped the
human PEX6 gene to 6p21.1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Yahraus et al. (1996) observed that expression of PXAAA1 restored
peroxisomal protein import in fibroblasts from 16 unrelated members of
complementation group 4 of the peroxisomal biogenesis disorders (PBDs).
Consistent with this observation, a complementation group 4 patient was
found to carry mutations in PXAAA1 (601498.0001 and 601498.0002).

Fukuda et al. (1996) found that human PAF2 restores peroxisome assembly
after gene transfer to fibroblasts of group C patients. In 2 patients
with what they termed group C Zellweger syndrome (group 4 in the
Kennedy-Krieger Institute Classification), the authors demonstrated
homozygosity for 2 different mutations in the PAF2 gene. Direct
sequencing of the PAF2 gene revealed a homozygous 1-bp insertion at
nucleotide 510 in 1 patient (601498.0003) and a splice site mutation in
intron 3 resulting in skipping of exon 3 in a second patient
(601498.0004).

Zhang et al. (1999) clarified the genomic DNA structure of PEX6 and
identified mutations in patients from various ethnic groups. Eleven
novel mutations (18 alleles) were identified by direct sequencing of the
PEX6 cDNA from 10 patients. There was no common mutation, but an exon
skip was identified in 2 unrelated Japanese patients. Most of the
mutations led to premature termination or large deletions of the PEX6
protein and resulted in the most severe peroxisome biogenesis disorder
phenotype of Zellweger syndrome. A patient with an atypical Zellweger
syndrome had a missense mutation that was shown to disrupt the cell's
ability to form peroxisomes.

Matsumoto et al. (2001) provided several lines of evidence indicating
that PEX6, the pathogenic gene for PBD of complementation group 4, is
impaired also in complementation group 6 PBD. They found that expression
of PEX6 restored peroxisome assembly in fibroblasts from a PBD patient
who was a compound heterozygote for PEX6 gene alleles.

Najmabadi et al. (2011) performed homozygosity mapping followed by exon
enrichment and next-generation sequencing in 136 consanguineous families
(over 90% Iranian and less than 10% Turkish or Arabic) segregating
syndromic or nonsyndromic forms of autosomal recessive intellectual
disability. In family M331, they identified a homozygous missense
mutation in the PEX6 gene (601498.0009) in 5 sibs with moderate
intellectual disability, retinitis pigmentosa, hearing loss, and ataxia.
Their parents, who were second cousins, had 6 healthy children.

NOMENCLATURE

Distel et al. (1996) provided a unified nomenclature for peroxisome
biogenesis. By the use of genetic approaches in a wide variety of
experimental organisms, 13 proteins required for peroxisome biogenesis
had been identified in the previous 10 years. Three of these had been
shown to be defective in lethal peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBDs).
However, the diversity of experimental systems had led to a profusion of
names for peroxisome assembly genes and proteins and a great array of
numbering systems. Distel et al. (1996) suggested that proteins involved
in peroxisome biogenesis should be designated 'peroxins,' with PEX
representing the gene acronym. Even though defects in peroxisomal
metabolic enzymes or transcription factors may affect peroxisome
proliferation and/or morphology, such proteins should not, they
recommended, be included in this group. The proteins and genes were to
be numbered by date of published characterization, both for known
factors and those identified in the future. When necessary, species of
origin could be specified by 1-letter abbreviations for genus and
species (e.g., hsPEX2). To minimize ambiguities in naming additional
proteins identified in the future, Distel et al. (1996) urged authors
before publication to contact the ad hoc nomenclature committee.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS DISORDER 4A (ZELLWEGER)
PEX6, IVSAS, G-A, -1, 8-BP DEL

After demonstrating that a newly isolated gene they called PXAAA1
corrected the defect in complementation group 4 PBD, Yahraus et al.
(1996) used a gene-specific primer to synthesize PXAAA1 cDNA from normal
and group 4 (CG4; PBD4A, 614862) fibroblasts. Fragments of the open
reading frame were then amplified by PCR and subjected to SSCP analysis.
PXAAA1 SSCP migration variants were detected in 9 of 13 CG4 patients
examined, even though only 40% of the ORF had been examined. Direct
sequencing of RT-PCR-generated cDNA fragments revealed that one patient
was a compound heterozygote for 2 different deletions: an 8-bp deletion
(nucleotides 1962-1969), and a 20-bp deletion (nucleotides 2398-2417)
together with insertion of a single T (601498.0002). Direct sequencing
of amplified genomic DNA revealed that 1 allele contained a G-to-A
transition at the -1 position of a splice acceptor site. This resulted
in the use of a cryptic splice acceptor site 8 bp downstream of the
normal site, generating the 8-bp deletion observed in the cDNA. The
father was heterozygous for this splice site mutation. The mother was
found to be heterozygous for the 20-bp deletion/1-bp insertion found in
the other allele of the patient. Both mutations in this patient (whose
cell line had the designation PBD106) shifted the reading frame of the
PXAAA1 mRNA. The product of the first allele lacked the C-terminal 326
amino acids of the protein product and instead contained the 3 amino
acids trp-leu-asp (WLD) in their place. The product of the second allele
lacked the C-terminal 181 amino acids and instead contained 15 novel
amino acids. Previous studies cited by Yahraus et al. (1996)
demonstrated that mutations which affect the reading frame of an mRNA
commonly result in mRNA instability and decreased steady-state levels of
mRNA.

.0002
PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS DISORDER 4A (ZELLWEGER)
PEX6, 20-BP DEL, 1-BP INS

See 601498.0001 and Yahraus et al. (1996).

.0003
PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS DISORDER 4A (ZELLWEGER)
PEX6, 1-BP INS, NT511

In a cell line from a patient with typical clinical features of
Zellweger syndrome (PBD4A; 614862) and ghost peroxisomes (GM04340 in the
Coriell Cell Repositories), Fukuda et al. (1996) identified homozygosity
for a 1-bp insertion at nucleotide 511 which introduced a premature
termination codon in the PXAAA1 gene. The patient was the product of a
father-daughter mating.

.0004
PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS DISORDER 4A (ZELLWEGER)
PEX6, IVS3DS, G-A, +1

In a Japanese girl with Zellweger syndrome, complementation group C
(PBD4A; 614862), born of nonconsanguineous parents Fukuda et al. (1996)
identified a heterozygous mutation in the consensus 5-prime splice site
of intron 3 (IVS3+1G-to-A), which led to skipping of exon 3. The patient
at birth was small and had severe asphyxia, profound hypotonia, and
clonic convulsions. The patient died of respiratory failure at age 7
months. An insertion introducing frameshift in the transcript from the
other allele was also detected.

.0005
PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS DISORDER 4A (ZELLWEGER)
PEX6, IVS7, G-A, +1

In 2 unrelated Japanese patients with severe Zellweger syndrome of
complementation group C (PBD4A; 614862), Zhang et al. (1999) found
homozygosity for a G-to-A transition in the first position of intron 7
of the PEX6 gene. Two abnormal splicing patterns were caused by this
mutation: one a skipping of exon 7, and the other a skipping of exons 6
and 7.

.0006
PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS DISORDER 4A (ZELLWEGER)
PEX6, 1-BP DEL, 1301C

In a case of severe Zellweger syndrome (PBD4A; 614862) surviving to the
age of 8.5 months, Zhang et al. (1999) found homozygosity for a 1-bp
deletion, 1301delC. This deletion resulted in a frameshift at serine
codon 434 and the creation of a premature termination at codon 449.

.0007
PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS DISORDER 4B
PEX6, 264-BP DEL, NT619

In a patient with a diagnosis of neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy (NALD)
belonging to complementation group 6 of the peroxisome biogenesis
disorders (PBD4B, 614863), Matsumoto et al. (2001) found compound
heterozygosity for mutations in the PEX6 gene. One allele had a deletion
of nucleotides 619-882 of PEX6; the other allele had a deletion of
nucleotides 2095-2362 and an insertion of 21 nucleotides (601498.0008).

.0008
PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS DISORDER 4B
PEX6, 269-BP DEL AND 21-BP INS

See 601498.0007 and Matsumoto et al. (2001).

.0009
PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS DISORDER 4B
PEX6, LEU534PRO

In family M331 (PBD4B; 614863), Najmabadi et al. (2011) identified a
homozygous A-to-G mutation in the PEX6 gene at genomic coordinate
Chr6:43044093 (NCBI36), resulting in a leu534-to-pro (L534P)
substitution, in 5 sibs with moderate intellectual disability, retinitis
pigmentosa, hearing loss, and ataxia. Their parents, who were second
cousins, had 6 healthy children.

REFERENCE 1. Distel, B.; Erdmann, R.; Gould, S. J.; Blobel, G.; Crane, D. I.;
Cregg, J. M.; Dodt, G.; Fujiki, Y.; Goodman, J. M.; Just, W. W.; Kiel,
J. A. K. W.; Kunau, W.-H.; Lazarow, P. B.; Mannaerts, G. P.; Moser,
H. W.; Osumi, T.; Rachubinski, R. A.; Roscher, A.; Subramani, S.;
Tabak, H. F.; Tsukamoto, T.; Valle, D.; van der Klei, I.; van Veldhoven,
P. P.; Veenhuis, M.: A unified nomenclature for peroxisome biogenesis
factors. J. Cell Biol.. 135: 1-3, 1996.

2. Fukuda, S.; Shimozawa, N.; Suzuki, Y.; Zhang, Z.; Tomatsu, S.;
Tsukamoto, T.; Hashiguchi, N.; Osumi, T.; Masuno, M.; Imaizumi, K.;
Kuroki, Y.; Fujiki, Y.; Orii, T.; Kondo, N.: Human peroxisome assembly
factor-2 (PAF-2): a gene responsible for group C peroxisome biogenesis
disorder in humans. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 59: 1210-1220, 1996.

3. Matsumoto, N.; Tamura, S.; Moser, A.; Moser, H. W.; Braverman,
N.; Suzuki, Y.; Shimozawa, N.; Kondo, N.; Fujiki, Y.: The peroxin
Pex6p gene is impaired in peroxisomal biogenesis disorders of complementation
group 6. J. Hum. Genet. 46: 273-277, 2001.

4. Najmabadi, H.; Hu, H.; Garshasbi, M.; Zemojtel, T.; Abedini, S.
S.; Chen, W.; Hosseini, M.; Behjati, F.; Haas, S.; Jamali, P.; Zecha,
A.; Mohseni, M.; and 33 others: Deep sequencing reveals 50 novel
genes for recessive cognitive disorders. Nature 478: 57-63, 2011.

5. Tsukamoto, T.; Miura, S.; Nakai, T.; Yokota, S.; Shimozawa, N.;
Suzuki, Y.; Orii, T.; Fujiki, Y.; Sakai, F.; Bogaki, A.; Yasumo, H.;
Osumi, T.: Peroxisome assembly factor-2, a putative ATPase cloned
by functional complementation on a peroxisome-deficient mammalian
cell mutant. Nature Genet. 11: 395-401, 1995.

6. Yahraus, T.; Braverman, N.; Dodt, G.; Kalish, J. E.; Morrell, J.
C.; Moser, H. W.; Valle, D.; Gould, S. J.: The peroxisome biogenesis
disorder group 4 gene, PXAAA1, encodes a cytoplasmic ATPase required
for stability of the PTS1 receptor. EMBO J. 15: 2914-2923, 1996.

7. Zhang, Z.; Suzuki, Y.; Shimozawa, N.; Fukuda, S.; Imamura, A.;
Tsukamoto, T.; Osumi, T.; Fujiki, Y.; Orii, T.; Wanders, R. J. A.;
Barth, P. G.; Moser, H. W.; Paton, B. C.; Besley, G. T.; Kondo, N.
: Genomic structure and identification of 11 novel mutations of the
PEX6 (peroxisome assembly factor-2) gene in patients with peroxisome
biogenesis disorders. Hum. Mutat. 13: 487-496, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/6/2012
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/15/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/22/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/6/1999
David Valle - edited: 6/23/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/12/1996

EDITED alopez: 10/25/2012
alopez: 10/24/2012
carol: 1/9/2012
terry: 1/6/2012
tkritzer: 7/20/2004
terry: 6/15/2004
alopez: 3/17/2004
alopez: 6/17/2002
carol: 7/6/2001
terry: 6/22/2001
jlewis: 7/21/1999
terry: 7/6/1999
terry: 5/10/1999
dkim: 9/10/1998
psherman: 6/10/1998
carol: 3/21/1998
mark: 6/23/1997
joanna: 6/23/1997
mark: 5/30/1997
terry: 1/16/1997
jamie: 1/15/1997
terry: 1/7/1997
jenny: 12/12/1996
mark: 12/9/1996
terry: 12/9/1996
terry: 11/27/1996
terry: 11/26/1996
mark: 11/12/1996

603620	TITLE *603620 PC4- AND SFRS1-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1; PSIP1
;;TRANSCRIPTIONAL COACTIVATOR p75; p75;;
LENS EPITHELIUM-DERIVED GROWTH FACTOR; LEDGF
TRANSCRIPTIONAL COACTIVATOR p52, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Transcriptional activation in human cell-free systems containing RNA
polymerase II and general initiation factors requires the action of one
or more additional coactivators. Ge et al. (1998) reported the isolation
of cDNAs encoding 2 novel human transcriptional coactivators (p52 and
p75) that are derived from alternatively spliced products of a single
gene and share a region of 325 residues, but show distinct coactivator
properties.

By immunoscreening a human lens epithelial cell cDNA library with
antibodies from a cataract patient, Singh et al. (2000) isolated a cDNA
encoding a protein that they named 'lens epithelium-derived growth
factor' (LEDGF). They determined that LEDGF is identical to p75, a
coactivator of both transcription and pre-mRNA splicing.

GENE STRUCTURE

Singh et al. (2000) found that the LEDGF gene contains at least 15 exons
and encodes LEDGF mRNA and p52 mRNA. Exons 1 through 15 encode LEDGF
mRNA; exons 1 through 9 and part of intron 9 encode p52.

GENE FUNCTION

Ge et al. (1998) demonstrated strong interactions of both p52 and p75
with the VP16 activation domain and several components of the general
transcriptional machinery. p52 is a potent broad-specificity
coactivator, whereas p75 is less active for most activation domains.

Ge et al. (1998) found that p52 interacts not only with transcriptional
activators and general transcription factors to enhance activated
transcription, but also with the essential splicing factor ASF/SF2 both
in vitro and in vivo to modulate ASF/SF2-mediated pre-mRNA splicing.
Immunofluorescence studies indicated that the majority of endogenous p52
is colocalized with ASF/SF2 in the nucleoplasm of HeLa cells. These
observations suggested that, in addition to functioning as a
transcriptional coactivator, p52 may also act as an adaptor to
coordinate pre-mRNA splicing and transcriptional activation of class II
genes.

Singh et al. (2000) observed that in serum-free medium, LEDGF stimulated
growth of lens epithelial cells, COS-7 cells, skin fibroblasts, and
keratinocytes, and prolonged survival of these cell lines. Antibodies
against LEDGF blocked cell growth and caused cell death. Singh et al.
(2000) concluded that LEDGF, a regulatory factor, might play an
important role in the growth and survival of a wide range of cell types.

Singh et al. (2000) found almost equal amounts of LEDGF/p75 and p52
expressed in lens epithelial cells in culture.

Nakamura et al. (2000) studied the effects of LEDGF on survival of
embryonic chick retinal photoreceptor cells under serum starvation and
heat stress. Immunohistochemistry detected LEDGF expression
predominantly in the nucleus of neuroretinal cells, including
photoreceptor cells. In the presence of LEDGF, photoreceptor cells
showed increased resistance to serum starvation and heat stress and
survived for longer periods. Levels of heat shock protein-90 (see
140571) were elevated in LEDGF-treated cells. Most retinal cells died in
the absence of LEDGF. They authors concluded that LEDGF enhanced
survival of retinal photoreceptor cells under serum starvation and heat
stress.

Machida et al. (2001) found that LEDGF protected photoreceptor structure
and function in both light-damaged and RCS rats (see 604705). However,
LEDGF failed to rescue photoreceptors in a transgenic rat model of human
retinitis pigmentosa (268000) carrying a P23H mutation in rhodopsin
(180380.0001).

Ciuffi et al. (2005) noted that LEDGF binds both chromosomal DNA and
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) integrase, suggesting that it might
direct HIV integration by a tethering interaction. They found that
treatment of kidney and T-cell lines with short hairpin RNAs to achieve
a strong knockdown of LEDGF resulted in a reduction of HIV integration
in transcription units (i.e., genes) compared with control cells.
Likewise, genes regulated by LEDGF were preferred integration sites.
Knockdown of LEDGF also resulted in increased HIV integration in
chromosomal regions with higher GC content, possibly due to LEDGF
binding preferentially in AT-rich chromosomal regions. Ciuffi et al.
(2005) proposed that LEDGF becomes enriched on genes by binding
components of the transcriptional apparatus, thereby positioning itself
to target HIV integration to these sites.

Llano et al. (2006) used intensified RNA interference and
dominant-negative protein approaches to show that the cellular
transcriptional coactivator lens epithelium-derived growth factor
LEDGF/p75 is an essential HIV integration cofactor. The mechanism
requires both linkages of a molecular tether that p75 forms between
integrase and chromatin. Fractionally minute levels of endogenous p75
are sufficient to enable integration, showing that cellular factors that
engage HIV after entry may elude identification in less intensive
knockdowns.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Cherepanov et al. (2005) reported the crystal structure of the dimeric
catalytic core domain of HIV-1 integrase complexed to the
integrase-binding domain of LEDGF at 2-angstrom resolution. The
structure elucidated the mode of recognition between the 2 proteins and
revealed a potential target site on the integrase for the design of
small molecule inhibitors to block the interaction.

MAPPING

By FISH, Singh et al. (2000) mapped the LEDGF gene to chromosome 9p22.2.
They noted that the 9p22-p21 region is the site of chromosomal
abnormalities in a variety of malignancies, including leukemia, glioma,
lung cancer, and melanoma.

REFERENCE 1. Cherepanov, P.; Ambrosio, A. L. B.; Rahman, S.; Ellenberger, T.;
Engelman, A.: Structural basis for the recognition between HIV-1
integrase and transcriptional coactivator p75. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102:
17308-17313, 2005.

2. Ciuffi, A.; Llano, M.; Poeschla, E.; Hoffmann, C.; Leipzig, J.;
Shinn, P.; Ecker, J. R.; Bushman, F.: A role for LEDGF/p75 in targeting
HIV DNA integration. Nature Med. 11: 1287-1289, 2005.

3. Ge, H.; Si, Y.; Roeder, R. G.: Isolation of cDNAs encoding novel
transcription coactivators p52 and p75 reveals an alternate regulatory
mechanism of transcriptional activation. EMBO J. 17: 6723-6729,
1998.

4. Ge, H.; Si, Y.; Wolffe, A. P.: A novel transcriptional coactivator,
p52, functionally interacts with the essential splicing factor ASF/SF2. Molec.
Cell 2: 751-759, 1998.

5. Llano, M.; Saenz, D. T.; Meehan, A.; Wongthida, P.; Peretz, M.;
Walker, W. H.; Teo, W.; Poeschla, E. M.: An essential role for LEDGF/p75
in HIV integration. Science 314: 461-464, 2006.

6. Machida, S.; Chaudhry, P.; Shinohara, T.; Singh, D. P.; Reddy,
V. N.; Chylack, L. T., Jr.; Sieving, P. A.; Bush, R. A.: Lens epithelium-derived
growth factor promotes photoreceptor survival in light-damaged and
RCS rats. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 42: 1087-1095, 2001.

7. Nakamura, M.; Singh, D. P.; Kubo, E.; Chylack, L. T., Jr.; Shinohara,
T.: LEDGF: survival of embryonic chick retinal photoreceptor cells. Invest.
Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 41: 1168-1175, 2000.

8. Singh, D. P.; Kimura, A.; Chylack, L. T., Jr.; Shinohara, T.:
Lens epithelium-derived growth factor (LEDGF/p75) and p52 are derived
from a single gene by alternative splicing. Gene 242: 265-273, 2000.

9. Singh, D. P.; Ohguro, N.; Kikuchi, T.; Sueno, T.; Reddy, V. N.;
Yuge, K.; Chylack, L. T., Jr.; Shinohara, T.: Lens epithelium-derived
growth factor: effects on growth and survival of lens epithelial cells,
keratinocytes, and fibroblasts. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 267:
373-381, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 03/01/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/31/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/20/2006
Jane Kelly - updated: 3/19/2004

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 3/10/1999

EDITED mgross: 03/01/2007
terry: 10/31/2006
mgross: 3/30/2006
terry: 3/20/2006
terry: 7/20/2004
alopez: 3/19/2004
alopez: 9/8/1999
carol: 3/10/1999

608453	TITLE *608453 CAS-BR-M MURINE ECOTROPIC RETROVIRAL TRANSFORMING SEQUENCE C; CBLC
;;CBL3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CBL proteins, such as CBLC, are phosphorylated upon activation of a
variety of receptors that signal via protein tyrosine kinases. Through
interactions with proteins containing SRC (190090) homology-2 (SH2) and
SH3 domains, CBL proteins modulate downstream cell signaling (Keane et
al., 1999).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for CBL-like sequences, followed by
screening a pancreas carcinoma cell line cDNA library and 5-prime RACE,
Keane et al. (1999) cloned CBLC, which they designated CBL3. The deduced
474-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 52.5 kD. CBLC
contains an N-terminal phosphotyrosine-binding domain, a conserved C3HC4
zinc finger motif, and a short proline-rich region near the C terminus.
CBLC lacks the extensive proline-rich domain and leucine zipper motif
found in CBL (165360) and CBLB (604491). Keane et al. (1999) also
identified a splice variant that encodes a protein with a 46-amino acid
deletion in the phosphotyrosine-binding domain; this protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 47.5 kD. Northern blot analysis detected a
1.7- to 2.0-kb transcript expressed at high levels in liver, pancreas,
small intestine, colon, prostate, and trachea. Low expression was
detected in stomach, lung, and thyroid, and no expression was detected
in hematopoietic tissues. RNA dot blot analysis detected low but
ubiquitous expression, with highest levels in adrenal gland and salivary
gland in addition to the tissues identified by Northern blot analysis.

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to CBL, followed by
screening a kidney cDNA library and oligo capping to extend the 5-prime
sequence, Kim et al. (1999) cloned CBLC. Northern blot analysis detected
a 2.0-kb transcript highly expressed in colon and small intestine.
Expression was also observed in pancreas, placenta, liver, kidney, and
prostate, but not in brain, testis, and lymphoid tissues. Minor
transcripts of 4.0 and 6.0 kb were also detected in several tissues.
Western blot analysis found that endogenous CBLC migrated with an
apparent molecular mass of 52 kD in colon carcinoma cell lines.

Griffiths et al. (2003) found that mouse Cblc was expressed in
epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract, the epidermis, and the
respiratory, urinary, and reproductive systems.

GENE FUNCTION

By in vitro protein binding assays, Keane et al. (1999) determined that
both the long (CBLC-L) and short (CBLC-S) forms of CBLC bound to
recombinant fusion proteins containing the SH3 domains of LYN (165120)
and CRK (164762), but not with any other SH3-containing proteins.
Following EGF (131530) stimulation of cotransfected embryonic kidney
cells, CBLC-L, but not CBLC-S, was phosphorylated and immunoprecipitated
with EGFR (131550). CBLC-L also inhibited EGF-induced stimulation of
transcription by ERK2 (MAPK1; 176948) in a dose-dependent manner. CBLC-S
had no effect on MAPK signaling.

Kim et al. (1999) transfected embryonic kidney cells with CBLC and EGFR.
The amount of EGFR that coimmunoprecipitated with CBLC increased
following EGF stimulation. In vitro binding assays showed that CBLC
bound to the SH3 domain, but not the SH2 domain, of FYN (137025), and it
bound to the SH3 domain of GRB2 (108355) and the p85 regulatory subunit
of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (171833). CBLC and FYN
coimmunoprecipitated in transfected embryonic kidney cells only when
both proteins were present.

GENE STRUCTURE

Nau and Lipkowitz (2003) determined that the CBLC gene contains 11 exons
and spans about 23 kb. The mouse Cblc gene contains 10 exons and lacks
the intron that exists between human exons 8 and 9.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and radiation hybrid analysis, Keane et
al. (1999) mapped the CBLC gene to chromosome 19q13.2. Using FISH, Kim
et al. (1999) mapped the CBLC gene to chromosome 19q13.2-q13.3. Southern
blot analysis indicated that CBLC is a single copy gene.

ANIMAL MODEL

Griffiths et al. (2003) found that Cblc-null mice were viable, healthy,
and fertile, and displayed no histologic abnormalities up to 18 months
of age. Proliferation of epithelial cells in the epidermis and
gastrointestinal tracts was unaffected by the loss of Cblc. Moreover,
Cblc was not required for attenuation of EGF-stimulated ERK activation
in primary keratinocytes.

REFERENCE 1. Griffiths, E. K.; Sanchez, O.; Mill, P.; Krawczyk, C.; Hojilla,
C. V.; Rubin, E.; Nau, M. M.; Khokha, R.; Lipkowitz, S.; Hui, C.;
Penninger, J. M.: Cbl-3-deficient mice exhibit normal epithelial
development. Molec. Cell. Biol. 23: 7708-7718, 2003.

2. Keane, M. M.; Ettenberg, S. A.; Nau, M. M.; Banerjee, P.; Cuello,
M.; Penninger, J.; Lipkowitz, S.: cbl-3: a new mammalian cbl family
protein. Oncogene 18: 3365-3375, 1999.

3. Kim, M.; Tezuka, T.; Suziki, Y.; Sugano, S.; Hirai, M.; Yamamoto,
T.: Molecular cloning and characterization of a novel cbl-family
gene, cbl-c. Gene 239: 145-154, 1999.

4. Nau, M. M.; Lipkowitz, S.: Comparative genomic organization of
the cbl genes. Gene 308: 103-113, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/9/2004

EDITED terry: 04/06/2005
mgross: 2/9/2004

612915	TITLE *612915 MEDIATOR COMPLEX SUBUNIT 20; MED20
;;TRF-PROXIMAL, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; TRFP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MED20 is a subunit of the Mediator complex, a multiprotein coactivator
of RNA transcription that interacts with DNA-bound transcriptional
activators, RNA polymerase II (see 180660), and general initiation
factors (Sato et al., 2003).

CLONING

By sequencing peptides from a protein coimmunoprecipitated with SRB7
(MED21; 603800) from HeLa cell nuclear extracts, followed by database
analysis, Xiao et al. (1999) identified MED20, which they called TRFP.
The deduced 209-amino acid protein shares 44% amino identity with
Drosophila Trfp. TRFP had an apparent molecular mass of 28 kD by
SDS-PAGE.

GENE FUNCTION

Xiao et al. (1999) identified TRFP as a component of an RNA polymerase
II-SRB complex. The TRFP-containing complex could substitute for core
RNA polymerase II in driving basal transcription from a minimal
promoter.

By coexpression of epitope-tagged Mediator subunits, Sato et al. (2003)
found that TRFP appeared to bridge an interaction between the Mediator
subunits MED29 (612914) and p28b (MED18; 612384).

MAPPING

Hartz (2009) mapped the MED20 gene to chromosome 6p21.1 based on an
alignment of the MED20 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF097725) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  7/16/2009.

2. Sato, S.; Tomomori-Sato, C.; Banks, C. A. S.; Parmely, T. J.; Sorokina,
I.; Brower, C. S.; Conaway, R. C.; Conaway, J. W.: A mammalian homolog
of Drosophila melanogaster transcriptional coactivator Intersex is
a subunit of the mammalian Mediator complex. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
49671-49674, 2003.

3. Xiao, H.; Tao, Y.; Roeder, R. G.: The human homologue of Drosophila
TRF-proximal protein is associated with an RNA polymerase II-SRB complex. J.
Biol. Chem. 274: 3937-3940, 1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/16/2009

EDITED mgross: 07/16/2009

612708	TITLE *612708 RANBP2-LIKE AND GRIP DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 5; RGPD5
;;RGP5;;
BS63
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using 5-prime RACE and nested PCR of testis total RNA, Cai et al. (2002)
cloned RGPD5, which they designated BS63. The deduced 1,765-amino acid
protein has structural characteristics of nucleoporins. Most of the
protein shares high homology with RANBP2 (601181), but it has a unique C
terminus. Cai et al. (2002) stated that Northern blot analysis detected
an 8.5-kb transcript in several human tissues and a 6-kb transcript in
testis only. Using immunoelectron microscopy of demembranated human
sperm, Cai et al. (2002) found that BS63 localized to the nuclear
membrane. In rat testis sections, Bs63 localized to nuclear pores in
spermatids.

By searching databases for intrachromosomal duplications of genes in
primates but not in other metazoans, Ciccarelli et al. (2005) identified
8 RGPD genes, including RGPD5, which they called RGP5. The RGPD genes
resulted from duplications of a region of human chromosome 2 containing
the RANBP2 and GCC2 (612711) genes. Like other RGPD proteins, the
deduced RGPD5 protein exceeds 1,700 amino acids. Most of the sequence is
homologous to regions of RANBP2, except for the C terminus, which
includes the GRIP domain from GCC2. Using primers that did not
differentiate between RGPD5 and RGPD6 (612709) for PCR analysis,
Ciccarelli et al. (2005) detected expression in testis and HeLa cell
cDNA libraries.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a mouse testis cDNA library, Cai et al.
(2002) found that human BS63 interacted with Ran (601179), transportin-1
(TNPO1; 602901), and Af10 (MLLT10; 602409), suggesting that BS63
functions in nuclear transport.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Ciccarelli et al. (2005) mapped the 8 RGPD
genes to chromosome 2p11.2-q13, and they named the genes according to
their physical order. RGPD5 is 1 of 6 RGPD genes on chromosome
2q12.3-q13.

EVOLUTION

See RGPD1 (612704) for information on the evolution of the RGPD genes.

REFERENCE 1. Cai, Y.; Gao, Y.; Sheng, Q.; Miao, S.; Cui, X.; Wang, L.; Zong,
S.; Koide, S. S.: Characterization and potential function of a novel
testis-specific nucleoporin BS-63. Molec. Reprod. Dev. 61: 126-134,
2002. Erratum: Molec. Reprod. Dev. 61: 279 only, 2002.

2. Ciccarelli, F. D.; von Mering, C.; Suyama, M.; Harrington, E. D.;
Izaurralde E.; Bork, P.: Complex genomic rearrangements lead to novel
primate gene function. Genome Res. 15: 343-351, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/2/2009

EDITED carol: 04/04/2013
mgross: 4/3/2009

609051	TITLE *609051 CASPASE RECRUITMENT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 8; CARD8
;;TUMOR-UPREGULATED CARD-CONTAINING ANTAGONIST OF CASP9; TUCAN;;
CARD INHIBITOR OF NFKB-ACTIVATING LIGANDS; CARDINAL;;
NDPP1;;
KIAA0955
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Caspase recruitment domain (CARD)-containing proteins, such as CARD8,
are involved in pathways leading to activation of caspases or nuclear
factor kappa-B (NFKB; see 164011) in the context of apoptosis or
inflammation, respectively (Bouchier-Hayes et al., 2001).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned CARD8, which they designated
KIAA0955. The transcript contains several repetitive elements in the
3-prime UTR, and the deduced protein contains 431 amino acids. RT-PCR
ELISA detected highest expression of CARD8 in kidney and corpus callosum
and lowest expression in pancreas. All other tissues and specific brain
regions examined showed intermediate expression.

By searching databases for sequences similar to the CARD domain of APAF1
(602233), followed by PCR, Pathan et al. (2001) cloned CARD8, which they
designated TUCAN. CARD8 contains an N-terminal segment that shares 50%
amino acid identity with a region of the proapoptotic protein DEFCAP
(NALP1; 606636), as well as a C-terminal CARD domain.

By Western blot analysis of several tissues, Bouchier-Hayes et al.
(2001) found CARD8 expressed at an apparent molecular mass of 50 kD,
close to the predicted molecular mass of 49 kD. Highest expression was
in lung, ovary, testis, and placenta, with low or absent expression in
brain, skeletal muscle, and spleen.

By RT-PCR, Razmara et al. (2002) found highest CARD8 expression in
placenta, spleen, lymph node, and bone marrow.

By EST analysis, Zhang and Fu (2002) identified 5 splice variants of
CARD8, which they called NDPP1. The variants all have different
translation start sites.

Yamamoto et al. (2005) cloned a splice variant of CARD8 that they named
TUCAN54 after the calculated molecular mass of the encoded protein. The
deduced 487-amino acid TUCAN54 protein has a unique 80-amino acid N
terminus compared with the 48-kD isoform, TUCAN48, but both proteins
contain a NALP homology domain, a candidate caspase cleavage site
(DEED), a C-terminal CARD domain, and several putative phosphorylation
sites. The N terminus of TUCAN54 provides phosphorylation sites not
found in TUCAN48. RT-PCR detected high TUCAN54 expression in leukocytes
and spleen. Expression was lower in heart, lung, thymus, liver,
pancreas, and testis, and little to no expression was detected in other
tissues examined. TUCAN54 was widely expressed in a variety of tumor
cell lines.

By EST database and RT-PCR analyses, Bagnall et al. (2008) characterized
5 isoforms of CARD8 that differ in their N termini and have predicted
molecular masses of 47.5, 48, 51, 54, and 60 kD. The major 48-kD isoform
has 432 amino acids and starts in exon 5, and the 54-kD isoform has 487
amino acids and starts in exon 4. The 47.5-kD isoform differs in the
first 20 amino acids from the 48-kD isoform and results from a putative
initiation codon 20 bp upstream of exon 6. Western blot analysis of
lymphoblastoid cell lines from 6 Crohn disease (see IBD1; 266600)
patients showed a 48- or 47.5-kD band in all cell lines and an
additional band of 54 kD in only 1 cell line.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhang and Fu (2002) determined that the CARD8 gene contains 14 exons and
spans more than 50 kb. The first 3 exons are noncoding.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Zhang and Fu (2002) mapped the CARD8 gene
to chromosome 19q13.3.

GENE FUNCTION

By overexpression in Jurkat human T cells, Pathan et al. (2001) found
that CARD8 inhibited apoptosis and caspase activation induced by APAF1-
and CASP9 (602234)-dependent stimuli but not APAF1- and
CASP9-independent stimuli. Immunohistochemical analysis detected
elevated CARD8 immunostaining in 42 of 66 (64%) colon cancer specimens
compared with the adjacent normal tissues. Higher endogenous CARD8
immunostaining correlated with shorter patient survival.

Bouchier-Hayes et al. (2001) found that CARD8 suppressed NFKB activation
associated with overexpression of NFKB activators or with ligand-induced
stimulation of IL1 receptor (see 147810) or TNF receptor (see 191190).
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments revealed that CARD8 interacted with
the regulatory subunit of the I-kappa-B kinase complex, IKK-gamma
(IKBKG; 300248). Bouchier-Hayes et al. (2001) concluded that CARD8 is a
regulator of NFKB activation in the context of proinflammatory signals.

Razmara et al. (2002) found that CARD8 mediated apoptosis.
Overexpression of CARD8 induced apoptosis in transfected breast cancer
and green monkey kidney cells. In contrast to the findings of Pathan et
al. (2001), inhibitor studies by Razmara et al. (2002) indicated that
apoptosis was induced by CARD8 via the APAF1/CASP9 apoptotic complex.
CARD8 also suppressed NFKB activation by diverse stimuli, and stable
CARD8 expression sensitized monocytes to differentiation-induced
apoptosis. Razmara et al. (2002) found that CARD8 bound CASP1 (147678)
and negatively regulated CASP1-dependent IL1B secretion in monocytes. In
addition, CARD8 bound the CASP1 inhibitors ICEBERG (605354) and
pseudo-ICE. Razmara et al. (2002) concluded that CARD8 may be an adaptor
molecule that regulates CASP1 activation, NFKB activation, and
apoptosis.

Zhang and Fu (2002) found that expression of CARD8 blocked BAX
(600040)-induced apoptosis in several human cell lines and in rat
embryonic fibroblasts. TNF-alpha-induced NFKB activation was suppressed
in a CARD8-transfected hepatoma cell line.

Agostini et al. (2004) noted that NALP1, unlike other short NALP
proteins, contains a C-terminal CARD domain that interacts with and
activates CASP5 (602665). CASP1 and CASP5 are activated when they
assemble with NALP1 and ASC (PYCARD; 606838) to form the inflammasome,
which is responsible for processing the inactive IL1B (147720) precursor
(proIL1B) to release active IL1B cytokine. Using immunoprecipitation
analysis, Agostini et al. (2004) found that CARD8, which contains
C-terminal FIIND (function to find) and CARD domains, associated with
constructs of NALP2 (609364) and NALP3 (CIAS1; 606416) lacking the
N-terminal pyrin domain and/or the C-terminal leucine-rich repeat
domain. They determined that the interaction was mediated by the FIIND
domain of CARD8 and the centrally located NACHT domain of NALP2 and
NALP3. The pyrin domain of NALP2 and NALP3, like that of NALP1,
interacted with the pyrin domain of ASC, which recruits CASP1.
Transfection experiments showed that an inflammasome could be assembled
containing ASC, CARD8, CASP1, and a short NALP, resulting in activation
of CASP1, but not CASP5, and strong processing of proIL1B.

Yamamoto et al. (2005) found that overexpression of TUCAN54 in human
cell lines inhibited pro-CASP9 activation and suppressed apoptosis
induced by staurosporin, a protein kinase inhibitor, and by etoposide, a
chemotherapeutic reagent. In contrast, suppression of TUCAN54 expression
via small interfering RNA increased etoposide-induced cell death.
TUCAN54 also inhibited CASP8 (601763) activation, thereby suppressing
FAS (TNFRSF6; 134637)-induced cell death. TUCAN48 inhibited CASP9
activation and, more weakly, CASP8 activation, but only TUCAN54
physically associated with FADD (602457). FADD constitutively associated
with pro-CASP8 in transfected cells, suggesting that TUCAN54 inhibits
pro-CASP8 activation by forming a molecular complex with FADD and
pro-CASP8.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using RNA from lymphoblastoid cell lines of Crohn disease patients,
Bagnall et al. (2008) showed that an A-to-T transversion in exon 5 of
the CARD8 gene (dbSNP rs2043211), predicted to result in a cys10-to-ter
(C10X) substitution in the 48-kD isoform of CARD8, did not affect the
47.5-kD isoform. Patients who were TT homozygous showed somewhat reduced
expression of CARD8 mRNA, but expressed a 47.5-kD protein. The authors
showed that the dbSNP rs2043211 variant had multiple outcomes including
unaffected, cys10 to ter, cys34 to ter, phe52 to ile, and phe102 to ile.
Bagnall et al. (2008) noted that the multiple isoforms and differing
consequences for a predicted stop codon polymorphism underline the
importance of detailed analysis of the effects of proposed functional
variants on gene expression.

Using a genomewide screen of Salmonella typhimurium-infected HapMap
lymphoblastoid cells from individuals of northern and western European
or Nigerian ancestry, Ko et al. (2009) identified a loss-of-function
allele of CARD8 (cys10 to ter; dbSNP rs2043211) that was associated with
increased cell death in vitro. Overexpression of alternative alleles and
RNA interference analysis supported the association. Genotyping of
individuals with systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) showed a
modestly increased risk with the variant. Ko et al. (2009) proposed that
loss of CARD8 function and an increased inflammatory response may
protect against Salmonella but lead to increased inflammatory disease.

REFERENCE 1. Agostini, L.; Martinon, F.; Burns, K.; McDermott, M. F.; Hawkins,
P. N.; Tschopp, J.: NALP3 forms an IL-1-beta-processing inflammasome
with increased activity in Muckle-Wells autoinflammatory disorder. Immunity 20:
319-325, 2004.

2. Bagnall, R. D.; Roberts, R. G.; Mirza, M. M.; Torigoe, T.; Prescott,
N. J.; Mathew, C. G.: Novel isoforms of the CARD8 (TUCAN) gene evade
a nonsense mutation. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 16: 619-625, 2008.

3. Bouchier-Hayes, L.; Conroy, H.; Egan, H.; Adrain, C.; Creagh, E.
M.; MacFarlane, M.; Martin, S. J.: CARDINAL, a novel caspase recruitment
domain protein, is an inhibitor of multiple NF-kappa-B activation
pathways. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 44069-44077, 2001.

4. Ko, D. C.; Shukla, K. P.; Fong, C.; Wasnick, M.; Brittnacher, M.
J.; Wurfel, M. M.; Holden, T. D.; O'Keefe, G. E.; Van Yserloo, B.;
Akey, J. M.; Miller, S. I.: A genome-wide in vitro bacterial-infection
screen reveals human variation in the host response associated with
inflammatory disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 85: 214-227, 2009.

5. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

6. Pathan, N.; Marusawa, H.; Krajewska, M.; Matsuzawa, S.; Kim, H.;
Okada, K.; Torii, S.; Kitada, S.; Krajewski, S.; Welsh, K.; Pio, F.;
Godzik, A.; Reed, J. C.: TUCAN, an antiapoptotic caspase-associated
recruitment domain family protein overexpressed in cancer. J. Biol.
Chem. 276: 32220-32229, 2001.

7. Razmara, M.; Srinivasula, S. M.; Wang, L.; Poyet, J.-L.; Geddes,
B. J.; DiStefano, P. S.; Bertin, J.; Alnemri, E. S.: CARD-8 protein,
a new CARD family member that regulates caspase-1 activation and apoptosis. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 13952-13958, 2002.

8. Yamamoto, M.; Torigoe, T.; Kamiguchi, K.; Hirohashi, Y.; Nakanishi,
K.; Nabeta, C.; Asanuma, H.; Tsuruma, T.; Sato, T.; Hata, F.; Ohmura,
T.; Yamaguchi, K.; Kurotaki, T.; Hirata, K.; Sato, N.: A novel isoform
of TUCAN is overexpressed in human cancer tissues and suppresses both
caspase-8- and caspase-9-mediated apoptosis. Cancer Res. 65: 8706-8714,
2005.

9. Zhang, H.; Fu, W.: NDPP1 is a novel CARD domain containing protein
which can inhibit apoptosis and suppress NF-kappa-B activation. Int.
J. Oncol. 20: 1035-1040, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/27/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/4/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/18/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/1/2005

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/29/2004

EDITED mgross: 10/27/2009
terry: 10/27/2009
mgross: 6/5/2009
terry: 6/4/2009
wwang: 12/30/2008
terry: 12/18/2008
mgross: 5/13/2005
mgross: 3/1/2005
mgross: 11/29/2004

608735	TITLE *608735 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 39 (ZINC TRANSPORTER), MEMBER 13; SLC39A13
;;ZIP13;;
LZT-HS9
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Zinc is an essential cofactor for hundreds of enzymes. It is involved in
protein, nucleic acid, carbohydrate, and lipid metabolism, as well as in
the control of gene transcription, growth, development, and
differentiation. SLC39A13 belongs to a subfamily of proteins that show
structural characteristics of zinc transporters (Taylor and Nicholson,
2003).

CLONING

By searching databases for sequences similar to a unique motif within
LIV1 (SLC39A6; 608731), Taylor and Nicholson (2003) identified SLC39A13,
which they designated LZT-Hs9. The deduced 364-amino acid protein
contains a long N terminus, followed by 8 putative transmembrane domains
and a short C terminus. It also has a high histidine content, including
a motif similar to the catalytic zinc-binding site of matrix
metalloproteases.

Using in situ hybridization, Fukada et al. (2008) found that Slc39a13
was highly expressed in mouse bone and eye. Slc39a13 was expressed in
osteoblasts of tibia and alveolar bone, in proliferative zone of growth
plate, in odontoblasts of the forming dentin crown in molar teeth, and
in fibroblasts of the reticular layer of skin. Immunohistochemical
analysis showed that Slc39a13 localized in the perinuclear region of
osteoblasts, chondrocytes, pulpal cells, and fibroblasts and was mainly
associated with the Golgi apparatus. Fukada et al. (2008) concluded that
SLC39A13 is expressed in cells essential for connective tissue
development.

Bin et al. (2011) noted that SLC39A13, which they called ZIP13, contains
an N-terminal pro-ala-leu (PAL) zinc-dependent processing site and a
his-glu-x-x-his (HExxH) zinc-binding motif, both of which are found in
the LZT family of zinc transporters. In ZIP13, the HExxH motif is
located within transmembrane domain 5. ZIP13 also has a putative
zinc-binding HN motif in transmembrane domain 4. Bin et al. (2011)
identified a a cleavable endoplasmic reticulum (ER) signal peptide
N-terminal to the PAL motif in ZIP13. Immunocytochemical analysis
revealed that ZIP13 colocalized with a Golgi marker and partially with
an ER marker. Protease accessibility experiments revealed that both the
N and C termini of ZIP13 were luminal.

MAPPING

Hartz (2004) mapped the SLC39A13 gene to chromosome 11p11.2 based on an
alignment of the SLC39A13 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK098651) with the
genomic sequence.

GENE FUNCTION

Using reducing and nonreducing SDS-PAGE, immunoprecipitation analysis,
and crosslinking experiments, Bin et al. (2011) showed that ZIP13 formed
homodimers. Overexpression of ZIP13 in HEK293 cells elevated
intracellular zinc content and caused upregulation of the gene encoding
metallothionein-1A (MT1A; 156350).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 6 affected members of 2 consanguineous families with a
spondylocheirodysplastic form of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (612350), Giunta
et al. (2008) identified homozygosity for a 9-bp in-frame deletion in
exon 4 of the SLC39A13 gene (608735.0001).

Fukada et al. (2008) identified a homozygous loss-of-function mutation
in the SLC39A13 gene (G74D; 608735.0002) in 2 sibs with an Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome-like phenotype similar to that reported by Giunta et al.
(2008).

ANIMAL MODEL

Fukada et al. (2008) found that Slc39a13 -/- mice were growth retarded
and developed progressive kyphosis after 3 or 4 weeks of age. They
showed changes in bone, teeth, and connective tissue reminiscent of
human Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, with defects in the maturation of
osteoblasts, chondrocytes, odontoblasts, and fibroblasts. The
corresponding tissues and cells showed impaired bone morphogenic protein
(BMP; see 112264) and TGF-beta (TGFB1; 190180) signaling.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPONDYLOCHEIRODYSPLASIA, EHLERS-DANLOS SYNDROME-LIKE
SLC39A13, 9-BP DEL, NT483

In 6 affected members of 2 consanguineous families with a
spondylocheirodysplastic form of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (612350), Giunta
et al. (2008) identified homozygosity for a 9-bp in-frame deletion in
exon 4 of the SLC39A13 gene (483_491del9), resulting in the deletion of
3 amino acids (F162_164del) within the highly conserved transmembrane
domain III. All of the parents and several sibs were heterozygous for
the mutation, which was not found in 182 control individuals.

.0002
SPONDYLOCHEIRODYSPLASIA, EHLERS-DANLOS SYNDROME-LIKE
SLC39A13, GLY74ASP

In 2 sibs with the spondylocheirodysplastic form of Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome (612350), Fukada et al. (2008) identified a homozygous G-to-A
transition at nucleotide 221 in the SLC39A13 cDNA, resulting in a
nonconservative gly74-to-asp (G74D) substitution. G74 is located in the
second transmembrane domain of SLC39A13 and is conserved in vertebrates
from fish to humans.

REFERENCE 1. Bin, B.-H.; Fukada, T.; Hosaka, T.; Yamasaki, S.; Ohashi, W.; Hojyo,
S.; Miyai, T.; Nishida, K.; Yokoyama, S.; Hirano, T.: Biochemical
characterization of human ZIP13 protein: a homo-dimerized zinc transporter
involved in the spondylocheiro dysplastic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. J.
Biol. Chem. 286: 40255-40265, 2011.

2. Fukada, T.; Civic, N.; Furuichi, T.; Shimoda, S.; Mishima, K.;
Higashiyama, H.; Idaira, Y.; Asada, Y.; Kitamura, H.; Yamasaki, S.;
Hojyo, S.; Nakayama, M.; and 14 others: The zinc transporter SLC39A13/ZIP13
is required for connective tissue development; its involvement in
BMP/TGF-beta signaling pathways. PLoS One 3: e3642, 2008. Note:
Electronic Article. Erratum published online.

3. Giunta, C.; Elcioglu, N. H.; Albrecht, B.; Eich, G.; Chambaz, C.;
Janecke, A. R.; Yeowell, H.; Weis, M.; Eyre, D. R.; Kraenzlin, M.;
Steinmann, B.: Spondylocheiro dysplastic form of the Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome--an autosomal-recessive entity caused by mutations in the
zinc transporter gene SLC39A13. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 82: 1290-1305,
2008.

4. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/15/2004.

5. Taylor, K. M.; Nicholson, R. I.: The LZT proteins; the LIV-1 subfamily
of zinc transporters. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1611: 16-30, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/6/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/13/2009
Kelly A. Przylepa - updated: 10/16/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/14/2004

EDITED carol: 03/21/2013
terry: 9/27/2012
mgross: 5/24/2012
terry: 4/6/2012
mgross: 2/17/2009
terry: 2/13/2009
carol: 10/16/2008
mgross: 6/15/2004

603870	TITLE *603870 CORE-BINDING FACTOR, ALPHA SUBUNIT 2, TRANSLOCATED TO, 3; CBFA2T3
;;MTG8-RELATED GENE 2; MTGR2;;
MYELOID TRANSLOCATION GENE ON CHROMOSOME 16; MTG16;;
ZINC FINGER MYND DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 4; ZMYND4;;
ETO2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CBFA2T3 belongs to a family of ubiquitously expressed transcriptional
repressors that interact with transcription factors bound to promoters
of target genes and with histone deacetylases (HDACs; see 601241)
critical for enforcement of repressor function (summary by Kumar et al.,
2008).

CLONING

MTG8 (133435) and CBFA2 (AML1; 151385) are the 2 loci involved in the
t(8;21)(q22;q22) translocation, one of the most common translocations in
acute myeloid leukemia. The MTG8 protein is related to the product of
the Drosophila 'nervy' gene, a target of the homeotic gene
'Ultrabithorax.' By screening human and mouse libraries with an MTG8
probe, Calabi and Cilli (1998) isolated human and mouse MTGR1 (CBFA2T2;
603672) cDNAs and the human genomic region of a novel gene, MTGR2. The
predicted MTGR2 protein shares 92% and 85% sequence identity with MTG8
and MTGR1, respectively.

The t(16;21)(q24;q22) translocation is a rare but recurrent chromosomal
abnormality associated with therapy-related myeloid malignancies. Gamou
et al. (1998) identified MTG16 as the partner gene of AML1 in leukemic
cells with a t(16;21)(q24;q22) translocation. The authors isolated cDNAs
for 2 MTG16 splice variants, MTG16A and MTG16B, that use alternate first
exons. MTG16A uses exon 1A and encodes a predicted 653-amino acid
protein. MTG16B uses exon 1B and lacks exon 3, and it encodes a
predicted 567-amino acid protein. Like MTG8 and MTGR1, both MTG16
isoforms contain 4 conserved regions termed NHRs (nervy homology
regions). NHR4 is a zinc finger domain. Both isoforms also contain
proline/serine/threonine-rich (PST) regions at the N terminus, C
terminus, and between NHR1 and NHR2. Northern blot analysis revealed
that MTG16 was expressed as multiple transcripts in a tissue-specific
pattern. Highest expression was detected in pancreas, thymus, and
peripheral blood leukocytes, and lowest expression was detected in
kidney and ovary.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gamou et al. (1998) determined that the MTG16 gene contains 13 exons,
including alternative first exons 1A and 1B, and spans more than 73 kb.

MAPPING

By analysis of a radiation hybrid panel, Calabi and Cilli (1998) mapped
the MTGR2 gene to 16q24. Gamou et al. (1998) confirmed the localization
by fluorescence in situ hybridization. By genomic sequence analysis,
Powell et al. (2002) mapped the CBFA2T3 gene to chromosome 16q24.3.

GENE FUNCTION

By screening peripheral blood T cells for A-kinase anchor proteins
(AKAPs) with an RII (see RII-alpha; 176910) overlay assay and with a
cAMP pull-down assay, followed by Western blot analysis, Schillace et
al. (2002) identified AKAP149 (AKAP1; 602449), AKAP79 (AKAP5; 604688),
AKAP95 (AKAP8; 604692), and WAVE (WASF1; 605035). Screening of a
stimulated Jurkat library with the RII overlay assay led to the
isolation of MTG16B. Binding and mutational analysis at position 408
indicated that residues 344 to 432 of MTG16B interact with RII-alpha,
coinciding with the predicted binding site of amino acids 399 to 420.
Coimmunoprecipitation analysis and confocal microscopy demonstrated a
brefeldin A-sensitive association of RII-alpha and MTG16B in the Golgi
of Jurkat cells.

TAL1 (187040) is necessary for establishment of the hematopoietic system
and can either activate or repress transcription depending upon other
factors recruited to TAL1-nucleated complexes. Goardon et al. (2006)
found that ETO2 copurified with TAL1 complexes in human and mouse
erythroleukemia cells. Protein pull-down assays revealed that ETO2
interacted with E2A (TCF3; 147141) and HEB (TCF12; 600480) within the
TAL1 complex, but not with TAL1 itself. ETO2 also interacted with E2A in
erythroid cells independent of the TAL1 complex. Reporter gene assays
revealed that ETO2 repressed the transcriptional activity of the
complex. The ETO2 content in TAL1 complexes was high during the
proliferative phase in erythroid cells. In contrast, ETO2 was
downregulated upon terminal differentiation, concomitant with appearance
of histone modifications associated with gene activation and expression
of glycophorin A (GPA; 111300) and band 4.2 (EPB42; 177070), which are
markers of erythrocyte maturation. Knockdown of ETO2 via small
interfering RNA induced growth arrest and differentiation in human and
mouse erythroid progenitors. Goardon et al. (2006) concluded that ETO2
is required for expansion of erythroid progenitors, but that it is
dispensable for terminal maturation. They proposed that the
stoichiometry of ETO2 with the TAL1 complex controls the transition from
erythroid progenitor expansion to terminal differentiation.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a human breast cDNA library and
immunoprecipitation analysis of cotransfected HEK293T cells, Kumar et
al. (2006) showed that ZNF652 (613907) interacted with CBFA2T3. Deletion
analysis revealed that the C-terminal 109-amino acids of ZNF652 were
required for the interaction, and inclusion of the ZNF652 central zinc
finger domain stabilized the interaction. Reporter gene assays showed
that ZNF652 functioned as a transcriptional repressor. CBFA2T3 enhanced
the repressor activity of ZNF652 in a dose-dependent manner.

Kumar et al. (2008) found that ZNF652 alone or in complex with CBFA2T3
bound the consensus ZNF652 response element (AAGGGTTAA) found in the
promoter region of the HEB gene. In HEK293T cells, which express
endogenous ZNF652 and CBFA2T3, overexpression of either protein
repressed HEB expression, and repression was enhanced by coexpression of
both ZNF652 and CBFA2T3. Mutation analysis revealed that the NHR3 and
NHR4 motifs of CBFA2T3 interacted with the proline-rich stretch in the C
terminus of ZNF652.

Moore et al. (2008) showed that epitope-tagged mammalian Mtgr1, Mtg8,
and Mtg16 interacted with human TCF4 (TCF7L2; 602228) in cotransfected
COS-7 cells. The Wnt signaling protein beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806)
disrupted interaction of Mtg proteins with TCF4. When expressed in
Xenopus embryos, Mtg family members inhibited Wnt-dependent axis
formation and impaired the ability of beta-catenin or Lef1 (153245) to
induce axis duplication. Furthermore, Myc (190080), a transcriptional
target of the Wnt pathway, was overexpressed in the small intestine of
mice lacking Mtgr1. Moore et al. (2008) concluded that MTG proteins act
downstream of beta-catenin in the Wnt signaling pathway.

Notch receptor (see 190198) signaling regulates gene expression for
specification of cell fate in diverse tissues during development and
adult tissue renewal. In response to ligand binding, the intracellular
domain (ICD) of Notch is proteolytically released by the gamma-secretase
complex (see 104311) and translocates to the nucleus, where it binds CSL
(RBPJ; 147183) and triggers its conversion from a repressor to an
activator of Notch target gene expression. Engel et al. (2010) found
that Mtg16 -/- mouse hematopoietic progenitor cells showed elevated
expression of Notch targets, in addition to impaired differentiation, in
response to Notch signaling. The defect was reversed by restoration of
Mtg16 expression. Using mouse and human cells, Engel et al. (2010)
showed that all MTG family proteins bound CSL and that MTG16 bound the
ICDs of all Notch receptor proteins. Binding of MTG16 to Notch ICD
disrupted MTG16-CSL and MTG16-NCOR (see 600849) interactions and
permitted Notch signaling. Mutation and coprecipitation analysis
revealed that the N-terminal PST region of MTG16 interacted directly
with Notch ICD and that binding was independent of the MTG16 NTR domains
required for DNA, CSL, and HDAC binding. The PST region of Mtg16 was
also essential for Mtg16-dependent lineage specification in mouse
hematopoietic progenitor cells. Engel et al.(2010) concluded that MTG16
is an integral component of Notch signaling that contributes to basal
repression of canonical Notch target genes.

CYTOGENETICS

The t(16;21)(q24;q22) translocation is a rare but recurrent chromosomal
abnormality associated with therapy-related myeloid malignancies and a
variant of the t(8;21) translocation in which the AML1 gene on
chromosome 21 is rearranged. Gamou et al. (1998) determined that, as in
t(8;21), the t(16;21) breakpoints occurred between exons 5 and 6 of AML1
and between exons 1 and 2 or exons 3 and 4 of MTG16. Using RT-PCR, they
detected the AML1-MTG16 chimeric transcript in all 4 t(16;21) patients
tested. The reciprocal MTG16-AML1 mRNA was present in only 1 patient and
its predicted product was truncated, suggesting that AML1-MTG16 rather
than MTG16-AML1 is involved in the pathogenesis of t(16;21) leukemia.
The AML1-MTG16 chimeric protein shares several structural features with
AML1-MTG8, including the presence of the AML1 runt domain and the 4
NHRs.

ANIMAL MODEL

Chyla et al. (2008) deleted the Mtg16 gene in mice on a mixed genetic
background. Mtg16 -/- mice were obtained at the expected frequency, were
fertile, and appeared normal. However, some Mtg16 -/- mice showed mild
anemia and compensatory reticulocytosis at 4 weeks of age. Histologic
examination of Mtg16 -/- mice revealed disruption in splenic
architecture, with excess lymphoid, myeloid, erythroid, and
megakaryocytic elements, consistent with extramedullary hematopoiesis.
Bone marrow of Mtg16 -/- mice also showed disruption of lineage
allocation, with fewer maturing erythroid progenitors and increased
granulocyte lineage. Exposure to phenylhydrazine, a hemolytic agent,
resulted in rapid loss of hematocrit and death in Mtg16 -/- mice, but
not in wildtype mice. Death in Mtg16 -/- mice appeared to be due to
failure to expand erythropoiesis in spleen. Microarray analysis revealed
misregulation of numerous genes associated with stem and progenitor cell
function in Mtg16 -/- mice. Examination of in vivo colony formation
revealed that Mtg16 -/- progenitors found their way to spleen but failed
to expand to form colonies. Reexpression of Mtg16 complemented the
proliferation defect, as did expression of Myc. Chyla et al. (2008)
concluded that inactivation of Mtg16 caused a profound defect in
hematopoietic progenitor cell expansion.

REFERENCE 1. Calabi, F.; Cilli, V.: CBFA2T1, a gene rearranged in human leukemia,
is a member of a multigene family. Genomics 52: 332-341, 1998.

2. Chyla, B. J.; Moreno-Miralles, I.; Steapleton, M. A.; Thompson,
M. A.; Bhaskara, S.; Engel, M.; Hiebert, S. W.: Deletion of Mtg16,
a target of t(16;21), alters hematopoietic progenitor cell proliferation
and lineage allocation. Molec. Cell. Biol. 28: 6234-6247, 2008.

3. Engel, M. E.; Nguyen, H. N.; Mariotti, J.; Hunt, A.; Hiebert, S.
W.: Myeloid translocation gene 16 (MTG16) interacts with Notch transcription
complex components to integrate Notch signaling in hematopoietic cell
fate specification. Molec. Cell. Biol 30: 1852-1863, 2010.

4. Gamou, T.; Kitamura, E.; Hosoda, F.; Shimizu, K.; Shinohara, K.;
Hayashi, Y.; Nagase, T.; Yokoyama, Y.; Ohki, M.: The partner gene
of AML1 in t(16;21) myeloid malignancies is a novel member of the
MTG8(ETO) family. Blood 91: 4028-4037, 1998.

5. Goardon, N.; Lambert, J. A.; Rodriguez, P.; Nissaire, P.; Herblot,
S.; Thibault, P.; Dumenil, D.; Strouboulis, J.; Romeo, P.-H.; Hoang,
T.: ETO2 coordinates cellular proliferation and differentiation during
erythropoiesis. EMBO J. 25: 357-366, 2006.

6. Kumar, R.; Cheney, K. M.; McKirdy, R.; Neilsen, P. M.; Schulz,
R. B.; Lee, J.; Cohen, J.; Booker, G. W.; Callen, D. F.: CBFA2T3-ZNF652
corepressor complex regulates transcription of the E-box gene HEB. J.
Biol. Chem. 283: 19026-19038, 2008.

7. Kumar, R.; Manning, J.; Spendlove, H. E.; Kremmidiotis, G.; McKirdy,
R.; Lee, J.; Millband, D. N.; Cheney, K. M.; Stampfer, M. R.; Dwivedi,
P. P.; Morris, H. A.; Callen, D. F.: ZNF652, a novel zinc finger
protein, interacts with the putative breast tumor suppressor CBFA2T3
to repress transcription. Molec. Cancer Res. 4: 655-665, 2006.

8. Moore, A. C.; Amann, J. M.; Williams, C. S.; Tahinci, E.; Farmer,
T. E.; Martinez, J. A.; Yang, G.; Luce, K. S.; Lee, E.; Hiebert, S.
W.: Myeloid translocation gene family members associate with T-cell
factors (TCFs) and influence TCF-dependent transcription. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 28: 977-987, 2008.

9. Powell, J. A.; Gardner, A. E.; Bais, A. J.; Hinze, S. J.; Baker,
E.; Whitmore, S.; Crawford, J.; Kochetkova, M.; Spendlove, H. E.;
Doggett, N. A.; Sutherland, G. R.; Callen, D. F.; Kremmidiotis, G.
: Sequencing, transcript identification, and quantitative gene expression
profiling in the breast cancer loss of heterozygosity region 16q24.3
reveal three potential tumor-suppressor genes. Genomics 80: 303-310,
2002.

10. Schillace, R. V.; Andrews, S. F.; Liberty, G. A.; Davey, M. P.;
Carr, D. W.: Identification and characterization of myeloid translocation
gene 16b as a novel A kinase anchoring protein in T lymphocytes. J.
Immun. 168: 1590-1599, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/18/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/16/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/27/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/3/1999

EDITED mgross: 06/08/2012
mgross: 6/8/2012
terry: 1/18/2012
mgross: 12/16/2004
mgross: 5/19/2004
mgross: 3/27/2002
jlewis: 6/7/1999

612971	TITLE *612971 PDZ DOMAIN-CONTAINING 7; PDZD7
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Schneider et al. (2009) used positional cloning to identify the PDZD7
gene from junction fragments of a reciprocal t(10;11) translocation.
They identified 4 PDZD7 isoforms; isoforms A and B contain 2 PDZ
domains, and the shorter isoforms C and D contain no PDZ domains and 1
PDZ domain, respectively. RT-PCR analysis detected PDZD7 expression in
human cortex with weak expression in the human inner ear.

GENE STRUCTURE

Schneider et al. (2009) reported that PDZD7 consists of 16 exons
spanning 23.3 kb and results in 4 different transcripts. The A and B
isoforms are encoded by exons 2 to 8 or 9, and the C and D isoforms are
encoded by exons 6 to 13 and exons 13 to 16, respectively.

MAPPING

By positional cloning, Schneider et al. (2009) mapped the PDZD7 gene to
chromosome 10q24.3.

GENE FUNCTION

By GST pull-down assay and Western blot analysis, Schneider et al.
(2009) showed that PDZD7 interacted with SANS (USH1G; 607696) in HEK293T
cells. GST pull-down assay in mouse retina showed that PDZD7 also
interacted with harmonin (USH1C; 605242).

Ebermann et al. (2010) performed a yeast 2-hybrid screen of human fetal
brain and observed interaction of the PDZ2 domain of PDZD7 with the
C-terminal intracellular domain of GPR98 (602851), including its
PDZ-binding motif. Coimmunoprecipitation studies confirmed the
interaction and revealed that it is mediated by the PDZ2 domain of PDZD7
and the PDZ-binding motif of GPR98. In addition, coimmunoprecipitation
studies demonstrated interaction of the first and second PDZ domains of
PDZD7 with USH2A (608400); a truncated version of USH2A without the
C-terminal PDZ-binding motif showed reduced interaction.

CYTOGENETICS

In a boy with nonsyndromic congenital sensorineural hearing impairment,
born of consanguineous parents, Schneider et al. (2009) identified a
homozygous reciprocal 46,XY t(10;11),t(10;11) translocation. Examination
did not show any signs of retinitis pigmentosa or vestibular dysfunction
at age 8 years. Both parents and their 4 other children were
heterozygous translocation carriers. FISH analysis localized the
breakpoints to chromosome 10q24.3 in intron 10 of the PDZD7 gene and to
chromosome 11q23.3 in close proximity (less than 5 Mb) to 2 other
nonsyndromic deafness genes, RDX (179410) and TECTA (602574). The
10q24.3 breakpoint would disrupt the open reading frame of the C and D
isoforms of PDZD7. Schneider et al. (2009) suggested that the PDZD7 gene
can cause nonsyndromic autosomal recessive deafness and is also a prime
candidate gene for Usher syndrome (see 276900).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Modifier of Retinal Disease in Usher Syndrome Type IIA

In 2 French Canadian sisters with USH2A (276901), Ebermann et al. (2010)
analyzed the PDZD7 gene and identified heterozygosity for a de novo
frameshift mutation (612971.0001) in 1 of the sisters, who had
earlier-onset and more severe retinal disease. The authors concluded
that PDZD7 is a retinal disease modifier in patients with USH2A.

- Usher Syndrome Type IIC, GPR98/PDZD7 Digenic

In a 51-year-old German man with type II Usher syndrome (see USH2C,
605472) who was negative for mutation in the Usher syndrome genes USH2A
(608400), WHRN (607928), and CLRN1 (606397), Ebermann et al. (2010)
identified a heterozygous frameshift mutation in the GPR98 gene
(602851.0010) and a heterozygous frameshift mutation in the PDZD7 gene
(612971.0002). No second mutant allele was detected in GPR98 or PDZD7.

ANIMAL MODEL

Ebermann et al. (2010) characterized pdzd7 in zebrafish and identified 2
orthologs, pdzd7a and pdzd7b, which were expressed in retinal cells and
mechanosensory hair cells of the inner ear. Functional studies of the
ortholog with higher expression, pdzd7a, demonstrated localization in
the connecting cilium region of photoreceptors as well as in the apical
region of hair cells in the inner ear and neuromasts in young fish.
Strong pdzd7a localization at the ciliary base as well as more diffuse
labeling of photoreceptor outer segments persisted in adult retinas,
indicating postdevelopmental function. Morpholino knockdown of pdzd7a
produced Usher-like symptoms that had previously been described in
zebrafish Usher gene mutations, including circling, reduced startle
reflex, and disorganized stereocilia. Half-strength morpholino knockdown
produced no impairment of balance or retinal cell survival when used
alone, whereas combined partial pdzd7a;gpr98 knockdown produced
Usher-like circling and retinal degeneration. In addition, no Usher-like
phenotype was observed in combined partial pdzd7a;ush2a knockdown.
However, knockdowns of either ush2a or pdzd7a alone produced similar
moderate levels of photoreceptor cell death, and this degeneration
increased dramatically when embryos were treated with a full dose of
ush2a morpholino combined with a half dose of pdzd7a morpholino. The
cell death observed in these retinas was restricted to the
photoreceptors, and the retinas were otherwise morphologically normal.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RETINAL DISEASE IN USHER SYNDROME TYPE IIA, MODIFIER OF
PDZD7, 1-BP INS, 166C

Ebermann et al. (2010) analyzed the PDZD7 gene in 2 French Canadian
sisters with USH2A (276901) who were homozygous for a frameshift
mutation in the USH2A gene (608400.0003), and identified heterozygosity
for an additional de novo 1-bp insertion (166insC) in the PDZD7 gene in
1 of the sisters, who had earlier-onset and more severe retinal disease.
The PDZD7 mutation was not present in the less-affected sister or in 254
controls.

.0002
USHER SYNDROME, TYPE IIC, GPR98/PDZD7 DIGENIC
PDZD7, 9-BP INS, NT2194

In a 51-year-old German man with Usher syndrome (see USH2C; 605472),
Ebermann et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 9-bp deletion
(2194_2203del) in the PDZD7 gene and a heterozygous frameshift mutation
in the GPR98 gene (602851.0010). No second mutant allele was detected in
GPR98 or PDZD7. His unaffected sister was heterozygous for the PDZD7
mutation but did not carry the GPR98 mutation; the PDZD7 mutation was
not found in 405 controls.

REFERENCE 1. Ebermann, I.; Phillips, J. B.; Liebau, M. C.; Koenekoop, R. K.;
Schermer, B.; Lopez, I.; Schafer, E.; Roux, A.-F.; Dafinger, C.; Bernd,
A.; Zrenner, E.; Claustres, M.; Blanco, B.; Nurnberg, G.; Nurnberg,
P.; Ruland, R.; Westerfield, M.; Benzing, T.; Bolz, H. J.: PDZD7
is a modifier of retinal disease and a contributor to digenic Usher
syndrome. J. Clin. Invest. 120: 1812-1823, 2010.

2. Schneider, E.; Marker, T.; Daser, A.; Frey-Mahn, G.; Beyer, V.;
Farcas, R.; Schneider-Ratzke, B.; Kohlschmidt, N.; Grossmann, B.;
Bauss, K.; Napiontek, U.; Keilmann, A.; Bartsch, O.; Zechner, U.;
Wolfrum, U.; Haaf, T.: Homozygous disruption of PDZD7 by reciprocal
translocation in a consanguineous family: a new member of the Usher
syndrome protein interactome causing congenital hearing impairment. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 18: 655-666, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/3/2011

CREATED George E. Tiller: 8/20/2009

EDITED joanna: 03/08/2012
carol: 5/5/2011
terry: 5/3/2011
carol: 4/27/2011
wwang: 8/20/2009

606892	TITLE *606892 SYNTAXIN 12; STX12
;;STX13
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis, Advani et al. (1998) identified syntaxin-12, which
they called syntaxin-13. They cloned STX12 cDNA from a rat brainstem and
spinal cord cDNA library using a human brain cDNA clone as probe. Rat
STX12 shares 53% sequence identity with STX7 (603217). Northern blot
analysis detected expression of a 2.9-kb transcript in rat brain, with
very little expression in other tissues. Western blot analysis detected
a 33-kD band in brain, a faint signal in pancreas, and barely detectable
signals in other tissues. Cell fractionation studies of rat brain showed
that STX12 is an integral membrane protein, and immunolocalization
studies localized STX12 to the cell body of cultured rat hippocampal
neurons. Tang et al. (1998) independently cloned rat STX12 from a rat
brain cDNA library. Northern blot analysis detected highest expression
in brain, lung, and kidney. Immunolocalization studies showed compact
perinuclear staining, and experimental manipulation revealed specific
localization of STX12 to the endosomal compartment.

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunocytochemistry, fluorescence, and confocal microscopy,
Collins et al. (2002) showed that STX7 and STX12 are involved in the
ordered fusion of endosomes and lysosomes with the phagosome, where
phagocytic cells kill and degrade internalized foreign particles. STX12
is localized to the recycling endosome compartment, while STX7 is found
in late endosomes and lysosomes and both are recruited to the phagosome.
However, STX12 is acquired earlier before rapidly recycling off the
phagosome, while STX7 is recruited later and continues to accumulate
throughout the phagosome maturation process.

REFERENCE 1. Advani, R. J.; Bae, H.-R.; Bock, J. B.; Chao, D. S.; Doung, Y.-C.;
Prekeris, R.; Yoo, J.-S.; Scheller, R. H.: Seven novel mammalian
SNARE proteins localize to distinct membrane compartments. J. Biol.
Chem. 273: 10317-10324, 1998.

2. Collins, R. F.; Schreiber, A. D.; Grinstein, S.; Trimble, W. S.
: Syntaxins 13 and 7 function at distinct steps during phagocytosis. J.
Immun. 169: 3250-3256, 2002.

3. Tang, B. L.; Tan, A. E. H.; Lim, L. K.; Lee, S. S.; Low, D. Y.
H.; Hong, W.: Syntaxin 12, a member of the syntaxin family localized
to the endosome. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 6944-6950, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/5/2003

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/29/2002

EDITED carol: 01/31/2007
terry: 3/3/2005
cwells: 8/5/2003
carol: 4/30/2002

600587	TITLE *600587 POM121/ZP3 FUSION PROTEIN; POMZP3
;;POMZP3 FUSION PROTEIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kipersztok et al. (1995) characterized an unusual human gene, which they
termed POMZP3, that appears to have resulted from a fusion of sequences
derived from 2 distinct loci. The 5-prime end of the gene has 77%
identity to the 5-prime end of the coding region of the rat POM121 gene,
which had been characterized as a nuclear pore membrane protein. The
3-prime end of POMZP3 is 99% identical to the last 4 exons of the zona
pellucida glycoprotein gene ZP3 (182889). POMZP3 is presumably the
result of partial duplication of the human POM121 homolog and ZP3.
Unlike the true ZP3 locus, which is transcribed exclusively in the
ovary, POMZP3 is expressed in a variety of tissues.

MAPPING

Kipersztok et al. (1995) mapped the POMZP3 gene by fluorescence in situ
hybridization to chromosome 7q11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Kipersztok, S.; Osawa, G. A.; Liang, L.; Modi, W. S.; Dean, J.
: POM-ZP3, a bipartite transcript derived from human ZP3 and a POM121
homologue. Genomics 25: 354-359, 1995.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/5/1995

EDITED carol: 06/08/2010
alopez: 3/21/2000
dholmes: 2/20/1998
mark: 6/6/1995
mark: 6/5/1995

610050	TITLE *610050 TRANSMEMBRANE PROTEIN, SERINE 13; TMPRSS13
;;MOSAIC SERINE PROTEASE LONG; MSPL
MOSAIC SERINE PROTEASE SHORT, INCLUDED; MSPS, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kim et al. (2001) used degenerate PCR to amplify trypsin-type serine
protease cDNA sequences from a human lung cDNA library. They identified
2 novel cDNAs encoding different serine protease isoforms, which they
designated mosaic serine protease long (MSPL) and mosaic serine protease
short (MSPS). MSPL encodes a deduced 581-amino acid protein, and MSPS
encodes a deduced 537-amino acid protein. Both isoforms contain 4
potential N-glycosylation sites. Except for the C-terminal ends, the 2
proteins have an identical serine protease domain exhibiting 42%, 39%,
and 43% identity to those of human plasma kallikrein (see 229000),
hepsin (142440), and transmembrane protease serine-2 (602060),
respectively. MSPL contains a transmembrane domain but MSPS does not.
The noncatalytic regions of both isoforms contain domains that may be
involved in protein-protein interactions, including tandem repeat motifs
corresponding to the phosphorylation sites of cyclin-dependent kinase
Cdc2 and protein kinase C, and a low density lipoprotein receptor-like
domain.

Using PCR-Southern analysis, Kim et al. (2001) detected expression of
both MSPL and MSPS in human lung, placenta, pancreas and prostate, but
not in brain, heart, liver, intestine, kidney, thymus, muscle, or ovary.
Low expression of MSPS was also detected in testis and peripheral blood
lymphocytes. Western blot analysis revealed bands of 60 kD and 57 kD,
corresponding to the predicted sizes for MSPL and MSPS, respectively.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the
TMPRSS13 gene to chromosome 11 (TMAP RH68429).

REFERENCE 1. Kim, D. R.; Sharmin, S.; Inoue, M.; Kido, H.: Cloning and expression
of novel mosaic serine proteases with and without a transmembrane
domain from human lung. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1518: 204-209, 2001.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 4/13/2006

EDITED carol: 04/13/2006

142220	TITLE *142220 HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H1 HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER E; HIST1H1E
;;HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H1E;;
HIST1 CLUSTER, H1E;;
H1E;;
H1.4;;
H1 HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER 4, FORMERLY; H1F4, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION For background information on histones, histone gene clusters, and the
H1 histone family, see HIST1H1A (142709).

CLONING

Albig et al. (1991) identified a gene encoding a member of the H1 class
of histones and designated it H1.4.

GENE FUNCTION

See HIST1H1A (142709) for functional information on H1 histones.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Tanguay et al. (1987) mapped the histone H1.4
gene to chromosome 12q11-q21. On the other hand, Albig et al. (1993)
mapped 6 H1 genes, including H1.4, to chromosome 6p22.1-p21.1. By
analysis of a YAC contig, Albig et al. (1997) mapped the H1.4 gene to
chromosome 6p21.3, within a cluster of 35 histone genes.

By genomic sequence analysis, Marzluff et al. (2002) determined that the
histone gene cluster on chromosome 6p22-p21, which they called histone
gene cluster-1 (HIST1), contains 55 histone genes, including HIST1H1E.

REFERENCE 1. Albig, W.; Drabent, B.; Kunz, J.; Kalff-Suske, M.; Grzeschik, K.-H.;
Doenecke, D.: All known human H1 histone genes except the H1(0) gene
are clustered on chromosome 6. Genomics 16: 649-654, 1993.

2. Albig, W.; Kardalinou, E.; Drabent, B.; Zimmer, A.; Doenecke, D.
: Isolation and characterization of two human H1 histone genes within
clusters of core histone genes. Genomics 10: 940-948, 1991.

3. Albig, W.; Kioschis, P.; Poustka, A.; Meergans, K.; Doenecke, D.
: Human histone gene organization: nonregular arrangement within a
large cluster. Genomics 40: 314-322, 1997.

4. Marzluff, W. F.; Gongidi, P.; Woods, K. R.; Jin, J.; Maltais, L.
J.: The human and mouse replication-dependent histone genes. Genomics 80:
487-498, 2002.

5. Tanguay, R. M.; Berube, D.; Gagne, R.: Localization of histone
genes to chromosomes 6, 12, and 1 by in situ hybridization. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 46: 702 only, 1987.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 06/24/2010
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 7/8/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/13/1989

EDITED mgross: 06/24/2010
mgross: 5/26/2010
tkritzer: 3/31/2003
alopez: 8/26/1998
alopez: 7/8/1998
alopez: 2/11/1998
mark: 9/22/1996
carol: 6/28/1993
carol: 6/25/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 4/19/1991
carol: 3/26/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990

611602	TITLE *611602 RIMS-BINDING PROTEIN 2; RIMBP2
;;KIAA0318
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a human brain cDNA library, Nagase et
al. (1997) cloned RIMBP2, which they designated KIAA0318. The deduced
protein contains 1,106 amino acids. RT-PCR detected highest expression
in testis, followed by brain, placenta, ovary, small intestine, and
kidney, in order of decreasing expression. Other tissues showed little
to no expression.

Mittelstaedt and Schoch (2007) stated that, like other RIMBP proteins,
the deduced 1,076-amino acid RIMBP2 protein has a unique N-terminal
domain, followed by an SRC (190090) homology-3 (SH3) domain, 3 tandem
fibronectin (135600)-like 3 (FN3) domains, and 2 C-terminal SH3 domains.
It also has a proline-rich sequence in the linker region between the FN3
domains and the C-terminal SH3 domains. By EST database analysis,
Mittelstaedt and Schoch (2007) identified 3 conserved variants of mouse
and human RIMBP2 with alternative splicing affecting the N-terminal
region, the linker region, and the C-terminal sequence. In situ
hybridization of adult rat brain showed that Rimbp2 was expressed in
neurons in a region-specific manner.

GENE FUNCTION

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a rat brain cDNA library, Wang et al.
(2000) found that the C-terminal halves of rat Rim1 (RIMS1; 606629) and
Rim2 (RIMS2; 606630) interacted with Rimbp1 (BZRAP1; 610764) and Rimbp2.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mittelstaedt and Schoch (2007) determined that the RIMBP2 gene contains
23 exons and spans 316.6 kb.

MAPPING

Using radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1997) mapped the RIMBP2
gene to chromosome 12. By genomic sequence analysis, Mittelstaedt and
Schoch (2007) mapped the RIMBP2 gene to chromosome 12q24.33. They mapped
the mouse Rimbp2 gene to chromosome 5F.

EVOLUTION

For information on the evolution of the RIMBP gene family, see RIMBP1
(BZRAP1; 610764).

REFERENCE 1. Mittelstaedt, T.; Schoch, S.: Structure and evolution of RIM-BP
genes: identification of a novel family member. Gene 403: 70-79,
2007.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Nakajima, D.; Ohira, M.; Seki, N.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which can code for large
proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4: 141-150, 1997.

3. Wang, Y.; Sugita, S.; Sudhof, T. C.: The RIM/NIM family of neuronal
C2 domain proteins: interactions with Rab3 and a new class of Src
homology 3 domain proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 20033-20044, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/23/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/19/2007

EDITED mgross: 03/27/2009
mgross: 3/27/2009
terry: 2/23/2009
mgross: 11/19/2007

604365	TITLE *604365 PROMININ 1; PROM1
;;PROMININ, MOUSE, HOMOLOG-LIKE 1; PROML1;;
AC133;;
CD133 ANTIGEN; CD133
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Maw et al. (2000) stated that the prominin 5-transmembrane domain
glycoprotein was originally identified as a protein that selectively
localized at the apical surface of murine neuroepithelial cells, whereas
PROML1 was identified as an antigenic marker (AC133 antigen) in
hematopoietic stem cells (Miraglia et al., 1997; Yin et al., 1997) and
found to be expressed in retinoblastoma cell lines and adult retina. The
gene encodes an 865-amino acid glycoprotein (Miraglia et al., 1997) and
is conserved throughout the animal kingdom.

Yu et al. (2002) cloned an AC133 splice variant that lacks the 27-bp
exon 3. They termed this isoform ACC133-2 and the longer isoform
AC133-1. Both isoforms encode glycosylated membrane proteins. PCR
analysis showed that AC133-2 was predominantly expressed in a variety of
fetal and adult tissues and in several carcinomas. In contrast, AC133-1
was prominent in fetal brain and adult skeletal muscle and absent in
fetal liver and kidney and in adult pancreas, kidney, bone marrow,
hematopoietic stem cells, and placenta. RT-PCR and flow cytometric
analysis revealed expression of AC133-2 in basal epidermal stem cells,
and the expression was downregulated in cultured basal cells. Yu et al.
(2002) concluded that AC133-2, not AC133-1, is the isoform expressed in
multiple stem cell niches, potentially providing a means to isolate
specific stem cell subpopulations from human tissues.

GENE STRUCTURE

Maw et al. (2000) determined that most of the PROM1 gene is contained in
23 exons distributed over more than 50 kb of genomic sequence.

MAPPING

Maw et al. (2000) noted that D4S1601 and D4S3048, which are located on
human chromosome 4p15.3-p15.2, map within intronic sequences of the
PROML1 gene.

GENE FUNCTION

Torrente et al. (2004) reported that a subpopulation of circulating
cells expressing AC133, a well-characterized marker of hematopoietic
stem cells, also expresses early myogenic markers. Freshly isolated,
circulating AC133(+) cells were induced to undergo myogenesis when
cocultured with myogenic cells or exposed in vitro to Wnt-producing
cells. Myogenesis was also induced when the circulating AC133(+) cells
were delivered in vivo through the arterial circulation or directly into
the muscles of transgenic scid/mdx mice, which are a model of Duchenne
muscular dystrophy (DMD; 310200) that tolerate human donor cells.
Injected cells also localized under the basal lamina of host muscle
fibers and expressed satellite cell markers such as M-cadherin (114019)
and MYF5 (159990). Functional tests of injected muscles revealed a
substantial recovery of force after treatment. Torrente et al. (2004)
suggested that because these cells can be isolated from the blood,
manipulated in vitro, and delivered through the circulation, they
represent a possible tool for future cell therapy applications in DMD
and other muscular dystrophies.

Singh et al. (2003) prospectively isolated a CD133-positive cell
subpopulation from human brain tumors that exhibited stem cell
properties in vitro. However, the true measures of cancer stem cells are
their capacity for self renewal and exact recapitulation of the original
tumor. Singh et al. (2004) reported the development of a xenograft assay
that identified human brain tumor-initiating cells that initiate tumors
in vivo. Only the CD133-positive brain tumor fraction contained cells
that were capable of tumor initiation in NOD-SCID mouse brains.
Injections of as few as 100 CD133-positive cells produced a tumor that
could be serially transplanted and was a phenocopy of the patient's
original tumor, whereas injection of 10(5) CD133-negative cells
engrafted but did not cause a tumor. Thus, Singh et al. (2004) concluded
that the identification of brain tumor-initiating cells provides
insights into human brain tumor pathogenesis, giving strong support for
the cancer stem cell hypothesis as the basis for many solid tumors.

Bao et al. (2006) showed that cancer stem cells contribute to glioma
radioresistance through preferential activation of the DNA damage
checkpoint response and an increase in DNA repair capacity. The fraction
of tumor cells expressing CD133, a marker for both neural stem cells and
brain cancer stem cells, is enriched after radiation in gliomas. In both
cell culture and the brains of immunocompromised mice, CD133-expressing
glioma cells survived ionizing radiation in increased proportions
relative to most tumor cells, which lack CD133. CD133-expressing tumor
cells isolated from both human glioma xenografts and primary patient
glioblastoma specimens preferentially activated the DNA damage
checkpoint in response to radiation, and repaired radiation-induced DNA
damage more effectively than CD133-negative tumor cells. In addition,
Bao et al. (2006) found that the radioresistance of CD133-positive
glioma stem cells could be reversed with a specific inhibitor of the
CHK1 (603078) and CHK2 (604373) checkpoint kinases. Bao et al. (2006)
concluded that CD133-positive tumor cells represent the cellular
population that confers glioma radioresistance and could be the source
of tumor recurrence after radiation. Targeting DNA damage checkpoint
response in cancer stem cells may overcome this radioresistance and
provide a therapeutic model for malignant brain cancers.

Piccirillo et al. (2006) reported that bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs),
among which BMP4 (112262) elicits the strongest effect, trigger a
significant reduction in the stem-like, tumor-initiating precursors of
human glioblastomas. They demonstrated that BMPs activate their cognate
receptor BMPRs and trigger the SMAD (see 601595) signaling cascade in
cells isolated from human glioblastomas. This is followed by a reduction
in proliferation, and increased expression of markers of neural
differentiation, with no effect on cell viability. The concomitant
reduction in clonogenic ability, in the size of the CD133-positive
population, and in the growth kinetics of glioblastoma cells indicated
that BMP4 reduces the tumor-initiating cell pool of glioblastomas.

Using a transgenic mouse model in which endogenous Cd133 promoters drove
expression of a reporter gene, as well as immunodetection studies in
mouse and human tissues, Shmelkov et al. (2008) showed that CD133 was
expressed not only on metastatic colon cancer cells, but also on
differentiated colonic epithelium in both adult mice and humans. Both
CD133-positive and CD133-negative human metastatic tumor subpopulations
formed colonospheres in vitro and tumors in immunodeficient mice.
Shmelkov et al. (2008) proposed that not only are CD133-negative cells
more aggressive cancer-initiating cells than CD133-positive cells, but
that CD133-positive cells may actually give rise to the CD133-negative
subset.

In immunoprecipitation studies in mice, Yang et al. (2008) demonstrated
that PROM1 interacts with protocadherin-21 (PCDH21; 609502) and with
actin filaments, both of which play critical roles in photoreceptor disc
membrane morphogenesis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Maw et al. (2000) performed molecular genetic analysis on an Indian
pedigree segregating for autosomal recessive retinal degeneration (RP41;
612095) and identified homozygosity for 1-bp deletion in PROM1 gene
(604365.0001) in affected individuals.

In affected members of a consanguineous Pakistani family with severe
retinitis pigmentosa, Zhang et al. (2007) identified homozygosity for a
nonsense mutation in the PROM1 gene (604365.0002).

Yang et al. (2008) screened 12 candidate genes in 2 families with
retinal disease mapping to chromosome 4p, 1 with a Stargardt-like
phenotype (STGD4; 603786) and 1 with retinal macular dystrophy-2 (MCDR2;
608051), and identified a missense mutation in the PROM1 gene in
affected members of both families (R373C; 608051.0003). The authors also
identified the R373C mutation in affected members of a family with
cone-rod dystrophy (CORD12; 612657). The mutation, which was not found
in 400 matched controls, was shown to cause mislocalization of mutant
and wildtype protein in the photoreceptor layers of mice and to be
associated with defective disc morphogenesis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using an inducible Cre-nuclear LacZ reporter allele knocked into the
Prom1 locus (Prom1(C-L)) Zhu et al. (2009) demonstrated that Prom1 is
expressed in a variety of developing and adult tissues. Lineage-tracing
studies of adult Prom1(C-L) heterozygous mice containing the Rosa26-YFP
reporter allele showed that Prom1-positive cells are located at the base
of crypts in the small intestine, coexpress Lgr5 (606667), generate the
entire intestinal epithelium, and are therefore the small intestinal
stem cell. Prom1 was reported to mark cancer stem cells of human
intestinal tumors that arise frequently as a consequence of aberrant Wnt
signaling. Activation of endogenous Wnt signaling in Prom1(C-L)
heterozygous mice containing a Cre-dependent mutant allele of
beta-catenin (116806) resulted in a gross disruption of crypt
architecture and a disproportionate expansion of Prom1 positive cells at
the crypt base. Lineage tracing demonstrated that the progeny of these
cells replaced the mucosa of the entire small intestine with neoplastic
tissue that was characterized by focal high grade intraepithelial
neoplasia and crypt adenoma formation. Although all neoplastic cells
arose from Prom1-positive cells in these mice, only 7% of tumor cells
retained Prom1 expression. Zhu et al. (2009) concluded that Prom1 marks
stem cells in the adult small intestine that are susceptible to
transformation into tumors retaining a fraction of mutant Prom1-positive
tumor cells.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 41
PROM1, 1-BP DEL, 1878G

In 4 affected members of a consanguineous Indian family with retinal
degeneration (RP41; 612095), Maw et al. (2000) identified homozygosity
for a 1-bp deletion (1878delG) in exon 16 of the PROM1 gene, predicted
to cause a frameshift at codon 614 and a prematurely truncated protein
lacking about half of the second extracellular loop, the final
membrane-spanning segment, and the cytoplasmic C-terminal domain. The
mutation was not found in 97 Indian controls. A similar PROM1 deletion
mutant expressed in CHO cells did not reach the cell surface, and
immunocytochemistry showed that PROM1 was concentrated in the plasma
membrane evaginations at the base of the outer segments of rod
photoreceptors. Maw et al. (2000) suggested that loss of prominin causes
retinal degeneration, possibly because of impaired generation of the
evaginations and/or impaired conversion of the evaginations to discs.

.0002
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 41
PROM1, GLN576TER

In all 6 affected members of a consanguineous Pakistani family with
severe retinitis pigmentosa (RP41; 612095), Zhang et al. (2007)
identified homozygosity for a 1726C-T transition in exon 15 of the PROM1
gene, resulting in a gln576-to-ter (Q576X) substitution. Five of 6
unaffected family members were heterozygous for the mutation, which was
not found in 192 ethnically matched unrelated controls from the same
region.

.0003
STARGARDT DISEASE 4
MACULAR DYSTROPHY, RETINAL, 2, INCLUDED;;
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 12, INCLUDED
PROM1, ARG373CYS

In affected members of a family with a Stargardt-like phenotype (STGD4;
603786), previously described by Kniazeva et al. (1999), and an
unrelated family with retinal macular dystrophy-2 (MCDR2; 608051),
previously reported by Michaelides et al. (2003), Yang et al. (2008)
identified heterozygosity for a 1117C-T transition in exon 10 of the
PROM1 gene, resulting in an arg373-to-cys (R373C) substitution. The
authors also identified the R373C mutation in affected members of a
family with cone-rod dystrophy (CORD12; 612657). Haplotype analysis
indicated that the mutation had arisen independently in each of the 3
families, and it was not found in 400 matched controls. Studies in
transgenic mice showed both mutant and endogenous PROM1 throughout the
layers of the photoreceptors, rather than at the base of the
photoreceptor outer segments where PROM1 is normally localized, and the
outer segment disc membranes were greatly overgrown and misplaced,
indicating defective disc morphogenesis.

Michaelides et al. (2010) examined affected members of 5 families with
the R373C mutation in the PROM1 gene, including 3 previously studied
families (Kniazeva et al., 1999, Michaelides et al., 2003, and Yang et
al., 2008, respectively) and 2 newly ascertained British families in
which affected individuals had bull's eye macular dystrophy (families
'D' and 'E'). The authors observed that the R373C mutation produces an
autosomal dominant, fully penetrant retinopathy characterized by the
consistent finding of bull's-eye maculopathy, with variable rod or
rod-cone dysfunction displaying marked intra- and interfamilial
variability, and phenotypes ranging from isolated maculopathy without
generalized photoreceptor dysfunction to maculopathy associated with
very severe rod-cone dysfunction. Michaelides et al. (2010) noted that
all reported patients with the R373C mutation exhibited only an ocular
phenotype, despite ubiquitous expression of PROM1 in plasma membrane
protrusions.

REFERENCE 1. Bao, S.; Wu, Q.; McLendon, R. E.; Hao, Y.; Shi, Q.; Hjelmeland,
A. B.; Dewhirst, M. W.; Bigner, D. D.; Rich, J. N.: Glioma stem cells
promote radioresistance by preferential activation of the DNA damage
response. Nature 444: 756-760, 2006.

2. Kniazeva, M.; Chiang, M. F.; Morgan, B.; Anduze, A. L.; Zack, D.
J.; Han, M.; Zhang, K.: A new locus for autosomal dominant Stargardt-like
disease maps to chromosome 4. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64: 1394-1399,
1999.

3. Maw, M. A.; Corbeil, D.; Koch, J.; Hellwig, A.; Wilson-Wheeler,
J. C.; Bridges, R. J.; Kumaramanickavel, G.; John, S.; Nancarrow,
D.; Roper, K.; Weigmann, A.; Huttner, W. B.; Denton, M. J.: A frameshift
mutation in prominin (mouse)-like 1 causes human retinal degeneration. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 27-34, 2000.

4. Michaelides, M.; Gaillard, M.-C.; Escher, P.; Tiab, L.; Bedell,
M.; Borruat, F.-X.; Barthelmes, D.; Carmona, R.; Zhang, K.; White,
E.; McClements, M.; Robson, A. G.; Holder, G. E.; Bradshaw, K.; Hunt,
D. M.; Webster, A. R.; Moore, A. T.; Schorderet, D. F.; Munier, F.
L.: The PROM1 mutation p.R373C causes an autosomal dominant bull's
eye maculopathy associated with rod, rod-cone, and macular dystrophy. Invest.
Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 51: 4771-4780, 2010.

5. Michaelides, M.; Johnson, S.; Poulson, A.; Bradshaw, K.; Bellmann,
C.; Hunt, D. M.; Moore, A. T.: An autosomal dominant bull's-eye macular
dystrophy (MCDR2) that maps to the short arm of chromosome 4. Invest.
Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 44: 1657-1662, 2003.

6. Miraglia, S.; Godfrey, W.; Yin, A. H.; Atkins, K.; Warnke, R.;
Holden, J. T.; Bray, R. A.; Waller, E. K.; Buck, D. W.: A novel five-transmembrane
hematopoietic stem cell antigen: isolation, characterization, and
molecular cloning. Blood 90: 5013-5021, 1997.

7. Piccirillo, S. G. M.; Reynolds, B. A.; Zanetti, N.; Lamorte, G.;
Binda, E.; Broggi, G.; Brem, H.; Olivi, A.; Dimeco, F.; Vescovi, A.
L.: Bone morphogenetic proteins inhibit the tumorigenic potential
of human brain tumour-initiating cells. Nature 444: 761-765, 2006.

8. Shmelkov, S. V.; Butler, J. M.; Hooper, A. T.; Hormigo, A.; Kushner,
J.; Milde, T.; St. Clair, R.; Baljevic, M.; White, I.; Jin, D. K.;
Chadburn, A.; Murphy, A. J.; Valenzuela, D. M.; Gale, N. W.; Thurston,
G.; Yancopoulos, G. D.; D'Angelica, M.; Kemeny, N.; Lyden, D.; Rafii,
S.: CD133 expression is not restricted to stem cells, and both CD133+
and CD133- metastatic colon cancer cells initiate tumors. J. Clin.
Invest. 118: 2111-2120, 2008.

9. Singh, S. K.; Clarke, I. D.; Terasaki, M.; Bonn, V. E.; Hawkins,
C.; Squire, J.; Dirks, P. B.: Identification of a cancer stem cell
in human brain tumors. Cancer Res. 63: 5821-5828, 2003.

10. Singh, S. K.; Hawkins, C.; Clarke, I. D.; Squire, J. A.; Bayani,
J.; Hide, T.; Henkelman, R. M.; Cusimano, M. D.; Dirks, P. B.: Identification
of human brain tumour initiating cells. Nature 432: 396-401, 2004.

11. Torrente, Y.; Belicchi, M.; Sampaolesi, M.; Pisati, F.; Meregalli,
M.; D'Antona, G.; Tonlorenzi, R.; Porretti, L.; Gavina, M.; Mamchaoui,
K.; Pellegrino, M. A.; Furling, D.; Mouly, V.; Butler-Browne, G. S.;
Bottinelli, R.; Cossu, G.; Bresolin, N.: Human circulating AC133(+)
stem cells restore dystrophin expression and ameliorate function in
dystrophic skeletal muscle. J. Clin. Invest. 114: 182-195, 2004.

12. Yang, Z.; Chen, Y.; Lillo, C.; Chien, J.; Yu, Z.; Michaelides,
M.; Klein, M.; Howes, K. A.; Li, Y.; Kaminoh, Y.; Chen, H. Zhao, C.;
and 21 others: Mutant prominin 1 found in patients with macular
degeneration disrupts photoreceptor disk morphogenesis in mice. J.
Clin. Invest. 118: 2908-2916, 2008.

13. Yin, A. H.; Miraglia, S.; Zanjani, E. D.; Almeida-Porada, G.;
Ogawa, M.; Leary, A. G.; Olweus, J.; Kearney, J.; Buck, D. W.: AC133,
a novel marker for human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Blood 90:
5002-5012, 1997.

14. Yu, Y.; Flint, A.; Dvorin, E. L.; Bischoff, J.: AC133-2, a novel
isoform of human AC133 stem cell antigen. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 20711-20716,
2002.

15. Zhang, Q.; Zulfiqar, F.; Xiao, X.; Riazuddin, S. A.; Ahmad, Z.;
Caruso, R.; MacDonald, I.; Sieving, P.; Riazuddin, S.; Hejtmancik,
J. F.: Severe retinitis pigmentosa mapped to 4p15 and associated
with a novel mutation in the PROM1 gene. Hum. Genet. 122: 293-299,
2007.

16. Zhu, L.; Gibson, P.; Currle, D. S.; Tong, Y.; Richardson, R. J.;
Bayazitov, I. T.; Poppleton, H.; Zakharenko, S.; Ellison, D. W.; Gilbertson,
R. J.: Prominin 1 marks intestinal stem cells that are susceptible
to neoplastic transformation. Nature 457: 603-607, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/4/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/12/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/13/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/20/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/29/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/23/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/10/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/3/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/15/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/22/1999

EDITED mgross: 03/18/2013
terry: 3/12/2013
carol: 10/11/2011
terry: 10/4/2011
terry: 10/12/2010
carol: 8/30/2010
carol: 3/17/2009
joanna: 3/16/2009
carol: 3/12/2009
alopez: 2/16/2009
terry: 2/13/2009
mgross: 8/25/2008
terry: 8/20/2008
wwang: 5/30/2008
terry: 5/29/2008
wwang: 5/19/2008
carol: 5/3/2007
alopez: 1/24/2007
terry: 1/23/2007
terry: 3/11/2005
alopez: 12/15/2004
terry: 12/10/2004
mgross: 12/3/2004
tkritzer: 9/16/2004
terry: 9/15/2004
joanna: 3/17/2004
carol: 3/26/2003
carol: 12/22/1999

116946	TITLE *116946 CELL DIVISION CYCLE 27; CDC27
;;ANAPHASE-PROMOTING COMPLEX, SUBUNIT 3; APC3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CDC27 is 1 of several subunits of the anaphase-promoting complex (APC),
which functions at the metaphase-to-anaphase transition of the cell
cycle and is regulated by spindle checkpoint proteins. The APC is an E3
ubiquitin ligase that targets cell cycle regulatory proteins for
degradation by the proteasome, thereby allowing progression through the
cell cycle (summary by Jorgensen et al., 2001).

CLONING

Tugendreich et al. (1993) described a strategy for quickly identifying
and positionally mapping human homologs of yeast genes in order to
cross-reference the rich biologic and genetic information concerning
yeast genes to mammalian species. Optimized computer search methods were
developed to scan the rapidly expanding expressed sequence tag (EST)
database of Venter and colleagues (Adams et al., 1992) to find human
open reading frames related to yeast protein sequences. The
corresponding human cDNA was then used to obtain a high-resolution map
position on human and mouse chromosomes, providing the links between
yeast genetic analysis and mapped mammalian loci. In this way,
Tugendreich et al. (1993) identified a human homolog of CDC27 of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Human CDC27 encodes an 823-amino acid protein
with global similarity to its fungal homologs.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a library of endoribonuclease-prepared short interfering RNAs
(esiRNAs), Kittler et al. (2004) identified 37 genes required for cell
division, one of which was CDC27. These 37 genes included several
splicing factors for which knockdown generates mitotic spindle defects.
In addition, a putative nuclear-export terminator was found to speed up
cell proliferation and mitotic progression after knockdown.

MAPPING

Tugendreich et al. (1993) mapped the CDC27 gene to human chromosome 17
and mouse chromosome 11 between the PKCA gene (176960) at 17q22-q23.2
and the ERBB2 gene (164870) at 17q12-q21. The assignment to human
chromosome 17 was achieved by PCR analysis of a panel of somatic cell
hybrids; the mapping to chromosome 11 between the murine homologs of the
PKCA and ERBB2 genes was done by linkage analysis. That CDC27 is located
between these genes in the human was inferred from the strong homology
of synteny.

REFERENCE 1. Adams, M. D.; Dubnick, M.; Kerlavage, A. R.; Moreno, R.; Kelley,
J. M.; Utterback, T. R.; Nagle, J. W.; Fields, C.; Venter, J. C.:
Sequence identification of 2,375 human brain genes. Nature 355:
632-634, 1992.

2. Jorgensen, P. M.; Graslund, S.; Betz, R.; Stahl, S.; Larsson, C.;
Hoog, C.: Characterisation of the human APC1, the largest subunit
of the anaphase-promoting complex. Gene 262: 51-59, 2001.

3. Kittler, R.; Putz, G.; Pelletier, L.; Poser, I.; Heninger, A.-K.;
Drechsel, D.; Fischer, S.; Konstantinova, I.; Habermann, B.; Grabner,
H.; Yaspo, M.-L.; Himmelbauer, H.; Korn, B.; Neugebauer, K.; Pisabarro,
M. T.; Buchholz, F.: An endoribonuclease-prepared siRNA screen in
human cells identifies genes essential for cell division. Nature 432:
1036-1040, 2004.

4. Tugendreich, S.; Boguski, M. S.; Seldin, M. S.; Hieter, P.: Linking
yeast genetics to mammalian genomes: identification and mapping of
the human homolog of CDC27 via the expressed sequence tag (EST) data
base. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 10031-10035, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/8/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/6/1994

EDITED carol: 12/30/2011
alopez: 3/8/2005
mgross: 5/16/2002
alopez: 1/25/1999
carol: 4/6/1994

123680	TITLE *123680 CRYSTALLIN, GAMMA-C; CRYGC
;;CRYSTALLIN, GAMMA-3; CRYG3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The crystallin proteins alpha (see 123660), beta (see 123610), and gamma
account for more than 90% of total lens proteins. Different
gamma-crystallin isoforms account for approximately one-third of total
lens proteins (Bloemendal et al., 2004).

GENE STRUCTURE

Den Dunnen et al. (1985) isolated a genomic cosmid clone containing 2
closely linked gamma-crystallin genes (CRYGC and CRYGB; 123670) oriented
in the same direction. Both genes contain 3 exons. Den Dunnen et al.
(1985) sequenced the coding regions of the genes as well as their
5-prime and 3-prime flanking regions. The genes share 80% homology.

MAPPING

Shiloh et al. (1986) localized the gamma-crystallin genes to 2q33-q36,
most probably 2q34-q35, by Southern analysis of DNA from somatic cell
hybrids and by in situ hybridization.

GENE FUNCTION

The alpha-crystallin subunits alpha-A (123580) and alpha-B (123590) each
can form an oligomer by itself or with the other. Fu and Liang (2002)
used a 2-hybrid system to study heterogeneous interactions among lens
crystallins of different classes. They found interactions between
alpha-A- (or alpha-B-) and beta-B2- (123620) or gamma-C-crystallins, but
the intensity of interaction was one-third that of alpha-A-alpha-B
interactions. HSP27 (602195), a member of the small heat-shock protein
family, showed similar interaction properties with alpha-B-crystallin.
Experiments with N- and C-terminal domain-truncated mutants demonstrated
that both N- and C-terminal domains were important in alpha-A-crystallin
self-interaction, but that only the C-terminal domain was important in
alpha-B-crystallin self-interaction.

Fu and Liang (2003) studied the effect of crystallin gene mutations that
result in congenital cataract on protein-protein interactions.
Interactions between mutated crystallins alpha-A (R116C; 123580.0001),
alpha-B (R120G; 123590.0001), and gamma-C (T5P; 123680.0001) and the
corresponding wildtype proteins, as well as with wildtype
beta-B2-crystallin and HSP27, were analyzed in a mammalian cell 2-hybrid
system. For mutated alpha-A-crystallin, interactions with wildtype
beta-B2-crystallin and gamma-C-crystallin decreased and those with
wildtype alpha-B-crystallin and HSP27 increased. For mutated
alpha-B-crystallin, the interactions with wildtype alpha-A-crystallin
and alpha-B-crystallin decreased, but those with wildtype
beta-B2-crystallin and gamma-C-crystallin increased slightly. For
mutated gamma-C-crystallin, most of the interactions were decreased. The
results indicated that crystallin mutations involved in congenital
cataracts alter protein-protein interactions, which might contribute to
decreased protein solubility and formation of cataract.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a family with Coppock-like cataract (CTRCT2; 604307), originally
reported by Harman (1910) and shown to be linked to the gamma-crystallin
gene family on chromosome 2q by Lubsen et al. (1987), Heon et al. (1999)
identified a heterozygous mutation in the CRYGC gene (T5P; 123680.0001).

In affected members of a family with autosomal dominant variable zonular
pulverulent cataract, Ren et al. (2000) identified a 5-bp duplication in
exon 2 of the CRYGC gene (123680.0002).

In a mother and 2 children with congenital lamellar cataract, Santhiya
et al. (2002) identified a heterozygous missense mutation in the CRYGC
gene (R168W; 123680.0003).

In 6 affected individuals from a 4-generation Mexican family segregating
autosomal dominant nuclear cataract, Gonzalez-Huerta et al. (2007)
identified heterozygosity for the R168W CRYGC mutation, previously
identified in an Indian family with lamellar cataract (Santhiya et al.,
2002).

In a 4-generation Chinese family with autosomal dominant nuclear
cataract and microcornea, Zhang et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous
nonsense mutation in the CRYGC gene (W157X; 123680.0004) that segregated
fully with disease in the family.

In a 4-generation Chinese family segregating autosomal dominant nuclear
cataract and microcornea, Guo et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity
for a W157X mutation in the CRYGC gene (123680.0005) in affected family
members. The substitution was caused by a different nucleotide change
from that identified by Zhang et al. (2009), which also resulted in a
W157X substitution (123680.0004).

In an 8-year-old Chinese girl with congenital nuclear cataract, Li et
al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a missense mutation in the
CRYGC gene (G129C; 123680.0006). The mutation was present in her
affected mother and maternal grandfather, but was not found in
unaffected family members or in 50 controls. In a zebrafish model, the
G129C mutant recapitulated the human cataract phenotype.

ANIMAL MODEL

Li et al. (2012) generated zebrafish embryos overexpressing
gamma-C-crystallin G129C mutant mRNA and observed obvious vacuoles in
83% of the mutant embryos at 28 hours post fertilization (hpf), compared
to 4% of zebrafish embryos injected with wildtype CRYGC mRNA. At 2 days
postfertilization (dpf), the lens and eyes of G129C mutant embryos
appeared relatively smaller than those expressing wildtype CRYGC, and at
3 to 4 dpf, there was marked opacity and roughness in the lens core of
mutant zebrafish compared to wildtype. Apart from ocular abnormalities,
no other developmental defects were observed in injected embryos.
Histologic examination demonstrated that lens fiber cell nuclei were
still present at 3 dpf and 4 dpf, indicating incomplete denucleation. In
situ hybridization revealed that 2 lens markers, CX23 and LIM2.3, were
significantly downregulated at 28 hpf in mutant embryos compared to
wildtype.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CATARACT 2, COPPOCK-LIKE
CRYGC, THR5PRO

In the original family diagnosed with Coppock-like cataract (CTRCT2;
604307) and shown to be linked to the gamma-crystallin gene family on
chromosome 2q, Heon et al. (1999) identified an A-to-C transversion in
exon 2 (nucleotide 225) of the CRYGC gene, resulting in a thr5-to-pro
substitution. Brakenhoff et al. (1994) had suggested that reactivation
of the CRYG5 (or crystallin-gamma-E pseudogene; 123660) and concomitant
overexpression of the gamma-crystallin fragment may be the cause of
Coppock-like cataract. However, the findings of Heon et al. (1999)
suggested that the reported sequence changes in the CRYG5 promoter
region are not causally related to cataract.

Fu and Liang (2003) observed that gamma-C-crystallin carrying the T5P
mutation had decreased interactions with wildtype gamma-C-crystallin and
alpha-A-, alpha-B-, and beta-B2-crystallins. Interactions between T5P
mutants themselves were unchanged versus wildtype gamma-C-crystallins,
indicating that homogeneous interaction sites or domains differ from
those used in heterogeneous interactions.

.0002
CATARACT 2, ZONULAR PULVERULENT
CRYGC, 5-BP DUP, NT226

In affected members of a family with autosomal dominant variable zonular
pulverulent cataract (CTRCT2; 604307), Ren et al. (2000) found a
heterozygous 5-bp duplication in exon 2 of the CRYGC gene. The
duplicated sequence was GCGGC, located between nucleotides 220 and 230
of the cDNA. Affected persons were heterozygous. The range of severity
of cataract in this kindred varied from a subtle unilateral zonular
pulverulent cataract not impairing visual function to dense bilateral
nuclear cataracts resulting in blindness. Detailed clinical findings of
affected individuals were previously reported by Scott et al. (1994).

.0003
CATARACT 2, MULTIPLE TYPES
CRYGC, ARG168TRP

In a mother and 2 children with congenital lamellar cataract (CTRCT2;
604307), Santhiya et al. (2002) observed a 502C-T transition in exon 3
of the CRYGC gene, leading to an arg168-to-trp (R168W) amino acid
change. Although there was consanguinity in the family, the mutation was
present in heterozygous state in the family of Indian descent.

In 6 affected individuals from a 4-generation Mexican family segregating
autosomal dominant nuclear cataract, Gonzalez-Huerta et al. (2007)
identified heterozygosity for the R168W in the CRYGC gene. The mutation
was not found in unaffected family members or in 170 controls.

.0004
CATARACT 2, NUCLEAR, WITH MICROCORNEA
CRYGC, TRP157TER, 470G-A

In affected members of a 4-generation Chinese family with autosomal
dominant nuclear cataract and microcornea (CTRCT2; 604307), Zhang et al.
(2009) identified heterozygosity for a c.470G-A transition in exon 3 of
the CRYGC gene, resulting in a trp157-to-ter (W157X) substitution at a
highly conserved residue. The mutation was not found in unaffected
family members or in 100 control individuals. Also see 123680.0005.

.0005
CATARACT 2, NUCLEAR, WITH MICROCORNEA
CRYGC, TRP157TER, 471G-A

In affected members of a 4-generation Chinese family segregating
autosomal dominant nuclear cataract and microcornea (CTRCT2; 604307),
Guo et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a c.471G-A transition in
exon 3 of the CRYGC gene, resulting in a W157X substitution. The
mutation was not found in unaffected family members or in 100 ethnically
matched controls. Also see 123680.0004.

.0006
CATARACT 2, NUCLEAR
CRYGC, GLY129CYS

In affected members of a 3-generation Chinese family with nuclear
cataract (CTRCT2; 604307), Li et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity
for a c.385G-T transversion in exon 3 of the CRYGC gene, resulting in a
gly129-to-cys (G129C) substitution at a highly conserved residue. The
mutation was not found in unaffected family members or in 50 controls.
In a zebrafish model, the G129C mutant recapitulated the human cataract
phenotype. Molecular modeling and spectroscopic studies indicated that
the mutation impairs the tertiary structure of the protein by modifying
the H-bonding network in the C-terminal domain. The G129C mutant caused
a dramatic decrease in the thermal stability of gamma-C-crystallin as
well as a significant increase in the propensity for aggregation when
subject to high concentrations, heat, and UV-irradiation stresses.

REFERENCE 1. Bloemendal, H.; de Jong, W.; Jaenicke, R.; Lubsen, N. H.; Slingsby,
C.; Tardieu, A.: Ageing and vision: structure, stability and function
of lens crystallins. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 86: 407-485, 2004.

2. Brakenhoff, R. H.; Henskens, H. A. M.; van Rossum, M. W. P. C.;
Lubsen, N. H.; Schoenmakers, J. G. G.: Activation of the gamma-E-crystallin
pseudogene in the human hereditary Coppock-like cataract. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 3: 279-283, 1994.

3. den Dunnen, J. T.; Moormann, R. J. M.; Cremers, F. P. M.; Schoenmakers,
J. G. G.: Two human gamma-crystallin genes are linked and riddled
with Alu-repeats. Gene 38: 197-204, 1985.

4. Fu, L.; Liang, J. J.-N.: Detection of protein-protein interactions
among lens crystallins in a mammalian two-hybrid system assay. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 4255-4260, 2002.

5. Fu, L.; Liang, J. J.-N.: Alteration of protein-protein interactions
of congenital cataract crystallin mutants. Invest. Ophthal. Vis.
Sci. 44: 1155-1159, 2003.

6. Gonzalez-Huerta, L. M.; Messina-Baas, O. M.; Cuevas-Covarrubias,
S. A.: A family with autosomal dominant primary congenital cataract
associated with a CRYGC mutation: evidence of clinical heterogeneity. Molec.
Vis. 13: 1333-1338, 2007.

7. Guo, Y.; Su, D.; Li, Q.; Yang, Z.; Ma, Z.; Ma, X.; Zhu, S.: A
nonsense mutation of CRYGC associated with autosomal dominant congenital
nuclear cataracts and microcornea in a Chinese pedigree. Molec. Vis. 18:
1874-1880, 2012.

8. Harman, N. B.: Ten pedigrees of congenital and infantile cataract;
lamellar, coralliform, discoid, and posterior polar with microphthalmia. Trans.
Ophthal. Soc. U.K. 30: 251-274, 1910.

9. Heon, E.; Priston, M.; Schorderet, D. F.; Billingsley, G. D.; Girard,
P. O.; Lubsen, N.; Munier, F. L.: The gamma-crystallins and human
cataracts: a puzzle made clearer. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65: 1261-1267,
1999. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 66: 753 only, 2000.

10. Li, X.-Q.; Cai, H.-C.; Zhou, S.-Y.; Yang, J.-H.; Xi, Y.-B.; Gao,
X.-B.; Zhao, W.-J.; Li, P.; Zhao, G.-Y.; Tong, Y.; Bao, F.-C.; Ma.,
Y.; Wang, S.; Yan, Y.-B.; Lu, C.-L.; Ma, X.: A novel mutation impairing
the tertiary structure and stability of gamma C-crystallin (CRYGC)
leads to cataract formation in humans and zebrafish lens. Hum. Mutat. 33:
391-401, 2012.

11. Lubsen, N. H.; Renwick, J. H.; Tsui, L.-C.; Breitman, M. L.; Schoenmakers,
J. G. G.: A locus for a human hereditary cataract is closely linked
to the gamma-crystallin gene family. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 489-492,
1987.

12. Ren, Z.; Li, A.; Shastry, B. S.; Padma, T.; Ayyagari, R.; Scott,
M. H.; Parks, M. M.; Kaiser-Kupfer, M. I.; Hejtmancik, J. F.: A 5-base
insertion in the gamma-C-crystallin gene is associated with autosomal
dominant variable zonular pulverulent cataract. Hum. Genet. 106:
531-537, 2000.

13. Santhiya, S. T.; Manohar, M. S.; Rawlley, D.; Vijayalakshmi, P.;
Namperumalsamy, P.; Gopinath, P. M.; Loster, J.; Graw, J.: Novel
mutations in the gamma-crystallin genes cause autosomal dominant congenital
cataracts. J. Med. Genet. 39: 352-358, 2002.

14. Scott, M. H.; Hejtmancik, J. F.; Wozencraft, L. A.; Reuter, L.
M.; Parks, M. M.; Kaiser-Kupfer, M. I.: Autosomal dominant congenital
cataract: interocular phenotypic variability. Ophthalmology 101:
866-871, 1994.

15. Shiloh, Y.; Donlon, T.; Bruns, G.; Breitman, M. L.; Tsui, L.-C.
: Assignment of the human gamma-crystallin gene cluster (CRYG) to
the long arm of chromosome 2, region q33-36. Hum. Genet. 73: 17-19,
1986.

16. Zhang, L.; Fu, S.; Ou, Y.; Zhao, T.; Su, Y.; Liu, P.: A novel
nonsense mutation in CRYGC is associated with autosomal dominant congenital
nuclear cataracts and microcornea. Molec. Vis. 15: 276-282, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/15/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/26/2013
Jane Kelly - updated: 3/5/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/30/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/15/1999
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 3/13/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 10/15/2013
carol: 4/26/2013
carol: 9/5/2012
mgross: 3/17/2004
alopez: 3/5/2004
cwells: 12/30/2003
mcapotos: 12/21/2001
mcapotos: 7/20/2000
mcapotos: 6/28/2000
terry: 6/12/2000
mgross: 11/23/1999
mgross: 11/22/1999
terry: 11/15/1999
carol: 8/27/1998
alopez: 4/13/1998
mark: 3/13/1997
mark: 12/26/1996
carol: 4/12/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/26/1989
marie: 3/25/1988
reenie: 6/4/1986

606278	TITLE *606278 F-BOX AND WD40 DOMAIN PROTEIN 7; FBXW7
;;FBW7;;
FBXW6; FBW6;;
FBXO30; FBX30;;
ARCHIPELAGO, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; AGO;;
CDC4, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;;
SEL10, C. ELEGANS, HOMOLOG OF; SEL10
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Archipelago is an F-box protein with 7 tandem WD (tryptophan-aspartic
acid) repeats. It binds directly to cyclin E (123837) and is thought to
target it for ubiquitin-mediated degradation.

CLONING

Moberg et al. (2001) identified the 'archipelago' gene (ago) in a screen
for Drosophila mutants that display increased cell proliferation. They
demonstrated that within the C-terminal region, the ago protein is most
similar to that encoded by an EST designated FLJ11071, which they
renamed 'human AGO.' The human AGO gene has 2 splice variants,
designated alpha and beta, of 707 and 627 amino acids, respectively. The
alpha and beta forms differ only in the N termini and thus are identical
in the putative functional domain containing the F box and 7 WD
(tryptophan-aspartic acid) repeats. Drosophila and human AGO are 78%
identical.

Strohmaier et al. (2001) cloned AGO as CDC4 and found that it has 2
isoforms, one of 110 kD and the other of 69 kD. They found by Northern
blot analysis that CDC4 is expressed in most, if not all, tissues as a
predominant mRNA species of about 5.5 kb. However, brain and skeletal
muscle strongly express a 4-kb mRNA as the predominant form. That CDC4
is expressed at high levels in nonproliferating tissues suggests a
function in addition to turnover of cyclin E (123837), because cyclin E
expression should be limited to tissues undergoing cell division.

By searching EST databases for homologs of C. elegans Sel10, Gupta-Rossi
et al. (2001) identified mouse and human FBXW7, which they called SEL10.
The deduced mouse and human proteins share more than 99% identity, and
their WD40 domains differ at only 2 amino acids. Human SEL10 shares 48%
identity with C. elegans Sel10.

Maruyama et al. (2001) cloned 2 splice variants of mouse Fbxw7, which
they called Fbxw6. The variants differ only in their 3-prime UTRs and
encode a 629-amino acid protein. Northern blot analysis detected
abundant expression of Fbxw7 in mouse brain, heart, and testis, with
lower expression in liver, lung, and kidney. Immunofluorescence analysis
of transfected COS-7 cells localized Fbxw7 to the endoplasmic reticulum
and Golgi apparatus.

Jin et al., (2004) reported that the beta form of FBXW7 contains an
N-terminal transmembrane domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Moberg et al. (2001) demonstrated that archipelago mutant cells have
persistently elevated levels of cyclin E protein without increased
levels of cyclin E RNA. They are underrepresented in G1 fractions and
continue to proliferate when their wildtype neighbors become quiescent.
The archipelago protein binds directly to cyclin E and is thought to
target it for ubiquitin-mediated degradation.

In C. elegans, Sel10 is a negative regulator of Notch (see NOTCH1;
190198) signaling. Gupta-Rossi et al. (2001) showed that mouse Sel10
bound to the C-terminal region of Notch1. A dominant-negative form of
Sel10 lacking the F-box stabilized Notch1 and enhanced its
transcriptional activity, but it had no effect on inactive
membrane-anchored forms of Notch1. Sel10 binding to nuclear Notch1
required Notch1 hyperphosphorylation. Gupta-Rossi et al. (2001)
concluded that SEL10 is involved in ending NOTCH signaling by
ubiquitin-proteasome-mediated degradation of active, phosphorylated
NOTCH1 in the nucleus.

Oberg et al. (2001) showed that human SEL10 ubiquitinated murine Notch1,
and that this ubiquitination required the C-terminal region of the
Notch1 intracellular domain, including the PEST domain. In the presence
of a proteasome inhibitor, the amount of ubiquitinated Notch1
intracellular domain increased, and this accumulation was accompanied by
decreased activation of the Hes1 (139605) promoter, suggesting that
ubiquitinated Notch1 intracellular domain is a less potent
transactivator. SEL10 itself was ubiquitinated and degraded by the
proteasome.

Using coimmunoprecipitation analysis, Maruyama et al. (2001) showed that
mouse Fbxw7 interacted with human SKP1 (SKP1A; 601434) and CUL1 (603134)
in transfected human embryonic kidney cells. The results indicated that
FBXW7 is a component of the SCF ubiquitin ligase complex.

Staropoli et al. (2003) demonstrated that parkin (602544) associates
with the F-box proteins FBXW7 and CUL1 in a distinct ubiquitin ligase
complex. FBXW7 serves to target the ligase activity to cyclin E, a
protein previously implicated in the regulation of neuronal apoptosis.
In cells transfected with the parkin T240R mutation (602544.0003),
parkin deficiency potentiated the accumulation of cyclin E in cultured
postmitotic neurons exposed to the glutamatergic excitotoxin kainate and
promoted their apoptosis. Furthermore, parkin overexpression attenuated
cyclin E accumulation in toxin-treated neurons and protected them from
apoptosis.

Welcker et al. (2004) found that FBXW7 promoted proteasome-dependent MYC
(190080) turnover in vivo and MYC ubiquitination in vitro.
Phosphorylation of MYC on thr58 by GSK3 (see 606784) regulated the
binding of FBXW7 to MYC and FBXW7-mediated MYC ubiquitination and
degradation. Because FBXW7 mediates the degradation of cyclin E, NOTCH,
JUN (165160), and MYC, Welcker et al. (2004) proposed that loss of FBXW7
is likely to have profound effects on cell proliferation during
tumorigenesis.

Kishi et al. (2007) stated that RCN proteins (see RCN1; 602735) are
highly conserved and, depending on their phosphorylation status, either
stimulate or inhibit calcineurin (see PPP3CA; 114105), a
Ca(2+)-dependent protein phosphatase that couples Ca(2+) signals to
cellular responses. In yeast, Kishi et al. (2007) found that Cdc4 bound
directly to phosphorylated Rcn1, resulting in Rcn1 ubiquitination and
subsequent degradation and relief of calcineurin inhibition.

Mao et al. (2008) demonstrated that mTOR (601231) is targeted for
ubiquitination and consequent degradation by binding to the tumor
suppressor protein FBXW7. Human breast cancer cell lines and primary
tumors showed a reciprocal relation between loss of FBXW7 and deletion
or mutation of PTEN (601728), which also activates mTOR. Tumor cell
lines harboring deletions or mutations in FBXW7 are particularly
sensitive to rapamycin treatment, suggesting to Mao et al. (2008) that
loss of FBXW7 may be a biomarker for human cancers susceptible to
treatment with inhibitors of the mTOR pathway.

Pierce et al. (2009) developed a quantitative framework based on product
distribution that predicted that the really interesting new gene (RING)
E3 enzymes SCF(Cdc4) and SCF-beta-TrCP (603482) work with the E2 Cdc34
(116948) to build polyubiquitin chains on substrates by sequential
transfers of single ubiquitins. Measurements with millisecond time
resolution directly demonstrated that substrate polyubiquitylation
proceeds sequentially. Pierce et al. (2009) concluded that their results
presented an unprecedented glimpse into the mechanism of RING ubiquitin
ligases and illuminated the quantitative parameters that underlie the
rate and pattern of ubiquitin chain assembly.

Inuzuka et al. (2011) demonstrated that the E3 ubiquitin ligase SCF-FBW7
(a SKP1-cullin-1-F-box complex that contains FBW7 as the F-box protein)
governs cellular apoptosis by targeting MCL1 (159552), a prosurvival
BCL2 (151430) family member, for ubiquitylation and destruction in a
manner that depends on phosphorylation by glycogen synthase kinase-3
(see 605004). Human T-ALL cell lines showed a close relationship between
FBW7 loss and MCL1 overexpression. Correspondingly, T-ALL cell lines
with defective FBW7 are particularly sensitive to the multikinase
inhibitor sorafenib but resistant to the BCL2 antagonist ABT-737. On the
genetic level, FBW7 reconstitution or MCL1 depletion restores
sensitivity to ABT-737, establishing MCL1 as a therapeutically relevant
bypass survival mechanism that enables FBW7-deficient cells to evade
apoptosis.

Wertz et al. (2011) demonstrated that the prosurvival protein MCL1 is a
crucial regulator of apoptosis triggered by antitubulin
chemotherapeutics. During mitotic arrest, MCL1 protein levels decline
markedly, through a posttranslational mechanism, potentiating cell
death. Phosphorylation of MCL1 directs its interaction with the tumor
suppressor protein FBW7, which is the substrate-binding component of a
ubiquitin ligase complex. The polyubiquitylation of MCL1 then targets it
for proteasomal degradation. The degradation of MCL1 was blocked in
patient-derived tumor cells that lacked FBW7 or had loss-of-function
mutations in FBW7, conferring resistance to antitubulin agents and
promoting chemotherapeutic-induced polyploidy. Additionally, primary
tumor samples were enriched for FBW7 inactivation and elevated MCL1
levels, underscoring the prominent roles of these proteins in
oncogenesis. Wertz et al. (2011) concluded that their findings suggested
that profiling the FBW7 and MCL1 status of tumors, in terms of protein
levels, mRNA levels, and genetic status, could be useful to predict the
response of patients to antitubulin chemotherapeutics.

MAPPING

Jin et al. (2004) reported that the FBXW7 gene maps to chromosome 4q31.3
and the mouse Fbxw7 gene maps to chromosome 3E3.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Moberg et al. (2001) detected mutations in the AGO gene in 4 cancer cell
lines, including 3 of 10 derived from ovarian carcinomas (see 167000).
The cell line derived from T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia,
CCRF-CEM, contains an arginine-to-cysteine change within the third WD
repeat at codon 385. The SK-OV3 ovarian cancer cell line contains an
arginine-to-leucine change within the fourth WD repeat at codon 425. The
mutation in the ovarian cell line MDAH 2774 is a G-to-A transition that
disrupts the splice donor acceptor site of exon 5, resulting in the use
of an adventitious splice acceptor site 37 nucleotides downstream. The
subsequent deletion in the mRNA shifts the reading frame at codon 208
and adds 41 incorrect amino acids after this codon prior to termination.
The protein was predicted to lack part of the F box and all of the WD
repeats. Moberg et al. (2001) suggested that these heterozygous
mutations in human AGO may give cells proliferative advantage. More
significantly, the ovarian cell line OV1063 is homozygous for a
truncating mutation (glu 40 to ter) close to the N terminus of the beta
form that most probably inactivates this isoform. Moberg et al. (2001)
concluded that this gene might represent an important mutational target
in ovarian cancer. Almost 20% of ovarian cancers express increased
levels of cyclin E mRNA, often the result of gene amplification (Courjal
et al., 1996).

Strohmaier et al. (2001) identified a mutation in the CDC4 gene in the
breast cancer (see 114480) cell line SUM149PT, which expresses high
levels of cyclin E. The mutation was an internal genomic duplication of
exons 8 and 9 separated by 11 basepairs of intronic sequence. This
mutation was predicted to result in chain termination, eliminating the
last 4 of 7 WD40 repeats and rendering the resulting polypeptide
nonfunctional. In vitro translation produced a truncated product that
did not bind to phosphorylated cyclin E. Strohmaier et al. (2001)
suggested that CDC4 may be a tumor suppressor associated with some types
of malignancy, including breast cancer.

Rajagopalan et al. (2004) reported the identification of mutations in
the CDC4 gene in both human colorectal cancers (see 114500) and their
precursor lesions. They demonstrated that genetic inactivation of CDC4,
by means of targeted disruption of the gene in karyotypically stable
colorectal cancer cells, results in a phenotype associated with
micronuclei and chromosomal instability. This phenotype can be traced to
a defect in the execution of metaphase and subsequent transmission of
chromosomes, and is dependent on cyclin E, a protein that is regulated
by CDC4. To determine whether CDC4 was genetically altered, its coding
exons were amplified by PCR from 190 colorectal tumors and sequenced.
Somatic mutations in the CDC4 gene were found in 22 of the 190 samples.
Nonsense mutations at codons 224, 278, 303, 393, and 446 were found in 8
tumors. Six of the tumors had biallelic inactivation. The 22 cancers
with CDC4 mutations represented all stages of colorectal cancer. To
determine the point in tumorigenesis at which the mutations occurred,
Rajagopalan et al. (2004) sequenced 58 colorectal adenomas and
identified 4 mutations, 2 of which occurred in adenomas less than 1 cm
in diameter; such lesions had been shown to progress to malignancy only
after 10 to 20 years. Rajagopalan et al. (2004) noted that 18 of the 19
missense mutations identified occurred at the surface of the 8-bladed
beta-propeller structure produced by the WD40 repeats. They concluded
that their data suggested that chromosomal instability is caused by
specific genetic alterations in a large fraction of human cancers and
can occur before malignant conversion.

To explore the genetic origins of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(see 275355), Agrawal et al. (2011) used whole-exome sequencing and gene
copy analyses to study 32 primary tumors. Tumors from patients with a
history of tobacco use had more mutations than did tumors from patients
who did not use tobacco, and tumors that were negative for human
papillomavirus (HPV) had more mutations than did HPV-positive tumors.
Six of the genes that were mutated in multiple tumors were assessed in
up to 88 additional HNSCCs. Among 120 primary HNSCCs, Agrawal et al.
(2011) identified 6 mutations in FBXW7. Two were indels and the other 4
were missense; none was homozygous. The FBXW7 mutations observed were in
a hotspot known to block the degradation of active NOTCH1. Agrawal et
al. (2011) noted that FBXW7 mutations had not been observed in HNSCC,
although they are frequent in other tumor types.

Le Gallo et al. (2012) used whole-exome sequencing to comprehensively
search for somatic mutations in 13 primary serous endometrial tumors
(see 608089), and subsequently resequenced 18 genes that were mutated in
more than 1 tumor and/or were components of an enriched functional
grouping from 40 additional serous tumors. Le Gallo et al. (2012)
identified a high frequency (29%) of somatic mutation in the FBXW7 gene.

ANIMAL MODEL

Tetzlaff et al. (2004) found that Fbw7-null mice died around 10.5 days
postcoitus due to deficiencies in hematopoietic and vascular development
and heart chamber maturation. The absence of Fbw7 resulted in elevated
levels of cyclin E, concurrent with inappropriate DNA replication in
placental giant trophoblast cells. Moreover, the levels of both Notch1
and Notch4 (164951) intracellular domains were elevated, leading to
elevated Hes1, Herp1 (HEY2; 604674), and Herp2 (HEY1; 602953) mRNA
transcription.

Mao et al. (2004) identified the mouse Fbxw7 gene in a mammalian genetic
screen for p53 (191170)-dependent genes involved in tumorigenesis.
Radiation-induced lymphomas from p53 +/- mice, but not those from p53
-/- mice, showed frequent loss of heterozygosity and a 10% mutation rate
of the Fbxw7 gene. Fbxw7 +/- mice had greater susceptibility to
radiation-induced tumorigenesis, but most tumors retained and expressed
the wildtype allele, indicating that Fbxw7 is a haploinsufficient tumor
suppressor gene. Loss of Fbxw7 altered the spectrum of tumors that
developed in p53-deficient mice to include a range of tumors in
epithelial tissues such as lung, liver, and ovary. Mouse embryo
fibroblasts from Fbxw7-deficient mice, or wildtype mouse cells
expressing Fbxw7 small interfering RNA, had higher levels of Aurora-A
kinase (603072), c-Jun (165160), and Notch4 (164951), but not of cyclin
E (123837). Mao et al. (2004) proposed that p53-dependent loss of Fbxw7
leads to genetic instability by mechanisms that might involve the
activation of Aurora-A, providing a rationale for the early occurrence
of these mutations in human cancers.

To assess the usefulness of mouse models in cancer gene discovery and
the extent of cross-species overlap in cancer-associated copy number
aberrations, Maser et al. (2007) engineered lymphoma-prone mice with
chromosomal instability. Along with targeted resequencing, their
comparative oncogenomic studies identified FBXW7 and PTEN (601728) to be
commonly deleted both in murine lymphomas and in human T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma (T-ALL). The murine cancers acquired
widespread recurrent amplifications and deletions targeting loci
syntenic to those not only in human T-ALL but also in diverse human
hematopoietic, mesenchymal, and epithelial tumors. These results
indicated that murine and human tumors experience common biologic
processes driven by orthologous genetic events in their malignant
evolution. Maser et al. (2007) concluded that the highly concordant
nature of genomic events encourages the use of genomically unstable
murine cancer models in the discovery of biologic driver events in the
human oncogenome.

Matsuoka et al. (2008) created mice with conditional inactivation of
Fbxw7 in bone marrow hematopoietic cells. Inactivation caused premature
depletion of hematopoietic cells due to active cell cycling and
p53-dependent apoptosis. Fbxw7 deletion also conferred a selective
advantage to cells with suppressed p53 function, eventually leading to
development of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Matsuoka et al.
(2008) concluded that FBXW7 functions as a fail-safe mechanism against
both premature hematopoietic stem cell loss and leukemogenesis.

REFERENCE 1. Agrawal, N.; Frederick, M. J.; Pickering, C. R.; Bettegowda, C.;
Chang, K.; Li, R. J.; Fakhry, C.; Xie, T.-X.; Zhang, J.; Wang, J.;
Zhang, N.; El-Naggar, A. K.; and 19 others: Exome sequencing of
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma reveals inactivating mutations
in NOTCH1. Science 333: 1154-1157, 2011.

2. Courjal, F.; Louason, G.; Speiser, P.; Katsaros, D.; Zeillinger,
R.; Theillet, C.: Cyclin gene amplification and overexpression in
breast and ovarian cancers: evidence for the selection of cyclin D1
in breast and cyclin E in ovarian tumors. Int. J. Cancer 69: 247-253,
1996.

3. Gupta-Rossi, N.; Le Bail, O.; Gonen, H.; Brou, C.; Logeat, F.;
Six, E.; Ciechanover, A.; Israel, A.: Functional interaction between
SEL-10, an F-box protein, and the nuclear form of activated Notch1
receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 34371-34378, 2001.

4. Inuzuka, H.; Shaik, S.; Onoyama, I.; Gao, D.; Tseng, A.; Maser,
R. S.; Zhai, B.; Wan, L.; Gutierrez, A.; Lau, A. W.; Xiao, Y.; Christie,
A. L.; Aster, J.; Settleman, J.; Gygi, S. P.; Kung, A. L.; Look, T.;
Nakayama, K. I.; DePinho, R. A.; Wei, W.: SCF(FBW7) regulates cellular
apoptosis by targeting MCL1 for ubiquitylation and destruction. Nature 471:
104-109, 2011.

5. Jin, J.; Cardozo, T.; Lovering, R. C.; Elledge, S. J.; Pagano,
M.; Harper, J. W.: Systematic analysis and nomenclature of mammalian
F-box proteins. Genes Dev. 18: 2573-2580, 2004.

6. Kishi, T.; Ikeda, A.; Nagao, R.; Koyama, N.: The SCF(Cdc4) ubiquitin
ligase regulates calcineurin signaling through degradation of phosphorylated
Rcn1, an inhibitor of calcineurin. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 17418-17423,
2007.

7. Le Gallo, M.; O'Hara, A. J.; Rudd, M. L.; Urick, M. E.; Hansen,
N. F.; O'Neil, N. J.; Price, J. C.; Zhang, S.; England, B. M.; Godwin,
A. K.; Sgroi, D. C.; NIH Intramural Sequencing Center (NISC) Comparative
Sequencing Program; Hieter, P.; Mullikan, J. C.; Merino, M. J.; Bell,
D. W.: Exome sequencing of serous endometrial tumors identifies recurrent
somatic mutations in chromatin-remodeling and ubiquitin ligase complex
genes. Nature Genet. 44: 1310-1315, 2012.

8. Mao, J.-H.; Kim, I.-J.; Wu, D.; Climent, J.; Kang, H. C.; DelRosario,
R.; Balmain, A.: FBXW7 targets mTOR for degradation and cooperates
with PTEN in tumor suppression. Science 321: 1499-1502, 2008.

9. Mao, J.-H.; Perez-Iosada, J.; Wu, D.; DelRosario, R.; Tsunematsu,
R.; Nakayama, K. I.; Brown, K.; Bryson, S.; Balmain, A.: Fbxw7/Cdc4
is a p53-dependent, haploinsufficient tumour suppressor gene. Nature 432:
775-779, 2004.

10. Maruyama, S.; Hatakeyama, S.; Nakayama, K.; Ishida, N.; Kawakami,
K.; Nakayama, K.-I.: Characterization of a mouse gene (Fbxw6) that
encodes a homologue of Caenorhabditis elegans SEL-10. Genomics 78:
214-222, 2001.

11. Maser, R. S.; Choudhury, B.; Campbell, P. J.; Feng, B.; Wong,
K.-K.; Protopopov, A.; O'Neil, J.; Gutierrez, A.; Ivanova, E.; Perna,
I.; Lin, E.; Mani, V.; and 24 others: Chromosomally unstable mouse
tumours have genomic alterations similar to diverse human cancers. Nature 447:
966-971, 2007.

12. Matsuoka, S.; Oike, Y.; Onoyama, I.; Iwama, A.; Arai, F.; Takubo,
K.; Mashimo, Y.; Oguro, H.; Nitta, E.; Ito, K.; Miyamoto, K.; Yoshiwara,
H.; and 12 others: Fbxw7 acts as a critical fail-safe against premature
loss of hematopoietic stem cells and development of T-ALL. Genes
Dev. 22: 986-991, 2008.

13. Moberg, K. H.; Bell, D. W.; Wahrer, D. C. R.; Haber, D. A.; Hariharan,
I. K.: Archipelago regulates cyclin E levels in Drosophila and is
mutated in human cancer cell lines. Nature 413: 311-316, 2001.

14. Oberg, C.; Li, J.; Pauley, A.; Wolf, E.; Gurney, M.; Lendahl,
U.: The Notch intracellular domain is ubiquitinated and negatively
regulated by the mammalian Sel-10 homolog. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 35847-35853,
2001.

15. Pierce, N. W.; Kleiger, G.; Shan, S.; Deshaies, R. J.: Detection
of sequential polyubiquitylation on a millisecond timescale. Nature 462:
615-619, 2009.

16. Rajagopalan, H.; Jallepalli, P. V.; Rago, C.; Velculescu, V. E.;
Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.; Lengauer, C.: Inactivation of hCDC4
can cause chromosomal instability. Nature 428: 77-81, 2004.

17. Staropoli, J. F.; McDermott, C.; Martinat, C.; Schulman, B.; Demireva,
E.; Abeliovich, A.: Parkin is a component of an SCF-like ubiquitin
ligase complex and protects postmitotic neurons from kainate excitotoxicity. Neuron 37:
735-749, 2003.

18. Strohmaier, H.; Spruck, C. H.; Kaiser, P.; Won, K.-A.; Sangfelt,
O.; Reed, S. I.: Human F-box protein hCdc4 targets cyclin E for proteolysis
and is mutated in a breast cancer cell line. Nature 413: 316-322,
2001.

19. Tetzlaff, M. T.; Yu, W.; Li, M.; Zhang, P.; Finegold, M.; Mahon,
K.; Harper, J. W.; Schwartz, R. J.; Elledge, S. J.: Defective cardiovascular
development and elevated cyclin E and Notch proteins in mice lacking
the Fbw7 F-box protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 3338-3345, 2004.

20. Welcker, M.; Orian, A.; Jin, J.; Grim, J. E.; Harper, J. W.; Eisenman,
R. N.; Clurman, B. E.: The Fbw7 tumor suppressor regulates glycogen
synthase kinase 3 phosphorylation-dependent c-Myc protein degradation. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 9085-9090, 2004. Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 103: 504 only, 2006.

21. Wertz, I. E.; Kusam, S.; Lam, C.; Okamoto, T.; Sandoval, W.; Anderson,
D. J.; Helgason, E.; Ernst, J. A.; Eby, M.; Liu, J.; Belmont, L. D.;
Kaminker, J. S.; and 15 others: Sensitivity to antitubulin chemotherapeutics
is regulated by MCL1 and FBW7. Nature 471: 110-114, 2011. Note:
Erratum: Nature 475: 122 only, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 02/07/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/21/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/10/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/6/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/29/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/20/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/27/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/19/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/10/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/30/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/27/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/8/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/11/2003
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 12/19/2001

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 9/24/2001

EDITED alopez: 02/07/2013
terry: 10/5/2012
terry: 8/6/2012
alopez: 9/23/2011
terry: 9/21/2011
alopez: 9/8/2011
alopez: 6/20/2011
terry: 6/10/2011
alopez: 1/12/2010
terry: 1/6/2010
alopez: 9/30/2008
terry: 9/29/2008
mgross: 8/21/2008
terry: 8/20/2008
mgross: 6/5/2008
terry: 5/27/2008
alopez: 7/24/2007
terry: 4/6/2005
wwang: 2/3/2005
wwang: 2/1/2005
wwang: 1/27/2005
terry: 1/19/2005
mgross: 12/10/2004
mgross: 11/30/2004
mgross: 10/27/2004
tkritzer: 3/9/2004
terry: 3/8/2004
carol: 7/14/2003
ckniffin: 7/11/2003
alopez: 1/7/2002
joanna: 12/19/2001
alopez: 9/24/2001

157132	TITLE *157132 MICROTUBULE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 4; MAP4
DESCRIPTION Chapin and Bulinski (1991) used a polyclonal antiserum raised against a
HeLa cell microtubule-associated protein of M(r) 210,000 (210-kD MAP or
MAP4), an abundant nonneuronal MAP, to isolate cDNA clones from a human
fetal brain lambda gt11 cDNA expression library. They found that this,
the major human nonneuronal MAP, resembles 2 neuronal MAPs in its
microtubule-binding domain, while most of the molecule has sequences,
and presumably functions, distinct from those of the neuronal MAPs
(e.g., 157130).

West et al. (1991) reported the structure of MAP4 on the basis of
comparisons of the human, mouse, and bovine sequences.

Chapin et al. (1995) isolated clones encoding alternatively spliced
forms of MAP4. One isoform is similar to an isoform of tau (157140) in
structure. The authors mapped human MAP4 gene to 3p21 by fluorescence in
situ hybridization. Mangan and Olmsted (1996) demonstrated that the
murine homolog is located on mouse chromosome 9.

REFERENCE 1. Chapin, S. J.; Bulinski, J. C.: Non-neuronal 210 x 10(3) M(r)
microtubule-associated protein (MAP4) contains a domain homologous
to the microtubule-binding domains of neuronal MAP2 and tau. J. Cell
Sci. 98: 27-36, 1991.

2. Chapin, S. J.; Lue, C.-M.; Yu, M. T.; Bulinski, J. C.: Differential
expression of alternatively spliced forms of MAP4: a repertoire of
structurally different microtubule-binding domains. Biochemistry 34:
2289-2301, 1995.

3. Mangan, M. E.; Olmsted, J. B.: The gene for microtubule-associated
protein 4 (Mtap4) maps to the distal region of mouse chromosome 9. Mammalian
Genome 7: 918-925, 1996.

4. West, R. R.; Tenbarge, K. M.; Olmsted, J. B.: A model for microtubule-associated
protein 4 structure: domains defined by comparisons of human, mouse,
and bovine sequences. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 21886-21896, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 05/07/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/16/1992

EDITED mark: 05/07/1997
terry: 5/2/1997
carol: 5/16/1994
carol: 1/15/1993
carol: 7/16/1992

612768	TITLE *612768 FOLLICULIN-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2; FNIP2
;;FNIP1-LIKE PROTEIN; FNIPL;;
METHYLGUANINE-INDUCED APOPTOSIS 1; MAPO1;;
KIAA1450
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned FNIP2, which they designated
KIAA1450. The deduced protein contains 1,139 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA
detected low expression in adult and fetal liver, adult and fetal whole
brain, and most individual adult brain regions examined. Very low
expression was detected in all other adult tissues examined.

By searching databases for sequences similar to FNIP1 (610594), Hasumi
et al. (2008) identified FNIP2. The deduced 1,114-amino acid protein
shares 49% identity with FNIP1. Quantitative real-time PCR detected
variable FNIP2 expression in most tissues examined, with highest
expression in fat, liver, pancreas, and salivary gland. Epitope-tagged
FNIP2 localized in the cytoplasm in a reticular pattern.

Using Northern blot analysis, Takagi et al. (2008) detected FNIPL
transcripts of 7.5 and 6.5 kb. Expression was highest in heart, followed
by placenta and liver. Moderate expression was detected in lung, small
intestine, kidney, and brain.

Komori et al. (2009) cloned mouse Fnip2, which they called Mapo1. The
deduced mouse protein contains 1,138 amino acids. MAPO1 orthologs were
identified in multicellular organisms from humans to nematode, but not
in microorganisms, including budding and fission yeasts.
Fluorescence-tagged mouse and human MAPO1 proteins were expressed in the
cytoplasm of transfected mouse fibroblasts and HeLa cells, respectively.

GENE FUNCTION

By coimmunoprecipitating endogenous or epitope-tagged proteins from
HEK293 cells, Hasumi et al. (2008) showed that FNIP2 resided in a
complex with FNIP1, folliculin (FLCN; 607273), and AMP-activated protein
kinase (AMPK; see 602739). They also showed that FNIP1 and FNIP2 were
able to form homo- and heterodimers.

Takagi et al. (2008) showed that FNIP2 bound directly to FLCN and
appeared to bind more tightly to phosphorylated FLCN. Truncation
analysis revealed that FNIP2 and FLCN interacted via their C-terminal
regions. When expressed alone, FLCN localized to the nucleus, but when
coexpressed with FNIP1 or FNIP2, the coexpressed proteins localized to
the cytoplasm in a reticular pattern. Cytoplasmic retention of FLCN was
countered by C-terminal truncation of FNIP2. Downregulation of FLCN,
FNIP1, or FNIP2 via small interfering RNA resulted in decreased S6K1
(RPS6KB1; 608938) phosphorylation, suggesting that the FLCN complex
regulates S6K1 phosphorylation.

Using gene trap mutagenesis, Komori et al. (2009) showed that mutation
of the Mapo1 gene increased the tolerance of mouse fibroblasts to a
simple alkylating agent that produces O(6)-methylguanine. Mapo1 mutation
did not impair DNA mismatch damage detection and signaling, but caused a
defect in O(6)-methylguanine-induced apoptosis.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the FNIP2 gene
to chromosome 4. Takagi et al. (2008) stated that the FNIP2 gene maps to
chromosome 4q.

Komori et al. (2009) mapped the mouse Fnip2 gene to chromosome 3E3.

REFERENCE 1. Hasumi, H.; Baba, M.; Hong, S.-B.; Hasumi, Y.; Huang, Y.; Yao,
M.; Valera, V. A.; Linehan, W. M.; Schmidt, L. S.: Identification
and characterization of a novel folliculin-interacting protein FNIP2. Gene 415:
60-67, 2008.

2. Komori, K.; Takagi, Y.; Sanada, M.; Lim, T.-H.; Nakatsu, Y.; Tsuzuki,
T.; Sekiguchi, M.; Hidaka, M.: A novel protein, MAPO1, that functions
in apoptosis triggered by O(6)-methylguanine mispair in DNA. Oncogene 28:
1142-1150, 2009.

3. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 143-150, 2000.

4. Takagi, Y.; Kobayashi, T.; Shiono, M.; Wang, L.; Piao, X.; Sun,
G.; Zhang, D.; Abe, M.; Hagiwara, Y.; Takahashi, K.; Hino, O.: Interaction
of folliculin (Birt-Hogg-Dube gene product) with a novel Fnip1-like
(FnipL/Fnip2) protein. Oncogene 27: 5339-5347, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/1/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/28/2009

EDITED mgross: 03/02/2010
terry: 3/1/2010
mgross: 4/28/2009

603366	TITLE *603366 TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR RECEPTOR SUPERFAMILY, MEMBER 25; TNFRSF25
;;TNFR25;;
APO3;;
DEATH RECEPTOR 3; DR3;;
LYMPHOCYTE-ASSOCIATED RECEPTOR OF DEATH; LARD;;
TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR RECEPTOR SUPERFAMILY, MEMBER 12, FORMERLY; TNFRSF12,
FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Members of the mammalian tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) family
are cell-surface proteins that interact with a corresponding TNF-related
ligand family. The receptors share homology in the extracellular domain,
which contains 3 to 6 cysteine-rich pseudorepeats, but are generally not
related in their cytoplasmic regions. However, the intracellular domains
(ICDs) of TNFR family members TNFR1 (191190) and FAS/APO1/CD95 (134637),
which can activate apoptotic cell death, do have a region of homology in
an oligomerization interface known as the death domain. By screening
human fetal heart and lung libraries with oligonucleotides based on ESTs
that showed homology to the ICDs of TNFR1 and CD95, Marsters et al.
(1996) isolated cDNAs encoding a protein that they designated Apo3. The
predicted 417-amino acid Apo3 contains a signal sequence, an
extracellular domain with 4 cysteine-rich pseudorepeats, a transmembrane
domain, and an ICD. Like TNFR1 and CD95, the ICD of Apo3 contains a
death domain. Overall, Apo3 shares 29% and 23% protein sequence identity
with TNFR1 and CD95, respectively. The apparent molecular mass of Apo3
is 47 kD by SDS-PAGE. Northern blot analysis revealed that Apo3 was
expressed as an approximately 4-kb mRNA predominantly in spleen, thymus,
and peripheral blood lymphocytes. Lower levels of expression were
observed in small intestine, colon, fetal lung, and fetal kidney.
Additional larger transcripts were observed in some tissues.

Chinnaiyan et al. (1996), Kitson et al. (1996), and Screaton et al.
(1997) independently isolated APO3 cDNAs, designating the gene DR3
(death receptor-3), WSL1, and LARD (lymphocyte-associated receptor of
death), respectively. By Northern blot analysis, Chinnaiyan et al.
(1996) found that DR3 expression was restricted to tissues enriched in
lymphocytes, suggesting that DR3 plays a role in regulating lymphocyte
homeostasis.

Screaton et al. (1997) showed that alternative mRNA splicing yields
transcripts encoding at least 11 distinct LARD isoforms, most of which
are potentially secreted molecules. Naive B and T cells express very low
levels of the full-length, membrane-bound isoform, LARD1. Upon T-cell
activation, a programmed change in alternative splicing occurs so that
LARD1 predominates. LARD expression is downregulated in transformed
lymphocyte cell lines, leading Screaton et al. (1997) to speculate that
loss of LARD may be a key event in the development of lymphoid
malignancies, allowing the cells to escape from homeostatic processes
that limit lymphocyte proliferation.

GENE FUNCTION

Marsters et al. (1996) showed that ectopic expression of Apo3 in
mammalian cells triggered apoptosis and activated the transcription
factor NF-kappa-B (see 164011). They suggested that, like TNFR1, Apo3
may regulate distinct signaling pathways in different cellular contexts.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Kitson et al. (1996) determined that WSL1
formed homodimers and interacted with the TNFR1-associated molecule
TRADD (603500) and with the TNFR1 death domain.

Marsters et al. (1998) found that TNFSF12 (602695), which they called
APO3L, binds to DR3. However, using flow cytometry and binding analyses,
Kaptein et al. (2000) could not detect binding of, TNFSF12, which they
called TWEAK, or any other known TNF ligand to WSL1 (TNFRSF25). They
observed that cells devoid of WSL1 or cells from knockout mice lacking
Wsl1 were TWEAK responsive.

Using techniques similar to those of Marsters et al. (1998), Wiley et
al. (2001) could not reproduce their results showing a TWEAK-APO3
interaction. Wiley et al. (2001) identified TWEAKR (605914), a small
protein with a cysteine-rich motif and a TRAF (see TRAF5;
602356)-binding site, as the TWEAK receptor.

Using affinity chromatography, pull-down assays, and mass spectrometric
analysis on adenocarcinoma cell lines, Gout et al. (2006) showed that
E-selectin (SELE; 131210) bound DR3 on the cancer cells. Western blot
analysis revealed that the SELE-binding protein was recognized by
anti-DR3 antibodies. Anti-DR3 or knockdown of DR3 by small interfering
RNA decreased adhesion of colon cancer cells to SELE and to
SELE-expressing endothelial cells. Moreover, DR3 inhibition and
knockdown impaired transendothelial migration of adenocarcinoma cells
and blocked p38 (MAPK14; 600289) and ERK (see MAPK1; 176948) activation
by SELE. DR3 was expressed as high molecular mass isoforms in primary
human colon carcinomas, but not in normal colon tissue. SELE activation
of DR3 failed to induce apoptosis in colon cancer cells, except when ERK
was inhibited. Gout et al. (2006) concluded that SELE activation of DR3
on colon cancer cells triggers activation of p38 and ERK and confers
migration and survival advantages. They proposed that activation of DR3
by SELE acts as a switch that regulates metastasis by allowing colon
cancer cells to escape apoptosis.

Using T cells from Tradd -/- mice, Pobezinskaya et al. (2011)
demonstrated that the proliferative response of both Cd4 (186940) and
Cd8 (see 186910) T cells to Tl1a (TNFSF15; 604052) was dependent on
Tradd. Stimulation of MAP kinase signaling and activation of NF-kappa-B
in response to Tl1a were also dramatically reduced in Tradd -/- T cells.
Tradd was required for recruitment of Rip1 (RIPK1; 603453) and Traf2
(601895) to the Dr3 signaling complex and for ubiquitination of Rip1.
Pobezinskaya et al. (2011) concluded that TRADD is essential in TL1A-DR3
signaling.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Using comparative modeling in which the structural elements of the
primary sequence of DR3 were aligned with TNFs of known crystal
structure and amino acid substitutions were made, Borysenko et al.
(2005) showed that the DR3 extracellular domain contains 4 homologous
cysteine-rich domains (CRDs). They found that a DR3 mutation associated
with rheumatoid arthritis (180300), asp158 to gly (D158G), occurs in a
region critical for the integrity of ligand-receptor complexes at the
end of CRD3. Borysenko et al. (2005) proposed that this position in CRDs
may be a hotspot for mutations in TNFRSF family proteins.

GENE STRUCTURE

Screaton et al. (1997) reported that the LARD gene contains 10 exons.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Marsters et al. (1996) mapped the
Apo3 gene to 1p36.3. Grenet et al. (1998) reported that the DR3 locus is
tandemly duplicated, with the DR3L locus several megabases away on
1p36.3-p36.2. They noted that deletions and/or translocations of the
1p36 region have been associated with a number of human malignancies and
developmental defects, including neuroblastoma (256700). Using
fluorescence in situ hybridization, Grenet et al. (1998) found that both
DR3 and DR3L sequences were simultaneously deleted and/or translocated
in most neuroblastoma cell lines analyzed.

ANIMAL MODEL

By disrupting exon 1 of the Dr3 gene and replacing the entire coding
region, Wang et al. (2001) generated mice deficient in Dr3. The Dr3 -/-
mice had no developmental defects or early thymocyte developmental
defects. However, negative selection and anti-CD3-mediated cell death of
thymocytes were impaired in the Dr3-deficient mice. Positive selection
and superantigen-induced negative selection were normal. Wang et al.
(2001) concluded that DR3 has a nonredundant in vivo role in the removal
of self-reactive T cells in the thymus.

Using Dr3-deficient mice, Meylan et al. (2008) identified Dr3 as the
receptor responsible for Tl1a-induced T-cell costimulation and dendritic
cells as the likely source for Tl1a during T-cell activation. Dr3 was
not required for in vivo T-cell priming, for polarization into Th1, Th2,
or Th17 effector cell subtypes, or for effective control of Toxoplasma
gondii infection. However, it was required on T cells for
immunopathology, local T accumulation, and cytokine production in the
inflammatory disease models experimental autoimmune encepalomyelitis and
allergic lung inflammation. Meylan et al. (2008) proposed that DR3 may
be an attractive therapeutic target for T cell-mediated autoimmune and
allergic diseases.

Fang et al. (2008) found that antibody blockade of the Tnfr25 ligand
Tnf15 or expression of a Tnfr25 dominant-negative transgene inhibited
lung inflammation and the production of Th2 cytokines, such as Il13
(147683), in mice. The antibody was effective even when administered
days after airway antigen exposure. Mice deficient in natural killer T
(NKT) cells and resistant to allergic lung inflammation became
susceptible upon adoptive transfer of wildtype NKT cells, but not upon
transfer of dominant-negative Tnfr25 transgenic NKT cells. Fang et al.
(2008) concluded that the TNFR25/TNF15 pair provides an early signal for
Th2 cytokine production in lung and may be a drug target for attempts to
attenuate lung inflammation in asthmatics.

REFERENCE 1. Borysenko, C. W.; Furey, W. F.; Blair, H. C.: Comparative modeling
of TNFRSF25 (DR3) predicts receptor destabilization by a mutation
linked to rheumatoid arthritis. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 328:
794-799, 2005.

2. Chinnaiyan, A. M.; O'Rourke, K.; Yu, G.-L.; Lyons, R. H.; Garg,
M.; Duan, D. R.; Xing, L.; Gentz, R.; Ni, J.; Dixit, V. M.: Signal
transduction by DR3, a death domain-containing receptor related to
TNFR-1 and CD95. Science 274: 990-992, 1996.

3. Fang, L.; Adkins, B.; Deyev, V.; Podack, E. R.: Essential role
of TNF receptor superfamily 25 (TNFRSF25) in the development of allergic
lung inflammation. J. Exp. Med. 205: 1037-1048, 2008.

4. Gout, S.; Morin, C.; Houle, F.; Huot, J.: Death receptor-3, a
new E-selectin counter-receptor that confers migration and survival
advantages to colon carcinoma cells by triggering p38 and ERK MAPK
activation. Cancer Res. 66: 9117-9124, 2006.

5. Grenet, J.; Valentine, V.; Kitson, J.; Li, H.; Farrow, S. N.; Kidd,
V. J.: Duplication of the DR3 gene on human chromosome 1p36 and its
deletion in human neuroblastoma. Genomics 49: 385-393, 1998.

6. Kaptein, A.; Jansen, M.; Dilaver, G.; Kitson, J.; Dash, L.; Wang,
E.; Owen, M. J.; Bodmer, J.-L.; Tschopp, J.; Farrow, S. N.: Studies
on the interaction between TWEAK and the death receptor WSL-1/TRAMP
(DR3). FEBS Lett. 485: 135-141, 2000.

7. Kitson, J.; Raven, T.; Jiang, Y.-P.; Goeddel, D. V.; Giles, K.
M.; Pun, K.-T.; Grinham, C. J.; Brown, R.; Farrow, S. N.: A death-domain-containing
receptor that mediates apoptosis. Nature 384: 372-375, 1996.

8. Marsters, S. A.; Sheridan, J. P.; Donahue, C. J.; Pitti, R. M.;
Gray, C. L.; Goddard, A. D.; Bauer, K. D.; Ashkenazi, A.: Apo-3,
a new member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor family, contains
a death domain and activates apoptosis and NF-kappa-B. Curr. Biol. 6:
1669-1676, 1996.

9. Marsters, S. A.; Sheridan, J. P.; Pitti, R. M.; Brush, J.; Goddard,
A.; Ashkenazi, A.: Identification of a ligand for the death-domain-containing
receptor Apo3. Curr. Biol. 8: 525-528, 1998.

10. Meylan, F.; Davidson, T. S.; Kahle, E.; Kinder, M.; Acharya, K.;
Jankovic, D.; Bundoc, V.; Hodges, M.; Shevach, E. M.; Keane-Myers,
A.; Wang, E. C. Y.; Siegel, R. M.: The TNF-family receptor DR3 is
essential for diverse T cell-mediated inflammatory diseases. Immunity 29:
79-89, 2008.

11. Pobezinskaya, Y. L.; Choksi, S.; Morgan, M. J.; Cao, X.; Liu,
Z.: The adaptor protein TRADD is essential for TNF-like ligand 1A/death
receptor 3 signaling. J. Immun. 186: 5212-5216, 2011.

12. Screaton, G. R.; Xu, X.-N.; Olsen, A. L.; Cowper, A. E.; Tan,
R.; McMichael, A. J.; Bell, J. I.: LARD: a new lymphoid-specific
death domain containing receptor regulated by alternative pre-mRNA
splicing. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 4615-4619, 1997.

13. Wang, E. C. Y.; Thern, A.; Denzel, A.; Kitson, J.; Farrow, S.
N.; Owen, M. J.: DR3 regulates negative selection during thymocyte
development. Molec. Cell. Biol. 21: 3451-3461, 2001.

14. Wiley, S. R.; Cassiano, L.; Lofton, T.; Davis-Smith, T.; Winkles,
J. A.; Lindner, V.; Liu, H.; Daniel, T. O.; Smith, C. A.; Fanslow,
W. C.: A novel TNF receptor family member binds TWEAK and is implicated
in angiogenesis. Immunity 15: 837-846, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/17/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/22/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/20/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/4/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/15/2001

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 12/17/1998

EDITED mgross: 09/18/2012
mgross: 9/18/2012
terry: 9/17/2012
mgross: 4/3/2012
terry: 3/22/2012
mgross: 1/26/2010
terry: 1/20/2010
mgross: 1/7/2010
terry: 1/4/2010
mgross: 1/2/2003
carol: 12/23/2002
mgross: 5/15/2001
alopez: 2/8/1999
alopez: 12/18/1998

603846	TITLE *603846 NADH-UBIQUINONE OXIDOREDUCTASE Fe-S PROTEIN 3; NDUFS3
;;COMPLEX I, MITOCHONDRIAL RESPIRATORY CHAIN, 30-KD SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The multisubunit NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) is the first
enzyme complex in the electron transport chain of mitochondria. The
iron-sulfur protein (IP) fraction of complex I is made up of 7 subunits.
See NDUFS1 (157655).

CLONING

By a combination of EST database searching and RT-PCR, Loeffen et al.
(1998) isolated cDNAs encoding NDUFS2 (602985), NDUFS3, and NDUFS6
(603848), the human homologs of the bovine 49-kD, 30-kD, and 13-kD
subunits of the IP fraction. The predicted 264-amino acid human NDUFS3
protein shares 90% identity with the bovine protein. The first 36 amino
acids of human NDUFS3 comprise a possible mitochondrial targeting
sequence.

Smeitink and van den Heuvel (1999) reviewed the available molecular data
regarding the human nuclear-encoded complex I subunits. They stated that
a small form of complex I, consisting of 14 subunits, is found in
Escherichia coli (Weidner et al., 1993). In this bacterium, all complex
I genes are organized as an operon, called 'Nuo' after the
NADH:ubiquinone oxidase. In most eukaryotes, homologs of NuoB-NuoG and
NuoI are nuclear genes; NDUFS3 is the homolog of NuoC. Comparative
studies showed that the number of nuclear-encoded complex I subunits
increases with the evolutionary complexity of the organism. The 7 human
nuclear-encoded counterparts of the Escherichia coli Nuo proteins,
namely, NDUFV1 (161015), NDUFV2 (600532), NDUFS1, NDUFS2, NDUFS3, NDUFS7
(601825), and NDUFS8 (602141), would be predicted to carry out essential
aspects of complex I function.

GENE FUNCTION

Using human and mouse cells and tissues, Martinvalet et al. (2008) found
that GZMA (140050) activated mitochondrial outer membrane
permeabilization- and caspase-independent cell death pathways by
cleaving NDUFS3 after lys56. NDUFS3 cleavage generated reactive oxygen
species, disrupted the mitochondrial membrane potential, and interfered
with NADH oxidation and ATP synthesis. The generation of reactive oxygen
species induced translocation of the SET complex (see 600960) from the
cytosol to the nucleus, followed by GZMA-mediated activation of the SET
complex DNases NM23H1 (NME1; 156490) and TREX1 (606609), leading to DNA
damage and cell death. SET complex translocation, DNase activation, and
cell death were blocked by superoxide scavengers or by overexpression of
a cleavage-resistant NDUFS3 mutant. Martinvalet et al. (2008) concluded
that cleavage of NDUFS3 is the first step in GZMA-induced cell death.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids, Loeffen et al. (1998) mapped the
NDUFS3 gene to chromosome 11. By radiation hybrid analysis, Emahazion et
al. (1998) mapped the NDUFS3 to 11p11.11.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a patient with complex I deficiency (252010) and features of Leigh
syndrome (256000), Benit et al. (2004) identified compound
heterozygosity for mutations in the NDUFS3 gene (T145I, 603846.0001 and
R199W, 603846.0002).

In a patient with complex I deficiency, Haack et al. (2012) identified
homozygosity for the R199W mutation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LEIGH SYNDROME DUE TO MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY
NDUFS3, THR145ILE

In a boy from Reunion Island with Leigh syndrome (256000) due to complex
I deficiency (252010), Benit et al. (2004) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the NDUFS3 gene: a 434C-T transition
in exon 5, resulting in a thr145-to-ile (T145I) change, and a 595C-T
transition in exon 6, resulting in an arg199-to-trp (R199W; 603846.0002)
change. The boy's psychomotor development was normal until 9 years of
age. He gradually developed severe axial dystonia with oral and
pharyngeal motor dysfunction, dysphagia, and a tetraparetic syndrome,
and died soon after from rapid multisystem deterioration.

.0002
LEIGH SYNDROME DUE TO MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY, INCLUDED
NDUFS3, ARG199TRP (dbSNP rs104894270)

See 603846.0001 and Benit et al. (2004).

Haack et al. (2012) identified a homozygous 532C-T transition in the
NDUFS3 gene, resulting in an arg199-to-trp (R199W) substitution in a
patient with complex I deficiency (252010). The mutation was identified
by exome sequencing, and is also known as dbSNP rs104894270. The patient
had encephalopathy, myopathy, developmental delay, and lactic acidosis;
Leigh syndrome was not noted. Complex I activity was 28% in muscle and
36% in fibroblasts and there was a decrease in fully assembled complex
I.

REFERENCE 1. Benit, P.; Slama, A.; Cartault, F.; Giurgea, I.; Chretien, D.;
Lebon, S.; Marsac, C.; Munnich, A.; Rotig, A.; Rustin, P.: Mutant
NDUFS3 subunit of mitochondrial complex I causes Leigh syndrome. J.
Med. Genet. 41: 14-17, 2004.

2. Emahazion, T.; Beskow, A.; Gyllensten, U.; Brookes, A. J.: Intron
based radiation hybrid mapping of 15 complex I genes of the human
electron transport chain. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 82: 115-119, 1998.

3. Haack, T. B.; Haberberger, B.; Frisch, E.-M.; Wieland, T.; Iuso,
A.; Gorza, M.; Strecker, V.; Graf, E.; Mayr, J. A.; Herberg, U.; Hennermann,
J. B.; Klopstock, T.; and 16 others: Molecular diagnosis in mitochondrial
complex I deficiency using exome sequencing. J. Med. Genet. 49:
277-283, 2012.

4. Loeffen, J.; van den Heuvel, L.; Smeets, R.; Triepels, R.; Sengers,
R.; Trijbels, F.; Smeitink, J.: cDNA sequence and chromosomal localization
of the remaining three human nuclear encoded iron sulphur protein
(IP) subunits of complex I: the human IP fraction is completed. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 247: 751-758, 1998.

5. Martinvalet, D.; Dykxhoorn, D. M.; Ferrini, R.; Lieberman, J.:
Granzyme A cleaves a mitochondrial complex I protein to initiate caspase-independent
cell death. Cell 133: 681-692, 2008.

6. Smeitink, J.; van den Heuvel, L.: Human mitochondrial complex
I in health and disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64: 1505-1510, 1999.

7. Weidner, U.; Geier, S.; Ptock, A.; Friedrich, T.; Leif, H.; Weiss,
H.: The gene locus of the proton-translocating NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase
in Escherichia coli: organization of the 14 genes and relationship
between the derived proteins and subunits of mitochondrial complex
I. J. Molec. Biol. 233: 109-122, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/22/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/3/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/8/1999

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/25/1999

EDITED carol: 12/04/2012
ckniffin: 11/29/2012
mgross: 8/22/2008
terry: 8/22/2008
carol: 9/21/2005
ckniffin: 8/29/2005
tkritzer: 5/12/2004
terry: 5/3/2004
mgross: 6/14/1999
mgross: 6/8/1999
alopez: 5/25/1999

605523	TITLE *605523 TRANSDUCER OF ERBB2, 1; TOB1
;;TOB
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Matsuda et al. (1996) cloned a cDNA encoding TOB1, which they called
TOB, a protein that interacts with the ERBB2 (164870) gene product p185.
Sequence analysis revealed that TOB1 is a 45-kD, 345-amino acid protein
whose N-terminal half is homologous to the antiproliferative gene
product BTG1 (109580). The C-terminal half of TOB1 is characterized by
the presence of a proline- and glutamine-rich sequence. Expression of
TOB1 mRNA was observed in various cell types.

GENE FUNCTION

Matsuda et al. (1996) found that, like BTG1, exogenously expressed TOB1
was able to suppress growth of NIH 3T3 cells, but the growth suppression
was hampered by the presence of kinase-active p185. By using GST-TOB1
proteins containing either full-length TOB1 or the N-terminal half of
TOB1, Matsuda et al. (1996) showed that the C-terminal half of TOB1 was
relevant to its interaction with p185. Furthermore, TOB1 could be
coimmunoprecipitated with anti-ERBB2 antibody, and reciprocally, p185
could be coimmunoprecipitated with anti-TOB1 antibodies. These data
suggested that p185 negatively regulates the TOB1-mediated
antiproliferative pathway through its interaction with TOB1, resulting
possibly in growth stimulation by p185. Expression of TOB1 mRNA was not
correlated with expression of ERBB2, suggesting that other receptor-type
protein-tyrosine kinases are also involved in the TOB1-mediated
regulation of cell growth.

Tzachanis et al. (2001) used antigen-specific T-cell clones rendered
anergic by stimulation of T-cell receptor (see 186810) in the absence of
costimulation or interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680) and suppression subtractive
hybridization and differential screening to identify genes selectively
expressed in anergic cells. TOB was constitutively expressed in primary
peripheral blood T lymphocytes and had to be downregulated for T-cell
activation. Immunoprecipitation, immunoblot, and gel-shift analyses
showed that TOB interacts with SMAD4 (MADH4; 600093) and, to a lesser
degree, with SMAD2 (601366) and augments SMAD DNA binding to sites in
the IL2 promoter, leading to an inhibition of IL2 transcription.
Tzachanis et al. (2001) concluded that T-cell quiescence is an actively
maintained phenotype that must be suppressed to allow T-cell activation
to occur, suggesting targets for the manipulation of the immune
response.

Xiong et al. (2006) found that zebrafish Tob1a was required for correct
dorsoventral patterning. Tob1a inhibited beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806)
transcriptional activity by physically associating with beta-catenin and
preventing formation of beta-catenin/Lef1 (153245) complexes. Although
Tob1a also inhibited the transcriptional activity of Smad3 (603109), its
role in limiting dorsal development was executed primarily by
antagonizing the beta-catenin signal. By immunoprecipitation analysis,
Xiong et al. (2006) showed that endogenous TOB1 and beta-catenin
interacted in human HEK293T cells. SMAD3 also immunoprecipitated with
TOB1 in human cells.

MAPPING

By FISH, Matsuda et al. (1996) mapped the TOB1 gene to 17q21.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yoshida et al. (2000) showed that murine Tob is a negative regulator of
bone morphogenetic protein (BMP; see 112265)/SMAD signaling in
osteoblasts. Mice carrying a targeted deletion of the Tob gene had a
greater bone mass due to increased numbers of osteoblasts. Orthotopic
bone formation in response to Bmp2 (112261) was elevated in
Tob-deficient mice. Overproduction of Tob repressed Bmp2-induced,
Smad-mediated transcriptional activation. Tob associated with
receptor-regulated Smads, including Smad1 (601595), Smad5 (603110), and
Smad8 (603295), and colocalized with these SMADs in the nuclear bodies
upon BMP2 stimulation. The results indicated that Tob negatively
regulates osteoblast proliferation and differentiation by suppressing
the activity of the receptor-regulated Smad proteins.

REFERENCE 1. Matsuda, S.; Kawamura-Tsuzuku, J.; Ohsugi, M.; Yoshida, M.; Emi,
M.; Nakamura, Y.; Onda, M.; Yoshida, Y.; Nishiyama, A.; Yamamoto,
T.: Tob, a novel protein that interacts with p185erbB2, is associated
with anti-proliferative activity. Oncogene 12: 705-713, 1996.

2. Tzachanis, D.; Freeman, G. J.; Hirano, N.; van Puijenbroek, A.
A. F. L.; Delfs, M. W.; Berezovskaya, A.; Nadler, L. M.; Boussiotis,
V. A.: Tob is a negative regulator of activation that is expressed
in anergic and quiescent T cells. Nature Immun. 2: 1174-1182, 2001.

3. Xiong, B.; Rui, Y.; Zhang, M.; Shi, K.; Jia, S.; Tian, T.; Yin,
K.; Huang, H.; Lin, S.; Zhao, X.; Chen, Y.; Chen, Y.-G.; Lin, S.-C.;
Meng, A.: Tob1 controls dorsal development of zebrafish embryos by
antagonizing maternal beta-catenin transcriptional activity. Dev.
Cell 11: 225-238, 2006.

4. Yoshida, Y.; Tanaka, S.; Umemori, H.; Minowa, O.; Usui, M.; Ikematsu,
N.; Hosoda, E.; Imamura, T.; Kuno, J.; Yamashita, T.; Miyazono, K.;
Noda, M.; Noda, T.; Yamamoto, T.: Negative regulation of BMP/Smad
signaling by Tob in osteoblasts. Cell 103: 1085-1097, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/17/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/1/2002

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 1/4/2001

EDITED alopez: 04/23/2009
mgross: 10/19/2006
terry: 10/17/2006
terry: 6/28/2005
carol: 10/1/2004
mgross: 2/1/2002
mgross: 2/2/2001
mgross: 1/4/2001

300092	TITLE *300092 TESTIS-EXPRESSED GENE 28; TEX28
;;CHROMOSOME X OPEN READING FRAME 2; CXORF2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Hanna et al. (1997) analyzed ESTs from a variety of human cDNA libraries
and identified a sequence identical to intergenic regions of the red
(RCP, or OPN1LW; 300822) and green (GCP, or OPN1MW; 300821) color
pigment gene cluster. The EST was derived from a testis cDNA clone. The
longest open reading frame encodes a polypeptide of 410 amino acids. A
1.8-kb transcript of the gene, which the authors called TEX28, was
detected in testis, but not in other tissues examined.

Using PCR, Chen et al. (2006) detected high expression of TEX28 in
testis and marginal expression in prostate, spleen, brain, breast,
pancreas, and placenta.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hanna et al. (1997) determined that the TEX28 gene contains 5 exons and
spans at least 96% of the 25.5 kb between the GCP and transketolase-2
(TKTL1; 300044) genes. It is transcribed in the orientation opposite to
GCP and TKTL1.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Hanna et al. (1997) mapped the TEX28 gene
between the GCP and TKTL1 genes on chromosome Xq28. They determined that
TEX28 is repeated multiple times within the color pigment gene array on
chromosome Xq28, but exclusion of exon 1 from the duplicative copies
suggested that transcription is restricted to the copy between the GCP
and TKTL1 genes. Hanna et al. (1997) suggested that color vision
disorders that result from deletion of the color pigment genes should be
reappraised for possible associated phenotypes that might derive from
disruption of the TEX28 gene.

Chen et al. (2006) determined that there are 3 exact copies of the TEX28
gene on chromosome Xq28.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Metlapally et al. (2009) used array CGH to study copy number variation
(CNV) in 5 families segregating X-linked high myopia with cone
dysfunction (300843), and found that affected individuals from 4 of the
families had either a greater (4 or 5) or fewer (1) number of copies of
CXORF2 than the 3 copies found in unaffected individuals. Metlapally et
al. (2009) suggested that CXORF2 gene CNVs appear to be associated with
the X-linked myopia and cone dysfunction phenotype.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, Y.-T.; Iseli, C.; Venditti, C. A.; Old, L. J.; Simpson, A.
J. G.; Jongeneel, C. V.: Identification of a new cancer/testis gene
family, CT47, among expressed multicopy genes on the human X chromosome. Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 45: 392-400, 2006.

2. Hanna, M. C.; Platts, J. T.; Kirkness, E. F.: Identification of
a gene within the tandem array of red and green color pigment genes. Genomics 43:
384-386, 1997.

3. Metlapally, R.; Michaelides, M.; Bulusu, A.; Li, Y.-J.; Schwartz,
M.; Rosenberg, T.; Hunt, D. M.; Moore, A. T.; Zuchner, S.; Rickman,
C. B.; Young, T. L.: Evaluation of the X-linked high-grade myopia
locus (MYP1) with cone dysfunction and color vision deficiencies. Invest.
Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 50: 1552-1558, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/20/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/8/2006

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/15/1997

EDITED alopez: 04/30/2012
terry: 3/16/2012
carol: 10/21/2011
terry: 10/20/2011
carol: 8/30/2010
carol: 8/12/2010
mgross: 5/18/2006
terry: 5/8/2006
alopez: 10/23/1998
mark: 10/17/1997
mark: 10/16/1997
mark: 10/15/1997

609372	TITLE *609372 FAMILY WITH SEQUENCE SIMILARITY 53, MEMBER C; FAM53C
;;CHROMOSOME 5 OPEN READING FRAME 6; C5ORF6
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Lai et al. (2000) identified C5ORF6 within a region of chromosome 5q
frequently deleted in malignant myelomas. The deduced 392-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 43 kD. The N terminus
contains a proline-rich sequence that includes 3 potential SH3
domain-binding sites. Northern blot analysis detected a 4.3-kb
transcript in all lymphoid tissues examined. C5ORF6 was also expressed
in heart, brain, placenta, lung, liver, skeletal muscle, kidney, and
pancreas.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Lai et al. (2000) determined that the
C4ORF6 gene contains 5 exons and spans about 11 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lai et al. (2000) mapped the C5ORF6 gene
to chromosome 5q31.

REFERENCE 1. Lai, F.; Godley, L. A.; Fernald, A. A.; Orelli, B. J.; Pamintuan,
L.; Zhao, N.; Le Beau, M. M.: cDNA cloning and genomic structure
of three genes localized to human chromosome band 5q31 encoding potential
nuclear proteins. Genomics 70: 123-130, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/16/2005

EDITED mgross: 05/16/2005
mgross: 5/16/2005

606825	TITLE *606825 TENSIN 3; TNS3
;;TUMOR ENDOTHELIAL MARKER 6; TEM6
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE), St Croix et al. (2000)
identified partial cDNAs corresponding to several tumor endothelial
markers (TEMs) that displayed elevated expression during tumor
angiogenesis. Among the genes they identified was TEM6. Using database
searches and 5-prime RACE, Carson-Walter et al. (2001) derived sequences
covering the entire TEM6 coding region, which encodes a 261-amino acid
protein.

By searching databases for sequences similar to tensin-1 (TNS1; 600076),
Cui et al. (2004) identified a full-length tensin-3 cDNA. The deduced
1,445-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 155.3 kD.
Like other tensins, tensin-3 has an N-terminal actin-binding domain and
C-terminal SH2 and PTB domains. It also has several potential tyrosine
phosphorylation sites. Northern blot analysis detected high expression
of an 8-kb transcript in kidney and placenta, with weaker expression in
heart, skeletal muscle, spleen, liver, and lung. Western blot analysis
revealed a 180-kD tensin-3 protein in human endothelial and epithelial
cells and fibroblasts. Immunofluorescence analysis localized tensin-3 to
focal adhesions in human lung epithelial cells.

Using RT-PCR, Maeda et al. (2006) found that expression of tensin-3 was
high in thyroid, moderate in placenta, and low in other tissues
examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Cui et al. (2004) found that EGF (131530) induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of tensin-3 in human breast carcinoma cells in a time-
and dose-dependent manner. Tyrosine phosphorylation of tensin-3 required
activation of EGF receptor (EGFR; 131550) and SRC (190090) family kinase
activity. Tensin-3 formed a complex with focal adhesion kinase (FAK, or
PTK2; 600758) and p130Cas (BCAR1; 602941) in human breast carcinoma
cells. Addition of EGF to these cells induced dephosphorylation of FAK
and p130Cas, leading to dissociation of the tensin-3/FAK/p130Cas complex
and enhanced interaction between tensin-3 and EGFR. Cui et al. (2004)
proposed that tensin-3 functions as a platform for disassembly of
EGF-related signaling complexes at focal adhesions.

Katz et al. (2007) found that EGF downregulated expression of tensin-3
and concomitantly upregulated expression of CTEN (TNS4; 608385), a
tensin family member that lacks the actin-binding domain, in HeLa cells
and human breast carcinoma cells. Knockdown of CTEN or tensin-3 impaired
or enhanced mammary cell migration, respectively. Furthermore, CTEN
displaced tensin-3 from the cytoplasmic tail of integrin beta-1 (ITGB1;
135630), thereby inducing actin fiber disassembly. In invasive breast
cancer, CTEN expression correlated with high EGFR and HER2 (ERBB2;
164870) expression and with metastasis to lymph nodes. Moreover,
treatment of inflammatory breast cancer patients with an EGFR/HER2
inhibitor significantly downregulated CTEN expression. Katz et al.
(2007) concluded that a transcriptional tensin-3-CTEN switch may
contribute to metastasis of mammary cancer.

Using sequence-specific differential display, Maeda et al. (2006) found
that expression of tensin-3 was downregulated in thyroid tumors compared
with normal thyroid tissue.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the TEM6
gene to chromosome 7 (TMAP SHGC-15194).

REFERENCE 1. Carson-Walter, E. B.; Watkins, D. N.; Nanda, A.; Vogelstein, B.;
Kinzler, K. W.; St. Croix, B.: Cell surface tumor endothelial markers
are conserved in mice and humans. Cancer Res. 61: 6649-6655, 2001.

2. Cui, Y.; Liao, Y.-C.; Lo, S. H.: Epidermal growth factor modulates
tyrosine phosphorylation of a novel tensin family member, tensin3. Molec.
Cancer Res. 2: 225-232, 2004.

3. Katz, M.; Amit, I.; Citri, A.; Shay, T.; Carvalho, S.; Lavi, S.;
Milanezi, F.; Lyass, L.; Amariglio, N.; Jacob-Hirsch, J.; Ben-Chetrit,
N.; Tarcic, G.; Lindzen, M.; Avraham, R.; Liao, Y.-C.; Trusk, P.;
Lyass, A.; Rechavi, G.; Spector, N. L.; Lo, S. H.; Schmitt, F.; Bacus,
S. S.; Yarden, Y.: A reciprocal tensin-3-cten switch mediates EGF-driven
mammary cell migration. Nature Cell Biol. 9: 961-969, 2007.

4. Maeda, I.; Takano, T.; Yoshida, H.; Matsuzuka, F.; Amino, N.; Miyauchi,
A.: Tensin3 is a novel thyroid-specific gene. J. Molec. Endocr. 36:
R1-R8, 2006.

5. St. Croix, B.; Rago, C.; Velculescu, V.; Traverso, G.; Romans,
K. E.; Montgomery, E.; Lal, A.; Riggins, G. J.; Lengauer, C.; Vogelstein,
B.; Kinzler, K. W.: Genes expressed in human tumor endothelium. Science 289:
1197-1202, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/8/2008

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 4/4/2002

EDITED carol: 05/22/2008
mgross: 2/18/2008
terry: 2/8/2008
mgross: 4/4/2002

610499	TITLE *610499 RAP GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE FACTOR 6; RAPGEF6
;;RAS-ASSOCIATING GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE FACTOR 2; RAGEF2;;
PDZ DOMAIN-CONTAINING GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE FACTOR 2; PDZGEF2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for sequences similar to RAGEF1 (RAPGEF2; 609530), followed
by screening a fetal brain cDNA library and 5-prime and 3-prime RACE,
Gao et al. (2001) cloned RAPGEF6, which they called RAGEF2. The deduced
1,509-amino acid protein contains several of the domains present in
RAPGEF2, including cNMP-binding, REM, PDZ, and RA domains as well as the
GEF catalytic domain. Northern blot analysis detected a RAPGEF6
transcript of about 8 kb which was abundantly expressed in heart, brain,
placenta, lung, and liver, but barely detectable in skeletal muscle,
kidney, and pancreas.

Kuiperij et al. (2003) cloned 2 splice variants of RAPGEF6, which they
called PDZGEF2A and PDZGEF2B, from human umbilical cord and Jurkat
T-cell cDNA libraries. The deduced proteins contain 1,601 and 1,391
amino acids, respectively, and they differ after amino acid 1,249. Like
RAPGEF2, PDZGEF2A contains a C-terminal proline-rich and a PDZ-binding
motif, whereas PDZGEF2B lacks these motifs. Unlike RAPGEF2, both PDZGEF2
isoforms contain a second, less conserved, N-terminal RCBD (related
cyclic nucleotide-binding domain) domain. Northern blot analysis
detected ubiquitous expression of an approximately 9.0-kb RAPGEF6
transcript.

GENE FUNCTION

Gao et al. (2001) found that human RAPGEF6 expressed in insect cells
showed GEF activity toward RAP1A (179520) and RAP2A (179540), but not
toward other RAS family members. RAPGEF6 colocalized with activated MRAS
(608435) in the plasma membrane of cotransfected COS-7 cells, leading to
an increase in the GTP-bound form of plasma membrane RAP1. Gao et al.
(2001) concluded that RAPGEF6 acts as the GEF for RAP1 and RAP2
downstream of MRAS in the plasma membrane. Kuiperij et al. (2003)
demonstrated that RAPGEF2 activated both RAP1 and RAP2.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Gao et al. (2001) and Kuiperij et al.
(2003) mapped the RAPGEF6 gene to chromosome 5.

REFERENCE 1. Gao, X.; Satoh, T.; Liao, Y.; Song, C.; Hu, C.-D.; Kariya, K.;
Kataoka, T.: Identification and characterization of RA-GEF-2, a Rap
guanine nucleotide exchange factor that serves as a downstream target
of M-Ras. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 42219-42225, 2001.

2. Kuiperij, H. B.; de Rooij, J.; Rehmann, H.; van Triest, M.; Wittinghofer,
A.; Bos, J. L.; Zwartkruis, F. J. T.: Characterisation of PDZ-GEFs,
a family of guanine nucleotide exchange factors specific for Rap1
and Rap2. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1593: 141-149, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/16/2006

EDITED carol: 10/25/2006
carol: 10/17/2006
carol: 10/16/2006

139150	TITLE *139150 RAS p21 PROTEIN ACTIVATOR 1; RASA1
;;GUANOSINE TRIPHOSPHATASE-ACTIVATING PROTEIN;;
GTPase-ACTIVATING PROTEIN; GAP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The RAS gene family encodes membrane-associated, guanine
nucleotide-binding proteins (p21) that are involved in the control of
cellular proliferation and differentiation. Similar to other
guanine-binding proteins (such as the heterotrimeric G proteins), the
RAS proteins cycle between an active guanosine-triphosphate (GTP) bound
form and an inactive, guanosine-diphosphate (GDP) bound form. The weak
intrinsic GTPase activity of RAS proteins is greatly enhanced by the
action of GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs), such as RASA1, which are
effectors of RAS oncogene action (Trahey et al., 1988).

CLONING

Trahey et al. (1988) purified RASA1 protein, which they called GAP, from
placenta and obtained internal amino acid sequence of the protein from
which they cloned 2 RASA1 transcripts. One transcript predicted a
protein with molecular weight similar to purified GAP and corresponded
to the human equivalent of bovine GAP cDNA. The other transcript
predicted a smaller protein with a different N-terminal sequence,
presumably the result of differential splicing. Both transcripts
produced protein with GAP activity.

MAPPING

By the combination of somatic cell hybrid analysis and in situ
hybridization, Hsieh et al. (1989) assigned the RASA1 gene to chromosome
5q13.3. Lemons et al. (1990) localized the RASA1 gene to chromosome
5q13-q15 by Southern analysis of somatic cell hybrids and by in situ
hybridization.

Hsieh and Francke (1989) mapped the mouse Rasa1 gene to the distal end
of chromosome 13.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Point mutations in RAS genes ('activating' or oncogenic mutants)
decrease the intrinsic GTPase activity of RAS and are insensitive to
stimulation by GAPs. This suggested to Friedman et al. (1993) that at
least some of the transforming activity of mutant RAS is conferred by
the RAS protein being constitutively activated in its GTP-bound state.
Mutations in RAS that render it insensitive to GAP regulation result in
tumor formation. Mutations in GAP that ablate its ability to
downregulate RAS might result in a similar phenotype. To test this
hypothesis, Friedman et al. (1993) analyzed 188 human tumor samples for
mutations within the catalytic domain of the GAP gene and for mutations
within its C-terminal SH2 region. Although no mutations could be
demonstrated in the catalytic domain, 3 different nonsense mutations
were observed in basal cell carcinomas. The region in which the
mutations were clustered is A/T rich, raising the possibility that UV
radiation is a contributing factor. The 3 mutations were found in the
first 5 tumors examined. No abnormality was found in 16 other basal cell
carcinomas. Thus, the apparent prevalence of GAP mutation was about 14%
(3 of 21). The tumors analyzed included a great variety, including
cancers of thyroid, lung, breast, colon, and pancreas. No GAP mutation
was found in any of these. Mitsudomi et al. (1994) could not demonstrate
mutations in the catalytic domain of the GAP gene in human lung cancer
cell lines.

Starting with a family study of capillary malformation, or 'port-wine
stain' (163000), Eerola et al. (2002, 2003) identified a susceptibility
locus on 5q, which was initially referred to as CMC1. Eerola et al.
(2003) screened for mutations in RASA1, which was a positional
candidate, in 17 families. Heterozygous inactivating RASA1 mutations
were detected in 6 families manifesting atypical capillary malformations
associated with either arteriovenous malformation, arteriovenous
fistula, or Parkes Weber syndrome (608355). Eerola et al. (2003) named
this new entity caused by RASA1 mutations 'capillary
malformation-arteriovenous malformation' (CMAVM; 608354). The phenotypic
variability was thought to be explained by the involvement of
p120-RasGAP in signaling for various growth factor receptors that
control proliferation, migration, and survival of several cell types,
including vascular endothelial cells.

Another inherited vascular malformation, cerebral capillary malformation
(CCM; 116860), has also been related to misregulated Ras signaling. The
mutated protein, KRIT1 (604214) was originally identified as a binding
partner of Rap1a (179520), an antagonist of Ras transformation. KRIT1
has also been shown to bind ICAP1 (607153), a protein that links
integrins and the actin cytoskeleton, which implies a process of
integrin-signaling-mediated cellular adhesion in the pathogenesis of
CCM. CMAVM and CCM may be due to similar cellular processes, since
p120-RasGAP can bind Rap1a, which has an important role in
integrin-mediated cellular adhesion. It is noteworthy that in certain
families with CCM and mutations in KRIT1, some members also have
cutaneous lesions characterized as hyperkeratotic capillary-venous
malformations (Labauge et al., 1999; Eerola et al., 2000).

In affected members of 3 Ashkenazi Jewish families with capillary
malformations, Hershkovitz et al. (2008) identified heterozygous
mutations in the RASA1 gene (139150.0006-139150.0008). An arteriovenous
malformation was only identified in 1 of the families, suggesting that
the phenotypic spectrum of RASA1-related CMAVM can include patients with
only capillary malformations.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BASAL CELL CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
RASA1, ARG398LEU

Using denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) and direct sequence
analysis, Friedman et al. (1993) screened a basal cell carcinoma tumor
and identified a missense mutation in the SH2 domain of GAP. A change in
codon 398 from CGA to CTA resulted in substitution of leucine for
arginine.

.0002
BASAL CELL CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
RASA1, LYS400GLY

Using DGGE and direct sequence analysis, Friedman et al. (1993) screened
a basal cell carcinoma tumor and identified a missense mutation in the
SH2 domain of GAP. A change in codon 400 from AAA to GAA resulted in
substitution of glycine for lysine.

.0003
BASAL CELL CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
RASA1, ILE401VAL

Using DGGE and direct sequence analysis, Friedman et al. (1993) screened
a basal cell carcinoma tumor and identified a missense mutation in the
SH2 domain of GAP. A change in codon 401 from ATA to GTA resulted in
substitution of valine for isoleucine.

.0004
CAPILLARY MALFORMATION-ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATION
PARKES WEBER SYNDROME, INCLUDED
RASA1, 2-BP DEL, 475CT

Eerola et al. (2003) described a family PW1 in which the proband had
Parkes Weber syndrome (608355) in the lower limb. Both parents and 1
grandparent on both sides of the family had capillary malformation
('port-wine stain'; 163000). The brother of the proband had an
intracranial arteriovenous malformation as well as multiple cutaneous
capillary malformations (CMAVM; 608354). A 2-bp deletion in the RASA1
cDNA,, 475_476delCT, was found, causing frameshift and a subsequent
premature stop codon at residue 178; the frameshift occurred at amino
acid 159. The father of the proband, with a large facial capillary
malformation, was pictured, as was a grandfather of the proband, who had
a large nuchal capillary malformation. Neither of these individuals had
the mutation in the RASA1 gene.

.0005
CAPILLARY MALFORMATION-ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATION
RASA1, CYS540TYR

In their family CM11, Eerola et al. (2003) found association of
capillary malformation-arteriovenous malformation (608354) with a
missense mutation of the RASA1 cDNA: a 1619G-A transition predicted to
result in a cys540-to-tyr (C540Y) amino acid change in the PH domain of
the corresponding RASA1 protein. Eight individuals in 4 sibships in 2
generations of the family carried the mutation. One member of family
CM11 had a facial capillary stain and hypertrophy distal to an
arteriovenous fistula, which was located between the left carotid artery
and the jugular vein and caused cardiac overload, requiring medication
since infancy.

.0006
CAPILLARY MALFORMATION WITHOUT ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATION
RASA1, ARG285TER

In affected members of an Ashkenazi Jewish family with capillary
malformation without arteriovenous malformations (see 608354),
Hershkovitz et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous 853C-T transition in
the RASA1 gene, resulting in an arg285-to-ter (R285X) substitution.

.0007
CAPILLARY MALFORMATION-ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATION
RASA1, IVS3AS, G-A, -9

In 2 twin brothers of Ashkenazi Jewish descent with capillary
malformation-arteriovenous malformation (608354), Hershkovitz et al.
(2008) identified a heterozygous G-to-A transition in intron 3 of the
RASA1 gene (829-9G-A), resulting in a frameshift and premature
termination. The proband had a small arteriovenous shunt in the outer
ear.

.0008
CAPILLARY MALFORMATION WITHOUT ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATION
RASA1, 4-BP DUP, 2252TCAT

In affected members of an Ashkenazi Jewish family with capillary
malformation without arteriovenous malformations (see 608354),
Hershkovitz et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous 4-bp duplication
(2252dupTCAT) in the RASA1 gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature
termination.

REFERENCE 1. Eerola, I.; Boon, L. M.; Mulliken, J. B.; Burrows, P. E.; Dompmartin,
A.; Watanabe, S.; Vanwijck, R.; Vikkula, M.: Capillary malformation-arteriovenous
malformation, a new clinical and genetic disorder caused by RASA1
mutations. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 73: 1240-1249, 2003.

2. Eerola, I.; Boon, L. M.; Watanabe, S.; Grynberg, H.; Mulliken,
J. B.; Vikkula, M.: Locus for susceptibility for familial capillary
malformation ('port-wine stain') maps to 5q. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 10:
375-380, 2002.

3. Eerola, I.; Plate, K. H.; Spiegel, R.; Boon, L. M.; Mulliken, J.
B.; Vikkula, M.: KRIT1 is mutated in hyperkeratotic cutaneous capillary-venous
malformation associated with cerebral capillary malformation. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 1351-1355, 2000.

4. Friedman, E.; Gejman, P. V.; Martin, G. A.; McCormick, F.: Nonsense
mutations in the C-terminal SH2 region of the GTPase activating protein
(GAP) gene in human tumours. Nature Genet. 5: 242-247, 1993.

5. Hershkovitz, D.; Bercovich, D.; Sprecher, E.; Lapidot, M.: RASA1
mutations may cause hereditary capillary malformations without arteriovenous
malformations. Brit. J. Derm. 158: 1035-1040, 2008.

6. Hsieh, C. L.; Francke, U.: The gene for GTPase activating protein
(GAP) is on human chromosome 5q and mouse chromosome 13. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 51: 1016 only, 1989.

7. Hsieh, C. L.; Vogel, U. S.; Dixon, R. A.; Francke, U.: Chromosome
localization and cDNA sequence of murine and human genes for ras p21
GTPase activating protein (GAP). Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 15: 579-590,
1989.

8. Labauge, P.; Enjolras, O.; Bonerandi, J.-J.; Laberge, S.; Dandurand,
M.; Joujoux, J.-M.; Tournier-Lasserve, E.: An association between
autosomal dominant cerebral cavernomas and a distinctive hyperkeratotic
cutaneous vascular malformation in 4 families. Ann. Neurol. 45:
250-254, 1999.

9. Lemons, R. S.; Espinosa, R., III; Rebentisch, M.; McCormick, F.;
Ladner, M.; Le Beau, M. M.: Chromosomal localization of the gene
encoding GTPase-activating protein (RASA) to human chromosome 5, bands
q13-q15. Genomics 6: 383-385, 1990.

10. Mitsudomi, T.; Friedman, E.; Gejman, P. V.; McCormick, F.; Gazdar,
A. F.: Genetic analysis of the catalytic domain of the GAP gene in
human lung cancer cell lines. Hum. Genet. 93: 27-31, 1994.

11. Trahey, M.; Wong, G.; Halenbeck, R.; Rubinfeld, B.; Martin, G.
A.; Ladner, M.; Long, C. M.; Crosier, W. J.; Watt, K.; Koths, K.;
McCormick, F.: Molecular cloning of two types of GAP complementary
DNA from human placenta. Science 242: 1697-1700, 1988.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/4/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/16/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/18/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/13/1989

EDITED carol: 09/05/2013
carol: 8/12/2011
joanna: 6/10/2011
wwang: 10/11/2010
ckniffin: 10/4/2010
wwang: 2/20/2009
ckniffin: 2/16/2009
joanna: 12/19/2005
alopez: 12/19/2003
terry: 12/18/2003
alopez: 12/23/1998
psherman: 6/19/1998
mark: 12/20/1996
jamie: 12/19/1996
carol: 3/18/1994
carol: 12/9/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 5/16/1991
carol: 7/2/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990

605146	TITLE *605146 SPHINGOSINE 1-PHOSPHATE RECEPTOR 5; S1PR5
;;ENDOTHELIAL DIFFERENTIATION GENE 8; EDG8;;
S1P RECEPTOR 5; S1P5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The lysosphingolipid sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) regulates cell
proliferation, apoptosis, motility, and neurite retraction. Its actions
may be both intracellular as a second messenger and extracellular as a
receptor ligand. S1P and the structurally related lysolipid mediator
lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) signal cells through a set of G
protein-coupled receptors known as EDG receptors. Some EDG receptors
(e.g., EDG1; 601974) are S1P receptors; others (e.g., EDG2; 602282) are
LPA receptors.

NOMENCLATURE

Chun et al. (2002) proposed a nomenclature scheme for the LPA and S1P
receptors that is consistent with the International Union of
Pharmacology (IUP) guidelines. According to these guidelines, a receptor
is to be named with the abbreviation of the natural agonist with the
highest potency, followed by a subscripted arabic number. Thus they
suggested that the designation EDG8 should be changed to S1P5.

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to the S1P EDG
receptors, followed by screening a rat brain cDNA library, Im et al.
(2000) isolated a cDNA encoding Edg8. The authors identified a human
sequence (GenBank GENBANK AC011461) from chromosome 19 that is 87%
identical to rat Edg8. The conceptualized 400-amino acid rat Edg8
protein shares 42 to 49% amino acid identity with the human S1P
receptors EDG1, EDG3 (601965), and EDG5 (605111). Binding analysis
confirmed that expression of Edg8 leads to high-affinity binding for
labeled S1P. Northern blot and in situ hybridization analyses detected
widespread expression of a 2.2-kb Edg8 transcript in rat tissues, with
strongest expression in spleen and white matter tracts of the brain.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the S1PR5
gene to chromosome 19 (TMAP SHGC-53359).

REFERENCE 1. Chun, J.; Goetzl, E. J.; Hla, T.; Igarashi, Y.; Lynch, K. R.; Moolenaar,
W.; Pyne, S.; Tigyi, G.: International Union of Pharmacology. XXXIV.
Lysophospholipid receptor nomenclature. Pharm. Rev. 54: 265-269,
2002.

2. Im, D.-S.; Heise, C. E.; Ancellin, N.; O'Dowd, B. F.; Shei, G.;
Heavens, R. P.; Rigby, M. R.; Hla, T.; Mandala, S.; McAllister, G.;
George, S. R.; Lynch, K. R.: Characterization of a novel sphingosine
1-phosphate receptor, Edg-8. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 14281-14286, 2000.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/14/2000

EDITED alopez: 05/04/2009
wwang: 9/25/2008
carol: 2/29/2008
alopez: 1/21/2004
mgross: 1/2/2001
mgross: 7/14/2000

606453	TITLE *606453 LIPOPOLYSACCHARIDE-RESPONSIVE, BEIGE-LIKE ANCHOR PROTEIN; LRBA
;;LBA;;
CELL DIVISION CYCLE 4-LIKE PROTEIN; CDC4L;;
CDC4-LIKE PROTEIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Patients with Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS1; 214500) suffer from a
systemic immunodeficiency involving defects in polarized trafficking of
vesicles in a number of immune system cell types. In mouse, this
syndrome is reproduced in strains with a mutation in the 'beige' gene
that results in proteins lacking the BEACH (beige and CHS1) domain and
C-terminal WD repeats. LRBA contains key features of both beige/CHS1 and
A kinase anchor proteins (AKAPs; see 602449).

CLONING

Using a differential screening strategy to identify chimeric cDNA clones
derived from long-terminal repeat-promoted transcripts, Feuchter et al.
(1992) obtained a partial cDNA encoding LRBA, which they termed CDC4L
due to its homology to the yeast cell division cycle gene Cdc4.

By gene trapping of a lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-inducible clone, PCR of a
mouse B-lymphocyte cDNA library, 5-prime and 3-prime RACE, and searching
sequence databases, Wang et al. (2001) obtained cDNAs encoding human
LRBA and 3 isoforms of mouse Lrba. Sequence analysis predicted that the
2,856-, 2,792-, and 2,579-amino acid mouse proteins (designated alpha,
beta, and gamma, respectively) all have a WD repeat-like (WDL) domain, a
BEACH domain with an SH3-binding site, and a unique C terminus. The
alpha isoform has 5 WD repeats, while the beta isoform has 3 and the
gamma isoform lacks WD repeats. The 2,863-amino acid human LRBA protein
is 85% identical to the mouse protein, and they have homology to a
Drosophila anchor protein, Akap550. Northern blot analysis using a mouse
Lrba probe revealed that expression of a 10-kb transcript was
upregulated in LPS-induced B-cell and macrophage lines. Simultaneous
multiplex RT-PCR analysis detected variable expression of the 3 Lrba
isoforms in cell lines and mouse tissues. Fluorescent, confocal, and
immunogold electron microscopy demonstrated upregulated expression of
the BEACH-WD region of Lrba in cytosolic vesicles after LPS stimulation;
it specifically colocalized with lysosomes and the Golgi apparatus. Wang
et al. (2001) proposed that LRBA is part of a WDL-BEACH-WD (WBW) gene
family. They concluded that LRBA is constitutively associated with
protein kinase A (PKA; see 176911), which, upon LPS stimulation and
BEACH phosphorylation, binds to intracellular vesicles that are
transported to the plasma membrane.

Lopez-Herrera et al. (2012) found expression of the LRBA gene in
multiple human tissues, both immune-related and nonimmune-related.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the LRBA
gene to chromosome 4 (TMAP stSG9931).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 5 patients from 4 unrelated consanguineous families with common
variable immunodeficiency-8 with autoimmunity (CVID8; 614700),
Lopez-Herrera et al. (2012) identified 4 different homozygous mutations
in the LRBA gene (606453.0001-606453.0004). The first mutation was found
by linkage analysis followed by candidate gene sequencing. Heterozygous
mutation carriers were unaffected. Affected individuals had
early-childhood onset of recurrent infections, particularly respiratory
infections, and also developed variable autoimmune disorders, including
idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, and
inflammatory bowel disease. Laboratory studies showed decreased numbers
of switched memory B cells, hypogammaglobulinemia, and variable other
defects. Cultured patient B cells showed a failure to proliferate,
differentiate into plasma cells, or produce antibodies under inducible
conditions. Patient cells also showed an increased susceptibility to
apoptosis, most likely due to impaired autophagy and abnormal
accumulation of cellular organelles. No LRBA mutations were found in 12
additional families with suspected autosomal recessive CVID.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
IMMUNODEFICIENCY, COMMON VARIABLE, 8, WITH AUTOIMMUNITY
LRBA, ILE2657SER

In 2 sibs, born of consanguineous Arab parents, with common variable
immunodeficiency syndrome-8 with autoimmunity (CVID8; 614700),
Lopez-Herrera et al. (2012) identified a homozygous 7970T-G transversion
in exon 54 of the LRBA gene, resulting in an ile2657-to-ser (I2657S)
substitution in a highly conserved residue. Each unaffected parent and 4
unaffected sibs were heterozygous for the mutation, which was not found
in 128 controls. The mutation was identified by linkage analysis
followed by candidate gene sequencing. Immunoblot analysis of patient
cells showed complete absence of the LRBA protein, suggesting that the
mutant protein was unstable. Naive B cells from the patients showed
extremely low levels of IgG, IgA, and IgM antibody production and
lymphocyte proliferation when stimulated. Patient cells also showed
increased apoptosis under serum depletion compared to controls, and this
was associated with defects in autophagy.

.0002
IMMUNODEFICIENCY, COMMON VARIABLE, 8, WITH AUTOIMMUNITY
LRBA, ARG1683TER

In a boy, born of consanguineous Sicilian parents, with CVID8 with
autoimmunity (614700), Lopez-Herrera et al. (2012) identified a
homozygous 5047C-T transition in exon 30 of the LRBA gene, resulting in
an arg1683-to-ter (R1683X) substitution. No LRBA protein was detected in
patient cells. The mutation was not found in 200 control alleles. Naive
B cells from the patient showed extremely low levels of IgG production
and lymphocyte proliferation when stimulated. Patient cells also showed
increased apoptosis under serum depletion compared to controls, and this
was associated with defects in autophagy.

.0003
IMMUNODEFICIENCY, COMMON VARIABLE, 8, WITH AUTOIMMUNITY
LRBA, GLU59TER

In a boy, born of consanguineous Iranian parents, with CVID8 with
autoimmunity (614700), Lopez-Herrera et al. (2012) identified a
homozygous 175G-T transversion in exon 3 of the LRBA gene, resulting in
a glu59-to-ter (E59X) substitution. The mutation was not found in 233
Iranian controls. Naive B cells from the patient showed low lymphocyte
proliferation when stimulated. Patient cells showed increased areas of
Golgi apparatus and accumulation of autophagosomes, suggesting impaired
autophagy.

.0004
IMMUNODEFICIENCY, COMMON VARIABLE, 8, WITH AUTOIMMUNITY
LRBA, 111.1-KB DEL

In a boy, born of consanguineous Iranian parents, with CVID8 with
autoimmunity (614700), Lopez-Herrera et al. (2012) identified a
homozygous 111.1-kb deletion on chromosome 4q including exons 1 and 2 of
the LRBA gene and about 60 kb upstream and 50 kb downstream of these
exons.

REFERENCE 1. Feuchter, A. E.; Freeman, J. D.; Mager, D. L.: Strategy for detecting
cellular transcripts promoted by human endogenous long terminal repeats:
identification of a novel gene (CDC4L) with homology to yeast CDC4. Genomics 13:
1237-1246, 1992.

2. Lopez-Herrera, G.; Tampella, G.; Pan-Hammarstrom, Q.; Herholz,
P.; Trujillo-Vargas, C. M.; Phadwal, K.; Simon, A. K.; Moutschen,
M.; Etzioni, A.; Mory, A.; Srugo, I.; Melamed, D.; and 21 others
: Deleterious mutations in LRBA are associated with a syndrome of
immune deficiency and autoimmunity. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90: 986-1001,
2012.

3. Wang, J.-W.; Howson, J.; Haller, E.; Kerr, W. G.: Identification
of a novel lipopolysaccharide-inducible gene with key features of
both a kinase anchor proteins and chs1/beige proteins. J. Immun. 166:
4586-4595, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/5/2012

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/12/2001

EDITED carol: 07/06/2012
ckniffin: 7/5/2012
mgross: 11/12/2001

605180	TITLE *605180 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 38 (AMINO ACID TRANSPORTER), MEMBER 2; SLC38A2
;;AMINO ACID TRANSPORTER A2; ATA2;;
SODIUM-DEPENDENT NEUTRAL AMINO ACID TRANSPORTER 2; SNAT2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Amino acid transport system A, named for its preference for alanine as
substrate, is present in most mammalian tissues. SLC38A2, or ATA2, is
responsible for system A activity in most tissues. The characteristics
of system A include sodium dependence, preference for short-chain
neutral amino acids, such as alanine, serine, proline, and glutamine, as
substrates, pH sensitivity, and transinhibition. Bulky hydrophobic amino
acids, anionic amino acids, and cationic amino acids are excluded by the
system. System A can be discriminated from other transport systems for
neutral amino acids by its unique ability to transport N-methylated
amino acids. System A is defined as the component of sodium-dependent
transport of any neutral amino acid that is inhibitable by the model
substrate alpha-(methylamino)isobutyric acid (MeAIB). System A is
upregulated by a variety of hormones, growth factors, and mitogens. It
is also subject to adaptive regulation mediated by altered levels of
intracellular amino acids. Expression of system A in the skeletal muscle
and liver, and its regulation by glucagon and insulin in these tissues,
are particularly important with respect to various physiologic
conditions, such as starvation and pregnancy, and pathologic states,
such as diabetes (Sugawara et al., 2000).

CLONING

By screening human fetal brain cDNAs for the potential to encode large
proteins, Nagase et al. (2000) isolated a partial ATA2 cDNA, which they
called KIAA1382, that lacks 5-prime coding sequence. The deduced
462-amino acid ATA2 partial protein shares 57% amino acid sequence
identity with the human transporter protein g17 across 98% of its
length. RT-PCR followed by ELISA detected ATA2 expression in all human
tissues examined, with the highest level in adult brain. Within the
brain, ATA2 expression was found in all regions tested, with the highest
level in the subthalamic nucleus.

Sugawara et al. (2000) cloned a rat skeletal muscle Ata2 cDNA. The
deduced Ata2 protein shares 55% sequence identity with the rat glutamine
transporter GlnT (ATA1, or SLC38A1; 608490).

Using rat Ata2 as probe, Hatanaka et al. (2000) cloned full-length human
ATA2 from a HepG2 cDNA library. The deduced 506-amino acid protein has
12 putative transmembrane domains and shares 88% identity with rat Ata2.
Northern blot analysis detected variable expression of a 4.5-kb ATA2
transcript in all 12 human tissues examined, with highest expression in
placenta.

Hyde et al. (2007) found that an epitope linked to the C terminus of rat
Snat2 was exposed on the surface of transfected cells. They concluded
that Snat2 has 11 transmembrane domains rather than 12.

GENE FUNCTION

Sugawara et al. (2000) found that rat Ata2 mediated sodium-dependent
transport of MeAIB when expressed in mammalian cells. The Ata2
transporter was specific for neutral amino acids, and it was pH
sensitive and lithium intolerant. The sodium:amino acid stoichiometry
was 1:1. When expressed in Xenopus oocytes, transport of neutral amino
acids via Ata2 was associated with inward currents, and the
substrate-induced current was sodium dependent and pH sensitive.

Hatanaka et al. (2000) showed that overexpression of human ATA2 in HRPE
cells increased transport of MeAIB. Transport was Na+ dependent, was
inhibited by Li+, and showed a pH optimum of 8. Competition experiments
revealed that human ATA2 recognized several neutral amino acids as
substrates, with a preference for short-chain neutral amino acids.
Hatanaka et al. (2000) concluded that ATA2 is a system A amino acid
transporter.

Freeman et al. (2002) found that Ata2-mediated MeAIB transport increased
in regenerating rat liver 12 hours after partial hepatectomy. Elevated
MeAIB transport appeared to be due to redistribution of Ata2 from an
intracellular compartment to the plasma membrane and not to increased
Ata2 mRNA content or translation.

Using reporter gene assays, Palii et al. (2004) found that a highly
conserved CAAT box and nearby amino acid response element (AARE) within
intron 1 of the SNAT2 gene had enhancer activity in amino acid-deprived
HepG2 cells. The SNAT2 proximal promoter was not responsive to amino
acid deprivation.

Using mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Palii et al. (2006) determined that
Snat2 upregulation due to amino acid deprivation required Gcn2 (EIF2AK4;
609280) and Eif2-alpha (EIF2S1; 603907). The AARE of SNAT2 formed
specific nuclear complexes that increased in abundance following amino
acid deprivation in HepG2 cells. In vitro supershift analysis revealed
increased AARE binding by ATF4 (604064), CEBPA (116897), CEBPB (189965),
and CEBPG (138972).

Hyde et al. (2007) identified 2 distinct signaling pathways that
controlled expression of rat Snat2 during amino acid deprivation. Amino
acids that were poor Snat2 substrates, such as tyrosine, suppressed
functional Snat2 expression in rat L6 myotubes and HeLa cells via
inhibition of the MAP kinase JNK (MAPK8; 601158). Amino acids that were
good Snat2 substrates, such as the alanine isomer sarcosine, suppressed
Snat2 expression via a JNK-independent mechanism. In addition, Snat2
protein was stabilized during amino acid withdrawal. Hyde et al. (2007)
concluded that SNAT2 may function as both a transporter and receptor for
amino acids.

By mutation analysis of rat Snat2, Zhang et al. (2008) found that the
conserved residue asn82 in transmembrane domain-1 was required for avid
Na+ binding by Snat2 and, consequently, alanine cotransport in
transfected cells.

Arsenite is a toxic environmental contaminant that can react with
thiols, resulting in oxidative protein damage and endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) stress. Using a genomewide RNA interference screen with HEK293
cells, Oh et al. (2012) identified SNAT2 among a set of genes required
for the arsenite-induced ER stress response. SNAT2 expression was
directly upregulated by arsenite exposure in HEK293 and mouse 3T3L1
adipocytes, and its expression was dependent upon ATF4. Inhibition of
SNAT2 expression or deprivation of its primary substrate, glutamine,
specifically suppressed ER stress due to arsenite exposure, but not ER
stress induced by other factors. Induction of SNAT2 was coincident with
activation of the nutrient-sensing MTOR pathway (see 601231). Oh et al.
(2012) concluded that SNAT2 has an important role in amino acid
signaling in the arsenic-induced stress response.

GENE STRUCTURE

Palii et al. (2004) determined that the SLC38A2 gene contains 16 exons.
The first exon is noncoding. Intron 1 contains a CAAT box, a purine-rich
box, and an AARE, all of which are highly conserved among human, rat,
and mouse genes.

MAPPING

Hartz (2013) mapped the SLC38A2 gene to chromosome 12q13.11 based on an
alignment of the SLC38A2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB037803) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Freeman, T. L.; Thiele, G. M.; Tuma, D. J.; Machu, T. K.; Mailliard,
M. E.: ATA2-mediated amino acid uptake following partial hepatectomy
is regulated by redistribution to the plasma membrane. Arch. Biochem.
Biophys. 400: 215-222, 2002.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/27/2013.

3. Hatanaka, T.; Huang, W.; Wang, H.; Sugawara, M.; Prasad, P. D.;
Leibach, F. H.; Ganapathy, V.: Primary structure, functional characteristics
and tissue expression pattern of human ATA2, a subtype of amino acid
transport system A. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1467: 1-6, 2000.

4. Hyde, R.; Cwiklinski, E. L.; MacAulay, K.; Taylor, P. M.; Hundal,
H. S.: Distinct sensor pathways in the hierarchical control of SNAT2,
a putative amino acid transceptor, by amino acid availability. J.
Biol. Chem. 282: 19788-19798, 2007.

5. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVI.
The complete sequences of 150 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 65-73, 2000.

6. Oh, R. S.; Pan, W.-C.; Yalcin, A.; Zhang, H.; Guilarte, T. R.;
Hotamisligil, G. S.; Christiani, D. C.; Lu, Q.: Functional RNA interference
(RNAi) screen identifies system A neutral amino acid transporter 2
(SNAT2) as a mediator of arsenic-induced endoplasmic reticulum stress. J.
Biol. Chem. 287: 6025-6034, 2012.

7. Palii, S. S.; Chen, H.; Kilberg, M. S.: Transcriptional control
of the human sodium-coupled neutral amino acid transporter system
A gene by amino acid availability is mediated by an intronic element. J.
Biol. Chem. 279: 3463-3471, 2004.

8. Palii, S. S.; Thiaville, M. M.; Pan, Y.-X.; Zhong, C.; Kilberg,
M. S.: Characterization of the amino acid transporter 2 (SNAT2) system
A transporter gene. Biochem. J. 395: 517-527, 2006.

9. Sugawara, M.; Nakanishi, T.; Fei, Y.-J.; Huang, W.; Ganapathy,
M. E.; Leibach, F. H.; Ganapathy, V.: Cloning of an amino acid transporter
with functional characteristics and tissue expression pattern identical
to that of system A. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 16473-16477, 2000.

10. Zhang, Z.; Gameiro, A.; Grewer, C.: Highly conserved asparagine
82 controls the interaction of Na+ with the sodium-coupled neutral
amino acid transporter SNAT2. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 12284-12292, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/27/2013

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 7/31/2000

EDITED mgross: 03/13/2013
terry: 2/27/2013
mgross: 8/28/2003
carol: 1/28/2002
mcapotos: 8/4/2000
psherman: 7/31/2000

129190	TITLE *129190 ECTO-5-PRIME NUCLEOTIDASE; NT5E
;;E5NT; ENT; NTE;;
NUCLEOTIDASE, ECTO-5-PRIME; NT5;;
CD73
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ecto-5-prime-nucleotidase (5-prime-ribonucleotide phosphohydrolase; EC
3.1.3.5) catalyzes the conversion at neutral pH of purine 5-prime
mononucleotides to nucleosides, the preferred substrate being AMP. The
enzyme consists of a dimer of 2 identical 70-kD subunits bound by a
glycosyl phosphatidyl inositol linkage to the external face of the
plasma membrane. The enzyme is used as a marker of lymphocyte
differentiation. Consequently, a deficiency of NT5 occurs in a variety
of immunodeficiency diseases (e.g., see 102700, 300755). Other forms of
5-prime nucleotidase exist in the cytoplasm and lysosomes and can be
distinguished from ecto-NT5 by their substrate affinities, requirement
for divalent magnesium ion, activation by ATP, and inhibition by
inorganic phosphate.

CLONING

Misumi et al. (1990) cloned and sequenced a cDNA for placental
5-prime-nucleotidase.

MAPPING

In human-Chinese hamster hybrids, Boyle et al. (1988) found a 100%
correlation between NT5 enzyme activity and presence of human chromosome
6. The correlation was confirmed by study of hybrid cells containing
chromosome 6 which were stained by indirect immunofluorescence for HLA
class 1 antigen and sorted by a fluorescence-activated cell sorter.
Cells that were HLA negative were also NT5 negative; cells that were HLA
positive were NT5 positive. Boyle et al. (1989) regionalized the NT5
gene to 6q14-q21 by study of a panel of human-mouse hybrids that
contained fragments of chromosome 6 as translocations.

GENE FUNCTION

Adrian et al. (2000) analyzed the expression of several purinergic
receptors, as well as CD73 and CD39 (ENTPD1; 601752), during
differentiation in a promyelocytic leukemia cell line. Granulocytic
differentiation was induced by dimethylsulfoxide, and a
monocytic/macrophage phenotype was induced by phorbol esters. CD73
expression was hardly detectable in undifferentiated cells and following
granulocyte differentiation. Monocytic differentiation resulted in a
marked upregulation of CD73 mRNA. Low expression was detected in normal
blood leukocytes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 5 affected sibs from a consanguineous family of English descent with
calcifications of arteries and joints mapping to chromosome 6q14
(211800), St. Hilaire et al. (2011) analyzed 3 candidate genes and
identified homozygosity for a nonsense mutation in the NT5E gene (S221X;
129190.0001). Analysis of NT5E in 3 affected Italian sisters revealed
homozygosity for a missense mutation (C358Y; 129190.0002), and the
proband from a third family was found to be a compound heterozygote for
S221X and a frameshift mutation (129190.0003). St. Hilaire et al. (2011)
noted that CD73 participates in the extracellular pathway that converts
ATP to adenosine on the surface of various types of cells. ENPP1
(173335) produces AMP and pyrophosphate from ATP; then CD73 produces
adenosine and inorganic phosphate from AMP. Mutation in the ENPP1 gene
causes generalized arterial calcification of infancy (208000).

ANIMAL MODEL

Adenosine mediates the renal tubuloglomerular feedback-induced vascular
response elicited by changes in the NaCl concentration (Sun et al.,
2001; see adenosine A1 receptor, 102775). To determine whether adenosine
formation depends on extracellular nucleotide hydrolysis, Castrop et al.
(2004) generated mice with a targeted deletion of
ecto-5-prime-nucleotidase. There was no difference in blood pressure,
blood and urine chemistry, and renal blood flow between null and
wildtype mice; however, whereas tubuloglomerular feedback responses did
not change significantly during prolonged loop of Henle perfusion in
wildtype mice, a complete disappearance of the residual feedback
response was noted in null mice over 10 minutes of perfusion. Castrop et
al. (2004) concluded that the generation of adenosine at the glomerular
pole depends to a major extent on ecto-5-prime-nucleotidase-mediated
dephosphorylation of 5-prime-AMP.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CALCIFICATION OF JOINTS AND ARTERIES
NT5E, SER221TER

In 5 affected sibs from a consanguineous family of English descent with
calcification of arteries and joints (211800), St. Hilaire et al. (2011)
identified homozygosity for a 662C-A transversion in exon 3 of the NT5E
gene, resulting in a ser221-to-ter (S221X) substitution. The unaffected
third-cousin parents were heterozygous for the mutation, which was not
found in 400 alleles from ethnically matched controls. Cultured
fibroblasts from affected family members showed markedly reduced
expression of NT5E mRNA, CD73 protein, and enzyme activity, as well as
increased alkaline phosphatase levels and accumulated calcium phosphate
crystals; rescue using a CD73-encoding lentiviral vector resulted in
normalized CD73 and alkaline phosphatase activity. In another proband
with calcification of arteries and joints, St. Hilaire et al. (2011)
identified compound heterozygosity for the S221X mutation and a
frameshift mutation in the NT5E gene (129190.0003).

.0002
CALCIFICATION OF JOINTS AND ARTERIES
NT5E, CYS358TYR

In 3 Italian sisters, born of distantly related parents, who had
calcification of arteries and joints (211800), St. Hilaire et al. (2011)
identified homozygosity for a 1073G-A transition in exon 5 of the NT5E
gene, resulting in a cys358-to-tyr (C358Y) substitution at a conserved
residue. The unaffected parents were heterozygous for the mutation,
which was not found in 400 alleles from ethnically matched controls.
Transfection studies in HEK293 cells showed negligible CD73 activity
with the mutant compared to controls.

.0003
CALCIFICATION OF JOINTS AND ARTERIES
NT5E, 1-BP DUP, 1609A

In a 44-year-old woman with extensive calcification of distal arteries
and joints (211800), St. Hilaire et al. (2011) identified compound
heterozygosity for the S221X mutation (129190.0001) and a 1-bp
duplication (1609dupA) of the NT5E gene, predicted to result in a
premature termination codon. Neither mutation was present in 400 alleles
from ethnically matched controls. Transfection studies in HEK293 cells
showed negligible CD73 activity with the mutant compared to controls.

REFERENCE 1. Adrian, K.; Bernhard, M. K.; Breitinger, H.-G.; Ogilvie, A.: Expression
of purinergic receptors (ionotropic P2X1-7 and metabotropic P2Y1-11)
during myeloid differentiation of HL60 cells. Biochim. Biophys. Res.
Acta 1492: 127-138, 2000.

2. Boyle, J. M.; Hey, Y.; Fox, M.: Human ecto-5-prime nucleotidase
maps to chromosome 6q14-q21. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51:
968 only, 1989.

3. Boyle, J. M.; Hey, Y.; Geurts van Kessel, A.; Fox, M.: Assignment
of ecto-5-prime-nucleotidase to human chromosome 6. Hum. Genet. 81:
88-92, 1988.

4. Castrop, H.; Huang, Y.; Hashimoto, S.; Mizel, D.; Hansen, P.; Theilig,
F.; Bachmann, S.; Deng, C.; Briggs, J.; Schnermann, J.: Impairment
of tubuloglomerular feedback regulation of GFR in ecto-5-prime-nucleotidase/CD73-deficient
mice. J. Clin. Invest. 114: 634-642, 2004.

5. Misumi, Y.; Ogata, S.; Ohkubo, K.; Hirose, S.; Ikehara, Y.: Primary
structure of human placental 5-prime-nucleotidase and identification
of the glycolipid anchor in the mature form. Europ. J. Biochem. 191:
563-569, 1990.

6. St. Hilaire, C.; Ziegler, S. G.; Markello, T. C.; Brusco, A.; Groden,
C.; Gill, F.; Carlson-Donohoe, H.; Lederman, R. J.; Chen, M. Y.; Yang,
D.; Siegenthaler, M. P.; Arduino, C.; and 9 others: NT5E mutations
and arterial calcifications. New Eng. J. Med. 364: 432-442, 2011.

7. Sun, D.; Samuelson, L. C.; Yang, T.; Huang, Y.; Paliege, A.; Saunders,
T.; Briggs, J.; Schnermann, J.: Mediation of tubuloglomerular feedback
by adenosine: evidence from mice lacking adenosine 1 receptors. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 9983-9988, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/7/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/4/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/22/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/1/1989

EDITED carol: 03/26/2012
wwang: 2/7/2011
terry: 2/7/2011
mgross: 3/4/2005
tkritzer: 11/22/2004
carol: 10/11/2004
carol: 4/19/2002
mark: 4/3/1997
carol: 7/22/1993
carol: 7/24/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 4/11/1991
carol: 4/2/1991
carol: 3/29/1991

613667	TITLE *613667 SINE OCULIS-BINDING PROTEIN, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; SOBP
;;JACKSON CIRCLER PROTEIN 1, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; JXC1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Birk et al. (2010) identified SOBP within a region of chromosome 6
associated with syndromic and nonsyndromic intellectual disability
(613671). The deduced 873-amino acid protein contains an N-terminal
nuclear localization signal (NLS), followed by 2 FCS-type zinc finger
motifs, a proline-rich region (PR1), a putative RNA-binding motif
region, and a C-terminal NLS embedded in a second proline-rich motif
(PR2). Birk et al. (2010) also identified a variant encoding a deduced
232-amino acid protein. SOBP was expressed in various human tissues. In
situ hybridization detected Sobp expression throughout developing mouse
brain at embryonic day 14, with intense staining in the cortical plate.
In postnatal and adult mouse brain, Sobp was expressed in all neurons,
with intense staining in the limbic system. Highest expression was in
layer V cortical neurons, hippocampus, pyriform cortex, dorsomedial
nucleus of thalamus, amygdala, and hypothalamus. Postnatal expression of
Sobp in the limbic system corresponded to a time of active
synaptogenesis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Birk et al. (2010) determined that the SOBP gene spans about 171 kb and
contains 7 exons, the last of which is untranslated. CpG islands are
associated with the upstream promoter and a second putative promoter
within exon 6.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Birk et al. (2010) mapped the SOBP gene to
chromosome 6q21.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 7 affected sibs from a consanguineous Israeli Arab family with mental
retardation, anterior maxillary protrusion, and strabismus (MRAMS;
613671) reported by Basel-Vanagaite et al. (2007), Birk et al. (2010)
identified a homozygous mutation in the SOBP gene (R661X; 613667.0001).

ANIMAL MODEL

Jackson circler (jc) mutant mice carry a mutation in the Sobp gene and
exhibit circling behavior associated with abnormalities in the organ of
Corti and lack of vestibular evoked potentials. Using proteomic
analysis, Birk et al. (2010) identified 24 proteins that were abnormally
expressed in jc/jc brain compared with +/jc brain, including 2
interacting proteins, dynamin (see 602377) and Pacsin1 (606512).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, ANTERIOR MAXILLARY PROTRUSION, AND STRABISMUS
SOBP, ARG661TER

In 7 affected sibs from a consanguineous Israeli Arab family with mental
retardation, anterior maxillary protrusion, and strabismus (MRAMS;
613671) reported by Basel-Vanagaite et al. (2007), Birk et al. (2010)
identified a homozygous 1981C-T transition in exon 6 of the SOBP gene,
resulting in an arg661-to-ter (R661X) substitution. The mutation was
predicted to result in the truncation of 212 residues of the protein,
which would cause elimination of the second proline-rich domain (PR2) as
well as the C-terminal NLS and an RNA-binding region that may be
important for the functioning of the protein. The mutation was not
observed in 300 control chromosomes from Israeli Arab individuals. Birk
et al. (2010) suggested that disruption of the SOBP gene in the limbic
system during synaptogenesis resulted in abnormal cognition in these
patients.

REFERENCE 1. Basel-Vanagaite, L.; Rainshtein, L.; Inbar, D.; Gothelf, D.; Hennekam,
R.; Straussberg, R.: Autosomal recessive mental retardation syndrome
with anterior maxillary protrusion and strabismus: MRAMS syndrome. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 143A: 1687-1691, 2007.

2. Birk, E.; Har-Zahav, A.; Manzini, C. M.; Pasmanik-Chor, M.; Kornreich,
L.; Walsh, C. A.; Noben-Trauth, K.; Albin, A.; Simon, A. J.; Colleaux,
L.; Morad, Y.; Rainshtein, L.; and 10 others: SOBP is mutated in
syndromic and nonsyndromic intellectual disability and is highly expressed
in the brain limbic system. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 87: 694-700, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/20/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/15/2010

EDITED carol: 01/05/2011
wwang: 12/21/2010
ckniffin: 12/20/2010
mgross: 12/15/2010

601778	TITLE *601778 POLYMERASE, RNA, MITOCHONDRIAL; POLRMT
;;MTRNAP
POLYMERASE, RNA, NUCLEAR, SINGLE-POLYPEPTIDE, IV, INCLUDED; SPRNAPIV,
INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION Mitochondria of all organisms contain a genome that is distinct from
that of the nucleus. The circular mitochondrial chromosome contains 37
genes that encode the RNA components of the mitochondrial translational
apparatus, i.e., 22 transfer RNAs and 2 ribosomal RNA genes, as well as
13 polypeptide-encoding genes. All 13 polypeptides are essential
components of 4 of the 5 complexes that form the mitochondrial oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS) pathway (complexes I, III, IV, and V). However,
gene expression in mitochondria relies upon numerous nuclear genes that
encode protein components required for transcription and translation of
the mtDNA-encoded genes, as well as protein and RNA components required
for replication of mtDNA. In addition, nuclear genes encode factors
controlling the import, assembly, and turnover of OXPHOS complexes, and
proteins acting as general regulators of mitochondrial function.
Nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins are synthesized by cytoplasmic
ribosomes, usually as precursors containing an N-terminal extension.
Import into mitochondria is carried out by a complex, ATP-dependent
transport system, followed by cleavage of the leader peptide, which
eventually produces a mature, functional protein. Tiranti et al. (1997)
noted that abnormalities in the nuclear genome repertoire controlling
mitochondrial biogenesis were proposed as the cause of some human
disorders characterized by the presence of mtDNA abnormalities and
mendelian transmission. Both autosomal dominant (157640) and autosomal
recessive (258450) forms of chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia
are associated with the accumulation of multiple deletions of mtDNA in
stable tissues. Another example is tissue-specific mtDNA depletion
(251880), an autosomal recessive disorder causing severe organ-specific
syndromes in early infancy. Mendelian inheritance indicates the presence
of transmissible mutations in nuclear genes that can ultimately damage
the structural integrity of the mtDNA molecule or its copy number. Genes
involved in the control of mtDNA replication and expression are
considered attractive candidates for these disorders. The
characterization of the collection of human proteins related to
mitochondria, the so-called human mitochondrial proteome, is important
in the elucidation of fundamental mechanisms of nucleo-mitochondrial
intergenomic signaling, as well as to clinical researchers interested in
mitochondrial disorders.

Tiranti et al. (1997) used a gene cloning strategy based on the
screening of the expressed sequence tags database (dbEST), using
sequences of mitochondrial housekeeping proteins of yeast, to identify
the cDNA encoding the precursor of the human mitochondrial RNA
polymerase. They identified a 3,831-bp human cDNA predicted to encode a
protein of 1,230 amino acid residues. The protein sequence showed
significant homology with sequences corresponding to mitochondrial RNA
polymerases from lower eukaryotes and to RNA polymerases from several
bacteriophages. Mitochondrial RNA polymerase carries out the central
activity of mitochondrial gene expression and, by providing the RNA
primers for initiation of replication, is also implicated in the
maintenance and propagation of the mitochondrial genome. Thus, it is an
attractive candidate for disorders of nucleo-mitochondrial intergenomic
signaling.

Tiranti et al. (1997) assigned the gene (symbolized mt-RPOL by them) to
chromosome 19 by PCR-based screening of a panel of human/rodent somatic
cell hybrids; regionalization to 19p13.3 was performed with a second
panel containing different portions of chromosome 19.

Tiranti et al. (1997) referred to 'cyberscreening' of sequence
databases, based on yeast-human cross-species comparison, as a powerful,
simple, rapid, and inexpensive method for the molecular dissection of
the human mitochondrial proteome. Cyberscreening might also be referred
to as 'cloning in silico.'

The term proteome appears first to have been used by Humphery-Smith et
al. (1994) and his colleagues (Wasinger et al., 1995) to refer to the
total protein complement of a genome. (They described methods that
allowed proteins to be identified prior to detection of their respective
genes.)

Fish et al. (2004) reported the discovery of a mitochondrial DNA heavy
strand replication origin at nucleotide position 57 in the
strand-displacement loop (D-loop) of several human cell lines (HeLa,
A549, and 143B.TK-) and immortalized lymphocytes. The nascent chains
starting at this origin, in contrast to those initiated at the
previously described origins (Anderson et al., 1981), did not terminate
prematurely at the 3-prime end of the D-loop but proceeded well beyond
this control point, behaving as 'true' replicating strands. This origin
is mainly responsible for mtDNA maintenance under steady-state
conditions, whereas mtDNA synthesis from the formerly identified D-loop
origins may be more important for recovery after mtDNA depletion and for
accelerating mtDNA replication in response to physiologic demands.

Kravchenko et al. (2005) demonstrated that transcription of some mRNAs
in human and rodents is mediated by a single-polypeptide nuclear RNA
polymerase, which they designated spRNAP-IV. spRNAP-IV is expressed from
an alternative transcript of the mitochondrial RNA polymerase gene
POLRMT. The spRNAP-IV lacks 262 N-terminal amino acids of mitochondrial
RNA polymerase, including the mitochondrial-targeting signal, and
localizes to the nucleus. Transcription by spRNAP-IV is resistant to the
RNA polymerase II (PolII; see 180660) inhibitor alpha-amanitin but is
sensitive to short interfering RNA specific for the POLRMT gene. The
promoters for spRNAP-IV differ substantially from those used by RNA
PolII, do not respond to transcriptional enhancers, and contain a common
functional sequence motif.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Ringel et al. (2011) reported the crystal structure of mtRNAP at
2.5-angstrom resolution, which revealed a T7-like catalytic C-terminal
domain, an N-terminal domain that remotely resembles the T7
promoter-binding domain, a novel pentatricopeptide repeat domain, and a
flexible N-terminal extension. The pentatricopeptide repeat domain
sequesters an AT-rich recognition loop, which binds promoter DNA in T7
RNAP, probably explaining the need for TFAM (600438) during promoter
binding. Consistent with this, substitution of a conserved arginine
residue in the AT-rich recognition loop, or release of this loop by
deletion of the N-terminal part of mtRNAP, had no effect on
transcription. The fingers domain and the intercalating hairpin, which
melts DNA in phage RNAPs, are repositioned, explaining the need for
TFB2M (607055) during promoter melting. Ringel et al. (2011) concluded
that their results provided a new venue for the mechanistic analysis of
mitochondrial transcription, and also indicated how an early phage-like
mtRNAP lost functions in promoter binding and melting, which were
provided by initiation factors in trans during evolution, to enable
mitochondrial gene regulation and the adaptation of mitochondrial
function to changes in the environment.

REFERENCE 1. Anderson, S.; Bankier, A. T.; Barrell, B. G.; de Bruijn, M. H.
L.; Coulson, A. R.; Drouin, J.; Eperon, I. C.; Nierlich, D. P.; Roe,
B. A.; Sanger, F.; Schreier, P. H.; Smith, A. J. H.; Staden, R.; Young,
I. G.: Sequence and organization of the human mitochondrial genome. Nature 290:
457-465, 1981.

2. Fish, J.; Raule, N.; Attardi, G.: Discovery of a major D-loop
replication origin reveals two modes of human mtDNA synthesis. Science 306:
2098-2101, 2004.

3. Humphery-Smith, I.; Guyonnet, F.; Chastel, C.: Polypeptide cartography
of Spiroplasma taiwanense. Electrophoresis 15: 1212-1217, 1994.
Note; Erratum: Electrophoresis 16: 1324 only, 1995.

4. Kravchenko, J. E.; Rogozin, I. B.; Koonin, E. V.; Chumakov, P.
M.: Transcription of mammalian messenger RNAs by a nuclear RNA polymerase
of mitochondrial origin. (Letter) Nature 436: 735-739, 2005.

5. Ringel, R.; Sologub, M.; Morozov, Y. I.; Litonin, D.; Cramer, P.;
Temiakov, D.: Structure of human mitochondrial RNA polymerase. Nature 478:
269-273, 2011.

6. Tiranti, V.; Savoia, A.; Forti, F.; D'Apolito, M.-F.; Centra, M.;
Rocchi, M.; Zeviani, M.: Identification of the gene encoding the
human mitochondrial RNA polymerase (h-mtRPOL) by cyberscreening of
the Expressed Sequence Tags database. Hum. Molec. Genet. 6: 615-625,
1997.

7. Wasinger, V. C.; Cordwell, S. J.; Cerpa-Poljak, A.; Yan, J. X.;
Gooley, A. A.; Wilkins, M. R.; Duncan, M. W.; Harris, R.; Williams,
K. L.; Humphery-Smith, I.: Progress with gene-product mapping of
the Mollicutes: Mycoplasma genitalium. Electrophoresis 16: 1090-1094,
1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/21/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/7/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/27/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/15/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/25/1997

EDITED terry: 09/14/2012
alopez: 11/28/2011
terry: 11/21/2011
terry: 5/27/2010
alopez: 9/14/2005
terry: 9/7/2005
wwang: 2/7/2005
wwang: 2/3/2005
terry: 1/27/2005
alopez: 11/22/1999
mgross: 9/22/1999
terry: 9/15/1999
alopez: 7/11/1997
alopez: 4/30/1997
alopez: 4/29/1997
alopez: 4/25/1997

615189	TITLE *615189 ANKYRIN REPEAT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 55; ANKRD55
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ankyrin (see 612641)-like repeats, such as those found in ANKRD55, are
33-residue motifs involved in protein-protein interaction (Alloza et
al., 2012).

CLONING

By database analysis, Alloza et al. (2012) found ANKRD55 expression in
ovary, testis, endometrium, and resting CD4 (186940)-positive T cells.

MAPPING

Alloza et al. (2012) stated that the ANKRD55 gene maps to chromosome
5q11.

REFERENCE 1. Alloza, I.; Otaegui, D.; Lopez de Lapuente, A.; Antiguedad, A.;
Varade, J.; Nunez, C.; Arroyo, R.; Urcelay, E.; Fernandez, O.; Leyva,
L.; Fedetz, M.; Izquierdo, G.; and 10 others: ANKRD55 and DHCR7
are novel multiple sclerosis risk loci. Genes Immunity 13: 253-257,
2012.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/19/2013

EDITED mgross: 04/19/2013

602943	TITLE *602943 RAR-RELATED ORPHAN RECEPTOR C; RORC
;;RAR-RELATED ORPHAN RECEPTOR GAMMA; RORG;;
RZR-GAMMA; RZRG;;
RETINOIC ACID-BINDING RECEPTOR GAMMA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The nuclear receptor gene superfamily encodes transcriptional regulators
that play critical roles during homeostasis and specific stages of
development. Members of this gene family include the steroid hormone,
thyroid hormone and retinoid receptors, and orphan receptors for which a
ligand has not yet been identified. Most nuclear receptors contain 5
major domains: an N-terminal A/B domain, a highly conserved DNA-binding
(C) domain containing 2 zinc fingers, a hinge (D) region, a
ligand-binding (E) domain, and an F domain at the C terminus. Using
RT-PCR with degenerate primers based on the 2 most conserved regions of
the C domain, Hirose et al. (1994) isolated a partial cDNA from human
pancreas encoding a novel nuclear receptor. They then recovered skeletal
muscle cDNAs containing the remainder of the coding region. By sequence
analysis, Hirose et al. (1994) found that the predicted 560-amino acid
protein, which they called ROR-gamma, belonged to the ROR/RZR nuclear
receptor subfamily. ROR-gamma shares 50 to 51% sequence identity with
RORA (600825) and RORB (601972). Northern blot analysis revealed that
the 3.2-kb ROR-gamma transcript was expressed at the highest levels in
skeletal muscle and at lower levels in various other tissues. Additional
5.2- and 7.2-kb transcripts were observed in thymus. Medvedev et al.
(1997) stated that the amino acid sequences of mouse and human ROR-gamma
are 88% identical.

GENE FUNCTION

Eberl and Littman (2004) showed that intestinal intraepithelial T
lymphocytes (IELs) expressing the alpha-beta T-cell receptor (see
186880) are derived from precursors that express ROR-gamma-t, an orphan
nuclear hormone receptor detected only in immature CD4(+)CD8(+)
thymocytes, fetal lymphoid tissue-inducer (LTi) cells, and LTi-like
cells in cryptopatches within the adult intestinal lamina propria. Using
cell fate mapping, the authors found that all intestinal alpha-beta T
cells are progeny of CD4(+)CD8(+) thymocytes, indicating that the adult
intestine is not a significant site for alpha-beta T cell development.
Eberl and Littman (2004) concluded that intestinal ROR-gamma-t(+) cells
are local organizers of mucosal lymphoid tissue. Rocha (2005) commented
on the paper by Eberl and Littman (2004), finding their experiments
inconclusive and their interpretations inconsistent with previously
published data. Eberl and Littman (2005) responded that while their
findings did not exclude an extrathymic origin for some IELs, in
particular, TCR-gamma-delta T cells, their contribution to the
generation of the intestinal T cell pool is minimal in healthy mice.

Toward a system-level understanding of the transcriptional circuitry
regulating circadian clocks, Ueda et al. (2005) identified
clock-controlled elements on 16 clock and clock-controlled genes in a
comprehensive surveillance of evolutionarily conserved cis elements and
measurement of the transcriptional dynamics. Ueda et al. (2005) found
that E boxes (CACGTG) and E-prime boxes (CACGTT) controlled the
expression of Per1 (602260), Nr1d2 (602304), Per2 (603426), Nr1d1
(602408), Dbp (124097), Bhlhb2 (604256), and Bhlhb3 (606200)
transcription following a repressor-precedes-activator pattern,
resulting in delayed transcriptional activity. RevErbA/ROR-binding
elements regulated the transcriptional activity of Arntl (602550), Npas2
(603347), Nfil3 (605327), Clock (601851), Cry1 (601933), and Rorc
(602943) through a repressor-precedes-activator pattern as well.
DBP/E4BP4-binding elements controlled the expression of Per1, Per2, Per3
(603427), Nr1d1, Nr1d2, Rora, and Rorb through a
repressor-antiphasic-to-activator mechanism, which generates
high-amplitude transcriptional activity. Ueda et al. (2005) suggested
that regulation of E/E-prime boxes is a topologic vulnerability in
mammalian circadian clocks, a concept that had been functionally
verified using in vitro phenotype assay systems.

Silva-Santos et al. (2005) reported that double-positive T cells
regulate the differentiation of early thymocyte progenitors and
gamma-delta cells by a mechanism dependent on the transcription factor
ROR-gamma-t and the lymphotoxin-beta receptor (LTBR; 600979).
Silva-Santos et al. (2005) suggested the finding provokes a revised view
of the thymus, in which lymphoid tissue induction-type processes
coordinate the developmental and functional integration of the two T
cell lineages.

Differentiation of both T(H)17 and T regulatory (Treg) cell types
requires transforming growth factor-beta (TGFB; 190180), but depends on
distinct transcription factors: ROR-gamma-t for T(H)17 cells and FOXP3
(300292) for Treg cells. Zhou et al. (2008) demonstrated that, together
with proinflammatory cytokines, TGFB orchestrates T(H)17 cell
differentiation in a concentration-dependent manner. At low
concentrations, TGFB synergizes with IL6 (147620) and IL21 (605384) to
promote IL23 receptor (IL23R; 607562) expression, favoring T(H)17 cell
differentiation. High concentrations of TGFB repressed IL23R expression
and favored FOXP3-positive Treg cells. ROR-gamma-t and Foxp3 are
coexpressed in naive CD4(+) T cells exposed to TGFB and in a subset of T
cells in the small intestinal lamina propria of the mouse. In vitro,
Tgfb-induced Foxp3 inhibited ROR-gamma-t function, at least in part
through their interaction. Accordingly, lamina propria T cells that
coexpressed both transcription factors produced less interleukin-17
(Il17a; 603149) than those that express ROR-gamma-t alone. Il6, Il21,
and Il23 relieved Foxp3-mediated inhibition of ROR-gamma-t, thereby
promoting T(H)17 cell differentiation. Therefore, Zhou et al. (2008)
concluded that the decision of antigen-stimulated cells to differentiate
into either T(H)17 or Treg cells depends on the cytokine-regulated
balance of ROR-gamma-t and FOXP3.

Ghoreschi et al. (2010) showed that T(H)17 differentiation can occur in
the absence of TGF-beta (190180) signaling. Neither IL6 nor IL23 (see
605580) alone efficiently generated T(H)17 cells; however, these
cytokines in combination with IL1-beta (147720) effectively induced IL17
production in naive precursors, independently of TGF-beta. Epigenetic
modification of the IL17A (603149), IL17F (606496), and RORC promoters
proceeded without TGF-beta-1, allowing the generation of cells that
coexpressed ROR-gamma-t and Tbet (TBX21; 604895).
Tbet+ROR-gamma-t+T(H)17 cells are generated in vivo during experimental
allergic encephalomyelitis, and adoptively transferred T(H)17 cells
generated with IL23 without TGF-beta-1 were pathogenic in this disease
model. Ghoreschi et al. (2010) concluded that their data indicated an
alternative mode for T(H)17 differentiation, and that, consistent with
genetic data linking IL23R with autoimmunity, their findings
reemphasized the importance of IL23 and therefore may have therapeutic
implications.

Lymphoid tissue-inducer (LTi) cells initiate the development of lymphoid
tissues through the activation of local stromal cells in a process
similar to inflammation. LTi cells express the nuclear hormone receptor
ROR-gamma-t, which also directs the expression of the proinflammatory
cytokine interleukin-17 in T cells. Sawa et al. (2010) demonstrated that
LTi cells are part of a larger family of proinflammatory
ROR-gamma-t-positive innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) that differentiate
from distinct fetal liver ROR-gamma-t-positive precursors. The fate of
ROR-gamma-t-positive ILCs is determined by mouse age, and after birth
favors the generation of cells involved in intestinal homeostasis and
defense. Contrary to ROR-gamma-t-positive T cells, however,
ROR-gamma-t-positive ILCs develop in the absence of microbiota. Sawa et
al. (2010) concluded that ROR-gamma-t-positive ILCs evolve to preempt
intestinal colonization by microbial symbionts.

By performing a chemical screen with an insect cell-based reporter
system, Huh et al. (2011) identified the cardiac glycoside digoxin as a
specific inhibitor of ROR-gamma-t transcriptional activity. Digoxin
inhibited murine TH17 cell differentiation without affecting
differentiation of other T cell lineages and was effective in delaying
the onset and reducing the severity of autoimmune disease in mice. At
high concentrations, digoxin is toxic for human cells, but nontoxic
synthetic derivatives 20,22-dihydrodigoxin-21,23-diol and
digoxin-21-salicylidene specifically inhibited induction of IL17 in
human CD4+ T cells. Using these small-molecule compounds, Huh et al.
(2011) demonstrated that ROR-gamma-t is important for the maintenance of
IL17 expression in mouse and human effector T cells, and suggested that
derivatives of digoxin can be used as chemical templates for the
development of ROR-gamma-t-targeted therapeutic agents that attenuate
inflammatory lymphocyte function and autoimmune disease.

Solt et al. (2011) presented SR1001, a high-affinity synthetic
ligand--the first in a new class of compound--that is specific to both
ROR-alpha (600825) and ROR-gamma-t and which inhibits TH17 cell
differentiation and function. SR1001 binds specifically to the
ligand-binding domains of ROR-alpha and ROR-gamma-t, inducing a
conformational change within the ligand-binding domain that encompasses
the repositioning of helix-12 and leads to diminished affinity for
coactivators and increased affinity for corepressors, resulting in
suppression of the receptors' transcriptional activity. SR1001 inhibited
the development of murine TH17 cells, as demonstrated by inhibition of
interleukin-17A gene expression and protein production. Furthermore,
SR1001 inhibited the expression of cytokines when added to
differentiated murine or human TH17 cells. Finally, SR1001 effectively
suppressed the clinical severity of autoimmune disease in mice. Solt et
al. (2011) concluded that their data demonstrated the feasibility of
targeting the orphan receptors ROR-alpha and ROR-gamma-t to inhibit
specifically TH17 cell differentiation and function, and indicated that
this novel class of compound has potential utility in the treatment of
autoimmune diseases.

ILCs expressing the transcription factor ROR-gamma-t induce the
postnatal formation of intestinal lymphoid follicles and regulate
intestinal homeostasis. ROR-gamma-t-positive ILC express the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AHR; 600253), a highly conserved, ligand-inducible
transcription factor believed to control adaptation of multicellular
organisms to environmental challenges. In mice, Kiss et al. (2011)
showed that Ahr is required for the postnatal expansion of intestinal
ROR-gamma-t-positive ILC and the formation of intestinal lymphoid
follicles. Ahr activity within ROR-gamma-t-positive ILC could be induced
by dietary ligands such as those contained in vegetables of the family
Brassicaceae. Ahr-deficient mice were highly susceptible to infection
with Citrobacter rodentium, a mouse model for attaching and effacing
infections. Kiss et al. (2011) concluded that their results established
a molecular link between nutrients and the formation of immune system
components required to maintain intestinal homeostasis and resistance to
infections.

Using predominantly wildtype and Hif1a (603348)-/- mouse T cells, Dang
et al. (2011) showed that Hif1a was specifically required for
differentiation of naive T cells into Th17 cells. Hif1a interacted
directly with Ror-gamma-t and acetyltransferase p300 (EP300; 602700) at
the Il17 promoter, and all 3 factors were required for optimum Il17
expression. Simultaneously, Hif1a downregulated differentiation of naive
T cells into Treg cells by directing proteasomal degradation of the
Treg-dependent transcription factor Foxp3 by a mechanism that was
independent of Hif1a transcriptional activity. Differentiation of Th17
cells and loss of Treg cells was enhanced in cultures subjected to
hypoxic conditions. Knockout of Hif1a in mouse T cells rendered mice
highly resistant to Mog (159465)-induced experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis, a mouse model of multiple sclerosis (see 126200).
Dang et al. (2011) concluded that HIF1A has a role in immune responses
by controlling the balance between Th17 and Treg cells.

Santarlasci et al. (2012) noted that Th17 cells have a critical
pathogenic role in chronic inflammatory disorders, but they are rarely
found in inflammatory sites. Santarlasci et al. (2012) found that,
unlike Th1 cells, human CD161 (KLRB1; 602890)-positive Th17 precursor
cells did not proliferate and produce IL2 (147680) in response to
anti-CD3 (see CD3E; 186830)/anti-CD28 (186760) stimulation. Th17 cells
also proliferated poorly in response to IL2, in part due to lower
expression of the transcription factors JUN (165160), FOS (164810), and
NFATC1 (600489) and reduced surface expression of CD3E and CD3Z (CD247;
186780). Microarray and small interfering RNA analyses revealed high
expression of IL4I1 (609742) in Th17 precursor cells and showed that
IL4I1 upregulation was strictly dependent on RORC, the Th17 master
regulatory gene. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that Th17 cells also
exhibited high CD28 expression that was RORC dependent, and stimulation
of CD28 alone induced IL17 production and IL4I1 mRNA upregulation. Th17
cells from synovial fluid of patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis
(see 604302) also expressed higher levels of IL4I1 and CD28 than did Th1
cells. Santarlasci et al. (2012) concluded that the rarity of human Th17
cells in inflamed tissues results from RORC-dependent mechanisms that
limit their expansion and, therefore, reduce their potential to cause
damage.

Klose et al. (2013) provided evidence that the transcription factor Tbet
(604895) determines the fate of a distinct lineage of CCR6
(601835)-negative ROR-gamma-t-positive ILCs. Postnatally emerging
CCR6-ROR-gamma-t+ ILCs upregulated Tbet, and this was controlled by cues
from the commensal microbiota and IL23 (605580). In contrast,
CCR6+ROR-gamma-t+ ILCs, which arise earlier during ontogeny, did not
express Tbet. Tbet instructed the expression of Tbet target genes such
as interferon-gamma (147570) and of the natural cytotoxicity receptor
NKp46 (604530). Mice genetically lacking Tbet showed normal development
of CCR6-ROR-gamma-t innate lymphoid cells, but these cells could not
differentiate into NKp46-expressing ROR-gamma-t+ ILCs (i.e., IL22
(605330)-producing natural killer cells) and failed to produce
interferon-gamma. The production of interferon-gamma by Tbet-expressing
CCR6-ROR-gamma-t+ ILCs was essential for the release of mucus-forming
glycoproteins required to protect the epithelial barrier against
Salmonella enterica infection. Klose et al. (2013) concluded that
coexpression of Tbet and ROR-gamma-t, which is also found in subsets of
IL17-producing T-helper cells, may be an evolutionarily conserved
transcriptional program that originally developed as part of the innate
defense against infections but that also confers an increased risk of
immune-mediated pathology.

GENE STRUCTURE

Medvedev et al. (1997) found that the mouse Rorc gene contains 11 exons
and spans more than 21 kb.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids, Hirose et al. (1994) mapped the
ROR-gamma gene to human chromosome 1. Using fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Medvedev et al. (1997) refined the map position to 1q21.
These authors mapped the ROR-gamma gene in mouse to band 3F2.1-2.2.

ANIMAL MODEL

Most developing thymocytes undergo apoptosis because they do not
interact productively with major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecules. A thymus-specific isoform of RORC, termed ROR-gamma-t
(RORGT), inhibits the expression of Fas ligand (TNFSF6; 134638) and IL2
(147680). Sun et al. (2000) generated Rorc-deficient mice and found that
although they were fertile and phenotypically normal, they had reduced
overall as well as double-positive (DP) CD4 (186940)-positive/CD8 (see
186910)-positive and single-positive CD4-positive thymic cell numbers
and did not express Bclxl (see BCL2L1; 600039). The DP cells underwent
spontaneous apoptosis at a more rapid rate than those in wildtype mice.
The Rorc-null mice had reduced amounts of CDKN1B (600778) and
correspondingly greater CDK2 (116953) activity. Expression of Bclxl
restored most aspects of thymocyte development and increased survival.
Although Rorc-deficient mice had normal export of T lymphocytes to the
periphery and normal splenic architecture, they completely lacked lymph
nodes and Peyer patches, possibly due to the absence of Rorc-expressing
CD4-positive/CD45 (151460)-positive progenitor cells.

To identify the physiologic functions of the retinoid-related orphan
receptor gamma, Kurebayashi et al. (2000) generated mice deficient in
ROR-gamma function by targeted disruption. Homozygous-null mice lacked
peripheral and mesenteric lymph nodes and Peyer patches, indicating that
RORC gene expression is indispensable for lymph node organogenesis.
Although the spleen was enlarged, its architecture was normal. The
thymus of Rorc -/- mice contained 74.4% fewer thymocytes than that of
wildtype mice. Rorc -/- thymocytes placed in culture exhibited dramatic
increase in the rate of 'spontaneous' apoptosis. The observations
indicated that ROR-gamma is essential for lymphoid organogenesis and
plays an important regulatory role in thymopoiesis.

Using FACS analysis, Zhang et al. (2003) showed that splenomegaly in
Rorg -/- mice was due to increased numbers of resting B lymphocytes,
with only marginal increases in T cells and macrophages. In contrast,
peripheral blood lymphocyte levels were comparable to those in wildtype
mice. B-lymphocyte development was normal in both bone marrow and
spleens of Rorg -/- mice. Experiments with bone marrow chimeras using
Rorg -/- or Rag2 (179616) -/- mice as recipients and wildtype or Rorg
-/- mice as donors, respectively, showed that there was no defect in
lymphocyte homeostasis in Rorg -/- mice, but they appeared to have a
defect in the exit of lymphocytes from the spleen.

Eberl et al. (2004) generated mice expressing green fluorescent protein
in exon 1 of the gene encoding Rorgt. During fetal life, Rorgt was
expressed exclusively in CD4-positive and CD4-negative lymphoid tissue
inducer (LTi) cells, which are associated with the development of lymph
nodes and Peyer patches. LTi cells provide essential factors, including
lymphotoxin alpha-1 (153440)/beta-2 (600978), for activation of the
mesenchyma in the lymph node and Peyer patch anlagen. Rorgt-deficient
mice lacked all lymph nodes and Peyer patches, as well as LTi cells, a
phenotype similar to that observed in Id2 (600386) -/- mice. However,
unlike Id2 -/- mice, Rorgt -/- mice retained CD45-positive cells, CD11b
(120980)-positive cells, and MHC class II-positive cells.

RORG, which is broadly expressed, and RORGT, which is expressed
exclusively in immune system cells, are both encoded by the RORC gene
through the use of different promoters and differ only in their N
termini. Ivanov et al. (2006) found that a subset of mouse lamina
propria T cells expressed Rorgt and, using mice lacking Rorgt, they
showed that Rorgt was required for expression of Il17 (IL17A; 603149).
Mice lacking Rorgt had 10-fold fewer Il17-positive cells in intestinal
lamina propria compared with wildtype mice. Forced expression of Rorgt
in naive T cells induced expression of Il17 and Il17f (606496). FACS and
RT-PCR analyses of mice lacking Il6 (147620), which have normal T-cell
numbers, defective induction of autoimmunity, and increased
susceptibility to a variety of pathogens, showed that Il6 was required
for expression of both Rorgt and Il17. Rorc -/- mice were less
susceptible to experimental allergic encephalomyelitis, as were
Rag2-deficient mice that received adoptively transferred cells from Rorc
-/- mice. Ivanov et al. (2006) concluded that RORGT is the transcription
factor that directs differentiation of inflammatory Th17 cells.

REFERENCE 1. Dang, E. V.; Barbi, J.; Yang, H.-Y.; Jinasena, D.; Yu, H.; Zheng,
Y.; Bordman, Z.; Fu, J.; Kim, Y.; Yen, H.-R.; Luo, W.; Zeller, K.;
Shimoda, L.; Topalian, S. L.; Semenza, G. L.; Dang, C. V.; Pardoll,
D. M.; Pan, F.: Control of TH17/T-reg balance by hypoxia-inducible
factor 1. Cell 146: 772-784, 2011.

2. Eberl, G.; Littman, D. R.: Thymic origin of intestinal alpha-beta
T cells revealed by fate mapping of ROR-gamma-t(+) cells. Science 305:
248-251, 2004.

3. Eberl, G.; Littman, D. R.: Response to comment on 'Thymic Origin
of Intestinal alpha-beta T Cells Revealed by Fate Mapping of ROR-gamma-delta+
Cells.' (Commentary) Science 308: 1553 only, 2005.

4. Eberl, G.; Marmon, S.; Sunshine, M.-J.; Rennert, P. D.; Choi, Y.;
Littman, D. R.: An essential function for the nuclear receptor ROR-gamma-t
in the generation of fetal lymphoid tissue inducer cells. Nature
Immun. 5: 64-73, 2004.

5. Ghoreschi, K.; Laurence, A.; Yang, X.-P.; Tato, C. M.; McGeachy,
M. J.; Konkel, J. E.; Ramos, H. L.; Wei, L.; Davidson, T. S.; Bouladoux,
N.; Grainger, J. R.; Chen, Q.; and 9 others: Generation of pathogenic
T(H)17 cells in the absence of TGF-beta signalling. Nature 467:
967-971, 2010.

6. Hirose, T.; Smith, R. J.; Jetten, A. M.: ROR-gamma: the third
member of ROR/RZR orphan receptor subfamily that is highly expressed
in skeletal muscle. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 205: 1976-1983,
1994.

7. Huh, J. R.; Leung, M. W. L.; Huang, P.; Ryan, D. A.; Krout, M.
R.; Malapaka, R. R. V.; Chow, J.; Manel, N.; Ciofani, M.; Kim, S.
V.; Cuesta, A.; Santori, F. R.; Lafaille, J. J.; Xu, H. E.; Gin, D.
Y.; Rastinejad, F.; Littman, D. R.: Digoxin and its derivatives suppress
TH17 cell differentiation by antagonizing ROR-gamma-t activity. Nature 472:
486-490, 2011.

8. Ivanov, I. I.; McKenzie, B. S.; Zhou, L.; Tadokoro, C. E.; Lepelley,
A.; Lafaille, J. J.; Cua, D. J.; Littman, D. R.: The orphan nuclear
receptor ROR-gamma-t directs the differentiation program of proinflammatory
IL-17+ T helper cells. Cell 126: 1121-1133, 2006.

9. Kiss, E. A.; Vonarbourg, C.; Kopfmann, S.; Hobeika, E.; Finke,
D.; Esser, C.; Diefenbach, A.: Natural aryl hydrocarbon receptor
ligands control organogenesis of intestinal lymphoid follicles. Science 334:
1561-1565, 2011.

10. Klose, C. S. N.; Kiss, E. A.; Schwierzeck, V.; Ebert, K.; Hoyler,
T.; d'Hargues, Y.; Goppert, N.; Croxford, A. L.; Waisman, A.; Tanriver,
Y.; Diefenbach, A.: A T-bet gradient controls the fate and function
of CCR6(-)ROR-gamma-t(+) innate lymphoid cells. Nature 494: 261-265,
2013.

11. Kurebayashi, S.; Ueda, E.; Sakaue, M.; Patel, D. D.; Medvedev,
A.; Zhang, F.; Jetten, A. M.: Retinoid-related orphan receptor gamma
(ROR-gamma) is essential for lymphoid organogenesis and controls apoptosis
during thymopoiesis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 10132-10137, 2000.

12. Medvedev, A.; Chistokhina, A.; Hirose, T.; Jetten, A. M.: Genomic
structure and chromosomal mapping of the nuclear orphan receptor ROR-gamma
(RORC) gene. Genomics 46: 93-102, 1997.

13. Rocha, B.: Comment on 'Thymic Origin of Intestinal alpha-beta
T Cells Revealed by Fate Mapping of ROR-gamma-delta+ Cells.' (Commentary) Science 308:
1553 only, 2005.

14. Santarlasci, V.; Maggi, L.; Capone, M.; Querci, V.; Beltrame,
L.; Cavalieri, D.; D'Aiuto, E.; Cimaz, R.; Nebbioso, A.; Liotta, F.;
De Palma, R.; Maggi, E.; Cosmi, L.; Romagnani, S.; Annunziato, F.
: Rarity of human T helper 17 cells is due to retinoic acid orphan
receptor-dependent mechanisms that limit their expression. Immunity 36:
201-214, 2012.

15. Sawa, S.; Cherrier, M.; Lochner, M.; Satoh-Takayama, N.; Fehling,
H. J.; Langa, F.; Di Santo, J. P.; Eberl, G.: Lineage relationship
analysis of ROR-gamma-t+ innate lymphoid cells. Science 330: 665-669,
2010.

16. Silva-Santos, B.; Pennington, D. J.; Hayday, A. C.: Lymphotoxin-mediated
regulation of gamma-delta cell differentiation by alpha-beta T cell
progenitors. Science 307: 925-928, 2005.

17. Solt, L. A.; Kumar, N.; Nuhant, P.; Wang, Y.; Lauer, J. L.; Liu,
J.; Istrate, M. A.; Kamenecka, T. M.; Roush, W. R.; Vidovic, D.; Schurer,
S. C.; Xu, J.; Wagoner, G.; Drew, P. D.; Griffin, P. R.; Burris, T.
P.: Suppression of TH17 differentiation and autoimmunity by a synthetic
ROR ligand. Nature 472: 491-494, 2011.

18. Sun, Z.; Unutmaz, D.; Zou, Y.-R.; Sunshine, M. J.; Pierani, A.;
Brenner-Morton, S.; Mebius, R. E.; Littman, D. R.: Requirement for
ROR-gamma in thymocyte survival and lymphoid organ development. Science 288:
2369-2373, 2000.

19. Ueda, H. R.; Hayashi, S.; Chen, W.; Sano, M.; Machida, M.; Shigeyoshi,
Y.; Iino, M.; Hashimoto, S.: System-level identification of transcriptional
circuits underlying mammalian circadian clocks. Nature Genet. 37:
187-192, 2005.

20. Zhang, N.; Guo, J.; He, Y.-W.: Lymphocyte accumulation in the
spleen of retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor gamma-deficient
mice. J. Immun. 171: 1667-1675, 2003.

21. Zhou, L.; Lopes, J. E.; Chong, M. M. W.; Ivanov, I. I.; Min, R.;
Victora, G. D.; Shen, Y.; Du, J.; Rubtsov, Y. P.; Rudensky, A. Y.;
Ziegler, S. F.; Littman, D. R.: TGF-beta-induced Foxp3 inhibits T(H)17
cell differentiation by antagonizing ROR-gamma-t function. Nature 453:
236-240, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/12/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/26/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/21/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/27/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/10/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/4/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/23/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/12/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/22/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/15/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/10/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/3/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/29/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/25/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/2/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/11/2000
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/29/2000

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 8/6/1998

EDITED mgross: 03/19/2013
terry: 3/12/2013
alopez: 3/5/2013
terry: 2/26/2013
mgross: 9/26/2012
terry: 9/21/2012
alopez: 2/29/2012
terry: 2/27/2012
alopez: 6/21/2011
terry: 6/10/2011
alopez: 1/4/2011
alopez: 11/29/2010
terry: 11/23/2010
alopez: 6/17/2008
terry: 6/12/2008
mgross: 1/2/2007
terry: 12/22/2006
mgross: 6/1/2006
terry: 5/15/2006
alopez: 2/17/2006
terry: 2/10/2006
alopez: 2/3/2006
terry: 2/3/2006
terry: 7/29/2005
terry: 4/5/2005
tkritzer: 8/26/2004
terry: 8/25/2004
mgross: 6/2/2004
terry: 10/11/2000
carol: 6/29/2000
dkim: 10/16/1998
alopez: 8/6/1998

610603	TITLE *610603 AlkB, E. COLI, HOMOLOG OF, 3; ALKBH3
;;PROSTATE CANCER ANTIGEN 1; PCA1;;
DEPC1;;
ABH3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The Escherichia coli AlkB protein protects against the cytotoxicity of
methylating agents by repair of the specific DNA lesions generated in
single-stranded DNA. ALKBH2 (610602) and ALKBH3 are E. coli AlkB
homologs that catalyze the removal of 1-methyladenine and
3-methylcytosine (Duncan et al., 2002).

CLONING

By searching human genomic and cDNA databases with ALKBH1 (605345) as
query, Duncan et al. (2002) obtained a full-length cDNA of ALKBH3. The
deduced protein shares 23.1% amino acid identity over the core region
with E. coli AlkB and shares similarity to
alpha-ketoglutarate/Fe(II)-dependent dioxygenases in the C-terminal
region. It has a predicted tertiary structure with high similarity to
the crystal structure of known dioxygenases. Northern blot analysis
detected ALKBH3 expression in all tissues examined, as well as several
carcinoma cell lines, with highest expression in spleen, prostate,
bladder and colon. Immunofluorescence studies localized ALKBH3 to the
nucleus in a diffuse pattern and to the cytoplasm.

Using fluorescent differential display analysis to identify genes
upregulated in prostate cancer, followed by RT-PCR and 5-prime RACE,
Konishi et al. (2005) cloned ALKBH3, which they called PCA1. The deduced
286-amino acid protein has an N-terminal signal sequence and a
C-terminal 2-oxoglutarate/Fe(II)-dependent oxygenase domain.
Quantitative real-time PCR detected PCA1 in all tissues examined, with
highest expression in pancreas and testis. Western blot analysis of
prostate cancer cell lines detected PCA1 at an apparent molecular mass
of about 40 kD. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that 90% (63 of
70) prostate cancer specimens were positive for PCA1. Staining was
confined to cancerous cells in the prostate tissue sample and was most
often exhibited by atypical epithelia in high-grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasias. Little to no staining was seen in adjacent
normal epithelium, in benign prostatic hyperplasia, or in several other
cancers tested.

Using quantitative real-time PCR, Tsujikawa et al. (2007) found variable
ABH3 expression in all 16 tissues examined, with highest expression in
pancreas, followed by ovary, liver, and testis. Fluorescence-tagged ABH3
was expressed diffusely in the cytoplasm and more strongly in the
nucleus of transfected HeLa cells

GENE FUNCTION

Using purified GST- and histidine-tagged ALKBH3 overexpressed in E.
coli, Duncan et al. (2002) showed that ALKBH3 catalyzed the removal of
both 1-methyladenine and 3-methylcytosine from methylated
polynucleotides. ALKBH3 directly reverted 3-methylcytosine to cytosine
and can also repair ethylated DNA bases through a mechanism similar to
E. coli AlkB activity.

By examining PCA1-transfected and control COS-7 cells, Konishi et al.
(2005) demonstrated that PCA1 conferred resistance against methylmethane
sulfonate-induced cell damage, indicative of demethylation activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Konishi et al. (2005) determined that the ALKBH3 gene contains at least
10 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Duncan et al. (2002) mapped the ALKBH3
gene to chromosome 11q11. By genomic sequence analysis, Konishi et al.
(2005) mapped the ALKBH3 gene to chromosome 11p11.12.

ANIMAL MODEL

Ringvoll et al. (2006) generated mice with targeted disruption of Abh2
(ALKBH2; 610602), Abh3, and Abh2/Abh3 double-knockout mice. Both single-
and double-knockout mice were viable and appeared normal into adulthood.
Using genomic DNA isolated from liver samples, the authors showed that
Abh2-null mice displayed an increased accumulation of 1-methyladenine
compared to wildtype and Abh3-null mice. Embryonic fibroblasts derived
from Abh2-null mice exhibited a decreased ability to remove methyl
methane sulfate (MMS)-induced 1-methyladenine from genomic DNA compared
to fibroblasts from both wildtype and Abh3-null mice. Ringvoll et al.
(2006) concluded that Abh2 and Abh3 have different roles in repair of
DNA damage caused by alkylating agents with Abh2 being the primary
oxidative demethylase for repair of 1-methyladenine and 3-methylcytosine
in double-stranded DNA.

REFERENCE 1. Duncan, T.; Trewick, S.; Koivisto, P.; Bates, P. A.; Lindahl, T.;
Sedgwick, B.: Reversal of DNA alkylation damage by two human dioxygenases. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 16660-16665, 2002.

2. Konishi, N.; Nakamura, M.; Ishida, E.; Shimada, K.; Mitsui, E.;
Yoshikawa, R.; Yamamoto, H.; Tsujikawa, K.: High expression of a
new parker PCA-1 in human prostate carcinoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 11:
5090-5097, 2005.

3. Ringvoll, J.; Nordstrand, L. M.; Vagbo, C. B.; Talstad, V.; Reite,
K.; Aas, P. A.; Lauritzen, K. H.; Liabakk, N. B.; Bjork, A.; Doughty,
R. W.; Falnes, P. O.; Krokan, H. E.; Klungland, A.: Repair deficient
mice reveal mABH2 as the primary oxidative demethylase for repairing
1meA and 3meC lesions in DNA. EMBO J. 25: 2189-2198, 2006.

4. Tsujikawa, K.; Koike, K.; Kitae, K.; Shinkawa, A.; Arima, H.; Suzuki,
T.; Tsuchiya, M.; Makino, Y.; Furukawa, T.; Konishi, N.; Yamamoto,
H.: Expression and sub-cellular localization of human ABH family
molecules. J. Cell. Molec. Med. 11: 1105-1116, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 03/12/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/29/2006

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 11/27/2006

EDITED mgross: 03/12/2010
alopez: 6/2/2008
terry: 5/23/2008
wwang: 11/29/2006
wwang: 11/28/2006

602443	TITLE *602443 X-PROLYL AMINOPEPTIDASE 1; XPNPEP1
;;X-PROLYL AMINOPEPTIDASE-LIKE; XPNPEPL;;
AMINOPEPTIDASE P-LIKE;;
AMINOPEPTIDASE P, SOLUBLE; SAMP;;
AMINOPEPTIDASE P, CYTOSOLIC;;
APP1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

X-prolyl aminopeptidase (EC 3.4.11.9) is a proline-specific
metalloaminopeptidase that specifically catalyzes the removal of any
unsubstituted N-terminal amino acid that is adjacent to a penultimate
proline residue. Because of its specificity toward proline, it has been
suggested that X-prolyl aminopeptidase is important in the maturation
and degradation of peptide hormones, neuropeptides, and tachykinins, as
well as in the digestion of otherwise resistant dietary protein
fragments, thereby complementing the pancreatic peptidases. Deficiency
of X-prolyl aminopeptidase results in excretion of large amounts of
imino-oligopeptides in urine (Blau et al., 1988).

CLONING

X-prolyl aminopeptidase has been isolated from different tissues and
species. Vergas Romero et al. (1995) reported the complete amino acid
sequence of the pig kidney enzyme. The nucleotide sequences of the
X-prolyl aminopeptidase-encoding genes (pepP) from several
microorganisms have been reported. By RT-PCR of
phytohemagglutinin-stimulated lymphocyte mRNA, Vanhoof et al. (1997)
isolated a novel human cDNA, named XPNPEPL, that encodes a 623-amino
acid protein exhibiting 44% sequence identity and 62% sequence
similarity to pig kidney X-prolyl aminopeptidase and high sequence
homology to proteins in S. pombe and S. cerevisiae. Northern blot
analysis indicated ubiquitous expression of XPNPEPL as a 2.7-kb
transcript, with the highest expression in pancreas, followed by heart
and muscle.

Sprinkle et al. (2000) cloned XPNPEPL, which they termed soluble
aminopeptidase P (SAMP), or XPNPEP1. They noted the presence of 4 blocks
of sequences homologous to E. coli methionine aminopeptidase, which is
part of the 'pita-bread fold' family. Like the bacteria enzyme, XPNPEPL
contains a putative proton shuttle (residue 395) and 5 divalent metal
ligands (residues 415, 426, 485, 523, and 537). Sprinkle et al. (2000)
proposed that the enzyme inactivates bradykinin and is part of an
intracellular kallikrein-kinin system, possibly in secretory vesicles.

Cottrell et al. (2000) cloned and characterized XPNPEPL, which they
designated cytosolic APP. They identified an arg residue at position 332
instead of the pro residue reported by Vanhoof et al. (1997) and
determined that the cytosolic protein is 43% identical to membrane
aminopeptidase P (XPNPEP2; 300145). The cytosolic enzyme lacks the
hydrophobic signal sequences for an N-terminal signal peptide and a
C-terminal GPI anchor found in the membrane-bound enzyme. Immunoblot
analysis showed expression of a 71-kD homodimer protein capable of
hydrolyzing bradykinin in a divalent cation-dependent manner, similar to
XPNPEP2. The principal metal in the purified recombinant protein was
manganese, at an approximately 1:1 molar ratio.

Using RT-PCR, Ersahin et al. (2005) detected APP1 expression in all
human tissues examined with high expression in pancreas, liver, kidney,
and testis. There was fairly uniform expression in T cells, B cells, and
monocytes. APP1 functions as a soluble cytosolic homodimer of about 70
kD and exhibits broad substrate specificity.

GENE FUNCTION

Oh et al. (2004) described a hypothesis-driven, systems biology approach
to identifying a small subset of proteins induced at the tissue-blood
interface that are inherently accessible to antibodies injected
intravenously. They used subcellular fractionation, subtractive
proteomics, and bioinformatics to identify endothelial cell surface
proteins exhibiting restricted tissue distribution and apparent tissue
modulation. Expression profiling and gamma-scintigraphic imaging with
antibodies established 2 of these proteins, aminopeptidase-P and annexin
A1 (151690), as selective in vivo targets for antibodies in lung and
solid tumors, respectively. Radioimmunotherapy to annexin A1 destroyed
tumors and increased animal survival.

MAPPING

Using FISH and somatic hybrid analysis, Sprinkle et al. (2000) mapped
the XPNPEPL gene to chromosome 10q25.3, distinct from the Xq25
localization of XPNPEP2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Associations Pending Confirmation

To identify loci contributing to susceptibility to biliary atresia
(210500), characterized by the progressive fibrosclerosing obliteration
of the extrahepatic biliary system during the first few weeks of life,
Garcia-Barcelo et al. (2010) carried out a genomewide association study
(GWAS) using nearly 500,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
200 Chinese biliary atresia patients and 481 ethnically matched control
subjects. The 10 most associated SNPs from the GWAS were genotyped in an
independent set of 124 BA and 90 control subjects. The strongest overall
association was found for dbSNP rs17095355 on chromosome 10q24, 68 kb
downstream from XPNPEP1.

REFERENCE 1. Blau, N.; Niederwieser, A.; Shmerling, D. H.: Peptiduria presumably
caused by aminopeptidase-P deficiency: a new inborn error of metabolism. J.
Inherit. Metab. Dis. 11 (suppl): 240-242, 1988.

2. Cottrell, G. S.; Hooper, N. M.; Turner, A. J.: Cloning, expression,
and characterization of human cytosolic aminopeptidase P: a single
manganese(II)-dependent enzyme. Biochemistry 39: 15121-15128, 2000.

3. Ersahin, C.; Szpaderska, A. M.; Orawski, A. T.; Simmons, W. H.
: Aminopeptidase P isozyme expression in human tissues and peripheral
blood mononuclear cell fractions. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 435: 303-310,
2005.

4. Garcia-Barcelo, M.-M.; Yeung, M.-Y.; Miao, X.-P.; Tang, C. S.-M.;
Chen, G.; So, M.-T.; Ngan, E. S.-W.; Lui, V. C.-H.; Chen, Y.; Liu,
X.-L.; Hui, K.-J. W. S.; Li, L.; and 13 others: Genome-wide association
study identifies a susceptibility locus for biliary atresia on 10q24.2. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 19: 2917-2925, 2010.

5. Oh, P.; Li, Y.; Yu, J.; Durr, E.; Krasinska, K. M.; Carver, L.
A.; Testa, J. E.; Schnitzer, J. E.: Subtractive proteomic mapping
of the endothelial surface in lung and solid tumours for tissue-specific
therapy. Nature 429: 629-635, 2004.

6. Sprinkle, T. J.; Caldwell, C.; Ryan, J. W.: Cloning, chromosomal
sublocalization of the human soluble aminopeptidase P gene (XPNPEP1)
to 10q25.3 and conservation of the putative proton shuttle and metal
ligand binding sites with XPNPEP2. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 378:
51-56, 2000.

7. Vanhoof, G.; Goossens, F.; Juliano, M. A.; Juliano, L.; Hendriks,
D.; Schatteman, K.; Lin, A. H.; Scharpe, S.: Isolation and sequence
analysis of a human cDNA clone (XPNPEPL) homologous to X-prolyl aminopeptidase
(aminopeptidase P). Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 78: 275-280, 1997.

8. Vergas Romero, C.; Neudorfer, I.; Mann, K.; Schafer, W.: Purification
and amino acid sequence of aminopeptidase P from pig kidney. Europ.
J. Biochem. 229: 262-269, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 09/06/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/7/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/26/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/24/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/16/1998

EDITED alopez: 09/06/2013
wwang: 9/7/2010
alopez: 7/26/2004
terry: 7/26/2004
alopez: 11/3/2003
mgross: 6/24/2002
mgross: 6/21/2002
dholmes: 4/1/1998
psherman: 3/16/1998

613524	TITLE *613524 SEROLOGICALLY DEFINED COLON CANCER ANTIGEN 8; SDCCAG8
;;CENTROSOMAL COLON CANCER AUTOANTIGEN PROTEIN; CCCAP;;
NY-CO-8;;
SLSN7 GENE;;
NPHP10 GENE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kenedy et al. (2003) cloned an SDCCAG8 cDNA, which they called CCCAP
(centrosomal colon cancer autoantigen protein), from a human placenta
cDNA library. By sequence analysis they discovered that a fragment of
CCCAP had been identified as colon cancer autoantigen NY-CO-8 by Scanlan
et al. (1998). Kenedy et al. (2003) found at least 3 alternatively
spliced CCCAP transcripts, including a full-length transcript encoding a
deduced 713-amino acid protein with a molecular mass of 82.5 kD. Kenedy
et al. (2003) cloned the mouse CCCAP cDNA from a spleen cDNA library.
The human and mouse proteins share 71% identity and have the same
predicted secondary structure consisting of a predicted N-terminal
globular domain and a C-terminal coiled-coil domain. Human and mouse
CCCAP transcripts were found to be ubiquitously expressed but at very
low copy number (Kenedy et al., 2003). Endogenous mouse BALB/c 3T3
fibroblasts and ectopic human CCCAP in U2-osteosarcoma cells localized
to centrosomes during interphase and mitosis.

Otto et al. (2010) determined that the SDCCAG8 gene comprises 18 exons.

MAPPING

Kenedy et al. (2003) stated that the CCCAP gene maps to chromosome
1q43-q44.

GENE FUNCTION

Based on the centrosomal localization of human and mouse CCCAP and the
ability of mouse CCCAP to homo-oligomerize, Kenedy et al. (2003)
suggested that CCCAP is a stable centrosomal component with a structural
role in the centrosomal architecture or the microtubule organizing
activities of the centrosome matrix.

In a mammalian renal epithelial cell line, Otto et al. (2010) found that
Sdccag8 localizes to centrosomes, but at a distance from centrioles and
from distal centrosomal appendages. There was colocalization with ninein
(608684), a marker of centrosomal appendages, and with NPHP5 (609237)
and OFD1 (300170). Sdccag8 also localized to cell-cell junctions.
Further cellular studies led Otto et al. (2010) to conclude that SDCCAG8
is located at the distal ends of both centrioles and that it colocalizes
to centrosomes throughout the cell cycle. Human SDCCAG8 was also found
in human retinal pigment epithelial cells, where it localized in the
vicinity of centrosomes. Yeast 2-hybrid screening studies showed that
SDCCAG8 interacts directly with OFD1, and studies in mouse photoreceptor
cells showed that Sdccag8 colocalized with Nphp5 in the transition zone.

Chaki et al. (2012) found that NPHP10 colocalized with the DNA damage
response proteins TIP60 (KAT5; 601409), SC35 (SRSF2; 600813), CEP164
(614848), and ZNF423 (604557) at nuclear foci in immortalized human
retinal pigment epithelial cells. This noncentrosomal localization of
NPHP10 suggested a role for this protein in DNA damage repair. Chaki et
al. (2012) suggested that defects in DNA repair may play a role in
nephronophthisis-related ciliopathies, such as Senior-Loken syndrome
(SLSN7; 613615).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Otto et al. (2010) used homozygosity mapping followed by exon capture
and massively parallel sequencing to identify a homozygous truncating
mutation in the SDCCAG8 gene (613524.0001) in 2 sibs with Senior-Loken
syndrome 7 (SLSN7; 613615), who were born of consanguineous parents from
Reunion Island. Both patients had biopsy-confirmed nephronophthisis and
retinal degeneration, leading to blindness in 1. Analysis of additional
families found 11 different truncating mutations (see, e.g.,
613524.0002-613524.0005) in 9 families with SLSN. Some of the families
had additional features, such as obesity and mild mental retardation,
that were suggestive of the ciliopathy Bardet-Biedl syndrome (209900);
however, none of the patients had polydactyly. Recessive SDCCAG8
mutations accounted for 3.3% (6 of 182) cases from a worldwide SLSN
cohort.

ANIMAL MODEL

Otto et al. (2010) demonstrated that knockout of the Sdccag8 gene in
zebrafish resulted in multiple developmental defects, including abnormal
body axis curvature, shortened and broadened tails, kidney cysts at 72
hours post fertilization, and hydrocephalus. Knockdown of murine Sdccag8
in renal epithelial cells resulted in the formation of spheroids with
architectural defects characterized by disturbed localization of
beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806) at the basolateral membrane, fewer tight
junctions, and an irregular lumen. These findings were consistent with a
defect in cell polarity and lumen formation, which may reflect the renal
tubular defects found in individuals with a congenital SDCCAG8 mutation.
Increased intracellular cAMP caused a dose-dependent loss of Sdccag8
from cell-cell junctions compared to controls.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SENIOR-LOKEN SYNDROME 7
SDCCAG8, 1-BP DEL, 1420G

In 2 sibs with Senior-Loken syndrome 7 (SLSN7; 613615), born of
consanguineous parents from Reunion Island, Otto et al. (2010)
identified a homozygous 1-bp deletion (1420delG) in exon 12 of the
SDCCAG8 gene, resulting in frameshift and premature termination
(Glu474fsTer493). The mutation was found by homozygosity mapping
followed by exon capture and massively parallel sequencing. One patient
had onset of nephronophthisis at age 4 years and retinal degeneration at
age 14 years, whereas the other was blind by age 7 years and had onset
of renal disease at age 14 years. The mutation was not found in 270
control individuals.

.0002
SENIOR-LOKEN SYNDROME 7
SDCCAG8, 1-BP INS, 1339G

In 2 affected members of a consanguineous Algerian family with SLSN7
(613615), Otto et al. (2010) identified a homozygous 1-bp insertion
(1339insG) in exon 11 of the SDCCAG8 gene, resulting in frameshift and
premature termination (Glu447fsTer463). Onset of nephronophthisis
occurred at ages 7 and 4 years, respectively, and flat
electroretinograms were observed at ages 13 and 6 years, respectively.
One of the patients had mild mental retardation. The mutation was not
found in 270 control individuals.

.0003
SENIOR-LOKEN SYNDROME 7
SDCCAG8, 4-BP DEL, 1946GTGT

By direct exon sequencing of 118 families with Senior-Loken syndrome,
Otto et al. (2010) found a homozygous truncating mutation in the SDCCAG8
gene in 1 family, consistent with SLSN7 (613615). The mutation was a
4-bp deletion (1946delGTGT) in exon 16, resulting in frameshift and
premature termination (Cys649fsTer658). The patient had retinal
degeneration, and nephronophthisis was confirmed by renal biopsy at age
22 years. The mutation was not found in 270 control individuals.

.0004
SENIOR-LOKEN SYNDROME 7
SDCCAG8, IVS7, C-T

In 4 affected members of a consanguineous Gypsy family with SLSN7
(613615), Otto et al. (2010) identified a homozygous deep intronic
mutation (c.740+356C-T) in intron 7 of the SDCCAG8 gene, predicted to
cause loss of an exonic splice enhancer site, with the result of
aberrant splicing introducing an in-frame stop codon. RT-PCR and
immunoblotting studies showed almost complete absence of the full-length
product. All patients had NPHP and retinal degeneration, as well as some
features of Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS; 209900), such as mild mental
retardation and obesity, although none had polydactyly. One of the
patients had relatively late onset of renal and retinal disease in the
twenties, which may have been due to some residual protein function. The
mutation was not found in 270 control individuals.

.0005
SENIOR-LOKEN SYNDROME 7
SDCCAG8, LYS227TER

In 2 affected members of a consanguineous family with SLSN7 (613615),
Otto et al. (2010) identified a homozygous 679A-T transversion in exon 7
of the SDCCAG8 gene, resulting in a lys227-to-ter (K227X) substitution.
Both individuals had NPHP and retinal degeneration, as well as some
features of Bardet-Biedl syndrome (209900), such as mild mental
retardation, obesity, and hypogenitalism, although neither had
polydactyly. The mutation was not found in 270 control individuals.

REFERENCE 1. Chaki, M.; Airik, R.; Ghosh, A. K.; Giles, R. H.; Chen, R.; Slaats,
G. G.; Wang, H.; Hurd, T. W.; Zhou, W.; Cluckey, A.; Gee, H. Y.; Ramaswami,
G.; and 61 others: Exome capture reveals ZNF423 and CEP164 mutations,
linking renal ciliopathies to DNA damage response signaling. Cell 150:
533-548, 2012.

2. Kenedy, A. A.; Cohen, K. J.; Loveys, D. A.; Kato, g. J.; Dang,
C. V.: Identification and characterization of the novel centrosome-associated
protein CCCAP. Gene 303: 35-46, 2003.

3. Otto, E. A.; Hurd, T. W.; Airik, R.; Chaki, M.; Zhou, W.; Stoetzel,
C.; Patil, S. B.; Levy, S.; Ghosh, A. K.; Murga-Zamalloa, C. A.; van
Reeuwijk, J.; Letteboer, S. J. F.; and 43 others: Candidate exome
capture identifies mutation of SDCCAG8 as the cause of a retinal-renal
ciliopathy. Nature Genet. 42: 840-850, 2010.

4. Scanlan, M. J.; Chen, Y.-T.; Williamson, B.; Gure, A. O.; Stockert,
E.; Gordan, J. D.; Tureci, O.; Sahin, U.; Pfreundschuh, M.; Old, L.
J.: Characterization of human colon cancer antigens recognized by
autologous antibodies. Int. J. Cancer 76: 652-658, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/4/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/29/2010

CREATED Joanna S. Amberger: 9/2/2010

EDITED carol: 10/03/2013
terry: 10/8/2012
mgross: 10/5/2012
ckniffin: 10/4/2012
alopez: 3/1/2011
terry: 12/10/2010
alopez: 11/3/2010
ckniffin: 10/29/2010
carol: 9/3/2010

603845	TITLE *603845 NADH-UBIQUINONE OXIDOREDUCTASE 1, SUBUNIT C2; NDUFC2
DESCRIPTION The multisubunit NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) is the first
enzyme complex in the electron transport chain of mitochondria. See
NDUFA2 (602137). By a combination of EST database searching and PCR,
Loeffen et al. (1998) isolated human cDNAs encoding NDUFC2 and 7 other
complex I subunits. The predicted 119-amino acid human protein is 74%
identical to B14.5B, the bovine homolog.

REFERENCE 1. Loeffen, J. L. C. M.; Triepels, R. H.; van den Heuvel, L. P.; Schuelke,
M.; Buskens, C. A. F.; Smeets, R. J. P.; Trijbels, J. M. F.; Smeitink,
J. A. M.: cDNA of eight nuclear encoded subunits of NADH:ubiquinone
oxidoreductase: human complex I cDNA characterization completed. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 253: 415-422, 1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/25/1999

EDITED alopez: 05/25/1999

605880	TITLE *605880 LYSINE ACETYLTRANSFERASE 6B; KAT6B
;;HISTONE ACETYLTRANSFERASE MYST4; MYST4;;
MONOCYTIC LEUKEMIA ZINC FINGER PROTEIN-RELATED FACTOR; MORF
MORF/CBF FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Champagne et al. (1999) identified and characterized monocytic leukemia
zinc finger protein-related factor (MORF), a novel human histone
acetyltransferase. MORF is a 1,781-residue protein that is ubiquitously
expressed in adult human tissues. MORF also contains a strong
transcriptional repression domain at its N terminus and a highly potent
activation domain at its C terminus, and may be involved in both
positive and negative regulation of transcription.

Using immunohistochemistry on mice of various developmental ages,
Campeau et al. (2012) demonstrated expression of Myst4 in the
telencephalic vesicles, trigeminal ganglion, spinal cord, dorsal root
ganglia, digestive tract, pancreas, liver, and ribs of developing
embryo; after birth, it is strongly expressed in the diaphysis of the
long bones, the kidney, and the patella, among other organs.

- MORF/CBP Fusion Gene

Panagopoulos et al. (2001) reported a novel t(10;16)(q22;p13)
chromosomal translocation in a childhood acute myelogenous leukemia
(AML-M5a) leading to a MORF-CBP (600140) chimera. RT-PCR experiments
yielded in-frame MORF-CBP and CBP-MORF fusion transcripts. Genomic
analyses revealed that the breaks were close to Alu elements in intron
16 of MORF and intron 2 of CBP and that duplications had occurred near
the breakpoints. The authors constructed an exon/intron map of the MORF
gene. The MORF-CBP protein retained the zinc fingers, 2 nuclear
localization signals, the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) domain, a
portion of the acidic domain of MORF, and the CBP protein downstream of
codon 29. The part of CBP encoding the RARA-binding domain, the
CREB-binding domain, the 3 cys/his-rich regions, the bromodomain, the
HAT domain and the glu-rich domains was present. In the reciprocal
CBP-MORF, part of the acidic domain, and the C-terminal ser- and
met-rich regions of MORF may be driven by the CBP promoter.

MAPPING

Champagne et al. (1999) mapped the MORF gene to chromosome 10q22 by
FISH.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) studied a cohort of 19 individuals with a
presumed diagnosis of the Ohdo syndrome SBBYS variant (SBBYSS; 603736).
Twelve individuals were considered to have typical features of the
syndrome, 2 had suggestive but milder features, and 5 were classified as
atypical. By whole-exome sequencing in 4 individuals with typical
features, Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified heterozygous mutations
in the KAT6B gene: a nonsense mutation (E1357X; 605880.0004) in
individual 4, a 1-bp insertion (605880.0001) in individual 1, and a 2-bp
deletion (605880.0002) in individual 2. Subsequently, all 19 individuals
with an SBBYSS or an SBBYSS-like phenotype were sequenced for the entire
KAT6B coding region by classic Sanger sequencing. Truncating mutations
in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene were confirmed in 12 individuals, and
individual 3 was found to have a heterozygous frameshift mutation in
exon 15 (605880.0003), which had not been detected on whole-exome
sequencing. When parental samples were available, the mutations were
shown to have occurred de novo. Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) suggested
that mutations of protein-protein interaction domains in exon 18 result
in a more complex phenotype than the phenotype due to simple
haploinsufficiency of KAT6B and raised the possibility that exon 18
mutations are activating or have a dominant-negative effect.

In 6 patients with genitopatellar syndrome (GTPTS; 606170), Campeau et
al. (2012) identified 5 different heterozygous de novo truncating
mutations in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene (605880.0005-605880.0009), all of
which were predicted to result in loss of the highly conserved
transcription activation domain. Campeau et al. (2012) noted that
SBBYSS, also caused by mutation in KAT6B, is a disorder with features
overlapping those of genitopatellar syndrome, but with clinical
differences.

Simpson et al. (2012) identified mutations in the KAT6B gene in 5
unrelated patients with genitopatellar syndrome (see, e.g., 605880.0006
and 605880.0010); they stated that the form of Ohdo syndrome (SBBYSS) in
which mutations in KAT6B had been found is phenotypically distinct from
genitopatellar syndrome.

In 2 children with clinical features of SBBYSS, including a 4-year-old
girl previously reported by Szakszon et al. (2011), Szakszon et al.
(2013) identified different de novo truncating mutations in the distal
region of exon 18 of the KAT6B gene (605880.0011-605880.0012).

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Szakszon et al. (2013) noted that truncating mutations of KAT6B exon 18
between positions c.3018 and c.3892 had been shown to cause GTPTS,
whereas truncating mutations distal to position c.4069 in the same exon
cause SBBYSS (with one exception, a c.4360_4368delins mutation in a
patient with GTPTS; see 605880.0005). They stated that their finding of
truncating mutations of KAT6B exon 18 at positions c.5064_5071
(605880.0011) and c.5389 (605880.0012) in patients with SBBYSS confirmed
this genotype-phenotype correlation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) examined mice carrying a gene trap insertion
in the mouse ortholog Kat6b (Qkf/Myst4/Morf) that produces approximately
5% of the normal amount of Kat6b mRNA. The Qkf gt/gt hypomorphic mutant
displayed a number of defects that mirror SBBYSS syndrome, although the
phenotype in the mice is milder. Mice are of normal size at birth but
fail to thrive and have brain developmental defects as well as
craniofacial defects. Observed abnormalities include short and narrow
palpebral fissures, low set ears, and malocclusion. Qkf mRNA is strongly
expressed in the eyelids and teeth primordia during development. Similar
to individuals with SBBYSS, the Qkf gt/gt mice have long, slender feet
and disproportionately long first digits.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, 1-BP INS, NT4405

By whole-exome sequencing in a patient (individual 1) with typical
features of SBBYSS (603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a
1-bp insertion at nucleotide 4405 in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, which
resulted in a frameshift.

.0002
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, 2-BP DEL, NT5370

By whole-exome sequencing in a patient (individual 2) with typical
features of SBBYSS (603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a
2-bp deletion at nucleotide 5370 in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, which
resulted in a frameshift.

.0003
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, 1-BP DEL, NT3018

By Sanger sequencing in a patient (individual 3) with typical SBBYSS
(603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a 1-bp deletion at
nucleotide 3018 in exon 15 of the KAT6B gene, which resulted in a
frameshift. The mutation was not initially detected on whole-exome
sequencing. The parents did not have the mutation. The patient also had
a 1q21 duplication, which the authors considered to be incidental.

.0004
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, GLU1357TER

By whole-exome sequencing in a patient (individual 4) with typical
features of SBBYSS (603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a
heterozygous 4069G-T transversion in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene,
resulting in a glu1357-to-ter (E1357X) substitution. The parents did not
have the mutation.

.0005
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, DEL/INS, NT4360

In a male patient with genitopatellar syndrome (GTPTS; 606170),
originally reported by Abdul-Rahman et al. (2006) ('patient 2'), Campeau
et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a de novo deletion/insertion
(4360_4368delinsAAAAACCAAAA) in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, predicted to
result in premature termination and loss of the highly conserved
transcription activation domain. The mutation was not found in the
patient's unaffected parents or in the Exome Variant Server.

.0006
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, 4-BP DEL, 3769TCTA

In 2 unrelated male patients with genitopatellar syndrome (606170), 1 of
whom was originally reported by Lifchez et al. (2003), Campeau et al.
(2012) identified heterozygosity for a de novo 4-bp deletion
(3769delTCTA) in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, predicted to result in
premature termination and loss of the highly conserved transcription
activation domain. The mutation was not found in the patients'
unaffected parents or in the Exome Variant Server.

In an unrelated 7-month-old girl and 3-month-old boy with genitopatellar
syndrome (606170), Simpson et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for
the 3769delTCTA mutation in the KAT6B gene, which was not present in
their unaffected parents, in the 1000 Genomes Project, or in 600 control
exome profiles. Quantitative assessment of global H3/H4 acetylation of
extracted histones in primary skin fibroblasts from the infant girl
demonstrated a significant reduction in H3 and H4 acetylation compared
to control fibroblasts.

.0007
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, 2-BP DEL, 3788AA

In a female patient with genitopatellar syndrome (606170), Campeau et
al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a de novo 2-bp deletion
(3788delAA) in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, predicted to result in
premature termination and loss of the highly conserved transcription
activation domain. The mutation was not found in the patients'
unaffected parents or in the Exome Variant Server.

.0008
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, GLY1298TER

In an African American girl with genitopatellar syndrome (606170),
originally reported by Abdul-Rahman et al. (2006), Campeau et al. (2012)
identified heterozygosity for a 3892G-T transversion in exon 18 of the
KAT6B gene, predicted to result in premature termination and loss of the
highly conserved transcription activation domain. DNA from the patient's
parents was unavailable; however, the mutation was not found in the
Exome Variant Server.

.0009
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, GLY1268TER

In a female patient with genitopatellar syndrome (606170), originally
reported by Lammer and Abrams (2002), Campeau et al. (2012) identified
heterozygosity for a de novo 3802G-T transversion in exon 18 of the
KAT6B gene, predicted to result in premature termination and loss of the
highly conserved transcription activation domain. The mutation was not
found in the patient's unaffected parents or in the Exome Variant
Server.

.0010
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, 4-BP DEL, NT1227

In a female patient with genitopatellar syndrome (606170), originally
reported by Reardon (2002), Simpson et al. (2012) identified
heterozygosity for a de novo 4-bp deletion (3680_3695del) in exon 18 of
the KAT6B gene. The mutation was not found in her unaffected parents, in
the 1000 Genomes Project, or in 600 control exome profiles.

.0011
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, 8-BP DEL/4-BP INS, NT5064

In a child of Sicilian ancestry with SBBYSS (603736), Szakszon et al.
(2013) identified a heterozygous, de novo, complex insertion/deletion
mutation, c.5064_5071delTACTATGGinsCACA, in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene,
leading to a net loss of 4 bp, a frameshift, and a premature stop codon
(met1690glufs*24).

.0012
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, ARG1797TER

By Sanger sequencing in a patient (individual 13) with typical SBBYSS
(603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous de novo
c.5389C-T transition in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, resulting in an
arg1797-to-ter (R1797X) substitution. The parents did not have the
mutation.

In a child of Hungarian ancestry with typical SBBYSS, previously
reported by Szakszon et al. (2011), Szakszon et al. (2013) identified de
novo heterozygosity for the same R2797X mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Abdul-Rahman, O. A.; La, T. H.; Kwan, A.; Schlaubitz, S.; Barsh,
G. S.; Enns, G. M.; Hudgins, L.: Genitopatellar syndrome: expanding
the phenotype and excluding mutations in LMX1B and TBX4. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 140A: 1567-1572, 2006.

2. Campeau, P. M.; Kim, J. C.; Lu, J. T.; Schwartzentruber, J. A.;
Abdul-Rahman, O. A.; Schlaubitz, S.; Murdock, D. M.; Jiang, M.-M.;
Lammer, E. J.; Enns, G. M.; Rhead, W. J.; Rowland, J.; and 9 others
: Mutations in KAT6B, encoding a histone acetyltransferase, cause
genitopatellar syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90: 282-289, 2012.

3. Champagne, N.; Bertos, N. R.; Pelletier, N.; Wang, A. H.; Vezmar,
M.; Yang,Y.; Heng, H. H.; Yang, X. J.: Identification of a human
histone acetyltransferase related to monocytic leukemia zinc finger
protein. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 28528-28536, 1999.

4. Clayton-Smith, J.; O'Sullivan, J.; Daly, S.; Bhaskar, S.; Day,
R.; Anderson, B.; Voss, A. K.; Thomas, T.; Biesecker, L. G.; Smith,
P.; Fryer, A.; Chandler, K. E.; and 13 others: Whole-exome-sequencing
identifies mutations in histone acetyltransferase gene KAT6B in individuals
with the Say-Barber-Biesecker variant of Ohdo syndrome. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 89: 675-681, 2011.

5. Lammer, E. J.; Abrams, L.: Genitopatellar syndrome: delineating
the anomalies of female genitalia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 111: 316-318,
2002.

6. Lifchez, C. A.; Rhead, W. J.; Leuthner, S. R.; Lubinsky, M. S.
: Genitopatellar syndrome: expanding the phenotype. Am. J. Med. Genet. 122A:
80-83, 2003.

7. Panagopoulos, I.; Fioretos, T.; Isaksson, M.; Samuelsson, U.; Billstrom,
R.; Strombeck, B.; Mitelman, F.; Johansson, B.: Fusion of the MORF
and CBP genes in acute myeloid leukemia with the t(10;16)(q22;p13). Hum.
Molec. Genet. 10: 395-404, 2001.

8. Reardon, W.: Genitopatellar syndrome: a recognizable phenotype. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 111: 313-315, 2002.

9. Simpson, M. A.; Deshpande, C.; Dafou, D.; Vissers, L. E. L. M.;
Woollard, W. J.; Holder, S. E.; Gillessen-Kaesbach, G.; Derks, R.;
White, S. M.; Cohen-Snuijf, R.; Kant, S. G.; Hoefsloot, L. H.; Reardon,
W.; Brunner, H. G.; Bongers, E. M. H. F.; Trembath, R. C.: De novo
mutations of the gene encoding the histone acetyltransferase KAT6B
cause genitopatellar syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90: 290-294, 2012.

10. Szakszon, K.; Berenyi, E.; Jakab, A.; Bessenyei, B.; Balogh, E.;
Kobling, T.; Szilvassy, J.; Knegt, A. C.; Olah, E.: Blepharophimosis
mental retardation syndrome Say-Barber/Biesecker/Young-Simpson type:
new findings with neuroimaging. Am. J. Med. Genet. 155A: 634-637,
2011.

11. Szakszon, K.; Salpietro, C.; Kakar, N.; Knegt, A. C.; Olah, E.;
Dallapiccola, B.; Borck, G.: De novo mutations of the gene encoding
the histone acetyltransferase KAT6B in two patients with Say-Barber/Biesecker/Young-Simpson
syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 161A: 884-888, 2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Nara Sobreira - updated: 5/14/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/10/2012
Nara Sobreira - updated: 12/13/2011

CREATED George E. Tiller: 4/26/2001

EDITED carol: 08/29/2013
carol: 5/14/2013
carol: 4/24/2012
carol: 4/10/2012
terry: 4/10/2012
carol: 12/13/2011
carol: 12/12/2011
mgross: 2/21/2006
cwells: 5/2/2001
cwells: 4/26/2001

609825	TITLE *609825 COQ2, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; COQ2
;;PARAHYDROXYBENZOATE-POLYPRENYLTRANSFERASE, MITOCHONDRIAL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CoQ (ubiquinone) serves as a redox carrier in the mitochondrial
respiratory chain and is a lipid-soluble antioxidant. COQ2, or
parahydroxybenzoate-polyprenyltransferase (EC 2.5.1.39), catalyzes one
of the final reactions in the biosynthesis of CoQ, the prenylation of
parahydroxybenzoate with an all-trans polyprenyl group (Forsgren et al.,
2004).

CLONING

By database analysis, followed by RT-PCR and RACE of human liver and
skeletal muscle cDNA libraries, Forsgren et al. (2004) cloned COQ2. The
deduced 421-amino acid protein contains a central polyprenyl
diphosphate-binding site, followed by 6 C-terminal transmembrane
regions. COQ2 was predicted to localize to mitochondria. Northern blot
analysis detected abundant expression of a 1.8-kb transcript in skeletal
muscle. RNA dot-blot analysis detected COQ2 in all adult and fetal
tissues examined, with highest levels in skeletal muscle, adrenal gland,
and heart.

GENE FUNCTION

Forsgren et al. (2004) found that human COQ2 rescued the growth of
Coq2-null yeast cells and restored CoQ biosynthesis. CoQ formed when
cells were incubated with labeled decaprenyl pyrophosphate and
nonaprenyl pyrophosphate, indicating that human COQ2 participates in the
biosynthesis of CoQ.

GENE STRUCTURE

Forsgren et al. (2004) determined that the COQ2 gene contains 7 exons
and spans more than 20.7 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Forsgren et al. (2004) mapped the COQ2
gene to chromosome 4q21-q22.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Primary Coenzyme Q10 Deficiency 1

Using homozygosity mapping and sequence analysis, Quinzii et al. (2006)
detected a homozygous A-to-G transition at nucleotide 890 of the COQ2
gene in a patient with coenzyme Q10 deficiency-1 (COQ10D1; 607486). The
mutation was predicted to change amino acid 297 from tyrosine to
cysteine (Y297C; 609825.0001) in the third of 6 predicted transmembrane
domains of the COQ2 protein. The transition was heterozygous in both
parents and absent in healthy individuals.

Mollet et al. (2007) reported a French family with COQ10 deficiency that
manifested as fatal infantile multiorgan disease. Enzymologic analysis
showed low quinone-dependent oxidative phosphorylation activity, and
COQ10 deficiency was confirmed by restoration of oxidative
phosphorylation activity after quinone addition. In the affected family
members, Mollet et al. (2007) identified a homozygous 1-bp deletion in
the COQ2 gene that resulted in a frameshift (609825.0002).
Transformation of yeast lacking Coq2 with human COQ2 containing the
mutation resulted in defective growth on respiratory medium.

Diomedi-Camassei et al. (2007) reported 2 patients with COQ10 deficiency
who had primarily renal involvement. The first patient presented with
steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome at the age of 18 months with no
extrarenal symptoms, and the second patient presented at 5 days of life
with oliguria and developed end-stage renal disease to which he
succumbed at 6 months of age after a course complicated by progressive
epileptic encephalopathy. Both patients carried 2 mutations in the COQ2
gene. The mutations (609825.0003, 609825.0004, and 609825.0005) were all
missense mutations occurring in residues highly conserved from yeast to
human.

- Susceptibility to Multiple System Atrophy 1

In affected members of 2 unrelated Japanese families with multiple
system atrophy-1 (MSA1; 146500), The Multiple-System Atrophy Research
Collaboration (2013) identified homozygous or compound heterozygous
mutations in the COQ2 gene (609825.0006-609825.0008). The mutations were
found in the first family by linkage analysis combined by whole-genome
sequencing. Subsequent sequencing of the COQ2 gene in 363 Japanese
patients with sporadic MSA and 2 sets of controls (520 individuals and
2,383 individuals) identified putative heterozygous or biallelic
pathogenic variants in 33 patients (see, e.g., 609825.0009). The most
common variant was V343A (609825.0007), which was also found in
heterozygous state in 17 Japanese controls. Statistical analysis in the
Japanese population yielded an odds ratio for disease development of
2.23 (p = 6.0 x 10(-5)) in COQ2 carriers. Rare pathogenic variants were
also found in 4 of 223 European patients with sporadic disease and in 1
of 172 North American patients with sporadic disease. None of 315
European controls carried a variant, but 1 of 294 North American
controls carried a variant. In vitro functional expression assays in
yeast Coq2-null strains demonstrated that the mutations caused variable
growth defects and variably low COQ2 activities in patient cell lines.
The findings suggested that mutations in the COQ2 gene may cause
susceptibility to the disorder. Patients with COQ2 mutations had
increased frequency of the cerebellar variant compared to the
parkinsonism variant. Four additional families with MSA, including a
German family reported by Wullner et al. (2009), did not have COQ2
mutations, indicating genetic heterogeneity.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COENZYME Q10 DEFICIENCY, PRIMARY, 1
COQ2, TYR297CYS

In a boy, born of consanguineous parents, with infantile
encephalomyopathy, nephropathy, and primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency-1
(COQ10D1; 607426), originally reported by Salviati et al. (2005),
Quinzii et al. (2006) identified a homozygous 890A-G transition in the
COQ2 gene, changing a highly conserved tyrosine to cysteine at amino
acid 297 (Y297C) within a predicted transmembrane domain of the protein.
He had a deficiency of CoQ10 in muscle and fibroblasts (22% of
controls), and fibroblasts showed about 36% residual COQ2 enzymatic
activity. His younger sister, who had only proteinuria and coenzyme Q
deficiency in fibroblasts, carried the same homozygous mutation.

Lopez-Martin et al. (2007) showed that the Y297C-mutant protein could
not functionally complement Coq2-defective yeast. An equivalent mutation
introduced into the wildtype yeast Coq2 gene decreased CoQ10 levels and
impaired growth in respiratory-chain dependent medium, consistent with a
loss of function. Growth was restored by CoQ10 supplementation. The
CoQ10 deficiency was also found to impair de novo pyrimidine synthesis,
which may contribute to the pathogenesis of the disease.

Quinzii et al. (2010) studied fibroblasts carrying a homozygous Y297C
mutation. CoQ10 levels were decreased to 42.7% of normal, and the cells
showed decreased ATP synthesis and increased oxidative stress-induced
death. The results suggested that partial CoQ10 deficiency can cause
oxidative stress that is toxic to the cells.

.0002
COENZYME Q10 DEFICIENCY, PRIMARY, 1
COQ2, 1-BP DEL, 1198T

Mollet et al. (2007) reported a French family with coenzyme Q10
deficiency-1 (607426) in which a son and daughter died shortly after
birth due to anemia, liver failure, and renal insufficiency. The healthy
parents were from the same region and shared a patronymic but no known
ancestry. In 1 of the affected children, Mollet et al. (2007) identified
a homozygous 1-bp deletion (T) at nucleotide 1198 in exon 7 of the COQ2
gene, resulting in a premature stop codon. The parents were heterozygous
for the mutation, which was absent in controls.

.0003
COENZYME Q10 DEFICIENCY, PRIMARY, 1
COQ2, ARG197HIS

In a patient with coenzyme Q10 deficiency (607426) who presented with
steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome at age 18 months, Diomedi-Camassei
et al. (2007) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the
COQ2 gene: a 590G-A transition resulting in an arg197-to-his (R197H)
substitution on the maternal allele, and a 683A-G transition resulting
in an asn228-to-ser (N228S; 609825.0004) substitution on the paternal
allele. Neither mutation was found in 500 control chromosomes.

Quinzii et al. (2010) studied fibroblasts carrying the compound
heterozygous R197H/N228S mutations. CoQ10 levels were decreased to 36%
of normal, and the cells showed impaired respiratory-dependent growth
after 48 hours, decreased ATP levels, increased oxidative stress
markers, and increased cell death. The results suggested that partial
CoQ10 deficiency can cause both impaired bioenergetics and oxidative
stress that is toxic to the cells.

.0004
COENZYME Q10 DEFICIENCY, PRIMARY, 1
COQ2, ASN228SER

See 609825.0003 and Diomedi-Camassei et al. (2007).

.0005
COENZYME Q10 DEFICIENCY, PRIMARY, 1
COQ2, SER146ASN

In an Italian child with coenzyme Q10 deficiency-1 (607426),
Diomedi-Camassei et al. (2007) identified homozygosity for a 437G-A
transition in the COQ2 gene, resulting in a ser146-to-asn (S146N)
substitution. Both parents were shown to be carriers and the mutation
was not identified in 500 control chromosomes. The child presented with
severe renal disease in the newborn period characterized as severe
crescentic glomerulonephritis on biopsy at 10 days of age, developed
intractable seizures and end-stage renal disease, and died at 6 months
of age.

.0006
MULTIPLE SYSTEM ATROPHY 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
COQ2, MET78VAL

In 2 Japanese sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with multiple system
atrophy-1 (MSA1; 146500), originally reported by Hara et al. (2007), The
Multiple-System Atrophy Research Collaboration (2013) identified a
homozygous met78-to-val (M78V) substitution in the COQ2 gene. The
mutation, which was found by linkage analysis combined with whole-genome
sequencing, was not found in a large control database or in 360 control
Japanese alleles. Each sib also carried a homozygous val343-to-ala
(V343A; 609825.0007) substitution that was found in heterozygous state
in 5 of 360 control Japanese alleles. An unaffected sib did not carry
either variant, and family history indicated that the parents, each of
whom was an obligate carrier of both variants, showed no signs of the
disorder. In vitro functional expression assays in yeast Coq2-null
strains demonstrated that the M78V variant showed severely decreased
growth similar to the null strain. Patient cerebellar tissue from a
homozygous carrier showed severely decreased intracellular levels of
COQ2.

.0007
MULTIPLE SYSTEM ATROPHY 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
COQ2, VAL343ALA

The Multiple-System Atrophy Research Collaboration (2013) found that a
val343-to-ala (V343A) variant in the COQ2 gene was associated with
multiple system atrophy-1 (146500) in Japanese patients. V343A was
present in homozygous state with another pathogenic homozygous mutation
(M78V; 609825.0006) in 2 Japanese sibs with the disorder. It was also
found in compound heterozygosity with R337X (609825.0008) in 2
additional Japanese sibs from another family with the disorder. Among
363 Japanese patients with sporadic MSA1, homozygous V343A was found in
2 patients and none of 520 controls, and heterozygous V343A was found in
31 patients and 17 controls; 2 heterozygous carriers were compound
heterozygous with another potentially pathogenic COQ2 variant. The
allele frequency was 4.8% in Japanese patients and 1.6% in Japanese
controls (odds ratio (OR) for MSA1 of 3.05, p = 1.5 x 10(-4)).
Genotyping in a second series of 2,383 Japanese controls showed that the
V343A variant had an allele frequency of 2.2%, yielding an OR of 2.23 (p
= 6.0 x 10(-5)). Two patients with Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300) who
were found to carry a homozygous V343A mutation did not show any signs
of parkinsonism, cerebellar ataxia, or autonomic dysfunction. Otherwise,
the V343A variant appeared to be specific for MSA. V343A was not found
in 395 patients or 609 controls from European/North American cohorts. In
vitro functional expression assays in yeast Coq2-null strains showed
that the V343A variant could restore growth similar to wildtype, but
showed somewhat decreased COQ2 activities in cell lines derived from
patients with MSA.

.0008
MULTIPLE SYSTEM ATROPHY 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
COQ2, ARG337TER

In 2 Japanese sibs with MSA1 (146500), The Multiple-System Atrophy
Research Collaboration (2013) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
variants in the COQ2 gene: an arg337-to-ter (R337X) substitution, and
V343A (609825.0007). V343A was present in 5 of 360 control Japanese
alleles, but R337X was not found in controls. Their unaffected mother
was heterozygous for V343A and another unaffected sib was heterozygous
for R337X. In vitro functional expression assays in yeast Coq2-null
strains showed that the R337X variant resulted in severely impaired
growth similar to the null strain, and COQ2 activity levels in patient
cells was decreased compared to wildtype.

.0009
MULTIPLE SYSTEM ATROPHY 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
COQ2, ARG337GLN

In a Japanese patient with sporadic MSA1 (146500), The Multiple-System
Atrophy Research Collaboration (2013) identified compound heterozygosity
for 2 variants in the COQ2 gene: arg337-to-gln (R337Q) and V343A
(609825.0007). In vitro functional expression assays in yeast Coq2-null
strains showed that the R337Q variant resulted in severely impaired
growth similar to the null strain, and COQ2 activity levels in patient
cells was decreased compared to wildtype.

REFERENCE 1. Diomedi-Camassei, F.; Di Giandomenico, S.; Santorelli, F. M.; Caridi,
G.; Piemonte, F.; Montini, G.; Ghiggeri, G. M.; Murer, L.; Barisoni,
L.; Pastore, A.; Muda, A. O.; Valente, M. L.; Bertini, E.; Emma, F.
: COQ2 nephropathy: a newly described inherited mitochondriopathy
with primary renal involvement. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 18: 2773-2780,
2007.

2. Forsgren, M.; Attersand, A.; Lake, S.; Grunler, J.; Swiezewska,
E.; Dallner, G.; Climent, I.: Isolation and functional expression
of human COQ2, a gene encoding a polyprenyl transferase involved in
the synthesis of CoQ. Biochem. J. 382: 519-526, 2004.

3. Hara, K.; Momose, Y.; Tokiguchi, S.; Shimohata, M.; Terajima, K.;
Onodera, O.; Kakita, A.; Yamada, M.; Takahashi, H.; Hirasawa, M.;
Mizuno, Y.; Ogata, K.; Goto, J.; Kanazawa, I.; Nishizawa, M.; Tsuji,
S.: Multiplex families with multiple system atrophy. Arch. Neurol. 64:
545-551, 2007.

4. Lopez-Martin, J. M.; Salviati, L.; Trevisson, E.; Montini, G.;
DiMauro, S.; Quinzii, C.; Hirano, M.; Rodriguez-Hernandez, A.; Cordero,
M. D.; Sanchez-Alcazar, J. A.; Santos-Ocana, C.; Navas, P.: Missense
mutation of the COQ2 gene causes defects of bioenergetics and de novo
pyrimidine synthesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 16: 1091-1097, 2007.

5. Mollet, J.; Giurgea, I.; Schlemmer, D.; Dallner, G.; Chretien,
D.; Delahodde, A.; Bacq, D.; de Lonlay, P.; Munnich, A.; Rotig, A.
: Prenyldiphosphate synthase, subunit 1 (PDSS1) and OH-benzoate polyprenyltransferase
(COQ2) mutations in ubiquinone deficiency and oxidative phosphorylation
disorders. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 765-772, 2007.

6. Quinzii, C.; Naini, A.; Salviati, L.; Trevisson, E.; Navas, P.;
DiMauro, S.; Hirano, M.: A mutation in Para-hydroxybenzoate-polyprenyl
transferase (COQ2) causes primary coenzyme Q10 deficiency. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 78: 345-349, 2006.

7. Quinzii, C. M.; Lopez, L. C.; Gilkerson, R. W.; Dorado, B.; Coku,
J.; Naini, A. B.; Lagier-Tourenne, C.; Schuelke, M.; Salviati, L.;
Carrozzo, R.; Santorelli, F.; Rahman, S.; Tazir, M.; Koenig, M.; DiMauro,
S.; Hirano, M.: Reactive oxygen species, oxidative stress, and cell
death correlate with level of CoQ10 deficiency. FASEB J. 24: 3733-3743,
2010.

8. Salviati, L.; Sacconi, S.; Murer, L.; Zacchello, G.; Franceschini,
L.; Laverda, A. M.; Basso, G.; Quinzii, C.; Angelini, C.; Hirano,
M.; Naini, A. B.; Navas, P.; DiMauro, S.; Montini, G.: Infantile
encephalomyopathy and nephropathy with CoQ10 deficiency: a CoQ10-responsive
condition. Neurology 65: 606-608, 2005.

9. The Multiple-System Atrophy Research Collaboration: Mutations
in COQ2 in familial and sporadic multiple-system atrophy. New Eng.
J. Med. 369: 233-244, 2013.

10. Wullner, U.; Schmitt, I.; Kammal, M.; Kretzschmar, H. A.; Neumann,
M.: Definite multiple system atrophy in a German family. J. Neurol.
Neurosurg.  Psych. 80: 449-450, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/6/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/13/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/23/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/19/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/7/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/17/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/23/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/17/2006

EDITED carol: 08/06/2013
ckniffin: 8/6/2013
alopez: 3/15/2013
ckniffin: 3/13/2013
carol: 5/24/2012
ckniffin: 5/23/2012
wwang: 2/23/2010
ckniffin: 2/19/2010
alopez: 10/9/2009
terry: 10/7/2009
terry: 8/6/2007
mgross: 5/17/2007
alopez: 2/2/2006
alopez: 2/1/2006
terry: 1/23/2006
mgross: 1/18/2006
mgross: 1/17/2006

605995	TITLE *605995 KINESIN FAMILY MEMBER 1B; KIF1B
;;KIAA0591
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Nangaku et al. (1994) cloned a member of the mouse kinesin superfamily,
Kif1b, which encodes an N-terminal-type motor protein. Kif1b was
expressed in all tissues tested. In situ hybridization revealed that
Kif1b was expressed abundantly in differentiated nerve cells.

Zhao et al. (2001) identified an isoform of mouse Kif1b, which they
called Kif1b-beta, that is distinct from Kif1b-alpha (Nangaku et al.,
1994) in its cargo-binding domain.

Yang et al. (2001) identified the KIF1B gene in a homozygously deleted
region of chromosome 1p36.2 in a neuroblastoma cell line. They reported
results suggesting that the gene is not a candidate for tumor suppressor
gene of neuroblastoma. Northern blot analysis demonstrated that human
KIF1B has at least 2 isoforms. The long isoform (KIF1B-beta) was
expressed in a wide variety of tissues, while the short isoform
(KIF1B-alpha) was detected only in adult testis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Schlisio et al. (2008) stated that the KIF1B gene contains 46 coding
exons.

MAPPING

By STS analysis, Gong et al. (1996) mapped the human KIF1B gene to
chromosome 1p36. They mapped the mouse Kif1b gene to chromosome 4.

Zuchner et al. (2004) stated that the KIF1B gene maps to chromosome
1p36.2, about 1.65 Mb telomeric to the MFN2 gene (608507), which is
mutant in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease-2A2 (CMT2A2; 609260).

NOMENCLATURE

Lawrence et al. (2004) presented a standardized kinesin nomenclature
based on 14 family designations. Under this system, KIF1B belongs to the
kinesin-3 family.

GENE FUNCTION

Nangaku et al. (1994) found that mouse Kif1b works as a monomer, having
a microtubule plus-end-directed motility. Rotary shadowing electron
microscopy revealed mostly single globular structures.
Immunocytochemically, Kif1b was colocalized with mitochondria in vivo. A
subcellular fractionation study showed that Kif1b was concentrated in
the mitochondrial fraction, and purified Kif1b could transport
mitochondria along microtubules in vitro. These data suggested that
Kif1b works as a monomeric motor for anterograde transport of
mitochondria.

Schlisio et al. (2008) found that apoptosis caused by NGF (see NGFB;
162030) withdrawal from cultured neuronal cells was mediated by EGLN3
(606426) and its downstream effector, KIF1B-beta.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease 2A1

In all affected members of a family with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease-2A1
(CMT2A1; 118210), Zhao et al. (2001) identified a loss-of-function
mutation in the KIF1B gene (605995.0001).

- Role in Cancer

In 1 medulloblastoma (155255), 3 neuroblastomas (NBLST1; 256700), and 2
pheochromocytoma (171300) tumor samples, Schlisio et al. (2008)
identified 6 different missense mutations in the KIF1B gene. In 3 tumors
there was loss of the wildtype allele and in 3 there was retention,
including 1 in which there was low-level amplification of the mutant
allele. In the 4 cases in which corresponding germline DNA samples from
the respective patients were available, the mutations were also present
(605995.0002-605995.0005). Functional studies in primary rat sympathetic
neurons revealed that induction of apoptosis was impaired with all of
the KIF1B variants compared to wildtype.

- Other Disease Associations

For discussion of an association between variation in the KIF1B gene and
multiple sclerosis, see MS4 (612596).

ANIMAL MODEL

Zhao et al. (2001) generated Kif1b knockout mice by gene targeting.
Kif1b knockout mice died at birth from apnea due to nervous system
defects. Death of knockout neurons in culture could be rescued by
expression of the Kif1b-beta isoform. The Kif1b heterozygotes had a
defect in transporting synaptic vesicle precursors and suffered from
progressive muscle weakness similar to human neuropathies.

Lyons et al. (2009) identified a mutation in the zebrafish Kif1b gene
that disrupted localization of Mbp (159430) mRNA in the central nervous
system (CNS) and outgrowth of the posterior lateral line nerve in the
peripheral nervous system (PNS). Using antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides to block translation of individual Kif1b isoforms, they
found that the phenotype was due to loss of Kif1b-beta rather than
Kif1b-alpha, even though the mutation occurred in the common region
shared by both isoforms. Examination of the zebrafish mutants revealed
that Kif1b was required to localize myelin mRNA to oligodendrocyte
processes, to elaborate the correct amount of myelin around axons, and
to prevent ectopic production of myelin-like membrane. Normal Kif1b
function was also required for development of certain axons in the CNS
and PNS.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, AXONAL, TYPE 2A1
KIF1B, GLN98LEU

In all affected individuals of a Japanese family (family 694) with
autosomal dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2A1 (CMT2A1; 118210)
reported by Saito et al. (1997), Zhao et al. (2001) identified an A-to-T
transversion in the KIF1B gene, resulting in a gln98-to-leu (Q98L)
substitution. The Q98L mutation was not identified in 95 healthy,
unrelated Japanese controls. The mutation occurred in the middle of the
P loop, the consensus ATP-binding site, and was predicted to disrupt the
function of this mechanochemical enzyme. Zhao et al. (2001) tested the
motor activity of recombinant mouse Kif1b with the Q98L mutation. The
microtubule-activated ATP turnover rates were reduced in the mutant
protein. Furthermore, the Q98L mutant protein remained and aggregated in
the perinuclear region, while the wildtype Kif1b protein accumulated at
the cell periphery. These data suggested that the Q98L mutation resulted
in a functional loss of motor activity.

.0002
NEUROBLASTOMA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
KIF1B, GLU656VAL

In a neuroblastoma (256700) tumor sample and in germline DNA from the
corresponding patient, Schlisio et al. (2008) identified an A-T
transversion in exon 20 of the KIF1B gene, resulting in a glu646-to-val
(E646V) substitution. There was loss of the wildtype allele in the tumor
sample, and MYCN (164840) amplification was present.

.0003
NEUROBLASTOMA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
KIF1B, THR827ILE

In a neuroblastoma (256700) tumor sample and in germline DNA from the
corresponding patient, Schlisio et al. (2008) identified a C-T
transition in exon 24 of the KIF1B gene, resulting in a thr827-to-ile
(T827I) substitution. The wildtype allele was retained in the tumor
sample; no amplification of MYCN (164840) was present, but low-level
(2-fold) amplification of the mutant allele was detected.

.0004
NEUROBLASTOMA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1
KIF1B, PRO1217SER

In a neuroblastoma (256700) tumor sample and in germline DNA from the
corresponding patient, Schlisio et al. (2008) identified a C-T
transition in exon 33 of the KIF1B gene, resulting in a pro1217-to-ser
(P1217S) substitution. There was loss of the wildtype allele in the
tumor sample, and no MYCN (164840) amplification was present.

.0005
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
NEUROBLASTOMA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1, INCLUDED
KIF1B, SER1481ASN

In a pheochromocytoma (171300) tumor sample and in germline DNA from the
corresponding patient, Schlisio et al. (2008) identified a 4442G-A
transition in exon 41 of the KIF1B gene, resulting in a ser1481-to-asn
(S1481N) substitution. The wildtype allele was retained in the tumor
sample. The proband was a 28-year-old female who presented at 17 months
of age with a neuroblastoma (256700) and in adulthood developed a mature
ganglioneuroma and bilateral pheochromocytoma. Her paternal grandfather
harbored the mutant S1481N allele and also developed bilateral
pheochromocytoma. In vitro functional expression studies showed that the
mutant protein was deficient in the ability to induce apoptosis of
sympathetic precursor cells in response to growth factor withdrawal
compared to wildtype KIF1B.

Yeh et al. (2008) reported further analysis of the family reported by
Schlisio et al. (2008). The proband developed a leiomyosarcoma, and her
father, who also carried the S1481N mutation, developed adenocarcinoma
of the lung (211980). Analysis of tumor tissue revealed that all 4
neural crest tumors and the leiomyosarcoma retained both KIF1B alleles
and showed no loss of heterozygosity (LOH), consistent with a
haploinsufficiency mechanism. Yeh et al. (2008) postulated that the
leiomyosarcoma may have evolved secondary to the proband's childhood
treatment for neuroblastoma. In contrast, about 45% of cells from the
lung tumor showed LOH at this locus, suggesting a possible role for gene
dosage in development of this nonneural tumor.

REFERENCE 1. Gong, T.-W. L.; Burmeister, M.; Lomax, M. I.: The novel gene D4Mil1e
maps to mouse chromosome 4 and human chromosome 1p36. Mammalian Genome 7:
790-791, 1996.

2. Lawrence, C. J.; Dawe, R. K.; Christie, K. R.; Cleveland, D. W.;
Dawson, S. C.; Endow, S. A.; Goldstein, L. S. B.; Goodson, H. V.;
Hirokawa, N.; Howard, J.; Malmberg, R. L.; McIntosh, J. R.; and 10
others: A standardized kinesin nomenclature. J. Cell Biol. 167:
19-22, 2004.

3. Lyons, D. A.; Naylor, S. G.; Scholze, A.; Talbot, W. S.: Kif1b
is essential for mRNA localization in oligodendrocytes and development
of myelinated axons. Nature Genet. 41: 854-858, 2009.

4. Nangaku, M.; Sato-Yoshitake, R.; Okada, Y.; Noda, Y.; Takemura,
R.; Yamazaki, H.; Hirokawa, N.: KIF1B, a novel microtubule plus end-directed
monomeric motor protein for transport of mitochondria. Cell 79:
1209-1220, 1994.

5. Saito, M.; Hayashi, Y.; Suzuki, T.; Tanaka, H.; Hozumi, I.; Tsuji,
S.: Linkage mapping of the gene for Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type
2 to chromosome 1p (CMT2A) and the clinical features of CMT2A. Neurology 49:
1630-1635, 1997.

6. Schlisio, S.; Kenchappa, R. S.; Vredeveld, L. C. W.; George, R.
E.; Stewart, R.; Greulich, H.; Shahriari, K.; Nguyen, N. V.; Pigny,
P.; Dahia, P. L.; Pomeroy, S. L.; Maris, J. M.; Look, A. T.; Meyerson,
M.; Peeper, D. S.; Carter, B. D.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.: The kinesin
KIF1B-beta (sic) acts downstream from EglN3 to induce apoptosis and
is a potential 1p36 tumor suppressor. Genes Dev. 22: 884-893, 2008.

7. Yang, H. W.; Chen, Y. Z.; Takita, J.; Soeda, E.; Piao, H. Y.; Hayashi,
Y.: Genomic structure and mutational analysis of the human KIF1B
gene which is homozygously deleted in neuroblastoma at chromosome
1p36.2. Oncogene 20: 5075-5083, 2001.

8. Yeh, I.-T.; Lenci, R. E.; Qin, Y.; Buddavarapu, K.; Ligon, A. H.;
Leteurtre, E.; Do Cao, C.; Cardot-Bauters, C.; Pigny, P.; Dahia, P.
L. M.: A germline mutation of the KIF1B gene on 1p36 in a family
with neural and nonneural tumors. Hum. Genet. 124: 279-285, 2008.

9. Zhao, C.; Takita, J.; Tanaka, Y.; Setou, M.; Nakagawa, T.; Takeda,
S.; Yang, H. W.; Terada, S.; Nakata, T.; Takei, Y.; Saito, M.; Tsuji,
S.; Hayashi, Y.; Hirokawa, N.: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2A
caused by mutation in a microtubule motor KIF1B-beta. Cell 105:
587-597, 2001. Note: Erratum: Cell 106: 127 only, 2001.

10. Zuchner, S.; Mersiyanova, I. V.; Muglia, M.; Bissar-Tadmouri,
N.; Rochelle, J.; Dadali, E. L.; Zappia, M.; Nelis, E.; Patitucci,
A.; Senderek, J.; Parman, Y.; Evgrafov, O.; and 10 others: Mutations
in the mitochondrial GTPase mitofusin 2 cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth
neuropathy type 2A. Nature Genet. 36: 449-451, 2004. Note: Erratum:
Nature Genet. 36: 660 only, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/21/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/10/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/30/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/9/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/28/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/21/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/4/2001

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 6/6/2001

EDITED terry: 10/10/2012
terry: 8/3/2012
mgross: 6/21/2012
ckniffin: 9/24/2009
ckniffin: 9/18/2009
mgross: 8/12/2009
terry: 8/10/2009
wwang: 4/10/2009
ckniffin: 3/30/2009
wwang: 2/13/2009
ckniffin: 2/9/2009
alopez: 12/5/2008
wwang: 7/8/2008
mgross: 5/30/2008
terry: 5/28/2008
mgross: 3/15/2005
ckniffin: 3/4/2005
terry: 2/21/2005
carol: 4/29/2003
ckniffin: 4/23/2003
mcapotos: 1/2/2002
mcapotos: 12/4/2001
mgross: 11/16/2001
mgross: 6/6/2001

164015	TITLE *164015 MATRIN 3; MATR3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Stuurman et al. (1990) showed that nuclear matrins, a group of proteins
in the nuclear matrix, are present in cultured cells from a variety of
tissues and are probably common to mammalian cells. Stuurman et al.
(1990) differentiated 2 nuclear matrix fractions: the peripheral nuclear
matrix (matrix proteins that remain insoluble after reduction), and the
internal nuclear matrix (matrix proteins released by reduction).

Nakayasu and Berezney (1991) identified several novel nuclear matrins
from a rat liver nuclear matrix and characterized them by peptide maps,
polyclonal antibodies generated against the individual matrins, and
indirect immunofluorescence microscopy. They designated the proteins
matrins 3, 4, D-G, 12, and 13.

Belgrader et al. (1991) cloned a full-length rat insulinoma cDNA that
encodes an acidic internal matrix protein designated matrin-3. The
deduced 845-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of
approximately 95 kD. Its primary structure consists of 33% charged
residues and is generally hydrophilic. Like the lamins (see 150330),
matrin-3 has a positively charged N terminus that contains a large
number of amino acids with free hydroxyl groups. A highly acidic domain
near the C terminus, in which 32% of the amino acids are acidic, is a
characteristic found in other nuclear proteins.

Nagase et al. (1998) cloned and sequenced matrin-3, which they called
KIAA0723, from human brain cDNA libraries. The deduced protein contains
847 amino acids.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the MATR3
gene to chromosome 5 (TMAP WI-15469).

Using genomic sequence analysis, Senderek et al. (2009) mapped the MATR3
gene to chromosome 5q31.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 2 unrelated families with a form of distal myopathy that included
vocal cord and pharyngeal weakness (MPD2; 606070), Senderek et al.
(2009) identified the same missense mutation in the MATR3 gene (S85C;
164015.0001).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MYOPATHY, DISTAL, 2
MATR3, SER85CYS

In affected members of a North American family originally reported by
Feit et al. (1998) and in an unrelated Bulgarian family with distal
myopathy with vocal cord and pharyngeal weakness (MPD2; 606070),
Senderek et al. (2009) identified heterozygosity for a C-to-G
transversion at nucleotide 254 in exon 2 of the MATR3 gene that resulted
in a change from serine to cysteine at codon 85 (S85C).

REFERENCE 1. Belgrader, P.; Dey, R.; Berezney, R.: Molecular cloning of matrin
3: a 125-kilodalton protein of the nuclear matrix contains an extensive
acidic domain. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 9893-9899, 1991.

2. Feit, H.; Silbergleit, A.; Schneider, L. B.; Gutierrez, J. A.;
Fitoussi, R.-P.; Reyes, C.; Rouleau, G. A.; Brais, B.; Jackson, C.
E.; Beckmann, J. S.; Seboun, E.: Vocal cord and pharyngeal weakness
with autosomal dominant distal myopathy: clinical description and
gene localization to 5q31. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63: 1732-1742, 1998.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Miyajima, N.;
Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the
coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XI. The complete sequences
of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in
vitro. DNA Res. 5: 277-286, 1998.

4. Nakayasu, H.; Berezney, R.: Nuclear matrins: identification of
the major nuclear matrix proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 10312-10316,
1991.

5. Senderek, J.; Garvey, S. M.; Krieger, M.; Guergueltcheva, V.; Urtizberea,
A.; Roos, A.; Elbracht, M.; Stendel, C.; Tournev, I.; Mihailova, V.;
Feit, H.; Tramonte, J.; and 11 others: Autosomal-dominant distal
myopathy associated with a recurrent missense mutation in the gene
encoding the nuclear matrix protein, matrin 3. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 84:
511-518, 2009.

6. Stuurman, N.; Meijne, A. M. L.; van der Pol, A. J.; de Jong, L.;
van Driel, R.; van Renswoude, J.: The nuclear matrix from cells of
different origin: evidence for a common set of matrix proteins. J.
Biol. Chem. 265: 5460-5465, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 10/20/2009

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/27/1991

EDITED wwang: 07/01/2011
alopez: 10/20/2009
carol: 5/4/2007
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 11/27/1991

603894	TITLE *603894 REGULATOR OF G PROTEIN SIGNALING 6; RGS6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the RGS (regulator of G protein signaling) family, such as
RGS6, modulate G protein function by activating the intrinsic GTPase
activity of the alpha (guanine nucleotide-binding) subunits (Seki et
al., 1999).

CLONING

By EST database analysis and PCR of a brain cDNA library, Posner et al.
(1999) obtained a full-length cDNA encoding RGS6. The predicted
472-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 54.4 kD. It
contains an N-terminal dishevelled (see 601365)/egl10/pleckstrin
(173570) (DEP) domain, a central G protein gamma subunit (see GNG2;
606981)-like (GGL) domain, and an RGS domain near the C terminus.

Using RT-PCR, Seki et al. (1999) showed that RGS6 was expressed in
various tissues.

By PCR of a brain cDNA library, Chatterjee et al. (2003) identified 36
RGS6 splice variants resulting from the use of 2 alternative
transcription sites and complex alternative splicing. The variants
encode proteins with long or short N-terminal domains, complete or
incomplete GGL domains, 7 distinct C-terminal domains, and a common
internal domain that includes the RGS domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Posner et al. (1999) expressed RGS6 in insect cells and found that it
formed a cytosolic heterodimer via its GGL domain with the G protein
beta-5 (GNB5; 604447) subunit, but not with other G protein beta
subunits tested. The RGS6/GNB5 complex acted as a GTPase-activating
protein, but it did not form heterotrimeric complexes with G-alpha-o
(GNAO1; 139311)-GDP or G-alpha-q (GNAQ; 600998)-GDP, it did not alter
activity of adenyl cyclase types I, II, or V, and it did not activate
phospholipase C-beta-1 (PLCB1; 607120) or PLCB2 (604114). However, the
RGS6/GNB5 complex inhibited GNB1/GNG2-mediated activation of PLCB2.

Chatterjee et al. (2003) found that RGS6 isoforms with complete GGL
domains interacted with GNB5, irrespective of their N-terminal domain,
following expression in COS-7 cells. In contrast, RGS6 isoforms lacking
a complete GGL domain did not interact with GNB5. Subcellular
distribution patterns for RGS6 isoforms ranged from exclusively
cytoplasmic to exclusively nuclear/nucleolar, and coexpression of GNB5
promoted nuclear localization of RGS6 isoforms.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sierra et al. (2002) determined that the RGS6 gene contains 17 exons.
Chatterjee et al. (2003) determined that the RGS6 gene contains 20 exons
and spans 630 kb.

MAPPING

By somatic cell and radiation hybrid analysis, Seki et al. (1999) mapped
the RGS6 gene to chromosome 14q24.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In an epidemiologic study of 477 bladder cancer patients and 446 matched
controls, Berman et al. (2004) identified 3 noncoding SNPs in RGS2
(600861) and RGS6 that were each associated with a significantly reduced
risk of bladder cancer. When analyzed separately, a C-to-T SNP in the
3-prime UTR of RGS6, dbSNP rs2074647, conferred the greatest overall
reduction in bladder cancer risk, with a significant odds ratio of 0.66.
The reduction of risk was more pronounced in those who had ever smoked.
Expression of dbSNP rs2074647 increased the activity of a luciferase-RGS
fusion protein nearly 3-fold. PCR analysis confirmed that RGS6 splice
variants were expressed in bladder cancer tissue and cell lines. Berman
et al. (2004) proposed that RGS proteins may be important modulators of
cancer risk.

REFERENCE 1. Berman, D. M.; Wang, Y.; Liu, Z.; Dong, Q.; Burke, L.-A.; Liotta,
L. A.; Fisher, R.; Wu, X.: A functional polymorphism in RGS6 modulates
the risk of bladder cancer. Cancer Res. 64: 6820-6826, 2004.

2. Chatterjee, T. K.; Liu, Z.; Fisher, R. A.: Human RGS6 gene structure,
complex alternative splicing, and role of N terminus and G protein
gamma-subunit-like (GGL) domain in subcellular localization of RGS6
splice variants. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 30261-30271, 2003.

3. Posner, B. A.; Gilman, A. G.; Harris, B. A.: Regulators of G protein
signaling 6 and 7: purification of complexes with G-beta-5 and assessment
of their effects on G protein-mediated signaling pathways. J. Biol.
Chem. 274: 31087-31093, 1999.

4. Seki, N.; Hattori, A.; Hayashi, A.; Kozuma, S.; Hori, T.; Saito,
T.: The human regulator of G-protein signaling protein 6 gene (RGS6)
maps between markers WI-5202 and D14S277 on chromosome 14q24.3. J.
Hum. Genet. 44: 138-140, 1999.

5. Sierra, D. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Householder, D.; Grishin, N. V.;
Yu, K.; Ukidwe, P.; Barker, S. A.; He, W.; Wensel, T. G.; Otero, G.;
Brown, G.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Wilkie, T. M.: Evolution
of the regulators of G-protein signaling multigene family in mouse
and human. Genomics 79: 177-185, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/22/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/12/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/11/1999

EDITED mgross: 10/22/2008
mgross: 9/12/2002
jlewis: 6/14/1999
jlewis: 6/11/1999

614625	TITLE *614625 DIFFERENTIATION-ANTAGONIZING NONCODING RNA; DANCR
;;ANTI-DIFFERENTIATION NONCODING RNA; ANCR;;
KIAA0114
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated KG-1 immature
myeloid cell line, Nagase et al. (1995) cloned DANCR, which they
designated KIAA0114. Northern blot analysis detected variable DANCR
expression in all human tissues and cell lines examined, with highest
expression in heart, skeletal muscle, and kidney.

By sequencing long noncoding RNAs expressed in undifferentiated human
epidermal progenitor cells, Kretz et al. (2012) cloned DANCR, which they
called ANCR. The mature transcript is 855 bases long. ANCR was variably
expressed in several primary human cell cultures and cell lines, with
highest expression in embryonic stem cells and K562 leukemia cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Kretz et al. (2012) found that ANCR expression was downregulated upon
terminal differentiation in cultured human keratinocytes, adipocytes,
and osteoblasts.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kretz et al. (2012) determined that the DANCR gene contains 3 exons and
harbors the genes for MIR4449 (614627) and SNORA26 (614626) in introns 1
and 2, respectively.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1995) mapped the DANCR gene
to chromosome 4. Hartz (2012) mapped the DANCR gene to chromosome 4q12
based on an alignment of the DANCR sequence (GenBank GENBANK D28589)
with the genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/8/2012.

2. Kretz, M.; Webster, D. E.; Flockhart, R. J.; Lee, C. S.; Zehnder,
A.; Lopez-Pajares, V.; Qu, K.; Zheng, G. X. Y.; Chow, J.; Kim, G.
E.; Rinn, J. L.; Chang, H. Y.; Siprashvili, Z.; Khavari, P. A.: Suppression
of progenitor differentiation requires the long noncoding RNA ANCR. Genes
Dev. 26: 338-343, 2012.

3. Nagase, T; Miyajima, N; Tanaka, A.; Sazuka, T.; Seki, N.; Sato,
S.; Tabata, S.; Ishikawa, K.; Kawarabayashi, Y.; Kotani, H.; Nomura,
N.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes.
III. The coding sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0081-KIAA0120) deduced
by analysis of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 2:
37-43, 1995.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/9/2012

EDITED mgross: 05/09/2012
mgross: 5/9/2012

604769	TITLE *604769 PEROXIREDOXIN 3; PRDX3
;;PRX3;;
ANTIOXIDANT PROTEIN 1; AOP1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Peroxiredoxins inactivate H2O2 by oxidizing a key cysteine residue in
their catalytic center, which is subsequently reduced by thioredoxins
(see 187700). The thioredoxins are subsequently reduced by electrons
from NADPH via thioredoxin reductases (see TXNRD1; 601112). PRDX3 is
localized exclusively in mitochondria (summary by Chiribau et al.,
2008).

CLONING

The mouse Aop1 protein, also called Mer5, may promote early events in
the differentiation of murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cells (Nemoto et
al., 1990). Tsuji et al. (1995) found that mouse Aop1 shares 38% amino
acid sequence identity with the C22 subunit of Salmonella typhimurium
alkylhydroperoxide reductase.

By screening a human leukemia cell line cDNA library with a mouse Aop1
cDNA, Tsuji et al. (1995) isolated a cDNA encoding human AOP1. The
deduced 256-amino acid human AOP1 protein shares 86% amino acid sequence
similarity with mouse Aop1, and significant similarity with both the
human proliferation-associated gene A product (PAGA; 176763) and the
mouse stress-induced peritoneal macrophage protein Msp23. AOP1 also
shows sequence similarity to the S. cerevisiae thiol-specific
antioxidant protein TSA; a surface antigen of Entamoeba histolytica,
which is a pathogenic protozoan that causes diarrhea and organ abscess
formation; and a protein of H. pylori, which is a causative agent in
gastritis, ulcers, and gastric adenocarcinoma.

GENE FUNCTION

Tsuji et al. (1995) demonstrated that recombinant mouse Aop1 could
complement an alkylhydroperoxide reductase mutation in E. coli,
suggesting that Aop1 functions as an antioxidant protein.

Shih et al. (2001) determined that AOP1 interacts with Abrin A-chain
(ABRA), which inhibits protein synthesis and can induce apoptosis. By
immunolocalization studies, they determined that both AOP1 and ABRA
colocalize within the mitochondria. By assays of thiol-dependent
antioxidant activity, they determined that ABRA can attenuate AOP1
activity in a dose-dependent manner. Ectopic expression of AOP1 also
blocked the release of cytochrome c from mitochondria and inhibited
apoptosis in ABRA-treated cells.

Deregulated expression of the MYC transcription factor (190080) is found
in a wide variety of human tumors. The primary transforming activity of
MYC is thought to arise through transcriptional regulation of numerous
target genes. Wonsey et al. (2002) showed that PRDX3, which encodes a
mitochondrial protein of the peroxiredoxin gene family, is such a
target. Expression of PRDX3 is induced by MYC and is reduced in c-myc
-/- cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis spanning the entire
PRDX3 genomic sequence revealed that MYC binds preferentially to a
930-bp region surrounding exon 1. Wonsey et al. (2002) showed that PRDX3
is required for MYC-mediated proliferation, transformation, and
apoptosis after glucose withdrawal. Results using mitochondria-specific
fluorescent probes demonstrated that PRDX3 is essential for maintaining
mitochondrial mass and membrane potential in transformed rat and human
cells. These data provided evidence that PRDX3 is a MYC target gene that
is required to maintain normal mitochondrial function.

Chiribau et al. (2008) found that the forkhead box transcription factor
FOXO3A (602681) was required for basal expression of PRX3 in human
cardiac fibroblasts. They identified 2 FOXO regulatory sequences in the
promoter region of PRX3 and showed that binding of FOXO3A to both
regulatory sequences was required for FOXO3A-mediated activation of a
PRX3 reporter plasmid. Chiribau et al. (2008) concluded that FOXO3A
mediates PRX3 expression and suggested that this regulation may play a
critical role in the resistance to oxidative stress in cardiac
fibroblasts.

MAPPING

By FISH, Tsuji et al. (1995) mapped the human AOP1 gene, also known as
PRDX3, to 10q25-q26. They mapped the mouse Aop1 gene to the distal
region of chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Chiribau, C. B.; Cheng, L.; Cucoranu, I. C.; Yu, Y.-S.; Clempus,
R. E.; Sorescu, D.: FOXO3A regulates peroxiredoxin III expression
in human cardiac fibroblasts. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 8211-8217, 2008.

2. Nemoto, Y.; Yamamoto, T.; Takada, S.; Matsui, Y.; Obinata, M.:
Antisense RNA of the latent period gene (MER5) inhibits the differentiation
of murine erythroleukemia cells. Gene 91: 261-265, 1990.

3. Shih, S.-F.; Wu, Y.-H.; Hung, C.-H.; Yang, H.-Y.; Lin, J.-Y.:
Abrin triggers cell death by inactivating a thiol-specific antioxidant
protein. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 21870-21877, 2001.

4. Tsuji, K.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Obinata, M.: Mammalian
antioxidant protein complements alkylhydroperoxide reductase (ahpC)
mutation in Escherichia coli. Biochem. J. 307: 377-381, 1995.

5. Wonsey, D. R.; Zeller, K. I.; Dang, C. V.: The c-Myc target gene
PRDX3 is required for mitochondrial homeostasis and neoplastic transformation. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 6649-6654, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/29/2010
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/14/2002
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/13/2002

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 3/30/2000

EDITED mgross: 02/02/2010
mgross: 2/2/2010
terry: 1/29/2010
cwells: 7/1/2002
cwells: 6/27/2002
terry: 6/14/2002
carol: 5/13/2002
alopez: 8/1/2000
mcapotos: 4/12/2000
psherman: 3/30/2000

601442	TITLE *601442 COFILIN 1; CFL1
;;COFILIN, NONMUSCLE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cofilin is a widely distributed intracellular actin-modulating protein
that binds and depolymerizes filamentous F-actin and inhibits the
polymerization of monomeric G-actin in a pH-dependent manner. It is
involved in the translocation of actin-cofilin complex from cytoplasm to
nucleus (summary by Gillett et al., 1996).

CLONING

Two cofilin isoforms have been identified in mouse: muscle, or M-type
(601443) and nonmuscle, or NM-type (Ono et al., 1994). The mouse M-type
cofilin is expressed in heart, skeletal muscle, and testis, whereas the
NM-type is found in a wide variety of tissues, including heart and
testis. NM-type cofilin expression is minimal in mature mammalian
skeletal muscle. Ogawa et al. (1990) isolated a cDNA encoding a
placentally expressed cofilin. Gillett et al. (1996) cloned CFL1, a
nonmuscle-type cofilin, from a human promyelocytic cDNA library. The
cDNA encodes a 166-amino acid polypeptide with a molecular mass of
approximately 18.5 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Cofilin exhibits actin-depolymerizing activity that is inhibited as a
result of its phosphorylation by LIM kinase (see 601329). Maekawa et al.
(1999) demonstrated that cofilin was phosphorylated during
lysophosphatidic acid-induced, Rho-mediated neurite retraction. This
phosphorylation was sensitive to Y-27632, a specific inhibitor of the
Rho-associated kinase ROCK (601702). ROCK, which is a downstream
effector of Rho, did not phosphorylate cofilin directly but
phosphorylated LIM kinase, which in turn was activated to phosphorylate
cofilin. Maekawa et al. (1999) concluded that phosphorylation of LIM
kinase by ROCK and, consequently, increased phosphorylation of cofilin
by LIM kinase, contribute to Rho-induced reorganization of the actin
cytoskeleton.

Kuhn et al. (2000) reviewed evidence from studies of several avian and
mammalian primary neural cultures and neuronal cell lines that showed a
role for ADF and cofilin in neurite outgrowth.

To study the in vivo biochemical action of cofilin and the subsequent
cellular response, Ghosh et al. (2004) used a general caging method for
proteins that are regulated by phosphorylation. By acute and local
activation of a chemically engineered, light-sensitive phosphocofilin
mimic, they demonstrated that cofilin polymerizes actin, generates
protrusions, and determines the direction of cell migration. Ghosh et
al. (2004) proposed a role for cofilin that is distinct from its role as
an actin-depolymerizing factor.

MAPPING

Gillett et al. (1996) mapped CFL1 to 11q12-q13.3 by analysis of somatic
cell hybrids and to 11q13 by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).
Fernandes et al. (1998) used FISH and mouse/hamster somatic cell hybrid
analysis to map the Cfl1 gene to mouse chromosome 19.

Courseaux et al. (1996) used a combination of methods to refine maps of
the approximately 5-Mb region of 11q13 that includes the MEN1 locus
(131100). They proposed the following gene order:
cen--PTA--FTH1--UGB--AHNAK--ROM1--MDU1--CHRM1--COX8--EMK1--FKBP2--PLCB3--[PYGM,
ZFM1]--FAU--CAPN1-- [MLK3, RELA]--FOSL1--SEA--CFL1--tel.

ANIMAL MODEL

Because deletion of n-cofilin results in embryonic lethality in mice,
Bellenchi et al. (2007) used a conditional knockout approach to examine
the role of n-cofilin in brain development. Homozygous mutant pups were
obtained at the expected mendelian frequency, but more than 90% died
within the first 3 postnatal days. The few that survived up to 30 days
showed growth retardation, ataxia, and signs of epileptic seizures.
Gross analysis of mutant brains revealed an overall normal organization,
but the cerebral cortex had a translucent appearance and enlarged
ventricles. Golgi staining of coronal sections showed that cortical
layers II to IV and parts of layer V were missing in mutant brains.
Studies performed on cultured cortical neuronal progenitors revealed
that loss of n-cofilin impaired their radial migration. Neuronal
progenitors in the ventricular zone showed increased cell cycle exit and
exaggerated neuronal differentiation, leading to depletion of the
neuronal progenitor pool.

REFERENCE 1. Bellenchi, G. C.; Gurniak, C. B.; Perlas, E.; Middei, S.; Ammassari-Teule,
M.; Witke, W.: N-cofilin is associated with neuronal migration disorders
and cell cycle control in the cerebral cortex. Genes Dev. 21: 2347-2357,
2007.

2. Courseaux, A.; Grosgeorge, J.; Gaudray, P.; Pannett, A. A. J.;
Forbes, S. A.; Williamson, C.; Bassett, D.; Thakker, R. V.; Teh, B.
T.; Farnebo, F.; Shepherd, J.; Skogseid, B.; Larsson, C.; Giraud,
S.; Zhang, C. X.; Salandre, J.; Calender, A.: Definition of the minimal
MEN1 candidate area based on a 5-Mb integrated map of proximal 11q13. Genomics 37:
354-365, 1996.

3. Fernandes, M.; Poirier, C.; Lespinasse, F.; Carle, G. F.: The
mouse homologs of human GIF, DDB1, and CFL1 genes are located on chromosome
19. Mammalian Genome 9: 339-342, 1998.

4. Ghosh, M.; Song, X.; Mouneimne, G.; Sidani, M.; Lawrence, D. S.;
Condeelis, J. S.: Cofilin promotes actin polymerization and defines
the direction of cell motility. Science 304: 743-746, 2004.

5. Gillett, G. T.; Fox, M. F.; Rowe, P. S. N.; Casimir, C. M.; Povey,
S.: Mapping of human non-muscle type cofilin (CFL1) to chromosome
11q13 and muscle-type cofilin (CFL2) to chromosome 14. Ann. Hum.
Genet. 60: 201-211, 1996.

6. Kuhn, T. B.; Meberg, P. J.; Brown, M. D.; Bernstein, B. W.; Minamide,
L. S.; Jensen, J. R.; Okada, K.; Soda, E. A.; Bamburg, J. R.: Regulating
actin dynamics in neuronal growth cones by ADF/cofilin and Rho family
GTPases. J. Neurobiol. 44: 126-144, 2000.

7. Maekawa, M.; Ishizaki, T.; Boku, S.; Watanabe, N.; Fujita, A.;
Iwamatsu, A.; Obinata, T.; Ohashi, K.; Mizuno, K.; Narumiya, S.:
Signaling from Rho to the actin cytoskeleton through protein kinases
ROCK and LIM-kinase. Science 285: 895-898, 1999.

8. Ogawa, K.; Tashima, M.; Yumoto, Y.; Okuda, T.; Sawada, H.; Okuma,
M.; Maruyama, Y.: Coding sequence of human placenta cofilin cDNA. Nucleic
Acids Res. 18: 7169 only, 1990.

9. Ono, S.; Minami, N.; Abe, H.; Obinata, T.: Characterization of
a novel cofilin isoform that is predominantly expressed in mammalian
skeletal muscle. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 15280-15286, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/17/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/16/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/7/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/22/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/5/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/3/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/10/1997
Alan F. Scott - updated: 12/2/1996

CREATED Lori M. Kelman: 9/23/1996

EDITED carol: 04/22/2011
terry: 4/20/2011
carol: 2/9/2011
wwang: 4/30/2008
terry: 4/25/2008
mgross: 10/17/2007
terry: 10/16/2007
alopez: 5/7/2004
terry: 5/7/2004
mgross: 10/22/2003
alopez: 8/5/1999
carol: 9/3/1998
terry: 8/5/1997
terry: 7/29/1997
alopez: 6/27/1997
mark: 4/10/1997
joanna: 4/9/1997
joanna: 12/2/1996
mark: 9/23/1996

606549	TITLE *606549 MEMBRANE-SPANNING 4-DOMAINS, SUBFAMILY A, MEMBER 8B; MS4A8B
DESCRIPTION MS4A family proteins share structural similarity, amino acid sequence
homology, and chromosomal location. They contain 4 highly conserved
transmembrane domains, flanked by N- and C-terminal cytoplasmic regions.

CLONING

By database searching for homologs of CD20 (MS4A1; 112210), Liang and
Tedder (2001) obtained a cDNA encoding MS4A8B. The predicted 250-amino
acid protein is 63% identical to its mouse homolog. PCR analysis
detected weak expression of MS4A8B in cDNA from 3 B-cell lines.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Liang and Tedder (2001) mapped the MS4A8B
gene to chromosome 11q12-q13, in the same region as MS4A2 (147138) and
MS4A3 (606498).

REFERENCE 1. Liang, Y.; Tedder, T. F.: Identification of a CD20-, Fc-epsilon-RI-beta-related
gene family: sixteen new MS4A family members expressed in human and
mouse. Genomics 72: 119-127, 2001.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/11/2001

EDITED mgross: 12/11/2001

116952	TITLE *116952 CELL DIVISION CYCLE 42; CDC42
;;GTP-BINDING PROTEIN, 25-KD; G25K
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CDC42 is a Ras (see 190020)-related GTP-binding protein. It is
implicated in a variety of biologic activities, including establishment
of cell polarity in yeast, regulation of cell morphology, motility, and
cell cycle progression in mammalian cells, and induction of malignant
transformation (summary by Wu et al., 2000).

CLONING

Shinjo et al. (1990) isolated cDNA clones that code for cdc42, a low
molecular weight GTP-binding protein originally designated G(p) and also
called G25K, from a human placenta library. The predicted amino acid
sequence of the protein was very similar to those of various members of
the RAS superfamily of low molecular weight GTP-binding proteins,
including NRAS, KRAS, HRAS, and the RHO proteins. The highest degree of
sequence identity (80%) was found with the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell
division cycle protein CDC42. The human placental gene complemented a
cdc42 mutation in S. cerevisiae. Munemitsu et al. (1990) presented
further evidence that G25K is the human homolog of the CDC42 gene
product.

Marks and Kwiatkowski (1996) identified 2 isoforms of mouse Cdc42. They
demonstrated that the 2 murine isoforms arise from a single gene by
alternative splicing. Although one is expressed in a wide variety of
tissues, the second isoform appeared to be expressed exclusively in
brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Erickson et al. (1996) used cell fractionation and immunofluorescence to
show that cdc42 is localized to the Golgi apparatus of mammalian cells.
It colocalizes with the nonclathrin coat proteins ARF3 (103190) and COPB
(600959) and its Golgi localization is disrupted by the drug brefeldin
A. Based on their findings, Erickson et al. (1996) suggested that cdc42
may be involved in the delivery of newly synthesized proteins and lipids
to the plasma membrane and that the GTP-binding/GTPase cycle may dictate
its subcellular localization.

By screening rat brain cytosol for proteins that interacted with
Ras-related GTPases, or p21 proteins, of the Rho (RHOA; 165390)
subfamily, Manser et al. (1994) identified 3 proteins, designated PAKs
(see PAK1; 602590) that interacted with the GTP-bound forms of human
CDC42 and RAC1 (602048), but not RHOA. Brown et al. (1996) found that
activity of human PAK1 was induced by coexpression with RAC1 or CDC42.

Zheng et al. (1996) reported that the FGD1 protein (305400) acts as a
cdc42-specific GDP-GTP exchange factor. Cells expressing a fragment of
the FGD1 protein encompassing the pleckstrin and Dbl homology domains
activated 2 elements downstream of cdc42, namely, Jun kinase (165160)
and p70 S6 kinase.

Manser et al. (1993) identified ACK1 (606994) as a binding partner and
inhibitor of the GTP-bound form of CDC42. Interaction between GTP-CDC42
and ACK1 inhibited both the intrinsic and GAP-stimulated GTPase activity
of CDC42.

CDC42 can regulate the actin cytoskeleton through activation of WASP
family members (see 301000). Activation relieves an autoinhibitory
contact between the GTPase-binding domain and the C-terminal region of
WASP proteins. Kim et al. (2000) reported the autoinhibited structure of
the GTPase-binding domain of WASP, which can be induced by the
C-terminal region or by organic cosolvents. In the autoinhibited
complex, intramolecular interactions with the GTPase-binding domain
occlude residues of the C terminus that regulate the Arp2/3
actin-nucleating complex (see 604221). Binding of CDC42 to the
GTPase-binding domain causes a dramatic conformational change, resulting
in disruption of the hydrophobic core and release of the C terminus,
enabling its interaction with the actin regulatory machinery.

Wu et al. (2000) identified a CDC42 mutant, Cdc42F28L, that binds GTP in
the absence of a guanine nucleotide exchange factor, but still
hydrolyzes GTP with a turnover number identical to that for wildtype
CDC42. Expression of this mutant in fibroblasts causes cellular
transformation, mimicking many of the characteristics of cells
transformed by the DBL oncoprotein (311030), a known guanine nucleotide
exchange factor for CDC42. Wu et al. (2000) searched for new CDC42
targets in an effort to understand how CDC42 mediates cellular
transformation. They identified the gamma-subunit of the coatomer
complex (gamma-COP; 604355) as a specific binding partner for activated
CDC42. The binding of CDC42 to gamma-COP is essential for a transforming
signal distinct from those elicited by Ras.

Dendritic cells (DCs) developmentally regulate antigen uptake by
controlling their endocytic capacity. Immature DCs actively internalize
antigen. Mature DCs, however, are poorly endocytic, functioning instead
to present antigens to T cells. Garrett et al. (2000) found that
endocytic downregulation reflects a decrease in endocytic activity
controlled by RHO family GTPases, especially CDC42. Blocking CDC42
function by toxin B treatment or injection of dominant-negative
inhibitors of CDC42 abrogated endocytosis in immature DCs. In mature
DCs, injection of constitutively active CDC42 or microbial delivery of a
CDC42 nucleotide exchange factor reactivated endocytosis. DCs regulated
endogenous levels of CDC42-GTP with activated CDC42 detectable only in
immature cells. Garrett et al. (2000) concluded that DCs developmentally
regulate endocytosis at least in part by controlling levels of activated
CDC42.

Using Mardin Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells expressing Cdc42 mutants
defective in nucleotide binding or hydrolysis, Musch et al. (2001)
showed that Cdc42 differentially regulated the exit of apical and
basolateral proteins from the trans-Golgi network (TGN).
GTPase-deficient Cdc42 accelerated the exit of an apical marker from the
TGN and inhibited the release of basolateral proteins. Basolateral
protein transport by Cdc42 with an activating mutation was accompanied
by changes in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton.

Sin et al. (2002) used in vivo time-lapse imaging of optic tectal cells
in Xenopus laevis tadpoles to demonstrate that enhanced visual activity
driven by a light stimulus promotes dendritic arbor growth. The
stimulus-induced dendritic arbor growth requires glutamate receptor (see
138249)-mediated synaptic transmission, decreased RhoA (165390)
activity, and increased RAC and CDC42 activity. Sin et al. (2002)
concluded that their results delineated a role for Rho GTPases in the
structural plasticity driven by visual stimulation in vivo.

Morphologic changes in dendritic spines are believed to be caused by
dynamic regulation of actin polymerization. Irie and Yamaguchi (2002)
found that the EphB2 receptor tyrosine kinase (600997) physically
associates with the guanine nucleotide exchange factor intersectin-1
(602442) in cooperation with the actin-regulating protein N-WASP
(605056), which in turn activates Cdc42 and spine morphogenesis.

In higher eukaryotes, the small GTPase CDC42, acting through a
PAR6-atypical protein kinase C (see PKC-zeta, 176982) complex, is
required to establish cellular asymmetry during epithelial
morphogenesis, asymmetric cell division, and directed cell migration.
Etienne-Manneville and Hall (2003) used primary rat astrocytes in a cell
migration assay to demonstrate that PAR6-PKC-zeta interacts directly
with and regulates glycogen synthase kinase-3-beta (GSK3-beta; 605004)
to promote polarization of the centrosome and to control the direction
of cell protrusion. CDC42-dependent phosphorylation of GSK3-beta occurs
specifically at the leading edge of migrating cells, and induces the
interaction of APC (611731) protein with the plus ends of microtubules.
The association of APC with microtubules is essential for cell
polarization. Etienne-Manneville and Hall (2003) concluded that CDC42
regulates cell polarity through the spatial regulation of GSK3-beta and
APC.

Wu et al. (2003) presented evidence that activation of CDC42 protects
EGF receptor (EGFR; 131550) from the negative regulatory activity of CBL
(165360), a ubiquitin ligase.

Yasuda et al. (2004) demonstrated that Cdc42 and mDia3 (DIAPH2; 300108)
regulate microtubule attachment to kinetochores.

Nalbant et al. (2004) reported the development of a biosensor capable of
visualizing the changing activation of endogenous unlabeled Cdc42 in
living cells. With the use of a dye that reports protein interactions,
the biosensor revealed localized activation in the trans-Golgi
apparatus, microtubule-dependent Cdc42 activation at the cell periphery,
and activation kinetics precisely coordinated with cell extension and
retraction.

By electroporating genes into chicken presomitic mesenchymal cells,
Nakaya et al. (2004) demonstrated that Cdc42 and Rac1 play different
roles in mesenchymal-epithelial transition. Different levels of Cdc42
appeared to affect the binary decision between epithelial and
mesenchymal states. Proper levels of Rac1 were also necessary for
somitic epithelialization, since cells with either activated or
inhibited Rac1 failed to undergo correct epithelialization.

Using functional and proteomic screens to identify regulators of Cdc42,
Wells et al. (2006) identified a network of proteins that centered on
Rich1 (ARHGAP17; 608293) and organized apical polarity in canine kidney
epithelial cells. Rich1 bound the coiled-coil domain of Amot (300410)
and was thereby targeted to a complex at tight junctions containing the
PDZ domain-containing proteins Pals1 (MPP5; 606958), Patj (INADL;
603199), and Par3 (PARD3; 606745). Regulation of Cdc42 by Rich1 was
required for maintenance of tight junctions. The coiled-coil domain of
Amot was required for its localization to apical membranes and for Amot
to relocalize Pals1 and Par3 to internal puncta. Wells et al. (2006)
proposed that RICH1 and AMOT maintain tight junction integrity by
coordinated regulation of CDC42 and by linking specific components of
the tight junction to intracellular protein trafficking.

Formation of the apical surface and lumen is a fundamental step in
epithelial organ development. Martin-Belmonte et al. (2007) showed that
Pten (601728) localized to the apical plasma membrane during epithelial
morphogenesis to mediate enrichment of phosphatidylinositol
4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P2) at this domain during cyst development
in a 3-dimensional Madin-Darby canine kidney cell system. Ectopic
PtdIns(4,5)P2 at the basolateral surface caused apical proteins to
relocalize to the basolateral surface. Annexin-2 (ANX2; 151740) bound
PtdIns(4,5)P2 and was recruited to the apical surface. Anx2 bound Cdc42
and recruited it to the apical surface, and Cdc42 in turn recruited the
Par6 (607484)/atypical protein kinase C (aPKC; see 176982) complex to
the apical surface. Loss of function of Pten, Anx2, Cdc42, or aPKC
prevented normal development of the apical surface and lumen.
Martin-Belmonte et al. (2007) concluded that PTEN, PtdIns(4,5)P2, ANX2,
CDC42, and aPKC control apical plasma membrane and lumen formation.

Hamann et al. (2007) found that both ASEF1 and ASEF2 were guanine
nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs) for CDC42, but not for RAC1 or RHOA.
ASEF2 required the lipid-modified form of CDC42. Using deletion mutants,
Hamann et al. (2007) showed that the tandem N-terminal ABR and SH3
domain (ABRSH3) of the ASEF proteins was required to bind the armadillo
repeat region of APC. ABRSH3 also functioned in an autoinhibitory
reaction by binding the C-terminal tails of ASEF1 and ASEF2 and
inhibiting their GEF activities. Deletion of ABRSH3 or coexpression of
the APC armadillo repeat sequence with full-length ASEF2 stimulated
filopodia formation in transfected HeLa cells. Hamann et al. (2007)
concluded that activation of ASEF1 and ASEF2 involves binding of APC to
ABRSH3, which disrupts the autoinhibitory interaction of ABRSH3 with the
ASEF C-terminal tail and allows GDP/GTP exchange on CDC42.

Kawasaki et al. (2007) found that ASEF2 was a GEF for both CDC42 and
RAC1 in MDCK and HeLa cells. Overexpression of ASEF2 increased membrane
ruffling and CDC42-mediated filopodia formation in HeLa cells.

Shen et al. (2008) showed that Nudel (NDEL1; 607538) colocalized with
Cdc42gap (ARHGAP1; 602732) at the leading edge of migrating NIH3T3 mouse
fibroblasts. This localization of Nudel required its phosphorylation by
Erk1 (MAPK3; 601795)/Erk2 (MAPK1; 176948). Shen et al. (2008) found that
Nudel competed with Cdc42 for binding Cdc42gap. Consequently, Nudel
inhibited Cdc42gap-mediated inactivation of Cdc42 in a dose-dependent
manner. Depletion of Nudel by RNA interference or overexpression of a
nonphosphorylatable Nudel mutant abolished Cdc42 activation and cell
migration. Shen et al. (2008) concluded that NUDEL facilitates cell
migration by sequestering CDC42GAP at the leading edge to stabilize
active CDC42 in response to extracellular stimuli.

Kang et al. (2008) performed a global characterization of rat neural
palmitoyl proteomes and identified most of the known neural palmitoyl
proteins, 68 in total, plus more than 200 novel palmitoyl protein
candidates, with further testing confirming palmitoylation for 21 of
these candidates. The novel palmitoyl proteins included neurotransmitter
receptors, transporters, adhesion molecules, scaffolding proteins, as
well as SNAREs and other vesicular trafficking proteins. Of particular
interest was the finding of palmitoylation for a brain-specific Cdc42
splice variant. The palmitoylated Cdc42 isoform (Cdc42-palm) differs
from the canonical, prenylated form (Cdc42-prenyl), with regard to both
localization and function: Cdc42-palm concentrates in dendritic spines
and has a special role in inducing these postsynaptic structures.
Furthermore, assessing palmitoylation dynamics in drug-induced activity
models identified rapidly induced changes for Cdc42 as well as for other
synaptic palmitoyl proteins, suggesting that palmitoylation may
participate broadly in the activity-driven changes that shape synapse
morphology and brain function.

Machacek et al. (2009) examined GTPase coordination in mouse embryonic
fibroblasts both through simultaneous visualization of 2 GTPase
biosensors and using a 'computational multiplexing' approach capable of
defining the relationships between multiple protein activities
visualized in separate experiments. They found that RhoA (165390) is
activated at the cell edge synchronous with edge advancement, whereas
Cdc42 and Rac1 are activated 2 microns behind the edge with a delay of
40 seconds. This indicates that Rac1 and RhoA operate antagonistically
through spatial separation and precise timing, and that RhoA has a role
in the initial events of protrusion, whereas Rac1 and Cdc42 activate
pathways implicated in reinforcement and stabilization of newly expanded
protrusions.

Frank et al. (2009) found that Cdc42 was involved in a signaling complex
that modulated presynaptic Cav2.1 (CACNA1A; 601011) calcium channels in
the Drosophila neuromuscular junction. This signaling system involved
the Rho-type GEF ephexin (NGEF; 605991), which appeared to act with
Cdc42 to activate the Eph receptor (see EPHA1; 179610) for modulation of
Cav2.1 channel activity.

Murakoshi et al. (2011) used 2-photon fluorescence lifetime imaging
microscopy to monitor the activity of 2 Rho GTPases, RhoA and Cdc42, in
single dendritic spines undergoing structural plasticity associated with
long-term potentiation in CA1 pyramidal neurons in cultured slices of
rat hippocampus. When long-term volume increase was induced in a single
spine using 2-photon glutamate uncaging, RhoA and Cdc42 were rapidly
activated in the stimulated spine. These activities decayed over about 5
minutes, and were then followed by a phase of persistent activation
lasting more than half an hour. Although active RhoA and Cdc42 were
similarly mobile, their activity patterns were different. RhoA
activation diffused out of the stimulated spine and spread over about 5
microns along the dendrite. In contrast, Cdc42 activation was restricted
to the stimulated spine, and exhibited a steep gradient at the spine
necks. Inhibition of the Rho-Rock pathway preferentially inhibited the
initial spine growth, whereas the inhibition of the Cdc42-Pak pathway
blocked the maintenance of sustained structural plasticity. RhoA and
Cdc42 activation depended on calcium ion/calmodulin-dependent kinase
(CaMKII). Thus, Murakoshi et al. (2011) concluded that RhoA and Cdc42
relay transient CaMKII activation to synapse-specific, long-term
signaling required for spine structural plasticity.

Using synthetic derivatives of the enteropathogenic Escherichia coli
guanine-nucleotide exchange factor Map, Orchard et al. (2012) found that
CDC42 GTPase signal transduction was controlled by interaction between
Map and the PDZ domains of EBP50 (SLC9A3R1; 604990) and the induction of
clusters of actin-rich membrane protrusions.

Keestra et al. (2013) demonstrated that NOD1 (605980) senses cytosolic
microbial products by monitoring the activation state of small Rho
GTPases. Activation of RAC1 (602048) and CDC42 by bacterial delivery or
ectopic expression of SopE, a virulence factor of the enteric pathogen
Salmonella, triggered the NOD1 signaling pathway with consequent RIP2
(603455)-mediated induction of NF-kappa-B (see 164011)-dependent
inflammatory responses. Similarly, activation of the NOD1 signaling
pathway by peptidoglycan required RAC1 activity. Furthermore, Keestra et
al. (2013) showed that constitutively active forms of RAC1, CDC42, and
RHOA (165390) activated the NOD1 signaling pathway.

GENE STRUCTURE

Nicole et al. (1999) determined the organization of the CDC42 gene and
found that the gene encodes the placental and brain isoforms generated
by alternative splicing.

Moats-Staats and Stiles (1995) showed that the 5-prime end of another
gene, called BB1 by them (601106), overlaps the 3-prime end of G25K.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Through a structural analysis of DOCK9 (607325)-CDC42 complexes, Yang et
al. (2009) identified a nucleotide sensor within the alpha-10 helix of
the DHR2 domain that contributes to release of guanine diphosphate (GDP)
and then to discharge of the activated GTP-bound Cdc42. Magnesium
exclusion, a critical factor in promoting GDP release, is mediated by a
conserved valine residue within this sensor, whereas binding of
GTP-magnesium ion to the nucleotide-free complex results in
magnesium-inducing displacement of the sensor to stimulate discharge of
Cdc42-GTP. Yang et al. (2009) concluded that their studies identified an
unusual mechanism of GDP release and defined the complete guanine
nucleotide exchange factor catalytic cycle from GDP dissociation
followed by GTP binding and discharge of the activated GTPase.

MAPPING

Using SSCP analysis of a mouse backcross panel, Marks and Kwiatkowski
(1996) demonstrated that the gene encoding cdc42 is localized to the
distal portion of mouse chromosome 4 between Ephb2 proximally and Cappb
(601572) distally. The human homologs of both of the 2 flanking genes
were mapped to human chromosome 1p36.1 by Barron-Casella et al. (1995),
thus indicating that this is the likely site of the human CDC42 gene.
The CDC42 gene was mapped to the 1p36-p35 region by radiation hybrid
analysis (Schuler et al., 1996; Jensen et al., 1997; Deloukas et al.,
1998).

Nicole et al. (1999) demonstrated a CDC42-like transcript on chromosome
4 that does not contain introns and is similar to the placental isoform,
suggesting that it is a processed pseudogene.

Nicole et al. (1999) excluded the CDC42 gene as the site of mutation in
the Schwartz-Jampel syndrome type 1 (255800).

ANIMAL MODEL

Wu et al. (2006) stated that constitutive knockout of Cdc42 in mice
results in death around implantation. In order to examine the role of
Cdc42 in the differentiation of skin stem cells into hair follicles,
they targeted Cdc42 deletion to keratinocytes. Mutant mice were born
without obvious defects but showed impaired hair formation and growth
retardation. Within 4 weeks, all hairs were lost and did not grow again
in older animals. In the absence of Cdc42, degradation of beta-catenin
(CTNNB1; 116806) increased corresponding to decreased phosphorylation of
Gsk3-beta and increased phosphorylation of axin (603816), which is
required for binding of beta-catenin to the degradation machinery. Wu et
al. (2006) concluded that Cdc42 regulation of beta-catenin turnover is
required for terminal differentiation of hair follicle progenitor cells.

By targeted deletion of Cdc42 in telencephalic neural progenitors in
mouse embryos, Chen et al. (2006) found that Cdc42 was essential for
establishment of apical-basal polarity of the telencephalic
neuroepithelium, a necessity for expansion and bifurcation of cerebral
hemispheres.

REFERENCE 1. Barron-Casella, E. A.; Torres, M. A.; Scherer, S. W.; Heng, H.
H.; Tsui, L. C.; Casella, J. F.: Sequence analysis and chromosomal
localization of human Cap Z: conserved residues within the actin-binding
domain may link Cap Z to gelsolin/severin and profilin protein families. J.
Biol. Chem. 270: 21472-21479, 1995.

2. Brown, J. L.; Stowers, L.; Baer, M.; Trejo, J.; Coughlin, S.; Chant,
J.: Human Ste20 homologue hPAK1 links GTPases to the JNK MAP kinase
pathway. Curr. Biol. 6: 598-605, 1996.

3. Chen, L.; Liao, G.; Yang, L.; Campbell, K.; Nakafuku, M.; Kuan,
C.-Y.; Zheng, Y.: Cdc42 deficiency causes Sonic hedgehog-independent
holoprosencephaly. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 16520-16525, 2006.

4. Deloukas, P.; Schuler, G. D.; Gyapay, G.; Beasley, E. M.; Soderlund,
C.; Rodriguez-Tome, P.; Hui, L.; Matise, T. C.; McKusick, K. B.; Beckmann,
J. S.; Bentolila, S.; Bihoreau, M.-T.; and 53 others: A physical
map of 30,000 human genes. Science 282: 744-746, 1998.

5. Erickson, J. W.; Zhang, C.; Kahn, R. A.; Evans, T.; Cerione, R.
A.: Mammalian cdc42 is a brefeldin A-sensitive component of the Golgi
apparatus. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 26850-26854, 1996.

6. Etienne-Manneville, S.; Hall, A.: Cdc42 regulates GSK-3-beta and
adenomatous polyposis coli to control cell polarity. Nature 421:
753-756, 2003.

7. Frank, C. A.; Pielage, J.; Davis, G. W.: A presynaptic homeostatic
signaling system composed of the Eph receptor, Ephexin, Cdc42, and
Cav2.1 calcium channels. Neuron 61: 556-569, 2009.

8. Garrett, W. S.; Chen, L.-M.; Kroschewski, R.; Ebersold, M.; Turley,
S.; Trombetta, S.; Galan, J. E.; Mellman, I.: Developmental control
of endocytosis in dendritic cells by Cdc42. Cell 102: 325-334, 2000.

9. Hamann, M. J.; Lubking, C. M.; Luchini, D. N.; Billadeau, D. D.
: Asef2 functions as a Cdc42 exchange factor and is stimulated by
the release of an autoinhibitory module from a concealed C-terminal
activation element. Molec. Cell. Biol. 27: 1380-1393, 2007.

10. Irie, F.; Yamaguchi, Y.: EphB receptors regulate dendritic spine
development via intersectin, Cdc42 and N-WASP. Nature Neurosci. 5:
1117-1118, 2002.

11. Jensen, S. J.; Sulman, E. P.; Maris, J. M.; Matise, T. C.; Vojta,
P. J.; Barrett, J. C.; Brodeur, G. M.; White, P. S.: An integrated
transcript map of human chromosome 1p35-p36. Genomics 42: 126-136,
1997.

12. Kang, R.; Wan, J.; Arstikaitis, P.; Takahashi, H.; Huang, K.;
Bailey, A. O.; Thompson, J. X.; Roth, A. F.; Drisdel, R. C.; Mastro,
R.; Green, W. N.; Yates, J. R., III; Davis, N. G.; El-Husseini, A.
: Neural palmitoyl-proteomics reveals dynamic synaptic palmitoylation. Nature 456:
904-909, 2008.

13. Kawasaki, Y.; Sagara, M.; Shibata, Y.; Shirouzu, M.; Yokoyama,
S.; Akiyama, T.: Identification and characterization of Asef2, a
guanine-nucleotide exchange factor specific for Rac1 and Cdc42. Oncogene 26:
7620-7627, 2007.

14. Keestra, A. M.; Winter, M. G.; Auburger, J. J.; Frassle, S. P.;
Xavier, M. N.; Winter, S. E.; Kim, A.; Poon, V.; Ravesloot, M. M.;
Waldenmaier, J. F. T.; Tsolis, R. M.; Eigenheer, R. A.; Baumler, A.
J.: Manipulation of small Rho GTPases is a pathogen-induced process
detected by NOD1. Nature 496: 233-237, 2013.

15. Kim, A. S.; Kakalis, L. T.; Abdul-Manan, N.; Liu, G. A.; Rosen,
M. K.: Autoinhibition and activation mechanisms of the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome protein. Nature 404: 151-158, 2000.

16. Machacek, M.; Hodgson, L.; Welch, C.; Elliott, H.; Pertz, O.;
Nalbant, P.; Abell, A.; Johnson, G. L.; Hahn, K. M.; Danuser, G.:
Coordination of Rho GTPase activities during cell protrusion. Nature 461:
99-103, 2009.

17. Manser, E.; Leung, T.; Salihuddin, H.; Tan, L.; Lim, L.: A non-receptor
tyrosine kinase that inhibits the GTPase activity of p21cdc42. Nature 363:
364-367, 1993.

18. Manser, E.; Leung, T.; Salihuddin, H.; Zhao, Z.; Lim, L.: A brain
serine/threonine protein kinase activated by Cdc42 and Rac1. Nature 367:
40-46, 1994.

19. Marks, P. W.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.: Genomic organization and chromosomal
location of murine Cdc42. Genomics 38: 13-18, 1996.

20. Martin-Belmonte, F.; Gassama, A.; Datta, A.; Yu, W.; Rescher,
U.; Gerke, V.; Mostov, K.: PTEN-mediated apical segregation of phosphoinositides
controls epithelial morphogenesis through Cdc42. Cell 128: 383-397,
2007.

21. Moats-Staats, B. M.; Stiles, A. D.: Southern hybridization analyses
of somatic cell hybrids reveal that human BB1 is a member of a multigene
family dispersed throughout the human genome and appears to be linked
to the human G25K genes. DNA Cell Biol. 14: 465-474, 1995.

22. Munemitsu, S.; Innis, M. A.; Clark, R.; McCormick, F.; Ullrich,
A.; Polakis, P.: Molecular cloning and expression of a G25K cDNA,
the human homolog of the yeast cell cycle gene CDC42. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 10: 5977-5982, 1990.

23. Murakoshi, H.; Wang, H.; Yasuda, R.: Local, persistent activation
of Rho GTPases during plasticity of single dendritic spines. Nature 472:
100-104, 2011.

24. Musch, A.; Cohen, D.; Kreitzer, G.; Rodriguez-Boulan, E.: cdc42
regulates the exit of apical and basolateral proteins from the trans-Golgi
network. EMBO J. 20: 2171-2179, 2001.

25. Nakaya, Y.; Kuroda, S.; Katagiri, Y. T.; Kaibuchi, K.; Takahashi,
Y.: Mesenchymal-epithelial transition during somitic segmentation
is regulated by differential roles of Cdc42 and Rac1. Dev. Cell 7:
425-438, 2004.

26. Nalbant, P.; Hodgson, L.; Kraynov, V.; Toutchkine, A.; Hahn, K.
M.: Activation of endogenous Cdc42 visualized in living cells. Science 305:
1615-1619, 2004.

27. Nicole, S.; White, P. S.; Topaloglu, H.; Beigthon, P.; Salih,
M.; Hentati, F.; Fontaine, B.: The human CDC42 gene: genomic organization,
evidence for the existence of a putative pseudogene and exclusion
as a SJS1 candidate gene. Hum. Genet. 105: 98-103, 1999.

28. Orchard, R. C.; Kittisopikul, M.; Altschuler, S. J.; Wu, L. F.;
Suel, G. M.; Alto, N. M.: Identification of F-actin as the dynamic
hub in a microbial-induced GTPase polarity circuit. Cell 148: 803-815,
2012.

29. Schuler, G. D.; Boguski, M. S.; Stewart, E. A.; Stein, L. D.;
Gyapay, G.; Rice, K.; White, R. E.; Rodriguez-Tome, P.; Aggarwal,
A.; Bajorek, E.; Bentolila, S.; Birren, B. B.; and 92 others: A
gene map of the human genome. Science 274: 540-546, 1996.

30. Shen, Y.; Li, N.; Wu, S.; Zhou, Y.; Shan, Y.; Zhang, Q.; Ding,
C.; Yuan, Q.; Zhao, F.; Zeng, R.; Zhu, X.: Nudel binds Cdc42GAP to
modulate Cdc42 activity at the leading edge of migrating cells. Dev.
Cell 14: 342-353, 2008.

31. Shinjo, K.; Koland, J. G.; Hart, M. J.; Narasimhan, V.; Johnson,
D. I.; Evans, T.; Cerione, R. A.: Molecular cloning of the gene for
the human placental GTP-binding protein G(p) (G25K): identification
of this GTP-binding protein as the human homolog of the yeast cell-division-cycle
protein CDC42. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 9853-9857, 1990.

32. Sin, W. C.; Haas, K.; Ruthazer, E. S.; Cline, H. T.: Dendrite
growth increased by visual activity requires NMDA receptor and Rho
GTPases. Nature 419: 475-480, 2002.

33. Wells, C. D.; Fawcett, J. P.; Traweger, A.; Yamanaka, Y.; Goudreault,
M.; Elder, K.; Kulkarni, S.; Gish, G.; Virag, C.; Lim, C.; Colwill,
K.; Starostine, A.; Metalnikov, P.; Pawson, T.: A Rich1/Amot complex
regulates the Cdc42 GTPase and apical-polarity proteins in epithelial
cells. Cell 125: 535-548, 2006.

34. Wu, W. J.; Erickson, J. W.; Lin, R.; Cerione, R. A.: The gamma-subunit
of the coatomer complex binds Cdc42 to mediate transformation. Nature 405:
800-804, 2000.

35. Wu, W. J.; Tu, S.; Cerione, R. A.: Activated Cdc42 sequesters
c-Cbl and prevents EGF receptor degradation. Cell 114: 715-725,
2003.

36. Wu, X.; Quondamatteo, F.; Lefever, T.; Czuchra, A.; Meyer, H.;
Chrostek, A.; Paus, R.; Langbein, L.; Brakebusch, C.: Cdc42 controls
progenitor cell differentiation and beta-catenin turnover in skin. Genes
Dev. 20: 571-585, 2006.

37. Yang, J.; Zhang, Z.; Roe, S. M.; Marshall, C. J.; Barford, D.
: Activation of Rho GTPases by DOCK exchange factors is mediated by
a nucleotide sensor. Science 325: 1398-1402, 2009.

38. Yasuda, S.; Oceguera-Yanez, F.; Kato, T.; Okamoto, M.; Yonemura,
S.; Terada, Y.; Ishizaki, T.; Narumiya, S.: Cdc42 and mDia3 regulate
microtubule attachment to kinetochores. Nature 428: 767-771, 2004.

39. Zheng, Y.; Fischer, D. J.; Santos, M. F.; Tigyi, G.; Pasteris,
N. G.; Gorski, J. L.; Xu, Y.: The faciogenital dysplasia gene product
FGD1 functions as a Cdc42Hs-specific guanine-nucleotide exchange factor. J.
Biol. Chem. 271: 33169-33172, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 05/06/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/26/2012
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/10/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/9/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/6/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/11/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/8/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/13/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/18/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/28/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/30/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/19/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/3/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/28/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/7/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/28/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/16/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/5/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/29/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/5/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/7/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/20/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/10/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/23/1999
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 4/8/1998
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 5/28/1997
Alan F. Scott - updated: 3/6/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/17/1991

EDITED alopez: 05/06/2013
mgross: 11/20/2012
terry: 10/26/2012
mgross: 5/10/2011
alopez: 5/10/2011
terry: 5/9/2011
mgross: 1/24/2011
terry: 1/6/2011
wwang: 5/17/2010
mgross: 5/11/2010
alopez: 1/11/2010
terry: 1/8/2010
alopez: 10/22/2009
terry: 10/13/2009
carol: 7/7/2009
alopez: 2/20/2009
terry: 2/18/2009
mgross: 4/28/2008
ckniffin: 2/5/2008
mgross: 10/4/2007
terry: 8/30/2007
mgross: 1/19/2007
mgross: 6/7/2006
terry: 5/3/2006
wwang: 4/3/2006
terry: 3/28/2006
mgross: 10/7/2004
alopez: 10/4/2004
tkritzer: 9/28/2004
alopez: 4/19/2004
terry: 4/16/2004
cwells: 11/10/2003
tkritzer: 3/14/2003
ckniffin: 3/5/2003
alopez: 3/3/2003
alopez: 1/29/2003
terry: 1/29/2003
alopez: 11/19/2002
terry: 11/18/2002
carol: 6/5/2002
terry: 11/15/2001
mgross: 9/7/2000
alopez: 7/20/2000
alopez: 3/10/2000
mcapotos: 12/7/1999
psherman: 11/3/1999
psherman: 10/18/1999
jlewis: 9/3/1999
terry: 8/23/1999
kayiaros: 7/13/1999
psherman: 3/18/1999
psherman: 4/21/1998
dholmes: 4/8/1998
alopez: 8/1/1997
alopez: 7/23/1997
mark: 12/16/1996
terry: 12/10/1996
terry: 4/17/1996
mark: 3/6/1996
carol: 4/1/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/2/1992
carol: 3/4/1991
carol: 1/17/1991

300550	TITLE *300550 PHOSPHATE-REGULATING ENDOPEPTIDASE HOMOLOG, X-LINKED; PHEX
;;PEX
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The HYP Consortium (1995), comprising 29 investigators in 5
institutions, isolated a candidate gene for X-linked hypophosphatemic
rickets (307800) from the Xp22.1 region by positional cloning. The gene
exhibited homology to a family of endopeptidase genes, members of which
are involved in the degradation or activation of a variety of peptide
hormones, including neutral endopeptidase (NEP; 120520),
endothelin-converting enzyme (ECE1; 600423), and Kell blood group
antigen (613883). Because of the homology and the function of the gene,
the authors referred to it as PEX ('phosphate regulating gene with
homologies to endopeptidases, on the X chromosome'). A partial PHEX
sequence corresponding to 638 amino acids was presented. The PHEX cDNA
was found to be evolutionarily conserved in primate, bovine, mouse, and
hamster DNA, and possibly in chicken DNA.

Guo and Quarles (1997) isolated a human PHEX cDNA from a bone cDNA
library. The deduced 749-amino acid protein has a molecular mass of 86.5
kD and shares 96% identity to the mouse sequence. The PHEX protein is
predicted to have a 20-residue N-terminal cytoplasmic tail, a 27-residue
transmembrane domain, and a 702-residue extracellular C-terminal region.
The protein belongs to the type II integral membrane zinc-dependent
endopeptidase family. PHEX transcripts were identified in human
osteosarcoma-derived cells and in differentiated mouse osteoblasts, but
not in immature mouse preosteoblasts, indicating stage-specific
expression. Guo and Quarles (1997) suggested that PHEX may play a role
in osteoblast-mediated bone mineralization.

Grieff et al. (1997) isolated human PHEX clones from an ovary cDNA
library. The gene encodes a 749-amino acid polypeptide that is 96%
identical to the murine Phex gene product and has significant homology
to other members of the membrane-bound zinc metallopeptidase family.
Northern blot analysis identified a 6.6-kb PHEX mRNA transcript at high
levels in adult ovary and fetal lung and at lower levels in adult lung
and fetal liver.

Du et al. (1996) reported the isolation and characterization of the
complete open reading frame of the mouse Phex gene. The deduced
749-amino acid protein showed 95% identity to the available human PHEX
sequence and significant homology to members of the membrane-bound
metalloendopeptidase family. Northern blot analysis revealed a 6.6-kb
mRNA transcript in bone and in cultured osteoblasts from normal mice;
the transcript was not detectable in samples from the mutant 'Hyp' mouse
but were detectable in Hyp bone by RT-PCR amplification. Beck et al.
(1997) cloned mouse Phex and human PHEX cDNAs encoding part of the
5-prime untranslated region, the protein coding region, and the entire
3-prime untranslated region. Using RT-PCR and ribonuclease protection
assays, they found that Phex/PHEX mRNA is expressed predominantly in
human fetal and in adult mouse calvaria and long bone.

GENE STRUCTURE

Holm et al. (1997) determined that the PHEX gene contains 18 exons. Its
genomic organization shares similarity with members of the family of
neutral endopeptidases.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 3 unrelated patients with X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets (307800),
the HYP Consortium (1995) identified 3 different mutations in the PHEX
gene (300550.0001-300550.0003).

Holm et al. (1997) identified mutations in the PHEX gene in 9 of 22
unrelated patients with X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets: 3 nonsense
mutations, a 1-bp deletion leading to a frameshift, a donor-splice site
mutation, and missense mutations in 4 patients (see, e.g.,
300550.0004-300550.0006).

Dixon et al. (1998) identified a total of 31 mutations in the PHEX gene
in 46 unrelated XLH kindreds and 22 unrelated patients with nonfamilial
XLH. Thirty of the mutations were scattered throughout the putative
extracellular domain. Dixon et al. (1998) also identified 6 PHEX
polymorphisms that had heterozygosity frequencies ranging from less than
1% to 43%. Over 20% of the mutations were observed in nonfamilial XLH
patients, who represented de novo occurrences of PHEX mutations. The
majority (over 70%) of the mutations were predicted to result in a
functional loss of the PHEX protein, rather than haploinsufficiency or a
dominant-negative effect.

Filisetti et al. (1999) reported 30 newly detected mutations in the PHEX
gene, and pooled findings with all previously published mutations. The
spectrum of the mutations displayed 16% deletions, 8% insertions, 34%
missense, 27% nonsense, and 15% splice site mutations, with peaks in
exons 15 and 17. Since 32.8% of PHEX amino acids are conserved in the
family of the endopeptidases, the number of missense mutations detected
at nonconserved residues was smaller than expected, whereas the number
of nonsense mutations observed at nonconserved residues was very close
to the expected number. Compared with conserved amino acids, the changes
in nonconserved amino acids may result in benign polymorphisms or
possibly mild disease that may go undiagnosed.

Sabbagh et al. (2000) stated that 131 HYP-causing mutations in the PHEX
gene had been reported. They announced the creation of an online PHEX
mutation database for the collection and distribution of information on
PHEX mutations.

Sabbagh et al. (2001) examined the effect of PHEX missense mutations on
cellular trafficking of the recombinant protein. Four mutant PHEX cDNAs
were generated by PCR mutagenesis (e.g., E581V). Three of the mutants
were completely sensitive to endoglycosidase H digestion, indicating
that they were not fully glycosylated. Sequestration of the
disease-causing mutant proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum and plasma
membrane localization of wildtype PHEX proteins was demonstrated by
immunofluorescence and cell surface biotinylation. Sabbagh et al. (2003)
assessed the impact of 9 PHEX missense mutations on cellular
trafficking, endopeptidase activity, and protein conformation. Eight
mutations had been identified in XLH patients; the remaining mutation,
E581V, had been engineered in NEP (120520), to which PHEX shows
significant homology, where it was shown to abolish catalytic activity
but not interfere with cell surface localization of the recombinant
protein (Devault et al., 1988). The authors demonstrated that some
mutations in secreted PHEX abrogate catalytic activity, whereas others
alter the trafficking and conformation of the protein, thus providing a
mechanism whereby missense mutations result in loss of function of the
PHEX protein. Endopeptidase activity of secreted and rescued PHEX
proteins was assessed using a novel internally quenched fluorogenic
peptide substrate.

Gaucher et al. (2009) analyzed the PHEX gene in 118 probands with
hypophosphatemic rickets and identified mutations in 49 (87%) of 56
familial cases and 44 (73%) of 60 known sporadic cases. Of the 78
different mutations identified, 16 were missense mutations, which all
occurred at residues that are highly conserved in mammals. Plotting all
reported PHEX missense mutations on a 3D protein model revealed that
missense mutations are primarily located in 2 regions in the inner part
of the PHEX protein; similar plotting of nonsense mutations showed a
random distribution. One patient with late-onset disease was found to
have a mutation in an intronic region of PHEX, 2 bp away from the splice
site consensus sequence, confirming that late-onset disease is part of
the spectrum of X-linked dominant hypophosphatemic rickets.

NOMENCLATURE

The PEX nomenclature conflicts with the use of the same symbol for
multiple peroxisomal proteins (peroxins) numbered 1 to 12 or more, e.g.,
PEX5 (600414). The gene symbol PHEX has much to recommend it (Dixon et
al., 1998; Filisetti et al., 1999).

ANIMAL MODEL

- The 'Hyp' Mouse

Eicher et al. (1976) observed a mouse model for X-linked
hypophosphatemia, designated Hyp. Hyp mice have bone changes resembling
rickets, dwarfism, and high fractional excretion of phosphate ion.

By various transplantation experiments, Ecarot-Charrier et al. (1988)
demonstrated an intrinsic defect in osteoblasts in the Hyp mouse. Bell
et al. (1988) reported that primary cultures of renal epithelial cells
from the Hyp mouse demonstrate a defect in phosphate transport and
vitamin D metabolism, suggesting a defect intrinsic to the kidney.
However, in cross-transplantation studies of kidneys in normal and Hyp
mice, Nesbitt et al. (1992) found that the Hyp phenotype was neither
transferred nor corrected by renal transplantation, suggesting that the
kidney was not the target organ for the genetic abnormality. Nesbitt et
al. (1992) postulated that the disorder in the mouse, and probably in
the human, is the result of a humoral factor and is not an intrinsic
renal abnormality. Nesbitt et al. (1992) suggested the presence of a
unique hormonal effect that results in a blockade of, or failure to
express, an essential gene function in a variety of cell types.

Parabiosis (Meyer et al., 1989) and renal transplantation (Nesbitt et
al., 1992) experiments demonstrated that the renal defect in brush
border membrane sodium-dependent phosphate transport in Hyp mice is not
intrinsic to the kidney, but rather depends on a circulating humoral
factor, which is not parathyroid hormone (Meyer et al., 1989), for its
expression. In Hyp mice, Tenenhouse et al. (1994) demonstrated that the
specific reduction in renal sodium-phosphate cotransport in brush border
membranes could be ascribed to a proportionate decrease in the abundance
of kidney NPT2 (182309) cotransporter mRNA and protein. However, the
NPT2 gene is located on chromosome 5 and, hence, cannot be the site of
the mutation primarily responsible for hereditary hypophosphatemia.
Tenenhouse et al. (1994) suggested that the X-linked gene may encode the
postulated circulating humoral factor that regulates the renal
sodium-phosphate cotransporter.

Beck et al. (1997) discovered a large deletion in the 3-prime region of
the Phex gene in the Hyp mouse.

Baum et al. (2003) demonstrated that Hyp mice have a 2-fold greater
urinary prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) excretion than wildtype mice. To
determine whether prostaglandins were involved in the pathogenesis of
this disorder, Hyp and wildtype C57/B6 mice received intraperitoneal
injections with vehicle or indomethacin and were studied approximately
12 hours after the last dose of indomethacin. In the Hyp mice,
indomethacin decreased the fractional excretion of phosphate and
increased serum phosphate. There was no effect of indomethacin in the
wildtype mice. Indomethacin did not affect serum creatine or inulin
clearance, demonstrating that the normalization of urinary phosphate
excretion was not caused by changes in glomerular filtration rate.
Indomethacin treatment increased renal brush border membrane vesicle
NaPi2 protein abundance in Hyp mice to levels comparable to that of
wildtype mice. Baum et al. (2003) concluded that there is dysregulation
of renal prostaglandin metabolism in Hyp mice, and that indomethacin
treatment normalizes the urinary excretion of phosphate by a direct
tubular effect. These studies suggested that indomethacin may be an
effective form of therapy in humans with X-linked hypophosphatemia.

Lorenz-Depiereux et al. (2004) studied 2 spontaneous mutations in the
mouse Phex gene, Hyp-2J, a 7.3-kb deletion containing exon 15, and
Hyp-Duk, a 30-kb deletion containing exons 13 and 14. Both mutations
caused similar phenotypes in males, including shortened hind legs and
tail, a shortened square trunk, hypophosphatemia, hypocalcemia, and
rachitic bone disease. Hyp-Duk males also exhibited background-dependent
variable expression of deafness, circling behavior, and cranial
dysmorphology. Both Hyp-2J and Hyp-Duk males had thickened temporal bone
surrounding the cochlea and a precipitate in the scala tympani, but only
the hearing-impaired Hyp-Duk mice had degeneration of the organ of Corti
and spiral ganglion. Lorenz-Depiereux et al. (2004) noted that XLH
phenotypes could now be separated from non-XLH-related phenotypes.

During development and postnatal growth of the endochondral skeleton,
proliferative chondrocytes differentiate into hypertrophic chondrocytes,
which subsequently undergo apoptosis and are replaced by bone. Donohue
and Demay (2002) found that mice with rickets due to ablation of the
vitamin D receptor (VDR; 601769) had expansion of hypertrophic
chondrocytes due to impaired apoptosis of these cells. Sabbagh et al.
(2005) showed that institution of a rescue diet that restored mineral
ion homeostasis in Vdr-null mice prevented the development of rachitic
changes, indicating that mineral ion abnormalities, not ablation of the
Vdr gene, were the cause of impaired chondrocyte apoptosis. Similarly,
Hyp mice with rickets also showed impaired apoptosis of hypertrophic
chondrocytes, and the decreased apoptosis was correlated with
hypophosphatemia. Wildtype mice rendered hypercalcemic and
hypophosphatemic by dietary means also developed rickets. In vitro
studies showed that the apoptosis was mediated by caspase-9 (CASP9;
602234). Sabbagh et al. (2005) concluded that hypophosphatemia was the
common mediator of rickets in these cases. The findings indicated that
normal phosphorus levels are required for growth plate maturation and
that circulating phosphate is a key regulator of hypertrophic
chondrocyte apoptosis.

Yuan et al. (2008) generated mice with a global Phex knockout (Phex -/-)
and mice with conditional osteocalcin-promoted Phex inactivation only in
osteoblasts and osteocytes (OC-Phex -/-). The reduction in serum
phosphorus levels and kidney cell membrane phosphate transport as
compared to wildtype mice was similar among Hyp, Phex -/-, and OC-Phex
-/- mice; all 3 mutant strains had increased bone production and serum
FGF23 (605370) levels and decreased kidney membrane NPT2, and manifested
comparable osteomalacia. Yuan et al. (2008) concluded that aberrant Phex
function in osteoblasts and/or osteocytes alone is sufficient to
underlie the Hyp phenotype.

- The Gyro (Gy) Mouse

Lyon et al. (1986) identified a second type of X-linked dominant
hypophosphatemia in the mouse in addition to the Hyp. The phenotype,
called Gyro (Gy), is characterized by rickets/osteomalacia as in the Hyp
mouse, but also shows circling behavior, inner ear abnormalities,
sterility in hemizygous males, and a milder phenotype in heterozygous
females. The Gy and Hyp mutations have similar expression in the renal
tubule, but the Gy mutation has an additional effect on the inner ear.
The Gy allele is expressed in the inner ear of some heterozygous mice,
which show circling behavior. The authors found that Gy mapped close
(crossover value 0.4-0.8%) to Hyp. Lowe syndrome (309000) is not a human
counterpart of Gy because in that condition the transport defect is not
limited to phosphorus; moreover, characteristic morphologic changes in
the nephron observed in Lowe syndrome are not seen in the Gy mouse.

Nesbitt et al. (1987) found that PTH-dependent 1-alpha-hydroxylase
(CYP27B1; 609506) activity in the renal proximal convoluted tubule was
abnormally regulated in the Hyp mouse, whereas calcitonin-dependent
enzyme function in the proximal straight tubule was modulated normally.

In the search for a human equivalent of the Gy mutation, Boneh et al.
(1987) measured hearing in 22 patients with X-linked hypophosphatemia;
5, including 2 mother/son pairs, had sensorineural hearing deficits due
to cochlear dysfunction. The authors suggested that the disease in these
persons may be the human counterpart of Gy.

Davidai et al. (1990) provided further information on the differences
between the Hyp and Gy phenotypes in the mouse.

Collins and Ghishan (1996) found normal expression and location of the
renal Na+/P(i) transporter NPT2 in Gy mice, suggesting that the
molecular defect in the Gy mice is distinct from that in the Hyp mice,
which show a decrease in transporter activity in the renal proximal
tubules possibly related to decreased transcription (Collins et al.,
1995).

In Gy mice, Strom et al. (1997) found a deletion of the first 3 exons
and the promoter region of the PHEX, indicating that Hyp and Gy are
allelic disorders. However, Meyer et al. (1998) found that the Gyro
mouse has a partial deletion of both the Phex gene and the upstream
spermine synthase gene (300105), making it a contiguous gene syndrome in
that species. Gy is thus not as useful a model for human XLH as Hyp.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, 2-BP DEL, 675TC

In a patient with X-linked hypophosphatemia (307800), the HYP Consortium
(1995) identified a 2-bp deletion (675delTC) in exon 1 of the PHEX gene.

.0002
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, IVS1AS, G-A, -1

In a patient with X-linked hypophosphatemia (307800), the HYP Consortium
(1995) identified a splicing mutation in the PHEX gene: a G-to-A
transition at the -1 position in the splice acceptor site of exon 2 of
the partially cloned gene.

.0003
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, IVS1AS, G-C, -1

In a patient with X-linked hypophosphatemia (307800), the HYP Consortium
(1995) identified a G-to-C transversion at the -1 position in the splice
acceptor site of exon 2 of the PHEX gene.

.0004
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, LEU274TER

In a sporadic case of hypophosphatemia in a female (307800), Holm et al.
(1997) identified an 823T-A transversion in the PHEX gene, resulting in
a leu274-to-ter (L274X) substitution. (The nucleotides and amino acids
were numbered on the basis of the cDNA sequence published by the HYP
Consortium (1995).)

.0005
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, CYS82TYR

In a male with familial X-linked hypophosphatemia (307800), Holm et al.
(1997) identified a 247G-A transition in exon 3 of the PHEX gene,
resulting in a cys82-to-tyr (C82Y) substitution. (The nucleotides and
amino acids were numbered on the basis of the cDNA sequence published by
the HYP Consortium (1995).)

.0006
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, PHE249SER AND MET250ILE

In a female with familial hypophosphatemia (307800), Holm et al. (1997)
identified 2 mutations that were 4-bp apart in exon 7 of the PHEX gene:
a 748T-C transition, resulting in a phe249-to-ser (F249S) substitution
and a 752G-A transition, resulting in a met250-to-ile (M250I)
substitution. The 2 mutations were on the same allele, as demonstrated
by sequencing of both alleles. (The nucleotides and amino acids were
numbered on the basis of the cDNA sequence published by the HYP
Consortium (1995).)

.0007
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, LEU555PRO

In affected members of a kindred originally reported by Frymoyer and
Hodgkin (1977) as having 'adult-onset vitamin D-resistant
hypophosphatemic osteomalacia' (AVDRR), Econs et al. (1998) identified a
T-to-C transition in exon 16 of the PHEX gene, resulting in a
leu555-to-pro (L555P) substitution. Frymoyer and Hodgkin (1977) had
asserted that the disorder was distinct from X-linked hypophosphatemic
rickets (307800) because affected children did not display radiographic
evidence of rickets and patients typically presented with clinical
manifestations of the disease in the fourth or fifth decade of life.
However, clinical evaluation of affected family members by Econs et al.
(1998) indicated that some displayed classic features of X-linked
hypophosphatemic rickets. The authors were unable to verify progressive
bowing in adults. Because of the clinical spectrum of X-linked
hypophosphatemic rickets and the presence of a PHEX mutation in affected
members of this kindred, the authors concluded that there is only 1 form
of X-linked dominant phosphate wasting.

.0008
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, A-G, NT-429

In a female patient from the Indian subcontinent with X-linked
hypophosphatemic rickets (307800) and congenital adrenal hypoplasia
originally reported by Shah et al. (1988), Dixon et al. (1998)
identified an A-to-G transition at codon -429 of the 5-prime
untranslated region in the PHEX gene. The A-to-G transition was found to
cosegregate with the disease and was absent in 247 alleles examined.
Dixon et al. (1998) suggested that the mutation may lead to an
alteration in the binding sites for ribosomal and other translation
factors, such as tissue-specific regulatory proteins.

Shah et al. (1988) had termed the disorders in this Indian girl as
'familial glucocorticoid deficiency' and familial hypophosphatemic
rickets, and had suggested the possibility of a chromosomal abnormality
in activating both the X-linked hypophosphatemia locus and a closely
situated locus for glucocorticoid deficiency.

.0009
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, IVS7, +1268, G-T

Using lymphoblastoid RNA and RT-PCR, Christie et al. (2001) investigated
11 unrelated X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets (307800) patients in whom
coding region mutations had been excluded for intronic mutations that
could lead to mRNA splicing abnormalities. One X-linked hypophosphatemia
patient was found to have 3 abnormally large transcripts resulting from
51-, 100-, and 170-bp insertions, all of which would lead to missense
peptides and premature termination codons. The origin of these
transcripts was a G-to-T transversion at position +1268 of intron 7,
which resulted in the occurrence of a high quality novel donor splice
site (ggaagg to gtaagg). Splicing between this novel donor splice site
and 3 preexisting, but normally silent, acceptor splice sites within
intron 7 resulted in the occurrence of the 3 pseudoexons.

.0010
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, ARG567TER

Goji et al. (2006) described a family in which the father and only 1 of
his 2 daughters were affected by hypophosphatemic rickets (307800). The
pedigree interpretation of the family suggested that genetic
transmission of the disorder occurred as an autosomal dominant trait.
However, the affected daughter was heterozygous for an arg567-to-ter
(R567X) mutation in the PHEX gene, rather than in the FGF23 gene
(605370), suggesting that the genetic transmission occurred as an
X-linked dominant trait. Unexpectedly, the father was heterozygous for
this mutation. Single-nucleotide primer extension and denaturing HPLC
analysis of the father using DNA from single hair roots revealed that he
was a somatic mosaic for the mutation. Haplotype analysis confirmed that
the father transmitted the genotypes for 18 markers on the X chromosome
equally to his 2 daughters. The fact that he transmitted the mutation to
only 1 his 2 daughters indicated that he was a germline mosaic for the
mutation. Goji et al. (2006) concluded that somatic and germline
mosaicism for an X-linked dominant mutation in PHEX may mimic autosomal
dominant inheritance.

.0011
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS, X-LINKED DOMINANT
PHEX, IVS4, T-C, +6

Makras et al. (2008) described a mother and 2 sons with X-linked
hypophosphatemic rickets (307800) with unusual clinical features,
including normal growth. A novel splice site mutation in intron 4 of the
PHEX gene, IVS4+6G-T, that resulted in skipping of exon 4 was present in
all 3 individuals. The mother and her sons were followed in the same
institution for nearly 30 years. The mother had hypophosphatemia and
normal height without ever receiving any treatment. Her 2 sons achieved
final heights of 183.7 cm (Z score, -0.01) and 182.7 cm (Z score,
-0.18), respectively, despite late initiation of treatment with
phosphate and low serum phosphate levels. In addition, they had
reversible proximal myopathy, which took approximately 7 years to
resolve in the more severely affected son and 8 months to resolve in the
other.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Collins and Ghishan (1994); Dennis et al. (1977); Lobaugh and Drezner
(1983); Meyer et al. (1979); Nesbitt et al. (1987); Strom et al. (1997)
REFERENCE 1. Baum, M.; Loleh, S.; Saini, N.; Seikaly, M.; Dwarakanath, V.; Quigley,
R.: Correction of proximal tubule phosphate transport defect in Hyp
mice in vivo and in vitro with indomethacin. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100:
11098-11103, 2003.

2. Beck, L.; Soumounou, Y.; Martel, J.; Krishnamurthy, G.; Gauthier,
C.; Goodyer, C. G.; Tenenhouse, H. S.: Pex/PEX tissue distribution
and evidence for a deletion in the 3-prime region of the Pex gene
in X-linked hypophosphatemic mice. J. Clin. Invest. 99: 1200-1209,
1997.

3. Bell, C. L.; Tenenhouse, H. S.; Scriver, C. R.: Primary cultures
of renal epithelial cells from X-linked hypophosphatemic (Hyp) mice
express defects in phosphate transport and vitamin D metabolism. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 43: 293-303, 1988.

4. Boneh, A.; Reade, T. M.; Scriver, C. R.; Rishikof, E.: Audiometric
evidence for two forms of X-linked hypophosphatemia in humans, apparent
counterparts of Hyp and Gy mutations in mouse. Am. J. Med. Genet. 27:
997-1003, 1987.

5. Christie, P. T.; Harding, B.; Nesbit, M. A.; Whyte, M. P.; Thakker,
R. V.: X-linked hypophosphatemia attributable to pseudoexons of the
PHEX gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86: 3840-3844, 2001.

6. Collins, J. F.; Bulus, N.; Ghishan, F. K.: Sodium-phosphate transporter
adaptation to dietary phosphate deprivation in normal and hypophosphatemic
mice. Am. J. Physiol. 268: G917-G924, 1995.

7. Collins, J. F.; Ghishan, F. K.: Molecular cloning, functional
expression, tissue distribution and in situ hybridization of the renal
sodium phosphate (Na+/P(i)) transporter in the control and hypophosphatemic
mouse. FASEB J. 8: 862-868, 1994.

8. Collins, J. F.; Ghishan, F. K.: The molecular defect in the renal
sodium-phosphate transporter expression pathway of Gyro (Gy) mice
is distinct from that of hypophosphatemic (Hyp) mice. FASEB J. 10:
751-759, 1996.

9. Davidai, G. A.; Nesbitt, T.; Drezner, M. K.: Normal regulation
of calcitriol production in Gy mice: evidence for biochemical heterogeneity
in the X-linked hypophosphatemic diseases. J. Clin. Invest. 85:
334-339, 1990.

10. Dennis, V. W.; Bello-Reuss, E.; Robinson, R. R.: Response of
phosphate transport to parathyroid hormone in segments of rabbit nephron. Am.
J. Physiol. 233: F29-F38, 1977.

11. Devault, A.; Nault, C.; Zollinger, M.; Fournie-Zaluski, M.-C.;
Roques, B. P.; Crine, P.; Boileau, G.: Expression of neutral endopeptidase
(enkephalinase) in heterologous COS-1 cells: characterization of the
recombinant enzyme and evidence for a glutamic acid residue at the
active site. J. Biol. Chem. 263: 4033-4040, 1988.

12. Dixon, P. H.; Christie, P. T.; Wooding, C.; Trump, D.; Grieff,
M.; Holm, I.; Gertner, J. M.; Schmidtke, J.; Shah, B.; Shaw, N.; Smith,
C.; Tau, C.; Schlessinger, D.; Whyte, M. P.; Thakker, R. V.: Mutational
analysis of PHEX gene in X-linked hypophosphatemia. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 83: 3615-3623, 1998.

13. Donohue, M. M.; Demay, M. B.: Rickets in VDR null mice is secondary
to decreased apoptosis of hypertrophic chondrocytes. Endocrinology 143:
3691-3694, 2002.

14. Du, L.; Desbarats, M.; Viel, J.; Glorieux, F. H.; Cawthorn, C.;
Ecarot, B.: cDNA cloning of the murine Pex gene implicated in X-linked
hypophosphatemia and evidence for expression in bone. Genomics 36:
22-28, 1996.

15. Ecarot-Charrier, B.; Glorieux, F. H.; Travers, R.; Desbarats,
M.; Bouchard, F.; Hinek, A.: Defective bone formation by transplanted
Hyp mouse bone cells into normal mice. Endocrinology 123: 768-773,
1988.

16. Econs, M. J.; Friedman, N. E.; Rowe, P. S. N.; Speer, M. C.; Francis,
F.; Strom, T. M.; Oudet, C.; Smith, J. A.; Ninomiya, J. T.; Lee, B.
E.; Bergen, H.: A PHEX gene mutation is responsible for adult-onset
vitamin D-resistant hypophosphatemic osteomalacia: evidence that the
disorder is not a distinct entity from X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 83: 3459-3462, 1998.

17. Eicher, E. M.; Southard, J. L.; Scriver, C. R.; Glorieux, F. H.
: Hypophosphatemia: mouse model for human familial hypophosphatemic
(vitamin D-resistant) rickets. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 73: 4667-4671,
1976.

18. Filisetti, D.; Ostermann, G.; von Bredow, M.; Strom, T.; Filler,
G.; Ehrich, J.; Pannetier, S.; Garnier, J.-M.; Rowe, P.; Francis,
F.; Julienne, A.; Hanauer, A.; Econs, M. J.; Oudet, C.: Non-random
distribution of mutations in the PHEX gene, and under-detected missense
mutations at non-conserved residues. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 7: 615-619,
1999.

19. Frymoyer, J. W.; Hodgkin, W.: Adult-onset vitamin D-resistant
hypophosphatemic osteomalacia: a possible variant of vitamin D-resistant
rickets. J. Bone Joint Surg. Am. 59: 101-106, 1977.

20. Gaucher, C.; Walrant-Debray, O.; Nguyen, T.-M.; Esterle, L.; Garabedian,
M.; Jehan, F.: PHEX analysis in 118 pedigrees reveals new genetic
clues in hypophosphatemic rickets. Hum. Genet. 125: 401-411, 2009.

21. Goji, K.; Ozaki, K.; Sadewa, A. H.; Nishio, H.; Matsuo, M.: Somatic
and germline mosaicism for a mutation of the PHEX gene can lead to
genetic transmission of X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets that mimics
an autosomal dominant trait. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 91: 365-370,
2006.

22. Grieff, M.; Mumm, S.; Waeltz, P.; Mazzarella, R.; Whyte, M. P.;
Thakker, R. V.; Schlessinger, D.: Expression and cloning of the human
X-linked hypophosphatemia gene cDNA. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 231:
635-639, 1997.

23. Guo, R.; Quarles, L. D.: Cloning and sequencing of human PEX
from a bone cDNA library: evidence for its developmental stage-specific
regulation in osteoblasts. J. Bone Miner. Res. 12: 1009-1017, 1997.

24. Holm, I. A.; Huang, X.; Kunkel, L. M.: Mutational analysis of
the PEX gene in patients with X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 60: 790-797, 1997.

25. HYP Consortium: A gene (HYP) with homologies to endopeptidases
is mutated in patients with X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets. Nature
Genet. 11: 130-136, 1995.

26. Lobaugh, B.; Drezner, M. K.: Abnormal regulation of renal 25-hydroxyvitamin
D-1-alpha-hydroxylase activity in the X-linked hypophosphatemic mouse. J.
Clin. Invest. 71: 400-403, 1983.

27. Lorenz-Depiereux, B.; Guido, V. E.; Johnson, K. R.; Zheng, Q.
Y.; Gagnon, L. H.; Bauschatz, J. D.; Davisson, M. T.; Washburn, L.
L.; Donahue, L. R.; Strom, T. M.; Eicher, E. M.: New intragenic deletions
in the Phex gene clarify X-linked hypophosphatemia-related abnormalities
in mice. Mammalian Genome 15: 151-161, 2004.

28. Lyon, M. F.; Scriver, C. R.; Baker, L. R. I.; Tenenhouse, H. S.;
Kronick, J.; Mandla, S.: The Gy mutation: another cause of X-linked
hypophosphatemia in mouse. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 4899-4903,
1986.

29. Makras, P.; Hamdy, N. A. T.; Kant, S. G.; Papapoulos, S. E.:
Normal growth and muscle dysfunction in X-linked hypophosphatemic
rickets associated with a novel mutation in the PHEX gene. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 93: 1386-1389, 2008.

30. Meyer, R. A., Jr.; Henley, C. M.; Meyer, M. H.; Morgan, P. L.;
McDonald, A. G.; Mills, C.; Price, D. K.: Partial deletion of both
the spermine synthase gene and the Pex gene in the X-linked hypophosphatemic,
Gyro (Gy) mouse. Genomics 48: 289-295, 1998.

31. Meyer, R. A., Jr.; Jowsey, J.; Meyer, M. H.: Osteomalacia and
altered magnesium metabolism in the X-linked hypophosphatemic mouse. Calcif.
Tissue Int. 27: 19-26, 1979.

32. Meyer, R. A., Jr.; Meyer, M. H.; Gray, R. W.: Parabiosis suggests
a humoral factor is involved in X-linked hypophosphatemia in mice. J.
Bone Miner. Res. 4: 493-500, 1989.

33. Nesbitt, T.; Coffman, T. M.; Griffiths, R.; Drezner, M. K.: Crosstransplantation
of kidneys in normal and Hyp mice: evidence that the Hyp mouse phenotype
is unrelated to an intrinsic renal defect. J. Clin. Invest. 89:
1453-1459, 1992.

34. Nesbitt, T.; Lobaugh, B.; Drezner, M. K.: Calcitonin stimulation
of renal 25-hydroxyvitamin D-1(alpha)-hydroxylase activity in hypophosphatemic
mice: evidence that the regulation of calcitriol production is not
universally abnormal in X-linked hypophosphatemia. J. Clin. Invest. 79:
15-19, 1987.

35. Nesbitt, T.; Lobaugh, B.; Drezner, M. K.: Calcitonin stimulation
of renal 25-hydroxyvitamin D-1(alpha)-hydroxylase activity in hypophosphatemic
mice: evidence that the regulation of calcitriol production is not
universally abnormal in X-linked hypophosphatemia. J. Clin. Invest. 79:
15-19, 1987.

36. Sabbagh, Y.; Boileau, G.; Campos, M.; Carmona, A. K.; Tenenhouse,
H. S.: Structure and function of disease-causing missense mutations
in the PHEX gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 2213-2222, 2003.

37. Sabbagh, Y.; Boileau, G.; DesGroseillers, L.; Tenenhouse, H. S.
: Disease-causing missense mutations in the PHEX gene interfere with
membrane targeting of the recombinant protein. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10:
1539-1546, 2001.

38. Sabbagh, Y.; Carpenter, T. O.; Demay, M. B.: Hypophosphatemia
leads to rickets by impairing caspase-mediated apoptosis of hypertrophic
chondrocytes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 9637-9642, 2005.

39. Sabbagh, Y.; Jones, A. O.; Tenenhouse, H. S.: PHEXdb, a locus-specific
database for mutations causing X-linked hypophosphatemia. Hum. Mutat. 16:
1-6, 2000.

40. Shah, B. R.; Fiordalisi, I.; Sheinbaum, K.; Finberg, L.: Familial
glucocorticoid deficiency in a girl with familial hypophosphatemic
rickets. Am. J. Dis. Child. 142: 900-903, 1988. Note: Erratum: Am.
J. Dis. Child. 142: 1330 only, 1988.

41. Strom, T. M.; Francis, F.; Lorenz, B.; Boddrich, A.; Econs, M.
J.; Lehrach, H.; Meitinger, T.: Pex gene deletions in Gy and Hyp
mice provide mouse models for X-linked hypophosphatemia. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 6: 165-171, 1997.

42. Strom, T. M.; Francis, F.; Lorenz, B.; Boddrich, A.; Econs, M.
J.; Lehrach, H.; Meitinger, T.: Pex gene deletions in Gy and Hyp
mice provide mouse models for X-linked hypophosphatemia. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 6: 165-171, 1997.

43. Tenenhouse, H. S.; Werner, A.; Biber, J.; Ma, S.; Martel, J.;
Roy, S.; Murer, H.: Renal Na(+)-phosphate cotransport in murine X-linked
hypophosphatemic rickets: molecular characterization. J. Clin. Invest. 93:
671-676, 1994.

44. Yuan, B.; Takaiwa, M.; Clemens, T. L.; Feng, J. Q.; Kumar, R.;
Rowe, P. S.; Xie, Y.; Drezner, M. K.: Aberrant Phex function in osteoblasts
and osteocytes alone underlies murine X-linked hypophosphatemia. J.
Clin. Invest. 118: 722-734, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/6/2010
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/14/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/20/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/21/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/7/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/15/2005

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 7/28/2005

EDITED terry: 04/04/2013
alopez: 4/18/2011
terry: 1/13/2011
wwang: 10/8/2010
terry: 10/6/2010
alopez: 1/14/2009
wwang: 3/25/2008
terry: 3/20/2008
terry: 8/6/2007
carol: 3/21/2007
wwang: 9/23/2005
wwang: 9/19/2005
ckniffin: 9/7/2005
carol: 9/1/2005
ckniffin: 8/15/2005

607515	TITLE *607515 PLACENTA-SPECIFIC GENE 8; PLAC8
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By subtractive hybridization, Rissoan et al. (2002) identified PLAC8,
which they designated C15, as 1 of several transcripts expressed at high
levels in plasmacytoid dendritic cells. The deduced 115-amino acid
protein contains a cleavable 23-amino acid signal peptide and no
transmembrane domain. PLAC8 shares 83% homology with mouse Plac8, which
contains 112 amino acids. The human sequence conserves 15 of the 16
cysteine residues found in the mouse protein. RT-PCR detected PLAC8
expression in all leukocyte populations tested, with weaker expression
in monocyte-derived dendritic cells. Northern blot analysis detected a
major transcript of 0.7 kb and minor transcripts of 4.4 and 7 kb in
organs of the immune system. High expression was found in spleen, lymph
nodes, peripheral blood leukocytes, and bone marrow, with lower
expression in thymus, appendix, and fetal liver.

By Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues, Galaviz-Hernandez et al.
(2003) detected strong expression of Plac8 in placenta at 9.5 days
postcoitum (dpc) through 18.5 dpc. In situ hybridization showed
expression limited to trophoblast giant cells at 6.5 and 8.5 dpc and to
the derived spongiotrophoblast layer at 10.5 and 18.5 dpc.

GENE FUNCTION

Rissoan et al. (2002) showed that PLAC8 expression was downregulated
upon activation, particularly in dendritic cells generated in vitro from
CD34 (142230) progenitor cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rissoan et al. (2002) determined that the PLAC8 gene contains 5 exons.

MAPPING

By homology to a BAC clone, Rissoan et al. (2002) mapped the PLAC8 gene
to chromosome 4q13-q21.

By database analysis, Galaviz-Hernandez et al. (2003) mapped the PLAC8
gene to chromosome 4q21 and the mouse Plac8 gene to chromosome 5E3.

REFERENCE 1. Galaviz-Hernandez, C.; Stagg, C.; de Ridder, G.; Tanaka, T. S.;
Ko, M. S. H.; Schlessinger, D.; Nagaraja, R.: Plac8 and Plac9, novel
placental-enriched genes identified through microarray analysis. Gene 309:
81-89, 2003.

2. Rissoan, M.-C.; Duhen, T.; Bridon, J.-M.; Bendriss-Vermare, N.;
Peronne, C.; Saint Vis, B.; Briere, F.; Bates, E. E. M.: Subtractive
hybridization reveals the expression of immunoglobulinlike transcript
7, Eph-B1, granzyme B, and 3 novel transcripts in human plasmacytoid
dendritic cells. Blood 100: 3295-3303, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Dorothy S. Reilly - updated: 6/11/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/24/2003

EDITED wwang: 06/16/2009
wwang: 6/16/2009
terry: 6/11/2009
mgross: 1/24/2003

605117	TITLE *605117 SUPPRESSOR OF CYTOKINE SIGNALING 2; SOCS2
;;STAT-INDUCED STAT INHIBITOR 2; SSI2; STATI2;;
CYTOKINE-INDUCIBLE SH2 PROTEIN 2; CIS2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SOCS proteins, such as SOCS2, negatively regulate cytokine receptor
signaling via the Janus kinase (see 147795)/signal transducer and
activation of transcription (STAT; see 600555) pathway (the JAK/STAT
pathway) (Minamoto et al., 1997).

CLONING

By a computer-aided homology search of sequence databases, Minamoto et
al. (1997) identified a partial sequence of SSI2, a member of the SSI
(STAT-induced STAT inhibitor) gene family. They isolated an SSI2 cDNA
from a Jurkat cDNA library. SSI2 encodes a protein of 198 amino acids.
The deduced amino acid sequences of human SSI2 and SSI3 (604176) share
significant homology with human and mouse SSI1 (SOCS1; 603597) and mouse
Cis (602441) at the C-terminal region as well as in the SH2 domain.
Northern blot analysis revealed strong expression of SSI2 in heart,
placenta, lung, kidney, and prostate.

On the basis of an EST database search, Masuhara et al. (1997)
identified SOCS2, which they called CIS2. They found that a C-terminal
40-amino acid region, designated the CIS homology (CH) domain, and the
SH2 domain are highly conserved in the CIS genes, while the respective
N-terminal regions of these proteins share little similarity.

Dey et al. (1998) identified SOCS2 based on its interaction with the
cytoplasmic domain of insulin-like growth factor I receptor (IGF1R;
147370) in a yeast 2-hybrid screen. They cloned a full-length SOCS2 cDNA
by 5-prime RACE PCR of a human fetal brain cDNA library. Northern blot
analysis demonstrated expression of SOCS2 in many human fetal and adult
tissues, with particular abundance in fetal kidney and adult heart,
skeletal muscle, pancreas, and liver.

GENE FUNCTION

Minamoto et al. (1997) found that SSI2 expression was induced by
cytokine stimulation, and its forced expression in the mouse myeloid
leukemia cell line M1 suppressed the apoptotic affects of LIF (159540)
similarly to SSI1.

Dey et al. (1998) found that the human SOCS2 protein interacted strongly
with the activated IGF1R and not with a kinase-negative mutant receptor
in yeast 2-hybrid assays. Mutation of receptor tyrosines 950, 1250,
1251, and 1316 to phenylalanine or deletion of the C-terminal 93 amino
acids did not result in decreased interaction of the receptor with human
SOCS2 protein. SOCS2 interacted with IGF1R both in vitro and in vivo.
Dey et al. (1998) concluded that their results raised the possibility
that SOCS proteins may play a regulatory role in IGF1 receptor
signaling.

Machado et al. (2006) showed that lipoxin A4 (LXA4) activated 2
receptors in mouse splenic dendritic cells, Ahr (600253) and Lxar
(FPRL1; 136538), and that this activation triggered Socs2.
Socs2-deficient mouse dendritic cells were hyperresponsive to microbial
stimuli and were refractory to the inhibitory action of LXA4, but not
Il10 (124092). Upon infection with an intracellular pathogen,
Socs2-deficient mice had uncontrolled production of proinflammatory
cytokines, decreased microbial proliferation, aberrant leukocyte
infiltration, and elevated mortality. Machado et al. (2006) also showed
that Socs2 was a crucial intracellular mediator of the antiinflammatory
actions of aspirin-induced lipoxins in vivo.

GENE STRUCTURE

Metcalf et al. (2000) demonstrated that the mouse SOCS2 gene is composed
of 3 exons and 2 introns.

MAPPING

By cytogenetic and radiation hybrid mapping, Yandava et al. (1999)
mapped the SOCS2 gene to chromosome 12q21.3-q23.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Kato et al. (2006) performed a region-wide association analysis on
12q15-q22 using more than 500 SNPs in 1,492 unrelated Japanese
individuals and identified an association between type II diabetes
(125853) and a 13.6-kb haplotype block that includes the entire SOCS2
gene. Five SNPs in the 5-prime region of the SOCS2 gene were
significantly associated with type II diabetes. Kato et al. (2006)
concluded that SOCS2 may play a role in susceptibility to type II
diabetes in the Japanese.

ANIMAL MODEL

Metcalf et al. (2000) generated mice deficient in Socs2 by targeted
disruption. Socs2-deficient mice were indistinguishable from their
littermates until weaning at 3 weeks of age, but subsequently grew more
rapidly. Socs2 -/- adult males were on average 40% heavier than wildtype
littermates. Adult Socs2 +/- males exhibited an intermediate body
weight. Increased growth was also significant but less marked in female
Socs2 -/- mice. Adult Socs2 -/- females typically attained the weight of
wildtype male mice, but heterozygous Socs2 females were not
significantly heavier than sex-matched wildtype littermates. Neither
male nor female Socs2 -/- mice accumulated significantly more fatty
tissue than wildtype mice. Rather, increased body weight in these mice
resulted from an increase in the weight of most visceral organs.
Sexually dimorphic or male-specific organs were not disproportionately
enlarged. Carcass weight was also significantly increased, indicating
that muscle and bone may contribute significantly to the increased size
of Socs2-deficient mice. There was significant increase in long bone
length. Tail length was normal. The increase in size was due to elevated
cell numbers rather than increased cell size. Metcalf et al. (2000)
observed a marked thickening of the dermis associated with excessive
collagen accumulation in all of 7 males, and less prominently in 6 of 8
female Socs2 -/- mice. Collagen deposition was also increased around the
bronchi and vessels of the lungs of 6 of the 9 male, but only 3 of 10
female, Socs2-deficient mice. No hematologic abnormalities were
observed. The characteristics of Socs2 -/- mice were similar to those of
mice with growth hormone (GH; 139250) excess and IGF1 (147440) excess.
Characteristics of deregulated growth hormone and IGF1 signaling,
including decreased production of major urinary protein, increased local
IGF1 production, and collagen accumulation in the dermis were observed
in Socs2-deficient mice, indicating that Socs2 may have an essential
negative regulatory role in the growth hormone/IGF1 pathway.

Turnley et al. (2002) studied the role of Socs2 in mouse neural
development. They found that Socs2 was expressed by mouse progenitor
cells and neurons in response to LIF-like cytokines. Progenitor cells
lacking Socs2 produced fewer neurons and more astrocytes in vitro. Socs2
-/- mice had fewer neurons and neurogenin-1 (NGN1; 601726)-expressing
cells in the developing cortex, whereas overexpression of Socs2
increased neuronal differentiation. Turnley et al. (2002) found that GH
inhibited Ngn1 expression and neuronal production, and this action was
blocked by Socs2 overexpression. They speculated that Socs2 promotes
neuronal differentiation by blocking GH-mediated downregulation of Ngn1.

Using GH-deficient Socs2 -/- mice, Greenhalgh et al. (2005) demonstrated
that the Socs2 -/- phenotype is dependent upon the presence of
endogenous GH. Treatment with exogenous GH induced excessive growth in
terms of overall body weight, body and bone lengths, and the weight of
internal organs and tissues. Microarray analysis on liver RNA extracts
after exogenous GH administration revealed a heightened response to GH.
The conserved C-terminal SOCS-box motif was essential for all inhibitory
function. SOCS2 was found to bind 2 phosphorylated tyrosines on the GH
receptor (600946), and mutation analysis of these amino acids showed
that both were essential for SOCS2 function. Greenhalgh et al. (2005)
concluded that SOCS2 is a negative regulator of GH signaling.

REFERENCE 1. Dey, B. R.; Spence, S. L.; Nissley, P.; Furlanetto, R. W.: Interaction
of human suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)-2 with the insulin-like
growth factor-I receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 24095-24101, 1998.

2. Greenhalgh, C. J.; Rico-Bautista, E.; Lorentzon, M.; Thaus, A.
L.; Morgan, P. O.; Willson, T. A.; Zervoudakis, P.; Metcalf, D.; Street,
I.; Nicola, N. A.; Nash, A. D.; Fabri, L. J.; Norstedt, G.; Ohlsson,
C.; Flores-Morales, A.; Alexander, W. S.; Hilton, D. J.: SOCS2 negatively
regulates growth hormone action in vitro and in vivo. J. Clin. Invest. 115:
397-406, 2005.

3. Kato, H.; Nomura, K.; Osabe, D.; Shinohara, S.; Mizumori, O.; Katashima,
R.; Iwasaki, S.; Nishimura, K.; Yoshino, M.; Kobori, M.; Ichiishi,
E.; Nakamura, N.; and 14 others: Association of single-nucleotide
polymorphisms in the suppressor of cytokine signaling 2 (SOCS2) gene
with type 2 diabetes in the Japanese. Genomics 87: 446-458, 2006.

4. Machado, F. S.; Johndrow, J. E.; Esper, L.; Dias, A.; Bafica, A.;
Serhan, C. N.; Aliberti, J.: Anti-inflammatory actions of lipoxin
A4 and aspirin-triggered lipoxin are SOCS-2 dependent. Nature Med. 12:
330-334, 2006.

5. Masuhara, M.; Sakamoto, H.; Matsumoto, A.; Suzuki, R.; Yasukawa,
H.; Mitsui, K.; Wakioka, T.; Tanimura, S.; Sasaki, A.; Misawa, H.;
Yokouchi, M.; Ohtsubo, M.; Yoshimura, A.: Cloning and characterization
of novel CIS family genes. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 239: 439-446,
1997.

6. Metcalf, D.; Greenhalgh, C. J.; Viney, E.; Willson, T. A.; Starr,
R.; Nicola, N. A.; Hilton, D. J.; Alexander, W. S.: Gigantism in
mice lacking suppressor of cytokine signalling-2. Nature 405: 1069-1073,
2000.

7. Minamoto, S.; Ikegame, K.; Ueno, K.; Narazaki, M.; Naka, T.; Yamamoto,
H.; Matsumoto, T.; Saito, H.; Hosoe, S.; Kishimoto, T.: Cloning and
functional analysis of new members of STAT induced STAT inhibitor
(SSI) family: SSI-2 and SSI-3. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 237:
79-83, 1997.

8. Turnley, A. M.; Faux, C. H.; Rietze, R. L.; Coonan, J. R.; Bartlett,
P. F.: Suppressor of cytokine signaling 2 regulates neuronal differentiation
by inhibiting growth hormone signaling. Nature Neurosci. 5: 1155-1162,
2002.

9. Yandava, C. N.; Pillari, A.; Drazen, J. M.: Radiation hybrid and
cytogenetic mapping of SOCS1 and SOCS2 to chromosomes 16p13 and 12q,
respectively. Genomics 61: 108-111, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/3/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/14/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/12/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/7/2002

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 7/7/2000

EDITED alopez: 08/07/2008
terry: 7/29/2008
mgross: 1/3/2007
wwang: 6/14/2006
tkritzer: 4/12/2005
alopez: 11/7/2002
mgross: 10/7/2002
alopez: 7/7/2000

606414	TITLE *606414 INSULIN-LIKE 6; INSL6
;;RELAXIN/INSULIN-LIKE FACTOR 1; RIF1
DESCRIPTION Insulin gene superfamily hormones regulate cell growth, metabolism, and
tissue-specific functions. Members of this family are characterized by a
signal peptide, a B chain, a connecting C chain, and an A chain.

CLONING

By EST database searching for sequences with similarity to the B or A
chains of insulin (INS; 176730) and relaxin (RLN1; 179730), followed by
RACE-PCR, Hsu (1999) identified cDNAs encoding mouse and human INSL6.
The deduced 213-amino acid protein, which shares 45% sequence identity
with the mouse protein, contains the classic B-C-A domain configuration,
including the 6 cysteines in the B and A domains, of the insulin/relaxin
family proteins. Northern blot analysis revealed expression of a 1.2-kb
transcript confined to testis. Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated
expression restricted to interstitial cells in mouse testis.

Using similar methods, Lok et al. (2000) also cloned and characterized
INSL6. In situ hybridization analysis detected localization primarily in
rat and rhesus seminiferous tubules.

MAPPING

Using radiation hybrid analysis, Lok et al. (2000) mapped the INSL6 gene
to chromosome 9p24, near the INSL4 (600910) and a proposed
'testis-determining factor' (see 154230) genes. By FISH, Hsu (1999)
mapped the mouse Insl6 gene to chromosome 19C3.

REFERENCE 1. Hsu, S. Y.: Cloning of two novel mammalian paralogs of relaxin/insulin
family proteins and their expression in testis and kidney. Molec.
Endocr. 13: 2163-2174, 1999.

2. Lok, S.; Johnston, D. S.; Conklin, D.; Lofton-Day, C. E.; Adams,
R. L.; Jelmberg, A. C.; Whitmore, T. E.; Schrader, S.; Griswold, M.
D.; Jaspers, S. R.: Identification of INSL6, a new member of the
insulin family that is expressed in the testis of the human and rat. Biol.
Reprod. 62: 1593-1599, 2000.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/25/2001

EDITED alopez: 02/18/2011
cwells: 11/2/2001
cwells: 10/26/2001

610777	TITLE *610777 NEUROGUIDIN; NGDN
;;NGD
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Neuroguidin is an EIF4E (133440)-binding protein that interacts with
CPEB (607342) and functions as a translational regulatory protein during
development of the vertebrate nervous system (Jung et al., 2006).

CLONING

Jung et al. (2006) cloned mouse Ngdn cDNA based on its homology with
Drosophila ngdn. The mouse and human protein sequences are 89%
identical. The 311-amino acid human NGDN protein has 3 conserved
N-terminal EIF4E-binding motifs. Northern blot analysis showed Ngdn
expression in mouse cortex, hippocampus, cerebellum, kidney, spleen,
ovary, and testis. Western blot analysis detected Ngdn protein in all
mouse tissues except muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

By coimmunoprecipitation and cap column assays in mouse cerebellum
extracts, Jung et al. (2006) determined that Ngdn physically interacts
with EIF4E. Using Ngdn EIF4E-binding motif deletion mutants, they showed
that all 3 motifs contribute to binding and can compensate for one
another. In Xenopus oocytes, Ngdn coimmunoprecipitated with CPEB, and
Ngdn inhibited translation of cytoplasmic polyadenylation element
(CPE)-containing mRNAs in oocytes. Whole-mount in situ hybridization of
developing Xenopus embryos detected ngdn mRNA in the animal pole
blastomeres of the 4-cell embryo and in the neural crest and neural
folds of the neurula-stage embryo. Injection of antisense
morpholino-oligonucleotides against ngdn resulted in disrupted neural
tube closure and neural crest migration.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the NGDN
gene to chromosome 14 (TMAP SHGC-62927).

REFERENCE 1. Jung, M.-Y.; Lorenz, L.; Richter, J. D.: Translational control
by neuroguidin, a eukaryotic initiation factor 4E and CPEB binding
protein. Molec. Cell Biol. 26: 4277-4287, 2006.

CREATED Stefanie A. Nelson: 2/20/2007

EDITED wwang: 02/20/2007
wwang: 2/20/2007

609666	TITLE *609666 TWO-PORE SEGMENT CHANNEL 1; TPCN1
;;TWO-PORE CHANNEL 1; TPC1;;
KIAA1169
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Voltage-gated Ca(2+) and Na+ channels have 4 homologous domains, each
containing 6 transmembrane segments, S1 to S6. TPCN1 is similar to these
channels, but it has only 2 domains containing S1 to S6 (Ishibashi et
al., 2000).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Hirosawa et al. (1999) cloned TPCN1, which they designated
KIAA1169. The deduced 775-amino acid protein, which may be N-terminally
truncated, contains motifs associated with ion transport proteins.
RT-PCR ELISA detected robust expression in all adult and fetal tissues
and specific brain regions examined. Highest expression was in heart and
kidney, and lowest expression was in spleen.

Ishibashi et al. (2000) cloned rat Tpcn1, which they called Tpc1. The
deduced 819-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 94.6
kD. It contains 2 homologous domains, each of which has 6 transmembrane
segments (S1 to S6) and a putative pore loop between S5 and S6. Northern
blot analysis detected a 5-kb transcript expressed at highest levels in
rat kidney, followed by liver, lung, and spleen. In rat kidney, Tpc1 was
expressed at the apical membrane of medullary collecting ducts. By EST
database analysis, Ishibashi et al. (2000) identified likely human and
plant orthologs of Tpc1.

GENE FUNCTION

Calcraft et al. (2009) showed that 2-pore channels (TPCs) comprise a
family of nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NAADP)
receptors, with human TPC1 and chicken TPC3 being expressed on endosomal
membranes, and human TPC2 on lysosomal membranes when expressed in
HEK293 cells. Membranes enriched with TPC2 show high affinity NAADP
binding, and TPC2 underpins NAADP-induced Ca(2+) release from
lysosome-related stores that is subsequently amplified by Ca(2+)-induced
Ca(2+) release by inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors (InsP3Rs).
Responses to NAADP were abolished by disrupting the lysosomal proton
gradient and by ablating TPC2 expression, but were only attenuated by
depleting endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) stores or by blocking InsP3Rs.
Thus, TPCs form NAADP receptors that release Ca(2+) from acidic
organelles, which can trigger further Ca(2+) signals via
sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum. Calcraft et al. (2009) concluded
that TPCs provide insights into the regulation and organization of
Ca(2+) signals in animal cells.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the TPCN1
gene to chromosome 12 (TMAP D12S1195E).

REFERENCE 1. Calcraft, P. J.; Ruas, M.; Pan, Z.; Cheng, X.; Arredouani, A.;
Hao, X.; Tang, J.; Rietdorf, K.; Teboul, L.; Chuang, K.-T.; Lin, P.;
Xiao, R.; and 9 others: NAADP mobilizes calcium from acidic organelles
through two-pore channels. Nature 459: 596-600, 2009.

2. Hirosawa, M.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Kikuno, R.; Nomura, N.;
Ohara, O.: Characterization of cDNA clones selected by the GeneMark
analysis from size-fractionated cDNA libraries from human brain. DNA
Res. 6: 329-336, 1999.

3. Ishibashi, K.; Suzuki, M.; Imai, M.: Molecular cloning of a novel
form (two-repeat) protein related to voltage-gated sodium and calcium
channels. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 270: 370-376, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/17/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/19/2005

EDITED alopez: 08/24/2009
terry: 8/17/2009
mgross: 10/19/2005

602327	TITLE *602327 PLECKSTRIN AND SEC7 DOMAINS-CONTAINING PROTEIN; PSD
;;TYL;;
EXCHANGE FACTOR FOR ARF6; EFA6;;
EFA6A
DESCRIPTION Perletti et al. (1997) identified a novel human gene on 10q24,
contiguous to the 3-prime end of the NFKB2 gene (164012) in a
tail-to-tail arrangement. They described a cDNA of 4,307 bp, isolated
from an adult human brain cDNA library, which contains an open reading
frame encoding a putative protein of 645 amino acids with a predicted
molecular weight of 71 kD. Database homology searches indicated that the
novel gene codes for a putative protein containing 2 discrete domains
with significant homology to the Sec7 and pleckstrin-homology (PH)
domains, respectively. They used the gene symbol PSD for
'pleckstrin-Sec7 domains.' Northern blot analysis of a panel of RNAs
from normal human tissues using the PSD cDNA as probe revealed the
presence of 3 different tissue-specific transcripts of approximately
4.3, 2.3, and 1.8 kb, the longest of which was expressed only in brain.
The data suggested that the PSD gene may encode a protein related to the
protein family containing both the Sec7 in the PH domains and thought to
be involved in signaling transduction processes. Other human proteins in
the same family include cytohesin-1 (Kolanus et al., 1996) and ARNO
(602488) (Chardin et al., 1996).

Derrien et al. (2002) reported that PSD, which they called EFA6A, is 63%
identical to EFA6B (PSD4; 614442) and contains a Sec7 domain adjacent to
a PH domain, followed by a C-terminal coiled-coil motif. Northern blot
analysis showed that EFA6A expression was largely restricted to brain,
with a smaller transcript expressed in small intestine, colon, and
ovary. Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated punctate cell surface
expression of ARF6 (600464) and EFA6A, like EFA6B, in transfected baby
hamster kidney cells. Both EFA6 proteins also colocalized with F-actin
(see 102610).

GENE FUNCTION

Derrien et al. (2002) found that recombinant EFA6A stimulated nucleotide
exchange on myristoylated ARF6, with only low activity on ARF1 (103180).
The C-terminal region was involved in microvilli lengthening. Derrien et
al. (2002) concluded that EFA6 family guanine exchange factors are
modular proteins that work through the coordinated action of the
catalytic Sec7 domain to promote ARF6 activation, through the PH domain
to regulate association with specific subdomains of the plasma membrane,
and through the C-terminal region to control actin cytoskeletal
reorganization.

MAPPING

Gross (2012) mapped the PSD gene to chromosome 10q24.32 based on an
alignment of the PSD sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC142689) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Chardin, P.; Paris, S.; Antonny, B.; Robineau, S.; Beraud-Dufour,
S.; Jackson, C. L.; Chabre, M.: A human exchange factor for ARF contains
Sec7- and pleckstrin-homology domains. Nature 384: 481-484, 1996.

2. Derrien, V.; Couillault, C.; Franco, M.; Martineau, S.; Montcourrier,
P.; Houlgatte, R.; Chavrier, P.: A conserved C-terminal domain of
EFA6-family ARF6-guanine nucleotide exchange factors induces lengthening
of microvilli-like membrane protrusions. J. Cell Sci. 115: 2867-2879,
2002.

3. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/24/2012.

4. Kolanus, W.; Nagel, W.; Schiller, B.; Zeitlmann, L.; Godar, S.;
Stockinger, H.; Seed, B.: Alpha-L-beta-2 integrin/LFA-1 binding to
ICAM-1 induced by cytohesin-1, a cytoplasmic regulatory molecule. Cell 86:
233-242, 1996.

5. Perletti, L.; Talarico, D.; Trecca, D.; Ronchetti, D.; Fracchiolla,
N. S.; Maiolo, A. T.; Neri, A.: Identification of a novel gene, PSD,
adjacent to NFKB2/lyt-10, which contains Sec7 and pleckstrin-homology
domains. Genomics 46: 251-259, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 01/24/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/16/2011

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/9/1998

EDITED mgross: 01/24/2012
terry: 12/16/2011
mgross: 4/21/2004
mgross: 1/20/2000
mgross: 3/18/1999
carol: 5/22/1998
dholmes: 3/10/1998
mark: 2/9/1998

300658	TITLE *300658 NDP GENE; NDP
;;NORRIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The NDP gene encodes norrin, a secreted cysteine-rich protein that
belongs to the cystine knot growth factor family (Meindl et al., 1992).

CLONING

By positional cloning, Berger et al. (1992) and Chen et al. (1992)
isolated a likely candidate gene for the site of mutation in Norrie
disease (ND; 310600). The gene was found to be expressed in retina,
choroid, and fetal brain by Berger et al. (1992) and in fetal and adult
brain by Chen et al. (1992). It was evolutionarily conserved and encoded
a predicted protein of 133 amino acids. The genomic equivalent of the
cDNA spanned a maximum of 50 kb (Chen et al., 1992) and was partly
deleted in several typical Norrie disease patients.

By studying the number and spacing of cysteine residues, Meindl et al.
(1992) detected homologies between the NDP gene product and a C-terminal
domain that is common to a group of proteins including mucins.

Chen et al. (1993) found that expression of the NDP gene is not confined
to the eye or to the brain. They found homology with cysteine-rich
protein-binding domains of intermediate-early genes implicated in the
regulation of cell proliferation. This led them to propose that the NDP
molecule likewise may be involved in the pathway that regulates neural
cell differentiation and proliferation.

Meitinger et al. (1993) reported that sequence pattern searches and
3-dimensional modeling suggested that the NDP protein has a tertiary
structure similar to that of transforming growth factor-beta (see TGFB1,
190180). The model identified NDP as a member of an emerging family of
growth factors containing a cystine knot motif, with direct implications
for the physiologic role of NDP.

Berger et al. (1996) cloned the mouse Ndp gene, which encodes a
polypeptide that shares 94% sequence identity with the human protein.
RNA in situ hybridization revealed expression in retina, brain, and
olfactory bulb and epithelium of 2-week-old mice.

GENE STRUCTURE

Meindl et al. (1992) found that only exons 2 and 3 of the NDP gene are
translated. Exon 2 contains the first 58 codons of the open reading
frame. The intron that follows it is roughly 14.5 kb. Exon 3 is the
largest exon and contains residues 59-133 of the open reading frame and
a 917-bp 3-prime untranslated region.

Chen et al. (1993) determined that the NDP gene spans 28 kb and contains
3 exons, the first of which is entirely contained within the 5-prime
untranslated region.

MAPPING

Sims et al. (1992) narrowed the mapping of the NDP gene to a 150-kb
region on chromosome Xp defined by a recombination and by the smallest
submicroscopic chromosomal deletion associated with Norrie disease. They
concluded that the order of loci was: pter--DXS7--MAOA--MAOB--NDP--cen.

Berger et al. (1996) mapped the mouse Ndp gene to the X chromosome.

GENE FUNCTION

In studies in COS-7 cells, Perez-Vilar and Hill (1997) found that norrin
was present only in cell lysates and the extracellular matrix. Further
analysis showed that most of the norrin in the extracellular matrix
formed cross-linked disulfide-bonded oligomers that contained up to 20
monomers.

By in situ hybridization of NDP mRNA, Hartzer et al. (1999) found
abundant signals in the outer nuclear, inner nuclear, and ganglion cell
layers of the retina in all 3 species (mouse, rabbit, and human)
examined. There was no significant expression in the vitreous humor,
lens, or rod outer segment. High expression levels were also observed in
the cerebellar granular layer, hippocampus, olfactory bulb, cortex, and
epithelium of the rabbit brain. These data suggested that the NDP gene
could play a critical role in the differentiation or maintenance of the
differentiated state of the retina.

Incomplete retinal vascularization occurs in both Norrie disease and
familial exudative vitreoretinopathy (FEVR). One form of FEVR (EVR1;
133780) is caused by defects in frizzled-4 (FZD4; 604579), a presumptive
Wnt receptor. Xu et al. (2004) determined that norrin and FZD4 function
as a ligand-receptor pair based on the similarity in vascular phenotypes
caused by norrin and FZD4 mutations in humans and mice; the specificity
and high affinity of norrin-FZD4 binding; the high efficiency with which
norrin induces FZD4- and LRP (see 107770)-dependent activation of the
classic Wnt pathway; and the signaling defects displayed by
disease-associated variants of norrin and FZD4. These data defined a
norrin-FZD4 signaling system that plays a central role in vascular
development in the eye and ear, and they indicated that ligands
unrelated to Wnts can act through frizzled receptors.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Norrie Disease

Berger et al. (1992) identified small deletions in the NDP gene in
several patients with Norrie disease. In 12 of 17 unrelated patients
with Norrie disease, Berger et al. (1992) identified 11 different
mutations in the NDP gene (see, e.g., 300658.0001-300658.0002). Most of
the mutations were located in exon 3.

In 3 unrelated patients with Norrie disease, Meindl et al. (1992)
identified 3 missense mutations in the NDP gene
(300658.0003-300658.0005). All 3 mutations replaced evolutionarily
conserved cysteines or created new cysteine codons, emphasizing the
functional importance of these sites. These findings and the clinical
features of Norrie disease suggested a possible role for the NDP gene in
a neuroectodermal cell-cell interaction.

- Familial Exudative Vitreoretinopathy

Shastry et al. (1997) reported 4 novel missense mutations in the NDP
gene associated with 1 X-linked and 4 sporadic cases of familial
exudative vitreoretinopathy (EVR2; 305390) (see 300658.0013).

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Among 109 patients with pediatric vitreoretinopathies, Wu et al. (2007)
identified 11 with a mutation in the NDP gene. They found that NDP
mutations disrupting the cysteine-knot motif corresponded to severe
retinal dysgenesis and a diagnosis of Norrie disease, whereas patients
with noncysteine mutations had varying degrees of avascular peripheral
retina, extraretinal vasculature, and subretinal exudate.

Kondo et al. (2007) screened 62 FEVR and 3 ND Japanese probands and
family members for mutations in the NDP gene and identified 5 different
mutations (1 splicing and 4 missense) in 4 FEVR patients and 2 ND
patients. One proband with a missense mutation in the signal sequence of
NDP had significant phenotypic heterogeneity between the affected eyes,
indicating a diagnosis of FEVR or ND. The proband with a splicing
mutation had typical features of ND, whereas a maternal nephew had a
diagnosis of FEVR.

Using a norrin-based reporter assay to analyze the effects of
FEVR-causing mutations, Qin et al. (2008) demonstrated that a nonsense
mutation in FZD4 completely abolished signaling activity, whereas
missense mutations in FZD4 and LRP5 caused a moderate level of
reduction, and a double missense mutation in both genes caused a severe
reduction in activity, correlating roughly with clinical phenotypes.
Norrin mutants, however, showed variable effects on signal transduction,
and no correlation with clinical phenotypes was observed; norrin mutants
also showed impaired cell surface binding. Qin et al. (2008) concluded
that norrin signaling is involved in FEVR pathogenesis, but suggested
the presence of an unknown parallel pathway at the level of
receptor/ligand binding as evidenced by the moderate and variable signal
reduction lacking a clear genotype/phenotype correlation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Berger et al. (1996) used gene targeting technology to generate Ndp
mutant mice. Hemizygous mice carrying a replacement mutation in exon 2
of the Ndp gene developed retrolental structures in the vitreous body
and showed an overall disorganization of the retinal ganglion cell
layer. The outer plexiform layer disappeared occasionally, resulting in
a juxtaposed inner and outer nuclear layer. The ocular findings were
consistent with observations in patients with Norrie disease.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, ARG90PRO

In a patient with Norrie disease (310600), Berger et al. (1992)
identified a 685G-C transversion in exon 3 of the NDP gene, resulting in
an arg90-to-pro (R90P) substitution. The patient had no hearing
impairment or mental disturbances, but had a family history of the
disorder.

.0002
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, SER75CYS

In a patient with Norrie disease (310600), Berger et al. (1992)
identified a 640C-G transversion in exon 3 of the NDP gene, resulting in
a ser75-to-cys (S75C) substitution.

.0003
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, VAL60GLU

In a patient with Norrie disease (310600), Meindl et al. (1992)
identified a 595T-A in the NDP gene, resulting in a val60-to-glu (V60E)
substitution, inherited from the mother.

.0004
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, TYR44CYS

In a patient with Norrie disease (310600), Meindl et al. (1992)
identified a 547A-G transition in the NDP gene, resulting in a
tyr44-to-cys (Y44C) substitution.

.0005
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, CYS96TYR

In a patient with Norrie disease (310600), Meindl et al. (1992)
identified a 703G-A transition in the NDP gene, resulting in a
cys96-to-tyr (C96Y) substitution.

.0006
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 2, X-LINKED
NDP, LEU124PHE

In a family with X-linked exudative vitreoretinopathy (EVR2; 305390)
manifested by members of 4 generations (Dudgeon, 1979) and found to have
possible linkage to markers in the region of the Norrie disease locus
(Fullwood et al., 1993), Chen et al. (1993) demonstrated a C-to-T
transition in the NDP gene, resulting in a leu124-to-phe (L124F)
substitution in the highly conserved region of the NDP gene. The
mutation was absent in unaffected family members and in normal controls.

.0007
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, CYS69SER

In a family with a manifesting female carrier of Norrie disease
(310600), Chen et al. (1993) identified a 614G-C transversion in the NDP
gene, resulting in a cys69-to-ser (C69S) substitution. The carrier
female had been noted to have severely impaired vision at age 2.
Examination revealed a cataract in the right eye and total retinal
detachment with a vascularized mass behind the lens. In the left eye, a
retinal fold and traction retinal detachment in the temporal periphery
were evident. The child was otherwise normal. Her carrier mother was
normal. Two of the mother's brothers had Norrie disease.

.0008
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, CYS128TER

In a patient with Norrie disease (310600), Wong et al. (1993) identified
a dinucleotide GC-to-AA change in the NDP gene, resulting in a
cys128-to-ter (C128X) substitution. The mutant protein lacked the last 6
amino acids of the carboxyl terminus. Wong et al. (1993) pointed out
that the NDP protein normally has 11 cysteines, that the codon 128
mutation involved the tenth cysteine, and that most reported mutations
have involved this amino acid residue.

.0009
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, MET1VAL

In 2 Japanese males with Norrie disease (310600) from apparently
unrelated families, Isashiki et al. (1995) identified an A-to-G
transition at the initiation codon of exon 2 of the NDP gene, resulting
in a met1-to-val (M1V) substitution. Both mothers were heterozygous for
the mutation. Neither patient showed mental retardation or hearing
impairment. Although the 2 families had lived in the same prefecture in
southwestern Japan for at least 2 centuries, no relationship between the
2 families could be identified. All previously identified mutations had
occurred in single families, indicating a marked heterogeneity of
mutations. The finding of the same mutation in 2 apparently unrelated
families, taken with the rarity of the disease, suggested that they
shared a common ancestor.

.0010
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 2, X-LINKED
NDP, ARG121TRP

In a 29-year-old male patient with X-linked exudative vitreoretinopathy
(EVR2; 305390), Fuchs et al. (1995) found an arg121-to-trp (R121W)
mutation in the NDP gene. Low visual acuity had been noted since birth.
When the patient was 3 years old, the right eye was enucleated because
an intraocular tumor was suspected. Histologic examination showed severe
intraocular inflammation without malignancy. Visual acuity in the left
eye remained unchanged until adulthood. The retina showed severe
temporal dragging of the vessels, including the macula. Severely reduced
visual acuity was known in several maternal male relatives; the mother
and maternal grandmother had normal visual acuity.

Shastry et al. (1995) identified the same mutation in affected members
in 3 generations of a family segregating X-linked exudative
vitreoretinopathy.

Shastry (1998) identified the R121W mutation in a 'simplex' case of
exudative vitreoretinopathy.

A different substitution at the same codon (R121L) has been described
(300658.0017).

.0011
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, LEU13ARG

In affected members of a large Cuban kindred with Norrie disease
(310600), Fuchs et al. (1994) identified a 454T-G transversion in the
NDP gene, resulting in a leu13-to-arg (L13R) substitution. The
nucleotide substitution creates a new HhaI restriction site. This
mutation was identified in a large Cuban pedigree which consisted of 380
members, 46 of whom were affected. The disorder showed a typical pattern
of X-linked inheritance over 7 generations. Eighteen patients examined
shared similar clinical features. Pseudoglioma was always present in
both eyes, frequently with phthisis bulbi, enophthalmos, opaque cornea,
and cataract. In addition, about 45% of the patients showed moderate or
severe mental retardation. Hearing loss was recognized in 78% of the
patients, with different ages of onset.

.0012
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, LEU61PHE

Rehm et al. (1997) identified a large Costa Rican kindred in which 15
males were afflicted with congenital blindness, progressive hearing
loss, and venous insufficiency. Because of an X-linked pattern of
inheritance and the ophthalmologic and otologic findings, including
bilateral retinal dysplasia and detachment and progressive bilateral
sensorineural hearing loss, a tentative diagnosis of Norrie disease
(310600) was considered. However, venous insufficiency was a clinical
finding apparently not previously recognized in association with Norrie
disease. Linkage analysis using microsatellite repeat markers
demonstrated linkage to the Norrie disease region and studies of the NDP
gene showed a point mutation in the third exon resulting in an
leu61-to-phe (L61F) substitution. No obligate carrier females had any
ocular or relevant pathology, but all affected males had varicose veins
with peripheral venous stasis ulcers. Phlebography and other radiologic
examinations showed deep venous system insufficiency and moderate
dilatation of veins. Transfemoral arteriography showed patency of the
femoral and distal arterial system.

.0013
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY, X-LINKED
NDP, HIS42ARG

Shastry et al. (1997) found an H42R mutation of the NDP gene segregating
with exudative vitreoretinopathy (305390) in 3 generations of a family.
They also identified mutations in the NDP gene in 4 sporadic cases of
FEVR.

.0014
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, 1-BP DEL

In a boy with Norrie disease (310600), Chynn et al. (1996) identified a
1-bp deletion in codon 35 of the NDP gene. The deletion changed the
amino acids encoded by codons 35 through 39 and resulted in a premature
stop at codon 40. The unaffected mother was heterozygous for the
mutation.

.0015
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, ALA105THR

In an Italian family in which 5 males in 4 generations had
characteristic ophthalmologic findings of Norrie disease (310600),
Torrente et al. (1997) identified an ala105-to-thr (A105T) missense
mutation in the NDP gene. Affected individuals had no mental retardation
or hearing abnormality.

.0016
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 2, X-LINKED
NDP, CYS110GLY

In an Italian family with exudative vitreoretinopathy (EVR2; 305390) in
an X-linked pedigree pattern, Torrente et al. (1997) demonstrated a
cys110-to-gly (C110G) mutation in the NDP gene.

.0017
EXUDATIVE VITREORETINOPATHY 2, X-LINKED
NDP, ARG121LEU

In a large kindred with X-linked recessive exudative vitreoretinopathy
(EVR2; 305390), Johnson et al. (1996) identified an arg121-to-leu
(R121L) mutation in the NDP gene. The clinical phenotype and rate of
disease progression were extremely variable, with progression to total
retinal detachment occurring before the age of 2 years in some and later
than 21 years in others. Johnson et al. (1996) pointed out that all
mutations identified in X-linked vitreoretinopathy have been missense
mutations, presumably not affecting the 3-dimensional structure of the
NDP gene product. Note that the same codon is involved in the
arg121-to-trp mutation (300658.0010). Johnson et al. (1996) suggested
that the mutations causing X-linked vitreoretinopathy cluster around
residues 121-126, but this is not entirely true, as indicated by the
cys110-to-gly mutation (300658.0016) and the his42-to-arg mutation
(300658.0013).

.0018
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, CYS96TRP

Black et al. (1999) reported a woman with a unilateral variant of Coats
disease (300216) who gave birth to a son affected by Norrie disease
(310600). Both carried a 704C-G transversion in the NDP gene, resulting
in a cys96-to-trp (C96W) substitution. Subsequent analysis of the
retinas of 9 enucleated eyes from males with Coats disease demonstrated
a somatic C96W mutation in the NDP gene in 1 that was not present in
nonretinal tissue. Black et al. (1999) suggested that Coats
telangiectasis is secondary to somatic mutation in the NDP gene, which
results in a deficiency of norrin within the developing retina. This
supported observations that the protein is critical for normal retinal
vasculogenesis. The authors noted that a cys96-to-tyr substitution
(300658.0005) had previously been described.

.0019
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, VAL45GLU

In a boy with Norrie disease (310600), Lev et al. (2007) identified a
134T-A transversion in the NDP gene, resulting in a val45-to-glu (V45E)
substitution. He had profound mental retardation and myoclonic seizures
with hypsarrhythmia on EEG. His asymptomatic mother was heterozygous for
the mutation. Bioinformatic analysis indicated that V45E lies within an
extracellular localization motif and may alter the distribution pattern
of norrin, which in turn may alter norrin-mediated cell-cell
communication.

.0020
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, SER73TER

In affected male members of a family with Norrie disease (310600),
Walker et al. (1997) identified a 626C-A transversion in exon 3 of the
NDP gene, resulting in a ser73-to-ter (S73X) substitution. Affected
members had a severe ocular phenotype, but no mental retardation or
deafness.

.0021
NORRIE DISEASE
NDP, SER101PHE

In affected male members of a family with Norrie disease (310600),
Walker et al. (1997) identified a 710C-T transition in exon 3 of the NDP
gene, resulting in a ser101-to-phe (S101F) substitution. Affected
members had a less severe ocular phenotype compared to other patients
with Norrie disease and no mental retardation or deafness.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Bergen et al. (1993); Bleeker-Wagemakers et al. (1985); Chen et al.
(1992); Harmon et al. (1993); Hattori et al. (1991); Isashiki et al.
(1995); Meindl et al. (1995); Schuback et al. (1995)
REFERENCE 1. Bergen, A. A. B.; Wapenaar, M. C.; Schuurman, E. J. M.; Diergaarde,
P. J.; Lerach, H.; Monaco, A. P.; Bakker, E.; Bleeker-Wagemakers,
E. M.; van Ommen, G. J. B.: Detection of a new submicroscopic Norrie
disease deletion interval with a novel DNA probe isolated by differential
Alu PCR fingerprint cloning. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 62: 231-235,
1993.

2. Berger, W.; Meindl, A.; van de Pol, T. J. R.; Cremers, F. P. M.;
Ropers, H. H.; Doerner, C.; Monaco, A.; Bergen, A. A. B.; Lebo, R.;
Warburg, M.; Zergollern, L.; Lorenz, B.; Gal, A.; Bleeker-Wagemakers,
E. M.; Meitinger, T.: Isolation of a candidate gene for Norrie disease
by positional cloning. Nature Genet. 1: 199-203, 1992. Note: Erratum:
Nature Genet. 2: 84 only, 1992.

3. Berger, W.; van de Pol, D.; Bachner, D.; Oerlemans, F.; Winkens,
H.; Hameister, H.; Wieringa, B.; Hendriks, W.; Ropers, H.-H.: An
animal model for Norrie disease (ND): gene targeting of the mouse
ND gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5: 51-59, 1996.

4. Berger, W.; van de Pol, D.; Warburg, M.; Gal, A.; Bleeker-Wagemakers,
L.; de Silva, H.; Meindl, A.; Meitinger, T.; Cremers, F.; Ropers,
H.-H.: Mutations in the candidate gene for Norrie disease. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 1: 461-465, 1992.

5. Black, G. C. M.; Perveen, R.; Bonshek, R.; Cahill, M.; Clayton-Smith,
J.; Lloyd, I. C.; McLeod, D.: Coats' disease of the retina (unilateral
retinal telangiectasis) caused by somatic mutation in the NDP gene:
a role for norrin in retinal angiogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 8:
2031-2035, 1999.

6. Bleeker-Wagemakers, L. M.; Friedrich, U.; Gal, A.; Wienker, T.
F.; Warburg, M.; Ropers, H.-H.: Close linkage between Norrie disease,
a cloned DNA sequence from the proximal short arm, and the centromere
of the X chromosome. Hum. Genet. 71: 211-214, 1985.

7. Chen, Z.-Y.; Battinelli, E. M.; Fielder, A.; Bundey, S.; Sims,
K.; Breakefield, X. O.; Craig, I. W.: A mutation in the Norrie disease
gene (NDP) associated with X-linked familial exudative vitreoretinopathy. Nature
Genet. 5: 180-183, 1993.

8. Chen, Z.-Y.; Battinelli, E. M.; Hendriks, R. W.; Powell, J. F.;
Middleton-Price, H.; Sims, K. B.; Breakefield, X. O.; Craig, I. W.
: Norrie disease gene: characterization of deletions and possible
function. Genomics 16: 533-535, 1993.

9. Chen, Z.-Y.; Battinelli, E. M.; Woodruff, G.; Young, I.; Breakefield,
X. O.; Craig, I. W.: Characterization of a mutation within the NDP
gene in a family with a manifesting female carrier. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2:
1727-1729, 1993.

10. Chen, Z.-Y.; Hendriks, R. W.; Jobling, M. A.; Powell, J. F.; Breakefield,
X. O.; Sims, K. B.; Craig, I. W.: Isolation and characterization
of a candidate gene for Norrie disease. Nature Genet. 1: 204-208,
1992.

11. Chen, Z.-Y.; Sims, K. B.; Coleman, M.; Donnai, D.; Monaco, A.;
Breakefield, X. O.; Davies, K. E.; Craig, I. W.: Characterization
of a YAC containing part or all of the Norrie disease locus. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 1: 161-164, 1992.

12. Chynn, E. W.; Walton, D. S.; Hahn, L. B.; Dryja, T. P.: Norrie
disease: diagnosis of a simplex case by DNA analysis. Arch. Ophthal. 114:
1136-1138, 1996.

13. Dudgeon, J.: Familial exudative vitreo-retinopathy. Trans. Ophthal.
Soc. U.K. 99: 45-49, 1979.

14. Fuchs, S.; Kellner, U.; Wedemann, H.; Gal, A.: Missense mutation
(Arg121Trp) in the Norrie disease gene associated with X-linked exudative
vitreoretinopathy. Hum. Mutat. 6: 257-259, 1995.

15. Fuchs, S.; Xu, S. Y.; Caballero, M.; Salcedo, M.; La O, A.; Wedemann,
H.; Gal, A.: A missense point mutation (Leu13Arg) of the Norrie disease
gene in a large Cuban kindred with Norrie disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3:
655-656, 1994.

16. Fullwood, P.; Jones, J.; Bundey, S.; Dudgeon, J.; Fielder, A.
R.; Kilpatrick, M. W.: X linked exudative vitreoretinopathy: clinical
features and genetic linkage analysis. Brit. J. Ophthal. 77: 168-170,
1993.

17. Harmon, D. L.; Gardner-Medwin, D.; Stirling, J. L.: Two new mutations
in a late infantile Tay-Sachs patient are both in exon 1 of the beta-hexosaminidase
alpha subunit gene. J. Med. Genet. 30: 123-128, 1993.

18. Hartzer, M. K.; Cheng, M.; Liu, X.; Shastry, B. S.: Localization
of the Norrie disease gene mRNA by in situ hybridization. Brain Res.
Bull. 49: 355-358, 1999.

19. Hattori, Y.; Yamashiro, Y.; Ohba, Y.; Miyaji, T.; Morishita, M.;
Yamamoto, K.; Yamamoto, K.; Narai, S.; Kimura, A.: A new beta-thalassemia
mutation (initiation codon ATG-to-GTG) found in the Japanese population. Hemoglobin 15:
317-325, 1991.

20. Isashiki, Y.; Ohba, N.; Yanagita, T.; Hokita, N.; Doi, N.; Nakagawa,
M.; Ozawa, M.; Kuroda, N.: Novel mutation at the initiation codon
in the Norrie disease gene in two Japanese families. Hum. Genet. 95:
105-108, 1995.

21. Isashiki, Y.; Ohba, N.; Yanagita, T.; Hokita, N.; Hotta, Y.; Hayakawa,
M.; Fujiki, K.; Tanabe, U.: Mutations in the Norrie disease gene:
a new mutation in a Japanese family. (Letter) Brit. J. Ophthal. 79:
703-708, 1995.

22. Johnson, K.; Mintz-Hittner, H. A.; Conley, Y. P.; Ferrell, R.
E.: X-linked exudative vitreoretinopathy caused by an arginine to
leucine substitution (R121L) in the Norrie disease protein. Clin.
Genet. 50: 113-115, 1996.

23. Kondo, H.; Qin, M.; Kusaka, S.; Tahira, T.; Hasebe, H.; Hayashi,
H.; Uchio, E.; Hayashi, K.: Novel mutations in Norrie disease gene
in Japanese patients with Norrie disease and familial exudative vitreoretinopathy. Invest.
Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 48: 1276-1282, 2007.

24. Lev, D.; Weigl, Y.; Hasan, M.; Gak, E.; Davidovich, M.; Vinkler,
C.; Leshinsky-Silver, E.; Lerman-Sagie, T.; Watemberg, N.: A novel
missense mutation in the NDP gene in a child with Norrie disease and
severe neurological involvement including infantile spasms. Am. J.
Med. Genet. 143A: 921-924, 2007.

25. Meindl, A.; Berger, W.; Meitinger, T.; van de Pol, D.; Achatz,
H.; Dorner, C.; Haasemann, M.; Hellebrand, H.; Gal, A.; Cremers, F.;
Ropers, H.-H.: Norrie disease is caused by mutations in an extracellular
protein resembling C-terminal globular domain of mucins. Nature Genet. 2:
139-143, 1992.

26. Meindl, A.; Lorenz, B.; Achatz, H.; Hellebrand, H.; Schmitz-Valckenberg,
P.; Meitinger, T.: Missense mutations in the NDP gene in patients
with a less severe course of Norrie disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4:
489-490, 1995.

27. Meitinger, T.; Meindl, A.; Bork, P.; Rost, B.; Sander, C.; Haasemann,
M.; Murken, J.: Molecular modeling of the Norrie disease protein
predicts a cystine knot growth factor tertiary structure. Nature
Genet. 5: 376-380, 1993.

28. Perez-Vilar, J.; Hill, R. L.: Norrie disease protein (norrin)
forms disulfide-linked oligomers associated with the extracellular
matrix. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 33410-33415, 1997.

29. Qin, M.; Kondo, H.; Tahira, T.; Hayashi, K.: Moderate reduction
of Norrin signaling activity associated with the causative missense
mutations identified in patients with familial exudative vitreoretinopathy. Hum.
Genet. 122: 615-623, 2008.

30. Rehm, H. L.; Gutierrez-Espeleta, G. A.; Garcia, R.; Jimenez, G.;
Khetarpal, U.; Priest, J. M.; Sims, K. B.; Keats, B. J. B.; Morton,
C. C.: Norrie disease gene mutation in a large Costa Rican kindred
with a novel phenotype including venous insufficiency. Hum. Mutat.
9: 402-408, 1997.

31. Schuback, D. E.; Chen, Z. Y.; Craig, I. W.; Breakefield, X. O.;
Sims, K. B.: Mutations in the Norrie disease gene. Hum. Mutat. 5:
285-292, 1995.

32. Shastry, B. S.: Identification of a recurrent missense mutation
in the Norrie disease gene associated with a simplex case of exudative
vitreoretinopathy. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 246: 35-38, 1998.

33. Shastry, B. S.; Hejtmancik, J. F.; Plager, D. A.; Hartzer, M.
K.; Trese, M. T.: Linkage and candidate gene analysis in X-linked
familial exudative vitreoretinopathy. Genomics 27: 341-344, 1995.

34. Shastry, B. S.; Hejtmancik, J. F.; Trese, M. T.: Identification
of novel missense mutations in the Norrie disease gene associated
with one X-linked and four sporadic cases of familial exudative vitreoretinopathy. Hum.
Mutat. 9: 396-401, 1997.

35. Sims, K. B.; Lebo, R. V.; Benson, G.; Shalish, C.; Schuback, D.;
Chen, Z. Y.; Bruns, G.; Craig, I. W.; Golbus, M. S.; Breakefield,
X. O.: The Norrie disease gene maps to a 150 kb region on chromosome
Xp11.3. Hum. Molec. Genet. 1: 83-89, 1992.

36. Torrente, I.; Mangino, M.; Gennarelli, M.; Novelli, G.; Giannotti,
A.; Vadala, P.; Dallapiccola, B.: Two new missense mutations (A105T
and C110G) in the norrin gene in two Italian families with Norrie
disease and familial exudative vitreoretinopathy. (Letter) Am. J.
Med. Genet. 72: 242-244, 1997.

37. Walker, J. L.; Dixon, J.; Fenton, C. R.; Hungerford, J.; Lynch,
S. A.; Stenhouses, S. A. R.; Christian, A.; Craig, I. W.: Two new
mutations in exon 3 of the NDP gene: S73X and S101F associated with
severe and less severe ocular phenotype, respectively. Hum. Mutat. 9:
53-56, 1997.

38. Wong, F.; Goldberg, M. F.; Hao, Y.: Identification of a nonsense
mutation at codon 128 of the Norrie's disease gene in a male infant. Arch.
Ophthal. 111: 1553-1557, 1993.

39. Wu, W.-C.; Drenser, K.; Trese, M.; Capone, A., Jr.; Dailey, W.
: Retinal phenotype-genotype correlation of pediatric patients expressing
mutations in the Norrie disease gene. Arch. Ophthal. 125: 225-230,
2007.

40. Xu, Q.; Wang, Y.; Dabdoub, A.; Smallwood, P. M.; Williams, J.;
Woods, C.; Kelley, M. W.; Jiang, L.; Tasman, W.; Zhang, K.; Nathans,
J.: Vascular development in the retina and inner ear: control by
Norrin and Frizzled-4, a high-affinity ligand-receptor pair. Cell 116:
883-895, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/12/2008
Jane Kelly - updated: 11/27/2007
Jane Kelly - updated: 10/19/2007

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 7/17/2007

EDITED wwang: 01/24/2011
carol: 12/19/2008
wwang: 3/17/2008
terry: 3/12/2008
carol: 11/27/2007
carol: 10/19/2007
carol: 7/27/2007
ckniffin: 7/27/2007
ckniffin: 7/26/2007

614792	TITLE *614792 TRANSMEMBRANE AND UBIQUITIN-LIKE DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; TMUB1
;;DENDRITIC CELL-DERIVED UBIQUITIN-LIKE PROTEIN; DULP;;
SB144;;
C7ORF21
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ubiquitin-like proteins (ULP) share 15 to 60% identity with ubiquitin at
the amino acid level and are involved in cell cycle progression, DNA
repair, apoptosis, endocytosis of membrane receptors, and cellular
protein location. DULP, a widely expressed protein derived from
dendritic cells, shares 26% identity with ubiquitin (see UBA52, 191321
and UBA80, 191343) (Liu et al., 2009).

CLONING

By random sequencing of a dendritic cell cDNA library, Liu et al. (2009)
isolated a 1,322-bp cDNA with a single open reading frame (ORF) of 738
bp and encoding a 246-amino acid protein that they designated DULP.
Residues 103 to 176 of DULP have homology to UBA80, including to the
essential ile44 hydrophobic patch and the lys6 involved in the formation
of a multiubiquitin chain that binds to the proteasome subunit RPN10
(PSMD4; 601648). However, val-gly substituted for the conserved
diglycine motif, required for conjugation formation by ULPs. RT-PCR
analysis detected wide expression in many, but not all, cancer cell
lines. Western blot analysis showed expression of a 28-kD myc
(190080)-tagged protein. Immunofluorescence analysis demonstrated
expression strong in the nucleus and weaker in the cytosol. Transient
expression of DULP resulted in apoptosis that was not mediated through
the proteasome or mitochondria. Liu et al. (2009) concluded that DULP is
a novel ubiquitin-like protein expressed in dendritic cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Liu et al. (2009) determined that the DULP gene comprises 2 exons.

MAPPING

By database analysis, Liu et al. (2009) mapped the TMUB1 (DULP) gene to
chromosome 7q36.1.

REFERENCE 1. Liu, G.; Liu, S.; Li, P.; Tang, L.; Han, Y.; An, H.; Li, J.; Dai,
X.; Li, N.; Cao, X.; Yu, Y.: Cloning and characterization of DULP,
a novel ubiquitin-like molecule from human dendritic cells. Cell.
Molec. Immun. 6: 27-33, 2009.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 8/30/2012

EDITED terry: 12/05/2012
terry: 12/5/2012
alopez: 8/30/2012

609206	TITLE *609206 EUKARYOTIC TRANSLATION ELONGATION FACTOR 1, EPSILON-1; EEF1E1
;;ELONGATION FACTOR p18
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing cDNAs randomly selected from a cDNA library derived from
human umbilical cord CD34 (142230)-positive cells, Mao et al. (1998)
obtained a full-length cDNA encoding EEF1E1. The deduced 174-amino acid
protein is a homolog of the rodent elongation factor p18.

GENE FUNCTION

Park et al. (2005) found that human p18 was induced and translocated to
the nucleus in response to DNA damage. Expression of p18 resulted in
elevated p53 (191170) levels, while p18 depletion blocked p53 induction.
p18 interacted directly with ATM (607585) and ATR (601215) in response
to DNA damage. ATM activity was dependent on the level of p18,
suggesting that p18 is required for activation of ATM. RT-PCR showed
that p18 expression was low in several different human cancer cell lines
and tissues. These results, as well as findings in p18 mutant mice,
suggested that p18 is a haploinsufficient tumor suppressor and a key
factor for ATM/ATR-mediated p53 activation.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Mao et al. (1998) mapped the EEF1E1 gene
to chromosome 6p25.1-p23.

ANIMAL MODEL

Park et al. (2005) found that inactivation of both p18 alleles in mice
caused embryonic lethality, whereas heterozygous mice showed high
susceptibility to spontaneous tumors.

REFERENCE 1. Mao, M.; Fu, G.; Wu, J.-S.; Zhang, Q.-H.; Zhou, J.; Kan, L.-X.;
Huang, Q.-H.; He, K.-L.; Gu, B.-W.; Han, Z.-G.; Shen, Y.; Gu, J.;
Yu, Y.-P.; Xu, S.-H.; Wang, Y.-X.; Chen, S.-J.; Chen, Z.: Identification
of genes expressed in human CD34+ hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells
by expressed sequence tags and efficient full-length cDNA cloning. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 8175-8180, 1998.

2. Park, B.-J.; Kang, J. W.; Lee, S. W.; Choi, S.-J.; Shin, Y. K.;
Ahn, Y. H.; Choi, Y. H.; Choi, D.; Lee, K. S.; Kim, S.: The haploinsufficient
tumor suppressor p18 upregulates p53 via interactions with ATM/ATR. Cell 120:
209-221, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 2/16/2005

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 2/16/2005

EDITED mgross: 02/16/2005
mgross: 2/16/2005

606926	TITLE *606926 LYSOPHOSPHATIDIC ACID RECEPTOR 5; LPAR5
;;LPA5;;
G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR 92; GPR92;;
GPR93
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs, or GPRs) contain 7 transmembrane
domains and transduce extracellular signals through heterotrimeric G
proteins.

CLONING

Lee et al. (2001) identified GPR92, which they designated GPR93, in a
genomic database using the sequences of the cysteinyl leukotriene-2
receptor (605666) as query. GPR92 encodes a deduced 372-amino acid
protein that shares 36 to 40% sequence identity in the transmembrane
regions with the G protein-coupled purinergic receptor P2Y5 (P2RY5;
609239), GPR23 (300086), and GPR17 (603071).

MAPPING

Lee et al. (2001) mapped the GPR92 gene to chromosome 12 based on
sequence similarity between the GPR92 sequence and a BAC clone (GenBank
GENBANK AC006087) localized to chromosome 12. White et al. (2000)
identified GPR92 near the FGF23 gene on chromosome 12p13.

REFERENCE 1. Lee, D. K.; Nguyen, T.; Lynch, K. R.; Cheng, R.; Vanti, W. B.;
Arkhitko, O.; Lewis, T.; Evans, J. F.; George, S. R.; O'Dowd, B. F.
: Discovery and mapping of ten novel G protein-coupled receptor genes. Gene 275:
83-91, 2001.

2. White, K. E.; Evans, W. E.; O'Riordan, J. L. H.; Speer, M. C.;
Econs, M. J.; Lorenz-Depiereux, B.; Grabowski, M.; Meitinger, T.;
Strom, T. M.: Autosomal dominant hypophosphataemic rickets is associated
with mutations in FGF23. Nature Genet. 26: 345-348, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/9/2002

EDITED alopez: 04/22/2008
mgross: 3/4/2005
terry: 11/22/2002
carol: 5/10/2002

114080	TITLE *114080 CALCIUM/CALMODULIN-DEPENDENT PROTEIN KINASE IV; CAMK4
;;BRAIN Ca(2+)/CALMODULIN-DEPENDENT PROTEIN KINASE TYPE IV
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Protein phosphorylation, a prominent activity in the brain, apparently
plays an important role in several neural functions such as neural
transmitter release, ion channel modulation, and axoplasmic transport.
Sikela et al. (1989) identified cDNA clones corresponding to a brain
Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase, which they referred to as
brain CaM kinase IV (CAMK4). On the basis of Western blot analysis, this
kinase appeared to be restricted to brain in the rat; interestingly, it
was not detected in the brain of the newborn, but became detectable
within a few days after birth.

By immunostaining of adult mouse brain sections, Wei et al. (2002) found
Camk4-labeled neurons in the hippocampus, amygdala, anterior cingulate
cortex, somatosensory cortex, and insular cortex.

MAPPING

By Southern blot analysis, Sikela et al. (1989) showed that the CAMK4
gene is present in single copy in the mouse and human genomes. Analysis
of DNA from hybrid cells showed that the gene is located on human
chromosome 5, and in situ hybridization indicated that the location is
5q21-q23. By Southern blot analysis of Chinese hamster/mouse somatic
cell hybrids, Sikela et al. (1990) demonstrated that the homologous
mouse locus, Camk4, maps to chromosome 18. Analysis of interspecific
backcrosses positioned Camk4 in the centromeric region near 2 mutations
known to affect neurologic function and fertility. Sikela et al. (1990)
raised the possibility that a defect in Camk4 may be responsible for 1
of these mutant phenotypes.

GENE FUNCTION

Koga et al. (2012) found that knockdown of CAMK4 via small interfering
RNA in T cells from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE;
152700) resulted in augmentation of the percentage of CD25 (IL2RA;
147730)-positive/FOXP3 (300292)-positive regulatory T cells. They
concluded that CAMK4 is important in the generation and function of
regulatory T cells in patients with SLE.

ANIMAL MODEL

Camk4 is a multifunctional serine/threonine protein kinase with limited
tissue distribution that has been implicated in transcriptional
regulation in lymphocytes, neurons, and male germ cells. In the mouse
testis, however, Camk4 is expressed in spermatids and associated with
chromatin and nuclear matrix. Elongating spermatids are not
transcriptionally active, raising the possibility that Camk4 has a novel
function in male germ cells. To investigate the role of Camk4 in
spermatogenesis, Wu et al. (2000) generated mice with a targeted
deletion of the Camk4 gene. Male Camk4 -/- mice were infertile with
impairment of spermiogenesis in late elongating spermatids. The
sequential deposition of sperm basic nuclear proteins on chromatin was
disrupted, with a specific loss of protamine-2 (182890) and prolonged
retention of transition protein-2 (190232) in step-15 spermatids.
Protamine-2 is phosphorylated by Camk4 in vitro, implicating a
connection between Camk4 signaling and the exchange of basic nuclear
proteins in mammalian male germ cells. Defects in protamine-2 have been
identified in sperm of infertile men, suggesting that the results of Wu
et al. (2000) may have clinical implications for the understanding of
human male infertility.

CAMK4 is implicated in the regulation of CRE-dependent transcription. To
investigate the role of this kinase in neuronal plasticity and memory,
Kang et al. (2001) generated transgenic mice in which the expression of
a dominant-negative form of Camk4 was restricted to the postnatal
forebrain. In these transgenic mice, activity-induced Creb (123810)
phosphorylation and Fos (164810) expression were significantly
attenuated. Hippocampal late long-term potentiation (LTP) was also
impaired, whereas basic synaptic function and early LTP were unaffected.
These deficits correlated with impairments in long-term memory,
specifically in its consolidation/retention phase but not in the
acquisition phase. The results indicated that neural activity-dependent
CAMK4 signaling in the neuronal nucleus plays an important role in the
consolidation/retention of hippocampus-dependent long-term memory.

Wei et al. (2002) studied pain and fear memory in Camk4-null mice.
Behavioral responses to an acute noxious stimulus or to prolonged injury
were identical in wildtype and Camk4-null mice, but fear memory was
significantly reduced in the absence of Camk4. Brain sections of
wildtype mice following fear conditioning showed phospho-Creb
immunoreactivity, indicating Creb activation, in memory-related areas
including the hippocampal CA1 region, basolateral amygdala, anterior
cingulate cortex, primary somatosensory cortex, and agranular insular
cortex. Brain sections of Camk4 -/- mice showed no evidence of
fear-induced phospho-Creb in the somatosensory cortex and insular cortex
and lower levels of phospho-Creb in the anterior cingulate cortex.
Electrophysiologic studies indicated that Camk4 contributes to synaptic
potentiation. Stimulation of brain slices induced significant synaptic
potentiation in the anterior cingulate cortex, insular cortex, and
somatosensory cortex of wildtype mice, but reduced or blocked
potentiation in Camk4 -/- mice. Camk4 was also found to be required for
calmodulin (see 114180) translocation in response to KCl application in
the hippocampus, amygdala, anterior cingulate cortex, somatosensory
cortex, and insular cortex. Wei et al. (2002) concluded that Camk4 is
crucial in the trapping of Ca(2+)/calmodulin complexes in neuronal
nuclei and in Creb phosphorylation and activation.

CAMK4 expression is developmentally regulated in T lymphocytes and is
highest in CD4 (186940)-positive/CD8 (see 186910)-positive thymocytes.
Using flow cytometric analysis, Raman et al. (2001) showed that
thymocytes from mice lacking Camk4 had impaired thymocyte maturation,
particularly in positive selection, and defective calcium-dependent gene
transcription.

Wu et al. (2002) generated transgenic mice that selectively express in
skeletal muscle a constitutively active form of
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase-4. Skeletal muscles from
these mice showed augmented mDNA replication and mitochondrial
biogenesis, upregulation of mitochondrial enzymes involved in fatty acid
metabolism and electron transport, and reduced susceptibility to fatigue
during repetitive contractions. CAMK induced expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1 (PGC1; 604517), a
master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis in vivo, and activated the
PGC1 gene promoter in cultured myocytes. Thus, Wu et al. (2002)
concluded that a calcium-regulated signaling pathway controls
mitochondrial biogenesis in mammalian cells.

MRL/lpr mice have decreased Il2 (147680) production and develop an
SLE-like disease. By RT-PCR analysis, Koga et al. (2012) showed that T
cells from MRL/lpr mice had increased nuclear Camk4. MRL/lpr mice
lacking Camk4 had significantly prolonged survival, restoration of Cd4
T-cell Il2 production, and increased numbers of
Cd4-positive/Cd25-positive/Foxp3-positive regulatory T cells. Koga et
al. (2012) concluded that Camk4 is important in the generation and
function of regulatory T cells in lupus-prone mice.

REFERENCE 1. Kang, H.; Sun, L. D.; Atkins, C. M.; Soderling, T. R.; Wilson,
M. A.; Tonegawa, S.: An important role of neural activity-dependent
CaMKIV signaling in the consolidation of long-term memory. Cell 106:
771-783, 2001.

2. Koga, T.; Ichinose, K.; Mizui, M.; Crispin, J. C.; Tsokos, G. C.
: Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV suppresses IL-2 production
and regulatory T cell activity in lupus. J. Immun. 189: 3490-3496,
2012.

3. Raman, V.; Blaeser, F.; Ho, N.; Engle, D. L.; Williams, C. B.;
Chatila, T. A.: Requirement for Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent kinase
type IV/Gr in setting the thymocyte selection threshold. J. Immun. 167:
6270-6278, 2001.

4. Sikela, J. M.; Adamson, M. C.; Wilson-Shaw, D.; Kozak, C. A.:
Genetic mapping of the gene for Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein
kinase IV (Camk-4) to mouse chromosome 18. Genomics 8: 579-582,
1990.

5. Sikela, J. M.; Law, M. L.; Kao, F.-T.; Hartz, J. A.; Wei, Q.; Hahn,
W. E.: Chromosomal localization of the human gene for brain Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent
protein kinase type IV. Genomics 4: 21-27, 1989.

6. Wei, F.; Qiu, C.-S.; Liauw, J.; Robinson, D. A.; Ho, N.; Chatila,
T.; Zhuo, M.: Calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IV is required
for fear memory. Nature Neurosci. 5: 573-579, 2002.

7. Wu, H.; Kanatous, S. B.; Thurmond, F. A.; Gallardo, T.; Isotani,
E.; Bassel-Duby, R.; Williams, R. S.: Regulation of mitochondrial
biogenesis in skeletal muscle by CaMK. Science 296: 349-352, 2002.

8. Wu, J. Y.; Ribar, T. J.; Cummings, D. E.; Burton, K. A.; McKnight,
G. S.; Means, A. R.: Spermiogenesis and exchange of basic nuclear
proteins are impaired in male germ cells lacking Camk4. Nature Genet. 25:
448-452, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 06/13/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/13/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/16/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/16/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/25/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/1/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/12/1989

EDITED mgross: 06/13/2013
terry: 5/19/2010
wwang: 12/20/2005
alopez: 7/25/2002
carol: 6/18/2002
terry: 6/13/2002
alopez: 4/17/2002
terry: 4/16/2002
mgross: 1/16/2002
mgross: 9/25/2001
alopez: 8/1/2000
terry: 8/1/2000
alopez: 2/22/1999
carol: 3/26/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/27/1992
carol: 2/4/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/26/1989

606044	TITLE *606044 SJOGREN SYNDROME/SCLERODERMA AUTOANTIGEN 1; SSSCA1
;;CENTROMERIC AUTOANTIGEN, 27-KD
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The centromere plays an essential role in the pairing and partitioning
of replicated chromosomes in mitosis and meiosis and is recognized by
anticentromere antibodies in patients with autoimmune disorders. By
immunoscreening a cDNA library with serum from a Sjogren syndrome
(270150) patient with anticentromere antibodies, Muro et al. (1998)
isolated a cDNA encoding SSSCA1, which they referred to as p27 due to
its molecular mass in Western blot analysis. The deduced 199-amino acid,
leucine-rich protein has an N terminus with many charged residues and a
potential phosphorylation site; 2 short proline-rich stretches; and a
potential C-terminal phosphorylation site. Immunofluorescence analysis
failed to demonstrate centromeric or other staining. Immunoblot analysis
with recombinant SSSCA1 determined that approximately 2% of patients
with anticentromere antibodies had anti-SSSCA1 antibodies, while less
than 1% of autoimmune patients without anticentromere antibodies had
anti-SSSCA1 antibodies. All 5 seropositive patients had a diagnosis of
scleroderma (see 181750) or Sjogren syndrome with internal organ
involvement.

REFERENCE 1. Muro, Y.; Yamada, T.; Himeno, M.; Sugimoto, K.: cDNA cloning of
a novel autoantigen targeted by a minor subset of anti-centromere
antibodies. Clin. Exp. Immun. 111: 372-376, 1998.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/20/2001

EDITED alopez: 04/04/2012
mgross: 6/20/2001

602034	TITLE *602034 CORTICOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE RECEPTOR 2; CRHR2
;;CORTICOTROPIN-RELEASING FACTOR RECEPTOR 2; CRFR2;;
CRF2 RECEPTOR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Liaw et al. (1996) stated that there are 2 G protein-coupled
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH; 122560) receptors, CRHR1 (122561)
and CRHR2, which they termed the CRF2 receptor. CRH is a 41-amino acid
peptide synthesized in the hypothalamus that is the principal
neuroregulator of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis and
plays an important role in coordinating the endocrine, autonomic, and
behavioral responses to stress and immune challenge.

CLONING

Liaw et al. (1996) used clones of the rat CRF2 receptor to isolate the
human gene from brain and kidney genomic DNA libraries. The predicted
protein, which is 411 amino acids in length and 70% identical to the
CRF1 receptor, contains a putative N-terminal secretory signal sequence
and 7 putative transmembrane domains. Liaw et al. (1996) expressed the
CRF2 receptor and found that transfected cells responded to the binding
of CRH with an increase in intracellular cAMP. Although the rat receptor
has 2 alternatively spliced variants, termed CRF2-alpha and CRF2-beta,
Liaw et al. (1996) found no evidence for alternative splicing of the
human receptor. Liaw et al. (1996) reported that the pharmacologic
profile of this protein was similar to that of the rat CRF2-alpha
protein but distinct from the human CRF1 receptor.

Kostich et al. (1998) reported a novel CRHR2 splice isoform, which they
referred to as 'CRF2-gamma,' found in human brain. CRF2-gamma cDNA
encodes a 397-amino acid receptor containing an amino terminus with no
significant homology to the already reported alpha- and beta-termini.
PCR and Southern blot analysis of CRF2-gamma RNA expression in human
brain detected expression in the septum and hippocampus, with weaker but
detectable expression in the amygdala, nucleus accumbens, midbrain, and
frontal cortex.

GENE FUNCTION

While CRFR1 shares 70% sequence identity with CRFR2, it has much higher
affinity for rat/human CRF. Liaw et al. (1997) determined the regions
involved in receptor-ligand binding and/or receptor activation using
chimeric receptor constructs of human CRFR1 and CRFR2 and generated
point mutations of both receptors. The EC(50) values in stimulation of
intracellular cAMP by the receptors for the peptide ligand were
determined using a cAMP-dependent reporter system. Three regions of the
receptor were found to be important for optimal binding of CRF and/or
receptor activation. The first region was mapped to the junction of the
third extracellular domain and the fifth transmembrane domain.
Substitutions of 3 amino acids of CRFR1 in this region (val266, tyr267,
and thr268) by the corresponding CRFR2 amino acids (asp266, leu267, and
val268) increased the EC(50) value by approximately 10-fold. The other 2
regions were in the second extracellular domain of the CRFR1 (amino
acids 175-178 and his189). Substitutions in each of these 2 regions
increased the EC(50) value for CRF by approximately 7- to 8-fold, but
only in the presence of the amino acid 266-268 mutation involving the
first region, suggesting that the latter 2 regions may play a secondary
role in peptide ligand binding.

Hsu and Hsueh (2001) identified stresscopin (SCP; 605901) and
stresscopin-related peptide (SRP; 605902) as specific ligands for CRHR2.

Lemos et al. (2012) reported that corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF;
122560), a neuropeptide released in response to acute stressors and
other arousing environmental stimuli, acts in the nucleus accumbens of
naive mice to increase dopamine release through coactivation of the
receptors CRFR1 (122561) and CRFR2. Remarkably, severe-stress exposure
completely abolished this effect without recovery for at least 90 days.
This loss of CRF's capacity to regulate dopamine release in the nucleus
accumbens is accompanied by a switch in the reaction to CRF from
appetitive to aversive, indicating a diametric change in the emotional
response to acute stressors. Lemos et al. (2012) concluded that their
results offer a biologic substrate for the switch in affect which is
central to stress-induced depressive disorders.

GENE STRUCTURE

The CRHR2 gene consists of 12 exons spanning approximately 30 kb (Liaw
et al., 1996).

MAPPING

Meyer et al. (1997) used radiation hybrids and fluorescence in situ
hybridization to map CRHR2 to human chromosome 7p21-p15 between the STS
markers D7S632 and D7S690.

Lesh et al. (1997) mapped the mouse Crhr2 gene to chromosome 6.

ANIMAL MODEL

Coste et al. (2000) generated Crhr2 -/- mice through targeted disruption
and demonstrated that CRHR2 supplies regulatory features of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis stress response. Although initiation
of the stress response appeared to be normal, Crhr2 -/- mice showed
early termination of adrenocorticotropic hormone (Acth) release,
suggesting that CRHR2 is involved in maintaining
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis drive. CRHR2 also appears to modify
the recovery phase of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis response,
as corticosterone levels remained elevated after stress in Crhr2 -/-
mice. In addition, stress coping behaviors associated with dearousal
were reduced in Crhr2 -/- mice. Coste et al. (2000) also demonstrated
that CRHR2 is essential for sustained feeding suppression induced by
urocortin (600945). Feeding was initially suppressed in Crhr2 -/- mice
following urocortin administration, but Crhr2 -/- mice recovered more
rapidly and completely than did wildtype mice. In addition to central
nervous system effects, Coste et al. (2000) found that, in contrast to
wildtype mice, Crhr2 -/- mice failed to show the enhanced cardiac
performance or reduced blood pressure associated with systemic
urocortin, suggesting that CRHR2 mediates these peripheral human dynamic
effects. Moreover, Crhr2 -/- mice have elevated basal blood pressure,
demonstrating that CRHR2 participates in cardiovascular homeostasis.

Bale et al. (2000) generated Crhr2 -/- mice by targeted disruption. They
found that Crhr2 -/- mice were hypersensitive to stress and displayed
increased anxiety-like behavior. Mutant mice had normal basal feeding
and weight gain but decreased food intake following food deprivation.
Intravenously injected urocortin produced no effect on mean arterial
pressure in the mutant mice.

Kishimoto et al. (2000) generated mice deficient for Crhr2 by targeted
disruption. They reported that male but not female Crhr2-deficient mice
exhibited enhanced anxious behavior in several tests of anxiety in
contrast to mice lacking Crhr1. The enhanced anxiety of Crhr2-deficient
mice was not due to changes in hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
activity, but rather reflected impaired responses in specific brain
regions involved in emotional and autonomic functions, as monitored by a
reduction in Creb phosphorylation in male, but not female, Crhr2 -/-
mice. Kishimoto et al. (2000) proposed that CRHR1 predominantly mediates
a central anxiolytic response, opposing the general anxiogenic effect of
CRH mediated by CRHR1. Kishimoto et al. (2000) found that neither male
nor female Crhr2-deficient mice showed alterations of baseline feeding
behavior. Both responded with increased edema formation in response to
thermal exposure, however, indicating that in contrast to its central
role in anxiety, the peripheral role of CRHR2 in vascular permeability
is independent of gender.

REFERENCE 1. Bale, T. L.; Contarino, A.; Smith, G. W.; Chan, R.; Gold, L. H.;
Sawchenko, P. E.; Koob, G. F.; Vale, W. W.; Lee, K.-F.: Mice deficient
for corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor-2 display anxiety-like
behaviour and are hypersensitive to stress. Nature Genet. 24: 410-414,
2000.

2. Coste, S. C.; Kesterson, R. A.; Heldwein, K. A.; Stevens, S. L.;
Heard, A. D.; Hollis, J. H.; Murray, S. E.; Hill, J. K.; Pantely,
G. A.; Hohimer, A. R.; Hatton, D. C.; Phillips, T. J.; Finn, D. A.;
Low, M. J.; Rittenberg, M. B.; Stenzel, P.; Stenzel-Poore, M. P.:
Abnormal adaptations to stress and impaired cardiovascular function
in mice lacking corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor-2. Nature
Genet. 24: 403-409, 2000.

3. Hsu, S. Y.; Hsueh, A. J. W.: Human stresscopin and stresscopin-related
peptide are selective ligands for the type 2 corticotropin-releasing
hormone receptor. Nature Med. 7: 605-611, 2001.

4. Kishimoto, T.; Radulovic, J.; Radulovic, M.; Lin, C. R.; Schrick,
C.; Hooshmand, F.; Hermanson, O.; Rosenfeld, M. G.; Spiess, J.: Deletion
of Crhr2 reveals an anxiolytic role for corticotropin-releasing hormone
receptor-2. Nature Genet. 24: 415-419, 2000.

5. Kostich, W. A.; Chen, A.; Sperle, K.; Largent, B. L.: Molecular
identification and analysis of a novel human corticotropin-releasing
factor (CRF) receptor: the CRF2-gamma receptor. Molec. Endocr. 12:
1077-1085, 1998.

6. Lemos, J. C.; Wanat, M. J.; Smith, J. S.; Reyes, B. A. S.; Hollon,
N. G.; Van Bockstaele, E. J.; Chavkin, C.; Phillips, P. E. M.: Severe
stress switches CRF action in the nucleus accumbens from appetitive
to aversive. Nature 490: 402-406, 2012.

7. Lesh, J. S.; Burrows, H. L.; Seasholtz, A. F.; Camper, S. A.:
Mapping of the mouse corticotropin-releasing hormone receptor 2 gene
(Crhr2) to chromosome 6. Mammalian Genome 8: 944-945, 1997.

8. Liaw, C. W.; Grigoriadis, D. E.; Lovenberg, T. W.; De Souza, E.
B.; Maki, R. A.: Localization of ligand-binding domains of human
corticotropin-releasing factor receptor: a chimeric receptor approach. Molec.
Endocr. 11: 980-985, 1997.

9. Liaw, C. W.; Lovenberg, T. W.; Barry, G.; Oltersdorf, T.; Grigoriadis,
D. E.; De Souza, E. B.: Cloning and characterization of the human
corticotropin-releasing factor-2 receptor complementary deoxyribonucleic
acid. Endocrinology 137: 72-77, 1996.

10. Meyer, A. H.; Ullmer, C.; Schmuck, K.; Morel, C.; Wishart, W.;
Lubbert, H.; Engels, P.: Localization of the human CRF2 receptor
to 7p21-p15 by radiation hybrid mapping and FISH analysis. Genomics 40:
189-190, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/1/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/2/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/30/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/15/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/27/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/8/1997

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 10/8/1997

EDITED alopez: 11/01/2012
terry: 11/1/2012
carol: 2/22/2012
alopez: 3/15/2010
alopez: 5/3/2001
terry: 5/2/2001
alopez: 3/31/2000
terry: 3/30/2000
carol: 7/23/1999
mgross: 4/16/1999
mgross: 4/15/1999
mark: 2/2/1998
alopez: 1/29/1998
terry: 1/27/1998
dholmes: 11/26/1997
alopez: 10/10/1997
alopez: 10/8/1997

604926	TITLE *604926 PHOSPHATE CYTIDYLYLTRANSFERASE 1, CHOLINE, BETA ISOFORM; PCYT1B
DESCRIPTION CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase (CT; EC 2.7.7.15) is a key
regulator of phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis; see PCYT1A (123695).

By searching EST databases for CT-like cDNAs, Lykidis et al. (1998)
identified a sequence encoding PCYT1B. Sequence analysis of the deduced
330-amino acid protein showed that the catalytic core and helical domain
of PCYT1B are nearly identical to those of PCYT1A. The N-terminal
domain, however, lacks the nuclear localization motif found in PCYT1A.
The C terminus of PCYT1B is shorter than that of PCYT1A and has only 3
rather than the 16 serine residues of PCYT1A that are potential
phosphorylation sites. Northern blot analysis revealed ubiquitous
expression of approximately 6.5-, 1.9-, and 1.1-kb PCYT1B transcripts
that were most abundant in testis, placenta, brain, ovary, and all fetal
tissues tested. Like PCYT1A, PCYT1B has CT activity that is dependent on
the presence of stimulatory lipids. SDS-PAGE and immunoblot analyses
indicated that PCYT1B is expressed both as a 35-kD and a 42-kD protein,
with an apparent posttranslational modification of the first 26 amino
acids accounting for expression of the second form. Immunofluorescence
microscopy showed that PCYT1B is localized in the cytoplasm.

REFERENCE 1. Lykidis, A.; Murti, K. G.; Jackowski, S.: Cloning and characterization
of a second human CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase. J. Biol.
Chem. 273: 14022-14029, 1998. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem. 273:
19357 only, 1998.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/5/2000

EDITED terry: 04/01/2013
carol: 5/8/2000

605744	TITLE *605744 EXOSTOSIN-LIKE GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE 3; EXTL3
;;EXOSTOSIN-LIKE 3;;
MULTIPLE EXOSTOSES-LIKE 3;;
EXT-RELATED GENE 1; EXTR1;;
REG PROTEIN RECEPTOR, RAT, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By EST database searching with the sequences of EXT1 (608177), EXT2
(608210), and EXTL1 (601738), followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE,
Saito et al. (1998) cloned full-length cDNAs for 2 new members of the
EXT family, EXTL2 (602411) and EXTL3, which they called EXTR2 and EXTR1,
respectively. The deduced 919-amino acid EXTL3 protein contains a highly
conserved region in the C terminus common to other EXT proteins.
Northern blot analysis detected expression of 6.2- and 4.7-kb EXTR1
transcripts in all tissues tested except ovary. The larger transcript
was predominant in brain, skeletal muscle, and testis, and the shorter
transcript in heart, liver, thymus, and prostate.

Kobayashi et al. (2000) isolated a cDNA for a REG protein (see 167770)
receptor from a rat islet cDNA library. Cells into which the cDNA had
been introduced bound REG protein with high affinity. When the cDNA was
introduced into a pancreatic beta-cell line that showed REG-dependent
growth, the transformants exhibited a significant increase in the
incorporation of 5-prime-bromo-2-prime-deoxyuridine as well as in the
cell numbers in response to REG protein. A homology search revealed that
the rat REG protein receptor cDNA is a homolog of EXTL3. The rat and
human proteins share 97% sequence identity. Kobayashi et al. (2000)
found that REG receptor mRNA in the rat is detectable in liver, kidney,
stomach, small intestine, colon, adrenal gland, pituitary gland, and
brain, but not in heart, suggesting the possible involvement of the
REG-REG protein receptor signal system in a variety of cell types other
than pancreatic beta cells.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid and radiation hybrid analyses, Saito et al.
(1998) mapped the human EXTL3 gene to chromosome 8p21. By FISH,
radiation hybrid analysis, and inclusion within a mapped contig, Van Hul
et al. (1998) mapped the gene to 8p21-p12.

REFERENCE 1. Kobayashi, S.; Akiyama, T.; Nata, K.; Abe, M.; Tajima, M.; Shervani,
N. J.; Unno, M.; Matsuno, S.; Sasaki, H.; Takasawa, S.; Okamoto, H.
: Identification of a receptor for Reg (regenerating gene) protein,
a pancreatic beta-cell regeneration factor. J. Biol. Chem. 275:
10723-10726, 2000.

2. Saito, T.; Seki, N.; Yamauchi, M.; Tsuji, S.; Hayashi, A.; Kozuma,
S.; Hori, T.: Structure, chromosomal location, and expression profile
of EXTR1 and EXTR2, new members of the multiple exostoses gene family. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 243: 61-66, 1998.

3. Van Hul, W.; Wuyts, W.; Hendrickx, J.; Speleman, F.; Wauters, J.;
De Boulle, K.; Van Roy, N.; Bossuyt, P.; Willems, P. J.: Identification
of a third EXT-like gene (EXTL3) belonging to the EXT gene family. Genomics 47:
230-237, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 5/29/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/19/2001

EDITED carol: 10/11/2013
ckniffin: 10/30/2003
mcapotos: 5/30/2001
carol: 5/29/2001
terry: 3/21/2001
carol: 3/19/2001

605710	TITLE *605710 GDNF FAMILY RECEPTOR ALPHA-3; GFRA3
;;GLIAL CELL LINE-DERIVED NEUROTROPHIC FACTOR RECEPTOR ALPHA-3
DESCRIPTION Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF; 600837) and neurturin
(NRTN; 602018) promote the survival and maintenance of different
neuronal cell types. GDNF signals through a receptor complex composed of
a GDNF family receptor and the membrane-bound protein tyrosine-kinase
receptor RET (164761).

CLONING

Masure et al. (1998) and Baloh et al. (1998) identified a novel member
of the GDNF receptor family, GFRA3, by screening databases for sequences
similar to GFRA1 (601496) and GFRA2 (601956). Masure et al. (1998) found
that the full-length GFRA3 cDNA sequence encodes a 400-amino acid
protein with a putative 26-amino acid signal peptide, a C-terminal
hydrophobic region, and 3 potential N-glycosylation sites. GFRA3 shares
approximately 35% amino acid identity with GFRA1 and GFRA2. There is
conservation of 28 cysteines between all 3 family members, suggesting
that the disulfide bond pairing has been conserved. Both Masure et al.
(1998) and Baloh et al. (1998) determined that GFRA3, like GFRA1 and
GFRA2, is a multiply N-glycosylated protein that is
glycosyl-phosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored to the cell surface. Masure
et al. (1998) identified N-glycosylated forms of GFRA3 ranging from 43
to 62 kD.

By Northern blot analysis, Masure et al. (1998) detected expression of
GFRA3 in human tissues as an approximately 2.3-kb transcript
predominantly in spinal cord, with weak expression in cerebellum; in
peripheral tissues, high expression was detected in colon, small
intestine, pancreas, heart, testis, and prostate. Additional 1.3- and
1.6-kb transcripts were detected in testis and pancreas. Using RT-PCR of
different brain regions, Masure et al. (1998) detected highest
expression in cerebellum and spinal cord, with little expression in
other brain areas. They confirmed expression of GFRA3 in cerebellum by
in situ hybridization. However, by Northern blot analysis, Baloh et al.
(1998) found no expression of GFRA3 in human whole brain or in any of 13
subdissected regions of the adult brain. They found expression in a wide
range of tissues, including the stomach, colon, small intestine,
appendix, and the urogenital system. By in situ hybridization of
embryonic day 14 mice, they detected expression of Gfra3 in developing
peripheral nerve, sensory ganglia, and sympathetic ganglia. Consistent
with their Northern blot data from human tissues, they found no
expression in mouse brain.

GENE FUNCTION

From studies in transfected fibroblasts, Baloh et al. (1998) concluded
that GFRA3 does not form a signaling receptor complex with RET for GDNF,
NRTN, or PSPN (602921). Baloh et al. (1998) determined that artemin
(ARTN; 603886), a novel member of the GDNF family, is a ligand for
GFRA3-RET.

GENE STRUCTURE

Onochie et al. (2000) characterized the structure of the human GFRA3
gene. The gene has 8 coding exons and a gene structure and organization
similar to that of GFRA1. The authors identified 3 polymorphic variants
in GFRA3 in a normal control population and found the same variants in
patients with Hirschsprung disease, but found no correlation between
these variants and the Hirschsprung disease phenotype.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Masure et al. (1998) and Baloh et
al. (1998) mapped the GFRA3 gene to 5q31.1-q31.3 and 5q31.2-q32,
respectively.

ANIMAL MODEL

Nishino et al. (1999) examined the role of Gfra3 in nervous system
development by generating mice with a disrupted Gfra3 gene. Mice lacking
functional Gfra3 exhibited severe defects in the superior cervical
ganglion (SCG), whereas other ganglia appeared normal. SCG precursor
cells in the mutant embryos failed to migrate to the correct position,
and they subsequently failed to innervate the target organs. After
birth, SCG neurons underwent progressive cell death. These observations
suggested that GFRA3-mediated signaling is required both for the rostral
migration of SCG precursors and for the survival of mature SCG neurons.

REFERENCE 1. Baloh, R. H.; Gorodinsky, A.; Golden, J. P.; Tansey, M. G.; Keck,
C. L.; Popescu, N. C.; Johnson, E. M., Jr.; Milbrandt, J.: GFR-alpha-3
is an orphan member of the GDNF/neurturin/persephin receptor family. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 5801-5806, 1998.

2. Baloh, R. H.; Tansey, M. G.; Lampe, P. A.; Fahrner, T. J.; Enomoto,
H.; Simburger, K. S.; Leitner, M. L.; Araki, T.; Johnson, E. M., Jr.;
Milbrandt, J.: Artemin, a novel member of the GDNF ligand family,
supports peripheral and central neurons and signals through the GFR-alpha-3-RET
receptor complex. Neuron 21: 1291-1302, 1998.

3. Masure, S.; Cik, M.; Pangalos, M. N.; Bonaventure, P.; Verhasselt,
P.; Lesage, A. S. J.; Leysen, J. E.; Gordon, R. D.: Molecular cloning,
expression and tissue distribution of glial-cell-line-derived neurotrophic
factor family receptor alpha-3 (GFR-alpha-3). Europ. J. Biochem. 251:
622-630, 1998.

4. Nishino, J.; Mochida, K.; Ohfuji, Y.; Shimazaki, T.; Meno, C.;
Ohishi, S.; Matsuda, Y.; Fujii, H.; Saijoh, Y.; Hamada, H.: GFR-alpha-3,
a component of the artemin receptor, is required for migration and
survival of the superior cervical ganglion. Neuron 23: 725-736,
1999.

5. Onochie, C. I.; Korngut, L. M.; Vanhorne, J. B.; Myers, S. M.;
Michaud, D.; Mulligan, L. M.: Characterisation of the human GFR-alpha-3
locus and investigation of the gene in Hirschsprung disease. J. Med.
Genet. 37: 674-679, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Michael J. Wright  - updated: 8/9/2001

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 3/1/2001

EDITED alopez: 07/17/2009
cwells: 8/16/2001
cwells: 8/14/2001
terry: 8/9/2001
carol: 3/5/2001
carol: 3/2/2001

300737	TITLE *300737 G ANTIGEN 10; GAGE10
DESCRIPTION See GAGE1 (300594) for more information about the GAGE gene cluster.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gjerstorff and Ditzel (2008) reported that the GAGE10 gene has an 8.9-kb
insertion relative to other genes in the GAGE gene cluster. The GAGE10
gene contains 5 exons spanning about 12.7 kb and has a LINE insertion.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Gjerstorff and Ditzel (2008) mapped the
GAGE10 gene to the 5-prime end of a GAGE gene cluster on chromosome
Xp11.23.

REFERENCE 1. Gjerstorff, M. F.; Ditzel, H. J.: An overview of the GAGE cancer/testis
antigen family with the inclusion of newly identified members. Tissue
Antigens 71: 187-192, 2008.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/6/2008

EDITED wwang: 08/18/2008
wwang: 8/6/2008

613664	TITLE *613664 SMOOTHELIN-LIKE 1; SMTNL1
;;CALPONIN HOMOLOGY-ASSOCIATED SMOOTH MUSCLE PROTEIN; CHASM
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SMTNL1, which is a member of the smoothelin (SMTN; 602127) family,
regulates contraction and relaxation of skeletal and smooth muscle
fibers and mediates vascular adaptation to exercise (Wooldridge et al.,
2008).

CLONING

Borman et al. (2004) cloned mouse Smtnl1, which they called Chasm. The
deduced 459-amino acid protein contains a C-terminal calponin homology
(CH) domain and a single potential serine phosphorylation site.

Using Western blot analysis, Wooldridge et al. (2008) showed that Smtnl1
was expressed in mouse skeletal muscle and heart and in tissues
containing smooth muscle. Smtnl1 was preferentially expressed in
striated muscles containing type 1 or type 2a fibers. Immunofluorescence
confocal microscopy revealed that Smtnl1 localized to the I band and M
line, but was absent in the Z line. In human muscle, SMTNL1 expression
appeared specific to type 2a fibers.

GENE FUNCTION

Smooth muscle can relax passively due to removal of the contractile
stimulus, or it can relax actively via cyclin nucleotide-dependent
protein kinases, such as PKA (see 176911) without a change in
contractile stimuli or intracellular calcium concentration, a phenomena
called calcium desensitization. Borman et al. (2004) showed that mouse
Chasm could relax permeabilized and submaximally contracted rabbit ileum
smooth muscle in a concentration-dependent manner. Chasm was
phosphorylated by PKA and PKG (see 176894) in vitro at the single serine
phosphorylation site, and Chasm was phosphorylated during the early
stages of smooth muscle relaxation.

Wooldridge et al. (2008) found that dephosphorylated mouse Smtnl1
inhibited the activity of mouse myosin phosphatase (see 603768), while
phosphorylation of Smtnl1 by PKA or PKG inactivated Smtnl1 and permitted
myosin dephosphorylation. In both isolated smooth and striated mouse
muscle, Smtnl1 was serine phosphorylated in response to agonists that
elevate intracellular cAMP or cGMP. Maximal phosphorylation of Smtnl1
correlated with maximal relaxation of aorta in response to
acetylcholine.

Lontay et al. (2010) showed that the expression of SMTNL1 was
upregulated in uterus during pregnancy in humans and mice. In mice,
pregnancy induced the expression of Smtnl1 in vascular and uterine
smooth muscle and in type 2a skeletal muscle fibers, and appeared to be
regulated by sex hormones. A concomitant increase in the myosin
phosphatase subunit Mypt1 (PPP1R12A; 602021) was also observed.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments and immunofluorescence microscopy
revealed that Smtnl1 bound and colocalized with Mypt1 in diffuse
cytosolic and discrete nuclear localizations. Agonist-dependent
phosphorylation of Smtnl1 resulted in its nuclear translocation.

MAPPING

Hartz (2010) mapped the SMTNL1 gene to chromosome 11q12.1 based on an
alignment of the SMTNL1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AA111832) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

ANIMAL MODEL

Wooldridge et al. (2008) found that deletion of Smtnl1 in mice had no
effect on basal activity, litter size, or embryonic development.
However, Smtnl1 -/- mice showed a PKA/PKG-mediated adaption to exercise,
exhibiting better exercise performance and improved
vasorelaxation/contractile responses compared with wildtype littermates.
Expression of Smtnl1 in wildtype animals was reduced with exercise, and
this effect was stronger in female mice. Vascular smooth muscle from
sedentary and exercise-trained female Smtnl1 -/- mice exhibited more
significant changes in responsiveness to beta- and alpha-adrenergic
agonists than their male counterparts. Exercise also induced more
significant reduction of Smtnl1 expression in females compared with
males. Striated muscle from male Smtnl1 -/- mice showed a greater
tendency to switch to an oxidative phenotype. Wooldridge et al. (2008)
concluded that receptor-mediated pathways can acutely regulate SMTNL1
function through serine phosphorylation, whereas exercise achieves the
same effect by reducing SMTNL1 expression.

Lontay et al. (2010) found that pregnant Smtnl1 -/- mice showed
increased expression of Mypt1 in vascular and uterine smooth muscle, and
isolated thoracic aorta from pregnant Smtn1l -/- females showed profound
reduction in isometric force compared with aorta from pregnant wildtype
females.

REFERENCE 1. Borman, M. A.; MacDonald, J. A.; Haystead, T. A. J.: Modulation
of smooth muscle contractility by CHASM, a novel member of the smoothelin
family of proteins. FEBS Lett. 573: 207-213, 2004.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  12/2/2010.

3. Lontay, B.; Bodoor, K.; Weitzel, D. H.; Loiselle, D.; Fortner,
C.; Lengyel, S.; Zheng, D.; Devente, J.; Hickner, R.; Haystead, T.
A. J.: Smoothelin-like 1 protein regulates myosin phosphatase-targeting
subunit 1 expression during sexual development and pregnancy. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 29357-29366, 2010.

4. Wooldridge, A. A.; Fortner, C. N.; Lontay, B.; Akimoto, T.; Neppl,
R. L.; Facemire, C.; Datto, M. B.; Kwon, A.; McCook, E.; Li, P.; Wang,
S.; Thresher, R. J.; Miller, S. E.; Perriard, J.-C.; Gavin, T. P.;
Hickner, R. C.; Coffman, T. M.; Somlyo, A. V.; Yan, Z.; Haystead,
T. A. J.: Deletion of the protein kinase A/protein kinase G target
SMTNL1 promotes an exercise-adapted phenotype in vascular smooth muscle. J.
Biol. Chem. 283: 11850-11859, 2008.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/9/2010

EDITED terry: 02/25/2011
wwang: 12/27/2010
wwang: 12/9/2010

194541	TITLE *194541 ZINC FINGER- AND BTB DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 25; ZBTB25
;;ZINC FINGER PROTEIN KUP; KUP;;
ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 46, FORMERLY; ZNF46, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Chardin et al. (1991) isolated a human cDNA encoding a protein with 2
zinc fingers in its C-terminal part, which they named KUP for
Kruppel-related protein. Genomic sequences hybridizing with the human
KUP probe were found in rat and mouse. The highest levels of expression
of the gene were found in testis, fetal liver, and hematopoietic cells.
The KUP protein is 433 amino acids long, has a molecular weight of about
50 kD, and binds to DNA. Its structure, resembling that of the Kruppel
family, suggests that it is also a transcription factor.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a systems analysis of transcriptional regulators within T cells
during different phases of development and differentiation, Benita et
al. (2010) identified ZBTB25, a BTB-POZ family transcription factor, as
a highly T cell-enriched transcription factor. They provided evidence
that ZBTB25 negatively regulates NFAT (see 600489) activation, including
RNA interference studies showing ZBTB25 knockdown resulted in enhanced
activation of NFAT target genes after T-cell receptor engagement. Benita
et al. (2010) concluded that ZBTB25 has a role in NFAT-mediated gene
expression.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Chardin et al. (1991) assigned the ZNF46 gene
to chromosome 14q23-q24.

REFERENCE 1. Benita, Y.; Cao, Z.; Giallourakis, C.; Li, C.; Gardet, A.; Xavier,
R. J.: Gene enrichment profiles reveal T-cell development, differentiation,
and lineage-specific transcription factors including ZBTB25 as a novel
NF-AT repressor. Blood 115: 5376-5384, 2010.

2. Chardin, P.; Courtois, G.; Mattei, M.-G.; Gisselbrecht, S.: The
KUP gene, located on human chromosome 14, encodes a protein with two
distant zinc fingers. Nucleic Acids Res. 19: 1431-1436, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/7/2011

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1991

EDITED mgross: 01/04/2012
terry: 12/7/2011
alopez: 7/6/2010
dkim: 6/26/1998
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 12/4/1991
supermim: 6/4/1991

614277	TITLE *614277 UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME 2W; UBE2W
;;UBC16, ARABIDOPSIS, HOMOLOG OF; UBC16
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ubiquitination is a common posttranslational modification that plays
roles in many cellular pathways and in protein degradation. Conjugation
of ubiquitin to substrate proteins requires an E1 ubiquitin-activating
enzyme (e.g., UBE1; 314370), an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (e.g.,
UBE2A; 312180), and an E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase (e.g., UBE3A;
601623). UBE2W is an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (summary by Zhang
et al., 2011).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a human fetal brain cDNA library, Yin
et al. (2006) cloned UBE2W, which they called UBC16. The deduced
162-amino acid protein has an approximately 150-amino acid catalytic
core, termed the E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (UBC) domain, which
contains 2 nuclear localization signals at its C-terminal end. Human
UBC16 shares 51% amino acid identity with Arabidopsis Ubc16. RT-PCR
detected ubiquitous UBC16 expression, with highest expression in heart,
brain, liver, and pancreas. Fluorescence-tagged UBC16 localized to
nuclei of transfected HEK293 cells.

GENE FUNCTION

By mutation analysis, Yin et al. (2006) showed that nuclear localization
of human UBC in transfected HEK293 cells required both the nuclear
localization signals and enzyme activity.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Zhang et al. (2011) showed that mouse
Ube2w interacted with Fancl (608111), an E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in
DNA damage repair. They confirmed the interaction by protein pull-down
and coimmunoprecipitation analyses. Fancl showed a ubiquitous
intracellular localization in the absence of Ube2w and a nuclear
localization in the presence of Ube2w. Ube2w formed nuclear homodimers.
Ube2w exhibited ubiquitin-conjugating activity and monoubiquitinated the
PHD domain of Fancl in vitro. Ubiquitination by Ube2w required a
conserved active-site cysteine within its ubiquitin-conjugating domain.
Ube2w also monoubiquitinated Fancd2 (613984). Downregulation of UBE2W in
human cell lines markedly reduced FANCD2 monoubiquitination caused by
ultraviolet irradiation, but not FANCD2 monoubiquitination caused by the
DNA crosslinking agent mitomycin C or FANCD2 monoubiquitination that
occurs normally during S phase.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yin et al. (2006) determined that the UBE2W gene contains 7 exons and
spans 8.6 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Yin et al. (2006) mapped the UBE2W gene to
chromosome 8q13-q21.1.

REFERENCE 1. Yin, G.; Ji, C.; Wu, T.; Shen, Z.; Xu, X.; Xie, Y.; Mao, Y.: Cloning,
characterization and subcellular localization of a gene encoding a
human ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2) homologous to the Arabidopsis
thaliana UBC-16 gene product. Front. Biosci. 11: 1500-1507, 2006.

2. Zhang, Y.; Zhou, X.; Zhao, L.; Li, C.; Zhu, H.; Xu, L.; Shan, L.;
Liao, X.; Guo, Z.; Huang, P.: UBE2W interacts with FANCL and regulates
the monoubiquitination of Fanconi anemia protein FANCD2. Molec. Cells 31:
113-122, 2011.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/2/2011

EDITED joanna: 11/03/2011
mgross: 11/2/2011
carol: 11/1/2011

180490	TITLE *180490 RIBOPHORIN II; RPN2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The RPN2 gene encodes ribophorin II, which is involved in ribosome
binding. Ribophorin I (RPN1; 180470) and RPN2 are abundant, highly
conserved glycoproteins located exclusively in the membranes of the
rough endoplasmic reticulum (Crimaudo et al., 1987).

CLONING

Using probes derived from a human liver expression library, Crimaudo et
al. (1987) isolated and sequenced full-length human cDNA clones encoding
ribophorins I and II. The cDNA clones hybridized to mRNA species of 2.5
kb and encoded polypeptides of 68.5 and 69.3 kD, respectively. Sequence
comparisons and immunoblotting with specific antibodies showed both
proteins to be highly conserved throughout a variety of species.
However, no relationship between the 2 proteins could be deduced from
their primary sequences.

MAPPING

Using cDNAs in the study of a panel of somatic cell hybrids, Barton et
al. (1987) mapped RPN2 to chromosome 20. Loffler et al. (1991) mapped
the RPN2 gene to 20q12-q13.1 by in situ hybridization.

GENE FUNCTION

Kelleher et al. (1992) reported that mammalian oligosaccharyltransferase
activity is associated with a protein complex composed of ribophorin I,
ribophorin II, and a 48-kD oligosaccharyltransferase protein (602202).

Among 44 women with breast cancer (114480), Honma et al. (2008) observed
a significant association (p = 0.0052) between increased expression of
RPN2 in cancer tissue and decreased clinical response to the
antimicrotubule chemotherapeutic agent docetaxel. Small interfering RNA
(siRNA) targeting RPN2 significantly promoted docetaxel-dependent
apoptosis and cell growth inhibition of docetaxel-resistant human breast
cancer cells in vitro. In vivo atelocollagen delivery of RPN2 siRNA
significantly reduced drug-resistant tumor growth in mice given
docetaxel. Further studies indicated that RPN2 conferred drug resistance
via increased glycosylation of P-glycoproteins. Honma et al. (2008)
concluded that RPN2 siRNA introduction may hypersensitize cancer cell
responses to chemotherapeutic agents.

REFERENCE 1. Barton, D. E.; Crimaudo, C.; Hortsch, M.; Francke, U.: The genes
for ribophorins I and II are on human chromosomes 3q and 20 and mouse
chromosomes 6 and 12, respectively. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46:
577 only, 1987.

2. Crimaudo, C.; Hortsch, M.; Gausepohl, H.; Meyer, D. I.: Human
ribophorins I and II: the primary structure and membrane topology
of two highly conserved round endoplasmic reticulum-specific glycoproteins. EMBO
J. 6: 75-82, 1987.

3. Honma, K.; Iwao-Koizumi, K.; Takeshita, F.; Yamamoto, Y.; Yoshida,
T.; Nishio, K.; Nagahara, S.; Kato, K.; Ochiya, T.: RPN2 gene confers
docetaxel resistance in breast cancer. Nature Med. 14: 939-948,
2008. Note: Erratum: Nature Med. 14: 1128 only, 2008.

4. Kelleher, D. J.; Kreibich, G.; Gilmore, R.: Oligosaccharyltransferase
activity is associated with a protein complex composed of ribophorins
I and II and a 48 kd protein. Cell 69: 55-65, 1992.

5. Loffler, C.; Gopal Rao, V. V. N.; Hansmann, I.: Mapping of the
ribophorin II (RPN II) gene to human chromosome 20q12-q13.1 by in-situ
hybridization. Hum. Genet. 87: 221-222, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/24/2008

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/26/1987

EDITED terry: 09/14/2012
wwang: 9/25/2008
ckniffin: 9/24/2008
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 12/2/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 6/20/1988
marie: 3/25/1988

612358	TITLE *612358 KININOGEN 1; KNG1
;;KININOGEN; KNG
HIGH MOLECULAR WEIGHT KININOGEN, INCLUDED; HMWK, INCLUDED; HK, INCLUDED;;
LOW MOLECULAR WEIGHT KININOGEN, INCLUDED; LMWK, INCLUDED; LK, INCLUDED;;
BRADYKININ, INCLUDED; BK, INCLUDED;;
FITZGERALD FACTOR, INCLUDED;;
FLAUJEAC FACTOR, INCLUDED;;
WILLIAMS FACTOR, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

High molecular weight kininogen (HMWK) plays an important role in
assembly of the plasma kallikrein (see 147910)-kinin system. The KNG1
gene generates both HMWK and low molecular weight kininogen (LMWK)
through alternative splicing. Both HMWK and LMWK contain an identical
heavy chain consisting of protein domains 1, 2, and 3. However, HMWK
contains a 56-kD light chain that consists of domains 5 and 6H, whereas
LMWK contains a unique 4-kD light chain that consists of domain 5L. In
both proteins, the heavy and light chains are linked by domain 4, which
contains the bradykinin (BK) nonapeptide. BK, which is released by
plasma kallikrein, is a potent inflammatory mediator that causes
vasodilation and enhanced capillary permeability, induces pain, and
stimulates production of nitric oxide and prostacyclin (see 601699) from
endothelial cells. During vascular damage, BK stimulates smooth muscle
proliferation and intimal hypertrophy. Release of BK from HMWK generates
a 2-chain HMWK, termed HMWKa, containing the heavy and light chains
joined by a disulfide bond (Merkulov et al., 2008).

CLONING

In the 1970s, a number of similar patients with abnormal coagulation
tests but no apparent bleeding tendency were identified and described as
lacking a coagulation factor variously termed Fitzgerald factor,
Flaujeac factor, or Williams factor, among other names (see 228960). At
first the nature of these factors was uncertain, but further studies
showed that they were identical to high molecular weight kininogen
(Davie, 1979; Giangrande, 2003).

Takagaki et al. (1985) isolated human cDNAs encoding the HMW and LMW
prekininogens. They determined that the HMW and LMW prekininogen mRNAs
are identical throughout the 5-prime UTR and the protein-coding region
up to the sequence encoding the 12 amino acids distal to the BK
sequence, after which the 2 mRNAs completely diverge. The HMW and LMW
prekininogens contain 626 and 427 amino acids, respectively. They share
a common signal peptide, heavy chain, and BK moiety, which consist of
18, 362, and 9 amino acids, respectively. The unique light chains of HMW
and LMW prekininogens consist of 255 and 38 amino acids, respectively.
There are 17 cysteines in both the bovine and human heavy chain,
indicating that the human heavy chain, like its bovine counterpart, can
form 8 loops, each connected by 2 adjacent cysteines.

Merkulov et al. (2008) determined that the mouse genome contains 2
kininogen genes, Kng1 and Kng2, that are 91% identical. Using RT-PCR,
they found that Kng1 was expressed predominantly in liver and adrenal
gland, whereas Kng2 was expressed predominantly in kidney, with lower
expression in liver.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kitamura et al. (1985) determined that the KNG1 gene contains 11 exons
and spans 27 kb. Exons 1 through 9 encode the 5-prime UTR and the signal
peptide and heavy chain sequences common to both HMWK and LMWK. Exon 10
encodes the common sequence for BK and the unique sequence for HMWK, and
exon 11 encodes the unique sequence for LMWK.

MAPPING

Fong et al. (1991) mapped the KNG gene to chromosome 3 using
human-hamster somatic cell hybrids and the PCR of hybrid DNA with
gene-specific primers. KNG was further assigned to chromosome 3q26-qter
using DNA from a second panel of chromosome 3 deletion mapping cell
hybrids. Cheung et al. (1992) also mapped the KNG gene to chromosome
3q26-qter by in situ hybridization. The assignment substantiated the
evolutionary relationship of kininogen to 2 other members of the
cystatin superfamily, alpha-2HS-glycoprotein (AHSG; 138680) and
histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG; 142640), which also map to the long
arm of chromosome 3.

Merkulov et al. (2008) determined that the 2 mouse kininogen genes, Kng1
and Kng2, are located in a head-to-head orientation on chromosome 16.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Cheung et al. (1993) demonstrated that Ms. Williams, the patient with
total kininogen deficiency (228960) reported by Colman et al. (1975),
was homozygous for a nonsense mutation in the KNG1 gene (612358.0001).

Krijanovski et al. (2003) found that a 6-year-old boy with cerebral
artery thrombosis and HMWK deficiency was homozygous for a 1-bp deletion
of 1492A in the KNG1 gene (612358.0002), corresponding to amino acid 480
of the mature protein. The mutation resulted in a frameshift and
premature termination at amino acid 532 of the mature protein. Each
parent and a sib were heterozygous for the mutation. Krijanovski et al.
(2003) found that truncation or frameshift at or before position 480 of
mature HMWK prevented biosynthesis, processing, and/or secretion of the
protein into plasma. Krijanovski et al. (2003) also identified the
causative mutation in Fitzgerald trait as a 17-bp substitution in intron
9 of the KNG1 gene (612358.0003). They provided a diagram comparing the
molecular defects of Williams trait (612358.0001), their reported
deletion of 1492A, and Fitzgerald trait with normal HMWK.

Using immunoblot and Southern blot analyses, Hayashi et al. (1990)
detected no molecular abnormality of kininogen in the DNA from patients
from 4 Japanese families with total kininogen deficiency or from 1
patient with isolated HMWK deficiency. However, in the patient with
isolated HMWK deficiency, a partial deletion in intron 7 was found by
restriction analysis. This partial deletion was assumed to be related to
an abnormality of alternative splicing of HMW prekininogen mRNA.
However, Shigekiyo et al. (2007) found that this patient with isolated
HMWK deficiency was homozygous for a 1-bp insertion (C) at nucleotide
1217 in exon 10 of the KNG1 gene (612358.0004). The insertion resulted
in a frameshift in codon 406 and a premature stop signal in codon 415.
The patient's parents and brother were heterozygous for the mutation.

- Association with Decreased Activated Partial Thromboplastin
Time

Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) is considered a global test
of thrombotic tendency. A shortened aPTT is associated with an increased
risk of thrombosis as well as several prothrombotic risk factors
including age, female sex, estrogen use, and obesity. Prolonged aPTT is
an indicator of coagulation disorders in patients with deficiencies of
factors in the intrinsic pathways of coagulation. Houlihan et al. (2010)
conducted a genomewide association study for activated partial
thromboplastin time (aPTT) in a total of 1,477 relatively healthy adults
from the Lothian Birth Cohorts of 1936 (LBC1936) and 1921 (LBC1921). A
highly significant association with a relatively large effect size was
found between aPTT and a SNP in the KNG1 gene, dbSNP rs710446 (combined
p = 9.52 x 10(-22)). The SNP dbSNP rs710446 represents a missense
change, ile581 to thr (I581T, 1742T-C), in exon 10 of kininogen 1
isoform 1. The effects of dbSNP rs710446 were additive, with each G
allele decreasing aPTT by 0.36 standard deviations. This SNP explained
5.2% and 8.1% of the variance in aPTT in LBC1936 and LBC1921,
respectively. Mutations in KNG1 cause high molecular weight kininogen
(HMWK) deficiency, an autosomal recessive coagulation defect; Kng1
knockout mice demonstrate prolonged aPTT and delayed arterial thrombosis
(Merkulov et al., 2008).

Among 1,542 European patients with venous thrombosis (see 188050) and
1,110 controls, Morange et al. (2011) found a significant association
between the C allele of dbSNP rs710446 and risk of thrombosis (odds
ratio (OR) of 1.196; p = 0.0012) A borderline association was observed
in a small independent sample of 590 controls and 596 patients (OR of
1.171; p = 0.059). This allele was also associated with decreased aPTT
levels. Morange et al. (2011) concluded that the I581T variant is a
genetic risk factor for venous thrombosis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Merkulov et al. (2008) found that Kng1 -/- mice were viable and appeared
normal, although they lacked plasma HMWK and LMWK. Kng1 -/- mice showed
normal tail vein bleeding times, but they displayed significantly
prolonged time to vessel occlusion in an induced arterial thrombosis
model.

NOMENCLATURE

For a historical account of the nomenclature of coagulation factors,
including high molecular weight kininogen, see Giangrande (2003).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
KININOGEN DEFICIENCY, TOTAL
KNG1, ARG196TER

In the patient (Ms. Williams) with total kininogen deficiency (228960)
reported by Colman et al. (1975) as having Williams trait, Cheung et al.
(1993) found homozygosity for a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 22 in
exon 5 (nucleotide 587 of the cDNA) of the KNG1 gene, resulting in a CGA
(arg)-to-TGA (stop) mutation in exon 5. All 3 daughters were found to be
heterozygous and a granddaughter was found to be normal. In the proband,
both high and low molecular weight kininogens were completely absent;
the 3 daughters had approximately 50% high molecular weight kininogen
and the granddaughter had normal high molecular weight kininogen. Using
the amino acid count according to Nakanishi, which includes the signal
peptide, Kunapuli (1993) determined that the amino acid altered was
arg196.

.0002
HIGH MOLECULAR WEIGHT KININOGEN DEFICIENCY
KNG1, 1-BP DEL, 1492A

Krijanovski et al. (2003) described studies of the plasma and DNA of a
6-year-old male, born of first-cousin parents, with cerebral artery
thrombosis and HMWK deficiency (228960). The previously healthy child
had headache and vomiting 10 days after moderate cerebral trauma,
followed by loss of consciousness and subsequent visual impairment. CT
scan and angiography showed extensive left vertebral-basilar artery
thrombosis and a left vertebral artery dissection. The patient had a
prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) and received
fresh frozen plasma before arteriography and then daily for 8 days,
which resulted in normalization of the APTT and resolution of neurologic
symptoms. There was full neurologic recovery with warfarin anticoagulant
therapy for 6 months, and there had been no recurrence after 2 years of
follow-up. The child had no high molecular weight kininogen procoagulant
activity and antigen (less than 1%). He was found to be homozygous for
deletion of an adenine at cDNA position 1492 in exon 10 of the KNG1
gene, corresponding to position 480 of the mature protein. The mutation
resulted in a frameshift and premature termination at amino acid 532 of
the mature protein. Each parent and a sib were heterozygous for the same
defect. Krijanovski et al. (2003) found that truncation or frameshift at
or before position 480 of mature HMWK prevented biosynthesis,
processing, and/or secretion of the protein into plasma.

.0003
HIGH MOLECULAR WEIGHT KININOGEN DEFICIENCY
KNG1, 17-BP DEL/17-BP INS, NT1559

The first plasma with HMWK deficiency (228960) to be recognized was
derived from an African American of the surname Fitzgerald (Waldmann et
al., 1975). Studying DNA prepared from a more that 25-year-old frozen
plasma specimen, Krijanovski et al. (2003) determined that the KNG1
defect in Fitzgerald trait resides in intron 9, with substitution of 17
consecutive basepairs at nucleotides 1559 through 1575. The substituted
segment had 1559T and 1575A at its 2 ends and consisted of 5 TGT
triplets, which in Fitzgerald DNA were changed to 5 GTG triplets, the
end nucleotides being changed to 1559G and 1575G. Also at nucleotide
position 1578, a GT sequence in normal DNA was changed to TG in
Fitzgerald intron 9. Furthermore, in Fitzgerald intron 9, single
basepair polymorphisms were found at nucleotide positions 119 (C to T),
1586 (T to G), and 1736 (A to G).

.0004
HIGH MOLECULAR WEIGHT KININOGEN DEFICIENCY
KNG1, 1-BP INS, 1217C

Using restriction analysis, Hayashi et al. (1990) found that a Japanese
patient with isolated HMWK deficiency (228960) had a partial deletion in
intron 7 of the KNG1 gene. This partial deletion was assumed to be
related to an abnormality of alternative splicing of HMW prekininogen
mRNA. However, Shigekiyo et al. (2007) found that this patient with
isolated HMWK deficiency was homozygous for a 1-bp insertion (C) at
nucleotide 1217 in exon 10 of the KNG1 gene. The insertion resulted in a
frameshift in codon 406 and a premature stop signal in codon 415. The
patient's brother and parents, who were second cousins, were
heterozygous for the mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Cheung, P. P.; Cannizzaro, L. A.; Colman, R. W.: Chromosomal mapping
of human kininogen gene (KNG) to 3q26-qter. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 59:
24-26, 1992.

2. Cheung, P. P.; Kunapuli, S. P.; Scott, C. F.; Wachtfogel, Y. T.;
Colman, R. W.: Genetic basis of total kininogen deficiency in Williams'
trait. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 23361-23365, 1993.

3. Colman, R. W.; Bagdasarian, A.; Talamo, R. C.; Scott, C. F.; Seavey,
M.; Guimaraes, J. A.; Pierce, J. V.; Kaplan, A. P.: Williams trait:
human kininogen deficiency with diminished levels of plasminogen proactivator
and prekallikrein associated with abnormalities of the Hageman factor
dependent pathways. J. Clin. Invest. 56: 1650-1662, 1975.

4. Davie, E. W.: Personal Communication. Seattle, Wash.  11/26/1979.

5. Fong, D.; Smith, D. I.; Hsieh, W.-T.: The human kininogen gene
(KNG) mapped to chromosome 3q26-qter by analysis of somatic cell hybrids
using the polymerase chain reaction. Hum. Genet. 87: 189-192, 1991.

6. Giangrande, P. L. F.: Six characters in search of an author: the
history of the nomenclature of coagulation factors. Brit.  J. Haemat. 121:
703-712, 2003.

7. Hayashi, H.; Ishimaru, F.; Fujita, T.; Tsurumi, N.; Tsuda, T.;
Kimura, I.: Molecular genetic survey of five Japanese families with
high molecular weight kininogen deficiency. Blood 75: 1296-1304,
1990.

8. Houlihan, L. M.; Davies, G.; Tenesa, A.; Harris, S. E.; Luciano,
M.; Gow, A. J.; McGhee, K. A.; Liewald, D. C.; Porteous, D. J.; Starr,
J.  M.; Lowe, G. D.; Visscher, P. M.; Deary, I. J.: Common variants
of large effect in F12, KNG1, and HRG are associated with activated
partial thromboplastin time. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 86: 626-631, 2010.

9. Kitamura, N.; Kitagawa, H.; Fukushima, D.; Takagaki, Y.; Miyata,
T.; Nakanishi, S.: Structural organization of the human kininogen
gene and a model for its evolution. J. Biol. Chem. 260: 8610-8617,
1985.

10. Krijanovski, Y.; Proulle, V.; Mahdi, F.; Dreyfus, M.; Muller-Esterl,
W.; Schmaier, A. H.: Characterization of molecular defects of Fitzgerald
trait and another novel high-molecular-weight kininogen-deficient
patient: insights into structural requirements for kininogen expression. Blood 101:
4430-4436, 2003.

11. Kunapuli, S. P.: Personal Communication. Philadelphia, Pa.
12/21/1993.

12. Merkulov, S.; Zhang, W.-M.; Komar, A. A.; Schmaier, A. H.; Barnes,
E.; Zhou, Y.; Lu, X.; Iwaki, T.; Castellino, F. J.; Luo, G.; McCrae,
K. R.: Deletion of murine kininogen gene 1 (mKng1) causes loss of
plasma kininogen and delays thrombosis. Blood 111: 1274-1281, 2008.

13. Morange, P.-E.; Oudot-Mellakh, T.; Cohen, W.; Germain, M.; Saut,
N.; Antoni, G.; Alessi, M.-C.; Bertrand, M.; Dupuy, A.-M.; Letenneur,
L.; Lathrop, M.; Lopez, L. M.; Lambert, J.-C.; Emmerich, J.; Amouyel,
P.; Tregouet, D.-A.: KNG1 Ile581Thr and susceptibility to venous
thrombosis. Blood 117: 3692-3694, 2011.

14. Shigekiyo, T.; Miyagi, J.; Shirakami, A.; Shibata, H.; Tsukai,
K.; Aihara, K.: Isolated high-molecular-weight kininogen deficiency:
a novel frameshift mutation in exon 10. (Letter) Blood 109: 5062-5063,
2007.

15. Takagaki, Y.; Kitamura, N.; Nakanishi, S.: Cloning and sequence
analysis of cDNAs for human high molecular weight and low molecular
weight prekininogens: primary structures of two human prekininogens. J.
Biol. Chem. 260: 8601-8609, 1985.

16. Waldmann, R.; Abraham, J. P.; Rebuck, J. W.; Caldwell, J.; Saito,
H.; Ratnoff, O. D.: Fitzgerald factor: a hitherto unrecognized coagulation
factor. Lancet 305: 949-951, 1975. Note: Originally Volume I.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/1/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/10/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/24/2008

CREATED Matthew B. Gross: 10/23/2008

EDITED ckniffin: 02/23/2012
wwang: 8/11/2011
ckniffin: 8/1/2011
alopez: 9/10/2010
alopez: 6/18/2010
terry: 6/14/2010
terry: 4/8/2009
mgross: 10/24/2008

612605	TITLE *612605 LATE CORNIFIED ENVELOPE 1C; LCE1C
;;LATE ENVELOPE PROTEIN 3; LEP3
DESCRIPTION For background information on the LCE gene cluster, see 612603.

CLONING

By database analysis to identify human orthologs of mouse genes encoding
late envelope proteins (LEPs), Marshall et al. (2001) identified LCE1C,
which they called LEP3.

Using real-time PCR, Jackson et al. (2005) detected high LCE1C
expression in human fetal, arm, penal, and abdominal skin. Expression
was much lower in vulva and was not detected in tongue and esophagus.

GENE FUNCTION

Jackson et al. (2005) showed that expression of LCE1 genes, including
LCE1C, was upregulated in cultured normal human keratinocytes by
ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, but not by calcium. Induction of LCE1C
could be detected 24 hours after UV irradiation and was very high 36
hours after UV irradiation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Jackson et al. (2005) determined that the LCE1C gene contains 2 exons.
Exon 1 is noncoding.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Marshall et al. (2001) mapped the LCE1C
gene within the LCE gene cluster on chromosome 1q21. Jackson et al.
(2005) stated that the mouse Lce1c gene maps to a syntenic LCE gene
cluster on chromosome 3F1.

REFERENCE 1. Jackson, B.; Tilli, C. M. L. J.; Hardman, M. J.; Avilion, A. A.;
MacLeod, M. C.; Ashcroft, G. S.; Byrne, C.: Late cornified envelope
family in differentiating epithelia--response to calcium and ultraviolet
irradiation. J. Invest. Derm. 124: 1062-1070, 2005.

2. Marshall, D.; Hardman, M. J.; Nield, K. M.; Byrne, C.: Differentially
expressed late constituents of the epidermal cornified envelope. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 13031-13036, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/11/2009

EDITED mgross: 02/11/2009

600811	TITLE *600811 DNA DAMAGE-BINDING PROTEIN 2; DDB2
;;DDB, p48 SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The p48 gene (DDB2) is required for expression of an ultraviolet
radiation (UV)-damaged DNA-binding activity and is disrupted by
mutations in the subset of xeroderma pigmentosum group E (XPE; 278740)
cells that lack this activity, DDB-negative XPE (Hwang et al., 1999).

CLONING

Dualan et al. (1995) isolated full-length human cDNAs encoding the 2
polypeptides of DDB: p127 (DDB1; 600045) and p48 (DDB2).

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Dualan et al. (1995) assigned the
DDB2 gene to chromosome 11p12-p11.

GENE FUNCTION

Nichols et al. (1996) found that overexpression of p48 in insect cells
greatly increased DDB activity in the cells, especially if p127 was
jointly overexpressed. These results demonstrated that p48 is required
for DNA-binding activity.

Hwang et al. (1998) demonstrated that expression of human DDB2 activated
DNA binding by DDB1 in several hamster and human cell lines. No such
effects were observed following expression of DDB2 containing single
amino acid substitutions from XPE cells that lacked binding activity.
DDB2 formed a complex with DDB1 either bound to UV-damaged DNA or in
free solution. Activation of DDB1 occurred by a 'hit-and-run' mechanism,
since the presence of DDB2 was not required for subsequent binding of
DDB1 to UV-damaged DNA. Hamster cells that failed to express Ddb2, which
contains a WD motif with homology to proteins that reorganize chromatin,
also failed to efficiently repair cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers in
nontranscribed DNA. Hwang et al. (1998) concluded that DDB2 plays a role
in repairing lesions that would otherwise remain inaccessible in
nontranscribed chromatin.

In human cells, efficient global genomic repair of DNA damage induced by
UV radiation requires the p53 tumor suppressor (191170). Hwang et al.
(1999) showed that p48 mRNA levels strongly depend on basal p53
expression and increase further after DNA damage in a p53-dependent
manner. Furthermore, like p53 -/- cells, XPE cells are deficient in
global genomic repair. These results identified p48 as a link between
p53 and the nucleotide excision-repair apparatus.

Shiyanov et al. (1999) stated that the DDB complex has a transcriptional
function in conjunction with E2F1 (189971), in addition to its role in
the DNA damage response. By coimmunoprecipitation analysis of HeLa cell
nuclear extracts, followed by mass spectrometric analysis and sequencing
of novel tryptic peptides, they found that the DDB complex interacted
with CUL4A (603137), a predicted E3 ubiquitin ligase. The DDB-CUL4A
complex bound UV-damaged DNA.

Tang et al. (2000) found that UV-damaged DNA-binding activity (UV-DDB)
is deficient in cell lines and primary tissues from rodents.
Transfection of p48 conferred UV-DDB to hamster cells and enhanced
removal of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) from genomic DNA and
from the nontranscribed strand of an expressed gene. Expression of p48
suppressed UV-induced mutations arising from the nontranscribed strand
but had no effect on cellular UV sensitivity. The results defined the
role of p48 in DNA repair, demonstrated the importance of CPDs in
mutagenesis, and suggested how rodent models can be improved to better
reflect cancer susceptibility in humans.

By immunoprecipitation analysis of HeLa cells, Groisman et al. (2003)
identified DDB2 and CSA (609412) as components of similar but distinct
protein complexes. Both DDB2 and CSA interacted with DDB1 (600045), a
component of both complexes. Cullin-4A (CUL4A; 603137), ROC1 (RBX1;
603814), and all the subunits of the COP9 signalosome (e.g., COPS2;
604508) were also present in both complexes. Following UV irradiation,
the DDB2 complex bound tightly to chromatin in a UV-dependent manner and
initiated global genome repair, whereas the CSA complex bound to RNA
polymerase II and initiated transcription-coupled repair. The COP9
signalosome in each complex differentially regulated cullin-based
ubiquitin ligase activity in response to UV irradiation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Nichols (1995) reported that RT-PCR mutation analysis in 5 fibroblast
XPE strains (2 without and 3 with DDB-binding activity) covering 90 to
99% of the sequence of DDB1 revealed no mutations. Approximately 40% of
DDB2 had been sequenced and had revealed no mutations in 2 fibroblast
XPF strains (278760).

Nichols et al. (1996) identified mutations in the DDB2 gene in the 3
known cases of DDB-negative XPE. No mutations were found in the cDNA of
the 127-kD subunit.

Rapic-Otrin et al. (2003) described several genetically unrelated
patients with XPE, each carrying 2 mutated alleles for DDB2, causing
either a single amino acid change (see 600811.0004), a protein
truncation, or internal deletion. These defects resulted in a severe
decrease of detectable p48 protein, abolished interaction with the p127
subunit, and produced a deficiency in UV-DDB binding activity.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP E, DDB-NEGATIVE FORM
DDB2, LYS244GLU

In 1 of the 3 known cases of DDB-negative xeroderma pigmentosum,
complementation group E (278740), Nichols et al. (1996) found an A-to-G
transition causing a lys244-to-glu (K244E) amino acid change in the
48-kD subunit of the DDB heterodimer.

Shiyanov et al. (1999) stated that the K244E mutation in DDB2 interferes
with the DDB1 (600045)-DDB2 interaction in damaged DNA binding assays
and also affects transcriptional activity.

.0002
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP E, DDB-NEGATIVE FORM
DDB2, ARG273HIS

In 2 of the 3 known cases of DDB-negative xeroderma pigmentosum,
complementation group E (278740), Nichols et al. (1996) found a G-to-A
transition that caused an arg273-to-his (R273H) amino acid change in the
48-kD subunit of the DDB protein.

Shiyanov et al. (1999) stated that the R273H and lys244-to-glu (K244E;
600811.0001) mutations in DDB2 interfere with the DDB1 (600045)-DDB2
interaction in damaged DNA binding assays and also affect
transcriptional activity. They showed that the R273H mutation, but not
the K244E mutation, also abrogated interaction of the DDB complex with
CUL4A (603137).

.0003
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP E, DDB-NEGATIVE FORM
DDB2, ARG313TER

Itoh et al. (1999) studied a 62-year-old Japanese woman who was first
recognized to be photosensitive at the age of about 20 (see XPE;
278740). There were no complications during pregnancy, labor, or
delivery. The parents were consanguineous. She showed average
development. At the time of study, she had clinical sensitivity to UV
light including pigmented or depigmented macules and patches on the
face, neck, chest, and limbs, especially the dorsa of the hands. The
sun-exposed skin showed slight dryness. Furthermore, she had multiple
skin neoplasms (5 malignant melanomas and 14 basal cell carcinomas on
the face, and 2 squamous cell carcinomas in situ on her forearm and
leg). No mutation of DDB1 (600045) was detected; the DDB2 cDNA showed
homozygosity for a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 937 in exon 7 of
genomic DNA, generating a nonsense mutation in CGA (arg) to TGA (stop)
at codon 313. This would be expected to produce a protein truncated by
115 amino acids.

.0004
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP E, DDB-NEGATIVE FORM
DDB2, ASP307TYR

In an Italian woman with DDB-negative xeroderma pigmentosum,
complementation group E (278740), Rapic-Otrin et al. (2003) identified
homozygosity for a 1094G-T transversion in the DDB2 gene, resulting in
an asp307-to-tyr (D307Y) substitution.

REFERENCE 1. Dualan, R.; Brody, T.; Keeney, S.; Nichols, A. F.; Admon, A.; Linn,
S.: Chromosomal localization and cDNA cloning of the genes (DDB1
and DDB2) for the p127 and p48 subunits of a human damage-specific
DNA binding protein. Genomics 29: 62-69, 1995.

2. Groisman, R.; Polanowska, J.; Kuraoka, I.; Sawada, J.; Saijo, M.;
Drapkin, R.; Kisselev, A. F.; Tanaka, K.; Nakatani, Y.: The ubiquitin
ligase activity in the DDB2 and CSA complexes is differentially regulated
by the COP9 signalosome in response to DNA damage. Cell 113: 357-367,
2003.

3. Hwang, B. J.; Ford, J. M.; Hanawalt, P. C.; Chu, G.: Expression
of the p48 xeroderma pigmentosum gene is p53-dependent and is involved
in global genomic repair. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 424-428, 1999.

4. Hwang, B. J.; Toering, S.; Francke, U.; Chu, G.: p48 activates
a UV-damaged-DNA binding factor and is defective in xeroderma pigmentosum
group E cells that lack binding activity. Molec. Cell. Biol. 18:
4391-4399, 1998.

5. Itoh, T.; Mori, T.; Ohkubo, H.; Yamaizumi, M.: A newly identified
patient with clinical xeroderma pigmentosum phenotype has a non-sense
mutation in the DDB2 gene and incomplete repair in (6-4) photoproducts. J.
Invest. Derm. 113: 251-257, 1999.

6. Nichols, A. F.: Personal Communication. Berkeley, Calif.  10/4/1995.

7. Nichols, A. F.; Ong, P.; Linn, S.: Mutations specific to the xeroderma
pigmentosum group E Ddb- phenotype. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 24317-24320,
1996.

8. Rapic-Otrin, V.; Navazza, V.; Nardo, T.; Botta, E.; McLenigan,
M.; Bisi, D. C.; Levine, A. S.; Stefanini, M.: True XP group E patients
have a defective UV-damaged DNA binding protein complex and mutations
in DDB2 which reveal the functional domains of its p48 product. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12: 1507-1522, 2003.

9. Shiyanov, P.; Nag, A.; Raychaudhuri, P.: Cullin 4A associates
with the UV-damaged DNA-binding protein DDB. J. Biol. Chem. 274:
35309-35312, 1999.

10. Tang, J. Y.; Hwang, B. J.; Ford, J. M.; Hanawalt, P. C.; Chu,
G.: Xeroderma pigmentosum p48 gene enhances global genomic repair
and suppresses UV-induced mutagenesis. Molec. Cell 5: 737-744, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/14/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/6/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/26/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/5/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 6/20/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/1/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/18/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/30/1995

EDITED mgross: 03/14/2013
terry: 3/14/2013
terry: 12/17/2007
mgross: 7/7/2006
terry: 7/6/2006
tkritzer: 4/26/2005
mgross: 11/9/2004
terry: 11/5/2004
mgross: 6/20/2000
carol: 11/10/1999
terry: 11/1/1999
carol: 3/4/1999
mgross: 2/26/1999
mgross: 2/24/1999
terry: 2/18/1999
psherman: 5/8/1998
terry: 12/10/1996
terry: 11/13/1996
mark: 10/30/1995

602963	TITLE *602963 UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME E2D 3; UBE2D3
;;UBC4/5, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;;
UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME UBCH5C; UBCH5C
DESCRIPTION See UBE2D1 (602961) for general information about ubiquitination and the
UBC4/5 subfamily of E2 enzymes.

CLONING

By PCR using oligonucleotides based on UBCH5B (UBE2D2; 602962), Jensen
et al. (1995) identified a human peripheral blood lymphocyte cDNA
encoding UBCH5C, or UBE2D3. The predicted 147-amino acid UBCH5C and
UBCH5B proteins differ by only 4 amino acids, with 3 of the differences
conservative changes; the nucleotide sequences of their cDNAs are 87%
identical within the coding region and 23% conserved within the 3-prime
untranslated region. The UBCH5C protein has 94% sequence identity with
the Drosophila UbcD1 protein, 92% identity with C. elegans ubc2, 88%
identity with human UBCH5A (UBE2D1), and 79% identity with S. cerevisiae
UBC4 and UBC5, and Arabidopsis thaliana UBC8 and UBC9. Recombinant
UBCH5C expressed in E. coli had a molecular mass of 16 kD by SDS-PAGE.
Quantitative PCR showed that UBCH5C was expressed in all human tissues
examined and at higher levels than UBCH5A and UBCH5B.

GENE FUNCTION

Jensen et al. (1995) demonstrated that UBCH5C could conjugate ubiquitin
to target proteins in an E6AP (UBE3A; 601623)-dependent manner.

All-trans retinoic acid (RA) is used in differentiation therapy to
achieve remission of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) because it
causes APL cell cycle arrest and differentiation. Using a short hairpin
RNA screen, Hattori et al. (2007) identified UBE2D3 among 26 proteins
that were essential for RA-induced differentiation and growth arrest in
NB4 human promyelocytic cells. UBE2D3 was upregulated following RA
treatment of NB4 cells. UBE2D3 physically associated with cyclin D1
(CCND1; 168461) and mediated RA-induced cyclin D1 degradation. Knockdown
of UBE2D3 by RNA interference blocked RA-induced cyclin D1 degradation
and cell cycle arrest. Hattori et al. (2007) concluded that
ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis is involved in RA-induced cell cycle
arrest.

Shembade et al. (2010) showed that A20 (191163) inhibits the E3 ligase
activities of TRAF6 (602355), TRAF2 (601895), and cIAP1 (601712) by
antagonizing interactions with E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes UBC13
(603679) and UBCH5C. A20, together with the regulatory molecule TAX1BP1
(605326), interacted with UBC13 and UBCH5C and triggered their
ubiquitination and proteasome-dependent degradation. These findings
suggested a mechanism of A20 action in the inhibition of inflammatory
signaling pathways.

Okiyoneda et al. (2010) identified the components of the peripheral
protein quality control network that removes unfolded CFTR containing
the F508del mutation (602421.0001) from the plasma membrane. Based on
their results and proteostatic mechanisms at different subcellular
locations, Okiyoneda et al. (2010) proposed a model in which the
recognition of unfolded cytoplasmic regions of CFTR is mediated by HSC70
(600816) in concert with DNAJA1 (602837) and possibly by the HSP90
machinery (140571). Prolonged interaction with the chaperone-cochaperone
complex recruits CHIP (607207)-UBCH5C and leads to ubiquitination of
conformationally damaged CFTR. This ubiquitination is probably
influenced by other E3 ligases and deubiquitinating enzyme activities,
culminating in accelerated endocytosis and lysosomal delivery mediated
by Ub-binding clathrin adaptors and the endosomal sorting complex
required for transport (ESCRT) machinery, respectively. In an
accompanying perspective, Hutt and Balch (2010) commented that the
'yin-yang' balance maintained by the proteostasis network is critical
for normal cellular, tissue, and organismal physiology.

REFERENCE 1. Hattori, H.; Zhang, X.; Jia, Y.; Subramanian, K. K.; Jo, H.; Loison,
F.; Newburger, P. E.; Luo, H. R.: RNAi screen identifies UBE2D3 as
a mediator of all-trans retinoic acid-induced cell growth arrest in
human acute promyelocytic NB4 cells. Blood 110: 640-650, 2007.

2. Hutt, D.; Balch, W. E.: The proteome in balance. Science 329:
766-767, 2010.

3. Jensen, J. P.; Bates, P. W.; Yang, M.; Vierstra, R. A.; Weissman,
A. M.: Identification of a family of closely related human ubiquitin
conjugating enzymes. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 30408-30414, 1995.

4. Okiyoneda, T.; Barriere, H.; Bagdany, M.; Rabeh, W. M.; Du, K.;
Hohfeld, J.; Young, J. C.; Lukacs, G. L.: Peripheral protein quality
control removes unfolded CFTR from the plasma membrane. Science 329:
805-810, 2010.

5. Shembade, N.; Ma, A.; Harhaj, E. W.: Inhibition of NF-kappa-B
signaling by A20 through disruption of ubiquitin enzyme complexes. Science 327:
1135-1139, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/31/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/11/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/27/2008

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 8/12/1998

EDITED alopez: 09/03/2010
terry: 8/31/2010
alopez: 3/11/2010
mgross: 6/24/2008
terry: 5/27/2008
psherman: 9/4/1998
alopez: 9/3/1998
psherman: 8/13/1998

139240	TITLE *139240 GROWTH HORMONE 2; GH2
;;GROWTH HORMONE, VARIANT; GHV;;
GROWTH HORMONE, PLACENTAL; GH2;;
GROWTH HORMONE-LIKE; GHL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Lewis et al. (1978) described a structural variant of human growth
hormone (GH1; 139250), which they called growth hormone-2, or GH2. Its
molecular mass was estimated to be about 20 kD, whereas GH1 has a
molecular mass of about 22 kD. The variant had several amino acid
differences and reacted poorly with antibody to human growth hormone.
Seeburg (1982) studied the structure of the GH2 gene, which they
referred to as the GHV gene, and Pavlakis et al. (1981) studied the
protein resulting from its in vitro expression. Frankenne et al. (1987)
showed that a placental variant of growth hormone, which appears in
maternal serum in midpregnancy and rises in concentration thereafter to
term, is the product of the GHV gene. The GHV gene is not expressed in
the pituitary. Liebhaber et al. (1989) showed that the GHV gene is
expressed in the term placenta, specifically in the
syncytiotrophoblastic epithelium. The similarity in developmental and
tissue-specific expression to that of the related CSA (150200) and CSB
(118820) genes suggested that these genes may share common regulatory
elements.

GENE STRUCTURE

The GH2 gene differs from the GH1 gene by the presence of a GT-to-AT
transition at the 5-prime donor splice site of intron 2 (Chen et al.,
1989). A cryptic site develops at nucleotide +19.

Boguszewski et al. (1998) noted that the GHN (GH1) and GHV (GH2) genes
consist of 5 exons. They examined alternative splicing of GHV
transcripts. The coding region of the GHV gene was amplified by RT-PCR
using placental cDNA as template. DNA sequencing of several clones
revealed 2 novel transcripts. One transcript isoform had a 45-bp
deletion caused by the use of an alternative 3-prime splice site in exon
3, similar to that in the GH1 gene, and is predicted to encode a 20-kD
GHV protein isoform. The other transcript isoform arose by the use of an
alternative 5-prime splice site which caused a 4-bp deletion in the end
of exon 4 and is predicted to encode a 24-kD protein with 219 amino
acids, which the authors referred to as GHV3. The carboxy-terminal
sequence of GHV3 differs from those of 22-kD GHV and GHV2, the 2
previously reported transcripts of the GHV gene, and does not contain a
predicted transmembrane domain as described for GHV2. The authors
concluded that the GHV transcript undergoes alternative splicing
pathways that can generate at least 4 different mRNA isoforms,
predicting the expression of different GH protein products, including 2
with a complete sequence divergence in the carboxy terminus.

GENE FUNCTION

Chellakooty et al. (2004) evaluated the association of maternal serum
levels of placental GH and IGF1 (147440) with fetal growth in a
prospective longitudinal study of 89 normal pregnant women. Placental GH
levels were detectable in all samples from as early as 5 weeks'
gestation and increased significantly throughout pregnancy until
approximately 37 weeks' gestation, when peak levels of 22 ng/ml were
reached. Subsequently, placental GH levels decreased until birth. The
change in placental GH during 24.5 to 37.5 weeks' gestation was
positively associated with fetal growth rate (P = 0.027) and birth
weight (P = 0.027). Gestational age at peak placental GH values (P =
0.007) was associated with pregnancy length. A positive association
between the change in placental GH and the change in IGF1 levels
throughout gestation was found in a multivariate analysis (r(2) = 0.42;
P less than 0.001).

MAPPING

By combination of restriction mapping with somatic cell hybridization,
Owerbach et al. (1980) localized the GH2 gene, which they called 'growth
hormone-like' (GHL), to chromosome 17.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

MacLeod et al. (1991) found abnormally large GHV mRNAs in 1 of 20
placentas. Sequence analysis demonstrated retention of the first 12
bases of intron 2, resulting from both a base substitution at the intron
2 splice-donor dinucleotide (GT to AT) and activation of a cryptic
splice-donor site 12 bases downstream. Survey of a total of 60
additional chromosomes failed to reveal other instances of this
mutation. While the importance of GHV to fetal and maternal physiology
remained to be defined, MacLeod et al. (1991) demonstrated by bioassays
that it has a strong somatogen activity. MacLeod et al. (1991) found no
direct evidence to suggest that the splice site mutation in the
heterozygous state has a significant adverse effect on the physiology of
pregnancy, labor, delivery, or fetal development.

REFERENCE 1. Boguszewski, C. L.; Svensson, P.-A.; Jansson, T.; Clark, R.; Carlsson,
L. M. S.; Carlsson, B.: Cloning of two novel growth hormone transcripts
expressed in human placenta. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 83: 2878-2885,
1998.

2. Chellakooty, M.; Vangsgaard, K.; Larsen, T.; Scheike, T.; Falck-Larsen,
J.; Legarth, J.; Andersson, A. M.; Main, K. M.; Skakkebaek, N. E.;
Juul, A.: A longitudinal study of intrauterine growth and the placental
growth hormone (GH)-insulin-like growth factor I axis in maternal
circulation: association between placental GH and fetal growth. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 384-391, 2004.

3. Chen, E. Y.; Liao, Y.-C.; Smith, D. H.; Barrera-Saldana, H. A.;
Gelinas, R. E.; Seeburg, P. H.: The human growth hormone locus: nucleotide
sequence, biology, and evolution. Genomics 4: 479-497, 1989.

4. Frankenne, F.; Rentier-Delrue, F.; Scippo, M.-L.; Martial, J.;
Hennen, G.: Expression of the growth hormone variant gene in human
placenta. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 64: 635-637, 1987.

5. Lewis, U. J.; Dunn, J. T.; Bonewald, L. F.; Seavey, B. K.; VanderLaan,
W. P.: A naturally occurring structural variant of human growth hormone. J.
Biol. Chem. 253: 2679-2687, 1978.

6. Liebhaber, S. A.; Urbanek, M.; Ray, J.; Tuan, R. S.; Cooke, N.
E.: Characterization and histologic localization of human growth
hormone-variant gene expression in the placenta. J. Clin. Invest. 83:
1985-1991, 1989.

7. MacLeod, J. N.; Liebhaber, S. A.; MacGillivray, M. H.; Cooke, N.
E.: Identification of a splice-site mutation in the human growth
hormone-variant gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 48: 1168-1174, 1991.

8. MacLeod, J. N.; Worsley, I.; Ray, J.; Friesen, H. G.; Liebhaber,
S. A.; Cooke, N. E.: Human growth hormone variant is a biologically
active somatogen and lactogen. Endocrinology 128: 1298-1302, 1991.

9. Owerbach, D.; Rutter, W. J.; Martial, J. A.; Baxter, J. D.; Shows,
T. B.: Genes for growth hormone, chorionic somatomammotropin and
growth hormone-like genes on chromosome 17 in humans. Science 209:
289-292, 1980.

10. Pavlakis, G. N.; Hizuka, N.; Gorden, P.; Seeburg, P. H.; Hamber,
D. H.: Expression of two human growth hormone genes in monkey cells
infected by simian virus 40 recombinants. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 78:
7398-7402, 1981.

11. Seeburg, P. H.: The human growth hormone gene family: nucleotide
sequences show recent divergence and predict a new polypeptide hormone. DNA 1:
239-249, 1982.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 03/25/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/18/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED alopez: 03/25/2009
carol: 5/27/2005
mgross: 3/23/1999
mgross: 3/18/1999
alopez: 10/28/1997
carol: 6/2/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/26/1992
carol: 1/22/1992
carol: 6/21/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990

605971	TITLE *605971 RET FINGER PROTEIN-LIKE 3, ANTISENSE; RFPL3S
;;RFP-LIKE 3, ANTISENSE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Natural antisense RNAs (NARs) such as RFPL3S affect diverse activities
in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. For example, NARs regulate
basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF2; 134920) negatively in frog and
human oocytes (summary by Seroussi et al., 1999).

CLONING

By analysis of a cosmid genomic clone from 22q12-q13 and by PCR,
Seroussi et al. (1999) obtained cDNAs encoding RET finger protein (RFP;
602165)-like-1 (RFPL1; 605968), RFPL2 (605969), and RFPL3 (605970), as
well as antisense RFPL1S (605972) and RFPL3S. Northern blot analysis
revealed expression of a 1.2-kb RFPL3S transcript that was strongly
expressed in testis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Seroussi et al. (1999) determined that the antisense RFPL3S transcript
contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

Seroussi et al. (1999) mapped the RFPL3S gene to chromosome 22q12-q13 by
analysis of a mapped cosmid genomic clone.

REFERENCE 1. Seroussi, E.; Kedra, D.; Pan, H.-Q.; Peyrad, M.; Schwartz, C.;
Scambler, P.; Donnai, D.; Roe, B. A.; Dumanski, J. P.: Duplications
on human chromosome 22 reveal a novel Ret finger protein-like gene
family with sense and endogenous antisense transcripts. Genome Res. 9:
803-814, 1999.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/25/2001

EDITED alopez: 03/27/2012
alopez: 3/26/2012
mgross: 6/6/2001
mgross: 5/25/2001

612072	TITLE *612072 MIF4G DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN; MIF4GD
;;SLBP-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1; SLIP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen, Cakmakci et al. (2008) identified a
protein, which they designated SLIP1, that binds to a 15-amino acid
N-terminal region of stem-loop binding protein (SLBP; 602422). This
region of SLBP binds to the 3-prime end of histone mRNA. Cakmakci et al.
(2008) identified 5 conserved residues in this region of SLBP that are
required for histone translation and found that mutations in any of
these residues reduced SLIP1 binding. Coexpression of SLIP1 and SLBP in
Xenopus oocytes stimulated translation of a reporter mRNA with a
stem-loop, as in histone mRNAs, but not of a reporter with a poly(A)
tail. Expression of SLIP1 in HeLa cells also stimulated expression of a
GFP reporter mRNA ending in a stem-loop. Downregulation of endogenous
SLIP1 by siRNA reduced the rate of translation of endogenous histone
mRNA as well as cell viability. Cakmakci et al. (2008) proposed that
SLIP1 stimulates histone mRNA translation by bridging between SLBP and
the 5-prime end of histone mRNA.

MAPPING

Scott (2008) mapped the SLIP1 gene to chromosome 17q25.1 based on an
alignment of the SLIP1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AC022211) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.3).

REFERENCE 1. Cakmakci, N. G.; Lerner, R. S.; Wagner, E. J.; Zheng. L.; Marzluff,
W. F.: SLIP1, a factor required for activation of histone mRNA translation
by the stem-loop binding protein. Molec. Cell. Biol. 28: 1182-1194,
2008.

2. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/19/2008.

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 5/21/2008

EDITED wwang: 05/21/2008
carol: 5/21/2008

608177	TITLE *608177 EXOSTOSIN GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE 1; EXT1
;;EXOSTOSIN 1;;
EXT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

EXT1 and EXT2 (608210) form a heterooligomeric complex that catalyzes
the polymerization of heparan sulfate. This complex is an essential
factor in a signal transduction cascade for regulation of chondrocyte
differentiation, ossification, and apoptosis (summary by Heinritz et
al., 2009).

CLONING

By screening a human chondrocyte cDNA library with cosmids that spanned
breakpoints on chromosome 8q identified in patients with multiple
exostoses type I (133700) (see Ludecke et al., 1995), Ahn et al. (1995)
identified a cDNA encoding a putative 746-amino acid protein with a
molecular mass of 86.3 kD. Northern blot analysis detected expression of
a 3.4-kb transcript in all tissues tested, with highest levels in liver.
The authors noted that the breakpoint region in the EXT1 gene contains 2
identical polypyrimidine tracts (CCCCCCT) that are known to be deletion
hotspots, similar to the retinoblastoma gene (RB1; 614041) (Lohmann et
al., 1994).

Lin and Wells (1997) cloned and sequenced a mouse cDNA that is
homologous to the human EXT1 gene. Lohmann et al. (1997) showed that the
murine Ext1 gene has a high level of sequence similarity with its human
homolog.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ludecke et al. (1997) reported that the EXT1 gene contains 11 exons.

MAPPING

Ahn et al. (1995) identified the EXT1 gene within the breakpoint regions
of chromosome 8q identified in patients with multiple exostoses type I.
Lohmann et al. (1997) found that the murine Ext1 gene is part of a
conserved linkage group on mouse chromosome 15.

GENE FUNCTION

Ahn et al. (1995) suggested that EXT1 may act as a tumor suppressor
gene. Hecht et al. (1995) and Raskind et al. (1995) presented evidence
suggesting that the EXT1 gene on chromosome 8 and the EXT2 gene (608210)
on chromosome 11 have tumor suppressor function. They found loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) for markers linked to these 2 genes in
chondrosarcomas originating in individuals with multiple exostoses (see
133700) as well as in sporadic chondrosarcomas. The proteins encoded by
the EXT1 and EXT2 genes play a role in the expression of proteoglycans
on the cell surface and in the extracellular matrix. To explain the fact
that normal bone growth occurs concurrently with abnormal exostosis
tumor growth, Hecht et al. (1995) and Raskind et al. (1995) proposed a
2-hit tumor formation model according to the Knudson hypothesis
(Knudson, 1971). In this model, a single germline mutation results in
the predisposition for disease and a second somatic mutational hit,
usually LOH, allows for aberrant growth. Hecht et al. (1997) noted that
although the EXT1 protein is ubiquitously expressed in many tissues, the
only known effect of mutated or inactivated EXT1 appears to be specific
to actively growing bone, allowing inappropriate bone growth to be
juxtaposed to the growth plate; as the bone continues to grow, the
exostoses appear to migrate toward the diaphysis. At puberty, with
growth plate fusion, linear growth ceases and no new exostoses develop.

McCormick et al. (1998) showed that EXT1 is an endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-resident type II transmembrane glycoprotein whose expression in
cells results in the alteration of the synthesis and display of cell
surface heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). Two EXT1 variants
containing missense mutations related to multiple exostoses failed to
alter cell surface glycosaminoglycans, despite retaining their ER
localization. By testing a cell line with a specific defect in EXT1 in
in vivo and in vitro assays, McCormick et al. (2000) showed that EXT2
does not harbor significant glycosyltransferase activity in the absence
of EXT1. Instead, it appears that EXT1 and EXT2 form a heterooligomeric
complex in vivo that leads to the accumulation of both proteins in the
Golgi apparatus. Remarkably, the Golgi-localized EXT1/EXT2 complex
possesses substantially higher glycosyltransferase activity than EXT1 or
EXT2 alone, suggesting that the complex represents the biologically
relevant form of the enzyme(s). These findings provided a rationale for
the causation of hereditary multiple exostoses by loss of activity in
either of the 2 EXT genes.

Bovee et al. (1999) conducted studies to determine whether inactivation
of both alleles of an EXT gene, according to the tumor suppressor model,
is required for osteochondroma development, or whether a single EXT
germline mutation acts in a single dominant-negative way. They studied
LOH and DNA ploidy in 8 sporadic and 6 hereditary osteochondromas. EXT1
and EXT2 mutation analysis was performed in a total of 34 sporadic and
hereditary osteochondromas and secondary peripheral chondrosarcomas.
They demonstrated that osteochondroma is a true neoplasm, since
aneuploidy was found in 4 of 10 osteochondromas. Furthermore, LOH was
almost exclusively found at the EXT1 locus in 5 of 14 osteochondromas.
Four novel constitutional cDNA alterations were detected in exon 1 of
EXT1. The 2 patients with multiple osteochondromas demonstrated a
germline mutation combined with the loss of the remaining wildtype
allele in 3 osteochondromas, indicating that, in cartilaginous cells of
the growth plate, inactivation of both copies of the EXT1 gene was
required for osteochondroma formation in hereditary cases. In contrast,
no somatic EXT1 cDNA alterations were found in sporadic osteochondromas.
No mutations in the EXT2 gene were found in any of these cases.

Ropero et al. (2004) reported that EXT1 function was abrogated in human
cancer cells by transcriptional silencing associated with CpG island
promoter hypermethylation. Epigenetic inactivation of EXT1 led to loss
of heparan sulfate (HS) synthesis that was reversed by a DNA
demethylating agent. Reintroduction of EXT1 into EXT1
methylation-deficient cancer cells induced tumor suppressor-like
features, including reduced colony formation density and tumor growth in
nude mouse xenograft models. By screening 79 human cancer cell lines and
454 primary tumors from different cell types, the authors found that
EXT1 CpG island hypermethylation was common in leukemia, especially
acute promyelocytic leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and
nonmelanoma skin cancer. Ropero et al. (2004) concluded that EXT1
epigenetic inactivation, leading to abrogation of HS biosynthesis, is an
important step in the processes of tumor onset and progression.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Multiple Exostoses Type I

In 2 of 23 unrelated families with multiple exostoses type I, Ahn et al.
(1995) identified a 1-bp deletion in the EXT1 gene (608177.0001) that
segregated with the disease. In 4 of 6 EXT families demonstrating
linkage to the EXT1 locus on chromosome 8, Hecht et al. (1997)
identified 3 germline mutations in the EXT1 gene that segregated with
the disease phenotype in each family (608177.0002-608177.0004).

In 7 of 17 families (41%) with EXT, Philippe et al. (1997) identified
mutations in the EXT1 gene, including 5 novel mutations (see, e.g.,
608177.0007 and 608177.0009). Five of the families (29%) had mutations
in the EXT2 gene. Wells et al. (1997) identified 6 mutations in the EXT1
gene in 6 unrelated EXT families showing linkage to chromosome 8. One of
the mutations was the same 1-bp deletion in exon 6 that was previously
reported in 2 independent EXT families (608177.0001). The other 5
mutations were novel. In each case, the mutation was predicted to result
in a truncated or nonfunctional EXT1 protein.

Wuyts et al. (1998) analyzed the EXT1 and EXT2 genes in 26 EXT families
originating from 9 countries. Of the 26 families, 10 had an EXT1
mutation and 10 had an EXT2 mutation. Twelve of these mutations had not
previously been described. From a review of these and previously
reported mutations, Wuyts et al. (1998) concluded that mutations in
either the EXT1 or the EXT2 gene are responsible for most cases of
multiple exostoses. Most of the mutations in these 2 genes cause
premature termination of the EXT proteins, whereas missense mutations
are rare. The authors concluded that the development of exostoses is
mainly due to loss of function of EXT genes, consistent with the
hypothesis that the EXT genes have a tumor suppressor function.

Among 11 isolated cases of exostoses and 20 families with EXT, Raskind
et al. (1998) identified 12 novel EXT1 mutations, including 5 frameshift
deletions or insertions, 1 codon deletion, and 6 single basepair
substitutions, distributed across 8 of the exons. Only 2 of the
mutations were identified in more than 1 family. Three mutations
affected sites in which alterations were previously reported.
Nonchain-terminating missense mutations were identified in codons 280
and 340, both coding for conserved arginine residues. Raskind et al.
(1998) suggested that these residues may be crucial to the function of
this protein. One of the mutations (608177.0008) was identified in a
Chamorro native on Guam, where EXT is unusually frequent. They concluded
that 45% of the isolated cases and 77% of the familial cases could be
attributed to abnormalities in EXT1.

In 23 of 43 Japanese families with hereditary multiple exostoses, Seki
et al. (2001) found 21 mutations, of which 18 were novel. Seventeen
(40%) of the 23 families had a mutation in the EXT1 gene and 6 (14%) had
a mutation in the EXT2 gene. Of the 17 families with EXT1 mutations, 13
had those causing premature termination of the EXT1 protein, and 4
showed missense mutations. All 4 EXT1 missense mutations occurred in the
arginine residue at codon 340 (R340L; 608177.0004). R340 is known as a
critical site for expression of heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycans,
suggesting that the region encompassing the arginine residue may play an
important role in the function of the EXT1 protein. In contrast to the
findings of Seki et al. (2001), Xu et al. (1999) detected more mutations
in EXT2 than in EXT1 in Chinese patients (33% and 14%, respectively). An
excess of EXT1 mutations was found in Caucasian patients, however, by
Philippe et al. (1997) and Wuyts et al. (1998). In both Caucasian
patients, as studied by Raskind et al. (1998), and Japanese patients,
more EXT1 mutations were identified in familial cases than in sporadic
cases.

In a study of 82 Japanese patients with hereditary multiple exostoses by
Seki et al. (2001), 4 patients developed malignancy and their mutations
(3 in EXT1 and 1 in EXT2) were all different, suggesting that malignant
transformation is not directly related to a particular mutation in EXT1
or EXT2, but more likely involves other genetic factors. Loss of
heterozygosity has been detected in chondrosarcoma not only at the EXT
loci but also at others such as 10q (RET; 164761) and 3q.

Wuyts and Van Hul (2000) stated that 49 different EXT1 and 25 different
EXT2 mutations had been identified in patients with multiple exostoses
and that mutations in these 2 genes were responsible for over 70% of the
EXT cases. Most of the mutations cause loss of function, which is
consistent with the presumed tumor suppressor function of the EXT genes.

McCormick et al. (1998) showed that the missense mutations G339D
(608177.0007) and R340C (608177.0009) abrogate the ability of
exostosin-1 to synthesize heparan sulfate (HS). Cheung et al. (2001)
used a functional assay that detects HS expression on the cell surface
of an EXT1-deficient cell line to test other missense mutant exostosin
proteins for their ability to rescue HS biosynthesis in vivo. Their
results showed that EXT1 mutants bearing 6 of these missense mutations
are also defective in HS expression, but surprisingly, 4 missense
mutations that had been considered etiologic were phenotypically
indistinguishable from wildtype EXT1. Three of these 4 'active'
mutations affect amino acids that are not conserved among vertebrates
and invertebrates, whereas all of the HS-biosynthesis null mutations
affect only conserved amino acids. Further, substitution or deletion of
each of these 4 residues does not abrogate HS biosynthesis. Taken
together, these results indicated that several of the reported etiologic
mutant EXT forms retain the ability to synthesize and express HS on the
cell surface. Cheung et al. (2001) suggested that these mutations may
represent rare genetic polymorphisms in the EXT1 gene or may interfere
with functions of EXT1 that are involved in the pathogenesis of
hereditary multiple exostoses.

Hall et al. (2002) reported the direct sequencing and LOH analysis of 12
exostoses in 10 hereditary multiple exostoses families, 4 solitary
exostoses, and their corresponding constitutional DNA. Of the 16
exostoses screened, there was only 1 isolated case in which 2 somatic
mutations, a deletion and an LOH, were present. Hall et al. (2002)
developed alternative models of pathogenesis, including a second
mutational event in genes other than EXT1 and EXT2, such as the EXTL1
(601738), EXTL2 (602411), and EXTL3 (605744) genes. Xu et al. (1999)
found no germline mutations in the EXTL1 and EXTL2 genes of patients
with hereditary multiple exostoses.

In 11 of 23 German patients with multiple exostoses, Heinritz et al.
(2009) identified 11 different novel mutations in the EXT1 gene (see,
e.g., 608177.0012). Eleven patients had mutations in the EXT2 gene, and
1 patient had no detectable mutations.

- Chondrosarcoma

In a patient with chondrosarcoma, Hecht et al. (1997) identified an EXT1
mutation in the constitutional DNA (608177.0005), but the tumor tissue
had retained the wildtype allele. In a patient with sporadic
chondrosarcoma, Hecht et al. (1997) identified a mutation in the tumor
tissue (608177.0006) which was not present in the constitutional DNA.
LOH analysis of chondrosarcomas and chondroblastomas revealed multiple
LOH events at loci on chromosomes 3q, 8q, 10q, and 19q. The authors
reported that a sporadic chondrosarcoma demonstrated LOH for EXT1 and
EXT3, whereas a second chondrosarcoma underwent LOH for EXT2 and
chromosome 10.

- Trichorhinophalangeal Syndrome Type II

Exostoses in the contiguous gene syndrome trichorhinophalangeal syndrome
type II (150230) are caused by loss of functional copies of the EXT1
gene (Ludecke et al., 1995).

ANIMAL MODEL

To define the developmental role of heparan sulfate in mammalian
species, Inatani et al. (2003) conditionally disrupted the heparan
sulfate polymerizing enzyme Ext1 in the embryonic mouse brain. The
Ext1-null brain exhibited patterning defects that were composites of
those caused by mutations of multiple heparan sulfate-binding
morphogens. Furthermore, the Ext1-null brain displayed severe guidance
errors in major commissural tracts, revealing a pivotal role of heparan
sulfate in midline axon guidance. Inatani et al. (2003) concluded that
heparan sulfate is essential for mammalian brain development.

By introducing a hypomorphic mutation in the Ext1 gene, Koziel et al.
(2004) developed mice producing significantly reduced levels of heparan
sulfate. Homozygous mutant embryos survived until embryonic day 14.5 at
a nonmendelian ratio of 14%. Only 4% were recovered at embryonic day
16.5. Mutant embryos were small and edematous. They had heart defects,
reduced skeleton size with fused vertebrae, shortened fore- and
hindlimbs, fused elbow and knee joints, and occasionally syndactylies of
digits. Homozygous mutant mice showed an extended distribution of Ihh
(600726) signaling during embryonic chondrocyte differentiation, and
ectopic heparan sulfate restricted Ihh signaling. The authors concluded
that heparan sulfate binds hedgehog in the extracellular space and
negatively regulates the range of hedgehog signaling in a dose-dependent
manner.

Matsumoto et al. (2010) created a line of mice with random deletion of
Ext1 in a small fraction of chondrocytes. Mutant mice developed
osteochondromas of the wrist, fibula, shoulder, and rib. A high
proportion of mutant animals also showed bowing deformity of the radius,
subluxation/dislocation of the radial head, scoliosis, and mild
abnormalities in the growth plate and joint cartilage. Genotyping showed
that osteochondromas contained a high proportion of wildtype
chondrocytes, in addition to Est1-null chondrocytes. The pattern of gene
expression in osteochondromas more resembled that of ectopic growth
plates than of neoplasms. Matsumoto et al. (2010) hypothesized that
Est1-null chondrocytes are required for initiation of osteochondromas,
but the subsequent growth of osteochondromas is not directly due to
upregulated proliferation of mutant cells.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, 1-BP DEL, 2120T

In 2 of 23 unrelated families with multiple exostoses type I (133700),
Ahn et al. (1995) identified a 1-bp deletion (2120T) in the EXT1 gene,
resulting in a premature stop codon. The mutation cosegregated with the
disease in the families over 2 and 3 generations, respectively.

.0002
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, 1-BP DEL, 1364C

In 2 unrelated families with multiple exostoses type I (133700), Hecht
et al. (1997) identified a 1-bp deletion (1364delC) in exon 1 of the
EXT1 gene, resulting in a premature stop codon at nucleotide 1403.

.0003
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, 4-BP INS, NT1035

In a family with multiple exostoses type I (133700), Hecht et al. (1997)
identified a 4-bp insertion (1035ins4) in exon 1 of the EXT1 gene,
resulting in a premature stop codon at nucleotide 1213.

.0004
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, ARG340LEU

In a family with multiple exostoses type I (133700), Hecht et al. (1997)
identified a 1635G-T transversion in exon 2 of the EXT1 gene, resulting
in an arg339-to-leu (R339L) substitution. It was subsequently discovered
that the mutation was a 1670G-T transversion that resulted in an
arg340-to-leu (R340L) substitution (Hogue, 1998).

.0005
CHONDROSARCOMA, SPORADIC
EXT1, 1-BP INS, 2077C

In a patient with sporadic chondrosarcoma, Hecht et al. (1997)
identified a 1-bp insertion (2077-2082insC) in the EXT1 gene in the
patient's constitutional DNA, resulting in a frameshift and a premature
stop codon at nucleotide 2208 in exon 6. Interestingly, the tumor tissue
retained the wildtype allele, but had LOH for chromosome 3q.

.0006
CHONDROSARCOMA, SOMATIC
EXT1, 8-BP DEL, NT1178

In the tumor tissue of a patient with sporadic chondrosarcoma, Hecht et
al. (1997) identified an 8-bp deletion (1178del8) in the EXT1 gene,
resulting in a premature stop codon at nucleotide 1213. This mutation
did not appear in the patient's constitutional DNA, suggesting somatic
origin.

.0007
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, GLY339ASP

In a family with multiple exostoses type I (133700), Philippe et al.
(1997) identified a gly339-to-asp (G339D) missense mutation in exon 2 of
the EXT1 gene.

McCormick et al. (1998) showed that the G339D missense mutation
abrogates HS biosynthesis.

.0008
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, TYR119TER

In a Chamorro native on Guam, Raskind et al. (1998) demonstrated that
multiple exostoses were associated with a 108C-A transversion in exon 1
of the EXT1 gene, leading to a stop codon, tyr119-to-ter (Y119X).
Raskind et al. (1998) suggested that identification of the Chamorro
mutation could allow investigation of a possible founder effect in this
population, which has an unusually high frequency of EXT.

.0009
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, ARG340CYS

Philippe et al. (1997) screened 17 probands with hereditary multiple
exostoses for alterations in the EXT1 or EXT2 (133701) genes. In a
family with multiple exostoses type I (133700), Philippe et al. (1997)
identified an arg340-to-cys (R340C) mutation in exon 2 of the EXT1 gene.

McCormick et al. (1998) showed that the R340C missense mutation
abrogates heparan sulfate biosynthesis.

.0010
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, IVS1DS, G-C

In affected members of a large consanguineous Pakistani family with
multiple exostoses type I (133700), Faiyaz-Ul-Haque et al. (2004)
identified a G-to-C transversion at the conserved splice donor site in
intron 1 of the EXT1 gene, predicted to result in a null allele. All
affected individuals, and no unaffected individuals, had bilateral
overriding of the fourth toe. This feature was present at birth,
allowing earlier diagnosis of the disorder.

.0011
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, 1-BP INS, 1664A

In affected members of a large consanguineous Pakistani family with
multiple exostoses type I (133700), Faiyaz-Ul-Haque et al. (2004)
identified a 1-bp insertion (1664insA) in exon 8 of the EXT1 gene,
predicted to produce a frameshift at codon 555 resulting in a premature
termination 10 codons downstream. Bilateral overriding of the second or
third toes was observed in all affected individuals except for 1
asymptomatic female and 1 mildly affected female. No unaffected
individuals had this feature, which was present at birth and allowed
earlier diagnosis of the disorder.

.0012
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE I
EXT1, IVS1DS, 4-BP DEL

In a German patient with multiple exostoses type I (113700), Heinritz et
al. (2009) identified a heterozygous 4-bp deletion (962+1-962+4del4) in
the 5-prime splice donor site of intron 1 of the EXT1 gene. The mutation
results in the skipping of exon 2 and a frameshift with premature
termination.

REFERENCE 1. Ahn, J.; Ludecke, H.-J.; Lindow, S.; Horton, W. A.; Lee, B.; Wagner,
M. J.; Horsthemke, B.; Wells, D. E.: Cloning of the putative tumour
suppressor gene for hereditary multiple exostoses (EXT1). Nature
Genet. 11: 137-143, 1995.

2. Bovee, J. V. M. G.; Cleton-Jansen, A.-M.; Wuyts, W.; Caethoven,
G.; Taminiau, A. H. M.; Bakker, E.; Van Hul, W.; Cornelisse, C. J.;
Hogendoorn, P. C. W.: EXT-mutation analysis and loss of heterozygosity
in sporadic and hereditary osteochondromas and secondary chondrosarcomas. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 65: 689-698, 1999.

3. Cheung, P. K.; McCormick, C.; Crawford, B. E.; Esko, J. D.; Tufaro,
F.; Duncan, G.: Etiological point mutations in the hereditary multiple
exostoses gene EXT1: a functional analysis of heparan sulfate polymerase
activity. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 69: 55-66, 2001.

4. Faiyaz-Ul-Haque, M.; Ahmad, W.; Zaidi, S. H. E.; Hussain, S.; Haque,
S.; Ahmad, M.; Cohn, D. H.; Tsui, L.-C.: Novel mutations in the EXT1
gene in two consanguineous families affected with multiple hereditary
exostoses (familial osteochondromatosis). Clin. Genet. 66: 144-151,
2004.

5. Hall, C. R.; Cole, W. G.; Haynes, R.; Hecht, J. T.: Reevaluation
of a genetic model for the development of exostosis in hereditary
multiple exostosis. Am. J. Med. Genet. 112: 1-5, 2002.

6. Hecht, J. T.; Hogue, D.; Strong, L. C.; Hansen, M. F.; Blanton,
S. H.; Wagner, M.: Hereditary multiple exostosis and chondrosarcoma:
linkage to chromosome 11 and loss of heterozygosity for EXT-linked
markers on chromosomes 11 and 8. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 56: 1125-1131,
1995.

7. Hecht, J. T.; Hogue, D.; Wang, Y.; Blanton, S. H.; Wagner, M.;
Strong, L. C.; Raskind, W.; Hansen, M. F.; Wells, D.: Hereditary
multiple exostoses (EXT): mutational studies of familial EXT1 cases
and EXT-associated malignancies. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 60: 80-86, 1997.

8. Heinritz, W.; Huffmeier, U.; Strenge, S.; Miterski, B.; Zweier,
C.; Leinung, S.; Bohring, A.; Mitulla, B.; Peters, U.; Froster, U.
G.: New mutations of EXT1 and EXT2 genes in German patients with
multiple osteochondromas. Ann. Hum. Genet. 73: 283-291, 2009.

9. Hogue, D: Personal Communication. Houston, Tex  2/6/1998.

10. Inatani, M.; Irie, F.; Plump, A. S.; Tessier-Lavigne, M.; Yamaguchi,
Y.: Mammalian brain morphogenesis and midline axon guidance require
heparan sulfate. Science 302: 1044-1046, 2003.

11. Knudson, A. G., Jr.: Mutation and cancer: statistical study of
retinoblastoma. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 68: 820-823, 1971.

12. Koziel, L.; Kunath, M.; Kelly, O. G.; Vortkamp, A.: Ext1-dependent
heparan sulfate regulates the range of Ihh signaling during endochondral
ossification. Dev. Cell 6: 801-813, 2004.

13. Lin, X.; Wells, D.: Isolation of the mouse cDNA homologous to
the human EXT1 gene responsible for hereditary multiple exostoses. DNA
Seq. 7: 199-202, 1997.

14. Lohmann, D. R.; Brandt, B.; Hopping, W.; Passarge, E.; Horsthemke,
B.: Spectrum of small length germline mutations in the RB1 gene. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 3: 2187-2193, 1994.

15. Lohmann, D. R.; Buiting, K.; Ludecke, H.-J.; Horsthemke, B.:
The murine Ext1 gene shows a high level of sequence similarity with
its human homologue and is part of a conserved linkage group on chromosome
15. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 76: 164-166, 1997.

16. Ludecke, H.-J.; Ahn, J.; Lin, X.; Hill, A.; Wagner, M. J.; Schomburg,
L.; Horsthemke, B.; Wells, D. E.: Genomic organization and promoter
structure of the human EXT1 gene. Genomics 40: 351-354, 1997.

17. Ludecke, H.-J.; Wagner, M. J.; Nardmann, J.; La Pillo, B.; Parrish,
J. E.; Willems, P. J.; Haan, E. A.; Frydman, M.; Hamers, G. J. H.;
Wells, D. E.; Horsthemke, B.: Molecular dissection of a contiguous
gene syndrome: localization of the genes involved in the Langer-Giedion
syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 31-36, 1995.

18. Matsumoto, K.; Irie, F.; Mackem, S.; Yamaguchi, Y.: A mouse model
of chondrocyte-specific somatic mutation reveals a role for Ext1 loss
of heterozygosity in multiple hereditary exostoses. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 107: 10932-10937, 2010.

19. McCormick, C.; Duncan, G.; Goutsos, K. T.; Tufaro, F.: The putative
tumor suppressors EXT1 and EXT2 form a stable complex that accumulates
in the Golgi apparatus and catalyzes the synthesis of heparan sulfate. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 668-673, 2000.

20. McCormick, C.; Leduc, Y.; Martindale, D.; Mattison, K.; Esford,
L. E.; Dyer, A. P.; Tufaro, F.: The putative tumour suppressor EXT1
alters the expression of cell-surface heparan sulfate. Nature Genet. 19:
158-161, 1998.

21. Philippe, C.; Porter, D. E.; Emerton, M. E.; Wells, D. E.; Simpson,
A. H. R. W.; Monaco, A. P.: Mutation screening of the EXT1 and EXT2
genes in patients with hereditary multiple exostoses. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 61: 520-528, 1997.

22. Raskind, W. H.; Conrad, E. U.; Chansky, H.; Matsushita, M.: Loss
of heterozygosity in chondrosarcomas for markers linked to hereditary
multiple exostoses loci on chromosomes 8 and 11. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 56:
1132-1139, 1995.

23. Raskind, W. H.; Conrad, E. U., III; Matsushita, M.; Wijsman, E.
M.; Wells, D. E.; Chapman, N.; Sandell, L. J.; Wagner, M.; Houck,
J.: Evaluation of locus heterogeneity and EXT1 mutations in 34 families
with hereditary multiple exostoses. Hum. Mutat. 11: 231-239, 1998.

24. Ropero, S.; Setien, F.; Espada, J.; Fraga, M. F.; Herranz, M.;
Asp, J.; Benassi, M. S.; Franchi, A.; Patino, A.; Ward, L. S.; Bovee,
J.; Cigudosa, J. C.; Wim, W.; Esteller, M.: Epigenetic loss of the
familial tumor-suppressor gene exostosin-1 (EXT1) disrupts heparan
sulfate synthesis in cancer cells. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 2753-2765,
2004.

25. Seki, H.; Kubota, T.; Ikegawa, S.; Haga, N.; Fujioka, F.; Ohzeki,
S.; Wakui, K.; Yoshikawa, H.; Takaoka, K.; Fukushima, Y.: Mutation
frequencies of EXT1 and EXT2 in 43 Japanese families with hereditary
multiple exostoses. Am. J. Med. Genet. 99: 59-62, 2001.

26. Wells, D. E.; Hill, A.; Lin, X.; Ahn, J.; Brown, N.; Wagner, M.
J.: Identification of novel mutations in the human EXT1 tumor suppressor
gene. Hum. Genet. 99: 612-615, 1997.

27. Wuyts, W.; Van Hul, W.: Molecular basis of multiple exostoses:
mutations in the EXT1 and EXT2 genes. Hum. Mutat. 15: 220-227, 2000.

28. Wuyts, W.; Van Hul, W.; De Boulle, K.; Hendrickx, J.; Bakker,
E.; Vanhoenacker, F.; Mollica, F.; Ludecke, H.-J.; Sayli, B. S.; Pazzaglia,
U. E.; Mortier, G.; Hamel, B.; Conrad, E. U.; Matsushita, M.; Raskind,
W. H.; Willems, P. J.: Mutations in the EXT1 and EXT2 genes in hereditary
multiple exostoses. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62: 346-354, 1998.

29. Xu, L.; Xia, J.; Jiang, H.; Zhou, J.; Li, H.; Wang, D.; Pan, Q.;
Long, Z.; Fan, C.; Deng, H.-X.: Mutation analysis of hereditary multiple
exostoses in the Chinese. Hum. Genet. 105: 45-50, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/13/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/10/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/22/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/20/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/9/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/3/2003

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 10/17/2003

EDITED carol: 10/11/2013
carol: 9/19/2013
mgross: 11/13/2012
terry: 11/13/2012
alopez: 6/17/2011
alopez: 1/10/2011
wwang: 12/8/2009
ckniffin: 11/10/2009
wwang: 5/30/2007
terry: 5/22/2007
carol: 2/8/2007
carol: 8/1/2006
mgross: 3/16/2006
wwang: 4/28/2005
wwang: 4/25/2005
terry: 4/20/2005
mgross: 8/10/2004
terry: 8/9/2004
alopez: 12/9/2003
terry: 12/3/2003
tkritzer: 11/21/2003
carol: 10/30/2003
ckniffin: 10/29/2003

601873	TITLE *601873 BETA-1,4-N-ACETYLGALACTOSAMINYLTRANSFERASE 1; B4GALNT1
;;BETA-1,4-N-ACETYLGALACTOSAMINYLTRANSFERASE; GALGT;;
GalNAcT;;
GM2/GD2 SYNTHASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The B4GALNT1 gene encodes beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyl transferase-1
(EC 2.4.1.92), an enzyme involved in the biosynthesis of complex
gangliosides (G), which are mono- (M), di- (D), and tri- (T) sialic
acid-containing glycosphingolipids generated by sequential
glycosylations. Gangliosides are part of the larger family of
glycosphingolipids and are components of the synaptic plasma membrane
involved in synaptic plasticity, signal transduction, and endocytosis
and then are critical for central nervous system development. B4GALNT1
catalyzes the transfer of N-acetylgalactosamine into GM3, GD3, and
globotriaosylceramide by a beta-1,4 linkage (summary by Boukhris et al.,
2013).

CLONING

Nagata et al. (1992) used expression cloning to isolate the cDNA for
beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase (GalNAcT), or G(M2)/G(D2)
synthase. The cDNA encodes a 561-amino acid polypeptide. Northern blot
analysis revealed that the gene is expressed as 2 differently sized
transcripts in all cells tested that expressed G(MS), G(D2), or both.
These findings indicate that the cDNAs catalyze the transfer of GalNAc
into G(M3) and G(D3) by a beta-1,4 linkage, resulting in the synthesis
of G(M2) and G(D2), respectively.

GENE STRUCTURE

Furukawa et al. (1996) examined the genomic structure of the human
GalNAcT gene and found that it contains more than 11 exons spanning over
8 kb of genomic DNA. They reported that the gene has at least 3 distinct
transcription initiation sites that may be involved in cell
type-specific gene expression.

MAPPING

By FISH, Furukawa et al. (1996) mapped the GALGT gene to 12q13.3. Hamlin
et al. (1998) mapped the GALGT and KIF5A (602821) genes to 12q13 by
FISH. They found that these genes are contained within the same
approximately 200-kb YAC insert as the GLI (165220) and DDIT3 (126337)
genes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By exome sequencing of 5 families with autosomal recessive spastic
paraplegia-26 (SPG26; 609195), Boukhris et al. (2013) identified 5
different homozygous mutations in the B4GALNT1 gene. The mutations
segregated with the disorder in the families and were not found in large
control databases. Subsequent analysis of this gene identified
pathogenic mutations in 2 of 65 additional probands with a similar
disorder. All mutations were truncating, except for 2 missense mutations
that occurred at highly conserved residues (see, e.g.,
601873.0001-601873.0005). No functional studies were performed. The
phenotype was characterized by onset in the first 2 decades of life of
gait abnormalities due to lower limb spasticity and muscle weakness.
Some patients had upper limb involvement. Additional features included
intellectual disability, peripheral neuropathy, dysarthria, cerebellar
signs, extrapyramidal signs, and cortical atrophy. The disorder was
slowly progressive.

ANIMAL MODEL

Takamiya et al. (1996) found that mice with a disrupted B4galnt1 gene
lacked all complex gangliosides, but did did not show any major
histologic defects in their nervous systems or in gross behavior.
Electrophysiologic studies showed a slight reduction in the neural
conduction velocity from the tibial nerve to the somatosensory cortex,
but not to the lumbar spine. The findings suggested that complex
gangliosides are required in neuronal functions, such as synaptic
transmission, but not in the morphogenesis and organogenesis of the
brain. Higher levels of GM3 and GD3 expressed in the brains of these
mutant mice may have been able to compensate for the lack of complex
gangliosides.

Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC; 257220) is a progressive
neurodegenerative disorder caused by mutations in the NPC1 gene (607623)
and characterized by intracellular accumulation of cholesterol and
sphingolipids. To determine the relative contribution of ganglioside
accumulation in the neuropathogenesis of Niemann-Pick C disease, Liu et
al. (2000) bred NPC model mice with mice carrying a targeted mutation in
GalNAcT. Unlike the NPC model mice, the double mutant mice did not
exhibit central nervous system accumulation of gangliosides GM2 or of
glycolipids GA1 and GA2. Histologic analysis revealed that the
characteristic neuronal storage pathology of NPC disease was
substantially reduced in the double mutant mice. By contrast, visceral
pathology was similar in the NPC and double mutant mice. Most notably,
the clinical phenotype of the double mutant mice, in the absence of CNS
ganglioside accumulation and associated neuronal pathology, did not
improve. The authors concluded that complex ganglioside storage, while
responsible for much of the neuronal pathology, did not significantly
influence the clinical phenotype of the NPC model.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, 1-BP DEL, 395C

In 3 Spanish sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with autosomal
recessive spastic paraplegia-26 (SPG26; 609195), Boukhris et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous 1-bp deletion (c.395delC) in the B4GALNT1 gene,
resulting in a frameshift and premature termination (Pro132GlnfsTer7).
The mutation, which was found by exome sequencing, segregated with the
disorder in the family and was not present in several large control
databases.

.0002
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, ARG228TER

In 2 Brazilian sibs with SPG26 (609195), Boukhris et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous c.682C-T transition in the B4GALNT1 gene,
resulting in an arg228-to-ter (R228X) substitution. The mutation, which
was found by exome sequencing, was not present in several large control
databases or in 2 unaffected sibs. Three additional sibs were reportedly
affected.

.0003
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, 1-BP DUP, 263G

In an Algerian patient, born of consanguineous parents, with SPG26
(609195), Boukhris et al. (2013) identified a homozygous 1-bp
duplication (c.263dupG), resulting in a frameshift and premature
termination (Leu89ProfsTer13). No other family members were available
for study.

.0004
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, GLN120TER

In 4 members of a Portuguese family with SPG26 (609195), Boukhris et al.
(2013) identified a homozygous c.358C-T transition in the B4GALNT1 gene,
resulting in a gln120-to-ter (Q120X) substitution. The mutation, which
was found by exome sequencing and was not present in several large
control databases, segregated with the disorder in the family.

.0005
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 26, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
B4GALNT1, ASP433ALA

In 3 German sibs with SPG26 (609195), Boukhris et al. (2013) identified
a homozygous c.1298A-C transversion in the B4GALNT1 gene, resulting in
an asp433-to-ala (D433A) substitution at a highly conserved residue. The
mutation, which was found by exome sequencing, was not found in several
large control databases and segregated with the disorder.

REFERENCE 1. Boukhris, A.; Schule, R.; Loureiro, J. L.; Lourenco, C. M.; Mundwiller,
E.; Gonzalez, M. A.; Charles, P.; Gauthier, J.; Rekik, I.; Acosta
Lebrigio, R. F.; Gaussen, M.; Speziani, F.; and 21 others: Alteration
of ganglioside biosynthesis responsible for complex hereditary spastic
paraplegia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 93: 118-123, 2013.

2. Furukawa, K.; Soejima, H.; Niikawa, N.; Shiku, H.; Furukawa, K.
: Genomic organization and chromosomal assignment of the human beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase
gene. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 20836-20844, 1996.

3. Hamlin, P. J.; Jones, P. F.; Leek, J. P.; Bransfield, K.; Lench,
N. J.; Aldersley, M. A.; Howdle, P. D.; Markham, A. F.; Robinson,
P. A.: Assignment of GALGT encoding beta-1,4N-acetylgalactosaminyl-transferase
(GalNAc-T) and KIF5A encoding neuronal kinesin (D12S1889) to human
chromosome band 12q13 by assignment to ICI YAC 26EG10 and in situ
hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 82: 267-268, 1998.

4. Liu, Y.; Wu, Y.-P.; Wada, R.; Neufeld, E. B.; Mullin, K. A.; Howard,
A. C.; Pentchev, P. G.; Vanier, M. T.; Suzuki, K.; Proia, R. L.:
Alleviation of neuronal ganglioside storage does not improve the clinical
course of the Niemann-Pick C disease mouse. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9:
1087-1092, 2000.

5. Nagata, Y.; Yamashiro, S.; Yodoi, J.; Lloyd, K. O.; Shiku, H.;
Furukawa, K.: Expression cloning of beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase
cDNAs that determine the expression of G(M2) and G(D2) gangliosides. J.
Biol. Chem. 267: 12082-12089, 1992. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem.
269: 7045 only, 1994.

6. Takamiya, K.; Yamamoto, A.; Furukawa, K.; Yamashiro, S.; Shin,
M.; Okada, M.; Fukumoto, S.; Haraguchi, M.; Takeda, N.; Fujimura,
K.; Sakae, M.; Kishikawa, M.; Shiku, H.; Furukawa, K.; Aizawa, S.
: Mice with disrupted GM2/GD2 synthase gene lack complex gangliosides
but exhibit only subtle defects in their nervous system. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 93: 10662-10667, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/1/2013
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/12/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 2/18/2000

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 4/10/1997

EDITED carol: 09/09/2013
carol: 8/6/2013
carol: 8/5/2013
ckniffin: 8/1/2013
carol: 4/3/2013
carol: 6/16/2006
carol: 11/14/2003
carol: 3/13/2003
alopez: 5/12/2000
mgross: 2/25/2000
psherman: 2/18/2000
carol: 6/16/1998
alopez: 1/28/1998

604456	TITLE *604456 INTERFERON-INDUCED TRANSMEMBRANE PROTEIN 1; IFITM1
;;INTERFERON-INDUCED PROTEIN 17; IFI17;;
LEU13;;
CD225
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In addition to their role in the defense against microbial infections,
interferons (IFNs; see, for example, 147570) exhibit antiproliferative
and differentiating activities that may confer on them potential as
antitumor agents. Exposure to IFNs leads to a modulation in the levels
of many cellular proteins that mediate the pleiotropic effects of
interferons. These effects may be mediated by soluble factors or by
cell-cell interactions involving specific membrane proteins. Deblandre
et al. (1995) identified a 17-kD membrane protein, IFI17, that was
inducible on tumor cell lines by interferon-alpha (147660) and, usually
to a lesser extent, by interferon-gamma (IFNG; 147570). Expression as
detected by FACS analysis or immunoprecipitation was correlated with
sensitivity of the cell lines to growth suppression by interferon. Using
mRNA extracted from HeLa cells incubated with interferon-alpha, the
authors screened a cDNA expression library by panning with a monoclonal
anti-IFI17. They obtained a cDNA sequence encoding a protein that is
identical except for 1 residue to the 125-amino acid protein 9-27 that
Reid et al. (1989) had isolated from a lymphoid cell cosmid library.

By whole-mount in situ hybridization, Lange et al. (2003) found that
expression of mouse fragilis, fragilis-2, and fragilis-3 was restricted
to the epiblast at embryonic days 5.5 and 6.5. By embryonic day 7.5, all
3 transcripts showed variable expression in a cluster of founder
premordial germ cells, and at embryonic days 11.5 and 12.5, all 3
transcripts were detected in gonadal germ cells. The 3 transcripts
showed unique patterns of expression in other tissues during mouse
development.

GENE FUNCTION

Reid et al. (1989) showed that transcription of the IFITM1 gene is
controlled by a 13-bp IFN-stimulated response element in the 5-prime
flanking region of the gene.

To determine precisely how germ cells are specified, Saitou et al.
(2002) performed a genetic screen between single nascent germ cells and
their somatic neighbors that share common ancestry. They demonstrated
that fragilis, a member of the IFN-inducible transmembrane protein
family, marks the onset of germ cell competence, and they proposed that
through homotypic association, it demarcates germ cells from somatic
neighbors. Using single cell gene expression profiles, Saitou et al.
(2002) showed that only those cells with the highest expression of
fragilis subsequently express 'stella' (see 608408), a murine gene that
was detected exclusively in lineage-restricted germ cells. The
stella-positive nascent germ cells exhibited repression of HOXB1
(142968), which may explain their escape from a somatic cell fate and
the retention of pluripotency.

Tanaka et al. (2005) determined that mouse Ifitm1 and Ifitm3 are
expressed on the cell surface of primordial germ cells in a
developmentally-regulated manner and that they appear to modulate cell
adhesion and influence cell differentiation. Ifitm1 activity was
required for primordial germ cell transit, and Ifitm1 acted as a
repulsive molecule, repelling non-Ifitm1-expressing primordial germ
cells from the mesoderm into the endoderm. In contrast, Ifitm3 was
expressed in migratory primordial germ cells and behaved as a homing
signal, enabling the cells to respond to environmental cues that guided
their localization. The guidance activities of Ifitm1 and Ifitm3 were
mediated by their unique N-terminal domains.

GENE STRUCTURE

Reid et al. (1989) found that the IFITM1 gene contains 2 exons.

Perry et al. (1999) found that the promoter of the bovine ISG17 gene was
similar to that of the ISG15 gene (147571) in placement of a tandem
IFN-stimulatory response element (ISRE) at position -90, but unique in
the presence of 3 additional ISREs at positions -123, -332, and -525.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lange et al. (2003) mapped the IFITM1 gene
to an IFITM gene cluster on chromosome 11p15.5. The order of the genes,
from telomere to centromere, is IFITM5 (614757), IFITM2 (605578),
IFITM1, and IFITM3 (605579), and the cluster spans about 26.5 kb. Lange
et al. (2003) stated that IFITM2 maps to the plus strand and that all
other IFITM genes map to the minus strand. However, Gross (2012)
determined that, in addition to IFITM2, the IFITM1 gene maps to the plus
strand based on an alignment of the IFITM1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK
BC000897) with the genomic sequence (GRCh37).

Lange et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Ifitm gene cluster to a region of
chromosome 7F5 that shares homology of synteny with human chromosome
11p15.5. The mouse Ifitm gene cluster contains 5 genes, whereas the
human cluster contains only 4 genes.

EVOLUTION

By phylogenetic analysis, Lange et al. (2003) found that only 2 mouse
fragilis genes, fragilis-4 (Ifitm5) and either fragilis (Ifitm3),
fragilis-2 (Ifitm1), or fragilis-3 (Ifitm2), have been conserved from
mouse to human. They suggested that subsequent gene duplications may
have occurred independently in both species.

REFERENCE 1. Deblandre, G. A.; Marinx, O. P.; Evans. S. S.; Majjaj, S.; Leo,
O.; Caput, D.; Huez, G. A.; Wathelet, M. G.: Expression cloning of
an interferon-inducible 17-kDa membrane protein implicated in the
control of cell growth. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 23860-23866, 1995.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/9/2012.

3. Lange, U. C.; Saitou, M.; Western, P. S.; Barton, S. C.; Surani,
M. A.: The fragilis interferon-inducible gene family of transmembrane
proteins is associated with germ cell specification in mice. BMC
Dev. Biol. 3: 1, 2003. Note: Electronic Article.

4. Perry, D. J.; Austin, K. J.; Hansen, T. R.: Cloning of interferon-stimulated
gene 17: the promoter and nuclear proteins that regulate transcription. Molec.
Endocr. 13: 1197-1206, 1999.

5. Reid, L. E.; Brasnett, A. H.; Gilbert, C. S.; Porter, A. C.; Gewert,
D. R.; Stark, G. R.; Kerr, I. M.: A single DNA response element can
confer inducibility by both alpha- and gamma interferons. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 86: 840-844, 1989.

6. Saitou, M.; Barton, S. C.; Surani, M. A.: A molecular programme
for the specification of germ cell fate in mice. Nature 418: 293-300,
2002.

7. Tanaka, S. S.; Yamaguchi, Y. L.; Tsoi, B.; Lickert, H.; Tam, P.
P. L.: IFITM/Mil/Fragilis family proteins IFITM1 and IFITM3 play
distinct roles in mouse primordial germ cell homing and repulsion. Dev.
Cell 9: 745-756, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 08/10/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/9/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/17/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/15/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/25/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/24/2000

EDITED mgross: 08/10/2012
terry: 8/9/2012
carol: 6/6/2006
alopez: 2/16/2006
terry: 1/17/2006
alopez: 7/15/2005
cwells: 7/25/2002
mgross: 1/24/2001
mgross: 9/22/2000
alopez: 2/23/2000
carol: 1/31/2000

604260	TITLE *604260 SIGNAL TRANSDUCER AND ACTIVATOR OF TRANSCRIPTION 5B; STAT5B
STAT5B/RARA FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

STAT5A (601511) and STAT5B are activated in response to a variety of
cytokines (Wang et al., 1996).

CLONING

Ambrosio et al. (2002) cloned the human STAT5B gene. They identified 2
alternatively spliced STAT5B transcripts that differ only in their
noncoding promoter sequences. The deduced 787-amino acid STAT5B protein
has an N-terminal DNA-binding domain, followed by a 4-helix bundle, a
DNA-binding specificity domain, a connector region, an SH2 domain, and a
C-terminal transactivation domain. RT-PCR detected the STAT5B transcript
containing promoter I in all tissues and cell lines examined.
Transcripts containing promoter II were highly expressed in placenta and
could be detected at weaker levels in spleen, brain, and heart, as well
as in some cell lines.

Wang et al. (1996) demonstrated that carboxy-truncated variant Stat5a
and Stat5b proteins of 77 and 80 kD, respectively, naturally occur in
mouse. These truncated Stat5a and Stat5b forms are derived from
incompletely spliced Stat5a and Stat5b transcripts.

By Northern blot analysis, Miyoshi et al. (2001) found that mouse Stat5b
is expressed from 2 promoters. Expression from the distal promoter was
ubiquitous, whereas expression from the proximal promoter was restricted
to liver, muscle, and mammary tissue.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (1996) showed that the truncated mouse Stat5a and Stat5b
proteins are inducibly tyrosine phosphorylated in the response to
several cytokines. These truncated Stat5 proteins form heterodimers with
both the full-length wildtype Stat5a and Stat5b proteins. Wang et al.
(1996) demonstrated that recombinant truncated forms of Stat5a and
Stat5b can be tyrosine phosphorylated and can bind to DNA. The tyrosine
phosphorylation of the carboxy-truncated forms was considerably more
stable than that of the wildtype Stat5a and Stat5b proteins.
Overexpression of a carboxy-truncated Stat5a protein in cells resulted
in the specific inhibition of the IL3 (147740)-induced transcriptional
activation of the oncostatin M gene (OSM; 165095) and the
cytokine-inducible SH2 domain-encoding gene (Cis), both of which have
been shown to be normally regulated by Stat5a. Although the truncated
Stat5a protein dominantly suppressed the induction of these genes, no
effects on cell proliferation were observed. Wang et al. (1996) stated
that their results demonstrate the natural existence of potential
dominantly suppressive variants of Stat5a and Stat5b, and implicate the
carboxyl domains of Stat5a and Stat5b proteins in transcriptional
regulation and functions related to dephosphorylation.

Boucheron et al. (1998) examined the DNA-binding domains of mouse Stat5a
and Stat5b and determined that the difference in their DNA-binding
specificities depends on a critical glycine residue in Stat5b and a
critical glutamic residue at a similar position in Stat5a.

Mak et al. (2002) studied the role of STAT5 as a component of the
differentiation of endometrium in response to ovarian hormone
stimulation in vivo. The abundance and subcellular distribution of STAT5
in endometrial stromal cells after a decidualization stimulus of cAMP
plus medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) had been investigated in vitro.
Western blot analysis revealed an increase in the apparent abundance of
STAT5A and STAT5B in the cytosolic and nuclear fractions at 2, 3, and 4
days after stimulation. The potential functional relevance of this
increase in STAT5 was suggested by the ability of transiently
transfected STAT5A or STAT5B to significantly enhance the response of
the decidual PRL (176760) promoter to cAMP/MPA acetate and attenuation
of the response to cAMP/MPA by dominant-negative STAT5. Mak et al.
(2002) concluded that regulated expression of STAT5 is therefore a
component of decidual differentiation of human endometrial stromal cells
and contributes significantly to activation of the decidual PRL
promoter. Alteration of this process by an antiphospholipid antibody
component suggested decidual differentiation as a potential clinical
target in recurrent early miscarriages.

In the Drosophila male germline, local activation of the Janus
kinase-signal transducer and activator of transcription (Jak-STAT)
pathway maintains stem cells; germline stem cells lacking Jak-STAT
signaling differentiate into spermatogonia without self-renewal. By
conditionally manipulating Jak-STAT signaling using a
temperature-sensitive allele of Stat92e, the Drosophila homolog of
STAT5B, Brawley and Matunis (2004) demonstrated that spermatogonia that
have initiated differentiation and are undergoing limited mitotic
(transit-amplifying) divisions can repopulate the niche and revert to
stem cell identity. Thus, Brawley and Matunis (2004) have shown that in
the appropriate microenvironment, transit-amplifying cells
dedifferentiate, becoming functional stem cells during tissue
regeneration.

Wawersik et al. (2005) showed that the JAK/STAT pathway provides a
sex-specific signal from the soma to the germline in Drosophila
embryonic gonads. The somatic gonad expresses a JAK/STAT ligand,
'unpaired' (upd), in a male-specific manner, and activates the JAK/STAT
pathway in male germ cells at the time of gonad formation. Furthermore,
the JAK/STAT pathway is necessary for male-specific germ cell behavior
during early gonad development, and is sufficient to activate aspects of
male germ cell behavior in female germ cells. Wawersik et al. (2005)
found that Drosophila Stat92e was upregulated specifically in male, but
not female, germ cells at the time of gonad formation. This reflects
male-specific activation of the JAK/STAT pathway because the activated
form of Stat92e (phosphorylated Stat92e) was also detected only in male
germ cells, and JAK activity was necessary and sufficient for Stat92e
expression. Wawersik et al. (2005) concluded that their findings
provided direct evidence that the JAK/STAT pathway mediates a key signal
from the somatic gonad that regulates male germline sexual development.

Vignudelli et al. (2010) found that overexpression of ZFP36L1 (601064)
in human CD34 (142230)-positive cord blood-derived stem/progenitor cells
inhibited their erythroid differentiation and colony formation, which
appeared to be due to downregulation of STAT5B protein levels through
degradation of STAT5B mRNA. Overexpression of ZFP36 (190700) also
inhibited erythroid differentiation, and overexpression of both ZFP36
and ZFP36L1 had a cumulative effect. Both ZFP36 and ZFP36L1 directly
bound a canonical AU-rich element II in the 3-prime UTR of STAT5B mRNA.
Vignudelli et al. (2010) concluded that ZFP36L1 negatively regulates
erythroid differentiation by interfering with the STAT5B pathway in
human hematopoietic stem cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ambrosio et al. (2002) determined that the STAT5B gene contains 19
exons. It has 2 alternate first exons, 1a and 1b, which are separated by
about 1.3 kb. A CpG island covers exon 1a and extends into the 5-prime
flanking region. Exon 2 contains the ATG start codon.

Miyoshi et al. (2001) determined that the mouse Stat5b gene contains 20
exons and spans more than 50 kb. The translation initiation codon is in
exon 2, and the stop codon is in exon 19. Stat5b has 2 promoters
separated by more than 20 kb.

Crispi et al. (2004) determined that both the STAT5A and STAT5B genes
lack TATA and CAAT elements, but both have binding sites for
transcription factors common in TATA-less promoters. Using a reporter
assay, they determined that gene fragments containing the CpG islands
were the most transcriptionally active fragments. Sp1 (189906) enhanced
expression of the basal promoters, and DNA methylation interfered with
Sp1-induced transcription. Cross-species sequence comparison identified
a bidirectional negative cis-acting regulatory element in the STAT5
intergenic region.

MAPPING

By FISH, Lin et al. (1996) mapped the STAT5A (601511) and STAT5B genes
to 17q11.2. In their FISH analysis, Arnould et al. (1999) found that the
STAT5B and RARA genes are very close to each other in 17q21.1-q21.2.
Ambrosio et al. (2002) determined that the STAT5A and STAT5B genes are
in an inverted orientation, with their 5-prime ends about 11 kb apart.

Miyoshi et al. (2001) mapped the mouse Stat5b gene to chromosome 11. The
promoters of the Stat5a and Stat5b genes are located head to head and
are separated by 10 kb. The order and orientation of genes at this
locus, Ptrf (603189)--Stat3 (102582)--Stat5a--Stat5b--Lgp1
(608587)--Hcrt (602358), are identical in the syntenic region of human
chromosome 17q21.

CYTOGENETICS

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) exhibits a characteristic t(15;17)
translocation that fuses the promyelocytic leukemia gene (PML; 102578)
on 15q22 to the retinoic acid receptor-alpha gene (RARA; 180240) on
17q12-q21.1. In a small subset of acute promyelocytic-like leukemias
(APLL), RARA is fused to a different partner: the promyelocytic leukemia
zinc finger gene (PLZF; 176797) on 11q23, the nucleophosmin gene (NPM1;
164040) on 5q35, or the nuclear mitotic apparatus-1 gene (NUMA1; 164009)
on 11q13. Arnould et al. (1999) reported the molecular characterization
of a RARA gene rearrangement in a patient with APLL and demonstrated
that the partner fused to RARA was the STAT5B gene, which belongs to the
Janus kinase (JAK)/STAT signaling pathway. Remarkably, the STAT5B
component of the chimeric protein was delocalized from the cytoplasm to
the nucleus, where it displayed a microspeckled pattern. Therefore,
unusual features of this APLL might result from dysregulation of the
JAK/STAT5 signal transducing pathways in the leukemic cells of the
patient. This was the first example of a human tumor bearing a
structurally abnormal STAT gene.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Kofoed et al. (2003) noted that signal transduction involving the growth
hormone receptor (GHR; 600946) occurs by means of at least 3
well-established pathways: STAT, phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (see
PIK3R1, 171833), and mitogen-activated protein kinase (see MAPK1,
176948) pathways. Collectively, these pathways mediate the
growth-promoting and metabolic actions of growth hormone (GH; 139250).
Kofoed et al. (2003) described a patient with the clinical and
biochemical characteristics of growth hormone insensitivity (245590), a
normal GHR gene, and a homozygous ala630-to-pro mutation (A630P;
604260.0001) in the STATB gene. The patient had a combined phenotype of
GH insensitivity and immunodeficiency consistent with the presence of a
defect in the JAK/STAT system.

Cohen et al. (2006) studied the patient originally reported by Kofoed et
al. (2003) and observed immune dysregulation with decreased numbers of
regulatory CD4+ (186940)/CD25 (IL2RA; 147730)-high T cells (Tregs). The
patient's Tregs showed low expression of FOXP3 (300292) and were
impaired in their ability to suppress proliferation of or to kill
CD4+/CD25- cells. CD25 expression was also reduced after IL2 (147680)
stimulation, although IL2-mediated upregulation of IL2RG (308380),
perforin (PRF1; 170280), and CD154 (CD40LG; 300386) was normal. The
immunologic phenotype of the patient's heterozygous parents tended to be
normal or intermediate.

In a 16.4-year-old Turkish girl with postnatal growth retardation and
insensitivity to growth hormone, who also had recurrent pulmonary
infections and a bleeding diathesis due to defective thrombocyte
aggregation, Hwa et al. (2005) identified homozygosity for a 1-bp
insertion in the STAT5B gene (604260.0002).

In a 30-year-old man born in the Dutch Antilles who had short stature
and delayed puberty with normal GH and GHBP levels, an elevated plasma
prolactin (176760) level, and extremely low levels of IGF1, IGFBP3
(146732), and acid-labile subunit (ALS; 601489), Vidarsdottir et al.
(2006) identified homozygosity for a 1-bp insertion in the STAT5B gene
(604260.0003). The authors stated that the patient was diagnosed with
congenital ichthyosis at birth (see 242300) and had hemorrhagic
varicella at 16 years of age, but had no history of pulmonary or
immunologic problems.

In a 16-year-old girl with severe postnatal growth failure, GH
insensitivity, and immunodeficiency, Bernasconi et al. (2006) identified
homozygosity for a nonsense mutation in the STAT5B gene (604260.0004).
Immunologic analysis revealed a moderate T-cell lymphopenia, normal
CD4/CD8 ratio, and very low numbers of natural killer and gamma-delta
(see 186970) T cells, and the T cells had a chronically hyperactivated
phenotype. In vitro T-cell proliferation and interleukin-2 (147680)
signaling were impaired, and CD4+/CD25+ regulatory T cells (Tregs) were
significantly diminished. Bernasconi et al. (2006) concluded that STAT5B
is a key protein for T-cell function in humans.

In 2 Kuwaiti sisters with severe postnatal growth retardation, normal GH
and GHBP levels, and no mutation in the GH receptor gene, Hwa et al.
(2007) identified homozygosity for a 1-bp deletion in the STAT5B gene
(604260.0005). The 3.9-year-old sister had recently been diagnosed with
bronchiectasis and interstitial pneumonitis, and her 2-year-old sister
had been diagnosed with idiopathic juvenile arthritis.

ANIMAL MODEL

STAT5 is activated in a broad spectrum of human hematologic
malignancies. Using a genetic approach, Schwaller et al. (2000)
addressed whether activation of STAT5 is necessary for the myelo- and
lymphoproliferative disease induced by the TEL (600618)/JAK2 (147796)
fusion gene. Whereas mice transplanted with bone marrow transduced with
retrovirus expressing TEL/JAK2 developed a rapidly fatal myelo- and
lymphoproliferative syndrome, reconstitution with bone marrow derived
from Stat5a/b-deficient mice expressing TEL/JAK2 did not induce disease.
Disease induction in the Stat5a/b-deficient background was rescued with
a bicistronic retrovirus encoding TEL/JAK2 and Stat5a. Furthermore,
myeloproliferative disease was induced by reconstitution with bone
marrow cells expressing a constitutively active mutant, Stat5a, or a
single Stat5a target, murine Osm. These data defined a critical role for
STAT5A/B and OSM in the pathogenesis of TEL/JAK2 disease.

Snow et al. (2003) observed that a subset of mice deficient in both
Stat5a and Stat5b had dramatic alterations in several bone marrow
progenitor populations, along with cellular infiltration of colon,
liver, and kidney and early death. The pathology and increased mortality
in these mice were abrogated when Rag1 (179615) was also deleted. The
phenotype was similar to that in mice defective in Il2 (147680)
signaling and correlated with a reduction in the number of Cd4
(186940)-positive/Cd25 (IL2RA; 147730)-positive regulatory T cells. Snow
et al. (2003) concluded that STAT5 is critical for maintenance of
tolerance in vivo and that STAT5 is probably activated by IL2R.

Cui et al. (2004) conditionally deleted the 110-kb Stat5 locus, which
spans both the Stat5a and Stat5b genes, to study the functions of the
Stat5 genes during mouse mammary gland development. Loss of the Stat5
genes prior to pregnancy prevented epithelial proliferation and
differentiation. Deletion of Stat5 during pregnancy, after mammary
epithelium had entered Stat5-mediated differentiation, resulted in
premature cell death, indicating that mammary epithelial cell
proliferation, differentiation, and survival require Stat5.

Yao et al. (2006) compared mice with a complete deletion of Stat5a and
Stat5b (Stat5 -/-) with mice having an N-terminally truncated, partially
functional Stat5 protein (Stat5delN) and mice lacking Il7r (146661),
Jak3 (600173), or the common gamma chain, Il2rg (308380). Stat5 -/- mice
died before or shortly after birth. Examination of day-18.5 Stat5 -/-
embryos showed a severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID; see 601457)
phenotype with significantly fewer thymocytes and splenocytes than
wildtype controls. The thymocyte deficit in Stat5 -/- embryos was
similar in magnitude to that in Il7r- or Il2rg-deficient embryos,
whereas Stat5delN embryos had significantly more thymocytes. The
splenocyte reduction in Stat5 -/- embryos was more severe than that in
Il7r- or IL2rg-deficient mice. B-cell proportions were particularly low
in Stat5 -/- embryos compared with controls, similar to Il7r -/- mice.
Tcra (see 186880) and Tcrb (see 186930) rearrangement was normal in
Stat5 -/- mice, but Tcrg (see 186970) rearrangement was defective. As in
Jak3 -/- mice, there was a marked reduction in CD8-positive T cells. Yao
et al. (2006) concluded that STAT5 deficiency results in SCID, similar
in many respects to what occurs in IL7R, JAK3, or IL2RG deficiency.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
GROWTH HORMONE INSENSITIVITY WITH IMMUNODEFICIENCY
STAT5B, ALA630PRO

In a 16.5-year-old Argentinian girl with short stature and growth
hormone insensitivity (245590), Kofoed et al. (2003) identified
homozygosity for a G-to-C transversion in exon 15 of the STAT5B gene,
result in an ala630-to-pro (A630P) substitution. Both parents were
heterozygous for the mutation; there was no family history of growth
failure, and the girl's younger sisters were of normal stature. The
patient also had recurrent pulmonary infections; biopsy revealed
lymphoid interstitial pneumonia and Pneumocystis carinii was isolated
from the tissue. Kofoed et al. (2003) concluded that the combined
phenotype of growth hormone insensitivity and immunodeficiency was
consistent with the presence of a defect in the JAK/STAT signaling
system.

Fang et al. (2006) studied the molecular mechanisms underlying the
growth hormone (GH; 139250) insensitivity and IGF1 (147440) deficiency
caused by A630P-mutated STAT5B. The A630P mutation disrupts the SRC
homology 2 (SH2) architecture such that mutant STAT5B most likely cannot
dock to phosphotyrosines on ligand-activated receptors, and stable
interactions with DNA are prevented. Fang et al. (2006) concluded that
because A630P-mutant STAT5B is an inefficient signal transducer and
transcription factor, the detrimental impact on signaling pathways
important for normal growth and immunity explains, in part, the complex
clinical phenotype of GH insensitivity and immune dysfunction.

.0002
GROWTH HORMONE INSENSITIVITY WITH IMMUNODEFICIENCY
STAT5B, 1-BP INS, 1191G

In a 16.4-year-old Turkish girl with postnatal growth retardation and
insensitivity to growth hormone (245590), born of second-cousin parents,
Hwa et al. (2005) identified homozygosity for a 1-bp insertion
(1191insG) in exon 10 of the STAT5B gene, resulting in an asp398-to-glu
(N398E) substitution and predicted to cause a stop codon 15 amino acids
downstream with loss of the C terminus. The mutation was not found in 50
controls. The patient also had recurrent pulmonary infections and a
bleeding diathesis due to defective thrombocyte aggregation.

.0003
GROWTH HORMONE INSENSITIVITY WITH IMMUNODEFICIENCY
STAT5B, 1-BP INS, 1102C

In a 30-year-old man, born in the Dutch Antilles of nonconsanguineous
parents, who had short stature and delayed puberty with growth hormone
insensitivity (245590), Vidarsdottir et al. (2006) identified
homozygosity for a 1-bp insertion (1102insC) in the STAT5b gene, causing
a frameshift predicted to result in a truncated protein lacking most of
the DNA-binding domain and the SH2 domain. The patient's parents,
brother, and sister were all heterozygous carriers of the mutation. The
authors stated that the patient was diagnosed with congenital ichthyosis
at birth (see 242300) and had hemorrhagic varicella at 16 years of age,
but had no history of pulmonary or immunologic problems.

.0004
GROWTH HORMONE INSENSITIVITY WITH IMMUNODEFICIENCY
STAT5B, ARG152TER

In a 16-year-old girl with severe postnatal growth failure, growth
hormone insensitivity, and immunodeficiency (245590), Bernasconi et al.
(2006) identified homozygosity for a C-T transition in exon 5 of the
STAT5B gene, resulting in an arg152-to-ter (R152X) substitution
predicted to cause complete absence of protein expression. The patient's
parents and brother were heterozygous for the mutation.

.0005
GROWTH HORMONE INSENSITIVITY WITH IMMUNODEFICIENCY
STAT5B, 1-BP DEL, EXON 13/INTRON 13 JUNCTION

In 2 Kuwaiti sisters, born of consanguineous parents, who had severe
postnatal growth retardation but normal growth hormone (139250) and
growth hormone-binding protein (see 600946) levels, Hwa et al. (2007)
identified homozygosity for the deletion of a single G at the exon
13/intron 13 junction of the STAT5B gene, predicted to cause a
frameshift and alternative splicing. The parents, who were of normal
stature, were heterozygous for the mutation. The older sister, aged 3.9
years, had recently been diagnosed with bronchiectasis and interstitial
pneumonitis, and her 2-year-old sister had been diagnosed with
idiopathic juvenile arthritis.

REFERENCE 1. Ambrosio, R.; Fimiani, G.; Monfregola, J.; Sanzari, E.; De Felice,
N.; Salerno, M. C.; Pignata, C.; D'Urso, M.; Ursini, M. V.: The structure
of human STAT5A and STAT5B genes reveals two regions of nearly identical
sequence and an alternative tissue specific STAT5B promoter. Gene 285:
311-318, 2002.

2. Arnould, C.; Philippe, C.; Bourdon, V.; Gregoire, M. J.; Berger,
R.; Jonveaux, P.: The signal transducer and activator of transcription
STAT5b gene is a new partner of retinoic acid receptor alpha in acute
promyelocytic-like leukaemia. Hum. Molec. Genet. 8: 1741-1749, 1999.

3. Bernasconi, A.; Marino, R.; Ribas, A.; Rossi, J.; Ciaccio, M.;
Oleastro, M.; Ornani, A.; Paz, R.; Rivarola, M. A.; Zelazko, M.; Belgorosky,
A.: Characterization of immunodeficiency in a patient with growth
hormone insensitivity secondary to a novel STAT5b gene mutation. Pediatrics 118:
e1584, 2006. Note: Electronic Article.

4. Boucheron, C.; Dumon, S.; Santos, S. C. R.; Moriggl, R.; Hennighausen,
L.; Gisselbrecht, S.; Gouilleux, F.: A single amino acid in the DNA
binding regions of STAT5A and STAT5B confers distinct binding specificities. J.
Biol. Chem. 273: 33936-33941, 1998.

5. Brawley, C.; Matunis, E.: Regeneration of male germline stem cells
by spermatogonial dedifferentiation in vivo. Science 304: 1331-1334,
2004.

6. Cohen, A. C.; Nadeau, K. C.; Tu, W.; Hwa, V.; Dionis, K.; Bezrodnik,
L.; Teper, A.; Gaillard, M.; Heinrich, J.; Krensky, A. M.; Rosenfeld,
R. G.; Lewis, D. B.: Decreased accumulation and regulatory function
of CD4+CD25(high) T cells in human STAT5b deficiency. J. Immun. 177:
2770-2774, 2006.

7. Crispi, S.; Sanzari, E.; Monfregola, J.; De Felice, N.; Fimiani,
G.; Ambrosio, R.; D'Urso, M.; Ursini, M. V.: Characterization of
the human STAT5A and STAT5B promoters: evidence of a positive and
negative mechanism of transcriptional regulation. FEBS Lett. 562:
27-34, 2004.

8. Cui, Y.; Riedlinger, G.; Miyoshi, K.; Tang, W.; Li, C.; Deng, C.-X.;
Robinson, G. W.; Hennighausen, L.: Inactivation of Stat5 in mouse
mammary epithelium during pregnancy reveals distinct functions in
cell proliferation, survival, and differentiation. Molec. Cell. Biol. 24:
8037-8047, 2004.

9. Fang, P.; Kofoed, E. M.; Little, B. M.; Wang, X.; Ross, R. J. M.;
Frank, S. J.; Hwa, V.; Rosenfeld, R. G.: A mutant signal transducer
and activator of transcription 5b, associated with growth hormone
insensitivity and insulin-like growth factor-I deficiency, cannot
function as a signal transducer or transcription factor. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 91: 1526-1534, 2006.

10. Hwa, V.; Camacho-Hubner, C.; Little, B. M.; David, A.; Metherell,
L. A.; El-Khatib, N.; Savage, M. O.; Rosenfeld, R. G.: Growth hormone
insensitivity and severe short stature in siblings: a novel mutation
at the exon 13-intron 13 junction of the STAT5b gene. Horm. Res. 68:
218-224, 2007.

11. Hwa, V.; Little, B.; Adiyaman, P.; Kofoed, E. M.; Pratt, K. L.;
Ocal, G.; Berberoglu, M.; Rosenfeld, R. G.: Severe growth hormone
insensitivity resulting from total absence of signal transducer and
activator of transcription 5b. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 4260-4266,
2005.

12. Kofoed, E. M.; Hwa, V.; Little, B.; Woods, K. A.; Buckway, C.
K.; Tsubaki, J.; Pratt, K. L.; Bezrodnik, L.; Jasper, H.; Tepper,
A.; Heinrich, J. J.; Rosenfeld, R. G.: Growth hormone insensitivity
associated with a STAT5b mutation. New Eng. J. Med. 349: 1139-1147,
2003.

13. Lin, J.-X.; Mietz, J.; Modi, W. S.; John, S.; Leonard, W. J.:
Cloning of human Stat5B: reconstitution of interleukin-2-induced Stat5A
and Stat5B DNA binding activity in COS-7 cells. J. Biol. Chem. 271:
10738-10744, 1996.

14. Mak, I. Y. H.; Brosens, J. J.; Christian, M.; Hills, F. A.; Chamley,
L.; Regan, L.; White, J. O.: Regulated expression of signal transducer
and activator of transcription, Stat5, and its enhancement of PRL
expression in human endometrial stromal cells in vitro. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 87: 2581-2588, 2002.

15. Miyoshi, K.; Cui, Y.; Riedlinger, G.; Robinson, P.; Lehoczky,
J.; Zon, L.; Oka, T.; Dewar, K.; Hennighausen, L.: Structure of the
mouse Stat 3/5 locus: evolution from Drosophila to zebrafish to mouse. Genomics 71:
150-155, 2001.

16. Schwaller, J.; Parganas, E.; Wang, D.; Cain, D.; Aster, J. C.;
Williams, I. R.; Lee, C.-K.; Gerthner, R.; Kitamura, T.; Frantsve,
J.; Anastasiadou, E.; Loh, M. L.; Levy, D. E.; Ihle, J. N.; Gilliland,
D. G.: Stat5 is essential for the myelo- and lymphoproliferative
disease induced by TEL/JAK2. Molec. Cell 6: 693-704, 2000.

17. Snow, J. W.; Abraham, N.; Ma, M. C.; Herndier, B. G.; Pastuszak,
A. W.; Goldsmith, M. A.: Loss of tolerance and autoimmunity affecting
multiple organs in STAT5A/5B-deficient mice. J. Immun. 171: 5042-5050,
2003.

18. Vidarsdottir, S.; Walenkamp, M. J. E.; Pereira, A. M.; Karperien,
M.; van Doorn, J.; van Duyvenvoorde, H. A.; White, S.; Bruening, M.
H.; Roelfsema, F.; Kruithof, M. F.; van Dissel, J.; Janssen, R.; Wit,
J. M.; Romijn, J. A.: Clinical and biochemical characteristics of
a male patient with a novel homozygous STAT5b mutation. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 91: 3482-3485, 2006.

19. Vignudelli, T.; Selmi, T.; Martello, A.; Parenti, S.; Grande,
A.; Gemelli, C.; Zanocco-Marani, T.; Ferrari, S.: ZFP36L1 negatively
regulates erythroid differentiation of CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells
by interfering with the Stat5b pathway. Molec. Biol. Cell 21: 3340-3351,
2010.

20. Wang, D.; Stravopodis, D.; Teglund, S.; Kitazawa, J.; Ihle, J.
N.: Naturally occurring dominant negative variants of Stat5. Molec.
Cell Biol. 16: 6141-6148, 1996.

21. Wawersik, M.; Milutinovich, A.; Casper, A. L.; Matunis, E.; Williams,
B.; Van Doren, M.: Somatic control of germline sexual development
is mediated by the JAK/STAT pathway. (Letter) Nature 436: 563-567,
2005.

22. Yao, Z.; Cui, Y.; Watford, W. T.; Bream, J. H.; Yamaoka, K.; Hissong,
B. D.; Li, D.; Durum, S. K.; Jiang, Q.; Bhandoola, A.; Hennighausen,
L.; O'Shea, J. J.: Stat5a/b are essential for normal lymphoid development
and differentiation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 1000-1005, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/22/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/17/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/14/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/9/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/5/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/16/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/15/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/5/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/8/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/1/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/10/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 2/4/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/11/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 6/26/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/26/1999

EDITED mgross: 10/04/2013
mgross: 1/11/2012
terry: 12/22/2011
alopez: 6/2/2009
terry: 7/17/2007
carol: 7/17/2007
alopez: 5/14/2007
mgross: 3/14/2007
terry: 3/9/2007
mgross: 5/8/2006
terry: 5/5/2006
mgross: 4/4/2006
terry: 3/16/2006
alopez: 8/19/2005
terry: 8/15/2005
mgross: 10/5/2004
alopez: 6/9/2004
terry: 6/8/2004
mgross: 4/16/2004
terry: 4/1/2004
carol: 10/27/2003
tkritzer: 10/21/2003
terry: 10/10/2003
cwells: 2/4/2003
mgross: 10/11/2000
mcapotos: 7/14/2000
psherman: 6/26/2000
mgross: 10/26/1999

611859	TITLE *611859 MITOCHONDRIAL RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L55; MRPL55
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mitochondria have their own translation system for production of 13
inner membrane proteins essential for oxidative phosphorylation. MRPL55
is a component of the large subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome that
is encoded by the nuclear genome (Koc et al., 2001).

CLONING

By searching databases using bovine Mrpl55 as query, Koc et al. (2001)
identified human MRPL55. They also identified MRPL55 homologs in mouse,
Drosophila, and C. elegans, but not in yeast, E. coli, or Arabidopsis.
Mouse and human MRPL55 share 71.7% amino acid identity.

MAPPING

Hartz (2008) mapped the MRPL55 gene to chromosome 1q42.13 based on an
alignment of the MRPL55 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AY358771) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/5/2008.

2. Koc, E. C.; Burkhart, W.; Blackburn, K.; Moyer, M. B.; Schlatzer,
D. M.; Moseley, A.; Spremulli, L. L.: The large subunit of the mammalian
mitochondrial ribosome: analysis of the complement of ribosomal proteins
present. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 43958-43969, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/26/2008

EDITED mgross: 03/05/2008

611698	TITLE *611698 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 22, MEMBER 24; SLC22A24
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SLC22A24 belongs to a large family of transmembrane proteins that
function as uniporters, symporters, and antiporters to transport organic
ions across cell membranes (Jacobsson et al., 2007).

CLONING

By searching a human database for SLC22 family members, Jacobsson et al.
(2007) identified SLC22A24. The deduced 322-amino acid protein has 12
putative transmembrane domains. Quantitative real-time PCR detected high
expression of rat Slc22a24 in liver and skeletal muscle and in coronal
sections taken from the olfactory bulb and forebrain. Expression was
weaker in other cortical sections, and none was detected in other
specific brain regions or in peripheral tissues.

GENE STRUCTURE

Jacobsson et al. (2007) determined that the SLC22A24 gene contains 4
exons.

MAPPING

Jacobsson et al. (2007) stated that the SLC22A24 gene maps to chromosome
11q12.3; the mouse Slc22a24 gene maps to chromosome 19qA.

REFERENCE 1. Jacobsson, J. A.; Haitina, T.; Lindblom, J.; Fredriksson, R.:
Identification of six putative human transporters with structural
similarity to the drug transporter SLC22 family. Genomics 90: 595-609,
2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/21/2007

EDITED carol: 08/15/2008
carol: 12/21/2007

601621	TITLE *601621 T-BOX 3; TBX3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the course of studying the 12q24.1 region where linkage studies
indicated that the Holt-Oram syndrome (142900) is located, Li et al.
(1997) and Basson et al. (1997) identified the genes TBX3 and TBX5
(601620). The latter gene was found to be the site of mutations
responsible for Holt-Oram syndrome.

The cloning of new TBX3 cDNAs allowed Bamshad et al. (1999) to complete
the characterization of the TBX3 gene and to identify alternatively
transcribed TBX3 transcripts, including 1 that interrupts the T-box. The
complete open reading frame of the TBX3 gene encodes a predicted
723-amino acid protein, of which 255 amino acids are encoded by newly
identified exons. Comparison of other T-box genes to TBX3 indicated
regions of substantial homology outside the DNA-binding domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Sowden et al. (2001) examined the role of Drosophila 'optomotor blind'
(omb)-related T-box genes in the development of human and mouse retina.
Murine Tbx2 (600747), Tbx3, and Tbx5 and human TBX2 cDNAs were isolated
from retina cDNA libraries by hybridization to the Drosophila omb gene.
Human and mouse TBX2, TBX3, and TBX5 were expressed asymmetrically
across the embryonic neural retina, with highest levels of mRNA within
dorsal and peripheral retina. The dorsoventral gradient of TBX2
expression disappeared before the ganglion cell layer (GCL) formed. Its
expression became restricted to the inner neuroblastic retina and later
to the GCL and inner nuclear layer (INL). The dorsal expression domains
of TBX5 and TBX3 were maintained during formation of the GCL. As the
retina matured, TBX3 expression was restricted to the INL, and TBX5 was
expressed within the GCL. The authors concluded that the expression
patterns of TBX2, TBX3, and TBX5 within the developing retina support
the idea that the encoded transcription factors play a role in providing
positional information important for topographic mapping in
differentiation of distinct cell types across the laminar axis of the
retina.

Hoogaars et al. (2007) found that the sinoatrial node of mouse heart was
formed by proliferation of Tbx3-positive precursor cells and not from
bordering atrial cells. Tbx3 deficiency resulted in expansion of atrial
gene expression into the sinoatrial node domain and partial loss of
sinoatrial node-specific gene expression. Ectopic expression of Tbx3 in
mice repressed the atrial phenotype and imposed the pacemaker phenotype
on the atria, resulting in development of functional ectopic pacemakers.

Niwa et al. (2009) showed that 2 LIF (159540) signaling pathways are
each connected to the core circuitry required to maintain pluripotency
via different transcription factors. In mouse embryonic stem cells, Klf4
(602253) is mainly activated by the Jak-Stat3 pathway and preferentially
activates Sox2 (184429), whereas Tbx3 is preferentially regulated by the
phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase-Akt and mitogen-activated protein
kinase pathways and predominantly stimulates Nanog (607937). In the
absence of Lif, artificial expression of Klf4 or Tbx3 was sufficient to
maintain pluripotency while maintaining the expression of Oct3/4
(164177). Notably, overexpression of Nanog supported Lif-independent
self-renewal of mouse embryonic stem cells in the absence of Klf4 and
Tbx3 activity. Therefore, Niwa et al. (2009) concluded that KLF4 and
TBX3 are involved in mediating LIF signaling to the core circuitry but
are not directly associated with the maintenance of pluripotency,
because embryonic stem cells keep pluripotency without their expression
in the particular context.

Using genetic lineage analysis, knockout studies, and explant assays,
Wiese et al. (2009) found that Tbx18 (604613) was required to establish
the large head structure of the mouse sinoatrial node from mesenchymal
precursors. Subsequently, Tbx3 induced expression of pacemaker genes for
pacemaker function.

Han et al. (2010) showed that the transcription factor Tbx3
significantly improves the quality of induced pluripotent stem (iPS)
cells. iPS cells generated with Klf4 and Tbx3 were superior in both germ
cell contribution to the gonads and germline transmission frequency.
However, global gene expression profiling could not distinguish between
the 2 groups of iPS cells. Genomewide chromatin immunoprecipitation
sequencing analysis of Tbx3-binding sites in embryonic stem cells
suggested that Tbx3 regulates pluripotency-associated and reprogramming
factors, in addition to sharing many common downstream regulatory
targets with Oct4, Sox2, Nanog, and Smad1 (601595). Han et al. (2010)
concluded that their study underscored the intrinsic qualitative
differences between iPS cells generated by different methods, and
highlighted the need to rigorously characterize iPS cells beyond in
vitro studies.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yi et al. (2000) determined that the TBX3 gene contains at least 6 exons
and spans more than 9.0 kb.

MAPPING

The human TBX3 and TBX5 genes map to chromosome 12q24.1, and the murine
homologs, Tbx3 and Tbx5, map to chromosome 5 (Li et al., 1997; Basson et
al., 1997).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Li et al. (1997) pointed out that TBX3 may be a candidate gene for
Noonan syndrome (163950) and ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS; 181450). The
latter possibility indeed proved to be the case; Bamshad et al. (1997)
demonstrated mutations in TBX3 in 2 families with ulnar-mammary
syndrome. Each mutation was predicted to cause haploinsufficiency of
TBX3, implying that critical levels of this transcription factor are
required for morphogenesis of several organs. Limb abnormalities of
ulnar-mammary syndrome involve posterior elements. Mutations in TBX5
cause anterior limb abnormalities in Holt-Oram syndrome. Because of
similarities in structure and function of TBX3 and TBX5 and because of
close linkage, Bamshad et al. (1997) proposed that these genes
originated from a common ancestral gene, each having acquired specific
complementary roles in patterning the mammalian upper limb.

Bamshad et al. (1999) identified novel mutations in the TBX3 gene in all
of 8 newly reported families with UMS, including 5 mutations downstream
of the region encoding the T-box. This suggested that a domain (or
domains) outside the T-box was highly conserved and important for the
function of TBX3. Bamshad et al. (1999) found no obvious phenotypic
differences between those who had missense mutations and those who had
deletions or frameshifts.

To determine how C-terminal mutations may affect transcription, Carlson
et al. (2001) created a series of fusion proteins to map regions that
conferred transcriptional activity, nuclear localization, and
DNA-binding properties of Tbx3. Tbx3 binds the canonic brachyury binding
site as a monomer and represses transcription. A key repression domain
(RD1) resides in the Tbx3 C terminus that can function as a portable
repression domain. Most UMS-associated C-terminal mutants lack the RD1
and exhibit decreased or loss of transcriptional repression activity. A
cluster of basic amino acids at residues 292-297 serves as a nuclear
localization signal. Two C-terminal truncation mutants exhibited
increased rates of protein decay. The RD1 repression domain of Tbx3 was
also shown to be capable of immortalizing primary embryo fibroblasts.

Borozdin et al. (2006) reported a Czech mother and 2 daughters who were
diagnosed with Holt-Oram syndrome, in whom they identified a 2.19 to
2.27-Mb contiguous deletion encompassing the TBX5 and TBX3 genes.
Clinical reexamination confirmed the presence of features of
ulnar-mammary syndrome that were previously unrecognized. Borozdin et
al. (2006) noted that the contiguous deletion also included the RBM19
gene, but commented that it was unlikely to contribute to or modify the
phenotype since all the anomalies present in the affected individuals
could be explained by either TBX5 or TBX3 haploinsufficiency.

Klopocki et al. (2006) sequenced the TBX3 gene in a 3.5-year-old girl
with an ulnar-mammary-like phenotype, dysmorphic facies, and mental
retardation, but did not detect any mutation. Microarray CGH revealed
heterozygosity for an interstitial 1.28-Mb deletion on chromosome
12q24.21, encompassing the TBX3 gene. The deletion and TBX3
haploinsufficiency were confirmed by FISH. Neither parent carried the
deletion. Klopocki et al. (2006) stated that this was the first
description of TBX3 haploinsufficiency caused by a genomic deletion in a
patient with ulnar-mammary syndrome and suggested that the facial
changes and mental retardation observed in this patient might be due to
involvement of neighboring genes.

In a boy and his mother with ulnar-mammary syndrome, Linden et al.
(2009) identified heterozygosity for a nonsense mutation in the TBX3
gene (601621.0005).

ANIMAL MODEL

Using the development of the 4-digit chick leg as a model system, Suzuki
et al. (2004) studied the role of Tbx2 and Tbx3 in specifying digit
identities along the anterior-posterior axis. Misexpression of Tbx2 and
Tbx3 induced posterior homeotic transformation of digit III to digit IV
and digit II to digit III, respectively. Conversely, misexpression of
constitutively active mutants induced anterior transformation. In both
cases, alterations in the expression of several markers, including Bmp2
(112261), Shh (600725), and HoxD genes (see 142987), were observed. In
addition, Tbx2 and Tbx3 rescued Noggin (602991)-mediated inhibition of
interdigital BMP signaling, which was pivotal in establishing digit
identities. Suzuki et al. (2004) concluded that, in the developing
chick, Tbx3 specifies digit III and the combination of Tbx2 and Tbx3
specifies digit IV, acting together with the interdigital BMP signaling
cascade.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ULNAR-MAMMARY SYNDROME
TBX3, 1-BP DEL, 227T

In a mother and son with ulnar-mammary syndrome (181450), Bamshad et al.
(1997) found that the TBX3 gene had deletion of nucleotide 227, a
thymidine, resulting in shift of the reading frame and a premature
termination codon after 11 novel amino acids. A hand x-ray in the mother
showed complete absence of the fourth digit (metacarpal and phalanges)
and fusion of the capitate and hamate bones on the right. The mutated
protein in this family was predicted to encode a markedly truncated
protein containing only 86 amino acids and lacking the entire T-box
domain. This mutant protein should be incapable of binding DNA. Affected
members of this family demonstrated limb and apocrine anomalies.

.0002
ULNAR-MAMMARY SYNDROME
TBX3, IVS2DS, G-C, +1

In a mother and daughter with ulnar-mammary syndrome (181450), Bamshad
et al. (1997) demonstrated heterozygosity for a G-to-C transversion in
the first nucleotide of intron 2. This substitution altered the
consensus splice donor site and was predicted to alter gene splicing.
This family exhibited limb, apocrine, and genital anomalies.

.0003
ULNAR-MAMMARY SYNDROME
TBX3, LYS273TER

In a Japanese mother and her 2 sons with ulnar-mammary syndrome
(181450), Sasaki et al. (2002) found a heterozygous 817A-T mutation in
exon 4 of the TBX3 gene, leading to a lys273-to-ter substitution. The
mutation is expected to impair the DNA-binding capacity of the TBX3
protein.

.0004
ULNAR-MAMMARY SYNDROME
TBX3, 1-BP INS, 88A

Wollnik et al. (2002) reported a large Turkish family in which 10
members spanning 3 generations had autosomal dominant ulnar-mammary
syndrome (181450). The phenotypic expression of the disease was highly
variable among the affected family members showing posterior (ulnar or
postaxial) limb deficiencies and/or duplications, mammary gland
hypoplasia, apocrine dysfunction, and dental and genital abnormalities.
Mutation analysis identified a 1-bp insertion (88insA) in the TBX3 gene.
The truncated protein lacked almost all functionally important parts of
TBX3 and probably had complete loss of function.

.0005
ULNAR-MAMMARY SYNDROME
TBX3, GLN331TER

In a boy and his mother with ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS; 181450),
Linden et al. (2009) identified heterozygosity for a 991C-T transition
in exon 5 of the TBX3 gene, resulting in a gln331-to-ter (Q331X)
substitution. The boy had phenotypic features not theretofore described
in UMS, including hypoplastic anterior pituitary and ectopic posterior
pituitary gland, ventricular septal defect, and cardiac conduction
defects consistent with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (see 194200). In
addition, the boy's mother did not show the classic features of UMS,
supporting the variable expressivity of UMS within the same family.

REFERENCE 1. Bamshad, M.; Le, T.; Watkins, W. S.; Dixon, M. E.; Kramer, B. E.;
Roeder, A. D.; Carey, J. C.; Root, S.; Schinzel, A.; Van Maldergem,
L.; Gardner, R. J. M.; Lin, R. C.; Seidman, C. E.; Seidman, J. G.;
Wallerstein, R.; Moran, E.; Sutphen, R.; Campbell, C. E.; Jorde, L.
B.: The spectrum of mutations in TBX3: genotype/phenotype relationship
in ulnar-mammary syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64: 1550-1562, 1999.

2. Bamshad, M.; Lin, R. C.; Law, D. J.; Watkins, W. S.; Krakowiak,
P. A.; Moore, M. E.; Franceschini, P.; Lala, R.; Holmes, L. B.; Gebuhr,
T. C.; Bruneau, B. G.; Schinzel, A.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C. E.;
Jorde, L. B.: Mutations in human TBX3 alter limb, apocrine and genital
development in ulnar-mammary syndrome. Nature Genet. 16: 311-315,
1997. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 19: 102 only, 1998.

3. Basson, C. T.; Bachinsky, D. R.; Lin, R. C.; Levi, T.; Elkins,
J. A.; Soults, J.; Grayzel, D.; Kroumpouzou, E.; Traill, T. A.; Leblanc-Straceski,
J.; Renault, B.; Kucherlapati, R.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C. E.
: Mutations in human TBX5 cause limb and cardiac malformation in Holt-Oram
syndrome. Nature Genet. 15: 30-35, 1997. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet.
15: 411 only, 1997.

4. Borozdin, W.; Bravo-Ferrer Acosta, A. M.; Seemanova, E.; Leipoldt,
M.; Bamshad, M. J.; Unger, S.; Kohlhase, J.: Contiguous hemizygous
deletion of TBX5, TBX3, and RBM19 resulting in a combined phenotype
of Holt-Oram and ulnar-mammary syndromes. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A:
1880-1886, 2006.

5. Carlson, H.; Ota, S.; Campbell, C. E.; Hurlin, P. J.: A dominant
repression domain in Tbx3 mediates transcriptional repression and
cell immortalization: relevance to mutations in Tbx3 that cause ulnar-mammary
syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 2403-2413, 2001.

6. Han, J.; Yuan, P.; Yang, H.; Zhang, J.; Soh, B. S.; Li, P.; Lim,
S. L.; Cao, S.; Tay, J.; Orlov, Y. L.; Lufkin, T. Hg, H.-H.; Tam,
W.-L.; Lim, B.: Tbx3 improves the germ-line competency of induced
pluripotent stem cells. Nature 463: 1096-1100, 2010.

7. Hoogaars, W. M. H.; Engel, A.; Brons, J. F.; Verkerk, A. O.; de
Lange, F. J.; Wong, L. Y. E.; Bakker, M. L.; Clout, D. E.; Wakker,
V.; Barnett, P.; Ravesloot, J. H.; Moorman, A. F. M.; Verheijck, E.
E.; Christoffels, V. M.: Tbx3 controls the sinoatrial node gene program
and imposes pacemaker function on the atria. Genes Dev. 21: 1098-1112,
2007.

8. Klopocki, E.; Neumann, L. M.; Tonnies, H.; Ropers, H.-H.; Mundlos,
S.; Ullmann, R.: Ulnar-mammary syndrome with dysmorphic facies and
mental retardation caused by a novel 1.28 Mb deletion encompassing
the TBX3 gene. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 14: 1274-1279, 2006.

9. Li, Q. Y.; Newbury-Ecob, R. A.; Terrett, J. A.; Wilson, D. I.;
Curtis, A. R. J.; Yi, C. H.; Gebuhr, T.; Bullen, P. J.; Robson, S.
C.; Strachan, T.; Bonnet, D.; Lyonnet, S.; Young, I. D.; Raeburn,
J. A.; Buckler, A. J.; Law, D. J.; Brook, J. D.: Holt-Oram syndrome
is caused by mutations in TBX5, a member of the Brachyury (T) gene
family. Nature Genet. 15: 21-29, 1997.

10. Linden, H.; Williams, R.; King, J.; Blair, E.; Kini, U.: Ulnar
mammary syndrome and TBX3: expanding the phenotype. Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A:
2809-2812, 2009.

11. Niwa, H.; Ogawa, K.; Shimosato, D.; Adachi, K.: A parallel circuit
of LIF signalling pathways maintains pluripotency of mouse ES cells. Nature 460:
118-122, 2009.

12. Sasaki, G.; Ogata, T.; Ishii, T.; Hasegawa, T.; Sato, S.; Matsuo,
N.: Novel mutation of TBX3 in a Japanese family with ulnar-mammary
syndrome: implication for impaired sex development. Am. J. Med. Genet. 110:
365-369, 2002.

13. Sowden, J. C.; Holt, J. K. L.; Meins, M.; Smith, H. K.; Bhattacharya,
S. S.: Expression of Drosophila omb-related T-box genes in the developing
human and mouse neural retina. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 42: 3095-3102,
2001.

14. Suzuki, T.; Takeuchi, J.; Koshiba-Takeuchi, K.; Ogura, T.: Tbx
genes specify posterior digit identity through Shh and BMP signaling. Dev.
Cell 6: 43-53, 2004. Note: Erratum: Dev. Cell 8: 971-972, 2005.

15. Wiese, C.; Grieskamp, T.; Airik, R.; Mommersteeg, M. T. M.; Gardiwal,
A.; de Gier-de Vries, C.; Schuster-Gossler, K.; Moorman, A. F. M.;
Kispert, A.; Christoffels, V. M.: Formation of the sinus node head
and differentiation of sinus node myocardium are independently regulated
by Tbx18 and Tbx3. Circ. Res. 104: 388-397, 2009.

16. Wollnik, B.; Kayserili, H.; Uyguner, O.; Tukel, T.; Yuksel-Apak,
M.: Haploinsufficiency of TBX3 causes ulnar-mammary syndrome in a
large Turkish family. Ann. Genet. 45: 213-217, 2002.

17. Yi, C.-H.; Russ, A.; Brook, J. D.: Virtual cloning and physical
mapping of a human T-box gene, TBX4. Genomics 67: 92-95, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/13/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/8/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/8/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/25/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/6/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/2/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/20/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/7/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/21/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/23/2004
Deborah L. Stone - updated: 10/4/2002
Jane Kelly - updated: 7/8/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/3/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/27/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/3/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/25/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/10/1997

EDITED terry: 11/29/2012
mgross: 9/13/2012
alopez: 6/14/2012
terry: 6/13/2012
terry: 5/10/2012
alopez: 4/9/2010
terry: 4/8/2010
mgross: 12/11/2009
terry: 12/8/2009
alopez: 8/27/2009
terry: 8/25/2009
mgross: 7/24/2007
terry: 7/6/2007
wwang: 3/8/2007
terry: 3/2/2007
wwang: 10/20/2006
mgross: 5/7/2004
mgross: 4/21/2004
tkritzer: 1/29/2004
terry: 1/23/2004
carol: 10/4/2002
mgross: 7/8/2002
cwells: 5/14/2002
cwells: 5/3/2002
mgross: 6/3/1999
terry: 5/27/1999
carol: 2/17/1999
mark: 7/7/1997
terry: 7/3/1997
mark: 6/17/1997
mark: 2/25/1997
terry: 2/24/1997
jenny: 1/14/1997
mark: 1/10/1997

116890	TITLE *116890 CATHEPSIN E; CTSE
;;CATE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cathepsin E, an endolysosomal aspartic proteinase predominantly
expressed in cells of the immune system, has an important role in immune
responses (Yanagawa et al., 2007).

CLONING

Taggart et al. (1989) used sets of complementary oligonucleotide probes
specific for the highly conserved active site region of aspartic
proteinases to isolate cDNA clones encoding novel enzymes of this class.
They identified 6 classes of cDNA clones in a gastric adenocarcinoma
cDNA library using a set of 18-mer probes. One of the cDNAs, designated
AGS402, was shown by DNA analysis to correspond to the predicted coding
sequence of cathepsin E. Couvreur et al. (1989, 1990) also isolated a
full-length CTSE cDNA clone from a gastric adenocarcinoma cDNA library.

Azuma et al. (1989, 1989) reported the amino acid sequence of CTSE
predicted on the basis of the cDNA sequence and compared the sequence
with that of other aspartic proteinases. Azuma et al. (1992)
demonstrated that multiple transcripts result from alternative
polyadenylation of the primary transcripts of the single CTSE gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

Azuma et al. (1992) determined that the CTSE gene contains 9 exons and
spans 17.5 kb. The size and placement of the exons are highly conserved
relative to other aspartic proteinases.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis, Taggart et al. (1989) mapped the CTSE
gene to chromosome 1. Azuma et al. (1989, 1989) also assigned the CTSE
gene to chromosome 1.

Couvreur et al. (1989, 1990) mapped the CTSE gene to chromosome
1q23-qter by analysis of human/rodent hybrid cell lines containing
different X;1 translocations. CTSE was further localized to chromosome
1q31 by in situ hybridization.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yanagawa et al. (2007) found that cathepsin E deficiency in mice
resulted in a lysosome storage disorder in macrophages that was
characterized by accumulation of major lysosomal membrane
sialoglycoproteins, including Lamp1 (153330), Lamp2 (309060), and Limp2
(SCARB2; 602257), and elevated lysosomal pH. Trafficking of soluble
lysosomal proteins to lysosomes was also partially impaired in Cate -/-
macrophages. Treatment of wildtype macrophages with a cathepsin E
inhibitor also led to accumulation of these lysosomal proteins and
elevated pH. Since vacuolar-type H(+) ATPase (see 603097) activity was
not altered in Cate -/- macrophages, Yanagawa et al. (2007) hypothesized
that the elevated lysosomal pH in Cate -/- macrophages was likely due to
the accumulation of the highly acidic lysosomal sialoglycoproteins.

REFERENCE 1. Azuma, T.; Liu, W. G.; Vander Laan, D. J.; Bowcock, A. M.; Taggart,
R. T.: Human gastric cathepsin E gene: multiple transcripts result
from alternative polyadenylation of the primary transcripts of a single
gene locus at 1q31-q32. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 1609-1614, 1992.

2. Azuma, T.; Pals, G.; Mohandas, T. K.; Couvreur, J. M.; Taggart,
R. T.: Cathepsin E: molecular cloning and characterization using
aspartyl proteinase active site probes. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 45
(suppl.): A171 only, 1989.

3. Azuma, T.; Pals, G.; Mohandas, T. K.; Couvreur, J. M.; Taggart,
R. T.: Human gastric cathepsin E: predicted sequence, localization
to chromosome 1, and sequence homology with other aspartic proteinases. J.
Biol. Chem. 264: 16748-16753, 1989.

4. Couvreur, J. M.; Azuma, T.; Miller, D. A.; Rocchi, M.; Mohandas,
T. K.; Boudi, F. A.; Taggart, R. T.: Assignment of cathepsin E (CTSE)
to human chromosome region 1q31 by in situ hybridization and analysis
of somatic cell hybrids. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 53: 137-139, 1990.

5. Couvreur, J. M.; Johnson, M. P.; Azuma, T.; Boudi, F. A.; Rocchi,
M.; Mohandas, T. K.; Miller, D. A.; Taggart, R. T.: Cathepsin E:
localization of a single gene locus to 1q31 by restriction analysis
of X;1 translocation somatic cell hybrids, and in situ hybridization.
(Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 45 (suppl.): A135 only, 1989.

6. Taggart, R. T.; Azuma, T.; Couvreur, J. M.; Mohandas, T. K.: Isolation
and mapping genes identified with probes specific for the conserved
active site of aspartic proteinases. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51:
1088 only, 1989.

7. Yanagawa, M.; Tsukuba, T.; Nishioku, T.; Okamoto, Y.; Okamoto,
K.; Takii, R.; Terada, Y.; Nakayama, K. I.; Kadowaki, T.; Yamamoto,
K.: Cathepsin E deficiency induces a novel form of lysosomal storage
disorder showing the accumulation of lysosomal membrane sialoglycoproteins
and the elevation of lysosomal pH in macrophages. J. Biol. Chem. 282:
1851-1862, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/25/2007

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1989

EDITED mgross: 10/03/2007
mgross: 10/3/2007
terry: 9/25/2007
carol: 1/13/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 9/28/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990
carol: 12/1/1989
carol: 11/10/1989

607865	TITLE *607865 SET DOMAIN PROTEIN, BIFURCATED, 2; SETDB2
;;CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA DELETION REGION GENE 8; CLLD8
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Proteins that contain a SET domain, such as SETDB2, modulate gene
expression epigenetically through histone H3 (see 602810) methylation.
SETDB2 is likely a histone H3 methyltransferase, as it contains both the
active site and flanking cysteine residues required for catalytic
activity (Zhang et al., 2003).

CLONING

Mabuchi et al. (2001) assembled a high-resolution physical map spanning
the critical region deleted in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(109543) on chromosome 13q14 and identified SETDB2, which they
designated CLLD8. The deduced 719-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of about 82 kD. SETDB2 contains a methyl-CpG-binding
domain, a preSET domain, and a SET domain that is bifurcated by a
218-amino acid insertion. SETDB2 shares 45% identity with SETDB1
(604396). Northern blot analysis detected a 3.3-kb transcript in nearly
all tissues and tumor cell lines examined, with highest expression in
heart, testis, and ovary.

Using a positional cloning approach, Zhang et al. (2003) cloned SETDB2
from a quantitative trait locus on chromosome 13q14 that influences
immunoglobulin E levels and asthma (147050). Northern blot analysis
detected a 4.0-kb transcript in all tissues examined. Higher molecular
mass bands were also detected at lower levels.

- SETDB2/PHF11 Fusion Transcripts

Using primers designed from exons utilized by SETDB2 and PHF11 (607796),
Zhang et al. (2003) amplified PCR products that spanned both and
represented 3 alternatively spliced fusion transcripts. Expression of
each transcript was tissue specific and was detected in nearly all
tissues examined.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mabuchi et al. (2001) determined that the SETDB2 gene contains 15 exons
and spans 49 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Mabuchi et al. (2001) mapped the SETDB2
gene to chromosome 13q14. It is centromeric to and transcribed in the
same direction as the PHF11 gene.

REFERENCE 1. Mabuchi, H.; Fujii, H.; Calin, G.; Alder, H.; Negrini, M.; Rassenti,
L.; Kipps, T. J.; Bullrich, F.; Croce, C. M.: Cloning and characterization
of CLLD6, CLLD7, CLLD8, novel candidate genes for leukemogenesis at
chromosome 13q14, a region commonly deleted in B-cell chronic lymphocytic
leukemia. Cancer Res. 61: 2870-2877, 2001.

2. Zhang, Y.; Leaves, N. I.; Anderson, G. G.; Ponting, C. P.; Broxholme,
J.; Holt, R.; Edser, P.; Bhattacharyya, S.; Dunham, A.; Adcock, I.
M.; Pulleyn, L.; Barnes, P. J.; and 11 others: Positional cloning
of a quantitative trait locus on chromosome 13q14 that influences
immunoglobulin E levels and asthma. Nature Genet. 34: 181-186, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/9/2003

EDITED mgross: 02/05/2013
mgross: 6/9/2003

603580	TITLE *603580 PROTOCADHERIN 8; PCDH8
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The protocadherins are a subfamily of calcium-dependent cell adhesion
and recognition proteins of the cadherin superfamily. See 602988.
Protocadherin-8 belongs to a subclass of protocadherins that share a
highly conserved 17-amino acid cytoplasmic motif (Wolverton and Lalande,
2001).

CLONING

During a screen for genes in the 13q14.3-q21.1 region, Strehl et al.
(1998) identified an exonic region encoding a cadherin-related protein.
The full-length PCDH8 sequence encodes a 936-amino acid polypeptide with
a single putative transmembrane domain and 6 cadherin repeats. Genomic
analysis demonstrated that PCDH8 is encoded by 3 exons spanning 5 kb of
genomic DNA. Northern blot analysis revealed that PCDH8 is expressed as
a 4-kb mRNA exclusively in fetal and adult brain.

MAPPING

By inclusion in a PAC/BAC contig on human chromosome 13, Strehl et al.
(1997) determined that the PCDH8 gene maps to the band boundary region
between 13q14.3 and 13q21.1, about 1 Mb distal to the ATP7B gene
(606882), which is mutated in Wilson disease (277900). Strehl et al.
(1998) localized the mouse Pcdh8 and Pcdh9 (603581) genes to the distal
part of chromosome 14, in a region of known homology of synteny with
human 13q14.3.

REFERENCE 1. Strehl, S.; Glatt, K.; Liu, Q. M.; Glatt, H.; Lalande, M.: Characterization
of two novel protocadherins (PCDH8 and PCDH9) localized on human chromosome
13 and mouse chromosome 14. Genomics 53: 81-89, 1998.

2. Strehl, S.; LaSalle, J. M.; Lalande, M.: High-resolution analysis
of DNA replication domain organization across an R/G-band boundary. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 17: 6157-6166, 1997.

3. Wolverton, T.; Lalande, M.: Identification and characterization
of three members of a novel subclass of protocadherins. Genomics 76:
66-72, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 11/26/2003

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 2/23/1999

EDITED carol: 11/26/2003
carol: 4/29/2002
alopez: 2/24/1999
alopez: 2/23/1999

606274	TITLE *606274 CASEIN KINASE I, GAMMA-1; CSNK1G1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Casein kinase I is the most abundant serine/threonine kinase in
eukaryotic cell extracts. Multiple isoforms of the enzyme exist. The
gamma-1 isoform is involved in growth and morphogenesis of eukaryotic
cells.

CLONING

By searching an EST database for homologs of rat Csnk1g1 and by
screening a testis cDNA library, Kusuda et al. (2000) obtained cDNAs
encoding short and long splice variants of human CSNK1G1, which they
called CSNK1G1S and CSNK1G1L, respectively. Sequence analysis predicted
that the 422-amino acid CSNK1G1L protein possesses a C-terminal most
terminal sequence motif (MTM), which it shares with CSNK1G2 (602214) and
CSNK1G3 (604253). The CSNK1G1S protein contains 393 amino acids and is
95%, 81%, and 84% homologous to rat Csnk1g1, Csnk1g2, and Csnk1g3,
respectively; it does not have the MTM. RT-PCR analysis detected
ubiquitous expression of CSNK1G1L, whereas expression of CSNK1G1S was
restricted to testis.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a protein modification screen for regulators of LRP6 (603507),
Davidson et al. (2005) described the identification of Xenopus casein
kinase 1-gamma (CSNK1G1), a membrane-bound member of the casein kinase-1
(CK1) family. Gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments showed
that CSNK1G1 is both necessary and sufficient to transduce LRP6
signaling in vertebrates and Drosophila cells. In Xenopus embryos,
CSNK1G1 was required during anterio-posterior patterning to promote
posteriorizing Wnt/beta-catenin (164820/116806) signaling. CSNK1G1 is
associated with LRP6, which has multiple, modular CK1 phosphorylation
sites. Wnt treatment induced the rapid CK1-gamma-mediated
phosphorylation of these sites within LRP6, which, in turn, promoted the
recruitment of the scaffold protein Axin (603816). Davidson et al.
(2005) concluded that their results reveal an evolutionarily conserved
mechanism that couples Wnt receptor activation to the cytoplasmic signal
transduction apparatus.

MAPPING

Using FISH, Kusuda et al. (2000) mapped the CSNK1G1 gene to
15q22.1-q22.31.

REFERENCE 1. Davidson, G.; Wu, W.; Shen, J.; Bilic, J.; Fenger, U.; Stannek,
P.; Glinka, A.; Niehrs, C.: Casein kinase 1-gamma couples Wnt receptor
activation to cytoplasmic signal transduction. Nature 438: 867-872,
2005.

2. Kusuda, J.; Hirai, M.; Tanuma, R.; Hashimoto, K.: Cloning, expression
analysis and chromosome mapping of human casein kinase 1 gamma-1 (CSNK1G1):
identification of two types of cDNA encoding the kinase protein associated
with heterologous carboxy-terminal sequences. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 90:
298-302, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/26/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 9/21/2001

EDITED alopez: 06/07/2006
terry: 5/26/2006
mgross: 9/21/2001

602338	TITLE *602338 PRECURSOR mRNA-PROCESSING FACTOR 4, S. POMBE, HOMOLOG OF, B; PRPF4B
;;PRP4, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The Prp4 gene of Schizosaccharomyces pombe encodes a protein kinase that
appears to be involved in pre-mRNA splicing (Gross et al., 1997). Based
on kinase domain sequence, Prp4 belongs to the Clk (CDC-like kinase)
family. Using a PCR approach, Gross et al. (1997) identified human and
mouse Prp4 homologs. The human and mouse amino acid sequences are 98%
identical, and the mammalian sequence shared 44% identity with that of
the S. pombe protein. Gross et al. (1997) demonstrated that Prp4 and a
recombinant fusion protein consisting of the yeast N terminus with the
mouse kinase domain phosphorylated the human arginine/serine-rich
splicing factor SFRS2 (600813) in vitro.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PRP4
gene to chromosome 6 (TMAP WI-6524).

REFERENCE 1. Gross, T.; Lutzelberger, M.; Wiegmann, H.; Klingenhoff, A.; Shenoy,
S.; Kaufer, N. F.: Functional analysis of the fission yeast Prp4
protein kinase involved in pre-mRNA splicing and isolation of a putative
mammalian homologue. Nucleic Acids Res. 25: 1028-1035, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 8/29/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/10/1998

EDITED joanna: 09/10/2009
joanna: 8/29/2002
dholmes: 2/19/1998
alopez: 2/10/1998

609575	TITLE *609575 ACYL-CoA DEHYDROGENASE, VERY LONG-CHAIN; ACADVL
;;VLCAD
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ACADVL gene encodes very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD)
(EC 1.3.99.13). VLCAD is unique among the acyl-CoA dehydrogenases in its
size, structure, and intramitochondrial distribution (Aoyama et al.,
1995).

CLONING

Izai et al. (1992) identified and purified a novel acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase, Acadvl, from rat liver mitochondria.

Aoyama et al. (1995) cloned and sequenced 2 overlapping cDNA clones
corresponding to human mitochondrial VLCAD. The cDNA encodes a 655-amino
acid protein with a 40-amino acid leader peptide, yielding a mature
615-residue protein.

Whereas the other acyl-CoA dehydrogenases are homotetramers of a 43- to
45-kD subunit, VLCAD purified from human liver was shown by Aoyama et
al. (1995) to be a 154-kD homodimer of a 70-kD subunit. VLCAD was
loosely bound to the mitochondrial inner membrane and required detergent
for stabilization. In contrast, the other 3 acyl-CoA dehydrogenases
others were readily extractable into the soluble fraction without
detergent, indicating that they are located in the mitochondrial matrix.

Andresen et al. (1996) isolated cDNA clones for human VLCAD by using rat
Vlcad cDNA sequences to identify an EST from human fetal brain in the
GenBank database, followed by 5-prime and 3-prime rapid amplification of
cDNA ends (RACE) to identify overlapping clones. Sequence analysis of
the coding region and the 5-prime noncoding region of the VLCAD cDNA
showed no differences with the sequence published by Aoyama et al.
(1995). Andresen et al. (1996) found 26 to 33% homology between VLCAD
and other human acyl-CoA dehydrogenases. Northern blot analysis detected
a 2.4-kb mRNA transcript in a variety of human tissues.

By real-time RT-PCR, Zhou and Blumberg (2003) detected VLCAD expression
in all tissues examined, with highest expression in heart and skeletal
muscle, followed by placenta and pancreas.

GENE FUNCTION

Izai et al. (1992) found that the properties of Acadvl purified from rat
liver mitochondria differed from those of the short (ACADS; 606885)-,
medium (ACADM; 607008)-, and long (ACADL; 609576)-chain acyl-CoA
dehydrogenases. Acadvl was active toward very long-chain fatty acids.

Aoyama et al. (1995) found that human VLCAD had 10 times higher specific
activity toward palmitoyl-CoA than did LCAD. The enzyme was found to
catalyze the major part of mitochondrial palmitoyl-CoA dehydrogenation
in liver, heart, skeletal muscle, and skin fibroblasts.

GENE STRUCTURE

Strauss et al. (1995) determined that the ACADVL gene contains 20 exons.
The ACADVL gene is about 5.4 kb long (Zhou and Blumberg, 2003).

Zhang et al. (2003) noted that the VLCAD and the DLG4 (602887) genes are
located in a head-to-head orientation on chromosome 17p. The transcribed
regions of the 2 genes overlap by about 220 bp. Using serial promoter
partial deletion constructs in a reporter gene assay, they found that
the essential promoter activity of DLG4 is carried within a region of
about 400 bp and covers the entire VLCAD minimal promoter, which spans
about 270 bp. The results from di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate
(DEHP)-treated HepG2 cells revealed that the minimal VLCAD promoter can
upregulate VLCAD expression in response to DEHP treatment. Site-directed
mutagenesis experiments showed that a mutated AP2 (107580)-binding site
markedly reduced the transcriptional activity of both the VLCAD and DLG4
promoters and abolished the minimal VLCAD promoter's response to DEHP
treatment.

Independently, Zhou and Blumberg (2003) determined that the VLCAD and
DLG4 genes overlap. The 2 genes share 245 nucleotides at their 5-prime
ends, and the transcription start site for DLG4 extends into the coding
region of VLCAD exon 1. The upstream regions of the VLCAD and DLG4
genes, including the overlapping region, contain 2 potential TATA-less
promoters with potential binding sites for several common transcription
factors. RT-PCR detected unique patterns of expression for VLCAD and
DLG4, indicating that, although they share common regulatory elements,
VLCAD and DLG4 also have distinct tissue-specific elements. The mouse
Dlg4 and Vlcad genes are oriented in a head-to-head manner, but they do
not overlap and are separated by almost 3.5 kb.

MAPPING

Andresen et al. (1996) mapped the ACADVL gene to human chromosome
17p13.1-p11.2 by analysis of rodent-human hybrids.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Orii et al. (1997) mapped the
murine Acadvl gene to chromosome 11 in a region of synteny to human
17p13.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In cultured fibroblasts of 2 patients with VLCAD deficiency (201475),
Aoyama et al. (1995) identified a 105-bp deletion in the ACADVL gene
(609575.0001).

Andresen et al. (1996) identified 9 different mutations in the ACADVL
gene in 4 unrelated patients with VLCAD deficiency. Two patients carried
3 different mutations. Different mutations were observed in each of the
patients. Western blot analysis on fibroblasts from 3 of the patients
revealed severe quantitative reduction in VLCAD protein.

Mathur et al. (1999) identified 21 different mutations in the ACADVL
gene in 18 of 37 children with cardiomyopathy, nonketotic hypoglycemia
and hepatic dysfunction, skeletal myopathy, or sudden death in infancy
with hepatic steatosis. Sixty-seven percent of children had severe
dilated or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy at presentation. In 7 patients,
only 1 mutation was found despite direct sequencing of all exons.
Missense, frameshift, and splice consensus sequence mutations were seen,
as well as in-frame deletions. Eighty percent of these mutations were
associated with cardiomyopathy. The authors concluded that infantile
cardiomyopathy is the most common clinical phenotype for VLCAD
deficiency and highlighted the marked allelic heterogeneity in this
disorder.

Since VLCAD-deficient patients frequently harbor missense mutations with
unpredictable effects on enzyme activity, Gobin-Limballe et al. (2007)
investigated the response to bezafibrate as a function of genotype in 33
VLCAD-deficient fibroblast cell lines representing 45 different
mutations. Treatment with bezafibrate (400 microM for 48 hours) resulted
in a marked increase in FAO capacities, often leading to restoration of
normal values, for 21 genotypes that mainly corresponded to patients
with the myopathic phenotype. In contrast, bezafibrate induced no
changes in FAO for 11 genotypes corresponding to severe neonatal or
infantile phenotypes. This pattern of response was not due to
differential inductions of VLCAD mRNA, as shown by quantitative
real-time PCR, but reflected variable increases in measured VLCAD
residual enzyme activity in response to bezafibrate. Genotype
cross-analysis allowed the identification of alleles carrying missense
mutations, which could account for these different pharmacologic
profiles and, on this basis, led to the characterization of 9 mild and
11 severe missense mutations. The responses to bezafibrate reflected the
severity of the metabolic blockage in various genotypes, which appeared
to be correlated with the phenotype. This study emphasized the potential
of bezafibrate, a widely prescribed hypolipidemic drug, for the
correction of VLCAD deficiency and exemplified the integration of
molecular information in a therapeutic strategy.

ANIMAL MODEL

Cox et al. (2001) generated mice with VLCAD deficiency (Vlcad -/-) and
compared their pathologic and biochemical phenotypes to mice with Lcad
deficiency (Lcad -/-) and wildtype mice. Vlcad -/- mice had milder fatty
acid change in liver and heart. Dehydrogenation of various acyl-CoA
substrates by liver, heart, and skeletal muscle mitochondria differed
among the 3 genotypes. The results for liver were most informative as
Vlcad -/- mice had a reduction in activity toward palmitoyl-CoA and
oleoyl-CoA (58% and 64% of wildtype, respectively), whereas Lcad -/-
mice showed a more profoundly reduced activity toward these substrates
(35% and 32% of wildtype, respectively), with a significant reduction of
activity toward the branched chain substrate 2,6-dimethylheptanoyl-CoA.
C16 and C18 acylcarnitines were elevated in bile, blood, and serum of
fasted Vlcad -/- mice, whereas abnormally elevated C12 and C14
acylcarnitines were prominent in Lcad -/- mice. Progeny with the
combined Lcad +/+//Vlcad +/- genotype were overrepresented in offspring
from sires and dams heterozygous for both Lcad and Vlcad mutations. In
contrast, no live mice with a compound Lcad -/-/Vlcad -/- genotype were
detected, suggesting that this genotype may be lethal in utero or in the
periparturient period.

To define the onset and molecular mechanism of myocardial disease, Exil
et al. (2003) generated Vlcad-deficient mice by homologous
recombination. They found that Vlcad-deficient hearts had microvesicular
lipid accumulation and marked mitochondrial proliferation, and
demonstrated facilitated induction of polymorphic ventricular
tachycardia, without antecedent stress. The expression of acyl-CoA
synthetase-1 (ACS1; 152425), adipophilin, Ap2, cytochrome c, and the
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1 (PPARGC1;
604517) were increased immediately after birth, preceding overt
histologic lipidosis, whereas Acs1 expression was markedly downregulated
in the adult heart. Exil et al. (2003) concluded that mice with Vlcad
deficiency have altered expression of a variety of genes in the fatty
acid metabolic pathway from birth, reflecting metabolic feedback
circuits, with progression to ultrastructural and physiologic correlates
of the associated human disease in the absence of stress.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, 105-BP DEL

In 2 patients with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Aoyama et al. (1995)
identified a 105-bp deletion encompassing bases 1078-1182 in the VLCAD
cDNA. The deletion was thought to result from exon skipping and was
predicted to result in the in-frame deletion of 35 amino acids,
beginning with val360 of the precursor VLCAD. Using the vaccinia viral
system, Aoyama et al. (1995) performed quantitative cDNA expression of
normal human VLCAD in the patients' fibroblasts and demonstrated that
raising VLCAD activity to approximately 20% of normal control fibroblast
activity raised palmitic acid beta-oxidation flux to the level found in
control fibroblasts. The mutation described in these patients has
consequences for enzyme folding and assembly that are similar to those
for the well-characterized A985G mutation (lys329-to-glu; 607008.0001)
found in approximately 90% of the mutant alleles in patients with MCAD
deficiency (201450).

.0002
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, IVS11, G-A, +1

In a patient with VLCAD deficiency (201475) associated with infantile
cardiomyopathy and sudden death, Strauss et al. (1995) identified a
homozygous G-to-A transition in the consensus dinucleotide of the donor
splice site in intron 11 of the ACADVL gene, resulting in the skipping
of exon 11.

.0003
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, ARG613TRP

In a patient with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Souri et al. (1996)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ACADVL gene: a
1837C-T transition, resulting in an arg613-to-trp (R613W) amino acid
substitution, and a 135-bp deletion of nucleotides 343-477, resulting in
the loss of 45 amino acids from the VLCAD protein (609575.0005).

.0004
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, IVS5, 1-BP DEL, G, -1

In a patient with VLCAD deficiency (201475) associated with infantile
cardiomyopathy and sudden death, Strauss et al. (1995) identified
compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ACADVL gene: R613W
(609575.0003) and a 1-bp deletion of one of the 2 guanine nucleotides
forming the intron-exon 6 boundary. The normal sequence is ccccagGAA and
the mutant sequence was cccaGAA. The authors noted that the most likely
consequence of this deletion would be an alternation in splicing because
of loss of the conserved ag dinucleotide at the splice acceptor site.
Alternatively, splicing at this site might occur but this would result
in loss of a single nucleotide in exon 6, causing a shift in the mRNA
reading frame. In either event, this mutation would most likely result
in an unstable mRNA and lack of VLCAD protein expression from the mutant
allele.

.0005
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, 135-BP DEL

See 609575.0003 and Souri et al. (1996).

.0006
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, 3-BP DEL, GLU130DEL

In a patient with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Souri et al. (1996)
identified a homozygous 3-bp deletion in the ACADVL gene, resulting in
deletion of glu130. In another patient, Souri et al. (1996) found the
3-bp deletion mutation in compound heterozygosity with the K382Q
mutation (609575.0008).

.0007
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, 3-BP DEL, LYS299DEL

In an infant with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Souri et al. (1996) found
deletion of nucleotides 895 and 897 in the ACADVL gene, resulting in
deletion of lys299 (K299X).

.0008
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, LYS382GLN

In an infant with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Souri et al. (1996)
identified a 1144A-C transversion in the ACADVL gene, resulting in a
lys382-to-gln (K382Q) amino acid substitution.

.0009
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, GLY401ASP

In a 42-year-old woman with late-onset VLCAD deficiency (201475), Smelt
et al. (1998) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the
ACADVL gene: a G-to-A transition in exon 13, resulting in a
gly401-to-asp (G401D) substitution, and a G-to-A transition in exon 14,
resulting in an arg410-to-his (R410H; 609575.0010) substitution. The
patient had recurrent rhabdomyolysis and markedly elevated levels of
tetradecadienoic acid and hexadecadienoic acid.

.0010
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, ARG410HIS

See 609575.0009 and Smelt et al. (1998).

.0011
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, PRO65LEU AND LYS247GLN

In an Israeli patient with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Watanabe et al.
(2000) found homozygosity for a complex mutant allele with pro65-to-leu
(P65L) and lys247-to-gln (K247Q) mutations in the ACADVL gene. The P65L
mutation resulted in the skipping of exon 3. The nucleotide substitution
causing the P65L amino acid change was a 194C-T transition located 11
bases upstream of the normal splice donor site of intron 3. This is an
example of an exonic mutation that affects exon splicing; a similar
situation had been described in the ACAT1 gene (see 203750.0009). RT-PCR
showed 2 cDNA fragments of different sizes. One had the expected size
and the other was shorter by 66 basepairs. In the case of P65L, the
amino acid change did not reduce enzyme activity, whereas the K247Q
mutation reduced it drastically.

.0012
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, PHE458LEU

In a patient with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Cox et al. (1998)
identified a 1372T-C transition in the ACADVL gene, resulting in a
phe458-to-leu (F458L) substitution.

.0013
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, ALA416THR

In a 14-year-old Japanese girl with very mild manifestations of VLCAD
deficiency (201475), Fukao et al. (2001) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ACADVL gene: 1 resulting in an
ala416-to-thr (A416T) substitution, and the other resulting in an
arg450-to-his (R450H; 609575.0014) substitution. In vitro functional
expression studies showed that both mutant proteins retained residual
activity at 30 degrees Celsius. Fukao et al. (2001) concluded that the
temperature-sensitive mild mutations resulted in the milder phenotype in
this patient.

.0014
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, ARG450HIS

See 609575.0013 and Fukao et al. (2001).

REFERENCE 1. Andresen, B. S.; Bross, P.; Vianey-Saban, C.; Divry, P.; Zabot,
M.-T.; Roe, C. R.; Nada, M. A.; Byskov, A.; Kruse, T. A.; Neve, S.;
Kristiansen, K.; Knudsen, I.; Corydon, M. J.; Gregersen, N.: Cloning
and characterization of human very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase
cDNA, chromosomal assignment of the gene and identification in four
patients of nine different mutations within the VLCAD gene. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 5: 461-472, 1996. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet.
5: 1390 only, 1996.

2. Aoyama, T.; Souri, M.; Ueno, I.; Kamijo, T.; Yamaguchi, S.; Rhead,
W. J.; Tanaka, K.; Hashimoto, T.: Cloning of human very-long-chain
acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase and molecular characterization of its
deficiency in two patients. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 57: 273-283, 1995.

3. Aoyama, T.; Souri, M.; Ushikubo, S.; Kamijo, T.; Yamaguchi, S.;
Kelley, R. I.; Rhead, W. J.; Uetake, K.; Tanaka, K.; Hashimoto, T.
: Purification of human very-long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase
and characterization of its deficiency in seven patients. J. Clin.
Invest. 95: 2465-2473, 1995.

4. Cox, G. F.; Souri, M.; Aoyama, T.; Rockenmacher, S.; Varvogli,
L.; Rohr, F.; Hashimoto, T.; Korson, M. S.: Reversal of severe hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy and excellent neuropsychologic outcome in very-long-chain
acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency. J. Pediat. 133: 247-253,
1998.

5. Cox, K. B.; Hamm, D. A.; Millington, D. S.; Matern, D.; Vockley,
J.; Rinaldo, P.; Pinkert, C. A.; Rhead, W. J.; Lindsey, J. R.; Wood,
P. A.: Gestational, pathologic and biochemical differences between
very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency and long-chain acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase deficiency in the mouse. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 2069-2077,
2001.

6. Exil, V. J.; Roberts, R. L.; Sims, H.; McLaughlin, J. E.; Malkin,
R. A.; Gardner, C. D.; Ni, G.; Rottman, J. N.; Strauss, A. W.: Very-long-chain
acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency in mice. Circ. Res. 93:
448-455, 2003.

7. Fukao, T.; Watanabe, H.; Orii, K. E.; Takahashi, Y.; Hirano, A.;
Kondo, T.; Yamaguchi, S.; Aoyama, T.; Kondo, N.: Myopathic form of
very-long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: evidence for temperature-sensitive
mild mutations in both mutant alleles in a Japanese girl. Pediat.
Res. 49: 227-231, 2001.

8. Gobin-Limballe, S.; Djouadi, F.; Aubey, F.; Olpin, S.; Andresen,
B. S.; Yamaguchi, S.; Mandel, H.; Fukao, T.; Ruiter, J. P. N.; Wanders,
R. J. A.; McAndrew, R.; Kim, J. J.; Bastin, J.: Genetic basis for
correction of very-long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency
by bezafibrate in patient fibroblasts: toward a genotype-based therapy. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 81: 1133-1143, 2007.

9. Izai, K.; Uchida, Y.; Orii, T.; Yamamoto, S.; Hashimoto, T.: Novel
fatty acid beta-oxidation enzymes in rat liver mitochondria. I. Purification
and properties of very-long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase. J.
Biol. Chem. 267: 1027-1033, 1992.

10. Mathur, A.; Sims, H. F.; Gopalakrishnan, D.; Gibson, B.; Rinaldo,
P.; Vockley, J.; Hug, G.; Strauss, A. W.: Molecular heterogeneity
in very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency causing pediatric
cardiomyopathy and sudden death. Circulation 99: 1337-1343, 1999.

11. Orii, K. O.; Saito-Ohara, F.; Ikeuchi, T.; Orii, T.; Kondo, N.;
Aoyama, T.; Hashimoto, T.: Assignment of the gene for very-long-chain
acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (Acadvl) to mouse chromosome band 11B2-B5 by
in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 78: 25-26, 1997.

12. Smelt, A. H. M.; Poorthuis, B. J. H. M.; Onkenhout, W.; Scholte,
H. R.; Andresen, B. S.; van Duinen, S. G.; Gregersen, N.; Wintzen,
A. R.: Very long chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency with
adult onset. Ann. Neurol. 43: 540-544, 1998.

13. Souri, M.; Aoyama, T.; Orii, K.; Yamaguchi, S.; Hashimoto, T.
: Mutation analysis of very-long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase
(VLCAD) deficiency: identification and characterization of mutant
VLCAD cDNAs from four patients. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 58: 97-106, 1996.

14. Strauss, A. W.; Powell, C. K.; Hale, D. E.; Anderson, M. M.; Ahuja,
A.; Brackett, J. C.; Sims, H. F.: Molecular basis of human mitochondrial
very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency causing cardiomyopathy
and sudden death in childhood. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 10496-10500,
1995.

15. Watanabe, H.; Orii, K. E.; Fukao, T.; Song, X.-Q.; Aoyama, T.;
IJlst, L.; Ruiter, J.; Wanders, R. J. A.; Kondo, N.: Molecular basis
of very long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency in three Israeli
patients: identification of a complex mutant allele with P65L and
K247Q mutations, the former being an exonic mutation causing exon
3 skipping. Hum. Mutat. 15: 430-438, 2000.

16. Zhang, L.-F.; Ding, J.-H.; Yang, B.-Z.; He, G.-C.; Roe, C.: Characterization
of the bidirectional promoter region between the human genes encoding
VLCAD and PSD-95. Genomics 82: 660-668, 2003.

17. Zhou, C.; Blumberg, B.: Overlapping gene structure of human VLCAD
and DLG4. Gene 305: 161-166, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/8/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/28/2007

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 9/12/2005

EDITED carol: 02/13/2012
carol: 5/3/2011
terry: 5/2/2011
mgross: 10/12/2009
terry: 10/8/2009
terry: 6/6/2008
alopez: 11/29/2007
terry: 11/28/2007
carol: 9/22/2005
ckniffin: 9/14/2005

611053	TITLE *611053 RUN AND SH3 DOMAIN-CONTAINING 2; RUSC2
;;KIAA0375;;
IPORIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones from a size-fractionated brain cDNA library, Nagase
et al. (1997) cloned a partial RUSC2 cDNA, which they called KIAA0375.
RT-PCR detected high expression in human kidney, ovary, and testis,
followed by moderate expression in brain, placenta, lung, liver, and
skeletal muscle, and low expression in prostate and small intestine.

By yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human placental cDNA library with mutant
Rab1b (612565) as prey, Bayer et al. (2005) identified RUSC2, which they
called iporin. The deduced 1516-amino acid protein contains a RUN domain
and an SH3 domain, as well as proline and glutamic acid-rich regions.
The mouse homolog shares 84% similarity to human RUSC2. Northern blot
analysis of human tissues detected ubiquitous expression of a 5.5-kb
transcript, with highest levels in brain and testis. The RUN domain of
RUSC2 mediated binding to Rab1. Western blot analysis detected a 220-kD
protein mainly associated with membrane fractions. Immunofluorescence
microscopy showed a cytosolic distribution with punctate perinuclear
enrichment. RUSC2 interacted with the Rab1-binding protein GM130
(GOLGA2; 602580) on yeast 2-hybrid and in vitro binding assays.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bayer et al., 2005 determined that the RUSC2 gene contains 11 exons and
spans about 14 kb.

MAPPING

Bayer et al. (2005) noted that the RUSC2 gene maps to chromosome 9p13.1.

REFERENCE 1. Bayer, M.; Fischer, J.; Kremerskothen, J.; Ossendorf, E.; Matanis,
T.; Konczal, M.; Weide, T.; Barnekow, A.: Identification and characterization
of iporin as a novel interaction partner for rab1. BMC Cell Biol. 6:
15, 2005. Note: Electronic Article.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Nakajima, D.; Ohira, M.; Seki, N.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which can code for large
proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4: 141-150, 1997.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 5/23/2007

EDITED mgross: 01/29/2009
wwang: 5/23/2007

607376	TITLE *607376 DYNACTIN 2; DCTN2
;;DYNAMITIN;;
DYNACTIN COMPLEX, 50-KD SUBUNIT; DCTN50
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DCTN2 is a 50-kD subunit of dynactin, a multiprotein complex associated
with dynein. Cytoplasmic dynein is a molecular motor responsible for
minus-end-directed movement along microtubules. See DCTN1 (601143) and
DNCH1 (600112) for additional information about the dynactin complex and
dynein.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the DCTN2
gene to chromosome 12 (TMAP RH70660).

ANIMAL MODEL

LaMonte et al. (2002) generated a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS; 105400) by overexpressing dynamitin in postnatal motor
neurons of transgenic mice. They found that dynamitin overexpression
disrupted the dynein-dynactin complex, resulting in an inhibition of
retrograde axonal transport. The authors observed a late-onset, slowly
progressive motor neuron degenerative disease in the transgenic mice and
concluded that their mouse model confirms the critical role of disrupted
axonal transport in the pathogenesis of motor neuron degenerative
disease.

REFERENCE 1. LaMonte, B. H.; Wallace, K. E.; Holloway, B. A.; Shelly, S. S.;
Ascano, J.; Tokito, M.; Van Winkle, T.; Howland, D. S.; Holzbaur,
E. L. F.: Disruption of dynein/dynactin inhibits axonal transport
in motor neurons causing late-onset progressive degeneration. Neuron 34:
715-727, 2002.

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 11/22/2002

EDITED mgross: 11/22/2002

607376	TITLE *607376 DYNACTIN 2; DCTN2
;;DYNAMITIN;;
DYNACTIN COMPLEX, 50-KD SUBUNIT; DCTN50
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DCTN2 is a 50-kD subunit of dynactin, a multiprotein complex associated
with dynein. Cytoplasmic dynein is a molecular motor responsible for
minus-end-directed movement along microtubules. See DCTN1 (601143) and
DNCH1 (600112) for additional information about the dynactin complex and
dynein.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the DCTN2
gene to chromosome 12 (TMAP RH70660).

ANIMAL MODEL

LaMonte et al. (2002) generated a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS; 105400) by overexpressing dynamitin in postnatal motor
neurons of transgenic mice. They found that dynamitin overexpression
disrupted the dynein-dynactin complex, resulting in an inhibition of
retrograde axonal transport. The authors observed a late-onset, slowly
progressive motor neuron degenerative disease in the transgenic mice and
concluded that their mouse model confirms the critical role of disrupted
axonal transport in the pathogenesis of motor neuron degenerative
disease.

REFERENCE 1. LaMonte, B. H.; Wallace, K. E.; Holloway, B. A.; Shelly, S. S.;
Ascano, J.; Tokito, M.; Van Winkle, T.; Howland, D. S.; Holzbaur,
E. L. F.: Disruption of dynein/dynactin inhibits axonal transport
in motor neurons causing late-onset progressive degeneration. Neuron 34:
715-727, 2002.

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 11/22/2002

EDITED mgross: 11/22/2002

611659	TITLE *611659 SPRY DOMAIN- AND SOCS BOX-CONTAINING 3; SPSB3
;;SPRY DOMAIN-CONTAINING SOCS BOX PROTEIN 3; SSB3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis, Wang et al. (2005) identified SPSB3, which they
called SSB3. The deduced 348-amino acid protein shares 16% amino acid
identity with SPSB1 (611657) and has a long N-terminal extension. SPSB3
contains a central SPRY domain and a C-terminal SOCS box.
Coimmunoprecipitation studies showed that SPSB3 interacted with MET
(164860).

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SPSB3
gene to chromosome 16 (TMAP RH103022).

REFERENCE 1. Wang, D.; Li, Z.; Messing, E. M.; Wu, G.: The SPRY domain-containing
SOCS box protein 1 (SSB-1) interacts with MET and enhances the hepatocyte
growth factor-induced Erk-Elk-1-serum response element pathway. J.
Biol. Chem. 280: 16393-16401, 2005.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 12/11/2007

EDITED wwang: 12/11/2007

601589	TITLE *601589 RAS p21 PROTEIN ACTIVATOR 2; RASA2
;;GTPase-ACTIVATING PROTEIN OF RAS; GAP1M
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Maekawa et al. (1994) isolated a mammalian GTPase-activating protein of
RAS from rat (GAP1M) that shows sequence similarity to the suppressor of
RAS (see 190020) function in Drosophila, known as Gap1 (Gaul et al.,
1992). Expression was relatively high in brain, placenta, and kidney but
lower in other tissues. A recombinantly expressed protein containing the
GAP-related domain was shown to stimulate GTPase activity of RAS.

Li et al. (1996) isolated the human homolog of rat GAP1M from a brain
cDNA library. The deduced 853-amino acid protein is 89.4% identical to
the rat protein.

MAPPING

Using a panel of somatic cell hybrid DNAs, Li et al. (1996) mapped the
human GAP1M gene to chromosome 3. By fluroescence in situ hybridization,
they mapped GAP1M to 3q22-q23.

REFERENCE 1. Gaul, U.; Mardon, G.; Rubin, G. M.: A putative Ras GTPase activating
protein acts as a negative regulator of signaling by the Sevenless
receptor tyrosine kinase. Cell 68: 1007-1019, 1992.

2. Li, S.; Satoh, H.; Watanabe, T.; Nakamura, S.; Hattori, S.: cDNA
cloning and chromosomal mapping of a novel human GAP (GAP1M), a GTPase-activating
protein of Ras. Genomics 35: 625-627, 1996.

3. Maekawa, M.; Li, S.; Iwamatsu, A.; Morishita, T.; Yokota, K.; Imai,
Y.; Kohsaka, S.; Nakamura, S.; Hattori, S.: A novel mammalian Ras
GTPase-activating protein which has phospholipid-binding and Btk homology
regions. Molec. Cell. Biol. 14: 6879-6885, 1994.

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 12/18/1996

EDITED carol: 06/08/2010
psherman: 8/12/1999
jamie: 1/6/1997
jamie: 12/19/1996

607764	TITLE *607764 3-@BETA-HYDROXY-DELTA-5-C27-STEROID OXIDOREDUCTASE; HSD3B7
;;C27-3-BETA-HSD
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Schwarz et al. (2000) used expression cloning to isolate cDNAs encoding
a microsomal 3-beta-hydroxy-delta-5-C27-steroid oxidoreductase that is
expressed predominantly in the liver. The predicted product showed 34%
sequence identity with the C19 and C21 3-beta-HSD enzymes, which
participate in steroid hormone metabolism. Schwarz et al. (2000)
observed that, when transfected into cultured cells, the enzyme encoded
by the C27 3-beta-HSD cDNA was active against four 7-alpha-hydroxylated
sterols, indicating that a single C27 3-beta-HSD enzyme can participate
in all pathways of bile acid synthesis known to that time. The expressed
enzyme did not metabolize several different C19/21 steroids as
substrates. The levels of hepatic C27 3-beta-HSD mRNA in the mouse were
not sexually dimorphic and did not change in response to dietary
cholesterol or to changes in bile acid pool size. The human C27
3-beta-HSD gene encodes a protein of 369 amino acids that is about 86%
identical to the mouse protein.

MAPPING

Schwarz et al. (2000) mapped the human HSD3B7 gene to chromosome
16p12-p11.2 by analysis of radiation hybrid panels.

GENE STRUCTURE

Schwarz et al. (2000) determined that the HSD3B7 gene contains 6 exons
and spans 3 kb of DNA.

GENE FUNCTION

Schwarz et al. (2000) observed that the C27 3-beta-HSD enzymes are
active only against 7-alpha hydroxylated sterol substrates. Human C27
3-beta-HSD enzymes were active against the 7-alpha hydroxylated forms of
24-hydroxycholesterol, 25-hydroxycholesterol, and 27-hydroxycholesterol
and showed no preference for any of those compounds. Northern blot
analysis identified a single 2.4-kb species present at high levels in
liver, pancreas, and kidney, and at lower levels in heart, skeletal
muscle, and placenta.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Schwarz et al. (2000) identified a 2-bp deletion in the C27 3-beta-HSD
gene (607764.0001) in a patient with a congenital defect in bile acid
synthesis (CBAS1; 607765) and neonatal cholestasis.

Cheng et al. (2003) performed a molecular analysis of 15 additional
patients from 13 kindreds with C27 3-beta-HSD deficiency deficiency and
identified 12 different mutations in the HSD3B7 gene (see, e.g.,
607764.0001-607764.0005). They studied 10 mutations in detail; these
were shown to cause complete loss of enzyme activity and, in 2 cases,
alterations in the size or amount of the transcribed RNA. Mutations were
homozygous in 13 patients from 10 families and heterozygous in 4
patients from 3 families. Cheng et al. (2003) concluded that a diverse
spectrum of HSD3B7 mutations underlies this rare form of neonatal
cholestasis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BILE ACID SYNTHESIS DEFECT, CONGENITAL, 1
HSD3B7, 2-BP DEL, NT1057

In a Saudi Arabian boy with neonatal progressive intrahepatic
cholestasis (607765), the fifth child of consanguineous parents in the
family originally described by Clayton et al. (1987), Schwarz et al.
(2000) identified a 2-bp deletion in exon 6 of the HSD3B7 gene. This
mutation was found in homozygosity and was not present in 25 healthy
controls. It was predicted to shift the translational reading frame,
causing premature termination and the removal of 23 amino acids from the
carboxy terminus of the protein. In vitro studies showed that the
protein carrying the 2-bp deletion prevented the production of enzyme
capable of isomerizing and oxidizing the 7-alpha-hydroxylated forms of
24-hydroxycholesterol, 25-hydroxycholesterol, and 27-hydroxycholesterol.

Cheng et al. (2003) confirmed this mutation in the family of Clayton et
al. (1987) and found it in a second consanguineous Saudi family. They
determined that the 1057deltaCT mutation gives rise to a protein in
which the first 346 amino acids of the normal protein are fused to a
5-residue extension. The mutation was found to produce mRNAs that were
similar in size and amount to those derived from the normal gene but
failed to encode an active enzyme when introduced into HEK293 cells. It
was not known whether inactivation resulted from elimination of the
normal C-terminal sequences or addition of the spurious residues.

.0002
BILE ACID SYNTHESIS DEFECT, CONGENITAL, 1
HSD3B7, 1-BP INS, 310C

In a Chilean family with neonatal cholestasis caused by C27 3-beta-HSD
deficiency (607765), Cheng et al. (2003) found a deletion of a C
nucleotide at position 310 in exon 1 of the HSD3B7 gene.

.0003
BILE ACID SYNTHESIS DEFECT, CONGENITAL, 1
HSD3B7, IVS2, 340G-T, +1

In a French family with neonatal cholestasis caused by C27 3-beta-HSD
deficiency (607765), Cheng et al. (2003) found a splice junction
mutation in intron 2 of the HSD3B7 gene, 340+1G-T.

.0004
BILE ACID SYNTHESIS DEFECT, CONGENITAL, 1
HSD3B7, GLU147LYS

In 2 French families with neonatal cholestasis caused by C27 3-beta-HSD
deficiency (607765), Cheng et al. (2003) found a missense mutation in
HSD3B7, glu147 to lys (E147K). The amino acid substitution resulted from
a G-to-A transition in exon 4. Although an apparently stable mRNA of
normal abundance was transcribed from the mutant gene, no enzyme
activity was detected in transfected cells. Glutamate-147 is conserved
among all members of the 3-beta-HSD enzyme family in human, mouse, and
rat.

.0005
BILE ACID SYNTHESIS DEFECT, CONGENITAL, 1
HSD3B7, 2-BP DEL, 63AG

In a British and a Canadian family with neonatal cholestasis caused by
C27 3-beta-HSD deficiency (607765), Cheng et al. (2003) found deletion
of AG at nucleotide 63 in exon 1 of the HSD3B7 gene.

REFERENCE 1. Cheng, J. B.; Jacquemin, E.; Gerhardt, M.; Nazer, H.; Cresteil,
D.; Heubi, J. E.; Setchell, K. D. R.; Russell, D. W.: Molecular genetics
of 3-beta-hydroxy-D5-C27-steroid oxidoreductase deficiency in 16 patients
with loss of bile acid synthesis and liver disease. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 88: 1833-1841, 2003.

2. Clayton, P. T.; Leonard, J. V.; Lawson, A. M.; Setchell, K. D.
R.; Andersson, S.; Egestad, B.; Sjovall, J.: Familial giant cell
hepatitis associated with synthesis of 3-beta,7-alpha-dihydroxy- and
3-beta,7-alpha,12-alpha-trihydroxy-5-cholenoic acids. J. Clin. Invest. 79:
1031-1038, 1987.

3. Schwarz, M.; Wright, A. C.; Davis, D. L.; Nazer, H.; Bjorkhem,
I.; Russell, D. W.: The bile acid synthetic gene 3-beta-hydroxy-delta-5-C27-steroid
oxidoreductase is mutated in progressive intrahepatic cholestasis. J.
Clin. Invest. 106: 1175-1184, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 9/8/2004

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 5/8/2003

EDITED carol: 09/03/2013
carol: 6/14/2006
ckniffin: 6/6/2006
ckniffin: 2/24/2006
alopez: 9/8/2004
alopez: 5/8/2003

209901	TITLE *209901 BBS1 GENE; BBS1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

BBS1 is 1 of 7 BBS proteins that form the stable core of a protein
complex required for ciliogenesis (Nachury et al., 2007).

CLONING

By positional cloning, Mykytyn et al. (2002) identified the gene that is
mutant in Bardet-Biedl syndrome-1 (see 209900). It was selected for
further examination because its encodes protein with modest similarity
to the BBS2 protein (606151). The gene consists of 3,370 bp with an open
reading frame of 593 codons. By Northern blot analysis, Mykytyn et al.
(2002) demonstrated that BBS1 was ubiquitously expressed, including
expression in fetal tissues, testis, retina, and adipose tissue. The
pattern of expression was similar to those seen for BBS2, BBS4 (600374),
and BBS6 (MKKS; 604896).

GENE STRUCTURE

Mykytyn et al. (2002) found that the BBS1 gene contains 17 exons and
spans approximately 23 kb. Mykytyn et al. (2003) showed that the BBS1
gene is highly conserved between mouse and human.

MAPPING

Mykytyn et al. (2002) identified the BBS1 gene within the critical
region defined for Bardet-Biedl syndrome-1 on chromosome 11q34.

Based on genomic sequence analysis, Sheffield (2003) assigned the mouse
Bbs1 gene to chromosome 19.

GENE FUNCTION

Nachury et al. (2007) found that BBS1, BBS2 (606151), BBS4 (600374),
BBS5 (603650), BBS7 (607590), BBS8 (TTC8; 608132), and BBS9 (607968)
copurified in stoichiometric amounts from human retinal pigment
epithelium (RPE) cells and from mouse testis. PCM1 (600299) and
alpha-tubulin (see 602529)/beta-tubulin (191130) copurified in
substoichiometric amounts. The apparent molecular mass of the complex,
which Nachury et al. (2007) called the BBSome, was 438 kD, and it had a
sedimentation coefficient of 14S. The complex localized with PCM1 to
nonmembranous centriolar satellites in the cytoplasm and, in the absence
of PCM1, to the ciliary membrane. Cotransfection and immunoprecipitation
experiments suggested that BBS9 was the complex-organizing subunit and
that BBS5 mediated binding to phospholipids, predominantly
phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate. BBS1 mediated interaction with RABIN8
(RAB3IP; 608686), the guanine nucleotide exchange factor for the small G
protein RAB8 (RAB8A; 165040). Nachury et al. (2007) found that RAB8
promoted ciliary membrane growth through fusion of exocytic vesicles to
the base of the ciliary membrane. They concluded that BBS proteins
likely function in membrane trafficking to the primary cilium.

Loktev et al. (2008) found that BBIP10 (613605) copurified and
cosedimented with the BBS protein complex from RPE cells. Knockdown of
BBIP10 in RPE cells via small interfering RNA compromised assembly of
the BBS protein complex and caused failure of ciliogenesis. Knockdown of
BBS1, BBS5, or PCM1 resulted in a similar failure of ciliogenesis in RPE
cells. Depletion of BBIP10 or BBS8 increased the frequency of centrosome
splitting in interphase cells. BBIP10 also had roles in cytoplasmic
microtubule stabilization and acetylation that appeared to be
independent of its role in assembly of the BBS protein complex.

Using a protein pull-down assay with homogenized bovine retina, Jin et
al. (2010) showed that ARL6 (608845) bound the BBS protein complex.
Depletion of ARL6 in human RPE cells did not affect assembly of the
complex, but it blocked its localization to cilia. Targeting of ARL6 and
the protein complex to cilia required GTP binding by ARL6, but not ARL6
GTPase activity. When in the GTP-bound form, the N-terminal amphipathic
helix of ARL6 bound brain lipid liposomes and recruited the BBS protein
complex. Upon recruitment, the complex appeared to polymerize into an
electron-dense planar coat, and it functioned in lateral transport of
test cargo proteins to ciliary membranes.

Ishizuka et al. (2011) reported that phosphorylation of DISC1 (605210)
acts as a molecular switch from maintaining proliferation of mitotic
progenitor cells to activating migration of postmitotic neurons in mice.
Unphosphorylated DISC1 regulates canonical Wnt signaling via an
interaction with GSK3-beta (605004), whereas specific phosphorylation at
serine-710 triggers the recruitment of Bardet-Biedl syndrome (see
209900) proteins to the centrosome. In support of this model, loss of
BBS1 (209901) leads to defects in migration, but not proliferation,
whereas DISC1 knockdown leads to deficits in both. A phospho-dead mutant
can only rescue proliferation, whereas a phospho-mimic mutant rescues
exclusively migration defects. Ishizuka et al. (2011) concluded that
their data highlight a dual role for DISC1 in corticogenesis and
indicate that phosphorylation of this protein at serine-710 activates a
key developmental switch.

By mass spectrometric analysis of transgenic mouse testis, Seo et al.
(2011) found that Lxtfl1 (606568) copurified with human BBS4 and with
the core mouse BBS complex subunits Bbs1, Bbs2, Bbs5, Bbs7, Bbs8, and
Bbs9. Immunohistochemical analysis of human RPE cells showed
colocalization of LXTFL1 and BBS9 in cytoplasmic punctae. Use of small
interfering RNA revealed distinct functions for each BBS subunit in BBS
complex assembly and trafficking. LZTFL1 depletion and overexpression
studies showed a negative role for LZTFL1 in BBS complex trafficking,
but no effect of LZTFL1 on BBS complex assembly. Mutation analysis
revealed that the C-terminal half of Lztfl1 interacted with with the
C-terminal domain of Bbs9 and that the N-terminal half of Lztfl1
negatively regulated BBS complex trafficking. Depletion of several BBS
subunits and LZTFL1 also altered Hedgehog (SHH; 600725) signaling, as
measured by GLI1 (GLI; 165220) expression and ciliary trafficking of SMO
(SMOH; 601500).

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Using computational analysis, Jin et al. (2010) found that the BBS
protein complex shares structural features with the canonical coat
complexes COPI (601924), COPII (see 610511), and clathrin AP1 (see
603531). BBS4 and BBS8 consist almost entirely of tetratricopeptide
repeats (TPRs) (13 and 12.5 TPRs, respectively), which are predicted to
fold into extended rod-shaped alpha solenoids. BBS1, BBS2, BBS7, and
BBS9 each have an N-terminal beta-propeller fold followed by an
amphipathic helical linker and a gamma-adaptin (AP1G1; 603533) ear
motif. In BBS2, BBS7, and BBS9, the ear motif is followed by an
alpha/beta platform domain and an alpha helix. In BBS1, a 4-helix bundle
is inserted between the second and third blades of the beta propeller.
BBS5 contains 2 pleckstrin (PLEK; 173570) homology domains and a 3-helix
bundle, while BBIP10 consists of 2 alpha helices. Jin et al. (2010)
concluded that the abundance of beta propellers, alpha solenoids, and
appendage domains inside the BBS protein complex suggests that it shares
an evolutionary relationship with canonical coat complexes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Mykytyn et al. (2002) sequenced the BBS1 gene in the probands from 6
families (5 of Puerto Rican and 1 of Turkish ancestry) showing linkage
to the BBS1 region on chromosome 11. In a consanguineous Puerto Rican
family, they found a homozygous G-to-T transversion in exon 16 that
results in a nonsense mutation, glu549 to ter (E549X; 209901.0002). In a
second consanguineous Puerto Rican family, they found a homozygous
T-to-G transversion in exon 12, predicted to result in a nonconservative
substitution from methionine to arginine at codon 390 (M390R;
209901.0001). Two additional Puerto Rican families were compound
heterozygotes with respect to the E549X and M390R mutations. Analysis of
a fifth Puerto Rican revealed the presence of a heterozygous E549X
mutation and a heterozygous G-to-A transition at the +1 position of the
splice donor site in exon 4 (432+1G-A; 209901.0003). Affected
individuals in the consanguineous Turkish family showed a homozygous
deletion of 1 bp in exon 10, resulting in a premature termination at
codon 288 (tyr284fsX288; 209901.0004). In an evaluation of 60 unrelated
North American probands with BBS of mostly northern European ancestry
for the presence of the 4 mutations identified in the extended families,
using single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis, Mykytyn
et al. (2002) identified 22 individuals who had at least 1 copy of the
M390R mutation. Of these 22 individuals, 16 were homozygous with respect
to this variant (allele frequency = 0.32). A sequence variant was not
detected in 192 control chromosomes from individuals of mostly northern
European ancestry.

Mykytyn et al. (2002) found that in their families with BBS1 the
disorder segregated as an autosomal recessive disease, with no evidence
of involvement of the common M390R mutation in triallelic inheritance.
See the INHERITANCE section of 209900 for a full discussion. Badano et
al. (2003) found heterozygous mutation in BBS1 (209901.0006) and
homozygous mutation in BBS7 (607590.0002) in affected individuals,
raising the possibility that BBS7 may interact genetically with other
loci to produce the BBS phenotype.

Beales et al. (2003) presented a comprehensive analysis of the spectrum,
distribution, and involvement in nonmendelian trait transmission of
mutant alleles in BBS1, the most common BBS locus. Analyses of 259
independent families segregating a BBS phenotype indicated that BBS1
participates in complex inheritance and that, in different families,
mutations in BBS1 can interact genetically with mutations at each of the
other known BBS genes, as well as genes at unknown loci, to cause the
phenotype. Consistent with this model, they identified homozygous M390R
alleles (209901.0001), the most frequent BBS1 mutation, in asymptomatic
individuals in 2 families. Moreover, their statistical analyses
indicated that the prevalence of the M390R allele in the general
population is consistent with an oligogenic rather than a recessive
model of disease transmission. Although all BBS alleles appeared to be
capable of interacting genetically with each other, some genes,
especially BBS2 and BBS6, are more likely to participate in triallelic
inheritance, suggesting a variable ability of the BBS proteins to
interact genetically with each other.

Mykytyn et al. (2003) evaluated the involvement of the BBS1 gene in a
cohort of 129 probands with BBS and reported 10 novel BBS1 mutations,
including a leu518-to-pro (L518P; 209901.0005) mutation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Davis et al. (2007) generated a knockin mouse model of the BBS1 M390R
mutation. Mice homozygous for M390R recapitulated aspects of the human
phenotype, including retinal degeneration, male infertility, and
obesity. Morphologic evaluation of Bbs1 mutant brain revealed
ventriculomegaly of the lateral and third ventricles, thinning of the
cerebral cortex, and reduced volume of the corpus striatum and
hippocampus. Ultrastructural examination of the ependymal cell cilia
that lined the enlarged third ventricle of Bbs1 mutant brains showed
that, whereas the 9+2 arrangement of axonemal microtubules was intact,
elongated cilia and cilia with abnormally swollen distal ends were
present. Davis et al. (2007) concluded that the M390R mutation does not
affect axonemal structure, but it may play a role in regulation of cilia
assembly and/or function.

Using mice lacking Bbs2, Bbs4, or Bbs6 and mice with the M390R mutation
in Bbs1, Shah et al. (2008) showed that expression of BBS proteins was
not required for ciliogenesis, but their loss caused structural defects
in a fraction of cilia covering airway epithelia. The most common
abnormality was bulges filled with vesicles near the tips of cilia, and
this same misshapen appearance was present in airway cilia from all
mutant mouse strains. Cilia of Bbs4-null and Bbs1 mutant mice beat at a
lower frequency than wildtype cilia. Neither airway hyperresponsiveness
nor inflammation increased in Bbs2- or Bbs4-null mice immunized with
ovalbumin compared with wildtype mice. Instead, mutant animals were
partially protected from airway hyperresponsiveness.

By immunostaining for axonemal proteins, Tan et al. (2007) demonstrated
that mouse dorsal root ganglion neurons contain cilia. Bbs1-null and
Bbs4-null mice demonstrated behavioral deficits in thermosensation and
mechanosensation associated with alterations in the trafficking of the
thermosensory channel Trpv1 (602076) and the mechanosensory channel
Stoml3 (608327) within sensory neurons. The findings were replicated in
C. elegans lacking Bbs7 or Bbs8 (TTC8; 608132). Detailed examination of
9 patients with BBS showed a noticeable decrease in peripheral sensation
in most of them.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 1
BBS1, MET390ARG

Mykytyn et al. (2002) identified a met390-to-arg (M390R) mutation in the
BBS1 gene in affected members of a consanguineous Puerto Rican family
with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (209900). The substitution results from a
T-to-G transversion at nucleotide 1169 (1169T-G) in exon 12 (Mykytyn,
2002). Two other Puerto Rican families carried this mutation and the
glu549-to-ter mutation (209901.0002) in compound heterozygosity. Mykytyn
et al. (2002) found the M390R mutation in 22 of 60 unrelated North
American probands with Bardet-Biedl syndrome of mostly northern European
ancestry. Sixteen of the 22 individuals were homozygous for the variant
(allele frequency = 0.32).

Mykytyn et al. (2003) found that the M390R mutation accounts for
approximately 80% of all BBS1 mutations and is found on a similar
genetic background across populations.

Beales et al. (2003) identified homozygous M390R alleles in asymptomatic
individuals in 2 separate families. They interpreted this as consistent
with an oligogenic rather than a recessive model of disease
transmission, as seen in triallelic inheritance.

Fan et al. (2004) reported the cases of 2 sisters homozygous for the
M390R mutation. One sister, who was also heterozygous for a G169A
mutation in the BBS3 gene (600151.0002), was more severely affected than
the sister without the additional mutation, suggesting a modifying
effect of the mutation in BBS3.

.0002
BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 1
BBS1, GLU549TER

In a consanguineous Puerto Rican family with Bardet-Biedl syndrome
(209900), Mykytyn et al. (2002) found a homozygous G-to-T transversion
at nucleotide 1655 (1655G-T) in exon 16 of the BBS1 gene that resulted
in a glu549-to-ter (E549X) nonsense mutation.

.0003
BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 1
BBS1, IVS4, G-A, +1

In a Puerto Rican family with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (209900), Mykytyn et
al. (2002) found a heterozygous G-to-A transition at the +1 position of
the splice donor site in exon 4 of the BBS1 gene (432+1G-A). Affected
individuals were compound heterozygous for the E549X mutation
(209901.0002).

.0004
BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 1
BBS1, 1-BP DEL, 851A

In a consanguineous Turkish family with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (209900),
Mykytyn et al. (2002) found a homozygous deletion of 1 bp in exon 10 of
the BBS1 gene (851delA), resulting in premature termination at codon 288
(tyr284fsX288).

.0005
BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 1
BBS1, LEU518PRO

One of 10 novel mutations in the BBS1 gene reported by Mykytyn et al.
(2003) was a 1553T-C transition in exon 15 of the cDNA, resulting in a
leu518-to-pro (L518P) change. It was detected in 3 patients with
Bardet-Biedl syndrome (209900), all in combination with the M390R
mutation (209901.0001), and in none of 96 control subjects.

.0006
BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 7
BBS1, GLU234LYS

In a family with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (209900), Badano et al. (2003)
found a heterozygous glu234-to-lys (E234K) mutation in the BBS1 gene in
all 3 affected members. These individuals were also homozygous for a
thr211-to-ile (T211I) amino acid substitution in the BBS7 gene
(607590.0002), raising the possibility that the BBS1 and BBS7 loci
interact. Since none of the unaffected sibs was homozygous for the
defect in BBS7, it was considered equally likely that the third mutant
allele (in BBS1) is either required for pathogenesis of the BBS7
phenotype or modifies the phenotype.

.0007
BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 1
BBS1, 1-BP DEL, 1650C

In 2 sisters with BBS1 (209900), Badano et al. (2003) identified
compound heterozygosity for mutations in the BBS1 gene: a 1-bp deletion
in exon 16, 1650delC, resulting in a frameshift at codon 548 and a
premature stop at codon 579, and met390-to-arg (M390R; 209901.0001). The
more severely affected sister was heterozygous for a thr325-to-pro
substitution in the MKKS gene (T325P; 604896.0014).

REFERENCE 1. Badano, J. L.; Ansley, S. J.; Leitch, C. C.; Lewis, R. A.; Lupski,
J. R.; Katsanis, N.: Identification of a novel Bardet-Biedl syndrome
protein, BBS7, that shares structural features with BBS1 and BBS2. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 72: 650-658, 2003.

2. Badano, J. L.; Kim, J. C.; Hoskins, B. E.; Lewis, R. A.; Ansley,
S. J.; Cutler, D. J.; Castellan, C.; Beales, P. L.; Leroux, M. R.;
Katsanis, N.: Heterozygous mutations in BBS1, BBS2 and BBS6 have
a potential epistatic effect on Bardet-Biedl patients with two mutations
at a second BBS locus. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 1651-1659, 2003.

3. Beales, P. L.; Badano, J. L.; Ross, A. J.; Ansley, S. J.; Hoskins,
B. E.; Kirsten, B.; Mein, C. A.; Froguel, P.; Scambler, P. J.; Lewis,
R. A.; Lupski, J. R.; Katsanis, N.: Genetic interaction of BBS1 mutations
with alleles at other BBS loci can result in non-mendelian Bardet-Biedl
syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 72: 1187-1199, 2003.

4. Davis, R. E.; Swiderski, R. E.; Rahmouni, K.; Nishimura, D. Y.;
Mullins, R. F.; Agassandian, K.; Philp, A. R.; Searby, C. C.; Andrews,
M. P.; Thompson, S.; Berry, C. J.; Thedens, D. R.; Yang, B.; Weiss,
R. M.; Cassell, M. D.; Stone, E. M.; Sheffield, V. C.: A knockin
mouse model of the Bardet-Biedl syndrome 1 M390R mutation has cilia
defects, ventriculomegaly, retinopathy, and obesity. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 104: 19422-19427, 2007.

5. Fan, Y.; Esmail, M. A.; Ansley, S. J.; Blacque, O. E.; Boroevich,
K.; Ross, A. J.; Moore, S. J.; Badano, J. L.; May-Simera, H.; Compton,
D. S.; Green, J. S.; Lewis, R. A.; van Haelst, M. M.; Parfrey, P.
S.; Baillie, D. L.; Beales, P. L.; Katsanis, N.; Davidson, W. S.;
Leroux, M. R.: Mutations in a member of the Ras superfamily of small
GTP-binding proteins causes Bardet-Biedl syndrome. Nature Genet. 36:
989-993, 2004.

6. Ishizuka, K.; Kamiya, A.; Oh, E. C.; Kanki, H.; Seshadri, S.; Robinson,
J. F.; Murdoch, H.; Dunlop, A. J.; Kubo, K.; Furukori, K.; Huang,
B.; Zeledon, M.; Hayashi-Takagi, A.; Okano, H.; Nakajima, K.; Houslay,
M. D.: Katsanis, N.; Sawa, A.: DISC1-dependent switch from progenitor
proliferation to migration in the developing cortex. Nature 473:
92-96, 2011.

7. Jin, H.; White, S. R.; Shida, T.; Schulz, S.; Aguiar, M.; Gygi,
S. P.; Bazan, J. F.; Nachury, M. V.: The conserved Bardet-Biedl syndrome
proteins assemble a coat that traffics membrane proteins to cilia. Cell 141:
1208-1219, 2010.

8. Loktev, A. V.; Zhang, Q.; Beck, J. S.; Searby, C. C.; Scheetz,
T. E.; Bazan, J. F.; Slusarski, D. C.; Sheffield, V. C.; Jackson,
P. K.; Nachury, M. V.: A BBSome subunit links ciliogenesis, microtubule
stability, and acetylation. Dev. Cell 15: 854-865, 2008.

9. Mykytyn, K.: Personal Communication. Iowa City, Iowa  11/18/2002.

10. Mykytyn, K.; Nishimura, D. Y.; Searby, C. C.; Beck, G.; Bugge,
K.; Haines, H. L.; Cornier, A. S.; Cox, G. F.; Fulton, A. B.; Carmi,
R.; Iannaccone, A.; Jacobson, S. G.; and 9 others: Evaluation of
complex inheritance involving the most common Bardet-Biedl syndrome
locus (BBS1). Am. J. Hum. Genet. 72: 429-437, 2003.

11. Mykytyn, K.; Nishimura, D. Y.; Searby, C. C.; Shastri, M.; Yen,
H.; Beck, J. S.; Braun, T.; Streb, L. M.; Cornier, A. S.; Cox, G.
F.; Fulton, A. B.; Carmi, R.; Luleci, G.; Chandrasekharappa, S. C.;
Collins, F. S.; Jacobson, S. G.; Heckenlively, J. R.; Weleber, R.
G.; Stone, E. M.; Sheffield, V. C.: Identification of the gene (BBS1)
most commonly involved in Bardet-Biedl syndrome, a complex human obesity
syndrome. Nature Genet. 31: 435-438, 2002.

12. Nachury, M. V.; Loktev, A. V.; Zhang, Q.; Westlake, C. J.; Peranen,
J.; Merdes, A.; Slusarski, D. C.; Scheller, R. H.; Bazan, J. F.; Sheffield,
V. C.; Jackson, P. K.: A core complex of BBS proteins cooperates
with the GTPase Rab8 to promote ciliary membrane biogenesis. Cell 129:
1201-1213, 2007.

13. Seo, S.; Zhang, Q.; Bugge, K.; Breslow, D. K.; Searby, C. C.;
Nachury, M. V.; Sheffield, V. C.: A novel protein LZTFL1 regulates
ciliary trafficking of the BBSome and Smoothened. PLoS Genet. 7:
e1002358, 2011. Note: Electronic Article.

14. Shah, A. S.; Farmen, S. L.; Moninger, T. O.; Businga, T. R.; Andrews,
M. P.; Bugge, K.; Searby, C. C.; Nishimura, D.; Brogden, K. A.; Kline,
J. N.; Sheffield, V. C.; Welsh, M. J.: Loss of Bardet-Biedl syndrome
proteins alters the morphology and function of motile cilia in airway
epithelia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 3380-3385, 2008.

15. Sheffield, V. C.: Personal Communication. Iowa City, Iowa
3/6/2003.

16. Tan, P. L.; Barr, T.; Inglis, P. N.; Mitsuma, N.; Huang, S. M.;
Garcia-Gonzalez, M. A.; Bradley, B. A.; Coforio, S.; Albrecht, P.
J.; Watnick, T.; Germino, G. G.; Beales, P. L.; Caterina, M. J.; Leroux,
M. R.; Rice, F. L.; Katsanis, N.: Loss of Bardet-Biedl syndrome proteins
causes defects in peripheral sensory innervation and function. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 17524-17529, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/12/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/13/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/12/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/21/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/12/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/24/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/10/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/4/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/27/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/16/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/13/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/20/1999
Michael J. Wright - updated: 6/18/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/14/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/6/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/14/1994

EDITED carol: 12/21/2012
mgross: 11/12/2012
alopez: 7/8/2011
mgross: 10/15/2010
terry: 10/13/2010
wwang: 8/22/2008
ckniffin: 8/12/2008
mgross: 5/21/2008
mgross: 3/14/2008
mgross: 3/13/2008
terry: 3/12/2008
tkritzer: 5/24/2005
alopez: 9/14/2004
terry: 9/10/2004
carol: 8/19/2004
cwells: 6/9/2003
terry: 6/4/2003
terry: 3/12/2003
carol: 3/6/2003
alopez: 2/28/2003
tkritzer: 2/28/2003
terry: 2/27/2003
alopez: 11/19/2002
alopez: 9/16/2002
joanna: 7/25/2002
alopez: 7/18/2002
cwells: 7/16/2002
alopez: 10/5/2001
alopez: 4/2/2001
mgross: 1/18/2000
terry: 1/13/2000
mgross: 1/11/2000
terry: 12/20/1999
mgross: 7/6/1999
terry: 6/18/1999
mark: 4/14/1997
terry: 4/10/1997
mark: 3/6/1997
terry: 3/4/1997
terry: 10/18/1994
carol: 5/12/1994
mimadm: 4/29/1994
warfield: 4/14/1994

602330	TITLE *602330 ACTIN-BINDING LIM PROTEIN FAMILY, MEMBER 1; ABLIM1
;;ABLIM;;
LIM ACTIN-BINDING PROTEIN 1; LIMAB1;;
LIMATIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ABLIM1 encodes limatin, an actin-binding LIM domain protein (Roof et
al., 1997). LIM domains play key roles in the regulation of
developmental pathways. They were first identified as cysteine-rich
motifs found in 3 proteins: Lin-11, Isl-1 (ISL1; 600366), and Mec-3 (Kim
et al., 1997).

CLONING

By screening a human retina cDNA library with the sequence of dematin
(EPB49; 125305) as probe, Roof et al. (1997) identified a novel cDNA,
designated ABLIM. The deduced ABLIM protein, which the authors called
limatin (LIM + dematin), contains an N-terminal region with 4 double
zinc finger motifs (LIM domains) and a C-terminal cytoskeletal domain
that is approximately 50% identical to that of dematin, an
actin-bundling protein of the erythroid cytoskeleton. The ABLIM protein
exists in 3 alternatively spliced isoforms, all varying in the number of
LIM domains, with widespread tissue distribution. The full-length
778-amino acid protein is found exclusively in the retina and is
enriched in biochemical extracts of retinal rod inner segments.

GENE FUNCTION

Roof et al. (1997) found that all 3 limatin isoforms bind to actin
filaments in vitro through the dematin-like sequence. They also found
that limatin undergoes extensive phosphorylation in light-adapted
retinas in vivo and that its developmental expression in the retina
coincides with the elaboration of photoreceptor inner and outer
segments.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Kim et al. (1997) mapped the
human ABLIM gene to 10q25. Radiation hybrid mapping placed the gene in a
37-cR interval between markers D10S554 and D10S2390. By RFLP analysis,
they mapped the mouse Ablim gene to chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Kim, A. C.; Peters, L. L.; Knoll, J. H. M.; Van Huffel, C.; Ciciotte,
S. L.; Kleyn, P. W.; Chisti, A. H.: Limatin (LIMAB1), an actin-binding
LIM protein, maps to mouse chromosome 19 and human chromosome 10q25,
a region frequently deleted in human cancers. Genomics 46: 291-293,
1997.

2. Roof, D. J.; Hayes, A.; Adamian, M.; Chishti, A. H.; Li, T.: Molecular
characterization of abLIM, a novel actin-binding and double zinc finger
protein. J. Cell Biol. 138: 575-588, 1997.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/9/1998

EDITED carol: 06/23/2009
carol: 1/16/2009
carol: 1/5/2009
mgross: 8/6/2007
mgross: 7/2/1999
alopez: 8/3/1998
dholmes: 3/9/1998
mark: 2/9/1998

300222	TITLE *300222 INTEGRAL MEMBRANE PROTEIN 2A; ITM2A
;;E25A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By differential screening of a cDNA library constructed from in vitro
cultured condyles, Deleersnijder et al. (1996) isolated a novel gene in
the mouse, which they called E25A, or integral membrane protein-2
(Itm2). The full-length E25A cDNA was predicted to encode a type II
integral membrane protein of 263 amino acid residues. In situ
hybridization showed that E25A is expressed in the outer perichondrial
rim of the postnatal mandibular condyle, which contains the
proliferating progenitor cells, but not in the deeper layers of the
condyle containing the more differentiated chondroblasts and
chondrocytes. Strong in situ hybridization signals were also detected on
bone trabeculae of mature bone, in tooth germs, and in hair follicles.
Northern blot analysis showed strong expression in osteogenic tissues,
such as neonatal mouse calvaria, paws, and tail, and in skin. Homology
searches of DNA databanks showed that E25A belongs to a novel multigene
family, containing at least 3 members in both man and mouse.

Mao et al. (1998) found that the human homolog of murine E25A is
expressed in human CD34+ hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells.

By subtractive hybridization for sequences differentially expressed by
plasmacytoid dendritic cells, Rissoan et al. (2002) detected ITM2A,
which they designated BRI3. The deduced type II transmembrane protein
contains an N-terminal cytosolic domain, an uncleaved signal anchor
sequence, and a tyrosine-rich C-terminal extracellular domain. The
312-amino acid mouse Itm2a protein shares 91% homology with human ITM2A.
RT-PCR of human lymphoid cells showed higher expression of ITM2A in
plasmacytoid dendritic cells than in monocytes and monocyte-derived
dendritic cells. A faint band was detected in CD34-derived dendritic
cells. Northern blot analysis revealed a 2.1-kb transcript in several
lymphoid tissues, including appendix, peripheral blood leukocytes, bone
marrow, fetal liver, with lower levels in spleen, lymph nodes, and
thymus.

MAPPING

Deleersnijder et al. (1996) mapped the mouse E25A gene to the X
chromosome.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Pittois et al. (1999) mapped the
mouse Itm2a gene to chromosome XA2-A3 and the human homolog to
Xq13.3-q21.2.

REFERENCE 1. Deleersnijder, W.; Hong, G.; Cortvrindt, R.; Poirier, C.; Tylzanowski,
P.; Pittois, K.; Van Marck, E.; Merregaert, J.: Isolation of markers
for chondro-osteogenic differentiation using cDNA library subtraction:
Molecular cloning and characterization of a gene belonging to a novel
multigene family of integral membrane proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 271:
19475-19482, 1996.

2. Mao, M.; Fu, G.; Wu, J.-S.; Zhang, Q.-H.; Zhou, J.; Kan, L.-X.;
Huang, Q.-H.; He, K.-L.; Gu, B.-W.; Han, Z.-G.; Shen, Y.; Gu, J.;
Yu, Y.-P.; Xu, S.-H.; Wang, Y.-X.; Chen, S.-J.; Chen, Z.: Identification
of genes expressed in human CD34+ hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells
by expressed sequence tags and efficient full-length cDNA cloning. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 8175-8180, 1998.

3. Pittois, K.; Wauters, J.; Bossuyt, P.; Deleersnijder, W.; Merregaert,
J.: Genomic organization and chromosomal localization of the Itm2a
gene. Mammalian Genome 10: 54-56, 1999.

4. Rissoan, M.-C.; Duhen, T.; Bridon, J.-M.; Bendriss-Vermare, N.;
Peronne, C.; Saint Vis, B.; Briere, F.; Bates, E. E. M.: Subtractive
hybridization reveals the expression of immunoglobulinlike transcript
7, Eph-B1, granzyme B, and 3 novel transcripts in human plasmacytoid
dendritic cells. Blood 100: 3295-3303, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/17/2003
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 12/3/1999

CREATED Wilson H. Y. Lo: 12/1/1999

EDITED mgross: 01/27/2003
terry: 1/17/2003
terry: 12/3/1999
carol: 12/3/1999
carol: 12/2/1999

603501	TITLE *603501 POLY(ADP-RIBOSE) GLYCOHYDROLASE; PARG
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The synthesis and rapid turnover of ADP-ribose polymers is an immediate
cellular response to DNA damage. Once synthesized by PARP (173870),
polymers are rapidly turned over and converted to free ADP-ribose by the
action of poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase (PARG).

CLONING

By PCR with degenerate primers based on the partial protein sequence of
bovine PARG, Lin et al. (1997) isolated bovine PARG cDNAs. The protein
had a calculated molecular mass of 111 kD, nearly twice the size of the
59-kD enzymatically active PARG isolated from bovine thymus. Using an
activity gel assay of extracts from bacteria expressing PARG, the
authors determined that cDNA encoded proteins of approximately 115 and
59 kD. The larger protein was sensitive to proteolysis, yielding a
protein of approximately 59 kD. The enzymatically active 59-kD PARG
corresponded to the C-terminal portion of the protein. The authors
suggested that proteolysis explains the presence of PARG activity with a
molecular mass of approximately 74 and 59 kD in bovine thymus
preparations, and previous reports of a 74-kD PARG in guinea pig liver
and human placenta. Using the sequence of the bovine cDNA, they searched
sequence databases and identified human and rat PARG cDNAs.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Slade et al. (2011) showed that filamentous fungi and a number of
bacteria possess a divergent form of PARG that has all the main
characteristics of the human PARG enzyme. Slade et al. (2011) presented
the first PARG crystal structure (derived from the bacterium
Thermomonospora curvata), which revealed that the PARG catalytic domain
is a distant member of the ubiquitous ADP-ribose-binding macrodomain
family. High-resolution structures of T. curvata PARG in complexes with
ADP-ribose and the PARG inhibitor ADP-HPD, complemented by biochemical
studies, allowed the authors to propose a model for PAR binding and
catalysis by PARG.

GENE FUNCTION

The poly(ADP ribose) polymerase PARP1 (173870) and the apoptosis factor
AIF (AIFM1; 300169) are members of an apoptotic signaling cascade.
Andrabi et al. (2006) and Yu et al. (2006) demonstrated that PARP1
activity induces cell death through its product, poly(ADP ribose) (PAR)
polymer. Andrabi et al. (2006) showed that degradation of PAR polymer by
Parg or phosphodiesterase-1 (see PDE1A, 171890) prevented PAR
polymer-induced cell death in cultured neurons, and increased Parg
expression in mice reduced damage caused by ischemia following middle
cerebral artery occlusion. Yu et al. (2006) showed that Parg prevented
Parp1-dependent Aif release from mitochondria in mouse cortical neurons
and prevented its accumulation in nuclei.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Ame et al. (1999) mapped the PARG
gene to human chromosome 10q11.23 and mouse chromosome 14B.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hanai et al. (2004) described a loss-of-function mutant in Drosophila.
The mutant lacked the conserved catalytic domain of poly(ADP-ribose)
glycohydrolase and was associated with lethality in the larval stages at
the normal development temperature of 25 degrees centigrade. However,
one-fourth of the mutants progressed to adult stage at 29 degrees
centigrade but showed progressive neurodegeneration with reduced
locomotor activity and a short life span. In association with this,
extensive accumulation of poly(ADP-ribose) could be detected in the
central nervous system. These results suggested that poly(ADP-ribose)
metabolism is required for maintenance of the normal function of
neuronal cells. Hanai et al. (2004) suggested that the phenotypes
observed in the Parg mutant might be useful to understand
neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer and Parkinson disease,
which are caused by abnormal accumulation of substances in nerve tissue.

REFERENCE 1. Ame, J.-C.; Apiou, F.; Jacobson, E. L.; Jacobson, M. K.: Assignment
of the poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase gene (PARG) to human chromosome
10q11.23 and mouse chromosome 14B by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 85: 269-270, 1999.

2. Andrabi, S. A.; Kim, N. S.; Yu, S.-W.; Wang, H.; Koh, D. W.; Sasaki,
M.; Klaus, J. A.; Otsuka, T.; Zhang, Z.; Koehler, R. C.; Hurn, P.
D.; Poirier, G. G.; Dawson, V. L.; Dawson, T. M.: Poly(ADP-ribose)
(PAR) polymer is a death signal. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 18308-18313,
2006.

3. Hanai, S.; Kanai, M.; Ohashi, S.; Okamoto, K.; Yamada, M.; Takahashi,
H.; Miwa, M.: Loss of poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase causes progressive
neurodegeneration in Drosophila melanogaster. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101:
82-86, 2004.

4. Lin, W.; Ame, J.-C.; Aboul-Ela, N.; Jacobson, E. L.; Jacobson,
M. K.: Isolation and characterization of the cDNA encoding bovine
poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 11895-11901,
1997.

5. Slade, D.; Dunstan, M. S.; Barkauskaite, E.; Weston, R.; Lafite,
P.; Dixon, N.; Ahel, M.; Leys, D.; Ahel, I.: The structure and catalytic
mechanism of a poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase. Nature 477: 616-620,
2011.

6. Yu, S.-W.; Andrabi, S. A.; Wang, H.; Kim, N. S.; Poirier, G. G.;
Dawson, T. M.; Dawson, V. L.: Apoptosis-inducing factor mediates
poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) polymer-induced cell death. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 103: 18314-18319, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/7/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/4/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/6/2004
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 10/1/1999

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/8/1999

EDITED alopez: 03/09/2012
terry: 3/7/2012
wwang: 5/4/2010
alopez: 2/4/2007
terry: 10/12/2005
cwells: 2/10/2004
terry: 2/6/2004
terry: 3/27/2002
carol: 10/1/1999
alopez: 2/8/1999

606417	TITLE *606417 WD REPEAT-CONTAINING PROTEIN 11; WDR11
;;WDR15;;
KIAA1351;;
BROMODOMAIN- AND WD REPEAT-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2, FORMERLY; BRWD2,
FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

WDR11 is a member of the WD repeat-containing protein family. For
background information on this family, see 604734.

CLONING

Allelic deletions in 10q25-q26 and 19q13.3-q13.4 are common genetic
alterations in glial tumors. Chernova et al. (2001) identified a
balanced t(10;19) reciprocal translocation in a glioblastoma cell line
that involved both critical regions on chromosomes 10 and 19. By
positional cloning of the translocation breakpoint, they identified a
novel WD-repeat gene on chromosome 10, which they designated WDR11.
WDR11 encodes a deduced 1,224-amino acid polypeptide with a calculated
molecular mass of 137 kD. It contains 6 putative WD40 repeats, a
predicted transmembrane region, and a tyrosine kinase phosphorylation
site. Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of 3 major
transcripts (4.5, 2.7 and 2.0 kb) in all tissues tested. Chernova et al.
(2001) determined that the translocation resulted in deletion of exon 5
and fusion of intron 4 of WDR11 to the 3-prime untranslated region of
ZNF320 (606427), a novel member of the Kruppel-like zinc finger gene
family on chromosome 19. Since ZNF320 is oriented toward the centromere
of chromosome 19, both genes appeared on the same derivative chromosome,
der(10). The chimeric transcript encodes an aberrant WDR11 polypeptide,
which is truncated after the second of the 6 WD repeats. Because of the
localization of WDR11 in a region frequently showing loss of
heterozygosity in glioblastoma (see DMBT1; 601969) and because WDR11 is
inactivated in glioblastoma cells, Chernova et al. (2001) considered
WDR11 to be a candidate tumor suppressor gene involved in tumorigenesis
of glial and other tumors.

To investigate developmental expression of Wdr11, Kim et al. (2010)
performed whole-mount in situ hybridization analysis in mouse embryos
from days E10.5 to E14.5. As early as E10.5, the entire developing
central nervous system, except for the spinal cord, revealed Wdr11
expression. The neuroepithelium, including the diencephalic region that
gives rise to hypothalamic neurons where GnRH (152760) neurons reside,
stained strongly for Wdr11 at E11.5 and E12.5. At E14.5, high levels of
Wdr11 expression were particularly noteworthy in the developing cortex
and olfactory bulb. In the adult brain, intense Wdr11 expression was
restricted to the olfactory bulb, the olfaction-related piriform cortex,
the granule cell layer of the cerebellum, and neurons of the hippocampal
formation. Kim et al. (2010) noted that the pattern of expression was
consistent with a role for WDR11 in both normosmic and anosmic forms of
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chernova et al. (2001) determined that the WDR11 gene contains 29 exons
distributed over 58 kb and is oriented towards the telomere.

MAPPING

By positional cloning, Chernova et al. (2001) mapped the WDR11 gene to
chromosome 10q26.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen, Kim et al. (2010) identified EMX1
(600034) as a WDR11 binding partner. The interaction was confirmed in
mammalian cells by coimmunoprecipitation assays and further confirmed by
GST pull-down analysis. Kim et al. (2010) generated WDR11 deletion
mutants and performed GST pull-down assays to assess binding, which
demonstrated that both the N terminus and the central portion of WDR11
bind to EMX1, whereas the C terminus does not. Immunostaining in a
physiologically relevant human cell system consisting of immortalized
human embryonic olfactory GnRH neuroblasts isolated from olfactory
epithelium of an 8- to 12-week-old human embryo (FCNB4-hTERT cells)
localized WDR11 to the cytoplasm. Fluorescence microscopy of transfected
U2OS cells also showed a cytoplasmic localization for WDR11, whereas
EMX1 localized to the nucleus. However, after treatment with leptomycin
B, an inhibitor of nuclear export, both EMX1 and WDR11 colocalized in
the nucleus, suggesting that WDR11 might be shuttling between nucleus
and cytoplasm.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Kim et al. (2010) screened 201 normosmic and hyposmic/anosmic patients
with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH14; 614858) for mutations in the
candidate gene WDR11 (606417) and identified 5 different heterozygous
missense mutations in 6 unrelated probands, including 5 normosmic
patients (see, e.g., 606417.0001 and 606417.0002) and 1 anosmic patient
(606417.0003). DNA from the parents was unavailable, but the mutations
were not found in more than 400 controls.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 14 WITHOUT ANOSMIA
WDR11, PHE1150LEU

In a man with incomplete hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and an unrelated
woman with complete HH, both of whom were normosmic (HH14; 614858), Kim
et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for a 3450T-G transversion in
exon 28 of the WDR11 gene, resulting in a phe1150-to-leu (F1150L)
substitution at a highly conserved residue near the C terminus. The
mutation was not found in 420 white controls. Haplotype analysis
indicated a shared haplotype around WDR11, suggesting that the 2
patients were likely to be descended from a recent common ancestor.

.0002
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 14 WITHOUT ANOSMIA
WDR11, ALA435THR

In a Turkish man with complete hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, who had
bilateral cryptorchidism and a normal sense of smell (HH14; 614858), Kim
et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for a 1303G-A transition in exon
10 of the WDR11 gene, resulting in an ala435-to-thr (A435T) substitution
at a highly conserved residue within the sixth WD domain. Transfection
studies in HEK293 cells demonstrated that the A435T mutation abolishes
EMX1 (600034) binding. The mutation was not found in 402 Turkish
controls or 426 white controls.

.0003
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 14 WITH ANOSMIA
WDR11, HIS690GLN

In a man with anosmic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH14; 614858), Kim
et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for a 2070T-A transversion in
exon 16 of the WDR11 gene, resulting in a his690-to-gln (H690Q)
substitution at a highly conserved residue within the ninth WD domain.
Transfection studies in HEK293 cells demonstrated that the H690Q
mutation abolishes EMX1 (600034) binding. The mutation was not found in
420 white controls.

REFERENCE 1. Chernova, O. B.; Hunyadi, A.; Malaj, E.; Pan, H.; Crooks, C.; Roe,
B.; Cowell, J. K.: A novel member of the WD-repeat gene family, WDR11,
maps to the 10q26 region and is disrupted by a chromosome translocation
in human glioblastoma cells. Oncogene 20: 5378-5392, 2001.

2. Kim, H.-G.; Ahn, J.-W.; Kurth, I.; Ullmann, R.; Kim, H.-T.; Kulharya,
A.; Ha, K.-S.; Itokawa, Y.; Meliciani, I.; Wenzel, W.; Lee, D.; Rosenberger,
G.; and 12 others: WDR11, a WD protein that interacts with transcription
factor EMX1, is mutated in idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
and Kallmann syndrome. Am. J. Hum.  Genet. 87: 465-479, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/11/2012

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/29/2001

EDITED carol: 10/11/2012
mgross: 2/26/2010
alopez: 10/27/2009
mgross: 9/2/2005
alopez: 11/3/2003
carol: 10/31/2001
carol: 10/29/2001

600069	TITLE *600069 URIDINE DIPHOSPHATE GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE 2 FAMILY, MEMBER B15; UGT2B15
;;UDP GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE 2 FAMILY, MEMBER B15;;
UDP GLUCURONOSYLTRANSFERASE 2 FAMILY, MEMBER B15;;
URIDINE DIPHOSPHATE GLUCURONOSYLTRANSFERASE 2 FAMILY, MEMBER B8;;
UDP GLUCURONOSYLTRANSFERASE 2 FAMILY, MEMBER B8; UGT2B8
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The UGTs are of major importance in the conjugation and subsequent
elimination of potentially toxic xenobiotics and endogenous compounds.
UGT2B8 demonstrates reactivity with estriol. See UGT2B4 (600067).

CLONING

Coffman et al. (1990) found that the cDNA corresponding to UGT2B8 is
2,094 bp and encodes a protein of 523 amino acids, including a 16-amino
acid leader sequence, and has an untranslated 3-prime region of 525 bp.

MAPPING

The steroid-metabolizing isoforms of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase are
encoded by multiple genes. By fluorescence in situ hybridization with a
YAC containing all 3 genes, Monaghan et al. (1994) localized UGT2B4,
UGT2B9 (600068), and UGT2B15 to 4q13. They provisionally ordered the
genes as UGT2B9--UGT2B4--UGT2B15.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Iida et al. (2002) provided a catalog of 86 SNPs in 3 uridine
diphosphate glycosyltransferase genes: UGT2A1 (604716), UGT2B15, and
UGT8 (601291).

POPULATION GENETICS

Using DNA from 100 healthy unrelated Caucasian volunteers, Menard et al.
(2009) characterized the common UGT2B17 (601903) and UGT2B28 (606497)
deletions and observed that their cooccurrence with a D85Y polymorphism
(dbSNP rs1902023) in the UGT2B15 gene generates 7 distinct haplotypes.
The authors concluded that analyzing copy number variation of UGT2B17
without evaluating UGT2B28 and the D85Y variant in UGT2B15 may over- or
underestimate the phenotypic impact of each gene.

REFERENCE 1. Coffman, B. L.; Tephly, T. R.; Irshaid, Y. M.; Green, M. D.; Smith,
C.; Jackson, M. R.; Wooster, R.; Burchell, B.: Characterization and
primary sequence of a human hepatic microsomal estriol UDP-glucuronosyltransferase. Arch.
Biochem. Biophys. 281: 170-175, 1990.

2. Iida, A.; Saito, S.; Sekine, A.; Mishima, C.; Kitamura, Y.; Kondo,
K.; Harigae, S.; Osawa, S.; Nakamura, Y.: Catalog of 86 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in three uridine diphosphate glycosyltransferase
genes: UGT2A1, UGTB15, and UGT8. J. Hum. Genet. 47: 505-510, 2002.

3. Menard, V.; Eap, O.; Harvey, M.; Guillemette, C.; Levesque, E.
: Copy-number variations (CNVs) of the human sex steroid metabolizing
genes UGT2B17 and UGT2B28 and their associations with a UGT2B15 functional
polymorphism. Hum. Mutat. 30: 1310-1319, 2009.

4. Monaghan, G.; Clarke, D. J.; Povey, S.; See, C. G.; Boxer, M.;
Burchell, B.: Isolation of a human YAC contig encompassing a cluster
of UGT2 genes and its regional localization to chromosome 4q13. Genomics 23:
496-499, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/17/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/7/2003
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 6/22/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/3/1994

EDITED wwang: 11/23/2009
terry: 11/17/2009
cwells: 1/8/2003
tkritzer: 1/7/2003
mcapotos: 4/6/2000
alopez: 7/7/1998
alopez: 6/22/1998
alopez: 5/20/1998
carol: 12/2/1994
terry: 8/4/1994
terry: 8/3/1994

179710	TITLE *179710 REGULATOR OF CHROMOSOME CONDENSATION 1; RCC1
;;CHROMOSOME CONDENSATION 1; CHC1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Mitotic cells possess chromosome-condensing factor(s), the presence of
which is shown by fusing mitotic and interphase cells. Upon fusion, the
chromatin is condensed and exhibits various forms of prematurely
condensed chromosomes (PCCs), depending on the phase of the cell. The
condensation process is essential for the even distribution of genetic
material into daughter cells. On the other hand, transcription cannot
occur from the mitotically condensed chromosomes. Cells obviously must
have regulatory mechanisms that allow condensation of the chromatin to
occur at a precisely correct time in the cell cycle. In the normal cell
cycle, the chromosome-condensing factor(s) appears in the early G2 phase
and accumulates toward the mitotic phase. Mutations associated with this
step in the cell cycle have to be isolated as temperature-sensitive
mutants (Kai et al., 1986). Ohtsubo et al. (1987) cloned the human RCC1
gene after DNA-mediated gene transfer into a temperature-sensitive
mutant which shows premature chromosome condensation at nonpermissive
temperatures (39.5-40 degrees C). This gene codes for a 2.5-kb
polyadenylated RNA that is well conserved in hamsters and humans.
Ohtsubo et al. (1987) found 2 cDNA clones in a human library that
complemented the temperature-sensitive mutation with an efficiency
comparable to that of the genomic DNA clone. The clones appeared to
encode a protein of 421 amino acids with a calculated molecular weight
of 44,847.

GENE STRUCTURE

Furuno et al. (1991) isolated total genomic DNA for the human RCC1 gene
from HeLa cells and determined its complete nucleotide sequence (34,641
bp) by the shotgun sequencing method. The gene was found to have 14
exons, 8 of which (starting from the seventh one) coded the 7 repeated
sequences of RCC1 protein. A single exon corresponded roughly to each
repeat of the RCC1 protein except for the middle one, indicating that
the RCC1 gene was generated through amplification of a primordial exon.
Primer extension analysis demonstrated the presence of an internal
promoter.

MAPPING

By hybridization to DNA from sorted chromosomes, Ohtsubo et al. (1987)
concluded that the gene, which they symbolized RCC1, is located on
chromosome 1. By fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using a
suppression FISH method for elimination of repetitive sequences in the
genomic clone, Nishimoto et al. (1994) mapped the CHC1 gene to 1p36.1.
They reported work of others indicating that the mouse counterpart maps
to the distal region of chromosome 4.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Makde et al. (2010) determined the crystal structure of a complex of
Drosophila RCC1 and the nucleosome core particle at 2.9-angstrom
resolution, providing an atomic view of how a chromatin protein
interacts with the histone and DNA components of the nucleosome. Their
structure also suggested that the Widom 601 DNA positioning sequence
present in the nucleosomes forms a 145-bp nucleosome core particle, not
the expected canonical 147-bp particle.

GENE FUNCTION

Bischoff et al. (1990) demonstrated that RCC1 protein is homologous to a
47-kD nuclear protein recognized by antikinetochore autoimmune sera from
patients with CREST syndrome (181750).

Hayashi et al. (1995) showed that, both in mammalian cells and in yeast,
RANBP1 (601180) acts as a negative regulator of RCC1 by inhibiting
RCC1-stimulated guanine nucleotide release from RAN (601179). See also
601181.

Ohba et al. (1999) demonstrated that the nucleotide exchange activity of
RCC1, the only known nucleotide exchange factor for RAN, was required
for microtubule aster formation with or without demembranated sperm in
Xenopus egg extracts arrested in meiosis II. In the RCC1-depleted egg
extracts, RanGTP (see 602362), but not RanGDP, induced self-organization
of microtubule asters, and the process required the activity of dynein
(see 603297). Thus, RAN was shown to regulate formation of the
microtubule network.

Adding chromatin beads to Xenopus egg extracts causes nucleation of
microtubules, which eventually reorganize into a bipolar spindle. Using
this assay, Carazo-Salas et al. (1999) demonstrated that the activity of
chromosome-associated RCC1 protein is required for spindle formation.
When in the GTP-bound state (RanGTP), RAN itself induces microtubule
nucleation and spindle-like structures in M-phase extract. Carazo-Salas
et al. (1999) proposed that RCC1 generates a high local concentration of
RanGTP around chromatin which, in turn, induces the local nucleation of
microtubules.

The Ran GTPase (601179) controls nucleocytoplasmic transport, mitotic
spindle formation, and nuclear envelope assembly. These functions rely
on the association of the Ran-specific exchange factor, RCC1, with
chromatin. Nemergut et al. (2001) found that RCC1 binds directly to
mononucleosomes and to histones H2A and H2B (142711). RCC1 utilizes
these histones to bind Xenopus sperm chromatin, and the binding of RCC1
to nucleosomes or histones stimulates the catalytic activity of RCC1.
Nemergut et al. (2001) proposed that the docking of RCC1 to H2A/H2B
establishes the polarity of the Ran-GTP gradient that drives nuclear
envelope assembly, nuclear transport, and other nuclear events.

Li and Zheng (2004) provided evidence that CDC2 (116940) coordinates
spindle assembly with the cell cycle during mitosis through
phosphorylation of RCC1. CDC2 phosphorylates RCC1 on serines located in
or near its nuclear localization signal. This phosphorylation activates
RCC1 to generate RanGTP on mitotic chromosomes, which is required for
spindle assembly and chromosome segregation.

At the time of the report of Schaner Tooley et al. (2010), the RAN
guanine nucleotide exchange factor RCC1 was the only protein for which
any biologic function of alpha-N-methylation had been identified.
Methylation-defective mutants of RCC1 have reduced affinity for DNA (Hao
and Macara, 2008) and cause mitotic defects (Chen et al., 2007), but
further characterization of this modification had been hindered by
ignorance of the responsible methyltransferase. Schaner Tooley et al.
(2010) reported the discovery of the first alpha-N-methyltransferase,
which they named N-terminal RCC1 methyltransferase (NRMT; 613560).
Substrate docking and mutational analysis of RCC1 defined the NRMT
recognition sequence and enabled the identification of numerous
methylation targets, including SET (600960) and RB1 (614041). Knockdown
of NRMT recapitulated the multispindle phenotype seen with
methylation-defective RCC1 mutants, demonstrating the importance of
alpha-N-methylation for normal bipolar spindle formation and chromosome
segregation.

NOMENCLATURE

RCC1 was used by HGM workshops for the primary renal cell carcinoma
locus on 3p (144700). CHC1 is another symbol for this locus (McAlpine,
1988).

REFERENCE 1. Bischoff, F. R.; Maier, G.; Tilz, G.; Ponstingl, H.: A 47-kDa
human nuclear protein recognized by antikinetochore autoimmune sera
is homologous with the protein encoded by RCC1, a gene implicated
in onset of chromosome condensation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 8617-8621,
1990.

2. Carazo-Salas, R. E.; Guarguaglini, G.; Gruss, O. J.; Segref, A.;
Karsenti, E.; Mattaj, I. W.: Generation of GTP-bound Ran by RCC1
is required for chromatin-induced mitotic spindle formation. Nature 400:
178-181, 1999.

3. Chen, T.; Muratore, T. L.; Schaner-Tooley, C. E.; Shabanowitz,
J.; Hunt, D. F.; Macara, I. G.: N-terminal alpha-methylation of RCC1
is necessary for stable chromatin association and normal mitosis. Nature
Cell Biol. 9: 596-603, 2007.

4. Furuno, N.; Nakagawa, K.; Eguchi, U.; Ohtsubo, M.; Nishimoto, T.;
Soeda, E.: Complete nucleotide sequence of the human RCC1 gene involved
in coupling between DNA replication and mitosis. Genomics 11: 459-461,
1991. Note: Erratum: Genomics 12: 181 only, 1992.

5. Hao, Y.; Macara, I. G.: Regulation of chromatin binding by a conformational
switch in the tail of the Ran exchange factor RCC1. J. Cell. Biol. 182:
827-836, 2008.

6. Hayashi, N.; Yokoyama, N.; Seki, T.; Azuma, Y.; Ohba, T.; Nishimoto,
T.: RanBP1, a Ras-like nuclear G protein binding to Ran/TC4, inhibits
RCC1 via Ran/TC4. Molec. Gen. Genet. 247: 661-669, 1995.

7. Kai, R.; Ohtsubo, M.; Sekiguchi, M.; Nishimoto, T.: Molecular
cloning of a human gene that regulates chromosome condensation and
is essential for cell proliferation. Molec. Cell. Biol. 6: 2027-2032,
1986.

8. Li, H.-Y.; Zheng, Y.: Phosphorylation of RCC1 in mitosis is essential
for producing a high RanGTP concentration on chromosomes and for spindle
assembly in mammalian cells. Genes Dev. 18: 512-527, 2004.

9. Makde, R. D.; England, J. R.; Yennawar, H. P.; Tan, S.: Structure
of RCC1 chromatin factor bound to the nucleosome core particle. Nature 467:
562-566, 2010.

10. McAlpine, P. J.: Personal Communication. Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada  6/22/1988.

11. Nemergut, M. E.; Mizzen, C. A.; Stukenberg, T.; Allis, C. D.;
Macara, I. G.: Chromatin docking and exchange activity enhancement
of RCC1 by histones H2A and H2B. Science 292: 1540-1543, 2001.

12. Nishimoto, T.; Seino, H.; Seki, N.; Hori, T.-A.: The human CHC1
gene encoding RCC1 (regulator of chromosome condensation) (CHC1) is
localized to human chromosome 1p36.1. Genomics 23: 719-721, 1994.

13. Ohba, T.; Nakamura, M.; Nishitani, H.; Nishimoto, T.: Self-organization
of microtubule asters induced in Xenopus egg extracts by GTP-bound
Ran. Science 284: 1356-1358, 1999.

14. Ohtsubo, M.; Kai, R.; Furuno, N.; Sekiguchi, T.; Sekiguchi, M.;
Hayashida, H.; Kuma, K.; Miyata, T.; Fukushige, S.; Murotsu, T.; Matsubara,
K.; Nishimoto, T.: Isolation and characterization of the active cDNA
of the human cell cycle gene (RCC1) involved in the regulation of
onset of chromosome condensation. Genes Dev. 1: 585-593, 1987.

15. Schaner Tooley, C. E.; Petkowski, J. J.; Muratore-Schroeder, T.
L.; Balsbaugh, J. L.; Shabanowitz, J.; Sabat, M.; Minor, W.; Hunt,
D. F.; Macara, I. G.: NRMT is an alpha-N-methyltransferase that methylates
RCC1 and retinoblastoma protein. Nature 466: 1125-1128, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/12/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/17/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/11/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/12/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/7/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/25/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/20/1999
Alan F. Scott - edited: 4/5/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/3/1987

EDITED tpirozzi: 10/01/2013
alopez: 3/8/2013
carol: 6/17/2011
alopez: 10/12/2010
terry: 10/12/2010
alopez: 9/17/2010
mgross: 9/16/2005
mgross: 5/11/2004
alopez: 4/15/2002
terry: 4/12/2002
cwells: 6/12/2001
cwells: 6/11/2001
terry: 6/7/2001
alopez: 8/25/1999
alopez: 5/20/1999
terry: 5/20/1999
dkim: 7/24/1998
dkim: 6/30/1998
mark: 2/3/1998
carol: 4/29/1996
terry: 4/17/1996
mark: 4/5/1996
mark: 4/4/1996
carol: 12/13/1994
mimadm: 4/29/1994
warfield: 4/14/1994
carol: 3/26/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 10/1/1991

606534	TITLE *606534 CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY IIIA, POLYPEPTIDE 43; CYP3A43
DESCRIPTION Subfamily IIIA of the cytochrome P450 family is considered to be the
major drug metabolizing subfamily. Its members are localized in the
organs most associated with drug disposition, including the liver,
gastrointestinal tract, and kidney. The major isoform in liver is CYP3A4
(124010), whereas CYP3A5 (605325) is present at only 10 to 30% of CYP3A4
levels, and CYP3A7 (605340) is not clearly present in adult liver at
all.

CLONING

By use of PCR on liver cDNA and 3-prime RACE, Domanski et al. (2001)
isolated a cDNA encoding CYP3A43, a novel cytochrome P450 IIIA isoform.
Sequence analysis predicted that the 503-amino acid protein differs from
the other forms at the N terminus as well as at 2 C-terminal conserved
sites and 4 sites that are important for the regioselectivity of steroid
hydroxylation. RNA dot-blot analysis detected only weak expression in
liver, whereas PCR of cDNA panels found expression in liver, kidney,
pancreas, and prostate as well as fetal liver and fetal skeletal muscle.
SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis showed expression of an approximately
55-kD protein. Functional analysis indicated that, under appropriate
conditions, CYP3A43 exhibits low but reproducible testosterone
6-beta-hydroxylase activity. Gellner et al. (2001) found the highest
expression level of CYP3A43 mRNA in prostate, an organ with extensive
steroid metabolism. It was also expressed in several other tissues
including liver, where it could be induced by rifampicin.

By EST database searching and 5-prime RACE, Westlind et al. (2001) also
obtained a cDNA encoding CYP3A43. The deduced protein is 76%, 76%, and
72% identical to CYP3A4, CYP3A5, and CYP3A7, respectively. Real-time PCR
in 10 different livers revealed that CYP3A43 is expressed at 0.1% and 2%
of the levels of CYP3A4 and CYP3A5.

GENE STRUCTURE

By RT-PCR analysis, Domanski et al. (2001) and Westlind et al. (2001)
determined that the CYP3A43 gene contains 13 exons and may have splice
variants.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Gellner et al. (2001) mapped the CYP3A43 gene
within a 231-kb region on chromosome 7q21.1, along with the CYP3A4,
CYP3A5, and CYP3A7 genes and 3 pseudogenes.

REFERENCE 1. Domanski, T. L.; Finta, C.; Halpert, J. R.; Zaphiropoulos, P. G.
: cDNA cloning and initial characterization of CYP3A43, a novel human
cytochrome P450. Molec. Pharm. 59: 386-392, 2001.

2. Gellner, K.; Eiselt, R.; Hustert, E.; Arnold, H.; Koch, I.; Haberl,
M.; Deglmann, C. J.; Burk, O.; Buntefuss, D.; Escher, S.; Bishop,
C.; Koebe, H.-G.; Brinkmann, U.; Klenk, H.-P.; Kleine, K.; Meyer,
U. A.; Wojnowski, L.: Genomic organization of the human CYP3A locus:
identification of a new, inducible CYP3A gene. Pharmacogenetics 11:
111-121, 2001.

3. Westlind, A.; Malmebo, S.; Johansson, I.; Otter, C.; Andersson,
T. B.; Ingelman-Sundberg, M.; Oscarson, M.: Cloning and tissue distribution
of a novel human cytochrome P450 of the CYP3A subfamily, CYP3A43. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 281: 1349-1355, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/7/2001

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/6/2001

EDITED mgross: 07/11/2002
carol: 12/7/2001

605475	TITLE *605475 BAI1-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2; BAIAP2
;;INSULIN RECEPTOR SUBSTRATE p53; IRSP53
DESCRIPTION Brain-specific angiogenesis inhibitor-1 (BAI1; 602682) is a secretin
receptor family member whose expression is induced by p53 (191170). Yeh
et al. (1996) cloned a hamster cDNA encoding a 53-kD BAI-associated
protein which, when expressed in mammalian cells, is tyrosine
phosphorylated by the insulin receptor. They termed the protein IRSp53
for insulin receptor substrate p53. The protein contains 521 amino acids
with a calculated molecular mass of 57 kD and is highly expressed in the
brain. The protein appears to be localized primarily in the particulate
fraction of cell lysates. The IRSp53 cDNA was found to encode an
additional protein product of 58 kD (p58) in vivo.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen with cytoplasmic BAI1 as bait, followed by
screening of a human fetal brain cDNA library, Oda et al. (1999)
isolated a cDNA encoding BAIAP2 and a splice variant. Sequence analysis
predicted that the 520- and 521-amino acid proteins are homologous to
hamster IRSp53 with identity conserved in the C-terminal SH3 domain.
Northern blot analysis revealed expression of a 3.2-kb transcript
primarily in brain with very low levels in placenta, prostate, and
testis as well as ubiquitous expression of a 2.2-kb transcript that is
relatively abundant in liver, prostate, testis, and placenta. The
expression of the 3.2-kb transcript overlaps that of BAI1 in brain
subregions, is similar to that of neuron- and neuroendocrine-restricted
NSE (ENO2; 131360), but different from that of astrocyte-specific GFAP
(137780). Yeast 2-hybrid and GST pull-down analyses with mutated
proteins confirmed that the SH3 domain of BAIAP2 interacts with the
proline-rich cytoplasmic portion of BAI1. Double immunofluorescence
microscopy demonstrated colocalization of BAI1 and BAIAP2 in the
cytoplasmic membrane, whereas cells expressing BAIAP2 alone showed
diffuse staining of the cytosol and nucleus.

Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA; 125370) is an autosomal
dominant, progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by
selective neuron death in the dentatorubral and pallidoluysian pathways
and is associated with CAG repeats in the DRPLA gene (607462). Using a
yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human fetal brain cDNA library with
N-terminus-deleted DRPLA as bait, Okamura-Oho et al. (1999) identified
cDNAs encoding human IRSP53. Sequence analysis identified deduced
proteins of 552 and 521 amino acids. The latter sequence is 94%
identical to hamster IRSp53. Northern blot analysis revealed expression
of a 3.0-kb transcript in most tissues examined and a 3.8-kb transcript
mainly in brain, suggesting alternative splicing. After stimulation of
cells with insulin, immunoblot analysis detected a phosphorylated 58-kD
IRSP53 protein which did not enhance binding to DRPLA.
Coimmunoprecipitation analysis and reporter gene assays indicated that
DRPLA and IRSP53 do interact. Confocal microscopy demonstrated
colocalization in perinuclear dots. GST pull-down analysis determined
that the SH3 domain in the C terminus of IRSP53 binds to a proline-rich
region of DRPLA, which may be interfered with by extended polyglutamine
tracts in the form of CAG repeats.

Miki et al. (2000) demonstrated that IRSP53 is the critical linker
between RAC (see 602048) and WAVE2 (605875). Activated RAC binds to the
N terminus of IRSP53, and the C-terminal SH3 domain of IRSP53 binds to
WAVE2 to form a trimolecular complex. From studies of ectopic
expression, Miki et al. (2000) found that IRSP53 is essential for RAC to
induce membrane ruffling, probably because it recruits WAVE2, which
stimulates actin polymerization mediated by the ARP2/3 complex.

By FISH, Oda et al. (1999) mapped the BAIAP2 gene to chromosome 17q25.

REFERENCE 1. Miki, H.; Yamaguchi, H.; Suetsugu, S.; Takenawa, T.: IRSp53 is
an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of
membrane ruffling. Nature 408: 732-735, 2000.

2. Oda, K.; Shiratsuchi, T.; Nishimori, H.; Inazawa, J.; Yoshikawa,
H.; Taketani, Y.; Nakamura, Y.; Tokino, T.: Identification of BAIAP2
(BAI-associated protein 2), a novel human homologue of hamster IRSp53,
whose SH3 domain interacts with the cytoplasmic domain of BAI1. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 84: 75-82, 1999.

3. Okamura-Oho, Y.; Miyashita, T.; Ohmi, K.; Yamada, M.: Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian
atrophy protein interacts through a proline-rich region near polyglutamine
with the SH3 domain of an insulin receptor tyrosine kinase substrate. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 8: 947-957, 1999.

4. Yeh, T. C.; Ogawa, W.; Danielsen, A. G.; Roth, R. A.: Characterization
and cloning of a 58/53-kDa substrate of the insulin receptor tyrosine
kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 2921-2928, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/15/2001

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 12/14/2000

EDITED carol: 01/24/2003
joanna: 4/24/2001
carol: 2/20/2001
mcapotos: 2/15/2001
carol: 2/13/2001
carol: 12/19/2000
carol: 12/14/2000

600514	TITLE *600514 REELIN; RELN
;;RL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The RELN gene encodes reelin, a large secreted glycoprotein that is
produced by specific cell types within the developing brain and
activates a signaling pathway in postmitotic migrating neurons required
for proper positioning of neurons within laminated nervous system
parenchyma (summary by Zaki et al., 2007).

CLONING

The autosomal recessive mouse mutation 'reeler' (rl) leads to impaired
motor coordination, tremors, and ataxia. Neurons in affected mice fail
to reach their correct locations in the developing brain, disrupting the
organization of the cerebellar and cerebral cortices and other laminated
regions. D'Arcangelo et al. (1995) isolated a gene called reelin (Reln)
that was deleted in 2 reeler alleles. The allele used in cloning the
gene was produced by transgene insertion. Normal but not mutant mice
expressed reelin in embryonic and postnatal neurons during periods of
neuronal migration. The encoded protein resembled extracellular matrix
proteins involved in cell adhesion. D'Arcangelo et al. (1995) found that
the 10,383-bp reelin open reading frame (ORF) begins with a methionine
codon preceded by a consensus sequence for translation initiation. The
stop codon is followed by about 1 kb of 3-prime untranslated sequence
and a potential polyadenylation signal. The ORF encodes a protein of
3,461 amino acids with a relative molecular mass of 388 kD. A single
reelin transcript of about 12 kb was detected in RNA from the brains of
normal mice, but not from brains of affected mice.

Hirotsune et al. (1995) also identified a strong candidate cDNA for the
mouse reeler gene. This 5-kb transcript encoded a 94.4-kD protein
consisting of 881 amino acids and possessing 2 EGF-like motifs. They
analyzed 2 mutant alleles: 'Jackson reeler,' which was found to have a
deletion of the entire gene, and 'Orleans reeler,' which exhibited a
220-bp deletion in the ORF that included the second EGF-like motif and
resulted in a frameshift. In situ hybridization demonstrated that the
transcript is detected exclusively in the pioneer neurons that guide
neuronal cell migration along the radial array. The findings offered an
explanation of how the reeler mutant phenotype causes a disturbance of
the complex architecture of the neuronal network.

DeSilva et al. (1997) found that, like its murine counterpart, human
reelin (RELN) is large, encoding an mRNA of approximately 12 kb. The
mouse and human proteins, predicted from the ORF of the overlapping cDNA
clones, are similar in size (388 kD) and the amino acid and nucleotide
sequences are 94.2% and 87.2% identical, respectively. Northern
hybridization analysis revealed that RELN is expressed in fetal and
postnatal brain as well as in liver. The expression of RELN in postnatal
human brain was high in the cerebellum.

GENE STRUCTURE

Royaux et al. (1997) described the genomic structure of the mouse Reln
gene and the 5-prime-flanking genomic DNA sequences. The gene contains
65 exons spanning approximately 450 kb of genomic DNA. They identified
different reelin transcripts, formed by alternative splicing of a
microexon as well as by use of 2 different polyadenylation sites. All
splice sites conform to the GT-AG rule, except for the splice donor site
of intron 30, which is GC instead of GT. A processed pseudogene was
present in intron 42. Its nucleotide sequence was 86% identical to the
sequence of the rat RDJ1 cDNA which codes for a DnaJ-like protein of the
Hsp40 family. The genomic structures of the mouse and human RELN genes
appear to be highly conserved. The presence of tandemly repeated regions
in the reelin protein suggested that gene duplication events occurred
during evolution. By comparison of the amino acid sequences of the 8
repeats and the positions of introns, Royaux et al. (1997) suggested a
model for the evolution of the repeat coding portion of the reelin gene
from a putative ancestral minigene.

MAPPING

To map the RL gene, D'Arcangelo (1995) used a mouse reelin probe to
isolate a human cDNA from a cerebellum phage library. A P1 clone was
then used for fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). The human
reelin gene maps to 7q22, a chromosomal region that had not yet been
linked to any human genetic disease (D'Arcangelo et al., 1995). RL was
also mapped to YAC contigs spanning the 7q22 region. In the mouse, the
rl gene maps to chromosome 5 (Green, 1989), which is known to have a
long region of homology to human chromosome 7. Based on both FISH and
localization within a well-positioned YAC contig, DeSilva et al. (1997)
mapped the RELN gene to chromosome 7q22.

GENE FUNCTION

Impagnatiello et al. (1998) suggested that reelin may have a role in
schizophrenia (181500) because it regulates positioning and/or trophism
of cortical pyramidal neurons, interneurons, and Purkinje cells during
brain development. Another factor that plays an important role in
guiding the migration of embryonic cortical neurons to their final
destinations in the subcortical plate is the gene that is mutant in the
mouse 'disabled-1' mutation. This gene encodes an adaptor protein (Dab1;
603448) that is a phosphorylation target for a signaling cascade
putatively triggered by the Reln protein interaction with extracellular
matrix (ECM) proteins. Dab1 expression is deficient in another
neurologic genetic phenotype, the 'scrambler' mouse, which is
neurologically and behaviorally similar to the reeler mouse. During
ontogenesis of a mammalian brain, including human brain, RELN is
abundantly synthesized by the Cajal-Retzius cells and other pioneer
neurons located in the telencephalic marginal zone and by granule cells
of the external granular layer of the cerebellum. In wildtype and
scrambler mice, Reln is secreted into the ECM, but the reeler mouse
neither synthesizes nor secretes typical Reln protein. During
development, telencephalic migrating neurons and interneurons express
DAB1, but they neither express nor secrete RELN. In the reeler mouse,
the telencephalic neurons (which are misplaced following migration)
express approximately 10-fold more Dab1 than their wildtype counterpart.
Such an increase in the expression of a protein that virtually functions
as a receptor is expected to occur when the specific signal for the
receptor is missing. The function of RELN in embryos may ultimately
depend on the phosphorylation of DAB1 expressed selectively in migrating
telencephalic pyramidal neurons and cerebellar Purkinje neurons.
Impagnatiello et al. (1998) studied postmortem prefrontal cortices,
temporal cortices, hippocampi, caudate nuclei, and cerebella of
schizophrenia patients and their matched nonpsychiatric subjects. In all
of the brain areas studied, RELN and its mRNA were significantly reduced
(approximately 50%) in patients with schizophrenia; this decrease was
similar in patients affected by undifferentiated or paranoid
schizophrenia. On the other hand, DAB1 was expressed at normal levels in
all of these areas that showed a decrease in RELN. The frequency of RELN
DNA polymorphism in schizophrenia patients and the location of this
variation in a stretch of genomic DNA important for the regulation of
RELN protein secretion (Royaux et al., 1997) increased the clinical
interest in RELN gene abnormalities as putative vulnerability factors in
schizophrenia.

Layering of neurons in the cerebral cortex and cerebellum requires RELN
and DAB1. By targeted disruption experiments in mice, Trommsdorff et al.
(1999) showed that 2 cell surface receptors, very low density
lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR; 192977) and apolipoprotein E receptor-2
(APOER2; 602600), are also required. Both receptors bound Dab1 on their
cytoplasmic tails and were expressed in cortical and cerebellar layers
adjacent to layers expressing Reln. Dab1 expression was upregulated in
knockout mice lacking both the Vldlr and Apoer2 genes. Inversion of
cortical layers, absence of cerebellar foliation, and the migration of
Purkinje cells in these animals precisely mimicked the phenotype of mice
lacking Reln or Dab1. These findings established novel signaling
functions for the LDL receptor gene family and suggested that VLDLR and
APOER2 participate in transmitting the extracellular RELN signal to
intracellular signaling processes initiated by DAB1.

Using in vitro binding experiments, Hiesberger et al. (1999) showed that
Reln binds directly and specifically to the extracellular domains of
Vldlr and ApoER2. In primary embryonic neuron cultures, they
demonstrated that blockade of Vldlr and ApoER2 ligand binding correlates
with loss of Reelin-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Dab1. With
Western blot analysis, they demonstrated that mice that lack either Reln
or Vldlr and ApoER2 (Trommsdorff et al., 1999) exhibit a dramatic
increase in the phosphorylation level of the microtubule-stabilizing
protein tau (MAPT; 157140). Hiesberger et al. (1999) concluded that Reln
acts via Vldlr and ApoER2 to regulate Dab1 tyrosine phosphorylation and
microtubule function in neurons.

D'Arcangelo et al. (1999) transfected 293T cells with expression
constructs encoding full-length VLDLR, APOER2, and LDLR (606945) cDNA.
Cells were incubated in the presence of reelin. By Western blotting, all
3 reelin isoforms (400, 250, and 180 kD) were found to associate with
293T cells expressing VLDLR and APOER2, and to a lower extent with cells
expressing LDLR; no binding was detected using mock transfected cells.
Binding required calcium and was inhibited in the presence of APOE
(107741). Furthermore, the CR-50 monoclonal antibody, which inhibits
reelin function, blocked the association of reelin with VLDLR. After
binding to VLDLR on the cell surface, reelin was internalized into
vesicles. In dissociated embryonic cortical neurons, APOE reduced the
level of reelin-induced intracellular tyrosine phosphorylation of Dab1.
The authors suggested that reelin directs neuronal migration by binding
to VLDLR and APOER2.

Mutation of the Reln gene in the mouse disrupts neuronal migration in
several brain regions and gives rise to functional deficits, such as
ataxic gait and trembling. Thus, reelin is thought to control cell-cell
interactions critical for cell positioning in the brain. Although an
abundance of reelin transcript is found in the embryonic spinal cord, it
was generally thought that neuronal migration in the spinal cord is not
affected by reelin. However, Yip et al. (2000) showed that migration of
sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the spinal cord is affected by
reelin. This study indicated that reelin affects neuronal migration
outside of the brain. Moreover, the relationship between reelin and
migrating preganglionic neurons suggests that reelin acts as a barrier
to neuronal migration.

Using neuronal precursors from postnatal mice in a Matrigel culture
system, Hack et al. (2002) showed that reelin acted as a detachment
signal for chain-migrating interneuron precursors in the olfactory bulb,
inducing their dispersal into individual cells. In vivo studies of
reeler mutant mice showed disrupted organization of the olfactory bulb
as well as failure of individual neuronal migration. Reelin did not act
as a stop signal, did not provide directional cues, and did not affect
migration distance.

Using in vitro and in vivo migration assays, Dulabon et al. (2000)
showed that reelin inhibits migration of cortical neurons in mouse
embryonic brain. Immunoprecipitation experiments showed that reelin
associates with alpha-3-beta-1 integrin (see 605025 and 135630), a
receptor that mediates neuronal adhesion to radial glial fibers and
radial migration. Using alpha-3-beta-1 integrin-deficient mouse embryos
for migration assays, Dulabon et al. (2000) showed that deficiency in
functional alpha-3-beta-1 integrins leads to deficiency in reelin
function. They observed reduced levels of Dab1 protein and elevated
expression of a 180-kD reelin fragment in cerebral cortices of
alpha-3-beta-1 integrin-deficient mice. Dulabon et al. (2000) concluded
that reelin may arrest neuronal migration and promote normal cortical
lamination by binding alpha-3-beta-1 integrin and modulating
integrin-mediated cellular adhesion.

By examining mice deficient in either Reln or Dab1, Rice et al. (2001)
found that expression of both genes was essential for the patterning of
synaptic connectivity in the retina. Physiologic studies of mice
deficient in either gene detected attenuated rod-driven retinal
responses that were associated with a decrease in rod bipolar cell
density and an abnormal distribution of processes in the inner plexiform
layer.

Grayson et al. (2005) found that postmortem brains from patients with
schizophrenia had increased methylation of the RELN gene within the
promoter region, particularly at positions -134 and -139, compared to
controls. The authors hypothesized that hypermethylation of this
promoter region results in decreased expression of RELN in
schizophrenia.

Botella-Lopez et al. (2006) found increased levels of a 180-kD reelin
fragment in CSF from 19 patients with Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300)
compared to 11 nondemented controls. Western blot and PCR analysis
confirmed increased levels of reelin protein and mRNA in tissue samples
from the frontal cortex of AD patients. Reelin was not increased in
plasma samples, suggesting distinct cellular origins. The reelin 180-kD
fragment was also increased in CSF samples of other neurodegenerative
disorders, including frontotemporal dementia (600274), progressive
supranuclear palsy (PSP; 601104), and Parkinson disease (PD; 168600).

Using overexpression and knockdown studies with cultured rat and mouse
hippocampal and cortical neurons, Matsuki et al. (2010) found that a
signaling pathway containing Stk25 (602255), Lkb1 (STK11; 602216), Strad
(STRADA; 608626), and the Golgi protein Gm130 (GOLGA2; 602580) promoted
Golgi condensation and multiple axon outgrowth while inhibiting Golgi
deployment into dendrites and dendritic growth. This signaling pathway
acted in opposition to the reelin-Dab1 pathway, which tended to inhibit
Golgi condensation and axon outgrowth and favor Golgi deployment into
dendrites and dendrite outgrowth.

Thirty percent of all cortical interneurons arise from a relatively
novel source within the ventral telencephalon, the caudal ganglionic
eminence (CGE) (summary by De Marco Garcia et al., 2011). Owing to their
late birth date, these interneurons populate the cortex only after the
majority of other interneurons and pyramidal cells are already in place
and have started to functionally integrate. De Marco Garcia et al.
(2011) demonstrated in mice that for CGE-derived reelin-positive and
calretinin (114051)-positive, but not vasoactive intestinal peptide
(VIP; 192320)-positive, interneurons, activity is essential before
postnatal day 3 for correct migration, and that after postnatal day 3,
glutamate-mediated activity controls the development of their axons and
dendrites. Furthermore, De Marco Garcia et al. (2011) showed that the
engulfment and cell motility-1 gene (Elmo1; 606420), a target of the
transcription factor distal-less homeobox-1 (Dlx1; 600029), is
selectively expressed in reelin-positive and calretinin-positive
interneurons and is both necessary and sufficient for activity-dependent
interneuron migration. De Marco Garcia et al. (2011) concluded that
their findings revealed a selective requirement for activity in shaping
the cortical integration of specific neuronal subtypes.

Senturk et al. (2011) showed that the neuronal guidance cues ephrin B
proteins are essential for Reelin signaling during the development of
laminated structures in the brain. They showed that ephrin Bs
genetically interact with Reelin. Notably, compound mouse mutants (Reln
heterozygotes null for either Efnb2 (600527) or Efnb3 (602297)) and
triple Efnb1 (300035)/Efnb2/Efnb3 knockouts showed neuronal migration
defects that recapitulated the ones observed in the neocortex,
hippocampus, and cerebellum of the reeler mouse. Mechanistically,
Senturk et al. (2011) showed that Reelin binds to the extracellular
domain of ephrin Bs, which associate at the membrane with VLDLR (192977)
and ApoER2 (602600) in neurons. Clustering of ephrin Bs leads to the
recruitment and phosphorylation of Dab1 (603448) which is necessary for
Reelin signaling. Conversely, loss of function of ephrin Bs severely
impairs Reelin-induced Dab1 phosphorylation. Importantly, activation of
ephrin Bs can rescue the reeler neuronal migration defects in the
absence of Reelin protein. Senturk et al. (2011) concluded that their
results identified ephrin Bs as essential components of the Reelin
receptor/signaling pathway to control neuronal migration during the
development of the nervous system.

Shim et al. (2012) showed that SOX4 (184430) and SOX11 (600898) are
crucial in regulating reelin expression and the inside-out pattern of
cortical layer formation. This regulation is independent of E4, a
conserved nonexonic element required for the specification of
corticospinal neuron identity and connectivity, and Fezf2 (607414), and
probably involves interactions with distinct regulatory elements.
Cortex-specific double deletion of Sox4 and Sox11 in mice led to the
loss of Fezf2 expression, failed specification of corticospinal neurons
and, independent of Fezf2, a reeler-like inversion of layers.

CYTOGENETICS

Zaki et al. (2007) reported 2 sibs from a consanguineous Egyptian
marriage who had cortical lissencephaly with cerebellar hypoplasia,
severe epilepsy, and mental retardation. Karyotype analysis identified a
homozygous, apparently balanced reciprocal translocation,
t(7;12)(q22;p13), in both children. Further analysis confirmed
disruption of the RELN gene at chromosome 7q22.1 and undetectable levels
of the protein in both children. The unaffected parents were related as
double first cousins were heterozygous for the translocation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Normal development of the cerebral cortex requires long-range migration
of cortical neurons from proliferative regions deep in the brain.
Lissencephaly ('smooth brain,' from 'lissos,' meaning 'smooth,' and
'encephalos,' meaning 'brain') is a severe developmental disorder in
which neuronal migration is impaired, leading to a thickened cerebral
cortex whose normally folded contour is simplified and smooth. X-linked
lissencephaly (300067) is caused by mutation in the gene encoding
doublecortin (DCX; 300121). Deletion of or mutation in the PAFAH1B1 gene
(601545), located on 17p, causes isolated lissencephaly sequence (LIS1;
607432), and haploinsufficiency of this and other neighboring genes is
responsible for the Miller-Dieker lissencephaly syndrome (247200), a
contiguous gene deletion syndrome. Hong et al. (2000) studied an
autosomal recessive form of lissencephaly associated with severe
abnormalities of the cerebellum, hippocampus, and brainstem; see
lissencephaly syndrome, Norman-Roberts type (LIS2; 257320). They tested
for linkage to markers near RELN on chromosome 7 and DAB1 on chromosome
1p32-p31, because mutations in the mouse homologs of these 2 genes cause
brain defects in mice that resemble lissencephaly, including hypoplasia
of the cerebellum, brainstem abnormalities, and a neuronal migration
disorder of the neocortex and hippocampus. In 2 unrelated pedigrees,
they found substantial regions of homozygosity in affected children near
the RELN gene on chromosome 7q22. In these 2 families, they demonstrated
different splice site mutations in the RELN gene (600514.0001 and
600514.0002, respectively). The study of these human patients pointed to
several previously unsuspected functions of reelin in and outside of the
brain. Although abnormalities of RELN mRNA had been reported in
postmortem brains of schizophrenic humans (Impagnatiello et al., 1998),
no evidence of schizophrenia was found in individuals with heterozygous
or homozygous RELN mutations. On the other hand, one of the
lissencephaly patients studied with a muscle biopsy showed evidence of
abnormal neuromuscular connectivity (Hourihane et al., 1993). Moreover,
at least 3 patients had persistent lymphedema neonatally, and one showed
accumulation of chylous (i.e., fatty) ascites fluid that required
peritoneal shunting (Hourihane et al., 1993). The apparent role for
reelin in serum homeostasis may reflect reelin interactions with LDL
superfamily receptors outside the brain, as well as in the brain.

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the RELN
gene and otosclerosis, see 166800.

ANIMAL MODEL

To investigate Reln function, Magdaleno et al. (2002) generated
transgenic mice using the nestin (NES; 600915) promoter to drive ectopic
expression of Reln in the ventricular zone during early brain
development. Ectopic Reln expression in transgenic reelin mice, which
lack endogenous Reln expression, induced tyrosine phosphorylation of
Dab1 in the ventricular zone. The transgene also rescued some, but not
all, of the neuroanatomic and behavioral abnormalities characteristic of
the reeler phenotype, including ataxia and the migration of Purkinje
cells. Magdaleno et al. (2002) hypothesized that Reln functions in
concert with other positional cues to promote cell-cell interactions
that are required for layer formation during development.

Assadi et al. (2003) investigated interactions between the reelin
signaling pathway and Lis1 in brain development. Compound mutant mice
with disruptions in the Reln pathway and heterozygous mutations in the
Pafah1b1 gene, which encodes Lis1, had a higher incidence of
hydrocephalus and enhanced cortical and hippocampal layering defects.
The Dab1 signaling molecule and Lis1 bound in a reelin-induced
phosphorylation-dependent manner. These data indicated genetic and
biochemical interaction between the reelin signaling pathway and LIS1.

In the mouse ventral spinal cord, Hochstim et al. (2008) identified 3
subtypes of white matter astrocytes with differential gene expression
corresponding to position. Astrocytes expressing both Reln and Slit1
(603742) were in the ventrolateral domain, those expressing Reln only
were at the dorsolateral domain, and those expressing Slit1 only were at
the ventromedial domain. The distinct positions of these astrocytes were
specified by varying expression of the homeodomain transcription factors
Pax6 (607108) and Nkx6.1 (602563). The findings indicated that
positional identity is an organizing principle underlying phenotypic
diversity among white matter astrocytes, as well as among neurons, and
that this diversity is prespecified within precursor cells in the
germinal zone of the CNS.

Miller and Sweatt (2007) found that DNA methylation, which is mediated
by DNA methyltransferase, was dynamically regulated during learning and
memory consolidation in adult rats. Animals exposed to an associative
context plus shock showed increased Dnmt3a (602769) and Dnmt3b (602900)
mRNA in hippocampal area CA1 compared to context-only animals. Context
plus shock rats showed increased methylation and decreased mRNA of the
memory suppressor gene PP1C-beta (PPP1CB; 600590) compared to shock-only
controls, as well as increased demethylation and increased mRNA levels
of reelin, which is involved in synaptic plasticity, compared to
controls. The methylation levels of both these target genes returned to
baseline within a day, indicating rapid and dynamic changes. Treatment
with a DNMT inhibitor blocked the methylation changes and prevented
memory consolidation of fear-conditioned learning, but the memory
changes were plastic, and memory consolidation was reestablished after
the inhibitor wore off. Miller and Sweatt (2007) noted that DNA
methylation has been viewed as having an exclusive role in development,
but they emphasized that their findings indicated that rapid and dynamic
alteration of DNA methylation can occur in the adult central nervous
system in response to environmental stimuli during associative learning
in the hippocampus.

HISTORY

Quattrocchi et al. (2003) concluded that mouse reelin functions
postnatally to regulate the development of the neuromuscular junction.
Because these results could not be replicated, Quattrocchi et al. (2004)
retracted their paper from Science of 2003. The results had been called
into question by Bidoia et al. (2004) and others. D'Arcangelo (2004)
could not reproduce the findings described by Quattrocchi et al. (2003)
and concluded that reelin does not regulate the development of the
neuromuscular junction.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LISSENCEPHALY SYNDROME, NORMAN-ROBERTS TYPE
RELN, IVS37AS, G-A, -1

In a Saudi Arabian family with first-cousin parents and 3 children with
lissencephaly-2 (257320), Hong et al. (2000) found a splice acceptor
site mutation in the RELN gene: IVS37AS, G-A, -1. The patients were
homozygous for the splice acceptor mutation and both parents were
heterozygous. In their paper Hong et al. (2000) referred to this
mutation as IVS36AS, G-A, -1; however, in an erratum, they noted that
their system for exon numbering differed from that adopted in the mouse
and clarified the human-mouse comparison so that a single numbering
system could be used in both species.

.0002
LISSENCEPHALY SYNDROME, NORMAN-ROBERTS TYPE
RELN, 148-BP DEL

Hong et al. (2000) studied a family in which 3 brothers, including a set
of identical twins, had lissencephaly-2 (257320) and the parents were
related as half first cousins. The brothers were found to have a 148-bp
deletion in the RELN gene corresponding to the removal of exon 42
(EX42DEL). The family was British and had previously been reported by
Hourihane et al. (1993). At birth, affected children showed normal head
size, congenital lymphedema, and hypotonia. Brain MRI showed moderate
lissencephaly and profound cerebellar hypoplasia. Cognitive development
was delayed for all affected children, with little or no language and no
ability to sit or stand unsupported. There was also myopia, nystagmus,
and generalized seizures that could be controlled with medication. In
one patient in this family muscle biopsy showed evidence of abnormal
neuromuscular connectivity. Patients from this family had persistent
lymphedema neonatally, and 1 showed accumulation of chylous (that is,
fatty) ascites fluid that required peritoneal shunting.

REFERENCE 1. Assadi, A. H.; Zhang, G.; Beffert, U.; McNeil, R. S.; Renfro, A.
L.; Niu, S.; Quattrocchi, C. C.; Antalffy, B. A.; Sheldon, M.; Armstrong,
D. D.; Wynshaw-Boris, A.; Herz, J.; D'Arcangelo, G.; Clark, G. D.
: Interaction of reelin signaling and Lis1 in brain development. Nature
Genet. 35: 270-276, 2003.

2. Bidoia, C.; Misgeld, T.; Weinzierl, E.; Buffelli, M.; Feng, G.;
Cangiano, A.; Lichtman, J. W.; Sanes, J. R.: Comment on 'reelin promotes
peripheral synapse elimination and maturation.' Science 303: 1977b,
2004.

3. Botella-Lopez, A.; Burgaya, F.; Gavin, R.; Garcia-Ayllon, M. S.;
Gomez-Tortosa, E.; Pena-Casanova, J.; Urena, J. M.; Del Rio, J. A.;
Blesa, R.; Soriano, E.; Saez-Valero, J.: Reelin expression and glycosylation
patterns are altered in Alzheimer's disease. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103:
5573-5578, 2006.

4. D'Arcangelo, G.: Personal Communication. Nutley, N. J.  6/2/1995.

5. D'Arcangelo, G.: Response to comment on 'reelin promotes peripheral
synapse elimination and maturation.' Science 303: 1977c only, 2004.

6. D'Arcangelo, G.; Homayouni, R.; Keshvara, L.; Rice, D. S.; Sheldon,
M.; Curran, T.: Reelin is a ligand for lipoprotein receptors. Neuron 24:
471-479, 1999.

7. D'Arcangelo, G.; Miao, G. G.; Chen, S.-C.; Soares, H. D.; Morgan,
J. I.; Curran, T.: A protein related to extracellular matrix proteins
deleted in the mouse mutant reeler. Nature 374: 719-723, 1995.

8. De Marco Garcia, N. V.; Karayannis, T.; Fishell, G.: Neuronal
activity is required for the development of specific cortical interneuron
subtypes. Nature 472: 351-355, 2011.

9. DeSilva, U.; D'Arcangelo, G.; Braden, V. V.; Chen, J.; Miao, G.
G.; Curran, T.; Green, E. D.: The human reelin gene: isolation, sequencing,
and mapping on chromosome 7. Genome Res. 7: 157-164, 1997.

10. Dulabon, L.; Olson, E. C.; Taglienti, M. G.; Eisenhuth, S.; McGrath,
B.; Walsh, C. A.; Kreidberg, J. A.; Anton, E. S.: Reelin binds alpha-3-beta-1
integrin and inhibits neuronal migration. Neuron 27: 33-44, 2000.

11. Grayson, D. R.; Jia, X.; Chen, Y.; Sharma, R. P.; Mitchell, C.
P.; Guidotti, A.; Costa, E.: Reelin promoter hypermethylation in
schizophrenia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 9341-9346, 2005.

12. Green, M. C.: Catalog of mutant genes and polymorphic loci.In:
Lyon, M. F.; Searle, A. G.: Genetic Variants and Strains of the Laboratory
Mouse.  Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press (pub.)  (2nd ed.): 1989.

13. Hack, I.; Bancila, M.; Loulier, K.; Carroll, P.; Cremer, H.:
Reelin is a detachment signal in tangential chain-migration during
postnatal neurogenesis. Nature Neurosci. 5: 939-945, 2002.

14. Hiesberger, T.; Trommsdorff, M.; Howell, B. W.; Goffinet, A.;
Mumby, M. C.; Cooper, J. A.; Herz, J.: Direct binding of reelin to
VLDL receptor and apoE receptor 2 induces tyrosine phosphorylation
of disabled-1 and modulates tau phosphorylation. Neuron 24: 481-489,
1999.

15. Hirotsune, S.; Takahara, T.; Sasaki, N.; Hirose, K.; Yoshiki,
A.; Ohashi, T.; Kusakabe, M.; Murakami, Y.; Muramatsu, M.; Watanabe,
S.; Nakao, K.; Katsuki, M.; Hayashizaki, Y.: The reeler gene encodes
a protein with an EGF-like motif expressed by pioneer neurons. Nature
Genet. 10: 77-83, 1995.

16. Hochstim, C.; Deneen, B.; Lukaszewicz, A.; Zhou, Q.; Anderson,
D. J.: Identification of positionally distinct astrocyte subtypes
whose identities are specified by a homeodomain code. Cell 133:
510-522, 2008.

17. Hong, S. E.; Shugart, Y. Y.; Huang, D. T.; Al Shahwan, S.; Grant,
P. E.; Hourihane, J. O.; Martin, N. D. T.; Walsh, C. A.: Autosomal
recessive lissencephaly with cerebellar hypoplasia is associated with
human RELN mutations. Nature Genet. 26: 93-96, 2000. Note: Erratum:
Nature Genet. 27: 225 only, 2001.

18. Hourihane, J. O.; Bennett, C. P.; Chaudhuri, R.; Robb, S. A.;
Martin, N. D. T.: A sibship with a neuronal migration defect, cerebellar
hypoplasia and congenital lymphedema. Neuropediatrics 24: 43-46,
1993.

19. Impagnatiello, F.; Guidotti, A. R.; Pesold, C.; Dwivedi, Y.; Caruncho,
H.; Pisu, M. G.; Uzunov, D. P.; Smalheiser, N. R.; Davis, J. M.; Pandey,
G. N.; Pappas, G. D.; Tueting, P.; Sharma, R. P.; Costa, E.: A decrease
of reelin expression as a putative vulnerability factor in schizophrenia. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 15718-15723, 1998.

20. Magdaleno, S.; Keshvara, L.; Curran, T.: Rescue of ataxia and
preplate splitting by ectopic expression of reelin in reeler mice. Neuron 33:
573-586, 2002.

21. Matsuki, T.; Matthews, R. T.; Cooper, J. A.; van der Brug, M.
P.; Cookson, M. R.; Hardy, J. A.; Olson, E. C.; Howell, B. W.: Reelin
and Stk25 have opposing roles in neuronal polarization and dendritic
Golgi deployment. Cell 143: 826-836, 2010.

22. Miller, C. A.; Sweatt, J. D.: Covalent modification of DNA regulates
memory formation. Neuron 53: 857-869, 2007. Note: Erratum: Neuron
59: 1051 only, 2008.

23. Quattrocchi, C. C.; Huang, C.; Niu, S.; Sheldon, M.; Benhayon,
D.; Cartwright, J., Jr.; Mosier, D. R.; Keller, F.; D'Arcangelo, G.
: Reelin promotes peripheral synapse elimination and maturation. Science 301:
649-653, 2003. Note: Erratum: Science 301: 1849 only, 2003. Retraction:
Science 303: 1974 only, 2004.

24. Quattrocchi, C. C.; Huang, C.; Niu, S.; Sheldon, M.; Benhayon,
D.; Cartwright, J., Jr.; Mosier, D. R.; Keller, F.; D'Arcangelo, G.
: Retraction. (Letter) Science 303: 1974 only, 2004.

25. Rice, D. S.; Nusinowitz, S.; Azimi, A. M.; Martinez, A.; Soriano,
E.; Curran, T.: The reelin pathway modulates the structure and function
of retinal synaptic circuitry. Neuron 31: 929-941, 2001.

26. Royaux, I.; Lambert de Rouvroit, C.; D'Arcangelo, G.; Demirov,
D.; Goffinet, A. M.: Genomic organization of the mouse reelin gene. Genomics 46:
240-250, 1997.

27. Senturk, A.; Pfennig, S.; Weiss, A.; Burk, K.; Acker-Palmer, A.
: Ephrin Bs are essential components of the Reelin pathway to regulate
neuronal migration. Nature 472: 356-360, 2011. Note: Erratum: Nature
478: 274 only, 2011.

28. Shim, S.; Kwan, K. Y.; Li, M.; Lefebvre, V.; Sestan, N.: Cis-regulatory
control of corticospinal system development and evolution. Nature 486:
74-79, 2012.

29. Trommsdorff, M.; Gotthardt, M.; Hiesberger, T.; Shelton, J.; Stockinger,
W.; Nimpf, J.; Hammer, R. E.; Richardson, J. A.; Herz, J.: Reeler/Disabled-like
disruption of neuronal migration in knockout mice lacking the VLDL
receptor and ApoE receptor 2. Cell 97: 689-701, 1999.

30. Yip, J. W.; Yip, Y. P. L.; Nakajima, K.; Capriotti, C.: Reelin
controls position of autonomic neurons in the spinal cord. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 8612-8616, 2000.

31. Zaki, M.; Shehab, M.; El-Aleem, A. A.; Abdel-Salam, G.; Koeller,
H. B.; Ilkin, Y.; Ross, M. E.; Dobyns, W. B.; Gleeson, J. G.: Identification
of a novel recessive RELN mutation using a homozygous balanced reciprocal
translocation. Am. J. Med. Genet. 143A: 939-944, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 07/17/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/10/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/13/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/15/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/18/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/24/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/7/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/11/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/7/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/31/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/12/2003
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 10/31/2002
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/16/2002
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 6/13/2002
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 11/25/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/27/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/29/2000
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 4/6/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/8/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/1/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/8/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/4/1995

EDITED alopez: 07/17/2012
carol: 5/24/2012
alopez: 11/29/2011
alopez: 7/12/2011
terry: 7/8/2011
carol: 6/2/2011
mgross: 2/16/2011
terry: 2/10/2011
alopez: 1/10/2011
carol: 11/15/2010
carol: 11/11/2010
wwang: 1/13/2010
wwang: 4/14/2009
terry: 4/13/2009
carol: 7/8/2008
wwang: 6/16/2008
ckniffin: 5/15/2008
wwang: 7/19/2007
ckniffin: 7/18/2007
wwang: 5/25/2006
ckniffin: 5/24/2006
wwang: 12/15/2005
wwang: 12/7/2005
wwang: 7/28/2005
ckniffin: 7/11/2005
terry: 6/3/2004
alopez: 4/8/2004
terry: 4/7/2004
tkritzer: 11/3/2003
terry: 10/31/2003
mgross: 8/12/2003
terry: 8/12/2003
carol: 11/4/2002
tkritzer: 10/31/2002
alopez: 10/18/2002
carol: 9/16/2002
ckniffin: 9/16/2002
cwells: 6/13/2002
ckniffin: 6/5/2002
carol: 11/25/2001
carol: 3/13/2001
alopez: 1/29/2001
mcapotos: 10/13/2000
mcapotos: 10/10/2000
terry: 9/27/2000
alopez: 8/31/2000
terry: 8/29/2000
carol: 4/7/2000
terry: 4/6/2000
mgross: 7/8/1999
carol: 3/22/1999
terry: 3/1/1999
alopez: 1/19/1999
carol: 8/12/1998
mark: 7/22/1997
mark: 4/8/1997
terry: 4/2/1997
mark: 6/29/1995
mark: 5/23/1995
mark: 5/4/1995

301000	TITLE #301000 WISKOTT-ALDRICH SYNDROME; WAS
;;WISKOTT-ALDRICH SYNDROME 1; WAS1;;
ALDRICH SYNDROME;;
ECZEMA-THROMBOCYTOPENIA-IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROME;;
IMMUNODEFICIENCY 2; IMD2
DESCRIPTION A number sign (#) is used with this entry because Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome is caused by mutation in the WAS gene (300392).

See 614493 for information on a similar disorder, Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome-2 (WAS2), caused by mutation in the WIPF1 gene (602357).

DESCRIPTION

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is an X-linked recessive immunodeficiency
characterized by thrombocytopenia, eczema, and recurrent infections
(Lemahieu et al., 1999).

CLINICAL FEATURES

The manifestations of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome are eczema,
thrombocytopenia, proneness to infection, and bloody diarrhea. Death
usually occurs before age 10 years. The original American kindred
reported by Aldrich et al. (1954) was of Dutch extraction; the 3
patients of Wiskott (1937) were German. Wiskott, who worked in Munich,
referred to the disorder in his patients as 'Werlhof's disease,' the
eponymic designation for thrombocytopenic purpura. Van den Bosch and
Drukker (1964) described several families in the Netherlands. In 3 of 5
female carriers, the platelet count was below the lower limit of normal.

Perry et al. (1980) reported that median survival increased from 8
months for patients born before 1935 to 6.5 years for those born after
1964. One patient had survived to age 36 years at the time of the
survey. Causes of death were mainly infections or bleeding, but 36 of
the 301 patients (12%) developed malignancies: lymphoreticular tumors in
23 and leukemia in 7. Ten Bensel et al. (1966) called attention to the
occurrence of malignancy of the reticuloendothelial system, which they
saw in 2 of 4 sibs and found in 5 reported cases.

Capsoni et al. (1986) described a 19-year-old man with WAS. Only 7
affected persons over age 18 had been described previously. Standen et
al. (1986) reported a kindred with 13 males in 6 sibships, related
through females, with inherited thrombocytopenia thought to be a variant
of WAS because it was associated with elevated serum IgA and mild
nephropathy. Five suffered from severe eczema since infancy but had no
unusual susceptibility to infections. Platelet volume was reduced.
Gutenberger et al. (1970) reported a similar family. Renal biopsy was
performed in 3 patients. In the first, advanced membranoproliferative
glomerulonephritis was found with deposition of complement and IgG on
the basement membrane. In the second, mesangial glomerulonephritis with
focal glomerulosclerosis and deposition of complement and IgA were
found. The third showed minimal glomerulonephritis. Standen et al.
(1986) concluded that despite the clinical similarities and the elevated
IgA in both conditions, the disorder is distinct from Berger disease
(161950). Spitler et al. (1980) found nephropathy in 5 of 32 patients
with WAS who participated in a study of treatment with transfer factor,
a dialyzable extract of leukocytes that enhances cellular immunity.
Although nephropathy occurred without such treatment, the temporal
relationships suggested that transfer factor aggravated the problem.

McEnery and Nash (1973) described 2 unrelated males with the association
of WAS and infantile cortical hyperostosis (Caffey disease; 114000), and
Abinun et al. (1988) also described a case. Thus, an immunologic defect
may play a role in the pathogenesis of infantile cortical hyperostosis.
Meropol et al. (1992) reported the case of a 24-year-old man with WAS
complicated by T-cell large cell lymphoma and Kaposi sarcoma (148000).
Kaposi sarcoma is well known in connection with the immunosuppression
used with allograft transplantation and in patients with HIV infection,
but this was the first incidence of its occurrence in this form of
immunodeficiency.

Sullivan et al. (1994) reported on a multiinstitutional survey of WAS in
the U.S. in which laboratory and clinical data were collected on 154
affected individuals. There was a family history of the disorder in the
case of 74 of the patients. Thrombocytopenia was a prerequisite for
entry into the study; however, only 27% of patients had the typical set
of 3 symptoms described originally by Aldrich et al. (1954). The
immunologic findings in particular varied considerably with the most
distinctive finding: that 61% of the patients had a low CD8+ count.
Eczema developed in 81% but was not always present at diagnosis. In
those patients in whom platelet size was measured, Sullivan et al.
(1994) found them to be small, although they did increase in size
following splenectomy. The average age at diagnosis was 21 months; the
average age at death was 8 years. There were 16 patients who lived
beyond 18 years, and the prognosis for the disorder had improved
considerably in recent years. Bone marrow transplantation had been
carried out in 47 cases and a good outcome was reported in two-thirds of
them. Autoimmune disorders occurred in 40% of patients; this group had a
poor prognosis as they were more likely to develop a malignancy.
Malignancies were seen in 13% of patients and were mainly of the
lymphoreticular system.

Du et al. (2006) described somatic mosaicism in a 15-year-old male WAS
patient due to a second-hit mutation in the initiation codon. See
300392.0019-300392.0020. The patient had no clear family history.
Thrombocytopenia was noticed at 1 month of age and thereafter eczema and
recurrent infections were clinical features. At 8 years of age, he had
persistent cough due to pulmonary hilar lymph node swelling. From the
result of hilar lymph node biopsy, he was diagnosed with Hodgkin disease
and received chemotherapy and local radiotherapy (Sasahara et al., 2001;
Sasahara et al., 2002). The patient had remained in complete remission
thereafter. His platelet count was in the range of
6,000-15,000/microliter. Episodes of respiratory infections occurred
less frequently, although severe eczema and thrombocytopenia persisted.

DIAGNOSIS

In an obligate heterozygote who was heterozygous for the AB polymorphism
of G6PD, Gealy et al. (1980) found that only the B isoenzyme was present
in platelets and T lymphocytes, although both were present in
erythrocytes and neutrophils. Prchal et al. (1980) pursued the
implications of this finding for genetic counseling. Although G6PD is
likely to be useful in only a limited number of potential carriers, the
large number of X-chromosome markers, DNA polymorphisms and other
markers now available make it likely that carrier detection will be
possible. Shapiro et al. (1978) concluded that carriers can be
identified by study of platelets, which show a defect in oxidative
phosphorylation.

Fearon et al. (1988) studied the pattern of X-chromosome inactivation in
various cell populations from female relatives of patients with WAS,
through analysis of the methylation patterns of X-linked genes that
display RFLPs. They found that carriers could be accurately identified
by the fact that peripheral blood T cells, granulocytes, and B cells of
obligate heterozygotes display specific patterns of X-chromosome
inactivation that are clearly different from those of normal controls.

Puck et al. (1990) pointed out that the diagnosis of WAS may be
difficult in infancy when sporadic thrombocytopenia with no, or only
questionable, immunologic abnormalities are present. In the case of 2
unrelated males with this problem, X-chromosome inactivation in the T
cells of the mothers showed each of them to have a highly skewed
X-chromosome inactivation pattern typical of WAS carriers. In one of the
patients, a T-cell defect was subsequently demonstrated directly by
studies of the lymphocytes, which failed to proliferate in periodate and
anti-CD43. Notarangelo et al. (1991) reported a similar case of a boy
with WAS presenting as idiopathic thrombocytopenia.

Notarangelo et al. (1991) studied a presumably heterozygous,
thrombocytopenic female from a WAS pedigree. Her carrier status was
confirmed by linkage studies. Both small-sized and normal-sized
platelets were present, suggesting that, unlike the vast majority of WAS
carriers, she did not manifest nonrandom X-chromosome inactivation in
the thrombopoietic cell lineage. Studies of X-chromosome inactivation by
means of RFLP and methylation analysis showed that the pattern of
X-chromosome inactivation was nonrandom in T lymphocytes but random in
granulocytes. Notarangelo et al. (1993) reviewed the use of the biased
inactivation of the X chromosome in hematopoietic cells as a tool for
carrier detection in connection with genetic counseling. A closely
linked hypervariable marker, M27-beta (DXS255), was used.

Yamada et al. (1999) showed that flow cytometric analysis of WASP
expression in lymphocytes is useful in the diagnosis of WAS. They found
that intracellular WASP is expressed as distinctly 'bright' and 'dim'
phenotypes in lymphocytes from normal individuals and WAS patients,
respectively. Yamada et al. (2000) demonstrated that WAS carriers could
also be identified by flow cytometric analysis of monocytes but not
lymphocytes. Bright and dim phenotypes for normal individuals and
patients, respectively, were observed in monocytes, whereas in carriers,
mixed populations (to varying degrees) of bright- and dim-staining cells
were detected. The authors noted that flow cytometry is a simpler and
more rapid method of diagnosis than molecular methods but may not be
sensitive enough to detect carriers with low percentages of WASP-dim
monocytes.

- Prenatal Diagnosis

Holmberg et al. (1983) found that normal midtrimester fetuses have
platelets of the same size as normal newborns and adults. They used
these data 'to exclude Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome in an 18-week fetus at
50% risk of being affected.' Unfortunately, we do not know that the
platelets of the WAS fetus are abnormally small.

Schwartz et al. (1989) described the first-trimester diagnosis and
exclusion of WAS by means of closely linked DNA markers.

In 2 unrelated families, Giliani et al. (1999) performed successful
prenatal diagnosis of WAS at week 12 of gestation, using a combined
nonradioactive analysis of SSCP and heteroduplex formation, followed by
automated sequencing.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT

Corash et al. (1985) studied the mechanism of the usual improvement in
thrombocytopenia in WAS after splenectomy. The thrombocytopenia is
accompanied by elevated platelet-associated IgG and low mean platelet
size. Both return to normal after splenectomy. Patients who relapse
redevelop elevated IgG but maintain normal platelet size.

Webb et al. (1993) described their experience with renal transplantation
in a 46-year-old man with the syndrome of thrombocytopenia with raised
IgA levels and impaired renal function. The man had a strong family
history of hereditary thrombocytopenia and had presented in early
childhood with allergic eczema, asthma, thrombocytopenic purpura, and
recurrent middle ear infections. He had a normal platelet count after
splenectomy was performed at the age of about 30. In his mid-thirties,
he had subtotal colectomy and ileostomy for severe ulcerative colitis.
This disorder later recurred, associated with keratitis and arthritis of
large joints. He was later admitted to the hospital with a febrile
illness, biopsy-proven cutaneous vasculitis, raised IgA levels, and
impaired renal function. Renal biopsy demonstrated mesangioproliferative
glomerulonephritis, old crescents, and mesangial IgA deposition. After
renal transplant, a 'reduced immunosuppressive protocol' was instituted
because of his underlying immunologic disorder. Despite this, no
rejection episodes occurred.

The first reports of successful bone marrow transplantation for severe
combined immunodeficiency (XSCID; 300400) and for WAS were provided by
Gatti et al. (1968) and Bach et al. (1968). Fischer et al. (1986) gave a
retrospective analysis of results in 162 patients who had undergone
transplantation in 14 European centers between 1969 and 1985. Brochstein
et al. (1991) reported on the bone marrow transplantation in 17 patients
with WAS.

Boztug et al. (2010) reported successful treatment of 2 patients with
Wiscott-Aldrich syndrome with transfusion of autologous, genetically
modified hematopoietic stem cells. They found sustained expression of
WAS protein expression in hematopoietic stem cells, lymphoid and myeloid
cells, and platelets after gene therapy. T and B cells, natural killer
cells, and monocytes were functionally corrected. After treatment, the
patients' clinical condition markedly improved, with resolution of
hemorrhagic diathesis, eczema, autoimmunity, and predisposition to
severe infection. Comprehensive insertion-site analysis showed vector
integration that targeted multiple genes controlling growth and
immunologic responses in a persistently polyclonal hematopoiesis that
was followed for 3 years in both boys.

POPULATION GENETICS

Perry et al. (1980) found an incidence of 4.0 per million live male
births in the United States.

PATHOGENESIS

Several groups (Blaese et al., 1968; Cooper et al., 1968) presented
evidence that the immune defect is in the afferent limb, i.e., is one of
antigen processing or recognition. In an obligate heterozygote who was
heterozygous for the AB polymorphism of G6PD (305900), Gealy et al.
(1980) found that only the B isoenzyme was present in platelets and T
lymphocytes, although both were present in erythrocytes and neutrophils.
The findings suggested selection against the WAS gene in these tissues,
which are also the ones that express the defect in the hemizygous
affected male.

Parkman et al. (1981) studied the surface proteins of lymphocytes and
platelets by radioiodination followed by SDS-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis and autoradiography. All 3 WAS patients studied showed,
in lymphocytes, absence of a protein, molecular weight 115,000, found in
normals. Platelets also showed an abnormality of surface glycoproteins.
CD43 (182160), or sialophorin, is a cell-surface sialoglycoprotein that
is deficient in quantity and/or is defective in lymphocytes of patients
with this disorder (Parkman et al., 1981; Remold-O'Donnell et al.,
1984). Mentzer et al. (1987) suggested that sialophorin functions in
T-cell activation.

Simon et al. (1992) presented experimental results indicating the
association of WAS with a defect in the coupling of surface
immunoglobulin (sIg) on B cells to signal transduction pathways
considered prerequisite for B-cell activation, probably at the level of
tyrosine phosphorylation.

Symons et al. (1996) proposed that the Wiskott-Aldrich protein provides
a link between CDC42 and the actin cytoskeleton. T lymphocytes of
affected males with WAS exhibit a severe disturbance of the actin
cytoskeleton, suggesting that the WAS protein may regulate its
organization. Kolluri et al. (1996) showed that WAS protein interacts
with Cdc42, a member of the RHO family of GTPases. This interaction,
which is GTP-dependent, was detected in cell lysates, in transient
transfections, and with purified recombinant proteins. Different mutant
WAS proteins from 3 unrelated affected males retained their ability to
interact with Cdc42 but the level of expression of the WAS protein in
these mutants was only 2 to 5% of normal. Taken together, these data
suggested to Kolluri et al. (1996) that the WAS protein may function as
a signal transduction adaptor downstream of Cdc42, and that, in affected
males, the cytoskeletal abnormalities may result from a defect in Cdc42
signaling.

MAPPING

Peacocke and Siminovitch (1987) studied 10 kindreds for linkage with
RFLPs. Significant linkage was found between WAS and 2 loci, DXS14 and
DXS7, that mapped to the proximal short arm of the X chromosome. Maximal
lod scores were 4.29 (at theta = 0.03) and 4.12 (at theta = 0.00),
respectively. Arveiler et al. (1987) found a strong suggestion of
linkage between IMD2 and DXS1, which is located in Xq11-q12. Kwan et al.
(1988) concluded from linkage studies that the WAS gene lies between
DXS7 (Xp11.3) and DXS14 (Xp11); the likelihood of this position was at
least 128 times higher than that of any other interval studied. In a
study of 12 WAS families, Kwan et al. (1989) demonstrated linkage to
another DNA marker, DXS255, located at Xp11.22; peak lod score = 4.65 at
theta = 0.05. Greer et al. (1989) showed linkage between WAS and DXZ1
(lod score = 7.08 at theta = 0.03) and between WAS and the TIMP (305370)
locus (lod score = 5.09 at theta = 0.0). Greer et al. (1990) extended
the linkage studies, demonstrating strongest linkage (maximum lod score
= 10.19 at theta = 0.0) between WAS and the hypervariable DXS255 locus,
a marker already mapped between DXS7 and DXS14. De Saint Basile et al.
(1989) found close linkage of WAS to DXS255 (maximum lod = 5.42 at theta
= 0.00). Kwan et al. (1991) likewise concluded that DXS255 is the
closest marker identified; WAS showed a multipoint maximum lod score of
8.59 at 1.2 cM distal to DXS255. Furthermore, they concluded that the
TIMP gene must lie distal to WAS; thus, WAS was thought to lie between
DXS255 (Xp11.22) and TIMP (Xp11.3). Greer et al. (1992) demonstrated
close linkage between the WAS and OATL1 (311240) loci; maximum lod =
6.08 at theta = 0.00. The finding localized the TIMP, OATL1, and WAS
loci distal to DXS146 and the OATL1 and WAS loci proximal to TIMP.

Arveiler et al. (1990) showed that failure to demonstrate linkage of WAS
to markers known from other families to be closely situated was
attributable to germ cell mosaicism in the grandfather of affected
males. The same phenomenon has been described in X-linked
agammaglobulinemia; see 300300.

De Saint-Basile et al. (1991) studied a family in which 4 members had
X-linked thrombocytopenia. Linkage studies showed mapping to the same
region of the X chromosome as that found in WAS. Although
polymorphonuclear leukocytes showed a normal pattern of X-inactivation,
a skewed pattern was demonstrated in lymphocytes. De Saint-Basile et al.
(1991) concluded that this was consistent with allelic mutations at the
same locus, with the severity of disease varying according to the
distinct patterns of hematopoietic cell involvement in obligate
carriers.

Kwan et al. (1995) isolated and characterized a polymorphic CA
dinucleotide repeat, DXS6940, that lies within 30 kb of the WAS gene.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Derry et al. (1994) found that the WAS gene was not expressed in 2
unrelated patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, 1 of whom had a single
base deletion that produced a frameshift and premature termination of
translation (300392.0001). Two additional patients were identified with
point mutations that changed the same arginine residue to either a
histidine or a leucine (300392.0002-300392.0003).

Villa et al. (1995) presented proof that mutations in the WAS gene can
result in X-linked thrombocytopenia characterized by thrombocytopenia
with small-sized platelets as an isolated finding (313900). Why some
mutations impair only the megakaryocytic lineage and have no apparent
effect on the lymphoid lineage was unclear. In a study of 16 WAS
patients and 4 X-linked thrombocytopenia patients, Thompson et al.
(1999) identified 14 distinct mutations, including 7 novel gene defects.

In an affected grandson of a female first cousin of the 3 patients
described originally by Wiskott (1937), Binder et al. (2006) found a
2-nucleotide deletion in exon 1 of the WAS gene (300392.0021).

Dobbs et al. (2007) identified 2 different but contiguous single
basepair deletions in maternal cousins with WAS (300392.0022 and
300392.0023, respectively). Their maternal grandmother was found to be a
mosaic for the deletions, both of which occurred on the haplotype from
the unaffected maternal great-grandfather, consistent with a bichromatid
mutation in a male gamete.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Schindelhauer et al. (1996) found no genotype/phenotype correlation
emerge after a comparison of the identified mutations with the resulting
clinical picture for a classical WAS phenotype. A mild course,
reminiscent of X-linked thrombocytopenia, or an attenuated phenotype was
more often associated with missense than with the other types of
mutations.

Greer et al. (1996) examined the genotypes and phenotypes of 24 patients
with WAS and compared them with other known mutations of the WASP gene.
They demonstrated clustering of WASP mutations within the 4 most
N-terminal exons of the gene and identified arg86 as the most prominent
hotspot for WASP mutations. They noted the prominence of missense
mutations among patients with milder forms of WAS, while noting that
missense mutations also comprise a substantial portion of mutations in
patients with severe forms of the disease. Greer et al. (1996) concluded
that phenotypes and genotypes of WAS are not well correlated; phenotypic
outcome cannot be reliably predicted on the basis of WASP genotype.

Lemahieu et al. (1999) identified 17 WASP gene mutations, 12 of which
were novel. All missense mutations were located in exons 1 to 4. Most of
the nonsense, frameshift, and splice site mutations were found in exons
6 to 11. Mutations that alter splice sites led to the synthesis of
several types of mRNAs, a fraction of which represented the normally
spliced product. The presence of normally spliced transcripts was
correlated with a milder phenotype. When one such case was studied by
Western blot analysis, reduced amounts of normal-sized WASP were
present. In other cases as well, a correlation was found between the
amount of normal or mutant WASP present and the phenotypes of the
affected individuals. No protein was detected in 2 individuals with
severe Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Reduced levels of a normal-sized WASP
with a missense mutation were seen in 2 individuals with X-linked
thrombocytopenia. Lemahieu et al. (1999) concluded that mutation
analysis at the DNA level is not sufficient for predicting clinical
course, and that studies at the transcript and protein levels are needed
for a better assessment.

Wada et al. (2001) provided evidence that in vivo reversion had occurred
in the WAS gene in a patient with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, resulting in
somatic mosaicism. The mutation was a 6-bp insertion (ACGAGG;
300392.0013) which abrogated expression of the WAS protein. Most of the
patient's T lymphocytes expressed nearly normal levels of WAS protein.
These lymphocytes were found to lack the deleterious mutation and showed
a selective growth advantage in vivo. Analysis of the sequence
surrounding the mutation site showed that the 6-bp insertion followed a
tandem repeat of the same 6 nucleotides. These findings strongly
suggested that DNA polymerase slippage was the cause of the original
germline insertion mutation in this family and that the same mechanism
was responsible for its deletion in one of the proband's T-cell
progenitors, thus leading to reversion mosaicism.

That some mutations in WASP result in X-linked thrombocytopenia without
the associated features of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is well
established. Devriendt et al. (2001) demonstrated, furthermore, that a
constitutively activating mutation in WASP can cause X-linked severe
congenital neutropenia (SCNX; 300299). See 300392.0012 for the L270P
mutation in WASP demonstrated by Devriendt et al. (2001).

Wada et al. (2004) described 2 additional patients from the same family
of the man with revertant T-cell lymphocytes reported by Wada et al.
(2001). Somatic mosaicism was demonstrated in leukocytes from the first
patient that were cryopreserved when he was 22 years old, 11 years
before his death from kidney failure. The second patient, 16 years old
at the time of report, had a moderate clinical phenotype and developed
revertant cells after the age of 14 years. T lymphocytes showed
selective in vivo advantage. These results supported DNA polymerase
slippage as a common underlying mechanism and indicated that T-cell
mosaicism may have different clinical effects in WAS. Wada et al. (2004)
stated that sibs with revertant mosaicism had previously been reported
(Wada et al., 2003; Waisfisz et al., 1999), but 3 patients with
revertant disease in a single kindred was unprecedented.

Boztug et al. (2008) reported 2 Ukrainian brothers, aged 3 and 4 years,
respectively, with WAS due to somatic mosaicism for a truncation
mutation and multiple different second-site mutations. Flow cytometric
analysis of peripheral blood cells showed that each patient had
WAS-negative cells resulting from the truncation mutation and a subset
of WAS-positive cells that expressed second-site missense WAS mutations.
The second-site mutations resulted in the production of altered, but
possibly functional, protein. All second-site mutations in both patients
occurred in the same nucleotide triplet in which the truncation mutation
occurred. Over time, both boys had a decrease in bleeding diathesis and
eczema, and normalization of platelet counts. Boztug et al. (2008)
suggested that the second-site mutations may confer a proliferative
advantage to the affected cells in these patients.

- X-Inactivation Status

Wengler et al. (1995) stated that obligate female carriers of the gene
for X-linked agammaglobulinemia (300300) show nonrandom X-chromosome
inactivation only in B lymphocytes, and obligate female carriers of the
gene for X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (XSCID) show
nonrandom X-chromosome inactivation in both T and B lymphocytes, as well
as natural killer cells. However, all formed elements of the blood
appear to be affected, as a rule, in obligate carriers of WAS, as judged
by the criteria of nonrandom X-chromosome inactivation and segregation
of G6PD alleles in informative females. Wengler et al. (1995)
demonstrated that CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells collected from
obligate carriers of WAS by apheresis showed nonrandom inactivation.
They used PCR analysis of a polymorphic VNTR within the X-linked
androgen receptor gene (313700) to demonstrate nonrandom inactivation
which clearly must occur early during hematopoietic differentiation.

Parolini et al. (1998) reported X-linked WAS in an 8-year-old girl. She
had a sporadic mutation, glu133 to lys, on the paternally derived X
chromosome, but had nonrandom X inactivation of the maternal X
chromosome in both blood and buccal mucosa. Her mother and maternal
grandmother also had nonrandom X inactivation, which suggested to the
authors the possibility of a defect in XIST (314670) or some other gene
involved in the X-inactivation process. Puck and Willard (1998)
commented on the subject of X inactivation in females with X-linked
disease in reference to the paper by Parolini et al. (1998).

Lutskiy et al. (2002) described a female heterozygote for a splice site
mutation (300392.0017) who presented at 14 months of age with features
of WAS (thrombocytopenia, small platelets, and immunologic dysfunction)
and had random inactivation of the X chromosome. She appeared to have a
defect in the mechanisms that, in disease-free WAS carriers, lead to
preferential survival/proliferation of cells bearing the active wildtype
X chromosome.

ANIMAL MODEL

Derry et al. (1995) stated that Wasp may be a candidate for involvement
in 'scurfy,' a T cell-mediated fatal lymphoreticular disease of mice
that had previously been proposed as a mouse homolog of Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome (Lyon et al., 1990). Northern analysis of sf tissue samples
indicated the presence of Wasp mRNA in liver and skin, presumably as a
consequence of lymphocyte infiltration, but no abnormalities in the
amount or size of mRNA were identified.

HISTORY

Puck and Candotti (2006) reviewed lessons from the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome. Alfred Wiskott (1898-1978) was a German authority on childhood
pneumonias who reported 3 affected brothers in 1937. In 1954, Robert
Aldrich (1917-1998) and colleagues published an independent description
of a large Dutch kindred in which segregation analysis showed X-linked
recessive inheritance (Aldrich et al., 1954). By 2006, more than 160
different WAS mutations spanning all 12 exons of the gene had been found
in more than 270 unrelated families and functional domains had been
defined. Binder et al. (2006) described an affected member from the
family reported by Wiskott (1937) and defined the specific mutation
(300392.0021). The patient studied was a first cousin twice removed of
the originally reported brothers. In a span of 2 generations, a fatal
condition had become treatable. The patient had been successfully cured
by transplantation by bone marrow from a matched, unrelated donor.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Blaese et al. (1971); Diaz-Buxo et al. (1974); Filipovich et al. (1979);
Gelzer and Gasser (1961); Hutter and Jones (1981); Kapoor et al. (1981);
Knox-Macaulay et al. (1993); Krivit and Good (1959); Levin et al.
(1970); Lum et al. (1980); Nathan  (1980); Ochs et al. (1980); Parkman
et al. (1978); Steinberg  (1959); Weiden and Blaese (1972); Wolff
(1967)
REFERENCE 1. Abinun, M.; Mikuska, M.; Filipovic, B.: Infantile cortical hyperostosis
associated with the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Europ. J. Pediat. 147:
518-519, 1988.

2. Aldrich, R. A.; Steinberg, A. G.; Campbell, D. C.: Pedigree demonstrating
a sex-linked recessive condition characterized by draining ears, eczematoid
dermatitis and bloody diarrhea. Pediatrics 13: 133-139, 1954.

3. Arveiler, B.; de Saint-Basile, G.; Fischer, A.; Griscelli, C.;
Mandel, J. L.: Germ-line mosaicism simulates genetic heterogeneity
in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 46: 906-911, 1990.

4. Arveiler, B.; de Saint Basile, G.; Debre, M.; Fischer, A.; Griscelli,
C.; Mandel, J. L.: Linkage analysis of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
(IMD2) using X-linked DNA polymorphisms. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 46: 573 only, 1987.

5. Bach, F. H.; Albertini, R. J.; Anderson, J. L.; Joo, P.; Bortin,
M.: Bone marrow transplantation in a patient with the Wiskott Aldrich
syndrome. Lancet 292: 1364-1366, 1968. Note: Originally Volume II.

6. Binder, V.; Albert, M. H.; Kabus, M.; Bertone, M.; Meindl, A.;
Belohradsky, B. H.: The genotype of the original Wiskott phenotype. New
Eng. J. Med. 355: 1790-1793, 2006.

7. Blaese, R. M.; Strober, W.; Brown, R. S.; Waldmann, T. A.: The
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: a disorder with a possible defect in antigen
processing or recognition. Lancet 292: 1056-1060, 1968. Note: Originally
Volume I.

8. Blaese, R. M.; Strober, W.; Levy, A. L.; Waldmann, T. A.: Hypercatabolism
of IgG, IgA, IgM, and albumin in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: a unique
disorder of serum protein metabolism. J. Clin. Invest. 50: 2331-2338,
1971.

9. Boztug, K.; Germeshausen, M.; Avedillo Diez, I.; Gulacsy, V.; Diestelhorst,
J.; Ballmaier, M.; Welte, K.; Marodi, L.; Chernyshova, L. I.; Klein,
C.: Multiple independent second-site mutations in two siblings with
somatic mosaicism for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Clin. Genet. 74:
68-74, 2008.

10. Boztug, K.; Schmidt, M.; Schwarzer, A.; Banerjee, P. P.; Diez,
I. A.; Dewey, R. A.; Bohm, M.; Nowrouzi, A.; Ball, C. R.; Glimm, H.;
Naundorf, S.; Kuhlcke, K.; Blasczyk, R.; Kondratenko, I.; Marodi,
L.; Orange, J. S.; von Kalle, C.; Klein, C.: Stem-cell gene therapy
for the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. New Eng. J. Med. 363: 1918-1927,
2010.

11. Brochstein, J. A.; Gillio, A. P.; Ruggiero, M.; Kernan, N. A.;
Emanuel, D.; Laver, J.; Small, T.; O'Reilly, R. J.: Marrow transplantation
from human leukocyte antigen-identical or haploidentical donors for
correction of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J. Pediat. 119: 907-912,
1991.

12. Capsoni, F.; Acerbi, L.; Bonora, G.; Perletti, L.; Ongari, A.
M.; Vanoli, M.; Zanussi, C.: Phagocyte function and immunological
findings in a Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome long-term survivor. J. Lab.
Clin. Immun. 19: 91-97, 1986.

13. Cooper, M. D.; Chae, H. P.; Lowman, J. T.; Krivit, W.; Good, R.
A.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: an immunologic deficiency disease involving
the afferent limb of immunity. Am. J. Med. 44: 499-513, 1968.

14. Corash, L.; Shafer, B.; Blaese, R. M.: Platelet-associated immunoglobulin,
platelet size, and the effect of splenectomy in the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome. Blood 65: 1439-1443, 1985.

15. Derry, J. M. J.; Ochs, H. D.; Francke, U.: Isolation of a novel
gene mutated in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Cell 78: 635-644, 1994.
Note: Erratum: Cell 79: following 922, 1994.

16. Derry, J. M. J.; Wiedemann, P.; Blair, P.; Wang, Y.; Kerns, J.
A.; Lemahieu, V.; Godfrey, V. L.; Wilkinson, J. E.; Francke, U.:
The mouse homolog of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) gene
is highly conserved and maps near the scurfy (sf) mutation on the
X chromosome. Genomics 29: 471-477, 1995.

17. de Saint-Basile, G.; Schlegel, N.; Caniglia, M.; Le Deist, F.;
Kaplan, C.; Lecompte, T.; Piller, F.; Fischer, A.; Griscelli, C.:
X-linked thrombocytopenia and Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: similar regional
assignment but distinct X-inactivation pattern in carriers. Ann.
Hemat. 63: 107-110, 1991.

18. de Saint Basile, G.; Arveiler, B.; Fraser, N. F.; Boyd, Y.; Graig,
I. W.; Griscelli, G.; Fischer, A.: Close linkage of hypervariable
marker DXS255 to disease locus of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Lancet 334:
1319-1321, 1989. Note: Originally Volume II.

19. Devriendt, K.; Kim, A. S.; Mathijs, G.; Frints, S. G. M.; Schwartz,
M.; Van den Oord, J. J.; Verhoef, G. E. G.; Boogaerts, M. A.; Fryns,
J.-P.; You, D.; Rosen, M. K.; Vandenberghe, P.: Constitutively activating
mutation in WASP causes X-linked severe congenital neutropenia. Nature
Genet. 27: 313-317, 2001.

20. Diaz-Buxo, J. A.; Hermans, P. E.; Ritts, R. E., Jr.: Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome in an adult. Mayo Clin. Proc. 49: 455-459, 1974.

21. Dobbs, A. K.; Yang, T.; Farmer, D. M.; Howard, V.; Conley, M.
E.: A possible bichromatid mutation in a male gamete giving rise
to a female mosaic for two different mutations in the X-linked gene
WAS. Clin. Genet. 71: 171-176, 2007.

22. Du, W.; Kumaki, S.; Uchiyama, T.; Yachie, A.; Looi, C. Y.; Kawai,
S.; Minegishi, M.; Ramesh, N.; Geha, R. S.; Sasahara, Y.; Tsuchiya,
S.: A second-site mutation in the initiation codon of WAS (WASP)
results in expansion of subsets of lymphocytes in an Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome patient. Hum. Mutat. 27: 370-375, 2006.

23. Fearon, E. R.; Kohn, D. B.; Winkelstein, J. A.; Vogelstein, B.;
Blaese, R. M.: Carrier detection in the Wiskott Aldrich syndrome. Blood 72:
1735-1739, 1988.

24. Filipovich, A. H.; Krivit, W.; Kersey, J. H.; Burke, B. A.: Fatal
arteritis as a complication of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J. Pediat. 95:
742-744, 1979.

25. Fischer, A.; Friedrich, W.; Levinsky, R.; Vossen, J.; Griscelli,
C.; Kubanek, B.; Morgan, G.; Wagemaker, G.; Landais, P.: Bone-marrow
transplantation for immunodeficiencies and osteopetrosis: European
survey, 1968-1985. Lancet 328: 1080-1084, 1986. Note: Originally
Volume II.

26. Gatti, R. A.; Meuwissen, J. J.; Allen, H. D.; Hong, R.; Good,
R. A.: Immunological reconstitution of sex-linked lymphopenic immunological
deficiency. Lancet 292: 1366-1369, 1968. Note: Originally Volume
I.

27. Gealy, W. J.; Dwyer, J. M.; Harley, J. B.: Allelic exclusion
of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase in platelets and T lymphocytes
from a Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome carrier. Lancet 315: 63-65, 1980.
Note: Originally Volume I.

28. Gelzer, J.; Gasser, C.: Wiskott-Aldrich-Syndrom. Helv. Paediat.
Acta 16: 17-39, 1961.

29. Giliani, S.; Fiorini, M.; Mella, P.; Candotti, F.; Schumacher,
R. F.; Wengler, G. S.; Lalatta, F.; Fasth, A.; Badolato, R.; Ugazio,
A. G.; Albertini, A.; Notarangelo, L. D.: Prenatal molecular diagnosis
of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome by direct mutation analysis. Prenatal
Diag. 19: 36-40, 1999.

30. Greer, W. L.; Mahtani, M. M.; Kwong, P. C.; Rubin, L. A.; Peacocke,
M.; Willard, H. F.; Siminovitch, K. A.: Linkage studies of the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome: polymorphisms at TIMP and the X chromosome centromere are
informative markers for genetic prediction. Hum. Genet. 83: 227-230,
1989.

31. Greer, W. L.; Peacocke, M.; Siminovitch, K. A.: The Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome: refinement of the localization on Xp and identification
of another closely linked marker locus, OATL1. Hum. Genet. 88: 453-456,
1992.

32. Greer, W. L.; Shehabeldin, A.; Schulman, J.; Junker, A.; Siminovitch,
K. A.: Identification of WASP mutations, mutation hotspots and genotype-phenotype
disparities in 24 patients with the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Hum.
Genet. 98: 685-690, 1996.

33. Greer, W. L.; Somani, A.-K.; Kwong, P. C.; Peacocke, M.; Rubin,
L. A.; Siminovitch, K. A.: Linkage relationships of the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome to 10 loci in the pericentromeric region of the human X chromosome. Genomics 6:
568-571, 1990.

34. Gutenberger, J.; Trygstad, C. W.; Stiehm, E. R.; Opitz, J. M.;
Thatcher, L. G.; Bloodworth, J. M. B.: Familial thrombocytopenia,
elevated serum IgA and renal disease. Am. J. Med. 49: 729-741, 1970.

35. Holmberg, L.; Gustavii, B.; Jonsson, A.: A prenatal study of
fetal platelet count and size with application to fetus at risk for
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J. Pediat. 102: 773-776, 1983.

36. Hutter, J. J., Jr.; Jones, J. F.: Results of a thymic epithelial
transplant in a child with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and central nervous
system lymphoma. Clin. Immun. Immunopath. 18: 121-125, 1981.

37. Kapoor, N.; Kirkpatrick, D.; Blaese, R. M.; Oleske, J.; Hilgartner,
M. H.; Chaganti, R. S. K.; Good, R. A.; O'Reilly, R. J.: Reconstitution
of normal megakaryocytopoiesis and immunologic functions in Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome by marrow transplantation following myelo-ablation and immunosuppression
with busulphan and cyclophosphamide. Blood 57: 692-696, 1981.

38. Knox-Macaulay, H. H. M.; Bashawri, L.; Davies, K. E.: X linked
recessive thrombocytopenia. J. Med. Genet. 30: 968-969, 1993.

39. Kolluri, R.; Tolias, K. F.; Carpenter, C. L.; Rosen, F. S.; Kirchhausen,
T.: Direct interaction of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein with
the GTPase Cdc42. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 5615-5618, 1996.

40. Krivit, W.; Good, R. A.: Aldrich's syndrome (thrombocytopenia,
eczema and infection in infants). Studies of the defense mechanisms. Am.
J. Dis. Child. 97: 137-153, 1959.

41. Kwan, S.-P.; Hagemann, T. L.; Radtke, B. E.; Blaese, R. M.; Rosen,
F. S.: Identification of mutations in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
gene and characterization of a polymorphic dinucleotide repeat at
DXS6940, adjacent to the disease gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92:
4706-4710, 1995.

42. Kwan, S.-P.; Lehner, T.; Hagemann, T.; Lu, B.; Blaese, M.; Ochs,
H.; Wedgwood, R.; Ott, J.; Craig, I. W.; Rosen, F. S.: Localization
of the gene for the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome between two flanking
markers, TIMP and DXS255, on Xp11.22-Xp11.3. Genomics 10: 29-33,
1991.

43. Kwan, S.-P.; Lehner, T.; Lu, B.; Raghu, G.; Blaese, M.; Sandkuyl,
L. A.; Ott, J.; Fraser, N.; Boyd, Y.; Craig, I. W.; Fischer, S.; Rosen,
F.: Linkage of DXS255 to the Wiskott Aldrich syndrome gene. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 51: 1027 only, 1989.

44. Kwan, S.-P.; Sandkuyl, L. A.; Blaese, M.; Kunkel, L. M.; Bruns,
G.; Parmley, R.; Skarshaug, S.; Page, D. C.; Ott, J.; Rosen, F. S.
: Genetic mapping of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome with two highly-linked
polymorphic DNA markers. Genomics 3: 39-43, 1988.

45. Lemahieu, V.; Gastier, J. M.; Francke, U.: Novel mutations in
the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein gene and their effects on transcriptional,
translational, and clinical phenotypes. Hum. Mutat. 14: 54-66, 1999.

46. Levin, A. S.; Spitler, L. E.; Stiles, D. P.; Fudenberg, H. H.
: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, a genetically determined cellular immunologic
deficiency: clinical and laboratory responses to therapy with transfer
factor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 67: 821-828, 1970.

47. Lum, L. G.; Tubergen, D. G.; Corash, L.; Blaese, R. M.: Splenectomy
in the management of the thrombocytopenia of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. New
Eng. J. Med. 302: 892-896, 1980.

48. Lutskiy, M. I.; Sasahara, Y.; Kenney, D. M.; Rosen, F. S.; Remold-O'Donnell,
E.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome in a female. Blood 100: 2763-2768,
2002.

49. Lyon, M. F.; Peters, J.; Glenister, P. H.; Ball, S.; Wright, E.
: The scurfy mouse mutant has previously unrecognized hematological
abnormalities and resembles Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 87: 2433-2437, 1990.

50. McEnery, G.; Nash, F. W.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome associated
with idiopathic infantile cortical hyperostosis (Caffey's disease). Arch.
Dis. Child. 48: 818-821, 1973.

51. Mentzer, S. J.; Remold-O'Donnell, E.; Crimmins, M. A. V.; Bierer,
B. E.; Rosen, F. S.; Burakoff, S. J.: Sialophorin, a surface sialoglycoprotein
defective in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, is involved in human T
lymphocyte proliferation. J. Exp. Med. 165: 1383-1392, 1987.

52. Meropol, N. J.; Hicks, D.; Brooks, J. J.; Siminovitch, K. A.;
Fishman, N. O.; Kant, J. A.; Bennett, J. S.: Coincident Kaposi sarcoma
and T-cell lymphoma in a patient with the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Am.
J. Hemat. 40: 126-134, 1992.

53. Nathan, D. G.: Splenectomy in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. (Editorial) New
Eng. J. Med. 302: 916-917, 1980.

54. Notarangelo, L. D.; Candotti, F.; Parolini, O.; Mantuano, E.;
Giliani, S.; Lanfranchi, A.; Albertini, A.: Application of molecular
analysis to genetic counseling in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS). DNA
Cell Biol. 12: 645-649, 1993.

55. Notarangelo, L. D.; Parolini, O.; Faustini, R.; Porteri, V.; Albertini,
A.; Ugazio, A. G.: Presentation of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome as isolated
thrombocytopenia. (Letter) Blood 77: 1125-1126, 1991.

56. Notarangelo, L. D.; Parolini, O.; Porta, F.; Locatelli, F.; Lanfranchi,
A.; Marconi, M.; Nespoli, L.; Albertini, A.; Craig, I. W.; Ugazio,
A. G.: Analysis of X-chromosome inactivation and presumptive expression
of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) gene in hematopoietic cell lineages
of a thrombocytopenic carrier female of WAS. Hum. Genet. 88: 237-241,
1991.

57. Ochs, H. D.; Slichter, S. J.; Harker, L. A.; Von Behrens, W. E.;
Clark, R. A.; Wedgwood, R. J.: The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: studies
of lymphocytes, granulocytes, and platelets. Blood 55: 243-252,
1980.

58. Parkman, R.; Kenney, D. M.; Remold-O'Donnell, E.; Perrine, S.;
Rosen, F. S.: Surface protein abnormalities in lymphocytes and platelets
from patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Lancet 318: 1387-1389,
1981. Note: Originally Volume II.

59. Parkman, R.; Rappeport, J.; Geha, R.; Belli, J.; Cassady, R.;
Levey, R.; Nathan, D. G.; Rosen, F. S.: Complete correction of the
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome by allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. New
Eng. J. Med. 298: 921-927, 1978.

60. Parolini, O.; Ressmann, G.; Haas, O. A.; Pawlowsky, J.; Gadner,
H.; Knapp, W.; Holter, W.: X-linked Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome in a
girl. New Eng. J. Med. 338: 291-295, 1998.

61. Peacocke, M.; Siminovitch, K. A.: Linkage of the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome with polymorphic DNA sequences from the human X chromosome. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 3430-3433, 1987.

62. Perry, G. S., III; Spector, B. D.; Schuman, L. M.; Mandel, J.
S.; Anderson, V. E.; McHugh, R. B.; Hanson, M. R.; Fahlstrom, S. M.;
Krivit, W.; Kersey, J. H.: The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome in the United
States and Canada (1892-1979). J. Pediat. 97: 72-78, 1980.

63. Prchal, J. T.; Carroll, A. J.; Prchal, J. F.; Crist, W. M.; Skalka,
H. W.; Gealy, W. J.; Harley, J.; Malluh, A.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome:
cellular impairments and their implication for carrier detection. Blood 56:
1048-1054, 1980.

64. Puck, J. M.; Candotti, F.: Lessons from the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. New
Eng. J. Med. 355: 1759-1761, 2006.

65. Puck, J. M.; Siminovitch, K. A.; Poncz, M.; Greenberg, C. R.;
Rottem, M.; Conley, M. E.: Atypical presentation of Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome: diagnosis in two unrelated males based on studies of maternal
T cell X chromosome inactivation. Blood 75: 2269-2374, 1990.

66. Puck, J. M.; Willard, H. F.: X inactivation in females with X-linked
disease. New Eng. J. Med. 338: 325-327, 1998.

67. Remold-O'Donnell, E.; Kenney, D. M.; Parkman, R.; Cairns, L.;
Savage, B.; Rosen, F. S.: Characterization of a human lymphocyte
surface sialoglycoprotein that is defective in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J.
Exp. Med. 159: 1705-1723, 1984.

68. Sasahara, Y.; Fujie, H.; Kumaki, S.; Ohashi, Y.; Minegishi, M.;
Tsuchiya, S.: Epstein-Barr virus-associated Hodgkin's disease in
a patient with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Acta Pediat. 90: 1348-1351,
2001.

69. Sasahara, Y.; Rachid, R.; Byrne, M. J.; de la Fuente, M. A.; Abraham,
R. T.; Ramesh, N.; Geha, R. S.: Mechanism of recruitment of WASP
to the immunological synapse and of its activation following TCR ligation. Molec.
Cell 10: 1269-1281, 2002.

70. Schindelhauer, D.; Weiss, M.; Hellebrand, H.; Golla, A.; Hergersberg,
M.; Seger, R.; Belohradsky, B. H.; Meindl, A.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome:
no strict genotype-phenotype correlations but clustering of missense
mutations in the amino-terminal part of the WASP gene product. Hum.
Genet. 98: 68-76, 1996.

71. Schwartz, M.; Mibashan, R. S.; Nicolaides, K. H.; Millar, D. S.;
Jenkins, E.; Rodeck, C. H.; Orstavik, K. H.; Stormorken, H.: First-trimester
diagnosis of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome by DNA markers. (Letter) Lancet 334:
1405 only, 1989. Note: Originally Volume II.

72. Shapiro, R. S.; Perry, G. S., III; Krivit, W.; Gerrard, J. M.;
White, J. G.; Kersey, J. H.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: detection
of carrier state by metabolic stress of platelets. Lancet 311: 121-123,
1978. Note: Originally Volume I.

73. Simon, H.-U.; Mills, G. B.; Hashimoto, S.; Siminovitch, K. A.
: Evidence for defective transmembrane signaling in B cells from patients
with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J. Clin. Invest. 90: 1396-1405, 1992.

74. Spitler, L. E.; Wray, B. B.; Mogerman, S.; Miller, J. J., III;
O'Reilly, R. J.; Lagios, M.: Nephropathy in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Pediatrics 66:
391-398, 1980.

75. Standen, G. R.; Lillicrap, D. P.; Matthews, N.; Bloom, A. L.:
Inherited thrombocytopenia, elevated serum IgA and renal disease:
identification as a variant of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Quart.
J. Med. 59: 401-408, 1986.

76. Steinberg, A. G.: Methodology in human genetics. J. Med. Educ. 34:
315-334, 1959.

77. Sullivan, K. E.; Mullen, C. A.; Blaese, R. M.; Winkelstein, J.
A.: A multiinstitutional survey of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J.
Pediat. 125: 876-885, 1994.

78. Symons, M.; Derry, J. M. J.; Karlak, B.; Jiang, S.; Lemahieu,
V.; McCormick, F.; Francke, U.; Abo, A.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
protein, a novel effector for the GTPase CDC42Hs, is implicated in
actin polymerization. Cell 84: 723-734, 1996.

79. ten Bensel, R. W.; Stadlan, E. M.; Krivit, W.: The development
of malignancy in the course of the Aldrich syndrome. J. Pediat. 68:
761-767, 1966.

80. Thompson, L. J.; Lalloz, M. R. A.; Layton, D. M.: Unique and
recurrent WAS gene mutations in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and X-linked
thrombocytopenia. Blood Cells Molec. Dis. 25: 218-226, 1999.

81. Van den Bosch, J.; Drukker, J.: Het Syndroom van Aldrich: een
klinisch en genetisch Onderzoek van enige nederlandse Families. Maandschr.
Kindergeneesk. 32: 359-373, 1964.

82. Villa, A.; Notarangelo, L.; Macchi, P.; Mantuano, E.; Cavagni,
G.; Brugnoni, D.; Strina, D.; Patrosso, M. C.; Ramenghi, U.; Sacco,
M. G.; Ugazio, A.; Vezzoni, P.: X-linked thrombocytopenia and Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome are allelic diseases with mutations in the WASP gene. Nature
Genet. 9: 414-417, 1995.

83. Wada, T.; Konno, A.; Schurman, S. H.; Garabedian, E. K.; Anderson,
S. M.; Kirby, M.; Nelson, D. L.; Candotti, F.: Second-site mutation
in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) protein gene causes somatic
mosaicism in two WAS siblings. J. Clin. Invest. 111: 1389-1397,
2003.

84. Wada, T.; Schurman, S. H.; Jagadeesh, G. J.; Garabedian, E. K.;
Nelson, D. L.; Candotti, F.: Multiple patients with revertant mosaicism
in a single Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome family. Blood 104: 1270-1272,
2004.

85. Wada, T.; Schurman, S. H.; Otsu, M.; Garabedian, E. K.; Ochs,
H. D.; Nelson, D. L.; Candotti, F.: Somatic mosaicism in Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome suggests in vivo reversion by a DNA slippage mechanism. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 8697-8702, 2001.

86. Wada, T.; Schurman, S. H.; Otsu, M.; Garabedian, E. K.; Ochs,
H. D.; Nelson, D. L.; Candotti, F.: Somatic mosaicism in Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome suggests in vivo reversion by a DNA slippage mechanism. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 8697-8702, 2001.

87. Waisfisz, Q.; Morgan, N. V.; Savino, M.; de Winter, J. P.; van
Berkel, C. G. M.; Hoatlin, M. E.; Ianzano, L.; Gibson, R. A.; Arwert,
F.; Savoia, A.; Mathew, C. G.; Pronk, J. C.; Joenje, H.: Spontaneous
functional correction of homozygous Fanconi anaemia alleles reveals
novel mechanistic basis for reverse mosaicism. Nature Genet. 22:
379-383, 1999.

88. Webb, M. C.; Andrews, P. A.; Koffman, C. G.; Cameron, J. S.:
Renal transplantation in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Transplantation 56:
747-748, 1993.

89. Weiden, P. L.; Blaese, R.: Hereditary thrombocytopenia: relation
to Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome with special reference to splenectomy. J.
Pediat. 80: 226-234, 1972.

90. Wengler, G.; Gorlin, J. B.; Williamson, J. M.; Rosen, F. S.; Bing,
D. H.: Nonrandom inactivation of the X chromosome in early lineage
hematopoietic cells in carriers of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Blood 85:
2471-2477, 1995.

91. Wiskott, A.: Familiarer, angeborener Morbus Werlhofii? Mschr.
Kinderheilk. 68: 212-216, 1937.

92. Wolff, J. A.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: clinical, immunologic,
and pathologic observations. J. Pediat. 70: 221-232, 1967.

93. Yamada, M.; Ariga, T.; Kawamura, N.; Yamaguchi, K.; Ohtsu, M.;
Nelson, D. L.; Kondoh, T.; Kobayashi, I.; Okano, M.; Kobayashi, K.;
Sakiyama, Y.: Determination of carrier status for the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome by flow cytometric analysis of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein
expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. J. Immun. 165:
1119-1122, 2000.

94. Yamada, M.; Ohtsu, M.; Kobayashi, I.; Kawamura, N.; Kobayashi,
K.; Ariga, T.; Sakiyama, Y.; Nelson, D. L.; Tsuruta, S.; Anakura,
M.; Ishikawa, N.: Flow cytometric analysis of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
(WAS) protein in lymphocytes from WAS patients and their familial
carriers. Blood 93: 756-759, 1999.

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS INHERITANCE:
X-linked recessive

HEAD AND NECK:
[Head];
Sinusitis;
[Ears];
Otitis media;
[Nose];
Epistaxis;
[Mouth];
Oral bleeding

RESPIRATORY:
[Airways];
Upper respiratory tract infections;
Lower respiratory tract infections;
[Lung];
Pneumonia

ABDOMEN:
[Gastrointestinal];
Diarrhea;
Hematemesis;
Melena;
Inflammatory bowel disease

GENITOURINARY:
[Kidneys];
Nephropathy

SKIN, NAILS, HAIR:
[Skin];
Eczema;
Petechiae;
Purpura

NEUROLOGIC:
[Central nervous system];
Meningitis

HEMATOLOGY:
Thrombocytopenia;
Small platelets size;
Hemolytic anemia;
Small and large vessel vasculitis;
Iron deficiency anemia;
CD43 (sialophorin) defectively expressed on surface of blood cells

IMMUNOLOGY:
Moderately depressed antibody response to polysaccharide antigens;
Lymphopenia;
Abnormal delayed hypersensitivity skin test;
Absent microvilli on the surface of peripheral blood lymphocytes

LABORATORY ABNORMALITIES:
Prolonged bleeding time;
Normal IgG levels;
Increased IgA levels;
Increased IgE levels;
Reduced IgM levels;
Raised ESR;
Raised CRP

MOLECULAR BASIS:
Caused by mutation in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein gene (WASP,
301000.0001)

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - reviewed: 1/4/2001
Assil Saleh - revised: 8/25/2000

CREATED John F. Jackson: 6/15/1995

EDITED joanna: 10/22/2013
joanna: 7/23/2013
joanna: 1/5/2001
joanna: 1/4/2001
kayiaros: 8/25/2000

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/11/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/27/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/21/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/30/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/13/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/27/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/10/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 5/13/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/21/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/10/2001
Sonja A. Rasmussen - updated: 6/8/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/28/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/21/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/16/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/19/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/16/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/18/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/4/1998
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/23/1998
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 6/9/1997
Cynthia K. Ewing - updated: 10/14/1996
Alan F. Scott - updated: 4/23/1996
Moyra Smith - updated: 4/22/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED terry: 03/28/2013
mgross: 2/23/2012
terry: 1/27/2012
carol: 6/7/2011
alopez: 11/16/2010
terry: 11/11/2010
wwang: 5/13/2009
ckniffin: 4/27/2009
terry: 3/27/2009
carol: 11/26/2007
terry: 11/21/2007
alopez: 12/8/2006
terry: 11/30/2006
alopez: 6/13/2006
tkritzer: 12/27/2004
tkritzer: 2/18/2004
tkritzer: 1/23/2003
tkritzer: 1/13/2003
terry: 1/10/2003
carol: 5/13/2002
ckniffin: 5/10/2002
ckniffin: 5/9/2002
mgross: 2/21/2002
carol: 2/12/2002
mcapotos: 8/15/2001
mcapotos: 8/14/2001
mcapotos: 8/10/2001
mcapotos: 6/8/2001
mcapotos: 5/25/2001
terry: 5/18/2001
alopez: 3/5/2001
alopez: 3/1/2001
terry: 2/28/2001
mgross: 9/21/2000
alopez: 5/16/2000
mcapotos: 1/27/2000
terry: 1/19/2000
alopez: 8/24/1999
jlewis: 8/24/1999
terry: 8/16/1999
jlewis: 6/30/1999
terry: 6/18/1999
terry: 5/20/1999
dkim: 11/13/1998
carol: 11/12/1998
terry: 11/4/1998
dkim: 9/10/1998
dkim: 7/21/1998
alopez: 6/9/1998
alopez: 4/23/1998
jenny: 8/27/1997
mark: 7/8/1997
jamie: 10/18/1996
jamie: 10/16/1996
jamie: 10/14/1996
mark: 8/12/1996
terry: 7/16/1996
terry: 7/15/1996
mark: 6/25/1996
terry: 6/25/1996
mark: 6/19/1996
terry: 6/11/1996
carol: 4/26/1996
mark: 4/23/1996
carol: 4/22/1996
mark: 2/5/1996
mark: 1/8/1996
mark: 10/25/1995
terry: 7/28/1995
carol: 12/14/1994
davew: 7/6/1994
pfoster: 7/1/1994
jason: 6/17/1994

