600418	TITLE *600418 AMPHIPHYSIN; AMPH
;;AMPHIPHYSIN I
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Lichte et al. (1992) isolated a novel synaptic vesicle-associated
protein, amphiphysin, by screening a chicken brain lambda-gt11 library
with antibodies raised against chicken brain synaptic proteins. An
acidic protein present also in mammalian nervous tissue, amphiphysin,
was shown by immunocytochemistry to be concentrated in nerve terminals.
See also amphiphysin-like (AMPHL; 601248).

GENE FUNCTION

David et al. (1994) found that the N- and C-terminal domains of the
amphiphysin protein are highly conserved between chicken and human.
Autoantibodies from patients with the stiff-man syndrome show a dominant
autoepitope located in the C-terminal region, which contains an SH3
domain.

Yamamoto et al. (1995) noted that the tissue distribution of AMPH and
its association with neurotransmitter vesicles make the gene a candidate
for involvement in such diverse heritable disorders as those of the
nervous system, certain endocrine tissues (such as the adrenal medulla,
pituitary gland or endocrine pancreas), or male fertility.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Pathogenic Role of Anti-Amphiphysin Antibodies

Stiff-man syndrome (184850) is a rare disease of the central nervous
system characterized by progressive rigidity of the body musculature
with superimposed painful spasms. An autoimmune origin of the disease
has been proposed. Approximately 60% of patients are positive for
autoantibodies directed against the GABA-synthesizing enzyme glutamic
acid decarboxylase (GAD; 605363). A few patients, all women affected by
breast cancer, were found to be negative for GAD autoantibodies but
positive for autoantibodies directed against a 128-kD synaptic protein.
De Camilli et al. (1993) found that this antigen is amphiphysin. Both
GAD and amphiphysin are nonintrinsic membrane proteins that are
concentrated in nerve terminals, where a pool of the 2 proteins is
associated with the cytoplasmic surface of synaptic vesicles.

Wessig et al. (2003) reported a 71-year-old woman with invasive ductal
carcinoma and a paraneoplastic stiff-person syndrome characterized by
stiffness in the right arm, stiff and unsteady gait, and increased
sweating. Anti-amphiphysin antibodies were detected in the patient's
serum and CSF, and the patient temporarily responded to plasmapheresis.
Postmortem studies detected antibodies in the central nervous system
parenchyma, suggesting a pathogenic role.

- Crystal Structure

Peter et al. (2004) solved the structure of the Drosophila amphiphysin
BAR domain. It is a crescent-shaped dimer that binds preferentially to
highly curved negatively charged membranes. With its amino-terminal
amphipathic helix and BAR domain, amphiphysin can drive membrane
curvature in vitro and in vivo. The structure is similar to that of
arfaptin-2 (601638), which Peter et al. (2004) found also binds and
tubulates membranes. From this, Peter et al. (2004) predicted that BAR
domains are in many protein families, including sorting nexins,
centaurins, and oligophrenins. The universal and minimal BAR domain is a
dimerization, membrane-binding, and curvature-sensing module.

MAPPING

By PCR analysis of hybrid cell DNAs and by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Yamamoto et al. (1995) mapped the AMPH gene to 7p14-p13.
The homologous locus Amph was mapped to the proximal region of mouse
chromosome 13 by Jenkins et al. (1995).

Yamamoto et al. (1995) excluded AMPH as a candidate gene for either RP9
(180104) or dominant cystoid macular dystrophy (MDDC; 153880) by showing
that AMPH maps to a different segment of the genetic map of chromosome
7, defined by microsatellite markers, than does either of the eye
disorders.

ANIMAL MODEL

Di Paolo et al. (2002) generated Amph knockout mice and found that lack
of Amph caused a parallel loss of amphiphysin-2 (601248) selectively in
brain. Cell-free assembly of endocytic protein scaffolds was defective
in mutant brain extracts and there were defects in synaptic vesicle
recycling. These defects correlated with major learning deficits and
with increased mortality due to rare irreversible seizures, suggesting
that Amph has a critical role in higher brain functions.

REFERENCE 1. David, C.; Solimena, M.; De Camilli, P.: Autoimmunity in stiff-man
syndrome with breast cancer is targeted to the C-terminal region of
human amphiphysin, a protein similar to the yeast proteins, Rvs167
and Rvs161. FEBS Lett. 351: 73-79, 1994.

2. De Camilli, P.; Thomas, A.; Cofiell, R.; Folli, F.; Lichte, B.;
Piccolo, G.; Meinck, H.-M.; Austoni, M.; Fassetta, G.; Bottazzo, G.;
Bates, D.; Cartlidge, N.; Solimena, M.; Kilimann, M. W.: The synaptic
vesicle-associated protein amphiphysin is the 128-kD autoantigen of
stiff-man syndrome with breast cancer. J. Exp. Med. 178: 2219-2223,
1993.

3. Di Paolo, G.; Sankaranarayanan, S.; Wenk, M. R.; Daniell, L.; Perucco,
E.; Caldarone, B. J.; Flavell, R.; Picciotto, M. R.; Ryan, T. A.;
Cremona, O.; De Camilli, P.: Decreased synaptic vesicle recycling
efficiency and cognitive deficits in amphiphysin 1 knockout mice. Neuron 33:
789-804, 2002.

4. Jenkins, N. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Yamamoto, R.; Kilimann, M. W.;
Copeland, N. G.: Amphiphysin (Amph) maps to the proximal region of
mouse chromosome 13. Genomics 28: 363-365, 1995.

5. Lichte, B.; Veh, R. W.; Meyer, H. E.; Kilimann, M. W.: Amphiphysin,
a novel protein associated with synaptic vesicles. EMBO J. 11: 2521-2530,
1992. Note: Erratum: EMBO J. 11 3809 only, 1992.

6. Peter, B. J.; Kent, H. M.; Mills, I. G.; Vallis, Y.; Butler, P.
J. G.; Evans, P. R.; McMahon, H. T.: BAR domains as sensors of membrane
curvature: the amphiphysin BAR structure. Science 303: 495-499,
2004.

7. Wessig, C.; Klein, R.; Schneider, M. F.; Toyka, K. V.; Naumann,
M.; Sommer, C.: Neuropathology and binding studies in anti-amphiphysin-associated
stiff-person syndrome. Neurology 61: 195-198, 2003.

8. Yamamoto, R.; Li, X.; Francke, U.; Kilimann, M. W.: Genetic mapping
of the human amphiphysin gene (AMPH) at 7p14-p13 excludes its involvement
in retinitis pigmentosa 9 or dominant cystoid macular dystrophy. (Letter) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 57: 970-972, 1995.

9. Yamamoto, R.; Li, X.; Winter, S.; Francke, U.; Kilimann, M. W.
: Primary structure of human amphiphysin, the dominant autoantigen
of paraneoplastic Stiff-Man syndrome, and mapping of its gene (AMPH)
to chromosome 7p13-p14. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 265-268, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/2/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/8/2003
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 12/16/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/17/1995

EDITED carol: 04/04/2013
alopez: 2/2/2004
ckniffin: 8/8/2003
carol: 1/28/2003
tkritzer: 12/16/2002
carol: 10/25/2000
mark: 10/2/1997
jamie: 2/12/1997
mimadm: 11/3/1995
terry: 10/20/1995
mark: 8/25/1995
mark: 3/31/1995
carol: 2/18/1995

610499	TITLE *610499 RAP GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE FACTOR 6; RAPGEF6
;;RAS-ASSOCIATING GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE FACTOR 2; RAGEF2;;
PDZ DOMAIN-CONTAINING GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE FACTOR 2; PDZGEF2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for sequences similar to RAGEF1 (RAPGEF2; 609530), followed
by screening a fetal brain cDNA library and 5-prime and 3-prime RACE,
Gao et al. (2001) cloned RAPGEF6, which they called RAGEF2. The deduced
1,509-amino acid protein contains several of the domains present in
RAPGEF2, including cNMP-binding, REM, PDZ, and RA domains as well as the
GEF catalytic domain. Northern blot analysis detected a RAPGEF6
transcript of about 8 kb which was abundantly expressed in heart, brain,
placenta, lung, and liver, but barely detectable in skeletal muscle,
kidney, and pancreas.

Kuiperij et al. (2003) cloned 2 splice variants of RAPGEF6, which they
called PDZGEF2A and PDZGEF2B, from human umbilical cord and Jurkat
T-cell cDNA libraries. The deduced proteins contain 1,601 and 1,391
amino acids, respectively, and they differ after amino acid 1,249. Like
RAPGEF2, PDZGEF2A contains a C-terminal proline-rich and a PDZ-binding
motif, whereas PDZGEF2B lacks these motifs. Unlike RAPGEF2, both PDZGEF2
isoforms contain a second, less conserved, N-terminal RCBD (related
cyclic nucleotide-binding domain) domain. Northern blot analysis
detected ubiquitous expression of an approximately 9.0-kb RAPGEF6
transcript.

GENE FUNCTION

Gao et al. (2001) found that human RAPGEF6 expressed in insect cells
showed GEF activity toward RAP1A (179520) and RAP2A (179540), but not
toward other RAS family members. RAPGEF6 colocalized with activated MRAS
(608435) in the plasma membrane of cotransfected COS-7 cells, leading to
an increase in the GTP-bound form of plasma membrane RAP1. Gao et al.
(2001) concluded that RAPGEF6 acts as the GEF for RAP1 and RAP2
downstream of MRAS in the plasma membrane. Kuiperij et al. (2003)
demonstrated that RAPGEF2 activated both RAP1 and RAP2.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Gao et al. (2001) and Kuiperij et al.
(2003) mapped the RAPGEF6 gene to chromosome 5.

REFERENCE 1. Gao, X.; Satoh, T.; Liao, Y.; Song, C.; Hu, C.-D.; Kariya, K.;
Kataoka, T.: Identification and characterization of RA-GEF-2, a Rap
guanine nucleotide exchange factor that serves as a downstream target
of M-Ras. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 42219-42225, 2001.

2. Kuiperij, H. B.; de Rooij, J.; Rehmann, H.; van Triest, M.; Wittinghofer,
A.; Bos, J. L.; Zwartkruis, F. J. T.: Characterisation of PDZ-GEFs,
a family of guanine nucleotide exchange factors specific for Rap1
and Rap2. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1593: 141-149, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/16/2006

EDITED carol: 10/25/2006
carol: 10/17/2006
carol: 10/16/2006

610398	TITLE *610398 SAP30-LIKE PROTEIN; SAP30L
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using differential display analysis to search for genes upregulated by
TGFB1 (190180) in differentiating intestinal epithelial cells, followed
by screening a human heart cDNA library, Lindfors et al. (2003) cloned
SAP30L. The deduced 183-amino acid protein contains 2 potential
N-glycosylation sites, 1 N-myristoylation site, and several
phosphorylation sites. Transient transfection studies showed that SAP30L
localized to the nucleus in small dense bodies that are not PML bodies.
Mutation of the SAP30L nuclear localization signal caused the protein to
also be expressed throughout the cytoplasm. SAP30L shares 70% identity
with SAP30 (603378) and 97% identity with mouse Sap30l. Northern blot
detected a 1.30-kb transcript in all human tissues examined, with
highest expression in testis, followed by heart, kidney, and placenta. A
6.5-kb transcript had high expression in brain and lung.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lindfors et al. (2003) determined that the SAP30L gene contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lindfors et al. (2003) mapped the SAP30L
gene to chromosome 5q33.2.

REFERENCE 1. Lindfors, K.; Viiri, K. M.; Niittynen, M.; Heinonen, T. Y. K.;
Maki, M.; Kainulainen, H.: TGF-beta induces expression of SAP30L,
a novel nuclear protein. BMC Genomics 4: 53, 2003. Note: Electronic
Article.

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 9/12/2006

EDITED wwang: 09/12/2006

180490	TITLE *180490 RIBOPHORIN II; RPN2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The RPN2 gene encodes ribophorin II, which is involved in ribosome
binding. Ribophorin I (RPN1; 180470) and RPN2 are abundant, highly
conserved glycoproteins located exclusively in the membranes of the
rough endoplasmic reticulum (Crimaudo et al., 1987).

CLONING

Using probes derived from a human liver expression library, Crimaudo et
al. (1987) isolated and sequenced full-length human cDNA clones encoding
ribophorins I and II. The cDNA clones hybridized to mRNA species of 2.5
kb and encoded polypeptides of 68.5 and 69.3 kD, respectively. Sequence
comparisons and immunoblotting with specific antibodies showed both
proteins to be highly conserved throughout a variety of species.
However, no relationship between the 2 proteins could be deduced from
their primary sequences.

MAPPING

Using cDNAs in the study of a panel of somatic cell hybrids, Barton et
al. (1987) mapped RPN2 to chromosome 20. Loffler et al. (1991) mapped
the RPN2 gene to 20q12-q13.1 by in situ hybridization.

GENE FUNCTION

Kelleher et al. (1992) reported that mammalian oligosaccharyltransferase
activity is associated with a protein complex composed of ribophorin I,
ribophorin II, and a 48-kD oligosaccharyltransferase protein (602202).

Among 44 women with breast cancer (114480), Honma et al. (2008) observed
a significant association (p = 0.0052) between increased expression of
RPN2 in cancer tissue and decreased clinical response to the
antimicrotubule chemotherapeutic agent docetaxel. Small interfering RNA
(siRNA) targeting RPN2 significantly promoted docetaxel-dependent
apoptosis and cell growth inhibition of docetaxel-resistant human breast
cancer cells in vitro. In vivo atelocollagen delivery of RPN2 siRNA
significantly reduced drug-resistant tumor growth in mice given
docetaxel. Further studies indicated that RPN2 conferred drug resistance
via increased glycosylation of P-glycoproteins. Honma et al. (2008)
concluded that RPN2 siRNA introduction may hypersensitize cancer cell
responses to chemotherapeutic agents.

REFERENCE 1. Barton, D. E.; Crimaudo, C.; Hortsch, M.; Francke, U.: The genes
for ribophorins I and II are on human chromosomes 3q and 20 and mouse
chromosomes 6 and 12, respectively. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46:
577 only, 1987.

2. Crimaudo, C.; Hortsch, M.; Gausepohl, H.; Meyer, D. I.: Human
ribophorins I and II: the primary structure and membrane topology
of two highly conserved round endoplasmic reticulum-specific glycoproteins. EMBO
J. 6: 75-82, 1987.

3. Honma, K.; Iwao-Koizumi, K.; Takeshita, F.; Yamamoto, Y.; Yoshida,
T.; Nishio, K.; Nagahara, S.; Kato, K.; Ochiya, T.: RPN2 gene confers
docetaxel resistance in breast cancer. Nature Med. 14: 939-948,
2008. Note: Erratum: Nature Med. 14: 1128 only, 2008.

4. Kelleher, D. J.; Kreibich, G.; Gilmore, R.: Oligosaccharyltransferase
activity is associated with a protein complex composed of ribophorins
I and II and a 48 kd protein. Cell 69: 55-65, 1992.

5. Loffler, C.; Gopal Rao, V. V. N.; Hansmann, I.: Mapping of the
ribophorin II (RPN II) gene to human chromosome 20q12-q13.1 by in-situ
hybridization. Hum. Genet. 87: 221-222, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/24/2008

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/26/1987

EDITED terry: 09/14/2012
wwang: 9/25/2008
ckniffin: 9/24/2008
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 12/2/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 6/20/1988
marie: 3/25/1988

601989	TITLE *601989 S100 CALCIUM-BINDING PROTEIN A13; S100A13
DESCRIPTION Wicki et al. (1996) reported the characterization of a human gene they
symbolized S100A13, a calcium-binding protein belonging to the S100
protein family. S100 proteins are small EF-hand calcium-binding proteins
of variable lengths and sequence identities. At least 12 of 15 members
of the family are clustered on chromosome 1q21 (see S100A1; 176940);
S100A13 likewise colocalizes with S100A1 on the 1q21 cluster. The
predicted 98 amino acid S100A13 protein shows sequence homologies to
other S100 proteins between 50.5% (S100A5; 176991) and 59.3% (S100A12;
603112). Northern blot analysis showed high amounts of S100A13 mRNA in
adult skeletal muscle, heart, kidney, ovary, spleen, small intestine,
and pancreas and in fetal lung, heart, cochlea, liver, spleen, and
parathyroid tumor cells. Moderate levels were detected in all other
tissues examined, with the exception of placenta and leukocytes, which
had very low or undetectable levels. Wicki et al. (1996) also cloned the
mouse S100A13 gene. Mouse S100A13 is composed of 98 amino acids and
displays 86.7% homology compared to human S100A13.

REFERENCE 1. Wicki, R.; Schafer, B. W.; Erne, P.; Heizmann, C. W.: Characterization
of the human and mouse cDNAs coding for S100A13, a new member of the
S100 protein family. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 227: 594-599,
1996.

CREATED Ethylin Wang Jabs: 9/11/1997

EDITED alopez: 10/09/1998
joanna: 1/9/1998
terry: 9/11/1997

163729	TITLE +163729 NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHASE 3; NOS3
;;NITRIC OXIDE SYNTHASE, ENDOTHELIAL; ENOS
CORONARY ARTERY SPASM 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
ALZHEIMER DISEASE, LATE-ONSET, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
HYPERTENSION, PREGNANCY-INDUCED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
HYPERTENSION RESISTANT TO CONVENTIONAL THERAPY, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Nitric oxide (NO) accounts for the biologic activity of
endothelium-derived relaxing factor (EDRF), discovered by Furchgott and
Zawadzki (1980) and Rapoport and Murad (1983). NO is synthesized in
endothelial cells from L-arginine by nitric oxide synthase (NOS). EDRF
is important in regulation of vasomotor tone and blood flow by
inhibiting smooth muscle contraction and platelet aggregation. Janssens
et al. (1992) isolated a cDNA encoding a human vascular NOS. The
translated human protein was 1,203 amino acids long with a predicted
molecular mass of 133 kD. They showed that the cDNA encodes a
calcium-regulated, constitutively expressed endothelial NOS, capable of
producing EDRF in blood vessels. Marsden et al. (1992) likewise cloned
and sequenced human endothelial NO synthase. Their cDNA clones predicted
a protein of 1,203 amino acids with about 60% identity with the rat
brain NO synthase isoform (163731). (Nitric oxide synthases have been
assigned to 2 classes: a constitutively expressed, calcium-regulated
class identified in brain, neutrophils, and endothelial cells, and a
calcium-independent class identified in endotoxin- or cytokine-induced
macrophages and endothelial cells (163730).)

GENE STRUCTURE

Marsden et al. (1993) isolated genomic clones encoding human endothelial
NO synthase and determined the structural organization of the gene. It
contains 26 exons spanning approximately 21 kb of genomic DNA and
encodes an mRNA of 4,052 nucleotides. Characterization of the
5-prime-flanking region indicated that the NOS3 gene is TATA-less and
exhibits proximal promoter elements consistent with a constitutively
expressed gene, namely, SP1 and GATA motifs.

MAPPING

By Southern blot hybridization of human/rodent somatic cell hybrids,
Marsden et al. (1993) assigned the NOS3 gene to chromosome 7 and
regionalized it to 7q35-q36 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. By
PCR amplification applied to a panel of DNAs from human/rodent somatic
cell hybrids, by Southern blot analysis, and by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Robinson et al. (1994) localized the NOS3 gene to 7q36.
By analysis of interspecific backcross progeny, Gregg et al. (1995)
mapped the mouse homolog to chromosome 5.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Raman et al. (1998) reported the crystal structure of the heme domain of
endothelial NOS in tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4)-free and -bound forms at
1.95-angstrom and 1.9-angstrom resolution, respectively. In both
structures a zinc ion is tetrahedrally coordinated to pairs of
symmetry-related cysteine residues at the dimer interface. The conserved
Cys-(X)4-Cys motif and its strategic location establish a structural
role for the metal center in maintaining the integrity of the
BH4-binding site. The unexpected recognition of the substrate L-arginine
at the BH4 site indicates that this site is poised to stabilize a
positively charged pterin ring and suggests a model involving a cationic
pterin radical in the catalytic cycle.

GENE FUNCTION

Fulton et al. (1999) demonstrated that AKT (164730) directly
phosphorylated eNOS and activated the enzyme leading to nitric oxide
production, whereas eNOS mutated at a putative AKT phosphorylation site
was resistant to phosphorylation and activation by AKT. Activated AKT
increased basal nitric oxide release from endothelial cells, and
activation-deficient AKT attenuated NO production stimulated by VEGF
(192290). Thus, Fulton et al. (1999) concluded the eNOS is an AKT
substrate linking signal transduction by AKT to the release of the
gaseous second messenger nitric oxide.

Dimmeler et al. (1999) stated that physiologically, the most important
stimulus for the continuous formation of nitric oxide is the viscous
drag (or shear stress) generated by the streaming blood on the
endothelial layer. PI3K (see 601232) and AKT are activated in
endothelial cells in response to shear stress. Dimmeler et al. (1999)
demonstrated that AKT mediates the activation of eNOS, leading to
increased nitric oxide production. Inhibition of the PI3K AKT pathway or
mutation of the AKT site on eNOS protein at serine-1177 attenuated the
serine phosphorylation and prevented the activation of eNOS. Mimicking
the phosphorylation of ser1177 directly enhanced enzyme activity and
altered the sensitivity of the enzyme to calcium, rendering its activity
maximal at subphysiologic concentrations of calcium. Thus,
phosphorylation of eNOS by AKT represented a novel calcium-independent
regulatory mechanism for activation of eNOS.

Napolitano et al. (2000) investigated the interactions between ET1
(131240) and the NO system in the feto-placental unit. They examined the
mRNA expression of ET1, inducible NOS (163730), and eNOS in human
cultured placental trophoblastic cells obtained from preeclamptic (PE)
and normotensive pregnancies. ET1 expression was increased in PE cells,
whereas iNOS, which represents the main source of NO synthesis, was
decreased; conversely, eNOS expression was increased. ET1 was able to
influence its own expression as well as NOS isoform expression in normal
and PE trophoblastic cultured cells. The findings suggested the
existence of a functional relationship between ET(s) and NOS isoforms
that could constitute the biologic mechanism leading to the reduced
placental blood flow and increased resistance to flow in the
feto-maternal circulation that are characteristic of the pathophysiology
of preeclampsia.

Autosomal dominant adult polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD; 173900) is
associated with altered endothelial-dependent vasodilation and decreased
vascular production of NO. Thus, eNOS could have a modifier effect in
ADPKD. To test this hypothesis, Persu et al. (2002) genotyped 173
unrelated European ADPKD patients for the glu298-to-asp (163729.0001),
intron 4 VNTR, and -786T-C (163729.0002) polymorphisms of ENOS and
looked for their influence on the age at end-stage renal disease (ESRD).
In 93 males, the glu298-to-asp polymorphism was associated with a lower
age at ESRD. This effect was confirmed in a subset of males linked to
PKD1 (601313) and reaching ESRD before age 45, and by a cumulative renal
survival analysis in PKD1-linked families. Further studies demonstrated
that NOS activity was decreased in renal artery samples from PKD males
harboring the asp298 allele, in association with posttranslational
modifications and partial cleavage of eNOS. No significant effect of the
other polymorphisms was found in males, and no polymorphism influenced
the age at ESRD in females. Persu et al. (2002) concluded that
glu298-to-asp is associated with a 5 year lower mean age at ESRD in a
subset of ADPKD males. They hypothesized that the effect could be due to
decreased NOS activity and a partial cleavage of eNOS, leading to a
further decrease in the vascular production of NO.

Nisoli et al. (2003) found that NO triggers mitochondrial biogenesis in
cells as diverse as brown adipocytes and 3T3-L1, U937, and HeLa cells.
This effect of NO was dependent on cGMP and was mediated by the
induction of PPARGC1 (604517), a master regulator of mitochondrial
biogenesis. Moreover, Nisoli et al. (2003) found that mitochondrial
biogenesis induced by exposure to cold was markedly reduced in brown
adipose tissue of eNOS -/- mice, which had a reduced metabolic rate and
accelerated weight gain compared to wildtype mice. Thus, Nisoli et al.
(2003) concluded that a NO-cGMP-dependent pathway controls mitochondrial
biogenesis and body energy balance.

Simoncini et al. (2004) demonstrated that tibolone and its estrogenic
metabolites activate NO synthesis by recruiting functional estrogen
receptors, whereas the progestogenic/androgenic metabolite had no
effect. During prolonged exposures, tibolone and the estrogenic
compounds enhanced the expression of eNOS. In addition, tibolone was
able to induce rapid activation of eNOS, leading to rapid increases in
the release of NO. Different from estrogen, rapid activation of eNOS did
not rely on recruitment of PI3K but rather on MAPK-dependent cascades.

Robb et al. (2004) found that the 5-prime UTR of the NOS3AS (612205)
transcript was complementary to the portion of NOS3 mRNA derived from
exons 23 to 26. RT-PCR analysis showed that expression of NOS3 in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and human aortic vascular
smooth muscle cells (HAOVSMCs) was inversely proportional to that of
NOS3AS. Both the NOS3 and NOS3AS genes were transcriptionally active;
however, NOS3AS appeared to downregulate the steady-state levels of NOS3
mRNA and protein. RT-PCR showed that overexpression of the overlapping
region of NOS3AS had little impact on NOS3 mRNA levels in HUVECs;
however, Western blot analysis showed that NOS3 protein levels were
markedly reduced. NOS3AS also reduced the expression of a chimeric
transcript containing the NOS3-overlapping sequence fused to a reporter
gene. Inhibition of NOS3AS expression by RNA interference (RNAi) in
HAOVSMCs increased NOS3 expression, and inhibition of histone
deacetylase (see HDAC1; 601241) in HAOVSMCs increased expression of
NOS3AS mRNA prior to decrease in NOS3 mRNA expression. Robb et al.
(2004) concluded that NOS3AS participates in the posttranscriptional
regulation of NOS3.

Fish et al. (2007) found that NOS3AS was induced by hypoxia in cultured
human endothelial and smooth muscle cells and in aortas of hypoxic rats.
NOS3AS induction preceded the decrease in NOS3 steady-state mRNA in
endothelial cells, and knockdown of NOS3AS by RNAi indicated that NOS3AS
downregulated NOS3 expression during hypoxia. Hypoxia did not induce
transcription of NOS3AS, but instead stabilized NOS3AS transcripts,
predominantly the short NOS3AS variant, leading to elevated NOS3AS
levels. RT-PCR of fractionated cells showed that both NOS3AS pre-mRNA
and mature NOS3AS mRNA were enriched in the nucleus under basal
conditions. Under hypoxic conditions, the cytoplasmic levels of mature
NOS3AS mRNA increased more than 30-fold, whereas levels in the nucleus
increased only moderately. In contrast, the nuclear/cytoplasmic
distribution of NOS3 mRNA was not altered under hypoxic conditions, with
NOS3 mRNA levels decreasing in both the cytoplasm and nucleus. NOS3
associated with polyribosomes in normoxic cells, but its association
with polyribosomes was attenuated in hypoxic cells, concurrent with
association of the short NOS3AS variant with polyribosomes. Fish et al.
(2007) concluded that NOS3 expression is regulated by its overlapping
NOS3AS transcript in a hypoxia-dependent fashion.

Nisoli et al. (2005) reported that calorie restriction for either 3 or
12 months induced eNOS expression and 3-prime/5-prime-cyclic GMP in
various tissues of male mice. This was accompanied by mitochondrial
biogenesis, with increased oxygen consumption and ATP production, and an
enhanced expression of Sirt1 (604479). Nisoli et al. (2005) reported
these effects were strongly attenuated in eNOS null-mutant mice. Thus,
Nisoli et al. (2005) concluded that nitric oxide plays a fundamental
role in the processes induced by calorie restriction and may be involved
in the extension of life span in mammals.

Using human platelets, Ji et al. (2007) demonstrated that polymerization
of beta-actin (ACTB; 102630) regulated the activation state of NOS3, and
hence NO formation, by altering its binding to heat-shock protein-90
(HSP90, or HSPCA; 140571). NOS3 bound the globular, but not the
filamentous, form of beta-actin, and the affinity of NOS3 for globular
beta-actin was, in turn, increased by HSP90. Formation of this ternary
complex of NOS3, globular beta-actin, and HSP90 increased NOS activity
and cyclic GMP, an index of bioactive NO, and increased the rate of
HSP90 degradation, thus limiting NOS3 activation. Ji et al. (2007)
concluded that beta-actin regulates NO formation and signaling in
platelets.

Lim et al. (2008) demonstrated that blocking phosphorylation of the AKT
substrate eNOS inhibits tumor initiation and maintenance. Moreover, eNOS
enhances the nitrosylation and activation of endogenous wildtype Ras
proteins (see 190020), which are required throughout tumorigenesis. Lim
et al. (2008) suggested that activation of the PI3K-AKT-eNOS-(wildtype)
Ras pathway by oncogenic Ras in cancer cells is required to initiate and
maintain tumor growth.

Chen et al. (2010) showed that S-glutathionylation of eNOS reversibly
decreases NOS activity with an increase in superoxide generation
primarily from the reductase, in which 2 highly conserved cysteine
residues are identified as sites of S-glutathionylation and found to be
critical for redox-regulation of eNOS function. Chen et al. (2010)
showed that e-NOS S-glutathionylation in endothelial cells, with loss of
nitric oxide and gain of superoxide generation, is associated with
impaired endothelium-dependent vasodilation. In hypertensive vessels,
eNOS S-glutathionylation is increased with impaired
endothelium-dependent vasodilation that is restored by thiol-specific
reducing agents, which reverse this S-glutathionylation. Chen et al.
(2010) concluded that S-glutathionylation of eNOS is a pivotal switch
providing redox regulation of cellular signaling, endothelial function,
and vascular tone.

Straub et al. (2012) reported a model for the regulation of NO signaling
by demonstrating that hemoglobin alpha, encoded by the HBA1 (141800) and
HBA2 (141850) genes, is expressed in human and mouse arterial
endothelial cells and enriched at the myoendothelial junction, where it
regulates the effects of NO on vascular reactivity. Notably, this
function is unique to hemoglobin alpha and is abrogated by its genetic
depletion. Mechanistically, endothelial hemoglobin alpha heme iron in
the Fe(3+) state permits NO signaling, and this signaling is shut off
when hemoglobin alpha is reduced to the Fe(2+) state by endothelial
CYB5R3 (613213). Genetic and pharmacologic inhibition of CYB5R3
increases NO bioactivity in small arteries. Straub et al. (2012)
concluded that their data revealed a mechanism by which the regulation
of the intracellular hemoglobin alpha oxidation state controls NOS
signaling in nonerythroid cells. The authors suggested that this model
may be relevant to heme-containing globins in a broad range of
NOS-containing somatic cells.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a Japanese study of 100 patients with essential hypertension (145500)
and 123 patients with normal blood pressure, Nakayama et al. (1997)
found that the distribution of allele frequencies for the CA repeat in
the NOS3 gene was not significantly different between the 2 groups.
However, comparing the allele frequencies in the hypertensive group
without left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) and the normotensive group,
the overall distributions were significantly different (p = 0.019). The
33-repeat allele was found more frequently in the hypertensive group
without LVH than in the normotensive group.

Bonnardeaux et al. (1995) found that the highly polymorphic (CA)n
repeats in intron 13 and 2 biallelic markers in intron 18 of the NOS3
gene are not associated with essential hypertension. Wang et al. (1996)
studied a marker closer to the 5-prime end of the NOS3 gene, the 27-bp
repeat in intron 4, in relation to coronary artery disease. They
identified 2 alleles: a common larger allele (allele frequency, 0.830)
and a smaller rare allele (0.170). The larger allele had 5 tandem 27-bp
repeats. The smaller allele had only 4 repeats that were apparently
missing the third repeat judging by minor a difference in sequence. The
distribution of the genotypes appeared to be in Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium and the polymorphism was inherited in a simple mendelian
fashion. Wang et al. (1996) found from study of 549 subjects with and
153 without coronary artery disease that in current and ex-cigarette
smokers, but not nonsmokers, there was a significant excess of
homozygotes for the rare allele in patients with severely stenosed
arteries, compared with those with no mild stenosis. This genotype was
also associated with a history of myocardial infarction. The authors
noted that, since endothelial-dependent vasodilatation is mediated by
release of nitric oxide formed by constitutively expressed endothelial
nitric oxide synthase, the smoking-dependent excess coronary risk in
homozygotes is consistent with a predisposition to endothelial
dysfunction.

Coronary spasm plays an important role in the pathogenesis not only of
variant angina but also of ischemic heart disease in general. However,
the prevalence of coronary spasm appears to be higher in Japanese than
in Caucasians (Bertrand et al., 1982; Yasue and Kugiyama, 1990),
suggesting that genetic factors may be involved in its pathogenesis.
Endothelial-derived nitric oxide has been implicated in the control of
vascular tone. Kugiyama et al. (1997) and Motoyama et al. (1997) showed
that basal acetylcholine-stimulated and flow-dependent nitric oxide
activities are decreased in both coronary and brachial arteries of
patients with coronary spasm. Yoshimura et al. (1998) identified a
glu298-to-asp variant (E298D; 163729.0001) in exon 7 of the NOS3 gene
that was more frequent in patients with coronary spasm. In studies of an
elderly population in Australia, Liyou et al. (1998) could find no
association of the E298D variant with coronary artery disease.

Nakayama et al. (1999) reported that a -786T-C mutation (163729.0002) in
the promoter region of the eNOS gene reduced transcription of the gene
and was strongly associated with coronary spastic angina and myocardial
infarction. To elucidate the molecular mechanism for the reduced eNOS
gene transcription, Miyamoto et al. (2000) purified a protein that
specifically binds to the mutant allele in nuclear extracts from HeLa
cells. The purified protein was identical to replication protein A1
(RPA1; 179835), known as a single-stranded DNA-binding protein essential
for DNA repair, replication, and recombination. In human umbilical vein
endothelial cells, inhibition of RPA1 expression using antisense
oligonucleotides restored transcription driven by the mutated promoter
sequence, whereas overexpression of RPA1 further reduced it. Serum
nitrite/nitrate levels among individuals carrying the -786T-C mutation
were significantly lower than among those without the mutation. The
authors concluded that RPA1 apparently functions as a repressor protein
in the -786T-C mutation-related reduction of eNOS gene transcription
associated with the development of coronary artery disease.

Pregnancy-induced hypertension (see 189800) may be regarded as a
manifestation of endothelial cell dysfunction. Constitutive nitric oxide
production in endothelial cells increases during pregnancy and
contributes to vasodilatation and blunting of vasopressor response. In
women developing pregnancy-induced hypertension, NO generation is
inappropriately low, and administration of an NO donor improves flow in
the uterine artery in normal early pregnancy and in women at high risk
of developing disease. Yallampalli and Garfield (1993) and others had
observed that inhibition of NO synthesis in rats during pregnancy
produces hypertension, proteinuria, thrombocytopenia, and fetal growth
retardation. These considerations prompted Arngrimsson et al. (1997) to
study linkage to the NOS3 gene in affected sisters and in multiplex
families. A lod score of 3.36 was obtained for D7S505 when a
best-fitting model derived from genetic epidemiologic data was used, and
lod scores of 2.54 to 4.03 were obtained when various other genetic
models were used. The transmission/disequilibrium test (TDT), a
model-free estimate of linkage, showed strongest association and linkage
with a microsatellite within intron 13 of the NOS3 gene (P = 0.005).

Lewis et al. (1999) were unable to detect linkage of preeclampsia to the
NOS3 region on 7q. They studied 2, separately ascertained, affected
sister-pairs collections, from Amsterdam and Cambridge (U.K.), that
contained 104 sibships. In the Cambridge Centre, a total of 21 extended
pedigrees suitable for conventional parametric linkage studies were also
identified. The reason for the discrepancy with the results of
Arngrimsson et al. (1997) was not clear. Lewis et al. (1999) concluded
that although abnormalities in NO production have been observed in
preeclampsia, the case for the NOS3 gene or its product, eNOS, having a
primary role in the pathophysiology of preeclampsia remained unproved.

Tempfer et al. (2001) performed a prospective case-control study of 105
women with idiopathic recurrent miscarriage and 91 healthy controls.
Using PCR, they identified the different alleles of a 27-basepair tandem
repeat polymorphism in intron 4 of the NOS3 gene. The wildtype allele
was identified in 329 of 392 chromosomes (frequency 0.84). The
polymorphic A allele was present on 63 chromosomes (frequency 0.16). The
genotype frequencies were as follows: 68% (B/B), 31% (A/B), and 0.5%
(A/A). The distribution of genotype frequencies was significantly
different between the study and in control groups for allele A/B
heterozygotes (36.7 vs 23.8%, P = 0.03, odds ratio 1.6, 95% CI 1.1-3.8).
Only 1 person in the study group was A/A.

Tanus-Santos et al. (2001) studied the distribution of genetic variants
of 3 clinically relevant NOS3 polymorphisms in 305 ethnically
well-characterized DNA samples (100 Caucasians, 100 African Americans,
and 105 Asians). They found marked interethnic differences in the
distribution of NOS3 variants, in the estimated haplotype frequency, and
in the association between variants. The asp298 variant (163729.0001)
was more common in Caucasians (34.5%) than in African Americans (15.5%)
or Asians (8.6%) (p less than 0.0001). The -786C variant (163729.0002)
was also more common in Caucasians (42.0%) than in African Americans
(17.5%) or Asians (13.8%) (p less than 0.0001). The 4a VNTR in intron 4
was more common in African Americans (26.5%) than in Caucasians (16.0%)
or Asians (12.9%) (p less than 0.0001). The most common predicted
haplotype in the 3 groups combined only wildtype variants. Asians had
the highest frequency of this haplotype (77% in Asians vs 46% in the
other groups). In Caucasians, the asp298 and -786C variants were
associated, and this haplotype was predicted to have a frequency of 24%.

Endothelial nitric oxide synthase plays a key role in the regulation of
normal function of the vessel wall. Heltianu et al. (2002) found a
relatively high frequency of 2 polymorphic variants of NOS3 in males
with Fabry disease (301500) and suggested that in addition to mutations
in the alpha-galactosidase A gene, variation in NOS3 may be significant
in determining the phenotype.

Casas et al. (2004) performed a metaanalysis of 26 case-control studies
evaluating the association between the NOS3 polymorphisms E298D,
-786T-C, and the intron 4 VNTR and ischemic heart disease (myocardial
infarction or angiographic coronary artery occlusion), involving 9,867
cases and 13,161 controls. They found that homozygosity for asp298 or
the intron 4 A allele was associated with an increased risk of ischemic
heart disease (OR, 1.31 and 1.34, respectively), but no significant
association was found with the -786C allele. Casas et al. (2004)
suggested that common genetic variations in the NOS3 gene contribute to
atherosclerosis susceptibility.

In 110 dizygotic white twin pairs, Persu et al. (2005) identified NOS3
haplotypes based on 3 polymorphisms, E298D, the intron 4 VNTR, and
-786T-C, and the intron 13 CA repeat. Haplotype analysis revealed a
significant association between NOS3 haplotypes and daytime ambulatory
diastolic and systolic blood pressure, with the latter remaining
significant after adjustment for multiple testing (p = 0.032) and mainly
attributable to 4 haplotypes accounting for 11.9% of all represented
haplotypes.

The therapeutic application of NO in high-altitude (HA) disorders, for
the improvement of oxygenation and vasodilation, prompted Ahsan et al.
(2005) to investigate the NOS3 gene with respect to high-altitude
adaptation. They screened 131 HA monks, 136 HA controls, and 170
lowlanders for the NOS3 894G-T (E298D; 163729.0001) polymorphism and for
the 4B/4A polymorphisms. NO levels were estimated and correlated with
the polymorphisms. The 3 groups were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for
the polymorphisms. Wildtype alleles G and 4B were significantly
overrepresented in the HA groups as compared with the lowlanders (p =
0.006 and p = 0.02, respectively). NO levels were highest in HA monks,
followed by HA controls, and then lowlanders (p less than 0.0001).
Combinations of the GG and BB genotypes were distributed significantly
more frequently in the HA monks (p less than 0.0001) and HA controls (p
= 0.0005) than in lowlanders. Ahsan et al. (2005) concluded that the
genotype combination of NOS3 wildtype homozygotes (GG, BB) occurs more
frequently in high-altitude groups that in lowlanders and contributes to
higher NO levels associated with high-altitude adaptation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Pharmacologic blockade of NO production with arginine analogs such as
L-nitroarginine or L-N-arginine methylester affects multiple isoforms of
nitric oxide synthase and so cannot distinguish their physiologic roles.
To study the role of endothelial NOS in vascular function, Huang et al.
(1995) disrupted the gene encoding endothelial NOS in mice by homologous
recombination. Homozygous mutant mice were found to be viable, fertile,
and indistinguishable from wildtype and heterozygous littermates in
appearance or routine behavior. Immunoreactive NOS3 protein was not
present, as shown by Western blot analysis of the brain, heart, lung,
and aorta. Endothelium-derived relaxing factor activity, as assayed by
acetylcholine-induced relaxation, was absent, and the NOS3 mutant mice
were hypertensive. Thus, the author concluded that NOS3 mediates basal
vasodilation. Responses to NOS blockade in the mutant mice suggested
that nonendothelial isoforms of NOS may be involved in maintaining blood
pressure. Huang et al. (1995) suggested that perhaps the
renin-angiotensin system and autonomic nervous system evolved to serve
primarily as a defense against hypotension, and diminution in their
activity is a poor buffer against hypertension. Alternatively, NOS3 may
be involved in establishing the baroreceptor set-point. The question of
whether subpopulations of humans suffering from hypertension have
defects in NOS3 expression awaits an answer from genetic analysis and
the development of more selective inhibitors of the NOS isoforms.

Snyder (1995) reviewed the significance of the findings of Huang et al.
(1995) in the NOS3 'knockout' mouse because so-called nNOS (NOS1;
163731) occurs in nerves that mediate penile erection and NOS inhibitors
block erection. It was thought that the null mutant nNOS mice would not
procreate. As it turned out, however, these animals do breed and appear
to be generally normal. However, they have dilated stomachs with a
constricted pyloric sphincter, and so provide a model for infantile
hypertrophic pyloric stenosis. The same mice are resistant to brain
damage caused by vascular strokes, confirming that nitric oxide is
crucial in mediating stroke damage. Further studies indicated that the
nNOS-negative mice are highly aggressive toward other males to the
extent that they will kill their wildtype littermates if left
unattended, and they display strikingly inappropriate and excessive
sexual behavior. Mice homozygous for a knockout in NOS2 (macrophage or
inducible NOS, iNOS) have markedly reduced defenses against
microorganisms such as Listeria and Leishmania and against the
proliferation of lymphoma tumor cells.

Champion et al. (1999) cited work indicating that NOS activity decreases
with age. To determine whether adenoviral-mediated overexpression of
NOS3 could enhance erectile responses, they administered a recombinant
adenovirus containing the NOS3 gene into the corpora cavernosum of the
aged rat. Adenoviral expression of the beta-galactosidase reporter gene
was observed in cavernosal tissue one day after the intracavernosal
administration of the beta-gal-marked adenovirus; one day after
administration of the construct containing NOS3, transgene expression
was confirmed by immunoblot staining of NOS3 protein, and cGMP levels
were increased. The increase in cavernosal pressure in response to
cavernosal nerve stimulation was enhanced in animals transfected with
NOS3, and erectile responses to acetylcholine and zaprinast were
enhanced. Champion et al. (1999) suggested that in vivo gene transfer of
NOS3, alone or in combination with a type V phosphodiesterase inhibitor,
may constitute a new therapeutic intervention for the treatment of
erectile dysfunction.

Steudel et al. (1998) investigated the effects of congenital deficiency
of NOS3 on the pulmonary vascular responses to hypoxia. The findings
suggested that congenital NOS3 deficiency in mice enhances hypoxic
pulmonary vascular remodeling and hypertension, and right ventricular
hypertrophy, and that NO production by NOS3 is vital to counterbalance
pulmonary vasoconstriction caused by chronic hypoxic stress.

To study the role of nitric oxide constitutively produced by NOS3 in the
regulation of blood pressure and vascular tone, Ohashi et al. (1998)
generated transgenic mice overexpressing bovine NOS3 in the vascular
wall using murine preproendothelin-1 (ET1) promoter. Blood pressure was
significantly lower in NOS3-overexpressing mice than in control
littermates. In the transgenic aorta, basal NO release and basal cGMP
levels were significantly increased. In contrast, relaxations of
transgenic aorta in response to acetylcholine and sodium nitroprusside
were significantly attenuated, and the reduced vascular reactivity was
associated with reduced response of cGMP elevation to these agents as
compared with control aortas. Thus, in addition to the essential role of
NOS3 in blood pressure regulation, tonic NO release by NOS3 in the
endothelium induces the reduced vascular reactivity to NO-mediated
vasodilatators, providing several insights into the pathogenesis of
nitrate tolerance.

In the heart, nitric oxide inhibits L-type calcium channels but
stimulates sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium release, leading to variable
effects on myocardial contractility. Barouch et al. (2002) demonstrated
that spatial confinement of specific nitric oxide synthase isoforms
regulates this process. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (NOS3)
localizes to caveolae, where compartmentalization with beta-adrenergic
receptors and L-type calcium channels allows nitric oxide to inhibit
beta-adrenergic-induced inotropy. Neuronal nitric oxide synthase (NOS1;
163731), however, is targeted to cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum. NO
stimulation of sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium release via the ryanodine
receptor (RYR2; 180902) in vitro, suggests that NOS1 has an opposite
facilitative effect on contractility. Barouch et al. (2002) demonstrated
that Nos1-deficient mice have suppressed inotropic response, whereas
Nos3-deficient mice have enhanced contractility, owing to corresponding
changes in sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium release. Both Nos1 -/- and
Nos3 -/- mice developed age-related hypertrophy, although only Nos3 -/-
mice were hypertensive. Nos1/3 -/- double knockout mice had suppressed
beta-adrenergic responses and an additive phenotype of marked
ventricular remodeling. Thus, NOS1 and NOS3 mediate independent, and in
some cases opposite, effects on cardiac structure and function.

Aicher et al. (2003) demonstrated that the impaired neovascularization
in mice lacking eNOS is related to a defect in progenitor cell
mobilization. Mice deficient in eNOS showed reduced vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF; 192240)-induced mobilization of endothelial
progenitor cells and increased mortality after myelosuppression.
Intravenous infusion of wildtype progenitor cells, but not bone marrow
transplantation, rescued the defective neovascularization of
Nos3-deficient mice in a model of hind-limb ischemia, suggesting that
progenitor mobilization from the bone marrow is impaired in Nos3-null
mice. Mechanistically, MMP9 (120361), required for stem cell
mobilization, was reduced in the bone marrow of Nos3-null mice. Aicher
et al. (2003) concluded that eNOS expressed by bone marrow stromal cells
influences recruitment of stem and progenitor cells. The authors
suggested that this may contribute to impaired regeneration processes in
ischemic heart disease patients, who are characterized by a reduced
systemic nitric oxide bioactivity.

Caveolin-3 (CAV3; 601253), a strong inhibitor of all NOS isoforms, is
expressed in sarcolemmal caveolae microdomains and binds to NOS3 in
cardiac myocytes and NOS1 in skeletal myocytes. Ohsawa et al. (2004)
characterized the biochemical and cardiac parameters of P104L
(601253.0001)-mutant Cav3 transgenic mice, a model of an autosomal
dominant limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD1C; 607801). Transgenic
mouse hearts demonstrated hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, enhanced basal
contractility, decreased left ventricular end diastolic diameter, and
loss and cytoplasmic mislocalization of Cav3 protein. Cardiac muscle
showed activation of NOS3 catalytic activity without increased
expression of all NOS isoforms. Ohsawa et al. (2004) suggested that a
moderate increase in NOS3 activity associated with loss of Cav3 may
result in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Bivalacqua et al. (2004) studied the contribution of RhoA (AHRA;
165390)/Rho kinase (ROCK1; 601702) signaling to erectile dysfunction in
streptozotocin (STZ) diabetic rats. Rho kinase and eNOS colocalized in
the endothelium of corpus cavernosum, and RhoA and Rho kinase abundance
and Mypt1 (602021) phosphorylation were elevated in STZ diabetic rat
penis. In addition, eNOS protein expression, cavernosal constitutive NOS
activity, and cGMP levels were reduced in STZ diabetic rat penis.
Bivalacqua et al. (2004) introduced a dominant-negative RhoA mutant and
found that erectile responses in the STZ diabetic rats improved to
values similar to controls.

Longo et al. (2005) crossbred Nos3-null and wildtype mice to generate 2
types of heterozygous litters, one with a maternally derived mutation
that developed in a Nos3-deficient environment and the other with a
paternally derived mutation that developed in a uterine environment
similar to wildtype mice. In studies of the in vitro reactivity of
carotid and mesenteric artery segments of adult mice to vasoactive
agents, the maternally derived heterozygous mice had abnormal vascular
reactivity that was similar to that of homozygous knockout mice
completely lacking functional NOS3, whereas the paternally derived
heterozygous mice had normal vascular reactivity that was not different
from that of wildtype mice. Longo et al. (2005) stated that this was the
first direct evidence in support of a role for uterine environment in
determining vascular function in later life.

In a mouse model of sepsis, Connelly et al. (2005) observed a temporal
reduction in iNOS expression and activity in lipopolysaccharide-treated
Nos3-knockout mice as compared with wildtype mice, which was reflected
in a more stable hemodynamic profile in Nos3-null mice during
endotoxemia. In human umbilical vein cells, lipopolysaccharide led to
the activation of Nos3 through phosphoinositide 3-kinase (see 171833)-
and Akt/protein kinase B (164730)-dependent enzyme phosphorylation.
Connelly et al. (2005) concluded that NOS3 has a proinflammatory role in
the pathogenesis of sepsis, in which following initial NOS3 activation
the resultant NO acts as a costimulus for the expression of iNOS.

Liu et al. (2005) presented evidence suggesting a role for G
protein-coupled receptor kinase-2 (GRK2; 109635) in the regulation of NO
production and hepatic vascular dynamics in a rat model of liver
sinusoidal endothelial injury and portal hypertension induced by bile
duct ligation. Sinusoidal endothelial cells isolated from the affected
animals had increased levels of GRK2, reduced levels of phosphorylated
AKT and eNOS, and decreased levels of NO. Gene silencing of GRK2 using
siRNA in injured sinusoidal endothelial cells restored AKT activity and
resulted in increased NO production. Liu et al. (2005) also found that
heterozygous Grk2 mice had increased levels of phosphorylated Akt and
decreased portal hypertension in response to injury compared to wildtype
mice. Liu et al. (2005) proposed a mechanism in which upregulation of
GRK2 after endothelial cell injury directly inhibits phosphorylation of
AKT, leading to reduced activation of eNOS and decreased production of
NO, and resulting in portal hypertension.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CORONARY ARTERY SPASM 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
ALZHEIMER DISEASE, LATE-ONSET, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
HYPERTENSION, PREGNANCY-INDUCED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
HYPERTENSION RESISTANT TO CONVENTIONAL THERAPY, INCLUDED;;
ISCHEMIC HEART DISEASE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
ISCHEMIC STROKE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
NOS3, GLU298ASP

Yoshimura et al. (1998) found a glu298-to-asp (E298D) variant (dbSNP
rs1799983) in exon 7 of the NOS3 gene. In a study of 113 patients with
coronary spasm, in whom the diagnosis of coronary spasm was made by
intracoronary injection of acetylcholine, and 100 control subjects, they
found a significant difference in the distribution of the variant; 21.2%
of the coronary spasm group and 9.0% of the control group (p = 0.014 for
dominant effect) showed the variant. In an elderly population in
Australia, Liyou et al. (1998) could demonstrate no difference in the
distribution of the E298D alleles in relation to the presence of
coronary artery disease.

Cai et al. (1999) genotyped 763 white Australians undergoing coronary
angiography for the eNOS glu298-to-asp mutation resulting from an 894G-T
transition. The frequencies of the GG, TG, and TT genotypes were not
significantly different in men or women with or without coronary artery
disease. The mutation was also not associated with myocardial infarction
(MI) in males or females, or with the number of significantly stenosed
vessels. The T allele frequency (32.5%) was much greater than that
reported for the Japanese population (7.8% in controls and 10% in MI
patients). Hingorani et al. (1999) investigated the relationship between
the glu298-to-asp variant in atherosclerotic coronary artery disease,
using 2 independent case-controlled studies. In the first study, cases
consisted of 298 unrelated patients with positive coronary angiograms
and controls were 138 unrelated healthy individuals ascertained through
a population health screen. In the second study, the cases were 249
patients with recent MI and a further 183 unrelated controls. There was
an excess of homozygotes for the asp298 variant among patients with
angiographic coronary artery disease, and among patients with recent MI
when compared with their respective controls (35.9% vs 10.2% in the
first study, and 18.1% vs 8.7% in the second study). In comparison to
glu298 homozygotes, homozygosity for asp298 was associated with an odds
ratio of 4.2 (95% confidence interval, 2.3 to 7.9) for angiographic
coronary artery disease and 2.5 (95% confidence interval, 1.3 to 4.2)
for MI.

Dahiyat et al. (1999) found a significant association of late-onset
Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300) and homozygosity for the glu allele in a
study of 122 early-onset and 317 late-onset Alzheimer cases compared to
392 controls. This was independent of apoE status. The authors remarked
on the interaction of beta-amyloid with endothelial cells. In contrast,
Higuchi et al. (2000) studied 411 Japanese patients with sporadic AD and
2 groups of controls: 350 Japanese controls and 52 Caucasian controls.
They found no difference in the glu298-to-asp polymorphism between AD
patients and controls, even when stratifying for age of onset and
presence of the APOE E4 allele. However, they observed that the glu
allele frequency was significantly higher in Japanese controls than in
Caucasian controls, suggesting that the association reported by Dahiyat
et al. (1999) may be a function of race. Akomolafe et al. (2006) found
that the glu298 allele was significantly associated with AD in a group
of over 200 African American patients, but not among a similar number of
Caucasians. A metaanalysis of 12 previously published similar studies
showed a small effect of the glu/glu genotype on AD risk across all
studies (OR of 1.15), but also showed significant heterogeneity.
Akomolafe et al. (2006) noted that the GG genotype (corresponding to
glu/glu) is prevalent in the general population (0.33 to 0.87),
suggesting that by itself the polymorphism plays only a modest role in
the development of AD and likely interacts with other factors.

In a study of 35 patients with histories of placental abruption and 170
control subjects, Yoshimura et al. (2001) found that the frequency of
glu298-to-asp homozygotes and heterozygotes was higher in the placental
abruption group than in the control group (40% vs 14%; p less than
0.001).

Kobashi et al. (2001) found in a study in Japan that the frequency of
heterozygotes and homozygotes for asp298 in the NOS3 gene was
significantly higher in patients with hypertension in pregnancy (0.23)
(see 189800) than in controls (0.12) (p less than 0.01). Multivariate
analysis showed that a family history of hypertension, the TT genotype
of the angiotensinogen gene (AGT; 106150.0001), the GA+AA NOS3 genotype,
and a prepregnancy body mass index of more than 24 were independent
potent risk factors, after adjustment for maternal age and parity. The
odds ratios of these factors were 2.7, 2.3, 2.2, and 2.1, respectively.
The results suggested that the asp298 of NOS3 is a potent, independent
risk factor for hypertension in pregnancy.

In a study of 150 'coloured' South African patients, 50 with normal
pregnancies, 50 with severe preeclampsia, and 50 with abruptio
placentae, Hillermann et al. (2005) found that the combined frequency of
the GT and TT NOS3 variant genotypes was significantly higher in the
abruptio placentae group than in the control group (p = 0.006). Among
preeclamptic patients who subsequently developed abruptio placentae, the
T allele emerged as a major risk factor for the development of abruptio
placentae (p less than 0.0001); the T variant did not seem to affect the
risk of preeclampsia itself, however.

Jachymova et al. (2001) found a significantly higher frequency of T
alleles (related to the E298D polymorphism) in hypertensives (see
145500) as compared to normotensives. Significant association was found
in patients showing resistance to conventional antihypertensive therapy.
In well-controlled hypertensives the tendency to a higher frequency of T
alleles was observed, but this did not reach statistical significance.
The presence of the T allele was thought to be predictive of the
patients' therapeutic response.

In a metaanalysis of 14 case-control studies evaluating the association
between E298D and ischemic heart disease (myocardial infarction or
angiographic coronary artery occlusion) involving 6,036 cases and 6,106
controls, Casas et al. (2004) found that homozygosity for asp298 was
associated with an increased risk of ischemic heart disease (OR, 1.31).

Berger et al. (2007) performed 2 large case-control studies involving
1,901 hospitalized stroke patients and 1,747 regional population
controls and found that E298D was significantly associated with ischemic
stroke (601367) independent of age, gender, hypertension, diabetes, and
hypercholesterolemia.

.0002
CORONARY ARTERY SPASM 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
NOS3, -786T-C

Nakayama et al. (1999) searched for possible mutations in the
endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene in patients with coronary spasm.
They found evidence of 3 linked mutations in the 5-prime flanking region
of the eNOS gene, among them a -786T-C transition. The incidence of
these alleles was significantly greater in 174 patients with coronary
artery spasm studied than in 161 controls. Multiple logistic regression
analysis with forward stepwise selection using the environmental risk
factors and the eNOS gene variant revealed that the most predictive
independent risk factor for coronary spasm was the mutant allele. As
assessed by luciferase reporter gene assays, the -786T-C mutation
resulted in a significant reduction of eNOS gene promoter activity,
whereas neither of the other mutations had any effect.

REFERENCE 1. Ahsan, A.; Norboo, T.; Baig, M. A.; Pasha, M. A. Q.: Simultaneous
selection of the wild-type genotypes of the G894T and 4B/4A polymorphisms
of NOS3 associate with high-altitude adaptation. Ann. Hum. Genet. 69:
260-267, 2005.

2. Aicher, A.; Heeschen, C.; Mildner-Rihm, C.; Urbich, C.; Ihling,
C.; Technau-Ihling, K.; Zeiher, A. M.; Dimmeler, S.: Essential role
of endothelial nitric oxide synthase for mobilization of stem and
progenitor cells. Nature Med. 9: 1370-1376, 2003. Note: Erratum:
Nature Med. 10: 999 only, 2004.

3. Akomolafe, A.; Lunetta, K. L.; Erlich, P. M.; Cupples, L. A.; Baldwin,
C. T.; Huyck, M.; Green, R. C.; Farrer, L. A.: Genetic association
between endothelial nitric oxide synthase and Alzheimer disease. Clin.
Genet. 70: 49-56, 2006.

4. Arngrimsson, R.; Hayward, C.; Nadaud, S.; Baldursdottir, A.; Walker,
J. J.; Liston, W. A.; Bjarnadottir, R. I.; Brock, D. J. H.; Geirsson,
R. T.; Connor, J. M.; Soubrier, F.: Evidence for a familial pregnancy-induced
hypertension locus in the eNOS-gene region. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61:
354-362, 1997.

5. Barouch, L. A.; Harrison, R. W.; Skaf, M. W.; Rosas, G. O.; Cappola,
T. P.; Kobeissi, Z. A.; Hobai, I. A.; Lemmon, C. A.; Burnett, A. L.;
O'Rourke, B.; Rodriguez, E. R.; Huang, P. L.; Lima, J. A. C.; Berkowitz,
D. E.; Hare, J. M.: Nitric oxide regulates the heart by spatial confinement
of nitric oxide synthase isoforms. Nature 416: 337-340, 2002.

6. Berger, K.; Stogbauer, F.; Stoll, M.; Wellmann, J.; Huge, A.; Cheng,
S.; Kessler, C.; John, U.; Assmann, G.; Ringelstein, E. B.; Funke,
H.: The glu298asp polymorphism in the nitric oxide synthase 3 gene
is associated with the risk of ischemic stroke in two large independent
case-control studies. Hum. Genet. 121: 169-178, 2007.

7. Bertrand, M. E.; LaBlanche, J. M.; Tilmant, P. Y.; Thieuleux, F.
A.; Delforge, M. R.; Carre, A. G.; Asseman, P.; Berzin, B.; Libersa,
C.; Laurent, J. M.: Frequency of provoked coronary arterial spasm
in 1089 consecutive patients undergoing coronary arteriography. Circulation 65:
1299-1306, 1982.

8. Bivalacqua, T. J.; Champion, H. C.; Usta, M. F.; Cellek, S.; Chitaley,
K.; Webb, R. C.; Lewis, R. L.; Mills, T. M.; Hellstrom, W. J. G.;
Kadowitz, P. J.: RhoA/Rho-kinase suppresses endothelial nitric oxide
synthase in the penis: a mechanism for diabetes-associated erectile
dysfunction. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 9121-9126, 2004.

9. Bonnardeaux, A.; Nadaud, S.; Charru, A.; Jeunemaitre, X.; Corvol,
P.; Soubrier, F.: Lack of evidence for linkage of the endothelial
cell nitric oxide synthase gene to essential hypertension. Circulation 91:
96-102, 1995.

10. Cai, H.; Wilcken, D. E. L.; Wang, X. L.: The glu298-asp (894G-T)
mutation at exon 7 of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene and
coronary artery disease. J. Molec. Med. 77: 511-514, 1999.

11. Casas, J. P.; Bautista, L. E.; Humphries, S. E.; Hingorani, A.
D.: Endothelial nitric oxide synthase genotype and ischemic heart
disease: meta-analysis of 26 studies involving 23028 subjects. Circulation 109:
1359-1365, 2004.

12. Champion, H. C.; Bivalacqua, T. J.; Hyman, A. L.; Ignarro, L.
J.; Hellstrom, W. J. G.; Kadowitz, P. J.: Gene transfer of endothelial
nitric oxide synthase to the penis augments erectile responses in
the aged rat. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 11648-11652, 1999.

13. Chen, C.-A.; Wang, T.-Y.; Varadharaj, S.; Reyes, L. A.; Hemann,
C.; Talukder, M. A. H.; Chen, Y.-R.; Druhan, L. J.; Zweier, J. L.
: S-glutathionylation uncouples eNOS and regulates its cellular and
vascular function. Nature 468: 1115-1118, 2010.

14. Connelly, L.; Madhani, M.; Hobbs, A. J.: Resistance to endotoxic
shock in endothelial nitric-oxide synthase (eNOS) knock-out mice:
a pro-inflammatory role for eNOS-derived NO in vivo. J. Biol. Chem. 280:
10040-10046, 2005.

15. Dahiyat, M.; Cumming, A.; Harrington, C.; Wischik, C.; Xuereb,
J.; Corrigan, F.; Breen, G.; Shaw, D.; St. Clair, D.: Association
between Alzheimer's disease and the NOS3 gene. Ann. Neurol. 46:
664-667, 1999.

16. Dimmeler, S.; Fleming, I.; Fisslthaler, B.; Hermann, C.; Busse,
R.; Zeiher, A. M.: Activation of nitric oxide synthase in endothelial
cells by Akt-dependent phosphorylation. Nature 399: 601-605, 1999.

17. Fish, J. E.; Matouk, C. C.; Yeboah, E.; Bevan, S. C.; Khan, M.;
Patil, K.; Ohh, M.; Marsden, P. A.: Hypoxia-inducible expression
of a natural cis-antisense transcript inhibits endothelial nitric-oxide
synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 282: 15652-15666, 2007.

18. Fulton, D.; Gratton, J.-P.; McCabe, T. J.; Fontana, J.; Fujio,
Y.; Walsh, K.; Franke, T. F.; Papapetropoulos, A.; Sessa, W. C.:
Regulation of endothelium-derived nitric oxide production by the protein
kinase Akt. Nature 399: 597-601, 1999. Note: Erratum: Nature 400:
792 only, 1999.

19. Furchgott, R. F.; Zawadzki, J. V.: The obligatory role of endothelial
cells in the relaxation of arterial smooth muscle by acetylcholine. Nature 288:
373-376, 1980.

20. Gregg, A. R.; Lee, C. G. L.; Herman, G. E.; O'Brien, W. E.: Endothelial
nitric oxide synthase (Nos3) maps to the proximal region of mouse
chromosome 5. Mammalian Genome 6: 152, 1995.

21. Heltianu, C.; Costache, G.; Azibi, K.; Poenaru, L.; Simionescu,
M.: Endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene polymorphisms in Fabry's
disease. Clin. Genet. 61: 423-429, 2002.

22. Higuchi, S.; Ohta, S.; Matsushita, S.; Matsui, T.; Yuzuriha, T.;
Urakami, K.; Arai, H.: NOS3 polymorphism not associated with Alzheimer's
disease in Japanese. (Letter) Ann. Neurol. 48: 685 only, 2000.

23. Hillermann, R.; Carelse, K.; Gebhardt, G. S.: The glu29-to-asp
variant of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene is associated
with an increased risk for abruptio placentae in pre-eclampsia. J.
Hum. Genet. 50: 415-419, 2005.

24. Hingorani, A. D.; Liang, C. F.; Fatibene, J.; Lyon, A.; Monteith,
S.; Parsons, A.; Haydock, S.; Hopper, R. V.; Stephens, N. G.; O'Shaughnessy,
K. M.; Brown, M. J.: A common variant of the endothelial nitric oxide
synthase (glu298-asp) is a major risk factor for coronary artery disease
in the UK. Circulation 100: 1515-1520, 1999.

25. Huang, P. L.; Huang, Z.; Mashimo, H.; Bloch, K. D.; Moskowitz,
M. A.; Bevan, J. A.; Fishman, M. C.: Hypertension in mice lacking
the gene for endothelial nitric oxide synthase. Nature 377: 239-242,
1995.

26. Jachymova, M.; Horky, K.; Bultas, J.; Kozich, V.; Jindra, A.;
Peleska, J.; Martasek, P.: Association of the glu298-to-asp polymorphism
in the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene with essential hypertension
resistant to conventional therapy. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 284:
426-430, 2001.

27. Janssens, S. P.; Shimouchi, A.; Quertermous, T.; Bloch, D. B.;
Bloch, K. D.: Cloning and expression of a cDNA encoding human endothelium-derived
relaxing factor/nitric oxide synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 14519-14522,
1992. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem. 267: 22694 only, 1992.

28. Ji, Y.; Ferracci, G.; Warley, A.; Ward, M.; Leung, K.-Y.; Samsuddin,
S.; Leveque, C.; Queen, L.; Reebye, V.; Pal, P.; Gkaliagkousi, E.;
Seager, M.; Ferro, A.: Beta-actin regulates platelet nitric oxide
synthase 3 activity through interaction with heat shock protein 90. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 8839-8844, 2007.

29. Kobashi, G.; Yamada, H.; Ohta, K.; Kato, E.-H.; Ebina, Y.; Fujimoto,
S.: Endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene (NOS3) variant and hypertension
in pregnancy. Am. J. Med. Genet. 103: 241-244, 2001.

30. Kugiyama, K.; Ohgushi, M.; Motoyama, T.; Sugiyama, S.; Ogawa,
H.; Yoshimura, M.; Inobe, Y.; Hirashima, O.; Kawano, H.; Soejima,
H.; Yasue, H.: Nitric oxide-mediated flow-dependent dilation is impaired
in coronary arteries in patients with coronary spastic angina. J.
Am. Coll. Cardiol. 30: 920-926, 1997.

31. Lewis, I.; Lachmeijer, G.; Downing, S.; Dekker, G.; Glazebrook,
C.; Clayton, D.; Morris, N. H.; O'Shaughnessy, K. M.: Failure to
detect linkage of preeclampsia to the region of the NOS3 locus on
chromosome 7q. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64: 310-313, 1999.

32. Lim, K.-H.; Ancrile, B. B.; Kashatus, D. F.; Counter, C. M.:
Tumour maintenance is mediated by eNOS. Nature 452: 646-649, 2008.

33. Liu, S.; Premont, R. T.; Kontos, C. D.; Zhu, S.; Rockey, D. C.
: A crucial role for GRK2 in regulation of endothelial cell nitric
oxide synthase function in portal hypertension. Nature Med. 11:
952-958, 2005.

34. Liyou, N.; Simons, L.; Friedlander, Y.; Simons, J.; McCallum,
J.; O'Shaughnessy, K.; Davis, D.; Johnson, A.: Coronary artery disease
is not associated with the E298D variant of the constitutive, endothelial
nitric oxide synthase gene. (Letter) Clin. Genet. 54: 528-529, 1998.

35. Longo, M.; Jain, V.; Vedernikov, Y. P.; Bukowski, R.; Garfield,
R. E.; Hankins, G. D.; Anderson, G. D.; Saade, G. R.: Fetal origins
of adult vascular dysfunction in mice lacking endothelial nitric oxide
synthase. Am. J. Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 288: R1114-R1121,
2005.

36. Marsden, P. A.; Heng, H. H. Q.; Scherer, S. W.; Stewart, R. J.;
Hall, A. V.; Shi, X.-M.; Tsui, L.-C.; Schappert, K. T.: Structure
and chromosomal localization of the human constitutive endothelial
nitric oxide synthase gene. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 17478-17488, 1993.

37. Marsden, P. A.; Schappert, K. T.; Chen, H. S.; Flowers, M.; Sundell,
C. L.; Wilcox, J. N.; Lamas, S.; Michel, T.: Molecular cloning and
characterization of human endothelial nitric oxide synthase. FEBS
Lett. 307: 287-293, 1992.

38. Miyamoto, Y.; Saito, Y.; Nakayama, M.; Shimasaki, Y.; Yoshimura,
T.; Yoshimura, M.; Harada, M.; Kajiyama, N.; Kishimoto, I.; Kuwahara,
K.; Hino, J.; Ogawa, E.; Hamanaka, I.; Kamitani, S.; Takahashi, N.;
Kawakami, R.; Kangawa, K.; Yasue, H.; Nakao, K.: Replication protein
A1 reduces transcription of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase
gene containing a -786T-C mutation associated with coronary spastic
angina. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 2629-2637, 2000.

39. Motoyama, T.; Kawano, H.; Kugiyama, K.; Okumura, K.; Ohgushi,
M.; Yoshimura, M.; Hirashima, O.; Yasue, H.: Flow-mediated, endothelium-dependent
dilatation of the brachial arteries is impaired in patients with coronary
spastic angina. Am. Heart J. 133: 263-267, 1997.

40. Nakayama, M.; Yasue, H.; Yoshimura, M.; Shimasaki, Y.; Kugiyama,
K.; Ogawa, H.; Motoyama, T.; Saito, Y.; Ogawa, Y.; Miyamoto, Y.; Nakao,
K.: T(-786)-C mutation in the 5-prime-flanking region of the endothelial
nitric oxide synthase gene is associated with coronary spasm. Circulation 99:
2864-2870, 1999.

41. Nakayama, T.; Soma, M.; Takahashi, Y.; Izumi, Y.; Kanmatsuse,
K.; Esumi, M.: Association analysis of CA repeat polymorphism of
the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene with essential hypertension
in Japanese. Clin. Genet. 51: 26-30, 1997.

42. Napolitano, M.; Miceli, F.; Calce, A.; Vacca, A.; Gulino, A.;
Apa, R.; Lanzone, A.: Expression and relationship between endothelin-1
messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) and inducible/endothelial nitric
oxide synthase mRNA isoforms from normal and preeclamptic placentas. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 2318-2323, 2000.

43. Nisoli, E.; Clementi, E.; Paolucci, C.; Cozzi, V.; Tonello, C.;
Sciorati, C.; Bracale, R.; Valerio, A.; Francolini, M.; Moncada, S.;
Carruba, M. O.: Mitochondrial biogenesis in mammals: the role of
endogenous nitric oxide. Science 299: 896-899, 2003.

44. Nisoli, E.; Tonello, C.; Cardile, A.; Cozzi, V.; Bracale, R.;
Tedesco, L.; Falcone, S.; Valerio, A.; Cantoni, O.; Clementi, E.;
Moncada, S.; Carruba, M. O.: Calorie restriction promotes mitochondrial
biogenesis by inducing the expression of eNOS. Science 310: 314-317,
2005.

45. Ohashi, Y.; Kawashima, S.; Hirata, K.; Yamashita, T.; Ishida,
T.; Inoue, N.; Sakoda, T.; Kurihara, H.; Yazaki, Y.; Yokoyama, M.
: Hypotension and reduced nitric oxide-elicited vasorelaxation in
transgenic mice overexpressing endothelial nitric oxide synthase. J.
Clin. Invest. 102: 2061-2071, 1998.

46. Ohsawa, Y.; Toko, H.; Katsura, M.; Morimoto, K.; Yamada, H.; Ichikawa,
Y.; Murakami, T.; Ohkuma, S.; Komuro, I.; Sunada, Y.: Overexpression
of P104L mutant caveolin-3 in mice develops hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
with enhanced contractility in association with increased endothelial
nitric oxide synthase activity. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 151-157,
2004.

47. Persu, A.; Stoenoiu, M. S.; Messiaen, T.; Davila, S.; Robino,
C.; El-Khattabi, O.; Mourad, M.; Horie, S.; Feron, O.; Balligand,
J.-L.; Wattiez, R.; Pirson, Y.; Chaveau, D.; Lens, X. M.; Devuyst,
O.: Modifier effect of ENOS in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney
disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 229-241, 2002.

48. Persu, A.; Vinck, W. J.; El Khattabi, O.; Janssen, R. G. J. H.;
Paulussen, A. D. C.; Devuyst, O.; Vlietinck, R.; Fagard, R. H.: Influence
of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene on conventional and
ambulatory blood pressure: sib-pair analysis and haplotype study. J.
Hypertens. 23: 759-765, 2005.

49. Raman, C. S.; Li, H.; Martasak, P.; Kral, V.; Masters, B. S. S.;
Poulos, T. L.: Crystal structure of constitutive endothelial nitric
oxide synthase: a paradigm for pterin function involving a novel metal
center. Cell 95: 939-950, 1998.

50. Rapoport, R. M.; Murad, F.: Agonist-induced endothelium-dependent
relaxation in rat thoracic aorta may be mediated through CGMP. Circ.
Res. 52: 352-357, 1983.

51. Robb, G. B.; Carson, A. R.; Tai, S. C.; Fish, J. E.; Singh, S.;
Yamada, T.; Scherer, S. W.; Nakabayashi, K.; Marsden, P. A.: Post-transcriptional
regulation of endothelial nitric-oxide synthase by an overlapping
antisense mRNA transcript. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 37982-37996, 2004.

52. Robinson, L. J.; Weremowicz, S.; Morton, C. C.; Michel, T.: Isolation
and chromosomal localization of the human endothelial nitric oxide
synthase (NOS3) gene. Genomics 19: 350-357, 1994.

53. Simoncini, T.; Mannella, P.; Fornari, L.; Caruso, A.; Varone,
G.; Garibaldi , S.; Genazzani, A. R.: Tibolone activates nitric oxide
synthesis in human endothelial cells. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89:
4594-4600, 2004.

54. Snyder, S. H.: No endothelial NO. Nature 377: 196-197, 1995.

55. Steudel, W.; Scherrer-Crosbie, M.; Bloch, K. D.; Weimann, J.;
Huang, P. L.; Jones, R. C.; Picard, M. H.; Zapol, W. M.: Sustained
pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular hypertrophy after chronic
hypoxia in mice with congenital deficiency of nitric oxide synthase
3. J. Clin. Invest. 101: 2468-2477, 1998.

56. Straub, A. C.; Lohman, A. W.; Billaud, M.; Johnstone, S. R.; Dwyer,
S. T.; Lee, M. Y.; Bortz, P. S.; Best, A. K.; Columbus, L.; Gaston,
B.; Isakson, B. E.: Endothelial cell expression of haemoglobin alpha
regulates nitric oxide signalling. Nature 491: 473-477, 2012.

57. Tanus-Santos, J. E.; Desai, M.; Flockhart, D. A.: Effects of
ethnicity on the distribution of clinically relevant endothelial nitric
oxide variants. Pharmacogenetics 11: 719-725, 2001.

58. Tempfer, C.; Unfried, G.; Zeillinger, R.; Hefler, L.; Nagele,
F.; Huber, J. C.: Endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene polymorphism
in women with idiopathic recurrent miscarriage. Hum. Reprod. 16:
1644-1647, 2001.

59. Wang, X. L.; Sim, A. S.; Badenhop, R. F.; McCredie, R. M.; Wilcken,
D. E. L.: A smoking-dependent risk of coronary artery disease associated
with a polymorphism of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase gene. Nature
Med. 2: 41-45, 1996.

60. Yallampalli, C.; Garfield, R. E.: Inhibition of nitric oxide
synthesis in rats during pregnancy produces signs similar to those
of preeclampsia. Am. J. Obstet. Gynec. 169: 1316-1320, 1993.

61. Yasue, H.; Kugiyama, K.: Coronary artery spasm: Japanese view. Coron.
Artery Dis. 1: 668-673, 1990.

62. Yoshimura, M.; Yasue, H.; Nakayama, M.; Shimasaki, Y.; Sumida,
H.; Sugiyama, S.; Kugiyama, K.; Ogawa, H.; Ogawa, Y.; Saito, Y.; Miyamoto,
Y.; Nakao, K.: A missense glu298asp variant in the endothelial nitric
oxide synthase gene is associated with coronary spasm in the Japanese. Hum.
Genet. 103: 65-69, 1998.

63. Yoshimura, T.; Yoshimura, M.; Tabata, A.; Yasue, H.; Okamura,
H.: The missense glu298-to-asp variant of the endothelial nitric
oxide synthase gene is strongly associated with placental abruption. Hum.
Genet. 108: 181-183, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/14/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/29/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/22/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/6/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/16/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/16/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/21/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/25/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/17/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/7/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/7/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/25/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/4/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/19/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/19/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/13/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/27/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/29/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/21/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/18/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/9/2002
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/14/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/8/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/19/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/5/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/29/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/10/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/6/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/25/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/29/2000
Orest Hurko - updated: 12/2/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/21/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/23/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/3/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/16/1999
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 2/4/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/18/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/19/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/26/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/24/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/24/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/14/1992

EDITED tpirozzi: 10/01/2013
carol: 4/4/2013
alopez: 12/17/2012
terry: 12/14/2012
alopez: 8/3/2012
carol: 6/7/2012
terry: 5/3/2011
terry: 4/29/2011
alopez: 3/31/2011
terry: 3/29/2011
wwang: 8/6/2010
wwang: 6/28/2010
terry: 6/22/2010
alopez: 1/13/2010
mgross: 5/15/2009
terry: 5/6/2009
joanna: 4/10/2009
alopez: 5/13/2008
terry: 4/16/2008
mgross: 1/25/2008
terry: 1/16/2008
wwang: 8/27/2007
terry: 8/21/2007
wwang: 9/1/2006
ckniffin: 8/25/2006
alopez: 3/28/2006
wwang: 3/9/2006
terry: 2/17/2006
carol: 12/7/2005
terry: 12/7/2005
wwang: 11/7/2005
alopez: 10/26/2005
terry: 10/25/2005
carol: 10/11/2005
ckniffin: 10/4/2005
wwang: 9/2/2005
wwang: 8/25/2005
terry: 8/19/2005
wwang: 7/25/2005
terry: 7/19/2005
carol: 5/25/2005
joanna: 5/25/2005
wwang: 5/11/2005
wwang: 4/13/2005
mgross: 10/27/2004
carol: 7/6/2004
alopez: 11/7/2003
cwells: 11/5/2003
alopez: 10/29/2003
terry: 10/29/2003
alopez: 2/24/2003
terry: 2/21/2003
alopez: 1/15/2003
terry: 1/14/2003
cwells: 9/18/2002
alopez: 9/9/2002
carol: 6/17/2002
ckniffin: 6/14/2002
alopez: 4/8/2002
cwells: 4/5/2002
cwells: 3/21/2002
terry: 3/19/2002
carol: 1/4/2002
carol: 11/13/2001
mcapotos: 10/15/2001
mcapotos: 10/10/2001
terry: 10/5/2001
cwells: 9/14/2001
cwells: 8/30/2001
terry: 8/29/2001
mgross: 5/10/2001
mcapotos: 4/16/2001
terry: 4/6/2001
mcapotos: 2/1/2001
mcapotos: 1/25/2001
alopez: 6/1/2000
terry: 5/29/2000
carol: 12/3/1999
terry: 12/2/1999
carol: 10/22/1999
terry: 10/21/1999
carol: 9/20/1999
alopez: 6/23/1999
mgross: 3/17/1999
carol: 3/10/1999
terry: 3/3/1999
carol: 2/16/1999
terry: 2/16/1999
carol: 2/4/1999
carol: 1/13/1999
terry: 12/18/1998
dkim: 9/10/1998
carol: 8/24/1998
terry: 8/19/1998
carol: 6/30/1998
terry: 6/26/1998
terry: 9/30/1997
terry: 9/24/1997
terry: 4/24/1997
terry: 4/21/1997
terry: 2/6/1996
mark: 1/5/1996
terry: 1/3/1996
terry: 10/30/1995
mark: 9/20/1995
carol: 2/15/1994
carol: 9/21/1993
carol: 9/13/1993
carol: 1/11/1993

608933	TITLE *608933 ENDONUCLEASE VIII-LIKE 2; NEIL2
;;NEI2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NEIL2 belongs to a class of DNA glycosylases homologous to the bacterial
Fpg/Nei family. These glycosylases initiate the first step in base
excision repair by cleaving bases damaged by reactive oxygen species and
introducing a DNA strand break via the associated lyase reaction
(Bandaru et al., 2002)

CLONING

By searching a database for sequences similar to the Arabidopsis DNA
glycosylase Fpg, Bandaru et al. (2002) identified NEIL2. Bacterial
Fpg/Nei proteins contain 2 structural domains: an N-terminal 2-layered
beta sandwich and a C-terminal 4-helix bundle, which includes a
helix-2-turns-helix (H2TH) motif and a zinc finger. The deduced
332-amino acid human NEIL2 protein has conserved residues in 6 highly
conserved regions that span both structural domains of the bacterial
Fpg/Nei proteins, but it has an unusual CHCC zinc finger.

Using Northern blot analysis, Hazra et al. (2002) detected a 2.4-kb
NEIL2 transcript. Expression was highest in skeletal muscle and testis,
moderate in brain and heart, and low in all other tissues examined.
Analysis of NEIL2 expression in synchronized human diploid fibroblasts
indicated that, unlike expression of NEIL1 (608844), expression of NEIL2
is independent of the cell cycle. Epitope-tagged NEIL2 was expressed in
nuclei of transfected cells, although a small fraction was also observed
in the cytoplasm. The deduced NEIL2 protein has a calculated molecular
mass of 36.7 kD, but bacterially-expressed NEIL2 showed an apparent
molecular mass of 42 kD by SDS-PAGE.

GENE FUNCTION

Hazra et al. (2002) characterized recombinant NEIL2 following expression
in E. coli. The enzyme showed DNA glycosylase/abasic lyase activity,
primarily for excising oxidative products of cytosine, with highest
activity for 5-hydroxyuracil. NEIL2 showed lower activity for
5,6-dihydrouracil and 5-hydroxycytosine, and negligible or undetectable
activity with 8-oxoguanine, thymine glycol, 2-hydroxyadenine,
hypoxanthine, and xanthine. Hazra et al. (2002) concluded that NEIL2 is
involved in global genome repair, mainly for removing oxidative products
of cytosine.

Dou et al. (2003) found that both NEIL2 and NEIL1 bound 5-hydroxyuracil
contained within bubble DNA, contrasting strongly with NTH1 (602656) and
OGG1 (601982), which did not produce stable complexes with either
single-strand DNA or a DNA bubble. NEIL2 had much higher activity for
excising 5-hydroxyuracil in bubble DNA than with duplex or single-strand
DNA. NEIL2 could also excise 8-oxoguanine when it was placed inside a
bubble.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bandaru et al. (2002) determined that the NEIL2 gene contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Bandaru et al. (2002) mapped the NEIL2
gene to chromosome 8p23.1.

REFERENCE 1. Bandaru, V.; Sunkara, S.; Wallace, S. S.; Bond, J. P.: A novel
human DNA glycosylase that removes oxidative DNA damage and is homologous
to Escherichia coli endonuclease VIII. DNA Repair 1: 517-529, 2002.

2. Dou, H.; Mitra, S.; Hazra, T. K.: Repair of oxidized bases in
DNA bubble structures by human DNA glycosylases NEIL1 and NEIL2. J.
Biol. Chem. 278: 49679-49684, 2003.

3. Hazra, T. K.; Kow, Y. W.; Hatahet, Z.; Imhoff, B.; Boldogh, I.;
Mokkapati, S. K.; Mitra, S.; Izumi, T.: Identification and characterization
of a novel human DNA glycosylase for repair of cytosine-derived lesions. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 30417-30420, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/21/2004

EDITED mgross: 09/21/2004

607043	TITLE *607043 TRAF3-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2; TRAF3IP2
;;CHROMOSOME 6 OPEN READING FRAME 5; C6ORF5;;
NUCLEAR FACTOR KAPPA-B ACTIVATOR 1; ACT1;;
CONNECTION TO I-KAPPA-B KINASE AND STRESS-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE;
CIKS;;
CHROMOSOME 6 OPEN READING FRAME 4; C6ORF4;;
CHROMOSOME 6 OPEN READING FRAME 6; C6ORF6
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using mouse Nemo/Ikk-gamma (IKBKG; 300248) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid
screen, Leonardi et al. (2000) cloned CIKS from a human liver cDNA
library. The deduced 574-amino acid protein contains a C-terminal
leucine zipper. Northern blot analysis of multiple human tissues
indicated ubiquitous expression of a 2.5-kb transcript.

Li et al. (2000) cloned a cDNA encoding ACT1 from a cDNA library
constructed from embryonic kidney cells induced to display constitutive
activation of nuclear factor kappa-B (NFKB; see 164011). The deduced
574-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 60 kD and
contains a helix-loop-helix domain and a C-terminal coiled-coil domain.
The helix-loop-helix domain shares 35% identity with the
helix-loop-helix domain of upstream stimulatory factor-1 (USF1; 191523).
Northern blot analysis detected highest expression in thymus, kidney,
and placenta, moderate expression in heart, skeletal muscle, colon,
liver, lung, and small intestine, and low expression in brain, spleen,
and peripheral blood leukocytes.

By screening thymus, skeletal muscle, and fetal liver cDNA libraries,
Morelli et al. (2000) identified 3 isoforms of ACT1 that they designated
C6ORF4, C6ORF5, and C6ORF6. C6ORF4 encodes a deduced 575-amino acid
protein. C6ORF5 and C6ORF6 result from the skipping of exon 2 and are
differentiated by use of alternate polyadenylation signals, yielding
identical proteins of 566 amino acids. Northern blot analysis detected
5.0- and 2.5-kb transcripts in all tissues examined, with a weak 3.8-kb
transcript in heart, skeletal muscle, and pancreas.

GENE FUNCTION

Leonardi et al. (2000) verified the interaction between CIKS and
IKK-gamma by in vitro binding assays using recombinant proteins and by
coimmunoprecipitation of lysates of transfected HeLa cells or
untransfected Jurkat T-leukemic cells. IKK-alpha (CHUK; 600664) and
IKK-beta (IKBKB; 603258) also coimmunoprecipitated with CIKS. Using
truncation mutants, the authors localized the binding domain to the N
terminus of CIKS. HeLa cells transfected with increasing amounts of CIKS
showed dose-dependent activation of an Ig kappa-B luciferase reporter
plasmid, and the activation could be blocked by cotransfection with
IKK-gamma. Cotransfection of CIKS with kinase-deficient mutants of NIK
(MAP3K14; 604655), MEKK1 (MAP3K1: 600982), IKK-alpha, and IKK-beta
indicated that CIKS activates NFKB exclusively through an IKK-dependent
mechanism. Overexpressed CIKS also potently activated SAPK/JNK (MAPK8;
601158). Analysis of the binding activity of truncation mutants showed
that the C terminus of CIK is involved in SAPK/JNK activation, whereas
the N terminus is necessary and sufficient for kappa-B reporter
activation.

Using gel shift assays, Li et al. (2000) confirmed constitutive
activation of NFKB with transfection of ACT1 into human embryonic kidney
cells. They also found constitutive activation of JNK and IKK.
Disruption of the N-terminal helix-loop-helix domain of ACT1 completely
abolished the interaction between ACT1 and the IKK complex as well as
the activation of NFKB.

By mutation analysis, Pacifico et al. (2003) identified a sequence in
the 5-prime flanking region of human CIKS that was essential for basal
promoter activity in a canine kidney cell line. RT-PCR, Northern, and
Western blot analyses showed that various proinflammatory cytokines
upregulated CIKS expression in HeLa cells.

Using immunoprecipitation analysis, Qian et al. (2007) found that IL17
(603149) induced association of ACT1 with IL17RA (605461) in various
cell types. The ACT1-IL17RA interaction required the SEFIR domain of
IL17RA. Expression of Il17-dependent inflammation-related genes was
abolished in Act1-deficient mouse cells. Mice lacking Act1 had delayed
onset and lower severity of experimental allergic encephalomyelitis, as
well as limited colitis. Qian et al. (2007) concluded that ACT1 is
essential for IL17-dependent signaling in autoimmune and inflammatory
disease.

GENE STRUCTURE

Morelli et al. (2000) determined that the ACT1 gene contains 10 exons
and spans more than 50 kb. They also identified C6UAS, which overlaps
exon 2 and is transcribed in the antisense orientation from the
complementary strand of C6ORF4. C6UAS has no apparent open reading
frame, but Morelli et al. (2000) provided experimental evidence that it
has a regulatory function and can behave as an antisense RNA in the
control of C6ORF4 translation.

Pacifico et al. (2003) mapped the CIKS transcription start site and
found that the 5-prime flanking region was TATA-less, but it had
initiator, GC, and CAAT boxes.

MAPPING

Morelli et al. (2000) identified ACT1 within an EST clone that maps to
chromosome 6q21.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Ellinghaus et al. (2010) and Huffmeier et al. (2010) independently
identified association of a coding single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP),
dbSNP rs33980500 (607043.0001), in the TRAF3IP2 gene with psoriasis
susceptibility (PSORS13; 614070).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PSORIASIS SUSCEPTIBILITY 13
TRAF3IP2, ASP19ASN (dbSNP rs33980500)

In a case-control genomewide association study of psoriasis
susceptibility (PSORS13; 614070), Ellinghaus et al. (2010) identified a
coding SNP, dbSNP rs33980500, in exon 2 of the TRAF3IP2 gene. A C-to-T
transition results in substitution of asn for asp at codon 19 (D19N).
This SNP was significantly associated with risk for psoriasis vulgaris
(P = 1.24 x 10(-16)) and psoriatic arthritis (P = 4.57 x 10(-12)).

In an independent case-control genomewide association study, Huffmeier
et al. (2010) found significant association of dbSNP rs33980500 with
psoriatic arthritis in a subset of cases and controls (P = 1.13 x
10(-20), OR = 1.95). Functional assays showed reducing binding of this
TRAF3IP2 variant to TRAF6 (602355), suggesting altered modulation of
immunoregulatory signals through altered TRAF interactions as a novel
and shared pathway for psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis vulgaris.
Huffmeier et al. (2010) referred to the amino acid change correlated
with this SNP as ASP10ASN.

REFERENCE 1. Ellinghaus, E.; Ellinghaus, D.; Stuart, P. E.; Nair, R. P.; Debrus,
S.; Raelson, J. V.; Belouchi, M.; Fournier, H.; Reinhard, C.; Ding,
J.; Li, Y.; Tejasvi, T.; and 21 others: Genome-wide association
study identifies a psoriasis susceptibility locus at TRAF3IP2. Nature
Genet. 42: 991-995, 2010.

2. Huffmeier, U.; Uebe, S.; Ekici, A. B.; Bowes, J.; Giardina, E.;
Korendowych, E.; Juneblad, K.; Apel, M.; McManus, R.; Ho, P.; Bruce,
I. N.; Ryan, A. W.; and 18 others: Common variants at TRAF3IP2
are associated with susceptibility to psoriatic arthritis and psoriasis. Nature
Genet. 42: 996-999, 2010.

3. Leonardi, A.; Chariot, A.; Claudio, E.; Cunningham, K.; Siebenlist,
U.: CIKS, a connection to I-kappa-B kinase and stress-activated protein
kinase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 10494-10499, 2000.

4. Li, X.; Commane, M.; Nie, H.; Hua, X.; Chatterjee-Kishore, M.;
Wald, D.; Haag, M.; Stark, G. R.: Act1, an NF-kappa-B-activating
protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 10489-10493, 2000.

5. Morelli, C.; Magnanini, C.; Mungall, A. J.; Negrini, M.; Barbanti-Brodano,
G.: Cloning and characterization of two overlapping genes in a subregion
at 6q21 involved in replicative senescence and schizophrenia. Gene 252:
217-225, 2000.

6. Pacifico, F.; Barone, C.; Mellone, S.; Di Jeso, B.; Consiglio,
E.; Formisano, S.; Vito, P.; Leonardi, A.: Promoter identification
of CIKS, a novel NF-kappa-B activating gene, and regulation of its
expression. Gene 307: 99-109, 2003.

7. Qian, Y.; Liu, C.; Hartupee, J.; Altuntas, C. Z.; Gulen, M. F.;
Jane-wit, D.; Xiao, J.; Lu, Y.; Giltiay, N.; Liu, J.; Kordula, T.;
Zhang, Q.-W.; Vallance, B.; Swaidani, S.; Aronica, M.; Tuohy, V. K.;
Hamilton, T.; Li, X.: The adaptor Act1 is required for interleukin
17-dependent signaling associated with autoimmune and inflammatory
disease. Nature Immun. 8: 247-256, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/24/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/12/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/18/2002

EDITED alopez: 06/30/2011
terry: 6/24/2011
alopez: 12/19/2007
mgross: 11/12/2007
alopez: 8/7/2007
mgross: 6/19/2002
mgross: 6/18/2002

607929	TITLE *607929 CCM2 GENE; CCM2
;;MALCAVERNIN;;
CHROMOSOME 7 OPEN READING FRAME 22; C7ORF22;;
OSMOSENSING SCAFFOLD FOR MEKK3; OSM
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The CCM complex, which includes CCM1 (KRIT1; 604214), CCM2, and CCM3
(PDCD10; 609118), is associated with cytoskeletal elements, signal
transduction components, and cell junctions (Hogan et al., 2008).

CLONING

In a study of cerebral cavernous malformations type 2 (603284), Liquori
et al. (2003) performed mutational analysis on a positional candidate
gene, MGC4607 (CCM2), located in the critical linkage region in the UCSC
human genome assembly. The gene was chosen because its translation
product contains a putative PTP domain. The same domain had been found
in ICAP1-alpha (607153), a binding partner of the CCM1 product KRIT1
(604214), which is mutant in cerebral cavernous malformations type 1
(116860).

Liquori et al. (2003) named the novel protein encoded by the CCM2 gene
malcavernin. They suggested that it may be part of the complex pathway
of integrin signaling that, when perturbed, causes abnormal vascular
morphogenesis in the brain, leading to CCM formation. Liquori et al.
(2003) found, from Northern blot analysis of human tissues, using the
entire cDNA as a probe, that MCG4607 is most highly expressed in
skeletal muscle, heart, and liver, with minimal or no expression in the
colon and lung. MGC4607 is also expressed in the brain.

Using Western blot analysis, Uhlik et al. (2003) found that CCM2, which
they called OSM, was expressed in the majority of mouse and human cell
types tested. Northern blot and in situ hybridization of mouse tissues
showed highest Osm expression in nervous system and lymphoid tissues.

GENE STRUCTURE

Liquori et al. (2003) determined that the CCM2 gene contains 10 exons
and spans 77.6 kb. It contains LINE and SINE elements, including Alu
sequences, within intron 1 and the 3-prime region distal to exon 10.

MAPPING

By linkage analysis, Craig et al. (1998) mapped the CCM2 gene to
chromosome 7p15-p13.

GENE FUNCTION

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a mouse T-cell cDNA library, Uhlik et al.
(2003) showed that a C-terminal fragment of mouse Osm interacted with
Mekk3 (MAP3K3; 602539), a p38 (MAPK14; 600289) activator that responds
to sorbitol-induced hyperosmotic conditions. Mekk3 and Osm colocalized
in the cytoplasmic compartment of cotransfected cells, and the Mekk3-Osm
complex was recruited to Rac1 (602048)- and cytoskeletal actin (see
102560)-containing membrane ruffles in response to sorbitol treatment.
Protein interaction assays showed that Osm interacted directly with the
Mekk3 substrate Mkk3 (MAP2K3; 602315), with actin, and with both GDP-
and GTP-loaded Rac1. Uhlik et al. (2003) concluded that the
RAC1-OSM-MEKK3-MKK3 complex is required for regulation of p38 activity
in response to osmotic shock.

Zawistowski et al. (2005) used coimmunoprecipitation, fluorescence
resonance energy transfer, and subcellular localization strategies to
show that KRIT1 interacted with CCM2. Analogous to the established
interactions of KRIT1/ITGB1 (135630) and KRIT1/ICAP1, the KRIT1/CCM2
association was dependent upon phosphotyrosine-binding (PTB) domain of
CCM2. A familial CCM2 L198R mutation (607929.0007) abrogated the
KRIT1/CCM2 interaction, suggesting that loss of this interaction may be
critical in CCM pathogenesis. CCM2 and ICAP1, when bound to KRIT1 via
their respective PTB domains, differentially influenced KRIT1
subcellular localization. The authors expanded upon the established
involvement of CCM2 in the p38 MAPK signaling module by demonstrating
that KRIT1 associated with CCM2 and MEKK3 in a ternary complex.
Zawistowski et al. (2005) proposed that the genetic heterogeneity
observed in familial CCM may reflect mutation of different molecular
members of a coordinated signaling complex.

By GST pull-down and coimmunoprecipitation analysis, Voss et al. (2007)
demonstrated that CCM2 coprecipitated and colocalized with CCM3 (PDCD10;
609118). Yeast 2-hybrid analysis showed that CCM3 directly bound to
STK25 (602255) and the phosphatase domain of FAP1 (600267). CCM3 was
phosphorylated by STK25, whereas the C-terminal domain of FAP1
dephosphorylated CCM3. Further experiments showed that STK25 and CCM2
formed a protein complex. The findings linked CCM3 and STK25 with CCM2,
which is part of signaling pathways that are essential for vascular
development. Voss et al. (2007) hypothesized that CCM3 is part of the
KRIT1/CCM2 protein complex through its interaction with CCM2, and
therefore may participate in CCM1-dependent modulation of ITGB1
signaling.

Using RNA interference, Crose et al. (2009) showed that knockdown of
Ccm2 in mouse brain endothelial cells led to increased monolayer
permeability, decreased tubule formation, and reduced cell migration
following wounding. These effects were associated with elevated levels
of RhoA (165390), a small GTPase necessary for cytoskeletal turnover and
migration. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis revealed that both Ccm2 and
Mekk3 directly bound the RhoA ubiquitin ligase Smurf1 (605568). Domain
analysis revealed that the PTB domain of Ccm2 directly bound the HECT
domain of Smurf1, and the interaction targeted Smurf1 to Ccm2 complexes
localized primarily at the cell periphery. Coexpression of Ccm2 and
Smurf1 led to cell rounding, likely due to loss of RhoA. Crose et al.
(2009) concluded that CCM2 contributes to endothelial cell integrity by
regulating SMURF1-directed RHOA degradation

Kleaveland et al. (2009) showed that knockdown of CCM2 in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) via small hairpin RNA had no
effect on cell size, proliferation, migration, or formation of branching
structures. However, branched cords formed by CCM2-knockdown HUVECs
often lacked visible lumens, suggesting a defect in endothelial tube
formation. Using mice and zebrafish lacking Ccm2 and/or Heg1 (614182)
and CCM2-knockdown HUVECs, Kleaveland et al. (2009) showed that
CCM2-HEG1 signaling regulated endothelial tube formation and endothelial
junction formation. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments and pull-down
assays in transfected HEK293T cells suggested a model in which HEG1
coupled with CCM2 primarily through interaction with KRIT1 at
endothelial cell-cell junctions.

Borikova et al. (2010) showed that knockdown of Ccm1, Ccm2, or Ccm3 in
mouse embryonic endothelial cells induced RhoA overexpression and
persistent RhoA activity at the cell edge, as well as in the cytoplasm
and nucleus. RhoA activation was especially pronounced following Ccm1
knockdown. Knockdown of Ccm1, Ccm2, or Ccm3 inhibited formation of
vessel-like tubes and invasion of extracellular matrix. Knockdown or
inhibition of Rock2 countered these effects and was associated with
inhibition of RhoA-stimulated phosphorylation of myosin light chain-2
(MLC2; see 160781). Borikova et al. (2010) concluded that the CCM
protein complex regulates RhoA activation and cytoskeletal dynamics.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Liquori et al. (2003) screened a cohort of 37 probands with cerebral
cavernous malformations for KRIT1 mutations and found mutations of this
gene in 10. Among the panel of 27 probands without a KRIT1 mutation,
they detected 8 different mutations in MGC4607. One mutation, a 4-bp
deletion (607929.0004), was found in 2 separate families which, as
suggested by a further investigation into ethnic background, may be
distantly related.

Denier et al. (2004) likewise identified the MGC4607 gene as the CCM2
gene. They narrowed the CCM2 linkage interval from 22 cM to 7.5 cM. They
then hypothesized that large deletions might be involved in the
disorder, as already reported in other hamartomatous conditions such as
tuberous sclerosis (191100) and neurofibromatosis (162200). They
performed a high density microsatellite genotyping of this 7.5-cM
interval in search of putative null alleles in 30 unrelated families. In
this way, they identified, in 2 families, null alleles that were the
result of deletions within a 350-kb interval. Additional microsatellite
and single-nucleotide polymorphism genotyping showed that these 2
distinct deletions overlapped and that both of them deleted the first
exon of MGC4607. In both families, 1 of the 2 MGC4607 transcripts was
not detected. They then identified 8 additional point mutations within
MGC4607 in 8 of the remaining families. One of them led to the
alteration of the initiation codon and 5 of them to a premature
termination, including 1 nonsense, 1 frameshift, and 3 splice-site
mutations. The findings in cerebral cavernous malformations strongly
suggest that MGC4607 has a role in vascular morphogenesis.

Liquori et al. (2007) commented that DNA sequence analysis of the genes
CCM1 (KRIT1), CCM2, and CCM3 (PDCD10) in a cohort of 63 CCM-affected
families showed that 40% of these lacked any identifiable mutation. The
data suggested either that another CCM gene exists or that a significant
fraction of CCM mutations are not found by routine DNA sequence
analysis. Potential mutations that would be undetected by sequence
analysis included mutations within regulatory regions not included in
routine sequencing, as well as larger genomic insertions, deletions, or
duplications. Liquori et al. (2007) used multiplex ligation-dependent
probe analysis to screen 25 probands who were negative for CCM1, -2, and
-3 mutations for potential deletions or duplications within these 3
genes. They identified 15 deletions: 1 in the CCM1 gene, none in the
CCM3 gene, and 14 in the CCM2 gene. In this cohort, mutation screening
that included sequence and deletion analyses gave disease-gene
frequencies of 40% for CCM1, 38% for CCM2, 6% for CCM3, and 16% with no
mutation detected. The data indicated that the prevalence of CCM2 is
much higher than previously predicted, nearly equal to CCM1, and that
large genomic deletions in the CCM2 gene represent a major component of
this disorder. A common 77.6-kb deletion spanning CCM2 exons 2 through
10 was identified, which was present in 13% of the entire CCM cohort
(607929.0008). Liquori et al. (2007) hypothesized that these deletions
occurred in a hypermutable region because of surrounding repetitive
sequence elements and may catalyze the formation of intragenic
deletions.

In 2 (14%) of 14 unrelated patients with sporadic CCM and multiple
lesions, Felbor et al. (2007) identified a respective deletion in the
CCM2 gene using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. One of
the deletions involved the entire coding region of the CCM2 gene.

Among 24 Italian families with CCM, Liquori et al. (2008) identified 4
deletions and 1 duplication in the CCM2 gene.

For each of the 3 CCM genes, Pagenstecher et al. (2009) showed complete
localized loss of either KRIT1, CCM2/malcavernin, or PDCD10 protein
expression depending on the respective inherited mutation. Cavernous but
not adjacent normal or reactive endothelial cells of known germline
mutation carriers displayed immunohistochemical negativity only for the
corresponding CCM protein, but stained positively for the 2 other
proteins. Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated endothelial cell
mosaicism as neoangiogenic vessels within caverns from a CCM1 patient,
normal brain endothelium from a CCM2 patient, and capillary endothelial
cells of vessels in a revascularized thrombosed cavern from a CCM3
patient stained positively for KRIT1, CCM2/malcavernin, and PDCD10
respectively. Pagenstecher et al. (2009) suggested that complete lack of
CCM protein in affected endothelial cells from CCM germline mutation
carriers supports a 2-hit mechanism for CCM formation.

Through repeated cycles of amplification, subcloning, and sequencing of
multiple clones per amplicon, Akers et al. (2009) identified somatic
mutations that were otherwise invisible by direct sequencing of the bulk
amplicon. Biallelic germline and somatic mutations were identified in
CCM lesions from all 3 forms of inherited CCMs. The somatic mutations
were found only in a subset of the endothelial cells lining the
cavernous vessels and not in interstitial lesion cells. Although widely
expressed in the different cell types of the brain, the authors also
suggested a unique role for the CCM proteins in endothelial cell
biology. Akers et al. (2009) suggested that CCM lesion genesis may
require complete loss of function for 1 of the CCM genes.

Gallione et al. (2011) identified a founder mutation in the Ashkenazi
Jewish population that affects mRNA splicing of the CCM2 gene causing
cerebral cavernous malformations (607929.0010).

ANIMAL MODEL

Hogan et al. (2008) found that deletion of Ccm1 in zebrafish caused
dilation of embryonic vessels. Vascular dilation was associated with
progressive spreading of endothelial cells and thinning of vessel walls.
Determination of cell fate, cell number, and endothelial cell-cell
contacts appeared normal. Ccm1 mutants, Ccm2 mutants, and Ccm1/Ccm2
double mutants had indistinguishable vascular phenotypes, suggesting
conservation of function.

Boulday et al. (2011) noted that deletion of Ccm1, Ccm2, or Ccm3 in mice
is embryonic lethal. They generated mice with an endothelial-specific
Ccm2 deletion at postnatal day 1, which resulted in vascular lesions
mimicking human CCM lesions. Deletion of Ccm1 or Ccm3 at postnatal day 1
resulted in similar cerebellar and retinal lesions. Ccm2 lesion
development was restricted to the venous bed. Boulday et al. (2011)
concluded that the consequences of Ccm2 deletion depend on the
developmental timing of the ablation and are associated with a
developmental stage with intense angiogenesis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, 1-BP DEL, 23G

In a family in which 4 members had type 2 cerebral cavernous
malformations (603284), Liquori et al. (2003) found a 1-bp deletion in
exon 1 of the CCM2 gene (23delG), causing a frameshift at amino acid 23
and premature termination at amino acid 22.

.0002
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, GLN107TER

In a family in which 2 members had type 2 cerebral cavernous
malformations (603284), Liquori et al. (2003) found a 319C-T transition
in exon 4 of the CCM2 gene, resulting in the nonsense mutation gln107 to
ter (Q107X).

.0003
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, IVS5, G-A, -1

In a family in which 5 members had type 2 cerebral cavernous
malformations (603284), Liquori et al. (2003) found a splice junction
mutation (610-1G-A), involving the invariant G residue at the splice
acceptor site adjacent to exon 6.

.0004
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, 4-BP DEL, NT169

In one family with 5 affected individuals and a second family with 4
affected individuals, Liquori et al. (2003) found that type 2 cerebral
cavernous malformations (603284) were associated with a 4-bp deletion in
exon 2 of the CCM2 gene (169-172delAGAC). The deletion caused a
frameshift at amino acid 57 with a premature stop at amino acid 58. Two
families were thought to be distantly related because they came from the
same ethnic background.

.0005
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, MET1VAL

In affected members of a family with cerebral cavernous malformations
(603284), Denier et al. (2004) found a mutation in the initiating ATG
codon changing nucleotide 1 from A to G. In this family, 2 sisters and
the daughter of 1 of them were affected.

.0006
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, IVS3, G-A, +1

In a family with cerebral cavernous malformations (603284), Denier et
al. (2004) identified a donor splice site mutation within intron 3,
nt288+1G-A, leading to a transcript in which exon 3 was deleted.

.0007
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, LEU198ARG

In a family with cerebral cavernous malformations (603284), Denier et
al. (2004) found that affected individuals had a leu198-to-arg (L198R)
mutation in exon 5 due to a T-to-G transversion at nucleotide 593. In
this family, a brother and sister were affected as well as a daughter
and son.

.0008
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, 2-BP DEL, 1248AG

In a family with cerebral cavernous malformations (603284) in 3
successive generations, Denier et al. (2004) found deletion of 2
nucleotides, 1248_1249delAG in exon 10 of the CCM2 gene.

.0009
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, 77.6-KB DEL

Among a cohort of 63 families with cerebral cavernous malformations
(603284), Liquori et al. (2007) identified a 77.6-kb deletion in the
CCM2 gene in 8 probands (13%). The deletion encompassed exons 2 through
10, with the proximal breakpoint within an AluSx repeat in intron 1 and
the distal breakpoint within an AluSg repeat distal to exon 10.
Haplotype analysis suggested that this deletion may have occurred
independently at least twice in their cohort, although the evidence was
not conclusive.

Liquori et al. (2008) reported 6 additional CCM families from the United
States with the 77.6-kb CCM2 deletion. Haplotype analysis, which
included the previously reported families with this deletion, indicated
a founder effect. This deletion was not present in 24 Italian families
with CCM, indicating that it is specific to a certain cohort of
patients.

.0010
CEREBRAL CAVERNOUS MALFORMATIONS 2
CCM2, IVS1, GC-TT, +5

In 7 apparently unrelated probands from 10 different kindreds of
Ashkenazi Jewish descent segregating CCM2 (603284), Gallione et al.
(2011) identified a 2-bp change in the CCM2 gene caused by deletion of a
GC pair and insertion of a TT pair near the splice donor site of exon 1
(30+5_6delinsTT). The 2-bp change segregated with affected status in the
study families. Transcripts arising from the normal and mutant alleles
were examined by RT-PCR from affected and unaffected Ashkenazi Jewish
cerebral cavernous malformation family members. A synthetic splicing
system using a chimeric exon was used to visualize the effects of the
change on splice donor site utilization. The 2-bp change, when tested in
this in vitro synthetic splicing system, altered splice donor site
utilization. RT-PCR revealed loss of the transcript allele that was in
phase with the mutation. Gallione et al. (2011) concluded that this 2-bp
change in CCM2 disruted proper splice donor utilization leading to a
degraded transcript. Resequencing of the genomic region proximal and
distal to the CCM2 gene mutation revealed a common SNP haplotype in
affected individuals that demonstrated that this mutation was due to a
founder in the Ashkenazi Jewish population.

REFERENCE 1. Akers, A. L.; Johnson, E.; Steinberg, G. K.; Zabramski, J. M.;
Marchuk, D. A.: Biallelic somatic and germline mutations in cerebral
cavernous malformations (CCMs): evidence for a two-hit mechanism of
CCM pathogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 919-930, 2009.

2. Borikova, A. L.; Dibble, C. F.; Sciaky, N.; Welch, C. M.; Abell,
A. N.; Bencharit, S.; Johnson, G. L.: Rho kinase inhibition rescues
the endothelial cell cerebral cavernous malformation phenotype. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 11760-11764, 2010.

3. Boulday, G.; Rudini, N.; Maddaluno, L.; Blecon, A.; Arnould, M.;
Gaudric, A.; Chapon, F.; Adams, R. H.; Dejana, E.; Tournier-Lasserve,
E.: Developmental timing of CCM2 loss influences cerebral cavernous
malformations in mice. J. Exp. Med. 208: 1835-1847, 2011.

4. Craig, H. D.; Gunel, M.; Cepeda, O.; Johnson, E. W.; Ptacek, L.;
Steinberg, G. K.; Ogilvy, C. S.; Berg, M. J.; Crawford, S. C.; Scott,
R. M.; Steichen-Gersdorf, E.; Sabroe, R.; Kennedy, C. T.; Mettler,
G.; Beis, M. J.; Fryer, A.; Awad, I. A.; Lifton, R. P.: Multilocus
linkage identifies two new loci for a mendelian form of stroke, cerebral
cavernous malformation, at 7p15-13 and 3q25.2-27. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7:
1851-1858, 1998.

5. Crose, L. E. S.; Hilder, T. L.; Sciaky, N.; Johnson, G. L.: Cerebral
cavernous malformation 2 protein promotes Smad ubiquitin regulatory
factor 1-mediated RhoA degradation in endothelial cells. J. Biol.
Chem. 284: 13301-13305, 2009.

6. Denier, C.; Goutagny, S.; Labauge, P.; Krivosic, V.; Arnoult, M.;
Cousin, A.; Benabid, A. L.; Comoy, J.; Frerebeau, P.; Gilbert, B.;
Houtteville, J. P.; Jan, M.; and 14 others: Mutations within the
MGC4607 gene cause cerebral cavernous malformations. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 74: 326-337, 2004.

7. Felbor, U.; Gaetzner, S.; Verlaan, D. J.; Vijzelaar, R.; Rouleau,
G. A.; Siegel, A. M.: Large germline deletions and duplication in
isolated cerebral cavernous malformation patients. Neurogenetics 8:
149-153, 2007.

8. Gallione, C. J.; Solatycki, A.; Awad, I. A.; Weber, J. L.; Marchuk,
D. A.: A founder mutation in the Ashkenazi Jewish population affecting
messenger RNA splicing of the CCM2 gene causes cerebral cavernous
malformations. Genet. Med. 13: 662-666, 2011.

9. Hogan, B. M.; Bussmann, J.; Wolburg, H.; Schulte-Merker, S.: ccm1
cell autonomously regulates endothelial cellular morphogenesis and
vascular tubulogenesis in zebrafish. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17: 2424-2432,
2008.

10. Kleaveland, B.; Zheng, X.; Liu, J. J.; Blum, Y.; Tung, J. J.;
Zou, Z.; Sweeney, S. M.; Chen, M.; Guo, L.; Lu, M.; Zhou, D.; Kitajewski,
J.; Affolter, M.; Ginsberg, M. H.; Kahn, M. L.: Regulation of cardiovascular
development and integrity by the heart of glass-cerebral cavernous
malformation protein pathway. Nature Med. 15: 169-176, 2009. Note:
Erratum: Nature Med. 15: 584 only, 2009.

11. Liquori, C. L.; Berg, M. J.; Siegel, A. M.; Huang, E.; Zawistowski,
J. S.; Stoffer, T.; Verlaan, D.; Balogun, F.; Hughes, L.; Leedom,
T. P.; Plummer, N. W.; Cannella, M.; Maglione, V.; Squitieri, F.;
Johnson, E. W.; Rouleau, G. A.; Ptacek, L.; Marchuk, D. A.: Mutations
in a gene encoding a novel protein containing a phosphotyrosine-binding
domain cause type 2 cerebral cavernous malformations. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 73: 1459-1464, 2003.

12. Liquori, C. L.; Berg, M. J.; Squitieri, F.; Leedom, T. P.; Ptacek,
L.; Johnson, E. W.; Marchuk, D. A.: Deletions in CCM2 are a common
cause of cervical cavernous malformations. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 80:
69-75, 2007.

13. Liquori, C. L.; Penco, S.; Gault, J.; Leedom, T. P.; Tassi, L.;
Esposito, T.; Awad, I. A.; Frati, L.; Johnson, E. W.; Squitieri, F.;
Marchuk, D. A.; Gianfrancesco, F.: Different spectra of genomic deletions
within the CCM genes between Italian and American CCM patient cohorts. Neurogenetics 9:
25-31, 2008.

14. Pagenstecher, A.; Stahl, S.; Sure, U.; Felbor, U.: A two-hit
mechanism causes cerebral cavernous malformations: complete inactivation
of CCM1, CCM2 or CCM3 in affected endothelial cells. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 18: 911-918, 2009.

15. Uhlik, M. T.; Abell, A. N.; Johnson, N. L.; Sun, W.; Cuevas, B.
D.; Lobel-Rice, K. E.; Horne, E. A.; Dell'Acqua, M. L.; Johnson, G.
L.: Rac-MEKK3-MKK3 scaffolding for p38 MAPK activation during hyperosmotic
shock. Nature Cell Biol. 5: 1104-1110, 2003.

16. Voss, K.; Stahl, S.; Schleider, E.; Ullrich, S.; Nickel, J.; Mueller,
T. D.; Felbor, U.: CCM3 interacts with CCM2 indicating common pathogenesis
for cerebral cavernous malformations. Neurogenetics 8: 249-256,
2007.

17. Zawistowski, J. S.; Stalheim, L.; Uhlik, M. T.; Abell, A. N.;
Ancrile, B. B.; Johnson, G. L.; Marchuk, D. A.: CCM1 and CCM2 protein
interactions in cell signaling: implications for cerebral cavernous
malformations pathogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 2521-2531, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/11/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/24/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/26/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/20/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 11/2/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/2/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/12/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/23/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/23/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/18/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/27/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/4/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/2/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/30/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/22/2003

EDITED mgross: 01/20/2012
terry: 1/11/2012
alopez: 8/24/2011
mgross: 8/19/2011
terry: 5/26/2011
mgross: 1/5/2011
terry: 12/20/2010
mgross: 11/2/2009
wwang: 8/26/2009
terry: 8/12/2009
mgross: 2/24/2009
terry: 2/23/2009
joanna: 2/2/2009
wwang: 1/23/2009
wwang: 4/15/2008
ckniffin: 3/18/2008
wwang: 12/3/2007
ckniffin: 11/27/2007
wwang: 5/11/2007
ckniffin: 5/4/2007
carol: 2/28/2007
alopez: 1/4/2007
terry: 1/2/2007
wwang: 4/12/2006
alopez: 2/5/2004
cwells: 1/30/2004
joanna: 1/15/2004
cwells: 12/22/2003

609097	TITLE *609097 F-BOX ONLY PROTEIN 24; FBXO24
;;FBX24
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the F-box protein family, such as FBXO24, are characterized
by an approximately 40-amino acid F-box motif. SCF complexes, formed by
SKP1 (601434), cullin (see CUL1; 603134), and F-box proteins, act as
protein-ubiquitin ligases. F-box proteins interact with SKP1 through the
F box, and they interact with ubiquitination targets through other
protein interaction domains (Jin et al., 2004).

CLONING

Jin et al. (2004) reported that the FBXO24 protein contains a central F
box and a C-terminal RCC1 (179710) fold.

MAPPING

Jin et al. (2004) stated that the FBXO24 gene maps to chromosome 7q22
and the mouse Fbxo24 gene maps to chromosome 5G2.

REFERENCE 1. Jin, J.; Cardozo, T.; Lovering, R. C.; Elledge, S. J.; Pagano,
M.; Harper, J. W.: Systematic analysis and nomenclature of mammalian
F-box proteins. Genes Dev. 18: 2573-2580, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/14/2004

EDITED mgross: 12/15/2004

602921	TITLE *602921 PERSEPHIN; PSPN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Neurotrophic factors, including persephin, are important for the proper
development and maintenance of the nervous system. These factors promote
neuronal survival and can prevent the neuronal degeneration associated
with injury, toxin exposure, or neurodegenerative disease (summary by
Milbrandt et al., 1998).

CLONING

To identify genes related to the neurotrophic factors GDNF (600837) and
NRTN (602018), Milbrandt et al. (1998) carried out PCR using primers
based on regions that were similar in these 2 proteins. They isolated
human, mouse and rat genomic fragments encoding a protein that they
designated persephin, symbolized PSP. The predicted 156-amino acid human
protein contains a 21-residue signal peptide. On Western blots, mature
mouse PSP has a molecular mass of 10 to 12 kD. The human PSP protein
shares 80% sequence identity with rat and mouse PSP, and 38% and 30%
identity with NTRN and GDNF, respectively. Like other GDNF family
members, the PSP gene contains an intron interrupting the prodomain.
RT-PCR analysis revealed that rat PSP mRNA was expressed at low levels
and was inefficiently spliced, leading Milbrandt et al. (1998) to
suggest that regulation of transcript processing is an important means
of regulating PSP protein production.

GENE FUNCTION

Milbrandt et al. (1998) found that PSP resembled GDNF and NTRN in that
it exhibited neurotrophic activity on mesencephalic dopaminergic and
motor neurons. Like GDNF, PSP also had effects on kidney development, as
evidenced by its ability to promote ureteric bud branching. However, in
contrast to GDNF and NTRN, PSP did not support any of the peripheral
neurons examined. Milbrandt et al. (1998) suggested that PSP utilizes
different, or additional, receptor components than do other members of
the GDNF family.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid mapping and somatic cell hybrid PCR, Chadwick et al.
(1998) mapped the PSPN gene to chromosome 19p13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Chadwick, B. P.; Helbling, L. A.; Angrist, M.; Chakravarti, A.;
Gusella, J. F.; Slaugenhaupt, S. A.: Assignment of persephin (PSPN),
a human neurotrophic factor, to chromosome 19p13.3 by radiation hybrid
mapping and somatic cell hybrid PCR. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 83:
236-237, 1998.

2. Milbrandt, J.; de Sauvage, F. J.; Fahrner, T. J.; Baloh, R. H.;
Leitner, M. L.; Tansey, M. G.; Lampe, P. A.; Heuckeroth, R. O.; Kotzbauer,
P. T.; Simburger, K. S.; Golden, J. P.; Davies, J. A.; and 15 others
: Persephin, a novel neurotrophic factor related to GDNF and neurturin. Neuron 20:
245-253, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 4/6/1999

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 8/3/1998

EDITED carol: 05/31/2012
mgross: 4/7/1999
carol: 4/6/1999
alopez: 8/3/1998

608757	TITLE *608757 CLP1, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF; CLP1
;;HEAB
HEAB/AF10 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By cloning and sequencing a complex rearrangement involving chromosomes
10 and 11, Tanabe et al. (1996) obtained a partial genomic clone of
HEAB. By 5-prime and 3-prime RACE of several cDNA libraries, they
obtained a full-length cDNA. The 3-prime UTR contains 2 putative
polyadenylation sites. The deduced 425-amino acid protein is valine- and
leucine-rich and contains a domain sharing similarity with the
ATP/GTP-binding domain of ABC transporters. It also has a possible
tyrosine kinase phosphorylation site. Northern blot analysis detected a
major 2.0-kb transcript that was expressed ubiquitously, with highest
expression in testis and skeletal muscle. A 3.2-kb transcript was less
abundant in many tissues, with highest expression in peripheral blood
leukocytes and thymus.

De Vries et al. (2000) purified pre-mRNA cleavage factor IIm (CFIIm) of
the 3-prime end processing complex (see 604978) from HeLa cell nuclear
extracts and determined that it contains PCF11 (608876) and CLP1. By
searching databases and PCR of a HeLa cell cDNA library, they cloned
CLP1. The deduced protein contains highly conserved Walker A and B
motifs, which have been implicated in ATP/GTP binding.

GENE FUNCTION

De Vries et al. (2000) found that immunodepletion of CLP1 reduced
pre-mRNA cleavage activity, but not polyadenylation activity, in
purified HeLa cell CFIIm. CLP1 interacted with CFIm and
cleavage-polyadenylation specificity factor (CPSF; see 606027),
suggesting that it bridges these two 3-prime end processing factors
within the cleavage complex.

Paushkin et al. (2004) identified and characterized the human tRNA
splicing endonuclease (see SEN2; 608753). They found that human
endonuclease complexes are associated with pre-mRNA 3-prime end
processing factors, including CLP1. Small interfering RNA-mediated
depletion of SEN2 led to defects in maturation of both pre-tRNA and
pre-mRNA. These findings demonstrated a link between pre-tRNA splicing
and pre-mRNA 3-prime end formation, suggesting that the endonuclease
subunits function in multiple RNA processing events.

Weitzer and Martinez (2007) applied a chromatographic approach that
resulted in the identification of the human protein CLP1, a component of
both tRNA splicing and mRNA 3-prime-end formation machineries, as the
RNA kinase responsible for phosphorylation of the 5-prime end of siRNAs
necessary for their subsequent incorporation into the RISC complex
(RNA-induced silencing complex). Weitzer and Martinez (2007) reported
that the kinase CLP1 phosphorylates and licenses synthetic siRNAs to
become assembled into RISC for subsequent target RNA cleavage. More
importantly, Weitzer and Martinez (2007) demonstrated that the
physiologic role of CLP1 as the RNA kinase that phosphorylates the
5-prime end of the 3-prime exon during human tRNA splicing, allowing the
subsequent ligation of both exon halves by an unknown tRNA ligase.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and FISH, Tanabe et al. (1996) mapped
the CLP1 gene to chromosome 11p12.

CYTOGENETICS

Tanabe et al. (1996) identified an invins(10;11)(p12;q23q12) and other
complex chromosomal rearrangements in a 2-year old boy with acute
monoblastic leukemia (AML-M5). Cloning of the proximal 10p breakpoint
showed that the MLL gene (159555) at chromosome 11q23 was fused to the
3-prime portion of AF10 (MLLT10; 602409) at chromosome 10p12. Cloning of
the telomeric 10p junction revealed that the 5-prime portion of AF10 was
fused with the HEAB gene. The 5-prime AF10/HEAB fusion transcript was
out of frame.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hanada et al. (2013) generated kinase-dead Clp1 mice that showed a
progressive loss of spinal motor neurons associated with axonal
degeneration in the peripheral nerves and denervation of neuromuscular
junctions, resulting in impaired motor function, muscle weakness,
paralysis, and fatal respiratory failure. Transgenic rescue experiments
showed that Clp1 functions in motor neurons. Mechanistically, loss of
Clp1 activity results in accumulation of a novel set of small RNA
fragments, derived from aberrant processing of tyrosine pre-transfer
RNA. These tRNA fragments sensitize cells to oxidative stress-induced
p53 (191170) activation and p53-dependent cell death. Genetic
inactivation of p53 rescues Clp1 kinase-dead mice from the motor neuron
loss, muscle denervation, and respiratory failure. Hanada et al. (2013)
concluded that their experiments uncovered a mechanistic link between
tRNA processing, formation of a new RNA species, and progressive loss of
lower motor neurons regulated by p53.

REFERENCE 1. de Vries, H.; Ruegsegger, U.; Hubner, W.; Friedlein, A.; Langen,
H.; Keller, W.: Human pre-mRNA cleavage factor IIm contains homologs
of yeast proteins and bridges two other cleavage factors. EMBO J. 19:
5895-5904, 2000.

2. Hanada, T.; Weitzer, S.; Mair, B.; Bernreuther, C.; Wainger, B.
J.; Ichida, J.; Hanada, R.; Orthofer, M.; Cronin, S. J.; Komnenovic,
V.; Minis, A.; Sato, F.; and 12 others: CLP1 links tRNA metabolism
to progressive motor-neuron loss. Nature 495: 474-480, 2013.

3. Paushkin, S. V.; Patel, M.; Furia, B. S.; Peltz, S. W.; Trotta,
C. R.: Identification of a human endonuclease complex reveals a link
between tRNA splicing and pre-mRNA 3-prime end formation. Cell 117:
311-321, 2004.

4. Tanabe, S.; Bohlander, S. K.; Vignon, C. V.; Espinosa, R., III;
Zhao, N.; Strissel, P. L.; Zeleznik-Le, N. J.; Rowley, J. D.: AF10
is split by MLL and HEAB, a human homolog to a putative Caenorhabditis
elegans ATP/GTP-binding protein in an invins(10;11)(p12;q23q12). Blood 88:
3535-3545, 1996.

5. Weitzer, S.; Martinez, J.: The human RNA kinase hClp1 is active
on 3-prime transfer RNA exons and short interfering RNAs. Nature 447:
222-226, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 09/25/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/15/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/26/2004

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 6/21/2004

EDITED alopez: 09/25/2013
alopez: 6/21/2007
terry: 6/15/2007
mgross: 8/27/2004
mgross: 8/26/2004
terry: 8/26/2004
mgross: 6/21/2004

609591	TITLE *609591 RIC-LIKE PROTEIN WITHOUT CAAX MOTIF 1; RIT1
;;RAS-LIKE PROTEIN EXPRESSED IN MANY TISSUES; RIT;;
ROC1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

RIT belongs to the RAS (HRAS; 190020) subfamily of small GTPases (Hynds
et al., 2003).

CLONING

By PCR using degenerate primers based on the conserved G3 and G4 domains
of RAS, followed by screening a mouse retina cDNA library, Lee et al.
(1996) cloned mouse Rit. The deduced 219-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 25.6 kD. By EST database analysis, Lee et
al. (1996) identified human RIT. The deduced human protein contains 219
amino acids and shares 94% identity with mouse Rit. Human and mouse RIT
have 5 highly conserved domains characteristic of small G proteins, but
they lack the C-terminal CAAX prenylation motif found in several other
RAS-like proteins. Northern blot analysis detected a 1.2-kb transcript
in all mouse tissues examined. Epitope-tagged mouse Rit localized to the
plasma membrane of transfected cells.

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to Drosophila Ric,
Wes et al. (1996) identified human RIT and RIN (609592). The core GTPase
domain of RIT shares 76% identity with that of RIN, and there is only 1
conservative substitution between the 2 human proteins and Drosophila
Ric within the effector G2 region. Northern blot analysis detected RIT
transcripts of 1.35, 2.9, and 3.9 kb in most tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Lee et al. (1996) demonstrated that mouse Rit bound radiolabeled GTP.

Shao et al. (1999) demonstrated that recombinant human RIT and RIN bound
GTP and exhibited intrinsic GTPase activity. Conversion of gln79 to leu
in RIT resulted in complete loss of GTPase activity. The activity of RIT
and RIN was significantly different from that of the majority of
RAS-related GTPases, and the GTP dissociation rates were 5- to 10-fold
faster than most RAS-like GTPases. Yeast 2-hybrid analysis showed that
RIT and RIN interacted with the RAS-binding proteins RALGDS (601619),
RLF (180610), and AF6 (MLLT4; 159559), but not with RAF kinases (e.g.,
RAF1; 164760), RIN1 (605965), or the p110 subunit of PI3K (see 171834).
Shao et al. (1999) concluded that RIT and RIN regulate signaling
pathways and cellular processes distinct from those controlled by RAS.

By expression of RIT in a human neuroblastoma cell line, Hynds et al.
(2003) demonstrated that RIT increased neurite outgrowth and branching
through MEK (see MEK1; 176872)-dependent and MEK-independent signaling
mechanisms, respectively. Adenoviral expression of wildtype or
constitutively active RIT increased neurite initiation, elongation, and
branching on endogenous matrix or a purified laminin-1 substratum. This
outgrowth was morphologically distinct from that promoted by
constitutively active RAS or RAF. Constitutively active RIT increased
phosphorylation of ERK1 (MAPK3; 601795)/ERK2 (MAPK1; 176948), but not
AKT (see AKT1; 164730). A MEK inhibitor blocked RIT-induced neurite
initiation, but not elongation or branching.

Shi and Andres (2005) found that stimulation of a rat pheochromocytoma
cell line by growth factors, including nerve growth factor (NGF;
162030), resulted in rapid and prolonged Rit activation. Ectopic
expression of active human RIT promoted neurite outgrowth and stimulated
activation of both Erk and p38 MAP kinase (MAPK14; 600289) signaling
pathways. RIT-induced differentiation depended upon both MAP kinase
cascades, since MEK inhibition blocked RIT-induced neurite outgrowth,
and p38 blockade inhibited neurite elongation and branching, but not
neurite initiation. Moreover, the ability of NGF to promote neuronal
differentiation was attenuated by Rit knockdown.

Heo et al. (2006) surveyed plasma membrane targeting mechanisms by
imaging the subcellular localization of 125 fluorescent
protein-conjugated Ras, Rab, Arf, and Rho proteins. Of 48 proteins that
were localized to the plasma membrane, 37 contained clusters of
positively charged amino acids. To test whether these polybasic clusters
bind negatively charged phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate lipids,
Heo et al. (2006) developed a chemical phosphatase activation method to
deplete plasma membrane phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate.
Unexpectedly, proteins with polybasic clusters dissociated from the
plasma membrane only when both phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate and
phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate were depleted, arguing that
both lipid second messengers jointly regulate plasma membrane targeting.

MAPPING

Wes et al. (1996) stated that the RIT gene was mapped to chromosome 1 by
somatic cell hybrid analysis. The mouse Rit gene maps to chromosome 3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 17 unrelated patients with Noonan syndrome-8 (NS8; 615355), Aoki et
al. (2013) identified heterozygous mutations in the RIT1 gene (see,
e.g., 609591.0001-609591.0004). The first mutations were found by exome
sequencing and subsequent mutations were identified from a larger cohort
of patients screened for the RIT1 gene. A total of 9 missense mutations
were found in 17 (9%) of 180 individuals suspected to have the disorder.
The phenotype was characterized by short stature, distinctive facial
features, and a high incidence of congenital heart defects and
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A subset of patients showed intellectual
disabilities. All of the mutations occurred de novo, except in 1 patient
who inherited the mutation from a mother with a Noonan syndrome
phenotype. The mutations tended to cluster in the switch II region, and
in vitro functional expression studies of 3 of the mutations showed that
they resulted in a gain of function. Transfection of 2 of the mutations
into zebrafish embryos resulted in a variety of developmental defects,
including gastrulation defects, craniofacial abnormalities, pericardial
edema, and elongated yolk sac. A smaller percentage of mutant embryos
showed even more disorganized growth and abnormal cardiogenesis. The
findings were similar to those observed with mutations in other RAS
genes (see, e.g., PTPN11, 176876; SOS1, 182530; NRAS, 164790) causing
other forms of Noonan syndrome.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NOONAN SYNDROME 8
RIT1, ALA57GLY

In 4 unrelated patients with Noonan syndrome-8 (NS8; 615355), Aoki et
al. (2013) identified a de novo heterozygous c.170C-G transversion in
exon 4 of the RIT1 gene, resulting in an ala57-to-gly (A57G)
substitution at a conserved residue. In vitro cellular expression
studies showed that the A57G mutation resulted in a gain of function.

.0002
NOONAN SYNDROME 8
RIT1, GLU81GLY

In a patient with Noonan syndrome-8 (615355), Aoki et al. (2013)
identified a de novo heterozygous c.242A-G transition in exon 5 of the
RIT1 gene, resulting in a glu81-to-gly (E81G) substitution at a
conserved residue. In vitro cellular expression studies showed that the
E81G mutation resulted in a gain of function. Transfection of the E81G
mutation into zebrafish embryos resulted in a variety of developmental
defects, including gastrulation defects, craniofacial abnormalities,
pericardial edema, and elongated yolk sac. A smaller percentage of
mutant embryos showed even more disorganized growth and abnormal
cardiogenesis.

.0003
NOONAN SYNDROME 8
RIT1, PHE82LEU

In 2 unrelated patients with Noonan syndrome-8 (615355), Aoki et al.
(2013) identified a de novo heterozygous c.246T-G transversion in exon 5
of the RIT1 gene, resulting in a phe82-to-leu (F82L) substitution at a
conserved residue. The mutation, which was initially found by exome
sequencing, was not present in several control databases. In vitro
cellular expression studies showed that the F82L mutation resulted in a
gain of function.

.0004
NOONAN SYNDROME 8
RIT1, GLY95ALA

In 4 unrelated patients with Noonan syndrome-8 (615355), Aoki et al.
(2013) identified a de novo heterozygous c.284G-C transversion in exon 5
of the RIT1 gene, resulting in a gly95-to-ala (G95A) substitution. The
mutation, which was initially found by exome sequencing, was not present
in several control databases. In vitro cellular expression studies
showed that the G95A mutation resulted in a gain of function.
Transfection of the G95A mutation into zebrafish embryos resulted in a
variety of developmental defects, including gastrulation defects,
craniofacial abnormalities, pericardial edema, and elongated yolk sac. A
smaller percentage of mutant embryos showed even more disorganized
growth and abnormal cardiogenesis.

REFERENCE 1. Aoki, Y.; Niihori, T.; Banjo, T.; Okamoto, N.; Mizuno, S.; Kurosawa,
K.; Ogata, T.; Takada, F.; Yano, M.; Ando, T.; Hoshika, T.; Barnett,
C.; and 13 others: Gain-of-function mutations in RIT1 cause Noonan
syndrome, a RAS/MAPK pathway syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 93: 173-180,
2013.

2. Heo, W. D.; Inoue, T.; Park, W. S.; Kim, M. L.; Park, B. O.; Wandless,
T. J.; Meyer, T.: PI(3,4,5)P(3) and PI(4,5)P(2) lipids target proteins
with polybasic clusters to the plasma membrane. Science 314: 1458-1461,
2006.

3. Hynds, D. L.; Spencer, M. L.; Andres, D. A.; Snow, D. M.: Rit
promotes MEK-independent neurite branching in human neuroblastoma
cells. J. Cell Sci. 116: 1925-1935, 2003.

4. Lee, C.-H. J.; Della, N. G.; Chew, C. E.; Zack, D. J.: Rin, a
neuron-specific and calmodulin-binding small G-protein, and Rit define
a novel subfamily of Ras proteins. J. Neurosci. 16: 6784-6794, 1996.

5. Shao, H.; Kadono-Okuda, K.; Finlin, B. S.; Andres, D. A.: Biochemical
characterization of the Ras-related GTPases Rit and Rin. Arch. Biochem.
Biophys. 371: 207-219, 1999.

6. Shi, G.-X.; Andres, D. A.: Rit contributes to nerve growth factor-induced
neuronal differentiation via activation of B-Raf-extracellular signal-regulated
kinase and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase cascades. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 25: 830-846, 2005.

7. Wes, P. D.; Yu, M.; Montell, C.: RIC, a calmodulin-binding Ras-like
GTPase. EMBO J. 15: 5839-5848, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/1/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/6/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/20/2005

EDITED carol: 08/02/2013
ckniffin: 8/1/2013
alopez: 2/8/2007
terry: 2/6/2007
carol: 9/29/2005
mgross: 9/20/2005

186591	TITLE *186591 SYNTAXIN 4; STX4
;;STX4A;;
SYNTAXIN, PLACENTAL;;
p35-2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Li et al. (1994) described the nucleotide sequence of STX4A, a syntaxin
gene isolated from a placenta library. (The gene was previously
symbolized STX2.) It encodes a predicted 297-amino acid protein that is
89% identical to the amino acid sequence of rat Stx4a.

By immunohistochemical analysis of rat brain sections, Kennedy et al.
(2010) showed that Stx4 was expressed throughout brain. In rat
hippocampal neurons, Stx4 showed a punctate distribution in the
somatodendritic compartment, and Stx4 clusters often localized to
dendritic spines. Immunogold electron microscopy of CA1 rat hippocampus
revealed frequent Stx4 labeling near spine membranes at sites lateral to
postsynaptic densities, with occasional labeling of presynaptic
membranes. Biochemical fractionation of mouse brain revealed Stx4 in
synaptosome fractions, but not in synaptic vesicle fractions.

GENE FUNCTION

Mandon et al. (1996) stated that vesicle-associated membrane proteins
(VAMPs) or synaptobrevins (see 185880) are proposed to bind to cognate
vesicle-targeting receptors in target membranes, which include several
members of the syntaxin family. The molecular mechanisms responsible for
targeting of vesicles containing aquaporin-2 (AQP2; 107777) to the
apical plasma membrane of renal collecting duct cells may involve the
vesicle-targeting protein STX4. Among the known syntaxin isoforms, only
STX1 (STX1A; 186590) and STX4 bind VAMP2 (185881) with high affinity.
Thus, STX1 and STX4 could be considered candidates for a role in
targeting of the AQP2/VAMP2-containing vesicles to the apical plasma
membrane in collecting duct cells. In contrast to STX1, which is
expressed predominantly in the central nervous system, STX4 is expressed
in a variety of tissues including the kidney. Mandon et al. (1996) used
sequence data for rat Stx1a, Stx1b (601485), and Stx4 from Bennett et
al. (1993) to design PCR primers for RT-PCR analysis of rat tissues.
They detected Stx4 mRNA in the apical plasma membrane of collecting duct
principal cells. They also demonstrated in the rat kidney the presence
of a protein with the characteristics of Stx4 in the apical plasma
membrane of inner medullary-collecting duct cells.

To clarify the physiologic function of STXBP3 (608339) in
insulin-stimulated GLUT4 (SLC2A4; 138190) exocytosis, Kanda et al.
(2005) generated mouse embryos deficient in the Stx4-binding protein
Stxbp3 and developed Stxbp3 -/- adipocytes from their mesenchymal
fibroblasts. The insulin-induced appearance of Glut4 at the cell surface
was enhanced in Stxbp3 -/- adipocytes compared to +/+ cells. Wortmannin,
an inhibitor of PI3K, inhibited insulin-stimulated Glut4 externalization
in +/+ but not -/- adipocytes. Kanda et al. (2005) suggested that
disruption of the interaction between STX4 and STXBP3 in adipocytes
might result in enhancement of insulin-stimulated GLUT4 externalization.

Using RT-PCR, immunoblot analysis, and immunofluorescence microscopy,
Sander et al. (2008) demonstrated that human intestinal mast cells (MCs)
expressed SNAP23 (602534), STX1B, STX2 (132350), STX3 (STX3A; 600876),
STX4, and STX6 (603944), but not SNAP25 (600322). MCs also expressed
VAMP3 (603657), VAMP7 (300053), and VAMP8 (603177), but, in contrast
with rodent MCs, they expressed only low levels of VAMP2 (185881). VAMP7
and VAMP8 translocated to the plasma membrane and interacted with SNAP23
and STX4 upon activation. Inhibition of STX4, SNAP23, VAMP7, or VAMP8,
but not VAMP2 or VAMP3, resulted in markedly reduced high-affinity IgE
receptor-mediated histamine release. Sander et al. (2008) concluded that
human MCs express a specific pattern of SNAREs and that VAMP7 and VAMP8,
but not VAMP2, are required for rapid degranulation.

Using rat hippocampal neurons, Kennedy et al. (2010) showed that
exocytosis of recycling endosomes at dendritic spines occurred at
Stx4-enriched sites immediately lateral to postsynaptic densities.
Disruption of Stx4 either acutely or chronically blocked membrane fusion
and cargo delivery triggered by synaptic activation, and acute
inhibition of Stx4 abolished long-term potentiation. Kennedy et al.
(2010) concluded that STX4 is a central component of the SNARE machinery
that mediates rapid, activity-dependent fusion of recycling endosomes in
dendritic spines.

REFERENCE 1. Bennett, M. K.; Garcia-Arraras, J. E.; Elferink, L. A.; Peterson,
K.; Fleming, A. M.; Hazuka, C. D.; Scheller, R. H.: The syntaxin
family of vesicular transport receptors. Cell 74: 863-873, 1993.

2. Kanda, H.; Tamori, Y.; Shinoda, H.; Yoshikawa, M.; Sakaue, M.;
Udagawa, J.; Otani, H.; Tashiro, F.; Miyazaki, J.; Kasuga, M.: Adipocytes
from Munc18c-null mice show increased sensitivity to insulin-stimulated
GLUT4 externalization. J. Clin. Invest. 115: 291-301, 2005.

3. Kennedy, M. J.; Davison, I. G.; Robinson, C. G.; Ehlers, M. D.
: Syntaxin-4 defines a domain for activity-dependent exocytosis in
dendritic spines. Cell 141: 524-535, 2010.

4. Li, H.; Hodge, D. R.; Pei, G. K.; Seth, A.: Isolation and sequence
analysis of the human syntaxin-encoding gene. Gene 143: 303-304,
1994.

5. Mandon, B.; Chou, C.-L.; Nielsen, S.; Knepper, M. A.: Syntaxin-4
is localized to the apical plasma membrane of rat renal collecting
duct cells: possible role in aquaporin-2 trafficking. J. Clin. Invest. 98:
906-913, 1996.

6. Sander, L. E.; Frank, S. P. C.; Bolat, S.; Blank, U.; Galli, T.;
Bigalke, H.; Bischoff, S. C.; Lorentz, A.: Vesicle associated membrane
protein (VAMP)-7 and VAMP-8, but not VAMP-2 or VAMP-3, are required
for activation-induced degranulation of mature human mast cells. Europ.
J. Immun. 38: 855-863, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/20/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/9/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/12/2005
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 10/25/1996
Alan F. Scott - updated: 9/20/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/10/1992

EDITED mgross: 01/03/2011
terry: 12/20/2010
mgross: 10/12/2009
mgross: 10/9/2009
tkritzer: 4/12/2005
psherman: 10/27/1998
mark: 10/25/1996
carol: 9/10/1992

600505	TITLE *600505 CASEIN KINASE I, ALPHA-1; CSNK1A1
;;CK1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Tapia et al. (1994) isolated a cDNA encoding human casein kinase I from
a fetal brain library using PCR primers based on the bovine sequence.
The cDNA was sequenced and shown to have a predicted amino acid sequence
identical to the bovine protein except that it contains 12 additional
amino acids at the carboxyl end.

GENE FUNCTION

Jia et al. (2004) showed that protein kinase A (PKA; see 188830) and
casein kinase I (CKI) regulate Smo (601500) cell surface accumulation
and activity in response to hedgehog (Hh; see 600725). Blocking PKA or
CKI activity in the Drosophila wing disc prevented Hh-induced Smo
accumulation and attenuated pathway activity, whereas increasing PKA
activity promoted Smo accumulation and pathway activation. Jia et al.
(2004) showed that PKA and CKI phosphorylate Smo at several sites, and
that phosphorylation-deficient forms of Smo fail to accumulate on the
cell surface and are unable to transduce the Hh signal. Conversely,
phosphorylation-mimicking Smo variants showed constitutive cell surface
expression and signaling activity. Furthermore, Jia et al. (2004) found
that the levels of Smo cell surface expression and activity correlated
with its levels of phosphorylation. Jia et al. (2004) concluded that Hh
induces progressive Smo phosphorylation by PKA and CKI, leading to
elevation of Smo cell surface levels and signaling activity.

Bidere et al. (2009) conducted parallel screens involving a mass
spectrometry analysis of CARMA1 (607210) binding partners and an RNA
interference screen for growth inhibition of the CBM-dependent
'activated B cell-like' (ABC) subtype of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL; see 605027). Bidere et al. (2009) reported that both screens
identified CK1-alpha as a bifunctional regulator of NF-kappa-B (164011).
CK1-alpha dynamically associates with the CBM complex on T cell receptor
engagement to participate in cytokine production and lymphocyte
proliferation. However, CK1-alpha kinase activity has a contrasting role
by subsequently promoting the phosphorylation and inactivation of
CARMA1. CK1-alpha has thus a dual 'gating' function which first promotes
and then terminates receptor-induced NF-kappa-B. ABC DLBCL cells
required CK1-alpha for constitutive NF-kappa-B activity, indicating that
CK1-alpha functions as a conditionally essential malignancy gene.

Elyada et al. (2011) showed that casein kinase I-alpha, a component of
the beta-catenin (116806) destruction complex, is a critical regulator
of the Wnt signaling (see 164820) pathway. Inducing the ablation of
Csnk1a1 in the gut triggers massive Wnt activation, surprisingly without
causing tumorigenesis. CKI-alpha-deficient epithelium shows many of the
features of human colorectal tumors in addition to Wnt activation, in
particular the induction of the DNA damage response and cellular
senescence, both of which are thought to provide a barrier against
malignant transformation. The epithelial DNA damage response in mice is
accompanied by substantial activation of p53 (191170), suggesting that
the p53 pathway may counteract the protumorigenic effects of Wnt
hyperactivation. Notably, the transition from benign adenomas to
invasive colorectal cancer in humans is typically linked to p53
inactivation, underscoring the importance of p53 as a safeguard against
malignant progression; however, the mechanism of p53-mediated tumor
suppression is unknown. Elyada et al. (2011) showed that the maintenance
of intestinal homeostasis in CKI-alpha-deficient gut requires
p53-mediated growth control, because the combined ablation of Csnk1a1
and either p53 or its target gene p21 (116899) triggered high-grade
dysplasia with extensive proliferation. Unexpectedly, these ablations
also induced nonproliferating cells to invade the villous lamina propria
rapidly, producing invasive carcinomas throughout the small bowel.
Furthermore, in p53-deficient gut, loss of heterozygosity of the gene
encoding CKI-alpha caused a highly invasive carcinoma, indicating that
CKI-alpha caused a highly invasive carcinoma, indicating that CKI-alpha
functions as a tumor suppressor when p53 is inactivated. Elyada et al.
(2011) identified a set of genes (the p53-suppressed invasiveness
signature, PSIS) that is activated by the loss of both p53 and CKI-alpha
and which probably accounts for the brisk induction of invasiveness.
PSIS transcription and tumor invasion were suppressed by p21,
independently of cell cycle control. Restraining tissue invasion through
suppressing PSIS expression is thus a novel tumor suppressor function of
wildtype p53. PROX1 (601546), IFITM2 (605578), and IFITM3 (605579) are
all PSIS genes.

MAPPING

Tapia et al. (1994) identified YAC genomic clones containing the human
gene and used them to map CKI to chromosome 13q13. Fish et al. (1995)
mapped the CSNK1A1 gene to chromosome 13q13.1-q14.1 by FISH. However,
Gross (2011) mapped the CSNK1A1 gene to chromosome 5q32 based on an
alignment of the CSNK1A1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC008717) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Bidere, N.; Ngo, V. N.; Lee, J.; Collins, C.; Zheng, L.; Wan, F.;
Davis, R. E.; Lenz, G.; Anderson, D. E.; Arnoult, D.; Vazquez, A.;
Sakai, K.; Zhang, J.; Meng, Z.; Veenstra, T. D.; Staudt, L. M.; Lenardo,
M. J.: Casein kinase 1-alpha governs antigen-receptor-induced NF-kappa-B
activation and human lymphoma cell survival. Nature 458: 92-96,
2009.

2. Elyada, E.; Pribluda, A.; Goldstein, R. E.; Morgenstern, Y.; Brachya,
G.; Cojocaru, G.; Snir-Alkalay, I.; Burstain, I.; Haffner-Krausz,
R.; Jung, S.; Wiener, Z.; Alitalo, K.; Oren, M.; Pikarsky, E.; Ben-Neriah,
Y.: CKI-alpha ablation highlights a critical role for p53 in invasiveness
control. Nature 470: 409-413, 2011.

3. Fish, K. J.; Cegielska, A.; Getman, M. E.; Landes, G. M.; Virshup,
D. M.: Isolation and characterization of human casein kinase I-epsilon
(CKI), a novel member of the CKI gene family. J. Biol. Chem. 270:
14875-14883, 1995.

4. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/9/2011.

5. Jia, J.; Tong, C.; Wang, B.; Luo, L.; Jiang, J.: Hedgehog signalling
activity of Smoothened requires phosphorylation by protein kinase
A and casein kinase I. Nature 432: 1045-1050, 2004.

6. Tapia, C.; Featherstone, T.; Gomez, C.; Taillon-Miller, P.; Allende,
C. C.; Allende, J. E.: Cloning and chromosomal localization of the
gene coding for human protein kinase CK1. FEBS Lett. 349: 307-312,
1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/29/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 2/9/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/2/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/3/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/9/2004

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 4/24/1995

EDITED carol: 07/06/2011
alopez: 7/5/2011
terry: 6/29/2011
mgross: 2/9/2011
alopez: 4/3/2009
terry: 4/2/2009
alopez: 3/4/2005
terry: 3/3/2005
mgross: 9/9/2004
psherman: 10/22/1999
dkim: 6/30/1998
mark: 5/13/1996
joanna: 12/6/1995
mark: 4/25/1995
mark: 4/24/1995

604652	TITLE *604652 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 7-LIKE 1; TCF7L1
;;TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 3, FORMERLY; TCF3, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TCF/LEF transcription factors, such as TCF7L1, are mediators of the Wnt
(see 164820) signaling pathway and are antagonized by the TGF-beta
(TGFB1; 190180) signaling pathway (Sagara and Katoh, 2000).

CLONING

The high mobility group (HMG) box is a DNA-binding domain. TCF7
(189908), also called TCF1, and LEF1 (153245), also called TCF1-alpha,
are human lymphoid transcription factors that contain a virtually
identical HMG box. By PCR of human genomic DNA using degenerate
oligonucleotides based on the HMG boxes of TCF7 and LEF1, Castrop et al.
(1992) identified the TCF7L1 and TCF7L2 (602228) genes, which they
called TCF3 and TCF4, respectively. TCF7L1 and TCF7L2 were not expressed
in cells of lymphoid lineage. The deduced amino acid sequences of the
HMG boxes of TCF7L1, TCF7L2, and TCF7 show striking homology. The
authors suggested the existence of a subfamily of TCF7-like HMG
box-containing transcription factors.

By searching databases for homologs of mouse Tcf3, followed by PCR of a
small intestine cDNA library and screening of a fetal lung cDNA library,
Sagara and Katoh (2000) cloned human TCF7L1, which they called TCF3. The
deduced 588-amino acid protein contains a beta-catenin (CTNNB1;
116806)-binding domain at its N terminus, followed by an HMG box, a
nuclear translocation signal, and 2 putative CTBP (see 602618)-binding
sites at its C terminus. TCF7L1 shares 58% amino acid identity with
TCF7L2, its closest homolog among human TCF proteins. Northern blot
analysis detected a 3.0-kb TCF7L1 transcript in human stomach and in
some human gastric cancer cell lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Using Northern blot analysis, Sagara and Katoh (2000) found that TCF7L1
was occasionally upregulated in primary gastric cancer compared with
normal gastric mucosa. Overexpression of TCF7L1 in MKN28 human gastric
cancer cell lines resulted in 8-fold resistance to mitomycin C compared
with controls. DTD (NQO1; 125860) mRNA was downregulated in MKN28 cell
lines overexpressing TCF7L1 and in primary gastric cancer with TCF7L1
upregulation. The DTD protein, which is implicated in mitomycin C
activation, was also downregulated in MKN28 cell lines overexpressing
TCF7L1. Sagara and Katoh (2000) concluded that mitomycin C resistance
induced by TCF7L1 overexpression in gastric cancer is likely due to DTD
downregulation.

Merrill et al. (2001) showed that Lef1 and Tcf3 controlled
differentiation of multipotent stem cells in mouse skin. Lef1 required
Wnt signaling and stabilized beta-catenin to express hair-specific
keratins and control hair differentiation. In contrast, Tcf3 acted
independently of its beta-catenin-interacting domain to suppress
features of epidermal differentiation, in which Tcf3 was normally shut
off, and promote features of the follicle outer root sheath and
multipotent stem cells.

By immunofluorescence analysis, Nguyen et al. (2006) found that
embryonic mouse skin progenitors expressed Tcf3. Using an inducible Tcf3
expression system in mice, they showed that postnatal Tcf3 reactivation
caused committed epidermal cells to induce genes associated with an
undifferentiated, Wnt-inhibited state, and that Tcf3 promoted a
transcriptional program shared by embryonic and postnatal stem cells.
Genes repressed by Tcf3 included transcriptional regulators of the
epidermal, sebaceous gland, and hair follicle differentiation programs,
and all 3 terminal differentiation pathways were suppressed by postnatal
Tcf3 induction. Nguyen et al. (2006) concluded that, in the absence of
Wnt signals, Tcf3 functions in skin stem cells to maintain an
undifferentiated state, and that through Wnt signaling, Tcf3 directs
these cells along the hair lineage.

To balance self-renewal and differentiation, embryonic stem (ES) cells
must control the levels of several transcription factors, including
NANOG (607937). Pereira et al. (2006) showed that Tcf3 limited the
steady-state levels of Nanog mRNA, protein, and promoter activity in
self-renewing mouse ES cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and promoter
reporter assays showed that Tcf3 bound to a promoter regulatory region
of the Nanog gene and repressed its transcriptional activity. Repression
of Nanog required the groucho (see 600189) interaction domain of Tcf3.
Absence of Tcf3 delayed differentiation of ES cells in vitro by allowing
elevated Nanog levels to persist through 5 days of embryoid body
formation. Pereira et al. (2006) concluded that TCF3-mediated control of
NANOG expression allows ES cells to balance the creation of
lineage-committed and undifferentiated cells.

ANIMAL MODEL

Nguyen et al. (2009) found that knockout of Tcf3 or Tcf4 individually
had no overt effect on hair phenotype in mice, but Tcf3/Tcf4 double
knockout resulted in a severe skin and hair defects. Newborn
Tcf3/Tcf4-null skin was thinner than normal and often lacked whiskers.
Tcf3/Tcf4-null skin showed signs of apoptosis and, when grafted onto
nude mice, became shrunken, was unable to repair wounds, and was
progressively lost, showing an inability to maintain long-term
self-renewing populations of skin epithelia. Tcf3/Tcf4-null skin cells
grew poorly in culture and did not survive passaging. Microarray
analysis of mRNAs expressed by normal and Tcf3/Tcf4-null skin suggested
that Tcf3 and Tcf4 maintain skin epithelial stem cells through
Wnt-dependent and Wnt-independent signaling.

NOMENCLATURE

The TCF7L1 gene, although initially designated TCF3, should not be
confused with the TCF3 gene (147141), also known as E2A. TCF7L1 encodes
a TCF/LEF transcription factor involved in Wnt signaling, whereas TCF3
encodes the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors E12 and
E47.

REFERENCE 1. Castrop, J.; van Norren, K.; Clevers, H.: A gene family of HMG-box
transcription factors with homology to TCF-1. Nucleic Acids Res. 20:
611 only, 1992.

2. Merrill, B. J.; Gat, U.; DasGupta, R.; Fuchs, E.: Tcf3 and Lef1
regulate lineage differentiation of multipotent stem cells in skin. Genes
Dev. 15: 1688-1705, 2001.

3. Nguyen, H.; Merrill, B. J.; Polak, L.; Nikolova, M.; Rendl, M.;
Shaver, T. M.; Pasolli, H. A.; Fuchs, E.: Tcf3 and Tcf4 are essential
for long-term homeostasis of skin epithelia. Nature Genet. 41: 1068-1075,
2009.

4. Nguyen, H.; Rendl, M.; Fuchs, E.: Tcf3 governs stem cell features
and represses cell fate determination in skin. Cell 127: 171-183,
2006.

5. Pereira, L.; Yi, F.; Merrill, B. J.: Repression of Nanog gene
transcription by Tcf3 limits embryonic stem cell self-renewal. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 26: 7479-7491, 2006.

6. Sagara, N.; Katoh, M.: Mitomycin C resistance induced by TCF-3
overexpression in gastric cancer cell line MKN28 is associated with
DT-diaphorase down-regulation. Cancer Res. 60: 5959-5962, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/22/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 9/14/2009

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 3/6/2000

EDITED mgross: 01/25/2010
terry: 1/22/2010
mgross: 9/14/2009
mgross: 3/10/2000
psherman: 3/6/2000

600960	TITLE *600960 SET TRANSLOCATION, MYELOID LEUKEMIA-ASSOCIATED; SET
;;INHIBITOR OF GZMA-ACTIVATED DNase; IGAAD
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The translocation (6;9)(p23q34) is the hallmark of a specific subtype of
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) characterized by a poor prognosis and a
young age of onset. It is classified in the French-American-British
(FAB) system mostly as M2/M4 and rarely as M1 or refractive anemia with
excess of blast cells (RAEB). On chromosome 9, breakpoints take place in
a specific intron, denoted icb-9, of a large gene named Cain (CAN;
114350). On chromosome 6, breakpoints occur in a single intron, icb-6,
of a gene named DEK (125264). In a patient with acute undifferentiated
leukemia and an apparently normal karyotype, von Lindern et al. (1992)
found a breakpoint in icb-9 of the CAN gene in a bone marrow sample but
detected no breakpoint in DEK. They isolated and characterized a novel
gene, named SET (suppressor of variegation, enhancer of zeste, and
Trithorax), that was fused to CAN in the leukemic cells of this patient.
A chimeric SET-CAN transcript whose sequence predicted a fusion protein
of 155 kD was detected. The SET gene encodes transcripts of 2.0 and 2.7
kb that result from the use of alternative polyadenylation sites. Both
transcripts contained the open reading frame for a putative protein with
a predicted molecular mass of 32 kD. The SET sequence showed homology
with the yeast nucleosome assembly protein NAP-I. The only common
sequence motif of SET and DEK proteins is an acidic region. SET has a
long acidic tail, of which a large part is present in the predicted
SET-CAN fusion protein.

GENE FUNCTION

Carlson et al. (1998) studied the role of SET in the regulation of renal
cell proliferation and tumorigenesis. The mRNA encoding SET was
expressed at much higher levels in transformed human and rodent cell
lines than in cultured renal epithelial and primary endothelial cells.
Consistent with a role for SET in cell proliferation, SET mRNA
expression was markedly reduced in cells rendered quiescent by serum
starvation, contact inhibition, or differentiation. Previous findings
during renal development were extended by demonstrating that SET protein
expression is also much greater in developing rat and human kidney than
in fully differentiated, mature kidney. Finally, high levels of SET mRNA
and SET protein expression were found in Wilms tumor but not in renal
cell carcinoma, adult polycystic kidney disease, or in transitional cell
carcinoma. The SET domain (Tschiersch et al., 1994) is found in proteins
that are involved in embryonic development (Tripoulas et al., 1996).

Granzyme A (GZMA; 140050) induces a caspase-independent cell death
pathway characterized by single-stranded DNA nicks and other features of
apoptosis. A GZMA-activated DNase (GAAD) is in an endoplasmic
reticulum-associated complex containing pp32 (600832) and the GZMA
substrates SET, HMG2 (163906), and APE1 (107748). Fan et al. (2003)
showed that GAAD is NM23H1 (156490), a nucleoside diphosphate kinase
implicated in suppression of tumor metastasis, and its specific
inhibitor (IGAAD) is SET. NM23H1 bound SET and was released from
inhibition by GZMA cleavage of SET. After GZMA loading or cytotoxic T
lymphocyte attack, SET and NM23H1 translocated to the nucleus and SET
was degraded, allowing NM23H1 to nick chromosomal DNA. GZMA-treated
cells with silenced NM23H1 expression were resistant to GZMA-mediated
DNA damage and cytolysis, while cells overexpressing NM23H1 were more
sensitive.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis using the N-terminal 277 amino acids of SET
as bait, Minakuchi et al. (2001) identified SET-binding protein-1
(SETBP1; 611060). Deletion and mutagenesis analysis revealed that amino
acids 182 to 223 of SET interacted with amino acids 1238 to 1434 of
SETBP1. Immunoprecipitation analysis verified that SETBP1 interacted
with endogenous SET in a human osteosarcoma cell line.

Ischemia and seizure cause excessive neuronal excitation that is
associated with brain acidosis and neuronal cell death. Liu et al.
(2008) found that the neurotoxin kainic acid activated lysosomal
asparagine endopeptidase (AEP, or LGMN; 602620) in mouse brain and
triggered degradation of Set, followed by DNA nicking and neuronal cell
death. Pike-L (CENTG1; 605476) strongly bound Set in the nucleus and
protected Set from proteolytic cleavage by Aep in vitro and in vivo,
thereby diminishing DNA damage and neuronal cell death. Kainic acid or
stroke failed to provoke DNA nicking and neuronal cell death in
Aep-deficient mice.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, von Lindern et al. (1992)
assigned the SET gene to 9q34, centromeric of ABL (189980).

REFERENCE 1. Carlson, S. G.; Eng, E.; Kim, E.-G.; Perlman, E. J.; Copeland,
T. D.; Ballermann, B. J.: Expression of SET, an inhibitor of protein
phosphatase 2A, in renal development and Wilms' tumor. J. Am. Soc.
Nephrol. 9: 1873-1880, 1998.

2. Fan, Z.; Beresford, P. J.; Oh, D. Y.; Zhang, D.; Lieberman, J.
: Tumor suppressor NM23-H1 is a granzyme A-activated DNase during
CTL-mediated apoptosis, and the nucleosome assembly protein SET is
its inhibitor. Cell 112: 659-672, 2003. Note: Erratum: Cell 115:
241 only, 2003.

3. Liu, Z.; Jang, S.-W.; Liu, X.; Cheng, D.; Peng, J.; Yepes, M.;
Li, X.; Matthews, S.; Watts, C.; Asano, M.; Hara-Nishimura, I.; Luo,
H. R.; Ye, K.: Neuroprotective actions of PIKE-L by inhibition of
SET proteolytic degradation by asparagine endopeptidase. Molec. Cell 29:
665-678, 2008.

4. Minakuchi, M.; Kakazu, N.; Gorrin-Rivas, M. J.; Abe, T.; Copeland,
T. D.; Ueda, K.; Adachi, Y.: Identification and characterization
of SEB, a novel protein that binds to the acute undifferentiated leukemia-associated
protein SET. Europ. J. Biochem. 268: 1340-1351, 2001.

5. Tripoulas, N.; LaJeunesse, D.; Gildea, J.; Shearn, A.: The Drosophila
ash1 gene product, which is localized at specific sites on polytene
chromosomes, contains a SET domain and a PHD finger. Genetics 143:
913-928, 1996.

6. Tschiersch, B.; Hofmann, A.; Krauss, V.; Dorn, R.; Korge, G.; Reuter,
G.: The protein encoded by the Drosophila position-effect variegation
suppressor gene Su(var)3-9 combines domains of antagonistic regulators
of homeotic gene complexes. EMBO J. 13: 3822-3831, 1994.

7. von Lindern, M.; van Baal, S.; Wiegant, J.; Raap, A.; Hagemeijer,
A.; Grosveld, G.: 'can,' a putative oncogene associated with myeloid
leukemogenesis, may be activated by fusion of its 3-prime half to
different genes: characterization of the 'set' gene. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 12: 3346-3355, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/30/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/23/2007
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/14/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/11/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/8/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/18/1995

EDITED mgross: 06/03/2008
terry: 5/30/2008
mgross: 5/23/2007
mgross: 6/20/2006
carol: 9/17/2003
mgross: 4/14/2003
mcapotos: 4/11/2001
terry: 4/9/2001
alopez: 5/17/1999
terry: 5/11/1999
dholmes: 7/22/1998
carol: 7/13/1998
terry: 7/8/1998
terry: 6/4/1998
mark: 12/18/1995

304040	TITLE *304040 GAP JUNCTION PROTEIN, BETA-1; GJB1
;;GAP JUNCTION PROTEIN, 32-KD;;
CONNEXIN 32; CX32;;
LIVER CONNEXIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Connexins are membrane-spanning proteins that assemble to form gap
junction channels that facilitate the transfer of ions and small
molecules between cells (Bergoffen et al., 1993). For a general
discussion of connexin proteins, see GJB2 (121011).

CLONING

Kumar and Gilula (1986) isolated the human CX32 gene from a human liver
cDNA library. By Northern blot analysis, Bergoffen et al. (1993) showed
CX32 expression in liver and peripheral nerve.

Sohl et al. (2003) stated that mouse and human CX32 share 99% amino acid
identity and differ at only 4 residues. They also share significant
similarity in the 5-prime UTR and promoter region. Northern blot
analysis detected a 1.6-kb CX32 transcript in both mouse and human. In
both species, expression was highest in liver and moderate in pancreas,
kidney, and brain. No expression was detected in skeletal muscle, lung,
and heart.

MAPPING

Willecke et al. (1990) used a rat cDNA probe in Southern analysis of a
panel of human-mouse somatic cell hybrids to map CX32 to Xp11-q13.
Through analysis of somatic cell hybrids by PCR and hybridization,
Fishman et al. (1991) assigned the GJA1 gene (121014) to chromosome 6
and the GJB1 gene to Xp11-q22. Structural comparisons of these genes
indicated that they probably arose from a common progenitor gene.
Because of a critical function, the connexins may have evolved early and
have remained relatively conserved despite their disparate locations.

Using a series of somatic cell hybrid mapping panels and a rat GJB1
probe, Corcos et al. (1992) mapped the CX32 gene to proximal Xq13.1, in
interval 8, as described by Lafreniere et al. (1991). By somatic cell
hybrids, Hsieh et al. (1991) mapped GJB1 to Xcen-q22 and mapped the
corresponding gene to the X chromosome in the mouse. Raimondi et al.
(1992) refined the assignment to Xq13 by in situ hybridization.

GENE FUNCTION

Bergoffen et al. (1993) found CX32 expression in myelinated peripheral
nerve at the nodes of Ranvier and Schmidt-Lanterman incisures. CX32 may
form intracellular gap junctions that connect to the folds of Schwann
cell cytoplasm, allowing the transfer of nutrients, ions, and molecules
to the innermost myelin layers.

Scherer et al. (1995) demonstrated that CX32 is normally found in the
paranodal myelin loops and Schmidt-Lanterman incisures of myelinating
Schwann cells in the peripheral nervous system, as well as in
oligodendrocytes and their processes, but not in compact myelin of the
central nervous system.

Kumar and Gilula (1996) gave a general review of the gap junction
communication channel. Beta-1 connexin is widely expressed in many
tissues, including liver.

Bondurand et al. (2001) showed that the transcription modulator SOX10
(602229), in synergy with EGR2 (129010), strongly activates CX32
expression in vitro by directly binding to its promoter. In agreement
with this finding, SOX10 and EGR2 mutants identified in patients with
peripheral myelin defects failed to transactivate the CX32 promoter.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By direct sequencing, Bergoffen et al. (1993) identified 7 different
mutations in the CX32 gene (see, e.g., 304040.0001-304040.0003) in
affected persons from 8 families with X-linked dominant
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMTX1; 302800).

Bone et al. (1995) described sequence analysis from 19 unrelated
patients with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, detecting 6 novel
mutations and 3 previously reported mutations (see, e.g.,
304040.0003-304040.0011). Analysis of the distribution of these
mutations as well as those previously reported suggested to the authors
that virtually all regions of connexin 32 are important in its function.

Ionasescu et al. (1996) studied 27 families with X-linked
Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy. Mutations in the coding region of the
CX32 gene were found in 22 families. These mutations included 4 nonsense
mutations, 8 missense mutations, 2 medium-sized deletions, and 1
insertion. Most missense mutations showed a mild clinical phenotype (5
of 8), whereas all nonsense mutations, the larger of the 2 deletions,
and the insertion that produced frameshifts showed severe phenotypes. No
point mutations in the CX32 gene coding region were found in 5 CMTX1
families with mild clinical phenotype. In 3 of these families, positive
genetic linkage with the markers of the Xq13.1 region were found; the
genetic linkage of the remaining 2 families could not be evaluated
because of their small size.

Omori et al. (1996) studied 4 known mutations in the connexin-32 gene:
lys60 to phe, a mutation in a highly conserved cysteine residue; val139
to met (304040.0003), located in the transmembrane region; arg215 to
trp, located in the cytoplasmic tail; and ala220 to ter (304040.0005),
also located in the cytoplasmic tail. Since HeLa cells do not show
detectable levels of gap junction intercellular communication (GJIC) or
expression of any connexins, they tested the functional effects of
transfecting mutant genes in HeLa cultures. The first 3 mutations were
unable to restore GJIC in transfected HeLa cells (although their gene
products were detectable), in contrast to normal GJIC detected with the
last mutation. In addition, the dominant-negative effect was tested in
doubly transfected HeLa cells and the investigators found that low
expression of the mutant CX32 gene had a relatively significant effect
on diminishing GJIC. Omori et al. (1996) therefore concluded that
certain mutants form nonfunctional chimeric connexins with wildtype
connexins.

Nelis et al. (1997) described 5 new mutations in the CX32 gene. Janssen
et al. (1997) performed SSCP analysis of the CX32 gene in 121 patients
selected from the larger group of 443 patients on the basis of linkage
to Xq13.1, absence of the 17p12 duplication or deletion, and absence of
point mutations in PMP22 and P0. They found 5 new mutations and 3
mutations previously described in other unrelated families.

In 35 unrelated CMTX patients without the 17p11.2 duplication but with
median nerve conduction between 30 and 40 m/s, Rouger et al. (1997)
screened for a CX32 mutation. A total of 14 mutations were found, 5 of
which had not previously been reported. All but 1 of the mutations were
detected by SSCP. Mutations causing CMTX have been found mostly in exon
2 of the gene.

Latour et al. (1997) identified a total of 19 separate mutations in the
CX32 gene as the cause of CMTX in 21 French families.

Ainsworth et al. (1998) reported a family in which affected members with
CMTX had complete deletion of the GJB1 gene with complete absence of the
Cx32 gene product. The clinical phenotype in the affected individuals in
this kindred did not appear to differ greatly from the phenotype
observed in other individuals with missense, nonsense, or frameshift
mutations in the gene. This would appear to make a dominant-negative
effect of the mutation unlikely.

Ikegami et al. (1998) stated that more than 130 different mutations of
the GJB1 gene, including coding and noncoding regions, had been reported
in patients with X-linked CMT. In studies of 49 Japanese families with
CMT1 they found 5 mutations of the GJB1 gene; 4 of which had not
previously been reported.

Nelis et al. (1999) identified 163 distinct mutations in the coding
region of the CX32 gene in 268 unrelated patients with hereditary
peripheral neuropathy. Of these mutations, 125 were missense mutations,
1 a double missense mutation, 1 a missense mutation combined with a
1-amino acid deletion, 12 nonsense mutations, 17 frameshift mutations,
and 6 in-frame deletions and insertions. Further, in 1 case a complex
rearrangement in the coding region of CX32 was found. Most missense
mutations showed a mild clinical phenotype, whereas all nonsense
mutations and frameshift deletion/insertions showed severe phenotypes.
Forty-four percent of the codons were mutated in more than 1 patient. At
codon 22, 4 distinct mutations were identified in 20 unrelated patients.
In 2 X-linked families not showing mutations in the coding region of
CX32, mutations in the noncoding region were identified by Ionasescu et
al. (1996). In addition to the 163 mutations tabulated for the CX32 gene
in patients with hereditary peripheral neuropathy, Nelis et al. (1999)
identified 58 mutations in the MPZ gene (159440) and 27 mutations in the
PMP22 gene (601097).

GJB1 is expressed in both the peripheral and the central nervous system.
In consequence, it is not surprising that patients with CMTX1 and
specific GJB1 mutations have both peripheral neuropathy and a mild or
transient brain disorder (Paulson et al., 2002; Hanemann et al., 2003;
Takashima et al., 2003).

Kleopa et al. (2006) reported 2 novel mutations in the GJB1 gene that
segregated with CMTX1 in 2 unrelated families. In vitro expression
studies and immunohistochemistry showed that the mutant proteins were
retained within the Golgi apparatus and failed to reach the cell
membrane where gap junctions are normally formed.

Casasnovas et al. (2006) identified 34 GJB1 mutations, including 6 novel
mutations, in 59 patients from 34 CMT families of Spanish or Portuguese
descent. The extracellular loop domains were affected in 64.6% of
mutations.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, ARG142TRP

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800),
Bergoffen et al. (1993) found a C-to-T transition in codon 142 of the
CX32 gene, resulting in substitution of tryptophan for arginine.

.0002
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, PRO172SER

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800),
Bergoffen et al. (1993) found a G-to-A transition in codon 172 of the
CX32 gene, resulting in substitution of serine for proline.

.0003
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, VAL139MET

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800),
Bergoffen et al. (1993) found a G-to-A transition in codon 139 of the
CX32 gene, resulting in a substitution of valine for methionine. The
identical mutation was found in an unrelated patient by Bone et al.
(1995).

.0004
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, TRP133ARG

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800), Bone et
al. (1995) found a T-to-C transition in codon 133 of the CX32 gene,
resulting in a substitution of arginine for tryptophan.

.0005
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, ARG220TER

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800),
Fairweather et al. (1994) found a C-to-T transition in codon 220 of the
CX32 gene, resulting in a stop signal in place of an arginine. The same
mutation was found in an unrelated Virginia family by Bone et al.
(1995).

.0006
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, ILE30ASN

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800), Bone et
al. (1995) found a T-to-A transversion in codon 30 of the CX32 gene,
resulting in the substitution of asparagine for isoleucine.

.0007
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, LEU156ARG

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800), Bone et
al. (1995) found a T-to-G transversion in codon 156 of the CX32 gene,
resulting in the substitution of arginine for leucine.

.0008
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, TYR65CYS

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800), Bone et
al. (1995) found an A-to-G transition in codon 65 of the CX32 gene,
resulting in a substitution of cysteine for tyrosine.

.0009
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, VAL13LEU

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800), Bone et
al. (1995) found a G-to-T transversion in codon 13 of the CX32 gene,
resulting in a substitution of leucine for valine.

.0010
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, 1-BP DEL

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800), Bone et
al. (1995) found a deletion of thymidine residue in codon 137 of CX32,
resulting in a frameshift mutation which predicted a truncated 194-amino
acid protein with the last 58 amino acids starting at codon 137 altered
from wildtype.

.0011
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, VAL95MET

In a family with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800), Bone et
al. (1995) found a G-to-A transition in codon 95 of the CX32 gene,
resulting in the substitution of methionine for valine.

Montenegro et al. (2011) reported the use of exome sequencing to
identify the V95M mutation in affected members of a large family with
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease and a questionable inheritance pattern.
Affected individuals had classic features of the disease, with onset
between ages 14 and 40 years of distal sensory impairment and muscle
weakness and atrophy affecting the upper and lower limbs. Nerve
conduction velocities were in the intermediate range.

.0012
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, ASN205SER

Since CX32 is expressed not only in Schwann cells in the peripheral
nervous system but also in oligodendrocytes in the central nervous
system, Bahr et al. (1999) examined a CMTX1 (302800) family for evidence
of CNS involvement. The family had an asn205-to-ser mutation involving
the fourth transmembrane domain of CX32. The patients showed typical
clinical and electrophysiologic abnormalities in the peripheral nervous
system, but, in addition, visual, acoustic, and motor pathways of the
CNS were affected subclinically. This was indicated by pathologic
changes in visual evoked potentials, brainstem auditory evoked
potentials, and central motor evoked potentials. They suggested that
abnormal electrophysiologic findings in CNS pathway examinations should
raise the suspicion of CMTX and a search for mutations in the GJB1 gene.

.0013
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, 367G-T

In a 71-year-old woman with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
(302800), Tabaraud et al. (1999) identified a truncating mutation, GAG
to TAG at nucleotide 367, in the GJB1 gene. The mutation led to
termination by a glutamic acid in codon position 102 instead of codon
283 for the normal protein.

.0014
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, SER85CYS

Janssen et al. (1997) identified a C-to-G transversion in the GJB1 gene,
resulting in a ser85-to-cys (S85C) substitution, associated with
X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800).

Abrams et al. (2002) showed that expression of the S85C mutation
resulted in large, relatively nonselective, voltage-dependent currents
not seen in oocytes expressing wildtype Cx32. The findings suggested
that the S85C mutant has a much greater propensity to form conducting
hemichannels than does wildtype Cx32. The authors suggested that the
resulting increase in membrane permeability may prevent normal
functioning of the Schwann cells and peripheral nerves of patients
harboring this mutation.

.0015
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, -528T-G

Ionasescu et al. (1996) described a family with X-linked CMT (302800)
that harbored a T-to-G transversion at position -528 with respect to the
ATG start codon. Bondurand et al. (2001) used gelshift experiments to
show that the mutation impaired the binding of SOX10 (602229) to the
CX32 promoter region.

.0016
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, THR55ILE

In 2 sibs with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800), Panas et
al. (2001) identified a C-to-T transition at position 164 in exon 2 of
the GJB1 gene, resulting in a thr55-to-ile (T55I) substitution. In
addition to extremity weakness and atrophy and polyneuropathy, the
patients had episodes of severe weakness lasting from hours to days,
dysarthria, dysphagia, and bilateral hyperintensities of the
periventricular white matter on MRI. Panas et al. (2001) noted that
connexin-32 is expressed in Schwann cells, oligodendrocytes, and some
neuronal populations, which may explain the CNS involvement.

.0017
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, 21-BP DUP

In a patient with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800),
Kawakami et al. (2002) identified a 21-bp duplication from residues 55
to 61 in exon 2 of the GJB1 gene, resulting in a 7-amino acid insertion
in the first extracellular loop of the protein. The patient showed
clinical cerebellar abnormalities with a normal MRI and prolonged
central somatosensory conduction times. His clinically asymptomatic
mother carried the mutation. The authors referred to the report by Panas
et al. (2001) (see 304040.0016), and suggested that mutation in this
area of the GJB1 gene, specifically residue 55, may lead to CNS
manifestations.

.0018
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, 3-BP DEL, 304GAG

Hanemann et al. (2003) reported a family in which 3 members were
affected with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (302800). Direct
sequencing of the GJB1 gene in 2 living patients identified a 3-bp
deletion (304delGAG), resulting in deletion of a glutamic acid at codon
102 (glu102). In addition to classic CMT clinical findings, all 3
patients had transient CNS symptoms correlating with transient and
reversible white matter lesions on MRI. CNS symptoms included
paraparesis, monoparesis, tetraparesis, dysarthria, aphasia, and cranial
nerve palsies.

.0019
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, -526G-C

In affected members of a large family with X-linked CMT (302800),
Houlden et al. (2004) identified a -526G-C transversion in a highly
conserved region of the nerve-specific P2 promoter of the GJB1 gene. The
mutation occurs within a SOX10 (602229) S2 binding site, similar to the
-528T-G mutation (304040.0015). Functional expression studies showed
that the -526G-C mutation impaired SOX10 binding, resulting in a 65%
decrease in transcriptional activation.

.0020
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
GJB1, PHE235CYS

In a girl with a severe early-onset form of X-linked CMT (302800), Liang
et al. (2005) identified a 766T-G transversion in the GJB1 gene,
resulting in a phe235-to-cys (F235C) substitution in the carboxy tail
domain of the protein. The mutation was not identified in 50 control
chromosomes. The patient's asymptomatic mother also carried the
mutation, but Southern blot analysis showed preferential inactivation of
the mutant X-chromosome by a ratio of approximately 9 to 1. Functional
expression studies demonstrated that cells with the F235C mutant protein
had normal plasma membrane expression of the channel protein, but showed
a reduction of the resting membrane potential of more than 40 mV, with a
decrease in the threshold of activation. Cells expressing the mutant
protein also showed decreased viability compared to wildtype. Liang et
al. (2005) concluded that the propensity of the F235C hemichannels to be
open at resting membrane potential ('leaky channel') adversely affected
cell viability, thus resulting in a severe phenotype. Similar in vitro
findings had been reported for another GJB1 mutation (S85C;
304040.0014).

.0021
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, X-LINKED DOMINANT, 1
DEJERINE-SOTTAS NEUROPATHY, INCLUDED
GJB1, VAL136ALA

In Korean patients with X-linked CMT (302800), Choi et al. (2004)
identified a 407T-C transition in the GJB1 gene, resulting in a
val136-to-ala (V136A) substitution. (In the original publication, Choi
et al. (2004) erroneously designated the nucleotide change as 408T-C.)

In a Korean girl with Dejerine-Sottas syndrome (145900), Chung et al.
(2005) identified 2 mutations in 2 different genes: the V136A
substitution in the GJB1 gene and an R359W mutation in the EGR2 gene
(129010.0004). She inherited the EGR2 mutation from her father, who had
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease-1D (607678). The GJB1 gene was de novo. The
father had pes cavus and developed difficulty walking at age 8 years,
but had a milder phenotype than the daughter, who had experienced gait
difficulties since infancy and facial weakness. She also had bilateral
hand muscle weakness and atrophy and had sensory impairment of both
upper and lower extremities. Chung et al. (2005) concluded that the more
severe phenotype in the daughter was caused by an additive effect of the
2 mutations.

REFERENCE 1. Abrams, C. K.; Bennett, M. V. L.; Verselis, V. K.; Bargiello, T.
A.: Voltage opens unopposed gap junction hemichannels formed by a
connexin 32 mutant associated with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 3980-3984, 2002.

2. Ainsworth, P. J.; Bolton, C. F.; Murphy, B. C.; Stuart, J. A.;
Hahn, A. F.: Genotype/phenotype correlation in affected individuals
of a family with a deletion of the entire coding sequence of the connexin
32 gene. Hum. Genet. 103: 242-244, 1998.

3. Bahr, M.; Andres, F.; Timmerman, V.; Nelis, M. E.; Van Broeckhoven,
C.; Dichgans, J.: Central visual, acoustic, and motor pathway involvement
in a Charcot-Marie-Tooth family with an asn205-to-ser mutation in
the connexin 32 gene. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiat. 66: 202-206,
1999.

4. Bergoffen, J.; Scherer, S. S.; Wang, S.; Oronzi Scott, M.; Bone,
L. J.; Paul, D. L.; Chen, K.; Lensch, M. W.; Chance, P. F.; Fischbeck,
K. H.: Connexin mutations in X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Science 262:
2039-2042, 1993.

5. Bondurand, N.; Girard, M.; Pingault, V.; Lemort, N.; Dubourg, O.;
Goossens, M.: Human connexin 32, a gap junction protein altered in
the X-linked form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, is directly regulated
by the transcription factor SOX10. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 2783-2795,
2001.

6. Bone, L. J.; Dahl, N.; Lensch, M. W.; Chance, P. F.; Kelly, T.;
Le Guern, E.; Magi, S.; Parry, G.; Shapiro, H.; Wang, S.; Fischbeck,
K. H.: New connexin32 mutations associated with X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease. Neurology 45: 1863-1866, 1995.

7. Casasnovas, C.; Banchs, I.; Corral, J.; Martinez-Matos, J. A.;
Volpini, V.: Clinical and molecular analysis of X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease type 1 in Spanish population. Clin. Genet. 70: 516-523,
2006. Note: Erratum: Clin. Genet. 73: 196 only, 2008.

8. Choi, B.-O.; Lee, M. S.; Shin, S. H.; Hwang, J. H.; Choi, K.-G.;
Kim, W.-K.; Sunwoo, I. N.; Kim, N. K.; Chung, K. W.: Mutational analysis
of PMP22, MPZ, GJB1, EGR2 and NEFL in Korean Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy
patients. (Abstract) Hum. Mutat. 24: 185-186, 2004. Note: Full Article
Online. Erratum: Hum. Mutat. 24: 350 only, 2004.

9. Chung, K. W.; Sunwoo, I. N.; Kim, S. M.; Park, K. D.; Kim, W.-K.;
Kim, T. S.; Koo, H.; Cho, M.; Lee, J.; Choi, B. O.: Two missense
mutations of EGR2 R359W and GJB1 V136A in a Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
family. Neurogenetics 6: 159-163, 2005.

10. Corcos, I. A.; Lafreniere, R. G.; Begy, C. R.; Loch-Caruso, R.;
Willard, H. F.; Glover, T. W.: Refined localization of human connexin
32 gene locus, GJB1, to Xq13.1. Genomics 13: 479-480, 1992.

11. Fairweather, N.; Bell, C.; Cochrane, S.; Chelly, J.; Wang, S.;
Mostacciuolo, M. L.; Monaco, A. P.; Haites, N. E.: Mutations in the
connexin 32 gene in X-linked dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
(CMTX1). Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 29-34, 1994. Note: Erratum: Hum.
Molec. Genet. 3: 1034 only, 1994.

12. Fishman, G. I.; Eddy, R. L.; Shows, T. B.; Rosenthal, L.; Leinwand,
L. A.: The human connexin gene family of gap junction proteins: distinct
chromosomal locations but similar structure. Genomics 10: 250-256,
1991.

13. Hanemann, C. O.; Bergmann, C.; Senderek, J.; Zerres, K.; Sperfeld,
A.-D.: Transient, recurrent, white matter lesions in X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease with novel connexin 32 mutation. Arch. Neurol. 60: 605-609,
2003.

14. Houlden, H.; Girard, M.; Cockerell, C.; Ingram, D.; Wood, N. W.;
Goossens, M.; Walker, R. W. H.; Reilly, M. M.: Connexin 32 promoter
P2 mutations: a mechanism of peripheral nerve dysfunction. Ann. Neurol. 56:
730-734, 2004.

15. Hsieh, C.-L.; Kumar, N. M.; Gilula, N. B.; Francke, U.: Distribution
of genes for gap junction membrane channel proteins on human and mouse
chromosomes. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 17: 191-200, 1991.

16. Ikegami, T.; Lin, C.; Kato, M.; Itoh, A.; Nonaka, I.; Kurimura,
M.; Hirayabashi, H.; Shinohara, Y.; Mochizuki, A.; Hayasaka, K.:
Four novel mutations of the connexin 32 gene in four Japanese families
with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1. Am. J. Med. Genet. 80:
352-355, 1998.

17. Ionasescu, V.; Ionasescu, R.; Searby, C.: Correlation between
connexin32 gene mutations and clinical phenotype in X-linked dominant
Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy. Am. J. Med. Genet. 63: 486-491,
1996.

18. Ionasescu, V. V.; Searby, C.; Ionasescu, R.; Neuhaus, I. M.; Werner,
R.: Mutations of the noncoding region of the connexin 32 gene in
X-linked dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy. Neurology 47:
541-544, 1996.

19. Janssen, E. A. M.; Kemp, S.; Hensels, G. W.; Sie, O. G.; de Die-Smulders,
C. E. M.; Hoogendijk, J. E.; de Visser, M.; Bolhuis, P. A.: Connexin32
gene mutations in X-linked dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMTX1). Hum.
Genet. 99: 501-505, 1997.

20. Kawakami, H.; Inoue, K.; Sakakihara, I.; Nakamura, S.: Novel
mutation in X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease associated with CNS
impairment. Neurology 59: 923-926, 2002.

21. Kleopa, K. A.; Zamba-Papanicolaou, E.; Alevra, X.; Nicolaou, P.;
Georgiou, D.-M.; Hadjisavvas, A.; Kyriakides, T.; Christodoulou, K.
: Phenotypic and cellular expression of two novel connexin32 mutations
causing CMT1X. Neurology 66: 396-402, 2006.

22. Kumar, N. M.; Gilula, N. B.: Cloning and characterization of
human and rat liver cDNAs coding for a gap junction protein. J. Cell
Biol. 103: 767-776, 1986.

23. Kumar, N. M.; Gilula, N. B.: The gap junction communication channel. Cell 84:
381-388, 1996.

24. Lafreniere, R. G.; Brown, C. J.; Powers, V. E.; Carrel, L.; Davies,
K. E.; Barker, D. F.; Willard, H. F.: Physical mapping of 60 DNA
markers in the p21.1-q21.3 region of the human X chromosome. Genomics 11:
352-363, 1991.

25. Latour, P.; Levy, N.; Paret, M.; Chapon, F.; Chazot, G.; Clavelou,
P.; Couratier, P.; Dumas, R.; Ollagnon, E.; Pouget, J.; Setiey, A.;
Vallat, J. M.; Boucherat, M.; Fontes, M.; Vandenberghe, A.: Mutations
in the X-linked form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease in the French
population. Neurogenetics 1: 117-123, 1997.

26. Liang, G. S. L.; de Miguel, M.; Gomez-Hernandez, J. M.; Glass,
J. D.; Scherer, S. S.; Mintz, M.; Barrio, L. C.; Fischbeck, K. H.
: Severe neuropathy with leaky connexin32 hemichannels. Ann. Neurol. 57:
749-754, 2005.

27. Montenegro, G.; Powell, E.; Huang, J.; Speziani, F.; Edwards,
Y. J. K.; Beecham, G.; Hulme, W.; Siskind, C.; Vance, J.; Shy, M.;
Zuchner, S.: Exome sequencing allows for rapid gene identification
in a Charcot-Marie-Tooth family. Ann. Neurol. 69: 464-470, 2011.

28. Nelis, E.; Haites, N.; Van Broeckhoven, C.: Mutations in the
peripheral myelin genes and associated genes in inherited peripheral
neuropathies. Hum. Mutat. 13: 11-28, 1999.

29. Nelis, E.; Simokovic, S.; Timmerman, V.; Lofgren, A.; Backhovens,
H.; De Jonghe, P.; Martin, J.-J.; Van Broeckhoven, C.: Mutation analysis
of the connexin 32 (Cx32) gene in Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy type
1: identification of five new mutations. Hum. Mutat. 9: 47-52, 1997.

30. Omori, Y.; Mesnil, M.; Yamasaki, H.: Connexin 32 mutations from
X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease patients: functional defects
and dominant negative effects. Molec. Biol. Cell 7: 907-916, 1996.

31. Panas, M.; Kalfakis, N.; Karadimas, C.; Vassilopoulos, D.: Episodes
of generalized weakness in two sibs with the C164T mutation of the
connexin 32 gene. Neurology 57: 1906-1908, 2001.

32. Paulson, H. L.; Garbern, J. Y.; Hoban, T. F.; Krajewski, K. M.;
Lewis, R. A.; Fischbeck, K. H.; Grossman, R. I.; Lenkinski, R.; Kamholz,
J. A.; Shy, M. E.: Transient central nervous system white matter
abnormality in X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Ann. Neurol. 52:
429-434, 2002.

33. Raimondi, E.; Gaudi, S.; Moralli, D.; De Carli, L.; Malcovati,
M.; Simonic, T.; Tenchini, M. L.: Assignment of the human connexin
32 gene (GJB1) to band Xq13. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 60: 210-211,
1992.

34. Rouger, H.; LeGuern, E.; Birouk, N.; Gouider, R.; Tardieu, S.;
Plassart, E.; Gugenheim, M.; Vallat, J.-M.; Louboutin, J.-P.; Bouche,
P.; Agid, Y.; Brice, A.: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease with intermediate
motor nerve conduction velocities: characterization of 14 CX32 mutations
in 35 families. Hum. Mutat. 10: 443-452, 1997.

35. Scherer, S. S.; Deschenes, S. M.; Xu, Y.; Grinspan, J. B.; Fischbeck,
K. H.; Paul, D. L.: Connexin32 is a myelin-related protein in the
PNS and CNS. J. Neurosci. 15: 8281-8294, 1995.

36. Sohl, G.; Nielsen, P. A.; Eiberger, J.; Willecke, K.: Expression
profiles of the novel human connexin genes hCx30.2, hCx40.1, and hCx62
differ from their putative mouse orthologues. Cell Commun. Adhesion 10:
27-36, 2003.

37. Tabaraud, F.; Lagrange, E.; Sindou, P.; Vandenberghe, A.; Levy,
N.; Vallat, J. M.: Demyelinating X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease:
unusual electrophysiological findings. Muscle Nerve 22: 1442-1447,
1999.

38. Takashima, H.; Nakagawa, M.; Umehara, F.; Hirata, K.; Suehara,
M.; Mayumi, H.; Yoshishige, K.; Matsuyama, W.; Saito, M.; Jonosono,
M.; Arimura, K.; Osame, M.: Gap junction protein beta 1 (GJB1) mutations
and central nervous system symptoms in X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease. Acta Neurol. Scand. 107: 31-37, 2003.

39. Willecke, K.; Jungbluth, S.; Dahl, E.; Hennemann, H.; Heynkes,
R.; Grzeschik, K.-H.: Six genes of the human connexin gene family
coding for gap junctional proteins are assigned to four different
human chromosomes. Europ. J. Cell Biol. 53: 275-280, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/13/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/27/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/7/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/10/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/30/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/23/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/28/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/12/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/10/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/17/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/8/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/3/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/12/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/30/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/29/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/5/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/12/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/19/1997
Cynthia K. Ewing - updated: 8/31/1996
Orest Hurko - updated: 4/4/1996
Orest Hurko - updated: 11/16/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/18/1991

EDITED carol: 03/08/2013
terry: 9/14/2012
carol: 1/12/2012
carol: 12/5/2011
carol: 10/21/2011
ckniffin: 10/13/2011
wwang: 1/28/2011
mgross: 3/27/2008
ckniffin: 2/29/2008
terry: 12/17/2007
wwang: 5/29/2007
ckniffin: 5/7/2007
wwang: 4/19/2006
ckniffin: 4/10/2006
joanna: 4/4/2006
wwang: 11/30/2005
ckniffin: 11/30/2005
wwang: 8/26/2005
ckniffin: 8/23/2005
ckniffin: 4/28/2005
terry: 3/3/2005
alopez: 7/16/2004
terry: 7/12/2004
carol: 4/30/2004
tkritzer: 6/9/2003
ckniffin: 5/28/2003
tkritzer: 1/8/2003
ckniffin: 1/3/2003
cwells: 6/12/2002
cwells: 6/10/2002
mgross: 4/25/2002
terry: 4/17/2002
carol: 12/8/1999
carol: 8/31/1999
psherman: 8/31/1999
jlewis: 6/9/1999
terry: 6/3/1999
mgross: 3/16/1999
carol: 1/14/1999
terry: 1/12/1999
carol: 1/5/1999
terry: 12/30/1998
carol: 11/2/1998
terry: 10/29/1998
carol: 10/12/1998
carol: 5/12/1998
terry: 5/5/1998
alopez: 1/12/1998
dholmes: 1/6/1998
mark: 9/1/1997
mark: 5/19/1997
terry: 5/19/1997
alopez: 4/30/1997
terry: 4/29/1997
terry: 2/26/1997
randy: 8/31/1996
terry: 8/29/1996
mark: 8/27/1996
mark: 6/25/1996
terry: 6/14/1996
mark: 4/4/1996
terry: 3/23/1996
mark: 3/9/1996
terry: 3/4/1996
carol: 12/20/1994
pfoster: 4/1/1994
mimadm: 2/27/1994
terry: 1/3/1994
carol: 10/27/1993

609699	TITLE *609699 MONOGLYCERIDE LIPASE; MGLL
;;MGL;;
MONOACYLGLYCEROL LIPASE; MAGL;;
HUK5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Monoglyceride lipase (MGLL; EC 3.1.1.23) functions together with
hormone-sensitive lipase (LIPE; 151750) to hydrolyze intracellular
triglyceride stores in adipocytes and other cells to fatty acids and
glycerol. MGLL may also complement lipoprotein lipase (LPL; 238600) in
completing hydrolysis of monoglycerides resulting from degradation of
lipoprotein triglycerides (Karlsson et al., 2001).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to a
lysophospholipase gene from ectromelia virus, Wall et al. (1997)
identified human MGLL, which they designated HUK5. The deduced 313-amino
acid protein shares 49.5% identity with the virus protein. Database
analysis indicated that MGLL is expressed in wide variety of tissues and
may be preferentially expressed in adipose.

By RT-PCR of adipocyte total RNA using primers based on mouse Mgl,
followed by screening an adipocyte cDNA library, Karlsson et al. (2001)
cloned human MGL. The deduced 303-amino acid protein shares 84% identity
with mouse Mgl. Mouse and human MGL both have an N-terminal his-gly
dipeptide, a characteristic of lipases, and a catalytic triad of ser122,
asp239, and his269. By EST database analysis, Karlsson et al. (2001)
identified mouse and human MGL transcripts containing 2 different
5-prime leader sequences. Northern blot analysis of human adipocyte
total RNA detected a 4.2-kb MGL transcript. MGL expression was also
detected in lung, liver, kidney, brain, and heart. Western blot analysis
of mouse tissues showed ubiquitous expression, but the pattern was
tissue specific with regard to both the size and number of Mgl proteins.

GENE FUNCTION

Dinh et al. (2002) found that rat Mgl participates in inactivation of
2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG), an endogenous cannabinoid monoglyceride.
Mgl was highly expressed in regions of rat brain that also expressed
cannabinoid receptors (see CNR1; 114610), and it appeared to assume a
presynaptic localization in hippocampus. Adenovirus-mediated transfer of
Mgl cDNA into rat cortical neurons increased Mgl expression and
attenuated 2-AG accumulation induced by N-methyl-D-aspartate/carbachol.

Nomura et al. (2010) found that KIAA1363 (NCEH1; 613234) and MAGL were
consistently elevated in aggressive human cancer cells relative to their
nonaggressive counterparts. The authors suggested that enrichment of
protumorigenic lipid signaling molecules in aggressive cancer cells
supports their malignant phenotype.

Nomura et al. (2011) demonstrated that a distinct pathway exists in
brain, where MAGL hydrolyzes the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol
to generate a major arachidonate precursor pool for neuroinflammatory
prostaglandins. MAGL-disrupted animals showed neuroprotection in a
parkinsonian mouse model. These animals were spared the hemorrhaging
caused by COX inhibitors in the gut, where prostaglandins are instead
regulated by cytosolic phospholipase A(2) (PLA(2); see 611651). Nomura
et al. (2011) concluded that their findings identified MAGL as a
distinct metabolic node that couples endocannabinoid to prostaglandin
signaling networks in the nervous system.

GENE STRUCTURE

Karlsson et al. (2001) determined that the mouse and human MGLL genes
contain 7 exons. Exon 1 is noncoding.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Analysis Consortium mapped the MGLL
gene to chromosome 3 (TMAP SHGC-31856).

Karlsson et al. (2001) mapped the mouse Mgll gene to a region of
chromosome 6 that shares homology of synteny with human chromosome 3q21.

REFERENCE 1. Dinh, T. P.; Carpenter, D.; Leslie, F. M.; Freund, T. F.; Katona,
I.; Sensi, S. L.; Kathuria, S.; Piomelli, D.: Brain monoglyceride
lipase participating in endocannabinoid inactivation. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 99: 10819-10824, 2002. Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 99: 13961 only, 2002.

2. Karlsson, M.; Reue, K.; Xia, Y.-R.; Lusis, A. J.; Langin, D.; Tornqvist,
H.; Holm, C.: Exon-intron organization and chromosomal localization
of the mouse monoglyceride lipase gene. Gene 272: 11-18, 2001.

3. Nomura, D. K.; Long, J. Z.; Niessen, S.; Hoover, H. S.; Ng, S.-W.;
Cravatt, B. F.: Monoacylglycerol lipase regulates a fatty acid network
that promotes cancer pathogenesis. Cell 140: 49-61, 2010.

4. Nomura, D. K.; Morrison, B. E.; Blankman, J. L.; Long, J. Z.; Kinsey,
S. G.; Marcondes, M. C. G.; Ward, A. M.; Hahn, Y. K.; Lichtman, A.
H.; Conti, B.; Cravatt, B. F.: Endocannabinoid hydrolysis generates
brain prostaglandins that promote neuroinflammation. Science 334:
809-813, 2011.

5. Wall, E. M.; Cao, J.; Chen, N.; Buller, R. M. L.; Upton, C.: A
novel poxvirus gene and its human homolog are similar to an E. coli
lysophospholipase. Virus Res. 52: 157-167, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/29/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/27/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/4/2005

EDITED alopez: 12/01/2011
terry: 11/29/2011
mgross: 1/27/2010
terry: 1/27/2010
mgross: 11/4/2005

602525	TITLE *602525 PYRUVATE DEHYDROGENASE KINASE, ISOENZYME 2; PDK2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PDK2 belongs to the family of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) kinases (EC
2.7.11.2), which reversibly inactivate the mitochondrial PDH complex by
ATP-dependent serine phosphorylation of the alpha subunit of the
complex's E1 component (see 300502) (summary by Korotchkina and Patel,
2001).

CLONING

By screening a human liver cDNA library with rat Pdk2, Gudi et al.
(1995) cloned PDK2. The deduced 407-amino acid protein, with a
calculated molecular mass of 46.2 kD, has a putative mitochondrial
protein kinase catalytic domain with 5 characteristic subdomains. The
human and rat proteins share 96% identity. Northern blot analysis
detected variable expression of a 2.4-kb PDK2 transcript in all 8 human
tissues examined, with highest expression in heart, followed by skeletal
muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Gudi et al. (1995) noted that the products of the PDH reaction stimulate
the kinase activity of PDKs, whereas the substrates are inhibitory. ADP
also acts synergistically with pyruvate to inhibit PDK kinase activity.
Using kinase-depleted PDH complexes isolated from rat heart as
substrate, Gudi et al. (1995) found that recombinant human PDK1
(602524), PDK2, and PDK3 (602526) inactivated PDH in an ATP-dependent
manner. PDK3 showed the highest kinase activity, and PDK2 the lowest.
However, the products of the PDH reaction, NADH and acetyl-CoA,
increased the ability of PDK2 to inhibit PDH.

Baker et al. (2000) found that the E2 subunit of PDH (DLAT; 608770), and
the isolated second N-terminal lipoyl (L2) domain of E2, differentially
enhanced the rates at which recombinant human PDK2 and PDK3
phosphorylated E1. There was little direct activation of PDK2 by the
free L2 domain, but the E2 60mer, which forms the core structure of the
PDH complex, enhanced PDK2 activity by 10-fold. PDK3 was activated
17-fold by E2; the majority of this activation was facilitated by the
free L2 domain. PDK2 and PDK3 also differed in their inhibition by
pyruvate, ADP, dichloroacetic acid, and acetylated lipoyl groups,
activation by NADH and acetyl-CoA, and combined effect of mixed
inhibitors and activators.

Each of the 2 E1 alpha subunits of PDH contains 3 serines that are
phosphorylated by PDKs. Using recombinant enzymes expressed in E. coli
and double site mutants of human E1, Korotchkina and Patel (2001) found
that rat Pdk1, Pdk2, and Pdk4 (602527), and human PDK3, showed unique
specificity and activity toward each of these serines. Only Pdk1 had
detectable activity with site 3, which the authors called ser203. Each
kinase also showed unique activity in the presence or absence of E2 in
complex with its binding partner E3BP (PDHX; 608769), and unique
sensitivity to the redox and/or acetylation state of the lipoyl moieties
of E2, and the buffer system employed.

Boulatnikov and Popov (2003) found that rat Pdk1 and Pdk2 could form
homodimers when expressed singly, or heterodimers when expressed
together, in E. coli. The heterodimeric kinase was catalytically active,
with kinetic parameters, site specificity, and regulation clearly
distinct from those of homodimeric Pdk1 or Pdk2. The Pdk1-Pdk2
heterodimers catalyzed phosphorylation of E1 site 3 serine, in addition
to sites 1 and 2 serines. Homodimers of Pdk1 or Pdk2 and the Pdk1-Pdk2
heterodimer also readily bound the isolated E2 component of PDH as well
as the E2-E3BP subcomplex. Interactions were strengthened by the
presence of the lipoate prosthetic groups in E2.

The nuclear peroxisome proliferator-activator receptors (PPARs; see
PPARA, 170990) are critical regulators of fatty acid oxidation. Using
quantitative real-time PCR, Degenhardt et al. (2007) found that
expression of PDK2, PDK3, and PDK4, but not PDK1, was induced by
PPAR-beta/delta (PPARD; 600409) agonists. In mice, induction of
PPAR-beta/delta increased renal expression of Pdk2 and Pdk4, but not
Pdk1 or Pdk3. In both human and mouse cells, PDK4 showed strongest
induction by PPAR-beta/delta ligands. Ligands for other PPAR subtypes
showed weaker regulation of PDK gene expression. In silico analysis,
chromatin immunoprecipitation, and Western blot analysis revealed that
PPAR-beta/delta bound regulatory elements in the PDK2, PDK3, and PDK4
genes, but not the PDK1 gene, and activated transcription in association
with its regulatory partners RXR-alpha (RXRA; 180245), PGC1-alpha
(PPARGC1A; 604517), and TRAP220 (MED1; 604311), and phosphorylated RNA
polymerase II (see POLR2A, 180660). Degenhardt et al. (2007) also found
that fibroblasts from Ppard-null mice showed reduced expression of Pdk2,
Pdk3, and Pdk4 compared with wildtype fibroblasts. Expression of Pdk4
was reduced 1200-fold. Degenhardt et al. (2007) concluded that PDK2,
PDK3, and PDK4 genes are primary PPAR targets and that PPAR-beta/delta
is a major regulator of PDK4 expression.

MAPPING

Hartz (2013) mapped the PDK2 gene to chromosome 17q21.33 based on an
alignment of the PDK2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK055119) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Baker, J. C.; Yan, X.; Peng, T.; Kasten, S.; Roche, T. E.: Marked
differences between two isoforms of human pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase. J.
Biol. Chem. 275: 15773-15781, 2000.

2. Boulatnikov, I.; Popov, K. M.: Formation of functional heterodimers
by isozymes 1 and 2 of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1645: 183-192, 2003.

3. Degenhardt, T.; Saramaki, A.; Malinen, M.; Rieck, M.; Vaisanen,
S.; Huotari, A.; Herzig, K.-H.; Muller, R.; Carlberg, C.: Three members
of the human pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase gene family are direct
targets of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor beta/delta. J.
Molec. Biol. 372: 341-355, 2007.

4. Gudi, R.; Bowker-Kinley, M. M.; Kedishvili, N. Y.; Zhao, Y.; Popov,
K. M.: Diversity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase gene family
in humans. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 28989-28994, 1995. Note: Erratum:
J. Biol. Chem. 271: 1250 only, 1996.

5. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/9/2013.

6. Korotchkina, L. G.; Patel, M. S.: Site specificity of four pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase isoenzymes toward the three phosphorylation sites
of human pyruvate dehydrogenase. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 37223-37229,
2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 08/20/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/9/2013

CREATED Lori M. Kelman: 4/16/1998

EDITED alopez: 08/20/2013
mgross: 8/9/2013
terry: 3/28/2013
alopez: 4/16/1998

300574	TITLE *300574 CHEMOKINE, CXC MOTIF, RECEPTOR 3; CXCR3
;;G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR 9; GPR9;;
CD183 ANTIGEN; CD183
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Chemokines mediate migration of immune cells into infected or inflamed
tissues to initiate effective immune responses. The chemokine receptor
CXCR3 is preferentially expressed by T helper-1 (Th1) cells and is
critically involved in their recruitment to inflamed tissue. Tissue
infiltration of T cells expressing high levels of CXCR3 depends on
interferon-gamma (IFNG; 147570)-induced release of the CXCR3 ligands
CXCL9 (601704), CXCL10 (147310), or CXCL11 (604852). CXCR3 is also
expressed on nonlymphoid tissue-homing CD4 (186940)-positive/CD25
(IL2RA; 147730)-positive regulatory T (Treg) cells (summary by Erhardt
et al., 2011).

CLONING

A wide spectrum of intercellular signals is mediated by peptide ligands
interacting with specific cell surface receptors. Many peptide-binding
receptors belong to the G protein-coupled receptor family and exhibit
common structural features, including the presence of 7 transmembrane
domains and a number of conserved amino acid residues. Marchese et al.
(1995) used PCR and genomic DNA library screening to clone 2 novel human
genes, GPR9 and GPR10 (600895), and a rat gene, GPR14 (600896). Each of
these encodes a G protein-coupled receptor. The receptor encoded by GPR9
was found to share the highest identity with human IL8 receptor type B
(IL8RB; 146928) (38% overall and 53% in the transmembrane regions),
followed by IL8RA (146929) (36% overall and 51% in the transmembrane
domains).

By database analysis and 5-prime and 3-prime RACE of total mRNA from
human microvascular endothelial cells and thymus, Lasagni et al. (2003)
cloned a novel CXCR3 splice variant that they termed CXCR3B. The
predicted CXCR3B protein contains 416 amino acids and has a longer N
terminus that differs from the original 368-amino acid CXCR3 protein,
CXCR3A, in the first 52 residues. Northern blot analysis detected CXCR3A
and CXCR3B transcripts of 1.6 and 1.8 kb, respectively, in heart,
kidney, liver, and skeletal muscle, with CXCR3A predominating. CXCR3A
was also present in placenta.

GENE FUNCTION

The superfamily of chemokines consists of an array of chemoattractant
proteins that has been divided into 4 branches (C, CC, CXC, and CXXC) on
the basis of the relative position of the cysteine residues in the
mature protein. Structural variants of chemokines are associated with
differences in their ability to regulate the trafficking of immune cells
during hematopoiesis and inflammatory responses. Chemokines exert their
attractant properties after binding to distinct membrane receptors.
Because a single chemokine receptor binds several chemokines, it is
often difficult to evaluate the activity of these structures in
lymphocyte homing. For instance, interferon (IFN)-inducible protein-10
(IP10, or CXCL10; 147310) and IFN-gamma-induced monokine-2 (MIG, or
CXCL9; 601704), CXC chemokines that are induced by IFN-gamma, bind the
CXCR3 receptor and are shown to be specifically chemotactic for
activated lymphocytes (Loetscher et al., 1996).

Although FACS analysis demonstrated that 40% of resting T lymphocytes
expressed CXCR3, Loetscher et al. (1998) found that these cells did not
have detectable CXCR3 transcripts and did not respond to CXCL9 or
CXCL10. However, exposure to IL2 (147680) with or without mitogen for 2
weeks resulted in expression of CXCR3 on more than 95% of T lymphocytes.

Using Northern blot analysis, Bonecchi et al. (1998) showed that
polarized Th1 cells preferentially express CXCR3 and CCR5 (601373). In
contrast, Th2 cells preferentially express CCR4 (604836) and, at least
in a subpopulation of Th2 cells, CCR3 (601268).

Trentin et al. (1999) investigated the expression and function of CXCR3
on normal and malignant B cells from 65 patients with chronic
lymphoproliferative disorders. Although CXCR3 was lacking in CD5(+) and
CD5(-) B cells from healthy subjects, it was expressed on leukemic B
lymphocytes from all (31/31) patients with chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL). The presence of CXCR3 was heterogeneous in other B-cell
disorders, being expressed in 2 of 7 patients with mantle cell lymphoma
(MCL), 4 of 12 patients with hairy cell leukemia (HCL), and 11 of 15
patients with other subtypes of non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHLs). Chemotaxis
assay showed that normal B cells from healthy subjects did not migrate
in response to IP10 and MIG. In contrast, a definite migration in
response to IP10 and MIG was observed in all malignant B cells from
patients with CLL, but not in patients with HCL or MCL. Neoplastic B
cells from other NHLs showed a heterogeneous pattern. The migration
elicited by IP10 and MIG was inhibited by blocking CXCR3. No effect of
IP10 and MIG chemokines was observed on the cytosolic calcium
concentration in malignant B cells. The data demonstrated that CXCR3 is
expressed on malignant B cells from chronic lymphoproliferative
disorders, particularly in patients with CLL, and represents a fully
functional receptor involved in chemotaxis of malignant B lymphocytes.

Using bronchoalveolar lavage and flow cytometry, Campbell et al. (2001)
determined that T lymphocytes homing to the lung in both normal and
asthmatic subjects express CCR5 and CXCR3 but not CCR9 (604738), which
is found on T cells homing to intestinal mucosal sites, or CLA (see
SELPLG; 600738), which is found on skin-homing T cells.

Frigerio et al. (2002) demonstrated that in response to inflammation,
beta cells secrete the chemokine CXC ligand-10 (CXCL10; 147310) and CXC
ligand-9 (CXCL9; 601704), which specifically attract T-effector cells
via CXCR3. In mice deficient for this receptor, the onset of type 1
diabetes (222100) is substantially delayed. Thus, Frigerio et al. (2002)
concluded that in the absence of known etiologic agents, CXCR3
represents a novel target for therapeutic interference early in type 1
diabetes.

Using nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, Booth et al. (2002)
showed that IP10 (CXCL10) interacted with the N terminus of CXCR3 via a
hydrophobic cleft formed by the N-loop and 40s-loop region of IP10,
similar to the interaction surface of other chemokines, such as IL8
(146930). An additional region of interaction was found that consisted
of a hydrophobic cleft formed by the N terminus and the 30s loop of
IP10.

Lasagni et al. (2003) found that both CXCR3A and CXCR3B bound CXCL9,
CXCL10, and CXCL11 (604852), but only CXCR3B bound CXCL4 (PF4; 173460),
following expression in a microvascular endothelial cell line.
Overexpression of CXCR3A induced an increase in endothelial cell
survival, whereas overexpression of CXCR3B upregulated apoptotic
pathways. Immunohistochemical analysis of primary microvascular
endothelial cells, whose growth in inhibited by CXCL4, CXCL9, CXCL10,
and CXCL11, demonstrated expression of CXCR3B, but not CXCR3A.
CXCR3B-specific monoclonal antibodies reacted with neoplastic tissue
endothelial cells, providing evidence that CXCR3B is expressed in vivo
and may account for the angiostatic effects of CXC chemokines.

Although chemokine signaling is often promiscuous, signaling events
between members of the distinct chemokine classes (CXC, CC, CX3C, and C)
are almost never observed. Dijkstra et al. (2004) showed that human
CCL21 (602737), in the absence of its primary receptor, CCR7 (600242),
is a functional ligand for CXCR3, inducing chemotaxis in adult
microglial cells, but not in kidney epithelial cells. CCL21-induced
chemotaxis could be inhibited by the CXCR3 ligand, CXCL10, whereas
CXCL10 had no effect on CX3CL1 (601880) chemotactic activity.
Fluorescence microscopy demonstrated that CXCR3 was expressed
predominantly in microglial cytoplasm. Dijkstra et al. (2004) concluded
that CCL21 signaling through CXCR3 depends on the cellular background in
which CXCR3 is expressed.

Using microarray analysis, Feferman et al. (2005) found increased
expression of Cxl10 and its receptor, Cxcr3, in lymph node cells of rats
with experimental autoimmune myasthenia gravis (MG; 254200). Real-time
RT-PCR, FACS, and immunohistochemistry analyses confirmed these findings
and revealed upregulated expression of another Cxcr3 chemoattractant,
Cxcl9, and of Tnf (191160) and Il1b (147720), which act synergistically
with Ifng (147570) to induce Cxcl10, in both lymph node cells and muscle
of myasthenic rats. Upregulation of these genes was reduced after
mucosal tolerance induction with an AChR (see CHRNA1; 100725) fragment.
Using RT-PCR, flow cytometric, and fluorescence microscopy analyses,
Feferman et al. (2005) found increased expression of CXL10 and CXCR3 in
thymus and muscle of MG patients compared with age-matched controls,
validating their findings in the rat model of MG. They concluded that
CXCL10/CXCR3 signaling is associated with MG pathogenesis and proposed
that CXCL10 and CXCR3 may serve as novel drug targets to treat MG.

Oo et al. (2010) found that 18% of T cells in inflamed areas of diseased
human livers expressed the Treg marker FOXP3 (300292). Flow cytometric
analysis showed that inflamed liver Tregs expressed higher levels of
CCR4 and CXCR3 compared with blood Tregs. Adhesion assays showed that
Tregs used CXCR3 and alpha-4 (ITGA4; 192975)/beta-1 (ITGB1; 135630) to
bind and transmigrate, whereas CCR4 played no role. The CCR4 ligands
CCL17 (601520) and CCL22 (602957) were absent from healthy liver, but
they were expressed by dendritic cells in inflamed liver, and these
dendritic cells were associated with CD8 T cells and CCR4-positive Tregs
in the parenchyma and septal areas. Ex vivo, liver-derived Tregs
migrated to CCR4 ligands secreted by dendritic cells. Oo et al. (2010)
proposed that CXCR3 mediates recruitment of Tregs via hepatic sinusoidal
endothelium and that dendritic cells secrete CCR4 ligands that recruit
Tregs to sites of inflammation in patients with chronic hepatitis.

By binding analyses, Struyf et al. (2011) found that human CXCL4L1
(PF4V1; 173461), a potent inhibitor of angiogenesis, had lower affinity
for heparin and chondroitin sulfate-E than did CXCL4 and that CXCL10 and
CXCL4L1 could displace each other on human microvascular endothelial
cells. CXCL4L1 bound to both CXCR3A and CXCR3B. Antibodies to CXCR3
blocked CXCL4L1 antiangiogenic activity, and human CXCL4L1 activity was
reduced in mice treated with anti-human CXCR3 or in mice lacking Cxcr3,
as assessed by tumor growth and vascularization of Lewis lung carcinoma.
Like CXCL4, CXCL4L1 attracted activated T, natural killer, and dendritic
cells, but preincubation with CXCL10 and CXCL11, pertussis toxin, or
anti-CXCR3 reduced or neutralized this activity. Struyf et al. (2011)
concluded that CXCR3A and CXCR3B are involved in the chemotactic and
vascular effects of CXCL4L1.

Endo et al. (2011) examined expression of cell surface markers to
identify functionally distinct subpopulations of mouse memory Th2 cells.
FACS analysis demonstrated 4 Th2 subpopulations based on high or low
expression levels of Cd62l (SELL; 153240) and Cxcr3. All 4
subpopulations produced comparable levels of Il4 (147780) and Il13
(147683), but Th2 cells expressing low levels of both Cd62l and Cxcr3
(Cd62l-lo/Cxcr3-lo cells) selectively produced Il5 (147850). Il5
production in Cd62l-lo/Cxcr3-lo cells was accompanied by histone H3-K4
methylation, a marker for the permissive conformation of chromatin, at
the IL5 promoter. DNA microarray analysis and quantitative RT-PCR showed
that Cd44 (107269)-positive memory Th2 cells expressing Il5 had lower
levels of Eomes (604615) and Tbx21 (604895) and higher levels of Rora
(600825) and Pparg (601487) than memory Th2 cells lacking Il5
expression. RNA silencing demonstrated that Eomes downregulation was
required for Il5 expression and that Eomes had no effect on H3-K4
methylation at the Il5 promoter. Instead Eomes suppressed Gata3 (131320)
transcriptional activity by inhibiting Gata3 binding to the Il5
promoter. Depletion of Cd62l-lo/Cxcr3-lo cells ameliorated memory Th2
cell-dependent airway inflammation in mice. Endo et al. (2011) concluded
that IL5 production preferentially occurs in the CD62L-lo/CXCR3-lo
subpopulation regulated by EOMES expression.

GENE STRUCTURE

Marchese et al. (1995) determined that GPR10 and GPR14 are intronless
within their coding regions, while GPR9 contains at least 1 intron.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Marchese et al. (1995) mapped the
GPR9 gene to 8p12-p11.2 and the GPR10 gene to 10q25.3-q26. Using FISH,
PCR, and Southern blot analysis, Loetscher et al. (1998) determined that
CXCR3 is a single-copy gene that maps to chromosome Xq13. The
International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium confirmed that the
CXCR3 gene maps to the X chromosome (TMAP RH47042).

ANIMAL MODEL

Liu et al. (2006) noted that mice lacking the Cxcr3 ligand Cxcl10
exhibit enhanced susceptibility to experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis (EAE), a model for certain aspects of multiple
sclerosis (MS; 126200). They found that EAE in mice lacking Cxcr3 was
characterized by exaggerated severity, aggravated blood-brain barrier
disruption, and increased tissue damage, accompanied by reduced
production of Ifng and impaired expression of inducible nitric oxide
synthase (NOS2A; 163730), compared with wildtype mice with EAE. However,
immunohistochemical, microscopic, and flow cytometric analyses
demonstrated a lack of quantitative and qualitative differences in
leukocytes infiltrating the central nervous system between Cxcr3 -/- and
wildtype mice with EAE. Liu et al. (2006) concluded that Cxcl10 is the
most relevant Cxcr3 ligand in EAE, and that Cxcr3 does not govern
leukocyte trafficking in EAE, but modulates Ifng production and
downstream events affecting disease severity.

Using a mouse model of immune-mediated liver injury induced by
concanavalin A (ConA), Erhardt et al. (2011) demonstrated enhanced
intrahepatic expression of the Cxcr3 ligands Cxcl9, Cxcl10, and Cxcl11
following induction of ConA hepatitis. Cxcr3 -/- mice developed more
severe liver injury with higher plasma transaminase activities and a
more pronounced Th1/Th17 response compared with wildtype mice after ConA
treatment. In addition, Cxcr3 -/- mice did not establish tolerance upon
ConA restimulation, although Tregs from Cxcr3 -/- mice were still
immunosuppressive in an in vitro suppression assay. However, there was
no accumulation of Cxcr3-positive/Tbet (TBX21; 604895)-positive Tregs
producing Il10 (124092) in liver of Cxcr3 -/- mice, as there was in
wildtype mice. Conversion to Tregs was dependent on a Th1 response, as
Ifng-deficient mice failed to produce Cxcr3-positive/Tbet-positive
Tregs. Cd25-positive/Foxp3-positive Tregs failed to protect against
ConA-induced hepatitis, whereas Cxcr3-positive/Tbet-positive Tregs
protected Cxcr3 -/- mice and allowed recovery from injury. Erhardt et
al. (2011) concluded that CXCR3-positive/TBET-positive/IL10-positive
Tregs are generated in liver in an IFNG-dependent manner, then
disseminate into the organism and migrate to liver, where they limit
immune-mediated damage.

Wuest and Carr (2008) found that corneal infection with herpes simplex
virus-1 (HSV1) resulted in elevated viral titers in the nervous system
of Cxcl10 -/- mice, which correlated with defects in leukocyte
recruitment to the brainstem. Similar levels of HSV1 were recovered from
Cxcl10 -/- or wildtype mice lacking natural killer (NK) cells or
virus-specific Cd8 (see 186910)-positive T cells. Cxcr3 -/- mice also
had poor recruitment of NK cells, but not Cd8-positive cells. Wuest and
Carr (2008) concluded that antigen-specific CD8-positive T cells,
recruited through CXCL10, are critical in the antiviral response at the
brainstem.

REFERENCE 1. Bonecchi, R.; Bianchi, G.; Bordignon, P. P.; D'Ambrosio, D.; Lang,
R.; Borsatti, A.; Sozzani, S.; Allavena, P.; Gray, P. A.; Mantovani,
A.; Sinigaglia, F.: Differential expression of chemokine receptors
and chemotactic responsiveness of type 1 T helper cells (Th1s) and
Th2s. J. Exp. Med. 187: 129-134, 1998.

2. Booth, V.; Keizer, D. W.; Kamphuis, M. B.; Clark-Lewis, I.; Sykes,
B. D.: The CXCR3 binding chemokine IP-10/CXCL10: structure and receptor
interactions. Biochemistry 41: 10418-10425, 2002.

3. Campbell, J. J.; Brightling, C. E.; Symon, F. A.; Qin, S.; Murphy,
K. E.; Hodge, M.; Andrew, D. P.; Wu, L.; Butcher, E. C.; Wardlaw,
A. J.: Expression of chemokine receptors by lung T cells from normal
and asthmatic subjects. J. Immun. 166: 2842-2848, 2001.

4. Dijkstra, I. M.; Hulshof, S.; van der Valk, P.; Boddeke, H. W.
G. M.; Biber, K.: Cutting edge: activity of human adult microglia
in response to CC chemokine ligand 21. J. Immun. 172: 2744-2747,
2004.

5. Endo, Y.; Iwamura, C.; Kuwahara, M.; Suzuki, A.; Sugaya, K.; Tumes,
D. J.; Tokoyoda, K.; Hosokawa, H.; Yamashita, M.; Nakayama, T.: Eomesodermin
controls interleukin-5 production in memory T helper 2 cells through
inhibition of activity of the transcription factor GATA3. Immunity 35:
733-745, 2011.

6. Erhardt, A.; Wegscheid, C.; Claass, B.; Carambia, A.; Herkel, J.;
Mittrucker, H.-W.; Panzer, U.; Tiegs, G.: CXCR3 deficiency exacerbates
liver disease and abrogates tolerance in a mouse model of immune-mediated
hepatitis. J. Immun. 186: 5284-5293, 2011.

7. Feferman, T.; Maiti, P. K.; Berrih-Aknin, S.; Bismuth, J.; Bidault,
J.; Fuchs, S.; Souroujon, M. C.: Overexpression of IFN-induced protein
10 and its receptor CXCR3 in myasthenia gravis. J. Immun. 174: 5324-5331,
2005.

8. Frigerio, S.; Junt, T.; Lu, B.; Gerard, C.; Zumsteg, U.; Hollander,
G. A.; Piali, L.: Beta cells are responsible for CXCR3-mediated T-cell
infiltration in insulitis. Nature Med. 8: 1414-1420, 2002.

9. Lasagni, L.; Francalanci, M.; Annunziato, F.; Lazzeri, E.; Giannini,
S.; Cosmi, L.; Sagrinati, C.; Mazzinghi, B.; Orlando, C.; Maggi, E.;
Marra, F.; Romagnani, S.; Serio, M.; Romagnani, P.: A alternatively
spliced variant of CXCR3 mediates the inhibition of endothelial cell
growth induced by IP-10, Mig, and I-TAC, and acts as a functional
receptor for platelet factor 4. J. Exp. Med. 197: 1537-1549, 2003.

10. Liu, L.; Huang, D.; Matsui, M.; He, T. T.; Hu, T.; DeMartino,
J.; Lu, B.; Gerard, C.; Ransohoff, R. M.: Severe disease, unaltered
leukocyte migration, and reduced IFN-gamma production in CXCR3-/-
mice with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J. Immun. 176:
4399-4409, 2006.

11. Loetscher, M.; Gerber, B.; Loetscher, P.; Jones, S. A.; Piali,
L.; Clark-Lewis, I.; Baggiolini, M.; Moser, B.: Chemokine receptor
specific for IP10 and mig: structure, function, and expression in
activated T-lymphocytes. J.  Exp. Med. 184: 963-969, 1996.

12. Loetscher, M.; Loetscher, P.; Brass, N.; Meese, E.; Moser, B.
: Lymphocyte-specific chemokine receptor CXCR3: regulation, chemokine
binding and gene localization. Europ. J. Immun. 28: 3696-3705, 1998.

13. Marchese, A.; Heiber, M.; Nguyen, T.; Heng, H. H. Q.; Saldivia,
V. R.; Cheng, R.; Murphy, P. M.; Tsui, L.-C.; Shi, X.; Gregor, P.;
George, S. R.; O'Dowd, B. F.; Docherty, J. M.: Cloning and chromosomal
mapping of the three novel genes, GPR9, GPR10, and GPR14, encoding
receptors related to interleukin 8, neuropeptide Y, and somatostatin
receptors. Genomics 29: 335-344, 1995.

14. Oo, Y. H.; Weston, C. J.; Lalor, P. F.; Curbishley, S. M.; Withers,
D. R.; Reynolds, G. M.; Shetty, S.; Harki, J.; Shaw, J. C.; Eksteen,
B.; Hubscher, S. G.; Walker, L. S. K.; Adams, D. H.: Distinct roles
for CCR4 and CXCR3 in the recruitment and positioning of regulatory
T cells in the inflamed human liver. J. Immun. 184: 2886-2898, 2010.

15. Struyf, S.; Salogni, L.; Burdick, M. D.; Vandercappellen, J.;
Gouwy, M.; Noppen, S.; Proost, P.; Opdenakker, G.; Parmentier, M.;
Gerard, C.; Sozzani, S.; Strieter, R. M.; Van Damme, J.: Angiostatic
and chemotactic activities of the CXC chemokine CXCL4L1 (platelet
factor-4 variant) are mediated by CXCR3. Blood 117: 480-488, 2011.

16. Trentin, L.; Agostini, C.; Facco, M.; Piazza, F.; Perin, A.; Siviero,
M.; Gurrieri, C.; Galvan, S.; Adami, F.; Zambello, R.; Semenzato,
G.: The chemokine receptor CXCR3 is expressed on malignant B cells
and mediates chemotaxis. J. Clin. Invest. 104: 115-121, 1999.

17. Wuest, T. R.; Carr, D. J. J.: Dysregulation of CXCR3 signaling
due to CXCL10 deficiency impairs the antiviral response to Herpes
simplex virus 1 infection. J. Immun. 181: 7985-7993, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 01/08/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/1/2012
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 4/3/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/2/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/31/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/26/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/4/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/11/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/14/2006

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/13/2006

EDITED mgross: 01/08/2013
mgross: 5/3/2012
terry: 5/1/2012
mgross: 4/3/2012
terry: 4/2/2012
mgross: 11/3/2011
terry: 10/31/2011
mgross: 10/27/2010
terry: 10/26/2010
mgross: 4/6/2007
terry: 4/4/2007
mgross: 9/28/2006
terry: 9/11/2006
mgross: 3/14/2006
mgross: 2/13/2006

611009	TITLE *611009 MEX3, C. ELEGANS, HOMOLOG OF, D; MEX3D
;;RING FINGER- AND KH DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; RKHD1;;
TINO;;
KIAA2031
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By yeast 3-hybrid screening of a placenta cDNA library using an AU-rich
element (ARE) of BCL2 (151430) as bait, Donnini et al. (2004) obtained a
partial cDNA encoding RKHD1, which they called TINO. The predicted
490-amino acid partial protein has 2 N-terminal ribonucleoprotein K
(HNRNPK; 600712) homology (KH) domains and a C-terminal RING domain, and
it shares similarity with C. elegans Mex3. Donnini et al. (2004) also
identified a partial cDNA, KIAA2031, that may represent a TINO splice
variant. RACE and database analyses suggested that the full-length TINO
protein contains 651 amino acids. Northern blot analysis detected a
3.1-kb transcript in all tissues examined, with highest expression in
placenta. A 6.5-kb transcript was also present in heart and skeletal
muscle. Immunofluorescence analysis of HeLa cells localized endogenous
TINO predominantly in the nucleus and perinuclear region.

C. elegans Mex3 is a regulator of translation that specifies posterior
blastomere identity in the early embryo and contributes to the
maintenance of germline totipotency. By database analysis and RT-PCR,
Buchet-Poyau et al. (2007) cloned a family of 4 human genes homologous
to C. elegans Mex3, including RKHD1, which they called MEX3D. Like the
other human MEX3 proteins, the deduced 651-amino acid MEX3D protein has
an N-terminal nuclear export signal (NES), 2 KH domains, and a
C-terminal RING finger domain. The KH domains are present in C. elegans
Mex3, but not the RING domain. RT-PCR detected ubiquitous expression of
MEX3D in human tissues and cell lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 3-hybrid and gel-shift assays, Donnini et al. (2004) showed
that TINO interacted with an ARE of BCL2 in vitro and in vivo. Upon
binding, TINO destabilized a chimeric reporter construct containing the
BCL2 ARE, revealing a negative regulatory action on BCL2 expression at
the posttranscriptional level.

GENE STRUCTURE

Donnini et al. (2004) determined that the RKHD1 gene contains 3 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Donnini et al. (2004) mapped the MEX3D
gene to chromosome 19p13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Buchet-Poyau, K.; Courchet, J.; Le Hir, H.; Seraphin, B.; Scoazec,
J.-Y.; Duret, L.; Domon-Dell, C.; Freund, J.-N.; Billaud, M.: Identification
and characterization of human Mex-3 proteins, a novel family of evolutionarily
conserved RNA-binding proteins differentially localized to processing
bodies. Nucleic Acids Res. 35: 1289-1300, 2007.

2. Donnini, M.; Lapucci, A.; Papucci, L.; Witort, E.; Jacquier, A.;
Brewer, G.; Nicolin, A.; Capaccioli, S.; Schiavone, N.: Identification
of TINO: a new evolutionarily conserved BCL-2 AU-rich element RNA-binding
protein. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 20154-20166, 2004.

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 5/9/2007

EDITED alopez: 04/03/2009
mgross: 5/9/2007

182205	TITLE *182205 SEX HORMONE-BINDING GLOBULIN; SHBG
;;ANDROGEN-BINDING PROTEIN; ABP;;
TESTOSTERONE-BINDING BETA-GLOBULIN; TEBG
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a previously characterized liver cDNA as a probe, Gershagen et al.
(1989) isolated a liver-secreted plasma glycoprotein that binds sex
steroids. Screening of a human testis cDNA library resulted in the
isolation of 2 distinct cDNA forms. One was identical to the previously
characterized liver SHBG cDNA, thus suggesting that human SHBG and the
androgen-binding protein (ABP) produced by Sertoli cells are encoded by
the same gene. The second cDNA differed from the first by having exon 1
exchanged with a completely different sequence and exon 7 deleted.
Primer extension experiments showed that the alternatively spliced
transcript corresponding to the second cDNA is present in both liver and
testis. From the primary structure of the putative SHBG-gene-related
protein, Gershagen et al. (1989) deduced that the protein is very
different from SHBG and probably without steroid-binding activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

By Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA, Gershagen et al. (1989) found
evidence indicating that only 1 SHBG is present in the human haploid
genome. The gene has 8 exons.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Berube et al. (1990) localized the SHBG gene
to chromosome 17p13-p12. By the study of intersubspecies backcrosses,
Joseph et al. (1991) found that Shbg is located on mouse chromosome 11
in close linkage to several neurologic mutations, one of which, Tr, is
associated with male sterility. The fact that ABP-SHBG is found
throughout the rat brain suggested that these mutations may represent a
defect in Shbg.

GENE FUNCTION

Testosterone in plasma is present in both bound and unbound form; only
the unbound hormone is biologically active and available to tissues.
About 66% of testosterone is bound to testosterone-binding beta-globulin
(TEBG), 31% to albumin, and 1.5% to transcortin; 2% is unbound. The
regulatory function of TEBG is said to be well illustrated by female
hirsutism; although many hirsute women have normal levels of total
plasma testosterone, nearly all have depressed levels of TEBG, resulting
in increased levels of unbound testosterone (Wenn et al., 1977; Raj et
al., 1978).

In mice expressing an 11-kb human SHBG transgene and in HepG2
hepatoblastoma cells, Selva et al. (2007) demonstrated that the
monosaccharides glucose and fructose reduced human SHBG production by
hepatocytes, irrespective of the presence of insulin, by downregulation
of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4A (HNF4A; 600281) and replacement of HNF4A
by COUP-TFI (NR2F1; 132890) at a cis-element within the human SHBG
promoter, coincident with repression of its transcriptional activity.
Dose-dependent reduction of HNF4A in HepG2 cells occurred in concert
with parallel increases in cellular palmitate levels and could be
mimicked by treatment with palmitoyl-CoA; inhibition of lipogenesis
prevented monosaccharide-induced downregulation of HNF4A and reduced
SHBG expression in HepG2 cells. Selva et al. (2007) concluded that
monosaccharide-induced lipogenesis reduces hepatic HNF4A levels, which
in turn attenuates SHBG expression, and noted that this provides a
biologic explanation for the sensitivity of SHBG as a biomarker of the
metabolic syndrome.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Cavalli-Sforza et al. (1977) developed an ingenious method for detection
of genetic variation in plasma proteins, namely, electrophoretic
screening after treatment with radioactive ligands such as vitamins,
hormones, metal ions and drugs. This is essentially a method of
'staining' the protein comparable to the methods using dyes. With this
approach they identified polymorphism of testosterone-binding
beta-globulin, as well as a possible silent allele. By polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (PAGE), Luckock and Cavalli-Sforza (1983) identified
4 electrophoretic variants, which they suggested result from
combinations of 3 alleles, designated N ('normal'), S ('slow'), and O
('absent'). The first 2 are codominant and the third recessive. The
frequencies of the 3 alleles in white Americans were, respectively,
0.68, 0.11, 0.21; in black Americans, 0.65, 0.14, 0.22; in Japanese
Americans, 0.59, 0.09, 0.32. Phenotype frequencies and segregation from
various crosses supported simple mendelian inheritance of an autosomal
gene.

By investigating neuraminidase-treated serum samples using isoelectric
focusing (IEF) followed by transfer to nitrocellulose membranes and
immunostaining, van Baelen et al. (1992) distinguished 3 patterns
consistent with the expression of a biallelic autosomal system. They
published data on allele frequencies in many populations and found
frequencies of the common allele (SHBG*1) varying from 0.848 in Chinese
to 0.985 in Balinese; monomorphism was found only in Australian
Aborigines, all 47 of whom were SHBG*1 homozygotes. Van Baelen et al.
(1992) found no significant difference for allele frequencies among
hirsute Belgian women. They also presented evidence that the subunit
produced by the SHBG*2 allele has a higher molecular mass than the one
produced by the SHBG*1 allele and that the 3 SHBG genotypes have
identical binding characteristics for 5-alpha-dihydrotestosterone.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Power et al. (1992) demonstrated in a Belgian patient homozygous for a
variant isoelectric focusing pattern that a point mutation was present
in exon 8, creating an additional site for N-linked glycosylation.
Expression studies showed that steroid binding was not affected. Hardy
et al. (1995) found the same mutation in Mexican subjects who were
heterozygous for the variant IEF phenotype. Denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis (DGGE) was used to localize the mutation in these
subjects and to purify the variant allele for DNA sequence analysis. A
GAC-to-AAC transition in codon 327 caused an asp-to-asn substitution in
the protein (D327N). The site of the mutation does not lie within the
predicted steroid-binding site of the molecule. The finding in these
widely separated populations suggested that the SHBG gene is biallelic
worldwide. The polymorphism was not associated with any pathologic
condition.

Xita et al. (2003) investigated the possible association of the
functional (TAAAA)n polymorphism in the promoter of the SHBG gene
(Hogeveen et al., 2001) with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS; 184700)
and SHBG levels. They studied 185 women with PCOS and 324 normal
controls. Genotyping revealed 6 (TAAAA)n alleles containing 6 to 11
repeats. The distribution of these alleles was different in the 2
groups. Women with PCOS had a significantly greater frequency of longer
(TAAAA)n alleles (more than 8 repeats) than normal women who had shorter
alleles (fewer than 8 repeats) in higher frequency (P = 0.001). In the
PCOS group, carriers of the longer allele genotypes had lower SHBG
levels than those with shorter alleles. The authors concluded that SHBG
may be a susceptibility gene for PCOS and may provide the genetic link
for the developmental origin hypothesis for PCOS that was proposed on
the basis of experimental observations in prenatally androgenized sheep
and primates (Abbott et al., 2002).

In a population of 303 women referred for hirsutism, Cousin et al.
(2004) investigated the relationship between the D327N mutation in SHBG
exon 8, the pentanucleotide repeat polymorphism (TAAAA)n in the SHBG
5-prime untranslated region, and SHBG levels. The D327N mutant allele
was associated with higher SHBG levels than was the wildtype.
Multivariate analysis showed that BMI, PCOS status, and D327N
polymorphism influenced plasma SHBG concentrations, each of these
parameters contributing independently of the others. A strong
disequilibrium linkage was found between the D327N variant allele and an
allele with 8 TAAAA repeats (P less than 0.0001). The authors suggested
that this linkage disequilibrium could mask the effect of the TAAAA
repeat polymorphism on SHBG concentration in vivo. Nevertheless, SHBG
levels in patients who were homozygous for 6 repeats were significantly
(P = 0.043) higher than in 9-repeat homozygous patients and lay between
the two for 8-repeat homozygous patients. Results supported the notion
that polymorphism within the coding sequence and, potentially, in the
regulatory sequence of the SHBG gene is associated with circulating SHBG
levels and may represent part of the genetic background of sex steroid
hormone activity in humans.

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the SHBG
gene and type 2 diabetes, see 125853.

- SHBG Circulating Level Quantitative Trait Locus

Eriksson et al. (2006) studied whether either of 2 polymorphisms in the
SHBG gene promoter, a (TAAAA)n microsatellite and the SNP dbSNP
rs1799941, are associated with serum levels of SHBG (613498), sex
steroids, or bone mineral density (BMD) in men. In both cohorts,
(TAAAA)n and dbSNP rs1799941 genotypes were associated with serum levels
of SHBG (P less than 0.001), dihydrotestosterone (P less than 0.05), and
5-alpha-androstane-3-alpha,17-beta-diol glucuronides (P less than 0.05).
In the elderly men, they were also associated with testosterone and BMD
at all hip bone sites. Eriksson et al. (2006) concluded that
polymorphisms in the SHBG promoter predict serum levels of SHBG,
androgens, and glucuronidated androgen metabolites, and hip BMD in men.

In the NCI-Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium using 874 SNPs
in 37 candidate genes in the sex steroid hormone pathway, Ahn et al.
(2009) identified a G-A variant (dbSNP rs1799941) located 67 bp upstream
from the transcription start site of the SHBG gene associated with
increased mean circulating levels of SHBG in 4,720 Caucasian men (p =
4.52 x 10(-21); 26.9% increase in AA homozygotes versus wildtype
homozygotes). The relationship between dbSNP rs1799941 was consistent
across the 5 cohorts in the study, age, BMI, and case-control status.
Additionally, dbSNP rs1799941 was also strongly associated with
increased mean circulating levels of testosterone in 4,678 Caucasian men
(p = 7.54 x 10(-15); 14.3% increase in AA homozygotes versus wildtype
homozygotes). Since clearance and bioavailability of testosterone are
related to SHBG levels, Ahn et al. (2009) used regression analysis to
show that also tended to predict SHBG adjusted-testosterone levels (p =
1.33 x 10(-3)).

HISTORY

Gross and Horton (1971) presented evidence indicating 'dominant'
segregation of the trait and low testosterone-binding protein, and
suggested Y-linkage. Hecht and Kimberling (1971) pointed out that since
the Y chromosome represents only about 2% of the human male haploid
genome, Bayesian correction of the estimate of Y-linkage reduces the
value to 1 in 3.

REFERENCE 1. Abbott, D. H.; Dumesic, D. A.; Franks, S.: Developmental origin
of polycystic ovary syndrome--a hypothesis. J. Endocr. 174: 1-5,
2002.

2. Ahn, J.; Schumacher, F. R.; Berndt, S. I.; Pfeiffer, R.; Albanes,
D.; Andriole, G. L.; Ardanaz, E.; Boeing, H.; Bueno-de-Mesquita, B.;
Chanock, S. J.; Clavel-Chapelon, F.; Diver, W. R.: and 25 others:
Quantitative trait loci predicting circulating sex steroid hormones
in men from the NCI-Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium (BPC3). Hum.
Molec. Genet. 18: 3749-3757, 2009.

3. Berube, D.; Seralini, G. E.; Gagne, R.; Hammond, G. L.: Localization
of the human sex hormone-binding globulin gene (SHBG) to the short
arm of chromosome 17 (17p12-p13). Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 54: 65-67,
1990.

4. Cavalli-Sforza, L. L.; Daiger, S. P.; Rummel, D. P.: Detection
of genetic variation with radioactive ligands. I. Electrophoretic
screening of plasma proteins with a selected panel of compounds. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 29: 581-592, 1977.

5. Cousin, P.; Calemard-Michel, L.; Lejeune, H.; Raverot, G.; Yessaad,
N.; Emptoz-Bonneton, A.; Morel, Y.; Pugeat, M.: Influence of SHBG
gene pentanucleotide TAAAA repeat and D327N polymorphism on serum
sex hormone-binding globulin concentration in hirsute women. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 89: 917-924, 2004.

6. Eriksson, A. L.; Lorentzon, M.; Mellstrom, D.; Vandenput, L.; Swanson,
C.; Andersson, N.; Hammond, G. L.; Jakobsson, J.; Rane, A.; Orwoll,
E. S.; Ljunggren, O.; Johnell, O.; Labrie, F.; Windahl, S. H.; Ohlsson,
C.: SHBG gene promoter polymorphisms in men are associated with serum
sex hormone-binding globulin, androgen and androgen metabolite levels,
and hip bone mineral density. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 91: 5029-5037,
2006.

7. Gershagen, S.; Lundwall, A.; Fernlund, P.: Characterization of
the human sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) gene and demonstration
of two transcripts in both liver and testis. Nucleic Acids Res. 17:
9245-9258, 1989.

8. Gross, H.; Horton, R.: Low testosterone binding protein: possibly
Y-linked trait. Lancet 297: 346-347, 1971. Note: Originally Volume
I.

9. Hardy, D. O.; Carino, C.; Catterall, J. F.; Larrea, F.: Molecular
characterization of a genetic variant of the steroid hormone-binding
globulin gene in heterozygous subjects. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 80:
1253-1256, 1995.

10. Hecht, F.; Kimberling, W. J.: Testosterone-binding protein probably
not Y-linked. (Letter) Lancet 297: 1300 only, 1971. Note: Originally
Volume I.

11. Hogeveen, K. N.; Talikka, M.; Hammond, G. L.: Human sex hormone-binding
globulin promoter activity is influenced by a (TAAAA)n repeat element
within an Alu sequence. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 36383-36390, 2001.

12. Joseph, D. R.; Adamson, M. C.; Kozak, C. A.: Genetic mapping
of the gene for androgen-binding protein/sex hormone-binding globulin
to mouse chromosome 11. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 56: 122-124, 1991.

13. Luckock, A.; Cavalli-Sforza, L. L.: Detection of genetic variation
with radioactive ligands. V. Genetic variants of testosterone-binding
globulin in human serum. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 35: 49-57, 1983.

14. Power, S. G.A.; Bocchinfuso, W. P.; Pallesen, M.; Warmels-Rodenhiser,
S.; Van Baelen, H.; Hammond, G. L.: Molecular analyses of a human
sex hormone-binding globulin variant: evidence for an additional carbohydrate
chain. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 75: 1066-1070, 1992.

15. Raj, S. G.; Thompson, I. E.; Berger, M. J.; Talert, L. M.; Taymor,
M. L.: Diagnostic value of androgen measurements in polycystic ovary
syndrome. Obstet. Gynec. 52: 169-171, 1978.

16. Selva, D. M.; Hogeveen, K. N.; Innis, S. M.; Hammond, G. L.:
Monosaccharide-induced lipogenesis regulates the human hepatic sex
hormone-binding globulin gene. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 3979-3987,
2007.

17. van Baelen, H.; Convents, R.; Cailleau, J.; Heyns, W.: Genetic
variation of human sex hormone-binding globulin: evidence for a worldwide
bi-allelic gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 75: 135-139, 1992.

18. Wenn, R. V.; Kamberi, I. A.; Vossough, P.; Kariminejad, M. H.;
Torabee, E.; Ayoughi, F.; Keyvanjah, M.; Sarberi, N.: Human testosterone-oestradiol
binding globulin in health and disease. Acta Endocr. 84: 850-859,
1977.

19. Xita, N.; Tsatsoulis, A.; Chatzikyriakidou, A.; Georgiou, I.:
Association of the (TAAAA)n repeat polymorphism in the sex hormone-binding
globulin (SHBG) gene with polycystic ovary syndrome and relation to
SHBG serum levels. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 5976-5980, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 7/8/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/16/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/2/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/13/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/31/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/2/1990

EDITED wwang: 07/23/2010
terry: 7/8/2010
carol: 9/16/2009
terry: 2/9/2009
wwang: 5/16/2008
alopez: 10/2/2007
alopez: 4/13/2005
alopez: 3/31/2005
carol: 5/14/2004
alopez: 5/24/1999
mark: 6/9/1995
carol: 9/1/1992
carol: 8/31/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 5/16/1991
carol: 1/23/1991

609178	TITLE *609178 MIS12, S. POMBE, HOMOLOG OF; MIS12
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for sequences similar to yeast Mis12, followed by PCR of a
HeLa cell cDNA library, Goshima et al. (2003) cloned MIS12. The deduced
205-amino acid protein contains 2 conserved blocks in its N-terminal 100
amino acids, followed by a coiled-coil region of about 50 amino acids.
Endogenous HeLa cell MIS12 had an apparent molecular mass of about 25
kD. Immunolocalization showed MIS12 colocalized at kinetochores with
CENPA (117139) and CENPC (117141), and its position during the cell
cycle was that of a typical kinetochore protein. The level of MIS12 did
not fluctuate during the cell cycle.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RNA interference (RNAi) in HeLa cells, Goshima et al. (2003)
demonstrated that reduced MIS12 resulted in misaligned metaphase
chromosomes, abnormally extended metaphase spindle length, lagging
anaphase chromosomes, and interphase micronuclei without mitotic delay.
Spindle checkpoint protein MAD2 (601467) temporally localized at
kinetochores at early mitotic stages after MIS12 RNAi. Kinetochore
localization of MIS12 was unaffected by CENPA RNAi.

Following MIS12 overexpression in HeLa cells, Obuse et al. (2004)
immunoprecipitated MIS12 in a kinetochore-associated complex that
contained PMF1 (609176), DC8 (609174), C20ORF172 (609175), and HP1-alpha
(CBX5; 604478). ZWINT (609177) also associated with the complex at
kinetochores during mitosis. Immunoprecipitation of transfected cells
indicated that MIS12 could form stable complexes with C20ORF172 and DC8.
Much weaker interaction was detected between MIS12 and ZWINT. Exclusion
chromatography revealed 3 peaks containing MIS12 and C20ORF172, but only
the middle peak, which had a mass of 669 kD, contained HP1-alpha. MIS12
knockdown by RNAi abolished the kinetochore association of ZWINT, DC8,
and C20ORF172.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the MIS12
gene to chromosome 17 (TMAP SHGC-36031).

REFERENCE 1. Goshima, G.; Kiyomitsu, T.; Yoda, K.; Yanagida, M.: Human centromere
chromatin protein hMis12, essential for equal segregation, is independent
of CENP-A loading pathway. J. Cell Biol. 160: 25-39, 2003.

2. Obuse, C.; Iwasaki, O.; Kiyomitsu, T.; Goshima, G.; Toyoda, Y.;
Yanagida, M.: A conserved Mis12 centromere complex is linked to heterochromatic
HP1 and outer kinetochore protein Zwint-1. Nature Cell Biol. 6:
1135-1141, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/27/2005

EDITED mgross: 01/28/2005
mgross: 1/27/2005

608536	TITLE *608536 GTP-BINDING PROTEIN 3; GTPBP3
;;MSS1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; MSS1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Mss1 is a yeast mitochondrial GTP-binding protein that functionally
interacts with 15S rRNA. By searching an EST database for sequences
similar to Mss1, followed by RT-PCR using hepatoma cell line total RNA
and 5-prime and 3-prime RACE, Li and Guan (2002) cloned 5 variants of
GTPBP3, an Mss1 homolog. The variants are generated by alternative
splicing and through the use of alternate polyadenylation signals. Two
variants differ only in their 3-prime UTRs and encode an identical
492-amino acid protein with a calculated molecular mass of 52.0 kD. Two
other variants encode an identical 471-amino acid protein, and another
variant encodes a 524-amino acid protein. GTPBP3 contains a typical
mitochondria targeting presequence, 2 GTP-binding domains, a p21 RAS
(see 190020)-like domain, and an SRC (190090) homology-3 (SH3) domain.
GTPBP3 shows extensive conservation of amino acid sequences with Mss1
homologs from several diverse species, including bacteria, yeast, and
nematode. Mouse and human GTPBP3 share 81% amino acid identity. Northern
blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of 2.6- and 1.9-kb
transcripts. Expression was highest in skeletal muscle, kidney, liver,
and heart, moderate in whole brain, thymus, spleen, and small intestine,
and low in colon, lung, and leukocytes. GTPBP3 was also expressed in all
individual brain regions examined. The larger transcript was more
abundant in most tissues. GTPBP3 colocalized with a mitochondrial marker
in transfected osteosarcoma cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Yeast cells carrying mutant alleles of Mss1 coupled with a 15S rRNA
mutation that corresponds to the 1555A-G mutation of human 12S rRNA
(561000.0001) fail to synthesize subunit 1 of cytochrome oxidase (see
516030) and manifest a respiratory-deficient phenotype. Li and Guan
(2002) found that overexpression of GTPBP3 complemented the respiration
defect of yeast carrying the Mss1 and 15S rRNA mutations. They suggested
that, like yeast Mss1, GTPBP3 may influence the phenotypic expression of
the 1555A-G mutation in 12S rRNA.

GENE STRUCTURE

Li and Guan (2002) determined that the GTPBP3 gene contains 9 exons and
spans more than 6 kb. There are 2 putative polyadenylation signals.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Li and Guan (2002) mapped the GTPBP3 gene
to chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Li, X.; Guan, M.-X.: A human mitochondrial GTP binding protein
related to tRNA modification may modulate phenotypic expression of
the deafness-associated mitochondrial 12S rRNA mutation. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 22: 7701-7711, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/17/2004

EDITED mgross: 03/17/2004

601212	TITLE *601212 PROTEIN-TYROSINE KINASE 2, BETA; PTK2B
;;PROLINE-RICH TYROSINE KINASE 2; PYK2;;
FOCAL ADHESION KINASE 2; FAK2;;
CELL ADHESION KINASE, BETA; CAKB
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Focal adhesion kinases are cytoplasmic protein-tyrosine kinases
associated with focal adhesions and whose activity is induced by ligand
binding to various receptors including those for integrin, growth
factors, etc. FAKs are known to target paxillin (602505) and are
substrates for Src family kinases (see 190090) (Calalb et al., 1995).
Herzog et al. (1996) identified a gene for another focal adhesion kinase
by low-stringency screening of a hippocampus cDNA library. They
symbolized the gene FAK2. The FAK2 cDNA encodes a predicted 1,009-amino
acid protein with 42% identity to FAK1 (600758). Northern blot analysis
detected a 4.5-kb mRNA in brain, kidney, spleen, and lymphocytes.

Protein-tyrosine kinases in the central nervous system are activated in
response to a variety of neurotrophic factors that control neuronal
differentiation and survival via cell surface receptors. Also, protein
phosphorylation is involved in membrane excitability and the function of
ion channels. Lev et al. (1995) discovered a nonreceptor type protein
kinase that is highly expressed in adult rat brain. The kinase, which
they symbolized PYK2 (proline-rich tyrosine kinase-2), was cloned from a
rat spinal cord cDNA library using degenerate PCR primers corresponding
to conserved tyrosine kinase motifs of PYK1 (see Manser et al., 1993).
Lev et al. (1995) cloned the human homolog from a human fetal brain cDNA
library using the rat sequence as a probe. The predicted protein of
1,009 amino acids has 61% sequence identity to the FAK1 protein (PTK2;
600758).

GENE FUNCTION

Lev et al. (1995) showed that the PYK2 protein undergoes rapid tyrosine
phosphorylation in response to various stimuli that elevate
intracellular calcium concentration, such as addition of bradykinin, a
neuropeptide hormone that binds to a G protein-coupled receptor and in
turn stimulates phosphatidylinositol hydrolysis. PYK2 is also tyrosine
phosphorylated following activation of the nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor (see 100690), by membrane depolarization, and by treatment of
cells with a calcium ionophore. Protein kinase C (176960) activation
also induces PYK2 phosphorylation. Activation of PYK2 leads to the
modulation of ion channel function and activation of the MAP kinase
signaling pathway. Lev et al. (1995) proposed that PYK2 may represent an
important signaling intermediate between neuropeptide activated
receptors or neurotransmitters that increase calcium flux and the
downstream signals that regulate neuronal activity. PYK2 may also
provide a mechanism for a variety of short- and long-term
calcium-dependent signaling events in the nervous system.

Matsuya et al. (1998) found specific interaction between the C-terminal
region of PYK2 and HIC5 (TGFB1I1; 602353). Both proteins were
tyrosine-phosphorylated in parallel in rat fibroblasts exposed to
hypertonic osmotic stress or stimulated with lysophosphatidic acid.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) causes acute and chronic infection of the liver
and is also a risk factor for hepatic cancer. The virus has only 4 open
reading frames, 3 of which encode the capsid, envelope, and polymerase
proteins. The fourth encodes HBX, a poorly expressed protein required
for viral replication (Ganem, 2001). Bouchard et al. (2001) showed that
HBX induces release of calcium into the cytoplasm, presumably from
mitochondria or endoplasmic reticulum. HBX expression thereby induces
activation of PYK2, which activates SRC and HBV DNA replication.
Inhibition of PYK2 or calcium signaling mediated by mitochondrial
calcium channels could block HBV DNA replication, and enhancement of
cytoplasmic calcium was able to substitute for HBX in stimulating HBV
DNA replication.

In a kidney proximal epithelial cell line (OKP) incubated in acid media,
Li et al. (2004) observed an increase in PYK2 phosphorylation and
PYK2/SRC binding. Transfection of OKP cells with dominant-negative PYK2
or small interfering PYK2 duplex RNA blocked acid activation of
sodium/hydrogen exchanger-3 (NHE3, or SLC9A3; 182307), whereas neither
had an effect on glucocorticoid activation of NHE3. Dominant-negative
PYK2 also blocked acid activation of SRC kinase, which is required for
acid regulation of NHE3. Li et al. (2004) concluded that PYK2 is
directly activated by acidic pH and that PYK2 activation is required for
acid activation of SRC kinase and NHE3. Partially purified PYK2 was
activated by acid in a cell-free system, leading Li et al. (2004) to
suggest that PYK2 may serve as the pH sensor that initiates the
acid-regulated signaling cascade involved in NHE3 regulation.

MAPPING

Herzog et al. (1996) assigned the FAK2 gene to chromosome 8 by PCR
analysis of somatic cell hybrid DNAs and localized it to 8p22-p11.2 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

ANIMAL MODEL

Buckbinder et al. (2007) found that Pyk2-null mice were normal in
appearance and body weight, but they had increased bone mass and
improved bone microstructure. Mouse bone marrow cultures showed that
Pyk2 deficiency enhanced differentiation and activity of osteoprogenitor
cells, as did expression of PYK2-specific short hairpin RNA or dominant
interfering proteins in human mesenchymal stem cells. Daily
administration of a small molecule Pyk2 inhibitor increased bone
formation and protected against bone loss in ovariectomized rats, an
established preclinical model of postmenopausal osteoporosis.

Using Pyk2 -/- mice, Kamen et al. (2011) showed that Pyk2 was required
for integrin-mediated degranulation responses in polymorphonuclear
neutrophils (PMNs), but not in adhesion-induced cell spreading or
activation of superoxide production. Pyk2-deficient PMNs also displayed
reduced migration on fibrinogen (see 134820)-coated surfaces and reduced
paxillin and Vav (VAV1; 164875) phosphorylation after integrin ligation.
Clearance of Staphylococcus aureus skin abscesses was poor in Pyk2 -/-
mice. The response to soluble agonists, however, was normal. Kamen et
al. (2011) concluded that PYK2 is involved in regulating
adhesion-mediated release of PMN granule contents.

REFERENCE 1. Bouchard, M. J.; Wang, L.-H.; Schneider, R. J.: Calcium signaling
by HBx protein in hepatitis B virus DNA replication. Science 294:
2376-2378, 2001.

2. Buckbinder, L.; Crawford, D. T.; Qi, H.; Ke, H. Z.; Olson, L. M.;
Long, K. R.; Bonnette, P. C.; Baumann, A. P.; Hambor, J. E.; Grasser,
W. A., III; Pan, L. C.; Owen, T. A.; and 11 others: Proline-rich
tyrosine kinase 2 regulates osteoprogenitor cells and bone formation,
and offers an anabolic treatment approach for osteoporosis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 10619-10624, 2007.

3. Calalb, M. B.; Polte, T. R.; Hanks, S. K.: Tyrosine phosphorylation
of focal adhesion kinase at sites in the catalytic domain regulates
kinase activity: a role for Src family kinases. Molec. Cell. Biol. 15:
954-963, 1995.

4. Ganem, D.: The X files--one step closer to closure. Science 294:
2299-2300, 2001.

5. Herzog, H.; Nicholl, J.; Hort, Y. J.; Sutherland, G. R.; Shine,
J.: Molecular cloning and assignment of FAK2, a novel human focal
adhesion kinase, to 8p11.2-p22 by nonisotopic in situ hybridization. Genomics 32:
484-486, 1996.

6. Kamen, L. A.; Schlessinger, J.; Lowell, C. A.: Pyk2 is required
for neutrophil degranulation and host defense responses to bacterial
infection. J. Immun. 186: 1656-1665, 2011.

7. Lev, S.; Moreno, H.; Martinez, R.; Canoll, P.; Peles, E.; Musacchio,
J. M.; Plowman, G. D.; Rudy, B.; Schlessinger, J.: Protein tyrosine
kinase PYK2 involved in Ca(2+)-induced regulation of ion channel and
MAP kinase functions. Nature 376: 737-745, 1995.

8. Li, S.; Sato, S.; Yang, X.; Preisig, P. A.; Alpern, R. J.: Pyk2
activation is integral to acid stimulation of sodium/hydrogen exchanger
3. J. Clin. Invest. 114: 1782-1789, 2004.

9. Manser, E.; Leung, T.; Salihuddin, H.; Tan, L.; Lim, L.: A non-receptor
tyrosine kinase that inhibits the GTPase activity of p21(cdc42). Nature 363:
364-367, 1993.

10. Matsuya, M.; Sasaki, H.; Aoto, H.; Mitaka, T.; Nagura, K.; Ohba,
T.; Ishino, M.; Takahashi, S.; Suzuki, R.; Sasaki, T.: Cell adhesion
kinase beta forms a complex with a new member, Hic-5, of proteins
localized at focal adhesions. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 1003-1014, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/15/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/10/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/14/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/3/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/18/2002

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 4/18/1996

EDITED mgross: 03/20/2012
mgross: 3/20/2012
terry: 3/15/2012
mgross: 8/8/2007
terry: 7/10/2007
carol: 1/19/2005
terry: 1/14/2005
mgross: 2/5/2004
carol: 4/3/2002
mgross: 1/18/2002
alopez: 1/12/1999
alopez: 4/8/1998
mark: 4/18/1996
terry: 4/18/1996
mark: 4/18/1996

176873	TITLE *176873 CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASE 11B; CDK11B
;;CELL DIVISION CYCLE 2-LIKE 1; CDC2L1;;
PROTEIN KINASE p58; PK58; p58;;
CDC-RELATED PROTEIN KINASE p58;;
PITSLRE B;;
CDK11
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Bunnell et al. (1990) identified a human cell division control
(CDC)-related protein kinase, p58, that is structurally and functionally
related to p34(cdc2) (CDC2; 116940). Abnormal expression of the p58
protein kinase in eukaryotic cells had effects suggesting that it is a
negative regulator of normal cell cycle progression. The gene is well
conserved evolutionarily. Its expression is regulated during murine
embryogenesis, and its activity is coordinately regulated with that of
p34(cdc2) during the cell cycle.

Lahti et al. (1994) characterized the genomic region surrounding CDC2L1
and found that a related gene, CDC2L2 (116951), was located within 100
kb. They referred to CDC2L1 as PITSLRE B, based on the amino acid
sequence of the region corresponding to the conserved CDC2 PSTAIRE box.

Xiang et al. (1994) isolated multiple, alternatively spliced CDC2L1 and
CDC2L2 mRNAs. The CDC2L1 transcripts encode protein isoforms ranging in
size from 58 to 110 kD. The isoforms vary in the length and sequence of
their N-terminal regions; the protein kinase catalytic and C-terminal
domains are identical. All contain a 30-residue acid blob domain
comprised primarily of glutamic acid. The larger protein species
contained a putative bipartite nuclear localization signal. Western blot
analysis revealed that the 58-kD isoform was present only in cells
undergoing apoptosis. Xiang et al. (1994) analyzed the expression
pattern of the CDC2L1 mRNAs.

The CDC2L1 and CDC2L2 genes encode almost identical protein kinases of
110 kD that contain at their C termini the open reading frame of a
smaller isoform of 58 kD. Cornelis et al. (2000) found that 2 PITSLRE
protein kinase isoforms, p110 and p58, are translated from a single
transcript by initiation at alternative in-frame AUG codons. p110 is
produced by classic cap-dependent translation, whereas p58 results from
internal initiation of translation controlled by an internal ribosome
entry site (IRES) with unique properties. The IRES element is localized
to the mRNA coding region, and its activity is cell cycle regulated,
permitting translation of p58 in G2/M.

Loyer et al. (2008) stated that both CDC2L2 and CDC2L1 can produce a
third isoform, p46, by caspase-dependent proteolysis of either the p110
or p58 isoforms. By immunofluorescence analysis of several human cell
lines, they detected p110 in both nucleoplasm and nuclear speckles.
Western blot analysis showed robust expression of p110 in several human
cell lines and in activated human peripheral blood cells. Only activated
blood cells expressed p58 and p46. Size exclusion chromatography of HeLa
cells revealed that p110 fractionated with protein complexes of about
170 kD to over 1 MDa.

GENE FUNCTION

Lahti et al. (1994) demonstrated that 1 allele of the entire gene CDC2L
complex was either deleted or translocated in 18 of 20 neuroblastoma
(256700) cell lines investigated. They suggested that the CDC2L gene
complex may harbor 1 or more tumor suppressor genes affected by
chromosome 1p36 modifications in neuroblastoma.

By immunoprecipitation analysis and protein pull-down assays with human
cell lines, Loyer et al. (2008) found that p110 CDK11 associated with
the alpha and beta isoforms of cyclin L1 (CCNL1; 613384) and L2 (CCNL2;
613482) in a high molecular mass complex that showed splicing activity.
The p58 and p46 CDK11 isoforms interacted more weakly with the cyclin L
alpha isoforms. In vivo splicing assays showed that expression of cyclin
L1-alpha, L1-beta, L2-alpha, or L2-beta and/or p110 CDK11 increased
intron-splicing activity and altered alternative splice-site selection
in a cyclin L1 and L2 isoform- and cell type-specific manner. In
contrast with p110 CDK11, p58 and p46 CDK11 reduced splicing activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Eipers et al. (1992) detailed the complete structure of the CDC2L1 gene
including its putative promoter region, transcriptional start sites,
exonic sequences, and intron/exon boundary sequences. The gene is 10 kb
and contains 12 exons and 11 introns.

Gururajan et al. (1998) determined the structure of the 140-kb CDC2L
genomic region. This region consists of 2 identical genomic segments
arranged in a tail-to-tail configuration. Each segment contains a CDC2L
gene linked to an MMP gene. See MMP21 (603320). In each case, the most
widely expressed products of the CDC2L gene are derived from a genomic
region that is composed of 20 exons and spans approximately 20 kb. The
authors reported that only 15 amino acids of the 773-786 residues that
encode the multiple CDC2L isoforms are unique to either CDC2L1 or
CDC2L2.

MAPPING

Eipers et al. (1991) assigned the expressed p58 gene to 1p36 by somatic
cell hybrid analysis, in situ hybridization, and nested PCR
amplification of microdissected chromosomes. The authors stated that
this gene, tentatively symbolized PK58, may be implicated in the
pathogenesis of tumors that have deletion in the region of 1p36.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Lahti et al. (1994) mapped the
CDC2L1 gene to 1p36.3.

White et al. (1995) showed that CDC2L1 is located outside the consensus
region of allelic loss of heterozygosity (LOH) associated with
neuroblastomas, namely, 1p36.3-p36.2, and is therefore not the
neuroblastoma suppressor gene.

REFERENCE 1. Bunnell, B.; Heath, L. S.; Adams, D. E.; Lahti, J. M.; Kidd, V.
J.: Elevated expression of a p58 protein kinase leads to changes
in the CHO cell cycle. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 7467-7471, 1990.
Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 2612 only, 1991.

2. Cornelis, S.; Bruynooghe, Y.; Denecker, G.; Van Huffel, S.; Tinton,
S.; Beyaert, R.: Identification and characterization of a novel cell
cycle-regulated internal ribosome entry site. Molec. Cell 5: 597-605,
2000.

3. Eipers, P. G.; Barnoski, B. L.; Han, J.; Carroll, A. J.; Kidd,
V. J.: Localization of the expressed human p58 protein kinase chromosomal
gene to chromosome 1p36 and a highly related sequence to chromosome
15. Genomics 11: 621-629, 1991.

4. Eipers, P. G.; Lahti, J. M.; Kidd, V. J.: Structure and expression
of the human p58(clk-1) protein kinase chromosomal gene. Genomics 13:
613-621, 1992.

5. Gururajan, R.; Lahti, J. M.; Grenet, J.; Easton, J.; Gruber, I.;
Ambros, P. F.; Kidd, V. J.: Duplication of a genomic region containing
the Cdc2L1-2 and MMP21-22 genes on human chromosome 1p36.3 and their
linkage to D1Z2. Genome Res. 8: 929-939, 1998.

6. Lahti, J. M.; Valentine, M.; Xiang, J.; Jones, B.; Amann, J.; Grenet,
J.; Richmond, G.; Look, A. T.; Kidd, V. J.: Alterations in the PITSLRE
protein kinase gene complex on chromosome 1p36 in childhood neuroblastoma. Nature
Genet. 7: 370-375, 1994.

7. Loyer, P.; Trembley, J. H.; Grenet, J. A.; Busson, A.; Corlu, A.;
Zhao, W.; Kocak, M.; Kidd, V. J.; Lahti, J. M.: Characterization
of cyclin L1 and L2 interactions with CDK11 and splicing factors:
influence of cyclin L isoforms on splice site selection. J. Biol.
Chem. 283: 7721-7732, 2008.

8. White, P. S.; Maris, J. M.; Beltinger, C.; Sulman, E.; Marshall,
H. N.; Fujimori, M.; Kaufman, B. A.; Biegel, J. A.; Allen, C.; Hilliard,
C.; Valentine, M. B.; Look, A. T.; Enomoto, H.; Sakiyama, S.; Brodeur,
G. M.: A region of consistent deletion in neuroblastoma maps within
human chromosome 1p36.2-36.3. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 5520-5524,
1995.

9. Xiang, J.; Lahti, J. M.; Grenet, J.; Easton, J.; Kidd, V. J.:
Molecular cloning and expression of alternatively spliced PITSLRE
protein kinase isoforms. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 15786-15794, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/3/2012
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 6/20/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 11/30/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/24/1991

EDITED mgross: 08/07/2012
terry: 8/3/2012
alopez: 11/19/2010
terry: 11/15/2010
alopez: 5/7/2007
mgross: 6/20/2000
alopez: 1/27/1999
alopez: 11/30/1998
alopez: 7/30/1997
jenny: 7/9/1997
mark: 6/29/1995
mimadm: 2/25/1995
carol: 7/20/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/2/1992
carol: 11/11/1991

609988	TITLE *609988 PYROPHOSPHATASE, INORGANIC, 2; PPA2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Inorganic pyrophosphates are generated as byproducts of many
biosynthetic reactions, including DNA and RNA synthesis, fatty acid and
amino acid activation, and cyclic nucleotide synthesis. Inorganic
pyrophosphatases (EC 3.6.1.1), such as PPA2, maintain the thermodynamic
favorability of these reactions by catalyzing the hydrolysis of
pyrophosphates into organic phosphates, which are then exported across
the cell membrane (Curbo et al., 2006).

CLONING

By searching databases using PPA1 (179030) as query, Curbo et al. (2006)
identified PPA2. The deduced 334-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 38 kD. PPA2 shares about 60% amino acid identity with
PPA1, and it has a 31-amino acid N-terminal extension not found in PPA1
that functions as a mitochondrial import signal. Northern blot analysis
detected a 1.4-kb PPA2 transcript in all 12 tissues examined, with
highest levels in heart, skeletal muscle, kidney, and liver.
Fluorescence-tagged PPA2 localized with a mitochondrial marker in
transfected HeLa cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Curbo et al. (2006) found that recombinant PPA2 hydrolyzed pyrophosphate
in vitro. The reaction was dependent on Mg(2+) and inhibited by Ca(2+).

GENE STRUCTURE

Curbo et al. (2006) determined that the PPA2 gene contains 12 exons and
spans about 100 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Curbo et al. (2006) mapped the PPA2 gene
to chromosome 4q25.

REFERENCE 1. Curbo, S.; Lagier-Tourenne, C.; Carrozzo, R.; Palenzuela, L.; Lucioli,
S.; Hirano, M.; Santorelli, F.; Arenas, J.; Karlsson, A.; Johansson,
M.: Human mitochondrial pyrophosphatase: cDNA cloning and analysis
of the gene in patients with mtDNA depletion syndromes. Genomics 87:
410-416, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/21/2006

EDITED mgross: 03/21/2006

601540	TITLE *601540 BROMODOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; BRD2
;;FEMALE STERILE HOMEOTIC-RELATED GENE 1, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; FSRG1;;
RING3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

BRD2 is a putative nuclear transcriptional regulator and a member of a
family of genes that are expressed during development.

CLONING

In a search for novel genes in the human major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class II region on chromosome 6p21.3, Okamoto et al.
(1991) and Beck et al. (1992) identified a gene that they termed RING3.
('RING' is an acronym for 'really interesting new gene.') Based on
mapping and genomic sequencing, RING3 was located in the middle of the
class II region between the genes HLA-DNA (142930) and HLA-DMA (142855).
In contrast to all the other genes encoded in the class II region, RING3
appeared to have no obvious function associated with the immune system
based on sequence comparisons. The striking sequence similarity to the
female sterile homeotic (fsh) gene in Drosophila, however, suggested a
conserved biologic function for RING3.

Denis and Green (1996) discovered that the RING3 product is, in fact, a
mitogen-activated nuclear kinase involved in signal transduction and
that it is upregulated in certain types of leukemia.

With the aim of learning more about the phylogeny of RING3, Thorpe et
al. (1996) identified further homologs in different species and
determined their gene structures. The functional analysis of RING3 had
been further complicated by the finding of a second, non-MHC-linked copy
of RING3 in humans by Nomura et al. (1994). This was referred to by them
as ORFX (601541).

GENE FUNCTION

Dawson et al. (2011) demonstrated that I-BET151, a novel small molecule
inhibitor of the BET family, of which BRD2 is a member, has profound
efficacy against human and murine MLL-fusion leukemia cell lines through
the induction of early cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. I-BET151
treatment in 2 human leukemia cell lines with different MLL fusions
altered the expression of a common set of genes whose function may
account for these phenotypic changes. The mode of action of I-BET151 is,
at least in part, due to the inhibition of transcription at key genes
BCL2 (151430), C-MYC (190080), and CDK6 (603368) through the
displacement of BRD3/4, PAFc, and SEC components from chromatin. In vivo
studies indicated that I-BET151 has significant therapeutic value,
providing survival benefit in 2 distinct mouse models of murine MLL-AF9
and human MLL-AF4 leukemia.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the BRD2
gene and juvenile myoclonic epilepsy, see EJM3 (608816).

REFERENCE 1. Beck, S.; Hanson, I.; Kelly, A.; Pappin, D. J.; Trowsdale, J.:
A homologue of the Drosophila female sterile homeotic (fsh) gene in
the class II region of the human MHC. DNA Sequence 2: 203-210, 1992.

2. Dawson, M. A.; Prinjha, R. K.; Dittmann, A.; Giotopoulos, G.; Bantscheff,
M.; Chan, W.-I.; Robson, S. C.; Chung, C.; Hopf, C.; Savitski, M.
M.; Huthmacher, C.; Gudgin, E.; and 15 others: Inhibition of BET
recruitment to chromatin as an effective treatment for MLL-fusion
leukaemia. Nature 478: 529-533, 2011.

3. Denis, G. V.; Green, M. R.: A novel, mitogen-activated nuclear
kinase is related to a Drosophila developmental regulator. Genes
Dev. 10: 261-271, 1996.

4. Nomura, N.; Nagase, T.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Sato,
S.; Seki, N.; Kawarabayasi, Y.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. II. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0041-KIAA0080) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 1: 223-229, 1994.

5. Okamoto, N.; Ando, A.; Kawai, J.; Yoshiwara, T.; Tsuji, K.; Inoko,
H.: Orientation of HLA-DNA gene and identification of a CpG island-associated
gene adjacent to DNA in human major histocompatibility complex class
II region. Hum. Immun. 32: 221-228, 1991.

6. Thorpe, K. L.; Abdulla, S.; Kaufman, J.; Trowsdale, J.; Beck, S.
: Phylogeny and structure of the RING3 gene. Immunogenetics 44:
391-396, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/4/2012
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/8/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/27/1996

EDITED alopez: 01/06/2012
terry: 1/4/2012
ckniffin: 10/2/2009
tkritzer: 8/14/2003
tkritzer: 8/13/2003
terry: 8/8/2003
mgross: 7/24/2000
psherman: 12/30/1999
alopez: 6/21/1999
carol: 6/2/1998
terry: 4/23/1998
alopez: 6/27/1997
jenny: 12/5/1996
mark: 11/27/1996

604065	TITLE *604065 CALCIUM CHANNEL, VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT, T TYPE, ALPHA-1G SUBUNIT; CACNA1G
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Voltage-activated calcium channels can be distinguished based on their
voltage-dependence, deactivation, and single-channel conductance. See
601011. Low-voltage-activated calcium channels are referred to as 'T'
type because their currents are both transient, owing to fast
inactivation, and tiny, owing to small conductance. T-type channels are
thought to be involved in pacemaker activity, low-threshold calcium
spikes, neuronal oscillations and resonance, and rebound burst firing.

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences related to calcium channels,
Perez-Reyes et al. (1998) identified a partial human cDNA encoding a
novel channel that they designated alpha-1G or Ca(V)T.1. The authors
used the partial cDNA to isolate additional human, rat, and mouse
alpha-1G cDNAs. Northern blot analysis of human and rat tissues
indicated that the alpha-1G gene was expressed as an 8.5-kb mRNA
predominantly in brain. An additional 9.7-kb transcript was also
detected. When expressed in Xenopus oocytes, the rat alpha-1G channel
exhibited the properties of a low-voltage-activated T-type calcium
channel.

Jagannathan et al. (2002) found that multiple isoforms of CACNA1G and at
least 2 isoforms of CACNA1H (607904) are generated by alternative
splicing and are expressed in testis. In situ hybridization localized
transcripts both in germ cells and in other testis cell types. Within
cardiac tissue, both CACNA1G and CACNA1H were expressed in vascular
tissue and not in myocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

By whole-cell patch clamp, Jagannathan et al. (2002) detected T-type
voltage-operated Ca(2+) channel currents in isolated round spermatids.
Currents were consistent with those generated by CACNA1H or CACNA1G
channels.

By action potential clamp studies, Chemin et al. (2002) found
significant differences in the biochemical properties of CACNA1G,
CACNA1H, and CACNA1I (608230) following transient transfection in human
embryonic kidney cells. Using firing activities recorded in dissociated
rat cerebellar Purkinje neurons and thalamocortical relay neurons as
voltage-clamp waveforms, they showed that CACNA1I currents contributed
to sustained electrical activities, while CACNA1G and CACNA1H currents
generated short burst firing. Chemin et al. (2002) hypothesized that
each of the T-channel pore-forming subunits displays specific gating
properties that uniquely contribute to neuronal firing and that CACNA1I
channels provide pacemaker activity.

MAPPING

By FISH and radiation hybrid analysis, Perez-Reyes et al. (1998) mapped
the CACNA1G gene to 17q22. Using interspecific backcross analysis, they
mapped the mouse Cacna1g gene to the distal portion of chromosome 11, in
a region showing homology of synteny with 17q22.

ANIMAL MODEL

To investigate whether T-type Ca(2+) channels in thalamocortical relay
(TC) neurons are involved in the generation of spike-and-wave discharges
(SWDs), Kim et al. (2001) used gene targeting to generate a null
mutation of CACNA1G that encodes the pore-forming subunit of T-type
Ca(2+) channels. The knockout mice grew normally and were fertile.
General development of the brain and major organs appeared normal. Using
pharmacologic models, Kim et al. (2001) analyzed the ability of mutant
mice to generate SWDs. The thalamocortical relay neurons of the knockout
mice lacked the burst mode firing of action potentials, whereas they
showed the normal pattern of tonic mode firing. The knockout thalamus
was specifically resistant to the generation of SWDs in response to
GABA-B receptor (see 603540) activation. Kim et al. (2001) concluded
that the modulation of the intrinsic firing pattern mediated by CACNA1G
T-type Ca(2+) channels plays a critical role in the generation of GABA-B
receptor-mediated SWDs in the thalamocortical pathway, the hallmark of
absence seizures.

Sensations from viscera, like fullness, easily become painful if the
stimulus persists. Kim et al. (2003) demonstrated that mice lacking
alpha 1G T-type calcium channels show hyperalgesia to visceral pain.
Thalamic infusion of a T-type blocker induced similar hyperalgesia in
wildtype mice. In response to visceral pain, the ventroposterolateral
thalamic neurons evoked a surge of single spikes, which then slowly
decayed as T type-dependent burst spikes gradually increased. In
alpha-1G-deficient neurons, the single-spike response persisted without
burst spikes. Kim et al. (2003) concluded that T-type calcium channels
underlie an antinociceptive mechanism operating in the thalamus and that
their findings support the idea that burst firing plays a critical role
in sensory gating in the thalamus.

REFERENCE 1. Chemin, J.; Monteil, A.; Perez-Reyes, E.; Bourinet, E.; Nargeot,
J.; Lory, P.: Specific contribution of human T-type calcium channel
isotypes (alpha-1G, alpha-1H, and alpha-1I) to neuronal excitability. J.
Physiol. 540: 3-14, 2002.

2. Jagannathan, S.; Punt, E. L.; Gu, Y.; Arnoult, C.; Sakkas, D.;
Barratt, C. L. R.; Publicover, S. J.: Identification and localization
of T-type voltage-operated calcium channel subunits in human male
germ cells: expression of multiple isoforms. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
8449-8456, 2002.

3. Kim, D.; Park, D.; Choi, S.; Lee, S.; Sun, M.; Kim, C.; Shin, H.-S.
: Thalamic control of visceral nociception mediated by T-type Ca(2+)
channels. Science 302: 117-119, 2003.

4. Kim, D.; Song, I.; Keum, S.; Lee, T.; Jeong, M.-J.; Kim, S.-S.;
McEnery, M. W.; Shin, H.-S.: Lack of the burst firing of thalamocortical
relay neurons and resistance to absence seizures in mice lacking alpha-1G
T-type Ca(2+) channels. Neuron 31: 35-45, 2001.

5. Perez-Reyes, E.; Cribbs, L. L.; Daud, A.; Lacerda, A. E.; Barclay,
J.; Williamson, M. P.; Fox, M.; Rees, M.; Lee, J.-H.: Molecular characterization
of a neuronal low-voltage-activated T-type calcium channel. Nature 391:
896-900, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/06/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/29/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/20/2003
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 2/1/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/26/1999

EDITED mgross: 11/06/2003
alopez: 10/29/2003
mgross: 6/20/2003
carol: 2/12/2002
terry: 2/1/2002
mgross: 7/26/1999

610428	TITLE *610428 CYTOCHROME c OXIDASE ASSEMBLY PROTEIN COX18; COX18
;;COX18, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;;
MITOCHONDRIAL COX18
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

COX18 encodes a cytochrome c oxidase (COX)-assembly protein. The S.
cerevisiae Cox18 protein catalyzes the insertion of the Cox2 (MTCO2;
516040) C-terminal tail into the mitochondrial inner membrane, an
intermediate step in the assembly of complex IV of the mitochondrial
respiratory chain (Sacconi et al., 2005).

CLONING

Using database analysis with S. cerevisiae Cox18 as query, followed by
PCR techniques, Sacconi et al. (2005) cloned COX18 cDNA from skin
fibroblasts. The deduced 333-amino acid protein has a predicted
molecular mass of 37.1 kD. COX18 shares 25% amino acid identity with S.
cerevisiae Cox18 and shares homology with mitochondrial inner membrane
protein Oxa1 (see OXA1L; 601066). Database analysis and comparison to
yeast Cox18 and Oxa1 suggested that COX18 has 5 transmembrane domains.
Northern blot analysis detected a 3.5-kb transcript in all tissues
examined with highest expression in liver, heart, and pancreas. A
shorter transcript was detected at low levels. By RACE analysis, Sacconi
et al. (2005) identified 2 mRNAs of 3,406 and 2,027 nucleotides that are
transcribed from 2 different transcription start sites. Fluorescence
microscopy showed that COX18 expressed in HEK293 cells localized to
mitochondria.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sacconi et al. (2005) determined that the COX18 gene contains 7 exons
and spans about 25 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Sacconi et al. (2005) mapped the COX18
gene to chromosome 4q21.1

REFERENCE 1. Sacconi, S.; Trevisson, E.; Pistollato, F.; Baldoin, M. C.; Rezzonico,
R.; Bourget, I.; Desnuelle, C.; Tenconi, R.; Basso, G.; DiMauro, S.;
Salviati, L.: hCOX18 and hCOX19: two human genes involved in cytochrome
c oxidase assembly. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 337: 832-839,
2005.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 9/25/2006

EDITED wwang: 09/25/2006

602644	TITLE *602644 TETRASPANIN 4; TSPAN4
;;TRANSMEMBRANE 4 SUPERFAMILY, MEMBER 7; TM4SF7;;
TETRASPAN;;
NOVEL ANTIGEN 2; NAG2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TSPAN4 belongs to the large family of tetraspanins, so named because
they contain 4 transmembrane domains. Tetraspanins are frequently
expressed at the cell surface in association with each other and with
other molecules, such as integrins (see ITGB1; 135630), and they
function to regulate cell adhesion, migration, proliferation, and
differentiation (summary by Todd et al., 1998).

CLONING

Tachibana et al. (1997) generated monoclonal antibodies against proteins
that coimmunoprecipitated with CD81 (TAPA1; 186845) from a human breast
cancer cell line. Two antibodies recognized a 28- to 35-kD protein,
which Tachibana et al. (1997) named NAG2 for 'novel antigen-2.' Using
the antibodies to screen a cDNA expression library derived from the
breast cancer cell line, the authors cloned cDNAs encoding NAG2. The
predicted 238-amino acid NAG2 protein contains 4 hydrophobic domains and
shows homology to transmembrane 4 superfamily (TM4SF) proteins. Northern
blot analysis detected a 1.5-kb NAG2 mRNA, and together with flow
cytometry and immunohistochemistry, showed that NAG2 was expressed in
multiple tissues but was absent in brain, lymphoid cells, and platelets.
Immunofluorescence analysis showed that NAG2 colocalized with CD81 on
the cell surface. Tachibana et al. (1997) identified mouse ESTs encoding
the mouse homolog of NAG2. The human and mouse NAG2 proteins have 95%
amino acid identity.

By searching an EST database for sequences containing a tetraspanin
consensus sequence, Todd et al. (1998) identified human TSPAN4. The
deduced 238-amino acid protein contains 4 transmembrane domains and
other features characteristic of tetraspanins, including conservation of
charged residues in or near the transmembrane domains, similar to ion
channels, and of 4 cysteines in the second extracellular domain.
Northern blot analysis detected highest TSPAN4 expression in heart and
placenta. EST database analysis suggested that TSPAN4 is also expressed
in brain, melanocytes, pancreas, and fetal liver/spleen, in addition to
pregnant uterus and adult and fetal heart.

GENE FUNCTION

Tachibana et al. (1997) found that NAG2 coimmunoprecipitated with
integrins and other TM4SF members, indicating that NAG2 is present in
TM4SF-TM4SF and TM4SF-integrin complexes.

MAPPING

Hartz (2009) mapped the TSPAN4 gene to chromosome 11p15.5 based on an
alignment of the TSPAN4 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF022813) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  11/23/2009.

2. Tachibana, I.; Bodorova, J.; Berditchevski, F.; Zutter, M. M.;
Hemler, M. E.: NAG-2, a novel transmembrane-4 superfamily (TM4SF)
protein that complexes with integrins and other TM4SF proteins. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 29181-29189, 1997.

3. Todd, S. C.; Doctor, V. S.; Levy, S.: Sequences and expression
of six new members of the tetraspanin/TM4SF family. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1399: 101-104, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/20/2009

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/20/1998

EDITED mgross: 12/03/2009
mgross: 11/23/2009
terry: 11/20/2009
alopez: 1/19/2006
psherman: 1/11/1999
carol: 8/10/1998
psherman: 5/29/1998
psherman: 5/21/1998
psherman: 5/20/1998

151410	TITLE *151410 BREAKPOINT CLUSTER REGION; BCR
;;BCR1
BCR/ABL FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
BCR/FGFR1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
BCR/PDGFRA FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The normal cellular BCR gene encodes a 160-kD phosphoprotein associated
with serine/threonine kinase activity. The BCR gene is the site of
breakpoints used in the generation of the 2 alternative forms of the
Philadelphia chromosome translocation found in chronic myeloid leukemia
(CML; 608232) and acute lymphocytic leukemia (Groffen et al., 1984;
Shtivelman et al., 1985; Hermans et al., 1987). These alternative
breakpoints join different exon sets of BCR to a common subset of the
exons of the ABL1 gene (189980) located on chromosome 9. This fusion
results in 2 alternative chimeric oncogene products called p210(BCR-ABL)
and p185(BCR-ABL). The activation of ABL tyrosine kinase activity is
necessary for the oncogenic potential of the chimeric oncogene (Maru and
Witte, 1991).

Laurent et al. (2001) reviewed the role of BCR alone or when joined with
ABL in normal and leukemic pathophysiology.

CLONING

Hariharan and Adams (1987) isolated cDNA clones that spanned the entire
BCR coding region. The deduced 1,271-residue protein has a molecular
mass of about 160 kD. The BCR gene is expressed as mRNAs of 4.5- and
6.7-kb, which apparently encode the same protein.

Stam et al. (1987) showed that the normal gene on chromosome 22 involved
at the breakpoint cluster region in the translocation between
chromosomes 9 and 22 encodes a 160,000-Da phosphoprotein with serine or
threonine kinase activity.

Chissoe et al. (1995) sequenced the complete BCR gene and greater than
80% of the human ABL gene, which are both involved in the t(9;22)
translocation (Philadelphia chromosome) associated with more than 90% of
CML, 25 to 30% of adult and 2 to 10% of childhood acute lymphoblastic
leukemia, and rare cases of acute myelogenous leukemia.

GENE STRUCTURE

Heisterkamp et al. (1985) determined the structural organization of the
BCR gene, which contains 23 exons and occupies a region of about 135 kb
on chromosome 22. The first exon contains a unique serine/threonine
kinase activity and at least two SH2 binding sites.

Stam et al. (1987) demonstrated that the BCR gene is oriented with its
5-prime end toward the centromere of chromosome 22.

Chissoe et al. (1995) determined that the BCR gene contains 23 BCR exons
with putative alternative BCR first and second exons.

MAPPING

The BCR gene is located on chromosome 22q11.2, the site of the
translocation breakpoint in CML (Prakash and Yunis, 1984).

Croce et al. (1987) demonstrated that there are in fact 4 BCR genes, all
located in the 22q11.2 band. By studying mouse-human hybrid cells with
breakpoints at various sites in that region, they concluded that the
order of loci is centromere--BCR2, BCR4, IGL--BCR1--BCR3--SIS. This
linear order was confirmed by Budarf et al. (1988), who also confirmed
that all of the BCR-like genes map proximal to the 22q11-q12 breakpoint
of a t(11;22) in a Ewing sarcoma (612219).

Using an interspecific backcross, Justice et al. (1990) mapped the Bcr
gene to chromosome 10 of the mouse.

GENE FUNCTION

Maru and Witte (1991) demonstrated that purified BCR contains
autophosphorylation activity and transphosphorylation activity for
several protein substrates. A region encoded by the first exon was
essential for this novel phosphotransferase activity. The findings
suggested that the protein kinase and SH2-binding domains may work in
concert with other regions of the molecule in intracellular signaling
processes.

Diekmann et al. (1991) found that the C-terminal domain of BCR functions
as a GTPase activating protein for p21(rac); see rac serine/threonine
protein kinase (164730).

- BCR/ABL Fusion Gene

Nowell and Hungerford (1960) identified the Philadelphia chromosome of
chronic myeloid leukemia (a G group chromosome with part of its long arm
missing). It was called the Philadelphia chromosome because it was
thought to be useful to follow the practice of hemoglobinologists and
name anomalous chromosomes after the city of discovery. It was presumed
to be a deleted chromosome 21, the same chromosome as that which is
trisomic in Down syndrome (190685). The elevated alkaline phosphatase
activity in Down syndrome and depressed activity in CML was viewed as
consistent with this interpretation. Using the improved definition
provided by 'banding' methods, Rowley (1973) showed that in fact there
is a translocation of the distal part of chromosome 22 (not 21) onto
another chromosome, usually 9q.

Fitzgerald (1976) described a family in which a man and 2 of his 3
children had a Philadelphia-like chromosome t(11;22)(q25;q13). The fact
that they did not have leukemia or other hematologic disorder was
thought by Fitzgerald to relate to the finding that the break in
chromosome 22 was distal to that in CML. In these cases it was at the
q12-q13 interface, whereas in the Philadelphia chromosome it is at the
q11-q12 band interface. Thus the 22q12 band may contain critical genetic
material concerned with normal (and abnormal) myeloid proliferation.

De Klein et al. (1982) demonstrated that the Abelson oncogene is
translocated from chromosome 9 to chromosome 22 in the formation of the
Philadelphia chromosome.

Prakash and Yunis (1984) located the breakpoints in CML to subbands
22q11.21 and 9q34.1. Although the position of the breakpoint in
chromosome 9 is quite variable, the breakpoint in chromosome 22 is
clustered in an area called bcr for 'breakpoint cluster region.'
Shtivelman et al. (1985) referred to bcr as a gene and stated that the
ABL oncogene is transferred 'into the bcr gene of chromosome 22.' They
found that an 8-kb RNA specific to CML is a fused transcript of the 2
genes. The fused protein is presumably involved in the malignant
process. The protein has bcr information at its amino terminus and
retains most but not all of the normal abl protein sequences. Since the
breakpoint in 9 may be as much as 30 or 40 kb 5-prime to ABL, a large
amount must be 'looped out' in the fusion process. The fusion protein
has tyrosine kinase activity.

About 10% of patients with acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) have the
translocation t(9;22)(q34;q11) indistinguishable from that of CML
(608232). Erikson et al. (1986), however, found in 3 of 5 such cases of
ALL that the bcr region was not involved and that the 22q11 chromosome
breakpoint was proximal (5-prime) to the bcr region. Furthermore, the
bcr and c-abl transcripts were of normal size in an ALL line carrying
the t(9;22) translocation. The breakpoints of the t(9;22) CML, the
t(9;22) of acute lymphocytic leukemia, and the t(8;22) of Burkitt
lymphoma fall into 22q11 and are cytologically indistinguishable. By
chromosomal in situ hybridization, however, they can be distinguished
(Emanuel et al., 1984; Erikson et al., 1986). To this experience,
Griffin et al. (1986) added observations on t(11;22), both
constitutional and tumor-related (see 133450). In the hybrid gene of
CML, the bcr contribution is 5-prime to the abl contribution. In the
creation of the gene, splicing can occur across an interval as great as
100 kb. The product of the bcr/abl hybrid gene is a 210-kD protein. It
was suggested that the hybrid gene and its product protein be designated
PHL.

Mes-Masson et al. (1986) isolated overlapping cDNA clones defining the
complete coding region for the hybrid protein generated from the ABL and
BCR genes.

As a result of the CML translocation, the 3-prime BCR exons are removed
and remain on chromosome 22 (Stam et al., 1987). The BCR and ABL genes
are fused in a head-to-tail fashion.

Verhest and Monsieur (1983) found the Philadelphia chromosome in a case
of essential thrombocytopenia.

Ganesan et al. (1986) found that the BCR gene was rearranged in 7 cases
of Philadelphia chromosome-negative CML. In 5 cases hematologic findings
were indistinguishable from those of patients with the Philadelphia
chromosome.

Hermans et al. (1987) showed that a distinct and different fusion of BCR
and ABL occurs in creation of the Philadelphia chromosome associated
with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Rubin et al. (1988) similarly
reported a distinctive fusion in ALL.

Haas et al. (1992) demonstrated a 'parent of origin' bias in cases of
Philadelphia chromosome-positive leukemia by use of unique specific
chromosome band polymorphisms. They showed that the translocated
chromosome 9 was always of paternal origin, whereas the translocated
chromosome 22 was derived exclusively from the maternal copy.
Preferential retention of paternal alleles has been found in sporadic
tumors such as Wilms tumor (194070), rhabdomyosarcoma (268210),
osteosarcoma (259500), and retinoblastoma (180200). The finding of
preferential participation of the paternally derived chromosome 9 and
the maternally derived chromosome 22 in the Ph-translocation strongly
indicates that the chromosomal regions involved are imprinted. Feinberg
(1993) reviewed 11 examples of preferential parental allelic alterations
in cancer. Fioretos et al. (1994) were unable to find evidence for
genomic imprinting of the human BCR gene. They identified a BamHI
polymorphism in the coding region of BCR exon 1 and by RT-PCR assay
showed that both BCR alleles are expressed in the peripheral blood cells
of normal persons. Furthermore, Litz and Copenhaver (1994) used PvuII
and MaeII restriction site polymorphisms in the BCR gene to study 3
cases of Philadelphia chromosome-positive CML. In all 3 cases, the
rearranged allele was paternal in origin. Melo et al. (1994) could find
no evidence of parental imprinting of the ABL gene and cited evidence
which appeared to exclude imprinting of the BCR gene and to suggest that
there is, in fact, no preferential involvement of the maternal BCR or
paternal ABL alleles in the formation of the BCR-ABL fusion gene. Melo
et al. (1995) further reviewed the evidence they interpreted as
indicating that there is no parental bias in the origin of the
translocated ABL gene and no evidence for genomic imprinting of ABL in
CML. On the other hand, Haas (1995) argued that it still remains likely
that ABL and BCR are imprinted.

From the sequence of 4 newly studied Philadelphia chromosome
translocations and a review of several other previously sequenced
breakpoints, Chissoe et al. (1995) could discern no consistent
breakpoint features. No clear-cut mechanism for Philadelphia chromosome
translocation was evident.

To block BCR/ABL function, Lim et al. (2000) created a unique tyrosine
phosphatase by fusing the catalytic domain of SHP1 (604630) to the ABL
binding domain of RIN1 (605965), an established binding partner and
substrate for c-ABL and BCR/ABL. This fusion construct binds to BCR/ABL
in cells and functions as an active phosphatase. It effectively
suppressed BCR/ABL function as judged by reductions in transformation of
fibroblast cells, growth factor independence of hematopoietic cell
lines, and proliferation of primary bone marrow cells. In addition, the
leukemogenic properties of BCR/ABL in a murine model system were blocked
by coexpression of the fusion construct. Expression of the construct
also reversed the transformed phenotype of a human leukemia-derived cell
line. These results appeared to have direct implications for leukemia
therapeutics and suggested an approach to block aberrant signal
transduction in other pathologies through the use of appropriately
designed escort/inhibitors.

Saglio et al. (2002) found that a patient with a typical form of CML
carried a large deletion on the derivative chromosome 9q+ and an unusual
BCR-BCL transcript characterized by the insertion, between BCR exon 14
and ABL exon 2, of 126 bp derived from a region located on chromosome 9,
1.4 Mb 5-prime to ABL. This sequence was contained in a bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC), which in FISH experiments on normal
metaphases was found to detect, in addition to the predicted clear
signal at 9q34, a faint but distinct signal at 22q11.2, where the BCR
gene is located, suggesting the presence of a large region of homology
between the 2 chromosome regions. A BLAST analysis of the particular BAC
sequence against the entire human genome revealed the presence of a
stretch of homology, about 76 kb long, located approximately 150 kb
3-prime to the BCR gene, and containing the 126-bp insertion sequence.
Evolutionary studies using FISH identified the region as a duplicon,
which transposed from the region orthologous to human 9q34 to chromosome
22 after the divergence of orangutan from the human-chimpanzee-gorilla
common ancestor about 14 million years ago. Saglio et al. (2002) noted
that sequence analyses reported as part of the Human Genome Project had
disclosed an unpredicted extensive segmental duplication in the human
genome, and the impact of duplicons in triggering genomic disorders is
becoming more and more apparent. The discovery of a large duplicon
relatively close to the ABL and BCR genes and the finding that the
126-bp insertion is very close to the duplicon at 9q34 open the question
of the possible involvement of the duplicon in the formation of the
Philadelphia chromosome translocation.

The arrest of differentiation is a feature of chronic myelogenous
leukemia cells both in myeloid blast crisis and in myeloid precursors
that ectopically express the p210(BCR-ABL) oncoprotein. Related to the
underlying mechanisms of this arrest of differentiation, Perrotti et al.
(2002) showed that expression of BCR-ABL in myeloid precursor cells
leads to transcriptional suppression of the gene encoding granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor receptor (CSF3R; 138971), possibly through
downmodulation of C/EBP-alpha (116897), the principal regulator of
granulocytic differentiation. Expression of C/EBP-alpha protein is
barely detectable in primary marrow cells taken from individuals
affected with chronic myeloid leukemia in blast crisis. In contrast,
CEBPA RNA is clearly present. Further experiments by Perrotti et al.
(2002) indicated that BCR-ABL regulates the expression of C/EBP-alpha by
inducing heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein E2 (PCBP2; 601210).

RNA interference (RNAi) is a highly conserved regulatory mechanism that
mediates sequence-specific posttranscriptional gene silencing initiated
by double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) (Fire, 1999). Fusion transcripts encoding
oncogenic proteins may represent potential targets for a tumor-specific
RNAi approach. Scherr et al. (2003) demonstrated that small interfering
RNAs (siRNAs) against BCR-ABL specifically inhibited expression of
BCR-ABL mRNA in hematopoietic cell lines and primary CML cells.

Goldman and Melo (2003) tabulated BCR-ABL substrates and diagrammed the
signal-transduction pathways affected by BCR-ABL.

To define oncogenic lesions that cooperate with BCR-ABL1 to induce ALL,
Mullighan et al. (2008) performed a genomewide analysis of diagnostic
leukemia samples from 304 individuals with ALL, including 43 BCR-ABL1
B-progenitor ALLs and 23 CML cases. IKZF1, encoding the transcription
factor Ikaros (603023), was deleted in 83.7% of BCR-ABL1 ALL, but not in
chronic phase CML. Deletion of IKZF1 was also identified as an acquired
lesion at the time of transformation of CML to ALL (lymphoid blast
crisis). The IKZF1 deletions resulted in haploinsufficiency, expression
of a dominant-negative Ikaros isoform, or the complete loss of Ikaros
expression. Sequencing of IKZF1 deletion breakpoints suggested that
aberrant RAG-mediated recombination (see 179615) is responsible for the
deletions. Mullighan et al. (2008) concluded that genetic lesions
resulting in the loss of Ikaros function are an important event in the
development of BCR-ABL1 ALL.

Zhao et al. (2009) demonstrated that the loss of Smoothened (Smo;
601500), an essential component of the hedgehog pathway (see 600725),
impairs hematopoietic stem cell renewal and decreases induction of
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML; 608232) by the BCR-ABL1 oncoprotein.
Loss of Smo causes depletion of CML stem cells, which propagate the
leukemia, whereas constitutively active Smo augments CML stem cell
number and accelerates disease. As a possible mechanism for Smo action,
Zhao et al. (2009) showed that the cell fate determinant Numb (603728),
which depletes CML stem cells, is increased in the absence of Smo
activity. Furthermore, pharmacologic inhibition of hedgehog signaling
impairs not only the propagation of CML driven by wildtype BCR-ABL1, but
also the growth of imatinib-resistant mouse and human CML. Zhao et al.
(2009) concluded that hedgehog pathway activity is required for
maintenance of normal and neoplastic stem cells of the hematopoietic
system and raised the possibility that the drug resistance and disease
recurrence associated with imatinib treatment of CML might be avoided by
targeting this essential stem cell maintenance pathway.

Resistance of Bcr-Abl-positive leukemic stem cells (LSCs) to imatinib
treatment in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML; 608232) can
cause relapse of disease and might be the origin for emerging
drug-resistant clones. Dierks et al. (2008) identified Smo as a drug
target in Bcr-Abl-positive LSCs. They showed that Hedgehog signaling is
activated in LSCs through upregulation of Smo. While nullity for Smo
does not affect long-term reconstitution of regular hematopoiesis, the
development of retransplantable Bcr-Abl-positive leukemias was abolished
in the absence of Smo expression. Pharmacologic Smo inhibition reduced
LSCs in vivo and enhanced time to relapse after end of treatment. Dierks
et al. (2008) postulated that Smo inhibition might be an effective
treatment strategy to reduce the LSC pool in CML.

Using xenografting and DNA copy number alteration (CNA) profiling of
human BCR-ABL1 lymphoblastic leukemia, Notta et al. (2011) demonstrated
that genetic diversity occurs in functionally defined
leukemia-initiating cells and that many diagnostic patient samples
contain multiple genetically distinct leukemia-initiating cell
subclones. Reconstructing the subclonal genetic ancestry of several
samples by CNA profiling demonstrated a branching multiclonal evolution
model of leukemogenesis, rather than linear succession. For some patient
samples, the predominant diagnostic clone repopulated xenografts,
whereas in others it was outcompeted by minor subclones. Reconstitution
with the predominant diagnosis clone was associated with more aggressive
growth properties in xenografts, deletion of CDKN2A (600160) and CDKN2B
(600431), and a trend towards poorer patient outcome. Notta et al.
(2011) concluded that their findings linked clonal diversity with
leukemia-initiating cell function and underscored the importance of
developing therapies that eradicate all intratumoral subclones.

- BCR/FGFR1 Fusion Gene

Demiroglu et al. (2001) described 2 patients with a clinical and
hematologic diagnosis of CML in chronic phase who had an acquired
t(8;22)(p11;q11). They confirmed that both patients were negative for a
BCR-ABL fusion gene and that both had an in-frame mRNA fusion between
BCR exon 4 and FGFR1 (136350) exon 9. Thus, a BCR-FGFR1 fusion may occur
in patients with apparently typical CML. The possibility of successful
treatment with specific FGFR1 inhibitors was suggested.

- BCR/PDGFRA Fusion Gene

Baxter et al. (2002) reported the identification and cloning of a rare
variant translocation, t(4;22)(q12;q11), in 2 patients with a CML-like
myeloproliferative disease. An unusual in-frame BCR/PDGFRA (173490)
fusion mRNA was identified in both patients, with either BCR exon 7 or
exon 12 fused to short BCR intron-derived sequences, which were in turn
fused to part of PDGFRA exon 12. Sequencing of the genomic breakpoint
junctions showed that the chromosome 22 breakpoints fell in BCR introns,
whereas the chromosome 4 breakpoints were within PDGFRA exon 12.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Resistance to Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors

Clinical studies with the Abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor STI571 in CML
demonstrated that many patients with advanced-stage disease respond
initially but then relapse. Through biochemical and molecular analysis
of clinical material, Gorre et al. (2001) found that the drug resistance
was associated with a reactivation of BCR-ABL signal transduction in all
cases examined. In 6 of 9 patients, resistance was associated with a
single amino acid substitution in a threonine residue of the Abl kinase
domain known to form a critical hydrogen bond with the drug. This
substitution (T315I; 189980.0001) was sufficient to confer STI571
resistance in a reconstitution experiment. In 3 patients, resistance was
associated with progressive BCR-ABL gene amplification. Gorre et al.
(2001) concluded that their studies provided evidence that genetically
complex cancers retain dependence on an initial oncogenic event and
suggested a strategy for identifying inhibitors of STI571 resistance.

Azam et al. (2003) stated that sequencing of the BCR-ABL gene in
patients who relapsed after STI571 chemotherapy revealed a limited set
of kinase domain mutations that mediate drug resistance. To obtain a
more comprehensive survey of the amino acid substitutions that confer
STI571 resistance, they performed an in vitro screen of randomly
mutagenized BCR-ABL and recovered all the major mutations previously
identified in patients and numerous others that illuminated novel
mechanisms of acquired drug resistance. Structural modeling implied that
a novel class of variants acts allosterically to destabilize the
autoinhibited conformation of the ABL kinase, to which STI571
preferentially binds. The authors concluded that this screening strategy
is a paradigm applicable to a growing list of target-directed anticancer
agents and provides a means of anticipating the drug-resistant amino
acid substitutions that are likely to be clinically problematic.

Resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) develops in virtually
all cases of Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Duy et al. (2011) reported the discovery of a novel mechanism
of drug resistance that is based on protective feedback signaling of
leukemia cells in response to treatment with TKIs. In Philadelphia
chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells, Duy et al.
(2011) identified BCL6 (109565) as a central component of this
drug-resistance pathway and demonstrated that targeted inhibition of
BCL6 leads to eradication of drug-resistant and leukemia-initiating
subclones.

ANIMAL MODEL

To determine whether the P210(bcr/abl) hybrid protein can induce
leukemia, Daley et al. (1990) infected murine bone marrow with a
retrovirus encoding this protein and transplanted the bone marrow into
irradiated syngeneic recipients. Transplant recipients developed several
hematologic malignancies, prominent among which was a myeloproliferative
syndrome closely resembling the chronic phase of human chronic
myelogenous leukemia. Tumor tissue from diseased mice harbored the
provirus encoding P210(bcr/abl). Heisterkamp et al. (1990) satisfied
Koch postulates in relation to leukemia by demonstrating leukemia in
mice transgenic for a bcr/abl p190 construct of the type found in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Tkachuk et al. (1990) used 2-color fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH) with probes from portions of the BCR and
ABL (189980) genes to detect the BCR-ABL fusion in individual blood and
bone marrow cells from 6 patients. The fusion event was detected in all
samples analyzed, of which 3 were cytogenetically Ph(1)-negative. One of
the Ph(1)-negative samples was also PCR-negative.

When the Philadelphia-chromosome-positive chronic myeloid leukemia-blast
crisis cell line BV173 is injected into SCID mice, a disease process
closely resembling that seen in leukemia patients results (Kamel-Reid et
al., 1989). For example, BCR-ABL transcripts are detectable in bone
marrow, spleen, peripheral blood, liver, and lungs. Skorski et al.
(1994) found that systemic treatment of the leukemic mice with a 26-mer
BCR-ABL antisense oligodeoxynucleotide induced disappearance of leukemic
cells and a marked decrease in BCR-ABL mRNA in mouse tissues. Untreated
mice or mice treated with a BCR-ABL sense oligodeoxynucleotide or a
6-base-mismatched antisense oligodeoxynucleotide were dead 8 to 13 weeks
after leukemia cell injection; in marked contrast, mice treated with
BCR-ABL antisense oligodeoxynucleotide died of leukemia 18 to 23 weeks
after injection of leukemic cells. Findings were interpreted as
indicating the in vivo effectiveness of an anticancer therapy based on
antisense oligodeoxynucleotides targeting a tumor-specific gene.

Cancer is thought to arise from multiple genetic events that establish
irreversible malignancy. A different mechanism might be present in
certain leukemias initiated by a chromosomal translocation. Huettner et
al. (2000) adopted a new approach to determine if ablation of the
genetic abnormality is sufficient for reversion. They generated a
conditional transgenic model of BCR-ABL-induced leukemia. The most
common form of the product of the fusion gene, p210 BCR-ABL1, is found
in more than 90% of patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia and in up
to 15% of adult patients with de novo acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Efforts to establish a useful transgenic model had been hampered by
embryonic lethality when the oncogene is expressed during embryogenesis,
by reduced penetrance, or by extremely long latency. Huettner et al.
(2000) used the 'knock-in' approach to induce leukemia by p190 BCR-ABL1
(Castellanos et al., 1997). Lethal leukemia developed within an
acceptable time frame in all animals, and complete remission was
achieved by suppression of BCR-ABL1 expression, even after multiple
rounds of induction and reversion. The results demonstrated that
BCR-ABL1 is required for both induction and maintenance of leukemia. The
findings suggested that complete and lasting remissions can be achieved
if the genetic abnormality is abolished or silenced before secondary
mutations are acquired. The results have implications for therapies that
directly target leukemia oncogenes, with a relevant example being the
use of BCR-ABL1-specific tyrosine kinase inhibitors.

Tanabe et al. (2000) designed a ribozyme which exclusively targets the
junction sequence of BCR-ABL and showed that it specifically cleaves the
BCR-ABL mRNA, inducing apoptosis in CML cells. Tanabe et al. (2000)
tested this technology in vivo by embedding genes encoding the maxizyme
downstream of genes for the human tRNA. They used a retroviral system
for the expression of the maxizyme in leukemic cells. A line of CML
cells was transduced either with a control vector in which the maxizyme
sequence had been deleted or with the maxizyme-encoding vector. They
then injected 2 x 10(6) transduced cells into the tail veins of NOD-SCID
mice. Animals transduced with the control vector died between 6 and 13
weeks afterwards due to diffuse leukemia. Animals treated with the
BCR-ABL ribozyme all survived, with no evidence of leukemia in 8 animals
8 weeks after inoculation. Tanabe et al. (2000) stated that their
maxizyme could be useful for purging bone marrow in cases of CML treated
by autologous transplantation, when it would presumably reduce the
incidence of relapse by decreasing the tumorigenicity of contaminating
CML cells in the transplant.

Voncken et al. (1995) found that exposure of Bcr-null mice to
gram-negative endotoxin led to severe septic shock and increased tissue
injury by neutrophils. Neutrophils of Bcr-null mice showed a pronounced
increase in reactive oxygen metabolite production upon activation and
were more sensitive to priming stimuli. Activated Bcr-null neutrophils
displayed a 3-fold increase in Rac2 (602049) membrane translocation
compared with wildtype neutrophils. The results showed that BCR is
involved in the regulation of RAC-mediated superoxide production by the
NADPH-oxidase system (see NOX1; 300225) of leukocytes and suggested a
link between BCR function and the cell type affected in Philadelphia
chromosome-positive leukemias.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Barbany et al. (2002); Brunning  (1980); Druker et al. (2001); Druker
et al. (2001); Goldman and Melo (2001); Grosveld et al. (1986); Klein
(1983); Koeffler and Golde (1981); Kohno and Sandberg (1980); Lillicrap
and Sterndale (1984); Mittelman and Levan (1978); Nowell and Hungerford
(1960); Olavarria et al. (2002); Pegoraro et al. (1983); Priest et
al. (1980); Savage and Antman (2002); Shtivelman et al. (1987); Stam
et al. (1985); Swan et al. (1982); Teyssier et al. (1985); Verma and
Dosik (1980)
REFERENCE 1. Azam, M.; Latek, R. R.; Daley, G. Q.: Mechanisms of autoinhibition
and STI-571/imatinib resistance revealed by mutagenesis of BCR-ABL. Cell 112:
831-843, 2003.

2. Barbany, G.; Hoglund, M.; Simonsson, B.: Complete molecular remission
in chronic myelogenous leukemia after imatinib therapy. (Letter) New
Eng. J. Med. 347: 539-540, 2002.

3. Baxter, E. J.; Hochhaus, A.; Bolufer, P.; Reiter, A.; Fernandez,
J. M.; Senent, L.; Cervera, J.; Moscardo, F.; Sanz, M. A.; Cross,
N. C. P.: The t(4;22)(q12;q11) in atypical chronic myeloid leukaemia
fuses BCR to PDGFRA. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 1391-1397, 2002.

4. Brunning, R. D.: Philadelphia chromosome positive leukemia. Hum.
Path. 11: 307-309, 1980.

5. Budarf, M.; Canaani, E.; Emanuel, B. S.: Linear order of the four
BCR-related loci in 22q11. Genomics 3: 168-171, 1988.

6. Castellanos, A.; Pintado, B.; Weruaga, E.; Arevalo, R.; Lopez,
A.; Orfao, A.; Sanchez-Garcia, I.: A BCR-ABL(p190) fusion gene made
by homologous recombination causes B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias
in chimeric mice with independence of the endogenous bcr product. Blood 90:
2168-2174, 1997.

7. Chissoe, S. L.; Bodenteich, A.; Wang, Y.-F.; Wang, Y.-P.; Burian,
D.; Clifton, S. W.; Crabtree, J.; Freeman, A.; Iyer, K.; Jian, L.;
Ma, Y.; McLaury, H.-J.; Pan, H.-Q.; Sarhan, O. H.; Toth, S.; Wang,
Z.; Zhang, G.; Heisterkamp, N.; Groffen, J.; Roe, B. A.: Sequence
and analysis of the human ABL gene, the BCR gene, and regions involved
in the Philadelphia chromosomal translocation. Genomics 27: 67-82,
1995.

8. Croce, C. M.; Huebner, K.; Isobe, M.; Fainstain, E.; Lifshitz,
B.; Shtivelman, E.; Canaani, E.: Mapping of four distinct BCR-related
loci to chromosome region 22q11: order of BCR loci relative to chronic
myelogenous leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia breakpoints. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 7174-7178, 1987.

9. Daley, G. Q.; Van Etten, R. A.; Baltimore, D.: Induction of chronic
myelogenous leukemia in mice by the P210(bcr/abl) gene of the Philadelphia
chromosome. Science 247: 824-830, 1990.

10. de Klein, A.; Geurts van Kessel, A.; Grosveld, G.; Bartram, C.
R.; Hagemeijer, A.; Bootsma, D.; Spurr, N. K.; Heisterkamp, N.; Groffen,
J.; Stephenson, J. R.: A cellular oncogene is translocated to the
Philadelphia chromosome in chronic myelocytic leukaemia. Nature 300:
765-767, 1982.

11. Demiroglu, A.; Steer, E. J.; Heath, C.; Taylor, K.; Bentley, M.;
Allen, S. L.; Koduru, P.; Brody, J. P.; Hawson, G.; Rodwell, R.; Doody,
M.-L.; Carnicero, F.; Reiter, A.; Goldman, J. M.; Melo, J. V.; Cross,
N. C. P.: The t(8;22) in chronic myeloid leukemia fuses BCR to FGFR1:
transforming activity and specific inhibition of FGFR1 fusion proteins. Blood 98:
3778-3783, 2001.

12. Diekmann, D.; Brill, S.; Garrett, M. D.; Totty, N.; Hsuan, J.;
Monfries, C.; Hall, C.; Lim, L.; Hall, A.: Bcr encodes a GTPase-activating
protein for p21(rac). Nature 351: 400-402, 1991.

13. Dierks, C.; Beigi, R.; Guo, G.-R.; Zirlik, K.; Stegert, M. R.;
Manley, P.; Trussell, C.; Schmitt-Graeff, A.; Landwerlin, K.; Veelken,
H.; Warmuth, M.: Expansion of Bcr-Abl-positive leukemic stem cells
is dependent on hedgehog pathway activation. Cancer Cell 14: 238-249,
2008.

14. Druker, B. J.; Sawyers, C. L.; Kantarjian, H.; Resta, D. J.; Reese,
S. F.; Ford, J. M.; Capdeville, R.; Talpaz, M.: Activity of a specific
inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in the blast crisis of chronic
myeloid leukemia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia with the Philadelphia
chromosome. New Eng. J. Med. 344: 1038-1042, 2001. Note: Erratum:
New Eng. J. Med. 345: 232 only, 2001.

15. Druker, B. J.; Talpaz, M.; Resta, D. J.; Peng, B.; Buchdunger,
E.; Ford, J. M.; Lydon, N. B.; Kantarjian, H.; Capdeville, R.; Ohno-Jones,
S.; Sawyers, C. L.: Efficacy and safety of a specific inhibitor of
the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in chronic myeloid leukemia. New Eng.
J. Med. 344: 1031-1037, 2001.

16. Duy, C.; Hurtz, C.; Shojaee, S.; Cerchietti, L.; Geng, H.; Swaminathan,
S.; Klemm, L.; Kweon, S.; Nahar, R.; Braig, M.; Park, E.; Kim, Y.;
and 11 others: BCL6 enables Ph+ acute lymphoblastic leukaemia cells
to survive BCR-ABL1 kinase inhibition. Nature 473: 384-388, 2011.

17. Emanuel, B. S.; Selden, J. R.; Wang, E.; Nowell, P. C.; Croce,
C. M.: In situ hybridization and translocation breakpoint mapping.
I. Non-identical 22q11 breakpoints for the t(9;22) of CML and the
t(8;22) of Burkitt lymphoma. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 38: 127-131,
1984.

18. Erikson, J.; Griffin, C.; ar-Rushdi, A.; Valtieri, M.; Hoxie,
J.; Finan, J.; Emanuel, B. S.; Rovera, G.; Nowell, P. C.; Croce, C.
M.: Heterogeneity of chromosome 22 breakpoint in Philadelphia-positive
(Ph+) acute lymphocytic leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 1807-1811,
1986.

19. Feinberg, A. P.: Genomic imprinting and gene activation in cancer. Nature
Genet. 4: 110-113, 1993.

20. Fioretos, T.; Heisterkamp, N.; Groffen, J.: No evidence for genomic
imprinting of the human BCR gene. Blood 83: 3441-3444, 1994.

21. Fire, A.: RNA-triggered gene silencing. Trends Genet. 15: 358-363,
1999.

22. Fitzgerald, P. H.: Evidence that chromosome band 22q12 is concerned
with cell proliferation in chronic myeloid leukemia. Hum. Genet. 33:
269-274, 1976.

23. Ganesan, T. S.; Rassool, F.; Guo, A.-P.; Th'ng, K. H.; Dowding,
C.; Hibbin, J. A.; Young, B. D.; White, H.; Kumaran, T. O.; Galton,
D. A. G.; Goldman, J. M.: Rearrangement of the bcr gene in Philadelphia
chromosome-negative chronic myeloid leukemia. Blood 68: 957-960,
1986.

24. Goldman, J. M.; Melo, J. V.: Targeting the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase
in chronic myeloid leukemia. (Editorial) New Eng. J. Med. 344: 1084-1086,
2001.

25. Goldman, J. M.; Melo, J. V.: Chronic myeloid leukemia--advances
in biology and new approaches to treatment. New Eng. J. Med. 349:
1451-1464, 2003.

26. Gorre, M. E.; Mohammed, M.; Ellwood, K.; Hsu, N.; Paquette, R.;
Rao, P. N.; Sawyers, C. L.: Clinical resistance to STI-571 cancer
therapy caused by BCR-ABL gene mutation or amplification. Science 293:
876-883, 2001.

27. Griffin, C. A.; McKeon, C.; Israel, M. A.; Gegonne, A.; Ghysdael,
J.; Stehelin, D.; Douglass, E. C.; Green, A. A.; Emanuel, B. S.:
Comparison of constitutional and tumor-associated 11;22 translocations:
nonidentical breakpoints on chromosomes 11 and 22. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 83: 6122-6126, 1986.

28. Groffen, J.; Stephenson, J. R.; Heisterkamp, N.; de Klein, A.;
Bartram, C. R.; Grosveld, G.: Philadelphia chromosomal breakpoints
are clustered within a limited region, bcr, on chromosome 22. Cell 36:
93-99, 1984.

29. Grosveld, G.; Verwoerd, T.; van Agthoven, T.; de Klein, A.; Ramachandran,
K. L.; Heisterkamp, N.; Stam, K.; Groffen, J.: The chronic myelocytic
cell line K562 contains a breakpoint in bcr and produces a chimeric
bcr/c-abl transcript. Molec. Cell. Biol. 6: 607-616, 1986.

30. Haas, O. A.: Are ABL and BCR imprinted? No definitive answers,
but more questions. Leukemia 9: 740-745, 1995.

31. Haas, O. A.; Argyriou-Tirita, A.; Lion, T.: Parental origin of
chromosomes involved in the translocation t(9;22). Nature 359: 414-416,
1992.

32. Hariharan, I. K.; Adams, J. M.: cDNA sequence for human bcr,
the gene that translocates to the abl oncogene in chronic myeloid
leukaemia. EMBO J. 6: 115-119, 1987.

33. Heisterkamp, N.; Jenster, G.; ten Hoeve, J.; Zovich, D.; Pattengale,
P. K.; Groffen, J.: Acute leukaemia in bcr/abl transgenic mice. Nature 344:
251-253, 1990.

34. Heisterkamp, N.; Stam, K.; Groffen, J.; de Klein, A.; Grosveld,
G.: Structural organization of the bcr gene and its role in the Ph-1
translocation. Nature 315: 758-761, 1985.

35. Hermans, A.; Heisterkamp, N.; von Lindern, M.; van Baal, S.; Meijer,
D.; van der Plas, D.; Wiedemann, L. M.; Groffen, J.; Bootsma, D.;
Grosveld, G.: Unique fusion of bcr and c-abl genes in Philadelphia
chromosome positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Cell 51: 33-40,
1987.

36. Huettner, C. S.; Zhang, P.; Van Etten, R. A.; Tenen, D. G.: Reversibility
of acute B-cell leukaemia induced by BCR-ABL1. Nature Genet. 24:
57-60, 2000.

37. Justice, M. J.; Siracusa, L. D.; Gilbert, D. J.; Heisterkamp,
N.; Groffen, J.; Chada, K.; Silan, C. M.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins,
N. A.: A genetic linkage map of mouse chromosome 10: localization
of eighteen molecular markers using a single interspecific backcross. Genetics 125:
855-866, 1990.

38. Kamel-Reid, S.; Letarte, M.; Sirard, C.; Doedens, M.; Grunberger,
T.; Fulop, G.; Freedman, M. H.; Phillips, R. A.; Dick, J. E.: A model
of human acute lymphoblastic leukemia in immune-deficient SCID mice. Science 246:
1597-600, 1989.

39. Klein, G.: Specific chromosomal translocations and the genesis
of the B-cell-derived tumors in mice and men. Cell 32: 311-315,
1983.

40. Koeffler, H. P.; Golde, D. W.: Chronic myelogenous leukemia--new
concepts. New Eng. J. Med. 304: 1201-1209 and 1269-1274, 1981.

41. Kohno, S.-I.; Sandberg, A. A.: Chromosomes and causation of human
cancer and leukemia. XXXIX. Usual and unusual findings in Ph(1)-positive
CML. Cancer 46: 2227-2237, 1980.

42. Laurent, E.; Talpaz, M.; Kantarjian, H.; Kurzrock, R.: The BCR
gene and Philadelphia chromosome-positive leukemogenesis. Cancer
Res. 61: 2343-2355, 2001.

43. Lillicrap, D. A.; Sterndale, H.: Familial chronic myeloid leukaemia.
(Letter) Lancet 324: 699 only, 1984. Note: Originally Volume II.

44. Lim, Y.-M.; Wong, S.; Lau, G.; Witte, O. N.; Colicelli, J.: BCR/ABL
inhibition by an escort/phosphatase fusion protein. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 97: 12233-12238, 2000.

45. Litz, C. E.; Copenhaver, C. M.: Paternal origin of the rearranged
major breakpoint cluster region in chronic myeloid leukemia. Blood 83:
3445-3448, 1994.

46. Maru, Y.; Witte, O. N.: The BCR gene encodes a novel serine/threonine
kinase activity within a single exon. Cell 67: 459-468, 1991.

47. Melo, J. V.; Yan, X.-H.; Diamond, J.; Goldman, J. M.: Balanced
parental contribution to the ABL component of the BCR-ABL gene in
chronic myeloid leukemia. Leukemia 9: 734-745, 1995.

48. Melo, J. V.; Yan, X.-H.; Diamond, J.; Goldman, J. M.: Lack of
imprinting of the ABL gene. (Letter) Nature Genet. 8: 318-319, 1994.

49. Mes-Masson, A.-M.; McLaughlin, J.; Daley, G. Q.; Paskind, M.;
Witte, O. N.: Overlapping cDNA clones define the complete coding
region for the P210(c-abl) gene product associated with chronic myelogeneous
leukemia cells containing the Philadelphia chromosome. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 83: 9768-9772, 1986. Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
84: 2507 only, 1987.

50. Mittelman, F.; Levan, G.: Clustering of aberrations to specific
chromosomes in human neoplasms. III. Incidence and geographic distribution
of chromosome aberrations in 856 cases. Hereditas 89: 207-232, 1978.

51. Mullighan, C. G.; Miller, C. B.; Radtke, I.; Phillips, L. A.;
Dalton, J.; Ma, J.; White, D.; Hughes, T. P.; Le Beau, M. M.; Pui,
C.-H.; Relling, M. V.; Shurtleff, S. A.; Downing, J. R.: BCR-ABL1
lymphoblastic leukaemia is characterized by the deletion of Ikaros. Nature 453:
110-114, 2008.

52. Notta, F.; Mullighan, C. G.; Wang, J. C. Y.; Poeppl, A.; Doulatov,
S.; Phillips, L. A.; Ma, J.; Minden, M. D.; Downing, J. R.; Dick,
J. E.: Evolution of human BCR-ABL1 lymphoblastic leukaemia-initiating
cells. Nature 469: 362-367, 2011. Note: Erratum: Nature 471: 254
only, 2011.

53. Nowell, P. C.; Hungerford, D. A.: A minute chromosome in human
chronic granulocytic leukemia. Science 132: 1497, 1960.

54. Nowell, P. C.; Hungerford, D. A.: Chromosome studies on normal
and leukemic human leukocytes. J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 25: 85-109,
1960.

55. Olavarria, E.; Craddock, C.; Dazzi, F.; Marin, D.; Marktel, S.;
Apperley, J. F.; Goldman, J. M.: Imatinib mesylate (STI571) in the
treatment of relapse of chronic myeloid leukemia after allogeneic
stem cell transplantation. Blood 99: 3861-3862, 2002.

56. Pegoraro, L.; Matera, L.; Ritz, J.; Levis, A.; Palumbo, A.; Biagini,
G.: Establishment of a Ph(1)-positive human cell line (BV173). J.
Nat. Cancer Inst. 70: 447-451, 1983.

57. Perrotti, D.; Cesi, V.; Trotta, R.; Guerzoni, C.; Santilli, G.;
Campbell, K.; Iervolino, A.; Condorelli, F.; Gambacorti-Passerini,
C.; Caligiuri, M. A.; Calabretta, B.: BCR-ABL suppresses C/EBP-alpha
expression through inhibitory action of hnRNP E2. Nature Genet. 30:
48-58, 2002.

58. Prakash, O.; Yunis, J. J.: High resolution chromosomes of the
t(9;22) positive leukemias. Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 11: 361-367,
1984.

59. Priest, J. R.; Robison, L. L.; McKenna, R. W.; Lindquist, L. L.;
Warkentin, P. I.; LeBien, T. W.; Woods, W. G.; Kersey, J. H.; Coccia,
P. F.; Nesbit, M. E., Jr.: Philadelphia chromosome positive childhood
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 56: 15-22, 1980.

60. Rowley, J. D.: A new consistent chromosomal abnormality in chronic
myelogenous leukemia identified by quinacrine fluorescence and Giemsa
staining. Nature 243: 290-293, 1973.

61. Rubin, C. M.; Carrino, J. J.; Dickler, M. N.; Leibowitz, D.; Smith,
S. D.; Westbrook, C. A.: Heterogeneity of genomic fusion of BCR and
ABL in Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 2795-2799, 1988.

62. Saglio, G.; Storlazzi, C. T.; Giugliano, E.; Surace, C.; Anelli,
L.; Rege-Cambrin, G.; Zagaria, A.; Velasco, A. J.; Heiniger, A.; Scaravaglio,
P.; Gomez, A. T.; Gomez, J. R.; Archidiacono, N.; Banfi, S.; Rocchi,
M.: A 76-kb duplicon maps close to the BCR gene on chromosome 22
and the ABL gene on chromosome 9: possible involvement in the genesis
of the Philadelphia chromosome translocation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99:
9882-9887, 2002.

63. Savage, D. G.; Antman, K. H.: Imatinib mesylate--a new oral targeted
therapy. New Eng. J. Med. 346: 683-693, 2002.

64. Scherr, M.; Battmer, K.; Winkler, T.; Heidenreich, O.; Ganser,
A.; Eder, M.: Specific inhibition of bcr-abl gene expression by small
interfering RNA. Blood 101: 1566-1569, 2003.

65. Shtivelman, E.; Gale, R. P.; Dreazen, O.; Berrebi, A.; Zaizov,
R.; Kubonishi, I.; Miyoshi, I.; Canaani, E.: bcr-abl RNA in patients
with chronic myelogenous leukemia. Blood 69: 971-973, 1987.

66. Shtivelman, E.; Lifshitz, B.; Gale, R. P.; Canaani, E.: Fused
transcript of abl and bcr genes in chronic myelogenous leukaemia. Nature 315:
550-554, 1985.

67. Skorski, T.; Nieborowska-Skorska, M.; Nicolaides, N. C.; Szczylik,
C.; Iversen, P.; Iozzo, R. V.; Zon, G.; Calabretta, B.: Suppression
of Philadelphia-1 leukemia cell growth in mice by BCR-ABL antisense
oligodeoxynucleotide. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 4504-4508, 1994.

68. Stam, K.; Heisterkamp, N.; Grosveld, G.; de Klein, A.; Verma,
R. S.; Coleman, M.; Dosik, H.; Groffen, J.: Evidence of a new chimeric
bcr/c-abl mRNA in patients with chronic myelocytic leukemia and the
Philadelphia chromosome. New Eng. J. Med. 313: 1429-1433, 1985.

69. Stam, K.; Heisterkamp, N.; Reynolds, F. H., Jr.; Groffen, J.:
Evidence that the phl gene encodes a 160,000-dalton phosphoprotein
with associated kinase activity. Molec. Cell. Biol. 7: 1955-1960,
1987.

70. Swan, D. C.; McBride, O. W.; Robbins, K. C.; Keithley, D. A.;
Reddy, E. P.; Aaronson, S. A.: Chromosomal mapping of the simian
sarcoma virus onc gene analogue in human cells. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 79: 4691-4695, 1982.

71. Tanabe, T.; Kuwabara, T.; Warashina, M.; Tani, K.; Taira, K.;
Asano, S.: Oncogene inactivation in a mouse model: tissue invasion
by leukaemic cells is stalled by loading them with a designer ribozyme. Nature 406:
473-474, 2000.

72. Teyssier, J. R.; Bartram, C. R.; Deville, J.; Potron, G.; Pigeon,
F.: C-abl oncogene and chromosome 22 'bcr' juxtaposition in chronic
myelogenous leukemia. New Eng. J. Med. 312: 1393-1394, 1985.

73. Tkachuk, D. C.; Westbrook, C. A.; Andreeff, M.; Donlon, T. A.;
Cleary, M. L.; Suryanarayan, K.; Homge, M.; Redner, A.; Gray, J.;
Pinkel, D.: Detection of bcr-abl fusion in chronic myelogeneous leukemia
by in situ hybridization. Science 250: 559-562, 1990.

74. Verhest, A.; Monsieur, R.: Philadelphia chromosome-positive thrombocythemia
with leukemic transformation. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 308: 1603,
1983.

75. Verma, R. S.; Dosik, H.: Heteromorphisms of the Philadelphia
(Ph-1) chromosome in patients with chronic myelogenous leukaemia (CML).
I. Classification and clinical significance. Brit. J. Haemat. 45:
215-222, 1980.

76. Voncken, J. W.; van Schaick, H.; Kaartinen, V.; Deemer, K.; Coates,
T.; Landing, B.; Pattengale, P.; Dorseuil, O.; Bokoch, G. M.; Groffen,
J.; Heisterkamp, N.: Increased neutrophil respiratory burst in bcr-null
mutants. Cell 80: 719-728, 1995.

77. Zhao, C.; Chen, A.; Jamieson, C. H.; Fereshteh, M.; Abrahamsson,
A.; Blum, J.; Kwon, H. Y.; Kim, J.; Chute, J. P.; Rizzieri, D.; Munchhof,
M.; VanArsdale, T.; Beachy, P. A.; Reya, T.: Hedgehog signalling
is essential for maintenance of cancer stem cells in myeloid leukaemia. Nature 458:
776-779, 2009. Note: Erratum: Nature 460: 652 only, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/10/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/27/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/28/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/12/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/31/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/16/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/14/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/25/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/26/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/20/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/1/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/14/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/27/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/25/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/27/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/2/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/28/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/6/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED terry: 04/04/2013
terry: 7/27/2012
alopez: 7/8/2011
alopez: 6/22/2011
alopez: 6/20/2011
terry: 6/10/2011
carol: 10/25/2010
alopez: 9/8/2009
terry: 8/27/2009
alopez: 5/6/2009
terry: 4/28/2009
terry: 1/27/2009
ckniffin: 10/13/2008
carol: 8/5/2008
alopez: 6/18/2008
terry: 6/12/2008
joanna: 5/19/2006
mgross: 2/1/2006
terry: 1/31/2006
carol: 1/30/2006
alopez: 2/7/2005
alopez: 11/13/2003
tkritzer: 7/17/2003
tkritzer: 5/28/2003
terry: 5/16/2003
mgross: 4/14/2003
tkritzer: 4/10/2003
cwells: 2/25/2003
carol: 9/30/2002
tkritzer: 9/26/2002
cwells: 9/25/2002
carol: 9/25/2002
cwells: 9/24/2002
carol: 9/20/2002
cwells: 7/23/2002
terry: 7/1/2002
alopez: 3/15/2002
terry: 3/14/2002
cwells: 3/6/2002
alopez: 1/15/2002
terry: 1/14/2002
carol: 11/26/2001
alopez: 8/31/2001
terry: 8/27/2001
mcapotos: 6/1/2001
mcapotos: 5/25/2001
terry: 5/18/2001
mcapotos: 5/2/2001
mcapotos: 4/26/2001
terry: 4/25/2001
mcapotos: 12/6/2000
terry: 11/27/2000
terry: 10/6/2000
alopez: 8/2/2000
terry: 8/2/2000
alopez: 3/6/2000
alopez: 12/29/1999
terry: 12/28/1999
carol: 5/10/1999
terry: 5/6/1999
alopez: 10/19/1998
mark: 2/5/1998
alopez: 6/2/1997
mark: 10/16/1996
terry: 5/16/1996
mark: 4/12/1996
mark: 6/27/1995
terry: 12/21/1994
mimadm: 11/5/1994
jason: 6/13/1994
carol: 9/1/1993
carol: 8/26/1993

609262	TITLE *609262 CEREBLON; CRBN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Higgins et al. (2004) identified a transcript, designated LOC51185,
within a candidate region for a form of autosomal recessive nonsyndromic
mental retardation (MRT2; 607417) that was mapped to chromosome
3pter-p25 in a large American family of German ancestry. The
corresponding cDNA encodes a 442-amino acid protein with a 237-residue
ATP-dependent Lon protease domain and several phosphorylation sites. The
gene was named 'cereblon' based on its putative role in cerebral
development and the large, highly conserved Lon domain. RT-PCR
demonstrated abundant expression of CRBN in the human brain.

Jo et al. (2005) cloned rat Crbn from a rat brain cDNA library. The
deduced 445-amino acid proteins shows 98% sequence identity with its
mouse ortholog. Rat Crbn contains an N-terminal domain of the Lon
protease, a RGS-like domain, a leucine zipper motif, and 4 putative
phosphorylation sites. Northern blot analysis of rat tissues detected
strong Crbn expression in brain, liver, kidney, and testis, and in situ
hybridization of rat brain showed strong expression in hippocampus,
habenula, and cortex.

GENE STRUCTURE

Higgins et al. (2004) determined that the CRBN gene contains 11 exons.

GENE FUNCTION

Ito et al. (2010) identified CRBN as a thalidomide-binding protein. CRBN
forms an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex with damaged DNA-binding protein-1
(DDB1; 600045) and CUL4A (603137) that is important for limb outgrowth
and expression of the fibroblast growth factor receptor FGF8 (600483) in
zebrafish and chicks. Thalidomide initiates its teratogenic effects by
binding to CRBN and inhibiting the associated ubiquitin ligase activity.
Ito et al. (2010) concluded that their study revealed a basis for
thalidomide teratogenicity and may contribute to the development of
thalidomide derivatives without teratogenic activity.

MAPPING

Higgins et al. (2004) identified the CRBN gene on chromosome 3pter-p25.

Jo et al. (2005) mapped the rat Crbn gene to chromosome 4q41. A mouse
ortholog was mapped to mouse chromosome 6.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of a family with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic
mental retardation, Higgins et al. (2004) identified a homozygous
arg419-to-ter mutation in the CRBN gene (R419X; 609262.0001) that
segregated with the phenotype.

ANIMAL MODEL

In rat brain, Jo et al. (2005) observed direct interaction of rat Crbn
with the cytosolic C terminus of the large conductance calcium-activated
potassium BK channel alpha-subunit (KCNMA1; 600150). Direct association
of rat Crbn with Kcnma1 was confirmed by immunoprecipitation in brain
lysate, and the 2 proteins colocalized in cultured rat hippocampal
neurons. Rat Crbn suppressed ionic currents of the channel and decreased
formation of the tetrameric BK channel complex, thus reducing surface
expression of functional channels. Jo et al. (2005) concluded that CRBN
may play an important role in modulating BK channel activity by
affecting assembly and surface expression.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 2
CRBN, ARG419TER

In affected members of a large family with autosomal recessive
nonsyndromic mental retardation (607417) previously described by Higgins
et al. (2000), Higgins et al. (2004) identified a homozygous 1274C-T
transition in exon 11 of the CRBN gene, resulting in an arg419-to-ter
(R419X) substitution. The mutation was not detected in 400 control
chromosomes. The truncation spares the Lon domain, but disrupts an
N-myristoylation site and deletes a casein kinase-2 phosphorylation site
at the C terminus, which may prevent proper subcellular targeting. As
human Lon-containing proteins are localized to the mitochondria, where
they selectively degrade short-lived polypeptides, Higgins et al. (2004)
hypothesized that a defect in the CRBN gene may perturb nuclear
regulation of mitochondrial energy metabolism.

Using RT-PCR to examine CRBN expression in lymphoblastoid cells derived
from patients with the R419X mutation, Higgins et al. (2008) found that
R419X-mutant CRBN was expressed at levels similar to wildtype protein.
However, presence of the mutant CRBN resulted in significantly different
expression of different KCNMA1 (600150) channel isoforms. Mutant CRBN
protein was associated with persistent postnatal expression of the
KCNMA1 isoform containing a site 2 insert that is usually downregulated
in adult life. Persistence of protein isoforms with the site 2 insert
would result in BK channels with higher intracellular calcium
sensitivity, faster activation, and slower deactivation kinetics
compared to the mature isoform without the site 2 insert. Higgins et al.
(2008) postulated that such alterations could contribute to abnormal
cortical development and cognitive impairments in patients with the
mutation. The authors noted that R419X-mutant CRBN escapes
nonsense-mediated decay.

REFERENCE 1. Higgins, J. J.; Hao, J.; Kosofsky, B. E.; Rajadhyaksha, A. M.:
Dysregulation of large-conductance Ca(2+)-activated K(+) channel expression
in nonsyndromal mental retardation due to a cereblon p.R419X mutation. Neurogenetics 9:
219-223, 2008.

2. Higgins, J. J.; Pucilowska, J.; Lombardi, R. Q.; Rooney, J. P.
: A mutation in a novel ATP-dependent Lon protease gene in a kindred
with mild mental retardation. Neurology 63: 1927-1931, 2004.

3. Higgins, J. J.; Rosen, D. R.; Loveless, J. M.; Clyman, J. C.; Grau,
M. J.: A gene for nonsyndromic mental retardation maps to chromosome
3p25-pter. Neurology 55: 335-340, 2000.

4. Ito, T.; Ando, H.; Suzuki, T.; Ogura, T.; Hotta, K.; Imamura, Y.;
Yamaguchi, Y.; Handa, H.: Identification of a primary target of thalidomide
teratogenicity. Science 327: 1345-1350, 2010.

5. Jo, S.; Lee, K.-H.; Song, S.; Jung, Y.-K.; Park, C.-S.: Identification
and functional characterization of cereblon as a binding protein for
large-conductance calcium-activated potassium channel in rat brain. J.
Neurochem. 94: 1212-1224, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/13/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/31/2008

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 3/16/2005

EDITED alopez: 04/15/2010
alopez: 4/15/2010
terry: 4/13/2010
wwang: 11/11/2008
ckniffin: 10/31/2008
carol: 10/15/2008
tkritzer: 3/17/2005
ckniffin: 3/16/2005

603153	TITLE *603153 RAD1, S. POMBE, HOMOLOG OF; RAD1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the fission yeast S. pombe, the rad1+ gene product is required for
DNA repair and replication. Parker et al. (1998) cloned 2 alternatively
spliced human cDNAs encoding proteins with significant homology to yeast
rad1+. The longer cDNA, called Hrad1A, encodes a 282-amino acid
polypeptide, while Hrad1B encodes a 163-amino acid polypeptide. Northern
blot analysis revealed that human RAD1 is expressed as mRNAs of 5, 3,
and 1.3 kb in a variety of human tissues, with higher levels present in
some cancer cell lines. Northern blot analysis of cells subjected to
ultraviolet radiation demonstrated that human RAD1 expression is not
induced in response to DNA damage. Purified RAD1 exhibited terminal
exonuclease activity on double-stranded DNA, with a preference for
3-prime ends.

Independently, Udell et al. (1998) isolated RAD1 cDNAs from a
spontaneously transformed human keratinocyte cDNA library. The cDNAs
encode the 282-amino acid RAD1 isoform, which is 90% and 27% identical
to mouse Rad1 and S. pombe rad1+, respectively. Udell et al. (1998)
found that expression of human RAD1 in yeast rad1 mutants partially
restores radiation resistance and G2 checkpoint proficiency.

GENE FUNCTION

Volkmer and Karnitz (1999) demonstrated that the human RAD1 and HUS1
(603760) proteins associate in a complex that interacts with a highly
modified form of RAD9 (603761). They concluded that these 3 proteins are
central components of a DNA damage-responsive protein complex in human
cells.

MAPPING

Parker et al. (1998) used fluorescence in situ hybridization to map the
RAD1 gene to human chromosome 5p13.3-p13.2. The authors stated that loss
of heterozygosity (LOH) of this region has been linked to a variety of
human neoplasias. This mapping assignment was confirmed by Dean et al.
(1998) using fluorescence in situ hybridization and radiation hybrid
analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Dean, F. B.; Lian, L.; O'Donnell, M.: cDNA cloning and gene mapping
of human homologs for Schizosaccharomyces pombe rad17, rad1, and hus1
and cloning of homologs from mouse, Caenorhabditis elegans, and Drosophila
melanogaster. Genomics 54: 424-436, 1998.

2. Parker, A. E.; Van de Weyer, I.; Laus, M. C.; Oostveen, I.; Yon,
J.; Verhasselt, P.; Luyten, W. H. M. L.: A human homologue of Schizosaccharomyces
pombe rad1+ checkpoint gene encodes an exonuclease. J. Biol. Chem. 273:
18332-18339, 1998.

3. Udell, C. M.; Lee, S. K.; Davey, S.: HRAD1 and MRAD1 encode mammalian
homologues of the fission yeast rad1+ cell cycle checkpoint control
gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 26: 3971-3976, 1998.

4. Volkmer, E.; Karnitz, L. M.: Human homologs of Schizosaccharomyces
pombe Rad1, Hus1, and Rad9 form a DNA damage-responsive protein complex. J.
Biol. Chem. 274: 567-570, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 4/21/1999
Sheryl A. Jankowski - updated: 12/22/1998

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 10/16/1998

EDITED alopez: 05/07/2010
alopez: 4/21/1999
psherman: 12/22/1998
alopez: 10/19/1998
alopez: 10/16/1998

607707	TITLE *607707 CALCIUM/CALMODULIN-DEPENDENT PROTEIN KINASE II-BETA; CAMK2B
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CAMK2B belongs to a family of type II multifunctional calcium- and
calmodulin (see 114180)-dependent protein kinases. There are at least 4
CAMK2 genes, and each yields several isoforms through alternative
splicing. CAMK2B is a prominent kinase in the central nervous system and
may function in long-term potentiation and neurotransmitter release.

CLONING

Tombes and Krystal (1997) cloned a number of CAMK2B variants from
several human tumor cell line and brain cDNA libraries. CAMK2B showed
wide tissue and cell distribution, but 1 variant predominated in adult
brain. The expression of other variants depended upon the tissue of
origin and whether the source was normal or tumor tissue.

By searching an EST database using rat Camk2 as query, followed by
screening a brain cDNA library, Li et al. (2001) obtained a full-length
cDNA encoding CAMK2B. The deduced protein contains 542 amino acids. A
comparison of CAMK2B and CAMK2A (114078) detected no amino acid changes
within the functional domains, including the ATP-binding site, the
calmodulin-binding domain, and autophosphorylation sites. Northern blot
analysis detected a major 3.9-kb transcript in adult and fetal brain;
expression was slightly lower in fetal brain. Using PCR primers designed
to identify alternatively spliced isoforms, Li et al. (2001) identified
3 CAMK2B isoforms in adult and fetal brain. Like other CAMK2 isoforms,
the CAMK2B isoforms have an insertion or deletion of 11 to 39 amino
acids within the central variable region.

Wang et al. (2000) identified and cloned CAMK2B by searching an EST
database using mouse Camk2b. They obtained a full-length cDNA by 5-prime
RACE of a brain cDNA library. Wang et al. (2000) also identified 5
splice variants resulting from alternative splicing within 7 central
variable domains, termed V1 to V7. The deduced proteins have calculated
molecular masses between 49 and 60 kD. Transient transfection of 3
CAMK2B variants in HEK293 cells revealed that all 3 were cytosolic
proteins.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (2000) showed that full-length CAMK2B and a variant lacking
V1 displayed Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent kinase activity against a
peptide substrate. Another variant lacking V1 through V5 did not exhibit
significant kinase activity under the same conditions.

By Western blot analysis, Thiagarajan et al. (2002) found that the
protein levels of Camk2a and Camk2b were inversely related during
activity in cultured rat pup hippocampal neurons. The levels of Camk2a
increased with heightened activity, and the levels of Camk2b increased
with suppression of activity. Thiagarajan et al. (2002) hypothesized
that the change in the ratio may help tune the Camk2 holoenzyme to
changing intensities of Ca(2+) signaling.

Novak et al. (2000) determined that expression of CAMK2B mRNA was
elevated about 2-fold in postmortem frontal cortex of schizophrenia
(181500) patients relative to controls.

Konig et al. (2010) used an integrative systems approach, based on
genomewide RNA interference screening, to identify 295 cellular
cofactors required for early-stage influenza virus replication. Within
this group, those involved in kinase-regulated signaling,
ubiquitination, and phosphatase activity are the most highly enriched,
and 181 factors assemble into a highly significant host-pathogen
interaction network. Moreover, 219 of the 295 factors were confirmed to
be required for efficient wildtype influenza virus growth, and further
analysis of a subset of genes showed 23 factors essential for viral
entry, including members of the vacuolar ATPase (see 192132) and COPI
(see 601924) protein families, fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR)
proteins, and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3)-beta (605004).
Furthermore, 10 proteins were confirmed to be involved in post-entry
steps of influenza virus replication. These include nuclear import
components, proteases, and CAMK2B. Notably, growth of swine-origin HIN1
influenza virus is also dependent on the identified host factors, and
Konig et al. (2010) showed that small molecule inhibitors of several
factors, including vATPase and CAMK2B, antagonize influenza virus
replication.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wang et al. (2000) determined that the variable region of the CAMK2B
protein is encoded by at least 7 exons. Alternative splicing within this
region gives rise to CAMK2B variants.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Wang et al. (2000) mapped the CAMK2B gene
to chromosome 7.

REFERENCE 1. Konig, R.; Stertz, S.; Zhou, Y.; Inoue, A.; Hoffmann, H.-H.; Bhattacharyya,
S.; Alamares, J. G.; Tscherne, D. M.; Ortigoza, M. B.; Liang, Y.;
Gao, Q.; Andrews, S. E.; and 14 others: Human host factors required
for influenza virus replication. Nature 463: 813-817, 2010.

2. Li, G.; Laabich, A.; Liu, L. O.; Xue, J.; Cooper, N. G. F.: Molecular
cloning and sequence analyses of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein
kinase II from fetal and adult human brain: sequence analyses of human
brain calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. Molec. Biol.
Rep. 28: 35-41, 2001.

3. Novak, G.; Seeman, P.; Tallerico, T.: Schizophrenia: elevated
mRNA for calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II-beta in frontal
cortex. Molec. Brain Res. 82: 95-100, 2000.

4. Thiagarajan, T. C.; Piedras-Renteria, E. S.; Tsien, R. W.: Alpha-
and beta-CaMKII: inverse regulation by neuronal activity and opposing
effects on synaptic strength. Neuron 36: 1103-1114, 2002.

5. Tombes, R. M.; Krystal, G. W.: Identification of novel human tumor
cell-specific CaMK-II variants. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1355: 281-292,
1997.

6. Wang, P.; Wu, Y.-L.; Zhou, T.-H.; Sun, Y.; Pei, G.: Identification
of alternative splicing variants of the beta subunit of human Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent
protein kinase II with different activities. FEBS Lett. 475: 107-110,
2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/1/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/5/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/23/2003

EDITED carol: 12/20/2012
terry: 7/19/2011
alopez: 7/7/2011
terry: 7/1/2011
alopez: 3/8/2010
terry: 3/5/2010
mgross: 4/23/2003

606016	TITLE *606016 KELCH-LIKE ECH-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; KEAP1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

KEAP1 is a substrate adaptor protein for a CUL3 (603136)-dependent
ubiquitin ligase complex that functions as a sensor for thiol-reactive
chemopreventive compounds and oxidative stress (Lo and Hannink, 2006).

CLONING

Transcription factor NRF2 (600492), which is homologous to the chicken
Ech protein, is essential for the expression of detoxifying enzymes and
oxidative stress-inducible genes to protect against DNA damage. Using a
yeast 2-hybrid screen of a mouse embryo cDNA library with mouse Nrf2 as
bait, Itoh et al. (1999) isolated cDNAs encoding a protein they named
'Kelch-like Ech-associated protein-1,' or Keap1, due to its resemblance
to the Drosophila Kelch protein. Sequence analysis predicted that the
624-amino acid mouse protein is 94% identical to the 624-amino acid
human KIAA0132 protein identified by Nagase et al. (1995). Keap1
contains a central BTB/POZ domain and a C-terminal double glycine repeat
(DGR), or Kelch, module. By RT-PCR analysis, Nagase et al. (1995)
detected strong expression of KIAA0132 in heart and skeletal muscle,
with lower expression in brain, placenta, lung, liver, testis, ovary,
small intestine, and colon, and weaker or undetectable expression in
other tissues.

MAPPING

Nagase et al. (1995) mapped the KIAA0132 gene (KEAP1) to chromosome 19
by analysis of a human-rodent hybrid cell panel.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid and BIAcore analyses of mutant Keap1, Itoh et al.
(1999) showed that the Kelch motifs of Keap1 interact with the Neh2
domain of Nrf2 and that this interaction is required for the repression
of Nrf2 by Keap1. Fluorescence microscopy demonstrated that Keap1 is
expressed in the cytoplasm with Nrf2. In the presence of the
electrophilic agent diethylmalate, Nrf2 activity was released from Keap1
and Nrf2 translocated to the nucleus.

Eades et al. (2011) found that microRNA-200A (MIR200A; 612090) bound to
the 3-prime UTR of the KEAP1 transcript, leading to degradation of the
mRNA. Epigenetic silencing of MIR200A in breast cancer cells resulted in
KEAP1 dysregulation, inhibition of NRF2 transcriptional activity, and
reduced expression of NQO1 (125860), a detoxifying NRF2 target gene.
Overexpression of MIR200A in human breast cancer cells or treatment of a
mouse model of breast cancer with a histone deacetylase inhibitor
enhanced MIR200A-dependent KEAP1 downregulation and restored NRF2
expression.

Using mass spectrometric analysis and database analysis to identify
transcripts encoding proteins other than NRF2 that copurified with KEAP1
from the MD-MB-231 breast carcinoma cell line, Lo and Hannink (2006)
identified 2 splice variants of PGAM5 (614939). Protein interaction
assays and mutation analysis revealed that the putative N-terminal
KEAP1-binding motif of both PGAM5 isoforms interacted with the Kelch
domain of KEAP1 in transfected HEK293T cells. Coexpression of KEAP1 with
the long isoform of PGAM5 (PGAM5L) resulted in PGAM5L ubiquitination and
reduced PGAM5L half-life and total protein content. Coexpression of CUL3
and RBX1 (603814) markedly induced KEAP1-dependent PGAML ubiquitination,
and proteasome inhibition blocked KEAP1-dependent PGAM5L degradation.
Oxidative stress or treatment of cells with the chemotherapeutic
isothiocyanate sulforaphane inhibited KEAP1-dependent PGAM5L
ubiquitination and increased steady-state PGAM5L protein levels.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Padmanabhan et al. (2006) resolved the crystal structure of the 6-bladed
Kelch repeat and the C-terminal region of mouse Keap1. Extensive inter-
and intrablade hydrogen bonds maintained the structural integrity and
proper association of Keap1 with Nrf2. A peptide containing the ETGE
motif of Nrf2 bound the beta propeller of Keap1 at the entrance of the
central cavity on the bottom side via electrostatic interactions with
conserved arginines. Padmanabhan et al. (2006) identified 2 mutations in
cell lines from lung cancer patients that disrupted the interaction
between Keap1 and Nrf2, thus reducing the ability of Keap1 to repress
Nrf2 transcriptional activity.

ANIMAL MODEL

Transcription factor NRF2 (600492) regulates a battery of detoxifying
and antioxidant genes, and KEAP1 represses NRF2 function. Wakabayashi et
al. (2003) found that Keap1-deficient mice died postnatally, probably
from malnutrition resulting from hyperkeratosis in the esophagus and
forestomach. Nrf2 activity affects the expression levels of several
squamous epithelial genes. Biochemical data showed that, without Keap1,
Nrf2 constitutively accumulates in the nucleus to stimulate
transcription of cytoprotective genes. Breeding to Nrf2-deficient mice
reversed the phenotypic Keap1 deficiencies. These experiments showed
that Keap1 acts upstream of Nrf2 in the cellular response to oxidative
and xenobiotic stress.

Wakabayashi et al. (2003) observed that the transient scaling phenotype
of Keap1 -/- mouse skin is similar to that of autosomal recessive
congenital ichthyosis (ARCI). In a Finnish kindred, Virolainen et al.
(2000) identified an ARCI locus corresponding to 19p13.2-p13.1 (see
ARCI5; 604777). The human KEAP1 locus is located at the same chromosomal
position as this autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis locus. Thus,
KEAP1 may have some relationship to congenital ichthyosis. The scaling
of the reported Finnish cases was mild, as in the scaling phenotype of
the Keap1 mutants, but the neonatal onset of the disorder in Keap1
mutants differed from the human disorder.

REFERENCE 1. Eades, G.; Yang, M.; Yao, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Zhou, Q.: miR-200a regulates
Nrf2 activation by targeting Keap1 mRNA in breast cancer cells. J.
Biol. Chem. 286: 40725-40733, 2011.

2. Itoh, K.; Wakabayashi, N.; Katoh, Y.; Ishii, T.; Igarashi, K.;
Engel, J. D.; Yamamoto, M.: Keap1 represses nuclear activation of
antioxidant responsive elements by Nrf2 through binding to the amino-terminal
Neh2 domain. Genes Dev. 13: 76-86, 1999.

3. Lo, S.-C.; Hannink, M.: PGAM5, a Bcl-X-L-interacting protein,
is a novel substrate for the redox-regulated Keap1-dependent ubiquitin
ligase complex. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 37893-37903, 2006.

4. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Tanaka, A.; Ishikawa, K.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. IV. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0121-KIAA0160) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 2: 167-174, 1995.

5. Padmanabhan, B.; Tong, K. I.; Ohta, T.; Nakamura, Y.; Scharlock,
M.; Ohtsuji, M.; Kang, M.-I.; Kobayashi, A.; Yokoyama, S.; Yamamoto,
M.: Structural basis for defects of Keap1 activity provoked by its
point mutations in lung cancer. Molec. Cell 21: 689-700, 2006.

6. Virolainen, E.; Wessman, M.; Hovatta, I.; Niemi, K.-M.; Ignatius,
J.; Kere, J.; Peltonen, L.; Palotie, A.: Assignment of a novel locus
for autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis to chromosome 19p13.1-p13.2. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 66: 1132-1137, 2000.

7. Wakabayashi, N.; Itoh, K.; Wakabayashi, J.; Motohashi, H.; Noda,
S.; Takahashi, S.; Imakado, S.; Kotsuji, T.; Otsuka, F.; Roop, D.
R.; Harada, T.; Engel, J. D.; Yamamoto, M.: Keap1-null mutation leads
to postnatal lethality due to constitutive Nrf2 activation. Nature
Genet. 35: 238-246, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/26/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/31/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/14/2001

EDITED carol: 01/16/2013
mgross: 11/19/2012
terry: 10/26/2012
mgross: 3/31/2006
alopez: 10/31/2003
alopez: 10/1/2003
mgross: 9/4/2001
mgross: 6/14/2001

156565	TITLE *156565 N-@METHYLPURINE DNA GLYCOSYLASE; MPG
;;METHYLADENINE DNA GLYCOSYLASE; MDG;;
3-@METHYLADENINE DNA GLYCOSYLASE;;
3@MeAde DNA GLYCOSYLASE;;
3-@ALKYLADENINE DNA GLYCOSYLASE; AAG;;
ALKYLPURINE DNA N-GLYCOSYLASE; APNG
DESCRIPTION The bacterial enzyme 3-methyladenine (3MeA) DNA glycosylase repairs the
lethal lesion 3MeA that blocks DNA replication in Escherichia coli. The
removal of 3MeA is mediated by two 3MeA DNA glycosylases in E. coli,
encoded by the alkA and tag genes. Using a human cDNA library cloned
into a bacterial expression vector, Boosalis et al. (1991) cloned a
1.15-kb cDNA that rescued alkA(-) tag(-) glycosylase-deficient E. coli
from alkylation-induced killing, and produced a 5-fold increase in 3MeA
DNA glycosylase activity in the E. coli strain. The cDNA hybridized to
human genomic DNA but did not hybridize to E. coli or yeast DNA. DNA
sequence analysis defined an open reading frame coding for a 33-kD
protein that showed extensive amino acid homology with rat 3MeA DNA
glycosylase. The gene (designated N-methylpurine DNA glycosylase, MPG)
was mapped to human chromosome 16 by analysis of a panel of DNAs from
mouse/human and hamster/human hybrid cell lines. Samson et al. (1991)
suggested that because of the 85% identity of 1 part of the human
glycosylase with the middle of the rat glycosylase polypeptide and,
hence, the likely common origin of the rat and human glycosylases, the
human gene should be called AAG for 3-alkyladenine DNA glycosylase.
Vickers et al. (1993) also isolated a cDNA corresponding to the human
MPG gene. They showed that the gene comprises 5 exons and lies within a
group of closely spaced genes in the terminal region of chromosome 16p.
The MPG gene was expressed in all cell lines and tissues examined, but
was found at particularly high levels in a colon adenocarcinoma cell
line (HT29). The completely characterized human MPG gene was found to
span 7 to 8 kb of genomic DNA and to be localized 75 kb upstream of the
embryonic zeta-globin gene (HBZ; 142310).

Kielman et al. (1995) described the genomic organization of the mouse
Mpg gene. Preliminary analyses by Kielman et al. (1993) and Kielman et
al. (1994) indicated that as in the human, the gene is upstream of the
alpha-globin gene cluster on mouse chromosome 11.

The human enzyme 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase removes a diverse group
of damaged bases from DNA, including cytotoxic and mutagenic alkylation
adducts of purines. Lau et al. (1998) reported the crystal structure of
human 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase complexed to a mechanism-based
pyrrolidine inhibitor. The enzyme had intercalated into the minor groove
of DNA, causing the abasic pyrrolidine nucleotide to flip into the
enzyme active site, where a bound water was poised for nucleophilic
attack.

ANIMAL MODEL

By targeted homologous recombination, Engelward et al. (1997) generated
mice deficient in the 3MeA DNA glycosylase encoded by the Aag gene. In
several mouse tissues, the Aag gene product appears to be the only DNA
glycosylase that is active against 3MeA, hypoxanthine, and
1,N6-ethenoadenine. Although the Aag protein has the capacity to remove
8-oxoguanine DNA lesions, it does not appear to be the major glycosylase
for 8-oxoguanine repair.

To assess the contribution of Apng to the repair of several mutagenic
lesions in vivo, Hang et al. (1997) biochemically analyzed cell-free
extracts of tissues from mice with a targeted deletion of the Apng gene.
They found that both 1,N6-ethenoadenine and hypoxanthine are substrates
for Apng, but 3,N4-ethenocytosine and 8-oxoguanine are not.

Elder et al. (1998) developed mice deficient in
alkylpurine-DNA-N-glycosylase by targeted disruption. Following
treatment with DNA-methylating agents, increased persistence of
7-methylguanine (meG) was found in liver sections of APNG knockout mice
in comparison with wildtype mice, demonstrating an in vivo phenotype for
the APNG-null animals. Unlike other null mutants of the basic excision
repair pathway, the APNG knockout mice exhibited a very mild phenotype,
showed no outward abnormalities, were fertile, and had an apparently
normal life span. Neither a difference in the number of leukocytes in
peripheral blood nor a difference in the number of bone marrow
polychromatic erythrocytes was found when knockout and wildtype mice
were exposed to methylating or chloroethylating agents. Treatment with
methyl methanesulfonate resulted in 3- to 4-fold more HPRT (308000)
mutations in splenic T lymphocytes from APNG knockout mice than in those
from wildtype mice. These mutations were predominantly single-basepair
changes that most likely were caused by 3-meA and 3- or 7-meG,
respectively.

REFERENCE 1. Boosalis, M.; Derfler, B.; Call, K.; Samson, L.: Cloning of a
human 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase cDNA whose gene maps to human
chromosome 16. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 49 (suppl.): 399 only,
1991.

2. Elder, R. H.; Jansen, J. G.; Weeks, R. J.; Willington, M. A.; Deans,
B.; Watson, A. J.; Mynett, K. J.; Bailey, J. A.; Cooper, D. P.; Rafferty,
J. A.; Heeran, M. C; Wijnhoven, S. W. P.; van Zeeland, A. A.; Margison,
G. P.: Alkylpurine-DNA-N-glycosylase knockout mice show increased
susceptibility to induction of mutations by methyl methanesulfonate. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 18: 5828-5837, 1998.

3. Engelward, B. P.; Weeda, G.; Wyatt, M. D.; Broekhof, J. L. M.;
de Wit, J.; Donker, I.; Allan, J. M.; Gold, B.; Hoeijmakers, J. H.
J.; Samson, L. D.: Base excision repair deficient mice lacking the
Aag alkyladenine DNA glycosylase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 13087-13092,
1997.

4. Hang, B.; Singer, B.; Margison, G. P.; Elder, R. H.: Targeted
deletion of alkylpurine-DNA-N-glycosylase in mice eliminates repair
of 1,N6-ethenoadenine and hypoxanthine but not of 3,N4-ethenocytosine
or 8-oxoguanine. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 12869-12874, 1997.

5. Kielman, M. F.; Smits, R.; Bernini, L. F.: Structure of the mouse
3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase gene and exact localization upstream
of the alpha-globin gene cluster on chromosome 11. Mammalian Genome 6:
499-504, 1995.

6. Kielman, M. F.; Smits, R.; Bernini, L. F.: Localization and characterization
of the mouse alpha-globin locus control region. Genomics 21: 431-433,
1994.

7. Kielman, M. F.; Smits, R.; Devi, T. S.; Fodde, R.; Bernini, L.
F.: Homology of a 130-kb region enclosing the alpha-globin gene cluster,
the alpha-locus controlling region, and two non-globin genes in human
and mouse. Mammalian Genome 4: 314-323, 1993.

8. Lau, A. Y.; Scharer, O. D.; Samson, L.; Verdine, G. L.; Ellenberger,
T.: Crystal structure of a human alkylbase-DNA repair enzyme complexed
to DNA: mechanisms for nucleotide flipping and base excision. Cell 95:
249-258, 1998.

9. Samson, L.; Derfler, B.; Boosalis, M.; Call, K.: Cloning and characterization
of a 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase cDNA from human cells whose gene
maps to chromosome 16. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 9127-9131, 1991.

10. Vickers, M. A.; Vyas, P.; Harris, P. C.; Simmons, D. L.; Higgs,
D. R.: Structure of the human 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase gene
and localization close to the 16p telomere. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90:
3437-3441, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/28/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 11/11/1998
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/6/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/4/1991

EDITED joanna: 12/17/2009
terry: 10/12/2005
alopez: 8/1/2000
terry: 7/28/2000
carol: 11/13/1998
psherman: 11/6/1998
terry: 7/8/1997
mark: 10/18/1995
carol: 3/10/1994
carol: 5/21/1993
carol: 8/28/1992
carol: 6/19/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

609097	TITLE *609097 F-BOX ONLY PROTEIN 24; FBXO24
;;FBX24
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the F-box protein family, such as FBXO24, are characterized
by an approximately 40-amino acid F-box motif. SCF complexes, formed by
SKP1 (601434), cullin (see CUL1; 603134), and F-box proteins, act as
protein-ubiquitin ligases. F-box proteins interact with SKP1 through the
F box, and they interact with ubiquitination targets through other
protein interaction domains (Jin et al., 2004).

CLONING

Jin et al. (2004) reported that the FBXO24 protein contains a central F
box and a C-terminal RCC1 (179710) fold.

MAPPING

Jin et al. (2004) stated that the FBXO24 gene maps to chromosome 7q22
and the mouse Fbxo24 gene maps to chromosome 5G2.

REFERENCE 1. Jin, J.; Cardozo, T.; Lovering, R. C.; Elledge, S. J.; Pagano,
M.; Harper, J. W.: Systematic analysis and nomenclature of mammalian
F-box proteins. Genes Dev. 18: 2573-2580, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/14/2004

EDITED mgross: 12/15/2004

609024	TITLE *609024 KDEL ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM PROTEIN RETENTION RECEPTOR 2; KDELR2
;;ERD2-LIKE PROTEIN 1; ELP1;;
ERD2.2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Resident soluble proteins within the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) are retained there by virtue of a C-terminal tetrapeptide ER
retention signal, commonly lys-asp-glu-leu (KDEL) in mammals. KDELR2 is
one of the receptors that cycle between the Golgi apparatus and the ER,
returning proteins containing the KDEL signal to the ER (Lewis and
Pelham, 1992).

CLONING

By screening cDNA libraries with a KDELR1 (131235) sequence, followed by
5-prime RACE of a Burkitt lymphoma cell line cDNA library, Lewis and
Pelham (1992) cloned KDELR2, which they designated ERD2.2. The deduced
212-amino acid protein contains 7 transmembrane domains and shares 83.5%
identity with KDELR1, with most differences between the 2 receptors in
the transmembrane spans.

Using degenerate PCR primers designed from a conserved region of KDELR1
to amplify related cDNAs from an erythroleukemia cell line cDNA library,
followed by screening a T-cell cDNA library, Hsu et al. (1992) cloned
KDELR2, which they called ELP1. The deduced 214-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 24.6 kD. Northern blot analysis detected a
KDELR2 transcript of about 1.2 kb.

GENE FUNCTION

Lewis and Pelham (1992) observed that KDELR2 transfected into COS-7
cells accumulated predominantly in the Golgi complex, but when the
receptor was coexpressed with a target protein containing the KDEL ER
retention signal, it redistributed to the ER, mirroring the behavior of
KDELR1 under the same conditions.

Hsu et al. (1992) found that about half of KDELR1- or KDELR2-transfected
COS cells expressed the receptors in a juxtanuclear, Golgi-like pattern,
while the remainder showed a reticular, ER-like pattern with nuclear
envelope staining. Overexpression of the KDEL receptors led to the
ER-like pattern and was associated with the collapse of the Golgi
apparatus into the ER, as seen in cells treated with brefeldin A. In
addition to the loss of the Golgi apparatus as a distinct organelle,
overexpression resulted in redistribution of the Golgi coat protein,
beta-COP (COPB; 600959), to the cytosol, addition of complex
oligosaccharides to resident ER glycoproteins, and blockage of
anterograde traffic. Hsu et al. (1992) concluded that the KDEL receptors
provide signals that regulate retrograde traffic between the Golgi and
the ER.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the KDELR2
gene to chromosome 7 (TMAP SHGC-55953).

REFERENCE 1. Hsu, V. W.; Shah, N.; Klausner, R. D.: A brefeldin A-like phenotype
is induced by the overexpression of a human ERD-2-like protein, ELP-1. Cell 69:
625-635, 1992.

2. Lewis, M. J.; Pelham, H. R. B.: Sequence of a second human KDEL
receptor. J. Molec. Biol. 226: 913-916, 1992.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/10/2004

EDITED mgross: 11/10/2004

606494	TITLE *606494 ST3 BETA-GALACTOSIDE ALPHA-2,3-SIALYLTRANSFERASE 3; ST3GAL3
;;SIALYLTRANSFERASE 6; SIAT6;;
N-ACETYLLACTOSAMINIDE ALPHA-2,3-SIALYLTRANSFERASE;;
ALPHA-2,3-SIALYLTRANSFERASE II; ST3GALII;;
ST3N
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ST3GAL3 gene encodes
beta-galactoside-alpha-2,3-sialyltransferase-III, a Golgi resident
membrane protein that forms the sialyl Lewis a (sLe-a) epitope on
glyocoproteins. These glycoproteins form the glycocalyx, composed of
sialic acids that act as key determinants of a variety of cellular
recognition and communication processes (summary by Hu et al., 2011).

CLONING

By screening a human placenta cDNA library with a probe based on the
sialyl motif (a highly conserved region in the catalytic domain of
sialyltransferases), Kitagawa and Paulson (1993) isolated a cDNA
encoding SIAT6, which they termed ST3N (EC 2.4.99.6). The deduced
375-amino acid protein is 97% identical to the rat protein. SDS-PAGE
analysis showed expression of an 80-kD protein having sialyltransferase
activity. Northern blot analysis revealed wide expression of a 2.7-kb
transcript with abundant expression in skeletal muscle and high
expression in fetal tissue but low expression in placenta.

Using Northern blot analysis, Kitagawa and Paulson (1994) evaluated the
differential expression of 5 human sialyltransferase genes in adult and
fetal tissues. A 2.7-kb ST3N transcript was expressed highly in skeletal
muscle and moderately in most other tissues examined. A 3.8-kb
transcript was also expressed in testis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Taniguchi et al. (2003) determined that the 5-prime UTR of the ST3GAL3
gene consists of 2 exons. The 5-prime flanking region of the promoter
lacks canonical TATA or CCAAT boxes, but it contains several putative
transcriptional factor binding sites.

Hu et al. (2011) stated that the ST3GAL3 gene contains 15 exons, 12 of
which are coding exons.

MAPPING

The International RH Mapping Consortium mapped the SIAT6 gene to
chromosome 1 (TMAP stSG22084).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Autosomal Recessive Mental Retardation 12

In affected members of 2 unrelated consanguineous Iranian families with
autosomal recessive nonsyndromic mental retardation-12 (MRT12; 611090),
Hu et al. (2011) used linkage analysis, chromosome sorting, and
next-generation sequencing to identify 2 different homozygous mutations
in the ST3GAL3 gene (A13D, 606494.0001 and D370Y, 606494.0002,
respectively.) Neither mutation affected the highly conserved sialyl
motifs, but rather affected the N-terminal transmembrane domain and
catalytic domain, respectively. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that the mutant proteins were mislocalized to the endoplasmic
reticulum and that one (D370Y) had loss of catalytic activity. The
findings demonstrated a link between the glycoprotein complex,
sialyltransferase activity, and higher cognitive functioning.

- Early Infantile Epileptic Encephalopathy 15

In 4 members of a consanguineous Palestinian family with early infantile
epileptic encephalopathy-15 (EIEE15; 615006), Edvardson et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous mutation in the ST3GAL3 gene (A320P;
606494.0003). The mutation was identified by linkage analysis combined
with whole-exome sequencing of 1 individual and confirmed by Sanger
sequencing. The mutation affected the highly conserved sialyl motif S,
which is crucially involved in binding of both donor and acceptor
substrate. In vitro functional expression studies showed that secretion
of the mutant protein was reduced to 25% of control levels and it had no
detectable enzymatic activity. The phenotype was severe: patients showed
delayed psychomotor development and had onset of refractory infantile
spasms between ages 3 and 7 months associated with hypsarrhythmia on
EEG. Other features included hypotonia, poor eye contact, and inability
to speak or walk, even later in childhood. All were profoundly mentally
retarded. Edvardson et al. (2013) noted that the phenotype was more
severe than that observed by Hu et al. (2011), who had identified
ST3GAL3 mutations outside of the highly conserved and functionally
important sialyl motifs.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 12
ST3GAL3, ALA13ASP

In affected members of a consanguineous Iranian family with autosomal
recessive mental retardation-12 (MRT12; 611090), previously reported by
Najmabadi et al. (2007), Hu et al. (2011) identified a homozygous 38C-A
transversion in exon 2 of the ST3GAL3 gene, resulting in an ala13-to-asp
(A13D) substitution in the transmembrane domain. The mutation was not
found in 278 copies of chromosome 1 from ethnically matched controls or
in 385 control individuals. In vitro functional expression studies in
murine fibroblasts showed that most of the mutant protein was improperly
localized to the endoplasmic reticulum, preventing the protein from
interacting with its substrates in the Golgi, resulting in a loss of
function. Catalytic activity of the A13D mutant enzyme was similar to
wildtype.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 12
ST3GAL3, ASP370TYR

In affected members of a consanguineous Iranian family with autosomal
recessive mental retardation-12 (MRT12; 611090), Hu et al. (2011)
identified a homozygous 1108G-T transversion in exon 14 of the ST3GAL3
gene, resulting in an asp370-to-tyr (D370Y) substitution in the
catalytic domain at the C-terminal end of the protein. The mutation was
not found in 278 copies of chromosome 1 from ethnically matched controls
or in 385 control individuals. In vitro functional expression studies in
murine fibroblasts showed that the mutant protein was improperly
localized to the endoplasmic reticulum, preventing the protein from
interacting with its substrates in the Golgi, resulting in a loss of
function. The D370Y mutant protein also showed a complete lack of enzyme
activity. Studies of recombinant proteins in CHO cells indicated that
secretion of the D370Y mutant protein was dramatically reduced compared
to wildtype. Hu et al. (2011) concluded that the mutant protein was
cleared by the endoplasmic reticulum-mediated system, suggesting that
the C terminus is important for the proper folding of functional
ST3GAL3.

.0003
EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 15
ST3GAL3, ALA320PRO

In 4 members of a consanguineous Palestinian family with early infantile
epileptic encephalopathy-15 (EIEE15; 615006), Edvardson et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous 958G-C transversion in exon 12 of the ST3GAL3
gene, resulting in an ala320-to-pro (A320P) substitution at a highly
conserved residue in the sialyl motif S. The mutation was identified by
linkage analysis combined with whole-exome sequencing of 1 individual
and confirmed by Sanger sequencing. It segregated with the disorder in
the family and was not found in 123 controls of the same ethnic origin
or in 5,379 control exomes. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that secretion of the mutant protein was reduced to 25% of
control levels and that the protein had no detectable enzymatic
activity.

REFERENCE 1. Edvardson, S.; Baumann, A.-M.; Muhlenhoff, M.; Stephan, O.; Kuss,
A. W.; Shaag, A.; He, L.; Zenvirt, S.; Tanzi, R.; Gerardy-Schahn,
R.; Elpeleg, O.: West syndrome caused by ST3Gal-III deficiency. Epilepsia 54:
e24-e27, 2013. Note: Electronic Article.

2. Hu, H.; Eggers, K.; Chen, W.; Garshasbi, M.; Motazacker, M. M.;
Wrogemann, K.; Kahrizi, K.; Tzschach, A.; Hosseini, M.; Bahman, I.;
Hucho, T.; Muhlenhoff, M.; Gerardy-Schahn, R.; Najmabadi, H.; Ropers,
H. H.; Kuss, A. W.: ST3GAL3 mutations impair the development of higher
cognitive functions. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 89: 407-414, 2011.

3. Kitagawa, H.; Paulson, J. C.: Cloning and expression of human
Gal-beta-1,3(4)GlcNAc alpha-2,3-sialyltransferase. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 194: 375-382, 1993.

4. Kitagawa, H.; Paulson, J. C.: Differential expression of five
sialyltransferase genes in human tissues. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 17872-17878,
1994.

5. Najmabadi, H.; Motazacker, M. M.; Garshasbi, M.; Kahrizi, K.; Tzschach,
A.; Chen, W.; Behjati, F.; Hadavi, V.; Nieh, S. E.; Abedini, S. S.;
Vazifehmand, R.; Firouzabadi, S. G.; and 9 others: Homozygosity mapping
in consanguineous families reveals extreme heterogeneity of non-syndromic
autosomal recessive mental retardation and identifies 8 novel gene
loci. Hum. Genet. 121: 43-48, 2007.

6. Taniguchi, A.; Saito, K.; Kubota, T.; Matsumoto, K.: Characterization
of the promoter region of the human Gal-beta-1,3(4)GlcNAc alpha-2,3-sialyltransferase
III (hST3Gal III) gene. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1626: 92-96, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/8/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/17/2006
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/1/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/26/2001

EDITED carol: 07/08/2013
carol: 1/8/2013
ckniffin: 1/8/2013
carol: 10/3/2011
ckniffin: 9/27/2011
mgross: 5/23/2006
terry: 5/17/2006
mgross: 5/1/2006
mgross: 4/28/2006
alopez: 12/4/2003
terry: 12/3/2003
mgross: 8/22/2002
alopez: 11/26/2001

604221	TITLE *604221 ACTIN-RELATED PROTEIN 2; ACTR2
;;ARP2
ARP2/3 COMPLEX, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The protrusion of the cell membrane is fundamental to cell shape change
and locomotion. Actin polymerization (see 102560) plays a critical role
in this process. The leading edge of motile cells is dominated by thin
actin-rich structures called lamellipodia, which exhibit highly dynamic
behavior characterized by rapid extension and retraction. Many aspects
of the mechanism of lamellipodial protrusion are echoed in the
intracellular motility of certain bacterial and viral pathogens, such as
the bacterium Listeria monocytogenes. Welch et al. (1997) purified an
approximately 220-kD multiprotein complex from human platelets that
induces actin polymerization at the L. monocytogenes cell surface and
mediates bacterial motility. This complex contains actin-related
proteins (Arps) in the Arp2 and Arp3 families and therefore was named
the Arp2/3 complex. In addition to 43-kD ARP2 and 50-kD ARP3 (ACTR3;
604222), the human complex consists of 41/40- (ARPC1B; 604223), 34-
(ARPC2; 604224), 21- (ARPC3; 604225), 20- (ARPC4; 604226), and 16-kD
(ARPC5; 604227) subunits, all present in approximately equal
stoichiometry. By searching an EST database with peptide sequences from
the 7 subunits of the human ARP2/3 complex, Welch et al. (1997)
identified full-length human cDNAs encoding each subunit. The ARP2 cDNA
encodes a deduced 394-amino acid protein that is 99% identical to
chicken Arp2 and 67% identical to S. cerevisiae Arp2. Welch et al.
(1997) localized several subunits of the ARP2/3 complex to the
lamellipodia of stationary and locomoting fibroblasts, as well as to the
actin tails assembled by L. monocytogenes. They suggested that the
ARP2/3 complex promotes actin assembly in lamellipodia and may
participate in lamellipodial protrusion.

Machesky et al. (1997) purified the ARP2/3 complex from human
neutrophils and sequenced peptides from each of the subunits.

GENE FUNCTION

Leisel et al. (1999) used pure components of the actin cytoskeleton to
reconstitute sustained movement in Listeria and Shigella in vitro.
Actin-based propulsion was driven by the free energy released by ATP
hydrolysis linked to actin polymerization and did not require myosin
(see 601478). In addition to actin and activated Arp2/3 complex, actin
depolymerizing factor and capping protein (see 601571) were also
required for motility as they maintained a high steady-state level of
G-actin (see 102610), which controls the rate of unidirectional growth
of actin filaments at the surface of the bacterium. The movement was
more effective when profilin (see 176610), alpha-actinin (see 102575),
and, in the case of Listeria, VASP (601703) were also included.

The protein N-WASP (WASL; 605056) regulates actin polymerization by
stimulating the actin-nucleating activity of the Arp2/3 complex. N-WASP
is tightly regulated by multiple signals; only costimulation by CDC42
(116952) and phosphatidylinositol (4,5)-bisphosphate (PIP2) yields
potent polymerization. Prehoda et al. (2000) found that regulation
requires N-WASP's constitutively active output domain
(verprolin/cofilin/acidic (VCA) domain) and 2 regulatory domains, a
CDC42-binding domain and a PIP2-binding domain. In the absence of
stimuli, the regulatory modules together hold the VCA-Arp2/3 complex in
an inactive 'closed' conformation. In this state, both the CDC42- and
PIP2-binding sites are masked. Binding of either input destabilizes the
closed state and enhances binding of the other input. This cooperative
activation mechanism shows how combinations of simple binding domains
can be used to integrate and amplify coincident signals.

Using fluorescence anisotropy analysis, Marchand et al. (2001) showed
that efficient actin nucleation requires both recruitment of an actin
monomer to the ARP2/3 complex and a subsequent activation step. The
initial steps in this pathway involve binding by the WA domain of
WASP/SCAR (605035) proteins, which consists of a WH2 motif (W) that
binds to the actin monomers and an acidic tail (A) that binds to the
ARP2/3 complex. Actin filaments seem to stimulate nucleation by
enhancing binding of WA to the ARP2/3 complex and favoring the formation
of a productive nucleus.

Weisswange et al. (2009) analyzed the dynamics of N-WASP,
WASP-interacting protein (WIP; 602357), GRB2 (108355), and NCK (600508),
which are required to stimulate ARP2/3 complex-dependent actin-based
motility of vaccinia virus, using fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching. Weisswange et al. (2009) showed that all 4 proteins are
rapidly exchanging, albeit at different rates, and that the turnover of
N-WASP depends on its ability to stimulate ARP2/3 complex-mediated actin
polymerization. Conversely, disruption of the interaction of N-WASP with
GRB2 and/or the barbed ends of actin filaments increases its exchange
rate and results in a faster rate of virus movement. Weisswange et al.
(2009) suggested that the exchange rate of N-WASP controls the rate of
ARP2/3 complex-dependent actin-based motility by regulating the extent
of actin polymerization by antagonizing filament capping.

Nolen et al. (2009) described 2 classes of small molecules that bind to
different sites on the Arp2/3 complex and inhibit its ability to
nucleate actin filaments. CK-0944636 binds between Arp2 and Arp3, where
it appears to block movement of Arp2 and Arp3 into their active
conformation. CK-0993548 inserts into the hydrophobic core of Arp3 and
alters its conformation. Both classes of compounds inhibit formation of
actin filament comet tails by Listeria and podosomes by monocytes.

Using immunofluorescence microscopy, Western blot analysis, and
knockdown strategies with human lung fibroblasts, Hanisch et al. (2011)
showed that Salmonella entered nonphagocytic cells by manipulating 2
machineries of actin-based motility in the host: actin polymerization
through the ARP2/3 complex, and actomyosin-mediated contractility in a
myosin IIA (MYH9; 160775)- and myosin IIB (MYH10; 160776)-dependent
manner. Hanisch et al. (2011) concluded that Salmonella entry can be
effected independently of membrane ruffling.

Li et al. (2012) showed that interactions between diverse synthetic,
multivalent macromolecules (including multidomain proteins and RNA)
produce sharp liquid-liquid-demixing phase separations, generating
micrometer-sized liquid droplets in aqueous solution. This macroscopic
transition corresponds to a molecular transition between small complexes
and large, dynamic supramolecular polymers. The concentrations needed
for phase transition are directly related to the valency of the
interacting species. In the case of the actin-regulatory protein N-WASP
(605056) interacting with its established biologic partners NCK (600508)
and phosphorylated nephrin (602716), the phase transition corresponds to
a sharp increase in activity towards an actin nucleation factor, the
ARP2/3 complex. The transition is governed by the degree of
phosphorylation of nephrin, explaining how this property of the system
can be controlled to regulatory effect by kinases. Li et al. (2012)
concluded that the widespread occurrence of multivalent systems suggests
that phase transitions may be used to spatially organize and
biochemically regulate information throughout biology.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Volkmann et al. (2001) performed electron cryomicroscopy and
3-dimensional reconstruction of Acanthamoeba castellanii and S.
cerevisiae Arp2/3 complexes bound to the WASP (301000) carboxy-terminal
domain. Asymmetric, oblate ellipsoids were revealed. Image analysis of
actin branches indicated that the complex binds the side of the mother
filament, and ARP2 and ARP3 are the first 2 subunits of the daughter
filament. Comparison to the actin-free WASP-activated complexes suggests
that branch initiation involves large-scale structural rearrangements
within ARP2/3.

Robinson et al. (2001) determined the crystal structure of bovine ARP2/3
complex at 2.0-angstrom resolution. ARP2 and ARP3 are folded like actin,
with distinctive surface features. Subunits ARPC2 and ARPC4 in the core
of the complex associate through long carboxy-terminal alpha helices and
have similarly folded amino-terminal alpha/beta domains. ARPC1 is a
7-blade beta propeller with an insertion that may associate with the
side of an actin filament. ARPC3 and ARPC5 are globular alpha-helical
subunits. Robinson et al. (2001) predicted that WASP/SCAR proteins
activate ARP2/3 complex by bringing ARP2 into proximity with ARP3 for
nucleation of a branch on the side of a preexisting actin filament.

REFERENCE 1. Hanisch, J.; Kolm, R.; Wozniczka, M.; Bumann, D.; Rottner, K.;
Stradal, T. E. B.: Activation of a RhoA/myosin II-dependent but Arp2/3
complex-independent pathway facilitates Salmonella invasion. Cell
Host Microbe 9: 273-285, 2011.

2. Leisel, T. P.; Boujemaa, R.; Pantaloni, D.; Carlier, M.-F.: Reconstitution
of actin-based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins. Nature 401:
613-616, 1999.

3. Li, P.; Banjade, S.; Cheng, H.-C.; Kim, S.; Chen, B.; Guo, L.;
Llaguno, M.; Hollingsworth, J. V.; King, D. S.; Banani, S. F.; Russo,
P. S.; Jiang, Q.-X.; Nixon, B. T.; Rosen, M. K.: Phase transitions
in the assembly of multivalent signalling proteins. Nature 483:
336-340, 2012.

4. Machesky, L. M.; Reeves, E.; Wientjes, F.; Mattheyse, F. J.; Grogan,
A.; Totty, N. F.; Burlingame, A. L.; Hsuan, J. J.; Segal, A. W.:
Mammalian actin-related protein 2/3 complex localizes to regions of
lamellipodial protrusion and is composed of evolutionarily conserved
proteins. Biochem. J. 328: 105-112, 1997.

5. Marchand, J.-B.; Kaiser, D. A.; Pollard, T. D.; Higgs, H. N.:
Interaction of WASP/Scar proteins with actin and vertebrate Arp2/3
complex. Nature Cell Biol. 3: 76-82, 2001.

6. Nolen, B. J.; Tomasevic, N.; Russell, A.; Pierce, D. W.; Jia, Z.;
McCormick, C. D.; Hartman, J.; Sakowicz, R.; Pollard, T. D.: Characterization
of two classes of small molecule inhibitors of Arp2/3 complex. Nature 460:
1031-1034, 2009.

7. Prehoda, K. E.; Scott, J. A.; Mullins, R. D.; Lim, W. A.: Integration
of multiple signals through cooperative regulation of the N-WASP-Arp2/3
complex. Science 290: 801-806, 2000.

8. Robinson, R. C.; Turbedsky, K.; Kaiser, D. A.; Marchand, J.-B.;
Higgs, H. N.; Choe, S.; Pollard, T. D.: Crystal structure of Arp2/3
complex. Science 294: 1679-1684, 2001.

9. Volkmann, N.; Amann, K. J.; Stoilova-McPhie, S.; Egile, C.; Winter,
D. C.; Hazelwood, L.; Heuser, J. E.; Li, R.; Pollard, T. D.; Hanein,
D.: Structure of Arp2/3 complex in its activated state and in actin
filament branch junctions. Science 293: 2456-2459, 2001.

10. Weisswange, I.; Newsome, T. P.; Schleich, S.; Way, M.: The rate
of N-WASP exchange limits the extent of ARP2/3-complex-dependent actin-based
motility. Nature 458: 87-91, 2009.

11. Welch, M. D.; DePace, A. H.; Verma, S.; Iwamatsu, A.; Mitchison,
T. J.: The human Arp2/3 complex is composed of evolutionarily conserved
subunits and is localized to cellular regions of dynamic actin filament
assembly. J. Cell Biol. 138: 375-384, 1997.

12. Welch, M. D.; Iwamatsu, A.; Mitchison, T. J.: Actin polymerization
is induced by Arp2/3 protein complex at the surface of Listeria monocytogenes. Nature 385:
265-269, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/16/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/1/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/15/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/2/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/21/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/10/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/11/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/7/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 10/29/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/12/1999

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 10/8/1999

EDITED alopez: 04/17/2012
terry: 4/16/2012
mgross: 3/2/2012
terry: 3/1/2012
alopez: 9/15/2009
terry: 9/15/2009
alopez: 4/3/2009
terry: 4/2/2009
mgross: 2/21/2002
alopez: 1/10/2002
alopez: 10/11/2001
mgross: 11/7/2000
mgross: 11/1/1999
psherman: 10/29/1999
mgross: 10/15/1999
psherman: 10/13/1999
alopez: 10/12/1999
psherman: 10/11/1999

615152	TITLE *615152 KELCH DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 10; KLHDC10
;;SCRUIN-LIKE AT THE MIDLINE, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF;;
SLIM, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

By virtue of its interaction with proteins of varied function, KLHDC10
is predicted to influence several intracellular pathways, including
oxidative stress-induced apoptosis (Sekine et al., 2012).

CLONING

By sequencing clones from a KG-1 human immature myeloid cell line cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1996) obtained a partial KLHDC10 clone, which
they designated KIAA0265. The deduced protein contained 401 amino acids.
Northern blot analysis detected moderate KLHDC10 expression in skeletal
muscle, with lower expression in all other tissues and cell lines
examined.

By searching a human database for proteins similar to Drosophila Slim,
Sekine et al. (2012) identified KLHDC10. The deduced 442-amino acid
protein contains a large central kelch repeat domain, followed by
putative Cul2 and BC boxes. The kelch repeat domain is predicted to form
a 6-bladed beta propeller structure. The Cul2 box is predicted to bind
cullin-2 (CUL2; 603135) of the CUL2 ubiquitin ligase complex, and the BC
box is predicted to bind the CUL2 adaptor proteins elongin B (TCEB2;
600787) and elongin C (TCEB1; 600788). Epitope-tagged KLHDC10 localized
predominantly to the nucleus of transfected HEK203 cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Similar to their results with Drosophila Slim, Sekine et al. (2012)
found that human KLHDC10 was involved in activation of apoptosis
signal-regulating kinase-1 (ASK1; 602448) via its kelch repeat domain.
The activation of ASK1 by reactive oxygen species (ROS) is involved in
oxidative stress-mediated cell death. Overexpression of KLHDC10 and ASK1
in HEK293 cells resulted in activation of ASK1 and downstream effectors
JNK (see MAPK8, 601158) and p38 (MAPK14; 600289). Immunoprecipitation of
HEK293 cells revealed that KLHDC10 interacted with PP5 (PPP5C, 600658),
a protein phosphatase known to inactivate ASK1 via dephosphorylation of
an essential phosphothreonine. KLHDC10 interacted directly with the
phosphatase domain of PP5. Both H2O2 and TNF-alpha (TNF; 191160)
increased the binding between KLHDC10 and PP5. Knockdown of Klhdc10 in
Neuro2A cells reduced H2O2-dependent activation of Ask1 and p38, and
suppressed H2O2-induced cell death. Immunoprecipitation analysis of
mouse Neuro2A neuroblastoma cells revealed that endogenous Klhdc10 also
interacted with Cul2, elongin B, and elongin C, and that the interaction
requires a functional C-terminal BC box of Klhdc10. Knockdown of Cul2
increased the protein level of Klhdc10.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1996) mapped the KLHDC10
gene to chromosome 7.

Hartz (2013) mapped the KLHDC10 gene to chromosome 7q32.2 based on an
alignment of the KLHDC10 sequence (GenBank GENBANK D87454) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/26/2013.

2. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Ohira, M.; Kawarabayasi, Y.;
Ohara, O.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Miyajima, N.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VI. The coding
sequences of 80 new genes (KIAA0201-KIAA0280) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from cell line KG-1 and brain. DNA Res. 3: 321-329,
1996.

3. Sekine, Y.; Hatanaka, R.; Watanabe, T.; Sono, N.; Iemura, S.; Natsume,
T.; Kuranaga, E.; Miura, M.; Takeda, K.; Ichijo, H.: The Kelch repeat
protein KLHDC10 regulates oxidative stress-induced ASK1 activation
by suppressing PP5. Molec. Cell 48: 692-704, 2012.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/29/2013

EDITED alopez: 03/29/2013
alopez: 3/29/2013

603948	TITLE *603948 NUCLEOPORIN, 153-KD; NUP153
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Nuclear pore complexes are elaborate structures that mediate the
regulated movement of macromolecules between the nucleus and cytoplasm.
These complexes are composed of at least 100 different polypeptide
subunits, many of which belong to the nucleoporin family. Nucleoporins
are pore complex-specific glycoproteins characterized by cytoplasmically
oriented O-linked N-acetylglucosamine residues and numerous repeats of
the pentapeptide sequence XFXFG.

CLONING

By immunoscreening a HeLa cell cDNA expression library with a monoclonal
antibody that recognizes a group of nucleoporins, McMorrow et al. (1994)
isolated a cDNA encoding NUP153. The deduced 1,475-amino acid protein
has a calculated molecular mass of 153.8 kD. It contains 33 copies of
the XFXFG sequence, a C-terminal half that is serine- and
threonine-rich, and 4 sequence motifs that resemble those of zinc
fingers. The human and rat NUP153 proteins are 82% identical. Northern
blot analysis detected a 6-kb human NUP153 mRNA.

GENE FUNCTION

Ullman et al. (1999) found that antibodies to Xenopus Nup153 blocked
export of snRNA, mRNA, and 5S rRNA from the nucleus, but did not impede
export of tRNA or recycling of importin-beta (see KPNB1; 602738) to the
cytoplasm. They also determined that Nup153, unlike other nucleoporins,
associates strongly with poly(G) and poly(U). The interaction may be
direct or may be via an adaptor protein.

By immunogold electron microscopy, Walther et al. (2001) localized
Xenopus Nup153 to the nuclear ring of the nuclear pore complex (NPC).
NPCs assembled in the absence of Nup153 lacked several nuclear basket
components, were unevenly distributed in the nuclear envelope, and,
unlike wildtype NPCs, were mobile within the nuclear envelope. Nuclear
import events requiring importin-alpha (see KPNA5; 604545)/importin-beta
were also defective due to reduced translocation of the import complex
rather than defective receptor recycling.

Liu et al. (2003) found that a central region of Xenopus Nup153
associated with COPI (601924), a coatomer complex previously
characterized in the context of vesicle budding during trafficking
within the Golgi and between the Golgi and the endoplasmic reticulum.
Nup153 recruited COPI to the nuclear membrane during mitosis, suggesting
that vesiculation is an important step in nuclear envelope breakdown.
Perturbing the function of the COPI complex impaired nuclear envelope
disassembly.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the NUP153
gene to chromosome 6 (TMAP WI-7306).

REFERENCE 1. Liu, J.; Prunuske, A. J.; Fager, A. M.; Ullman, K. S.: The COPI
complex functions in nuclear envelope breakdown and is recruited by
the nucleoporin Nup153. Dev. Cell 5: 487-498, 2003.

2. McMorrow, I.; Bastos, R.; Horton, H.; Burke, B.: Sequence analysis
of a cDNA encoding a human nuclear pore complex protein, hnup153. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1217: 219-223, 1994.

3. Ullman, K. S.; Shah, S.; Powers, M. A.; Forbes, D. J.: The nucleoporin
Nup153 plays a critical role in multiple types of nuclear export. Molec.
Biol. Cell 10: 649-664, 1999.

4. Walther, T. C.; Fornerod, M.; Pickersgill, H.; Goldberg, M.; Allen,
T. D.; Mattaj, I. W.: The nucleoporin Nup153 is required for nuclear
pore basket formation, nuclear pore complex anchoring and import of
a subset of nuclear proteins. EMBO J. 20: 5703-5714, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 05/12/2004

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 6/29/1999

EDITED mgross: 05/12/2004
carol: 2/18/2002
carol: 2/16/2002
mgross: 6/30/1999
psherman: 6/29/1999

607515	TITLE *607515 PLACENTA-SPECIFIC GENE 8; PLAC8
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By subtractive hybridization, Rissoan et al. (2002) identified PLAC8,
which they designated C15, as 1 of several transcripts expressed at high
levels in plasmacytoid dendritic cells. The deduced 115-amino acid
protein contains a cleavable 23-amino acid signal peptide and no
transmembrane domain. PLAC8 shares 83% homology with mouse Plac8, which
contains 112 amino acids. The human sequence conserves 15 of the 16
cysteine residues found in the mouse protein. RT-PCR detected PLAC8
expression in all leukocyte populations tested, with weaker expression
in monocyte-derived dendritic cells. Northern blot analysis detected a
major transcript of 0.7 kb and minor transcripts of 4.4 and 7 kb in
organs of the immune system. High expression was found in spleen, lymph
nodes, peripheral blood leukocytes, and bone marrow, with lower
expression in thymus, appendix, and fetal liver.

By Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues, Galaviz-Hernandez et al.
(2003) detected strong expression of Plac8 in placenta at 9.5 days
postcoitum (dpc) through 18.5 dpc. In situ hybridization showed
expression limited to trophoblast giant cells at 6.5 and 8.5 dpc and to
the derived spongiotrophoblast layer at 10.5 and 18.5 dpc.

GENE FUNCTION

Rissoan et al. (2002) showed that PLAC8 expression was downregulated
upon activation, particularly in dendritic cells generated in vitro from
CD34 (142230) progenitor cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rissoan et al. (2002) determined that the PLAC8 gene contains 5 exons.

MAPPING

By homology to a BAC clone, Rissoan et al. (2002) mapped the PLAC8 gene
to chromosome 4q13-q21.

By database analysis, Galaviz-Hernandez et al. (2003) mapped the PLAC8
gene to chromosome 4q21 and the mouse Plac8 gene to chromosome 5E3.

REFERENCE 1. Galaviz-Hernandez, C.; Stagg, C.; de Ridder, G.; Tanaka, T. S.;
Ko, M. S. H.; Schlessinger, D.; Nagaraja, R.: Plac8 and Plac9, novel
placental-enriched genes identified through microarray analysis. Gene 309:
81-89, 2003.

2. Rissoan, M.-C.; Duhen, T.; Bridon, J.-M.; Bendriss-Vermare, N.;
Peronne, C.; Saint Vis, B.; Briere, F.; Bates, E. E. M.: Subtractive
hybridization reveals the expression of immunoglobulinlike transcript
7, Eph-B1, granzyme B, and 3 novel transcripts in human plasmacytoid
dendritic cells. Blood 100: 3295-3303, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Dorothy S. Reilly - updated: 6/11/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/24/2003

EDITED wwang: 06/16/2009
wwang: 6/16/2009
terry: 6/11/2009
mgross: 1/24/2003

602291	TITLE *602291 FORKHEAD BOX J1; FOXJ1
;;FORKHEAD, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 13; FKHL13;;
HFH4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

FOXJ1 is a member of the forkhead gene family, which was originally
identified in Drosophila. The forkhead family is composed of
transcription factors with a conserved 100-amino acid DNA-binding motif.

CLONING

Using the forkhead domain of the rat Hnf3-alpha gene (602294) as a
probe, Murphy et al. (1997) isolated a cDNA from a human testis library
whose sequence showed more than 90% homology with that of rat Hfh4
within the putative coding region. The open reading frame predicted a
403-amino acid protein. By RT-PCR, Murphy et al. (1997) found FKHL13
expression in human testis, oviduct, lung, and brain cortex, which
suggests that expression may be associated with ciliated/flagellated
cells.

Using the rat Hfh4 forkhead domain to probe a fetal lung cDNA library,
Pelletier et al. (1998) cloned FOXJ1, which they called HFH4. The
deduced 421-amino acid protein contains a central 101-amino acid
forkhead domain. HFH4 shares about 91% amino acid identity with mouse
and rat Hfh4, including 100% identity within the forkhead domain.
Northern blot analysis of several adult and fetal tissues detected
highest expression of a 2.5-kb transcript in adult testis. Lower levels
were detected in adult ovary and lung and in fetal brain, lung, and
kidney. No expression was detected in several other adult tissues and
fetal liver.

GENE FUNCTION

By in situ hybridization of fetal tissue at several developmental
stages, Pelletier et al. (1998) found that expression of HFH4 was
associated with differentiation of the proximal pulmonary epithelium,
starting during the pseudoglandular stage of lung development. During
renal morphogenesis, HFH4 was expressed in the developing epithelial
cells of the ureteric duct, glomerulus, and epithelial vesicles.

Using a microarray-based screen, Yu et al. (2008) found that Foxj1a was
positively regulated in response to hedgehog (see SHH; 600725) signaling
in the developing zebrafish neural tube floorplate. Loss of Foxj1a
compromised the assembly of motile cilia that decorate neural tube floor
plate cells. Foxj1a was also expressed in Kupffer vesicles and
pronephric ducts, where it promoted ciliary differentiation. Foxj1a
activated a constellation of genes essential for motile cilia formation
and function, and its activity was sufficient for ectopic development of
motile cilia. Yu et al. (2008) also identified a paralogous gene,
Foxj1b, that was expressed in zebrafish otic vesicle and appeared to
regulate motile cilia formation in that tissue. Yu et al. (2008)
concluded that FOXJ1 is a master regulator of a transcriptional program
that controls the production of motile cilia.

Venugopalan et al. (2008) showed that Foxj1 and the homeobox
transcription factor Pitx2 (601542) were coexpressed temporally during
development of mouse orofacial structures, including molar inner enamel
epithelium, oral and tongue epithelium, and submandibular gland.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that Pitx2 bound the
Foxj1 promoter in a mouse ameloblast cell line. Reporter gene assays
showed that the Pitx2a and Pitx2c isoforms strongly activated the Foxj1
promoter, whereas the Pitx2b isoform more weakly activated Foxj1. Pitx2a
interacted with Lef1 (153245) and beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806) to
activate the Foxj1 promoter, and once activated, Foxj1 contributed to
its own activation in a positive feedback loop.

GENE STRUCTURE

Murphy et al. (1997) isolated a genomic clone of FKHL13 and showed that
the gene contains 2 exons.

MAPPING

Using PCR of human-hamster hybrid cell lines, Murphy et al. (1997)
localized the FKHL13 gene to chromosome 17, supporting the map position
of 17q22-q25 predicted by Avraham et al. (1995) on the basis of
comparative mapping of the mouse Hfh4 gene. By Southern blot analysis,
Pelletier et al. (1998) mapped the HFH4 gene to chromosome 17q23-qter.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a Korean population comprising 295 patients with allergic rhinitis
(607154) and 418 controls, Li et al. (2006) reported a significant
association between allergic rhinitis and 3 SNPs of the FOXJ1 gene:
-460C-T (dbSNP rs880213), 1805G-T (dbSNP rs1868823), and 3375G-C (dbSNP
rs3192453). Haplotype analysis revealed that the main haplotype, CGG of
the 3 SNPs respectively, was significantly associated with allergic
rhinitis (p = 0.000018). There was no association between the SNPs and
serum IgE levels. Li et al. (2006) suggested that dysregulation of FOXJ1
may affect T cell activity.

ANIMAL MODEL

To define the role of HFH4, Chen et al. (1998) created a targeted
mutation in the mouse Hfh4 gene. In mice with the homozygous disruption,
no expression of Hfh4 was detected. The homozygous mice were noted to
have abnormalities of organ situs consistent with random determination
of left-right asymmetry. In addition, a complete absence of cilia was
noted in Hfh4 -/- mice. The Hfh4 gene is thus essential for nonrandom
determination of left-right asymmetry and development of ciliated cells.
Homozygous mutant mice also exhibited prenatal and postnatal growth
failure, perinatal lethality, and, in some cases, hydrocephalus. RT-PCR
revealed an absence of left-right dynein (lrd) expression in the
embryonic lungs of Hfh4 -/- mice, suggesting that HFH4 may act by
regulating expression of members of the dynein family of genes. These
abnormalities are similar to those observed in human congenital
syndromes such as the recessive disorder Kartagener syndrome (244400).

Stubbs et al. (2008) found that the cilia underlying left-right
patterning on the Xenopus gastrocoel roof plate and zebrafish Kupffer
vesicle were severely shortened or failed to form in Foxj1 morphants.
Misexpression of Foxj1 was sufficient to induce ectopic gastrocoel roof
plate-like cilia in frog embryos. Microarray analysis indicated that
Xenopus Foxj1 induced formation of cilia by upregulating expression of
motile cilia genes.

To avoid embryonic lethality in Foxj1-deficient mice, Lin et al. (2004)
targeted Foxj1 deficiency to the lymphoid system using fetal liver
chimeras. By 12- to 16-weeks postreconstitution, a large proportion of
mice that had received Foxj1 null fetal livers appeared moribund, with
ruffled fur and hunched posture. Upon histopathologic examination,
Foxj1-deficient chimeras displayed multiorgan systemic inflammation,
exaggerated Th1 cytokine production, and T-cell proliferation in
autologous mixed lymphocyte reactions. Foxj1 suppressed nuclear factor
kappa-B (NFKB; see 164011) transcription activity in vitro, and
Foxj1-deficient T cells possessed increased NFKB activity in vivo,
correlating with the ability of Foxj1 to regulate I-kappa-B proteins,
particularly IKKB (604495). Lin et al. (2004) concluded that FOXJ1
antagonizes proinflammatory transcriptional activities and potentially
enforces lymphocyte quiescence.

Srivatsan and Peng (2005) found that autoimmunity-prone mice with T
cells ectopically expressing Foxj1 showed a significant reduction in
lymphadenopathy, pathogenic autoantibodies, and end-organ disease.
Reversion of autoimmunity was not attributable to Nfkb modulation, but
rather to peripheral T-cell lymphopenia due to impaired exodus of cells
from the thymus. Srivatsan and Peng (2005) concluded that FOXJ1 is not
only important in regulating T-cell tolerance, but also in regulating
thymocyte egress.

REFERENCE 1. Avraham, K. B.; Fletcher, C.; Overdier, D. G.; Clevidence, D. E.;
Lai, E.; Costa, R. H.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland, N. G.: Murine chromosomal
location of eight members of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/fork
head winged helix family of transcription factors. Genomics 25:
388-393, 1995.

2. Chen, J.; Knowles, H. J.; Hebert, J. L.; Hackett, B. P.: Mutation
of the mouse hepatocyte nuclear factor/forkhead homologue 4 gene results
in an absence of cilia and random left-right asymmetry. J. Clin.
Invest. 102: 1077-1082, 1998.

3. Li, C.-S.; Chae, S.-C.; Lee, J.-H.; Zhang, Q.; Chung, H.-T.: Identification
of single nucleotide polymorphisms in FOXJ1 and their association
with allergic rhinitis. J. Hum. Genet. 51: 292-297, 2006.

4. Lin, L.; Spoor, M. S.; Gerth, A. J.; Brody, S. L.; Peng, S. L.
: Modulation of Th1 activation and inflammation by the NF-kappa-B
repressor Foxj1. Science 303: 1017-1020, 2004.

5. Murphy, D. B.; Seeman, S.; Wiese, S.; Kirschner, R.; Grzeschik,
K. H.; Thies, U.: The human hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/fork head
gene FKHL13: genomic structure and pattern of expression. Genomics 40:
462-469, 1997.

6. Pelletier, G. J.; Brody, S. L.; Liapis, H.; White, R. A.; Hackett,
B. P.: A human forkhead/winged-helix transcription factor expressed
in developing pulmonary and renal epithelium. Am. J. Physiol. 274:
L351-L359, 1998.

7. Srivatsan, S.; Peng, S. L.: Cutting edge: Foxj1 protects against
autoimmunity and inhibits thymocyte egress. J. Immun. 175: 7805-7809,
2005.

8. Stubbs, J. L.; Oishi, I.; Belmonte, J. C. I.; Kintner, C.: The
forkhead protein Foxj1 specifies node-like cilia in Xenopus and zebrafish
embryos. Nature Genet. 40: 1454-1460, 2008.

9. Venugopalan, S. R.; Amen, M. A.; Wang, J.; Wong, L.; Cavender,
A. C.; D'Souza, R. N.; Akerlund, M.; Brody, S. L.; Hjalt, T. A.; Amendt,
B. A.: Novel expression and transcriptional regulation of FoxJ1 during
oro-facial morphogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17: 3643-3654, 2008.

10. Yu, X.; Ng, C. P.; Habacher, H.; Roy, S.: Foxj1 transcription
factors are master regulators of the motile ciliogenic program. Nature
Genet. 40: 1445-1453, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 09/10/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/11/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/31/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/24/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/19/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/6/1998

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 1/28/1998

EDITED mgross: 09/10/2010
mgross: 2/16/2009
terry: 2/11/2009
mgross: 9/26/2006
terry: 8/31/2006
wwang: 5/31/2006
ckniffin: 5/24/2006
mgross: 2/19/2004
carol: 10/12/1998
terry: 10/6/1998
carol: 2/2/1998
alopez: 1/28/1998

609503	TITLE *609503 TESTICULAR HAPLOID EXPRESSED GENE, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; THEG
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to mouse Theg,
followed by 5-prime RACE and RT-PCR of a testis cDNA library, Mannan et
al. (2000) cloned 2 variants of human THEG. The deduced proteins,
THEG-major and THEG-minor, contain 379 and 355 amino acids and have
calculated molecular masses of 43.3 and 40.6 kD, respectively. Compared
with THEG-major, THEG-minor lacks 24 amino acids encoded by exon 3. Both
proteins contain several nuclear localization signals. RNA dot blot and
Northern blot analyses detected a 1.5-kb THEG transcript only in testis.
Immunohistochemical analysis of mouse testis sections detected Theg in
the nucleus of round spermatids, but not in other germ cell stages or in
somatic cells of testis. Transfected mouse fibroblasts expressed
fluorescence-tagged Theg predominantly in the nucleus.

GENE FUNCTION

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Yanaka et al. (2000) determined that mouse
Theg interacted with Cct-epsilon (CCT5; 610150), suggesting that THEG
functions as a regulatory factor in protein assembly.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mannan et al. (2000) determined that the THEG gene contains 8 exons and
spans 14 kb.

MAPPING

By FISH and genomic sequence analysis, Mannan et al. (2000) mapped the
THEG gene to chromosome 19pter-p13.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yanaka et al. (2000) found that the Theg gene was disrupted in an
insertional transgenic mouse mutant, termed kisimo, characterized by
male sterility. Mutant males showed abnormal germ cell development, with
elongated spermatids in the lumina of seminiferous tubules.

In contrast to the findings of Yanaka et al. (2000), Mannan et al.
(2003) found that Theg knockout did not affect the fertility of mutant
male mice. Theg-null males appeared normal, with no gross abnormalities
in testicular morphology or sperm properties.

REFERENCE 1. Mannan, A.; Lucke, K.; Dixkens, C.; Neesen, J.; Kamper, M.; Engel,
W.; Burfeind, P.: Alternative splicing, chromosome assignment and
subcellular localization of the testicular haploid expressed gene
(THEG). Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 91: 171-179, 2000.

2. Mannan, A. U.; Nayernia, K.; Mueller, C.; Burfeind, P.; Adham,
I. M.; Engel, W.: Male mice lacking the Theg (testicular haploid
expressed gene) protein undergo normal spermatogenesis and are fertile. Biol.
Reprod. 69: 788-796, 2003.

3. Yanaka, N.; Kobayashi, K.; Wakimoto, K.; Yamada, E.; Imahie, H.;
Imai, Y.; Mori, C.: Insertional mutation of the murine kisimo locus
caused a defect in spermatogenesis. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 14791-14794,
2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/26/2005

EDITED mgross: 05/30/2006
mgross: 7/26/2005

603769	TITLE *603769 T-CELL LYMPHOMA/LEUKEMIA 1B; TCL1B
;;TML1
DESCRIPTION The TCL1A oncogene (186960) on 14q32.1 is involved in the development of
T-cell leukemia. Its expression in these leukemias is activated by
chromosomal translocations and inversions at 14q32.1. By searching an
EST database for sequences homologous to TCL1A and MTCP1 (300116), a
member of the TCL1 gene family that is located on Xq28 and is activated
in rare cases of mature T-cell leukemia with a t(X;14) translocation,
Pekarsky et al. (1999) isolated TCL1B, a novel member of the TCL1 gene
family. The approximately 1.2-kb TCL1B cDNA encodes a 14-kD protein that
contains 128 amino acids and shows 60% sequence similarity to the TCL1A
protein. By PCR analysis of a radiation hybrid panel, they mapped the
TCL1B gene to chromosome 14q32.1. Pulse-field analysis of a positive BAC
clone revealed that the TCL1B gene is located approximately 16 kb
centromeric of the TCL1A gene. Expression profiles of the 2 genes are
very similar: both genes are expressed at very low levels in normal bone
marrow and peripheral lymphocytes but are activated in T-cell leukemia
by rearrangement of the 14q32.1 region. Thus, translocations and
inversions at 14q32.1 in T-cell malignancies involve 2 oncogenes.

Hallas et al. (1999) presented cloning, mapping, and expression analysis
of the human and murine TCL1/Tcl1 locus. In addition to TCL1A and TCL1B,
the human locus contains 2 additional genes, TNG1 (TCL1-neighboring
gene-1 and TNG2; 604412), encoding proteins of 141 and 110 amino acids,
respectively. Both genes showed no homology to any known genes, but
their expression profiles were very similar to those of TCL1A and TCL1B.
TNG1 and TNG2 also were activated in T cell leukemias with
rearrangements at 14q32.1. To aid in the development of the mouse model,
Hallas et al. (1999) characterized the murine Tcl1a locus and found 5
genes homologous to human TCL1B. The 5 Tcl1b proteins ranged in size
from 117 to 123 amino acids and were 65 to 80% similar, but they showed
only a 30 to 40% similarity to human TCL1B. All murine Tcl1b and Tcl1a
mRNAs were abundant in mouse oocytes and 2-cell embryos but rare in
various adult tissues and lymphoid cell lines. These data suggested a
similar or complementary function of these proteins in early
embryogenesis.

REFERENCE 1. Hallas, C.; Pekarsky, Y.; Itoyama, T.; Varnum, J.; Bichi, R.; Rothstein,
J. L.; Croce, C. M.: Genomic analysis of human and mouse TCL1 loci
reveals a complex of tightly clustered genes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96:
14418-14423, 1999.

2. Pekarsky, Y.; Hallas, C.; Isobe, M.; Russo, G.; Croce, C. M.:
Abnormalities at 14q32.1 in T cell malignancies involve two oncogenes. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 2949-2951, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/3/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/23/1999

EDITED terry: 09/07/2010
alopez: 1/10/2000
terry: 1/3/2000
mgross: 5/5/1999

611089	TITLE *611089 MYOTUBULARIN-RELATED PROTEIN 14; MTMR14
;;C3ORF29;;
EGG-DERIVED TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF;;
HJUMPY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The MTMR14 gene encodes a muscle-specific inositide phosphatase that
acts specifically on phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate (PI(3,5)P2),
and possibly other targets, and plays a critical role in skeletal muscle
calcium homeostasis and likely other cellular processes (summary by
Romero-Suarez et al., 2010).

CLONING

From a database screen for protein sequences similar to human
myotubularin (300415), which is mutated in a form of centronuclear
myopathy (CNMX; 310400), Tosch et al. (2006) identified a novel protein,
MTMR14, with high homology to Drosophila egg-derived tyrosine
phosphatase (EDTP). The authors called this protein hJUMPY because
disruption of EDTP protein function in Drosophila causes a phenotype
termed JUMPY: a muscle defect and a progressive loss of muscle control
together with shaky and slower movements. The deduced 650-amino acid
MTMR14 protein contains a predicted protein tyrosine phosphatase and
dual-specificity phosphatase (PTP/DSP) domain and the canonical C(X)5R
consensus present in active PTP/DSPs. The MTMR14 catalytic loop shows
closest resemblance to that of active myotubularins. Northern blot
analysis detected a 2.5-kb MTMR14 transcript with highest expression in
skeletal muscle and heart and lower expression in placenta, kidney,
liver, pancreas, and lung. Immunofluorescence studies showed that MTMR14
localizes to cytoplasmic reticular structures and plasma membrane
ruffles, and displays a concentration near the nucleus of COS-1 cells.
MTMR14 was more concentrated in structures positive for giantin
(602500), a Golgi marker.

Shen et al. (2009) identified the MTMR14 protein as a phosphatase
predominantly expressed in skeletal and heart muscle. The human and
mouse proteins share 90% amino acid sequence homology.

GENE FUNCTION

By quantitative PCR in mice, Tosch et al. (2006) showed that expression
of Mtmr14 increased with C2C12 myotubule formation and differentiation
in culture. Using in vitro and ex vivo approaches, Tosch et al. (2006)
demonstrated that MTMR14 is a PPIn 3-phosphatase that dephosphorylates
the same substrates as myotubularin, PtdIns(3)P and PtdIns(3,5)P2.

Shen et al. (2009) also demonstrated that MTMR14 dephosphorylates a
variety of PtdInsPs, particularly PtdIns(3,5)P2.

GENE STRUCTURE

Tosch et al. (2006) determined that the MTMR14 gene contains 19 exons;
EST database analysis indicated that exons 17 and 18 are alternatives.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Tosch et al. (2006) mapped the MTMR14 gene
to chromosome 3p25.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Tosch et al. (2006) described 2 sporadic cases of centronuclear myopathy
in which each proband carried a heterozygous missense mutation in the
MTMR14 gene. The first proband and his unaffected father carried an
R336Q substitution (611089.0001). A second mutant allele was postulated,
but not identified. The other proband carried a Y462C substitution in
MTMR14 (611089.0002) and an additional missense mutation in DYN2 (E368K;
602378.0007), consistent with autosomal dominant centronuclear myopathy
(160150). The Y462C mutation was also found in a control individual.
Both variants impaired enzymatic function, the R336Q mutation strongly
and the Y462C mutation to a lesser extent. Tosch et al. (2006) remarked
that myotubular myopathy patients with other characterized mutations in
DYN2 usually have an age of onset in childhood or adulthood, whereas the
age of onset in their patient was neonatal. The report raised the
possibility of MTMR14 being a modifier of the phenotype in some cases of
centronuclear myopathy.

ANIMAL MODEL

Shen et al. (2009) found that Mtmr14-null mice had muscle weakness and
increased fatigue with exercise. Isolated muscles from mutant mice
showed decreased contractile force, exacerbated fatigue, and prolonged
relaxation compared to muscle from wildtype mice. Mtmr14 deficiency
resulted in increased elevated resting calcium levels in myotubes due to
spontaneous calcium leakage from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. This
leakage was attributed to decreased activity of Mtmr14 phosphatase
activity and accumulation of substrates, especially PtdIns(3,5)P2 and
PtdIns(3,4)P2. In addition, PtdIns(3,5)P2 and PtdIns(3,4)P2 bound to and
directly activated the RYR1 (180901) calcium release channel in the
sarcoplasmic reticulum. The findings indicated that fine control of
PtdInsP levels in muscle cells is essential for maintaining calcium
homeostasis and muscle performance.

Normal aging is associated with sarcopenia, or a decrease in muscle mass
and function. Romero-Suarez et al. (2010) found that Mtmr14-null mice
manifested features of sarcopenia much earlier (12 to 14 months)
compared to wildtype mice (22 to 24 months). In particular, young and
mature mutant mice behaved like old wildtype mice, indicating earlier
onset of locomotor dysfunction in mutant mice. These changes were
associated with muscle atrophy and a decrease in contractile force and
power in the muscles of mutant mice. Wildtype mice showed downregulation
of Mtmr14 during normal aging, and muscle tissue from both old wildtype
and mutant mature mice showed dysfunctional calcium homeostasis, with
increased resting calcium levels and decreased calcium release from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum when triggered. The findings indicated that
Mtmr14 is a potent regulator of skeletal muscle function under normal
conditions and that its downregulation may contribute to age-related
sarcopenia. Romero-Suarez et al. (2010) concluded that loss of Mtmr14
results in altered PtdIns(3,5)P2 signaling, as well as altered calcium
signaling, which can affect a variety of cell processes.

Dowling et al. (2010) examined zebrafish MTMR14 using gene dosage
manipulation. As with MTM1 (300415) knockdown, morpholino-mediated
knockdown of MTMR14 resulted in morphologic abnormalities, a
developmental motor phenotype characterized by diminished spontaneous
contractions and abnormal escape response, and impaired
excitation-contraction coupling. In contrast to MTM1 knockdown, however,
muscle ultrastructure was unaffected. Double knockdown of MTM1 and
MTMR14 significantly impaired motor function and altered skeletal muscle
ultrastructure. The combined effect of reducing levels of both MTMR14
and MTM1 was significantly more severe than either knockdown alone, an
effect which may be mediated by increased autophagy. The authors
concluded that MTMR14 is required for motor function and, in combination
with MTM1, is required for myocyte homeostasis and normal embryonic
development.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MYOPATHY, CENTRONUCLEAR, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT, MODIFIER OF
MTMR14, ARG336GLN

Tosch et al. (2006) reported a 12-year old Brazilian boy with
centronuclear myopathy (160150) who presented with neonatal hypotonia,
proximal muscle weakness, and ophthalmoparesis. Both he and his
clinically unaffected father were heterozygous for a 1007G-A transition
in exon 11 of the MTMR14 gene. The mutation was predicted to result in
an arg336-to-gln (R336Q) substitution in a highly conserved region of
the active site of the protein. The mutation was not found in 820
control chromosomes. Immunoprecipitation assays detected a strong
decrease in the phosphatase activity of the R336Q mutant, 22% of the
level of wildtype. A second mutation in MTMR14 was not identified, and
the patient did not have a mutation in exons or splice sites of the DNM2
gene (602378). Tosch et al. (2006) hypothesized that another mutant
allele in either the MTMR14 gene or in another gene must be present.

.0002
MYOPATHY, CENTRONUCLEAR, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT, MODIFIER OF
MTMR14, TYR462CYS

Tosch et al. (2006) reported a 36-year-old woman with centronuclear
myopathy-1 (160150) caused by a heterozygous missense mutation in the
DNM2 gene (E368K; 602378.0007) who also carried a heterozygous 1385A-G
transition in exon 16 of the MTMR14 gene, resulting in a tyr462-to-cys
(Y462C) substitution in a semiconserved region outside of the active
site of the protein. The Y462C mutation was found in 1 of 700 Brazilian
control chromosomes. The Y462C mutant displayed 80% of the phosphatase
activity of the wildtype protein in immunoprecipitation assays. Both
mutations occurred de novo. The patient presented with neonatal
hypotonia, muscle weakness, and ophthalmoparesis. The report raised the
possibility of MTMR14 being a modifier of the phenotype in some cases of
centronuclear myopathy.

REFERENCE 1. Dowling, J. J.; Low, S. E.; Busta, A. S.; Feldman, E. L.: Zebrafish
MTMR14 is required for excitation-contraction coupling, developmental
motor function and the regulation of autophagy. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19:
2668-2681, 2010.

2. Romero-Suarez, S.; Shen, J.; Brotto, L.; Hall, T.; Mo, C.; Valdivia,
H. H.; Andresen, J.; Wacker, M.; Nosek, T. M.; Qu, C.-K.; Brotto,
M.: Muscle-specific inositide phosphatase (MIP/MTMR14) is reduced
with age and its loss accelerates skeletal muscle aging process by
altering calcium homeostasis. Aging 2: 504-513, 2010.

3. Shen, J.; Yu, W.-M.; Brotto, M.; Scherman, J. A.; Guo, C.; Stoddard,
C.; Nosek, T. M.; Valdivia, H. H.; Qu, C.-K.: Deficiency of MIP/MTMR14
phosphatase induces a muscle disorder by disrupting Ca(2+) homeostasis. Nature
Cell Biol. 11: 769-776, 2009.

4. Tosch, V.; Rohde, H. M.; Tronchere, H.; Zanoteli, E.; Monroy, N.;
Kretz, C.; Dondaine, N.; Payrastre, B.; Mandel, J.-L.; Laporte, J.
: A novel PtdIns3P and PtdIns(3,5)P2 phosphatase with an inactivating
variant in centronuclear myopathy. Hum. Molec. Genet. 15: 3098-3106,
2006.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 8/23/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/22/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/25/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/19/2007

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 6/6/2007

EDITED tpirozzi: 08/23/2013
tpirozzi: 8/23/2013
joanna: 1/25/2013
carol: 12/29/2011
ckniffin: 12/22/2011
joanna: 7/27/2010
ckniffin: 3/12/2010
wwang: 12/16/2009
ckniffin: 11/25/2009
alopez: 7/19/2007
carol: 6/6/2007

600303	TITLE *600303 RAP GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE FACTOR 1; RAPGEF1
;;GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE-RELEASING FACTOR 2; GRF2;;
CRK SH3-BINDING GNRP; C3G
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By Far Western screening of a human spleen lambda-gt11 expression
library using the SH3 domain of CRK (164762) as probe, Tanaka et al.
(1994) isolated a cDNA clone corresponding to RAPGEF1, which they called
C3G. Additional clones from human spleen and placenta cDNA libraries
were obtained by plaque hybridization with the (32)P-labeled spleen cDNA
clone. The deduced 1,077-amino acid protein has a predicted molecular
mass of 121 kD and contains a central proline-rich SH3-binding domain
and a C-terminal region homologous to guanine nucleotide-releasing
proteins (GNRP) for RAS, such as RASGRF1 (606600) and SOS1 (182530).
Northern blot analysis of human adult and fetal tissues detected a
7.5-kb transcript in all tissues examined with highest expression in
skeletal muscle, placenta, and fetal heart and brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Tanaka et al. (1994) showed that CRK and C3G coimmunoprecipitated in
transfected rabbit kidney cells. Deletion analysis showed that the CRK
SH3 domain interacted with a 50-amino acid proline-rich sequence in C3G.
The authors suggested that the complex of C3G and CRK or C3G and
GRB2/ASH (108355) transduces signals from tyrosine kinases to RAS in a
number of different tissues.

The RAS-CRK-RAP1 (179520) cellular signal transduction system is
regulated by guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs). Transcription
of C3G is activated by the CRK adaptor protein. Hirata et al. (2004)
documented the amplification of C3G in 5 of 18 primary nonsmall cell
lung cancers examined and its increased expression in 18 of 28 tumors in
comparison to corresponding noncancerous lung tissues. The data were
interpreted as indicating that amplification and increased expression of
the C3G gene may play some role in human lung carcinogenesis through
derangement of the CRK-RAP1 signaling pathway.

MAPPING

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, Takai et al. (1994) mapped the
RAPGEF1 gene to chromosome 9q34.3, where chromosomal changes have been
reported in human hematopoietic malignancies.

REFERENCE 1. Hirata, T.; Nagai, H.; Koizumi, K.; Okino, K.; Harada, A.; Onda,
M.; Nagahata, T.; Mikami, I.; Hirai, K.; Haraguchi, S.; Jin, E.; Kawanami,
O.; Shimizu, K.; Emi, M.: Amplification, up-regulation and over-expression
of C3G (CRK SH3 domain-binding guanine nucleotide-releasing factor)
in non-small cell lung cancers. J. Hum. Genet. 49: 290-295, 2004.

2. Takai, S.; Tanaka, M.; Sugimura, H.; Yamada, K.; Naito, Y.; Kino,
I.; Matsuda, M.: Mapping of the human C3G gene coding a guanine nucleotide
releasing protein for Ras family to 9q34.3 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. Hum. Genet. 94: 549-550, 1994.

3. Tanaka, S.; Morishita, T.; Hashimoto, Y.; Hattori, S.; Nakamura,
S.; Shibuya, M.; Matsuoka, K.; Takenawa, T.; Kurata, T.; Nagashima,
K.; Matsuda, M.: C3G, a guanine nucleotide-releasing protein expressed
ubiquitously, binds to the Src homology 3 domains of CRK and GRB2/ASH
proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 3443-3447, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/9/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/11/1995

EDITED wwang: 08/17/2010
carol: 10/16/2006
tkritzer: 7/20/2004
terry: 7/9/2004
carol: 9/20/1999
mark: 9/15/1996
carol: 1/17/1995
carol: 1/11/1995

100650	TITLE +100650 ALDEHYDE DEHYDROGENASE 2 FAMILY; ALDH2
;;ALDEHYDE DEHYDROGENASE 2;;
ALDH, LIVER MITOCHONDRIAL;;
ACETALDEHYDE DEHYDROGENASE 2
SUBLINGUAL NITROGLYCERIN, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO POOR RESPONSE TO, INCLUDED;;
ALDH2/HMGIC FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
ESOPHAGEAL CANCER, ALCOHOL-RELATED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Acetaldehyde dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.1.3) is the next enzyme after alcohol
dehydrogenase (see 103700) in the major pathway of alcohol metabolism.
There are 2 major ALDH isozymes in the liver: cytosolic ALDH1 (ALDH1A1;
100640) and mitochondrial ALDH2.

CLONING

Hsu et al. (1985) isolated partial cDNA clones of ALDH1 and ALDH2 from a
human liver cDNA library. Hsu et al. (1988) isolated and characterized
ALDH2 genomic clones. The deduced ALDH2 protein contains 517 amino
acids, including a 17-amino acid signal peptide.

GENE FUNCTION

Using an unbiased proteomic search, Chen et al. (2008) identified
mitochondrial ALDH2 as an enzyme whose activation correlated with
reduced ischemic heart damage in rodent models. A high-throughput screen
identified a small molecule activator of ALDH2, which they called
Alda-1, that, when administered to rats before an ischemic event,
reduced infarct size by 60%, most likely through its inhibitory effect
on the formation of cytotoxic aldehydes. In vitro, Alda-1 was a
particularly effective activator of ALDH2*2 (100650.0001), an inactive
mutant form of the enzyme that is found in 40% of East Asian
populations. Chen et al. (2008) concluded that the pharmacologic
enhancement of ALDH2 activity may be useful for patients with wildtype
or mutant ALDH2 who are subjected to cardiac ischemia, such as during
coronary bypass surgery.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hsu et al. (1988) determined that the ALDH2 gene contains at least 13
exons and spans approximately 44 kb.

MAPPING

Hsu et al. (1985) assigned the ALDH2 locus to chromosome 12 by means of
a cDNA probe and Southern blot analysis of somatic cell hybrids. With a
cDNA fragment corresponding to the 3-prime coding part of human ALDH1
mRNA, Braun et al. (1986) studied human-rodent somatic cell hybrids and
confirmed the assignment to chromosome 12. The mitochondrial and
cytosolic forms of ALDH are coded by mouse chromosomes 4 and 19,
respectively (Mather and Holmes, 1984). Comparative mapping in man,
mouse, and bovine led Womack (1990) to suggest that ALDH2 is in the
distal part of 12q, distal to IFNG (147570), a conclusion consistent
with other information on the mapping of these 2 loci.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Data on gene frequencies of allelic variants were tabulated by
Roychoudhury and Nei (1988).

The ALDH2 alleles encoding the active and inactive subunits are termed
'ALDH2*1' and 'ALDH2*2,' respectively; see 100650.0001. It had been
thought that the 2 alleles were expressed codominantly, and that only
individuals homozygous for ALDH2*2 were ALDH2-deficient. However,
studies of the inheritance of alcohol-induced flushing (610251) in
families suggested that the trait is dominant (Schwitters et al., 1982).

- Early Studies of ALDH Isoforms

Harada et al. (1980) presented evidence that ALDH is polymorphic in
Japanese. They identified 2 major isozymes: a faster migrating (low Km
for acetaldehyde) and a slower migrating isozyme (high Km for
acetaldehyde). The unusual slower-migrating phenotype, which had less
enzymatic activity, was found in 52% of the specimens; the
fast-migrating isozyme was absent in these specimens. Harada et al.
(1980) postulated that initial intoxicating symptoms after alcohol
drinking in these individuals may be due to delayed oxidation of
acetaldehyde due to variant or absent ALDH. The slow-migrating ALDH
isoform was strongly inactivated by disulfiram, whereas the
faster-migrating isoform was relatively insensitive to disulfiram. These
isoforms were later identified as ALDH1 and ALDH2, respectively.

Agarwal et al. (1981) performed a population genetic study in East
Asians of several different extractions using hair root lysates to
investigate ALDH isozymes. Between 40 and 80% of the several East Asian
groups were found to be deficient in the faster migrating isozyme,
termed ALDH2, whereas not a single European individual was deficient.
The deficiency was invariably associated with sensitivity to alcohol.
Family studies suggested autosomal recessive inheritance of the
deficiency. Harada et al. (1981) found deficiency of the
fast-metabolizing isoform in 43% of Japanese; all deficient persons had
flushing symptoms and, after alcohol drinking, showed an increased mean
acetaldehyde concentration of 37.3 micromoles as compared with 2.1
micromoles in nondeficient persons. Impraim et al. (1982) investigated
the basis of the lack in about 50% of East Asians of 1 of the 2 major
liver ALDH isozymes. Consistent with a convention of nomenclature
adopted by the worldwide workshops, ALDH1 is cytosolic and ALDH2 is
mitochondrial. Impraim et al. (1982) confirmed that it was the ALDH2
isozyme that was missing in persons of Asian descent. The unusual ALDH2
isozyme in Japanese liver was enzymatically inactive but immunologically
cross-reactive. Thus, a structural mutation at the ALDH2 locus was
presumed to be the genetic basis.

Goedde et al. (1983) noted the existence of 4 isozymes of ALDH, which
differed in electrophoretic mobility and isoelectric point. In a
population study, they found that the frequency of deficiency of the
more active isoform was 69% in Indians of the Ecuador Highlands, 44% in
Japanese, and 35% in Chinese. This deficiency was not seen in Egyptians,
Liberians, Kenyans, or Europeans. The authors suggested that deficiency
is related to flushing and a slower metabolism of acetaldehyde, which
could in turn result in a lower frequency of alcoholism and
alcohol-related problems. (Note that the nomenclature used by some of
these authors is confused: ALDH1 is actually ALDH2).

- Molecular Basis

Hsu et al. (1987) developed a method for distinguishing the 2 main
alleles by means of allele-specific 21-base synthetic oligonucleotides.
Using a pair of synthetic oligonucleotides, one complementary to the
ALDH2*1 allele and the other complementary to the ALDH2*2 allele,

Shibuya and Yoshida (1988) determined the genotypes of 49 unrelated
Japanese persons and 12 Caucasians. The frequency of the atypical allele
was found to be 0.35 in the Japanese samples examined. The atypical
allele was not found in the Caucasians.

Crabb et al. (1989) did genotyping on the liver from 24 Japanese
individuals, using the PCR technique for amplification of genomic DNA.
In correlating genotype with phenotype, they found that both
heterozygotes and homozygotes for ALDH2*2 are deficient in ALDH2
activity; that is, the ALDH2*2 allele is dominant. Since ALDH2 is a
homotetrameric enzyme, random association of active and inactive
subunits, equally expressed, should generate about 6% normal tetramers;
the remainder would contain at least 1 mutant subunit. Thus, if all
tetramers containing at least 1 mutant subunit were inactive, there
would be only 6% activity in heterozygotes. This low amount of activity
is likely to be below the detection limit of activity staining of the
gels.

Using allele-specific oligonucleotides for ALDH2*2, Singh et al. (1989)
studied phenotypically deficient individuals in the Chinese, Japanese,
and South Korean families to determine heterozygous or homozygous
status. All individuals with a heterozygous genotype were found to be
deficient, thus demonstrating that only the normal homotetrameric enzyme
is catalytically active.

Oota et al. (2004) used the ALDH2*2 allele, which is responsible for
catalytic deficiency of ALDH2, and 4 noncoding SNPs to study ALDH2
haplotype frequency and linkage disequilibrium in 37 worldwide
populations. Only 4 major SNP-defined haplotypes were found to account
for almost all chromosomes in all populations. A fifth haplotype
harbored the functional variant and was found only in East Asians.

- ALDH2 and Alcoholism

Crabb (1990) pointed out that the single base mutation in ALDH2
responsible for acute alcohol-flushing reaction in Asians, glu504-to-lys
(ALDH2*2; 100650.0001), is the best-characterized genetic factor
influencing alcohol drinking behavior.

Shibuya et al. (1988) studied 23 Japanese with alcoholic liver disease.
No difference was found in the genotypes at the ADH2 (103720) locus;
however, at the ALDH2 locus, 20 of the 23 patients were homozygous for
ALDH2*1, only 3 were heterozygous, and none of the patients was
homozygous for ALDH2*2. The results were interpreted as indicating that
Japanese with the atypical allele are at a much lower risk for alcoholic
liver disease, presumably due to their sensitivity to alcohol
intoxication.

Thomasson et al. (1991) hypothesized that the polymorphisms of both of
the liver enzymes responsible for the oxidative metabolism of ethanol
may modify the predisposition to development of alcoholism (103780).
Using leukocyte DNA amplified by PCR and allele-specific
oligonucleotides in a study of Chinese men living in Taiwan, they
demonstrated that alcoholics had significantly lower frequencies not
only of ALDH2*2 but also of ADH1B*2 (103720.0001) and ADH1C*1 (see
103730.0002). Goedde et al. (1992) gave extensive population frequency
data on ALDH2 as well as on ADH1B. They again showed that the atypical
ALDH2 gene (ALDH2*2) is extremely rare in Caucasians, Blacks, Papua New
Guineans, Australian Aborigines, and Aurocanians (South Chile), but
widely prevalent among East Asians. They cited evidence indicating that
individuals possessing the ALDH2*2 allele show alcohol-related
sensitivity responses such as facial flushing, are usually not habitual
drinkers, and appear to suffer less from alcoholism and alcohol-related
liver disease.

Muramatsu et al. (1995) used the PCR/RFLP method to determine the
genotypes of the ADH2 and ALDH2 loci of alcoholic and nonalcoholic
Chinese living in Shanghai. They found that the alcoholics had
significantly lower frequencies of the ADH2*2 and ALDH2*2 alleles than
did the nonalcoholics, suggesting the inhibitory effects of these
alleles for the development of alcoholism. In the nonalcoholic subjects,
ADH2*2 had little, if any, effect, despite the significant effect of the
ALDH2*2 allele in decreasing the alcohol consumption of the individual.
Taken together, these results were considered consistent with the
proposed hypothesis for the development of alcoholism, i.e., drinking
behavior is greatly influenced by the individual's genotype of
alcohol-metabolizing enzymes and the risk of becoming alcoholic is
proportionate with the ethanol consumption of the individual.

To investigate possible interactions among the variant alleles ADH2*2,
ADH3*1, and ALDH2*2, Chen et al. (1999) genotyped 340 alcoholic and 545
control Han Chinese living in Taiwan at the ADH2, ADH3, and ALDH2 loci.
After the influence of ALDH2*2 was controlled for, multiple logistic
regression analysis indicated that allelic variation at ADH3 exerts no
significant effect on the risk of alcoholism. Any presumed affect could
be accounted for by linkage disequilibrium between ADH3*1 and ADH2*2;
the 2 genes are located on 4q22. ALDH2*2 homozygosity, regardless of the
ADH2 genotype, was fully protective against alcoholism; no individual
showing such homozygosity was found among the alcoholics. Logistic
regression analyses of the remaining 6 combinatorial genotypes of the
polymorphic ADH2 and ALDH2 loci indicated that individuals carrying 1 or
2 copies of ADH2*2 and a single copy of ALDH2*2 had the lowest risk
(odds ratios = 0.04-0.05) for alcoholism, as compared with the ADH2*1/*1
and ALDH2*1/*1 genotypes. The disease risk associated with the
ADH2*2/*2-ALDH2*1/*1 genotype appeared to be about half of that
associated with the ADH2*1/*2-ALDH2*1/*1 genotype. These results
suggested that protection afforded by the ADH2*2 allele may be
independent of that afforded by ALDH2*2.

Chai et al. (2005) examined ADH2, ADH3, and ALDH2 polymorphisms in 72
alcoholic and 38 nonalcoholic healthy Korean men. Forty-eight of the
alcoholic men had Cloninger type 1 and 24 had Cloninger type 2
alcoholism. The frequency of ADH2*1 (103720.0001) and ADH3*2
(103730.0002) alleles was significantly higher in men with type 2
alcoholism than in men with type 1 alcoholism and in healthy men. The
frequency of the ALDH2*1 allele was significantly higher in men with
alcohol dependence than in healthy men. Chai et al. (2005) suggested
that the genetic characteristics of alcohol metabolism in type 1
alcoholism falls between nonalcoholism and type 2 alcoholism.

Luo et al. (2006) genotyped 16 markers within the ADH gene cluster, 4
markers within the ALDH2 gene, and 38 unlinked ancestry-informative
markers in a case-control sample of 801 individuals. Associations
between markers and disease were analyzed by a Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium test, a conventional case-control comparison, a structured
association analysis, and a novel diplotype trend regression (DTR)
analysis. All markers were found to be in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in
controls, but some markers showed Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium in cases
of alcohol dependence. Genotypes of many markers were associated with
alcohol dependence. DTR analysis showed that the ADH5 (103710) genotypes
and diplotypes of ADH1A (103700), ADH1B (103720), ADH7 (600086), and
ALDH2 were associated with alcohol dependence in European Americans
and/or African Americans. The risk-influencing alleles were fine mapped
from among the markers studied and were found to coincide with some well
known functional variants. They demonstrated that DTR was more powerful
than many other conventional association methods. They also found that
several ADH genes and the ALDH2 gene were susceptibility loci for
alcohol dependence, and the associations were best explained by several
independent risk genes.

Although the ALDH2*2 allele is considered to be a genetic deterrent for
alcoholism, Muramatsu et al. (1996) found that 80 of 655 Japanese
alcoholics had the mutant allele. The authors postulated that these
alcoholics had some other factor that overcame the adverse effects of
acetaldehydemia and that such a factor might reside in the brain's
'reward system,' in which dopamine plays a crucial role. Muramatsu et
al. (1996) studied variation at the DRD4 locus (126452) and found a
higher frequency of a 5-repeat allele of the DRD4 receptor 48-bp repeat
polymorphism in alcoholics with ALDH2*2 than in 100 other alcoholics and
144 controls. They found that alcoholics with the 5-repeat allele also
abused other drugs more often.

- ALDH2/HMGIC Fusion Gene

Kazmierczak et al. (1995) found that the ALDH2 gene was a translocation
partner of the HMGIC gene (HMGA2; 600698) in a uterine leiomyoma. Fusion
genes involving HMGIC are found in pleomorphic adenomas of salivary
glands and in a variety of benign mesenchymal tumors.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using an antisense oligonucleotide (ASO-9) containing the
5-prime-TCCC-3-prime motif, which acts by greatly reducing mRNA levels,
Garver et al. (2001) showed that rat hepatoma cells had reduced Aldh2
mRNA levels and activity, resulting in more than 90% inhibition of Aldh2
synthesis, probably mediated by RNase H hydrolysis. Mismatches in the
TCCC motif, in particular, reduced the efficacy of ASO-9, which
specifically reduced mRNA levels of Aldh2 but not of a control
mitochondrial enzyme, glutamate dehydrogenase (GLUD1; 138130). Treatment
of rats with ASO-9 specifically reduced Aldh2 activity by approximately
40% and increased plasma acetaldehyde levels 4-fold after ethanol
administration. Behavioral analysis indicated that ASO-9 treatment
induced an aversion to ethanol. After initial consumption, a reduction
of 61% in ethanol consumption was observed in treated rats, a level
comparable to that achieved with disulfiram (Antabuse). Garver et al.
(2001) concluded that the specificity and lack of side effects of an ASO
that inhibits ALDH2 expression and mimics the Asian phenotype would be
advantageous when compared with disulfiram.

Nitroglycerin, or glyceryl trinitrate (GTN), elicits nitric oxide
(NO)-based signaling to dilate blood vessels. Chen et al. (2005) found
that mitochondrial bioconversion of GTN to NO was absent in mitochondria
obtained from Aldh2-null mice. Vasoactivity from alternative
nitro(so)vasodilators was unaffected. GTN bioactivity could still be
generated in mutant mice and their isolated vascular tissue, but only at
substantially higher concentrations of GTN. Chen et al. (2005) concluded
that ALDH2 is necessary and sufficient for vasoactivity derived from
therapeutic levels of GTN.

Yao et al. (2010) found that a selective ALDH2 inhibitor (CVT-10216),
suppressed cocaine self-administration in rats and prevented cocaine- or
cue-induced reinstatement in a rat model of cocaine relapse-like
behavior. Inhibition of ALDH2 was found to decrease cocaine-stimulated
dopamine production in neurons in the primary ventral tegmental area by
increasing the formation of tetrahydropapaveroline (THP). THP was found
to selectively inhibit phosphorylated (activated) tyrosine hydroxylase
(TH; 191290), and thus reduce dopamine production via negative feedback.
Yao et al. (2010) concluded that reducing cocaine- and
craving-associated increases in dopamine release appears to be the
mechanism by which ALDH2 inhibition suppresses cocaine-seeking behavior.

Langevin et al. (2011) found that the Fanconi anemia DNA repair pathway
counteracts acetaldehyde-induced genotoxicity in mice. Their results
showed that the acetaldehyde-catabolizing enzyme Aldh2 is essential for
the development of Fancd2 (613984)-null embryos. Nevertheless,
acetaldehyde-catabolism-competent mothers (Aldh2 heterozygotes) could
support the development of double-mutant Aldh2-null/Fancd2-null mice.
However, these embryos were unusually sensitive to ethanol exposure in
utero, and ethanol consumption by postnatal double-deficient mice
rapidly precipitated bone marrow failure. Lastly, Aldh2-null/Fancd2-null
mice spontaneously developed acute leukemia. Langevin et al. (2011)
concluded that acetaldehyde-mediated DNA damage may critically
contribute to the genesis of fetal alcohol syndrome in fetuses, as well
to normal development, hematopoietic failure, and cancer predisposition
in Fanconi anemia (see 227650) patients.

Garaycoechea et al. (2012) reported that aged Aldh2-null/Fancd2-null
mutant mice that do not develop leukemia spontaneously develop aplastic
anemia, with the concomitant accumulation of damaged DNA within the
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell (HSPC) pool. Unexpectedly, they
found that only HSPCs, and not more mature blood precursors, require
Aldh2 for protection against acetaldehyde toxicity. Additionally, the
aldehyde-oxidizing activity of HSPCs, as measured by Aldefluor stain, is
due to Aldh2 and correlates with this protection. Finally, there is more
than a 600-fold reduction in the HSC pool of mice deficient in boh
Fanconi anemia pathway-mediated DNA repair and acetaldehyde
detoxification. Therefore, Garaycoechea et al. (2012) concluded that the
emergence of bone marrow failure in Fanconi anemia is probably due to
aldehyde-mediated genotoxicity restricted to the HSPC pool.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ALCOHOL SENSITIVITY, ACUTE
ALCOHOL DEPENDENCE, PROTECTION AGAINST, INCLUDED;;
HANGOVER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
SUBLINGUAL NITROGLYCERIN, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO POOR RESPONSE TO, INCLUDED;;
ESOPHAGEAL CANCER, ALCOHOL-RELATED, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
ALDH2, GLU504LYS (dbSNP rs671)

The designation for the ALDH2*2 polymorphism has been changed from
GLU487LYS to GLU504LYS. The numbering change includes the N-terminal
mitochondrial leader peptide of 17 amino acids (Li et al., 2006).

The ALDH2*2-encoded protein was first reported to have a change from
glutamic acid (glutamate) to lysine at residue 487 (Yoshida et al.,
1984). Hempel et al. (1985) and Hsu et al. (1985) also showed that the
catalytic deficiency in mitochondrial ALDH in East Asians that manifests
as acute alcohol sensitivity (610251) can be traced to a structural
point mutation at amino acid position 487 of the polypeptide. The
substitution of lysine for glutamic acid results from a G-A transition.

About 50% of East Asians are missing the ALDH2 isozyme. Impraim et al.
(1982) found that the livers of East Asians lacking the ALDH2 isozyme
show an enzymatically inactive but immunologically cross-reactive
material (CRM) corresponding to the ALDH2 isozyme.

To study the mechanism by which the ALDH2*2 allele exerts its dominant
effect in decreasing ALDH2 activity in liver extracts and producing
cutaneous flushing when the subject drinks alcohol, Xiao et al. (1995)
cloned ALDH2*1 cDNA and generated the ALDH2*2 allele by site-directed
mutagenesis. These cDNAs were transduced using retroviral vectors into
HeLa and CV1 cells, which do not express ALDH2. The normal allele
directed synthesis of immunoreactive ALDH2 protein with the expected
isoelectric point and increased aldehyde dehydrogenase activity. The
ALDH2*2 allele directed synthesis of mRNA and immunoreactive protein,
but the protein lacked enzymatic activity. When ALDH2*1-expressing cells
were transduced with ALDH2*2 vectors, both mRNAs were expressed and
immunoreactive proteins with isoelectric points ranging between those of
the 2 gene products were present, indicating that the subunits formed
heteromers. ALDH2 activity in these cells was reduced below that of the
parental ALDH2*1-expressing cells. Thus, the authors concluded that
ALDH2*2 allele is sufficient to cause ALDH2 deficiency in vitro.

Xiao et al. (1996) referred to the ALDH2 enzyme encoded by the ALDH2*1
allele (the wildtype form) as ALDH2E and the enzyme subunit encoded by
ALDH2*2 as ALDH2K. They found that the ALDH2E enzyme was very stable,
with a half-life of at least 22 hours. ALDH2K, on the other hand, had an
enzyme half-life of only 14 hours. In cells expressing both subunits,
most of the subunits assemble as heterotetramers, and these enzymes had
a half-life of 13 hours. Thus, the effect of ALDH2K on enzyme turnover
is dominant. Their studies indicated that ALDH2*2 exerts its dominant
effect both by interfering with the catalytic activity of the enzyme and
by increasing its turnover.

Because genetic epidemiologic studies have suggested a mechanism by
which homozygosity for the ALDH2*2 allele inhibits the development of
alcoholism (103780) in Asians, Peng et al. (1999) recruited 18 adult Han
Chinese men, matched by age, body-mass index, nutritional state, and
homozygosity at the ALDH2 gene loci from a population of 273 men. Six
individuals were chosen for each of the 3 ALDH2 allotypes, i.e., 2
homozygotes and 1 heterozygote. Following a low dose of ethanol,
homozygous ALDH2*2 individuals were found to be strikingly responsive
with pronounced cardiovascular hemodynamic effects as well as subjective
perception of general discomfort for as long as 2 hours following
ingestion.

Among 71 Japanese nondrinkers and 268 drinkers of alcohol, Liu et al.
(2005) found that drinkers had a significantly higher frequency of the
504glu allele. Individuals with the 504lys allele had an increased risk
of alcohol-induced flushing (odds ratio of 33.0).

In a study of 140 men and women of Chinese, Japanese, and Korean
heritage, Wall et al. (2000) found that those with ALDH2*2 alleles
experienced more severe hangovers (see 610251) and suggested that this
may contribute, in part, to protection against the development of
excessive or problematic drinking in Asian Americans. Yokoyama et al.
(2005) found that inactive heterozygous ALDH2, alcohol flushing, and
increased mean corpuscular volume (MCV) were positively associated with
hangover susceptibility in Japanese workers, suggesting that
acetaldehyde is etiologically linked to the development of hangover.

In 80 Han Chinese patients with arteriography-confirmed coronary artery
disease who used only sublingual nitroglycerin, or glyceryl trinitrate
(GTN) for angina relief, Li et al. (2006) found that the ALDH2*2 allele
was associated with lack of efficacy of sublingual GTN. Enzyme kinetic
analysis revealed that the catalytic efficiency of GTN metabolism of the
glu504 protein is approximately 10-fold higher than that of the lys504
enzyme. Li et al. (2006) concluded that the presence of the ALDH2*2
allele contributes, in large part, to the lack of an efficacious
clinical response to GTN and recommended that this genetic factor be
considered when administering GTN, particularly to Asian patients, 30 to
50% of whom possess the inactive ALDH2*2 mutant allele.

In a study of 32 adult Han Chinese male students with no personal or
family history of alcoholism, Peng et al. (2007) found that
heterozygosity for the ALDH2*2 allele resulted in higher acetaldehyde
levels after alcohol ingestion compared to wildtype homozygotes. After
ingestion, heterozygotes also had faster heart rates, faster blood flow
in the facial and carotid arteries, and more subjective discomfort
compared to wildtype homozygotes. Overall, the findings indicated that
acetaldehyde, rather than ethanol or acetate, are responsible for
observed alcohol sensitivity reactions. Peng et al. (2007) postulated
that ALDH2*2 heterozygotes have decreased aversion to the adverse
effects of alcohol, and thus increased risk of drinking, compared to
those who are homozygous for ALDH2*2.

Among 1,032 Korean individuals, Kim et al. (2008) found that the
combination of the ADH1B his48 allele (dbSNP rs1229984; 103720.0001) and
the ALDH2 lys504 allele offered protection against alcoholism.
Individuals who carried both susceptibility alleles (arg48 and glu504,
respectively) had a significantly increased risk for alcoholism (OR,
91.43; p = 1.4 x 10(-32)). Individuals with 1 protective and 1
susceptibility allele had a lesser increased risk for alcoholism (OR,
11.40; p = 3.5 x 10(-15)) compared to those with both protective
alleles. Kim et al. (2008) calculated that alcoholism in the Korean
population is 86.5% attributable to the detrimental effect of the ADH1B
arg48 and the ALDH2 glu504 alleles.

In a case-control study with 221 Chinese patients with esophageal cancer
and 191 controls, Ding et al. (2010) found that alcohol drinkers with
the ALDH2 A allele showed a significantly increased risk of esophageal
cancer compared to drinkers with the ALDH2 G/G genotype (OR, 3.08) or
compared to nondrinkers with any genotype (OR, 3.05). There was a
significantly higher risk of esophageal cancer in those with higher
alcohol consumption (OR, 11.93), and a dose-dependent positive effect
was observed. Drinkers with high cumulative lifetime consumption
(greater than 2.5 kg*year calculated as grams of alcohol consumed per
day multiplied by number of years of consumption) carrying both the
ALHD2 A allele and the G allele of ADH1B (his48 allele) had an even
higher risk of esophageal cancer (OR, 53.15) compared to individuals
with the ALDH2 G/G and ADH1B A/A genotypes. Ding et al. (2010)
hypothesized that increased acetaldehyde in drinkers with these
susceptibility alleles has a carcinogenic effect.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Agarwal et al. (1981); Bennion and Li (1976); Goedde et al. (1986);
Goedde et al. (1979); Harada et al. (1981); Harada et al. (1978);
Reed  (1977); Yoshida  (1984); Yoshida et al. (1983)
REFERENCE 1. Agarwal, D. P.; Harada, S.; Goedde, H. W.: Racial differences
in biological sensitivity to ethanol: the role of alcohol dehydrogenase
and aldehyde dehydrogenase isozymes. Alcoholism 5: 12-16, 1981.

2. Agarwal, D. P.; Meier-Tackmann, D.; Harada, S.; Goedde, H. W.;
Du, R.: Mechanism of biological sensitivity to alcohol: inherited
deficiency of aldehyde dehydrogenase isoenzyme I in Mongoloids. (Abstract) Sixth
Int. Cong. Hum. Genet., Jerusalem 102 only, 1981.

3. Bennion, L. J.; Li, T.-K.: Alcohol metabolism in American Indians
and whites: lack of racial differences in metabolic rate and liver
alcohol dehydrogenase. New Eng. J. Med. 294: 9-13, 1976.

4. Braun, T.; Grzeschik, K. H.; Bober, E.; Singh, S.; Agarwal, D.
P.; Goedde, H. W.: The structural gene for the mitochondrial aldehyde
dehydrogenase maps to human chromosome 12. Hum. Genet. 73: 365-367,
1986.

5. Chai, Y.-G.; Oh, D.-Y.; Chung, E. K.; Kim, G. S.; Kim, L.; Lee,
Y.-S.; Choi, I.-G.: Alcohol and aldehyde dehydrogenase polymorphisms
in men with type I and type II alcoholism. Am. J. Psychiat. 162:
1003-1005, 2005.

6. Chen, C.-C.; Lu, R.-B.; Chen, Y.-C.; Wang, M.-F.; Chang, Y.-C.;
Li, T.-K.; Yin, S.-J.: Interaction between the functional polymorphisms
of the alcohol-metabolism genes in protection against alcoholism. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 65: 795-807, 1999.

7. Chen, C.-H.; Budas, G. R.; Churchill, E. N.; Disatnik, M.-H.; Hurley,
T. D.; Mochly-Rosen, D.: Activation of aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 reduces
ischemic damage to the heart. Science 321: 1493-1495, 2008.

8. Chen, Z.; Foster, M. W.; Zhang, J.; Mao, L.; Rockman, H. A.; Kawamoto,
T.; Kitagawa, K.; Nakayama, K. I.; Hess, D. T.; Stamler, J. S.: An
essential role for mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase in nitroglycerin
bioactivation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 12159-12164, 2005.

9. Crabb, D. W.: Biological markers for increased risk of alcoholism
and for quantitation of alcohol consumption. J. Clin. Invest. 85:
311-315, 1990.

10. Crabb, D. W.; Edenberg, H. J.; Bosron, W. F.; Li, T.-K.: Genotypes
for aldehyde dehydrogenase deficiency and alcohol sensitivity: the
inactive ALDH2*2 allele is dominant. J. Clin. Invest. 83: 314-316,
1989.

11. Ding, J.; Li, S.; Cao, H.; Wu, J.; Gao, C.; Liu, Y.; Zhou, J.;
Chang, J.; Yao, G.: Alcohol dehydrogenase-2 and aldehyde dehydrogenase-2
genotypes, alcohol drinking and the risk for esophageal cancer in
a Chinese population. J. Hum. Genet. 55: 97-102, 2010.

12. Garaycoechea, J. I.; Crossan, G. P.; Langevin, F.; Daly, M.; Arends,
M. J.; Patel, K. J.: Genotoxic consequences of endogenous aldehydes
on mouse haematopoietic stem cell function. Nature 489: 571-575,
2012.

13. Garver, E.; Tu, G.; Cao, Q.-N.; Aini, M.; Zhou, F.; Israel, Y.
: Eliciting the low-activity aldehyde dehydrogenase Asian phenotype
by an antisense mechanism results in an aversion to ethanol. J. Exp.
Med. 194: 571-580, 2001.

14. Goedde, H. W.; Agarwal, D. P.; Fritze, G.; Meier-Tackmann, D.;
Singh, S.; Beckmann, G.; Bhatia, K.; Chen, L. Z.; Fang, B.; Lisker,
R.; Paik, Y. K.; Rothhammer, F.; Saha, N.; Segal, B.; Srivastava,
L. M.; Czeizel, A.: Distribution of ADH-2 and ALDH2 genotypes in
different populations. Hum. Genet. 88: 344-346, 1992.

15. Goedde, H. W.; Agarwal, D. P.; Harada, S.; Meier-Tackmann, D.;
Ruofu, D.; Bienzle, U.; Kroeger, A.; Hussein, L.: Population genetic
studies on aldehyde dehydrogenase isozyme deficiency and alcohol sensitivity. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 35: 769-772, 1983.

16. Goedde, H. W.; Agarwal, D. P.; Harada, S.; Rothhammer, F.; Whittaker,
J. O.; Lisker, R.: Aldehyde dehydrogenase polymorphism in North American,
South American, and Mexican Indian populations. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 38:
395-399, 1986.

17. Goedde, H. W.; Harada, S.; Agarwal, D. P.: Racial differences
in alcohol sensitivity: a new hypothesis. Hum. Genet. 51: 331-334,
1979.

18. Harada, S.; Agarwal, D. P.; Goedde, H. W.: Aldehyde dehydrogenase
deficiency as cause of facial flushing reaction to alcohol in Japanese.
(Letter) Lancet 317: 982 only, 1981. Note: Originally Volume II.

19. Harada, S.; Agarwal, D. P.; Goedde, H. W.: Aldehyde metabolism
and polymorphism of aldehyde dehydrogenase in Japanese. (Abstract) Sixth
Int. Cong. Hum. Genet., Jerusalem 103 only, 1981.

20. Harada, S.; Agarwal, D. P.; Goedde, H. W.: Isozyme variations
in acetaldehyde dehydrogenase (E.C. 1.2.1.3) in human tissues. Hum.
Genet. 44: 181-185, 1978.

21. Harada, S.; Misawa, S.; Agarwal, D. P.; Goedde, H. W.: Liver
alcohol dehydrogenase and aldehyde dehydrogenase in the Japanese:
isozyme variation and its possible role in alcohol intoxication. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 32: 8-15, 1980.

22. Hempel, J.; Kaiser, R.; Jornvall, H.: Mitochondrial aldehyde
dehydrogenase from human liver: primary structure, differences in
relation to the cytosolic enzyme and functional correlations. Europ.
J. Biochem. 153: 13-28, 1985.

23. Hsu, L. C.; Bendel, R. E.; Yoshida, A.: Direct detection of usual
and atypical alleles on the human aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 (ALDH2)
locus. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 41: 996-1001, 1987.

24. Hsu, L. C.; Bendel, R. E.; Yoshida, A.: Genomic structure of
the human mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase gene. Genomics 2:
57-65, 1988.

25. Hsu, L. C.; Tani, K.; Fujiyoshi, T.; Kurachi, K.; Yoshida, A.
: Cloning of cDNAs for human aldehyde dehydrogenases 1 and 2. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 3771-3775, 1985.

26. Hsu, L. C.; Yoshida, A.; Mohandas, T.: Chromosomal assignment
of the genes for human aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) and aldehyde
dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2). (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 40: 656-657,
1985.

27. Impraim, C.; Wang, G.; Yoshida, A.: Structural mutation in a
major human aldehyde dehydrogenase gene results in loss of enzyme
activity. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 34: 837-841, 1982.

28. Kazmierczak, B.; Hennig, Y.; Wanschura, S.; Rogalla, P.; Bartnitzke,
S.; van de Ven, W. J. M.; Bullerdiek, J.: Description of a novel
fusion transcript between HMGI-C, a gene encoding for a member of
the high mobility group proteins, and the mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase
gene. Cancer Res. 55: 6038-6039, 1995.

29. Kim, D.-J.; Choi, I.-G.; Park, B. L.; Lee, B.-C.; Ham, B.-J.;
Yoon, S.; Bae, J. S.; Cheong, H. S.; Shin, H. D.: Major genetic components
underlying alcoholism in Korean population. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17:
854-858, 2008.

30. Langevin, F.; Crossan, G. P.; Rosado, I. V.; Arends, M. J.; Patel,
K. J.: Fancd2 counteracts the toxic effects of naturally produced
aldehydes in mice. Nature 475: 53-58, 2011.

31. Li, Y.; Zhang, D.; Jin, W.; Shao, C.; Yan, P.; Xu, C.; Sheng,
H.; Liu, Y.; Yu, J.; Xie, Y.; Zhao, Y.; Lu, D.; Nebert, D. W.; Harrison,
D. C.; Huang, W.; Jin, L.: Mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase-2
(ALDH2) glu504lys polymorphism contributes to the variation in efficacy
of sublingual nitroglycerin. J. Clin. Invest. 116: 506-511, 2006.

32. Liu, Y.; Yoshimura, K.; Hanaoka, T.; Ohnami, S.; Ohnami, S.; Kohno,
T.; Yoshida, T.; Sakamoto, H.; Sobue, T.; Tsugane, S.: Association
of habitual smoking and drinking with single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) in 40 candidate genes: data from random population-based Japanese
samples. J. Hum. Genet. 50: 62-68, 2005.

33. Luo, X.; Kranzler, H. R.; Zuo, L.; Wang, S.; Schork, N. J.; Gelernter,
J.: Diplotype trend regression analysis of the ADH gene cluster and
the ALDH2 gene: multiple significant associations with alcohol dependence. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 78: 973-987, 2006.

34. Mather, P. B.; Holmes, R. S.: Biochemical genetics of aldehyde
dehydrogenase isoenzymes in the mouse: evidence for stomach and testis-specific
isoenzymes. Biochem. Genet. 22: 981-995, 1984.

35. Muramatsu, T.; Higuchi, S.; Murayama, M.; Matsushita, S.; Hayashida,
M.: Association between alcoholism and the dopamine D4 receptor gene. J.
Med. Genet. 33: 113-115, 1996.

36. Muramatsu, T.; Zu-Cheng, W.; Yi-Ru, F.; Kou-Bao, H.; Heqin, Y.;
Yamada, K.; Higuchi, S.; Harada, S.; Kono, H.: Alcohol and aldehyde
dehydrogenase genotypes and drinking behavior of Chinese living in
Shanghai. Hum. Genet. 96: 151-154, 1995.

37. Oota, H.; Pakstis, A. J.; Bonne-Tamir, B.; Goldman, D.; Grigorenko,
E.; Kajuna, S. L. B.; Karoma, N. J.; Kungulilo, S.; Lu, R.-B.; Odunsi,
K.; Okonofua, F.; Zhukova, O. V.; Kidd, J. R.; Kidd, K. K.: The evolution
and population genetics of the ALDH2 locus: random genetic drift,
selection, and low levels of recombination. Ann. Hum. Genet. 68:
93-109, 2004.

38. Peng, G.-S.; Chen, Y.-C.; Tsao, T.-P.; Wang, M.-F.; Yin, S.-J.
: Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic basis for partial protection
against alcoholism in Asians, heterozygous for the variant ALDH2*2
gene allele. Pharmacogenet. Genomics 17: 845-855, 2007.

39. Peng, G.-S.; Wang, M.-F.; Chen, C.-Y.; Luu, S.-U.; Chou, H.-C.;
Li, T.-K.; Yin, S.-J.: Involvement of acetaldehyde for full protection
against alcoholism by homozygosity of the variant allele of mitochondrial
aldehyde dehydrogenase gene in Asians. Pharmacogenetics 9: 463-476,
1999.

40. Reed, T. E.: Three heritable responses to alcohol in a heterogeneous
randomly mated mouse strain: inferences for humans. J. Studies Alcohol 38:
618-632, 1977.

41. Roychoudhury, A. K.; Nei, M.: Human Polymorphic Genes: World
Distribution.  New York: Oxford Univ. Press (pub.)  1988.

42. Schwitters, S. Y.; Johnson, R. C.; Johnson, S. B.; Ahern, F. M.
: Familial resemblances in flushing following alcohol use. Behav.
Genet. 12: 349-352, 1982.

43. Shibuya, A.; Ikuta, T.; Hsu, L. C.; Yoshida, A.: Genotypes of
alcohol metabolizing enzymes in Japanese with alcoholic liver diseases:
a strong association of the usual Caucasian type aldehyde dehydrogenase
allele (ALDH2) with the disease. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 43:
A201, 1988.

44. Shibuya, A.; Yoshida, A.: Frequency of the atypical aldehyde
dehydrogenase-2 gene (ALDH2/2) in Japanese and Caucasians. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 43: 741-743, 1988.

45. Singh, S.; Fritze, G.; Fang, B.; Harada, S.; Paik, Y. K.; Eckey,
R.; Agarwal, D. P.; Goedde, H. W.: Inheritance of mitochondrial aldehyde
dehydrogenase: genotyping in Chinese, Japanese and South Korean families
reveals dominance of the mutant allele. Hum. Genet. 83: 119-121,
1989.

46. Thomasson, H. R.; Edenberg, H. J.; Crabb, D. W.; Mai, X.-L.; Jerome,
R. E.; Li, T.-K.; Wang, S.-P.; Lin, Y.-T.; Lu, R.-B.; Yin, S.-J.:
Alcohol and aldehyde dehydrogenase genotypes and alcoholism in Chinese
men. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 48: 677-681, 1991.

47. Wall, T. L.; Horn, S. M.; Johnson, M. L.; Smith, T. L.; Carr,
L. G.: Hangover symptoms in Asian Americans with variations in the
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH2) gene. J. Stud. Alcohol 61: 13-17,
2000.

48. Womack, J. E.: Personal Communication. College Station, Texas
2/26/1990.

49. Xiao, Q.; Weiner, H.; Crabb, D. W.: The mutation in the mitochondrial
aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH2) gene responsible for alcohol-induced
flushing increases turnover of the enzyme tetramers in a dominant
fashion. J. Clin. Invest. 98: 2027-2032, 1996.

50. Xiao, Q.; Weiner, H.; Johnston, T.; Crabb, D. W.: The aldehyde
dehydrogenase ALDH2*2 allele exhibits dominance over ALDH2*1 in transduced
HeLa cells. J. Clin. Invest. 96: 2180-2186, 1995.

51. Yao, L.; Fan, P.; Arolfo, M.; Jiang, Z.; Olive, M. F.; Zablocki,
J.; Sun, H.-L.; Chu, N.; Lee, J.; Kim, H.-Y.; Leung, K.; Shryock,
J.; Blackburn, B.; Diamond, I.: Inhibition of aldehyde dehydrogenase-2
suppresses cocaine seeking by generating THP, a cocaine use-dependent
inhibitor of dopamine synthesis. Nature Med. 16: 1024-1028, 2010.
Note: Erratum: Nature Med. 17: 229 only, 2011.

52. Yokoyama, M.; Yokoyama, A.; Yokoyama, T.; Funazu, K.; Hamana,
G.; Kondo, S.; Yamashita, T.; Nakamura, H.: Hangover susceptibility
in relation to aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 genotype, alcohol flushing,
and mean corpuscular volume in Japanese workers. Alcohol Clin. Exp.
Res. 29: 1165-1171, 2005.

53. Yoshida, A.: Determination of aldehyde dehydrogenase phenotypes
using hair roots: re-examination. Hum. Genet. 66: 296-299, 1984.

54. Yoshida, A.; Huang, I.-Y.; Ikawa, M.: Molecular abnormality of
an inactive aldehyde dehydrogenase variant commonly found in Orientals. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 81: 258-261, 1984.

55. Yoshida, A.; Wang, G.; Dave, V.: Determination of genotypes of
human aldehyde dehydrogenase ALDH-2 locus. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 35:
1107-1116, 1983.

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS 
Metabolic:
Increased intoxicating symptoms after alcohol drinking

Skin:
Facial flushing after alcohol intake

Misc:
Oriental type alcohol flushing with abnormal ALDH2

Lab:
Mitochondrial acetaldehyde dehydrogenase;
Delayed oxidation of acetaldehyde;
High Km for NAD;
Low Km foracetaldehyde;
Disulfiram insensitive

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/10/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/6/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/3/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/25/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/24/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/19/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/30/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/29/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/10/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/6/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/28/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/1/2005
John Logan Black, III - updated: 8/8/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/2/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/16/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/29/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/4/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/24/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/30/1998
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 6/12/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED terry: 04/04/2013
alopez: 10/24/2012
terry: 10/10/2012
alopez: 9/7/2011
terry: 9/6/2011
carol: 2/22/2011
wwang: 12/6/2010
ckniffin: 12/3/2010
wwang: 6/21/2010
ckniffin: 3/25/2010
ckniffin: 3/24/2010
wwang: 1/27/2010
ckniffin: 1/19/2010
wwang: 1/15/2010
ckniffin: 12/30/2009
ckniffin: 10/27/2009
alopez: 9/30/2008
terry: 9/29/2008
carol: 7/17/2008
wwang: 7/13/2006
terry: 7/10/2006
carol: 6/21/2006
alopez: 6/13/2006
terry: 6/6/2006
alopez: 5/19/2006
terry: 5/18/2006
carol: 4/4/2006
mgross: 10/6/2005
terry: 9/28/2005
wwang: 9/1/2005
ckniffin: 9/1/2005
wwang: 8/10/2005
terry: 8/8/2005
tkritzer: 6/8/2004
terry: 6/2/2004
joanna: 3/17/2004
cwells: 1/20/2004
terry: 1/16/2004
mgross: 12/5/2001
terry: 11/29/2001
carol: 4/3/2001
carol: 11/8/1999
terry: 11/4/1999
alopez: 10/26/1999
terry: 9/24/1999
carol: 9/4/1998
dkim: 7/17/1998
dholmes: 5/12/1998
carol: 5/5/1998
terry: 4/30/1998
terry: 12/6/1996
mark: 6/12/1996
mark: 2/26/1996
terry: 2/20/1996
mark: 2/2/1996
terry: 1/26/1996
mark: 10/15/1995
warfield: 3/31/1994
mimadm: 3/11/1994
carol: 1/26/1994
carol: 6/9/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

612087	TITLE *612087 C-TYPE LECTIN DOMAIN FAMILY 2, MEMBER A; CLEC2A
;;PROLIFERATION-INDUCED LYMPHOCYTE-ASSOCIATED RECEPTOR; PILAR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CLEC2A belongs to the CLEC2 family of activation-induced, natural killer
gene complex-encoded C-type lectin-like receptors (Spreu et al., 2007).

CLONING

By database analysis and PCR of a premonocytic leukemia cell line cDNA
library, Spreu et al. (2007) obtained cDNAs for 4 CLEC2A splice
variants. The principal variants, CLEC2A1 and CLEC2A2, contain distinct
terminal exons (exons 5A and 5B, respectively) and encode predicted 174-
and 160-amino acid proteins, respectively. Both contain an N-terminal
cytoplasmic tail, a transmembrane domain, a short stalk region, and a
C-terminal C-type lectin domain (CTLD) with 3 potential N-glycosylation
sites. The CTLD of CLEC2A1 shares 40 to 50% identity with the CTLDs of
other CLEC2 proteins, whereas the final 23 amino acids of the CLEC2A2
CTLD lack homology to other CLEC2 proteins. The 2 shorter CLEC2A
variants, sCLEC2A1 and sCLEC2A2, lack exon 2, which encodes the
transmembrane domain, suggesting they may encode soluble isoforms.
However, sCLEC2A1 and sCLEC2A2 were not detected in supernatants of
transfected 293T or COS-7 cells. RT-PCR analysis revealed CLEC2A
expression predominantly in myeloid cell lines, but not epithelial cell
lines, and in skin and bone marrow. FACS analysis showed surface
expression of CLEC2A1, but not CLEC2A2, on transfected 293T and COS-7
cells.

By sequence analysis of genes encoding C-type lectin domain-containing
proteins on chromosome 12p12-p13, followed by RACE-PCR of spleen cDNA,
Huarte et al. (2008) cloned CLEC2A, which they called PILAR. The deduced
174-amino acid protein contains a transmembrane domain and a truncated
C-type lectin domain in its extracellular region. RT-PCR analysis showed
PILAR expression in thymus, small intestine, uterus, testis, and ovary.
PILAR was expressed in B cells and T cells, particularly naive CD8 (see
186910) T cells, but not in natural killer cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Using Western blot and immunoprecipitation analysis, Huarte et al.
(2008) showed that PILAR interacted with CD161 (KLRB1; 602890). RT-PCR
analysis showed that T-cell activation induced transient expression of
PILAR in CD8 T cells, and flow cytometric analysis demonstrated
expression of PILAR on activated CD4 (186940) T cells. Increased
expression of PILAR on antigen-presenting cells enhanced T-cell
proliferation by increasing survival through enhanced expression of
antiapoptotic proteins (e.g., BCLXL; 600039) in a CD161-dependent
manner. PILAR was expressed by 7 to 10% of CD4 T cells from 2 samples of
inflammatory synovial fluid, suggesting a role in joint inflammation
pathogenesis. Huarte et al. (2008) concluded that PILAR has a central
role in modulating the extent of T-cell expansion.

Martick et al. (2008) showed that highly active hammerhead ribozymes are
present in the 3-prime UTRs of rodent Clec2 genes. Using a hammerhead
RNA motif search with relaxed delimitation of the nonconserved regions,
Martick et al. (2008) detected ribozyme sequences in which the invariant
regions, in contrast to the previously identified continuous
hammerheads, occurred as 2 fragments separated by hundreds of
nucleotides. Notably, a fragment pair could assemble to form an active
hammerhead ribozyme structure between the translation termination and
the polyadenylation signals within the 3-prime UTR. Martick et al.
(2008) demonstrated that this hammerhead structure could self-cleave
both in vitro and in vivo, and it was able to reduce protein expression
in mouse cells. Martick et al. (2008) concluded that an unrecognized
mechanism of postranscriptional gene regulation involving association of
discontinuous ribozyme sequences within an mRNA may be modulating the
expression of several CLEC2 proteins that function in bone remodeling
and the immune response of several mammals.

GENE STRUCTURE

Spreu et al. (2007) determined that the CLEC2A gene contains 6 exons,
including 2 alternative terminal exons (exons 5A and 5B), and spans 33.7
kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Spreu et al. (2007) mapped the CLEC2A gene
to chromosome 12p13, between the CLEC2B (603242) and CLEC12A (612088)
genes. Huarte et al. (2008) mapped the CLEC2A gene to chromosome
12p13.31 by genomic sequence analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Huarte, E.; Cubillos-Ruiz, J. R.; Nesbeth, Y. C.; Scarlett, U.
K.; Martinez, D. G.; Engle, X. A.; Rigby, W. F.; Pioli, P. A.; Guyre,
P. M.; Conejo-Garcia, J. R.: PILAR is a novel modulator of human
T-cell expansion. Blood 112: 1259-1268, 2008.

2. Martick, M.; Horan, L. H.; Noller, H. F.; Scott, W. G.: A discontinuous
hammerhead ribozyme embedded in a mammalian messenger RNA. Nature 454:
899-902, 2008.

3. Spreu, J.; Kienle, E. C.; Schrage, B.; Steinle, A.: CLEC2A: a
novel, alternatively spliced and skin-associated member of the NKC-encoded
AICL-CD69-LLT1 family. Immunogenetics 59: 903-912, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/8/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/12/2008

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/29/2008

EDITED mgross: 01/09/2009
terry: 1/8/2009
alopez: 9/12/2008
mgross: 5/29/2008

141800	TITLE +141800 HEMOGLOBIN--ALPHA LOCUS 1; HBA1
;;3-PRIME @ALPHA-GLOBIN GENE;;
MINOR ALPHA-GLOBIN LOCUS
METHEMOGLOBINEMIA, ALPHA-GLOBIN TYPE, INCLUDED;;
ERYTHREMIA, ALPHA-GLOBIN TYPE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The alpha and beta loci determine the structure of the 2 types of
polypeptide chains in the tetrameric adult hemoglobin, Hb A,
alpha-2/beta-2. The alpha locus also determines a polypeptide chain, the
alpha chain, in fetal hemoglobin (alpha-2/gamma-2), in hemoglobin
A2(alpha-2/delta-2), and in embryonic hemoglobin (alpha-2/epsilon-2).
The number of normal alpha genes (3, 2, 1 or none) in Asian cases of
alpha-thalassemia (604131) results in 4 different alpha-thalassemia
syndromes (Kan et al., 1976). Three normal alpha genes gives a silent
carrier state. Two normal alpha genes results in microcytosis (so-called
heterozygous alpha-thalassemia). One normal alpha gene results in
microcytosis and hemolysis (so-called Hb H disease, 613978). No normal
alpha gene results in 'homozygous alpha-thalassemia' manifested as fatal
hydrops fetalis.

MAPPING

By studies of somatic cell hybrids, Deisseroth et al. (1976) showed that
the alpha and beta loci are on different chromosomes.

Deisseroth et al. (1977) combined the methods of somatic cell
hybridization and DNA-cDNA hybridization to establish assignment of the
alpha-globin locus to chromosome 16. This represents an extension of the
cell hybridization method permitting mapping of genes that are not
functional in the cultured cell. Deisseroth and Hendrick (1978)
confirmed the assignment of the alpha locus to chromosome 16 by means of
cotransfer of this gene with the human APRT gene, known to be on 16 (see
102600), into mouse erythroleukemia cells. (The APRT gene is on the long
arm of chromosome 16.)

Weitkamp et al. (1977) presented data concerning linkage of the alpha
and beta loci to 34 marker loci. Data on alpha-thalassemia, combined
with those on the Hopkins-2 variant, excluded linkage of alpha and
haptoglobin (140100) at a recombination fraction less than 0.15.

On the basis of findings in a case of partial trisomy 16, Wainscoat et
al. (1981) concluded that the alpha-globin genes are on segment
16pter-p12. By combining somatic cell hybridization with a cDNA probe in
the study of a cell line with reciprocal translocation between 16q and
11q, Koeffler et al. (1981) showed that the alpha-globin genes are on
the short arm of 16. Gerhard et al. (1981) used an improved method of in
situ hybridization to confirm the assignment of the alpha-globin cluster
to chromosome 16p. The evidence on the precise location of HBAC was
conflicting, with assignments from 16p13.33 to 16p13.11 (Reeders, 1986).
The fact that adult polycystic kidney disease (APKD; 173900) is proximal
to HBAC and is on the 5-prime side of HBAC appeared to indicate that the
order is 16cen--APKD--5-prime HBZ1--HBA1--3-prime HVR--pter. (3-prime
HVR is the hypervariable region used in mapping APKD to 16p.)

On the basis of the findings in a fetus with an unbalanced translocation
involving 16p, Breuning et al. (1987) concluded that the HBA cluster is
distal to PGP (172280).

By a combination of in situ hybridization, Southern blot analysis, and
linkage analysis using the fragile site 16p12.3 and translocation
breakpoints within band 16p13.1, Simmers et al. (1987) mapped the
alpha-globin gene complex to 16pter-p13.2.

CYTOGENETICS

Buckle et al. (1988) described a child in whom cytogenetic analysis
indicated monosomy for 16pter-p13.3. DNA studies showed that the patient
had not inherited either maternal alpha-globin allele. The child had the
alpha-thalassemia trait as well as moderate mental retardation and
dysmorphic features. They determined that the gene is located in the
16pter-p13.3 segment. After reviewing earlier data placing the
alpha-globin cluster slightly more proximal, they concluded that the
findings in this child may be more reliable.

GENE STRUCTURE

Orkin (1978) identified alpha-globin gene fragments in restriction
endonuclease digests of total DNA after electrophoresis by hybridization
with P32-labeled cDNA probes. The data indicated that the alpha genes
occur in duplicate and that the 2 copies lie close together. Thus direct
physical evidence was provided for the duplication deduced from the
findings with mutant alpha chains and with the alpha-thalassemias and
the kinetics of hybridization in solution. The 2 alpha chains lie about
3.7 kilobases apart.

Leder et al. (1978) presented evidence that the alpha and beta genes of
all adult mammalian hemoglobins have 2 intervening sequences at
analogous positions.

GENE FUNCTION

Straub et al. (2012) reported a model for the regulation of nitric oxide
(NO) signaling by demonstrating that hemoglobin alpha, encoded by the
HBA1 and HBA2 (141850) genes, is expressed in human and mouse arterial
endothelial cells and enriched at the myoendothelial junction, where it
regulates the effects of NO on vascular reactivity. Notably, this
function is unique to hemoglobin alpha and is abrogated by its genetic
depletion. Mechanistically, endothelial hemoglobin alpha heme iron in
the Fe(3+) state permits NO signaling, and this signaling is shut off
when hemoglobin alpha is reduced to the Fe(2+) state by endothelial
cytochrome b5 reductase 3 (CYB5R3; 613213). Genetic and pharmacologic
inhibition of CYB5R3 increased NO bioactivity in small arteries. Straub
et al. (2012) concluded that their data revealed a mechanism by which
the regulation of the intracellular hemoglobin alpha oxidation state
controls nitric oxide synthase (NOS; see 163729) signaling in
nonerythroid cells. The authors suggested that this model may be
relevant to heme-containing globins in a broad range of NOS-containing
somatic cells.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Andersen et al. (2012) presented the crystal structure of the dimeric
porcine haptoglobin (140100)-hemoglobin complex determined at
2.9-angstrom resolution. This structure revealed that haptoglobin
molecules dimerize through an unexpected beta-strand swap between 2
complement control protein (CCP) domains, defining a new fusion CCP
domain structure. The haptoglobin serine protease domain forms extensive
interactions with both the alpha- and beta-subunits of hemoglobin,
explaining the tight binding between haptoglobin and hemoglobin. The
hemoglobin-interacting region in the alpha-beta dimer is highly
overlapping with the interface between the 2 alpha-beta dimers that
constitute the native hemoglobin tetramer. Several hemoglobin residues
prone to oxidative modification after exposure to heme-induced reactive
oxygen species are buried in the haptoglobin-hemoglobin interface, thus
showing a direct protective role of haptoglobin. The haptoglobin loop
previously shown to be essential for binding of haptoglobin-hemoglobin
to the macrophage scavenger receptor CD163 (605545) protrudes from the
surface of the distal end of the complex, adjacent to the associated
hemoglobin alpha-subunit. Small-angle x-ray scattering measurements of
human haptoglobin-hemoglobin bound to the ligand-binding fragment of
CD163 confirmed receptor binding in this area, and showed that the rigid
dimeric complex can bind 2 receptors.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Wilson et al. (1977) described a possible nucleotide polymorphism in the
untranslated 3-prime region of the alpha-globin gene and suggested that
the heterogeneity is related to the existence of 2 alpha gene loci.

Musumeci et al. (1978) pointed out that the combination of
alpha-thalassemia and beta-thalassemia leads to less severe clinical
expression of homozygous beta-thalassemia. The rarity of a chromosome 16
with both alpha loci deleted (as demonstrated by the restriction
endonuclease mapping technique of Southern) explains the rarity of
severe forms of alpha-thalassemia in Africans, e.g., Hb H disease, which
requires loss of 3 alpha loci and homozygous alpha-thalassemia which
requires loss of 4 alpha loci (Dozy et al., 1979).

By restriction endonuclease mapping, Goossens et al. (1980) identified
12 persons heterozygous for a chromosome carrying 3 alpha genes. There
were no hematologic abnormalities. The frequency was 0.0036 in American
Blacks and 0.05 in Greek Cypriots. They had previously shown a frequency
of 0.16 for the single alpha-globin locus in black Americans. The single
locus had a frequency of 0.18 in Sardinians, but none of 125 Sardinians
had a triple alpha locus, suggesting that the former had a selective
advantage. Greek Cypriots have a frequency of 0.07 for the single alpha
locus. Among 645 Japanese subjects studied, Nakashima et al. (1990)
found 10 persons heterozygous for a chromosome with the triplicated
alpha-globin locus. Thus, the frequency of the triplicate alpha locus
was 0.008 in this population, while that of the single alpha-locus,
i.e., the alpha-thalassemia-2 gene, may be lower than 0.0008. Analysis
of haplotypes suggested that the triple alpha loci may have had multiple
origins. Nakashima et al. (1990) commented on the fact that in Melanesia
the frequency of the triplicated genotype is about the same (Flint et
al., 1986) as in Japan, whereas the frequency of the single alpha gene
is much higher, compatible with a selective advantage vis-a-vis malaria.
Liebhaber et al. (1981) found identity of the alpha-1-globin genes from
an Asian and a Caucasian. Furthermore, the alpha-1 and alpha-2 genes
have a much higher degree of homology than would be predicted from the
timing of the duplication before the bird-mammal divergence (about 300
Myr ago). Liebhaber et al. (1981) presented this as evidence for the
existence of mechanisms for suppression of allelic polymorphisms and for
exchange of genetic information within the alpha-globin gene complex.
See 142200 for a discussion of gene conversion in relation to a
comparably surprising homology of the 2 gamma-globin genes.

Lehmann and Carrell (1984) suggested the use of the following
nomenclature for alpha-thalassemias based on the number of alpha-globin
genes that are missing or abnormal: 1-alpha-thalassemia (silent type);
2-alpha-thalassemia, trans or cis (thalassemia trait);
3-alpha-thalassemia (Hb H disease); and 4-alpha-thalassemia (Hb Bart's
hydrops fetalis). In this scheme, homozygous Hb Constant Spring is a
2-alpha-thalassemia which, if combined with a cis 2-alpha-thalassemia
heterozygous Hb Constant Spring, gives a 3-alpha-thalassemia and results
in Hb H disease. Lehmann and Carrell (1984) also proposed that the 2
alpha-globin genes be designated as 5-prime (now alpha-2) and 3-prime
(now alpha-1). Liebhaber and Cash (1985) described a method for
identifying whether the alpha-1 or alpha-2 locus is the site of
particular alpha-globin mutations. Rubin and Kan (1985) described a
sensitive method for determining how many alpha-globin genes are
present. It had the advantages of not requiring restriction enzyme
digestion and gel electrophoresis and using the much more stable isotope
(35)S rather than 32(P) for labeling. Only a small sample of DNA is
needed. Application of the approach to diagnosis of Down syndrome was
proposed. Assum et al. (1985) added a fourth restriction site
polymorphism in the alpha-globin gene cluster. Compared to the
beta-globin cluster, the alpha-globin cluster seemed to show a poverty
of DNA polymorphism; however, Higgs et al. (1986) demonstrated a
remarkable degree of DNA polymorphism in the alpha-globin gene cluster.
In addition, the RFLP haplotype is associated with hypervariable regions
of DNA.

Pseudo-alpha-1 (HBAP1), a pseudogene, is defective in several respects,
including splice junction mutations and premature termination codons.
Hardison et al. (1986) identified a previously undetected pseudogene in
the alpha-globin cluster. It was not detected by hybridization studies
but was found only on sequence analysis. Hardison et al. (1986)
suggested that 'divergent copies of a large number of genes may comprise
a substantial fraction of the slowly renaturing DNA of mammalian
genomes.' The newly detected pseudogene, which will be symbolized HBAP2,
is only 65 bp 3-prime to the polyadenylation site of zeta-1 (HBZP). The
sequence is: 5-prime--HBZ--HBZP--HBAP2--HBA2--HBA1--3-prime. (The
functional Hba gene of the mouse is on chromosome 11, but pseudogenes
are dispersed to other chromosomes (e.g., Hba-ps3 to mouse chromosome
15) (Popp et al., 1981; Leder et al., 1981; Eicher and Lee, 1991).)

Vandenplas et al. (1987) described a new form of alpha-0 thalassemia in
a South African family ascertained through a case of Hb H disease. A
novel deletion of 22.8-23.7 kb of DNA removed 3 pseudogenes as well as
the alpha-2 and alpha-1 genes. Since the alpha-2-globin gene encodes the
majority of alpha-globin, a thalassemic mutation of the alpha-1-globin
gene would be expected to result in a less severe loss of alpha-chain
synthesis.

Moi et al. (1987) described an initiation codon mutation, AUG-to-GUG, in
the alpha-1-globin gene. As predicted, the degree of interference with
alpha-globin synthesis was less in this mutation than in the mutation in
the initiation codon of the alpha-2-globin gene (see 141850).

Hill et al. (1987) described a unique nondeletion form of Hb H disease
in Papua New Guinea: all 4 alpha genes were intact. Hill et al. (1987)
commented on the striking difference in the hemoglobinopathies that
occur in Southeast Asia and in Melanesia. In the former area, Hb E, Hb
Constant Spring, and the Southeast Asian form of deletion
alpha-0-thalassemia are all common, whereas these forms have never been
found in Melanesians or Polynesians.

Jarman and Higgs (1988) identified a highly polymorphic region
approximately 100 kb upstream of the alpha-globin genes and referred to
it as 5-prime HVR. This is a valuable genetic marker for 16p. Higgs et
al. (1989) gave a comprehensive review of the molecular genetics of the
alpha-globin gene cluster, including its diseases.

Hatton et al. (1990) presented evidence for the existence of an
alpha-locus control region (LCRA; 152422). This would be comparable to
the beta-LCR which controls expression of the beta-like genes; see
152424. Liebhaber et al. (1990) identified an individual with
alpha-thalassemia in whom structurally normal alpha-globin genes were
inactivated in cis by a discrete de novo 35-kb deletion located about 30
kb 5-prime to the alpha-globin gene cluster. They concluded that the
deletion inactivates expression of the alpha-globin genes by removing
one or more of the previously identified upstream regulatory sequences
that are critical to expression of the alpha-globin genes.

Hemoglobinopathies of alpha-globin can result from missense mutations at
either of the 2 alpha-globin loci, HBA1 or HBA2. Since the normal HBA1
and HBA2 genes encode an identical alpha globin, these mutants cannot be
assigned to their specific loci on the basis of protein structural
analysis. A clue to the encoding locus, HBA1 versus HBA2, is provided by
the relative concentration of the alpha-globin mutant in the erythrocyte
based on the 2- to 3-fold higher level of expression of the HBA2 gene
(Liebhaber et al., 1986). However, since variables such as protein
stability, efficiency of hemoglobin tetramer formation, and other
factors can affect the steady-state levels of globin mutants, a
definitive locus assignment must be directly determined. Cash et al.
(1989) quantitated the expression of 2 alpha-globin structural mutants
found in the Caribbean basin, Fort de France and Spanish Town, and
showed that they are HBA1 and HBA2 mutants, respectively, on the basis
of low or high expression.

Wilkie et al. (1991) described major polymorphic length variation in the
terminal region of 16p (16p13.3) by physically linking the alpha-globin
locus with probes to telomere-associated repeats. They found 3 alleles
in which the alpha-globin genes lie 170 kb, 350 kb, or 430 kb from the
telomere. The 2 most common alleles were found to contain different
terminal segments, starting 145 kb distal to the alpha-globin genes.
Beyond this boundary these alleles are nonhomologous, yet each contains
sequences related to other, different chromosome termini. This
chromosome-size polymorphism probably arose by occasional exchanges
between the subtelomeric regions of nonhomologous chromosomes. Wilkie et
al. (1991) raised the possibility that the high frequency of trisomy 16
may be related to this nonhomology of the 2 common 16pter alleles in
their subtelomeric region.

Huisman et al. (1996) found that of the 141 codons of the alpha-globin
genes (there are no sequence differences between the coding regions of
the alpha-2 and alpha-1 genes), as many as 99 have been found to be
mutated; for several, 3 or 4 mutations have been discovered, while 5
mutations are known for codons 23, 75, and 94, and 6 for codon 141. The
mutations appear to occur at random; thus, either one of the 3 bases are
replaced in the 199 known alpha-globin gene mutants.

The suggestion that alpha(+)-thalassemia has achieved a high frequency
in some populations as a result of selection by malaria is based on a
number of epidemiologic studies. In the southwest Pacific region, there
is a striking geographic correlation between the frequency of
alpha(+)-thalassemia and the endemicity of Plasmodium falciparum. Allen
et al. (1997) undertook a prospective case-control study of children
with severe malaria on the north coast of Papua New Guinea, where
malaria transmission is intense and alpha(+)-thalassemia affects more
than 90% of the population (homozygotes comprise approximately 55% and
heterozygotes 37% of the population). Compared with normal children, the
risk of having severe malaria was 0.40 in alpha(+)-thalassemia
homozygotes and 0.66 in heterozygotes. Unexpectedly, the risk of
hospital admission with infections other than malaria also was reduced
to a similar degree in homozygotes (0.36) and heterozygotes (0.63). This
clinical study demonstrated that a malaria resistance gene protects
against disease caused by infections other than malaria. A reduction in
mortality greater than that attributable directly to malaria had been
observed after the prevention of malaria by insecticides,
chemoprophylaxis, and insecticide-impregnated bed nets. Previous
observations that direct malaria mortality cannot account for observed
hemoglobin S gene frequencies suggest that the findings of this study
may apply equally to other malaria resistance genes.

Fung et al. (1999) reported 3 cases of homozygous alpha-thalassemia who
survived beyond the newborn period, all with hypospadias. Review of the
literature identified 2 additional cases. Fung et al. (1999) suggested
that the hypospadias may have been secondary to the in utero edema
leading to failure of fusion of urogenital folds or due to defect or
deletion of another gene at 16p13.3.

For a review of hydrops fetalis caused by alpha-thalassemia, see Chui
and Waye (1998).

From work on the mouse model of alpha-thalassemia, Leder et al. (1999)
demonstrated that a normal beta-globin allele can act as a modifying
gene ameliorating the severity of alpha-thalassemia. They found that the
phenotype of alpha-thalassemia was strongly influenced by the genetic
background in which the mutation resided; when both mutant genes were on
a chromosome derived from strain 129, the phenotype was severe, whereas
it was mild when the gene was on a 129 chromosome and a C57BL/6
chromosome. Linkage mapping indicated that the modifying gene is very
tightly linked to the beta-globin locus (lod score = 13.3). Furthermore,
the severity of the phenotype correlated with the size of
beta-globin-containing inclusion bodies, which accumulate in red blood
cells and likely accelerate their destruction. The beta-major globin
chains encoded by the 2 strains differed by 3 amino acids, one of which
is a glycine-to-cysteine substitution at position 13. The cys13 should
be available for interchain disulfide bridging and consequent
aggregation between excess beta chains. This normal polymorphic
variation between murine beta-globin chains could account for the
modifying action of the unlinked beta-globin locus. Here, the variation
in severity of the phenotype would not depend on a change in the ratio
between alpha and beta chains but on the chemical nature of the normal
beta chain, which is in excess. This work also indicated that modifying
genes can be normal variants that, absent an apparent physiologic
rationale, may be difficult to identify on the basis of structure alone.

De Gobbi et al. (2006) identified a pathogenetic mechanism underlying a
variant form of the inherited blood disorder alpha-thalassemia.
Association studies of affected individuals from Melanesia localized the
disease trait to the telomeric region of human chromosome 16, which
includes the alpha-globin gene cluster, but no molecular defects were
detected by conventional approaches. After resequencing and using a
combination of chromatin immunoprecipitation and expression analysis on
a tiled oligonucleotide array, De Gobbi et al. (2006) identified a
gain-of-function regulatory single-nucleotide polymorphism (rSNP)
(141800.0218) in a nongenic region between the alpha-globin genes and
their upstream regulatory elements. The rSNP creates a new promoter-like
element that interferes with normal activation of all downstream
alpha-like globin genes. De Gobbi et al. (2006) concluded that their
work illustrates a strategy for distinguishing between neutral and
functionally important rSNPs, and it also identifies a pathogenetic
mechanism that could potentially underlie other genetic diseases.

Schoenfelder et al. (2010) found that mouse Hbb and Hba associated with
hundreds of active genes from nearly all chromosomes in nuclear foci
that they called 'transcription factories.' The 2 globin genes
preferentially associated with a specific and partially overlapping
subset of active genes. Schoenfelder et al. (2010) also noted that
expression of the Hbb locus is dependent upon Klf1 (600599), while
expression of the Hba locus is only partially dependent on Klf1.
Immunofluorescence analysis of mouse erythroid cells showed that most
Klf1 localized to the cytoplasm and that nuclear Klf1 was present in
discrete sites that overlapped with RNAII foci. Klf1 knockout in mouse
erythroid cells specifically disrupted the association of Klf1-regulated
genes within the Hbb-associated network. Klf1 knockout more weakly
disrupted interactions within the specific Hba network. Schoenfelder et
al. (2010) concluded that transcriptional regulation involves a complex
3-dimensional network rather than factors acting on single genes in
isolation.

N.B.: Alpha-globin variants for which it is unknown whether HBA1 or HBA2
is involved have arbitrarily been included in this entry. Carver and
Kutlar (1995) listed 191 alpha-globin variants as of January 1995. The
syllabus by Huisman et al. (1996) listed 199 alpha-chain hemoglobin
variants as of January 1996. These included single-base mutations in the
alpha-2 and alpha-1 genes as well as 2-base mutations. Not included in
their syllabus were deletions in mutations that result in
alpha-thalassemia, even if such a change (point mutation or frameshift)
occurred in one of the coding regions of the gene. Information about the
alpha-thalassemias was provided by Higgs et al. (1989).

HISTORY

Gandini et al. (1977) concluded, incorrectly as it turned out, that the
alpha loci are on the long arm of chromosome 4 (4q28-q34). The
conclusion was based on a finding of excessive synthesis of alpha chains
in patients with duplication of this region.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HEMOGLOBIN AICHI
HBA1, HIS50ARG

See Harano et al. (1984) and Baudin et al. (1987).

.0002
HEMOGLOBIN ALBANY-GEORGIA
HEMOGLOBIN ALBANY-SUMA
HBA1, LYS11ASN

This was found in a clinically normal black female in Albany, Georgia
(Webber et al., 1983). See also Shimasaki et al. (1983).

.0003
HEMOGLOBIN ANANTHARAJ
HBA1, LYS11GLU

See Pootrakul et al. (1975).

.0004
HEMOGLOBIN ANN ARBOR
HBA1, LEU80ARG

See Adams et al. (1972) and Adams (1974).

.0005
HEMOGLOBIN ARYA
HBA1, ASP47ASN

See Rahbar et al. (1975).

.0006
HEMOGLOBIN ATAGO
HBA1, ASP85TYR

See Fujiwara (1970) and Fujiwara et al. (1971).

.0007
HEMOGLOBIN ATTLEBORO
HBA1, SER138PRO

See McDonald et al. (1990).

.0008
HEMOGLOBIN AZTEC
HBA1, MET76THR

See Shelton et al. (1985).

.0009
HEMOGLOBIN BARI
HBA1, HIS45GLN

See Marinucci et al. (1980).

.0010
HEMOGLOBIN BEIJING
HBA1, LYS16ASN

See Liang et al. (1982).

.0011
HEMOGLOBIN BIBBA
HBA1, LEU136PRO

See Kleihauer et al. (1968). (This is actually an allelic variant of the
HBA2 gene; see 141850.0030.)

.0012
HEMOGLOBIN BOURMEDES
HBA1, PRO37ARG

See Dahmane-Arbane et al. (1987).

.0014
HEMOGLOBIN BROUSSAIS
HEMOGLOBIN J (BROUSSAIS);;
HEMOGLOBIN TAGAWA I
HBA1, LYS90ASN

See de Traverse et al. (1966), Yanase et al. (1968), Vella et al.
(1970), and Fleming et al. (1978).

.0015
HEMOGLOBIN CATONSVILLE
HBA1, INS GLU, PRO37/GLU/THR38

See Virshup et al. (1988). Moo-Penn et al. (1989) identified insertion
of a glutamic acid residue between proline-37 and threonine-38 in an
unstable hemoglobin variant. The PCR-amplified fragment of the variant
gene showed insertion of a GAA codon. In the normal alpha-globin gene
cluster, GAG is the codon for glutamic acid. Moo-Penn et al. (1989)
suggested that this mutation may have resulted from nonhomologous
nonallelic gene conversion.

.0016
HEMOGLOBIN CHAD
HBA1, GLU23LYS

See Boyer et al. (1968).

.0017
HEMOGLOBIN CHAPEL HILL
HBA1, ASP74GLY

See Orringer et al. (1976).

.0018
HEMOGLOBIN CHESAPEAKE
HBA1, ARG92LEU

See Clegg et al. (1966) and Harano et al. (1983). Polycythemia is the
only clinical feature. This was the first polycythemia-producing variant
to be described (Charache et al., 1966).

.0019
HEMOGLOBIN CHIAPAS
HBA1, PRO114ARG

See Jones et al. (1968).

.0020
HEMOGLOBIN CHICAGO
HBA1, LEU136MET

See Bowman et al. (1986).

.0021
HEMOGLOBIN CHONGQING
HBA1, LEU2ARG

See Zeng et al. (1984).

.0022
HEMOGLOBIN CONTALDO
HBA1, HIS103ARG

Unstable hemoglobin due to disruption of hydrogen bond between alpha 103
(his) and beta 108 (asn) (Sciarratta et al., 1984).

.0023
HEMOGLOBIN CORDELE
HBA1, ASP47ALA

See Nakatsuji et al. (1984).

.0024
HEMOGLOBIN DAGESTAN
HBA1, LYS60GLU

See Spivak et al. (1981) and Lacombe et al. (1987).

.0025
HEMOGLOBIN DALLAS
HBA1, ASN97LYS

See Dysert et al. (1982).

.0026
HEMOGLOBIN DANESHGAH-TEHRAN
HBA1, HIS72ARG

See Rahbar et al. (1973) and de Weinstein et al. (1985).

.0027
HEMOGLOBIN DENMARK HILL
HBA1, PRO95ALA

See Wiltshire et al. (1972).

.0028
HEMOGLOBIN DUAN
HBA1, ASP75ALA

See Liang et al. (1981, 1988).

.0029
HEMOGLOBIN DUNN
HBA1, ASP6ASN

See Jue et al. (1979) and Baklouti et al. (1988).

.0030
HEMOGLOBIN ETOBICOKE
HBA1, SER84ARG

See Crookston et al. (1969) and Headlee et al. (1983).

.0031
HEMOGLOBIN EVANSTON
HBA1, TRP14ARG

Honig et al. (1982) first described Hb Evanston in 2 black families. See
also Moo-Penn et al. (1983).

Harteveld et al. (2004) found this rare variant alone and in the
presence of common alpha-thalassemia deletions in 3 independent Asian
cases.

.0032
HEMOGLOBIN FERNDOWN
HBA1, ASP6VAL

See Lee-Potter et al. (1981).

.0033
HEMOGLOBIN FONTAINEBLEAU
HBA1, ALA21PRO

Wajcman et al. (1989) found this substitution in an Italian family. The
substitution produced no change in the stability or oxygen binding
properties of the hemoglobin molecule. The electrophoretic properties
were, furthermore, identical to those of Hb A, with the exception of
isoelectric focusing in which the variant migrated like Hb A1c. Hb
J(Nyanza), another substitution at position alpha-21, likewise causes no
hematologic disorder.

.0034
HEMOGLOBIN FORT DE FRANCE
HBA1, HIS45ARG

See Braconnier et al. (1977). Cash et al. (1989) confirmed that this is
a mutant of the HBA1 gene.

.0035
HEMOGLOBIN G (AUDHALI)
HBA1, GLU23VAL

See Marengo-Rowe et al. (1968).

.0037
HEMOGLOBIN G (FORT WORTH)
HEMOGLOBIN FORT WORTH
HBA1, GLU27GLY

This variant was described in 2 black families. Unusually low (5%)
concentration was found in heterozygotes, perhaps because of decreased
ability of the abnormal alpha chain to form dimers with beta chains. See
Schneider et al. (1971) and Carstairs et al. (1985).

.0038
HEMOGLOBIN G (GEORGIA)
HBA1, PRO95LEU

See Huisman et al. (1970).

.0039
MOVED TO 141850.0054
.0040
HEMOGLOBIN G (NORFOLK)
HBA1, ASP85ASN

See Cohen-Solal et al. (1975) and Lorkin et al. (1975).

.0041
HEMOGLOBIN G (PEST)
HBA1, ASP74ASN

Hb G (Pest) and Hb J (Buda) (141850.0008), both alpha-chain mutants,
occurred together in a Hungarian male with erythrocytosis. The
occurrence of some normal Hb A in this man showed the existence of at
least 2 alpha loci. See Brimhall et al. (1970, 1974) and Hollan et al.
(1972). Using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify selectively
alpha-1 and alpha-2-globin cDNAs, Mamalaki et al. (1990) then hybridized
the cDNAs to synthetic oligonucleotides specific for either the normal
or the mutated sequence. Using this approach, the alpha-globin
structural mutants J-Buda and G-Pest were found to be encoded by the
alpha-2 and the alpha-1-globin genes, respectively. The substitution in
G-Pest was a change from GAC to AAC at codon 74.

.0042
HEMOGLOBIN G (TAICHUNG)
HEMOGLOBIN Q;;
HEMOGLOBIN Q (THAILAND);;
HEMOGLOBIN MAHIDOL;;
HEMOGLOBIN ASABARA;;
HEMOGLOBIN KURASHIKI
HBA1, ASP74HIS

See Vella et al. (1958), Gammack et al. (1961), Lie-Injo et al. (1966,
1979); Blackwell and Liu (1970), Pootrakul and Dixon (1970), Lorkin et
al. (1970), Iuchi et al. (1978), and Higgs et al. (1980). Zeng et al.
(1992) demonstrated that the mutation is due to a GAC-to-CAC change in
codon 74 of the HBA1 gene. They developed a simple and accurate method
for diagnosis of the Hb Q (Thailand) variant based on restriction enzyme
analysis.

.0043
HEMOGLOBIN G (WAIMANALO)
HEMOGLOBIN AIDA
HBA1, ASP64ASN

See Blackwell et al. (1973) and Bunn et al. (1978). Schiliro et al.
(1991) found this variant in a Filipino mother and child living in
Sicily. They showed no hematologic abnormalities.

.0044
HEMOGLOBIN GARDEN STATE
HBA1, ALA82ASP

See Winter et al. (1978).

.0045
HEMOGLOBIN GRADY
HEMOGLOBIN DAKAR
HBA1, 3AA INS, 118THR-GLU-PHE119

At the time it was first studied by Huisman et al. (1974), hemoglobin
Grady was unique in having an insertion of threonine-glutamic
acid-phenylalanine between amino acids 118 and 119 of the alpha chain.
Several hemoglobins with deletions were then known (Leiden, Lyon,
Freiburg, Niteroi, Tochigi, St. Antoine, Tours and Gun Hill). Scott et
al. (1981) found no evidence of an extra (fifth) alpha gene. They
argued, therefore, that if, as supposed, Hb Grady arose by unequal
crossing over, the event occurred between alleles rather than between
the separate alpha-1 and alpha-2 loci. The glu-phe-thr insertion is a
repeat of normal residues 116, 117 and 118. See Cleek et al. (1983).
Substitution of glutamine for histidine at alpha 112 was thought to be
the change in hemoglobin Dakar; however, on restudy the hemoglobin was
found to be identical to Hb Grady (Garel et al., 1976).

.0046
HEMOGLOBIN GUANGZHOU
HEMOGLOBIN HANGZHOU
HBA1, ASP64GLY

See Jen and Liu (1987), Zhou et al. (1987), and Li et al. (1990).

.0047
HEMOGLOBIN GUIZHOU
HEMOGLOBIN UTSUNOMIYA
HBA1, PRO77ARG

See Hattori et al. (1985).

.0048
HEMOGLOBIN HANDA
HEMOGLOBIN MUNAKATA
HBA1, LYS90MET

See Harano et al. (1982) and Sugihara et al. (1983).

.0049
HEMOGLOBIN HANDSWORTH
HBA1, GLY18ARG

See Griffiths et al. (1977), Chih-chuan et al. (1981), and Al-Awamy et
al. (1985).

.0050
HEMOGLOBIN HARBIN
HBA1, LYS16MET

See Zeng et al. (1984).

.0051
HEMOGLOBIN HEKINAN
HBA1, GLU27ASP

See Harano et al. (1988). Using dot-blot analysis of amplified DNA with
(32)p-labeled probes, Zhao et al. (1990) located the mutation in codon
27 of the minor alpha-1 globin gene and showed that the change involved
a GAG (glutamic acid)-to-GAT (aspartic acid) mutation. Their patients
were 3 Chinese women from Macau.

In Thailand, Ngiwsara et al. (2004) described 2 unrelated cases of
compound heterozygosity for Hb Hekinan and alpha-thalassemia.

.0052
HEMOGLOBIN HIROSAKI
HBA1, PHE43LEU

See Ohba et al. (1975, 1978).

.0053
HEMOGLOBIN HOBART
HBA1, HIS20ARG

See Fleming et al. (1987).

.0054
HEMOGLOBIN HOPKINS 2
HBA1, HIS112ASP

Fast hemoglobin. See Smith and Torbert (1958), Itano and Robinson
(1960), Bradley et al. (1961), Ostertag et al. (1972), Clegg and
Charache (1978).

.0055
HEMOGLOBIN I
HEMOGLOBIN I (BURLINGTON);;
HEMOGLOBIN I (PHILADELPHIA);;
HEMOGLOBIN I (SKAMANIA);;
HEMOGLOBIN I (TEXAS)
HBA1, LYS16GLU

Fast hemoglobin. Substitution of aspartic acid for lysine at alpha 16
was first reported by Murayama (1962). However, Crick pointed out that
this substitution could not be accomplished by change in one base.
Restudy by Beale and Lehmann (1965) and by Schneider et al. (1966)
showed substitution of glutamic acid for lysine. Hemoglobin I was
thought to show sickling but this has been shown to be due to faulty
technique (Schneider et al., 1967). See Rucknagel et al. (1955),
Schwartz et al. (1957), Itano and Robinson (1959, 1960), Ranney et al.
(1962), O'Brien et al. (1964), Thompson et al. (1965), Schneider et al.
(1966), Bowman and Barnett (1967), Baur (1968), Labossiere and Vella
(1971), Fleming et al. (1978), and Liebhaber et al. (1984). The
hemoglobin I mutation is curious in that the mutation is present in HBA2
(141850.0011) as well as in HBA1.

.0057
HEMOGLOBIN IWATA
HBA1, HIS87ARG

See Shibata et al. (1980) and Liu et al. (1983).

.0058
HEMOGLOBIN J (ABIDJAN)
HBA1, GLY51ASP

See Cabannes et al. (1972).

.0059
HEMOGLOBIN J (ANATOLIA)
HBA1, LYS61THR

See Giordano et al. (1990).

.0060
HEMOGLOBIN J (BIRMINGHAM)
HEMOGLOBIN J (MEERUT)
HBA1, ALA120GLU

See Kamuzora and Lehmann (1974) and Blackwell et al. (1974).

.0062
HEMOGLOBIN J (CAMAGUEY)
HBA1, ARG141GLY

See Martinez et al. (1978). Romero et al. (1995) found this hemoglobin
variant in 3 Spanish families. The original description by Martinez et
al. (1978) was in a Cuban family of Spanish ancestry.

.0063
HEMOGLOBIN J (CAPE TOWN)
HBA1, ARG92GLN

See Botha et al. (1966), Harano et al. (1983), and Lambridis et al.
(1986).

.0064
HEMOGLOBIN J (CUBUJUQUI)
HBA1, ARG141SER

See Saenz et al. (1977) and Moo-Penn et al. (1981).

.0065
HEMOGLOBIN J (HABANA)
HBA1, ALA71GLU

See Colombo et al. (1974) and Ohba et al. (1983).

.0066
HEMOGLOBIN J (KUROSH)
HBA1, ALA19ASP

See Rahbar et al. (1976).

.0067
HEMOGLOBIN J (MEDELLIN)
HBA1, GLY22ASP

See Gottlieb et al. (1964).

.0068
HEMOGLOBIN J (NYANZA)
HBA1, ALA21ASP

See Kendall et al. (1973).

.0070
HEMOGLOBIN J (PARIS 1)
HEMOGLOBIN J (ALJEZUR)
HBA1, ALA12ASP

See Rosa et al. (1966), Trincao et al. (1968), and Marinucci et al.
(1979).

.0071
HEMOGLOBIN J (RAJAPPEN)
HBA1, LYS90THR

See Hyde et al. (1971).

.0072
HEMOGLOBIN J (ROVIGO)
HBA1, ALA53ASP

See Alberti et al. (1974) and Moo-Penn et al. (1978).

.0074
HEMOGLOBIN J (SINGA)
HBA1, ASN78ASP

See Wong et al. (1984).

.0075
HEMOGLOBIN J (SINGAPORE)
HBA1, ASN78ASP AND ALA79GLY

Since no simple frameshift mechanism could be imagined, the possibility
of 2 separate mutations was favored by Blackwell et al. (1972), who
suggested that 2 separate hemoglobins, appropriately called Hb J (Singa)
and Hb J (Pore), will be discovered eventually. Double mutation on the
same chromosome would seem more likely than crossing-over in a compound
heterozygote since the 2 codons involved are contiguous.

.0076
HEMOGLOBIN J (TASHIKUERGAN)
HBA1, ALA19GLU

See Houjun et al. (1984). Li et al. (1990) found this variant in
populations in the Silk Road region of China.

.0077
HEMOGLOBIN J (TONGARIKI)
HBA1, ALA115ASP

See Gajdusek et al. (1967) and Beaven et al. (1972). A homozygous
individual had only anomalous hemoglobin suggesting the existence of
only one alpha locus in Melanesians (Abramson et al., 1970).

.0078
HEMOGLOBIN J (TORONTO)
HBA1, ALA5ASP

See Crookston et al. (1965).

.0079
HEMOGLOBIN JACKSON
HBA1, LYS127ASN

See Moo-Penn et al. (1976).

.0080
HEMOGLOBIN KARACHI
HBA1, ALA5PRO

See Ahmad et al. (1986).

.0081
HEMOGLOBIN KARIYA
HBA1, LYS40GLU

See Harano et al. (1983) and Imai et al. (1989).

.0082
HEMOGLOBIN KAWACHI
HBA1, PRO44ARG

See Harano et al. (1982).

.0083
HEMOGLOBIN KOELLIKER
HEMOGLOBIN F (KOELLIKER)
HBA1, ARG141DEL

Not a genetic change. The C-terminal amino acid, 141, of the alpha chain
(arginine) is missing, probably from the action of a carboxypeptidase
present in normal plasma. This unusual fast hemoglobin is observed in
persons with hemolysis. The change can occur in fetal hemoglobin also
(Kohne et al., 1977). See Marti et al. (1967) and Schiliro et al.
(1982).

.0084
HEMOGLOBIN KOKURA
HEMOGLOBIN BEILINSON;;
HEMOGLOBIN MICHIGAN-I;;
HEMOGLOBIN MICHIGAN-II;;
HEMOGLOBIN L (GASLINI);;
HEMOGLOBIN TAGAWA II;;
HEMOGLOBIN UMI;;
HEMOGLOBIN MUGINO;;
HEMOGLOBIN YUKUHASHI-2
HBA1, ASP47GLY

See Yamaoka et al. (1960), Ooya et al. (1961), Sumida (1975), and Ohba
et al. (1982). The change is in TP IV (DeVries et al., 1963).

.0086
HEMOGLOBIN L (PERSIAN GULF)
HBA1, GLY57ARG

See Rahbar et al. (1969).

.0087
HEMOGLOBIN LEGNANO
HBA1, ARG141LEU

See Mavilio et al. (1978).

.0088
HEMOGLOBIN LE LAMENTIN
HBA1, HIS20GLN

See Sellaye et al. (1982), Harano et al. (1983), and Malcorra-Azpiazu et
al. (1988).

.0089
HEMOGLOBIN LILLE
HBA1, ASP74ALA

See Djoumessi et al. (1981) and Lu et al. (1984).

.0090
HEMOGLOBIN LOIRE
HBA1, ALA88SER

This variant was discovered in a 10-year-old Algerian boy born in Loire.
The child had erythrocytosis and microcytosis, the latter being due to
iron deficiency (Baklouti et al., 1988).

.0091
HEMOGLOBIN LUXEMBOURG
HBA1, TYR24HIS

Groff et al. (1989) found this substitution in association with mild
hemolytic anemia and increased indirect bilirubinemia in a family
originating from the Netherlands.

.0092
HEMOGLOBIN M (BOSTON)
HEMOGLOBIN GOTHENBURG;;
HEMOGLOBIN M (GOTHENBURG);;
HEMOGLOBIN M (OSAKA);;
HEMOGLOBIN M (KISKUNHALAS)
HBA1, HIS58TYR

The aberrant hemoglobins associated with methemoglobinemia are referred
to as hemoglobin M. Most of the hemoglobin M variants have substitutions
of histidine at alpha 58, alpha 87, beta 63, or beta 92. These 4 amino
acids are critical to the binding of the heme group. The exception is
hemoglobin M (Milwaukee-1). See Gerald et al. (1957), Hansen et al.
(1960), Gerald and Efron (1961), Betke (1962), Hayashi et al. (1964),
Shimizu et al. (1965), Suzuki et al. (1965), Hollan et al. (1967), and
Pulsinelli et al. (1973).

.0093
HEMOGLOBIN M (IWATE)
HEMOGLOBIN M (KANKAKEE);;
HEMOGLOBIN M (OLDENBURG);;
HEMOGLOBIN M (SENDAI)
HBA1, HIS87TYR

Hb Iwate was the first variant hemoglobin found in Japan (Shibata et
al., 1960). Familial cyanosis had been recognized for about 200 years in
the prefecture of Iwate in Honshu, where about 70 affected persons were
identified in the 1950s. It was called 'kuchikuro,' or 'blackmouth.' In
each form of methemoglobinemia, the heme iron is stabilized in the
ferric form. Patients with the Hb M alpha forms are cyanotic at birth;
those with the Hb M beta forms are usually not cyanotic until they are 3
months of age. Horst et al. (1987) showed that the Iwate mutation
involves the alpha-1 globin gene. Specifically, they demonstrated a
CAC-to-TAC mutation in codon 87 of that gene. They showed that the Iwate
mutation can be identified directly on RsaI digestion. See Meyering et
al. (1960), Shibata et al. (1961), Gerald and Efron (1961), Miyaji et
al. (1962), Heller (1962), Heller et al. (1962), Tonz et al. (1962),
Shibata (1964), Tamura (1964), Shimizu et al. (1965), Pik and Tonz
(1966), Maggio et al. (1981), and Mayne et al. (1986).

Ameri et al. (1999) likewise determined that the molecular defect in 2
patients with Hb M (Kankakee) was his87 to tyr in the HBA1 gene. The
proportion of Hb M (Kankakee) observed was higher than that predicted
for an alpha-1-globin variant. They presented evidence suggesting that
the greater-than-expected proportion of Hb M (Kankakee) results from
preferential association of the electronegative beta-globin chains with
the alpha-(M)-globin chains that are more electropositive than normal
alpha-globin chains.

.0094
MOVED TO 141850.0047
.0095
HEMOGLOBIN MATSUE-OKI
HBA1, ASP75ASN

See Ohba et al. (1977) and Yi-Tao et al. (1982).

.0096
HEMOGLOBIN MEMPHIS
HBA1, GLU23GLN

Substitution of glutamine for glutamic acid at alpha 23. A hemoglobin S
homozygote who also carries this abnormal hemoglobin has a mild form of
sickle cell anemia. See Kraus et al. (1965, 1967) and Cooper et al.
(1973).

.0097
HEMOGLOBIN MEXICO
HEMOGLOBIN J;;
HEMOGLOBIN J (MEXICO);;
HEMOGLOBIN J (PARIS 2);;
HEMOGLOBIN UPPSALA
HBA1, GLN54GLU

Fast hemoglobin. See Jones et al. (1963, 1968), Beckman et al. (1966),
Labie and Rosa (1966), Quattrin and Ventruto (1967), Fessas et al.
(1969), and Trabuchet et al. (1982).

.0098
HEMOGLOBIN MILLEDGEVILLE
HBA1, PRO44LEU

See Honig et al. (1980).

.0099
HEMOGLOBIN MIYANO
HBA1, THR41SER

See Ohba et al. (1989).

.0100
HEMOGLOBIN MIZUSHI
HBA1, ASP75GLY

No hematologic abnormality. See Iuchi et al. (1980).

.0101
HEMOGLOBIN MOABIT
HBA1, LEU86ARG

See Knuth et al. (1979).

.0104
HEMOGLOBIN NECKER ENFANTS-MALADES
HBA1, HIS20TYR

This variant was detected by chromatography in the course of screening
diabetics for Hb A1c (Wajcman et al., 1980).

.0105
HEMOGLOBIN NIGERIA
HBA1, SER81CYS

See Honig et al. (1978).

.0106
HEMOGLOBIN NOKO
HBA1, MET76LYS

See Shibata et al. (1981).

.0107
HEMOGLOBIN NORFOLK
HEMOGLOBIN J (NORFOLK);;
HEMOGLOBIN KAGOSHIMA;;
HEMOGLOBIN NISHIK
HBA1, GLY57ASP

Fast hemoglobin. See Ager et al. (1958), Baglioni (1962), Huntsman et
al. (1963), Hanada et al. (1964), Imamura (1966), and Lehmann and
Carrell (1969).

.0108
HEMOGLOBIN NOUAKCHOTT
HBA1, PRO114LEU

See Wajcman et al. (1989).

.0109
HEMOGLOBIN NUNOBIKI
HBA1, ARG141CYS

This hemoglobin showed an extremely high oxygen affinity. The patient,
who had 'marginal erythrocytosis,' was shown to have 13.1% Hb Nunobiki
(Shimasaki, 1985).

.0110
HEMOGLOBIN O (INDONESIA)
HEMOGLOBIN O (BUGINESE-X);;
HEMOGLOBIN BUGINESE-X;;
HEMOGLOBIN O (OLIVIERE);;
HEMOGLOBIN OLIVIERE
HBA1, GLU116LYS

See Lie-Injo and Sadono (1958), Baglioni and Lehmann (1962), and Sansone
et al. (1970).

Daud et al. (2001) investigated the occurrence of hemoglobin O
(Indonesia) in related ethnic populations of the Indonesian archipelago.
Nineteen individuals heterozygous for this variant were identified in 4
ethnic populations. The level of Hb O (Indonesia) in 17 of the
individuals was 11.6 +/- 1.0%, significantly lower than the expected 17
to 22%, indicating the instability of Hb O (Indonesia).

.0111
HEMOGLOBIN O (PADOVA)
HBA1, GLU30LYS

See Vettore et al. (1974), Kilinc et al. (1985), and Martin et al.
(1990). Schnedl et al. (1997) showed that the silent hemoglobin O Padova
mutation causes an additional peak on high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) and falsely low HbA(1c) values (glycated
hemoglobin) when measured by HPLC. HPLC is the gold standard for
evaluation of glycated hemoglobin in diabetes mellitus.

.0112
HEMOGLOBIN OGI
HEMOGLOBIN QUEENS
HBA1, LEU34ARG

See Sugihara et al. (1982), Moo-Penn et al. (1982), and Yongsuwan et al.
(1987). This has been shown to be a mutation of the HBA1 gene (Cash et
al., 1989).

.0113
HEMOGLOBIN OLEANDER
HBA1, GLU116GLN

See Schneider et al. (1980).

.0114
HEMOGLOBIN OTTAWA
HEMOGLOBIN SIAM
HBA1, GLY15ARG

See Vella et al. (1974) and Pootrakul et al. (1974).

Yodsowan et al. (2000) studied this variant in a 21-year-old Thai female
and her mother. Turbpaiboon et al. (2002) reported a fourth case of Hb
Siam in a healthy Thai female and concluded that there is no
alpha-thalassemic effect of the variant.

.0115
HEMOGLOBIN OWARI
HBA1, VAL121MET

This is a neutral-to-neutral change; it was detected in the course of
mass screening by isoelectric focusing (Harano et al., 1986).

.0116
HEMOGLOBIN PERSPOLIS
HBA1, ASP64TYR

See Rahbar et al. (1976).

.0117
HEMOGLOBIN PETAH TIKVA
HBA1, ALA110ASP

See Honig et al. (1981).

.0118
HEMOGLOBIN PONTOISE
HEMOGLOBIN J (PONTOISE)
HBA1, ALA63ASP

See Thillet et al. (1977) and Gonzalez-Redondo et al. (1987).

.0119
HEMOGLOBIN PORT PHILLIP
HBA1, LEU91PRO

See Brennan et al. (1977).

.0120
MOVED TO 141850.0055
.0121
HEMOGLOBIN Q (INDIA)
HBA1, ASP64HIS

See Sukumaran et al. (1972) and Schmidt et al. (1976).

.0122
HEMOGLOBIN Q (IRAN)
HBA1, ASP75HIS

See Lorkin et al. (1970), Lie-Injo et al. (1979), and Higgs et al.
(1980).

.0123
MOVED TO 141850.0052
.0124
HEMOGLOBIN REIMS
HBA1, GLU23GLY

See Bardakdjian-Michau et al. (1989).

.0125
HEMOGLOBIN RUSS
HBA1, GLY51ARG

See Huisman and Sydenstricker (1962) and Reynolds and Huisman (1966).
This has been shown to be a mutation of the HBA1 gene (Cash et al.,
1989).

.0126
HEMOGLOBIN SASSARI
HBA1, ASP126HIS

Masala et al. (1987) first described this variant as an
electrophoretically slow-moving hemoglobin in 2 brothers affected by
erythrocytosis with slight microcytosis. In a large screening program
involving 20,000 people in the city of Sassari and its surrounding area
in Sardinia, Masala (1992) found the variant in 3 other apparently
unrelated subjects. A male of German origin was identified by
Bardakdjian-Michau et al. (1990) as a carrier of the same mutation.
Sanna et al. (1994) demonstrated that the adult variant has increased
oxygen affinity, a dramatic reduction of homotropic interactions, and a
significant decrease of the effect of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (35% lower
than that observed for Hb A). The fetal variant also showed increased
oxygen affinity compared with normal Hb F and an almost abolished
heme-heme interaction.

Paglietti et al. (1998) demonstrated that Hb Sassari results from a GAC
(asp)-to-CAC (his) mutation in the HBA1 gene.

.0127
HEMOGLOBIN SAVARIA
HBA1, SER49ARG

See Szelenyi et al. (1980), Juricic et al. (1985), Ojwang et al. (1985),
and Suarez et al. (1985).

.0128
HEMOGLOBIN SAWARA
HBA1, ASP6ALA

No pathologic effects were observed (Sumida et al., 1973; Sumida, 1975).

.0130
HEMOGLOBIN SETIF
HBA1, ASP94TYR

See Wajcman et al. (1972), Nozari et al. (1977), Al-Awamy et al. (1985),
and Abdo (1989). Schiliro et al. (1991) found this hemoglobin variant in
Sicily.

Dincol et al. (2003) stated that Hb Setif was first described in an
Algerian family (Wajcman et al., 1972) and subsequently in Iranian,
African, Saudi Arabian, and Maltese populations. They identified the
variant in a Turkish family. Heterozygotes were asymptomatic.

.0131
HEMOGLOBIN SHAARE ZEDEK
HBA1, LYS56GLU

See Abramov et al. (1980).

.0132
HEMOGLOBIN SHENYANG
HBA1, ALA26GLU

See Zeng et al. (1982) and Yi et al. (1989).

.0133
HEMOGLOBIN SHIMONOSEKI
HEMOGLOBIN HIKOSHIMA
HBA1, GLN54ARG

See Yamaoka et al. (1960) and Hanada and Rucknagel (1964).

.0134
HEMOGLOBIN SHUANGFENG
HBA1, GLU27LYS

See Liang et al. (1981).

.0135
HEMOGLOBIN SINGAPORE
HBA1, ARG141PRO

See Clegg et al. (1969).

.0137
HEMOGLOBIN ST. CLAUDE
HBA1, LYS127THR

See Vella et al. (1974).

.0138
HEMOGLOBIN ST. LUKE'S
HBA1, PRO95ARG

See Bannister et al. (1972).

Felice (2003) cited evidence that Hb St. Luke's is a mutation of the
HBA1 gene.

.0139
HEMOGLOBIN STANLEYVILLE-II
HBA1, ASN78LYS

See Van Ros et al. (1968), North et al. (1980), and Rhoda et al. (1983).
Costa et al. (1991) described a family with 1 homozygote and 3
heterozygotes for Hb Stanleyville II. The pattern of restriction
fragments demonstrated an associated 3.7-kb alpha-globin gene deletion.

.0140
HEMOGLOBIN STRUMICA
HEMOGLOBIN SERBIA
HBA1, HIS112ARG

See Niazi et al. (1975) and Beksedic et al. (1975).

.0143
HEMOGLOBIN SUNSHINE SETH
HBA1, ASP94HIS

See Schroeder et al. (1979).

.0144
HEMOGLOBIN SURESNES
HBA1, ARG141HIS

See Poyart et al. (1976) and Saenz et al. (1978).

.0145
HEMOGLOBIN SWAN RIVER
HBA1, ASP6GLY

See Moo-Penn et al. (1987). Harano et al. (1996) observed this variant
in a Japanese man with mild polycythemia.

.0147
HEMOGLOBIN THAILAND
HBA1, LYS56THR

See Pootrakul et al. (1977).

.0148
HEMOGLOBIN TITUSVILLE
HBA1, ASP94ASN

See Schneider et al. (1975).

.0149
HEMOGLOBIN TOKONAME
HBA1, LYS139THR

See Harano et al. (1983).

.0150
HEMOGLOBIN TORINO
HBA1, PHE43VAL

See Beretta et al. (1968) and Prato et al. (1970).

.0151
HEMOGLOBIN TOTTORI
HBA1, GLY59VAL

See Nakatsuji et al. (1981).

.0152
HEMOGLOBIN TOYAMA
HEINZ BODY HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA
HBA1, LEU136ARG

This hemoglobin variant is associated with congenital Heinz body anemia
(Ohba et al., 1987).

.0153
HEMOGLOBIN TWIN PEAKS
HBA1, LEU113HIS

See Guis et al. (1985). This has been shown to be a mutation of the HBA1
gene (Cash et al., 1989).

.0154
HEMOGLOBIN UBE-2
HBA1, ASN68ASP

See Miyaji et al. (1967). In Turkey, Bilginer et al. (1984) found the
first instance of Hb Ube-2 outside Japan. It occurred in other members
of the family.

Cotton et al. (2000) found this rare variant during universal neonatal
screening. The patients had normal hematologic parameters. The variant
was found in twins and an older sister and in the father; both parents
were of Belgian ancestry.

Shin et al. (2002) described the disorder in a Taiwanese subject.

.0155
HEMOGLOBIN UBE-4
HBA1, GLU116ALA

See Ohba et al. (1978).

.0156
HEMOGLOBIN WESTMEAD
HBA1, HIS122GLN

This variant was found in a Chinese woman (Fleming et al., 1980). See
Liang et al. (1988).

.0157
HEMOGLOBIN WINNIPEG
HBA1, ASP75TYR

See Vella et al. (1973) and Nakatsuji et al. (1983). This has been shown
to be a mutation of the HBA1 gene (Cash et al., 1989).

.0158
HEMOGLOBIN WOODVILLE
HBA1, ASP6TYR

Since alpha-6 asp is involved in salt linkage with alpha-127 lys of the
same chain, the increased oxygen affinity of hemoglobin variants at this
position probably reflects loss of this salt bridge in the deoxy state.
Similar changes have been observed for Hb St. Claude which also cannot
form the salt bridge because of substitution of threonine for lysine at
alpha-127. See Como et al. (1986).

.0159
HEMOGLOBIN WUMING
HEMOGLOBIN J (WENCHANG-WUMING)
HBA1, LYS11GLN

See Zeng et al. (1981). Qualtieri et al. (1995) found this
fast-migrating hemoglobin variant in a pregnant woman living in Italy.

.0160
HEMOGLOBIN ZAMBIA
HBA1, LYS60ASN

See Barclay et al. (1969).

.0161
HEMOGLOBIN BELLIARD
HBA1, LYS56ASN

See Wajcman et al. (1990).

.0162
HEMOGLOBIN TONOSHO
HBA1, ALA110THR

In the course of measuring hemoglobin A1c by automated cation exchange
high performance liquid chromatography, Ohba et al. (1990) detected a
new alpha-chain variant: substitution of alanine by threonine at
position 110. The abnormal alpha chain comprised about 14% of the total
alpha chain.

.0163
HEMOGLOBIN FUKUTOMI
HBA1, ASP126VAL

This hemoglobin, which has a high affinity for oxygen, was detected in a
Japanese male during a screening survey. The proband was a 53-year-old
man with liver cirrhosis and hemorrhagic gastritis (Hidaka et al.,
1990).

.0164
HEMOGLOBIN PORT HURON
HBA1, LYS56ARG

Zwerdling et al. (1991) investigated the structural abnormality of a
putative Hb E detected in an African American family with no apparent
Asian ancestry. The tryptic peptide map formed by high performance
liquid chromatography showed that the electrophoretic variant was indeed
the beta glu26-to-lys mutation of Hb E. In addition, however, the
tryptic map showed an abnormal alpha peptide. The second mutation was a
substitution of arginine for lysine at residue 56 of the alpha chain.
The variant was clinically silent.

.0166
HEMOGLOBIN PAVIE
HBA1, VAL135GLU

See Wajcman et al. (1990).

.0167
HEMOGLOBIN QUESTEMBERT
HBA1, SER131PRO

See Wajcman et al. (1990, 1993).

.0168
HEMOGLOBIN THIONVILLE
HBA1, NH2 EXTENSION, VAL1GLU

See Vasseur et al. (1990). Substitution of glutamic acid for valine as
the first residue in the mature protein is accompanied by retention of
the initiator methionine residue. This may be the only known hemoglobin
variant with an NH2-extension in the alpha-globin chain. Hb Marseille
(141900.0171), Hb Doha (141900.0069), and Hb South Florida (141900.0266)
are examples of hemoglobin variants with an NH2-extension due to
retention of the initiator methionine in the beta-globin chain. Each is
due to mutation in the first or second residue of the mature protein.
Vasseur et al. (1992) found that elongation of the NH2-terminus of the
alpha-chain, due to inhibition of cleavage of the initiator methionine
which is then acetylated, modifies the 3-dimensional structure of
hemoglobin at a region that is known to have an important role in the
allosteric regulation of oxygen binding. Hb Thionville has a lowered
affinity for oxygen. In contrast, response to 2,3-diphosphoglycerate is
normal.

.0169
HEMOGLOBIN KANAGAWA
HBA1, LYS40MET

In the course of a high performance liquid chromatography survey of Hb
A1c, Miyashita et al. (1992) detected a new hemoglobin in a 70-year-old
Japanese male with cerebral infarction and erythremia. Further studies
revealed a lys40-to-met mutation. The variant showed increased oxygen
affinity, decreased heme-heme interaction, and a lowered
2,3-diphosphoglycerate effect.

(Erythemia, a now almost obsolete synonym for polycythemia and
erythrocytosis, means increased red blood cell mass.)

.0170
HEMOGLOBIN TURRIFF
HBA1, LYS99GLU

In a diabetic woman of Scottish ancestry, Langdown et al. (1992)
detected a new hemoglobin variant in the course of determining Hb A1c by
high performance liquid chromatography. The abnormal hemoglobin
chromatographed with the Hb A1c fraction. Family studies showed that a
lys99-to-glu mutation, which was not associated with any hematologic
disturbance, had occurred de novo. An AAG-to-GAG mutation was presumed
and was not assigned to either the alpha-2- or alpha-1-globin chain.

The Hb A(1c) level in the patient of Langdown et al. (1992) was found to
be very high. In a Japanese individual, Harano et al. (2003) likewise
found an unexpectedly high Hb A(1c) level as measured by an automatic Hb
A(1c) analyzer and found by DNA sequencing a change in the first
nucleotide of codon 99 (AAG-GAG) of the Hb A1 gene.

.0171
HEMOGLOBIN ZAIRE
HBA1, 15-BP TANDEM REPEAT

Hemoglobin Zaire was found in a 36-year-old patient from Zaire during a
systematic hemoglobin study. Wajcman et al. (1992) demonstrated that the
abnormality was the insertion of 5 amino acids--his, leu, pro, ala,
glu--between glu116 and phe117 of the alpha-globin chain. This sequence
represented a tandem repeat of the 5 amino acid residues from 112
through 116, located at the end of the GH corner of the molecule.
Hemoglobin Grady (141800.0045) involves the insertion of 3 amino acids
as repeats of residues 116, 117 and 118. Unequal crossing over between
alleles rather than between the separate alpha-1 and alpha-2 loci was
thought to be the mechanism in that case and possibly in the case of Hb
Zaire as well.

.0172
HEMOGLOBIN LUTON
HBA1, HIS89LEU

In a newborn infant and the father, a 35-year-old Pakistani man,
Williamson et al. (1992) described a new hemoglobin with high oxygen
affinity. The high affinity hemoglobin mutation was identified by HPLC
peptide mapping and amino acid sequencing; leucine was substituted for
histidine at amino acid position 89. The mutation occurred at the end of
the F helix (FG1), a part of the hemoglobin structure critical in
determining oxygen affinity since it is directly linked to the heme iron
through the proximal histidine residue F8. This was the first example of
a mutation at this position of the alpha chain of hemoglobin, although
there were 2 high affinity mutants that involved the structurally
equivalent amino acid (beta94 asp) of the beta chain: Hb Barcelona
(beta94 his; 141900.0016) and Hb Bunbury (beta94 asn; 141900.0035). The
new hemoglobin was called Hb Luton for the name of the hospital where
the proband was originally treated. The proband was a neonate in whom 2
abnormal hemoglobin bands were found, the 2 bands being the mutant forms
of fetal and adult hemoglobins containing the anomalous alpha globin.
The father had microcytosis as well as mild polycythemia and was shown
to have an accompanying alpha-thalassemia trait due to deletion of a
single alpha-globin gene.

.0173
HEMOGLOBIN OZIERI
HBA1, ALA71VAL

During a screening for hemoglobinopathies in Sardinia, Ferranti et al.
(1993) found a new 'silent' hemoglobin variant in 5 apparently unrelated
newborn babies. The variant was detected by means of isoelectric
focusing (IEF), and further study revealed a valine for alanine
substitution at position 71 of the alpha-globin chain. The substitution
indicated that a C-to-T transition had occurred in the GCG codon for
alanine which contains one of the 35 unmethylated CpG dinucleotides of
the HBA1 gene. This observation brought to 13 the number of variants due
to mutation in the CpGs of the HBA1 gene and raised the possibility that
unmethylated CpGs, like methylated ones, may be hotspots for mutations.

.0174
HEMOGLOBIN ADANA
HEMOGLOBIN H DISEASE, NONDELETIONAL, INCLUDED
HBA1, GLY59ASP

In 3 Turkish children with severe thalassemia, Curuk et al. (1992) found
a GGC-to-GAC mutation in codon 59 of the HBA1 gene resulting in a
replacement of glycine by aspartic acid. The combination of an
alpha-thal-1 deletion with the unstable Hb Adana resulted in a severe
type of Hb H disease (613978).

.0175
HEMOGLOBIN AL-AIN ABU DHABI
HBA1, GLY18ASP

During a routine program of hemoglobin screening performed in the United
Arab Emirates, Abbes et al. (1992) found an electrophoretically
fast-moving variant in a 9-month-old girl and in several members of her
family. Amino acid sequencing demonstrated that the new variant had a
gly18-to-asp substitution. Its functional properties were normal.

.0176
HEMOGLOBIN POITIERS
HBA1, HIS45ASP

Hb Poitiers was discovered by Bardakdjian et al. (1994) in a 9-year-old
French Caucasian boy who suffered from chronic anemia. The molecular
defect consists of a missense mutation at codon 45 of the HBA1 gene,
changing histidine to aspartate. Hb Poitiers displays a 2-fold increased
oxygen affinity, a slightly decreased heme-heme interaction, and a
slightly faster autooxidation rate. In adult hemoglobin (Hb A), the
histidine residue at position 45 of the alpha-globin gene is the only
polar contact between the heme group and globin. This position, however,
seems to allow for moderate variation without dramatic consequences on
the function of hemoglobin. His45 is replaced by glutamine in Hb Bari
(141800.0009) and by arginine in Hb Fort de France (141800.0034).

.0177
MOVED TO 141850.0062
.0178
HEMOGLOBIN CAEN
HBA1, VAL132GLY

Wajcman et al. (1993) discovered the Hb Caen variant in a 25-year-old
French Caucasian woman suffering from a mild chronic hemolytic anemia.
Trypsin degradation of the isolated hemoglobin alpha chain followed by
high performance liquid chromatography indicated that the valine residue
at position 132 was replaced by glycine.

.0179
HEMOGLOBIN YUDA
HBA1, ALA130ASP

Hb Yuda was discovered in a 65-year-old Japanese female with
noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (Fujisawa et al., 1992). Gas
phase Edman degradation indicated that the abnormal hemoglobin alpha
chain has a substitution of aspartic acid for alanine at residue 130. Hb
Yuda has a very low oxygen affinity and slightly decreased cooperative
subunit interaction.

.0180
HEMOGLOBIN CAPA
HBA1, ASP94GLY

Hb Capa was discovered in a 28-year-old female in Turkey who was being
treated for chronic iron deficiency anemia. The hemoglobin showed
abnormal electrophoretic mobility and was mildly unstable in a heat
denaturation test. The molecular change was a GAC-to-GGC transition in
codon 94, resulting in substitution of glycine for aspartic acid. Three
other substitutions of asp-94 are known: Hb Setif (141800.0130), Hb
Titusville (141800.0148), and Hb Sunshine Seth (141800.0143). All 4
variants exhibit mild instability.

.0181
HEMOGLOBIN MONTEFIORE
HBA1, ASP126TYR

Wajcman et al. (1992) demonstrated an asp126-to-tyr change in the HBA1
gene in an individual of Puerto Rican descent. At physiologic pH (7.4),
the oxygen binding of the patient's red blood cells revealed a 40%
reduction. Hb Montefiore appears to have lower cooperativity than other
characterized alpha-126 mutants: aspartic acid is replaced by asparagine
in Hb Tarrant (141800.0146), by histidine in Hb Sassari (141800.0126),
and by valine in Hb Fukutomi (141800.0163).

.0182
HEMOGLOBIN ROUEN
HEMOGLOBIN ETHIOPIA
HBA1, TYR140HIS

A tyr140-to-his mutation in the HBA1 gene was discovered and
characterized in a French patient with polycythemia vera by Wajcman et
al. (1992) and in a newborn baby of Ethiopian descent by Webber et al.
(1992). This mutation provides an example of an alteration of the
C-terminus of the alpha chain, a region involved in the mechanisms of
allosteric regulation. Hb Rouen has increased oxygen affinity and
decreased cooperativity. A complementary tyr145-to-his mutation (Hb
Bethesda; 141900.0022) in the hemoglobin beta chain has more dramatic
effects, suggesting that the alpha and beta chains play unequal roles in
the overall function of hemoglobin.

.0183
HEMOGLOBIN MELUSINE
HBA1, PRO114SER

Hb Melusine was found in an Algerian patient during a systematic
screening for hemoglobinopathies in Luxembourg. Using isoelectric
focusing and reverse phase high performance liquid chromatography
(RP-HPLC), Wajcman et al. (1993) determined that the molecular mutation
at amino acid position 114 of the HBA1 gene changed the residue from
proline to serine.

.0184
HEMOGLOBIN TAYBE
HBA1, THR38DEL OR THR39DEL

Girodon et al. (1992) reported the characterization of Hb Taybe, a
hemoglobin variant discovered in a young Arabic woman suffering since
birth from a severe and highly regenerative hemolytic anemia. DNA
amplification and sequencing of the HBA1 gene indicated a 3-bp deletion
(encoding threonine) at amino acid position 38 or 39. This variant
increases the hydrophobicity of the amino acid chain, and it is quite
unstable.

.0185
HEMOGLOBIN CEMENELUM
HBA1, ARG92TRP

Wajcman et al. (1994) described a missense mutation involving the same
codon as that involved in Hb Chesapeake (141800.0018), the first high
oxygen affinity hemoglobin variant to be described in association with
polycythemia (Charache et al., 1966). Hb Chesapeake has an arg92-to-leu
substitution; Hb Cemenelum has an arg92-to-trp substitution. Hb J (Cape
Town) (141800.0063) has a substitution (arg92-to-gln) in the same codon.
Hb Cemenelum was discovered in a French diabetic patient with no
hematologic abnormalities. The purified abnormal hemoglobin, like Hb J
(Cape Town), displayed only a 1.5- to 2-fold increased oxygen affinity.
The findings demonstrate that the degree to which the functional
properties are altered by changes in key residues at the alpha-beta
interface depends upon the specific residue occupying this position.

.0186
HEMOGLOBIN RAMONA
HBA1, TYR24CYS

Hb Ramona was accidentally detected by isoelectrofocusing in a pregnant
woman of part Spanish descent; its mobility was slightly faster than
that of Hb A. A TAT-to-TGT change was found at codon 24, corresponding
to a replacement of tyrosine by cysteine.

.0187
HEMOGLOBIN TATRAS
HBA1, LYS7ASN

In a 72-year-old woman born in Czechoslovakia, Wajcman et al. (1994)
found a lys7-to-asn mutation when investigating the basis for an
abnormal level of Hb A1c. No abnormal hematologic features were
observed.

.0188
HEMOGLOBIN LISBON
HBA1, GLU23ASP

In a 31-year-old man of Portuguese origin who had suffered from diabetes
mellitus since the age of 15 years, Wajcman et al. (1994) found an
abnormal hemoglobin during measurement of Hb A1c by an
isoelectrofocusing study. There were no abnormal hematologic features.

.0189
HEMOGLOBIN ROANNE
HBA1, ASP94GLU

Kister et al. (1995) described a new hemoglobin variant in a 73-year-old
woman from Roanne in central France. She suffered from mild chronic
hemolytic anemia. An asp94-to-glu substitution was found in the alpha-1
chain. Aspartate-94 is involved in several contacts, both in the deoxy-
and oxy-structures of the hemoglobin.

.0190
HEMOGLOBIN MALHACEN
HBA1, ALA123SER

Kazanetz et al. (1995) observed this variant hemoglobin in an adult male
in Granada, Spain, who was evaluated because of severe iron deficiency
anemia. Sequencing of the HBA1 gene showed 2 nucleotide changes. One was
a simple polymorphism, as both GCG and GCT code for alanine (at codon
120). The second mutation was a GCC-to-TCC change at codon 123 resulting
in replacement of alanine by serine. The replacement caused slight
differences in the IEF and reversed-phase HPLC experiments, but the
stability of the hemoglobin was normal. Family studies were not
performed; thus, whether the 2 mutations were in coupling or repulsion
was not known.

.0191
HEMOGLOBIN TUNIS-BIZERTE
HBA1, LEU129PRO

In 3 members of a Tunisian family, Darbellay et al. (1995) identified a
leu129-to-pro substitution in the HBA1 gene by sequencing the entirety
of the HBA2 and HBA1 genes. In the heterozygous state, the variant was
manifested by microcytosis, whereas the homozygous state showed moderate
anemia with marked microcytosis.

.0192
MOVED TO 141850.0068
.0193
HEMOGLOBIN BOIS GUILLAUME
HBA1, ALA65VAL

By tiny abnormalities observed during isoelectrofocusing, Wajcman et al.
(1995) identified this electrophoretically silent variant in 3 members
of a Caucasian-French family. This hemoglobin was the first alpha-chain
variant that involved position 64. In the beta chain, the corresponding
position, E14, is also occupied by an alanine residue; in Hb Seattle
(141900.0256), it is replaced by aspartic acid (ala70-to-asp).

.0194
HEMOGLOBIN MANTES-LA-JOLIE
HBA1, ALA79THR

Wajcman et al. (1995) found this variant hemoglobin during a systematic
study of the iron status in a 6-month-old baby and his mother who
originated from Chad in North Central Africa.

.0195
HEMOGLOBIN MOSELLA
HBA1, ALA111THR

Wajcman et al. (1995) found this variant in a 35-year-old pregnant woman
of Caucasian origin who lived in Luxembourg. The abnormal Hb was also
found in one of her daughters.

.0196
HEMOGLOBIN FUCHU-I
HBA1, HIS72TYR

At the Fuchu Municipal Medical Center in Tokyo, Harano et al. (1995)
identified 2 Hb variants in the course of assaying glycated hemoglobin,
Hb A(1c), of the peripheral blood by cation exchange HPLC. Structural
analyses demonstrated that 1 patient had a his72-to-tyr substitution and
the other an asn97-to-his substitution (141800.0197) of the alpha-globin
chain. These were named Hb Fuchu-I and Hb Fuchu-II, respectively. Both
were healthy adults.

.0197
HEMOGLOBIN FUCHU-II
HBA1, ASN97HIS

See 141800.0196.

.0198
HEMOGLOBIN GOUDA
HBA1, HIS72GLN

In a 54-year-old Dutch woman under treatment for diabetes mellitus,
Giordano et al. (1996) incidentally found a silent alpha-chain variant
on testing for glycated hemoglobin. A CAC-to-CAA transversion was
predicted to result in substitution of glutamine for histidine at
residue 72 in the HBA1 gene.

.0199
HEMOGLOBIN J (BISKRA)
HBA1, 24-BP DEL

Wajcman et al. (1998) described Hb J-Biskra, a variant hemoglobin
consisting of deletion of 24 nucleotides from the HBA1 gene and 8 amino
acid residues from the alpha-globin chain: residues 50-57, 51-58, or
52-59. This variant was mildly unstable in vitro only, and there was no
hematologic or biochemical evidence of hemolysis in affected family
members. Wajcman et al. (1998) stated that this was the largest deletion
reported to that time in a hemoglobin molecule that is expressed at an
almost normal level in the red blood cell.

.0200
HEMOGLOBIN GODAVARI
HBA1, PRO95THR

Hb Godavari is the fourth example of a substitution involving neutral
residues at position 95 of the alpha-1 chain. In all of these variants,
the electrophoretic pattern suggested that the structural modification
unmasks a charged residue in the alpha-1/beta-2 contact area. The other
examples are Hb Denmark Hill, pro95 to ala (141800.0027); Hb G
(Georgia), and pro95 to leu (141800.0038). Hb Godavari shared the same
electrophoretic properties as these variants, but displayed minimal
alterations of the oxygen-binding properties. Wajcman et al. (1998)
identified Hb Godavari in 2 families of different ethnic origin. The
first case, found in the Netherlands, involved an Indian patient. The
second case was identified a few months later in an African family from
Mali, living in France.

.0201
HEMOGLOBIN OITA
HBA1, HIS45PRO

Hamaguchi et al. (1998) reported a neutral (silent) hemoglobin variant,
designated Hb Oita, in which a change from CAC to CCC caused a
his45-to-pro substitution. In Hb Bari (141800.0009), his45 is replaced
by gln. In Hb Fort de France (141800.0034), his45 is replaced by arg. In
Hb Portiers (141800.0176), his45 is replaced by asp.

.0202
HEMOGLOBIN AGHIA SOPHIA
HEMOGLOBIN H DISEASE, NONDELETIONAL, INCLUDED
HBA1, VAL62DEL

In a Greek child with Hb H disease (613978), Traeger-Synodinos et al.
(1999) found deletion of codon 62 of the alpha-1 gene, leading to
alpha-plus-thalassemia. Codon 62 encodes a valine residue at the E11
alpha helix, which is located in the interior of the heme pocket.
Substitutions of this valine with other amino acid residues in the alpha
as well as beta polypeptide chains lead, in the heterozygous carrier,
either to Hb M disease or to congenital nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia.
Traeger-Synodinos et al. (1999) assumed that deletion of val at position
62 disrupted the conformation of the alpha chain to such an extent that
the mutated subunit was rapidly removed by proteolysis. The final result
was an alpha-thalassemia phenotype rather than an unstable hemoglobin
syndrome. This conclusion was supported by the apparent absence of an
abnormal alpha chain in the peripheral blood of the patient. Hb Evans
(141850.0006) is a val62-to-met mutation of the HBA2 gene and was found
in a patient with mild hemolytic anemia. Four amino acid substitutions
at position 67(E11)val of the beta chain lead to instability of the Hb
tetramer and an anemia of variable degrees in the heterozygotes. One of
these substitutions, val67 to glu (141900.0163), results in the stable
Hb M-Milwaukee-I.

.0203
HEMOGLOBIN CHAROLLES
HBA1, HIS103TYR

Lacan et al. (1999) detected Hb Charolles in a 46-year-old patient who
presented with microcytosis and hypochromia. It was easily detected by
isoelectrofocusing and high performance liquid chromatography. It
accounted for 11% of the total hemoglobin. The amino acid change
resulted from a CAC-to-TAC change in codon 103.

.0204
HEMOGLOBIN ROUBAIX
HBA1, VAL55LEU

In a French family from the north of France, Prehu et al. (1999) found a
new HBA1 variant in 5 members. The variant was initially detected during
measurement of glycated hemoglobin in a woman originating from Roubaix.
Codon 55 in exon 2 was found to have a heterozygous change from GTT
(val) to CTT (leu). This was a neutral variant.

.0205
HEMOGLOBIN DOUALA
HBA1, SER3PHE

In a woman from Cameroon, Prehu et al. (2001) identified a new
hemoglobin variant, designated Hb Douala, with a C-to-T transition
(TCT-TTT) in the HBA1 gene, resulting in a ser3-to-phe (S3F) amino acid
substitution. The patient was also heterozygous for Hb S (141900.0243)
and for a 3.7-kb deletional alpha-thalassemia.

.0206
THALASSEMIA, ALPHA-PLUS
HBA1, 21-BP INS-DUP

In a patient of Iranian descent with the hematologic profile of
alpha-plus-thalassemia characterized by mild microcytosis, Waye et al.
(2001) found a 21-bp insertion/duplication that gave rise to a predicted
alpha-globin chain containing a duplication of amino acid residues
93-99.

.0207
THALASSEMIA, ALPHA-PLUS
HBA1, 33-BP DEL

In a patient of Greek descent with the hematologic profile of
alpha-plus-thalassemia characterized by mild microcytosis, Waye et al.
(2001) found a 33-bp deletion in the HBA1 gene resulting in a predicted
alpha-globin chain missing amino acid residues 64-74.

.0208
HEMOGLOBIN DELFZICHT
HBA1, ASN9LYS

Harteveld et al. (2002) reported a 69-year-old Dutch woman monitored for
diabetes mellitus in whom Hb A(L1c) analysis revealed a clinically
silent hemoglobin variant, asn9 to lys (N9K), due to an AAC-to-AAG
transversion in heterozygous state. The mutation was identical to that
found at the same position in the HBA2 gene that leads to a variant
named Hb Park Ridge (141850.0048).

.0209
HEMOGLOBIN SARATOGA SPRINGS
HBA1, LYS40ASN

In a 34-year-old Caucasian male of Swedish ancestry who lived in
Saratoga Springs, New York, Hoyer et al. (2003) identified a hemoglobin
variant with abnormal oxygen affinity, designated Hb Saratoga Springs.
There was no family history of erythrocytosis. The patient had no
smoking history. A change of codon 40 of the HBA1 gene from AAG to AAC
resulted in a lys40-to-asn (K40N) change. Lys40 is replaced by glu in Hb
Kariya (141800.0081), and by met in Hb Kanagawa (141800.0169). Both of
these hemoglobins had been shown to have increased oxygen affinity, but
neither was associated with erythrocytosis.

.0210
HEMOGLOBIN DIE
HBA1, VAL93ALA

In a 7-year-old girl living near the town of Die in southeast France,
Lacan et al. (2004) identified a val93-to-ala (V93A) mutation in the
HBA1 gene. The family was of French Caucasian origin.

.0211
HEMOGLOBIN BEZIERS
HBA1, LYS99ASN

In a 72-year-old woman of French Caucasian origin living in the city of
Beziers in the south of France, Lacan et al. (2004) identified a
lys99-to-asn (K99N) mutation in the HBA1 gene. The variant was found
during the determination of Hb A(1c) by high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) in this diabetic patient. Hematologic data were
normal, without hepatomegaly or splenomegaly.

.0212
HEMOGLOBIN BUFFALO
HBA1, HIS89GLN

In a 32-year-old Somali male living in the Netherlands who was being
monitored for diabetes mellitus, Harteveld et al. (2004) identified Hb S
(141900.0243) in heterozygous state and a heterozygous C-to-G
transversion in the HBA1 gene, resulting in a his89-to-gln (H89Q)
substitution. The H89Q mutation had previously been described in a
Yemenite woman and 2 apparently unrelated Somali males (Hoyer et al.,
2002), and had been designated Hb Buffalo. No hematologic abnormality
had been associated with the allelic variant in this or other cases. In
addition to Hb Buffalo, 4 amino acid substitutions had been reported at
codon 89: Hb Luton (his89 to leu; 141800.0172), Hb Villeurbanne (his89
to tyr; 141800.0213), Hb Tokyo (his89 to pro; 141800.0214), and Hb
Tamano (his89 to arg; 141800.0215).

.0213
HEMOGLOBIN VILLEURBANNE
HBA1, HIS89TYR

Deon et al. (1997) identified a his89-to-tyr (H89Y) mutation in the HBA1
gene as the defect in Hb Villeurbanne.

.0214
HEMOGLOBIN TOKYO
HBA1, HIS89PRO

Harteveld et al. (2004) stated that Hb Tokyo carries a his89-to-pro
(H89P) mutation in the HBA1 gene.

.0215
HEMOGLOBIN TAMANO
HBA1, HIS89ARG

Harteveld et al. (2004) stated that Hb Tamano carries a his89-to-arg
(H89R) mutation in the HBA1 gene.

.0216
HEMOGLOBIN RICCARTON
HBA1, GLY51SER

In a 4-year-old Caucasian boy investigated for fatigue and microcytosis,
Brennan et al. (2005) found a GGC-to-AGC transition at codon 51 in the
HBA1 gene, resulting in a gly51-to-ser substitution (G51S). The mutation
was thought not to be the cause of the microcytosis as it was detected
also in the boy's father who had normal red cell indices.

.0217
HEMOGLOBIN OEGSTGEEST
HBA1, CYS104SER

In an 8-year-old black female of Surinamese origin with a mild
alpha-thalassemia phenotype, Harteveld et al. (2005) identified
homozygosity for a TGC-to-AGC transversion in the HBA1 gene, resulting
in a cys104-to-ser substitution. Cysteine-104 is involved in alpha/beta
globin contact and had been described as a critical amino acid of the
HBA2 chain when substituted by a tyrosine (cys104 to tyr) in Hb
Sallanches (141850.0031).

.0218
HEMOGLOBIN LAMEN ISLAND
HBA1, 149709T-C

De Gobbi et al. (2006) studied 148 individuals from Melanesia with
alpha-thalassemia, including 5 with HbH disease, in whom none of the
theretofore described molecular defects could be found. The pattern of
inheritance suggested that individuals with HbH disease were homozygous
for a codominant defect, referred to as (alpha-alpha)T, causing
alpha-thalassemia with a predicted genotype of
(alpha-alpha)T/(alpha-alpha)T. In situ RNA hybridization in erythroid
cells from an affected individual from Lamen Island (Vanuatu) detected
substantially fewer nuclear transcripts from the alpha-globin genes than
from the beta-globin genes. DNA FISH in 2 affected individuals showed
that the alpha-globin cluster was present at its normal location of
chromosome 16, and no deletions or chromosomal rearrangements were
detected in any of these individuals. Linkage analysis showed that the
disease phenotype in individuals was derived from telomeric chromosome
16 T. Only the C allele of SNP195 (C or T, located at coordinate 149709)
segregated with thalassemia in the affected families and showed complete
association with the (alpha-alpha)T haplotype. This allele was not found
in a separate analysis of 131 nonthalassemic Melanesian individuals.
SNP195 changes the sequence 5-prime-TAATAA-3-prime (T allele) to
5-prime-TGATAA-3-prime (C allele), potentially creating a new binding
site for the key erythroid transcription factor GATA1. GATA1 binds at
the C allele of SNP195 in vivo. SNP195 creates a new promoter-like
element between the upstream regulatory elements and their cognate
promoters. This element, when activated, causes significant
downregulation of the alpha-D, alpha-2, and alpha-1 genes that lie
downstream, thereby causing alpha-thalassemia.

.0219
ALPHA-THALASSEMIA
HBA1, 1-BP DEL, 354C

In a newborn of mixed black and Chinese descent who carried the
Southeast Asian alpha-0-thal deletion, Eng et al. (2006) also found a
1-bp deletion of cysteine from codon 78 in exon 2 of the HBA1 gene,
resulting in a frameshift and premature termination at codon 83.

.0220
HEMOGLOBIN AUCKLAND
HBA1, HIS87ASN

In a 27-year-old woman with mild compensated hemolytic anemia, Brennan
and Matthews (1997) identified Hb Auckland, a his87-to-asn substitution
in the HBA1 gene.

.9999
HEMOGLOBIN ALPHA VARIANTS, MOLECULAR DEFECT UNKNOWN

HEMOGLOBIN J (INDIA). See Raper (1957).

HEMOGLOBIN J (MALAYA). See Lehmann (1962).

HEMOGLOBIN K (CALCUTTA). Fast hemoglobin. See Lehmann (1962).

HEMOGLOBIN K (MADRAS). See Ager and Lehmann (1957).

HEMOGLOBIN KARAMOJO. See Allbrook et al. (1965).

HEMOGLOBIN L (BOMBAY). See Sukumaran and Pik (1965).

HEMOGLOBIN M (RESERVE). Reduced oxygen affinity and decreased reversible
oxygen-binding capacity (Overly et al., 1967).

HEMOGLOBIN N, ALPHA TYPE. An alpha chain anomaly was deduced from
molecular hybridization experiments with canine hemoglobin (Silvestroni
et al., 1963). Other hemoglobin N variants have a beta change.

HEMOGLOBIN NICOSIA. See Fessas et al. (1965).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Al-Awamy et al. (1985); Baklouti et al. (1988); Barg et al. (1982);
Barton et al. (1982); Brittenham et al. (1980); Davis et al. (1979);
Dincol et al. (1994); Dozy et al. (1979); Embury et al. (1979); Harano
et al. (1983); Harano et al. (1983); Harano et al. (1983); Harano
et al. (1984); Harano et al. (1982); Hess et al. (1983); Higgs et
al. (1981); Hill et al. (1985); Huisman and Miller (1976); Kan et
al. (1979); Kielman et al. (1993); Li et al. (1990); Liang et al.
(1981); Liebhaber et al. (1980); Marinucci et al. (1979); Meloni et
al. (1980); Ohba et al. (1978); Phillips et al. (1979); Phillips et
al. (1980); Pobedimskaya et al. (1994); Priest et al. (1989); Proudfoot
and Maniatis (1980); Romao et al. (1992); Schroeder and Jones (1965);
Shimizu et al. (1965); Southern  (1975); Vella et al. (1974); Wainscoat
et al. (1983); Wajcman et al. (1989); Wajcman et al. (1990); Wajcman
et al. (1992); Wajcman et al. (1992); Wajcman et al. (1993); Wajcman
et al. (1990); Weatherall and Clegg (1979); Zimmer et al. (1980)
REFERENCE 1. Abbes, S.; M'Rad, A.; Fitzgerald, P. A.; Dormer, P.; Blouquit,
Y.; Kister, J.; Galacteros, F.; Wajcman, H.: Hb Al-Ain Abu Dhabi
[alpha-18 (A16) gly-to-asp]: a new hemoglobin variant discovered in
an Emiratee family. Hemoglobin 16: 355-362, 1992.

2. Abdo, M. Z.: Hb Setif (alpha94(G1)asp-to-tyr) in a Saudi Arabian
family. Hemoglobin 13: 737-742, 1989.

3. Abramov, A.; Lehmann, H.; Robb, L.: Hb Shaare Zedek (alpha56 E5
lys-to-glu). FEBS Lett. 113: 235-237, 1980.

4. Abramson, R. K.; Rucknagel, D. L.; Shreffler, D. C.; Saave, J.
J.: Homozygous Hb J Tongariki: evidence for only one alpha chain
structural locus in Melanesians. Science 169: 194-196, 1970.

5. Adams, J. G., III: Hemoglobin Ann Arbor: disturbance in the coordinated
biosynthesis of globin chains? Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 241: 232-241,
1974.

6. Adams, J. G., III; Winter, W. P.; Rucknagel, D. L.; Spencer, H.
H.: Biosynthesis of hemoglobin Ann Arbor: evidence for catabolic
and feedback regulation. Science 176: 1427-1429, 1972.

7. Ager, J. A. M.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin K in an East Indian and
his family. Brit. Med. J. 1: 1449-1450, 1957.

8. Ager, J. A. M.; Lehmann, H.; Vella, F.: Haemoglobin 'Norfolk':
a new haemoglobin found in an English family. Brit. Med. J. 2: 539-541,
1958.

9. Ahmad, A.; Naqvi, S.; Ehsanullah, S.; Zaidi, Z. H.: Abnormal hemoglobins-11
= Hb (Karachi), an alpha chain abnormality at position 5 ala-to-pro. J.
Pakistan Med. Assoc. 36: 206-208, 1986.

10. Al-Awamy, B.; Niazi, G. A.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.:
Hb Setif or alpha94(G1)asp-to-tyr observed in a Saudi Arabian family. Hemoglobin 9:
87-90, 1985.

11. Al-Awamy, B. H.; Niazi, G. A.; Naeem, M. A.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman,
T. H. J.: Hemoglobin Handsworth or alpha18(A16)gly-to-arg in a Saudi
newborn. Hemoglobin 9: 183-186, 1985.

12. Alberti, R.; Mariuzzi, G. M.; Artibani, L.; Bruni, E.; Tentori,
L.: A new haemoglobin variant: J-Rovigo alpha 53 (E-2) alanine to
aspartic acid. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 342: 1-4, 1974.

13. Allbrook, D.; Barnicot, N. A.; Dance, N.; Lawler, S. D.; Marshall,
R.; Mungai, J.: Blood groups, haemoglobin and serum factors of the
Karamojo. Hum. Biol. 37: 217-237, 1965.

14. Allen, S. J.; O'Donnell, A.; Alexander, N. D. E.; Alpers, M. P.;
Peto, T. E. A.; Clegg, J. B.; Weatherall, D. J.: Alpha(+)-thalassemia
protects children against disease caused by other infections as well
as malaria. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 14736-14741, 1997.

15. Ameri, A.; Fairbanks, V. F.; Yanik, G. A.; Mahdi, F.; Thibodeau,
S. N.; McCormick, D. J.; Boxer, L. A.; McDonagh, K. T.: Identification
of the molecular genetic defect of patients with methemoglobin M Kankakee
(M-Iwate), alpha-87 (F8) his-to-tyr: evidence for an electrostatic
model of alpha-M hemoglobin assembly. Blood 94: 1825-1826, 1999.

16. Andersen, C. B. F.; Torvund-Jensen, M.; Nielsen, M. J.; de Oliveira,
C. L. P.; Hersleth, H.-P.; Andersen, N. H.; Pedersen, J. S.; Andersen,
G. R.; Moestrup, S. K.: Structure of the haptoglobin-haemoglobin
complex. Nature 489: 456-459, 2012.

17. Assum, G.; Griese, E.-U.; Horst, J.: Detection of a restriction
site polymorphism within the human alpha-globin gene complex. Hum.
Genet. 69: 144-146, 1985.

18. Baglioni, C.: A chemical study of hemoglobin-Norfolk. J. Biol.
Chem. 237: 69-74, 1962.

19. Baglioni, C.; Lehmann, H.: Chemical heterogeneity of haemoglobin
O. Nature 196: 229-231, 1962.

20. Baklouti, F.; Baudin-Chich, V.; Kister, J.; Marden, M.; Teyssier,
G.; Poyart, C.; Delaunay, J.; Wajcman, H.: Increased oxygen affinity
with normal heterotropic effects in hemoglobin Loire (alpha88 (F9)
ala-to-ser). Europ. J. Biochem. 177: 307-312, 1988.

21. Baklouti, F.; Francina, A.; Dorleac, E.; Baudin-Chich, V.; Gombaud-Saintonge,
G.; Plauchu, H.; Wajcman, H.; Delaunay, J.; Godet, J.: Asymptomatic
association of hemoglobin Dunn (alpha-6(A4)asp-to-asn) and hemoglobin
O-Arab (beta-121[GH4]glu-to-lys) in a Moroccan man. Am. J. Hemat. 27:
253-256, 1988.

22. Bannister, W. H.; Grech, J. L.; Plese, C. F.; Smith, L. L.; Barton,
B. P.; Wilson, J. B.; Reynolds, C. A.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hemoglobin
St. Luke's or alpha 95 arg (G2). Europ. J. Biochem. 29: 301-307,
1972.

23. Barclay, G. P. T.; Charlesworth, D.; Lehmann, H.: Abnormal haemoglobins
in Zambia: a new hemoglobin Zambia alpha 60 (E9) lysine to asparagine. Brit.
Med. J. 2: 595-596, 1969.

24. Bardakdjian, J.; Kister, J.; Wajcman, H.; Boulard, P.; Bohn, B.;
Blouquit, Y.; Galacteros, F.: Hb Poitiers [alpha45 (CE3) his-to-asp]:
a new hemoglobin variant with a two-fold increase in oxygen affinity. Hemoglobin 18:
1-9, 1994.

25. Bardakdjian-Michau, J.; Galacteros, F.; Craescu, C. T.: Functional
and NMR studies of Hb Sassari (asp126-alpha-to-his): role of the inter-subunit
contacts in the affinity control of human hemoglobin. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1041: 250-253, 1990.

26. Bardakdjian-Michau, J.; Rosa, J.; Galacteros, F.; Lancelot, M.;
Marquart, F. X.: Hb Reims (alpha23(B4)glu-to-gly): a new alpha chain
variant with slightly decreased stability. Hemoglobin 13: 733-735,
1989.

27. Barg, R.; Barton, P.; Caine, A.; Clements, R. L.; Ferguson-Smith,
M. A.; Malcolm, S.; Morrison, N.; Murphy, C. S.: Regional localization
of the human alpha-globin gene to the short arm of chromosome 16 (16p12-pter)
using both somatic cell hybrids and in situ hybridization. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 32: 252-253, 1982.

28. Barton, P.; Malcolm, S.; Murphy, C.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.: Localization
of the human alpha-globin gene cluster to the short arm of chromosome
16 (16p12-16pter) by hybridization in situ. J. Molec. Biol. 156:
269-278, 1982.

29. Baudin, V.; Baklouti, F.; Wajcman, H.; Delaunay, J.: Hemoglobin
Aichi (alpha50 (CE8) his-to-arg) in a French Caucasian patient. Hemoglobin 11:
145-149, 1987.

30. Baur, E. W.: Hb alpha 2 glu beta 2(Hb I) in a Caucasian family:
independent mutation or common origin? Humangenetik 6: 368-372,
1968.

31. Beale, D.; Lehmann, H.: Abnormal haemoglobins and the genetic
code. Nature 207: 259-261, 1965.

32. Beaven, G. H.; Hornabrook, R. W.; Fox, R. H.; Huehns, E. R.:
Occurrence of heterozygotes and homozygotes for the alpha-chain haemoglobin
variant Hb-J (Tongariki) in New Guinea. Nature 235: 46-47, 1972.

33. Beckman, L.; Christodoulou, C.; Fessas, P.; Loukopoulos, D.; Kaltsoya,
A.; Nilsson, L.-O.: A Swedish haemoglobin variant. Acta Genet. Statist.
Med. 16: 362-370, 1966.

34. Beksedic, D.; Rajevska, T.; Lorkin, P. A.; Lehmann, H.: Hb Serbia
(alpha112 his-to-arg), a new haemoglobin variant from Yugoslavia. FEBS
Lett. 58: 226-229, 1975.

35. Beretta, A.; Prato, V.; Gallo, E.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin Torino--alpha
43 (CD 1) phenylalanine replaced by valine. Nature 217: 1016-1018,
1968.

36. Betke, K.: Haemoglobin-M: Typen und ihre Differenzierung (Uebersicht).In:
Lehmann, H.; Betke, K.: Haemoglobin-Colloquium.  Stuttgart: Georg
Thieme Verlag (pub.)  1962. Pp. 39-47.

37. Bilginer, A.; Lehmann, H.; Arcasoy, A.: Hemoglobin Ube-2 (alpha68
asn-to-asp) observed in a Turkish family. Hemoglobin 8: 189-191,
1984.

38. Blackwell, R. Q.; Boon, W. H.; Liu, C. S.; Weng, M. I.: Hemoglobin
J Singapore: alpha-78 asn to asp; alpha-79 ala to gly. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 278: 482-490, 1972.

39. Blackwell, R. Q.; Jim, R. T. S.; Tan, T. G. H.; Weng, M. I.; Liu,
C. S.; Wang, C. L.: Hemoglobin G Waimanalo: alpha 64 asp-to-asn. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 322: 27-33, 1973.

40. Blackwell, R. Q.; Liu, C. S.: Hemoglobin G Taichung: alpha74
asp-to-his. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 200: 70-75, 1970.

41. Blackwell, R. Q.; Wong, H. B.; Wang, C.-L.; Weng, M. I.; Liu,
C.-S.: Hemoglobin J-Meerut: alpha 120 ala-to-glu. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 351: 7-12, 1974.

42. Botha, M. C.; Beale, D.; Issacs, W. A.; Lehmann, H.: Hemoglobin
J Cape Town. Nature 212: 792-794, 1966.

43. Bowman, B. H.; Barnett, D. R.: Amino-acid substitution in haemoglobin
I (Texas variant). Nature 214: 499, 1967.

44. Bowman, J. E.; Bloom, R.; Chen, S. S.; Webber, B. B.; Wilson,
J. B.; Kutlar, F.; Kutlar, A.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Chicago or alpha136
(H19) leu-to-met and a G-gamma-G-gamma-globin gene arrangement in
a black family. Hemoglobin 10: 495-505, 1986.

45. Boyer, S. H.; Crosby, E. F.; Fuller, G. F.; Ulenurm, L.; Buck,
A. A.: A survey of hemoglobins in the Republic of Chad and characterization
of hemoglobin Chad: alpha 23 glu-to-lys. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 20:
570-578, 1968.

46. Braconnier, F.; Gacon, G.; Thillet, J.; Wajcman, H.; Soria, J.;
Maigret, P.; Labie, D.; Rosa, J.: Hemoglobin Fort de France (alpha
45(CD3) his-to-arg): a new variant with increased oxygen affinity. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 477: 223-234, 1977.

47. Bradley, T. B., Jr.; Boyer, S. H.; Allen, F. H., Jr.: Hopkins-2
hemoglobin: a revised pedigree with data on blood and serum groups. Bull.
Johns Hopkins Hosp. 108: 75-79, 1961.

48. Brennan, S. O.; Chan, T.; Obele, M.; George, P. M.: Hb Riccarton
(alpha-51(CE9)gly-to-ser): a variant arising from a novel mutation
in the alpha-1 gene. Hemoglobin 29: 61-64, 2005.

49. Brennan, S. O.; Matthews, J. R. D.: Hb Auckland (alpha87(F8)his-to-asn):
a new mutation of the proximal histidine identified by electrospray
mass spectrometry. Hemoglobin 21: 393-403, 1997.

50. Brennan, S. O.; Tauro, G. P.; Melrose, W.; Carrell, R. W.: Haemoglobin
Port Phillip: alpha 91 (FG3) leu-to-pro, a new unstable hemoglobin. FEBS
Lett. 81: 115-117, 1977.

51. Breuning, M. H.; Madan, K.; Verjaal, M.; Wijnen, J. T.; Meera
Khan, P.; Pearson, P. L.: Human alpha-globin maps to pter-p13.3 in
chromosome 16 distal to PGP. Hum. Genet. 76: 287-289, 1987.

52. Brimhall, B.; Duerst, M.; Hollan, S. R.; Stenzel, P.; Szelenyi,
J.; Jones, R. T.: Structural characterizations of hemoglobins J-Buda
(alpha 61 (E10) lys-to-asn) and G-Pest (alpha 74 (EF3) asp-to-asn). Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 336: 344-360, 1974.

53. Brimhall, B.; Hollan, S.; Jones, R. T.; Koler, R. D.; Stocklen,
Z.; Szelenyi, J. G.: Multiple alpha-chain loci for human hemoglobin.
(Abstract) Clin. Res. 18: 184, 1970.

54. Brittenham, G.; Lozoff, B.; Harris, J. W.; Kan, Y. W.; Dozy, A.
M.; Nayudu, N. V. S.: Alpha globin gene number: population and restriction
endonuclease studies. Blood 55: 706-708, 1980.

55. Buckle, V. J.; Higgs, D. R.; Wilkie, A. O. M.; Super, M.; Weatherall,
D. J.: Localisation of human alpha globin to 16p13.3-pter. J. Med.
Genet. 25: 847-849, 1988.

56. Bunn, H. F.; Altman, A. J.; Stangland, K.; Firshein, S. I.; Forget,
B.; Schmidt, G. J.; Jones, R. T.: Hemoglobins Aida (alpha 64 asp-to-asn)
and D-Los Angeles (beta 121 glu-to-gln) in an Asian-Indian family. Hemoglobin 2:
531-540, 1978.

57. Cabannes, R.; Renaud, R.; Mauran, A.; Pennors, H.; Charlesworth,
D.; Price, B. G.; Lehmann, H.: Two fast haemoglobins in Ivory-Coast:
Hb K Woolwich and a new haemoglobin Hb J Abidjan (alpha 51 gly-to-asp). Nouv.
Rev. Franc. Hemat. 12: 289-300, 1972.

58. Carstairs, K. C.; Raulfs, A.; Kutlar, A.; Chen, S. S.; Webber,
B. B.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Fort Worth or alpha(2)27(B8)glu-to-gly
in a black family from Canada. Hemoglobin 9: 201-205, 1985.

59. Carver, M. F. H.; Kutlar, A.: International Hemoglobin Information
Center: variant list. Hemoglobin 19: 37-149, 1995.

60. Cash, F. E.; Monplaisir, N.; Goossens, M.; Liebhaber, S. A.:
Locus assignment of two alpha-globin structural mutants from the Caribbean
Basin: alpha Fort de France (alpha(45-arg)) and alpha Spanish Town
(alpha(27-val)). Blood 74: 833-835, 1989.

61. Charache, S.; Weatherall, D. J.; Clegg, J. B.: Polycythemia associated
with a hemoglobinopathy. J. Clin. Invest. 45: 813-822, 1966.

62. Chih-chuan, L.; Hai-nan, T.; Kuo-feng, C.: Hemoglobin Handsworth
(alpha 18 (A16) gly-to-arg) in a Chinese. Hemoglobin 5: 191-193,
1981.

63. Chui, D. H. K.; Waye, J. S.: Hydrops fetalis caused by alpha-thalassemia:
an emerging health care problem. Blood 91: 2213-2222, 1998.

64. Cleek, M. P.; Gardiner, M. B.; Reese, A. L.; Harris, H. F.; Felice,
A. E.; Huisman, T. H. J.: The Atlanta family with hemoglobin Grady
revisited. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 35: 1314-1316, 1983.

65. Clegg, J. B.; Charache, S.: The structure of hemoglobin Hopkins-2. Hemoglobin 2:
85-88, 1978.

66. Clegg, J. B.; Naughton, M. A.; Weatherall, D. J.: Abnormal human
haemoglobins: separation and characterization of the alpha and beta
chains by chromatography, and the determination of two new variants,
Hb Chesapeake and Hb J (Bangkok). J. Molec. Biol. 19: 91-108, 1966.

67. Clegg, J. B.; Weatherall, D. J.; Boon, W. H.; Mustafa, D.: Two
new haemoglobin variants involving proline substitutions. Nature 222:
379-380, 1969.

68. Cohen-Solal, M.; Manesse, B.; Thillet, J.; Rosa, J.: Haemoglobin
G Norfolk alpha-85 (F6) asp-to-asn: structural characterization by
sequenator analysis and functional properties of a new variant with
high oxygen affinity. FEBS Lett. 50: 163-167, 1975.

69. Colombo, B.; Vidal, H.; Kamuzora, H.; Lehmann, H.: A new haemoglobin
J-Habana--alpha 71 (E20) alanine-to-glutamic acid. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 351: 1-6, 1974.

70. Como, P. F.; Barber, S.; Sage, R. E.; Kronenberg, H.: Hemoglobin
Woodville: alpha6 (A4) aspartic acid-to-tyrosine. Hemoglobin 10:
135-141, 1986.

71. Cooper, M. R.; Kraus, A. P.; Felts, J. H.; Myers, R.; Kraus, L.
M.: A third case of hemoglobin Memphis: sickle cell disease. Am.
J. Med. 55: 535-541, 1973.

72. Costa, F. F.; Sonati, M. F.; Zago, M. A.: Hemoglobin Stanleyville
II (alpha-78 asn-to-lys) is associated with a 3.7-kb alpha-globin
gene deletion. Hum. Genet. 86: 319-320, 1991.

73. Cotton, F.; Hansen, V.; Lin, C.; Parma, J.; Cochaux, P.; Damis,
E.; Vertongen, F.; Gulbis, B.: Hb Ube-2 [alpha-68(E17)asn-asp] and
Hb Hafnia [beta-116(G18)his-gln] observed during neonatal screening
in Brussels. Hemoglobin 24: 65-69, 2000.

74. Crookston, J. H.; Beale, D.; Irvine, D.; Lehmann, H.: A new haemoglobin,
J Toronto (alpha-5 alanine to aspartic acid). Nature 208: 1059-1060,
1965.

75. Crookston, J. H.; Farquharson, H. A.; Beale, D.; Lehmann, H.:
Hemoglobin Etobicoke: alpha 84(F5) serine replaced by arginine. Canad.
J. Biochem. 47: 143-146, 1969.

76. Curuk, M. A.; Altay, C.; Fei, Y.-J.; Kutlar, F.; Baysal, E.; Gu,
L.-H.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Severe Hb H disease due to a combination
of the -(alpha)20 kb deletion and Hb Adana, an unstable alpha-1 variant
with gly-to-asp at alpha-59 (GGC-to-GAC). (Abstract) Blood 80: 81a,
1992.

77. Dahmane-Arbane, M.; Blouquit, Y.; Arous, N.; Bardakdjian, J.;
Benamani, M.; Riou, J.; Benabadji, M.; Rosa, J.; Galacteros, F.:
Hemoglobine Boumerdes alpha-37 (C2) pro-to-arg: un nouveau variant
de la chaine alpha associe a l'hemoglobine S dans une famille algerienne. Nouv.
Rev. Franc. Hemat. 29: 317-320, 1987.

78. Darbellay, R.; Mach-Pascual, S.; Rose, K.; Graf, J.; Beris, Ph.
: Haemoglobin Tunis-Bizerte: a new alpha-1 globin 129 leu-to-pro unstable
variant with thalassaemic phenotype. Brit. J. Haemat. 90: 71-76,
1995.

79. Daud, D.; Harahap, A.; Setianingsih, I.; Nainggolan, I.; Tranggana,
S.; Pakasi, R.; Marzuki, S.: The hemoglobin O mutation in Indonesia:
distribution and phenotypic expression. J. Hum. Genet. 46: 499-505,
2001.

80. Davis, J. R., Jr.; Dozy, A. M.; Lubin, B.; Koenig, H. M.; Pierce,
H. I.; Stamatoyannopoulos, G.; Kan, Y. W.: Alpha-thalassemia in blacks
is due to gene deletion. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 31: 569-573, 1979.

81. De Gobbi, M.; Viprakasit, V.; Hughes, J. R.; Fisher, C.; Buckle,
V. J.; Ayyub, H.; Gibbons, R. J.; Vernimmen, D.; Yoshinaga, Y.; de
Jong, P.; Cheng, J.-F.; Rubin, E. M.; Wood, W. G.; Bowden, D.; Higgs,
D. R.: A regulatory SNP causes a human genetic disease by creating
a new transcriptional promoter. Science 312: 1215-1217, 2006.

82. Deisseroth, A.; Hendrick, D.: Human alpha-globin gene expression
following chromosomal dependent gene transfer into mouse erythroleukemia
cells. Cell 15: 55-63, 1978.

83. Deisseroth, A.; Nienhuis, A.; Turner, P.; Velez, R.; Anderson,
W. F.; Ruddle, F. H.; Lawrence, J.; Creagan, R. P.; Kucherlapati,
R. S.: Localization of the human alpha globin structural gene to
chromosome 16 in somatic cell hybrids by molecular hybridization assay. Cell 12:
205-218, 1977.

84. Deisseroth, A.; Velez, R.; Nienhuis, A. W.: Hemoglobin synthesis
in somatic cell hybrids: independent segregation of the human alpha-
and beta-globin genes. Science 191: 1262-1263, 1976.

85. Deon, C.; Prome, J. C.; Prome, D.; Francina, A.; Groff, P.; Kalmes,
G.; Galacteros, F.; Wajcman, H.: Combined mass spectrometric methods
for the characterization of human hemoglobin variants localized within
alpha-T9 peptide: identification of Hb Villeurbanne alpha-89 (FG1)
his-to-tyr. J. Mass Spectrom. 32: 880-887, 1997.

86. de Traverse, P. M.; Lehmann, H.; Coquelet, M. L.; Beale, D.; Isaacs,
W. A.: Etude d'une hemoglobine J-alpha non encore decrite, dans une
famille francaise. Comp. Rend. Soc. Biol. 160: 2270-2272, 1966.

87. DeVries, A.; Joshua, H.; Lehmann, H.; Hill, R. L.; Fellows, R.
E.: The first observation of an abnormal hemoglobin in a Jewish family:
hemoglobin Beilinson. Brit. J. Haemat. 9: 484-486, 1963.

88. de Weinstein, B. I.; Kutlar, A.; Webber, B. B.; Wilson, J. B.;
Huisman, T. H. J.: Hemoglobin Daneshgah-Tehran or alpha72(EF1)his-to-arg
in an Argentinean family. Hemoglobin 9: 409-411, 1985.

89. Dincol, G.; Dincol, K.; Erdem, S.; Pobedimskaya, D. D.; Molchanova,
T. P.; Ye, Z.; Webber, B. B.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb
Capa or alpha-94(G1)asp-to-gly, a mildly unstable variant with an
A-to-G (GAC-to-GGC) mutation in codon 94 of the alpha-1-globin gene. Hemoglobin 18:
57-60, 1994.

90. Dincol, G.; Elam, D.; Kutlar, A.; Kutlar, F.: Hb Setif [alpha-94(G1)asp-to-tyr
(alpha-2)] detected in a Turkish family. Hemoglobin 27: 249-252,
2003.

91. Djoumessi, S.; Rousseaux, J.; Descamps, J.; Goudemand, M.; Dautrevaux,
M.: Hemoglobin Lille, alpha-2(74(EF3) asp-to-ala)beta-2. Hemoglobin 5:
475-479, 1981.

92. Dozy, A. M.; Forman, E. N.; Abuelo, D. N.; Barsel-Bowers, G.;
Mahoney, M. J.; Forget, B. G.; Kan, Y. W.: Prenatal diagnosis of
hemizygous alpha-thalassemia. JAMA 241: 1610-1613, 1979.

93. Dozy, A. M.; Kan, Y. W.; Embury, S. H.; Mentzer, W. C.; Wang,
W. C.: Alpha-globin gene organisation in blacks precludes the severe
form of alpha-thalassaemia. Nature 280: 605-607, 1979.

94. Dysert, P. A., II; Head, C. G.; Shih, T. B.; Jones, R. T.; Schneider,
R. G.: Hb Dallas, alpha 97(G4) asn-to-lys: a new abnormal hemoglobin
with high oxygen affinity. (Abstract) Blood 60: 53a, 1982.

95. Eicher, E. M.; Lee, B. K.: Growth hormone receptor (Ghr) and
hemoglobin alpha-chain pseudogene 3 (Hba-ps3) map proximal to the
myelocytomatosis oncogene (Myc) on mouse chromosome 15. Mammalian
Genome 1: 57-58, 1991.

96. Embury, S. H.; Lebo, R. V.; Dozy, A. M.; Kan, Y. W.: Organization
of the alpha-globin genes in the Chinese alpha-thalassemia syndromes. J.
Clin. Invest. 63: 1307-1310, 1979.

97. Eng, B.; Patterson, M.; Walker, L.; Hoppe, C.; Azimi, M.; Lee,
H.; Giordano, P. C.; Waye, J. S.: Three new alpha-thalassemia point
mutations ascertained through newborn screening. Hemoglobin 30:
149-153, 2006.

98. Felice, A. E.: Hb St. Luke's (alpha-95(G2)pro-to-arg (alpha-1)).
(Letter) Hemoglobin 27: 137 only, 2003.

99. Ferranti, P.; Parlapiano, A.; Malorni, A.; Pucci, P.; Marino,
G.; Cossu, G.; Manca, L.; Masala, B.: Hemoglobin Ozieri: a new alpha-chain
variant (alpha-71(E20)ala-to-val): characterization using FAB- and
electrospray-mass spectrometric techniques. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1162:
203-208, 1993.

100. Fessas, C.; Karaklis, A.; Loukopoulos, D.; Stamatoyannopoulos,
G.; Fessas, P.: Hemoglobin Nicosia: an alpha-chain variant and its
combination with beta-thalassaemia. Brit. J. Haemat. 11: 323-330,
1965.

101. Fessas, P.; Kaltsoya, A.; Loukopoulos, D.; Nilsson, L.-O.: On
the chemical structure of haemoglobin Uppsala. Hum. Hered. 19: 152-158,
1969.

102. Fleming, P. J.; Arnold, B. J.; Thompson, E. O. P.; Hughes, W.
G.; Morgan, L.: Hb I alpha 16 lys-to-glu and Hb Broussais alpha 90
lys-to-asn in Australian families. Pathology 10: 317-327, 1978.

103. Fleming, P. J.; Hughes, W. G.; Farmilo, R. K.; Wyatt, K.; Cooper,
W. N.: Hemoglobin Westmead (alpha 122(H5) his-to-gln): a new hemoglobin
variant with the substitution in the alpha-beta contact area. Hemoglobin 4:
39-52, 1980.

104. Fleming, P. J.; Sumner, D. R.; Wyatt, K.; Hughes, W. G.; Melrose,
W. D.; Jupe, D. M. D.; Baikie, M. J.: Hemoglobin Hobart or alpha20
(B1) his-to-arg: a new alpha chain hemoglobin variant. Hemoglobin 11:
211-220, 1987.

105. Flint, J.; Hill, A. V. S.; Bowden, D. K.; Oppenheimer, S. J.;
Sill, P. R.; Serjeantson, S. W.; Bonna-Kori, J.; Bhatia, K.; Alpers,
M. P.; Boyce, A. J.; Weatherall, D. J.; Clegg, J. B.: High frequencies
of alpha-thalassemia are the result of natural selection by malaria. Nature 321:
744-751, 1986.

106. Fujisawa, K.; Hattori, Y.; Ohba, Y.; Ando, S.: Hb Yuda or alpha130
(H13) ala-to-asp; a new alpha chain variant with low oxygen affinity. Hemoglobin 16:
435-439, 1992.

107. Fujiwara, N.: An amino acid substitution in Hb Atago, an abnormal
human hemoglobin. J. Jpn. Biochem. Soc. 42: 341-349, 1970.

108. Fujiwara, N.; Maekawa, T.; Matsuda, G.: Hemoglobin Atago (alpha
85 tyr): a new abnormal human hemoglobin found in Nagasaki. Int.
J. Protein Res. 3: 35-39, 1971.

109. Fung, T. Y.; Kin, L. T.; Kong, L. C.; Keung, L. C.: Homozygous
alpha-thalassemia associated with hypospadias in three survivors. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 82: 225-227, 1999.

110. Gajdusek, D. C.; Guiart, J.; Kirk, R. L.; Carrell, R. W.; Irvine,
D.; Kynoch, P. A. M.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin J Tongariki (alpha
115 alanine to aspartic acid): the first new haemoglobin variant found
in a Pacific (Melanesian) population. J. Med. Genet. 4: 1-6, 1967.

111. Gammack, D. B.; Huehns, E. R.; Lehmann, H.; Shooter, E. M.:
The abnormal polypeptide chains in a number of haemoglobin variants. Acta
Genet. Statist. Med. 11: 1-16, 1961.

112. Gandini, E.; Dallapiccola, B.; Laurent, C.; Suerine, E. F.; Forabosco,
A.; Conconi, G.; Del Senno, L.: Evidence for localisation of genes
for human alpha-globin on the long arm of chromosome 4. Nature 265:
65-66, 1977.

113. Garel, M. C.; Goossens, M.; Oudart, J. L.; Blouquit, Y.; Thillet,
J.; Rosa, J.: Hemoglobin Dakar = Hb Grady: demonstration by a new
approach to the analysis of the tryptic core region of the alpha chain
and oxygen equilibrium properties. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 453: 459-471,
1976.

114. Gerald, P. S.; Cook, C. D.; Diamond, L. K.: Hemoglobin M. Science 126:
300-301, 1957.

115. Gerald, P. S.; Efron, M. L.: Chemical studies of several varieties
of Hb M. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 47: 1758-1767, 1961.

116. Gerhard, D. S.; Kawasaki, E. S.; Bancroft, F. C.; Szabo, P.:
Localization of a unique gene by direct hybridization in situ. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 78: 3755-3759, 1981.

117. Giordano, P. C.; Fodde, R.; Amons, R.; Ploem, J. E.; Bernini,
L. F.: Hb J-Anatolia (alpha61(E10)lys-to-thr): structural characterization
and gene localization of a new alpha chain variant. Hemoglobin 14:
119-128, 1990.

118. Giordano, P. C.; Harteveld, C. L.; Kok, P. J. M. J.; Geenen,
A.; Batelaan, D.; Amons, R.; Bernini, L. F.: Hb Gouda (alpha72(EF1)his-to-gln),
a new silent alpha-chain variant. Hemoglobin 20: 21-29, 1996.

119. Girodon, E.; M'Rad, A.; Martin, J.; Goossens, M.; Galacteros,
F.; Rosa, J.; Gisselbrecht, C.; Boiron, M.; Cohen, I. J.; Jaber, L.;
Tamari, H.; Goshen, J.; Zaizov, R.; Wajcman, H.: Hb Taybe (alpha
38 or 39 THR deleted): a new unstable alpha chain hemoglobin variant.
(Abstract) Blood 80 (suppl. 1): 388a, 1992.

120. Gonzalez Redondo, J. M.; Wilson, J. B.; Kutlar, A.; Huisman,
T. H. J.; Sicilia, A.; Romero, C.; Fernandes Fuertes, I.: Hb J-Pontoise
or alpha63(E12)ala-to-asp in four members of a Spanish family. Hemoglobin 11:
47-50, 1987.

121. Goossens, M.; Dozy, A. M.; Embury, S. H.; Zachariadis, Z.; Hadjiminas,
M. G.; Stamatoyannopoulos, G.; Kan, Y. W.: Triplicated alpha-globin
loci in humans. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 77: 518-521, 1980.

122. Gottlieb, A. J.; Restrepo, A.; Itano, H. A.: Hb J (Medellin).
Chemical and genetic study. Fed. Proc. 23: 172, 1964.

123. Griffiths, K. D.; Lang, A.; Lehmann, H.; Mann, J. R.; Plowman,
D.; Raine, D. N.: Haemoglobin Handsworth alpha 18 glycine-to-arginine. FEBS
Lett. 75: 93-95, 1977.

124. Groff, P.; Galacteros, F.; Kalmes, G.; Blouquit, Y.; Wajcman,
H.: HB Luxembourg (alpha24(B5)tyr-to-his): a new unstable variant. Hemoglobin 13:
429-436, 1989.

125. Guis, M.; Mentzer, W. C.; Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M. H.; McGuffey,
J. E.; Moo-Penn, W. F.: Hemoglobin Twin Peaks: alpha113(GH1) leu-to-his. Hemoglobin 9:
175-177, 1985.

126. Hamaguchi, K.; Harano, K.; Harano, T.; Sakata, T.: Hb Oita (alpha-45(CE3)his-to-pro):
a new silent hemoglobin variant. Hemoglobin 22: 347-354, 1998. Note:
Erratum: Hemoglobin 22: 539-540, 1998.

127. Hanada, M.; Ohta, Y.; Imamura, T.; Fejimura, T.; Kawasaki, K.;
Kosaka, K.; Yamaoka, K.; Seita, M.: Studies of abnormal hemoglobins
in western Japan. (Abstract) Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 9: 253-254, 1964.

128. Hanada, M.; Rucknagel, D. L.: The characterization of hemoglobin
Shimonoseki. Blood 24: 624-635, 1964.

129. Hansen, H. A.; Jagenburg, O. R.; Johansson, B. G.: Studies on
an abnormal hemoglobin causing hereditary congenital cyanosis. Acta
Paediat. 49: 503-511, 1960.

130. Harano, K.; Harano, T.; Shibata, S.; Mori, H.; Ueda, S.; Imai,
K.; Ohba, Y.; Irimajiri, K.: Hb J Oxford (alpha15 (A13) gly-to-asp)
in Japan. Hemoglobin 8: 197-198, 1984.

131. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Hong, Y.-F.; Than, A. M.; Suetsugu, Y.;
Ohba, K.: The mutation of Hb Turriff (alpha-99(G6)lys-to-glu (AAG-GAG))
is carried by the alpha-1-globin gene in a Japanese (Hb Turriff-I). Hemoglobin 27:
123-127, 2003.

132. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Imai, K.; Terunuma, S.: Hb Swan River
(alpha6(A4)asp-to-gly) observed in a Japanese man. Hemoglobin 20:
75-78, 1996.

133. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Imai, N.; Ueda, S.; Seki, M.: An electrophoretically
silent hemoglobin variant, Hb Hekinan (alpha27 (B8) glu-to-asp) found
in a Japanese. Hemoglobin 12: 61-65, 1988.

134. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Imai, K.; Seki,
M.: Hb Handa (alpha90 (FG2) lys-to-met): structure and biosynthesis
of a new slightly higher oxygen affinity variant. Hemoglobin 6:
379-389, 1982.

135. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Imai, K.; Seki,
M.: Hemoglobin Tokoname (alpha139 (HC 1) lys-to-thr): a new hemoglobin
variant with a slightly increased oxygen affinity. Hemoglobin 7:
85-90, 1983.

136. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Imai, K.; Tsuneshige,
A.; Uchida, E.; Horiuchi, K.: Hb Le Lamentin (alpha20 (B1) his-to-gln)
in Japan: structure, function and biosynthesis. Hemoglobin 7: 181-184,
1983.

137. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Imai, K.; Tsuneshige,
A.; Yamada, H.; Seki, M.; Fukui, H.: Hemoglobin Kariya (alpha40 (C5)
lys-to-glu) a new hemoglobin variant with an increased oxygen affinity. FEBS
Lett. 153: 332-334, 1983.

138. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Mori, H.; Imai,
K.: Hb Chesapeake (alpha92 (FG4) arg-to-leu) and Hb J Cape Town (alpha92
(FG4) arg-to-gln) first discovered in Japanese. Hemoglobin 7: 461-465,
1983.

139. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Mori, H.; Seki,
M.: Hemoglobin Aichi (alpha50 (CE8) his-to-arg): a new slightly unstable
hemoglobin variant discovered in Japan. FEBS Lett. 169: 297-299,
1984.

140. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Ueda, S.: Hb Owari (alpha121 (H4) val-to-met):
a new hemoglobin variant with a neutral-to-neutral amino acid substitution
detected by isoelectric focusing. Hemoglobin 10: 127-134, 1986.

141. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Ueda, S.; Shibata, S.; Imai, K.; Ohba,
Y.; Shinohara, T.; Horio, S.; Nishioka, K.; Shirotani, H.: Hemoglobin
Kawachi (alpha 44 (CE2) pro-to-arg): a new hemoglobin variant of high
oxygen affinity with amino acid substitution at alpha(1)-beta(2) contact. Hemoglobin 6:
43-49, 1982.

142. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Uehara, S.; Matsushita, K.: Two new
alpha chain variants: Hb Fuchu-I (alpha-72(EF1)his-to-tyr) and Hb
Fuchu-II (alpha-97(G4)asn-to-his). Hemoglobin 19: 389-395, 1995.

143. Hardison, R. C.; Sawada, I.; Cheng, J.-F.; Shen, C.-K. J.; Schmid,
C. W.: A previously undetected pseudogene in the human alpha globin
gene cluster. Nucleic Acids Res. 14: 1903-1911, 1986.

144. Harteveld, C. L.; Rozendaal, L.; Blom, N. A.; Lo-A-Njoe, S.;
Akkerman, N.; Arkestijn, S.; Van Delft, P.; Giordano, P. C.: Hb Oegstgeest
(alpha-104(G11)cys-to-ser(alpha-1)): a new hemoglobin variant associated
with a mild alpha-thalassemia phenotype. Hemoglobin 29: 165-169,
2005.

145. Harteveld, C. L.; Van Delft, P.; Akkermans, N.; Arkesteijn, S.;
Van Rooijen-Nijdam, I. H.; Kok, P. J. M. J.; Versteegh, F. G. A.;
Giordano, P. C.: Hb Buffalo [alpha-89(FG1)his-to-gln (alpha-1)],
observed solely and in the presence of an Hb S [beta-6(A3)glu-to-val]
heterozygosity. Hemoglobin 28: 223-227, 2004.

146. Harteveld, C. L.; Van Delft, P.; Plug, R. J.; Erjavec, Z.; Wajcman,
H.; Giordano, P. C.: Hb Delfzicht [alpha-9(A7)asn-to-lys (alpha-1)]:
a new, clinically silent hemoglobin variant observed in a Dutch patient. Hemoglobin 26:
181-184, 2002.

147. Harteveld, C. L.; Wijermans, P. W.; de Ree, J. E. L. M.; Ter
Hal, P.; Van Delft, P.; Van Rooijen-Nijdam, I. H.; Rasp, E.; Kok,
P. J. M. J.; Souverijn, J. H. M.; Versteegh, F. G. A.; Giordano, P.
C.: A new Hb Evanston allele (alpha-14(A12)trp-to-arg) found solely,
and in the presence of common alpha-thalassemia deletions, in three
independent Asian cases. Hemoglobin 28: 1-5, 2004.

148. Hatton, C. S. R.; Wilkie, A. O. M.; Drysdale, H. C.; Wood, W.
G.; Vickers, M. A.; Sharpe, J.; Ayyub, H.; Pretorius, I. M.; Buckle,
V. J.; Higgs, D. R.: Alpha-thalassemia caused by a large (62 kb)
deletion upstream of the human alpha-globin gene cluster. Blood 76:
221-227, 1990.

149. Hattori, Y.; Ohba, Y.; Suda, T.; Miura, Y.; Yoshinaka, H.; Miyaji,
T.: Hemoglobin Guizhou in Japan. Hemoglobin 9: 187-192, 1985.

150. Hayashi, A.; Yamamura, Y.; Ogita, S.; Kikkawa, H.: Hemoglobin
M (Osaka), a new variant of hemoglobin M. Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 9:
87-94, 1964.

151. Headlee, M. G.; Nakatsuji, T.; Lam, H.; Wrightstone, R. N.; Huisman,
T. H. J.: Hb Etobicoke, alpha85(F5) ser-to-arg found in a newborn
of French-Indian-English descent. Hemoglobin 7: 285-287, 1983.

152. Heller, P.: Hemoglobin M (Chicago) and M (Kankakee).In: Lehmann,
H.; Betke, K.: Haemoglobin-Colloquium.  Stuttgart: Georg Thieme
Verlag (pub.)  1962. Pp. 47-49.

153. Heller, P.; Weinstein, H. G.; Yakulis, V. J.; Rosenthal, I. M.
: Hemoglobin M (Kankakee), a new variant of hemoglobin M. Blood 20:
287-301, 1962.

154. Hess, J. F.; Fox, M.; Schmid, C.; Shen, C.-K. J.: Molecular
evolution of the human adult alpha-globin-like gene region: insertion
and deletion of Alu family repeats and non-Alu DNA sequences. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 5970-5974, 1983.

155. Hidaka, K.; Iuchi, I.; Kobayashi, T.; Katoh, K.; Yaguchi, K.
: Hb Fukutomi (alpha126(H9)asp-to-val): a new hemoglobin variant with
high oxygen affinity. Hemoglobin 14: 499-509, 1990.

156. Higgs, D. R.; Goodbourn, S. E. Y.; Wainscoat, J. S.; Clegg, J.
B.; Weatherall, D. J.: Highly variable regions of DNA flank the human
alpha-globin genes. Nucleic Acids Res. 9: 4213-4224, 1981.

157. Higgs, D. R.; Hunt, D. M.; Drysdale, H. C.; Clegg, J. B.; Pressley,
L.; Weatherall, D. J.: The genetic basis of Hb Q-H disease. Brit.
J. Haemat. 46: 387-400, 1980.

158. Higgs, D. R.; Vickers, M. A.; Wilkie, A. O. M.; Pretorius, I.-M.;
Jarman, A. P.; Weatherall, D. J.: A review of the molecular genetics
of the alpha-globin gene cluster. Blood 73: 1081-1104, 1989.

159. Higgs, D. R.; Wainscoat, J. S.; Flint, J.; Hill, A. V. S.; Thein,
S. L.; Nicholls, R. D.; Teal, H.; Ayyub, H.; Peto, T. E. A.; Falusi,
A. G.; Jarman, A. P.; Clegg, J. B.; Weatherall, D. J.: Analysis of
the human alpha-globin gene cluster reveals a highly informative genetic
locus. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 5165-5169, 1986.

160. Hill, A. V. S.; Bowden, D. K.; Trent, R. J.; Higgs, D. R.; Oppenheimer,
S. J.; Thein, S. L.; Mickleson, K. N. P.; Weatherall, D. J.; Clegg,
J. B.: Melanesians and Polynesians share a unique alpha-thalassemia
mutation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 37: 571-580, 1985.

161. Hill, A. V. S.; Thein, S. L.; Mavo, B.; Weatherall, D. J.; Clegg,
J. B.: Non-deletion haemoglobin H disease in Papua New Guinea. J.
Med. Genet. 24: 767-771, 1987.

162. Hollan, S. R.; Szelenyi, J. G.; Brimhall, B.; Duerst, M.; Jones,
R. T.; Koler, R. D.; Stocklen, Z.: Multiple alpha chain loci for
human haemoglobins: Hb J (Buda) and Hb G (Pest). Nature 235: 47-50,
1972.

163. Hollan, S. R.; Szelenyi, J. G.; Lehmann, H.; Beale, D.: A Boston-type
haemoglobin M in Hungary: haemoglobin M Kiskunhalas. Haematologica 1:
11-18, 1967.

164. Honig, G. R.; Shamsuddin, M.; Tremaine, L. M.; Mason, R. G.;
Vida, L. N.; Sarnwick, R.; Shahidi, N. T.: Hemoglobin Nigeria (alpha81
ser-to-cys), a new variant having an inhibitory effect on the gelation
of sickle hemoglobin. (Abstract) Blood 52 (suppl. 1): 113, 1978.

165. Honig, G. R.; Shamsuddin, M.; Vida, L. N.; Mompoint, M.; Bowie,
L.; Jones, E.; Weil, S.: Hb Evanston (alpha 14 trp-to-arg): a new
variant with thalassemia-like hematologic expression. (Abstract) Blood 60:
53a, 1982.

166. Honig, G. R.; Shamsuddin, M.; Zaizov, R.; Steinherz, M.; Solar,
I.; Kirschmann, C.: Hemoglobin Petah Tikva (alpha 110 ala-to-asp):
a new unstable variant with alpha-thalassemia-like expression. Blood 57:
705-711, 1981.

167. Honig, G. R.; Vida, L. N.; Shamsuddin, M.; Mason, R. G.; Schlumpf,
H. W.; Luke, R. A.: Hemoglobin Milledgeville (alpha44 (CD2) pro-to-leu):
a new variant with increased oxygen affinity. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 626:
424-431, 1980.

168. Horst, J.; Assum, G.; Griese, E. U.; Eigel, A.; Hampl, W.; Kohne,
E.: Hemoglobin M Iwate is caused by a C-to-T transition in codon
87 of the human alpha-1-globin gene. Hum. Genet. 75: 53-55, 1987.

169. Houjun, L.; Dexiang, L.; Zhiguo, L.; Ping, L.; Ly, L.; Ji, C.;
Shaozhi, H.: A new fast-moving hemoglobin variant, Hb J-Tashikuergan
alpha19 (AB1) ala-to-glu. Hemoglobin 8: 391-395, 1984.

170. Hoyer, J. D.; McCormick, D. J.; Snow, K.; Lawler, J.; Jadick,
M.; Grageda, R.; Early, J. L.; Ball, C.; Skarda, P.; Kubik, K. S.;
Holmes, M. W.; Fairbanks, V. F.: Three new variants of the alpha-1-globin
gene without clinical or hematologic effects: Hb Hagerstown [alpha-44(CE2)pro-to-ala
(alpha-1)]; Hb Buffalo [alpha-89(FG1)his-to-gln (alpha-1)], a hemoglobin
variant from Somalia and Yemen; Hb Wichita [alpha-95(G2)pro-to-gln
(alpha-1)]; and a second, unrelated, case of Hb Roubaix [alpha-55(E4)val-to-leu
(alpha-1)]. Hemoglobin 26: 291-298, 2002.

171. Hoyer, J. D.; Weinhold, J.; Mailhot, E.; Alter, D.; McCormick,
D. J.; Snow, K.; Kubik, K. S.; Holmes, M. W.; Fairbanks, V. F.: Three
new hemoglobin variants with abnormal oxygen affinity: Hb Saratoga
Springs [alpha-40(C5)lys-to-asn (alpha-1)], Hb Santa Clara [beta-97(FG4)his-to-asn],
and Hb Sparta [beta-103(G5)phe-to-val]. Hemoglobin 27: 235-241,
2003.

172. Huisman, T. H. J.; Adams, H. R.; Wilson, J. B.; Efremov, G. D.;
Reynolds, C. A.; Wrightstone, R. N.: Hemoglobin G Georgia or alpha
95 leu (G-2) beta 2. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 200: 578-580, 1970.

173. Huisman, T. H. J.; Carver, M. F. H.; Efremov, G. D.: A syllabus
of human hemoglobin variants (1996). Augusta, Ga.: The Sickle Cell
Anemia Foundation , 1996.

174. Huisman, T. H. J.; Miller, A.: Hb Grady and alpha-thalassemia:
a contribution to the problem of the number of Hb (alpha) structural
loci in man. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 28: 363-369, 1976.

175. Huisman, T. H. J.; Sydenstricker, V. P.: Difference in gross
structure of two electrophoretically identical 'minor' hemoglobin
components. Nature 193: 489-491, 1962.

176. Huisman, T. H. J.; Wilson, J. B.; Gravely, M.; Hubbard, M.:
Hemoglobin Grady: the first example of a variant with elongated chains
due to an insertion of residues. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 71: 3270-3273,
1974.

177. Huntsman, R. G.; Hall, M.; Lehmann, H.; Sukumaran, P. K.: A
second and a third abnormal haemoglobin in Norfolk. Hb G-Norfolk and
Hb D-Norfolk. Brit. Med. J. 1: 720-722, 1963.

178. Hyde, R. D.; Kinderlerer, J. L.; Lehmann, H.; Hall, M.: Hb J
Rajappen. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 243: 515-519, 1971.

179. Imai, K.; Tsuneshige, A.; Harano, T.; Harano, K.: Structure-function
relationships in hemoglobin Kariya, lys40(C5)alpha-to-glu, with high
oxygen affinity: functional role of the salt bridge between lys40alpha
and the beta-chain COOH terminus. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 11174-11180,
1989.

180. Imamura, T.: Hemoglobin Kagoshima: an example of hemoglobin
Norfolk in a Japanese family. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 18: 584-593, 1966.

181. Itano, H. A.; Robinson, E. A.: Genetic control of the alpha-
and beta-chains of hemoglobin. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 46: 1492-1501,
1960.

182. Itano, H. A.; Robinson, E. A.: Formation of normal and double
abnormal haemoglobins by recombination of haemoglobin I with S and
C. Nature 183: 1799-1800, 1959.

183. Iuchi, I.; Hidaka, K.; Ueda, S.; Shibata, S.; Kusumoto, T.:
Hemoglobin G Taichung (alpha 74 asp-to-his) heterozygotes found in
two Japanese families. Hemoglobin 2: 79-84, 1978.

184. Iuchi, I.; Shimasaki, S.; Hidaka, K.; Harano, T.; Ueda, S.; Shibata,
S.; Mizushima, J.; Kubo, N.: Hemoglobin Mizushi (alpha75 EF4 asp-to-gly):
a new hemoglobin variant observed in a Japanese family. Hemoglobin 4:
209-214, 1980.

185. Jarman, A. P.; Higgs, D. R.: A new hypervariable marker for
the human alpha-globin gene cluster. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 43: 249-256,
1988.

186. Jen, P. C.; Liu, Y.: Hemoglobin Guangzhou, alpha64 (E3) asp-to-gly,
a new abnormal hemoglobin found in Guangzhou, China. Hemoglobin 11:
25-30, 1987.

187. Jones, R. T.; Brimhall, B.; Lisker, R.: Chemical characterization
of hemoglobin Mexico and hemoglobin Chiapas. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 154:
488-495, 1968.

188. Jones, R. T.; Koler, R. D.; Lisker, R.: The chemical structure
of hemoglobin Mexico determined by automatic peptide chromatography
and subunit hybridization. Clin. Res. 11: 105, 1963.

189. Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M. H.; Patchen, L. C.; Moo-Penn, W. F.:
Hemoglobin Dunn: alpha6 aspartic acid-to-asparagine. Hemoglobin 3:
137-143, 1979.

190. Juricic, D.; Efremov, G. D.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.
: Hb Savaria or alpha49(CE7)ser-to-arg in a Yugoslavian family. Hemoglobin 9:
631-633, 1985.

191. Kamuzora, H.; Lehmann, H.: A new hemoglobin variant. Hemoglobin
J (Birmingham): alpha 120 (H3) ala-to-glu. Ann. Clin. Biochem. 11:
53-55, 1974.

192. Kan, Y. W.; Dozy, A. M.; Stamatoyannopoulos, G.; Hadjiminas,
M. G.; Zachariadis, Z.; Furbetta, M.; Cao, A.: Molecular basis of
hemoglobin-H disease in the Mediterranean population. Blood 54:
1434-1438, 1979.

193. Kan, Y. W.; Golbus, M. S.; Dozy, A. M.: Prenatal diagnosis of
alpha-thalassemia: clinical application of molecular hybridization. New
Eng. J. Med. 295: 1165-1167, 1976.

194. Kazanetz, E. G.; Leonova, J. Y.; Wilson, J. B.; McMillan, S.
K.; Walbrecht, M.; de Pablos Gallego, J. M.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb
Anamosa or alpha(2)-111(G18)ala--val-beta2 (alpha2 mutation) and Hb
Mulhacen or alpha(2)-123(H6)ala--ser-beta2 (alpha1 mutation) are two
silent, stable variants detected by sequencing of amplified DNA. Hemoglobin 19:
1-6, 1995.

195. Kendall, A. G.; Barr, R. D.; Lang, A.; Lehmann, H.: Hemoglobin
J (Nyanza) alpha 21 (B2) ala-to-asp. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 310:
357-359, 1973.

196. Kielman, M. F.; Smits, R.; Devi, T. S.; Fodde, R.; Bernini, L.
F.: Homology of a 130-kb region enclosing the alpha-globin gene cluster,
the alpha-locus controlling region, and two non-globin genes in human
and mouse. Mammalian Genome 4: 314-323, 1993.

197. Kilinc, Y.; Kumi, M.; Gurgey, A.; Altay, C.; Webber, B. B.; Wilson,
J. B.; Kutlar, A.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hemoglobin O-Padova or alpha30(B11)glu-to-lys
observed in members of a Turkish family. Hemoglobin 9: 621-625,
1985.

198. Kister, J.; Kiger, L.; Francina, A.; Hanny, P.; Szymanowicz,
A.; Blouquit, Y.; Prome, D.; Galacteros, F.; Delaunay, J.; Wajcman,
H.: Hemoglobin Roanne (alpha94(G1)asp-to-glu): a variant of the alpha-1
beta-2 interface with an unexpected high oxygen affinity. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1246: 34-38, 1995.

199. Kleihauer, E. F.; Reynolds, C. A.; Dozy, A. M.; Wilson, J. B.;
Moores, R. R.; Berenson, M. P.; Wright, C. S.; Huisman, T. H. J.:
Hemoglobin Bibba or alpha(2)136 pro beta(2), an unstable alpha chain
abnormal hemoglobin. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 154: 220-221, 1968.

200. Knuth, A.; Pribilla, W.; Marti, H. R.; Winterhalter, K. H.:
Hemoglobin Moabit: alpha 86 (F7) leu-to-arg: a new unstable abnormal
hemoglobin. Acta Haemat. 61: 121-124, 1979.

201. Koeffler, H. P.; Sparkes, R. S.; Stang, H.; Mohandas, T.: Regional
assignment of genes for human alpha-globin and phosphoglycollate phosphatase
to the short arm of chromosome 16. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 78: 7015-7018,
1981.

202. Kohne, E.; Krause, M.; Leupold, D.; Kleihauer, E.: Hemoglobin
F Koelliker (alpha-2-minus 141 (HC3) arg-to-gamma-2): a modification
of fetal hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 1: 257-266, 1977.

203. Kraus, A. P.; Miyaji, T.; Iuchi, I.; Kraus, L. M.: Hemoglobin
Memphis, a new variant of sickle cell anemia. Trans. Assoc. Am. Phys. 80:
297-304, 1967.

204. Kraus, A. P.; Miyaji, T.; Iuchi, I.; Kraus, L. M.: Hemoglobin
Memphis: a new variety of sickle cell anemia with symptoms due to
an alpha-chain variant hemoglobin (alpha23 glu). J. Lab. Clin. Med. 66:
886-887, 1965.

205. Labie, D.; Rosa, J.: Sur une nouvelle hemoglobine anormale:
l'hemoglobine J (alpha-54 glutamine a glutamique). Nouv. Rev. Franc.
Hemat. 6: 426-430, 1966.

206. Labossiere, A.; Vella, F.: Hemoglobin I in a white family in
Saskatoon. Clin. Biochem. 4: 104-113, 1971.

207. Lacan, P.; Aubry, M.; Couprie, N.; Francina, A.: Two new alpha
chain variants: Hb Die (alpha-93(FG5)val-to-ala (alpha-1)) and Hb
Beziers [alpha-99(G6)lys-to-asn (alpha-1)]. Hemoglobin 28: 59-63,
2004.

208. Lacan, P.; Francina, A.; Souillet, G.; Aubry, M.; Couprie, N.;
Dementhon, L.; Becchi, M.: Two new alpha chain variants: Hb Boghe
(alpha-58(E7)his-to-gln, alpha-2), a variant on the distal histidine,
and Hb Charolles (alpha-103(G10)his-to-tyr, alpha-1). Hemoglobin 23:
345-352, 1999.

209. Lacombe, C.; Soria, J.; Arous, N.; Blouquit, Y.; Bardakdjian,
J.; Riou, J.; Galacteros, F.: A new case of Hb Dagestan (alpha60(E9)
lys-to-glu). Hemoglobin 11: 39-41, 1987.

210. Lambridis, A. J.; Ramsay, M.; Jenkins, T.: The haematological
puzzle of Hb J Cape Town is partly solved. Brit. J. Haemat. 63:
363-367, 1986.

211. Langdown, J. V.; Davidson, R. J. L.; Williamson, D.: A new alpha
chain variant, Hb Turriff (alpha-99(G6)lys-to-glu): the interference
of abnormal hemoglobins in Hb A(1c) determination. Hemoglobin 16:
11-17, 1992.

212. Leder, A.; Miller, H. I.; Hamer, D. H.; Seidman, J. G.; Norman,
B.; Sullivan, M.; Leder, P.: Comparison of cloned mouse alpha- and
beta-globin genes: conservation of intervening sequence locations
and extragenic homology. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 75: 6187-6191, 1978.

213. Leder, A.; Swan, D.; Ruddle, F.; D'Eustachio, P. D.; Leder, P.
: Dispersion of alpha-like globin genes of the mouse to three different
chromosomes. Nature 293: 196-200, 1981.

214. Leder, A.; Wiener, E.; Lee, M. J.; Wickramasinghe, S. N.; Leder,
P.: A normal beta-globin allele as a modifier gene ameliorating the
severity of alpha-thalassemia in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96:
6291-6295, 1999.

215. Lee-Potter, J. P.; Deacon-Smith, R. A.; Lehmann, H.; Robb, L.
: Haemoglobin Ferndown (alpha6 aspartic acid-to-valine). FEBS Lett. 126:
117-119, 1981.

216. Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobins and haemoglobinopathies.In: Lehmann,
H.; Betke, K.: Haemoglobin-Colloquium.  Stuttgart: Georg Thieme
Verlag (pub.)  1962. Pp. 1-14.

217. Lehmann, H.; Carrell, R. W.: Nomenclature of the alpha-thalassaemias. Lancet 323:
552-553, 1984. Note: Originally Volume I.

218. Lehmann, H.; Carrell, R. W.: Variations in the structure of
human haemoglobins: with particular reference to the unstable haemoglobins. Brit.
Med. Bull. 25: 14-23, 1969.

219. Li, H.; Zhao, X.; Qin, F.; Li, H.; Li, L.; He, X.; Chang, X.;
Li, Z.; Liang, K.; Xing, F.; Chang, W.; Wong, R.; Yang, I.; Li, F.;
Zhang, T.; Tian, R.; Webber, B. B.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H.
J.: Abnormal hemoglobins in the Silk Road region of China. Hum.
Genet. 86: 231-235, 1990.

220. Li, H. J.; Liu, D. X.; Li, L.; Cha, S. C.; Wilson, J. B.; Webber,
B. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Guangzhou-Hangzhou or alpha64(E13)asp-to-gly
observed in members of a Chinese family living in Xinjiang. Hemoglobin 14:
441-444, 1990.

221. Liang, C.; Tao, H.; Lo, H.; Huang, S.; Li, R.; Wang, B.: Hemoglobin
Shuangfeng (alpha27 (B8) glu-to-lys): a new unstable hemoglobin variant. Hemoglobin 5:
691-700, 1981.

222. Liang, C.-C.; Chen, S.; Yang, K.; Jia, P.; Ma, Y.; Li, T.; Ni,
X.; Wang, X.; Deng, Q.; Yao, S.: Hemoglobin Beijing (alpha16 (A14)
lys-to-asn): a new fast-moving hemoglobin variant. Hemoglobin 6:
629-633, 1982.

223. Liang, C.-C.; Chen, S.-S.; Jia, P.-C.; Wang, L.-F.; Luo, H.-Y.;
Liu, G.-Y.; Liang, S.; Lung, G.-F.; Yu, C.-M.; Zuang, L.-Z.; Liant,
B.-L.; Tang, Z.-N.: Hemoglobin Duan (alpha75(EF4) asp-to-ala), a
new variant found in China. Hemoglobin 5: 481-486, 1981.

224. Liang, S.; Tang, Z.; Su, C.; Lung, Q.; Liang, R.; Fei, Y. J.;
Kutlar, F.; Wilson, J. B.; Webber, B. B.; Hu, H.; Huisman, T. H. J.
: Hb Duan (alpha-75(EF4)asp-to-ala), Hb Westmead (alpha-122(H5)his-to-gln),
and alpha-thalassemia-2 (-4.2 kb deletion) in a Chinese family. Hemoglobin 12:
13-21, 1988.

225. Lie-Injo, L. E.; Dozy, A. M.; Kan, Y. W.; Lopes, M.; Todd, D.
: The alpha-globin gene adjacent to the gene for Hb Q (alpha 74 asp-to-his)
is deleted, but not that adjacent to the gene for Hb G (alpha 30 glu-to-gln);
three-fourths of the alpha-globin genes are deleted in Hb Q-alpha-thalassemia. Blood 54:
1407-1416, 1979.

226. Lie-Injo, L. E.; Pillay, R. P.; Thuraisingham, V.: Further cases
of haemoglobin Q-H disease (Hb Q-alpha thalassemia). Blood 28: 830-839,
1966.

227. Lie-Injo, L. E.; Sadono, (NI): Haemoglobin O (Buginese X) in
Sulawesi. Brit. Med. J. 1: 1461-1462, 1958.

228. Liebhaber, S. A.; Cash, F. E.: Locus assignment of alpha-globin
structural mutations by hybrid-selected translation. J. Clin. Invest. 75:
64-70, 1985.

229. Liebhaber, S. A.; Cash, F. E.; Ballas, S. K.: Human alpha-globin
gene expression: the dominant role of the alpha(2)-locus in mRNA and
protein synthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 15327-15333, 1986.

230. Liebhaber, S. A.; Goossens, M.; Kan, Y. W.: Homology and concerted
evolution at the alpha-1 and alpha-2 loci of human alpha-globin. Nature 290:
26-29, 1981.

231. Liebhaber, S. A.; Goossens, M. J.; Kan, Y. W.: Cloning and complete
nucleotide sequence of human 5(prime)-alpha-globin gene. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 77: 7054-7058, 1980.

232. Liebhaber, S. A.; Griese, E.-U.; Weiss, I.; Cash, F. E.; Ayyub,
H.; Higgs, D. R.; Horst, J.: Inactivation of human alpha-globin gene
expression by a de novo deletion located upstream of the alpha-globin
gene cluster. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 9431-9435, 1990.

233. Liebhaber, S. A.; Rappaport, E. F.; Cash, F. E.; Ballas, S. K.;
Schwartz, E.; Surrey, S.: Hemoglobin I mutation encoded at both alpha-globin
loci on the same chromosome: concerted evolution in the human genome. Science 226:
1449-1451, 1984.

234. Liu, G.-Y.; Zhang, G.-X.; Nie, S.-Y.; Luo, H.-Y.; Teng, Y.-Q.;
Liu, S.-P.; Song, M.; Son, L.; Chen, S.-S.; Jia, P.-C.; Liang, C.-C.
: A case of hemoglobin Iwate (alpha87(F8)his-to-arg) in China. Hemoglobin 7:
279-282, 1983.

235. Lorkin, P. A.; Charlesworth, D.; Lehmann, H.; Rahbar, S.; Tuchinda,
S.; Lie-Injo, L. E.: Two haemoglobins Q, alpha 74 (EF3) and alpha
75 (EF4) aspartic acid to histidine. Brit. J. Haemat. 19: 117-125,
1970.

236. Lorkin, P. A.; Huntsman, R. G.; Ager, J. A. M.; Lehmann, H.;
Vella, F.; Dakbre, P. D.: Hemoglobin G (Norfolk): alpha 85 (F6) asp-to-asn. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 379: 22-27, 1975.

237. Lu, Y.-Q.; Liu, J.-F.; Huang, C.-H.; Huang, P.-Y.; Hu, H.-L.;
Peng, X.-H.; Chen, S.-S.; Jia, P.-C.; Yang, K.-G.; Liang, C.-C.; Zuo,
C.-R.: Hemoglobin Lille (alpha74 (EF3) asp-to-ala): the first instance
in China. Hemoglobin 8: 523-527, 1984.

238. Maggio, A.; Massa, A.; Giampaolo, A.; Mavilio, F.; Tentori, L.
: Occurrence of Hb M Iwate (alpha 87 his-to-tyr) in an Italian carrier. Hemoglobin 5:
205-208, 1981.

239. Malcorra-Azpiazu, J. J.; Balda-Aguirre, M. I.; Diaz-Chico, J.
C.; Kutlar, F.; Kutlar, A.; Wilson, J. B.; Hu, H.; Huisman, T. H.
J.: Hb Le Lamentin or alpha20 (B1) his-to-gln found in a Spanish
family. Hemoglobin 12: 201-205, 1988.

240. Mamalaki, A.; Horanyi, M.; Szelenyi, J.; Moschonas, N. K.: Locus
assignment of human alpha-globin structural mutants by selective enzymatic
amplification of alpha-1 and alpha-2-globin cDNAs. Hum. Genet. 85:
509-512, 1990.

241. Marengo-Rowe, A. J.; Beale, D.; Lehmann, H.: New human hemoglobin
variant from southern Arabia: G-Audhali (alpha-23(b4) glutamic acid-valine)
and the variability of B4 in human haemoglobin. Nature 219: 1164-1166,
1968.

242. Marinucci, M.; Mavilio, F.; Massa, A.; Gabbianelli, M.; Fontanarosa,
P. P.; Camagna, A.; Ignesti, C.; Tentori, L.: A new abnormal human
hemoglobin: Hb Prato (alpha31 arg-to-ser). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 578:
534-540, 1979.

243. Marinucci, M.; Mavilio, F.; Tentori, L.; Bestetti, A.: Occurrence
of Hb J Paris in an Italian family and recombination studies on the
free abnormal alpha-chain. Hemoglobin 3: 465-469, 1979.

244. Marinucci, M.; Mavilio, F.; Tentori, L.; D'Erasmo, F.; Colapietro,
A.; De Stasio, G.; Di Fonzo, S.: A new human hemoglobin variant:
Hb Bari (alpha 45(CD3) his-to-gln). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 622:
315-319, 1980.

245. Marti, H. R.; Beale, D.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin Koelliker:
a new acquired haemoglobin appearing after severe haemolysis: alpha-2
(minus 141 arg) beta-2. Acta Haemat. 37: 174-180, 1967.

246. Martin, G.; Villegas, A.; Calero, F.; del Palacio, S.; Lopez,
J. C.; Lopez, M.; Espinos, D.: Hb O Padova in a Spanish family. Acta
Haemat. 84: 1-4, 1990.

247. Martinez, G.; Lima, F.; Residenti, C.; Colombo, B.: Hb J Camaguey
alpha 141 (HC3) arg-to-gly: a new abnormal human hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 2:
47-52, 1978.

248. Masala, B.: Hemoglobinopathies in Sardinia. Hemoglobin 16:
331-351, 1992.

249. Masala, B.; Manca, L.; Stangoni, A.; Cuccuru, G. B.; Wilson,
J. B.; Webber, B. B.; Kutlar, A.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Sassari or
alpha126 (H9) asp-to-his observed in a family from northern Sardinia. Hemoglobin 11:
373-378, 1987.

250. Mavilio, F.; Marinucci, M.; Tentori, L.; Fontanarosa, P. P.;
Rossi, U.; Biagiotti, S.: Hemoglobin Legnano (alpha 141 (HC3) arg-to-leu):
a new abnormal human hemoglobin with high oxygen affinity. Hemoglobin 2:
249-259, 1978.

251. Mayne, E. E.; Elder, G. E.; Lappin, T. R. J.; Ferguson, L. A.
K.: Hb M Iwate (alpha87 his-to-tyr): de novo mutation in an Irish
family. Hemoglobin 10: 205-208, 1986.

252. McDonald, M. J.; Michalski, L. A.; Turci, S. M.; Guillette, R.
A.; Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M. H.; Moo-Penn, W. F.: Structural, functional,
and subunit assembly properties of Hb Attleboro [alpha138(H21)ser-to-pro],
a variant possessing a site mutation at a critical C-terminal residue. Biochemistry 29:
173-178, 1990.

253. Meloni, T.; Pilo, G.; Camardella, L.; Cancedda, F.; Lania, A.;
Pepe, G.; Luzzatto, L.: Coexistence of three hemoglobins with different
alpha-chains in two unrelated children (with family studies indicating
polymorphism in the number of alpha-globin genes in the Sardinian
population). Blood 55: 1025-1032, 1980.

254. Meyering, C. A.; Israels, A. L.; Sebens, T.; Huisman, T. H. J.
: Studies on the heterogeneity of hemoglobin. II. The heterogeneity
of different human hemoglobin types in carboxymethyl cellulose and
in amberlite irc-50 chromatography: quantitative aspects. Clin. Chim.
Acta 5: 208-222, 1960.

255. Miyaji, T.; Iuchi, I.; Yamamoto, K.; Ohba, Y.; Shibata, S.:
Amino acid substitution of hemoglobin Ube 2 (alpha 68 asp): an example
of successful application of partial hydrolysis of peptide with 5
percent acetic acid. Clin. Chim. Acta 16: 347-352, 1967.

256. Miyaji, T.; Ueda, S.; Shibata, S.; Tamura, A.; Sasaki, H.: Further
studies on the fingerprint of Hb M (Iwate). Acta Haemat. Jpn. 25:
169-175, 1962.

257. Miyashita, H.; Hashimoto, K.; Mohri, H.; Ohokubo, T.; Harano,
T.; Harano, K.; Imai, K.: Hb Kanagawa (alpha-40(C5)lys-to-met): a
new alpha chain variant with an increased oxygen affinity. Hemoglobin 16:
1-10, 1992.

258. Moi, P.; Cash, F. E.; Liebhaber, S. A.; Cao, A.; Pirastu, M.
: An initiation codon mutation (AUG-to-GUG) of the human alpha-1-globin
gene: structural characterization and evidence for a mild thalassemic
phenotype. J. Clin. Invest. 80: 1416-1421, 1987.

259. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Baine, R. M.; Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M. H.; McGuffey,
J. E.; Benson, J. M.: Hemoglobin Evanston: alpha14(A12) trp-to-arg--a
variant hemoglobin associated with alpha-thalassemia-2. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 747: 65-70, 1983.

260. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Bechtel, K. C.; Johnson, M. H.; Jue, D. L.;
Holland, S.; Huff, C.; Schmidt, R. M.: Hemoglobin (Jackson) alpha
127 (H10) lys-to-asn. Am. J. Clin. Path. 66: 453-456, 1976.

261. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Jue, D. L.; Baine, R. M.: Hemoglobin J Rovigo
(alpha 53 ala-to-asp) in association with beta thalassemia. Hemoglobin 2:
443-445, 1978.

262. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M. H.; McGuffey, J. E.;
Simpkins, H.; Katz, J.: Hemoglobin Queens: alpha34(B15) leu-to-arg
structural and functional properties and its association with Hb E. Am.
J. Hemat. 13: 323-327, 1982.

263. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M. H.; Therrell, B. L.
: Hemoglobin Swan River (alpha6(A4)asp-to-gly). Hemoglobin 11: 61-62,
1987.

264. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Swan, D. C.; Hine, T. K.; Baine, R. M.; Jue,
D. L.; Benson, J. M.; Johnson, M. H.; Virshup, D. M.; Zinkham, W.
H.: Hb Catonsville (glutamic acid inserted between pro-37 (C2) alpha
and thr-38 (C3) alpha). J. Biol. Chem. 264: 21454-21457, 1989.

265. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Therrell, B. L., Jr.; Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M.
H.: Hemoglobin Cubujuqui (alpha141 arg-to-ser): functional consequences
of the alteration of the C-terminus of the alpha chain of hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 5:
715-724, 1981.

266. Murayama, M.: Chemical difference between normal human haemoglobin
and haemoglobin-I. Nature 196: 276-277, 1962.

267. Musumeci, S.; Schiliro, G.; Pizzarelli, G.; Fischer, A.; Russo,
G.: Thalassemia of intermediate severity resulting from the interaction
between alpha- and beta-thalassemia. J. Med. Genet. 15: 448-451,
1978.

268. Nakashima, H.; Fujiyama, A.; Kagiyama, S.; Imamura, T.: Genetic
polymorphisms of gene conversion within the duplicated human alpha-globin
loci. Hum. Genet. 84: 568-570, 1990.

269. Nakatsuji, T.; Abraham, B. L.; Lam, H.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman,
T. H. J.: Hb Winnipeg or alpha75 (EF4) asp-to-tyr in a large Caucasian
family living in Georgia, USA. Hemoglobin 7: 105-110, 1983.

270. Nakatsuji, T.; Miwa, S.; Ohba, Y.; Miyaji, T.; Matsumoto, N.;
Matsuoka, I.: Hemoglobin Tottori (alpha59 (E8) glycine-to-valine):
a new unstable hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 5: 427-439, 1981.

271. Nakatsuji, T.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Cordele
alpha47 (CE5) asp-to-ala, a mildly unstable variant observed in black
twins. Hemoglobin 8: 37-46, 1984.

272. Ngiwsara, L.; Srisomsap, C.; Winichagoon, P.; Fucharoen, S.;
Svasti, J.: Two cases of compound heterozygosity for Hb Hekinan [alpha27(B8)glu-to-asp
(alpha-1)] and alpha-thalassemia in Thailand. Hemoglobin 28: 145-150,
2004.

273. Niazi, G. A.; Efremov, G. D.; Nikolov, N.; Hunter, E., Jr.; Huisman,
T. H. J.: Hemoglobin Strumica or alpha 112(G19) his-to-arg. (with
an addendum: hemoglobin J-Paris-I, alpha 12(A10) ala-to-asp, in the
same population). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 412: 181-186, 1975.

274. North, M. L.; Hassan, W.; Thillet, J.; Schwartz, M.; Taubert,
C.; Ritter, J.; Gandar, R.; Rosa, J.: Etude clinique et biologique
d'un cas d'hemoglobine hybride S-Stanleyville II (alpha 78 asn-to-lys,
beta 6 glu-to-val). Nouv. Rev. Franc. Hemat. 22: 235-241, 1980.

275. Nozari, G.; Rahbar, S.; Darbre, P.; Lehmann, H.: Hemoglobin
Setif (alpha 94 (G1) asp-to-tyr) in Iran--a report of 9 cases. Hemoglobin 1:
289-291, 1977.

276. O'Brien, C.; Gray, M. J.; Jacobs, A. S.: A survey of cord bloods
for abnormal hemoglobin, with further observations on hemoglobin I
(Burlington). Am. J. Obstet. Gynec. 88: 816-822, 1964.

277. Ohba, Y.; Fujisawa, K.; Imai, K.; Leowattana, W.; Tani, Y.; Ami,
M.; Miyaji, T.: A new alpha chain variant Hb Tonosho [alpha110(G17)ala-to-thr]:
subunit dissociation during cation exchange chromatography for Hb
A1c assay. Hemoglobin 14: 413-422, 1990.

278. Ohba, Y.; Hattori, Y.; Matsuoka, M.; Miyaji, T.; Fuyuno, K.:
Hb Kokura (alpha 47 (CE5) asp-to-gly): a slightly unstable variant. Hemoglobin 6:
69-74, 1982.

279. Ohba, Y.; Imai, K.; Uenaka, R.; Ami, M.; Fujisawa, K.; Itoh,
K.; Hirakawa, K.; Miyaji, T.: Hb Miyano or alpha41(C6)thr-to-ser:
a new high oxygen affinity alpha chain variant found in an erythremic
blood donor. Hemoglobin 13: 637-647, 1989.

280. Ohba, Y.; Miyaji, T.; Matsuoka, M.; Morito, M.; Iuchi, I.: Characterization
of Hb Ube-4: alpha 116 (GH4) glu-to-ala. Hemoglobin 2: 181-186,
1978.

281. Ohba, Y.; Miyaji, T.; Matsuoka, M.; Takeda, I.; Fukuba, Y.; Shibata,
S.; Ohkura, K.: Hemoglobin Matsue-Oki: alpha 75 (EF4) aspartic acid-to-asparagine. Hemoglobin 1:
383-388, 1977.

282. Ohba, Y.; Miyaji, T.; Matsuoka, M.; Yokoyama, M.: Further studies
on hemoglobin Hirosaki: demonstration of its presence at low concentration. Hemoglobin 2:
281-286, 1978.

283. Ohba, Y.; Miyaji, T.; Matsuoka, M.; Yokoyama, M.; Numakura, H.;
Nagata, K.; Takebe, Y.; Izumi, Y.; Shibata, S.: Hemoglobin Hirosaki
(alpha 43(CE1) phe-to-leu), a new unstable variant. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 405: 155-160, 1975.

284. Ohba, Y.; Yamamoto, K.; Kawata, R.; Miyaji, T.: Hyperunstable
hemoglobin Toyama, alpha136 (H19) leu to arg detection and identification
by in vitro biosynthesis with radioactive amino acids. Hemoglobin 11:
539-556, 1987.

285. Ohba, Y.; Yoshinaka, H.; Hattori, Y.; Matsuoka, M.; Miyaji, T.
: Hemoglobin J Habana found in a cord blood of a Japanese. Hemoglobin 7:
327-329, 1983.

286. Ojwang, P. J.; Ogada, T.; Webber, B. B.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman,
T. H. J.: Hb Savaria or alpha(2)49(CE7) ser-to-arg in an indigenous
female from Kenya. Hemoglobin 9: 197-200, 1985.

287. Ooya, I.; Kawamura, K.; Seita, M.; Hanada, M.; Hitsumoto, A.
: Hemoglobin Kokura which was discovered in Kokura. (Abstract) 23rd
Gen. Meeting Japan. Soc. Hemat., Kyoto , 1961.

288. Orkin, S. H.: The duplicated human alpha globin lie close together
in cellular DNA. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 75: 5950-5954, 1978.

289. Orringer, E. P.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hemoglobin
Chapel Hill or alpha 74 asp-to-gly. FEBS Lett. 65: 297-300, 1976.

290. Ostertag, W.; Von Ehrenstein, G.; Charache, S.: Duplicated alpha-chain
genes in Hopkins-2 haemoglobin of man and evidence for unequal crossing
over between them. Nature N.B. 237: 90-94, 1972.

291. Overly, W. L.; Rosenberg, A.; Harris, J. W.: Hemoglobin M (Reserve):
studies on identification and characterization. J. Lab. Clin. Med. 69:
62-87, 1967.

292. Paglietti, E.; Barella, S.; Satta, S.; Perra, C.; Cao, A.; Galanello,
R.: Hb Sassari [alpha-126(H9)asp-to-his] results from a GAC-to-CAC
mutation in the alpha-1-globin gene. Hemoglobin 22: 65-67, 1998.

293. Phillips, J. A., III; Scott, A. F.; Smith, K. D.; Young, K. E.;
Lightbody, K. L.; Jiji, R. M.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.: A molecular
basis for hemoglobin-H diseases in American blacks. Blood 54: 1439-1445,
1979.

294. Phillips, J. A., III; Vik, T. A.; Scott, A. F.; Young, K. E.;
Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Smith, K. D.; Fairbanks, V. F.; Koenig, H. M.
: Unequal crossing-over: a common basis of single alpha-globin genes
in Asians and American blacks with hemoglobin-H disease. Blood 55:
1066-1069, 1980.

295. Pik, C.; Tonz, O.: Nature of haemoglobin M (Oldenburg). Nature 210:
1182, 1966.

296. Pobedimskaya, D. D.; Molchanova, T. P.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb
Ramona or alpha(2)24(B5)tyr-to-cys. Hemoglobin 18: 365-366, 1994.

297. Pootrakul, S.; Boonyarat, D.; Kematorn, B.; Suanpan, S.; Wasi,
P.: Hemoglobin Thailand (alpha 56 (E5) lys-to-thr): a new abnormal
human hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 1: 781-798, 1977.

298. Pootrakul, S.; Dixon, G. H.: Hemoglobin Mahidol: a new hemoglobin
alpha-chain mutant. Canad. J. Biochem. 48: 1066-1078, 1970.

299. Pootrakul, S.; Kematorn, B.; Na-Nakorn, S.; Suanpan, S.: A new
haemoglobin variant. Haemoglobin Anantharaj (alpha 11 (A9) lysine-to-glutamic
acid). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 405: 161-166, 1975.

300. Pootrakul, S.; Srichiyanont, S.; Wasi, P.; Suanpan, S.: Hemoglobin
Siam (alpha 15 arg): a new alpha-chain variant. Humangenetik 25:
199-204, 1974.

301. Popp, R. A.; Lalley, P. A.; Whitney, J. B., III; Anderson, W.
F.: Mouse alpha-like globin genes and alpha-globin-like pseudogenes
are not syntenic. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 78: 6362-6366, 1981.

302. Poyart, C.; Krishnamoorthy, R.; Bursaux, E.; Gacon, G.; Labie,
D.: Structural and functional studies of haemoglobin Suresnes or
alpha 141 (HC3) arg-to-his, a new high oxygen affinity mutant. FEBS
Lett. 69: 103-107, 1976.

303. Prato, V.; Gallo, E.; Ricco, G.; Mazza, U.; Bianco, G.; Lehmann,
H.: Haemolytic anaemia due to haemoglobin Torino. Brit. J. Haemat. 19:
105-115, 1970.

304. Prehu, C.; Bost, M.; Barro, C.; Prome, D.; Riou, J.; Godart,
C.; Kister, J.; Galacteros, F.; Wajcman, H.: Hb Roubaix (alpha-55(E4)val-to-leu):
a new neutral hemoglobin variant involving the alpha-1 gene. Hemoglobin 23:
361-365, 1999.

305. Prehu, C.; Hanichi, A.; Yapo, A. P.; Claparols, C.; Prome, D.;
Riou, J.; Wajcman, H.: Hb Douala [alpha-3(A1)ser-phe]: a new alpha-1
gene mutation in a Cameroonian woman heterozygous for Hb S and a 3.7
kb deletional alpha-thalassemia. Hemoglobin 25: 323-329, 2001.

306. Priest, J. R.; Watterson, J.; Jones, R. T.; Faassen, A. E.; Hedlund,
B. E.: Mutant fetal hemoglobin causing cyanosis in a newborn. Pediat. 83:
734-736, 1989.

307. Proudfoot, N. J.; Maniatis, T.: The structure of a human alpha-globin
pseudogene and its relationship to alpha-globin gene duplication. Cell 21:
537-544, 1980.

308. Pulsinelli, P. D.; Perutz, M. F.; Nagel, R. L.: Structure of
hemoglobin M (Boston), a variant with a five-coordinated ferric heme. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 70: 3870-3874, 1973.

309. Qualtieri, A.; De Marco, E. V.; Crescibene, L.; Andreoli, V.;
Bagala, A.; Scornaienchi, M.; Brancati, C.; Greco, C. M.: Hb J-Wenchang-Wuming
or alpha-11(A9)lys-to-gln in an Italian woman. Hemoglobin 19: 277-280,
1995.

310. Quattrin, N.; Ventruto, V.: Hemoglobin Mexico in a Sardinian
woman. Helv. Med. Acta 33: 388-394, 1967.

311. Rahbar, S.; Ala, F.; Akhavan, E.; Nowzari, G.; Shoa'i, I.; Zamanianpoor,
M. H.: Two new hemoglobins: hemoglobin Perspolis (alpha 64 (E13)
asp-to-tyr) and hemoglobin J Kurosh (alpha 19 (AB) ala-to-asp). Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 427: 119-125, 1976.

312. Rahbar, S.; Kinderlerer, J. L.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin L Persian
Gulf: alpha 57 (E6) glycine leads to arginine. Acta Haemat. 42:
169-175, 1969.

313. Rahbar, S.; Mahdavi, N.; Nowzari, G.; Mostafavi, I.: Hemoglobin
Arya: alpha 47, aspartic acid to asparagine. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 386:
525-529, 1975.

314. Rahbar, S.; Nowzari, G.; Daneshmand, P.: Hemoglobin Daneshgah-Tehran
alpha 72 (EF1) histidine-to-arginine. Nature N.B. 245: 268-269,
1973.

315. Ranney, H. M.; O'Brien, C.; Jacobs, A. S.: An abnormal human
foetal haemoglobin with an abnormal alpha-polypeptide chain. Nature 194:
743-745, 1962.

316. Raper, A. B.: Unusual haemoglobin variant in a Gujerati Indian. Brit.
Med. J. 1: 1285-1286, 1957.

317. Reeders, S. T.: Personal Communication. Oxford, England  9/26/1986.

318. Reynolds, C. A.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hemoglobin Russ or alpha-2
(51 arg) beta-2. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 130: 541-543, 1966.

319. Rhoda, M.-D.; Martin, J.; Blouquit, Y.; Garel, M.-C.; Edelstein,
S. J.; Rosa, J.: Sickle cell hemoglobin fiber formation strongly
inhibited by the Stanleyville II mutation (alpha78 asn-to-lys). Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 111: 8-13, 1983.

320. Romao, L.; Cash, F.; Weiss, I.; Liebhaber, S.; Pirastu, M.; Galanello,
R.; Loi, A.; Paglietti, E.; Ioannou, P.; Cao, A.: Human alpha-globin
gene expression is silenced by terminal truncation of chromosome 16p
beginning immediately 3-prime of the zeta-globin gene. Hum. Genet. 89:
323-328, 1992.

321. Romero, M. J.; Garrido, M. L.; Abril, E.; Garrido, F.; de Pablos,
J. Ma.: Detection of Hb J-Camaguey (alpha-141(HC3)arg-to-gly) in
three Spanish families. Hemoglobin 19: 287-289, 1995.

322. Rosa, J.; Maleknia, N.; Vergos, D.; Dunet, R.: Une nouvelle
hemoglobine anormale: l'hemoglobine J(alpha-Paris) 12 ala-a-asp. Nouv.
Rev. Franc. Hemat. 6: 423-426, 1966.

323. Rubin, E. M.; Kan, Y. W.: A simple sensitive prenatal test for
hydrops fetalis caused by alpha-thalassaemia. Lancet 325: 75-77,
1985. Note: Originally Volume I.

324. Rucknagel, D. L.; Page, E. B.; Jensen, W. N.: Hemoglobin I:
an inherited hemoglobin anomaly. Blood 10: 999-1009, 1955.

325. Saenz, G. F.; Alvarado, M.; Arroyo, G.; Alfaro, E.; Montero,
G.; Jimenez, J.; Martinez, G.; Lima, F.; Colombo, B.: Hemoglobin
Suresnes in a Costa-Rican woman of Spanish-Indian ancestry. Hemoglobin 2:
383-387, 1978.

326. Saenz, G. F.; Elizondo, J.; Alvarado, M. A.; Atmetlla, F.; Arroyo,
G.; Martinez, G.; Lima, F.; Colombo, B.: Chemical characterization
of a new haemoglobin variant Haemoglobin J (Cubujuqui) (alpha 141
(HC3) arg-to-ser). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 494: 48-50, 1977.

327. Sanna, M. T.; Giardina, B.; Scatena, R.; Pellegrini, M.; Olianas,
A.; Manca, L.; Masala, B.; Castagnola, M.; Corda, M.: Functional
alterations in adult and fetal hemoglobin Sassari asp-alpha-126(H9)-to-his:
the role of alpha-1-alpha-2 contact. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 18338-18342,
1994.

328. Sansone, G.; Centa, A.; Sciarratta, V.; Gallo, E.; Lehmann, H.
: Haemoglobin O Indonesia (alpha116 glu-to-lys) in an Italian family. Acta
Haemat. 43: 40-47, 1970.

329. Schiliro, G.; Russo, A.; Azzia, N.; Digiacomo, M. S.; Musumeci,
S.; Russo, G.: Hemoglobin Koelliker (alpha minus 141 arg) in favism. Acta
Haemat. 67: 229, 1982.

330. Schiliro, G.; Russo-Mancuso, G.; Dibenedetto, S. P.; Samperi,
P.; Di Cataldo, A.; Ragusa, R.; Testa, R.: Six rare hemoglobin variants
found in Sicily. Hemoglobin 15: 431-437, 1991.

331. Schmidt, R. M.; Bechtel, K. C.; Moo-Penn, W. F.: Hemoglobin
Q(India), alpha 64 (E13) asp-to-his, and beta thalassemia in a Canadian
family. Am. J. Clin. Path. 66: 446-448, 1976.

332. Schnedl, W. J.; Reisinger, E. C.; Katzensteiner, S.; Lipp, R.
W.; Schreiber, F.; Hopmeier, P.; Krejs, G. J.: Haemoglobin O Padova
and falsely low haemoglobin A(1c) in a patient with type I diabetes. J.
Clin. Path. 50: 434-446, 1997.

333. Schneider, R. G.; Alperin, J. B.; Beale, D.; Lehmann, H.: Hemoglobin
I in an American Negro family: structural and hematologic studies. J.
Lab. Clin. Med. 68: 940-946, 1966.

334. Schneider, R. G.; Alperin, J. B.; Lehmann, H.: Sickling tests.
Pitfalls in performance and interpretation. JAMA 202: 419-421, 1967.

335. Schneider, R. G.; Atkins, R. J.; Hosty, T. S.; Tomlin, G.; Casey,
R.; Lehmann, P. A.; Lorkin, P. A.; Nagai, K.: Haemoglobin Titusville
(alpha 94 asp-to-asn): a new haemoglobin with a lowered affinity for
oxygen. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 400: 365-373, 1975.

336. Schneider, R. G.; Brimhall, B.; Jones, R. T.; Bryant, R.; Mitchell,
C. B.; Goldberg, A. I.: Hb Ft. Worth: alpha27glu-to-gly--a variant
present in unusually low concentration. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 243:
164-169, 1971.

337. Schneider, R. G.; Hightower, B.; Carpentieri, U.; Duerst, M.
L.; Shih, T. B.; Jones, R. T.: Hemoglobin Oleander (alpha116 (GH4)
glu-to-gln): structural and functional characterization. Hemoglobin 6:
465-480, 1980.

338. Schoenfelder, S.; Sexton, T.; Chakalova, L.; Cope, N. F.; Horton,
A.; Andrews, S.; Kurukuti, S.; Mitchell, J. A.; Umlauf, D.; Dimitrova,
D. S.; Eskiw, C. H.; Luo, Y.; Wei, C.-L.; Ruan, Y.; Bieker, J. J.;
Fraser, P.: Preferential associations between co-regulated genes
reveal a transcription interactome in erythroid cells. Nature Genet. 42:
53-61, 2010.

339. Schroeder, W. A.; Jones, R. T.: Some aspects of the chemistry
and function of human and animal hemoglobins. Fortschr. Chem. Organ.
Naturst. 23: 113-194, 1965.

340. Schroeder, W. A.; Shelton, J. B.; Shelton, J. R.; Powars, D.
: Hemoglobin Sunshine Seth (alpha94 asp-to-his). Hemoglobin 3: 145-159,
1979.

341. Schwartz, I. R.; Atwater, J.; Repplinger, E.; Tocantins, L. M.
: Sickling of erythrocytes with I-A electrophoretic haemoglobin pattern. Fed.
Proc. 16: 115, 1957.

342. Sciarratta, G. V.; Ivaldi, G.; Molaro, G. L.; Sansone, G.; Salkie,
M. L.; Wilson, J. B.; Reese, A. L.; Huisman, T. H. J.: The characterization
of hemoglobin Manitoba or alpha(2)102(G9)ser-to-arg and hemoglobin
Contaldo or alpha(2)103(G10)his-to-arg by high performance liquid
chromatography. Hemoglobin 8: 169-181, 1984.

343. Scott, A. F.; Phillips, J. A., III; Young, K. E.; Kazazian, H.
H., Jr.; Smith, K. D.; Charache, S.; Clegg, J. B.: The molecular
basis of hemoglobin Grady. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 33: 129-133, 1981.

344. Sellaye, M.; Blouquit, Y.; Galacteros, F.; Arous, N.; Monplaisir,
N.; Rhoda, M. D.; Braconnier, F.; Rosa, J.: A new silent hemoglobin
variant in a black family from French West Indies: hemoglobin Le Lamentin
alpha20 his-to-gln. FEBS Lett. 145: 128-130, 1982.

345. Shelton, J. B.; Shelton, J. R.; Schroeder, W. A.; Powars, D.
R.: Hb Aztec or alpha76(EF5) met-to-thr: detection of a silent mutant
by high performance liquid chromatography. Hemoglobin 9: 325-332,
1985.

346. Shibata, S.: Hereditary nigremia (geneticobiochemical aspects). Jpn.
J. Hum. Genet. 9: 193-206, 1964.

347. Shibata, S.; Iuchi, I.; Miyaji, T.; Ueda, S.: Spectroscopic
characterization of hemoglobin M (Iwate) and hemoglobin M (Kurume),
the two variants of hemoglobin M found in Japan. Acta Haemat. Jpn. 24:
477-485 and 486-494, 1961.

348. Shibata, S.; Miyaji, T.; Ohba, Y.: Abnormal hemoglobins in Japan. Hemoglobin 4:
395-408, 1980.

349. Shibata, S.; Tamura, A.; Iuchi, I.; Takahashi, H.: Hemoglobin
M-1. Demonstration of a new abnormal hemoglobin in hereditary nigremia. Acta
Haemat. Jpn. 23: 96-104, 1960.

350. Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Miyaji, T.; Imamura, T.: Hemoglobinopathies
in Japan. Hemoglobin 5: 509-515, 1981.

351. Shimasaki, S.: A new hemoglobin variant, hemoglobin Nunobiki
(alpha141 (HC3) arg-to-cys): notable influence of the carboxy-terminal
cysteine upon various physico-chemical characteristics of hemoglobin. J.
Clin. Invest. 75: 695-701, 1985.

352. Shimasaki, S.; Iuchi, I.; Hidaka, K.; Mizuta, W.: The survey
of abnormal hemoglobin in Kobe district. Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 28:
127-128, 1983.

353. Shimizu, A.; Hayashi, A.; Yamamura, Y.; Tsugita, A.; Kitayama,
K.: The structural study on a new hemoglobin variant, Hb M (Osaka). Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 97: 472-482, 1965.

354. Shimizu, A.; Tsugita, A.; Hayashi, A.; Yamamura, Y.: The primary
structure of hemoglobin M (Iwate). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 107: 270-277,
1965.

355. Shin, M.-C.; Chen, C.-M.; Liu, S.-C.; Huang, C.-H.; Lee, T.-P.;
Chan, W.-L.; Chang, J.-G.: Hb UBE-2 in a Taiwanese subject: an A-to-G
substitution at codon 68 of the alpha-2-globin gene. Hemoglobin 26:
99-101, 2002.

356. Silvestroni, E.; Bianco, I.; Brancati, C.: Haemoglobins N and
P in Italian families. Nature 200: 658-659, 1963.

357. Simmers, R. N.; Mulley, J. C.; Hyland, V. J.; Callen, D. F.;
Sutherland, G. R.: Mapping the human alpha globin gene complex to
16p13.2-pter. J. Med. Genet. 24: 761-766, 1987.

358. Smith, E. W.; Torbert, J. V.: Study of two abnormal hemoglobins
with evidence for a new genetic locus for hemoglobin formation. Bull.
Johns Hopkins Hosp. 102: 38-45, 1958.

359. Southern, E. M.: Detection of specific sequences among DNA fragments
separated by gel electrophoresis. J. Molec. Biol. 98: 503-517, 1975.

360. Spivak, V. A.; Molchanova, T. P.; Ermakov, N. V.; Tokarev, Y.
N.; Martinez, G.; Szelenyi, J.; Horanyi, M.; Foldi, J.; Hollan, S.;
Kazieva, H.; Shamov, I. A.: A new hemoglobin variant: Hb Dagestan
alpha60(E9) lys-to-glu. Hemoglobin 5: 133-138, 1981.

361. Straub, A. C.; Lohman, A. W.; Billaud, M.; Johnstone, S. R.;
Dwyer, S. T.; Lee, M. Y.; Bortz, P. S.; Best, A. K.; Columbus, L.;
Gaston, B.; Isakson, B. E.: Endothelial cell expression of haemoglobin
alpha regulates nitric oxide signalling. Nature 491: 473-477, 2012.

362. Suarez, C. R.; Jue, D. L.; Moo-Penn, W. F.: Hemoglobin Savaria--alpha49(CE7)ser-to-arg
in the United States. Hemoglobin 9: 627-629, 1985.

363. Sugihara, J.; Imamura, T.; Kagimoto, M.; Matsuo, T.; Yamada,
H.; Imoto, T.; Yanase, T.: A new electrophoretic variant of hemoglobin
(Munakata) in which a lysine residue is replaced by a methionine residue
at position 90 of the alpha-chain. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 744: 119-120,
1983.

364. Sugihara, J.; Imamura, T.; Yamada, H.; Imoto, T.; Matsuo, T.;
Sumida, I.; Yanase, T.: A new electrophoretic variant of hemoglobin
(Ogi) in which a leucine residue is replaced by an arginine residue
at position 34 of the alpha-chain. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 701: 45-48,
1982.

365. Sukumaran, P. K.; Merchant, S. M.; Desai, M. P.; Wiltshire, B.
G.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin Q India (alpha-64 (E13) aspartic acid
to histidine). Associated with beta-thalassemia observed in three
Sindhi families. J. Med. Genet. 9: 436-442, 1972.

366. Sukumaran, P. K.; Pik, C.: Some observations on haemoglobin
L(Bombay). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 104: 290-292, 1965.

367. Sumida, I.: Studies of abnormal hemoglobins in western Japan:
frequency of visible hemoglobin variants, and chemical characterization
of hemoglobin Sawara (alpha26ala-beta2) and hemoglobin Mugino (Hb
L Ferrara; alpha247gly-beta2). Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 19: 343-363,
1975.

368. Sumida, I.; Ohta, Y.; Imamura, T.; Yanase, T.: Hemoglobin Sawara:
alpha 6 (A4) aspartic acid to alanine. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 322:
23-26, 1973.

369. Suzuki, T.; Hayashi, A.; Yamamura, Y.; Enoki, Y.; Tyuma, I.:
Functional abnormality of hemoglobin M (Osaka). Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 19: 691-695, 1965.

370. Szelenyi, J. G.; Horanyi, M.; Foldi, J.; Hudacsek, J.; Istvan,
L.; Hollan, S. R.: A new hemoglobin variant in Hungary: Hb Savaria-alpha
49 (CE7) ser-to-arg. Hemoglobin 4: 27-38, 1980.

371. Tamura, A.: Black blood disease. Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 9: 183-192,
1964.

372. Thillet, J.; Blouquit, Y.; Perrone, F.; Rosa, J.: Hemoglobin
Pontoise: alpha 63 ala-to-asp (E12): a new fast moving variant. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 491: 16-22, 1977.

373. Thompson, R. B.; Rau, P. J.; Odom, J.; Bell, W. N.: The sickling
phenomenon in a white male without Hb-S. Acta Haemat. 34: 347-353,
1965.

374. Tonz, O.; Simon, H. A.; Hasselfeld, W.: Untersuchung einer grossen
Haemoglobin-M-Sippe. Entdeckung eines neuen Blutfarbstoffes: Hb M-Oldenburg. Schweiz.
Med. Wschr. 92: 1311-1313, 1962.

375. Trabuchet, G.; Morle, F.; Verdier, G.; Godet, J.; Benabadji,
M.; Nigon, V. M.: Mapping the alpha-globin genes in Hb J Mexico carriers. Hum.
Genet. 62: 164-166, 1982.

376. Traeger-Synodinos, J.; Harteveld, C. L.; Kanavakis, E.; Giordano,
P. C.; Kattamis, C.; Bernini, L. F.: Hb Aghia Sophia (alpha-62(E11)val-to-0
(alpha-1)), an 'in-frame' deletion causing alpha-thalassemia. Hemoglobin 23:
317-324, 1999.

377. Trincao, C.; Demelo, J. M.; Lorkin, P. A.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin
J Paris in the south of Portugal (Algarve). Acta Haemat. 39: 291-298,
1968.

378. Turbpaiboon, C.; Svasti, S.; Sawangareetakul, P.; Winichagoon,
P.; Srisomsap, C.; Siritanaratkul, N.; Fucharoen, S.; Wilairat, P.;
Svasti, J.: Hb Siam (alpha-15(A13)gly-to-arg(alpha-1) (GGT-to-CGT))
is a typical alpha chain hemoglobinopathy without an alpha-thalassemic
effect. Hemoglobin 26: 77-81, 2002.

379. Vandenplas, S.; Higgs, D. R.; Nicholls, R. D.; Bester, A. J.;
Mathew, C. G. P.: Characterization of a new alpha(0) thalassemia
defect in the South African population. Brit. J. Haemat. 66: 539-542,
1987.

380. Van Ros, G.; Beale, D.; Lehmann, H.: Hemoglobin Stanleyville-II
(alpha 78 asparagine to lysine). Brit. Med. J. 4: 92-93, 1968.

381. Vasseur, C.; Blouquit, Y.; Kister, J.; Prome, D.; Kavanaugh,
J. S.; Rogers, P. H.; Guillemin, C.; Arnone, A.; Galacteros, F.; Poyart,
C.; Rosa, J.; Wajcman, H.: Hemoglobin Thionville: an alpha-chain
variant with a substitution of a glutamate for valine at NA-1 and
having an acetylated methionine NH(2) terminus. J. Biol. Chem. 267:
12682-12691, 1992.

382. Vasseur, C.; Guillemin, C.; Galacteros, F.; Wajcman, H.: Hemoglobin
Thionville: an alpha chain variant with substitution of a glutamic
residue for valine NA-1 and having an extended N-terminus. (Abstract) Blood 76
(suppl. 1): 78a, 1990.

383. Vella, F.; Casey, R.; Lehmann, H.; Labossiere, A.; Jones, T.
G.: Haemoglobin Ottawa: alpha 15 gly-to-arg. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 336:
25-29, 1974.

384. Vella, F.; Charlesworth, D.; Lorkin, P. A.; Lehmann, H.: Hemoglobin
Broussais: alpha 90 lys replaced by asn. Canad. J. Biochem. 48:
408-410, 1970.

385. Vella, F.; Galbraith, P.; Wilson, J. B.; Wong, S. C.; Folger,
G. C.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hemoglobin St. Claude or alpha 127 (H10)
lys-to-thr. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 365: 318-323, 1974.

386. Vella, F.; Wells, R. H. C.; Ager, J. A. M.; Lehmann, H.: A haemoglobinopathy
involving haemoglobin H and a new (Q) haemoglobin. Brit. Med. J. 1:
752-755, 1958.

387. Vella, F.; Wiltshire, B.; Lehmann, H.; Galbraith, P.: Hemoglobin
Winnipeg. Clin. Biochem. 6: 66-70, 1973.

388. Vettore, L.; De Sandre, G.; Di Iorio, E. E.; Winterhalter, K.
H.; Lang, A.; Lehmann, H.: A new abnormal hemoglobin O Padova, alpha
30 (B11) glu-to-lys, and a dyserythropoietic anemia with erythroblastic
multinuclearity coexisting in the same patient. Blood 44: 869-878,
1974.

389. Virshup, D. M.; Zinkham, W. H.; Hine, T.; Baine, R. M.; Jue,
D. L.; Moo-Penn, W. F.: Hemoglobin Catonsville: an unstable, high
affinity variant with an insertion of glutamic acid between residues
37(pro) and 38 (thr) in the alpha chain. (Abstract) Blood 72 (suppl.):
75a, 1988.

390. Wainscoat, J. S.; Higgs, D. R.; Kanavakis, E.; Cao, A.; Georgiou,
D.; Clegg, J. B.; Weatherall, D. J.: Association of two DNA polymorphisms
in the alpha-globin gene cluster: implications for genetic analysis. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 35: 1086-1089, 1983.

391. Wainscoat, J. S.; Kanavakis, E.; Weatherall, D. J.; Walker, J.;
Holmes-Seidle, M.; Bobrow, M.; Donnison, A. B.: Regional localisation
of the human alpha-globin genes. (Letter) Lancet 318: 301-302, 1981.
Note: Originally Volume II.

392. Wajcman, H.; Beklhodja, O.; Labie, D.: Hb Setif: G1 (94) alpha--asp-to-tyr.
A new chain hemoglobin variant with substitution of the residue involved
in a hydrogen bond between unlike subunits. FEBS Lett. 27: 298-300,
1972.

393. Wajcman, H.; Blouquit, Y.; Gombaud-Saintonge, G.; Riou, J.; Galacteros,
F.: HB Fontainebleau (alpha21(B2)ala-to-pro), a new silent mutant
hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 13: 421-429, 1989.

394. Wajcman, H.; Blouquit, Y.; Lahary, A.; Soummer, A. M.; Groff,
P.; Bardakdjian, J.; Prehu, C.; Riou, J.; Godard, C.; Galacteros,
F.: Three new neutral alpha chain variants: Hb Bois Guillaume (alpha-65(E14)ala-to-val),
Hb Mantes-La-Jolie (alpha-79(EF8)ala-to-thr), and Hb Mosella (alpha-111(G18)ala-to-thr). Hemoglobin 19:
281-286, 1995.

395. Wajcman, H.; Blouquit, Y.; Riou, J.; Kister, J.; Poyart, C.;
Soria, J.; Galacteros, F.: A new hemoglobin variant found during
investigations of diabetes mellitus: Hb Pavie [alpha-135(H18)val-to-glu]. Clin.
Chim. Acta 188: 39-48, 1990.

396. Wajcman, H.; Blouquit, Y.; Vasseur, C.; Le Querrec, A.; Laniece,
M.; Melevendi, C.; Rasore, A.; Galacteros, F.: Two new human hemoglobin
variants caused by unusual mutational events: Hb Zaire contains a
five residue repetition within the alpha-chain and Hb Duino has two
residues substituted in the beta-chain. Hum. Genet. 89: 676-680,
1992.

397. Wajcman, H.; Bost, M.; Blouquit, Y.; Prehu, C.; Riou, J.; Galacteros,
F.: Two new alpha chain variants found during glycated hemoglobin
screening: Hb Tatras (alpha7(A5)lys-to-asn) and Hb Lisbon (alpha23(B4)glu-to-asp). Hemoglobin 18:
427-432, 1994.

398. Wajcman, H.; Dahmane, M.; Prehu, C.; Costes, B.; Prome, D.; Arous,
N.; Bardakdjian-Michau, J.; Riou, J.; Ayache, K. C.; Godart, C.; Galacteros,
F.: Haemoglobin J-Biskra: a new mildly unstable alpha-1 gene variant
with a deletion of eight residues (alpha-50-57, alpha-51-58 or alpha-52-59)
including the distal histidine. Brit. J. Haemat. 100: 401-406, 1998.

399. Wajcman, H.; Delaunay, J.; Francina, A.; Rosa, J.; Galacteros,
F.: Hemoglobin Nouakchott [alpha114(GH2)pro-to-leu]: a new hemoglobin
variant displaying an unusual increase in hydrophobicity. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 998: 25-31, 1989.

400. Wajcman, H.; Elion, J.; Boissel, J. P.; Labie, D.; Jos, J.; Girot,
R.: A silent hemoglobin variant: hemoglobin Necker Enfants-Malades
alpha 20 (B1) his-to-tyr. Hemoglobin 4: 177-184, 1980.

401. Wajcman, H.; Gombaud-Saintonge, G.; Galacteros, F.; Martha, M.;
Vertongen, F.: Hb Belliard (alpha56 (E5) lys-to-asn): a new fast-moving
alpha chain variant found in a subject of Spanish origin. Hemoglobin 13:
157-162, 1990.

402. Wajcman, H.; Kister, J.; Galacteros, F.; Josifovska, O.; Spielvogel,
A.; Nagel, R.L.: Hb Montefiore [alpha126 (H9) asp-to-tyr]: an abnormal
hemoglobin with high oxygen affinity and absence of cooperativity..
(Abstract) Blood 80 (suppl. 1): 82a, 1992.

403. Wajcman, H.; Kister, J.; M'Rad, A.; Marden, M. C.; Riou, J.;
Galacteros, F.: Hb Val de Marne [alpha133 (H16) ser-to-arg]: a new
hemoglobin variant with moderate increase in oxygen affinity.. Hemoglobin 17:
407-417, 1993.

404. Wajcman, H.; Kister, J.; M'Rad, A.; Soummer, A. M.; Galacteros,
F.: Hb Cemenelum [alpha92 (FG4) arg-to-trp]: a hemoglobin variant
of the alpha-1/beta-2 interface that displays a moderate increase
in oxygen affinity. Ann. Hemat. 68: 73-76, 1994.

405. Wajcman, H.; Kister, J.; Marden, M.; Lahary, A.; Monconduit,
M.; Galacteros, F.: Hemoglobin Rouen (alpha140(HC2)tyr-to-his): alteration
of the alpha chain C-terminal region and moderate increase in oxygen
affinity. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1180: 53-57, 1992.

406. Wajcman, H.; Kister, J.; Riou, J.; Galacteros, F.; Girot, R.;
Maier-Redelsperger, M.; Nayudu, N. V. S.; Giordano, P. C.: Hb Godavari
(alpha-95(G2)pro to thr): a neutral amino acid substitution in the
alpha-1/beta-2 interface that modifies the electrophoretic mobility
of hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 22: 11-22, 1998.

407. Wajcman, H.; Vasseur, C.; Blouquit, Y.; Rosa, J.; Labie, D.;
Najman, A.; Reman, O.; Leporrier, M.; Galacteros, F.: Unstable alpha-chain
hemoglobin variants with factitious beta-thalassemia biosynthetic
ratio: Hb Questembert (alpha131 [H14] ser-to-pro) and Hb Caen (alpha132
[H15] val-to-gly). Am. J. Hemat. 42: 367-374, 1993.

408. Wajcman, H.; Vasseur, C.; Galacteros, F.; Blouquit, Y.; Rosa,
J.; Labie, D.; Najman, A.: Hb Questembert [alpha-131(H14)ser-to-pro]:
a new highly unstable variant with unbalanced chain synthesis. (Abstract) Blood 76
(suppl. 1): 79a, 1990.

409. Waye, J. S.; Eng, B.; Patterson, M.; Carcao, M. D.; Chang, L.;
Olivieri, N. F.; Chui, D. H. K.: Identification of two new alpha-thalassemia
mutations in exon 2 of the alpha-1-globin gene. Hemoglobin 25: 391-396,
2001.

410. Weatherall, D. J.; Clegg, J. B.: Recent developments in the
molecular genetics of human hemoglobin. Cell 16: 467-479, 1979.

411. Webber, B. B.; Lam, H.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb
Albany-GA or alpha11(A9)lys-to-asn. Hemoglobin 7: 257-262, 1983.

412. Webber, B. B.; Wilson, J. B.; Gu, L.-H.; Huisman, T. H. J.:
Hb Ethiopia or alpha140(HC2)tyr-to-his. Hemoglobin 16: 441-443,
1992.

413. Weitkamp, L. R.; Stamatoyannopoulos, G.; Rowley, P. T.; Kirk,
R. L.: The linkage relationships of the haemoglobin beta, delta and
alpha loci with 34 genetic marker systems. Ann. Hum. Genet. 41:
61-75, 1977.

414. Wilkie, A. O. M.; Higgs, D. R.; Rack, K. A.; Buckle, V. J.; Spurr,
N. K.; Fischel-Ghodsian, N.; Ceccherini, I.; Brown, W. R. A.; Harris,
P. C.: Stable length polymorphism of up to 260 kb at the tip of the
short arm of human chromosome 16. Cell 64: 595-606, 1991.

415. Williamson, D.; Langdown, J. V.; Myles, T.; Mason, C.; Henthorn,
J. S.; Davies, S. C.: Polycythaemia and microcytosis arising from
the combination of a new high oxygen affinity haemoglobin (Hb Luton,
alpha-89 his-to-leu) and alpha-thalassaemia trait. Brit. J. Haemat. 82:
621-622, 1992.

416. Wilson, J. T.; deRiel, J. K.; Forget, B. G.; Marotta, C. A.;
Weissman, S. M.: Nucleotide sequence of 3-prime untranslated portion
of human alpha globin mRNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 4: 2353-2368, 1977.

417. Wiltshire, B. G.; Clark, K. G. A.; Lorkin, P. A.; Lehmann, H.
: Haemoglobin Denmark Hill (alpha 95 (G2) pro-to-ala), a variant with
unusual electrophoretic and oxygen-binding properties. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 278: 459-464, 1972.

418. Winter, W. P.; Rucknagel, D. L.; Fielding, J.: Identification
of several rare hemoglobin variants discovered in a population survey
including a new variant Hb Garden State alpha-82 ala-to-asp. (Abstract) Clin.
Res. 26: 122A, 1978.

419. Wong, S. C.; Ali, M. A. M.; Pond, J. R.; Rubin, S. M.; Johnson,
S. E. N.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb J-Singa (alpha-78
asn-to-asp), a newly discovered hemoglobin variant with the same amino
acid substitution as one of the two present in Hb J-Singapore (alpha-78
asn-to-asp, alpha-79 ala-to-gly). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 784: 187-188,
1984.

420. Yamaoka, K.; Kawamura, K.; Hanada, M.; Seita, M.; Hitsumoto,
S.; Ooya, I.: Studies on abnormal haemoglobins. Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 5:
99-111, 1960.

421. Yanase, T.; Hanada, M.; Seita, M.; Ohya, I.; Ohta, Y.; Imamura,
T.; Fujimura, T.; Kawasaki, K.; Yamaoka, K.: Molecular basis of morbidity
from a series of studies of hemoglobinopathies in western Japan. Jpn.
J. Hum. Genet. 13: 40-53, 1968.

422. Yi, C. H.; Li, H. J.; Li, H. W.; Zhang, X. S.; Zhao, X. N.; Zhang,
C. T.: Hemoglobin Shenyang found among Uygurs in P.R. China. Hemoglobin 13:
97-99, 1989.

423. Yi-Tao, Z.; Headlee, M. E.; Henson, J.; Lam, H.; Wilson, J. B.;
Huisman, T. H. J.: Identification of hemoglobin G-Philadelphia (alpha68
asn-to-lys) and hemoglobin Matsue-Oki (alpha75 asp-to-asn) in a black
infant. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 707: 206-212, 1982.

424. Yodsowan, B.; Svasti, J.; Srisomsap, C.; Winichagoon, P.; Fucharoen,
S.: Hb Siam [alpha-15(A13)gly-arg] is a GGT-CGT mutation in the alpha-1-globin
gene. Hemoglobin 24: 71-75, 2000.

425. Yongsuwan, S.; Svasti, J.; Fucharoen, S.: Decreased heat stability
found in purified hemoglobin Queens (alpha34(B15)leu-to-arg). Hemoglobin 11:
567-570, 1987.

426. Zeng, F.-Y.; Fucharoen, S.; Huang, S.-Z.; Rodgers, G. P.: Hb
Q-Thailand (alpha74 (EF3) asp-to-his): gene organization, molecular
structure, and DNA diagnosis. Hemoglobin 16: 481-491, 1992.

427. Zeng, Y.; Huang, S.; Liang, X.; Long, G.; Lam, H.; Wilson, J.
B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Wuming or alpha11 (A9) lys-to-gln. Hemoglobin 5:
679-687, 1981.

428. Zeng, Y.; Huang, S.; Qiu, X.; Cheng, G.; Ren, Z.; Jin, Q.; Chen,
C.; Jiao, C.; Tang, Z.; Liu, R.; Bao, X.; Zeng, L.; Duan, Y.; Zhang,
G.: Hemoglobin Chongqing (alpha2 (NA2) leu-to-arg) and hemoglobin
Harbin (alpha16 (A14) lys-to-met) found in China. Hemoglobin 8:
569-581, 1984.

429. Zeng, Y.; Huang, S.; Zhou, X.; Qiu, X.; Dong, Q.; Li, M.; Bai,
J.: Hb Shenyang (alpha26 (B7) ala-to-glu): a new unstable variant
found in China. Hemoglobin 6: 625-628, 1982.

430. Zhao, W.; Wilson, J. B.; Webber, B. B.; Kutlar, A.; Tamagnini,
G. P.; Kuam, B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Hekinan observed in three
Chinese from Macau: identification of the GAG-to-GAT mutation in the
alpha-1-globin gene. Hemoglobin 14: 627-635, 1990.

431. Zhou, Z.; Chen, L.; Chen, P.; Zhang, K.; Wang, Y.: Hemoglobin
Hangzhou alpha64 (E13) asp-to-gly: a new variant found in China. Hemoglobin 11:
31-33, 1987.

432. Zimmer, E. A.; Martin, S. L.; Beverley, S. M.; Kan, Y. W.; Wilson,
A. C.: Rapid duplication and loss of genes coding for the alpha chains
of hemoglobin. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 77: 2158-2162, 1980.

433. Zwerdling, T.; Williams, S.; Nasr, S. A.; Rucknagel, D. L.:
Hb Port Huron (alpha56(E5)lys-to-arg): a new alpha chain variant. Hemoglobin 15:
381-391, 1991.

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS INHERITANCE:
Autosomal dominant

SKIN, NAILS, HAIR:
[Skin];
Jaundice;
Cyanosis

HEMATOLOGY:
Alpha polypeptide hemoglobin chain;
Alpha-thalassemia silent carrier (3 normal genes);
Alpha-thalassemia with microcytosis (2 normal genes);
Alpha-thalassemia with microcytosis and hemolysis, Hb H disease (1
normal gene);
Alpha-thalassemia with fatal Hb Bart's hydrops fetalis (No normal
gene);
Polycythemia (e.g. Hb Chesapeake 141800.0018);
Unstable hemoglobin (e.g. Hb Contaldo 141800.0022);
Hemolysis (e.g. Hb Koelliker 141800.0083);
Methemoglobinemia (e.g. Hb M Boston 141800.0092);
Amelioration of SS disease (e.g. Hb Memphis 141800.0096);
Congenital Heinz body anemia (e.g. Hb Toyama 141800.0152)

LABORATORY ABNORMALITIES:
Decreased heme-heme interaction (e.g. Hb Kanagawa 141800.0169);
Increased oxygen affinity (e.g. Hb Nunobiki 141800.0109);
Reduced oxygen affinity (e.g. Hb Thionville 141800.0168);
Decreased reversible oxygen-binding capacity (e.g. Hb L (Bombay) 141800.9999)

MISCELLANEOUS:
Two alpha-globin genes - 5-prime or alpha-2 and 3-prime or alpha-1

CREATED John F. Jackson: 6/15/1995

EDITED joanna: 05/18/2011

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/14/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/1/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/28/2010
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 5/22/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/19/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/21/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/29/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/11/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/11/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/11/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/6/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/6/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/2/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/20/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/15/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/2/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/5/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/2/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/3/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/23/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/27/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/1/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/11/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/1/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/19/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/14/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/21/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/24/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/9/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/12/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/30/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/6/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/27/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/23/1986

EDITED tpirozzi: 09/30/2013
alopez: 12/19/2012
terry: 12/14/2012
alopez: 11/2/2012
terry: 11/1/2012
alopez: 8/6/2012
alopez: 7/25/2011
carol: 6/9/2011
alopez: 5/13/2011
alopez: 1/28/2010
terry: 6/3/2009
carol: 5/22/2009
terry: 1/15/2009
terry: 1/14/2009
wwang: 10/4/2007
wwang: 10/3/2006
terry: 9/19/2006
alopez: 7/25/2006
terry: 7/21/2006
terry: 6/23/2006
terry: 3/29/2006
carol: 10/21/2005
wwang: 10/21/2005
terry: 10/11/2005
carol: 10/3/2005
terry: 8/11/2005
wwang: 6/7/2005
terry: 5/17/2005
wwang: 5/13/2005
terry: 5/11/2005
terry: 2/7/2005
tkritzer: 1/25/2005
terry: 12/6/2004
tkritzer: 8/10/2004
terry: 8/6/2004
tkritzer: 6/8/2004
terry: 6/2/2004
carol: 3/17/2004
tkritzer: 1/21/2004
terry: 1/20/2004
terry: 1/15/2004
cwells: 9/3/2003
terry: 9/2/2003
carol: 8/29/2003
carol: 8/25/2003
carol: 5/13/2003
terry: 4/17/2003
terry: 3/5/2003
terry: 3/3/2003
tkritzer: 12/10/2002
tkritzer: 10/7/2002
tkritzer: 10/3/2002
tkritzer: 10/2/2002
carol: 6/3/2002
terry: 6/3/2002
terry: 5/23/2002
cwells: 3/22/2002
cwells: 3/20/2002
terry: 2/27/2002
mcapotos: 11/1/2001
mcapotos: 10/26/2001
mcapotos: 10/11/2001
cwells: 5/31/2001
mcapotos: 2/19/2001
mcapotos: 2/15/2001
terry: 2/14/2001
mcapotos: 5/26/2000
mcapotos: 5/24/2000
terry: 5/1/2000
mcapotos: 2/7/2000
mcapotos: 2/4/2000
carol: 1/28/2000
mcapotos: 1/28/2000
mcapotos: 1/24/2000
terry: 1/19/2000
carol: 12/8/1999
mgross: 7/16/1999
terry: 7/14/1999
carol: 6/27/1999
terry: 4/30/1999
alopez: 4/21/1999
terry: 3/24/1999
carol: 3/9/1999
terry: 2/24/1999
mgross: 2/16/1999
mgross: 2/11/1999
terry: 2/9/1999
dkim: 7/21/1998
carol: 7/2/1998
alopez: 6/12/1998
terry: 6/5/1998
alopez: 5/14/1998
carol: 5/4/1998
terry: 4/30/1998
mark: 2/16/1998
terry: 2/6/1998
mark: 10/19/1997
jenny: 9/5/1997
terry: 8/27/1997
alopez: 7/31/1997
alopez: 7/29/1997
terry: 7/10/1997
mark: 7/10/1997
alopez: 7/10/1997
terry: 7/9/1997
terry: 7/7/1997
mark: 6/14/1997
terry: 11/15/1996
terry: 11/13/1996
mark: 4/12/1996
terry: 4/9/1996
mark: 2/13/1996
terry: 2/5/1996
mark: 11/17/1995
terry: 11/18/1994
jason: 7/29/1994
pfoster: 4/25/1994
mimadm: 4/17/1994
warfield: 4/8/1994

612174	TITLE *612174 CALCIUM-BINDING PROTEIN 39; CAB39
;;MO25-ALPHA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching databases using peptide fragments of proteins that
interacted with the serine/threonine protein kinase LKB1 (STK11; 602216)
in HeLa cells, Boudeau et al. (2003) identified CAB39, which they
designated MO25-alpha. The deduced 341-amino acid protein shares a high
degree of conservation with its C. elegans and Drosophila orthologs.
Northern blot analysis detected a 4.2-kb MO25-alpha transcript in all
tissues examined, with highest expression in skeletal muscle. Western
blot analysis detected MO25-alpha in most tissues and cell lines
examined. Endogenous MO25-alpha in HeLa cells had an apparent molecular
mass of 40 kD by SDS-PAGE.

GENE FUNCTION

By immunoprecipitation analysis of human and rat cells, Boudeau et al.
(2003) showed that MO25-alpha associated with STRAD-alpha (608626) and
LKB1. Cotransfection and mutation analysis revealed that MO25-alpha
interacted directly with STRAD-alpha rather than with LKB1, and the
interaction required the last 3 residues of STRAD-alpha. MO25-alpha also
interacted with STRAD-beta (ALS2CR2; 607333) in a complex with LKB1.
MO25-alpha and STRAD-alpha anchored LKB1 in the cytoplasm, excluding it
from the nucleus. Moreover, MO25-alpha enhanced formation of
LKB1-STRAD-alpha complexes in vivo and stimulated LKB1 catalytic
activity about 10-fold. Boudeau et al. (2003) concluded that MO25-alpha
may function as a scaffolding component of the LKB1-STRAD complex and
regulate LKB1 activity and cellular localization.

Using mutagenesis, Boudeau et al. (2004) identified 2 binding sites on
opposite surfaces of MO25-alpha that were required for assembly of the
MO25-alpha-STRAD-alpha-LKB1 complex.

Denning et al. (2012) identified a mechanism of cell extrusion that is
caspase-independent and that can eliminate a subset of the C. elegans
cells programmed to die during embryonic development. In wildtype
animals, these cells die soon after their generation through
caspase-mediated apoptosis. However, in mutants lacking all 4 C. elegans
caspase genes, these cells were eliminated by being extruded from the
developing embryo into the extraembryonic space of the egg. The shed
cells showed apoptosis-like cytologic and morphologic characteristics,
indicating that apoptosis can occur in the absence of caspases in C.
elegans. Denning et al. (2012) described a kinase pathway required for
cell extrusion involving Par4, Strd1, and Mop25.1/25.2, the C. elegans
homologs of the mammalian tumor suppressor kinase LKB1 (602216) and its
binding partners STRAD-alpha (608626) and MO25-alpha. The AMPK-related
kinase Pig1, a possible target of the Par4-Strd1-Mop25 kinase complex,
is also required for cell shedding. Pig1 promotes shed cell detachment
by preventing the cell surface expression of cell adhesion molecules.
Denning et al. (2012) concluded that their findings revealed a mechanism
for apoptotic cell elimination that is fundamentally distinct from that
of canonical programmed cell death.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Zeqiraj et al. (2009) described the structure of the core heterotrimeric
LKB1-STRAD-alpha-MO25-alpha complex, revealing an unusual allosteric
mechanism of LKB1 activation. STRAD-alpha adopts a closed conformation
typical of active protein kinases and binds LKB1 as a pseudosubstrate.
STRAD-alpha and MO25-alpha promote the active conformation of LKB1,
which is stabilized by MO25-alpha interacting with the LKB1 activation
loop. Zeqiraj et al. (2009) suggested that this previously undescribed
mechanism of kinase activation may be relevant to understanding the
evolution of other pseudokinases, and also commented that the structure
reveals how mutations found in Peutz-Jeghers (175200) syndrome and in
various sporadic cancers impair LKB1 function.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the CAB39
gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP RH94102).

REFERENCE 1. Boudeau, J.; Baas, A. F.; Deak, M.; Morrice, N. A.; Kieloch, A.;
Schutkowski, M.; Prescott, A. R.; Clevers, H. C.; Alessi, D. R.:
MO25-alpha/beta interact with STRAD-alpha/beta enhancing their ability
to bind, activate and localize LKB1 in the cytoplasm. EMBO J. 22:
5102-5114, 2003.

2. Boudeau, J.; Scott, J. W.; Resta, N.; Deak, M.; Kieloch, A.; Komander,
D.; Hardie, D. G.; Prescott, A. R.; van Aalten, D. M. F.; Alessi,
D. R.: Analysis of the LKB1-STRAD-MO25 complex. J. Cell Sci. 117:
6365-6375, 2004.

3. Denning, D. P.; Hatch, V.; Horvitz, H. R.: Programmed elimination
of cells by caspase-independent cell extrusion in C. elegans. Nature 488:
226-230, 2012.

4. Zeqiraj, E.; Filippi, B. M.; Deak, M.; Alessi, D. R.; van Aalten,
D. M. F.: Structure of the LKB1-STRAD-MO25 complex reveals an allosteric
mechanism of kinase activation. Science 326: 1707-1711, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/28/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/8/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/14/2008

EDITED alopez: 08/29/2012
terry: 8/28/2012
alopez: 1/11/2010
terry: 1/8/2010
terry: 9/4/2009
mgross: 7/14/2008

613593	TITLE *613593 BUTYROPHILIN, SUBFAMILY 3, MEMBER A1; BTN3A1
;;BT3.1;;
BTF5;;
CD277
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The butyrophilin (BTN) genes are a group of major histocompatibility
complex (MHC)-associated genes that encode type I membrane proteins with
2 extracellular immunoglobulin (Ig) domains and an intracellular B30.2
(PRYSPRY) domain. Three subfamilies of human BTN genes are located in
the MHC class I region: the single-copy BTN1A1 gene (601610) and the
BTN2 (e.g., BTN2A1; 613590) and BTN3 (e.g., BNT3A1) genes, which have
undergone tandem duplication, resulting in 3 copies of each (summary by
Smith et al., 2010).

CLONING

By genomic sequence analysis, RT-PCR of peripheral blood leukocytes and
human cell lines, and 3-prime RACE of a fetal tissue cDNA library,
Rhodes et al. (2001) cloned BTN3A1. They also identified a BTN3A1 splice
variant encoding a truncated protein lacking the B30.2 domain, and this
variant was more abundant than the full-length form.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rhodes et al. (2001) determined that the BTN3A1 gene spans approximately
12 kb and contains 9 coding exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Rhodes et al. (2001) mapped the BTN3A1
gene within the BTN gene cluster on chromosome 6p22.1. The BTN gene
cluster is located about 4 Mb telomeric to the classical MHC class I
genes.

REFERENCE 1. Rhodes, D. A.; Stammers, M.; Malcherek, G.; Beck, S.; Trowsdale,
J.: The cluster of BTN genes in the extended major histocompatibility
complex. Genomics 71: 351-362, 2001.

2. Smith, I. A.; Knezevic, B. R.; Ammann, J. U.; Rhodes, D. A.; Aw,
D.; Palmer, D. B.; Mather, I. H.; Trowsdale, J.: BTN1A1, the mammary
gland butyrophilin, and BTN2A2 are both inhibitors of T cell activation. J.
Immun. 184: 3514-3525, 2010.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/11/2010

EDITED mgross: 10/11/2010

174761	TITLE *174761 POLYMERASE (DNA-DIRECTED), DELTA 1, CATALYTIC SUBUNIT; POLD1
;;POLYMERASE, DNA, DELTA; POLD
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The POLD1 gene encodes the catalytic and proofreading subunit of DNA
polymerase-delta, which is responsible for DNA synthesis of the lagging
strand during DNA replication (summary by Palles et al., 2013 and Weedon
et al., 2013).

The DNA polymerase delta complex is involved in DNA replication and
repair, and it consists of the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA;
176740), the multisubunit replication factor C (see 102579), and the 4
subunit polymerase complex: POLD1, POLD2 (600815), POLD3 (611415), and
POLD4 (611525) (Liu and Warbrick, 2006).

CLONING

Syvaoja et al. (1990) purified DNA polymerases alpha (312040), delta,
and epsilon (174762) from the same HeLa cell extract. The results of
their studies supported the premise that the alpha, delta, and epsilon
polymerases are distinct enzymes. PCNA is the auxiliary protein
(cofactor) for DNA polymerase delta. Syvaoja and Linn (1989) identified
a form of DNA polymerase delta in HeLa cells that is insensitive to
PCNA. Lee and Toomey (1987) isolated DNA polymerase delta from human
placenta and presented evidence that both its polymerase and its
exonuclease activities are associated with a single protein. Lee (1988)
concluded that the multiple forms of placenta DNA polymerase delta are
the result of proteolysis during isolation and that all derive from one
protein.

Chung et al. (1991) cloned cDNA corresponding to the POLD gene and
showed that the 3,443-bp sequence encodes a polypeptide of 1,107 amino
acids. The enzyme is 94% identical to bovine DNA polymerase delta and
contains the numerous highly conserved regions previously observed in
the bovine and yeast enzymes. The human enzyme also contains 2 putative
zinc finger domains in the C-terminal region of the molecule as well as
a putative nuclear localization signal at the N-terminal end.

Yang et al. (1992) also cloned human POLD cDNA and demonstrated that it
is 3.5 kb long and encodes a protein of 1,107 amino acids with a
calculated molecular mass of 124 kD. Northern blot analysis demonstrated
that the mRNA is 3.4 kb.

Weedon et al. (2013) found expression of the POLD1 gene across a panel
of human tissues, with high levels of expression in heart and lung.

GENE FUNCTION

Nishida et al. (1988) showed that DNA repair synthesis in human
fibroblasts requires DNA polymerase delta. Dresler et al. (1988) showed
that repair synthesis late after ultraviolet irradiation, like repair
synthesis at earlier stages, is mediated by this enzyme.

Kamath-Loeb et al. (2000) showed that WRN functionally interacts with
DNA polymerase delta, which is required for DNA replication and DNA
repair.

Lydeard et al. (2007) showed that in haploid budding yeast, Rad51
(179617)-dependent break-induced replication (BIR) induced by HO
endonuclease requires the lagging strand DNA polymerase alpha-primase
complex as well as polymerase delta to initiate new DNA synthesis.
Polymerase epsilon is not required for the initial primer extension step
of BIR but is required to complete 30 kb of new DNA synthesis.
Initiation of BIR also requires the nonessential DNA polymerase delta
subunit polymerase-32 primarily through its interaction with another
polymerase delta subunit, polymerase-31. HO-induced gene conversion, in
which both ends of a double-strand break engage in homologous
recombination, does not require polymerase-32. Polymerase-32 is also
required for the recovery of both Rad51-dependent and Rad51-independent
survivors in yeast strains lacking telomerase. The results of Lydeard et
al. (2007) strongly suggested that both types of telomere maintenance
pathways occur by recombination-dependent DNA replication. Thus,
polymerase-32, dispensable for replication and for gene conversion, is
uniquely required for BIR; this finding provided an opening into
understanding how DNA replication restart mechanisms operate in
eukaryotes.

MAPPING

By PCR analysis of DNA from a panel of 24 human/hamster hybrid cells,
Chung et al. (1991) mapped the POLD gene to chromosome 19. Yang et al.
(1992) localized the POLD gene to chromosome 19 by Southern blotting of
EcoRI-digested DNA from a panel of rodent/human cell hybrids. By in situ
hybridization, Kemper et al. (1992) assigned the POLD1 gene to
19q13.3-q13.4.

Goldsby et al. (1998) mapped the Pold1 gene to mouse chromosome 7.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chang et al. (1995) showed that the human POLD1 gene contains 27 exons
spanning approximately 32 kb. The gene has a GC-rich promoter region and
multiple transcription start sites. Zhao and Chang (1997) found that the
core promoter of the POLD1 gene extends 328 bp upstream from the major
transcription start site. Multiple elements in this region, including
two 11-bp direct repeats, play an important role in POLD1 promoter
activity. Zhao and Chang (1997) showed that SP1 (189906) and SP3
(601804) can activate the POLD1 promoter through the direct repeat
sequences.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Susceptibility to Colorectal Cancer 10

In affected members of 2 large multigenerational families with
susceptibility to colorectal cancer-10 (CRCS10; 612591), Palles et al.
(2013) identified a heterozygous mutation in the POLD1 gene (S478N;
174761.0001) at a highly conserved residue in the exonuclease domain.
The S489N mutation was also identified in a third affected family in the
validation phase of the study. The phenotype was characterized by the
development of multiple colorectal adenomas and carcinomas early in
adult life. However, 7 mutation carriers also developed endometrial
carcinoma, and 1 patient had 2 primary brain tumors. Tumor tissue from 2
of 6 mutation carriers showed additional somatic mutations, most
commonly in the APC (611731), KRAS (190070), or FBXW7 (606278) genes.
All tumors showed microsatellite stability. In addition to germline
POLD1 mutations, Palles et al. (2013) identified somatic POLE mutations
in 5 colorectal cancers from a large database. All of these tumors had
additional somatic mutations. These findings suggested that the
mechanism of tumorigenesis in POLD1-mutated tumors is decreased fidelity
of replication-associated polymerase proofreading, leading to an
increased mutation rate.

- Mandibular Hypoplasia, Deafness, Progeroid Features, and
Lipodystrophy Syndrome

In 4 unrelated patients with mandibular hypoplasia, deafness, progeroid
features, and lipodystrophy syndrome (MDPL; 615381), Weedon et al.
(2013) identified a de novo heterozygous in-frame deletion of residue
ser605 (ser604del) in the polymerase active site of the POLD1 gene
(174761.0003). The mutation, which was initially found by exome
sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing in 2 of the patients, was
not found in any of the parents or in several large control databases.
The disorder was characterized by loss of subcutaneous fat in early
childhood, a characteristic facial appearance, and metabolic
abnormalities including insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus.
Sensorineural deafness occurred late in the first or second decades of
life. In vitro functional expression studies in E. coli showed that the
mutant enzyme had lost its DNA polymerase ability, whereas its
exonuclease activity, although decreased compared to wildtype, was still
present. The studies demonstrated decoupling of the mutant enzyme's
activities and suggested that the mutant protein could bind DNA, but was
unable to interact with and incorporate dNTPs. The mutations causing
colorectal cancer (174761.0001 and 174761.0002) affect the proofreading
domain and lead to increased base-substitution error rates, whereas the
ser605del mutant enzyme retains proofreading ability but cannot catalyze
polymerization, which likely leads to an increase in stalled replication
forks, cell senescence, and death. The findings implicated POLD1 in
adipose tissue homeostasis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Normal cells minimize spontaneous mutations through the combined actions
of polymerase base selectivity, 3-prime to 5-prime exonucleolytic
proofreading, mismatch correction, and DNA damage repair. To determine
the consequences of defective proofreading in mammals, Goldsby et al.
(2002) generated mice with a point mutation (asp400 to ala) in the
proofreading domain of DNA polymerase delta. They showed that this
mutation inactivates the 3-prime to 5-prime exonuclease of DNA
polymerase delta and causes a mutator and cancer phenotype in a
recessive manner. By 18 months of age, 94% of mice homozygous for the
mutation developed cancer and died (median survival, 10 months). In
contrast, only 3 to 4% of heterozygotes and wildtype homozygotes
developed cancer in this time frame. Of the 66 tumors arising in 49
homozygous mice, 40 were epithelial in origin (carcinomas), 24 were
mesenchymal (lymphomas and sarcomas), and 2 were composite (teratomas);
one-third of these animals developed tumors in more than 1 tissue. Skin
squamous cell carcinoma was the most common tumor type, occurring in 60%
of all homozygous mice and in 90% of those surviving beyond 8 months of
age. These data showed that DNA polymerase delta proofreading suppresses
spontaneous tumor development and strongly suggested that unrepaired DNA
polymerase errors contribute to carcinogenesis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COLORECTAL CANCER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 10
POLD1, SER478ASN

In affected members of 2 large multigenerational families with
susceptibility to colorectal cancer-10 (CRCS10; 612591), Palles et al.
(2013) identified a heterozygous 1433G-A transition in the POLD1 gene,
resulting in a ser478-to-asn (S478N) substitution at a highly conserved
residue in the exonuclease domain. The mutant mRNA was stably expressed.
Microsatellite analysis of the 2 families suggested a common ancestor.
The S489N mutation was identified in a third affected family in the
validation phase of the study. The mutation, which was initially
identified by linkage analysis combined with whole-genome sequencing,
was not found in 6,721 controls or 10,755 control exomes. A yeast
construct carrying the analogous mutation showed a 12-fold higher
mutation rate compared to wildtype. Molecular modeling using yeast
structures indicated that the S478N mutation will distort the packing of
helices involved at the exonuclease active site, likely affecting
nuclear activity. The phenotype was characterized by the development of
multiple colorectal adenomas and carcinomas early in adult life.
However, 7 mutation carriers also developed endometrial carcinoma, and 1
patient had 2 primary brain tumors. Tumor tissue from 2 of 6 mutation
carriers showed additional somatic mutations, most commonly in the APC
(611731), KRAS (190070), or FBXW7 (606278) genes. All tumors showed
microsatellite stability.

.0002
COLORECTAL CANCER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 10
POLD1, PRO327LEU

In a 70-year-old patient with multiple colorectal adenomas (612591),
Palles et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous 981C-G transversion in
the POLD1 gene, resulting in a pro327-to-leu (P327L) substitution at a
highly conserved residue in the exonuclease domain.

.0003
MANDIBULAR HYPOPLASIA, DEAFNESS, PROGEROID FEATURES, AND LIPODYSTROPHY
SYNDROME
POLD1, 3-BP DEL, 1812CTC

In 4 unrelated patients with mandibular hypoplasia, deafness, progeroid
features, and lipodystrophy syndrome (MDPL; 615381), Weedon et al.
(2013) identified a de novo heterozygous in-frame 3-bp deletion
(c.1812_1814delCTC) in the POLD1 gene, resulting in the deletion of
residue ser605 (ser605del) in motif A, a highly conserved region of the
polymerase active site. The mutation, which was initially found by exome
sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing in 2 of the patients, was
not found in any of the parents or in several large control databases.
In vitro functional expression studies in E. coli showed that the mutant
enzyme had lost its DNA polymerase ability, whereas its exonuclease
activity, although decreased compared to wildtype, was still present.
These studies demonstrated decoupling of the mutant enzyme's activities
and suggested that the mutant protein could bind DNA, but was unable to
interact with and incorporate dNTPs. The findings implicated POLD1 in
adipose tissue homeostasis.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Bertazzoni et al. (1977); Dresler et al. (1988); Lestienne  (1987)
REFERENCE 1. Bertazzoni, U.; Scovassi, A. I.; Brun, G. M.: Chick-embryo DNA
polymerase gamma: identity of gamma-polymerases purified from nuclei
and mitochondria. Europ. J. Biochem. 81: 237-248, 1977.

2. Chang, L.-S.; Zhao, L.; Zhu, L.; Chen, M.-L.; Lee, M. Y. W. T.
: Structure of the gene for the catalytic subunit of human DNA polymerase
delta (POLD1). Genomics 28: 411-419, 1995.

3. Chung, D. W.; Zhang, J.; Tan, C.-K.; Davie, E. W.; So, A. G.; Downey,
K. M.: Primary structure of the catalytic subunit of human DNA polymerase
delta and chromosomal location of the gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88:
11197-11201, 1991.

4. Dresler, S. L.; Gowans, B. J.; Robinson-Hill, R. M.; Hunting, D.
J.: Involvement of DNA polymerase delta in DNA repair synthesis in
human fibroblasts at late times after ultraviolet irradiation. Biochemistry 27:
6379-6383, 1988.

5. Goldsby, R. E.; Hays, L. E.; Chen, X.; Olmsted, E. A.; Slayton,
W. B.; Spangrude, G. J.; Preston, B. D.: High incidence of epithelial
cancers in mice deficient for DNA polymerase delta proofreading. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 15560-15565, 2002.

6. Goldsby, R. E.; Singh, M.; Preston, B. D.: Mouse DNA polymerase
delta gene (Pold1) maps to chromosome 7. Mammalian Genome 9: 92-93,
1998.

7. Kamath-Loeb, A. S.; Johansson, E.; Burgers, P. M. J.; Loeb, L.
A.: Functional interaction between the Werner syndrome protein and
DNA polymerase delta. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 4603-4608, 2000.

8. Kemper, R. R.; Ahn, E. R.; Zhang, P.; Lee, M. Y. W. T.; Rabin,
M.: Human DNA polymerase delta gene maps to region 19q13.3-q13.4
by in situ hybridization. Genomics 14: 205-206, 1992.

9. Lee, M. Y. W. T.: Isolation of multiple forms of DNA polymerase
delta: evidence of proteolytic modification during isolation. Biochemistry 27:
5188-5193, 1988.

10. Lee, M. Y. W. T.; Toomey, N. L.: Human placental DNA polymerase
delta: identification of a 170-kilodalton polypeptide by activity
staining and immunoblotting. Biochemistry 26: 1076-1085, 1987.

11. Lestienne, P.: Evidence for a direct role of the DNA polymerase
gamma in the replication of the human mitochondrial DNA in vitro. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 146: 1146-1153, 1987.

12. Liu, G.; Warbrick, E.: The p66 and p12 subunits of DNA polymerase
delta are modified by ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like proteins. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 349: 360-366, 2006.

13. Lydeard, J. R.; Jain, S.; Yamaguchi, M.; Haber, J. E.: Break-induced
replication and telomerase-independent telomere maintenance require
Pol32. Nature 448: 820-823, 2007.

14. Nishida, C.; Reinhard, P.; Linn, S.: DNA repair synthesis in
human fibroblasts requires DNA polymerase delta. J. Biol. Chem. 263:
501-510, 1988.

15. Palles, C.; Cazier, J.-B.; Howarth, K. M.; Domingo, E.; Jones,
A. M.; Broderick, P.; Kemp, Z.; Spain, S. L.; Almeida, E. G.; Salguero,
I.; Sherborne, A.; Chubb, D.; and 27 others: Germline mutations
affecting the proofreading domains of POLE and POLD1 predispose to
colorectal adenomas and carcinomas. Nature Genet. 45: 136-144, 2013.

16. Syvaoja, J.; Linn, S.: Characterization of a large form of DNA
polymerase delta from HeLa cells that is insensitive to proliferating
cell nuclear antigen. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 2489-2497, 1989.

17. Syvaoja, J.; Suomensaari, S.; Nishida, C.; Goldsmith, J. S.; Chui,
G. S. J.; Jain, S.; Linn, S.: DNA polymerases alpha, delta, and epsilon:
three distinct enzymes from HeLa cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87:
6664-6668, 1990.

18. Weedon, M. N.; Ellard, S.; Prindle, M. J.; Caswell, R.; Allen,
H. L.; Oram, R.; Godbole, K.; Yajnik, C. S.; Sbraccia, P.; Novelli,
G.; Turnpenny, P.; McCann, E.; and 10 others: An in-frame deletion
at the polymerase active site of POLD1 causes a multisystem disorder
with lipodystrophy. Nature Genet. 45: 947-950, 2013.

19. Yang, C.-L.; Chang, L.-S.; Zhang, P.; Hao, H.; Zhu, L.; Toomey,
N. L.; Lee, M. Y. W. T.: Molecular cloning of the cDNA for the catalytic
subunit of human DNA polymerase delta. Nucleic Acids Res. 20: 735-745,
1992.

20. Zhao, L.; Chang, L.-S.: The human POLD1 gene: identification
of an upstream activator sequence, activation by Sp1 and Sp3, and
cell cycle regulation. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 4869-4882, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/27/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/18/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/15/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/19/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 5/7/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/19/1998
Alan F. Scott - updated: 9/27/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/8/1990

EDITED carol: 08/27/2013
ckniffin: 8/27/2013
carol: 2/19/2013
ckniffin: 2/18/2013
alopez: 10/26/2007
terry: 10/15/2007
wwang: 10/12/2007
wwang: 9/10/2007
carol: 1/22/2003
tkritzer: 1/17/2003
terry: 1/14/2003
mcapotos: 7/19/2000
mcapotos: 7/17/2000
terry: 12/2/1999
kayiaros: 7/12/1999
psherman: 5/7/1998
terry: 2/19/1998
mark: 3/18/1997
carol: 2/1/1995
warfield: 4/21/1994
carol: 9/21/1992
carol: 9/4/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

607873	TITLE *607873 SCAVENGER RECEPTOR CLASS F, MEMBER 1; SCARF1
;;SCAVENGER RECEPTOR EXPRESSED BY ENDOTHELIAL CELLS; SREC;;
SREC1;;
SREC I;;
KIAA0149
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Scavenger receptors mediate the endocytosis of chemically modified
lipoproteins. SCARF1 specifically mediates the selective uptake of
acetylated low density lipoprotein (Ac-LDL) into endothelial cells.

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a myeloid leukemia cell cDNA library,
Nagase et al. (1995) cloned SCARF1, which they designated KIAA0149. The
deduced 830-amino acid protein contains a putative transmembrane domain
and an EGF-like pattern of cysteine repeats. SCARF1 shares about 33%
identity over 147 amino acids with mouse Tie2 (600221), an epithelial
receptor tyrosine kinase. The 3-prime untranslated region contains an
Alu repeat. Northern blot analysis detected expression in most tissues
examined, with highest levels in lung and spleen. No expression was
detected in HeLa cells, pancreas, or colon.

Adachi et al. (1997) cloned SCARF1, which they designated SREC, using an
expression cloning strategy in which they assayed for uptake of
fluorescence-labeled Ac-LDL into CHO cells transfected with a human
umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) cDNA library. The deduced
830-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 86 kD.
SCARF1 contains a hydrophobic signal sequence followed by 5 EGF-like
cysteine pattern signatures in its extracellular N-terminal half, a
transmembrane region, and an intracellular C-terminal half containing a
serine/proline-rich region followed by a glycine-rich region. It has 3
potential N-glycosylation sites and several putative sites for serine
and threonine phosphorylation. Northern blot analysis revealed a 3.5-kb
transcript expressed in HUVECs and in coronary artery endothelial cells,
but not in coronary artery smooth muscle cells.

Adachi and Tsujimoto (2002) identified several SCARF1 variants in a
peripheral blood leukocyte cDNA library. Alternative splicing introduces
a stop codon before the transmembrane region in 2 of the variants,
resulting in soluble forms of SCARF1.

GENE FUNCTION

Adachi et al. (1997) determined that CHO cells stably expressing SCARF1
bound radiolabeled Ac-LDL with high affinity and degraded it via an
endocytic pathway. The association between SCARF1 and Ac-LDL was
inhibited by oxidized LDL, malondialdehyde-modified LDL, dextran
sulfate, and polyinosinic acid, but not by natural LDL or heparin.

Adachi and Tsujimoto (2002) determined that all membrane-bound splice
variants of SCARF1 showed receptor activity toward Ac-LDL. They
identified a transcriptional activator of SCARF1, ZNF444 (607874).
Overexpression of ZNF444 in HUVECs increased SCARF1 promoter activity
nearly 2.5-fold. An intact SP1 (189906) motif and an intact inverted
repeat sequence with a triple-nucleotide spacer (IR3), which binds
ZNF444, were required for maximal SCARF1 expression. Several
inflammatory cytokines inhibited SCARF1 promoter activity in vitro and
decreased Ac-LDL uptake in vivo.

Means et al. (2009) showed that the scavenger receptors Scarf1 and Cd36
(173510) mediated mouse defense against 2 fungal pathogens, Cryptococcus
neoformans and Candida albicans, by enabling production of antimicrobial
peptides. Studies in C. elegans indicated that the homologous proteins
protected nematodes. Macrophage binding and cytokine production required
Cd36, but not Tlr2 (603028), and binding was dependent on recognition of
pathogen beta-glucans. Mice lacking Cd36, but expressing other
beta-glucan receptors (e.g., CLEC7A; 606264), had a higher fungal burden
and greater mortality after intravenous infection with C. neoformans
compared with wildtype mice. Means et al. (2009) concluded that SCARF1
and CD36 are beta-glucan-binding receptors and are involved in an
evolutionarily conserved pathway for the innate sensing of fungal
pathogens.

GENE STRUCTURE

Adachi and Tsujimoto (2002) determined that the SCARF1 gene contains 11
exons and spans 12 kb. The 5-prime flanking region lacks TATA and CCAAT
boxes, but it contains several putative motifs for DNA-binding elements,
including an SP1 motif and an IR3 sequence that binds ZNF444.

MAPPING

By PCR of a human/rodent hybrid panel, Nagase et al. (1995) mapped the
SCARF1 gene to chromosome 17.

REFERENCE 1. Adachi, H.; Tsujimoto, M.: Characterization of the human gene
encoding the scavenger receptor expressed by endothelial cell and
its regulation by a novel transcription factor, endothelial zinc finger
protein-2. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 24014-24021, 2002.

2. Adachi, H.; Tsujimoto, M.; Arai, H.; Inoue, K.: Expression cloning
of a novel scavenger receptor from human endothelial cells. J. Biol.
Chem. 272: 31217-31220, 1997.

3. Means, T. K.; Mylonakis, E.; Tampakakis, E.; Colvin, R. A.; Seung,
E.; Puckett, L.; Tai, M. F.; Stewart, C. R.; Pukkila-Worley, R.; Hickman,
S. E.; Moore, K. J.; Calderwood, S. B.; Hacohen, N.; Luster, A. D.;
El Khoury, J.: Evolutionarily conserved recognition and innate immunity
to fungal pathogens by the scavenger receptors SCARF1 and CD36. J.
Exp. Med. 206: 637-653, 2009.

4. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Tanaka, A.; Ishikawa, K.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. IV. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0121-KIAA0160) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 2: 167-174, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/30/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/11/2003

EDITED mgross: 12/02/2010
terry: 11/30/2010
mgross: 10/29/2010
mgross: 6/11/2003

610715	TITLE *610715 HEMOGEN; HEMGN
;;ERYTHROID DIFFERENTIATION-ASSOCIATED GENE; EDAG
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Yang et al. (2001) cloned mouse Hemgn and, by database analysis and
RT-PCR of a K562 myelogenous leukemia cell line cDNA library, they
cloned human HEMGN, or EDAG. The deduced mouse and human proteins
contain 503 and 484 amino acids, respectively, and share 43% identity. A
coiled-coil region and bipartite nuclear localization signal are
conserved in the N termini of both proteins. Northern blot analysis
detected a major 2.4-kb transcript and a minor 1.8-kb transcript in
adult human bone marrow and fetal liver. RT-PCR detected high HEMGN
expression in untreated and mitogen-treated K562 cells, adult bone
marrow, and CD34 (142230)-positive progenitor cells. Lower expression
was detected in a child thymus and in a histiocyte lymphoma cell line,
but no expression was detected in cultured T cells, monocytes, and
nonhematopoietic cell lines examined. Northern blot analysis of adult
mice detected Hemgn expression in bone marrow and spleen, but not in
thymus and nonhematopoietic tissues. In situ hybridization of adult
spleen revealed Hemgn in red, but not white, pulp. In situ hybridization
of day-8.5 mouse embryos showed Hemgn in blood islands of the yolk sac
and in circulating primitive blood cells. Hemgn was expressed in
developing hepatic primordia at day 10.5 and, from day 11.5, it was
expressed exclusively in fetal liver. FACS analysis showed Hemgn in
hematopoietic precursors of adult mice, but not in mature blood cells.
Transfected COS-7 cells expressed mouse Hemgn in nuclei, but not in
nucleoli or cytoplasm.

By database analysis, Yang et al. (2003) identified a testis-specific
HEMGN splice variant that they called HEMGN-t. HEMGN-t and the
hematopoietic variant, HEMGN-h, differ in their 5-prime and 3-prime
UTRs, but they have the same coding region. Northern blot analysis
detected a 1.9-kb HEMGN-t transcript in mouse and human testis. In situ
hybridization of adult mouse testis revealed Hemgn only in round
spermatids. Northern blot analysis showed that Hemgn expression in
prepubertal mouse testis correlated with the appearance of postmeiotic
cells, and Hemgn expression was weak in testis of mice lacking
postmeiotic germ cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Li et al. (2004) found that downregulation of EDAG in K562 cells
resulted in inhibition of growth and colony formation, as well as
enhancement of sensitivity to erythroid differentiation induced by
hemin. Overexpression of EDAG in a human myeloid leukemia cell line
significantly blocked expression of the monocyte/macrophage
differentiation marker CD11b (ITGAM; 120980) after mitogen exposure.
Moreover, overexpression of EDAG in a mouse pro-B cell line prolonged
survival and increased expression of Myc (190080), Bcl2 (151430), and
Bclxl (600039) in the absence of interleukin-3 (IL3; 147740). EDAG
enhanced the transcriptional activity of NF-kappa-B (NFKB; see 164011),
and high DNA-binding activity of Nfkb was sustained in EDAG-expressing
pre-B cells after IL3 withdrawal. In these cells, inhibition of Nfkb
activity promoted cell death. Li et al. (2004) concluded that EDAG
regulates proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic cells and
resists cell death through activation of NFKB.

By examining expression of a mouse Hemgn promoter-reporter plasmid in
transgenic mice, Yang et al. (2006) showed that the promoter was
transcriptionally active in embryonic yolk sac, fetal liver, and adult
spleen, bone marrow, brain, thymus, lung, and testis. Mutagenesis
analysis showed that 2 highly conserved GATA boxes were critical for
promoter activity. GATA1 (305371), but not GATA2 (137295), bound to the
GATA-binding sites and transactivated the Hemgn promoter in a
dose-dependent manner. Yang et al. (2006) also found that levels of
HEMGN and GATA1 transcripts closely correlated in human primary acute
myeloid leukemia specimens.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yang et al. (2001) determined that the HEMGN gene spans 18 kb and
contains 5 exons. The first exon is specific to the HEMGN-t variant and
encodes an alternative 5-prime UTR. The donor-acceptor sequence used for
this alternative first exon is GC-AC instead of the canonical GT-AG. The
last exon of HEMGN contains 2 alternative noncanonical polyadenylation
sequences used by the HEMGN-t and HEMGN-h variants. Two promoters in the
5-prime region direct transcription of HEMGN-t and HEMGN-h and are
separated by 6 kb.

Yang et al. (2006) found that the region upstream of the HEMGN coding
sequence contains several evolutionarily conserved sequences and that
the proximal promoter contains a TATA box and 2 conserved GATA boxes.

MAPPING

By FISH, Yang et al. (2003) mapped the HEMGN gene to chromosome 9q22.
They mapped the mouse Hemgn gene to chromosome 4A5-B2.

REFERENCE 1. Li, C. Y.; Zhan, Y. Q.; Xu, C. W.; Xu, W. X.; Wang, S. Y.; Lv,
J.; Zhou, Y.; Yue, P. B.; Chen, B.; Yang, X. M.: EDAG regulates the
proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic cells and resists
cell apoptosis through the activation of nuclear factor-kappa-B. Cell
Death Diff. 11: 1299-1308, 2004.

2. Yang, L. V.; Heng, H. H.; Wan, J.; Southwood, C. M.; Gow, A.; Li,
L.: Alternative promoters and polyadenylation regulate tissue-specific
expression of hemogen isoforms during hematopoiesis and spermatogenesis. Dev.
Dyn. 228: 606-616, 2003.

3. Yang, L. V.; Nicholson, R. H.; Kaplan, J.; Galy, A.; Li, L.: Hemogen
is a novel nuclear factor specifically expressed in mouse hematopoietic
development and its human homologue EDAG maps to chromosome 9q22,
a region containing breakpoints of hematological neoplasms. Mech.
Dev. 104: 105-111, 2001.

4. Yang, L. V.; Wan, J.; Ge, Y.; Fu, Z.; Kim, S. Y.; Fujiwara, Y.;
Taub, J. W.; Matherly, L. H.; Eliason, J.; Li, L.: The GATA site-dependent
hemogen promoter is transcriptionally regulated by GATA1 in hematopoietic
and leukemia cells. Leukemia 20: 417-425, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/23/2007

EDITED mgross: 01/23/2007

609294	TITLE *609294 SEMAPHORIN 6C; SEMA6C
;;KIAA1869
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2001) cloned SEMA6C, which they designated
KIAA1869. The deduced protein contains 755 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA
detected high expression in skeletal muscle and relatively low
expression in whole adult brain and pancreas. Expression was
intermediate in fetal brain and in all other tissues and specific adult
brain regions examined.

By searching a fetal liver cDNA library for sequences similar to rat
Sema6c, followed by PCR and 5-prime RACE of a human brain cDNA library,
Qu et al. (2002) cloned 3 SEMA6C splice variants. The longest deduced
protein, designated SEMA6C.1, has 962 amino acids and a calculated
molecular mass of 104.3 kD. SEMA6C.1 contains an N-terminal signal
sequence, followed by a SEMA domain, a PSI domain, a transmembrane
segment, and a proline-rich C terminus. SEMA6C.1 also has 3 potential
N-glycosylation sites. SEMA6C.2 contains 930 amino acids and has a
deletion between the extracellular PSI domain and the transmembrane
domain. SEMA6C.3 contains 922 amino acids and has an incomplete SEMA
domain. Northern blot analysis detected a major transcript of 4.0 kb and
a second transcript of 6.0 kb. Expression was high in skeletal muscle,
moderate in heart, brain, and kidney, low in liver and placenta, and
barely detectable in other tissues examined. In situ hybridization of
mouse embryos detected Sema6c expression beginning at embryonic day 13,
with widespread expression in brain and spinal cord. Labeling of
cultured rat spinal cord neurons showed expression in neural perikaryon,
processes, and termini, but no labeling of nuclei or axons. Transient
transfection of SEMA6C.1 in COS-7 cells resulted in expression of a
cytoplasmic protein of about 62.5 kD and a secreted protein of about 75
kD, suggesting modification after secretion. SEMA6C.1 was also expressed
on the cell surface. Both SEMA6C.3 and a SEMA6C.1 mutant lacking the PSI
domain were expressed in a punctate cytoplasmic distribution, with
accumulation at the 2 ends of many cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Qu et al. (2002) exposed chicken embryo dorsal root ganglion explants
and neonatal rat cortical and hippocampal neurons to SEMA6C secreted
from transfected COS-7 cells and found that SEMA6C induced growth cone
collapse. SEMA6C also inhibited axonal extension in a nerve growth
factor (NGF; see 162030)-differentiated rat pheochromocytoma cell line.

GENE STRUCTURE

Qu et al. (2002) determined that the SEMA6C contains at least 20 exons
and spans about 15 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2001) mapped the SEMA6C
gene to chromosome 10. However, Qu et al. (2002) mapped the SEMA6C gene
to chromosome 1q12-q21.1 by genomic sequence analysis. The International
Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SEMA6C gene to chromosome
1 (TMAP RH47819).

Qu et al. (2002) mapped the mouse Sema6c gene to chromosome 16.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Nakayama, M.; Nakajima, D.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XX.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 8: 85-95, 2001.

2. Qu, X.; Wei, H.; Zhai, Y.; Que, H.; Chen, Q.; Tang, F.; Wu, Y.;
Xing, G.; Zhu, Y.; Liu, S.; Fan, M.; He, F.: Identification, characterization,
and functional study of the two novel human members of the semaphorin
gene family. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 35574-35585, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/1/2005

EDITED mgross: 04/01/2005

604447	TITLE *604447 GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE-BINDING PROTEIN, BETA-5; GNB5
;;GB5
DESCRIPTION The beta subunits of the heterotrimeric GTP-binding proteins (G
proteins) are important regulators of G protein alpha subunits as well
as of certain signal transduction receptors and effectors. For
structural information about these proteins, see 600874.

CLONING

Using a degenerate PCR approach to screen a human brain cDNA library,
Jones et al. (1998) cloned the beta-5 subunit, symbolized GNB5, of G
protein. In contrast to beta subunits 1 through 4, which are at least
83% homologous, GNB5 is only 50% homologous to the other beta subunits.
On the other hand, the predicted 353-amino acid protein sequence is
99.4% homologous to the mouse beta-5 protein, with only 2 conservative
amino acid differences. Northern blot analysis revealed that mouse Gnb5
is expressed predominantly in brain (Watson et al., 1994), whereas human
GNB5 is expressed at high levels not only in brain but also in pancreas,
kidney, and heart (Jones et al., 1998), as a major 3.0- and minor 2.0-
and 9.0-kb transcripts. Within the brain, (Jones et al., 1998) detected
highest expression in cerebellum, cerebral cortex, occipital pole,
frontal lobe, temporal lobe, and caudate putamen, and lowest expression
in corpus callosum and spinal cord.

Watson et al. (1996) reported the cloning of a retina-specific cDNA,
termed G-beta-5L, in the mouse, which is identical to GNB5 except for an
additional 126-bp 5-prime exon.

GENE FUNCTION

GNB5 interacts with regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) proteins
containing the G protein gamma-like (GGL) domain: RGS6 (603894), RGS7
(602517), RGS9 (604067), and RGS11 (603895). Chen et al. (2003)
presented data indicating that GNB5 and GGL domain-containing RGS
proteins are obligate partners and supporting the notion that GNB5
functions as a component of the GTPase-accelerating protein (GAP)
complex.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rosskopf et al. (2003) determined that the GNB5 gene contains 12 exons.
The first exon is noncoding and exons 2 and 3 contain alternate ATG
translational start codons.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the GNB5
gene to chromosome 15 (TMAP sts-AA017518).

ANIMAL MODEL

The 'flailer' (flr) mouse exhibits a phenotype consisting of frequent
falling, convulsive limb movements (leg flailing), and ataxia persistent
into adulthood. Jones et al. (2000) determined that the flailer mouse
expresses a novel gene combining the promoter and first 2 exons of Gnb5
with the C-terminal exons of the closely linked myosin-5A (MyoVA) gene
(Myo5a; 160777). Biochemical and genetic studies indicated that the
flailer protein, which is expressed predominantly in brain, competes
with wildtype MyoVA in vivo, preventing the localization of smooth
endoplasmic reticulum vesicles in the dendritic spines of cerebellar
Purkinje cells. The flailer protein thus has a dominant-negative
mechanism of action with a recessive mode of inheritance due to the
dependence of competitive binding on the ratio between mutant and
wildtype proteins. The chromosomal arrangement of Myo5a upstream of Gnb5
is consistent with nonhomologous recombination as the mutational
mechanism.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, C.-K.; Eversole-Cire, P.; Zhang, H.; Mancino, V.; Chen, Y.-J.;
He, W.; Wensel, T. G.; Simon, M. I.: Instability of GGL domain-containing
RGS proteins in mice lacking the G protein beta-subunit G-beta-5. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 6604-6609, 2003.

2. Jones, J. M.; Huang, J.-D.; Mermall, V.; Hamilton, B. A.; Mooseker,
M. S.; Escayg, A.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Meisler, M. H.
: The mouse neurological mutant flailer expresses a novel hybrid gene
derived by exon shuffling between Gnb5 and Myo5a. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9:
821-828, 2000.

3. Jones, P. G.; Lombardi, S. J.; Cockett, M. I.: Cloning and tissue
distribution of the human G protein beta-5 cDNA. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1402: 288-291, 1998.

4. Rosskopf, D.; Nikula, C.; Manthey, I.; Joisten, M.; Frey, U.; Kohnen,
S.; Siffert, W.: The human G protein beta-4 subunit: gene structure,
expression, G-gamma and effector interaction. FEBS Lett. 544: 27-32,
2003.

5. Watson, A. J.; Aragay, A. M.; Slepak, V. Z.; Simon, M. I.: A novel
form of the G protein beta subunit G-beta-5 is specifically expressed
in the vertebrate retina. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 28154-28160, 1996.

6. Watson, A. J.; Katz, A.; Simon, M. I.: A fifth member of the mammalian
G-protein beta subunit family: expression in brain and activation
of the beta-2 isotype of phospholipase C. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 22150-22156,
1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/14/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/25/2003
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 4/19/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/25/2000

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/19/2000

EDITED wwang: 03/20/2007
terry: 3/14/2007
tkritzer: 6/27/2003
tkritzer: 6/25/2003
joanna: 4/19/2002
alopez: 4/25/2000
carol: 1/19/2000

610207	TITLE *610207 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 4 (ANION EXCHANGER), MEMBER 9; SLC4A9
;;ANION EXCHANGE PROTEIN 4; AE4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By genomic sequence analysis, database analysis, and PCR of kidney and
fetal brain cDNA libraries, Lipovich et al. (2001) cloned SLC4A9. They
identified 14 different SLC4A9 splice variants, with most variation
involving the inclusion or exclusion of portions of exons 8, 10, 11, 19,
and 20. The major splice variant encodes a 990-amino acid protein that
shares 49% and 48% identity with SLC4A4 (603345) and SLC4A7 (603353),
respectively. It contains 12 transmembrane domains, intracellular N and
C termini, and several serine and threonine phosphorylation sites.
Northern blot analysis detected transcripts of 4.3 and 6.0 kb in kidney
only.

By searching databases for homologs of bicarbonate transporters,
followed by PCR of a kidney cDNA library, Parker et al. (2001) cloned
SLC4A9, which they called AE4. The predicted protein contains 945 amino
acids and has a calculated molecular mass of 104 kD. AE4 has 14
transmembrane domains and intracellular N and C termini. It contains an
N-terminal leucine zipper motif, multiple intracellular phosphorylation
sites, and 2 extracellular N-glycosylation sites. It shares 84% amino
acid identity with rabbit Ae4, a sodium-independent Cl-/HCO3- exchanger
located on the apical membrane of beta-intercalated kidney cells.
SDS-PAGE following cell-free translation revealed AE4 at an apparent
molecular mass of 100 kD. AE4 did not appear to be N-glycosylated.
Northern blot analysis detected expression in kidney only.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lipovich et al. (2001) determined that the SLC4A9 gene contains 23
exons. Parker et al. (2001) identified 22 exons in the SLC4A9 gene. A
CCAAT box, a GC box, and a TATA box are located upstream of the
transcriptional start site.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lipovich et al. (2001) mapped the SLC4A9
gene to chromosome 5q31, between the HEGFL (HBEGF; 126150) and FGF1
(131220) genes.

REFERENCE 1. Lipovich, L.; Lynch, E. D.; Lee, M. K.; King, M.-C.: A novel sodium
bicarbonate cotransporter-like gene in an ancient duplicated region:
SLC4A9 at 5q31. Genome Biol. 2: RESEARCH0011 only, 2001. Note: Electronic
Article.

2. Parker, M. D.; Ourmozdi, E. P.; Tanner, M. J. A.: Human BTR1,
a new bicarbonate transporter superfamily member and human AE4 from
kidney. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 282: 1103-1109, 2001.

CREATED Matthew B. Gross: 6/22/2006

EDITED wwang: 06/23/2006
mgross: 6/22/2006

102593	TITLE *102593 ACYLOXYACYL HYDROLASE; AOAH
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Acyloxyacyl hydrolase (AOAH) is a 2-subunit lipase present in phagocytic
cells. The enzyme specifically hydrolyzes the secondary acyl chains of
the lipopolysaccharide found in the walls of gram-negative bacteria
(summary by Whitmore et al., 1994).

CLONING

Hagen et al. (1991) cloned and characterized cDNA for human AOAH and
showed that its 2 subunits are translated from a single mRNA molecule
about 2.2 kb long.

GENE FUNCTION

Whitmore et al. (1994) stated the action of acyloxyacyl hydrolase on
lipopolysaccharide (or endotoxin) suggests that it modulates the host's
inflammatory response to gram-negative bacteria. This hypothesis was
supported by studies showing that the deacylation of lipopolysaccharide
by AOAH in vitro greatly reduces its toxicity and activity.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Whitmore et al. (1994) mapped the
AOAH gene to 7p14-p12.

REFERENCE 1. Hagen, F. S.; Grant, F. J.; Kuijper, J. L.; Slaughter, C. A.; Moomaw,
C. R.; Orth, K.; O'Hara, P. J.; Munford, R. S.: Expression and characterization
of recombinant human acyloxyacyl hydrolase, a leukocyte enzyme that
deacylates bacterial lipopolysaccharides. Biochemistry 30: 8415-8423,
1991.

2. Whitmore, T. E.; Mathewes, S. L.; O'Hara, P. J.; Durnam, D. M.
: Chromosomal localization of the acyloxyacyl hydrolase (AOAH) gene
to 7p14-p12 using fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 21:
457-458, 1994.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/17/1994

EDITED terry: 05/22/2012
jason: 6/17/1994

602691	TITLE *602691 NUCLEAR RECEPTOR COACTIVATOR 1; NCOA1
;;STEROID RECEPTOR COACTIVATOR 1; SRC1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Onate et al. (1995) identified steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC1), a
coactivator that is required for full transcriptional activity of the
steroid receptor superfamily. They isolated a cDNA encoding SRC1 using
the yeast 2-hybrid system to identify proteins that interact with the
human progesterone receptor (PGR; 607311). The SRC1 protein has a
glutamine-rich region and a serine/threonine-rich region. SRC1 is
expressed as 2 mRNAs of approximately 5.5 and 7.5 kb in a variety of
human tissues and cell lines.

Using a Far Western-based approach to screen a HeLa cell cDNA expression
library with bacterially expressed rat thyroid hormone receptor (THRB;
190160), Takeshita et al. (1996) identified a partial SRC1 cDNA. They
isolated the remaining sequence by 5-prime RACE. The full-length cDNA
encodes a 1,440-amino acid protein with a mass of approximately 160 kD.

Hayashi et al. (1997) identified mRNA splicing variants encoding 3
isoforms: SRC1, SRC1E, and SRC1(-Q). SRC1(-Q) is identical to the
protein described by Takeshita et al. (1996). The C-terminal 56 amino
acids of SRC1 are replaced by 14 unique amino acids in SRC1E, while
SRC1(-Q) differs from SRC1 by deletion of a single glutamine residue.
RT-PCR analysis showed that SRC1E mRNA was more abundantly expressed
than SRC1 or SRC1(-Q) mRNAs in all the cell lines tested. SRC1E enhanced
thyroid hormone-dependent transactivation of reporter gene expression
more efficiently than SRC1 or SRC1(-Q).

GENE FUNCTION

Onate et al. (1995) showed that SRC1 enhances the transcriptional
activity of ligand-bound PGR but does not alter the basal activity of
the target promoter. SRC1 also enhances estrogen receptor (ESR; 133430),
glucocorticoid receptor (GRL; 138040), thyroid hormone receptor (e.g.,
190120), and retinoid X receptor (e.g., RXRA; 180245) transcriptional
activities through their cognate DNA response elements in the presence
of hormone. Studies of the effects of SRC1 on unrelated transactivators
showed that SRC1 can enhance the transcriptional activities of SP1
(189906) and the chimeric Gal4-VP16 protein, but not those of E2F (e.g.,
189971), E47 (147141), or CREB (123810). Coexpression of SRC1 with PGR
and ESR reversed the ability of ESR to squelch activation by PGR,
suggesting that SRC1 is a limiting factor necessary for efficient PGR
and ESR transactivation. A C-terminal form of SRC1 containing the
receptor-binding region acted as a dominant-negative repressor of
endogenous SRC1 function.

In vitro binding studies by Takeshita et al. (1996) showed that SRC1 can
bind to TBP (600075) and to TFIIB (189963), in addition to a variety of
nuclear hormone receptors in a ligand-dependent manner, suggesting that
SRC1 may play a role as a bridging molecule between nuclear hormone
receptors and general transcription factors. The conserved AF-2 region
of nuclear hormone receptors was not required for receptor-SRC1 binding.

To dissect the role of SRC1 in PGR transactivation, Liu et al. (1999)
used a cell-free transcription system with chromatin templates. They
reported the successful reconstitution of ligand-dependent and
PGR-dependent transcription using chromatin. They showed that,
consistent with their previously proposed hypothesis (Jenster et al.,
1997), the addition of liganded PGR to preassembled chromatin led to the
reconfiguration of nucleosome structure in the vicinity of its binding
site. This study suggested a dual role for SRC1 in PGR-mediated
transactivation: SRC1 is involved in both chromatin remodeling and the
process of recruitment/stabilization of general transcription factors.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Zhang et al. (2007) found that SIP
(KANK2; 614610) interacted with the N-terminal domain of SRC1. Western
blot analysis of MCF-7 human breast cancer cell immunoprecipitates
confirmed interaction between SIP and SRC1. Mutation analysis showed
that the ankyrin (612641) repeat domain of SIP was required for its
interaction with SRC1. Zhang et al. (2007) found that estrogen
stimulation of MCF-7 cells caused nuclear translocation of cytosolic
SRC1, while SIP remained cytosolic. Knockdown of SIP via RNA
interference resulted in SRC1 nuclear localization, independent of
estrogen treatment, and increased expression of an estrogen-dependent
reporter. Overexpression of SIP in MCF-7 cells reduced cell
proliferation and caused accumulation of cells in G0/G1 phase in
response to estrogen treatment. In contrast, knockdown of SIP led to an
increase of cells in S and G2/M phases following estrogen treatment.
Casein kinase II (see 115440) phosphorylated SIP in vitro, and
phosphorylated SIP no longer interacted with SRC1 in MCF-7 cells,
permitting SRC1 translocation to the nucleus. Zhang et al. (2007)
concluded that SIP sequesters SRC1 in the cytoplasm and thereby
regulates its transactivation activity.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Carapeti et al. (1998) mapped the
NCOA1 gene to human chromosome 2p23.

ANIMAL MODEL

Picard et al. (2002) found that Tif2 (601993) -/- mice were protected
against obesity and displayed enhanced adaptive thermogenesis, whereas
Src1 -/- mice were prone to obesity due to reduced energy expenditure.
In white adipose tissue, lack of Tif2 decreased Pparg (601487) activity
and reduced fat accumulation, whereas in brown adipose tissue, it
facilitated the interaction between Src1 and Pgc1-alpha (604517), which
induced the thermogenic activity of Pgc1-alpha. A high-fat diet
increased the Tif2/Src1 expression ratio, which may have contributed to
weight gain. These results revealed that the relative level of TIF2/SRC1
can modulate energy metabolism.

Ye et al. (2005) developed transgenic androgen receptor (AR;
313700)-reporter mice and crossed them with Src1 or Tif2 knockout mice
to analyze the contributions of Src1 and Tif2 to AR activity in testis.
In vivo imaging and reporter gene assays showed that testicular AR
activity was decreased significantly in mice with the Tif2 +/- mutation,
but not in those with an Src1 +/- background, suggesting that Tif2 is
the preferential coactivator for AR in testis. Immunohistologic analysis
confirmed that AR and Tif2 coexist in mouse testicular Sertoli cell
nuclei under normal conditions. Although Src1 concentrated in Sertoli
cell nuclei in the absence of Tif2, nuclear Src1 did not rescue AR
activity in the Tif2 mutant background. Src1 appeared to negatively
influence AR activity, whereas Tif2 stimulated AR activity.

REFERENCE 1. Carapeti, M.; Aguiar, R. C. T.; Chase, A.; Goldman, J. M.; Cross,
N. C. P.: Assignment of the steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1)
gene to human chromosome band 2p23. Genomics 52: 242-244, 1998.

2. Hayashi, Y.; Ohmori, S.; Ito, T.; Seo, H.: A splicing variant
of steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1E): the major isoform of SRC-1
to mediate thyroid hormone action. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 236:
83-87, 1997.

3. Jenster, G.; Spencer, T. E.; Burcin, M. M.; Tsai, S. Y.; Tsai,
M.-J.; O'Malley, B. W.: Steroid receptor induction of gene transcription:
a two-step model. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 7879-7884, 1997.

4. Liu, Z.; Wong, J.; Tsai, S. Y.; Tsai, M. J.; O'Malley, B. W.:
Steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1) enhances ligand-dependent and
receptor-dependent cell-free transcription of chromatin. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 96: 9485-9490, 1999.

5. Onate, S. A.; Tsai, S. Y.; Tsai, M.-J.; O'Malley, B. W.: Sequence
and characterization of a coactivator for the steroid hormone receptor
superfamily. Science 270: 1354-1357, 1995.

6. Picard, F.; Gehin, M.; Annicotte, J.-S.; Rocchi, S.; Champy, M.-F.;
O'Malley, B. W.; Chambon, P.; Auwerx, J.: SRC-1 and TIF2 control
energy balance between white and brown adipose tissues. Cell 111:
931-941, 2002.

7. Takeshita, A.; Yen, P. M.; Misiti, S.; Cardona, G. R.; Liu, Y.;
Chin, W. W.: Molecular cloning and properties of a full-length putative
thyroid hormone receptor coactivator. Endocrinology 137: 3594-3597,
1996.

8. Ye, X.; Han, S. J.; Tsai, S. Y.; DeMayo, F. J.; Xu, J.; Tsai, M.-J.;
O'Malley, B. W.: Roles of steroid receptor coactivator (SRC)-1 and
transcriptional intermediary factor (TIF) 2 in androgen receptor activity
in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 9487-9492, 2005.

9. Zhang, Y.; Zhang, H.; Liang, J.; Yu, W.; Shang, Y.: SIP, a novel
ankyrin repeat containing protein, sequesters steroid receptor coactivators
in the cytoplasm. EMBO J. 26: 2645-2657, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/30/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/15/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/15/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/21/1999
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 11/19/1998

CREATED Ethylin Wang Jabs: 6/5/1998

EDITED alopez: 07/20/2012
terry: 7/19/2012
mgross: 4/30/2012
mgross: 8/15/2005
mgross: 1/15/2003
mgross: 10/18/2002
psherman: 12/17/1999
terry: 12/1/1999
carol: 10/21/1999
terry: 11/19/1998
carol: 11/19/1998
psherman: 6/8/1998
psherman: 6/5/1998

603458	TITLE *603458 EMBRYONIC LETHAL, ABNORMAL VISION, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG-LIKE 3; ELAVL3
;;HU-ANTIGEN C; HUC;;
PARANEOPLASTIC LIMBIC ENCEPHALITIS ANTIGEN 21; PLE21
DESCRIPTION Paraneoplastic neurologic disorders (PNDs) are a group of neurologic
syndromes that arise when an immune response to systemic tumors
expressing neuronal proteins develops into an autoimmune neuronal
degeneration. Sakai et al. (1994) determined that the serum of a patient
with paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis (PLE) contained autoantibodies
that recognized a 38-kD nuclear antigen in neural cells. By screening a
hippocampus expression library with this serum, they isolated cDNAs
encoding a protein that they called PLE21. The predicted 350-amino acid
protein contains 3 RNA recognition motifs (RRMs). PLE21 shares 82% and
54% protein sequence identity with the human neural autoantigen HuD
(168360) and Drosophila ELAV protein, respectively. Northern blot
analysis revealed that PLE21 is expressed as an approximately 2-kb mRNA
exclusively in brain. Liu et al. (1995) stated that PLE21, or HuC, is
one of several Hu antigens, neuronal-specific RNA-binding proteins
recognized by the anti-Hu serum antibody present in sera from patients
with paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis and sensory neuronopathy
(PEM/PSN). The Hu antigens HuD, HuC, and Hel-N1 (601673) each contain 2
tandemly arranged RRMs connected to a third RRM by a highly basic
segment.

Abe et al. (1996) cloned cDNAs encoding mouse HuC. The predicted mouse
and human proteins are 96% identical. These authors found that
alternative splicing generates 2 mouse HuC isoforms, both of which can
bind to AU-rich elements (AREs) within the 3-prime untranslated regions
of mRNAs. Functional domain mapping using mouse HuC deletion mutants
showed that the first RRM binds to ARE, that the second RRM has no
binding activity by itself but facilitates ARE binding by the first RRM,
and that the third RRM has specific binding activity for the poly(A)
sequence.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), Van Tine et al. (1998)
mapped the ELAVL3 gene to 19p13.2. Using FISH and radiation hybrid
analysis, they demonstrated that ELAVL3 is centromeric to the ELAVL1
(HuR; 603466) gene located in the same chromosomal region. By analysis
of an interspecific backcross, Fletcher et al. (1997) mapped the mouse
HuC gene to chromosome 9, in a region showing homology of synteny to
human chromosome 19p13.2.

REFERENCE 1. Abe, R.; Sakashita, E.; Yamamoto, K.; Sakamoto, H.: Two different
RNA binding activities for the AU-rich element and the poly(A) sequence
of the mouse neuronal protein mHuC. Nucleic Acids Res. 24: 4895-4901,
1996.

2. Fletcher, C. F.; Okano, H. J.; Gilbert, D. J.; Yang, Y.; Yang,
C.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Darnell, R. B.: Mouse chromosomal
locations of nine genes encoding homologs of human paraneoplastic
neurologic disorder antigens. Genomics 45: 313-319, 1997.

3. Liu, J.; Dalmau, J.; Szabo, A.; Rosenfeld, M.; Huber, J.; Furneaux,
H.: Paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis antigens bind to the AU-rich
elements of mRNA. Neurology 45: 544-550, 1995.

4. Sakai, K.; Gofuku, M.; Kitagawa, Y.; Ogasawara, T.; Hirose, G.;
Yamazaki, M.; Koh, C.-S.; Yanagisawa, N.; Steinman, L.: A hippocampal
protein associated with paraneoplastic neurologic syndrome and small
cell lung carcinoma. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 199: 1200-1208,
1994.

5. Van Tine, B. A.; Knops, J. F.; Butler, A.; Deloukas, P.; Shaw,
G. M.; King, P. H.: Localization of HuC (ELAVL3) to chromosome 19p13.2
by fluorescence in situ hybridization utilizing a novel tyramide labeling
technique. Genomics 53: 296-299, 1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 1/25/1999

EDITED carol: 11/24/2001
alopez: 1/26/1999
alopez: 1/25/1999

605754	TITLE *605754 PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL GLYCAN, CLASS Q; PIGQ
DESCRIPTION Many eukaryotic proteins are anchored to the membrane through the
hydrocarbon chains of a covalently bound glycosylphosphatidylinositol
(GPI) membrane anchor. GPI anchoring is important for regulation of cell
growth and activation. GPI biosynthesis in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) is initiated by transfer of N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) from
UDP-GlcNAc to phosphatidylinositol (PI). This transfer is catalyzed by
GlcNAc transferase (GPI-GnT) and enzyme activity requires several genes
including PIGA (311770), PIGC (601730), and PIGH (600154) in mammals and
Gpi1, Gpi2 (PIGC homolog), and Gpi3 (PIGA homolog) in yeast. PIGQ is
involved in the first step of GPI biosynthesis (Tiede et al., 1998).

CLONING

In a database search for homologs of yeast Gpi1, Tiede et al. (1998) and
Watanabe et al. (1998) identified PIGQ, which they called hGPI1. The
full-length PIGQ cDNA encodes a deduced 581-amino acid protein that
shares 24% overall amino acid identity with yeast Gpi1. The C-terminal
half of PIGQ is better conserved than the N-terminal half. Watanabe et
al. (1998) predicted that PIGQ has several hydrophobic regions, some of
which may be transmembrane domains, and a potential tyrosine
phosphorylation site in the third cytoplasmic loop. Tiede et al. (1998)
predicted that most of the amino acids and conserved residues are on the
cytoplasmic face of the ER and that there are no significant domains in
the lumen of the ER. Tiede et al. (1998) and Hong et al. (1999)
independently cloned the mouse PIGQ homolog, which shares 85 to 89%
amino acid identity with human PIGQ.

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunoprecipitation experiments, Watanabe et al. (1998)
demonstrated that PIGQ associates specifically with PIGA, PIGC, and PIGH
and that all 4 proteins form a complex that has GPI-GnT activity in
vitro. The authors concluded that these 4 proteins form part or all of
GPI-GnT.

By expressing the mouse and human PIGQ in Gpi1-deficient S. cerevisiae,
Tiede et al. (1998) demonstrated that PIGQ specifically rescues S.
cerevisiae Gpi1 mutants, indicating that mouse and human PIGQ are indeed
orthologs of yeast Gpi1 and that there is a high degree of evolutionary
conservation in GPI biosynthesis. Tiede et al. (1998) concluded that
PIGQ is involved in the first step of GPI biosynthesis and that the
specific function of PIGQ may be to stabilize the enzyme complex in the
ER rather than to participate in catalysis of GlcNAc transfer.

GENE STRUCTURE

By comparing cDNA and genomic sequence, Hong et al. (1999) predicted
that PIGQ is encoded by 11 exons.

MAPPING

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, Hong et al. (1999) mapped the
PIGQ gene to chromosome 16p13.3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hong et al. (1999) disrupted the mouse Gpi1 gene in F9 embryonal
carcinoma cells, which caused a severe but not complete defect in the
generation of GPI-anchored proteins. A complex of Piga, Pigh, and Pigc
decreased to a nearly undetectable level, whereas a complex of Piga and
Pigh was easily detected. A lack of Gpi1 also caused partial decreases
of Pigc and Pigh. Therefore, GPI1 stabilizes the enzyme by tying up Pigc
with a complex of Piga and Pigh.

REFERENCE 1. Hong, Y.; Ohishi, K.; Watanabe, R.; Endo, Y.; Maeda, Y.; Kinoshita,
T.: GPI1 stabilizes an enzyme essential in the first step of glycosylphosphatidylinositol
biosynthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 18582-18588, 1999.

2. Tiede, A.; Schubert, J.; Nischan, C.; Jensen, I.; Westfall, B.;
Taron, C. H.; Orlean, P.; Schmidt, R. E.: Human and mouse Gpi1p homologues
restore glycosylphosphatidylinositol membrane anchor biosynthesis
in yeast mutants. Biochem. J. 334: 609-616, 1998.

3. Watanabe, R.; Inoue, N.; Westfall, B.; Taron, C. H.; Orlean, P.;
Takeda, J.; Kinoshita, T.: The first step of glycosylphosphatidylinositol
biosynthesis is mediated by a complex of PIG-A, PIG-H, PIG-C and GPI1. EMBO
J. 17: 877-885, 1998.

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 3/22/2001

EDITED alopez: 07/21/2009
carol: 3/22/2001

600729	TITLE *600729 NUCLEAR FACTOR I/C; NFIC
;;TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR NFIC;;
CTF
DESCRIPTION For background information on nuclear factor I proteins, see NFIA
(600727).

GENE STRUCTURE

Grunder et al. (2003) determined that the NFIC gene contains 11 exons.
By ortholog comparisons using protein sequences from 7 vertebrate
species, they identified 11 NFIC variants that are produced by
alternative splicing.

MAPPING

Qian et al. (1995) localized the NFIC and NFIX (164005) genes to
chromosome 19p13.3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. By FISH,
Grunder et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Nfic gene to the distal region of
chromosome 10C.

ANIMAL MODEL

Steele-Perkins et al. (2003) found that the Nfic gene was expressed in
many mouse organ systems, including the developing tooth. They disrupted
the Nfic gene in mice and found that, while heterozygous animals
appeared normal, Nfic-null mice had unique tooth pathologies, primarily
defects in tooth root development. Molar crown development was normal,
but molars lacked roots, mandibular incisors were thin and brittle, and
maxillary incisors were weakened and appeared abnormal. Feeding in
Nfic-null mice was severely impaired; however, mutants well nourished by
a soft-dough diet were fertile and had normal life spans.

REFERENCE 1. Grunder, A.; Qian, F.; Ebel, T. T.; Mincheva, A.; Lichter, P.;
Kruse, U.; Sippel, A. E.: Genomic organization, splice products and
mouse chromosomal localization of genes for transcription factor Nuclear
Factor One. Gene 304: 171-181, 2003.

2. Qian, F.; Kruse, U.; Lichter, P.; Sippel, A. E.: Chromosomal localization
of the four genes (NFIA, B, C, and X) for the human transcription
factor nuclear factor I by FISH. Genomics 28: 66-73, 1995.

3. Steele-Perkins, G.; Butz, K. G.; Lyons, G. E.; Zeichner-David,
M.; Kim, H.-J.; Cho, M.-I.; Gronostajski, R. M.: Essential role for
NFI-C/CTF transcription-replication factor in tooth root development. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 23: 1075-1084, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/1/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/16/1995

EDITED terry: 04/04/2005
mgross: 4/3/2003
terry: 4/1/2003
terry: 11/21/1997
mark: 10/16/1995

300061	TITLE *300061 ZINC FINGER, MYM-TYPE 3; ZMYM3
;;ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 261; ZNF261;;
DXS6673E
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Van der Maarel et al. (1996) reported the cloning and characterization
of the ZNF261 gene, which the called DXS6673E. ZNF261 maps to the X
chromosome, is subject to X inactivation, and was disrupted in the
5-prime untranslated region by a balanced X;13 translocation in a
mentally retarded female. They identified a YAC clone that spanned the
breakpoint and used this YAC to isolate a cDNA from a fetal brain
library. The cDNA contains a 4,074-bp ORF encoding a predicted
1,358-amino acid polypeptide. By Northern analysis, van der Maarel et
al. (1996) showed that the DXS6673E gene is highly conserved among
vertebrates and that its expression is most abundant in brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Hakimi et al. (2003) identified a family of multiprotein corepressor
complexes that function through modifying chromatin structure to keep
genes silent. The polypeptide composition of these complexes includes a
common core of 2 subunits, HDAC1 (601241)/HDAC2 (605164) and the
FAD-binding protein BHC110 (AOF2; 609132). Other subunits of these
complexes include ZNF261, GTF2I (601679), and polypeptides associated
with cancer-causing chromosomal translocations.

GENE STRUCTURE

Van der Maarel et al. (1996) reported that the ZNF261 gene contains 25
exons, including 2 putative alternatively spliced noncoding exons (1A
and 1B).

MAPPING

Van der Maarel et al. (1996) mapped the ZNF261 gene to chromosome
Xq13.1.

CYTOGENETICS

Van der Maarel et al. (1996) reported a mentally retarded female whose
ZNF261 gene was disrupted in the 5-prime UTR by a balanced X;13
translocation. They noted that apart from mental retardation, the only
conspicuous clinical features in this patient were scoliosis and spotty
abdominal hypopigmentation.

REFERENCE 1. Hakimi, M.-A.; Dong, Y.; Lane, W. S.; Speicher, D. W.; Shiekhattar,
R.: A candidate X-linked mental retardation gene is a component of
a new family of histone deacetylase-containing complexes. J. Biol.
Chem. 278: 7234-7239, 2003.

2. van der Maarel, S. M.; Scholten, I. H. J. M.; Huber, I.; Philippe,
C.; Suijkerbuijk, R. F.; Gilgenkrantz, S.; Kere, J.; Cremers, F. P.
M.; Ropers, H.-H.: Cloning and characterization of DXS6673E, a candidate
gene for X-linked mental retardation in Xq13.1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5:
887-897, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/3/2005

CREATED Moyra Smith: 8/8/1996

EDITED carol: 09/02/2010
mgross: 1/3/2005
alopez: 10/12/1999
terry: 8/15/1996
mark: 8/15/1996
marlene: 8/9/1996
mark: 8/8/1996

153370	TITLE *153370 INTEGRIN, ALPHA-L; ITGAL
;;LYMPHOCYTE FUNCTION-ASSOCIATED ANTIGEN, TYPE 1, ALPHA SUBUNIT; LFA1A;;
CD11A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Larson et al. (1989) isolated clones corresponding to the LFA1-alpha
subunit from a size-selected lambda-gt10 cDNA library constructed from
PMA-stimulated myeloid cells. The protein contains a 25-amino acid
hydrophobic signal sequence, a 1,063-amino acid extracellular domain, a
29-amino acid transmembrane domain, and a 53-amino acid cytoplasmic
tail. The extracellular region contains 7 repeats. The LFA1-alpha
protein shares 36% identity with the alpha subunits of MAC1 (ITGAM;
120980) and p150,95 (ITGAX; 151510); all 3 of these proteins contain an
approximately 200-amino acid insert in the N terminus relative to other
integrin alpha subunits. Northern blot analysis detected expression of a
5.5-kb transcript in lymphoid and myeloid cells but not in bladder
carcinoma.

GENE FUNCTION

Lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA1) is a dimer consisting of
CD11A (ITGAL) and a beta subunit (ITGB2; 600065). ITGB2 also associates
with other alpha chains, e.g., with ITGAM (120980) to form MAC1 and with
ITGAX (151510) to form p150,95. LFA1 is expressed on lymphocytes and
phagocytic cells. The LFA1 molecule is involved in the adhesion of
cytotoxic T cells to their target cells. Patients with LFA1
immunodeficiency disease (116920) have recurrent life-threatening
infections, show deficiency of the beta chain of all 3 molecules, LFA1,
Mac1 (macrophage antigen-1), and p150,95, and display profound defects
in adhesion-dependent granulocyte, monocyte, and B- and T-lymphocyte
functions. The alpha subunits were designated by Marlin et al. (1986) as
alpha-L for LFA1, alpha-M for Mac1, and alpha-X for p150,95.

Marlin et al. (1986) showed that the genetic defect in LFA1
immunodeficiency disease resides in the common beta subunit of these 3
molecules. Furthermore, they were able to demonstrate that the beta
subunit is coded by chromosome 21, whereas the unique alpha subunit of
LFA1 is coded by chromosome 16. These results were obtained by
human-mouse T-cell fusion studies. Human LFA1 alpha and mouse beta
subunits joined in the interspecies hybrid cells to form alpha-beta
complexes. Surface expression of the alpha, but not of the beta, subunit
of patient cells was restored by the formation of interspecies
complexes. These findings showed that the LFA1 alpha subunit in
genetically deficient cells is competent for surface expression in the
presence of an appropriate beta subunit.

In the serum of a multiply transfused patient with systemic lupus
erythematosus (152700), Pischel et al. (1987) identified an antibody
directed at determinants of the LFA1 alpha-chain. Since the serum did
not immunoprecipitate LFA1 from autologous cells, even though LFA1
molecules were present, the serum identified 2 serologic phenotypes of
LFA1. The serum reacted with cells from 95% of normal individuals.

Lu and Cyster (2002) studied the mechanisms that control localization of
marginal zone B cells. They demonstrated that marginal zone B cells
express elevated levels of the integrins LFA1 and alpha-4-beta-1 (see
192975 and 135630) and that the marginal zone B cells bind to the
ligands ICAM1 (147840) and VCAM1 (192225). These ligands are expressed
within the marginal zone in a lymphotoxin-dependent manner. Combined
inhibition of LFA1 and alpha-4-beta-1 causes a rapid and selective
release of B cells from the marginal zone. Furthermore,
lipopolysaccharide-triggered marginal zone B cell relocalization
involves downregulation of integrin-mediated adhesion. Lu and Cyster
(2002) concluded that their studies identified key requirements for
marginal zone B cell localization and established a role for integrins
in peripheral lymphoid tissue compartmentalization.

Anikeeva et al. (2005) found that LFA1 engagement could be replaced by
other adhesion mechanisms, such as CD2 (186990)-CD58 (LFA3; 153420)
interaction, in antigen-induced cytotoxic T-lymphocyte granule
polarization and degranulation, but that LFA1 engagement was
indispensable for effective target cell lysis by the released granules.
LFA1-mediated adhesion to glass-supported bilayers resulted in a much
larger junction area and formation of a peripheral supramolecular
activation cluster compared with CD2-mediated adhesion. Anikeeva et al.
(2005) concluded that LFA1 delivers a distinct signal essential for
directing released granules to antigen-bearing target cells to mediate
their destruction.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Corbi et al. (1988) demonstrated that the
genes encoding the alpha subunits of LFA1, Mac1, and p150,95, all of
which play a part in leukocyte adhesion, constitute a cluster located on
16p13.1-p11. Callen et al. (1991) narrowed the localization to 16p11.2.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Kim et al. (2003) investigated cytoplasmic conformational changes in the
integrin LFA1 (alpha-L; beta-2, 600065) in living cells by measuring
fluorescence resonance energy transfer between cyan fluorescent
protein-fused and yellow fluorescent protein-fused alpha-L and beta-2
cytoplasmic domains. In the resting state these domains were close to
each other, but underwent significant spatial separation upon either
intracellular activation of integrin adhesiveness (inside-out signaling)
or ligand binding (outside-in signaling). Thus, bidirectional integrin
signaling is accomplished by coupling extracellular conformational
changes to an unclasping and separation of the alpha and beta
cytoplasmic domains, which Kim et al. (2003) noted as a distinctive
mechanism for transmitting information across the plasma membrane.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT

Interactions between LFA1 and intercellular adhesion molecules are
important in the pathogenesis of psoriasis (see 177900). Lebwohl et al.
(2003) studied the therapeutic effects of efalizumab, a humanized
monoclonal antibody that binds to the alpha subunit of LFA1 and inhibits
the activation of T cells, in subjects with psoriasis. A significant
improvement in plaque psoriasis was observed in subjects with moderate
to severe disease. Extending treatment from 12 to 24 weeks resulted in
both maintenance and improvement of responses.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Fischer et al. (1986); Sanchez-Madrid et al. (1983)
REFERENCE 1. Anikeeva, N.; Somersalo, K.; Sims, T. N.; Thomas, V. K.; Dustin,
M. L.; Sykulev, Y.: Distinct role of lymphocyte function-associated
antigen-1 in mediating effective cytolytic activity by cytotoxic T
lymphocytes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 6437-6442, 2005.

2. Callen, D. F.; Chen, L. Z.; Nancarrow, J.; Whitmore, S. A.; Apostolou,
S.; Thompson, A. D.; Lane, S. A.; Stallings, R. L.; Hildebrand, C.
E.; Harris, P. G.; Sutherland, G. R.: Current state of the physical
map of human chromosome 16. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 58:
1998 only, 1991.

3. Corbi, A. L.; Larson, R. S.; Kishimoto, T. K.; Springer, T. A.;
Morton, C. C.: Chromosomal location of the genes encoding the leukocyte
adhesion receptors LFA-1, Mac-1 and p150,95: identification of a gene
cluster involved in cell adhesion. J. Exp. Med. 167: 1597-1607,
1988.

4. Fischer, A.; Durandy, A.; Sterkers, G.; Griscelli, C.: Role of
the LFA-1 molecule in cellular interactions required for antibody
production in humans. J. Immun. 136: 3198-3203, 1986.

5. Kim, M.; Carman, C. V.; Springer, T. A.: Bidirectional transmembrane
signaling by cytoplasmic domain separation in integrins. Science 301:
1720-1725, 2003.

6. Larson, R. S.; Corbi, A. L.; Berman, L.; Springer, T.: Primary
structure of the leukocyte function-associated molecule-1 alpha subunit:
an integrin with an embedded domain defining a protein superfamily. J.
Cell Biol. 108: 703-712, 1989.

7. Lebwohl, M.; Tyring, S. K.; Hamilton, T. K.; Toth, D.; Glazer,
S.; Tawfik, N. H.; Walicke, P.; Dummer, W.; Wang, X.; Garovoy, M.
R.; Pariser, D.: A novel targeted T-cell modulator, efalizumab, for
plaque psoriasis. New Eng. J. Med. 349: 2004-2013, 2003.

8. Lu, T. T.; Cyster, J. G.: Integrin-mediated long-term B cell retention
in the splenic marginal zone. Science 297: 409-412, 2002.

9. Marlin, S. D.; Morton, C. C.; Anderson, D. C.; Springer, T. A.
: LFA-1 immunodeficiency disease: definition of the genetic defect
and chromosomal mapping of alpha and beta subunits of the lymphocyte
function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1) by complementation in hybrid
cells. J. Exp. Med. 164: 855-867, 1986.

10. Pischel, K. D.; Marlin, S. D.; Springer, T. A.; Woods, V. L.,
Jr.; Bluestein, H. G.: Polymorphism of lymphocyte function-associated
antigen-1 demonstrated by a lupus patient's alloantiserum. J. Clin.
Invest. 79: 1607-1614, 1987.

11. Sanchez-Madrid, F.; Nagy, J.; Robbins, E.; Simon, P.; Springer,
T. A.: A human leukocyte differentiation antigen family with distinct
alpha subunits and a common beta subunit: the lymphocyte function-associated
antigen (LFA-1), the C3bi complement receptor (OKM1/Mac-1), and the
p150,95 molecule. J. Exp. Med. 158: 1785-1803, 1983.

CONTRIBUTORS Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 08/22/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/22/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/9/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/26/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/10/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/25/1986

EDITED alopez: 08/22/2008
mgross: 5/22/2007
carol: 5/16/2007
carol: 5/15/2007
tkritzer: 1/9/2004
terry: 1/9/2004
terry: 9/26/2003
alopez: 9/11/2002
tkritzer: 9/11/2002
tkritzer: 9/10/2002
mark: 6/12/1997
mimadm: 11/6/1994
carol: 5/4/1992
carol: 3/26/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989

605722	TITLE *605722 POTASSIUM CHANNEL, INWARDLY RECTIFYING, SUBFAMILY J, MEMBER 16; KCNJ16
;;KIR5.1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Inwardly rectifying potassium (Kir) channels are important for
regulation of the resting membrane potential and control of cellular
electrical activity. KCNJ16, or Kir5.1, belongs to the Kir family, but
it does not produce functional potassium channels when expressed by
itself. Instead, Kir5.1 appears to coassemble selectively with either
Kir4.1 (KCNJ10; 602208) or Kir4.2 (KCNJ15; 602106) to form novel
heteromeric channels (summary by D'Adamo et al., 2011).

CLONING

By EST database searching for sequences showing homology to mouse
Kir5.1, Liu et al. (2000) identified a human EST with 98% sequence
identity to a segment on chromosome 17. Using the full-length Kir5.1
mouse clone, they derived the human ortholog, designated KCNJ16, from
genomic sequence. The KCNJ16 gene encodes a deduced 418-amino acid
protein with a calculated molecular mass of 48 kD. The protein shares
over 95% sequence identity with both mouse and rat Kir5.1. RT-PCR
analysis detected ubiquitous expression of KCNJ16, whereas Northern blot
analysis detected significant expression of a 4.0-kb transcript in
kidney, pancreas, and thyroid gland. In situ hybridization demonstrated
expression of KCNJ16 in convoluted tubule cells of the kidney and in
acinar and ductal cells of the pancreas. Liu et al. (2000) noted that
Kir1.1 (KCNJ1; 600359), Kir4.1, and Kir4.2 are all expressed in kidney.
They suggested that heteromultimers of these potassium channel proteins
in kidney and pancreas may play a role in ion transport, fluid
regulation, and pH balance.

By database searching with sequences from rat Kir5.1, Derst et al.
(2001) independently assembled a human KCNJ16 cDNA, which they called
Kir5.1. They predicted that Kir5.1 encodes a protein of 418 amino acids
that shares 91% amino acid identity with rat and mouse Kir5.1. They
noted that Kir5.1 shares 40 to 43% amino acid identity with members of
the Kir2 gene family, including Kir2.1 (KCNJ2; 600681), Kir2.2 (KCNJ12;
602323), Kir2.3, and Kir2.4 (KCNJ14; 603953).

Using in situ hybridization, Derst et al. (2001) detected Kir5.1
expression restricted to the hindbrain, midbrain, and diencephalon in
rat brain. Using RT-PCR, they detected KCNJ16 expression in human kidney
in the proximal tubule, the thick ascending limb, and the cortical
collecting duct. They noted that KCNJ16 expression overlaps with Kir2.1
expression in some regions of the brain and kidney.

GENE FUNCTION

Derst et al. (2001) found that when Kir5.1 was expressed in Xenopus
oocytes, it was targeted to the cell surface and formed electrically
silent channels together with Kir2.1, thus negatively controlling Kir2.1
channel activity in native cells.

By electrophysiologic recording of HEK293T cells transfected with rat
cDNAs, Tanemoto et al. (2000) showed that Kir4.1, but not Kir5.1, formed
functional homomeric K+ channels sensitive to intracellular, but not
extracellular, pH. Heteromeric Kir4.1/Kir5 channels were functional and
showed channel properties different than those of homomeric Kir4.1
channels. For both Kir4.1 and Kir4.1/Kir5.1 channels, response to pH
disappeared at pH 5.5 and increased in a pH-dependent manner between pH
6.5 and pH 8.0. Kir4.1/Kir5.1 channels had larger conductance, altered
kinetics, and greater sensitivity to pH than Kir4.1 channels.
Kir4.1/Kir5.1 channels opened in bursts, and the closed period between
bursts was influenced by intracellular pH.

In cotransfection experiments, Tanemoto et al. (2002) showed that Kir5.1
assembles to form a functional homomeric potassium channel by
interacting with PSD95 (602887). Kir5.1 expressed alone was distributed
mostly in the cytoplasm, but Kir5.1 coexpressed with PSD95 was located
on the plasma membrane in a clustered manner. Using GST pull-down
studies, Tanemoto et al. (2002) identified domains responsible for
Kir5.1/PSD95 interaction. They found that protein kinase A
(PKA)-mediated phosphorylation of Kir5.1 disrupted the binding of Kir5.1
with PSD95. Tanemoto et al. (2002) hypothesized that Kir5.1/PSD95 forms
a functional brain potassium channel that may be a physiologic target of
PKA-mediated signaling.

GENE STRUCTURE

Derst et al. (2001) determined that the KCNJ16 gene is encoded by 5
exons spanning approximately 60 kb. They noted that KCNJ16 and KCNJ2 are
separated by only 34 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Liu et al. (2000) mapped the KCNJ16 gene
to chromosome 17q25. By the same method, Derst et al. (2001) assigned
KCNJ16 to chromosome 17q23.1-q24.2, near KCNJ2.

ANIMAL MODEL

D'Adamo et al. (2011) found that, despite widespread Kir5.1 expression,
Kir5.1 -/- mice were born at the expected mendelian ratio, were viable
and fertile, and showed no behavioral or physical abnormalities.
However, whole-cell patch clamp experiments showed that neurons cultured
from the locus ceruleus (LC) of Kir5.1 -/- mice exhibited reduced
response to intracellular pH compared with wildtype LC neurons. Both the
kinetics and amplitude of firing of Kir5.1 -/- LC neurons were altered
in response to NH4Cl application or elevated soluble CO2. D'Adamo et al.
(2011) concluded that Kir5.1/Kir4.1 channels of the LC respond to
hypercapnic acidosis.

REFERENCE 1. D'Adamo, M. C.; Shang, L.; Imbrici, P.; Brown, S. D. M.; Pessia,
M.; Tucker, S. J.: Genetic inactivation of Kcnj16 identifies Kir5.1
as an important determinant of neuronal PCO2/pH sensitivity. J. Biol.
Chem. 286: 192-198, 2011.

2. Derst, C.; Karschin, C.; Wischmeyer, E.; Hirsch, J. R.; Preisig-Muller,
R.; Rajan, S.; Engel, H.; Grzeschik, K.-H.; Daut, J.; Karschin, A.
: Genetic and functional linkage of Kir5.1 and Kir2.1 channel subunits. FEBS
Lett. 491: 305-311, 2001.

3. Liu, Y.; McKenna, E.; Figueroa, D. J.; Blevins, R.; Austin, C.
P.; Bennett, P. B.; Swanson, R.: The human inward rectifier K+ channel
subunit Kir5.1 (KCNJ16) maps to chromosome 17q25 and is expressed
in kidney and pancreas. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 90: 60-63, 2000.

4. Tanemoto, M.; Fujita, A.; Higashi, K.; Kurachi, Y.: PSD-95 mediates
formation of a functional homomeric Kir5.1 channel in the brain. Neuron 34:
387-397, 2002.

5. Tanemoto, M.; Kittaka, N.; Inanobe, A.; Kurachi, Y.: In vivo formation
of a proton-sensitive K+ channel by heteromeric subunit assembly of
Kir5.1 with Kir4.1. J. Physiol. 525: 587-592, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/9/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/1/2011
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 12/18/2002

CREATED Yen-Pei C. Chang: 3/8/2001

EDITED terry: 11/29/2012
mgross: 6/9/2011
terry: 6/1/2011
carol: 2/4/2003
tkritzer: 12/18/2002
carol: 3/8/2001

607389	TITLE *607389 SINGLE-STRANDED DNA-BINDING PROTEIN 2; SSBP2
;;SENSOR OF SINGLE-STRANDED DNA COMPLEX, SUBUNIT B2; SOSSB2;;
SOSS COMPLEX, SUBUNIT B2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SSBP2 is a subunit of a single-stranded DNA (ssDNA)-binding complex
involved in the maintenance of genome stability (Huang et al., 2009).

CLONING

By positional cloning, Castro et al. (2002) identified a novel gene,
which they designated SSBP2, that is disrupted at the 5q13 breakpoint in
the acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell line ML3. EST database searching
revealed that the transcript is similar to the chicken gene CSDP, which
encodes a protein that binds single-stranded pyrimidine-rich
mirror-repeat elements with high specificity. By further database
searching, they identified 2 additional cDNAs encoding single-stranded
DNA-binding proteins, SSBP3 (607390) and SSBP4 (607391). The deduced
362-amino acid SSBP2 protein shares 83% and 73% sequence identity with
SSBP3 and SSBP4, respectively, and 100% identity with the mouse Ssbp2
homolog. SSBP family members share a highly conserved N terminus
followed by a glycine- and proline-rich domain. Northern blot analysis
detected ubiquitous expression of a 1.9-kb SSBP2 transcript. Expression
was high in all hematopoietic tissues, including spleen, lymph node,
peripheral blood, bone marrow, thymus, and fetal liver, with highest
expression in thymus and fetal liver. Expression was also high in heart,
brain, kidney, and skeletal muscle. Of 5 leukemia cell lines tested,
expression was highest in pre-T lymphoblastic leukemia cell line CEM. No
gross inactivating mutations were found in leukemia cell lines or in
primary leukemic blasts from 4 patients.

GENE FUNCTION

Using HEK293 cells for tandem affinity purification, Huang et al. (2009)
identified SOSSA (INTS3; 611347) and SOSSC (613273) as common components
of 2 distinct and complementary ssDNA-binding heterotrimeric complexes
defined by their inclusion of either SOSSB1 (SSBP1; 600439) or SOSSB2
(SSBP2), but not both. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis confirmed that
SOSS complexes formed in HeLa cells independent of DNA damage.
Recombinant heterotrimeric SOSS complexes specifically bound ssDNA, but
not double-stranded DNA. SOSSA served as the central assembly factor,
and SOSSB and SOSSC bound overlapping regions on SOSSA, but they did not
interact directly with each other. Depletion of SOSSA by small
interfering RNA led to dramatic decreases in SOSSB1 and SOSSB2 protein
levels, abrogated targeting of SOSSB1 and SOSSB2 to chromatin, increased
ionizing radiation sensitivity, caused defective G2/M checkpoint, and
impaired homologous recombination repair. Huang et al. (2009)
demonstrated that both SOSS complexes and the CTIP (RBBP8; 604124)/RPA
(see RPA1; 179835) complex acted downstream of the MRE11 (600814)-RAD50
(604040)-NBS1 (NBN; 602667) complex and functioned in DNA damage repair.

GENE STRUCTURE

Castro et al. (2002) determined that the SSBP2, SSBP3, and SSBP4 genes
all contain 17 exons and have identical intron/exon boundaries,
suggesting duplication from a common ancestral gene. They also
identified alternative splicing and additional internal exons for all 3
genes, suggesting the existence of multiple isoforms for each protein.
The SSBP2 gene spans more than 200 kb.

MAPPING

Castro et al. (2002) mapped the SSBP2 gene to chromosome 5q13.3, within
the critical breakpoint region in the AML cell line ML3.

REFERENCE 1. Castro, P.; Liang, H.; Liang, J. C.; Nagarajan, L.: A novel, evolutionarily
conserved gene family with putative sequence-specific single-stranded
DNA-binding activity. Genomics 80: 78-85, 2002.

2. Huang, J.; Gong, Z.; Ghosal, G.; Chen, J.: SOSS complexes participate
in the maintenance of genomic stability. Molec. Cell 35: 384-393,
2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/19/2010

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 11/26/2002

EDITED mgross: 02/22/2010
terry: 2/19/2010
mgross: 12/3/2002
carol: 12/2/2002

102565	TITLE *102565 FILAMIN C; FLNC
;;FILAMIN, GAMMA;;
FILAMIN 2; FLN2;;
ACTIN-BINDING PROTEIN 280, AUTOSOMAL FORM; ABP280A;;
ABPA;;
ACTIN-BINDING PROTEIN-LIKE; ABPL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Filamins, such as FLNC, are a family of actin (see ACTA1;
102610)-binding proteins involved in reshaping of the cytoskeleton. See
FLN1 (FLNA; 300017) for background information on the filamin gene
family.

CLONING

Xie et al. (1998) cloned FLNC, which they called ABPL, from a heart cDNA
library. The deduced 2,705-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular
mass of 289 kD. ABPL contains an N-terminal actin-binding domain,
followed by 24 repeats of about 94 amino acids. It has hinge sequences
prior to repeats 16 and 24. Xie et al. (1998) also identified an
alternatively spliced transcript that encodes a protein lacking hinge 1.
PCR analysis detected transcripts encoding the hinge 1-containing
isoform in stomach, uterus, umbilical vein endothelial cells, and
prostate. Transcripts encoding both isoforms were detected in heart,
thyroid, fetal brain, fetal lung, retina, spinal cord, skeletal muscle,
and bone marrow.

Using sarcoglycan-gamma (SGCG; 608896) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid
screen of a skeletal muscle cDNA library, followed by EST database
analysis and screening of a skeletal muscle cDNA library, Thompson et
al. (2000) cloned FLNC, which they called FLN2. The deduced 2,688-amino
acid protein shares 74% and 71% identity with FLN1 and filamin-beta
(FLNB; 603381), respectively, and the 3 proteins are nearly 100%
identical in the actin-binding domains. FLN2 lacks the first hinge
region present in FLN1 and FLNB, but it has the second hinge region.
Like FLN1 and FLNB, FLNC has a C-terminal domain containing binding
sites for several receptor proteins. Western blot analysis detected a
280-kD protein in heart and skeletal muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Thompson et al. (2000) found that
sarcoglycan-gamma and -delta (SGCD; 601411) interacted with FLN2, but
sarcoglycan-alpha (SGCA; 600119) and -beta (SGCB; 600900) did not. In
vitro binding assays indicated that FLN2 interacted directly with
sarcoglycan-gamma and -delta, but not with dystrophin (DMD; 300377) and
syntrophin beta-1 (SNTB1; 600026). Coimmunoprecipitation analysis of
transfected proteins and of endogenous proteins in mouse myotube lysates
confirmed that FLN2 interacted with sarcoglycans-gamma and -delta. Fln2
was detected predominantly in the soluble fraction of lysed mouse
myotube cultures. Immunoelectron microscopy detected 2 pools of Fln2,
one adjacent to the sarcolemmal membrane and the other more diffuse.
Thompson et al. (2000) found elevated levels of membrane-associated FLN2
in 2 patients with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2C (LGMD2C;
253700), a patient with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD; 310200), and
dystrophic mice.

The KY protein (605739) has been implicated in a neuromuscular dystrophy
in the mouse, but its role in muscle function remains unclear. Beatham
et al. (2004) showed that KY interacted with several sarcomeric
cytoskeletal proteins including filamin C and the slow isoform of the
myosin-binding protein C (MYBPC1; 160794). A role for KY in regulating
filamin C function in vivo was supported by the expression analysis of
filamin C in the Ky-null mouse mutant, where distinct irregular
subcellular localization of filamin C was found in subsets of muscle
fibers, which appeared to be a specific outcome of KY deficiency. In
vitro assays showed that KY has protease activity, and specific
degradation of filamin C by KY was shown in transfected cells. Beatham
et al. (2004) suggested that KY may be an intrinsic part of the protein
networks underlying the molecular mechanism of several limb-girdle
muscular dystrophies, particularly those where interactions between
filamin C and disease-causing proteins have been shown.

MAPPING

Gariboldi et al. (1994) mapped the FLN2 gene to human chromosome
7q32-q35 by analysis of somatic cell hybrids containing portions of
chromosome 7. Chakarova et al. (2000) assigned the FLNC gene to 7q32 by
radiation hybrid analysis.

By interspecific backcross analysis, Gariboldi et al. (1994) mapped the
mouse homolog to chromosome 6 in a region showing homology of synteny to
human chromosome 7.

- Pseudogene

An FLNC pseudogene maps to chromosome 7q32-q35 about 53.7 kb downstream
from the functional FLNC gene. The pseudogene is 98% homologous to exons
46, 47, and 48 of the functional gene (van der Ven et al., 2010).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Myofibrillar Myopathy 5

In affected members of a German family with autosomal dominant
myofibrillar myopathy-5 (MFM5; 609524), Vorgerd et al. (2005) identified
a heterozygous mutation in the FLNC gene (102565.0001).

In a German mother and daughter with adult-onset limb-girdle muscle
weakness, Shatunov et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous deletion in
the FLNC gene (102565.0002). This family was the only 1 of 127 families
with a myopathy examined that was found to have an FLNC mutation,
indicating that this subtype of myofibrillar myopathy is rare.

- Distal Myopathy 4

By linkage analysis followed by candidate gene sequencing of an
Australian family with distal myopathy-4 (MPD4; 614065), reported by
Williams et al. (2005), Duff et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous
mutation in the FLNC gene (M251T; 102565.0003). A different heterozygous
mutation (A193T; 102565.0004) was found in affected members of an
Italian family with the same phenotype. Both mutations occurred in the
actin-binding domain, and in vitro cellular expression studies showed
that both mutations resulted in increased affinity for actin.

HISTORY

Kono et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 1-bp deletion (8107delG) in
exon 48 of the FLNC gene in affected members of a Japanese family with
adult-onset myofibrillar myopathy primarily affecting the distal limbs,
with later involvement of proximal muscles. However, the paper was later
retracted by the authors after the mutation was found to occur in the
FLNC pseudogene, based on the report of van der Ven et al. (2010). Van
der Ven et al. (2010) noted that the pseudogene is 98% homologous to
exons 46, 47, and 48 of the functional FLNC gene and that the pseudogene
contains the 8107delG variant.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MYOPATHY, MYOFIBRILLAR, 5
FLNC, TRP2710TER

In affected members of a German family with autosomal dominant
myofibrillar myopathy-5 (MFM5; 609524), Vorgerd et al. (2005) identified
a heterozygous 8130G-A transition in exon 48 of the FLNC gene, resulting
in a trp2710-to-ter (W2710X) substitution. The mutation leads to a
truncation of the filamin C immunoglobulin domain that is responsible
for dimerization. Functional expression studies showed that the W2710X
protein had improper folding, was unable to form dimers, and showed
abnormal aggregation. The findings implied that dimer formation is
essential for the biologic function of filamin. The mutation was not
identified in 220 control chromosomes.

By in vitro functional expression studies, Lowe et al. (2007) showed
that W2710X-mutant protein was less stable and more susceptible to
proteolysis compared to wildtype. The mutant protein did not dimerize
properly and formed filamin aggregates in cultured cells. Aggregation of
mutant protein did not affect dimerization of wildtype filamin C, and
the mutant protein still showed normal binding to actin and
sarcoglycans.

.0002
MYOPATHY, MYOFIBRILLAR, 5
FLNC, 12-BP DEL, NT2997

In a German mother and daughter with autosomal dominant myofibrillar
myopathy-5 (609524), Shatunov et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous
12-bp deletion (2997_3008del) in exon 18 of the FLNC gene, predicted to
result in an in-frame deletion of 4 residues (val930 to thr933) in the
seventh repeat and confirmed by RT-PCR analysis of muscle tissue from
the affected daughter. The phenotype was characterized by adult-onset
muscle weakness initially involving proximal muscles of the lower limbs
and spreading to the upper limbs and distal muscles of lower
extremities. Both had paraspinal and abdominal muscle involvement and
winging of the scapula. Cardiac and respiratory muscles were not
affected. Skeletal muscle biopsy from the daughter showed marked
variation in fiber size, some fibers with internal nuclei, and type 1
fiber predominance. Several fibers showed polymorphous hyaline and
nonhyaline myofibrillary FLNC-positive inclusions with a convoluted,
serpentine appearance. Ultrastructural examination showed major
myofibrillar abnormalities, with accumulation of Z disc debris,
granulofilamentous material, and nemaline rods. There were also
mitochondrial aggregates.

.0003
MYOPATHY, DISTAL, 4
FLNC, MET251THR

In affected members of a large Australian family with autosomal dominant
distal myopathy-4 (MPD4; 614065) originally reported by Williams et al.
(2005), Duff et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous 752T-C transition
in exon 4 of the FLNC gene, resulting in a met251-to-thr (M251T)
substitution in a highly conserved residue in the CH2 domain in the
actin-binding domain. The mutation was not found in 400 control
chromosomes. The mutant protein had slightly decreased thermal stability
and showed increased actin-binding activity compared to the wildtype
protein. Transfection of the mutant M251T protein into cells showed
significantly decreased nuclear localization compared to wildtype and
resulted in the formation of intracellular protein aggregates. Duff et
al. (2011) concluded that the disease mechanism somehow involves
increased affinity for actin. The phenotype was characterized by adult
onset of distal muscle weakness and atrophy affecting the upper and
lower limbs, with nonspecific findings on muscle biopsy.

.0004
MYOPATHY, DISTAL, 4
FLNC, ALA193THR

In affected members of an Italian family with autosomal dominant distal
myopathy-4 (MPD4; 614065), Duff et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous
577G-A transition in exon 2 of the FLNC gene, resulting in an
ala193-to-thr (A193T) substitution in a highly conserved residue in the
CH2 domain in the actin-binding domain. The mutation was not found in
204 control chromosomes. The mutant protein had slightly decreased
thermal stability and showed increased actin-binding activity compared
to the wildtype protein. Nuclear localization was unaltered, but
transfection resulted in the formation of intracellular protein
aggregates. Duff et al. (2011) concluded that the disease mechanism
somehow involves increased affinity for actin. The phenotype was
characterized by adult onset of distal muscle weakness and atrophy
affecting the upper and lower limbs, with nonspecific findings on muscle
biopsy.

REFERENCE 1. Beatham, J.; Romero, R.; Townsend, S. K. M.; Hacker, T.; van der
Ven, P. F. M.; Blanco, G.: Filamin C interacts with the muscular
dystrophy KY protein and is abnormally distributed in mouse KY deficient
muscle fibres. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 2863-2874, 2004.

2. Chakarova, C.; Wehnert, M. S.; Uhl, K.; Sakthivel, S.; Vosberg,
H.-P.; van der Ven, P. F. M.; Furst, D. O.: Genomic structure and
fine mapping of the two human filamin gene paralogues FLNB and FLNC
and comparative analysis of the filamin gene family. Hum. Genet. 107:
597-611, 2000.

3. Duff, R. M.; Tay, V.; Hackman, P.; Ravenscroft, G.; McLean, C.;
Kennedy, P.; Steinbach, A.; Schoffler, W.; van der Ven, P. F.; Furst,
D. O.; Song, J.; Djinovic-Carugo, K.; and 12 others: Mutations
in the N-terminal actin-binding domain of filamin C cause a distal
myopathy. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 88: 729-740, 2011.

4. Gariboldi, M.; Maestrini, E.; Canzian, F.; Manenti, G.; De Gregorio,
L.; Rivella, S.; Chatterjee, A.; Herman, G. E.; Archidiacono, N.;
Antonacci, R.; Pierotti, M. A.; Dragani, T. A.; Toniolo, D.: Comparative
mapping of the actin-binding protein 280 genes in human and mouse. Genomics 21:
428-430, 1994.

5. Kono, S.; Nishio, T.; Takahashi, Y.; Goto-Inoue, N.; Kinoshita,
M.; Zaima, N.; Suzuki, H.; Fukutoku-Otsuji, A.; Setou, M.; Miyajima,
H.: Dominant-negative effects of a novel mutation in the filamin
myopathy. Neurology 75: 547-554, 2010. Note: Retraction: Neurology
75: 2138 only, 2010.

6. Lowe, T.; Kley, R. A.; van der Ven, P. F. M.; Himmel, M.; Huebner,
A.; Vorgerd, M.; Furst, D. O.: The pathomechanism of filaminopathy:
altered biochemical properties explain the cellular phenotype of a
protein aggregation myopathy. Hum. Molec. Genet. 16: 1351-1358,
2007.

7. Shatunov, A.; Olive, M.; Odgerel, Z.; Stadelmann-Nessler, C.; Irlbacher,
K.; van Landeghem, F.; Bayarsaikhan, M.; Lee, H.-S.; Goudeau, B.;
Chinnery, P. F.; Straub, V.; Hilton-Jones, D.; and 9 others: In-frame
deletion in the seventh immunoglobulin-like repeat of filamin C in
a family with myofibrillar myopathy. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 17: 656-663,
2009.

8. Thompson, T. G.; Chan, Y.-M.; Hack, A. A.; Brosius, M.; Rajala,
M.; Lidov, H. G. W.; McNally, E. M.; Watkins, S.; Kunkel, L. M.:
Filamin 2 (FLN2): a muscle-specific sarcoglycan interacting protein. J.
Cell Biol. 148: 115-126, 2000.

9. Van der Ven, P. F. M.; Odgerel, Z.; Furst, D. O.; Goldfarb, L.
G.: Dominant-negative effects of a novel mutation in the filamin
myopathy. (Letter) Neurology 75: 2137-2138, 2010.

10. Vorgerd, M.; van der Ven, P. F. M.; Bruchertseifer, V.; Lowe,
T.; Kley, R. A.; Schroder, R.; Lochmuller, H.; Himmel, M.; Koehler,
K.; Furst, D. O.; Huebner, A.: A mutation in the dimerization domain
of filamin C causes a novel type of autosomal dominant myofibrillar
myopathy. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 77: 297-304, 2005.

11. Williams, D. R.; Reardon, K.; Roberts, L.; Dennet, X.; Duff, R.;
Laing, N. G.; Byrne, E.: A new dominant distal myopathy affecting
posterior leg and anterior upper limb muscles. Neurology 64: 1245-1254,
2005.

12. Xie, Z.; Xu, W.; Davie, E. W.; Chung, D. W.: Molecular cloning
of human ABPL, an actin-binding protein homologue. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 251: 914-919, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/29/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/28/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/2/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/22/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/22/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/21/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/9/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/18/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/8/1993

EDITED carol: 08/07/2013
alopez: 2/3/2012
wwang: 7/1/2011
ckniffin: 6/29/2011
wwang: 2/24/2011
wwang: 2/21/2011
ckniffin: 1/28/2011
wwang: 12/7/2010
ckniffin: 11/2/2010
wwang: 2/23/2010
ckniffin: 2/22/2010
wwang: 6/15/2007
terry: 5/22/2007
mgross: 10/10/2005
terry: 9/21/2005
wwang: 8/30/2005
wwang: 8/12/2005
ckniffin: 8/9/2005
mcapotos: 1/18/2001
terry: 12/18/2000
alopez: 9/5/2000
alopez: 10/20/1999
carol: 3/30/1999
alopez: 12/4/1998
dkim: 7/17/1998
mark: 4/10/1997
jason: 6/8/1994
carol: 4/13/1994
carol: 8/16/1993
carol: 7/8/1993

603429	TITLE *603429 ATP-BINDING CASSETTE, SUBFAMILY F, MEMBER 1; ABCF1
;;ATP-BINDING CASSETTE 50; ABC50
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The family of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) proteins (e.g., 601691) is
extensive and is responsible for the transport of a variety of molecules
across biologic membranes. Using differential display PCR to identify
genes that are modulated by TNF-alpha (191160) in synoviocytes, Richard
et al. (1998) isolated a cDNA encoding a novel member of the ABC family,
named ABC50. The deduced 807-amino acid ABC50 protein has 2 ABC
transporter family signature motifs, 2 ATP/GTP-binding site A motifs,
and 3 nuclear localization patterns. The authors found that ABC50 also
contains a signature sequence that is characteristic of yeast cluster IV
ABC proteins. Unlike most previously reported family members, ABC50 does
not contain a transmembrane domain. Northern blot analysis demonstrated
ubiquitous expression of a 3.7-kb ABC50 transcript in human tissues.
TNF-alpha stimulation increased the expression of the ABC50 mRNA in
cultured synoviocytes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Berezikov et al. (2007) determined that intron 13 of the ABCF1 gene
contains the microRNA MIRN877 (611619).

MAPPING

Richard et al. (1998) used fluorescence in situ hybridization to map the
human ABC50 gene to chromosome 6p21.33.

REFERENCE 1. Berezikov, E.; Chung, W.-J.; Willis, J.; Cuppen, E.; Lai, E. C.
: Mammalian mirtron genes. Molec. Cell 28: 328-336, 2007.

2. Richard, M.; Drouin, R.; Beaulieu, A. D.: ABC50, a novel human
ATP-binding cassette protein found in tumor necrosis factor-alpha-stimulated
synoviocytes. Genomics 53: 137-145, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/26/2007

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 1/13/1999

EDITED mgross: 11/26/2007
carol: 11/11/1999
psherman: 1/14/1999

614215	TITLE *614215 ACTIVATING SIGNAL COINTEGRATOR 1 COMPLEX, SUBUNIT 1; ASCC1
;;ASC1 COMPLEX, 50-KD SUBUNIT;;
p50
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing peptides that copurified with the 650-kD ASC1 (TRIP4;
604501) complex from HeLa cells, followed by database analysis and PCR
of a HeLa cell cDNA library, Jung et al. (2002) cloned ASCC1, which they
designated p50. The deduced 357-amino acid protein contains a KH-type
RNA-binding motif near its N terminus. Northern blot analysis detected
variable expression of an approximately 2.1-kb transcript in all tissues
examined. P50 localized to both nuclei and cytoplasm of HeLa cells.
Database analysis revealed orthologs of p50 in mouse, fly, frog, and
nematode.

GENE FUNCTION

Jung et al. (2002) identified a 650-kD protein complex containing ASC1,
p50, p100 (ASCC2; 614216), and p200 (ASCC3; 614217). Immunodepletion of
p50 from HeLa cell nuclear extracts almost completely eliminated phorbol
ester-induced AP1 (see 165160) transactivation of a reporter gene. Yeast
2-hybrid analysis, coimmunoprecipitation of in vitro-translated
proteins, and protein pull-down experiments confirmed direct interaction
between p50 and p200. Domain analysis revealed that the KH motif of p50
was required its interaction with p200.

Gastrin (GAS; 137250) regulates the expression of a variety of genes
involved in the control of acid secretion. It also triggers tissue
response to damage, infection, and inflammation in cells expressing
gastrin receptor (CCKBR; 118445) and, indirectly, in nearby cells via a
paracrine mechanism. Almeida-Vega et al. (2009) found that gastrin
directly induced upregulation of the antiapoptotic regulator PAI2
(SERPINB2; 173390) in CCKBR-positive cells. CCKBR-positive cells also
released IL8 (146930) and prostaglandin E2 into the culture medium in
response to gastrin, which resulted in elevated PAI2 expression in
cocultured CCKBR-negative cells. IL8 signaling in CCKBR-negative cells
upregulated PAI2 via binding of the ASC1 complex to the PAI2 promoter.
Prostaglandin E2 independently upregulated PAI2 via RHOA
(165390)-dependent signaling that induced binding of MAZ (600999) to the
PAI2 promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that MAZ and the p50 subunit of
the ASC1 complex bound directly to sites in the PAI2 promoter. Mutation
of the putative MAZ site in the PAI2 promoter reduced responses to RHOA.
Knockdown of the p50 or p65 (TRIP4) subunits of the ASC1 complex via
small interfering RNA significantly reduced PAI2 upregulation in
response to gastrin.

MAPPING

Hartz (2011) mapped the ASCC1 gene to chromosome 10q22.1 based on an
alignment of the ASCC1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF132952) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Orloff et al. (2011) identified a germline asn290-to-ser (N290S;
614215.0001) mutation in the ASCC1 gene in 2 (2.1%) of 116 patients of
European descent with Barrett esophagus and/or esophageal adenocarcinoma
(614266). The mutation was not found in 125 controls. This genomic
region was studied after being identified by genomewide linkage analysis
of 21 concordant and 11 discordant sib pairs with the disorders.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BARRETT ESOPHAGUS/ESOPHAGEAL ADENOCARCINOMA
ASCC1, ASN290SER

Orloff et al. (2011) identified a germline 869G-A transition in exon 8
of the ASCC1 gene, resulting in an asn290-to-ser (N290S) substitution,
in 2 (2.1%) of 116 patients of European descent with Barrett esophagus
and/or esophageal adenocarcinoma (614266). The mutation was not found in
125 controls. This genomic region was studied after being identified by
genomewide linkage analysis of 21 concordant and 11 discordant sib pairs
with the disorders.

REFERENCE 1. Almeida-Vega, S.; Catlow, K.; Kenny, S.; Dimaline, R.; Varro, A.
: Gastrin activates paracrine networks leading to induction of PAI-2
via MAZ and ASC-1. Am. J. Physiol. Gastrointest. Liver Physiol. 296:
G414-G423, 2009.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/6/2011.

3. Jung, D.-J.; Sung, H.-S.; Goo, Y.-W.; Lee, H. M.; Park, O. K.;
Jung, S.-Y.; Lim, J.; Kim, H.-J.; Lee, S.-K.; Kim, T. S.; Lee, J.
W.; Lee, Y. C.: Novel transcription coactivator complex containing
activating signal cointegrator 1. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22: 5203-5211,
2002.

4. Orloff, M.; Peterson, C.; He, X.; Ganapathi, S.; Heald, B.; Yang,
Y.; Bebek, G.; Romigh, T.; Song, J. H.; Wu, W.; David, S.; Cheng,
Y.; Meltzer, S. J.; Eng, C.: Germline mutations in MSR1, ASCC1, and
CTHRC1 in patients with Barrett esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma. JAMA 306:
410-419, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/7/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/21/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/7/2011

EDITED terry: 10/13/2011
mgross: 10/7/2011
carol: 10/4/2011
ckniffin: 10/4/2011
carol: 10/4/2011
ckniffin: 10/4/2011
ckniffin: 9/21/2011
mgross: 9/7/2011

603200	TITLE *603200 REGULATORY FACTOR X, ANKYRIN REPEAT-CONTAINING; RFXANK
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Major histocompatibility (MHC) class II molecules are transmembrane
proteins that have a central role in development and control of the
immune system. They are encoded by a multigene family and their
expression is tightly regulated. MHC class II deficiency (209920) is an
autosomal recessive immunodeficiency syndrome resulting from defects in
transacting factors essential for transcription of MHC class II genes.
There are 4 genetic complementation groups (A, B, C, and D), reflecting
the existence of 4 MHC class II regulators. The factor defective in
group A is CIITA, or MHC class II transactivator (MHCTA; 600005); in
group C, regulatory factor-5 (RFX5; 601863); and in group D, regulatory
factor X-associated protein (RFXAP; 601861). CIITA is a non-DNA-binding
coactivator that controls the cell type specificity and inducibility of
MHC class II expression. RFX5 and RFXAP are 2 subunits of RFX, a
multiprotein complex that binds the X box motif of MHC class II
promoters. Mutations in the genes encoding RFX5 or RFXAP abolish binding
of RFX to DNA. Similar to groups C and D, group B is characterized by a
defect in RFX binding, and although it accounts for the majority of
patients, the factor defective in group B remained unknown until
Masternak et al. (1998) isolated RFX by a novel single-step DNA-affinity
purification approach and identified RFXANK, the gene encoding the third
subunit of RFX. RFXANK restored MHC class II expression in cell lines
from patients in group B and was found to be mutated in these patients.
RFXANK contains a protein-protein interaction region consisting of 3
ankyrin repeats. Its interaction with RFX5 and RFXAP is essential for
binding of the RFX complex to MHC class II promoters. The gene was
symbolized RFXANK because the protein contains 3 ankyrin repeats.
Wiszniewski et al. (2000) stated that, since the first description of
combined immunodeficiency due to absence of MHC class II molecule
expression, about 70 patients from 50 families had been reported. Of the
4 complementation groups described, the largest had been group B. Most
of the patients in this category had been of North African origin.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Nekrep et al. (2000) demonstrated a direct interaction between the C
terminus of RFXAP and RFXANK; mutant RFXAP or RFXANK proteins failed to
bind. The authors found that RFX5 binds only to the RFXANK-RFXAP
scaffold and not to either protein alone. However, neither the scaffold
nor RFX5 alone can bind DNA. Nekrep et al. (2000) concluded that the
binding of the RFXANK-RFXAP scaffold to RFX5 leads to a conformational
change in the latter that exposes the DNA-binding domain of RFX5. The
DNA-binding domain of RFX5 anchors the RFX complex to the MHC class II X
and S promoter boxes. Another part of the RFX5 protein interacts with
MHC2TA. The authors pointed out that mutation of either protein in
complementation group B or group D of BLS patients prevents its binding
to the other protein, explaining why MHC class II promoters are bare in
the bare lymphocyte syndrome.

GENE STRUCTURE

Masternak et al. (1998) found that the RFXANK gene is composed of 10
exons spanning approximately 10 kb.

MAPPING

Masternak et al. (1998) reported that the RFXANK gene is located on
19p12 between MEF2B (600661) and CSPG3 (600826). This mapping was
accomplished by genomic DNA sequence information which referred them to
specific cosmids that were part of the Lawrence-Livermore chromosome 19
sequencing work.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Lennon-Dumenil et al. (2001) described a patient of North African origin
with the classic features of MHC class II deficiency. The patient had a
homozygous mutation affecting a splice donor site downstream of exon 4
of the RFXANK gene (603200.0003), resulting in a premature stop codon
and an inactive protein lacking all 3 ankyrin domains. Northern and
Western blot analyses of a cell line established from the patient
revealed a lack of expression of HLA-DPA (142880), HLA-DRB (142857),
HLA-DQB (604305), and HLA-DPB (142858), but near normal expression of
HLA-DRA (142860) and HLA-DQA (146880). The authors identified an
alternatively spliced RFXANK gene product that lacks exon 4, resulting
in a 28-amino acid deletion, and complementation and cytofluorometric
analyses confirmed that this alternative RFXANK cDNA could rescue
HLA-DRA and HLA-DRB expression.

Wiszniewski et al. (2003) stated that 7 different RFXANK mutations had
been reported in 26 unrelated patients with MHC class II deficiency.
They reported 2 novel mutations, including D121V (603200.0004),
resulting in loss of function of the gene.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BARE LYMPHOCYTE SYNDROME, TYPE II, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP B
RFXANK, 26-BP DEL, NT752

In 2 unrelated patients with bare lymphocyte syndrome type II,
complementation group B (209920), Masternak et al. (1998) found a 26-bp
deletion of genomic DNA that removed the splice acceptor site and the
first nucleotide of exon 6 of the RFXANK gene. In 1 of these families,
reported by Lisowska-Grospierre et al. (1994), the parents were known to
be consanguineous. In both families, homozygosity was confirmed by
analysis of DNA from other family members.

Wiszniewski et al. (2000) performed a mutation analysis in 20 additional
patients belonging to complementation group B and detected the 26-bp
deletion beginning with 752G in 17 patients, all of North African
origin. A founder effect was documented, since all tested patients,
except 1, displayed a common haplotype spanning the RFXANK locus.

.0002
BARE LYMPHOCYTE SYNDROME, TYPE II, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP B
RFXANK, 58-BP DEL

In a patient with bare lymphocyte syndrome type II, complementation type
B (209920), Masternak et al. (1998) found a 58-bp deletion of genomic
DNA that removed the last 23 nucleotides and the splice donor site of
exon 6 of the RFXANK gene.

.0003
BARE LYMPHOCYTE SYNDROME, TYPE II, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP B
RFXANK, IVS4DS, G-C, +1

Lennon-Dumenil et al. (2001) described a patient of North African origin
with MHC class II deficiency (209920). The patient had a homozygous 1-bp
transversion (G to C) that abolished the splice site downstream of exon
4 of the RFXANK gene, resulting in a premature stop codon and an
inactive protein lacking all 3 ankyrin domains. Northern and Western
blot analyses of a cell line established from the patient revealed a
lack of expression of HLA-DPA (142880), HLA-DRB (142857), HLA-DQB
(604305), and HLA-DPB (142858), but near normal expression of HLA-DRA
(142860) and HLA-DQA (146880). The authors identified an alternatively
spliced RFXANK gene product that lacks exon 4, resulting in a 28-amino
acid deletion, and complementation and cytofluorometric analyses
confirmed that this alternative RFXANK cDNA could rescue HLA-DRA and
HLA-DRB expression.

.0004
BARE LYMPHOCYTE SYNDROME, TYPE II, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP B
RFXANK, ASP121VAL

Wiszniewski et al. (2003) identified an asp121-to-val (D121V) missense
mutation in the RFXANK gene. The D121V mutant was unable to form the RFX
complex, indicating that D121 is required for RFXAP binding.

REFERENCE 1. Lennon-Dumenil, A.-M.; Barbouche, M.-R.; Vedrenne, J.; Prod'Homme,
T.; Bejaoui, M.; Ghariani, S.; Charron, D.; Fellous, M.; Dellagi,
K.; Alcaide-Loridan, C.: Uncoordinated HLA-D gene expression in a
RFXANK-defective patient with MHC class II deficiency. J. Immun. 166:
5681-5687, 2001.

2. Lisowska-Grospierre, B.; Fondaneche, M. C.; Rols, M. P.; Griscelli,
C.; Fischer, A.: Two complementation groups account for most cases
of inherited MHC class II deficiency. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 953-958,
1994.

3. Masternak, K.; Barras, E.; Zufferey, M.; Conrad, B.; Corthals,
G.; Aebersold, R.; Sanchez, J.-C.; Hochstrasser, D. F.; Mach, B.;
Reith, W.: A gene encoding a novel RFX-associated transactivator
is mutated in the majority of MHC class II deficiency patients. Nature
Genet. 20: 273-277, 1998.

4. Nekrep, N.; Jabrane-Ferrat, N.; Peterlin, B. M.: Mutations in
the bare lymphocyte syndrome define critical steps in the assembly
of the regulatory factor X complex. Molec. Cell Biol. 20: 4455-4461,
2000.

5. Wiszniewski, W.; Fondaneche, M.-C.; Lambert, N.; Masternak, K.;
Picard, C.; Notarangelo, L.; Schwartz, K.; Bal, J.; Reith, W.; Alcaide,
C.; de Saint Basile, G.; Fischer, A.; Lisowska-Grospierre, B.: Founder
effect for a 26-bp deletion in the RFXANK gene in North African major
histocompatibility complex class II-deficient patients belonging to
complementation group B. Immunogenetics 51: 261-267, 2000.

6. Wiszniewski, W.; Fondaneche, M.-C.; Louise-Plence, P.; Prochnicka-Chalufour,
A.; Selz, F.; Picard, C.; Deist, F.; Eliaou, J.-F.; Fischer, A.; Lisowska-Grospierre,
B.: Novel mutations in the RFXANK gene: RFX complex containing in-vitro-generated
RFXANK mutant binds the promoter without transactivating MHC II. Immunogenetics 54:
747-755, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/20/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/18/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/14/2000
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/3/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/12/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/26/1998

EDITED alopez: 06/23/2003
terry: 6/20/2003
mgross: 1/18/2002
mcapotos: 7/26/2000
mcapotos: 7/25/2000
terry: 7/14/2000
mgross: 7/3/2000
carol: 2/28/2000
carol: 11/18/1998
terry: 11/12/1998
alopez: 10/28/1998
alopez: 10/26/1998

603819	TITLE *603819 STEROID RECEPTOR RNA ACTIVATOR 1; SRA1
;;SRA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screening system, Lanz et al. (1999) isolated a
transcriptional coactivator of steroid nuclear receptors, termed steroid
receptor RNA activator (SRA). Northern blot analysis revealed that the
SRA gene was expressed in all human tissues tested as major transcripts
of approximately 0.7 to 0.85 kb and minor transcripts of approximately
1.3 to 1.5 kb; SRA was expressed at high levels in liver and skeletal
muscle and at a low level in brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Lanz et al. (1999) found that SRA was selective for steroid hormone
receptors and mediated transactivation via their N-terminal activation
function. The authors provided functional and mechanistic evidence that
SRA acts as an RNA transcript; transfected SRA, unlike other steroid
receptor coregulators, functioned in the presence of cycloheximide, and
SRA mutants containing multiple translational stop signals retained
their ability to activate steroid receptor-dependent gene expression.
Biochemical fractionation showed that SRA exists in distinct
ribonucleoprotein complexes, one of which contains steroid receptor
coactivator-1 (602691). Lanz et al. (1999) suggested that SRA may act to
confer functional specificity upon multiprotein complexes recruited by
liganded receptors during transcriptional activation.

By immunoprecipitation analysis, Caretti et al. (2006) found that p68
(DDX5; 180630), p72 (DDX17; 608469), and the noncoding RNA SRA
associated with MYOD (MYOD1; 159970) in MYOD-transfected HeLa cells. In
vitro and in vivo experiments identified p68, p72, and SRA as
coactivators of MYOD, and their knockdown in C2C12 mouse myoblast cells
prevented proper muscle gene expression and cell differentiation.

MAPPING

By sequence comparisons, Lanz et al. (1999) identified partial SRA
sequences isolated as HepG2 3-prime untranslated region (GenBank GENBANK
D16861), EST clones, and chromosome 5 BAC clone 319C17 (GenBank GENBANK
AC005214), providing a preliminary mapping of the SRA gene to chromosome
5.

REFERENCE 1. Caretti, G.; Schiltz, R. L.; Dilworth, F. J.; Di Padova, M.; Zhao,
P.; Ogryzko, V.; Fuller-Pace, F. V.; Hoffman, E. P.; Tapscott, S.
J.; Sartorelli, V.: The RNA helicases p68/p72 and the noncoding RNA
SRA are coregulators of MyoD and skeletal muscle differentiation. Dev.
Cell 11: 547-560, 2006.

2. Lanz, R. B.; McKenna, N. J.; Onate, S. A.; Albrecht, U.; Wong,
J.; Tsai, S. Y.; Tsai, M.-J.; O'Malley, B. W.: A steroid receptor
coactivator, SRA, functions as an RNA and is present in an SRC-1 complex. Cell 97:
17-27, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 01/02/2007

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 5/19/1999

EDITED mgross: 01/02/2007
alopez: 4/20/2000
mgross: 5/19/1999

608503	TITLE *608503 POLY(rC)-BINDING PROTEIN 4; PCBP4
;;ALPHA-CP4;;
MCG10
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The poly(rC)-binding proteins are a subfamily of KH-domain-containing
RNA-binding proteins that bind C-rich pyrimidine tracts and play pivotal
roles in a broad spectrum of posttranscriptional events (Chkheidze and
Liebhaber, 2003).

CLONING

By subtraction hybridization for genes induced by p53 (191170) in a lung
cancer cell line, Zhu and Chen (2000) cloned PCBP4, which they
designated MCG10. They also identified an alternatively spliced
transcript, which they designated MCG10as. The deduced proteins contain
424 and 369 amino acids. Each protein contains an N-terminal KH (HNRNPK
(600712)-homology) domain, a C-terminal KH domain, 3 proline-rich
domains, a potential nuclear export signal, and a potential nuclear
localization signal.

Based on its sequence similarity with mouse and human PCBP2 (601210),
Makeyev and Liebhaber (2000) cloned mouse Pcbp4, and using this sequence
as query to search an EST database, they identified human PCBP4. Both
mouse and human PCBP4 encode 403-amino acid proteins with calculated
molecular masses of 41.5 kD. PCBP4 contains 2 KH domains in the
N-terminal half, and 1 near the C terminus. Quantitative RT-PCR detected
expression in all mouse tissues examined.

Chkheidze and Liebhaber (2003) cloned a PCBP4 transcript that encodes a
deduced 329-amino acid protein. Epitope-tagged PCBP4 localized to the
cytosol of transfected HeLa cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhu and Chen (2000) found that PCBP4 was induced following p53
expression in a lung cancer cell line. Expression of a p53 mutant
defective in transactivation, and a p53 lacking the proline-rich domain,
did not induce PCBP4 expression. Chemically-induced DNA damage also led
to p53-dependent PCBP4 upregulation. By generating cell lines that
inducibly expressed either wildtype or mutated forms of the 2 PCBP4
splice variants, Zhu and Chen (2000) found that both variants suppressed
cell proliferation by inducing apoptosis and cell cycle arrest in
G(2)-M. Through their KH domains, both variants bound poly(rC) and their
RNA-binding activity was necessary to induce apoptosis and cell cycle
arrest.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhu and Chen (2000) identified 3 potential p53-binding sites in the
untranslated region upstream of the PCBP4 transcription start site.
Makeyev and Liebhaber (2000) determined that the PCBP4 gene contains 14
exons and spans 9.8 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Zhu and Chen (2000) and Makeyev and
Liebhaber (2000) mapped the PCBP4 gene to chromosome 3p21. By FISH,
Makeyev and Liebhaber (2000) mapped the mouse Pcbp4 gene to a syntenic
region of mouse chromosome 9F1-F2.

REFERENCE 1. Chkheidze, A. N.; Liebhaber, S. A.: A novel set of nuclear localization
signals determine distributions of the alpha-CP RNA-binding proteins. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 23: 8405-8415, 2003.

2. Makeyev, A. V.; Liebhaber, S. A.: Identification of two novel
mammalian genes establishes a subfamily of KH-domain RNA-binding proteins. Genomics 67:
301-316, 2000.

3. Zhu, J.; Chen, X.: MCG10, a novel p53 target gene that encodes
a KH domain RNA-binding protein, is capable of inducing apoptosis
and cell cycle arrest in G(2)-M. Molec. Cell. Biol. 20: 5602-5618,
2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/2/2004

EDITED mgross: 03/05/2004
cwells: 3/2/2004

136836	TITLE *136836 FUCOSYLTRANSFERASE 6; FUT6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The alpha-1,3-fucosyltransferases constitute a large family of
glycosyltransferases with a high degree of homology. The enzymes of this
family comprise 3 main activity patterns called myeloid, plasma, and
Lewis, based on their capacity to transfer alpha-L-fucose to distinct
oligosaccharide acceptors, their sensitivity to N-ethylmaleimide
inhibition, their cation requirements, and their tissue-specific
expression patterns. The different categories of
alpha-1,3-fucosyltransferases are sequentially expressed during
embryo-fetal development. FUT6 encodes a 'plasma type' of
alpha-1,3-fucosyltransferase (summary by Mollicone et al., 1994).

CLONING

Weston et al. (1992) isolated and cloned a novel
alpha(1,3)fucosyltransferase gene, which they designated FUT6, which
encodes a deduced 358-amino acid protein. FUT6 shares 85% and 89% amino
acid sequence identity with FUT3 (111100) and FUT5 (136835),
respectively, but differs substantially in its acceptor substrate
requirements.

Koszdin and Bowen (1992) amplified FUT6 by PCR of a squamous carcinoma
cell line and a myeloid leukemia cell line.

Cameron et al. (1995) studied the tissue distribution of FUT6 by RT-PCR,
RACE, and Northern blot analysis. They found that FUT6 was expressed at
high levels as a 3.5-kb transcript in kidney and liver and as a 2.5-kb
transcript in colon and liver. They identified alternate polyadenylation
sites as well as splice variants resulting in deletion of the catalytic
domain. By RT-PCR, Schnyder-Candrian et al. (2000) found FUT6 to be the
major fucosyltransferase of human umbilical vein endothelial cells.
Immunolocalization showed that FUT6 colocalizes with
beta-4-galactosyltransferase-1 (B4GALT1; 137060) in compact juxtanuclear
structures typical of the Golgi apparatus. Antibodies raised against
another epitope of FUT6 localized the enzyme to Weibel-Palade bodies,
endothelial storage granules.

MAPPING

By PCR analysis of somatic cell hybrid DNAs, Weston et al. (1992)
demonstrated that the FUT6 gene is located on chromosome 19, where the
Lewis blood group gene (FUT3; 111100) had long been known to be located.

McCurley et al. (1995) demonstrated that FUT5, FUT3, and FUT6 are
located in the 19p13.3 region in an interval of about 40 kb. They are
situated in close proximity and the direction of transcription of all 3
is toward the telomere. The organization may suggest coordinate
regulation.

GENE FUNCTION

Weston et al. (1992) found that when FUT6 was transfected into mammalian
cells, it was capable of directing expression of the Lewis x, sialyl
Lewis x, and difucosyl sialyl Lewis x epitopes.

Koszdin and Bowen (1992) also showed that transfection of FUT6 cDNA into
mammalian cells conferred alpha-1,3-fucosyltransferase activity to the
cells, resulting in cell surface expression of Lewis x and sialyl Lewis
x carbohydrates.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Whereas most humans express an alpha-1,3-fucosyltransferase in plasma,
9% of individuals on the isle of Java (Indonesia) do not express this
enzyme. The Lewis negative phenotype is found on red cells of 95% of
these FUT-deficient individuals, suggesting strong linkage
disequilibrium between these 2 traits. To define a molecular basis for
this plasma FUT deficiency (613852) and to determine which of 2
candidate human FUT genes, FUT5 (136835) and FUT6, encode this enzyme,
Mollicone et al. (1994) cloned and analyzed alleles at these 2 loci from
an Indonesian individual with fucosyltransferase deficiency. Single
basepair changes were identified in the coding region of each gene,
yielding 3 codon changes in FUT5 and 3 in FUT6. Only the changes in the
FUT6 alleles inactivated the gene when tested by expression in
transfected COS-1 cells. One of these inactivating changes was a
missense mutation (glu247-to-lys) within the enzyme's catalytic domain.
The other inactivating mutation, a nonsense tyr315-to-ter change,
truncated the C terminus of the enzyme by 45 amino acids. The
glu247-to-lys missense mutation was present in homozygous state in 9
plasma FUT-deficient individuals tested, whereas the nonsense mutation
at tyrosine-315 was present in homozygous state in only 1 of these 9
persons. These results demonstrated that the
alpha-1,3-fucosyltransferase activity in human plasma is encoded by the
FUT6 gene and that the missense mutation within codon 247 of this gene
is responsible for the Indonesian deficiency of this activity.

Brinkman-Van der Linden et al. (1996) found that all individuals with a
homozygous gly739-to-ala FUT6 mutation showed no fucosylation of
alpha-1-acid glycoprotein. The same result was found for
alpha-1-antichymotrypsin and alpha-1-protease inhibitor. On the other
hand, in all individuals with alpha-3-fucosyltransferase activity in the
plasma, alpha-3-fucosylated glycoforms of the glycoproteins studied were
found. Thus, their data suggested that the product of FUT6, but not of
FUT3 or of FUT5, is responsible for the alpha-3-fucosylation of
glycoproteins produced in liver and suggested that this organ is a major
source of alpha-3-fucosyltransferase activity in plasma.

Pang et al. (1999) sequenced the 1080-bp coding region of the FUT6 gene
in 161 individuals (322 chromosomes) drawn from 3 populations: 56
Africans (Xhosa), 52 European-Africans of South Africa, and 53 Japanese.
In addition to 6 base substitutions previously reported, 11 new base
substitutions and a single base insertion were found. They also
identified 11 functional and 4 null alleles, of which 10 were novel. The
allelic distributions of FUT6 were different among these 3 populations.
The heterozygosity of FUT6 was 0.860, 0.699, and 0.632 in the 3
populations, respectively. Pang et al. (1999) suggested that the
extensive DNA sequence diversity of FUT6 may make it suitable as a tool
in genetic studies of modern human evolution.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
FUCOSYLTRANSFERASE 6 DEFICIENCY
FUT6, GLU247LYS

Mollicone et al. (1994) demonstrated a glu247-to-lys (E247K) missense
mutation in homozygous state as the apparent cause of fucosyltransferase
deficiency in plasma (613852) found in 9% of individuals on the Isle of
Java (Indonesia).

REFERENCE 1. Brinkman-Van der Linden, E. C. M.; Mollicone, R.; Oriol, R.; Larson,
G.; Van den Eijnden, D. H.; Van Dijk, W.: A missense mutation in
the FUT6 gene results in total absence of alpha-3-fucosylation of
human alpha-1-acid glycoprotein. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 14492-14495,
1996.

2. Cameron, H. S.; Szczepaniak, D.; Weston, B. W.: Expression of
human chromosome 19p alpha-(1,3)-fucosyltransferase genes in normal
tissues: alternative splicing, polyadenylation, and isoforms. J.
Biol. Chem. 270: 20112-20122, 1995.

3. Koszdin, K. L.; Bowen, B. R.: The cloning and expression of a
human alpha-1,3 fucosyltransferase capable of forming the E-selectin
ligand. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 187: 152-157, 1992.

4. McCurley, R. S.; Recinos, A., III; Olsen, A. S.; Gingrich, J. C.;
Szczepaniak, D.; Cameron, H. S.; Krauss, R.; Weston, B. W.: Physical
maps of human alpha(1,3)fucosyltransferase genes FUT3-FUT6 on chromosomes
19p13.3 and 11q21. Genomics 26: 142-146, 1995.

5. Mollicone, R.; Reguigne, I.; Fletcher, A.; Aziz, A.; Rustam, M.;
Weston, B. W.; Kelly, R. J.; Lowe, J. B.; Oriol, R.: Molecular basis
for plasma alpha(1,3)-fucosyltransferase gene deficiency (FUT6). J.
Biol. Chem. 269: 12662-12671, 1994.

6. Pang, H.; Koda, Y.; Soejima, M.; Schlaphoff, T.; Du Toit, E. D.;
Kimura, H.: Allelic diversity of the human plasma alpha(1,3)fucosyltransferase
gene (FUT6). Ann. Hum. Genet. 63: 277-284, 1999.

7. Schnyder-Candrian, S.; Borsig, L.; Moser, R.; Berger, E. G.: Localization
of alpha-1,3-fucosyltransferase VI in Weibel-Palade bodies of human
endothelial cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 8369-8374, 2000.

8. Weston, B. W.; Smith, P. L.; Kelly, R. J.; Lowe, J. B.: Molecular
cloning of a fourth member of a human alpha(1,3)fucosyltransferase
gene family: multiple homologous sequences that determine expression
of the Lewis x, sialyl Lewis x, and difucosyl sialyl Lewis x epitopes. J.
Biol. Chem. 267: 24575-24584, 1992. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem.
268: 18398 only, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/1/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/1/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/22/1994

EDITED terry: 12/20/2012
carol: 3/30/2011
mgross: 3/17/2004
carol: 7/1/2002
terry: 5/1/2000
alopez: 5/4/1998
mark: 11/24/1996
terry: 11/7/1996
terry: 9/20/1996
mark: 5/14/1995
terry: 1/27/1995
jason: 6/22/1994

609178	TITLE *609178 MIS12, S. POMBE, HOMOLOG OF; MIS12
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for sequences similar to yeast Mis12, followed by PCR of a
HeLa cell cDNA library, Goshima et al. (2003) cloned MIS12. The deduced
205-amino acid protein contains 2 conserved blocks in its N-terminal 100
amino acids, followed by a coiled-coil region of about 50 amino acids.
Endogenous HeLa cell MIS12 had an apparent molecular mass of about 25
kD. Immunolocalization showed MIS12 colocalized at kinetochores with
CENPA (117139) and CENPC (117141), and its position during the cell
cycle was that of a typical kinetochore protein. The level of MIS12 did
not fluctuate during the cell cycle.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RNA interference (RNAi) in HeLa cells, Goshima et al. (2003)
demonstrated that reduced MIS12 resulted in misaligned metaphase
chromosomes, abnormally extended metaphase spindle length, lagging
anaphase chromosomes, and interphase micronuclei without mitotic delay.
Spindle checkpoint protein MAD2 (601467) temporally localized at
kinetochores at early mitotic stages after MIS12 RNAi. Kinetochore
localization of MIS12 was unaffected by CENPA RNAi.

Following MIS12 overexpression in HeLa cells, Obuse et al. (2004)
immunoprecipitated MIS12 in a kinetochore-associated complex that
contained PMF1 (609176), DC8 (609174), C20ORF172 (609175), and HP1-alpha
(CBX5; 604478). ZWINT (609177) also associated with the complex at
kinetochores during mitosis. Immunoprecipitation of transfected cells
indicated that MIS12 could form stable complexes with C20ORF172 and DC8.
Much weaker interaction was detected between MIS12 and ZWINT. Exclusion
chromatography revealed 3 peaks containing MIS12 and C20ORF172, but only
the middle peak, which had a mass of 669 kD, contained HP1-alpha. MIS12
knockdown by RNAi abolished the kinetochore association of ZWINT, DC8,
and C20ORF172.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the MIS12
gene to chromosome 17 (TMAP SHGC-36031).

REFERENCE 1. Goshima, G.; Kiyomitsu, T.; Yoda, K.; Yanagida, M.: Human centromere
chromatin protein hMis12, essential for equal segregation, is independent
of CENP-A loading pathway. J. Cell Biol. 160: 25-39, 2003.

2. Obuse, C.; Iwasaki, O.; Kiyomitsu, T.; Goshima, G.; Toyoda, Y.;
Yanagida, M.: A conserved Mis12 centromere complex is linked to heterochromatic
HP1 and outer kinetochore protein Zwint-1. Nature Cell Biol. 6:
1135-1141, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/27/2005

EDITED mgross: 01/28/2005
mgross: 1/27/2005

601530	TITLE *601530 SEQUESTOSOME 1; SQSTM1
;;UBIQUITIN-BINDING PROTEIN P62; P62
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The Src homology type 2 (SH2) domain is a highly conserved motif of
about 100 amino acids which mediates protein-protein interactions by
binding to phosphotyrosine. p56-lck (153390), a T-cell-specific src
family tyrosine kinase with an SH2 domain, is involved in T-cell signal
transduction. A 62-kD protein (p62) was identified by Park et al. (1995)
as a ligand of the p56-lck SH2 domain.

Joung et al. (1996) cloned the gene for p62 by purifying the p62 protein
to obtain peptide microsequences, producing a PCR product with
degenerate oligonucleotides, and then using this PCR product to screen a
HeLa cell cDNA library. Sequence analysis of full-length cDNAs by Joung
et al. (1996) revealed that the p62 gene encodes a 440-amino acid
polypeptide with the following conserved domains: (1) a cysteine-rich
domain, predicted to be a metal-binding site involved in protein-protein
or protein-DNA interaction; (2) a region with homology to the cdc42
GTPase binding-site; and (3) a PEST motif which is a degradation signal
found in many short-lived proteins. Northern blot analysis suggested
that p62 is expressed ubiquitously in all tissues examined.

Gong et al. (1999) screened a yeast 2-hybrid library made from rat
hippocampal mRNA against full-length Kv-beta-2 (601142). Two previously
unknown interacting proteins were identified, one of which was identical
to Zip (PKC-zeta (176982)-interacting protein), the rat homolog of p62.
Zip1 and Zip2, which arise from alternative splicing, are identical
except for 27 residues missing from Zip2.

GENE FUNCTION

Park et al. (1995) found that the p56-lck SH2 domain binds to p62 at the
ser59 of p62 only when that serine is phosphorylated. Moreover, Park et
al. (1995) found that p62 is associated with a serine/threonine kinase
activity and also binds to ras GTP-ase-activating protein, a negative
regulator of the ras signaling pathway.

Joung et al. (1996) expressed epitope-tagged p62 in HeLa cells and
showed that the expressed protein bound to the lck SH2 domain and that
this binding was dependent on the N-terminal 50 amino acids of p62 but
not on the tyrosine residue in this region. Thus Joung et al. (1996)
proposed that the mechanism of binding of p62 to the p56-lck SH2 domain
is by a mechanism different from the previously characterized modes of
binding of SH2 domains and their ligands.

Vadlamudi et al. (1996) used the yeast 2-hybrid system to identify
proteins that interact with p62. They isolated 46 clones that tested
positively for specific interaction with p62. Forty-three of the 46
clones were found by sequencing to be members of the ubiquitin family.
Ubiquitination of cellular proteins is a crucial feature in regulation
of signal transduction and cell cycle progression through
ubiquitination-dependent proteasomal degradation of important cellular
proteins. Vadlamudi et al. (1996) studied the interaction of p62 with
ubiquitin by in vitro binding studies which showed that p62 binds
noncovalently to ubiquitin. Vadlamudi et al. (1996) noted that p62
contains no homology with any known ubiquitin-binding protein and thus
represents a new class of ubiquitin-binding protein.

Gong et al. (1999) found that the rat Zip1 and Zip2 isoforms
differentially stimulated phosphorylation of Kv-beta-2 by PKC-zeta. Zip1
and Zip2 interacted to form heteromultimers, allowing for a hybrid
stimulatory activity to PKC-zeta. Gong et al. (1999) found that Zip1 and
Zip2 coexisted in the same cell type and were elevated differentially by
neurotrophic factors. They suggested that these results provide a
mechanism for specificity and regulation of PKC-zeta-targeted
phosphorylation.

By small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of Rab factors in a murine
macrophage line, Pilli et al. (2012) showed that inhibition of Rab8b
(613532) caused a decrease in conversion of Mycobacterium bovis BCG
phagosomes to degradative compartments after the induction of autophagy
and autophagic killing of mycobacteria. Knockdown of Rab8b-interacting
partners showed that Tbk1 (604834) was critical for autophagic killing
of BCG by suppressing the maturation of autophagosomes.
Coimmunoprecipitation, proximity ligation in situ analysis, and confocal
microscopy revealed that Tbk1 associated with Rab8b on autophagic
organelles. High-content imaging analysis showed that Tbk1 was required
in bone marrow macrophages for phosphorylation of p62 on ser403, which
was in turn required for autophagic function and clearance of p62 and
associated cargo. Further analysis revealed that Il1b was necessary for
the induction of autophagy in mycobacteria-infected macrophages and that
Tbk1 was required for Il1b-induced autophagic elimination of M.
tuberculosis.

Lee et al. (2012) showed that the atypical (i.e., nontuberculous)
mycobacterium M. abscessus (Mabc) robustly activated the NLRP3 (606416)
inflammasome in human macrophages via dectin-1 (CLEC7A; 606264)/SYK
(600085)-dependent signaling and the cytoplasmic scaffold protein
SQSTM1. Both dectin-1 and TLR2 (603028) were required for Mabc-induced
expression of IL1B (147720), CAMP (600474), and DEFB4 (DEFB4A; 602215).
Dectin-1-dependent SYK signaling, but not MYD88 (602170) signaling, led
to activation of CASP1 (147678) and secretion of IL1B through a
potassium efflux-dependent NLRP3/ASC (PYCARD; 606838) inflammasome.
Mabc-induced SQSTM1 expression was also critically involved in NLRP3
inflammasome activation. Lee et al. (2012) concluded that the NLRP3/ASC
inflammasome is critical for antimicrobial responses and innate immunity
to Mabc infection.

GENE STRUCTURE

The 2,870-nucleotide SQSTM1 transcript is contained within 8 exons
distributed over a 16-kb genomic segment (Laurin et al., 2002).

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the p62
gene to chromosome 5q35 (TMAP sts-Z40707).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using 24 French Canadian families and 112 unrelated individuals with
Paget disease of bone (602080), Laurin et al. (2002) confined the PDB3
locus (602080) on 5q35-qter to a region of approximately 300 kb. Within
this interval, 2 disease-related haplotype signatures were observed in
11 families and 18 unrelated patients. This region encoded the SQSTM1
gene, which is a candidate gene for PDB because of its association with
the RANK pathway (see 603499). Screening SQSTM1 for mutations led to the
identification of a recurrent nonconservative change (P392L;
601530.0001) flanking the ubiquitin-associated domain (UBA; position
394-440) of the protein that was not present in 291 control individuals.
The data demonstrated that 2 independent mutational events at the same
position in SQSTM1 cause Paget disease of bone in a high proportion of
French Canadian patients.

Kurihara et al. (2007) found that osteoclast precursors from PDB
patients with the P392L mutation and osteoclast precursors transduced
with p62 protein carrying the P392L mutation were hyperresponsive to
RANKL (TNFSF11; 602642) and TNF (191160) compared with control
osteoclast precursors. Mice transgenic for P392L developed increased
osteoclast numbers and progressive bone loss, but they did not manifest
the increased osteoblast numbers seen in PDB. Kurihara et al. (2007)
concluded that expression of P392L in osteoclasts is necessary to cause
predisposition to PDB, but it is not sufficient for the full PDB
phenotype.

ANIMAL MODEL

Inactivation of constitutive autophagy results in formation of
cytoplasmic protein inclusions and leads to liver injury and
neurodegeneration. Using proteomic, immunoprecipitation, and
immunofluorescence microscopy analyses, Komatsu et al. (2007) found that
p62 interacted with LC3 (MAP1LC3A; 601242) in mouse lysosomes and
autophagosomes. p62 accumulated in autophagy-deficient mouse livers and
neurons lacking Atg5 (604261) or Atg7 (608760). Mice lacking p62 were
fertile and lived more than 1 year, although they developed adult-onset
obesity and diabetes. p62 -/- Atg7 -/- double-knockout mice did not
accumulate ubiquitin protein inclusions in neurons or livers. Komatsu et
al. (2007) concluded that p62 levels are regulated by autophagy and that
the pathology of autophagy deficiency is cell type specific.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PAGET DISEASE OF BONE
SQSTM1, PRO392LEU

In 8 families showing linkage of Paget disease (602080) to the PDB3
locus on 5q, Laurin et al. (2002) used a haplotype signature strategy to
find ancestral haplotypes shared by affected individuals to narrow the
mapping interval. The SQSTM1 gene, which maps to that interval, was
found to have a C-to-T transition at position 1215 in exon 8 in all 5
affected individuals tested. This change caused the substitution of
proline-392 to a leucine (P392L). The P392L mutation was found in 18
(16%) of 112 sporadic cases and in 11 (46%) of 24 families with Paget
disease tested. Haplotype analysis by means of intragenic SNPs showed
that the P392L mutation was associated with 2 distinct haplotypes and
probably originated from 2 independent events. This mutation, occurring
at a hypermutable CpG dinucleotide, may have arisen by deamination of a
methylated cytosine.

.0002
PAGET DISEASE OF BONE
SQSTM1, 1-BP INS, 1224T

Hocking et al. (2002) identified 4 of 62 PDB (602080) families whose
affected members were heterozygous for a T insertion after base 1224 in
the SQSTM1 gene. The mutation was predicted to result in premature
termination at codon 396 in the ubiquitin-binding domain.

.0003
PAGET DISEASE OF BONE
SQSTM1, IVS7, G-A, +1

Hocking et al. (2002) identified an Australian family with PDB (602080)
whose affected members were heterozygous for a G-to-A substitution at
splice donor site IVS7+1 of the SQSTM1 gene. The mutation was predicted
to result in skipping of exon 7, which encodes part of the
ubiquitin-binding domain.

REFERENCE 1. Gong, J.; Xu, J.; Bezanilla, M.; van Huizen, R.; Derin, R.; Li,
M.: Differential stimulation of PKC phosphorylation of potassium
channels by ZIP1 and ZIP2. Science 285: 1565-1569, 1999.

2. Hocking, L. J.; Lucas, G. J. A.; Daroszewska, A.; Mangion, J.;
Olavesen, M.; Cundy, T.; Nicholson, G. C.; Ward, L.; Bennett, S. T.;
Wuyts, W.; Van Hul, W.; Ralston, S. H.: Domain-specific mutations
in sequestosome 1 (SQSTM1) cause familial and sporadic Paget's disease. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 11: 2735-2739, 2002.

3. Joung, I.; Strominger, J. L.; Shin, J.: Molecular cloning of a
phosphotyrosine-independent ligand of the p56-lck SH2 domain. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 5991-5995, 1996.

4. Komatsu, M.; Waguri, S.; Koike, M.; Sou, Y.; Ueno, T.; Hara, T.;
Mizushima, N.; Iwata, J.; Ezaki, J.; Murata, S.; Hamazaki, J.; Nishito,
Y.: and 13 others: Homeostatic levels of p62 control cytoplasmic
inclusion body formation in autophagy-deficient mice. Cell 131:
1149-1163, 2007.

5. Kurihara, N.; Hiruma, Y.; Zhou, H.; Subler, M. A.; Dempster, D.
W.; Singer, F. R.; Reddy, S. V.; Gruber, H. E.; Windle, J. J.; Roodman,
G. D.: Mutation of the sequestosome 1 (p62) gene increases osteoclastogenesis
but does not induce Paget disease. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 133-142,
2007.

6. Laurin, N.; Brown, J. P.; Morissette, J.; Raymond, V.: Recurrent
mutation of the gene encoding sequestosome 1 (SQSTM1/p62) in Paget
disease of bone. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 70: 1582-1588, 2002.

7. Lee, H.-M.; Yuk, J.-M.; Kim, K.-H.; Jang, J.; Kang, G.; Park, J.
B.; Son, J.-W.; Jo, E.-K.: Mycobacterium abscessus activates the
NLRP3 inflammasome via dectin-1-Syk and p62/SQSTM1. Immun. Cell Biol. 90:
601-610, 2012.

8. Park, I.; Chung, J.; Walsh, C. T.; Yun, Y.; Strominger, J. L.;
Shin, J.: Phosphotyrosine-independent binding of a 62-kDa protein
to the src homology 2 (SH2) domain of p56-lck and its regulation by
phosphorylation of ser-59 in the lck unique N-terminal region. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 12338-12342, 1995.

9. Pilli, M.; Arko-Mensah, J.; Ponpuak, M.; Roberts, E.; Master, S.;
Mandell, M. A.; Dupont, N.; Ornatowski, W.; Jiang, S.; Bradfute, S.
B.; Bruun, J.-A.; Hansen, T. E.; Johansen, T.; Deretic, V.: TBK-1
promotes autophagy-mediated antimicrobial defense by controlling autophagosome
maturation. Immunity 37: 223-234, 2012.

10. Vadlamudi, R. K.; Joung, I.; Strominger, J. L.; Shin, J.: p62,
a phosphotyrosine-independent ligand of the SH2 domain of p56-lck,
belongs to a new class of ubiquitin-binding proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 271:
20235-20237, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/19/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/13/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/30/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/12/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/12/2002
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 6/13/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/2/1999

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 11/22/1996

EDITED mgross: 08/19/2013
mgross: 8/19/2013
wwang: 5/15/2008
mgross: 3/14/2008
terry: 3/13/2008
mgross: 4/12/2007
terry: 3/30/2007
cwells: 2/12/2004
tkritzer: 2/6/2004
alopez: 2/20/2003
alopez: 6/14/2002
terry: 6/12/2002
terry: 6/13/2000
carol: 6/13/2000
alopez: 9/2/1999
terry: 9/2/1999
jamie: 2/4/1997
jamie: 11/22/1996

604783	TITLE *604783 CLEFT LIP- AND PALATE-ASSOCIATED TRANSMEMBRANE PROTEIN 1; CLPTM1
DESCRIPTION Yoshiura et al. (1998) identified a family in which cleft lip and palate
(119530) segregated in 2 of 3 generations with a balanced chromosomal
translocation t(2;19)(q11.2;q13.3). They identified a novel gene on
chromosome 19, which they named 'cleft lip- and palate-associated
transmembrane protein-1' (CLPTM1), by positional cloning. Assembled cDNA
sequences and comparison with genomic sequences predicted a gene with 13
exons encoding a putative protein with 7 transmembrane domains highly
conserved between human and C. elegans. Yoshiura et al. (1998) found
ubiquitous expression of a 2.6-kb transcript using Northern blot
analysis of various adult human tissues and whole-mount in situ
hybridization to day 10-12 postconception mouse embryos. Using SSCP
analysis in sporadic cases of clefting and direct sequencing of coding
sequences in familial cases, Yoshiura et al. (1998) identified no
pathologic mutations.

REFERENCE 1. Yoshiura, K.; Machida, J.; Daack-Hirsch, S.; Patil, S. R.; Ashworth,
L. K.; Hecht, J. T.; Murray, J. C.: Characterization of a novel gene
disrupted by a balanced chromosomal translocation t(2;19)(q11.2;q13.3)
in a family with cleft lip and palate. Genomics 54: 231-240, 1998.

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 4/4/2000

EDITED carol: 07/11/2006
alopez: 4/4/2000

612606	TITLE *612606 LATE CORNIFIED ENVELOPE PROTEIN 1D; LCE1D
;;LATE ENVELOPE PROTEIN 4; LEP4
DESCRIPTION For background information on the LCE gene cluster, see 612603.

CLONING

By database analysis to identify human orthologs of mouse genes encoding
late envelope proteins (LEPs), Marshall et al. (2001) identified LCE1D,
which they called LEP4.

Using real-time PCR with primers that did not differentiate between
LCE1D and LCE1E (612607), Jackson et al. (2005) detected moderate
LCE1D/E expression in human fetal, arm, penal, and abdominal skin. Much
lower expression was detected in vulva, and little to no expression was
detected in tongue and esophagus.

GENE FUNCTION

Marshall et al. (2001) showed that Lep4 was expressed in cultured mouse
keratinocytes only after calcium induction. It was not associated with
cornified cells until 4 to 5 days after calcium induction. In situ
assays showed that Lep4 was a transglutaminase substrate and was
incorporated at the cell periphery in a calcium-dependent manner. The
incorporated protein was resistant to heat and detergent, consistent
with stable crosslinking of Lep4 into the cornified envelope.

Jackson et al. (2005) showed that expression LCE1 genes, including
LCE1D/E, was upregulated in cultured normal human keratinocytes by
ultraviolet irradiation, but not by calcium. Real-time PCR of skin
biopsies from 4 normal individuals revealed an individual who lacked
LCE1D/E almost completely. This individual did not have a major skin
defect, suggesting that loss of 1 of these genes has only minor
consequences.

GENE STRUCTURE

Jackson et al. (2005) determined that the LCE1D gene contains 2 exons.
Exon 1 is noncoding.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Marshall et al. (2001) mapped the LCE1D
gene within the LCE gene cluster on chromosome 1q21. Jackson et al.
(2005) stated that the mouse Lce1d gene maps to a syntenic LCE gene
cluster on chromosome 3F1.

REFERENCE 1. Jackson, B.; Tilli, C. M. L. J.; Hardman, M. J.; Avilion, A. A.;
MacLeod, M. C.; Ashcroft, G. S.; Byrne, C.: Late cornified envelope
family in differentiating epithelia--response to calcium and ultraviolet
irradiation. J. Invest. Derm. 124: 1062-1070, 2005.

2. Marshall, D.; Hardman, M. J.; Nield, K. M.; Byrne, C.: Differentially
expressed late constituents of the epidermal cornified envelope. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 13031-13036, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/11/2009

EDITED mgross: 02/12/2009
mgross: 2/12/2009

614463	TITLE *614463 NMYC DOWNSTREAM-REGULATED GENE 4; NDRG4
;;SMOOTH MUSCLE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 8; SMAP8;;
KIAA1180
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Hirosawa et al. (1999) cloned NDRG4. The deduced protein
contains 273 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA detected highest expression in
adult and fetal brain and adult heart, followed by lung and testis.
Lower expression was detected in other adult tissues examined, but
little to no expression was detected in fetal liver. High NDRG4
expression was detected in all specific adult brain regions examined,
with highest expression in amygdala, cerebellum, and thalamus.

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to NDRG1 (605262),
followed by 3-prime and 5-prime RACE of human brain and heart cDNA
libraries and cap-site hunting, Zhou et al. (2001) cloned 3 splice
variants of NDRG4. The variants NDRG4B and NDRG4B-var, which were
obtained from the brain library, encode deduced proteins of 339 and 352
amino acids with calculated molecular masses of 37.1 and 38.5 kD,
respectively. Compared with NDRG4B, NDRG4B-var has a 14-amino acid
insertion near the C terminus. The variant NDRG4H, which was obtained
from the heart library, encodes a deduced 371-amino acid protein with a
calculated molecular mass of 40.6 kD. NDRG4H differs from NDRG4B and
NDRG4B-var at its N-terminal end, and it lacks the 14-amino acid
insertion. Northern blot analysis detected NDRG4 transcripts of about
3.2 kb in brain and heart only. Variant-specific probes showed NDRG4B
expression in brain only, whereas NDRG4H was expressed in both brain and
heart, with higher expression in heart. RT-PCR confirmed expression of
all 3 variants in brain and of NDRG4H in heart. RNA dot-blot analysis
revealed NDRG4 expression in spinal cord, all specific brain regions
examined, and all specific heart regions examined except aorta.
Expression was also detected in spleen, lymph node, testis, adrenal
gland, and fetal brain and heart, but not in other tissues examined. In
situ hybridization of normal adult brain detected NDRG4 mRNA in
cytoplasm of neurons in cerebral cortex, cerebellum, mesencephalon,
pons, medulla oblongata, and spinal cord. No signal was detected in
peripheral nerves or other cell types, such as glial cells. Western blot
analysis of endogenous or exogenously expressed proteins showed that
NDRG4B, NDRG4B-var, and NDRG4H had apparent molecular masses of 37, 39,
and 41 kD, respectively.

Using expression profiling to identify genes expressed in aortic smooth
muscle, followed by screening a heart cDNA library, Nishimoto et al.
(2003) cloned NDRG4, which they called SMAP8. The deduced 371-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of 40.7 kD. Northern blot
analysis detected high expression of an approximately 3.3-kb transcript
in heart and brain, with little to no expression in other tissues
examined. PCR analysis showed moderate expression in aorta and vascular
smooth muscle cells. Western blot analysis of heart and brain detected
SMAP8 at an apparent molecular mass of about 45 kD. SMAP8 localized to
the cytoplasmic fraction of transfected A10 embryonic rat aortic smooth
muscle cells.

By in situ hybridization of adult mouse brain, Yamamoto et al. (2011)
detected wide distribution of Ndrg4 in neurons, but not in astrocytes.
Western blot analysis of adult mouse brain detected 3 Ndrg4 isoforms
representing orthologs of human NDRG4B, NDRG4B-var, and NDRG4H.

GENE FUNCTION

Nishimoto et al. (2003) showed that homocysteine upregulated SMAP8
expression in primary human aortic smooth muscle cells and rat A10
cells, but not in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Proliferation
and migration of A10 cells significantly decreased following expression
of human SMAP8. SMAP8 was phosphorylated by a serine/threonine kinase
via activation of a PDGF (see 173430) signaling pathway. In addition,
ERK1 (MAPK3; 601795)/ERK2 (MAPK1; 176948) and MEK1 (MAP2K1; 176872)/MEK2
(MAP2K2; 601263) were activated in SMAP8-transfected A10 cells.

Hongo et al. (2006) found that overexpression of 1 of the 6 isoforms of
rat Ndrg4, Ndrg4c2, in PC12 rat pheochromocytoma cells reduced NGF (see
162030)-induced phosphorylation of Elk1 (311040), a nuclear target of
Erk. Reporter gene assays revealed that Ndrg4c2 suppressed Elk1-mediated
activation of a serum response element.

By RT-PCR and immunohistochemical analysis, Schilling et al. (2009)
found that NDRG4 expression was increased in glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM; see 137800) compared with normal human astrocytes. Knockdown of
NDRG4 via short hairpin RNA reduced the viability of GBM cells via G1
cell cycle arrest and subsequent apoptosis. Knockdown of NDRG4 also
reduced the viability of several GBM cell lines and primary astrocytes.
Knockdown of NDRG4 in GBM tumor xenografts reduced tumor growth
following intracranial injection in immunocompromised mice.
Overexpression of NDRG4B or NDRG4H did not affect cell viability.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhou et al. (2001) determined that the NDRG4 gene contains 17 exons and
spans 26 kb. Exons 1 and 2 are specific for NDRG4H, exon 3 is specific
for NDRG4B and NDGR4B-var, and exon 16 is specific for NDRG4B-var. The
region upstream of exon 1 contains a GGCG sequence that may represent a
TATA-less promoter for NDRG4H expression. The region upstream of exon 3
contains a consensus TATA box and 2 CCAAT sequences and may represent
the promoter for NDRG4B and NDRG4B-var expression.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Zhou et al. (2001) mapped the NDRG4 gene
to chromosome 16q21-q22.3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yamamoto et al. (2011) found that Ndrg4 -/- mice were born at the
expected mendelian ratio, appeared normal, and were fertile. However,
Ndrg4 -/- mice showed deficits in spatial learning and memory, and they
exhibited increased sensitivity to ischemic stress following middle
cerebral artery occlusion. Consistent with these findings, Ndrg4 -/-
mice had reduced expression of the neuroprotective factor Bdnf (113505).

REFERENCE 1. Hirosawa, M.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Kikuno, R.; Nomura, N.;
Ohara, O.: Characterization of cDNA clones selected by the GeneMark
analysis from size-fractionated cDNA libraries from human brain. DNA
Res. 6: 329-336, 1999.

2. Hongo, S.; Watanabe, T.; Takahashi, K.; Miyazaki, A.: Ndrg4 enhances
NGF-induced ERK activation uncoupled with Elk-1 activation. J. Cell.
Biochem. 98: 185-193, 2006.

3. Nishimoto, S.; Tawara, J.; Toyoda, H.; Kitamura, K.; Komurasaki,
T.: A novel homocysteine-responsive gene, smap8, modulates mitogenesis
in rat vascular smooth muscle cells. Europ. J. Biochem. 270: 2521-2531,
2003.

4. Schilling, S. H.; Hjelmeland, A. B.; Radiloff, D. R.; Liu, I. M.;
Wakeman, T. P.; Fielhauer, J. R.; Foster, E. H.; Lathia, J. D.; Rich,
J. N.; Wang, X.-F.; Datto, M. B.: NDRG4 is required for cell cycle
progression and survival in glioblastoma cells. J. Biol. Chem. 284:
25160-25169, 2009.

5. Yamamoto, H.; Kokame, K.; Okuda, T.; Nakajo, Y.; Yanamoto, H.;
Miyata, T.: NDRG4 protein-deficient mice exhibit spatial learning
deficits and vulnerabilities to cerebral ischemia. J. Biol. Chem. 286:
26158-26165, 2011.

6. Zhou, R.-H.; Kokame, K.; Tsukamoto, Y.; Yutani, C.; Kato, H.; Miyata,
T.: Characterization of the human NDRG gene family: a newly identified
member, NDRG4, is specifically expressed in brain and heart. Genomics 73:
86-97, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/31/2012

EDITED terry: 02/01/2012
mgross: 1/31/2012

118661	TITLE *118661 VERSICAN; VCAN
;;CHONDROITIN SULFATE PROTEOGLYCAN 2; CSPG2;;
CHONDROITIN SULFATE PROTEOGLYCAN CORE PROTEIN, CARTILAGE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Large chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans were first identified in hyaline
cartilage, where they specifically interact with hyaluronan and form
large supramolecular complexes. Together with other matrix
glycoproteins, they provide mechanical support and a fixed negative
charge. Such molecules exist also in a variety of soft tissues where
they may play additional physiologic roles (Kjellen and Lindahl, 1991).

CLONING

Zimmermann and Ruoslahti (1989) cloned and sequenced the cDNA of the
core protein of fibroblast chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan. They
designated it versican in recognition of its versatile modular
structure. Decorin (125255) and biglycan (301870) are 2 other soft
tissue proteoglycans.

Naso et al. (1995) reported that the mouse versican protein is 89%
identical to human versican and is highly expressed in mouse embryos at
days 13, 14, and 18.

Dours-Zimmermann and Zimmermann (1994) provided evidence for the
existence of 3 versican splice variants, designated V0, V1, and V2,
which differ in the length of their glycosaminoglycan attachment portion
inserted between the globular modules at the N- and C-terminal ends of
the core proteins. Versican V1 and V2 include either the GAG-alpha or
the GAG-beta domain providing attachment sites for about 5 to 8 or 12 to
15 glycosaminoglycan chains, respectively. In the V0 variant, both
GAG-alpha and GAG-beta are present. Zako et al. (1995) demonstrated the
existence of another splice variant, designated V3, which lacks a
chondroitin sulfate attachment region, the most distinctive portion of a
proteoglycan molecule.

Bode-Lesniewska et al. (1996) studied the distribution of versican by
using affinity-purified polyclonal antibodies that recognize the core
protein of the prominent versican splice variants V0 and V1. Versican
was present in the loose connective tissues of various organs and was
often associated with the elastic fiber network. It was localized in
most smooth muscle tissues and in fibrous and elastic cartilage.
Versican staining was noted in the central and peripheral nervous
system, in the basal layer of the epidermis, and on the luminal surface
of some glandular epithelia. In blood vessels, versican was present in
all 3 wall layers of veins and elastic arteries. In muscular arteries
the immunoreactivity was normally restricted to the tunica adventitia.
However, it appeared in the media and the split elastica interna of
atherosclerotically transformed vessel walls.

GENE STRUCTURE

Naso et al. (1994) showed that the human versican gene contains 15 exons
spanning more than 90 kb. One of these, exon 7, is used in an
alternative splice variant. The authors sequenced the 5-prime
promoter-containing region of the gene and found that it contained
numerous binding sites for transactivators such as AP2 (107580) and Sp1
(189906). They used transient transfection studies to show that the
promoter functioned well in both mesenchymal and epithelial cells. The
authors used deletion studies to show that this 5-prime region (to
approximately -630) contains both strong enhancer and strong negative
regulatory elements.

MAPPING

The distinctness of CSPG1 (AGC1; 155760) and CSPG2 was uncertain until
both genes had been mapped. Whereas CSPG1 is located on chromosome 15,
Iozzo et al. (1992) demonstrated that the CSPG2 gene is located on
chromosome 5. They used a combination of human/rodent somatic cell
hybrids including a panel of hybrids containing partial deletions of
chromosome 5 and narrowed the assignment to 5q12-q14, with the precise
site likely to be 5q13.2, by in situ hybridization.

Using interspecific backcross analysis, Naso et al. (1995) assigned the
Cspg2 gene to mouse chromosome 13 in a region that is syntenic with 5q.

GENE FUNCTION

To determine whether TP53 (191170) gene dosage affects transcriptional
regulation of target genes, Yoon et al. (2002) performed oligonucleotide
array gene expression analysis by using human cells with wildtype p53 or
with 1 or both TP53 alleles disrupted by homologous recombination. They
identified 35 genes, including CSPG2, whose expression was significantly
correlated to the dosage of TP53. Motif search analysis revealed that
CSPG2 contains a p53 consensus binding site in its first intron. In
vitro and in vivo assays demonstrated that CSPG2 is directly
transactivated by p53.

To understand how cancer cells infect the inflammatory microenvironment,
Kim et al. (2009) conducted a biochemical screen for
macrophage-activating factors secreted by metastatic carcinomas. They
demonstrated that, among the cell lines screened, Lewis lung carcinoma
(LLC) were the most potent macrophage activators leading to production
of interleukin-6 (IL6; 147620) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha; 119160) through activation of the Toll-like receptor family
members TLR2 (603028) and TLR6 (605403). Both TNF-alpha and TLR2 were
found to be required for LLC metastasis. Biochemical purification of
LLC-conditioned medium led to identification of the extracellular matrix
proteoglycan versican, which is upregulated in many human tumors
including lung cancer, as a macrophage activator that acts through TLR2
and its coreceptors TLR6 and CD14 (158120). By activating TLR2:TLR6
complexes and inducing TNF-alpha secretion by myeloid cells, versican
strongly enhances LLC metastatic growth. Kim et al. (2009) concluded
that their results explained how advanced cancer cells usurp components
of the host innate immune system, including bone marrow-derived myeloid
progenitors, to generate an inflammatory microenvironment hospitable for
metastatic growth.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Wagner vitreoretinopathy (WGVRP; 143200) is an autosomal dominant
vitreoretinopathy. Miyamoto et al. (2005) demonstrated a heterozygous
A-to-G transversion at the second base of the 3-prime acceptor splice
site of intron 7 of the CSPG2 gene that cosegregated with the disease in
a Japanese family (118661.0001).

In the large 5-generation Swiss family with vitreoretinopathy originally
described by Wagner (1938), Kloeckener-Gruissem et al. (2006) identified
a heterozygous splice site mutation in intron 8 of the VCAN gene
(118661.0002) that segregated fully with disease.

In affected members of 7 Dutch families with vitreoretinopathy,
Mukhopadhyay et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for 3 splice site
mutations in intron 7 of the VCAN gene (118661.0003-118661.0005).
Quantitative PCR using RNA from patient blood samples revealed a highly
significant (p less than 0.0001) and consistent increase in the V2 and
V3 splice variants (more than 38-fold and more than 12-fold,
respectively) in all patients with intron 7 nucleotide changes, as well
as in a Chinese family with vitreoretinopathy in which a causal variant
was not identified. Mukhopadhyay et al. (2006) suggested that Wagner
vitreoretinopathy is caused by an imbalance of versican isoforms,
mediated by intronic variants.

In a 4-generation French family with a severe vitreoretinal disorder
mapping to 5q13-q14, Brezin et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous
splice site mutation in intron 7 of the VCAN gene (118661.0006) that
segregated with disease and was not found 100 French controls.

In a British family and a French family with Wagner vitreoretinopathy,
Kloeckener-Gruissem et al. (2013) sequenced the VCAN gene and identified
2 heterozygous splice site mutations, in intron 8 and intron 7 of the
VCAN gene, respectively, that segregated with disease in each family
(118661.0007 and 118661.0008). The levels of splice variants V2 and V3
were significantly increased in all patient fibroblast and blood samples
from these families as well as samples from the Swiss family with
vitreoretinopathy originally described by Wagner (1938), although the
magnitude of the increase varied between tissues and mutations. There
were no statistically significant differences in V0 and V1 levels in
fibroblasts or blood between patients and controls.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
WAGNER VITREORETINOPATHY
VCAN, IVS7AS, A-G, -2

In a Japanese family with Wagner syndrome (143200) in which members of 4
generations, to a total of 13 with 11 living at the time of study, were
affected, Miyamoto et al. (2005) described a heterozygous splice
acceptor site mutation in the CSPG2 gene: 4004-2 A-G. Results of RT-PCR
analysis indicated that the mutation activated a cryptic splice site
located 39 bp downstream from the authentic 3-prime splice acceptor
site.

.0002
WAGNER VITREORETINOPATHY
VCAN, IVS8DS, G-A, +1

In a large 5-generation Swiss family with vitreoretinopathy (143200),
originally described by Wagner (1938), Kloeckener-Gruissem et al. (2006)
identified a heterozygous transition (9265+1G-A) at the highly conserved
splice donor sequence in intron 8 of the VCAN gene, which segregated
with the phenotype in 21 affected and 26 unaffected family members and
was not found in 104 control alleles. RT-PCR analysis using patient RNA
from venous blood revealed 2 aberrant CSPG2 transcripts, 1 lacking the
entire exon 8 and the other missing only the last 21 bp of exon 8.

Kloeckener-Gruissem et al. (2013) analyzed fibroblasts from a member of
the Swiss family with vitreoretinopathy originally described by Wagner
(1938) and found a 700-fold and a 150-fold increase in versican isoforms
V2 and V3, respectively, compared to controls. In patient blood samples,
amounts of V2 and V3 were increased 48-fold and 32-fold, respectively.

.0003
WAGNER VITREORETINOPATHY
VCAN, IVS7AS, T-C, -5

In all affected individuals from 5 Dutch families with vitreoretinopathy
(143200), including 4 families diagnosed with Wagner syndrome and 1 with
erosive vitreoretinopathy, Mukhopadhyay et al. (2006) identified
heterozygosity for a transition in intron 7 (4004-5T-C) of the VCAN
gene. The mutation was not found in unaffected individuals from any of
the 5 families, or in 250 Dutch controls. The 5 families shared a common
haplotype on chromosome 5q14, suggesting a founder mutation.
Quantitative PCR using RNA from patient blood samples revealed a highly
significant (p less than 0.0001) and consistent increase in the V2 and
V3 splice variants (more than 38-fold and more than 12-fold,
respectively) compared to controls.

.0004
WAGNER VITREORETINOPATHY
VCAN, IVS7AS, T-A, -5

In affected members of a Dutch family with Wagner vitreoretinopathy
(143200), Mukhopadhyay et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for a
transition in intron 7 (4004-5T-A) of the VCAN gene. The mutation was
not found in unaffected members of the family, or in 250 Dutch controls.
RT-PCR analysis of mutant versican transcripts showed activation of a
cryptic splice site resulting in a 39-nucleotide in-frame deletion of
exon 8 in splice variant V0. Quantitative PCR using RNA from patient
blood samples revealed a highly significant (p less than 0.0001) and
consistent increase in the V2 and V3 splice variants (more than 45-fold
and more than 13-fold, respectively) compared to controls.

.0005
WAGNER VITREORETINOPATHY
VCAN, IVS7AS, G-A, -1

In affected members of a Dutch family with Wagner vitreoretinopathy
(143200), Mukhopadhyay et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for a
transition in intron 7 (4004-1G-A) of the VCAN gene. The mutation was
not found in unaffected members of the family, or in 250 Dutch controls.
RT-PCR analysis of mutant versican transcripts showed activation of a
cryptic splice site resulting in a 39-nucleotide in-frame deletion of
exon 8 in splice variant V0. Quantitative PCR using RNA from patient
blood samples revealed a highly significant (p less than 0.0001) and
consistent increase in the V2 and V3 splice variants (more than 137-fold
and more than 22-fold, respectively) compared to controls.

.0006
WAGNER VITREORETINOPATHY
VCAN, IVS7AS, A-T, -2

In 10 affected members of a 4-generation French family with severe
vitreoretinopathy (1432300), Brezin et al. (2011) identified
heterozygosity for a transversion within the highly conserved acceptor
splice site of intron 7 (4004-2A-T) of the VCAN gene. The mutation was
not found in 6 unaffected family members or in 100 French controls.
Patients in this kindred had a highly variable phenotype, including
exudative vascular abnormalities, and exhibited severe visual
impairment. RT-PCR analysis of patient lymphoblastoid cell RNA indicated
that the mutation activates a cryptic acceptor splice site within exon
8, located 39 bp downstream from the authentic 3-prime splice acceptor
site. Direct sequencing of a shortened RNA fragment showed loss of the
first 39 bp of exon 8, predicted to cause in-frame deletion of 13 amino
acid residues from the beginning of the GAG-beta domain of mature
versican. RT-PCR also indicated aberrant expression of a versican mRNA
lacking the entire exon 8.

.0007
WAGNER VITREORETINOPATHY
VCAN, IVS7, T-A, +2

In 3 affected members of a 4-generation British family with Wagner
vitreoretinopathy (143200), previously studied by Fryer et al. (1990),
Kloeckener-Gruissem et al. (2013) identified heterozygosity for a
transition within the conserved splice donor site of intron 8
(9265+2T-A) of the VCAN gene. The mutation was not found in 300 control
alleles. In patient blood samples, there was a 230-fold and a 143-fold
increase in versican isoforms V2 and V3, respectively, compared to
controls.

.0008
WAGNER VITREORETINOPATHY
VCAN, IVS7, G-C, -1

In 19 affected members of a 4-generation French family with Wagner
vitreoretinopathy (143200), originally reported by Zech et al. (1999),
Kloeckener-Gruissem et al. (2013) identified heterozygosity for a
transversion within the conserved splice acceptor site of intron 7
(4004-1G-C) of the VCAN gene. The mutation was not found in 19
unaffected family members or in 300 control alleles. In patient
fibroblasts, there was an 80-fold and a 150-fold increase in versican
isoforms V2 and V3, respectively, compared to controls, whereas in
patient blood samples, amounts of V2 and V3 increased 64-fold and
6-fold, respectively.

REFERENCE 1. Bode-Lesniewska, B.; Dours-Zimmermann, M. T.; Odermatt, B. F.;
Briner, J.; Heitz, P. U.; Zimmermann, D. R.: Distribution of the
large aggregating proteoglycan versican in adult human tissues. J.
Histochem. Cytochem. 44: 303-312, 1996.

2. Brezin, A. P.; Nedelec, B.; Barjol, A.; Rothschild, P.-R.; Delpech,
M.; Valleix, S.: A new VCAN/versican splice acceptor site mutation
in a French Wagner family associated with vascular and inflammatory
ocular features. Molec. Vis. 17: 1669-1678, 2011.

3. Dours-Zimmermann, M. T.; Zimmermann, D. R.: A novel glycosaminoglycan
attachment domain identified in two alternative splice variants of
human versican. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 32992-32998, 1994.

4. Fryer, A. E.; Upadhyaya, M.; Littler, M.; Bacon, P.; Watkins, D.;
Tsipouras, P.; Harper, P. S.: Exclusion of COL2A1 as a candidate
gene in a family with Wagner-Stickler syndrome. J. Med. Genet. 27:
91-93, 1990.

5. Iozzo, R. V.; Naso, M. F.; Cannizzaro, L. A.; Wasmuth, J. J.; McPherson,
J. D.: Mapping of the versican proteoglycan gene (CSPG2) to the long
arm of human chromosome 5 (5q12-5q14). Genomics 14: 845-851, 1992.

6. Kim, S.; Takahashi, H.; Lin, W.-W.; Descargues, P.; Grivennikov,
S.; Kim, Y.; Luo, J.-L.; Karin, M.: Carcinoma-produced factors activate
myeloid cells through TLR2 to stimulate metastasis. Nature 457:
102-106, 2009.

7. Kjellen, L.; Lindahl, U.: Proteoglycans: structures and interactions. Annu.
Rev. Biochem. 60: 443-475, 1991. Note: Erratum: Annu. Rev. Biochem.
61: following viii, 1992.

8. Kloeckener-Gruissem, B.; Bartholdi, D.; Abdou, M.-T.; Zimmermann,
D. R.; Berger, W.: Identification of the genetic defect in the original
Wagner syndrome family. Molec. Vis. 12: 350-355, 2006.

9. Kloeckener-Gruissem, B.; Neidhardt, J.; Magyar, I.; Plauchu, H.;
Zech, J.-C.; Morle, L.; Palmer-Smith, S. M.; MacDonald, M. J.; Nas,
V.; Fry, A. E.; Berger, W.: Novel VCAN mutations and evidence for
unbalanced alternative splicing in the pathogenesis of Wagner syndrome. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 21: 352-356, 2013.

10. Miyamoto, T.; Inoue, H.; Sakamoto, Y.; Kudo, E.; Naito, T.; Mikawa,
T.; Mikawa, Y.; Isashiki, Y.; Osabe, D.; Shinohara, S.; Shiota, H.;
Itakura, M.: Identification of a novel splice site mutation of the
CSPG2 gene in a Japanese family with Wagner syndrome. Invest. Ophthal.
Vis. Sci. 46: 2726-2735, 2005.

11. Mukhopadhyay, A.; Nikopoulos, K.; Maugeri, A.; de Brouwer, A.
P. M.; van Nouhuys, C. E.; Boon, C. J. F.; Perveen, R.; Zegers, H.
A. A.; Wittebol-Post, D.; van den Biesen, P. R.; van der Velde-Visser,
S. D.; Brunner, H. G.; Black, G. C. M.; Hoyng, C. B.; Cremers, F.
P. M.: Erosive vitreoretinopathy and Wagner disease are caused by
intronic mutations in CSPG2/versican that result in an imbalance of
splice variants. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 47: 3565-3572, 2006.

12. Naso, M. F.; Morgan, J. L.; Buchberg, A. M.; Siracusa, L. D.;
Iozzo, R. V.: Expression pattern and mapping of the murine versican
gene (Cspg2) to chromosome 13. Genomics 29: 297-300, 1995.

13. Naso, M. F.; Zimmermann, D. R.; Iozzo, R. V.: Characterization
of the complete genomic structure of the human versican gene and functional
analysis of its promoter. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 32999-33008, 1994.

14. Wagner, H.: Ein bisher unbekanntes Erbleiden des Auges (degeneratio
hyaloideo-retinalis hereditaria), beobachtet im Kanton Zurich. Klin.
Monatsbl. Augenheilkd. 100: 840-858, 1938.

15. Yoon, H.; Liyanarachchi, S.; Wright, F. A.; Davuluri, R.; Lockman,
J. C.; de la Chapelle, A.; Pellegata, N. S.: Gene expression profiling
of isogenic cells with different TP53 gene dosage reveals numerous
genes that are affected by TP53 dosage and identifies CSPG2 as a direct
target of p53. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 15632-15637, 2002.

16. Zako, M.; Shinomura, T.; Ujita, M.; Ito, K.; Kimata, K.: Expression
of PG-M(V3), an alternatively spliced form of PG-M without a chondroitin
sulfate attachment region in mouse and human tissues. J. Biol. Chem. 270:
3914-3918, 1995.

17. Zech, J.-C.; Morle, L.; Vincent, P.; Alloisio, N.; Bozon, M.;
Gonnet, C.; Milazzo, S.; Grange, J.-D.; Trepsat, C.; Godet, J.; Plauchu,
H.: Wagner vitreoretinal degeneration with genetic linkage refinement
on chromosome 5q13-q14. Graefe Arch. Clin. Exp. Ophthal. 237: 387-393,
1999.

18. Zimmermann, D. R.; Ruoslahti, E.: Multiple domains of the large
fibroblast proteoglycan, versican. EMBO J. 8: 2975-2981, 1989.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 04/08/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/27/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/29/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/26/2003
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 2/13/2001
Alan F. Scott - updated: 3/27/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/13/1991

EDITED carol: 04/08/2013
terry: 8/31/2012
terry: 11/17/2010
carol: 7/16/2010
alopez: 1/29/2009
terry: 1/27/2009
alopez: 10/16/2006
terry: 9/29/2006
carol: 4/2/2003
tkritzer: 3/28/2003
terry: 3/26/2003
mcapotos: 2/13/2001
carol: 2/13/2001
carol: 2/12/2001
alopez: 2/15/2000
terry: 4/17/1996
mark: 3/27/1996
mark: 10/3/1995
warfield: 3/21/1994
carol: 10/21/1993
carol: 4/16/1993
carol: 1/14/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992

610969	TITLE *610969 TRAFFICKING PROTEIN PARTICLE COMPLEX, SUBUNIT 1; TRAPPC1
;;BET5, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;;
MELANOMA UBIQUITOUS MUTATED 2; MUM2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening a PAC library with a cDNA clone isolated from a melanoma
cell line, followed by 5-prime RACE, Chiari et al. (1999) obtained
TRAPPC1, which they called MUM2. The deduced 145-amino acid protein is
homologous to yeast Bet5. Northern blot analysis detected TRAPPC1 at 0.8
kb.

GENE FUNCTION

Chiari et al. (1999) noted that yeast Bet5 is implicated in vesicular
transport of proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi. They
found that wildtype TRAPPC1 could complement Bet5 function in yeast with
a disrupted Bet5 gene. They concluded that the function of TRAPPC1 is
conserved in eukaryotic cells and that it is involved in vesicular
transport of proteins.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chiari et al. (1999) determined that the TRAPPC1 gene contains 5 exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Chiari et al. (1999) mapped the TRAPPC1
gene to chromosome 17p13.

REFERENCE 1. Chiari, R.; Foury, F.; De Plaen, E.; Baurain, J.-F.; Thonnard,
J.; Coulie, P. G.: Two antigens recognized by autologous cytolytic
T lymphocytes on a melanoma result from a single point mutation in
an essential housekeeping gene. Cancer Res. 59: 5785-5792, 1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/24/2007

EDITED wwang: 05/29/2007
wwang: 4/27/2007
wwang: 4/25/2007
wwang: 4/24/2007

120240	TITLE *120240 COLLAGEN, TYPE VI, ALPHA-2; COL6A2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The COL6A2 gene encodes the alpha-2 subunit of type VI collagen, an
ubiquitously expressed extracellular matrix protein. It is 1 of the 3
subunits comprising the full collagen VI protein (see also COL6A1,
120220 and COL6A3, 120250) (summary by Zhang et al., 2010).

CLONING

Weil et al. (1988) isolated clones corresponding to the COL6A2 gene from
a human placenta expression library. Northern blot analysis detected a
3.5-kb mRNA transcript. The molecular mass of the protein is
approximately 140 kD.

Chu et al. (1989) determined that the COL6A2 protein contains 998 amino
acids with 31% identity to COL6A1 in the N-terminal and C-terminal
globular domains, which are connected by a triple helical segment. Both
COL6A1 and COL6A2 contain small signal peptide sequences. Internal
alignment of the globular sequences showed a repetitive 200-residue
structure (15 to 23% identity) occurring 3 times (N1, C1, C2) in each
chain. Sequencing of COL6A2 cDNA clones revealed 2 variant chains with a
distinct C2 subdomain and 3-prime noncoding region. The repetitive
segments C1, C2 and, to a lesser extent, N1 showed significant identity
(15 to 18%) to the collagen-binding A domains of von Willebrand factor
(VWF; 613160). These results suggested that the globular domains of the
COL6 proteins bind to collagenous structures.

Saitta et al. (1992) found that the human COL6A2 gene uses alternative
processing to produce multiple mRNA transcripts differing in the 5-prime
untranslated region as well as in the 3-prime coding and noncoding
sequences.

GENE STRUCTURE

Saitta et al. (1992) demonstrated that the COL6A2 gene contains 30 exons
and spans 36 kb.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid and FISH analysis, Weil et al. (1988) mapped the
COL6A2 gene to chromosome 21q22.3.

GENE FUNCTION

Klewer et al. (1998) studied COL6A2 gene expression in the developing
mammalian heart. The pattern of expression was identical to that of
COL6A1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 9 kindreds with the Bethlem form of autosomal dominant myopathy with
contractures (158810), Jobsis et al. (1996) demonstrated genetic linkage
to the COL6A1-COL6A2 cluster on 21q22.3. By sequence analysis in 4
families, Jobsis et al. (1996) identified a mutation in COL6A1 in 1
kindred and a mutation in COL6A2 in 2 others. Both mutations disrupted
the Gly-X-Y motif of the triple helical domain by substitution of gly
for either val or ser. Analogous to the putative perturbation of the
anchoring function of the dystrophin-associated complex in congenital
muscular dystrophy with mutations in the alpha-2-subunit of laminin
(156225), the observation suggested a similar mechanism in Bethlem
myopathy.

Ullrich scleroatonic muscular dystrophy, also known as Ullrich
congenital muscular dystrophy (UCMD; 254090), shares some clinical
features with Bethlem myopathy, such as joint contractures, but displays
a more severe course. Vanegas et al. (2001) demonstrated recessive
mutations in the COL6A2 gene (see 120240.0002) leading to UCMD.

Lampe et al. (2005) developed a method for rapid direct sequence
analysis of all 107 coding exons of the COL6 genes (COL6A1, COL6A2,
COL6A3; 120250) using single condition amplification/internal primer
(SCAIP) sequencing. They sequenced all 3 COL6 genes from genomic DNA in
79 patients with UCMD or Bethlem myopathy, and found putative mutations
in 1 of the COL6 genes in 62% of patients. Some patients showed changes
in more than one of the COL6 genes, and some UCMD patients appeared to
have dominant rather than recessive disease. Lampe et al. (2005)
concluded that these findings may explain some or all of the cases of
UCMD that are unlinked to the COL6 gene under a recessive model.

In 2 unrelated patients with Bethlem myopathy, Baker et al. (2007)
identified 2 different heterozygous mutations in the COL6A2 gene
(120240.0009; 120240.0010). In vitro studies indicated defective
collagen VI synthesis and secretion.

In 2 sibs with autosomal recessive myosclerosis (255600), Merlini et al.
(2008) identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the COL6A2 gene
(120240.0011).

Nadeau et al. (2009) identified a homozygous COL6A2 mutation (C777R;
120240.0012) in 3 patients with autosomal recessive UCMD. Two additional
patients had 2 different heterozygous COL6A2 mutations (see, e.g.,
G283R, 120240.0013), consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance.
Another patient was compound heterozygous for a mutation in the COL6A1
gene (G281R; 120220.0014) and a mutation in the COL6A2 gene (R498H;
120240.0014), consistent with digenic inheritance.

- Role of COL6A2 in Atrioventricular Septal Defect

Ackerman et al. (2012) used a candidate gene approach among individuals
with Down syndrome and complete atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD)
(141 cases) and Down syndrome with no congenital heart defect (141
controls) to determine whether rare genetic variants in genes involved
in atrioventricular valvuloseptal morphogenesis contribute to AVSD in
this sensitized population. Ackerman et al. (2012) found a significant
excess (p less than 0.0001) of variants predicted to be deleterious in
cases compared to controls. At the most stringent level of filtering,
they found potentially damaging variants in nearly 20% of cases but in
fewer than 3% of controls. The variants with the highest probability of
being damaging in cases only were found in 6 genes: COL6A1, COL6A2,
CRELD1 (607170) (already identified as a cause of AVSD; see 606217),
FBLN2 (135821), FRZB (605083), and GATA5 (611496). Several of the
case-specific variants were recurrent in unrelated individuals,
occurring in 10% of cases studied. No variants with an equal probability
of being damaging were found in controls, demonstrating a highly
specific association with AVSD. Of note, all of these genes are in the
VEGFA (192240) pathway, suggesting to Ackerman et al. (2012) that rare
variants in this pathway might contribute to the genetic underpinnings
of AVSD in humans.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Gualandi et al. (2009) reported 2 unrelated patients with Bethlem
myopathy who were each compound heterozygous for a truncating and a
missense mutation in the COL6A2 gene (Q819X, 120240.0011 and
R830Q/R843W, 120240.0017; R366X, 120240.0018 and D871N; 120240.0019,
respectively). Both patients remained ambulatory as adults, and muscle
biopsies and studies of fibroblasts showed variable degrees of aberrant
collagen VI microfilament formation. Gualandi et al. (2009) noted that
autosomal recessive inheritance had not been reported in Bethlem
myopathy and suggested that collagen VI-related myopathies comprise a
spectrum of conditions with variable severity. In addition, the findings
did not support pure haploinsufficiency as a causative mechanism for
Bethlem myopathy, and suggested that some previously reported patients
may harbor a second missed mutation. The genotype findings in these
patients had important implications for genetic counseling.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BETHLEM MYOPATHY
COL6A2, GLY250SER

In 2 kindreds with Bethlem myopathy (158810), Jobsis et al. (1996)
demonstrated that affected members had a heterozygous missense mutation
(898G-A) resulting in a G250S amino acid substitution in the triple
helical region.

.0002
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, 1-BP INS, 1151C

In an Italian family, Vanegas et al. (2001) found that a son with
Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (254090) had a homozygous
insertion of a C leading to a premature termination codon in the triple
helical domain of COL6A2 mRNA. Both healthy consanguineous parents were
carriers. The insertion of the C was in a stretch of 5 cytosines between
nucleotides 1147 and 1151 of the COL6A2 cDNA, causing a slippage of the
reading frame with a premature termination codon at nucleotides
1347-1349. The affected patient in this family showed reduced fetal
movements. At birth he was unusually long (55 cm), showed multiple joint
contractures of his knees and elbows, a kyphotic contracture of the
spine, a left hip dislocation, bilateral congenital convex pes valgus,
long and slender fingers and toes with adducted thumbs, ogival palate,
micrognathia, and a short neck with torticollis. He also showed marked
bilateral distal hyperlaxity of fingers, toes, calcanei, and wrists. The
child walked at the age of 13 months, but generalized muscle weakness
persisted thereafter, and progressive scoliosis and respiratory failure
developed. He underwent tracheostomy and nocturnal positive pressure
mechanical ventilation at the age of 8 years, with signs of
diaphragmatic insufficiency. At the age of 11 years, he was still
ambulant and had normal intelligence.

In fibroblasts from the patient reported by Vanegas et al. (2001), Zhang
et al. (2002) showed almost complete absence of COL6A2 mRNA by Northern
blot analysis, suggesting that the mutation led to nonsense-mediated
mRNA decay. There was complete absence of secreted COL6A2 protein in the
medium of the patient's cells, suggesting that the mutation in the
triple helical domain prevented microfibrillar assembly and secretion.
Although both parents showed decreased levels of COL6A2 mRNA, long-term
collagen VI deposition was essentially normal.

.0003
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, IVS17, A-G, -2

In an Italian family, Vanegas et al. (2001) found that 2 brothers with
Ullrich scleroatonic muscular dystrophy (254090) had a splice acceptor
site mutation in the COL6A2 gene. Deletion of 28 nucleotides was caused
by an A-to-G substitution at nucleotide -2 of intron 17, causing
activation of a cryptic acceptor site within exon 18. The normal parents
were unrelated. Severe contractures of elbows and knees, rigidity of the
spine, ogival (gothic) palate, and hypotonia were present. In 1 brother
there was distal hyperlaxity and marked weakness of head flexors but
almost complete disappearance of limb joint contractures at the age of 2
years. In the brothers, this mutation was found in compound
heterozygosity with a splice site mutation in intron 23 (120240.0004).
The first mutation was present in the healthy mother, whereas the second
mutation was carried by the healthy father. In another Italian family,
Vanegas et al. (2001) found the same 28-bp deletion but did not find the
mutation in the other allele. This mutation occurred de novo in the
patient.

In fibroblasts from 1 of the patients reported by Vanegas et al. (2001)
who was a compound heterozygote for mutations in the COL6A2 gene, Zhang
et al. (2002) showed decreased levels of COL6A2 mRNA by Northern blot
analysis, suggesting that the mutations led to nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay. Low levels of COL6A2 protein were detected in the medium of the
patient's cells, suggesting that the mutations, which occurred at the
distal part of the triple helical domain, allowed secretion of a small
amount of mutant collagen VI protein. Further analysis showed that the
truncated proteins were able to form triple helical monomers, but unable
to assemble into dimers and tetramers for the completed collagen VI
protein. Zhang et al. (2002) noted that the IVS23 mutation (120240.0004)
retains the triple helical domain and thus can assemble into monomers,
but has a shorter C-terminal globular domain which prevents further
assembly into higher ordered structures. Although both parents showed
decreased levels of COL6A2 mRNA, long-term collagen VI deposition was
essentially normal.

.0004
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, IVS23, G-A, -1

Vanegas et al. (2001) described 2 brothers with Ullrich scleroatonic
muscular dystrophy (254090) who were compound heterozygotes for 2 splice
site mutations in the COL6A2 gene, one in intron 17 (120240.0003) and
the other a G-to-A substitution at nucleotide -1 in intron 23.

.0005
BETHLEM MYOPATHY
COL6A2, ASP620ASN

In a Caucasian family from Mississippi and North Carolina, Scacheri et
al. (2002) found 9 members with an autosomal dominant limb-girdle
muscular dystrophy phenotype. A causative missense mutation, asp620 to
asn (D620N), was present in heterozygous state. This mutation did not
overtly affect the expression of proteins of the extracellular matrix
(ECM), but did alter the expression of laminin beta-1 (150240) in the
basement membrane of muscle fibers. Type VI collagen was thought to
anchor the basal lamina to the extracellular matrix by interacting with
collagen type IV, which in turn was thought to bind laminin beta-1 (Kuo
et al., 1997). Scacheri et al. (2002) suggested that their studies widen
the clinical spectrum of Bethlem myopathy (158810) and indicated that
autosomal dominant limb-girdle muscular dystrophy should be studied for
possible collagen VI etiology.

.0006
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, 26-BP DEL, NT731

In a patient with Ullrich disease (254090), Higuchi et al. (2001)
identified a homozygous 26-bp deletion (nucleotides 731-756) in exon 14
of the COL6A2 gene, causing a frameshift and premature termination
codon, and resulting in a truncated collagen VI alpha-2 chain. Collagen
VI expression was absent from the patient's skeletal muscle and skin
samples.

.0007
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, IVS12AS, A-G, -10

In a patient with Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (254090),
Lucarini et al. (2005) identified a homozygous A-to-G transition in
intron 12 of the COL6A2 gene, resulting in deletion of exon 13, which
removed 21 amino acids from the N terminus of the triple helical domain.
The misaligned N-terminal region was predicted to interfere with the
assembly of collagen VI microfibrils. The intron mutation activated
numerous cryptic acceptor sites, generating both normal and exon
13-deleted COL6A2 mRNA as well as multiple transcripts containing
frameshifts that were degraded through nonsense-mediated decay.

.0008
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
COL6A2, 1.3-KB DEL

In a patient with Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (254090), Baker
et al. (2005) identified heterozygosity for a 1,332-bp deletion of the
COL6A2 gene, which included part of intron 5, all of exon 6 and intron
6, and part of exon 7 and was predicted to result in loss of 27 amino
acids in the triple helical region. The patient's mother was a mosaic
carrier of the deletion.

.0009
BETHLEM MYOPATHY
COL6A2, IVS10AS, A-G, -2

In a 40-year-old man with Bethlem myopathy (158810), Baker et al. (2007)
identified a heterozygous A-to-G transition in intron 10 of the COL6A2
gene, resulting in the skipping of exon 11. Exon 11 codes for the only
cysteine residue in the triple helical domain of the protein, which is
predicted to form a disulfide bond critical for dimerization. This would
result in decreased assembly of the collagen VI protein. Further
evidence indicated nonsense-mediated decay of an mRNA with a premature
stop codon, and reduced secretion of structurally abnormal collagen. The
patient had proximal muscle weakness, decreased motor capacity, joint
contractures, and dystrophic features on muscle biopsy.

.0010
BETHLEM MYOPATHY
COL6A2, PRO932LEU

In a 42-year-old Australian man with Bethlem myopathy (158810), Baker et
al. (2007) identified a heterozygous 2795C-T transition in exon 28 of
the COL6A2 gene, resulting in a pro932-to-leu (P932L) substitution in
the globular C2 A-domain. Three first cousins and a niece were affected
and also carried the mutation. The proband had proximal muscle weakness
and joint contractures. Further studies indicated that the mutant P932L
resulted in reduced intracellular collagen VI assembly and secretion.

.0011
MYOSCLEROSIS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
BETHLEM MYOPATHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, GLN819TER

In 2 sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with autosomal recessive
myosclerosis (255600), Merlini et al. (2008) identified a homozygous
2537C-T transition in exon 27 in the COL6A2 gene, resulting in a
gln819-to-ter (Q819X) substitution in the C1 domain. RT-PCR studies
showed that the mutation did not result in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay;
the translated truncated protein lacked the C2 domain. Studies in
patient fibroblasts showed decreased COL6A2 transcripts and decreased
amounts of collagen VI deposited in the extracellular matrix. The
secreted collagen VI microfibrils were abnormally organized and did not
assemble properly into tetramers. The heterozygous parents were
unaffected, suggesting that the mutation is not pathogenic in the
heterozygous state.

Gualandi et al. (2009) identified compound heterozygosity for the Q819X
mutation and a complex missense allele (R830Q/R843W; 120240.0017) in a
25-year-old woman with Bethlem myopathy (158800). Although this genotype
suggested autosomal recessive inheritance, the R819X mutation escaped
nonsense-mediated decay and was thought not to be pathogenic in the
heterozygous state, based on the report of Merlini et al. (2008).
However, the fact that the woman reported by Gualandi et al. (2009)
carried COL6A2 mutations on both alleles had implications for genetic
counseling.

.0012
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, CYS777ARG

In 3 patients with UCMD (254090), including 2 cousins, Nadeau et al.
(2009) identified a homozygous 2329T-C transition in exon 26 of the
COL6A2 gene, resulting in a cys777-to-arg (C777R) substitution. Onset
ranged from birth to 2 years. One child had congenital hip dislocation.
All had proximal muscle weakness and learned to walk independently at
about 1 year of age, but became wheelchair-bound at ages 6.8, 9, and
11.5 years, respectively. Other features included spinal rigidity,
scoliosis, and kyphosis. All also required nocturnal ventilation, and 1
needed gastrostomy for chewing difficulties. Only 1 had follicular
hyperkeratosis.

.0013
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
COL6A2, GLY283ARG

In a 20-year-old patient with UCMD (254090), Nadeau et al. (2009)
identified a heterozygous 847G-A transition in exon 6 of the COL6A2
gene, resulting in a gly283-to-arg (G283R) substitution. The patient had
onset at birth with hypotonia, contractures, scoliosis, and delayed
motor development. Walking with support was achieved at age 3.3 years,
but the patient became wheelchair-bound at age 10. Nocturnal ventilation
was also required. Skin changes included follicular hyperkeratosis and
keloid formation.

.0014
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, DIGENIC, COL6A1/COL6A2
COL6A2, ARG498HIS

In a 25-year-old patient with UCMD (254090), Nadeau et al. (2009)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in 2 different genes:
a 1493G-A transition in exon 18 of the COL6A2 gene, resulting in an
arg498-to-his (R498H) substitution, and a substitution in the COL6A1
gene (G281R; 120220.0014). The findings were consistent with digenic
inheritance. The patient had onset at age 1.5 years of delayed motor
development with proximal muscle weakness. Independent walking was
achieved, but the patient became wheelchair-bound at age 19. Spinal
rigidity, scoliosis, and contractures were also present, as well as
follicular hyperkeratosis and a requirement for nocturnal ventilation.

.0015
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, GLU624LYS

In a Brazilian girl with Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (254090),
Zhang et al. (2010) identified a homozygous 1870G-A transition in the
COL6A2 gene, resulting in a glu624-to-lys (E624K) substitution in the C1
globular subdomain. Sequence alignment and molecular modeling indicated
that the mutation occurred in a consensus metal ion-dependent adhesion
site (MIDAS). Patient fibroblasts deposited abundant collagen VI
microfibrils that were thick and abnormally knotty. HEK293 cells
transfected with the mutation assembled low levels of short collagen VI
microfibrils. The E624K mutation did not affect collagen VI formation
and assembly and did not exert a dominant-negative effect, as
heterozygous family members were unaffected. However, the E624K-mutant
chain was less efficient in supporting microfibrillar assembly than
wildtype.

.0016
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, ARG876SER

In a young man, born of consanguineous Filipino parents, with Ullrich
congenital muscular dystrophy (254090), Zhang et al. (2010) identified a
homozygous 2626C-A transversion in the COL6A2 gene, resulting in an
arg876-to-ser (R876S) substitution in the beta-2 strand of the C2
globular subdomain. Patient fibroblasts produced almost no collagen VI
microfibrils in the extracellular matrix. The minute amounts of COL6A2
that were produced consisted of the C2a splice variant with a shorter
alternative C2 subdomain not affected by the missense mutation. The C2a
splice variant COL6A2 was not assembled into a triple-helical collagen
VI molecule. HEK293 cells transfected with the R876S mutation showed
intracellular retention of the mutant chain and were unable to
synthesize normal collagen VI microfibrils. However, the patient showed
a slightly less severe phenotype than another affected patient with a
different mutation (see 120240.0015), suggesting that the low levels of
COL6A2 with alternatively spliced C2a may have functionally compensated
for loss of normal COL6A2.

.0017
BETHLEM MYOPATHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, ARG830GLN AND ARG843TRP

In a 25-year-old woman with Bethlem myopathy (158810), Gualandi et al.
(2009) identified compound heterozygosity for variations in the COL6A2
gene. The maternal allele carried a 2571G-A and a 2609C-T transition,
both in exon 28, resulting in an arg830-t-gln (R830Q) and an
arg843-to-trp (R843W) substitution, respectively, in the C2 domain. Both
mutations affected highly conserved residues. The paternal allele
carried a Q819X (120240.0011) substitution. The patient had onset of
progressive proximal muscle weakness at age 2 years. During the course
of the disorder, she developed prominent joint contractures and
decreased forced vital capacity (65% of predicted), but retained
independent ambulation. Muscle biopsy showed a myopathic pattern and
fibrosis with mildly decreased collagen VI staining. Studies of
fibroblasts showed absence of collagen VI tetramer formation, but
electron microscopy showed correct filamentous and interconnected
collagen VI microfilaments. Gualandi et al. (2009) concluded that this
woman showed rare autosomal recessive inheritance of Bethlem myopathy
based on her genotype. However, the authors noted that the R819X
mutation escaped nonsense-mediated decay and was thought not to be
pathogenic in the heterozygous state, based on the report of Merlini et
al. (2008). The fact that the woman reported by Gualandi et al. (2009)
carried COL6A2 mutations on both alleles had implications for genetic
counseling.

.0018
BETHLEM MYOPATHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, ARG366TER

In a 47-year-old man with Bethlem myopathy (158810), Gualandi et al.
(2009) identified compound heterozygous mutations in the COL6A2 gene: a
1178C-T transition in exon 12, resulting in an arg366-to-ter (R366X)
substitution, and a de novo 2693G-A transition in exon 28, resulting in
an asp871-to-asn (D871N; 120240.0019) substitution in a conserved region
of the C2 domain. The nonsense mutation was demonstrated to undergo
nonsense-mediated decay. The patient's unaffected mother carried the
heterozygous R377X mutation, suggesting that it is not pathogenic in the
heterozygous state. The patient was born with talipes equinovarus and
had Achilles contractures in childhood. He had limb-girdle weakness with
joint contractures and reduced vital capacity (64% of predicted). At age
47, he could walk with aid, but could no longer rise from the floor.
Muscle biopsy showed dystrophic features and decreased collagen VI.
Studies of fibroblasts showed severely decreased levels of all forms of
collagen VI, and electron microscopy showed irregular collagen VI
microfilaments with absence of normal network structure. Gualandi et al.
(2009) concluded that this patient had autosomal recessive Bethlem
myopathy because of the genotype and his ability to remain ambulatory.
The authors stated that the combination of a missense and a nonsense
mutation in the COL6A2 gene had not previously been reported, yielding
implications for genetic counseling.

.0019
BETHLEM MYOPATHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, ASP871ASN

See 120240.0018 and Gualandi et al. (2009).

.0020
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A2, 6-BP DEL, 1855

In a girl with UCMD (254090), Tooley et al. (2010) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the COL6A2 gene: a 6-bp deletion in
exon 25 (1855_1860del6) causing an in-frame deletion of 2 amino acids in
the N-terminal C1 VWA domain (V619_I620del2), and a G-to-T transversion
in intron 23 (1771-1G-T; 120240.0021), resulting in the skipping of exon
24, a frameshift, and premature termination. Each mutation was inherited
from an unaffected parent. Northern blot analysis of patient fibroblasts
showed that the intron 23 mutation resulted in nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay. Patient fibroblasts showed reduced, but present, collagen VI
production, indicating that the COL6A1 and COL6A3 chains could associate
with mutant COL6A2, forming monomers, dimers, and tetramers. However,
kinetic studies showed that the mutation delayed the assembly and
secretion of collagen VI compared to controls, and several additional
approaches showed that the mutation prevented the association of
secreted tetramers into collagen VI microfibrils. Recombinant C1 domains
containing the mutation were insoluble and retained intracellularly as
disulfide-bonded aggregates, consistent with misfolding. The findings
indicated that a correctly folded COL6A2 C1 domain is important for
microfibril assembly.

.0021
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A3, IVS23AS, G-T, -1

See 120240.0020 and Tooley et al. (2010).

REFERENCE 1. Ackerman, C.; Locke, A. E.; Feingold, E.; Reshey, B.; Espana, K.;
Thusberg, J.; Mooney, S.; Bean, L. J. H.; Dooley, K. J.; Cua, C. L.;
Reeves, R. H.; Sherman, S. L.; Maslen, C. L.: An excess of deleterious
variants in VEGF-A pathway genes in Down-syndrome-associated atrioventricular
septal defects. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 91: 646-659, 2012.

2. Baker, N. L.; Morgelin, M.; Pace, R. A.; Peat, R. A.; Adams, N.
E.; Gardner, R. J. M.; Rowland, L. P.; Miller, G.; De Jonghe, P.;
Ceulemans, B.; Hannibal, M. C.; Edwards, M.; Thompson, E. M.; Jacobson,
R.; Quinlivan, R. C. M.; Aftimos, S.; Kornberg, A. J.; North, K. N.;
Bateman, J. F.; Lamande, S. R.: Molecular consequences of dominant
Bethlem myopathy collagen VI mutations. Ann. Neurol. 62: 390-405,
2007.

3. Baker, N. L.; Morgelin, M.; Peat, R.; Goemans, N.; North, K. N.;
Bateman, J. F.; Lamande, S. R.: Dominant collagen VI mutations are
a common cause of Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 14: 279-293, 2005.

4. Chu, M.-L.; Pan, T.-C.; Conway, D.; Kuo, H.-J.; Glanville, R. W.;
Timpl, R.; Mann, K.; Deutzmann, R.: Sequence analysis of alpha 1(VI)
and alpha 2(VI) chains of human type VI collagen reveals internal
triplication of globular domains similar to the A domains of von Willebrand
factor and two alpha-2(VI) chain variants that differ in the carboxy
terminus. EMBO J. 8: 1939-1946, 1989.

5. Gualandi, F.; Urciuolo, A.; Martoni, E.; Sabatelli, P.; Squarzoni,
S.; Bovolenta, M.; Messina, S.; Mercuri, E.; Franchella, A.; Ferlini,
A.; Bonaldo, P; Merlini, L.: Autosomal recessive Bethlem myopathy. Neurology 73:
1883-1891, 2009.

6. Higuchi, I.; Shiraishi, T.; Hashiguchi, T,; Suehara, M.; Niiyama,
T.; Nakagawa, M.; Arimura, K.; Maruyama, I.; Osame, M.: Frameshift
mutation in the collagen VI gene causes Ullrich's disease. Ann. Neurol. 50:
261-265, 2001.

7. Jobsis, G. J.; Bolhuis, P. A.; Boers, J. M.; Baas, F.; Wolterman,
R. A.; Hensels, G. W.; de Visser, M.: Genetic localization of Bethlem
myopathy. Neurology 46: 779-782, 1996.

8. Jobsis, G. J.; Keizers, H.; Vreijling, J. P.; de Visser, M.; Speer,
M. C.; Wolterman, R. A.; Baas, F.; Bohlhuis, P. A.: Type VI collagen
mutations in Bethlem myopathy, an autosomal dominant myopathy with
contractures. Nature Genet. 14: 113-115, 1996.

9. Klewer, S. E.; Krob, S. L.; Kolker, S. J.; Kitten, G. T.: Expression
of type VI collagen in the developing mouse heart. :Dev. Dyn. 211:
248-255, 1998.

10. Kuo, H.-J.; Maslen, C. L.; Keene, D. R.; Glanville, R. W.: Type
VI collagen anchors endothelial basement membranes by interacting
with type IV collagen. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 26522-26529, 1997.

11. Lampe, A. K.; Dunn, D. M.; von Niederhausern, A. C.; Hamil, C.;
Aoyagi, A.; Laval, S. H.; Marie, S. K.; Chu, M.-L.; Swoboda, K.; Muntoni,
F.; Bonnemann, C. G.; Flanigan, K. M.; Bushby, K. M. D.; Weiss, R.
B.: Automated genomic sequence analysis of the three collagen VI
genes: applications to Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy and Bethlem
myopathy. J. Med. Genet. 42: 108-120, 2005.

12. Lucarini, L.; Giusti, B.; Zhang, R.-Z.; Pan, T.-C.; Jimenez-Mallebrera,
C.; Mercuri, E.; Muntoni, F.; Pepe, G.; Chu, M.-L.: A homozygous
COL6A2 intron mutation causes in-frame triple-helical deletion and
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay in a patient with Ullrich congenital
muscular dystrophy. Hum. Genet. 117: 460-466, 2005.

13. Merlini, L.; Martoni, E.; Grumati, P.; Sabatelli, P.; Squarzoni,
S.; Urciuolo, A.; Ferlini, A.; Gualandi, F.; Bonaldo, P.: Autosomal
recessive myosclerosis myopathy is a collagen VI disorder. Neurology 71:
1245-1253, 2008.

14. Nadeau, A.; Kinali, M.; Main, M.; Jimenez-Mallebrera, C.; Aloysius,
A.; Clement, E.; North, B.; Manzur, A. Y.; Robb, S. A.; Mercuri, E.;
Muntoni, F.: Natural history of Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy. Neurology 73:
25-31, 2009.

15. Saitta, B.; Timpl, R.; Chu, M.-L.: Human alpha-2(VI) collagen
gene: heterogeneity at the 5-prime-untranslated region generated by
an alternate exon. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 6188-6196, 1992.

16. Scacheri, P. C.; Gillanders, E. M.; Subramony, S. H.; Vedanarayanan,
V.; Crowe, C. A.; Thakore, N.; Bingler, M.; Hoffman, E. P.: Novel
mutations in collagen VI genes: expansion of the Bethlem myopathy
phenotype. Neurology 58: 593-602, 2002.

17. Tooley, L. D.; Zamurs, L. K.; Beecher, N.; Baker, N. L.; Peat,
R. A.; Adams, N. E.; Bateman, J. F.; North, K. N.; Baldock, C.; Lamande,
S. R.: Collagen VI microfibril formation is abolished by an alpha-2(VI)
von Willebrand factor type A domain mutation in a patient with Ullrich
congenital muscular dystrophy. J. Biol. Chem. 285: 33567-33576,
2010.

18. Vanegas, O. C.; Bertini, E.; Zhang, R.-Z.; Petrini, S.; Minosse,
C.; Sabatelli, P.; Giusti, B.; Chu, M.-L.; Pepe, G.: Ullrich scleroatonic
muscular dystrophy is caused by recessive mutations in collagen type
VI. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 7516-7521, 2001.

19. Weil, D.; Mattei, M.-G.; Passage, E.; Van Cong, N.; Pribula-Conway,
D.; Mann, K.; Deutzmann, R.; Timpl, R.; Chu, M.-L.: Cloning and chromosomal
localization of human genes encoding the three chains of type VI collagen. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 42: 435-445, 1988.

20. Zhang, R.-Z.; Sabatelli, P.; Pan, T.-C.; Squarzoni, S.; Mattioli,
E.; Bertini, E.; Pepe, G.; Chu, M.-L.: Effects on collagen VI mRNA
stability and microfibrillar assembly of three COL6A2 mutations in
two families with Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy. J. Biol.
Chem. 277: 43557-43564, 2002.

21. Zhang, R.-Z.; Zou, Y.; Pan, T.-C.; Markova, D.; Fertala, A.; Hu,
Y.; Squarzoni, S.; Reed, U. C.; Marie, S. K. N.; Bonnemann, C. G.;
Chu, M.-L.: Recessive COL6A2 C-globular missense mutations in Ullrich
congenital muscular dystrophy: role of the C2a splice variant. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 10005-10015, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/14/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/17/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/28/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/14/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/15/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/30/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/23/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/8/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/11/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/1/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/8/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/8/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/8/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/3/2001
Paul Brennan - updated: 5/21/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 09/18/2013
joanna: 8/21/2013
alopez: 2/14/2013
carol: 8/2/2012
ckniffin: 7/17/2012
terry: 2/18/2011
wwang: 2/18/2011
ckniffin: 1/28/2011
wwang: 1/6/2011
ckniffin: 12/14/2010
alopez: 6/8/2010
carol: 12/23/2009
ckniffin: 12/15/2009
wwang: 4/13/2009
ckniffin: 3/30/2009
wwang: 7/8/2008
ckniffin: 5/23/2008
wwang: 11/30/2007
terry: 11/8/2007
wwang: 10/26/2005
ckniffin: 10/11/2005
wwang: 3/14/2005
wwang: 3/8/2005
terry: 3/1/2005
cwells: 1/15/2003
ckniffin: 1/8/2003
carol: 11/13/2002
ckniffin: 11/8/2002
terry: 6/26/2002
cwells: 4/19/2002
cwells: 4/17/2002
terry: 4/8/2002
carol: 7/19/2001
joanna: 7/18/2001
alopez: 7/17/2001
mcapotos: 7/3/2001
dkim: 12/10/1998
dkim: 12/9/1998
carol: 5/21/1998
mark: 9/6/1996
terry: 9/5/1996
terry: 9/3/1996
mimadm: 4/18/1994
warfield: 4/8/1994
carol: 4/6/1993
carol: 6/17/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990

300083	TITLE *300083 PROTEIN KINASE, X-LINKED; PRKX
;;PROTEIN KINASE PKX1; PKX1
DESCRIPTION Klink et al. (1995) isolated a gene designated PKX1 by virtue of its
position within the candidate region for chondrodysplasia punctata in
Xp22.3. PKX1 appeared to encode a novel type of protein kinase that is
related to the catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinases and
has striking homology to the DC2 protein kinase of Drosophila
melanogaster. PKX1 is part of a family of at least 4 genes or
pseudogenes, of which 3 map to the human sex chromosomes. In contrast to
all other genes from the X-specific region of Xp22.3, PKX1 has a homolog
on Yp (PRKY; 400008) rather than Yq. This suggests that the single
pericentric inversion event hypothesized to have occurred during primate
evolution is not sufficient to explain the present X/Y homology pattern
of Xp22.3. Klink et al. (1995) found that a high proportion of the
chromosomal rearrangements in Xp22.3 or Yp occurred within the PKX1
locus. This suggests that the PKX1 gene, besides harboring a previously
described hotspot for illegitimate Xp/Yp recombination, contains
additional sequences which predispose the X chromosome to breakage
events.

PRKX (formerly PKX1) is a novel serine/threonine subtype of protein
kinase that appears to encode a protein related to the catalytic subunit
of the cAMP-dependent protein kinases which are key players in the
cellular responses to the second messenger cAMP. Klink et al. (1995)
found that somatic cell hybrid analysis of PRKX under high stringency
conditions revealed at least 3 further loci closely related to this gene
in the human, constituting a small subfamily. Schiebel et al. (1997)
used FISH analysis to map the Y homolog of PRKX (PRKY) to Yp11.2 in
close proximity to AMELY (410000); the autosomal copy, a pseudogene
(PRKXP1), to 15q26; and a further X-linked pseudogene (PRKXP2) to
Xq12-q13.

Renal expression of the PRKX gene is developmentally regulated and
restricted to the ureteric bud epithelium of the fetal metanephric
kidney. Li et al. (2002) found aberrant adult kidney expression of PRKX
in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (PKD1; 601313). PRKX
kinase expression markedly activated migration of cultured renal
epithelial cells in the presence of cAMP; this effect was blocked by
cell treatment with the PKA inhibitor H89 and was not observed in
PKA-transfected cells. These and other results suggested that the PRKX
kinase may regulate epithelial morphogenesis during mammalian kidney
development.

REFERENCE 1. Klink, A.; Schiebel, K.; Winkelmann, M.; Rao, E.; Horsthemke, B.;
Ludecke, H.-J.; Claussen, U.; Scherer, G.; Rappold, G.: The human
protein kinase gene PKX1 on Xp22.3 displays Xp/Yp homology and is
a site of chromosomal instability. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 869-878,
1995.

2. Li, X.; Li, H.-P.; Amsler, K.; Hyink, D.; Wilson, P. D.; Burrow,
C. R.: PRKX, a phylogenetically and functionally distinct cAMP-dependent
protein kinase, activates renal epithelial cell migration and morphogenesis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 9260-9265, 2002.

3. Schiebel, K.; Mertz, A.; Winkelmann, B.; Glaser, B.; Schempp, W.;
Rappold, G.: FISH localization of the human Y-homolog of protein
kinase PRKX (PRKY) to Yp11.2 and two pseudogenes to 15q26 and Xq12-q13. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 76: 49-52, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/9/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/19/1997

EDITED carol: 09/18/2002
tkritzer: 9/9/2002
alopez: 5/21/1998
jenny: 6/23/1997
mark: 6/19/1997

102680	TITLE *102680 ADDUCIN 1; ADD1
;;ADDUCIN, ALPHA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Adducin is a 200-kD heterodimeric protein associated with the
erythrocyte membrane skeleton, which binds to Ca(2+)/calmodulin (see
114180), promotes binding of spectrin to actin, and is a substrate for
protein kinases C and A (Gardner and Bennett, 1986; Bennett et al.,
1988). The name adducin comes from the Latin 'adducere,' meaning 'to
bring together.'

CLONING

Adducin was first purified from human erythrocytes by Gardner and
Bennett (1986) and subsequently isolated from bovine brain membranes
(Bennett et al., 1988).

Joshi and Bennett (1990) investigated the structure and function of the
separate domains of alpha adducin. Joshi et al. (1991) isolated
reticulocyte cDNAs for alpha- and beta- (ADD2; 102681) adducin. The
deduced alpha-adducin protein contains 737 amino acids and shares
approximately 49% sequence identity with beta adducin, suggesting
evolution by gene duplication. Each adducin subunit has 3 distinct
domains: a 39-kD N-terminal globular protease-resistant domain,
connected by a 9-kD domain to a 33-kD C-terminal protease-sensitive tail
comprised almost entirely by hydrophilic amino acids. The head domains
of both alpha- and beta-adducin have limited sequence similarity with
the N-terminal actin-binding motif present in members of the spectrin
superfamily and actin gelation proteins. The C termini of both proteins
contain an identical 22-amino acid sequence showing similarity to the
MARCKS protein (177061). Northern blot analysis of rat tissues, K562
erythroleukemia cells, and reticulocytes demonstrated ubiquitous
expression of alpha adducin.

Goldberg et al. (1992) identified a 4-kb alpha-adducin transcript that
was abundantly expressed in the caudate nucleus, the site of major
neuronal loss in Huntington disease (HD; 143100). No sequence
alterations specific to HD were discovered in sequencing the brain
alpha-adducin cDNA from 2 HD patients and an age-matched control. Brain
cDNA from both patients and controls showed 2 alternately spliced brain
exons not previously described in erythrocyte cDNA.

In a comprehensive assay of gene expression, Gilligan et al. (1999)
showed the ubiquitous expression of alpha- and gamma-adducin (ADD3;
601568), in contrast to the restricted expression of beta-adducin.
Beta-adducin was expressed at high levels in brain and hematopoietic
tissues (bone marrow in humans, spleen in mice).

See Gilligan and Bennett (1993) for a review of adducin and the other
components of the junctional complex of the cell membrane skeleton.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis, Joshi et al. (1991) provisionally
assigned the ADD1 gene to chromosome 4 and the ADD2 gene to chromosome
2. Both alpha- and beta-adducin show alternative splicing; thus, there
may be several different heterodimeric or homodimeric forms of adducin,
each with a different functional specificity.

Using the technique of 'exon trapping' devised by Buckler et al. (1991),
Taylor et al. (1992) identified exons corresponding to the alpha subunit
of adducin within the 4p16.3 region where Huntington disease appeared to
be located. They mapped the ADD1 gene immediately telomeric to D4S95.

Goldberg et al. (1992) reported the isolation and cloning of cDNA for
the brain alpha-adducin gene, which they found to be located within 20
kb of D4S95.

Nasir et al. (1994) used an interspecific backcross to map the mouse
Add1 gene to chromosome 5, within the region of syntenic homology with
the short arm of human chromosome 4. Grosson et al. (1994) also mapped
the mouse Add1 gene to chromosome 5 in a continuous linkage group that
included the Huntington disease homolog.

GENE FUNCTION

Kuhlman et al. (1996) found that purified human erythrocyte adducin
completely blocked elongation and depolymerization at the fast-growing
barbed ends of actin filaments in vitro, thus functioning as a barbed
end capping protein. This barbed end capping activity required the
intact adducin molecule and was downregulated by calmodulin in the
presence of calcium. Kuhlman et al. (1996) concluded that adducin
restricts actin filament length in erythrocytes.

To investigate the molecular involvement of alpha-adducin in controlling
Na/K pump activity, Torielli et al. (2008) transfected wildtype or
mutated rat and human ADD1 into several renal cell lines and
demonstrated that the rat and human mutated forms increased Na/K pump
activity and the number of pump units; both variants
coimmunoprecipitated with the Na/K pump. The increased pump activity was
not due to changes in its basolateral location, but to an alteration of
Na/K pump residential time on the plasma membrane. Both the rat and
human mutated variants reduced constitutive Na/K pump endocytosis and
similarly affected transferrin receptor (190010) trafficking and
fluid-phase endocytosis. Alpha-adducin was also detected in clathrin
(see 118955)-coated vesicles and coimmunoprecipitated with clathrin.
Torielli et al. (2008) suggested that adducin, in addition to having
modulatory effects on actin cytoskeleton dynamics, might play a direct
role in clathrin-dependent endocytosis, and that the constitutive
reduction of Na/K pump endocytic rate induced by mutated adducin
variants might be relevant in sodium-dependent hypertension (see
145500).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a case-control study involving 190 patients with primary hypertension
and 126 controls, Casari et al. (1995) found an association between
essential hypertension (see 145500) and allelic markers near the
alpha-adducin locus.

Cusi et al. (1997) found significant linkage of the alpha-adducin locus
to essential hypertension and greater sensitivity to changes in sodium
balance among patients with a particular ADD1 allele, trp460
(102680.0001), suggesting that alpha adducin is associated with a
salt-sensitive form of essential hypertension.

Manunta et al. (1998) analyzed the pressure-natriuresis relationship in
108 hypertensive individuals and found that patients with a G/W or W/W
ADD1 genotype showed lower plasma renin activity and fractional
excretion of sodium as well as reduced slope of the pressure-natriuresis
relationship after sodium depletion or sodium loading compared to G/G
patients. These findings supported the hypothesis that individuals with
at least 1 ADD1 460W allele have increased renal tubular sodium
reabsorption.

Using endogenous lithium and uric acid as markers of proximal tubular
sodium reabsorption, Manunta et al. (1999) investigated the relationship
between renal sodium handling and ADD1 polymorphism in untreated
hypertensive patients and found that adducin genotype was significantly
and directly related to the fractional excretion of lithium. Manunta et
al. (1999) concluded that ADD1 represents a 'renal hypertensive gene'
that modulates the capacity of tubular epithelial cells to transport
sodium and thus affects blood pressure levels.

Allayee et al. (2001) performed a genomewide scan for blood pressure in
18 Dutch families exhibiting the common lipid disorder familial combined
hyperlipidemia (144250). They found a locus on chromosome 4 that
exhibited a significant lod score of 3.9 for systolic blood pressure. In
addition, this locus appeared to influence plasma free fatty acid levels
(lod = 2.4). After adjustment for age and gender, the lod score for
systolic blood pressure increased to 4.6, whereas the lod score for free
fatty acid levels did not change. Allayee et al. (2001) tested for an
association between 2 intragenic ADD1 polymorphisms and systolic blood
pressure in this sample and found none.

Lanzani et al. (2005) examined the association between polymorphisms in
the ADD1, ADD2, and ADD3 genes (G460W, C1797T, and IVS11+386A-G,
respectively) and ambulatory blood pressure and plasma levels of renin
activity and endogenous ouabain in 512 newly discovered and
never-treated hypertensive patients. Relative to carriers of the
wildtype (G/G) ADD1 gene, carriers of the mutant 460W allele had higher
blood pressure and lower plasma renin activity and endogenous ouabain
levels. Polymorphisms in the ADD2 and ADD3 genes taken alone were not
associated with these variables, but the blood pressure difference
between the 2 ADD1 genotypes was greatest in carriers of the ADD3 G
allele (increased by approximately 8 mm Hg; p = 0.020 to 0.006,
depending on the genetic model applied). The authors suggested that
there were epistatic effects between the ADD1 and ADD3 loci affecting
variation in blood pressure.

ANIMAL MODEL

The Milan hypertensive strain of rats develops a genetic form of renal
hypertension that, when compared to its normotensive control, shows
renal dysfunction similar to that of a subset of human patients with
primary hypertension. Bianchi et al. (1994) showed that 1 point mutation
in each of the 2 genes coding for adducin is associated with blood
pressure level in this strain of rats. The hypertensive and normal rats
differed, respectively, by the amino acids tyrosine and phenylalanine at
position 316 of the alpha subunit; at the beta-adducin locus, the
hypertensive strain was always homozygous for arginine at position 529,
while the normal strain showed either arginine or glutamine in that
position. The arg/gln heterozygotes showed lower blood pressure than any
of the homozygotes. In vitro phosphorylation studies suggested that both
of these amino acid substitutions occurred within protein kinase
recognition sites. Analysis of an F2 generation demonstrated that Y
(tyrosine) alleles segregated with a significant increment in blood
pressure. This effect was modulated by the presence of the R (arginine)
allele of the beta subunit. Bianchi et al. (1994) stated that, taken
together, these findings strongly supported a role for adducin
polymorphisms in causing variation of blood pressure in the Milan strain
of rats. In the rat, the beta- and alpha-adducin genes were said to be
located on chromosomes 4 and 14, respectively.

Tripodi et al. (1996) studied the effects of the Milan hypertensive rat
316Y and 529R mutations in Add1 and Add2, respectively, on actin
polymerization and bundling in a cell-free system and found that
double-mutated adducin exerted only a slight inhibitory effect with a
much higher final extent of polymerization compared to wildtype. Adducin
heterodimer mutated only in the beta subunit behaved as normal adducin,
whereas adducin heterodimer mutated only in the alpha subunit exhibited
an intermediate phenotype, consistent with the associated levels of
blood pressure previously described by Bianchi et al. (1994). Studies of
the actin cytoskeleton in transfected rat kidney epithelial cell lines
showed that cells overexpressing the mutated alpha-adducin chain
exhibited larger microfilament bundles and larger focal contacts with
patchy aggregates of alpha-v integrin (193210), compared to cells
overexpressing wildtype adducin, in which the microfilament bundles were
organized in a much looser texture and alpha-v integrin was present in a
diffuse punctate pattern with small focal contacts. The surface
expression of the Na-K pump alpha subunit was considerably increased in
cells overexpressing the mutated alpha-adducin chain, and Na-K pump
activity at V(max) was increased with respect to normal transfected
lines and untransfected cells. Tripodi et al. (1996) suggested that
adducin has a role in the constitutive capacity of the renal epithelia
both to transport ions and to expose adhesion molecules.

Efendiev et al. (2004) studied Milan rats carrying the hypertensive
adducin phenotype and observed higher renal tubule Na/K-ATPase activity
and found that their Na/K-ATPase molecules did not undergo endocytosis
in response to dopamine like those of normotensive rats. In the
hypertensive rats, dopamine failed to promote the interaction between
adaptins (see 601026) and the Na/K-ATPase, required for endocytosis,
because of adaptin-mu-2 subunit (602296) hyperphosphorylation.
Expression of the hypertensive rat or human variant of ADD1 into normal
renal epithelial cells recreated the hypertensive phenotype with higher
Na/K-ATPase activity, mu-2-subunit hyperphosphorylation, and impaired
Na/K-ATPase endocytosis. The authors concluded that increased renal
Na/K-ATPase activity and altered sodium reabsorption in certain forms of
hypertension could be attributed to a mutant form of adducin that
impairs the dynamic regulation of renal Na/K-ATPase endocytosis in
response to natriuretic signals.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPERTENSION, SALT-SENSITIVE ESSENTIAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
ADD1, GLY460TRP

Cusi et al. (1997) found a significant association between a
gly460-to-trp polymorphism (G460W) in the ADD1 gene and salt sensitivity
in patients with essential hypertension (see 145500). Patients with the
W460 allele showed greater sensitivity to changes in sodium balance, and
heterozygous hypertensive patients (G/W) showed a greater fall in mean
arterial pressure in response to 2 months' treatment with
hydrochlorothiazide, than did wildtype homozygous (G/G) hypertensive
patients. In controls in an Italian cohort, the G460 allele had a
frequency of 86.4% and the W460 allele 13.6%.

Manunta et al. (1998) analyzed the pressure-natriuresis relationship in
108 hypertensive individuals, 80 of whom were wildtype homozygous (G/G),
26 G/W heterozygous, and 2 W/W homozygous. At baseline, the G/W and W/W
patients showed lower plasma renin activity and fractional excretion of
sodium; these patients also had reduced slope of the
pressure-natriuresis relationship after sodium depletion or sodium
loading compared to G/G patients. These findings supported the
hypothesis that individuals with at least 1 ADD1 460W allele have
increased renal tubular sodium reabsorption.

Using endogenous lithium and uric acid as markers of proximal tubular
sodium reabsorption, Manunta et al. (1999) investigated the relationship
between renal sodium handling and ADD1 polymorphism in 54 untreated
hypertensive patients, 29 with the G/G genotype and 25 with the G/W
genotype. Fractional excretions of lithium and uric acid were
significantly decreased in G/W patients compared to G/G patients;
multiple regression analysis showed that adducin genotype was
significantly and directly related to the fractional excretion of
lithium. Manunta et al. (1999) concluded that ADD1 represents a 'renal
hypertensive gene' that modulates the capacity of tubular epithelial
cells to transport sodium and thus affects blood pressure levels.

REFERENCE 1. Allayee, H.; de Bruin, T. W. A.; Dominguez, K. M.; Cheng, L. S.-C.;
Ipp, E.; Cantor, R. M.; Krass, K. L.; Keulen, E. T. P.; Aouizerat,
B. E.; Lusis, A. J.; Rotter, J. I.: Genome scan for blood pressure
in Dutch dyslipidemic families reveals linkage to a locus on chromosome
4p. Hypertension 38: 773-778, 2001.

2. Bennett, V.; Gardner, K.; Steiner, J. P.: Brain adducin: a protein
kinase C substrate that may mediate site-directed assembly at the
spectrin-actin junction. J. Biol. Chem. 263: 5860-5869, 1988.

3. Bianchi, G.; Tripodi, G.; Casari, G.; Salardi, S.; Barber, B. R.;
Garcia, R.; Leoni, P.; Torielli, L.; Cusi, D.; Ferrandi, M.; Pinna,
L. A.; Baralle, F. E.; Ferrari, P.: Two point mutations within the
adducin genes are involved in blood pressure variation. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 91: 3999-4003, 1994.

4. Buckler, A. J.; Chang, D. D.; Graw, S. L.; Brook, J. D.; Haber,
D. A.; Sharp, P. A.; Housman, D. E.: Exon amplification: a strategy
to isolate mammalian genes based on RNA splicing. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 88: 4005-4009, 1991.

5. Casari, G.; Barlassina, C.; Cusi, D.; Zagato, L.; Muirhead, R.;
Righetti, M.; Nembri, P.; Amar, K.; Gatti, M.; Macciardi, F.; Binelli,
G.; Bianchi, G.: Association of the alpha-adducin locus with essential
hypertension. Hypertension 25: 320-326, 1995.

6. Cusi, D.; Barlassina, C.; Azzani, T.; Casari, G.; Citterio, L.;
Devoto, M.; Glorioso, N.; Lanzani, C.; Manunta, P.; Righetti, M.;
Rivera, R.; Stella, P.; Troffa, C.; Zagato, L.; Bianchi, G.: Polymorphisms
of alpha-adducin and salt sensitivity in patients with essential hypertension. Lancet 349:
1353-1357, 1997. Note: Erratum: Lancet 350: 524 only, 1997.

7. Efendiev, R.; Krmar, R. T.; Ogimoto, G.; Zwiller, J.; Tripodi,
G.; Katz, A. I.; Bianchi, G.; Pedemonte, C. H.; Bertorello, A. M.
: Hypertension-linked mutation in the adducin alpha-subunit leads
to higher AP2-mu-2 phosphorylation and impaired Na+, K+-ATPase trafficking
in response to GPCR signals and intracellular sodium. Circ. Res. 95:
1100-1108, 2004.

8. Gardner, K.; Bennett, V.: A new erythrocyte membrane-associated
protein with calmodulin binding activity: identification and purification. J.
Biol. Chem. 261: 1339-1348, 1986.

9. Gilligan, D. M.; Bennett, V.: The junctional complex of the membrane
skeleton. Seminars Hemat. 30: 74-83, 1993.

10. Gilligan, D. M.; Lozovatsky, L.; Gwynn, B.; Brugnara, C.; Mohandas,
N.; Peters, L. L.: Targeted disruption of the beta adducin gene (Add2)
causes red blood cell spherocytosis in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96:
10717-10722, 1999.

11. Goldberg, Y. P.; Lin, B.-Y.; Andrew, S. E.; Nasir, J.; Graham,
R.; Glaves, M. L.; Hutchinson, G.; Theilmann, J.; Ginzinger, D. G.;
Schappert, K.; Clarke, L.; Rommens, J. M.; Hayden, M. R.: Cloning
and mapping of the alpha-adducin gene close to D4S95 and assessment
of its relationship to Huntington disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 1:
669-675, 1992.

12. Grosson, C. L. S.; MacDonald, M. E.; Duyao, M. P.; Ambrose, C.
M.; Roffler-Tarlov, S.; Gusella, J. F.: Synteny conservation of the
Huntington's disease gene and surrounding loci on mouse chromosome
5. Mammalian Genome 5: 424-428, 1994.

13. Joshi, R.; Bennett, V.: Mapping the domain structure of human
erythrocyte adducin. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 13130-13136, 1990.

14. Joshi, R.; Gilligan, D. M.; Otto, E.; McLaughlin, T.; Bennett,
V.: Primary structure and domain organization of human alpha and
beta adducin. J. Cell Biol. 115: 665-675, 1991.

15. Kuhlman, P. A.; Hughes, C. A.; Bennett, V.; Fowler, V. M.: A
new function for adducin: calcium/calmodulin-regulated capping of
the barbed ends of actin filaments. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 7986-7991,
1996.

16. Lanzani, C.; Citterio, L.; Jankaricova, M.; Sciarrone, M. T.;
Barlassina, C.; Fattori, S.; Messaggio, E.; Di Serio, C.; Zagato,
L.; Cusi, D.; Hamlyn, J. M.; Stella, A.; Bianchi, G.; Manunta, P.
: Role of the adducin family genes in human essential hypertension. J.
Hypertension 23: 543-549, 2005.

17. Manunta, P.; Burnier, M.; D'Amico, M.; Buzzi, L.; Maillard, M.;
Barlassina, C.; Lanella, G.; Cusi, D.; Bianchi, G.: Adducin polymorphism
affects renal proximal tubule reabsorption in hypertension. Hypertension 33:
694-697, 1999.

18. Manunta, P.; Cusi, D.; Barlassina, C.; Righetti, M.; Lanzani,
C.; D'Amico, M.; Buzzi, L.; Citterio, L.; Stella, P.; Rivera, R.;
Bianchi, G.: Alpha-adducin polymorphisms and renal sodium handling
in essential hypertensive patients. Kidney Int. 53: 1471-1478, 1998.

19. Nasir, J.; Lin, B.; Bucan, M.; Koizumi, T.; Nadeau, J. H.; Hayden,
M. R.: The murine homologues of the Huntington disease gene (Hdh)
and the alpha-adducin gene (Add1) map to mouse chromosome 5 within
a region of conserved synteny with human chromosome 4p16.3. Genomics 22:
198-201, 1994.

20. Taylor, S. A. M.; Snell, R. G.; Buckler, A.; Ambrose, C.; Duyao,
M.; Church, D.; Lin, C. S.; Altherr, M.; Bates, G. P.; Groot, N.;
Barnes, G.; Shaw, D. J.; Lehrach, H.; Wasmuth, J. J.; Harper, P. S.;
Housman, D. E.; MacDonald, M. E.; Gusella, J. F.: Cloning of the
alpha-adducin gene from the Huntington's disease candidate region
of chromosome 4 by exon amplification. Nature Genet. 2: 223-227,
1992.

21. Torielli, L.; Tivodar, S.; Montella, R. C.; Iacone, R.; Padoani,
G.; Tarsini, P.; Russo, O.; Sarnataro, D.; Strazzullo, P.; Ferrari,
P.; Bianchi, G.; Zurzolo, C.: Alpha-adducin mutations increase Na/K
pump activity in renal cells by affecting constitutive endocytosis:
implications for tubular Na reabsorption. Am. J. Physiol. Renal Physiol. 295:
F478-F487, 2008.

22. Tripodi, G.; Valtorta, F.; Torielli, L.; Chieregatti, E.; Salardi,
S.; Trusolino, L.; Menegon, A.; Ferrari, P.; Marchisio, P.-C.; Bianchi,
G.: Hypertension-associated point mutations in the adducin alpha
and beta subunits affect actin cytoskeleton and ion transport. J.
Clin. Invest. 97: 2815-2822, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/10/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/2/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/8/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/4/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/8/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/9/1991

EDITED terry: 08/31/2012
mgross: 4/10/2009
terry: 4/10/2009
terry: 12/23/2008
carol: 12/8/2008
carol: 12/2/2008
wwang: 3/10/2005
wwang: 3/9/2005
terry: 3/8/2005
terry: 3/6/2002
carol: 1/11/2002
mcapotos: 1/8/2002
terry: 1/4/2002
mgross: 11/8/1999
carol: 2/18/1999
mark: 5/7/1997
terry: 5/2/1997
terry: 8/26/1994
jason: 7/19/1994
carol: 6/1/1994
carol: 3/20/1993
carol: 2/18/1993
carol: 2/2/1993

600744	TITLE *600744 T-CELL TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR EB; TFEB
;;TCFEB
TFEB/ALPHA FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Transcription factors of the basic helix-loop-helix zipper (bHLH-ZIP)
family contain a basic domain, used for DNA binding, and HLH and ZIP
domains, both used for oligomerization. TFEB was isolated from a human
B-cell cDNA library using a binding sequence from the adenovirus major
late promoter (Carr and Sharp, 1990).

MAPPING

By interspecific backcross analysis, Steingrimsson et al. (1995) mapped
the Tcfeb gene in the mouse to chromosome 17 in a region of homology to
human 6p21, which can be presumed to be the location of the human
homolog.

CYTOGENETICS

Argani et al. (2001) identified a class of renal tumors containing a
translocation t(6;11)(p21.1;q12). Whereas these tumors exhibited
epitheloid morphology suggestive of renal carcinoma, they were
distinctive in their nonimmunoreactivity for epithelial markers
(cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen) and positive immunoreactivity
for melanocytic markers. Davis et al. (2003) reported that TFEB is
targeted by this translocation in both of 2 tumors examined. TFEB fuses
with the Alpha gene at 11q13, an intronless gene that does not
contribute coding sequence to the fusion product. In the 2 primary
tumors the Alpha gene rearranged with the first intron of TFEB, just
upstream of TFEB's initiation ATG, preserving the entire TFEB coding
sequence. Fluorescence in situ hybridization confirmed the involvement
of both TFEB and Alpha in this translocation. Although the Alpha
promoter drives expression of this fusion gene, the Alpha gene does not
contribute to the ORF.

Whereas TFE3 (314310) is typically fused to partner proteins in subsets
of renal tumors, Davis et al. (2003) found that wildtype, unfused TFE3
stimulates clonogenic growth in a cell-based assay, suggesting that
dysregulated expression, rather than altered function of TFEB or TFE3
fusions, may confer neoplastic properties, a mechanism reminiscent of
MYC (190080) activation by promoter substitution in Burkitt lymphoma.
Alpha-TFEB is thus identified as a fusion gene in a subset of renal
neoplasms in children and young adults. Two patients studied by Davis et
al. (2003) were an 18-year-old female with a history of obesity,
hirsutism, and polycystic ovary syndrome. A right renal mass was
detected, and partial nephrectomy was performed. Postoperatively, she
was well without evidence of recurrent neoplastic disease and continued
to require spironolactone for control of hirsutism. The second patient
was an 18-year-old male with clinical details reported by Argani et al.
(2001).

Kuiper et al. (2003) collected 3 cases of renal cell carcinoma (RCC;
605074) from patients 14 to 42 years of age, wherein a t(6;11)(p21;q13)
translocation was the sole cytogenetic abnormality. Molecular analysis
revealed fusion of the TFEB gene on chromosome 6 to the Alpha gene
(607924) on chromosome 11. The Alpha/TFEB fusion gene linked all coding
exons of the TFEB gene to 5-prime upstream regulatory sequences of the
Alpha gene. Alpha/TFEB mRNA levels were significantly upregulated in
primary tumor cells as compared with wildtype TFEB mRNA levels in normal
kidney samples, resulting in a dramatic upregulation of TFEB protein
levels. The TFEB protein encoded by the Alpha/TFEB fusion gene was
efficiently targeted to the nucleus. Kuiper et al. (2003) speculated
that this resulted in severely unbalanced nuclear ratios of MITF
(156845)/TFE subfamily members and that this imbalance may lead to
changes in the expression of downstream target genes, ultimately
resulting in the development of RCC.

GENE FUNCTION

Sardiello et al. (2009) found that most lysosomal genes exhibit
coordinated transcription behavior and are regulated by the
transcription factor EB (TFEB). They found that 68 of 96 lysosomal genes
had a palindromic 10-bp GTCACGTGAC motif, either as a single sequence or
as tandem multiple copies, in the 5-prime untranslated region. Sardiello
et al. (2009) named this motif the Coordinated Lysosomal Expression and
Regulation (CLEAR) element. Under aberrant lysosomal storage conditions,
TFEB translocated from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, resulting in the
activation of its target genes. TFEB overexpression in cultured cells
induced lysosomal biogenesis and increased degradation of complex
molecules such as glucosaminoglycans and polyQ-expanded huntingtin.

Settembre et al. (2011) found that starvation activates a
transcriptional program that controls major steps of the autophagic
pathway, including autophagosome formation, autophagosome-lysosome
fusion, and substrate degradation. The transcription factor EB, the
master gene for lysosomal biogenesis, coordinated this program by
driving expression of autophagy and lysosomal genes. Nuclear
localization and activity of TFEB were regulated by serine
phosphorylation mediated by the extracellular signal-regulated kinase-2
(ERK2; 176948), whose activity was tuned by the levels of extracellular
nutrients. Thus, Settembre et al. (2011) concluded that a
mitogen-activated protein kinase-dependent mechanism regulates autophagy
by controlling the biogenesis and partnership of 2 distinct cellular
organelles.

REFERENCE 1. Argani, P.; Hawkins, A.; Griffin, C. A.; Goldstein, J. D.; Haas,
M.; Beckwith, J. B.; Mankinen, C. B.; Perlman, E. J.: A distinctive
pediatric renal neoplasm characterized by epithelioid morphology,
basement membrane production, focal HMB45 immunoreactivity, and t(6;11)(p21.1;q12)
chromosome translocation. Am. J. Path. 158: 2089-2096, 2001.

2. Carr, C. S.; Sharp, P. A.: A helix-loop-helix protein related
to the immunoglobulin E box-binding proteins. Molec. Cell. Biol. 10:
4384-4388, 1990.

3. Davis, I. J.; Hsi, B.-L.; Arroyo, J. D.; Vargas, S. O.; Yeh, Y.
A.; Motyckova, G.; Valencia, P.; Perez-Atayde, A. R.; Argani, P.;
Ladanyi, M.; Fletcher, J. A.; Fisher, D. E.: Cloning of an alpha-TFEB
fusion in renal tumors harboring the t(6;11)(p21;q13) chromosome translocation. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 6051-6056, 2003.

4. Kuiper, R. P.; Schepens, M.; Thijssen, J.; van Asseldonk, M.; van
den Berg, E.; Bridge, J.; Schuuring, E.; Schoenmakers, E. F. P. M.;
van Kessel, A. G.: Upregulation of the transcription factor TFEB
in t(6;11)(p21;q13)-positive renal cell carcinomas due to promoter
substitution. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 1661-1669, 2003.

5. Sardiello, M.; Palmieri, M.; di Ronza, A.; Medina, D. L.; Valenza,
M.; Gennarino, V. A.; Di Malta, C.; Donaudy, F.; Embrione, V.; Polishchuk,
R. S.; Banfi, S.; Parenti, G.; Cattaneo, E.; Ballabio, A.: A gene
network regulating lysosomal biogenesis and function. Science 325:
473-477, 2009.

6. Settembre, C.; Di Malta, C.; Polito, V. A.; Arencibia, M. G.; Vetrini,
F.; Erdin, S.; Erdin, S. U.; Huynh, T.; Medina, D.; Colella, P.; Sardiello,
M.; Rubinsztein, D. C.; Ballabio, A.: TFEB links autophagy to lysosomal
biogenesis. Science 332: 1429-1433, 2011.

7. Steingrimsson, E.; Sawadogo, M.; Gilbert, D. J.; Zervos, A. S.;
Brent, R.; Blanar, M. A.; Fisher, D. E.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins,
N. A.: Murine chromosomal location of five bHLH-Zip transcription
factor genes. Genomics 28: 179-183, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/1/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/14/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/3/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/19/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/25/1995

EDITED alopez: 07/07/2011
terry: 7/1/2011
alopez: 8/18/2009
terry: 8/14/2009
tkritzer: 5/3/2005
terry: 8/17/2004
tkritzer: 10/20/2003
alopez: 6/26/2003
terry: 6/19/2003
carol: 9/20/1999
alopez: 1/22/1998
mark: 5/14/1996
terry: 9/11/1995
mark: 8/25/1995

612647	TITLE *612647 RADIAL SPOKE HEAD 4, CHLAMYDOMONAS, HOMOLOG OF, A; RSPH4A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Radial spokes are regularly spaced along cilia, sperm, and flagella
axonemes and have a multisubunit 'stalk' and 'head' that form a signal
transduction scaffold between the central microtubule pair and dynein
(see 603297) arms. RSPH4A is predicted to be a component of the radial
spoke head based on homology with proteins in the biflagellate alga
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and other ciliates (Castleman et al., 2009).

CLONING

By genomewide linkage analysis and positional candidate gene analysis in
5 families with primary ciliary dyskinesia linked to chromosome 6q22
(CILD11; 612649) and central microtubule pair abnormalities, Castleman
et al. (2009) identified the RSPH4A and RSPH9 genes (612648). The
deduced RSPH4A protein contains 716 amino acids and shares about 30%
identity with the Chlamydomonas radial spoke head proteins Rsp4 and
Rsp6.

GENE STRUCTURE

Castleman et al. (2009) determined that the RSPH4A gene contains 6
exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Castleman et al. (2009) mapped the RSPH4A
gene to chromosome 6q22.1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 4 Pakistani families with CILD11, Castleman et
al. (2009) identified a homozygous mutation in the RSPH4A gene
(612647.0001). In affected members of a family of northern European
descent with CILD11, they identified compound heterozygosity for 2
mutations in the RSPH4A gene (612647.0001; 612647.0002). The patients
had classic respiratory features of CILD, but no situs abnormalities.
Electron microscopic studies showed complete absence of the central
microtubule pair of the ciliary axoneme. These findings suggested that
radial spoke proteins are not essential for embryonic nodal ciliary
function, which is important in the determination of left-right axis
development.

Kott et al. (2013) identified pathogenic mutations in the RSPH4A gene
(see, e.g., 612647.0004-612647.0005) in 7 (14%) of 48 families with with
a specific CILD phenotype characterized by ciliary central complex and
radial spoke defects. None of the patients had situs inversus.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 11, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
RSPH4A, GLN154TER

In all 10 affected members of 4 Pakistani families with primary ciliary
dyskinesia-11 (612649), Castleman et al. (2009) identified a homozygous
460C-T transition in exon 1 of the RSPH4A gene, resulting in a
gln154-to-ter (Q154X) substitution. The patients had classic respiratory
features of CILD, but no situs abnormalities. Electron microscopic
studies showed complete absence of the central microtubule pair of the
ciliary axoneme.

.0002
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 11, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
RSPH4A, GLN109TER

In affected individuals in a family of northern European descent with
CILD11 (612649), Castleman et al. (2009) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the RSPH4A gene: a 325C-T transition
in exon 1 resulting in a gln109-to-ter (Q109X) substitution, and a
1468C-T transition in exon 3 resulting in an arg490-to-ter (R490X;
612647.0003) substitution. The patients had classic respiratory features
of CILD, but no situs abnormalities. Electron microscopic studies showed
complete absence of the central microtubule pair of the ciliary axoneme.

.0003
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 11, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
RSPH4A, ARG490TER

See Castleman et al. (2009) and 612647.0002.

.0004
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 11, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
RSPH4A, 1-BP DEL, 667A

In a family with primary CILD11 (612649) without situs inversus, Kott et
al. (2013) identified compound heterozygous mutations in the RSPH4A
gene: a 1-bp deletion (667delA), resulting in premature termination
(Ser223AlafsTer15), and a 1-bp deletion (c.1720delA; 612647.0005),
resulting premature termination (Thr424GlnfsTer19). Transmission
electron microscopy showed that a variable proportion of cilia on
respiratory epithelial cells had central complex defects. Radial spokes
were absent in cilia with no central microtubule complex.

.0005
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 11, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
RSPH4A, 1-BP DEL, 1720A

See 612647.0004 and Kott et al. (2013).

REFERENCE 1. Castleman, V. H.; Romio, L.; Chodhari, R.; Hirst, R. A.; de Castro,
S. C. P.; Parker, K. A.; Ybot-Gonzalez, P.; Emes, R. D.; Wilson, S.
W.; Wallis, C.; Johnson, C. A.; Herrera, R. J.; and 12 others:
Mutations in radial spoke head protein genes RSPH9 and RSPH4A cause
primary ciliary dyskinesia with central-microtubular-pair abnormalities. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 84: 197-209, 2009.

2. Kott, E.; Legendre, M.; Copin, B.; Papon, J.-F.; Dastot-Le Moal,
F.; Montantin, G.; Duquesnoy, P.; Piterboth, W.; Amram, D.; Bassinet,
L.; Beucher, J.; Beydon, N.; and 18 others: Loss-of-function mutations
in RSPH1 cause primary ciliary dyskinesia with central-complex and
radial-spoke defects. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 93: 561-570, 2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/16/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/5/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/5/2009

EDITED carol: 11/05/2013
carol: 10/17/2013
ckniffin: 10/16/2013
carol: 3/9/2009
ckniffin: 3/5/2009
mgross: 3/5/2009

605370	TITLE *605370 RHO GTPase-ACTIVATING PROTEIN 26; ARHGAP26
;;GTPase REGULATOR ASSOCIATED WITH FOCAL ADHESION KINASE; GRAF;;
KIAA0621
GRAF/MLL FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Borkhardt et al. (2000) stated that mutual translocations involving
11q23 in acute leukemias had been demonstrated to show fusion between
the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL; 159555) gene and a variety of different
partner genes to a total of 23. The detection of a unique
t(5;11)(q31;q23) in an infant with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia
(JMML; 607785) and an MLL gene rearrangement provided an opportunity to
clone another MLL fusion partner gene. By cloning the breakpoints in
this translocation, Borkhardt et al. (2000) recovered a member of the
GTPase-activating protein (GAP) family, which they identified as the
human homolog of the avian GRAF gene (Hildebrand et al., 1996).

Ishikawa et al. (1998) cloned a GRAF cDNA, which they designated
KIAA0621, from a human brain cDNA library and found that it encodes a
deduced 753-amino acid protein with a molecular mass of 87 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Hildebrand et al. (1996) determined that the GRAF gene is highly
homologous to the BCR gene (151410), which is also involved in a
leukemia-associated translocation. The avian GRAF protein binds to the
C-terminal domain of pp125(FAK), one of the tyrosine kinases predicted
to be a critical component of the integrin signaling transduction
pathway, in an SH3 domain-dependent manner and stimulates the GTPase
activity of the GTP-binding protein RhoA. Thus, GRAF acts as a negative
regulator of RhoA.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, in vitro binding assays, and
immunoprecipitation analysis, Shibata et al. (2001) showed that PKN-beta
(PKN3; 610714) interacted with GRAF and GRAF2 (ARHGAP10; 609746). A
constitutively active form of PKN-beta phosphorylated recombinant GRAF
and GRAF2. Mutation analysis showed that the linker region of PKN-beta
bound to the SH3 domains of GRAF and GRAF2.

MAPPING

Ishikawa et al. (1998) mapped the GRAF gene to chromosome 5. Borkhardt
et al. (2000) found that the GRAF gene maps outside the 5q31 region that
is commonly deleted in hematologic malignancies; however, inactivation
of both alleles in at least some cases suggests that deletions and
mutations of the GRAF gene may be instrumental in the development and
progression of hematologic disorders with a del(5q). By FISH, Borkhardt
et al. (2000) confirmed the assignment of GRAF to 5q31.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Borkhardt et al. (2000) sequenced several cDNA clones from 13 cases of
hematologic malignancy in which 1 allele of GRAF was deleted. In 1
patient with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML; 607785), they found
a point mutation within the GAP domain of the second GRAF allele
(605370.0001). In 2 additional patients, they found an insertion of 52
or 74 bp within the GRAF cDNA, which generated a reading frameshift
followed by a premature stop codon (605370.0002-605370.0003). The
mutations were apparently somatic events.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LEUKEMIA, JUVENILE MYELOMONOCYTIC, SOMATIC
ARHGAP26, ASN417SER

In a leukemic cells derived from a patient with juvenile myelomonocytic
leukemia (JMML; 607785) and a fusion between the MLL gene on 11q and the
GRAF gene on 5q, Borkhardt et al. (2000) identified in the other GRAF
allele an A-to-G transition at nucleotide 1255 that resulted in the
substitution of a serine for an asparagine at amino acid 417. This was
thought to be a second hit in a leukemogenic process.

.0002
LEUKEMIA, JUVENILE MYELOMONOCYTIC, SOMATIC
ARHGAP26, 52-BP INS

In leukemic cells from a patient with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia
(JMML; 607785) and a reciprocal translocation t(5;11)(q31;q23) involving
the GRAF and MLL genes, Borkhardt et al. (2000) found that the other
allele of the GRAF gene carried a 52-bp insertion at the splice junction
of exons 12 and 13. The exon/intron boundary was located at nucleotides
1290/91. The insertion led to a reading frameshift that generated a stop
codon. The predicted truncated GRAF protein lacked almost the entire GAP
domain and therefore was most likely not functional. The 52-bp insertion
(nucleotides 32560-32611) originated from a 524-bp long sequence located
upstream of the 3-prime splice site of the adjacent nearly 13-kb long
intron. Because the insertion is imbedded in perfect splice donor and
acceptor sites, it was thought to be the result of aberrant splicing.

.0003
LEUKEMIA, JUVENILE MYELOMONOCYTIC, SOMATIC
ARHGAP26, 74-BP INS

In leukemic cells from a patient with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia
(JMML; 607785) and a t(5;11)(q31;q23) involving the N-terminal part of
MLL and the C-terminal part of the GRAF gene, Borkhardt et al. (2000)
found that the GRAF allele on the other chromosome 5 carried a 74-bp
insertion located in the 60-kb long intron between exons 15 and 16. The
insertion presumably generated a stop codon. The predicted protein
lacked the SH3 domain of GRAF that was shown to be necessary for the
interaction with the focal adhesion kinase.

REFERENCE 1. Borkhardt, A.; Bojesen, S.; Haas, O. A.; Fuchs, U.; Bartelheimer,
D.; Loncarevic, I. F.; Bohle, R. M.; Harbott, J.; Repp, R.; Jaeger,
U.; Viehmann, S.; Henn, T.; Korth, P.; Scharr, D.; Lampert, F.: The
human GRAF gene is fused to MLL in a unique t(5;11)(q31;q23) and both
alleles are disrupted in three cases of myelodysplastic syndrome/acute
myeloid leukemia with a deletion 5q. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 9168-9173,
2000.

2. Hildebrand, J. D.; Taylor, J. M.; Parsons, T. J.: An SH3 domain-containing
GTPase-activating protein for Rho and Cdc42 associates with focal
adhesion kinase. Molec. Cell. Biol. 16: 3169-3178, 1996.

3. Ishikawa, K.; Nagase, T.; Suyama, M.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.;
Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. X. The complete sequences of 100 new
cDNA clones from brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA
Res. 5: 169-176, 1998.

4. Shibata, H.; Oishi, K.; Yamagiwa, A.; Matsumoto, M.; Mukai, H.;
Ono, Y.: PKN-beta interacts with the SH3 domains of Graf and a novel
Graf related protein, Graf2, which are GTPase activating proteins
for Rho family. J. Biochem. 130: 23-31, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/23/2007
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 10/26/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/26/2000

EDITED wwang: 05/19/2011
ckniffin: 5/3/2011
mgross: 1/23/2007
carol: 10/16/2006
alopez: 5/14/2003
tkritzer: 3/27/2003
carol: 11/17/2000
terry: 10/26/2000
carol: 10/26/2000

602892	TITLE *602892 KILLER CELL LECTIN-LIKE RECEPTOR, SUBFAMILY C, MEMBER 3; KLRC3
;;NKG2E
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Natural killer (NK) cells are lymphocytes that can mediate lysis of
certain tumor cells and virus-infected cells without previous
activation. Members of the NKG2 gene family encode NK cell-specific
lectin-like molecules that may have receptor function. See 161555. By
screening an NK cell library with an NKG2C (KLR2C; 602891) cDNA,
Adamkiewicz et al. (1994) identified cDNAs corresponding to a member of
the NKG2 family that they called NKG2E. The sequence of the predicted
261-amino acid protein is 95% identical to that of NKG2C over the first
191 amino acids.

GENE STRUCTURE

Glienke et al. (1998) determined that the NKG2C, NKG2E, and NKG2F
(602893) genes are highly similar except for variability at their
3-prime ends. The NKG2C gene contains 6 exons, whereas NKG2E has 7 exons
and NKG2F has only 4 exons.

MAPPING

By analysis of a cosmid contig, Plougastel and Trowsdale (1998) found
that the NKG2E gene and other members of the NKG2 gene family are
clustered within 350 kb on 12p13.2-p12.3. This cluster is located within
the NK complex, a region that contains C-type lectin genes
preferentially expressed on NK cells.

REFERENCE 1. Adamkiewicz, T. V.; McSherry, C.; Bach, F. H.; Houchins, J. P.
: Natural killer lectin-like receptors have divergent carboxy-termini,
distinct from C-type lectins. Immunogenetics 39: 218, 1994. Note:
Erratum: Immunogenetics 40: 318 only, 1994.

2. Glienke, J.; Sobanov, Y.; Brostjan, C.; Steffens, C.; Nguyen, C.;
Lehrach, H.; Hofer, E.; Francis, F.: The genomic organization of
NKG2C, E, F, and D receptor genes in the human natural killer gene
complex. Immunogenetics 48: 163-173, 1998.

3. Plougastel, B.; Trowsdale, J.: Sequence analysis of a 62-kb region
overlapping the human KLRC cluster of genes. Genomics 49: 193-199,
1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/21/2005

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/24/1998

EDITED terry: 12/20/2012
mgross: 1/21/2005
alopez: 8/20/1998
alopez: 7/24/1998

604941	TITLE *604941 PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 2, REGULATORY SUBUNIT B, ALPHA; PPP2R2A
;;PR55-ALPHA;;
B55-ALPHA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Protein phosphorylation on serine and threonine residues by protein
kinases is responsible for the communication of many intracellular
signals. Equally important is the dephosphorylation of proteins by
serine/threonine phosphatases. Protein phosphatase-2A (PP2A; see
176915), a heterotrimeric serine/threonine phosphatase, has a
particularly complex set of regulatory subunits controlling its function
and localization. By screening lung fibroblast and fetal brain cDNA
libraries using 2 overlapping oligonucleotides corresponding to a
tryptic peptide derived from the 55-kD subunit of rabbit PP2A (PR55),
Mayer et al. (1991) isolated human cDNAs encoding PPP2R2A and PPP2R2B
(604325), which they termed PR55-alpha and PR55-beta, respectively. The
deduced 447-amino acid PPP2R2A protein has a calculated molecular mass
of approximately 52 kD. SDS-PAGE analysis, however, showed that PPP2R2A
was expressed as a 55-kD protein. The nucleotide sequence of PPP2R2A is
75% identical to PPP2R2B in the coding region. Northern blot analysis
detected PPP2R2A transcripts of 2.3 and 2.5 kb, as well as a less
abundant one of 4.4 kb, in all cell lines examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Hyperphosphorylation of Tau (MAPT; 157140) contributes to Alzheimer
disease (104300), and PP2A dephosphorylates Tau, reducing its
deleterious effect. Using an in vitro assay with recombinant human
proteins, Xu et al. (2008) showed that the B-alpha subunit specifically
and markedly facilitated dephosphorylation of phosphorylated Tau by
heterotrimeric PP2A.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PPP2R2A
gene to chromosome 8 (TMAP WI-18898).

REFERENCE 1. Mayer, R. E.; Hendrix, P.; Cron, P.; Matthies, R.; Stone, S. R.;
Goris, J.; Merlevede, W.; Hofsteenge, J.; Hemmings, B. A.: Structure
of the 55-kDa regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 2A: evidence
for a neuronal-specific isoform. Biochemistry 30: 3589-3597, 1991.

2. Xu, Y.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, P.; Jeffrey, P. D.; Shi, Y.: Structure
of a protein phosphatase 2A holoenzyme: insights into B55-mediated
Tau dephosphorylation. Molec. Cell 31: 873-885, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/29/2009

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/9/2000

EDITED mgross: 06/02/2009
terry: 5/29/2009
mgross: 12/1/2006
mgross: 5/10/2000
mgross: 5/9/2000

605675	TITLE *605675 RING FINGER PROTEIN 14; RNF14
;;ANDROGEN RECEPTOR-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 54; ARA54
DESCRIPTION The RING finger motif is a unique zinc-chelating domain involved in
mediating protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions. Using the
sequence of the partial cDNA clone HFB30 isolated by Ueki et al. (1998)
to screen a human fetal brain cDNA library, Ueki et al. (1999) cloned
the full-length cDNA, which encoded a novel ring finger protein, RNF14.
The deduced 474-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of
approximately 53 kD. RT-PCR analysis revealed ubiquitous expression of
RNF14 in a wide variety of human tissues.

Kang et al. (1999) independently cloned RNF14, which they called ARA54
(androgen receptor-associated protein-54), by a yeast 2-hybrid screen of
a prostate cDNA library. Northern blot analysis detected a major 3-kb
transcript, with highest expression in testis, followed by thymus,
spleen, colon, prostate, and uterus. Low expression was detected in
small intestine and blood leukocytes. The RNF14 transcript was also
strongly detected in 2 other prostate cell lines. A second transcript of
2 kb was detected in testis only. Kang et al. (1999) demonstrated that
RNF14 can function as a coactivator for androgen-dependent transcription
on both wildtype and mutant androgen receptor (313700). They also showed
that in the presence of a certain amount of 17-beta-estradiol or
hydroxyflutamide, the transcriptional activity of a specific AR mutant
was significantly enhanced, whereas that of wildtype and another AR
mutant was not. The authors suggested that both RNF14 and the positions
of the AR mutation might contribute to the specificity of AR-mediated
transactivation.

Ueki et al. (1999) determined that the RNF14 gene contains 9 exons and
spans approximately 20 kb of genomic DNA. By somatic cell hybrid and
radiation hybrid analyses, Ueki et al. (1999) mapped the RNF14 gene to
chromosome 5q23.3-q31.1.

REFERENCE 1. Kang, H.-Y.; Yeh, S.; Fujimoto, N.; Chang, C.: Cloning and characterization
of human prostate coactivator ARA54, a novel protein that associates
with the androgen receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 8570-8576, 1999.

2. Ueki, N.; Oda, T.; Kondo, M.; Yano, K.; Noguchi, T.; Muramatsu,
M.: Selection system for genes encoding nuclear-targeted proteins. Nature
Biotech. 16: 1338-1342, 1998.

3. Ueki, N.; Seki, N.; Yano, K.; Masuho, Y.; Saito, T.; Muramatsu,
M.: Isolation and characterization of a novel human gene (HFB30)
which encodes a protein with a RING finger motif. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1445: 232-236, 1999.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 2/22/2001

EDITED terry: 10/13/2010
cwells: 9/17/2003
mcapotos: 3/13/2001
mcapotos: 2/22/2001
carol: 2/22/2001

601633	TITLE *601633 N-ETHYLMALEIMIDE-SENSITIVE FACTOR; NSF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Mammalian N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive protein was first described by
Glick and Rothman (1987) as the protein that restored the ability of
Golgi membranes that had been inactivated with the reagent
N-ethylmaleimide to re-engage in vesicular transport. The NSF gene was
subsequently cloned from Chinese hamster cells by Block et al. (1988)
and Wilson et al. (1989). NSF is a member of the AAA (ATPases associated
with diverse cellular activities) gene family. Hoyle et al. (1996)
stated that the genes are most related throughout the approximately
200-amino acid domain (the AAA domain) that binds ATP; however, the
family is notable not only for its conservation but also for diverse
functions of its proteins in eukaryotic cells. The family can be
subdivided into those with either 1 or 2 ATP-binding domains. NSF is a
2-domain member of the AAA family. Valosin-containing protein (601023),
which is also involved in membrane fusion, is another 2-AAA domain
protein.

GENE FUNCTION

The process of vesicle targeting and fusion in the secretory and
endocytic pathways has been described by the SNAREs hypothesis (Rothman,
1994). This proposes that vesicles dock with specific target membranes
by binding to membrane-specific SNAREs (soluble
N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factors attachment protein receptors) (see
604026). Hoyle et al. (1996) noted that targeting specificity is also
affected by the Rabs, a group of small soluble GTPases. After the
vesicle has bound to the target membrane, the SNARE multimer is joined
by the soluble SNAP proteins and N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor
(NSF). The resulting large complex is thought to allow membrane fusion
and the ATPase activity of the NSF appears to be essential for the
process. Hoyle et al. (1996) stated that while many of different SNAREs,
Rabs, and SNAPs are involved in membrane fusion, there is only 1 NSF,
and the SNARE hypothesis describes NSF-dependent fusion.

By use of microarray expression profiling of prefrontal cortex from
matched pairs of patients with schizophrenia (181500) and control
subjects and hierarchical data analysis, Mirnics et al. (2000) found
that transcripts encoding proteins involved in the regulation of
presynaptic function were decreased in all subjects with schizophrenia.
Genes of presynaptic function showed a different combination of
decreased expression across subjects. Over 250 other gene groups did not
show altered expression. Selected presynaptic function gene microarray
observations were verified by in situ hybridization. Two of the most
consistently changed transcripts in the presynaptic functional gene
group, N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor and synapsin-2 (600755), were
decreased in 10 of 10 and 9 of 10 subjects with schizophrenia,
respectively. The combined data suggested that subjects with
schizophrenia share a common abnormality in presynaptic function.

MAPPING

By PCR amplification in a human monochromosomal somatic cell hybrid
mapping panel, Hoyle et al. (1996) mapped the NSF gene to human
chromosome 17. To determine a regional mapping position for NSF and to
confirm their cell hybrid results, they isolated NSF-containing human
cosmids for fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) mapping. The
results showed that the gene mapped to 17q21-q22. They mapped the mouse
homolog, Nsf, to mouse chromosome 11 by analysis of DNA from
interspecific backcrosses. Hoyle et al. (1996) noted that there are
neurologic disorders mapping in that region of chromosome 17, such as
DDBAC (600274) and PPND (600274), which may be allelic disorders. They
noted that NSF is preferentially expressed in the mammalian nervous
system. An aberrant Nsf gene in Drosophila results in defective synaptic
transmission.

REFERENCE 1. Block, M. R.; Glick, B. S.; Wilcox, C. A.; Wieland, F. T.; Rothman,
J. E.: Purification of an N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive protein catalyzing
vesicular transport. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 7852-7856, 1988.

2. Glick, B. S.; Rothman, J. E.: Possible role for fatty acyl-coenzyme
A in intracellular protein transport. Nature 326: 309-312, 1987.

3. Hoyle, J.; Phelan, J. P.; Bermingham, N.; Fisher, E. M. C.: Localization
of human and mouse N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF) gene: a
two-domain member of the AAA family that is involved in membrane fusion. Mammalian
Genome 7: 850-852, 1996.

4. Mirnics, K.; Middleton, F. A.; Marquez, A.; Lewis, D. A.; Levitt,
P.: Molecular characterization of schizophrenia viewed by microarray
analysis of gene expression in prefrontal cortex. Neuron 28: 53-67,
2000.

5. Rothman, J. E.: Mechanisms of intracellular protein transport. Nature 372:
55-63, 1994.

6. Wilson, D. W.; Wilcox, C. A.; Flynn, G. C.; Chen, E.; Kuang, W.-J.;
Henzel, W. J.; Block, M. R.; Ullrich, A.; Rothman, J. E.: A fusion
protein required for vesicle-mediated transport in both mammalian
cells and yeast. Nature 339: 355-359, 1989.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/16/1997

EDITED terry: 05/20/2010
alopez: 7/15/2009
terry: 7/9/2009
cwells: 1/23/2001
cwells: 1/19/2001
jamie: 1/16/1997

612911	TITLE *612911 NADH DEHYDROGENASE 1 ALPHA SUBCOMPLEX, ASSEMBLY FACTOR 3; NDUFAF3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Hartmann and Stamm (1997) cloned rat Ndufaf3, which they called E3-3,
and identified the human ortholog by EST database analysis. RT-PCR
detected E3-3 expression in all rat tissues examined, with highest
expression in testis.

Using human SOB1 (AKAP3; 604689) in a low-stringency screen of a mouse
germinal cell cDNA library, Hammami-Hamza et al. (2003) cloned mouse
Ndufaf3, which they called 2P1. Northern blot analysis detected
expression only in mouse testis. In situ hybridization detected 2P1 in
stage I pachytene spermatocytes, and expression persisted until stage
XII of the spermatogenic cycle. No expression was detected in
interstitial tissue.

Saada et al. (2009) stated that the NDUFAF3 gene encodes 2 isoforms, A
and B, which share a 'domain of unknown function' (DUF498). The longer A
isoform harbors a predicted N-terminal mitochondrial-targeting sequence
of about 35 amino acids.

GENE STRUCTURE

The NDUFAF3 gene contains 4 exons (Saada et al., 2009).

MAPPING

Hartz (2009) mapped the NDUFAF3 gene to chromosome 3p21.31 based on an
alignment of the NDUFAF3 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AL049955) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

GENE FUNCTION

Using subcellular fractionation experiments, Saada et al. (2009) showed
that NDUFAF3 was predominantly localized to mitochondria and remained in
the pellet after carbonate extraction, suggesting a strong interaction
with the mitochondrial membrane, although NDUFAF3 has no predicted
transmembrane helices. Localization appeared identical to that of
NDUFAF4 (611776). RNA interference studies indicated that the NDUFAF3
gene product is necessary for mitochondrial complex I assembly. The
activity of NDUFAF3 showed functional interdependence with NDUFAF4. Gene
conservation analysis linked NDUFAF3 to the bacterial-membrane-insertion
gene cluster SecF/SecD/YajC and C8ORF38 (612392), suggesting a
translation-dependent early assembly mechanism.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 5 patients with severe mitochondrial complex I deficiency (252010)
and lactic acidosis, Saada et al. (2009) identified homozygous or
compound heterozygous mutations in the NDUFAF3 gene
(612911.0001-612911.0003). All patients died before age 6 months.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY
NDUFAF3, GLY77ARG

In 3 Muslim sibs with severe mitochondrial complex I deficiency (252010)
resulting in death by age 3 months, Saada et al. (2009) identified a
homozygous 229G-C transversion in the NDUFAF3 gene, resulting in a
gly77-to-arg (G77R) substitution. The parents were consanguineous.

.0002
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY
NDUFAF3, ARG122PRO

In a male infant with severe mitochondrial complex I deficiency
(252010), Saada et al. (2009) identified a homozygous 365G-C
transversion in the NDUFAF3 gene, resulting in an arg122-to-pro (R122P)
substitution at the C-terminal end of the protein. The child was born of
consanguineous Arab Muslim parents. At 3 weeks of age, he became
hypoactive and sucked poorly. Physical examination revealed
macrocephaly, a weak cry, wide anterior fontanel, and axial hypotonia.
He had intermittent generalized tonic movements, and funduscopy showed
pallor of the optic discs. At 3 months of age, there was no eye contact
and marked axial hypotonia with brisk tendon reflexes. He died at age 4
months.

.0003
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY
NDUFAF3, MET1THR

In a female infant with severe mitochondrial complex I deficiency
(252010), Saada et al. (2009) identified compound heterozygosity for
mutation in the NDUFAF3 gene: a 2T-C transition, resulting in a
met1-to-thr (M1T) substitution, and the R122P (612911.0002) mutation.
She was the daughter of unrelated parents of Jewish origin. At age 3
months, she developed myoclonic seizures, and brain MRI revealed diffuse
brain leukomalacia. She died at age 6 months of respiratory failure.
Complex I activity was markedly decreased.

REFERENCE 1. Hammami-Hamza, S.; Doussau, M.; Allemand, I.; Segretain, D.; Gasc,
J.-M.; Finaz, C.: 2P1, a novel male mouse cDNA specifically expressed
during meiosis. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 47: 71-76, 2003.

2. Hartmann, A. M.; Stamm, S.: Molecular cloning of a novel alternatively
spliced nuclear protein. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1353: 224-230, 1997.

3. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  7/14/2009.

4. Saada, A.; Vogel, R. O.; Hoefs, S. J.; van den Brand, M. A.; Wessels,
H. J.; Willems, P. H.; Venselaar, H.; Shaag, A.; Barghuti, F.; Reish,
O.; Shohat, M.; Huynen, M. A.; Smeitink, J. A. M.; van den Heuvel,
L. P.; Nijtmans, L. G.: Mutations in NDUFAF3 (C3ORF60), encoding
an NDUFAF4 (C6ORF66)-interacting complex I assembly protein, cause
fatal neonatal mitochondrial disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 84: 718-727,
2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/22/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/14/2009

EDITED carol: 12/18/2009
wwang: 8/4/2009
ckniffin: 7/22/2009
mgross: 7/14/2009

611550	TITLE *611550 NATURAL CYTOTOXICITY TRIGGERING RECEPTOR 3; NCR3
;;1C7;;
ACTIVATING NATURAL KILLER RECEPTOR p30; NKp30;;
CD337 ANTIGEN; CD337
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Natural cytotoxicity receptors (NCRs), such as NCR3, are activating
natural killer (NK) cell receptors that belong to the immunoglobulin
(Ig) superfamily. NCR3 is expressed in all resting and activated NK
cells and forms a complex with CD3-zeta (CD3Z, or CD247; 186780) (Sato
et al., 2001).

CLONING

Pende et al. (1999) generated monoclonal antibodies (mAb) and identified
one that reacted with a 30-kD integral membrane protein, NKp30, on NK
cells and cell lines. By screening an NK cell cDNA expression library,
they isolated a cDNA encoding NKp30. The deduced 190-amino acid protein
has a signal peptide followed by a 120-amino acid extracellular region
that forms a V-type Ig-like domain with 2 potential N-linked
glycosylation sites; a hydrophobic transmembrane region with a
positively charged arg residue; and a 33-amino acid cytoplasmic tail
lacking an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activating motif (ITAM).
Northern blot analysis detected a 1.0-kb transcript only in NK cells.

Using Northern blot analysis, Sivakamasundari et al. (2000) detected a
1.35-kb 1C7 transcript in human spleen, lymph node, and blood
leukocytes, with lower expression in appendix. They noted that the 3
principal IC7 splice variants differ in exon 4, and RT-PCR showed that
all 3 were expressed in human tonsil and NKL cells. However, a unique
splicing pattern was observed in human liver, including differential
usage of exon 2. Fluorescence microscopy of transfected COS-7 cells
showed cytoplasmic and perinuclear expression of IC7.
Immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization revealed expression of
IC7 in tonsillar NK germinal center cells. Western blot analysis
detected IC7 protein in human tonsil, NKL cells, and brain.
Sivakamasundari et al. (2000) noted that Ic7 is a pseudogene in mouse,
but not rat.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Neville and Campbell (1999) mapped the NCR3 gene
centromeric to LST1 (LY117; 109170) and telomeric to AIF1 (601833) on
chromosome 6p21.3.

GENE FUNCTION

Pende et al. (1999) found that treatment of NK cells with anti-NKp30
inhibited natural cytotoxicity against normal target cells and most
tumor cells. Further analysis determined that NKp30 sometimes cooperated
with NKp44 (NCR2; 604531) and NKp46 (NCR1; 604530) in mediating
cytotoxicity. Western blot analysis showed that NKp30 associated with
CD3Z. Thus, NKp30 can transduce activating signals by its association
with ITAM-containing CD3Z polypeptides.

Using flow cytometric analysis, Arnon et al. (2005) showed that pp65,
the main tegument protein of human cytomegalovirus, inhibited NK cell
cytotoxicity by interacting directly and specifically with NKp30. The
interaction led to dissociation of CD3Z from NKp30 and, consequently,
reduced killing.

Using RT-PCR analysis, Mulcahy et al. (2006) detected significantly
increased expression of LST1 (109170) in blood of rheumatoid arthritis
(RA; 180300) patients and of NCR3 in blood and synovium of RA patients
compared with controls. The increased LST1 and NCR3 expression was
independent of any increase in inflammatory cells. Both genes were also
significantly upregulated in response to lipopolysaccharide, IFNG
(147570), and bacterial infection. Mulcahy et al. (2006) concluded that
LST1 and NCR3 are involved in infection, autoimmune-related
inflammation, and dendritic cell/NK cell-associated functions.

Mavoungou et al. (2007) found that NKp30- and NKp46-Ig fusion proteins
interacted with the Duffy binding-like-1-alpha (Dbl1a) domain of P.
falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein-1 on the surface of infected red
cells. The interaction was functional, leading NK cells to produce
perforin (PRF1; 170280) and granzyme B (GZMB; 123910) and to lyse
infected erythrocytes.

Using NKp30-Fc fusion proteins to screen for molecules binding NKp30 and
triggering NKp30-mediated cytolysis, followed by proteomic and mass
spectrometric analyses, Brandt et al. (2009) identified B7H6 (613714).
Using surface plasmon resonance experiments, they confirmed interaction
between B7H6 and NKp30, and interaction of the 2 proteins could be
blocked by anti-NKp30. Expression of B7H6 in a murine mastocytoma line
enabled cytotoxicity by an NKp30-expressing NK cell line and by IL2
(147680)-activated primary human NK cells.

In transfection studies of a human NK cell line, Delahaye et al. (2011)
observed functional differences between the 3 alternatively spliced exon
4 isoforms of NCR3. The 3 isoforms transmitted distinct signals: both
NCR3a and NCR3b stimulated Th1 cytokine release, including IL12 (see
161561) and gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570), whereas NCR3a was the only
isoform that triggered cytotoxicity. These functions were consistent
with an immunostimulatory effect. In contrast, NCR3c promoted IL10
(124092) production, relaying an immunosuppressive signal through rapid
phosphorylation of p38 MAP kinase (MAPK14; 600289).

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Li et al. (2011) determined the structure of NKp30 in complex with B7H6.
NKp30 uses both front and back beta sheets of its Ig-like domain to bind
B7H6, in contrast to CTLA4 (123890) and PD1 (PDCD1; 600244), which only
use the front beta sheet to bind ligands. B7H6 contacts NKp30 through
the complementarity-determining region-like loops of its V-like domain
in an antibody-like interaction not seen for B7 (CD80; 112203) or PDL
(PDCD1LG1; 605402). Li et al. (2011) proposed that the NKp30-B7H6
structure may be useful in designing molecules to stimulate
NKp30-mediated cytolytic activity for tumor immunotherapy.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Sato et al. (2001) identified SNPs in the promoter region and in exon 2
of the NCR3 gene.

A susceptibility locus for mild malaria maps to the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) region on chromosome 6 (MALS; 609148),
and polymorphisms in TNF (191160), which is 15 kb proximal to NCR3, are
associated with mild malaria. By genotyping 10 NCR3 SNPs in a
malaria-endemic Burkina Faso population, Delahaye et al. (2007)
identified an association between mild malaria and the -412G-C
(611550.0001; dbSNP rs2736191) SNP in the NCR3 promoter. Carriers with
the -412C variant had more frequent mild malaria attacks than -412GG
individuals. NCR3 -412C and a haplotype containing -412C were
significantly associated with increased risk of mild malaria, and the
association was independent of TNF. Delahaye et al. (2007) concluded
that at least 2 centrally located MHC region genes are involved in
genetic control of malaria. They proposed that genetic variation in
NK-cell receptors may account for the heterogeneity of NK-cell
reactivity to P. falciparum-infected erythrocytes.

Delahaye et al. (2011) found an association between alternatively
spliced exon 4 isoforms of NCR3 and prognosis in gastrointestinal
stromal tumors (GIST; 606764). In a study of 44 GIST tumors,
tumor-infiltrating NK cells showed downregulation of NCR3 compared to
circulating cells of healthy volunteers. The density of the NK cell
infiltrate was inversely correlated with the presence of metastasis at
diagnosis, suggesting an NK cell-mediated immunosurveillance mechanism
in these tumors. RT-PCR studies of peripheral blood from 80 patients
with GIST showed preferential expression of the immunosuppressive NCR3c
isoform in 53%, compared to healthy volunteers, of whom only 30%
expressed isoform NCR3c (p = 0.02). NK cells from GIST patients with the
NCR3c isoform showed a defect in NCR3-driven NK effector functions. A
retrospective analysis of 80 GIST patients treated with imatinib showed
decreased overall survival in those with the NRC3c isoform compared to
those with NRC3a and NRC3b isoforms (p = 0.001). Delahaye et al. (2011)
also found an association between a 3790T-C SNP (dbSNP rs986475) in the
promoter region of the NCR3 gene, as well as other SNPs, and expression
of the NCR3c isoform. The findings suggested that the genetically
determined NCR3 status may predict clinical outcome in patients with
GIST.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MALARIA, MILD, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
NCR3, -412G-C, 5-PRIME UTR

By genotyping 10 NCR3 SNPs in 34 families comprising 53 parents and 140
sibs in a P. falciparum malaria-endemic region of Burkina Faso, Delahaye
et al. (2007) identified a significant association between mild malaria
(609148) and a SNP in the NCR3 promoter, a G-to-C change at position
-412 (dbSNP rs2736191) relative to the transcription start site.
Carriers with the -412C variant had more frequent mild malaria attacks
than -412GG individuals, and -412C and a haplotype containing -412C were
significantly associated with increased risk of mild malaria.

REFERENCE 1. Arnon, T. I.; Achdout, H.; Levi, O.; Markel, G.; Saleh, N.; Katz,
G.; Gazit, R.; Gonen-Gross, T.; Hanna, J.; Nahari, E.; Porgador, A.;
Honigman, A.; Plachter, B.; Mevorach, D.; Wolf, D. G.; Mandelboim,
O.: Inhibition of the NKp30 activating receptor by pp65 of human
cytomegalovirus. Nature Immun. 6: 515-523, 2005.

2. Brandt, C. S.; Baratin, M.; Yi, E. C.; Kennedy, J.; Gao, Z.; Fox,
B.; Haldeman, B.; Ostrander, C. D.; Kaifu, T.; Chabannon, C.; Moretta,
A.; West, R.; Xu, W.; Vivier, E.; Levin, S. D.: The B7 family member
B7-H6 is a tumor cell ligand for the activating natural killer cell
receptor NKp30 in humans. J. Exp. Med. 206: 1495-1503, 2009.

3. Delahaye, N. F.; Barbier, M.; Fumoux, F.; Rihet, P.: Association
analyses of NCR3 polymorphisms with P. falciparum mild malaria. Microbes
Infect. 9: 160-166, 2007.

4. Delahaye, N. F.; Rusakiewicz, S.; Martins, I.; Menard, C.; Roux,
S.; Lyonnet, L.; Pascale, P.; Sarabi, M.; Chaput, N.; Semeraro, M.;
Minard-Colin, V.; Poirier-Colame, V.; and 29 others: Alternatively
spliced NKp30 isoforms affect the prognosis of gastrointestinal stromal
tumors. Nature Med. 17: 700-707, 2011.

5. Li, Y.; Wang, Q.; Mariuzza, R. A.: Structure of the human activating
natural cytotoxicity receptor NKp30 bound to its tumor cell ligand
B7-H6. J. Exp. Med. 208: 703-714, 2011.

6. Mavoungou, E.; Held, J.; Mewono, L.; Kremsner, P. G.: A Duffy
binding-like domain is involved in the NKp30-mediated recognition
of Plasmodium falciparum-parasitized erythrocytes by natural killer
cells. J. Infect. Dis. 195: 1521-1531, 2007.

7. Mulcahy, H.; O'Rourke, K. P.; Adams, C.; Molloy, M. G.; O'Gara,
F.: LST1 and NCR3 expression in autoimmune inflammation and in response
to IFN-gamma, LPS and microbial infection. Immunogenetics 57: 893-903,
2006.

8. Neville, M. J.; Campbell, R. D.: A new member of the Ig superfamily
and a V-ATPase G subunit are among the predicted products of novel
genes close to the TNF locus in the human MHC. J. Immun. 162: 4745-4754,
1999.

9. Pende, D.; Parolini, S.; Pessino, A.; Sivori, S.; Augugliaro, R.;
Morelli, L.; Marcenaro, E.; Accame, L.; Malaspina, A.; Biassoni, R.;
Bottino, C.; Moretta, L.; Moretta, A.: Identification and molecular
characterization of NKp30, a novel triggering receptor involved in
natural cytotoxicity mediated by human natural killer cells. J. Exp.
Med. 190: 1505-1516, 1999.

10. Sato, M.; Ohashi, J.; Tsuchiya, N.; Tadokoro, K.; Juji, T.; Hanaoka,
K.; Tokunaga, K.; Yabe, T.: Identification of novel single nucleotide
substitutions in the NKp30 gene expressed in human natural killer
cells. Tissue Antigens 58: 255-258, 2001.

11. Sivakamasundari, R.; Raghunathan, A.; Zhang, C. Y.; Chowdhury,
R.-R.; Weissman, S. M.: Expression and cellular localization of the
protein encoded by the 1C7 gene: a recently described component of
the MHC. Immunogenetics 51: 723-732, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/22/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/6/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/30/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/19/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/15/2007

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/24/2007

EDITED terry: 10/10/2011
mgross: 10/3/2011
terry: 9/22/2011
carol: 9/7/2011
ckniffin: 9/6/2011
mgross: 7/11/2008
terry: 4/30/2008
mgross: 3/20/2008
terry: 3/19/2008
mgross: 11/29/2007
terry: 11/15/2007
mgross: 10/24/2007

