607783	TITLE *607783 MESODERM DEVELOPMENT CANDIDATE GENE 2; MESDC2
;;MESODERM DEVELOPMENT GENE; MESD;;
KIAA0081;;
BOCA, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; BOCA
MESDC2/SENP1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing cDNAs randomly selected from a cDNA library derived from
the human immature myeloid cell line KG-1, Nagase et al. (1995) isolated
a cDNA encoding MESDC2, which they designated KIAA0081. The predicted
233-amino acid protein contains at least 1 putative transmembrane
region. Northern blot analysis detected expression in all tissues tested
except peripheral blood leukocytes.

Wines et al. (2001) cloned mouse Mesdc2, which encodes a 223-amino acid
protein that shares 82% identity with the 234-amino acid human protein.
MESDC2 was predicted to have an N-terminal transmembrane domain.
Northern blot analysis detected a 1.8-kb transcript in mouse embryos
throughout development and in all adult mouse tissues tested, except
skeletal muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Hsieh et al. (2003) demonstrated that Mesdc2, a gene identified in the
mesoderm development (Mesd) deletion interval on mouse chromosome 7, is
essential for specification of embryonic polarity and mesoderm
induction. They determined that the patterning and cell differentiation
defects observed in Mesd deletion homozygotes result solely from loss of
the Mesdc2 gene, and therefore they renamed the gene Mesd. Hsieh et al.
(2003) showed that Mesd functions in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) as a
specific chaperone for Lrp5 (603506) and Lrp6 (603507), which in
conjunction with frizzled (see 603408) are coreceptors for canonical Wnt
signal transduction. The authors proposed that disruption of embryonic
polarity and mesoderm differentiation in Mesd-deficient embryos likely
results from a primary defect in Wnt signaling. However, phenotypic
differences between Mesd-deficient and Wnt3 (165330) -/- embryos
suggested that Mesd may function on related members of the LDLR family.
LDLR family members mediate diverse cellular processes ranging from
cargo transport to signaling.

Culi and Mann (2003) described boca, an evolutionarily conserved gene in
Drosophila melanogaster that encodes an ER protein homologous to the
mouse Mesdc2 protein. They showed that boca is specifically required for
the intracellular trafficking of members of the LDLR family. Two LDLRs
in flies, arrow (see 603507), which is required for wingless signal
transduction, and yolkless, which is required for yolk protein uptake
during oogenesis, were found to require boca function. Culi and Mann
(2003) concluded that boca is an essential component of the wingless
pathway but is more generally required for the activities of multiple
LDLR family members.

Veltman et al. (2005) identified a patient with an infantile
sacrococcygeal teratoma and a constitutional t(12;15)(q13;q25)
chromosomal translocation, resulting SENP1 (612157)/MESDC2 fusion gene.
Both reciprocal SENP1/MESDC2 (SEME) and MESDC2/SENP1 (MESE) fusion genes
were transcribed in tumor-derived cells, and their open reading frames
encoded aberrant proteins. In contrast to wildtype MESDC2, the
translocation-associated SEME protein was no longer targeted to the
endoplasmic reticulum, leading to a presumed loss-of-function as a
chaperone for the WNT coreceptors LRP5 (603506) and/or LRP6 (603507).
SUMO, a posttranslational modifier, plays an important role in several
cellular key processes and is cleaved from its substrates by wildtype
SENP1. In vitro studies revealed that translocation-associated MESE
proteins exhibited desumoylation capacities similar to those observed
for wildtype SENP1. Veltman et al. (2005) speculated that spatiotemporal
disturbances in desumoylating activities during critical stages of
embryonic development might be responsible for teratoma formation. The
constitutional t(12;15)(q13;q25) translocation suggested SENP1 and
MESDC2 as candidate genes for neonatal/infantile germ cell tumor
development.

MAPPING

Nagase et al. (1995) mapped the MESDC2 gene to chromosome 15 by analysis
of human-rodent hybrid cell lines.

By radiation hybrid analysis and sequencing a BAC contig, Wines et al.
(2001) mapped the MESCD2 gene to chromosome 15q23-q25. They mapped the
mouse Mesdc2 gene to a region of chromosome 7 that shares homology of
synteny with human chromosome 15q23-q25.

Veltman et al. (2005) stated that the MESDC2 gene maps to chromosome
15q25.

ANIMAL MODEL

Wines et al. (2001) identified Mesdc2 within a region of mouse
chromosome 7 that, when deleted, results in failure to form mesoderm and
embryonic lethality.

REFERENCE 1. Culi, J.; Mann, R. S.: Boca, an endoplasmic reticulum protein
required for Wingless signaling and trafficking of LDL receptor family
members in Drosophila. Cell 112: 343-354, 2003.

2. Hsieh, J.-C.; Lee, L.; Zhang, L.; Wefer, S.; Brown, K.; DeRossi,
C.; Wines, M. E.; Rosenquist, T.; Holdener, B. C.: Mesd encodes the
LRP5/6 chaperone essential for specification of mouse embryonic polarity. Cell 112:
355-367, 2003.

3. Nagase, T; Miyajima, N; Tanaka, A.; Sazuka, T.; Seki, N.; Sato,
S.; Tabata, S.; Ishikawa, K.; Kawarabayashi, Y.; Kotani, H.; Nomura,
N.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes.
III. The coding sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0081-KIAA0120) deduced
by analysis of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 2:
37-43, 1995.

4. Veltman, I. M.; Vreede, L. A.; Cheng, J.; Looijenga, L. H. J.;
Janssen, B.; Schoenmakers, E. F. P. M.; Yeh, E. T. H.; Geurts van
Kessel, A.: Fusion of the SUMO/sentrin-specific protease 1 gene SENP1
and the embryonic polarity-related mesoderm development gene MESDC2
in a patient with an infantile teratoma and a constitutional t(12;15)(q13;q25). Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 1955-1963, 2005.

5. Wines, M. E.; Lee, L.; Katari, M. S.; Zhang, L.; DeRossi, C.; Shi,
Y.; Perkins, S.; Feldman, M.; McCombie, W. R.; Holdener, B. C.: Identification
of mesoderm development (mesd) candidate genes by comparative mapping
and genome sequence analysis. Genomics 72: 88-98, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz: 10/9/2013
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/17/2008
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/13/2003

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 5/13/2003

EDITED mgross: 10/18/2013
tpirozzi: 10/9/2013
wwang: 11/18/2008
wwang: 11/17/2008
mgross: 5/13/2003

608216	TITLE *608216 COMM DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 5; COMMD5
;;COPPER METABOLISM MURR1 DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 5;;
HYPERTENSION-RELATED CALCIUM-REGULATED GENE; HCARG
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Solban et al. (2000) cloned rat Hcarg from a cDNA library constructed
from the spontaneously hypertensive rat parathyroid gland. The deduced
224-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 22.5 kD.
Hcarg has a 67% alpha helix content, a calcium-binding EF-hand motif, 4
putative leucine zipper motifs, a nuclear receptor-binding domain, and
no transmembrane domain. It also contains several putative
phosphorylation sites and an N-glycosylation site. Using rat Hcarg as
probe, Solban et al. (2000) cloned human HCARG from a vascular smooth
muscle cell cDNA library. The deduced 224-amino acid protein shares 80%
homology with rat Hcarg. Multiple-tissue expression array analysis
detected high expression in heart, stomach, jejunum, kidney, liver, and
adrenal gland. Expression was generally higher in adult organs than in
fetal tissues, particularly in heart, kidney, and liver. In situ
hybridization of rat tissues detected expression in the medulla and zona
fasciculata of the adrenal cortex and in the tubules of the kidney, but
showed no expression in renal glomeruli. Immunofluorescence microscopy
of transfected COS-7 cells and immunohistochemical staining of rat
pituitary detected Hcarg predominantly localized to the nucleus, with
some staining at sites of protein synthesis.

GENE FUNCTION

Solban et al. (2000) found that expression of Hcarg was higher in the
adrenal cortex and kidney tubules of hypertensive rats compared with
their normotensive controls. Rat Hcarg inhibited cell proliferation in
human embryonic kidney cells following transfection.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Solban et al. (2002) mapped the COMMD5
gene to chromosome 8q24.3.

REFERENCE 1. Solban, N.; Dumas, P.; Gossard, F.; Sun, Y.; Pravenec, M.; Kren,
V.; Lewanczuk, R.; Hamet, P.; Tremblay, J.: Chromosomal mapping of
HCaRG, a novel hypertension-related, calcium-regulated gene. Folia
Biologica 48: 9-14, 2002.

2. Solban, N.; Jia, H.-P.; Richard, S.; Tremblay, S.; Devlin, A. M.;
Peng, J.; Gossard, F.; Guo, D.-F.; Morel, G.; Hamet, P.; Lewanczuk,
R.; Tremblay, J.: HCaRG, a novel calcium-regulated gene coding for
a nuclear protein, is potentially involved in the regulation of cell
proliferation. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 32234-32243, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/30/2003

EDITED mgross: 02/27/2009
alopez: 5/12/2008
terry: 5/10/2006
mgross: 10/30/2003

603478	TITLE *603478 UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE 1; USP1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) are capable of producing a free
ubiquitin moiety from ubiquitin-fused precursors and ubiquitylated
proteins in cells. DUBs possess conserved catalytic regions known as the
'cys domain' and the 'his domain.' There are 2 distinct families of
DUBs: ubiquitin-specific processing proteases (UBPs, or USPs) and
ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolases (UCHs).

CLONING

By computerized sequence analysis of human fetal brain cDNAs, Fujiwara
et al. (1998) identified a cDNA encoding a novel UBP family member,
which they designated USP1 (ubiquitin-specific protease-1). The
predicted 785-amino acid USP1 protein contains a cys domain and a his
domain, as well as conserved asp and KRF domains. Recombinant USP1
protein exhibited UBP activity.

MAPPING

By analysis of radiation hybrids and by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Fujiwara et al. (1998) mapped the USP1 gene to
1p32.1-p31.3.

REFERENCE 1. Fujiwara, T.; Saito, A.; Suzuki, M.; Shinomiya, H.; Suzuki, T.;
Takahashi, E.; Tanigami, A.; Ichiyama, A.; Chung, C. H.; Nakamura,
Y.; Tanaka, K.: Identification and chromosomal assignment of USP1,
a novel gene encoding a human ubiquitin-specific protease. Genomics 54:
155-158, 1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/3/1999

EDITED wwang: 12/17/2008
carol: 1/31/2003
alopez: 2/3/1999

601683	TITLE *601683 COQ7, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; COQ7
;;CLK1, C. ELEGANS, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the nematode C. elegans, the activity of clk1 controls the rate of
worm development, the pace of behaviors, and the time of death. Ewbank
et al. (1997) identified the C. elegans clk1 gene. They showed that the
predicted 187-amino acid clk1 protein is conserved among eukaryotes,
including humans, and they cloned partial cDNAs representing the human
and mouse homologs. The clk1 protein is structurally similar to the S.
cerevisiae metabolic regulator Cat5 (also called Coq7). These proteins
contain a tandem duplication of a core 82-residue domain.

Asaumi et al. (1999) cloned the mouse homolog of clk1, designated Coq7.
They cloned the human COQ7 cDNA by screening a liver cDNA library with
the mouse cDNA as probe. Human COQ7 encodes a deduced 217-amino acid
protein with a calculated molecular mass of 24.3 kD. The protein shares
85%, 89%, 53%, and 37% sequence identity with orthologs from mouse, rat,
C. elegans, and S. cerevisiae, respectively. COQ7 transfected into COS-7
cells shows a single band of about 25 kD by Western blot analysis.
Northern blot analysis detected expression of a 0.9-kb COQ7 transcript
in heart and skeletal muscle, with barely detectable expression in
brain, placenta, liver, kidney, and pancreas.

Takahashi et al. (2001) cloned Coq7 from a mouse diaphragm cDNA library
and found that the deduced 217-amino acid protein has an N-terminal,
38-residue mitochondria targeting sequence. Immunofluorescence
localization of Coq7 revealed punctate staining in the cytoplasm of
skeletal muscle and heart muscle, in smooth muscle cells surrounding
small blood vessels, and in renal tubule cells. Coq7 transfected into
COS-7 cells gave a punctate staining pattern consistent with
mitochondrial localization, and transfection with Coq7 lacking the
putative mitochondria targeting sequence led to diffuse cytoplasmic
staining.

Vajo et al. (1999) cloned COQ7 from human heart. They found that the
predicted protein contains 179 amino acids, is mostly helical, and
contains an alpha-helical membrane insertion. It has a potential
N-glycosylation site, a phosphorylation site for protein kinase C and
another for casein kinase II, and 3 N-myristoylation sites. Northern
blot analysis detected 3 transcripts; a 1-kb transcript was predominant
in heart, and a 3-kb transcript was predominant in skeletal muscle,
kidney, and pancreas.

GENE FUNCTION

Ewbank et al. (1997) noted that the timing of a wide range of
physiologic processes is deregulated and the life span is extended in C.
elegans clk1 mutants. Mutations in clk1, clk2 (TELO2; 611140), clk3, and
gro1 interact genetically to affect developmental rate and longevity.
They demonstrated that the clk1 gene complemented the clk1 phenotypes
and restored normal longevity. They also showed that clk1 complements
the phenotype of S. cerevisiae Cat5/Coq7 null mutants, demonstrating
that the 2 genes share biochemical function and that clk1 acts at the
level of cellular physiology.

In yeast, Coq7/Cat5 is essential for several metabolic pathways,
including ubiquinone biosynthesis, respiration, and gluconeogenic gene
activation. Jonassen et al. (1998) demonstrated that the Coq7/Cat5 gene
product is a mitochondrial inner membrane protein directly involved in
ubiquinone biosynthesis. They showed that the defect in gluconeogenic
gene activation in coq7/cat5 null mutants is a general consequence of a
defect in respiration. Jonassen et al. (1998) stated that these results
obtained in the yeast model suggest that the effects on development and
life span in C. elegans clk1 mutants may relate to changes in the amount
of ubiquinone, an essential electron transport component and a
lipid-soluble antioxidant.

Guarente (1997) discussed the relevance of the studies in yeast and
nematode to the understanding of human aging.

GENE STRUCTURE

By PCR amplification and Southern blot analysis on human genomic DNA,
Asaumi et al. (1999) determined that the COQ7 gene contains 6 exons and
spans 11 kb. Analysis of the putative promoter region revealed an Alu-J
subfamily consensus sequence, and CAAT box- and TATA box-like sequences.

MAPPING

By PCR analysis of human/rodent somatic cell hybrids and radiation
hybrid analysis, Asaumi et al. (1999) mapped the COQ7 gene to chromosome
16p12.3-p11. By radiation hybrid analysis and FISH, Vajo et al. (1999)
mapped the gene to 16p13.1-p12.

REFERENCE 1. Asaumi, S.; Kuroyanagi, H.; Seki, N.; Shirasawa, T.: Orthologues
of the Caenorhabditis elegans longevity gene clk-1 in mouse and human. Genomics 58:
293-301, 1999.

2. Ewbank, J. J.; Barnes, T. M.; Lakowski, B.; Lussier, M.; Bussey,
H.; Hekimi, S.: Structural and functional conservation of the Caenorhabditis
elegans timing gene clk-1. Science 275: 980-983, 1997.

3. Guarente, L.: What makes us tick? Science 275: 943-944, 1997.

4. Jonassen, T.; Proft, M.; Randez-Gil, F.; Schultz, J. R.; Marbois,
B. N.; Entian, K.-D.; Clarke, C. F.: Yeast Clk-1 homologue (Coq7/Cat5)
is a mitochondrial protein in coenzyme Q synthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 273:
3351-3357, 1998.

5. Takahashi, M.; Asaumi, S.; Honda, S.; Suzuki, Y.; Nakai, D.; Kuroyanagi,
H.; Shimizu, T.; Honda, Y.; Shirasawa, T.: Mouse coq7/clk-1 orthologue
rescued slowed rhythmic behavior and extended life span of clk-1 longevity
mutant in Caenorhabditis elegans. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 286:
534-540, 2001.

6. Vajo, Z.; King, L. M.; Jonassen, T.; Wilkin, D. J.; Ho, N.; Munnich,
A.; Clarke, C. F.; Francomano, C. A.: Conservation of the Caenorhabditis
elegans timing gene clk-1 from yeast to human: a gene required for
ubiquinone biosynthesis with potential implications for aging. Mammalian
Genome 10: 1000-1004, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/13/2002
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/17/2002
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 4/4/2002
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 6/14/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/10/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/13/1997

EDITED mgross: 06/26/2007
mgross: 1/18/2006
terry: 7/19/2004
carol: 6/18/2002
terry: 6/13/2002
carol: 4/17/2002
joanna: 4/4/2002
mcapotos: 6/21/2000
psherman: 6/14/2000
alopez: 8/12/1999
alopez: 3/12/1999
alopez: 3/11/1999
alopez: 3/10/1999
alopez: 1/5/1999
psherman: 8/19/1998
alopez: 5/11/1998
mark: 2/13/1997

601558	TITLE *601558 RNA-BINDING PROTEIN GENE WITH MULTIPLE SPLICING; RBPMS
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Shimamoto et al. (1996) established a 1.3-Mb physical map spanning the
Werner syndrome (WRN; 277700) region on chromosome 8p and identified a
unique gene that they called RBPMS. The single-copy RBPMS gene is
alternatively spliced, resulting in at least 12 transcripts with an
average length of 1.5 kb. Nine different types of cDNAs encoding an
N-terminal RNA-binding motif homologous to that of the Drosophila 'couch
potato' protein and C-terminal helix-rich sequences were identified.
Northern blot analysis showed that the RBPMS gene was expressed strongly
in heart, prostate, intestine, and ovary, and poorly in skeletal muscle,
spleen, thymus, brain, and peripheral leukocytes. Shimamoto et al.
(1996) noted evidence that alternative splicing of RBPMS was regulated
in a tissue-specific fashion.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid screens, coaffinity purification analysis of
transfected HEK293 cells, and bioinformatic analysis, Lim et al. (2006)
developed an interaction network for 54 human proteins involved in 23
inherited ataxias. By database analysis, they expanded the core network
to include more distantly related interacting proteins that could
function as genetic modifiers. ATXN1 (601556) showed a strong direct
interaction with RBPMS, and the N-terminal portion of ATXN1 was required
for interaction with RBPMS. RBPMS was a main hub in the network and
interacted with many proteins, including 2 cerebellar ataxia-associated
proteins, ATN1 (607462) and QK1 (609590).

GENE STRUCTURE

Shimamoto et al. (1996) determined that the RBPMS gene contains 16 exons
and spans at least 230 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Shimamoto et al. (1996) mapped the RBPMS
gene to chromosome 8p12-p11.

REFERENCE 1. Lim, J.; Hao, T.; Shaw, C.; Patel, A. J.; Szabo, G.; Rual, J.-F.;
Fisk, C. J.; Li, N.; Smolyar, A.; Hill, D. E.; Barabasi, A.-L.; Vidal,
M.; Zoghbi, H. Y.: A protein-protein interaction network for human
inherited ataxias and disorders of Purkinje cell degeneration. Cell 125:
801-814, 2006.

2. Shimamoto, A.; Kitao, S.; Ichikawa, K.; Suzuki, N.; Yamabe, Y.;
Imamura, O.; Tokutake, Y.; Satoh, M.; Matsumoto, T.; Kuromitsu, J.;
Kataoka, H.; Sugawara, K.; Sugawara, M.; Sugimoto, M.; Goto, M.; Furuichi,
Y.: A unique human gene that spans over 230 kb in the human chromosome
8p11-12 and codes multiple family proteins sharing RNA-binding motifs. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 10913-10917, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 01/15/2009

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/5/1996

EDITED mgross: 01/15/2009
jamie: 12/6/1996
mark: 12/5/1996

113505	TITLE *113505 BRAIN-DERIVED NEUROTROPHIC FACTOR; BDNF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

BDNF is a prosurvival factor induced by cortical neurons that is
necessary for survival of striatal neurons in the brain (Zuccato et al.,
2001).

For background information on neurotrophins and their receptors, see
NGFR (162010).

CLONING

Jones and Reichardt (1990) noted that during normal vertebral
development, up to 80% of the neurons in diverse cell populations within
the forming nervous system die. This is thought to be a mechanism that
ensures that adequate numbers of neurons establish appropriate
innervation densities with effector organs or other neuronal
populations. In several instances, the innervation target of a
population of neurons has been shown to have a crucial role in
regulating the number of surviving neurons. Targets of neuronal
innervation produce a limited supply of neurotrophic factors, and
competition between neurons responsive to these factors determines which
neurons survive. In addition to nerve growth factor (NGF; 162030), BDNF
has been purified and shown in vivo to reduce the amount of naturally
occurring neuronal cell death in portions of the peripheral nervous
system (Hofer and Barde, 1988).

Jones and Reichardt (1990) cloned human BDNF, which encodes a deduced
247 preproprotein that is proteolytically processed into a mature
119-amino acid protein. The mature BDNF protein shares 100% identity
with mature porcine Bdnf and 52% identity with mature human NGF.
Northern blot analysis detected BDNF transcripts of 1.6 and 4.0 kb in
all brain regions examined.

Maisonpierre et al. (1991) cloned the human and rat genes encoding BDNF.
They demonstrated that the mature form was identical in all mammals
examined. Furthermore, the tissue distributions and neuronal
specificities are conserved among mammals.

By database analysis and RT-PCR, Liu et al. (2005) identified 9
alternatively spliced BDNF transcripts. The transcripts differ in their
use of alternative promoters, alternative splice donor and acceptor
sites, and alternative polyadenylation sites. Most transcripts encode
the previously identified proBDNF; however, 2 transcripts contain
additional in-frame methionines that may result in proteins with longer
N termini, and another transcript encodes a protein with an internal
deletion of 48 amino acids. RT-PCR revealed a complex pattern of BDNF
transcripts in brain and a more simple pattern of expression in
peripheral tissues. Liu et al. (2005) also identified noncoding RNAs
transcribed from a gene that overlaps with BDNF on the opposite strand
(BDNFOS; 611468).

By in silico analysis, RT-PCR of adult frontal cerebral cortex, medulla,
and hippocampus total RNA, and 5-prime RACE of adult hippocampus and
cerebellum RNA, Pruunsild et al. (2007) identified numerous BDNF
transcripts. The transcripts differ in the length of their 5-prime UTR,
and most encode proBDNF. RT-PCR detected tissue-specific expression of
BDNF variants. Most showed highest expression in brain, although several
alternative transcripts showed relatively high expression in nonneural
tissues. The BDNF variants showed variable expression in all specific
brain regions examined, and all were expressed at high levels in
mammillary body, pons, hippocampus, frontal cortex, colliculi, and
olfactory tract.

By examining expression of Bdnf transcripts in rat and mouse brain, An
et al. (2008) found that mRNAs with short 3-prime UTRs were restricted
to somata, whereas those with long 3-prime UTRs also localized to
dendrites.

GENE STRUCTURE

Pruunsild et al. (2007) determined that the BDNF gene contains 11 exons
and spans about 70 kb. They identified transcription start sites in 9
exons, each of which was associated with a functional promoter.

MAPPING

Maisonpierre et al. (1991) localized the BDNF gene to 11p13. Ozcelik et
al. (1991) also mapped BDNF to human chromosome 11p15.5-p11.2 by
analysis of somatic cell hybrids. They assigned the mouse gene to
chromosome 2. By deletion analysis of somatic cell hybrids containing
human chromosome 11 with deletion or translocation breakpoints, Hanson
et al. (1992) showed that BDNF maps between FSHB (136530) and HVBS1
(114550) at the boundary of 11p13 and 11p14.

GENE FUNCTION

Chen and Weber (2001) conducted experiments to determine whether BDNF,
which is a neuroprotectant in the small rat eye, might also serve as an
effective neuroprotectant in larger vertebrate eyes. They used a cat
optic nerve crush model; the non-BDNF-injected eye served as control.
Their data showed that BDNF is an effective neuroprotectant in
primate-sized eyes after optic nerve injury. High doses of BDNF induced
inflammation and resulted in a decrease in total ganglion cell survival
but appeared necessary to save medium-sized neurons that are affected
most severely by nerve injury.

Lu et al. (2001) showed that SDF1 (600835) and BDNF are chemoattractants
for cerebellar granule cells.

Zuccato et al. (2001) demonstrated that wildtype huntingtin (HTT;
613004) upregulates transcription of BDNF. They showed that this
beneficial activity of huntingtin is lost when the protein becomes
mutated, resulting in decreased production of cortical BDNF. This leads
to insufficient neurotrophic support for striatal neurons, which then
die. Zuccato et al. (2001) suggested that restoring wildtype huntingtin
activity and increasing BDNF production may be therapeutic approaches
for treating Huntington disease (HD; 143100).

Gauthier et al. (2004) showed that huntingtin specifically enhances
vesicular transport of BDNF along microtubules. They determined that
huntingtin-mediated transport involves huntingtin-associated protein-1
(HAP1; 600947) and the p150(Glued) (601143) subunit of dynactin, an
essential component of molecular motors. BDNF transport was attenuated
both in the disease context and by reducing the levels of wildtype
huntingtin. The alteration of the huntingtin/HAP1/p150(Glued) complex
correlated with reduced association of motor proteins with microtubules.
The polyglutamine-huntingtin-induced transport deficit resulted in the
loss of neurotrophic support and neuronal toxicity. Gauthier et al.
(2004) concluded that a key role of huntingtin is to promote BDNF
transport and suggested that loss of this function might contribute to
pathogenesis.

Although proneurotrophins have been considered inactive precursors, Lee
et al. (2001) demonstrated that the proforms of NGF and the proforms of
BDNF are secreted and cleaved extracellularly by the serine protease
plasmin (173350) and by selective matrix metalloproteinases (MMP7,
178990; MMP3, 185250). ProNGF is a high-affinity ligand for p75(NTR)
(NGFR; 162010), and induced p75(NTR)-dependent apoptosis in cultured
neurons with minimal activation of TRKA (191315)-mediated
differentiation or survival. The biologic action of neurotrophins is
thus regulated by proteolytic cleavage, with proforms preferentially
activating p75(NTR) to mediate apoptosis and mature forms activating TRK
receptors to promote survival.

By imaging dentate granule cells in mouse hippocampal slices, Kovalchuk
et al. (2002) identified BDNF-evoked calcium transients in dendrites and
spines, but not at presynaptic sites. Pairing a weak burst of synaptic
stimulation with a brief dendritic BDNF application caused an immediate
and robust induction of long-term potentiation. Long-term potentiation
induction required activation of postsynaptic calcium channels and NMDA
receptors and was prevented by the blockage of postsynaptic calcium
transients. Kovalchuk et al. (2002) concluded that BDNF-mediated
long-term potentiation is induced postsynaptically, and that the
observation that dendritic spines are the exclusive synaptic sites for
rapid BDNF-evoked calcium signaling supports this conclusion.

Ming et al. (2002) found that axonal growth cones of cultured frog
spinal neurons exhibit adaptation during chemotactic migration,
undergoing consecutive phases of desensitization and resensitization in
the presence of increasing basal concentrations of the guidance factors
Ntn1 (601614) or Bdnf1. Ntn1- or Bdnf1-specific desensitization was
accompanied by a reduction of calcium signaling, whereas resensitization
required activation of Mapk and local protein synthesis. Ming et al.
(2002) suggested that the protracted nature of this process allows
adaptive changes in the sensitivity of the growth cone and that the
adaptive behavior exemplifies the image of the growth cone as a
chemotaking amoeba, as proposed in the 19th century by Ramon y Cajal.

Using quantitative RT-PCR analysis in cultured rat cortical neurons, Tao
et al. (2002) demonstrated that the induction of BDNF exon 3 expression
is selectively activated by calcium influx specifically in neurons. They
used mutagenesis to identify calcium-responsive enhancer elements within
the BDNF promoter III, which they named CaRE1 and CaRE2. Tao et al.
(2002) found that CaRE1 is required for membrane depolarization-mediated
induction of a BDNF promoter III reporter gene in neurons in a calcium-
and neural-selective manner. Using a yeast 1-hybrid screen to clone
CaRE1-binding proteins, Tao et al. (2002) identified the calcium
response factor gene (CARF; 607586). They hypothesized that CARF is a
neuronal, calcium-regulated transcriptional activator of BDNF exon 3
expression.

In cell cultures of rat sympathetic neurons innervating cardiac
myocytes, Yang et al. (2002) showed that BDNF rapidly (within 15
minutes) shifted the neurotransmitter release properties of the neurons
from excitatory to inhibitory cholinergic transmission in response to
neural stimulation via the presynaptic p75 neurotrophin receptor
(162010).

Chen et al. (2003) found that MECP2 (300005) binds selectively to BDNF
promoter III and functions to repress expression of the BDNF gene.
Membrane depolarization triggers the calcium-dependent phosphorylation
and release of MECP2 from BDNF promoter III, thereby facilitating
transcription. Chen et al. (2003) concluded that MECP2 plays a key role
in the control of neuronal activity-dependent gene regulation and that
the deregulation of this process may underlie the pathology of Rett
syndrome (312750).

Martinowich et al. (2003) reported that increased synthesis of BDNF in
mouse neurons after depolarization correlates with a decrease in CpG
methylation within the regulatory region of the BDNF gene. Moreover,
increased BDNF transcription involves dissociation of the MECP2-histone
deacetylase-(see 601241)-Sin3A (607776) repression complex from its
promoter. Martinowich et al. (2003) concluded that DNA
methylation-related chromatin remodeling is important for
activity-dependent gene regulation that may be critical for neural
plasticity. Martinowich et al. (2003) proposed a model in which DNA
methylation and its related chromatin remodeling play critical roles in
regulating gene transcription in response to neuronal activity. CpG
methylation at any critical site may increase the likelihood of MECP2
binding, which can recruit histone deacetylases and the H3-K9
methyltransferase to mediate inactive chromatin remodeling, or may
directly induce chromatin compaction to repress gene expression.

In a rat model, Baker-Herman et al. (2004) found that intermittent
hypoxia, but not carotid body denervation or hypercapnia, elicited a
serotonin-mediated increase in BDNF in the spinal cord. The increase in
BDNF was necessary and sufficient for spinal respiratory plasticity and
respiratory long-term facilitation. Evidence suggested that BDNF elicits
the response through the TrkB receptor (600456). RNA interference (RNAi)
targeted against BDNF mRNA inhibited the effect.

The Royal College of Surgeons (RCS) rat is a widely studied, classic
model of recessively inherited retinal degeneration in which the retinal
pigment epithelium (RPE) fails to phagocytose shed outer segments, and
photoreceptor cells subsequently die. Lawrence et al. (2004) found that
engineered Schwann cells sustained retinal structure and function in the
RCS rat. Cells overexpressing glial cell line-derived neurotrophic
factor (GDNF; 600837) or BDNF had a greater effect on photoreceptor
survival than the parent line or sham surgery. The authors concluded
that their study demonstrated that ex vivo gene therapy and subsequent
cell transplantation could be effective in preserving photoreceptors
from the cell death that normally accompanies retinal degeneration.

Du and Poo (2004) demonstrated that rapid retrograde synaptic
modification exists in an intact developing retinotectal system. Local
application of BDNF to the Xenopus laevis optic tectum, which induced
persistent potentiation of retinotectal synapses, led to a rapid
modification of synaptic inputs at the dendrites of retinal ganglion
cells, as shown by a persistent enhancement of light-evoked excitatory
synaptic currents and spiking activity of retinal ganglion cells. This
retrograde effect required TrkB receptor activation, phospholipase
C-gamma (see 172420) activity, and calcium elevation in retinal ganglion
cells, and was accounted for by a selective increase in the number of
postsynaptic AMPA-subtype glutamate receptors at retinal ganglion cell
dendrites. Such retrograde information flow in the neuron allows rapid
regulation of synaptic inputs at the dendrite in accordance to signals
received at axon terminals, a process reminiscent of back-propagation
algorithm for learning in neural networks.

By infusing antisense oligodeoxynucleotides into the hippocampus of
rats, Lee et al. (2004) showed that consolidation and reconsolidation
are doubly dissociable component processes of memory. Consolidation
involves BDNF but not the transcription factor ZIF268 (EGR1; 128990),
whereas reconsolidation recruits ZIF268 but not BDNF. Lee et al. (2004)
concluded that their findings confirmed a requirement for BDNF
specifically in memory consolidation and also resolved the role of
ZIF268 in brain plasticity, learning, and memory.

Neurotrophins (NTFs) act as survival and differentiation factors in the
nervous system and have been detected in the developing rodent testis.
To determine whether neurotrophins could influence development and
maturation of the human fetal testis, Robinson et al. (2003) examined
the cell-specific expression and distribution of several members of the
neurotrophin family and their receptors during the second trimester,
with particular emphasis on NT4 and TRKB. They detected expression of
mRNA for nerve growth factor (NGF; 162030), NTF3 (162660) and NTF4
(162662), BDNF, the high-affinity receptors TRKA, TRKB, and TRKC
(191316), and the low-affinity p75 receptor (NGFR) in the human testis
between 14 and 19 weeks' gestation. NT4 mRNA and protein were
predominantly localized to the peritubular cells. These cells were also
the site of expression of p75. By contrast, NGF and NT3 were mainly
expressed in Sertoli and interstitial cells. The authors concluded that
these data demonstrate the expression of neurotrophins and their
receptors in the human fetal testis during the second trimester and
indicate possible roles in the regulation of proliferation and survival
of germ cells and peritubular cells.

Pang et al. (2004) showed that tissue plasminogen activator (173370), by
activating the extracellular protease plasmin, converts the precursor
proBdnf to the mature Bdnf, and that such conversion is critical for
late-phase long-term potentiation expression in mouse hippocampus.
Moreover, Pang et al. (2004) found that application of mature Bdnf is
sufficient to rescue late-phase long-term potentiation when protein
synthesis is inhibited, which suggests that mature BDNF is a key protein
synthesis product for late-phase long-term potentiation expression.

By DNA microarray analysis, Kawamura et al. (2005) found Bdnf expression
induced by luteinizing hormone (see LH; 152780) during the preovulatory
period in mouse oocytes. Bdnf transcript and protein were detected in
mural granulosa and cumulus cells of preovulatory follicles. Ovarian
Bdnf acted on Trkb (NTRK2; 600456) receptors expressed exclusively in
oocytes to enhance first polar body extrusion of oocytes and to promote
the in vitro development of zygotes into preimplantation embryos.
Kawamura et al. (2005) concluded that ovarian BDNF is important to
nuclear and cytoplasmic maturation of oocytes.

Li et al. (2005) reported that in cultured cerebellar granule cells,
TRPC (transient receptor potential canonical) channels contribute to the
BDNF-induced elevation of calcium at the growth cone and are required
for BDNF-induced chemoattractive turning. They observed that several
members of the TRPC family are highly expressed in these neurons, and
both calcium ion elevation and growth cone turning induced by BDNF were
abolished by pharmacologic inhibition of TRPC channels, overexpression
of a dominant-negative form of TRPC3 (602345) or TRPC6 (603652), or
downregulation of TRPC3 expression via short interfering RNA (siRNA).
Thus, TRPC channel activity is essential for nerve-growth-cone guidance
by BDNF.

Wang and Poo (2005) reported that TRP-like channel activity exists in
the growth cones of cultured Xenopus neurons and can be modulated by
exposure to netrin-1 (601614) and BDNF, 2 chemoattractants for axon
guidance. Whole-cell recording from growth cones showed that netrin-1
induced a membrane depolarization, part of which remained after all
major voltage-dependent channels were blocked. Furthermore, the membrane
depolarization was sensitive to blockers of TRP channels. Pharmacologic
blockade of putative TRP currents or downregulation of Xenopus TRP1
(xTRPC1) expression with a specific morpholino oligonucleotide abolished
the growth cone turning and calcium ion elevation induced by a netrin-1
gradient. Thus, Wang and Poo (2005) concluded that TRPC currents reflect
early events in the growth cone's detection of some extracellular
guidance signal, resulting in membrane depolarization and cytoplasmic
calcium ion elevation that mediates the turning of growth cones.

Coull et al. (2005) showed that ATP-stimulated microglia cause a
depolarizating shift in the anion reversal potential in spinal lamina I
neurons. This shift inverts the polarity of currents activated by GABA,
as occurs after peripheral nerve injury. Applied BDNF mimicked the
alteration in the anion reversal potential. Blocking signaling between
BDNF and the receptor TrkB reversed the allodynia and the anion reversal
potential shift that follows both nerve injury and administration of
ATP-stimulated microglia. ATP stimulation evoked the release of BDNF
from microglia. Preventing BDNF release from microglia by pretreating
them with interfering RNA directed against BDNF before ATP stimulation
also inhibited the effects of these cells on the withdrawal threshold
and anion reversal potential. Coull et al. (2005) concluded that their
results showed that ATP-stimulated microglia signal to lamina I neurons,
causing a collapse of their transmembrane anion gradient, and that BDNF
is a crucial signaling molecule between microglia and neurons.

Using a PCR-based assay, Pruunsild et al. (2007) showed that BDNF and
BDNFOS transcripts formed double-stranded RNA duplexes in human
cerebellum in vivo.

In rat brain splices, the repetitive pairing of postsynaptic spikes and
2-photon uncaging of glutamate at single spines (a spike-timing
protocol) produced both immediate and gradual phases of spine
enlargement in CA1 pyramidal neurons. The gradual enlargement was
strongly dependent on protein synthesis and BDNF action, often
associated with spine twitching, and was induced specifically at the
spines that were immediately enlarged by the synaptic stimulation. Thus,
Tanaka et al. (2008) found that this spike-timing protocol is an
efficient trigger for BDNF secretion and induces protein
synthesis-dependent long-term enlargement at the level of single spines.

Deppmann et al. (2008) reported that developmental competition between
sympathetic neurons for survival is critically dependent on a
sensitization process initiated by target innervation and mediated by a
series of feedback loops. Target-derived nerve growth factor (NGF;
162020) promoted expression of its own receptor TrkA (191315) in mouse
and rat neurons and prolonged TrkA-mediated signals. NGF also controlled
expression of BDNF and neurotrophin-4 (162662), which, through the
receptor p75 (162010), can kill neighboring neurons with low retrograde
NGF-TrkA signaling, whereas neurons with high NGF-TrkA signaling are
protected. Perturbation of any of these feedback loops disrupts the
dynamics of competition. Deppmann et al. (2008) suggested that 3
target-initiated events are essential for rapid and robust competition
between neurons: sensitization, paracrine apoptotic signaling, and
protection from such effects.

Nott et al. (2008) demonstrated that BDNF triggers nitric oxide (NO)
synthesis and S-nitrosylation of histone deacetylase-2 (HDAC2; 605164)
in neurons, resulting in changes to histone modifications and gene
activation. S-nitrosylation of HDAC2 occurs at cys262 and cys274 and
does not affect deacetylase activity. In contrast, nitrosylation of
HDAC2 induces its release from chromatin, which increases acetylation of
histones surrounding neurotrophin-dependent gene promoters and promotes
transcription. Notably, nitrosylation of HDAC2 in embryonic cortical
neurons regulates dendritic growth and branching, possibly by the
activation of CREB (123810)-dependent genes. Thus Nott et al. (2008)
concluded that, by stimulating NO production and S-nitrosylation of
HDAC2, neurotrophic factors promote chromatin remodeling and the
activation of genes that are associated with neuronal development.

By examining a mouse mutant in which the Bdnf long 3-prime UTR was
truncated, An et al. (2008) found that the Bdnf long 3-prime UTR had
roles in targeting of Bdnf mRNA to dendrites, controlling the abundance
of dendritic Bdnf protein, and regulating pruning and enlargement of
dendritic spines. CA1 pyramidal neurons lacking dendritic Bdnf mRNA
showed selective impairment in long-term potentiation at dendritic
synapses, but not at somatic synapses. An et al. (2008) concluded that
the long 3-prime UTR in BDNF mRNA has a role in trafficking and
dendritic functioning in central nervous system neurons.

Vargas-Perez et al. (2009) found that a single infusion of BDNF into the
ventral tegmental area promoted a shift from a dopamine-independent to a
dopamine-dependent opiate reward system, identical to that seen when an
opiate-naive rat becomes dependent and withdrawn. The shift involved a
switch in the gamma-aminobutyric acid type A receptors of ventral
tegmental area GABAergic neurons, from inhibitory to excitatory
signaling.

BDNF is a key mediator of synaptic plasticity in multiple brain areas.
In rats subjected to auditory fear conditioning, Peters et al. (2010)
found that BDNF infused into the infralimbic medial prefrontal cortex
reduced conditioned fear for up to 48 hours, even in the absence of
extinction training, which suggested that BDNF substituted for
extinction. Similar to extinction, BDNF-induced reduction in fear
required NMDA receptors and did not erase the original fear memory. Rats
failing to learn extinction showed reduced BDNF in hippocampal inputs to
the infralimbic medial prefrontal cortex, and augmenting BDNF in this
pathway prevented extinction failure. Hence, Peters et al. (2010)
concluded that boosting BDNF activity in hippocampal-infralimbic
circuits may ameliorate disorders of learned fear.

Lobo et al. (2010) showed that deletion of TrkB (600456), the BDNF
receptor, selectively from D1+ or D2+ neurons in the nucleus accumbens
oppositely affects cocaine reward. Because loss of TrkB in D2+ neurons
increases their neuronal excitability, Lobo et al. (2010) next used
optogenetic tools to control selectively the firing rate of D1+ and D2+
nucleus accumbens neurons and studied consequent effects on cocaine
reward. Activation of D2+ neurons, mimicking the loss of TrkB,
suppressed cocaine reward, with opposite effects induced by activation
of D1+ neurons.

Autry et al. (2011) showed that ketamine and other NMDAR (see 138252)
antagonists produce fast-acting behavioral antidepressant-like effects
in mouse models, and that these effects depend on the rapid synthesis of
BDNF. They found that the ketamine-mediated blockade of NMDAR at rest
deactivates eukaryotic elongation factor-2 kinase (EEF2K; 606968),
resulting in reduced EEF2 phosphorylation and desuppression of
translation of BDNF. Furthermore, Autry et al. (2011) found that
inhibitors of EEF2K induce fast-acting behavioral antidepressant-like
effects. Autry et al. (2011) concluded that the regulation of protein
synthesis by spontaneous neurotransmission may serve as a viable
therapeutic target for the development of fast-acting antidepressants.

Micro RNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs that posttranscriptionally
downregulate expression of target mRNAs by inhibiting their translation
or causing their degradation. By in silico analysis, Mellios et al.
(2008) identified putative binding sites for 26 miRNAs, including MIR30A
(612329) and MIR195 (610718), in the 3-prime UTR of the BDNF transcript.
MIR30A, MIR195, and several other miRNAs predicted to interact with BDNF
were expressed in a laminar pattern in prefrontal cortex of adult
postmortem brain. The most abundant MIR30A miRNA, MIR30A-5p, originates
from the 5-prime end of the precursor MIR30A stem-loop structure.
Reporter gene assays showed that MIR30A-5p and MIR195 downregulated
expression of a reporter containing the BDNF 3-prime UTR. Quantitative
RT-PCR confirmed downregulation of BDNF mRNA by MIR30A-5p and MIR195.

Koo et al. (2012) discovered a surprising role for BDNF in countering
responses to chronic morphine exposure. The suppression of BDNF in the
ventral tegmental area (VTA) enhanced the ability of morphine to
increase dopamine neuron excitability and promote reward. In contrast,
optical stimulation of VTA dopamine terminals in nucleus accumbens
completely reversed the suppressive effect of BDNF on morphine reward.
Furthermore, Koo et al. (2012) identified numerous genes in the nucleus
accumbens, a major target region of VTA dopamine neurons, whose
regulation by BDNF in the context of chronic morphine exposure mediated
this counteractive function.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Congenital Central Hypoventilation Syndrome

Weese-Mayer et al. (2002) studied 19 children with congenital central
hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS; 209880), 5 of whom also had Hirschsprung
disease, for mutations in the BDNF gene. They identified a missense
mutation (113505.0001) in 1 child with isolated CCHS as well as in his
father, who did not have CCHS but had symptoms of postural hypotension
and vasovagal syncope.

- Susceptibility to Memory Impairment

Egan et al. (2003) examined the effects of a single nucleotide
polymorphism (dbSNP rs6265), G to A at nucleotide 196, that results in a
val66-to-met (V66M; 11350.0002) change in the 5-prime pro-region of the
human BDNF protein in a cohort of 641 human subjects. In humans, the M66
allele was associated with poorer episodic memory, abnormal hippocampal
activation assayed with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI),
and lower hippocampal N-acetyl aspartate, assayed with MRI spectroscopy.
Neurons transfected with M66-BDNF-GFP showed lower
depolarization-induced secretion, while constitutive secretion was
unchanged. Furthermore, M66-BDNF-GFP failed to localize to secretory
granules or synapses. These results demonstrated a role for BDNF and its
V66M polymorphism in human memory and hippocampal function and suggested
that V66M exerts these effects by impacting intracellular trafficking
and activity-dependent secretion of BDNF.

- Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder

Patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD; 164230) experience
intrusive, disturbing, repetitive thoughts (obsessions) and the
uncontrollable urge to repeatedly enact stereotypic behaviors or rituals
(compulsions), thereby reducing the psychic anxiety produced by the
obsessional process. Hall et al. (2003) evaluated a possible association
between the BDNF gene and susceptibility to OCD by genotyping a number
of SNPs and 1 microsatellite marker from the extended BDNF locus in 164
OCD proband-parent trios. Extensive background linkage disequilibrium
was observed at this locus. Single-locus transmission distortion tests
revealed significant evidence of association with the disease for all
the BDNF gene markers tested, including the V66M polymorphism, which
affects the sequence of the BDNF protein. Analysis of multi-SNP
haplotypes provided similar results. Haplotype transmission comparisons
in this and previous studies pointed to a functionally distinct BDNF
haplotype uniquely marked by the rare M66 allele, which is
undertransmitted and likely confers a protective effect in OCD and other
psychiatric disorders.

- Anorexia Nervosa or Bulimia

Several genes with an essential role in the regulation of eating
behavior and body weight are considered candidates involved in the
etiology of the eating disorders anorexia nervosa (see 606788) and
bulimia nervosa (see 607499). BDNF has been implicated in the regulation
of food intake and body weight in rodents (Lyons et al., 1999; Kernie et
al., 2000; Rios et al., 2001). Ribases et al. (2003) reported a strong
association of the BDNF met66 allele (113505.0002) with restricting
anorexia nervosa (see 610269) and low minimum body mass index in Spanish
patients. In a case-control study of European patients with eating
disorders, Ribases et al. (2004) found that the met66 variant of BDNF
was strongly associated with all eating disorder subtypes and that the
-270C BDNF variant (113505.0003) had an effect on bulimia nervosa
(610269) and late age at onset of weight loss.

- Bipolar Disorder

Geller et al. (2004) noted that 2 independent research groups (Sklar et
al., 2002; Neves-Pereira et al., 2002), using family-based methods, had
found that the val66 allele of BDNF was preferentially transmitted to
predominantly Caucasian adult probands with bipolar disorder (125480).
To determine whether preferential transmission of the val66 allele also
occurred in prepubertal and early adolescent bipolar disorder I, Geller
et al. (2004) studied 53 complete, independent trios in which the mean
age of the probands was 10.7 years. Using the Family Based Association
Test in 27 informative families, Geller et al. (2004) found that the
BDNF val66 allele was preferentially transmitted (p = 0.014). Lohoff et
al. (2005) studied the BDNF val66 allele in 621 European patients with
bipolar I disorder and positive family histories of affective disorder
and 998 European controls. The frequency of the val66 allele was
significantly increased in the bipolar I patients when compared to
controls (p = 0.028; OR of 1.22).

- Schizophrenia

Neves-Pereira et al. (2005) studied the BDNF gene as a risk factor for
schizophrenia (181500) in a Scottish population, including 321 probands
with a primary diagnosis of schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder,
263 probands with a diagnosis of bipolar affective disorder, and 350
controls. The val66-to-met polymorphism showed significant (p = 0.005)
association for valine (allele G) with schizophrenia but not bipolar
disorder. Haplotype analysis of the val/met SNP and a dinucleotide
repeat polymorphism in the promoter region revealed highly significant
(p less than 0.00000001) underrepresentation of the methionine (met1)
haplotype in the schizophrenic but not the bipolar population.
Therefore, the risk of this polymorphism may depend upon haplotypic
background on which the val/met variant is carried.

- Wilms Tumor, Aniridia, Genitourinary Anomalies, Mental Retardation
and Obesity Syndrome (WAGRO)

In a study of the relationship between genotype and body mass index
(BMI) in 33 patients with the chromosome 11p13 deletion syndrome (WAGR;
194072), Han et al. (2008) found that haploinsufficiency for BDNF was
strongly associated the WAGR subtype characterized by childhood-onset
obesity (WAGRO; 612469). All 19 patients with deletions that involved
any portion of the BDNF gene became obese by 10 years of age, whereas in
each patient who had normal weight during childhood, the BDNF gene was
intact. The concentration of serum BDNF in the group of patients with
heterozygous BDNF deletions was 47% lower than that in patients without
BDNF deletions.

ANIMAL MODEL

Conover et al. (1995) and Liu et al. (1995) performed studies in mice
rendered deficient in Bdnf and/or neurotrophin-4 (Nt4; 162662) by the
use of homologous recombination targeting vectors in embryonic stem
cells. Conover et al. (1995) found that Nt4-deficient mice were
long-lived and showed no obvious neurologic defects. Further analysis of
distinct neuronal populations demonstrated that vestibular and
trigeminal sensory neurons required Bdnf but not Nt4, whereas
nodose-petrosal sensory neurons required both Bdnf and Nt4. Liu et al.
(1995) likewise found that Nt4-deficient mice were viable but exhibited
a loss of sensory neurons in the nodose-petrosal and geniculate ganglia.
In contrast, motor neurons of the facial nucleus and sympathetic neurons
of the superior cervical ganglion were unaffected. In mice lacking both
Nt4 and Bdnf, facial motor neurons remained unaffected, whereas the loss
of sensory neurons was more severe than with either mutation alone.

Maturation of the visual cortex is influenced by visual experience
during an early postnatal period. Huang et al. (1999) examined the
maturation and plasticity of the visual cortex in transgenic mice in
which the postnatal rise of Bdnf was accelerated using the promoter of
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II-alpha (CAMK2A; 114078)
upstream of the mouse Bdnf gene. In these mice, the maturation of
GABAergic innervation and inhibition was accelerated. Furthermore, the
age-dependent decline of cortical long-term potentiation induced by
white matter stimulation, a form of synaptic plasticity sensitive to
cortical inhibition, occurred earlier. The transgenic mice also showed a
precocious development of visual acuity and an earlier termination of
the critical period for ocular dominance plasticity. The authors
proposed that BDNF promotes the maturation of cortical inhibition during
early postnatal life, thereby regulating the critical period for visual
cortical plasticity.

BDNF was initially thought to be responsible for neuron proliferation,
differentiation, and survival through its uptake at nerve terminals and
retrograde transport to the cell body. A more diverse role for BDNF
emerged progressively from observations showing that it is also
transported anterogradely, is released upon neuron depolarization, and
triggers rapid intracellular signals and action potentials in central
neurons. Guillin et al. (2001) reported that BDNF elicits long-term
neuronal adaptations by controlling the responsiveness of its target
neurons to the important neurotransmitter, dopamine. Using lesions and
gene-targeted mice lacking BDNF, Guillin et al. (2001) showed that BDNF
from dopamine neurons is responsible for inducing normal expression of
the dopamine D3 receptor (126451) in nucleus accumbens both during
development and in adulthood. BDNF from corticostriatal neurons also
induces behavioral sensitization by triggering overexpression of the D3
receptor in striatum of hemiparkinsonian rats. Guillin et al. (2001)
concluded that BDNF may be an important determinant of pathophysiologic
conditions such as drug addiction, schizophrenia (181500), or Parkinson
disease (PD; 168600), in which D3 receptor expression is abnormal.

Lyons et al. (1999) showed that heterozygous Bdnf +/- mice demonstrated
physiologic disturbances in central serotonergic neurons in early
adulthood as well as a structural deterioration of these neurons in
advanced age. Abnormalities included blunted neuronal serotonin release
responses and altered expression of several postsynaptic serotonin
receptors in the frontal cortex, hippocampus, and hypothalamus. The
heterozygous mice also showed behavioral abnormalities that had been
linked to serotonergic dysfunction, including increased aggressiveness
and hyperphagia. The authors concluded that endogenous BDNF is critical
for the normal development and function of central serotonergic neurons.

The melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R; 155541) has a critical role in
regulating energy balance, and mutations in the MC4R gene result in
obesity in mice and humans. Xu et al. (2003) found that similar to MC4R
mutants, mouse mutants that express decreased amounts of the BDNF
receptor TrkB (600456) showed hyperphagia and maturity-onset obesity,
suggesting a role for BDNF in energy balance. The authors found that
BDNF is an anorexigenic factor that is highly expressed in murine
ventromedial hypothalamic (VMH) nuclei and is regulated by feeding
status. Deficiency in MC4R signaling reduced expression of BDNF in the
VMH, indicating that BDNF and its receptor TrkB are downstream
components in the MC4R-mediated control of energy balance.

Mice experiencing repeated aggression develop a long-lasting aversion to
social contact, which can be normalized by chronic, but not acute,
administration of antidepressants. Using viral-mediated, mesolimbic
dopamine pathway-specific knockdown of BDNF, Berton et al. (2006) showed
that BDNF is required for the development of this experience-dependent
social aversion. Gene profiling in the nucleus accumbens indicated that
local knockdown of BDNF obliterates most of the effects of repeated
aggression on gene expression within this circuit, with similar effects
being produced by chronic treatment with antidepressant. Berton et al.
(2006) concluded that their results establish an essential role for BDNF
in mediating long-term neural and behavioral plasticity in response to
aversive social experiences.

Kalueff et al. (2006) questioned the report of Berton et al. (2006) on
several points, suggesting that modeling transitions from anxiety to
depression, use of longer social and nonsocial stressors, and specific
targeting of neuromediatory systems beyond dopamine may help further
elaborate BDNF's important role in brain stress-related disorders. In
response, Berton et al. (2006) agreed with Kalueff et al. (2006) that
the duration of the chronic social defeat, which was not addressed in
their earlier studies, is a critical dimension for future
investigations. They further noted that the persistent social avoidance
induced by chronic social defeat stress could be relevant to several
human syndromes including depression, anxiety, and posttraumatic stress
disorder. They remarked that it should not be surprising that a molecule
like BDNF exerts different or even opposite effects on behavior
depending on the neural circuitry in question.

Govindarajan et al. (2006) observed that transgenic mice overexpressing
Bdnf showed increased anxiety behavior paralleled by an increase in
dendritic spine density in the basolateral amygdala, similar to the
effects of chronic stress on control mice. In contrast, mice
overexpressing Bdnf showed decreased depressive behavior and absence of
stress-induced hippocampal atrophy, thus showing an antidepressive
effect. The findings indicated inherent differences between the amygdala
and hippocampus in manifesting diverse emotional symptoms related to
mood disorders.

Chen et al. (2006) generated a variant Bdnf mouse carrying a
substitution of a variant methionine for valine at codon 66 (V66M;
113505.0002) on both alleles. This mouse reproduced the phenotypic
hallmarks of human with the variant allele. Bdnf(met) was expressed in
brain at normal levels, but its secretion from neurons was defective.
When placed in stressful settings, Bdnf(met/met) mice exhibited
increased anxiety-related behaviors that were not normalized by the
antidepressant fluoxetine. Chen et al. (2006) concluded that a variant
BDNF may thus play a key role in genetic predispositions to anxiety and
depressive disorders.

Bekinschtein et al. (2008) found that intrahippocampal delivery of BDNF
in rats reversed the deficit in memory persistence caused by
pharmacologic inhibition of hippocampal protein synthesis. BDNF also
induced memory persistence by itself in an ERK (see 176948)-dependent
manner. The authors concluded that BDNF is both necessary and sufficient
to induce a late postacquisition phase in the hippocampus that is
essential for long-term memory storage.

Nagahara et al. (2009) reported beneficial effects of entorhinal BDNF
administration in 3 models of Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300)-related
cognitive decline in mouse and nonhuman primates: an App (104760)-mutant
mouse strain, aged rats, and aged monkeys. BDNF is widely expressed in
the entorhinal cortex and undergoes anterograde transport into the
hippocampus, where it is implicated in plasticity mechanisms. In
App-transgenic mice, lentiviral BDNF gene delivery administered after
disease onset reversed synapse loss, partially normalized aberrant gene
expression, improved cell signaling, and restored learning and memory.
These changes occurred independently of amyloid plaque load. In aged
rats, BDNF protein and lentiviral gene infusion, respectively, reversed
cognitive decline and improved age-related perturbations in gene
expression. In adult rats and primates, lentiviral BDNF gene delivery
prevented lesion-induced death of entorhinal cortical neurons. Finally,
lentiviral BDNF gene delivery and expression in aged primates reversed
neuronal atrophy and ameliorated age-related cognitive impairment.
Nagahara et al. (2009) suggested that BDNF exerts substantial protective
effects on crucial neuronal circuitry involved in AD, acting through
amyloid-independent mechanisms.

In rats with induced status epilepticus and hippocampal damage, Paradiso
et al. (2009) found that injection of FGF2 (134920) and BDNF-containing
vectors into the lesioned hippocampus resulted in increased
neuronogenesis with appropriate distribution, less neuronal damage,
decreased epileptogenesis, and decreased occurrence and severity of
spontaneous recurrent seizures 2 to 3 weeks later. The findings
indicated that supplementation of specific growth factors in lesioned
areas of the brain may decrease neuronal damage and lessen
epileptogenesis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CENTRAL HYPOVENTILATION SYNDROME, CONGENITAL
BDNF, THR2ILE

Weese-Mayer et al. (2002) studied 19 children with congenital central
hypoventilation syndrome (209880), 5 of whom also had Hirschsprung
disease, for mutations in the BDNF gene. A mutation was identified in
one child with isolated CCHS and his father, who did not have CCHS but
had symptoms of postural hypotension and vasovagal syncope. The authors
stated that the mutation resulted in the substitution of an isoleucine
for threonine at amino acid position 2 in the coding sequence.

.0002
MEMORY IMPAIRMENT, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER, PROTECTION AGAINST, INCLUDED;;
ANOREXIA NERVOSA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 2, INCLUDED;;
BULIMIA NERVOSA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 2, INCLUDED;;
BIPOLAR AFFECTIVE DISORDER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
PARKINSON DISEASE, AGE AT ONSET, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
BDNF, VAL66MET

Egan et al. (2003) identified a single-nucleotide polymorphism (dbSNP
6265), 196G-A, in the BDNF gene that results in a val66-to-met (V66M)
change in the 5-prime pro-region of the protein. They examined the
effects of this polymorphism in a cohort of 641 human subjects. The M66
allele was associated with poorer episodic memory, abnormal hippocampal
activation assayed with fMRI, and lower hippocampal N-acetyl aspartate
assayed with MRI spectroscopy.

In a study of 164 proband-parent trios with obsessive-compulsive
disorder (164230), Hall et al. (2003) found significant evidence of
association between OCD and all BDNF gene markers tested, including the
V66M polymorphism. Haplotype transmission comparisons in this and
previous studies pointed to a functionally distinct BDNF haplotype
uniquely marked by the rare M66 allele, which is undertransmitted and
likely confers a protective effect in OCD and other psychiatric
disorders.

Ribases et al. (2003) reported a strong association of the met66 allele
with restricting anorexia nervosa (ANR; see 610269) and low minimum body
mass index in Spanish patients. Ribases et al. (2004) performed a
case-control study in 1,142 European patients with eating disorders.
They found that the met66 variant of BDNF was strongly associated with
all eating disorder subtypes (anorexia nervosa, restricting anorexia
nervosa, binge-eating/purging anorexia nervosa, and bulimia nervosa; see
610269).

Geller et al. (2004) noted that Sklar et al. (2002) and Neves-Pereira et
al. (2002), using family-based methods, had found that the val66 allele
was preferentially transmitted to predominantly Caucasian adult probands
with bipolar disorder (125480). Geller et al. (2004) reported that the
val66 allele was also preferentially transmitted in children with
bipolar disorder.

Lohoff et al. (2005) studied the BDNF val66 allele in 621 European
patients with bipolar I disorder and positive family histories of
affective disorder and 998 European controls. The frequency of the val66
allele was significantly increased in the bipolar I patients when
compared to controls (p = 0.028; OR of 1.22).

Rybakowski et al. (2006) studied the performance of 111 patients with
bipolar disorder, 129 schizophrenia patients, and 92 healthy controls on
the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test in the context of the BDNF V66M
polymorphism. Bipolar patients with the val/val genotype made
significantly fewer perseverative errors and had more correctly
completed categories and conceptual level responses compared to bipolar
patients with the val/met or met/met genotypes. No differences were
observed in schizophrenia patients or controls.

Rosa et al. (2006) studied the V66M polymorphism in a sample of 94
nuclear families (94 probands with schizophrenia-spectrum disorders and
282 family members). The results indicated that the val66 polymorphism
plays a significant role in the phenotype of psychosis. No association
was found with prefrontal cognitive functions as assessed on the
Wisconsin Card Sorting Test and Trail Making Test.

In a metaanalysis of 6 published association studies, Zintzaras and
Hadjigeorgiou (2005) found no association between the 196G-A
polymorphism and the development of Parkinson disease.

In a study of 597 patients from 322 families with PD, Karamohamed et al.
(2005) found that homozygosity for the met66 allele was associated with
a 5.4-year older age at disease onset. The findings were significant
only under an autosomal recessive model (see, e.g., PARK2; 600116).

Soliman et al. (2010) identified parallel phenotypes in mice and humans
resulting from the common V66M SNP in BDNF, which is involved in
anxiety-related behavior. An inbred genetic knockin mouse strain
expressing the variant BDNF recapitulated the phenotypic effects of the
human polymorphism. Both were impaired in extinguishing a conditioned
fear response, which was paralleled by atypical frontoamygdala activity
in humans. Soliman et al. (2010) concluded that this variant BDNF allele
may play a role in anxiety disorders showing impaired learning of cues
that signal safety versus threat and in the efficacy of treatments that
rely on extinction mechanisms, such as exposure therapy.

.0003
BULIMIA NERVOSA, AGE OF ONSET OF WEIGHT LOSS IN
BDNF, -270C-T

Among 268 European patients with bulimia nervosa (610269), Ribases et
al. (2004) found an effect of a promoter polymorphism in BDNF, -270C-T,
on age of onset of weight loss. Patients with the C/C genotype had a
later mean age of onset of weight loss (18.1 years vs 15.9 years; p =
0.001) compared to those with the C/T or T/T genotype.

REFERENCE 1. An, J. J.; Gharami, K.; Liao, G.-Y.; Woo, N. H.; Lau, A. G.; Vanevski,
F.; Torre, E. R.; Jones, K. R.; Feng, Y.; Lu, B.; Xu, B.: Distinct
role of long 3-prime UTR BDNF mRNA in spine morphology and synaptic
plasticity in hippocampal neurons. Cell 134: 175-187, 2008.

2. Autry, A. E.; Adachi, M.; Nosyreva, E.; Na, E. S.; Los, M. F.;
Cheng, P.; Kavalali, E. T.; Monteggia, L. M.: NMDA receptor blockade
at rest triggers rapid behavioural antidepressant responses. Nature 475:
91-95, 2011.

3. Baker-Herman, T. L.; Fuller, D. D.; Bavis, R. W.; Zabka, A. G.;
Golder, F. J.; Doperalski, N. J.; Johnson, R. A.; Watters, J. J.;
Mitchell, G. S.: BDNF is necessary and sufficient for spinal respiratory
plasticity following intermittent hypoxia. Nature Neurosci. 7: 48-55,
2004.

4. Bekinschtein, P.; Cammarota, M.; Katche, C.; Slipczuk, L.; Rossato,
J. I.; Goldin, A.; Izquierdo, I.; Medina, J. H.: BDNF is essential
to promote persistence of long-term memory storage. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 105: 2711-2716, 2008.

5. Berton, O.; Krishnan, V.; Nestler, E. J.: Response to Kalueff
et al. (Letter) Science 312: 1598-1599, 2006.

6. Berton, O.; McClung, C. A.; DiLeone, R. J.; Krishnan, V.; Renthal,
W.; Russo, S. J.; Graham, D.; Tsankova, N. M.; Bolanos, C. A.; Rios,
M.; Monteggia, L. M.; Self, D. W.; Nestler, E. J.: Essential role
of BDNF in the mesolimbic dopamine pathway in social defeat stress. Science 311:
864-868, 2006.

7. Chen, H.; Weber, A. J.: BDNF enhances retinal ganglion cell survival
in cats with optic nerve damage. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 42:
966-974, 2001.

8. Chen, W. G.; Chang, Q.; Lin, Y.; Meissner, A.; West, A. E.; Griffith,
E. C.; Jaenisch, R.; Greenberg, M. E.: Derepression of BDNF transcription
involves calcium-dependent phosphorylation of MeCP2. Science 302:
885-889, 2003.

9. Chen, Z.-Y.; Jing, D.; Bath, K. G.; Ieraci, A.; Khan, T.; Siao,
C.-J.; Herrera, D. G.; Toth, M.; Yang, C.; McEwen, B. S.; Hempstead,
B. L.; Lee, F. S.: Genetic variant BDNF (val66met) polymorphism alters
anxiety-related behavior. Science 314: 140-143, 2006.

10. Conover, J. C.; Erickson, J. T.; Katz, D. M.; Bianchi, L. M.;
Poueymirou, W. T.; McClain, J.; Pan, L.; Helgren, M.; Ip, N. Y.; Boland,
P.; Friedman, B.; Wiegand, S.; Vejsada, R.; Kato, A. C.; DeChiara,
T. M.; Yancopoulos, G. D.: Neuronal deficits, not involving motor
neurons, in mice lacking BDNF and/or NT4. Nature 375: 235-238, 1995.

11. Coull, J. A. M.; Beggs, S.; Boudreau, D.; Boivin, D.; Tsuda, M.;
Inoue, K.; Gravel, C.; Salter, M. W.; De Koninck, Y.: BDNF from microglia
causes the shift in neuronal anion gradient underlying neuropathic
pain. Nature 438: 1017-1021, 2005.

12. Deppmann, C. D.; Mihalas, S.; Sharma, N.; Lonze, B. E.; Niebur,
E.; Ginty, D. D.: A model for neuronal competition during development. Science 320:
369-373, 2008.

13. Du, J.; Poo, M.: Rapid BDNF-induced retrograde synaptic modification
in a developing retinotectal system. Nature 429: 878-883, 2004.

14. Egan, M. F.; Kojima, M.; Callicott, J. H.; Goldberg, T. E.; Kolachana,
B. S.; Bertolino, A.; Zaitsev, E.; Gold, B.; Goldman, D.; Dean, M.;
Lu, B.; Weinberger, D. R.: The BDNF val66met polymorphism affects
activity-dependent secretion of BDNF and human memory and hippocampal
function. Cell 112: 257-269, 2003.

15. Gauthier, L. R.; Charrin, B. C.; Borrell-Pages, M.; Dompierre,
J. P.; Rangone, H.; Cordelieres, F. P.; De Mey, J.; MacDonald, M.
E.; Lebmann, V.; Humbert, S.; Saudou, F.: Huntingtin controls neurotrophic
support and survival of neurons by enhancing BDNF vesicular transport
along microtubules. Cell 118: 127-138, 2004.

16. Geller, B.; Badner, J. A.; Tillman, R.; Christian, S. L.; Bolhofner,
K.; Cook, E. H., Jr.: Linkage disequilibrium of the brain-derived
neurotrophic factor val66met polymorphism in children with prepubertal
and early adolescent bipolar disorder phenotype. Am. J. Psychiat. 161:
1698-1700, 2004.

17. Govindarajan, A.; Rao, B. S. S.; Nair, D.; Trinh, M.; Mawjee,
N.; Tonegawa, S.; Chattarji, S.: Transgenic brain-derived neurotrophic
factor expression causes both anxiogenic and antidepressant effects. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 13208-13213, 2006.

18. Guillin, O.; Diaz, J.; Carroll, P.; Griffon, N.; Schwartz, J.-C.;
Sokoloff, P.: BDNF controls dopamine D3 receptor expression and triggers
behavioural sensitization. Nature 411: 86-89, 2001.

19. Hall, D.; Dhilla, A.; Charalambous, A.; Gogos, J. A.; Karayiorgou,
M.: Sequence variants of the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF)
gene are strongly associated with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 73: 370-376, 2003.

20. Han, J. C.; Liu, Q.-R.; Jones, M.; Levinn, R. L.; Menzie, C. M.;
Jefferson-George, K. S.; Adler-Wailes, D. C.; Sanford, E. L.; Lacbawan,
F. L.; Uhl, G. R.; Rennert, O. M.; Yanovski, J. A.: Brain-derived
neurotrophic factor and obesity in the WAGR syndrome. New Eng. J.
Med. 359: 918-927, 2008. Note: Erratum: New Eng. J. Med. 359: 1414
only, 2008.

21. Hanson, I. M.; Seawright, A.; van Heyningen, V.: The human BDNF
gene maps between FSHB and HVBS1 at the boundary of 11p13-p14. Genomics 13:
1331-1333, 1992.

22. Hofer, M. M.; Barde, Y.-A.: Brain-derived neurotrophic factor
prevents neuronal death in vivo. Nature 331: 261-262, 1988.

23. Huang, Z. J.; Kirkwood, A.; Pizzorusso, T.; Porciatti, V.; Morales,
B.; Bear, M. F.; Maffei, L.; Tonegawa, S.: BDNF regulates the maturation
of inhibition and the critical period of plasticity in mouse visual
cortex. Cell 98: 739-755, 1999.

24. Jones, K. R.; Reichardt, L. F.: Molecular cloning of a human
gene that is a member of the nerve growth factor family. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 87: 8060-8064, 1990.

25. Kalueff, A. V.; Avgustinovich, D. F.; Kudryavtseva, N. N.; Murphy,
D. L.: BDNF in anxiety and depression. (Letter) Science 312: 1598
only, 2006.

26. Karamohamed, S.; Latourelle, J. C.; Racette, B. A.; Perlmutter,
J. S.; Wooten, G. F.; Lew, M.; Klein, C.; Shill, H.; Golbe, L. I.;
Mark, M. H.; Guttman, M.; Nicholson, G.; and 24 others: BDNF genetic
variants are associated with onset age of familial Parkinson disease:
GenePD study Neurology 65: 1823-1825, 2005.

27. Kawamura, K.; Kawamura, N.; Mulders, S. M.; Sollewijn Gelpke,
M. D.; Hsueh, A. J. W.: Ovarian brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF) promotes the development of oocytes into preimplantation embryos. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 9206-9211, 2005.

28. Kernie, S. G.; Liebl, D. J.; Parada, L. F.: BDNF regulates eating
behavior and locomotor activity in mice. EMBO J. 19: 1290-1300,
2000.

29. Koo, J. W.; Mazei-Robison, M. S.; Chaudhury, D.; Juarez, B.; LaPlant,
Q.; Ferguson, D.; Feng, J.; Sun, H.; Scobie, K. N.; Damez-Werno, D.;
Crumiller, M.; Ohnishi, Y. N.; Ohnishi, Y. H.; Mouzon, E.; Dietz,
D. M.; Lobo, M. K.; Neve, R. L.; Russo, S. J.; Han, M.-H.; Nestler,
E. J.: BDNF is a negative modulator of morphine action. Science 338:
124-128, 2012.

30. Kovalchuk, Y.; Hanse, E.; Kafitz, K. W.; Konnerth, A.: Postsynaptic
induction of BDNF-mediated long-term potentiation. Science 295:
1729-1734, 2002.

31. Lawrence, J. M.; Keegan, D. J.; Muir, E. M.; Coffey, P. J.; Rogers,
J. H.; Wilby, M. J.; Fawcett, J. W.; Lund, R. D.: Transplantation
of Schwann cell line clones secreting GDNF or BDNF into the retinas
of dystrophic Royal College of Surgeons rats. Invest. Ophthal. Vis.
Sci. 45: 267-274, 2004.

32. Lee, J. L. C.; Everitt, B. J.; Thomas, K. L.: Independent cellular
processes for hippocampal memory consolidation and reconsolidation. Science 304:
839-843, 2004.

33. Lee, R.; Kermani, P.; Teng, K. K.; Hempstead, B. L.: Regulation
of cell survival by secreted proneurotrophins. Science 294: 1945-1948,
2001.

34. Li, Y.; Jian, J.-C.; Cui, K.; Li, N.; Zheng, Z.-Y.; Wang, Y.;
Yuan, X.: Essential role of TRPC channels in the guidance of nerve
growth cones by brain-derived neurotrophic factor. Nature 434: 894-898,
2005.

35. Liu, Q.-R.; Walther, D.; Drgon, T.; Polesskaya, O.; Lesnick, T.
G.; Strain, K. J.; de Andrade, M.; Bower, J. H.; Maraganore, D. M.;
Uhl, G. R.: Human brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) genes,
splicing patterns, and assessments of associations with substance
abuse and Parkinson's disease. Am. J. Med. Genet. 134B: 93-103,
2005.

36. Liu, X.; Ernfors, P.; Wu, H.; Jaenisch, R.: Sensory but not motor
neuron deficits in mice lacking NT4 and BDNF. Nature 375: 238-241,
1995.

37. Lobo, M. K.; Covington, H. E., III; Chaudhury, D.; Friedman, A.
K.; Sun, H.; Damez-Werno, D.; Dietz, D. M.; Zaman, S.; Koo, J. W.;
Kennedy, P. J.; Mouzon, E.; Mogri, M.; Neve, R. L.; Deisseroth, K.;
Han, M.-H.; Nestler, E. J.: Cell type-specific loss of BDNF signaling
mimics optogenetic control of cocaine reward. Science 330: 385-390,
2010.

38. Lohoff, F. W.; Sander, T.; Ferraro, T. N.; Dahl, J. P.; Gallinat,
J.; Berrettini, W. H.: Confirmation of association between the val66-to-met
polymorphism in the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene
and bipolar I disorder. Am. J. Med. Genet. 139B: 51-53, 2005.

39. Lu, Q.; Sun, E. E.; Klein, R. S.; Flanagan, J. G.: Ephrin-B reverse
signaling is mediated by a novel PDZ-RGS protein and selectively inhibits
G protein-coupled chemoattraction. Cell 105: 69-79, 2001.

40. Lyons, W. E.; Mamounas, L. A.; Ricaurte, G. A; Coppola, V.; Reid,
S. W.; Bora, S. H.; Wihler, C.; Koliatsos, V. E.; Tessarollo, L.:
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor-deficient mice develop aggressiveness
and hyperphagia in conjunction with brain serotonergic abnormalities. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 15239-15244, 1999.

41. Maisonpierre, P. C.; Le Beau, M. M.; Espinosa, R., III; Ip, N.
Y.; Belluscio, L.; de la Monte, S. M.; Squinto, S.; Furth, M. E.;
Yancopoulos, G. D.: Human and rat brain-derived neurotrophic factor
and neurotrophin-3: gene structures, distributions and chromosomal
localizations. Genomics 10: 558-568, 1991.

42. Martinowich, K.; Hattori, D.; Wu, H.; Fouse, S.; He, F.; Hu, Y.;
Fan, G.; Sun, Y. E.: DNA methylation-related chromatin remodeling
in activity-dependent Bdnf gene regulation. Science 302: 890-893,
2003.

43. Mellios, N.; Huang, H.-S.; Grigorenko, A.; Rogaev, E.; Akbarian,
S.: A set of differentially expressed miRNAs, including miR-30a-5p,
act as post-transcriptional inhibitors of BDNF in prefrontal cortex. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 17: 3030-3042, 2008.

44. Ming, G.; Wong, S. T.; Henley, J.; Yuan, X.; Song, H.; Spitzer,
N. C.; Poo, M.: Adaptation in the chemotactic guidance of nerve growth
cones. Nature 417: 411-418, 2002.

45. Nagahara, A. H.; Merrill, D. A.; Coppola, G.; Tsukada, S.; Schroeder,
B. E.; Shaked, G. M.; Wang, L.; Blesch, A.; Kim, A.; Conner, J. M.;
Rockenstein, E.; Chao, M. V.; Koo, E. H.; Geschwind, D.; Masliah,
E.; Chiba, A. A.; Tuszynski, M. H.: Neuroprotective effects of brain-derived
neurotrophic factor in rodent and primate models of Alzheimer's disease. Nature
Med. 15: 331-337, 2009.

46. Neves-Pereira, M.; Cheung, J. K.; Pasdar, A.; Zhang, F.; Breen,
G.; Yates, P.; Sinclair, M.; Crombie, C.; Walker, N.; St Clair, D.
M.: BDNF gene is a risk factor for schizophrenia in a Scottish population. Molec.
Psychiat. 10: 208-212, 2005.

47. Neves-Pereira, M.; Mundo, E.; Muglia, P.; King, N.; Macciardi,
F.; Kennedy, J. L.: The brain-derived neurotrophic factor gene confers
susceptibility to bipolar disorder: evidence from a family-based association
study. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 71: 651-655, 2002.

48. Nott, A.; Watson, P. M.; Robinson, J. D.; Crepaldi, L.; Riccio,
A.: S-nitrosylation of histone deacetylase 2 induces chromatin remodelling
in neurons. Nature 455: 411-415, 2008.

49. Ozcelik, T.; Rosenthal, A.; Francke, U.: Chromosomal mapping
of brain-derived neurotrophic factor and neurotrophin-3 genes in man
and mouse. Genomics 10: 569-575, 1991.

50. Pang, P. T.; Teng, H. K.; Zaitsev, E.; Woo, N. T.; Sakata, K.;
Zhen, S.; Teng, K. K.; Yung, W.-H.; Hempstead, B. L.; Lu, B.: Cleavage
of proBDNF by tPA/plasmin is essential for long-term hippocampal plasticity. Science 306:
487-491, 2004.

51. Paradiso, B.; Marconi, P.; Zucchini, S.; Berto, E.; Binaschi,
A.; Bozac, A.; Buzzi, A.; Mazzuferi, M.; Magri, E.; Mora, G. N.; Rodi,
D.; Su, T.; Volpi, I.; Zanetti, L.; Marzola, A.; Manservigi, R.; Fabene,
P. F.; Simonato, M.: Localized delivery of fibroblast growth factor-2
and brain-derived neurotrophic factor reduces spontaneous seizures
in an epilepsy model. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 106: 7191-7196, 2009.

52. Peters, J.; Dieppa-Perea, L. M.; Melendez, L. M.; Quirk, G. J.
: Induction of fear extinction with hippocampal-infralimbic BDNF. Science 328:
1288-1290, 2010.

53. Pruunsild, P.; Kazantseva, A.; Aid, T.; Palm, K.; Timmusk, T.
: Dissecting the human BDNF locus: bidirectional transcription, complex
splicing, and multiple promoters. Genomics 90: 397-406, 2007.

54. Ribases, M.; Gratacos, M.; Armengol, L.; de Cid, R.; Badia, A.;
Jimenez, L.; Solano, R.; Vallejo, J.; Fernandez, F.; Estivill, X.
: Met66 in the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) precursor
is associated with anorexia nervosa restrictive type. Molec. Psych. 8:
745-751, 2003.

55. Ribases, M.; Gratacos, M.; Fernandez-Aranda, F.; Bellodi, L.;
Boni, C.; Anderluh, M.; Cavallini, M. C.; Cellini, E.; Di Bella, D.;
Erzegovesi, S.; Foulon, C.; Gabrovsek, M.; and 16 others: Association
of BDNF with anorexia, bulimia and age of onset of weight loss in
six European populations. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 1205-1212, 2004.

56. Rios, M.; Fan, G.; Fekete, C.; Kelly, J.; Bates, B.; Kuehn, R.;
Lechan, R. M.; Jaenisch, R.: Conditional deletion of brain-derived
neurotrophic factor in the postnatal brain leads to obesity and hyperactivity. Molec.
Endocr. 15: 1748-1757, 2001.

57. Robinson, L. L. L.; Townsend, J.; Anderson, R. A.: The human
fetal testis is a site of expression of neurotrophins and their receptors:
regulation of the germ cell and peritubular cell population. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 88: 3943-3951, 2003.

58. Rosa, A.; Cuesta, M. J.; Fatjo-Vilas, M.; Peralta, V.; Zarzuela,
A.; Fananas, L.: The val66-to-met polymorphisms of the brain-derived
neurotrophic factor gene is associated with risk for psychosis: evidence
from a family-based association study. Am. J. Med. Genet. (Neuropsychiat.
Genet.) 141B: 135-138, 2006.

59. Rybakowski, J.; Borkowska, A.; Skibinska, M.; Hauser, J.: Illness-specific
association of val66met BDNF polymorphism with performance on Wisconsin
Card Sorting Test in bipolar disorder. (Letter) Molec. Psychiat. 11:
122-124, 2006.

60. Sklar, P.; Gabriel, S. B.; McInnis, M. G.; Bennett, P.; Lim, Y.-M.;
Tsan, G.; Schaffner, S.; Kirov, G.; Jones, I.; Owen, M.; Craddock,
N.; DePaulo, J. R.; Lander, E. S.: Family-based association study
of 76 candidate genes in bipolar disorder: BDNF is a potential risk
locus. Molec. Psychiat. 7: 579-593, 2002.

61. Soliman, F.; Glatt, C. E.; Bath, K. G.; Levita, L.; Jones, R.
M.; Pattwell, S. S.; Jing, D.; Tottenham, N.; Amso, D.; Somerville,
L. H.; Voss, H. U.; Glover, G.; Ballon, D. J.; Liston, C.; Teslovich,
T.; Van Kempen, T.; Lee, F. S.; Casey, B. J.: A genetic variant BDNF
polymorphism alters extinction learning in both mouse and human. Science 327:
863-866, 2010.

62. Tanaka, J.; Horiike, Y.; Matsuzaki, M.; Miyazaki, T.; Ellis-Davies,
G. C. R.; Kasai, H.: Protein synthesis and neurotrophin-dependent
structural plasticity of single dendritic spines. Science 319: 1683-1687,
2008. Note: Erratum: Science 326: 1482 only, 2009.

63. Tao, X.; West, A. E.; Chen, W. G.; Corfas, G.; Greenberg, M. E.
: A calcium-responsive transcription factor, CaRF, that regulates
neuronal activity-dependent expression of BDNF. Neuron 33: 383-395,
2002.

64. Vargas-Perez, H.; Kee, R. T.-A.; Walton, C. H.; Hansen, D. M.;
Razavi, R.; Clarke, L.; Bufalino, M. R.; Allison, D. W.; Steffensen,
S. C.; van der Kooy, D.: Ventral tegmental area BDNF induces an opiate-dependent-like
reward state in naive rats. Science 324: 1732-1734, 2009. Note:
Erratum: Science 326: 46 only, 2009.

65. Wang, G. X.; Poo, M.: Requirement of TRPC channels in netrin-1-induced
chemotropic turning of nerve growth cones. Nature 434: 898-904,
2005.

66. Weese-Mayer, D. E.; Bolk, S.; Silvestri, J. M.; Chakravarti, A.
: Idiopathic congenital central hypoventilation syndrome: evaluation
of brain-derived neurotrophic factor genomic DNA sequence variation. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 107: 306-310, 2002.

67. Xu, B.; Goulding, E. H.; Zang, K.; Cepoi, D.; Cone, R. D.; Jones,
K. R.; Tecott, L. H.; Reichardt, L. F.: Brain-derived neurotrophic
factor regulates energy balance downstream of melanocortin-4 receptor. Nature
Neurosci. 6: 736-742, 2003.

68. Yang, B.; Slonimsky, J. D.; Birren, S. J.: A rapid switch in
sympathetic neurotransmitter release properties mediated by the p75
receptor. Nature Neurosci. 5: 539-545, 2002.

69. Zintzaras, E.; Hadjigeorgiou, G. M.: The role of G196A polymorphism
in the brain-derived neurotrophic factor gene in the cause of Parkinson's
disease: a meta-analysis. J. Hum. Genet. 50: 560-566, 2005.

70. Zuccato, C.; Ciammola, A.; Rigamonti, D.; Leavitt, B. R.; Goffredo,
D.; Conti, L.; MacDonald, M. E.; Friedlander, R. M.; Silani, V.; Hayden,
M. R.; Timmusk, T.; Sipione, S.; Cattaneo, E.: Loss of huntingtin-mediated
BDNF gene transcription in Huntington's disease. Science 293: 493-498,
2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/24/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/23/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/6/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/29/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/30/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/19/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/5/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/25/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/13/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/9/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/28/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/11/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/5/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/2/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/17/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/8/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/13/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/21/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/25/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/28/2006
John Logan Black, III - updated: 8/4/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/1/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/6/2006
John Logan Black, III - updated: 6/7/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/25/2006
John Logan Black, III - updated: 5/25/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/9/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/12/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/19/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/25/2005
John Logan Black, III - updated: 7/21/2005
John Logan Black, III - updated: 2/23/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/1/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/6/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/18/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/3/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/29/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/22/2004
Jane Kelly - updated: 6/14/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/22/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/3/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/8/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/16/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/12/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 2/4/2003
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 8/23/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/6/2002
Sonja A. Rasmussen - updated: 3/7/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/6/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/18/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/27/2001
Jane Kelly - updated: 6/12/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/15/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/1/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/26/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/29/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/19/1990

EDITED alopez: 10/26/2012
terry: 10/24/2012
terry: 9/24/2012
mgross: 12/12/2011
terry: 11/23/2011
alopez: 9/7/2011
terry: 9/6/2011
carol: 2/16/2011
carol: 12/14/2010
alopez: 12/1/2010
terry: 11/29/2010
alopez: 7/1/2010
terry: 6/30/2010
alopez: 3/22/2010
terry: 3/19/2010
terry: 1/5/2010
wwang: 12/16/2009
ckniffin: 11/25/2009
terry: 11/13/2009
carol: 9/15/2009
ckniffin: 9/2/2009
terry: 7/9/2009
wwang: 6/10/2009
ckniffin: 5/28/2009
alopez: 12/11/2008
mgross: 11/7/2008
terry: 11/5/2008
alopez: 10/6/2008
terry: 10/2/2008
ckniffin: 7/3/2008
alopez: 6/20/2008
terry: 6/17/2008
terry: 5/8/2008
wwang: 4/1/2008
ckniffin: 3/13/2008
mgross: 9/27/2007
terry: 9/21/2007
alopez: 11/2/2006
terry: 10/25/2006
wwang: 10/17/2006
ckniffin: 9/28/2006
carol: 8/25/2006
terry: 8/4/2006
wwang: 8/3/2006
alopez: 8/3/2006
terry: 8/1/2006
carol: 7/22/2006
alopez: 7/6/2006
wwang: 6/7/2006
ckniffin: 5/25/2006
wwang: 5/25/2006
ckniffin: 3/9/2006
alopez: 1/13/2006
terry: 1/12/2006
alopez: 9/20/2005
terry: 9/19/2005
wwang: 8/4/2005
wwang: 7/28/2005
terry: 7/25/2005
carol: 7/21/2005
terry: 7/21/2005
carol: 2/23/2005
tkritzer: 2/9/2005
terry: 2/1/2005
alopez: 12/10/2004
terry: 11/4/2004
ckniffin: 10/27/2004
alopez: 10/6/2004
alopez: 8/18/2004
mgross: 8/3/2004
tkritzer: 7/29/2004
terry: 7/29/2004
alopez: 7/23/2004
terry: 7/22/2004
alopez: 6/14/2004
tkritzer: 2/5/2004
carol: 1/30/2004
ckniffin: 1/22/2004
alopez: 12/9/2003
terry: 12/3/2003
tkritzer: 8/14/2003
terry: 8/8/2003
alopez: 7/28/2003
carol: 6/17/2003
ckniffin: 6/16/2003
carol: 2/25/2003
ckniffin: 2/12/2003
mgross: 2/4/2003
tkritzer: 2/4/2003
tkritzer: 8/23/2002
alopez: 6/7/2002
mgross: 5/6/2002
carol: 3/8/2002
terry: 3/7/2002
alopez: 3/7/2002
terry: 3/6/2002
alopez: 1/3/2002
terry: 12/18/2001
alopez: 8/30/2001
terry: 8/27/2001
mcapotos: 6/14/2001
mcapotos: 6/12/2001
mgross: 5/15/2001
alopez: 5/2/2001
terry: 5/1/2001
mgross: 4/26/2001
mgross: 9/29/1999
mark: 6/23/1997
mark: 6/19/1995
carol: 8/14/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/18/1992
carol: 5/21/1991
carol: 4/2/1991

606605	TITLE *606605 ATR-INTERACTING PROTEIN; ATRIP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Cortez et al. (2001) searched for substrates of ATM (see 607585) and ATR
(601215) and identified a protein of 86 kD, which they called ATRIP for
'ATR-interacting protein.' The full-length cDNA encodes a deduced
791-amino acid protein with a coiled-coil domain near its N terminus.
RNA blotting indicated that ATRIP is expressed in all tissues tested.
Cortez et al. (2001) also identified an alternatively spliced exon
encoding amino acids 658 to 684 near the C-terminus. RT-PCR from 2 cell
lines indicated that both forms were expressed.

GENE FUNCTION

ATRIP is phosphorylated by ATR, regulates ATR expression, and is an
essential component of the DNA damage checkpoint pathway. Cortez et al.
(2001) demonstrated that ATR and ATRIP both localize to intranuclear
foci after DNA damage or inhibition of replication. Deletion of ATR
mediated by the Cre recombinase caused the loss of ATR and ATRIP
expression, loss of DNA damage checkpoint responses, and cell death.
Therefore, ATR is essential for the viability of human somatic cells.
Small interfering RNA directed against ATRIP caused the loss of both
ATRIP and ATR expression and the loss of checkpoint responses to DNA
damage. Cortez et al. (2001) concluded that ATRIP and ATR are mutually
dependent partners in cell cycle checkpoint signaling pathways.

The function of the ATR-ATRIP protein kinase complex is crucial for the
cellular response to replication stress and DNA damage. Zou and Elledge
(2003) demonstrated that replication protein A (RPA) complex, which
associates with single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), is required for recruitment
of ATR to sites of DNA damage and for ATR-mediated CHK1 (603078)
activation in human cells. In vitro, RPA stimulates the binding of ATRIP
to single-stranded DNA. The binding of ATRIP to RPA-coated
single-stranded DNA enables the ATR-ATRIP complex to associate with DNA
and stimulates phosphorylation of the RAD17 (603139) protein that is
bound to DNA. Furthermore, Ddc2, the budding yeast homolog of ATRIP, is
specifically recruited to double-stranded DNA breaks in an RPA-dependent
manner. A checkpoint-deficient mutant of RPA, rfa1-t11, is defective for
recruiting Ddc2 to single-stranded DNA both in vivo and in vitro. Zou
and Elledge (2003) concluded that RPA-coated single-stranded DNA is the
critical structure at sites of DNA damage that recruits the ATR-ATRIP
complex and facilitates its recognition of substrates for
phosphorylation and the initiation of checkpoint signaling.

By mutation analysis, Namiki and Zou (2006) identified 2 major
RPA-ssDNA-interacting domains of ATRIP in regions flanking the conserved
coiled-coil domain. They also identified an internal region of ATRIP
that exhibited affinity to single-stranded DNA. Namiki and Zou (2006)
concluded that there are multiple interactions between ATRIP and
RPA-ssDNA and that ATRIP may interact directly with ssDNA in the
ATRIP-RPA-ssDNA complex.

REFERENCE 1. Cortez, D.; Guntuku, S.; Qin, J.; Elledge, S. J.: ATR and ATRIP:
partners in checkpoint signaling. Science 294: 1713-1716, 2001.

2. Namiki, Y.; Zou, L.: ATRIP associates with replication protein
A-coated ssDNA through multiple interactions. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103:
580-585, 2006.

3. Zou, L.; Elledge, S. J.: Sensing DNA damage through ATRIP recognition
of RPA-ssDNA complexes. Science 300: 1542-1548, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/27/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/22/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/18/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/15/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/10/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/17/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/28/2002

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 1/10/2002

EDITED alopez: 01/14/2010
carol: 6/1/2007
alopez: 4/2/2007
terry: 3/27/2007
mgross: 8/22/2006
carol: 8/18/2006
ckniffin: 8/17/2006
terry: 8/15/2006
wwang: 3/24/2006
terry: 3/10/2006
alopez: 6/19/2003
terry: 6/17/2003
ckniffin: 3/11/2003
alopez: 1/28/2002
alopez: 1/10/2002

603420	TITLE *603420 CALUMENIN; CALU
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Many calcium-binding proteins are reported to be localized in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and involved in such ER functions as protein
folding and sorting. Among these are RCN1 (602735), RCN2 (602584), and
calumenin (CALU), which form a novel family of calcium-binding proteins
in the ER and Golgi apparatus. By searching sequence databases with a
mouse Calu cDNA sequence (Yabe et al., 1997), Yabe et al. (1998)
identified a human CALU EST, which they used to clone a full-length CALU
cDNA. The cDNA encodes a deduced 315-amino acid protein containing 6
EF-hand motifs, 1 potential N-glycosylation site, and a C-terminal ER
retention signal. The human and mouse CALU proteins are 98% identical.
Northern blot analysis demonstrated that the 3.4-kb CALU mRNA is
ubiquitously expressed in human tissues. Southern blot analysis using a
human CALU cDNA probe detected bands in a variety of species.

MAPPING

Yabe et al. (1997) mapped the mouse Calu gene to the proximal portion of
chromosome 7. By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Yabe et al. (1998)
localized the human CALU gene to 7q32, which was an unexpected result
due to the homology of synteny between proximal mouse chromosome 7 and
human 19q13.2-q13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Yabe, D.; Nakamura, T.; Kanazawa, N.; Tashiro, K.; Honjo, T.:
Calumenin, a Ca(2+)-binding protein retained in the endoplasmic reticulum
with a novel carboxyl-terminal sequence, HDEF. J. Biol. Chem. 272:
18232-18239, 1997.

2. Yabe, D.; Taniwaki, M.; Nakamura, T.; Kanazawa, N.; Tashiro, K.;
Honjo, T.: Human calumenin gene (CALU): cDNA isolation and chromosomal
mapping to 7q32. Genomics 49: 331-333, 1998.

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 1/12/1999

EDITED carol: 06/22/2012
psherman: 1/12/1999

118938	TITLE *118938 CHYMASE 1; CMA1
;;CHYMASE, MAST CELL;;
CHYMASE, HEART; CYH
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Chymase is a major secreted protease of mast cells with suspected roles
in vasoactive peptide generation, extracellular matrix degradation, and
regulation of gland secretion. Caughey et al. (1991) cloned and
sequenced a human chymase gene encoding a preproenzyme with a 19-amino
acid signal peptide, an acidic 2-amino acid propeptide, and a 226-amino
acid catalytic domain. In the phase and placement of introns, the
organization of the human chymase gene is similar to that of several
other granule-associated leukocyte serine proteases including lymphocyte
granzymes (see 600311), neutrophil cathepsin G (CTSG; 116830), and
elastase (130130). However, its organization differs from that of mast
cell tryptase.

GENE FUNCTION

The heart, a target organ for angiotensin II (see 106150), has a dual
pathway for its formation in which the major angiotensin II-forming
enzymes are angiotensin I-converting enzyme (106180) and chymase.
Compared to other chymases, human heart chymase has an unusually high
degree of specificity for the substrate angiotensin I. Urata et al.
(1991) cloned the gene for human heart chymase, the most catalytically
efficient enzyme that had been described for the cleavage of angiotensin
I to yield angiotensin II and the dipeptide his-leu. The deduced amino
acid sequence showed a high degree of homology to other members of the
chymase subfamily. However, this gene lacked mast cell-specific
sequences found in the 5-prime and 3-prime untranslated regions of the
rat chymase II gene. In addition, human heart chymase contained clusters
of unique amino acid sequences located at key positions probably
involved in substrate binding. Urata et al. (1993) performed in situ
hybridization studies suggesting that cardiac mast cells, mesenchymal
interstitial cells, and endothelial cells are the cellular sites of
synthesis of angiotensin II and storage of chymase.

Ju et al. (2001) cloned a rat vascular chymase (RVCH) from smooth muscle
cells (SMCs) that converts angiotensin I to II and is upregulated in SMC
from spontaneously hypertensive versus normotensive rats. To determine
whether increased activity of RVCH is sufficient to cause hypertension,
transgenic mice were generated with targeted conditional expression of
RVCH to SMC. Ju et al. (2001) confirmed conditional expression of RVCH
in the absence, but not in the presence, of dietary doxycycline.
Systolic, diastolic, and mean pressures were elevated in the transgenic
mice. Hypertension was completely reversed by doxycycline, suggesting a
causal link with chymase expression. Medial thickening of mesenteric
arteries in the transgenic mice was associated with increased SMC
proliferation. These structural changes were also prevented by
doxycycline. Increased vasoconstriction in response to phenylephrine and
impaired metacholine-induced vasodilatation could be demonstrated when
compared with littermate controls or with the doxycycline-treated group.
These studies suggested that upregulation of this vascular chymase is
sufficient to cause hypertensive arteriopathy, and that RVCH may be a
candidate gene and a therapeutic target in patients with high blood
pressure.

Using a mouse model of acute inflammation, Chmelar et al. (2011) found
that a salivary protein, termed Irs2, from the tick Ixodes ricinus, the
vector for Lyme disease in Europe, inhibited edema formation and
neutrophil influx in inflamed tissue. Using a panel of human proteins,
they found that Irs2 primarily inhibited CTSG and CMA1. Human platelet
aggregation assays showed that Irs2 inhibited CTSG-induced and thrombin
(F2; 176930)-induced platelet aggregation. Structural analysis revealed
that Irs2 resembles mammalian serpins, including bovine antithrombin III
(SERPINC1; 107300) and human alpha-1-antichymotrypsin (SERPINA3; 107280)
and alpha-1-antitrypsin (SERPINA1; 107400).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Sharma et al. (2005) studied the association of a polymorphism in the
CMA1 gene, -1903G-A, and a (TG)n(GA)n repeat polymorphism located 254 bp
downstream of the gene with asthma and IgE levels in Indian asthmatic
patients with a family history of asthma and atopy (see 147050). A
significant association was observed between -1903G-A genotype and serum
IgE levels (p = 0.003 and p = 0.0004 for a northern and western cohort,
respectively). Sharma et al. (2005) suggested that the CMA1 gene
contributes to asthma susceptibility and may be involved in regulating
IgE levels in atopic asthma.

MAPPING

By a study of hamster-human hybrid DNAs, Caughey et al. (1991) assigned
the CMA1 gene to human chromosome 14, which is the site of related
genes. From studies of YACs and cosmid clones, Caughey et al. (1993)
demonstrated that the mast cell chymase gene is located at 14q11.2 in
the same cluster as the genes for 3 other proteases, T-cell receptor
alpha/delta (TCRA; see 186880/TCRD; see 186810), neutrophil cathepsin G,
and the lymphocyte cathepsin G-like proteins CGL1 (123910) and CGL2
(116831). They found that CMA1 maps to a site within 150 kb of the
cathepsin G gene. The gene order is:
cen--TCRA/TCRD--CGL1--CGL2--CTSG--CMA. In some cells, the chymase and
cathepsin G genes were cotranscribed; in others, they appeared to be
capable of independent regulation.

REFERENCE 1. Caughey, G. H.; Schaumberg, T. H.; Zerweck, E. H.; Butterfield,
J. H.; Hanson, R. D.; Silverman, G. A.; Ley, T. J.: The human mast
cell chymase gene (CMA1): mapping to the cathepsin G/granzyme gene
cluster and lineage-restricted expression. Genomics 15: 614-620,
1993.

2. Caughey, G. H.; Zerweck, E. H.; Vanderslice, P.: Structure, chromosomal
assignment, and deduced amino acid sequence of a human gene for mast
cell chymase. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 12956-12963, 1991.

3. Chmelar, J.; Oliveira, C. J.; Rezacova, P.; Francischetti, I. M.
B.; Kovarova, Z.; Pejler, G.; Kopacek, P.; Ribeiro, J. M. C.; Mares,
M.; Kopecky, J.; Kotsyfakis, M.: A tick salivary protein targets
cathepsin G and chymase and inhibits host inflammation and platelet
aggregation. Blood 117: 736-744, 2011.

4. Ju, H.; Gros, R.; You, X.; Tsang, S.; Husain, M.; Rabinovitch,
M.: Conditional and targeted overexpression of vascular chymase causes
hypertension in transgenic mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 7469-7474,
2001.

5. Sharma, S.; Rajan, U. M.; Kumar, A.; Soni, A.; Ghosh, B.: A novel
(TG)n(GA)m repeat polymorphism 254 bp downstream of the mast cell
chymase (CMA1) gene is associated with atopic asthma and total serum
IgE levels. J. Hum. Genet. 50: 276-282, 2005.

6. Urata, H.; Boehm, K. D.; Philip, A.; Kinoshita, A.; Gabrovsek,
J.; Bumpus, F. M.; Husain, A.: Cellular localization and regional
distribution of an angiotensin II-forming chymase in the heart. J.
Clin. Invest. 91: 1269-1281, 1993.

7. Urata, H.; Kinoshita, A.; Perez, D. M.; Misono, K. S.; Bumpus,
F. M.; Graham, R. M.; Husain, A.: Cloning of the gene and cDNA for
human heart chymase. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 17173-17179, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/31/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/30/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/1/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/6/1991

EDITED mgross: 10/04/2013
mgross: 11/2/2011
terry: 10/31/2011
carol: 9/11/2006
carol: 9/5/2006
terry: 8/30/2006
mcapotos: 8/16/2001
mcapotos: 8/7/2001
terry: 8/1/2001
alopez: 8/11/1999
carol: 6/23/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 11/13/1991
carol: 11/6/1991

601684	TITLE *601684 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN S6 KINASE, 90-KD, 1; RPS6KA1
;;RIBOSOMAL S6 KINASE 1; RSK1;;
MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE 1A; MAPKAPK1A;;
MAPKAP KINASE 1A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The RSK (ribosomal S6 kinase) family comprises growth factor-regulated
serine/threonine kinases, known also as p90(rsk). Homologs of RSK exist
in several species. The highly conserved feature of all members of the
RSK family is the presence of 2 nonidentical kinase catalytic domains.
RSKs are implicated in the activation of the mitogen-activated kinase
(MAPK) cascade (see 176872) and the stimulation of cell proliferation
(at the transition between phases G0 and G1 of the cell cycle) and
differentiation.

CLONING

Moller et al. (1994) described the cloning and characterization of 3
genes encoding RSKs, which they called HU1 (RPS6KA1), HU2 (RPS6KA2;
601685), and HU3 (RPS6KA3; 300075). The HU1 cDNA (GenBank GENBANK
L07597) encodes a predicted 735-amino acid protein containing 2 distinct
consensus ATP-binding site sequences. Northern blot and RNase protection
analyses detected an approximately 3.5-kb HU1 transcript in lymphocytes,
skeletal muscle, liver, and adipose tissue.

Zeniou et al. (2002) determined the expression of the RSK1, RSK2
(300075), and RSK3 (601685) genes in various human tissues, during mouse
embryogenesis, and in mouse brain. The 3 RSK mRNAs were expressed in all
human tissues and brain regions tested, supporting functional
redundancy. However, tissue-specific variations in levels suggested that
the proteins may also serve specific roles. The mouse Rsk3 gene was
prominently expressed in the developing neural and sensory tissues,
whereas Rsk1 gene expression was the strongest in various other tissues
with high proliferative activity, suggesting distinct roles during
development. In adult mouse brain, the highest levels of Rsk2 expression
were observed in regions with high synaptic activity, including the
neocortex, the hippocampus, and Purkinje cells. The authors suggested
that in these areas, which are essential to cognitive function and
learning, the RSK1 and RSK3 genes may not be able to fully compensate
for a lack of RSK2 function.

GENE FUNCTION

Bonni et al. (1999) characterized the mechanism by which the RAS (see
190020)-MAPK signaling pathway (see 602448) mediates growth
factor-dependent cell survival. The MAP-activated kinases, the Rsks,
catalyzed the phosphorylation of the proapoptotic protein BAD (603167)
at ser112 both in vitro and in vivo. The Rsk-induced phosphorylation of
BAD at ser112 suppressed BAD-mediated apoptosis in neurons. The Rsks are
known to phosphorylate the transcription factor CREB (see 123810) at
ser133. Activated CREB promoted cell survival, and inhibition of CREB
phosphorylation at ser133 triggered apoptosis. Bonni et al. (1999)
suggested that the MAP kinase signaling pathway promotes cell survival
by a dual mechanism comprising the posttranslational modification and
inactivation of a component of the cell death machinery and the
increased transcription of prosurvival genes.

Bhatt and Ferrell (1999) demonstrated that Xenopus laevis egg extracts
immunodepleted of Rsk lost their capacity to undergo mitotic arrest in
response to activation of the Mos (190060)-MEK1 (176872)-p42 (603441)
MAPK cascade of protein kinases. Replenishing Rsk-depleted extracts with
catalytically competent Rsk protein restored the ability of the extracts
to undergo mitotic arrest. Bhatt and Ferrell (1999) concluded that Rsk
appears to be essential for cytostatic factor arrest.

Gross et al. (1999) investigated whether cytostatic factor arrest is
mediated by the protein kinase p90 Rsk, which is phosphorylated and
activated by MAPK, by expressing a constitutively activated form of Rsk
in Xenopus embryos. Expression of constitutively active Rsk resulted in
cleavage arrest, and cytologic analysis showed that arrested blastomeres
were in M phase with prominent spindles characteristic of meiotic
metaphase. Thus, Gross et al. (1999) concluded that Rsk appears to be
the mediator of MAPK-dependent cytostatic factor arrest in vertebrate
unfertilized eggs. Gross et al. (1999) found that because Rsk expression
did not activate the endogenous MAPK pathway, MAPK required no other
substrate for induction of cytostatic factor arrest. They also stated
that cytostatic factor arrest is not a consequence of direct regulation
of the spindle assembly checkpoint or the anaphase-promoting complex by
MAPK.

Cohen et al. (2005) used a structural bioinformatics approach to
identify 2 selectivity filters, a threonine and a cysteine, at defined
positions in the active site of p90 ribosomal protein S6 kinase (RSK). A
fluoromethylketone inhibitor, designed to exploit both selectivity
filters, potently and selectively inactivated RSK1 and RSK2 in mammalian
cells. Kinases with only one selectivity filter were resistant to the
inhibitor, yet they became sensitized after genetic introduction of the
second selectivity filter. Thus, Cohen et al. (2005) concluded that 2
amino acids that distinguish RSK from other protein kinases are
sufficient to confer inhibitor sensitivity.

Nishiyama et al. (2007) reported that in Xenopus eggs Erp1 (see 609110)
is a substrate of p90rsk, and that Mos (a mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) kinase kinase)-dependent phosphorylation of Erp1 by p90rsk
at thr336, ser342, and ser344 is crucial for both stabilizing Erp1 and
establishing cytostatic factor (CSF) arrest in meiosis II oocytes.
Semiquantitative analysis of CSF-arrested egg extracts revealed that the
Mos-dependent phosphorylation of Erp1 enhances, but does not generate,
the activity of Erp1 that maintains metaphase arrest. Nishiyama et al.
(2007) concluded that their results also suggested that Erp1 inhibits
cyclin B (see 123836) degradation by binding the anaphase-promoting
complex/cyclosome (APC/C) at its carboxy-terminal destruction box, and
this binding is also enhanced by the Mos-dependent phosphorylation.
Thus, Mos and Erp1 collaboratively establish and maintain metaphase II
arrest in Xenopus eggs.

Inoue et al. (2007) demonstrated that p90rsk, the kinase immediately
downstream from Mos-MAPK, directly targets Erp1 for CSF arrest in
Xenopus oocytes. Erp1 is synthesized immediately after meiosis I, and
the Mos-MAPK pathway or p90rsk is essential for CSF arrest by Erp1.
p90rsk can directly phosphorylate Erp1 on ser335/thr336 both in vivo and
in vitro, and upregulates both Erp1 stability and activity. Erp1 is also
present in early embryos, but has little CSF activity owing, at least in
part, to the absence of p90rsk activity. Inoue et al. (2007) concluded
that their results clarified the direct link of the classical Mos-MAPK
pathway to Erp1 in meiotic arrest of vertebrate oocytes.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids, Moller et al. (1994) mapped the
RPS6KA1 gene to chromosome 3.

REFERENCE 1. Bhatt, R. R.; Ferrell, J. E., Jr.: The protein kinase p90 Rsk
as an essential mediator of cytostatic factor activity. Science 286:
1362-1365, 1999.

2. Bonni, A.; Brunet, A.; West, A. E.; Datta, S. R.; Takasu, M. A.;
Greenberg, M. E.: Cell survival promoted by the Ras-MAPK signaling
pathway by transcription-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Science 286:
1358-1362, 1999.

3. Cohen, M. S.; Zhang, C.; Shokat, K. M.; Taunton, J.: Structural
bioinformatics-based design of selective, irreversible kinase inhibitors. Science 308:
1318-1321, 2005.

4. Gross, S. D.; Schwab, M. S.; Lewellyn, A. L.; Maller, J. L.: Induction
of metaphase arrest in cleaving Xenopus embryos by the protein kinase
p90(Rsk). Science 286: 1365-1367, 1999.

5. Inoue, D.; Ohe, M.; Kanemori, Y.; Nobui, T.; Sagata, N.: A direct
link of the Mos-MAPK pathway to Erp1/Emi2 in meiotic arrest of Xenopus
laevis eggs. Nature 446: 1100-1104, 2007.

6. Moller, D. E.; Xia, C. H.; Tang, W.; Zhu, A. X.; Jakubowski, M.
: Human rsk isoforms: cloning and characterization of tissue-specific
expression. Am. J. Physiol. 266: C351-C359, 1994.

7. Nishiyama, T.; Ohsumi, K.; Kishimoto, T.: Phosphorylation of Erp1
by p90rsk is required for cytostatic factor arrest in Xenopus laevis
eggs. Nature 446: 1096-1099, 2007.

8. Zeniou, M.; Ding, T.; Trivier, E.; Hanauer, A.: Expression analysis
of RSK gene family members: the RSK2 gene, mutated in Coffin-Lowry
syndrome, is prominently expressed in brain structures essential for
cognitive function and learning. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 2929-2940,
2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/30/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/15/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/21/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/12/1999
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 11/17/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/14/1997

EDITED alopez: 05/30/2007
terry: 5/30/2007
mgross: 3/13/2007
alopez: 6/15/2005
terry: 6/15/2005
mgross: 9/20/2004
tkritzer: 3/31/2004
terry: 3/21/2001
carol: 12/23/2000
terry: 12/21/2000
alopez: 11/12/1999
carol: 12/8/1998
psherman: 11/17/1998
terry: 7/30/1998
mark: 2/14/1997

